---
reference_id: PMID:23393150
title: Residues located inside the Escherichia coli FepE protein oligomer are essential for lipopolysaccharide O-antigen modal chain length regulation.
authors:
- Tran ENH
- Morona R
journal: Microbiology (Reading)
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1099/mic.0.065631-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Residues located inside the Escherichia coli FepE protein oligomer are essential for lipopolysaccharide O-antigen modal chain length regulation.
**Authors:** Tran ENH, Morona R
**Journal:** Microbiology (Reading) (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1099/mic.0.065631-0](https://doi.org/10.1099/mic.0.065631-0)

## Content

1. Microbiology (Reading). 2013 Apr;159(Pt 4):701-714. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.065631-0.  Epub 2013 Feb 7.

Residues located inside the Escherichia coli FepE protein oligomer are essential 
for lipopolysaccharide O-antigen modal chain length regulation.

Tran ENH(1), Morona R(1).

Author information:
(1)Discipline of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Molecular and Biomedical 
Science, University of Adelaide, Adelaide 5005, Australia.

The Escherichia coli O157 : H7 FepE protein regulates lipopolysaccharide (LPS) 
O-antigen (Oag) chain length to confer a very long modal chain length of >80 Oag 
repeat units (RUs). The mechanism by which FepE regulates Oag modal chain length 
and the regions within it that are important for its function remain unclear. 
Studies on the structure of FepE show that the protein oligomerizes. However, 
the exact size of the oligomer is in dispute, further hampering our 
understanding of its mechanism. Guided by information previously obtained for 
regions known to be important for Oag modal chain length determination in the 
homologous Shigella flexneri WzzBSF protein, a set of FepE mutant constructs 
with single amino acid substitutions was created. Analysis of the resulting LPS 
conferred by these mutant His6-FepE proteins showed that amino acid 
substitutions of leucine 168 (L168) and aspartic acid 268 (D268) resulted in LPS 
with consistently shortened Oag chain lengths of <80 Oag RUs. Substitution of 
FepE's transmembrane cysteine residues did not affect function. Chemical 
cross-linking experiments on mutant FepE proteins showed no consistent 
correlation between oligomer size and functional activity, and MS analysis of 
FepE oligomers indicated that the in vivo size of FepE is consistent with a 
maximum size of a hexamer. Our findings suggest that different FepE residues, 
mainly located within the internal cavity of the oligomer, contribute to Oag 
modal chain length determination but not the oligomeric state of the protein.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.065631-0
PMID: 23393150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]