---
pmid: '31153831'
title: Ubiquitination is required for the initial removal of paternal organelles in
  C. elegans.
authors:
- Molina P
- Lim Y
- Boyd L
journal: Dev Biol
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6685074
doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2019.05.015
---

# Ubiquitination is required for the initial removal of paternal organelles in C. elegans.
**Authors:** Molina P, Lim Y, Boyd L
**Journal:** Dev Biol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ydbio.2019.05.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2019.05.015)
**PMC:** [PMC6685074](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6685074/)

## Abstract

1. Dev Biol. 2019 Sep 15;453(2):168-179. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2019.05.015. Epub 
2019 May 30.

Ubiquitination is required for the initial removal of paternal organelles in 
C. elegans.

Molina P(1), Lim Y(2), Boyd L(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Middle Tennessee State University, 1301 E. Main St, 
Murfreesboro, TN, 37132, USA.
(2)School of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Rochester Medical Center, 
Rochester, NY, 14642, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, Middle Tennessee State University, 1301 E. Main St, 
Murfreesboro, TN, 37132, USA. Electronic address: lynn.boyd@mtsu.edu.

Elimination of paternal mitochondria after fertilization occurs in many species 
using the process of selective autophagy. The mechanism for targeting paternal 
mitochondria, but not maternal mitochondria, for elimination in the early embryo 
is not well understood. The results in this paper suggest that there are at 
least two different mechanisms for targeting paternal mitochondria for 
elimination: the first involving ubiquitination and a second involving a 
mitochondrial associated autophagy receptor, fndc-1. Elimination of paternal 
mitochondria can be visualized in embryos of the nematode, C. elegans. Paternal 
mitochondria enter the zygote at fertilization. Initially, they are closely 
associated with another sperm organelle, the membraneous organelle (MO). The MOs 
become ubiquitinated within minutes after fertilization. Simultaneous RNAi 
knockdown of two ubiquitin conjugating enzymes, ubc-18 and ubc-16, reduces MO 
ubiquitination. Loss of function of ubc-18 alone leads to loss of K48-linked 
polyubiquitin chains and halts the recruitment of proteasome to MOs. 
Interestingly, knockdown of ubc-18 or ubc-16 or the combination does not reduce 
the localization of K63-linked ubiquitin chains to MOs suggesting that some 
ubiquitin structure other than K63 chains is responsible for recruiting the 
autophagy machinery to MOs. Double knockdown (ubc-18/ubc-16) inhibits the 
recruitment of the autophagy protein, LGG-1 (homolog of LC3/GABARAP), to 
paternal organelles and causes the persistence of paternal mitochondria into the 
two cell stage. If paternal mitochondria are not eliminated via this early 
process, they are eventually removed from the embryo in a process that depends 
on the mitophagy adaptor protein, fndc-1. Thus, there are two redundant, but 
temporally distinct mechanisms that target paternal mitochondria for elimination 
in C. elegans. In addition to the involvement of ubiquitination in the 
elimination of paternal mitochondria, two subunits of the proteasome, rpn-10 and 
rad-23, are required for elimination of paternal mitochondria. These subunits 
are known to function as ubiquitin receptors and knockdown of either inhibits 
the recruitment of proteasome to ubiquitinated MOs. Their knockdown does not 
affect the localization of LGG-1 to paternal structures indicating that the 
proteasome is not required for autophagy membrane recruitment but might be 
involved in autophagosome maturation or its fusion with the lysosome.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2019.05.015
PMCID: PMC6685074
PMID: 31153831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
