---
pmid: '18923422'
title: Rad51 suppresses gross chromosomal rearrangement at centromere in Schizosaccharomyces
  pombe.
authors:
- Nakamura K
- Okamoto A
- Katou Y
- Yadani C
- Shitanda T
- Kaweeteerawat C
- Takahashi TS
- Itoh T
- Shirahige K
- Masukata H
- Nakagawa T
journal: EMBO J
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2585166
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.215
---

# Rad51 suppresses gross chromosomal rearrangement at centromere in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
**Authors:** Nakamura K, Okamoto A, Katou Y, Yadani C, Shitanda T, Kaweeteerawat C, Takahashi TS, Itoh T, Shirahige K, Masukata H, Nakagawa T
**Journal:** EMBO J (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2008.215](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2008.215)
**PMC:** [PMC2585166](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2585166/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2008 Nov 19;27(22):3036-46. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.215. Epub 2008 Oct
 16.

Rad51 suppresses gross chromosomal rearrangement at centromere in 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe.

Nakamura K(1), Okamoto A, Katou Y, Yadani C, Shitanda T, Kaweeteerawat C, 
Takahashi TS, Itoh T, Shirahige K, Masukata H, Nakagawa T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, Toyonaka, 
Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

Centromere that plays a pivotal role in chromosome segregation is composed of 
repetitive elements in many eukaryotes. Although chromosomal regions containing 
repeats are the hotspots of rearrangements, little is known about the stability 
of centromere repeats. Here, by using a minichromosome that has a complete set 
of centromere sequences, we have developed a fission yeast system to detect 
gross chromosomal rearrangements (GCRs) that occur spontaneously. Southern and 
comprehensive genome hybridization analyses of rearranged chromosomes show two 
types of GCRs: translocation between homologous chromosomes and formation of 
isochromosomes in which a chromosome arm is replaced by a copy of the other. 
Remarkably, all the examined isochromosomes contain the breakpoint in centromere 
repeats, showing that isochromosomes are produced by centromere rearrangement. 
Mutations in the Rad3 checkpoint kinase increase both types of GCRs. In 
contrast, the deletion of Rad51 recombinase preferentially elevates 
isochromosome formation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis shows that Rad51 
localizes at centromere around S phase. These data suggest that Rad51 suppresses 
rearrangements of centromere repeats that result in isochromosome formation.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2008.215
PMCID: PMC2585166
PMID: 18923422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Centromere that plays a pivotal role in chromosome segregation is composed of repetitive elements in many eukaryotes. Although chromosomal regions containing repeats are the hotspots of rearrangements, little is known about the stability of centromere repeats. Here, by using a minichromosome that has a complete set of centromere sequences, we have developed a fission yeast system to detect gross chromosomal rearrangements (GCRs) that occur spontaneously. Southern and comprehensive genome hybridization analyses of rearranged chromosomes show two types of GCRs: translocation between homologous chromosomes and formation of isochromosomes in which a chromosome arm is replaced by a copy of the other. Remarkably, all the examined isochromosomes contain the breakpoint in centromere repeats, showing that isochromosomes are produced by centromere rearrangement. Mutations in the Rad3 checkpoint kinase increase both types of GCRs. In contrast, the deletion of Rad51 recombinase preferentially elevates isochromosome formation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis shows that Rad51 localizes at centromere around S phase. These data suggest that Rad51 suppresses rearrangements of centromere repeats that result in isochromosome formation.

Introduction

Maintaining genetic information through cell divisions is crucial for cell proliferation and for preventing genetic diseases in multicellular organisms. However, external stress such as ultraviolet irradiation or internal stress such as reactive oxygen species introduces various kinds of insults into genomic DNA. When aberrant DNA structures (e.g. DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs)) are produced, a DNA checkpoint is activated that coordinates the repair process and cell cycle progression ( Carr, 2002 ; Nyberg et al , 2002 ). Mammalian ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) and ataxia telangiectasia and Rad3 related (ATR) are the central checkpoint kinases that are activated in response to aberrant DNA structures. DSBs are a serious threat to genome integrity ( Myung and Kolodner, 2003 ; Prudden et al , 2003 ), and they can be repaired by non-homologous end joining or by homologous recombination when the template DNA strand is available ( Paques and Haber, 1999 ; Branzei and Foiani, 2008 ). Although homologous recombination is a relatively conservative mechanism of DSB repair, it leads to gross chromosomal rearrangement (GCR) when associated with crossing over or break-induced replication (BIR) ( Myung et al , 2001 ; Lambert et al , 2005 ). Many types of homologous recombination, including gene conversion (GC), require the Rad51 protein that promotes DNA-strand exchange and Holliday junction formation ( Shinohara et al , 1993 ; Bianco et al , 1998 ; Murayama et al , 2008 ). However, a subset of recombination including BIR occurs even in the absence of Rad51 ( Malkova et al , 1996 ). To maintain genome integrity, it is important to process aberrant DNA structures in an appropriate way.

Genome instability such as GCR is one of the hallmarks of cancer cells. GCR is associated with loss of heterogeneity (LOH) between two alleles and/or the alteration of gene dosage, either of which is implicated in tumorigenic process of neoplasms ( Lengauer et al , 1998 ). BRCA2 that regulates Rad51 recombinase is frequently mutated in breast cancer cells ( Thorslund and West, 2007 ), suggesting the involvement of homologous recombination in GCR events. Among the various types of GCR events (e.g. translocation, deletion, and so on) observed in cancer cells, isochromosome is unique in that it is the chromosome with homologous arms that are mirror images of one another ( Mertens et al , 1994 ). Although DNA cleavage around the centromere is proposed to lead to isochromosome formation ( Jin et al , 2000 ), the sequence complexity of the centromere hampers the relationship between the centromere and isochromosome formation.

Centromere is functionally divided into two regions: kinetochore where mitotic spindles are attached to chromosomes and pericentromeric heterochromatin where a pair of sister chromatids are held together until the onset of anaphase ( Bernard et al , 2001 ; Pidoux and Allshire, 2005 ; Schueler and Sullivan, 2006 ). Most centromeres of animals and plants consist of arrays of DNA repeats. In humans, centromere spans 300–5000 kb and contains extensive copies of repetitive elements called α-satellite (171 bp) ( Grewal and Jia, 2007 ). α-satellites are arranged homogeneously in the centromere core, whereas in pericentromeric heterochromatin, the stretches of α-satellites are not uniformly oriented and frequently interrupted by interspersed elements such as LINE, SINE, and LTR ( Schueler and Sullivan, 2006 ). In the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe , centromere is relatively short (40–110 kb), but it contains repetitive elements that surround a unique central core ( Grewal and Jia, 2007 ). DNA rearrangement or recombination occurs in chromosomal regions that contain repetitive elements such as rDNA and telomere ( Kobayashi, 2006 ; Longhese, 2008 ). GC tracts can enter and extend through centromere in budding yeast ( Liebman et al , 1988 ), showing that recombination can happen in centromere. However, little is known about the stability of centromere repeats.

Here, we have developed a system to detect GCRs using a fission yeast minichromosome ChL that is derived from chromosome III (ChIII) and contains an intact centromere 3 (cen3). Analyses of the GCR products show that translocation between homologous chromosomes, ChL and ChIII, and isochromosome are detected in our system. We found that the isochromosome is produced by the rearrangement of centromere repeats. Mutations in the Rad3 checkpoint kinase ( Bentley et al , 1996 ) increase both types of GCRs, suggesting that DSBs accumulated in the mutant cells induce both translocation and isochromosome formation. Interestingly, the deletion of Rad51 (also called Rhp51 in fission yeast) recombinase strongly elevates the rate of isochromosome formation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis shows the Rad51 localization at centromere around S phase. We propose that Rad51 suppresses the formation of isochromosome that is produced by the rearrangement of centromere repeats.

Discussion

Using an extra minichromosome ChL, we developed a fission yeast system to detect spontaneous GCRs. Analyses of the rearranged chromosomes revealed two types of GCRs: translocation between homologous chromosomes and isochromosome formation. We found that the isochromosome was produced by the rearrangement of centromere repeats. Both types of GCRs were increased by the mutations of Rad3 checkpoint kinase. In contrast, the deletion of Rad51 preferentially increased the isochromosome formation.

As GCR can lead to cell death, a dispensable chromosome ChL was constructed and used to detect GCR in this study. The rate of GCR was determined to be 2.9 × 10 −5 per cell division, which is even higher than that of allelic GC (∼1–4 × 10 −6 per cell division) ( Virgin et al , 2001 ). The high incidence of GCR is not surprising, because it has been observed that GCR occurs at comparable rates when a dispensable chromosome is monitored in budding yeast ( Huang and Koshland, 2003 ). Although an affect of an extra chromosome on the GCR rate cannot be excluded, it is possible that GCR occurs at a high rate in normal cells. In the wild type, two different types of GCR products were observed. Around half of the GCR products (type-I) acquired the right arm of ChIII and became larger than ChL. It appears that type-I products are formed by translocation between homologous chromosomes ChL and ChIII and contain the ChIII right arm to its end, as detected by a probe specific to rDNA originally present at the ChIII ends. The length of the type-I products (∼2.0 Mb) is consistent with this idea. In most cases, the breakpoint appears to be located in a 170-kb arm region flanking cen3 and ura4 + . A similar type of translocation was induced by a site-specific DSB, and a pedigree analysis revealed that the translocation occurs either by reciprocal crossing over or nonreciprocal BIR mechanism ( Prudden et al , 2003 ; Cullen et al , 2007 ). The translocation observed in this study may also be initiated by a DSB produced at fragile sites on the chromosomes ( Cha and Kleckner, 2002 ). The tRNA gene is one of the fragile sites ( Ivessa et al , 2003 ; Admire et al , 2006 ), and ChL has three such genes on the right arm at ∼70, 110, and 220 kb from cen3. It is also possible that extensive degradation of DNA (>140 kb) from a chromosome end that passes the ura4 + and ade6 + genes leads to translocation. The deletion of a chromosome end combined with de novo addition of telomere sequences has been reported to occur in haploid cells ( Chen et al , 1998 ). However, such kind of GCR products was not seen in this study, probably because the rearrangement between homologous sequences is prevailing when homologous chromosomes or sequences are present in the same nucleus. The translocation between the cen3 sequences of ChL and ChIII was observed, although that between cen3 and other centromeres, was not detected. Different sequences of cnt , imr , and irc and different arrangements of otr repeats may prevent GCR between different centromeres. It should be noted that the rate of type-I GCR seems to be underestimated, as the cells harbouring type-I products grew less effectively as compared with those containing the parental ChL or isochromosomes (type-II). The slow growth may be due to the increased copy number of the rDNA and/or the other genes present on the right arm of ChIII ( Chikashige et al , 2007 ).

The second type of GCR products (type-II) has lost the original right arm and they became smaller than ChL. CGH and Southern blotting revealed that the original right arm was replaced by a copy of the left arm, resulting in the formation of the isochromosome that has homologous arms of the mirror image. Fission yeast centromere is composed of a unique central core, cnt , surrounded by pairs of inverted repeats, namely, imr , otr , and irc , except cen2 where no irc is recognized. In all the examined isochromosomes, the right edge of cen3 (i.e. irc3R ) had been altered, whereas the central cnt3 – imr3 junctions were preserved, indicating that the isochromosome is produced by the rearrangement of centromere repeats. As isochromosome formation occurs at a rate comparable to that of the translocation between homologous chromosomes, centromere seems to be more prone to rearrangement than expected. Consistent with this idea, it has been reported recently that in mammalian cells mitotic recombination occurs at centromere at a higher frequency than those at chromosome arm or telomere ( Jaco et al , 2008 ). Our data show that centromere is one of the fragile sites where deleterious chromosome rearrangements such as isochromosome formation and translocation can happen.

With regard to the structure and function, centromere can be divided into two regions: kinetochore and pericentromeric heterochromatin. The kinetochore-specific histone H3 variant (i.e. CENP-A) is incorporated around cnt to create kinetochore, whereas specific modifications of histones (e.g. histone H3 K9 methylation) take place in pericentromeric heterochromatin. Chromatin boundaries of pericentromeric heterochromatin are present in imr and irc ( Cam et al , 2005 ; Scott et al , 2006 ). tRNA genes are also embedded in imr . Cruciform DNA has been detected by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis in the centromere of fission yeast ( Smith et al , 1995 ). Pausing of the replication forks has been seen in the centromere of budding yeast ( Greenfeder and Newlon, 1992 ). Thus, it is possible that aberrant DNA structures produced in centromere triggers isochromosome formation. This type of GCR (i.e. isochromosome formation) may occur for any chromosome in fission yeast. This is because isochromosome is produced by the rearrangement of inverted repeats surrounding a central core, cnt , and all the centromeres are essentially mirror images. Interestingly, an intramolecular loop structure around the centromere (C-loop) that brings both sides of the centromere-flanking regions close has been observed in budding yeast ( Yeh et al , 2008 ). Higher order structures of the centromere such as the C-loop might facilitate the interaction between centromere repeats.

Rad3 is the central player of the DNA structure checkpoint, and it is activated when DNA damage or replication stress is induced. We found that amino-acid substitutions in the kinase domain, as well as a rad3 deletion ( rad3 Δ), increased the rate of GCR. Thus, it is likely that the kinase function of Rad3 is important to suppress spontaneous GCR. Analyses of the GCR products formed in a rad3 Δ mutant suggest that both translocation and isochromosome formation were increased. Alteration of the size of ChIII observed in the rad3 mutant suggests that Rad3 may also affect the rDNA repeats on ChIII. As it has been shown that DSBs are accumulated in the absence of the checkpoint kinase ( Brown and Baltimore, 2000 ; de Klein et al , 2000 ; Cha and Kleckner, 2002 ), our data suggest that translocation, as well as isochromosome formation, is initiated by DSBs. Consistent with this notion, chronic exposure of wild-type cells with MMS or HU that may induce DSBs increased the rate of GCR as well as minichromosome loss ( Supplementary Figure 7 ).

In contrast to rad3 Δ, the rate of isochromosome formation was preferentially and strongly increased by rad51 Δ, indicating that Rad51 suppresses isochromosome formation. It should be noted that rad51 Δ might also increase other types of GCR that cause extreme slow growth or cell death in the rad51 Δ background. Although the breakpoints are equally found in imr3 and in otr3 – irc3 in wild-type isochromosomes, they are significantly enriched in imr3 in rad51 Δ isochromosomes, suggesting that Rad51 may have some specific function in the imr region of centromere. The high incidence of minichromosome loss and the hypersensitivity to the microtubule-destabilizing drug TBZ suggest that Rad51 has a function in the centromere structure and/or function. The observation that rad51 Δ increases missegregation of chromosomes following HU treatment ( Bailis et al , 2008 ) supports this idea. We have found that Rad51 localizes at centromere around S phase, suggesting that Rad51-mediated recombination occurs at centromere around S phase. Figure 8 shows our current model for the isochromosome formation and its suppression by Rad51. In wild type, aberrant DNA structures such as DSBs created at centromere may be repaired either by the conservative GC or by BIR mechanism ( Figure 8 , the left and right arrows respectively). GC between sister chromatids or between the centromere repeats from a chromatid would not cause the isochromosome formation. However, in the absence of Rad51, the aberrant DNA may be repaired mainly by BIR. Because, it has been shown in budding yeast that BIR can occur in a Rad51-independent manner, whereas GC is severely impaired by a rad51 deletion ( Malkova et al , 1996 ; Fasullo et al , 2001 ). It appears that Rad51 suppresses BIR by facilitating GC. BIR between sisters may or may not result in the isochromosome formation, but BIR between the centromere repeats from a chromatid always lead to an isochromosome ( Figure 8 , the boxes). On the basis of the sizes of the two restriction fragments containing LEU2 , it appears that most of the isochromosomes that have the breakpoint in imr3 possess the same number of the outer repeats on either side of centromere. However, we found three exceptions where different numbers of the outer repeats are present, although the breakpoint is in imr3 (clone no. 1 and 17, wild type; clone no. 2, rad51 Δ). It is possible that they have been produced by several rounds of strand invasion, DNA synthesis and dissociation. Because template switching has been found to occur during BIR ( Smith et al , 2007 ), these data further support the idea that isochromosomes are produced by BIR. Although further studies are required to understand the molecular mechanism by which isochromosomes are produced, our data provide the first evidence for a role of Rad51 in the suppression of rearrangements of centromere repeats that results in isochromosome formation.
