---
pmid: '16169548'
title: Notch1 and 2 cooperate in limb ectoderm to receive an early Jagged2 signal
  regulating interdigital apoptosis.
authors:
- Pan Y
- Liu Z
- Shen J
- Kopan R
journal: Dev Biol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2005.08.037
---

# Notch1 and 2 cooperate in limb ectoderm to receive an early Jagged2 signal regulating interdigital apoptosis.
**Authors:** Pan Y, Liu Z, Shen J, Kopan R
**Journal:** Dev Biol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ydbio.2005.08.037](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2005.08.037)

## Abstract

1. Dev Biol. 2005 Oct 15;286(2):472-82. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2005.08.037. Epub
2005  Sep 19.

Notch1 and 2 cooperate in limb ectoderm to receive an early Jagged2 signal 
regulating interdigital apoptosis.

Pan Y(1), Liu Z, Shen J, Kopan R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Pharmacology, Washington University 
School of Medicine, Box 8103, 660 S. Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Spontaneous and engineered mutations in the Notch ligand Jagged2 produced the 
Syndactylism phenotype (Jiang, R.L., Lan, Y., Chapman, H.D., Shawber, C., 
Norton, C.R., Serreze, D.V., Weinmaster, G., Gridley, T., 1998. Defects in limb, 
craniofacial, and thymic Development in Jagged2 mutant mice. Genes Dev. 12, 
1046-1057; Sidow, A., Bulotsky, M.S., Kerrebrock, A.W., Bronson, R.T., Daly, 
M.J., Reeve, M.P., Hawkins, T.L., Birren, B.W., Jaenisch, R., Lander, E.S., 
1997. Serrate2 is disrupted in the mouse limb-development mutant syndactylism. 
Nature 389, 722-725). Given that additional ligands may be expressed in the 
developing limb bud, it was possible that loss of Jagged2 disabled only part of 
Notch function in the limb. In addition, it is not clear from the expression 
pattern of Jagged2 in the apical ectodermal ridge (AER) whether the ectodermal 
or mesenchymal compartment of the limb bud receives the Jagged2 signal. To 
elucidate the requirement for the Notch pathway in limb development, we have 
analyzed single and compound Notch receptor mutants as well as 
gamma-secretase-deficient limbs. Floxed alleles were removed either from the 
developing limb bud ectoderm (using Msx2-Cre) or from the mesenchyme (using 
Prx1-Cre). Our results confirm that Jagged2 loss describes the contribution of 
the entire Notch pathway to the mouse limb development and revealed that both 
Notch1 and 2 are required in the ectoderm to receive the Jagged2 signal. 
Interestingly, our allelic series allowed us to determine that Notch receives 
this signal at an early stage in the developmental process and that memory of 
this event is retained by the mesenchyme, where Notch signaling appears to be 
dispensable. Thus, Notch signaling plays a non-autonomous role in digit 
septation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2005.08.037
PMID: 16169548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
