---
pmid: '16255717'
title: Intestinal alkaline sphingomyelinase hydrolyses and inactivates platelet-activating
  factor by a phospholipase C activity.
authors:
- Wu J
- Nilsson A
- Jönsson BA
- Stenstad H
- Agace W
- Cheng Y
- Duan RD
journal: Biochem J
year: '2006'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1386028
doi: 10.1042/BJ20051121
---

# Intestinal alkaline sphingomyelinase hydrolyses and inactivates platelet-activating factor by a phospholipase C activity.
**Authors:** Wu J, Nilsson A, Jönsson BA, Stenstad H, Agace W, Cheng Y, Duan RD
**Journal:** Biochem J (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BJ20051121](https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20051121)
**PMC:** [PMC1386028](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1386028/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2006 Feb 15;394(Pt 1):299-308. doi: 10.1042/BJ20051121.

Intestinal alkaline sphingomyelinase hydrolyses and inactivates 
platelet-activating factor by a phospholipase C activity.

Wu J(1), Nilsson A, Jönsson BA, Stenstad H, Agace W, Cheng Y, Duan RD.

Author information:
(1)Gastroenterology Laboratory, Biomedical Centre, B11, Lund University, S-221 
84 Lund, Sweden.

Alkaline sphingomyelinase (alk-SMase) is a new member of the NPP (nucleotide 
pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase) family that hydrolyses SM (sphingomyelin) to 
generate ceramide in the intestinal tract. The enzyme may protect the intestinal 
mucosa from inflammation and tumorigenesis. PAF (platelet-activating factor) is 
a pro-inflammatory phospholipid involved in pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel 
diseases. We examined whether alk-SMase can hydrolyse and inactivate PAF. 
[3H]Octadecyl-labelled PAF was incubated with purified rat intestinal alk-SMase 
or recombinant human alk-SMase expressed in COS-7 cells. The hydrolytic products 
were assayed with TLC and MS. We found that alkSMase cleaved the phosphocholine 
head group from PAF and generated 1-O-alkyl-2-acetyl-sn-glycerol. Differing from 
the activity against SM, the activity against PAF was optimal at pH 7.5, 
inhibited by EDTA and stimulated by 0.1-0.25 mM Zn2+. The activity was abolished 
by site mutation of the predicted metal-binding sites that are conserved in all 
NPP members. Similar to the activity against SM, the activity against PAF was 
dependent on bile salt, particularly taurocholate and taurochenodeoxycholate. 
The V(max) for PAF hydrolysis was 374 mumol x h(-1) x (mg of protein)(-1). The 
hydrolysis of PAF and SM could be inhibited by the presence of SM and PAF 
respectively, the inhibition of PAF hydrolysis by SM being stronger. The 
PAF-induced MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinase) activation and IL-8 
(interleukin 8) release in HT-29 cells, and chemotaxis in leucocytes were 
abolished by alk-SMase treatment. In conclusion, alk-SMase hydrolyses and 
inactivates PAF by a phospholipase C activity. The finding reveals a novel 
function, by which alk-SMase may counteract the development of intestinal 
inflammation and colon cancer.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20051121
PMCID: PMC1386028
PMID: 16255717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Alkaline sphingomyelinase (alk-SMase) is a new member of the NPP (nucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase) family that hydrolyses SM (sphingomyelin) to generate ceramide in the intestinal tract. The enzyme may protect the intestinal mucosa from inflammation and tumorigenesis. PAF (platelet-activating factor) is a pro-inflammatory phospholipid involved in pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel diseases. We examined whether alk-SMase can hydrolyse and inactivate PAF. [ 3 H]Octadecyl-labelled PAF was incubated with purified rat intestinal alk-SMase or recombinant human alk-SMase expressed in COS-7 cells. The hydrolytic products were assayed with TLC and MS. We found that alkSMase cleaved the phosphocholine head group from PAF and generated 1- O -alkyl-2-acetyl- sn -glycerol. Differing from the activity against SM, the activity against PAF was optimal at pH 7.5, inhibited by EDTA and stimulated by 0.1–0.25 mM Zn 2+ . The activity was abolished by site mutation of the predicted metal-binding sites that are conserved in all NPP members. Similar to the activity against SM, the activity against PAF was dependent on bile salt, particularly taurocholate and taurochenodeoxycholate. The V max for PAF hydrolysis was 374 μmol·h −1 ·(mg of protein) −1 . The hydrolysis of PAF and SM could be inhibited by the presence of SM and PAF respectively, the inhibition of PAF hydrolysis by SM being stronger. The PAF-induced MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinase) activation and IL-8 (interleukin 8) release in HT-29 cells, and chemotaxis in leucocytes were abolished by alk-SMase treatment. In conclusion, alk-SMase hydrolyses and inactivates PAF by a phospholipase C activity. The finding reveals a novel function, by which alk-SMase may counteract the development of intestinal inflammation and colon cancer.

INTRODUCTION

PAF (platelet-activating factor; 1- O -alkyl-2-acetyl- sn -glycero-3-phosphocholine), first named by its platelet-aggregating activity, is a type of phospholipid with a phosphocholine head group at the position C-3 and an alkyl group linked to the glycerol by an ether bond. It is derived from 1-alkyl-2-acyl-glycero-3-phosphocholine in cell membrane, which is first hydrolysed by PLA 2 (phospholipase A 2 ) to lyso-PAF and subsequently acetified to PAF [ 1 ]. The catabolism of PAF is initiated by an acetyl hydrolase to form lyso-PAF, which is in turn either reacylated with longchain fatty acid to yield 1-alkyl-2-acyl- sn -glycero-3-phosphocholine or hydrolysed by PLD (phospholipase D) [ 2 ]. PAF has been recognized as an important mediator in the pathogenesis of various intestinal diseases including IBD (inflammatory bowel disease), cholera and necrotizing enterocolitis in newborns [ 3 – 6 ]. The effects of PAF are mediated through G-protein-coupled receptors expressed in several tissues, including the intestinal mucosa [ 7 ], leading to functional changes of numerous signalling molecules such as activation of MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinase) and NF-κB (nuclear factor κB), induction of biosynthesis of prostaglandins, expression of PLA 2 and release of a variety of cytokines, including IL-8 (interleukin 8), IL-1β and TNFα (tumour necrosis factor α) [ 8 – 11 ]. Increased PAF has been reported in faeces from patients with ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease [ 12 ]. High levels of PAF were also found in colon cancer tissue [ 13 ].

Intestinal alk-SMase (alkaline sphingomyelinase) was first found in the intestinal content of human and the intestinal mucosa of rat and pig by Nilsson [ 14 ]. The enzyme was recently purified and cloned from both human and rat by our group and found to be a novel member of the NPP (nucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase) family, sharing no structural similarities with other SMases [ 15 – 17 ]. Although it belongs to the NPP family, the enzyme has no activity against nucleotide phosphodiesters, but was characterized as an SMase with some activity against phosphatidylcholine and lysophosphatidylcholine [ 17 ]. Alk-SMase is an ectoenzyme bound on the surface of intestinal microvilli with its C-terminal anchor, and is released to the intestinal lumen in an active form by pancreatic trypsin [ 18 ]. Previous studies showed that the physiological function of alk-SMase is to hydrolyse dietary SM (sphingomyelin), which is abundant in milk, egg, meat and fish, and also SM in the plasma membrane of epithelial cells [ 17 ]. Recent studies have shown decreased activity of the enzyme in the tissues of human long-standing ulcerative colitis and colonic adenoma and carcinomas, suggesting a potential role of the enzyme in both colonic inflammation and carcinogenesis [ 19 – 21 ]. An alternative splicing of alk-SMase mRNA, which leads to inactivation of the enzyme, has been found in colon cancer HT-29 cells [ 22 ].

Both PAF and SM are phospholipids with a positively charged phosphocholine head group and a hydrophobic tail. Previous studies did not find any type of SMase that can hydrolyse PAF; only an enzyme originally predicted to be a neutral SMase was found to hydrolyse lyso-PAF but not PAF by a PLC activity [ 23 ]. Whether alk-SMase can hydrolyse PAF, which is coexisting with the enzyme in the intestinal lumen in the inflamed bowel, has not been investigated. Our study identified a novel function of intestinal alk-SMase to hydrolyse and inactivate PAF. The finding supports the potential protective effects of the enzyme against IBDs and colon cancer.

DISCUSSION

The present study demonstrates that intestinal alk-SMase can hydrolyse and inactivate PAF, a well-known lipid mediator involved in pathogenesis of several inflammatory diseases including IBD [ 6 ]. The activity was identified with highly purified rat intestinal alk-SMase and with the recombinant human enzyme expressed in COS-7 cells. The activity is characterized as a type of PLC, since the enzyme generates a neutral lipid portion similar to DG in TLC and this neutral lipid was further identified to be AAG by LC-MS. No formation of lyso-PAF or 1- O -alkyl-2-acetyl-glycero-phosphatidic acid was found. The finding is novel as no known SMase has been shown to hydrolyse PAF by a PLC activity.

When the activity was characterized and compared with its activity against SM, several similarities and differences were identified. A major similarity is the bile salt dependency. The activity against PAF is also stimulated by bile salt, particularly by TC and TCDC, while other detergents such as Triton X-100 and CHAPS had no effect. The dependency of alk-SMase on specific bile salts is a unique property of the enzyme, which allows the enzyme to exert its function against both SM and PAF in the intestinal environment. It may also be the reason why previous studies did not find PAF PLC activity in the intestine when measured in a bile-salt-free buffer [ 30 ]. Characterization also showed two major differences. The first is the optimal pH, which is 7.5 and is lower than that for the activity against SM, but closer to the pH in the intestinal lumen. The second is the zinc dependency. We previously found that the activity of alk-SMase against SM was inhibited by Zn 2+ . A 60% inhibition was observed with 0.25 mM Zn 2+ [ 17 ]. Interestingly, we found in the present study that its activity against PAF is increased by Zn 2+ at 0.25 mM and inhibited by EDTA. The Zn 2+ dependency resembles that of other NPP members [ 26 , 31 ]. However, the activity of alk-SMase against PAF could also be inhibited by Zn 2+ at concentrations higher than 0.25 mM and by mutations of the metal-binding sites, similar to its activity against SM. Under optimal conditions for the activity of alk-SMase against PAF, the inhibitory effect of Zn 2+ on SM hydrolysis was found to be much weaker than under the conditions optimal for SM hydrolysis. Thus, at neutral pH and in the presence of Zn 2+ in the gut, both SM and PAF may be hydrolysed. Although high concentrations of SM inhibit PAF hydrolysis, hydrolysis of SM by alk-SMase may suppress the inhibition and thus facilitate its second activity for PAF hydrolysis. The conclusion is that the metal-binding sites are necessary for the hydrolysis of both SM and PAF, but the role of metal ions in catalysis or in the enzyme substrate interaction differs for the two substrates and requires further investigation. Table 1 is a comparison of the major features of alk-SMase activities against SM and PAF.

The activity of alk-SMase against PAF was approx. 10% of its activity against SM. There is a mutual inhibition in the sense that one substrate inhibited the activity against the other. The inhibitory effect of SM on PAF hydrolysis was stronger than that of PAF against SM hydrolysis when determined under the optimal conditions. The results indicate that the affinity and the catalytic capacity of the enzyme are higher for SM than for PAF. The physiological relevance of the results is not easy to assess, since the concentrations of SM in ileum and colon under physiological and pathological conditions are currently unknown. In the intestinal mucosa, alk-SMase activity against SM is approx. 10 nmol·h −1 ·(mg of mucosal protein) −1 , and in faeces, it is approx. 0.5–1.0 mmol·h −1 ·(g of dry faeces) −1 [ 32 ]. The concentration of PAF in the intestinal tissue or intestinal lumen is low under normal conditions, approx. 4.5±0.8 pg/mg of mucosal protein. The levels can be significantly increased under the inflammatory conditions. In stools of patients with Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis, the PAF concentrations are 319.2±143.5 and 824.9±408 pg/g of stool (∼0.5–1.4 pmol/g of stool) respectively [ 12 ]. Considering the high level of the enzyme in the middle and lower small intestine where bile salt concentrations should also be favourable for the activity of the enzyme, we postulate that the enzyme could hydrolyse substantial amounts of PAF located in this part of the gut.

Alk-SMase is expressed in the intestinal mucosa and released into the intestinal lumen by pancreatic trypsin [ 13 , 15 ]. PAF is present in the intestinal lumen where it is released from epithelial cells [ 33 ]. A large body of evidence indicates that PAF in the intestine, particularly in the colon, has several pro-inflammatory functions. PAF has been shown to have strong chemotactic effects [ 34 ], to enhance lymphocyte infiltration [ 35 ], to induce Cl − secretion [ 9 , 36 ] and to cause diarrhoea [ 5 ]. It is the major factor responsible for endotoxin-induced diarrhoea [ 5 , 37 ] and necrotizing enterocolitis in the newborn [ 38 ]. PAF probably promotes inflammation via multiple mechanisms, including production and release of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-8, TNFα and IL-1β [ 9 , 10 , 39 ], and activation of MAPK and NF-κB [ 8 , 40 ]. The increased cytokines may in turn stimulate the release of PAF [ 41 ], creating a positive feedback loop in accelerating the inflammatory response. Long-standing inflammation is a risk for carcinogenesis and PAF may play a role in colonic carcinogenesis, as its levels are increased in the inflamed tissues of ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease [ 12 ], and colorectal carcinoma of Dukes' A and B stages [ 13 ]. Apart from the pro-inflammatory effects, PAF has also been found to affect the function of oncogenes, such as stimulating the expression and action of VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor) [ 42 ]. Effort has been made to discover novel drugs to inactivate PAF and attention is mainly focused on the cleavage of the acetyl group at C-2 position or on the interference of PAF receptor. To our knowledge, no agent that inactivates PAF by cleaving phosphocholine linked to the C-3 position has been reported. Our study for the first time identifies such a physiological factor in the intestinal tract. The alk-SMase-induced inactivation of PAF was demonstrated by the effects on the release of cytokine IL-8, the activation of MAPK and the chemotactic effect induced by PAF. In vivo inactivation of PAF by alk-SMase may block the noxious positive feedback and inhibit the inflammatory response in a short-term and carcinogenesis in a long-term perspective. Lack of a sufficient alk-SMase activity may increase the susceptibility of the mucosa to the effects of PAF, resulting in development of inflammation and cancer. In agreement with this hypothesis, a significant reduction of alk-SMase has been reported in long-standing ulcerative colitis [ 21 ] and in human colorectal carcinomas [ 19 , 43 ].

Our finding may also have important implications in liver diseases, because PAF was found to be associated with some types of liver damage, including carbon tetrachloride-induced liver cirrhosis [ 44 ], endotoxin- and alcohol-induced hepatic apoptosis and necrosis [ 45 ], and liver metastasis of colorectal carcinoma [ 46 ]. Alk-SMase is expressed also in human liver [ 17 ], and high alk-SMase activity was found in human bile [ 47 , 48 ]. Based on the findings in the present study, a protective effect of alk-SMase through hydrolysis and inactivating PAF in the liver and bile can be predicted.

In conclusion, the present study found a novel function of alk-SMase of hydrolysing and inactivating PAF by a PLC activity. This finding indicates a potentially important role of intestinal alkSMase in preventing IBD and carcinogenesis in the gut.
