---
pmid: '26280537'
title: Secreted and O-GlcNAcylated MIF binds to the human EGF receptor and inhibits
  its activation.
authors:
- Zheng Y
- Li X
- Qian X
- Wang Y
- Lee JH
- Xia Y
- Hawke DH
- Zhang G
- Lyu J
- Lu Z
journal: Nat Cell Biol
year: '2015'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4785887
doi: 10.1038/ncb3222
---

# Secreted and O-GlcNAcylated MIF binds to the human EGF receptor and inhibits its activation.
**Authors:** Zheng Y, Li X, Qian X, Wang Y, Lee JH, Xia Y, Hawke DH, Zhang G, Lyu J, Lu Z
**Journal:** Nat Cell Biol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncb3222](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb3222)
**PMC:** [PMC4785887](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4785887/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Cell Biol. 2015 Oct;17(10):1348-55. doi: 10.1038/ncb3222. Epub 2015 Aug
17.

Secreted and O-GlcNAcylated MIF binds to the human EGF receptor and inhibits its 
activation.

Zheng Y(1), Li X(1), Qian X(1), Wang Y(1), Lee JH(1), Xia Y(1), Hawke DH(2), 
Zhang G(3), Lyu J(4), Lu Z(1)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuro-Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.
(2)Department of Systems Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.
(3)Department of Surgical Oncology, Affiliated Hospital of Hebei University, 
Baoding, Hebei 071000, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Laboratory Medicine, Ministry of Education, Zhejiang 
Provincial Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics, School of Laboratory Medicine and 
Life Sciences, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou 325035, China.
(5)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.
(6)Cancer Biology Program, The University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical 
Sciences at Houston, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Activation of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), which occurs in many 
types of tumour, promotes tumour progression. However, no extracellular 
antagonist of human EGFR has been identified. We found that human macrophage 
migration inhibitory factor (MIF) is O-GlcNAcylated at Ser 112/Thr 113 at its 
carboxy terminus. The naturally secreted and O-GlcNAcylated MIF binds to EGFR, 
thereby inhibiting the binding of EGF to EGFR and EGF-induced EGFR activation, 
phosphorylation of ERK and c-Jun, cell invasion, proliferation and brain tumour 
formation. Activation of EGFR through mutation or its ligand binding enhances 
the secretion of MMP13, which degrades extracellular MIF, and results in 
abrogation of the negative regulation of MIF on EGFR. The finding that EGFR 
activation downregulates its antagonist in the tumour microenvironment 
represents an important feedforward mechanism for human tumour cells to enhance 
EGFR signalling and promote tumorigenesis.

DOI: 10.1038/ncb3222
PMCID: PMC4785887
PMID: 26280537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.

## Full Text

Abstract

Activation of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), which occurs in many types of tumour, promotes tumour progression 1 , 2 . However, no extracellular antagonist of human EGFR has been identified. We found that human macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) is O -GlcNAcylated at Ser 112/Thr 113 at its carboxy terminus. The naturally secreted and O -GlcNAcylated MIF binds to EGFR, thereby inhibiting the binding of EGF to EGFR and EGF-induced EGFR activation, phosphorylation of ERK and c-Jun, cell invasion, proliferation and brain tumour formation. Activation of EGFR through mutation or its ligand binding enhances the secretion of MMP13, which degrades extracellular MIF, and results in abrogation of the negative regulation of MIF on EGFR. The finding that EGFR activation downregulates its antagonist in the tumour microenvironment represents an important feedforward mechanism for human tumour cells to enhance EGFR signalling and promote tumorigenesis.

EGFR activation results in MMP13-dependent degradation of secreted MIF

To determine whether EGFR activation regulates intra- and extracellular MIF expression, we treated A431 human epidermoid carcinoma cells with EGF. Prolonged EGF treatment, which did not alter intracellular MIF expression, decreased the secreted MIF in medium in a time-dependent manner ( Fig. 1a ). Pretreating the cells with AG1478, an EGFR inhibitor, which blocked EGF-induced EGFR phosphorylation, blocked EGF-induced downregulation of extracellular MIF ( Fig. 1b ). This EGFR activation-dependent extracellular MIF downregulation was also observed in MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells, DU145 human prostate cancer cells, and U251 and U87 human glioblastoma cells ( Fig. 1c ). In addition, expression of a constitutively active EGFRvIII mutant 15 resulted in downregulation of extracellular MIF ( Fig. 1d ). These results indicate that reduced extracellular MIF is a general response to EGFR activation in various types of human tumour cell.

The MMPs, a family of 23 proteolytic enzymes that are either membrane-anchored or secreted, degrade extracellular matrix proteins and are involved in many phases of cancer progression 16 , 17 . Pretreating cells with GM6001, a MMP inhibitor for MMP1-3, MMP8 and MMP9 (ref. 18 ), or CL-82198, a potent selective inhibitor for MMP13 (ref. 19 ), showed that only CL-82198 inhibited EGF-induced extracellular MIF degradation ( Fig. 1e ). These results suggest that MMP13, a member of the matrix MMPs, is involved in MIF degradation. In line with these results, EGF treatment enhanced the MMP13 secretion in medium with correlated MIF degradation, and these effects were blocked by AG1478 in A431 and U87 cells ( Fig. 1f ). In addition, MMP13 depletion largely reduced EGF-induced MMP13 accumulation in medium and blocked EGF-enhanced MIF degradation ( Fig. 1g ). These results indicate that EGFR activation-induced MMP13 secretion results in MIF degradation.

DISCUSSION

Activation of EGFR promotes tumour progression 1 , 2 , 4 , 23 . The ligand binding or mutation of EGFR initiates many EGFR activation-induced cellular activities. We demonstrated here that MIF is O -GlcNAcylated at Ser 112/Thr 113. The naturally secreted and O -GlcNAcylated MIF binds to EGFR, thereby inhibiting the binding of EGF to EGFR and subsequent EGF-induced EGFR activation. EGFR activation enhanced the secretion of MMP13, which degraded extracellular MIF, thereby alleviating the negative regulation of EGFR by MIF and promoting EGFR activation ( Fig. 5g ). Given the heterogeneous nature of human tumours and the fact that individual glioblastoma tumours express both amplified EGFR and EGFRvIII and undergo tumour-promoting effects from EGFRvIII-expressing cells through paracrine mechanisms 24 , EGFRvIII expression in some tumour cells downregulates extracellular MIF, which, in turn, is likely to promote EGF-induced WT EGFR activation in the tumour cells expressing WT EGFR. Our finding demonstrates an important mechanism underlying amplified EGFR activation in tumours, which is mediated by downregulation of its antagonist MIF in the tumour microenvironment.

The Drosophila protein Argos binds to EGF, thereby sequestering EGF and inhibiting its bindings to EGFR (refs 6 , 25 ). In contrast, MIF, which is O -GlcNAcylated at its C-terminal Ser 112/Thr 113 on a β-strand 22 , binds to EGFR directly and competitively inhibits the binding of EGF to EGFR. The O -GlcNAcylated looped structure at the C terminus of MIF (ref. 22 ) may directly interact with the extracellular domain of EGFR, which physically hinders the access of EGF to EGFR.

MIF has been reported to bind to the extracellular domain of CD74 and CXCR4 and to activate ERK1/2 and AKT. In previous studies, anti-CXCR4 and anti-CD74 antibodies blocked MIF-induced activation of ERK1/2 and AKT, and cell proliferation 9 , 10 . In contrast, extracellular O -GlcNAcylated MIF did not induce a regulatory effect on ERK and AKT in tested tumour cells. Instead, it blocked EGF-induced signalling and tumour cell invasion. Given that intracellular MIF may have distinct functions according to the cell type and the nature of the extracellular stimulus, our results in combination with previous findings strongly suggest that the cellular activities of MIF can vary based on differences in cell types and cellular microenvironments. That the O -GlcNAcylation-deficient MIF mutant failed to block EGF-induced tumour cell invasion and inhibit tumour growth reveals the importance of post-translational modification of MIF in its involvement of tumour progression. Our finding of EGFR-induced and MMP13-dependent MIF degradation and subsequent amplification of EGFR activation provides an instrumental insight into tumour progression mediated by the regulation of the tumour microenvironment and may provide an alternative approach for treating human cancer by intervening in this auto-regulation loop.
