---
pmid: '39013473'
title: Competition between two HUSH complexes orchestrates the immune response to
  retroelement invasion.
authors:
- Danac JMC
- Matthews RE
- Gungi A
- Qin C
- Parsons H
- Antrobus R
- Timms RT
- Tchasovnikarova IA
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2024'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2024.06.020
---

# Competition between two HUSH complexes orchestrates the immune response to retroelement invasion.
**Authors:** Danac JMC, Matthews RE, Gungi A, Qin C, Parsons H, Antrobus R, Timms RT, Tchasovnikarova IA
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2024.06.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2024.06.020)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2024 Aug 8;84(15):2870-2881.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2024.06.020. 
Epub 2024 Jul 15.

Competition between two HUSH complexes orchestrates the immune response to 
retroelement invasion.

Danac JMC(1), Matthews RE(1), Gungi A(1), Qin C(1), Parsons H(2), Antrobus R(2), 
Timms RT(3), Tchasovnikarova IA(4).

Author information:
(1)The Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge 
CB2 1QN, UK; Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court 
Road, Cambridge CB2 1QN, UK.
(2)Department of Medicine, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, 
Addenbrooke's Hospital, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 0XY, UK.
(3)Cambridge Institute of Therapeutic Immunology and Infectious Disease, Jeffrey 
Cheah Biomedical Centre, Cambridge CB2 0AW, UK.
(4)The Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge 
CB2 1QN, UK; Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court 
Road, Cambridge CB2 1QN, UK. Electronic address: it257@cam.ac.uk.

The human silencing hub (HUSH) preserves genome integrity through the epigenetic 
repression of invasive genetic elements. However, despite our understanding of 
HUSH as an obligate complex of three subunits, only loss of MPP8 or Periphilin, 
but not TASOR, triggers interferon signaling following derepression of 
endogenous retroelements. Here, we resolve this paradox by characterizing a 
second HUSH complex that shares MPP8 and Periphilin but assembles around TASOR2, 
an uncharacterized paralog of TASOR. Whereas HUSH represses LINE-1 retroelements 
marked by the repressive histone modification H3K9me3, HUSH2 is recruited by the 
transcription factor IRF2 to repress interferon-stimulated genes. 
Mechanistically, HUSH-mediated retroelement silencing sequesters the limited 
pool of the shared subunits MPP8 and Periphilin, preventing TASOR2 from forming 
HUSH2 complexes and hence relieving the HUSH2-mediated repression of 
interferon-stimulated genes. Thus, competition between two HUSH complexes 
intertwines retroelement silencing with the induction of an immune response, 
coupling epigenetic and immune aspects of genome defense.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2024.06.020
PMID: 39013473 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.
