---
pmid: '37926298'
title: Therapeutic role of 2-stearoxyphenethyl phosphocholine targeting microtubule
  dynamics and Wnt/β-catenin/EMT signaling in human colorectal cancer cells.
authors:
- Park SE
- Chung KS
- Heo SW
- Kim SY
- Lee JH
- Hassan AHE
- Lee YS
- Lee JY
- Lee KT
journal: Life Sci
year: '2023'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2023.122227
---

# Therapeutic role of 2-stearoxyphenethyl phosphocholine targeting microtubule dynamics and Wnt/β-catenin/EMT signaling in human colorectal cancer cells.
**Authors:** Park SE, Chung KS, Heo SW, Kim SY, Lee JH, Hassan AHE, Lee YS, Lee JY, Lee KT
**Journal:** Life Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lfs.2023.122227](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lfs.2023.122227)

## Abstract

1. Life Sci. 2023 Dec 1;334:122227. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2023.122227. Epub 2023 Nov
 3.

Therapeutic role of 2-stearoxyphenethyl phosphocholine targeting microtubule 
dynamics and Wnt/β-catenin/EMT signaling in human colorectal cancer cells.

Park SE(1), Chung KS(2), Heo SW(1), Kim SY(3), Lee JH(4), Hassan AHE(5), Lee 
YS(6), Lee JY(7), Lee KT(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Biochemistry, College of Pharmacy, Kyung Hee 
University, Seoul 02447, Republic of Korea; Department of Biomedical 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Kyung Hee University, Seoul 02447, 
Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Biochemistry, College of Pharmacy, Kyung Hee 
University, Seoul 02447, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: 
adella76@khu.ac.kr.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Biochemistry, College of Pharmacy, Kyung Hee 
University, Seoul 02447, Republic of Korea; Department of Fundamental 
Pharmaceutical Science, Graduate School, Kyung Hee University, Seoul 02447, 
Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutical Biochemistry, College of Pharmacy, Kyung Hee 
University, Seoul 02447, Republic of Korea; Department of Life and 
Nanopharmaceutical Science, College of Pharmacy, Kyung Hee University, Seoul 
02447, Republic of Korea.
(5)Medicinal Chemistry Laboratory, College of Pharmacy, Kyung Hee University, 
Seoul 02447, Republic of Korea; Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Faculty of 
Pharmacy, Mansoura University, Mansoura 35516, Egypt.
(6)Department of Life and Nanopharmaceutical Science, College of Pharmacy, Kyung 
Hee University, Seoul 02447, Republic of Korea; Medicinal Chemistry Laboratory, 
College of Pharmacy, Kyung Hee University, Seoul 02447, Republic of Korea. 
Electronic address: kyslee@khu.ac.kr.
(7)Research Institute for Basic Sciences and Department of Chemistry, College of 
Sciences, Kyung Hee University, Seoul 02447, Republic of Korea; KHU-KIST 
Department of Converging Science and Technology, Graduate School, Kyung Hee 
University, Seoul 02447, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: ljy@khu.ac.kr.
(8)Department of Pharmaceutical Biochemistry, College of Pharmacy, Kyung Hee 
University, Seoul 02447, Republic of Korea; Department of Fundamental 
Pharmaceutical Science, Graduate School, Kyung Hee University, Seoul 02447, 
Republic of Korea; Department of Life and Nanopharmaceutical Science, College of 
Pharmacy, Kyung Hee University, Seoul 02447, Republic of Korea. Electronic 
address: ktlee@khu.ac.kr.

The inhibition of cell death, perturbation of microtubule dynamics, and 
acceleration of Wnt/β-catenin/epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) signaling 
are fundamental processes in the progression and metastasis of colorectal cancer 
(CRC). To explore the role of 2-stearoxyphenethyl phosphocholine (stPEPC), an 
alkylphospholipid-based compound, in CRC, we conducted an MTT assay, cell cycle 
analysis, western blot analysis, immunoprecipitation, immunofluorescence 
staining, Annexin V/propidium iodide double staining, small interfering RNA gene 
silencing, a wound-healing assay, an invasion assay, and terminal 
deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) assay in the human 
CRC cell lines HT29 and HCT116. stPEPC showed anti-proliferative properties and 
mitotic cell accumulation via upregulated phosphorylation of BUBR1 and an 
association between mitotic arrest deficiency 2 (MAD2) and cell division cycle 
protein 20 homolog (CDC20). These results suggest that activation of the mitotic 
checkpoint complex and tubulin polymerization occurred, resulting in mitotic 
catastrophe in HT29 and HCT116 cells. In addition, stPEPC attenuated cell 
migration and invasion by regulating proteins mediated by EMT, such as 
E-cadherin and occludin. stPEPC altered the protein expression of Wnt3a and 
phosphorylation of low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 6 (LRP6), 
glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK3β), and β-catenin as well as their target 
genes, including cMyc and cyclin D1, in CRC cells. Thus, stPEPC may be useful 
for developing new drugs to treat human CRC.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lfs.2023.122227
PMID: 37926298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare no conflict of interest.
