---
reference_id: PMID:38474353
title: AUP1 Regulates the Endoplasmic Reticulum-Associated Degradation and Polyubiquitination of NKCC2.
authors:
- Frachon N
- Demaretz S
- Seaayfan E
- Chelbi L
- Bakhos-Douaihy D
- Laghmani K
journal: Cells
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cells13050389
content_type: abstract_only
---

# AUP1 Regulates the Endoplasmic Reticulum-Associated Degradation and Polyubiquitination of NKCC2.
**Authors:** Frachon N, Demaretz S, Seaayfan E, Chelbi L, Bakhos-Douaihy D, Laghmani K
**Journal:** Cells (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells13050389](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells13050389)

## Content

1. Cells. 2024 Feb 24;13(5):389. doi: 10.3390/cells13050389.

AUP1 Regulates the Endoplasmic Reticulum-Associated Degradation and
Polyubiquitination of NKCC2.

Frachon N(1)(2), Demaretz S(1)(2), Seaayfan E(1)(2), Chelbi L(1)(2),
Bakhos-Douaihy D(1)(2), Laghmani K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, INSERM, Sorbonne Université, Université
de Paris, F-75006 Paris, France.
(2)CNRS, ERL8228, F-75006 Paris, France.

Inactivating mutations of kidney Na-K-2Cl cotransporter NKCC2 lead to antenatal
Bartter syndrome (BS) type 1, a life-threatening salt-losing tubulopathy. We
previously reported that this serious inherited renal disease is linked to the
endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD) pathway. The purpose of this
work is to characterize further the ERAD machinery of NKCC2. Here, we report the
identification of ancient ubiquitous protein 1 (AUP1) as a novel interactor of
NKCC2 ER-resident form in renal cells. AUP1 is also an interactor of the ER
lectin OS9, a key player in the ERAD of NKCC2. Similar to OS9, AUP1
co-expression decreased the amount of total NKCC2 protein by enhancing the ER
retention and associated protein degradation of the cotransporter. Blocking the
ERAD pathway with the proteasome inhibitor MG132 or the α-mannosidase inhibitor
kifunensine fully abolished the AUP1 effect on NKCC2. Importantly, AUP1
knock-down or inhibition by overexpressing its dominant negative form strikingly
decreased NKCC2 polyubiquitination and increased the protein level of the
cotransporter. Interestingly, AUP1 co-expression produced a more profound impact
on NKCC2 folding mutants. Moreover, AUP1 also interacted with the related kidney
cotransporter NCC and downregulated its expression, strongly indicating that
AUP1 is a common regulator of sodium-dependent chloride cotransporters. In
conclusion, our data reveal the presence of an AUP1-mediated pathway enhancing
the polyubiquitination and ERAD of NKCC2. The characterization and selective
regulation of specific ERAD constituents of NKCC2 and its pathogenic mutants
could open new avenues in the therapeutic strategies for type 1 BS treatment.

DOI: 10.3390/cells13050389
PMCID: PMC10931229
PMID: 38474353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.