---
pmid: '18997010'
title: Ribonucleotide reduction is a cytosolic process in mammalian cells independently
  of DNA damage.
authors:
- Pontarin G
- Fijolek A
- Pizzo P
- Ferraro P
- Rampazzo C
- Pozzan T
- Thelander L
- Reichard PA
- Bianchi V
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2584719
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0808198105
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Ribonucleotide reduction is a cytosolic process in mammalian cells independently of DNA damage.
**Authors:** Pontarin G, Fijolek A, Pizzo P, Ferraro P, Rampazzo C, Pozzan T, Thelander L, Reichard PA, Bianchi V
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0808198105](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0808198105)
**PMC:** [PMC2584719](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2584719/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Nov 18;105(46):17801-6. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0808198105. Epub 2008 Nov 7.

Ribonucleotide reduction is a cytosolic process in mammalian cells independently 
of DNA damage.

Pontarin G(1), Fijolek A, Pizzo P, Ferraro P, Rampazzo C, Pozzan T, Thelander L, 
Reichard PA, Bianchi V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Padova, 35131 Padova, Italy.

Ribonucleotide reductase provides deoxynucleotides for nuclear and mitochondrial 
(mt) DNA replication and repair. The mammalian enzyme consists of a catalytic 
(R1) and a radical-generating (R2 or p53R2) subunit. During S-phase, a R1/R2 
complex is the major provider of deoxynucleotides. p53R2 is induced by p53 after 
DNA damage and was proposed to supply deoxynucleotides for DNA repair after 
translocating from the cytosol to the cell nucleus. Similarly R1 and R2 were 
claimed to move to the nucleus during S-phase to provide deoxynucleotides for 
DNA replication. These models suggest translocation of ribonucleotide reductase 
subunits as a regulatory mechanism. In quiescent cells that are devoid of R2, 
R1/p53R2 synthesizes deoxynucleotides also in the absence of DNA damage. 
Mutations in human p53R2 cause severe mitochondrial DNA depletion demonstrating 
a vital function for p53R2 different from DNA repair and cast doubt on a nuclear 
localization of the protein. Here we use three independent methods to localize 
R1, R2, and p53R2 in fibroblasts during cell proliferation and after DNA damage: 
Western blotting after separation of cytosol and nuclei; immunofluorescence in 
intact cells; and transfection with proteins carrying fluorescent tags. We 
thoroughly validate each method, especially the specificity of antibodies. We 
find in all cases that ribonucleotide reductase resides in the cytosol 
suggesting that the deoxynucleotides produced by the enzyme diffuse into the 
nucleus or are transported into mitochondria and supporting a primary function 
of p53R2 for mitochondrial DNA replication.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0808198105
PMCID: PMC2584719
PMID: 18997010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
