---
pmid: '30985297'
title: ATP6AP2 variant impairs CNS development and neuronal survival to cause fulminant
  neurodegeneration.
authors:
- Hirose T
- Cabrera-Socorro A
- Chitayat D
- Lemonnier T
- Féraud O
- Cifuentes-Diaz C
- Gervasi N
- Mombereau C
- Ghosh T
- Stoica L
- Bacha JDA
- Yamada H
- Lauterbach MA
- Guillon M
- Kaneko K
- Norris JW
- Siriwardena K
- Blasér S
- Teillon J
- Mendoza-Londono R
- Russeau M
- Hadoux J
- Ito S
- Corvol P
- Matheus MG
- Holden KR
- Takei K
- Emiliani V
- Bennaceur-Griscelli A
- Schwartz CE
- Nguyen G
- Groszer M
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6486358
doi: 10.1172/JCI79990
---

# ATP6AP2 variant impairs CNS development and neuronal survival to cause fulminant neurodegeneration.
**Authors:** Hirose T, Cabrera-Socorro A, Chitayat D, Lemonnier T, Féraud O, Cifuentes-Diaz C, Gervasi N, Mombereau C, Ghosh T, Stoica L, Bacha JDA, Yamada H, Lauterbach MA, Guillon M, Kaneko K, Norris JW, Siriwardena K, Blasér S, Teillon J, Mendoza-Londono R, Russeau M, Hadoux J, Ito S, Corvol P, Matheus MG, Holden KR, Takei K, Emiliani V, Bennaceur-Griscelli A, Schwartz CE, Nguyen G, Groszer M
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI79990](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI79990)
**PMC:** [PMC6486358](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6486358/)

## Abstract

1. J Clin Invest. 2019 Apr 15;129(5):2145-2162. doi: 10.1172/JCI79990.
eCollection  2019 Apr 15.

ATP6AP2 variant impairs CNS development and neuronal survival to cause fulminant 
neurodegeneration.

Hirose T(1), Cabrera-Socorro A(2)(3)(4), Chitayat D(5)(6)(7), Lemonnier 
T(2)(3)(4), Féraud O(8)(9), Cifuentes-Diaz C(2)(3)(4), Gervasi N(2)(3)(4), 
Mombereau C(2)(3)(4), Ghosh T(2)(3)(4), Stoica L(2)(3)(4), Bacha 
JDA(1)(3)(4)(10)(11), Yamada H(12), Lauterbach MA(13), Guillon M(13), Kaneko 
K(14), Norris JW(15), Siriwardena K(6), Blasér S(6), Teillon J(1)(16)(17), 
Mendoza-Londono R(6), Russeau M(2)(3)(4), Hadoux J(8)(9), Ito S(18), Corvol 
P(1)(16)(17), Matheus MG(19), Holden KR(20), Takei K(12), Emiliani V(13), 
Bennaceur-Griscelli A(8)(9)(21)(22), Schwartz CE(15), Nguyen G(1)(16)(17), 
Groszer M(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Collège de France, Center for Interdisciplinary Research in Biology, Paris, 
France.
(2)INSERM, UMR-S 1270, Paris, France.
(3)Sorbonne Université, Paris, France.
(4)Institut du Fer à Moulin, Paris, France.
(5)Prenatal Diagnosis and Medical Genetics Program, Department of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology, Mount Sinai Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(6)Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics and.
(7)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, Division of Pediatric Neuroradiology, The 
Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(8)INSERM, UMR 935, ESTeam Paris Sud, SFR André Lwoff, Université Paris Sud, 
Villejuif, France.
(9)Infrastructure Nationale INGESTEM, Université Paris Sud, INSERM, Paris, 
France.
(10)Laboratory of Applied Biotechnology, Azm Center for the Research in 
Biotechnology and Its Applications, Doctoral School for Sciences and Technology, 
Lebanese University, Tripoli, Lebanon.
(11)Reviva Regenerative Medicine Center, Human Genetic Center, Middle East 
Institute of Health Hospital, Bsalim, Lebanon.
(12)Department of Neuroscience, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan.
(13)Wavefront-Engineering Microscopy Group, Neurophotonics Laboratory, CNRS, UMR 
8250, Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(14)Department of Endocrinology and Applied Medical Science, Tohoku University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan.
(15)Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, South Carolina, USA.
(16)INSERM, U1050, Paris, France.
(17)CNRS, UMR 7241, Paris, France.
(18)Division of Nephrology, Endocrinology and Vascular Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan.
(19)Department of Neurosciences (Neurology) and.
(20)Department of Radiology, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, 
South Carolina, USA.
(21)Faculté de Médecine, Kremlin-Bicêtre, Université Paris Sud, Paris Saclay, 
France.
(22)AP-HP, Service d'Hématologie, Hôpitaux Universitaires Paris Sud, Hôpital 
Paul Brousse, Villejuif, France.

Vacuolar H+-ATPase-dependent (V-ATPase-dependent) functions are critical for 
neural proteostasis and are involved in neurodegeneration and brain 
tumorigenesis. We identified a patient with fulminant neurodegeneration of the 
developing brain carrying a de novo splice site variant in ATP6AP2 encoding an 
accessory protein of the V-ATPase. Functional studies of induced pluripotent 
stem cell-derived (iPSC-derived) neurons from this patient revealed reduced 
spontaneous activity and severe deficiency in lysosomal acidification and 
protein degradation leading to neuronal cell death. These deficiencies could be 
rescued by expression of full-length ATP6AP2. Conditional deletion of Atp6ap2 in 
developing mouse brain impaired V-ATPase-dependent functions, causing impaired 
neural stem cell self-renewal, premature neuronal differentiation, and apoptosis 
resulting in degeneration of nearly the entire cortex. In vitro studies revealed 
that ATP6AP2 deficiency decreases V-ATPase membrane assembly and increases 
endosomal-lysosomal fusion. We conclude that ATP6AP2 is a key mediator of 
V-ATPase-dependent signaling and protein degradation in the developing human 
central nervous system.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI79990
PMCID: PMC6486358
PMID: 30985297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: GN and M. Groszer are 
inventors on the European patent PCT/EP2013053538.
