---
pmid: '17124493'
title: Huntingtin inhibits caspase-3 activation.
authors:
- Zhang Y
- Leavitt BR
- van Raamsdonk JM
- Dragatsis I
- Goldowitz D
- MacDonald ME
- Hayden MR
- Friedlander RM
journal: EMBO J
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1698892
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601445
---

# Huntingtin inhibits caspase-3 activation.
**Authors:** Zhang Y, Leavitt BR, van Raamsdonk JM, Dragatsis I, Goldowitz D, MacDonald ME, Hayden MR, Friedlander RM
**Journal:** EMBO J (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7601445](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7601445)
**PMC:** [PMC1698892](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1698892/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2006 Dec 13;25(24):5896-906. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601445. Epub 2006 
Nov 23.

Huntingtin inhibits caspase-3 activation.

Zhang Y(1), Leavitt BR, van Raamsdonk JM, Dragatsis I, Goldowitz D, MacDonald 
ME, Hayden MR, Friedlander RM.

Author information:
(1)Neuroapoptosis Laboratory, Department of Neurosurgery, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 75 Francis Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Huntington's disease results from a mutation in the HD gene encoding for the 
protein huntingtin. The function of huntingtin, although beginning to be 
elucidated, remains largely unclear. To probe the prosurvival function of 
huntingtin, we modulate levels of wild-type huntingtin in a number of cellular 
and in vivo models. Huntingtin depletion resulted in caspase-3 activation, and 
overexpression of huntingtin resulted in caspase-3 inhibition. Additionally, we 
demonstrate that huntingtin physically interacts with active caspase-3. 
Interestingly, mutant huntingtin binds active caspase-3 with a lower affinity 
and lower inhibitory effect on active caspase-3 than does wild-type huntingtin. 
Although reduction of huntingtin levels resulted in caspase-3 activation in all 
conditions examined, the cellular response was cell-type specific. Depletion of 
huntingtin resulted in either overt cell death, or in increased vulnerability to 
cell death. These data demonstrate that huntingtin inhibits caspase-3 activity, 
suggesting a mechanism whereby caspase-mediated huntingtin depletion results in 
a detrimental amplification cascade leading to further caspase-3 activation, 
resulting in cell dysfunction and cell death.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601445
PMCID: PMC1698892
PMID: 17124493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
