---
pmid: '16109376'
title: The bromodomain protein Brd4 is a positive regulatory component of P-TEFb and
  stimulates RNA polymerase II-dependent transcription.
authors:
- Jang MK
- Mochizuki K
- Zhou M
- Jeong HS
- Brady JN
- Ozato K
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.06.027
---

# The bromodomain protein Brd4 is a positive regulatory component of P-TEFb and stimulates RNA polymerase II-dependent transcription.
**Authors:** Jang MK, Mochizuki K, Zhou M, Jeong HS, Brady JN, Ozato K
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2005.06.027](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2005.06.027)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2005 Aug 19;19(4):523-34. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.06.027.

The bromodomain protein Brd4 is a positive regulatory component of P-TEFb and 
stimulates RNA polymerase II-dependent transcription.

Jang MK(1), Mochizuki K, Zhou M, Jeong HS, Brady JN, Ozato K.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Growth Regulation, National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, 
USA.

Brd4 is a mammalian bromodomain protein that binds to acetylated chromatin. 
Proteomic analysis revealed that Brd4 interacts with cyclinT1 and Cdk9 that 
constitutes core positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb). Brd4 
interacted with P-TEFb in the living nucleus through its bromodomain. About half 
of P-TEFb was bound to the inhibitory subunit and functionally inactive. Brd4 
interacted with P-TEFb that was free of the inhibitory subunit. An increase in 
Brd4 expression led to increased P-TEFb-dependent phosphorylation of RNA 
polymerase II (RNAPII) CTD and stimulation of transcription from promoters in 
vivo. Conversely, a reduction in Brd4 expression by siRNA reduced CTD 
phosphorylation and transcription, revealing that Brd4 is a positive regulatory 
component of P-TEFb. In chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays, the 
recruitment of P-TEFb to a promoter was dependent on Brd4 and was enhanced by an 
increase in chromatin acetylation. Together, P-TEFb alternately interacts with 
Brd4 and the inhibitory subunit to maintain functional equilibrium in the cell.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.06.027
PMID: 16109376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
