---
pmid: '37165185'
title: Peroxisome biogenesis initiated by protein phase separation.
authors:
- Ravindran R
- Bacellar IOL
- Castellanos-Girouard X
- Wahba HM
- Zhang Z
- Omichinski JG
- Kisley L
- Michnick SW
journal: Nature
year: '2023'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: xml
pmcid: PMC10302873
doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06044-1
---

# Peroxisome biogenesis initiated by protein phase separation.
**Authors:** Ravindran R, Bacellar IOL, Castellanos-Girouard X, Wahba HM, Zhang Z, Omichinski JG, Kisley L, Michnick SW
**Journal:** Nature (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41586-023-06044-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06044-1)
**PMC:** [PMC10302873](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10302873/)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2023 May;617(7961):608-615. doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06044-1. Epub 2023
 May 10.

Peroxisome biogenesis initiated by protein phase separation.

Ravindran R(1), Bacellar IOL(1)(2), Castellanos-Girouard X(1), Wahba HM(1)(3), 
Zhang Z(4)(5), Omichinski JG(1), Kisley L(4)(6), Michnick SW(7).

Author information:
(1)Département de Biochimie, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(2)Douglas Research Centre, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Beni-Suef University, 
Beni-Suef, Egypt.
(4)Department of Physics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(5)Mitchell Physics Building (MPHY), College Station, TX, USA.
(6)Department of Chemistry, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(7)Département de Biochimie, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. 
stephen.michnick@umontreal.ca.

Peroxisomes are organelles that carry out β-oxidation of fatty acids and amino 
acids. Both rare and prevalent diseases are caused by their dysfunction1. Among 
disease-causing variant genes are those required for protein transport into 
peroxisomes. The peroxisomal protein import machinery, which also shares 
similarities with chloroplasts2, is unique in transporting folded and large, up 
to 10 nm in diameter, protein complexes into peroxisomes3. Current models 
postulate a large pore formed by transmembrane proteins4; however, so far, no 
pore structure has been observed. In the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, 
the minimum transport machinery includes the membrane proteins Pex13 and Pex14 
and the cargo-protein-binding transport receptor, Pex5. Here we show that Pex13 
undergoes liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) with Pex5-cargo. Intrinsically 
disordered regions in Pex13 and Pex5 resemble those found in nuclear pore 
complex proteins. Peroxisomal protein import depends on both the number and 
pattern of aromatic residues in these intrinsically disordered regions, 
consistent with their roles as 'stickers' in associative polymer models of 
LLPS5,6. Finally, imaging fluorescence cross-correlation spectroscopy shows that 
cargo import correlates with transient focusing of GFP-Pex13 and GFP-Pex14 on 
the peroxisome membrane. Pex13 and Pex14 form foci in distinct time frames, 
suggesting that they may form channels at different saturating concentrations of 
Pex5-cargo. Our findings lead us to suggest a model in which LLPS of Pex5-cargo 
with Pex13 and Pex14 results in transient protein transport channels7.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-023-06044-1
PMCID: PMC10302873
PMID: 37165185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.

## Full Text

The peroxins Pex5, Pex13 and Pex14 have a critical role in the protein translocation step of the peroxisomal targeting signal 1 (PTS1) pathway. Pex5 binds to cargo proteins in the cytosol, by recognition of PTS1 motifs—the carboxy-terminal tripeptide sequence serine-lysine-leucine (SKL) or its variants8. A conformation change on binding of cargo exposes an intrinsically disordered region (IDR), which interacts with the peroxisome membrane proteins Pex13 (refs. 9,10) and Pex14 (refs. 11,12), leading to translocation of cargo proteins to the peroxisomal matrix13. No channel structure has ever been observed in peroxisomes, and no physical model of transport has been validated, but compelling evidence of at least transiently formed channels has been provided. An in vitro study in which lipid membranes reconstituted with Pex14 complexes showed Pex5–cargo-dependent ion conductance with cargoes of up to 9 nm in diameter4.

A clue to a possible mechanism of transport is the sequence characteristics of IDRs in Pex5, Pex13 and Pex14 that resemble those of nucleoporin proteins of nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) (Fig. 1a,b). Notably, Pex13 features a series of Tyr-Gly (YG) repeats within its IDR (Fig. 1c). We reasoned that these residues may undergo LLPS by engaging in π–π or π–cation interactions similar to those formed by Phe-Gly (FG) repeats in nucleoporins that undergo LLPS and compose the selective-permeability filter of the NPC; we postulate that the resulting condensate forms a simple, primitive and transient NPC-like assembly14,15. This hypothesis would provide a natural explanation for protein import into peroxisomes, with peroxins forming a biomolecular condensate through LLPS and creating a transient conduit for cargo transport across the peroxisomal membrane, with Pex5 acting as a shuttling receptor analogously to karyopherins16. The budding yeast S. cerevisiae Pex13 has aromatic repeats in its IDR, and Pex5 and Pex13 notably have prion-like domains (PLDs) within their IDRs, which have been demonstrated to form biomolecular condensates through multivalent π–π or π–cation ‘sticker’ interactions5,6,17,18. Indeed, peroxisomal proteins were shown to precipitate as large complexes under ATP depletion, suggesting that their formation precedes translocation19. We thus set out to test the hypothesis that peroxisome protein transport occurs through Pex5–cargo–Pex13–Pex14 LLPS.

Cargo import depends on Pex13 YG repeatsWe predicted IDRs of yeast PTS1 peroxins, Pex5 (ref. 20), Pex13 and Pex14 (ref. 17), including PLDs, within the amino-terminal IDRs of Pex5 and Pex13, but not in Pex14 (ref.21) (Extended Data Fig. 1a–c). The Pex5 PLD (residues 150–190) is enriched in polar amino acids, Ser (S), Gln (Q) and Asn (N) (Fig. 1a), a hallmark of several known prion-like proteins. By contrast, the Pex13 PLD (amino acids 76–142) contains a high proportion of Y and G residues forming a YG repeat domain, punctuated by S or N residues (Fig. 1b), reminiscent of Phe-Gly (FG) motifs with S or Thr spacers found in nucleoporin proteins that line the central channel of the NPC (Fig. 1c).The Y residues within the Pex13 PLD are conserved despite very low sequence conservation (Extended Data Fig. 1d). To determine whether the YG repeats in Pex13 are important for PTS1 protein import, we used CRISPR–Cas9 to generate variants in which Pex13-PLD YG motifs were replaced by SG or FG motifs (Extended Data Tables 1 and 2). The substitutions (S3–S15 and F1–F14) were made between Y71 and Y133, varying in number, pattern (blocky or interspersed) and location (Extended Data Fig. 2a). Whereas the Y-to-S substitution preserves the hydroxyl group that engages in dipolar and hydrogen bond interactions, the Y-to-F change retains the aromatic ring required for π–π or π–cation interactions. To investigate whether the peroxisomal protein import is functional in the Pex13 Y-to-S or F variants, we constitutively expressed mCherry fused to a PTS1-targeting SKL sequence as a model cargo protein for which we could visualize and quantify peroxisomal uptake in vivo (Fig. 1d).We observed that both S and F substitutions affect the transport of mCherry–SKL. Whereas variants with fewer than seven Y-to-S or F substitutions exhibited mCherry–SKL foci like wild-type (WT) cells, variants with more than seven substitutions (S7–S9 and F7–F9) showed fewer mCherry–SKL foci (Extended Data Fig. 2a). No mCherry–SKL foci were observed for the S13–S15 and F13–F14 variants, showing that the Y residues in the Pex13 PLD are essential for PTS1 protein transport. To facilitate imaging experiments, we repeated the same assay in Pex13 YG variants in which the VPS1 gene is deleted, resulting in enlarged and mostly single peroxisomes in individual cells22,23. Pex13 was endogenously tagged to GFP, serving as a peroxisomal marker. We found that more than 90% of the WT-Pex13 and Pex13(S8) cells exhibited a discrete mCherry–SKL focus that overlaps with GFP–Pex13 fluorescence (Fig. 1e,f), thus showing active peroxisomal transport. By contrast, the frequency of cells with foci was reduced in the Pex13(S9) variant, with less than 25% of the S9 variant cells showing mCherry–SKL foci. mCherry–SKL fluorescence remained cytoplasmic in cells expressing the Pex13(S15) variant lacking all aromatic amino acids within the PLD (Fig. 1e–g). The sharp transition in mCherry–SKL import at a critical number of Y residues is consistent with observed dependencies of LLPS on numbers of aromatic π–π or π–cation interactions that can be made5.

Cargo import depends on Pex13 YG repeats

We predicted IDRs of yeast PTS1 peroxins, Pex5 (ref. 20), Pex13 and Pex14 (ref. 17), including PLDs, within the amino-terminal IDRs of Pex5 and Pex13, but not in Pex14 (ref.21) (Extended Data Fig. 1a–c). The Pex5 PLD (residues 150–190) is enriched in polar amino acids, Ser (S), Gln (Q) and Asn (N) (Fig. 1a), a hallmark of several known prion-like proteins. By contrast, the Pex13 PLD (amino acids 76–142) contains a high proportion of Y and G residues forming a YG repeat domain, punctuated by S or N residues (Fig. 1b), reminiscent of Phe-Gly (FG) motifs with S or Thr spacers found in nucleoporin proteins that line the central channel of the NPC (Fig. 1c).

The Y residues within the Pex13 PLD are conserved despite very low sequence conservation (Extended Data Fig. 1d). To determine whether the YG repeats in Pex13 are important for PTS1 protein import, we used CRISPR–Cas9 to generate variants in which Pex13-PLD YG motifs were replaced by SG or FG motifs (Extended Data Tables 1 and 2). The substitutions (S3–S15 and F1–F14) were made between Y71 and Y133, varying in number, pattern (blocky or interspersed) and location (Extended Data Fig. 2a). Whereas the Y-to-S substitution preserves the hydroxyl group that engages in dipolar and hydrogen bond interactions, the Y-to-F change retains the aromatic ring required for π–π or π–cation interactions. To investigate whether the peroxisomal protein import is functional in the Pex13 Y-to-S or F variants, we constitutively expressed mCherry fused to a PTS1-targeting SKL sequence as a model cargo protein for which we could visualize and quantify peroxisomal uptake in vivo (Fig. 1d).

We observed that both S and F substitutions affect the transport of mCherry–SKL. Whereas variants with fewer than seven Y-to-S or F substitutions exhibited mCherry–SKL foci like wild-type (WT) cells, variants with more than seven substitutions (S7–S9 and F7–F9) showed fewer mCherry–SKL foci (Extended Data Fig. 2a). No mCherry–SKL foci were observed for the S13–S15 and F13–F14 variants, showing that the Y residues in the Pex13 PLD are essential for PTS1 protein transport. To facilitate imaging experiments, we repeated the same assay in Pex13 YG variants in which the VPS1 gene is deleted, resulting in enlarged and mostly single peroxisomes in individual cells22,23. Pex13 was endogenously tagged to GFP, serving as a peroxisomal marker. We found that more than 90% of the WT-Pex13 and Pex13(S8) cells exhibited a discrete mCherry–SKL focus that overlaps with GFP–Pex13 fluorescence (Fig. 1e,f), thus showing active peroxisomal transport. By contrast, the frequency of cells with foci was reduced in the Pex13(S9) variant, with less than 25% of the S9 variant cells showing mCherry–SKL foci. mCherry–SKL fluorescence remained cytoplasmic in cells expressing the Pex13(S15) variant lacking all aromatic amino acids within the PLD (Fig. 1e–g). The sharp transition in mCherry–SKL import at a critical number of Y residues is consistent with observed dependencies of LLPS on numbers of aromatic π–π or π–cation interactions that can be made5.

Import at a critical Pex5–cargo levelTo further investigate the role of Pex13 YG repeats in peroxisomal protein import, we designed an assay to monitor mCherry–SKL import as a function of time, and therefore mCherry–Pex5 complex abundance, by transiently expressing the PEX5 PTS1-specific transporter gene. We introduced the inducible pGAL1 promoter immediately upstream of the PEX5 gene, thus allowing for Pex5 expression and transport of PTS1 cargo only when cells are grown in galactose-containing medium24. We measured the kinetics of mCherry–SKL foci formation in WT-Pex13 cells and Pex13 Y-to-S variants following galactose induction of Pex5 and thus peroxisomal protein import. (Fig. 2a). A Pex5 signal was detected by immunoblot approximately 30 min post galactose induction of Pex5 in WT cells (Fig. 2b and Supplementary Fig. 1). Consistent with this, our findings show that the import of mCherry–SKL begins 30 min after Pex5 induction, with more than 90% of cells showing mCherry–SKL foci that co-localize with GFP–Pex13 within 1 h (Fig. 2c,d). mCherry–SKL foci appear in an all-or-none manner that we can resolve as happening over less than 2 min, followed by a continuous increase in intensity (Fig. 2e), suggesting that Pex5 expression must reach a critical level for protein import to take place. Similarly, the S8 and S9 variant strains showed all-or-none appearance of foci, but only after 120 and 240 min of Pex5 induction, respectively (Fig. 2f and Extended Data Fig. 2b,c). These results imply that saturating concentrations of Pex5 for LLPS increase with the number of Y-to-S substitutions and rates of uptake decrease.

Import at a critical Pex5–cargo level

To further investigate the role of Pex13 YG repeats in peroxisomal protein import, we designed an assay to monitor mCherry–SKL import as a function of time, and therefore mCherry–Pex5 complex abundance, by transiently expressing the PEX5 PTS1-specific transporter gene. We introduced the inducible pGAL1 promoter immediately upstream of the PEX5 gene, thus allowing for Pex5 expression and transport of PTS1 cargo only when cells are grown in galactose-containing medium24. We measured the kinetics of mCherry–SKL foci formation in WT-Pex13 cells and Pex13 Y-to-S variants following galactose induction of Pex5 and thus peroxisomal protein import. (Fig. 2a). A Pex5 signal was detected by immunoblot approximately 30 min post galactose induction of Pex5 in WT cells (Fig. 2b and Supplementary Fig. 1). Consistent with this, our findings show that the import of mCherry–SKL begins 30 min after Pex5 induction, with more than 90% of cells showing mCherry–SKL foci that co-localize with GFP–Pex13 within 1 h (Fig. 2c,d). mCherry–SKL foci appear in an all-or-none manner that we can resolve as happening over less than 2 min, followed by a continuous increase in intensity (Fig. 2e), suggesting that Pex5 expression must reach a critical level for protein import to take place. Similarly, the S8 and S9 variant strains showed all-or-none appearance of foci, but only after 120 and 240 min of Pex5 induction, respectively (Fig. 2f and Extended Data Fig. 2b,c). These results imply that saturating concentrations of Pex5 for LLPS increase with the number of Y-to-S substitutions and rates of uptake decrease.

Import dependent on Pex13 YG patternTo determine whether the peroxisomal import efficiency also depends on the pattern of Y residues within the PLD, we measured the kinetics of mCherry–SKL foci formation in Pex13 variants expressing the same number but a different pattern of Y-to-S or F substitutions. We found that Pex13-variant strains with interspersed S8 and S9 changes exhibit faster cargo import kinetics as compared to the S8 and S9 blocky variants (Fig. 2g,i). Furthermore, mCherry–SKL import in Pex13 variants with F9 blocky substitutions proceeds faster than in the S8 blocky variant (Extended Data Fig. 3a). A sharp drop in the rate of cargo import was observed for variants with between S7 and S9 blocky substitutions (Fig. 2h,i and Extended Data Figs. 3b–d and 4). In our hypothesis, these observations are consistent with transport following phase separation that occurs when Pex5 reaches its saturating concentration for LLPS with Pex13. Both saturating concentration and rate of protein transport depend on the strength of intermolecular aromatic π–π or π–cation interactions that can be made between Pex13, Pex14 and Pex5 IDRs. Decreased valency of the S7–S9 variants results in the reduction of favourable free energies of phase separation5. In the context of the stickers-and-spacers model for the phase separation of PLDs, it has been shown that Y is a stronger sticker than F and that G and S residues act as non-equivalent spacers25. Furthermore, the pattern of YG repeats is important when we consider the frequency of mCherry–SKL foci in a population of cells. These results follow from expected variations in expression of Pex13, Pex14 and Pex5 across a population of cells and how this could determine saturating concentrations of Pex5 if we project concentration variations onto an LLPS phase diagram26 (Fig. 2j). Pex5 and Pex13 mean abundances and variations are almost equal, and assuming a Gaussian distribution of abundances with tenfold variation, would vary from approximately 1,000 to 2,000 copies per cell with a mean value of about 1,600 copies. Assuming that saturating concentrations of Pex5 and Pex13 are equal to the mean concentrations of the protein, then we would expect to observe LLPS of Pex5–cargo/Pex13/Pex14 and consequently cargo uptake in most to all cells. A small shift in the phase diagram for the S8 interspersed variant, and consequently an increase in the saturating concentration, would only slightly reduce the number of cells in which LLPS could occur, but a larger shift for the S9 blocky variant corresponding to about one standard deviation would lead to a reduction to about 20% of cells in which protein transport will occur, as we observed (Fig. 2f).

Import dependent on Pex13 YG pattern

To determine whether the peroxisomal import efficiency also depends on the pattern of Y residues within the PLD, we measured the kinetics of mCherry–SKL foci formation in Pex13 variants expressing the same number but a different pattern of Y-to-S or F substitutions. We found that Pex13-variant strains with interspersed S8 and S9 changes exhibit faster cargo import kinetics as compared to the S8 and S9 blocky variants (Fig. 2g,i). Furthermore, mCherry–SKL import in Pex13 variants with F9 blocky substitutions proceeds faster than in the S8 blocky variant (Extended Data Fig. 3a). A sharp drop in the rate of cargo import was observed for variants with between S7 and S9 blocky substitutions (Fig. 2h,i and Extended Data Figs. 3b–d and 4). In our hypothesis, these observations are consistent with transport following phase separation that occurs when Pex5 reaches its saturating concentration for LLPS with Pex13. Both saturating concentration and rate of protein transport depend on the strength of intermolecular aromatic π–π or π–cation interactions that can be made between Pex13, Pex14 and Pex5 IDRs. Decreased valency of the S7–S9 variants results in the reduction of favourable free energies of phase separation5. In the context of the stickers-and-spacers model for the phase separation of PLDs, it has been shown that Y is a stronger sticker than F and that G and S residues act as non-equivalent spacers25. Furthermore, the pattern of YG repeats is important when we consider the frequency of mCherry–SKL foci in a population of cells. These results follow from expected variations in expression of Pex13, Pex14 and Pex5 across a population of cells and how this could determine saturating concentrations of Pex5 if we project concentration variations onto an LLPS phase diagram26 (Fig. 2j). Pex5 and Pex13 mean abundances and variations are almost equal, and assuming a Gaussian distribution of abundances with tenfold variation, would vary from approximately 1,000 to 2,000 copies per cell with a mean value of about 1,600 copies. Assuming that saturating concentrations of Pex5 and Pex13 are equal to the mean concentrations of the protein, then we would expect to observe LLPS of Pex5–cargo/Pex13/Pex14 and consequently cargo uptake in most to all cells. A small shift in the phase diagram for the S8 interspersed variant, and consequently an increase in the saturating concentration, would only slightly reduce the number of cells in which LLPS could occur, but a larger shift for the S9 blocky variant corresponding to about one standard deviation would lead to a reduction to about 20% of cells in which protein transport will occur, as we observed (Fig. 2f).

Pex5–cargo partition into Pex13 dropletsWe expressed and purified the IDRs of WT Pex13, Pex13(S8), Pex13(S15), Pex5 and Pex14 (Extended Data Fig. 5a) and induced LLPS by rapidly diluting the concentrated protein stock in a phase separation buffer similar to that used to study LLPS with nucleoporin IDRs (20 mM Tris pH 7.4 containing 10% polyethylene glycol (PEG) 8000)15. This assay confirmed that WT-Pex13 and Pex13(S8) IDRs form spherical condensates at 10 μM and 30 μM, respectively, and Pex13(S15) IDR does not form condensates up to 100 μM (Fig. 3a), consistent with our hypothesis that saturating concentrations for condensation of peroxins depend on aromatic π–π or π–cation interactions. Pex13-IDR condensates readily fused into single larger spheres with an average fusion timescale (τavg) of 0.2 s (Fig. 3b). Pex13 IDR tagged with AZdye 488 maleimide forms fluorescent condensates at 10 μM concentration, which was dependent on both salt and PEG (Extended Data Fig. 5b,c). Pex5 labelled with AZdye 647 maleimide also underwent salt- and PEG-dependent phase separation at 2 μM concentration (Extended Data Fig. 5d,e). By contrast, Pex14 IDR tagged with AZdye 488 maleimide (4 μM) formed elongated particles whose formation was dependent on crowding, but independent of salt concentration (Extended Data Fig. 5f,g).We next tested whether a candidate peroxisomal cargo-purified mCherry–SKL and the Pex5 transporter could partition within Pex13-IDR condensates. We titrated the concentrations at which AZdye 647 maleimide-tagged Pex5 and mCherry–SKL do not form condensates in the phase separation buffer (Extended Data Fig. 6a,b). Under these conditions, Pex5 was incubated with mCherry–SKL followed by introduction of Pex13 IDR. Pex5–mCherry–SKL complexes partitioned into the WT-Pex13-IDR condensates (Fig. 3c,d and Extended Data Fig. 6c), whereas mCherry–SKL alone did not, as expected for channel-forming events in vivo. Pex5 alone could also partition into Pex13-IDR condensates. In addition, an unrelated large protein, Cas9 (about 160 kDa), did not partition with Pex13 condensates even in the presence of Pex5, but it was not excluded, as its short-axis diameter of 50 Å is smaller than the molecular exclusion limit of about 100 Å observed for several biomolecular condensates27,28 (Extended Data Fig. 6d). Pex5–mCherry–SKL also partitioned into Pex13(S8)-IDR condensates at an elevated saturation concentration of 30 μM and remained diffusely distributed in most images of Pex13(S15)-IDR aggregates (Extended Data Fig. 6e,f). Thus, Pex13-IDR condensates act as a conduit for Pex5-bound cargo. Further, mCherry–SKL partitioned within Pex13-IDR condensates in the presence of Pex5 showed a fluorescence recovery after photobleaching within 2 min, but with a residual of 20%, suggesting a viscoelastic structure (Fig. 3e).

Pex5–cargo partition into Pex13 droplets

We expressed and purified the IDRs of WT Pex13, Pex13(S8), Pex13(S15), Pex5 and Pex14 (Extended Data Fig. 5a) and induced LLPS by rapidly diluting the concentrated protein stock in a phase separation buffer similar to that used to study LLPS with nucleoporin IDRs (20 mM Tris pH 7.4 containing 10% polyethylene glycol (PEG) 8000)15. This assay confirmed that WT-Pex13 and Pex13(S8) IDRs form spherical condensates at 10 μM and 30 μM, respectively, and Pex13(S15) IDR does not form condensates up to 100 μM (Fig. 3a), consistent with our hypothesis that saturating concentrations for condensation of peroxins depend on aromatic π–π or π–cation interactions. Pex13-IDR condensates readily fused into single larger spheres with an average fusion timescale (τavg) of 0.2 s (Fig. 3b). Pex13 IDR tagged with AZdye 488 maleimide forms fluorescent condensates at 10 μM concentration, which was dependent on both salt and PEG (Extended Data Fig. 5b,c). Pex5 labelled with AZdye 647 maleimide also underwent salt- and PEG-dependent phase separation at 2 μM concentration (Extended Data Fig. 5d,e). By contrast, Pex14 IDR tagged with AZdye 488 maleimide (4 μM) formed elongated particles whose formation was dependent on crowding, but independent of salt concentration (Extended Data Fig. 5f,g).

We next tested whether a candidate peroxisomal cargo-purified mCherry–SKL and the Pex5 transporter could partition within Pex13-IDR condensates. We titrated the concentrations at which AZdye 647 maleimide-tagged Pex5 and mCherry–SKL do not form condensates in the phase separation buffer (Extended Data Fig. 6a,b). Under these conditions, Pex5 was incubated with mCherry–SKL followed by introduction of Pex13 IDR. Pex5–mCherry–SKL complexes partitioned into the WT-Pex13-IDR condensates (Fig. 3c,d and Extended Data Fig. 6c), whereas mCherry–SKL alone did not, as expected for channel-forming events in vivo. Pex5 alone could also partition into Pex13-IDR condensates. In addition, an unrelated large protein, Cas9 (about 160 kDa), did not partition with Pex13 condensates even in the presence of Pex5, but it was not excluded, as its short-axis diameter of 50 Å is smaller than the molecular exclusion limit of about 100 Å observed for several biomolecular condensates27,28 (Extended Data Fig. 6d). Pex5–mCherry–SKL also partitioned into Pex13(S8)-IDR condensates at an elevated saturation concentration of 30 μM and remained diffusely distributed in most images of Pex13(S15)-IDR aggregates (Extended Data Fig. 6e,f). Thus, Pex13-IDR condensates act as a conduit for Pex5-bound cargo. Further, mCherry–SKL partitioned within Pex13-IDR condensates in the presence of Pex5 showed a fluorescence recovery after photobleaching within 2 min, but with a residual of 20%, suggesting a viscoelastic structure (Fig. 3e).

Transient Pex13–Pex14 foci on peroxisomeA model for peroxin-dependent protein transport begins to emerge by combining our evidence for Pex5-dependent partitioning of cargo into Pex13 condensates with that of transiently formed Pex5–cargo-dependent ion conductance in lipid bilayer vesicles reconstituted with Pex14 complexes4. It remains, however, that no transport pores in peroxisomes have been observed. We reasoned that these channels could be too small and short-lived to be directly observable with optical or electron tomographic techniques. We instead sought to identify spatially defined and transient correlations of cargo and peroxins as evidence of channel formation using imaging fluorescence cross-correlation spectroscopy (iFCCS)29,30.iFCCS calculates where mCherry–SKL and GFP–Pex13 intensities are similar within individual peroxisomes and how the relative intensities change over millisecond to second time scales (Extended Data Fig. 7). Microscopic images of GFP–Pex13 and mCherry–SKL channels (Fig. 4a) were aligned using fiduciary markers, and peroxisomes were identified using a previously established single-particle tracking algorithm31. The intensities of GFP–Pex13 or GFP–Pex14 and mCherry–SKL at each individual pixel within the peroxisome were cross-correlated over time. A cutoff of the magnitude of the cross-correlation amplitude, GXC(τ) at τ = 0 ms of > 0.5 was selected to indicate peroxisomes of interest, and the percentage of peroxisomes with GXC(τ) > 0.5 was plotted against time after Pex5 induction. Fluorescence cross-correlation follows a similar trend as observed for mCherry–SKL cargo import kinetics in Fig. 2 (Fig. 4j). Both spatial and temporal information were then obtained by inspecting the correlation curves at each pixel and over the lag times (Extended Data Fig. 7f,g). Data were collected at variable laser powers to ensure that the cross-correlation curves were not affected by photobleaching (Extended Data Fig. 7h,i).We first measured iFCCS of control GFP and mCherry fluorescent proteins either associated with or independent of one another to quantify the capabilities of our iFCCS analysis. We carried out iFCCS with a positive control in which both GFP and mCherry are fused to Pex13 (GFP–Pex13–mCherry) (Fig. 4b). We observed a high, but incomplete, percentage of 44 ± 20% peroxisomes with >0.5 cross-correlation. Spatially, high correlation values were observed throughout the entire peroxisome, indicating that Pex13 is distributed throughout the entire membrane of the peroxisome, with correlation decays of the order of seconds (Fig. 4d and Supplementary Video 1). The total dataset comprised >46,000 individual correlation curves (162 peroxisomes with 289 pixels of data each), from which we calculated an average decay time based on an exponential fit to the correlation at the pixel at the centre of each peroxisome of τ = 2.2 ± 1.3 s, probably due to the photophysics of the fluorescent protein labels32. This value indicates the resolution of our measurement that we would observe in permanent or long-lived, covalent-like association of mCherry–SKL and GFP–Pex13. A negative control of mCherry–SKL and GFP–Ant1, a peroxisomal transmembrane protein that Pex5–cargo complexes are reported not to interact with33, showed that only 6 ± 5% of peroxisomes have GXC(0 ms) > 0.5 and the spatial images showed low correlation throughout the peroxisome with the correlation randomly scattered around GXC(τ) = 0 (Fig. 4c,d and Supplementary Video 2). Finally, we analysed a GFP–Pex13 and soluble mCherry (no SKL) dataset that showed only 1.4% of peroxisomes with GXC(0 ms) > 0.5, ensuring that the high cross-correlation values obtained with mCherry–SKL foci at the peroxisome are not an artefact (Extended Data Fig. 8a).We next quantified iFCCS between GFP–Pex13 and mCherry–SKL at sub-peroxisome spatial scales with millisecond temporal resolutions following induction of Pex5 expression. On the basis of observed time courses for appearance of mCherry foci, we collected data before and after they appeared (Fig. 2d,e). We observed that before mCherry–SKL import (10 min), the correlation is low and random throughout the peroxisome (Fig. 4e, left and Supplementary Video 3), with only 3.4 ± 0.6% peroxisomes having GXC(0 ms) > 0.5. The temporal GXC seemed similar to the negative control data (Fig. 4e, right). After mCherry–SKL import in WT-Pex13 strains at 50 min, the number of peroxisomes with GXC(0 ms) > 0.5 increased over time and highly distinct clusters of pixels forming foci of GXC(0 ms) ≥ 0.5 were observed around the edges of the peroxisome (Fig. 4f and Supplementary Video 4), noticeably different from the positive control data, which show high GXC throughout the entire peroxisome. These foci of high correlation are diverse in form (ranging the entire peroxisome, polarized or centred; Extended Data Fig. 8b). Foci sizes ranged around the diffraction limit (about 300 nm), as confirmed by measuring full-width at half-maximum GXC(0 ms) intensities across pixels centred on pixels of maximum intensity, confirming our original estimate for diffraction-limited resolution and our supposition that this resolution would be sufficient to spatially resolve correlations of GFP and mCherry fluorescence (Fig. 4g,h). Temporal behaviours of GXC were also diverse with different decays within the same peroxisome and some traces showing multiple phases (Fig. 4f, right), along with variable decays and fluctuations observed in the decay and fluctuations of the cross-correlation over time between foci in different peroxisomes (Extended Data Fig. 8c). The heterogeneity over time emphasizes the transient nature of individual foci. Consequently, we did not attempt to fit the data to a model, but we note that typically GXC traces decayed faster than the 2.2 s of the positive control owing to lateral diffusion of Pex13 in the membrane, suggesting that we may be capturing the faster diffusion rates of cargo through putative transient channels. GFP–Pex14 showed similar GXC foci with mCherry–SKL as Pex13 but at longer times, suggesting that saturation concentrations of Pex5 and Pex14 for forming condensates must be higher (Fig. 4i,j). Overall, iFCCS showed that increases in mCherry–SKL uptake versus time (and thus Pex5 abundance following induction) manifested in this experiment as an increase in numbers of high-GXC foci over time reflecting the increase in mCherry–SKL import rate observed for WT Pex13 and the Y-to-S variant (Figs. 2f,h and 4j).We also estimated the effective number, Neff, of GFP–Pex13, GFP–Pex14 and Pex5 (indirectly through mCherry–SKL) from the amplitude of the autocorrelation curves30,34,35
GAC(τ), before normalization: GAC(τ) = (1/Neff)(1/[1 + (τ/τD)]). We approximate Neff as 1/GAC(0 ms). With this value, we determined the ratio between NGFP–Pex13 and NmCherry–SKL. We autocorrelated the signal from the GFP–Pex13 and mCherry–SKL channels alone, extracting a value from the pixel exhibiting the highest GXC(0 ms) > 0.5 in each peroxisome from the GFP–WT-Pex13 strain 50 min after induction. The resulting distribution of NGFP–Pex13/NmCherry–SKL has an average notably close to a 1:1 ratio between the Pex13 and cargo (and hence Pex5), but with a broader range of values up to ratios of 2 or 3 Pex13 to every mCherry–SKL cargo (Extended Data Fig. 8d). We carried out a similar analysis with the Pex14 data 90 min after induction, obtaining again a predominant ≈1:1 population ratio, with other less predominant population ratios > 1 (Extended Data Fig. 8e). The NGFP–Pex13/14/NmCherry–SKL > 1 could be another indication of the transient nature of the pores, where dynamic changes in the number of Pex13 and possibly Pex14 could depend on the stage of import and is not a fixed, static structure. We adapted our analysis to quantify these properties in droplets as well, analysing all pixels within a single condensate of WT-Pex13 IDR or Pex13(S8) IDR with Pex5 partitioned within the condensate. The resulting distribution of NPex13–488/NPex5–647 shows that the ratio of Pex13 to Pex5 decreases with the S8 alteration relative to WT, suggesting that a higher concentration of Pex5 is present in the Pex13(S8)-IDR condensate (Extended Data Fig. 8f). We note that this method ignores effects of triplet relaxation, differences in brightness between the fluorophore labels, and crosstalk between channels, and further work will be needed to carry out absolute quantification of protein numbers or equilibrium constants. Overall, the iFCCS data provide direct evidence of dynamic changes occurring at the peroxisomal membrane associated with cargo import and the transient nature of cargo–Pex13 or Pex14 bodies that correlates directly with the critical concentration of Pex5 necessary for transport to occur.

Transient Pex13–Pex14 foci on peroxisome

A model for peroxin-dependent protein transport begins to emerge by combining our evidence for Pex5-dependent partitioning of cargo into Pex13 condensates with that of transiently formed Pex5–cargo-dependent ion conductance in lipid bilayer vesicles reconstituted with Pex14 complexes4. It remains, however, that no transport pores in peroxisomes have been observed. We reasoned that these channels could be too small and short-lived to be directly observable with optical or electron tomographic techniques. We instead sought to identify spatially defined and transient correlations of cargo and peroxins as evidence of channel formation using imaging fluorescence cross-correlation spectroscopy (iFCCS)29,30.

iFCCS calculates where mCherry–SKL and GFP–Pex13 intensities are similar within individual peroxisomes and how the relative intensities change over millisecond to second time scales (Extended Data Fig. 7). Microscopic images of GFP–Pex13 and mCherry–SKL channels (Fig. 4a) were aligned using fiduciary markers, and peroxisomes were identified using a previously established single-particle tracking algorithm31. The intensities of GFP–Pex13 or GFP–Pex14 and mCherry–SKL at each individual pixel within the peroxisome were cross-correlated over time. A cutoff of the magnitude of the cross-correlation amplitude, GXC(τ) at τ = 0 ms of > 0.5 was selected to indicate peroxisomes of interest, and the percentage of peroxisomes with GXC(τ) > 0.5 was plotted against time after Pex5 induction. Fluorescence cross-correlation follows a similar trend as observed for mCherry–SKL cargo import kinetics in Fig. 2 (Fig. 4j). Both spatial and temporal information were then obtained by inspecting the correlation curves at each pixel and over the lag times (Extended Data Fig. 7f,g). Data were collected at variable laser powers to ensure that the cross-correlation curves were not affected by photobleaching (Extended Data Fig. 7h,i).

We first measured iFCCS of control GFP and mCherry fluorescent proteins either associated with or independent of one another to quantify the capabilities of our iFCCS analysis. We carried out iFCCS with a positive control in which both GFP and mCherry are fused to Pex13 (GFP–Pex13–mCherry) (Fig. 4b). We observed a high, but incomplete, percentage of 44 ± 20% peroxisomes with >0.5 cross-correlation. Spatially, high correlation values were observed throughout the entire peroxisome, indicating that Pex13 is distributed throughout the entire membrane of the peroxisome, with correlation decays of the order of seconds (Fig. 4d and Supplementary Video 1). The total dataset comprised >46,000 individual correlation curves (162 peroxisomes with 289 pixels of data each), from which we calculated an average decay time based on an exponential fit to the correlation at the pixel at the centre of each peroxisome of τ = 2.2 ± 1.3 s, probably due to the photophysics of the fluorescent protein labels32. This value indicates the resolution of our measurement that we would observe in permanent or long-lived, covalent-like association of mCherry–SKL and GFP–Pex13. A negative control of mCherry–SKL and GFP–Ant1, a peroxisomal transmembrane protein that Pex5–cargo complexes are reported not to interact with33, showed that only 6 ± 5% of peroxisomes have GXC(0 ms) > 0.5 and the spatial images showed low correlation throughout the peroxisome with the correlation randomly scattered around GXC(τ) = 0 (Fig. 4c,d and Supplementary Video 2). Finally, we analysed a GFP–Pex13 and soluble mCherry (no SKL) dataset that showed only 1.4% of peroxisomes with GXC(0 ms) > 0.5, ensuring that the high cross-correlation values obtained with mCherry–SKL foci at the peroxisome are not an artefact (Extended Data Fig. 8a).

We next quantified iFCCS between GFP–Pex13 and mCherry–SKL at sub-peroxisome spatial scales with millisecond temporal resolutions following induction of Pex5 expression. On the basis of observed time courses for appearance of mCherry foci, we collected data before and after they appeared (Fig. 2d,e). We observed that before mCherry–SKL import (10 min), the correlation is low and random throughout the peroxisome (Fig. 4e, left and Supplementary Video 3), with only 3.4 ± 0.6% peroxisomes having GXC(0 ms) > 0.5. The temporal GXC seemed similar to the negative control data (Fig. 4e, right). After mCherry–SKL import in WT-Pex13 strains at 50 min, the number of peroxisomes with GXC(0 ms) > 0.5 increased over time and highly distinct clusters of pixels forming foci of GXC(0 ms) ≥ 0.5 were observed around the edges of the peroxisome (Fig. 4f and Supplementary Video 4), noticeably different from the positive control data, which show high GXC throughout the entire peroxisome. These foci of high correlation are diverse in form (ranging the entire peroxisome, polarized or centred; Extended Data Fig. 8b). Foci sizes ranged around the diffraction limit (about 300 nm), as confirmed by measuring full-width at half-maximum GXC(0 ms) intensities across pixels centred on pixels of maximum intensity, confirming our original estimate for diffraction-limited resolution and our supposition that this resolution would be sufficient to spatially resolve correlations of GFP and mCherry fluorescence (Fig. 4g,h). Temporal behaviours of GXC were also diverse with different decays within the same peroxisome and some traces showing multiple phases (Fig. 4f, right), along with variable decays and fluctuations observed in the decay and fluctuations of the cross-correlation over time between foci in different peroxisomes (Extended Data Fig. 8c). The heterogeneity over time emphasizes the transient nature of individual foci. Consequently, we did not attempt to fit the data to a model, but we note that typically GXC traces decayed faster than the 2.2 s of the positive control owing to lateral diffusion of Pex13 in the membrane, suggesting that we may be capturing the faster diffusion rates of cargo through putative transient channels. GFP–Pex14 showed similar GXC foci with mCherry–SKL as Pex13 but at longer times, suggesting that saturation concentrations of Pex5 and Pex14 for forming condensates must be higher (Fig. 4i,j). Overall, iFCCS showed that increases in mCherry–SKL uptake versus time (and thus Pex5 abundance following induction) manifested in this experiment as an increase in numbers of high-GXC foci over time reflecting the increase in mCherry–SKL import rate observed for WT Pex13 and the Y-to-S variant (Figs. 2f,h and 4j).

We also estimated the effective number, Neff, of GFP–Pex13, GFP–Pex14 and Pex5 (indirectly through mCherry–SKL) from the amplitude of the autocorrelation curves30,34,35
GAC(τ), before normalization: GAC(τ) = (1/Neff)(1/[1 + (τ/τD)]). We approximate Neff as 1/GAC(0 ms). With this value, we determined the ratio between NGFP–Pex13 and NmCherry–SKL. We autocorrelated the signal from the GFP–Pex13 and mCherry–SKL channels alone, extracting a value from the pixel exhibiting the highest GXC(0 ms) > 0.5 in each peroxisome from the GFP–WT-Pex13 strain 50 min after induction. The resulting distribution of NGFP–Pex13/NmCherry–SKL has an average notably close to a 1:1 ratio between the Pex13 and cargo (and hence Pex5), but with a broader range of values up to ratios of 2 or 3 Pex13 to every mCherry–SKL cargo (Extended Data Fig. 8d). We carried out a similar analysis with the Pex14 data 90 min after induction, obtaining again a predominant ≈1:1 population ratio, with other less predominant population ratios > 1 (Extended Data Fig. 8e). The NGFP–Pex13/14/NmCherry–SKL > 1 could be another indication of the transient nature of the pores, where dynamic changes in the number of Pex13 and possibly Pex14 could depend on the stage of import and is not a fixed, static structure. We adapted our analysis to quantify these properties in droplets as well, analysing all pixels within a single condensate of WT-Pex13 IDR or Pex13(S8) IDR with Pex5 partitioned within the condensate. The resulting distribution of NPex13–488/NPex5–647 shows that the ratio of Pex13 to Pex5 decreases with the S8 alteration relative to WT, suggesting that a higher concentration of Pex5 is present in the Pex13(S8)-IDR condensate (Extended Data Fig. 8f). We note that this method ignores effects of triplet relaxation, differences in brightness between the fluorophore labels, and crosstalk between channels, and further work will be needed to carry out absolute quantification of protein numbers or equilibrium constants. Overall, the iFCCS data provide direct evidence of dynamic changes occurring at the peroxisomal membrane associated with cargo import and the transient nature of cargo–Pex13 or Pex14 bodies that correlates directly with the critical concentration of Pex5 necessary for transport to occur.

DiscussionThe mechanism by which folded proteins and complexes are translocated into peroxisomes has been an enigma. Here we present evidence that transient biomolecular condensates composed of Pex13, Pex14 and Pex5 could act as conduits for protein import into peroxisomes and an analogous mechanism probably also occurs in chloroplasts36. The formation of these condensates could explain how the peroxisomal pore is formed and disassembled on demand for translocating cargoes of variable size. A biochemically derived model for peroxin-mediated transport shows that the IDR of membrane-associated Pex13 is exposed to the cytosol where it captures Pex5–cargo complexes through an unknown mechanism37,38. It has also been proposed that Pex13 and Pex14 IDRs make long-range contact with cytosolic Pex5–cargo complexes to increase the association rate of Pex5 with the peroxisomal membrane17. Although the Pex5 IDR has been shown to spontaneously insert into lipid membranes in vitro39, the mechanism of Pex5 interaction with the peroxisome membrane is unclear. In our model (Fig. 4k), at specific saturating concentrations, Pex13/Pex14 and Pex5–cargo complexes form a biomolecular condensate at the peroxisomal membrane that triggers LLPS in the lipid membrane and membrane insertion of Pex5. This could be followed by a reorganization of the condensate or by membrane intercalation (Extended Data Fig. 8g) to form a transient pore in the bilayer. Such reorganization within membranes has been described before for membrane-anchored protein signalling complexes undergoing bi-dimensional phase separation40. In the peroxisome lumen, the N-terminal Pex5 pentapeptide motifs could interact with the luminal Pex14 IDR domain41. Cargo release and Pex5 departitioning from the condensate may be triggered by insertion of the Pex5 IDR into the Pex2–Pex10–Pex12 ligase channel42. Ubiquitylation of Pex5 and extraction by Pex1–Pex6 AAA ATPase could restart the cycle of cargo binding43, phase separation and cargo release. Notably, blocking the Pex5 ubiquitylation step leads to accumulation of Pex13 (but not Pex14)42, suggesting that Pex5 recycling may be linked to resetting Pex13 homeostasis on the peroxisomal membrane.Our model serves as a framework for advancing knowledge on the function and dynamics of peroxisomes. The demonstration of transient foci formed by Pex13 and cargo on the peroxisome surface with a short and heterogeneous lifetime of <2.2 s explains the failure to visualize the peroxisomal pore, consistent with the generally accepted transient channel hypothesis7. A competing model was recently proposed in which a stable pore is formed composed of a Pex13 YG-repeat-dependent hydrogel44. This model would require a rapid catalytic mechanism of formation and dissolution to account for the very short lifetime of the Pex13–mCherry–SKL bodies. Furthermore, as we demonstrate, Pex13 liquid condensates are sufficient for Pex5-facilitated partitioning of cargo into the condensate, as shown for nucleoporins15,16. The existence of Pex13 and Pex14 channels at different concentrations of Pex5 suggests an analogy to active transporters of transition metals where high- and low-affinity metal transporters function to transport when extracellular metal concentrations are low or high, respectively45,46. Our model is consistent with PTS1 import required for normal peroxisome biogenesis. For instance, overexpression of Pex5 can partially compensate an import defect of a PEX14Δ mutant, supporting the notion that an increase in saturating concentrations for phase separation of channel-forming proteins in mutant peroxins could be the cause of protein transport deficits47.Defects in the import machinery of the peroxisome in humans result in peroxisome biogenesis disorders, the most severe being Zellweger spectrum disorders. Mutations that lead to deficiency or total absence of Pex5, Pex13 and Pex14 have been identified in patients with a Zellweger spectrum disorder48,49. Notably, although the IDRs have many sequence variations, none of these contributes to disease. Perhaps this is because phase separation remains robust to such sequence variations. Finally, given that Pex13, Pex14 and Pex5 are broadly conserved, the mechanism of transport we propose is probably conserved across eukaryotes50.

The mechanism by which folded proteins and complexes are translocated into peroxisomes has been an enigma. Here we present evidence that transient biomolecular condensates composed of Pex13, Pex14 and Pex5 could act as conduits for protein import into peroxisomes and an analogous mechanism probably also occurs in chloroplasts36. The formation of these condensates could explain how the peroxisomal pore is formed and disassembled on demand for translocating cargoes of variable size. A biochemically derived model for peroxin-mediated transport shows that the IDR of membrane-associated Pex13 is exposed to the cytosol where it captures Pex5–cargo complexes through an unknown mechanism37,38. It has also been proposed that Pex13 and Pex14 IDRs make long-range contact with cytosolic Pex5–cargo complexes to increase the association rate of Pex5 with the peroxisomal membrane17. Although the Pex5 IDR has been shown to spontaneously insert into lipid membranes in vitro39, the mechanism of Pex5 interaction with the peroxisome membrane is unclear. In our model (Fig. 4k), at specific saturating concentrations, Pex13/Pex14 and Pex5–cargo complexes form a biomolecular condensate at the peroxisomal membrane that triggers LLPS in the lipid membrane and membrane insertion of Pex5. This could be followed by a reorganization of the condensate or by membrane intercalation (Extended Data Fig. 8g) to form a transient pore in the bilayer. Such reorganization within membranes has been described before for membrane-anchored protein signalling complexes undergoing bi-dimensional phase separation40. In the peroxisome lumen, the N-terminal Pex5 pentapeptide motifs could interact with the luminal Pex14 IDR domain41. Cargo release and Pex5 departitioning from the condensate may be triggered by insertion of the Pex5 IDR into the Pex2–Pex10–Pex12 ligase channel42. Ubiquitylation of Pex5 and extraction by Pex1–Pex6 AAA ATPase could restart the cycle of cargo binding43, phase separation and cargo release. Notably, blocking the Pex5 ubiquitylation step leads to accumulation of Pex13 (but not Pex14)42, suggesting that Pex5 recycling may be linked to resetting Pex13 homeostasis on the peroxisomal membrane.

Our model serves as a framework for advancing knowledge on the function and dynamics of peroxisomes. The demonstration of transient foci formed by Pex13 and cargo on the peroxisome surface with a short and heterogeneous lifetime of <2.2 s explains the failure to visualize the peroxisomal pore, consistent with the generally accepted transient channel hypothesis7. A competing model was recently proposed in which a stable pore is formed composed of a Pex13 YG-repeat-dependent hydrogel44. This model would require a rapid catalytic mechanism of formation and dissolution to account for the very short lifetime of the Pex13–mCherry–SKL bodies. Furthermore, as we demonstrate, Pex13 liquid condensates are sufficient for Pex5-facilitated partitioning of cargo into the condensate, as shown for nucleoporins15,16. The existence of Pex13 and Pex14 channels at different concentrations of Pex5 suggests an analogy to active transporters of transition metals where high- and low-affinity metal transporters function to transport when extracellular metal concentrations are low or high, respectively45,46. Our model is consistent with PTS1 import required for normal peroxisome biogenesis. For instance, overexpression of Pex5 can partially compensate an import defect of a PEX14Δ mutant, supporting the notion that an increase in saturating concentrations for phase separation of channel-forming proteins in mutant peroxins could be the cause of protein transport deficits47.

Defects in the import machinery of the peroxisome in humans result in peroxisome biogenesis disorders, the most severe being Zellweger spectrum disorders. Mutations that lead to deficiency or total absence of Pex5, Pex13 and Pex14 have been identified in patients with a Zellweger spectrum disorder48,49. Notably, although the IDRs have many sequence variations, none of these contributes to disease. Perhaps this is because phase separation remains robust to such sequence variations. Finally, given that Pex13, Pex14 and Pex5 are broadly conserved, the mechanism of transport we propose is probably conserved across eukaryotes50.

MethodsStrains, gene editing and culture conditionsThe yeast strains used in this study are listed in Extended Data Table 1. All strains mentioned in Extended Data Fig. 2a are in the BY4742 background with Y-to-S or Y-to-F substitutions in untagged Pex13. Strains in the seamless SWAT background (MATα his3Δ1 leu2Δ0 met15Δ0 ura3Δ0 lys+ can1Δ∷pGAL1-SceI∷pSTE2-SpHIS5 lyp1Δ∷pSTE3-LEU2) were used for all experiments with GFP–Pex13 and GFP–Pex14 (ref. 51). Yeast transformation, manipulation of Escherichia coli and the preparation of bacterial growth medium were carried out as described previously52. Gene editing was carried out by CRISPR–Cas9 editing according to ref. 53. Imaging experiments were carried out with exponentially growing cells in synthetic complete medium. A vector constitutively expressing mCherry–SKL was designed by PCR amplification of a p413-ADH1-mCherry template and subcloned into p413-ADH1 at the XbaI and XhoI restriction sites. For kinetics and single-molecule microscopy studies of mCherry–SKL import, the GAL1 promoter (pGAL1) was amplified from the genome of the BY4742 strain and inserted upstream of the PEX5 gene by CRISPR–Cas9 editing. The plasmids used in this study are listed in Extended Data Table 2.Induction of Pex5 expression and immunoblot analysisPre-cultures of strains expressing pGal1-PEX5 were grown in synthetic complete medium lacking histidine (SC–His) containing 2% glucose w/v overnight at 30 °C with shaking. The pre-culture was washed, diluted to optical density at 600 nm (OD600 nm) of 0.2 and incubated overnight at 30 °C with shaking in SC–His medium containing 2% raffinose. The overnight culture was diluted again in SC–His medium containing 2% raffinose and allowed to reach an OD600 nm of 0.6. Cells were incubated on glass-bottom 8-well microscopy chambers (Lab-Tek Nunc) coated with 0.1% concanavalin A w/v (Sigma-Aldrich no. C-7275) for 20 min. Unbound cells were washed once with SC–His raffinose medium followed by addition of SC–His medium containing 2% galactose w/v to induce Pex5 expression. Images were acquired with a Quorum Diskovery platform consisting of a spinning-disc confocal system (see the section entitled ‘Microscopy and analysis‘) using a 100× oil immersion objective. Culture aliquots were taken for preparation of total protein extracts at the same time as for imaging. Cells were lysed in trichloroacetic acid using glass beads54, and protein extracts were electrophoresed on 12% Tris glycine gels. Gels were blotted onto PVDF membranes (Amersham Protran), and immunoblot analysis was carried out using 1:10,000 dilution of anti-Pex5 rabbit polyclonal antibody11 (a gift from R. Erdmann, Bochum, Germany) with HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG (Cell Signaling, 7074). Anti-tubulin (Sigma, T6074) in 1:5,000 dilution was used as the loading control and detected with HRP-conjugated anti-mouse IgG (Dako, P0447). Uncropped immunoblots are available in Supplementary Fig. 1.Protein purificationBacterial codon-optimized sequences were generated for all Pex13, Pex14 and Pex5 constructs by Bio Basic Life Science. To generate fusion proteins with glutathione-S-transferase (GST), Pex14-IDR, Pex5 and WT-Pex13-IDR and Pex13-variant oligonucleotides were subcloned into a a pGEX-TEV vector between the BamHI and EcoRI sites55. An N-terminal cysteine residue was added to the Pex13 and Pex14 IDRs, to allow fluorescent labelling through maleimide chemistry. The mCherry–SKL-coding oligonucleotide was subcloned into pET15b to generate a 6×His-tagged fusion protein. Proteins were expressed in E. coli BL21 strain (Novagen) in LB-Amp medium. Protein expression was induced at OD600 nm = 0.8 with 0.6 mM IPTG at 30 °C for 4 h. Cells were collected by centrifugation, resuspended in lysis buffer (20 mM Tris pH 7.4, 0.2 mM EDTA, 1 M NaCl, 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT)) and lysed by passing the suspension through a French press twice, alternating with sonicating and homogenizing cycles. Cell lysates were centrifuged at 105,000g for 1 h at 4 °C, and the resulting supernatant was incubated with glutathione Sepharose resin for 1 h at room temperature with gentle shaking. Supernatant was filtered to collect resin-bound GST-fusion protein and washed four times with lysis buffer, and twice with TEV buffer (25 mM Tris p 7.4, 100 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT). The GST tag was cleaved by incubating the resin in TEV buffer containing TEV enzyme. The sample was centrifuged after incubation with TEV, and the supernatant containing the cleaved protein was purified by anion-exchange chromatography using a column packed with either Q Sepharose High Performance (GE Healthcare) for Pex13 and Pex14 IDRs or SP Sepharose High Performance (GE Healthcare) for Pex5. The column (50 ml) was equilibrated with buffer A (20 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 2.5 mM DTT), and the protein was eluted using a gradient of buffer B (0 to 1 M NaCl over 0.5 l). Fractions containing the protein were pooled and further purified with gel filtration using a Superose-12 column equilibrated with 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl. IDRs were eluted under denaturing conditions (4 M urea added to buffer A) and buffer exchanged in 4 M guanidinium hydrochloride before flash freezing in liquid nitrogen and storing in aliquots at −80 °C. To purify mCherry–SKL, cell lysates were prepared using the above-mentioned method and buffers with the following changes. Supernatant of cell lysate was incubated with Chelating Sepharose FastFlow resin (GE Healthcare) charged with Ni2+ (according to the manufacturer’s protocol) for 1 h at room temperature with gentle shaking. Resin-bound 6×His-fusion protein was washed four times with wash buffer (20 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 5 mM imidazole) and eluted using an imidazole gradient. The 6×His tag was cleaved by incubating the resin in wash buffer containing thrombin enzyme. The supernatant containing untagged mCherry–SKL was purified by anion-exchange chromatography and gel filtration as mentioned above. For Cas9 purification, BL21 (DE3) Rosetta bacteria transformed with pET28b-Cas9-His were grown in LB medium containing chloramphenicol and kanamycin, followed by induction with 1 mM IPTG at room temperature. Cell lysates were prepared and purified as mentioned above except the following changes in buffers: lysis buffer (20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 250 mM KCl, 20 mM imidazole, 10% glycerol, 0.5 mM DTT), HisTrap column pre-equilibration buffer (20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 250 mM KCl, 20 mM imidazole, 10% glycerol, 0.5 mM DTT), elution buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 500 mM KCl, 250 mM imidazole, 10% glycerol). Cas9-containing fractions were further purified using a gel filtration column conditioned with 20 mM Tris pH 7.5 and 500 mM NaCl.In vitro phase separation assaysScreening to determine the saturation concentration of protein was carried out in 384-well microplates (Corning). A small volume (0.5 μl) of concentrated protein fractions in 4 M guanidine hydrochloride was placed on the imaging chamber and diluted rapidly in 50 μl of phase separation buffer (20 mM Tris pH 7.4 containing 10% PEG 8000). Images were taken immediately post dilution for testing droplet formation. Pex13 fusion events were captured by 30-ms time lapses using a 60× objective on a Nikon Eclipse TE2000E microscope. Fusion of two droplets of similar size was analysed as previously described56 with required changes to the MATLAB code for analysing bright-field images. For fluorescence microscopy and reconstitution assays, Pex5 was labelled with AZdye 647 maleimide (Click Chemistry Tools 1526–1), whereas WT-Pex13 IDR, Pex13(S8) IDR and Pex14 IDR were labelled with AZdye 488 maleimide (Click Chemistry Tools 1520–1) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. A small amount of labelled protein was added to unlabelled protein (1% labelled protein) and tested for droplet formation to determine whether labelling affects saturation concentration for phase separation. For reconstitution assays, equimolar concentrations of AZdye 647 maleimide-labelled Pex5 and mCherry–SKL were mixed in a microfuge tube taking care to avoid introduction of bubbles and incubated at room temperature for 30 min. Pex13-IDR labelled with AZdye 488 maleimide stock (3 mM) was rapidly diluted to 10 μM in phase separation buffer directly on glass-bottom microslides (Ibidi), and formation of condensates was tested. Pex5–AZdye -647 maleimide and mCherry–SKL complex was added to the preformed Pex13 droplets to reach a final concentration at which Pex5 and mCherry–SKL do not form condensates (1 μM; Extended Data Fig. 6a,b). Negative control reactions lacking mCherry–SKL or Pex5, and in presence of an unrelated bulky protein Cas9 AZdye 488 maleimide were prepared and analysed simultaneously. Condensates were imaged immediately with the Quorum Diskovery platform consisting of a spinning-disc confocal system (see the section entitled ‘Microscopy and analysis‘) using a 100× oil immersion objective.Microscopy and analysisIn vivo imaging experiments and imaging of fluorescently labelled protein droplets were carried out using the Quorum DiskoveryFlex platform consisting of a Leica DMi6000 inverted microscope equipped with a Spectral Diskovery multimodal imaging system (Andor) attached to 2 Prime BSI cameras (Photometrics). Metamorph software (Molecular Devices) was used for image acquisition controls. Fluorescence images were acquired in a series of z-axis planes (0.2 μm apart). Fluorescence intensity measurement was carried out using z-axis projection of images, and the maximum fluorescence in nine adjacent pixels was measured using Fiji software57. Screening and bright-field imaging of protein droplets was carried out using a Nikon Eclipse TE2000E microscope equipped with a 60×, 1.45 plan objective (Nikon) and a Hamamatsu ORCA Flash 4.0 V2.Fluorescence recovery after photobleachingFluorescence recovery after photobleaching was carried out to determine recovery of mCherry–SKL partitioned within Pex13-IDR droplets in the presence of Pex5. Images were acquired with a spinning-disc confocal system (Quorum) using a 100× oil immersion objective and the fluorescence recovery after photobleaching module of Metamorph software. Five control images were taken using the mCherry filter before bleaching. A region of interest (ROI) of 1 μm in diameter was set for photobleaching with a 405-nm laser at 100% power for 150 ms. Images were acquired immediately every 10 s for 1 min, then every 15 s for another minute and then every 30 s for the following 3 min (total 300 s). Relative fluorescence intensity of the ROI (F) through all of the stacks was measured using the Fiji image processing package57. Additionally, recovery in a nearby unbleached fluorescent droplet (control) and a non-fluorescent background region (Fb) were also measured. The photobleaching rate (r) was calculated by comparing the fluorescence of the control region before (Fc0) and after (Fc) photobleaching: r = Fc/Fc0. The fluorescence intensity of the ROI of the droplet was normalized with the background and photobleaching rate as follows: Fnorm = (F − Fb)/r. Finally, the normalized fluorescence intensity was curve fitted with a one-phase exponential equation of GraphPad Prism software.iFCCSThe output of the microscopy data was two image stacks corresponding to 1,200 pixels × 1,200 pixels (84 μm x 84 μm) and 150 frames (22.5 s) in size (Extended Data Fig. 7). A corresponding image of fiduciary markers (Thermo Fisher T7279) taken at the coverslip–sample interface of the same area of the sample was also collected. The analysis first used the fiducial markers to align the green and red channels using MATLAB’s built in control point selection and correlation functions to ensure pixel-level accuracy between channels. The centroid positions of at least six fiducial markers were selected by hand (Extended Data Fig. 7b) and the coordinates exported (MATLAB’s cpselect). The points were further refined by using a normalized cross-correlation between the red and green channels (cpcorr). The corresponding points were used to calculate an affine transformation to shift the green channel of the GFP–Pex13 image stack with respect to the mCherry–SKL data. Next, the centroid locations of peroxisomes of interest were localized using a previously established particle localization analysis (Extended Data Fig. 7c, dashed circle provided as guide for the eye)31. The location of peroxisomes was identified from the sum of all collected frames. Single-particle tracking analysis showed that diffusion of the peroxisomes over one pixel during the observation time (> 2.2 × 104 μm2 s−1) was negligible. The GFP and mCherry intensities of the surrounding 17 pixels × 17 pixels of the peroxisome centroid location were extracted (Extended Data Fig. 7d, intensities of centroid pixel boxed in Extended Data Fig. 7c). From the intensity over time at each pixel, F(t), the intensity fluctuations, δF(t), relative to the mean intensity, <F(t)>, were calculated according to δF(t) = F(t) − <F(t)> and used to calculate the cross-correlation, G(τ), using MATLAB’s xcorr function with a normalization based on the autocorrelations of the GFP and mCherry signals at zero lag being equal to 1 (MATLAB’s coeff). The resulting cross-correlation data were used to determine protein–protein interactions at a specific locations and times. Viewed spatially at each pixel, the magnitude of the cross-correlation at τ = 0 ms and subsequent lag times were used to localize where Pex13 and mCherry–SKL are relative to each other at sub-organelle resolution (Extended Data Fig. 7f; dashed line indicates the same area as shown in Extended Data Fig. 7c). Temporally (Extended Data Fig. 7g), the cross-correlation decay curves determine how the mCherry fluorescence changes with respect to the GFP fluorescence at an individual pixel. The magnitude, shape and decay time of the curve was used to quantify dynamics. The custom code for iFCCS and the modified code for Pex13-IDR droplet fusion analysis are available on Zenodo (https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7702794 (ref. 58) and https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7702890 (ref. 59), respectively).Statistics and reproducibilityThe statistical tests used in Figs. 1f,g and 3d are mentioned in the figure legends. All experiments in Figs. 1–3 and Extended Data Figs. 2–6 were repeated at least three times independently with similar results. Biological replicates of yeast strains were used for independent experiments. For experiments with purified protein, samples from at least two different batches of protein purification were tested with similar results. iFCCS tests and controls in Fig. 4 and Extended Data Figs. 7 and 8 were validated with about 70 peroxisomes at each time point across 2 independent datasets of each yeast strain with 289 pixels of cross-correlation data for each peroxisome. As this dataset was extremely large, representative peroxisomes were selected to include in the manuscript.

Strains, gene editing and culture conditionsThe yeast strains used in this study are listed in Extended Data Table 1. All strains mentioned in Extended Data Fig. 2a are in the BY4742 background with Y-to-S or Y-to-F substitutions in untagged Pex13. Strains in the seamless SWAT background (MATα his3Δ1 leu2Δ0 met15Δ0 ura3Δ0 lys+ can1Δ∷pGAL1-SceI∷pSTE2-SpHIS5 lyp1Δ∷pSTE3-LEU2) were used for all experiments with GFP–Pex13 and GFP–Pex14 (ref. 51). Yeast transformation, manipulation of Escherichia coli and the preparation of bacterial growth medium were carried out as described previously52. Gene editing was carried out by CRISPR–Cas9 editing according to ref. 53. Imaging experiments were carried out with exponentially growing cells in synthetic complete medium. A vector constitutively expressing mCherry–SKL was designed by PCR amplification of a p413-ADH1-mCherry template and subcloned into p413-ADH1 at the XbaI and XhoI restriction sites. For kinetics and single-molecule microscopy studies of mCherry–SKL import, the GAL1 promoter (pGAL1) was amplified from the genome of the BY4742 strain and inserted upstream of the PEX5 gene by CRISPR–Cas9 editing. The plasmids used in this study are listed in Extended Data Table 2.

Strains, gene editing and culture conditions

The yeast strains used in this study are listed in Extended Data Table 1. All strains mentioned in Extended Data Fig. 2a are in the BY4742 background with Y-to-S or Y-to-F substitutions in untagged Pex13. Strains in the seamless SWAT background (MATα his3Δ1 leu2Δ0 met15Δ0 ura3Δ0 lys+ can1Δ∷pGAL1-SceI∷pSTE2-SpHIS5 lyp1Δ∷pSTE3-LEU2) were used for all experiments with GFP–Pex13 and GFP–Pex14 (ref. 51). Yeast transformation, manipulation of Escherichia coli and the preparation of bacterial growth medium were carried out as described previously52. Gene editing was carried out by CRISPR–Cas9 editing according to ref. 53. Imaging experiments were carried out with exponentially growing cells in synthetic complete medium. A vector constitutively expressing mCherry–SKL was designed by PCR amplification of a p413-ADH1-mCherry template and subcloned into p413-ADH1 at the XbaI and XhoI restriction sites. For kinetics and single-molecule microscopy studies of mCherry–SKL import, the GAL1 promoter (pGAL1) was amplified from the genome of the BY4742 strain and inserted upstream of the PEX5 gene by CRISPR–Cas9 editing. The plasmids used in this study are listed in Extended Data Table 2.

Induction of Pex5 expression and immunoblot analysisPre-cultures of strains expressing pGal1-PEX5 were grown in synthetic complete medium lacking histidine (SC–His) containing 2% glucose w/v overnight at 30 °C with shaking. The pre-culture was washed, diluted to optical density at 600 nm (OD600 nm) of 0.2 and incubated overnight at 30 °C with shaking in SC–His medium containing 2% raffinose. The overnight culture was diluted again in SC–His medium containing 2% raffinose and allowed to reach an OD600 nm of 0.6. Cells were incubated on glass-bottom 8-well microscopy chambers (Lab-Tek Nunc) coated with 0.1% concanavalin A w/v (Sigma-Aldrich no. C-7275) for 20 min. Unbound cells were washed once with SC–His raffinose medium followed by addition of SC–His medium containing 2% galactose w/v to induce Pex5 expression. Images were acquired with a Quorum Diskovery platform consisting of a spinning-disc confocal system (see the section entitled ‘Microscopy and analysis‘) using a 100× oil immersion objective. Culture aliquots were taken for preparation of total protein extracts at the same time as for imaging. Cells were lysed in trichloroacetic acid using glass beads54, and protein extracts were electrophoresed on 12% Tris glycine gels. Gels were blotted onto PVDF membranes (Amersham Protran), and immunoblot analysis was carried out using 1:10,000 dilution of anti-Pex5 rabbit polyclonal antibody11 (a gift from R. Erdmann, Bochum, Germany) with HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG (Cell Signaling, 7074). Anti-tubulin (Sigma, T6074) in 1:5,000 dilution was used as the loading control and detected with HRP-conjugated anti-mouse IgG (Dako, P0447). Uncropped immunoblots are available in Supplementary Fig. 1.

Induction of Pex5 expression and immunoblot analysis

Pre-cultures of strains expressing pGal1-PEX5 were grown in synthetic complete medium lacking histidine (SC–His) containing 2% glucose w/v overnight at 30 °C with shaking. The pre-culture was washed, diluted to optical density at 600 nm (OD600 nm) of 0.2 and incubated overnight at 30 °C with shaking in SC–His medium containing 2% raffinose. The overnight culture was diluted again in SC–His medium containing 2% raffinose and allowed to reach an OD600 nm of 0.6. Cells were incubated on glass-bottom 8-well microscopy chambers (Lab-Tek Nunc) coated with 0.1% concanavalin A w/v (Sigma-Aldrich no. C-7275) for 20 min. Unbound cells were washed once with SC–His raffinose medium followed by addition of SC–His medium containing 2% galactose w/v to induce Pex5 expression. Images were acquired with a Quorum Diskovery platform consisting of a spinning-disc confocal system (see the section entitled ‘Microscopy and analysis‘) using a 100× oil immersion objective. Culture aliquots were taken for preparation of total protein extracts at the same time as for imaging. Cells were lysed in trichloroacetic acid using glass beads54, and protein extracts were electrophoresed on 12% Tris glycine gels. Gels were blotted onto PVDF membranes (Amersham Protran), and immunoblot analysis was carried out using 1:10,000 dilution of anti-Pex5 rabbit polyclonal antibody11 (a gift from R. Erdmann, Bochum, Germany) with HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG (Cell Signaling, 7074). Anti-tubulin (Sigma, T6074) in 1:5,000 dilution was used as the loading control and detected with HRP-conjugated anti-mouse IgG (Dako, P0447). Uncropped immunoblots are available in Supplementary Fig. 1.

Protein purificationBacterial codon-optimized sequences were generated for all Pex13, Pex14 and Pex5 constructs by Bio Basic Life Science. To generate fusion proteins with glutathione-S-transferase (GST), Pex14-IDR, Pex5 and WT-Pex13-IDR and Pex13-variant oligonucleotides were subcloned into a a pGEX-TEV vector between the BamHI and EcoRI sites55. An N-terminal cysteine residue was added to the Pex13 and Pex14 IDRs, to allow fluorescent labelling through maleimide chemistry. The mCherry–SKL-coding oligonucleotide was subcloned into pET15b to generate a 6×His-tagged fusion protein. Proteins were expressed in E. coli BL21 strain (Novagen) in LB-Amp medium. Protein expression was induced at OD600 nm = 0.8 with 0.6 mM IPTG at 30 °C for 4 h. Cells were collected by centrifugation, resuspended in lysis buffer (20 mM Tris pH 7.4, 0.2 mM EDTA, 1 M NaCl, 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT)) and lysed by passing the suspension through a French press twice, alternating with sonicating and homogenizing cycles. Cell lysates were centrifuged at 105,000g for 1 h at 4 °C, and the resulting supernatant was incubated with glutathione Sepharose resin for 1 h at room temperature with gentle shaking. Supernatant was filtered to collect resin-bound GST-fusion protein and washed four times with lysis buffer, and twice with TEV buffer (25 mM Tris p 7.4, 100 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT). The GST tag was cleaved by incubating the resin in TEV buffer containing TEV enzyme. The sample was centrifuged after incubation with TEV, and the supernatant containing the cleaved protein was purified by anion-exchange chromatography using a column packed with either Q Sepharose High Performance (GE Healthcare) for Pex13 and Pex14 IDRs or SP Sepharose High Performance (GE Healthcare) for Pex5. The column (50 ml) was equilibrated with buffer A (20 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 2.5 mM DTT), and the protein was eluted using a gradient of buffer B (0 to 1 M NaCl over 0.5 l). Fractions containing the protein were pooled and further purified with gel filtration using a Superose-12 column equilibrated with 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl. IDRs were eluted under denaturing conditions (4 M urea added to buffer A) and buffer exchanged in 4 M guanidinium hydrochloride before flash freezing in liquid nitrogen and storing in aliquots at −80 °C. To purify mCherry–SKL, cell lysates were prepared using the above-mentioned method and buffers with the following changes. Supernatant of cell lysate was incubated with Chelating Sepharose FastFlow resin (GE Healthcare) charged with Ni2+ (according to the manufacturer’s protocol) for 1 h at room temperature with gentle shaking. Resin-bound 6×His-fusion protein was washed four times with wash buffer (20 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 5 mM imidazole) and eluted using an imidazole gradient. The 6×His tag was cleaved by incubating the resin in wash buffer containing thrombin enzyme. The supernatant containing untagged mCherry–SKL was purified by anion-exchange chromatography and gel filtration as mentioned above. For Cas9 purification, BL21 (DE3) Rosetta bacteria transformed with pET28b-Cas9-His were grown in LB medium containing chloramphenicol and kanamycin, followed by induction with 1 mM IPTG at room temperature. Cell lysates were prepared and purified as mentioned above except the following changes in buffers: lysis buffer (20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 250 mM KCl, 20 mM imidazole, 10% glycerol, 0.5 mM DTT), HisTrap column pre-equilibration buffer (20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 250 mM KCl, 20 mM imidazole, 10% glycerol, 0.5 mM DTT), elution buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 500 mM KCl, 250 mM imidazole, 10% glycerol). Cas9-containing fractions were further purified using a gel filtration column conditioned with 20 mM Tris pH 7.5 and 500 mM NaCl.

Protein purification

Bacterial codon-optimized sequences were generated for all Pex13, Pex14 and Pex5 constructs by Bio Basic Life Science. To generate fusion proteins with glutathione-S-transferase (GST), Pex14-IDR, Pex5 and WT-Pex13-IDR and Pex13-variant oligonucleotides were subcloned into a a pGEX-TEV vector between the BamHI and EcoRI sites55. An N-terminal cysteine residue was added to the Pex13 and Pex14 IDRs, to allow fluorescent labelling through maleimide chemistry. The mCherry–SKL-coding oligonucleotide was subcloned into pET15b to generate a 6×His-tagged fusion protein. Proteins were expressed in E. coli BL21 strain (Novagen) in LB-Amp medium. Protein expression was induced at OD600 nm = 0.8 with 0.6 mM IPTG at 30 °C for 4 h. Cells were collected by centrifugation, resuspended in lysis buffer (20 mM Tris pH 7.4, 0.2 mM EDTA, 1 M NaCl, 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT)) and lysed by passing the suspension through a French press twice, alternating with sonicating and homogenizing cycles. Cell lysates were centrifuged at 105,000g for 1 h at 4 °C, and the resulting supernatant was incubated with glutathione Sepharose resin for 1 h at room temperature with gentle shaking. Supernatant was filtered to collect resin-bound GST-fusion protein and washed four times with lysis buffer, and twice with TEV buffer (25 mM Tris p 7.4, 100 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT). The GST tag was cleaved by incubating the resin in TEV buffer containing TEV enzyme. The sample was centrifuged after incubation with TEV, and the supernatant containing the cleaved protein was purified by anion-exchange chromatography using a column packed with either Q Sepharose High Performance (GE Healthcare) for Pex13 and Pex14 IDRs or SP Sepharose High Performance (GE Healthcare) for Pex5. The column (50 ml) was equilibrated with buffer A (20 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 2.5 mM DTT), and the protein was eluted using a gradient of buffer B (0 to 1 M NaCl over 0.5 l). Fractions containing the protein were pooled and further purified with gel filtration using a Superose-12 column equilibrated with 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl. IDRs were eluted under denaturing conditions (4 M urea added to buffer A) and buffer exchanged in 4 M guanidinium hydrochloride before flash freezing in liquid nitrogen and storing in aliquots at −80 °C. To purify mCherry–SKL, cell lysates were prepared using the above-mentioned method and buffers with the following changes. Supernatant of cell lysate was incubated with Chelating Sepharose FastFlow resin (GE Healthcare) charged with Ni2+ (according to the manufacturer’s protocol) for 1 h at room temperature with gentle shaking. Resin-bound 6×His-fusion protein was washed four times with wash buffer (20 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 5 mM imidazole) and eluted using an imidazole gradient. The 6×His tag was cleaved by incubating the resin in wash buffer containing thrombin enzyme. The supernatant containing untagged mCherry–SKL was purified by anion-exchange chromatography and gel filtration as mentioned above. For Cas9 purification, BL21 (DE3) Rosetta bacteria transformed with pET28b-Cas9-His were grown in LB medium containing chloramphenicol and kanamycin, followed by induction with 1 mM IPTG at room temperature. Cell lysates were prepared and purified as mentioned above except the following changes in buffers: lysis buffer (20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 250 mM KCl, 20 mM imidazole, 10% glycerol, 0.5 mM DTT), HisTrap column pre-equilibration buffer (20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 250 mM KCl, 20 mM imidazole, 10% glycerol, 0.5 mM DTT), elution buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 500 mM KCl, 250 mM imidazole, 10% glycerol). Cas9-containing fractions were further purified using a gel filtration column conditioned with 20 mM Tris pH 7.5 and 500 mM NaCl.

In vitro phase separation assaysScreening to determine the saturation concentration of protein was carried out in 384-well microplates (Corning). A small volume (0.5 μl) of concentrated protein fractions in 4 M guanidine hydrochloride was placed on the imaging chamber and diluted rapidly in 50 μl of phase separation buffer (20 mM Tris pH 7.4 containing 10% PEG 8000). Images were taken immediately post dilution for testing droplet formation. Pex13 fusion events were captured by 30-ms time lapses using a 60× objective on a Nikon Eclipse TE2000E microscope. Fusion of two droplets of similar size was analysed as previously described56 with required changes to the MATLAB code for analysing bright-field images. For fluorescence microscopy and reconstitution assays, Pex5 was labelled with AZdye 647 maleimide (Click Chemistry Tools 1526–1), whereas WT-Pex13 IDR, Pex13(S8) IDR and Pex14 IDR were labelled with AZdye 488 maleimide (Click Chemistry Tools 1520–1) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. A small amount of labelled protein was added to unlabelled protein (1% labelled protein) and tested for droplet formation to determine whether labelling affects saturation concentration for phase separation. For reconstitution assays, equimolar concentrations of AZdye 647 maleimide-labelled Pex5 and mCherry–SKL were mixed in a microfuge tube taking care to avoid introduction of bubbles and incubated at room temperature for 30 min. Pex13-IDR labelled with AZdye 488 maleimide stock (3 mM) was rapidly diluted to 10 μM in phase separation buffer directly on glass-bottom microslides (Ibidi), and formation of condensates was tested. Pex5–AZdye -647 maleimide and mCherry–SKL complex was added to the preformed Pex13 droplets to reach a final concentration at which Pex5 and mCherry–SKL do not form condensates (1 μM; Extended Data Fig. 6a,b). Negative control reactions lacking mCherry–SKL or Pex5, and in presence of an unrelated bulky protein Cas9 AZdye 488 maleimide were prepared and analysed simultaneously. Condensates were imaged immediately with the Quorum Diskovery platform consisting of a spinning-disc confocal system (see the section entitled ‘Microscopy and analysis‘) using a 100× oil immersion objective.

In vitro phase separation assays

Screening to determine the saturation concentration of protein was carried out in 384-well microplates (Corning). A small volume (0.5 μl) of concentrated protein fractions in 4 M guanidine hydrochloride was placed on the imaging chamber and diluted rapidly in 50 μl of phase separation buffer (20 mM Tris pH 7.4 containing 10% PEG 8000). Images were taken immediately post dilution for testing droplet formation. Pex13 fusion events were captured by 30-ms time lapses using a 60× objective on a Nikon Eclipse TE2000E microscope. Fusion of two droplets of similar size was analysed as previously described56 with required changes to the MATLAB code for analysing bright-field images. For fluorescence microscopy and reconstitution assays, Pex5 was labelled with AZdye 647 maleimide (Click Chemistry Tools 1526–1), whereas WT-Pex13 IDR, Pex13(S8) IDR and Pex14 IDR were labelled with AZdye 488 maleimide (Click Chemistry Tools 1520–1) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. A small amount of labelled protein was added to unlabelled protein (1% labelled protein) and tested for droplet formation to determine whether labelling affects saturation concentration for phase separation. For reconstitution assays, equimolar concentrations of AZdye 647 maleimide-labelled Pex5 and mCherry–SKL were mixed in a microfuge tube taking care to avoid introduction of bubbles and incubated at room temperature for 30 min. Pex13-IDR labelled with AZdye 488 maleimide stock (3 mM) was rapidly diluted to 10 μM in phase separation buffer directly on glass-bottom microslides (Ibidi), and formation of condensates was tested. Pex5–AZdye -647 maleimide and mCherry–SKL complex was added to the preformed Pex13 droplets to reach a final concentration at which Pex5 and mCherry–SKL do not form condensates (1 μM; Extended Data Fig. 6a,b). Negative control reactions lacking mCherry–SKL or Pex5, and in presence of an unrelated bulky protein Cas9 AZdye 488 maleimide were prepared and analysed simultaneously. Condensates were imaged immediately with the Quorum Diskovery platform consisting of a spinning-disc confocal system (see the section entitled ‘Microscopy and analysis‘) using a 100× oil immersion objective.

Microscopy and analysisIn vivo imaging experiments and imaging of fluorescently labelled protein droplets were carried out using the Quorum DiskoveryFlex platform consisting of a Leica DMi6000 inverted microscope equipped with a Spectral Diskovery multimodal imaging system (Andor) attached to 2 Prime BSI cameras (Photometrics). Metamorph software (Molecular Devices) was used for image acquisition controls. Fluorescence images were acquired in a series of z-axis planes (0.2 μm apart). Fluorescence intensity measurement was carried out using z-axis projection of images, and the maximum fluorescence in nine adjacent pixels was measured using Fiji software57. Screening and bright-field imaging of protein droplets was carried out using a Nikon Eclipse TE2000E microscope equipped with a 60×, 1.45 plan objective (Nikon) and a Hamamatsu ORCA Flash 4.0 V2.

Microscopy and analysis

In vivo imaging experiments and imaging of fluorescently labelled protein droplets were carried out using the Quorum DiskoveryFlex platform consisting of a Leica DMi6000 inverted microscope equipped with a Spectral Diskovery multimodal imaging system (Andor) attached to 2 Prime BSI cameras (Photometrics). Metamorph software (Molecular Devices) was used for image acquisition controls. Fluorescence images were acquired in a series of z-axis planes (0.2 μm apart). Fluorescence intensity measurement was carried out using z-axis projection of images, and the maximum fluorescence in nine adjacent pixels was measured using Fiji software57. Screening and bright-field imaging of protein droplets was carried out using a Nikon Eclipse TE2000E microscope equipped with a 60×, 1.45 plan objective (Nikon) and a Hamamatsu ORCA Flash 4.0 V2.

Fluorescence recovery after photobleachingFluorescence recovery after photobleaching was carried out to determine recovery of mCherry–SKL partitioned within Pex13-IDR droplets in the presence of Pex5. Images were acquired with a spinning-disc confocal system (Quorum) using a 100× oil immersion objective and the fluorescence recovery after photobleaching module of Metamorph software. Five control images were taken using the mCherry filter before bleaching. A region of interest (ROI) of 1 μm in diameter was set for photobleaching with a 405-nm laser at 100% power for 150 ms. Images were acquired immediately every 10 s for 1 min, then every 15 s for another minute and then every 30 s for the following 3 min (total 300 s). Relative fluorescence intensity of the ROI (F) through all of the stacks was measured using the Fiji image processing package57. Additionally, recovery in a nearby unbleached fluorescent droplet (control) and a non-fluorescent background region (Fb) were also measured. The photobleaching rate (r) was calculated by comparing the fluorescence of the control region before (Fc0) and after (Fc) photobleaching: r = Fc/Fc0. The fluorescence intensity of the ROI of the droplet was normalized with the background and photobleaching rate as follows: Fnorm = (F − Fb)/r. Finally, the normalized fluorescence intensity was curve fitted with a one-phase exponential equation of GraphPad Prism software.

Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching

Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching was carried out to determine recovery of mCherry–SKL partitioned within Pex13-IDR droplets in the presence of Pex5. Images were acquired with a spinning-disc confocal system (Quorum) using a 100× oil immersion objective and the fluorescence recovery after photobleaching module of Metamorph software. Five control images were taken using the mCherry filter before bleaching. A region of interest (ROI) of 1 μm in diameter was set for photobleaching with a 405-nm laser at 100% power for 150 ms. Images were acquired immediately every 10 s for 1 min, then every 15 s for another minute and then every 30 s for the following 3 min (total 300 s). Relative fluorescence intensity of the ROI (F) through all of the stacks was measured using the Fiji image processing package57. Additionally, recovery in a nearby unbleached fluorescent droplet (control) and a non-fluorescent background region (Fb) were also measured. The photobleaching rate (r) was calculated by comparing the fluorescence of the control region before (Fc0) and after (Fc) photobleaching: r = Fc/Fc0. The fluorescence intensity of the ROI of the droplet was normalized with the background and photobleaching rate as follows: Fnorm = (F − Fb)/r. Finally, the normalized fluorescence intensity was curve fitted with a one-phase exponential equation of GraphPad Prism software.

iFCCSThe output of the microscopy data was two image stacks corresponding to 1,200 pixels × 1,200 pixels (84 μm x 84 μm) and 150 frames (22.5 s) in size (Extended Data Fig. 7). A corresponding image of fiduciary markers (Thermo Fisher T7279) taken at the coverslip–sample interface of the same area of the sample was also collected. The analysis first used the fiducial markers to align the green and red channels using MATLAB’s built in control point selection and correlation functions to ensure pixel-level accuracy between channels. The centroid positions of at least six fiducial markers were selected by hand (Extended Data Fig. 7b) and the coordinates exported (MATLAB’s cpselect). The points were further refined by using a normalized cross-correlation between the red and green channels (cpcorr). The corresponding points were used to calculate an affine transformation to shift the green channel of the GFP–Pex13 image stack with respect to the mCherry–SKL data. Next, the centroid locations of peroxisomes of interest were localized using a previously established particle localization analysis (Extended Data Fig. 7c, dashed circle provided as guide for the eye)31. The location of peroxisomes was identified from the sum of all collected frames. Single-particle tracking analysis showed that diffusion of the peroxisomes over one pixel during the observation time (> 2.2 × 104 μm2 s−1) was negligible. The GFP and mCherry intensities of the surrounding 17 pixels × 17 pixels of the peroxisome centroid location were extracted (Extended Data Fig. 7d, intensities of centroid pixel boxed in Extended Data Fig. 7c). From the intensity over time at each pixel, F(t), the intensity fluctuations, δF(t), relative to the mean intensity, <F(t)>, were calculated according to δF(t) = F(t) − <F(t)> and used to calculate the cross-correlation, G(τ), using MATLAB’s xcorr function with a normalization based on the autocorrelations of the GFP and mCherry signals at zero lag being equal to 1 (MATLAB’s coeff). The resulting cross-correlation data were used to determine protein–protein interactions at a specific locations and times. Viewed spatially at each pixel, the magnitude of the cross-correlation at τ = 0 ms and subsequent lag times were used to localize where Pex13 and mCherry–SKL are relative to each other at sub-organelle resolution (Extended Data Fig. 7f; dashed line indicates the same area as shown in Extended Data Fig. 7c). Temporally (Extended Data Fig. 7g), the cross-correlation decay curves determine how the mCherry fluorescence changes with respect to the GFP fluorescence at an individual pixel. The magnitude, shape and decay time of the curve was used to quantify dynamics. The custom code for iFCCS and the modified code for Pex13-IDR droplet fusion analysis are available on Zenodo (https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7702794 (ref. 58) and https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7702890 (ref. 59), respectively).

The output of the microscopy data was two image stacks corresponding to 1,200 pixels × 1,200 pixels (84 μm x 84 μm) and 150 frames (22.5 s) in size (Extended Data Fig. 7). A corresponding image of fiduciary markers (Thermo Fisher T7279) taken at the coverslip–sample interface of the same area of the sample was also collected. The analysis first used the fiducial markers to align the green and red channels using MATLAB’s built in control point selection and correlation functions to ensure pixel-level accuracy between channels. The centroid positions of at least six fiducial markers were selected by hand (Extended Data Fig. 7b) and the coordinates exported (MATLAB’s cpselect). The points were further refined by using a normalized cross-correlation between the red and green channels (cpcorr). The corresponding points were used to calculate an affine transformation to shift the green channel of the GFP–Pex13 image stack with respect to the mCherry–SKL data. Next, the centroid locations of peroxisomes of interest were localized using a previously established particle localization analysis (Extended Data Fig. 7c, dashed circle provided as guide for the eye)31. The location of peroxisomes was identified from the sum of all collected frames. Single-particle tracking analysis showed that diffusion of the peroxisomes over one pixel during the observation time (> 2.2 × 104 μm2 s−1) was negligible. The GFP and mCherry intensities of the surrounding 17 pixels × 17 pixels of the peroxisome centroid location were extracted (Extended Data Fig. 7d, intensities of centroid pixel boxed in Extended Data Fig. 7c). From the intensity over time at each pixel, F(t), the intensity fluctuations, δF(t), relative to the mean intensity, <F(t)>, were calculated according to δF(t) = F(t) − <F(t)> and used to calculate the cross-correlation, G(τ), using MATLAB’s xcorr function with a normalization based on the autocorrelations of the GFP and mCherry signals at zero lag being equal to 1 (MATLAB’s coeff). The resulting cross-correlation data were used to determine protein–protein interactions at a specific locations and times. Viewed spatially at each pixel, the magnitude of the cross-correlation at τ = 0 ms and subsequent lag times were used to localize where Pex13 and mCherry–SKL are relative to each other at sub-organelle resolution (Extended Data Fig. 7f; dashed line indicates the same area as shown in Extended Data Fig. 7c). Temporally (Extended Data Fig. 7g), the cross-correlation decay curves determine how the mCherry fluorescence changes with respect to the GFP fluorescence at an individual pixel. The magnitude, shape and decay time of the curve was used to quantify dynamics. The custom code for iFCCS and the modified code for Pex13-IDR droplet fusion analysis are available on Zenodo (https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7702794 (ref. 58) and https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7702890 (ref. 59), respectively).

Statistics and reproducibilityThe statistical tests used in Figs. 1f,g and 3d are mentioned in the figure legends. All experiments in Figs. 1–3 and Extended Data Figs. 2–6 were repeated at least three times independently with similar results. Biological replicates of yeast strains were used for independent experiments. For experiments with purified protein, samples from at least two different batches of protein purification were tested with similar results. iFCCS tests and controls in Fig. 4 and Extended Data Figs. 7 and 8 were validated with about 70 peroxisomes at each time point across 2 independent datasets of each yeast strain with 289 pixels of cross-correlation data for each peroxisome. As this dataset was extremely large, representative peroxisomes were selected to include in the manuscript.

Statistics and reproducibility

The statistical tests used in Figs. 1f,g and 3d are mentioned in the figure legends. All experiments in Figs. 1–3 and Extended Data Figs. 2–6 were repeated at least three times independently with similar results. Biological replicates of yeast strains were used for independent experiments. For experiments with purified protein, samples from at least two different batches of protein purification were tested with similar results. iFCCS tests and controls in Fig. 4 and Extended Data Figs. 7 and 8 were validated with about 70 peroxisomes at each time point across 2 independent datasets of each yeast strain with 289 pixels of cross-correlation data for each peroxisome. As this dataset was extremely large, representative peroxisomes were selected to include in the manuscript.

Extended DataExtended Data Fig. 1 |Predicted PLD in Pex13 and Pex5.PLD Analysis of a, Pex13 b, Pex5 and c, Pex14 using PLAAC21. Predicted PLD sequence is marked in red for Pex13 and Pex5 on the left, corresponding to the outputs on the right. d, Multiple sequence alignment of the Pex13 sequence from the indicated five species, showing conserved Y residues within the predicted yeast PLD sequence.Extended Data Fig. 2 |PTS1 transport defective in Pex13-PLD variants.a, Distribution of Y (white) to F (orange) or S (purple) substitutions introduced in the Pex13 PLD using CRISPR-Cas9. Point mutation heat map shown in shades of gray denotes the number of mCherry foci observed in the indicated cells. n = 100 cells from 3 independent experiments. Confocal images of b, GFP-Pex13-S8 (interspersed) and c, GFP-Pex13-S9 (blocky) cells taken at the indicated time points after induction of Pex5. Scale bar 5 μm. Percentage cells displaying mCherry-SKL foci are indicated below each panel. n = 100 cells per sample.Extended Data Fig. 3 |Import kinetics in Pex13-WT and Y→S or F substitutions.a, Percentage of cells displaying mCherry-SKL foci in the indicated strains following Pex5 induction. Error bars are mean ± s.e.m. for 3 independent experiments, n = 100 cells. The schematic on the right shows the Y→S or F substitutions made. b, Timelapse following mCherry-SKL foci formation in Pex13 WT cells (black arrow) and c, Pex13 S8 cells (orange and blue arrows). Scale bar 5 μm. d,e, mCherry-SKL foci fluorescence intensity of the cells imaged in panels b and c, respectively, plotted as a function of time after induction of Pex5 expression.Extended Data Fig. 4 |Representative images of cargo import defects.Spinning disc confocal images of a, GFP-Pex13-S7 and b, GFP-Pex13-S15 cells taken at the indicated time points after induction of Pex5. Scale bar 5 μm. Percentage cells displaying mCherry-SKL foci are indicated below the panels. n = 100 cells.Extended Data Fig. 5 |LLPS of purified PTS1 peroxins.a, Coomassie stained SDS-PAGE gels of 1 μg of the indicated purified proteins. Images of condensates formed by b,c, Pex13-IDR WT labeled with AZdye 488 maleimide d,e, Pex5 labeled with AZdye 647 maleimide and f,g, Pex14 IDR labeled with AZdye 488 maleimide. Scale bar 5 μm.Extended Data Fig. 6 |Pex5-cargo partitions into Pex13-IDR condensates.Titration of a, Pex5 and b, mCherry-SKL to determine the concentration at which they do not form condensates. 1 μM of both Pex5 and mCherry-SKL were used for in vitro reconstitution assays with Pex13-IDR. c, Reconstitution experiments to measure partitioning of Pex5 labelled with AZ 647 dye and mCherry-SKL into Pex13-IDR WT condensates immediately after mixing at room temperature. d, Cas9-AZdye 488 maleimide does not actively partition into Pex13 droplets (top) while mCherry-SKL partitions with Pex5 and Pex13 (bottom). e, Pex5 and mCherry-SKL partition into Pex13-IDR WT (10 μM) and Pex13-IDR S8 (30 μM) condensates. f, Pex13-IDR S15 does not form spherical condensates. mCherry-SKL remains diffuse in most images of Pex13-S15 aggregates (top). In some images, however, Pex5-mCherry-SKL appears to partition with Pex13-S15 (bottom). This is likely due to experimental variation, perhaps a somewhat lower concentration of Pex5-mCherry-SKL, co-aggregating with Pex13-IDR-S15. Scale bar 5 μm.Extended Data Fig. 7 |iFCCS) workflow and controls.a, Fiducial markers used to align the GFP-Pex13 and mCherry-SKL channels using MATLAB. b, The centroid position of fiducial markers are selected and the coordinates are exported using a normalized cross correlation between the red and green channels. c, The centroid locations of peroxisomes of interest are localized using a particle localization analysis (dashed circle provided as guide for the eye). d, The GFP and mCherry intensities of each of the surrounding 17×17 pixels of the peroxisome centroid location are extracted. The intensities of centroid pixel boxed in c are shown in d. Using the equation in e, the intensity fluctuations, δF(t), relative to the mean intensity are calculated and used to calculate G(τ). Resulting data f, Spatial and g, Temporal, as explained in the methods section. h, Controls for laser power effect on photo bleaching. i, Averaged standard deviation of the cross correlation curves with the maximum G_XC(0) value in each peroxisome at each laser power.Extended Data Fig. 8 |iFCCS spatial and temporal data shows transient clusters of correlated signal of mCherry-SKL and GFP-Pex13.a, Percentage of peroxisomes with GXC(0 ms) > 0.5 for GFP-Pex13 and soluble mCherry (no SKL) (gray). The-data of GFP-Pex13 with mCherry-SKL import from Fig. 4j is shown for comparison (red). b, Spatial iFCCS data from six different peroxisomes in WT 50 min after Pex5 induction where distinct transient clusters of correlated signals are observed. Images measure 1.19 μm × 1.19 μm in size. c, Transient nature of individual clusters are observed in the decay and fluctuations of the cross-correlation over time between clusters in different peroxisomes (n = 27 peroxisomes). d, Gaussian distribution of NGFP-Pex13/NmCherry-SKL obtained by autocorrelating signal from the Pex13-GFP and SKL-mCherry channels, extracting a value from the pixel exhibiting the highest GXC(0) > 0.5 in each peroxisome from the Pex13 WT strain, 50 min after Pex5 induction. e, Bimodal Gaussian fit of GFP-Pex14 same as in panel d, for data obtained 90 min after Pex5 induction. f, Distribution of NPex13–488/NPex5–647 showing the ratio of Pex13 to Pex5 in Pex13-IDR and Pex13-S8 condensates. All pixels within a single condensate of Pex13-IDR-WT or Pex13-IDR-S8 with Pex5 partitioned within the condensate were analyzed. Gaussian fit parameters μ and σ listed with 95% confidence intervals in panels d,e and f. g, An alternative transmembrane intercalation model for peroxisomal cargo import.Extended Data Table 1 |Strains used in this studyNameGenotypeSourceSWAT backgroundMATα his3Δ1 leu2Δ0 met15Δ0 ura3Δ0 lys+ can1Δ::pGAL1-Scel::pSTE2-SpHIS5 Iyp1Δ::pSTE3-LEU251BY4742
MATα his3Δ1 leu2Δ0 lys2Δ0 ura3Δ0
This studyGFP-PEX13SWAT GFP-PEX1351GFP-PEX13 VPS1ΔSWAT GFP-PEX13 VPS1ΔThis studyGFP-PEX13-S8SWAT GFP-PEX13-S8 Y→S substitutions at Y71, Y86, Y95, Y108, Y114, Y119, Y123, Y133 VPS1ΔThis studyGFP-PEX13-S9SWAT GFP-PEX13-S9 Y→S substitutions at Y71, Y81, Y86, Y95, Y108, Y114, Y119, Y123, Y133 VPS1ΔThis studyGFP-PEX13-S15SWAT GFP-PEX13-S15 Y→S substitutions at Y71, Y81, Y86, Y90, Y95, Y101, Y108, Y110, Y114, Y115, Y119, Y123, Y127 VPS1ΔThis studypGAL1-PEX5 GFP-PEX13SWAT GFP-PEX13-WT pPEX5::pGAL1-PEX5 sfGFP-PEX13-WT VPS1ΔThis studypGAL1-PEX5 GFP-PEX14SWAT GFP-PEX14 pPEX5::pGAL1-PEX5 sfGFP-PEX14 VPS1ΔThis studypGAL1-PEX5 GFP-PEX13-mCherrySWAT GFP-PEX13-WT pPEX5::pGAL1-PEX5 sfGFP-PEX13-mCherry VPS1ΔThis studypGAL1-PEX5 NOP1-GFP-ANT1Nop1-GFP, his3Δ1 leu2Δ0 met15Δ0 ura3Δ0 hphΔn::URA3::SpNOP1pr-sfGFP-ANT1 pPEX5::pGAL 1-PEX5 VPS1ΔThis studypGAL1-PEX5 GFP-PEX13-S7 blockySWAT PEX13-S7 Y→S substitutions at Y81, Y86, Y90, Y95, Y101, Y108, Y110 pPEX5::pGAL1-PEX5 VPS1ΔThis studypGAL1-PEX5 GFP-PEX13-S8 interspersedSWAT GFP-PEX13-S8 Y→S substitutions at Y71, Y86, Y95, Y108, Y114, Y119, Y123, Y133 pPEX5::pGAL1-PEX5 VPS1ΔThis studypGAL1-PEX5 GFP-PEX13-S8 blockySWAT PEX13-S8 Y→S substitutions at Y101, Y108, Y110, Y114, Y115, Y119, Y123, Y127 pPEX5::pGAL1-PEX5 VPS1ΔThis studypGAL1-PEX5 GFP-PEX13-S9 interspersedSWAT PEX13-S9 Y→S substitutions at Y71, Y81, Y86, Y95, Y108, Y114, Y119, Y123, Y133 pPEX5::pGAL1-PEX5 VPS1ΔThis studypGAL1-PEX5 GFP-PEX13-S9 blockySWAT PEX13-S9 Y→S substitutions at Y101, Y108, Y110, Y114, Y115, Y119, Y123, Y127, Y133 pPEX5::pGAL 1-PEX5 VPS1ΔThis studypGAL1-PEX5 GFP-PEX13-S15SWAT GFP-PEX13-S15 Y→S substitutions at Y71, Y81, Y86, Y90, Y95, Y101, Y108, Y110, Y114, Y115, Y119, Y123, Y127 pPEX5::pGAL1-PEX5 VPS1ΔThis studypGAL1-PEX5 GFP-PEX13-F8 blockySWAT PEX13-S8 Y→F substitutions at Y108, Y110, Y114, Y115, Y119, Y123, Y127, Y133 pPEX5::pGAL1-PEX5 VPS1ΔThis studypGAL1-PEX5 GFP-PEX13-F9 blockySWAT PEX13-S9 Y→F substitutions at Y101, Y108, Y110, Y114, Y115, Y119, Y123, Y127, Y133 pPEX5::pGAL1-PEX5 VPS1ΔThis studyStrains in the seamless SWAT background were used for all experiments with GFP-Pex13 and GFP-Pex14. All strains mentioned in Extended Data Fig. 2a are in the BY4742 background with Y→S or Y→F substitutions in untagged Pex13.Extended Data Table 2 |Plasmids used in this studyPlasmidDescriptionSourcepWS082sgRNA entry vector53pWS175CRISPR-Cas9 vector53pWS082-vps1_del_1vps1_del_1 sgRNA, targeting 5’-CTACTGGCCAAATGACAGAG-3’This studypWS082-vps1_del_2vps1_del_2 sgRNA, targeting 5’-GAACCGACAACAGTGATCTG-3’This studypWS082-Pex5Pex5_NT sgRNA, targeting 5’-GGACGTAGGAAGTTGCTCAG-3’This studypWS082-Pex13sgRNA targeting 5’-TATACGGAAACAGCATAGGGAGG-3’This studypGEXTEVPlasmid derived from pGEX-2T, expressing GST-TEV for purification with substitution of the thrombin cleavage site for TEV cleavage site.This studypGEXTEV-Pex13-IDR (WT)Codon optimized Pex13-IDR WT sequence inserted between BamHI and EcoRIThis studypGEXTEV-Pex13-IDR (S8)Codon optimized Pex13-IDR S8 sequence inserted between BamHI and EcoRIThis studypGEXTEV-Pex13-IDR (S15)Codon optimized Pex13-IDR S15 sequence inserted between BamHI and EcoRIThis studypGEXTEV-Pex14 IDRCodon optimized Pex14-IDR sequence inserted between BamHI and EcoRIThis studypGEXTEV-Pex5Codon optimized Pex5 sequence inserted between BamHI and EcoRIThis studyp413 ADH1 mCherry-SKLYeast mcherry-SKL expression plasmid. mCherry-SKL inserted between Xbal and Xhol restriction sites of p413This studypET 15b-mCherry-SKL-HismCherry-SKL purificationThis studypET28b-Cas9-HisCas9 purificationThis studyPlasmids for CRISPR-based techniques in S. cerevisiae and protein purification of codon-optimized S. cerevisiae proteins in bacteria.

Extended Data

Predicted PLD in Pex13 and Pex5.

PLD Analysis of a, Pex13 b, Pex5 and c, Pex14 using PLAAC21. Predicted PLD sequence is marked in red for Pex13 and Pex5 on the left, corresponding to the outputs on the right. d, Multiple sequence alignment of the Pex13 sequence from the indicated five species, showing conserved Y residues within the predicted yeast PLD sequence.

PTS1 transport defective in Pex13-PLD variants.

a, Distribution of Y (white) to F (orange) or S (purple) substitutions introduced in the Pex13 PLD using CRISPR-Cas9. Point mutation heat map shown in shades of gray denotes the number of mCherry foci observed in the indicated cells. n = 100 cells from 3 independent experiments. Confocal images of b, GFP-Pex13-S8 (interspersed) and c, GFP-Pex13-S9 (blocky) cells taken at the indicated time points after induction of Pex5. Scale bar 5 μm. Percentage cells displaying mCherry-SKL foci are indicated below each panel. n = 100 cells per sample.

Import kinetics in Pex13-WT and Y→S or F substitutions.

a, Percentage of cells displaying mCherry-SKL foci in the indicated strains following Pex5 induction. Error bars are mean ± s.e.m. for 3 independent experiments, n = 100 cells. The schematic on the right shows the Y→S or F substitutions made. b, Timelapse following mCherry-SKL foci formation in Pex13 WT cells (black arrow) and c, Pex13 S8 cells (orange and blue arrows). Scale bar 5 μm. d,e, mCherry-SKL foci fluorescence intensity of the cells imaged in panels b and c, respectively, plotted as a function of time after induction of Pex5 expression.

Representative images of cargo import defects.

Spinning disc confocal images of a, GFP-Pex13-S7 and b, GFP-Pex13-S15 cells taken at the indicated time points after induction of Pex5. Scale bar 5 μm. Percentage cells displaying mCherry-SKL foci are indicated below the panels. n = 100 cells.

LLPS of purified PTS1 peroxins.

a, Coomassie stained SDS-PAGE gels of 1 μg of the indicated purified proteins. Images of condensates formed by b,c, Pex13-IDR WT labeled with AZdye 488 maleimide d,e, Pex5 labeled with AZdye 647 maleimide and f,g, Pex14 IDR labeled with AZdye 488 maleimide. Scale bar 5 μm.

Pex5-cargo partitions into Pex13-IDR condensates.

Titration of a, Pex5 and b, mCherry-SKL to determine the concentration at which they do not form condensates. 1 μM of both Pex5 and mCherry-SKL were used for in vitro reconstitution assays with Pex13-IDR. c, Reconstitution experiments to measure partitioning of Pex5 labelled with AZ 647 dye and mCherry-SKL into Pex13-IDR WT condensates immediately after mixing at room temperature. d, Cas9-AZdye 488 maleimide does not actively partition into Pex13 droplets (top) while mCherry-SKL partitions with Pex5 and Pex13 (bottom). e, Pex5 and mCherry-SKL partition into Pex13-IDR WT (10 μM) and Pex13-IDR S8 (30 μM) condensates. f, Pex13-IDR S15 does not form spherical condensates. mCherry-SKL remains diffuse in most images of Pex13-S15 aggregates (top). In some images, however, Pex5-mCherry-SKL appears to partition with Pex13-S15 (bottom). This is likely due to experimental variation, perhaps a somewhat lower concentration of Pex5-mCherry-SKL, co-aggregating with Pex13-IDR-S15. Scale bar 5 μm.

iFCCS) workflow and controls.

a, Fiducial markers used to align the GFP-Pex13 and mCherry-SKL channels using MATLAB. b, The centroid position of fiducial markers are selected and the coordinates are exported using a normalized cross correlation between the red and green channels. c, The centroid locations of peroxisomes of interest are localized using a particle localization analysis (dashed circle provided as guide for the eye). d, The GFP and mCherry intensities of each of the surrounding 17×17 pixels of the peroxisome centroid location are extracted. The intensities of centroid pixel boxed in c are shown in d. Using the equation in e, the intensity fluctuations, δF(t), relative to the mean intensity are calculated and used to calculate G(τ). Resulting data f, Spatial and g, Temporal, as explained in the methods section. h, Controls for laser power effect on photo bleaching. i, Averaged standard deviation of the cross correlation curves with the maximum G_XC(0) value in each peroxisome at each laser power.

iFCCS spatial and temporal data shows transient clusters of correlated signal of mCherry-SKL and GFP-Pex13.

a, Percentage of peroxisomes with GXC(0 ms) > 0.5 for GFP-Pex13 and soluble mCherry (no SKL) (gray). The-data of GFP-Pex13 with mCherry-SKL import from Fig. 4j is shown for comparison (red). b, Spatial iFCCS data from six different peroxisomes in WT 50 min after Pex5 induction where distinct transient clusters of correlated signals are observed. Images measure 1.19 μm × 1.19 μm in size. c, Transient nature of individual clusters are observed in the decay and fluctuations of the cross-correlation over time between clusters in different peroxisomes (n = 27 peroxisomes). d, Gaussian distribution of NGFP-Pex13/NmCherry-SKL obtained by autocorrelating signal from the Pex13-GFP and SKL-mCherry channels, extracting a value from the pixel exhibiting the highest GXC(0) > 0.5 in each peroxisome from the Pex13 WT strain, 50 min after Pex5 induction. e, Bimodal Gaussian fit of GFP-Pex14 same as in panel d, for data obtained 90 min after Pex5 induction. f, Distribution of NPex13–488/NPex5–647 showing the ratio of Pex13 to Pex5 in Pex13-IDR and Pex13-S8 condensates. All pixels within a single condensate of Pex13-IDR-WT or Pex13-IDR-S8 with Pex5 partitioned within the condensate were analyzed. Gaussian fit parameters μ and σ listed with 95% confidence intervals in panels d,e and f. g, An alternative transmembrane intercalation model for peroxisomal cargo import.

Strains used in this study

Strains in the seamless SWAT background were used for all experiments with GFP-Pex13 and GFP-Pex14. All strains mentioned in Extended Data Fig. 2a are in the BY4742 background with Y→S or Y→F substitutions in untagged Pex13.

Plasmids used in this study

Plasmids for CRISPR-based techniques in S. cerevisiae and protein purification of codon-optimized S. cerevisiae proteins in bacteria.

Supplementary MaterialVideo 1Video 2Video3Video4SIfiguredata1data3data2data4data5data6data7data8

Supplementary Material
