---
pmid: '19800306'
title: Effect of high mobility group box-1 protein on apoptosis of peritoneal macrophages.
authors:
- Zhu XM
- Yao YM
- Liang HP
- Liu F
- Dong N
- Yu Y
- Sheng ZY
journal: Arch Biochem Biophys
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2009.09.016
---

# Effect of high mobility group box-1 protein on apoptosis of peritoneal macrophages.
**Authors:** Zhu XM, Yao YM, Liang HP, Liu F, Dong N, Yu Y, Sheng ZY
**Journal:** Arch Biochem Biophys (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.abb.2009.09.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.abb.2009.09.016)

## Abstract

1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2009 Dec;492(1-2):54-61. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2009.09.016.
 Epub 2009 Oct 1.

Effect of high mobility group box-1 protein on apoptosis of peritoneal 
macrophages.

Zhu XM(1), Yao YM, Liang HP, Liu F, Dong N, Yu Y, Sheng ZY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Burns Institute, First Hospital 
Affiliated to the Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100048, People's 
Republic of China.

The present study was performed to clarify the effects of high mobility group 
box-1 protein (HMGB1), a recently described late-acting pro-inflammatory 
cytokine, on apoptosis of macrophages. Treatment with HMGB1 (0.01, 0.1, 1, 10 
microg/ml for 24 h, or 10 microg/ml for 6, 12, 24, 48 h) resulted in a dose- and 
time-dependent induction of apoptosis in mice macrophages, peaked at 24 h after 
10 microg/ml HMGB1 stimulation. HMGB1 treatment enhanced the receptor for 
advanced glycation end products (RAGE) expression and caspase-3 activation in 
macrophages. Blockage of RAGE and caspase-3 activation could significantly 
reduce apoptosis of macrophages induced by HMGB1. The activity of NF-kappaB/p65 
in macrophages was decreased after HMGB1 treatment. These results suggested that 
HMGB1-induced apoptosis of macrophages in a dose- and time-dependent manner. 
RAGE, together with caspase-3 activation and inhibition of NF-kappaB signaling 
pathways, might be involved in the pathogenesis of macrophage apoptosis induced 
by HMGB1.

DOI: 10.1016/j.abb.2009.09.016
PMID: 19800306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
