---
pmid: '12680698'
title: The Saccharomyces cerevisiae Arr4p is involved in metal and heat tolerance.
authors:
- Shen J
- Hsu CM
- Kang BK
- Rosen BP
- Bhattacharjee H
journal: Biometals
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1023/a:1022504311669
---

# The Saccharomyces cerevisiae Arr4p is involved in metal and heat tolerance.
**Authors:** Shen J, Hsu CM, Kang BK, Rosen BP, Bhattacharjee H
**Journal:** Biometals (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1023/a:1022504311669](https://doi.org/10.1023/a:1022504311669)

## Abstract

1. Biometals. 2003 Sep;16(3):369-78. doi: 10.1023/a:1022504311669.

The Saccharomyces cerevisiae Arr4p is involved in metal and heat tolerance.

Shen J(1), Hsu CM, Kang BK, Rosen BP, Bhattacharjee H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Wayne State University 
School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan, USA.

Homologues of the bacterial ArsA ATPase are found in nearly every organism. 
While the enzyme is involved in arsenic detoxification in bacteria, the roles of 
eukaryotic homologues have not been identified. This article reports the 
function of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae homologue encoded by ARR4 gene (YDL100c 
ORF). Disruption of ARR4 was not lethal, but the disrupted strain displayed 
increased sensitivity to As3+, As5+, Co2+, Cr3+, Cu2+ or VO4(3-) salts and 
temperature. A plasmid-encoded copy of a wild-type ARR4 gene could complement 
the heat- or metal-related stress responses. Mutation of a codon within the 
consensus sequence for the nucleotide-binding site resulted in loss of 
complementation of the disrupted strain and produced a dominant negative 
phenotype in a wild type strain. Wild type and mutant Arr4p were purified from 
Escherichia coli. The wild type protein exhibited a low level of ATPase 
activity, and the mutant was inactive. The purified ATPase eluted as a dimer of 
80-kDa species. A fusion of ARR4 and the GFP (green fluorescent protein) gene 
was constructed. The gene fusion was able to complement stress-related phenotype 
of the ARR4 disruption. Under non-stress conditions, GFP fluorescence was found 
diffusely in the cytosol. Under stress conditions GFP was localized in a few 
punctate bodies resembling late endosomes. It is proposed that under heat or 
metal stress, the soluble ATPase becomes membrane-associated, perhaps through 
interaction with a partner protein, and that this complex is involved in stress 
tolerance.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1022504311669
PMID: 12680698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
