---
pmid: '8900172'
title: Type I, II, III, IV, V, and VI collagens serve as extracellular ligands for
  the isoforms of platelet-derived growth factor (AA, BB, and AB).
authors:
- Somasundaram R
- Schuppan D
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.43.26884
---

# Type I, II, III, IV, V, and VI collagens serve as extracellular ligands for the isoforms of platelet-derived growth factor (AA, BB, and AB).
**Authors:** Somasundaram R, Schuppan D
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.271.43.26884](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.271.43.26884)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1996 Oct 25;271(43):26884-91. doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.43.26884.

Type I, II, III, IV, V, and VI collagens serve as extracellular ligands for the 
isoforms of platelet-derived growth factor (AA, BB, and AB).

Somasundaram R(1), Schuppan D.

Author information:
(1)Abteilung für Gastroenterologie und Hepatologie, Universitätsklinikum 
Benjamin Franklin, Freie Universität Berlin, Hindenburgdamm 30, 12200 Berlin, 
Germany.

The biological activities of several growth factors/cytokines have been shown to 
be modulated by binding to molecules of the extracellular matrix. Here, the 
interactions of PDGF (isoforms AA, BB, and AB), a potent mitogen for mesenchymal 
cells, with collagens were investigated. All radiolabeled PDGF isoforms 
specifically interacted with type I, II, III, IV, V, and VI collagens 
(preferential binding to types III, I, VI, and IV) and their constituent chains, 
either when immobilized on polystyrene or blotted to nitrocellulose. 
PDGF-collagen interactions were of medium affinity (KD between 4 and 22 nM) and 
were inhibited by different soluble collagen chains suggesting a collagenous 
consensus binding site(s) for the PDGF isoforms investigated. Scatchard analysis 
revealed molar ratios of up to 3-4 PDGF molecules bound/triple-helical (native) 
collagen. Biological activity of collagen-bound PDGF was demonstrated by a 
1.5-3-fold stimulation of proliferation of human fibroblasts and mouse 3T3 
cells. Furthermore, a preferential association of PDGF with the collagenous 
extracellular matrix of cirrhotic liver could be shown by immunostaining. Our 
data are in accord with previous studies that localized PDGF in the 
extracellular matrix of fibroproliferative lesions and suggest that binding of 
PDGF to collagens may localize and modulate its biological activities.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.43.26884
PMID: 8900172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
