---
pmid: '29923261'
title: JMJ30-mediated demethylation of H3K9me3 drives tissue identity changes to promote
  callus formation in Arabidopsis.
authors:
- Lee K
- Park OS
- Seo PJ
journal: Plant J
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/tpj.14002
---

# JMJ30-mediated demethylation of H3K9me3 drives tissue identity changes to promote callus formation in Arabidopsis.
**Authors:** Lee K, Park OS, Seo PJ
**Journal:** Plant J (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/tpj.14002](https://doi.org/10.1111/tpj.14002)

## Abstract

1. Plant J. 2018 Sep;95(6):961-975. doi: 10.1111/tpj.14002. Epub 2018 Jul 6.

JMJ30-mediated demethylation of H3K9me3 drives tissue identity changes to 
promote callus formation in Arabidopsis.

Lee K(1), Park OS(1), Seo PJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, 16419, 
Korea.

Plant somatic cells can be reprogrammed by in vitro tissue culture methods, and 
massive genome-wide chromatin remodeling occurs, particularly during callus 
formation. Since callus tissue resembles root primordium, conversion of tissue 
identity is essentially required when leaf explants are used. Consistent with 
the fact that the differentiation state is defined by chromatin structure, which 
permits limited gene profiles, epigenetic changes underlie cellular 
reprogramming for changes to tissue identity. Although a histone methylation 
process suppressing leaf identity during leaf-to-callus transition has been 
demonstrated, the epigenetic factor involved in activation of root identity 
remains elusive. Here, we report that JUMONJI C DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 30 
(JMJ30) stimulates callus formation by promoting expression of a subset of 
LATERAL ORGAN BOUNDARIES-DOMAIN (LBD) genes that establish root primordia. The 
JMJ30 protein binds to promoters of the LBD16 and LBD29 genes along with AUXIN 
RESPONSE FACTOR 7 (ARF7) and ARF19 and activates LBD expression. Consistently, 
the JMJ30-deficient mutant displays reduced callus formation with low LBD 
transcript levels. The ARF-JMJ30 complex catalyzes the removal of methyl groups 
from H3K9me3, especially at the LBD16 and LBD29 loci to activate their 
expression during leaf-to-callus transition. Moreover, the ARF-JMJ30 complex 
further recruits ARABIDOPSIS TRITHORAX-RELATED 2 (ATXR2), which promotes 
deposition of H3K36me3 at the LBD16 and LBD29 promoters, and the tripartite 
complex ensures stable LBD activation during callus formation. These results 
indicate that the coordinated epigenetic modifications promote callus formation 
by establishing root primordium identity.

© 2018 The Authors The Plant Journal © 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/tpj.14002
PMID: 29923261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
