---
pmid: '12618308'
title: GAPs galore! A survey of putative Ras superfamily GTPase activating proteins
  in man and Drosophila.
authors:
- Bernards A
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0304-419x(02)00082-3
---

# GAPs galore! A survey of putative Ras superfamily GTPase activating proteins in man and Drosophila.
**Authors:** Bernards A
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0304-419x(02)00082-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0304-419x(02)00082-3)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2003 Mar 17;1603(2):47-82. doi: 
10.1016/s0304-419x(02)00082-3.

GAPs galore! A survey of putative Ras superfamily GTPase activating proteins in 
man and Drosophila.

Bernards A(1).

Author information:
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Building 149, 13th Street, 
Charlestown, MA 02129-2000, USA. abernard@helix.mgh.harvard.edu

Typical members of the Ras superfamily of small monomeric GTP-binding proteins 
function as regulators of diverse processes by cycling between biologically 
active GTP- and inactive GDP-bound conformations. Proteins that control this 
cycling include guanine nucleotide exchange factors or GEFs, which activate Ras 
superfamily members by catalyzing GTP for GDP exchange, and GTPase activating 
proteins or GAPs, which accelerate the low intrinsic GTP hydrolysis rate of 
typical Ras superfamily members, thus causing their inactivation. Two among the 
latter class of proteins have been implicated in common genetic disorders 
associated with an increased cancer risk, neurofibromatosis-1, and tuberous 
sclerosis. To facilitate genetic analysis, I surveyed Drosophila and human 
sequence databases for genes predicting proteins related to GAPs for Ras 
superfamily members. Remarkably, close to 0.5% of genes in both species (173 
human and 64 Drosophila genes) predict proteins related to GAPs for Arf, Rab, 
Ran, Rap, Ras, Rho, and Sar family GTPases. Information on these genes has been 
entered into a pair of relational databases, which can be used to identify 
evolutionary conserved proteins that are likely to serve basic biological 
functions, and which can be updated when definitive information on the coding 
potential of both genomes becomes available.

Copyright 2003 Elsevier Science B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/s0304-419x(02)00082-3
PMID: 12618308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
