---
pmid: '16407978'
title: The phosphatase Ppt1 is a dedicated regulator of the molecular chaperone Hsp90.
authors:
- Wandinger SK
- Suhre MH
- Wegele H
- Buchner J
journal: EMBO J
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1383513
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600930
---

# The phosphatase Ppt1 is a dedicated regulator of the molecular chaperone Hsp90.
**Authors:** Wandinger SK, Suhre MH, Wegele H, Buchner J
**Journal:** EMBO J (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7600930](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7600930)
**PMC:** [PMC1383513](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1383513/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2006 Jan 25;25(2):367-76. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600930. Epub 2006 Jan
 12.

The phosphatase Ppt1 is a dedicated regulator of the molecular chaperone Hsp90.

Wandinger SK(1), Suhre MH, Wegele H, Buchner J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Technische Universität München, Garching, Germany.

Ppt1 is the yeast member of a novel family of protein phosphatases, which is 
characterized by the presence of a tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) domain. Ppt1 
is known to bind to Hsp90, a molecular chaperone that performs essential 
functions in the folding and activation of a large number of client proteins. 
The function of Ppt1 in the Hsp90 chaperone cycle remained unknown. Here, we 
analyzed the function of Ppt1 in vivo and in vitro. We show that purified Ppt1 
specifically dephosphorylates Hsp90. This activity requires Hsp90 to be directly 
attached to Ppt1 via its TPR domain. Deletion of the ppt1 gene leads to 
hyperphosphorylation of Hsp90 in vivo and an apparent decrease in the efficiency 
of the Hsp90 chaperone system. Interestingly, several Hsp90 client proteins were 
affected in a distinct manner. Our findings indicate that the Hsp90 
multichaperone cycle is more complex than was previously thought. Besides its 
regulation via the Hsp90 ATPase activity and the sequential binding and release 
of cochaperones, with Ppt1, a specific phosphatase exists, which positively 
modulates the maturation of Hsp90 client proteins.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600930
PMCID: PMC1383513
PMID: 16407978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
