---
pmid: '11390366'
title: Golgi-localizing, gamma-adaptin ear homology domain, ADP-ribosylation factor-binding
  (GGA) proteins interact with acidic dileucine sequences within the cytoplasmic domains
  of sorting receptors through their Vps27p/Hrs/STAM (VHS) domains.
authors:
- Takatsu H
- Katoh Y
- Shiba Y
- Nakayama K
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.C100218200
---

# Golgi-localizing, gamma-adaptin ear homology domain, ADP-ribosylation factor-binding (GGA) proteins interact with acidic dileucine sequences within the cytoplasmic domains of sorting receptors through their Vps27p/Hrs/STAM (VHS) domains.
**Authors:** Takatsu H, Katoh Y, Shiba Y, Nakayama K
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.C100218200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.C100218200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jul 27;276(30):28541-5. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C100218200. Epub
2001  Jun 4.

Golgi-localizing, gamma-adaptin ear homology domain, ADP-ribosylation 
factor-binding (GGA) proteins interact with acidic dileucine sequences within 
the cytoplasmic domains of sorting receptors through their Vps27p/Hrs/STAM (VHS) 
domains.

Takatsu H(1), Katoh Y, Shiba Y, Nakayama K.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biological Sciences and Gene Experiment Center, University of 
Tsukuba, Tsukuba Science City, Ibaraki 305-8572, Japan.

GGA (Golgi-localizing, gamma-adaptin ear homology domain, ARF-binding) proteins 
are potential effectors of ADP-ribosylation factors, are associated with the 
trans-Golgi network (TGN), and are involved in protein transport from this 
compartment. By yeast two-hybrid screening and subsequent two-hybrid and 
pull-down analyses, we have shown that GGA proteins, through their VHS 
(Vps27p/Hrs/STAM) domains, interact with acidic dileucine sequences found in the 
cytoplasmic domains of TGN-localized sorting receptors such as sortilin and 
mannose 6-phosphate receptor. A mutational analysis has revealed that a leucine 
pair and a cluster of acidic residues adjacent to the pair are mainly 
responsible for the interaction. A chimeric receptor with the sortilin 
cytoplasmic domain localizes to the TGN, whereas the chimeric receptor with a 
mutation at the leucine pair or the acidic cluster is mislocalized to punctate 
structures reminiscent of early endosomes. These results indicate that GGA 
proteins regulate the localization to or exit from the TGN of the sorting 
receptors.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.C100218200
PMID: 11390366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
