---
pmid: '12214236'
title: Actin dynamics in the contractile ring during cytokinesis in fission yeast.
authors:
- Pelham RJ
- Chang F
journal: Nature
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature00999
---

# Actin dynamics in the contractile ring during cytokinesis in fission yeast.
**Authors:** Pelham RJ, Chang F
**Journal:** Nature (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature00999](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature00999)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2002 Sep 5;419(6902):82-6. doi: 10.1038/nature00999.

Actin dynamics in the contractile ring during cytokinesis in fission yeast.

Pelham RJ(1), Chang F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Columbia University College of Physicians and 
Surgeons, 701 West 168th Street, New York, New York 10032, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2002 Sep 5;419(6902):27-8. doi: 10.1038/419027a.

Cytokinesis in many eukaryotes requires a contractile ring of actin and myosin 
that cleaves the cell in two. Little is known about how actin filaments and 
other components assemble into this ring structure and generate force. Here we 
show that the contractile ring in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe is 
an active site of actin assembly. This actin polymerization activity requires 
Arp3, the formin Cdc12, profilin and WASP, but not myosin II or IQGAP proteins. 
Both newly polymerized actin filaments and pre-existing actin cables can 
contribute to the initial assembly of the ring. Once formed, the ring remains a 
dynamic structure in which actin and other ring components continuously assemble 
and disassemble from the ring every minute. The rate of actin polymerization can 
influence the rate of cleavage. Thus, actin polymerization driven by the Arp2/3 
complex and formins is a central process in cytokinesis. Our studies show that 
cytokinesis is a more dynamic process than previously thought and provide a 
perspective on the mechanism of cell division.

DOI: 10.1038/nature00999
PMID: 12214236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
