---
pmid: '12805231'
title: 'The nuclear actin-related proteins Arp7 and Arp9: a dimeric module that cooperates
  with architectural proteins for chromatin remodeling.'
authors:
- Szerlong H
- Saha A
- Cairns BR
journal: EMBO J
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC162148
doi: 10.1093/emboj/cdg296
---

# The nuclear actin-related proteins Arp7 and Arp9: a dimeric module that cooperates with architectural proteins for chromatin remodeling.
**Authors:** Szerlong H, Saha A, Cairns BR
**Journal:** EMBO J (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/cdg296](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/cdg296)
**PMC:** [PMC162148](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC162148/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2003 Jun 16;22(12):3175-87. doi: 10.1093/emboj/cdg296.

The nuclear actin-related proteins Arp7 and Arp9: a dimeric module that 
cooperates with architectural proteins for chromatin remodeling.

Szerlong H(1), Saha A, Cairns BR.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of 
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Nuclear actin-related proteins (ARPs) are essential components of chromatin 
remodeling and modifying complexes, but their functions and relationship to 
actin remain elusive. The yeast SWI/SNF and RSC complexes contain Arp7 and Arp9, 
and are shown to form a stable heterodimer with the properties of a functional 
module. Arp7 and Arp9 rely on their actin-related regions for 
heterodimerization, and their unique C-termini cooperate for assembly into RSC. 
We suggest that regulated ARP-ARP (and possibly ARP-beta-actin) 
heterodimerization might be a conserved feature of chromatin complexes. A RSC 
complex lacking Arp7/9 was isolated that displays robust nucleosome remodeling 
activity, suggesting a separate essential role for ARPs in the regulation of 
chromatin structure. A screen for suppressors of arp mutations yielded the DNA 
bending architectural transcription factor Nhp6, which interacts with RSC 
complex physically and functionally and shows facilitated binding to nucleosomes 
by RSC. We propose that Arp7/9 dimers function with DNA bending proteins to 
facilitate proper chromatin architecture and complex- complex interactions.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/cdg296
PMCID: PMC162148
PMID: 12805231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
