---
pmid: '18418388'
title: Yeast and human Ysl2p/hMon2 interact with Gga adaptors and mediate their subcellular
  distribution.
authors:
- Singer-Krüger B
- Lasić M
- Bürger AM
- Hausser A
- Pipkorn R
- Wang Y
journal: EMBO J
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2396392
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.75
---

# Yeast and human Ysl2p/hMon2 interact with Gga adaptors and mediate their subcellular distribution.
**Authors:** Singer-Krüger B, Lasić M, Bürger AM, Hausser A, Pipkorn R, Wang Y
**Journal:** EMBO J (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2008.75](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2008.75)
**PMC:** [PMC2396392](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2396392/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2008 May 21;27(10):1423-35. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.75. Epub 2008 Apr 
17.

Yeast and human Ysl2p/hMon2 interact with Gga adaptors and mediate their 
subcellular distribution.

Singer-Krüger B(1), Lasić M, Bürger AM, Hausser A, Pipkorn R, Wang Y.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Biochemistry, University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany. 
Singer-Krueger@ibc.uni-stuttgart.de

The Gga proteins represent a family of ubiquitously expressed clathrin adaptors 
engaged in vesicle budding at the tubular endosomal network/trans Golgi network. 
Their membrane recruitment is commonly thought to involve interactions with Arf 
and signals in cargo through the so-called VHS domain. For yeast Gga proteins, 
however, partners binding to its VHS domain have remained elusive and Gga 
localization does not absolutely depend on Arf. Here, we demonstrate that yeast 
Gga recruitment relies on a network of interactions between the scaffold 
Ysl2p/Mon2p, the small GTPase Arl1p, and the flippase Neo1p. Deletion of either 
YSL2 or ARL1 causes mislocalization of Gga2p, whereas a neo1-69 mutant 
accumulates Gga2p on aberrant structures. Remarkably, Ysl2p directly interacts 
with human and yeast Ggas through the VHS domain, and binding to Gga proteins is 
also found for the human Ysl2p orthologue hMon2. Thus, Ysl2p represents an 
essential, evolutionarily conserved member of a network controlling direct 
binding and membrane docking of Ggas. Because activated Arl1p is part of the 
network that binds Gga2p, Arf and Arf-like GTPases may interact in a regulatory 
cascade.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2008.75
PMCID: PMC2396392
PMID: 18418388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
