---
pmid: '8622660'
title: Analysis of ATF3, a transcription factor induced by physiological stresses
  and modulated by gadd153/Chop10.
authors:
- Chen BP
- Wolfgang CD
- Hai T
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC231098
doi: 10.1128/MCB.16.3.1157
---

# Analysis of ATF3, a transcription factor induced by physiological stresses and modulated by gadd153/Chop10.
**Authors:** Chen BP, Wolfgang CD, Hai T
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.16.3.1157](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.16.3.1157)
**PMC:** [PMC231098](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC231098/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Mar;16(3):1157-68. doi: 10.1128/MCB.16.3.1157.

Analysis of ATF3, a transcription factor induced by physiological stresses and
modulated by gadd153/Chop10.

Chen BP(1), Wolfgang CD, Hai T.

Author information:
(1)Ohio State Biochemistry Program, Ohio State University, Columbus, 43210, USA.

We demonstrate that ATF3, a member of the ATF/CREB family of transcription
factors, is induced in a variety of stressed tissues: mechanically injured
liver, toxin-injured liver, blood-deprived heart, and postseizure brain. We also
demonstrate that an ATF3-interacting protein, gadd153/Chop10, forms a
nonfunctional heterodimer with ATF3: the heterodimer, in contrast to the ATF3
homodimer, does not bind to the ATF/cyclic AMP response element consensus site
and does not repress transcription. Interestingly, ATF3 and gadd153/Chop10 are
expressed in inverse but overlapping manners during the liver's response to
carbon tetrachloride (CCl4): the level of gadd153/Chop10 mRNA is high in the
normal liver and greatly decreases upon CCl4 treatment; the level of ATF3 mRNA,
on the other hand, is low in the normal liver and greatly increases upon CCl4
treatment. We hypothesize that in nonstressed liver, gadd153/Chop10 inhibits the
limited amount of ATF3 by forming an inactive heterodimer with it, whereas in
CCl4-injured liver, the synthesis of gadd153/Chop10 is repressed, allowing the
induced ATF3 to function.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.16.3.1157
PMCID: PMC231098
PMID: 8622660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

We demonstrate that ATF3, a member of the ATF/CREB family of transcription factors, is induced in a variety of stressed tissues: mechanically injured liver, toxin-injured liver, blood-deprived heart, and postseizure brain. We also demonstrate that an ATF3-interacting protein, gadd153/Chop10, forms a nonfunctional heterodimer with ATF3: the heterodimer, in contrast to the ATF3 homodimer, does not bind to the ATF/cyclic AMP response element consensus site and does not repress transcription. Interestingly, ATF3 and gadd153/Chop10 are expressed in inverse but overlapping manners during the liver's response to carbon tetrachloride (CCl4): the level of gadd153/Chop10 mRNA is high in the normal liver and greatly decreases upon CCl4 treatment; the level of ATF3 mRNA, on the other hand, is low in the normal liver and greatly increases upon CCl4 treatment. We hypothesize that in nonstressed liver, gadd153/Chop10 inhibits the limited amount of ATF3 by forming an inactive heterodimer with it, whereas in CCl4-injured liver, the synthesis of gadd153/Chop10 is repressed, allowing the induced ATF3 to function.
