---
pmid: '9921896'
title: Genomic structure and mutational spectrum of the bicistronic MOCS1 gene defective
  in molybdenum cofactor deficiency type A.
authors:
- Reiss J
- Christensen E
- Kurlemann G
- Zabot MT
- Dorche C
journal: Hum Genet
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s004390050884
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Genomic structure and mutational spectrum of the bicistronic MOCS1 gene defective in molybdenum cofactor deficiency type A.
**Authors:** Reiss J, Christensen E, Kurlemann G, Zabot MT, Dorche C
**Journal:** Hum Genet (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s004390050884](https://doi.org/10.1007/s004390050884)

## Abstract

1. Hum Genet. 1998 Dec;103(6):639-44. doi: 10.1007/s004390050884.

Genomic structure and mutational spectrum of the bicistronic MOCS1 gene 
defective in molybdenum cofactor deficiency type A.

Reiss J(1), Christensen E, Kurlemann G, Zabot MT, Dorche C.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Humangenetik der Universität, Göttingen, Germany. jreiss@gwdg.de

Molybdenum cofactor (MoCo) deficiency is a rare and devastating disease 
resulting in neonatal seizures and other neurological symptoms identical to 
those of sulphite oxidase deficiency. It is an autosomal recessive disease and 
no therapy is known. Most patients harbour MOCS1 mutations, which are found in 
both open reading frames of this unusual gene encoding the first two enzymes 
required in the MoCo biosynthesis pathway, MOCS1 A and MOCS1 B, in a single 
transcript. We describe genomic details as a prerequisite for comprehensive 
mutation analysis. In an initial cohort of 24 MoCo deficiency patients, we 
identified 13 different mutations on 34 chromosomes, with a mutation detection 
rate of 70%. Five mutations were observed in more than one patient and together 
accounted for two thirds of detected mutations. These comprise the most frequent 
mutation, R319Q, which is restricted to England, two Danish/German mutations 
(one missense and one splice site mutation), a missense mutation found in 
England and Germany, and a "Mediterranean" frameshift mutation. All patients 
with identified mutations are either homozygous or compound heterozygous for 
mutations in either of the two open reading frames corresponding to MOCS1 A and 
MOCS1 B, respectively. This observation suggests the existence of more than the 
two previously described complementation groups in MoCo biosynthesis.

DOI: 10.1007/s004390050884
PMID: 9921896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
