---
pmid: '9405491'
title: Agrin is a major heparan sulfate proteoglycan in the human glomerular basement
  membrane.
authors:
- Groffen AJ
- Ruegg MA
- Dijkman H
- van de Velden TJ
- Buskens CA
- van den Born J
- Assmann KJ
- Monnens LA
- Veerkamp JH
- van den Heuvel LP
journal: J Histochem Cytochem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1177/002215549804600104
---

# Agrin is a major heparan sulfate proteoglycan in the human glomerular basement membrane.
**Authors:** Groffen AJ, Ruegg MA, Dijkman H, van de Velden TJ, Buskens CA, van den Born J, Assmann KJ, Monnens LA, Veerkamp JH, van den Heuvel LP
**Journal:** J Histochem Cytochem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1177/002215549804600104](https://doi.org/10.1177/002215549804600104)

## Abstract

1. J Histochem Cytochem. 1998 Jan;46(1):19-27. doi: 10.1177/002215549804600104.

Agrin is a major heparan sulfate proteoglycan in the human glomerular basement 
membrane.

Groffen AJ(1), Ruegg MA, Dijkman H, van de Velden TJ, Buskens CA, van den Born 
J, Assmann KJ, Monnens LA, Veerkamp JH, van den Heuvel LP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Agrin is a heparan sulfate proteoglycan (HSPG) that is highly concentrated in 
the synaptic basal lamina at the neuromuscular junction (NMJ). Agrin-like 
immunoreactivity is also detected outside the NMJ. Here we show that agrin is a 
major HSPG component of the human glomerular basement membrane (GBM). This is in 
addition to perlecan, a previously characterized HSPG of basement membranes. 
Antibodies against agrin and against an unidentified GBM HSPG produced a strong 
staining of the GBM and the NMJ, different from that observed with anti-perlecan 
antibodies. In addition, anti-agrin antisera recognized purified GBM HSPG and 
competed with an anti-GBM HSPG monoclonal antibody in ELISA. Furthermore, both 
antibodies recognized a molecule that migrated in SDS-PAGE as a smear and had a 
molecular mass of approximately 200-210 kD after deglycosylation. In 
immunoelectron microscopy, agrin showed a linear distribution along the GBM and 
was present throughout the width of the GBM. This was again different from 
perlecan, which was exclusively present on the endothelial side of the GBM and 
was distributed in a nonlinear manner. Quantitative ELISA showed that, compared 
with perlecan, the agrin-like GBM HSPG showed a sixfold higher molarity in crude 
glomerular extract. These results show that agrin is a major component of the 
GBM, indicating that it may play a role in renal ultrafiltration and cell matrix 
interaction. (J Histochem Cytochem 46:19-27, 1998)

DOI: 10.1177/002215549804600104
PMID: 9405491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
