---
pmid: '7807015'
title: CTLA-4 binding to the lipid kinase phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase in T cells.
authors:
- Schneider H
- Prasad KV
- Shoelson SE
- Rudd CE
journal: J Exp Med
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2191832
doi: 10.1084/jem.181.1.351
---

# CTLA-4 binding to the lipid kinase phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase in T cells.
**Authors:** Schneider H, Prasad KV, Shoelson SE, Rudd CE
**Journal:** J Exp Med (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1084/jem.181.1.351](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.181.1.351)
**PMC:** [PMC2191832](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2191832/)

## Abstract

1. J Exp Med. 1995 Jan 1;181(1):351-5. doi: 10.1084/jem.181.1.351.

CTLA-4 binding to the lipid kinase phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase in T cells.

Schneider H(1), Prasad KV, Shoelson SE, Rudd CE.

Author information:
(1)Division of Tumor Immunology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02215.

CTLA-4 is a T cell antigen that is structurally related to CD28 and serves as a 
high affinity ligand for the B cell antigen B7-1/2. Unlike CD28, the function of 
CTLA-4 is unclear, although reports have implicated the antigen in the 
costimulation of T cells. Recently, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI 3-kinase) 
has been implicated in the costimulatory function of CD28 by virtue of its 
ability to bind to a pYMNM motif within the cytoplasmic tail of the antigen. In 
this study, we show that CTLA-4 can also associate with PI 3-kinase as detected 
by lipid kinase analysis and immunoblotting with anti-p85 antiserum. High 
pressure liquid chromatographic separation of deacylated lipids showed the 
presence of a peak corresponding to PI-3-P. Anti-CTLA-4 ligation of the receptor 
induced a significant increase in the levels of precipitable PI 3-kinase 
activity. Peptide binding studies revealed that the NH2- and COOH-terminal SH2 
domains of p85 bind the CTLA-4 cytoplasmic pYVKM motif with an affinity (ID50: 
0.6 and 0.04 microM), that is similar to CD28. CTLA-4 binding to PI 3-kinase 
provides further evidence that CTLA-4 is not an inert counterreceptor, but 
rather is coupled to an intracellular signaling molecule with the capacity to 
regulate cell growth.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.181.1.351
PMCID: PMC2191832
PMID: 7807015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
