---
pmid: '23723426'
title: Kindlin-2 mediates activation of TGF-β/Smad signaling and renal fibrosis.
authors:
- Wei X
- Xia Y
- Li F
- Tang Y
- Nie J
- Liu Y
- Zhou Z
- Zhang H
- Hou FF
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3752947
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2012101041
---

# Kindlin-2 mediates activation of TGF-β/Smad signaling and renal fibrosis.
**Authors:** Wei X, Xia Y, Li F, Tang Y, Nie J, Liu Y, Zhou Z, Zhang H, Hou FF
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.2012101041](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2012101041)
**PMC:** [PMC3752947](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3752947/)

## Abstract

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013 Sep;24(9):1387-98. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2012101041. Epub
2013  May 30.

Kindlin-2 mediates activation of TGF-β/Smad signaling and renal fibrosis.

Wei X(1), Xia Y, Li F, Tang Y, Nie J, Liu Y, Zhou Z, Zhang H, Hou FF.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, 
Institute of Nephrology Guangdong Province, Key Laboratory for Organ Failure 
Research, Ministry of Education, Guangzhou, China.

Comment in
    J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013 Sep;24(9):1339-40. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2013060627.

Activation of TGF-β/Smad signaling plays a central role in the pathogenesis of 
tubulointerstitial fibrosis, but the mechanisms underlying the initial 
interaction of the TGF-β receptor with Smads, leading to their activation, 
remain unclear. Here, we found that Kindlin-2, an integrin-binding protein, 
physically mediated the interaction of the TGF-β type I receptor (TβRI) with 
Smad3 in human kidney tubular epithelial cells. Kindlin-2 bound to TβRI through 
its FERM domain and to Smad3 through its N terminus. Overexpression of Kindlin-2 
increased TGF-β-induced Smad3 activation. Knockdown of Kindlin-2 significantly 
suppressed the engagement of TβRI with Smad3 and inhibited TGF-β-induced Smad3 
activation, as well as the expression of its target genes. Neither transfection 
of a Kindlin-2 mutant incapable of binding to β1 integrin nor knockdown of β1 
integrin influenced the effect of Kindlin-2 on TGF-β1-induced Smad3 activation, 
indicating that this effect is independent of integrin. Kindlin-2 expression was 
markedly increased, predominantly in renal tubular epithelial cells, both in the 
unilateral ureteral obstruction model of kidney fibrosis and in human tissue 
exhibiting tubulointerstitial fibrosis. Furthermore, in the unilateral ureteral 
obstruction model, knocking down Kindlin-2 significantly inhibited activation of 
TGF-β/Smad signaling, decreased the expression of matrix genes, and ameliorated 
fibrosis. In summary, Kindlin-2 physically interacts with both TβRI and Smad3, 
promoting the activation of TGF-β/Smad signaling and contributing to the 
pathogenesis of tubulointerstitial fibrosis. Blockade of Kindlin-2 might be a 
rational therapeutic strategy for the treatment of fibrotic kidney diseases.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2012101041
PMCID: PMC3752947
PMID: 23723426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
