---
pmid: '9694901'
title: A Pro504 --> Ser substitution in the beta-subunit of beta-hexosaminidase A
  inhibits alpha-subunit hydrolysis of GM2 ganglioside, resulting in chronic Sandhoff
  disease.
authors:
- Hou Y
- McInnes B
- Hinek A
- Karpati G
- Mahuran D
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.33.21386
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# A Pro504 --> Ser substitution in the beta-subunit of beta-hexosaminidase A inhibits alpha-subunit hydrolysis of GM2 ganglioside, resulting in chronic Sandhoff disease.
**Authors:** Hou Y, McInnes B, Hinek A, Karpati G, Mahuran D
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.273.33.21386](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.33.21386)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Aug 14;273(33):21386-92. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.33.21386.

A Pro504 --> Ser substitution in the beta-subunit of beta-hexosaminidase A 
inhibits alpha-subunit hydrolysis of GM2 ganglioside, resulting in chronic 
Sandhoff disease.

Hou Y(1), McInnes B, Hinek A, Karpati G, Mahuran D.

Author information:
(1)The Research Institute, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario M5G 
1X8, Canada.

The GM2 gangliosidoses are caused by mutations in the genes encoding the alpha- 
(Tay-Sachs) or beta- (Sandhoff) subunits of heterodimeric beta-hexosaminidase A 
(Hex A), or the GM2 activator protein (AB variant), a substrate-specific 
co-factor for Hex A. Although the active site associated with the hydrolysis of 
GM2 ganglioside, as well as part of the binding site for the 
ganglioside-activator complex, is associated with the alpha-subunit, elements of 
the beta-subunit are also involved. Missense mutations in these genes normally 
result in the mutant protein being retained in the endoplasmic reticulum and 
degraded. The mutations associated with the B1-variant of Tay-Sachs are rare 
exceptions that directly affect residues in the alpha-active site. We have 
previously reported two sisters with chronic Sandhoff disease who were 
heterozygous for the common HEXB deletion allele. Cells from these patients had 
higher than expected levels of mature beta-protein and residual Hex A activity, 
approximately 20%. We now identify these patients' second mutant allele as a 
C1510T transition encoding a beta-Pro504 --> Ser substitution. Biochemical 
characterization of Hex A from both patient cells and cotransfected CHO cells 
demonstrated that this substitution (a) decreases the level of heterodimer 
transport out of the endoplasmic reticulum by approximately 45%, (b) lowers its 
heat stability, (c) does not affect its Km for neutral or charged artificial 
substrates, and (d) lowers the ratio of units of ganglioside/units of artificial 
substrate hydrolyzed by a factor of 3. We concluded that the beta-Pro504 --> Ser 
mutation directly affects the ability of Hex A to hydrolyze its natural 
substrate but not its artificial substrates. The effect of the mutation on 
ganglioside hydrolysis, combined with its effect on intracellular transport, 
produces chronic Sandhoff disease.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.33.21386
PMID: 9694901 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
