---
pmid: '8103405'
title: Molecular studies of mitochondrial acetoacetyl-coenzyme A thiolase deficiency
  in the two original families.
authors:
- Fukao T
- Yamaguchi S
- Scriver CR
- Dunbar G
- Wakazono A
- Kano M
- Orii T
- Hashimoto T
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '1993'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/humu.1380020310
pubmed_publication_types:
- Case Reports
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: CASE_REPORT
---

# Molecular studies of mitochondrial acetoacetyl-coenzyme A thiolase deficiency in the two original families.
**Authors:** Fukao T, Yamaguchi S, Scriver CR, Dunbar G, Wakazono A, Kano M, Orii T, Hashimoto T
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.1380020310](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.1380020310)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mutat. 1993;2(3):214-20. doi: 10.1002/humu.1380020310.

Molecular studies of mitochondrial acetoacetyl-coenzyme A thiolase deficiency in 
the two original families.

Fukao T(1), Yamaguchi S, Scriver CR, Dunbar G, Wakazono A, Kano M, Orii T, 
Hashimoto T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Gifu University School of Medicine, Japan.

We describe mutations identified in stored skin fibroblast cell lines from two 
original probands (JB and JM), first reported with 2-methylacetoacetic aciduria, 
and shown later to have a deficiency of the K(+)-activated enzyme, mitochondrial 
acetoacetyl-coenzyme A thiolase (T2). JB is homozygous for a 4-base insertion 
(GCAG) which is derived mutation. The primary mutation is an AG/gt to AG/gc 
transition at the 5'-splice-junction site in intron 11. An alternative splice 
site 4 bp downstream (Ggcag/gt) is used which causes a frame shift and replaces 
39 C-terminal residues by 70 nonfunctional residues. JM is homozygous for a 
mutation in the translation-initiation codon (ATG to AAG). By expression 
analyses the JB mutation (IVS11nt2) causes an unstable T2 polypeptide and the JM 
mutation (M1K) severely impairs T2 mRNA translation. The JB allele associates 
with Dutch ancestry (no consanguinity) and the JM allele with Chilean ancestry 
(distant consanguinity).

DOI: 10.1002/humu.1380020310
PMID: 8103405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
