---
pmid: '8648092'
title: Human and mouse killer-cell inhibitory receptors recruit PTP1C and PTP1D protein
  tyrosine phosphatases.
authors:
- Olcese L
- Lang P
- Vély F
- Cambiaggi A
- Marguet D
- Bléry M
- Hippen KL
- Biassoni R
- Moretta A
- Moretta L
- Cambier JC
- Vivier E
journal: J Immunol
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
---

# Human and mouse killer-cell inhibitory receptors recruit PTP1C and PTP1D protein tyrosine phosphatases.
**Authors:** Olcese L, Lang P, Vély F, Cambiaggi A, Marguet D, Bléry M, Hippen KL, Biassoni R, Moretta A, Moretta L, Cambier JC, Vivier E
**Journal:** J Immunol (1996)

## Abstract

1. J Immunol. 1996 Jun 15;156(12):4531-4.

Human and mouse killer-cell inhibitory receptors recruit PTP1C and PTP1D protein 
tyrosine phosphatases.

Olcese L(1), Lang P, Vély F, Cambiaggi A, Marguet D, Bléry M, Hippen KL, 
Biassoni R, Moretta A, Moretta L, Cambier JC, Vivier E.

Author information:
(1)Center for Immunology, INSERM/CNRS of Marseille-Luminy, France.

NK cells express cell surface receptors for MHC class I proteins (KIR). 
Engagement of these receptors inhibits NK cell cytotoxic programs. KIR can be 
expressed on T cells, and their engagement also results in inhibition of 
effector functions initiated by the CD3/TCR complex. While human KIR genes 
belong to the Ig gene superfamily, mouse KIR belong to a family of dimeric 
lectins. Despite these distinct evolutionary origins, we show here that both 
HLA-Cw3-specific human p58.183 receptors and H-2D d/k-specific mouse Ly49A 
receptors recruit the same protein tyrosine phosphatases, PTP1C and PTP1D, upon 
phosphorylation of critical intracytoplasmic tyrosine residues. These results 
document a common pathway by which diverse KIR can down-regulate NK and T cell 
activation programs, and further define the sequence of the immunoreceptor 
tyrosine-based inhibitory motif (ITIM), initially described in FcgammaRIIB1, and 
expressed in both human and mouse KIR.

PMID: 8648092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
