---
pmid: '7908405'
title: Molecular cloning, functional characterization, and chromosomal localization
  of a human somatostatin receptor (somatostatin receptor type 5) with preferential
  affinity for somatostatin-28.
authors:
- Panetta R
- Greenwood MT
- Warszynska A
- Demchyshyn LL
- Day R
- Niznik HB
- Srikant CB
- Patel YC
journal: Mol Pharmacol
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
---

# Molecular cloning, functional characterization, and chromosomal localization of a human somatostatin receptor (somatostatin receptor type 5) with preferential affinity for somatostatin-28.
**Authors:** Panetta R, Greenwood MT, Warszynska A, Demchyshyn LL, Day R, Niznik HB, Srikant CB, Patel YC
**Journal:** Mol Pharmacol (1994)

## Abstract

1. Mol Pharmacol. 1994 Mar;45(3):417-27.

Molecular cloning, functional characterization, and chromosomal localization of 
a human somatostatin receptor (somatostatin receptor type 5) with preferential 
affinity for somatostatin-28.

Panetta R(1), Greenwood MT, Warszynska A, Demchyshyn LL, Day R, Niznik HB, 
Srikant CB, Patel YC.

Author information:
(1)Fraser Laboratories, Department of Medicine, McGill University, Royal 
Victoria Hospital, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Using a combination of polymerase chain reaction and genomic library screening 
we have cloned a human gene for a subtype of the somatostatin (SST) receptor 
(SSTR) termed human SSTR5 (hSSTR5), which is located on chromosome 16. The 
predicted amino acid sequence of hSSTR5 displays 75% sequence identity with a 
recently identified rat SSTR [Mol. Pharmacol. 42:939-946 (1992)], suggesting 
that it is the human homologue of this receptor. hSSTR5 consists of a 
363-residue polypeptide exhibiting a putative seven-transmembrane domain 
topology typical of G protein-coupled receptors. The receptor displays 
considerable sequence identity to hSSTR1 (42%), hSSTR2 (48%), hSSTR3 (47%), and 
hSSTR4 (46%). Membranes prepared from COS-7 cells transiently expressing the 
hSSTR5 gene bound 125I-Leu8,D-Trp22,Tyr25-SST-28 (125I-LTT-SST-28) with high 
affinity and in a saturable manner. SST-14, SST-28, and various synthetic SST 
peptide agonists produced dose-dependent inhibition of radioligand binding with 
the following rank order of potency: LTT-SST-28 > SST-28 > D-Trp8-SST-14 > 
SST-14 approximately RC-160 approximately BIM 23014 > MK-678 > SMS 201-995. 
hSSTR5 bound SST-28 with a 12.6-fold greater affinity (Ki = 0.19 nM), compared 
with SST-14 (Ki = 2.24 nM), indicating that the receptor is SST-28 selective. 
Addition of GTP, guanosine-5'-O-(3-thio)triphosphate, Na+ ions, or pertusis 
toxin greatly reduced 125I-LTT-SST-28 binding, thereby indicating that hSSTR5 is 
coupled to pertussis toxin-sensitive G proteins. Both SST-14 and SST-28 
displayed dose-dependent inhibition of forskolin-stimulated cAMP accumulation, 
consistent with functional coupling of the receptor to adenylyl cyclase 
inhibition. Northern blot analysis of SSTR5 mRNA revealed a 2.4-kilobase 
transcript in normal rat pituitary and GH3 rat pituitary tumor cells and a 
4.0-kilobase transcript in normal human pituitary. Reverse transcriptase 
polymerase chain reaction revealed expression of the hSSTR gene in fetal human 
pituitary and hypothalamus but not in human cerebral cortex. In situ 
hybridization of the rat pituitary showed that SSTR5 mRNA is selectively 
localized in the anterior lobe. SSTR5 mRNA was not expressed in four human 
pituitary tumors (somatotroph adenoma, prolactinoma, and chromophobe adenomas) 
or in a human insulinoma. Although hSSTR5 displays approximately 75% sequence 
identity with rat SSTR5, the two receptors display significantly different 
pharmacological profiles, especially with respect to their binding affinities 
for the SST analogue SMS 201-995.

PMID: 7908405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
