---
pmid: '29039417'
title: Protein interaction perturbation profiling at amino-acid resolution.
authors:
- Woodsmith J
- Apelt L
- Casado-Medrano V
- Özkan Z
- Timmermann B
- Stelzl U
journal: Nat Methods
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nmeth.4464
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Protein interaction perturbation profiling at amino-acid resolution.
**Authors:** Woodsmith J, Apelt L, Casado-Medrano V, Özkan Z, Timmermann B, Stelzl U
**Journal:** Nat Methods (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nmeth.4464](https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.4464)

## Abstract

1. Nat Methods. 2017 Dec;14(12):1213-1221. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.4464. Epub 2017 Oct
 16.

Protein interaction perturbation profiling at amino-acid resolution.

Woodsmith J(1)(2), Apelt L(1), Casado-Medrano V(1), Özkan Z(1), Timmermann B(1), 
Stelzl U(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Otto-Warburg Laboratory, Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics (MPIMG), 
Berlin, Germany.
(2)Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Graz and BioTechMed-Graz, 
Graz, Austria.

The identification of genomic variants in healthy and diseased individuals 
continues to rapidly outpace our ability to functionally annotate these 
variants. Techniques that both systematically assay the functional consequences 
of nucleotide-resolution variation and can scale to hundreds of genes are 
urgently required. We designed a sensitive yeast two-hybrid-based 'off switch' 
for positive selection of interaction-disruptive variants from complex genetic 
libraries. Combined with massively parallel programmed mutagenesis and a 
sequencing readout, this method enables systematic profiling of 
protein-interaction determinants at amino-acid resolution. We defined >1,000 
interaction-disrupting amino acid mutations across eight subunits of the BBSome, 
the major human cilia protein complex associated with the pleiotropic genetic 
disorder Bardet-Biedl syndrome. These high-resolution interaction-perturbation 
profiles provide a framework for interpreting patient-derived mutations across 
the entire protein complex and thus highlight how the impact of disease 
variation on interactome networks can be systematically assessed.

DOI: 10.1038/nmeth.4464
PMID: 29039417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
