---
pmid: '7530043'
title: Direct determination of the sequence recognition requirements of the SH2 domains
  of SH-PTP2.
authors:
- Huyer G
- Li ZM
- Adam M
- Huckle WR
- Ramachandran C
journal: Biochemistry
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi00003a039
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Direct determination of the sequence recognition requirements of the SH2 domains of SH-PTP2.
**Authors:** Huyer G, Li ZM, Adam M, Huckle WR, Ramachandran C
**Journal:** Biochemistry (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi00003a039](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi00003a039)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 1995 Jan 24;34(3):1040-9. doi: 10.1021/bi00003a039.

Direct determination of the sequence recognition requirements of the SH2 domains 
of SH-PTP2.

Huyer G(1), Li ZM, Adam M, Huckle WR, Ramachandran C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Merck Frosst Centre for 
Therapeutic Research, Pointe-Claire-Dorval, Québec, Canada.

SH-PTP2 is a widely-expressed protein tyrosine phosphatase with two tandem SH2 
(src homology 2) domains and a C-terminal catalytic domain. Glutathione 
S-transferase fusions of the SH2 domains alone and of a catalytically inactive 
full-length mutant were made, and binding assays were developed using the 
purified fusion proteins to directly determine what residues are involved in the 
recognition of binding targets by the SH2 domains. The binding kinetics of the 
SH2 domains to a phosphotyrosyl-containing peptide of the sequence surrounding 
Tyr1009 of the platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR) beta subunit 
[DTSSVL(pY)TAVQPN] were determined by surface plasmon resonance, confirming that 
this is a high-affinity binding ligand. Using various N- and C-terminal 
truncations of this peptide as competitors in the binding assays, the minimum 
peptide that served as a high-affinity binding ligand was found to be VL(pY)TAV. 
Systematic Ala substitutions of this peptide indicated that in addition to the 
phosphotyrosine (pY), the critical residues for recognition and binding are at 
pY + 1 and pY + 3 as previously reported, and notably at pY-2 as well. Binding 
competition results with these and other PDGFR, IRP, and IRS-1 peptides 
suggested some general rules for sequence recognition by the SH2 domains of 
SH-PTP2. Peptides that bind to the SH2 domains in the binding assays were also 
found to stimulate the phosphatase activity of SH-PTP2.

DOI: 10.1021/bi00003a039
PMID: 7530043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
