---
pmid: '30012616'
title: Atomistic simulations indicate the functional loop-to-coiled-coil transition
  in influenza hemagglutinin is not downhill.
authors:
- Lin X
- Noel JK
- Wang Q
- Ma J
- Onuchic JN
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6112712
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1805442115
---

# Atomistic simulations indicate the functional loop-to-coiled-coil transition in influenza hemagglutinin is not downhill.
**Authors:** Lin X, Noel JK, Wang Q, Ma J, Onuchic JN
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1805442115](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1805442115)
**PMC:** [PMC6112712](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6112712/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2018 Aug 21;115(34):E7905-E7913. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1805442115. Epub 2018 Jul 16.

Atomistic simulations indicate the functional loop-to-coiled-coil transition in 
influenza hemagglutinin is not downhill.

Lin X(1)(2), Noel JK(3), Wang Q(4), Ma J(1)(4)(5), Onuchic JN(6)(2)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Center for Theoretical Biological Physics, Rice University, Houston, TX 
77030.
(2)Department of Physics and Astronomy, Rice University, Houston, TX 77005.
(3)Crystallography, Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, 13125 Berlin, 
Germany.
(4)Verna and Marrs McLean Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030.
(5)Department of Bioengineering, Rice University, Houston, TX 77030.
(6)Center for Theoretical Biological Physics, Rice University, Houston, TX 
77030; jonuchic@rice.edu.
(7)Department of Chemistry, Rice University, Houston, TX 77005.
(8)Department of BioSciences, Rice University, Houston, TX 77005.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2018 Aug 28;115(35):8655-8657. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1811183115.

Influenza hemagglutinin (HA) mediates viral entry into host cells through a 
large-scale conformational rearrangement at low pH that leads to fusion of the 
viral and endosomal membranes. Crystallographic and biochemical data suggest 
that a loop-to-coiled-coil transition of the B-loop region of HA is important 
for driving this structural rearrangement. However, the microscopic picture for 
this proposed "spring-loaded" movement is missing. In this study, we focus on 
understanding the transition of the B loop and perform a set of all-atom 
molecular dynamics simulations of the full B-loop trimeric structure with the 
CHARMM36 force field. The free-energy profile constructed from our simulations 
describes a B loop that stably folds half of the postfusion coiled coil in tens 
of microseconds, but the full coiled coil is unfavorable. A buried hydrophilic 
residue, Thr59, is implicated in destabilizing the coiled coil. Interestingly, 
this conserved threonine is the only residue in the B loop that strictly 
differentiates between the group 1 and 2 HA molecules. Microsecond-scale 
constant temperature simulations revealed that kinetic traps in the structural 
switch of the B loop can be caused by nonnative, intramonomer, or intermonomer 
β-sheets. The addition of the A helix stabilized the postfusion state of the B 
loop, but introduced the possibility for further β-sheet structures. Overall, 
our results do not support a description of the B loop in group 2 HAs as a stiff 
spring, but, rather, it allows for more structural heterogeneity in the 
placement of the fusion peptides during the fusion process.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1805442115
PMCID: PMC6112712
PMID: 30012616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
