---
pmid: '18653662'
title: Coordinated changes in xenobiotic metabolizing enzyme gene expression in aging
  male rats.
authors:
- Lee JS
- Ward WO
- Wolf DC
- Allen JW
- Mills C
- DeVito MJ
- Corton JC
journal: Toxicol Sci
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfn144
---

# Coordinated changes in xenobiotic metabolizing enzyme gene expression in aging male rats.
**Authors:** Lee JS, Ward WO, Wolf DC, Allen JW, Mills C, DeVito MJ, Corton JC
**Journal:** Toxicol Sci (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1093/toxsci/kfn144](https://doi.org/10.1093/toxsci/kfn144)

## Abstract

1. Toxicol Sci. 2008 Nov;106(1):263-83. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfn144. Epub 2008 Jul
 24.

Coordinated changes in xenobiotic metabolizing enzyme gene expression in aging 
male rats.

Lee JS(1), Ward WO, Wolf DC, Allen JW, Mills C, DeVito MJ, Corton JC.

Author information:
(1)National Health and Environmental Effects Research Laboratory, US 
Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27711, 
USA.

In order to gain insight into the effects of aging on susceptibility to 
environmental toxins, we characterized the expression of xenobiotic metabolizing 
enzymes (XMEs) from the livers of male F344 and Brown Norway (BN) rats across 
the adult lifespan. Using full-genome Affymetrix arrays, principal component 
analysis showed a clear age-dependent separation between young and old animals 
in both rat strains. Out of 1135 or 1435 genes altered between the old and young 
groups in the F344 or BN rats, 7 or 3% were XMEs and included members of the 
phase I, II, and III classes of genes. There was a 20 or 32% overlap in the gene 
expression profile between the two strains for F344 or BN, respectively. Lipid, 
ergosterol, alcohol, and fatty acid metabolism genes were also altered with age 
in both strains. Some of the genes altered by age exhibited a gender-dependent 
expression pattern in young adult rats, suggesting an increasingly feminized 
pattern of gene expression with age in male rats. To examine transcriptional 
responses across lifespan after challenge with a xenobiotic compound, BN rats 
were exposed to toluene by oral gavage. Toluene exposure decreased the 
expression of glutathione synthetase, and dramatically increased the number of 
phase III genes being downregulated. The expression of CYP2B2 and 
glutathione-S-transferase decreased with age but increased in all age groups 
after toluene exposure. Decreased ability to detoxify and transport chemicals 
out of the body with age could result in increased susceptibility to some 
classes of chemicals in the aging population.

DOI: 10.1093/toxsci/kfn144
PMID: 18653662 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
