---
pmid: '14608379'
title: Regulator of G-protein signaling-2 mediates vascular smooth muscle relaxation
  and blood pressure.
authors:
- Tang KM
- Wang GR
- Lu P
- Karas RH
- Aronovitz M
- Heximer SP
- Kaltenbronn KM
- Blumer KJ
- Siderovski DP
- Zhu Y
- Mendelsohn ME
journal: Nat Med
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nm958
---

# Regulator of G-protein signaling-2 mediates vascular smooth muscle relaxation and blood pressure.
**Authors:** Tang KM, Wang GR, Lu P, Karas RH, Aronovitz M, Heximer SP, Kaltenbronn KM, Blumer KJ, Siderovski DP, Zhu Y, Mendelsohn ME
**Journal:** Nat Med (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nm958](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm958)

## Abstract

1. Nat Med. 2003 Dec;9(12):1506-12. doi: 10.1038/nm958. Epub 2003 Nov 9.

Regulator of G-protein signaling-2 mediates vascular smooth muscle relaxation 
and blood pressure.

Tang KM(1), Wang GR, Lu P, Karas RH, Aronovitz M, Heximer SP, Kaltenbronn KM, 
Blumer KJ, Siderovski DP, Zhu Y, Mendelsohn ME.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Cardiology Research Institute, New England Medical Center and 
Department of Medicine, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02111, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Med. 2004 Jan;10(1):105. Tang, Mary [corrected to Tang, K Mary]; Wang, 
Guang [corrected to Wang, Guang-rong].

Nitric oxide (NO) inhibits vascular contraction by activating cGMP-dependent 
protein kinase I-alpha (PKGI-alpha), which causes dephosphorylation of myosin 
light chain (MLC) and vascular smooth muscle relaxation. Here we show that 
PKGI-alpha attenuates signaling by the thrombin receptor protease-activated 
receptor-1 (PAR-1) through direct activation of regulator of G-protein 
signaling-2 (RGS-2). NO donors and cGMP cause cGMP-mediated inhibition of PAR-1 
and membrane localization of RGS-2. PKGI-alpha binds directly to and 
phosphorylates RGS-2, which significantly increases GTPase activity of G(q), 
terminating PAR-1 signaling. Disruption of the RGS-2-PKGI-alpha interaction 
reverses inhibition of PAR-1 signaling by nitrovasodilators and cGMP. Rgs2-/- 
mice develop marked hypertension, and their blood vessels show enhanced 
contraction and decreased cGMP-mediated relaxation. Thus, PKGI-alpha binds to, 
phosphorylates and activates RGS-2, attenuating receptor-mediated vascular 
contraction. Our study shows that RGS-2 is required for normal vascular function 
and blood pressure and is a new drug development target for hypertension.

DOI: 10.1038/nm958
PMID: 14608379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
