---
pmid: '7972031'
title: 'Isoform-specific interactions of apolipoprotein E with microtubule-associated
  protein tau: implications for Alzheimer disease.'
authors:
- Strittmatter WJ
- Saunders AM
- Goedert M
- Weisgraber KH
- Dong LM
- Jakes R
- Huang DY
- Pericak-Vance M
- Schmechel D
- Roses AD
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC45191
doi: 10.1073/pnas.91.23.11183
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Isoform-specific interactions of apolipoprotein E with microtubule-associated protein tau: implications for Alzheimer disease.
**Authors:** Strittmatter WJ, Saunders AM, Goedert M, Weisgraber KH, Dong LM, Jakes R, Huang DY, Pericak-Vance M, Schmechel D, Roses AD
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.91.23.11183](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.91.23.11183)
**PMC:** [PMC45191](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC45191/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Nov 8;91(23):11183-6. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.91.23.11183.

Isoform-specific interactions of apolipoprotein E with microtubule-associated 
protein tau: implications for Alzheimer disease.

Strittmatter WJ(1), Saunders AM, Goedert M, Weisgraber KH, Dong LM, Jakes R, 
Huang DY, Pericak-Vance M, Schmechel D, Roses AD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine (Neurology), Joseph and Kathleen Bryan Alzheimer's 
Disease Research Center, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710.

The apolipoprotein E (apoE) type 4 allele (APOE4) is a susceptibility gene for 
late-onset familial and sporadic Alzheimer disease. ApoE is found in some 
neurofibrillary tangle-bearing neurons, one of the major pathologic hallmarks of 
the disease. Neurofibrillary tangles contain paired helical filaments formed 
from hyperphosphorylated microtubule-associated protein tau. In vitro, tau binds 
avidly to apoE3, but not to apoE4, forming a bimolecular complex. Tau 
phosphorylated with a brain extract does not bind either isoform. ApoE3 binds to 
the microtubule-binding repeat region of tau, which is also the region that is 
thought to cause self-assembly into the paired helical filament. Binding studies 
with fragments of ApoE demonstrate that the tau-binding region of apoE3 
corresponds to its receptor-binding domain and is distinct from the region that 
binds lipoprotein particles or beta/A4 peptide. Isoform-specific interactions of 
apoE with tau may regulate intraneuronal tau metabolism in Alzheimer disease and 
alter the rate of formation of paired helical filaments and neurofibrillary 
tangles.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.91.23.11183
PMCID: PMC45191
PMID: 7972031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The apolipoprotein E (apoE) type 4 allele (APOE4) is a susceptibility gene for late-onset familial and sporadic Alzheimer disease. ApoE is found in some neurofibrillary tangle-bearing neurons, one of the major pathologic hallmarks of the disease. Neurofibrillary tangles contain paired helical filaments formed from hyperphosphorylated microtubule-associated protein tau. In vitro, tau binds avidly to apoE3, but not to apoE4, forming a bimolecular complex. Tau phosphorylated with a brain extract does not bind either isoform. ApoE3 binds to the microtubule-binding repeat region of tau, which is also the region that is thought to cause self-assembly into the paired helical filament. Binding studies with fragments of ApoE demonstrate that the tau-binding region of apoE3 corresponds to its receptor-binding domain and is distinct from the region that binds lipoprotein particles or beta/A4 peptide. Isoform-specific interactions of apoE with tau may regulate intraneuronal tau metabolism in Alzheimer disease and alter the rate of formation of paired helical filaments and neurofibrillary tangles.
