---
pmid: '2841196'
title: 'The Caenorhabditis elegans hsp70 gene family: a molecular genetic characterization.'
authors:
- Snutch TP
- Heschl MF
- Baillie DL
journal: Gene
year: '1988'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0378-1119(88)90339-3
---

# The Caenorhabditis elegans hsp70 gene family: a molecular genetic characterization.
**Authors:** Snutch TP, Heschl MF, Baillie DL
**Journal:** Gene (1988)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0378-1119(88)90339-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/0378-1119(88)90339-3)

## Abstract

1. Gene. 1988 Apr 29;64(2):241-55. doi: 10.1016/0378-1119(88)90339-3.

The Caenorhabditis elegans hsp70 gene family: a molecular genetic 
characterization.

Snutch TP(1), Heschl MF, Baillie DL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, 
Canada.

We have isolated genomic clones representing six distinct members of the 
Caenorhabditis elegans 70-kDa heat-shock protein gene (hsp70) family. Each 
member exists as a single copy element in the C. elegans genome. Transcripts of 
four of the hsp70 genes have been detected by Northern-blot analysis. One 
member, hsp70C, appears to be a heat-shock-cognate hsp70 gene (hsc70) since its 
transcription is developmentally regulated and is not increased in response to 
heat shock. Transcripts of another gene, hsp70A, are abundant in control worms 
and are also increased (two- to six-fold) upon heat shock. Nucleotide sequencing 
of genomic and cDNA clones of hsp70A reveals that it is highly homologous to 
Drosophila and yeast heat-shock-inducible and heat-shock-cognate hsp70 genes. 
Three DNA elements homologous to the heat-shock promoter, 5'-C--GAA--TTC--G-3' 
are located upstream from the Hsp70A-coding region. We find that hsp70A contains 
three introns, one of which is in a similar position with an intron in the 
Drosophila hsc1 and hsc2 genes. Finally, utilizing strain-specific restriction 
fragment length differences, we have mapped the chromosomal position of hsp70A 
to the far right of chromosome IV.

DOI: 10.1016/0378-1119(88)90339-3
PMID: 2841196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
