---
pmid: '18624398'
title: Protein interaction data set highlighted with human Ras-MAPK/PI3K signaling
  pathways.
authors:
- Wang J
- Yuan Y
- Zhou Y
- Guo L
- Zhang L
- Kuai X
- Deng B
- Pan Z
- Li D
- He F
journal: J Proteome Res
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/pr8001645
---

# Protein interaction data set highlighted with human Ras-MAPK/PI3K signaling pathways.
**Authors:** Wang J, Yuan Y, Zhou Y, Guo L, Zhang L, Kuai X, Deng B, Pan Z, Li D, He F
**Journal:** J Proteome Res (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1021/pr8001645](https://doi.org/10.1021/pr8001645)

## Abstract

1. J Proteome Res. 2008 Sep;7(9):3879-89. doi: 10.1021/pr8001645. Epub 2008 Jul
15.

Protein interaction data set highlighted with human Ras-MAPK/PI3K signaling 
pathways.

Wang J(1), Yuan Y, Zhou Y, Guo L, Zhang L, Kuai X, Deng B, Pan Z, Li D, He F.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, Beijing 
Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing 102206, China.

The Ras-MAPK and PI3K-AKT pathways are conserved in metazoan organisms, which 
involve a series of signaling cascades and form the basis for numerous 
physiological and pathological processes. Here we report on yeast two hybrid 
screening results of a protein interaction network around the known components 
of human Ras-MAPK/PI3K pathways. A total of 42 independent cDNA library 
screenings resulted in 200 protein-protein interaction (PPI) pairs among 180 
molecules. Most of the proteins formed a large cluster that contains 193 PPIs 
between 169 proteins. Seventy-four interactions indicate high-confidence 
according to bioinformatics analysis. The prey list contains high enrichment 
genes with specific Gene Ontology (GO) terms such as response to stress and 
response to external stimulus. Most interactions link the Ras signaling pathway 
with various cellular processes. Five interactions were validated by 
coimmunoprecipitation and colocalization assays in mammalian cells to confirm 
their in vivo interactions. This protein interaction network provides further 
insights into the molecular mechanism of Ras-MAPK/PI3K signaling pathways.

DOI: 10.1021/pr8001645
PMID: 18624398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
