---
pmid: '11985583'
title: Purification and biochemical characterization of some of the properties of
  recombinant human kynureninase.
authors:
- Walsh HA
- Botting NP
journal: Eur J Biochem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1046/j.1432-1033.2002.02854.x
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Purification and biochemical characterization of some of the properties of recombinant human kynureninase.
**Authors:** Walsh HA, Botting NP
**Journal:** Eur J Biochem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1432-1033.2002.02854.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1432-1033.2002.02854.x)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Biochem. 2002 Apr;269(8):2069-74. doi: 10.1046/j.1432-1033.2002.02854.x.

Purification and biochemical characterization of some of the properties of 
recombinant human kynureninase.

Walsh HA(1), Botting NP.

Author information:
(1)School of Chemistry, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, Fife, Scotland, 
UK.

Recombinant human kynureninase (L-kynurenine hydrolase, EC 3.7.1.3) was purified 
to homogeneity (60-fold) from Spodoptera frugiperda (Sf9) cells infected with 
baculovirus containing the kynureninase gene. The purification protocol 
comprised ammonium sulfate precipitation and several chromatographic steps, 
including DEAE-Sepharose CL-6B, hydroxyapatite, strong anionic and cationic 
separations. The purity of the enzyme was determined by SDS/PAGE, and the 
molecular mass verified by MALDI-TOF MS. The monomeric molecular mass of 52.4 
kDa determined was > 99.99% of the predicted molecular mass. A UV absorption 
spectrum of the holoenzyme resulted in a peak at 432 nm. The optimum pH was 8.25 
and the enzyme displayed a strong dependence on the ionic strength of the buffer 
for optimum activity. This cloned enzyme was highly specific for 
3-hydroxykynurenine (Km = 3.0 microm +/- 0.10) and was inhibited by L-kynurenine 
(Ki = 20 microm), d-kynurenine (Ki = 12 microm) and a synthetic substrate 
analogue D,L-3,7-dihydroxydesaminokynurenine (Ki = 100 nm). The 
activity/concentration profile for kynureninase from this source was sigmoidal 
in all instances. There appeared to be partial inhibition by substrate, and 
excess pyridoxal 5'-phosphate was found to be inhibitory.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1432-1033.2002.02854.x
PMID: 11985583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
