---
pmid: '18332125'
title: PTEN nuclear localization is regulated by oxidative stress and mediates p53-dependent
  tumor suppression.
authors:
- Chang CJ
- Mulholland DJ
- Valamehr B
- Mosessian S
- Sellers WR
- Wu H
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2423144
doi: 10.1128/MCB.00310-08
---

# PTEN nuclear localization is regulated by oxidative stress and mediates p53-dependent tumor suppression.
**Authors:** Chang CJ, Mulholland DJ, Valamehr B, Mosessian S, Sellers WR, Wu H
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.00310-08](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.00310-08)
**PMC:** [PMC2423144](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2423144/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 May;28(10):3281-9. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00310-08. Epub 2008
Mar  10.

PTEN nuclear localization is regulated by oxidative stress and mediates 
p53-dependent tumor suppression.

Chang CJ(1), Mulholland DJ, Valamehr B, Mosessian S, Sellers WR, Wu H.

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 
90095, USA.

The tumor suppressor gene PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homologue deleted on 
chromosome 10) is frequently mutated or deleted in various human cancers. PTEN 
localizes predominantly to the cytoplasm and functions as a lipid phosphatase, 
thereby negatively regulating the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-AKT signaling 
pathway. PTEN can also localize to the nucleus, where it binds and regulates p53 
protein level and transcription activity. However, the precise function of 
nuclear PTEN and the factors that control PTEN nuclear localization are still 
largely unknown. In this study, we identified oxidative stress as one of the 
physiological stimuli that regulate the accumulation of nuclear PTEN. 
Specifically, oxidative stress inhibits PTEN nuclear export, a process depending 
on phosphorylation of its amino acid residue Ser-380. Nuclear PTEN, independent 
of its phosphatase activity, leads to p53-mediated G(1) growth arrest, cell 
death, and reduction of reactive oxygen species production. Using xenografts 
propagated from human prostate cancer cell lines, we reveal that nuclear PTEN is 
sufficient to reduce tumor progression in vivo in a p53-dependent manner. The 
data outlined in this study suggest a unique role of nuclear PTEN to arrest and 
protect cells upon oxidative damage and to regulate tumorigenesis. Since tumor 
cells are constantly exposed to oxidative stress, our study elucidates the 
cooperative roles of nuclear PTEN with p53 in tumor suppression.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00310-08
PMCID: PMC2423144
PMID: 18332125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The tumor suppressor gene PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homologue deleted on chromosome 10) is frequently mutated or deleted in various human cancers. PTEN localizes predominantly to the cytoplasm and functions as a lipid phosphatase, thereby negatively regulating the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-AKT signaling pathway. PTEN can also localize to the nucleus, where it binds and regulates p53 protein level and transcription activity. However, the precise function of nuclear PTEN and the factors that control PTEN nuclear localization are still largely unknown. In this study, we identified oxidative stress as one of the physiological stimuli that regulate the accumulation of nuclear PTEN. Specifically, oxidative stress inhibits PTEN nuclear export, a process depending on phosphorylation of its amino acid residue Ser-380. Nuclear PTEN, independent of its phosphatase activity, leads to p53-mediated G 1 growth arrest, cell death, and reduction of reactive oxygen species production. Using xenografts propagated from human prostate cancer cell lines, we reveal that nuclear PTEN is sufficient to reduce tumor progression in vivo in a p53-dependent manner. The data outlined in this study suggest a unique role of nuclear PTEN to arrest and protect cells upon oxidative damage and to regulate tumorigenesis. Since tumor cells are constantly exposed to oxidative stress, our study elucidates the cooperative roles of nuclear PTEN with p53 in tumor suppression.

DISCUSSION

In this study, we demonstrated that oxidative stress leads to PTEN nuclear accumulation by attenuating the nuclear export of phosphorylated PTEN. Nuclear PTEN, independent of its phosphatase activity, increases p53 levels, thereby enhancing p53 function. We propose that the increased PTEN nuclear localization in response to oxidative stress may protect the cells from DNA damage and tumorigenesis by modulating p53-dependent ROS reduction, cell cycle arrest, apoptosis, and possibly DNA damage repair (Fig. 7 ).

Oxidative stress can cause severe damage to DNA, lipids, and proteins ( 24 ). Under oxidative stress, p53 is able to suppress cellular ROS level and maintain genomic stability by inducing gene products responsible for cell cycle arrest ( p21 and GADD45a ) and antioxidation ( Sestrins ) ( 29 , 38 ). Our study suggests that nuclear PTEN can further enhance p53-mediated cell cycle arrest and ROS reduction, at least in part, independent of its phosphatase activity.

Recent studies have explored extensively the regulations and functions of PTEN subcellular localization in different cell lines and conditions. Combined data from Gil et al. ( 13 ), Denning et al. ( 8 ), and Trotman et al. ( 35 ) suggest that mutation of the N-terminal cytoplasmic anchor (PIP2 binding/adjacent cytoplasmic localization signal) and ubiquitination at K289 and K13 contribute to PTEN nuclear import. Interestingly, we also found that constitutively phosphorylated nuclear PTEN (380D) acquired high monoubiquitination, whereas the nonphosphorylated nuclear PTEN (380A) showed diminished ubiquitination (data not shown). This may elucidate an important association between phosphorylation and ubiquitination of PTEN in the nucleus. However, the regulation of different posttranslational modifications versus stability and activity of PTEN in the nucleus requires further mechanistic investigations.

Substantial evidence also suggests the correlations among PTEN phosphorylation, subcellular localization, and potential nuclear functions. First, several kinases can phosphorylate PTEN at its C2 domain and influence PTEN stability/activity, including CK2 ( 33 ) and glycogen synthase kinase 3β ( 3 ). In addition, Rho kinase (ROCK) phosphorylates several threonine/serine residues (S229, T223, T319, T321) in the PTEN C2 domain and delocalizes PTEN from the front edge of Dictyostelium during chemotaxis ( 19 ). Of note, P-PTENS380 expresses at a high level in the nucleus of quiescent hematopoietic stem cells ( 41 ). Our study suggests that PTEN nuclear accumulation is regulated by S380 phosphorylation status: P-S380 mediates rapid exportation of nuclear PTEN to the cytosol. Moreover, upon oxidative stress, more P-PTEN can accumulate in the nucleus, bind to p53, and enhance p53-mediated functions. Recently, it was demonstrated that PTEN can undergo nuclear export through a feedback regulation of the PI3K-S6K pathway ( 21 ). However, the detailed mechanisms of how oxidative stress or other signaling pathways regulate PTEN export systems remain to be further investigated.

Our study also reveals that nuclear P-PTEN associates with and enhances p53 function upon oxidative stress. Additionally, a recent study ( 17 ) provided elaborate data showing nuclear PTEN is recruited to the p53-p300 complex and maintains high p53 acetylation and activation in response to DNA damage. Interestingly, the same study showed low levels of p53 acetylation and tetramer formation are required for PTEN to interact and function within the p53-p300 complex. It is possible that the p53-p300 complex may serve as an anchor for PTEN nuclear localization under cell stress.

Using prostate cancer xenograft models, we showed that nuclear PTEN regulates cell proliferation and tumorigenesis through various signaling pathways, either dependent on or independent of its phosphatase activity. Trotman et al. ( 35 ) showed that catalytically active nuclear PTEN is able to down-regulate nuclear P-AKT; nuclear P-AKT was previously known to inactivate FOXO3a and accelerate tumor progression ( 34 ). Our data indicate that nuclear PTEN′s lipid phosphatase activity can be dispensable, in the presence of p53, in suppressing the growth of human prostate cancer cell tumorigenesis. Since mutations in PTEN phosphatase domain occur in approximately 65% of PTEN mutations found in human predisposition cancers ( 10 ), our results underlie the possibility of treating PTEN phosphatase domain-mutated tumors via enhanced p53 expression or activity.

Nuclear PTEN has recently been demonstrated to control chromosome stability and DNA repair ( 31 ). Our in vitro and in vivo data provide novel findings indicating that, in addition to inducing growth arrest and apoptosis, nuclear PTEN is able to reduce oxidative damage and to sufficiently suppress tumor growth independent of its phosphatase activity. Thus, regulation of cell growth and survival through the canonical PI3K-AKT pathway may only endow partial antitumor function of nuclear PTEN. Therefore, further understanding PTEN nuclear localization and nuclear function by exploring the involved cellular partners and pathways will be important for future studies.
