---
pmid: '10233018'
title: alpha-MSH and its receptors in regulation of tumor necrosis factor-alpha production
  by human monocyte/macrophages.
authors:
- Taherzadeh S
- Sharma S
- Chhajlani V
- Gantz I
- Rajora N
- Demitri MT
- Kelly L
- Zhao H
- Ichiyama T
- Catania A
- Lipton JM
journal: Am J Physiol
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1152/ajpregu.1999.276.5.R1289
---

# alpha-MSH and its receptors in regulation of tumor necrosis factor-alpha production by human monocyte/macrophages.
**Authors:** Taherzadeh S, Sharma S, Chhajlani V, Gantz I, Rajora N, Demitri MT, Kelly L, Zhao H, Ichiyama T, Catania A, Lipton JM
**Journal:** Am J Physiol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpregu.1999.276.5.R1289](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpregu.1999.276.5.R1289)

## Abstract

1. Am J Physiol. 1999 May;276(5):R1289-94. doi: 10.1152/ajpregu.1999.276.5.R1289.

alpha-MSH and its receptors in regulation of tumor necrosis factor-alpha 
production by human monocyte/macrophages.

Taherzadeh S(1), Sharma S, Chhajlani V, Gantz I, Rajora N, Demitri MT, Kelly L, 
Zhao H, Ichiyama T, Catania A, Lipton JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at 
Dallas, Dallas, Texas 75235-9040, USA.

The hypothesis that macrophages contain an autocrine circuit based on 
melanocortin [ACTH and alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (alpha-MSH)] 
peptides has major implications for neuroimmunomodulation research and 
inflammation therapy. To test this hypothesis, cells of the THP-1 human 
monocyte/macrophage line were stimulated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in the 
presence and absence of alpha-MSH. The inflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis 
factor (TNF)-alpha was inhibited in relation to alpha-MSH concentration. Similar 
inhibitory effects on TNF-alpha were observed with ACTH peptides that contain 
the alpha-MSH amino acid sequence and act on melanocortin receptors. Nuclease 
protection assays indicated that expression of the human melanocortin-1 receptor 
subtype (hMC-1R) occurs in THP-1 cells; Southern blots of RT-PCR product 
revealed that additional subtypes, hMC-3R and hMC-5R, also occur. Incubation of 
resting macrophages with antibody to hMC-1R increased TNF-alpha concentration; 
the antibody also markedly reduced the inhibitory influence of alpha-MSH on 
TNF-alpha in macrophages treated with LPS. These results in cells known to 
produce alpha-MSH at rest and to increase secretion of the peptide when 
challenged are consistent with an endogenous regulatory circuit based on 
melanocortin peptides and their receptors. Targeting of this 
neuroimmunomodulatory circuit in inflammatory diseases in which myelomonocytic 
cells are prominent should be beneficial.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpregu.1999.276.5.R1289
PMID: 10233018 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
