---
pmid: '1847510'
title: 'Isolation and expression of human cytokine synthesis inhibitory factor cDNA
  clones: homology to Epstein-Barr virus open reading frame BCRFI.'
authors:
- Vieira P
- de Waal-Malefyt R
- Dang MN
- Johnson KE
- Kastelein R
- Fiorentino DF
- deVries JE
- Roncarolo MG
- Mosmann TR
- Moore KW
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1991'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC50979
doi: 10.1073/pnas.88.4.1172
---

# Isolation and expression of human cytokine synthesis inhibitory factor cDNA clones: homology to Epstein-Barr virus open reading frame BCRFI.
**Authors:** Vieira P, de Waal-Malefyt R, Dang MN, Johnson KE, Kastelein R, Fiorentino DF, deVries JE, Roncarolo MG, Mosmann TR, Moore KW
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.88.4.1172](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.88.4.1172)
**PMC:** [PMC50979](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC50979/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991 Feb 15;88(4):1172-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.88.4.1172.

Isolation and expression of human cytokine synthesis inhibitory factor cDNA 
clones: homology to Epstein-Barr virus open reading frame BCRFI.

Vieira P(1), de Waal-Malefyt R, Dang MN, Johnson KE, Kastelein R, Fiorentino DF, 
deVries JE, Roncarolo MG, Mosmann TR, Moore KW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, DNAX Research Institute of Molecular and Cellular 
Biology, Palo Alto, CA 94304.

We have demonstrated the existence of human cytokine synthesis inhibitory factor 
(CSIF) [interleukin 10 (IL-10)]. cDNA clones encoding human IL-10 (hIL-10) were 
isolated from a tetanus toxin-specific human T-cell clone. Like mouse IL-10, 
hIL-10 exhibits strong DNA and amino acid sequence homology to an open reading 
frame in the Epstein-Barr virus, BCRFI. hIL-10 and the BCRFI product inhibit 
cytokine synthesis by activated human peripheral blood mononuclear cells and by 
a mouse Th1 clone. Both hIL-10 and mouse IL-10 sustain the viability of a mouse 
mast cell line in culture, but BCRFI lacks comparable activity in this assay, 
suggesting that BCRFI may have conserved only a subset of hIL-10 activities.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.88.4.1172
PMCID: PMC50979
PMID: 1847510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
