---
pmid: '8464478'
title: Oncogene ect2 is related to regulators of small GTP-binding proteins.
authors:
- Miki T
- Smith CL
- Long JE
- Eva A
- Fleming TP
journal: Nature
year: '1993'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/362462a0
---

# Oncogene ect2 is related to regulators of small GTP-binding proteins.
**Authors:** Miki T, Smith CL, Long JE, Eva A, Fleming TP
**Journal:** Nature (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1038/362462a0](https://doi.org/10.1038/362462a0)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 1993 Apr 1;362(6419):462-5. doi: 10.1038/362462a0.

Oncogene ect2 is related to regulators of small GTP-binding proteins.

Miki T(1), Smith CL, Long JE, Eva A, Fleming TP.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Biology, National Cancer Institute, 
Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

Erratum in
    Nature 1993 Aug 19;364(6439):737.

We have developed an efficient expression cloning system that allows rapid 
isolation of complementary DNAs able to induce the transformed phenotype. We 
searched for molecules expressed in epithelial cells and possessing transforming 
potential to fibroblasts, and cloned a cDNA for the normal receptor of a growth 
factor secreted by NIH/3T3 cells. Here we report a second novel transforming 
gene, ect2. The isolated cDNA is activated by amino-terminal truncation of the 
normal product. The Ect2 protein has sequence similarity within a central core 
of 255 amino acids with the products of the breakpoint cluster gene, bcr (ref. 
5), the yeast cell cycle gene, CDC24 (ref. 6), and the dbl oncogene. Each of 
these genes encodes regulatory molecules or effectors for Rho-like small 
GTP-binding proteins. The baculovirus-expressed Ect2 protein could bind highly 
specifically to Rho and Rac proteins, whereas the dbl product showed broader 
binding specificity to Rho family proteins. Thus ect2 is a new member of an 
expanding family, whose products have transforming properties and interact with 
Rho-like proteins of the Ras superfamily.

DOI: 10.1038/362462a0
PMID: 8464478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
