---
pmid: '1359644'
title: Prevention of protein denaturation under heat stress by the chaperonin Hsp60.
authors:
- Martin J
- Horwich AL
- Hartl FU
journal: Science
year: '1992'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.1359644
---

# Prevention of protein denaturation under heat stress by the chaperonin Hsp60.
**Authors:** Martin J, Horwich AL, Hartl FU
**Journal:** Science (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1359644](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1359644)

## Abstract

1. Science. 1992 Nov 6;258(5084):995-8. doi: 10.1126/science.1359644.

Prevention of protein denaturation under heat stress by the chaperonin Hsp60.

Martin J(1), Horwich AL, Hartl FU.

Author information:
(1)Program of Cellular Biochemistry and Biophysics, Rockefeller Research 
Laboratories, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, NY 10021.

The increased synthesis of heat shock proteins is a ubiquitous physiological 
response of cells to environmental stress. How these proteins function in 
protecting cellular structures is not yet understood. The mitochondrial heat 
shock protein 60 (Hsp60) has now been shown to form complexes with a variety of 
polypeptides in organelles exposed to heat stress. The Hsp60 was required to 
prevent the thermal inactivation in vivo of native dihydrofolate reductase 
(DHFR) imported into mitochondria. In vitro, Hsp60 bound to DHFR in the course 
of thermal denaturation, preventing its aggregation, and mediated its adenosine 
triphosphate-dependent refolding at increased temperatures. These results 
suggest a general mechanism by which heat shock proteins of the Hsp60 family 
stabilize preexisting proteins under stress conditions.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1359644
PMID: 1359644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
