---
pmid: '9851977'
title: 'Nuclear events in ethylene signaling: a transcriptional cascade mediated by
  ETHYLENE-INSENSITIVE3 and ETHYLENE-RESPONSE-FACTOR1.'
authors:
- Solano R
- Stepanova A
- Chao Q
- Ecker JR
journal: Genes Dev
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC317251
doi: 10.1101/gad.12.23.3703
---

# Nuclear events in ethylene signaling: a transcriptional cascade mediated by ETHYLENE-INSENSITIVE3 and ETHYLENE-RESPONSE-FACTOR1.
**Authors:** Solano R, Stepanova A, Chao Q, Ecker JR
**Journal:** Genes Dev (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.12.23.3703](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.12.23.3703)
**PMC:** [PMC317251](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC317251/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 1998 Dec 1;12(23):3703-14. doi: 10.1101/gad.12.23.3703.

Nuclear events in ethylene signaling: a transcriptional cascade mediated by
ETHYLENE-INSENSITIVE3 and ETHYLENE-RESPONSE-FACTOR1.

Solano R(1), Stepanova A, Chao Q, Ecker JR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Plant Science Institute, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6018 USA.

Response to the gaseous plant hormone ethylene in Arabidopsis requires the
EIN3/EIL family of nuclear proteins. The biochemical function(s) of EIN3/EIL
proteins, however, has remained unknown. In this study, we show that EIN3 and
EILs comprise a family of novel sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins that
regulate gene expression by binding directly to a primary ethylene response
element (PERE) related to the tomato E4-element. Moreover, we identified an
immediate target of EIN3, ETHYLENE-RESPONSE-FACTOR1 (ERF1), which contains this
element in its promoter. EIN3 is necessary and sufficient for ERF1 expression,
and, like EIN3-overexpression in transgenic plants, constitutive expression of
ERF1 results in the activation of a variety of ethylene response genes and
phenotypes. Evidence is also provided that ERF1 acts downstream of EIN3 and all
other components of the ethylene signaling pathway. The results demonstrate that
the nuclear proteins EIN3 and ERF1 act sequentially in a cascade of
transcriptional regulation initiated by ethylene gas.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.12.23.3703
PMCID: PMC317251
PMID: 9851977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Response to the gaseous plant hormone ethylene in Arabidopsis requires the EIN3/EIL family of nuclear proteins. The biochemical function(s) of EIN3/EIL proteins, however, has remained unknown. In this study, we show that EIN3 and EILs comprise a family of novel sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins that regulate gene expression by binding directly to a primary ethylene response element (PERE) related to the tomato E4-element. Moreover, we identified an immediate target of EIN3, ETHYLENE-RESPONSE-FACTOR1 ( ERF1 ), which contains this element in its promoter. EIN3 is necessary and sufficient for ERF1 expression, and, like EIN3 -overexpression in transgenic plants, constitutive expression of ERF1 results in the activation of a variety of ethylene response genes and phenotypes. Evidence is also provided that ERF1 acts downstream of EIN3 and all other components of the ethylene signaling pathway. The results demonstrate that the nuclear proteins EIN3 and ERF1 act sequentially in a cascade of transcriptional regulation initiated by ethylene gas.

Discussion

Cloning of EIN3 and related EIL genes identified a new family of proteins that are necessary and sufficient for signaling events initiated by ethylene ( Chao et al. 1997 ). In this study, we show that EIN3 and EILs proteins comprise a novel family of sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins and define a primary ethylene response element (PERE) present in the promoters of several ethylene-regulated genes that is similar to the tomato E4 ethylene response element. EIN3 was both necessary and sufficient for the activation of ethylene responsive target genes and in particular for ERF1, a novel gene encoding an AP2/EREBP-type DNA-binding protein. Evidence is provided that sequences in the promoter of ERF1 serve as an immediate target of EIN3 binding and that constitutive expression of ERF1 activates the transcription of downstream effector genes, such as basic-chitinase and PDF1.2 , to achieve the ethylene response (Fig. 8 ).
