---
pmid: '11278957'
title: Antioxidant system within yeast peroxisome. Biochemical and physiological characterization
  of CbPmp20 in the methylotrophic yeast Candida boidinii.
authors:
- Horiguchi H
- Yurimoto H
- Kato N
- Sakai Y
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M011661200
---

# Antioxidant system within yeast peroxisome. Biochemical and physiological characterization of CbPmp20 in the methylotrophic yeast Candida boidinii.
**Authors:** Horiguchi H, Yurimoto H, Kato N, Sakai Y
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M011661200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M011661200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Apr 27;276(17):14279-88. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M011661200. Epub 
2001 Jan 30.

Antioxidant system within yeast peroxisome. Biochemical and physiological 
characterization of CbPmp20 in the methylotrophic yeast Candida boidinii.

Horiguchi H(1), Yurimoto H, Kato N, Sakai Y.

Author information:
(1)Division of Applied Life Sciences, Graduate School of Agriculture, Kyoto 
University, Kitashirakawa-Oiwake, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan.

Candida boidinii Pmp20 (CbPmp20), a protein associated with the inner side of 
peroxisomal membrane, belongs to a recently identified protein family of 
antioxidant enzymes, the peroxiredoxins, which contain one cysteine residue. 
Pmp20 homologs containing the putative peroxisome targeting signal type 1 have 
also been identified in mammals and lower eukaryotes. However, the physiological 
function of these Pmp20 family proteins has been unclear. In this study, we 
investigated the biochemical and physiological functions of recombinant CbPmp20 
protein in methanol-induced peroxisomes of C. boidinii using the PMP20-deleted 
strain of C. boidinii (pmp20Delta strain). The His(6)-tagged CbPmp20 fusion 
protein was found to have glutathione peroxidase activity in vitro toward alkyl 
hydroperoxides and H(2)O(2). Catalytic activity and dimerization of 
His(6)-CbPmp20 depended on the only cysteine residue corresponding to Cys(53). 
The pmp20Delta strain was found to have lost growth ability on methanol as a 
carbon and energy source. The pmp20Delta growth defect was rescued by CbPmp20, 
but neither CbPmp20 lacking the peroxisome targeting signal type 1 sequence nor 
CbPmp20 haboring the C53S mutation retrieved the growth defect. Interestingly, 
the pmp20Delta strain had a more severe growth defect than the cta1Delta strain, 
which lacks catalase, another antioxidant enzyme within the peroxisome. During 
incubation of these strains in methanol medium, the cta1Delta strain accumulated 
H(2)O(2), whereas the pmp20Delta strain did not. Therefore, it is speculated to 
be the main function of CbPmp20 is to decompose reactive oxygen species 
generated at peroxisomal membrane surface, e.g. lipid hydroperoxides, rather 
than to decompose H(2)O(2). In addition, we detected a physiological level of 
reduced glutathione in peroxisomal fraction of C. boidinii. These results may 
indicate a physiological role for CbPmp20 as an antioxidant enzyme within 
peroxisomes rich in reactive oxygen species.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M011661200
PMID: 11278957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
