---
pmid: '29361115'
title: The GATA transcription factor ELT-2 modulates both the expression and methyltransferase
  activity of PRMT-1 in Caenorhabditis elegans.
authors:
- Araoi S
- Daitoku H
- Yokoyama A
- Kako K
- Hirota K
- Fukamizu A
journal: J Biochem
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/jb/mvy012
---

# The GATA transcription factor ELT-2 modulates both the expression and methyltransferase activity of PRMT-1 in Caenorhabditis elegans.
**Authors:** Araoi S, Daitoku H, Yokoyama A, Kako K, Hirota K, Fukamizu A
**Journal:** J Biochem (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jb/mvy012](https://doi.org/10.1093/jb/mvy012)

## Abstract

1. J Biochem. 2018 May 1;163(5):433-440. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvy012.

The GATA transcription factor ELT-2 modulates both the expression and 
methyltransferase activity of PRMT-1 in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Araoi S(1), Daitoku H(2), Yokoyama A(1), Kako K(3), Hirota K(3)(4), Fukamizu 
A(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Life and Environmental Sciences.
(2)Life Science Center, Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance.
(3)Faculty of Life and Environmental Sciences.
(4)Human Biology, School of Integrative and Global Majors, University of 
Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennoudai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8577, Japan.

Protein arginine methyltransferase 1 (PRMT1) catalyzes asymmetric arginine 
dimethylation of cellular proteins and thus modulates various biological 
processes, including gene regulation, RNA metabolism, cell signaling and DNA 
repair. Since prmt-1 null mutant completely abolishes asymmetric 
dimethylarginine in C. elegans, PRMT-1 is thought to play a crucial role in 
determining levels of asymmetric arginine dimethylation. However, the mechanism 
underlying the regulation of PRMT-1 activity remains largely unknown. Here, we 
explored for transcription factors that induce the expression of PRMT-1 by an 
RNAi screen using transgenic C. elegans harbouring prmt-1 promoter upstream of 
gfp. Of 529 clones, we identify a GATA transcription factor elt-2 as a positive 
regulator of Pprmt-1:: gfp expression and show that elt-2 RNAi decreases 
endogenous PRMT-1 expression at mRNA and protein levels. Nevertheless, 
surprisingly arginine methylation levels are increased when elt-2 is silenced, 
implying that erythroid-like transcription factor (ELT)-2 may also have ability 
to inhibit methyltransferase activity of PRMT-1. Supporting this idea, GST 
pull-down and co-immunoprecipitation assays demonstrate the interaction between 
ELT-2 and PRMT-1. Furthermore, we find that ELT-2 interferes with PRMT-1-induced 
arginine methylation in a dose-dependent manner. Collectively, our results 
illustrate the two modes of PRMT-1 regulation, which could determine the levels 
of asymmetric arginine dimethylation in C. elegans.

DOI: 10.1093/jb/mvy012
PMID: 29361115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
