---
pmid: '11306575'
title: The EMAPII cytokine is released from the mammalian multisynthetase complex
  after cleavage of its p43/proEMAPII component.
authors:
- Shalak V
- Kaminska M
- Mitnacht-Kraus R
- Vandenabeele P
- Clauss M
- Mirande M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M100489200
---

# The EMAPII cytokine is released from the mammalian multisynthetase complex after cleavage of its p43/proEMAPII component.
**Authors:** Shalak V, Kaminska M, Mitnacht-Kraus R, Vandenabeele P, Clauss M, Mirande M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M100489200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M100489200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 29;276(26):23769-76. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M100489200. Epub 
2001 Apr 16.

The EMAPII cytokine is released from the mammalian multisynthetase complex after 
cleavage of its p43/proEMAPII component.

Shalak V(1), Kaminska M, Mitnacht-Kraus R, Vandenabeele P, Clauss M, Mirande M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire d'Enzymologie et Biochimie Structurales, CNRS, 1 Avenue de la 
Terrasse, 91190 Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

Endothelial-monocyte-activating polypeptide II (EMAPII) is an inflammatory 
cytokine released under apoptotic conditions. Its proEMAPII precursor proved to 
be identical to the auxiliary p43 component of the aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase 
complex. We show here that the EMAPII domain of p43 is released readily from the 
complex after in vitro digestion with caspase 7 and is able to induce migration 
of human mononuclear phagocytes. The N terminus of in vitro-processed EMAPII 
coincides exactly with that of the mature cytokine isolated from conditioned 
medium of fibrosarcoma cells. We also show that p43/proEMAPII has a strong tRNA 
binding capacity (K(D) = 0.2 microm) as compared with its isolated N or C 
domains (7.5 microm and 40 microm, respectively). The potent general RNA binding 
capacity ascribed to p43/proEMAPII is lost upon the release of the EMAPII 
domain. This suggests that after onset of apoptosis, the first consequence of 
the cleavage of p43 is to limit the availability of tRNA for aminoacyl-tRNA 
synthetases associated within the complex. Translation arrest is accompanied by 
the release of the EMAPII cytokine that plays a role in the engulfment of 
apoptotic cells by attracting phagocytes. As a consequence, p43 compares well 
with a molecular fuse that triggers the irreversible cell growth/cell death 
transition induced under apoptotic conditions.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M100489200
PMID: 11306575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
