---
pmid: '7528537'
title: 'Intramolecular regulation of protein tyrosine phosphatase SH-PTP1: a new function
  for Src homology 2 domains.'
authors:
- Pei D
- Lorenz U
- Klingmüller U
- Neel BG
- Walsh CT
journal: Biochemistry
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi00255a030
---

# Intramolecular regulation of protein tyrosine phosphatase SH-PTP1: a new function for Src homology 2 domains.
**Authors:** Pei D, Lorenz U, Klingmüller U, Neel BG, Walsh CT
**Journal:** Biochemistry (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi00255a030](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi00255a030)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 1994 Dec 27;33(51):15483-93. doi: 10.1021/bi00255a030.

Intramolecular regulation of protein tyrosine phosphatase SH-PTP1: a new 
function for Src homology 2 domains.

Pei D(1), Lorenz U, Klingmüller U, Neel BG, Walsh CT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115.

The steady-state kinetic properties of SH-PTP1 (PTP1C, SHP, HCP), a Src homology 
2 (SH2) domain-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTPase), were assessed 
and compared with those of three truncation mutants, using p-nitrophenyl 
phosphate, phosphotyrosyl (pY) peptides, and reduced, carboxyamido-methylated, 
maleylated, and tyrosyl-phosphorylated lysozyme as substrates. At physiological 
pH (7.4), truncation of the two N-terminal SH2 domains [SH-PTP1(delta SH2)] or 
the last 35 amino acids of the C-terminus [SH-PTP1(delta C35)] activated the 
phosphatase activity by 30-fold and 20-34-fold relative to the wild-type enzyme, 
respectively. Truncation of the last 60 amino acids resulted in a mutant 
[SH-PTP1(delta C60)] with wild-type activity. SH-PTP1 and SH-PTP1(delta C60) 
displayed apparent saturation kinetics toward pNPP only at acidic pH (pH < or = 
5.4); as pH increased above 5.5, their apparent KM values increased 
dramatically. In contrast, SH-PTP1(delta SH2) obeyed normal Michaelis-Menten 
kinetics at all pH values tested (pH 5.1-7.4) with a constant KM (10-14 mM). 
Furthermore, two synthetic pY peptides corresponding to known and potential 
phosphorylation sites on the erythropoietin (EPOR pY429) and interleukin-3 
(IL-3R pY628) receptors bound specifically to the N-terminal SH2 domain of 
SH-PTP1 (KD = 1.8-10 microM) and activated the catalytic activity of SH-PTP1 and 
SH-PTP1(delta C60) but not SH-PTP1(delta SH2), in a concentration-dependent 
manner. Maximal activation (25-30-fold) of SH-PTP1 was achieved at 70 microM 
EPOR pY429, and the maximally activated enzyme approached the activity of 
SH-PTP1(delta SH2). Addition of EPOR pY429 peptide, which corresponds to the 
recently identified in vivo binding site for SH-PTP1, at 40 microM also 
completely restored the saturation kinetic behavior of SH-PTP1 (at pH 7.4) 
toward pNPP, with catalytic parameters (KM = 12.8 mM, kcat = 3.2 s-1) similar to 
those of SH-PTP1(delta SH2). These data suggest that the SH2 domains of SH-PTP1 
serve to autoinhibit the phosphatase activity of the PTPase domain. A model is 
proposed in which the SH2 domains interact with the PTPase domain in a 
pY-independent fashion and drive the PTPase domain into an inactive 
conformation.

DOI: 10.1021/bi00255a030
PMID: 7528537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
