---
pmid: '10924459'
title: POB3 is required for both transcription and replication in the yeast Saccharomyces
  cerevisiae.
authors:
- Schlesinger MB
- Formosa T
journal: Genetics
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1461200
doi: 10.1093/genetics/155.4.1593
---

# POB3 is required for both transcription and replication in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Schlesinger MB, Formosa T
**Journal:** Genetics (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1093/genetics/155.4.1593](https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/155.4.1593)
**PMC:** [PMC1461200](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1461200/)

## Abstract

1. Genetics. 2000 Aug;155(4):1593-606. doi: 10.1093/genetics/155.4.1593.

POB3 is required for both transcription and replication in the yeast 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Schlesinger MB(1), Formosa T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake 
City, Utah 84132, USA.

Spt16 and Pob3 form stable heterodimers in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, and 
homologous proteins have also been purified as complexes from diverse 
eukaryotes. This conserved factor has been implicated in both transcription and 
replication and may affect both by altering the characteristics of chromatin. 
Here we describe the isolation and properties of a set of pob3 mutants and 
confirm that they have defects in both replication and transcription. Mutation 
of POB3 caused the Spt(-) phenotype, spt16 and pob3 alleles displayed severe 
synthetic defects, and elevated levels of Pob3 suppressed some spt16 phenotypes. 
These results are consistent with previous reports that Spt16 and Pob3 act in a 
complex that modulates transcription. Additional genetic interactions were 
observed between pob3 mutations and the genes encoding several DNA replication 
factors, including POL1, CTF4, DNA2, and CHL12. pob3 alleles caused sensitivity 
to the ribonucleotide reductase inhibitor hydroxyurea, indicating a defect in a 
process requiring rapid dNTP synthesis. Mutation of the S phase checkpoint gene 
MEC1 caused pob3 mutants to lose viability rapidly under restrictive conditions, 
revealing defects in a process monitored by Mec1. Direct examination of DNA 
contents by flow cytometry showed that S phase onset and progression were 
delayed when POB3 was mutated. We conclude that Pob3 is required for normal 
replication as well as for transcription.

DOI: 10.1093/genetics/155.4.1593
PMCID: PMC1461200
PMID: 10924459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
