---
pmid: '19208758'
title: Akt promotes BMP2-mediated osteoblast differentiation and bone development.
authors:
- Mukherjee A
- Rotwein P
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2720922
doi: 10.1242/jcs.042770
---

# Akt promotes BMP2-mediated osteoblast differentiation and bone development.
**Authors:** Mukherjee A, Rotwein P
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.042770](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.042770)
**PMC:** [PMC2720922](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2720922/)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2009 Mar 1;122(Pt 5):716-26. doi: 10.1242/jcs.042770. Epub 2009
Feb  10.

Akt promotes BMP2-mediated osteoblast differentiation and bone development.

Mukherjee A(1), Rotwein P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health and Science 
University, Portland, OR 97239, USA.

Signaling through the IGF-I receptor by locally synthesized IGF-I or IGF-II is 
crucial for normal skeletal development and for bone remodeling. Osteogenesis is 
primarily regulated by bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), which activate gene 
expression programs driven by bone-specific transcription factors. In a 
mesenchymal stem cell model of osteoblast commitment and differentiation 
controlled by BMP2, we show that an inhibitor of PI3-kinase or a 
dominant-negative Akt were as potent in preventing osteoblast differentiation as 
the IGF binding protein IGFBP5, whereas a Mek inhibitor was ineffective. 
Conversely, an adenovirus encoding an inducible-active Akt was able to overcome 
the blockade of differentiation caused by IGFBP5 or the PI3-kinase inhibitor, 
and could restore normal osteogenesis. Inhibition of PI3-kinase or Akt did not 
block BMP2-mediated signaling, because the Smad-responsive genes Sox9 and JunB 
were induced normally under all experimental conditions. When activated during 
different stages of osteoblast maturation, dominant-negative Akt prevented 
accumulation of bone-specific alkaline phosphatase and reduced mineralization, 
and more significantly inhibited the longitudinal growth of metatarsal bones in 
primary culture by interfering with both chondrocyte and osteoblast development 
and function. We conclude that an intact IGF-induced PI3-kinase-Akt signaling 
cascade is essential for BMP2-activated osteoblast differentiation and 
maturation, bone development and growth, and suggest that manipulation of this 
pathway could facilitate bone remodeling and fracture repair.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.042770
PMCID: PMC2720922
PMID: 19208758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
