---
pmid: '2584203'
title: Identification of an 18,000-dalton protein in mammalian lens fiber cell membranes.
authors:
- Louis CF
- Hur KC
- Galvan AC
- TenBroek EM
- Jarvis LJ
- Eccleston ED
- Howard JB
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1989'
full_text_available: false
---

# Identification of an 18,000-dalton protein in mammalian lens fiber cell membranes.
**Authors:** Louis CF, Hur KC, Galvan AC, TenBroek EM, Jarvis LJ, Eccleston ED, Howard JB
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1989)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1989 Nov 25;264(33):19967-73.

Identification of an 18,000-dalton protein in mammalian lens fiber cell 
membranes.

Louis CF(1), Hur KC, Galvan AC, TenBroek EM, Jarvis LJ, Eccleston ED, Howard JB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Biology, University of Minnesota, St. Paul 55108.

Monoclonal antibodies have been produced against electrophoretically purified 
MP18, a major calf lens membrane Mr = 18,000 substrate for cAMP-dependent 
protein kinase. One of these antibodies (monoclonal antibody 2D10) cross-reacted 
with both native MP18 in lens membranes, and sodium dodecyl sulfate-denatured, 
electrophoretically purified MP18. In immunoblots, this antibody recognized MP18 
in pig, sheep, rat, human, but not chicken lens membranes, indicating the 
similarity of this protein in mammalian lenses. Amino acid sequencing revealed 
that the N-terminal sequence of MP18 is identical in these five different 
mammalian species and is unrelated to any previously sequenced lens or 
junctional proteins. Electron microscopic examination of monoclonal antibody 
2D10-labeled bovine, pig and rat lens membranes indicated that MP18 is localized 
exclusively to the thicker 16-17 nm junctions in isolated preparations of lens 
fiber cell membranes. These results provide evidence of a role for MP18 in 
mammalian lens fiber cell junctional organization.

PMID: 2584203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
