---
pmid: '17267552'
title: A Drosophila model of mutant human parkin-induced toxicity demonstrates selective
  loss of dopaminergic neurons and dependence on cellular dopamine.
authors:
- Sang TK
- Chang HY
- Lawless GM
- Ratnaparkhi A
- Mee L
- Ackerson LC
- Maidment NT
- Krantz DE
- Jackson GR
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC6673194
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4810-06.2007
---

# A Drosophila model of mutant human parkin-induced toxicity demonstrates selective loss of dopaminergic neurons and dependence on cellular dopamine.
**Authors:** Sang TK, Chang HY, Lawless GM, Ratnaparkhi A, Mee L, Ackerson LC, Maidment NT, Krantz DE, Jackson GR
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4810-06.2007](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4810-06.2007)
**PMC:** [PMC6673194](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6673194/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2007 Jan 31;27(5):981-92. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4810-06.2007.

A Drosophila model of mutant human parkin-induced toxicity demonstrates 
selective loss of dopaminergic neurons and dependence on cellular dopamine.

Sang TK(1), Chang HY, Lawless GM, Ratnaparkhi A, Mee L, Ackerson LC, Maidment 
NT, Krantz DE, Jackson GR.

Author information:
(1)Neurogenetics Program, Department of Neurology, National Tsing Hua 
University, Taiwan, Republic of China.

Mutations in human parkin have been identified in familial Parkinson's disease 
and in some sporadic cases. Here, we report that expression of mutant but not 
wild-type human parkin in Drosophila causes age-dependent, selective 
degeneration of dopaminergic (DA) neurons accompanied by a progressive motor 
impairment. Overexpression or knockdown of the Drosophila vesicular monoamine 
transporter, which regulates cytosolic DA homeostasis, partially rescues or 
exacerbates, respectively, the degenerative phenotypes caused by mutant human 
parkin. These results support a model in which the vulnerability of DA neurons 
to parkin-induced neurotoxicity results from the interaction of mutant parkin 
with cytoplasmic dopamine.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4810-06.2007
PMCID: PMC6673194
PMID: 17267552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Mutations in human parkin have been identified in familial Parkinson's disease and in some sporadic cases. Here, we report that expression of mutant but not wild-type human parkin in Drosophila causes age-dependent, selective degeneration of dopaminergic (DA) neurons accompanied by a progressive motor impairment. Overexpression or knockdown of the Drosophila vesicular monoamine transporter, which regulates cytosolic DA homeostasis, partially rescues or exacerbates, respectively, the degenerative phenotypes caused by mutant human parkin. These results support a model in which the vulnerability of DA neurons to parkin-induced neurotoxicity results from the interaction of mutant parkin with cytoplasmic dopamine.

Introduction

The clinical features of Parkinson's disease (PD), including bradykinesia, rigidity, resting tremor, and postural impairment, are primarily resulting from the loss of dopaminergic (DA) neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc) ( Fahn, 2003 ). Although the vast majority of PD cases are sporadic, insights from studies of rare inherited forms have provided opportunities to investigate the pathogenesis of idiopathic disease. Mutations in parkin are thought to be the second most common genetic cause of sporadic PD, after LRRK2/dardarin ( Kitada et al., 1998 ; Foroud et al., 2003 ; Klein et al., 2003 ; Lincoln et al., 2003 ; Hedrich et al., 2004 ; Gilks et al., 2005 ; Hernandez et al., 2005 ). Parkin mutations originally were identified in families with autosomal recessive juvenile parkinsonism (AR-JP) ( Kitada et al., 1998 ).

Although neuropathology is not limited to the nigrostriatal system, ablation of DA neurons in the SNc remains the hallmark of sporadic PD; yet, the reason that DA neurons are selectively vulnerable is unresolved. Dopamine is a highly reactive amine, and its oxidation generates neurotoxic quinones and reactive oxygen species ( Stokes et al., 1999 ; Sulzer and Zecca, 2000 ). DA quinone spontaneously reacts with reduced sulfhydryl groups of cysteine, and recent results indicate that covalent modification of parkin by DA quinone reduces its E3 ligase activity and also decreases solubility ( LaVoie et al., 2005 ). Cell culture models also suggest that dopamine and other potential oxidants modify parkin solubility and may reduce its neuroprotective effects ( Sriram et al., 2005 ; Wang et al., 2005a , b ). These data support the long-standing suspicion that dopamine itself may be the basis for the regional vulnerability seen in some forms of PD ( Cookson, 2005 ). Mouse and Drosophila models used to test this hypothesis show variable degrees of pathology in DA neurons ( Bonifati et al., 2003 ; Goldberg et al., 2003 , 2005 ; Von Coelln et al., 2004 ; Chen et al., 2005 ; Menzies et al., 2005 ; Meulener et al., 2005 ; Perez and Palmiter, 2005 ).

Here, we use Drosophila to explore whether parkin mutations identified in familial PD can exert cell-specific toxic effects in vivo , suspending conventional notions regarding the genetics of parkin-linked AR-JP. Using histological and behavioral analysis, we demonstrate that expression of mutant but not wild-type human parkin in Drosophila induces progressive, age-dependent degeneration of DA neurons as well as motor dysfunction. Manipulation of dopamine storage using the Drosophila vesicular monoamine transporter (DVMAT) has profound effects on mutant parkin-induced toxicity. These in vivo data support a neurotoxic mechanism in which interaction of mutant parkin with dopamine underlies selective vulnerability of DA neurons in parkin-associated familial PD.

Discussion

Here, we report that expression of mutant but not wild-type human parkin in Drosophila results in progressive, age-dependent dysfunction and degeneration of DA neurons. Degeneration is less marked in 5-HT neurons and does not occur in histaminergic or cholinergic neurons expressing mutant parkin. The selective vulnerability of DA neurons to mutant parkin is likely to be associated with dopamine itself and/or its metabolites, because genetic manipulation of VMAT affects mutant parkin-induced neurodegeneration and motor dysfunction.
