---
pmid: '15561729'
title: Proteome analysis of the human mitotic spindle.
authors:
- Sauer G
- Körner R
- Hanisch A
- Ries A
- Nigg EA
- Silljé HH
journal: Mol Cell Proteomics
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/mcp.M400158-MCP200
---

# Proteome analysis of the human mitotic spindle.
**Authors:** Sauer G, Körner R, Hanisch A, Ries A, Nigg EA, Silljé HH
**Journal:** Mol Cell Proteomics (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/mcp.M400158-MCP200](https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M400158-MCP200)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2005 Jan;4(1):35-43. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M400158-MCP200.
Epub  2004 Nov 23.

Proteome analysis of the human mitotic spindle.

Sauer G(1), Körner R, Hanisch A, Ries A, Nigg EA, Silljé HH.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Department of Cell Biology, D-82152 
Martinsried, Germany.

The accurate distribution of sister chromatids during cell division is crucial 
for the generation of two cells with the same complement of genetic information. 
A highly dynamic microtubule-based structure, the mitotic spindle, carries out 
the physical separation of the chromosomes to opposite poles of the cells and, 
moreover, determines the cell division cleavage plane. In animal cells, the 
spindle comprises microtubules that radiate from the microtubule organizing 
centers, the centrosomes, and interact with kinetochores on the chromosomes. 
Malfunctioning of the spindle can lead to chromosome missegregation and hence 
result in aneuploidy, a hallmark of most human cancers. Despite major progress 
in deciphering the temporal and spatial regulation of the mitotic spindle, its 
composition and function are not fully understood. A more complete inventory of 
spindle components would therefore constitute an important advance. Here we 
describe the purification of human mitotic spindles and their analysis by MS/MS. 
We identified 151 proteins previously known to associate with the spindle 
apparatus, centrosomes, and/or kinetochores and 644 other proteins, including 
154 uncharacterized components that did not show obvious homologies to known 
proteins and did not contain motifs indicative of a particular localization. Of 
these uncharacterized proteins, 17 were tagged and localized in transfected 
mitotic cells, resulting in the identification of six genuine spindle components 
(KIAA0008, CdcA8, KIAA1187, FLJ12649, FLJ90806, and C20Orf129). This study 
illustrates the strength of a proteomic approach for the analysis of isolated 
human spindles and identifies several novel spindle components for future 
functional studies.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M400158-MCP200
PMID: 15561729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
