---
pmid: '14656432'
title: The crystal structure of the yeast Hsp40 Ydj1 complexed with its peptide substrate.
authors:
- Li J
- Qian X
- Sha B
journal: Structure
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.str.2003.10.012
---

# The crystal structure of the yeast Hsp40 Ydj1 complexed with its peptide substrate.
**Authors:** Li J, Qian X, Sha B
**Journal:** Structure (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.str.2003.10.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2003.10.012)

## Abstract

1. Structure. 2003 Dec;11(12):1475-83. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2003.10.012.

The crystal structure of the yeast Hsp40 Ydj1 complexed with its peptide 
substrate.

Li J(1), Qian X, Sha B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Center for Biophysical Sciences and Engineering, 
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

The mechanisms by which Hsp40 functions as a molecular chaperone to recognize 
and bind non-native polypeptides is not understood. We have identified a peptide 
substrate for Ydj1, a member of the type I Hsp40 from yeast. The structure of 
the Ydj1 peptide binding fragment and its peptide substrate complex was 
determined to 2.7 A resolution. The complex structure reveals that Ydj1 peptide 
binding fragment forms an L-shaped molecule constituted by three domains. The 
domain I exhibits a similar protein folds as domain III while the domain II 
contains two Zinc finger motifs. The peptide substrate binds Ydj1 by forming an 
extra beta strand with domain I of Ydj1. The Leucine residue in the middle of 
the peptide substrate GWLYEIS inserts its side chain into a hydrophobic pocket 
formed on the molecular surface of Ydj1 domain I. The Zinc finger motifs located 
in the Ydj1 domain II are not in the vicinity of peptide substrate binding site.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2003.10.012
PMID: 14656432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
