---
pmid: '17699751'
title: Recruitment of factors linking transcription and processing of pre-rRNA to
  NOR chromatin is UBF-dependent and occurs independent of transcription in human
  cells.
authors:
- Prieto JL
- McStay B
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1948859
doi: 10.1101/gad.436707
---

# Recruitment of factors linking transcription and processing of pre-rRNA to NOR chromatin is UBF-dependent and occurs independent of transcription in human cells.
**Authors:** Prieto JL, McStay B
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.436707](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.436707)
**PMC:** [PMC1948859](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1948859/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2007 Aug 15;21(16):2041-54. doi: 10.1101/gad.436707.

Recruitment of factors linking transcription and processing of pre-rRNA to NOR 
chromatin is UBF-dependent and occurs independent of transcription in human 
cells.

Prieto JL(1), McStay B.

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Research Centre, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, University 
of Dundee, Dundee, DD1 9SY Scotland, United Kingdom.

Efficient ribosome biogenesis requires coordination of a highly complex series 
of events. Early events include pre-RNA transcription, processing, and 
modification. Analysis in yeast has demonstrated that t-UTPs, components of the 
U3 snoRNA-containing pre-rRNA processing complex, are required for efficient 
transcription of ribosomal genes (rDNA) by RNA polymerase I (pol I). Here, we 
characterize human t-UTPs and establish that their ability to link transcription 
and pre-rRNA processing is evolutionarily conserved. The pol I transcription 
factor UBF binds extensively across rDNA throughout the cell cycle, resulting in 
a specialized form of chromatin that is the hallmark of active nucleolar 
organizer regions (NORs). Transcriptionally silent pseudo-NORs are ectopic, 
chromosomally integrated, artificial arrays that mimic this specialized 
chromatin structure. Pseudo-NORs sequester t-UTPs and factors linking 
transcription with pre-rRNA modification (Nopp140 and Treacle). Recruitment is 
independent of transcription, the underlying DNA sequence, and location within 
the nucleolus. Previously, we have demonstrated that pseudo-NORs sequester every 
component of the pol I transcription machinery. Taken together, these results 
highlight the importance of the specialized chromatin structure at active NORs 
in coordinating early events in ribosome biogenesis and nucleolar formation.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.436707
PMCID: PMC1948859
PMID: 17699751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
