---
pmid: '12925581'
title: Spatial and temporal patterns of ERK signaling during mouse embryogenesis.
authors:
- Corson LB
- Yamanaka Y
- Lai KM
- Rossant J
journal: Development
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/dev.00669
---

# Spatial and temporal patterns of ERK signaling during mouse embryogenesis.
**Authors:** Corson LB, Yamanaka Y, Lai KM, Rossant J
**Journal:** Development (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.00669](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.00669)

## Abstract

1. Development. 2003 Oct;130(19):4527-37. doi: 10.1242/dev.00669.

Spatial and temporal patterns of ERK signaling during mouse embryogenesis.

Corson LB(1), Yamanaka Y, Lai KM, Rossant J.

Author information:
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.

Signaling between tissues is essential to form the complex, three-dimensional 
organization of an embryo. Because many receptor tyrosine kinases signal through 
the RAS-MAPK pathway, phosphorylated ERK can be used as an indicator of when and 
where signaling is active during development. Using whole-mount 
immunohistochemistry with antibodies specific to phosphorylated ERK1 and ERK2, 
we analyzed the location, timing, distribution, duration and intensity of ERK 
signaling during mouse embryogenesis (5-10.5 days postcoitum). Spatial and 
temporal domains of ERK activation were discrete with well-defined boundaries, 
indicating specific regulation of signaling in vivo. Prominent, sustained 
domains of ERK activation were seen in the ectoplacental cone, extra-embryonic 
ectoderm, limb buds, branchial arches, frontonasal process, forebrain, 
midbrain-hindbrain boundary, tailbud, foregut and liver. Transient activation 
was seen in neural crest, peripheral nervous system, nascent blood vessels, and 
anlagen of the eye, ear and heart. In the contiguous domains of ERK signaling, 
phospho-ERK staining was cytoplasmic with no sign of nuclear translocation. With 
few exceptions, the strongest domains of ERK activation correlated with regions 
of known or suspected fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signaling, and brief 
incubation with an inhibitor of the fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) 
specifically diminished the phospho-ERK staining in these regions. Although many 
domains of ERK activation were FGFR-dependent, not all domains of FGF signaling 
were phospho-ERK positive. These studies identify key domains of sustained ERK 
signaling in the intact mouse embryo, give significant insight into the 
regulation of this signaling in vivo and pinpoint regions where downstream 
target genes can be sought.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.00669
PMID: 12925581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
