---
pmid: '16463099'
title: Transcriptional regulation of ABI3- and ABA-responsive genes including RD29B
  and RD29A in seeds, germinating embryos, and seedlings of Arabidopsis.
authors:
- Nakashima K
- Fujita Y
- Katsura K
- Maruyama K
- Narusaka Y
- Seki M
- Shinozaki K
- Yamaguchi-Shinozaki K
journal: Plant Mol Biol
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s11103-005-2418-5
---

# Transcriptional regulation of ABI3- and ABA-responsive genes including RD29B and RD29A in seeds, germinating embryos, and seedlings of Arabidopsis.
**Authors:** Nakashima K, Fujita Y, Katsura K, Maruyama K, Narusaka Y, Seki M, Shinozaki K, Yamaguchi-Shinozaki K
**Journal:** Plant Mol Biol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11103-005-2418-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11103-005-2418-5)

## Abstract

1. Plant Mol Biol. 2006 Jan;60(1):51-68. doi: 10.1007/s11103-005-2418-5.

Transcriptional regulation of ABI3- and ABA-responsive genes including RD29B and 
RD29A in seeds, germinating embryos, and seedlings of Arabidopsis.

Nakashima K(1), Fujita Y, Katsura K, Maruyama K, Narusaka Y, Seki M, Shinozaki 
K, Yamaguchi-Shinozaki K.

Author information:
(1)Biological Resources Division, Japan International Research Center for 
Agricultural Sciences, JIRCAS, 1-1 Ohwashi, Tsukuba, 305-8686, Japan.

ABA-responsive elements (ABREs) are cis-acting elements and basic leucine zipper 
(bZIP)-type ABRE-binding proteins (AREBs) are transcriptional activators that 
function in the expression of RD29B in vegetative tissue of Arabidopsis in 
response to abscisic acid (ABA) treatment. Dehydration-responsive elements 
(DREs) function as coupling elements of ABRE in the expression of RD29A in 
response to ABA. Expression analysis using abi3 and abi5 mutants showed that 
ABI3 and ABI5 play important roles in the expression of RD29B in seeds. 
Base-substitution analysis showed that two ABREs function strongly and one ABRE 
coupled with DRE functions weakly in the expression of RD29A in embryos. In a 
transient transactivation experiment, ABI3, ABI5 and AREB1 activated 
transcription of a GUS reporter gene driven by the RD29B promoter strongly but 
these proteins activated the transcription driven by the RD29A promoter weakly. 
In 35S::ABI3 Arabidopsis plants, the expression of RD29B was up-regulated 
strongly, but that of RD29A was up-regulated weakly. These results indicate that 
the expression of RD29B having ABREs in the promoter is up-regulated strongly by 
ABI3, whereas that of RD29A having one ABRE coupled with DREs in the promoter is 
up-regulated weakly by ABI3. We compared the expression of 7000 Arabidopsis 
genes in response to ABA treatment during germination and in the vegetative 
growth stage, and that in 35S::ABI3 plants using a full-length cDNA microarray. 
The expression of ABI3- and/or ABA-responsive genes and cis-elements in the 
promoters are discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/s11103-005-2418-5
PMID: 16463099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
