---
pmid: '15507444'
title: 'A role for Pet100p in the assembly of yeast cytochrome c oxidase: interaction
  with a subassembly that accumulates in a pet100 mutant.'
authors:
- Church C
- Goehring B
- Forsha D
- Wazny P
- Poyton RO
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M410726200
---

# A role for Pet100p in the assembly of yeast cytochrome c oxidase: interaction with a subassembly that accumulates in a pet100 mutant.
**Authors:** Church C, Goehring B, Forsha D, Wazny P, Poyton RO
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M410726200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M410726200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jan 21;280(3):1854-63. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M410726200. Epub
2004  Oct 26.

A role for Pet100p in the assembly of yeast cytochrome c oxidase: interaction 
with a subassembly that accumulates in a pet100 mutant.

Church C(1), Goehring B, Forsha D, Wazny P, Poyton RO.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of 
Colorado, Boulder, Colorado 80309-0347, USA.

The biogenesis of multimeric protein complexes of the inner mitochondrial 
membrane in yeast requires a number of nuclear-coded ancillary proteins. One of 
these, Pet100p, is required for cytochrome c oxidase. Previous studies have 
shown that Pet100p is not required for the synthesis, processing, or targeting 
of cytochrome c oxidase subunits to the mitochondrion nor for heme A 
biosynthesis. Here, we report that Pet100p does not affect the localization of 
cytochrome c oxidase subunit polypeptides to the inner mitochondrial membrane 
but instead functions after they have arrived at the inner membrane. We have 
also localized Pet100p to the inner mitochondrial membrane in wild type cells, 
where it is present in a subassembly (Complex A) with cytochrome c oxidase 
subunits VII, VIIa, and VIII. Pet100p does not interact with the same subunits 
after they have been assembled into the holoenzyme. In addition, we have 
identified two subassemblies that are present in pet100 null mutant cells: one 
subassembly (Complex A') is composed of subunits VII, VIIa, and VIII but not 
Pet100p, and another subassembly (Complex B) is composed of subunits Va and VI. 
Because pet100 null mutant cells lack assembled cytochrome c oxidase but 
accumulate Complexes A' and B it appears likely that these subassemblies of 
cytochrome c oxidase subunits are intermediates along an assembly pathway for 
holocytochrome c oxidase and that Pet100p functions in this pathway to 
facilitate the interaction(s) between Complex A' and other cytochrome c oxidase 
subassemblies and subunits.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M410726200
PMID: 15507444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
