---
pmid: '17532299'
title: NM23-H2 involves in negative regulation of Diva and Bcl2L10 in apoptosis signaling.
authors:
- Kang Y
- Lee DC
- Han J
- Yoon S
- Won M
- Yeom JH
- Seong MJ
- Ko JJ
- Lee KA
- Lee K
- Bae J
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2007.05.090
---

# NM23-H2 involves in negative regulation of Diva and Bcl2L10 in apoptosis signaling.
**Authors:** Kang Y, Lee DC, Han J, Yoon S, Won M, Yeom JH, Seong MJ, Ko JJ, Lee KA, Lee K, Bae J
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2007.05.090](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2007.05.090)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Jul 20;359(1):76-82. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2007.05.090. Epub 2007 May 24.

NM23-H2 involves in negative regulation of Diva and Bcl2L10 in apoptosis 
signaling.

Kang Y(1), Lee DC, Han J, Yoon S, Won M, Yeom JH, Seong MJ, Ko JJ, Lee KA, Lee 
K, Bae J.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Life Science and Biotechnology, Pochon CHA University, 
School of Medicine, Seongnam 463-836, South Korea.

The Bcl-2 family members are evolutionally conserved and crucial regulators of 
apoptosis. Diva (Boo), an ortholog of Bcl2L10 or Bcl-B, is a member of the Bcl-2 
family that has contradictory functions in apoptosis. To understand the 
signaling mechanisms of Diva, we searched for proteins that interact with Diva 
using the yeast two-hybrid system. We identified a nucleoside diphosphate kinase 
isoform, NM23-H2. Here, we show that Diva bound to NM23-H2 in cells in which the 
transmembrane domain of Diva was required, and both proteins were colocalized in 
cytoplasm. Of interest, Diva protein level was significantly down-regulated by 
NM23-H2 as knock down of NM23-H2 restored Diva expression. Overexpression of 
NM23-H2 induced apoptosis, and the depletion of NM23-H2 led to the increase of 
Diva's apoptotic activity. Thus, these results indicate the existence of a 
previously undiscovered mechanism by which NM23-H2 involves in the regulation of 
Diva-mediated apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2007.05.090
PMID: 17532299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
