---
pmid: '28404855'
title: Genome-Wide Screening Uncovers the Significance of N-Sulfation of Heparan Sulfate
  as a Host Cell Factor for Chikungunya Virus Infection.
authors:
- Tanaka A
- Tumkosit U
- Nakamura S
- Motooka D
- Kishishita N
- Priengprom T
- Sa-Ngasang A
- Kinoshita T
- Takeda N
- Maeda Y
journal: J Virol
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5469253
doi: 10.1128/JVI.00432-17
---

# Genome-Wide Screening Uncovers the Significance of N-Sulfation of Heparan Sulfate as a Host Cell Factor for Chikungunya Virus Infection.
**Authors:** Tanaka A, Tumkosit U, Nakamura S, Motooka D, Kishishita N, Priengprom T, Sa-Ngasang A, Kinoshita T, Takeda N, Maeda Y
**Journal:** J Virol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.00432-17](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.00432-17)
**PMC:** [PMC5469253](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5469253/)

## Abstract

1. J Virol. 2017 Jun 9;91(13):e00432-17. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00432-17. Print 2017
Jul  1.

Genome-Wide Screening Uncovers the Significance of N-Sulfation of Heparan 
Sulfate as a Host Cell Factor for Chikungunya Virus Infection.

Tanaka A(1)(2), Tumkosit U(2), Nakamura S(1), Motooka D(1), Kishishita N(1)(2), 
Priengprom T(2), Sa-Ngasang A(3), Kinoshita T(1)(4), Takeda N(1)(2), Maeda Y(5).

Author information:
(1)Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, 
Japan.
(2)Thailand-Japan Research Collaboration Center on Emerging and Re-emerging 
Infections, Department of Medical Sciences, Ministry of Public Health, 
Nonthaburi, Thailand.
(3)Arbovirus Section, National Institute of Health, Department of Medical 
Sciences, Ministry of Public Health, Nonthaburi, Thailand.
(4)WPI Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, 
Japan.
(5)Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, 
Japan ymaeda@biken.osaka-u.ac.jp.

The molecular mechanisms underlying chikungunya virus (CHIKV) infection are 
poorly characterized. In this study, we analyzed the host factors involved in 
CHIKV infection using genome-wide screening. Human haploid HAP1 cells, into 
which an exon-trapping vector was introduced, were challenged with a vesicular 
stomatitis virus pseudotype bearing the CHIKV E3 to E1 envelope proteins. 
Analysis of genes enriched in the cells resistant to the pseudotyped virus 
infection unveiled a critical role of N-sulfation of heparan sulfate (HS) for 
the infectivity of the clinically isolated CHIKV Thai#16856 strain to HAP1 
cells. Knockout of NDST1 that catalyzes N-sulfation of HS greatly decreased the 
binding and infectivity of CHIKV Thai#16856 strain but not infectivity of 
Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) and yellow fever virus (YFV). While 
glycosaminoglycans were commonly required for the efficient infectivity of 
CHIKV, JEV, and YFV, as shown by using B3GAT3 knockout cells, the tropism for 
N-sulfate was specific to CHIKV. Expression of chondroitin sulfate (CS) in 
NDST1-knockout HAP1 cells did not restore the binding of CHIKV Thai#16856 strain 
and the infectivity of its pseudotype but restored the infectivity of authentic 
CHIKV Thai#16856, suggesting that CS functions at later steps after CHIKV 
binding. Among the genes enriched in this screening, we found that TM9SF2 is 
critical for N-sulfation of HS and therefore for CHIKV infection because it is 
involved in the proper localization and stability of NDST1. Determination of the 
significance of and the relevant proteins to N-sulfation of HS may contribute to 
understanding mechanisms of CHIKV propagation, cell tropism, and 
pathogenesis.IMPORTANCE Recent outbreaks of chikungunya fever have increased its 
clinical importance. Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) utilizes host glycosaminoglycans 
to bind efficiently to its target cells. However, the substructure in 
glycosaminoglycans required for CHIKV infection have not been characterized. 
Here, we unveil that N-sulfate in heparan sulfate is essential for the efficient 
infection of a clinical CHIKV strain to HAP1 cells and that chondroitin sulfate 
does not help the CHIKV binding but does play roles at the later steps in HAP1 
cells. We show, by comparing previous reports using Chinese hamster ovary cells, 
along with another observation that enhanced infectivity of CHIKV bearing Arg82 
in envelope E2 does not depend on glycosaminoglycans in HAP1 cells, that the 
infection manner of CHIKV varies among host cells. We also show that TM9SF2 is 
required for CHIKV infection to HAP1 cells because it is involved in the 
N-sulfation of heparan sulfate through ensuring NDST1 activity.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00432-17
PMCID: PMC5469253
PMID: 28404855 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
