---
reference_id: PMID:21261884
title: Functional analysis of aromatic biosynthetic pathways in Pseudomonas putida KT2440.
authors:
- Molina-Henares MA
- García-Salamanca A
- Molina-Henares AJ
- de la Torre J
- Herrera MC
- Ramos JL
- Duque E
journal: Microb Biotechnol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1111/j.1751-7915.2008.00062.x
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Functional analysis of aromatic biosynthetic pathways in Pseudomonas putida KT2440.
**Authors:** Molina-Henares MA, García-Salamanca A, Molina-Henares AJ, de la Torre J, Herrera MC, Ramos JL, Duque E
**Journal:** Microb Biotechnol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1751-7915.2008.00062.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1751-7915.2008.00062.x)

## Content

1. Microb Biotechnol. 2009 Jan;2(1):91-100. doi:
10.1111/j.1751-7915.2008.00062.x.  Epub 2008 Oct 13.

Functional analysis of aromatic biosynthetic pathways in Pseudomonas putida 
KT2440.

Molina-Henares MA(1), García-Salamanca A, Molina-Henares AJ, de la Torre J, 
Herrera MC, Ramos JL, Duque E.

Author information:
(1)Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Estación del Zaidín, 
Department of Environmental Protection, Granada, Spain.

Pseudomonas putida KT2440 is a non-pathogenic prototrophic bacterium with high 
potential for biotechnological applications. Despite all that is known about 
this strain, the biosynthesis of essential chemicals has not been fully analysed 
and auxotroph mutants are scarce. We carried out massive mini-Tn5 random 
mutagenesis and screened for auxotrophs that require aromatic amino acids. The 
biosynthesis of aromatic amino acids was analysed in detail including physical 
and transcriptional organization of genes, complementation assays and feeding 
experiments to establish pathway intermediates. There is a single pathway from 
chorismate leading to the biosynthesis of tryptophan, whereas the biosynthesis 
of phenylalanine and tyrosine is achieved through multiple convergent pathways. 
Genes for tryptophan biosynthesis are grouped in unlinked regions with the trpBA 
and trpGDE genes organized as operons and the trpI, trpE and trpF genes 
organized as single transcriptional units. The pheA and tyrA gene-encoding 
multifunctional enzymes for phenylalanine and tyrosine biosynthesis are linked 
in the chromosome and form an operon with the serC gene involved in serine 
biosynthesis. The last step in the biosynthesis of these two amino acids 
requires an amino transferase activity for which multiple tyrB-like genes are 
present in the host chromosome.

© 2008 The Authors; Journal compilation © 2008 Society for Applied Microbiology 
and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1751-7915.2008.00062.x
PMCID: PMC3815424
PMID: 21261884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]