---
pmid: '10716990'
title: Identification and localization of two brefeldin A-inhibited guanine nucleotide-exchange
  proteins for ADP-ribosylation factors in a macromolecular complex.
authors:
- Yamaji R
- Adamik R
- Takeda K
- Togawa A
- Pacheco-Rodriguez G
- Ferrans VJ
- Moss J
- Vaughan M
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC15969
doi: 10.1073/pnas.97.6.2567
---

# Identification and localization of two brefeldin A-inhibited guanine nucleotide-exchange proteins for ADP-ribosylation factors in a macromolecular complex.
**Authors:** Yamaji R, Adamik R, Takeda K, Togawa A, Pacheco-Rodriguez G, Ferrans VJ, Moss J, Vaughan M
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.97.6.2567](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.97.6.2567)
**PMC:** [PMC15969](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC15969/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Mar 14;97(6):2567-72. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.97.6.2567.

Identification and localization of two brefeldin A-inhibited guanine 
nucleotide-exchange proteins for ADP-ribosylation factors in a macromolecular 
complex.

Yamaji R(1), Adamik R, Takeda K, Togawa A, Pacheco-Rodriguez G, Ferrans VJ, Moss 
J, Vaughan M.

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary-Critical Care Medicine Branch and Pathology Section, National 
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 
20892, USA. yamajir@fido.nhlbi.nih.gov

Two brefeldin A (BFA)-inhibited guanine nucleotide-exchange proteins for 
ADP-ribosylation factors, 200-kDa BIG1 and 190-kDa BIG2, were copurified from 
bovine brain cytosol associated with >670-kDa macromolecular complexes. When 
observed by immunofluorescence in HeLa S3 and HepG2 cells, endogenous BIG1 and 
coexpressed BIG2 were distributed in a punctate pattern throughout the cytosol, 
and also concentrated in the perinuclear region, where endogenous BIG1 and BIG2 
each partially colocalized with Golgi-specific 58K protein and gamma-adaptin. On 
Western blot analysis, both BIG1 and BIG2 were clearly more abundant in the 
cytosol than in the microsomal fractions. After density gradient centrifugation 
of a microsomal fraction, BIG1 and BIG2 were recovered in the same fraction as 
beta-COP, a marker for Golgi membranes. When cytosol from HeLa S3 cells was 
subjected to gel filtration and fractions were analyzed by Western blotting, the 
largest percentages of both BIG1 and BIG2 were detected in fractions containing 
proteins with a molecular mass of >670 kDa. Western blotting using anti-peptide 
antibodies specific for BIG1 or BIG2 demonstrated that approximately 70% of BIG2 
was immunoprecipitated along with 100% of BIG1 by the anti-BIG1 IgG, and 
approximately 75% of BIG1 was coprecipitated with 100% of BIG2 by the anti-BIG2 
IgG. All observations were consistent with the conclusion that significant 
fractions of BIG1 and BIG2 exist as components of the same macromolecular 
complexes in bovine brain cytosol and are similarly localized in cultured cells.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.97.6.2567
PMCID: PMC15969
PMID: 10716990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
