---
pmid: '15466857'
title: Inhibition of NF-kappa B activation by peptides targeting NF-kappa B essential
  modulator (nemo) oligomerization.
authors:
- Agou F
- Courtois G
- Chiaravalli J
- Baleux F
- Coïc YM
- Traincard F
- Israël A
- Véron M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M406423200
---

# Inhibition of NF-kappa B activation by peptides targeting NF-kappa B essential modulator (nemo) oligomerization.
**Authors:** Agou F, Courtois G, Chiaravalli J, Baleux F, Coïc YM, Traincard F, Israël A, Véron M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M406423200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M406423200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Dec 24;279(52):54248-57. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M406423200. Epub 
2004 Oct 5.

Inhibition of NF-kappa B activation by peptides targeting NF-kappa B essential 
modulator (nemo) oligomerization.

Agou F(1), Courtois G, Chiaravalli J, Baleux F, Coïc YM, Traincard F, Israël A, 
Véron M.

Author information:
(1)Unité de Régulation Enzymatique des Activités Cellulaires, CNRS URA 2185, 
75724 Paris, France. fagou@pasteur.fr

NF-kappa B essential modulator/IKK-gamma (NEMO/IKK-gamma) plays a key role in 
the activation of the NF-kappa B pathway in response to proinflammatory stimuli. 
Previous studies suggested that the signal-dependent activation of the IKK 
complex involves the trimerization of NEMO. The minimal oligomerization domain 
of this protein consists of two coiled-coil subdomains named Coiled-coil 2 (CC2) 
and leucine zipper (LZ) (Agou, F., Traincard, F., Vinolo, E., Courtois, G., 
Yamaoka, S., Israel, A., and Veron, M. (2004) J. Biol. Chem. 279, 27861-27869). 
To search for drugs inhibiting NF-kappa B activation, we have rationally 
designed cell-permeable peptides corresponding to the CC2 and LZ subdomains that 
mimic the contact areas between NEMO subunits. The peptides were tagged with the 
Antennapedia/Penetratin motif and delivered to cells prior to stimulation with 
lipopolysaccharide. Peptide transduction was monitored by fluorescence-activated 
cell sorter, and their effect on lipopolysaccharide-induced NF-kappa B 
activation was quantified using an NF-kappa B-dependent beta-galactosidase assay 
in stably transfected pre-B 70Z/3 lymphocytes. We show that the peptides 
corresponding to the LZ and CC2 subdomains inhibit NF-kappa B activation with an 
IC(50) in the mum range. Control peptides, including mutated CC2 and LZ peptides 
and a heterologous coiled-coil peptide, had no inhibitory effect. The designed 
peptides are able to induce cell death in human retinoblastoma Y79 cells 
exhibiting constitutive NF-kappa B activity. Our results provide the "proof of 
concept" for a new and promising strategy for the inhibition of NF-kappa B 
pathway activation through targeting the oligomerization state of the NEMO 
protein.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M406423200
PMID: 15466857 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
