---
pmid: '29222906'
title: 'Low maternal folate concentrations and maternal MTHFR C677T polymorphism are
  associated with an increased risk for neural tube defects in offspring: a case-control
  study among Pakistani case and control mothers.'
authors:
- Nauman N
- Jalali S
- Shami S
- Rafiq S
- Große G
- Hilger AC
- Zhang R
- Mansoor S
- Ludwig M
- Reutter H
journal: Asia Pac J Clin Nutr
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.6133/apjcn.032017.10
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Low maternal folate concentrations and maternal MTHFR C677T polymorphism are associated with an increased risk for neural tube defects in offspring: a case-control study among Pakistani case and control mothers.
**Authors:** Nauman N, Jalali S, Shami S, Rafiq S, Große G, Hilger AC, Zhang R, Mansoor S, Ludwig M, Reutter H
**Journal:** Asia Pac J Clin Nutr (2018)
**DOI:** [10.6133/apjcn.032017.10](https://doi.org/10.6133/apjcn.032017.10)

## Abstract

1. Asia Pac J Clin Nutr. 2018;27(1):253-260. doi: 10.6133/apjcn.032017.10.

Low maternal folate concentrations and maternal MTHFR C677T polymorphism are 
associated with an increased risk for neural tube defects in offspring: a 
case-control study among Pakistani case and control mothers.

Nauman N(1), Jalali S(2), Shami S(2), Rafiq S(1), Große G(3), Hilger AC(3), 
Zhang R(3)(4), Mansoor S(5)(6), Ludwig M(7), Reutter H(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Deptartment of Pathology, Rawalpindi Medical College, Quaid-i-Azam 
University, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(2)Deptartment of Animal Sciences, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(3)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Germany.
(4)Deptartment of Genomics, Life and Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, 
Germany.
(5)Deptartment of Community Medicine, Wah Medical College, Wah Cantt, Pakistan.
(6)Deptartment of Medical Education, Wah Medical College, Wah Cantt, Pakistan.
(7)Deptartment of Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Pharmacology, University of 
Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(8)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Germany. Email: 
reutter@uni-bonn.de.
(9)Deptartment of Neonatology and Pediatric Intensive Care, University of Bonn, 
Bonn, Germany.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: There is considerable evidence that periconceptional 
maternal folate deficiency and coding variants in maternal genes coding for 
critical enzymes in the folate pathway are associated with neural tube defects 
(NTDs) in offspring. In a case-control study we investigated C677T polymorphism 
in the 5,10- methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene in case and 
control mothers of Pakistani origin, and compared these with the respective 
maternal folate concentrations measured at the time of delivery.
METHODS AND STUDY DESIGN: A case-control study was conducted among 109 case and 
100 control mothers identified through the Holy Family Hospital Rawalpindi, 
Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan. Red blood cell (RBC) and serum 
folate concentrations and MTHFRC677T polymorphism were compared between case and 
control mothers.
RESULTS: Mean RBC folate and serum folate concentrations were significantly 
lower in cases compared with control mothers (p<0.0001). Maternal MTHFR 677CT 
and 677TT genotypes were more common among cases compared with control mothers 
(CC vs TT p<0.0393 and CC/CT vs TT p<0.021). T-allele frequency was higher in 
cases compared with control mothers (C vs T p<0.017). Case mothers with 677CT or 
677TT genotypes had significantly lower serum (p<0.0001) and RBC folate 
concentrations (p<0.0001) compared with control mothers.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study provides further evidence that maternal folate 
deficiency and MTHFRC677T polymorphism might be associated with an increased 
risk for NTDs in offspring. Our results are limited by the fact that maternal 
folate concentrations were not obtained during the periconceptional period, but 
at delivery. Further analyses, including maternal folate levels during the 
periconceptional period, are warranted.

DOI: 10.6133/apjcn.032017.10
PMID: 29222906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
