---
reference_id: PMID:18191226
title: A beta-arrestin 2 signaling complex mediates lithium action on behavior.
authors:
- Beaulieu JM
- Marion S
- Rodriguiz RM
- Medvedev IO
- Sotnikova TD
- Ghisi V
- Wetsel WC
- Lefkowitz RJ
- Gainetdinov RR
- Caron MG
journal: Cell
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.11.041
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# A beta-arrestin 2 signaling complex mediates lithium action on behavior.
**Authors:** Beaulieu JM, Marion S, Rodriguiz RM, Medvedev IO, Sotnikova TD, Ghisi V, Wetsel WC, Lefkowitz RJ, Gainetdinov RR, Caron MG
**Journal:** Cell (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2007.11.041](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2007.11.041)

## Content

1. Cell. 2008 Jan 11;132(1):125-36. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.11.041.

A beta-arrestin 2 signaling complex mediates lithium action on behavior.

Beaulieu JM(1), Marion S, Rodriguiz RM, Medvedev IO, Sotnikova TD, Ghisi V,
Wetsel WC, Lefkowitz RJ, Gainetdinov RR, Caron MG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.

Besides their role in desensitization, beta-arrestin 1 and 2 promote the
formation of signaling complexes allowing G protein-coupled receptors (GPCR) to
signal independently from G proteins. Here we show that lithium, a
pharmacological agent used for the management of psychiatric disorders such as
bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, and depression, regulates Akt/glycogen synthase
kinase 3 (GSK3) signaling and related behaviors in mice by disrupting a
signaling complex composed of Akt, beta-arrestin 2, and protein phosphatase 2A.
When administered to beta-arrestin 2 knockout mice, lithium fails to affect
Akt/GSK3 signaling and induce behavioral changes associated with GSK3 inhibition
as it does in normal animals. These results point toward a pharmacological
approach to modulating GPCR function that affects the formation of
beta-arrestin-mediated signaling complexes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.11.041
PMID: 18191226 [Indexed for MEDLINE]