---
pmid: '12194817'
title: Regulation of human separase by securin binding and autocleavage.
authors:
- Waizenegger I
- Giménez-Abián JF
- Wernic D
- Peters JM
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0960-9822(02)01073-4
---

# Regulation of human separase by securin binding and autocleavage.
**Authors:** Waizenegger I, Giménez-Abián JF, Wernic D, Peters JM
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0960-9822(02)01073-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0960-9822(02)01073-4)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2002 Aug 20;12(16):1368-78. doi: 10.1016/s0960-9822(02)01073-4.

Regulation of human separase by securin binding and autocleavage.

Waizenegger I(1), Giménez-Abián JF, Wernic D, Peters JM.

Author information:
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Dr. Bohr-Gasse 7, 1030, Vienna, 
Austria.

BACKGROUND: Sister chromatid separation is initiated by separase, a protease 
that cleaves cohesin and thereby dissolves sister chromatid cohesion. Separase 
is activated by the degradation of its inhibitor securin and by the removal of 
inhibitory phosphates. In human cells, separase activation also coincides with 
the cleavage of separase, but it is not known if this reaction activates 
separase, which protease cleaves separase, and how separase cleavage is 
regulated.
RESULTS: Inhibition of separase expression in human cells by RNA interference 
causes the formation of polyploid cells with large lobed nuclei. In mitosis, 
many of these cells contain abnormal chromosome plates with unseparated sister 
chromatids. Inhibitor binding experiments in vitro reveal that securin prevents 
the access of substrate analogs to the active site of separase. Upon securin 
degradation, the active site of full-length separase becomes accessible, 
allowing rapid autocatalytic cleavage of separase at one of three sites. The 
resulting N- and C-terminal fragments remain associated and can be reinhibited 
by securin. A noncleavable separase mutant retains its ability to cleave cohesin 
in vitro.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that separase is required for sister chromatid 
separation during mitosis in human cells. Our data further indicate that securin 
inhibits separase by blocking the access of substrates to the active site of 
separase. Securin proteolysis allows autocatalytic processing of separase into a 
cleaved form, but separase cleavage is not essential for separase activation.

DOI: 10.1016/s0960-9822(02)01073-4
PMID: 12194817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
