---
pmid: '16293619'
title: 'Thermodynamics of beta-catenin-ligand interactions: the roles of the N- and
  C-terminal tails in modulating binding affinity.'
authors:
- Choi HJ
- Huber AH
- Weis WI
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M511338200
---

# Thermodynamics of beta-catenin-ligand interactions: the roles of the N- and C-terminal tails in modulating binding affinity.
**Authors:** Choi HJ, Huber AH, Weis WI
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M511338200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M511338200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jan 13;281(2):1027-38. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M511338200. Epub
2005  Nov 17.

Thermodynamics of beta-catenin-ligand interactions: the roles of the N- and 
C-terminal tails in modulating binding affinity.

Choi HJ(1), Huber AH, Weis WI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Structural Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, CA 
94305-5126, USA.

beta-Catenin is a structural component of adherens junctions, where it binds to 
the cytoplasmic domain of cadherin cell adhesion molecules. beta-Catenin is also 
a transcriptional coactivator in the Wnt signaling pathway, where it binds to 
Tcf/Lef family transcription factors. In the absence of a Wnt signal, 
nonjunctional beta-catenin is present in a multiprotein complex containing the 
proteins axin and adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), both of which bind directly 
to beta-catenin. The thermodynamics of beta-catenin binding to E-cadherin, 
Lef-1, APC, axin, and the transcriptional inhibitor ICAT have been determined by 
isothermal titration calorimetry. Most of the interactions showed large, 
unfavorable entropy changes, consistent with these ligands being natively 
unstructured in the absence of beta-catenin. Phosphorylation of serine residues 
present in a sequence motif common to cadherins and APC increased the affinity 
for beta-catenin 300-700-fold, and surface plasmon resonance measurements 
revealed that phosphorylation of E-cadherin both enhanced its on rate and 
decreased its off rate. The effects of the N- and C-terminal "tails" that flank 
the beta-catenin armadillo repeat domain on ligand binding have also been 
investigated using constructs lacking one or both tails. Contrary to earlier 
studies that employed less direct binding assays, the tails did not affect the 
affinity of beta-catenin for tight ligands such as E-cadherin, Lef-1, and 
phosphorylated APC. However, the beta-catenin C-terminal tail was found to 
decrease the affinity for the weaker ligands APC and axin, suggesting that this 
region may have a regulatory role in beta-catenin degradation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M511338200
PMID: 16293619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
