---
pmid: '20138881'
title: Crystal structure of the LMAN1-CRD/MCFD2 transport receptor complex provides
  insight into combined deficiency of factor V and factor VIII.
authors:
- Wigren E
- Bourhis JM
- Kursula I
- Guy JE
- Lindqvist Y
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2010.02.009
---

# Crystal structure of the LMAN1-CRD/MCFD2 transport receptor complex provides insight into combined deficiency of factor V and factor VIII.
**Authors:** Wigren E, Bourhis JM, Kursula I, Guy JE, Lindqvist Y
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2010.02.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2010.02.009)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2010 Mar 5;584(5):878-82. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2010.02.009. Epub 
2010 Feb 9.

Crystal structure of the LMAN1-CRD/MCFD2 transport receptor complex provides 
insight into combined deficiency of factor V and factor VIII.

Wigren E(1), Bourhis JM, Kursula I, Guy JE, Lindqvist Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, 
17177 Stockholm, Sweden.

LMAN1 is a glycoprotein receptor, mediating transfer from the ER to the ER-Golgi 
intermediate compartment. Together with the co-receptor MCFD2, it transports 
coagulation factors V and VIII. Mutations in LMAN1 and MCFD2 can cause combined 
deficiency of factors V and VIII (F5F8D). We present the crystal structure of 
the LMAN1/MCFD2 complex and relate it to patient mutations. Circular dichroism 
data show that the majority of the substitution mutations give rise to a 
disordered or severely destabilized MCFD2 protein. The few stable mutation 
variants are found in the binding surface of the complex leading to impaired 
LMAN1 binding and F5F8D.

Copyright (c) 2010 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2010.02.009
PMID: 20138881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
