---
pmid: '21507177'
title: Cell-cell and cell-surface interactions mediated by cellulose and a novel exopolysaccharide
  contribute to Pseudomonas putida biofilm formation and fitness under water-limiting
  conditions.
authors:
- Nielsen L
- Li X
- Halverson LJ
journal: Environ Microbiol
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2011.02432.x
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Cell-cell and cell-surface interactions mediated by cellulose and a novel exopolysaccharide contribute to Pseudomonas putida biofilm formation and fitness under water-limiting conditions.
**Authors:** Nielsen L, Li X, Halverson LJ
**Journal:** Environ Microbiol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1462-2920.2011.02432.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1462-2920.2011.02432.x)

## Abstract

1. Environ Microbiol. 2011 May;13(5):1342-56. doi: 
10.1111/j.1462-2920.2011.02432.x. Epub 2011 Mar 9.

Cell-cell and cell-surface interactions mediated by cellulose and a novel 
exopolysaccharide contribute to Pseudomonas putida biofilm formation and fitness 
under water-limiting conditions.

Nielsen L(1), Li X, Halverson LJ.

Author information:
(1)Interdepartmental Graduate Program in Microbiology Department of Plant 
Pathology, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA.

The composition of the exopolysaccharide matrix of Pseudomonas putida mt2 
biofilms is relatively undefined as well as the contributions of each polymer to 
ecological fitness. Here, we describe the role of two putative exopolysaccharide 
gene clusters, putida exopolysaccharide A (pea) and bacterial cellulose (bcs) in 
biofilm formation and stability, rhizosphere colonization and matrix hydration 
under water-limiting conditions. Our findings suggest that pea is involved in 
the production of a novel glucose, galactose, and mannose-rich polymer that 
contributes to cell-cell interactions necessary for pellicle and biofilm 
formation and stability. In contrast, Bcs plays a minor role in biofilm 
formation and stability, although it does contribute to rhizosphere colonization 
based on a competition assay. We show that pea expression is highly induced 
transiently under water-limiting conditions but only slightly by high 
osmolarity, as determined by qRT-PCR. In contrast, both forms of water stress 
highly induced bcs expression. Cells deficient in making one or more 
exopolysaccharide experienced greater dehydration-mediated cell-envelope stress, 
leading to increased alginate promoter activity. However, this did not lead to 
increased exopolysaccharide production, except in bcs or pea mutants unable to 
produce alginate, indicating that P. putida compensates by producing, presumably 
more Pea or Bcs exopolysaccharides, to facilitate biofilm hydration. 
Collectively, the data suggest that Pea and Bcs contribute to biofilm formation 
and in turn their presence contributes to fitness under water-limiting 
conditions, but not to the extent of alginate.

© 2011 Society for Applied Microbiology and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2011.02432.x
PMID: 21507177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
