---
pmid: '30723177'
title: Ascorbic Acid Integrates the Antagonistic Modulation of Ethylene and Abscisic
  Acid in the Accumulation of Reactive Oxygen Species.
authors:
- Yu Y
- Wang J
- Li S
- Kakan X
- Zhou Y
- Miao Y
- Wang F
- Qin H
- Huang R
journal: Plant Physiol
year: '2019'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC6446745
doi: 10.1104/pp.18.01250
---

# Ascorbic Acid Integrates the Antagonistic Modulation of Ethylene and Abscisic Acid in the Accumulation of Reactive Oxygen Species.
**Authors:** Yu Y, Wang J, Li S, Kakan X, Zhou Y, Miao Y, Wang F, Qin H, Huang R
**Journal:** Plant Physiol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1104/pp.18.01250](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.18.01250)
**PMC:** [PMC6446745](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6446745/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Physiol. 2019 Apr;179(4):1861-1875. doi: 10.1104/pp.18.01250. Epub 2019
Feb 5.

Ascorbic Acid Integrates the Antagonistic Modulation of Ethylene and Abscisic
Acid in the Accumulation of Reactive Oxygen Species.

Yu Y(1)(2), Wang J(1)(2), Li S(1), Kakan X(1), Zhou Y(3), Miao Y(3), Wang F(1),
Qin H(1)(2), Huang R(4)(2).

Author information:
(1)Biotechnology Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Beijing 100081, China.
(2)National Key Facility of Crop Gene Resources and Genetic Improvement, Beijing
100081, China.
(3)Institute of Plant Stress Biology, Henan University, Collaborative Innovation
Center of Crop Stress Biology, Kaifeng 475001, Henan, China.
(4)Biotechnology Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Beijing 100081, China rfhuang@caas.cn.

During plant growth and development, ethylene and abscisic acid (ABA) play
important roles and exert synergistic or antagonistic effects on various
biological processes, but the detailed mechanism underlying the interaction of
the two phytohormones, especially in the regulation of the accumulation of
reactive oxygen species (ROS), is largely unclear. Here, we report that ethylene
inhibits but ABA promotes the accumulation of ROS in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis
thaliana) seedlings. Furthermore, changes in the biosynthesis of ascorbic acid
(AsA) act as a key factor in integrating the interaction of ethylene and ABA in
the regulation of ROS levels. We found that ethylene and ABA antagonistically
regulate AsA biosynthesis via ETHYLENE-INSENSITIVE3 (EIN3) and ABA INSENSITIVE4
(ABI4), which are key factors in the ethylene and ABA signaling pathways,
respectively. In addition, ABI4 is transcriptionally repressed by EIN3 in
ethylene-regulated AsA biosynthesis. Via transcriptome analysis and molecular
and genetic experiments, we identified VITAMIN C DEFECTIVE2as the direct target
of ABI4 in the regulation of AsA biosynthesis and ROS accumulation. Thus, the
EIN3-ABI4- VITAMIN C DEFECTIVE2 transcriptional cascade involves a mechanism by
which ethylene and ABA antagonistically regulate AsA biosynthesis and ROS
accumulation in response to complex environmental stimuli.

© 2019 American Society of Plant Biologists. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1104/pp.18.01250
PMCID: PMC6446745
PMID: 30723177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

During plant growth and development, ethylene and abscisic acid (ABA) play important roles and exert synergistic or antagonistic effects on various biological processes, but the detailed mechanism underlying the interaction of the two phytohormones, especially in the regulation of the accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), is largely unclear. Here, we report that ethylene inhibits but ABA promotes the accumulation of ROS in Arabidopsis ( Arabidopsis thaliana ) seedlings. Furthermore, changes in the biosynthesis of ascorbic acid (AsA) act as a key factor in integrating the interaction of ethylene and ABA in the regulation of ROS levels. We found that ethylene and ABA antagonistically regulate AsA biosynthesis via ETHYLENE-INSENSITIVE3 (EIN3) and ABA INSENSITIVE4 (ABI4), which are key factors in the ethylene and ABA signaling pathways, respectively. In addition, ABI4 is transcriptionally repressed by EIN3 in ethylene-regulated AsA biosynthesis. Via transcriptome analysis and molecular and genetic experiments, we identified VITAMIN C DEFECTIVE2 as the direct target of ABI4 in the regulation of AsA biosynthesis and ROS accumulation. Thus, the EIN3-ABI4- VITAMIN C DEFECTIVE2 transcriptional cascade involves a mechanism by which ethylene and ABA antagonistically regulate AsA biosynthesis and ROS accumulation in response to complex environmental stimuli.

DISCUSSION

The regulation of ROS accumulation by ethylene and ABA impacts many different physiological processes ( Pei et al., 2000 ; Overmyer et al., 2003 ; Wang and Song, 2008 ; Zhong et al., 2009 ; Mersmann et al., 2010 ; Jiang et al., 2013 ; Tintor et al., 2013 ; Peng et al., 2014 ), but the underlying mechanisms governing the relationship between ethylene and ABA remain poorly understood. Here, at the Arabidopsis early seedling stage, we reveal that AsA plays an essential role in the regulation of ROS accumulation in response to ethylene and ABA. During this process, ethylene and ABA antagonistically regulate AsA biosynthesis and ROS accumulation via EIN3 and ABI4; and this regulation is mediated by the direct targeting of EIN3 to ABI4 , which further transcriptionally represses the expression of the AsA biosynthesis gene VTC2 . As a crucial node, ABI4 coordinates the cross talk between ethylene and ABA in the regulation of AsA biosynthesis and ROS accumulation.

ROS contents in plants are dynamically regulated by ethylene and ABA, although this regulation most likely differs among physiological processes. For example, ABA increases ROS production in guard cells to promote stomatal closure but reduces ROS levels in imbibed seeds to inhibit germination ( Pei et al., 2000 ; Wang and Song, 2008 ; Ye et al., 2012 ). Interestingly, it is reported that ethylene not only promotes ROS production but also accelerates ROS scavenging, which enhance seedling salt tolerance through different mechanisms ( Jiang et al., 2013 ; Peng et al., 2014 ). Moreover, an increasing number of studies also have proved that ethylene could promote ROS accumulation under stress conditions, especially in senescent leaves where direct regulation of RBOH expression by ethylene might be more important in ROS production ( Pei et al., 2000 ; Wang and Song, 2008 ; Jiang et al., 2013 ). This is probably because of the dual roles and different levels of ROS under stress conditions and in older plants. Therefore, more investigations are required to explore the function of ethylene and ABA in the regulation of ROS accumulation in different tissues and developmental stages. In our research, we found that ABA promotes while ethylene suppresses ROS accumulation in Arabidopsis at the early seedling stage. This regulation is achieved by the nonenzymatic antioxidant AsA, which is induced by ethylene but suppressed by ABA, and plays an important role in ethylene- and ABA-coregulated ROS accumulation.

It is well known that AsA is a primary antioxidant and a key enzyme cofactor in both animals and plants ( Smirnoff and Wheeler, 2000 ; De Tullio and Arrigoni, 2004 ; Smirnoff, 2018 ). Despite controversy, AsA has been considered as a promising anticancer agent ( Shenoy et al., 2018 ). Due to mutation of the last enzyme in the AsA biosynthesis pathway, some animals, including humans, have to obtain AsA from plants to ensure essential metabolic levels and oxidative protection ( Chatterjee, 1973 ). Moreover, increasing numbers of investigations have focused on the regulation of AsA production ( Gallie, 2013 ; Wang et al., 2013b ; Bulley and Laing, 2016 ). For instance, Arabidopsis ERF98 binds to the promoter of VTC1 and increases its expression and, thereby, AsA production ( Zhang et al., 2012 ). CSN5B interacts with the VTC1 protein to modulate AsA biosynthesis ( Wang et al., 2013a ). As the enzyme of the committed step, VTC2 is considered a key regulator of AsA biosynthesis in many plant species ( Dowdle et al., 2007 ; Bulley et al., 2009 ; Li et al., 2013 ). In this research, we showed that EIN3 and ABI4 consequently regulate the expression of VTC2 rather than that of VTC1 . Thus, our results in this research demonstrate that VTC2 , as a key regulatory point, is transcriptionally and antagonistically modulated by ethylene and ABA. Although another study found that the vtc2 mutant contains two independent mutations, one that confers AsA biosynthesis and another that affects seedling growth ( Dowdle et al., 2007 ; Lim et al., 2016 ), the mutant we used in this research clearly effectively controls AsA production. Further research will be required to clarify whether the VTC2-mediated regulation of AsA biosynthesis by phytohormones participates in plant growth or other developmental processes.

The cross talk between ethylene and ABA has been studied for a long time. For example, Ghassemian et al. (2000) and Beaudoin et al. (2000) proved that ethylene and ABA act synergistically or antagonistically in the regulation of root growth and seed germination, respectively. In this report, we reveal that ABI4 is a novel integrating node in the interaction between ethylene and ABA in AsA biosynthesis and ROS accumulation; ABI4 is transcriptionally repressed by the upstream factor EIN3, releasing the transcriptional inhibition of VTC2 to coordinate the cross talk between ethylene and ABA in AsA biosynthesis. Moreover, EIN3 is considered a key regulator of ethylene networks in other signaling pathways such as the light and salt responses ( Zhong et al., 2009 , 2012 ; Chang et al., 2013 ); consistent with this fact, our data showed that EIN3 regulates ABI4 transcription. In addition, ABI4 and AsA have been reported to contribute to the regulation of the biosynthesis of ethylene ( Smirnoff and Wheeler, 2000 ; Dong et al., 2016 ), gibberellins ( Shu et al., 2013 ), and ABA and cytokinins ( Smirnoff and Wheeler, 2000 ; Huang et al., 2017 ); thus, a complex regulatory loop might exist in the ABI4-integrated regulation of ethylene and ABA in AsA biosynthesis.

ABI4 encodes an AP2/ERF transcription factor that can be transcriptionally activated by itself and was initially characterized as a crucial element in the ABA signaling pathway; ABI4 is involved in many plant developmental processes, including seed development and germination ( Finkelstein et al., 1998 ; Söderman et al., 2000 ; Bossi et al., 2009 ), the Glc response ( Arenas-Huertero et al., 2000 ; Laby et al., 2000 ), lipid mobilization ( Penfield et al., 2006 ), and salt stress and chloroplast-nucleus retrograde signaling pathways ( Koussevitzky et al., 2007 ; Jagadeeswaran et al., 2009 ; Xu et al., 2016 ). ABI4 is required for AsA-regulated Arabidopsis growth ( Kerchev et al., 2011 ); however, the effects of ABI4 on AsA biosynthesis have not been studied in depth. Here, we found that ABI4 suppresses AsA production via transcriptional inhibition of the VTC2 gene. Moreover, this process is affected by ethylene and ABA and probably mediates phytohormone-regulated plant growth and stress responses. EIN3 and ABI4 can regulate the expression of target genes by acting as repressors or activators ( Wind et al., 2013 ; Ju and Chang, 2015 ). In our study, the inhibitory effect of the two transcription factors was demonstrated via transient expression assays. In tobacco leaves and Arabidopsis protoplasts, EIN3 and ABI4 significantly inhibited the expression of the target genes ABI4 and VTC2 , respectively. In the presence of ethylene, this successive transcriptional inhibition was activated by the accumulation of EIN3 and could be suppressed by ABA via activation of the core element ABI4 . This phenomenon might be a strategy by which plants subtly and delicately control AsA production in natural environments.

In conclusion, our findings offer novel insights into how plant hormones regulate AsA biosynthesis and propose a model of the cross talk between ethylene and ABA in Arabidopsis at the early seedling stage ( Fig. 8H ): ethylene and ABA antagonistically regulate the expression of ABI4 , which affects the transcription of the VTC2 gene, AsA biosynthesis, and ROS accumulation, in Arabidopsis seedlings. This regulatory mechanism might provide a delicate way for plants to control AsA production and ROS accumulation. Under environmental stimuli, such as salt stress, both ethylene and ABA are induced, which will antagonistically control ROS levels through AsA, and this regulation is integrated by the promotion of ethylene and repression of ABA. Our previous work proved that ABA suppresses ethylene biosynthesis via ABI4 ( Dong et al., 2016 ), leading to changes in the endogenous concentrations of ethylene and ABA in plants subjected to environmental stimuli. The interactions of ethylene and ABA will be balanced via the control of the key integrator ABI4, subsequently affecting AsA biosynthesis. To verify this hypothesis, we observed the growth of plants, in which the functions of EIN3 and ABI4 were genetically perturbed, under salt stress. The abi4-102 mutant, which displays high AsA levels and low ROS accumulation, was less sensitive to salt stress than Col-0; whereas ABI4ox and ein3 eil1 , which present low levels of AsA and high ROS accumulation, were more sensitive ( Supplemental Fig. S4 ). Importantly, the suppression of growth in ABI4ox and ein3 eil1 under salt stress was largely reversed by supplementation with AsA ( Supplemental Fig. S4 ), strongly suggesting a key role for AsA in ROS accumulation under salt stress. Thus, the EIN3-ABI4-VTC2 transcriptional cascade coordinates the function of ethylene and ABA in AsA production and ROS accumulation in response to complex environmental stimuli.
