---
pmid: '10531035'
title: Identification of a family of human F-box proteins.
authors:
- Cenciarelli C
- Chiaur DS
- Guardavaccaro D
- Parks W
- Vidal M
- Pagano M
journal: Curr Biol
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/S0960-9822(00)80020-2
---

# Identification of a family of human F-box proteins.
**Authors:** Cenciarelli C, Chiaur DS, Guardavaccaro D, Parks W, Vidal M, Pagano M
**Journal:** Curr Biol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0960-9822(00)80020-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0960-9822(00)80020-2)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 1999 Oct 21;9(20):1177-9. doi: 10.1016/S0960-9822(00)80020-2.

Identification of a family of human F-box proteins.

Cenciarelli C(1), Chiaur DS, Guardavaccaro D, Parks W, Vidal M, Pagano M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Kaplan Comprehensive Cancer Center, MSB 548, New 
York University School of Medicine 550 First Avenue, New York, New York, 10016, 
USA.

F-box proteins are an expanding family of eukaryotic proteins characterized by 
an approximately 40 aminoacid motif, the F box (so named because cyclin F was 
one of the first proteins in which this motif was identified) [1]. Some F-box 
proteins have been shown to be critical for the controlled degradation of 
cellular regulatory proteins [2] [3]. In fact, F-box proteins are one of the 
four subunits of ubiquitin protein ligases called SCFs. The other three subunits 
are the Skp1 protein; one of the cullin proteins (Cul1 in metazoans and Cdc53 or 
Cul A in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae); and the recently identified Roc1 
protein (also called Rbx1 or Hrt1). SCF ligases bring ubiquitin conjugating 
enzymes (either Ubc3 or Ubc4) to substrates that are specifically recruited by 
the different F-box proteins. The need for high substrate specificity and the 
large number of known F-box proteins in yeast and worms [2] [4] suggest the 
existence of a large family of mammalian F-box proteins. Using Skp1 as a bait in 
a yeast two-hybrid screen and by searching DNA databases, we identified a family 
of 26 human F-box proteins, 25 of which were novel. Some of these proteins 
contained WD-40 domains or leucine-rich repeats; others contained either 
different protein-protein interaction modules or no recognizable motifs. We have 
named the F-box proteins that contain WD-40 domains Fbws, those containing 
leucine-rich repeats, Fbls, and the remaining ones Fbxs. We have further 
characterized representative members of these three classes of F-box proteins.

DOI: 10.1016/S0960-9822(00)80020-2
PMID: 10531035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
