---
pmid: '8625820'
title: Bax promotes neuronal survival and antagonises the survival effects of neurotrophic
  factors.
authors:
- Middleton G
- Nunez G
- Davies AM
journal: Development
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/dev.122.2.695
---

# Bax promotes neuronal survival and antagonises the survival effects of neurotrophic factors.
**Authors:** Middleton G, Nunez G, Davies AM
**Journal:** Development (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.122.2.695](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.122.2.695)

## Abstract

1. Development. 1996 Feb;122(2):695-701. doi: 10.1242/dev.122.2.695.

Bax promotes neuronal survival and antagonises the survival effects of 
neurotrophic factors.

Middleton G(1), Nunez G, Davies AM.

Author information:
(1)School of Biological and Medical Sciences, University of St. Andrews, 
Scotland.

Bcl-2, Bcl-x and Bax are members fo a family of cytoplasmic proteins that 
influence cell survival. Whereas increased expression of Bcl-2 or Bcl-x promotes 
cell survival following withdrawal of survival factors, increased expression of 
Bax is thought to suppress survival. To investigate the potential roles of these 
proteins in regulating the survival of developing neurons, we compared the 
effects of overexpressing these proteins in embryonic neurons deprived of 
different neurotrophic factors in vitro. Surprisingly, overexpression of Bax 
rescued populations of sensory neurons deprived of nerve growth factor, as did 
overexpression of Bcl-2 and two Bcl-x variants, Bcl-XL and Bcl-Xbeta. Bax also 
enhanced the survival of ciliary neurons deprived of ciliary neurotrophic 
factor, although this effect was short-lived. Whereas Bcl-2 overexpression did 
not affect the survival response of neurons to neurotrophic factors, Bax 
overexpression partially inhibited the action of neurotrophic factors. 
Co-injection of Bcl-2 and Bax expression vectors promoted the survival of 
neurotrophic factor-deprived neurons if either was in excess, but failed to 
rescue neurons if they injected at a 1:1 ratio. Our findings demonstrate that 
Bax can promote the survival of neurotrophic factor-deprived neurons and that 
its effect on survival is dominant to that of neurotrophic factors. Our results 
also argue that the relative amounts of Bcl-2 and Bax are critical in regulating 
neuronal survival.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.122.2.695
PMID: 8625820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
