---
reference_id: PMID:11820816
title: Otx2 is required to respond to signals from anterior neural ridge for forebrain specification.
authors:
- Tian E
- Kimura C
- Takeda N
- Aizawa S
- Matsuo I
journal: Dev Biol
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1006/dbio.2001.0531
keywords:
- Alleles
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- DNA Primers
- Genetic Vectors
- Genotype
- Homeodomain Proteins/genetics
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Otx Transcription Factors
- Prosencephalon/embryology
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics"
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Trans-Activators/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Otx2 is required to respond to signals from anterior neural ridge for forebrain specification.
**Authors:** Tian E, Kimura C, Takeda N, Aizawa S, Matsuo I
**Journal:** Dev Biol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1006/dbio.2001.0531](https://doi.org/10.1006/dbio.2001.0531)

## Content

1. Dev Biol. 2002 Feb 15;242(2):204-23. doi: 10.1006/dbio.2001.0531.

Otx2 is required to respond to signals from anterior neural ridge for forebrain 
specification.

Tian E(1), Kimura C, Takeda N, Aizawa S, Matsuo I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Morphogenesis, Kumamoto University, Honjo 2-2-1, Kumamoto, 
860-0811, Japan.

Previous analysis employing chimeric and transgenic rescue experiments has 
suggested that Otx2 is required in the neuroectoderm for development of the 
forebrain region. In order to elucidate the precise role of Otx2 in forebrain 
development, we attempted to generate an allelic series of Otx2 mutations by 
Flp- and Cre-mediated recombination for the production of conditional knock-out 
mice. Unexpectedly, the neo-cassette insertion created a hypomorphic Otx2 
allele; consequently, the phenotype of compound mutant embryos carrying both a 
hypomorphic and a null allele (Otx2(frt-neo/-)) was analyzed. Otx2(frt-neo/-) 
mutant mice died at birth, displaying rostral head malformations. Molecular 
marker analysis demonstrated that Otx2(frt-neo/-) mutant embryos appeared to 
undergo anterior-posterior axis generation and induction of anterior 
neuroectoderm normally; however, these mutants subsequently failed to correctly 
specify the forebrain region. As the rostral margin of the neural plate, termed 
the anterior neural ridge (ANR), plays crucial roles with respect to neural 
plate specification, we examined expression of molecular markers for the ANR and 
the neural plate; moreover, neural plate explant studies were performed. 
Analyses revealed that telencephalic gene expression did not occur in mutant 
embryos due to defects of the neural plate; however, the mutant ANR bore normal 
induction activity on gene expression. These results further suggest that Otx2 
dosage may be crucial in the neural plate with respect to response to inductive 
signals primarily from the ANR for forebrain specification.

DOI: 10.1006/dbio.2001.0531
PMID: 11820816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]