---
pmid: '27055666'
title: A homozygous truncating mutation in PUS3 expands the role of tRNA modification
  in normal cognition.
authors:
- Shaheen R
- Han L
- Faqeih E
- Ewida N
- Alobeid E
- Phizicky EM
- Alkuraya FS
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2016'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC5152754
doi: 10.1007/s00439-016-1665-7
---

# A homozygous truncating mutation in PUS3 expands the role of tRNA modification in normal cognition.
**Authors:** Shaheen R, Han L, Faqeih E, Ewida N, Alobeid E, Phizicky EM, Alkuraya FS
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00439-016-1665-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-016-1665-7)
**PMC:** [PMC5152754](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5152754/)

## Abstract

1. Hum Genet. 2016 Jul;135(7):707-13. doi: 10.1007/s00439-016-1665-7. Epub 2016
Apr  7.

A homozygous truncating mutation in PUS3 expands the role of tRNA modification 
in normal cognition.

Shaheen R(1), Han L(2), Faqeih E(3), Ewida N(1), Alobeid E(1), Phizicky EM(4), 
Alkuraya FS(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Center for RNA Biology, University 
of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatric Subspecialties, Children's Hospital, King Fahad 
Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Center for RNA Biology, University 
of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY, USA. 
eric_phizicky@urmc.rochester.edu.
(5)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. falkuraya@kfshrc.edu.sa.
(6)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, Alfaisal 
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. falkuraya@kfshrc.edu.sa.

Intellectual disability is a common and highly heterogeneous disorder 
etiologically. In a multiplex consanguineous family, we applied autozygosity 
mapping and exome sequencing and identified a novel homozygous truncating 
mutation in PUS3 that fully segregates with the intellectual disability 
phenotype. Consistent with the known role of Pus3 in isomerizing uracil to 
pseudouridine at positions 38 and 39 in tRNA, we found a significant reduction 
in this post-transcriptional modification of tRNA in patient cells. Our finding 
adds to a growing list of intellectual disability disorders that are caused by 
perturbation of various tRNA modifications, which highlights the sensitivity of 
the brain to these highly conserved processes.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-016-1665-7
PMCID: PMC5152754
PMID: 27055666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors declare no conflict of interest

## Full Text

Abstract

Intellectual disability is a common and highly heterogeneous disorder etiologically. In a multiplex consanguineous family, we applied autozygosity mapping and exome sequencing and identified a novel homozygous truncating mutation in PUS3 that fully segregates with the intellectual disability phenotype. Consistent with the known role of Pus3 in isomerizing uracil to pseudouridine at positions 38 and 39 in tRNA, we found a significant reduction in this post-transcriptional modification of tRNA in patient cells. Our finding adds to a growing list of intellectual disability disorders that are caused by perturbation of various tRNA modifications, which highlights the sensitivity of the brain to these highly conserved processes.

INTRODUCTION

Intellectual disability (ID) is defined as significant limitations both in intellectual functioning and in adaptive behavior as expressed in conceptual, social, and practical adaptive skills, originating before the age 18 ( Association 2013 ). ID is a highly prevalent condition with estimates ranging 1–2% across populations ( Maulik et al. 2011 ). While chromosomal abnormalities are seen in at least 10% of ID patients ( Miller et al. 2010 ), large genomic sequencing studies suggest that single gene mutations are far more frequent and account for another 50%, almost always de novo dominant in severe cases ( de Ligt et al. 2012 ; Gilissen et al. 2014 ; Rauch et al. 2012 ; Vissers et al. 2010 ). The contribution of autosomal recessive mutations to ID is unknown but likely to be significant as inferred by the large number of candidate genes identified by recent large scale studies ( Alazami et al. 2015 ; Karaca et al. 2015 ).

The genes that are mutated in ID patients encode highly diverse groups of proteins, which suggests critical and non-redundant roles of numerous biological processes in normal cognition. One such process that emerged from the discovery of Mendelian forms of ID is tRNA modification. For example, the most common form of autosomal recessive ID in Arabia was found to be due to mutation of ADAT3 , which edits adenosine to inosine at the wobble position 34 of mature tRNA ( Alazami et al. 2013 ; El-Hattab et al. 2016 ; Gerber and Keller 1999 ). More recently, we have identified a form of severe microcephalic primordial dwarfism with global developmental delay that is caused by mutation of WDR4 , a subunit of the methyltransferase that catalyzes 7-methylguanosine modification of residue G 46 of tRNA ( Shaheen et al. 2015 ). These findings suggest that normal brain development and function is highly sensitive to perturbation of tRNA modification, presumably by virtue of impaired protein synthesis.

In this study, we show that a homozygous truncation mutation in PUS3 segregating with ID results in impaired isomerization of uridine to pseudouridine (Ψ) in patient tRNA. PUS3 is a member of the highly conserved TruA/Pus3 family of pseudouridylases, which are important for healthy growth in bacteria and yeast ( Bekaert and Rousset 2005 ; Carbone et al. 1991 ; Chang et al. 1971 ; Lecointe et al. 2002 ; Tsui et al. 1991 ), and catalyze pseudouridine formation at specific uridine residues in the anticodon-stem loop of tRNAs in all kingdoms of life ( Blaby et al. 2011 ; Chen and Patton 2000 ; Han et al. 2015 ; Hur and Stroud 2007 ; Lecointe et al. 1998 ; Singer et al. 1972 ). These findings expand the list of tRNA modification defects linked to ID.

DISCUSSION

Pseudouridine is the most abundant post-transcriptional modification of non-coding RNA observed to date across all domains of life ( Cantara et al. 2011 ; Charette and Gray 2000 ). Pseudouridine possesses an additional free NH group at position 3 allowing for additional hydrogen bonding with other molecules, and it is thought that the presence of this class of modified nucleotides plays a role in increasing the stability of RNA ( Auffinger and Westhof 1998 ). In characterized human tRNAs, pseudouridine is found at 13 different locations (residues 13, 20a, 20b, 31, 32, 27, 28, 35, 38, 39, 54, 55, and e2), and different pseudouridylases are required for modification at each of the different sites or sets of sites. PUS3 was originally identified as the S. cerevisiae ortholog of E.coli TruA, which synthesizes Ψ at U 38 , U 39 and U 40 ( Kammen et al. 1988 ; Singer et al. 1972 ). However, the yeast ortholog was found to possess activity only at positions 38 and 39 ( Lecointe et al. 1998 ), and similar results have been obtained in the mammalian ortholog protein, which prefers U 39 ( Chen and Patton 2000 ).

Lack of PUS3 activity is clearly physiologically consequential. Bacterial truA mutants have significant growth defects ( Chang et al. 1971 ; Tsui et al. 1991 ), while S. cerevisiae pus3Δ mutants are slow growing and temperature-sensitive ( Carbone et al. 1991 ; Lecointe et al. 2002 ), primarily due to reduced function of tRNA Gln(UUG) ( Han et al. 2015 ), and have reduced −1 frameshifting ( Bekaert and Rousset 2005 ). Since tRNA Phe from LCLs with the Arg435* allele of PUS3 had almost exactly 1 mole/mole less Ψ than control LCLs, we infer that the Arg435* allele nearly completely knocks out PUS3 function due to truncation of the conserved domain and the last 45 amino acids, although the mechanism is not clear.

Our understanding of the physiological context of pseudouridine synthesis, like many other biological processes, was informed by Mendelian disorders that are caused by mutations in genes involved in this process. In 1998, a severe multisystem disorder known as dyskeratosis congenita (DKC) was found to be caused by mutations in DKC1 , which encodes a protein that both pseudouridylates rRNA and maintains telomere length ( Heiss et al. 1998 ; Mochizuki et al. 2004 ). More relevant to the family we present is the finding that a stop mutation in PUS1 , which is another tRNA pseudouridylase, was associated with mitochondrial myopathy and sideroblastic anemia because PUS1 pseudouridylates tRNA, although the activity of PUS1 on mitochondrial tRNA may have influenced the mitochondrial-specific phenotype ( Bykhovskaya et al. 2004 ; Fernandez-Vizarra et al. 2007 ).

The phenotype we observe in the context of PUS3 deficiency is largely brain-specific. The expression profile of PUS3 in mammals is unknown but available datasets suggest a wide tissue distribution (Expression Atlas, EBI). Therefore, it is possible that brain-specific phenotype reflects a higher sensitivity to reduced translational efficiency by the brain compared to other organs ( Torres et al. 2014 ). This would be consistent with the finding by us and others that mutations in other genes involved in tRNA modification result in phenotypes with predilection to the brain e.g. ADAT3 , WDR4 , TRM10 , NSUN2 , and FTSJ1 ( Abbasi-Moheb et al. 2012 ; Alazami et al. 2013 ; El-Hattab et al. 2016 ; Fahiminiya et al. 2014 ; Freude et al. 2004 ; Gillis et al. 2014 ; Guy et al. 2015 ; Igoillo-Esteve et al. 2013 ; Khan et al. 2012 ; Martinez et al. 2012 ; Ramser et al. 2004 ; Shaheen et al. 2015 ). Similarly, many disease-causing mutations in tRNA synthetases and in the ribosome manifest their effects in functional disturbance of the nervous system ( Antonellis et al. 2003 ; Antonellis and Green 2008 ; Brooks et al. 2014 ; Yao and Fox 2013 ).

In conclusion, we show that a nonsense mutation in PUS3 segregates with an apparently novel autosomal recessive form of ID. Our finding that this mutation results in functional deficiency of PUS3 and a reduction in the availability of tRNA species that are pseudouridylated suggests a disease mechanism that is consistent with the recent identification of ID phenotypes caused by defects in other forms of tRNA modification.
