---
pmid: '8804427'
title: Only sphingolipid activator protein B (SAP-B or saposin B) stimulates the degradation
  of globotriaosylceramide by recombinant human lysosomal alpha-galactosidase in a
  detergent-free liposomal system.
authors:
- Kase R
- Bierfreund U
- Klein A
- Kolter T
- Itoh K
- Suzuki M
- Hashimoto Y
- Sandhoff K
- Sakuraba H
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0014-5793(96)00863-0
---

# Only sphingolipid activator protein B (SAP-B or saposin B) stimulates the degradation of globotriaosylceramide by recombinant human lysosomal alpha-galactosidase in a detergent-free liposomal system.
**Authors:** Kase R, Bierfreund U, Klein A, Kolter T, Itoh K, Suzuki M, Hashimoto Y, Sandhoff K, Sakuraba H
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0014-5793(96)00863-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/0014-5793(96)00863-0)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 1996 Sep 9;393(1):74-6. doi: 10.1016/0014-5793(96)00863-0.

Only sphingolipid activator protein B (SAP-B or saposin B) stimulates the 
degradation of globotriaosylceramide by recombinant human lysosomal 
alpha-galactosidase in a detergent-free liposomal system.

Kase R(1), Bierfreund U, Klein A, Kolter T, Itoh K, Suzuki M, Hashimoto Y, 
Sandhoff K, Sakuraba H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical 
Science, Japan. kase@rinshoken.or.jp

The degradation of globotriaosylceramide (GbO-se3Cer) by insect-cell derived 
recombinant human alpha-galactosidase (EC 3.2.1.22) was carried out in a 
detergent-free liposomal system in order to mimic intralysosomal conditions. 
GbOse3Cer incorporated into unilamellar liposomes was used as the substrate, and 
naturally occurring sphingolipid activator proteins, rather than detergents, 
were used to stimulate the enzyme reaction. The degradation of GbOse3Cer was 
dependent on the presence of both alpha-galactosidase and sphingolipid activator 
protein B (SAP-B or saposin B). It proceeded optimally at pH 4.6, and was 
enhanced by increasing amounts of both alpha-galactosidase (0.24-24 mU/50 
microliters assay) and SAP-B (0-5 micrograms/50 microliters assay). The enzyme 
reaction was not affected by SAP-A, SAP-C, or SAP-D. Therefore, our results 
indicate that only SAP-B is essential for the degradation of GbOse3Cer by 
alpha-galactosidase.

DOI: 10.1016/0014-5793(96)00863-0
PMID: 8804427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
