---
pmid: '15525938'
title: Regulation of p53 activity through lysine methylation.
authors:
- Chuikov S
- Kurash JK
- Wilson JR
- Xiao B
- Justin N
- Ivanov GS
- McKinney K
- Tempst P
- Prives C
- Gamblin SJ
- Barlev NA
- Reinberg D
journal: Nature
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature03117
---

# Regulation of p53 activity through lysine methylation.
**Authors:** Chuikov S, Kurash JK, Wilson JR, Xiao B, Justin N, Ivanov GS, McKinney K, Tempst P, Prives C, Gamblin SJ, Barlev NA, Reinberg D
**Journal:** Nature (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature03117](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature03117)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2004 Nov 18;432(7015):353-60. doi: 10.1038/nature03117. Epub 2004 Nov
3.

Regulation of p53 activity through lysine methylation.

Chuikov S(1), Kurash JK, Wilson JR, Xiao B, Justin N, Ivanov GS, McKinney K, 
Tempst P, Prives C, Gamblin SJ, Barlev NA, Reinberg D.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Division of Nucleic Acids Enzymology, 
Department of Biochemistry, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscataway, New 
Jersey 08854, USA.

p53 is a tumour suppressor that regulates the cellular response to genotoxic 
stresses. p53 is a short-lived protein and its activity is regulated mostly by 
stabilization via different post-translational modifications. Here we report a 
novel mechanism of p53 regulation through lysine methylation by Set9 
methyltransferase. Set9 specifically methylates p53 at one residue within the 
carboxyl-terminus regulatory region. Methylated p53 is restricted to the nucleus 
and the modification positively affects its stability. Set9 regulates the 
expression of p53 target genes in a manner dependent on the p53-methylation 
site. The crystal structure of a ternary complex of Set9 with a p53 peptide and 
the cofactor product S-adenosyl-l-homocysteine (AdoHcy) provides the molecular 
basis for recognition of p53 by this lysine methyltransferase.

DOI: 10.1038/nature03117
PMID: 15525938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
