---
pmid: '15284227'
title: MAP kinase phosphatase 3 (MKP3) interacts with and is phosphorylated by protein
  kinase CK2alpha.
authors:
- Castelli M
- Camps M
- Gillieron C
- Leroy D
- Arkinstall S
- Rommel C
- Nichols A
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M407669200
---

# MAP kinase phosphatase 3 (MKP3) interacts with and is phosphorylated by protein kinase CK2alpha.
**Authors:** Castelli M, Camps M, Gillieron C, Leroy D, Arkinstall S, Rommel C, Nichols A
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M407669200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M407669200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Oct 22;279(43):44731-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M407669200. Epub
2004  Jul 28.

MAP kinase phosphatase 3 (MKP3) interacts with and is phosphorylated by protein 
kinase CK2alpha.

Castelli M(1), Camps M, Gillieron C, Leroy D, Arkinstall S, Rommel C, Nichols A.

Author information:
(1)Serono Pharmaceutical Research Institute, Serono International S.A., 
Plan-les-Ouates 1228, Geneva CH1228, Switzerland.

Mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases play a central role in controlling a 
wide range of cellular functions following their activation by a variety of 
extracellular stimuli. MAP kinase phosphatases (MKPs) represent a subfamily of 
dual specificity phosphatases, which negatively regulate MAP kinases. Although 
ERK2 activity is regulated by its phosphorylation state, MKP3 is regulated by 
physical interaction with ERK2, independent of its enzymatic activity (Camps, 
M., Nichols, A., Gillieron, C., Antonsson, B., Muda, M., Chabert, C., Boschert, 
U., and Arkinstall, S., (1998) Science 280, 1262-1265; Farooq, A., Chaturvedi, 
G., Mujtaba, S., Plotnikova, O., Zeng, L., Dhalluin, C., Ashton, R., and Zhou, 
M. M. (2001), Mol. Cell 7, 387-399; Zhou, B., and Zhang, Z. Y. (1999) J. Biol. 
Chem. 274, 35526-35534). The interaction of ERK2 and MKP3 allows the reciprocal 
cross-regulation of their catalytic activity. Indeed, MKP3 acts as a negative 
regulator on ERK2-MAP kinase signal transduction activity, representing thus a 
negative feedback for this MAPK pathway. To identify novel proteins able to 
complex MKP3, we used the yeast two-hybrid system. Here we report that MKP3 and 
protein kinase CK2 form a protein complex, which can include ERK2. The 
phosphatase activity of MKP3 is then slightly increased in vitro, whereas in 
transfected cells, ERK2 dephosphorylation is reduced. In addition, we 
demonstrated that CK2 selectively phosphorylates MKP3, suggesting 
cross-regulation between CK2alpha and MKP3, as well as a modulation of ERK2-MAPK 
signaling by CK2alpha via MKP3.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M407669200
PMID: 15284227 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
