---
pmid: '36053485'
title: Identification of Feronia-interacting proteins in Arabidopsis thaliana.
authors:
- Choi JH
- Kim JW
- Oh MH
journal: Genes Genomics
year: '2022'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s13258-022-01292-3
---

# Identification of Feronia-interacting proteins in Arabidopsis thaliana.
**Authors:** Choi JH, Kim JW, Oh MH
**Journal:** Genes Genomics (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13258-022-01292-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13258-022-01292-3)

## Abstract

1. Genes Genomics. 2022 Dec;44(12):1477-1485. doi: 10.1007/s13258-022-01292-3.
Epub  2022 Sep 2.

Identification of Feronia-interacting proteins in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Choi JH(#)(1), Kim JW(#)(1), Oh MH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Biological Sciences and 
Biotechnology, Chungnam National University, Daejeon, 34134, South Korea.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Biological Sciences and 
Biotechnology, Chungnam National University, Daejeon, 34134, South Korea. 
manhooh@cnu.ac.kr.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Plant growth and development are complex processes modulated by 
numerous genes, transcription factors, hormones, and peptides. Several reports 
implicate the membrane-localized Catharanthus roseus receptor-like kinase1 
(CrRLK1L) protein, FERONIA (FER), involved in plant development. However, 
protein targets of FER remain poorly characterized.
OBJECTIVE: FER recombinant proteins were analyzed, and FER-interacting proteins 
were identified, to better understand the function of the Arabidopsis thaliana 
FER (AtFER) gene in plant development.
METHODS: AtFER-interacting proteins were identified through Yeast-Two Hybrid 
(Y2H) and validated by bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC). 
Autophosphorylation activity was evaluated in AtFER site-directed and deletion 
mutants.
RESULTS: AtFER cytoplasmic kinase domain (Flag-FER-CD) is autophosphorylated at 
the Thr residue (s), with T559 and T664 as important sites for AtFER kinase 
activity. In addition, the carboxy terminal region is essential for AtFER kinase 
activity. Y2H identified an Armadillo (ARM)-repeat protein (At4g16490) with 
tandem copies of a degenerate protein sequence motif, a U-BOX 9 (PUB9, 
At3g07360), IQ-DOMAIN 7 (IQD7, At1g17480), and heteroglycan glucosidase 1 (HGL1, 
At3g23640) as AtFER-interacting proteins. BiFC confirmed the in vivo 
interactions between these four proteins and AtFER in tobacco (Nicotiana 
benthamiana) leaf transient expression assays. The RAPID ALKALINIZATION FACTOR1 
(RALF1) peptide, which is a FER ligand, induced the expression of genes encoding 
the four AtFER-interacting proteins.
CONCLUSION: The AtFER-interacting proteins identified in this study are likely 
involved in FER-mediated intracellular signaling pathways that are essential in 
plant growth and development, and possibly plant immunity.

© 2022. The Author(s) under exclusive licence to The Genetics Society of Korea.

DOI: 10.1007/s13258-022-01292-3
PMID: 36053485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
