---
pmid: '14533738'
title: Targeting of the human adrenoleukodystrophy protein to the peroxisomal membrane
  by an internal region containing a highly conserved motif.
authors:
- Landgraf P
- Mayerhofer PU
- Polanetz R
- Roscher AA
- Holzinger A
journal: Eur J Cell Biol
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1078/0171-9335-00331
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Targeting of the human adrenoleukodystrophy protein to the peroxisomal membrane by an internal region containing a highly conserved motif.
**Authors:** Landgraf P, Mayerhofer PU, Polanetz R, Roscher AA, Holzinger A
**Journal:** Eur J Cell Biol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1078/0171-9335-00331](https://doi.org/10.1078/0171-9335-00331)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Cell Biol. 2003 Aug;82(8):401-10. doi: 10.1078/0171-9335-00331.

Targeting of the human adrenoleukodystrophy protein to the peroxisomal membrane 
by an internal region containing a highly conserved motif.

Landgraf P(1), Mayerhofer PU, Polanetz R, Roscher AA, Holzinger A.

Author information:
(1)Dr. von Hauner Children's Hospital, Department of Clinical Chemistry, 
Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, 
Germany.

In this study we addressed the targeting requirements of peroxisomal ABC 
transporters, in particular the human adrenoleukodystrophy protein. This 
membrane protein is defective or missing in X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy, a 
neurodegenerative disorder predominantly presenting in childhood. Using 
adrenoleukodystrophy protein deletion constructs and green fluorescent protein 
fusion constructs we identified the amino acid regions 1-110 and 67-164 to be 
sufficient for peroxisomal targeting. However, the minimal region shared by 
these constructs (amino acids 67-110) is not sufficient for peroxisomal 
targeting by itself. Additionally, the NH2-terminal 66 amino acids enhance 
targeting efficiency. Green fluorescent protein-labeled fragments of human 
peroxisomal membrane protein 69 and Saccharomyces cerevisiae Pxa1 corresponding 
to the amino acid 67-164 adrenoleukodystrophy protein region were also directed 
to the mammalian peroxisome. The required region contains a 14-amino-acid motif 
(71-84) conserved between the adrenoleukodystrophy protein and human peroxisomal 
membrane protein 69 and yeast Pxa1. Omission or truncation of this motif in the 
adrenoleukodystrophy protein abolished peroxisomal targeting. The single amino 
acid substitution L78F resulted in a significant reduction of targeting 
efficiency. The in-frame deletion of three amino acids (del78-80LLR) within the 
proposed targeting motif in two patients suffering from X-linked 
adrenoleukodystrophy resulted in the mislocalization of a green fluorescent 
protein fusion protein to nucleus, cytosol and mitochondria. Our data define the 
targeting region of human adrenoleukodystrophy protein containing a highly 
conserved 14-amino-acid motif.

DOI: 10.1078/0171-9335-00331
PMID: 14533738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
