---
pmid: '10843682'
title: Vitamin D3 up-regulated protein 1 mediates oxidative stress via suppressing
  the thioredoxin function.
authors:
- Junn E
- Han SH
- Im JY
- Yang Y
- Cho EW
- Um HD
- Kim DK
- Lee KW
- Han PL
- Rhee SG
- Choi I
journal: J Immunol
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.164.12.6287
---

# Vitamin D3 up-regulated protein 1 mediates oxidative stress via suppressing the thioredoxin function.
**Authors:** Junn E, Han SH, Im JY, Yang Y, Cho EW, Um HD, Kim DK, Lee KW, Han PL, Rhee SG, Choi I
**Journal:** J Immunol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.4049/jimmunol.164.12.6287](https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.164.12.6287)

## Abstract

1. J Immunol. 2000 Jun 15;164(12):6287-95. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.164.12.6287.

Vitamin D3 up-regulated protein 1 mediates oxidative stress via suppressing the 
thioredoxin function.

Junn E(1), Han SH, Im JY, Yang Y, Cho EW, Um HD, Kim DK, Lee KW, Han PL, Rhee 
SG, Choi I.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and 
Biotechnology, Taejon, Republic of Korea.

As a result of identifying the regulatory proteins of thioredoxin (TRX), a 
murine homologue for human vitamin D3 up-regulated protein 1 (VDUP1) was 
identified from a yeast two-hybrid screen. Cotransfection into 293 cells and 
precipitation assays confirmed that mouse VDUP1 (mVDUP1) bound to TRX, but it 
failed to bind to a Cys32 and Cys35 mutant TRX, suggesting the redox-active site 
is critical for binding. mVDUP1 was ubiquitously expressed in various tissues 
and located in the cytoplasm. Biochemical analysis showed that mVDUP1 inhibited 
the insulin-reducing activity of TRX. When cells were treated with various 
stress stimuli such as H2O2 and heat shock, mVDUP1 was significantly induced. 
TRX is known to interact with other proteins such as proliferation-associated 
gene and apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1. Coexpression of mVDUP1 interfered 
with the interaction between TRX and proliferation-associated gene or TRX and 
ASK-1, suggesting its roles in cell proliferation and oxidative stress. To 
investigate the roles of mVDUP1 in oxidative stress, mVDUP1 was overexpressed in 
NIH 3T3 cells. When cells were exposed to stress, cell proliferation was 
declined with elevated apoptotic cell death compared with control cells. In 
addition, c-Jun N-terminal kinase activation and IL-6 expression were elevated. 
Taken together, these results demonstrate that mVDUP1 functions as an oxidative 
stress mediator by inhibiting TRX activity.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.164.12.6287
PMID: 10843682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
