---
pmid: '18632665'
title: The human escort protein Hep binds to the ATPase domain of mitochondrial hsp70
  and regulates ATP hydrolysis.
authors:
- Zhai P
- Stanworth C
- Liu S
- Silberg JJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3258852
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M803475200
---

# The human escort protein Hep binds to the ATPase domain of mitochondrial hsp70 and regulates ATP hydrolysis.
**Authors:** Zhai P, Stanworth C, Liu S, Silberg JJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M803475200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M803475200)
**PMC:** [PMC3258852](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3258852/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Sep 19;283(38):26098-106. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M803475200. Epub 
2008 Jul 16.

The human escort protein Hep binds to the ATPase domain of mitochondrial hsp70 
and regulates ATP hydrolysis.

Zhai P(1), Stanworth C, Liu S, Silberg JJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Rice University, Houston, Texas 
77251, USA.

Hsp70 escort proteins (Hep) have been implicated as essential for maintaining 
the function of yeast mitochondrial hsp70 molecular chaperones (mtHsp70), but 
the role that escort proteins play in regulating mammalian chaperone folding and 
function has not been established. We present evidence that human mtHsp70 
exhibits limited solubility due to aggregation mediated by its ATPase domain and 
show that human Hep directly enhances chaperone solubility through interactions 
with this domain. In the absence of Hep, mtHsp70 was insoluble when expressed in 
Escherichia coli, as was its isolated ATPase domain and a chimera having this 
domain fused to the peptide-binding domain of HscA, a soluble monomeric 
chaperone. In contrast, these proteins all exhibited increased solubility when 
expressed in the presence of Hep. In vitro studies further revealed that 
purified Hep regulates the interaction of mtHsp70 with nucleotides. Full-length 
mtHsp70 exhibited slow intrinsic ATP hydrolysis activity (6.8+/-0.2 x 10(-4) 
s(-1)) at 25 degrees C, which was stimulated up to 49-fold by Hep. Hep also 
stimulated the activity of the isolated ATPase domain, albeit to a lower maximal 
extent (11.5-fold). In addition, gel-filtration studies showed that formation of 
chaperone-escort protein complexes inhibited mtHsp70 self-association, and they 
revealed that Hep binding to full-length mtHsp70 and its isolated ATPase domain 
is strongest in the absence of nucleotides. These findings provide evidence that 
metazoan escort proteins regulate the catalytic activity and solubility of their 
cognate chaperones, and they indicate that both forms of regulation arise from 
interactions with the mtHsp70 ATPase domain.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M803475200
PMCID: PMC3258852
PMID: 18632665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
