---
pmid: '3318829'
title: Localization of GTP cyclohydrolase I in human peripheral blood smears using
  a specific monoclonal antibody and an immune-alkaline phosphatase labeling technique.
authors:
- Schoedon G
- Curtis HC
- Niederwieser A
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '1987'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0006-291x(87)80264-4
---

# Localization of GTP cyclohydrolase I in human peripheral blood smears using a specific monoclonal antibody and an immune-alkaline phosphatase labeling technique.
**Authors:** Schoedon G, Curtis HC, Niederwieser A
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (1987)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0006-291x(87)80264-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0006-291x(87)80264-4)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1987 Nov 13;148(3):1232-6. doi: 
10.1016/s0006-291x(87)80264-4.

Localization of GTP cyclohydrolase I in human peripheral blood smears using a 
specific monoclonal antibody and an immune-alkaline phosphatase labeling 
technique.

Schoedon G(1), Curtis HC, Niederwieser A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Zurich, Switzerland.

GTP cyclohydrolase I, the enzyme catalyzing the first step in the cofactor 
biosynthesis for the aromatic amino acid hydroxylases, has been localized in 
situ. By the use of a monoclonal antibody specific to human GTP cyclohydrolase 
I, the enzyme has been visualized immuno-enzymatically by alkaline phosphatase 
monoclonal anti-alkaline phosphatase labeling. In routine blood smears 
lymphocytes, monocytes/macrophages, and granulocytes show strong intraplasmatic 
staining. Premature erythrocytes show clear staining of the reticulated 
cytoplasmatic structure, while mature erythrocytes are completely negative. 
Neither is there any staining for GTP cyclohydrolase I in the blast cells of a 
case of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. These results closely confirm the 
prior finding that mature erythrocytes as well as most malignant mononuclear 
cells lack GTP cyclohydrolase I activity, and they indicate that in these cells 
the enzyme protein may be absent.

DOI: 10.1016/s0006-291x(87)80264-4
PMID: 3318829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
