---
pmid: '25983245'
title: Biallelic mutations in the autophagy regulator DRAM2 cause retinal dystrophy
  with early macular involvement.
authors:
- El-Asrag ME
- Sergouniotis PI
- McKibbin M
- Plagnol V
- Sheridan E
- Waseem N
- Abdelhamed Z
- McKeefry D
- Van Schil K
- Poulter JA
- UK Inherited Retinal Disease Consortium
- Johnson CA
- Carr IM
- Leroy BP
- De Baere E
- Inglehearn CF
- Webster AR
- Toomes C
- Ali M
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4457961
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.04.006
---

# Biallelic mutations in the autophagy regulator DRAM2 cause retinal dystrophy with early macular involvement.
**Authors:** El-Asrag ME, Sergouniotis PI, McKibbin M, Plagnol V, Sheridan E, Waseem N, Abdelhamed Z, McKeefry D, Van Schil K, Poulter JA, UK Inherited Retinal Disease Consortium, Johnson CA, Carr IM, Leroy BP, De Baere E, Inglehearn CF, Webster AR, Toomes C, Ali M
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.04.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.04.006)
**PMC:** [PMC4457961](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4457961/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2015 Jun 4;96(6):948-54. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.04.006. Epub
 2015 May 14.

Biallelic mutations in the autophagy regulator DRAM2 cause retinal dystrophy 
with early macular involvement.

El-Asrag ME(1), Sergouniotis PI(2), McKibbin M(3), Plagnol V(4), Sheridan E(5), 
Waseem N(6), Abdelhamed Z(7), McKeefry D(8), Van Schil K(9), Poulter JA(7); UK 
Inherited Retinal Disease Consortium; Johnson CA(7), Carr IM(7), Leroy BP(10), 
De Baere E(9), Inglehearn CF(7), Webster AR(11), Toomes C(12), Ali M(13).

Collaborators: Black G, Hall G, Ingram S, Gillespie R, Ramsden S, Manson F, 
Hardcastle A, Michaelides M, Cheetham M, Arno G, Thomas N, Bhattacharya S, Moore 
T, Nemeth A, Downes S, Lise S, Lord E.

Author information:
(1)Section of Ophthalmology and Neuroscience, Leeds Institute of Biomedical and 
Clinical Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds LS9 7TF, UK; Department of 
Zoology, Faculty of Science, Benha University, 13511 Benha, Egypt.
(2)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London EC1V 9EL, 
UK; Institute of Human Development, Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences, 
University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9WL, UK.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, St. James's University Hospital, Leeds LS9 7TF, 
UK.
(4)UCL Genetics Institute, University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK.
(5)Yorkshire Regional Genetics Service, St. James's University Hospital, Leeds 
LS9 7TF, UK.
(6)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London EC1V 9EL, 
UK.
(7)Section of Ophthalmology and Neuroscience, Leeds Institute of Biomedical and 
Clinical Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds LS9 7TF, UK.
(8)Bradford School of Optometry and Visual Science, University of Bradford, 
Bradford BD7 1DP, UK.
(9)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, 9000 Ghent, Belgium.
(10)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, 9000 Ghent, Belgium; 
Department of Ophthalmology, Ghent University Hospital, 9000 Ghent, Belgium; 
Division of Ophthalmology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, PA 19104, 
USA.
(11)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London EC1V 9EL, 
UK; Moorfields Eye Hospital, London EC1V 2PD, UK.
(12)Section of Ophthalmology and Neuroscience, Leeds Institute of Biomedical and 
Clinical Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds LS9 7TF, UK. Electronic address: 
c.toomes@leeds.ac.uk.
(13)Section of Ophthalmology and Neuroscience, Leeds Institute of Biomedical and 
Clinical Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds LS9 7TF, UK. Electronic address: 
m.ali@leeds.ac.uk.

Retinal dystrophies are an overlapping group of genetically heterogeneous 
conditions resulting from mutations in more than 250 genes. Here we describe 
five families affected by an adult-onset retinal dystrophy with early macular 
involvement and associated central visual loss in the third or fourth decade of 
life. Affected individuals were found to harbor disease-causing variants in 
DRAM2 (DNA-damage regulated autophagy modulator protein 2). Homozygosity mapping 
and exome sequencing in a large, consanguineous British family of Pakistani 
origin revealed a homozygous frameshift variant (c.140delG [p.Gly47Valfs(∗)3]) 
in nine affected family members. Sanger sequencing of DRAM2 in 322 unrelated 
probands with retinal dystrophy revealed one European subject with compound 
heterozygous DRAM2 changes (c.494G>A [p.Trp165(∗)] and c.131G>A [p.Ser44Asn]). 
Inspection of previously generated exome sequencing data in unsolved retinal 
dystrophy cases identified a homozygous variant in an individual of Indian 
origin (c.64_66del [p.Ala22del]). Independently, a gene-based case-control 
association study was conducted via an exome sequencing dataset of 18 
phenotypically similar case subjects and 1,917 control subjects. Using a 
recessive model and a binomial test for rare, presumed biallelic, variants, we 
found DRAM2 to be the most statistically enriched gene; one subject was a 
homozygote (c.362A>T [p.His121Leu]) and another a compound heterozygote (c.79T>C 
[p.Tyr27His] and c.217_225del [p.Val73_Tyr75del]). DRAM2 encodes a transmembrane 
lysosomal protein thought to play a role in the initiation of autophagy. 
Immunohistochemical analysis showed DRAM2 localization to photoreceptor inner 
segments and to the apical surface of retinal pigment epithelial cells where it 
might be involved in the process of photoreceptor renewal and recycling to 
preserve visual function.

Copyright © 2015 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.04.006
PMCID: PMC4457961
PMID: 25983245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
