---
pmid: '22420621'
title: Exorcising the exocyst complex.
authors:
- Heider MR
- Munson M
journal: Traffic
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3374049
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2012.01353.x
---

# Exorcising the exocyst complex.
**Authors:** Heider MR, Munson M
**Journal:** Traffic (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1600-0854.2012.01353.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0854.2012.01353.x)
**PMC:** [PMC3374049](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3374049/)

## Abstract

1. Traffic. 2012 Jul;13(7):898-907. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2012.01353.x. Epub 
2012 Apr 8.

Exorcising the exocyst complex.

Heider MR(1), Munson M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of 
Massachusetts Medical School, 364 Plantation Street, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

The exocyst complex is an evolutionarily conserved multisubunit protein complex 
implicated in tethering secretory vesicles to the plasma membrane. Originally 
identified two decades ago in budding yeast, investigations using several 
different eukaryotic systems have since made great progress toward determination 
of the overall structure and organization of the eight exocyst subunits. Studies 
point to a critical role for the complex as a spatiotemporal regulator through 
the numerous protein and lipid interactions of its subunits, although a 
molecular understanding of exocyst function has been challenging to elucidate. 
Recent progress demonstrates that the exocyst is also important for additional 
trafficking steps and cellular processes beyond exocytosis, with links to 
development and disease. In this review, we discuss current knowledge of exocyst 
architecture, assembly, regulation and its roles in a variety of cellular 
trafficking pathways.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2012.01353.x
PMCID: PMC3374049
PMID: 22420621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
