---
pmid: '22290180'
title: Mitsugumin 29 is transcriptionally induced in senile plaque-associated astrocytes.
authors:
- Satoh K
- Akatsu H
- Yamamoto T
- Kosaka K
- Yokota H
- Yamada T
journal: Brain Res
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2011.12.062
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Mitsugumin 29 is transcriptionally induced in senile plaque-associated astrocytes.
**Authors:** Satoh K, Akatsu H, Yamamoto T, Kosaka K, Yokota H, Yamada T
**Journal:** Brain Res (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.brainres.2011.12.062](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2011.12.062)

## Abstract

1. Brain Res. 2012 Mar 2;1441:9-16. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2011.12.062. Epub
2012  Jan 12.

Mitsugumin 29 is transcriptionally induced in senile plaque-associated 
astrocytes.

Satoh K(1), Akatsu H, Yamamoto T, Kosaka K, Yokota H, Yamada T.

Author information:
(1)Frontier Research Laboratories, Daiichi Sankyo Co., Ltd., Tokyo 134-8640, 
Japan. satoh.kazuki.i6@daiichisankyo.co.jp

Astrocytes associated with beta-amyloid (Aβ)-deposited senile plaques are a 
common neuropathological feature of Alzheimer's disease (AD). There is little 
doubt that the association of Aβ with the major component in the central nervous 
system cells significantly influences disease progression, however, the 
molecular mechanisms by which Aβ contributes to the astrocyte-mediated 
neuropathological changes have not been well established. In an effort to 
identify astrocyte-derived molecules that may be closely associated with 
exacerbation of AD, we identified a novel Aβ-induced rat gene, whose mouse 
counterpart, mitsugumin 29 (MG29), is known to be involved in intracellular Ca²⁺ 
homeostasis in skeletal muscle. To evaluate the roles of human MG29 in AD, we 
investigated its expression in AD brain. In non-AD brains, MG29 mRNA has been 
detected in neurons, but not in quiescent astrocytes. On the contrary, in AD 
brains, MG29 is expressed in activated astrocytes associated with senile 
plaques, but not expressed in neurons around lesions. Human MG29-transfected 
cells express the protein in the endoplasmic reticulum and the level of 
expression is involved in Ca²⁺-dependent exocytosis mechanisms. Increased MG29 
expression in senile plaques-associated activated astrocytes suggests that 
intracellular Ca²⁺ turnovers may be changed in these astrocytes. This might be 
related in sustained Ca²⁺-dependent exocytosis of various transmitters including 
glutamate, leading to the acceleration of neurodegeneration in the lesion 
observed in AD.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2011.12.062
PMID: 22290180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
