---
pmid: '12270943'
title: Casein kinase 1 regulates connexin-43 gap junction assembly.
authors:
- Cooper CD
- Lampe PD
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M209427200
---

# Casein kinase 1 regulates connexin-43 gap junction assembly.
**Authors:** Cooper CD, Lampe PD
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M209427200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M209427200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 22;277(47):44962-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M209427200. Epub
2002  Sep 20.

Casein kinase 1 regulates connexin-43 gap junction assembly.

Cooper CD(1), Lampe PD.

Author information:
(1)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center and Department of Pathobiology, 
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98109-1024, USA.

Phosphorylation of members of the connexin family of gap junction proteins has 
been correlated with gap junction assembly, but the mechanisms involved remain 
unclear. We have examined the role of casein kinase 1 (CK1) in connexin-43 
(Cx43) gap junction assembly. Cellular co-immunoprecipitation experiments and in 
vitro CK1 phosphorylation reactions indicate that CK1 interacted with and 
phosphorylated Cx43, initially on serine(s) 325, 328, or 330. 
(32)P(i)-Metabolically labeled cells treated with CKI-7, a specific CK1 
inhibitor, showed a reduction in Cx43 phosphorylation on site(s) that can be 
phosphorylated by CK1 in vitro. To examine CK1 function, normal rat kidney cells 
were treated with CKI-7, and Cx43 content was analyzed by Triton X-100 
extraction, cell-surface biotinylation, and immunofluorescence. Western blot 
analysis indicated a slight increase in total Cx43, whereas gap junctional 
(Triton-insoluble) Cx43 decreased, and non-junctional plasma membrane Cx43 
increased (as detected by cell surface biotinylation). Immunofluorescence 
experiments in the presence of CK1 inhibitor showed increases in Cx43 plasma 
membrane localization but not necessarily accumulation at cell-cell interfaces. 
Decreased gap junctional and phosphorylated Cx43 was also detected when cells 
were treated with IC261, a CK1 inhibitor specific for delta or epsilon isoforms. 
These data suggest CK1delta could regulate Cx43 gap junction assembly by 
directly phosphorylating Cx43.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M209427200
PMID: 12270943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
