---
reference_id: PMID:12145306
title: Regulation of osteocalcin gene expression by a novel Ku antigen transcription factor complex.
authors:
- Willis DM
- Loewy AP
- Charlton-Kachigian N
- Shao JS
- Ornitz DM
- Towler DA
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M206482200
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Regulation of osteocalcin gene expression by a novel Ku antigen transcription factor complex.
**Authors:** Willis DM, Loewy AP, Charlton-Kachigian N, Shao JS, Ornitz DM, Towler DA
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M206482200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M206482200)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Oct 4;277(40):37280-91. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M206482200. Epub
2002  Jul 26.

Regulation of osteocalcin gene expression by a novel Ku antigen transcription
factor complex.

Willis DM(1), Loewy AP, Charlton-Kachigian N, Shao JS, Ornitz DM, Towler DA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri 63110, USA.

We previously described an osteocalcin (OC) fibroblast growth factor (FGF)
response element (FRE) DNA binding activity as a target of Msx2 transcriptional
regulation. We now identify Ku70, Ku80, and Tbdn100, a variant of Tubedown-1, as
constituents of the purified OCFRE-binding complex. Northern and Western blot
analyses demonstrate expression of Ku and Tbdn100 in MC3T3E1 osteoblasts. FGF2
treatment regulates Ku, but not Tbdn100, protein accumulation. Gel supershift
studies confirm sequence-specific DNA binding of Ku in the OCFRE complex;
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays confirm association of Ku and Tbdn100 with
the endogenous OC promoter. In the promoter region -154 to -113, the OCFRE is
juxtaposed to OSE2, an osteoblast-specific element that binds Runx2 (Osf2,
Cbfa1). Expression of the Ku.Tbdn100 complex up-regulates both the basal and
Runx2-dependent transcription driven by this 42-bp OC promoter element,
reconstituted in CV-1 cells. Synergistic transactivation occurs in the presence
of activated FGF receptor 2 signaling. Msx2 suppresses Ku- and Runx2-dependent
transcription; suppression is dependent upon the Msx2 homeodomain NH(2)-terminal
arm and extension. Pull-down assays confirm physical interactions between Ku and
these co-regulatory transcription factors, consistent with the functional
interactions identified. Finally, cultured Ku70 -/- calvarial cells exhibit a
profound, selective deficiency in OC expression as compared with wild-type
calvarial cells, confirming the biochemical data showing a role for Ku in OC
transcription. In toto, these data indicate that a novel Ku antigen complex
assembles on the OC promoter, functioning in concert with Msx2 and Runx2 to
regulate OC gene expression.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M206482200
PMID: 12145306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]