---
pmid: '15665297'
title: cIAP1 Localizes to the nuclear compartment and modulates the cell cycle.
authors:
- Samuel T
- Okada K
- Hyer M
- Welsh K
- Zapata JM
- Reed JC
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
---

# cIAP1 Localizes to the nuclear compartment and modulates the cell cycle.
**Authors:** Samuel T, Okada K, Hyer M, Welsh K, Zapata JM, Reed JC
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2005)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Res. 2005 Jan 1;65(1):210-8.

cIAP1 Localizes to the nuclear compartment and modulates the cell cycle.

Samuel T(1), Okada K, Hyer M, Welsh K, Zapata JM, Reed JC.

Author information:
(1)Burnham Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. reedoffice@burnham.org

We explored the location and function of the human cIAP1 protein, a member of 
the inhibitor of apoptosis protein (IAP) family. Unlike family member X-linked 
IAP (XIAP), which was predominantly cytoplasmic, the cIAP1 protein localized 
almost exclusively to nuclei in cells, as determined by immunofluorescence 
microscopy and subcellular fractionation methods. Interestingly, apoptotic 
stimuli induced nuclear export of cIAP1, which was blocked by a chemical caspase 
inhibitor. In dividing cells, cIAP1 was released into the cytosol early in 
mitosis, then reaccumulated in nuclei in late anaphase and in telophase, with 
the exception of a pool of cIAP1 that associated with the midbody. Survivin, 
another IAP family member, and cIAP1 were both localized on midbody microtubules 
at telophase, and also interacted with each other during mitosis. Cells stably 
overexpressing cIAP1 accumulated in G(2)-M phase and grew slower than 
control-transfected cells. These cIAP1-overexpressing cells also exhibited 
cytokinesis defects over 10 times more often than control cells and displayed a 
mitotic checkpoint abnormality with production of polyploid cells when exposed 
to microtubule-targeting drugs nocodazole and paclitaxel (Taxol). Our findings 
demonstrate a role for overexpressed cIAP1 in genetic instability, possibly by 
interfering with mitotic functions of Survivin. These findings may have 
important implications for cancers in which cIAP1 overexpression occurs.

PMID: 15665297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
