---
pmid: '7987400'
title: Mutations in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 gene cause Crouzon syndrome.
authors:
- Reardon W
- Winter RM
- Rutland P
- Pulleyn LJ
- Jones BM
- Malcolm S
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ng0994-98
---

# Mutations in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 gene cause Crouzon syndrome.
**Authors:** Reardon W, Winter RM, Rutland P, Pulleyn LJ, Jones BM, Malcolm S
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng0994-98](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng0994-98)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 1994 Sep;8(1):98-103. doi: 10.1038/ng0994-98.

Mutations in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 gene cause Crouzon 
syndrome.

Reardon W(1), Winter RM, Rutland P, Pulleyn LJ, Jones BM, Malcolm S.

Author information:
(1)Mothercare Unit of Clinical Genetics and Fetal Medicine, Institute of Child 
Health, London, UK.

Crouzon syndrome is an autosomal dominant condition causing premature fusion of 
the cranial sutures (craniosynostosis) and maps to chromosome 10q25-q26. We now 
present evidence that mutations in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 gene 
(FGFR2) cause Crouzon syndrome. We found SSCP variations in the B exon of FGFR2 
in nine unrelated affected individuals as well as complete cosegregation between 
SSCP variation and disease in three unrelated multigenerational families. In 
four sporadic cases, the normal parents did not have SSCP variation. Finally, 
direct sequencing has revealed specific mutations in the B exon in all nine 
sporadic and familial cases, including replacement of a cysteine in an 
immunoglobulin-like domain in five patients.

DOI: 10.1038/ng0994-98
PMID: 7987400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
