---
pmid: '12384576'
title: Structure of a regulatory complex involving the Abl SH3 domain, the Crk SH2
  domain, and a Crk-derived phosphopeptide.
authors:
- Donaldson LW
- Gish G
- Pawson T
- Kay LE
- Forman-Kay JD
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC137835
doi: 10.1073/pnas.212518799
---

# Structure of a regulatory complex involving the Abl SH3 domain, the Crk SH2 domain, and a Crk-derived phosphopeptide.
**Authors:** Donaldson LW, Gish G, Pawson T, Kay LE, Forman-Kay JD
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.212518799](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.212518799)
**PMC:** [PMC137835](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC137835/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Oct 29;99(22):14053-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.212518799. Epub 2002 Oct 16.

Structure of a regulatory complex involving the Abl SH3 domain, the Crk SH2 
domain, and a Crk-derived phosphopeptide.

Donaldson LW(1), Gish G, Pawson T, Kay LE, Forman-Kay JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
ON, Canada M5S 1A8.

On phosphorylation of Y221 by Abelson (Abl) kinase, the Crk-II adapter protein 
undergoes an intramolecular reorganization initiated by the binding of its own 
Src homology 2 (SH2) domain to the pY221 site. Conformational changes induced by 
phosphotyrosine recognition promote the binding of the Src homology 3 (SH3) 
domain of the Abl tyrosine kinase to a proline-rich loop located between the 
betaD and betaE strands of the SH2 domain (DE loop). We have determined the NMR 
solution structure of the ternary complex of the Abl SH3 domain with the Crk SH2 
domain bound to a Crk pY221 phosphopeptide. The SH2 domain bridges two ligands 
that bind at distinct sites. The interaction between the Abl SH3 domain and the 
Crk SH2 domain is localized to a canonical eight-residue site within the DE 
loop. From (15)N relaxation experiments, the DE loop of the SH2 domain in the 
complex displays a significant degree of conformational freedom. The structural 
and dynamic data therefore indicate that these SH2 and SH3 domains do not assume 
a unique orientation with respect to one another; rather, they appear to be only 
tethered via the DE loop. Thus, SH2 domain-SH3 domain interactions do not 
require additional tertiary contacts or restriction of domain orientation when a 
recognition motif is presented in a mobile loop. This complex between the Abl 
SH3 domain, Crk SH2 domain, and Crk phosphopeptide is an example of the 
extremely modular nature of regulatory proteins that provides a rich repertoire 
of mechanisms for control of biological function.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.212518799
PMCID: PMC137835
PMID: 12384576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
