---
pmid: '9212163'
title: Cloning and expression of two human lysophosphatidic acid acyltransferase cDNAs
  that enhance cytokine-induced signaling responses in cells.
authors:
- West J
- Tompkins CK
- Balantac N
- Nudelman E
- Meengs B
- White T
- Bursten S
- Coleman J
- Kumar A
- Singer JW
- Leung DW
journal: DNA Cell Biol
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1089/dna.1997.16.691
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Cloning and expression of two human lysophosphatidic acid acyltransferase cDNAs that enhance cytokine-induced signaling responses in cells.
**Authors:** West J, Tompkins CK, Balantac N, Nudelman E, Meengs B, White T, Bursten S, Coleman J, Kumar A, Singer JW, Leung DW
**Journal:** DNA Cell Biol (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1089/dna.1997.16.691](https://doi.org/10.1089/dna.1997.16.691)

## Abstract

1. DNA Cell Biol. 1997 Jun;16(6):691-701. doi: 10.1089/dna.1997.16.691.

Cloning and expression of two human lysophosphatidic acid acyltransferase cDNAs 
that enhance cytokine-induced signaling responses in cells.

West J(1), Tompkins CK, Balantac N, Nudelman E, Meengs B, White T, Bursten S, 
Coleman J, Kumar A, Singer JW, Leung DW.

Author information:
(1)Cell Therapeutics, Inc., Seattle, WA 98119, USA.

Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) and phosphatidic acid (PA) are two phospholipids 
involved in signal transduction and in lipid biosynthesis in cells. LPA 
acyltransferase (LPAAT), also known as 1-acyl sn-glycerol-3-phosphate 
acetyltransferase (EC 2.3.1.51), catalyzes the conversion of LPA to PA. In this 
study, we describe the isolation and characterization of two human cDNAs that 
encode proteins possessing LPAAT activities. These two proteins, designated here 
as LPAAT-alpha and LPAAT-beta, contain extensive sequence sequence similarities 
to microbial or plant LPAAT sequences. LPAAT-alpha mRNA was detected in all 
tissues with highest expression in skeletal muscle whereas LPAAT-beta was 
expressed predominantly in heart and liver tissues. Expression of these two 
cDNAs in an Escherichia coli strain with a mutated LPAAT gene (plsC) complements 
its growth defect and shifts the equilibrium of cellular lipid content from LPA 
to PA and other lipids. Overexpression of these two cDNAs in mammalian cells 
leads to increased LPAAT activity in cell-free extracts using an in vitro assay 
that measures the conversion of fluorescently labeled LPA to PA. This increase 
in LPAAT activity correlates with enhancement of transcription and synthesis of 
tumor necrosis factor-alpha and interleukin-6 from cells upon stimulation with 
interleukin-1beta, suggesting LPAAT overexpression may amplify cellular 
signaling responses from cytokines.

DOI: 10.1089/dna.1997.16.691
PMID: 9212163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
