---
pmid: '22160680'
title: Conformational plasticity of glycogenin and its maltosaccharide substrate during
  glycogen biogenesis.
authors:
- Chaikuad A
- Froese DS
- Berridge G
- von Delft F
- Oppermann U
- Yue WW
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3248551
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1113921108
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Conformational plasticity of glycogenin and its maltosaccharide substrate during glycogen biogenesis.
**Authors:** Chaikuad A, Froese DS, Berridge G, von Delft F, Oppermann U, Yue WW
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1113921108](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1113921108)
**PMC:** [PMC3248551](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3248551/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Dec 27;108(52):21028-33. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1113921108. Epub 2011 Dec 12.

Conformational plasticity of glycogenin and its maltosaccharide substrate during 
glycogen biogenesis.

Chaikuad A(1), Froese DS, Berridge G, von Delft F, Oppermann U, Yue WW.

Author information:
(1)Structural Genomics Consortium, Old Road Research Campus Building, Oxford, 
United Kingdom OX3 7DQ.

Glycogenin initiates the synthesis of a maltosaccharide chain covalently 
attached to itself on Tyr195 via a stepwise glucosylation reaction, priming 
glycogen synthesis. We have captured crystallographic snapshots of human 
glycogenin during its reaction cycle, revealing a dynamic conformational switch 
between ground and active states mediated by the sugar donor UDP-glucose. This 
switch includes the ordering of a polypeptide stretch containing Tyr195, and 
major movement of an approximately 30-residue "lid" segment covering the active 
site. The rearranged lid guides the nascent maltosaccharide chain into the 
active site in either an intra- or intersubunit mode dependent upon chain length 
and steric factors and positions the donor and acceptor sugar groups for 
catalysis. The Thr83Met mutation, which causes glycogen storage disease XV, is 
conformationally locked in the ground state and catalytically inactive. Our data 
highlight the conformational plasticity of glycogenin and coexistence of two 
modes of glucosylation as integral to its catalytic mechanism.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1113921108
PMCID: PMC3248551
PMID: 22160680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
