---
pmid: '12154078'
title: Regulation of the CDK-related protein kinase PCTAIRE-1 and its possible role
  in neurite outgrowth in Neuro-2A cells.
authors:
- Graeser R
- Gannon J
- Poon RY
- Dubois T
- Aitken A
- Hunt T
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.115.17.3479
---

# Regulation of the CDK-related protein kinase PCTAIRE-1 and its possible role in neurite outgrowth in Neuro-2A cells.
**Authors:** Graeser R, Gannon J, Poon RY, Dubois T, Aitken A, Hunt T
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.115.17.3479](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.115.17.3479)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2002 Sep 1;115(Pt 17):3479-90. doi: 10.1242/jcs.115.17.3479.

Regulation of the CDK-related protein kinase PCTAIRE-1 and its possible role in 
neurite outgrowth in Neuro-2A cells.

Graeser R(1), Gannon J, Poon RY, Dubois T, Aitken A, Hunt T.

Author information:
(1)ICRF Clare Hall Laboratories, South Mimms, Herts EN6 3LD, UK. 
r.graeser@proqinase.com

PCTAIRE-1 is a CDK-related protein kinase found in terminally differentiated 
cells in brain and testis, and in many immortalised and transformed cell lines. 
Bacterially expressed PCTAIRE is completely inactive as a protein kinase, but is 
a very good substrate for protein kinase A (PKA), which phosphorylates a total 
of four sites in the N-terminus of PCTAIRE-1. Phosphorylation of one of these 
sites, Ser119, generates a 14-3-3 binding site, which is functional in vitro as 
well as in vivo. Mutation of another PKA site, Ser153, to an alanine residue 
generated an activated kinase in transfected mammalian cells. This activity was 
comparable to that of CDK5 activated by a bacterially expressed, truncated 
version of p35(nck), p21. Gel filtration analysis of a brain extract suggested 
that monomeric PCTAIRE-1 was the active species, implying that PCTAIRE-1 may not 
be a true CDK, in that it does not require a partner (cyclin-like) subunit for 
kinase activity. Finally, we found that various forms of PCTAIRE-1 transfected 
into neuroblastoma cell lines could either promote or inhibit neurite outgrowth, 
suggesting a potential role for the PCTAIRE-1 gene product in the control of 
neurite outgrowth.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.115.17.3479
PMID: 12154078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
