---
pmid: '12176387'
title: Crystal structure of the dinuclear zinc aminopeptidase PepV from Lactobacillus
  delbrueckii unravels its preference for dipeptides.
authors:
- Jozic D
- Bourenkow G
- Bartunik H
- Scholze H
- Dive V
- Henrich B
- Huber R
- Bode W
- Maskos K
journal: Structure
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0969-2126(02)00805-5
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Crystal structure of the dinuclear zinc aminopeptidase PepV from Lactobacillus delbrueckii unravels its preference for dipeptides.
**Authors:** Jozic D, Bourenkow G, Bartunik H, Scholze H, Dive V, Henrich B, Huber R, Bode W, Maskos K
**Journal:** Structure (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0969-2126(02)00805-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0969-2126(02)00805-5)

## Abstract

1. Structure. 2002 Aug;10(8):1097-106. doi: 10.1016/s0969-2126(02)00805-5.

Crystal structure of the dinuclear zinc aminopeptidase PepV from Lactobacillus 
delbrueckii unravels its preference for dipeptides.

Jozic D(1), Bourenkow G, Bartunik H, Scholze H, Dive V, Henrich B, Huber R, Bode 
W, Maskos K.

Author information:
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Biochemie, Abteilung Strukturforschung, Am 
Klopferspitz 18a, D-82152 Martinsried, Germany. jozic@biochem.mpg.de

PepV from Lactobacillus delbrueckii, a dinuclear zinc peptidase, has been 
characterized as an unspecific amino dipeptidase. The crystal structure of PepV 
in complex with the phosphinic inhibitor AspPsi[PO(2)CH(2)]AlaOH, a dipeptide 
substrate mimetic, reveals a "catalytic domain" and a "lid domain," which 
together form an internal active site cavity that traps the inhibitor. The 
catalytic domain is topologically similar to catalytic domains from amino- and 
carboxypeptidases. However, the lid domain is unique among the related enzymes. 
In contrast to the other related exopeptidases, PepV recognizes and fixes the 
dipeptide backbone, while the side chains are not specifically probed and can 
vary, rendering it a nonspecific dipeptidase. The cocrystallized inhibitor 
illustrates the two roles of the two catalytic zinc ions, namely stabilization 
of the tetrahedral intermediate and activation of the catalytic water molecule.

DOI: 10.1016/s0969-2126(02)00805-5
PMID: 12176387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
