---
pmid: '23614719'
title: Human prefoldin inhibits amyloid-β (Aβ) fibrillation and contributes to formation
  of nontoxic Aβ aggregates.
authors:
- Sörgjerd KM
- Zako T
- Sakono M
- Stirling PC
- Leroux MR
- Saito T
- Nilsson P
- Sekimoto M
- Saido TC
- Maeda M
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi301705c
---

# Human prefoldin inhibits amyloid-β (Aβ) fibrillation and contributes to formation of nontoxic Aβ aggregates.
**Authors:** Sörgjerd KM, Zako T, Sakono M, Stirling PC, Leroux MR, Saito T, Nilsson P, Sekimoto M, Saido TC, Maeda M
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi301705c](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi301705c)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2013 May 21;52(20):3532-42. doi: 10.1021/bi301705c. Epub 2013
May  8.

Human prefoldin inhibits amyloid-β (Aβ) fibrillation and contributes to 
formation of nontoxic Aβ aggregates.

Sörgjerd KM(1), Zako T, Sakono M, Stirling PC, Leroux MR, Saito T, Nilsson P, 
Sekimoto M, Saido TC, Maeda M.

Author information:
(1)Bioengineering Laboratory, RIKEN , 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, 
Japan.

Erratum in
    Biochemistry. 2014 Jun 3;53(21):3520.

Amyloid-β (Aβ) peptides represent key players in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's 
disease (AD), and mounting evidence indicates that soluble Aβ oligomers mediate 
the toxicity. Prefoldin (PFD) is a molecular chaperone that prevents aggregation 
of misfolded proteins. Here we investigated the role of PFD in Aβ aggregation. 
First, we demonstrated that PFD is expressed in mouse brain by Western blotting 
and immunohistochemistry and found that PFD is upregulated in AD model APP23 
transgenic mice. Then we investigated the effect of recombinant human PFD (hPFD) 
on Aβ(1-42) aggregation in vitro and found that hPFD inhibited Aβ fibrillation 
and induced formation of soluble Aβ oligomers. Interestingly, cell viability 
measurements using the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium 
bromide assay showed that Aβ oligomers formed by hPFD were 30-40% less toxic to 
cultured rat pheochromocytoma (PC12) cells or primary cortical neurons from 
embryonic C57BL/6CrSlc mice than previously reported Aβ oligomers (formed by 
archaeal PFD) and Aβ fibrils (p < 0.001). Thioflavin T measurements and 
immunoblotting indicated different structural properties for the different Aβ 
oligomers. Our findings show a relation between cytotoxicity of Aβ oligomers and 
structure and suggest a possible protective role of PFD in AD.

DOI: 10.1021/bi301705c
PMID: 23614719 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
