---
pmid: '16614222'
title: A bifurcating pathway directs abscisic acid effects on stomatal closure and
  opening in Arabidopsis.
authors:
- Mishra G
- Zhang W
- Deng F
- Zhao J
- Wang X
journal: Science
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.1123769
---

# A bifurcating pathway directs abscisic acid effects on stomatal closure and opening in Arabidopsis.
**Authors:** Mishra G, Zhang W, Deng F, Zhao J, Wang X
**Journal:** Science (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1123769](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1123769)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2006 Apr 14;312(5771):264-6. doi: 10.1126/science.1123769.

A bifurcating pathway directs abscisic acid effects on stomatal closure and 
opening in Arabidopsis.

Mishra G(1), Zhang W, Deng F, Zhao J, Wang X.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Missouri, St. Louis, MO 63121, USA, and 
Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, St. Louis, MO 63132, USA.

Terrestrial plants lose water primarily through stomata, pores on the leaves. 
The hormone abscisic acid (ABA) decreases water loss by regulating opening and 
closing of stomata. Here, we show that phospholipase Dalpha1 (PLDalpha1) 
mediates the ABA effects on stomata through interaction with a protein 
phosphatase 2C (PP2C) and a heterotrimeric GTP-binding protein (G protein) in 
Arabidopsis. PLDalpha1-produced phosphatidic acid (PA) binds to the ABI1 PP2C to 
signal ABA-promoted stomatal closure, whereas PLDalpha1 and PA interact with the 
Galpha subunit of heterotrimeric G protein to mediate ABA inhibition of stomatal 
opening. The results reveal a bifurcating signaling pathway that regulates plant 
water loss.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1123769
PMID: 16614222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
