---
reference_id: PMID:9373175
title: Further evidence that the inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase-3beta by IGF-1 is mediated by PDK1/PKB-induced phosphorylation of Ser-9 and not by dephosphorylation of Tyr-216.
authors:
- Shaw M
- Cohen P
- Alessi DR
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(97)01235-0
content_type: full_text_html
full_text_attempted: true
full_text_provider: openalex
full_text_url: "https://discovery.dundee.ac.uk/en/publications/ee253f8d-d713-476e-9366-56c9e237e14b"
oa_status: green
license: other-oa
---

# Further evidence that the inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase-3beta by IGF-1 is mediated by PDK1/PKB-induced phosphorylation of Ser-9 and not by dephosphorylation of Tyr-216.
**Authors:** Shaw M, Cohen P, Alessi DR
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0014-5793(97)01235-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0014-5793(97)01235-0)

## Content

1. FEBS Lett. 1997 Oct 27;416(3):307-11. doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(97)01235-0.

Further evidence that the inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase-3beta by IGF-1
is mediated by PDK1/PKB-induced phosphorylation of Ser-9 and not by
dephosphorylation of Tyr-216.

Shaw M(1), Cohen P, Alessi DR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Dundee, UK.

293 cells were transfected with wild-type GSK3beta (WT-GSK3beta) or a mutant in
which the PKB phosphorylation site (Ser-9) was altered to Ala (A9-GSK3beta).
Upon stimulation with IGF-1 or insulin, WT-GSK3beta was inhibited 75% or 60%,
respectively, whereas the activity of the A9-GSK3beta mutant was unaffected.
Incubation of WT-GSK3beta with PP2A1 (a Ser/Thr-specific phosphatase) completely
reversed the IGF-1- or insulin-induced inhibition. IGF-1 stimulation did not
induce any tyrosine dephosphorylation of WT-GSK3beta or A9-GSK3beta.
Coexpression of WT-GSK3beta in 293 cells with either PKB alpha (also known as
AKT) or PDK1 (the 'upstream' activator of PKB) mimicked the IGF-1- or
insulin-induced phosphorylation of Ser-9 and inactivation of GSK3beta.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(97)01235-0
PMID: 9373175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Research output:Contribution to journal›Article›peer-review

293 cells were transfected with wild-type GSK3β (WT-GSK3β) or a mutant in which the PKB phosphorylation site (Ser-9) was altered to Ala (A9-GSK3β). Upon stimulation with IGF-1 or insulin, WT-GSK3β was inhibited 75% or 60%, respectively, whereas the activity of the A9-GSK3β mutant was unaffected. Incubation of WT-GSK3β with PP2A1(a Ser/Thr-specific phosphatase) completely reversed the IGF-1- or insulin-induced inhibition. IGF-1 stimulation did not induce any tyrosine dephosphorylation of WT-GSK3β or A9-GSK3β. Coexpression of WT-GSK3β in 293 cells with either PKBα (also known as AKT) or PDK1 (the 'upstream' activator of PKB) mimicked the IGF-1- or insulin-induced phosphorylation of Ser-9 and inactivation of GSK3β.

}

Research output:Contribution to journal›Article›peer-review

TY  - JOUR

T1  - Further evidence that the inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase-3β by IGF-1 is mediated by PDK1/PKB-induced phosphorylation of Ser-9 and not by dephosphorylation of Tyr-216

AU  - Shaw, Morag

AU  - Cohen, Philip

AU  - Alessi, Dario R.

PY  - 1997/10/27

Y1  - 1997/10/27

N2  - 293 cells were transfected with wild-type GSK3β (WT-GSK3β) or a mutant in which the PKB phosphorylation site (Ser-9) was altered to Ala (A9-GSK3β). Upon stimulation with IGF-1 or insulin, WT-GSK3β was inhibited 75% or 60%, respectively, whereas the activity of the A9-GSK3β mutant was unaffected. Incubation of WT-GSK3β with PP2A1 (a Ser/Thr-specific phosphatase) completely reversed the IGF-1- or insulin-induced inhibition. IGF-1 stimulation did not induce any tyrosine dephosphorylation of WT-GSK3β or A9-GSK3β. Coexpression of WT-GSK3β in 293 cells with either PKBα (also known as AKT) or PDK1 (the 'upstream' activator of PKB) mimicked the IGF-1- or insulin-induced phosphorylation of Ser-9 and inactivation of GSK3β.

AB  - 293 cells were transfected with wild-type GSK3β (WT-GSK3β) or a mutant in which the PKB phosphorylation site (Ser-9) was altered to Ala (A9-GSK3β). Upon stimulation with IGF-1 or insulin, WT-GSK3β was inhibited 75% or 60%, respectively, whereas the activity of the A9-GSK3β mutant was unaffected. Incubation of WT-GSK3β with PP2A1 (a Ser/Thr-specific phosphatase) completely reversed the IGF-1- or insulin-induced inhibition. IGF-1 stimulation did not induce any tyrosine dephosphorylation of WT-GSK3β or A9-GSK3β. Coexpression of WT-GSK3β in 293 cells with either PKBα (also known as AKT) or PDK1 (the 'upstream' activator of PKB) mimicked the IGF-1- or insulin-induced phosphorylation of Ser-9 and inactivation of GSK3β.

KW  - 3-Phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase

KW  - Glycogen synthase

KW  - Glycogen synthase kinase-3

KW  - Insulin

KW  - Insulin-like growth factor-1

KW  - Protein kinase B

UR  - https://www.scopus.com/pages/publications/0030712317

U2  - 10.1016/S0014-5793(97)01235-0

DO  - 10.1016/S0014-5793(97)01235-0

M3  - Article

C2  - 9373175

AN  - SCOPUS:0030712317

SN  - 0014-5793

VL  - 416

SP  - 307

EP  - 311

JO  - FEBS Letters

JF  - FEBS Letters

IS  - 3

ER  -