---
pmid: '17488291'
title: The trans-Golgi network golgin, GCC185, is required for endosome-to-Golgi transport
  and maintenance of Golgi structure.
authors:
- Derby MC
- Lieu ZZ
- Brown D
- Stow JL
- Goud B
- Gleeson PA
journal: Traffic
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2007.00563.x
---

# The trans-Golgi network golgin, GCC185, is required for endosome-to-Golgi transport and maintenance of Golgi structure.
**Authors:** Derby MC, Lieu ZZ, Brown D, Stow JL, Goud B, Gleeson PA
**Journal:** Traffic (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1600-0854.2007.00563.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0854.2007.00563.x)

## Abstract

1. Traffic. 2007 Jun;8(6):758-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2007.00563.x. Epub
2007  May 4.

The trans-Golgi network golgin, GCC185, is required for endosome-to-Golgi 
transport and maintenance of Golgi structure.

Derby MC(1), Lieu ZZ, Brown D, Stow JL, Goud B, Gleeson PA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia, and Bio21 Molecular Science and 
Biotechnology Institute, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria 3010, 
Australia.

Four mammalian golgins are specifically targeted to the trans-Golgi network 
(TGN) membranes via their C-terminal GRIP domains. The TGN golgins, 
p230/golgin-245 and golgin-97, are recruited via the GTPase Arl1, whereas the 
TGN golgin GCC185 is recruited independently of Arl1. Here we show that GCC185 
is localized to a region of the TGN distinct from Arl1 and plays an essential 
role in maintaining the organization of the Golgi apparatus. Using both small 
interfering RNA (siRNA) and microRNA (miRNA), we show that depletion of GCC185 
in HeLa cells frequently resulted in fragmentation of the Golgi apparatus. Golgi 
apparatus fragments were dispersed throughout the cytoplasm and contained both 
cis and trans markers. Trafficking of anterograde and retrograde cargo was 
analysed over an extended period following GCC185 depletion. Early effects of 
GCC185 depletion included a perturbation in the distribution of the 
mannose-6-phosphate receptor and a block in shiga toxin trafficking to the Golgi 
apparatus, which occurred in parallel with the fragmentation of the Golgi 
ribbon. Internalized shiga toxin accumulated in Rab11-positive endosomes, 
indicating GCC185 is essential for transport between the recycling endosome and 
the TGN. In contrast, the plasma membrane-TGN recycling protein TGN38 was 
efficiently transported into GCC185-depleted Golgi apparatus fragments 
throughout a 96-h period, and anterograde transport of E-cadherin was functional 
until a late stage of GCC185 depletion. This study demonstrated (i) a more 
effective long-term depletion of GCC185 using miRNA than siRNA and (ii) a dual 
role for the GCC185 golgin in the regulation of endosome-to-TGN membrane 
transport and in the organization of the Golgi apparatus.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2007.00563.x
PMID: 17488291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
