---
pmid: '8758134'
title: '3-Phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase deficiency: an inborn error of serine biosynthesis.'
authors:
- Jaeken J
- Detheux M
- Van Maldergem L
- Foulon M
- Carchon H
- Van Schaftingen E
journal: Arch Dis Child
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC1511571
doi: 10.1136/adc.74.6.542
pubmed_publication_types:
- Case Reports
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: CASE_REPORT
---

# 3-Phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase deficiency: an inborn error of serine biosynthesis.
**Authors:** Jaeken J, Detheux M, Van Maldergem L, Foulon M, Carchon H, Van Schaftingen E
**Journal:** Arch Dis Child (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1136/adc.74.6.542](https://doi.org/10.1136/adc.74.6.542)
**PMC:** [PMC1511571](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1511571/)

## Abstract

1. Arch Dis Child. 1996 Jun;74(6):542-5. doi: 10.1136/adc.74.6.542.

3-Phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase deficiency: an inborn error of serine 
biosynthesis.

Jaeken J(1), Detheux M, Van Maldergem L, Foulon M, Carchon H, Van Schaftingen E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, University Hospital Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium.

Serine concentrations were markedly decreased in the cerebrospinal fluid of two 
brothers with congenital microcephaly, profound psychomotor retardation, 
hypertonia, epilepsy, growth retardation, and hypogonadism. The youngest boy 
also had congenital bilateral cataract. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain 
showed evidence of dysmyelination. Plasma serine as well as plasma and 
cerebrospinal fluid glycine concentrations were also decreased but to a lesser 
extent. Treatment with oral serine in the youngest patient significantly 
increased cerebrospinal fluid serine and abolished the convulsions. In 
fibroblasts of both patients, a decreased activity was demonstrated of 
3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase, the first step of serine biosynthesis (22% and 
13% of the mean control value). This is an unusual disorder as the great 
majority of aminoacidopathies are catabolic defects. It is a severe but 
potentially treatable inborn error of metabolism that has not been previously 
reported in man.

DOI: 10.1136/adc.74.6.542
PMCID: PMC1511571
PMID: 8758134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Serine concentrations were markedly decreased in the cerebrospinal fluid of two brothers with congenital microcephaly, profound psychomotor retardation, hypertonia, epilepsy, growth retardation, and hypogonadism. The youngest boy also had congenital bilateral cataract. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain showed evidence of dysmyelination. Plasma serine as well as plasma and cerebrospinal fluid glycine concentrations were also decreased but to a lesser extent. Treatment with oral serine in the youngest patient significantly increased cerebrospinal fluid serine and abolished the convulsions. In fibroblasts of both patients, a decreased activity was demonstrated of 3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase, the first step of serine biosynthesis (22% and 13% of the mean control value). This is an unusual disorder as the great majority of aminoacidopathies are catabolic defects. It is a severe but potentially treatable inborn error of metabolism that has not been previously reported in man.
