---
pmid: '22248825'
title: Sgt1 acts via an LKB1/AMPK pathway to establish cortical polarity in larval
  neuroblasts.
authors:
- Andersen RO
- Turnbull DW
- Johnson EA
- Doe CQ
journal: Dev Biol
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4013783
doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.12.047
---

# Sgt1 acts via an LKB1/AMPK pathway to establish cortical polarity in larval neuroblasts.
**Authors:** Andersen RO, Turnbull DW, Johnson EA, Doe CQ
**Journal:** Dev Biol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.12.047](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.12.047)
**PMC:** [PMC4013783](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4013783/)

## Abstract

1. Dev Biol. 2012 Mar 1;363(1):258-65. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.12.047. Epub
2012  Jan 10.

Sgt1 acts via an LKB1/AMPK pathway to establish cortical polarity in larval 
neuroblasts.

Andersen RO(1), Turnbull DW, Johnson EA, Doe CQ.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon 97403, USA.

Drosophila neuroblasts are a model system for studying stem cell self-renewal 
and the establishment of cortical polarity. Larval neuroblasts generate a large 
apical self-renewing neuroblast, and a small basal cell that differentiates. We 
performed a genetic screen to identify regulators of neuroblast self-renewal, 
and identified a mutation in sgt1 (suppressor-of-G2-allele-of-skp1) that had 
fewer neuroblasts. We found that sgt1 neuroblasts have two polarity phenotypes: 
failure to establish apical cortical polarity at prophase, and lack of cortical 
Scribble localization throughout the cell cycle. Apical cortical polarity was 
partially restored at metaphase by a microtubule-induced cortical polarity 
pathway. Double mutants lacking Sgt1 and Pins (a microtubule-induced polarity 
pathway component) resulted in neuroblasts without detectable cortical polarity 
and formation of "neuroblast tumors." Mutants in hsp83 (encoding the predicted 
Sgt1-binding protein Hsp90), LKB1, or AMPKα all show similar prophase apical 
cortical polarity defects (but no Scribble phenotype), and activated AMPKα 
rescued the sgt1 mutant phenotype. We propose that an Sgt1/Hsp90-LKB1-AMPK 
pathway acts redundantly with a microtubule-induced polarity pathway to generate 
neuroblast cortical polarity, and the absence of neuroblast cortical polarity 
can produce neuroblast tumors.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.12.047
PMCID: PMC4013783
PMID: 22248825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
