---
pmid: '8978818'
title: 'A role for N-myristoylation in protein targeting: NADH-cytochrome b5 reductase
  requires myristic acid for association with outer mitochondrial but not ER membranes.'
authors:
- Borgese N
- Aggujaro D
- Carrera P
- Pietrini G
- Bassetti M
journal: J Cell Biol
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: xml_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC2133939
doi: 10.1083/jcb.135.6.1501
---

# A role for N-myristoylation in protein targeting: NADH-cytochrome b5 reductase requires myristic acid for association with outer mitochondrial but not ER membranes.
**Authors:** Borgese N, Aggujaro D, Carrera P, Pietrini G, Bassetti M
**Journal:** J Cell Biol (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1083/jcb.135.6.1501](https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.135.6.1501)
**PMC:** [PMC2133939](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2133939/)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Biol. 1996 Dec;135(6 Pt 1):1501-13. doi: 10.1083/jcb.135.6.1501.

A role for N-myristoylation in protein targeting: NADH-cytochrome b5 reductase 
requires myristic acid for association with outer mitochondrial but not ER 
membranes.

Borgese N(1), Aggujaro D, Carrera P, Pietrini G, Bassetti M.

Author information:
(1)Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology 
Center, Department of Pharmacology, University of Milan, Italy. 
Nica@Farmal.csfic.mi.cnr.it

N-myristoylation is a cotranslational modification involved in protein-protein 
interactions as well as in anchoring polypeptides to phospholipid bilayers; 
however, its role in targeting proteins to specific subcellular compartments has 
not been clearly defined. The mammalian myristoylated flavoenzyme 
NADH-cytochrome b5 reductase is integrated into ER and mitochondrial outer 
membranes via an anchor containing a stretch of 14 uncharged amino acids 
downstream to the NH2-terminal myristoylate glycine. Since previous studies 
suggested that the anchoring function could be adequately carried out by the 14 
uncharged residues, we investigated a possible role for myristic acid in 
reductase targeting. The wild type (wt) and a nonmyristoylatable reductase 
mutant (gly2-->ala) were stably expressed in MDCK cells, and their localization 
was investigated by immunofluorescence, immuno-EM, and cell fractionation. By 
all three techniques, the wt protein localized to ER and mitochondria, while the 
nonmyristoylated mutant was found only on ER membranes. Pulse-chase experiments 
indicated that this altered steady state distribution was due to the mutant's 
inability to target to mitochondria, and not to its enhanced instability in that 
location. Both wt and mutant reductase were resistant to Na2CO3 extraction and 
partitioned into the detergent phase after treatment of a membrane fraction with 
Triton X-114, demonstrating that myristic acid is not required for tight 
anchoring of reductase to membranes. Our results indicate that myristoylated 
reductase localizes to ER and mitochondria by different mechanisms, and reveal a 
novel role for myristic acid in protein targeting.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.135.6.1501
PMCID: PMC2133939
PMID: 8978818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

N-myristoylation is a cotranslational modification involved in protein- protein interactions as well as in anchoring polypeptides to phospholipid bilayers; however, its role in targeting proteins to specific subcellular compartments has not been clearly defined. The mammalian myristoylated flavoenzyme NADH-cytochrome b5 reductase is integrated into ER and mitochondrial outer membranes via an anchor containing a stretch of 14 uncharged amino acids downstream to the NH2- terminal myristoylate glycine. Since previous studies suggested that the anchoring function could be adequately carried out by the 14 uncharged residues, we investigated a possible role for myristic acid in reductase targeting. The wild type (wt) and a nonmyristoylatable reductase mutant (gly2-->ala) were stably expressed in MDCK cells, and their localization was investigated by immunofluorescence, immuno-EM, and cell fractionation. By all three techniques, the wt protein localized to ER and mitochondria, while the nonmyristoylated mutant was found only on ER membranes. Pulse-chase experiments indicated that this altered steady state distribution was due to the mutant's inability to target to mitochondria, and not to its enhanced instability in that location. Both wt and mutant reductase were resistant to Na2CO3 extraction and partitioned into the detergent phase after treatment of a membrane fraction with Triton X-114, demonstrating that myristic acid is not required for tight anchoring of reductase to membranes. Our results indicate that myristoylated reductase localizes to ER and mitochondria by different mechanisms, and reveal a novel role for myristic acid in protein targeting.
