---
pmid: '15328338'
title: FVT-1 is a mammalian 3-ketodihydrosphingosine reductase with an active site
  that faces the cytosolic side of the endoplasmic reticulum membrane.
authors:
- Kihara A
- Igarashi Y
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M405915200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# FVT-1 is a mammalian 3-ketodihydrosphingosine reductase with an active site that faces the cytosolic side of the endoplasmic reticulum membrane.
**Authors:** Kihara A, Igarashi Y
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M405915200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M405915200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Nov 19;279(47):49243-50. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M405915200. Epub 
2004 Aug 24.

FVT-1 is a mammalian 3-ketodihydrosphingosine reductase with an active site that 
faces the cytosolic side of the endoplasmic reticulum membrane.

Kihara A(1), Igarashi Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomembrane and Biofunctional Chemistry, Graduate School of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido University, Kita 12-jo, Nishi 6-choume, 
Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.

Sphingolipids are essential membrane components of eukaryotic cells. Their 
synthesis is initiated with the condensation of l-serine with palmitoyl-CoA, 
producing 3-ketodihydrosphingosine (KDS), followed by a reduction to 
dihydrosphingosine by KDS reductase. Until now, only yeast TSC10 has been 
identified as a KDS reductase gene. Here, we provide evidence that the human 
FVT-1 (hFVT-1) and mouse FVT-1 (mFVT-1) are functional mammalian KDS reductases. 
The forced expression of hFVT-1 or mFVT-1 in TSC10-null yeast cells suppressed 
growth defects, and hFVT-1 overproduced in cultured cells exhibited KDS 
reductase activity in vitro. Moreover, purified recombinant hFVT-1 protein 
exhibited NADPH-dependent KDS reductase activity. The identification of the 
FVT-1 genes enabled us to characterize the mammalian KDS reductase at the 
molecular level. Northern blot analyses demonstrated that both hFVT-1 and mFVT-1 
mRNAs are ubiquitously expressed, suggesting that FVT-1 is a major KDS 
reductase. We also found the presence of hFVT-1 variants, which were 
differentially expressed among tissues. Immunofluorescence microscopic analysis 
revealed that hFVT-1 is localized at the endoplasmic reticulum. Moreover, a 
proteinase K digestion assay revealed that the large hydrophilic domain of 
hFVT-1, which contains putative active site residues, faces the cytosol. These 
results suggest that KDS is converted to dihydrosphingosine in the cytosolic 
side of the endoplasmic reticulum membrane. Moreover, the topology studies 
provide insight into the spatial organization of the sphingolipid biosynthetic 
pathway.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M405915200
PMID: 15328338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
