---
pmid: '19028694'
title: Identification and characterization of a novel gene, dapr, involved in skeletal
  muscle differentiation and protein kinase B signaling.
authors:
- Virtanen C
- Paris J
- Takahashi M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807000200
---

# Identification and characterization of a novel gene, dapr, involved in skeletal muscle differentiation and protein kinase B signaling.
**Authors:** Virtanen C, Paris J, Takahashi M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M807000200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M807000200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jan 16;284(3):1636-43. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807000200. Epub
2008  Nov 20.

Identification and characterization of a novel gene, dapr, involved in skeletal 
muscle differentiation and protein kinase B signaling.

Virtanen C(1), Paris J, Takahashi M.

Author information:
(1)University Health Network Microarray Centre, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1L7, 
Canada.

The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) signaling pathway has been associated 
with a variety of cellular functions ranging from cell cycle regulation to 
tissue development. Although years of research have extensively characterized 
this signaling pathway, little is known as to how specific cellular events are 
coordinated by its activation. Here we demonstrate that Dapr 
(differentiation-associated protein), a novel protein, appears to focus one 
aspect of this pathway by acting as a putative scaffold protein during skeletal 
muscle differentiation. We present for the first time a description of this 
protein using in silico analysis. dapr was discovered through a previous study 
employing chromatin immunoprecipitation and CpG microarray analysis experiments 
as being regulated by myocyte-enhancing factor 2, a key transcription factor 
involved in the differentiation of skeletal muscle tissue. In this study we show 
that during the course of differentiation, Dapr binds to the PI3K signaling 
pathway member protein kinase B (PKB). In C2C12 myoblast cells before 
differentiation Dapr is localized to the cytosol, migrating with PKB to the 
membrane after initiation of muscle differentiation. Knockdown of Dapr by RNAi 
resulted in inhibition of myotube formation. Our findings indicate that Dapr is 
a key component required by myoblasts for orchestrating their differentiation 
during myogenesis. Furthermore, it appears that Dapr is involved in the PI3K 
signaling cascade, potentially acting as a scaffold protein for PKB and 
coordinating its compartmentalization during differentiation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M807000200
PMID: 19028694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
