---
pmid: '28633330'
title: The asparagine-rich protein NRP interacts with the Verticillium effector PevD1
  and regulates the subcellular localization of cryptochrome 2.
authors:
- Zhou R
- Zhu T
- Han L
- Liu M
- Xu M
- Liu Y
- Han D
- Qiu D
- Gong Q
- Liu X
journal: J Exp Bot
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/jxb/erx192
---

# The asparagine-rich protein NRP interacts with the Verticillium effector PevD1 and regulates the subcellular localization of cryptochrome 2.
**Authors:** Zhou R, Zhu T, Han L, Liu M, Xu M, Liu Y, Han D, Qiu D, Gong Q, Liu X
**Journal:** J Exp Bot (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jxb/erx192](https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erx192)

## Abstract

1. J Exp Bot. 2017 Jun 15;68(13):3427-3440. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erx192.

The asparagine-rich protein NRP interacts with the Verticillium effector PevD1 
and regulates the subcellular localization of cryptochrome 2.

Zhou R(1), Zhu T(1), Han L(2), Liu M(2), Xu M(1), Liu Y(1), Han D(1), Qiu D(2), 
Gong Q(3), Liu X(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, Department of 
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, 
Tianjin 300071, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory for Biology of Plant Diseases and Insect Pests, Chinese 
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Institute of Plant Protection, Beijing 100081, 
China.
(3)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Protein Science, Department of Plant Biology and 
Ecology, College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China.

The soil-borne fungal pathogen Verticillium dahliae infects a wide range of 
dicotyledonous plants including cotton, tobacco, and Arabidopsis. Among the 
effector proteins secreted by V. dahliae, the 16 kDa PevD1 induces a 
hypersensitive response in tobacco. Here we report the high-resolution structure 
of PevD1 with folds resembling a C2 domain-like structure with a calcium ion 
bound to the C-terminal acidic pocket. A yeast two-hybrid screen, designed to 
probe for molecular functions of PevD1, identified Arabidopsis asparagine-rich 
protein (NRP) as the interacting partner of PevD1. Extending the pathway of V. 
dahliae effects, which include induction of early flowering in cotton and 
Arabidopsis, NRP was found to interact with cryptochrome 2 (CRY2), leading to 
increased cytoplasmic accumulation of CRY2 in a blue light-independent manner. 
Further physiological and genetic evidence suggests that PevD1 indirectly 
activates CRY2 by antagonizing NRP functions. The promotion of CRY2-mediated 
flowering by a fungal effector outlines a novel pathway by which an external 
stimulus is recognized and transferred in changing a developmental program.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Experimental Biology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/erx192
PMID: 28633330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
