---
pmid: '26805781'
title: Recurrent Muscle Weakness with Rhabdomyolysis, Metabolic Crises, and Cardiac
  Arrhythmia Due to Bi-allelic TANGO2 Mutations.
authors:
- Lalani SR
- Liu P
- Rosenfeld JA
- Watkin LB
- Chiang T
- Leduc MS
- Zhu W
- Ding Y
- Pan S
- Vetrini F
- Miyake CY
- Shinawi M
- Gambin T
- Eldomery MK
- Akdemir ZH
- Emrick L
- Wilnai Y
- Schelley S
- Koenig MK
- Memon N
- Farach LS
- Coe BP
- Azamian M
- Hernandez P
- Zapata G
- Jhangiani SN
- Muzny DM
- Lotze T
- Clark G
- Wilfong A
- Northrup H
- Adesina A
- Bacino CA
- Scaglia F
- Bonnen PE
- Crosson J
- Duis J
- Maegawa GH
- Coman D
- Inwood A
- McGill J
- Boerwinkle E
- Graham B
- Beaudet A
- Eng CM
- Hanchard NA
- Xia F
- Orange JS
- Gibbs RA
- Lupski JR
- Yang Y
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4746334
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.12.008
---

# Recurrent Muscle Weakness with Rhabdomyolysis, Metabolic Crises, and Cardiac Arrhythmia Due to Bi-allelic TANGO2 Mutations.
**Authors:** Lalani SR, Liu P, Rosenfeld JA, Watkin LB, Chiang T, Leduc MS, Zhu W, Ding Y, Pan S, Vetrini F, Miyake CY, Shinawi M, Gambin T, Eldomery MK, Akdemir ZH, Emrick L, Wilnai Y, Schelley S, Koenig MK, Memon N, Farach LS, Coe BP, Azamian M, Hernandez P, Zapata G, Jhangiani SN, Muzny DM, Lotze T, Clark G, Wilfong A, Northrup H, Adesina A, Bacino CA, Scaglia F, Bonnen PE, Crosson J, Duis J, Maegawa GH, Coman D, Inwood A, McGill J, Boerwinkle E, Graham B, Beaudet A, Eng CM, Hanchard NA, Xia F, Orange JS, Gibbs RA, Lupski JR, Yang Y
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.12.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.12.008)
**PMC:** [PMC4746334](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4746334/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2016 Feb 4;98(2):347-57. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.12.008. Epub
 2016 Jan 21.

Recurrent Muscle Weakness with Rhabdomyolysis, Metabolic Crises, and Cardiac 
Arrhythmia Due to Bi-allelic TANGO2 Mutations.

Lalani SR(1), Liu P(2), Rosenfeld JA(3), Watkin LB(4), Chiang T(5), Leduc MS(2), 
Zhu W(6), Ding Y(5), Pan S(3), Vetrini F(6), Miyake CY(7), Shinawi M(8), Gambin 
T(3), Eldomery MK(3), Akdemir ZH(3), Emrick L(9), Wilnai Y(10), Schelley S(10), 
Koenig MK(11), Memon N(12), Farach LS(13), Coe BP(14), Azamian M(3), Hernandez 
P(3), Zapata G(3), Jhangiani SN(15), Muzny DM(15), Lotze T(16), Clark G(16), 
Wilfong A(16), Northrup H(13), Adesina A(17), Bacino CA(3), Scaglia F(3), Bonnen 
PE(3), Crosson J(18), Duis J(19), Maegawa GH(20), Coman D(21), Inwood A(21), 
McGill J(21), Boerwinkle E(22), Graham B(3), Beaudet A(3), Eng CM(2), Hanchard 
NA(23), Xia F(2), Orange JS(4), Gibbs RA(15), Lupski JR(24), Yang Y(25).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic address: seemal@bcm.edu.
(2)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Baylor Miraca Genetics Laboratories, Houston, TX 77030, 
USA.
(3)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; 
Texas Children's Hospital Center for Human Immuno-Biology, Houston, TX 77030, 
USA.
(5)Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 
77030, USA.
(6)Baylor Miraca Genetics Laboratories, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(7)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX 
77030, USA.
(8)Division of Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(9)Division of Neurology and Developmental Neuroscience, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(10)Division of Medical Genetics, Stanford School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 
94304, USA.
(11)Division of Child & Adolescent Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, The 
University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(12)Division of Cardiology, DCH Regional Medical Center, Tuscaloosa, AL 35401, 
USA.
(13)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, The University of 
Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(14)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, 
USA.
(15)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(16)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, 
USA; Division of Neurology and Developmental Neuroscience, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(17)Department of Pathology, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(18)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, The Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
(19)Mckusick-Nathans Inst. of Genetic Medicine & Department of Pediatrics, The 
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
(20)Mckusick-Nathans Inst. of Genetic Medicine & Department of Pediatrics, The 
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA; 
Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetics & Metabolism, University of 
Florida, Gainsville, FL 32610, USA.
(21)Department of Metabolic Medicine, Lady Cilento Children's Hospital, South 
Brisbane, QLD 4101, Australia.
(22)Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 
77030, USA; Human Genetics Center, School of Public Health, University of 
Houston Health Science Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(23)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(24)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX 77030, 
USA.
(25)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Baylor Miraca Genetics Laboratories, Houston, TX 77030, 
USA. Electronic address: yapingy@bcm.edu.

Comment in
    Heart Rhythm. 2024 Feb;21(2):161-162. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2023.11.002.

The underlying genetic etiology of rhabdomyolysis remains elusive in a 
significant fraction of individuals presenting with recurrent metabolic crises 
and muscle weakness. Using exome sequencing, we identified bi-allelic mutations 
in TANGO2 encoding transport and Golgi organization 2 homolog (Drosophila) in 12 
subjects with episodic rhabdomyolysis, hypoglycemia, hyperammonemia, and 
susceptibility to life-threatening cardiac tachyarrhythmias. A recurrent 
homozygous c.460G>A (p.Gly154Arg) mutation was found in four unrelated 
individuals of Hispanic/Latino origin, and a homozygous ∼34 kb deletion 
affecting exons 3-9 was observed in two families of European ancestry. One 
individual of mixed Hispanic/European descent was found to be compound 
heterozygous for c.460G>A (p.Gly154Arg) and the deletion of exons 3-9. 
Additionally, a homozygous exons 4-6 deletion was identified in a consanguineous 
Middle Eastern Arab family. No homozygotes have been reported for these changes 
in control databases. Fibroblasts derived from a subject with the recurrent 
c.460G>A (p.Gly154Arg) mutation showed evidence of increased endoplasmic 
reticulum stress and a reduction in Golgi volume density in comparison to 
control. Our results show that the c.460G>A (p.Gly154Arg) mutation and the exons 
3-9 heterozygous deletion in TANGO2 are recurrent pathogenic alleles present in 
the Latino/Hispanic and European populations, respectively, causing considerable 
morbidity in the homozygotes in these populations.

Copyright © 2016 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.12.008
PMCID: PMC4746334
PMID: 26805781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
