---
pmid: '24685137'
title: A histone methylation network regulates transgenerational epigenetic memory
  in C. elegans.
authors:
- Greer EL
- Beese-Sims SE
- Brookes E
- Spadafora R
- Zhu Y
- Rothbart SB
- Aristizábal-Corrales D
- Chen S
- Badeaux AI
- Jin Q
- Wang W
- Strahl BD
- Colaiácovo MP
- Shi Y
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4012616
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.02.044
---

# A histone methylation network regulates transgenerational epigenetic memory in C. elegans.
**Authors:** Greer EL, Beese-Sims SE, Brookes E, Spadafora R, Zhu Y, Rothbart SB, Aristizábal-Corrales D, Chen S, Badeaux AI, Jin Q, Wang W, Strahl BD, Colaiácovo MP, Shi Y
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2014.02.044](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2014.02.044)
**PMC:** [PMC4012616](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4012616/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Rep. 2014 Apr 10;7(1):113-26. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.02.044. Epub
2014  Mar 27.

A histone methylation network regulates transgenerational epigenetic memory in 
C. elegans.

Greer EL(1), Beese-Sims SE(2), Brookes E(1), Spadafora R(3), Zhu Y(4), Rothbart 
SB(5), Aristizábal-Corrales D(1), Chen S(1), Badeaux AI(1), Jin Q(1), Wang W(4), 
Strahl BD(5), Colaiácovo MP(2), Shi Y(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; 
Division of Newborn Medicine, Children's Hospital Boston, 300 Longwood Avenue, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(3)Division of Newborn Medicine, Children's Hospital Boston, 300 Longwood 
Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(4)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, San 
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Medicine, 
Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.
(6)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; 
Division of Newborn Medicine, Children's Hospital Boston, 300 Longwood Avenue, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address: yshi@hms.harvard.edu.

How epigenetic information is transmitted from generation to generation remains 
largely unknown. Deletion of the C. elegans histone H3 lysine 4 dimethyl 
(H3K4me2) demethylase spr-5 leads to inherited accumulation of the euchromatic 
H3K4me2 mark and progressive decline in fertility. Here, we identified multiple 
chromatin-modifying factors, including H3K4me1/me2 and H3K9me3 
methyltransferases, an H3K9me3 demethylase, and an H3K9me reader, which either 
suppress or accelerate the progressive transgenerational phenotypes of spr-5 
mutant worms. Our findings uncover a network of chromatin regulators that 
control the transgenerational flow of epigenetic information and suggest that 
the balance between euchromatic H3K4 and heterochromatic H3K9 methylation 
regulates transgenerational effects on fertility.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.02.044
PMCID: PMC4012616
PMID: 24685137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
