---
pmid: '20133875'
title: Synthetic amyloid-beta oligomers impair long-term memory independently of cellular
  prion protein.
authors:
- Balducci C
- Beeg M
- Stravalaci M
- Bastone A
- Sclip A
- Biasini E
- Tapella L
- Colombo L
- Manzoni C
- Borsello T
- Chiesa R
- Gobbi M
- Salmona M
- Forloni G
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2836680
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0911829107
---

# Synthetic amyloid-beta oligomers impair long-term memory independently of cellular prion protein.
**Authors:** Balducci C, Beeg M, Stravalaci M, Bastone A, Sclip A, Biasini E, Tapella L, Colombo L, Manzoni C, Borsello T, Chiesa R, Gobbi M, Salmona M, Forloni G
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0911829107](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0911829107)
**PMC:** [PMC2836680](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2836680/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Feb 2;107(5):2295-300. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0911829107. Epub 2010 Jan 19.

Synthetic amyloid-beta oligomers impair long-term memory independently of 
cellular prion protein.

Balducci C(1), Beeg M, Stravalaci M, Bastone A, Sclip A, Biasini E, Tapella L, 
Colombo L, Manzoni C, Borsello T, Chiesa R, Gobbi M, Salmona M, Forloni G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Mario Negri Institute for Pharmacological 
Research, Milan 20156, Italy.

Inability to form new memories is an early clinical sign of Alzheimer's disease 
(AD). There is ample evidence that the amyloid-beta (Abeta) peptide plays a key 
role in the pathogenesis of this disorder. Soluble, bio-derived oligomers of 
Abeta are proposed as the key mediators of synaptic and cognitive dysfunction, 
but more tractable models of Abeta-mediated cognitive impairment are needed. 
Here we report that, in mice, acute intracerebroventricular injections of 
synthetic Abeta(1-42) oligomers impaired consolidation of the long-term 
recognition memory, whereas mature Abeta(1-42) fibrils and freshly dissolved 
peptide did not. The deficit induced by oligomers was reversible and was 
prevented by an anti-Abeta antibody. It has been suggested that the cellular 
prion protein (PrP(C)) mediates the impairment of synaptic plasticity induced by 
Abeta. We confirmed that Abeta(1-42) oligomers interact with PrP(C), with 
nanomolar affinity. However, PrP-expressing and PrP knock-out mice were equally 
susceptible to this impairment. These data suggest that Abeta(1-42) oligomers 
are responsible for cognitive impairment in AD and that PrP(C) is not required.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0911829107
PMCID: PMC2836680
PMID: 20133875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
