---
pmid: '7556975'
title: Binding of human, porcine and bovine insulin to insulin receptors from human
  brain, muscle and adipocytes and to expressed recombinant alternatively spliced
  insulin receptor isoforms.
authors:
- Kotzke G
- Sch端tt M
- Missler U
- Moller DE
- Fehm HL
- Klein HH
journal: Diabetologia
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s001250050349
---

# Binding of human, porcine and bovine insulin to insulin receptors from human brain, muscle and adipocytes and to expressed recombinant alternatively spliced insulin receptor isoforms.
**Authors:** Kotzke G, Sch端tt M, Missler U, Moller DE, Fehm HL, Klein HH
**Journal:** Diabetologia (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s001250050349](https://doi.org/10.1007/s001250050349)

## Abstract

1. Diabetologia. 1995 Jul;38(7):757-63. doi: 10.1007/s001250050349.

Binding of human, porcine and bovine insulin to insulin receptors from human 
brain, muscle and adipocytes and to expressed recombinant alternatively spliced 
insulin receptor isoforms.

Kotzke G(1), Sch端tt M, Missler U, Moller DE, Fehm HL, Klein HH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of L端beck, Germany.

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 1996 Feb;39(2):248-9. doi: 10.1007/BF00403974.

Previous studies have suggested that human and porcine insulin exert identical 
effects on blood glucose and counter-regulatory hormones but elicit different 
neurophysiological reactions. A major goal of the present study was to 
investigate whether this could be caused by different relative affinities of the 
insulins from different species to insulin receptors from the brain compared to 
other tissues. Insulin receptors isolated from human brain, muscle or adipocytes 
as well as from cultured cells over-expressing either of the human insulin 
receptor isoforms (exon 11- or exon 11 +) were immobilized to microwells coated 
with monoclonal anti-insulin receptor antibody. Subsequently the binding of 
human, porcine and bovine insulin was measured. While the receptors derived from 
the different tissues had different affinities for insulin, there were no 
tissue-specific differences in the relative binding of the insulins of the three 
species. The insulins of the three species were also not different with regard 
to their binding to the receptor isoforms. Finally, in human brain homogenates 
no differences in the degradation rates for human, porcine and bovine insulin 
were detected. Thus, our data do not support the hypothesis that different 
neurophysiological reactions during hypoglycaemia due to human or porcine 
insulin are caused by differences of the binding of the insulins to human brain 
insulin receptors or their degradation in the human brain.

DOI: 10.1007/s001250050349
PMID: 7556975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
