---
pmid: '24726327'
title: Binding of OTULIN to the PUB domain of HOIP controls NF-κB signaling.
authors:
- Schaeffer V
- Akutsu M
- Olma MH
- Gomes LC
- Kawasaki M
- Dikic I
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.03.016
---

# Binding of OTULIN to the PUB domain of HOIP controls NF-κB signaling.
**Authors:** Schaeffer V, Akutsu M, Olma MH, Gomes LC, Kawasaki M, Dikic I
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2014.03.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2014.03.016)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2014 May 8;54(3):349-61. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.03.016. Epub
2014  Apr 10.

Binding of OTULIN to the PUB domain of HOIP controls NF-κB signaling.

Schaeffer V(1), Akutsu M(2), Olma MH(1), Gomes LC(3), Kawasaki M(4), Dikic I(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University Faculty of Medicine, 60590 
Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(2)Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University Faculty of Medicine, 60590 
Frankfurt am Main, Germany; Buchmann Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, 
Goethe University, 60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(3)Buchmann Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Goethe University, 60438 
Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(4)Structural Biology Research Center, Photon Factory, Institute of Materials 
Structure Science, High Energy Accelerator Research Organization (KEK), Tsukuba, 
Ibaraki, 305-0801, Japan.
(5)Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University Faculty of Medicine, 60590 
Frankfurt am Main, Germany; Buchmann Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, 
Goethe University, 60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany. Electronic address: 
Ivan.Dikic@biochem2.de.

Linear ubiquitin chains are implicated in the regulation of the NF-κB pathway, 
immunity, and inflammation. They are synthesized by the LUBAC complex containing 
the catalytic subunit HOIL-1-interacting protein (HOIP) and are disassembled by 
the linear ubiquitin-specific deubiquitinase OTULIN. Little is known about the 
regulation of these opposing activities. Here we demonstrate that HOIP and 
OTULIN interact and act as a bimolecular editing pair for linear ubiquitin 
signals in vivo. The HOIP PUB domain binds to the PUB interacting motif (PIM) of 
OTULIN and the chaperone VCP/p97. Structural studies revealed the basis of 
high-affinity interaction with the OTULIN PIM. The conserved Tyr56 of OTULIN 
makes critical contacts with the HOIP PUB domain, and its phosphorylation 
negatively regulates this interaction. Functionally, HOIP binding to OTULIN is 
required for the recruitment of OTULIN to the TNF receptor complex and to 
counteract HOIP-dependent activation of the NF-κB pathway.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.03.016
PMID: 24726327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
