---
pmid: '12242223'
title: A novel yeast silencer. the 2mu origin of Saccharomyces cerevisiae has HST3-,
  MIG1- and SIR-dependent silencing activity.
authors:
- Grünweller A
- Ehrenhofer-Murray AE
journal: Genetics
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1462261
doi: 10.1093/genetics/162.1.59
---

# A novel yeast silencer. the 2mu origin of Saccharomyces cerevisiae has HST3-, MIG1- and SIR-dependent silencing activity.
**Authors:** Grünweller A, Ehrenhofer-Murray AE
**Journal:** Genetics (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1093/genetics/162.1.59](https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/162.1.59)
**PMC:** [PMC1462261](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1462261/)

## Abstract

1. Genetics. 2002 Sep;162(1):59-71. doi: 10.1093/genetics/162.1.59.

A novel yeast silencer. the 2mu origin of Saccharomyces cerevisiae has HST3-, 
MIG1- and SIR-dependent silencing activity.

Grünweller A(1), Ehrenhofer-Murray AE.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, 14195 Berlin, Germany.

Silencing in Saccharomyces cerevisiae is found at the mating-type loci HMR and 
HML, in subtelomeric regions, and at the rDNA locus. Repressed chromatin is 
built up by the recruitment of the Sir proteins via their interaction with 
DNA-binding proteins that bind to silencers. Here, we have performed a genetic 
screen for novel sequence elements within the yeast genome that display 
silencing activity. We isolated as a novel silencer element the origin of 
replication from the endogenous 2mu plasmid (2mu ARS). 2mu ARS-mediated 
silencing was dependent upon the Sir proteins, the origin recognition complex 
(ORC), and Hst3, a Sir2 histone deacetylase homolog, suggesting that it 
constituted a novel class of silencing in yeast. Moreover, 2mu ARS carried a 
binding site for Mig1, a transcriptional repressor of glucose-regulated genes. 
Both the Mig1-binding site and the MIG1 gene were necessary for full silencing 
activity of 2mu ARS. Furthermore, Hst3 was physically present at 2mu ARS in a 
silencing context as well as at the endogenous 2mu plasmid. Also, Hst3 regulated 
the repression of the flipase gene, although this was likely an indirect effect 
of HST3 on FLP1 expression.

DOI: 10.1093/genetics/162.1.59
PMCID: PMC1462261
PMID: 12242223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
