---
pmid: '16097032'
title: Subproteomic analysis of metal-interacting proteins in human B cells.
authors:
- Heiss K
- Junkes C
- Guerreiro N
- Swamy M
- Camacho-Carvajal MM
- Schamel WW
- Haidl ID
- Wild D
- Weltzien HU
- Thierse HJ
journal: Proteomics
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/pmic.200401215
---

# Subproteomic analysis of metal-interacting proteins in human B cells.
**Authors:** Heiss K, Junkes C, Guerreiro N, Swamy M, Camacho-Carvajal MM, Schamel WW, Haidl ID, Wild D, Weltzien HU, Thierse HJ
**Journal:** Proteomics (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pmic.200401215](https://doi.org/10.1002/pmic.200401215)

## Abstract

1. Proteomics. 2005 Sep;5(14):3614-22. doi: 10.1002/pmic.200401215.

Subproteomic analysis of metal-interacting proteins in human B cells.

Heiss K(1), Junkes C, Guerreiro N, Swamy M, Camacho-Carvajal MM, Schamel WW, 
Haidl ID, Wild D, Weltzien HU, Thierse HJ.

Author information:
(1)Max-Planck Institute for Immunobiology, Freiburg, Germany.

Metal-protein interactions are vitally important in all living organisms. 
Metalloproteins, including structural proteins and metabolic enzymes, 
participate in energy transfer and redox reactions or act as metallochaperones 
in metal trafficking. Among metal-associated diseases, T cell mediated allergy 
to nickel (Ni) represents the most common form of human contact 
hypersensitivity. With the aim to elucidate disease-underlying mechanisms such 
as Ni-specific T cell activation, we initiated a proteomic approach to identify 
Ni-interacting proteins in human B cells. As antigen presenting cells, B cells 
are capable of presenting MHC-associated Ni-epitopes to T cells, a prerequisite 
for hapten-specific T cell activation. Using metal-affinity enrichment, 2-DE and 
MS, 22 Ni-interacting proteins were identified. In addition to known Ni-binding 
molecules such as tubulin, actin or cullin-2, we unexpectedly discovered that at 
least nine of these 22 proteins belong to stress-inducible heat shock proteins 
or chaperonins. Enrichment was particularly effective for the hetero-oligomeric 
TRiC/CCT complex, which is involved in MHC class I processing. Blue Native/SDS 
electrophoresis analysis revealed that Ni-NTA-beads specifically retained the 
complete protein machinery, including the associated chaperonin substrate 
tubulin. The apparent Ni-affinity of heat shock proteins suggests a new function 
of these molecules in human Ni allergy, by linking innate and adaptive immune 
responses.

DOI: 10.1002/pmic.200401215
PMID: 16097032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
