---
pmid: '21720390'
title: SIRT3-dependent deacetylation exacerbates acetaminophen hepatotoxicity.
authors:
- Lu Z
- Bourdi M
- Li JH
- Aponte AM
- Chen Y
- Lombard DB
- Gucek M
- Pohl LR
- Sack MN
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3147261
doi: 10.1038/embor.2011.121
---

# SIRT3-dependent deacetylation exacerbates acetaminophen hepatotoxicity.
**Authors:** Lu Z, Bourdi M, Li JH, Aponte AM, Chen Y, Lombard DB, Gucek M, Pohl LR, Sack MN
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/embor.2011.121](https://doi.org/10.1038/embor.2011.121)
**PMC:** [PMC3147261](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3147261/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2011 Jul 1;12(8):840-6. doi: 10.1038/embor.2011.121.

SIRT3-dependent deacetylation exacerbates acetaminophen hepatotoxicity.

Lu Z(1), Bourdi M, Li JH, Aponte AM, Chen Y, Lombard DB, Gucek M, Pohl LR, Sack 
MN.

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine, NHLBI, National Institutes of Health, Building 
10-CRC, Room 5-3150, 10 Center Drive, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Comment in
    EMBO Rep. 2011 Jul 08;12(8):746-7. doi: 10.1038/embor.2011.147.

Acetaminophen/paracetamol-induced liver failure--which is induced by the binding 
of reactive metabolites to mitochondrial proteins and their disruption--is 
exacerbated by fasting. As fasting promotes SIRT3-mediated mitochondrial-protein 
deacetylation and acetaminophen metabolites bind to lysine residues, we 
investigated whether deacetylation predisposes mice to toxic metabolite-mediated 
disruption of mitochondrial proteins. We show that mitochondrial deacetylase 
SIRT3(-/-) mice are protected from acetaminophen hepatotoxicity, that 
mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase 2 is a direct SIRT3 substrate, and that its 
deacetylation increases acetaminophen toxic-metabolite binding and enzyme 
inactivation. Thus, protein deacetylation enhances xenobiotic liver injury by 
modulating the binding of a toxic metabolite to mitochondrial proteins.

DOI: 10.1038/embor.2011.121
PMCID: PMC3147261
PMID: 21720390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
