---
pmid: '27052415'
title: 'The Bach Family of Transcription Factors: A Comprehensive Review.'
authors:
- Zhou Y
- Wu H
- Zhao M
- Chang C
- Lu Q
journal: Clin Rev Allergy Immunol
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s12016-016-8538-7
---

# The Bach Family of Transcription Factors: A Comprehensive Review.
**Authors:** Zhou Y, Wu H, Zhao M, Chang C, Lu Q
**Journal:** Clin Rev Allergy Immunol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12016-016-8538-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12016-016-8538-7)

## Abstract

1. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2016 Jun;50(3):345-56. doi:
10.1007/s12016-016-8538-7.

The Bach Family of Transcription Factors: A Comprehensive Review.

Zhou Y(1)(2), Wu H(1), Zhao M(1), Chang C(3), Lu Q(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Second Xiangya Hospital, Hunan Key Laboratory of 
Medical Epigenomics, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China.
(2)Department of Medical Cosmetology, Peace Hospital, Changzhi Medical College, 
Changzhi, Shanxi, China.
(3)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Clinical Immunology, University of 
California at Davis, Davis, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Second Xiangya Hospital, Hunan Key Laboratory of 
Medical Epigenomics, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China. 
qianlu5860@gmail.com.

The transcription factors Bach1 and Bach2, which belong to a basic 
region-leucine zipper (bZip) family, repress target gene expression by forming 
heterodimers with small Maf proteins. With the ability to bind to heme, Bach1 
and Bach2 are important in maintaining heme homeostasis in response to oxidative 
stress, which is characterized by high levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) 
in cells and thereby induces cellular damage and senescence. The inactivation of 
Bach1 exerts an antioxidant effect. Thus, Bach1 may be a potential therapeutic 
target of oxidative stress-related diseases. Bach2 participates in oxidative 
stress-mediated apoptosis and is involved in macrophage-mediated innate immunity 
as well as the adaptive immune response. Bach1 and Bach2 promote the 
differentiation of common lymphoid progenitors to B cells by repressing 
myeloid-related genes. Bach2 is able to regulate class-switch recombination and 
plasma cell differentiation by altering the concentration of mitochondrial ROS 
during B cell differentiation. Furthermore, Bach2 maintains T cell homeostasis, 
influences the function of macrophages, and plays a role in autoimmunity. 
Bach2-controlling genes with super enhancers in T cells play a key role in 
immune regulation. However, in spite of new research, the role of Bach1 and 
Bach2 in immune cells and immune response is not completely clear, nor are their 
respective roles of in oxidative stress and the immune response, in particular 
with regard to the clinical phenotypes of autoimmune diseases. The 
anti-immunosenescence action of Bach and the role of epigenetic modifications of 
these transcription factors may be important in the mechanism of Bach 
transcription factors in mediating oxidative stress and cellular immunity.

DOI: 10.1007/s12016-016-8538-7
PMID: 27052415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
