---
pmid: '12296995'
title: TAK1-dependent activation of AP-1 and c-Jun N-terminal kinase by receptor activator
  of NF-kappaB.
authors:
- Lee SW
- Han SI
- Kim HH
- Lee ZH
journal: J Biochem Mol Biol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.5483/bmbrep.2002.35.4.371
---

# TAK1-dependent activation of AP-1 and c-Jun N-terminal kinase by receptor activator of NF-kappaB.
**Authors:** Lee SW, Han SI, Kim HH, Lee ZH
**Journal:** J Biochem Mol Biol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.5483/bmbrep.2002.35.4.371](https://doi.org/10.5483/bmbrep.2002.35.4.371)

## Abstract

1. J Biochem Mol Biol. 2002 Jul 31;35(4):371-6. doi:
10.5483/bmbrep.2002.35.4.371.

TAK1-dependent activation of AP-1 and c-Jun N-terminal kinase by receptor 
activator of NF-kappaB.

Lee SW(1), Han SI, Kim HH, Lee ZH.

Author information:
(1)National Research Laboratory for Bone Metabolism, Chosun University, Gwangju, 
Korea.

The receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B (RANK) is a member of the tumor 
necrosis factor (TNF) receptor superfamily. It plays a critical role in 
osteoclast differentiation, lymph node organogenesis, and mammary gland 
development. The stimulation of RANK causes the activation of transcription 
factors NF-kappaB and activator protein 1 (AP1), and the mitogen activated 
protein kinase (MAPK) c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK). In the signal transduction 
of RANK, the recruitment of the adaptor molecules, TNF receptor-associated 
factors (TRAFs), is an initial cytoplasmic event. Recently, the association of 
the MAPK kinase kinase, transforming growth factor-beta-activated kinase 1 
(TAK1), with TRAF6 was shown to mediate the IL-1 signaling to NF-kappaB and JNK. 
We investigated whether or not TAK1 plays a role in RANK signaling. A 
dominant-negative form of TAK1 was discovered to abolish the RANK-induced 
activation of AP1 and JNK. The AP1 activation by TRAF2, TRAF5, and TRAF6 was 
also greatly suppressed by the dominant negative TAK1. The inhibitory effect of 
the TAK1 mutant on RANK- and TRAF-induced NF-kappaB activation was also 
observed, but less efficiently. Our findings indicate that TAK1 is involved in 
the MAPK cascade and NF-kappaB pathway that is activated by RANK.

DOI: 10.5483/bmbrep.2002.35.4.371
PMID: 12296995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
