---
pmid: '17848177'
title: Tissue factor induction by protease-activated receptor 1 requires intact caveolin-enriched
  membrane microdomains in human endothelial cells.
authors:
- Banfi C
- Brioschi M
- Barcella S
- Pignieri A
- Parolari A
- Biglioli P
- Tremoli E
- Mussoni L
journal: J Thromb Haemost
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1538-7836.2007.02759.x
---

# Tissue factor induction by protease-activated receptor 1 requires intact caveolin-enriched membrane microdomains in human endothelial cells.
**Authors:** Banfi C, Brioschi M, Barcella S, Pignieri A, Parolari A, Biglioli P, Tremoli E, Mussoni L
**Journal:** J Thromb Haemost (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1538-7836.2007.02759.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1538-7836.2007.02759.x)

## Abstract

1. J Thromb Haemost. 2007 Dec;5(12):2437-44. doi:
10.1111/j.1538-7836.2007.02759.x.  Epub 2007 Sep 10.

Tissue factor induction by protease-activated receptor 1 requires intact 
caveolin-enriched membrane microdomains in human endothelial cells.

Banfi C(1), Brioschi M, Barcella S, Pignieri A, Parolari A, Biglioli P, Tremoli 
E, Mussoni L.

Author information:
(1)Monzino Cardiologic Centre IRCCS, and Department of Pharmacological Sciences, 
University of Milan, via Parea 4, Milan, Italy. cristina.banfi@unimi.it

BACKGROUND: Protease-activated receptors (PARs) comprise a family of 
G-protein-coupled receptors with a unique mechanism of proteolytic activation. 
PARs regulate a broad range of cellular functions and are active in the 
pathogenesis of disorders characterized by chronic inflammation or activation of 
the coagulation cascade. Signaling through PAR1 and PAR2 shifts the endothelium 
towards a prothrombotic phenotype, thereby exacerbating the initial 
pathophysiologic condition.
OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to analyze the localization of PARs in the cell 
membrane and how their compartmentalization affects tissue factor (TF) in human 
endothelial cells.
METHODS: TF expression was determined by quantitative real-time polymerase chain 
reaction analysis and by activity assays. The interaction of PARs with caveolin 
was investigated through: (i) caveolin-1 gene knockdown performed by 
transfection with specific small interfering RNA (siRNA); (ii) caveolin-enriched 
membrane microdomain disruption; and (iii) coimmunoprecipitation assay.
RESULTS: We have shown that PAR1, but not PAR2, is present in endothelial 
caveolin-enriched membrane microdomains, where it is bound to caveolin-1, and 
that these structures must be intact if PAR1-induced signaling is to increase TF 
activity. Cholesterol depletion of endothelial cells by cholesterol-sequestering 
agents caused the PAR1 to relocate to high-density membranes, and impaired the 
induction of TF (P < 0.01) without affecting the PAR2-mediated procoagulant 
effect. In addition, siRNA directed against caveolin-1 inhibited TF activation 
by PAR1 (P < 0.01 and P < 0.01, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: PAR1 localization in the caveolin-enriched membrane microdomain, 
bound to caveolin-1, represents a crucial requirement for TF induction in 
endothelial cells.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1538-7836.2007.02759.x
PMID: 17848177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
