---
pmid: '18615096'
title: Huntingtin phosphorylation acts as a molecular switch for anterograde/retrograde
  transport in neurons.
authors:
- Colin E
- Zala D
- Liot G
- Rangone H
- Borrell-Pagès M
- Li XJ
- Saudou F
- Humbert S
journal: EMBO J
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2516882
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.133
---

# Huntingtin phosphorylation acts as a molecular switch for anterograde/retrograde transport in neurons.
**Authors:** Colin E, Zala D, Liot G, Rangone H, Borrell-Pagès M, Li XJ, Saudou F, Humbert S
**Journal:** EMBO J (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2008.133](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2008.133)
**PMC:** [PMC2516882](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2516882/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2008 Aug 6;27(15):2124-34. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.133. Epub 2008 Jul 
10.

Huntingtin phosphorylation acts as a molecular switch for anterograde/retrograde 
transport in neurons.

Colin E(1), Zala D, Liot G, Rangone H, Borrell-Pagès M, Li XJ, Saudou F, Humbert 
S.

Author information:
(1)Institut Curie, Orsay, France.

The transport of vesicles in neurons is a highly regulated process, with 
vesicles moving either anterogradely or retrogradely depending on the nature of 
the molecular motors, kinesins and dynein, respectively, which propel vesicles 
along microtubules (MTs). However, the mechanisms that determine the 
directionality of transport remain unclear. Huntingtin, the protein mutated in 
Huntington's disease, is a positive regulatory factor for vesicular transport. 
Huntingtin is phosphorylated at serine 421 by the kinase Akt but the role of 
this modification is unknown. Here, we demonstrate that phosphorylation of 
wild-type huntingtin at S421 is crucial to control the direction of vesicles in 
neurons. When phosphorylated, huntingtin recruits kinesin-1 to the dynactin 
complex on vesicles and MTs. Using brain-derived neurotrophic factor as a marker 
of vesicular transport, we demonstrate that huntingtin phosphorylation promotes 
anterograde transport. Conversely, when huntingtin is not phosphorylated, 
kinesin-1 detaches and vesicles are more likely to undergo retrograde transport. 
This also applies to other vesicles suggesting an essential role for huntingtin 
in the control of vesicular directionality in neurons.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2008.133
PMCID: PMC2516882
PMID: 18615096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The transport of vesicles in neurons is a highly regulated process, with vesicles moving either anterogradely or retrogradely depending on the nature of the molecular motors, kinesins and dynein, respectively, which propel vesicles along microtubules (MTs). However, the mechanisms that determine the directionality of transport remain unclear. Huntingtin, the protein mutated in Huntington's disease, is a positive regulatory factor for vesicular transport. Huntingtin is phosphorylated at serine 421 by the kinase Akt but the role of this modification is unknown. Here, we demonstrate that phosphorylation of wild-type huntingtin at S421 is crucial to control the direction of vesicles in neurons. When phosphorylated, huntingtin recruits kinesin-1 to the dynactin complex on vesicles and MTs. Using brain-derived neurotrophic factor as a marker of vesicular transport, we demonstrate that huntingtin phosphorylation promotes anterograde transport. Conversely, when huntingtin is not phosphorylated, kinesin-1 detaches and vesicles are more likely to undergo retrograde transport. This also applies to other vesicles suggesting an essential role for huntingtin in the control of vesicular directionality in neurons.

Introduction

The proper intracellular transport of membranous organelles and of other cargoes is determined by the nature of the molecular motors that propel vesicles along microtubules (MTs). Kinesins generally move vesicles anterogradely from the cell body to the tip of the neurites, whereas cytoplasmic dynein leads to the retrograde transport of vesicles back towards the cell body. In vitro studies have demonstrated that dynein and kinesins can function independently and that the direction of transport of a given cargo along MTs depends on the nature of the molecular motor that is present ( Vale, 2003 ). However, the situation is more complex in vivo . A high level of coordination is necessary to ensure the proper transport of a given cargo to the right place. One key multiprotein complex that could have an important function in the coordination of bidirectional transport of vesicles is dynactin, which is required for attaching motors to cargoes ( Holleran et al , 1998 ; Martin et al , 1999 ; Deacon et al , 2003 ; Schroer, 2004 ; Welte, 2004 ). In particular, the p150 Glued subunit of dynactin physically interacts with MTs, the intermediate chains of dynein (DIC) and kinesin. However, the mechanisms by which the net directionality of organelle movement is achieved remain unclear and the proteins or factors that control directly or indirectly directionality remain to be identified.

The huntingtin (htt) protein is a positive regulatory factor for vesicular transport. htt associates with vesicles and MTs ( Borrell-Pages et al , 2006 ) and facilitates vesicular transport in both anterograde and retrograde directions in vitro , in mammalian neuronal cells and in Drosophila ( Gunawardena et al , 2003 ; Gauthier et al , 2004 ; Caviston et al , 2007 ). This mechanism involves the direct interaction of htt with dynein intermediate chain ( Caviston et al , 2007 ) and with huntingtin-associated protein-1 (HAP1), which in turn interacts with the p150 Glued subunit of dynactin and kinesin ( Engelender et al , 1997 ; Li et al , 1998 ; Gauthier et al , 2004 ; McGuire et al , 2006 ). We have previously described an assay to study intracellular transport by analysing the dynamics of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)–eGFP-containing vesicles using fast 3D videomicroscopy followed by deconvolution ( Gauthier et al , 2004 ; Dompierre et al , 2007 ). BDNF is synthesized from a large precursor protein, pre-pro-BDNF, that is proteolytically processed and trafficked through the Golgi apparatus to the trans-Golgi network where it is packaged into secretory vesicles ( Thomas and Davies, 2005 ). BDNF is important to study htt's function, and its dysfunction in disease as the striatal source of BDNF that is crucial for the survival of striatal neurons is dependent on the proper synthesis and transport of BDNF from the cortico-striatal-projecting neurons ( Altar et al , 1997 ; Saudou et al , 1998 ; Zuccato et al , 2001 ; Baquet et al , 2004 ; Gauthier et al , 2004 ).

Most of the aforementioned studies have been conducted in cells rather than in primary cultures of neurons and the role of htt in the control of anterograde and retrograde transport has not been investigated. Therefore, to further characterize the function of htt in axonal transport, we studied the regulatory role of htt in transport in primary cultures of cortical neurons, the neurons that transport BDNF in vivo ( Altar et al , 1997 ). We show here that htt is a facilitator of anterograde and retrograde transport in neurons and that this function is regulated by the phosphorylation of htt at serine 421. When htt is phosphorylated, kinesin-1 is recruited to vesicles and MTs, facilitating anterograde transport. By contrast, retrograde transport is favoured in the absence of htt phosphorylation at S421. This study reveals that vesicular directionality can be regulated by phosphorylation of htt and identifies htt as the first regulator of the direction of transport in neurons.

Discussion

Since the discovery of the abnormal polyglutamine expansion in htt as the mutation responsible for HD, most of the studies in the field have focused on understanding the gain of the toxic function elicited by this mutation. Although little is known about the function of wild-type htt, growing evidences reveal that loss of function also contributes to pathogenesis supporting the importance of understanding htt normal function ( Zuccato et al , 2001 ; Gauthier et al , 2004 ). We demonstrate here that htt is a key protein that regulates bidirectional axonal transport and we reveal a new cellular mechanism by which the direction of vesicular transport is controlled in neurons.

It is well accepted that anterograde transport of vesicles is mainly mediated by kinesins, whereas DIC moves organelles in the retrograde direction. In vitro , these motors can function independently. In vivo , the cell needs to regulate and coordinate this transport efficiently to allow cargoes to move rapidly and reverse their direction. The dynactin complex may have a function in coordinating organelle transport directionality, and several studies have suggested that dynactin may accomplish this by serving as a platform protein ( Burkhardt et al , 1997 ; Waterman-Storer et al , 1997 ; Deacon et al , 2003 ). Kinesins and dyneins are interdependent. For example, in Drosophila , depletion of DHC by siRNA or by genetic approaches results in a decrease in both retrograde and anterograde transport ( Martin et al , 1999 ). Similarly, immunodepletion of conventional kinesin inhibits both plus and minus end-directed vesicle transport ( Schroer et al , 1988 ; Brady et al , 1990 ). The notion that the various motors are interdependent is also supported by experiments on peroxisome transport ( Kural et al , 2005 ). Finally, the direct interaction between kinesin-1 and dynein is in agreement with a coordinated movement between anterograde and retrograde motors ( Ligon et al , 2004 ). Using fast 3D videomicroscopy to record intracellular transport of BDNF-containing vesicles in primary neurons and RNAi experiments, we also found that kinesin-1, DIC and dynactin are essential for the bidirectional transport of vesicles. Our results together with work from previous studies demonstrate that htt also has a function in the bidirectional transport of organelles by associating with motor complexes ( Engelender et al , 1997 ; Li et al , 1998 ; Gauthier et al , 2004 ; McGuire et al , 2006 ). Consistently, htt is found at the distal and proximal sites after sciatic nerve ligation, indicating that htt is actively transported in both directions in axons in vivo ( Block-Galarza et al , 1997 ).

Although it is clear that motors and certain accessory proteins such as htt are involved in bidirectional transport, the mechanisms that control the directionality of transport are poorly understood. Studies strongly suggest these events are somehow coordinated. For example, in Drosophila , the Klar and Halo proteins may coordinate antagonistic motors and regulate the net directionality of lipid droplets and vesicles ( Welte et al , 1998 ; Gross et al , 2003 ). Also, substitutions of single amino acids by mutagenesis in the Drosophila retrograde motor non-claret disjunctional (ncd) have been shown to lead to a reversal of motor direction ( Endow and Higuchi, 2000 ). This indicates that components of motor complexes or trans-acting factors such as htt could regulate direction of transport through modifications such as phosphorylation. Our study has established for the first time that a single phosphorylation in htt dictates the direction of the movements of vesicles along MTs in neurons. htt phosphorylation does not affect basic MT properties such as nucleation, dynamics or stability. Phosphorylation also fails to modify the localization of BDNF to other motile organelles or of BDNF vesicles to MTs. In contrast, we show by various complementary approaches that htt phosphorylation leads to the recruitment of the anterograde motor kinesin-1 to vesicles and MTs and preferentially increases the overall anterograde transport of organelles. When htt is dephosphorylated, kinesin-1 is released from MTs and vesicles, and these vesicles that still contain the htt–dynein–dynactin complex move back towards the nucleus ( Figure 7D ).

How does htt phosphorylation lead to kinesin-1 recruitment to vesicles and MTs? htt binds to HAP1 and to the dynein complex through the dynein intermediate chain ( Li et al , 1995 ; Caviston et al , 2007 ). However, no direct interaction with kinesin-1 has thus far been reported. HAP1 interacts with p150 Glued and the heavy chain of kinesin-1 through its coiled-coil domain ( Engelender et al , 1997 ; Li et al , 1998 ). More recently, HAP1 has been shown to interact with the C-terminal part of the KLC ( McGuire et al , 2006 ). We found that htt S421 phosphorylation leads to no binding differences between htt and HAP1 or between HAP1 and p150 Glued or kinesin-1. However, the marked increase in the interaction between p150 Glued and kinesin-1 suggests that htt phosphorylation stabilizes the interaction of kinesin-1 to dynactin. We propose that recruitment of kinesin-1 upon htt phosphorylation to vesicles and MTs is a regulatory process that changes transport direction in neurons.

htt's function in the control of bidirectional transport is not only restricted to the transport of BDNF vesicles in cortical neurons but also applies to TI-VAMP vesicles and APP-labelled organelles, suggesting this previously unknown phenomenon to be of broad significance. The specificity of the htt-stimulated transport may depend on the nature of the organelles and of its associated motors. Indeed, our results show that the htt-dependent anterograde transport requires kinesin-1. The observation that APP-containing vesicles, whose transport depends on kinesin-1 ( Kaether et al , 2000 ; Araki et al , 2007 ), are also regulated by htt support our findings. However, not all kinesin-1-dependent organelles are regulated by htt. For example, mitochondrial transport, although kinesin-1 dependent, is not altered in early stage of disease ( Gauthier et al , 2004 ; Hollenbeck and Saxton, 2005 ). This specificity could be determined by proteins such as the htt-interacting protein HAP1 and its Drosophila orthologue Milton that exert an effect as adaptors for cargoes. Indeed, whereas Milton is essential for mitochondrial axonal transport by recruiting kinesin-1 ( Glater et al , 2006 ) it has no effect on BDNF vesicles (data not shown). Conversely, HAP1 is required for the transport of BDNF- and APP-containing organelles but does not alter the trafficking of mitochondria ( Gauthier et al , 2004 ; McGuire et al , 2006 ).

htt is phosphorylated by Akt upon IGF-1 stimulation. Phosphorylation of htt at S421 leads to an increased anterograde transport and flux that lead to an increased BDNF release from cortical neurons. We suggest a new mechanism by which IGF-1/Akt regulates survival, through the activation of intracellular trafficking. BDNF is produced by cortical neurons and is transported from the cortex to the striatum where it exerts an effect as a pro-survival factor for striatal neurons. The direct phosphorylation of htt by Akt promotes the anterograde transport of the BDNF factor and therefore provides an essential trophic support to striatal neurons.
