---
pmid: '18562316'
title: 'Structural basis of human triosephosphate isomerase deficiency: mutation E104D
  is related to alterations of a conserved water network at the dimer interface.'
authors:
- Rodríguez-Almazán C
- Arreola R
- Rodríguez-Larrea D
- Aguirre-López B
- de Gómez-Puyou MT
- Pérez-Montfort R
- Costas M
- Gómez-Puyou A
- Torres-Larios A
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M802145200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Structural basis of human triosephosphate isomerase deficiency: mutation E104D is related to alterations of a conserved water network at the dimer interface.
**Authors:** Rodríguez-Almazán C, Arreola R, Rodríguez-Larrea D, Aguirre-López B, de Gómez-Puyou MT, Pérez-Montfort R, Costas M, Gómez-Puyou A, Torres-Larios A
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M802145200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M802145200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Aug 22;283(34):23254-63. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M802145200. Epub 
2008 Jun 18.

Structural basis of human triosephosphate isomerase deficiency: mutation E104D 
is related to alterations of a conserved water network at the dimer interface.

Rodríguez-Almazán C(1), Arreola R, Rodríguez-Larrea D, Aguirre-López B, de 
Gómez-Puyou MT, Pérez-Montfort R, Costas M, Gómez-Puyou A, Torres-Larios A.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica, Instituto de Fisiología Celular, Universidad 
Nacional Autónoma de México, Ciudad Universitaria, Apartado Postal 70-243, 
Mexico City 04510, México.

Human triosephosphate isomerase deficiency is a rare autosomal disease that 
causes premature death of homozygous individuals. The most frequent mutation 
that leads to this illness is in position 104, which involves a conservative 
change of a Glu for Asp. Despite the extensive work that has been carried out on 
the E104D mutant enzyme in hemolysates and whole cells, the molecular basis of 
this disease is poorly understood. Here, we show that the purified, recombinant 
mutant enzyme E104D, while exhibiting normal catalytic activity, shows 
impairments in the formation of active dimers and low thermostability and 
monomerizes under conditions in which the wild type retains its dimeric form. 
The crystal structure of the E104D mutant at 1.85 A resolution showed that its 
global structure was similar to that of the wild type; however, residue 104 is 
part of a conserved cluster of 10 residues, five from each subunit. An analysis 
of the available high resolution structures of TIM dimers revealed that this 
cluster forms a cavity that possesses an elaborate conserved network of buried 
water molecules that bridge the two subunits. In the E104D mutant, a disruption 
of contacts of the amino acid side chains in the conserved cluster leads to a 
perturbation of the water network in which the water-protein and water-water 
interactions that join the two monomers are significantly weakened and 
diminished. Thus, the disruption of this solvent system would stand as the 
underlying cause of the deficiency.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M802145200
PMID: 18562316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
