---
pmid: '8759755'
title: Activation of human eosinophils by IL-13. Induction of CD69 surface antigen,
  its relationship to messenger RNA expression, and promotion of cellular viability.
authors:
- Luttmann W
- Knoechel B
- Foerster M
- Matthys H
- Virchow JC Jr
- Kroegel C
journal: J Immunol
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
---

# Activation of human eosinophils by IL-13. Induction of CD69 surface antigen, its relationship to messenger RNA expression, and promotion of cellular viability.
**Authors:** Luttmann W, Knoechel B, Foerster M, Matthys H, Virchow JC Jr, Kroegel C
**Journal:** J Immunol (1996)

## Abstract

1. J Immunol. 1996 Aug 15;157(4):1678-83.

Activation of human eosinophils by IL-13. Induction of CD69 surface antigen, its 
relationship to messenger RNA expression, and promotion of cellular viability.

Luttmann W(1), Knoechel B, Foerster M, Matthys H, Virchow JC Jr, Kroegel C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pneumology, Medical University Clinics, Freiburg, Germany.

To study the effect of IL-13 on CD69 expression and cell viability in human 
eosinophils, purified human peripheral blood eosinophils from healthy donors 
were incubated with increasing concentrations of IL-13. The expression of CD69 
was analyzed by flow cytometry (FACS). Surface expression of CD69, which was 
absent on untreated eosinophils, was induced by IL-13 at concentrations ranging 
from 1 ng/ml to 1 microgram/ml in a concentration-dependent manner. In contrast, 
neutrophils expressed CD69 neither spontaneously nor following incubation with 
IL-13. Semiquantitative reverse transcription-PCR for CD69 mRNA showed 
constitutive CD69 mRNA expression in purified human eosinophils. Incubation of 
eosinophils with IL-13 further increased CD69-specific mRNA. Analysis of 
intracellularly stored CD69 in eosinophils permeabilized with saponin revealed 
intracellular binding of anti-CD69 Abs in all isolated eosinophils. After 
stimulation with 100 ng/ml IL-13 for 24 h, the concentration of intracellular 
CD69 decreased by 41 +/- 9%. Furthermore, IL-13 at a concentration of 100 ng/ml 
enhanced eosinophil viability, as assessed by propidium iodide staining after 4 
days in culture from 8.6 +/- 5.5% in control medium to 50.7 +/- 6.8% following 
stimulation with IL-13 treatment. The effect of Il-13 on eosinophil viability as 
well as that on CD69 expression were both neutralized by anti-IL-13 Abs. In 
conclusion, our results demonstrate that IL-13 specifically activates human 
eosinophils, as determined by the expression of CD69 cell surface protein and 
mRNA expression. Furthermore, IL-13 significantly prolongs eosinophil survival 
in vitro. The data suggest that IL-13 may play a role in the activation of 
eosinophils.

PMID: 8759755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
