---
reference_id: PMID:38546045
title: The CPLANE protein Fuzzy regulates ciliogenesis by suppressing actin polymerization at the base of the primary cilium via p190A RhoGAP.
authors:
- Sharma R
- Kalot R
- Levin Y
- Babayeva S
- Kachurina N
- Chung CF
- Liu KJ
- Bouchard M
- Torban E
journal: Development
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1242/dev.202322
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# The CPLANE protein Fuzzy regulates ciliogenesis by suppressing actin polymerization at the base of the primary cilium via p190A RhoGAP.
**Authors:** Sharma R, Kalot R, Levin Y, Babayeva S, Kachurina N, Chung CF, Liu KJ, Bouchard M, Torban E
**Journal:** Development (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.202322](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.202322)

## Content

1. Development. 2024 Mar 15;151(6):dev202322. doi: 10.1242/dev.202322. Epub 2024
Mar 28.

The CPLANE protein Fuzzy regulates ciliogenesis by suppressing actin
polymerization at the base of the primary cilium via p190A RhoGAP.

Sharma R(1), Kalot R(1), Levin Y(1), Babayeva S(2), Kachurina N(2), Chung CF(1),
Liu KJ(3), Bouchard M(4), Torban E(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Department of Physiology, McGill University,
Montreal H4A 3J1, QC, Canada.
(2)Metabolic Disorders and Complications Program, Research Institute of the
McGill University Health Centre, McGill University, Montreal H4A 3J1, QC,
Canada.
(3)Centre for Craniofacial and Regenerative Biology, King's College London,
London SE1 9RT, UK.
(4)Rosalind and Morris Goodman Cancer Institute, Department of Medicine of the
McGill University,McGill University, Montreal H3A 1A3, QC, Canada.

The primary cilium decorates most eukaryotic cells and regulates tissue
morphogenesis and maintenance. Structural or functional defects of primary
cilium result in ciliopathies, congenital human disorders affecting multiple
organs. Pathogenic variants in the ciliogenesis and planar cell polarity
effectors (CPLANE) genes FUZZY, INTU and WDPCP disturb ciliogenesis, causing
severe ciliopathies in humans and mice. Here, we show that the loss of Fuzzy in
mice results in defects of primary cilia, accompanied by increased RhoA activity
and excessive actin polymerization at the basal body. We discovered that,
mechanistically, Fuzzy interacts with and recruits the negative actin regulator
ARHGAP35 (also known as p190A RhoGAP) to the basal body. We identified genetic
interactions between the two genes and found that a mutant ArhGAP35 allele
increases the severity of phenotypic defects observed in Fuzzy-/- mice. Based on
our findings, we propose that Fuzzy regulates ciliogenesis by recruiting
ARHGAP35 to the basal body, where the latter likely restricts actin
polymerization and modifies the actin network. Our study identifies a mechanism
whereby CPLANE proteins control both actin polymerization and primary cilium
formation.

© 2024. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.202322
PMCID: PMC11006408
PMID: 38546045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no
competing or financial interests.