---
pmid: '21113149'
title: Reversing EphB2 depletion rescues cognitive functions in Alzheimer model.
authors:
- Cissé M
- Halabisky B
- Harris J
- Devidze N
- Dubal DB
- Sun B
- Orr A
- Lotz G
- Kim DH
- Hamto P
- Ho K
- Yu GQ
- Mucke L
journal: Nature
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3030448
doi: 10.1038/nature09635
---

# Reversing EphB2 depletion rescues cognitive functions in Alzheimer model.
**Authors:** Cissé M, Halabisky B, Harris J, Devidze N, Dubal DB, Sun B, Orr A, Lotz G, Kim DH, Hamto P, Ho K, Yu GQ, Mucke L
**Journal:** Nature (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature09635](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature09635)
**PMC:** [PMC3030448](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3030448/)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2011 Jan 6;469(7328):47-52. doi: 10.1038/nature09635. Epub 2010 Nov
28.

Reversing EphB2 depletion rescues cognitive functions in Alzheimer model.

Cissé M(1), Halabisky B, Harris J, Devidze N, Dubal DB, Sun B, Orr A, Lotz G, 
Kim DH, Hamto P, Ho K, Yu GQ, Mucke L.

Author information:
(1)Gladstone Institute of Neurological Disease, San Francisco, California 94158, 
USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2011 Jan 6;469(7328):44-5. doi: 10.1038/469044a.
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2011 Feb;7(2):62. doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2010.204.

Amyloid-β oligomers may cause cognitive deficits in Alzheimer's disease by 
impairing neuronal NMDA-type glutamate receptors, whose function is regulated by 
the receptor tyrosine kinase EphB2. Here we show that amyloid-β oligomers bind 
to the fibronectin repeats domain of EphB2 and trigger EphB2 degradation in the 
proteasome. To determine the pathogenic importance of EphB2 depletions in 
Alzheimer's disease and related models, we used lentiviral constructs to reduce 
or increase neuronal expression of EphB2 in memory centres of the mouse brain. 
In nontransgenic mice, knockdown of EphB2 mediated by short hairpin RNA reduced 
NMDA receptor currents and impaired long-term potentiation in the dentate gyrus, 
which are important for memory formation. Increasing EphB2 expression in the 
dentate gyrus of human amyloid precursor protein transgenic mice reversed 
deficits in NMDA receptor-dependent long-term potentiation and memory 
impairments. Thus, depletion of EphB2 is critical in amyloid-β-induced neuronal 
dysfunction. Increasing EphB2 levels or function could be beneficial in 
Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.1038/nature09635
PMCID: PMC3030448
PMID: 21113149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
