---
pmid: '30967269'
title: CARK6 is involved in abscisic acid to regulate stress responses in Arabidopsis
  thaliana.
authors:
- Wang J
- Zhang Q
- Yu Q
- Peng L
- Wang J
- Dai Q
- Yang Y
- Li X
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.03.180
---

# CARK6 is involved in abscisic acid to regulate stress responses in Arabidopsis thaliana.
**Authors:** Wang J, Zhang Q, Yu Q, Peng L, Wang J, Dai Q, Yang Y, Li X
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.03.180](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.03.180)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2019 May 28;513(2):460-464. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.03.180. Epub 2019 Apr 6.

CARK6 is involved in abscisic acid to regulate stress responses in Arabidopsis 
thaliana.

Wang J(1), Zhang Q(2), Yu Q(2), Peng L(2), Wang J(2), Dai Q(3), Yang Y(2), Li 
X(4).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Bio-Resources and Eco-Environment of Ministry of Education, 
College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610065, China; College of 
Science and Biotechnology, Mianyang Teachers' College, Mianyang, 621000, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Bio-Resources and Eco-Environment of Ministry of Education, 
College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610065, China.
(3)School of Life Science and Engineering, Southwest University of Science and 
Technology, Mianyang, 621010, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Bio-Resources and Eco-Environment of Ministry of Education, 
College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610065, China. Electronic 
address: 2014322040033@stu.scu.edu.cn.

Abscisic acid (ABA), one of phytohormones, is induced in response to abiotic 
stress to mediate plant acclimation to environmental challenge. Key players of 
the ABA-signaling pathway are the ABA-binding receptors (RCAR/PYR1/PYL), which 
perceive ABA and then inhibit PP2Cs to activate SnRK2s. Here, we report that a 
putative receptor-like cytoplasmic kinase (RLCK) in Arabidopsis named CARK6, 
which is a member of cytosolic ABA receptor kinases. We confirm that CARK6 
interacts with ABA receptors, RCAR11-14 in vitro and in vivo. Induced 
overexpression of CARK6 in Arabidopsis enhances sensitivity to ABA by inhibition 
of seed germination and root elongation, and promotes the drought resistance. 
However, loss-of-function seedlings of cark6 are less sensitive to ABA and show 
reduced drought stress response with respect to water loss and stomatal 
aperture. In transgenic Arabidopsis complementation lines in the cark6 mutant 
background, stress responsivity was restored by CARK6. In conclusion, our data 
provide evidence that CARK6 plays a positive role in ABA signaling in 
Arabidopsis.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.03.180
PMID: 30967269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
