---
pmid: '8538796'
title: Spatial constraints on the recognition of phosphoproteins by the tandem SH2
  domains of the phosphatase SH-PTP2.
authors:
- Eck MJ
- Pluskey S
- Trüb T
- Harrison SC
- Shoelson SE
journal: Nature
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/379277a0
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Spatial constraints on the recognition of phosphoproteins by the tandem SH2 domains of the phosphatase SH-PTP2.
**Authors:** Eck MJ, Pluskey S, Trüb T, Harrison SC, Shoelson SE
**Journal:** Nature (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1038/379277a0](https://doi.org/10.1038/379277a0)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 1996 Jan 18;379(6562):277-80. doi: 10.1038/379277a0.

Spatial constraints on the recognition of phosphoproteins by the tandem SH2 
domains of the phosphatase SH-PTP2.

Eck MJ(1), Pluskey S, Trüb T, Harrison SC, Shoelson SE.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA.

The domain organization of many signalling proteins facilitates a segregation of 
binding, catalytic and regulatory functions. The mammalian SH2 domain protein 
tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) contain tandem SH2 domains and a single 
carboxy-terminal catalytic domain. SH-PTP1 (PTP1C, HCP) and SH-PTP2 (Syp, PTP2C, 
PTP1D) function downstream from tyrosine kinase-linked insulin, growth factor, 
cytokine and antigen receptors. As well as directing subcellular localization by 
binding to receptors and their substrates, the two SH2 domains of these PTPs 
function together to regulate catalysis. Here we report the structure of the 
tandem SH2 domains of SH-PTP2 in complex with monophosphopeptides. A fixed 
relative orientation of the two domains, stabilized by a disulphide bond and a 
small hydrophobic patch within the interface, separates the peptide binding 
sites by approximately 40 A. The defined orientation of the SH2 domains in the 
structure, and data showing that peptide orientation and spacing between binding 
sites is critical for enzymatic activation, suggest that spatial constraints are 
important in this multidomain protein-protein interaction.

DOI: 10.1038/379277a0
PMID: 8538796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
