---
pmid: '8861906'
title: Spatial and temporal controls target pal-1 blastomere-specification activity
  to a single blastomere lineage in C. elegans embryos.
authors:
- Hunter CP
- Kenyon C
journal: Cell
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81340-9
---

# Spatial and temporal controls target pal-1 blastomere-specification activity to a single blastomere lineage in C. elegans embryos.
**Authors:** Hunter CP, Kenyon C
**Journal:** Cell (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81340-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81340-9)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 1996 Oct 18;87(2):217-26. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81340-9.

Spatial and temporal controls target pal-1 blastomere-specification activity to 
a single blastomere lineage in C. elegans embryos.

Hunter CP(1), Kenyon C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California, San 
Francisco 94143-0554, USA.

The early asymmetric cleavages of Caenorhabditis elegans embryos produce 
blastomeres with distinct developmental potentials. Here, we show that the 
caudal-like homeodomain protein PAL-1 is required to specify the somatic 
identity of one posterior blastomere in the 4 cell embryo. We find that pal-1 
activity is sequentially restricted to this blastomere. First, at the 4 cell 
stage, it is translated only in the two posterior blastomeres. Then, its 
function is restricted to one of these blastomeres. This second targeting step 
is dependent on the activities of the posteriorly localized SKN-1 and 
asymmetrically segregated PIE-1 proteins. We propose that the segregation of 
PIE-1, combined with the temporal decay of SKN-1, targets pal-1 activity to this 
posterior lineage, thus coupling the regulation of this conserved posterior 
patterning gene to asymmetric cell cleavages.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81340-9
PMID: 8861906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
