---
pmid: '10694380'
title: Two homologues encoding human UDP-glucose:glycoprotein glucosyltransferase
  differ in mRNA expression and enzymatic activity.
authors:
- Arnold SM
- Fessler LI
- Fessler JH
- Kaufman RJ
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi9916473
---

# Two homologues encoding human UDP-glucose:glycoprotein glucosyltransferase differ in mRNA expression and enzymatic activity.
**Authors:** Arnold SM, Fessler LI, Fessler JH, Kaufman RJ
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi9916473](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi9916473)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2000 Mar 7;39(9):2149-63. doi: 10.1021/bi9916473.

Two homologues encoding human UDP-glucose:glycoprotein glucosyltransferase 
differ in mRNA expression and enzymatic activity.

Arnold SM(1), Fessler LI, Fessler JH, Kaufman RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 
University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

UDP-glucose:glycoprotein glucosyltransferase (UGT) is a soluble protein of the 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) that operates as a gatekeeper for quality control by 
preventing transport of improperly folded glycoproteins out of the ER. We report 
the isolation of two cDNAs encoding human UDP-glucose:glycoprotein 
glucosyltransferase homologues. HUGT1 encodes a 1555 amino acid polypeptide 
that, upon cleavage of an N-terminal signal peptide, is predicted to produce a 
soluble 173 kDa protein with the ER retrieval signal REEL. HUGT2 encodes a 1516 
amino acid polypeptide that also contains a signal peptide and the ER retrieval 
signal HDEL. HUGT1 shares 55% identity with HUGT2 and 31-45% identity with 
Drosophila, Caenorhabditis elegans, and Schizosaccharomyces pombe homologues, 
with most extensive conservation of residues in the carboxy-terminal fifth of 
the protein, the proposed catalytic domain. HUGT1 is expressed as multiple mRNA 
species that are induced to similar extents upon disruption of protein folding 
in the ER. In contrast, HUGT2 is transcribed as a single mRNA species that is 
not induced under similar conditions. HUGT1 and HUGT2 mRNAs are broadly 
expressed in multiple tissues and differ slightly in their tissue distribution. 
The HUGT1 and HUGT2 cDNAs were expressed by transient transfection in COS-1 
monkey cells to obtain similar levels of protein localized to the ER. Extracts 
from HUGT1-transfected cells displayed a 27-fold increase in the transfer of 
[(14)C]glucose from UDP-[(14)C]glucose to denatured substrates. Despite its high 
degree of sequence identity with HUGT1, the expressed recombinant HUGT2 protein 
was not functional under the conditions optimized for HUGT1. Site-directed 
alanine mutagenesis within a highly conserved region of HUGT1 identified four 
residues that are essential for catalytic function.

DOI: 10.1021/bi9916473
PMID: 10694380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
