---
pmid: '12221011'
title: Sonic hedgehog activates mesenchymal Gli1 expression during prostate ductal
  bud formation.
authors:
- Lamm ML
- Catbagan WS
- Laciak RJ
- Barnett DH
- Hebner CM
- Gaffield W
- Walterhouse D
- Iannaccone P
- Bushman W
journal: Dev Biol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/dbio.2002.0774
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Sonic hedgehog activates mesenchymal Gli1 expression during prostate ductal bud formation.
**Authors:** Lamm ML, Catbagan WS, Laciak RJ, Barnett DH, Hebner CM, Gaffield W, Walterhouse D, Iannaccone P, Bushman W
**Journal:** Dev Biol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1006/dbio.2002.0774](https://doi.org/10.1006/dbio.2002.0774)

## Abstract

1. Dev Biol. 2002 Sep 15;249(2):349-66. doi: 10.1006/dbio.2002.0774.

Sonic hedgehog activates mesenchymal Gli1 expression during prostate ductal bud 
formation.

Lamm ML(1), Catbagan WS, Laciak RJ, Barnett DH, Hebner CM, Gaffield W, 
Walterhouse D, Iannaccone P, Bushman W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago, IL 
60611, USA.

Ductal budding in the developing prostate is a testosterone-dependent event that 
involves signaling between the urogenital sinus epithelium (UGE) and urogenital 
sinus mesenchyme (UGM). We show here that ductal bud formation is associated 
with focused expression of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) in the epithelium of nascent 
prostate buds and in the growing tips of elongating prostate ducts. This pattern 
of localized Shh expression occurs in response to testosterone stimulation. The 
gene for the Shh receptor, Ptc1, is expressed in the UGM, as are the members of 
the Gli gene family of transcriptional regulators (Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3). 
Expression of Ptc1, Gli1, and Gli2 is localized primarily to mesenchyme 
surrounding prostate buds, whereas Gli3 is expressed diffusely throughout the 
UGM. A strong dependence of Gli1 (and Ptc1) expression on Shh signaling is 
demonstrated by induction of expression in both the intact urogenital sinus and 
the isolated UGM by exogenous SHH peptide. A similar dependence of Gli2 and Gli3 
expression on Shh is not observed. Nonetheless, the chemical inhibitor of Shh 
signaling, cyclopamine, produced a graded inhibition of Gli gene expression 
(Gli1>Gli2>Gli3) in urogenital sinus explants that was paralleled by a severe 
inhibition of ductal budding.

DOI: 10.1006/dbio.2002.0774
PMID: 12221011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
