---
pmid: '30963583'
title: 'Characterizing the Bioluminescence of the Humboldt Squid, Dosidicus gigas
  (d''Orbigny, 1835): One of the Largest Luminescent Animals in the World.'
authors:
- Galeazzo GA
- Mirza JD
- Dorr FA
- Pinto E
- Stevani CV
- Lohrmann KB
- Oliveira AG
journal: Photochem Photobiol
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/php.13106
---

# Characterizing the Bioluminescence of the Humboldt Squid, Dosidicus gigas (d'Orbigny, 1835): One of the Largest Luminescent Animals in the World.
**Authors:** Galeazzo GA, Mirza JD, Dorr FA, Pinto E, Stevani CV, Lohrmann KB, Oliveira AG
**Journal:** Photochem Photobiol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/php.13106](https://doi.org/10.1111/php.13106)

## Abstract

1. Photochem Photobiol. 2019 Sep;95(5):1179-1185. doi: 10.1111/php.13106. Epub
2019  May 8.

Characterizing the Bioluminescence of the Humboldt Squid, Dosidicus gigas 
(d'Orbigny, 1835): One of the Largest Luminescent Animals in the World.

Galeazzo GA(1), Mirza JD(1)(2), Dorr FA(3), Pinto E(3), Stevani CV(4), Lohrmann 
KB(5), Oliveira AG(1).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Oceanografia Física, Química e Geológica, Instituto 
Oceanográfico, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Departamento de Química, Instituto de Ciências Ambientais, Químicas e 
Farmacêuticas, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Diadema, SP, Brazil.
(3)Departamento de Análises Clínicas e Toxicológicas, Faculdade de Ciências 
Farmacêuticas, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(4)Departamento de Química Fundamental, Instituto de Química, Universidade de 
São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(5)Departamento de Biología Marina, Facultad de Ciencias del Mar, Centro 
Innovación Acuícola Aquapacífico, Universidad Católica del Norte, Coquimbo, 
Chile.

Bioluminescence is found in a number of cephalopods, such as Watasenia 
scintillans and Sthenoteuthis oualaniensis; however, many species remain poorly 
studied, including the Humboldt squid, Dosidicus gigas. This is the largest 
member of the Ommastrephidae family and grows to 2 m in length, making it one of 
the largest luminescent animals ever observed. Humboldt squid have small 
photophores all over their body that emit a brilliant blue luminescence. Using 
lyophilized photophores from squid caught off the coast of Chile, experiments 
were conducted to isolate the luciferin and protein involved in its 
bioluminescence. Methanolic extracts of the photophores were shown to contain 
dehydrocoelenterazine, and a membrane-bound photoprotein was shown to be 
involved. This photoprotein was purified using ion exchange chromatography, and 
SDS-PAGE showed a clean band of approximately 60 kDa. The excised band was 
analyzed by LC/MS, and the obtained data were compared against the transcriptome 
data of D. gigas, allowing us to find two gene products which displayed high 
coverage (>80%), the enzymes symplectin and vanin-2, which potentially associate 
with light emission process in this organism. Finally, the purified photoprotein 
was shown to emit a blue light (470 nm) in the presence of 
dehydrocoelenterazine.

© 2019 American Society for Photobiology.

DOI: 10.1111/php.13106
PMID: 30963583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
