---
pmid: '22337587'
title: Protein interaction profiling of the p97 adaptor UBXD1 points to a role for
  the complex in modulating ERGIC-53 trafficking.
authors:
- Haines DS
- Lee JE
- Beauparlant SL
- Kyle DB
- den Besten W
- Sweredoski MJ
- Graham RL
- Hess S
- Deshaies RJ
journal: Mol Cell Proteomics
year: '2012'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3433925
doi: 10.1074/mcp.M111.016444
---

# Protein interaction profiling of the p97 adaptor UBXD1 points to a role for the complex in modulating ERGIC-53 trafficking.
**Authors:** Haines DS, Lee JE, Beauparlant SL, Kyle DB, den Besten W, Sweredoski MJ, Graham RL, Hess S, Deshaies RJ
**Journal:** Mol Cell Proteomics (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1074/mcp.M111.016444](https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M111.016444)
**PMC:** [PMC3433925](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3433925/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2012 Jun;11(6):M111.016444. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M111.016444.
 Epub 2012 Feb 14.

Protein interaction profiling of the p97 adaptor UBXD1 points to a role for the 
complex in modulating ERGIC-53 trafficking.

Haines DS(1), Lee JE, Beauparlant SL, Kyle DB, den Besten W, Sweredoski MJ, 
Graham RL, Hess S, Deshaies RJ.

Author information:
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Temple University 
School of Medicine, 3307 North Broad Street, Philadelphia, 19104 Pennsylvania, 
USA.

UBXD1 is a member of the poorly understood subfamily of p97 adaptors that do not 
harbor a ubiquitin association domain or bind ubiquitin-modified proteins. Of 
clinical importance, p97 mutants found in familial neurodegenerative conditions 
Inclusion Body Myopathy Paget's disease of the bone and/or Frontotemporal 
Dementia and Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis are defective at interacting with 
UBXD1, indicating that functions regulated by a p97-UBXD1 complex are altered in 
these diseases. We have performed liquid chromatography-mass spectrometric 
analysis of UBXD1-interacting proteins to identify pathways in which UBXD1 
functions. UBXD1 displays prominent association with ERGIC-53, a hexameric type 
I integral membrane protein that functions in protein trafficking. The 
UBXD1-ERGIC-53 interaction requires the N-terminal 10 residues of UBXD1 and the 
C-terminal cytoplasmic 12 amino acid tail of ERGIC-53. Use of p97 and E1 enzyme 
inhibitors indicate that complex formation between UBXD1 and ERGIC-53 requires 
the ATPase activity of p97, but not ubiquitin modification. We also performed 
SILAC-based quantitative proteomic profiling to identify ERGIC-53 interacting 
proteins. This analysis identified known (e.g. COPI subunits) and novel 
(Rab3GAP1/2 complex involved in the fusion of vesicles at the cell membrane) 
interactions that are also mediated through the C terminus of the protein. 
Immunoprecipitation and Western blotting analysis confirmed the proteomic 
interaction data and it also revealed that an UBXD1-Rab3GAP association requires 
the ERGIC-53 binding domain of UBXD1. Localization studies indicate that UBXD1 
modules the sub-cellular trafficking of ERGIC-53, including promoting movement 
to the cell membrane. We propose that p97-UBXD1 modulates the trafficking of 
ERGIC-53-containing vesicles by controlling the interaction of transport factors 
with the cytoplasmic tail of ERGIC-53.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M111.016444
PMCID: PMC3433925
PMID: 22337587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

UBXD1 is a member of the poorly understood subfamily of p97 adaptors that do not harbor a ubiquitin association domain or bind ubiquitin-modified proteins. Of clinical importance, p97 mutants found in familial neurodegenerative conditions Inclusion Body Myopathy Paget's disease of the bone and/or Frontotemporal Dementia and A myotrophic L ateral S clerosis are defective at interacting with UBXD1, indicating that functions regulated by a p97-UBXD1 complex are altered in these diseases. We have performed liquid chromatography-mass spectrometric analysis of UBXD1-interacting proteins to identify pathways in which UBXD1 functions. UBXD1 displays prominent association with ERGIC-53, a hexameric type I integral membrane protein that functions in protein trafficking. The UBXD1-ERGIC-53 interaction requires the N-terminal 10 residues of UBXD1 and the C-terminal cytoplasmic 12 amino acid tail of ERGIC-53. Use of p97 and E1 enzyme inhibitors indicate that complex formation between UBXD1 and ERGIC-53 requires the ATPase activity of p97, but not ubiquitin modification. We also performed SILAC-based quantitative proteomic profiling to identify ERGIC-53 interacting proteins. This analysis identified known ( e.g. COPI subunits) and novel (Rab3GAP1/2 complex involved in the fusion of vesicles at the cell membrane) interactions that are also mediated through the C terminus of the protein. Immunoprecipitation and Western blotting analysis confirmed the proteomic interaction data and it also revealed that an UBXD1-Rab3GAP association requires the ERGIC-53 binding domain of UBXD1. Localization studies indicate that UBXD1 modules the sub-cellular trafficking of ERGIC-53, including promoting movement to the cell membrane. We propose that p97-UBXD1 modulates the trafficking of ERGIC-53-containing vesicles by controlling the interaction of transport factors with the cytoplasmic tail of ERGIC-53.

RESULTS

Mass spectrometric analysis identifies ERGIC-53 as a high abundance UBXD1 interacting protein. We first generated a H1299 derived cell line that allows for regulated expression control of a C-terminally FLAG-tagged UBXD1 protein (UBXD1 FLAG ) using the Drosophila hormone ponasterone ( Fig. 1 A ). After generation of this line, cells were exposed to two different concentrations (0.1 and 0.3 μ m ) of hormone, which results in modest overexpression of UBXD1 FLAG (in the two- fivefold range over endogenous UBXD1) ( Fig. 1 A ). UBXD1 FLAG and interacting proteins were immunopurified from extracts using anti-FLAG antibody-conjugated beads and subjected to mass spectrometric analysis using an LTQ-FT instrument. Table I provides a list of proteins present in the UBXD1 FLAG samples and not present in control anti-FLAG immunoprecipitations from mock-induced cells harboring the empty vector. As expected, UBXD1 and p97 were abundant constituents of both UBXD1 FLAG immunoprecipitates. The protein that yielded the next highest number of spectra counts was ERGIC-53. Also present in both UBXD1 FLAG immunoprecipitations was the actin binding protein LIMA1 (also called EPLIN1), SEPT9 and DST ( Table I ). CAV1, a recently identified UBXD1 interacting protein ( 10 ), was detected but the number of spectral counts for CAV1 was low and did not reach statistical significance.

In addition to performing the analysis with the inducible H1299 system, we characterized FLAG UBXD1 interacting proteins using transiently transfected 293T cells. For these studies, we used SILAC (stable isotope labeling with amino acids in culture) and an LTQ-Orbitrap instrument. Samples were comprised of a 1:1 mixture of FLAG immunoprecipitates from “light” 293T cells (cultured in media supplemented with standard lysine and arginine) that had been transiently transfected with UBXD1 FLAG plasmid versus “heavy” 293T cells (cultured in media containing Arg6 (U- 13 C6) and Lys8 (U- 13 C6, U- 15 N2)) that had been transfected with the empty vector control. Table II provides a list of proteins that were present in UBXD1 FLAG immunoprecipitates. These proteins were not found in the control immunoprecipitations ( i.e. no heavy peptides found). P97, UBXD1 and ERGIC-53 were present at high abundance. Numerous proteins were also identified in this second round of analysis, including 3 additional p97 interacting proteins (UBXD8, UBXD9, NPL4), ERGIC-53 binding proteins (MCFD2 and COPA) and others with diverse functions (CAD, ATP5B, PRKDC, IRS4, FLOT1). We also found high abundance proteins that are routinely found in shotgun mass spectrometry experiments, including ribonucleotide protein HNRNPU, translation elongation factor EEF1A2, transcription factors RUVBL1 and RUVBL2 and components of various chaperone systems (GRP78, UGGT1, HSPA1A, CCT8). TUBA1C and TUBB6 were identified as well, which is interesting as numerous tubulin proteins were later found to be highly enriched in FLAG ERGIC-53 immunoprecipitations.

We decided to focus our follow-up studies on ERGIC-53, the most dominant novel UBXD1 FLAG interacting protein identified in the three different experiments. ERGIC-53 is a mannose-binding ER resident protein that participates in the early part of the secretory pathway (reviewed in 26 , 27 ). It contains a single-pass transmembrane domain oriented such that the vast majority of the molecule is present in the lumen of the ER, with only 12 C-terminal residues at the C terminus exposed to the cytosol. Like p97, ERGIC-53 exists as a hexamer. The current working model is that ERGIC-53 binds ER-localized client proteins on its own or via its co-factor MCFD2. Upon client binding, ERGIC-53 undergoes COPII-dependent budding from the ER, which requires its C-terminal diphenylalanine motif. ERGIC-53 containing vesicles then move to a structure called the ER-Golgi Intermediate Compartment (ERGIC), where they fuse and deliver client proteins for further sorting and trafficking. ERGIC-53 is recycled from the ERGIC to the ER by COPI-complex-dependent budding, which is specified by two lysine residues that precede the C-terminal phenylalanine residues.

We first sought to validate the mass spectrometry findings by conventional immunoprecipitation and Western blotting. Two concentrations of ponasterone were used for this verification experiment: one (0.03 μ m ) that results in the production of UBXD1 FLAG at physiologically relevant levels and another (3 μ m ) that results in ∼10-fold overproduction ( Fig. 1 A ). After induction, cells were harvested, extracts prepared, and immunoprecipitations carried out with anti-FLAG beads. Immunoprecipitated proteins were resolved by SDS-PAGE, transferred to nitrocellulose membranes and probed with anti-FLAG and anti-ERGIC-53 antibodies. As shown in Fig. 1 B , endogenous ERGIC-53 was present in both anti-FLAG immunoprecipitates.

ERGIC-53 interacts specifically with UBXD1. We next assessed if ERGIC-53 associates with other UBX domain-containing p97 adaptors. For this experiment, expression constructs encoding 10 different FLAG-tagged UBX proteins were transiently transfected into H1299 cells. Protein extracts were prepared and immunoprecipitations using anti-FLAG beads were performed as described above. Western blotting was then carried out with FLAG, ERGIC-53, and p97 antibodies. As shown in Fig. 2 , UBXD1 FLAG was the only UBX domain-containing adaptor that bound ERGIC-53.

N-terminal region of UBXD1 and C-terminal tail of ERGIC-53 are required for complex formation. During the course of testing for interactions between ERGIC-53 and the various p97 adaptors, we noticed that whereas UBXD1 FLAG was proficient at binding endogenous ERGIC-53, N-terminally-tagged FLAG UBXD1 was not ( Fig. 2 ). These results raised the possibility that the N terminus of UBXD1 is important for ERGIC-53 binding. To test this idea, we generated a series of N-terminal UBXD1 FLAG deletion mutants and examined their ability to bind endogenous ERGIC-53 and p97 in transiently transfected H1299 cells. As shown in Fig. 3 A , deletion of the first 10 amino acids of UBXD1 FLAG resulted in the loss of binding to ERGIC-53, but not p97. We next performed alanine-scanning mutagenesis to identify individual amino acids within this region that are required for ERGIC-53 association. Fig. 3 B shows that mutating N-terminal residues 2, 4, 5, 7, and 8 compromised the ability of UBXD1 FLAG to associate with ERGIC-53.

Given the known topology of ERGIC-53 in the ER membrane, we reasoned that the last 12 amino acids of ERGIC-53 mediate binding to UBXD1. To test this, cells were co-transfected with constructs encoding C-terminally HA-tagged UBXD1 (UBXD1 HA ) and expression plasmids encoding N-terminally FLAG-tagged ERGIC-53 ( FLAG ERGIC-53) or a mutant lacking the last 12 amino acids ( FLAG ERGIC-53ΔC). Extracts were prepared and immunoprecipitations were performed with anti-HA conjugated beads. Westerns were then carried out with anti-FLAG and anti-UBXD1 antibodies. As shown in Fig. 3 C , deletion of the C-terminal 12 residues of FLAG ERGIC-53 resulted in the loss of UBXD1 HA binding.

UBXD1-ERGIC-53 association is suppressed by the p97 inhibitor DBeQ, but not the E1 ubiquitin activation enzyme inhibitor PYR-41. We next wanted to assess if the interaction between UBXD1 and ERGIC-53 requires the enzymatic function of the ATPase or ubiquitin modification. Cells harboring ponasterone-inducible UBXD1 FLAG were exposed to hormone for 6 h in the absence and presence of the p97 inhibitor DBeQ ( 28 ) or the E1 ubiquitin activation enzyme inhibitor PYR-41 ( 29 ). After treatments, cells were harvested, extracts were prepared, and immunoprecipitations performed with anti-FLAG antibody. The amounts of endogenous ERGIC-53 in these immunoprecipitations was determined by Western blotting. As shown in Fig. 4 A , treatment of cells with DBeQ suppressed an interaction between UBXD1 FLAG and ERGIC-53. The E1 ubiquitin activation enzyme inhibitor PYR-41 had no apparent effect on UBXD1 FLAG association with ERGIC-53. Similar results were obtained in 293T cells transiently transfected with UBXD1 FLAG ( Fig. 4 B ). Treatment of transfected cells with 10 μ m DBeQ for 8 h inhibited binding of endogenous ERGIC-53 to UBXD1 FLAG , without altering p97-UBXD1 FLAG interaction. PYR-41 exposure had no discernable effect on the binding of UBXD1 FLAG to ERGIC-53 ( Fig. 4 B ).

Quantitative mass spectrometric analyses for ERGIC-53 interacting proteins. We next characterized the interactome for ERGIC-53. For these experiments, we performed SILAC mass spectrometric analysis of “light” labeled 293T cells that had been transfected with the FLAG ERGIC-53 expression construct versus “heavy” labeled 293T cells that had been transfected with the empty vector control. Table III provides a list of proteins that were detected in FLAG ERGIC-53 but not in control immunoprecipitates in two independent experiments. Interactions were detected with proteins that make up the COPI complex (COPA, COPB2, COP3, COPB1) as well as with Rab3GAP1 and Rab3GAP2. COPI proteins promote the retrograde transport of ERGIC-53 to the ER ( 30 ). Rab3GAP1 and Rab3GAP2 form a stable heteromeric complex and regulate the fusion of vesicles to the plasma membrane ( 31 ). Their interactions with ERGIC-53 have yet to be reported. Numerous tubulin proteins (TUBB2C, TUBB3, TUBB4, TUBB2, TUBB), which could play a role in facilitating transport of ERGIC-53 containing vesicles, were also present in FLAG ERGIC immunoprecipitations. Not surprisingly, a few chaperones were present in these immunoprecipitations as well, including HSPA8, HSPA1A/HSPA1B, and DNAJC7. Curiously, although we did identify p97 peptides in the FLAG ERGIC-53 immunoprecipitates, we did not detect UBXD1. There are a couple of possible explanations for this, including that the amount of interacting UBXD1 is below our detection limits and/or that p97 can interact with ERGIC-53 via UBXD1 independent mechanisms, perhaps even with misfolded polypetides during the process of ERAD. It is also curious that we did not identify any COPII proteins in this analysis. The percentage of ERGIC-53-COPII complexes at any one time may be small or just highly unstable under the conditions used here.

Identification of proteins that require the C-terminal tail of ERGIC-53 for binding. Considering that UBXD1 binds to the C-terminal tail of ERGIC-53 and may regulate interactions that also occur there, we next wanted to identify FLAG ERGIC-53 binding proteins that require this tail for association. SILAC-based quantitative proteomics was again performed, measuring the level of enriched FLAG ERGIC-53 interacting proteins in cells transfected with full length FLAG ERGIC-53 versus the C-terminal deletion mutant. Table IV displays a list of proteins whose peptide spectral counts were significantly decreased more than 3 fold in FLAG ERGIC-53ΔC immunoprecipitates as well as the ratio of known proteins that are part of these complexes that were in both FLAG ERGIC and FLAG ERGIC-53 immunoprecipitation. Rab3GAPs and COPI complex proteins were the only proteins found to require the C-terminal tail of FLAG ERGIC-53 for binding.

An interaction between ERGIC-53 and the Rab3GAP complex has yet to be reported and we thus wanted to verify this association by immunoprecipitation and Western blotting. We also wanted to test if UBXD1, ERGIC-53 and Rab3GAPs can form a ternary complex. As shown in Fig. 5 , FLAG ERGIC-53 interacted with endogenous Rab3GAP1 and Rab3GAP2 and these associations were not observed with a FLAG ERGIC-53 mutant lacking the C-terminal 12 residues of the protein. Fig. 5 also shows that whereas RabGAP1 was present in UBXD1 FLAG immunoprecipitates, it was not present in those using the UBXD1Δ10 FLAG mutant that was unable to bind ERGIC-53. We were unable to detect Rab3GAP2 in the UBXD1 FLAG immunoprecipitations, presumably because of the insensitive nature of the anti-Rab3GAP2 antibody used here. Notwithstanding, these studies indicate that an ERGIC-53 hexamer can accommodate the docking of multiple protein complexes to its C-terminal tail.

UBXD1 modulates ERGIC-53 localization. As the C-terminal tail of ERGIC-53 plays an important role in controlling its localization in cells via interaction with various protein trafficking complexes (reviewed in 26 , 27 ), we wanted to evaluate if UBXD1 FLAG expression influences the subcellular localization of ERGIC-53. We again used the ponasterone inducible system for this analysis and included cells that inducibly express the UBXD1Δ10 FLAG mutant that is ERGIC-53 binding deficient. Cells harboring the empty vector control, UBXD1 FLAG or UBXD1Δ10 FLAG were exposed to 1 μ m ponasterone for 48 h. Cells were fixed and localization of endogenous ERGIC-53 and induced UBXD1 FLAG was determined by indirect immunofluorescence with rabbit anti-ERGIC-53 and mouse anti-UBXD1 antibodies. We observed two distinct types of altered ERGIC-53 localization phenotypes upon expression of UBXD1 FLAG and in both cases, UBXD1 FLAG staining overlapped with ERGIC-53. First, there was an increase in the percentage of ERGIC-53 protein present in cytoplasmic vacuoles (noted by arrows with dashed lines) ( Fig. 6 ). This was observed in 50–60% of UBXD1 FLAG expressing cells. Second, we observed an enhancement in the amount of ERGIC-53 localized close to or at the cell membrane in ∼20% of UBXD1 FLAG positive cells (noted by arrows with solid lines). Cytoplasmic vacuole or membrane localization of ERGIC-53 was not observed in cells expressing UBXD1Δ10 FLAG ( Fig. 6 ).

DISCUSSION

UBXD1 is a member of the non-UBA domain family of p97 adaptors and it has recently been shown to be defective at binding p97 mutants found in familial IBMPFD and ALS ( 10 ). These results indicate that processes requiring the activity of a p97-UBXD1 complex are altered in human disease and underscore the importance of elucidating its biochemical and molecular activities. To begin to uncover these functions, we used liquid chromatography mass spectrometry based approaches to identify interacting partners for UBXD1. We have found that UBXD1 interacts strongly with ERGIC-53, a molecule that functions in protein trafficking (reviewed in 26 , 27 ). This interaction is very specific (not observed with other UBX proteins) and requires the amino-terminal domain of UBXD1 and the carboxy-terminal tail of ERGIC-53. Interestingly, UBXD1-ERGIC-53 interaction is suppressed by the p97 inhibitor DBeQ that blocks the ATPase activity of the enzyme ( 28 ). These results indicate that formation of a stable UBXD1-ERGIC-53 complex requires the enzymatic activity of p97. We have also found that UBXD1-ERGIC-53 association is unaffected by the E1 ubiquitin activation enzyme inhibitor. This suggests that UBXD1-ERGIC-53 interaction is not mediated by ubiquitination and indicates that the non-UBA family of p97 adaptors can couple p97 to substrates in an ubiquitin-independent manner.

What might be the biochemical consequence of these associations? Based on the data presented here, we propose that p97 and UBXD1 cooperate in regulating the association of trafficking factors with the C-terminal tails of hexameric ERGIC-53. P97 and UBXD1 may work together in displacing proteins that interact with the ERGIC-53 tails and/or promote the formation of new stable interactions, including with UBXD1 itself. As we find that Rab3GAP1 interacts with UBXD1 through ERGIC-53, it is possible that the tails of a single ERGIC-53 hexamer can link together different complexes that in cooperation modulate ERGIC-53 trafficking.

ERGIC-53 is known to cycle between the ER, ERGIC, and Golgi (reviewed in 26, 27). It has also been shown that upon transient overproduction, ERGIC-53 localizes to the cell surface, where it can subsequently undergo endocytosis ( 32 ). This cell surface localization was deemed aberrant and attributed to the saturation of cofactors required for intracellular retention ( 32 ). We would like to suggest that a pool of endogenous ERGIC-53 naturally localizes to the plasma membrane, perhaps in a regulated manner, and is recycled by endocytosis. Three observations support this idea. First, proteomics studies have identified endogenous ERGIC-53 in purified early endosomes ( 33 ). Second, UBXD1 can promote the localization of endogenous ERGIC-53 to the cell periphery. Third, both transfected and endogenous ERGIC-53 (this is deduced based on detecting an interaction between UBXD1 and Rab3GAP1 that is dependent on the ERGIC-53 binding domain of the protein) bind Rab3GAPs, a protein complex involved in promoting vesicle fusion at the cell membrane ( 31 ). If this speculation is correct, it will be interesting to define protein constituents of vesicles that contain ERGIC-53 and Rab3GAPs and what functions they confer. A number of ERGIC-53 clients have been identified, including alpha-1 antitrypsin ( 34 ), coagulation factors V/VII ( 35 ), and cathepsin C ( 36 ) and Z ( 37 ). However, considering that these are luminal and/or secreted proteins as well as their trafficking are routed through the Golgi, it seems unlikely that a p97-UBXD1 complex is promoting the movement of these ERGIC-53 clients to the cell surface. Rather, p97-UBXD1 may induce cell surface trafficking of other integral or peripheral membrane proteins that are present on ERGIC-53 positive vesicles and perhaps function at the cell surface or on endocytosed vesicles. This could even pertain to p97 and UBXD1 themselves. Interestingly, p97 and UBXD1 have recently been reported to promote endo-lysosomal sorting of ubiquitinated caveolins ( 10 ). Perhaps ERGIC-53 plays a role in the routing of p97-UBXD1 so it can function in this process. Alternatively, p97-UBXD1 may not directly regulate ERGIC-53 localization, but influence how ERGIC-53 loaded with luminal ligands is packaged into transport vesicles that move to specific locations. This could be through controlling the association/disassociation with various transport factors with the C-terminal tails or regulating the oligomerization of ERGIC-53 by binding the tails. Future studies are obviously needed to work out the mechanistic consequences of these newly discovered interactions.

UBXD1 is defective at binding p97 mutants found in familial IBMPFD and ALS ( 10 ). It will therefore be important to test if trafficking of ERGIC-53 or ERGIC-53 containing vesicles are compromised in cells harboring mutant p97. ERGIC-53 is mutated in a rare autosomal recessive clotting disorder in which the amount of its client proteins coagulation factors V and VIII are diminished in the plasma ( 38 ). Most mutations reported to date lead to absence of ERGIC-53 protein and there has yet to be any report of other abnormalities in these individuals. It is therefore unlikely that loss of ERGIC-53 function alone is causal for IBMPFD and ALS phenotypes in patients with mutant p97. A recent study has shown that deletion of ERGIC-53 alleles in mice results in a modest decrease in factor V and VII levels in the serum and interestingly, a partially penetrant, perinatal embryonic lethality ( 39 ). Thus, ERGIC-53 is likely to have yet to be discovered functions that are influenced by polymorphic alleles. If so, the presence of these alleles in situations of defective p97-UBXD1 regulated ERGIC-53 trafficking may contribute to IBMPFD and/or ALS. Alternatively, loss of p97-UBXD1 function may result in a gain of ERGIC-53 activity that promotes these diseases. Future experiments using loss of functional approaches will address the functional role of p97-UBXD1 in the trafficking of ERGIC-53 and ERGIC-53 containing vesicles and if these processes are disturbed in cells harboring mutant p97. As UBXD1 shows high expression in neurons ( 40 ), it is likely that these cells will be the most appropriate for future studies investigating the role of UBXD1 in modulating the trafficking of ERGIC-53 containing vesicles, defining how this activity impinges on cellular processes, and determining if alterations in this pathway contribute to neurodegeneration.
