---
pmid: '8666386'
title: 'Sequence of human tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase (TDO2): presence of a glucocorticoid
  response-like element composed of a GTT repeat and an intronic CCCCT repeat.'
authors:
- Comings DE
- Muhleman D
- Dietz G
- Sherman M
- Forest GL
journal: Genomics
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/geno.1995.9990
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Sequence of human tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase (TDO2): presence of a glucocorticoid response-like element composed of a GTT repeat and an intronic CCCCT repeat.
**Authors:** Comings DE, Muhleman D, Dietz G, Sherman M, Forest GL
**Journal:** Genomics (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1006/geno.1995.9990](https://doi.org/10.1006/geno.1995.9990)

## Abstract

1. Genomics. 1995 Sep 20;29(2):390-6. doi: 10.1006/geno.1995.9990.

Sequence of human tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase (TDO2): presence of a 
glucocorticoid response-like element composed of a GTT repeat and an intronic 
CCCCT repeat.

Comings DE(1), Muhleman D, Dietz G, Sherman M, Forest GL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope 
Medical Center, Duarte, California 91010, USA.

Abnormalities in serotonin levels have been implicated in a wide range of 
psychiatric disorders. Tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase is the rate-limiting enzyme in 
the catabolism of tryptophan, the precursor of serotonin. As such it is a 
potential major candidate gene in psychiatric genetics. The regulatory, intron, 
and exon regions of the human TDO2 gene have been sequenced. Twelve exons were 
identified. The amino acid sequence of the enzyme was 88% homologous to that of 
the rat. Compared to the rat, the regulatory region of the human TDO2 gene had 
an insertion of approximately 1064 bp of random DNA beginning at -293 bp and 
extending to -1357 bp. This displaced the glucocorticoid response element (GRE) 
occurring at -1174 bp in the rat to -1500 in the human. The proximal GRE at -419 
in the rat was missing in the human. However, within the DNA insert there was a 
GRE-like microsatellite region containing multiple GTT repeats plus additional 
GT(n) sequences. This could produce several staggered regions of the sequence 
TGTTGTnnnTGTTGT similar to a GRE consensus sequence of TGTTCAnnnTGTTCT. The 
intron regions 5' and 3' to each exon were sequenced This showed a HIS --> Val 
mutation polymorphism in exon 7. Three introns, 1,5, and 6, were completely 
sequenced and examined for polymorphism. This identified two polymorphisms 
consisting of G -- >T and G --> A mutations 2 bp apart in intron 6. The 3' end 
of intron 5 showed an extensive CCCT pentanucleotide repeat that was markedly 
polymorphic. These polymorphisms allow the TDO2 gene to be examined for a 
possible role in psychiatric disorders.

DOI: 10.1006/geno.1995.9990
PMID: 8666386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
