---
pmid: '29039458'
title: DNA polymerase 5 acetylation by Eso1 is essential for Schizosaccharomyces pombe
  viability.
authors:
- Chen Z
- Cao H
- Lu Y
- Ren Q
- Sun L
journal: Int J Mol Med
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2017.3192
---

# DNA polymerase 5 acetylation by Eso1 is essential for Schizosaccharomyces pombe viability.
**Authors:** Chen Z, Cao H, Lu Y, Ren Q, Sun L
**Journal:** Int J Mol Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.3892/ijmm.2017.3192](https://doi.org/10.3892/ijmm.2017.3192)

## Abstract

1. Int J Mol Med. 2017 Dec;40(6):1907-1913. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2017.3192. Epub
2017  Oct 16.

DNA polymerase 5 acetylation by Eso1 is essential for Schizosaccharomyces pombe 
viability.

Chen Z(1), Cao H(2), Lu Y(1), Ren Q(1), Sun L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Forensic Pathology, Basic Medical College, The First Hospital, 
Jilin University, Jilin 130021, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, The First Hospital, Jilin University, Jilin 
130021, P.R. China.

Eco1/Eso1 protein plays an important role in chromosome segregation, DNA repair 
and gene regulation. Eco1 mutation induces Roberts syndrome clinically and rDNA 
transcription disorders in vivo. In this study, we examined the role of Eso1 
protein binding to polymerase 5 (Pol5) and the acetylation of Pol5 protein in 
the regulation of Schizosaccharomyces pombe (S. pombe) viability. 
Immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry assays identified Eso1 protein binding 
to Cdc2, Pol5 and Cdc21, as well as other proteins. Pol5 protein specifically 
bound to Eso1 protein, but not to the Rad30 part or Rad30 part plus the 
additional zinc finger domain of Eco1 protein. Mass spectrometry data further 
identified several acetylation or trimethylation modification sites in the 
lysine residues of the Pol5 protein. However, the mutation of the Pol5 K47 site 
to arginine was lethal to S. pombe. Eso1 protein was able to acetylate Pol5 
protein and mediate S. pombe viability. On the whole, our data indicate that the 
Eso1 interaction with Pol5 which acetylates Pol5 protein is essential for 
S. pombe viability.

DOI: 10.3892/ijmm.2017.3192
PMID: 29039458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
