---
pmid: '22058036'
title: Crystal structure of human Gadd45γ [corrected] reveals an active dimer.
authors:
- Zhang W
- Fu S
- Liu X
- Zhao X
- Zhang W
- Peng W
- Wu C
- Li Y
- Li X
- Bartlam M
- Zeng ZH
- Zhan Q
- Rao Z
journal: Protein Cell
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4875293
doi: 10.1007/s13238-011-1090-6
---

# Crystal structure of human Gadd45γ [corrected] reveals an active dimer.
**Authors:** Zhang W, Fu S, Liu X, Zhao X, Zhang W, Peng W, Wu C, Li Y, Li X, Bartlam M, Zeng ZH, Zhan Q, Rao Z
**Journal:** Protein Cell (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13238-011-1090-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13238-011-1090-6)
**PMC:** [PMC4875293](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4875293/)

## Abstract

1. Protein Cell. 2011 Oct;2(10):814-26. doi: 10.1007/s13238-011-1090-6. Epub 2011
 Nov 6.

Crystal structure of human Gadd45γ [corrected] reveals an active dimer.

Zhang W(1), Fu S, Liu X, Zhao X, Zhang W, Peng W, Wu C, Li Y, Li X, Bartlam M, 
Zeng ZH, Zhan Q, Rao Z.

Author information:
(1)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.

Erratum in
    Protein Cell. 2012 Mar;3(3):239.

The human Gadd45 protein family plays critical roles in DNA repair, negative 
growth control, genomic stability, cell cycle checkpoints and apoptosis. Here we 
report the crystal structure of human Gadd45γ [corrected], revealing a unique 
dimer formed via a bundle of four parallel helices, involving the most conserved 
residues among the Gadd45 isoforms. Mutational analysis of human Gadd45γ 
[corrected] identified a conserved, highly acidic patch in the central region of 
the dimer for interaction with the proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), 
p21 and cdc2, suggesting that the parallel dimer is the active form for the 
interaction. Cellular assays indicate that: (1) dimerization of Gadd45γ 
[corrected] is necessary for apoptosis as well as growth inhibition, and that 
cell growth inhibition is caused by both cell cycle arrest and apoptosis; (2) a 
conserved and highly acidic patch on the dimer surface, including the important 
residues Glu87 and Asp89, is a putative interface for binding proteins related 
to the cell cycle, DNA repair and apoptosis. These results reveal the mechanism 
of self-association by Gadd45 proteins and the importance of this 
self-association for their biological function.

DOI: 10.1007/s13238-011-1090-6
PMCID: PMC4875293
PMID: 22058036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
