---
pmid: '19965384'
title: The Fanconi anemia pathway promotes replication-dependent DNA interstrand cross-link
  repair.
authors:
- Knipscheer P
- Räschle M
- Smogorzewska A
- Enoiu M
- Ho TV
- Schärer OD
- Elledge SJ
- Walter JC
journal: Science
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2909596
doi: 10.1126/science.1182372
---

# The Fanconi anemia pathway promotes replication-dependent DNA interstrand cross-link repair.
**Authors:** Knipscheer P, Räschle M, Smogorzewska A, Enoiu M, Ho TV, Schärer OD, Elledge SJ, Walter JC
**Journal:** Science (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1182372](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1182372)
**PMC:** [PMC2909596](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2909596/)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2009 Dec 18;326(5960):1698-701. doi: 10.1126/science.1182372. Epub
2009  Nov 12.

The Fanconi anemia pathway promotes replication-dependent DNA interstrand 
cross-link repair.

Knipscheer P(1), Räschle M, Smogorzewska A, Enoiu M, Ho TV, Schärer OD, Elledge 
SJ, Walter JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Fanconi anemia is a human cancer predisposition syndrome caused by mutations in 
13 Fanc genes. The disorder is characterized by genomic instability and cellular 
hypersensitivity to chemicals that generate DNA interstrand cross-links (ICLs). 
A central event in the activation of the Fanconi anemia pathway is the 
mono-ubiquitylation of the FANCI-FANCD2 complex, but how this complex confers 
ICL resistance remains enigmatic. Using a cell-free system, we showed that 
FANCI-FANCD2 is required for replication-coupled ICL repair in S phase. Removal 
of FANCD2 from extracts inhibits both nucleolytic incisions near the ICL and 
translesion DNA synthesis past the lesion. Reversal of these defects requires 
ubiquitylated FANCI-FANCD2. Our results show that multiple steps of the 
essential S-phase ICL repair mechanism fail when the Fanconi anemia pathway is 
compromised.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1182372
PMCID: PMC2909596
PMID: 19965384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
