---
pmid: '18703517'
title: Intramolecular activation mechanism of the Dictyostelium LRRK2 homolog Roco
  protein GbpC.
authors:
- van Egmond WN
- Kortholt A
- Plak K
- Bosgraaf L
- Bosgraaf S
- Keizer-Gunnink I
- van Haastert PJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2662088
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M804265200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Intramolecular activation mechanism of the Dictyostelium LRRK2 homolog Roco protein GbpC.
**Authors:** van Egmond WN, Kortholt A, Plak K, Bosgraaf L, Bosgraaf S, Keizer-Gunnink I, van Haastert PJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M804265200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M804265200)
**PMC:** [PMC2662088](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2662088/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Oct 31;283(44):30412-20. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M804265200. Epub 
2008 Aug 14.

Intramolecular activation mechanism of the Dictyostelium LRRK2 homolog Roco 
protein GbpC.

van Egmond WN(1), Kortholt A, Plak K, Bosgraaf L, Bosgraaf S, Keizer-Gunnink I, 
van Haastert PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biochemistry, University of Groningen, Kerklaan 30, 9751 
NN Haren, The Netherlands.

GbpC is a large multidomain protein involved in cGMP-mediated chemotaxis in the 
cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum. GbpC belongs to the Roco family of 
proteins that often share a central core region, consisting of leucine-rich 
repeats, a Ras domain (Roc), a Cor domain, and a MAPKKKinase domain. In addition 
to this core, GbpC contains a RasGEF domain and two cGMP-binding domains. Here, 
we report on an intramolecular signaling cascade of GbpC. In vitro, the RasGEF 
domain of GbpC specifically accelerates the GDP/GTP exchange of the Roc domain. 
Moreover, cGMP binding to GbpC strongly stimulates the binding of GbpC to 
GTP-agarose, suggesting cGMP-stimulated GDP/GTP exchange at the Roc domain. The 
function of the protein in vivo was investigated by rescue analysis of the 
chemotactic defect of gbpC null cells. Mutants that lack a functional guanine 
exchange factor (GEF), Roc, or kinase domain are inactive in vivo. Together, the 
results suggest a four-step intramolecular activation mechanism of the Roco 
protein GbpC: cGMP binding to the cyclic nucleotide-binding domains, activation 
of the GEF domain, GDP/GTP exchange of Roc, and activation of the MAPKKK domain.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M804265200
PMCID: PMC2662088
PMID: 18703517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

GbpC is a large multidomain protein involved in cGMP-mediated chemotaxis in
 the cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum . GbpC belongs to the
 Roco family of proteins that often share a central core region, consisting of
 leucine-rich repeats, a Ras domain (Roc), a Cor domain, and a MAPKKKinase
 domain. In addition to this core, GbpC contains a RasGEF domain and two
 cGMP-binding domains. Here, we report on an intramolecular signaling cascade
 of GbpC. In vitro , the RasGEF domain of GbpC specifically accelerates
 the GDP/GTP exchange of the Roc domain. Moreover, cGMP binding to GbpC
 strongly stimulates the binding of GbpC to GTP-agarose, suggesting
 cGMP-stimulated GDP/GTP exchange at the Roc domain. The function of the
 protein in vivo was investigated by rescue analysis of the
 chemotactic defect of gbpC null cells. Mutants that lack a functional
 guanine exchange factor (GEF), Roc, or kinase domain are inactive in
 vivo . Together, the results suggest a four-step intramolecular activation
 mechanism of the Roco protein GbpC: cGMP binding to the cyclic
 nucleotide-binding domains, activation of the GEF domain, GDP/GTP exchange of
 Roc, and activation of the MAPKKK domain.

RESULTS

The RasGEF Domain of GbpC Specifically Activates the Roc Domain in
 Vitro —RasGEFs activate Ras proteins by catalyzing the exchange of
 GDP to GTP. In Dictyostelium , the RasGEF domain of GbpC is one of the
 at least 25 RasGEFs that were identified by computer analysis
 ( 23 ). GbpC, also referred to
 as gef-T, is the only protein in Dictyostelium known so far that
 possesses both a RasGEF domain and a Ras-like domain called Roc, making it an
 excellent candidate for intramolecular Ras-GEF-mediated Ras activation. To
 investigate the potential activation of Roc by the RasGEF domain, we performed in vitro fluorescence nucleotide exchange assays
 ( Fig. 1 A ). For these
 experiments, the Roc-Cor fragment of GbpC was expressed in E. coli and isolated as a 63-kDa protein. The isolated Roc-Cor fragment was loaded
 with the fluorescence GDP analog mGDP and incubated with excess GDP in the
 presence or absence of a GEF. Nucleotide exchange was measured in real time as
 the decay of fluorescence, caused by the release of mGDP. As a control, the
 stability of the protein was measured by incubating the mGDP-loaded protein
 without GDP, and the subsequent release of mGDP followed, using the same
 conditions. In the presence of GDP but the absence of GEF, the fluorescence
 slowly decreases, indicating that the Roc domain has a slow intrinsic exchange
 activity, like many G-proteins. The RasGEF domain of GbpC, comprising amino
 acids 1410-2008, was expressed in E. coli and isolated as an
 N-terminal His-tagged protein. The addition of GbpC-GEF to mGDP-loaded Roc-Cor
 results in the rapid decrease of fluorescence, demonstrating that the RasGEF
 domain of GbpC possesses nucleotide exchange activity on the Roc domain. Next,
 we tested the specificity of this RasGEF/Roc interaction by performing the
 same assay with several other purified Ras proteins. The addition of GbpC
 RasGEF to mGDP-loaded Dictyostelium RasG and RapA, and human N-Ras
 and Rap1 did not result in a decrease in fluorescence
 ( Fig. 1 B ). GbpC-GEF
 was also unable to accelerate nucleotide exchange on RasB, RasD, or RasS (data
 not shown). The Ras and Rap preparations used are activated by CDC25 and C3G,
 respectively, indicating that purified proteins are stable and functional
 ( 21 ). CDC25 and C3G did not
 activate nucleotide exchange of mGDP loaded Roc-Cor (data not shown). These
 results indicate that RasGEF of GbpC specifically activates Roc.

Expression of GbpC Mutants —To characterize the activation
 mechanism of GbpC in vitro and in vivo , we cloned the
 complete 7.9-kb gbpC cDNA in MB74-derived Dictyostelium expression plasmids. Furthermore, we expressed several mutated and truncated
 GbpC-derived proteins in gbpC null cells
 ( Fig. 2 B ). All of the
 strains expressing mutant GbpC proteins were tested for the presence of high
 affinity binding sites in a radio nucleotide binding assay, using 10
 n m [ 3 H]cGMP ( Fig.
 2 C ). Because GbpC is the only high affinity cGMP-target
 in Dictyostelium , comparison of the amount of these cGMP-binding
 sites between cell lines gives an accurate indication about the expression
 level of GbpC. Moreover, cGMP binding assures correct folding of at least the
 cNBDs of the protein. Expression and correct protein folding was further
 monitored with GFP fluorescence, Western blotting, and binding to GTP-agarose.
 Expression of GbpC in gbpC null cells results in a
 [ 3 H]cGMP binding activity that is about 3-fold higher compared with
 wild-type AX3 cells ( Fig.
 2 C ). Expression of GbpC, fused to a C-terminal GFP tag,
 can also be monitored on a Western blot with anti-GFP antibodies: a
 ∼320-kDa band is visible, as well as a smaller band of ∼140 kDa,
 probably representing a degradation product
 ( Fig. 3 A ). At extended
 starvation times, the presence of this product gradually decreases
 ( Fig. 3 B ). The
 functional activity of GbpC and GbpC mutants was tested in vitro for
 their ability to bind GTP and in vivo to restore the chemotactic
 defects of gbpC null cells.

cGMP Binding to GbpC Activates the Roc Domain —We
 hypothesized that cGMP binding to the cyclic nucleotide-binding domains
 (cNBDs) of GbpC could lead to the activation of GbpC. This activation could
 occur through direct activation of the kinase domain or via an intramolecular
 signaling cascade, involving Roc activation through RasGEF. In the latter
 case, this would mean that the GDP/GTP exchange activity of Roc should
 increase upon cGMP binding, resulting in an increased amount of Roc in the
 active GTP-bound state. To investigate the role of cGMP binding in protein
 function, we incubated lysates of gbpC null cells expressing GbpC-GFP
 with GTP-agarose beads. The amount of GbpC-GFP bound to these beads is a
 marker for the activation state of the Roc domain
 ( 16 , 24 ). After incubation of the
 lysate with GTP-agarose beads, the beads were extensively washed, and bound
 GbpC-GFP was eluted and detected by Western blot
 ( Fig. 3 C ). Similarly
 to LRRK1 and LRRK2, we observed that small but significant amounts of GbpC-GFP
 could be affinity-purified with GTP-agarose beads, but not in the presence of
 an excess GTP, suggesting a specific GTP-interaction. Interestingly, the
 addition of cGMP to the incubation mixture causes a 2-3-fold increase of GbpC
 binding to the GTP beads, suggesting that cGMP binding to GbpC-GFP causes
 activation of the Roc domain ( Fig.
 3 C ).

GTP Binding to the Roc Domain Is Required for GbpC
 Activity —To assess the importance of the Roc domain in the activity
 of GbpC, we expressed in gbpC null cells a GbpC mutant that was
 predicted to be unable to bind GDP and GTP. In LRRK1, mutation of
 Lys 650 caused a dramatic decrease in nucleotide affinity by the Roc
 domain, thus making the domain inactive
 ( 16 ). Other GTPases with the
 same mutation were also shown to have the same defect, which is explained by
 the inactivation of the essential P-loop that is located in the
 nucleotide-binding pocket
 ( 25 ). An alignment of the Roc
 domain of GbpC with these domains shows that the same conserved lysine is
 present at position 342, thus serving as a good candidate to inactivate the
 Roc domain ( Fig. 2 D ).
 Therefore, we created a K342N mutation in GbpC and called this mutant
 GbpC-RocInactive. To verify the loss of nucleotide binding capacity, a Roc
 domain with this mutation was purified from E. coli , analogous to the
 purification of the Roc domain that we used for the exchange assay in Fig. 1 . Contrary to the
 wild-type Roc domain, it was impossible to load the mutated Roc domain with
 GDP or GTP, confirming that the mutation indeed abolished the capacity of the
 Roc domain to bind these nucleotides (data not shown). To investigate the role
 of the Roc domain for binding to GTP beads, we performed the GTP-agarose
 pulldown assay with GbpC-RocInactive ( Fig.
 3 D ). Both GbpC-GFP and GbpC-Roc-InactiveGFP were
 expressed at similar levels in gbpC null cells. In contrast to
 GbpC-GFP, it was not possible to specifically pull down GbpC-RocInactiveGFP,
 confirming that GTP binding is mediated by the Roc domain.

GbpC plays a critical role in cAMP-induced chemotaxis of Dictyostelium cells, which was measured by a small population/drop
 assay ( 19 ). In this assay,
 starved cells are placed on NN-agar in small drops, close to drops containing
 cAMP, and observed for the ability to chemotax toward these cAMP drops.
 Chemotaxis of 7 h starved Dictyostelium cells is mediated by at least
 three signaling pathways: phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, PLA 2 , and
 a cGMP pathway ( 20 ). Wild-type
 cells show around 50% chemotaxis, when assayed with 10 -6 m cAMP, in the presence of the PI3K inhibitor LY and the
 PLA 2 inhibitor p -bromophenacyl bromide. Recently, it was
 found that this remaining chemotaxis is abolished in cells that have
 disruptions in genes that encode guanylyl cyclases or GbpC
 ( 20 ). Here, we performed a
 rescue analysis by expressing GbpC or GbpC mutants in gbpC null cells
 ( Fig. 4 ). Expression of GbpC in gbpC null cells restores chemotaxis to approximately wild-type
 levels. In contrast, expression of the GbpC-RocInactive mutant in gbpC null cells was unable to rescue the chemotaxis defect of gbpC null cells ( Fig.
 4 ), although the mutant was expressed at a similar level as GbpC
 ( Fig. 2 C ). This
 suggests that a functional Roc domain is essential for a functional GbpC
 protein in vivo .

A Functional Kinase Domain Is Essential for GbpC
 Activity —Active kinase domains have a fully conserved lysine in
 their activation loops. Mutating this lysine into a tryptophan results in a
 kinase domain that is unable to bind ATP, thus making it inactive
 ( 16 , 26 , 27 ). The corresponding
 mutation in GbpC is K905W ( Fig.
 2 E ). Proper expression of this kinase dead mutant in gbpC null cells was verified with a cGMP binding assay, showing an
 expression level that was about 3-fold more compared with expression of GbpC
 in gbpC null cells ( Fig.
 2 C ). In chemotaxis assays, similar results were found as
 for the Roc-Inactive mutant; the cells were unable to chemotax, suggesting
 that the kinase domain is also essential for GbpC to be functional in
 vivo ( Fig. 4 ). To test
 whether the kinase domain lies upstream or downstream of the Roc domain in a
 signaling cascade through GbpC, a GTP-agarose pulldown assay was performed,
 showing that cGMP-stimulated Roc activation was still present in this mutant,
 as was seen for the wild-type protein ( Fig.
 3 E ). This shows that the Roc domain lies upstream of the
 kinase domain.

The RasGEF Domain Is Essential for GbpC Activity and Mediates
 cGMP-stimulated Roc Activation —To investigate the role of the
 Ras-GEF domain of GbpC, we inactivated the GEF domain in GbpC by deleting the
 catalytic part of the GEF domain ( Fig.
 2 B ), thus assuring that no GEF-mediated GDP/GTP exchange
 on the Roc domain could occur. This mutant, called GbpC-ΔGEF, was still
 able to bind GTP specifically, confirming that GTP binding by the Roc domain
 can occur independently of the RasGEF domain
 ( Fig. 3 E ). However,
 stimulated Roc activation by cGMP could not be found for this mutant, strongly
 suggesting that cGMP binding to the cNBDs causes the RasGEF domain to catalyze
 GDP/GTP exchange at the Roc domain. The importance of the RasGEF domain is
 underlined in the observation that the GbpC-ΔGEF mutant is inactive in vivo in the chemotaxis assay
 ( Fig. 4 ). We observed that
 cells expressing GbpC-ΔGEFGFP exhibit good fluorescence intensity
 comparable with cells expressing wild-type GbpC-GFP but that cGMP binding to
 the lysates of this mutant was lower compared with the wild-type protein
 ( Fig. 2 C and data not
 shown), which may suggest that the mutant protein has a somewhat lower
 affinity for cGMP or that some parts of the protein are not folded correctly.
 Therefore, to verify the chemotaxis results of the GbpC-ΔGEF mutant, a
 less severe mutation was introduced in the catalytic part of the GEF domain,
 analogous to a mutation that was described before in the RasGEF protein SOS1
 ( 28 ). In that study, a mutated
 phenylalanine resulted in a RasGEF domain with a 50-fold decreased affinity
 for its Ras domain. This residue is located in a helical hairpin that is
 thought to be important in the activity of GEF domains. The corresponding
 phenylalanine is conserved in GbpC, and we mutated it to an alanine (F1892A),
 yielding the GbpC-GEFInactive mutant ( Fig.
 2 G ). Cells expressing the mutant protein exhibit very
 good cGMP binding activity, suggesting good expression and correct folding
 ( Fig. 2 C ). The
 GbpC-GEFInactive mutant did not restore the chemotactic defect of gbpC null cells, confirming the results of the GbpC-ΔGEF
 mutant, meaning that an intact GEF domain is essential for the function of
 GbpC in vivo ( Fig.
 4 ).

Inactive cNBDs Do Not Completely Inactivate GbpC —GbpC
 contains two cyclic nucleotide-binding domains that specifically bind cGMP
 with high affinity ( 9 ). From
 the GTP-agarose pulldown assay, we concluded that cGMP binding causes
 activation of the Roc domain. A mutant that is unable to bind cGMP would lead
 to an inactive protein, if Roc activation is fully dependent on cGMP binding.
 Both cGMP-binding sites of GbpC possess FGE motifs, which are thought to be
 important for cGMP binding
 ( 29 ). We abolished the motifs
 of both domains by mutating them into an AGA motif (F2082A, E2084A, F2564A,
 and E2566A; Fig. 2 F ).
 Abolishing either one of the FGE motifs created GbpC mutants with diminished
 but still substantial cGMP binding (data not shown). As expected, abolishing
 both motifs yields a mutant protein that was unable to bind cGMP (from now on
 called GbpC-ΔcGMP) ( Fig.
 2 C ). To confirm proper expression, we made a C-terminal
 GFP construct of this mutant. The fluorescence intensity of the cells
 expressing this protein was approximately similar to cells expressing
 GbpC-GFP, which was also confirmed by Western blot
 ( Fig. 3 A ). Next, we
 tested this mutant in the GTP-agarose pulldown assay. GbpC-ΔcGMP was
 able to specifically bind GTP, but the stimulation by cGMP, as seen for the
 wild-type protein, was abolished ( Fig.
 3 E ). This result also confirms that the cGMP-stimulated
 Roc activation is caused by binding of cGMP to the cyclic nucleotide-binding
 domains of GbpC. Expression of GbpC-ΔcGMP in gbpC null cells
 partly restored chemotaxis; statistically, the chemotactic activity of this
 mutant is significantly more than chemotaxis of gbpC null cells but
 less than chemotaxis of gbpC null cells expressing wild-type GbpC
 ( Fig. 4 ). This partial rescue
 suggests that (an) additional GbpC-activating factor(s), next to cGMP, is
 present in cells.

The LRR Are Essential for Chemotactic Activity in Vivo but Not for
 cGMP-stimulated Roc Activation in Vitro —Leucine-rich repeats are
 thought to be important in protein-protein interactions
 ( 30 ). A truncated GbpC protein
 was created that lacks the first 311 amino acids, comprising these LRR repeats
 ( Fig. 2 B ). The
 expression of this GbpC-ΔLRR protein was comparable with the kinase dead
 mutant as indicated by the cGMP binding activity
 ( Fig. 2 C ). Moreover,
 cGMP-stimulated Roc activation was also present in this mutant
 ( Fig. 3 E ), excluding
 an important function for the LRR in cGMP binding, GEF activity, and Roc
 activation. Interestingly, when this mutant was tested in the chemotaxis
 assay, no rescue whatsoever of the gbpC null phenotype could be
 observed ( Fig. 4 ), suggesting
 that the LRR are essential for GbpC to function in vivo , similar to
 the mammalian Roco protein LRRK2
 ( 31 ). Similar results were
 obtained for larger N-terminal deletions of GbpC; proteins that lack more
 N-terminal amino acids in addition to the LRR are also consistently inactive in vivo (data not shown). Most importantly, expression of the kinase
 domain alone in gbpC null cells does not contribute to chemotaxis,
 whereas expression in wild-type cells has no effect on chemotaxis, suggesting
 that the kinase domain needs to be in the context of the rest of GbpC to be
 active in the cell.

DISCUSSION

GbpC is a complex multi-domain protein that belongs to the Roco family of
 proteins. These proteins share a conserved Roc-Cor domain module, often in
 addition to LRR and MAPKKK domains. Additional regulatory domains are present
 in some Roco proteins ( 11 ).
 GbpC contains a C-terminal extension with a RasGEF and two cNBDs that bind
 cGMP with high affinity. This domain extension is homologous to the entire
 sequence of the Rap-GEF GbpD, suggesting that GbpC arose from a fusion of an
 ancestor Roco gene with the ancestor GbpD gene. It should be noted that GbpD,
 despite having two cNBDs, does not bind cyclic nucleotides, and GbpC is the
 only cGMP-target protein in Dictyostelium identified
 ( 9 ). We have shown here that
 the RasGEF domain of GbpC specifically induces GDP/GTP exchange of the Roc
 domain of GbpC. The RasGEF domain of GbpC does not activate any other member
 of the Ras superfamily, and vice versa, the Roc domain of GbpC is not
 activated by any other GEF, including C3G and CDC25 that activate Rap and Ras
 GTPases and GbpD ( 21 ).

The presence of GEF, Ras, and MAPKKK domains in one protein strongly
 suggests that GbpC possesses a complete Ras signaling pathway in one protein.
 To investigate this pathway, we developed two assays: cGMP-stimulated binding
 of GbpC to GTP-coated beads in vitro and rescue of the chemotactic
 defect of gbpC null cells in vivo . During the time course of
 this study, it was found to be technically difficult to develop a suitable
 kinase assay for GbpC, because the protein is very large, and no suitable
 phosphorylation targets of the protein are known at present. This prompted us
 to assay the final response of the pathway, which is the chemotactic effects in vivo , rather than examining direct kinase activity of the protein.
 GbpC plays an important role in Dictyostelium chemotaxis, together
 with phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and PLA 2 ( 20 , 32 ). The recognition that
 these three parallel pathways mediate the transduction of chemotactic cAMP
 signals allowed us to develop an assay to analyze the activity of GbpC in
 vivo . In this assay, chemotaxis is measured in the presence of chemical
 inhibitors of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and PLA 2 , by which the
 chemotactic response becomes critically dependent on guanylyl cyclases and
 GbpC. Using the GTP binding and chemotaxis assays, we reach four major
 conclusions on the regulation of GbpC. First, binding of GbpC to GTP-agarose
 beads is abolished upon mutational inactivation of the Roc domain but not by
 inactivation of the GEF or cGMP-binding domains. Furthermore we observed that
 the wild-type Roc-Cor domain, purified from E. coli , is in a
 GDP-bound state, which becomes free of nucleotides upon mutation of
 Lys 342 in the P-loop of the Roc domain. Together, these
 observations strongly suggest that the Roc domain is responsible for binding
 of GbpC to GTP-agarose beads. Second, cGMP stimulates GbpC binding to
 GTP-agarose beads, which no longer occurs upon inactivation of the GEF or
 cNBDs. Because cGMP binding to GbpC is specifically lost upon inactivation of
 the cNBDs, we conclude that cGMP-mediated activation of Roc occurs through
 cGMP binding to cNBDs and subsequent activation of the GEF domain. Third, a
 mutant defective in the MAPKKK domain still has cGMP-stimulated GTP binding to
 the Roc domain, suggesting that the kinase domain lies downstream of
 cGMP-stimulated Roc activation, thereby probably representing the output of
 the protein. Fourth, the GEF, Roc, MAPKKK, and LRR domains are absolutely
 required in vivo to rescue the chemotactic defect of gbpC null cells, whereas cGMP binding to the cNBD is partially required.

These conclusions suggest a model for the activation of GbpC
 ( Fig. 5 ); binding of cGMP to
 the cNBDs leads to an activation of the RasGEF domain, most likely through a
 conformational change in the protein. Roc is active in the GTP-bound state. In
 the absence of cGMP or GEF activity, a small fraction of GbpC is in the active
 GTP-bound state; the GTP-bound fraction is strongly enhanced by
 cGMP-stimulated GEF activity. Finally, GTP-activated Roc stimulates the
 activity of the MAPKKK domain, which very likely acts as the signaling output
 of GbpC by phosphorylating downstream proteins. It has been shown for the
 homologous mammalian Roco proteins LRRK1 and LRRK2 that their kinase
 activities are strongly dependent on the Roc domain; activation of this domain
 by GDP/GTP exchange causes an increase in kinase activity in vitro ( 15 , 16 ). It is very likely that
 GbpC works in a similar way; the phosphorylation and activation of myosin
 light chain kinase A is activated in a cGMP- and GbpC-dependent process
 ( 8 ). In addition, the
 phosphorylation states of the stress-activated protein kinase SAPKα and
 the transcription factor StatC have been shown to be regulated by cGMP in Dictyostelium ( 33 , 34 ). Recently, the crystal
 structure of the Roc domain of LRRK2 was solved, and it was suggested that the
 protein is activated in cis by forming a dimer
 ( 35 ). Disturbance of dimer
 formation leads to decreased GTPase activity, and the result is an overactive
 Roc and Kinase domain. At present, it is unclear whether GbpC signaling occurs in cis or in trans . Attempts to show dimer formation have
 been unsuccessful so
 far. 3

The role of cGMP and LRR for activation of GbpC requires further attention.
 The GbpC-ΔcGMP mutant is still capable of partially rescuing the gbpC null chemotaxis defect. Strikingly, this result resembles the
 outcome of a previous study, in which a catalytically inactive sGC was also
 capable of partially rescuing the chemotactic defect of gc null
 cells, which cannot produce cGMP anymore
 ( 20 ). In that study, two
 functions for sGC in chemotaxis were identified: one function as an enzyme
 producing cGMP, thereby regulating the rear of the cell, and a second function
 as a protein that translocates to the actin cytoskeleton at the front of the
 cell. The similarities with our current results for GbpC of cGMP-dependent and
 cGMP-independent contribution of chemotaxis make us hypothesize that sGC and
 GbpC can communicate with each other through two mechanisms: first, through
 cGMP, because sGC produces a pool of cGMP which stimulates GbpC activity, and
 second, sGC protein may interact with GbpC protein that may function as a
 second input signal for the activation of GbpC in vivo . In this
 respect, it is interesting that a cGMP-binding protein has been shown to
 regulate guanylyl cyclase activity in Dictyostelium ( 36 ). Because GbpC is the only
 high affinity cGMP-binding protein in Dictyostelium , and sGC was the
 only guanylyl cyclase activity present in those experiments, this hints to a
 close interaction between GbpC and sGC. The notion that the LRR domain of GbpC
 is essential for its function in vivo , but not for cGMP-regulated
 activation of the Roc domain in vitro , suggests that the LRR of GbpC
 provides a second input signal for GbpC to function in the cell. In mammalian
 LRRK2, the LRR domain may play a similar role, because also in this Roco
 protein, the absence of the LRR domain does not affect kinase activity in
 vitro but does interfere with toxic effects of wild-type LRRK2 in
 vivo ( 31 ).
