---
pmid: '17696782'
title: Josephin domain-containing proteins from a variety of species are active de-ubiquitination
  enzymes.
authors:
- Tzvetkov N
- Breuer P
journal: Biol Chem
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1515/BC.2007.107
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Josephin domain-containing proteins from a variety of species are active de-ubiquitination enzymes.
**Authors:** Tzvetkov N, Breuer P
**Journal:** Biol Chem (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1515/BC.2007.107](https://doi.org/10.1515/BC.2007.107)

## Abstract

1. Biol Chem. 2007 Sep;388(9):973-8. doi: 10.1515/BC.2007.107.

Josephin domain-containing proteins from a variety of species are active 
de-ubiquitination enzymes.

Tzvetkov N(1), Breuer P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Am 
Klopferspitz 18, D-82152 Martinsried, Germany.

The neurodegenerative disease spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 (SCA3) is caused by 
the presence of an extended polyglutamine stretch (polyQ) in the unstructured 
C-terminus of the human ataxin-3 (AT3) protein. The structured N-terminal 
Josephin domain (JD) of AT3 is conserved within a novel family of potential 
ubiquitin proteases, the JD-containing proteins, which are sub-divided into two 
groups termed ataxins and Josephins. These AT3 orthologs are encoded by the 
genomes of organisms ranging from Plasmodium falciparum to humans, with most 
species possessing more than one homolog. While Josephins consist of JDs alone, 
ataxins contain additional functional domains that may influence their enzyme 
activity. Here, we show that the enzyme activity of human AT3 (hAT3) is not 
affected by the length of polyQ in its C-terminus, even when it is in the range 
associated with SCA3. We also show that JDs of all human proteins with homology 
to AT3 and its homologs from various species possess de-ubiquitination activity. 
These results establish JD-containing proteins as a novel family of active 
de-ubiquitination enzymes with wide phylogenic distribution.

DOI: 10.1515/BC.2007.107
PMID: 17696782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
