---
pmid: '26133670'
title: The BEACH Domain Protein SPIRRIG Is Essential for Arabidopsis Salt Stress Tolerance
  and Functions as a Regulator of Transcript Stabilization and Localization.
authors:
- Steffens A
- Bräutigam A
- Jakoby M
- Hülskamp M
journal: PLoS Biol
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4489804
doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002188
---

# The BEACH Domain Protein SPIRRIG Is Essential for Arabidopsis Salt Stress Tolerance and Functions as a Regulator of Transcript Stabilization and Localization.
**Authors:** Steffens A, Bräutigam A, Jakoby M, Hülskamp M
**Journal:** PLoS Biol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pbio.1002188](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1002188)
**PMC:** [PMC4489804](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4489804/)

## Abstract

1. PLoS Biol. 2015 Jul 2;13(7):e1002188. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002188. 
eCollection 2015 Jul.

The BEACH Domain Protein SPIRRIG Is Essential for Arabidopsis Salt Stress 
Tolerance and Functions as a Regulator of Transcript Stabilization and 
Localization.

Steffens A(1), Bräutigam A(2), Jakoby M(1), Hülskamp M(1).

Author information:
(1)Botanical Institute, Biocenter, Cologne University, Cologne, Germany.
(2)Institute of Plant Biochemistry, Cluster of Excellence on Plant Sciences 
(CEPLAS), Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany; Plant Biochemistry, 
Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany.

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 2015 Jul 02;13(7):e1002189. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002189.

Members of the highly conserved class of BEACH domain containing proteins 
(BDCPs) have been established as broad facilitators of protein-protein 
interactions and membrane dynamics in the context of human diseases like 
albinism, bleeding diathesis, impaired cellular immunity, cancer predisposition, 
and neurological dysfunctions. Also, the Arabidopsis thaliana BDCP SPIRRIG (SPI) 
is important for membrane integrity, as spi mutants exhibit split vacuoles. In 
this work, we report a novel molecular function of the BDCP SPI in 
ribonucleoprotein particle formation. We show that SPI interacts with the P-body 
core component DECAPPING PROTEIN 1 (DCP1), associates to mRNA processing bodies 
(P-bodies), and regulates their assembly upon salt stress. The finding that spi 
mutants exhibit salt hypersensitivity suggests that the local function of SPI at 
P-bodies is of biological relevance. Transcriptome-wide analysis revealed 
qualitative differences in the salt stress-regulated transcriptional response of 
Col-0 and spi. We show that SPI regulates the salt stress-dependent 
post-transcriptional stabilization, cytoplasmic agglomeration, and localization 
to P-bodies of a subset of salt stress-regulated mRNAs. Finally, we show that 
the PH-BEACH domains of SPI and its human homolog FAN (Factor Associated with 
Neutral sphingomyelinase activation) interact with DCP1 isoforms from plants, 
mammals, and yeast, suggesting the evolutionary conservation of an association 
of BDCPs and P-bodies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002188
PMCID: PMC4489804
PMID: 26133670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.
