---
pmid: '29775580'
title: ZNFX-1 Functions within Perinuclear Nuage to Balance Epigenetic Signals.
authors:
- Ishidate T
- Ozturk AR
- Durning DJ
- Sharma R
- Shen EZ
- Chen H
- Seth M
- Shirayama M
- Mello CC
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5994929
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2018.04.009
---

# ZNFX-1 Functions within Perinuclear Nuage to Balance Epigenetic Signals.
**Authors:** Ishidate T, Ozturk AR, Durning DJ, Sharma R, Shen EZ, Chen H, Seth M, Shirayama M, Mello CC
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2018.04.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2018.04.009)
**PMC:** [PMC5994929](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5994929/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2018 May 17;70(4):639-649.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2018.04.009.

ZNFX-1 Functions within Perinuclear Nuage to Balance Epigenetic Signals.

Ishidate T(1), Ozturk AR(2), Durning DJ(2), Sharma R(2), Shen EZ(2), Chen H(3), 
Seth M(2), Shirayama M(1), Mello CC(4).

Author information:
(1)RNA Therapeutics Institute, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, MA 01605, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Worcester, MA 01605, 
USA.
(2)RNA Therapeutics Institute, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, MA 01605, USA.
(3)Program in Bioinformatics and Integrative Biology, University of 
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.
(4)RNA Therapeutics Institute, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, MA 01605, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Worcester, MA 01605, 
USA. Electronic address: craig.mello@umassmed.edu.

Animal cells have a remarkable capacity to adopt durable and heritable gene 
expression programs or epigenetic states that define the physical properties and 
diversity of somatic cell types. The maintenance of epigenetic programs depends 
on poorly understood pathways that prevent gain or loss of inherited signals. In 
the germline, epigenetic factors are enriched in liquid-like perinuclear 
condensates called nuage. Here, we identify the deeply conserved helicase-domain 
protein, ZNFX-1, as an epigenetic regulator and component of nuage that 
interacts with Argonaute systems to balance epigenetic inheritance. Our findings 
suggest that ZNFX-1 promotes the 3' recruitment of machinery that propagates the 
small RNA epigenetic signal and thus counteracts a tendency for Argonaute 
targeting to shift 5' along the mRNA. These functional insights support the idea 
that recently identified subdomains of nuage, including ZNFX-1 granules or 
"Z-granules," may define spatial and temporal zones of molecular activity during 
epigenetic regulation.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2018.04.009
PMCID: PMC5994929
PMID: 29775580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DECLARATION OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
competing interests.
