---
pmid: '31187491'
title: Slc25a17 acts as a peroxisomal coenzyme A transporter and regulates multiorgan
  development in zebrafish.
authors:
- Kim YI
- Nam IK
- Lee DK
- Bhandari S
- Charton L
- Kwak S
- Lim JY
- Hong K
- Kim SJ
- Lee JN
- Kwon SW
- So HS
- Linka N
- Park R
- Choe SK
journal: J Cell Physiol
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/jcp.28954
---

# Slc25a17 acts as a peroxisomal coenzyme A transporter and regulates multiorgan development in zebrafish.
**Authors:** Kim YI, Nam IK, Lee DK, Bhandari S, Charton L, Kwak S, Lim JY, Hong K, Kim SJ, Lee JN, Kwon SW, So HS, Linka N, Park R, Choe SK
**Journal:** J Cell Physiol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jcp.28954](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcp.28954)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Physiol. 2020 Jan;235(1):151-165. doi: 10.1002/jcp.28954. Epub 2019 Jun
 11.

Slc25a17 acts as a peroxisomal coenzyme A transporter and regulates multiorgan 
development in zebrafish.

Kim YI(1), Nam IK(1)(2), Lee DK(3), Bhandari S(1), Charton L(4), Kwak S(5), Lim 
JY(1)(2), Hong K(1), Kim SJ(2), Lee JN(2), Kwon SW(3), So HS(1), Linka N(4), 
Park R(2), Choe SK(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Center for Metabolic Function Regulation, 
Wonkwang University School of Medicine, Iksan, South Korea.
(2)Department of Biomedical Science and Engineering, Gwangju Institute of 
Science and Technology, Gwangju, South Korea.
(3)College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Seoul 
National University, Seoul, South Korea.
(4)Department of Plant Biochemistry, Heinrich-Heine University Düsseldorf, 
Düsseldorf, Germany.
(5)Zoonosis Research Center, Wonkwang University School of Medicine, Iksan, 
South Korea.
(6)Wonkwang Medical Institute, Wonkwang University School of Medicine, Iksan, 
South Korea.

Slc25a17 is known as a peroxisomal solute carrier, but the in vivo role of the 
protein has not been demonstrated. We found that the zebrafish genome contains 
two slc25a17 genes that function redundantly, but additively. Notably, 
peroxisome function in slc25a17 knockdown embryos is severely compromised, 
resulting in an altered lipid composition. Along the defects found in 
peroxisome-associated phenotypic presentations, we highlighted that development 
of the swim bladder is also highly dependent on Slc25a17 function. As Slc25a17 
showed substrate specificity towards coenzyme A (CoA), injecting CoA, but not 
NAD+ , rescued the defective swim bladder induced by slc25a17 knockdown. These 
results indicated that Slc25a17 acts as a CoA transporter, involved in the 
maintenance of functional peroxisomes that are essential for the development of 
multiple organs during zebrafish embryogenesis. Given high homology in protein 
sequences, the role of zebrafish Slc25a17 may also be applicable to the 
mammalian system.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.28954
PMID: 31187491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
