---
pmid: '20018850'
title: Human alanine-glyoxylate aminotransferase 2 lowers asymmetric dimethylarginine
  and protects from inhibition of nitric oxide production.
authors:
- Rodionov RN
- Murry DJ
- Vaulman SF
- Stevens JW
- Lentz SR
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2820767
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.091280
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Human alanine-glyoxylate aminotransferase 2 lowers asymmetric dimethylarginine and protects from inhibition of nitric oxide production.
**Authors:** Rodionov RN, Murry DJ, Vaulman SF, Stevens JW, Lentz SR
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M109.091280](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.091280)
**PMC:** [PMC2820767](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2820767/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Feb 19;285(8):5385-91. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.091280. Epub
2009  Dec 14.

Human alanine-glyoxylate aminotransferase 2 lowers asymmetric dimethylarginine 
and protects from inhibition of nitric oxide production.

Rodionov RN(1), Murry DJ, Vaulman SF, Stevens JW, Lentz SR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, The University of Iowa Carver College of 
Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Elevated blood concentrations of asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA), an 
endogenous inhibitor of nitric-oxide (NO) synthase, are found in association 
with diabetes, hypertension, congestive heart failure, and atherosclerosis. ADMA 
levels are controlled by dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolases (DDAHs), 
cytosolic enzymes that hydrolyze ADMA to citrulline and dimethylamine. ADMA also 
has been proposed to be regulated through an alternative pathway by 
alanine-glyoxylate aminotransferase 2 (AGXT2), a mitochondrial aminotransferase 
expressed primarily in the kidney. The goal of this study was to define the 
subcellular localization of human AGXT2 and test the hypothesis that 
overexpression of human AGXT2 protects from ADMA-induced inhibition in nitric 
oxide (NO) production. AGXT2 was cloned from human kidney cDNA and overexpressed 
in COS-7 cells and human umbilical vein endothelial cells with a C-terminal FLAG 
epitope tag. Mitochondrial localization of human AGXT2 was demonstrated by 
confocal microscopy and a 41-amino acid N-terminal mitochondrial cleavage 
sequence was delineated by N-terminal sequencing of the mature protein. 
Overexpression of human AGXT2 in the liver of C57BL/6 mice using an adenoviral 
expression vector produced significant decreases in ADMA levels in plasma and 
liver. Overexpression of human AGXT2 also protected endothelial cells from 
ADMA-mediated inhibition of NO production. We conclude that mitochondrially 
localized human AGXT2 is able to effectively metabolize ADMA in vivo resulting 
in decreased ADMA levels and improved endothelial NO production.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.091280
PMCID: PMC2820767
PMID: 20018850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
