---
pmid: '16221731'
title: A conserved RNA-protein complex component involved in physiological germline
  apoptosis regulation in C. elegans.
authors:
- Boag PR
- Nakamura A
- Blackwell TK
journal: Development
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/dev.02060
---

# A conserved RNA-protein complex component involved in physiological germline apoptosis regulation in C. elegans.
**Authors:** Boag PR, Nakamura A, Blackwell TK
**Journal:** Development (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.02060](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.02060)

## Abstract

1. Development. 2005 Nov;132(22):4975-86. doi: 10.1242/dev.02060. Epub 2005 Oct
12.

A conserved RNA-protein complex component involved in physiological germline 
apoptosis regulation in C. elegans.

Boag PR(1), Nakamura A, Blackwell TK.

Author information:
(1)Joslin Diabetes Center and Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, 
One Joslin Place, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Two conserved features of oogenesis are the accumulation of translationally 
quiescent mRNA, and a high rate of stage-specific apoptosis. Little is 
understood about the function of this cell death. In C. elegans, apoptosis 
occurring through a specific ;physiological' pathway normally claims about half 
of all developing oocytes. The frequency of this germ cell death is dramatically 
increased by a lack of the RNA helicase CGH-1, orthologs of which are involved 
in translational control in oocytes and decapping-dependent mRNA degradation in 
yeast processing (P) bodies. Here, we describe a predicted RNA-binding protein, 
CAR-1, that associates with CGH-1 and Y-box proteins within a conserved germline 
RNA-protein (RNP) complex, and in cytoplasmic particles in the gonad and early 
embryo. The CGH-1/CAR-1 interaction is conserved in Drosophila oocytes. When 
car-1 expression is depleted by RNA interference (RNAi), physiological apoptosis 
is increased, brood size is modestly reduced, and early embryonic cytokinesis is 
abnormal. Surprisingly, if apoptosis is prevented car-1(RNAi) animals are 
characterized by a progressive oogenesis defect that leads rapidly to gonad 
failure. Elevated germ cell death similarly compensates for lack of the 
translational regulator CPB-3 (CPEB), orthologs of which function together with 
CGH-1 in diverse organisms. We conclude that CAR-1 is of critical importance for 
oogenesis, that the association between CAR-1 and CGH-1 has been conserved, and 
that the regulation of physiological germ cell apoptosis is specifically 
influenced by certain functions of the CGH-1/CAR-1 RNP complex. We propose that 
this cell death pathway facilitates the formation of functional oocytes, 
possibly by monitoring specific cytoplasmic events during oogenesis.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.02060
PMID: 16221731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
