---
pmid: '22904146'
title: The phytochrome-interacting vascular plant one-zinc finger1 and VOZ2 redundantly
  regulate flowering in Arabidopsis.
authors:
- Yasui Y
- Mukougawa K
- Uemoto M
- Yokofuji A
- Suzuri R
- Nishitani A
- Kohchi T
journal: Plant Cell
year: '2012'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3462629
doi: 10.1105/tpc.112.101915
---

# The phytochrome-interacting vascular plant one-zinc finger1 and VOZ2 redundantly regulate flowering in Arabidopsis.
**Authors:** Yasui Y, Mukougawa K, Uemoto M, Yokofuji A, Suzuri R, Nishitani A, Kohchi T
**Journal:** Plant Cell (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1105/tpc.112.101915](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.112.101915)
**PMC:** [PMC3462629](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3462629/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell. 2012 Aug;24(8):3248-63. doi: 10.1105/tpc.112.101915. Epub 2012 Aug
 17.

The phytochrome-interacting vascular plant one-zinc finger1 and VOZ2 redundantly 
regulate flowering in Arabidopsis.

Yasui Y(1), Mukougawa K, Uemoto M, Yokofuji A, Suzuri R, Nishitani A, Kohchi T.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan.

The timing of the transition to flowering in plants is regulated by various 
environmental factors, including daylength and light quality. Although the 
red/far-red photoreceptor phytochrome B (phyB) represses flowering by indirectly 
regulating the expression of a key flowering regulator, FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT), 
the mechanism of phyB signaling for flowering is largely unknown. Here, we 
identified two Arabidopsis thaliana genes, VASCULAR PLANT ONE-ZINC FINGER1 
(VOZ1) and VOZ2, which are highly conserved throughout land plant evolution, as 
phyB-interacting factors. voz1 voz2 double mutants, but neither single mutant, 
showed a late-flowering phenotype under long-day conditions, which indicated 
that VOZ1 and VOZ2 redundantly promote flowering. voz1 voz2 mutations suppressed 
the early-flowering phenotype of the phyB mutant, and FT expression was 
repressed in the voz1 voz2 mutant. Green fluorescent protein-VOZ2 signal was 
observed in the cytoplasm, and interaction of VOZ proteins with phyB was 
indicated to occur in the cytoplasm under far-red light. However, VOZ2 protein 
modified to localize constitutively in the nucleus promoted flowering. In 
addition, the stability of VOZ2 proteins in the nucleus was modulated by light 
quality in a phytochrome-dependent manner. We propose that partial translocation 
of VOZ proteins from the cytoplasm to the nucleus mediates the initial step of 
the phyB signal transduction pathway that regulates flowering.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.112.101915
PMCID: PMC3462629
PMID: 22904146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The timing of the transition to flowering in plants is regulated by various environmental factors, including daylength and light quality. Although the red/far-red photoreceptor phytochrome B (phyB) represses flowering by indirectly regulating the expression of a key flowering regulator, FLOWERING LOCUS T ( FT ), the mechanism of phyB signaling for flowering is largely unknown. Here, we identified two Arabidopsis thaliana genes, VASCULAR PLANT ONE–ZINC FINGER1 ( VOZ1 ) and VOZ2 , which are highly conserved throughout land plant evolution, as phyB-interacting factors. voz1 voz2 double mutants, but neither single mutant, showed a late-flowering phenotype under long-day conditions, which indicated that VOZ1 and VOZ2 redundantly promote flowering. voz1 voz2 mutations suppressed the early-flowering phenotype of the phyB mutant, and FT expression was repressed in the voz1 voz2 mutant. Green fluorescent protein–VOZ2 signal was observed in the cytoplasm, and interaction of VOZ proteins with phyB was indicated to occur in the cytoplasm under far-red light. However, VOZ2 protein modified to localize constitutively in the nucleus promoted flowering. In addition, the stability of VOZ2 proteins in the nucleus was modulated by light quality in a phytochrome-dependent manner. We propose that partial translocation of VOZ proteins from the cytoplasm to the nucleus mediates the initial step of the phyB signal transduction pathway that regulates flowering.

INTRODUCTION

Vegetative development in plants is controlled by various environmental cues, such as daylength, light quality, temperature, drought, and nutrition ( Fankhauser and Chory, 1997 ; Bäurle and Dean, 2006 ). These signals are sensed by a variety of systems, transmitted by different signal transduction pathways, and integrated to control expression of a specific set of downstream genes for whole plant fitness. The molecular mechanisms for such integration have remained largely elusive. Of the various environmental cues, light affects many aspects of plant growth as a source of energy but also provides pivotal information about the environment ( Whitelam et al., 1998 ). To detect the intensity, quality (wavelength), and direction of incident light, plants have evolved a set of photoreceptors: red/far-red light-absorbing phytochromes; blue light receptors, such as cryptochromes and phototropins; and UV-B receptors ( Chen et al., 2004 ; Rizzini et al., 2011 ). Among these photoreceptors, only the phytochrome family members are sensitive to red and far-red light.

Phytochromes are encoded by a small gene family, and five phytochromes (phytochrome A [phyA] to phyE) have been identified in Arabidopsis thaliana ( Sharrock and Quail, 1989 ; Clack et al., 1994 ). The photosensory function of the phytochrome resides in its capacity for reversible interconversion between the biologically active Pfr and the inactive Pr ( Quail et al., 1995 ). Of the five phytochromes, phyA and phyB have the most important photosensory functions. phyA is a photolabile photoreceptor accumulated in the dark and triggers very low fluence responses, such as seed germination, and high irradiance responses, such as inhibition of hypocotyl elongation under far-red light. phyB is the dominant phytochrome species in light-grown plants and plays a role in germination, deetiolation, shade avoidance, and flowering repression ( Franklin and Quail, 2010 ). Newly synthesized phyB in the cytoplasm is in the Pr form but is converted into the Pfr form by red light and translocated to the nucleus ( Kircher et al., 2002 ; Nagatani, 2004 ) and then affects the expression of many downstream genes to induce photomorphogenesis ( Devlin et al., 2003 ; Tepperman et al., 2004 ).

To determine the components that mediate the phytochrome-dependent signaling cascade, two main experimental approaches have been used: screening for light response mutants and yeast two-hybrid assays to identify phytochrome-interacting proteins ( Nagy and Schäfer, 2002 ). Genetic screenings have identified regulatory networks mediated by phytochromes. For example, the constitutive photomorphogenic / de-etiolated / fusca mutants represent one of the major networks in light signaling and function as negative regulators of photomorphogenesis ( Hardtke and Deng, 2000 ). In darkness, these factors work in concert to target a number of photomorphogenesis-promoting transcription factors for degradation by the proteasome, thus preventing photomorphogenesis ( Osterlund et al., 2000 ; Schwechheimer and Deng, 2000 ). As an alternative approach, yeast two-hybrid assays have identified several phytochrome-interacting proteins, such as basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors, designated phytochrome-interacting factors ( PIFs ), whose functions have been characterized in detail ( Castillon et al., 2007 ). PIFs act as negative regulators for various light-regulated responses ( Ni et al., 1998 ; Kim et al., 2003 ; Leivar and Quail, 2011 ). PIF proteins are localized constitutively in the nucleus and interact directly with phytochromes in the photoactivated Pfr form ( Ni et al., 1999 ; Shimizu-Sato et al., 2002 ; Khanna et al., 2004 ). PIFs that interact with phytochromes are rapidly phosphorylated and then subjected to ubiquitylation and subsequent degradation ( Shen et al., 2005 ; Al-Sady et al., 2006 ).

Identification of a substantial number of signaling components has enabled an outline of phytochrome signal transduction from light perception to regulation of gene expression to be drafted ( Chory, 2010 ). However, the studies described above have screened mostly responses in early stages of development, such as germination and inhibition of hypocotyl elongation, as indicators of the phytochrome-signaling pathway. For this reason, despite identification of a large number of phytochrome-signaling components, phyB-interacting factors that function in vegetative and reproductive developmental processes such as flowering have not been studied extensively, with the exception of PIF4, which was recently reported to control thermosensory activation of flowering ( Kumar et al., 2012 ).

The timing of the transition from the vegetative to the reproductive phase in flowering plants is tightly controlled by light conditions. In response to daylength, leaves produce a mobile signal that is transported to the shoot apex to induce flowering ( Zeevaart, 1976 ). Recent work on Arabidopsis and several other species identified the FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT) protein as the main component of the long-distance signal florigen ( Corbesier et al., 2007 ; Tamaki et al., 2007 ; Notaguchi et al., 2008 ; Navarro et al., 2011 ). In Arabidopsis , long-day ( LD ) conditions accelerate flowering, whereas short-day ( SD ) conditions delay flowering. Spectral light quality also affects flowering time. These processes are regulated by multiple photoreceptors, including phyB ( Guo et al., 1998 ; Mockler et al., 2003 ). phyB inhibits flowering by repressing FT expression ( Cerdán and Chory, 2003 ); CONSTANS (CO)-dependent and CO-independent mechanisms mediate this repression. CO is a central regulator of photoperiodic flowering, and its expression in an oscillating pattern is controlled by the circadian clock ( Suárez-López et al., 2001 ). In addition, CO is regulated posttranslationally by light quality ( Valverde et al., 2004 ). phyB promotes the degradation of CO early in the day and under red light ( Valverde et al., 2004 ; Jang et al., 2008 ). The CO-independent mechanism for phyB repression of flowering is not well understood, except for the involvement of PHYTOCHROME AND FLOWERING TIME1 ( PFT1 ), which was identified by genetic screening ( Cerdán and Chory, 2003 ). PFT1 confers a late-flowering phenotype when mutated and regulates FT expression downstream of phyB by both CO-dependent and CO-independent pathways ( Cerdán and Chory, 2003 ; Iñigo et al., 2012 ). PFT1 encodes the MED25 subunit of the mediator complex ( Bäckström et al., 2007 ). Another flowering regulator is FLOWERING LOCUS C ( FLC ), a MADS box transcription factor and a major determinant of the response to prolonged cold (vernalization) ( Michaels and Amasino, 1999 ; Sheldon et al., 1999 ). FLC represses downstream genes that promote flowering, including FT ( Helliwell et al., 2006 ; Searle et al., 2006 ). During vernalization, the FLC transcript level decreases and plants become competent to flower ( Kim et al., 2009 ). Recently, it was reported that the addition of far-red light to LD conditions promotes flowering by altering the balance between the FLC -mediated repression and the CO-mediated induction of flowering ( Wollenberg et al., 2008 ).

To investigate the mechanism by which phytochrome signaling regulates the growth phase, we performed a yeast two-hybrid screen using phytochrome as the bait against a cDNA library derived from Arabidopsis in the late vegetative phase. We identified the VASCULAR PLANT ONE–ZINC FINGER1 ( VOZ1 ) and VOZ2 genes as phyB-interacting factors. The voz1 voz2 double mutant showed delayed flowering under LD conditions, and genetic analysis demonstrated that VOZ1 and VOZ2 act downstream of phyB. Expression analysis indicated that VOZ1 and VOZ2 upregulate FT expression and downregulate FLC expression. Transgenic studies showed that VOZ2 functions in the nucleus and that VOZ2 abundance in the nucleus is controlled by light quality mediated by phytochromes.

DISCUSSION

Previous studies demonstrated that Arabidopsis phyB is involved in the control of flowering by repressing FT expression ( Cerdán and Chory, 2003 ). In this study, we identified VOZ1 and VOZ2 as phyB-interacting factors using a yeast two-hybrid screen. Characterization of voz mutants, genetic approaches, and expression analyses indicated that VOZ1 and VOZ2 specifically promote flowering downstream of phyB and regulate the expression of the key flowering-related factors FLC and FT . Histochemical analysis demonstrated that VOZ1 and VOZ2 function in vascular bundles. Moreover, subcellular localization and in vivo interaction analysis suggested that VOZ1 and VOZ2 interact with phyB in the cytoplasm, are translocated to the nucleus at signal transmission, and are subjected to degradation in a phytochrome-dependent manner.
