---
pmid: '22980980'
title: Ragulator is a GEF for the rag GTPases that signal amino acid levels to mTORC1.
authors:
- Bar-Peled L
- Schweitzer LD
- Zoncu R
- Sabatini DM
journal: Cell
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3517996
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.07.032
---

# Ragulator is a GEF for the rag GTPases that signal amino acid levels to mTORC1.
**Authors:** Bar-Peled L, Schweitzer LD, Zoncu R, Sabatini DM
**Journal:** Cell (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2012.07.032](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2012.07.032)
**PMC:** [PMC3517996](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3517996/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2012 Sep 14;150(6):1196-208. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.07.032.

Ragulator is a GEF for the rag GTPases that signal amino acid levels to mTORC1.

Bar-Peled L(1), Schweitzer LD, Zoncu R, Sabatini DM.

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Department of Biology, Nine Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA 02142, 
USA.

The mTOR Complex 1 (mTORC1) pathway regulates cell growth in response to 
numerous cues, including amino acids, which promote mTORC1 translocation to the 
lysosomal surface, its site of activation. The heterodimeric RagA/B-RagC/D 
GTPases, the Ragulator complex that tethers the Rags to the lysosome, and the 
v-ATPase form a signaling system that is necessary for amino acid sensing by 
mTORC1. Amino acids stimulate the binding of guanosine triphosphate to RagA and 
RagB but the factors that regulate Rag nucleotide loading are unknown. Here, we 
identify HBXIP and C7orf59 as two additional Ragulator components that are 
required for mTORC1 activation by amino acids. The expanded Ragulator has 
nucleotide exchange activity toward RagA and RagB and interacts with the Rag 
heterodimers in an amino acid- and v-ATPase-dependent fashion. Thus, we provide 
mechanistic insight into how mTORC1 senses amino acids by identifying Ragulator 
as a guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) for the Rag GTPases.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.07.032
PMCID: PMC3517996
PMID: 22980980 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
