---
pmid: '16922859'
title: A genetic module regulates the melanization response of Anopheles to Plasmodium.
authors:
- Volz J
- Müller HM
- Zdanowicz A
- Kafatos FC
- Osta MA
journal: Cell Microbiol
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2006.00718.x
---

# A genetic module regulates the melanization response of Anopheles to Plasmodium.
**Authors:** Volz J, Müller HM, Zdanowicz A, Kafatos FC, Osta MA
**Journal:** Cell Microbiol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1462-5822.2006.00718.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1462-5822.2006.00718.x)

## Abstract

1. Cell Microbiol. 2006 Sep;8(9):1392-405. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2006.00718.x.

A genetic module regulates the melanization response of Anopheles to Plasmodium.

Volz J(1), Müller HM, Zdanowicz A, Kafatos FC, Osta MA.

Author information:
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Victoria 
3050, Australia.

Two modes of refractoriness to Plasmodium, ookinete lysis and melanization, are 
known in the malaria vector, Anopheles gambiae. Melanization, a potent insect 
immune response, is manifested in a genetically selected refractory strain and 
in susceptible mosquitoes that are depleted of specific C-type lectins (CTLs). 
Here we use a systematic in vivo RNA interference-mediated reverse genetic 
screen and other recent results to define a melanization-regulating genetic 
module or network. It encompasses at least 14 genes, including those that encode 
five Easter-like clip domain serine proteases and four Masquerade-like serine 
protease homologues of the mosquito CLIPB and CLIPA subfamilies respectively. We 
show that several but not all CLIPB genes promote Plasmodium melanization, 
exhibiting partial functional overlap and synergy. We also report that several 
CLIPA genes have contrasting roles: CLIPA8 is essential for parasite 
melanization, while three other CLIPAs are novel synergistic inhibitors of this 
response. Importantly, the roles of certain CLIPAs and CLIPBs are strain 
specific, indicating that this network may differ between strains. Finally, we 
provide evidence that in susceptible mosquitoes melanization induced by 
knockdown of either CTL4 or CLIPA2/CLIPA5 directly kills ookinetes, in contrast 
to refractory mosquitoes where it merely disposes of dead parasites.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2006.00718.x
PMID: 16922859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
