---
pmid: '19640509'
title: SLITRK1 binds 14-3-3 and regulates neurite outgrowth in a phosphorylation-dependent
  manner.
authors:
- Kajiwara Y
- Buxbaum JD
- Grice DE
journal: Biol Psychiatry
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2009.05.033
---

# SLITRK1 binds 14-3-3 and regulates neurite outgrowth in a phosphorylation-dependent manner.
**Authors:** Kajiwara Y, Buxbaum JD, Grice DE
**Journal:** Biol Psychiatry (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.biopsych.2009.05.033](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2009.05.033)

## Abstract

1. Biol Psychiatry. 2009 Nov 15;66(10):918-25. doi:
10.1016/j.biopsych.2009.05.033.  Epub 2009 Jul 29.

SLITRK1 binds 14-3-3 and regulates neurite outgrowth in a 
phosphorylation-dependent manner.

Kajiwara Y(1), Buxbaum JD, Grice DE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New 
York, USA.

BACKGROUND: Rare genetic variants of SLITRK1 have been previously associated 
with Tourette syndrome (TS), attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), 
and obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) symptoms.
METHODS: We studied SLITRK1 processing and phosphorylation. To explore potential 
signaling pathways of the cytoplasmic domain of SLITRK1, we made use of the 
yeast two-hybrid screen.
RESULTS: We observed that the extracellular domain of SLITRK1 is secreted in 
vitro and in vivo and that this process is activated by protein kinase C and 
inhibited by an inhibitor of tumor necrosis factor-alpha converting enzyme 
(TACE). We observed that SLITRK1 undergoes gamma-secretase cleavage to release a 
SLITRK1 intracellular domain (SICD). We identified an interaction between 
SLITRK1 and 14-3-3 proteins and observed that these proteins co-localized in 
cortical neuronal cultures and were coprecipitated from rat brain lysates, 
consistent with an interaction in vivo. We mapped the binding site to the very 
COOH-terminus of SLITRK1, as deletion of the last six amino acids of SLITRK1 
abolished the interaction. We demonstrated phosphorylation of SLITRK1 by protein 
kinase A (PKA), protein kinase C (PKC), and casein kinase II (CK2) and observed 
that CK2 phosphorylates SLITRK1 in the 14-3-3 binding site. Mutating the CK2 
phosphorylation site of SLITRK1 decreased binding to 14-3-3 and inhibited 
SLITRK1-mediated neurite outgrowth.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results shed light on the cell biology of SLITRK1, including 
its protein phosphorylation and potential molecular pathways for SLITRK1 
function, and should contribute to further understanding the role of SLIRTK1 in 
developmental neuropsychiatric conditions such TS, OCD, and ADHD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2009.05.033
PMID: 19640509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
