---
pmid: '11179424'
title: Peroxide sensors for the fission yeast stress-activated mitogen-activated protein
  kinase pathway.
authors:
- Buck V
- Quinn J
- Soto Pino T
- Martin H
- Saldanha J
- Makino K
- Morgan BA
- Millar JB
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '2001'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC30952
doi: 10.1091/mbc.12.2.407
---

# Peroxide sensors for the fission yeast stress-activated mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway.
**Authors:** Buck V, Quinn J, Soto Pino T, Martin H, Saldanha J, Makino K, Morgan BA, Millar JB
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.12.2.407](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.12.2.407)
**PMC:** [PMC30952](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC30952/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Cell. 2001 Feb;12(2):407-19. doi: 10.1091/mbc.12.2.407.

Peroxide sensors for the fission yeast stress-activated mitogen-activated 
protein kinase pathway.

Buck V(1), Quinn J, Soto Pino T, Martin H, Saldanha J, Makino K, Morgan BA, 
Millar JB.

Author information:
(1)Division of Yeast Genetics, National Institute for Medical Research, The 
Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London, NW7 1AA United Kingdom.

The Schizosaccharomyces pombe stress-activated Sty1p/Spc1p mitogen-activated 
protein (MAP) kinase regulates gene expression through the Atf1p and Pap1p 
transcription factors, homologs of human ATF2 and c-Jun, respectively. Mcs4p, a 
response regulator protein, acts upstream of Sty1p by binding the Wak1p/Wis4p 
MAP kinase kinase kinase. We show that phosphorylation of Mcs4p on a conserved 
aspartic acid residue is required for activation of Sty1p only in response to 
peroxide stress. Mcs4p acts in a conserved phospho-relay system initiated by two 
PAS/PAC domain-containing histidine kinases, Mak2p and Mak3p. In the absence of 
Mak2p or Mak3p, Sty1p fails to phosphorylate the Atf1p transcription factor or 
induce Atf1p-dependent gene expression. As a consequence, cells lacking Mak2p 
and Mak3p are sensitive to peroxide attack in the absence of Prr1p, a distinct 
response regulator protein that functions in association with Pap1p. The Mak1p 
histidine kinase, which also contains PAS/PAC repeats, does not regulate Sty1p 
or Atf1p but is partially required for Pap1p- and Prr1p-dependent transcription. 
We conclude that the transcriptional response to free radical attack is 
initiated by at least two distinct phospho-relay pathways in fission yeast.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.12.2.407
PMCID: PMC30952
PMID: 11179424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The Schizosaccharomyces pombe stress-activated
 Sty1p/Spc1p mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase regulates gene
 expression through the Atf1p and Pap1p transcription factors, homologs
 of human ATF2 and c-Jun, respectively. Mcs4p, a response
 regulator protein, acts upstream of Sty1p by binding the Wak1p/Wis4p
 MAP kinase kinase kinase. We show that phosphorylation of Mcs4p on a
 conserved aspartic acid residue is required for activation of Sty1p
 only in response to peroxide stress. Mcs4p acts in a conserved
 phospho-relay system initiated by two PAS/PAC domain-containing
 histidine kinases, Mak2p and Mak3p. In the absence of Mak2p or Mak3p,
 Sty1p fails to phosphorylate the Atf1p transcription factor or induce
 Atf1p-dependent gene expression. As a consequence, cells lacking Mak2p
 and Mak3p are sensitive to peroxide attack in the absence of Prr1p, a
 distinct response regulator protein that functions in association with
 Pap1p. The Mak1p histidine kinase, which also contains PAS/PAC repeats,
 does not regulate Sty1p or Atf1p but is partially required for Pap1p-
 and Prr1p-dependent transcription. We conclude that the transcriptional
 response to free radical attack is initiated by at least two distinct
 phospho-relay pathways in fission yeast.

INTRODUCTION

The mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase (MAPK) signaling
 pathways are critical for the response of cells to changes in their
 environment ( Marshall, 1994 ; Herskowitz, 1995 ; Waskiewicz and Cooper,
 1995 ; Treisman, 1996 ). They serve to transduce signals generated
 at the cell surface or in the cytoplasm to the nucleus, where changes
 in gene expression result. In mammalian cells, multiple distinct MAP
 kinases have been identified, including a large subset whose members
 are activated by a variety of environmental stress conditions,
 DNA-damaging agents, inflammatory cytokines, and certain vasoactive
 neuropeptides ( Dérijard et al. , 1994 ; Freshney et al. , 1994 ; Galcheva-Gargova et al. , 1994 ; Han et al. , 1994 ; Kyriakis et al ., 1994 ; Lee et
 al. , 1994 ; Rouse et al. , 1994 ; Sluss et al. ,
 1994 ). These stress-activated MAP kinases (SAPKs) fall into two
 distinct classes, termed the C-Jun N-terminal kinase
 (JNK) and p38 kinases, based on their sequences (Davies,
 1994; Waskiewicz and Cooper, 1995 ). A number of transcription
 factors are phosphorylated in response to SAPK activation; for example,
 the c-Jun factor is regulated by JNK ( Hibi et al. , 1993 ; Derijard et al. , 1994 ; Kyriakis et al. ,
 1994 ) but not by p38, whereas ATF2 is phosphorylated and regulated by
 both JNK ( Gupta et al. , 1995 ; Livingstone et al. ,
 1995 ; van Dam et al. , 1995 ) and p38 ( Raingeaud et
 al. , 1995 ). Although a number of MAPK kinases (MAPKKs) and MAPKK
 kinases (MAPKKKs) that activate the SAPKs have been identified in
 mammalian cells, very little is known about how these are regulated by
 stress stimuli (reviewed in Ichijo, 1999 ; Tibbles and Woodgett, 1999 ).
 This is probably due to the multiplicity of SAPK pathways in mammalian
 cells and the difficulties of genetic analysis in these organisms.

Recently, a single member of the SAPK family, called Sty1p (also known
 as Spc1p or Phh1p), has been identified in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe ( Millar et al. , 1995 ; Shiozaki and Russell, 1995 ; Kato et al. , 1996 ). The Sty1p
 MAP kinase stimulates gene expression via the Atf1p and Pap1p
 transcription factors, homologs of human ATF2 and c-Jun, respectively,
 suggesting that the transcriptional targets of the S. pombe pathway are closely related to those in mammalian cells ( Toda et
 al. , 1991 ; Takeda et al. , 1995 ; Wilkinson et
 al. , 1996 ; Shiozaki and Russell, 1996 ; Gaits et al. ,
 1998 ; Toone et al. , 1998 ; Wilkinson and Millar, 1998 ).
 Stress-induced nuclear translocation of activated Sty1p causes it to
 bind and phosphorylate Atf1p, although the precise mechanism by which
 this phosphorylation induces transcriptional activation is not known
 ( Wilkinson et al. , 1996 ; Shiozaki and Russell, 1996 ; Gaits et al. , 1998 ). Sty1p also binds to Pap1p but in this case
 the mechanism of activation appears to be distinct. In contrast to
 Atf1p, the bulk of the Pap1p protein is cytoplasmic in unstressed cells
 and is translocated to the nucleus only in response to an oxidative
 stress ( Toone et al. , 1998 ). This translocation requires
 Sty1p, although activation of Pap1p may not involve phosphorylation,
 because Pap1p is not a phosphorylation target of Sty1p in vitro.
 Instead, interaction of Pap1p with the nuclear export factor Crm1p is
 disturbed by oxidation of the cysteine residues in the C terminus of
 Pap1p. The role of Sty1p in this process is not understood (reviewed in Wilkinson and Millar, 1998 ). Nevertheless, many of the genes induced
 after Sty1p activation in S. pombe are similar to those
 induced by SAPK activation in mammals.

Sty1p is activated by a similar range of environmental stimuli to the
 mammalian SAPKs, including oxidative stress, UV light, DNA-damaging
 agents, osmotic stress, physical stresses, heat shock, and the protein
 synthesis inhibitor anisomycin ( Millar et al. , 1995 ; Shiozaki and Russell, 1995 ; Degols et al. , 1996 ; Degols and
 Russell, 1997 ; Shieh et al. , 1997 , 1998 ). Thus, one might
 postulate that the mechanisms controlling SAPK activation are similar
 in S. pombe and mammalian cells. However, we recently
 demonstrated that activation of Sty1p is regulated by Mcs4p, a protein
 that is homologous to the Saccharomyces cerevisiae Ssk1p
 response regulator protein, which is similar to a number of
 two-component systems that function in bacteria but have yet to be
 identified in mammals ( Stock et al. , 1989 ; Parkinson, 1993 ).
 Ssk1p acts in a multistep phospho-relay system to control the activity
 of the Hog1p MAPK ( Maeda et al. , 1994 , 1995 ; Posas et
 al. , 1996 ; Shieh et al. , 1997 ; Posas and Saito, 1998 ).
 Although Hog1p is structurally related to the SAPK family, it is
 activated only by increases in external osmolarity ( Brewster et
 al. , 1993 ; Schüller et al. , 1994 ). In hypotonic
 medium, a transmembrane histidine kinase, Sln1p, initiates a
 phospho-relay system in which a phosphate group is transferred from the
 Sln1p response-regulator domain to a histidine residue in Ypd1p and
 then to a conserved aspartate residue in Ssk1p ( Posas et
 al. , 1996 ). In response to hypertonic stress, Sln1p is inactivated
 and Ssk1p is dephosphorylated. In this state, Ssk1p binds and activates
 one of two functionally overlapping MAPKKKs, Ssk2p and Ssk22p ( Maeda et al. , 1994 , 1995 ; Posas and Saito, 1998 ). Ssk2p and Ssk22p
 kinase activation leads to the sequential phosphorylation and
 activation of the Pbs2p MAPKK and Hog1p MAPK ( Brewster et
 al. , 1993 ; Maeda et al. , 1994 , 1995 ). Activation of
 Hog1p leads to the induction of a number of genes whose products
 protect the cells in hypertonic medium.

It has been shown previously that in S. pombe , Mcs4p acts
 upstream of the Wak1/Wis4p and Win1p kinases, homologs of the Ssk2p and
 Ssk22p MAPKKKs, which in turn transmit the stress signal to the Wis1p
 MAPKK, the direct activator of Sty1p ( Warbrick and Fantes, 1991 ; Millar et al. , 1995 ; Shiozaki and Russell, 1995 ; Shieh et
 al. , 1997 , 1998 ; Samejima et al. , 1998 ). Recently, an S. pombe homolog of Ypd1p, Mpr1p, was found to be required
 for the activation of Sty1p in response to an oxidative but not osmotic
 stress ( Nguyen et al. , 2000 ). This suggests that the Sty1p
 MAPK pathway may be regulated by a phospho-relay system similar to the
 Sln1p-Ypd1p-Ssk1p pathway in S. cerevisiae . However, the
 sensors that initiate this signal in S. pombe have not been
 identified. Moreover, because deletion of mcs4 abrogrates
 the activation of Sty1p in response to multiple environmental stresses,
 it is not clear what role Mcs4p phosphorylation may play in
 transmitting these signals.

In this article, we describe the role of Mcs4p in stress-induced
 activation of Sty1p in more detail. We present evidence that S.
 pombe contains at least two phospho-relay signaling systems that
 are specifically involved in sensing peroxide stress and that one of
 these directly controls the activity of the Sty1p MAPK. We discuss the
 implications of these results both in relation to the ability of
 microbial pathogens to survive free radical attack and the mechanisms
 controlling SAPK activation in metazoans.

DISCUSSION

As reported previously, we and others have identified Mcs4p as an
 upstream regulator of the S. pombe Sty1p MAPK pathway
 ( Shiozaki et al ., 1997 ; Shieh et al. ,
 1997 ). Here we show that Mcs4p associates with Wak1p, one of two
 MAPKKKs that control phosphorylation of Sty1p. Thus, Mcs4p acts in a
 manner similar to that of the S cerevisiae Ssk1p
 response-regulator protein, which binds the Ssk2p and Ssk22p MAPKKKs to
 regulate the Hog1p MAP kinase ( Posas and Saito, 1998 ). The activity of
 Ssk1p is controlled by phosphorylation on aspartate 554, an event that
 is initiated by a transmembrane histidine kinase, Sln1p.
 Phosphotransfer between Sln1p and Ssk1p requires phosphorylation of an
 intermediate protein, Ypd1p, on histidine 64. In this article, we
 report that phosphorylation of the equivalent residue in Mcs4p (D412)
 is required for activation of the Sty1p MAP kinase, but only in
 response to hydrogen peroxide and not to a battery of other
 environmental insults, including osmotic stress. Surprisingly,
 paraquat, which induces superoxide radicals and, as a consequence, the
 production of hydrogen peroxide, still activates Sty1p in mcs4(D412N) cells. We conclude that either the superoxide
 radical is sensed by a distinct mechanism or, at the concentration
 used, paraquat activates stress signals other than the overproduction
 of peroxide. Similarly, heavy metal toxicity, also regarded as an
 oxidative stress, appears to require a distinct pathway to activate
 Sty1p that does not involve phosphorylation of Mcs4p. Together, these
 results suggest that Mcs4p acts in a two-component system that
 specifically senses peroxide stress. Indeed, Nguyen et al. (2000) have
 recently shown that an S. pombe homolog of S.
 cerevisiae Ypd1p, Mpr1p, is also required for activation of Sty1p
 by peroxide and that this is mediated through a conserved histidine
 residue. In this article, we present evidence that deletion of either
 the Mak2p or Mak3p histidine kinase, but not Mak1p, prevents
 phosphorylation of Sty1p in response to hydrogen peroxide. As a
 consequence, Sty1p is not activated as judged by the absence of Atf1p
 phosphorylation and failure of Atf1-dependent gene expression. These
 results strongly suggest that Sty1p is controlled by a phospho-relay
 system that is similar to the Sln1p-Ypd1p-Ssk1p pathway in S.
 cerevisiae , but which is initiated by two histidine kinases, Mak2p
 and Mak3p (see model in Figure 7 ).

An important difference between the S. pombe and S.
 cerevisiae histidine kinases is that Mak2p and Mak3p specifically
 sense oxidative stress, whereas Sln1p senses changes in external
 osmolarity. The domain architecture of the Mak2p and Mak3p proteins
 provides some clue as to why this may be. In particular, both proteins
 contain a single repeat of a PAS/PAC domain, which has been identified
 in a variety of prokaryotic sensors of oxygen or redox, including other
 members of the histidine-kinase superfamily such as E. coli Aer and ArcB and Rhizobium meliloti FixL, but not Sln1p
 ( Crews and Fan, 1999 ). Importantly, the PAS/PAC domain of FixL binds
 heme as a prosthetic group. Changes in the availability of oxygen to
 the heme moiety induce a conformational change in the PAS/PAC domain
 that causes an alteration in the activity of the adjoining
 histidine-kinase domain ( Gong et al. , 1998 ; Pellequer et al. , 1999 ). It is possible that a similar mechanism may
 regulate the activity of Mak2p and Mak3p. The PAS/PAC domain may also
 explain why both of these histidine kinases are required for signal
 transmission to Sty1p, because this domain has been shown to mediate
 protein–protein interaction in other species ( Huang et al. ,
 1993 , 1995 ). Although Mak2p and Mak3p appear to be exclusively
 cytoplasmic in S. pombe , we have not been able to
 demonstrate an interaction between them (Quinn, Buck, and Millar,
 unpublished data). Thus, we cannot yet rule out the possibility that
 Mak2p and Mak3p initiate independent signals that are both required for
 activation of Wak1p.

How is the peroxide signal actually transduced to the Wak1p
 MAPKKK? It is possible that the peroxide signal activates the
 histidine-kinase domains of Mak2p and/or Mak3p. In this manner, the
 response-regulator domains of Mak2p, Mak3p, or both would become
 phosphorylated and the phosphate group would, in turn, be transferred
 to Mpr1p. This conclusion is supported by the observation that peroxide
 induces Mpr1p to associate with Mcs4p and mutation of histidine 221 in
 Mpr1p abolishes this association ( Nguyen et al. , 2000 ).
 Conversely, it is also formally possible that the peroxide signal
 inhibits the activity of Mak2p and/or Mak3p, leading to
 dephosphorylation of Mpr1p and Mcs4p, and that the dephosphorylated
 form of Mcs4p activates Wak1p. Notably, mcs4(D412N) cells
 show a higher basal level of Sty1p phosphorylation than mcs4 + cells, suggesting that the
 dephosphorylated form of Mcs4p is active. Analysis of the in vivo
 phosphorylation status of Mak2p, Mak3p, Mpr1p, and Mcs4p will be
 necessary to distinguish between these possibilities.

In contrast to Mak2p and Mak3p, Mak1p does not control Sty1p activity
 or Atf1p-dependent gene expression. Instead, we find that Mak1p is
 partially required for the induction of catalase in response to
 peroxide stress. It is intriguing in this respect that Mak1p also
 contains two PAS/PAC repeats, suggesting that Mak1p may also function
 as a peroxide sensor. Induction of catalase requires both the Pap1p
 transcription factor and Prr1p, a response-regulator protein that is
 homologous to the S. cerevisiae Skn7p transcription factor
 ( Ohmiya et al. , 1999 ). Skn7p shares an overlapping function
 with the Yap1p transcription factor in the response to oxidative stress
 in S. cerevisiae ( Brown et al. , 1993 ; Morgan et al. , 1995 ; Krems et al. , 1996 ; Morgan et
 al. , 1997 ). It is possible that Mak1p regulates the activity of
 Prr1p via phosphorylation of an independent pool of Mpr1p, but the
 details of such a pathway are unclear because deletion of mpr1 causes superinduction of catalase expression ( Nguyen et al. , 2000 ). Nevertheless, these results suggest that the
 transcriptional response to free radical attack is regulated by at
 least two distinct phospho-relay pathways in fission yeast.

In addition to the PAS/PAC motif, Mak2p and Mak3p contain a GAF
 domain, which has been identified in a diverse array of
 phototransducing proteins, including cGMP-specific and -stimulated
 phosphodiesterases, Anabena adenylate cyclase, and the E. coli FhlA transcriptional regulator ( Aravind and Ponting,
 1997 ). One function of the GAF domain that has been well characterized
 is that of cGMP binding ( Charbonneau et al. , 1990 ).
 Intriguingly, the chromophore attachment site in plant and
 cyanobacterial phytochromes occurs on a conserved cysteine residue
 within their single GAF domain (Figure 3 B; Yeh and Lagarias, 1998 ).
 Although the overall domain architecture of Mak2p and Mak3p is similar
 to that of the phytochrome family, their GAF domains lack this residue.
 Thus, the function of this domain in Mak2 and Mak3 is at present
 unknown. Intriguingly, Mak2p and Mak3p are most closely related to a
 histidine kinase in the human pathogen C. albicans , C.a. HK1
 ( Calera et al. , 1998 ). In addition to histidine-kinase,
 response-regulator and GAF domains, all three proteins possess an
 N-terminal domain that is strikingly similar to a series of atypical
 serine/threonine kinase in prokaryotes, in particular M.
 tuberculosis PknB. To our knowledge, these are the only known
 proteins to have two separate kinase domains of apparently distinct
 specificity. Our initial analysis suggests that these N-terminal
 domains in Mak2p and Mak3p are not required for signal transmission to
 Sty1p (Quinn, Buck, and Millar, unpublished data). Nevertheless, it is
 tempting to speculate that Mak2p, Mak3p, and C.a. HK1 are derived from
 a fusion of distinct ORFs in an ancestral prokaryotic operon that
 functioned in a common signaling pathway to sense and respond to free
 radical attack. Although it is not clear whether C.a. HK1, which lacks
 a PAS/PAC motif, acts as a peroxide sensor, homozygous null diploids
 for HK1 are nonvirulent in a murine model ( Calera et al. ,
 1998 , 1999 ). Furthermore, a homolog of Ssk1p and Mcs4p is also required
 for virulence in this system, suggesting that C.a. HK1 may function in
 a phospho-relay system similar to that described here ( Calera and
 Calderone, 1999 ; Calera et al. , 2000 ).

The absence of structural homologs of Mak2p and Mak3p in S.
 cerevisiae could explain why the Hog1p MAP kinase is activated
 only in response to osmotic stress and not to hydrogen peroxide.
 Indeed, S. cerevisiae has only one histidine kinase (Sln1p),
 whereas at least three have been identified in C. albicans and S. pombe . In addition, the C. albicans and S. pombe histidine kinases are not identical to each other.
 Although an osmosensing Sln1p homolog exists in C. albicans (C.a. Sln1), it is unlikely that Sty1p is controlled by a Sln1p-like
 molecule in S. pombe , because activation of Sty1p in
 response to osmotic stress does not require phosphorylation of Mcs4p.
 Conversely, no homologs of Mak1p or C.a. Nik1 have been identified in C. albicans and S. pombe , respectively. It seems
 possible, therefore, that all fungi are derived from a common
 eukaryotic ancestor that possessed multiple two-component regulatory
 systems that have been selectively lost by evolutionary pressure.

To date, no structural homologs of the phospho-relay proteins
 have been identified in mammals. Thus, control of SAPK pathways by
 two-component systems is likely to be unique to lower eukaryotes.
 Importantly, we have shown that the phospho-relay system is not
 required for activation of the S. pombe Sty1p MAPK in
 response to environmental stresses that activate the mammalian SAPKs,
 including heat shock, the protein-synthesis inhibitor anisomycin,
 agents that cause oxidative damage such heavy metals (e.g., arsenic or
 cadmium), superoxide anion generators (e.g., paraquat), or UV light
 mimetics (e.g., 4-nitroquinoline oxide). We tentatively propose that
 each environmental stress is sensed by a specific cellular receptor(s)
 that triggers activation of Sty1p, possibly by regulating the activity
 of the Wak1p/Wis4p and/or Win1p MAPKKKs (Figure 7 ). We will need to
 identify other upstream activators of the Sty1p pathway to determine
 whether these are structurally or functionally conserved in mammals.
