---
reference_id: PMID:37871215
title: A degron-based approach to manipulate Eomes functions in the context of the developing mouse embryo.
authors:
- Bisia AM
- Costello I
- Xypolita ME
- Harland LTG
- Kurbel PJ
- Bikoff EK
- Robertson EJ
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.2311946120
keywords:
- Mice
- Animals
- Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition
- "T-Box Domain Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Germ Layers/metabolism
- "Embryo, Mammalian/metabolism"
- Mesoderm/metabolism
- Endoderm/metabolism
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# A degron-based approach to manipulate Eomes functions in the context of the developing mouse embryo.
**Authors:** Bisia AM, Costello I, Xypolita ME, Harland LTG, Kurbel PJ, Bikoff EK, Robertson EJ
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.2311946120](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2311946120)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2023 Oct 31;120(44):e2311946120. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2311946120. Epub 2023 Oct 23.

A degron-based approach to manipulate Eomes functions in the context of the 
developing mouse embryo.

Bisia AM(#)(1), Costello I(#)(1), Xypolita ME(#)(1), Harland LTG(1), Kurbel 
PJ(1), Bikoff EK(1), Robertson EJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3RE, 
United Kingdom.
(#)Contributed equally

The T-box transcription factor Eomesodermin (Eomes), also known as Tbr2, plays 
essential roles in the early mouse embryo. Loss-of-function mutant embryos 
arrest at implantation due to Eomes requirements in the trophectoderm cell 
lineage. Slightly later, expression in the visceral endoderm promotes anterior 
visceral endoderm formation and anterior-posterior axis specification. Early 
induction in the epiblast beginning at day 6 is necessary for nascent mesoderm 
to undergo epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). Eomes acts in a 
temporally and spatially restricted manner to sequentially specify the yolk sac 
haemogenic endothelium, cardiac mesoderm, definitive endoderm, and axial 
mesoderm progenitors during gastrulation. Little is known about the underlying 
molecular mechanisms governing Eomes actions during the formation of these 
distinct progenitor cell populations. Here, we introduced a degron-tag and 
mCherry reporter sequence into the Eomes locus. Our experiments analyzing 
homozygously tagged embryonic stem cells and embryos demonstrate that the 
degron-tagged Eomes protein is fully functional. dTAG (degradation fusion tag) 
treatment in vitro results in rapid protein degradation and recapitulates the 
Eomes-null phenotype. However in utero administration of dTAG resulted in 
variable and lineage-specific degradation, likely reflecting diverse cell 
type-specific Eomes expression dynamics. Finally, we demonstrate that Eomes 
protein rapidly recovers following dTAG wash-out in vitro. The ability to 
temporally manipulate Eomes protein expression in combination with cell marking 
by the mCherry-reporter offers a powerful tool for dissecting Eomes-dependent 
functional roles in these diverse cell types in the early embryo.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2311946120
PMCID: PMC10622880
PMID: 37871215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.