---
pmid: '18310072'
title: Multiple molecular interactions implicate the connectin/titin N2A region as
  a modulating scaffold for p94/calpain 3 activity in skeletal muscle.
authors:
- Hayashi C
- Ono Y
- Doi N
- Kitamura F
- Tagami M
- Mineki R
- Arai T
- Taguchi H
- Yanagida M
- Hirner S
- Labeit D
- Labeit S
- Sorimachi H
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M708262200
---

# Multiple molecular interactions implicate the connectin/titin N2A region as a modulating scaffold for p94/calpain 3 activity in skeletal muscle.
**Authors:** Hayashi C, Ono Y, Doi N, Kitamura F, Tagami M, Mineki R, Arai T, Taguchi H, Yanagida M, Hirner S, Labeit D, Labeit S, Sorimachi H
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M708262200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M708262200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2008 May 23;283(21):14801-14. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M708262200. Epub 
2008 Feb 29.

Multiple molecular interactions implicate the connectin/titin N2A region as a 
modulating scaffold for p94/calpain 3 activity in skeletal muscle.

Hayashi C(1), Ono Y, Doi N, Kitamura F, Tagami M, Mineki R, Arai T, Taguchi H, 
Yanagida M, Hirner S, Labeit D, Labeit S, Sorimachi H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Enzymatic Regulation for Cell Functions (Calpain Project), The 
Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science (Rinshoken), Tokyo, Japan.

p94/calpain 3 is a skeletal muscle-specific Ca(2+)-regulated cysteine protease 
(calpain), and genetic loss of p94 protease activity causes muscular dystrophy 
(calpainopathy). In addition, a small in-frame deletion in the N2A region of 
connectin/titin that impairs p94-connectin interaction causes a severe muscular 
dystrophy (mdm) in mice. Since p94 via its interaction with the N2A and M-line 
regions of connectin becomes part of the connectin filament system that serves 
as a molecular scaffold for the myofibril, it has been proposed that structural 
and functional integrity of the p94-connectin complex is essential for health 
and maintenance of myocytes. In this study, we have surveyed the interactions 
made by p94 and connectin N2A inside COS7 cells. This revealed that p94 binds to 
connectin at multiple sites, including newly identified loci in the N2A and PEVK 
regions of connectin. Functionally, p94-N2A interactions suppress p94 autolysis 
and protected connectin from proteolysis. The connectin N2A region also contains 
a binding site for the muscle ankyrin repeat proteins (MARPs), a protein family 
involved in the cellular stress responses. MARP2/Ankrd2 competed with p94 for 
binding to connectin and was also proteolyzed by p94. Intriguingly, a connectin 
N2A fragment with the mdm deletion possessed enhanced resistance to proteases, 
including p94, and its interaction with MARPs was weakened. Our data support a 
model in which MARP2-p94 signaling converges within the N2A connectin segment 
and the mdm deletion disrupts their coordination. These results also implicate 
the dynamic nature of connectin molecule as a regulatory scaffold of p94 
functions.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M708262200
PMID: 18310072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
