---
pmid: '10749851'
title: Protein-arginine methyltransferase I, the predominant protein-arginine methyltransferase
  in cells, interacts with and is regulated by interleukin enhancer-binding factor
  3.
authors:
- Tang J
- Kao PN
- Herschman HR
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M000023200
---

# Protein-arginine methyltransferase I, the predominant protein-arginine methyltransferase in cells, interacts with and is regulated by interleukin enhancer-binding factor 3.
**Authors:** Tang J, Kao PN, Herschman HR
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M000023200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M000023200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jun 30;275(26):19866-76. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M000023200.

Protein-arginine methyltransferase I, the predominant protein-arginine 
methyltransferase in cells, interacts with and is regulated by interleukin 
enhancer-binding factor 3.

Tang J(1), Kao PN, Herschman HR.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biology Institute and the Department of Biological Chemistry, UCLA 
School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.

Arginine methylation is a common post-translation modification found in many 
proteins. Protein-arginine methyltransferase I (PRMT1) contributes >90% of type 
I protein-arginine methyltransferase activity in cells and tissues. To expand 
our knowledge on the regulation and role of PRMT1 in cells, we used the yeast 
two-hybrid system to identify proteins that interact with PRMT1. One of the 
interacting proteins we cloned is interleukin enhancer-binding factor 3 (ILF3), 
also known as M phase phosphoprotein 4. ILF3 is closely related to nuclear 
factor 90 (NF90). Using an immunofluorescence analysis, we determined that ILF3 
and PRMT1 co-localize in the nucleus. Moreover, PRMT1 and ILF3 co-precipitate in 
immunoprecipitation assays and can be isolated together in "pull-down" 
experiments using recombinant fusion proteins. ILF3 is a robust substrate for 
methylation by PRMT1 and can modulate PRMT1 activity in in vitro methylation 
assays. Deletion studies demonstrated that the COOH-terminal region of ILF3, 
which is rich in arginine, glycine, and serine, is responsible for the strong 
interaction between PRMT1 and ILF3 and is the site of ILF3 methylation by PRMT1. 
Although ILF3 and NF90 are highly similar, they differ in their 
carboxyl-terminal regions. Because of this difference, NF90 does not interact 
with PRMT1, is a much poorer substrate than ILF3 for PRMT1-dependent 
methylation, and does not modulate PRMT1 enzyme activity.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M000023200
PMID: 10749851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
