---
pmid: '21951279'
title: Role of presenilin 1 in structural plasticity of cortical dendritic spines
  in vivo.
authors:
- Jung CK
- Fuhrmann M
- Honarnejad K
- Van Leuven F
- Herms J
journal: J Neurochem
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2011.07503.x
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Role of presenilin 1 in structural plasticity of cortical dendritic spines in vivo.
**Authors:** Jung CK, Fuhrmann M, Honarnejad K, Van Leuven F, Herms J
**Journal:** J Neurochem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1471-4159.2011.07503.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1471-4159.2011.07503.x)

## Abstract

1. J Neurochem. 2011 Dec;119(5):1064-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2011.07503.x. 
Epub 2011 Oct 24.

Role of presenilin 1 in structural plasticity of cortical dendritic spines in 
vivo.

Jung CK(1), Fuhrmann M, Honarnejad K, Van Leuven F, Herms J.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neuropathology and Prion Research, Laboratory of Experimental 
Neuropathology, Ludwig-Maximilian-University, Munich, Germany.

Mutations in presenilins are the major cause of familial Alzheimer's disease 
(FAD), leading to impairments of memory and synaptic plasticity followed by 
age-dependent neurodegeneration. Presenilins are the catalytic subunits of 
γ-secretase, which itself is critically involved in the processing of amyloid 
precursor protein to release neurotoxic amyloid β (Aβ). Besides Aβ generation, 
there is growing evidence that presenilins play an essential role in the 
formation and maintenance of synapses. To further elucidate the effect of 
presenilin1 (PS1) on synapses, we performed longitudinal in vivo two-photon 
imaging of dendritic spines in the somatosensory cortex of transgenic mice 
over-expressing either human wild-type PS1 or the FAD-mutated variant A246E 
(FAD-PS1). Interestingly, the consequences of transgene expression were 
different in two subtypes of cortical dendrites. On apical layer 5 dendrites, we 
found an enhanced spine density in both mice over-expressing human wild-type 
presenilin1 and FAD-PS1, whereas on basal layer 3 dendrites only over-expression 
of FAD-PS1 increased the spine density. Time-lapse imaging revealed no 
differences in kinetically distinct classes of dendritic spines nor was the 
shape of spines affected. Although γ-secretase-dependent processing of 
synapse-relevant proteins seemed to be unaltered, higher expression levels of 
ryanodine receptors suggest a modified Ca(2+) homeostasis in PS1 over-expressing 
mice. However, the conditional depletion of PS1 in single cortical neurons had 
no observable impact on dendritic spines. In consequence, our results favor the 
view that PS1 influences dendritic spine plasticity in a gain-of-function but 
γ-secretase-independent manner.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal of Neurochemistry © 2011 International Society for 
Neurochemistry.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2011.07503.x
PMID: 21951279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
