---
pmid: '15684425'
title: Phosphorylation of Ser28 in histone H3 mediated by mixed lineage kinase-like
  mitogen-activated protein triple kinase alpha.
authors:
- Choi HS
- Choi BY
- Cho YY
- Zhu F
- Bode AM
- Dong Z
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M410521200
---

# Phosphorylation of Ser28 in histone H3 mediated by mixed lineage kinase-like mitogen-activated protein triple kinase alpha.
**Authors:** Choi HS, Choi BY, Cho YY, Zhu F, Bode AM, Dong Z
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M410521200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M410521200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 8;280(14):13545-53. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M410521200. Epub
2005  Jan 31.

Phosphorylation of Ser28 in histone H3 mediated by mixed lineage kinase-like 
mitogen-activated protein triple kinase alpha.

Choi HS(1), Choi BY, Cho YY, Zhu F, Bode AM, Dong Z.

Author information:
(1)Hormel Institute, University of Minnesota, Austin, Minnesota 55912, USA.

The mitogen-activated protein kinase cascades elicit modification of chromatin 
proteins such as histone H3 by phosphorylation concomitant with gene activation. 
Here, we demonstrate for the first time that the mixed lineage kinase-like 
mitogen-activated protein triple kinase (MLTK)-alpha phosphorylates histone H3 
at Ser28. MLTK-alpha but neither a kinase-negative mutant of MLTK-alpha nor 
MLTK-beta interacted with and phosphorylated histone H3 in vivo and in vitro. 
When overexpressed in 293T or JB6 Cl41 cells, MLTK-alpha phosphorylated histone 
H3 at Ser28 but not at Ser10. The interaction between MLTK-alpha and histone H3 
was enhanced by stimulation with ultraviolet B light (UVB) or epidermal growth 
factor (EGF), which resulted in the accumulation of MLTK-alpha in the nucleus. 
UVB- or EGF-induced phosphorylation of histone H3 at Ser28 was not affected by 
PD 98059, a MEK inhibitor, or SB 202190, a p38 kinase inhibitor, in 
MLTK-alpha-overexpressing JB6 Cl41 cells. Significantly, UVB- or EGF-induced 
phosphorylation of histone H3 at Ser28 was blocked by small interfering RNA of 
MLTK-alpha. The inhibition of histone H3 phosphorylation at Ser28 in the 
MLTK-alpha knock-down JB6 Cl41 cells was not due to a defect in mitogen- and 
stress-activated protein kinase 1 or 90-kDa ribosomal S6 kinase (p90RSK) 
activity. In summary, these results illustrate that MLTK-alpha plays a key role 
in the UVB- and EGF-induced phosphorylation of histone H3 at Ser28, suggesting 
that MLTK-alpha might be a new histone H3 kinase at the level of 
mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinases.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M410521200
PMID: 15684425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
