---
pmid: '24936062'
title: F-box only protein 31 (FBXO31) negatively regulates p38 mitogen-activated protein
  kinase (MAPK) signaling by mediating lysine 48-linked ubiquitination and degradation
  of mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 6 (MKK6).
authors:
- Liu J
- Han L
- Li B
- Yang J
- Huen MS
- Pan X
- Tsao SW
- Cheung AL
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4118112
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.560342
---

# F-box only protein 31 (FBXO31) negatively regulates p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling by mediating lysine 48-linked ubiquitination and degradation of mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 6 (MKK6).
**Authors:** Liu J, Han L, Li B, Yang J, Huen MS, Pan X, Tsao SW, Cheung AL
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M114.560342](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M114.560342)
**PMC:** [PMC4118112](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4118112/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Aug 1;289(31):21508-18. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.560342. Epub 
2014 Jun 16.

F-box only protein 31 (FBXO31) negatively regulates p38 mitogen-activated 
protein kinase (MAPK) signaling by mediating lysine 48-linked ubiquitination and 
degradation of mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 6 (MKK6).

Liu J(1), Han L(1), Li B(1), Yang J(1), Huen MS(1), Pan X(2), Tsao SW(1), Cheung 
AL(3).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Anatomy, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The 
University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China and.
(2)the Center for Molecular Medicine, NHLBI, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland 20892.
(3)From the Department of Anatomy, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The 
University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China and lmcheung@hku.hk.

The p38 MAPK signal transduction pathway plays an important role in inflammatory 
and stress responses. MAPKK6 (MKK6), a dual specificity protein kinase, is a p38 
activator. Activation of the MKK6-p38 pathway is kept in check by multiple 
layers of regulations, including autoinhibition, dimerization, scaffold 
proteins, and Lys-63-linked polyubiquitination. However, the mechanisms 
underlying deactivation of MKK6-p38, which is crucial for maintaining the 
magnitude and duration of signal transduction, are not well understood. 
Lys-48-linked ubiquitination, which marks substrates for proteasomal 
degradation, is an important negative posttranslational regulatory machinery for 
signal pathway transduction. Here we report that the accumulation of F-box only 
protein 31 (FBXO31), a component of Skp1 · Cul1 · F-box protein E3 ligase, 
negatively regulated p38 activation in cancer cells upon genotoxic stresses. Our 
results show that FBXO31 binds to MKK6 and mediates its Lys-48-linked 
polyubiquitination and degradation, thereby functioning as a negative regulator 
of MKK6-p38 signaling and protecting cells from stress-induced cell apoptosis. 
Taken together, our findings uncover a new mechanism of deactivation of MKK6-p38 
and substantiate a novel regulatory role of FBXO31 in stress response.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.560342
PMCID: PMC4118112
PMID: 24936062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
