---
pmid: '8823175'
title: 'Medium-long-chain chimeric human Acyl-CoA dehydrogenase: medium-chain enzyme
  with the active center base arrangement of long-chain Acyl-CoA dehydrogenase.'
authors:
- Nandy A
- Kieweg V
- Kräutle FG
- Vock P
- Küchler B
- Bross P
- Kim JJ
- Rasched I
- Ghisla S
journal: Biochemistry
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi960785e
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Medium-long-chain chimeric human Acyl-CoA dehydrogenase: medium-chain enzyme with the active center base arrangement of long-chain Acyl-CoA dehydrogenase.
**Authors:** Nandy A, Kieweg V, Kräutle FG, Vock P, Küchler B, Bross P, Kim JJ, Rasched I, Ghisla S
**Journal:** Biochemistry (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi960785e](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi960785e)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 1996 Sep 24;35(38):12402-11. doi: 10.1021/bi960785e.

Medium-long-chain chimeric human Acyl-CoA dehydrogenase: medium-chain enzyme 
with the active center base arrangement of long-chain Acyl-CoA dehydrogenase.

Nandy A(1), Kieweg V, Kräutle FG, Vock P, Küchler B, Bross P, Kim JJ, Rasched I, 
Ghisla S.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Biology, University of Konstanz, Germany.

The catalytically essential glutamate residue that initiates catalysis by 
abstracting the substrate alpha-hydrogen as H+ is located at position 376 
(mature MCADH numbering) on loop JK in medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase 
(MCADH). In long chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (LCADH) and isovaleryl-CoA 
dehydrogenase (IVDH), the corresponding Glu carrying out the same function is 
placed at position 255 on the adjacent helix G. These glutamates thus act on 
substrate approaching from two opposite regions at the active center. We have 
implemented the topology of LCADH in MCADH by carrying out the two mutations 
Glu376Gly and Thr255Glu. The resulting chimeric enzyme, "medium-/long" chain 
acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MLCADH) has approximately 20% of the activity of MCADH 
and approximately 25% that of LCADH with its best substrates octanoyl-CoA and 
dodecanoyl-CoA, respectively. MLCADH exhibits an enhanced rate of reoxidation 
with oxygen, however, with a much narrower substrate chain length specificity 
that peaks with dodecanoyl-CoA. This is the same maximum as that of LCADH and is 
thus significantly shifted from that of native MCADH (hexanoyl/octanoyl-CoA). 
The putative, common ancestor of LCADH and IVDH has two Glu residues, one each 
at positions 255 and 376. The corresponding MCADH mutant, Thr255Glu 
(glu/glu-MCADH), is as active as MCADH with octanoyl-CoA; its activity/chain 
length profile is, however, much narrower. The topology of the Glu as H+ 
abstracting base seems an important factor in determining chain length 
specificity and reactivity in acyl-CoA dehydrogenases. The mechanisms underlying 
these effects are discussed in view of the three-dimensional structure of 
MLCADH, which is presented in the accompanying paper [Lee et al. (1996) 
Biochemistry 35, 12412-12420].

DOI: 10.1021/bi960785e
PMID: 8823175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
