---
pmid: '12941608'
title: NUFIP1 (nuclear FMRP interacting protein 1) is a nucleocytoplasmic shuttling
  protein associated with active synaptoneurosomes.
authors:
- Bardoni B
- Willemsen R
- Weiler IJ
- Schenck A
- Severijnen LA
- Hindelang C
- Lalli E
- Mandel JL
journal: Exp Cell Res
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0014-4827(03)00222-2
---

# NUFIP1 (nuclear FMRP interacting protein 1) is a nucleocytoplasmic shuttling protein associated with active synaptoneurosomes.
**Authors:** Bardoni B, Willemsen R, Weiler IJ, Schenck A, Severijnen LA, Hindelang C, Lalli E, Mandel JL
**Journal:** Exp Cell Res (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0014-4827(03)00222-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0014-4827(03)00222-2)

## Abstract

1. Exp Cell Res. 2003 Sep 10;289(1):95-107. doi: 10.1016/s0014-4827(03)00222-2.

NUFIP1 (nuclear FMRP interacting protein 1) is a nucleocytoplasmic shuttling 
protein associated with active synaptoneurosomes.

Bardoni B(1), Willemsen R, Weiler IJ, Schenck A, Severijnen LA, Hindelang C, 
Lalli E, Mandel JL.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, 
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, BP 10142, 67404 Illkirch, C.U. de Strasbourg, France. 
bardoni@igbmc.u-strasbg.fr

Fragile X syndrome, the most common cause of inherited mental retardation, is 
caused by the absence of FMRP (Fragile X Mental Retardation Protein). FMRP is an 
RNA binding protein reported to be involved in translational control, notably at 
postsynaptic sites of protein synthesis as a part of a multiprotein/mRNA 
complex. One of the FMRP interactors, NUFIP1, is an RNA binding protein with an 
expression profile matching that of FMRP. We now show that in the nucleus NUFIP1 
is localized in the nuclear matrix in RNA-containing structures lying in the 
proximity of, but not overlapping with, sites of nascent RNA. NUFIP1 is also 
present in the cytoplasm, where it is associated with ribosomes, similarly to 
FMRP. In neurons NUFIP1 can be detected in functional synaptoneurosomes, 
colocalizing with ribosomes. Consistent with its subcellular localization in 
both nucleus and cytoplasm, we show that NUFIP1 contains a functional 
CRM1-dependent nuclear export signal and is able to shuttle between these two 
cellular compartments. These findings suggest the involvement of NUFIP1 in the 
export and localization of mRNA and, in association with FMRP, in the regulation 
of local protein synthesis near synapses.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-4827(03)00222-2
PMID: 12941608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
