---
pmid: '10966938'
title: Functional and pharmacological characterization of human Na(+)-carnitine cotransporter
  hOCTN2.
authors:
- Wagner CA
- Lükewille U
- Kaltenbach S
- Moschen I
- Bröer A
- Risler T
- Bröer S
- Lang F
journal: Am J Physiol Renal Physiol
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1152/ajprenal.2000.279.3.F584
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Functional and pharmacological characterization of human Na(+)-carnitine cotransporter hOCTN2.
**Authors:** Wagner CA, Lükewille U, Kaltenbach S, Moschen I, Bröer A, Risler T, Bröer S, Lang F
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Renal Physiol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajprenal.2000.279.3.F584](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajprenal.2000.279.3.F584)

## Abstract

1. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2000 Sep;279(3):F584-91. doi: 
10.1152/ajprenal.2000.279.3.F584.

Functional and pharmacological characterization of human Na(+)-carnitine 
cotransporter hOCTN2.

Wagner CA(1), Lükewille U, Kaltenbach S, Moschen I, Bröer A, Risler T, Bröer S, 
Lang F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology I, University of Tübingen, 72076 Tübingen, Germany. 
wagnerca@hotmail.com

L-Carnitine is essential for the translocation of acyl-carnitine into the 
mitochondria for beta-oxidation of long-chain fatty acids. It is taken up into 
the cells by the recently cloned Na(+)-driven carnitine organic cation 
transporter OCTN2. Here we expressed hOCTN2 in Xenopus laevis oocytes and 
investigated with two-electrode voltage- clamp and flux measurements its 
functional and pharmacological properties as a Na(+)-carnitine cotransporter. 
L-carnitine transport was electrogenic. The L-carnitine-induced currents were 
voltage and Na(+) dependent, with half-maximal currents at 0.3 +/- 0.1 mM Na(+) 
at -60 mV. Furthermore, L-carnitine-induced currents were pH dependent, 
decreasing with acidification. In contrast to other members of the organic 
cation transporter family, hOCTN2 functions as a Na(+)-coupled carnitine 
transporter. Carnitine transport was stereoselective, with an apparent 
Michaelis-Menten constant (K(m)) of 4.8 +/- 0.3 microM for L-carnitine and 98.3 
+/- 38.0 microM for D-carnitine. The substrate specificity of hOCTN2 differs 
from rOCT-1 and hOCT-2 as hOCTN2 showed only small currents with classic OCT 
substrates such as choline or tetraethylammonium; by contrast hOCTN2 mediated 
transport of betaine. hOCTN2 was inhibited by several drugs known to induce 
secondary carnitine deficiency. Most potent blockers were the antibiotic emetine 
and the ion channel blockers quinidine and verapamil. The apparent IC(50) for 
emetine was 4.2 +/- 1.2 microM. The anticonvulsant valproic acid did not induce 
a significant inhibition of carnitine transport, pointing to a different mode of 
action. In summary, hOCTN2 mediates electrogenic Na(+)-dependent stereoselective 
high-affinity transport of L-carnitine and Na(+). hOCTN2 displays transport 
properties distinct from other members of the OCT family and is directly 
inhibited by several substances known to induce systemic carnitine deficiency.

DOI: 10.1152/ajprenal.2000.279.3.F584
PMID: 10966938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
