---
pmid: '27224728'
title: Identification of a Minimal Peptide Tag for in Vivo and in Vitro Loading of
  Encapsulin.
authors:
- Cassidy-Amstutz C
- Oltrogge L
- Going CC
- Lee A
- Teng P
- Quintanilla D
- East-Seletsky A
- Williams ER
- Savage DF
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.6b00294
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Identification of a Minimal Peptide Tag for in Vivo and in Vitro Loading of Encapsulin.
**Authors:** Cassidy-Amstutz C, Oltrogge L, Going CC, Lee A, Teng P, Quintanilla D, East-Seletsky A, Williams ER, Savage DF
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1021/acs.biochem.6b00294](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.biochem.6b00294)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2016 Jun 21;55(24):3461-8. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.6b00294.
Epub  2016 Jun 7.

Identification of a Minimal Peptide Tag for in Vivo and in Vitro Loading of 
Encapsulin.

Cassidy-Amstutz C(1), Oltrogge L(1), Going CC(2), Lee A(3), Teng P(1), 
Quintanilla D(1), East-Seletsky A(1), Williams ER(2), Savage DF(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California at 
Berkeley , Berkeley, California 94720, United States.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of California at Berkeley , Berkeley, 
California 94720, United States.
(3)Department of Physics, University of California at Berkeley , Berkeley, 
California 94720, United States.
(4)Energy Biosciences Institute, University of California at Berkeley , 
Berkeley, California 94720, United States.

The encapsulation of enzymes and other proteins within a proteinaceous shell has 
been observed in many bacteria and archaea, but the function and utility of many 
such compartments are enigmatic. Efforts to study these functions have been 
complicated by the size and complexity of traditional protein compartments. One 
potential system for investigating the effect of compartmentalization is 
encapsulin, a large and newly discovered class of protein shells that are 
typically composed of two proteins: a protomer that assembles into the 
icosahedral shell and a cargo protein packaged inside. Encapsulins are some of 
the simplest known protein shell systems and readily self-assemble in vivo. 
Systematic characterization of the effects of compartmentalization requires the 
ability to load a wide range of cargo proteins. Here, we demonstrate that 
foreign cargo can be loaded into the encapsulin from Thermotoga maritima both in 
vivo and in vitro by fusion of the cargo protein with a short C-terminal peptide 
present in the native cargo. To facilitate biochemical characterization, we also 
develop a simple and rapid purification protocol and demonstrate the thermal and 
pH stability of the shell. Efforts to study the biophysical effects of protein 
encapsulation have been problematic in complex compartments, but the simplicity 
of assembling and loading encapsulin makes it an ideal system for future 
experiments exploring the effects of encapsulation on proteins.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.6b00294
PMID: 27224728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
