---
pmid: '11502818'
title: Heterozygous mutation in the cholesterol side chain cleavage enzyme (p450scc)
  gene in a patient with 46,XY sex reversal and adrenal insufficiency.
authors:
- Tajima T
- Fujieda K
- Kouda N
- Nakae J
- Miller WL
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1210/jcem.86.8.7748
pubmed_publication_types:
- Case Reports
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: CASE_REPORT
---

# Heterozygous mutation in the cholesterol side chain cleavage enzyme (p450scc) gene in a patient with 46,XY sex reversal and adrenal insufficiency.
**Authors:** Tajima T, Fujieda K, Kouda N, Nakae J, Miller WL
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jcem.86.8.7748](https://doi.org/10.1210/jcem.86.8.7748)

## Abstract

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Aug;86(8):3820-5. doi: 10.1210/jcem.86.8.7748.

Heterozygous mutation in the cholesterol side chain cleavage enzyme (p450scc) 
gene in a patient with 46,XY sex reversal and adrenal insufficiency.

Tajima T(1), Fujieda K, Kouda N, Nakae J, Miller WL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hokkaido University School of Medicine N15, 
060-8638 Sapporo, Japan.

Cytochrome P450scc, the mitochondrial cholesterol side chain cleavage enzyme, is 
the only enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of cholesterol to pregnenolone 
and, thus, is required for the biosynthesis of all steroid hormones. Congenital 
lipoid adrenal hyperplasia is a severe disorder of steroidogenesis in which 
cholesterol accumulates within steroidogenic cells and the synthesis of all 
adrenal and gonadal steroids is impaired, hormonally suggesting a disorder in 
P450scc. However, congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia is caused by mutations 
in the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein StAR; it has been thought that 
P450scc mutations are incompatible with human term gestation, because P450scc is 
needed for placental biosynthesis of progesterone, which is required to maintain 
pregnancy. In studying patients with congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia, we 
identified an individual with normal StAR and SF-1 genes and a heterozygous 
mutation in P450scc. The mutation was found in multiple cell types, but neither 
parent carried the mutation, suggesting it arose de novo during meiosis, before 
fertilization. The patient was atypical for congenital lipoid adrenal 
hyperplasia, having survived for 4 yr without hormonal replacement before 
experiencing life-threatening adrenal insufficiency. The P450scc mutation, an 
in-frame insertion of Gly and Asp between Asp271 and Val272, was inserted into a 
catalytically active fusion protein of the P450scc system 
(H2N-P450scc-Adrenodoxin Reductase-Adrenodoxin-COOH), completely inactivating 
enzymatic activity. Cotransfection of wild-type and mutant vectors showed that 
the mutation did not exert a dominant negative effect. Because P450scc is 
normally a slow and inefficient enzyme, we propose that P450scc 
haploinsufficiency results in subnormal responses to ACTH, so that recurrent 
ACTH stimulation leads to a slow accumulation of adrenal cholesterol, eventually 
causing cellular damage. Thus, although homozygous absence of P450scc should be 
incompatible with term gestation, haploinsufficiency of P450scc causes a 
late-onset form of congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia that can be explained 
by the same two-hit model that has been validated for congenital lipoid adrenal 
hyperplasia caused by StAR deficiency.

DOI: 10.1210/jcem.86.8.7748
PMID: 11502818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
