---
pmid: '21376235'
title: Mpk1 MAPK association with the Paf1 complex blocks Sen1-mediated premature
  transcription termination.
authors:
- Kim KY
- Levin DE
journal: Cell
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3063357
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.01.034
---

# Mpk1 MAPK association with the Paf1 complex blocks Sen1-mediated premature transcription termination.
**Authors:** Kim KY, Levin DE
**Journal:** Cell (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2011.01.034](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2011.01.034)
**PMC:** [PMC3063357](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3063357/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2011 Mar 4;144(5):745-56. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.01.034.

Mpk1 MAPK association with the Paf1 complex blocks Sen1-mediated premature 
transcription termination.

Kim KY(1), Levin DE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Boston University Goldman School of 
Dental Medicine, Boston University, Boston, MA 02118, USA.

The Mpk1 MAPK of the yeast cell wall integrity pathway uses a noncatalytic 
mechanism to activate transcription of stress-induced genes by recruitment of 
initiation factors to target promoters. We show here that Mpk1 additionally 
serves a function in transcription elongation that is also independent of its 
catalytic activity. This function is mediated by an interaction between Mpk1 and 
the Paf1 subunit of the Paf1C elongation complex. A mutation in Paf1 that blocks 
this interaction causes a specific defect in transcription elongation of an 
Mpk1-induced gene, which results from Sen1-dependent premature termination 
through a Nab3-binding site within the promoter-proximal region of the gene. Our 
findings reveal a regulatory mechanism in which Mpk1 overcomes transcriptional 
attenuation by blocking recruitment of the Sen1-Nrd1-Nab3 termination complex to 
the elongating polymerase. Finally, we demonstrate that this mechanism is 
conserved in an interaction between the human ERK5 MAPK and human Paf1.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.01.034
PMCID: PMC3063357
PMID: 21376235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
