---
pmid: '12032307'
title: A single unbranched S-phase DNA damage and replication fork blockage checkpoint
  pathway.
authors:
- Marchetti MA
- Kumar S
- Hartsuiker E
- Maftahi M
- Carr AM
- Freyer GA
- Burhans WC
- Huberman JA
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC124255
doi: 10.1073/pnas.112702399
---

# A single unbranched S-phase DNA damage and replication fork blockage checkpoint pathway.
**Authors:** Marchetti MA, Kumar S, Hartsuiker E, Maftahi M, Carr AM, Freyer GA, Burhans WC, Huberman JA
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.112702399](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.112702399)
**PMC:** [PMC124255](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC124255/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 May 28;99(11):7472-7. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.112702399.

A single unbranched S-phase DNA damage and replication fork blockage checkpoint 
pathway.

Marchetti MA(1), Kumar S, Hartsuiker E, Maftahi M, Carr AM, Freyer GA, Burhans 
WC, Huberman JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Genetics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Elm and Carlton 
Streets, Buffalo, NY 14263-0001, USA.

The eukaryotic intra-S-phase checkpoint, which slows DNA synthesis in response 
to DNA damage, is poorly understood. Is DNA damage recognized directly, or 
indirectly through its effects on replication forks? Is the slowing of S phase 
in part because of competition between DNA synthesis and recombination/repair 
processes? The results of our genetic analyses of the intra-S-phase checkpoint 
in the fission yeast, Schizosaccharomyces pombe, suggest that the slowing of S 
phase depends weakly on the helicases Rqh1 and Srs2 but not on other 
recombination/repair pathways. The slowing of S phase depends strongly on the 
six checkpoint-Rad proteins, on Cds1, and on Rad4/Cut5 (similar to budding yeast 
Dpb11, which interacts with DNA polymerase epsilon) but not on Rhp9 (similar to 
budding yeast Rad9, necessary for direct damage recognition). These results 
suggest that, in fission yeast, the signal activating the intra-S-phase 
checkpoint is generated only when replication forks encounter DNA damage.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.112702399
PMCID: PMC124255
PMID: 12032307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The eukaryotic intra-S-phase checkpoint, which slows DNA synthesis in response to DNA damage, is poorly understood. Is DNA damage recognized directly, or indirectly through its effects on replication forks? Is the slowing of S phase in part because of competition between DNA synthesis and recombination/repair processes? The results of our genetic analyses of the intra-S-phase checkpoint in the fission yeast, Schizosaccharomyces pombe , suggest that the slowing of S phase depends weakly on the helicases Rqh1 and Srs2 but not on other recombination/repair pathways. The slowing of S phase depends strongly on the six checkpoint-Rad proteins, on Cds1, and on Rad4/Cut5 (similar to budding yeast Dpb11, which interacts with DNA polymerase ɛ) but not on Rhp9 (similar to budding yeast Rad9, necessary for direct damage recognition). These results suggest that, in fission yeast, the signal activating the intra-S-phase checkpoint is generated only when replication forks encounter DNA damage.
