---
pmid: '30559292'
title: Disease-linked mutations in the phosphatidylcholine regulatory enzyme CCTα
  impair enzymatic activity and fold stability.
authors:
- Cornell RB
- Taneva SG
- Dennis MK
- Tse R
- Dhillon RK
- Lee J
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6364779
doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.006457
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Disease-linked mutations in the phosphatidylcholine regulatory enzyme CCTα impair enzymatic activity and fold stability.
**Authors:** Cornell RB, Taneva SG, Dennis MK, Tse R, Dhillon RK, Lee J
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.RA118.006457](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA118.006457)
**PMC:** [PMC6364779](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6364779/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2019 Feb 1;294(5):1490-1501. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.006457. Epub 
2018 Dec 17.

Disease-linked mutations in the phosphatidylcholine regulatory enzyme CCTα 
impair enzymatic activity and fold stability.

Cornell RB(1), Taneva SG(2), Dennis MK(2), Tse R(2), Dhillon RK(2), Lee J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Simon Fraser University, 
Burnaby, British Columbia V5A 1S6 Canada; Department of Chemistry, Simon Fraser 
University, Burnaby, British Columbia V5A 1S6 Canada. Electronic address: 
cornell@sfu.ca.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Simon Fraser University, 
Burnaby, British Columbia V5A 1S6 Canada.

CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase (CCT) is the key regulatory enzyme in 
phosphatidylcholine (PC) synthesis and is activated by binding to PC-deficient 
membranes. Mutations in the gene encoding CCTα (PCYT1A) cause three distinct 
pathologies in humans: lipodystrophy, spondylometaphyseal dysplasia with 
cone-rod dystrophy (SMD-CRD), and isolated retinal dystrophy. Previous analyses 
showed that for some disease-linked PCYT1A variants steady state levels of CCTα 
and PC synthesis were reduced in patient fibroblasts, but other variants 
impaired PC synthesis with little effect on CCT levels. To explore the impact on 
CCT stability and function we expressed WT and mutant CCTs in COS-1 cells, which 
have very low endogenous CCT. Over-expression of two missense variants in the 
catalytic domain (V142M and P150A) generated aggregated enzymes that could not 
be refolded after solubilization by denaturation. Other mutations in the 
catalytic core that generated CCTs with reduced solubility could be purified. 
Five variants destabilized the catalytic domain-fold as assessed by lower 
transition temperatures for unfolding, and three of these manifested defects in 
substrate Km values. A mutation (R223S) in a signal-transducing linker between 
the catalytic and membrane-binding domains also impaired enzyme kinetics. 
E280del, a single amino acid deletion in the autoinhibitory helix increased the 
constitutive (lipid-independent) enzyme activity ∼4-fold. This helix also 
participates in membrane binding, and surprisingly E280del enhanced the enzyme's 
response to anionic lipid vesicles ∼4-fold. These in vitro analyses on purified 
mutant CCTs will complement future measurements of their impact on PC synthesis 
in cultured cells and in tissues with a stringent requirement for CCTα.

© 2019 Cornell et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.006457
PMCID: PMC6364779
PMID: 30559292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article
