---
pmid: '16513828'
title: 'Impact of obesity on the growth hormone axis: evidence for a direct inhibitory
  effect of hyperinsulinemia on pituitary function.'
authors:
- Luque RM
- Kineman RD
journal: Endocrinology
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1210/en.2005-1549
---

# Impact of obesity on the growth hormone axis: evidence for a direct inhibitory effect of hyperinsulinemia on pituitary function.
**Authors:** Luque RM, Kineman RD
**Journal:** Endocrinology (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1210/en.2005-1549](https://doi.org/10.1210/en.2005-1549)

## Abstract

1. Endocrinology. 2006 Jun;147(6):2754-63. doi: 10.1210/en.2005-1549. Epub 2006
Mar  2.

Impact of obesity on the growth hormone axis: evidence for a direct inhibitory 
effect of hyperinsulinemia on pituitary function.

Luque RM(1), Kineman RD.

Author information:
(1)Section of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, University 
of Illinois at Chicago, Illinois, USA.

There is a negative relationship between obesity and GH. However, it is not 
known how metabolic changes, associated with obesity, lead to a reduction in GH 
output. This study examined the GH axis of two mouse models of obesity, the 
leptin-deficient (ob/ob) mouse and the diet-induced obese (DIO; high-fat fed) 
mouse. Both models displayed hyperglycemia and hyperinsulinemia with reduced 
expression of GH as well as reduced expression of pituitary receptors important 
for GH synthesis and release [GHRH receptor (DIO only) and the ghrelin receptor 
(ob/ob and DIO)]. These pituitary changes were not accompanied by changes in 
hypothalamic expression of GHRH or somatostatin; suggesting that alterations in 
pituitary function may be precipitated in part by direct effects of systemic 
signals. Of the metabolic and hormonal parameters examined (insulin, glucose, 
corticosterone, free fatty acids, ghrelin, and IGF-I), only insulin/glucose 
showed a significant, and negative, correlation with pituitary expression. 
Pituitaries of DIO mice remained responsive to the acute in vivo actions of 
insulin, as assessed by phosphorylation of Akt, despite systemic (skeletal 
muscle and fat) insulin resistance. In addition, treating primary pituitary cell 
cultures from lean mice with insulin reduced GH release as well as GH, GHRH 
receptor, and ghrelin receptor mRNA levels compared with vehicle-treated 
controls, where the magnitude of suppression of pituitary mRNA levels was 
similar to that observed in the DIO mouse. These results coupled with the fact 
that the pituitary expresses the insulin receptor at levels comparable to 
tissues classically considered insulin sensitive, indicates high circulating 
insulin levels can directly contribute to the suppression of GH synthesis and 
release in the obese state.

DOI: 10.1210/en.2005-1549
PMID: 16513828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
