---
pmid: '15910006'
title: 'Molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis in humans: identification of a persulfide
  group in the rhodanese-like domain of MOCS3 by mass spectrometry.'
authors:
- Matthies A
- Nimtz M
- Leimkühler S
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi0503448
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis in humans: identification of a persulfide group in the rhodanese-like domain of MOCS3 by mass spectrometry.
**Authors:** Matthies A, Nimtz M, Leimkühler S
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi0503448](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi0503448)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2005 May 31;44(21):7912-20. doi: 10.1021/bi0503448.

Molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis in humans: identification of a persulfide group 
in the rhodanese-like domain of MOCS3 by mass spectrometry.

Matthies A(1), Nimtz M, Leimkühler S.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Pflanzenbiologie, Technische Universität Braunschweig, 38023 
Braunschweig, Germany.

The human MOCS3 protein contains an N-terminal domain similar to the Escherichia 
coli MoeB protein and a C-terminal segment displaying similarities to the 
sulfurtransferase rhodanese. MOCS3 is proposed to catalyze both the adenylation 
and the subsequent generation of a thiocarboxylate group at the C-terminus of 
the smaller subunit of molybdopterin (MPT) synthase during Moco biosynthesis in 
humans. Recent studies have shown that the MOCS3 rhodanese-like domain 
(MOCS3-RLD) catalyzes the transfer of sulfur from thiosulfate to cyanide and is 
also able to provide the sulfur for the thiocarboxylation of MOCS2A in a defined 
in vitro system for the generation of MPT from precursor Z. MOCS3-RLD contains 
four cysteine residues of which only C412 in the six amino acid active loop is 
conserved in homologous proteins from other organisms. ESI-MS/MS studies gave 
direct evidence for the formation of a persulfide group that is exclusively 
formed on C412. Simultaneous mutagenesis of the remaining three cysteine 
residues showed that none of them is involved in the sulfur transfer reaction in 
vitro. A disulfide bridge was identified to be formed between C316 and C324, and 
possible roles of the three noncatalytic cysteine residues are discussed. By 
ESI-MS/MS a partially gluconoylated N-terminus of the His6-tagged MOCS3-RLD was 
identified (mass increment of 178 Da) which resulted in a heterogeneity of the 
protein but did not influence sulfurtransferase activity.

DOI: 10.1021/bi0503448
PMID: 15910006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
