---
pmid: '27808481'
title: RNF167 targets Arl8B for degradation to regulate lysosome positioning and endocytic
  trafficking.
authors:
- Deshar R
- Moon S
- Yoo W
- Cho EB
- Yoon SK
- Yoon JB
journal: FEBS J
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/febs.13947
---

# RNF167 targets Arl8B for degradation to regulate lysosome positioning and endocytic trafficking.
**Authors:** Deshar R, Moon S, Yoo W, Cho EB, Yoon SK, Yoon JB
**Journal:** FEBS J (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1111/febs.13947](https://doi.org/10.1111/febs.13947)

## Abstract

1. FEBS J. 2016 Dec;283(24):4583-4599. doi: 10.1111/febs.13947. Epub 2016 Nov 16.

RNF167 targets Arl8B for degradation to regulate lysosome positioning and 
endocytic trafficking.

Deshar R(1), Moon S(2), Yoo W(2), Cho EB(2), Yoon SK(1), Yoon JB(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Lifesciences, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, 
Korea.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Translational Research Center for Protein 
Function Control, Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea.

The protease-associated (PA) domain-containing E3 ubiquitin ligases are 
transmembrane proteins located in intracellular organelles such as the 
endoplasmic reticulum, endosomes, or lysosomes. The functional roles of these 
ubiquitin ligases are not well defined. To understand the function of E3 
ubiquitin ligases, identification of their substrates is of critical importance. 
In this study, we describe a newly devised method based on proximity-dependent 
biotin labeling to identify substrates of ubiquitin ligases. Application of this 
method to RING finger protein 167 (RNF167), a member of the PA domain-containing 
E3 family, led to identification of Arl8B as its substrate. We demonstrated that 
RNF167 ubiquitinates Arl8B at the lysine residue K141 and reduces the level of 
the Arl8B protein. Overexpression and knockdown of RNF167 revealed its 
regulatory role in Arl8B-dependent lysosome positioning and endocytic 
trafficking to lysosomes. Furthermore, we found that the 
ubiquitination-defective Arl8B K141R mutant counteracts RNF167 in these cellular 
events. These results indicate that RNF167 plays a crucial role as an E3 
ubiquitin ligase targeting Arl8B to regulate lysosome positioning and endocytic 
trafficking.

© 2016 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.13947
PMID: 27808481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
