---
pmid: '12753588'
title: The NFP locus of Medicago truncatula controls an early step of Nod factor signal
  transduction upstream of a rapid calcium flux and root hair deformation.
authors:
- Amor BB
- Shaw SL
- Oldroyd GE
- Maillet F
- Penmetsa RV
- Cook D
- Long SR
- Dénarié J
- Gough C
journal: Plant J
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-313x.2003.01743.x
---

# The NFP locus of Medicago truncatula controls an early step of Nod factor signal transduction upstream of a rapid calcium flux and root hair deformation.
**Authors:** Amor BB, Shaw SL, Oldroyd GE, Maillet F, Penmetsa RV, Cook D, Long SR, Dénarié J, Gough C
**Journal:** Plant J (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1365-313x.2003.01743.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-313x.2003.01743.x)

## Abstract

1. Plant J. 2003 May;34(4):495-506. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-313x.2003.01743.x.

The NFP locus of Medicago truncatula controls an early step of Nod factor signal 
transduction upstream of a rapid calcium flux and root hair deformation.

Amor BB(1), Shaw SL, Oldroyd GE, Maillet F, Penmetsa RV, Cook D, Long SR, 
Dénarié J, Gough C.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire des Interactions Plantes-Microorganismes, INRA-CNRS, BP 27, 31326 
Castanet-Tolosan, France.

Erratum in
    Plant J. 2003 Jul;35(1):140.

Establishment of the Rhizobium-legume symbiosis depends on a molecular dialogue, 
in which rhizobial nodulation (Nod) factors act as symbiotic signals, playing a 
key role in the control of specificity of infection and nodule formation. Using 
nodulation-defective (Nod-) mutants of Medicago truncatula to study the 
mechanisms controlling Nod factor perception and signalling, we have previously 
identified five genes that control components of a Nod factor-activated signal 
transduction pathway. Characterisation of a new M. truncatula Nod- mutant led to 
the identification of the Nod Factor Perception (NFP) locus. The nfp mutant has 
a novel phenotype among Nod- mutants of M. truncatula, as it does not respond to 
Nod factors by any of the responses tested. The nfp mutant thus shows no rapid 
calcium flux, the earliest detectable Nod factor response of wild-type plants, 
and no root hair deformation. The nfp mutant is also deficient in Nod 
factor-induced calcium spiking and early nodulin gene expression. While certain 
genes controlling Nod factor signal transduction also control the establishment 
of an arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis, the nfp mutant shows a wild-type 
mycorrhizal phenotype. These data indicate that the NFP locus controls an early 
step of Nod factor signal transduction, upstream of previously identified genes 
and specific to nodulation.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-313x.2003.01743.x
PMID: 12753588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
