---
pmid: '12592337'
title: The protein tyrosine phosphatase HePTP regulates nuclear translocation of ERK2
  and can modulate megakaryocytic differentiation of K562 cells.
authors:
- Pettiford SM
- Herbst R
journal: Leukemia
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.leu.2402767
---

# The protein tyrosine phosphatase HePTP regulates nuclear translocation of ERK2 and can modulate megakaryocytic differentiation of K562 cells.
**Authors:** Pettiford SM, Herbst R
**Journal:** Leukemia (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.leu.2402767](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.leu.2402767)

## Abstract

1. Leukemia. 2003 Feb;17(2):366-78. doi: 10.1038/sj.leu.2402767.

The protein tyrosine phosphatase HePTP regulates nuclear translocation of ERK2 
and can modulate megakaryocytic differentiation of K562 cells.

Pettiford SM(1), Herbst R.

Author information:
(1)DNAX Research Institute, 901 California Avenue, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA.

In response to PMA treatment K562 myelogenous leukemia cells undergo 
megakaryocytic differentiation, which is dependent on prolonged ERK activation 
and is characterized by growth arrest, upregulation of CD41 and IL-6, and, 
finally, by characteristic changes in cell morphology. The tyrosine phosphatase 
HePTP was recently demonstrated to regulate ERK activity and changes in HePTP 
expression have been associated with hematopoietic malignancies. Here, we have 
studied the function of HePTP during PMA-induced megakaryocytic differentiation 
of K562 cells. Overexpression of HePTP or inhibition of HePTP expression with 
antisense cDNA had no effect on PMA-induced cell cycle arrest or upregulation of 
cyclin D in K562 cells. The expression of megakaryocytic markers such as CD41 
and IL6, however, were highly reduced in cells overexpressing HePTP, due to 
reduced ERK activation, and the cells were impaired in their ability to 
differentiate. Compared to control cells, HePTP antisense expressing cells did 
not show increased basal or PMA-induced ERK activity. However, antisense 
inhibition of HePTP enhanced nuclear translocation of ERK and the expression of 
the megakaryocytic markers CD41 and IL-6. Interestingly, like cells 
overexpressing HePTP, morphological differentiation was also impaired in HePTP 
antisense expressing cells. The results for the first time demonstrate that 
different aspects of megakaryocytic differentiation have distinct requirements 
for ERK activity. They further show that HePTP is involved in the regulation of 
nuclear translocation of ERK2 and that HePTP protein levels can modulate K562 
cell differentiation.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.leu.2402767
PMID: 12592337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
