---
pmid: '26095851'
title: Cyclophilin A regulates JNK/p38-MAPK signaling through its physical interaction
  with ASK1.
authors:
- Kim H
- Oh Y
- Kim K
- Jeong S
- Chon S
- Kim D
- Jung MH
- Pak YK
- Ha J
- Kang I
- Choe W
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.06.078
---

# Cyclophilin A regulates JNK/p38-MAPK signaling through its physical interaction with ASK1.
**Authors:** Kim H, Oh Y, Kim K, Jeong S, Chon S, Kim D, Jung MH, Pak YK, Ha J, Kang I, Choe W
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.06.078](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.06.078)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Aug 14;464(1):112-7. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.06.078. Epub 2015 Jun 19.

Cyclophilin A regulates JNK/p38-MAPK signaling through its physical interaction 
with ASK1.

Kim H(1), Oh Y(1), Kim K(1), Jeong S(1), Chon S(2), Kim D(3), Jung MH(4), Pak 
YK(5), Ha J(1), Kang I(1), Choe W(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (BK21 project), Medical 
Research Center for Bioreaction to Reactive Oxygen Species and Biomedical 
Science Institute, School of Medicine, Kyung Hee University, Seoul 130-701, 
Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Kyung Hee University School of 
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Molecular Imaging & Therapy Branch, National Cancer Center, 809 Madu1dong 
Ilsandonggu Goyangsi, Gyeonggydo 410-769, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, Kyung Hee University, Seoul 
130-731, Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, School of Medicine, Kyung Hee 
University, Seoul 130-701, Republic of Korea.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (BK21 project), Medical 
Research Center for Bioreaction to Reactive Oxygen Species and Biomedical 
Science Institute, School of Medicine, Kyung Hee University, Seoul 130-701, 
Republic of Korea. Electronic address: wchoe@khu.ac.kr.

Erratum in
    Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2018 Jul 12;502(2):290. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.05.046.

Cyclophilin A (CypA), a member of the immunophilin family, is predominantly 
localized in the cytoplasm. The peptidylprolyl isomerase (PPIase) activity of 
CypA has been demonstrated to be involved in diverse cellular processes, 
including intracellular protein trafficking, mitochondrial function, pre-mRNA 
processing, and maintenance of multiprotein complex stability. In this study, we 
have demonstrated that CypA regulates apoptosis signaling-regulating kinase 1 
(ASK1) through its direct binding. ASK1 is a member of MAPK kinase kinase 
(MAP3K) family, and selectively activates both JNK and p38 MAPK pathways. Here, 
we also report that CypA negatively regulates phosphorylation of ASK1 at Ser966, 
and that CypA reduces ASK1 and its downstream kinases of the JNK and p38 
signaling. ASK1 is known to induce caspase-3 activation and apoptosis, and CypA 
inhibited ASK1-mediated apoptosis by decrease in caspase-3 activity under 
cellular stress conditions. Overall, we conclude that CypA negatively regulates 
ASK1 functions by its physical interaction with ASK1.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.06.078
PMID: 26095851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
