---
pmid: '23116673'
title: Transcriptional expression of Stilbene synthase genes are regulated developmentally
  and differentially in response to powdery mildew in Norton and Cabernet Sauvignon
  grapevine.
authors:
- Dai R
- Ge H
- Howard S
- Qiu W
journal: Plant Sci
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.plantsci.2012.09.004
---

# Transcriptional expression of Stilbene synthase genes are regulated developmentally and differentially in response to powdery mildew in Norton and Cabernet Sauvignon grapevine.
**Authors:** Dai R, Ge H, Howard S, Qiu W
**Journal:** Plant Sci (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.plantsci.2012.09.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plantsci.2012.09.004)

## Abstract

1. Plant Sci. 2012 Dec;197:70-6. doi: 10.1016/j.plantsci.2012.09.004. Epub 2012
Sep  18.

Transcriptional expression of Stilbene synthase genes are regulated 
developmentally and differentially in response to powdery mildew in Norton and 
Cabernet Sauvignon grapevine.

Dai R(1), Ge H, Howard S, Qiu W.

Author information:
(1)Center for Grapevine Biotechnology, William H. Darr School of Agriculture, 
Missouri State University, Mountain Grove, MO 65711, USA. 
rdy6f@mail.missouri.edu

Stilbenic compounds are natural phytoalexins that have antimicrobial activities 
in plant defense against pathogens. Stilbene synthase (STS) is the key enzyme 
that catalyzes the biosynthesis of stilbenic compounds. Grapevine genome 
contains a family of preliminarily annotated 35 STS genes, the regulation of 
each STS gene needs to be studied to define their roles. In this study, we 
selected eight STS genes, STS8, STS27/31, STS16/22, STS13/17/23, and applied 
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) to characterize their 
transcriptional expression profiles in leaf tissues upon infection by the 
powdery mildew fungus (PM), Erysiphe necator (Schw.) Burr. Their transcripts 
were also compared in young and old leaves as well as in the berry skin at five 
developmental stages in Vitis vinifera 'Cabernet Sauvignon' and Vitis aestivalis 
'Norton'. The results showed that transcripts of selected STS genes increased 
significantly in Cabernet Sauvignon leaves at 24 and 48 h post inoculation with 
PM spores and remained unchanged in Norton leaves in response to the PM 
infection. Transcripts of STS8, STS27/31 and STS13/17/23 were more abundant in 
the old leaves of Norton than in Cabernet Sauvignon. STS genes showed lower 
expression levels in young leaves than in old leaves. Transcript levels of the 
eight STS genes increased drastically in the berry skin of Cabernet Sauvignon 
and Norton post véraison. In addition, the content of trans-resveratrol in the 
berry skin rapidly increased post véraison and reached the highest level at 
harvest. These assays demonstrated that individual STS genes are regulated 
differentially in response to PM infection and during development in the two 
grape varieties. The present study yields basic knowledge for further 
investigation of the regulation and function of each STS gene in grapevine and 
provides experimental evidences for the functional annotation of the STS gene 
family in the grapevine genome.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.plantsci.2012.09.004
PMID: 23116673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
