---
pmid: '15578726'
title: Molecular basis of human glutamate dehydrogenase regulation under changing
  energy demands.
authors:
- Mastorodemos V
- Zaganas I
- Spanaki C
- Bessa M
- Plaitakis A
journal: J Neurosci Res
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/jnr.20353
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Molecular basis of human glutamate dehydrogenase regulation under changing energy demands.
**Authors:** Mastorodemos V, Zaganas I, Spanaki C, Bessa M, Plaitakis A
**Journal:** J Neurosci Res (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jnr.20353](https://doi.org/10.1002/jnr.20353)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci Res. 2005 Jan 1-15;79(1-2):65-73. doi: 10.1002/jnr.20353.

Molecular basis of human glutamate dehydrogenase regulation under changing 
energy demands.

Mastorodemos V(1), Zaganas I, Spanaki C, Bessa M, Plaitakis A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Crete, School of Health Sciences, 
Section of Medicine, Heraklion, Crete, Greece.

Glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH), an enzyme central to glutamate metabolism, is 
located in the mitochondria although there is evidence for extramitochondrial 
localization of GDH. In the human, housekeeping and nerve tissue-specific 
isoforms, encoded by the GLUD1 and GLUD2 genes, have been identified. The two 
isoenzymes differ markedly in their baseline activities, allosteric regulation, 
and thermal stability. GTP potently inhibits GLUD1-derived GDH (IC(50) = 0.2 
muM), whereas the GLUD2-derived isoenzyme is resistant to this compound. The 
GLUD2-derived GDH shows low basal activity and has the capacity to be activated 
fully by ADP or L-leucine. We used molecular biological tools to study the 
subcellular localization of GLUD1-derived GDH in cultured cells and the 
molecular basis of its regulation. COS7 cells, transfected with a GLUD1-pEGFP-N3 
vector, revealed a GFP fluorescence pattern nearly identical to that of the 
mitochondrial marker pDsRed2-Mito. Site-directed mutagenesis of GLUD1 gene 
showed that replacement of Gly456 by Ala made the enzyme resistant to GTP 
(IC(50) = 2.8 +/- 0.15 microM) without altering its regulation by ADP. 
Substitution of Ser for Arg443 rendered the enzyme virtually inactive at its 
basal state, but fully responsive to ADP activation. The Arg443Ser mutant was 
more active at pH 7.0 than at pH 8.0. The Gly456Ala change therefore dissociated 
GLUD2-derived GDH function from GTP, whereas the Arg443Ser change made enzyme 
regulation possible without this inhibitor. These properties may allow the brain 
isoenzyme to function well under conditions of intracellular acidification and 
increased turnover of ATP to ADP, as occurs in synaptic astrocytes during 
excitatory transmission.

(c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jnr.20353
PMID: 15578726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
