---
pmid: '24806444'
title: AmotL2 links VE-cadherin to contractile actin fibres necessary for aortic lumen
  expansion.
authors:
- Hultin S
- Zheng Y
- Mojallal M
- Vertuani S
- Gentili C
- Balland M
- Milloud R
- Belting HG
- Affolter M
- Helker CS
- Adams RH
- Herzog W
- Uhlen P
- Majumdar A
- Holmgren L
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ncomms4743
---

# AmotL2 links VE-cadherin to contractile actin fibres necessary for aortic lumen expansion.
**Authors:** Hultin S, Zheng Y, Mojallal M, Vertuani S, Gentili C, Balland M, Milloud R, Belting HG, Affolter M, Helker CS, Adams RH, Herzog W, Uhlen P, Majumdar A, Holmgren L
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncomms4743](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms4743)

## Abstract

1. Nat Commun. 2014 May 7;5:3743. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4743.

AmotL2 links VE-cadherin to contractile actin fibres necessary for aortic lumen 
expansion.

Hultin S(1), Zheng Y(1), Mojallal M(1), Vertuani S(1), Gentili C(1), Balland 
M(2), Milloud R(2), Belting HG(3), Affolter M(3), Helker CS(4), Adams RH(5), 
Herzog W(6), Uhlen P(7), Majumdar A(8), Holmgren L(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology and Pathology, Cancer Center Karolinska, Karolinska 
University Hospital, 171 76 Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Laboratoire interdisciplinaire de Physique, Université Joseph Fourier 
(Grenoble 1), Domaine Universitaire, Bat. E45 140, rue de la physique, Saint 
Martin d´Hères Cedex 9 38402 Grenoble, France.
(3)Abt. Zellbiologie, Biozentrum/Uni Basel, Klingelbergstrasse 70, CH 4056 
Basel, Switzerland.
(4)Biological Faculty, University of Muenster, 48149 Muenster, Germany.
(5)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, 48149 Muenster, Germany.
(6)1] Biological Faculty, University of Muenster, 48149 Muenster, Germany [2] 
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, 48149 Muenster, Germany [3] 
Cluster of Excellence EXC 1003, Cells in Motion, CiM -, 48149 Münster, Germany.
(7)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, 171 
77 Stockholm, Sweden.
(8)1] Department of Oncology and Pathology, Cancer Center Karolinska, Karolinska 
University Hospital, 171 76 Stockholm, Sweden [2].

The assembly of individual endothelial cells into multicellular tubes is a 
complex morphogenetic event in vascular development. Extracellular matrix cues 
and cell-cell junctional communication are fundamental to tube formation. 
Together they determine the shape of endothelial cells and the tubular 
structures that they ultimately form. Little is known regarding how mechanical 
signals are transmitted between cells to control cell shape changes during 
morphogenesis. Here we provide evidence that the scaffold protein amotL2 is 
needed for aortic vessel lumen expansion. Using gene inactivation strategies in 
zebrafish, mouse and endothelial cell culture systems, we show that amotL2 
associates to the VE-cadherin adhesion complex where it couples adherens 
junctions to contractile actin fibres. Inactivation of amotL2 dissociates 
VE-cadherin from cytoskeletal tensile forces that affect endothelial cell shape. 
We propose that the VE-cadherin/amotL2 complex is responsible for transmitting 
mechanical force between endothelial cells for the coordination of cellular 
morphogenesis consistent with aortic lumen expansion and function.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms4743
PMID: 24806444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
