---
pmid: '36481055'
title: OLA1 Phosphorylation Governs the Mitochondrial Bioenergetic Function of Pulmonary
  Vascular Cells.
authors:
- Sidlowski P
- Czerwinski A
- Liu Y
- Liu P
- Teng RJ
- Kumar S
- Wells C
- Pritchard K Jr
- Konduri GG
- Afolayan AJ
journal: Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol
year: '2023'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC10112427
doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2022-0186OC
---

# OLA1 Phosphorylation Governs the Mitochondrial Bioenergetic Function of Pulmonary Vascular Cells.
**Authors:** Sidlowski P, Czerwinski A, Liu Y, Liu P, Teng RJ, Kumar S, Wells C, Pritchard K Jr, Konduri GG, Afolayan AJ
**Journal:** Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1165/rcmb.2022-0186OC](https://doi.org/10.1165/rcmb.2022-0186OC)
**PMC:** [PMC10112427](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10112427/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2023 Apr;68(4):395-405. doi: 
10.1165/rcmb.2022-0186OC.

OLA1 Phosphorylation Governs the Mitochondrial Bioenergetic Function of 
Pulmonary Vascular Cells.

Sidlowski P(1)(2)(3)(4), Czerwinski A(1)(2)(3)(4), Liu Y(5), Liu P(5), Teng 
RJ(1)(2)(3)(4), Kumar S(2)(4), Wells C(6), Pritchard K Jr(2)(3)(4)(7), Konduri 
GG(1)(2)(3)(4), Afolayan AJ(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics.
(2)Cardiovascular Research Center.
(3)Children's Research Institute.
(4)Department of Pathology.
(5)Department of Physiology.
(6)Department of Cell Biology, Neurology, and Anatomy, and.
(7)Department of Surgery, Medical College of Wisconsin, Wauwatosa, Wisconsin.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2023 Apr;68(4):347-348. doi: 
10.1165/rcmb.2022-0450ED.

Mitochondrial function and metabolic homeostasis are integral to cardiovascular 
function and influence how vascular cells respond to stress. However, little is 
known regarding how mitochondrial redox control mechanisms and metabolic 
regulation interact in the developing lungs. Here we show that human OLA1 
(Obg-like ATPase-1) couples redox signals to the metabolic response pathway by 
activating metabolic gene transcription in the nucleus. OLA1 phosphorylation at 
Ser232/Tyr236 triggers its translocation from the cytoplasm and mitochondria 
into the nucleus. Subsequent phosphorylation of OLA1 at Thr325 effectively 
changes its biochemical function from ATPase to GTPase, promoting the expression 
of genes involved in the mitochondrial bioenergetic function. This process is 
regulated by ERK1/2 (extracellular-regulated kinases 1 and 2), which were 
restrained by PP1A (protein phosphatase 1A) when stress abated. Knockdown of 
ERK1 or OLA1 mutated to a phosphoresistant T325A mutant blocked its nuclear 
translocation, compromised the expression of nuclear-encoded mitochondrial 
genes, and consequently led to cellular energy depletion. Moreover, the lungs of 
OLA1 knockout mice have fewer mitochondria, lower cellular ATP concentrations, 
and higher lactate concentrations. The ensuing mitochondrial metabolic 
dysfunction resulted in abnormal behaviors of pulmonary vascular cells and 
significant vascular remodeling. Our findings demonstrate that OLA1 is an 
important component of the mitochondrial retrograde communication pathways that 
couple stress signals with metabolic genes in the nucleus. Thus, 
phosphorylation-dependent nuclear OLA1 localization that governs cellular energy 
metabolism is critical to cardiovascular function.

DOI: 10.1165/rcmb.2022-0186OC
PMCID: PMC10112427
PMID: 36481055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
