---
pmid: '16740478'
title: Apc tumor suppressor gene is the "zonation-keeper" of mouse liver.
authors:
- Benhamouche S
- Decaens T
- Godard C
- Chambrey R
- Rickman DS
- Moinard C
- Vasseur-Cognet M
- Kuo CJ
- Kahn A
- Perret C
- Colnot S
journal: Dev Cell
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2006.03.015
---

# Apc tumor suppressor gene is the "zonation-keeper" of mouse liver.
**Authors:** Benhamouche S, Decaens T, Godard C, Chambrey R, Rickman DS, Moinard C, Vasseur-Cognet M, Kuo CJ, Kahn A, Perret C, Colnot S
**Journal:** Dev Cell (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.devcel.2006.03.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2006.03.015)

## Abstract

1. Dev Cell. 2006 Jun;10(6):759-70. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2006.03.015.

Apc tumor suppressor gene is the "zonation-keeper" of mouse liver.

Benhamouche S(1), Decaens T, Godard C, Chambrey R, Rickman DS, Moinard C, 
Vasseur-Cognet M, Kuo CJ, Kahn A, Perret C, Colnot S.

Author information:
(1)Institut Cochin, Département GDPM, INSERM U567, CNRS, UMR-S 8104, Paris, 
F-75014, France.

The molecular mechanisms by which liver genes are differentially expressed along 
a portocentral axis, allowing for metabolic zonation, are poorly understood. We 
provide here compelling evidence that the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway plays a key 
role in liver zonation. First, we show the complementary localization of 
activated beta-catenin in the perivenous area and the negative regulator Apc in 
periportal hepatocytes. We then analyzed the immediate consequences of either a 
liver-inducible Apc disruption or a blockade of Wnt signaling after infection 
with an adenovirus encoding Dkk1, and we show that Wnt/beta-catenin signaling 
inversely controls the perivenous and periportal genetic programs. Finally, we 
show that genes involved in the periportal urea cycle and the perivenous 
glutamine synthesis systems are critical targets of beta-catenin signaling, and 
that perturbations to ammonia metabolism are likely responsible for the death of 
mice with liver-targeted Apc loss. From our results, we propose that Apc is the 
liver "zonation-keeper" gene.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2006.03.015
PMID: 16740478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
