---
pmid: '26839314'
title: Ubiquitin-specific Protease 20 Regulates the Reciprocal Functions of β-Arrestin2
  in Toll-like Receptor 4-promoted Nuclear Factor κB (NFκB) Activation.
authors:
- Jean-Charles PY
- Zhang L
- Wu JH
- Han SO
- Brian L
- Freedman NJ
- Shenoy SK
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2016'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4817176
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.687129
---

# Ubiquitin-specific Protease 20 Regulates the Reciprocal Functions of β-Arrestin2 in Toll-like Receptor 4-promoted Nuclear Factor κB (NFκB) Activation.
**Authors:** Jean-Charles PY, Zhang L, Wu JH, Han SO, Brian L, Freedman NJ, Shenoy SK
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M115.687129](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M115.687129)
**PMC:** [PMC4817176](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4817176/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2016 Apr 1;291(14):7450-64. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.687129. Epub
2016  Feb 2.

Ubiquitin-specific Protease 20 Regulates the Reciprocal Functions of β-Arrestin2 
in Toll-like Receptor 4-promoted Nuclear Factor κB (NFκB) Activation.

Jean-Charles PY(1), Zhang L(1), Wu JH(1), Han SO(1), Brian L(1), Freedman NJ(2), 
Shenoy SK(3).

Author information:
(1)From the Departments of Medicine (Cardiology) and.
(2)From the Departments of Medicine (Cardiology) and Cell Biology, Duke 
University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710 
neil.freedman@dm.duke.edu.
(3)From the Departments of Medicine (Cardiology) and Cell Biology, Duke 
University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710 skshenoy@dm.duke.edu.

Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) promotes vascular inflammatory disorders such as 
neointimal hyperplasia and atherosclerosis. TLR4 triggers NFκB signaling through 
the ubiquitin ligase TRAF6 (tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 6). 
TRAF6 activity can be impeded by deubiquitinating enzymes like 
ubiquitin-specific protease 20 (USP20), which can reverse TRAF6 
autoubiquitination, and by association with the multifunctional adaptor protein 
β-arrestin2. Although β-arrestin2 effects on TRAF6 suggest an anti-inflammatory 
role, physiologic β-arrestin2 promotes inflammation in atherosclerosis and 
neointimal hyperplasia. We hypothesized that anti- and proinflammatory 
dimensions of β-arrestin2 activity could be dictated by β-arrestin2's 
ubiquitination status, which has been linked with its ability to scaffold and 
localize activated ERK1/2 to signalosomes. With purified proteins and in intact 
cells, our protein interaction studies showed that TRAF6/USP20 association and 
subsequent USP20-mediated TRAF6 deubiquitination were β-arrestin2-dependent. 
Generation of transgenic mice with smooth muscle cell-specific expression of 
either USP20 or its catalytically inactive mutant revealed anti-inflammatory 
effects of USP20in vivoandin vitro Carotid endothelial denudation showed that 
antagonizing smooth muscle cell USP20 activity increased NFκB activation and 
neointimal hyperplasia. We found that β-arrestin2 ubiquitination was promoted by 
TLR4 and reversed by USP20. The association of USP20 with β-arrestin2 was 
augmented when β-arrestin2 ubiquitination was prevented and reduced when 
β-arrestin2 ubiquitination was rendered constitutive. Constitutive β-arrestin2 
ubiquitination also augmented NFκB activation. We infer that pro- and 
anti-inflammatory activities of β-arrestin2 are determined by β-arrestin2 
ubiquitination and that changes in USP20 expression and/or activity can 
therefore regulate inflammatory responses, at least in part, by defining the 
ubiquitination status of β-arrestin2.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M115.687129
PMCID: PMC4817176
PMID: 26839314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) promotes vascular inflammatory disorders such as neointimal hyperplasia and atherosclerosis. TLR4 triggers NFκB signaling through the ubiquitin ligase TRAF6 (tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 6). TRAF6 activity can be impeded by deubiquitinating enzymes like ubiquitin-specific protease 20 (USP20), which can reverse TRAF6 autoubiquitination, and by association with the multifunctional adaptor protein β-arrestin2. Although β-arrestin2 effects on TRAF6 suggest an anti-inflammatory role, physiologic β-arrestin2 promotes inflammation in atherosclerosis and neointimal hyperplasia. We hypothesized that anti- and proinflammatory dimensions of β-arrestin2 activity could be dictated by β-arrestin2's ubiquitination status, which has been linked with its ability to scaffold and localize activated ERK1/2 to signalosomes. With purified proteins and in intact cells, our protein interaction studies showed that TRAF6/USP20 association and subsequent USP20-mediated TRAF6 deubiquitination were β-arrestin2-dependent. Generation of transgenic mice with smooth muscle cell-specific expression of either USP20 or its catalytically inactive mutant revealed anti-inflammatory effects of USP20 in vivo and in vitro . Carotid endothelial denudation showed that antagonizing smooth muscle cell USP20 activity increased NFκB activation and neointimal hyperplasia. We found that β-arrestin2 ubiquitination was promoted by TLR4 and reversed by USP20. The association of USP20 with β-arrestin2 was augmented when β-arrestin2 ubiquitination was prevented and reduced when β-arrestin2 ubiquitination was rendered constitutive. Constitutive β-arrestin2 ubiquitination also augmented NFκB activation. We infer that pro- and anti-inflammatory activities of β-arrestin2 are determined by β-arrestin2 ubiquitination and that changes in USP20 expression and/or activity can therefore regulate inflammatory responses, at least in part, by defining the ubiquitination status of β-arrestin2.

Introduction

β-Arrestin2 (βarr2) is an ∼46-kDa multifunctional scaffolding protein that was discovered originally for its ability to desensitize G protein-mediated signaling evoked by seven-transmembrane receptors (7TMRs) 4 ( 1 , 2 ). However, βarr2 modulates the signaling and/or endocytosis of not only most 7TMRs but also of several receptor protein tyrosine kinases, cytokine receptors, ion channel receptors, and the LDL receptor ( 3 , 4 ). Both the endocytic and signaling functions of βarr2 are intertwined with its ubiquitination, which in turn is stimulus-driven and regulated by specific E3 ubiquitin ligases or deubiquitinases (DUBs) ( 4 ). βarr2 not only undergoes dynamic ubiquitination/deubiquitination but also recruits E3 ubiquitin ligases to other substrates. Indeed, βarr2 is integral to the ubiquitination of cell surface receptors, channels, and non-receptor proteins ( 4 , 5 ). However, thus far there is no clear demonstration that βarr2 can scaffold a DUB to specific substrates and affect signal transduction by mediating deubiquitination.

A role in deubiquitination could help explain the ability of βarr2 to inhibit proinflammatory signaling that culminates in the activation of NFκB ( 6 – 8 ). Canonical activation of NFκB involves agonist-mediated TLR4 or interleukin-1 receptor dimerization, which engenders MyD88-dependent activation of the E3 ubiquitin ligase TRAF6—a process that involves TRAF6 oligomerization, autoubiquitination, and subsequent synthesis of Lys-63-linked polyubiquitin chains that are either covalently or noncovalently attached to other proteins ( 9 ). Such Lys-63-linked polyubiquitin chains activate TAK1 and co-localize TAK1 with IκB kinase (IKK) through noncovalent interactions ( 9 ). Consequently, TAK1 phosphorylates and thereby activates IKKβ. IKKβ-mediated phosphorylation of IκBα triggers Lys-48-linked polyubiquitination and proteasomal degradation of IκBα, with subsequent deinhibition of NFκB p65/p50 heterodimers ( 9 , 10 ). In this schema, βarr2 can inhibit NFκB signaling at two levels: by binding to and thereby impeding oligomerization and autoubiquitination of TRAF6 ( 6 ) and by binding to and preventing the degradation of IκBα ( 7 , 8 ). Whether the association of βarr2 with TRAF6 and/or IκBα facilitates deubiquitination of these proteins remains enigmatic.

Although βarr2 appears to inhibit NFκB activation and consequent inflammation in certain systems ( 6 – 8 , 11 – 13 ), it also appears to augment inflammatory signaling in distinct systems ( 14 – 16 ). Physiologic βarr2 expression in SMCs of endothelium-denuded arteries promotes neointimal hyperplasia, a pathology involving inflammation-induced proliferation and migration of SMCs from the tunica media into the subendothelial tunica intima ( 14 , 17 ). In Ldlr −/− mice, βarr2 promotes atherosclerosis ( 14 ), a chronic vasculitis that fundamentally involves canonical NFκB signaling ( 18 – 20 ). Similar proinflammatory roles of βarr2 have been reported in allergic asthma and in lysophosphatidic acid-induced NFκB activation ( 16 , 21 ). Thus, current data paint a paradoxical picture for βarr2 with respect to NFκB signaling and inflammation.

Apparent paradoxes in βarr2-regulated inflammatory signaling may be reconciled by extrapolating from studies demonstrating reciprocal functions of ubiquitinated βarr2 and non-ubiquitinated βarr2 in 7TMR signaling ( 22 , 23 ). Does reversible ubiquitination of βarr2 explain the proinflammatory versus anti-inflammatory dimensions of βarr2 activity? Deubiquitination of βarr2 itself is mediated by USP33 ( 23 ), and the USP33 homolog USP20 has been shown to deubiquitinate TRAF6 in heterologous systems ( 24 ). By scaffolding TRAF6 and USP20, could βarr2 block canonical NFκB activation? Conversely, by sequestering USP20, could βarr2 inhibit TRAF6 deubiquitination and thereby promote canonical NFκB activation? And could these reciprocal roles of βarr2 be regulated by reversible ubiquitination of βarr2? This study uses a variety of in vivo and in vitro approaches to address these questions and to determine whether USP20 and βarr2 function in concert to regulate TRAF6 ubiquitination and canonical NFκB activation.

Discussion

Our data demonstrate that USP20 inhibits inflammatory signaling in SMCs, and that USP20 may do so, in part, by deubiquitinating TRAF6 in a manner that requires scaffolding by non-ubiquitinated βarr2. Non-ubiquitinated βarr2 thereby serves to diminish inflammatory signaling. However, ubiquitinated βarr2 augments inflammatory signaling in a manner that can be triggered by TLR4 signaling. TLR4 signaling promotes βarr2 ubiquitination, reduces USP20/βarr2 association, and thereby potentiates TRAF6 ubiquitination and downstream NFκB signaling ( Fig. 12 ). Consequently, our study helps to elucidate apparently paradoxical findings showing that βarr2 can be anti-inflammatory in some systems ( 6 – 8 , 11 – 13 ) and proinflammatory in models of vascular disease ( 14 – 16 , 21 ).

In earlier studies, βarr2 failed to deubiquitinate TRAF6 in cell-free assays ( 6 ). Consequently, the inhibitory effect of βarr2 on TLR4-dependent NFκB signaling was previously attributed to βarr2-mediated inhibition of TRAF6 oligomerization and subsequent TRAF6 autoubiquitination ( 6 ). In this study, however, we report that βarr2 facilitates TRAF6 deubiquitination by serving as a scaffold for the deubiquitinase USP20. Thus, the ternary complex of TRAF6-βarr2-USP20 conforms to a common theme: that deubiquitinases associate with scaffolding proteins to facilitate association with their substrate and, consequently, to enhance their substrate affinity and specificity ( 51 ). Although the absence of USP20 did not affect the association of βarr2 with TRAF6, the absence of βarr2 abrogated the association of USP20 with TRAF6 in cells and reduced by 5-fold the association of purified USP20 with purified TRAF6. Indeed, the βarr2 dependence of TRAF6/USP20 association may, along with possible βarr2-mediated inhibition of TRAF6 oligomerization, account for the increase in TRAF6 ubiquitination observed in βarr2-deficient cells ( 6 ).

βarr2 appears to regulate NFκB activation through cell- and signaling context-specific mechanisms. In response to LPS, bone marrow-derived macrophages from β arr2 −/− mice show more IKK activity than WT macrophages ( 6 ), but they show equivalent LPS-induced secretion of the NFκB-dependent gene products TNF and IL-6 ( 11 ). Although βarr2 appears to reduce secretion of TNF and IL-6 from fibroblast-like synoviocytes ( 13 ), it has no effect on the secretion of the NFκB-dependent gene products ( 52 – 54 ) hyaluronan and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 from lung fibroblasts ( 15 ). However, in SMCs, βarr2 augments TLR4-dependent IκB degradation and inflammation-associated SMC proliferation ( Fig. 9 and Ref. 14 ). By performing βarr2 reconstitution experiments in βarr1/2-double knockout MEFs, distinct groups have shown both ( a ) that βarr2 decreases LPS-induced TRAF6 ubiquitination and IκBα phosphorylation ( 6 ), and ( b ) that βarr2 increases lysophosphatidic acid-induced activation of nuclear NFκB ( 21 ). In the intact mouse, βarr2 exerts similarly diverse effects on a variety of endpoints regulated substantially by canonical NFκB activation ( 20 , 55 , 56 ). βarr2 attenuates the effects of LPS-induced or septic shock, which transpires over hours ( 6 , 11 ). However, βarr2 has no effect on LPS-induced asthma ( 16 ), and βarr2 augments allergic asthma ( 16 ), arterial neointimal hyperplasia, and atherosclerosis ( 14 ), which develop over many weeks. To reconcile these diverse (and in some cases divergent) findings in vitro and in vivo , one could in some cases invoke the diversity of signaling mechanisms in play. However, the current work with dynamic βarr2 ubiquitination enables us to invoke more specific and novel mechanisms, too. We speculate that ( a ) βarr2 augments NFκB activity under conditions where deubiquitination of βarr2 is relatively slow, or impaired, so that βarr2 cannot serve to tether USP20 to TRAF6 and ( b ) βarr2 attenuates NFκB activity under conditions where βarr2-mediated scaffolding of USP20 is important for negatively regulating NFκB activation. Such conditions may be found in systems wherein the ratios of βarr2:USP20 and βarr2:TRAF6 are sufficiently low to favor the ternary complex of βarr2-USP20-TRAF6 rather than the binary complexes of βarr2-USP20 and βarr2-TRAF6, as demonstrated by our studies with purified proteins ( Fig. 2 ). Our transgenic mice with SMC-specific expression of USP20 or DN-USP20 provide the first in vivo evidence that USP20 serves an anti-inflammatory role. This finding is remarkable because USP20 is only one of ∼85 DUBs in the mammalian proteome ( 57 , 58 ), and very few of these have been implicated in the regulation of NFκB signaling. For example, the USP-family DUB known as CYLD can bind to p62/TRAF6 complexes, inhibit TRAF6 ubiquitination, and regulate RANK signaling in osteoclast precursor cells ( 59 ). Furthermore, CYLD also inhibits TNF receptor-triggered NFκB signaling by deubiquitinating TRAF2 ( 60 , 61 ). A somewhat contrary example is provided by the ovarian tumor protease DUB subfamily member A20, which can also deubiquitinate TRAF6, regulate NFκB signaling ( 62 – 64 ), and reduce NFκB-dependent gene product expression and atherosclerosis in Apoe −/− mice ( 65 ). Knockin studies with a deubiquitinase-defective A20 demonstrate that domains distinct from the DUB domain appear to achieve A20-mediated NFκB regulation ( 66 ). Whether βarr2 functions as an adaptor for additional DUBs that may regulate the NFκB pathway remains to be determined.

This study reveals the importance of dynamic ubiquitination as a major modulator of the reciprocal roles of βarr2 in NFκB signaling. Although ubiquitinated βarr2 scaffolds proteins in 7TMR pathways ( 22 ), non-ubiquitinated βarr2 appears to scaffold USP20 and its substrate TRAF6 in canonical NFκB pathways. Our data also suggest the possibility that activation and inactivation of USP20 may regulate the signaling properties of βarr2 in the canonical NFκB pathways. In the context of 7TMR trafficking, USP20 activity is regulated by cAMP-dependent kinase (PKA)-mediated phosphorylation of USP20 ( 67 ). Whether seryl phosphorylation of USP20 by TLR4-activated kinases such as IRAK1 ( 68 ) can modulate USP20 activity and thereby regulate βarr2 functions remains an interesting possibility that warrants further scrutiny.
