---
pmid: '11278417'
title: Uridine phosphorylase association with vimentin. Intracellular distribution
  and localization.
authors:
- Russell RL
- Cao D
- Zhang D
- Handschumacher RE
- Pizzorno G
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M008512200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Uridine phosphorylase association with vimentin. Intracellular distribution and localization.
**Authors:** Russell RL, Cao D, Zhang D, Handschumacher RE, Pizzorno G
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M008512200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M008512200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Apr 20;276(16):13302-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M008512200. Epub
2001  Jan 24.

Uridine phosphorylase association with vimentin. Intracellular distribution and 
localization.

Russell RL(1), Cao D, Zhang D, Handschumacher RE, Pizzorno G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Section of Medical Oncology, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

Uridine phosphorylase (UPase), a key enzyme in the pyrimidine salvage pathway, 
is associated with the intermediate filament protein vimentin, in NIH 3T3 
fibroblasts and colon 26 cells. Affinity chromatography was utilized to purify 
UPase from colon 26 and NIH 3T3 cells using the uridine phosphorylase inhibitor 
5'-amino benzylacyclouridine linked to an agarose matrix. Vimentin 
copurification with UPase was confirmed using both Western blot analysis and 
MALDI-MS methods. Separation of cytosolic proteins using gel filtration 
chromatography yields a high molecular weight complex containing UPase and 
vimentin. Purified recombinant UPase and recombinant vimentin were shown to bind 
in vitro with an affinity of 120 pm and a stoichiometry of 1:2. 
Immunofluorescence techniques confirm that UPase is associated with vimentin in 
both NIH 3T3 and colon 26 cells and that depolymerization of the microtubule 
system using nocodazole results in UPase remaining associated with the collapsed 
intermediate filament, vimentin. Our data demonstrate that UPase is associated 
with both the soluble and insoluble pools of vimentin. Approximately 60-70% of 
the total UPase exists in the cytosol as a soluble protein. Sequential 
extraction of NIH 3T3 or colon 26 cells liberates an additional 30-40% UPase 
activity associated with a detergent extractable fraction. All pools of UPase 
have been shown to possess enzymatic activity. We demonstrate for the first time 
that UPase is associated with vimentin and the existence of an enzymatically 
active cytoskeleton-associated UPase.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M008512200
PMID: 11278417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
