---
pmid: '26085330'
title: FBXO21 mediates the ubiquitylation and proteasomal degradation of EID1.
authors:
- Watanabe K
- Yumimoto K
- Nakayama KI
journal: Genes Cells
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/gtc.12260
---

# FBXO21 mediates the ubiquitylation and proteasomal degradation of EID1.
**Authors:** Watanabe K, Yumimoto K, Nakayama KI
**Journal:** Genes Cells (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1111/gtc.12260](https://doi.org/10.1111/gtc.12260)

## Abstract

1. Genes Cells. 2015 Aug;20(8):667-74. doi: 10.1111/gtc.12260. Epub 2015 Jun 18.

FBXO21 mediates the ubiquitylation and proteasomal degradation of EID1.

Watanabe K(1), Yumimoto K(1), Nakayama KI(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Medical Institute of 
Bioregulation, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, 812-8582, 
Japan.

Although identification of substrates for ubiquitin ligase (E3) is important for 
understanding its biological functions, detection of the interaction between an 
E3 and its substrates has remained challenging. We recently developed a new 
approach, termed differential proteomics-based identification of ubiquitylation 
substrates (DiPIUS), for the discovery of substrates of a given E3 ligase. We 
have now applied this approach to an uncharacterized human F-box protein, 
FBXO21, which serves as the substrate-recognition subunit of a SKP1-CUL1-F-box 
protein (SCF)-type E3, thereby identifying EID1 (EP300-interacting inhibitor of 
differentiation 1) as a candidate substrate. The central and COOH-terminal 
portion of FBXO21 was found to interact with the COOH-terminal region of EID1 in 
transfected cells. Over-expression of FBXO21 resulted in the down-regulation of 
EID1, whereas disruption of the FBXO21 gene with the CRISPR/Cas9 system 
stabilized EID1 and led to its accumulation in both the cytoplasm and nucleus. 
An in vitro ubiquitylation assay showed that EID1 is a direct substrate of 
SCF(FBXO)(21). Collectively, our results suggest that EID1 is a bona fide 
substrate of FBXO21 and that the control of EID1 abundance by SCF(FBXO)(21) 
might affect the transcriptional repression activity of EID1.

© 2015 The Molecular Biology Society of Japan and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/gtc.12260
PMID: 26085330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
