---
pmid: '16723661'
title: The network of protein-protein interactions within the human U4/U6.U5 tri-snRNP.
authors:
- Liu S
- Rauhut R
- Vornlocher HP
- Lührmann R
journal: RNA
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1484429
doi: 10.1261/rna.55406
---

# The network of protein-protein interactions within the human U4/U6.U5 tri-snRNP.
**Authors:** Liu S, Rauhut R, Vornlocher HP, Lührmann R
**Journal:** RNA (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1261/rna.55406](https://doi.org/10.1261/rna.55406)
**PMC:** [PMC1484429](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1484429/)

## Abstract

1. RNA. 2006 Jul;12(7):1418-30. doi: 10.1261/rna.55406. Epub 2006 May 24.

The network of protein-protein interactions within the human U4/U6.U5 tri-snRNP.

Liu S(1), Rauhut R, Vornlocher HP, Lührmann R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry, MPI of Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, 
Germany.

The human 25S U4/U6.U5 tri-snRNP is a major building block of the U2-type 
spliceosome and contains, in addition to the U4, U6, and U5 snRNAs, at least 30 
distinct proteins. To learn more about the molecular architecture of the 
tri-snRNP, we have investigated interactions between tri-snRNP proteins using 
the yeast two-hybrid assay and in vitro binding assays, and, in addition, have 
identified distinct protein domains that are critical for the connectivity of 
this protein network in the human tri-snRNP. These studies revealed multiple 
interactions between distinct domains of the U5 proteins hPrp8, hBrr2 (a 
DExH/D-box helicase), and hSnu114 (a putative GTPase), which are key players in 
the catalytic activation of the spliceosome, during which the U4/U6 base-pairing 
interaction is disrupted and U4 is released from the spliceosome. Both the 
U5-specific, TPR/HAT-repeat-containing hPrp6 protein and the tri-snRNP-specific 
hSnu66 protein interact with several U5- and U4/U6-associated proteins, 
including hBrr2 and hPrp3, which contacts the U6 snRNA. Thus, both proteins are 
located at the interface between U5 and U4/U6 in the tri-snRNP complex, and 
likely play an important role in transmitting the activity of hBrr2 and hSnu114 
in the U5 snRNP to the U4/U6 duplex during spliceosome activation. A more 
detailed analysis of these protein interactions revealed that different HAT 
repeats mediate interactions with specific hPrp6 partners. Taken together, data 
presented here provide a detailed picture of the network of protein interactions 
within the human tri-snRNP.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.55406
PMCID: PMC1484429
PMID: 16723661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
