---
pmid: '17634190'
title: Two C. elegans histone methyltransferases repress lin-3 EGF transcription to
  inhibit vulval development.
authors:
- Andersen EC
- Horvitz HR
journal: Development
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/dev.009373
---

# Two C. elegans histone methyltransferases repress lin-3 EGF transcription to inhibit vulval development.
**Authors:** Andersen EC, Horvitz HR
**Journal:** Development (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.009373](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.009373)

## Abstract

1. Development. 2007 Aug;134(16):2991-9. doi: 10.1242/dev.009373. Epub 2007 Jul
18.

Two C. elegans histone methyltransferases repress lin-3 EGF transcription to 
inhibit vulval development.

Andersen EC(1), Horvitz HR.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biology, MIT, 77 Massachusetts 
Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Studies of Schizosaccharomyces pombe and mammalian cells identified a series of 
histone modifications that result in transcriptional repression. Lysine 9 of 
histone H3 (H3K9) is deacetylated by the NuRD complex, methylated by a histone 
methyltransferase (HMT) and then bound by a chromodomain-containing protein, 
such as heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1), leading to transcriptional repression. 
A Caenorhabditis elegans NuRD-like complex and HP1 homologs regulate vulval 
development, but no HMT is known to act in this process. We surveyed all 38 
putative HMT genes in C. elegans and identified met-1 and met-2 as negative 
regulators of vulval cell-fate specification. met-1 is homologous to 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae Set2, an H3K36 HMT that prevents the ectopic initiation 
of transcription. met-2 is homologous to human SETDB1, an H3K9 HMT that 
represses transcription. met-1 and met-2 (1) are each required for the normal 
trimethylation of both H3K9 and H3K36; (2) act redundantly with each other as 
well as with the C. elegans HP1 homologs; and (3) repress transcription of the 
EGF gene lin-3, which encodes the signal that induces vulval development. We 
propose that as is the case for Set2 in yeast, MET-1 prevents the reinitiation 
of transcription. Our results suggest that in the inhibition of vulval 
development, homologs of SETDB1, HP1 and the NuRD complex act with this H3K36 
HMT to prevent ectopic transcriptional initiation.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.009373
PMID: 17634190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
