---
pmid: '20837997'
title: Reversal of salt preference is directed by the insulin/PI3K and Gq/PKC signaling
  in Caenorhabditis elegans.
authors:
- Adachi T
- Kunitomo H
- Tomioka M
- Ohno H
- Okochi Y
- Mori I
- Iino Y
journal: Genetics
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC2998313
doi: 10.1534/genetics.110.119768
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Reversal of salt preference is directed by the insulin/PI3K and Gq/PKC signaling in Caenorhabditis elegans.
**Authors:** Adachi T, Kunitomo H, Tomioka M, Ohno H, Okochi Y, Mori I, Iino Y
**Journal:** Genetics (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1534/genetics.110.119768](https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.110.119768)
**PMC:** [PMC2998313](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2998313/)

## Abstract

1. Genetics. 2010 Dec;186(4):1309-19. doi: 10.1534/genetics.110.119768. Epub 2010
 Sep 13.

Reversal of salt preference is directed by the insulin/PI3K and Gq/PKC signaling 
in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Adachi T(1), Kunitomo H, Tomioka M, Ohno H, Okochi Y, Mori I, Iino Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate School of Science, The 
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Animals search for foods and decide their behaviors according to previous 
experience. Caenorhabditis elegans detects chemicals with a limited number of 
sensory neurons, allowing us to dissect roles of each neuron for innate and 
learned behaviors. C. elegans is attracted to salt after exposure to the salt 
(NaCl) with food. In contrast, it learns to avoid the salt after exposure to the 
salt without food. In salt-attraction behavior, it is known that the ASE taste 
sensory neurons (ASEL and ASER) play a major role. However, little is known 
about mechanisms for learned salt avoidance. Here, through dissecting 
contributions of ASE neurons for salt chemotaxis, we show that both ASEL and 
ASER generate salt chemotaxis plasticity. In ASER, we have previously shown that 
the insulin/PI 3-kinase signaling acts for starvation-induced salt chemotaxis 
plasticity. This study shows that the PI 3-kinase signaling promotes aversive 
drive of ASER but not of ASEL. Furthermore, the Gq signaling pathway composed of 
Gqα EGL-30, diacylglycerol, and nPKC (novel protein kinase C) TTX-4 promotes 
attractive drive of ASER but not of ASEL. A putative salt receptor GCY-22 
guanylyl cyclase is required in ASER for both salt attraction and avoidance. Our 
results suggest that ASEL and ASER use distinct molecular mechanisms to regulate 
salt chemotaxis plasticity.

DOI: 10.1534/genetics.110.119768
PMCID: PMC2998313
PMID: 20837997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Animals search for foods and decide their behaviors according to previous experience. Caenorhabditis elegans detects chemicals with a limited number of sensory neurons, allowing us to dissect roles of each neuron for innate and learned behaviors. C. elegans is attracted to salt after exposure to the salt (NaCl) with food. In contrast, it learns to avoid the salt after exposure to the salt without food. In salt-attraction behavior, it is known that the ASE taste sensory neurons ( ASEL and ASER ) play a major role. However, little is known about mechanisms for learned salt avoidance. Here, through dissecting contributions of ASE neurons for salt chemotaxis, we show that both ASEL and ASER generate salt chemotaxis plasticity. In ASER , we have previously shown that the insulin/PI 3-kinase signaling acts for starvation-induced salt chemotaxis plasticity. This study shows that the PI 3-kinase signaling promotes aversive drive of ASER but not of ASEL . Furthermore, the G q signaling pathway composed of G q α EGL-30 , diacylglycerol, and nPKC (novel protein kinase C) TTX-4 promotes attractive drive of ASER but not of ASEL . A putative salt receptor GCY-22 guanylyl cyclase is required in ASER for both salt attraction and avoidance. Our results suggest that ASEL and ASER use distinct molecular mechanisms to regulate salt chemotaxis plasticity.

DISCUSSION

In this study, we reported that both ASEL and ASER generate starvation-induced salt chemotaxis plasticity. We showed that the PI 3-kinase signaling and the G q /DAG/PKC signaling in ASER contribute to reversal of the orientation of salt chemotaxis. Attractive and aversive drives of ASER depend on GCY-22 function.
