---
pmid: '14749723'
title: DJ-1 has a role in antioxidative stress to prevent cell death.
authors:
- Taira T
- Saito Y
- Niki T
- Iguchi-Ariga SM
- Takahashi K
- Ariga H
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1298985
doi: 10.1038/sj.embor.7400074
---

# DJ-1 has a role in antioxidative stress to prevent cell death.
**Authors:** Taira T, Saito Y, Niki T, Iguchi-Ariga SM, Takahashi K, Ariga H
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.embor.7400074](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.embor.7400074)
**PMC:** [PMC1298985](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1298985/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2004 Feb;5(2):213-8. doi: 10.1038/sj.embor.7400074. Epub 2004 Jan
23.

DJ-1 has a role in antioxidative stress to prevent cell death.

Taira T(1), Saito Y, Niki T, Iguchi-Ariga SM, Takahashi K, Ariga H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Hokkaido University, Kita 12, Nishi 6, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.

Erratum in
    EMBO Rep. 2004 Apr;5(4):430.

Deletion and point (L166P) mutations of DJ-1 have recently been shown to be 
responsible for the onset of familial Parkinson's disease (PD, PARK7). The aim 
of this study was to determine the role of DJ-1 in PD. We first found that DJ-1 
eliminated hydrogen peroxide in vitro by oxidizing itself. We then found that 
DJ-1 knockdown by short interfering RNA rendered SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells 
susceptible to hydrogen peroxide-, MPP+- or 6-hydroxydopamine-induced cell death 
and that cells harbouring mutant forms of DJ-1, including L166P, became 
susceptible to death in parallel with the loss of oxidized forms of DJ-1. These 
results clearly showed that DJ-1 has a role in the antioxidative stress reaction 
and that mutations of DJ-1 lead to cell death, which is observed in PD.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.embor.7400074
PMCID: PMC1298985
PMID: 14749723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
