---
pmid: '32413283'
title: Bi-allelic Variations of SMO in Humans Cause a Broad Spectrum of Developmental
  Anomalies Due to Abnormal Hedgehog Signaling.
authors:
- Le TL
- Sribudiani Y
- Dong X
- Huber C
- Kois C
- Baujat G
- Gordon CT
- Mayne V
- Galmiche L
- Serre V
- Goudin N
- Zarhrate M
- Bole-Feysot C
- Masson C
- Nitschké P
- Verheijen FW
- Pais L
- Pelet A
- Sadedin S
- Pugh JA
- Shur N
- White SM
- El Chehadeh S
- Christodoulou J
- Cormier-Daire V
- Hofstra RMW
- Lyonnet S
- Tan TY
- Attié-Bitach T
- Kerstjens-Frederikse WS
- Amiel J
- Thomas S
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC7273534
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.04.010
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Bi-allelic Variations of SMO in Humans Cause a Broad Spectrum of Developmental Anomalies Due to Abnormal Hedgehog Signaling.
**Authors:** Le TL, Sribudiani Y, Dong X, Huber C, Kois C, Baujat G, Gordon CT, Mayne V, Galmiche L, Serre V, Goudin N, Zarhrate M, Bole-Feysot C, Masson C, Nitschké P, Verheijen FW, Pais L, Pelet A, Sadedin S, Pugh JA, Shur N, White SM, El Chehadeh S, Christodoulou J, Cormier-Daire V, Hofstra RMW, Lyonnet S, Tan TY, Attié-Bitach T, Kerstjens-Frederikse WS, Amiel J, Thomas S
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.04.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.04.010)
**PMC:** [PMC7273534](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7273534/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2020 Jun 4;106(6):779-792. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.04.010.
Epub  2020 May 14.

Bi-allelic Variations of SMO in Humans Cause a Broad Spectrum of Developmental 
Anomalies Due to Abnormal Hedgehog Signaling.

Le TL(1), Sribudiani Y(2), Dong X(3), Huber C(4), Kois C(5), Baujat G(6), Gordon 
CT(1), Mayne V(7), Galmiche L(8), Serre V(9), Goudin N(10), Zarhrate M(11), 
Bole-Feysot C(11), Masson C(12), Nitschké P(12), Verheijen FW(13), Pais L(14), 
Pelet A(1), Sadedin S(3), Pugh JA(5), Shur N(15), White SM(16), El Chehadeh 
S(17), Christodoulou J(3), Cormier-Daire V(6), Hofstra RMW(13), Lyonnet S(18), 
Tan TY(16), Attié-Bitach T(19), Kerstjens-Frederikse WS(20), Amiel J(18), Thomas 
S(21).

Author information:
(1)Université de Paris, Imagine Institute, Laboratory of Embryology and Genetics 
of Malformations, INSERM UMR 1163, 75015 Paris, France.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, 3015 GD Rotterdam, 
the Netherlands; Department of Biomedical Sciences, Division of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Padjadjaran, Bandung 40132, 
Indonesia.
(3)Brain and Mitochondrial Research Group, Murdoch Children's Research 
Institute, Royal Children's Hospital, 50 Flemington Rd, Parkville VIC 3052, 
Australia; Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, 3010 
Victoria, Australia.
(4)Université de Paris, Imagine Institute, Laboratory of Molecular and 
Physiopathological Bases of Osteochondrodysplasia, INSERM UMR 1163, 75015 Paris, 
France.
(5)Albany Medical Center, 43 New Scotland Ave, Albany, NY 12208, USA.
(6)Université de Paris, Imagine Institute, Laboratory of Molecular and 
Physiopathological Bases of Osteochondrodysplasia, INSERM UMR 1163, 75015 Paris, 
France; Fédération de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Assistance 
Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, 75015 Paris, France.
(7)Department of Medical Imaging, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, 
Australia 3052.
(8)Department of Pathology, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Assistance Publique 
Hôpitaux de Paris, 75015 Paris, France.
(9)Université de Paris, Institut Jacques Monod, UMR7592 CNRS, 15 Rue Hélène 
Brion, 75013 Paris, France.
(10)Université de Paris, Imagine Institute, Cell Imaging, INSERM UMR 1163, 75015 
Paris, France.
(11)Université de Paris, Imagine Institute, Structure Fédérative de Recherche 
Necker, Genomic Platform, INSERM UMR 1163 and INSERM US24, Centre National de la 
Recherche Scientifique UMS3633, 75015 Paris, France.
(12)Université de Paris, Imagine Institute, Bioinformatics Platform, INSERM UMR 
1163, 75015 Paris, France.
(13)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, 3015 GD Rotterdam, 
the Netherlands.
(14)Center for Mendelian Genomics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, 415 Main 
St, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(15)Children's National, 111 Michigan Ave NW, Washington, D.C. 20010, USA.
(16)Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Children's Research Institute 
and Department of Pediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia 
3052.
(17)Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital de Hautepierre, 67098 Strasbourg, 
France.
(18)Université de Paris, Imagine Institute, Laboratory of Embryology and 
Genetics of Malformations, INSERM UMR 1163, 75015 Paris, France; Fédération de 
Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de 
Paris, 75015 Paris, France.
(19)Fédération de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Assistance Publique 
Hôpitaux de Paris, 75015 Paris, France; Université de Paris, Imagine Institute, 
Laboratory of Genetics and Development of the Cerebral Cortex, INSERM UMR 1163, 
75015 Paris, France.
(20)Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, 
9713 GZ Groningen, the Netherlands.
(21)Université de Paris, Imagine Institute, Laboratory of Embryology and 
Genetics of Malformations, INSERM UMR 1163, 75015 Paris, France. Electronic 
address: sophie.thomas@inserm.fr.

The evolutionarily conserved hedgehog (Hh) pathway is essential for 
organogenesis and plays critical roles in postnatal tissue maintenance and 
renewal. A unique feature of the vertebrate Hh pathway is that signal 
transduction requires the primary cilium (PC) where major pathway components are 
dynamically enriched. These factors include smoothened (SMO) and patched, which 
constitute the core reception system for sonic hedgehog (SHH) as well as GLI 
transcription factors, the key mediators of the pathway. Here, we report 
bi-allelic loss-of-function variations in SMO in seven individuals from five 
independent families; these variations cause a wide phenotypic spectrum of 
developmental anomalies affecting the brain (hypothalamic hamartoma and 
microcephaly), heart (atrioventricular septal defect), skeleton (postaxial 
polydactyly, narrow chest, and shortening of long bones), and enteric nervous 
system (aganglionosis). Cells derived from affected individuals showed normal 
ciliogenesis but severely altered Hh-signal transduction as a result of either 
altered PC trafficking or abnormal activation of the pathway downstream of SMO. 
In addition, Hh-independent GLI2 accumulation at the PC tip in cells from the 
affected individuals suggests a potential function of SMO in regulating basal 
ciliary trafficking of GLI2 when the pathway is off. Thus, loss of SMO function 
results in abnormal PC dynamics of key components of the Hh signaling pathway 
and leads to a large continuum of malformations in humans.

Copyright © 2020 American Society of Human Genetics. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.04.010
PMCID: PMC7273534
PMID: 32413283 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
