---
pmid: '17420447'
title: Phosphorylation-dependent regulation of nuclear localization and functions
  of integrin-linked kinase.
authors:
- Acconcia F
- Barnes CJ
- Singh RR
- Talukder AH
- Kumar R
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1871862
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0701999104
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Phosphorylation-dependent regulation of nuclear localization and functions of integrin-linked kinase.
**Authors:** Acconcia F, Barnes CJ, Singh RR, Talukder AH, Kumar R
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0701999104](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0701999104)
**PMC:** [PMC1871862](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1871862/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Apr 17;104(16):6782-7. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0701999104. Epub 2007 Apr 9.

Phosphorylation-dependent regulation of nuclear localization and functions of 
integrin-linked kinase.

Acconcia F(1), Barnes CJ, Singh RR, Talukder AH, Kumar R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, University of Texas M. D. 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Integrin-linked kinase (ILK) is a phosphorylated protein that regulates 
physiological processes that overlap with those regulated by p21-activated 
kinase 1 (PAK1). Here we report the possible role of ILK phosphorylation by PAK1 
in ILK-mediated signaling and intracellular translocation. We found that PAK1 
phosphorylates ILK at threonine-173 and serine-246 in vitro and in vivo. 
Depletion of PAK1 decreased the levels of endogenous ILK phosphorylation in 
vivo. Mutation of PAK1 phosphorylation sites on ILK to alanine reduced cell 
motility and cell proliferation. Biochemical fractionation, confocal microscopy, 
and chromatin-interaction analyses of human cells revealed that ILK localizes 
predominantly in the cytoplasm but also resides in the nucleus. Transfection of 
MCF-7 cells with point mutants ILK-T173A, ILK-S246A, or ILK-T173A; S246A 
(ILK-DM) altered ILK localization. Selective depletion of PAK1 dramatically 
increased the nuclear and focal point accumulation of ILK, further demonstrating 
a role for PAK1 in ILK translocation. We also identified functional nuclear 
localization sequence and nuclear export sequence motifs in ILK, delineated an 
apparently integral role for ILK in maintaining normal nuclear integrity, and 
established that ILK interacts with the regulatory region of the CNKSR3 gene 
chromatin to negatively modulate its expression. Together, these results suggest 
that ILK is a PAK1 substrate, undergoes phosphorylation-dependent shuttling 
between the cell nucleus and cytoplasm, and interacts with gene-regulatory 
chromatin.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0701999104
PMCID: PMC1871862
PMID: 17420447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Integrin-linked kinase (ILK) is a phosphorylated protein that regulates physiological processes that overlap with those regulated by p21-activated kinase 1 (PAK1). Here we report the possible role of ILK phosphorylation by PAK1 in ILK-mediated signaling and intracellular translocation. We found that PAK1 phosphorylates ILK at threonine-173 and serine-246 in vitro and in vivo . Depletion of PAK1 decreased the levels of endogenous ILK phosphorylation in vivo . Mutation of PAK1 phosphorylation sites on ILK to alanine reduced cell motility and cell proliferation. Biochemical fractionation, confocal microscopy, and chromatin-interaction analyses of human cells revealed that ILK localizes predominantly in the cytoplasm but also resides in the nucleus. Transfection of MCF-7 cells with point mutants ILK-T173A, ILK-S246A, or ILK-T173A; S246A (ILK-DM) altered ILK localization. Selective depletion of PAK1 dramatically increased the nuclear and focal point accumulation of ILK, further demonstrating a role for PAK1 in ILK translocation. We also identified functional nuclear localization sequence and nuclear export sequence motifs in ILK, delineated an apparently integral role for ILK in maintaining normal nuclear integrity, and established that ILK interacts with the regulatory region of the CNKSR3 gene chromatin to negatively modulate its expression. Together, these results suggest that ILK is a PAK1 substrate, undergoes phosphorylation-dependent shuttling between the cell nucleus and cytoplasm, and interacts with gene-regulatory chromatin.

Discussion

On the basis of commonly driven cellular outcomes ( 8 ) and the presence of PAK1 phosphorylation sites on ILK, we identified PAK1 as a physiological upstream kinase for ILK. We identified two solvent-exposed ILK residues (i.e., T173 and S246) as the sites of PAK1 phosphorylation on ILK. Mutation of the two PAK1 phosphorylation sites inhibited cell growth and migration. Analysis of the role of phosphorylation in ILK subcellular distribution led to several key observations. First, we observed that a pool of ILK localizes in the nucleus and that ILK's cellular localization is altered when ILK is phosphorylated. Second, we identified a functional NLS in ILK whose mutation abrogates ILK's nuclear localization. Third, we established that ILK localization is also regulated by an NES that we identified as I400. Fourth, we implicated PAK1 activity in ILK nuclear export by observing that ILK accumulates in the nucleus when PAK1 protein levels are reduced. Although treatment of cells with EGF, a potent PAK1 activator, increased nuclear ILK, our data indicate a potential role for PAK1 in ILK nuclear export, and other EGF-induced pathways may also trigger ILK nuclear localization.

ILK seems to be important for the maintenance of nuclear integrity because disruption of normal ILK subcellular localization patterns led to several nuclear aberrations, including altered morphology and abnormal lamin A/C distribution. Some of these nuclear alterations were reminiscent of those seen in diseases of compromised nuclear integrity, such as laminopathy leading to muscular dystrophy ( 19 ), to premature aging syndromes ( 20 , 21 ), and to aging of the kidney ( 22 ). However, there are currently no literature reports connecting ILK and specific laminopathies, and this may warrant further exploration.

Our data also indicate another potential role for ILK in the nucleus. We found that ILK associates with target chromatin and acts as a gene repressor. This finding is not without precedent, because nonconventional, location-specific functions have been for both cytoplasmic ( 16 , 17 ) and nuclear ( 23 ) proteins. Functional plasticity of proteins overcomes the restraints of subcellular localization and expands the repertoire of cytoplasmic proteins found in the nuclear compartment. In addition, in light of the nuclear localization of EGF receptor ( 16 ), myosin VI ( 17 ), actin ( 24 ), and ILK (present study), it is tempting to speculate that a network of cytoskeleton proteins may also extend functionally into the nucleus. Nonetheless, our findings raise as many questions as they answer. For example, identify the cellular compartment in which ILK becomes phosphorylated by PAK1. Considering that PAK1 localizes in the nucleus upon EGF treatment ( 25 ), this phosphorylation may occur in the nucleus to regulate ILK nuclear export. In this respect, the regulation of ILK's association with specific exportins ( 10 ) might be an additional level of regulation for ILK nuclear/cytoplasmic shuttling. It is also possible that phosphorylation might affect the ability of ILK to interact with and regulate its cytoskeleton-binding partners. Nevertheless, our present findings warrant the conclusion that PAK1-mediated ILK phosphorylation controls ILK-regulated cellular processes and that ILK is a nuclear protein with nuclear functions.
