---
pmid: '18087040'
title: Regulation of p53 tetramerization and nuclear export by ARC.
authors:
- Foo RS
- Nam YJ
- Ostreicher MJ
- Metzl MD
- Whelan RS
- Peng CF
- Ashton AW
- Fu W
- Mani K
- Chin SF
- Provenzano E
- Ellis I
- Figg N
- Pinder S
- Bennett MR
- Caldas C
- Kitsis RN
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2409226
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0710017104
---

# Regulation of p53 tetramerization and nuclear export by ARC.
**Authors:** Foo RS, Nam YJ, Ostreicher MJ, Metzl MD, Whelan RS, Peng CF, Ashton AW, Fu W, Mani K, Chin SF, Provenzano E, Ellis I, Figg N, Pinder S, Bennett MR, Caldas C, Kitsis RN
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0710017104](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0710017104)
**PMC:** [PMC2409226](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2409226/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Dec 26;104(52):20826-31. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0710017104. Epub 2007 Dec 17.

Regulation of p53 tetramerization and nuclear export by ARC.

Foo RS(1), Nam YJ, Ostreicher MJ, Metzl MD, Whelan RS, Peng CF, Ashton AW, Fu W, 
Mani K, Chin SF, Provenzano E, Ellis I, Figg N, Pinder S, Bennett MR, Caldas C, 
Kitsis RN.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Medicine and Cell Biology, Cardiovascular Research Center, and 
Cancer Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Inactivation of the transcription factor p53 is central to carcinogenesis. Yet 
only approximately one-half of cancers have p53 loss-of-function mutations. 
Here, we demonstrate a mechanism for p53 inactivation by apoptosis repressor 
with caspase recruitment domain (ARC), a protein induced in multiple cancer 
cells. The direct binding in the nucleus of ARC to the p53 tetramerization 
domain inhibits p53 tetramerization. This exposes a nuclear export signal in 
p53, triggering Crm1-dependent relocation of p53 to the cytoplasm. Knockdown of 
endogenous ARC in breast cancer cells results in spontaneous tetramerization of 
endogenous p53, accumulation of p53 in the nucleus, and activation of endogenous 
p53 target genes. In primary human breast cancers with nuclear ARC, p53 is 
almost always WT. Conversely, nearly all breast cancers with mutant p53 lack 
nuclear ARC. We conclude that nuclear ARC is induced in cancer cells and 
negatively regulates p53.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0710017104
PMCID: PMC2409226
PMID: 18087040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Inactivation of the transcription factor p53 is central to carcinogenesis. Yet only approximately one-half of cancers have p53 loss-of-function mutations. Here, we demonstrate a mechanism for p53 inactivation by apoptosis repressor with caspase recruitment domain (ARC), a protein induced in multiple cancer cells. The direct binding in the nucleus of ARC to the p53 tetramerization domain inhibits p53 tetramerization. This exposes a nuclear export signal in p53, triggering Crm1-dependent relocation of p53 to the cytoplasm. Knockdown of endogenous ARC in breast cancer cells results in spontaneous tetramerization of endogenous p53, accumulation of p53 in the nucleus, and activation of endogenous p53 target genes. In primary human breast cancers with nuclear ARC, p53 is almost always WT. Conversely, nearly all breast cancers with mutant p53 lack nuclear ARC. We conclude that nuclear ARC is induced in cancer cells and negatively regulates p53.

Discussion

The experiments herein identify ARC as a negative regulator of p53 in cancer cells and delineate a mechanism by which this inhibition is mediated: ARC binds p53 and inhibits p53 tetramerization. Inhibition of p53 tetramerization disables p53 function as a transcription factor and exposes an NES in p53 that triggers its Crm1-dependent nuclear export.

The relocation of WT p53 to the cytoplasm in cancer cells has long been recognized ( 5 ), but the underlying mechanisms remain incompletely understood. In addition to the ARC-dependent mechanism delineated here, monoubiquitination of p53 by Mdm2 has been described to stimulate p53 nuclear export in some cancer cells ( 23 – 25 ). ARC-dependent nuclear export appears distinct from that mediated by Mdm2, however, in that GFP-p53CT, which is exported by ARC, lacks the N-terminal Mdm2 binding site that is required for Mdm2-mediated p53 nuclear export ( 23 ). Noncanonical ubiquitination by Ubc13 has also been shown to stimulate p53 nuclear export, although this mechanism may involve interference with p53 tetramerization similar to ARC ( 26 ). Relocation of p53 to the cytoplasm is brought about in some cancer cells by cytoplasmic retention rather than nuclear hyperexport. For example, Parc is a cytoplasmic protein that binds and retains p53 ( 27 ). Notably, Parc is expressed at very low levels in MCF7 cells (data not shown) where there is abundant ARC ( Fig. 1 A ). Conversely, Parc levels are high in U2OS cells ( 27 ), which contain little ARC ( Fig. 1 C and D ). These observations suggest complementarity between different p53-inactivating mechanisms.

Activation of p53 in response to stress stimuli elicits cell cycle arrest or apoptosis ( 28 ). In this study, we show that ARC antagonizes p53-induced apoptosis. Some stress stimuli that activate p53, however, also trigger ubiquitin-mediated degradation of ARC, and decreases in ARC levels are required for these stimuli to kill ( 29 ). Whether the machinery required for ARC degradation operates in cancer cells remains to be determined.

Knockdown of endogenous ARC in breast cancer cells, by itself, stimulates endogenous p53 to tetramerize, relocate to the nucleus, and activate endogenous p53 target genes. These data indicate that physiological levels of ARC are adequate to inhibit p53. Moreover, genetic analysis of human breast cancers shows that the presence of nuclear ARC is almost invariably associated with WT p53, and conversely, the presence of mutant p53 is associated with the absence of nuclear ARC. These data suggest an important role for ARC in the inactivation of WT p53 in human cancer.
