---
pmid: '9371705'
title: 'Bovine cytosolic IMP/GMP-specific 5''-nucleotidase: cloning and expression
  of active enzyme in Escherichia coli.'
authors:
- Allegrini S
- Pesi R
- Tozzi MG
- Fiol CJ
- Johnson RB
- Eriksson S
journal: Biochem J
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1218945
doi: 10.1042/bj3280483
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Bovine cytosolic IMP/GMP-specific 5'-nucleotidase: cloning and expression of active enzyme in Escherichia coli.
**Authors:** Allegrini S, Pesi R, Tozzi MG, Fiol CJ, Johnson RB, Eriksson S
**Journal:** Biochem J (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1042/bj3280483](https://doi.org/10.1042/bj3280483)
**PMC:** [PMC1218945](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1218945/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 1997 Dec 1;328 ( Pt 2)(Pt 2):483-7. doi: 10.1042/bj3280483.

Bovine cytosolic IMP/GMP-specific 5'-nucleotidase: cloning and expression of 
active enzyme in Escherichia coli.

Allegrini S(1), Pesi R, Tozzi MG, Fiol CJ, Johnson RB, Eriksson S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Medical Chemistry, Swedish University of 
Agricultural Science, The Biomedical Center, Box 575, S-751 23 Uppsala, Sweden.

A cDNA coding for bovine cytosolic IMP/GMP-specific 5'-nucleotidase endowed with 
phosphotransferase activity was cloned from calf thymus RNA, by 5' and 3' rapid 
amplification of cDNA ends protocols (5' and 3' RACE). Two products were 
isolated: a 5' RACE 1.6 kb fragment and a 3' RACE 2.0 kb fragment, with an 
overlapping region of 505 bp, leading to a total length of approx. 2951 bp. The 
similarity in the coding region to that of the human 5'-nucleotidase cDNA 
sequence [Oka, Matsumoto, Hosokawa and Inoue (1994) Biochem. Biophys. Res. 
Commun. 205, 917-922], indirectly identified as a 5'-nucleotidase, was 94% and 
the deduced amino acid sequences were 99.5% identical. The bovine cDNA sequence 
included the sequences codifying for six peptides obtained from 
5'-nucleotidase/phosphotransferase purified from calf thymus. Northern blots of 
human mRNA species from different tissues showed a 3.6 kb mRNA expressed at 
equal levels in most tissues. The cDNA was cloned into a pET-28c expression 
vector and the protein obtained after induction had a molecular mass of 61 kDa 
under SDS/PAGE. It exhibited both 5'-nucleotidase and phosphotransferase 
activity, as well as immunological and kinetic properties similar to those of 
the enzyme purified from calf thymus. This is the first time that a fully active 
recombinant 5'nucleotidase has been described.

DOI: 10.1042/bj3280483
PMCID: PMC1218945
PMID: 9371705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
