---
pmid: '2166947'
title: Hot spot mutations in adenosine deaminase deficiency.
authors:
- Hirschhorn R
- Tzall S
- Ellenbogen A
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1990'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC54494
doi: 10.1073/pnas.87.16.6171
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Hot spot mutations in adenosine deaminase deficiency.
**Authors:** Hirschhorn R, Tzall S, Ellenbogen A
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1990)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.87.16.6171](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.87.16.6171)
**PMC:** [PMC54494](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC54494/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1990 Aug;87(16):6171-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.87.16.6171.

Hot spot mutations in adenosine deaminase deficiency.

Hirschhorn R(1), Tzall S, Ellenbogen A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, New York University Medical School, NY 10016.

We have previously characterized mutant adenosine deaminase (ADA; adenosine 
aminohydrolase, EC 3.5.4.4) enzymes in seven children with partial ADA 
deficiency. Six children shared common origins, suggesting a common progenitor. 
However, we found evidence for multiple phenotypically different mutant enzymes. 
We hypothesized that many of the mutations would be at CpG dinucleotides, hot 
spots at which spontaneous deamination of 5-methylcytosine results in C to T or 
G to A transitions. Digestion of DNA from these children with Msp I and Taq I, 
enzymes recognizing CpG dinucleotides, identified three different mutations, 
each correlating with expression of a different mutant enzyme. Sequencing of 
cDNA clones and genomic DNA amplified by polymerase chain reaction confirmed the 
presence of C to T or G to A transitions at CpG dinucleotides (C226 to T, G446 
to A, and C821 to T, resulting in Arg76 to Trp, Arg149 to Gln, and Pro274 to 
Leu). A "null" mutation, also found in two ADA-deficient severe combined 
immunodeficient children, was serendipitously detected as gain of a site for Msp 
I. Simultaneous loss of a site for Bal I defined the precise base substitution 
(T320 to C, Leu107 to Pro), confirmed by sequence analysis. To determine the 
true frequency of hot spot mutation in these children, consecutively ascertained 
through a newborn screening program, we sequenced cDNA from the remaining 
alleles. Two others were hot spot mutations (C631 to T and G643 to A, resulting 
in Arg211 to Cys and Ala215 to Thr), each again resulting in expression of a 
phenotypically different mutant enzyme. Only one additional mutation (previously 
identified by us) is not in a hot spot. These seven mutations account for all 14 
chromosomes in these children. There is thus a very high frequency of hot spot 
mutations in partial ADA deficiency. Most of these children carry two different 
mutant alleles. We were able to correlate genotype and phenotype and to dissect 
the activity of individual mutant alleles.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.87.16.6171
PMCID: PMC54494
PMID: 2166947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
