---
pmid: '15778465'
title: Targeted proteomic analysis of 14-3-3 sigma, a p53 effector commonly silenced
  in cancer.
authors:
- Benzinger A
- Muster N
- Koch HB
- Yates JR 3rd
- Hermeking H
journal: Mol Cell Proteomics
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/mcp.M500021-MCP200
---

# Targeted proteomic analysis of 14-3-3 sigma, a p53 effector commonly silenced in cancer.
**Authors:** Benzinger A, Muster N, Koch HB, Yates JR 3rd, Hermeking H
**Journal:** Mol Cell Proteomics (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/mcp.M500021-MCP200](https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M500021-MCP200)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2005 Jun;4(6):785-95. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M500021-MCP200.
Epub  2005 Mar 18.

Targeted proteomic analysis of 14-3-3 sigma, a p53 effector commonly silenced in 
cancer.

Benzinger A(1), Muster N, Koch HB, Yates JR 3rd, Hermeking H.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Oncology, Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, 
D-82152 Martinsried/Munich, Germany.

To comprehensively identify proteins interacting with 14-3-3 sigma in vivo, 
tandem affinity purification and the multidimensional protein identification 
technology were combined to characterize 117 proteins associated with 14-3-3 
sigma in human cells. The majority of identified proteins contained one or 
several phosphorylatable 14-3-3-binding sites indicating a potential direct 
interaction with 14-3-3 sigma. 25 proteins were not previously assigned to any 
function and were named SIP2-26 (for 14-3-3 sigma-interacting protein). Among 
the 92 interactors with known function were a number of proteins previously 
implicated in oncogenic signaling (APC, A-RAF, B-RAF, and c-RAF) and cell cycle 
regulation (AJUBA, c-TAK, PTOV-1, and WEE1). The largest functional classes 
comprised proteins involved in the regulation of cytoskeletal dynamics, 
polarity, adhesion, mitogenic signaling, and motility. Accordingly ectopic 
14-3-3 sigma expression prevented cellular migration in a wounding assay and 
enhanced mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling. The functional diversity of 
the identified proteins indicates that induction of 14-3-3 sigma could allow p53 
to affect numerous processes in addition to the previously characterized 
inhibitory effect on G2/M progression. The data suggest that the cancer-specific 
loss of 14-3-3 sigma expression by epigenetic silencing or p53 mutations 
contributes to cancer formation by multiple routes.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M500021-MCP200
PMID: 15778465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
