---
pmid: '23019581'
title: DBL-1, a TGF-β, is essential for Caenorhabditis elegans aversive olfactory
  learning.
authors:
- Zhang X
- Zhang Y
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3479501
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1205982109
---

# DBL-1, a TGF-β, is essential for Caenorhabditis elegans aversive olfactory learning.
**Authors:** Zhang X, Zhang Y
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1205982109](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1205982109)
**PMC:** [PMC3479501](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3479501/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Oct 16;109(42):17081-6. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1205982109. Epub 2012 Sep 26.

DBL-1, a TGF-β, is essential for Caenorhabditis elegans aversive olfactory 
learning.

Zhang X(1), Zhang Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Center for Brain Science, 
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

The TGF-β superfamily is conserved throughout metazoan, and its members play 
essential roles in development and disease. TGF-β has also been implicated in 
adult neural plasticity. However, the underlying mechanisms are not well 
understood. Here we report that DBL-1, a Caenorhabditis elegans TGF-β homolog 
known to control body morphology and immunity, is essential for aversive 
olfactory learning of potentially harmful bacteria food. We show that DBL-1 
generated by the AVA command interneurons, which are critical for sensorimotor 
responses, regulates aversive olfactory learning, and that the activity of the 
type I TGF-β receptor SMA-6 in the hypodermis is needed during adulthood to 
generate olfactory plasticity. These spatial and temporal mechanisms are 
critical for the DBL-1 signaling to achieve its diverse functions in development 
and adult neural plasticity. Interestingly, aversive training decreases AVA 
calcium response, leading to an increase in the DBL-1 signal secreted from AVA, 
revealing an experience-dependent change that can underlie the role of TGF-β 
signaling in mediating plasticity.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1205982109
PMCID: PMC3479501
PMID: 23019581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
