---
pmid: '9681465'
title: Enhanced oxidative stress and altered antioxidants in brains of Bcl-2-deficient
  mice.
authors:
- Hochman A
- Sternin H
- Gorodin S
- Korsmeyer S
- Ziv I
- Melamed E
- Offen D
journal: J Neurochem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1046/j.1471-4159.1998.71020741.x
---

# Enhanced oxidative stress and altered antioxidants in brains of Bcl-2-deficient mice.
**Authors:** Hochman A, Sternin H, Gorodin S, Korsmeyer S, Ziv I, Melamed E, Offen D
**Journal:** J Neurochem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1471-4159.1998.71020741.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1471-4159.1998.71020741.x)

## Abstract

1. J Neurochem. 1998 Aug;71(2):741-8. doi: 10.1046/j.1471-4159.1998.71020741.x.

Enhanced oxidative stress and altered antioxidants in brains of Bcl-2-deficient 
mice.

Hochman A(1), Sternin H, Gorodin S, Korsmeyer S, Ziv I, Melamed E, Offen D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv 
University, Israel.

Bcl-2 is an antiapoptotic protein located in the outer mitochondrial membrane. 
Cellular perturbations associated with programmed cell death may be the 
consequence of disrupted mitochondrial function as well as excessive production 
of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Numerous studies indicate that Bcl-2 is 
involved in opposing cell death induced by oxidative stimuli, but its mode of 
action is uncertain. We reexamined the role of Bcl-2 by using a loss-of-function 
model, Bcl-2 knockout mice. Brains from Bcl-2-deficient mice had a 43% higher 
content of oxidized proteins and 27% lower number of cells in the cerebellum 
relative to wild-type mice. Incubation of cerebellar neurons from Bcl-2 +/+ 
brains with 0.5 mM dopamine caused 25% cell death, whereas in Bcl-2-deficient 
cells, it resulted in 52% death; glial cells provided protection in both 
cultures. Splenocytes from Bcl-2-deficient mice were also killed more 
effectively by dopamine as well as paraquat. Bcl-2-deficient mice did not 
survive intraperitoneal injection of MPTP, which caused a decrease in dopamine 
level in the striatum of Bcl-2 +/- brains, which was more significant than in 
wild-type mice. When compared with Bcl-2 +/+ brains, brains of 8-day-old 
Bcl-2-deficient mice had higher activities of the antioxidant enzymes GSH 
reductase (192%) and GSH transferase (142%), whereas at the age of 30 days, GSH 
peroxidase was significantly lower (66%). Activities of GSH transferase and GSH 
reductase increased significantly (158 and 262%, respectively) from day 8 to day 
30 in Bcl-2 +/+ mice, whereas GSH peroxidase decreased (31%) significantly in 
Bcl-2 -/- animals. In summary, our results demonstrated enhanced oxidative 
stress and susceptibility to oxidants as well as altered levels of antioxidant 
enzymes in brains of Bcl-2-deficient mice. It is concluded that Bcl-2 affects 
cellular levels of ROS, which may be due to an effect either on their production 
or on antioxidant pathways.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1471-4159.1998.71020741.x
PMID: 9681465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
