---
pmid: '101549'
title: Isolation and characterization of a high molecular weight glycoprotein from
  human blood platelets.
authors:
- Lawler JW
- Slayter HS
- Coligan JE
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1978'
full_text_available: false
---

# Isolation and characterization of a high molecular weight glycoprotein from human blood platelets.
**Authors:** Lawler JW, Slayter HS, Coligan JE
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1978)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1978 Dec 10;253(23):8609-16.

Isolation and characterization of a high molecular weight glycoprotein from 
human blood platelets.

Lawler JW, Slayter HS, Coligan JE.

A high molecular weight glycoprotein consisting of three disulfide-linked 
142,000 molecular weight chains has been isolated from human blood platelets. 
The glycoprotein, designated thrombospondin, is released by platelets in 
response to thrombin treatment and is proteolyzed when left in the presence of 
platelets after liberation. It is relatively insensitive to degradation by 
thrombin. Thrombospondin is a filamentous protein of dimensions approximately 7 
X 70 nm and contains 1.9% neutral sugars, 1.4% amino sugars, 0.7% sialic acid, 
and no hexuronic acid. Amino acid analysis reveals that the level of cysteine is 
approximately 260 residues per molecule. Thrombospondin binds to immobilized 
heparin but is released by 0.45 M sodium chloride. A single band is obtained by 
isoelectric focusing, indicating a pI of 4.7 as well as a relatively high degree 
of purity. Degradation of the intact molecule with trypsin yields a stable core 
particle of molecular weight 210,000 comprised of three 70,000 chains.

PMID: 101549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
