---
pmid: '24005319'
title: Genome-wide RNAi screen identifies ATPase inhibitory factor 1 (ATPIF1) as essential
  for PARK2 recruitment and mitophagy.
authors:
- Lefebvre V
- Du Q
- Baird S
- Ng AC
- Nascimento M
- Campanella M
- McBride HM
- Screaton RA
journal: Autophagy
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.4161/auto.25413
---

# Genome-wide RNAi screen identifies ATPase inhibitory factor 1 (ATPIF1) as essential for PARK2 recruitment and mitophagy.
**Authors:** Lefebvre V, Du Q, Baird S, Ng AC, Nascimento M, Campanella M, McBride HM, Screaton RA
**Journal:** Autophagy (2013)
**DOI:** [10.4161/auto.25413](https://doi.org/10.4161/auto.25413)

## Abstract

1. Autophagy. 2013 Nov 1;9(11):1770-9. doi: 10.4161/auto.25413. Epub 2013 Aug 7.

Genome-wide RNAi screen identifies ATPase inhibitory factor 1 (ATPIF1) as 
essential for PARK2 recruitment and mitophagy.

Lefebvre V(1), Du Q, Baird S, Ng AC, Nascimento M, Campanella M, McBride HM, 
Screaton RA.

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute; Ottawa, ON Canada; 
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine; University of Ottawa; Ottawa, ON 
Canada.

Mitochondrial dysfunction is a hallmark of aging and numerous human diseases, 
including Parkinson disease (PD). Multiple homeostatic mechanisms exist to 
ensure mitochondrial integrity, including the selective autophagic program 
mitophagy, that is activated during starvation or in response to mitochondrial 
dysfunction. Following prolonged loss of potential across the inner 
mitochondrial membrane (ΔΨ), PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1) and the 
E3-ubiquitin ligase PARK2 work in the same pathway to trigger mitophagy of 
dysfunctional mitochondria. Mutations in PINK1 and PARK2, as well as PARK7/DJ-1, 
underlie autosomal recessive Parkinsonism and impair mitochondrial function and 
morphology. In a genome-wide RNAi screen searching for genes that are required 
for PARK2 translocation to the mitochondria, we identified ATPase inhibitory 
factor 1 (ATPIF1/IF1) as essential for PARK2 recruitment and mitophagy in 
cultured cells. During uncoupling, ATPIF1 promotes collapse of ΔΨ and activation 
of the PINK-PARK2 mitophagy pathway by blocking the ATPase activity of the F 
1-Fo ATP synthase. Restoration of ATPIF1 in Rho0 cells, which lack mtDNA and a 
functional electron transport chain, lowers ΔΨ and triggers PARK2 recruitment. 
Our findings identified ATPIF1 and the ATP synthase as novel components of the 
PINK1-PARK2 mitophagy pathway and provide genetic evidence that loss of ΔΨ is an 
essential trigger for mitophagy.

DOI: 10.4161/auto.25413
PMID: 24005319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
