---
pmid: '2835776'
title: Transgenic mice express the human phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase gene
  in adrenal medulla and retina.
authors:
- Baetge EE
- Behringer RR
- Messing A
- Brinster RL
- Palmiter RD
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1988'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC280271
doi: 10.1073/pnas.85.10.3648
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Transgenic mice express the human phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase gene in adrenal medulla and retina.
**Authors:** Baetge EE, Behringer RR, Messing A, Brinster RL, Palmiter RD
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1988)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.85.10.3648](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.85.10.3648)
**PMC:** [PMC280271](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC280271/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1988 May;85(10):3648-52. doi:
10.1073/pnas.85.10.3648.

Transgenic mice express the human phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase gene in 
adrenal medulla and retina.

Baetge EE(1), Behringer RR, Messing A, Brinster RL, Palmiter RD.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Washington, Seattle 98195.

The human gene for phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase (hPNMT), responsible 
for the conversion of norepinephrine to epinephrine, has been cloned and the 
complete nucleotide sequence has been determined. The structural gene consists 
of three exons and two introns spanning approximately equal to 2100 base pairs. 
Transgenic mice containing the hPNMT gene with either 2 or 8 kilobases of 
5'-flanking sequence were produced and resulted in expression of hPNMT mRNA in 
the adrenal gland and eye. A chimeric gene consisting of 2 kilobases of the 
hPNMT 5'-flanking region fused to the simian virus 40 early region also resulted 
in tumor (T) antigen mRNA expression in adrenal glands and eyes; furthermore, 
immunocytochemistry showed that tumor antigen was localized in nuclei of adrenal 
medullary cells and cells of the inner nuclear cell layer of the retina, 
prominent sites of epinephrine synthesis. These results indicate that the 
enhancer(s) for appropriate expression of the hPNMT gene in these cell types is 
in the 2-kilobase 5'-flanking region of the human gene.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.85.10.3648
PMCID: PMC280271
PMID: 2835776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
