---
pmid: '11922622'
title: Isolation of the interacting molecules with GEX-3 by a novel functional screening.
authors:
- Tsuboi D
- Qadota H
- Kasuya K
- Amano M
- Kaibuchi K
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/bbrc.2002.6717
---

# Isolation of the interacting molecules with GEX-3 by a novel functional screening.
**Authors:** Tsuboi D, Qadota H, Kasuya K, Amano M, Kaibuchi K
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1006/bbrc.2002.6717](https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.2002.6717)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Apr 5;292(3):697-701. doi: 
10.1006/bbrc.2002.6717.

Isolation of the interacting molecules with GEX-3 by a novel functional 
screening.

Tsuboi D(1), Qadota H, Kasuya K, Amano M, Kaibuchi K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Pharmacology, Nagoya University Graduate School of 
Medicine, 65 Tsurumai, Showa, Nagoya, Aichi 466-8550, Japan.

To screen for important molecules that interact with a gene of interest in 
Caenorhabditis elegans (C. elegans), we established a novel functional screening 
system using the yeast two-hybrid system with the RNA interference technique. 
Our screening system makes it possible to identify the molecular machinery 
involved in the function of a gene of interest starting with the cDNA of this 
gene. As a model case, we examined the molecular machinery involved in the 
function of GEX-3, an essential factor of tissue morphogenesis. We identified 
many interacting molecules by yeast two-hybrid screening and could detect some 
functional interactions using this novel functional screening system.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.2002.6717
PMID: 11922622 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
