---
pmid: '17937914'
title: Structure of the yeast WD40 domain protein Cia1, a component acting late in
  iron-sulfur protein biogenesis.
authors:
- Srinivasan V
- Netz DJ
- Webert H
- Mascarenhas J
- Pierik AJ
- Michel H
- Lill R
journal: Structure
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.str.2007.08.009
---

# Structure of the yeast WD40 domain protein Cia1, a component acting late in iron-sulfur protein biogenesis.
**Authors:** Srinivasan V, Netz DJ, Webert H, Mascarenhas J, Pierik AJ, Michel H, Lill R
**Journal:** Structure (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.str.2007.08.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2007.08.009)

## Abstract

1. Structure. 2007 Oct;15(10):1246-57. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2007.08.009.

Structure of the yeast WD40 domain protein Cia1, a component acting late in 
iron-sulfur protein biogenesis.

Srinivasan V(1), Netz DJ, Webert H, Mascarenhas J, Pierik AJ, Michel H, Lill R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Membrane Biology, Max-Planck Institute for 
Biophysics, Max-von-Laue Str. 3, D-60438 Frankfurt/M, Germany.

The WD40-repeat protein Cia1 is an essential, conserved member of the cytosolic 
iron-sulfur (Fe/S) protein assembly (CIA) machinery in eukaryotes. Here, we 
report the crystal structure of Saccharomyces cerevisiae Cia1 to 1.7 A 
resolution. The structure folds into a beta propeller with seven blades pseudo 
symmetrically arranged around a central axis. Structure-based sequence alignment 
of Cia1 proteins shows that the WD40 propeller core elements are highly 
conserved. Site-directed mutagenesis of amino acid residues in loop regions with 
high solvent accessibility identified that the conserved top surface residue 
R127 performs a critical function: the R127 mutant cells grew slowly and were 
impaired in cytosolic Fe/S protein assembly. Human Ciao1, which reportedly 
interacts with the Wilms' tumor suppressor, WT1, is structurally similar to 
yeast Cia1. We show that Ciao1 can functionally replace Cia1 and support 
cytosolic Fe/S protein biogenesis. Hence, our structural and biochemical studies 
indicate the conservation of Cia1 function in eukaryotes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2007.08.009
PMID: 17937914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
