---
pmid: '15310755'
title: AIP1/DAB2IP, a novel member of the Ras-GAP family, transduces TRAF2-induced
  ASK1-JNK activation.
authors:
- Zhang H
- Zhang R
- Luo Y
- D'Alessio A
- Pober JS
- Min W
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M407617200
---

# AIP1/DAB2IP, a novel member of the Ras-GAP family, transduces TRAF2-induced ASK1-JNK activation.
**Authors:** Zhang H, Zhang R, Luo Y, D'Alessio A, Pober JS, Min W
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M407617200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M407617200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Oct 22;279(43):44955-65. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M407617200. Epub 
2004 Aug 13.

AIP1/DAB2IP, a novel member of the Ras-GAP family, transduces TRAF2-induced 
ASK1-JNK activation.

Zhang H(1), Zhang R, Luo Y, D'Alessio A, Pober JS, Min W.

Author information:
(1)Interdepartmental Program in Vascular Biology and Transplantation, Boyer 
Center for Molecular Medicine, Department of Pathology, Yale University School 
of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06510, USA.

Previously we have shown that ASK-interacting protein 1 (AIP1, also known as 
DAB2IP), a novel member of the Ras-GAP protein family, mediates TNF-induced 
activation of ASK1-JNK signaling pathway. However, the mechanism by which TNF 
signaling is coupled to AIP1 is not known. Here we show that AIP1 is localized 
on the plasma membrane in resting endothelial cells (EC) in a complex with 
TNFR1. TNF binding induces release of AIP1 from TNFR1, resulting in cytoplasmic 
translocation and concomitant formation of an intracellular signaling complex 
comprised of TRADD, RIP1, TRAF2, and AIPl. A proline-rich region (amino acids 
796-807) is critical for maintaining AIP1 in a closed form, which associates 
with a region of TNFR1 distinct from the death domain, the site of TNFR1 
association with TRADD. An AIP1 mutant with deletion of this proline-rich region 
constitutively binds to TRAF2 and ASK1. A PERIOD-like domain (amino acids 
591-719) of AIP1 binds to the intact RING finger of TRAF2, and specifically 
enhances TRAF2-induced ASK1 activation. At the same time, the binding of AIP1 to 
TRAF2 inhibits TNF-induced IKK-NF-kappaB signaling. Taken together, our data 
suggest that AIP1 is a novel transducer in TNF-induced TRAF2-dependent 
activation of ASK1 that mediates a balance between JNK versus NF-kappaB 
signaling.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M407617200
PMID: 15310755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
