---
pmid: '21255211'
title: Rab GTPases regulating phagosome maturation are differentially recruited to
  mycobacterial phagosomes.
authors:
- Seto S
- Tsujimura K
- Koide Y
journal: Traffic
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2011.01165.x
---

# Rab GTPases regulating phagosome maturation are differentially recruited to mycobacterial phagosomes.
**Authors:** Seto S, Tsujimura K, Koide Y
**Journal:** Traffic (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1600-0854.2011.01165.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0854.2011.01165.x)

## Abstract

1. Traffic. 2011 Apr;12(4):407-20. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2011.01165.x. Epub
2011  Feb 21.

Rab GTPases regulating phagosome maturation are differentially recruited to 
mycobacterial phagosomes.

Seto S(1), Tsujimura K, Koide Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, 1-20-1 Handa-yama, Hamamatsu 431-3192, 
Japan.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M. tb) is an intracellular pathogen that can 
replicate within infected macrophages. The ability of M. tb to arrest phagosome 
maturation is believed to facilitate its intracellular multiplication. Rab 
GTPases regulate membrane trafficking, but details of how Rab GTPases regulate 
phagosome maturation and how M. tb modulates their localization during 
inhibiting phagolysosome biogenesis remain elusive. We compared the localization 
of 42 distinct Rab GTPases to phagosomes containing either Staphylococcus aureus 
or M. tb. The phagosomes containing S. aureus were associated with 22 Rab 
GTPases, but only 5 of these showed similar localization kinetics as the 
phagosomes containing M. tb. The Rab GTPases responsible for phagosome 
maturation, phagosomal acidification and recruitment of cathepsin D were 
examined in macrophages expressing the dominant-negative form of each Rab 
GTPase. LysoTracker staining and immunofluorescence microscopy revealed that 
Rab7, Rab20 and Rab39 regulated phagosomal acidification and Rab7, Rab20, 
Rab22b, Rab32, Rab34, Rab38 and Rab43 controlled the recruitment of cathepsin D 
to the phagosome. These results suggest that phagosome maturation is achieved by 
a series of interactions between Rab GTPases and phagosomes and that 
differential recruitment of these Rab GTPases, except for Rab22b and Rab43, to 
M. tb-containing phagosomes is involved in arresting phagosome maturation and 
inhibiting phagolysosome biogenesis.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2011.01165.x
PMID: 21255211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
