---
pmid: '10830168'
title: Crystal structures of two FGF-FGFR complexes reveal the determinants of ligand-receptor
  specificity.
authors:
- Plotnikov AN
- Hubbard SR
- Schlessinger J
- Mohammadi M
journal: Cell
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80851-x
---

# Crystal structures of two FGF-FGFR complexes reveal the determinants of ligand-receptor specificity.
**Authors:** Plotnikov AN, Hubbard SR, Schlessinger J, Mohammadi M
**Journal:** Cell (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80851-x](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80851-x)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2000 May 12;101(4):413-24. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80851-x.

Crystal structures of two FGF-FGFR complexes reveal the determinants of 
ligand-receptor specificity.

Plotnikov AN(1), Hubbard SR, Schlessinger J, Mohammadi M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, New York University School of Medicine, New York 
10016, USA.

To elucidate the structural determinants governing specificity in fibroblast 
growth factor (FGF) signaling, we have determined the crystal structures of FGF1 
and FGF2 complexed with the ligand binding domains (immunoglobulin-like domains 
2 [D2] and 3 [D3]) of FGF receptor 1 (FGFR1) and FGFR2, respectively. Highly 
conserved FGF-D2 and FGF-linker (between D2-D3) interfaces define a general 
binding site for all FGF-FGFR complexes. Specificity is achieved through 
interactions between the N-terminal and central regions of FGFs and two loop 
regions in D3 that are subject to alternative splicing. These structures provide 
a molecular basis for FGF1 as a universal FGFR ligand and for modulation of 
FGF-FGFR specificity through primary sequence variations and alternative 
splicing.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80851-x
PMID: 10830168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
