---
pmid: '17557115'
title: The Fas ligand intracellular domain is released by ADAM10 and SPPL2a cleavage
  in T-cells.
authors:
- Kirkin V
- Cahuzac N
- Guardiola-Serrano F
- Huault S
- Lückerath K
- Friedmann E
- Novac N
- Wels WS
- Martoglio B
- Hueber AO
- Zörnig M
journal: Cell Death Differ
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.cdd.4402175
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The Fas ligand intracellular domain is released by ADAM10 and SPPL2a cleavage in T-cells.
**Authors:** Kirkin V, Cahuzac N, Guardiola-Serrano F, Huault S, Lückerath K, Friedmann E, Novac N, Wels WS, Martoglio B, Hueber AO, Zörnig M
**Journal:** Cell Death Differ (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.cdd.4402175](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.cdd.4402175)

## Abstract

1. Cell Death Differ. 2007 Sep;14(9):1678-87. doi: 10.1038/sj.cdd.4402175. Epub 
2007 Jun 8.

The Fas ligand intracellular domain is released by ADAM10 and SPPL2a cleavage in 
T-cells.

Kirkin V(1), Cahuzac N, Guardiola-Serrano F, Huault S, Lückerath K, Friedmann E, 
Novac N, Wels WS, Martoglio B, Hueber AO, Zörnig M.

Author information:
(1)Chemotherapeutisches Forschungsinstitut Georg-Speyer-Haus, 
Paul-Ehrlich-Strasse 42-44, 60596 Frankfurt, Germany.

Fas ligand (FasL) is a type II transmembrane protein belonging to the tumor 
necrosis factor family. Its binding to the cognate Fas receptor triggers the 
apoptosis that plays a pivotal role in the maintenance of immune system 
homeostasis. The cell death-inducing property of FasL has been associated with 
its extracellular domain, which can be cleaved off by metalloprotease activity 
to produce soluble FasL. The fate of the remaining membrane-anchored N-terminal 
part of the FasL molecule has not been determined. Here we show that 
post-translational processing of overexpressed and endogenous FasL in T-cells by 
the disintegrin and metalloprotease ADAM10 generates a 17-kDa N-terminal 
fragment, which lacks the receptor-binding extracellular domain. This FasL 
remnant is membrane anchored and further processed by SPPL2a, a member of the 
signal peptide peptidase-like family of intramembrane-cleaving proteases. SPPL2a 
cleavage liberates a smaller and highly unstable fragment mainly containing the 
intracellular FasL domain (FasL ICD). We show that this fragment translocates to 
the nucleus and is capable of inhibiting gene transcription. With ADAM10 and 
SPPL2a we have identified two proteases implicated in FasL processing and 
release of the FasL ICD, which has been shown to be important for retrograde 
FasL signaling.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.cdd.4402175
PMID: 17557115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
