---
pmid: '7628637'
title: Localization of cyclic-AMP receptors with acidosomes in Dictyostelium discoideum.
authors:
- Padh H
- Tanjore S
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0014-5793(95)00656-t
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Localization of cyclic-AMP receptors with acidosomes in Dictyostelium discoideum.
**Authors:** Padh H, Tanjore S
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0014-5793(95)00656-t](https://doi.org/10.1016/0014-5793(95)00656-t)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 1995 Jul 17;368(2):358-62. doi: 10.1016/0014-5793(95)00656-t.

Localization of cyclic-AMP receptors with acidosomes in Dictyostelium 
discoideum.

Padh H(1), Tanjore S.

Author information:
(1)Center for Biotechnology, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA.

Earlier studies have shown that in Dictyostelium discoideum, a buoyant membrane 
fraction contained approximately 90% of the vacuolar proton pump (V-H(+)-ATPase) 
activity, leading to its designation acidosomes. It was proposed that acidosomes 
may be involved in endocytosis, specially in the acidification of endosomes. In 
this study we further investigated the putative function(s) of acidosomes. The 
findings suggest that acidosomes contain abundant receptors for cyclic AMP 
(CAR1) and that it may be the site for recycling of internalized receptors. 
Acidosomes also contain an abundance of Rab4 (Bush et al. 1994), a marker for 
early endosomes. By these criteria, we suggest that the acidosomes are analogous 
to early or recycling endosome present in mammalian cells. These findings 
suggest that the structure earlier defined biochemically, morphologically and 
immunologically as acidosomes may represent early and/or recycling endosomes in 
this protist.

DOI: 10.1016/0014-5793(95)00656-t
PMID: 7628637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
