---
pmid: '16716188'
title: Cell cycle execution point analysis of ORC function and characterization of
  the checkpoint response to ORC inactivation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
authors:
- Gibson DG
- Bell SP
- Aparicio OM
journal: Genes Cells
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2006.00967.x
---

# Cell cycle execution point analysis of ORC function and characterization of the checkpoint response to ORC inactivation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Gibson DG, Bell SP, Aparicio OM
**Journal:** Genes Cells (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2443.2006.00967.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2443.2006.00967.x)

## Abstract

1. Genes Cells. 2006 Jun;11(6):557-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2006.00967.x.

Cell cycle execution point analysis of ORC function and characterization of the 
checkpoint response to ORC inactivation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Gibson DG(1), Bell SP, Aparicio OM.

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Computational Biology Program, Department of Biological 
Sciences, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90089-2910, 
USA.

Erratum in
    Genes Cells. 2006 Aug;11(8):969.

Chromosomal replication initiates through the assembly of a prereplicative 
complex (pre-RC) at individual replication origins in the G1-phase, followed by 
activation of these complexes in the S-phase. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the 
origin recognition complex (ORC) binds replication origins throughout the cell 
cycle and participates in pre-RC assembly. Whether the ORC plays an additional 
role subsequent to pre-RC assembly in replication initiation or any other 
essential cell cycle process is not clear. To study the function of the ORC 
during defined cell cycle periods, we performed cell cycle execution point 
analyses with strains containing a conditional mutation in the ORC1, ORC2 or 
ORC5 subunit of ORC. We found that the ORC is essential for replication 
initiation, but is dispensable for replication elongation or later cell cycle 
events. Defective initiation in ORC mutant cells results in incomplete 
replication and mitotic arrest enforced by the DNA damage and spindle assembly 
checkpoint pathways. The involvement of the spindle assembly checkpoint implies 
a defect in kinetochore-spindle attachment or sister chromatid cohesion due to 
incomplete replication and/or DNA damage. Remarkably, under semipermissive 
conditions for ORC1 function, the spindle checkpoint alone suffices to block 
proliferation, suggesting this checkpoint is highly sensitive to replication 
initiation defects. We discuss the potential significance of these overlapping 
checkpoints and the impact of our findings on previously postulated role(s) of 
ORCs in other cell cycle functions.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2006.00967.x
PMID: 16716188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
