---
pmid: '15858711'
title: Alternative splicing suggests extended function of PEX26 in peroxisome biogenesis.
authors:
- Weller S
- Cajigas I
- Morrell J
- Obie C
- Steel G
- Gould SJ
- Valle D
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2005'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1196456
doi: 10.1086/430637
---

# Alternative splicing suggests extended function of PEX26 in peroxisome biogenesis.
**Authors:** Weller S, Cajigas I, Morrell J, Obie C, Steel G, Gould SJ, Valle D
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1086/430637](https://doi.org/10.1086/430637)
**PMC:** [PMC1196456](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1196456/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2005 Jun;76(6):987-1007. doi: 10.1086/430637. Epub 2005 Apr
27.

Alternative splicing suggests extended function of PEX26 in peroxisome 
biogenesis.

Weller S(1), Cajigas I, Morrell J, Obie C, Steel G, Gould SJ, Valle D.

Author information:
(1)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Matsumoto and colleagues recently identified PEX26 as the gene responsible for 
complementation group 8 of the peroxisome biogenesis disorders and showed that 
it encodes an integral peroxisomal membrane protein with a single C-terminal 
transmembrane domain and a cytosolic N-terminus that interacts with the 
PEX1/PEX6 heterodimer through direct binding to the latter. They proposed that 
PEX26 functions as the peroxisomal docking factor for the PEX1/PEX6 heterodimer. 
Here, we identify new PEX26 disease alleles, localize the PEX6-binding domain to 
the N-terminal half of the protein (aa 29-174), and show that, at the cellular 
level, PEX26 deficiency impairs peroxisomal import of both PTS1- and 
PTS2-targeted matrix proteins. Also, we find that PEX26 undergoes alternative 
splicing to produce several splice forms--including one, PEX26- delta ex5, that 
maintains frame and encodes an isoform lacking the transmembrane domain of 
full-length PEX26 (PEX26-FL). Despite its cytosolic location, PEX26- delta ex5 
rescues peroxisome biogenesis in PEX26-deficient cells as efficiently as does 
PEX26-FL. To test our observation that a peroxisomal location is not required 
for PEX26 function, we made a chimeric protein (PEX26-Mito) with PEX26 as its 
N-terminus and the targeting segment of a mitochondrial outer membrane protein 
(OMP25) at its C-terminus. We found PEX26-Mito localized to the mitochondria and 
directed all detectable PEX6 and a fraction of PEX1 to this extraperoxisomal 
location; yet PEX26-Mito retains the full ability to rescue peroxisome 
biogenesis in PEX26-deficient cells. On the basis of these observations, we 
suggest that a peroxisomal localization of PEX26 and PEX6 is not required for 
their function and that the interaction of PEX6 with PEX1 is dynamic. This model 
predicts that, once activated in an extraperoxisomal location, PEX1 moves to the 
peroxisome and completes the function of the PEX1/6 heterodimer.

DOI: 10.1086/430637
PMCID: PMC1196456
PMID: 15858711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Matsumoto and colleagues recently identified PEX26 as the gene responsible for complementation group 8 of the peroxisome biogenesis disorders and showed that it encodes an integral peroxisomal membrane protein with a single C-terminal transmembrane domain and a cytosolic N-terminus that interacts with the PEX1/PEX6 heterodimer through direct binding to the latter. They proposed that PEX26 functions as the peroxisomal docking factor for the PEX1/PEX6 heterodimer. Here, we identify new PEX26 disease alleles, localize the PEX6-binding domain to the N-terminal half of the protein (aa 29–174), and show that, at the cellular level, PEX26 deficiency impairs peroxisomal import of both PTS1- and PTS2-targeted matrix proteins. Also, we find that PEX26 undergoes alternative splicing to produce several splice forms—including one, PEX26-Δex5, that maintains frame and encodes an isoform lacking the transmembrane domain of full-length PEX26 (PEX26-FL). Despite its cytosolic location, PEX26-Δex5 rescues peroxisome biogenesis in PEX26-deficient cells as efficiently as does PEX26-FL. To test our observation that a peroxisomal location is not required for PEX26 function, we made a chimeric protein (PEX26-Mito) with PEX26 as its N-terminus and the targeting segment of a mitochondrial outer membrane protein (OMP25) at its C-terminus. We found PEX26-Mito localized to the mitochondria and directed all detectable PEX6 and a fraction of PEX1 to this extraperoxisomal location; yet PEX26-Mito retains the full ability to rescue peroxisome biogenesis in PEX26-deficient cells. On the basis of these observations, we suggest that a peroxisomal localization of PEX26 and PEX6 is not required for their function and that the interaction of PEX6 with PEX1 is dynamic. This model predicts that, once activated in an extraperoxisomal location, PEX1 moves to the peroxisome and completes the function of the PEX1/6 heterodimer.

Introduction

Peroxisomes are ubiquitous, single-membrane–bound organelles that contain ⩾50 enzymes and participate in a variety of metabolic pathways. The importance of the peroxisome in development and metabolism is highlighted by inherited defects in peroxisome biogenesis in which most or all of peroxisomal metabolic functions are deficient (Wanders 2004 a, 2004 b ). The clinical phenotype of the peroxisome-biogenesis disorders (PBDs) varies widely in severity and can be classified into two broad categories, the Zellweger spectrum and rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata (RCDP [MIM 215100 ]) (Gould et al. 2001 ). The Zellweger spectrum includes at least three overlapping phenotypes that represent segments of a phenotypic continuum, including Zellweger syndrome (ZS [MIM 214100 ]) at the severe end, neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy (NALD [MIM 202370 ]) as an intermediate form, and infantile Refsum disease (IRD [MIM 266510 ]) at the mild end of the spectrum. Dysmorphic features, neurological symptoms, hepatic disease, and skeletal abnormalities in varying degrees are common to all three (Gould et al. 2001 ). Reflecting the complexity of peroxisome assembly, somatic-cell-hybridization studies show that PBDs are genetically heterogeneous, with at least 13 human complementation groups (CGs) (Weller et al. 2003 ; Shimozawa et al. 2004 ).

At the cellular level, the PBDs can be divided into defects of peroxisomal membrane biogenesis and matrix protein import. Three CGs (9, 12, and 14) have blocks in peroxisome membrane biogenesis and lack identifiable peroxisomal structures entirely. The remaining 10 CGs (1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 10, 11, 13, and K [Gifu]) display defects in peroxisome matrix protein import but retain the ability to form peroxisomal membranes (Sacksteder and Gould 2000 ; Shimozawa et al. 2004 ). Peroxisomal matrix proteins are synthesized on free cytosolic ribosomes and are targeted posttranslationally to the organelle by cytosolic receptors that bind to cis -acting sequences, the peroxisomal targeting signals (PTSs). The majority of matrix proteins are targeted by the PTS1, a C-terminal -SKL or conserved variant (Gould et al. 1988 , 1989 ). A few matrix proteins are targeted by a different sequence, the PTS2, a degenerate sequence—(R/K)(L/V/I)X 5 (H/Q)(L/A)—located near the N-terminus (Osumi et al. 1991 ; Swinkels et al. 1991 ). PTS1 and PTS2 sequences are recognized by the cytosolic receptors PEX5 and PEX7, respectively. The receptor/matrix protein complexes assemble in the cytosol and shuttle to the peroxisome, where they dock to PEX14, an integral peroxisomal-membrane protein. Unloading and translocation of the cargo proteins into the peroxisomal matrix involves interactions with several other membrane peroxins (PEX13, PEX10, and PEX12) (Weller et al. 2003 ). The receptors are recycled back to the cytosol to participate in another round of import (Dodt and Gould 1996 ). Decreased steady-state levels of PEX5 in cell lines from patients with primary deficiencies of PEX1 or PEX6 suggest a role for these peroxins in stabilization and/or recycling of the former (Yahraus et al. 1996 ; Reuber et al. 1997 ; Collins et al. 2000 ). PEX1 and PEX6 are AAA ATPases that, in yeast, form heterodimeric complexes in an ATP-dependent manner (Faber et al. 1998 a ; Birschmann et al. 2005 ). AAA ATPases are involved in a diverse set of cellular processes, many involving protein unfolding, refolding, or the disassembly of protein complexes (Vale 2000 ; Lupas and Martin 2002 ). Although the precise roles of PEX1 and PEX6 in the peroxisome membrane protein import process are unknown, epistasis analyses utilizing the decreased level of PEX5 in PEX1 and PEX6-deficient cells indicated that they may act in the disassembly of the multimeric PEX5-PTS protein complex (preimplex) prior to or during the import process (Collins et al. 2000 ; Gould and Collins 2002 ).

Using expression cloning in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells defective for peroxisome biogenesis, Matsumoto and colleagues ( 2003 a ) recently identified PEX26 as the gene responsible for CG8, the last unexplained human CG. In both human and mouse, PEX26 is a 305-aa protein with one transmembrane domain, located near the C-terminus of the protein (aa 252–269) and an N-terminal domain (NTD) exposed to the cytosol. Matsumoto and colleagues ( 2003 a ) showed that PEX26 binds PEX6 and proposed that it functions to recruit PEX1 and PEX6 to peroxisomal membranes. Interestingly, they also propose that PEX26 function is required for import of only catalase and PTS2-targeted proteins and is not required for import of classical PTS1-targeted proteins. To date, 12 pathologic PEX26 alleles have been described in studies of 12 patients with CG8, all with phenotypes in the Zellweger spectrum (Matsumoto et al. 2003 a, 2003 b ; Steinberg et al. 2004 ).

Here, we identify all mutant PEX26 alleles in 10 CG8 probands, including five new PEX26 mutations, and quantify the peroxisomal import phenotype in CG8 cells of known genotype, showing that both PTS1- and PTS2-mediated import is impaired. We also determine the effect of PEX26 deficiency on PEX5 and PEX1 steady-state levels and map the PEX6-binding domain in PEX26. Additionally, we describe extensive alternative splicing of PEX26 in fibroblasts and various human tissues that creates a cytoplasmic, but nevertheless functional, PEX26 isoform. Extending this observation, we show that PEX26 mislocalized to the outer mitochondrial membrane retains its function in peroxisome biogenesis. Our findings extend the consequences of PEX26 deficiency to PTS1-mediated import and challenge the current model of PEX26 function as a docking factor for the PEX1-PEX6 protein complex at the peroxisomal membrane.

Discussion

The recent identification of PEX26 by Matsumoto and colleagues completed the search for the genes responsible for the 12 recognized CGs for the Zellweger spectrum subgroup of the PBDs (Matsumoto et al. 2003 a , 2003 b ) These investigators showed that PEX26 encodes a 305-aa, 34-kD integral peroxisomal membrane protein with a single C-terminal transmembrane domain near the C-terminus, a short (∼36 aa) intraperoxisomal C-terminal tail, and long (250 aa) N-terminus exposed to the cytosol. They also showed that PEX26 binds PEX6 directly and PEX1 indirectly, through the interaction with PEX6. The latter are AAA ATPases that have been proposed to act late in the peroxisomal matrix-protein import cycle (Collins et al. 2000 ; Vale 2000 ). Together, mutations in PEX1, PEX6, and PEX26 account for a large fraction (∼70%) of all patients with PBD (Gould and Valle 2000 ). In this work, we have identified 5 new PEX26 mutant alleles, which brings the total to 17. Of these, six are missense mutations in the N-terminal, cytosolic 60% of the protein, a segment with greater sequence identity across the recognized PEX26 vertebrate orthologs, as compared with the remaining C-terminal segment (e.g., human compared with Danio has 38% identity vs. 24% identity, respectively) ( fig. 1 ). We find that none of these missense mutations are common in the general population, although R98W accounts for 14 (39%) of the mutant PEX26 genes in the total collection of 18 genotyped probands with CG8 (10 patients in our study and 7 in that of Matsumoto et al., with four overlaps, and 5 in that of Steinberg et al.). The high frequency of R98W may represent a founder effect, as has been described for certain alleles in other PBD CGs (Braverman et al. 1997 ), or recurrent mutations at a CpG dinucleotide in codon 98 ( C GG→ T GG). Haplotype studies will be necessary to distinguish between these possibilities.

In patient fibroblasts expressing endogenous PEX26, our immunoblot studies indicate that all of the missense mutations we tested are associated with a substantial reduction in steady-state levels of PEX26 ( fig. 3 ). Thus, the major pathological consequence of these mutations in vivo appears to be destabilization of PEX26, a result that is similar to the consequences of disease-associated missense mutations at other loci (Brody et al. 1992 ). Additionally, our immunoblot studies suggest that cells with null mutations in PEX1 or PEX6 also appear to have some reduction in PEX26 that is not simply explained by alterations in the amount of peroxisomal membrane, as indicated by the similar levels of the integral peroxisome membrane protein PEX13 in all samples ( fig. 3 ). The explanation for this observation is uncertain, but the finding is consistent with a model in which PEX26, PEX1, and PEX6 interact in a functional unit (see below).

As an additional aspect of the cellular phenotype, we also examined the steady-state levels of the PTS1 receptor PEX5 in the PEX26-deficient cells ( fig. 3 ). Reduced abundance of PEX5 is characteristic of PEX1- and PEX6 -deficient cell lines and has been reported elsewhere in a PEX26 -deficient cell line (Dodt and Gould 1996 ) but is not observed in human cells with primary defects in PEX2, PEX7, PEX10, PEX12, or PEX16 (Dodt and Gould 1996 ; Yahraus et al. 1996 ; Sacksteder and Gould 2000 ). Reduced PEX5 steady-state levels are also found in yeast cells with primary defects in Pex1 and Pex6 (Collins et al. 2000 ). In our studies, we found a severe reduction in PEX5 in five different PEX26 -deficient cell lines, independent of their genotype and similar in extent to that we observed in PEX1- and PEX6 -deficient cells ( fig. 3 ). This result also is consistent with a model in which PEX26, -1, and -6 work together as a functional unit whose activity influences the levels of PEX5. The levels of PEX1, by contrast, in the same set of cell lines, are normal or nearly so, and we are unable to measure PEX6 levels because of lack of an appropriate antibody.

Curiously, Matsumoto et al.—using indirect immunofluorescence staining for endogenous PTS1-targeted matrix proteins (detected with an anti-peptide antibody directly against the consensus PTS1, -SKL), catalase (targeted by an atypical PTS1, -KANL), and peroxisomal thiolase (a PTS2-targeted protein)—concluded that the cellular phenotype of PEX26 -deficient cells was characterized by impaired peroxisomal import of catalase and PTS2-targeted proteins with normal import of classical PTS1-targeted proteins. Given that the clinical phenotype of primary deficiency of catalase involves either adult-onset oral ulcers or no symptoms at all (Wanders et al. 2001 ), this conclusion suggests that the clinical phenotype of PEX26 -deficient patients would mainly reflect deficiency of PTS2-targeted proteins and, therefore, should resemble RCDP (caused by deficiency of the PTS2 receptor, PEX7 ) rather than the Zellweger spectrum, as described for patients with CG8 (see table 2 ). To address this discrepancy, we performed quantitative studies of the peroxisomal import of a set of four matrix proteins targeted by consensus (-SKL, PECI), near consensus (-SKI, HAOX1), or atypical (-KANL, catalase) PTS1-targeting signals plus a consensus PTS2-targeted protein, PAHX, in four CG8 cell lines with a variety of PEX26 genotypes. Although there is some residual import, our results show a clear and substantial defect in all three PTS1-targeted reporters, most severe for catalase but substantial for PECI and HAOX1 (14%–77% of control and 0%–30% of control, respectively, depending on cell line) ( fig. 2 ). These results are consistent with the Zellweger spectrum clinical phenotype of PEX26 -deficient patients and with a model of PEX26 function that involves interaction with PEX6 and PEX1, both of which are known to be necessary for the import of PTS1-targeted proteins. The reason(s) for the discrepancy between our results and those of Matsumoto et al. is unclear. It is possible that by using an antibody expected to detect any matrix protein with a classic (-SKL) PTS1-targeting signal, some or all of which may have a low level of residual import in PEX26 -deficient cell lines, Matsumoto et al. may have underestimated the effect of PEX26 mutations on PTS-1–mediated import. Our studies also show a rough correlation of PEX26 genotype with cellular phenotype. The predicted null PBD059 (c.230+1G→T/c.230+1 G→T genotype) cells show the most severe defect in matrix-protein import and two cell lines homozygous for R98W showing the mildest defect, with some residual import for all four reporters. Moreover, there is a suggestion of correlation of genotype with clinical phenotype. PBD059 had ZS, the most severe clinical phenotype, whereas seven probands either homozygous or heterozygous for R98W had milder phenotypes, ranging from NALD to IRD ( table 2 ).

At the mRNA level, we observed extensive alternative splicing of PEX26 transcripts in RNA isolated from fibroblasts and in multiple human tissues ( fig. 4 ). The most informative of these alternatively spliced transcripts skips exon 5 and encodes a PEX26 isoform of 256 aa that lacks the transmembrane domain of the full-length protein ( fig. 1 ). If, as previously suggested, the function of PEX26 is to recruit the PEX1/PEX6 heterodimer to peroxisomes, this splice form seemed likely to encode a functionally inactive form of PEX26. Surprisingly, our expression studies showed this isoform is functionally active despite being located in the cytosol ( fig. 5 ). This result shows that a peroxisomal location is not required for PEX26 function and that the essential function(s) of PEX26 in peroxisome biogenesis involves more than recruitment of PEX6 to the organelle (see below).

Although we find no sequence similarity between vertebrate PEX26 and S. cerevisiae Pex15 (see above), they share a type II membrane protein topology, and both have been described as a PEX1/PEX6 anchoring site at the peroxisomal membrane (Birschmann et al. 2003 ; Matsumoto et al. 2003 a ). In an attempt to establish additional functional similarities between human PEX26 and S. cerevisiae Pex15, we asked if a cytosolic form of Pex15 is functional in peroxisome biogenesis. We tested two TMD-less constructs of PEX15 (aa 2–330 and aa 2–260). In contrast to our results with PEX26 in human cells and with full-length PEX15 (aa 2–283) in S. cerevisiae, we found that the transmembrane domain–less, cytosolic form of Pex15 did not rescue peroxisome matrix-protein import in a Δ pex15 yeast strain (I.C., S.W., S.J.G, and D.V., unpublished results).

Estimating from our RT-PCR results, the ratio of PEX26-Δex5 transcript to full length is ∼1:2 and seemed similar in all the tissues we examined, with the possible exception of a lower amount in brain ( fig. 4 ). In immunoblot experiments, however, we did not detect the shorter PEX26 isoform (predicted molecular weight of 28 vs. 34 kD for full-length PEX26). This suggests that either the shorter transcript is not translated with the same efficiency as for the full-length transcript or the shorter isoform of PEX26 is less stable. Additional studies determining the relative ratio of these transcripts and the amount of the short PEX26 isoform in various cells and tissues in response to metabolic and/or developmental perturbations will be required to determine potential physiologic consequences of this alternative splicing.

The other alternatively spliced PEX26 transcript we tested, PEX26-Δex2, lacks the normal translation start site and did not encode a functional PEX26 isoform. This result indicates that translation initiation at the most N-terminal internal methionine (Met96) either does not occur or produces an N-terminal–truncated protein that is unstable and/or nonfunctional. We favor the latter possibility. Met96 has an apparently acceptable Kozak consensus and might reasonably be expected to initiate translation. However, our functional studies (see below) and the N-terminal clustering of conserved sequence blocks and disease-producing missense mutations indicate that the N-terminus of PEX26 is essential for its function. These observations and conclusions contrast with those of Matsumoto et al., who report some residual activity for the PEX26-M1T allele expressed in PEX26-deficient CHO cells (ZP167) (Matsumoto et al. 2003 b ). The explanation for this difference is not clear, except possibly that the M1T transcript and/or its protein product behave differently in the CHO cell environment, as compared with our experiments in patient fibroblasts.

What do these results say about PEX26 function? First, our C- and N-terminal truncation studies of PEX26, mislocalized to the nucleus, delimit the PEX6-binding domain of PEX26 to the N-terminal half of the protein (residues 29–163). This result is consistent with the higher degree of sequence conservation among the vertebrate PEX26 orthologs in this segment of the protein and with the clustering of the disease-producing missense mutation to the same region. Moreover, our functional studies show that the minimal segment of PEX26 required to rescue peroxisome biogenesis in CG8 cells (residues 2–174) corresponds almost precisely to the minimal segment required for PEX6 binding. Additionally, we find that PEX26 undergoes alternative splicing, and, surprisingly, a splice form lacking the transmembrane ( PEX26-Δex5 ) is fully functional, despite a cytosolic rather than peroxisomal location. The conclusion that PEX26 does not require peroxisomal location to restore biogenesis is substantiated by our studies with a chimeric protein (PEX26-Mito) comprising the N-terminal half of PEX26 and a C-terminal segment from a rat mitochondrial outer membrane protein that is exclusively (within the limits of detection by indirect immunofluorescence methods) localized to mitochondria. In this extraperoxisomal location, PEX26-Mito sequesters PEX6 and a substantial fraction of PEX1 ( fig. 8 ). Despite the mislocalization of these peroxins, we find that peroxisome matrix-protein import is restored by the expression of PEX26-Mito in PEX26-deficient cells ( fig. 7 ). Although the interaction of PEX26 with PEX6 is essential for matrix-protein import, our results indicate that neither protein requires a peroxisomal location to perform its function in peroxisome biogenesis.

Ultimately, understanding the role of PEX26 in peroxisome biogenesis will require better understanding of the functions of PEX1 and PEX6. Observations in yeast and humans suggest that these two, closely related, type II AAA ATPases (Vale 2000 ; Frickey and Lupas 2004 ) form a dynamic hetero-oligomeric complex whose subunit interactions depend on ATP binding and whose function depends on ATP hydrolysis (Faber et al. 1998 b ; Tamura et al. 1998 ; Kiel et al. 1999 ). For example, in the yeast Pichia pastoris, PEX1 and PEX6 coimmunoprecipitate only in the presence of ATP or ATPγS. In this regard, PEX1 and PEX6 appear to resemble a few AAA ATPases (e.g., VPS4 and katanin) that cycle between monomeric and oligomeric forms and contrast to other AAA ATPases (e.g., NSF, p97) that form stable two-tiered hexameric rings (Vale 2000 ). Consistent with the hypothesis that the interaction between PEX1 and PEX6 is dynamic, their subcellular localizations appear to be overlapping but not identical. Using epitope-tagged constructs with expression driven by a strong promoter in wild-type cells, we found that PEX6 appears to be exclusively cytosolic, whereas PEX1 is mainly cytosolic but with detectable signal also colocalizing with peroxisomes. Similar overlapping but nonidentical subcellular localizations were described for Pichia pastoris PEX1 and PEX6 (Faber et al. 1998 b ). Moreover, our results with PEX26-Mito showing full restoration of peroxisome matrix-protein import in PEX26-deficient cells despite mislocalization of PEX26, PEX6, and a fraction of PEX1 to the mitochondrial outer membrane predict that some protein is able to move from the PEX26-PEX6 complex on the mitochondrial outer membrane to the peroxisome. PEX1 is the most obvious candidate, given that its interaction with PEX6 appears to be dynamic and that we find PEX1 at both mitochondrial and peroxisomal locations. We also speculate that, in these mislocalization experiments, PEX1 cycles between a location on the peroxisomal membrane and the complex with PEX6 tethered to the mitochondrial outer membrane by PEX26-Mito. We also speculate that the interaction with PEX6 serves to “activate” PEX1, perhaps through some conformational change in a manner that allows it to complete its function for matrix-protein import after it relocates to the peroxisome membrane. This function could involve disassembly of the matrix-protein–receptor complex or release of the N-terminus of PEX5 from the peroxisome membrane (Costa-Rodrigues et al. 2004 ) or some other, as yet unappreciated, function. Consistent with this model, Shiozawa et al. ( 2004 ) have recently examined the structure of the NTD of PEX1 (aa 1–180). Using bioinformatics analyses, they noted that the NTD of PEX1 but not that of PEX6 resembles that of two other AAA ATPases, NSF and p97. Using crystallographic studies at a 2.05-Å resolution, they showed that the NTD of PEX1 folds independently as a globular domain, with striking similarities to the structure of the NTDs of NSF and p97. On the basis of similarity to the NTDs of NSF and p97, Shiozama et al. predict that the PEX1 NTD functions in substrate binding and/or as a site for the binding of a hypothetical adaptor protein. Our hypothesized “activation” of PEX1 might involve a conformation change in the NTD similar to those involved in the function of NSF or p97 (Brunger and DeLaBarre 2003 ; Shimozawa et al. 2004 ; Whiteheart and Matveeva 2004 ). A corollary of our model is that activated PEX1 has some mechanism for localizing to the peroxisome membrane independent of the PEX26-PEX6 complex, possibly by docking to a site on one of the integral peroxisomal membrane proteins or to a site on PEX5, which appears to insert into the peroxisomal membrane as it delivers peroxisomal matrix proteins to the organelle but leaves its N-terminus exposed (Gouveia et al. 2003 ; Oliveira et al. 2003 ; Costa-Rodrigues et al. 2004 ). Given that the release of unloaded PEX5 from the organelle requires ATP hydrolysis (Dodt and Gould 1996 ; Oliveira et al. 2003 ), some interaction with PEX1 at this stage seems likely.
