---
pmid: '15292204'
title: BBK32, a fibronectin binding MSCRAMM from Borrelia burgdorferi, contains a
  disordered region that undergoes a conformational change on ligand binding.
authors:
- Kim JH
- Singvall J
- Schwarz-Linek U
- Johnson BJ
- Potts JR
- Höök M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M401691200
---

# BBK32, a fibronectin binding MSCRAMM from Borrelia burgdorferi, contains a disordered region that undergoes a conformational change on ligand binding.
**Authors:** Kim JH, Singvall J, Schwarz-Linek U, Johnson BJ, Potts JR, Höök M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M401691200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M401691200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Oct 1;279(40):41706-14. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M401691200. Epub
2004  Jul 29.

BBK32, a fibronectin binding MSCRAMM from Borrelia burgdorferi, contains a 
disordered region that undergoes a conformational change on ligand binding.

Kim JH(1), Singvall J, Schwarz-Linek U, Johnson BJ, Potts JR, Höök M.

Author information:
(1)Center for Extracellular Matrix Biology, Albert B. Alkek Institute of 
Biosciences and Technology, Texas A and M University System Health Science 
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

BBK32 is a fibronectin-binding lipoprotein on Borrelia burgdorferi, the 
causative agent of Lyme disease. Analysis using secondary structure prediction 
programs suggested that BBK32 is composed of two domains, an N-terminal segment 
lacking well defined secondary structure and a C-terminal segment composed 
largely of alpha-helices. Analysis of purified recombinant forms of the two 
domains by circular dichroism spectroscopy, gel permeation chromatography, and 
intrinsic viscosity determination were consistent with an N-terminal-extended, 
unstructured segment and a C-terminal globular domain in BBK32. Solid phase 
binding experiments suggest that the unstructured N-terminal domain binds 
fibronectin. Analysis of changes in circular dichroism spectra of the N-terminal 
segment of BBK32 upon binding of the N-terminal domain of fibronectin revealed 
an increase in beta-sheet content in the complex. Hence, BBK32, which belongs to 
a different family of proteins and shows no overall sequence similarity with the 
fibronectin binding MSCRAMMs (microbial surface components recognizing adhesive 
matrix molecules) of Gram-positive bacteria, binds fibronectin by a mechanism 
that is reminiscent of the "tandem beta-zipper" previously demonstrated for the 
fibronectin binding of streptococcal adhesins.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M401691200
PMID: 15292204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
