---
pmid: '12485888'
title: Signal transduction through tyrosine-phosphorylated carboxy-terminal fragments
  of APP via an enhanced interaction with Shc/Grb2 adaptor proteins in reactive astrocytes
  of Alzheimer's disease brain.
authors:
- Russo C
- Dolcini V
- Salis S
- Venezia V
- Violani E
- Carlo P
- Zambrano N
- Russo T
- Schettini G
journal: Ann N Y Acad Sci
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2002.tb04660.x
---

# Signal transduction through tyrosine-phosphorylated carboxy-terminal fragments of APP via an enhanced interaction with Shc/Grb2 adaptor proteins in reactive astrocytes of Alzheimer's disease brain.
**Authors:** Russo C, Dolcini V, Salis S, Venezia V, Violani E, Carlo P, Zambrano N, Russo T, Schettini G
**Journal:** Ann N Y Acad Sci (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1749-6632.2002.tb04660.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-6632.2002.tb04660.x)

## Abstract

1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2002 Nov;973:323-33. doi:
10.1111/j.1749-6632.2002.tb04660.x.

Signal transduction through tyrosine-phosphorylated carboxy-terminal fragments 
of APP via an enhanced interaction with Shc/Grb2 adaptor proteins in reactive 
astrocytes of Alzheimer's disease brain.

Russo C(1), Dolcini V, Salis S, Venezia V, Violani E, Carlo P, Zambrano N, Russo 
T, Schettini G.

Author information:
(1)Sezione di Farmacologia, Dipartimento Oncologia Biologia e Genetica, 
Università di Genova, Dipartimento di Farmacologia e Neuroscienze IST c/o Centro 
di Biotecnologie Avanzate, Largo R. Benzi 10, 16132 Genoa, Italy.

The processing of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) through the formation of 
C-terminal fragments (CTFs) and the production of beta-amyloid, are events 
likely to influence the development and the progression of Alzheimer's disease 
(AD). APP is a transmembrane protein similar to a cell-surface receptor with the 
intraluminal NPTY motif in the cytosolic C terminus. Although APP holoprotein 
can be bound to intracellular proteins like Fe65, X11, and mDab, the ultimate 
function and the mechanisms through which this putative receptor transfers its 
message are unclear. Here it is shown that in human brain, a subset of 
tyrosine-phosphorylated CTFs represent docking sites for the adaptor protein 
ShcA. ShcA immunoreactivity is greatly enhanced in Alzheimer's patients; it is 
mainly localized to glial cells and occurs at reactive astrocytes surrounding 
cerebral vessels and amyloid plaques. Grb2 also is involved in complexes with 
ShcA and tyrosine-phosphorylated CTFs, and in AD brain the interaction between 
Grb2-ShcA and CTFs is enhanced. Also, a higher amount of phospho-ERK1,2 is 
present in AD brain in comparison with control cases, likely as a result of the 
ShcA activation. In vitro experiments show that the ShcA-CTFs interaction is 
strictly confined to glial cells when treated with thrombin, which is a 
well-known ShcA and ERK1,2 activator, mitogen, and regulator of APP cleavage. In 
untreated cells ShcA does not interact with either APP or CTFs, although they 
are normally produced. Altogether these data suggest that CTFs are implicated in 
cell signaling via Shc transduction machinery, likely influencing MAPK activity 
and glial reaction in AD patients.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2002.tb04660.x
PMID: 12485888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
