---
pmid: '19805289'
title: Structure of the C-terminus of the mRNA export factor Dbp5 reveals the interaction
  surface for the ATPase activator Gle1.
authors:
- Dossani ZY
- Weirich CS
- Erzberger JP
- Berger JM
- Weis K
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2752551
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0902251106
---

# Structure of the C-terminus of the mRNA export factor Dbp5 reveals the interaction surface for the ATPase activator Gle1.
**Authors:** Dossani ZY, Weirich CS, Erzberger JP, Berger JM, Weis K
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0902251106](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0902251106)
**PMC:** [PMC2752551](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2752551/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Sep 22;106(38):16251-6. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0902251106. Epub 2009 Sep 2.

Structure of the C-terminus of the mRNA export factor Dbp5 reveals the 
interaction surface for the ATPase activator Gle1.

Dossani ZY(1), Weirich CS, Erzberger JP, Berger JM, Weis K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cell and Developmental Biology, Department of Molecular and Cell 
Biology, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720-3200, USA.

The DExD/H-box RNA-dependent ATPase Dbp5 plays an essential role in the nuclear 
export of mRNA. Dbp5 localizes to the nuclear pore complex, where its ATPase 
activity is stimulated by Gle1 and its coactivator inositol hexakisphosphate. 
Here, we present the crystal structure of the C-terminal domain of Dbp5, refined 
to 1.8 A. The structure reveals a RecA-like fold that contains two defining 
characteristics not present in other structurally characterized DExD/H-box 
proteins: a C-terminal alpha-helix and a loop connecting beta5 and alpha4, both 
of which are composed of conserved and unique elements in the Dbp5 primary 
sequence. Using structure-guided mutagenesis, we have identified several charged 
surface residues that, when mutated, weaken the binding of Gle1 and inhibit the 
ability of Gle1 to stimulate Dbp5's ATPase activity. In vivo analysis of the 
same mutations reveals that those mutants displaying the weakest ATPase 
stimulation in vitro are also unable to support yeast growth. Analysis of the 
correlation between the in vitro and in vivo data indicates that a threshold 
level of Dbp5 ATPase activity is required for cellular mRNA export that is not 
met by the unstimulated enzyme, suggesting a possible mechanism by which Dbp5's 
activity can be modulated to regulate mRNA export.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0902251106
PMCID: PMC2752551
PMID: 19805289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
