---
pmid: '9136026'
title: Phytoalexin-deficient mutants of Arabidopsis reveal that PAD4 encodes a regulatory
  factor and that four PAD genes contribute to downy mildew resistance.
authors:
- Glazebrook J
- Zook M
- Mert F
- Kagan I
- Rogers EE
- Crute IR
- Holub EB
- Hammerschmidt R
- Ausubel FM
journal: Genetics
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC1207952
doi: 10.1093/genetics/146.1.381
---

# Phytoalexin-deficient mutants of Arabidopsis reveal that PAD4 encodes a regulatory factor and that four PAD genes contribute to downy mildew resistance.
**Authors:** Glazebrook J, Zook M, Mert F, Kagan I, Rogers EE, Crute IR, Holub EB, Hammerschmidt R, Ausubel FM
**Journal:** Genetics (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1093/genetics/146.1.381](https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/146.1.381)
**PMC:** [PMC1207952](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1207952/)

## Abstract

1. Genetics. 1997 May;146(1):381-92. doi: 10.1093/genetics/146.1.381.

Phytoalexin-deficient mutants of Arabidopsis reveal that PAD4 encodes a 
regulatory factor and that four PAD genes contribute to downy mildew resistance.

Glazebrook J(1), Zook M, Mert F, Kagan I, Rogers EE, Crute IR, Holub EB, 
Hammerschmidt R, Ausubel FM.

Author information:
(1)Center for Agricultural Biotechnology, University of Maryland Biotechnology 
Institute, College Park 20742, USA. glazebro@umbi.umd.edu

We are working to determine the role of the Arabidopsis phytoalexin, camalexin, 
in protecting the plant from pathogen attack by isolating phytoalexin-deficient 
(pad) mutants in the accession Columbia (Col-0) and examining their response to 
pathogens. Mutations in PAD1, PAD2, and PAD4 caused enhanced susceptibility to 
the bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas syringae pv. maculicola strain ES4326 
(PsmES4326), while mutations in PAD3 or PAD5 did not. Camalexin was not detected 
in any of the double mutants pad1-1 pad2-1, pad1-1 pad3-1 or pad2-1 pad3-1. 
Growth of PsmES4326 in pad1-1 pad2-1 was greater than that in pad1-1 or pad2-1 
plants, while growth in pad1-1 pad3-1 and pad2-1 pad3-1 plants was similar to 
that in pad1-1 and pad2-1 plants, respectively. The pad4-1 mutation caused 
reduced camalexin synthesis in response to PsmES4326 infection, but not in 
response to Cochliobolus carbonum infection, indicating that PAD4 has a 
regulatory function. PAD1, PAD2, PAD3 and PAD4 are all required for resistance 
to the eukaryotic biotroph Peronospora parasitica. The pad4-1 mutation caused 
the most dramatic change, exhibiting full susceptibility to four of six 
Col-incompatible parasite isolates. Interestingly, each combination of double 
mutants between pad1-1, pad2-1 and pad3-1 exhibited additive shifts to moderate 
or full susceptibility to most of the isolates.

DOI: 10.1093/genetics/146.1.381
PMCID: PMC1207952
PMID: 9136026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

We are working to determine the role of the Arabidopsis phytoalexin, camalexin, in protecting the plant from pathogen attack by isolating phytoalexin-deficient (pad) mutants in the accession Columbia (Col-0) and examining their response to pathogens. Mutations in PAD1, PAD2, and PAD4 caused enhanced susceptibility to the bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas syringae pv. maculicola strain ES4326 (PsmES4326), while mutations in PAD3 or PAD5 did not. Camalexin was not detected in any of the double mutants pad1-1 pad2-1, pad1-1 pad3-1 or pad2-1 pad3-1. Growth of PsmES4326 in pad1-1 pad2-1 was greater than that in pad1-1 or pad2-1 plants, while growth in pad1-1 pad3-1 and pad2-1 pad3-1 plants was similar to that in pad1-1 and pad2-1 plants, respectively. The pad4-1 mutation caused reduced camalexin synthesis in response to PsmES4326 infection, but not in response to Cochliobolus carbonum infection, indicating that PAD4 has a regulatory function. PAD1, PAD2, PAD3 and PAD4 are all required for resistance to the eukaryotic biotroph Peronospora parasitica. The pad4-1 mutation caused the most dramatic change, exhibiting full susceptibility to four of six Col-incompatible parasite isolates. Interestingly, each combination of double mutants between pad1-1, pad2-1 and pad3-1 exhibited additive shifts to moderate or full susceptibility to most of the isolates.
