---
pmid: '27125566'
title: Regulation of ecmF gene expression and genetic hierarchy among STATa, CudA,
  and MybC on several prestalk A-specific gene expressions in Dictyostelium.
authors:
- Saga Y
- Inamura T
- Shimada N
- Kawata T
journal: Dev Growth Differ
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/dgd.12285
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Regulation of ecmF gene expression and genetic hierarchy among STATa, CudA, and MybC on several prestalk A-specific gene expressions in Dictyostelium.
**Authors:** Saga Y, Inamura T, Shimada N, Kawata T
**Journal:** Dev Growth Differ (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1111/dgd.12285](https://doi.org/10.1111/dgd.12285)

## Abstract

1. Dev Growth Differ. 2016 May;58(4):383-99. doi: 10.1111/dgd.12285. Epub 2016
Apr  29.

Regulation of ecmF gene expression and genetic hierarchy among STATa, CudA, and 
MybC on several prestalk A-specific gene expressions in Dictyostelium.

Saga Y(1), Inamura T(1), Shimada N(1), Kawata T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Toho University, Funabashi, Chiba, 
274-8510, Japan.

STATa, a Dictyostelium homologue of metazoan signal transducer and activator of 
transcription, is important for the organizer function in the tip region of the 
migrating Dictyostelium slug. We previously showed that ecmF gene expression 
depends on STATa in prestalk A (pstA) cells, where STATa is activated. Deletion 
and site-directed mutagenesis analysis of the ecmF/lacZ fusion gene in wild-type 
and STATa null strains identified an imperfect inverted repeat sequence, 
ACAAATANTATTTGT, as a STATa-responsive element. An upstream sequence element was 
required for efficient expression in the rear region of pstA zone; an element 
downstream of the inverted repeat was necessary for sufficient prestalk 
expression during culmination. Band shift analyses using purified STATa protein 
detected no sequence-specific binding to those ecmF elements. The only verified 
upregulated target gene of STATa is cudA gene; CudA directly activates expL7 
gene expression in prestalk cells. However, ecmF gene expression was almost 
unaffected in a cudA null mutant. Several previously reported putative STATa 
target genes were also expressed in cudA null mutant but were downregulated in 
STATa null mutant. Moreover, mybC, which encodes another transcription factor, 
belonged to this category, and ecmF expression was downregulated in a mybC null 
mutant. These findings demonstrate the existence of a genetic hierarchy for 
pstA-specific genes, which can be classified into two distinct STATa downstream 
pathways, CudA dependent and independent. The ecmF expression is indirectly 
upregulated by STATa in a CudA-independent activation manner but dependent on 
MybC, whose expression is positively regulated by STATa.

© 2016 Japanese Society of Developmental Biologists.

DOI: 10.1111/dgd.12285
PMID: 27125566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
