---
pmid: '25009997'
title: Contribution of calumin to embryogenesis through participation in the endoplasmic
  reticulum-associated degradation activity.
authors:
- Yamamoto S
- Yamazaki T
- Komazaki S
- Yamashita T
- Osaki M
- Matsubayashi M
- Kidoya H
- Takakura N
- Yamazaki D
- Kakizawa S
journal: Dev Biol
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.06.024
---

# Contribution of calumin to embryogenesis through participation in the endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation activity.
**Authors:** Yamamoto S, Yamazaki T, Komazaki S, Yamashita T, Osaki M, Matsubayashi M, Kidoya H, Takakura N, Yamazaki D, Kakizawa S
**Journal:** Dev Biol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.06.024](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.06.024)

## Abstract

1. Dev Biol. 2014 Sep 1;393(1):33-43. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.06.024. Epub 2014
 Jul 8.

Contribution of calumin to embryogenesis through participation in the 
endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation activity.

Yamamoto S(1), Yamazaki T(2), Komazaki S(3), Yamashita T(4), Osaki M(4), 
Matsubayashi M(4), Kidoya H(5), Takakura N(5), Yamazaki D(4), Kakizawa S(4).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8501, 
Japan; Department of Molecular Cell Biology and Medicine, Institute of Health 
Biosciences, University of Tokushima Graduate School, Tokushima 770-8505, Japan. 
Electronic address: yamashin@tokushima-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Molecular Cell Biology and Medicine, Institute of Health 
Biosciences, University of Tokushima Graduate School, Tokushima 770-8505, Japan.
(3)Saitama Medical University, Saitama 350-0495, Japan.
(4)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8501, 
Japan.
(5)Department of Signal Transduction, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, 
Osaka University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Calumin is an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-transmembrane protein, and little is 
known about its physiological roles. Here we showed that calumin homozygous 
mutant embryos die at embryonic days (E) 10.5-11.5. At mid-gestation, calumin 
was expressed predominantly in the yolk sac. Apoptosis was enhanced in calumin 
homozygous mutant yolk sacs at E9.5, pointing to a possible link to the 
embryonic lethality. Calumin co-immunoprecipitated with ERAD components such as 
p97, BIP, derlin-1, derlin-2 and VIMP, suggesting its involvement in ERAD. 
Indeed, calumin knockdown in HEK 293 cells resulted in ERAD being less 
efficient, as demonstrated by attenuation in both degradations of a misfolded 
α1-antitrypsin variant and the ER-to-cytosol dislocation of cholera toxin A1 
subunit. In calumin homozygous mutant yolk sac endoderm cells, ER 
stress-associated alterations were observed, including lipid droplet 
accumulation, fragmentation of the ER and dissociation of ribosomes from the ER. 
In this context, the ER-overload response, assumed to be cytoprotective, was 
also triggered in the mutant endoderm cells, but seemed to fully counteract the 
excessive ER stress generated due to defective ERAD. Taken together, our 
findings suggested that calumin serves to maintain the yolk sac integrity 
through participation in the ERAD activity, contributing to embryonic 
development.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.06.024
PMID: 25009997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
