---
pmid: '11104755'
title: Substitution of a glycogen synthase kinase-3beta phosphorylation site in presenilin
  1 separates presenilin function from beta-catenin signaling.
authors:
- Kirschenbaum F
- Hsu SC
- Cordell B
- McCarthy JV
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M004697200
---

# Substitution of a glycogen synthase kinase-3beta phosphorylation site in presenilin 1 separates presenilin function from beta-catenin signaling.
**Authors:** Kirschenbaum F, Hsu SC, Cordell B, McCarthy JV
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M004697200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M004697200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 9;276(10):7366-75. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M004697200. Epub
2000  Dec 4.

Substitution of a glycogen synthase kinase-3beta phosphorylation site in 
presenilin 1 separates presenilin function from beta-catenin signaling.

Kirschenbaum F(1), Hsu SC, Cordell B, McCarthy JV.

Author information:
(1)Scios Inc., Sunnyvale, California 94086, USA.

The majority of cases with early onset familial Alzheimer's disease have been 
attributed to mutations in the presenilin 1 (PS1) gene. PS1 protein is a 
component of a high molecular weight membrane-bound complex that also contains 
beta-catenin. The physiological relevance of the association between PS1 and 
beta-catenin remains controversial. In this study, we report the identification 
and functional characterization of a highly conserved glycogen synthase 
kinase-3beta consensus phosphorylation site within the hydrophilic loop domain 
of PS1. Site-directed mutagenesis, together with in vitro and in vivo 
phosphorylation assays, indicates that PS1 residues Ser(353) and Ser(357) are 
glycogen synthase kinase-3beta targets. Substitution of one or both of these 
residues greatly reduces the ability of PS1 to associate with beta-catenin. By 
disrupting this interaction, we demonstrate that the association between PS1 and 
beta-catenin has no effect on Abeta peptide production, beta-catenin stability, 
or cellular susceptibility to apoptosis. Significantly, in the absence of 
PS1/beta-catenin association, we found no alteration in beta-catenin signaling 
using induction of this pathway by exogenous expression of Wnt-1 or beta-catenin 
and a Tcf/Lef transcriptional assay. These results argue against a 
pathologically relevant role for the association between PS1 and beta-catenin in 
familial Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M004697200
PMID: 11104755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
