---
pmid: '18632736'
title: Identification and functional characterization of a novel human and rat riboflavin
  transporter, RFT1.
authors:
- Yonezawa A
- Masuda S
- Katsura T
- Inui K
journal: Am J Physiol Cell Physiol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.00019.2008
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Identification and functional characterization of a novel human and rat riboflavin transporter, RFT1.
**Authors:** Yonezawa A, Masuda S, Katsura T, Inui K
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Cell Physiol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpcell.00019.2008](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.00019.2008)

## Abstract

1. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2008 Sep;295(3):C632-41. doi: 
10.1152/ajpcell.00019.2008. Epub 2008 Jul 16.

Identification and functional characterization of a novel human and rat 
riboflavin transporter, RFT1.

Yonezawa A(1), Masuda S, Katsura T, Inui K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Kyoto University Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, 
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan.

Absorption of riboflavin is mediated by transporter(s). However, a mammalian 
riboflavin transporter has yet to be identified. In the present study, the novel 
human and rat riboflavin transporters hRFT1 and rRFT1 were identified on the 
basis of our rat kidney mRNA expression database (Horiba N, Masuda S, Takeuchi 
A, Saito H, Okuda M, Inui K. Kidney Int 66: 29-45, 2004). hRFT1 and rRFT1 cDNAs 
have an open reading frame encoding 448- and 450-amino acid proteins, 
respectively, that exhibit 81.1% identity and 96.4% similarity to one another. 
In addition, an inactive splice variant of hRFT1, hRFT1sv, was also cloned. The 
hRFT1sv cDNA, which encodes a 167-amino acid protein, retains an intron between 
exons 2 and 3 of hRFT1. Real-time PCR revealed that the sum of hRFT1 and hRFT1sv 
mRNAs was expressed strongly in the placenta and small intestine and was 
detected in all tissues examined. In addition, hRFT1 and hRFT1sv were expressed 
in human embryonic kidney (HEK)-293 and Caco-2 cells. HEK-293 cells transfected 
with green fluorescent protein-tagged hRFT1 and rRFT1 exhibited a fluorescent 
signal in the plasma membrane. Overexpression of hRFT1 and rRFT1, but not 
hRFT1sv, increased the cellular accumulation of [(3)H]riboflavin. The 
transfection of small interfering RNA targeting both hRFT1 and hRFT1sv 
significantly decreased the uptake of [(3)H]riboflavin by HEK-293 and Caco-2 
cells. Riboflavin transport is Na(+), potential, and pH independent. Kinetic 
analyses demonstrated that the Michaelis-Menten constants for the uptake by 
HEK-293 and Caco-2 cells were 28.1 and 63.7 nM, respectively. We propose that 
hRFT1 and rRFT1 are novel mammalian riboflavin transporters, which belong to a 
new mammalian riboflavin transporter family.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpcell.00019.2008
PMID: 18632736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
