---
pmid: '9789033'
title: Identification of a gene encoding an acyl CoA:diacylglycerol acyltransferase,
  a key enzyme in triacylglycerol synthesis.
authors:
- Cases S
- Smith SJ
- Zheng YW
- Myers HM
- Lear SR
- Sande E
- Novak S
- Collins C
- Welch CB
- Lusis AJ
- Erickson SK
- Farese RV Jr
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC23692
doi: 10.1073/pnas.95.22.13018
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Identification of a gene encoding an acyl CoA:diacylglycerol acyltransferase, a key enzyme in triacylglycerol synthesis.
**Authors:** Cases S, Smith SJ, Zheng YW, Myers HM, Lear SR, Sande E, Novak S, Collins C, Welch CB, Lusis AJ, Erickson SK, Farese RV Jr
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.95.22.13018](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.95.22.13018)
**PMC:** [PMC23692](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC23692/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Oct 27;95(22):13018-23. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.95.22.13018.

Identification of a gene encoding an acyl CoA:diacylglycerol acyltransferase, a 
key enzyme in triacylglycerol synthesis.

Cases S(1), Smith SJ, Zheng YW, Myers HM, Lear SR, Sande E, Novak S, Collins C, 
Welch CB, Lusis AJ, Erickson SK, Farese RV Jr.

Author information:
(1)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, University of California, San 
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Triacylglycerols are quantitatively the most important storage form of energy 
for eukaryotic cells. Acyl CoA:diacylglycerol acyltransferase (DGAT, EC 
2.3.1.20) catalyzes the terminal and only committed step in triacylglycerol 
synthesis, by using diacylglycerol and fatty acyl CoA as substrates. DGAT plays 
a fundamental role in the metabolism of cellular diacylglycerol and is important 
in higher eukaryotes for physiologic processes involving triacylglycerol 
metabolism such as intestinal fat absorption, lipoprotein assembly, adipose 
tissue formation, and lactation. DGAT is an integral membrane protein that has 
never been purified to homogeneity, nor has its gene been cloned. We identified 
an expressed sequence tag clone that shared regions of similarity with acyl 
CoA:cholesterol acyltransferase, an enzyme that also uses fatty acyl CoA as a 
substrate. Expression of a mouse cDNA for this expressed sequence tag in insect 
cells resulted in high levels of DGAT activity in cell membranes. No other 
acyltransferase activity was detected when a variety of substrates, including 
cholesterol, were used as acyl acceptors. The gene was expressed in all tissues 
examined; during differentiation of NIH 3T3-L1 cells into adipocytes, its 
expression increased markedly in parallel with increases in DGAT activity. The 
identification of this cDNA encoding a DGAT will greatly facilitate studies of 
cellular glycerolipid metabolism and its regulation.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.95.22.13018
PMCID: PMC23692
PMID: 9789033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
