---
pmid: '31474574'
title: Disease-Causing Mutations in SF3B1 Alter Splicing by Disrupting Interaction
  with SUGP1.
authors:
- Zhang J
- Ali AM
- Lieu YK
- Liu Z
- Gao J
- Rabadan R
- Raza A
- Mukherjee S
- Manley JL
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC7065273
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2019.07.017
---

# Disease-Causing Mutations in SF3B1 Alter Splicing by Disrupting Interaction with SUGP1.
**Authors:** Zhang J, Ali AM, Lieu YK, Liu Z, Gao J, Rabadan R, Raza A, Mukherjee S, Manley JL
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2019.07.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2019.07.017)
**PMC:** [PMC7065273](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7065273/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2019 Oct 3;76(1):82-95.e7. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2019.07.017. Epub 
2019 Aug 29.

Disease-Causing Mutations in SF3B1 Alter Splicing by Disrupting Interaction with 
SUGP1.

Zhang J(1), Ali AM(2), Lieu YK(3), Liu Z(4), Gao J(1), Rabadan R(4), Raza A(5), 
Mukherjee S(6), Manley JL(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, 
USA.
(2)Irving Cancer Research Center, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, 
USA; Irving Cancer Research Center, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, 
USA.
(4)Department of Systems Biology, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA; 
Department of Biomedical Informatics, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, 
USA.
(5)Irving Cancer Research Center, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA; 
Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Columbia University, 
New York, NY 10032, USA.
(6)Irving Cancer Research Center, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA; 
Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Columbia University, 
New York, NY 10032, USA. Electronic address: sm3252@cumc.columbia.edu.
(7)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, 
USA. Electronic address: jlm2@columbia.edu.

SF3B1, which encodes an essential spliceosomal protein, is frequently mutated in 
myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) and many cancers. However, the defect of mutant 
SF3B1 is unknown. Here, we analyzed RNA sequencing data from MDS patients and 
confirmed that SF3B1 mutants use aberrant 3' splice sites. To elucidate the 
underlying mechanism, we purified complexes containing either wild-type or the 
hotspot K700E mutant SF3B1 and found that levels of a poorly studied 
spliceosomal protein, SUGP1, were reduced in mutant spliceosomes. Strikingly, 
SUGP1 knockdown completely recapitulated the splicing errors, whereas SUGP1 
overexpression drove the protein, which our data suggest plays an important role 
in branchsite recognition, into the mutant spliceosome and partially rescued 
splicing. Other hotspot SF3B1 mutants showed similar altered splicing and 
diminished interaction with SUGP1. Our study demonstrates that SUGP1 loss is a 
common defect of spliceosomes with disease-causing SF3B1 mutations and, because 
this defect can be rescued, suggests possibilities for therapeutic intervention.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2019.07.017
PMCID: PMC7065273
PMID: 31474574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DECLARATION OF INTERESTS The authors declare no 
competing interests.
