---
pmid: '1385479'
title: Expression and localization of proteins of the complement system in human skin.
authors:
- Dovezenski N
- Billetta R
- Gigli I
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '1992'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC443264
doi: 10.1172/JCI116080
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Expression and localization of proteins of the complement system in human skin.
**Authors:** Dovezenski N, Billetta R, Gigli I
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI116080](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI116080)
**PMC:** [PMC443264](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC443264/)

## Abstract

1. J Clin Invest. 1992 Nov;90(5):2000-12. doi: 10.1172/JCI116080.

Expression and localization of proteins of the complement system in human skin.

Dovezenski N(1), Billetta R, Gigli I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego School of 
Medicine 92103.

The complement system participates in the immune recognition of foreign 
antigens, many of which may penetrate the skin by physical injury or 
transcutaneous adsorption. In this study, we examined the presence of complement 
components and complement regulatory proteins in the human skin and cultured 
human keratinocytes. Immunofluorescence studies showed C3, Factor B, decay 
accelerating factor, the C3b receptor (CR1), and C3d receptor (CR2), distributed 
among cells of the epidermis as well as on cultured keratinocytes. Immunoblot 
analysis of keratinocytes supernatants showed the presence of C3 with a 
molecular weight of approximately 180 kD. The decay accelerating factor was 
localized as previously reported on elastic fibers; additionally it was observed 
in the basement membrane zone. In situ hybridization studies suggest the 
expression of CR1 and CR2 mRNA in human epidermis. These results show the 
presence in the human epidermis of complement components that are capable of 
generating the initial C3 convertase of the alternative pathway. The presence of 
complement regulatory proteins could endow keratinocytes with immune functions 
such as the regulation of complement activation and endocytosis of C3 opsonized 
particles.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI116080
PMCID: PMC443264
PMID: 1385479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
