---
pmid: '31063815'
title: Cyclophilin A-FoxO1 signaling pathway in endothelial cell apoptosis.
authors:
- Xie Y
- Li X
- Ge J
journal: Cell Signal
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2019.04.014
---

# Cyclophilin A-FoxO1 signaling pathway in endothelial cell apoptosis.
**Authors:** Xie Y, Li X, Ge J
**Journal:** Cell Signal (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cellsig.2019.04.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cellsig.2019.04.014)

## Abstract

1. Cell Signal. 2019 Sep;61:57-65. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2019.04.014. Epub 2019 
May 4.

Cyclophilin A-FoxO1 signaling pathway in endothelial cell apoptosis.

Xie Y(1), Li X(2), Ge J(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biomedical Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China; 
Department of Cardiology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 
Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases, Shanghai 200032, China.
(2)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Regulatory Biology, Institute of Biomedical 
Sciences, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200241, China; Department of 
Molecular and Cellular Biology, The Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor College 
of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. Electronic address: xiaotaol@bcm.edu.
(3)Institute of Biomedical Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China; 
Department of Cardiology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 
Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases, Shanghai 200032, China. Electronic 
address: jbge@zs-hospital.sh.cn.

Cyclophilin A (CyPA), which is encoded by PPIA, is a ubiquitously expressed 
intracellular protein and is secreted in response to inflammatory stimuli. CyPA 
stimulates proinflammatory signaling pathways in vascular smooth muscle cells 
(VSMCs) and endothelial cells (ECs), promotes VSMC migration and proliferation, 
EC adhesion molecules expression, and inflammatory cell chemotaxis and 
apoptosis. Moreover, CyPA activates mitogen-activated protein kinases, including 
ERK1/2, JNK, and p38, and stimulates IkB-α phosphorylation, NF-kB activation, 
and vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 and E-selectin expression in human 
umbilical vein ECs. Therefore, we hypothesized that CyPA regulated transcription 
factor FoxO1 phosphorylation and transcriptional activity and the expression of 
downstream genes involved in vascular EC activation, thus activated vascular ECs 
in vitro. We found that intracellular CyPA promoted FoxO1 dephosphorylation at 
Ser256, nuclear accumulation, and transcriptional activity by interacting with 
it. Moreover, CyPA induced FoxO1-dependent expression of downstream genes 
involved in EC chemotaxis and apoptosis, including monocyte chemoattractant 
protein-1 and BCL-2-interacting mediator of cell death, and stimulated the 
apoptosis of human umbilical vein ECs in vitro.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2019.04.014
PMID: 31063815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
