---
pmid: '9495277'
title: Gene expression of 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 and type 2 in
  the kidneys of insulin-dependent diabetic rats.
authors:
- Liu YJ
- Nakagawa Y
- Ohzeki T
journal: Hypertension
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1161/01.hyp.31.3.885
---

# Gene expression of 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 and type 2 in the kidneys of insulin-dependent diabetic rats.
**Authors:** Liu YJ, Nakagawa Y, Ohzeki T
**Journal:** Hypertension (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1161/01.hyp.31.3.885](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.hyp.31.3.885)

## Abstract

1. Hypertension. 1998 Mar;31(3):885-9. doi: 10.1161/01.hyp.31.3.885.

Gene expression of 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 and type 2 in the 
kidneys of insulin-dependent diabetic rats.

Liu YJ(1), Nakagawa Y, Ohzeki T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Japan.

The presence of 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (11beta-HSD) activity in the 
kidney has been suggested to be important in the regulation of 
glucocorticoid-induced disorders of electrolyte balance and the control of blood 
pressure. To assess the possible effect of 11beta-HSD isoforms in 
diabetes-related hypertension, we measured the mean systolic blood pressure and 
the 11beta-HSD activity and mRNA levels for both 11beta-HSD1 and 11beta-HSD2 in 
the kidney of streptozotocin (STZ)-diabetic female rats. Three weeks after 
injection of STZ (65 mg/kg), the mean systolic blood pressure of diabetic rats 
was elevated 13.6% above that of normal rats (P<.01). The renal 11beta-HSD2 
activity and level of mRNA expression were significantly decreased in diabetic 
rats (P<.01). However, the treatment of rats with STZ did not decrease the 
levels of renal 11beta-HSD1 activity and mRNA expression in diabetic rats. 
Insulin administered subcutaneously to diabetic rats for 2 weeks completely 
reversed the decrease in renal 11beta-HSD2 activity and gene expression and 
prevented the elevation in blood pressure in the diabetic rat. These results 
indicate that alteration of renal 11beta-HSD2 activity and gene expression may 
be primarily responsible for the changes in blood pressure of STZ-diabetic rats 
after early treatment with insulin.

DOI: 10.1161/01.hyp.31.3.885
PMID: 9495277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
