---
pmid: '8663599'
title: Molecular cloning of human phosphomevalonate kinase and identification of a
  consensus peroxisomal targeting sequence.
authors:
- Chambliss KL
- Slaughter CA
- Schreiner R
- Hoffmann GF
- Gibson KM
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.29.17330
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Molecular cloning of human phosphomevalonate kinase and identification of a consensus peroxisomal targeting sequence.
**Authors:** Chambliss KL, Slaughter CA, Schreiner R, Hoffmann GF, Gibson KM
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.271.29.17330](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.271.29.17330)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jul 19;271(29):17330-4. doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.29.17330.

Molecular cloning of human phosphomevalonate kinase and identification of a 
consensus peroxisomal targeting sequence.

Chambliss KL(1), Slaughter CA, Schreiner R, Hoffmann GF, Gibson KM.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Metabolic Disease, Baylor Research Institute and Baylor 
University Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75226, USA.

Two overlapping cDNAs which encode human liver phosphomevalonate kinase (PMKase) 
were isolated. The human PMKase cDNAs predict a 191-amino acid protein with a 
molecular weight of 21,862, consistent with previous reports for mammalian 
PMKase (Mr = 21,000-22,500). Further verification of the clones was obtained by 
expression of PMKase activity in bacteria using a composite 1024-base pair cDNA 
clone. Northern blot analysis of several human tissues revealed a doublet of 
transcripts at approximately 1 kilobase (kb) in heart, liver, skeletal muscle, 
kidney, and pancreas and lower but detectable transcript levels in brain, 
placenta, and lung. Analysis of transcripts from human lymphoblasts subcultured 
in lipid-depleted sera (LDS) and LDS supplemented with lovastatin indicated that 
PMKase gene expression is subject to regulation by sterol at the level of 
transcription. Southern blotting indicated that PMKase is a single copy gene 
covering less than 15 kb in the human genome. The human PMKase amino acid 
sequence contains a consensus peroxisomal targeting sequence (PTS-1), 
Ser-Arg-Leu, at the C terminus of the protein. This is the first report of a 
cholesterol biosynthetic protein which contains a consensus PTS-1, providing 
further evidence for the concept that early cholesterol and nonsterol isoprenoid 
biosynthesis may occur in the peroxisome.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.29.17330
PMID: 8663599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
