---
pmid: '11578593'
title: Analysis of genes differentially expressed in astrocytes stimulated with lipopolysaccharide
  using cDNA arrays.
authors:
- Pang Y
- Cai Z
- Rhodes PG
journal: Brain Res
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0006-8993(01)02766-4
---

# Analysis of genes differentially expressed in astrocytes stimulated with lipopolysaccharide using cDNA arrays.
**Authors:** Pang Y, Cai Z, Rhodes PG
**Journal:** Brain Res (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0006-8993(01)02766-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0006-8993(01)02766-4)

## Abstract

1. Brain Res. 2001 Sep 28;914(1-2):15-22. doi: 10.1016/s0006-8993(01)02766-4.

Analysis of genes differentially expressed in astrocytes stimulated with 
lipopolysaccharide using cDNA arrays.

Pang Y(1), Cai Z, Rhodes PG.

Author information:
(1)Division of Newborn Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Mississippi Medical Center, 2500 N State Street, Jackson, MS 39216, USA.

We used cDNA arrays to investigate differentially expressed genes in astrocytes 
challenged with lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Astrocyte cultures were prepared from 
1-day-old rat brains. Purified astrocytes were treated with LPS (1 microg/ml) 
for 2, 8 and 48 h. Differentially expressed genes in these astrocytes were 
examined with Atlas rat cDNA arrays. At all the three time points studied, three 
genes were found consistently up-regulated: I-kappaB alpha chain, NF-kappaB, and 
interferon induced protein. In addition to these three, six other genes were 
also up-regulated at 2 and 8 h. They were genes encoding vascular cell adhesion 
protein 1 (VCAM-1), interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF-1), mitochondrial 
hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA synthase (HMG-CoA synthase), aldehyde dehydrogenase 2, 
macrophage inflammatory protein 1 (MIP-1) and neurotensin receptor 2. At these 
two time points, three genes were down-regulated: copper-zinc-containing 
superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD-1), insulin-like growth factor binding protein 1 
(IGFBP-1), and insulin-like growth factor binding protein 3 (IGFBP-3). 
Expression of several differentially expressed genes in cDNA array (I-kappaB, 
VCAM-1 and MIP-3) were further confirmed by reverse transcription polymerase 
chain reaction study. The prominently modulated genes could be classified into 
three categories: nuclear transcription factors, pro-inflammatory 
cytokines/chemokines and metabolic enzymes. Application of pyrrolidine 
dithiocarbamate, an inhibitor of nuclear factor-kB (NF-kappaB), prior to LPS 
stimulation not only prevented up-regulation of NF-kappaB gene expression, but 
also completely blocked up-regulation of pro-inflammatory cytokine genes 
(TNF-alpha and interleukin-1beta) and two chemokine genes: CXC chemokine LIX and 
CC chemokine MIP-3 alpha. These results indicate that both up-regulation of 
inflammatory cytokine expression and down-regulation of growth factor expression 
are probably involved in the response of astrocytes upon exposure to LPS.

DOI: 10.1016/s0006-8993(01)02766-4
PMID: 11578593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
