---
pmid: '3800397'
title: The purification and characterization of human kidney L-arginine:glycine amidinotransferase.
authors:
- Gross MD
- Eggen MA
- Simon AM
- Van Pilsum JF
journal: Arch Biochem Biophys
year: '1986'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0003-9861(86)90385-1
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The purification and characterization of human kidney L-arginine:glycine amidinotransferase.
**Authors:** Gross MD, Eggen MA, Simon AM, Van Pilsum JF
**Journal:** Arch Biochem Biophys (1986)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0003-9861(86)90385-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/0003-9861(86)90385-1)

## Abstract

1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1986 Dec;251(2):747-55. doi:
10.1016/0003-9861(86)90385-1.

The purification and characterization of human kidney L-arginine:glycine 
amidinotransferase.

Gross MD, Eggen MA, Simon AM, Van Pilsum JF.

Human kidney L-arginine:glycine amidinotransferase (transamidinase) has been 
purified to a homogeneous state as defined by native and sodium dodecyl sulfate 
gel electrophoresis and by ultracentrifugation (sedimentation equilibrium) 
experiments. The four steps in the isolation procedure were chromatography with 
DEAE-cellulose, gel filtration with Sephadex G-150, chromatography with phenyl 
Sepharose, and high-pressure liquid chromatography with hydroxylapatite. The 
final product represented a 90-fold purification of the enzyme. Human kidney 
transamidinase is a dimer with a molecular mass of 89,000 Da and subunit masses 
of 44,000 Da. The Km for arginine and glycine were both 2.5 mM and the Vmax was 
0.5 mumol ornithine/min/mg protein. The ultraviolet absorption spectrum, 
specific activity, and isoelectric points were determined for human kidney 
transamidinase. Multiple forms of the enzyme were obtained by isoelectric 
focusing. Human kidney transamidinase cross-reacted with polyclonal antibodies 
raised to rat kidney transamidinase. All of the properties of human kidney 
transamidinase that we have examined were similar to those of rat kidney 
transamidinase. A close evolutionary relationship between the rat and human 
kidney transamidinase is suggested.

DOI: 10.1016/0003-9861(86)90385-1
PMID: 3800397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
