---
pmid: '19660551'
title: Biochemical and immunohistochemical analysis of an Alzheimer's disease mouse
  model reveals the presence of multiple cerebral Abeta assembly forms throughout
  life.
authors:
- Shankar GM
- Leissring MA
- Adame A
- Sun X
- Spooner E
- Masliah E
- Selkoe DJ
- Lemere CA
- Walsh DM
journal: Neurobiol Dis
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2782414
doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2009.07.021
---

# Biochemical and immunohistochemical analysis of an Alzheimer's disease mouse model reveals the presence of multiple cerebral Abeta assembly forms throughout life.
**Authors:** Shankar GM, Leissring MA, Adame A, Sun X, Spooner E, Masliah E, Selkoe DJ, Lemere CA, Walsh DM
**Journal:** Neurobiol Dis (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nbd.2009.07.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2009.07.021)
**PMC:** [PMC2782414](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2782414/)

## Abstract

1. Neurobiol Dis. 2009 Nov;36(2):293-302. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2009.07.021. Epub
2009  Aug 4.

Biochemical and immunohistochemical analysis of an Alzheimer's disease mouse 
model reveals the presence of multiple cerebral Abeta assembly forms throughout 
life.

Shankar GM(1), Leissring MA, Adame A, Sun X, Spooner E, Masliah E, Selkoe DJ, 
Lemere CA, Walsh DM.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Neurodegenerative Research, School of Biomolecular and 
Biomedical Sciences, Conway Institute for Biomedical and Biomolecular Research, 
University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Republic of Ireland.

The amyloid beta-protein (Abeta) is believed to play a causal role in 
Alzheimer's disease, however, the mechanism by which Abeta mediates its effect 
and the assembly form(s) of Abeta responsible remain unclear. Several APP 
transgenic mice have been shown to accumulate Abeta and to develop cognitive 
deficits. We have studied one such model, the J20 mouse. Using an 
immunoprecipitation/Western blotting technique we find an age-dependent increase 
in Abeta monomer and SDS-stable dimer. But prior to the earliest detection of 
Abeta dimers, immunohistochemical analysis revealed an increase in oligomer 
immunoreactivity that was coincident with reduced hippocampal MAP2 and 
synaptophysin staining. Moreover, biochemical fractionation and ELISA analysis 
revealed evidence of TBS and triton-insoluble sedimentable Abeta aggregates at 
the earliest ages studied. These data demonstrate the presence of multiple 
assembly forms of Abeta throughout the life of J20 mice and highlight the 
difficulty in attributing synaptotoxicity to a single Abeta species.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2009.07.021
PMCID: PMC2782414
PMID: 19660551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
