---
pmid: '17928862'
title: ESCRT-III recognition by VPS4 ATPases.
authors:
- Stuchell-Brereton MD
- Skalicky JJ
- Kieffer C
- Karren MA
- Ghaffarian S
- Sundquist WI
journal: Nature
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature06172
---

# ESCRT-III recognition by VPS4 ATPases.
**Authors:** Stuchell-Brereton MD, Skalicky JJ, Kieffer C, Karren MA, Ghaffarian S, Sundquist WI
**Journal:** Nature (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature06172](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature06172)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2007 Oct 11;449(7163):740-4. doi: 10.1038/nature06172.

ESCRT-III recognition by VPS4 ATPases.

Stuchell-Brereton MD(1), Skalicky JJ, Kieffer C, Karren MA, Ghaffarian S, 
Sundquist WI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Room 4100, 15 N. Medical Drive East, University 
of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112-5650, USA.

The ESCRT (endosomal sorting complex required for transport) pathway is required 
for terminal membrane fission events in several important biological processes, 
including endosomal intraluminal vesicle formation, HIV budding and cytokinesis. 
VPS4 ATPases perform a key function in this pathway by recognizing 
membrane-associated ESCRT-III assemblies and catalysing their disassembly, 
possibly in conjunction with membrane fission. Here we show that the microtubule 
interacting and transport (MIT) domains of human VPS4A and VPS4B bind conserved 
sequence motifs located at the carboxy termini of the CHMP1-3 class of ESCRT-III 
proteins. Structures of VPS4A MIT-CHMP1A and VPS4B MIT-CHMP2B complexes reveal 
that the C-terminal CHMP motif forms an amphipathic helix that binds in a groove 
between the last two helices of the tetratricopeptide-like repeat (TPR) of the 
VPS4 MIT domain, but in the opposite orientation to that of a canonical TPR 
interaction. Distinct pockets in the MIT domain bind three conserved leucine 
residues of the CHMP motif, and mutations that inhibit these interactions block 
VPS4 recruitment, impair endosomal protein sorting and relieve dominant-negative 
VPS4 inhibition of HIV budding. Thus, our studies reveal how the VPS4 ATPases 
recognize their CHMP substrates to facilitate the membrane fission events 
required for the release of viruses, endosomal vesicles and daughter cells.

DOI: 10.1038/nature06172
PMID: 17928862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
