---
pmid: '6230359'
title: Association of alpha- and beta-subunits during the biosynthesis of beta-hexosaminidase
  in cultured human fibroblasts.
authors:
- Proia RL
- d'Azzo A
- Neufeld EF
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1984'
full_text_available: false
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Association of alpha- and beta-subunits during the biosynthesis of beta-hexosaminidase in cultured human fibroblasts.
**Authors:** Proia RL, d'Azzo A, Neufeld EF
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1984)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1984 Mar 10;259(5):3350-4.

Association of alpha- and beta-subunits during the biosynthesis of 
beta-hexosaminidase in cultured human fibroblasts.

Proia RL, d'Azzo A, Neufeld EF.

Subunit association of beta-hexosaminidase was studied in intact fibroblasts 
using antisera that discriminate between free and associated alpha-chains. These 
were anti-beta-hexosaminidase A (anti-alpha beta), which precipitated all 
alpha-chains, free or associated; anti-beta-hexosaminidase B (anti-beta beta), 
which precipitated those alpha-chains that were associated with beta; and 
anti-alpha-chains, which recognized only monomeric alpha-chains. After 
biosynthetic labeling, beta-hexosaminidase or its free alpha-subunit were 
immuno-precipitated from extracts of cells and medium with the aid of protein 
A-bearing Staphylococcus aureus, subjected to sodium dodecyl 
sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, and visualized by fluorography. 
Pulse-chase labeling showed that the alpha-chains existed predominantly in the 
monomeric precursor form during the first 5 h, and then began to accumulate in 
the mature (lysosomal) associated alpha beta form. Precursor alpha beta 
complexes were secreted, along with some precursor alpha monomers; the latter 
were catalytically inert. Both alpha- and beta-chains were phosphorylated (a 
Golgi modification) prior to association. Thus alpha-beta association probably 
occurred in the Golgi area before transfer to lysosomes and before secretion. 
Cycloheximide inhibited the association and subsequent maturation of preformed 
alpha-chains, perhaps by causing a depletion of a pool of beta-chain precursor 
upstream from the site of subunit association. In fibroblasts from a patient 
with Sandhoff disease, that produced no beta-chains, the alpha-chains 
self-associated but their maturation was markedly decreased. We suggest that 
association with beta-chains is necessary not only for acquisition of catalytic 
activity but also for transport of alpha-chains to lysosomes.

PMID: 6230359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
