---
pmid: '19628817'
title: SDH5, a gene required for flavination of succinate dehydrogenase, is mutated
  in paraganglioma.
authors:
- Hao HX
- Khalimonchuk O
- Schraders M
- Dephoure N
- Bayley JP
- Kunst H
- Devilee P
- Cremers CW
- Schiffman JD
- Bentz BG
- Gygi SP
- Winge DR
- Kremer H
- Rutter J
journal: Science
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3881419
doi: 10.1126/science.1175689
---

# SDH5, a gene required for flavination of succinate dehydrogenase, is mutated in paraganglioma.
**Authors:** Hao HX, Khalimonchuk O, Schraders M, Dephoure N, Bayley JP, Kunst H, Devilee P, Cremers CW, Schiffman JD, Bentz BG, Gygi SP, Winge DR, Kremer H, Rutter J
**Journal:** Science (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1175689](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1175689)
**PMC:** [PMC3881419](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3881419/)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2009 Aug 28;325(5944):1139-42. doi: 10.1126/science.1175689. Epub
2009  Jul 23.

SDH5, a gene required for flavination of succinate dehydrogenase, is mutated in 
paraganglioma.

Hao HX(1), Khalimonchuk O, Schraders M, Dephoure N, Bayley JP, Kunst H, Devilee 
P, Cremers CW, Schiffman JD, Bentz BG, Gygi SP, Winge DR, Kremer H, Rutter J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake 
City, UT 84112, USA.

Mammalian mitochondria contain about 1100 proteins, nearly 300 of which are 
uncharacterized. Given the well-established role of mitochondrial defects in 
human disease, functional characterization of these proteins may shed new light 
on disease mechanisms. Starting with yeast as a model system, we investigated an 
uncharacterized but highly conserved mitochondrial protein (named here Sdh5). 
Both yeast and human Sdh5 interact with the catalytic subunit of the succinate 
dehydrogenase (SDH) complex, a component of both the electron transport chain 
and the tricarboxylic acid cycle. Sdh5 is required for SDH-dependent respiration 
and for Sdh1 flavination (incorporation of the flavin adenine dinucleotide 
cofactor). Germline loss-of-function mutations in the human SDH5 gene, located 
on chromosome 11q13.1, segregate with disease in a family with hereditary 
paraganglioma, a neuroendocrine tumor previously linked to mutations in genes 
encoding SDH subunits. Thus, a mitochondrial proteomics analysis in yeast has 
led to the discovery of a human tumor susceptibility gene.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1175689
PMCID: PMC3881419
PMID: 19628817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
