---
reference_id: PMID:37643813
title: Examining SRP pathway function in mRNA localization to the endoplasmic reticulum.
authors:
- Child JR
- Hofler AC
- Chen Q
- Yang BH
- Kristofich J
- Zheng T
- Hannigan MM
- Elles AL
- Reid DW
- Nicchitta CV
journal: RNA
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1261/rna.079643.123
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Examining SRP pathway function in mRNA localization to the endoplasmic reticulum.
**Authors:** Child JR, Hofler AC, Chen Q, Yang BH, Kristofich J, Zheng T, Hannigan MM, Elles AL, Reid DW, Nicchitta CV
**Journal:** RNA (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1261/rna.079643.123](https://doi.org/10.1261/rna.079643.123)

## Content

1. RNA. 2023 Nov;29(11):1703-1724. doi: 10.1261/rna.079643.123. Epub 2023 Aug 29.

Examining SRP pathway function in mRNA localization to the endoplasmic
reticulum.

Child JR(1), Hofler AC(2), Chen Q(1), Yang BH(1), Kristofich J(1), Zheng T(1),
Hannigan MM(1), Elles AL(1), Reid DW(1), Nicchitta CV(3)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA.
(3)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA christopher.nicchitta@duke.edu.

Signal recognition particle (SRP) pathway function in protein translocation
across the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is well established; its role in RNA
localization to the ER remains, however, unclear. In current models, mRNAs
undergo translation- and SRP-dependent trafficking to the ER, with ER
localization mediated via interactions between SRP-bound translating ribosomes
and the ER-resident SRP receptor (SR), a heterodimeric complex comprising SRA,
the SRP-binding subunit, and SRB, an integral membrane ER protein. To study SRP
pathway function in RNA localization, SR knockout (KO) mammalian cell lines were
generated and the consequences of SR KO on steady-state and dynamic mRNA
localization examined. CRISPR/Cas9-mediated SRPRB KO resulted in profound
destabilization of SRA. Pairing siRNA silencing of SRPRA in SRPRB KO cells
yielded viable SR KO cells. Steady-state mRNA compositions and ER-localization
patterns in parental and SR KO cells were determined by cell fractionation and
deep sequencing. Notably, steady-state cytosol and ER mRNA compositions and
partitioning patterns were largely unaltered by loss of SR expression. To
examine SRP pathway function in RNA localization dynamics, the subcellular
trafficking itineraries of newly exported mRNAs were determined by 4-thiouridine
(4SU) pulse-labeling/4SU-seq/cell fractionation. Newly exported mRNAs were
distinguished by high ER enrichment, with ER localization being SR-independent.
Intriguingly, under conditions of translation initiation inhibition, the ER was
the default localization site for all newly exported mRNAs. These data
demonstrate that mRNA localization to the ER can be uncoupled from the SRP
pathway function and reopen questions regarding the mechanism of RNA
localization to the ER.

© 2023 Child et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the
RNA Society.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.079643.123
PMCID: PMC10578483
PMID: 37643813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]