---
pmid: '9920938'
title: Molecular and biochemical characterization of lecithin retinol acyltransferase.
authors:
- Ruiz A
- Winston A
- Lim YH
- Gilbert BA
- Rando RR
- Bok D
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.6.3834
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Molecular and biochemical characterization of lecithin retinol acyltransferase.
**Authors:** Ruiz A, Winston A, Lim YH, Gilbert BA, Rando RR, Bok D
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.274.6.3834](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.6.3834)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Feb 5;274(6):3834-41. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.6.3834.

Molecular and biochemical characterization of lecithin retinol acyltransferase.

Ruiz A(1), Winston A, Lim YH, Gilbert BA, Rando RR, Bok D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, School of Medicine, University of California, Los 
Angeles, California 90095, USA.

The enzyme responsible for conversion of all-trans-retinol into retinyl esters, 
the lecithin retinol acyltransferase (LRAT) has been characterized at the 
molecular level. The cDNA coding for this protein was cloned and its amino acid 
sequence deduced. LRAT is composed of a polypeptide of 230 amino acid residues 
with a calculated mass of 25.3 kDa. Tissue distribution analysis by Northern 
blot showed expression of a 5.0-kilobase transcript in the human retinal pigment 
epithelium as well as in other tissues that are known for their high LRAT 
activity and vitamin A processing. Affinity labeling experiments using specific 
compounds with high affinity for LRAT and monospecific polyclonal antibodies 
raised in rabbits against two peptide sequences for LRAT confirmed the molecular 
mass of LRAT as a 25-kDa protein. High performance liquid chromatography 
analysis of the reaction product formed by HEK-293 cells transfected with LRAT 
cDNA confirmed the ability of the transfected cells to convert 
[3H]all-trans-retinol into authentic [3H]all-trans-retinyl palmitate as 
chemically determined.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.6.3834
PMID: 9920938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
