---
pmid: '10811920'
title: The silencing protein SIR2 and its homologs are NAD-dependent protein deacetylases.
authors:
- Landry J
- Sutton A
- Tafrov ST
- Heller RC
- Stebbins J
- Pillus L
- Sternglanz R
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC18515
doi: 10.1073/pnas.110148297
---

# The silencing protein SIR2 and its homologs are NAD-dependent protein deacetylases.
**Authors:** Landry J, Sutton A, Tafrov ST, Heller RC, Stebbins J, Pillus L, Sternglanz R
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.110148297](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.110148297)
**PMC:** [PMC18515](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC18515/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 May 23;97(11):5807-11. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.110148297.

The silencing protein SIR2 and its homologs are NAD-dependent protein 
deacetylases.

Landry J(1), Sutton A, Tafrov ST, Heller RC, Stebbins J, Pillus L, Sternglanz R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, State University of New York, 
Stony Brook, NY 11794-5215, USA.

Homologs of the chromatin-bound yeast silent information regulator 2 (SIR2) 
protein are found in organisms from all biological kingdoms. SIR2 itself was 
originally discovered to influence mating-type control in haploid cells by 
locus-specific transcriptional silencing. Since then, SIR2 and its homologs have 
been suggested to play additional roles in suppression of recombination, 
chromosomal stability, metabolic regulation, meiosis, and aging. Considering the 
far-ranging nature of these functions, a major experimental goal has been to 
understand the molecular mechanism(s) by which this family of proteins acts. We 
report here that members of the SIR2 family catalyze an NAD-nicotinamide 
exchange reaction that requires the presence of acetylated lysines such as those 
found in the N termini of histones. Significantly, these enzymes also catalyze 
histone deacetylation in a reaction that absolutely requires NAD, thereby 
distinguishing them from previously characterized deacetylases. The enzymes are 
active on histone substrates that have been acetylated by both chromatin 
assembly-linked and transcription-related acetyltransferases. Contrary to a 
recent report, we find no evidence that these proteins ADP-ribosylate histones. 
Discovery of an intrinsic deacetylation activity for the conserved SIR2 family 
provides a mechanism for modifying histones and other proteins to regulate 
transcription and diverse biological processes.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.110148297
PMCID: PMC18515
PMID: 10811920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
