---
pmid: '8703114'
title: Cloning and comparative mapping of a gene from the commonly deleted region
  of DiGeorge and Velocardiofacial syndromes conserved in C. elegans.
authors:
- Rizzu P
- Lindsay EA
- Taylor C
- O'Donnell H
- Levy A
- Scambler P
- Baldini A
journal: Mamm Genome
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s003359900197
---

# Cloning and comparative mapping of a gene from the commonly deleted region of DiGeorge and Velocardiofacial syndromes conserved in C. elegans.
**Authors:** Rizzu P, Lindsay EA, Taylor C, O'Donnell H, Levy A, Scambler P, Baldini A
**Journal:** Mamm Genome (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s003359900197](https://doi.org/10.1007/s003359900197)

## Abstract

1. Mamm Genome. 1996 Sep;7(9):639-43. doi: 10.1007/s003359900197.

Cloning and comparative mapping of a gene from the commonly deleted region of 
DiGeorge and Velocardiofacial syndromes conserved in C. elegans.

Rizzu P(1), Lindsay EA, Taylor C, O'Donnell H, Levy A, Scambler P, Baldini A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 1 
Baylor Plaza, T936, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

We have identified and cloned a gene, ES2, encoding a putative 476 amino acid 
protein with a predicted Mr of 52,568. The gene is localized within the 
DiGeorge/Velocardiofacial syndrome locus on 22q11.2 and is deleted in all the 
patients in which a deletion within 22q11 could be demonstrated, with the 
exception of one patient. ES2 is expressed in all the tissues studied. Sequence 
comparison showed identity with five ESTs and at the amino acid level the 
sequence was highly similar to, and collinear with, a hypothetical C. elegans 
protein of unknown function. Mutation analysis was performed in 16 patients 
without deletion, but no mutation has been found. The cDNA sequence is conserved 
in mouse and is localized on MMU16B1-B3, known to contain a syntenic group in 
common with HSA 22q11.2.

DOI: 10.1007/s003359900197
PMID: 8703114 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
