---
pmid: '23454188'
title: Structural insights into the mechanism of GTPase activation in the GIMAP family.
authors:
- Schwefel D
- Arasu BS
- Marino SF
- Lamprecht B
- Köchert K
- Rosenbaum E
- Eichhorst J
- Wiesner B
- Behlke J
- Rocks O
- Mathas S
- Daumke O
journal: Structure
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.str.2013.01.014
---

# Structural insights into the mechanism of GTPase activation in the GIMAP family.
**Authors:** Schwefel D, Arasu BS, Marino SF, Lamprecht B, Köchert K, Rosenbaum E, Eichhorst J, Wiesner B, Behlke J, Rocks O, Mathas S, Daumke O
**Journal:** Structure (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.str.2013.01.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2013.01.014)

## Abstract

1. Structure. 2013 Apr 2;21(4):550-9. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2013.01.014. Epub 2013
Feb  28.

Structural insights into the mechanism of GTPase activation in the GIMAP family.

Schwefel D(1), Arasu BS, Marino SF, Lamprecht B, Köchert K, Rosenbaum E, 
Eichhorst J, Wiesner B, Behlke J, Rocks O, Mathas S, Daumke O.

Author information:
(1)Max-Delbrück-Centrum für Molekulare Medizin, Robert-Rössle-Strasse 10, 13125 
Berlin, Germany. david.schwefel@nimr.mrc.ac.uk

GTPases of immunity-associated proteins (GIMAPs) are regulators of lymphocyte 
survival and homeostasis. We previously determined the structural basis of 
GTP-dependent GIMAP2 scaffold formation on lipid droplets. To understand how its 
GTP hydrolysis is activated, we screened for other GIMAPs on lipid droplets and 
identified GIMAP7. In contrast to GIMAP2, GIMAP7 displayed 
dimerization-stimulated GTP hydrolysis. The crystal structure of GTP-bound 
GIMAP7 showed a homodimer that assembled via the G domains, with the helical 
extensions protruding in opposite directions. We identified a catalytic arginine 
that is supplied to the opposing monomer to stimulate GTP hydrolysis. GIMAP7 
also stimulated GTP hydrolysis by GIMAP2 via an analogous mechanism. Finally, we 
found GIMAP2 and GIMAP7 expression differentially regulated in several human 
T cell lymphoma lines. Our findings suggest that GTPase activity in the GIMAP 
family is controlled by homo- and heterodimerization. This may have implications 
for the differential roles of some GIMAPs in lymphocyte survival.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2013.01.014
PMID: 23454188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
