---
reference_id: PMID:15016356
title: "Crystal structure of RumA, an iron-sulfur cluster containing E. coli ribosomal RNA 5-methyluridine methyltransferase."
authors:
- Lee TT
- Agarwalla S
- Stroud RM
journal: Structure
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1016/j.str.2004.02.009
keywords:
- Amino Acid Motifs
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Bacterial Proteins/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Crystallography, X-Ray"
- Escherichia coli/enzymology
- "Methyltransferases/chemistry, metabolism"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Protein Binding
- "Protein Structure, Secondary"
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- "RNA, Ribosomal/metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Crystal structure of RumA, an iron-sulfur cluster containing E. coli ribosomal RNA 5-methyluridine methyltransferase.
**Authors:** Lee TT, Agarwalla S, Stroud RM
**Journal:** Structure (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.str.2004.02.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2004.02.009)

## Content

1. Structure. 2004 Mar;12(3):397-407. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2004.02.009.

Crystal structure of RumA, an iron-sulfur cluster containing E. coli ribosomal 
RNA 5-methyluridine methyltransferase.

Lee TT(1), Agarwalla S, Stroud RM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94107 USA.

RumA catalyzes transfer of a methyl group from S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) 
specifically to uridine 1939 of 23S ribosomal RNA in Escherichia coli to yield 
5-methyluridine. We determined the crystal structure of RumA at 1.95 A 
resolution. The protein is organized into three structural domains: The 
N-terminal domain contains sequence homology to the conserved TRAM motif and 
displays a five-stranded beta barrel architecture characteristic of an 
oligosaccharide/oligonucleotide binding fold. The central domain contains a 
[Fe(4)S(4)] cluster coordinated by four conserved cysteine residues. The 
C-terminal domain displays the typical SAM-dependent methyltransferase fold. The 
catalytic nucleophile Cys389 lies in a motif different from that in DNA 
5-methylcytosine methyltransferases. The electrostatic potential surface reveals 
a predominately positively charged area that covers the concave surface of the 
first two domains and suggests an RNA binding mode. The iron-sulfur cluster may 
be involved in the correct folding of the protein or may have a role in RNA 
binding.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2004.02.009
PMID: 15016356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]