---
pmid: '12051826'
title: lon-1 regulates Caenorhabditis elegans body size downstream of the dbl-1 TGF
  beta signaling pathway.
authors:
- Maduzia LL
- Gumienny TL
- Zimmerman CM
- Wang H
- Shetgiri P
- Krishna S
- Roberts AF
- Padgett RW
journal: Dev Biol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/dbio.2002.0662
---

# lon-1 regulates Caenorhabditis elegans body size downstream of the dbl-1 TGF beta signaling pathway.
**Authors:** Maduzia LL, Gumienny TL, Zimmerman CM, Wang H, Shetgiri P, Krishna S, Roberts AF, Padgett RW
**Journal:** Dev Biol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1006/dbio.2002.0662](https://doi.org/10.1006/dbio.2002.0662)

## Abstract

1. Dev Biol. 2002 Jun 15;246(2):418-28. doi: 10.1006/dbio.2002.0662.

lon-1 regulates Caenorhabditis elegans body size downstream of the dbl-1 TGF 
beta signaling pathway.

Maduzia LL(1), Gumienny TL, Zimmerman CM, Wang H, Shetgiri P, Krishna S, Roberts 
AF, Padgett RW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Waksman Institute, Rutgers 
University, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854-8020, USA.

In Caenorhabditis elegans, two well-characterized TGF beta signaling cascades 
have been identified: the Small/Male tail abnormal (Sma/Mab) and Dauer formation 
(Daf) pathways. The Sma/Mab pathway regulates body size morphogenesis and male 
tail development. The ligand of the pathway, dbl-1, transmits its signal through 
two receptor serine threonine kinases, daf-4 and sma-6, which in turn regulate 
the activity of the Smads, sma-2, sma-3, and sma-4. In general, Smads have been 
shown to both positively and negatively regulate the transcriptional activity of 
downstream target genes in various organisms. In C. elegans, however, target 
genes have remained elusive. We have cloned and characterized lon-1, a gene with 
homology to the cysteine-rich secretory protein (CRISP) family of proteins. 
lon-1 regulates body size morphogenesis, but does not affect male tail 
development. lon-1 is expressed in hypodermal tissues, which is the focus of 
body size determination, similar to sma-2, sma-4, and sma-6. Using genetic 
methods, we show that lon-1 lies downstream of the Sma/Mab signaling cascade and 
demonstrate that lon-1 mRNA levels are up-regulated in sma-6-null mutant 
animals. This provides evidence that lon-1 is negatively regulated by Sma/Mab 
pathway signaling. Taken together, these data identify lon-1 as a novel 
downstream target gene of the dbl-1 TGF beta-like signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.1006/dbio.2002.0662
PMID: 12051826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
