---
pmid: '12217653'
title: Monitoring receptor-mediated activation of heterotrimeric G-proteins by fluorescence
  resonance energy transfer.
authors:
- Janetopoulos C
- Devreotes P
journal: Methods
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s1046-2023(02)00095-6
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Monitoring receptor-mediated activation of heterotrimeric G-proteins by fluorescence resonance energy transfer.
**Authors:** Janetopoulos C, Devreotes P
**Journal:** Methods (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1046-2023(02)00095-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1046-2023(02)00095-6)

## Abstract

1. Methods. 2002 Aug;27(4):366-73. doi: 10.1016/s1046-2023(02)00095-6.

Monitoring receptor-mediated activation of heterotrimeric G-proteins by 
fluorescence resonance energy transfer.

Janetopoulos C(1), Devreotes P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Green fluorescent protein (GFP)-centered fluorescence resonance energy transfer 
(FRET) relies on a distance-dependent transfer of energy from a donor 
fluorophore to an acceptor fluorophore and can be used to examine protein 
interactions in living cells. Here we describe a method to monitor the 
association and disassociation of heterotrimeric GTP-binding (G-proteins) from 
one another before and after stimulation of coupled receptors in living 
Dictyostelium discoideum cells. The Galpha(2)and Gbetagamma proteins were tagged 
with cyan and yellow fluorescent proteins and used to observe the state of the 
G-protein heterotrimer. Data from emission spectra were used to detect the FRET 
fluorescence and to determine kinetics and dose-response curves of bound ligand 
and analogs. Extending G-protein FRET to mammalian G-proteins should enable 
direct in situ mechanistic studies and applications such as drug screening and 
identifying ligands of new G-protein-coupled receptors.

DOI: 10.1016/s1046-2023(02)00095-6
PMID: 12217653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
