---
pmid: '15574588'
title: The AMP-activated protein kinase AAK-2 links energy levels and insulin-like
  signals to lifespan in C. elegans.
authors:
- Apfeld J
- O'Connor G
- McDonagh T
- DiStefano PS
- Curtis R
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC535911
doi: 10.1101/gad.1255404
---

# The AMP-activated protein kinase AAK-2 links energy levels and insulin-like signals to lifespan in C. elegans.
**Authors:** Apfeld J, O'Connor G, McDonagh T, DiStefano PS, Curtis R
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.1255404](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.1255404)
**PMC:** [PMC535911](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC535911/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2004 Dec 15;18(24):3004-9. doi: 10.1101/gad.1255404. Epub 2004 Dec
1.

The AMP-activated protein kinase AAK-2 links energy levels and insulin-like 
signals to lifespan in C. elegans.

Apfeld J(1), O'Connor G, McDonagh T, DiStefano PS, Curtis R.

Author information:
(1)Elixir Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA. 
japfeld@elixirpharm.com

Erratum in
    Genes Dev. 2005 Feb 1;19(3):411.
    Genes Dev. 2005 Jan 1;19(1):188.

Although limiting energy availability extends lifespan in many organisms, it is 
not understood how lifespan is coupled to energy levels. We find that the 
AMP:ATP ratio, a measure of energy levels, increases with age in Caenorhabditis 
elegans and can be used to predict life expectancy. The C. elegans AMP-activated 
protein kinase alpha subunit AAK-2 is activated by AMP and functions to extend 
lifespan. In addition, either an environmental stressor that increases the 
AMP:ATP ratio or mutations that lower insulin-like signaling extend lifespan in 
an aak-2-dependent manner. Thus, AAK-2 is a sensor that couples lifespan to 
information about energy levels and insulin-like signals.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.1255404
PMCID: PMC535911
PMID: 15574588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
