---
pmid: '8589713'
title: Mutations in GPC3, a glypican gene, cause the Simpson-Golabi-Behmel overgrowth
  syndrome.
authors:
- Pilia G
- Hughes-Benzie RM
- MacKenzie A
- Baybayan P
- Chen EY
- Huber R
- Neri G
- Cao A
- Forabosco A
- Schlessinger D
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ng0396-241
---

# Mutations in GPC3, a glypican gene, cause the Simpson-Golabi-Behmel overgrowth syndrome.
**Authors:** Pilia G, Hughes-Benzie RM, MacKenzie A, Baybayan P, Chen EY, Huber R, Neri G, Cao A, Forabosco A, Schlessinger D
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng0396-241](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng0396-241)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 1996 Mar;12(3):241-7. doi: 10.1038/ng0396-241.

Mutations in GPC3, a glypican gene, cause the Simpson-Golabi-Behmel overgrowth 
syndrome.

Pilia G(1), Hughes-Benzie RM, MacKenzie A, Baybayan P, Chen EY, Huber R, Neri G, 
Cao A, Forabosco A, Schlessinger D.

Author information:
(1)Center for Genetics in Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, 
St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 1996 Mar;12(3):225-7. doi: 10.1038/ng0396-225.

Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome (SGBS) is an X-linked condition characterized by 
pre- and postnatal overgrowth with visceral and skeletal anomalies. To identify 
the causative gene, breakpoints in two female patients with X;autosome 
translocations were identified. The breakpoints occur near the 5' and 3' ends of 
a gene, GPC3, that spans more than 500 kilobases in Xq26; in three families, 
different microdeletions encompassing exons cosegregate with SGBS. GPC3 encodes 
a putative extracellular proteoglycan, glypican 3, that is inferred to play an 
important role in growth control in embryonic mesodermal tissues in which it is 
selectively expressed. Initial western- and ligand-blotting experiments suggest 
that glypican 3 forms a complex with insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2), and 
might thereby modulate IGF2 action.

DOI: 10.1038/ng0396-241
PMID: 8589713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
