---
pmid: '1565101'
title: 'Purification and cDNA cloning of a novel factor produced by a human T-cell
  hybridoma: sequence homology with animal lectins.'
authors:
- Yoshimatsu K
- Ohya Y
- Shikata Y
- Seto T
- Hasegawa Y
- Tanaka I
- Kawamura T
- Kitoh K
- Toyoshima S
- Osawa T
journal: Mol Immunol
year: '1992'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0161-5890(92)90012-m
---

# Purification and cDNA cloning of a novel factor produced by a human T-cell hybridoma: sequence homology with animal lectins.
**Authors:** Yoshimatsu K, Ohya Y, Shikata Y, Seto T, Hasegawa Y, Tanaka I, Kawamura T, Kitoh K, Toyoshima S, Osawa T
**Journal:** Mol Immunol (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0161-5890(92)90012-m](https://doi.org/10.1016/0161-5890(92)90012-m)

## Abstract

1. Mol Immunol. 1992 Apr;29(4):537-46. doi: 10.1016/0161-5890(92)90012-m.

Purification and cDNA cloning of a novel factor produced by a human T-cell 
hybridoma: sequence homology with animal lectins.

Yoshimatsu K(1), Ohya Y, Shikata Y, Seto T, Hasegawa Y, Tanaka I, Kawamura T, 
Kitoh K, Toyoshima S, Osawa T.

Author information:
(1)Tsukuba Research Laboratory, Eisai Co., Ltd, Ibaragi, Japan.

We have purified a novel immunoregulatory factor (BMPG: bone-marrow 
proteoglycan) produced by a T-cell hybridoma, with a monoclonal antibody column. 
Using an oligonucleotide probe corresponding to the partial amino acid sequence 
of BMPG, we cloned, sequenced, and expressed a cDNA for BMPG. BMPG has 222 amino 
acid residues with a 16 N-terminal signal sequence, so the mature form has 206 
amino acid residues. BMPG was found to have unique characteristics: it has three 
types of sugar chains and it shows a marked homology with animal lectins 
including the human asialoglycoprotein receptor, chicken hepatic lectin and the 
homing receptor of lymphocytes.

DOI: 10.1016/0161-5890(92)90012-m
PMID: 1565101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
