---
pmid: '12692135'
title: P63 alpha mutations lead to aberrant splicing of keratinocyte growth factor
  receptor in the Hay-Wells syndrome.
authors:
- Fomenkov A
- Huang YP
- Topaloglu O
- Brechman A
- Osada M
- Fomenkova T
- Yuriditsky E
- Trink B
- Sidransky D
- Ratovitski E
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M300746200
---

# P63 alpha mutations lead to aberrant splicing of keratinocyte growth factor receptor in the Hay-Wells syndrome.
**Authors:** Fomenkov A, Huang YP, Topaloglu O, Brechman A, Osada M, Fomenkova T, Yuriditsky E, Trink B, Sidransky D, Ratovitski E
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M300746200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M300746200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jun 27;278(26):23906-14. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M300746200. Epub 
2003 Apr 10.

P63 alpha mutations lead to aberrant splicing of keratinocyte growth factor 
receptor in the Hay-Wells syndrome.

Fomenkov A(1), Huang YP, Topaloglu O, Brechman A, Osada M, Fomenkova T, 
Yuriditsky E, Trink B, Sidransky D, Ratovitski E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

p63, a p53 family member, is required for craniofacial and limb development as 
well as proper skin differentiation. However, p63 mutations associated with the 
ankyloblepharon-ectodermal dysplasia-clefting (AEC) syndrome (Hay-Wells 
syndrome) were found in the p63 carboxyl-terminal region with a sterile 
alpha-motif. By two-hybrid screen we identified several proteins that interact 
with the p63alpha carboxyl terminus and its sterile alpha-motif, including the 
apobec-1-binding protein-1 (ABBP1). AEC-associated mutations completely 
abolished the physical interaction between ABBP1 and p63alpha. Moreover the 
physical association of p63alpha and ABBP1 led to a specific shift of FGFR-2 
alternative splicing toward the K-SAM isoform essential for epithelial 
differentiation. We thus propose that a p63alpha-ABBP1 complex differentially 
regulates FGFR-2 expression by supporting alternative splicing of the K-SAM 
isoform of FGFR-2. The inability of mutated p63alpha to support this splicing 
likely leads to the inhibition of epithelial differentiation and, in turn, 
accounts for the AEC phenotype.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M300746200
PMID: 12692135 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
