---
pmid: '16595653'
title: Pseudomonas aeruginosa porin OprF exists in two different conformations.
authors:
- Sugawara E
- Nestorovich EM
- Bezrukov SM
- Nikaido H
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2846725
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M600680200
---

# Pseudomonas aeruginosa porin OprF exists in two different conformations.
**Authors:** Sugawara E, Nestorovich EM, Bezrukov SM, Nikaido H
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M600680200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M600680200)
**PMC:** [PMC2846725](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2846725/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jun 16;281(24):16220-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M600680200. Epub
2006  Apr 4.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa porin OprF exists in two different conformations.

Sugawara E(1), Nestorovich EM, Bezrukov SM, Nikaido H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California-Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA 94720-3202, USA.

The major nonspecific porin of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, OprF, produces a large 
channel yet allows only a slow diffusion of various solutes. Here we provide an 
explanation of this apparent paradox. We first show, by introduction of tobacco 
etch virus protease cleavage site in the middle of OprF protein, that most of 
OprF population folds as a two-domain protein with an N-terminal beta-barrel 
domain and a C-terminal periplasmic domain rich in alpha-helices. However, 
sedimentation of unilamellar proteoliposomes through an iso-osmotic gradient 
showed that only about 5% of the OprF population produced open channels. Gel 
filtration showed that the open channel conformers tended to occur in oligomeric 
associations. Because the open channel conformer is likely to fold as a single 
domain protein with a large beta-barrel, we reasoned that residues near the C 
terminus may be exposed on cell surface in this conformer. Introduction of a 
cysteine residue at position 312 produced a functional mutant protein. By using 
bulky biotinylation reagents on intact cells, we showed that this cysteine 
residue was not exposed on cell surface in most of the OprF population. However, 
the minority OprF population that was biotinylated in such experiments was 
enriched for the conformer with pore-forming activity and had a 10-fold higher 
pore-forming specific activity than the bulk OprF population. Finally trypsin 
treatment, which preferentially cleaves the C-terminal domain of the two-domain 
conformer, did not affect the pore-forming activity of OprF nor did it digest 
the minority conformer whose residue 312 is exposed on cell surface.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M600680200
PMCID: PMC2846725
PMID: 16595653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
