---
pmid: '17428825'
title: Specification of Arabidopsis floral meristem identity by repression of flowering
  time genes.
authors:
- Liu C
- Zhou J
- Bracha-Drori K
- Yalovsky S
- Ito T
- Yu H
journal: Development
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/dev.003103
---

# Specification of Arabidopsis floral meristem identity by repression of flowering time genes.
**Authors:** Liu C, Zhou J, Bracha-Drori K, Yalovsky S, Ito T, Yu H
**Journal:** Development (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.003103](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.003103)

## Abstract

1. Development. 2007 May;134(10):1901-10. doi: 10.1242/dev.003103. Epub 2007 Apr 
11.

Specification of Arabidopsis floral meristem identity by repression of flowering 
time genes.

Liu C(1), Zhou J, Bracha-Drori K, Yalovsky S, Ito T, Yu H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Temasek Life Sciences Laboratory, 
National University of Singapore, Singapore 117543, Singapore.

Flowering plants produce floral meristems in response to intrinsic and extrinsic 
flowering inductive signals. In Arabidopsis, the floral meristem identity genes 
LEAFY (LFY) and APETALA1 (AP1) are activated to play a pivotal role in 
specifying floral meristems during floral transition. We show here that the 
emerging floral meristems require AP1 to partly specify their floral identities 
by directly repressing a group of flowering time genes, including SHORT 
VEGETATIVE PHASE (SVP), AGAMOUS-LIKE 24 (AGL24) and SUPPRESSOR OF OVEREXPRESSION 
OF CO1 (SOC1). In wild-type plants, these flowering time genes are normally 
downregulated in emerging floral meristems. In the absence of AP1, these genes 
are ectopically expressed, transforming floral meristems into shoot meristems. 
By post-translational activation of an AP1-GR fusion protein and chromatin 
immunoprecipitation assays, we further demonstrate the repression of these 
flowering time genes by induced AP1 activity and in vivo AP1 binding to the 
cis-regulatory regions of these genes. These findings indicate that once AP1 is 
activated during the floral transition, it acts partly as a master repressor in 
floral meristems by directly suppressing the expression of flowering time genes, 
thus preventing the continuation of the shoot developmental program.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.003103
PMID: 17428825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
