---
pmid: '21486945'
title: Cdc48/p97-Ufd1-Npl4 antagonizes Aurora B during chromosome segregation in HeLa
  cells.
authors:
- Dobrynin G
- Popp O
- Romer T
- Bremer S
- Schmitz MH
- Gerlich DW
- Meyer H
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.069500
---

# Cdc48/p97-Ufd1-Npl4 antagonizes Aurora B during chromosome segregation in HeLa cells.
**Authors:** Dobrynin G, Popp O, Romer T, Bremer S, Schmitz MH, Gerlich DW, Meyer H
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.069500](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.069500)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2011 May 1;124(Pt 9):1571-80. doi: 10.1242/jcs.069500. Epub 2011
Apr  12.

Cdc48/p97-Ufd1-Npl4 antagonizes Aurora B during chromosome segregation in HeLa 
cells.

Dobrynin G(1), Popp O, Romer T, Bremer S, Schmitz MH, Gerlich DW, Meyer H.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Medical Biotechnology, University of Duisburg-Essen, 45117 Essen, 
Germany.

During exit from mitosis in Xenopus laevis egg extracts, the AAA+ ATPase 
Cdc48/p97 (also known as VCP in vertebrates) and its adapter Ufd1-Npl4 remove 
the kinase Aurora B from chromatin to allow nucleus formation. Here, we show 
that in HeLa cells Ufd1-Npl4 already antagonizes Aurora B on chromosomes during 
earlier mitotic stages and that this is crucial for proper chromosome 
segregation. Depletion of Ufd1-Npl4 by small interfering RNA (siRNA) caused 
chromosome alignment and anaphase defects resulting in missegregated chromosomes 
and multi-lobed nuclei. Ufd1-Npl4 depletion also led to increased levels of 
Aurora B on prometaphase and metaphase chromosomes. This increase was associated 
with higher Aurora B activity, as evidenced by the partial resistance of CENP-A 
phosphorylation to the Aurora B inhibitor hesperadin. Furthermore, low 
concentrations of hesperadin partially rescued chromosome alignment in 
Ufd1-depleted cells, whereas, conversely, Ufd1-depletion partially restored 
congression in the presence of hesperadin. These data establish 
Cdc48/p97-Ufd1-Npl4 as a crucial negative regulator of Aurora B early in mitosis 
of human somatic cells and suggest that the activity of Aurora B on chromosomes 
needs to be restrained to ensure faithful chromosome segregation.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.069500
PMID: 21486945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
