---
pmid: '1917972'
title: Amino acid residues necessary for putrescine stimulation of human S-adenosylmethionine
  decarboxylase proenzyme processing and catalytic activity.
authors:
- Stanley BA
- Pegg AE
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1991'
full_text_available: false
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Amino acid residues necessary for putrescine stimulation of human S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase proenzyme processing and catalytic activity.
**Authors:** Stanley BA, Pegg AE
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1991)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1991 Oct 5;266(28):18502-6.

Amino acid residues necessary for putrescine stimulation of human 
S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase proenzyme processing and catalytic activity.

Stanley BA(1), Pegg AE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Milton S. Hershey Medical 
Center, Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, Hershey 17033.

Human S-adenosylmethionine (AdoMet) decarboxylase is synthesized as a 38-kDa 
proenzyme that is autocatalytically cleaved, forming the covalently attached 
pyruvate cofactor and the two subunits (67 and 267 amino acid residues) of the 
mature enzyme. Both the cleavage reaction and the catalytic activity of the 
mature enzyme are stimulated by putrescine. Using site-specific mutagenesis and 
in vitro transcription followed by translation of the resultant RNA in a 
cellfree system, we have examined the importance of several amino acid residues 
on the processing reaction rate and catalytic activity and on stimulation of 
each of these by putrescine. Changing Cys82 to Ala decreased the stimulatory 
effect of putrescine on processing and completely eliminated catalytic activity, 
indicating a probable role in the active site of the enzyme, whereas changing 
Cys49 or Cys226 to Ala had minimal effects on processing and activity or the 
putrescine stimulation of either. Since Cys49 is the only cysteine residue in 
the smaller subunit, this indicates that disulfide-bond formation between the 
two subunits cannot be necessary for maintenance of the conformation for 
proenzyme processing or catalytic activity. Changing Glu8 or Glu11 to Gln 
produced an AdoMet decarboxylase that processed, but was catalytically inactive. 
Mutation at Glu11 also completely eliminated the putrescine stimulation of 
proenzyme processing, as did double mutation at Glu8 and Glu11, whereas the 
single mutation at Glu8 had no effect on the putrescine stimulation of proenzyme 
processing. Changing Glu15, Glu61, Glu67, Glu247, or Glu247 and Glu249 to Gln 
had a minimal effect on processing and activity or putrescine stimulation of 
either. These results demonstrate a role for the smaller subunit in the 
catalytic activity of the mature AdoMet decarboxylase enzyme and show that Glu8, 
Glu11, and Cys82 are essential for catalytic activity, with Glu11 also being 
essential for the putrescine stimulation of AdoMet decarboxylase proenzyme 
processing.

PMID: 1917972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
