---
pmid: '12598619'
title: Novel espin actin-bundling proteins are localized to Purkinje cell dendritic
  spines and bind the Src homology 3 adapter protein insulin receptor substrate p53.
authors:
- Sekerková G
- Loomis PA
- Changyaleket B
- Zheng L
- Eytan R
- Chen B
- Mugnaini E
- Bartles JR
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2854510
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.23-04-01310.2003
---

# Novel espin actin-bundling proteins are localized to Purkinje cell dendritic spines and bind the Src homology 3 adapter protein insulin receptor substrate p53.
**Authors:** Sekerková G, Loomis PA, Changyaleket B, Zheng L, Eytan R, Chen B, Mugnaini E, Bartles JR
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.23-04-01310.2003](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.23-04-01310.2003)
**PMC:** [PMC2854510](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2854510/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2003 Feb 15;23(4):1310-9. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.23-04-01310.2003.

Novel espin actin-bundling proteins are localized to Purkinje cell dendritic 
spines and bind the Src homology 3 adapter protein insulin receptor substrate 
p53.

Sekerková G(1), Loomis PA, Changyaleket B, Zheng L, Eytan R, Chen B, Mugnaini E, 
Bartles JR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Feinberg School of Medicine and the 
Institute for Neuroscience, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, 
USA.

We identified a group of actin-binding-bundling proteins that are expressed in 
cerebellar Purkinje cells (PCs) but are not detected in other neurons of the 
CNS. These proteins are novel isoforms of the actin-bundling protein espin that 
arise through the use of a unique site for transcriptional initiation and 
differential splicing. Light and electron microscopic localization studies 
demonstrated that these espin isoforms are enriched in the dendritic spines of 
PCs. They were detected in the head and neck and in association with the 
postsynaptic density (PSD) of dendritic spines in synaptic contact with parallel 
or climbing fibers. They were also highly enriched in PSD fractions isolated 
from cerebellum. The PC espins efficiently bound and bundled actin filaments in 
vitro, and these activities were not inhibited by Ca2+. When expressed in 
transfected neuronal cell lines, the PC espins colocalized with actin filaments 
and elicited the formation of coarse cytoplasmic actin bundles. The insulin 
receptor substrate p53 (IRSp53), an Src homology 3 (SH3) adapter protein and 
regulator of the actin cytoskeleton, was identified as an espin-binding protein 
in yeast two-hybrid screens. Cotransfection studies and pull-down assays showed 
that this interaction was direct and required the N-terminal proline-rich 
peptide of the PC espins. Thus, the PC espins exhibit the properties of modular 
actin-bundling proteins with the potential to influence the organization and 
dynamics of the actin cytoskeleton in PC dendritic spines and to participate in 
multiprotein complexes involving SH3 domain-containing proteins, such as IRSp53.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.23-04-01310.2003
PMCID: PMC2854510
PMID: 12598619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
