---
pmid: '19234194'
title: Human SCAMP5, a novel secretory carrier membrane protein, facilitates calcium-triggered
  cytokine secretion by interaction with SNARE machinery.
authors:
- Han C
- Chen T
- Yang M
- Li N
- Liu H
- Cao X
journal: J Immunol
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0802002
---

# Human SCAMP5, a novel secretory carrier membrane protein, facilitates calcium-triggered cytokine secretion by interaction with SNARE machinery.
**Authors:** Han C, Chen T, Yang M, Li N, Liu H, Cao X
**Journal:** J Immunol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.4049/jimmunol.0802002](https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.0802002)

## Abstract

1. J Immunol. 2009 Mar 1;182(5):2986-96. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0802002.

Human SCAMP5, a novel secretory carrier membrane protein, facilitates 
calcium-triggered cytokine secretion by interaction with SNARE machinery.

Han C(1), Chen T, Yang M, Li N, Liu H, Cao X.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Immunology, Tsinghua University School of Medicine, Beijing, 
People's Republic of China.

Cytokines produced by immune cells play pivotal roles in the regulation of both 
innate and adaptive immunity. However, the mechanisms controlling secretion of 
cytokines have not been fully elucidated. Secretory carrier membrane proteins 
(SCAMPs) are widely distributed integral membrane molecules implicated in 
regulating vesicular transport. In this study, we report the functional 
characterization of human SCAMP5 (hSCAMP5), a novel SCAMP protein that is widely 
expressed by a variety of neuronal and nonneuronal tissues and cells. By 
measuring the cytokine secretion (RANTES/CCL5 and IL-1beta) as an exocytotic 
model, we show that hSCAMP5 can promote the calcium-regulated signal 
peptide-containing cytokine (CCL5 but not IL-1beta) secretion in human 
epithelial cancer cells, human monocytes, and mouse macrophages. By using 
subcellular fractionation, immunofluorescence confocal microscopy, and membrane 
vesicle immunoisolation methods, we find that hSCAMP5 is mainly localized in the 
Golgi-associated compartments, and the calcium ionophore ionomycin can trigger a 
rapid translocation of hSCAMP5 from Golgi apparatus to plasma membrane along the 
classical exocytosis pathway. During the translocation of hSCAMP5 from Golgi 
apparatus to plasma membrane, hSCAMP5 can codistribute and complex with local 
soluble N-ethylmaleimide sensitive factor attachment protein receptors (SNAREs) 
molecules. We further demonstrate that hSCAMP5 can directly interact with the 
calcium sensor synaptotagmins via the cytosolic C-terminal tail of hSCAMP5, thus 
providing a potential molecular mechanism linking SCAMPs with the SNARE 
molecules. Our findings suggest that hSCAMP5, in cooperation with the SNARE 
machinery, is involved in calcium-regulated exocytosis of signal 
peptide-containing cytokines.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0802002
PMID: 19234194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
