---
pmid: '34711951'
title: AKIRIN2 controls the nuclear import of proteasomes in vertebrates.
authors:
- de Almeida M
- Hinterndorfer M
- Brunner H
- Grishkovskaya I
- Singh K
- Schleiffer A
- Jude J
- Deswal S
- Kalis R
- Vunjak M
- Lendl T
- Imre R
- Roitinger E
- Neumann T
- Kandolf S
- Schutzbier M
- Mechtler K
- Versteeg GA
- Haselbach D
- Zuber J
journal: Nature
year: '2021'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/s41586-021-04035-8
---

# AKIRIN2 controls the nuclear import of proteasomes in vertebrates.
**Authors:** de Almeida M, Hinterndorfer M, Brunner H, Grishkovskaya I, Singh K, Schleiffer A, Jude J, Deswal S, Kalis R, Vunjak M, Lendl T, Imre R, Roitinger E, Neumann T, Kandolf S, Schutzbier M, Mechtler K, Versteeg GA, Haselbach D, Zuber J
**Journal:** Nature (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41586-021-04035-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-04035-8)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2021 Nov;599(7885):491-496. doi: 10.1038/s41586-021-04035-8. Epub 2021
 Oct 28.

AKIRIN2 controls the nuclear import of proteasomes in vertebrates.

de Almeida M(#)(1)(2), Hinterndorfer M(#)(1)(2), Brunner H(1)(2), Grishkovskaya 
I(1), Singh K(1)(3), Schleiffer A(1), Jude J(1)(4), Deswal S(1)(5), Kalis 
R(1)(2), Vunjak M(2)(6), Lendl T(1), Imre R(1), Roitinger E(1), Neumann T(1)(7), 
Kandolf S(1), Schutzbier M(1), Mechtler K(1), Versteeg GA(6), Haselbach D(8), 
Zuber J(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), 
Vienna, Austria.
(2)Vienna BioCenter PhD Program, Doctoral School of the University at Vienna and 
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria.
(3)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK.
(4)Twist Bioscience, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(5)Genome Engineering, Discovery Sciences, BioPharmaceuticals R&D, AstraZeneca, 
Gothenburg, Sweden.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Immunobiology and Genetics, Max Perutz Labs, 
University of Vienna, Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria.
(7)Quantro Therapeutics, Vienna, Austria.
(8)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), 
Vienna, Austria. david.haselbach@imp.ac.at.
(9)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), 
Vienna, Austria. johannes.zuber@imp.ac.at.
(10)Medical University of Vienna, Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria. 
johannes.zuber@imp.ac.at.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2022 Jan 6;82(1):13-14. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2021.11.020.

Protein expression and turnover are controlled through a complex interplay of 
transcriptional, post-transcriptional and post-translational mechanisms to 
enable spatial and temporal regulation of cellular processes. To systematically 
elucidate such gene regulatory networks, we developed a CRISPR screening assay 
based on time-controlled Cas9 mutagenesis, intracellular immunostaining and 
fluorescence-activated cell sorting that enables the identification of 
regulatory factors independent of their effects on cellular fitness. We 
pioneered this approach by systematically probing the regulation of the 
transcription factor MYC, a master regulator of cell growth1-3. Our screens 
uncover a highly conserved protein, AKIRIN2, that is essentially required for 
nuclear protein degradation. We found that AKIRIN2 forms homodimers that 
directly bind to fully assembled 20S proteasomes to mediate their nuclear 
import. During mitosis, proteasomes are excluded from condensing chromatin and 
re-imported into newly formed daughter nuclei in a highly dynamic, 
AKIRIN2-dependent process. Cells undergoing mitosis in the absence of AKIRIN2 
become devoid of nuclear proteasomes, rapidly causing accumulation of MYC and 
other nuclear proteins. Collectively, our study reveals a dedicated pathway 
controlling the nuclear import of proteasomes in vertebrates and establishes a 
scalable approach to decipher regulators in essential cellular processes.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-021-04035-8
PMID: 34711951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
