---
pmid: '11773383'
title: Tumor necrosis factor alpha exerts powerful anti-influenza virus effects in
  lung epithelial cells.
authors:
- Seo SH
- Webster RG
journal: J Virol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC135862
doi: 10.1128/jvi.76.3.1071-1076.2002
---

# Tumor necrosis factor alpha exerts powerful anti-influenza virus effects in lung epithelial cells.
**Authors:** Seo SH, Webster RG
**Journal:** J Virol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1128/jvi.76.3.1071-1076.2002](https://doi.org/10.1128/jvi.76.3.1071-1076.2002)
**PMC:** [PMC135862](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC135862/)

## Abstract

1. J Virol. 2002 Feb;76(3):1071-6. doi: 10.1128/jvi.76.3.1071-1076.2002.

Tumor necrosis factor alpha exerts powerful anti-influenza virus effects in lung 
epithelial cells.

Seo SH(1), Webster RG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Virology and Molecular Biology, St. Jude Children's Research 
Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38105-2794, USA.

Previous studies have associated influenza virus-induced expression of 
inflammatory cytokines, including tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha), with 
influenza pathogenesis in the human respiratory tract and have suggested that 
alpha and beta interferons are the first cytokines recruited to counteract such 
infection. However, we report here that TNF-alpha has powerful anti-influenza 
virus activity. When infected with influenza virus, cultured porcine lung 
epithelial cells expressed TNF-alpha in a dose-dependent manner. Expression of 
TNF-alpha was induced only by replicating virus. TNF-alpha showed strong 
antiviral activity against avian, swine, and human influenza viruses, and the 
antiviral effect of TNF-alpha was greater than that of gamma or alpha 
interferon. These findings suggest that TNF-alpha serves as the first line of 
defense against influenza virus infection in the natural host.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.76.3.1071-1076.2002
PMCID: PMC135862
PMID: 11773383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Previous studies have associated influenza virus-induced expression of inflammatory cytokines, including tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), with influenza pathogenesis in the human respiratory tract and have suggested that alpha and beta interferons are the first cytokines recruited to counteract such infection. However, we report here that TNF-α has powerful anti-influenza virus activity. When infected with influenza virus, cultured porcine lung epithelial cells expressed TNF-α in a dose-dependent manner. Expression of TNF-α was induced only by replicating virus. TNF-α showed strong antiviral activity against avian, swine, and human influenza viruses, and the antiviral effect of TNF-α was greater than that of gamma or alpha interferon. These findings suggest that TNF-α serves as the first line of defense against influenza virus infection in the natural host.

DISCUSSION

Although influenza virus infection is known to induce expression of TNF-α in animals and humans ( 16 , 17 , 24 , 38 ), whether lung epithelial cells can produce TNF-α has not previously been established, nor has the activity of TNF-α against influenza virus been demonstrated. This report is the first to describe the expression of TNF-α by infected lung epithelial cells and the powerful activity exerted by the cytokine against influenza virus infection.

TNF-α expression in lung epithelial cells, which are the key targets of influenza virus infection, appears to be crucial to control of influenza virus infection in the host respiratory tract. This powerful inflammatory cytokine’s role in recruiting various host cells, including monocytes and T and B lymphocytes, to sites of infection ( 1 ) suggests that TNF-α plays an important role in clearing influenza virus infection in the respiratory tract before the secondary immune response is activated. Previous studies showed that influenza virus infection of human macrophages triggers production of TNF-α ( 20 , 21 , 29 , 35 ), IL-1β, IL-18, and IFN-α/β ( 35 ). It is possible that CD4 + and CD8 + T cells can be very important sources of TNF-α, since these cells produce a considerable amount of TNF-α in an infected host ( 1 ).

In our study, expression of TNF-α in porcine lung epithelial cells was induced only by replicating virus. However, in the mouse model of influenza, purified influenza virus neuraminidase (NA) induced expression of TNF-α in peritoneal macrophages ( 21 ). The disparity between the findings of these two studies may reflect the different properties of the two cell types. Macrophages, unlike epithelial cells, can engulf and degrade foreign antigens, leading to cytokine induction ( 1 ). In other studies, macrophages have expressed various cytokines in response to bacterial lipopolysaccharide or bacterial cell wall proteins in the absence of bacterial infection ( 10 , 32 , 47 ).

We found TNF-α expression in lung epithelial cells to be proportional to the titer of replicating virus. Thus, specific subtypes of influenza virus may induce expression of TNF-α in host lung epithelial cells at levels that reflect the subtype’s rate of replication. Furthermore, a subtype of influenza virus that has a novel mechanism to counteract TNF-α may replicate to high titers, thus inducing a high level of TNF-α expression. An in vivo study of influenza virus infection in humans found that the concentration of the inflammatory cytokines IL-6, TNF-α, IFN-γ, and IL-10 in nasal lavage fluids increased in proportion to influenza virus titers ( 9 , 16 ).

Our study is the first to show that TNF-α exerts strong antiviral activity against influenza viruses. Other investigators, in contrast, have hypothesized that the inflammatory cytokine response is related to influenza pathogenesis ( 9 , 16 , 38 , 42 ). Fritz and coworkers ( 9 ) found that in humans, virus titers peaked 2 or 3 days after intranasal inoculation with A/Texas/36/91 (H1N1) influenza virus and declined to basal levels after 5 days, whereas TNF-α peaked 3 days after inoculation and declined to basal levels after 5 to 6 days. The clinical symptoms were associated with increasing virus titer and cytokine concentration ( 9 ). These findings suggested that TNF-α might have antiviral activity, but the anti-influenza virus activity of the cytokine was not tested. Other studies found no association between influenza virus-induced fever and the concentrations of inflammatory cytokines ( 23 , 36 ). In a ferret model of influenza, the level of endogenous pyrogen expression induced by influenza virus was not correlated with the concentrations of cytokines such as IL-1, IL-6, and TNF-α ( 23 ).

Several investigators have suggested that influenza virus infection is initially controlled by interferon-mediated antiviral activity ( 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 26 , 31 , 34 , 39 , 43 , 44 ). Our findings showed that although the interferons do exert anti-influenza virus activity, the effect of TNF-α against influenza virus in vitro is greater. The previous study showed that the study with the mouse model of influenza on antiviral activity by TNF-α and IFN-α/β or IFN-γ is different from our study. Blocking of TNF-α by monoclonal antibody did not affect virus clearance ( 22 ), and mice unable to respond to IFN-α/β, IFN-γ, or both interferons did not differ from wild-type mice in the outcome of influenza virus clearance ( 37 ).

In humans, there is strong correlation between the level of virus multiplication and the amount of interferon induced in the respiratory tract ( 31 ). The reason for the difference may be the difference in the viral replication cycle among hosts. In mice infected with mouse-adapted A/PR/8/34 (H1N1) influenza virus, virus titers remained high even at 8 days postinfection ( 37 ), but influenza viruses were undetectable at 5 days postinfection in humans and pigs ( 15 , 28 , 31 ). To address antiviral activity by these cytokines, we need to use a better animal model, such as pigs.

TNF-α is known to inhibit the replication of other viruses ( 25 , 27 , 30 , 46 ) to various extents. Treatment of Vero E6 cells with 50 ng of recombinant TNF-α per ml reduced the quantity of sin nombre virus nucleocapsid protein 1, 3, 4, 5, and 7 days after inoculation but did not affect the percentage of infected cells ( 25 ). TNF-α also inhibited the replication of HIV-1 in peripheral blood monocytes and alveolar macrophages. Treatment of peripheral blood monocytes with 50 ng of TNF-α per ml reduced the reverse transcriptase activity of HIV-1 by 70%, whereas treatment with 5 ng/ml reduced it by 30% ( 27 ). In A549 human lung carcinoma cells treated with 10,000 ng of TNF-α or IFN-γ per ml, the replication of vesicular stomatitis virus, encephalomyocarditis virus, adenovirus type 2, and herpes simplex virus type II was inhibited only 10- to 100-fold. However, simultaneous treatment of the cells with both cytokines inhibited virus replication 1,000- to 10,000-fold ( 45 ). The differences observed in response to TNF-α may reflect either viral sensitivity or the cellular systems used.

TNF-α antiviral activity seems to be species specific. In a study of TNF-α inhibition of influenza virus replication in MDCK cells infected with A/PR/8/34 (H1N1) ( 45 ), TNF-α inhibition effect was transient. At 48 h postinfection, the difference between virus yield from control and recombinant murine TNF-α-treated MDCK cells was no longer found. This study did not determine TNF-α induction in MDCK cells. Our study is in accordance with this study. Treatment of MDCK cells with recombinant swine or human TNF-α did not inhibit the replication of influenza virus (data not shown).

Whether TNF-α can inhibit human cells remains to be studied. At present, we do not have a good human cell line to productively support influenza virus and to test TNF-α inhibition. Furthermore, whether TNF-α can be induced in cells from other human sources, such as endothelial cells and dendritic cells, needs to be addressed.

In conclusion, our findings suggest that TNF-α plays an important role in resolving influenza virus infection in the host respiratory tract. The molecular mechanisms by which TNF-α inhibits influenza virus replication warrant further study.
