---
pmid: '11448880'
title: Conformational model for binding site recognition by the E.coli MetJ transcription
  factor.
authors:
- Liu R
- Blackwell TW
- States DJ
journal: Bioinformatics
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/17.7.622
---

# Conformational model for binding site recognition by the E.coli MetJ transcription factor.
**Authors:** Liu R, Blackwell TW, States DJ
**Journal:** Bioinformatics (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1093/bioinformatics/17.7.622](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/17.7.622)

## Abstract

1. Bioinformatics. 2001 Jul;17(7):622-33. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/17.7.622.

Conformational model for binding site recognition by the E.coli MetJ 
transcription factor.

Liu R(1), Blackwell TW, States DJ.

Author information:
(1)Center for Computational Biology and Department of Genetics, Washington 
University School of Medicine, 700 S. Euclid Ave, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

MOTIVATION: Current methods for identifying sequence specific binding sites in 
DNA sequence using position specific weight matrices are limited in both 
sensitivity and specificity. Double strand DNA helix exhibits sequence dependent 
variations in conformation. Interactions between macromolecules result from 
complementarity of the two tertiary structures. We hypothesize that this 
conformational variation plays a role in transcription factor binding site 
recognition, and that the use of this structure information will improve the 
predictive power of transcription factor binding site models.
RESULTS: Conformation models for the sequence dependence of DNA helix distortion 
have been developed. Using our conformational models, we defined a tertiary 
structure template for the met operon repressor MetJ binding site. Both 
naturally occurring sites and precursor binding sites identified through in 
vitro selection were used as the basis for template definition. The 
conformational model appears to recognize features of protein binding sites that 
are distinct from the features recognized by primary sequence based profiles. 
Combining the conformational model and primary sequence profile yields a hybrid 
model with improved discriminatory power compared with either the conformational 
model or sequence profile alone. Using our hybrid model, we searched the E.coli 
genome. We are able to identify the documented MetJ sites in the promoter 
regions of metA, metB, metC, metR and metF. In addition, we find several novel 
loci with characteristics suggesting that they are functional MetJ repressor 
binding sites. Novel MetJ binding sites are found upstream of the metK gene, as 
well as upstream of a gene, abc, a gene that encodes for a component of a 
multifunction transporter which may transport amino acids across the membrane. 
The false positive rate is significantly lower than the sequence profile method.
AVAILABILITY: The programs of implementation of this algorithm are available 
upon request. The list of crystal structures used for compiling the mean base 
step parameters of DNA is available by anonymous ftp at 
http://stateslab.wustl.edu/pub/helix/StructureList.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/17.7.622
PMID: 11448880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
