---
pmid: '28497574'
title: Protein destabilization and loss of protein-protein interaction are fundamental
  mechanisms in cblA-type methylmalonic aciduria.
authors:
- Plessl T
- Bürer C
- Lutz S
- Yue WW
- Baumgartner MR
- Froese DS
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/humu.23251
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Protein destabilization and loss of protein-protein interaction are fundamental mechanisms in cblA-type methylmalonic aciduria.
**Authors:** Plessl T, Bürer C, Lutz S, Yue WW, Baumgartner MR, Froese DS
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.23251](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.23251)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mutat. 2017 Aug;38(8):988-1001. doi: 10.1002/humu.23251. Epub 2017 Jun 6.

Protein destabilization and loss of protein-protein interaction are fundamental 
mechanisms in cblA-type methylmalonic aciduria.

Plessl T(1)(2), Bürer C(1), Lutz S(1), Yue WW(3), Baumgartner MR(1)(2)(4), 
Froese DS(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Metabolism and Children's Research Center, University Children's, 
Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Zurich Center for Integrative Human Physiology, University of Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(3)Structural Genomics Consortium, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(4)radiz - Rare Disease Initiative Zurich, Clinical Research Priority Program 
for Rare Diseases, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Mutations in the human MMAA gene cause the metabolic disorder cblA-type 
methylmalonic aciduria (MMA), although knowledge of the mechanism of dysfunction 
remains lacking. MMAA regulates the incorporation of the cofactor 
adenosylcobalamin (AdoCbl), generated from the MMAB adenosyltransferase, into 
the destination enzyme methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (MUT). This function of MMAA 
depends on its GTPase activity, which is stimulated by an interaction with MUT. 
Here, we present 67 new patients with cblA-type MMA, identifying 19 novel 
mutations. We biochemically investigated how missense mutations in MMAA in 22 
patients lead to disease. About a third confer instability to the recombinant 
protein in bacterial and human expression systems. All 15 purified mutant 
proteins demonstrated wild-type like intrinsic GTPase activity and only one 
(p.Asp292Val), where the mutation is in the GTP binding domain, revealed 
decreased GTP binding. However, all mutations strongly decreased functional 
association with MUT by reducing GTPase activity stimulation upon incubation 
with MUT, while nine mutant proteins additionally lost the ability to physically 
bind MUT. Finally, all mutations interfered with gating the transfer of AdoCbl 
from MMAB to MUT. This work suggests loss of functional interaction between MMAA 
and MUT as a disease-causing mechanism that impacts processing and assembly of a 
cofactor to its destination enzyme.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.23251
PMID: 28497574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
