---
pmid: '7660129'
title: 'Elongin (SIII): a multisubunit regulator of elongation by RNA polymerase II.'
authors:
- Aso T
- Lane WS
- Conaway JW
- Conaway RC
journal: Science
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.7660129
---

# Elongin (SIII): a multisubunit regulator of elongation by RNA polymerase II.
**Authors:** Aso T, Lane WS, Conaway JW, Conaway RC
**Journal:** Science (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.7660129](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.7660129)

## Abstract

1. Science. 1995 Sep 8;269(5229):1439-43. doi: 10.1126/science.7660129.

Elongin (SIII): a multisubunit regulator of elongation by RNA polymerase II.

Aso T(1), Lane WS, Conaway JW, Conaway RC.

Author information:
(1)Program in Molecular and Cell Biology, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, 
Oklahoma City 73104, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 1995 Sep 8;269(5229):1400-1. doi: 10.1126/science.7660121.

The Elongin (SIII) complex activates elongation by mammalian RNA polymerase II 
by suppressing transient pausing of the polymerase at many sites within 
transcription units. Elongin is a heterotrimer composed of A, B, and C subunits 
of 110, 18, and 15 kilodaltons, respectively. Here, the mammalian Elongin A gene 
was isolated and expressed, and the Elongin (SIII) complex reconstituted with 
recombinant subunits. Elongin A is shown to function as the transcriptionally 
active component of Elongin (SIII) and Elongin B and C as regulatory subunits. 
Whereas Elongin C assembles with Elongin A to form an AC complex with increased 
specific activity, Elongin B, a member of the ubiquitin-homology gene family, 
appears to serve a chaperone-like function, facilitating assembly and enhancing 
stability of the Elongin (SIII) complex.

DOI: 10.1126/science.7660129
PMID: 7660129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
