---
pmid: '24388849'
title: The leucine-rich repeat receptor kinase BIR2 is a negative regulator of BAK1
  in plant immunity.
authors:
- Halter T
- Imkampe J
- Mazzotta S
- Wierzba M
- Postel S
- Bücherl C
- Kiefer C
- Stahl M
- Chinchilla D
- Wang X
- Nürnberger T
- Zipfel C
- Clouse S
- Borst JW
- Boeren S
- de Vries SC
- Tax F
- Kemmerling B
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2013.11.047
---

# The leucine-rich repeat receptor kinase BIR2 is a negative regulator of BAK1 in plant immunity.
**Authors:** Halter T, Imkampe J, Mazzotta S, Wierzba M, Postel S, Bücherl C, Kiefer C, Stahl M, Chinchilla D, Wang X, Nürnberger T, Zipfel C, Clouse S, Borst JW, Boeren S, de Vries SC, Tax F, Kemmerling B
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cub.2013.11.047](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2013.11.047)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2014 Jan 20;24(2):134-143. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2013.11.047. Epub
2014  Jan 2.

The leucine-rich repeat receptor kinase BIR2 is a negative regulator of BAK1 in 
plant immunity.

Halter T(1), Imkampe J(1), Mazzotta S(1), Wierzba M(2), Postel S(1), Bücherl 
C(3), Kiefer C(1), Stahl M(4), Chinchilla D(5), Wang X(6), Nürnberger T(1), 
Zipfel C(7), Clouse S(6), Borst JW(8), Boeren S(8), de Vries SC(8), Tax F(2), 
Kemmerling B(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Biochemistry (ZMBP), Eberhard Karls University Tübingen, 
72076 Tübingen, Germany.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Arizona, Tucson, 
AZ 85721, USA.
(3)Department of Plant Biochemistry (ZMBP), Eberhard Karls University Tübingen, 
72076 Tübingen, Germany; The Sainsbury Laboratory, Norwich Research Park, 
Norwich NR4 7UH, UK.
(4)Analytics (ZMBP), Eberhard Karls University Tübingen, 72076 Tübingen, 
Germany.
(5)Zurich-Basel Plant Science Center, Department of Environmental Sciences, 
University of Basel, 4056 Basel, Switzerland.
(6)Department of Horticultural Science, North Carolina State University, 
Raleigh, NC 27695-7609, USA.
(7)The Sainsbury Laboratory, Norwich Research Park, Norwich NR4 7UH, UK.
(8)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Wageningen University, Wageningen 6703 HA, the 
Netherlands.
(9)Department of Plant Biochemistry (ZMBP), Eberhard Karls University Tübingen, 
72076 Tübingen, Germany. Electronic address: 
birgit.kemmerling@zmbp.uni-tuebingen.de.

BACKGROUND: Transmembrane leucine-rich repeat (LRR) receptors are commonly used 
innate immune receptors in plants and animals but can also sense endogenous 
signals to regulate development. BAK1 is a plant LRR-receptor-like kinase (RLK) 
that interacts with several ligand-binding LRR-RLKs to positively regulate their 
functions. BAK1 is involved in brassinosteroid-dependent growth and development, 
innate immunity, and cell-death control by interacting with the brassinosteroid 
receptor BRI1, immune receptors, such as FLS2 and EFR, and the small receptor 
kinase BIR1, respectively.
RESULTS: Identification of in vivo BAK1 complex partners by LC/ESI-MS/MS 
uncovered two novel BAK1-interacting RLKs, BIR2 and BIR3. Phosphorylation 
studies revealed that BIR2 is unidirectionally phosphorylated by BAK1 and that 
the interaction between BAK1 and BIR2 is kinase-activity dependent. Functional 
analyses of bir2 mutants show differential impact on BAK1-regulated processes, 
such as hyperresponsiveness to pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMP), 
enhanced cell death, and resistance to bacterial pathogens, but have no effect 
on brassinosteroid-regulated growth. BIR2 interacts constitutively with BAK1, 
thereby preventing interaction with the ligand-binding LRR-RLK FLS2. PAMP 
perception leads to BIR2 release from the BAK1 complex and enables the 
recruitment of BAK1 into the FLS2 complex.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide evidence for a new regulatory mechanism for 
innate immune receptors with BIR2 acting as a negative regulator of 
PAMP-triggered immunity by limiting BAK1-receptor complex formation in the 
absence of ligands.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2013.11.047
PMID: 24388849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
