---
pmid: '22730131'
title: Molecular characterization of the flagellar hook in Bacillus subtilis.
authors:
- Courtney CR
- Cozy LM
- Kearns DB
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3415477
doi: 10.1128/JB.00444-12
---

# Molecular characterization of the flagellar hook in Bacillus subtilis.
**Authors:** Courtney CR, Cozy LM, Kearns DB
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JB.00444-12](https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.00444-12)
**PMC:** [PMC3415477](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3415477/)

## Abstract

1. J Bacteriol. 2012 Sep;194(17):4619-29. doi: 10.1128/JB.00444-12. Epub 2012 Jun
 22.

Molecular characterization of the flagellar hook in Bacillus subtilis.

Courtney CR(1), Cozy LM, Kearns DB.

Author information:
(1)Indiana University, Department of Biology, Bloomington, Indiana, USA.

The structure of the Gram-positive flagellum is poorly understood, and Bacillus 
subtilis encodes three proteins homologous to the flagellar hook protein from 
Salmonella enterica. Here we generated a modified B. subtilis hook protein that 
could be fluorescently stained using a cysteine-reactive dye. We used the 
fluorescently labeled hook to demonstrate that FlgE is the hook structural 
protein and that FliK regulated hook length. We further demonstrate that two 
proteins of unknown function, FlhO and FlhP, and the putative hook cap, FlgD, 
were required for hook assembly, such that when flhO, flhP, or flgD was mutated, 
hook protein was secreted into the supernatant. All mutants defective in hook 
completion resulted in homogeneously reduced σ(D)-dependent gene expression due 
to the action of the anti-sigma factor FlgM.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00444-12
PMCID: PMC3415477
PMID: 22730131 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
