---
pmid: '20445063'
title: Memory impairment in transgenic Alzheimer mice requires cellular prion protein.
authors:
- Gimbel DA
- Nygaard HB
- Coffey EE
- Gunther EC
- Laurén J
- Gimbel ZA
- Strittmatter SM
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3323924
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0395-10.2010
---

# Memory impairment in transgenic Alzheimer mice requires cellular prion protein.
**Authors:** Gimbel DA, Nygaard HB, Coffey EE, Gunther EC, Laurén J, Gimbel ZA, Strittmatter SM
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0395-10.2010](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0395-10.2010)
**PMC:** [PMC3323924](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3323924/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2010 May 5;30(18):6367-74. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0395-10.2010.

Memory impairment in transgenic Alzheimer mice requires cellular prion protein.

Gimbel DA(1), Nygaard HB, Coffey EE, Gunther EC, Laurén J, Gimbel ZA, 
Strittmatter SM.

Author information:
(1)Cellular Neuroscience, Neurodegeneration, and Repair Program, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06536, USA.

Comment in
    J Neurosci. 2010 Sep 8;30(36):11883-4. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3235-10.2010.

Soluble oligomers of the amyloid-beta (Abeta) peptide are thought to play a key 
role in the pathophysiology of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Recently, we reported 
that synthetic Abeta oligomers bind to cellular prion protein (PrP(C)) and that 
this interaction is required for suppression of synaptic plasticity in 
hippocampal slices by oligomeric Abeta peptide. We hypothesized that PrP(C) is 
essential for the ability of brain-derived Abeta to suppress cognitive function. 
Here, we crossed familial AD transgenes encoding APPswe and PSen1DeltaE9 into 
Prnp-/- mice to examine the necessity of PrP(C) for AD-related phenotypes. 
Neither APP expression nor Abeta level is altered by PrP(C) absence in this 
transgenic AD model, and astrogliosis is unchanged. However, deletion of PrP(C) 
expression rescues 5-HT axonal degeneration, loss of synaptic markers, and early 
death in APPswe/PSen1DeltaE9 transgenic mice. The AD transgenic mice with intact 
PrP(C) expression exhibit deficits in spatial learning and memory. Mice lacking 
PrP(C), but containing Abeta plaque derived from APPswe/PSen1DeltaE9 transgenes, 
show no detectable impairment of spatial learning and memory. Thus, deletion of 
PrP(C) expression dissociates Abeta accumulation from behavioral impairment in 
these AD mice, with the cognitive deficits selectively requiring PrP(C).

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0395-10.2010
PMCID: PMC3323924
PMID: 20445063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
