---
pmid: '9442029'
title: Identification of the eukaryotic initiation factor 5A as a retinoic acid-stimulated
  cellular binding partner for tissue transglutaminase II.
authors:
- Singh US
- Li Q
- Cerione R
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.4.1946
---

# Identification of the eukaryotic initiation factor 5A as a retinoic acid-stimulated cellular binding partner for tissue transglutaminase II.
**Authors:** Singh US, Li Q, Cerione R
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.273.4.1946](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.4.1946)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jan 23;273(4):1946-50. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.4.1946.

Identification of the eukaryotic initiation factor 5A as a retinoic 
acid-stimulated cellular binding partner for tissue transglutaminase II.

Singh US(1), Li Q, Cerione R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell 
University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA.

GTP-binding protein/transglutaminases (tissue transglutaminases or TGases) have 
been implicated in a variety of cellular processes including retinoic acid 
(RA)-induced apoptosis. Recently, we have shown that RA activates TGases as 
reflected by stimulated GTP binding, increased membrane association, and 
stimulated phosphoinositide lipid turnover. This prompted us to search for 
cellular proteins that bind TGases in a RA-stimulated manner. In this report, we 
show that the eukaryotic initiation factor (eIF-5A), a protein that is essential 
for cell viability, perhaps through effects on protein synthesis and/or RNA 
export, associates with the TGase in vivo. The interaction between eIF-5A and 
TGase is specific for the GDP-bound form of the TGase and is not detected when 
the TGase is pre-loaded with GTP gamma S. The TGase-eIF-5A interaction also is 
promoted by Ca2+, Mg2+, and RA treatment of HeLa cells. In the presence of 
retinoic acid, millimolar levels of Ca2+ are no longer required for the 
TGase-eIF-5A interaction. Nocodazole treatment, which blocks the cell cycle at 
mitosis (M phase), strongly inhibits the interaction between eIF-5A and 
cytosolic TGase. The interaction between TGase and eIF-5A and its sensitivity to 
the nucleotide-occupied state of the TGase provides a potentially interesting 
connection between RA signaling and protein synthesis and/or RNA trafficking 
activities.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.4.1946
PMID: 9442029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
