---
pmid: '20605787'
title: Ribosomal protein S3, a new substrate of Akt, serves as a signal mediator between
  neuronal apoptosis and DNA repair.
authors:
- Lee SB
- Kwon IS
- Park J
- Lee KH
- Ahn Y
- Lee C
- Kim J
- Choi SY
- Cho SW
- Ahn JY
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2937978
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.131367
---

# Ribosomal protein S3, a new substrate of Akt, serves as a signal mediator between neuronal apoptosis and DNA repair.
**Authors:** Lee SB, Kwon IS, Park J, Lee KH, Ahn Y, Lee C, Kim J, Choi SY, Cho SW, Ahn JY
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110.131367](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.131367)
**PMC:** [PMC2937978](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2937978/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Sep 17;285(38):29457-68. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.131367. Epub 
2010 Jul 6.

Ribosomal protein S3, a new substrate of Akt, serves as a signal mediator 
between neuronal apoptosis and DNA repair.

Lee SB(1), Kwon IS, Park J, Lee KH, Ahn Y, Lee C, Kim J, Choi SY, Cho SW, Ahn 
JY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Biomedical Research Institute, 
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Suwon, Korea.

RPS3, a conserved, eukaryotic ribosomal protein of the 40 S subunit, is required 
for ribosome biogenesis. Because ribosomal proteins are abundant and ubiquitous, 
they may have additional extraribosomal functions. Here, we show that human RPS3 
is a physiological target of Akt kinase and a novel mediator of neuronal 
apoptosis. NGF stimulation resulted in phosphorylation of threonine 70 of RPS3 
by Akt, and this phosphorylation was required for Akt binding to RPS3. RPS3 
induced neuronal apoptosis, up-regulating proapoptotic proteins Dp5/Hrk and Bim 
by binding to E2F1 and acting synergistically with it. Akt-dependent 
phosphorylation of RPS3 inhibited its proapoptotic function and perturbed its 
interaction with E2F1. These events coincided with nuclear translocation and 
accumulation of RPS3, where it functions as an endonuclease. Nuclear 
accumulation of RPS3 results in an increase in DNA repair activity to some 
extent, thereby sustaining neuronal survival. Abolishment of Akt-mediated RPS3 
phosphorylation through mutagenesis accelerated apoptotic cell death and 
severely compromised nuclear translocation of RPS3. Thus, our findings define an 
extraribosomal role of RPS3 as a molecular switch that accommodates apoptotic 
induction to DNA repair through Akt-mediated phosphorylation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.131367
PMCID: PMC2937978
PMID: 20605787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
