---
pmid: '15494396'
title: Identification of new genes regulated by the Crt1 transcription factor, an
  effector of the DNA damage checkpoint pathway in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
authors:
- Zaim J
- Speina E
- Kierzek AM
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M404669200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Identification of new genes regulated by the Crt1 transcription factor, an effector of the DNA damage checkpoint pathway in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Zaim J, Speina E, Kierzek AM
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M404669200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M404669200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jan 7;280(1):28-37. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M404669200. Epub 2004
Oct  19.

Identification of new genes regulated by the Crt1 transcription factor, an 
effector of the DNA damage checkpoint pathway in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Zaim J(1), Speina E, Kierzek AM.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, 
Pawinskiego 5a, 02-106 Warsaw, Poland.

The Crt1 (RFX1) protein in Saccharomyces cerevisiae is an effector of the DNA 
damage checkpoint pathway. It recognizes a 13-bp cis-regulatory element in the 
5'-untranslated region (5'-UTR) of the ribonucleotide reductase genes RNR2, 
RNR3, and RNR4; the HUG1 gene; and itself. We calculated the weight matrix 
representing the Crt1p binding site motif according to analysis of the 5'-UTR 
sequences of the genes that are under its regulation. We subsequently searched 
the 5'-UTR sequences of all the genes in the yeast genome for the occurrence of 
this motif. The motif was found in regulatory regions of 30 genes. A statistical 
analysis showed that it is unlikely that a random gene cluster contains the 
motif conserved as well as the Crt1p binding site. Analysis of microarray data 
provided supporting evidence for five putative Crt1p targets: FSH3, YLR345W, 
UBC5, NDE2, and NTH2. We used reverse transcription-PCR to compare the 
expression levels of these genes in wild-type and crt1Delta strains. Our results 
indicated that FSH3, YLR345W, and NTH2 are indeed under the regulation of Crt1p. 
Sequence analysis of the FSH3p indicated that this protein may be involved in 
folate metabolism either by carrying serine hydrolase activity required for the 
novel metabolic pathway involving dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) or by directly 
interacting with the DHFR enzyme. We postulate that Crt1p may influence 
deoxyribonucleotide synthesis not only by regulating expression of the RNR genes 
but also by modulating DHFR activity. FSH3p shares significant sequence 
similarity with the product of the human tumor suppressor gene OVCA2. YLR345Wp 
and NTH2p are enzymes involved in the central metabolism under stress 
conditions.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M404669200
PMID: 15494396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
