---
pmid: '15064750'
title: EBP1 is a nucleolar growth-regulating protein that is part of pre-ribosomal
  ribonucleoprotein complexes.
authors:
- Squatrito M
- Mancino M
- Donzelli M
- Areces LB
- Draetta GF
journal: Oncogene
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1207579
---

# EBP1 is a nucleolar growth-regulating protein that is part of pre-ribosomal ribonucleoprotein complexes.
**Authors:** Squatrito M, Mancino M, Donzelli M, Areces LB, Draetta GF
**Journal:** Oncogene (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1207579](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1207579)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2004 May 27;23(25):4454-65. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1207579.

EBP1 is a nucleolar growth-regulating protein that is part of pre-ribosomal 
ribonucleoprotein complexes.

Squatrito M(1), Mancino M, Donzelli M, Areces LB, Draetta GF.

Author information:
(1)European Institute of Oncology, 435 Via Ripamonti, 20141 Milan, Italy.

EBP1 was identified as a protein that interacts with the ErbB-3 receptor and 
possibly contributes to transducing growth regulatory signals. The existence of 
EBP1 homologs across species from simple eukaryotes to humans and its wide 
tissue expression pattern suggest that EBP1 acts as a general signaling 
molecule. We provide evidence that EBP1 is localized to the cytoplasm and to the 
nucleolus, and that its nucleolar localization requires amino-acid sequences 
present at both the amino- and carboxy-terminus of the molecule. We also show 
that EBP1 overexpression inhibits proliferation of human fibroblasts, and that 
this effect is linked to its nucleolar localization. Using mass spectrometry we 
demonstrate that EBP1 is part of ribonucleoprotein complexes and associates with 
different rRNA species. It is becoming clear that cell growth and proliferation 
are actively coordinated with rRNA processing and ribosome assembly. Our 
findings indicate that EBP1 is a nucleolar growth-regulating protein, and we 
propose that it could represent a new link between ribosome biosynthesis and 
cell proliferation.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1207579
PMID: 15064750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
