---
pmid: '10595546'
title: 'A test case for structure-based functional assignment: the 1.2 A crystal structure
  of the yjgF gene product from Escherichia coli.'
authors:
- Volz K
journal: Protein Sci
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2144179
doi: 10.1110/ps.8.11.2428
---

# A test case for structure-based functional assignment: the 1.2 A crystal structure of the yjgF gene product from Escherichia coli.
**Authors:** Volz K
**Journal:** Protein Sci (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1110/ps.8.11.2428](https://doi.org/10.1110/ps.8.11.2428)
**PMC:** [PMC2144179](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2144179/)

## Abstract

1. Protein Sci. 1999 Nov;8(11):2428-37. doi: 10.1110/ps.8.11.2428.

A test case for structure-based functional assignment: the 1.2 A crystal 
structure of the yjgF gene product from Escherichia coli.

Volz K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Illinois at Chicago, 
60612-7344, USA. karl@e002.mim.uic.edu

The YER057c/YIL051c/YjgF protein family is a set of 24 full-length homologs, 
each approximately 130 residues in length, and each with no known function or 
relationship to proteins of known structure. To determine the function of this 
family, the structure of one member--the YjgF protein from Escherichia coli--was 
solved and refined at a resolution of 1.2 A. The YjgF molecule is a homotrimer 
with exact threefold symmetry. Its tertiary and quaternary structures are 
related to that of Bacillus subtilis chorismate mutase, although their active 
sites are completely different. The YjgF protein has an active site curiously 
similar to protein tyrosine phosphatases, including a covalently modified 
cysteine, but it is unlikely to be functionally related. The lessons learned 
from this attempt to deduce function from structure may be useful to future 
projects in structural genomics.

DOI: 10.1110/ps.8.11.2428
PMCID: PMC2144179
PMID: 10595546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
