---
pmid: '27044754'
title: FRMD4A-cytohesin signaling modulates the cellular release of tau.
authors:
- Yan X
- Nykänen NP
- Brunello CA
- Haapasalo A
- Hiltunen M
- Uronen RL
- Huttunen HJ
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.180745
---

# FRMD4A-cytohesin signaling modulates the cellular release of tau.
**Authors:** Yan X, Nykänen NP, Brunello CA, Haapasalo A, Hiltunen M, Uronen RL, Huttunen HJ
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.180745](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.180745)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2016 May 15;129(10):2003-15. doi: 10.1242/jcs.180745. Epub 2016
Apr  4.

FRMD4A-cytohesin signaling modulates the cellular release of tau.

Yan X(1), Nykänen NP(1), Brunello CA(1), Haapasalo A(2), Hiltunen M(2), Uronen 
RL(1), Huttunen HJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Center, University of Helsinki, FI-00014 Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Institute of Clinical Medicine-Neurology, University of Eastern Finland, 
FI-70211 Kuopio, Finland Department of Neurology, Kuopio University Hospital, 
FI-70029 Kuopio, Finland Institute of Biomedicine, University of Eastern 
Finland, FI-70211 Kuopio, Finland.
(3)Neuroscience Center, University of Helsinki, FI-00014 Helsinki, Finland 
Henri.Huttunen@helsinki.fi.

One of the defining pathological features of Alzheimer's disease is the 
intraneuronal accumulation of tau (also known as MAPT) protein. Tau is also 
secreted from neurons in response to various stimuli and accumulates in the 
cerebrospinal fluid of Alzheimer's disease patients. Tau pathology might spread 
from cell to cell through a mechanism involving secretion and uptake. Here, we 
developed an assay to follow cellular release and uptake of tau dimers. 
Individual silencing of ten common late-onset Alzheimer's disease risk genes in 
HEK293T cells expressing the tau reporters suggested that FRMD4A is functionally 
linked to tau secretion. FRMD4A depletion by using RNA interference (RNAi) 
reduced and overexpression increased tau secretion. The activity of cytohesins, 
interactors of FRMD4A and guanine-nucleotide-exchange factors of Arf6, was 
necessary for FRMD4A-induced tau secretion. Increased Arf6 and cell polarity 
signaling through Par6 and atypical protein kinase Cζ (aPKCζ) stimulated tau 
secretion. In mature cortical neurons, FRMD4A RNAi or inhibition of cytohesins 
strongly upregulated secretion of endogenous tau. These results suggest that 
FRMD4A, a genetic risk factor for late-onset Alzheimer's disease, regulates tau 
secretion by activating cytohesin-Arf6 signaling. We conclude that genetic risk 
factors of Alzheimer's disease might modulate disease progression by altering 
tau secretion.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.180745
PMID: 27044754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
