---
pmid: '14967045'
title: Homooligomerization of the cytoplasmic domain of the T cell receptor zeta chain
  and of other proteins containing the immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif.
authors:
- Sigalov A
- Aivazian D
- Stern L
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi035900h
---

# Homooligomerization of the cytoplasmic domain of the T cell receptor zeta chain and of other proteins containing the immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif.
**Authors:** Sigalov A, Aivazian D, Stern L
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi035900h](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi035900h)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2004 Feb 24;43(7):2049-61. doi: 10.1021/bi035900h.

Homooligomerization of the cytoplasmic domain of the T cell receptor zeta chain 
and of other proteins containing the immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation 
motif.

Sigalov A(1), Aivazian D, Stern L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 55 Lake 
Avenue North, Worcester, Massachusetts 01655, USA. 
Alexander.Sigalov@umassmed.edu

Antigen receptors on T cells, B cells, mast cells, and basophils all have 
cytoplasmic domains containing one or more copies of an immunoreceptor 
tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM), tyrosine residues of which are 
phosphorylated upon receptor engagement in an early and obligatory event in the 
signaling cascade. How clustering of receptor extracellular domains leads to 
phosphorylation of cytoplasmic domain ITAMs is not known, and little structural 
or biochemical information is available for the ITAM-containing cytoplasmic 
domains. Here we investigate the conformation and oligomeric state of several 
immune receptor cytoplasmic domains, using purified recombinant proteins and a 
variety of biophysical and biochemical techniques. We show that all of the 
cytoplasmic domains of ITAM-containing signaling subunits studied are oligomeric 
in solution, namely, T cell antigen receptor zeta, CD3epsilon, CD3delta, and 
CD3gamma, B cell antigen receptor Igalpha and Igbeta, and Fc receptor 
FcepsilonRIgamma. For zeta(cyt), the oligomerization behavior is best described 
by a two-step monomer-dimer-tetramer fast dynamic equilibrium with dissociation 
constants in the order of approximately 10 microM (monomer-dimer) and 
approximately 1 mM (dimer-tetramer). In contrast to the other ITAM-containing 
proteins, Igalpha(cyt) forms stable dimers and tetramers even below 10 microM. 
Circular dichroic analysis reveals the lack of stable ordered structure of the 
cytoplasmic domains studied, and oligomerization does not change the 
random-coil-like conformation observed. The random-coil nature of zeta(cyt) was 
also confirmed by heteronuclear NMR. Phosphorylation of zeta(cyt) and 
FcepsilonRIgamma(cyt) does not significantly alter their oligomerization 
behavior. The implications of these results for transmembrane signaling and 
cellular activation by immune receptors are discussed.

DOI: 10.1021/bi035900h
PMID: 14967045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
