---
pmid: '12760743'
title: Cloning of an emopamil-binding protein (EBP)-like protein that lacks sterol
  delta8-delta7 isomerase activity.
authors:
- Moebius FF
- Fitzky BU
- Wietzorrek G
- Haidekker A
- Eder A
- Glossmann H
journal: Biochem J
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1223579
doi: 10.1042/BJ20030465
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Cloning of an emopamil-binding protein (EBP)-like protein that lacks sterol delta8-delta7 isomerase activity.
**Authors:** Moebius FF, Fitzky BU, Wietzorrek G, Haidekker A, Eder A, Glossmann H
**Journal:** Biochem J (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BJ20030465](https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20030465)
**PMC:** [PMC1223579](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1223579/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2003 Aug 15;374(Pt 1):229-37. doi: 10.1042/BJ20030465.

Cloning of an emopamil-binding protein (EBP)-like protein that lacks sterol 
delta8-delta7 isomerase activity.

Moebius FF(1), Fitzky BU, Wietzorrek G, Haidekker A, Eder A, Glossmann H.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Biochemische Pharmakologie, Peter-Mayr-Strasse 1, A-6020 
Innsbruck, Austria. Fabian.Moebius@uibk.ac.at

EBP (emopamil-binding protein) is a high-affinity binding protein for 
[3H]emopamil and belongs to the family of so-called sigma receptors. Mutations 
that disrupt EBP's 3beta-hydroxysteroid sterol delta8-delta7 isomerase activity 
(EC 5.3.3.5) impair cholesterol biosynthesis and cause X-chromosomal dominant 
chondrodysplasia punctata. We identified a human cDNA for a novel EBPL (EBP-like 
protein) with a calculated mass of 23.2 kDa. Amino acid sequence alignments and 
phylogenetic analysis revealed that EBPL is distantly related to EBP (31% 
identity and 52% similarity) and found in animals but not in plants. EBPL is 
encoded by four exons on human chromosome 13q14.2 covering 30.7 kb, and a 
partially processed EBPL pseudogene was found on 16q21. The EBPL mRNA was 
expressed ubiquitously and most abundant in liver, lung and kidney. Upon 
heterologous expression in yeast EBPL had no detectable 3beta-hydroxysteroid 
sterol delta8-delta7 isomerase and sigma-ligand-binding activity. Nine out of 
ten amino acid residues essential for catalytic activity of EBP were conserved 
in EBPL. Replacement of the only differing residue (EBP-Y111W) reduced catalytic 
activity of EBP. Transfer of the divergent residue from EBP to EBPL (EBPL-W91Y) 
and chimaerization of EBP and EBPL at various positions failed to restore 
catalytic activity of EBPL. Chemical cross-linking induced homodimerization of 
EBPL and EBP. Whereas mevinolin increased the mRNA for EBP and DHCR7 
(delta7-sterol reductase) in HepG2 cells, it had no effect on mRNAs for EBPL and 
sigma1 receptor, indicating that EBP and EBPL expression are not co-ordinated. 
We propose that EBPL has a yet-to-be-discovered function other than cholesterol 
biosynthesis.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20030465
PMCID: PMC1223579
PMID: 12760743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
