---
pmid: '18429042'
title: Molecular and functional characterization of eight novel GAA mutations in Italian
  infants with Pompe disease.
authors:
- Pittis MG
- Donnarumma M
- Montalvo AL
- Dominissini S
- Kroos M
- Rosano C
- Stroppiano M
- Bianco MG
- Donati MA
- Parenti G
- D'Amico A
- Ciana G
- Di Rocco M
- Reuser A
- Bembi B
- Filocamo M
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/humu.20753
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Molecular and functional characterization of eight novel GAA mutations in Italian infants with Pompe disease.
**Authors:** Pittis MG, Donnarumma M, Montalvo AL, Dominissini S, Kroos M, Rosano C, Stroppiano M, Bianco MG, Donati MA, Parenti G, D'Amico A, Ciana G, Di Rocco M, Reuser A, Bembi B, Filocamo M
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.20753](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.20753)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mutat. 2008 Jun;29(6):E27-36. doi: 10.1002/humu.20753.

Molecular and functional characterization of eight novel GAA mutations in 
Italian infants with Pompe disease.

Pittis MG(1), Donnarumma M, Montalvo AL, Dominissini S, Kroos M, Rosano C, 
Stroppiano M, Bianco MG, Donati MA, Parenti G, D'Amico A, Ciana G, Di Rocco M, 
Reuser A, Bembi B, Filocamo M.

Author information:
(1)Unità di Malattie Metaboliche, IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy.

We characterized 29 unrelated patients presenting with the severe form of Pompe 
disease (Glycogen Storage Disease Type II, acid maltase deficiency) and 
identified 26 pathogenic mutations divided over 28 different genotypes. Among 
the eight new mutations, five were exonic point mutations (c.572A>G, c.1124G>T, 
c.1202A>G, c.1564C>G and c.1796C>A) leading to codon changes (p.Y191C, p.R375L, 
p.Q401R, p.P522A and p.S599Y); two were intronic point mutations (c.-32-3C>A and 
c.1636+5G>C) affecting mRNA processing; one was a single base deletion 
(c.742delC) generating a truncated protein (p.L248PfsX20). A comprehensive 
evaluation, based on different methodological approaches, confirmed the 
detrimental effect of the eight mutations on the protein and its function. 
Structural alterations potentially induced by the five missense mutations were 
also predicted through visual inspection of the atomic model of the GAA protein, 
in terms of both function and spatial orientation of specific residues as well 
as disturbance generated by amino acid substitutions. Although the remarkable 
heterogeneity of the mutational spectrum in Pompe disease was already known, our 
data demonstrate and confirm the power of molecular and functional analysis in 
predicting the natural course of Pompe disease.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.20753
PMID: 18429042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
