---
pmid: '15304329'
title: Hepatopoietin interacts directly with COP9 signalosome and regulates AP-1 activity.
authors:
- Wang Y
- Lu C
- Wei H
- Wang N
- Chen X
- Zhang L
- Zhai Y
- Zhu Y
- Lu Y
- He F
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2004.07.012
---

# Hepatopoietin interacts directly with COP9 signalosome and regulates AP-1 activity.
**Authors:** Wang Y, Lu C, Wei H, Wang N, Chen X, Zhang L, Zhai Y, Zhu Y, Lu Y, He F
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2004.07.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2004.07.012)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2004 Aug 13;572(1-3):85-91. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2004.07.012.

Hepatopoietin interacts directly with COP9 signalosome and regulates AP-1 
activity.

Wang Y(1), Lu C, Wei H, Wang N, Chen X, Zhang L, Zhai Y, Zhu Y, Lu Y, He F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genomics and Proteomics, Beijing Institute of Radiation 
Medicine, Chinese National Human Genome Center, 27 Taiping Road, Beijing 100850, 
PR China.

Hepatopoietin (HPO)/augmenter of liver regeneration (ALR) is a specific 
hepatotrophic growth factor, which plays a key role in liver regeneration. Our 
previous study indicated that HPO executes its function by an inter-reactive 
network of the autocrine, paracrine and endocrine pathways. Recently, we have 
demonstrated that intracellular HPO interacts with Jun activation domain-binding 
protein 1 (JAB1) and leads to potentiation of activating protein-1 (AP-1) 
activity in a MAPK independent fashion. JAB1 is the fifth subunit of the COP9 
signalosome (CSN), which is first identified as a suppressor of plant 
morphogenesis. A protein complex kinase activity associated with the CSN has 
been reported but not identified yet. In this report, we investigated further 
the association of HPO with the whole CSN. HPO exists in a complex with the 
eight-component CSN, both when purified from glycerol gradient centrifugation 
and when reciprocal immunoprecipitated from the lysates of transfected COS-7 
cells. Intracellular HPO colocalizes with endogenous CSN in nucleus of hepatic 
cells. In addition, intracellular function of HPO that increases the 
phosphorylation of c-Jun leading to potentiate the AP-1 activity is inhibited by 
curcumin, a potent inhibitor of CSN-associated kinase. Taken together, these 
results elucidate a novel relationship of intracellular growth factor, HPO with 
large protein complex, CSN, which suggests a possible linkage between CSN and 
liver regeneration.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2004.07.012
PMID: 15304329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
