---
pmid: '10773671'
title: Cloning and expression of CIS6, chromosome assignment to 3p22 and 2p21 by in
  situ hybridization.
authors:
- Magrangeas F
- Apiou F
- Denis S
- Weidle U
- Jacques Y
- Minvielle S
journal: Cytogenet Cell Genet
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1159/000015490
---

# Cloning and expression of CIS6, chromosome assignment to 3p22 and 2p21 by in situ hybridization.
**Authors:** Magrangeas F, Apiou F, Denis S, Weidle U, Jacques Y, Minvielle S
**Journal:** Cytogenet Cell Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000015490](https://doi.org/10.1159/000015490)

## Abstract

1. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 2000;88(1-2):78-81. doi: 10.1159/000015490.

Cloning and expression of CIS6, chromosome assignment to 3p22 and 2p21 by in 
situ hybridization.

Magrangeas F(1), Apiou F, Denis S, Weidle U, Jacques Y, Minvielle S.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U463, Institut de Biologie, Nantes, France.

A family of negative regulators of JAK signaling pathway referred to as 
suppressor of cytokines signaling (SOCS) or cytokine-inducible SH2 protein (CIS) 
has been recently identified. In order to find additional members of this 
family, we have used a consensus amino acid sequence contained in the 
well-conserved central SH2 domain to search DNA databases. We isolated cDNA 
coding for the human homologue of SOCS-5, referred to as CIS6. Northern blot 
analysis revealed CIS6 mRNA expression in various tissues such as heart, muscle, 
spleen, and thymus and in all myeloma cell lines examined. The gene was assigned 
to human chromosome bands 2p21 and 3p22 by in situ hybridization. CIS6 is 
structurally related to other members of the CIS family and therefore could act 
as a negative regulator of signal transduction.

Copyright 2000 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 10.1159/000015490
PMID: 10773671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
