---
pmid: '20053667'
title: Molecular control of the cytosolic aconitase/IRP1 switch by extramitochondrial
  frataxin.
authors:
- Condò I
- Malisan F
- Guccini I
- Serio D
- Rufini A
- Testi R
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp592
---

# Molecular control of the cytosolic aconitase/IRP1 switch by extramitochondrial frataxin.
**Authors:** Condò I, Malisan F, Guccini I, Serio D, Rufini A, Testi R
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddp592](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddp592)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Apr 1;19(7):1221-9. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp592. Epub 2010 Jan
 6.

Molecular control of the cytosolic aconitase/IRP1 switch by extramitochondrial 
frataxin.

Condò I(1), Malisan F, Guccini I, Serio D, Rufini A, Testi R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Biochemical Sciences, University of 
Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.

The inability to produce normal levels of the mitochondrial protein frataxin 
causes the hereditary degenerative disorder Friedreich's Ataxia (FRDA), a 
syndrome characterized by progressive gait instability, cardiomyopathy and high 
incidence of diabetes. Frataxin is an iron-binding protein involved in the 
biogenesis of iron-sulfur clusters (ISC), prosthetic groups allowing essential 
cellular functions such as oxidative phosphorylation, enzyme catalysis and gene 
regulation. Although several evidence suggest that frataxin acts as an 
iron-chaperone within the mitochondrial compartment, we have recently 
demonstrated the existence of a functional extramitochondrial pool of mature 
frataxin in various human cell types. Here, we show that a similar proteolytic 
process generates both mature mitochondrial and extramitochondrial frataxin. To 
address the physiological function of human extramitochondrial frataxin, we 
searched for ISC-dependent interaction partners. We demonstrate that the 
extramitochondrial form of frataxin directly interacts with cytosolic 
aconitase/iron regulatory protein-1 (IRP1), a bifunctional protein alternating 
between an enzymatic and a RNA-binding function through the 'iron-sulfur switch' 
mechanism. Importantly, we found that the cytosolic aconitase defect and 
consequent IRP1 activation occurring in FRDA cells are reversed by the action of 
extramitochondrial frataxin. These results provide new insight into the control 
of cytosolic aconitase/IRP1 switch and expand current knowledge about the 
molecular pathogenesis of FRDA.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddp592
PMID: 20053667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
