---
pmid: '10838181'
title: Expression of five iduronate-2-sulfatase site-directed mutations.
authors:
- Villani GR
- Daniele A
- Balzano N
- Di Natale P
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0925-4439(00)00006-5
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Expression of five iduronate-2-sulfatase site-directed mutations.
**Authors:** Villani GR, Daniele A, Balzano N, Di Natale P
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0925-4439(00)00006-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0925-4439(00)00006-5)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Jun 15;1501(2-3):71-80. doi: 
10.1016/s0925-4439(00)00006-5.

Expression of five iduronate-2-sulfatase site-directed mutations.

Villani GR(1), Daniele A, Balzano N, Di Natale P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Medical Biotechnologies, Medical School, 
University of Naples 'Federico II', Via S. Pansini 5, 80131, Naples, Italy.

Five point mutations (R88H, R88P, T118I, 959delT, R468Q) previously identified 
in the iduronate-2-sulfatase (IDS) gene of Italian Hunter patients were 
expressed in COS cells to evaluate their functional consequence on enzyme 
activity, processing and intracellular localization. The 88 arginine residue 
belongs to the CXPSR pentapeptide conserved in all human sulfatases, where 
cysteine modification to formylglycine is required for enzyme activity. 
Substitution of arginine with histidine residue resulted in 13.7% residual 
enzyme activity, with an apparent K(m) value (133 microM) lower than that found 
for the normal enzyme (327 microM), indicating a higher affinity for the 
substrate; substitution of arginine with proline resulted in total absence of 
residual activity, in agreement with the phenotypes observed in patients 
carrying R88H and R88P mutations. For the four missense mutations, pulse-chase 
labelling experiments showed an apparently normal maturation; however, 
subcellular fractionation demonstrated poor transport to lysosomes. Therefore, 
residues 88, 118 and 468 appear to be not essential for processing but important 
for IDS conformation.

DOI: 10.1016/s0925-4439(00)00006-5
PMID: 10838181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
