---
pmid: '1712068'
title: Studies on the biochemical structure of the major cat allergen Felis domesticus
  I.
authors:
- Duffort OA
- Carreira J
- Nitti G
- Polo F
- Lombardero M
journal: Mol Immunol
year: '1991'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0161-5890(91)90141-6
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Studies on the biochemical structure of the major cat allergen Felis domesticus I.
**Authors:** Duffort OA, Carreira J, Nitti G, Polo F, Lombardero M
**Journal:** Mol Immunol (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0161-5890(91)90141-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/0161-5890(91)90141-6)

## Abstract

1. Mol Immunol. 1991 Apr-May;28(4-5):301-9. doi: 10.1016/0161-5890(91)90141-6.

Studies on the biochemical structure of the major cat allergen Felis domesticus 
I.

Duffort OA(1), Carreira J, Nitti G, Polo F, Lombardero M.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Investigación, Algeria e Immunología Abelló S.A., Madrid, 
Spain.

The major cat allergen, Fel d I, was purified to homogeneity from cat dander 
extract by sequential mAb affinity chromatography and HPLC size exclusion. The 
purity and allergenic activity of the preparation was demonstrated by different 
techniques such as HPLC, RAST inhibition, skin prick tests and CIE/CRIE. Fel d I 
showed a mol. wt of about 35,000 by HPLC gel filtration and of 18,000 by 
SDS-PAGE, confirming that it is a non-covalently linked dimer. However, SDS-PAGE 
analysis under reducing conditions as well as labelling experiments with 
14C-iodoacetamide of 2-ME-reduced Fel d I showed that each mol. wt 18,000 
monomer is comprised of two covalently S-S bound polypeptides with apparent mol. 
wt. of 4000 (alpha-chain) and 14,000 (beta-chain). Reduction and alkylation of 
Fel d I obliterated most of its allergenic activity, as determined by RAST 
inhibition and immunoblotting, suggesting that most of the IgE-binding sites are 
conformational. On the other hand, treatment of Fel d I by N-glycanase under 
reducing and non-reducing conditions indicated the presence of N-linked 
oligosaccharides in the beta-chain. Carbohydrate analysis data of the whole Fel 
d I molecule showed the presence of a relatively high carbohydrate content 
(approximately 20%). RAST inhibition experiments of native and deglycosilated 
allergen suggest that most IgE epitopes are located in the protein moiety of the 
molecule. However, the deglycosilated allergen showed a 2-4 fold reduction in 
its inhibition capacity of RAST as compared to the native allergen, suggesting 
that carbohydrates could have some role in keeping the active conformation of 
those epitopes. The N-terminal amino acid sequence of the beta-chain (20 
residues) and most of the alpha-chain (40 residues) were determined. Both chain 
sequences showed no homology with other known protein sequences.

DOI: 10.1016/0161-5890(91)90141-6
PMID: 1712068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
