---
pmid: '23250427'
title: CRT1 is a nuclear-translocated MORC endonuclease that participates in multiple
  levels of plant immunity.
authors:
- Kang HG
- Hyong WC
- von Einem S
- Manosalva P
- Ehlers K
- Liu PP
- Buxa SV
- Moreau M
- Mang HG
- Kachroo P
- Kogel KH
- Klessig DF
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ncomms2279
---

# CRT1 is a nuclear-translocated MORC endonuclease that participates in multiple levels of plant immunity.
**Authors:** Kang HG, Hyong WC, von Einem S, Manosalva P, Ehlers K, Liu PP, Buxa SV, Moreau M, Mang HG, Kachroo P, Kogel KH, Klessig DF
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncomms2279](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms2279)

## Abstract

1. Nat Commun. 2012;3:1297. doi: 10.1038/ncomms2279.

CRT1 is a nuclear-translocated MORC endonuclease that participates in multiple 
levels of plant immunity.

Kang HG(1)(2), Hyong WC(1), von Einem S(3)(4), Manosalva P(1), Ehlers K(3)(4), 
Liu PP(1), Buxa SV(3)(4), Moreau M(1), Mang HG(2), Kachroo P(5), Kogel KH(3)(4), 
Klessig DF(1).

Author information:
(1)Boyce Thompson Institute for Plant Research, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA. 
kang@txstate.edu
(2)Department of Biology, Texas State University, San Marcos, 78666, Texas, USA
(3)Research Center for Bio Systems, Land Use, and Nutrition
(4)Institute for Botany, Justus Liebig University, Giessen, D-35392, Germany
(5)Department of Plant Pathology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, 40546, 
Kentucky, USA

Erratum in
    Nat Commun. 2013;4:1297. Mang, Hyong-Gon [corrected to Mang, Hyung-Gon].

Arabidopsis thaliana CRT1 (compromised for recognition of Turnip Crinkle Virus) 
was previously shown to be required for effector-triggered immunity. Sequence 
analyses previously revealed that CRT1 contains the ATPase and S5 domains 
characteristic of Microchidia (MORC) proteins; these proteins are associated 
with DNA modification and repair. Here we show that CRT1 and its closest 
homologue, CRH1, are also required for pathogen-associated molecular pattern 
(PAMP)-triggered immunity, basal resistance, non-host resistance and systemic 
acquired resistance. Consistent with its role in PAMP-triggered immunity, CRT1 
interacted with the PAMP recognition receptor FLS2. Subcellular fractionation 
and transmission electron microscopy detected a subpopulation of CRT1 in the 
nucleus, whose levels increased following PAMP treatment or infection with an 
avirulent pathogen. These results, combined with the demonstration that CRT1 
binds DNA, exhibits endonuclease activity, and affects tolerance to the 
DNA-damaging agent mitomycin C, argue that this prototypic eukaryotic member of 
the MORC superfamily has important nuclear functions during immune response 
activation.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms2279
PMID: 23250427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
