---
pmid: '16271884'
title: The molecular mechanism for receptor-stimulated iron release from the plasma
  iron transport protein transferrin.
authors:
- Giannetti AM
- Halbrooks PJ
- Mason AB
- Vogt TM
- Enns CA
- Björkman PJ
journal: Structure
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.str.2005.07.016
---

# The molecular mechanism for receptor-stimulated iron release from the plasma iron transport protein transferrin.
**Authors:** Giannetti AM, Halbrooks PJ, Mason AB, Vogt TM, Enns CA, Björkman PJ
**Journal:** Structure (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.str.2005.07.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2005.07.016)

## Abstract

1. Structure. 2005 Nov;13(11):1613-23. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2005.07.016.

The molecular mechanism for receptor-stimulated iron release from the plasma 
iron transport protein transferrin.

Giannetti AM(1), Halbrooks PJ, Mason AB, Vogt TM, Enns CA, Björkman PJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biology 114-96, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, 
California 91125, USA.

Human transferrin receptor 1 (TfR) binds iron-loaded transferrin (Fe-Tf) and 
transports it to acidic endosomes where iron is released in a TfR-facilitated 
process. Consistent with our hypothesis that TfR binding stimulates iron release 
from Fe-Tf at acidic pH by stabilizing the apo-Tf conformation, a TfR mutant 
(W641A/F760A-TfR) that binds Fe-Tf, but not apo-Tf, cannot stimulate iron 
release from Fe-Tf, and less iron is released from Fe-Tf inside cells expressing 
W641A/F760A-TfR than cells expressing wild-type TfR (wtTfR). Electron 
paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy shows that binding at acidic pH to wtTfR, 
but not W641A/F760A-TfR, changes the Tf iron binding site > or =30 A from the 
TfR W641/F760 patch. Mutation of Tf histidine residues predicted to interact 
with the W641/F760 patch eliminates TfR-dependent acceleration of iron release. 
Identification of TfR and Tf residues critical for TfR-facilitated iron release, 
yet distant from a Tf iron binding site, demonstrates that TfR transmits 
long-range conformational changes and stabilizes the conformation of apo-Tf to 
accelerate iron release from Fe-Tf.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2005.07.016
PMID: 16271884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
