---
pmid: '12861020'
title: Proliferation failure and gamma radiation sensitivity of Fen1 null mutant mice
  at the blastocyst stage.
authors:
- Larsen E
- Gran C
- Saether BE
- Seeberg E
- Klungland A
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC165721
doi: 10.1128/MCB.23.15.5346-5353.2003
---

# Proliferation failure and gamma radiation sensitivity of Fen1 null mutant mice at the blastocyst stage.
**Authors:** Larsen E, Gran C, Saether BE, Seeberg E, Klungland A
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.23.15.5346-5353.2003](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.23.15.5346-5353.2003)
**PMC:** [PMC165721](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC165721/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Aug;23(15):5346-53. doi: 10.1128/MCB.23.15.5346-5353.2003.

Proliferation failure and gamma radiation sensitivity of Fen1 null mutant mice 
at the blastocyst stage.

Larsen E(1), Gran C, Saether BE, Seeberg E, Klungland A.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Molecular Biology and Neuroscience, Institute of Medical 
Microbiology, The National Hospital, University of Oslo, 0027 Oslo, Norway.

Flap endonuclease 1 (FEN1) has been shown to remove 5' overhanging flap 
intermediates during base excision repair and to process the 5' ends of Okazaki 
fragments during lagging-strand DNA replication in vitro. To assess the in vivo 
role of the mammalian enzyme in repair and replication, we used a gene-targeting 
approach to generate mice lacking a functional Fen1 gene. Heterozygote animals 
appear normal, whereas complete depletion of FEN1 causes early embryonic 
lethality. Fen1(-/-) blastocysts fail to form inner cell mass during cellular 
outgrowth, and a complete inactivation of DNA synthesis in giant cells of 
blastocyst outgrowth was observed. Exposure of Fen1(-/-) blastocysts to gamma 
radiation caused extensive apoptosis, implying an essential role for FEN1 in the 
repair of radiation-induced DNA damage in vivo. Our data thus provide in vivo 
evidence for an essential function of FEN1 in DNA repair, as well as in DNA 
replication.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.23.15.5346-5353.2003
PMCID: PMC165721
PMID: 12861020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
