---
pmid: '9926942'
title: The second BRCT domain of BRCA1 proteins interacts with p53 and stimulates
  transcription from the p21WAF1/CIP1 promoter.
authors:
- Chai YL
- Cui J
- Shao N
- Shyam E
- Reddy P
- Rao VN
journal: Oncogene
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1202323
---

# The second BRCT domain of BRCA1 proteins interacts with p53 and stimulates transcription from the p21WAF1/CIP1 promoter.
**Authors:** Chai YL, Cui J, Shao N, Shyam E, Reddy P, Rao VN
**Journal:** Oncogene (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1202323](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1202323)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 1999 Jan 7;18(1):263-8. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1202323.

The second BRCT domain of BRCA1 proteins interacts with p53 and stimulates
transcription from the p21WAF1/CIP1 promoter.

Chai YL(1), Cui J, Shao N, Shyam E, Reddy P, Rao VN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Allegheny University of the Health Sciences,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19102, USA.

Inherited mutations in the breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility gene BRCA1
are associated with high risk for developing breast and ovarian cancers. Several
studies link BRCA1 to transcriptional regulation, DNA repair, apoptosis and
growth/tumor suppression. BRCA1 associates with p53 and stimulates transcription
in both p53 dependent and p53-independent manners. BRCA1 splice variants BRCA1a
(p110) and BRCA1b (p100) associates with CBP/p300 co-activators. Here we show
that BRCA1a and BRCA1b proteins stimulate p53-dependent transcription from the
p21WAF1/CIP1 promoter. In addition, the C-terminal second BRCA1 (BRCT) domain is
sufficient for p53 mediated transactivation of the p21 promoter. Previous
studies emphasized the importance of the BRCT domain, which shows homology with
p53 binding protein (53BP1), in transcriptional activation, growth inhibition
and tumor suppression. Our findings demonstrate an additional function for this
domain in protein-protein interaction and co-activation of p53. We also found
that BRCA1a and BRCA1b proteins interact with p53 in vitro and in vivo. The p53
interaction domain of BRCA1a/1b maps, in vitro, to the second BRCT domain (aa
1760-1863). The BRCT domain binds to the central domain of p53 which is required
for sequence specific DNA binding. These results demonstrate for the first time
the presence of a second p53 interaction domain in BRCA1 proteins and suggests
that BRCA1a and BRCA1b proteins, like BRCA1, function as p53 co-activators. This
BRCT domain also binds in vitro to CBP. These results suggest that one of the
mechanisms by which BRCA1 proteins function is through recruitment of CBP/p300
associated HAT/FAT activity for acetylation of p53 to specific promoters
resulting in transcriptional activation.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1202323
PMID: 9926942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
