---
pmid: '25421890'
title: Implication of human endogenous retrovirus envelope proteins in placental functions.
authors:
- Lokossou AG
- Toudic C
- Barbeau B
journal: Viruses
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4246240
doi: 10.3390/v6114609
---

# Implication of human endogenous retrovirus envelope proteins in placental functions.
**Authors:** Lokossou AG, Toudic C, Barbeau B
**Journal:** Viruses (2014)
**DOI:** [10.3390/v6114609](https://doi.org/10.3390/v6114609)
**PMC:** [PMC4246240](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4246240/)

## Abstract

1. Viruses. 2014 Nov 24;6(11):4609-27. doi: 10.3390/v6114609.

Implication of human endogenous retrovirus envelope proteins in placental 
functions.

Lokossou AG(1), Toudic C(2), Barbeau B(3).

Author information:
(1)Département des Sciences Biologiques and Centre de recherche BioMed, 
Université du Québec à Montréal, 2080 Saint-Urbain, Montréal, PQ H2X 3X8, 
Canada. gatien.lokossou@gmail.com.
(2)Département des Sciences Biologiques and Centre de recherche BioMed, 
Université du Québec à Montréal, 2080 Saint-Urbain, Montréal, PQ H2X 3X8, 
Canada. caroline.toudic22@gmail.com.
(3)Département des Sciences Biologiques and Centre de recherche BioMed, 
Université du Québec à Montréal, 2080 Saint-Urbain, Montréal, PQ H2X 3X8, 
Canada. barbeau.benoit@uqam.ca.

Human endogenous retroviruses (ERVs) represent 8% of the total human genome. 
Although the majority of these ancient proviral sequences have only retained 
non-coding long terminal repeats (LTRs), a number of "endogenized" retroviral 
genes encode functional proteins. Previous studies have underlined the 
implication of these ERV-derived proteins in the development and the function of 
the placenta. In this review, we summarize recent findings showing that two ERV 
genes, termed Syncytin-1 and Syncytin-2, which encode former envelope (Env) 
proteins, trigger fusion events between villous cytotrophoblasts and the 
peripheral multinucleated syncytiotrophoblast layer. Such fusion events maintain 
the stability of this latter cell structure, which plays an important role in 
fetal development by the active secretion of various soluble factors, gas 
exchange and regulation of fetomaternal immunotolerance. We also highlight new 
studies showing that these ERV proteins, in addition to their localization at 
the cell surface of cytotrophoblasts, are also incorporated on the surface of 
various extracellular microvesicles, including exosomes. Such exosome-associated 
proteins could be involved in the various functions attributed to these vesicles 
and could provide a form of tropism. Additionally, through their 
immunosuppressive domains, these ERV proteins could also contribute to 
fetomaternal immunotolerance in a local and more distal manner. These various 
aspects of the implication of Syncytin-1 and -2 in placental function are also 
addressed in the context of the placenta-related disorder, preeclampsia.

DOI: 10.3390/v6114609
PMCID: PMC4246240
PMID: 25421890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
