---
pmid: '10198052'
title: Regulation of ribosome biogenesis by the rapamycin-sensitive TOR-signaling
  pathway in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
authors:
- Powers T
- Walter P
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC25225
doi: 10.1091/mbc.10.4.987
---

# Regulation of ribosome biogenesis by the rapamycin-sensitive TOR-signaling pathway in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Powers T, Walter P
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.10.4.987](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.10.4.987)
**PMC:** [PMC25225](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC25225/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Cell. 1999 Apr;10(4):987-1000. doi: 10.1091/mbc.10.4.987.

Regulation of ribosome biogenesis by the rapamycin-sensitive TOR-signaling 
pathway in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Powers T(1), Walter P.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Biochemistry and 
Biophysics, University of California, School of Medicine, San Francisco, 
California 94143-0448, USA. tpowers@socrates.ucsf.edu

The TOR (target of rapamycin) signal transduction pathway is an important 
mechanism by which cell growth is controlled in all eucaryotic cells. 
Specifically, TOR signaling adjusts the protein biosynthetic capacity of cells 
according to nutrient availability. In mammalian cells, one branch of this 
pathway controls general translational initiation, whereas a separate branch 
specifically regulates the translation of ribosomal protein (r-protein) mRNAs. 
In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the TOR pathway similarly regulates general 
translational initiation, but its specific role in the synthesis of ribosomal 
components is not well understood. Here we demonstrate that in yeast control of 
ribosome biosynthesis by the TOR pathway is surprisingly complex. In addition to 
general effects on translational initiation, TOR exerts drastic control over 
r-protein gene transcription as well as the synthesis and subsequent processing 
of 35S precursor rRNA. We also find that TOR signaling is a prerequisite for the 
induction of r-protein gene transcription that occurs in response to improved 
nutrient conditions. This induction has been shown previously to involve both 
the Ras-adenylate cyclase as well as the fermentable growth medium-induced 
pathways, and our results therefore suggest that these three pathways may be 
intimately linked.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.10.4.987
PMCID: PMC25225
PMID: 10198052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
