---
pmid: '23603394'
title: EFA6 activates Arf6 and participates in its targeting to the Flemming body
  during cytokinesis.
authors:
- Ueda T
- Hanai A
- Takei T
- Kubo K
- Ohgi M
- Sakagami H
- Takahashi S
- Shin HW
- Nakayama K
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.03.042
---

# EFA6 activates Arf6 and participates in its targeting to the Flemming body during cytokinesis.
**Authors:** Ueda T, Hanai A, Takei T, Kubo K, Ohgi M, Sakagami H, Takahashi S, Shin HW, Nakayama K
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2013.03.042](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2013.03.042)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2013 Jun 5;587(11):1617-23. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.03.042.
Epub  2013 Apr 18.

EFA6 activates Arf6 and participates in its targeting to the Flemming body 
during cytokinesis.

Ueda T(1), Hanai A, Takei T, Kubo K, Ohgi M, Sakagami H, Takahashi S, Shin HW, 
Nakayama K.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 
606-8501, Japan.

The small GTPase Arf6 is transiently associated with the ingressing cleavage 
furrow and subsequently targeted to the Flemming body during cytokinesis, 
suggesting its activation around the cleavage furrow. Here, we show that EFA6 
(exchange factor for Arf6) localizes on the cleavage furrow through its PH 
domain. Time-lapse analysis showed that both EFA6 and Arf6 are transiently 
localized around the ingressing cleavage furrow, but only Arf6 is subsequently 
targeted to the Flemming body. Expression of an EFA6 mutant suppresses Arf6 
recruitment onto the Flemming body. These results suggest that EFA6 participates 
in activation of Arf6 around the cleavage furrow during cytokinesis.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.03.042
PMID: 23603394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
