---
pmid: '7568038'
title: 'p56Lck and p59Fyn regulate CD28 binding to phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase,
  growth factor receptor-bound protein GRB-2, and T cell-specific protein-tyrosine
  kinase ITK: implications for T-cell costimulation.'
authors:
- Raab M
- Cai YC
- Bunnell SC
- Heyeck SD
- Berg LJ
- Rudd CE
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC41073
doi: 10.1073/pnas.92.19.8891
---

# p56Lck and p59Fyn regulate CD28 binding to phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, growth factor receptor-bound protein GRB-2, and T cell-specific protein-tyrosine kinase ITK: implications for T-cell costimulation.
**Authors:** Raab M, Cai YC, Bunnell SC, Heyeck SD, Berg LJ, Rudd CE
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.92.19.8891](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.92.19.8891)
**PMC:** [PMC41073](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC41073/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Sep 12;92(19):8891-5. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.92.19.8891.

p56Lck and p59Fyn regulate CD28 binding to phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, growth 
factor receptor-bound protein GRB-2, and T cell-specific protein-tyrosine kinase 
ITK: implications for T-cell costimulation.

Raab M(1), Cai YC, Bunnell SC, Heyeck SD, Berg LJ, Rudd CE.

Author information:
(1)Division of Tumor Immunology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115, 
USA.

T-cell activation requires cooperative signals generated by the T-cell antigen 
receptor zeta-chain complex (TCR zeta-CD3) and the costimulatory antigen CD28. 
CD28 interacts with three intracellular proteins-phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase 
(PI 3-kinase), T cell-specific protein-tyrosine kinase ITK (formerly TSK or 
EMT), and the complex between growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 and son of 
sevenless guanine nucleotide exchange protein (GRB-2-SOS). PI 3-kinase and GRB-2 
bind to the CD28 phosphotyrosine-based Tyr-Met-Asn-Met motif by means of 
intrinsic Src-homology 2 (SH2) domains. The requirement for tyrosine 
phosphorylation of the Tyr-Met-Asn-Met motif for SH2 domain binding implicates 
an intervening protein-tyrosine kinase in the recruitment of PI 3-kinase and 
GRB-2 by CD28. Candidate kinases include p56Lck, p59Fyn, zeta-chain-associated 
70-kDa protein (ZAP-70), and ITK. In this study, we demonstrate in coexpression 
studies that p56Lck and p59Fyn phosphorylate CD28 primarily at Tyr-191 of the 
Tyr-Met-Asn-Met motif, inducing a 3- to 8-fold increase in p85 (subunit of PI 
3-kinase) and GRB-2 SH2 binding to CD28. Phosphatase digestion of CD28 
eliminated binding. In contrast to Src kinases, ZAP-70 and ITK failed to induce 
these events. Further, ITK binding to CD28 was dependent on the presence of 
p56Lck and is thus likely to act downstream of p56Lck/p59Fyn in a signaling 
cascade. p56Lck is therefore likely to be a central switch in T-cell activation, 
with the dual function of regulating CD28-mediated costimulation as well as 
TCR-CD3-CD4 signaling.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.92.19.8891
PMCID: PMC41073
PMID: 7568038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
