---
pmid: '18056995'
title: Crystal structure of human kynurenine aminotransferase II.
authors:
- Han Q
- Robinson H
- Li J
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M708358200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Crystal structure of human kynurenine aminotransferase II.
**Authors:** Han Q, Robinson H, Li J
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M708358200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M708358200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Feb 8;283(6):3567-3573. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M708358200. Epub
2007  Dec 5.

Crystal structure of human kynurenine aminotransferase II.

Han Q(1), Robinson H(2), Li J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Virginia Tech University, Blacksburg, Virginia 
24061.
(2)Biology Department, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York 11973.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Virginia Tech University, Blacksburg, Virginia 
24061. Electronic address: lij@vt.edu.

Human kynurenine aminotransferase II (hKAT-II) efficiently catalyzes the 
transamination of knunrenine to kynurenic acid (KYNA). KYNA is the only known 
endogenous antagonist of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors and is also an 
antagonist of 7-nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. Abnormal concentrations of 
brain KYNA have been implicated in the pathogenesis and development of several 
neurological and psychiatric diseases in humans. Consequently, enzymes involved 
in the production of brain KYNA have been considered potential regulatory 
targets. In this article, we report a 2.16 A crystal structure of hKAT-II and a 
1.95 A structure of its complex with kynurenine. The protein architecture of 
hKAT-II reveals that it belongs to the fold-type I pyridoxal 5-phosphate 
(PLP)-dependent enzymes. In comparison with all subclasses of fold-type 
I-PLP-dependent enzymes, we propose that hKAT-II represents a novel subclass in 
the fold-type I enzymes because of the unique folding of its first 65 N-terminal 
residues. This study provides a molecular basis for future effort in maintaining 
physiological concentrations of KYNA through molecular and biochemical 
regulation of hKAT-II.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M708358200
PMID: 18056995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
