---
pmid: '21073465'
title: Insight into the mode of action of the LRRK2 Y1699C pathogenic mutant.
authors:
- Daniëls V
- Vancraenenbroeck R
- Law BM
- Greggio E
- Lobbestael E
- Gao F
- De Maeyer M
- Cookson MR
- Harvey K
- Baekelandt V
- Taymans JM
journal: J Neurochem
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3005098
doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.07105.x
---

# Insight into the mode of action of the LRRK2 Y1699C pathogenic mutant.
**Authors:** Daniëls V, Vancraenenbroeck R, Law BM, Greggio E, Lobbestael E, Gao F, De Maeyer M, Cookson MR, Harvey K, Baekelandt V, Taymans JM
**Journal:** J Neurochem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.07105.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.07105.x)
**PMC:** [PMC3005098](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3005098/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurochem. 2011 Jan;116(2):304-15. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.07105.x.

Insight into the mode of action of the LRRK2 Y1699C pathogenic mutant.

Daniëls V(1), Vancraenenbroeck R, Law BM, Greggio E, Lobbestael E, Gao F, De 
Maeyer M, Cookson MR, Harvey K, Baekelandt V, Taymans JM.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Neurobiology and Gene Therapy, Division of Molecular Medicine, 
Department of Molecular and Cellular Medicine, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, 
Leuven, Belgium.

Mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene are the most 
prevalent known cause of autosomal dominant Parkinson's disease. The LRRK2 gene 
encodes a Roco protein featuring a Ras of complex proteins (ROC) GTPase and a 
kinase domain linked by the C-terminal of ROC (COR) domain. Here, we explored 
the effects of the Y1699C pathogenic LRRK2 mutation in the COR domain on GTPase 
activity and interactions within the catalytic core of LRRK2. We observed a 
decrease in GTPase activity for LRRK2 Y1699C comparable to the decrease observed 
for the R1441C pathogenic mutant and the T1348N dysfunctional mutant. To study 
the underlying mechanism, we explored the dimerization in the catalytic core of 
LRRK2. ROC-COR dimerization was significantly weakened by the Y1699C or R1441C/G 
mutation. Using a competition assay, we demonstrated that the intra-molecular 
ROC : COR interaction is favoured over ROC : ROC dimerization. Interestingly, 
the intra-molecular ROC : COR interaction was strengthened by the Y1699C 
mutation. This is supported by a 3D homology model of the ROC-COR tandem of 
LRRK2, showing that Y1699 is positioned at the intra-molecular ROC : COR 
interface. In conclusion, our data provides mechanistic insight into the mode of 
action of the Y1699C LRRK2 mutant: the Y1699C substitution, situated at the 
intra-molecular ROC : COR interface, strengthens the intra-molecular ROC : COR 
interaction, thereby locally weakening the dimerization of LRRK2 at the ROC-COR 
tandem domain resulting in decreased GTPase activity.

© 2010 The Authors. Journal of Neurochemistry © 2010 International Society for 
Neurochemistry.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.07105.x
PMCID: PMC3005098
PMID: 21073465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
