---
pmid: '29061699'
title: HuD and the Survival Motor Neuron Protein Interact in Motoneurons and Are Essential
  for Motoneuron Development, Function, and mRNA Regulation.
authors:
- Hao le T
- Duy PQ
- An M
- Talbot J
- Iyer CC
- Wolman M
- Beattie CE
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5707763
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1528-17.2017
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# HuD and the Survival Motor Neuron Protein Interact in Motoneurons and Are Essential for Motoneuron Development, Function, and mRNA Regulation.
**Authors:** Hao le T, Duy PQ, An M, Talbot J, Iyer CC, Wolman M, Beattie CE
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1528-17.2017](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1528-17.2017)
**PMC:** [PMC5707763](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5707763/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2017 Nov 29;37(48):11559-11571. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1528-17.2017.  Epub 2017 Oct 23.

HuD and the Survival Motor Neuron Protein Interact in Motoneurons and Are 
Essential for Motoneuron Development, Function, and mRNA Regulation.

Hao le T(1), Duy PQ(1), An M(1), Talbot J(2)(3), Iyer CC(2), Wolman M(4), 
Beattie CE(5).

Author information:
(1)Wexner Medical Center Department of Neuroscience.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Pharmacology, and.
(3)Department of Molecular Genetics and Center for Muscle Health and 
Neuromuscular Disorders, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, and.
(4)Department of Zoology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53706.
(5)Wexner Medical Center Department of Neuroscience, beattie.24@osu.edu.

Motoneurons establish a critical link between the CNS and muscles. If 
motoneurons do not develop correctly, they cannot form the required connections, 
resulting in movement defects or paralysis. Compromised development can also 
lead to degeneration because the motoneuron is not set up to function properly. 
Little is known, however, regarding the mechanisms that control vertebrate 
motoneuron development, particularly the later stages of axon branch and 
dendrite formation. The motoneuron disease spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is 
caused by low levels of the survival motor neuron (SMN) protein leading to 
defects in vertebrate motoneuron development and synapse formation. Here we show 
using zebrafish as a model system that SMN interacts with the RNA binding 
protein (RBP) HuD in motoneurons in vivo during formation of axonal branches and 
dendrites. To determine the function of HuD in motoneurons, we generated 
zebrafish HuD mutants and found that they exhibited decreased motor axon 
branches, dramatically fewer dendrites, and movement defects. These same 
phenotypes are present in animals expressing low levels of SMN, indicating that 
both proteins function in motoneuron development. HuD binds and transports mRNAs 
and one of its target mRNAs, Gap43, is involved in axonal outgrowth. We found 
that Gap43 was decreased in both HuD and SMN mutants. Importantly, transgenic 
expression of HuD in motoneurons of SMN mutants rescued the motoneuron defects, 
the movement defects, and Gap43 mRNA levels. These data support that the 
interaction between SMN and HuD is critical for motoneuron development and point 
to a role for RBPs in SMA.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT In zebrafish models of the 
motoneuron disease spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), motor axons fail to form the 
normal extent of axonal branches and dendrites leading to decreased motor 
function. SMA is caused by low levels of the survival motor neuron (SMN) 
protein. We show in motoneurons in vivo that SMN interacts with the RNA binding 
protein, HuD. Novel mutants reveal that HuD is also necessary for motor axonal 
branch and dendrite formation. Data also revealed that both SMN and HuD affect 
levels of an mRNA involved in axonal growth. Moreover, expressing HuD in 
SMN-deficient motoneurons can rescue the motoneuron development and motor 
defects caused by low levels of SMN. These data support that SMN:HuD complexes 
are essential for normal motoneuron development and indicate that mRNA handling 
is a critical component of SMA.

Copyright © 2017 the authors 0270-6474/17/3711559-13$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1528-17.2017
PMCID: PMC5707763
PMID: 29061699 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
