---
pmid: '20399188'
title: Structural insights into the COP9 signalosome and its common architecture with
  the 26S proteasome lid and eIF3.
authors:
- Enchev RI
- Schreiber A
- Beuron F
- Morris EP
journal: Structure
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.str.2010.02.008
---

# Structural insights into the COP9 signalosome and its common architecture with the 26S proteasome lid and eIF3.
**Authors:** Enchev RI, Schreiber A, Beuron F, Morris EP
**Journal:** Structure (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.str.2010.02.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2010.02.008)

## Abstract

1. Structure. 2010 Mar 14;18(4):518-27. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2010.02.008.

Structural insights into the COP9 signalosome and its common architecture with 
the 26S proteasome lid and eIF3.

Enchev RI(1), Schreiber A, Beuron F, Morris EP.

Author information:
(1)Section of Structural Biology, The Institute of Cancer Research, Chester 
Beatty Laboratories, 237 Fulham Road, London SW3 6JB, UK.

The evolutionary conserved COP9 signalosome (CSN), a large multisubunit complex, 
plays a central role in regulating ubiquitination and cell signaling. Here we 
report recombinant insect cell expression and two-step purification of human CSN 
and demonstrate its functional assembly. We further obtain a three-dimensional 
structure of both native and recombinant CSN using electron microscopy and 
single particle analysis. Antibody labeling of CSN5 and segmentation of the 
structure suggest a likely subunit distribution and the architecture of its 
helical repeat subunits is revealed. We compare the structure of CSN with its 
homologous complexes, the 26S proteasome lid and eIF3, and propose a conserved 
architecture implying similar assembly pathways and/or conserved substrate 
interaction modes.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2010.02.008
PMID: 20399188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
