---
pmid: '26392287'
title: Glucocerebrosidase gene therapy prevents α-synucleinopathy of midbrain dopamine
  neurons.
authors:
- Rocha EM
- Smith GA
- Park E
- Cao H
- Brown E
- Hayes MA
- Beagan J
- McLean JR
- Izen SC
- Perez-Torres E
- Hallett PJ
- Isacson O
journal: Neurobiol Dis
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2015.09.009
---

# Glucocerebrosidase gene therapy prevents α-synucleinopathy of midbrain dopamine neurons.
**Authors:** Rocha EM, Smith GA, Park E, Cao H, Brown E, Hayes MA, Beagan J, McLean JR, Izen SC, Perez-Torres E, Hallett PJ, Isacson O
**Journal:** Neurobiol Dis (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nbd.2015.09.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2015.09.009)

## Abstract

1. Neurobiol Dis. 2015 Oct;82:495-503. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2015.09.009. Epub 2015 
Sep 25.

Glucocerebrosidase gene therapy prevents α-synucleinopathy of midbrain dopamine 
neurons.

Rocha EM(1), Smith GA(1), Park E(2), Cao H(2), Brown E(2), Hayes MA(1), Beagan 
J(1), McLean JR(1), Izen SC(1), Perez-Torres E(1), Hallett PJ(3), Isacson O(4).

Author information:
(1)Neuroregeneration Research Institute, Harvard Medical School/McLean Hospital, 
Belmont, MA 02478, USA.
(2)Shire, 300 Shire Way, Lexington, MA 02421, USA.
(3)Neuroregeneration Research Institute, Harvard Medical School/McLean Hospital, 
Belmont, MA 02478, USA. Electronic address: phallett@mclean.harvard.edu.
(4)Neuroregeneration Research Institute, Harvard Medical School/McLean Hospital, 
Belmont, MA 02478, USA. Electronic address: isacson@hms.harvard.edu.

Diminished lysosomal function can lead to abnormal cellular accumulation of 
specific proteins, including α-synuclein, contributing to disease pathogenesis 
of vulnerable neurons in Parkinson's disease (PD) and related 
α-synucleinopathies. GBA1 encodes for the lysosomal hydrolase glucocerebrosidase 
(GCase), and mutations in GBA1 are a prominent genetic risk factor for PD. 
Previous studies showed that in sporadic PD, and in normal aging, GCase brain 
activity is reduced and levels of corresponding glycolipid substrates are 
increased. The present study tested whether increasing GCase through AAV-GBA1 
intra-cerebral gene delivery in two PD rodent models would reduce the 
accumulation of α-synuclein and protect midbrain dopamine neurons from 
α-synuclein-mediated neuronal damage. In the first model, transgenic mice 
overexpressing wildtype α-synuclein throughout the brain (ASO mice) were used, 
and in the second model, a rat model of selective dopamine neuron degeneration 
was induced by AAV-A53T mutant α-synuclein. In ASO mice, intra-cerebral AAV-GBA1 
injections into several brain regions increased GCase activity and reduced the 
accumulation of α-synuclein in the substantia nigra and striatum. In rats, 
co-injection of AAV-GBA1 with AAV-A53T α-synuclein into the substantia nigra 
prevented α-synuclein-mediated degeneration of nigrostriatal dopamine neurons by 
6 months. These neuroprotective effects were associated with altered protein 
expression of markers of autophagy. These experiments demonstrate, for the first 
time, the neuroprotective effects of increasing GCase against dopaminergic 
neuron degeneration, and support the development of therapeutics targeting GCase 
or other lysosomal genes to improve neuronal handling of α-synuclein.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2015.09.009
PMID: 26392287 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
