---
pmid: '17825065'
title: 'Yeast two-hybrid analysis of the origin recognition complex of Saccharomyces
  cerevisiae: interaction between subunits and identification of binding proteins.'
authors:
- Matsuda K
- Makise M
- Sueyasu Y
- Takehara M
- Asano T
- Mizushima T
journal: FEMS Yeast Res
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1567-1364.2007.00298.x
---

# Yeast two-hybrid analysis of the origin recognition complex of Saccharomyces cerevisiae: interaction between subunits and identification of binding proteins.
**Authors:** Matsuda K, Makise M, Sueyasu Y, Takehara M, Asano T, Mizushima T
**Journal:** FEMS Yeast Res (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1567-1364.2007.00298.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1567-1364.2007.00298.x)

## Abstract

1. FEMS Yeast Res. 2007 Dec;7(8):1263-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1567-1364.2007.00298.x. 
Epub 2007 Sep 6.

Yeast two-hybrid analysis of the origin recognition complex of Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae: interaction between subunits and identification of binding proteins.

Matsuda K(1), Makise M, Sueyasu Y, Takehara M, Asano T, Mizushima T.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Medical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kumamoto University, 
Kumamoto, Japan.

Origin recognition complex (ORC), a six-protein complex (Orc1p-6p), is the most 
likely initiator of chromosomal DNA replication in eukaryotes. Although ORC of 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae has been studied extensively from biochemical and 
genetic perspectives, its quaternary structure remains unknown. Previous studies 
suggested that ORC has functions other than DNA replication, such as gene 
silencing, but the molecular mechanisms of these functions have not been 
determined. In this study, we used yeast two-hybrid analysis to examine the 
interaction between ORC subunits and to search for ORC-binding proteins. As well 
as the known Orc4p-Orc5p interaction, we revealed strong interactions between 
Orc2p and Ord3p (2p-3p), Orc2p and Ord5p (2p-5p), Orc2p and Ord6p (2p-6p) and 
Orc3p and Ord6p (3p-6p) and weaker interactions between Orc1p and Ord4p (1p-4p), 
Orc3p and Ord4p (3p-4p), Orc2p and Ord3p (3p-5p) and Orc5p and Ord3p (5p-6p). 
These results suggest that 2p-3p-6p may form a core complex. Orc2p and Orc6p are 
phosphorylated in vivo, regulating initiation of DNA replication. However, 
replacing the phosphorylated amino acid residues with others that cannot be 
phosphorylated, or that mimic phosphorylation, did not affect subunit 
interactions. We also identified several proteins that interact with ORC 
subunits; Sir4p and Mad1p interact with Orc2p; Cac1p and Ykr077wp with Orc3p; 
Rrm3p and Swi6p with Orc5p; and Mih1p with Orc6p. We discuss roles of these 
interactions in functions of ORC.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1567-1364.2007.00298.x
PMID: 17825065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
