---
reference_id: PMID:10924358
title: "Cloning and expression of ZAK, a mixed lineage kinase-like protein containing a leucine-zipper and a sterile-alpha motif."
authors:
- Liu TC
- Huang CJ
- Chu YC
- Wei CC
- Chou CC
- Chou MY
- Chou CK
- Yang JJ
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1006/bbrc.2000.3236
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cloning and expression of ZAK, a mixed lineage kinase-like protein containing a leucine-zipper and a sterile-alpha motif.
**Authors:** Liu TC, Huang CJ, Chu YC, Wei CC, Chou CC, Chou MY, Chou CK, Yang JJ
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1006/bbrc.2000.3236](https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.2000.3236)

## Content

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Aug 11;274(3):811-6. doi:
10.1006/bbrc.2000.3236.

Cloning and expression of ZAK, a mixed lineage kinase-like protein containing a
leucine-zipper and a sterile-alpha motif.

Liu TC(1), Huang CJ, Chu YC, Wei CC, Chou CC, Chou MY, Chou CK, Yang JJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutrition, Chung-Shan Medical College, Taichung, 402, Taiwan.

A novel mixed lineage kinase-like protein ZAK, containing a leucine-zipper (LZ)
and a sterile-alpha motif (SAM), was cloned. This cDNA has 2456 bp and encodes a
protein of 800 amino acids that contains a kinase catalytic domain, a
leucine-zipper and a SAM. The molecular weight of this protein is 91kDa.
Northern blot analysis revealed that the expression of this ZAK gene is found in
various parts of human tissues. We also found that ZAK proteins might form
homodimers or oligomers in mammalian cells. MLKs have been proposed to function
as mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase in pathways leading to MAPK
cascade. The expression of ZAK in mammalian cells specifically leads to the
activation of the JNK/SAPK pathway as well as the activation of transcription
factor, NF-kappaB. Overexpression of the ZAK gene induces the apoptosis of a
hepatoma cell line.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.2000.3236
PMID: 10924358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]