---
pmid: '20837989'
title: Naturally occurring variants of human aldo-keto reductases with reduced in
  vitro metabolism of daunorubicin and doxorubicin.
authors:
- Bains OS
- Grigliatti TA
- Reid RE
- Riggs KW
journal: J Pharmacol Exp Ther
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1124/jpet.110.173179
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Naturally occurring variants of human aldo-keto reductases with reduced in vitro metabolism of daunorubicin and doxorubicin.
**Authors:** Bains OS, Grigliatti TA, Reid RE, Riggs KW
**Journal:** J Pharmacol Exp Ther (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1124/jpet.110.173179](https://doi.org/10.1124/jpet.110.173179)

## Abstract

1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2010 Dec;335(3):533-45. doi: 10.1124/jpet.110.173179.
Epub  2010 Sep 13.

Naturally occurring variants of human aldo-keto reductases with reduced in vitro 
metabolism of daunorubicin and doxorubicin.

Bains OS(1), Grigliatti TA, Reid RE, Riggs KW.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics, Faculty of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Doxorubicin (DOX) and daunorubicin (DAUN) are effective anticancer drugs; 
however, considerable interpatient variability exists in their pharmacokinetics. 
This may be caused by altered metabolism by nonsynonymous single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms (ns-SNPs) in genes encoding aldo-keto reductases (AKRs) and 
carbonyl reductases. This study examined the effect of 27 ns-SNPs, in eight 
human genes, on the in vitro metabolism of both drugs to their major 
metabolites, doxorubicinol and daunorubicinol. Kinetic assays measured 
metabolite levels by high-performance liquid chromatography separation with 
fluorescence detection using purified, histidine-tagged, human wild-type, and 
variant enzymes. Maximal rate of activity (V(max)), substrate affinity (K(m)), 
turnover rate (k(cat)), and catalytic efficiency (k(cat)/K(m)) were determined. 
With DAUN as substrate, variants for three genes exhibited significant 
differences in these parameters compared with their wild-type counterparts: the 
A106T, R170C, and P180S variants significantly reduced metabolism compared with 
the AKR1C3 wild-type (V(max), 23-47% decrease; k(cat), 22-47%; k(cat)/K(m), 
38-44%); the L311V variant of AKR1C4 significantly decreased V(max) (47% lower) 
and k(cat) and k(cat)/K(m) (both 43% lower); and the A142T variant of AKR7A2 
significantly affected all kinetic parameters (V(max) and k(cat), 61% decrease; 
K(m), 156% increase; k(cat)/K(m), 85% decrease). With DOX, the R170C and P180S 
variants of AKR1C3 showed significantly reduced V(max) (41-44% decrease), k(cat) 
(39-45%), and k(cat)/K(m) (52-69%), whereas the A142T variant significantly 
altered all kinetic parameters for AKR7A2 (V(max), 41% decrease; k(cat), 44% 
decrease; K(m), 47% increase; k(cat)/K(m), 60% decrease). These findings suggest 
that ns-SNPs in human AKR1C3, AKR1C4, and AKR7A2 significantly decrease the in 
vitro metabolism of DOX and DAUN.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.110.173179
PMID: 20837989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
