---
pmid: '10631168'
title: Hippocampus development and generation of dentate gyrus granule cells is regulated
  by LEF1.
authors:
- Galceran J
- Miyashita-Lin EM
- Devaney E
- Rubenstein JL
- Grosschedl R
journal: Development
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/dev.127.3.469
---

# Hippocampus development and generation of dentate gyrus granule cells is regulated by LEF1.
**Authors:** Galceran J, Miyashita-Lin EM, Devaney E, Rubenstein JL, Grosschedl R
**Journal:** Development (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.127.3.469](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.127.3.469)

## Abstract

1. Development. 2000 Feb;127(3):469-82. doi: 10.1242/dev.127.3.469.

Hippocampus development and generation of dentate gyrus granule cells is 
regulated by LEF1.

Galceran J(1), Miyashita-Lin EM, Devaney E, Rubenstein JL, Grosschedl R.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Microbiology, University of 
California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Lef1 and other genes of the LEF1/TCF family of transcription factors are nuclear 
mediators of Wnt signaling. Here we examine the expression pattern and 
functional importance of Lef1 in the developing forebrain of the mouse. Lef1 is 
expressed in the developing hippocampus, and LEF1-deficient embryos lack dentate 
gyrus granule cells but contain glial cells and interneurons in the region of 
the dentate gyrus. In mouse embryos homozygous for a Lef1-lacZ fusion gene, 
which encodes a protein that is not only deficient in DNA binding but also 
interferes with (beta)-catenin-mediated transcriptional activation by other 
LEF1/TCF proteins, the entire hippocampus including the CA fields is missing. 
Thus, LEF1 regulates the generation of dentate gyrus granule cells, and together 
with other LEF1/TCF proteins, the development of the hippocampus.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.127.3.469
PMID: 10631168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
