---
pmid: '24684932'
title: MUT-14 and SMUT-1 DEAD box RNA helicases have overlapping roles in germline
  RNAi and endogenous siRNA formation.
authors:
- Phillips CM
- Montgomery BE
- Breen PC
- Roovers EF
- Rim YS
- Ohsumi TK
- Newman MA
- van Wolfswinkel JC
- Ketting RF
- Ruvkun G
- Montgomery TA
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4010136
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2014.02.060
---

# MUT-14 and SMUT-1 DEAD box RNA helicases have overlapping roles in germline RNAi and endogenous siRNA formation.
**Authors:** Phillips CM, Montgomery BE, Breen PC, Roovers EF, Rim YS, Ohsumi TK, Newman MA, van Wolfswinkel JC, Ketting RF, Ruvkun G, Montgomery TA
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cub.2014.02.060](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2014.02.060)
**PMC:** [PMC4010136](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4010136/)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2014 Apr 14;24(8):839-44. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2014.02.060. Epub 2014
 Mar 27.

MUT-14 and SMUT-1 DEAD box RNA helicases have overlapping roles in germline RNAi 
and endogenous siRNA formation.

Phillips CM(1), Montgomery BE(2), Breen PC(1), Roovers EF(3), Rim YS(1), Ohsumi 
TK(1), Newman MA(1), van Wolfswinkel JC(4), Ketting RF(5), Ruvkun G(6), 
Montgomery TA(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 
02114, USA; Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, 
USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523, 
USA.
(3)Institute of Molecular Biology, 55128 Mainz, Germany.
(4)Hubrecht Institute-KNAW and University Medical Centre Utrecht, 3584 CT 
Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(5)Institute of Molecular Biology, 55128 Mainz, Germany; Hubrecht Institute-KNAW 
and University Medical Centre Utrecht, 3584 CT Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(6)Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 
02114, USA; Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, 
USA. Electronic address: ruvkun@molbio.mgh.harvard.edu.
(7)Department of Biology, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523, 
USA. Electronic address: tai.montgomery@colostate.edu.

More than 2,000 C. elegans genes are targeted for RNA silencing by the mutator 
complex, a specialized small interfering RNA (siRNA) amplification module which 
is nucleated by the Q/N-rich protein MUT-16. The mutator complex localizes to 
Mutator foci adjacent to P granules at the nuclear periphery in germ cells. 
Here, we show that the DEAD box RNA helicase smut-1 functions redundantly in the 
mutator pathway with its paralog mut-14 during RNAi. Mutations in both smut-1 
and mut-14 also cause widespread loss of endogenous siRNAs. The targets of 
mut-14 and smut-1 largely overlap with the targets of other mutator class genes; 
however, the mut-14 smut-1 double mutant and the mut-16 mutant display the most 
dramatic depletion of siRNAs, suggesting that they act at a similarly early step 
in siRNA formation. mut-14 and smut-1 are predominantly expressed in the 
germline and, unlike other mutator class genes, are specifically required for 
RNAi targeting germline genes. A catalytically inactive, dominant-negative 
missense mutant of MUT-14 is RNAi defective in vivo; however, mutator complexes 
containing the mutant protein retain the ability to synthesize siRNAs in vitro. 
The results point to a role for mut-14 and smut-1 in initiating siRNA 
amplification in germ cell Mutator foci, possibly through the recruitment or 
retention of target mRNAs.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2014.02.060
PMCID: PMC4010136
PMID: 24684932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
