---
pmid: '16973552'
title: Human ESCRT-II complex and its role in human immunodeficiency virus type 1
  release.
authors:
- Langelier C
- von Schwedler UK
- Fisher RD
- De Domenico I
- White PL
- Hill CP
- Kaplan J
- Ward D
- Sundquist WI
journal: J Virol
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1617254
doi: 10.1128/JVI.01049-06
---

# Human ESCRT-II complex and its role in human immunodeficiency virus type 1 release.
**Authors:** Langelier C, von Schwedler UK, Fisher RD, De Domenico I, White PL, Hill CP, Kaplan J, Ward D, Sundquist WI
**Journal:** J Virol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.01049-06](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.01049-06)
**PMC:** [PMC1617254](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1617254/)

## Abstract

1. J Virol. 2006 Oct;80(19):9465-80. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01049-06.

Human ESCRT-II complex and its role in human immunodeficiency virus type 1 
release.

Langelier C(1), von Schwedler UK, Fisher RD, De Domenico I, White PL, Hill CP, 
Kaplan J, Ward D, Sundquist WI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, 15 N. Medical Drive East, Room 4100, University 
of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84112-5650, USA.

The budding of many enveloped RNA viruses, including human immunodeficiency 
virus type 1 (HIV-1), requires some of the same cellular machinery as vesicle 
formation at the multivesicular body (MVB). In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the 
ESCRT-II complex performs a central role in MVB protein sorting and vesicle 
formation, as it is recruited by the upstream ESCRT-I complex and nucleates 
assembly of the downstream ESCRT-III complex. Here, we report that the three 
subunits of human ESCRT-II, EAP20, EAP30, and EAP45, have a number of properties 
in common with their yeast orthologs. Specifically, EAP45 bound ubiquitin via 
its N-terminal GRAM-like ubiquitin-binding in EAP45 (GLUE) domain, both EAP45 
and EAP30 bound the C-terminal domain of TSG101/ESCRT-I, and EAP20 bound the 
N-terminal half of CHMP6/ESCRT-III. Consistent with its expected role in MVB 
vesicle formation, (i) human ESCRT-II localized to endosomal membranes in a 
VPS4-dependent fashion and (ii) depletion of EAP20/ESCRT-II and CHMP6/ESCRT-III 
inhibited lysosomal targeting and downregulation of the epidermal growth factor 
receptor, albeit to a lesser extent than depletion of TSG101/ESCRT-I. 
Nevertheless, HIV-1 release and infectivity were not reduced by efficient small 
interfering RNA depletion of EAP20/ESCRT-II or CHMP6/ESCRT-III. These 
observations indicate that there are probably multiple pathways for protein 
sorting/MVB vesicle formation in human cells and that HIV-1 does not utilize an 
ESCRT-II-dependent pathway to leave the cell.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01049-06
PMCID: PMC1617254
PMID: 16973552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
