---
pmid: '14703012'
title: Functional analysis of the single calmodulin gene in the nematode Caenorhabditis
  elegans by RNA interference and 4-D microscopy.
authors:
- Karabinos A
- Büssing I
- Schulze E
- Wang J
- Weber K
- Schnabel R
journal: Eur J Cell Biol
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1078/0171-9335-00347
---

# Functional analysis of the single calmodulin gene in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans by RNA interference and 4-D microscopy.
**Authors:** Karabinos A, Büssing I, Schulze E, Wang J, Weber K, Schnabel R
**Journal:** Eur J Cell Biol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1078/0171-9335-00347](https://doi.org/10.1078/0171-9335-00347)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Cell Biol. 2003 Nov;82(11):557-63. doi: 10.1078/0171-9335-00347.

Functional analysis of the single calmodulin gene in the nematode Caenorhabditis 
elegans by RNA interference and 4-D microscopy.

Karabinos A(1), Büssing I, Schulze E, Wang J, Weber K, Schnabel R.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Department of Biochemistry, 
Goettingen, Germany.

Calmodulin (CaM), a small calcium-binding protein, is the key mediator of 
numerous calcium-induced changes in cellular activity. Its ligands include 
enzymes, cytoskeletal proteins and ion channels, identified in large part by 
biochemical and cell biological approaches. Thus far it has been difficult to 
assess the function of CaM genetically, because of the maternal supply in 
Drosophila and the presence of at least three nonallelic genes in vertebrates. 
Here we use the unique possibility offered by the C. elegans model system to 
inactivate the single CaM gene (cmd-1) through RNA interference (RNAi). We show 
that the RNAi microinjection approach results in a severe embryonic lethal 
phenotype. Embryos show disturbed morphogenesis, aberrant cell migration 
patterns, a striking hyperproliferation of cells and multiple defects in 
apoptosis. Finally, we show that RNAi delivery by the feeding protocol does not 
allow the efficient silencing of the CaM gene obtained by microinjection. 
General differences between the two delivery methods are discussed.

DOI: 10.1078/0171-9335-00347
PMID: 14703012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
