---
pmid: '2349235'
title: Uvomorulin-catenin complex formation is regulated by a specific domain in the
  cytoplasmic region of the cell adhesion molecule.
authors:
- Ozawa M
- Ringwald M
- Kemler R
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1990'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC54085
doi: 10.1073/pnas.87.11.4246
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Uvomorulin-catenin complex formation is regulated by a specific domain in the cytoplasmic region of the cell adhesion molecule.
**Authors:** Ozawa M, Ringwald M, Kemler R
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1990)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.87.11.4246](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.87.11.4246)
**PMC:** [PMC54085](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC54085/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1990 Jun;87(11):4246-50. doi:
10.1073/pnas.87.11.4246.

Uvomorulin-catenin complex formation is regulated by a specific domain in the 
cytoplasmic region of the cell adhesion molecule.

Ozawa M(1), Ringwald M, Kemler R.

Author information:
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Immunbiologie, Forschergruppe Molekulare Embryologie, 
Stübeweg, Freiburg, Federal Republic of Germany.

We have recently found that the cytoplasmic region of the cell adhesion molecule 
uvomorulin associates with three proteins named catenin alpha, beta, and gamma. 
Here we show by analysis of various mutant uvomorulin polypeptides expressed in 
mouse L cells that this association is mediated by a specific domain in the 
cytoplasmic region. A specific recognition site for catenins is located in a 
72-amino acid domain. Interestingly, 69 of the 72 amino acid residues are 
encoded by a single exon of the uvomorulin gene. To demonstrate the direct 
interaction between catenins and the 72-amino acid domain, cDNA constructs 
composed of H-2Kd cDNA and various 3' sequences of uvomorulin were expressed in 
L cells. Chimeric proteins between H-2Kd and the 72-amino acid domain of 
uvomorulin were shown, by immunoprecipitation with anti-H-2Kd antibodies, to 
complex with catenin alpha, beta, and gamma. Catenins connect uvomorulin to 
cytoskeletal structures. We provide biochemical evidence for an association of 
the uvomorulin-catenin complex with actin bundles. Our results suggest that 
catenin alpha plays a key role in the association with actin filaments, whereas 
catenin beta binds more directly to the cytoplasmic region of uvomorulin. In 
cell aggregation assays with transfected cells expressing normal or mutant 
uvomorulin, the adhesive function was expressed only when uvomorulin was 
associated with catenins. From these results we conclude that the cytoplasmic 
anchorage of uvomorulin is of major biological importance.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.87.11.4246
PMCID: PMC54085
PMID: 2349235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

We have recently found that the cytoplasmic region of the cell adhesion molecule uvomorulin associates with three proteins named catenin alpha, beta, and gamma. Here we show by analysis of various mutant uvomorulin polypeptides expressed in mouse L cells that this association is mediated by a specific domain in the cytoplasmic region. A specific recognition site for catenins is located in a 72-amino acid domain. Interestingly, 69 of the 72 amino acid residues are encoded by a single exon of the uvomorulin gene. To demonstrate the direct interaction between catenins and the 72-amino acid domain, cDNA constructs composed of H-2Kd cDNA and various 3' sequences of uvomorulin were expressed in L cells. Chimeric proteins between H-2Kd and the 72-amino acid domain of uvomorulin were shown, by immunoprecipitation with anti-H-2Kd antibodies, to complex with catenin alpha, beta, and gamma. Catenins connect uvomorulin to cytoskeletal structures. We provide biochemical evidence for an association of the uvomorulin-catenin complex with actin bundles. Our results suggest that catenin alpha plays a key role in the association with actin filaments, whereas catenin beta binds more directly to the cytoplasmic region of uvomorulin. In cell aggregation assays with transfected cells expressing normal or mutant uvomorulin, the adhesive function was expressed only when uvomorulin was associated with catenins. From these results we conclude that the cytoplasmic anchorage of uvomorulin is of major biological importance.
