---
pmid: '12614151'
title: 'Structures of human thymidylate kinase in complex with prodrugs: implications
  for the structure-based design of novel compounds.'
authors:
- Ostermann N
- Segura-Peña D
- Meier C
- Veit T
- Monnerjahn C
- Konrad M
- Lavie A
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi027302t
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Structures of human thymidylate kinase in complex with prodrugs: implications for the structure-based design of novel compounds.
**Authors:** Ostermann N, Segura-Peña D, Meier C, Veit T, Monnerjahn C, Konrad M, Lavie A
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi027302t](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi027302t)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2003 Mar 11;42(9):2568-77. doi: 10.1021/bi027302t.

Structures of human thymidylate kinase in complex with prodrugs: implications 
for the structure-based design of novel compounds.

Ostermann N(1), Segura-Peña D, Meier C, Veit T, Monnerjahn C, Konrad M, Lavie A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Biochemistry, Max Planck Institute for Molecular 
Physiology, Otto-Hahn-Strasse 11, 44227 Dortmund, Germany.

Nucleoside analogue prodrugs are dependent on efficient intracellular stepwise 
phosphorylation to their triphosphate form to become therapeutically active. In 
many cases it is this activation pathway that largely determines the efficacy of 
the drug. To gain further understanding of the determinants for efficient 
conversion by the enzyme thymidylate kinase (TMPK) of clinically important 
thymidine monophosphate analogues to the corresponding diphosphates, we solved 
the crystal structures of the enzyme, with either ADP or the ATP analogue AppNHp 
at the phosphoryl donor site, in complex with TMP, AZTMP (previous work), 
NH2TMP, d4TMP, ddTMP, and FLTMP (this work) at the phosphoryl acceptor site. In 
conjunction with steady-state kinetic data, our structures shed light on the 
effect of 3'-substitutions in the nucleoside monophosphate (NMP) sugar moiety on 
the catalytic rate. We observe a direct correlation between the rate of 
phosphorylation of an NMP and its ability to induce a closing of the enzyme's 
phosphate-binding loop (P-loop). Our results show the drastic effects that 
slight modifications of the substrates exert on the enzyme's conformation and, 
hence, activity and suggest the type of substitutions that are compatible with 
efficient phosphorylation by TMPK.

DOI: 10.1021/bi027302t
PMID: 12614151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
