---
pmid: '27629921'
title: IL-13Rα2 uses TMEM219 in chitinase 3-like-1-induced signalling and effector
  responses.
authors:
- Lee CM
- He CH
- Nour AM
- Zhou Y
- Ma B
- Park JW
- Kim KH
- Dela Cruz C
- Sharma L
- Nasr ML
- Modis Y
- Lee CG
- Elias JA
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5027616
doi: 10.1038/ncomms12752
---

# IL-13Rα2 uses TMEM219 in chitinase 3-like-1-induced signalling and effector responses.
**Authors:** Lee CM, He CH, Nour AM, Zhou Y, Ma B, Park JW, Kim KH, Dela Cruz C, Sharma L, Nasr ML, Modis Y, Lee CG, Elias JA
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncomms12752](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms12752)
**PMC:** [PMC5027616](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5027616/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Commun. 2016 Sep 15;7:12752. doi: 10.1038/ncomms12752.

IL-13Rα2 uses TMEM219 in chitinase 3-like-1-induced signalling and effector 
responses.

Lee CM(1), He CH(1), Nour AM(1), Zhou Y(1), Ma B(1), Park JW(1), Kim KH(2), Dela 
Cruz C(3), Sharma L(3), Nasr ML(4), Modis Y(4), Lee CG(1), Elias JA(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Brown University, 185 
Meeting Street, Box G-L, Providence, Rhode Island 02912, USA.
(2)Division of Cardiology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia 
30322, USA.
(3)Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, 300 Cedar Street, New Haven, 
Connecticut 06520, USA.
(4)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard 
Medical School, 240 Longwood Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.
(5)Division of Medicine and Biological Sciences, Warren Alpert School of 
Medicine, Brown University, Box G-A1, 97 Waterman Street, Providence, Rhode 
Island 02912, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Commun. 2016 Nov 14;7:13541. doi: 10.1038/ncomms13541.

Recent studies demonstrated that chitinase 3-like-1 (Chi3l1) binds to and 
signals via IL-13Rα2. However, the mechanism that IL-13Rα2 uses to mediate the 
effects of Chi3l1 has not been defined. Here, we demonstrate that the membrane 
protein, TMEM219, is a binding partner of IL-13Rα2 using yeast two-hybrid, 
co-immunoprecipitation, co-localization and bimolecular fluorescence 
complementation assays. Furthermore, fluorescence anisotropy nanodisc assays 
revealed a direct physical interaction between TMEM219 and IL-13Rα2-Chi3l1 
complexes. Null mutations or siRNA silencing of TMEM219 or IL-13Rα2 similarly 
decreased Chi3l1-stimulated epithelial cell HB-EGF production and macrophage 
MAPK/Erk and PKB/Akt activation. Null mutations of TMEM219 or IL-13Rα2 also 
phenocopied one another as regards the ability of Chi3l1 to inhibit 
oxidant-induced apoptosis and lung injury, promote melanoma metastasis and 
stimulate TGF-β1. TMEM219 also contributed to the decoy function of IL-13Rα2. 
These studies demonstrate that TMEM219 plays a critical role in Chi3l1-induced 
IL-13Rα2 mediated signalling and tissue responses.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms12752
PMCID: PMC5027616
PMID: 27629921 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
