---
pmid: '23219958'
title: CDC42 is required for structural patterning of the lung during development.
authors:
- Wan H
- Liu C
- Wert SE
- Xu W
- Liao Y
- Zheng Y
- Whitsett JA
journal: Dev Biol
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3549046
doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.11.030
---

# CDC42 is required for structural patterning of the lung during development.
**Authors:** Wan H, Liu C, Wert SE, Xu W, Liao Y, Zheng Y, Whitsett JA
**Journal:** Dev Biol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.11.030](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.11.030)
**PMC:** [PMC3549046](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3549046/)

## Abstract

1. Dev Biol. 2013 Feb 1;374(1):46-57. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.11.030. Epub 2012
 Dec 5.

CDC42 is required for structural patterning of the lung during development.

Wan H(1), Liu C, Wert SE, Xu W, Liao Y, Zheng Y, Whitsett JA.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Obstetric, Gynecologic and Pediatric Diseases and Birth 
Defects of the Ministry of Education, West China Institute of Women and 
Children's Health, and Department of Pediatrics, Huaxi Second University 
Hospital, Sichuan University, No. 17, Section 3, South Renming Rd., Chengdu, 
Sichuan 610041, PR China. wanhuajing@yahoo.com

The formation of highly branched epithelial structures is critical for the 
development of many essential organs, including lung, liver, pancreas, kidney 
and mammary glands. Elongation and branching of these structures require precise 
control of complex morphogenetic processes that are dependent upon coordinate 
regulation of cell shape, apical-basal polarity, proliferation, migration, and 
interactions among multiple cell types. Herein, we demonstrate that 
temporal-spatial regulation of epithelial cell polarity by the small GTPase, 
CDC42, is essential for branching morphogenesis of the developing lung. 
Epithelial cell-specific deletion of CDC42 in fetal mice disrupted epithelial 
cell polarity, the actin cytoskeleton, intercellular contacts, directional 
trafficking of proteins, proliferation and mitotic spindle orientation, 
impairing the organization and patterning of the developing respiratory 
epithelium and adjacent mesenchyme. Transition from a pseudostratified to a 
simple columnar epithelium was impaired, consistent with coordinate 
dysregulation of epithelial cell polarity, mitotic spindle orientation, and 
repositioning of mitotic cells within the epithelium during cell cycle 
progression. Expression of sonic hedgehog and its receptor, patched-1, was 
decreased, while fibroblast growth factor 10 expression in the mesenchyme was 
expanded, resulting in disruption of branching morphogenesis and bronchiolar 
smooth muscle formation in this model. CDC42 is required for spatial positioning 
of proliferating epithelial cells, as well as signaling interactions between the 
epithelium and mesenchyme and is, therefore, essential for formation and 
maintenance of the respiratory tract during morphogenesis of the fetal lung.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.11.030
PMCID: PMC3549046
PMID: 23219958 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
