---
reference_id: PMID:16752391
title: A homozygous nonsense mutation in the methylmalonyl-CoA epimerase gene (MCEE) results in mild methylmalonic aciduria.
authors:
- Bikker H
- Bakker HD
- Abeling NG
- Poll-The BT
- Kleijer WJ
- Rosenblatt DS
- Waterham HR
- Wanders RJ
- Duran M
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1002/humu.20373
keywords:
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Consanguinity
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Methylmalonic Acid/urine
- Racemases and Epimerases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# A homozygous nonsense mutation in the methylmalonyl-CoA epimerase gene (MCEE) results in mild methylmalonic aciduria.
**Authors:** Bikker H, Bakker HD, Abeling NG, Poll-The BT, Kleijer WJ, Rosenblatt DS, Waterham HR, Wanders RJ, Duran M
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.20373](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.20373)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2006 Jul;27(7):640-3. doi: 10.1002/humu.20373.

A homozygous nonsense mutation in the methylmalonyl-CoA epimerase gene (MCEE) 
results in mild methylmalonic aciduria.

Bikker H(1), Bakker HD, Abeling NG, Poll-The BT, Kleijer WJ, Rosenblatt DS, 
Waterham HR, Wanders RJ, Duran M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Genetic Metabolic Diseases and Department of Clinical 
Genetics/Pediatrics/Pediatric Neurology, Academic Medical Center, University of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Methylmalonic aciduria (MMA-uria) is an autosomal recessive inborn error of 
amino acid metabolism, involving valine, threonine, isoleucine, and methionine. 
This organic aciduria may present in the neonatal period with life-threatening 
metabolic acidosis, hyperammonemia, feeding difficulties, pancytopenia, and 
coma. Most affected patients have mutations in the methylmalonyl-coenzyme A 
(methylmalonyl-CoA) mutase gene. Mildly affected patients may present in 
childhood with failure to thrive and recurrent attacks of metabolic acidosis. 
Both a higher residual activity of methylmalonyl-CoA mutase as well as the 
vitamin B12-responsive defects (cblA and cblB) may form the basis of the mild 
disorder. A few patients with moderate MMA-uria are known in whom no defect 
could be identified. Here we present a 16-year-old female patient with 
persisting moderate MMA-uria (approximately 50 mmol/mol creatinine). She was 
born to consanguineous Caucasian parents. Her fibroblast mutase activity was 
normal and no effect of vitamin B12 supplementation could be established. 
Reduced incorporation of 14C-propionate into macromolecules suggested a defect 
in the propionate-to-succinate pathway. We found a homozygous nonsense mutation 
(c.139C>T) in the methylmalonyl-CoA epimerase gene (MCEE), resulting in an early 
terminating signal (p.R47X). Both parents were heterozygous for this mutation; 
they were found to excrete normal amounts of methylmalonic acid (MMA). This is 
the first report of methylmalonyl-CoA epimerase deficiency, thereby 
unequivocally demonstrating the biochemical role of this enzyme in human 
metabolism.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.20373
PMID: 16752391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]