---
pmid: '9417867'
title: 'Multiple protein: protein interactions between the snRNP common core proteins.'
authors:
- Fury MG
- Zhang W
- Christodoulopoulos I
- Zieve GW
journal: Exp Cell Res
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/excr.1997.3750
---

# Multiple protein: protein interactions between the snRNP common core proteins.
**Authors:** Fury MG, Zhang W, Christodoulopoulos I, Zieve GW
**Journal:** Exp Cell Res (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1006/excr.1997.3750](https://doi.org/10.1006/excr.1997.3750)

## Abstract

1. Exp Cell Res. 1997 Nov 25;237(1):63-9. doi: 10.1006/excr.1997.3750.

Multiple protein: protein interactions between the snRNP common core proteins.

Fury MG(1), Zhang W, Christodoulopoulos I, Zieve GW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, SUNY Stony Brook School of Medicine 11794-8691, USA.

The snRNP core proteins (B, D3, D2, D1, E, F, and G) assemble with snRNA and 
form the snRNP core particle with a suggested stoichiometry of B2[D1, D2(E, F, 
G)2]D3. The newly synthesized snRNP core proteins are stored in the cytoplasm in 
three RNA-free complexes of (1) B at 2S-6S; (2) [D1, D2(E, F, G)2] at 6S; and 
(3) (B, D3, and 69 kDa) at 20S. The snRNP proteins assemble stepwise with snRNAs 
that appear transiently in the cytoplasm before returning to the nucleus as 
mature snRNP particles. In this report, two approaches are used to investigate 
the protein:protein interactions between the snRNP proteins. First, the 6S and 
20S cytoplasmic complexes chromatographed as intact structures, supporting their 
identifications as discrete complexes. Second, the cDNAs for the proteins were 
used to test all pair-wise interactions between the seven major core proteins 
using the yeast two-hybrid system. The two-hybrid system identified four strong 
reciprocal interactions, one weak reciprocal interaction, five one-way 
interactions, and one homotypic interaction. The strongest interactions were 
between proteins within the 6S particle. Other interactions were between 
proteins in the 6S and 20S particles or within the 20S particle itself. These 
interactions are likely to occur within the cytoplasmic snRNP core protein 
complexes and the mature snRNP particle.

DOI: 10.1006/excr.1997.3750
PMID: 9417867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
