---
pmid: '10454575'
title: Insulin-induced phosphorylation and activation of cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase
  3B by the serine-threonine kinase Akt.
authors:
- Kitamura T
- Kitamura Y
- Kuroda S
- Hino Y
- Ando M
- Kotani K
- Konishi H
- Matsuzaki H
- Kikkawa U
- Ogawa W
- Kasuga M
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC84592
doi: 10.1128/MCB.19.9.6286
---

# Insulin-induced phosphorylation and activation of cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase 3B by the serine-threonine kinase Akt.
**Authors:** Kitamura T, Kitamura Y, Kuroda S, Hino Y, Ando M, Kotani K, Konishi H, Matsuzaki H, Kikkawa U, Ogawa W, Kasuga M
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.19.9.6286](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.19.9.6286)
**PMC:** [PMC84592](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC84592/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Sep;19(9):6286-96. doi: 10.1128/MCB.19.9.6286.

Insulin-induced phosphorylation and activation of cyclic nucleotide 
phosphodiesterase 3B by the serine-threonine kinase Akt.

Kitamura T(1), Kitamura Y, Kuroda S, Hino Y, Ando M, Kotani K, Konishi H, 
Matsuzaki H, Kikkawa U, Ogawa W, Kasuga M.

Author information:
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Kobe University School of Medicine, 
Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0017, Japan.

Cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase (PDE) is an important regulator of the 
cellular concentrations of the second messengers cyclic AMP (cAMP) and cGMP. 
Insulin activates the 3B isoform of PDE in adipocytes in a phosphoinositide 
3-kinase-dependent manner; however, downstream effectors that mediate signaling 
to PDE3B remain unknown. Insulin-induced phosphorylation and activation of 
endogenous or recombinant PDE3B in 3T3-L1 adipocytes have now been shown to be 
inhibited by a dominant-negative mutant of the serine-threonine kinase Akt, 
suggesting that Akt is necessary for insulin-induced phosphorylation and 
activation of PDE3B. Serine-273 of mouse PDE3B is located within a motif 
(RXRXXS) that is preferentially phosphorylated by Akt. A mutant PDE3B in which 
serine-273 was replaced by alanine was not phosphorylated either in response to 
insulin in intact cells or by purified Akt in vitro. In contrast, PDE3B mutants 
in which alanine was substituted for either serine-296 or serine-421, each of 
which lies within a sequence (RRXS) preferentially phosphorylated by 
cAMP-dependent protein kinase, were phosphorylated by Akt in vitro or in 
response to insulin in intact cells. Moreover, the serine-273 mutant of PDE3B 
was not activated by insulin when expressed in adipocytes. These results suggest 
that PDE3B is a physiological substrate of Akt and that Akt-mediated 
phosphorylation of PDE3B on serine-273 is important for insulin-induced 
activation of PDE3B.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.19.9.6286
PMCID: PMC84592
PMID: 10454575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
