---
pmid: '11555644'
title: Binding of 14-3-3beta regulates the kinase activity and subcellular localization
  of testicular protein kinase 1.
authors:
- Toshima JY
- Toshima J
- Watanabe T
- Mizuno K
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M104620200
---

# Binding of 14-3-3beta regulates the kinase activity and subcellular localization of testicular protein kinase 1.
**Authors:** Toshima JY, Toshima J, Watanabe T, Mizuno K
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M104620200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M104620200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 16;276(46):43471-81. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M104620200. Epub 
2001 Sep 12.

Binding of 14-3-3beta regulates the kinase activity and subcellular localization 
of testicular protein kinase 1.

Toshima JY(1), Toshima J, Watanabe T, Mizuno K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomolecular Sciences, Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku 
University, Sendai 980-8578, Japan.

Testicular protein kinase 1 (TESK1) is a serine/threonine kinase that 
phosphorylates cofilin and induces actin cytoskeletal reorganization. The kinase 
activity of TESK1 is stimulated by integrin-mediated signaling pathways, but the 
mechanism of regulation has remained unknown. By using the yeast two-hybrid 
system, we identified 14-3-3beta to be the binding protein of TESK1. Specific 
interaction between TESK1 and 14-3-3beta became evident in in vitro and in vivo 
co-precipitation assays. 14-3-3beta interacts with TESK1 through the C-terminal 
region of TESK1 and in a manner dependent on the phosphorylation of Ser-439 
within an RXXSXP motif. Binding of 14-3-3beta inhibited the kinase activity of 
TESK1. During cell spreading on fibronectin, the TESK1/14-3-3beta interaction 
significantly decreased, in a time course that inversely correlated with 
increase in TESK1 kinase activity. Thus, the dissociation of 14-3-3beta from a 
TESK1/14-3-3beta complex is likely to be involved in the integrin-mediated TESK1 
activation. In HeLa cells, TESK1, together with 14-3-3beta, accumulated at the 
cell periphery when cells were plated on fibronectin, whereas they were 
diffusely distributed in the cytoplasm in the case of non-stimulated cells. We 
propose that 14-3-3beta plays important roles in regulating the kinase activity 
of TESK1 and localizing TESK1 to cell adhesion sites following integrin 
stimulation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M104620200
PMID: 11555644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
