---
pmid: '25704822'
title: Synthetic quantitative array technology identifies the Ubp3-Bre5 deubiquitinase
  complex as a negative regulator of mitophagy.
authors:
- Müller M
- Kötter P
- Behrendt C
- Walter E
- Scheckhuber CQ
- Entian KD
- Reichert AS
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.01.044
---

# Synthetic quantitative array technology identifies the Ubp3-Bre5 deubiquitinase complex as a negative regulator of mitophagy.
**Authors:** Müller M, Kötter P, Behrendt C, Walter E, Scheckhuber CQ, Entian KD, Reichert AS
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2015.01.044](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2015.01.044)

## Abstract

1. Cell Rep. 2015 Feb 24;10(7):1215-25. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.01.044. Epub 
2015 Feb 19.

Synthetic quantitative array technology identifies the Ubp3-Bre5 deubiquitinase 
complex as a negative regulator of mitophagy.

Müller M(1), Kötter P(2), Behrendt C(3), Walter E(1), Scheckhuber CQ(1), Entian 
KD(2), Reichert AS(4).

Author information:
(1)Mitochondrial Biology, Buchmann Institute for Molecular Life Sciences and 
Zentrum für Molekulare Medizin, Goethe University, Max-von-Laue-Straße 15, 60438 
Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(2)Institut für Molekulare Biowissenschaften, Goethe University, 
Max-von-Laue-Straße 9, 60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(3)Mitochondrial Biology, Buchmann Institute for Molecular Life Sciences and 
Zentrum für Molekulare Medizin, Goethe University, Max-von-Laue-Straße 15, 60438 
Frankfurt am Main, Germany; Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology I, 
Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University, Universitätsstraße 1, 40225 
Düsseldorf, Germany.
(4)Mitochondrial Biology, Buchmann Institute for Molecular Life Sciences and 
Zentrum für Molekulare Medizin, Goethe University, Max-von-Laue-Straße 15, 60438 
Frankfurt am Main, Germany; Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology I, 
Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University, Universitätsstraße 1, 40225 
Düsseldorf, Germany. Electronic address: reichert@hhu.de.

Mitophagy is crucial to ensuring mitochondrial quality control. However, the 
molecular mechanism and regulation of mitophagy are still not fully understood. 
Here, we developed a quantitative methodology termed synthetic quantitative 
array (SQA) technology, which allowed us to perform a genome-wide screen for 
modulators of rapamycin-induced mitophagy in S. cerevisiae. SQA technology can 
be easily employed for other enzyme-based reporter systems and widely applied in 
yeast research. We identified 86 positive and 10 negative regulators of 
mitophagy. Moreover, SQA-based analysis of non-selective autophagy revealed that 
63 of these regulators are specific for mitophagy and 33 regulate autophagy in 
general. The Ubp3-Bre5 deubiquitination complex was found to inhibit mitophagy 
but, conversely, to promote other types of autophagy, including ribophagy. This 
complex translocates dynamically to mitochondria upon induction of mitophagy. 
These findings point to a role of ubiquitination in mitophagy in yeast and 
suggest a reciprocal regulation of distinct autophagy pathways.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.01.044
PMID: 25704822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
