---
pmid: '17920016'
title: Amyloid precursor protein regulates brain apolipoprotein E and cholesterol
  metabolism through lipoprotein receptor LRP1.
authors:
- Liu Q
- Zerbinatti CV
- Zhang J
- Hoe HS
- Wang B
- Cole SL
- Herz J
- Muglia L
- Bu G
journal: Neuron
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2045076
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2007.08.008
---

# Amyloid precursor protein regulates brain apolipoprotein E and cholesterol metabolism through lipoprotein receptor LRP1.
**Authors:** Liu Q, Zerbinatti CV, Zhang J, Hoe HS, Wang B, Cole SL, Herz J, Muglia L, Bu G
**Journal:** Neuron (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuron.2007.08.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2007.08.008)
**PMC:** [PMC2045076](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2045076/)

## Abstract

1. Neuron. 2007 Oct 4;56(1):66-78. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2007.08.008.

Amyloid precursor protein regulates brain apolipoprotein E and cholesterol 
metabolism through lipoprotein receptor LRP1.

Liu Q(1), Zerbinatti CV, Zhang J, Hoe HS, Wang B, Cole SL, Herz J, Muglia L, Bu 
G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, 
MO 63110, USA.

Mutations in the amyloid precursor protein (APP) cause early-onset Alzheimer's 
disease (AD), but the only genetic risk factor for late-onset AD is the 
varepsilon4 allele of apolipoprotein E (apoE), a major cholesterol carrier. 
Using Cre-lox conditional knockout mice, we demonstrate that lipoprotein 
receptor LRP1 expression regulates apoE and cholesterol levels within the CNS. 
We also found that deletion of APP and its homolog APLP2, or components of the 
gamma-secretase complex, significantly enhanced the expression and function of 
LRP1, which was reversed by forced expression of the APP intracellular domain 
(AICD). We further show that AICD, together with Fe65 and Tip60, interacts with 
the LRP1 promoter and suppresses its transcription. Together, our findings 
support that the gamma-secretase cleavage of APP plays a central role in 
regulating apoE and cholesterol metabolism in the CNS via LRP1 and establish a 
biological linkage between APP and apoE, the two major genetic determinants of 
AD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2007.08.008
PMCID: PMC2045076
PMID: 17920016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
