---
pmid: '18658046'
title: Transcriptional activation of HIF-1 by RORalpha and its role in hypoxia signaling.
authors:
- Kim EJ
- Yoo YG
- Yang WK
- Lim YS
- Na TY
- Lee IK
- Lee MO
journal: Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.108.171546
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Transcriptional activation of HIF-1 by RORalpha and its role in hypoxia signaling.
**Authors:** Kim EJ, Yoo YG, Yang WK, Lim YS, Na TY, Lee IK, Lee MO
**Journal:** Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1161/ATVBAHA.108.171546](https://doi.org/10.1161/ATVBAHA.108.171546)

## Abstract

1. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2008 Oct;28(10):1796-802. doi: 
10.1161/ATVBAHA.108.171546. Epub 2008 Jul 24.

Transcriptional activation of HIF-1 by RORalpha and its role in hypoxia 
signaling.

Kim EJ(1), Yoo YG, Yang WK, Lim YS, Na TY, Lee IK, Lee MO.

Author information:
(1)College of Pharmacy and Bio-MAX Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul, 
Korea.

OBJECTIVE: Hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha (HIF-1alpha) is primarily involved in 
the adapting of cells to changes in oxygen levels, which is essential for normal 
vascular function. Recently, physiological roles for retinoic acid-related 
orphan receptor alpha (RORalpha) have been implicated in cardiovascular diseases 
such as atherosclerosis. In this study, we have investigated the potential roles 
of RORalpha in the hypoxia signaling pathway in connection with activation of 
HIF-1alpha.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Under hypoxic conditions, expression of RORalpha was 
induced. When RORalpha was introduced exogenously, protein level as well as 
transcriptional activity of HIF-1alpha was enhanced. Putative ligands of 
RORalpha, such as melatonin and cholesterol sulfate, induced transcriptional 
activity for HIF-1alpha, which was abolished by RNA interference against 
RORalpha. RORalpha was physically associated with HIF-1alpha through DNA binding 
domain, which was required to the RORalpha-induced stabilization and 
transcriptional activation of HIF-1alpha. Finally, either infection with 
adenovirus encoding RORalpha or treatment with ROR ligands enhanced the 
formation of capillary tubes by human umbilical vascular endothelial cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide a new insight for the function of RORalpha in 
amplification of hypoxia signaling and suggest a potential application of 
RORalpha ligands for the therapy of hypoxia-associated vascular diseases.

DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.108.171546
PMID: 18658046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
