---
pmid: '9139828'
title: Thermoregulatory and metabolic phenotypes of mice lacking noradrenaline and
  adrenaline.
authors:
- Thomas SA
- Palmiter RD
journal: Nature
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/387094a0
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Thermoregulatory and metabolic phenotypes of mice lacking noradrenaline and adrenaline.
**Authors:** Thomas SA, Palmiter RD
**Journal:** Nature (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1038/387094a0](https://doi.org/10.1038/387094a0)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 1997 May 1;387(6628):94-7. doi: 10.1038/387094a0.

Thermoregulatory and metabolic phenotypes of mice lacking noradrenaline and 
adrenaline.

Thomas SA(1), Palmiter RD.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry, University of 
Washington, Seattle 98195-7370, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 1997 May 1;387(6628):27-8. doi: 10.1038/387027a0.

Adrenaline and noradrenaline, the main effectors of the sympathetic nervous 
system and adrenal medulla, respectively, are thought to control adiposity and 
energy balance through several mechanisms. They promote catabolism of 
triglycerides and glycogen, stimulate food intake when injected into the central 
nervous system, activate thermogenesis in brown adipose tissue, and regulate 
heat loss through modulation of peripheral vasoconstriction and piloerection. 
Thermogenesis in brown adipose tissue occurs in response to cold and overeating 
(diet induced), and there is an inverse relationship between diet-induced 
thermogenesis and obesity both in humans and in animal models. As a potential 
model for obesity, we generated mice that cannot synthesize noradrenaline or 
adrenaline by inactivating the gene that encodes dopamine beta-hydroxylase. 
These mice are cold intolerant because they have impaired peripheral 
vasoconstriction and are unable to induce thermogenesis in brown adipose tissue 
through uncoupling protein (UCP1). The mutants have increased food intake but do 
not become obese because their basal metabolic rate is also elevated. The 
unexpected increase in basal metabolic rate is not due to hyperthyroidism, 
compensation by the widely expressed uncoupling protein UCP2, or shivering.

DOI: 10.1038/387094a0
PMID: 9139828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
