---
pmid: '15941950'
title: Alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase protein expression is associated with the degree
  of differentiation in breast cancer using quantitative image analysis.
authors:
- Witkiewicz AK
- Varambally S
- Shen R
- Mehra R
- Sabel MS
- Ghosh D
- Chinnaiyan AM
- Rubin MA
- Kleer CG
journal: Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-04-0607
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase protein expression is associated with the degree of differentiation in breast cancer using quantitative image analysis.
**Authors:** Witkiewicz AK, Varambally S, Shen R, Mehra R, Sabel MS, Ghosh D, Chinnaiyan AM, Rubin MA, Kleer CG
**Journal:** Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-04-0607](https://doi.org/10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-04-0607)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2005 Jun;14(6):1418-23. doi: 
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-04-0607.

Alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase protein expression is associated with the degree 
of differentiation in breast cancer using quantitative image analysis.

Witkiewicz AK(1), Varambally S, Shen R, Mehra R, Sabel MS, Ghosh D, Chinnaiyan 
AM, Rubin MA, Kleer CG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase (AMACR) is an enzyme involved in the metabolism of 
fatty acids and is an important tissue biomarker in the prostate to distinguish 
normal glands from prostate cancer. Here, for the first time, we evaluated the 
expression of AMACR protein in normal breast, ductal carcinoma in situ, and 
invasive carcinomas. By immunofluorescence and immunohistochemistry, AMACR was 
seen in cytoplasmic granules consistent with a mitochondrial and peroxisomal 
localization. AMACR expression was determined by immunohistochemistry on 160 
invasive carcinomas with long follow-up, using a high-density tissue microarray, 
and evaluated by two methods: standard pathology review and quantitative image 
analysis. AMACR was overexpressed in 42 of 160 (26%) invasive carcinomas, and it 
was associated with a decrease in tumor differentiation, a feature of aggressive 
breast cancer. Quantitative analysis allowed for better discrimination and more 
accurate evaluation of low-intensity staining. In conclusion, AMACR protein is 
expressed in normal breast and its expression seems to increase in invasive 
carcinomas. We observed stronger AMACR protein expression in high-grade 
carcinomas when compared with low-grade ones. Quantitative image analysis is a 
novel way to accurately and reproducibly evaluate immunohistochemistry in breast 
tissue samples using high-density tissue microarrays.

DOI: 10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-04-0607
PMID: 15941950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
