---
pmid: '19262567'
title: Molecular dissection of the eukaryotic initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) export-competent
  RNP.
authors:
- Topisirovic I
- Siddiqui N
- Lapointe VL
- Trost M
- Thibault P
- Bangeranye C
- Piñol-Roma S
- Borden KL
journal: EMBO J
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2683702
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.53
---

# Molecular dissection of the eukaryotic initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) export-competent RNP.
**Authors:** Topisirovic I, Siddiqui N, Lapointe VL, Trost M, Thibault P, Bangeranye C, Piñol-Roma S, Borden KL
**Journal:** EMBO J (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2009.53](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2009.53)
**PMC:** [PMC2683702](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2683702/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2009 Apr 22;28(8):1087-98. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.53. Epub 2009 Mar
5.

Molecular dissection of the eukaryotic initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) 
export-competent RNP.

Topisirovic I(1), Siddiqui N, Lapointe VL, Trost M, Thibault P, Bangeranye C, 
Piñol-Roma S, Borden KL.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Université de Montréal, 
Montréal, Quebec, Canada.

The eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) controls gene expression 
through its effects on mRNA export and cap-dependent translation, both of which 
contribute to its oncogenic potential. In contrast to its translation function, 
the mRNA export function of eIF4E is poorly understood. Using an RNP 
isolation/mass spectrometry approach, we identified candidate cofactors of eIF4E 
mRNA export including LRPPRC. This protein associates with mRNAs containing the 
eIF4E-sensitivity element (4E-SE), and its overexpression alters the nuclear 
export of several eIF4E-sensitive mRNAs. LRPPRC-mediated alteration of eIF4E's 
mRNA export function requires the integrity of its eIF4E-binding site and it 
coincides with the subcellular re-distribution of eIF4E. The eIF4E export RNP is 
distinct in composition from the bulk mRNA export pathway, in that eIF4E- and 
eIF4E-sensitive mRNAs do not associate with general mRNA export factors such as 
TAP/NXF1 or REF/Aly. Our data indicate that mRNA export pathways have evolved 
for specific mRNAs enabling the differential regulation of biochemical pathways 
by modulating the expression of groups of genes at the level of their export.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2009.53
PMCID: PMC2683702
PMID: 19262567 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
