---
pmid: '11331876'
title: WIP regulates N-WASP-mediated actin polymerization and filopodium formation.
authors:
- Martinez-Quiles N
- Rohatgi R
- Antón IM
- Medina M
- Saville SP
- Miki H
- Yamaguchi H
- Takenawa T
- Hartwig JH
- Geha RS
- Ramesh N
journal: Nat Cell Biol
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/35074551
---

# WIP regulates N-WASP-mediated actin polymerization and filopodium formation.
**Authors:** Martinez-Quiles N, Rohatgi R, Antón IM, Medina M, Saville SP, Miki H, Yamaguchi H, Takenawa T, Hartwig JH, Geha RS, Ramesh N
**Journal:** Nat Cell Biol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1038/35074551](https://doi.org/10.1038/35074551)

## Abstract

1. Nat Cell Biol. 2001 May;3(5):484-91. doi: 10.1038/35074551.

WIP regulates N-WASP-mediated actin polymerization and filopodium formation.

Martinez-Quiles N(1), Rohatgi R, Antón IM, Medina M, Saville SP, Miki H, 
Yamaguchi H, Takenawa T, Hartwig JH, Geha RS, Ramesh N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Immunology, Children's Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Induction of filopodia is dependent on activation of the small GTPase Cdc42 and 
on neural Wiskott-Aldrich-syndrome protein (N-WASP). Here we show that 
WASP-interacting protein (WIP) interacts directly with N-WASP and actin. WIP 
retards N-WASP/Cdc42-activated actin polymerization mediated by the Arp2/3 
complex, and stabilizes actin filaments. Microinjection of WIP into NIH 3T3 
fibroblasts induces filopodia; this is inhibited by microinjection of 
anti-N-WASP antibody. Microinjection of anti-WIP antibody inhibits induction of 
filopodia by bradykinin, by an active Cdc42 mutant (Cdc42(V12)) and by N-WASP. 
Our results indicate that WIP and N-WASP may act as a functional unit in 
filopodium formation, which is consistent with their role in actin-tail 
formation in cells infected with vaccinia virus or Shigella.

DOI: 10.1038/35074551
PMID: 11331876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
