---
reference_id: PMID:40569974
title: Cryo-EM structural analyses reveal a unique role for elongation factor G2 (EF-G2) in Mycobacteria.
authors:
- Baid P
- Sengupta J
journal: FEBS J
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1111/febs.70161
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cryo-EM structural analyses reveal a unique role for elongation factor G2 (EF-G2) in Mycobacteria.
**Authors:** Baid P, Sengupta J
**Journal:** FEBS J (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1111/febs.70161](https://doi.org/10.1111/febs.70161)

## Content

1. FEBS J. 2025 Dec;292(24):6533-6556. doi: 10.1111/febs.70161. Epub 2025 Jun 26.

Cryo-EM structural analyses reveal a unique role for elongation factor G2 
(EF-G2) in Mycobacteria.

Baid P(1), Sengupta J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Structural Biology and Bioinformatics Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of 
Chemical Biology, Kolkata, India.
(2)Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad, India.

The gene-encoding translation elongation factor G (EF-G) has undergone gene 
duplication across various bacterial species including Mycobacteria, and in 
mammalian mitochondria, leading to the emergence of the paralogue elongation 
factor G2 (EF-G2). Our study reveals that mycobacterial EF-G2, unlike EF-G1, 
neither participates in ribosome-recycling nor significantly contributes to 
overall translation, suggesting that it plays an alternative role in 
Mycobacteria. Remarkably, our investigation found a significant overexpression 
of mycobacterial EF-G2 during the stationary growth phase. Moreover, EF-G2 lacks 
ribosome-dependent GTPase activity, an observation consistent with previous 
reports. Cryo-EM analysis of the M. smegmatis 70S ribosome purified from the 
nutrient-starved (stationary) phase and complexed with EF-G2 unveiled the 
structural basis for its inability to hydrolyse GTP in a ribosome-dependent 
manner. Furthermore, we report an unprecedented binding mode of two EF-G2 copies 
on the 50S ribosomal subunit that impedes subunit association, thereby 
preventing the formation of active 70S ribosomes. Thus, instead of performing 
canonical functions, mycobacterial EF-G2 acts as a translation repressor during 
nutrient starvation. Altogether, our findings shed light on the multifaceted 
mechanisms by which EF-G2 modulates protein synthesis under nutrient-limited 
conditions, providing insights into adaptive strategies employed by Mycobacteria 
to survive in hostile environments.

© 2025 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.70161
PMID: 40569974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]