---
pmid: '25778793'
title: The immunosuppressive enzyme IL4I1 promotes FoxP3(+) regulatory T lymphocyte
  differentiation.
authors:
- Cousin C
- Aubatin A
- Le Gouvello S
- Apetoh L
- Castellano F
- Molinier-Frenkel V
journal: Eur J Immunol
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/eji.201445000
---

# The immunosuppressive enzyme IL4I1 promotes FoxP3(+) regulatory T lymphocyte differentiation.
**Authors:** Cousin C, Aubatin A, Le Gouvello S, Apetoh L, Castellano F, Molinier-Frenkel V
**Journal:** Eur J Immunol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/eji.201445000](https://doi.org/10.1002/eji.201445000)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Jun;45(6):1772-82. doi: 10.1002/eji.201445000. Epub 2015
Apr  17.

The immunosuppressive enzyme IL4I1 promotes FoxP3(+) regulatory T lymphocyte 
differentiation.

Cousin C(1)(2), Aubatin A(1)(2), Le Gouvello S(1)(2)(3), Apetoh L(4)(5)(6), 
Castellano F(1)(2)(3), Molinier-Frenkel V(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)INSERM, U955, Equipe 09 and Equipe 04, Créteil, France.
(2)Université Paris Est, Faculté de médecine, Créteil, France.
(3)AP-HP, Hôpital H. Mondor - A. Chenevier, Service d'Immunologie Biologique, 
Créteil, France.
(4)INSERM, U866, Dijon, France.
(5)Centre Georges François Leclerc, Dijon, France.
(6)Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France.

IL4I1 (interleukin-4-induced gene 1) is a phenylalanine oxidase produced mainly 
by APCs of myeloid origin, and converts phenylalanine (Phe) to phenylpyruvate, 
hydrogen peroxide, and ammonia. We have previously shown that IL4I1 is highly 
expressed by tumor-associated macrophages from various human cancers and 
facilitates immune evasion from the cytotoxic response in a murine tumor model. 
Indeed, IL4I1 inhibits T-cell proliferation via hydrogen peroxide toxicity on 
effector/memory T cells. Here, we explored the effect of IL4I1 on naïve CD4(+) 
T-cell differentiation. We show that IL4I1 stimulates the generation of Foxp3(+) 
regulatory T (Treg) cells in vitro from human and mouse T cells. This effect was 
observed with IL4I1 from different sources, including the naturally produced 
enzyme. Conversely, IL4I1 limits Th1 and Th2 polarization while modifying the 
Th17 phenotype, in particular, by inducing its own production. Analysis of 
Treg-cell induction under conditions of Phe deprivation and hydrogen peroxide 
addition suggests that Phe consumption by the enzyme participates in Treg-cell 
enrichment. In line with this hypothesis, IL4I1 inhibits mTORC1 signaling 
shortly after T-cell activation. Thus, the IL4I1 enzyme may act on T cells both 
by direct inhibition of effector cell proliferation and by indirect 
immunoregulation mediated by Treg-cell induction.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201445000
PMID: 25778793 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
