---
pmid: '21135155'
title: Cryptochrome-positive and -negative clock neurons in Drosophila entrain differentially
  to light and temperature.
authors:
- Yoshii T
- Hermann C
- Helfrich-Förster C
journal: J Biol Rhythms
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1177/0748730410381962
---

# Cryptochrome-positive and -negative clock neurons in Drosophila entrain differentially to light and temperature.
**Authors:** Yoshii T, Hermann C, Helfrich-Förster C
**Journal:** J Biol Rhythms (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0748730410381962](https://doi.org/10.1177/0748730410381962)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Rhythms. 2010 Dec;25(6):387-98. doi: 10.1177/0748730410381962.

Cryptochrome-positive and -negative clock neurons in Drosophila entrain 
differentially to light and temperature.

Yoshii T(1), Hermann C, Helfrich-Förster C.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Zoology, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany. 
taishi.yoshii@biozentrum.uni-wuerzburg.de

The blue-light photoreceptive protein Cryptochrome (CRY) plays an important role 
in the light synchronization of the Drosophila circadian clock. Previously, we 
found that among the approximately 150 clock neurons, many but not all neurons 
express CRY. We speculated that the CRY-positive pacemaker neurons may be 
especially important for light entrainment, whereas the CRY-negative neurons may 
be important for other environmental cues, for example, temperature. To 
investigate this hypothesis, we tested the entrainability of the clock neurons 
to out-of-phase light and temperature cycles. When light-dark or light-dim light 
cycles were shifted by 12 h with respect to temperature cycles, behavioral 
rhythms of wild-type flies were re-entrained by the light cycles. In this 
condition, we found that TIMELESS (TIM) level was strongly influenced by the 
temperature cycles in many CRY-negative clock neurons, suggesting that the 
CRY-negative neurons have higher sensitivity to temperature. Under the same 
conditions, cry-null mutants entrained to the temperature cycles or very slowly 
re-entrained to light-dark cycles. Our results suggest that there are 2 types of 
clock neurons having differential sensitivities to light and temperature, and 
CRY is a key component for the preferential entrainment to light.

DOI: 10.1177/0748730410381962
PMID: 21135155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
