---
pmid: '28586645'
title: The Protein Phosphatase 4 and SMEK1 Complex Dephosphorylates HYL1 to Promote
  miRNA Biogenesis by Antagonizing the MAPK Cascade in Arabidopsis.
authors:
- Su C
- Li Z
- Cheng J
- Li L
- Zhong S
- Liu L
- Zheng Y
- Zheng B
journal: Dev Cell
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2017.05.008
---

# The Protein Phosphatase 4 and SMEK1 Complex Dephosphorylates HYL1 to Promote miRNA Biogenesis by Antagonizing the MAPK Cascade in Arabidopsis.
**Authors:** Su C, Li Z, Cheng J, Li L, Zhong S, Liu L, Zheng Y, Zheng B
**Journal:** Dev Cell (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.devcel.2017.05.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2017.05.008)

## Abstract

1. Dev Cell. 2017 Jun 5;41(5):527-539.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2017.05.008.

The Protein Phosphatase 4 and SMEK1 Complex Dephosphorylates HYL1 to Promote
miRNA Biogenesis by Antagonizing the MAPK Cascade in Arabidopsis.

Su C(1), Li Z(1), Cheng J(1), Li L(1), Zhong S(1), Liu L(2), Zheng Y(2), Zheng
B(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Collaborative Innovation Center
for Genetics and Development, Institute of Plant Biology, School of Life
Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China.
(2)Yunnan Key Laboratory of Primate Biomedical Research, Institute of Primate
Translational Medicine, Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming
650500, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Collaborative Innovation Center
for Genetics and Development, Institute of Plant Biology, School of Life
Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China. Electronic address:
zhengbl@fudan.edu.cn.

Phosphorylation plays an essential role in microRNA (miRNA) processing by
regulating co-factors of the miRNA biogenesis machinery. HYL1 (Hyponastic Leaves
1), a core co-factor in plant miRNA biogenesis, is a short-lived phosphoprotein.
However, the precise balance and regulatory mechanism of the stability and
phosphorylation of HYL1 remain unclear. Here, we show that a highly conserved
PP4 (Protein Phosphatase 4) and SMEK1 (Suppressor of MEK 1) complex
dephosphorylates HYL1 to promote miRNA biogenesis, by antagonizing the MAPK
cascade in Arabidopsis. The smek1 mutants exhibit defective miRNA biogenesis due
to accelerated degradation of HYL1. SMEK1 stabilizes HYL1 in a dual manner:
SMEK1, as a suppressor, inhibits MAPK activation to attenuate HYL1
phosphorylation; SMEK1 assembles a functional PP4 to target HYL1 for
dephosphorylation. Moreover, the protein level of SMEK1 is increased in response
to abscisic acid. Our results provide insights into the delicate balance between
a protein kinase and a phosphatase during miRNA biogenesis.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2017.05.008
PMID: 28586645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
