---
pmid: '17242187'
title: p85alpha acts as a novel signal transducer for mediation of cellular apoptotic
  response to UV radiation.
authors:
- Song L
- Li J
- Ye J
- Yu G
- Ding J
- Zhang D
- Ouyang W
- Dong Z
- Kim SO
- Huang C
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1899908
doi: 10.1128/MCB.00657-06
---

# p85alpha acts as a novel signal transducer for mediation of cellular apoptotic response to UV radiation.
**Authors:** Song L, Li J, Ye J, Yu G, Ding J, Zhang D, Ouyang W, Dong Z, Kim SO, Huang C
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.00657-06](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.00657-06)
**PMC:** [PMC1899908](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1899908/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Apr;27(7):2713-31. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00657-06. Epub 2007
Jan  22.

p85alpha acts as a novel signal transducer for mediation of cellular apoptotic 
response to UV radiation.

Song L(1), Li J, Ye J, Yu G, Ding J, Zhang D, Ouyang W, Dong Z, Kim SO, Huang C.

Author information:
(1)Nelson Institute of Environmental Medicine, New York University School of 
Medicine, 57 Old Forge Road, Tuxedo, NY 10987, USA.

Apoptosis is an important cellular response to UV radiation (UVR), but the 
corresponding mechanisms remain largely unknown. Here we report that the 
p85alpha regulatory subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI-3K) exerted a 
proapoptotic role in response to UVR through the induction of tumor necrosis 
factor alpha (TNF-alpha) gene expression. This special effect of p85alpha was 
unrelated to the PI-3K-dependent signaling pathway. Further evidence 
demonstrated that the inducible transcription factor NFAT3 was the major 
downstream target of p85alpha for the mediation of UVR-induced apoptosis and 
TNF-alpha gene transcription. p85alpha regulated UVR-induced NFAT3 activation by 
modulation of its nuclear translocation and DNA binding and the relevant 
transcriptional activities. Gel shift assays and site-directed mutagenesis 
allowed the identification of two regions in the TNF-alpha gene promoter that 
served as the NFAT3 recognition sequences. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays 
further confirmed that the recruitment of NFAT3 to the endogenous TNF-alpha 
promoter was regulated by p85alpha upon UVR exposure. Finally, the knockdown of 
the NFAT3 level by its specific small interfering RNA decreased UVR-induced 
TNF-alpha gene transcription and cell apoptosis. The knockdown of endogenous 
p85alpha blocked NFAT activity and TNF-alpha gene transcription, as well as cell 
apoptosis. Thus, we demonstrated p85alpha-associated but PI-3K-independent cell 
death in response to UVR and identified a novel p85alpha/NFAT3/TNF-alpha 
signaling pathway for the mediation of cellular apoptotic responses under 
certain stress conditions such as UVR.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00657-06
PMCID: PMC1899908
PMID: 17242187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
