---
pmid: '15702347'
title: The N-terminal region of the Schizosaccharomyces pombe RecQ helicase, Rqh1p,
  physically interacts with Topoisomerase III and is required for Rqh1p function.
authors:
- Ahmad F
- Stewart E
journal: Mol Genet Genomics
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s00438-005-1111-3
---

# The N-terminal region of the Schizosaccharomyces pombe RecQ helicase, Rqh1p, physically interacts with Topoisomerase III and is required for Rqh1p function.
**Authors:** Ahmad F, Stewart E
**Journal:** Mol Genet Genomics (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00438-005-1111-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00438-005-1111-3)

## Abstract

1. Mol Genet Genomics. 2005 Mar;273(1):102-14. doi: 10.1007/s00438-005-1111-3.
Epub  2005 Feb 9.

The N-terminal region of the Schizosaccharomyces pombe RecQ helicase, Rqh1p, 
physically interacts with Topoisomerase III and is required for Rqh1p function.

Ahmad F(1), Stewart E.

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Michael Smith Building, University of 
Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PT, UK. Fouzia.ahmad@manchester.ac.uk

The Schizosaccharomyces pombe rqh1+ gene encodes a member of the RecQ DNA 
helicase family. Members of this protein family are essential for the 
maintenance of genetic integrity. Thus, mutations in the genes encoding the 
human RecQ homologues Blm, Wrn and RecQ4 cause Bloom syndrome, Werner syndrome 
and Rothmund-Thomson syndrome, respectively-diseases which result from genome 
instability. S. pombe cells that lack a functional rqh1+ gene show reduced 
viability and display defective chromosome segregation, particularly after UV 
irradiation or S-phase arrest. In this study we used an rqh1+ deletion series to 
show that the N-terminal portion of Rqh1 is essential for Rqh1 function. 
Moreover, the conserved Helicase and RNaseD C-terminal (HRDC) domain of Rqh1 
also plays a role in allowing cells to tolerate exposure to DNA damaging agents 
and the S-phase inhibitor hydroxyurea (HU). We also demonstrate that 
Topoisomerase III (Top3) binds to a site within the first 322 N-terminal amino 
acids of Rqh1 and that this binding correlates with Rqh1 function. Genetic 
analysis of rqh1- top3delta mutants reveals that, in the presence of functional 
or partially functional Rqh1 protein, Top3 is required to maintain genome 
integrity and cell viability.

DOI: 10.1007/s00438-005-1111-3
PMID: 15702347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
