---
pmid: '23687085'
title: A novel RASA1 mutation causing capillary malformation-arteriovenous malformation
  (CM-AVM) presenting during pregnancy.
authors:
- Durrington HJ
- Firth HV
- Patient C
- Belham M
- Jayne D
- Burrows N
- Morrell NW
- Chilvers ER
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35935
---

# A novel RASA1 mutation causing capillary malformation-arteriovenous malformation (CM-AVM) presenting during pregnancy.
**Authors:** Durrington HJ, Firth HV, Patient C, Belham M, Jayne D, Burrows N, Morrell NW, Chilvers ER
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.35935](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.35935)

## Abstract

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Jul;161A(7):1690-4. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35935. Epub
2013  May 17.

A novel RASA1 mutation causing capillary malformation-arteriovenous malformation 
(CM-AVM) presenting during pregnancy.

Durrington HJ(1), Firth HV, Patient C, Belham M, Jayne D, Burrows N, Morrell NW, 
Chilvers ER.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine, 
Cambridge, UK.

Capillary malformation-arteriovenous malformation (CM-AVM) is a newly recognized 
clinical entity caused by mutation of the RASA1 gene, which encodes p120-RasGAP. 
Here we describe, for the first time, a patient with CM-AVM presenting during 
the late stages of pregnancy with pulmonary "capillary level" microvascular 
shunt, worsening cutaneous capillary malformations, and gross fluid overload. 
Sequencing revealed a novel mutation of the RASA1 gene involving a frameshift 
mutation in the RASGAP domain of RASA1. This report extends our current genetic 
and clinical understanding of CM-AVM.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35935
PMID: 23687085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
