---
pmid: '17182577'
title: Cross-reactivity and 1.4-A crystal structure of Malassezia sympodialis thioredoxin
  (Mala s 13), a member of a new pan-allergen family.
authors:
- Limacher A
- Glaser AG
- Meier C
- Schmid-Grendelmeier P
- Zeller S
- Scapozza L
- Crameri R
journal: J Immunol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.178.1.389
---

# Cross-reactivity and 1.4-A crystal structure of Malassezia sympodialis thioredoxin (Mala s 13), a member of a new pan-allergen family.
**Authors:** Limacher A, Glaser AG, Meier C, Schmid-Grendelmeier P, Zeller S, Scapozza L, Crameri R
**Journal:** J Immunol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.4049/jimmunol.178.1.389](https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.178.1.389)

## Abstract

1. J Immunol. 2007 Jan 1;178(1):389-96. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.178.1.389.

Cross-reactivity and 1.4-A crystal structure of Malassezia sympodialis 
thioredoxin (Mala s 13), a member of a new pan-allergen family.

Limacher A(1), Glaser AG, Meier C, Schmid-Grendelmeier P, Zeller S, Scapozza L, 
Crameri R.

Author information:
(1)Swiss Institute of Allergy and Asthma Research (SIAF), Davos, Switzerland.

We have identified thioredoxins (Trx) of Malassezia sympodialis, a yeast 
involved in the pathogenesis of atopic eczema, and of Aspergillus fumigatus, a 
fungus involved in pulmonary complications, as novel IgE-binding proteins. We 
show that these Trx, including the human enzyme, represent cross-reactive 
structures recognized by serum IgE from individuals sensitized to M. sympodialis 
Trx. Moreover, all three proteins were able to elicit immediate-type allergic 
skin reactions in sensitized individuals, indicating a humoral immune response 
based on molecular mimicry. To analyze structural elements involved in these 
reactions, the three-dimensional structure of M. sympodialis Trx (Mala s 13) has 
been determined at 1.4-A resolution by x-ray diffraction analysis. The structure 
was solved by molecular replacement and refined to a crystallographic R factor 
of 14.0% and a free R factor of 16.8% and shows the typical Trx fold. Mala s 13 
shares 45% sequence identity with human Trx and superposition of the solved Mala 
s 13 structure with those of human Trx reveals a high similarity with a root 
mean square deviation of 1.11 A for all Calpha atoms. In a detailed analysis of 
the molecular surface in combination with sequence alignment, we identified 
conserved solvent-exposed amino acids scattered over the surface in both 
structures which cluster to patches, thus forming putative conformational B cell 
epitopes potentially involved in IgE-mediated cross- and autoreactivity.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.178.1.389
PMID: 17182577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
