---
pmid: '17000644'
title: Distinct and overlapping sets of SUMO-1 and SUMO-2 target proteins revealed
  by quantitative proteomics.
authors:
- Vertegaal AC
- Andersen JS
- Ogg SC
- Hay RT
- Mann M
- Lamond AI
journal: Mol Cell Proteomics
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/mcp.M600212-MCP200
---

# Distinct and overlapping sets of SUMO-1 and SUMO-2 target proteins revealed by quantitative proteomics.
**Authors:** Vertegaal AC, Andersen JS, Ogg SC, Hay RT, Mann M, Lamond AI
**Journal:** Mol Cell Proteomics (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1074/mcp.M600212-MCP200](https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M600212-MCP200)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2006 Dec;5(12):2298-310. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M600212-MCP200.
 Epub 2006 Sep 25.

Distinct and overlapping sets of SUMO-1 and SUMO-2 target proteins revealed by 
quantitative proteomics.

Vertegaal AC(1), Andersen JS, Ogg SC, Hay RT, Mann M, Lamond AI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, 2300 
RC Leiden, The Netherlands. vertegaal@lumc.nl

The small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) family in vertebrates includes three 
different family members that are conjugated as post-translational modifications 
to target proteins. SUMO-2 and -3 are nearly identical but differ substantially 
from SUMO-1. We used quantitative proteomics to investigate the target protein 
preferences of SUMO-1 and SUMO-2. HeLa cells were established that stably 
express His6-SUMO-1 or His6-SUMO-2. These cell lines and control HeLa cells were 
labeled with stable arginine isotopes, and His6-SUMOs were enriched from lysates 
using immobilized metal affinity chromatography. 53 SUMO-conjugated proteins 
were identified, including 44 novel SUMO targets. 25 proteins were 
preferentially conjugated to SUMO-1, 19 were preferentially conjugated to 
SUMO-2, and nine proteins were conjugated to both SUMO-1 and SUMO-2. SART1 was 
confirmed by immunoblotting to have both SUMO-1- and SUMO-2-linked forms at 
similar levels. SUMO-1 and SUMO-2 are thus shown to have distinct and 
overlapping sets of target proteins, indicating that SUMO-1 and SUMO-2 may have 
both redundant and non-redundant cellular functions. Interestingly, 14 of the 25 
SUMO-1-conjugated proteins contain zinc fingers. Although both SUMO family 
members play roles in many cellular processes, our data show that sumoylation is 
strongly associated with transcription because nearly one-third of the 
identified target proteins are putative transcriptional regulators.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M600212-MCP200
PMID: 17000644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
