---
pmid: '31495489'
title: Loss of SMPD4 Causes a Developmental Disorder Characterized by Microcephaly
  and Congenital Arthrogryposis.
authors:
- Magini P
- Smits DJ
- Vandervore L
- Schot R
- Columbaro M
- Kasteleijn E
- van der Ent M
- Palombo F
- Lequin MH
- Dremmen M
- de Wit MCY
- Severino M
- Divizia MT
- Striano P
- Ordonez-Herrera N
- Alhashem A
- Al Fares A
- Al Ghamdi M
- Rolfs A
- Bauer P
- Demmers J
- Verheijen FW
- Wilke M
- van Slegtenhorst M
- van der Spek PJ
- Seri M
- Jansen AC
- Stottmann RW
- Hufnagel RB
- Hopkin RJ
- Aljeaid D
- Wiszniewski W
- Gawlinski P
- Laure-Kamionowska M
- Alkuraya FS
- Akleh H
- Stanley V
- Musaev D
- Gleeson JG
- Zaki MS
- Brunetti-Pierri N
- Cappuccio G
- Davidov B
- Basel-Salmon L
- Bazak L
- Shahar NR
- Bertoli-Avella A
- Mirzaa GM
- Dobyns WB
- Pippucci T
- Fornerod M
- Mancini GMS
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2019'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC6817560
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2019.08.006
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Loss of SMPD4 Causes a Developmental Disorder Characterized by Microcephaly and Congenital Arthrogryposis.
**Authors:** Magini P, Smits DJ, Vandervore L, Schot R, Columbaro M, Kasteleijn E, van der Ent M, Palombo F, Lequin MH, Dremmen M, de Wit MCY, Severino M, Divizia MT, Striano P, Ordonez-Herrera N, Alhashem A, Al Fares A, Al Ghamdi M, Rolfs A, Bauer P, Demmers J, Verheijen FW, Wilke M, van Slegtenhorst M, van der Spek PJ, Seri M, Jansen AC, Stottmann RW, Hufnagel RB, Hopkin RJ, Aljeaid D, Wiszniewski W, Gawlinski P, Laure-Kamionowska M, Alkuraya FS, Akleh H, Stanley V, Musaev D, Gleeson JG, Zaki MS, Brunetti-Pierri N, Cappuccio G, Davidov B, Basel-Salmon L, Bazak L, Shahar NR, Bertoli-Avella A, Mirzaa GM, Dobyns WB, Pippucci T, Fornerod M, Mancini GMS
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2019.08.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2019.08.006)
**PMC:** [PMC6817560](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6817560/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2019 Oct 3;105(4):689-705. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2019.08.006.
Epub  2019 Sep 5.

Loss of SMPD4 Causes a Developmental Disorder Characterized by Microcephaly and 
Congenital Arthrogryposis.

Magini P(1), Smits DJ(2), Vandervore L(3), Schot R(2), Columbaro M(4), 
Kasteleijn E(2), van der Ent M(5), Palombo F(6), Lequin MH(7), Dremmen M(8), de 
Wit MCY(9), Severino M(10), Divizia MT(11), Striano P(12), Ordonez-Herrera 
N(13), Alhashem A(14), Al Fares A(14), Al Ghamdi M(15), Rolfs A(13), Bauer 
P(13), Demmers J(16), Verheijen FW(2), Wilke M(2), van Slegtenhorst M(2), van 
der Spek PJ(17), Seri M(18), Jansen AC(19), Stottmann RW(20), Hufnagel RB(21), 
Hopkin RJ(22), Aljeaid D(23), Wiszniewski W(24), Gawlinski P(25), 
Laure-Kamionowska M(26), Alkuraya FS(27), Akleh H(28), Stanley V(29), Musaev 
D(29), Gleeson JG(29), Zaki MS(30), Brunetti-Pierri N(31), Cappuccio G(31), 
Davidov B(32), Basel-Salmon L(33), Bazak L(32), Shahar NR(32), Bertoli-Avella 
A(13), Mirzaa GM(34), Dobyns WB(35), Pippucci T(36), Fornerod M(5), Mancini 
GMS(37).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Unit, S.Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, via Massarenti 9, 40138 
Bologna, Italy.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, ErasmusMC University Medical Center 
Rotterdam, Dr. Molewaterplein 40, 3015 GD Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Clinical Genetics, ErasmusMC University Medical Center 
Rotterdam, Dr. Molewaterplein 40, 3015 GD Rotterdam, the Netherlands; Vrije 
Universiteit Brussel, Centrum Medische Genetica, Laarbeeklaan 101, 1090 
Brussels, Belgium.
(4)Laboratory of Musculoskeletal Cell Biology, IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico 
Rizzoli, 40136 Bologna, Italy.
(5)Department of Cell Biology, ErasmusMC University Medical Center Rotterdam, 
Dr. Molewaterplein 40, 3015 GD Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(6)IRCCS Institute of Neurological Sciences of Bologna, Bellaria Hospital, 40139 
Bologna, Italy.
(7)Department of Radiology, University medical center Utrecht, Heidelberglaan 
100, 3584 CX Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(8)Department of Radiology, Sophia Children's hospital, ErasmusMC University 
Medical Center Rotterdam, Dr. Molewaterplein 40, 3015 GD Rotterdam, the 
Netherlands.
(9)Department of Child Neurology, Sophia Children's hospital, ErasmusMC 
University Medical Center Rotterdam, Dr. Molewaterplein 40, 3015 GD Rotterdam, 
the Netherlands.
(10)Neuroradiology Unit, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, 16147 Genova, Italy.
(11)UOC Genetica Medica, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, 16147 Genova, Italy.
(12)Pediatric Neurology and Muscular diseases Unit, IRCCS Istituto Giannina 
Gaslini, 16147 Genova, Italy; Department of neursciences, Rehabilitation, 
Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal and Child Health, University of Genova, 16126 
Genova, Italy.
(13)CENTOGENE AG. Am Strande 7, 18055 Rostock, Germany.
(14)Department of Pediatrics, Prince Sultan Military Medical City, Riyadh 12233, 
Saudi Arabia; Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, Qassim University, 
Qassim 52571, Saudi Arabia.
(15)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh 
11451, Saudi Arabia.
(16)Proteomics Center, Room Ee-679A, Erasmus University Medical Center. 
Wytemaweg 80, 3015 CN Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(17)Department of Pathology, Clinical Bioinformatics, ErasmusMC University 
Medical Center PO Box, 3000CA Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(18)Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, 
University of Bologna, via Massarenti 9, 40138 Bologna, Italy.
(19)Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Centrum Medische Genetica, Laarbeeklaan 101, 
1090 Brussels, Belgium; Pediatric Neurology Unit, UZ Univeristy of Brussel, 
Laarbeeklaan 101, 1090 Brussels, Belgium.
(20)Department of Human Genetics, Division of Developmental Biology Cincinnati 
Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue, MLC 7016, Cincinnati, OH 
45229, USA.
(21)Medical Genetics and Ophthalmic Genomics Unit, National Eye Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, 10 Center Drive, Building 10, Room 10N109, 
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(22)Department of Human Genetics, Division of Developmental Biology Cincinnati 
Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue, MLC 7016, Cincinnati, OH 
45229, USA; Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati, College of 
Medicine, 3333 Burnet Ave., ML 4006, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.
(23)Department of Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, King Abdulaziz 
University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia.
(24)Oregon Health & Sciences University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road L103, 
Portland, OR, USA; Institute of Mother and Child, Kasprzaka 17a, 02-211 Warsaw, 
Poland.
(25)Institute of Mother and Child, Kasprzaka 17a, 02-211 Warsaw, Poland.
(26)Department of Experimental and Clinical Neuropathology, Mossakowski Medical 
Research Centre Polish Academy of Sciences, Pawinskiego 5, 02-106 Warsaw, 
Poland.
(27)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(28)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and 
Research Center, Riyadh 12713, Saudi Arabia.
(29)Laboratory for Pediatric Brain Disease, Department of Neurosciences, Howard 
Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, San Diego, San Diego, CA 
92093, USA.
(30)Human Genetics and Genome Research Division, Clinical Genetics Department, 
National Research Centre, Cairo 12622, Egypt.
(31)Department of Translational Medicine, University of Naples "Federico II," 
Naples 80131, Italy; Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), 
Pozzuoli 80078, Italy.
(32)Department of Medical Genetics, Recanati Genetic Institute Rabin Medical 
Center, Beilinson Campus, Petah Tikva, 49100 Tel Aviv, Israel.
(33)Department of Medical Genetics, Recanati Genetic Institute Rabin Medical 
Center, Beilinson Campus, Petah Tikva, 49100 Tel Aviv, Israel; Felsenstein 
Medical Research Center, Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva 49100, Israel; 
Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel.
(34)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA; 
Center for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children's Research Institute, 
Seattle, WA 98101, USA.
(35)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(36)Medical Genetics Unit, S.Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, via Massarenti 9, 40138 
Bologna, Italy. Electronic address: tommaso.pippucci@gmail.com.
(37)Department of Clinical Genetics, ErasmusMC University Medical Center 
Rotterdam, Dr. Molewaterplein 40, 3015 GD Rotterdam, the Netherlands. Electronic 
address: g.mancini@erasmusmc.nl.

Sphingomyelinases generate ceramide from sphingomyelin as a second messenger in 
intracellular signaling pathways involved in cell proliferation, 
differentiation, or apoptosis. Children from 12 unrelated families presented 
with microcephaly, simplified gyral pattern of the cortex, hypomyelination, 
cerebellar hypoplasia, congenital arthrogryposis, and early fetal/postnatal 
demise. Genomic analysis revealed bi-allelic loss-of-function variants in SMPD4, 
coding for the neutral sphingomyelinase-3 (nSMase-3/SMPD4). Overexpression of 
human Myc-tagged SMPD4 showed localization both to the outer nuclear envelope 
and the ER and additionally revealed interactions with several nuclear pore 
complex proteins by proteomics analysis. Fibroblasts from affected individuals 
showed ER cisternae abnormalities, suspected for increased autophagy, and were 
more susceptible to apoptosis under stress conditions, while treatment with 
siSMPD4 caused delayed cell cycle progression. Our data show that SMPD4 links 
homeostasis of membrane sphingolipids to cell fate by regulating the cross-talk 
between the ER and the outer nuclear envelope, while its loss reveals a 
pathogenic mechanism in microcephaly.

Copyright © 2019 American Society of Human Genetics. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2019.08.006
PMCID: PMC6817560
PMID: 31495489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

## Full Text

Abstract

Sphingomyelinases generate ceramide from sphingomyelin as a second messenger in intracellular signaling pathways involved in cell proliferation, differentiation, or apoptosis. Children from 12 unrelated families presented with microcephaly, simplified gyral pattern of the cortex, hypomyelination, cerebellar hypoplasia, congenital arthrogryposis, and early fetal/postnatal demise. Genomic analysis revealed bi-allelic loss-of-function variants in SMPD4 , coding for the neutral sphingomyelinase-3 (nSMase-3/SMPD4). Overexpression of human Myc-tagged SMPD4 showed localization both to the outer nuclear envelope and the ER and additionally revealed interactions with several nuclear pore complex proteins by proteomics analysis. Fibroblasts from affected individuals showed ER cisternae abnormalities, suspected for increased autophagy, and were more susceptible to apoptosis under stress conditions, while treatment with siSMPD4 caused delayed cell cycle progression. Our data show that SMPD4 links homeostasis of membrane sphingolipids to cell fate by regulating the cross-talk between the ER and the outer nuclear envelope, while its loss reveals a pathogenic mechanism in microcephaly.

Introduction

Sphingolipids constitute a class of lipids with essential cellular functions, including the modulation of physical properties of cell membranes and regulation of transmembrane and peripheral membrane proteins. In addition, sphingolipids regulate the production of biosynthetic intermediates with roles as signaling molecules, such as sphingosine and ceramides. 1 Sphingolipids are highly enriched in the nervous system and are important for proper brain development and function. 2

Sphingomyelin is the most abundant eukaryotic sphingolipid and regulation of its metabolism is critical for cell function. Dysfunction of enzymes regulating the balance between sphingomyelin synthesis and degradation have been reported in many pathologies affecting the central nervous system. 3 Sphingomyelinases hydrolyze sphingomyelin into ceramide and phosphorylcholine. To date, one acid sphingomyelinase (SMPD1) and four neutral sphinogmyelinases (nSMases) have been characterized in mammals: nSMase1 (SMPD2), nSMase2 (SMPD3), nSMase3 (SMPD4), and a mitochondria-associated MA-nSMase (SMPD5), respectively encoded by SMPD1 (MIM: 607608 ), SMPD2 (MIM: 603498 ), SMPD3 (MIM: 605777 ), SMPD4 (MIM: 610457 ), and SMPD5 . Although nSMase-3 (from now on indicated as SMPD4), encoded by SMPD4 , has no significant sequence homology with other sphingomyelinases, some papers reported its catalytic activity and described regulation of its expression by tumor necrosis factor and p53, implicating this protein in response to cellular stress. 4 , 5 , 6 SMPD4 is a 866 amino acid long protein with a protein-protein interaction domain and a C-terminal transmembrane domain close to the putative enzyme active site, which includes a potential N-glycosylation site. 5 , 6 Subcellular localization experiments have shown the presence of SMPD4 at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and the Golgi apparatus. In independent studies, proteomics analysis of nuclear fractions detected SMPD4 at the nuclear envelope. 4 , 5 , 7 , 8 In this latter context, SMPD4 was identified as nuclear envelope transmembrane protein-13, NET13.

Defects in genes encoding proteins of this sphingomyelinase family are known to cause developmental disorders linked to intracellular organelle dysfunction. Inactivation of Smpd3 , the murine homolog of human SMPD3 , impairs Golgi vesicular transport, perturbs protein homeostasis, and induces ER stress, leading to apoptosis, growth inhibition, and development retardation in mice. 9 To date, human variants have only been reported in SMPD1 , causing lysosomal storage disorders Niemann-Pick disease type A and B (MIM: 607608 ).

Here, we report on 12 families including individuals presenting with congenital microcephaly with simplified gyral pattern, mild cerebellar hypoplasia, severe encephalopathy, congenital arthrogryposis, diabetes mellitus, cardiomyopathy, and early demise. 23 affected individuals were available for sequencing, all of whom harbor bi-allelic variants in SMPD4 . We provide clinical and neuroimaging data of this cohort to describe the disease phenotype, together with functional evidence for a role of SMPD4 in cell fate and mitosis.

Discussion

We have identified an autosomal-recessive syndrome presenting with congenital microcephaly, arthrogryposis, severe neurodevelopmental delay, and early death in 12 unrelated families linked to bi-allelic SMPD4 variants. Our observations shed light on an unanticipated and primary function of SMPD4 in brain development and in postnatal brain function.

Conclusion

Loss of SMPD4 is associated with a severe neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by microcephaly, simplified gyration, hypomyelination, thin corpus callosum, mild cerebellar hypoplasia, brainstem hypoplasia, congenital arthrogryposis, diabetes mellitus, heart disease, severe encephalopathy, and respiratory problems often leading to early demise. We provide evidence that SMPD4 loss induces ER stress, autophagy, and interference with sphingolipids homeostasis. SMPD4 is a putative integral membrane protein that we showed to localize to both ER and the outer nuclear envelope. Cells depleted of SMPD4 by natural variants or by siRNA show mitotic abnormalitites and increased susceptibility to apoptotic cell death. The disease pathogenesis can be linked to all of the abnormalities observed in vitro . Interestingly, preliminary studies indicate that disruption of nSMase3 through knock out of murine Smpd4 leads to partial lethality, while surviving mice show severe post natal growth retardation. 49 Future studies in appropriate models are needed to address the intriguing link between regulation of ER stress, cell division, and association with nuclear pore proteins, in order to unravel this interesting sphingolipid-related pathway leading to the severe human cerebral developmental disorder.
