---
pmid: '16275660'
title: Identification of VCP/p97, carboxyl terminus of Hsp70-interacting protein (CHIP),
  and amphiphysin II interaction partners using membrane-based human proteome arrays.
authors:
- Grelle G
- Kostka S
- Otto A
- Kersten B
- Genser KF
- Müller EC
- Wälter S
- Böddrich A
- Stelzl U
- Hänig C
- Volkmer-Engert R
- Landgraf C
- Alberti S
- Höhfeld J
- Strödicke M
- Wanker EE
journal: Mol Cell Proteomics
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/mcp.M500198-MCP200
---

# Identification of VCP/p97, carboxyl terminus of Hsp70-interacting protein (CHIP), and amphiphysin II interaction partners using membrane-based human proteome arrays.
**Authors:** Grelle G, Kostka S, Otto A, Kersten B, Genser KF, Müller EC, Wälter S, Böddrich A, Stelzl U, Hänig C, Volkmer-Engert R, Landgraf C, Alberti S, Höhfeld J, Strödicke M, Wanker EE
**Journal:** Mol Cell Proteomics (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1074/mcp.M500198-MCP200](https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M500198-MCP200)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2006 Feb;5(2):234-44. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M500198-MCP200.
Epub  2005 Nov 7.

Identification of VCP/p97, carboxyl terminus of Hsp70-interacting protein 
(CHIP), and amphiphysin II interaction partners using membrane-based human 
proteome arrays.

Grelle G(1), Kostka S, Otto A, Kersten B, Genser KF, Müller EC, Wälter S, 
Böddrich A, Stelzl U, Hänig C, Volkmer-Engert R, Landgraf C, Alberti S, Höhfeld 
J, Strödicke M, Wanker EE.

Author information:
(1)Max-Delbrück-Centrum für Molekulare Medizin, Robert-Rössle-Strasse 10, 
D-13125 Berlin-Buch, Germany.

Proteins mediate their biological function through interactions with other 
proteins. Therefore, the systematic identification and characterization of 
protein-protein interactions have become a powerful proteomic strategy to 
understand protein function and comprehensive cellular regulatory networks. For 
the screening of valosin-containing protein, carboxyl terminus of 
Hsp70-interacting protein (CHIP), and amphiphysin II interaction partners, we 
utilized a membrane-based array technology that allows the identification of 
human protein-protein interactions with crude bacterial cell extracts. Many 
novel interaction pairs such as valosin-containing protein/autocrine motility 
factor receptor, CHIP/caytaxin, or amphiphysin II/DLP4 were identified and 
subsequently confirmed by pull-down, two-hybrid and co-immunoprecipitation 
experiments. In addition, assays were performed to validate the interactions 
functionally. CHIP e.g. was found to efficiently polyubiquitinate caytaxin in 
vitro, suggesting that it might influence caytaxin degradation in vivo. Using 
peptide arrays, we also identified the binding motifs in the proteins DLP4, 
XRCC4, and fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase, which are crucial for the association 
with the Src homology 3 domain of amphiphysin II. Together these studies 
indicate that our human proteome array technology permits the identification of 
protein-protein interactions that are functionally involved in neurodegenerative 
disease processes, the degradation of protein substrates, and the transport of 
membrane vesicles.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M500198-MCP200
PMID: 16275660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
