---
pmid: '21095239'
title: Phosphorylation of Bcl-associated death protein (Bad) by erythropoietin-activated
  c-Jun N-terminal protein kinase 1 contributes to survival of erythropoietin-dependent
  cells.
authors:
- Deng H
- Zhang J
- Yoon T
- Song D
- Li D
- Lin A
journal: Int J Biochem Cell Biol
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3039111
doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2010.11.011
---

# Phosphorylation of Bcl-associated death protein (Bad) by erythropoietin-activated c-Jun N-terminal protein kinase 1 contributes to survival of erythropoietin-dependent cells.
**Authors:** Deng H, Zhang J, Yoon T, Song D, Li D, Lin A
**Journal:** Int J Biochem Cell Biol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.biocel.2010.11.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocel.2010.11.011)
**PMC:** [PMC3039111](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3039111/)

## Abstract

1. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2011 Mar;43(3):409-15. doi: 
10.1016/j.biocel.2010.11.011. Epub 2010 Nov 21.

Phosphorylation of Bcl-associated death protein (Bad) by 
erythropoietin-activated c-Jun N-terminal protein kinase 1 contributes to 
survival of erythropoietin-dependent cells.

Deng H(1), Zhang J, Yoon T, Song D, Li D, Lin A.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & 
Peking Union Medical College, #1 Tian Tan Xi Li, Beijing 100050, China. 
denghongbin024@hotmail.com

The glycoprotein erythropoietin (Epo) is a hematopoietic cytokine necessary for 
the survival of erythrocytes from immature erythroid cells. The 
mitogen-activated c-Jun N-terminal kinase 1 (JNK1) plays an important role in 
the proliferation and survival of erythroid cells in response to Epo. However, 
the precise mechanism of JNK1 activation promoting erythroid cell survival is 
incompletely understood. Here, we reported that JNK1 is required for 
Epo-mediated cell survival through phosphorylation and inactivation of the 
pro-apoptotic, Bcl-2 homology domain 3 (BH3)-only Bcl-associated death protein 
(Bad). Upon Epo withdrawal, HCD57 cells, a murine Epo-dependent cell line, 
displayed increased apoptotic cell death that was associated with decreased JNK1 
activity. Epo withdrawal-induced apoptosis was promoted by inhibition of JNK1 
activity but suppressed by expression of a constitutively active JNK1. 
Furthermore, Epo-activated JNK1 phosphorylated Bad at threonine 201, thereby 
inhibiting the association of Bad with the anti-apoptotic molecule B-cell 
lymphoma-extra large (Bcl-X(L)). Replacement of threonine 201 by alanine in Bad 
promoted Epo withdrawal-induced apoptosis. Thus, our results provide a molecular 
mechanism by which JNK1 contributes to the survival of erythroid cells.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biocel.2010.11.011
PMCID: PMC3039111
PMID: 21095239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
