---
pmid: '19304802'
title: Synaptic transmission block by presynaptic injection of oligomeric amyloid
  beta.
authors:
- Moreno H
- Yu E
- Pigino G
- Hernandez AI
- Kim N
- Moreira JE
- Sugimori M
- Llinás RR
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2659170
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0900944106
---

# Synaptic transmission block by presynaptic injection of oligomeric amyloid beta.
**Authors:** Moreno H, Yu E, Pigino G, Hernandez AI, Kim N, Moreira JE, Sugimori M, Llinás RR
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0900944106](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0900944106)
**PMC:** [PMC2659170](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2659170/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Apr 7;106(14):5901-6. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0900944106. Epub 2009 Mar 20.

Synaptic transmission block by presynaptic injection of oligomeric amyloid beta.

Moreno H(1), Yu E, Pigino G, Hernandez AI, Kim N, Moreira JE, Sugimori M, Llinás 
RR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Physiology/Pharmacology, State University of New 
York Downstate Medical Center, Brooklyn, NY 11203, USA.

Early Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathophysiology is characterized by synaptic 
changes induced by degradation products of amyloid precursor protein (APP). The 
exact mechanisms of such modulation are unknown. Here, we report that nanomolar 
concentrations of intraaxonal oligomeric (o)Abeta42, but not oAbeta40 or 
extracellular oAbeta42, acutely inhibited synaptic transmission at the squid 
giant synapse. Further characterization of this phenotype demonstrated that 
presynaptic calcium currents were unaffected. However, electron microscopy 
experiments revealed diminished docked synaptic vesicles in 
oAbeta42-microinjected terminals, without affecting clathrin-coated vesicles. 
The molecular events of this modulation involved casein kinase 2 and the 
synaptic vesicle rapid endocytosis pathway. These findings open the possibility 
of a new therapeutic target aimed at ameliorating synaptic dysfunction in AD.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0900944106
PMCID: PMC2659170
PMID: 19304802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
