---
pmid: '9398857'
title: The Fanconi anaemia proteins, FAA and FAC, interact to form a nuclear complex.
authors:
- Kupfer GM
- Näf D
- Suliman A
- Pulsipher M
- D'Andrea AD
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ng1297-487
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The Fanconi anaemia proteins, FAA and FAC, interact to form a nuclear complex.
**Authors:** Kupfer GM, Näf D, Suliman A, Pulsipher M, D'Andrea AD
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1297-487](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1297-487)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 1997 Dec;17(4):487-90. doi: 10.1038/ng1297-487.

The Fanconi anaemia proteins, FAA and FAC, interact to form a nuclear complex.

Kupfer GM(1), Näf D, Suliman A, Pulsipher M, D'Andrea AD.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. garyvkupfer@dfci.harvard.edu

Fanconi anaemia (FA) is an autosomal-recessive disorder characterized by genomic 
instability, developmental defects, DNA crosslinking agent hypersensitivity and 
cancer susceptibility. Somatic-cell hybrid studies have revealed five FA 
complementation groups (A-E; refs 4-6) displaying similar phenotypes, suggesting 
that FA genes are functionally related. The two cloned FA genes, FAA and FAC, 
encode proteins that are unrelated to each other or to other proteins in 
GenBank. In the current study, we demonstrate the FAA and FAC bind each other 
and form a complex. Protein binding correlates with the functional activity of 
FAA and FAC, as patient-derived mutant FAC (L554P) fails to bind FAA. Although 
unbound FAA and FAC localize predominantly to the cytoplasm, the FAA-FAC complex 
is found in similar abundance in both cytoplasm and nucleus. Our results confirm 
the interrelatedness of the FA genes in a pathway, suggesting the cooperation of 
FAA and FAC in a nuclear function.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1297-487
PMID: 9398857 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
