---
pmid: '28228557'
title: Surfactant Protein A Inhibits Growth and Adherence of Uropathogenic Escherichia
  coli To Protect the Bladder from Infection.
authors:
- Hashimoto J
- Takahashi M
- Saito A
- Murata M
- Kurimura Y
- Nishitani C
- Takamiya R
- Uehara Y
- Hasegawa Y
- Hiyama Y
- Sawada N
- Takahashi S
- Masumori N
- Kuroki Y
- Ariki S
journal: J Immunol
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1502626
---

# Surfactant Protein A Inhibits Growth and Adherence of Uropathogenic Escherichia coli To Protect the Bladder from Infection.
**Authors:** Hashimoto J, Takahashi M, Saito A, Murata M, Kurimura Y, Nishitani C, Takamiya R, Uehara Y, Hasegawa Y, Hiyama Y, Sawada N, Takahashi S, Masumori N, Kuroki Y, Ariki S
**Journal:** J Immunol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.4049/jimmunol.1502626](https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.1502626)

## Abstract

1. J Immunol. 2017 Apr 1;198(7):2898-2905. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1502626. Epub
2017  Feb 22.

Surfactant Protein A Inhibits Growth and Adherence of Uropathogenic Escherichia 
coli To Protect the Bladder from Infection.

Hashimoto J(1)(2), Takahashi M(1), Saito A(1)(3), Murata M(4), Kurimura Y(2), 
Nishitani C(1), Takamiya R(1), Uehara Y(3), Hasegawa Y(1)(3), Hiyama Y(2), 
Sawada N(4), Takahashi S(5), Masumori N(2), Kuroki Y(1), Ariki S(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine, 
Sapporo 060-8556, Japan.
(2)Department of Urologic Surgery and Andrology, Sapporo Medical University 
School of Medicine, Sapporo 060-8556, Japan.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology, Sapporo Medical 
University School of Medicine, Sapporo 060-8556, Japan.
(4)Department of Pathology, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine, 
Sapporo 060-8556, Japan.
(5)Department of Infection Control and Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Sapporo 
Medical University School of Medicine, Sapporo 060-8556, Japan; and.
(6)Department of Biochemistry, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine, 
Sapporo 060-8556, Japan; sarikscb@sapmed.ac.jp.
(7)Department of Chemistry, Sapporo Medical University Center for Medical 
Education, Sapporo 060-8556, Japan.

Surfactant protein A (SP-A) is a multifunctional host defense collectin that was 
first identified as a component of pulmonary surfactant. Although SP-A is also 
expressed in various tissues, including the urinary tract, its innate immune 
functions in nonpulmonary tissues are poorly understood. In this study, we 
demonstrated that adherence of uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC) to the 
bladder was enhanced in SP-A-deficient mice, which suggests that SP-A plays an 
important role in innate immunity against UPEC. To understand the innate immune 
functions of SP-A in detail, we performed in vitro experiments. SP-A directly 
bound to UPEC in a Ca2+-dependent manner, but it did not agglutinate UPEC. Our 
results suggest that a bouquet-like arrangement seems unsuitable to agglutinate 
UPEC. Meanwhile, SP-A inhibited growth of UPEC in human urine. Furthermore, the 
binding of SP-A to UPEC decreased the adherence of bacteria to urothelial cells. 
These results indicate that direct action of SP-A on UPEC is important in host 
defense against UPEC. Additionally, adhesion of UPEC to urothelial cells was 
decreased when the cells were preincubated with SP-A. Adhesion of UPEC to 
urothelial cells is achieved via interaction between FimH, an adhesin located at 
bacterial pili, and uroplakin Ia, a glycoprotein expressed on the urothelium. 
SP-A directly bound to uroplakin Ia and competed with FimH for uroplakin Ia 
binding. These results lead us to conclude that SP-A plays important roles in 
host defense against UPEC.

Copyright © 2017 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1502626
PMID: 28228557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
