---
pmid: '16537422'
title: Structural basis for mammalian vitamin B12 transport by transcobalamin.
authors:
- Wuerges J
- Garau G
- Geremia S
- Fedosov SN
- Petersen TE
- Randaccio L
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1450181
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0509099103
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Structural basis for mammalian vitamin B12 transport by transcobalamin.
**Authors:** Wuerges J, Garau G, Geremia S, Fedosov SN, Petersen TE, Randaccio L
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0509099103](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0509099103)
**PMC:** [PMC1450181](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1450181/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Mar 21;103(12):4386-91. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0509099103. Epub 2006 Mar 14.

Structural basis for mammalian vitamin B12 transport by transcobalamin.

Wuerges J(1), Garau G, Geremia S, Fedosov SN, Petersen TE, Randaccio L.

Author information:
(1)Centre of Excellence in Biocrystallography, Department of Chemical Sciences, 
University of Trieste, Via L. Giorgieri 1, I-34127 Trieste, Italy.

Cobalamin (Cbl, vitamin B(12)) serves for two essential cofactors in mammals. 
The pathway for its intestinal absorption, plasma transport, and cellular uptake 
uses cell surface receptors and three Cbl-transporting proteins, haptocorrin, 
intrinsic factor, and transcobalamin (TC). We present the structure 
determination of a member of the mammalian Cbl-transporter family. The crystal 
structures of recombinant human and bovine holo-TCs reveal a two-domain 
architecture, with an N-terminal alpha(6)-alpha(6) barrel and a smaller 
C-terminal domain. One Cbl molecule in base-on conformation is buried inside the 
domain interface. Structural data combined with previous binding assays indicate 
a domain motion in the first step of Cbl binding. In a second step, the weakly 
coordinated ligand H(2)O at the upper axial side of added H(2)O-Cbl is displaced 
by a histidine residue of the alpha(6)-alpha(6) barrel. Analysis of amino acid 
conservation on TC's surface in orthologous proteins suggests the location of 
the TC-receptor-recognition site in an extended region on the alpha(6)-alpha(6) 
barrel. The TC structure allows for the mapping of sites of amino acid variation 
due to polymorphisms of the human TC gene. Structural information is used to 
predict the overall fold of haptocorrin and intrinsic factor and permits a 
rational approach to the design of new Cbl-based bioconjugates for diagnostic or 
therapeutic drug delivery.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0509099103
PMCID: PMC1450181
PMID: 16537422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts 
declared.
