---
pmid: '8717514'
title: CD28/B7 system of T cell costimulation.
authors:
- Lenschow DJ
- Walunas TL
- Bluestone JA
journal: Annu Rev Immunol
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1146/annurev.immunol.14.1.233
---

# CD28/B7 system of T cell costimulation.
**Authors:** Lenschow DJ, Walunas TL, Bluestone JA
**Journal:** Annu Rev Immunol (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev.immunol.14.1.233](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.immunol.14.1.233)

## Abstract

1. Annu Rev Immunol. 1996;14:233-58. doi: 10.1146/annurev.immunol.14.1.233.

CD28/B7 system of T cell costimulation.

Lenschow DJ(1), Walunas TL, Bluestone JA.

Author information:
(1)Committee on Immunology, Ben May Institute, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

T cells play a central role in the initiation and regulation of the immune 
response to antigen. Both the engagement of the TCR with MHC/Ag and a second 
signal are needed for the complete activation of the T cell. The CD28/B7 
receptor/ligand system is one of the dominant costimulatory pathways. 
Interruption of this signaling pathway with CD28 antagonists not only results in 
the suppression of the immune response, but in some cases induces 
antigen-specific tolerance. However, the CD28/B7 system is increasingly complex 
due to the identification of multiple receptors and ligands with positive and 
negative signaling activities. This review summarizes the state of CD28/B7 
immunobiology both in vitro and in vivo; summarizes the many experiments that 
have led to our current understanding of the participants in this complex 
receptor/ligand system; and illustrates the current models for CD28/B7-mediated 
T cell and B cell regulation. It is our hope and expectation that this review 
will provoke additional research that will unravel this important, yet complex, 
signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev.immunol.14.1.233
PMID: 8717514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
