---
reference_id: PMID:12510191
title: Inherent calcineurin inhibitor FKBP38 targets Bcl-2 to mitochondria and inhibits apoptosis.
authors:
- Shirane M
- Nakayama KI
journal: Nat Cell Biol
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1038/ncb894
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inherent calcineurin inhibitor FKBP38 targets Bcl-2 to mitochondria and inhibits apoptosis.
**Authors:** Shirane M, Nakayama KI
**Journal:** Nat Cell Biol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncb894](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb894)

## Content

1. Nat Cell Biol. 2003 Jan;5(1):28-37. doi: 10.1038/ncb894.

Inherent calcineurin inhibitor FKBP38 targets Bcl-2 to mitochondria and inhibits
apoptosis.

Shirane M(1), Nakayama KI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Medical Institute of
Bioregulation, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, Fukuoka
812-8582, Japan.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2003 Jan;5(1):9-11. doi: 10.1038/ncb0103-9a.

The mitochondrial localization of the membrane proteins Bcl-2 and Bcl-x(L) is
essential for their anti-apoptotic function. Here we show that mitochondrial
FK506-binding protein 38 (FKBP38), unlike FKBP12, binds to and inhibits
calcineurin in the absence of the immunosuppressant FK506, suggesting that
FKBP38 is an inherent inhibitor of this phosphatase. FKBP38 is associated with
Bcl-2 and Bcl-x(L) in immunoprecipitation assays and colocalizes with these
proteins in mitochondria; in addition, the expression of FKBP38 mutant proteins
induces a marked redistribution of Bcl-2 and Bcl-x(L). Overexpression of FKBP38
blocks apoptosis, whereas functional inhibition of this protein by a
dominant-negative mutant or by RNA interference promotes apoptosis. Thus, FKBP38
might function to inhibit apoptosis by anchoring Bcl-2 and Bcl-x(L) to
mitochondria.

DOI: 10.1038/ncb894
PMID: 12510191 [Indexed for MEDLINE]