---
pmid: '16135516'
title: Substrate binding to the molecular chaperone Hsp104 and its regulation by nucleotides.
authors:
- Bösl B
- Grimminger V
- Walter S
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M506149200
---

# Substrate binding to the molecular chaperone Hsp104 and its regulation by nucleotides.
**Authors:** Bösl B, Grimminger V, Walter S
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M506149200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M506149200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Nov 18;280(46):38170-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M506149200. Epub
2005  Aug 31.

Substrate binding to the molecular chaperone Hsp104 and its regulation by 
nucleotides.

Bösl B(1), Grimminger V, Walter S.

Author information:
(1)Department Chemie, Technische Universität München, 85747 Garching, Germany.

The Hsp104 protein from Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a member of the Hsp100/Clp 
family of molecular chaperones. It mediates the solubilization of aggregated 
proteins in an ATP-dependent process assisted by the Hsp70/40 system. Although 
the principal function of Hsp104 is well established, the mechanistic details of 
this catalyzed disaggregation are poorly understood. In this work, we have 
investigated the interaction of Hsp104 with reduced, carboxymethylated 
alpha-lactalbumin (RCMLa), a permanently unfolded model substrate. Our results 
demonstrate that the affinity of Hsp104 toward polypeptides is regulated by 
nucleotides. In the presence of ATP or adenosine-5' -O-(3-thiotriphosphate), the 
chaperone formed complexes with RCMLa, whereas no binding was observed in the 
presence of ADP. In particular, the occupation of the N-terminally located 
nucleotide-binding domain with ATP seems to be crucial for substrate 
interaction. When ATP binding to this domain was impaired by mutation, Hsp104 
lost its ability to interact with RCMLa. Our results also indicate that upon 
association with a polypeptide, a conformational change occurs within Hsp104 
that strongly reduces the dynamics of nucleotide exchange and commits the bound 
polypeptide to ATP hydrolysis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M506149200
PMID: 16135516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
