---
pmid: '10428959'
title: 'Sin1: an evolutionarily conserved component of the eukaryotic SAPK pathway.'
authors:
- Wilkinson MG
- Pino TS
- Tournier S
- Buck V
- Martin H
- Christiansen J
- Wilkinson DG
- Millar JB
journal: EMBO J
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC1171497
doi: 10.1093/emboj/18.15.4210
---

# Sin1: an evolutionarily conserved component of the eukaryotic SAPK pathway.
**Authors:** Wilkinson MG, Pino TS, Tournier S, Buck V, Martin H, Christiansen J, Wilkinson DG, Millar JB
**Journal:** EMBO J (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/18.15.4210](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/18.15.4210)
**PMC:** [PMC1171497](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1171497/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 1999 Aug 2;18(15):4210-21. doi: 10.1093/emboj/18.15.4210.

Sin1: an evolutionarily conserved component of the eukaryotic SAPK pathway.

Wilkinson MG(1), Pino TS, Tournier S, Buck V, Martin H, Christiansen J, 
Wilkinson DG, Millar JB.

Author information:
(1)Division of Yeast Genetics, National Institute for Medical Research, The 
Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

The fission yeast Sty1/Spc1 mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase is a member 
of the eukaryotic stress-activated MAP kinase (SAPK) family. We have identified 
a protein, Sin1, that interacts with Sty1/Spc1 which is a member of a new 
evolutionarily conserved gene family. Cells lacking Sin1 display many, but not 
all, of the phenotypes of cells lacking the Sty1/Spc1 MAP kinase including 
sterility, multiple stress sensitivity and a cell-cycle delay. Sin1 is 
phosphorylated after stress but this is not Sty1/Spc1-dependent. Importantly, 
Sin1 is not required for activation of Sty1/Spc1 but is required for 
stress-dependent transcription via its substrate, Atf1. We find that in the 
absence of Sin1, Sty1/Spc1 appears to translocate to the nucleus but Atf1 is not 
fully phosphorylated and becomes unstable in response to environmental stress. 
Sin1 is also required for effective transcription via the AP-1 factor Pap1 but 
does not prevent its nuclear translocation. Remarkably chimaeric fusions of sin1 
with chicken sin1 sequences rescue loss of sin1 function. We conclude that Sin1 
is a novel component of the eukaryotic SAPK pathway.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/18.15.4210
PMCID: PMC1171497
PMID: 10428959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The fission yeast Sty1/Spc1 mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase is a member of the eukaryotic stress-activated MAP kinase (SAPK) family. We have identified a protein, Sin1, that interacts with Sty1/Spc1 which is a member of a new evolutionarily conserved gene family. Cells lacking Sin1 display many, but not all, of the phenotypes of cells lacking the Sty1/Spc1 MAP kinase including sterility, multiple stress sensitivity and a cell-cycle delay. Sin1 is phosphorylated after stress but this is not Sty1/Spc1-dependent. Importantly, Sin1 is not required for activation of Sty1/Spc1 but is required for stress-dependent transcription via its substrate, Atf1. We find that in the absence of Sin1, Sty1/Spc1 appears to translocate to the nucleus but Atf1 is not fully phosphorylated and becomes unstable in response to environmental stress. Sin1 is also required for effective transcription via the AP-1 factor Pap1 but does not prevent its nuclear translocation. Remarkably chimaeric fusions of sin1 with chicken sin1 sequences rescue loss of sin1 function. We conclude that Sin1 is a novel component of the eukaryotic SAPK pathway.
