---
pmid: '21459326'
title: TLE3 is a dual-function transcriptional coregulator of adipogenesis.
authors:
- Villanueva CJ
- Waki H
- Godio C
- Nielsen R
- Chou WL
- Vargas L
- Wroblewski K
- Schmedt C
- Chao LC
- Boyadjian R
- Mandrup S
- Hevener A
- Saez E
- Tontonoz P
journal: Cell Metab
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3089971
doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2011.02.014
---

# TLE3 is a dual-function transcriptional coregulator of adipogenesis.
**Authors:** Villanueva CJ, Waki H, Godio C, Nielsen R, Chou WL, Vargas L, Wroblewski K, Schmedt C, Chao LC, Boyadjian R, Mandrup S, Hevener A, Saez E, Tontonoz P
**Journal:** Cell Metab (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cmet.2011.02.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2011.02.014)
**PMC:** [PMC3089971](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3089971/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Metab. 2011 Apr 6;13(4):413-427. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2011.02.014.

TLE3 is a dual-function transcriptional coregulator of adipogenesis.

Villanueva CJ(1), Waki H(1), Godio C(2), Nielsen R(3), Chou WL(2), Vargas L(4), 
Wroblewski K(1), Schmedt C(4), Chao LC(1), Boyadjian R(1), Mandrup S(3), Hevener 
A(5), Saez E(6), Tontonoz P(7).

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Pathology and Laboratory 
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(2)Department of Chemical Physiology, The Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology, 
The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern 
Denmark, 5230 Odense M, Denmark.
(4)Genomics Institute of the Novartis Research Foundation, San Diego, CA 92121, 
USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, University of California, 
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(6)Department of Chemical Physiology, The Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology, 
The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. Electronic address: 
esaez@scripps.edu.
(7)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Pathology and Laboratory 
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. 
Electronic address: ptontonoz@mednet.ucla.edu.

PPARγ and Wnt signaling are central positive and negative regulators of 
adipogenesis, respectively. Here we identify the groucho family member TLE3 as a 
transcriptional integrator of the PPARγ and Wnt pathways. TLE3 is a direct 
target of PPARγ that participates in a feed-forward loop during adipocyte 
differentiation. TLE3 enhances PPARγ activity and functions synergistically with 
PPARγ on its target promoters to stimulate adipogenesis. At the same time, 
induction of TLE3 during differentiation provides a mechanism for termination of 
Wnt signaling. TLE3 antagonizes TCF4 activation by β-catenin in preadipocytes, 
thereby inhibiting Wnt target gene expression and reversing β-catenin-dependent 
repression of adipocyte gene expression. Transgenic expression of TLE3 in 
adipose tissue in vivo mimics the effects of PPARγ agonist and ameliorates 
high-fat-diet-induced insulin resistance. Our data suggest that TLE3 acts as a 
dual-function switch, driving the formation of both active and repressive 
transcriptional complexes that facilitate the adipogenic program.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmet.2011.02.014
PMCID: PMC3089971
PMID: 21459326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
