---
pmid: '15337530'
title: Drosophila PI3 kinase and Akt involved in insulin-stimulated proliferation
  and ERK pathway activation in Schneider cells.
authors:
- Kim SE
- Cho JY
- Kim KS
- Lee SJ
- Lee KH
- Choi KY
journal: Cell Signal
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2004.04.004
---

# Drosophila PI3 kinase and Akt involved in insulin-stimulated proliferation and ERK pathway activation in Schneider cells.
**Authors:** Kim SE, Cho JY, Kim KS, Lee SJ, Lee KH, Choi KY
**Journal:** Cell Signal (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cellsig.2004.04.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cellsig.2004.04.004)

## Abstract

1. Cell Signal. 2004 Nov;16(11):1309-17. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2004.04.004.

Drosophila PI3 kinase and Akt involved in insulin-stimulated proliferation and 
ERK pathway activation in Schneider cells.

Kim SE(1), Cho JY, Kim KS, Lee SJ, Lee KH, Choi KY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Division of Cellular and Molecular Biology, 
Yonsei University, 132 Shinchon-Dong, Seodemun-Gu, Seoul 120-752, South Korea.

We have characterized the role of Drosophila PI3K and AKT in ERK pathway 
activation involving insulin-induced proliferation using Drosophila Schneider 
cells. After insulin treatment, dPI3K and dAKT activities were both increased 
along with activation of the dERK pathway components dMEK and dERK. The 
insulin-induced activations of dERK and dAKT were blocked by LY294002, dPTEN, 
and by an AKT inhibitor, indicating involvement of dPI3K and dAKT in the 
insulin-induced dERK and dAKT activations. Proliferation and the G1 to S phase 
cell cycle progression due to insulin were also blocked by PI3K and AKT 
inhibitors, indicating that the Drosophila PI3K-AKT pathway involves 
insulin-mediated cell proliferation. The insulin-stimulated size increase was 
blocked by both LY294002 and AKT inhibitor, not by U0126, indicating that 
insulin-mediated size control by dPI3K and dAKT occurs independently of the ERK 
pathway. This study indicates that dPI3K and dAKT are involved in 
insulin-induced ERK pathway activation leading to proliferation in Drosophila 
Schneider cells.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2004.04.004
PMID: 15337530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
