---
pmid: '15988022'
title: Multiple roles of vertebrate REV genes in DNA repair and recombination.
authors:
- Okada T
- Sonoda E
- Yoshimura M
- Kawano Y
- Saya H
- Kohzaki M
- Takeda S
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1168817
doi: 10.1128/MCB.25.14.6103-6111.2005
---

# Multiple roles of vertebrate REV genes in DNA repair and recombination.
**Authors:** Okada T, Sonoda E, Yoshimura M, Kawano Y, Saya H, Kohzaki M, Takeda S
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.25.14.6103-6111.2005](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.25.14.6103-6111.2005)
**PMC:** [PMC1168817](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1168817/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Jul;25(14):6103-11. doi: 10.1128/MCB.25.14.6103-6111.2005.

Multiple roles of vertebrate REV genes in DNA repair and recombination.

Okada T(1), Sonoda E, Yoshimura M, Kawano Y, Saya H, Kohzaki M, Takeda S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Genetics, Kyoto University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

In yeast, Rev1, Rev3, and Rev7 are involved in translesion synthesis over 
various kinds of DNA damage and spontaneous and UV-induced mutagenesis. Here, we 
disrupted Rev1, Rev3, and Rev7 in the chicken B-lymphocyte line DT40. REV1-/- 
REV3-/- REV7-/- cells showed spontaneous cell death, chromosomal 
instability/fragility, and hypersensitivity to various genotoxic treatments as 
observed in each of the single mutants. Surprisingly, the triple-knockout cells 
showed a suppressed level of sister chromatid exchanges (SCEs), which may 
reflect postreplication repair events mediated by homologous recombination, 
while each single mutant showed an elevated SCE level. Furthermore, REV1-/- 
cells as well as triple mutants showed a decreased level of immunoglobulin gene 
conversion, suggesting participation of Rev1 in a recombination-based pathway. 
The present study gives us a new insight into cooperative function of three Rev 
molecules and the Polzeta (Rev3-Rev7)-independent role of Rev1 in vertebrate 
cells.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.25.14.6103-6111.2005
PMCID: PMC1168817
PMID: 15988022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
