---
pmid: '8312229'
title: IL-10 inhibits apoptotic cell death in human T cells starved of IL-2.
authors:
- Taga K
- Cherney B
- Tosato G
journal: Int Immunol
year: '1993'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/intimm/5.12.1599
---

# IL-10 inhibits apoptotic cell death in human T cells starved of IL-2.
**Authors:** Taga K, Cherney B, Tosato G
**Journal:** Int Immunol (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1093/intimm/5.12.1599](https://doi.org/10.1093/intimm/5.12.1599)

## Abstract

1. Int Immunol. 1993 Dec;5(12):1599-608. doi: 10.1093/intimm/5.12.1599.

IL-10 inhibits apoptotic cell death in human T cells starved of IL-2.

Taga K(1), Cherney B, Tosato G.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, 
Bethesda, MD 20892.

IL-10 was originally described as an inhibitory factor produced by murine Th2 
lymphocytes that suppresses IFN-gamma production by activated murine Th1 
lymphocytes. In this study, we have analyzed the effect of human IL-10 on human 
T cell death induced by IL-2 deprivation. IL-2-dependent T lymphocytes rapidly 
die when deprived of IL-2. This cell death was found to involve loss of cell 
volume, chromatin condensation, and DNA fragmentation, all characteristic of 
apoptosis. After 2 days incubation in culture medium without IL-2, the viability 
of TM11 cells (a tetanus toxoid-specific T cell line) and of activated 
peripheral blood T cells decreased from > 98% to 34.3 (+/- 2.9) and 39.7 (+/- 
5.5%) respectively. Addition of purified human IL-10 (100 U/ml) to these 
IL-2-starved cells significantly improved cell viability (66.0 +/- 6.0 and 73.1 
+/- 12.3% respectively, P = 0.0051). This protective effect of IL-10 was 
dose-dependent and was neutralized by the anti-human IL-10 mAb 19F1. It was 
neither accompanied by T cell growth stimulation as judged by [3H]thymidine 
incorporation nor neutralized by anti-IL-2 or anti-IL-2 receptor (CD25) 
antibodies. Analysis of DNA after separation on agarose gels revealed that IL-10 
inhibits DNA fragmentation in IL-2-starved T cells. T cells protected from death 
by IL-10 were indistinguishable from IL-10-untreated viable T cells in the 
ability to proliferate in response to IL-2. Thus, another property of IL-10 is 
to promote the survival of IL-2-dependent T cells otherwise destined to die by 
apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/5.12.1599
PMID: 8312229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
