---
pmid: '27913741'
title: AIK1, A Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase, Modulates Abscisic Acid Responses
  through the MKK5-MPK6 Kinase Cascade.
authors:
- Li K
- Yang F
- Zhang G
- Song S
- Li Y
- Ren D
- Miao Y
- Song CP
journal: Plant Physiol
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC5291029
doi: 10.1104/pp.16.01386
---

# AIK1, A Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase, Modulates Abscisic Acid Responses through the MKK5-MPK6 Kinase Cascade.
**Authors:** Li K, Yang F, Zhang G, Song S, Li Y, Ren D, Miao Y, Song CP
**Journal:** Plant Physiol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1104/pp.16.01386](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.16.01386)
**PMC:** [PMC5291029](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5291029/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Physiol. 2017 Feb;173(2):1391-1408. doi: 10.1104/pp.16.01386. Epub 2016 
Dec 2.

AIK1, A Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase, Modulates Abscisic Acid Responses 
through the MKK5-MPK6 Kinase Cascade.

Li K(1)(2), Yang F(1)(2), Zhang G(1)(2), Song S(1)(2), Li Y(1)(2), Ren D(1)(2), 
Miao Y(3)(4), Song CP(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Plant Stress Biology, State Key Laboratory of Cotton Biology, 
Department of Biology, Henan University, Kaifeng 475001, China (K.L., F.Y., 
G.Z., S.S., Y.M., C.-P.S.); and.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, China Agricultural 
University, Beijing 100193, China (Y.L., D.R.).
(3)Institute of Plant Stress Biology, State Key Laboratory of Cotton Biology, 
Department of Biology, Henan University, Kaifeng 475001, China (K.L., F.Y., 
G.Z., S.S., Y.M., C.-P.S.); and miaoych@henu.edu.cn songcp@henu.edu.cn.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, China Agricultural 
University, Beijing 100193, China (Y.L., D.R.) miaoych@henu.edu.cn 
songcp@henu.edu.cn.

The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade is an evolutionarily 
conserved signal transduction module involved in transducing extracellular 
signals to the nucleus for appropriate cellular adjustment. This cascade 
essentially consists of three components: a MAPK kinase kinase (MAPKKK), a MAPK 
kinase, and a MAPK, connected to each other by the event of phosphorylation. 
Here, we report the characterization of a MAPKKK, ABA-INSENSITIVE PROTEIN 
KINASE1 (AIK1), which regulates abscisic acid (ABA) responses in Arabidopsis 
(Arabidopsis thaliana). T-DNA insertion mutants of AIK1 showed insensitivity to 
ABA in terms of both root growth and stomatal response. AIK1 functions in ABA 
responses via regulation of root cell division and elongation, as well as 
stomatal responses. The activity of AIK1 is induced by ABA in Arabidopsis and 
tobacco (Nicotiana benthamiana), and the Arabidopsis protein phosphatase type 
2C, ABI1, a negative regulator of ABA signaling, restricts AIK1 activity by 
dephosphorylation. Bimolecular fluorescence complementation analysis showed that 
MPK3, MPK6, and AIK1 interact with MKK5. The single mutant seedlings of mpk6 and 
mkk5 have similar phenotypes to aik1, but mkk4 does not. AIK1 was localized in 
the cytoplasm and shown to activate MKK5 by protein phosphorylation, which was 
an ABA-activated process. Constitutively active MKK5 in aik1 mutant seedlings 
complements the ABA-insensitive root growth phenotype of aik1 The activity of 
MPK6 was increased by ABA in wild-type seedlings, but its activation by ABA was 
impaired in aik1 and aik1 mkk5 mutants. These findings clearly suggest that the 
AIK1-MKK5-MPK6 cascade functions in the ABA regulation of primary root growth 
and stomatal response.

© 2017 American Society of Plant Biologists. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1104/pp.16.01386
PMCID: PMC5291029
PMID: 27913741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The mitogen-activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) cascade is an evolutionarily conserved signal transduction module involved in transducing extracellular signals to the nucleus for appropriate cellular adjustment. This cascade essentially consists of three components: a MAPK kinase kinase ( MAPKKK ), a MAPK kinase, and a MAPK , connected to each other by the event of phosphorylation. Here, we report the characterization of a MAPKKK , ABA-INSENSITIVE PROTEIN KINASE1 (AIK1), which regulates abscisic acid ( ABA ) responses in Arabidopsis ( Arabidopsis thaliana ). T-DNA insertion mutants of AIK1 showed insensitivity to ABA in terms of both root growth and stomatal response. AIK1 functions in ABA responses via regulation of root cell division and elongation, as well as stomatal responses. The activity of AIK1 is induced by ABA in Arabidopsis and tobacco ( Nicotiana benthamiana ), and the Arabidopsis protein phosphatase type 2C, ABI1, a negative regulator of ABA signaling, restricts AIK1 activity by dephosphorylation. Bimolecular fluorescence complementation analysis showed that MPK3, MPK6, and AIK1 interact with MKK5. The single mutant seedlings of mpk6 and mkk5 have similar phenotypes to aik1 , but mkk4 does not. AIK1 was localized in the cytoplasm and shown to activate MKK5 by protein phosphorylation, which was an ABA-activated process. Constitutively active MKK5 in aik1 mutant seedlings complements the ABA-insensitive root growth phenotype of aik1 . The activity of MPK6 was increased by ABA in wild-type seedlings, but its activation by ABA was impaired in aik1 and aik1 mkk5 mutants. These findings clearly suggest that the AIK1-MKK5-MPK6 cascade functions in the ABA regulation of primary root growth and stomatal response.

DISCUSSION

In this study, we revealed that AIK1 plays an important role in the primary root growth and guard cell signaling in response to ABA. We have shown that the mutation of AIK1 leads to insensitivity to ABA in terms of guard cell signaling, primary root growth, and development in Arabidopsis. Further experiments have indicated that, upon exposure to ABA, the stomatal closing in aik1 plants was less sensitive to ABA than that in wild-type plants, the cell numbers from root tip to the elongation zone were greater in aik1 than in wild-type seedlings, and the cell length in the elongation zone of aik1 was longer than in wild-type seedlings. We have also shown that the intracellular signals were relayed and amplified through sequential phosphorylations of the AIK1 (MKKK20)-MKK5-MPK6 cascade, in response to ABA for regulating primary root growth ( Fig. 7G ).
