---
pmid: '25979161'
title: Transmembrane protein 64 reciprocally regulates osteoblast and adipocyte differentiation
  by modulating Wnt/β-catenin signaling.
authors:
- Jeong BC
- Kim TS
- Kim HS
- Lee SH
- Choi Y
journal: Bone
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2015.05.009
---

# Transmembrane protein 64 reciprocally regulates osteoblast and adipocyte differentiation by modulating Wnt/β-catenin signaling.
**Authors:** Jeong BC, Kim TS, Kim HS, Lee SH, Choi Y
**Journal:** Bone (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bone.2015.05.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2015.05.009)

## Abstract

1. Bone. 2015 Sep;78:165-73. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2015.05.009. Epub 2015 May 13.

Transmembrane protein 64 reciprocally regulates osteoblast and adipocyte 
differentiation by modulating Wnt/β-catenin signaling.

Jeong BC(1), Kim TS(2), Kim HS(3), Lee SH(4), Choi Y(5).

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Center for Biomineralization Disorders, School of Dentistry, 
Chonnam National University, Gwangju, 500-757, Republic of Korea. Electronic 
address: bcfrank@chonnam.ac.kr.
(2)TKM-Based Herbal Drug Research Group, Korea Institute of Oriental Medicine, 
Daejeon, 305-811, Republic of Korea.
(3)University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Department of 
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(4)Department of Oral Microbiology and Immunology, College of Dentistry and 
Center for Metabolic Function Regulation (CMFR), Wonkwang University, Iksan 
570-749, Republic of Korea.
(5)University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Department of 
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Electronic 
address: ychoi3@mail.med.upenn.edu.

Age-related osteoporosis is associated with a reciprocal decrease in bone 
formation and an increase in adiposity in the bone marrow niche. We previously 
reported Transmembrane protein 64 (Tmem64) to be an important regulator of 
osteoclast function; however, its precise role in osteoblasts has not yet been 
established. Here, we showed that ablation of the Tmem64 gene in mice resulted 
in markedly increased osteoblast and reduced adipocyte differentiation from bone 
marrow-derived stromal cells (BMSCs). Conversely, Tmem64 overexpression 
inhibited osteogenesis and accelerated adipogenesis. Furthermore, BMSCs isolated 
from Tmem64 knockout mice formed a greater number of colony-forming 
unit-osteoblasts and a lower number of colony-forming unit-adipocytes than the 
wild type controls. Mechanistically, the expression level of β-catenin, the key 
Wnt signaling molecule, increased significantly, and its nuclear translocation 
was enhanced in Tmem64-deficient cells. Introduction of Tmem64 significantly 
suppressed β-catenin-mediated transcriptional activity in an in vitro 
co-transfection experiment as well as during an in vivo experiment involving 
BAT-Gal reporter mice. These results demonstrate that Tmem64 plays an important 
role in the regulation of mesenchymal lineage allocation by modulating 
Wnt/β-catenin signaling.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2015.05.009
PMID: 25979161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
