---
pmid: '31748347'
title: The Tetraspanin CD53 Regulates Early B Cell Development by Promoting IL-7R
  Signaling.
authors:
- Greenberg ZJ
- Monlish DA
- Bartnett RL
- Yang Y
- Shen G
- Li W
- Bednarski JJ
- Schuettpelz LG
journal: J Immunol
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6926393
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1900539
---

# The Tetraspanin CD53 Regulates Early B Cell Development by Promoting IL-7R Signaling.
**Authors:** Greenberg ZJ, Monlish DA, Bartnett RL, Yang Y, Shen G, Li W, Bednarski JJ, Schuettpelz LG
**Journal:** J Immunol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.4049/jimmunol.1900539](https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.1900539)
**PMC:** [PMC6926393](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6926393/)

## Abstract

1. J Immunol. 2020 Jan 1;204(1):58-67. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1900539. Epub 2019
Nov  20.

The Tetraspanin CD53 Regulates Early B Cell Development by Promoting IL-7R 
Signaling.

Greenberg ZJ(1), Monlish DA(1), Bartnett RL(1), Yang Y(2), Shen G(3), Li W(2), 
Bednarski JJ(1), Schuettpelz LG(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, MO 63110.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110; and.
(3)College of Medicine, Henan University of Science and Technology, Luoyang, 
Henan 471003, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, MO 63110; Schuettpelz_l@wustl.edu.

The tetraspanin CD53 has been implicated in B cell development and function. 
CD53 is a transcriptional target of EBF1, a critical transcription factor for 
early B cell development. Further, human deficiency of CD53 results in recurrent 
infections and reduced serum Igs. Although prior studies have indicated a role 
for CD53 in regulating mature B cells, its role in early B cell development is 
not well understood. In this study, we show that CD53 expression, which is 
minimal on hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells, increases throughout bone 
marrow B cell maturation, and mice lacking CD53 have significantly decreased 
bone marrow, splenic, lymphatic, and peripheral B cells. Mixed bone marrow 
chimeras show that CD53 functions cell autonomously to promote B lymphopoiesis. 
Cd53-/- mice have reduced surface expression of IL-7Rα and diminished 
phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase and JAK/STAT signaling in prepro- and pro-B cells. 
Signaling through these pathways via IL-7R is essential for early B cell 
survival and transition from the pro-B to pre-B cell developmental stage. 
Indeed, we find increased apoptosis in developing B cells and an associated 
reduction in pre-B and immature B cell populations in the absence of CD53. 
Coimmunoprecipitation and proximity ligation studies demonstrate physical 
interaction between CD53 and IL-7R. Together, these data, to our knowledge, 
suggest a novel role for CD53 during IL-7 signaling to promote early B cell 
differentiation.

Copyright © 2019 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1900539
PMCID: PMC6926393
PMID: 31748347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
