---
pmid: '17126326'
title: Extracellular heat shock protein 70 mediates heat stress-induced epidermal
  growth factor receptor transactivation in A431 carcinoma cells.
authors:
- Evdonin AL
- Guzhova IV
- Margulis BA
- Medvedeva ND
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2006.11.024
---

# Extracellular heat shock protein 70 mediates heat stress-induced epidermal growth factor receptor transactivation in A431 carcinoma cells.
**Authors:** Evdonin AL, Guzhova IV, Margulis BA, Medvedeva ND
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2006.11.024](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2006.11.024)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2006 Dec 11;580(28-29):6674-8. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2006.11.024. 
Epub 2006 Nov 20.

Extracellular heat shock protein 70 mediates heat stress-induced epidermal 
growth factor receptor transactivation in A431 carcinoma cells.

Evdonin AL(1), Guzhova IV, Margulis BA, Medvedeva ND.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Signaling and Transport, Institute of Cytology, RAS, 4 
Tychoretsky av., S-Petersburg, Russia. evdonin@mail.ru

The initial steps of heat stress in A431 cells were previously characterized by 
ligand-independent EGFR transactivation via an unknown mechanism and concomitant 
secretion of Hsp70. In this work we demonstrate that the depletion of Hsp70 from 
the conditioned medium of heated cells abolishes EGFR transactivation indicating 
that secreted Hsp70 is essential for EGFR transactivation during heat shock. 
This notion is supported by the findings that purified Hsp70 can induce EGFR 
transactivation and the activation of EGFR-dependent signaling pathways. Both 
heat stress and pure Hsp70 stimulate activation of TLR2/4 and their association 
with EGFR. These results suggest that the secreted Hsp70 mediates the 
cross-communication of TLR and EGFR signaling systems in A431 cells.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2006.11.024
PMID: 17126326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
