---
pmid: '10662863'
title: The Arabidopsis NPR1/NIM1 protein enhances the DNA binding activity of a subgroup
  of the TGA family of bZIP transcription factors.
authors:
- Després C
- DeLong C
- Glaze S
- Liu E
- Fobert PR
journal: Plant Cell
year: '2000'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC139764
---

# The Arabidopsis NPR1/NIM1 protein enhances the DNA binding activity of a subgroup of the TGA family of bZIP transcription factors.
**Authors:** Després C, DeLong C, Glaze S, Liu E, Fobert PR
**Journal:** Plant Cell (2000)
**PMC:** [PMC139764](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC139764/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell. 2000 Feb;12(2):279-90.

The Arabidopsis NPR1/NIM1 protein enhances the DNA binding activity of a 
subgroup of the TGA family of bZIP transcription factors.

Després C(1), DeLong C, Glaze S, Liu E, Fobert PR.

Author information:
(1)National Research Council Canada, Plant Biotechnology Institute, 110 
Gymnasium Place, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada S7N 0W9.

Comment in
    Plant Cell. 2000 Feb;12(2):179-81. doi: 10.1105/tpc.12.2.179.

The Arabidopsis NPR1 gene is essential in activating systemic, inducible plant 
defense responses. To gain a better understanding of NPR1 function, we conducted 
a yeast two-hybrid screening procedure and identified a differential interaction 
between NPR1 and all known members of the Arabidopsis TGA family of basic 
leucine zipper transcription factors. In the electrophoretic mobility shift 
assay, NPR1 substantially increased the binding of TGA2 to its cognate promoter 
element (as-1) as well as to a positive salicylic acid-inducible element (LS7) 
and a negative element (LS5) in the promoter of the pathogenesis-related PR-1 
gene. Proteins encoded by npr1 mutants interacted poorly with TGA2 and did not 
substantially increase TGA2 binding to the as-1, LS5, or LS7 elements, thus 
establishing a link between the loss of disease resistance and the loss of TGA2 
interaction and NPR1-enhanced DNA binding. Coupled with observations that the 
DNA binding activity of TGA factors is deregulated in npr1 plants, the results 
suggest that NPR1-mediated DNA binding of TGA2 is critical for activation of 
defense genes.

PMCID: PMC139764
PMID: 10662863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The Arabidopsis NPR1 gene is essential in activating systemic, inducible plant defense responses. To gain a better understanding of NPR1 function, we conducted a yeast two-hybrid screening procedure and identified a differential interaction between NPR1 and all known members of the Arabidopsis TGA family of basic leucine zipper transcription factors. In the electrophoretic mobility shift assay, NPR1 substantially increased the binding of TGA2 to its cognate promoter element ( as-1 ) as well as to a positive salicylic acid–inducible element ( LS7 ) and a negative element ( LS5 ) in the promoter of the pathogenesis-related PR-1 gene. Proteins encoded by npr1 mutants interacted poorly with TGA2 and did not substantially increase TGA2 binding to the as-1 , LS5 , or LS7 elements, thus establishing a link between the loss of disease resistance and the loss of TGA2 interaction and NPR1-enhanced DNA binding. Coupled with observations that the DNA binding activity of TGA factors is deregulated in npr1 plants, the results suggest that NPR1-mediated DNA binding of TGA2 is critical for activation of defense genes.

INTRODUCTION

Localized exposure of plants to certain microbes can induce subsequent resistance to a broad range of otherwise virulent pathogens in distant, noninfected tissues. To date, two types of such induced, or acquired, systemic disease resistance have been described: systemic acquired resistance (SAR) ( Ryals et al., 1996 ) and induced systemic resistance (ISR) ( van Loon et al., 1998 ). The former is triggered by pathogens that cause cell death at the site of infection and is associated with the activation of pathogenesis-related ( PR ) genes and the accumulation of PR proteins ( Ward et al., 1991 ). Salicylic acid (SA) is a key metabolite in the deployment of SAR. Transgenic plants expressing the bacterial nahG gene encoding a SA-degrading enzyme are unable to mount SAR and are impaired in PR gene expression ( Delaney et al., 1994 ). ISR is induced by certain nonpathogenic, root-colonizing rhizobacteria ( van Loon et al., 1998 ). In contrast to SAR, ISR is not associated with the activation of PR genes and is presumed to rely on the activation of genes yet to be identified ( Pieterse et al., 1998 ). ISR is independent of SA but requires intact jasmonate and ethylene response pathways ( Pieterse et al., 1998 ).

Despite their differences, SAR and ISR both require the activity of the Arabidopsis NPR1 gene ( Cao et al., 1994 ; Pieterse et al., 1998 ), also known as NIM1 ( Ryals et al., 1997 ). Plants containing mutations at the NPR1 locus are compromised in their ability to mount effective SAR and ISR and are more susceptible to normally incompatible pathogens ( Cao et al., 1994 ; Delaney et al., 1995 ; Pieterse et al., 1998 ). Transgenic plants expressing lesser amounts of NPR1 are also more susceptible to infection from compatible pathogens, whereas lines overexpressing NPR1 display enhanced resistance against bacterial and fungal pathogens ( Cao et al., 1998 ). Genetic analyses have established that NPR1 acts downstream of SA in the SAR signal transduction pathway ( Cao et al., 1994 ; Delaney et al., 1995 ) and downstream of jasmonate and ethylene in the ISR signaling pathway ( Pieterse et al., 1998 ).

The NPR1 gene has recently been isolated and predicted to encode a protein containing ankyrin-like repeats ( Cao et al., 1997 ; Ryals et al., 1997 ), which is a motif known to be responsible for mediating protein–protein interactions ( Sedgwick and Smerdon, 1999 ). It has been proposed that NPR1 possesses extensive sequence conservation with the mammalian protein IκBα and that it may represent the plant homolog of IκBα ( Ryals et al., 1997 ). IκB proteins bind to and control the transcriptional activity of NF-κB, a member of the Rel family of transcription factors and a critical regulator of several cellular events, such as response to stress and to pathogens ( Baldwin, 1996 ).

To gain a better understanding of NPR1 function, we and others have conducted yeast two-hybrid screening procedures to identify proteins capable of interacting with NPR1. Recently, one of these groups ( Zhang et al., 1999 ) screened a tomato cDNA library with a putative tomato homolog of NPR1 (TomNPR1) and reported that it interacted with a basic leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription factor called NIF1 (for NPR1 Interacting Factor1). NIF1 belongs to a subclass of bZIP proteins that includes the Arabidopsis TGA factors. Subsequently, these authors showed by using directed yeast two-hybrid tests that Arabidopsis NPR1 interacts with three members of the Arabidopsis TGA family: AHBP-1b/TGA2, OBF5/TGA5, and TGA6. Mutant derivatives of NPR1 that abolish SAR in the plant failed to interact in the yeast two-hybrid system with the two TGA factors tested; these were TGA2 and TGA6 ( Zhang et al., 1999 ). Furthermore, it was shown that TGA2 binds to sequences in the PR-1 promoter. Although it has been reported that TGA2 binds to sequences required for SA induction of PR-1 ( Zhang et al., 1999 ), the probe used in the electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) contained two cis -acting elements previously identified by linker scanning mutagenesis ( Lebel et al., 1998 ). These elements, linker scan7 ( LS7 ) and LS5 , contain the sequence ACGTCA, which is complementary to TGACGT, the sequence reported to be the preferred substrate for TGA factors ( Schindler et al., 1992 ). LS7 represents a positive regulatory element involved in 2,6-dichloroisonicotinic acid and SA responsiveness, whereas LS5 is a negative regulatory element ( Lebel et al., 1998 ). To demonstrate that TGA2 binds the PR-1 promoter sequence required for SA induction ( LS7 ), Zhang et al. (1999) used a mutant competitor in which both the LS5 and LS7 sequences were mutated. Therefore, it is still not clear whether TGA factors bind to the SA response element, the negative regulatory element, or both. Nevertheless, the results they obtained suggest that NPR1 may regulate the expression of genes involved in SAR by interacting with a subclass of bZIP transcription factors ( Zhang et al., 1999 ).

Here, we report on our yeast two-hybrid screen, using Arabidopsis NPR1 as bait. Our results confirm those of Zhang et al. (1999) and expand upon them to show the following points. (1) NPR1 interacts with two additional members of the Arabidopsis TGA family, TGA3 and a newly identified member, TGA7, but does not interact with TGA1 and TGA4. (2) TGA factors bind to both a positive ( LS7 ) and a negative ( LS5 ) regulatory element found within the PR-1 promoter. (3) NPR1 enhances the binding of an interacting TGA factor to a well-characterized cis -acting element ( as-1 from the cauliflower mosaic virus 35S promoter) as well as to the PR-1 LS5 and LS7 elements, but it has little or no effect on the DNA binding properties of a noninteracting TGA factor. (4) NPR1 fractionates to both the cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions in unstimulated Arabidopsis tissues. And (5) the DNA binding activity of TGA factors is deregulated in npr1 plants. These results suggest that the activity of TGA2, and possibly of other members of the TGA family, is regulated by their interaction with NPR1 and that disruption of the interaction between these proteins can compromise systemic induced disease resistance.

DISCUSSION

Using a combination of in vivo and in vitro assays, we have identified a differential physical interaction between a key positive regulator of acquired and induced systemic resistance (SAR/ISR), NPR1, and members of the Arabidopsis TGA family of bZIP transcription factors. Although the precise in vivo function of these transcription factors is unclear, they are known to bind to promoter elements, such as the cauliflower mosaic virus 35S as-1 element, that are inducible by phytohormones implicated in SAR and ISR signaling ( Xiang et al., 1996 ; van Loon et al., 1998 ). As described in this study, at least one TGA factor (TGA2) is also capable of binding in the EMSA to the SA response element LS7 of the PR-1 gene promoter, which is a gene that is known to be induced during SAR ( Ward et al., 1991 ) and whose expression is abolished in npr1 mutants ( Cao et al., 1994 ; Delaney et al., 1995 ). Furthermore, TGA factors, such as tobacco TGA1a, act as genuine transcription factors in heterologous and homologous in vitro transcription systems ( Katagiri et al., 1990 ; Yamazaki et al., 1990 ) and can transcriptionally activate as-1 –containing promoters in plants ( Lam et al., 1989 ) and yeast ( Rüth et al., 1994 ). Taken together, these results suggest that a subgroup of the TGA factors acts immediately downstream of NPR1 in the SAR and ISR signaling pathways and that ultimately the expression of genes involved in SAR and ISR could be controlled by the NPR1-regulated binding of TGA factors to cis -acting promoter elements. In support of this last statement, we present two lines of evidence suggesting that NPR1 is capable of regulating TGA factor activity.

First, in vitro–synthesized NPR1 enhanced the binding of an NPR1-interacting TGA factor (TGA2) to its cognate promoter elements in the EMSA ( Figures 4 to 6 ). This enhancement of binding was specific, because it was not observed with a mutant version of NPR1 (NIM1-2) that fails to mount SAR ( Ryals et al., 1997 ), that did not interact with TGA factors in the yeast two-hybrid system ( Figure 2 ), and that bound weakly with TGA2 in the in vitro assay ( Figure 3 ). Also, this enhancement was not observed when a member of the TGA family (TGA4) that failed to interact with NPR1 in the yeast two-hybrid system and interacted only weakly with NPR1 in the in vitro binding assay was tested. These results suggest that interaction with NPR1 in the plant cell could stimulate the binding of specific TGA factors to cognate promoter elements found in genes involved in SAR and ISR, resulting in their activation. Accordingly, the inability of npr1 mutants to establish SAR and/or ISR would be attributed to the production of NPR1 proteins with greatly reduced ability to interact with TGA factors ( Table 2 and Figures 3 to 6 ). In the absence of wild-type NPR1, TGA factors that normally interact with this regulator would be unable to productively bind cognate promoter elements found in genes involved in SAR and ISR, thus failing to activate gene transcription. Enhanced disease resistance and PR gene expression observed in plants overexpressing NPR1 ( Cao et al., 1998 ) could be explained by enhanced TGA binding to promoter elements stimulated by the increased availability of NPR1 protein.

The observation that the DNA binding activity of TGA4 is not greatly affected by NPR1 suggests that the activity of members of the TGA family that interact poorly with NPR1 may not be regulated by NPR1 in vivo. Such TGA factors could be involved in regulating the expression of genes in an NPR1-independent manner. Thus, differential interaction with NPR1 may be one mechanism by which the in vivo specificity and activity of TGA transcription factors, which bind to the same target sequences in vitro, are regulated.

The observation that NPR1 enhanced TGA2 interaction to a negative regulatory element ( LS5 ) of the PR1 promoter ( Figure 6 ) suggests that in addition to a stimulatory role, the NPR1-regulated DNA binding activity of the TGA factors could be required for the transcriptional repression of genes. There are numerous reports of mammalian and Drosophila transcription factors acting as repressors. One example is provided by the transcription factor Dorsal, the Drosophila homolog of NF-κB, which activates the twist gene but represses the zen gene ( Lehming et al., 1994 ). The specific promoter context surrounding NPR1-regulated TGA binding sites and the identity of the TGA factors bound to NPR1 are two variables that could influence whether TGA factor binding results in transcriptional activation or repression.

The second line of evidence suggesting that NPR1 is important for TGA function comes from a comparison of as-1 binding activity in wild-type and npr1 plants. We observed that as-1 binding in wild-type Arabidopsis leaves is inducible by SA ( Figure 8 ). To our knowledge, this phenomenon has not been reported for Arabidopsis, although the as-1 element is known to confer SA-inducible gene expression in this species ( Xiang et al., 1996 ). Our results are reminiscent of those obtained in tobacco, in which SA was reported to stimulate the as-1 binding of a factor called SA response protein that is immunologically related to TGA1a ( Jupin and Chua, 1996 ). The tobacco results, together with previous reports that TGA factors, in particular TGA2, represent a significant component of nuclear as-1 binding in Arabidopsis ( Lam and Lam, 1995 ), suggest that the SA-inducible as-1 binding we observed in wild-type Arabidopsis is mediated by TGA factors.

In extracts from water-treated npr1 mutant plants, as-1 binding activity was substantially higher than that observed in similarly treated wild-type plants ( Figure 8 ). Furthermore, this binding activity did not increase after treatment with SA. These results demonstrate that TGA factor activity is altered in the absence of wild-type NPR1 function and, consequently, that NPR1 is an important regulator of TGA factors in plants. Although this line of research does not provide information as to how NPR1 may regulate TGA factor activity in vivo, the observations that these proteins interact with each other in the yeast two-hybrid system and in vitro suggest that it is likely through a direct physical interaction.

The observation that extracts from water-treated npr1 plants possessed higher as-1 binding activity than did wild-type plants suggests that the role of NPR1 in regulating gene expression is complex and likely to extend beyond simply enhancing the DNA binding activity of the TGA factors. Indeed, any model of NPR1 function during SA-activated PR-1 gene expression must consider the NPR1-dependent DNA binding enhancement of TGA factors, the cytoplasmic and nuclear localization of NPR1, the SA inducibility of as-1 binding activity in wild-type Arabidopsis, as well as the constitutive as-1 binding activity in npr1 plants.

A rise in the levels of SA concentrations could result in the modification of NPR1, TGA factors, or both partners, altering one or more of their functions and/or properties. For example, it could modify the transactivation activity of TGA factors, the ability of NPR1 and TGA factors to interact with each other or with additional partners, and/or the abundance or availability of either protein at the PR-1 promoter. These effects, in turn, could be mediated by a number of different mechanisms, including (de)phosphorylation, altered protein turnover, changes in subcellular localization, and/or sequestration. The importance of these processes in regulating the activity of transcription factors in other systems has been abundantly documented ( Calkhoven and Ab, 1996 ).

Although it is too early to advocate any one particular mechanism, it has been previously proposed that the TGA factors, or at least the related SA response protein, is sequestered under noninductive conditions by an inhibitor protein called SAI ( Jupin and Chua, 1996 ). After SA treatment, the SA response protein is released from SAI in a process that involves phosphorylation ( Jupin and Chua, 1996 ). Based on our results of TGA binding in npr1 plants, it appears possible that NPR1 could be SAI or could control SAI activity.

Clearly, additional research is required to resolve the possible functions of NPR1 implied from our current work. Future research should include analysis of the subcellular localization of NPR1 before and after activation of SAR and of PR-1 gene expression in plants containing dominant-negative or knockout versions of TGA factors.
