---
pmid: '9461559'
title: Regulation of Rad51 function by c-Abl in response to DNA damage.
authors:
- Yuan ZM
- Huang Y
- Ishiko T
- Nakada S
- Utsugisawa T
- Kharbanda S
- Wang R
- Sung P
- Shinohara A
- Weichselbaum R
- Kufe D
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.7.3799
---

# Regulation of Rad51 function by c-Abl in response to DNA damage.
**Authors:** Yuan ZM, Huang Y, Ishiko T, Nakada S, Utsugisawa T, Kharbanda S, Wang R, Sung P, Shinohara A, Weichselbaum R, Kufe D
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.273.7.3799](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.7.3799)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Feb 13;273(7):3799-802. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.7.3799.

Regulation of Rad51 function by c-Abl in response to DNA damage.

Yuan ZM(1), Huang Y, Ishiko T, Nakada S, Utsugisawa T, Kharbanda S, Wang R, Sung 
P, Shinohara A, Weichselbaum R, Kufe D.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cancer Pharmacology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The Rad51 protein, a homolog of bacterial RecA, functions in DNA double-strand 
break repair and genetic recombination. Whereas Rad51 catalyzes ATP-dependent 
pairing and strand exchange between homologous DNA molecules, regulation of this 
function is unknown. The c-Abl tyrosine kinase is activated by ionizing 
radiation and certain other DNA-damaging agents. Here we demonstrate that c-Abl 
interacts constitutively with Rad51. We show that c-Abl phosphorylates Rad51 on 
Tyr-54 in vitro. The results also show that treatment of cells with ionizing 
radiation induces c-Abl-dependent phosphorylation of Rad51. Phosphorylation of 
Rad51 by c-Abl inhibits the binding of Rad51 to DNA and the function of Rad51 in 
ATP-dependent DNA strand exchange reactions. These findings represent the first 
demonstration that Rad51 is regulated by phosphorylation and support a 
functional role for c-Abl in regulating Rad51-dependent recombination in the 
response to DNA damage.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.7.3799
PMID: 9461559 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
