---
pmid: '11006113'
title: Molecular cloning and chromosomal mapping of a novel five-span transmembrane
  protein gene, M83.
authors:
- Motohashi T
- Miyoshi S
- Osawa M
- Eyre HJ
- Sutherland GR
- Matsuda Y
- Nakamura Y
- Shibuya A
- Iwama A
- Nakauchi H
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/bbrc.2000.3409
---

# Molecular cloning and chromosomal mapping of a novel five-span transmembrane protein gene, M83.
**Authors:** Motohashi T, Miyoshi S, Osawa M, Eyre HJ, Sutherland GR, Matsuda Y, Nakamura Y, Shibuya A, Iwama A, Nakauchi H
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1006/bbrc.2000.3409](https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.2000.3409)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Sep 16;276(1):244-50. doi: 
10.1006/bbrc.2000.3409.

Molecular cloning and chromosomal mapping of a novel five-span transmembrane 
protein gene, M83.

Motohashi T(1), Miyoshi S, Osawa M, Eyre HJ, Sutherland GR, Matsuda Y, Nakamura 
Y, Shibuya A, Iwama A, Nakauchi H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Tsukuba, 
Ibaraki, Japan.

In an attempt to identify novel transmembrane molecules expressed on 
hematopoietic cells, we identified a novel transmembrane protein gene, M83. 
Cloning of the full-length cDNAs of human and mouse M83 revealed that M83 
encodes a type I transmembrane protein with a region containing five hydrophobic 
segments within the C-terminal part of the protein, suggesting that M83 is a 
five-span transmembrane molecule. The M83 protein was expressed on the cell 
surface as a glycosylated protein with a molecular mass of 84 kDa. The M83 gene 
was localized to human chromosome 16p13.3, mouse chromosome 17B1, and rat 
chromosome 10q12.3 distal. In human, M83 mRNA was highly expressed in placenta, 
pancreas, and lymphohematopoietic tissues including peripheral blood, spleen, 
and bone marrow. Among hematopoietic cells, it was highly expressed in resting T 
lymphocytes and was downregulated by cell activation, suggestive of its 
biological role related to the T cell resting status.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.2000.3409
PMID: 11006113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
