---
pmid: '15775988'
title: TRB3, a novel ER stress-inducible gene, is induced via ATF4-CHOP pathway and
  is involved in cell death.
authors:
- Ohoka N
- Yoshii S
- Hattori T
- Onozaki K
- Hayashi H
journal: EMBO J
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC556400
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600596
---

# TRB3, a novel ER stress-inducible gene, is induced via ATF4-CHOP pathway and is involved in cell death.
**Authors:** Ohoka N, Yoshii S, Hattori T, Onozaki K, Hayashi H
**Journal:** EMBO J (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7600596](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7600596)
**PMC:** [PMC556400](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC556400/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2005 Mar 23;24(6):1243-55. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600596. Epub 2005
Mar  10.

TRB3, a novel ER stress-inducible gene, is induced via ATF4-CHOP pathway and is 
involved in cell death.

Ohoka N(1), Yoshii S, Hattori T, Onozaki K, Hayashi H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Health Sciences, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Nagoya City University, Mizuho, Nagoya, Japan.

C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) is a stress-inducible nuclear protein that is 
crucial for the development of programmed cell death and regeneration; however, 
the regulation of its function has not been well characterized. Slbo, a 
Drosophila homolog of C/EBP (CCAAT/enhancer binding protein), was shown to be 
unstabilized by tribbles. Here, we identified TRB3 as a tribbles ortholog in 
humans, which associated with CHOP to suppress the CHOP-dependent 
transactivation. TRB3 is induced by various forms endoplasmic reticulum (ER) 
stress later than CHOP. Tunicamycin treatment enhanced the TRB3 promoter 
activity, while dominant-negative forms of CHOP suppressed the 
tunicamycin-induced activation. In addition, the tunicamycin response region in 
the TRB3 promoter contains amino-acid response elements overlapping the 
CHOP-binding site, and CHOP and ATF4 cooperated to activate this promoter 
activity. Knockdown of endogenous ATF4 or CHOP expression dramatically repressed 
tunicamycin-induced TRB3 induction. Furthermore, knockdown of TRB3 expression 
decreased ER stress-dependent cell death. These results indicate that TRB3 is a 
novel target of CHOP/ATF4 and downregulates its own induction by repression of 
CHOP/ATF4 functions, and that it is involved in CHOP-dependent cell death during 
ER stress.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600596
PMCID: PMC556400
PMID: 15775988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
