---
pmid: '8016655'
title: Stimulation of GAL4 derivative binding to nucleosomal DNA by the yeast SWI/SNF
  complex.
authors:
- Côté J
- Quinn J
- Workman JL
- Peterson CL
journal: Science
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.8016655
---

# Stimulation of GAL4 derivative binding to nucleosomal DNA by the yeast SWI/SNF complex.
**Authors:** Côté J, Quinn J, Workman JL, Peterson CL
**Journal:** Science (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.8016655](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.8016655)

## Abstract

1. Science. 1994 Jul 1;265(5168):53-60. doi: 10.1126/science.8016655.

Stimulation of GAL4 derivative binding to nucleosomal DNA by the yeast SWI/SNF 
complex.

Côté J(1), Quinn J, Workman JL, Peterson CL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State 
University, University Park 16802.

The SWI/SNF protein complex is required for the enhancement of transcription by 
many transcriptional activators in yeast. Here it is shown that the purified 
SWI/SNF complex is composed of 10 subunits and includes the SWI1, SWI2/SNF2, 
SWI3, SNF5, and SNF6 gene products. The complex exhibited DNA-stimulated 
adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) activity, but lacked helicase activity. The 
SWI/SNF complex caused a 10- to 30-fold stimulation in the binding of GAL4 
derivatives to nucleosomal DNA in a reaction that required adenosine 
triphosphate (ATP) hydrolysis but was activation domain-independent. Stimulation 
of GAL4 binding by the complex was abolished by a mutant SWI2 subunit, and was 
increased by the presence of a histone-binding protein, nucleoplasmin. A direct 
ATP-dependent interaction between the SWI/SNF complex and nucleosomal DNA was 
detected. These observations suggest that a primary role of the SWI/SNF complex 
is to promote activator binding to nucleosomal DNA.

DOI: 10.1126/science.8016655
PMID: 8016655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
