---
pmid: '7540104'
title: Analysis of the sequences of human beta-1,4-galactosyltransferase cDNA clones.
authors:
- Chatterjee SK
- Mukerjee S
- Tripathi PK
journal: Int J Biochem Cell Biol
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/1357-2725(94)00062-g
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Analysis of the sequences of human beta-1,4-galactosyltransferase cDNA clones.
**Authors:** Chatterjee SK, Mukerjee S, Tripathi PK
**Journal:** Int J Biochem Cell Biol (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1016/1357-2725(94)00062-g](https://doi.org/10.1016/1357-2725(94)00062-g)

## Abstract

1. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 1995 Mar;27(3):329-36. doi: 
10.1016/1357-2725(94)00062-g.

Analysis of the sequences of human beta-1,4-galactosyltransferase cDNA clones.

Chatterjee SK(1), Mukerjee S, Tripathi PK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Kentucky, Lexington 
40536-0096, USA.

UDP-galactose:beta-1,4 N-acetyl glucosamine galactosyltransferase (4 beta GT) is 
a promising tumor marker for ovarian cancer. To study the role of 4 beta GT in 
malignant transformation at the molecular level human 4 beta GT cDNA and genomic 
clones were isolated and analyzed. For the isolation of 4 beta GT cDNA and 
genomic clones, a human fetal liver cDNA library in lambda gt11 and a human 
genomic library in EMBL-3B vectors respectively were screened using a 4 beta GT 
cDNA insert as the probe. Complete sequence of the cDNA clones were determined 
by subcloning in plasmid vectors, and compared with the published sequence of 
human liver 4 beta GT. Presence of various 4 beta GT exons in the genomic clones 
were determined by Southern blot analysis using specific oligodeoxynucleotide 
probes. Among the 5 cDNA clones isolated, 2 clones GTN 6 and GTN 17 were sibling 
clones and had a nucleotide sequence identical to the published 4 beta GT cDNA 
sequence, except at the 3'-end, where these clones had 7 unique nucleotide 
sequences. One cDNA clone, GTN2 also had a nucleotide sequence identical to that 
of 4 beta GT, except for 3 G residues at the 5'-end. One cDNA clone, GTN 1, had 
a unique sequence at the 5'-end comprising of 74 nucleotides. Another clone, GTN 
20, was unrelated to 4 beta GT. Analysis of genomic clones showed that 4 beta GT 
exons 3, 4, 5 and 6 were present in a 14 kb genomic clone, EMGT-4. Exon 1 was 
present in a separate 16 kb clone, EMGT-6.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1016/1357-2725(94)00062-g
PMID: 7540104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
