---
pmid: '25335890'
title: Ciliopathy proteins establish a bipartite signaling compartment in a C. elegans
  thermosensory neuron.
authors:
- Nguyen PA
- Liou W
- Hall DH
- Leroux MR
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4265742
doi: 10.1242/jcs.157610
---

# Ciliopathy proteins establish a bipartite signaling compartment in a C. elegans thermosensory neuron.
**Authors:** Nguyen PA, Liou W, Hall DH, Leroux MR
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.157610](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.157610)
**PMC:** [PMC4265742](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4265742/)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2014 Dec 15;127(Pt 24):5317-30. doi: 10.1242/jcs.157610. Epub 2014
 Oct 21.

Ciliopathy proteins establish a bipartite signaling compartment in a C. elegans 
thermosensory neuron.

Nguyen PA(1), Liou W(2), Hall DH(3), Leroux MR(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Simon Fraser University, 
Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6, Canada.
(2)Department of Anatomy, Chang Gung University, Kwei-san Tao-yuan 333, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New 
York, NY 10461, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Simon Fraser University, 
Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6, Canada leroux@sfu.ca.

How signaling domains form is an important, yet largely unexplored question. 
Here, we show that ciliary proteins help establish two contiguous, yet distinct 
cyclic GMP (cGMP) signaling compartments in Caenorhabditis elegans thermosensory 
AFD neurons. One compartment, a bona fide cilium, is delineated by proteins 
associated with Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS), Meckel syndrome and 
nephronophthisis at its base, and requires NPHP-2 (known as inversin in mammals) 
to anchor a cGMP-gated ion channel within the proximal ciliary region. The 
other, a subcompartment with profuse microvilli and a different lipid 
environment, is separated from the dendrite by a cellular junction and requires 
BBS-8 and DAF-25 (known as Ankmy2 in mammals) for correct localization of 
guanylyl cyclases needed for thermosensation. Consistent with a requirement for 
a membrane diffusion barrier at the subcompartment base, we reveal the 
unexpected presence of ciliary transition zone proteins where no canonical 
transition zone ultrastructure exists. We propose that differential 
compartmentalization of signal transduction components by ciliary proteins is 
important for the functions of ciliated sensory neurons.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.157610
PMCID: PMC4265742
PMID: 25335890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
