---
pmid: '8125261'
title: Cloning and characterization of the G-box binding factor, an essential component
  of the developmental switch between early and late development in Dictyostelium.
authors:
- Schnitzler GR
- Fischer WH
- Firtel RA
journal: Genes Dev
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1101/gad.8.4.502
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Cloning and characterization of the G-box binding factor, an essential component of the developmental switch between early and late development in Dictyostelium.
**Authors:** Schnitzler GR, Fischer WH, Firtel RA
**Journal:** Genes Dev (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.8.4.502](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.8.4.502)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 1994 Feb 15;8(4):502-14. doi: 10.1101/gad.8.4.502.

Cloning and characterization of the G-box binding factor, an essential component 
of the developmental switch between early and late development in Dictyostelium.

Schnitzler GR(1), Fischer WH, Firtel RA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla 
92093-0634.

During Dictyostelium development, the cAMP-regulated induction of 
cell-type-specific late genes marks a developmental switch from the initial 
formation of the multicellular organism to the differentiation of the various 
cell types that mediate morphogenesis and eventually give rise to the mature 
fruting body. The G-box binding factor (GBF) is a developmentally regulated 
Dictyostelium transcription factor whose affinity for a DNA sequence correlates 
with the ability of that sequence to confer inducibility to late gene promoters 
in response to high, continuous levels of extracellular cAMP. We report the 
purification of GBF and cloning of the gene that encodes it, as confirmed by in 
vitro production of GBF activity. The predicted protein is highly basic and 
contains two putative zinc fingers. Disruption of the GBF gene by homologous 
recombination results in the loss of all GBF DNA-binding activity, developmental 
arrest at the loose aggregate stage, and the loss of late gene induction during 
development or in response to extracellular cAMP. Constitutive expression of GBF 
complements the null phenotype and allows for the rapid activation of a class of 
late genes in response to cAMP. Our results indicate that GBF acts as an 
extracellular cAMP-responsive transcriptional activator regulating late gene 
expression and is an essential component of a developmental switch between 
aggregation and cellular morphogenesis.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.8.4.502
PMID: 8125261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
