---
pmid: '17274640'
title: A limited screen for protein interactions reveals new roles for protein phosphatase
  1 in cell cycle control and apoptosis.
authors:
- Flores-Delgado G
- Liu CW
- Sposto R
- Berndt N
journal: J Proteome Res
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/pr060504h
---

# A limited screen for protein interactions reveals new roles for protein phosphatase 1 in cell cycle control and apoptosis.
**Authors:** Flores-Delgado G, Liu CW, Sposto R, Berndt N
**Journal:** J Proteome Res (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1021/pr060504h](https://doi.org/10.1021/pr060504h)

## Abstract

1. J Proteome Res. 2007 Mar;6(3):1165-75. doi: 10.1021/pr060504h. Epub 2007 Feb
3.

A limited screen for protein interactions reveals new roles for protein 
phosphatase 1 in cell cycle control and apoptosis.

Flores-Delgado G(1), Liu CW, Sposto R, Berndt N.

Author information:
(1)Division Of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Keck School 
of Medicine, University of Southern California, 4650 Sunset Boulevard, Los 
Angeles, California 90027, USA.

Erratum in
    J Proteome Res. 2008 Mar;7(3):1352.

Protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) catalytic subunits typically combine with other 
proteins that modulate their activity, direct them to distinct substrates, or 
serve as substrates for PP1. More than 50 PP1-interacting proteins (PIPs) have 
been identified so far. Given there are approximately 10 000 phosphoproteins in 
mammals, many PIPs remain to be discovered. We have used arrays containing 100 
carefully selected antibodies to identify novel PIPs that are important in cell 
proliferation and cell survival in murine fetal lung epithelial cells and human 
A549 lung cancer cells. The antibody arrays identified 31 potential novel PIPs 
and 11 of 17 well-known PIPs included as controls, suggesting a sensitivity of 
at least 65%. A majority of the interactions between PP1 and putative PIPs were 
isoform- or cell type-specific. We confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation that 9 of 
these proteins associate with PP1: APAF-1, Bax, E-cadherin, HSP-70, Id2, 
p19Skp1, p53, PCNA, and PTEN. We examined two of these interactions in greater 
detail in A549 cells. Exposure to nicotine enhanced association of PP1 with Bax 
(and Bad), but also induced inhibitory phosphorylation of PP1. In addition to 
p19Skp1, PP1alpha antibodies also coprecipitated cullin 1, suggesting that 
PP1alpha is associated with the SCF1 complex. This interaction was only 
detectable during the G1/S transition and S phase. Forced loss of PP1 function 
decreased the levels of p27Kip1, a well-known SCF1 substrate, suggesting that 
PP1 may rescue proteins from ubiquitin/proteasome-mediated destruction. Both of 
these novel interactions are consistent with PP1 facilitating cell cycle arrest 
and/or apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1021/pr060504h
PMID: 17274640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
