---
pmid: '16037825'
title: Cryopyrin and pyrin activate caspase-1, but not NF-kappaB, via ASC oligomerization.
authors:
- Yu JW
- Wu J
- Zhang Z
- Datta P
- Ibrahimi I
- Taniguchi S
- Sagara J
- Fernandes-Alnemri T
- Alnemri ES
journal: Cell Death Differ
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.cdd.4401734
---

# Cryopyrin and pyrin activate caspase-1, but not NF-kappaB, via ASC oligomerization.
**Authors:** Yu JW, Wu J, Zhang Z, Datta P, Ibrahimi I, Taniguchi S, Sagara J, Fernandes-Alnemri T, Alnemri ES
**Journal:** Cell Death Differ (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.cdd.4401734](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.cdd.4401734)

## Abstract

1. Cell Death Differ. 2006 Feb;13(2):236-49. doi: 10.1038/sj.cdd.4401734.

Cryopyrin and pyrin activate caspase-1, but not NF-kappaB, via ASC 
oligomerization.

Yu JW(1), Wu J, Zhang Z, Datta P, Ibrahimi I, Taniguchi S, Sagara J, 
Fernandes-Alnemri T, Alnemri ES.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Center for Apoptosis Research, 
Kimmel Cancer Institute, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, 
USA.

Mutations in cryopyrin and pyrin proteins are responsible for several 
autoinflammatory disorders in humans, suggesting that these proteins play 
important roles in regulating inflammation. Using a HEK293 cell-based 
reconstitution system that stably expresses ASC and procaspase-1 we demonstrated 
that neither cryopyrin nor pyrin or their corresponding disease-associated 
mutants could significantly activate NF-kappaB in this system. However, both 
cryopyrin and two disease-associated cryopyrin mutants induced ASC 
oligomerization and ASC-dependent caspase-1 activation, with the 
disease-associated mutants being more potent than the wild-type (WT) cryopyrin, 
because of increased self-oligomerization. Contrary to the proposed 
anti-inflammatory activity of WT pyrin, our results demonstrated that pyrin, 
like cryopyrin, can also assemble an inflammasome complex with ASC and 
procaspase-1 leading to ASC oligomerization, caspase-1 activation and 
interleukin-1beta processing. Thus, we propose that pyrin could function as a 
proinflammatory molecule.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.cdd.4401734
PMID: 16037825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
