---
pmid: '21285510'
title: Mutations in the human SC4MOL gene encoding a methyl sterol oxidase cause psoriasiform
  dermatitis, microcephaly, and developmental delay.
authors:
- He M
- Kratz LE
- Michel JJ
- Vallejo AN
- Ferris L
- Kelley RI
- Hoover JJ
- Jukic D
- Gibson KM
- Wolfe LA
- Ramachandran D
- Zwick ME
- Vockley J
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3049385
doi: 10.1172/JCI42650
pubmed_publication_types:
- Case Reports
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: CASE_REPORT
---

# Mutations in the human SC4MOL gene encoding a methyl sterol oxidase cause psoriasiform dermatitis, microcephaly, and developmental delay.
**Authors:** He M, Kratz LE, Michel JJ, Vallejo AN, Ferris L, Kelley RI, Hoover JJ, Jukic D, Gibson KM, Wolfe LA, Ramachandran D, Zwick ME, Vockley J
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI42650](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI42650)
**PMC:** [PMC3049385](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3049385/)

## Abstract

1. J Clin Invest. 2011 Mar;121(3):976-84. doi: 10.1172/JCI42650.

Mutations in the human SC4MOL gene encoding a methyl sterol oxidase cause 
psoriasiform dermatitis, microcephaly, and developmental delay.

He M(1), Kratz LE, Michel JJ, Vallejo AN, Ferris L, Kelley RI, Hoover JJ, Jukic 
D, Gibson KM, Wolfe LA, Ramachandran D, Zwick ME, Vockley J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, 
Georgia, USA.

Defects in cholesterol synthesis result in a wide variety of symptoms, from 
neonatal lethality to the relatively mild dysmorphic features and developmental 
delay found in individuals with Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome. We report here the 
identification of mutations in sterol-C4-methyl oxidase–like gene (SC4MOL) as 
the cause of an autosomal recessive syndrome in a human patient with 
psoriasiform dermatitis, arthralgias, congenital cataracts, microcephaly, and 
developmental delay. This gene encodes a sterol-C4-methyl oxidase (SMO), which 
catalyzes demethylation of C4-methylsterols in the cholesterol synthesis 
pathway. C4-Methylsterols are meiosis-activating sterols (MASs). They exist at 
high concentrations in the testis and ovary and play roles in meiosis 
activation. In this study, we found that an accumulation of MASs in the patient 
led to cell overproliferation in both skin and blood. SMO deficiency also 
substantially altered immunocyte phenotype and in vitro function. MASs serve as 
ligands for liver X receptors α and β(LXRα and LXRβ), which are important in 
regulating not only lipid transport in the epidermis, but also innate and 
adaptive immunity. Deficiency of SMO represents a biochemical defect in the 
cholesterol synthesis pathway, the clinical spectrum of which remains to be 
defined.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI42650
PMCID: PMC3049385
PMID: 21285510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
