---
pmid: '37882330'
title: Mammalian cysteine-rich secretory proteins interact with plasma membrane Ca(2+)
  exporter PMCA4b.
authors:
- Miya V
- Kumar C
- Breed AA
- Idicula-Thomas S
- Pathak BR
journal: Andrology
year: '2024'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/andr.13549
---

# Mammalian cysteine-rich secretory proteins interact with plasma membrane Ca(2+) exporter PMCA4b.
**Authors:** Miya V, Kumar C, Breed AA, Idicula-Thomas S, Pathak BR
**Journal:** Andrology (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/andr.13549](https://doi.org/10.1111/andr.13549)

## Abstract

1. Andrology. 2024 Jul;12(5):1096-1110. doi: 10.1111/andr.13549. Epub 2023 Oct
26.

Mammalian cysteine-rich secretory proteins interact with plasma membrane Ca(2+) 
exporter PMCA4b.

Miya V(1), Kumar C(2), Breed AA(1), Idicula-Thomas S(2), Pathak BR(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cellular and Structural Biology, ICMR-National Institute for 
Research in Reproductive and Child Health, Parel, Mumbai, India.
(2)Biomedical Informatics Centre, ICMR-National Institute for Research in 
Reproductive and Child Health, Parel, Mumbai, India.

BACKGROUND: Mammalian cysteine-rich secretory proteins (CRISPs) are 
predominantly expressed in the male reproductive tract. Knockout mice lacking 
two or more CRISPs show defects in sperm transport, sperm-egg interaction and 
Ca2+ homeostasis. CRISPs play redundant and specific roles via their binding 
partners. To understand this, a comprehensive analysis of CRISP interactome 
needs to be undertaken.
OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to analyse CRISP4 binding partners on the plasma 
membrane of rat caudal spermatozoa.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Total proteins from rat caudal spermatozoa were subjected 
to immunoprecipitation using anti-CRISP4 antibody followed by liquid 
chromatography-mass spectrophotometry analysis. Plasma membrane localised 
proteins were shortlisted, and a key target was validated by 
co-immunoprecipitation and co-localisation. Co-transfection followed by 
co-immunoprecipitation was carried out for studying the interaction of 
full-length as well as deletion mutants of CRISPs with human plasma membrane 
calcium ATPase, isoform b (hPMCA4b). Calcium assays were performed using 
Fura-2-AM. The cholesterol binding ability of different CRISPs was evaluated in 
silico.
RESULTS: The membrane-specific interactome of rat CRISP4 (rCRISP4) from caudal 
spermatozoa revealed PMCA4b as a novel binding partner, and their interaction 
was validated in rat spermatozoa. Human CRISP1 (hCRISP1) and hCRISP3 also 
interacted with PMCA4b via the N-terminal domain. Interestingly, hCRISP1 and 
rCRISP4 delayed PMCA4b-mediated calcium extrusion but hCRISP3 did not. In silico 
analysis demonstrated that hCRISP1 and rCRISP4 have higher binding affinity 
towards cholesterol than hCRISP3. The secretion profile of different CRISPs also 
showed that the ratio of secreted to cell-associated proteins was highest for 
hCRISP3.
CONCLUSION: Our study identifies PMCA4b as a target of multiple mammalian CRISPs 
and unravels a new role of CRISPs in regulating calcium homeostasis. Differences 
in the interaction of different CRISPs with cholesterol may regulate their 
enrichment in the lipid rafts and redistribution in the membrane 
post-capacitation, thereby affecting their interaction with PMCA4b.

© 2023 American Society of Andrology and European Academy of Andrology.

DOI: 10.1111/andr.13549
PMID: 37882330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
