---
pmid: '15256590'
title: Mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways defend against bacterial pore-forming
  toxins.
authors:
- Huffman DL
- Abrami L
- Sasik R
- Corbeil J
- van der Goot FG
- Aroian RV
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC503732
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0404073101
---

# Mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways defend against bacterial pore-forming toxins.
**Authors:** Huffman DL, Abrami L, Sasik R, Corbeil J, van der Goot FG, Aroian RV
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0404073101](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0404073101)
**PMC:** [PMC503732](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC503732/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Jul 27;101(30):10995-1000. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0404073101. Epub 2004 Jul 15.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways defend against bacterial pore-forming 
toxins.

Huffman DL(1), Abrami L, Sasik R, Corbeil J, van der Goot FG, Aroian RV.

Author information:
(1)Section of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of California at San 
Diego, La Jolla, 92093, USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Aug 31;101(35):12781-2. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0404890101.

Cytolytic pore-forming toxins are important for the virulence of many 
disease-causing bacteria. How target cells molecularly respond to these toxins 
and whether or not they can mount a defense are poorly understood. By using 
microarrays, we demonstrate that the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans responds 
robustly to Cry5B, a member of the pore-forming Crystal toxin family made by 
Bacillus thuringiensis. This genomic response is distinct from that seen with a 
different stressor, the heavy metal cadmium. A p38 mitogen-activated protein 
kinase (MAPK) kinase and a c-Jun N-terminal-like MAPK are both transcriptionally 
up-regulated by Cry5B. Moreover, both MAPK pathways are functionally important 
because elimination of either leads to animals that are (i) hypersensitive to a 
low, chronic dose of toxin and (ii) hypersensitive to a high, brief dose of 
toxin such that the animal might naturally encounter in the wild. These results 
extend to mammalian cells because inhibition of p38 results in the 
hypersensitivity of baby hamster kidney cells to aerolysin, a pore-forming toxin 
that targets humans. Furthermore, we identify two downstream transcriptional 
targets of the p38 MAPK pathway, ttm-1 and ttm-2, that are required for defense 
against Cry5B. Our data demonstrate that cells defend against pore-forming 
toxins by means of conserved MAPK pathways.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0404073101
PMCID: PMC503732
PMID: 15256590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
