---
pmid: '32409583'
title: The O(2)-independent pathway of ubiquinone biosynthesis is essential for denitrification
  in Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
authors:
- Vo CD
- Michaud J
- Elsen S
- Faivre B
- Bouveret E
- Barras F
- Fontecave M
- Pierrel F
- Lombard M
- Pelosi L
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC7335794
doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.013748
---

# The O(2)-independent pathway of ubiquinone biosynthesis is essential for denitrification in Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
**Authors:** Vo CD, Michaud J, Elsen S, Faivre B, Bouveret E, Barras F, Fontecave M, Pierrel F, Lombard M, Pelosi L
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.RA120.013748](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA120.013748)
**PMC:** [PMC7335794](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7335794/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2020 Jul 3;295(27):9021-9032. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.013748. Epub
 2020 May 14.

The O(2)-independent pathway of ubiquinone biosynthesis is essential for 
denitrification in Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Vo CD(1), Michaud J(2), Elsen S(3), Faivre B(1), Bouveret E(4), Barras F(4), 
Fontecave M(1), Pierrel F(2), Lombard M(5), Pelosi L(6).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Chimie des Processus Biologiques, Collège de France, CNRS UMR 
8229, PSL Research University, Sorbonne Université, Paris, France.
(2)CNRS, CHU Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble INP, TIMC-IMAG, Université Grenoble Alpes, 
Grenoble, France.
(3)Biology of Cancer and Infection, U1036 INSERM, CEA, Université Grenoble 
Alpes, ERL5261 CNRS, Grenoble, France.
(4)SAMe Unit, Department of Microbiology, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France; 
IMM-UMR 2001 CNRS-Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
(5)Laboratoire de Chimie des Processus Biologiques, Collège de France, CNRS UMR 
8229, PSL Research University, Sorbonne Université, Paris, France. Electronic 
address: murielle.lombard@college-de-france.fr.
(6)CNRS, CHU Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble INP, TIMC-IMAG, Université Grenoble Alpes, 
Grenoble, France. Electronic address: ludovic.pelosi@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr.

Many proteobacteria, such as Escherichia coli, contain two main types of 
quinones: benzoquinones, represented by ubiquinone (UQ) and naphthoquinones, 
such as menaquinone (MK), and dimethyl-menaquinone (DMK). MK and DMK function 
predominantly in anaerobic respiratory chains, whereas UQ is the major electron 
carrier in the reduction of dioxygen. However, this division of labor is 
probably not very strict. Indeed, a pathway that produces UQ under anaerobic 
conditions in an UbiU-, UbiV-, and UbiT-dependent manner has been discovered 
recently in E. coli Its physiological relevance is not yet understood, because 
MK and DMK are also present in E. coli Here, we established that UQ9 is the 
major quinone of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and is required for growth under 
anaerobic respiration (i.e. denitrification). We demonstrate that the ORFs 
PA3911, PA3912, and PA3913, which are homologs of the E. coli ubiT, ubiV, and 
ubiU genes, respectively, are essential for UQ9 biosynthesis and, thus, for 
denitrification in P. aeruginosa These three genes here are called ubiTPa , 
ubiVPa , and ubiUPa We show that UbiVPa accommodates an iron-sulfur [4Fe-4S] 
cluster. Moreover, we report that UbiUPa and UbiTPa can bind UQ and that the 
isoprenoid tail of UQ is the structural determinant required for recognition by 
these two Ubi proteins. Since the denitrification metabolism of P. aeruginosa is 
believed to be important for the pathogenicity of this bacterium in individuals 
with cystic fibrosis, our results highlight that the O2-independent UQ 
biosynthetic pathway may represent a target for antibiotics development to 
manage P. aeruginosa infections.

© 2020 Vo et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.013748
PMCID: PMC7335794
PMID: 32409583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest—The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.
