---
pmid: '7440562'
title: The mitochondrial glycine cleavage system. Purification and properties of glycine
  decarboxylase from chicken liver mitochondria.
authors:
- Hiraga K
- Kikuchi G
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1980'
full_text_available: false
---

# The mitochondrial glycine cleavage system. Purification and properties of glycine decarboxylase from chicken liver mitochondria.
**Authors:** Hiraga K, Kikuchi G
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1980)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1980 Dec 25;255(24):11664-70.

The mitochondrial glycine cleavage system. Purification and properties of 
glycine decarboxylase from chicken liver mitochondria.

Hiraga K, Kikuchi G.

Glycine decarboxylase, tentatively called P-protein and considered a constituent 
of the glycine cleavage system, was purified to apparent homogeneity from 
chicken liver mitochondria. P-protein is a homodimer having a Mr = approximately 
200,000 and consisting of identical subunits with Mr = approximately 100,000. 
Each subunit appears to contain an equimolar pyridoxal 5'-phosphate which is 
bound to the protein, possibly through a protonated aldimine linkage. The 
isoelectric point of P-protein was 7.2. P-protein could bind glycine, showing a 
Kd of 33 mM for it, and could catalyze glycine decarboxylation even though the 
rate of decarboxylation catalyzed by P-protein alone was extremely low. The 
product of glycine decarboxylation was methylamine and the Km for glycine. 
Methylamine could bind to P-protein, giving a Kd value of 63 mM, and it 
inhibited the glycine decarboxylation. P-protein alone could also slightly 
catalyze the exchange of carboxyl carbon of glycine with CO2 and the exchange 
appeared to obey a ping-pong mechanism. Both glycine decarboxylation and the 
glycine-CO2 exchange catalyzed by P-protein were stimulated 100-fold or more by 
the addition of lipoic acid, which is a functional group of H-protein. We may 
define P-protein as glycine decarboxylase although P-protein alone exhibits only 
very low catalytic activities.

PMID: 7440562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
