---
pmid: '10518545'
title: Direct visualization of the elt-2 gut-specific GATA factor binding to a target
  promoter inside the living Caenorhabditis elegans embryo.
authors:
- Fukushige T
- Hendzel MJ
- Bazett-Jones DP
- McGhee JD
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC18381
doi: 10.1073/pnas.96.21.11883
---

# Direct visualization of the elt-2 gut-specific GATA factor binding to a target promoter inside the living Caenorhabditis elegans embryo.
**Authors:** Fukushige T, Hendzel MJ, Bazett-Jones DP, McGhee JD
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.96.21.11883](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.96.21.11883)
**PMC:** [PMC18381](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC18381/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Oct 12;96(21):11883-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.96.21.11883.

Direct visualization of the elt-2 gut-specific GATA factor binding to a target 
promoter inside the living Caenorhabditis elegans embryo.

Fukushige T(1), Hendzel MJ, Bazett-Jones DP, McGhee JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada 
T2N 4N1.

In analyzing the transcriptional networks that regulate development, one ideally 
would like to determine whether a particular transcription factor binds directly 
to a candidate target promoter inside the living embryo. Properties of the 
Caenorhabditis elegans elt-2 gene, which encodes a gut-specific GATA factor, 
have allowed us to develop such a method. We previously have shown, by means of 
ectopic expression studies, that elt-2 regulates its own promoter. To test 
whether this autoregulation is direct, we fused green fluorescent protein (GFP) 
close to the C terminus of elt-2 in a construct that contains the full elt-2 
promoter and the full elt-2 zinc finger DNA binding domain; the construct is 
expressed correctly (i.e., only in the gut lineage) and is able to rescue the 
lethality of an elt-2 null mutant. Multicopy transgenic arrays of this rescuing 
elt-2::GFP construct were integrated into the genome and transgenic embryos were 
examined when the developing gut has 4-8 cells; the majority of these embryonic 
gut nuclei show two discrete intense foci of fluorescence. We interpret these 
fluorescent foci as the result of ELT-2::GFP binding directly to its own 
promoter within nuclei of the developing gut lineage. Numerous control 
experiments, both genetic and biochemical, all support this conclusion and 
support the specificity of the binding. The approach should be applicable to 
studying other transcription factors binding target promoters, all within the 
living C. elegans embryo.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.96.21.11883
PMCID: PMC18381
PMID: 10518545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
