---
pmid: '25589350'
title: Single-strand DNA-binding protein SSB1 facilitates TERT recruitment to telomeres
  and maintains telomere G-overhangs.
authors:
- Pandita RK
- Chow TT
- Udayakumar D
- Bain AL
- Cubeddu L
- Hunt CR
- Shi W
- Horikoshi N
- Zhao Y
- Wright WE
- Khanna KK
- Shay JW
- Pandita TK
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4351820
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-2289
---

# Single-strand DNA-binding protein SSB1 facilitates TERT recruitment to telomeres and maintains telomere G-overhangs.
**Authors:** Pandita RK, Chow TT, Udayakumar D, Bain AL, Cubeddu L, Hunt CR, Shi W, Horikoshi N, Zhao Y, Wright WE, Khanna KK, Shay JW, Pandita TK
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-2289](https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-2289)
**PMC:** [PMC4351820](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4351820/)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Res. 2015 Mar 1;75(5):858-69. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-2289. Epub 
2015 Jan 14.

Single-strand DNA-binding protein SSB1 facilitates TERT recruitment to telomeres 
and maintains telomere G-overhangs.

Pandita RK(1), Chow TT(2), Udayakumar D(3), Bain AL(4), Cubeddu L(5), Hunt 
CR(3), Shi W(4), Horikoshi N(3), Zhao Y(2), Wright WE(2), Khanna KK(4), Shay 
JW(6), Pandita TK(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, Texas. Department of Radiation Oncology, The Houston Methodist Research 
Institute, Houston, Texas.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, Texas.
(3)Department of Radiation Oncology, The Houston Methodist Research Institute, 
Houston, Texas. Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas.
(4)QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Herston, Brisbane, Australia.
(5)School of Science and Health, University of Western Sydney, Sydney, 
Australia.
(6)Department of Cell Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, Texas. Center for Excellence in Genomics Medicine Research, King 
Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. tpandita@houstonmethodist.org 
jerry.shay@utsouthwestern.edu.
(7)Department of Radiation Oncology, The Houston Methodist Research Institute, 
Houston, Texas. Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas. tpandita@houstonmethodist.org 
jerry.shay@utsouthwestern.edu.

Proliferating mammalian stem and cancer cells express telomerase [telomerase 
reverse transcriptase (TERT)] in an effort to extend chromosomal G-overhangs and 
maintain telomere ends. Telomerase-expressing cells also have higher levels of 
the single-stranded DNA-binding protein SSB1, which has a critical role in DNA 
double-strand break (DSB) repair. Here, we report that SSB1 binds specifically 
to G-strand telomeric DNA in vitro and associates with telomeres in vivo. SSB1 
interacts with the TERT catalytic subunit and regulates its interaction with 
telomeres. Deletion of SSB1 reduces TERT interaction with telomeres and leads to 
G-overhang loss. Although SSB1 is recruited to DSB sites, we found no 
corresponding change in TERT levels at these sites, implying that SSB1-TERT 
interaction relies upon a specific chromatin structure or context. Our findings 
offer an explanation for how telomerase is recruited to telomeres to facilitate 
G-strand DNA extension, a critical step in maintaining telomere ends and cell 
viability in all cancer cells. Cancer Res; 75(5); 858-69. ©2015 AACR.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-2289
PMCID: PMC4351820
PMID: 25589350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing financial interests: The authors 
declare no competing financial interests and have no conflict of interest.
