---
pmid: '20185128'
title: The effects of silencing EDF-1 in human endothelial cells.
authors:
- Leidi M
- Mariotti M
- Maier JA
journal: Atherosclerosis
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2010.01.022
---

# The effects of silencing EDF-1 in human endothelial cells.
**Authors:** Leidi M, Mariotti M, Maier JA
**Journal:** Atherosclerosis (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2010.01.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2010.01.022)

## Abstract

1. Atherosclerosis. 2010 Jul;211(1):55-60. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2010.01.022. Epub 2010 Jan 28.

The effects of silencing EDF-1 in human endothelial cells.

Leidi M(1), Mariotti M, Maier JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Università di Milano Medical School, Via GB
Grassi 74, 20157 Milano, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: EDF-1, a 16 kDa highly conserved intracellular protein, serves as a
calmodulin binding protein and, upon nuclear translocation, functions as a
coactivator of several transcription factors. To understand whether EDF-1 is
implicated in regulating endothelial function, we silenced EDF-1 expression
using small hairpin (sh) RNA.
METHODS: Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) were utilized and EDF-1
levels were detected by western blot. Cell proliferation, cell organization in
fibrin gel and nitric oxide release were evaluated in cells silencing EDF-1
after transfection with shRNA.
RESULTS: EDF-1 was downregulated in quiescent and senescent HUVEC, whereas it
was upregulated in proliferating cells. Knocking down EDF-1 promoted the
acquisition of a spindle phenotype, inhibited cell proliferation, accelerated
the organization into capillary-like networks on fibrin gels and induced the
production of nitric oxide (NO). While the total amounts and the degree of
phosphorylation of endothelial NO synthase are not altered in cells silencing
EDF-1, we found an increased interaction between calmodulin and endothelial NO
synthase. Accordingly, the calmodulin inhibitor calmidazolium significantly
decreased NO release in cells silencing EDF-1. These results suggest that
knocking down EDF-1 might increase free calmodulin which ultimately activates
endothelial NO synthase.
CONCLUSIONS: Since EDF-1 (i) is involved in the control of endothelial
proliferation and organization, events which are crucial to repair damages to
the vessel wall, and (ii) increases NO, which exerts anti-atherogenic and
anti-thrombotic effects, we conclude that EDF-1 is implicated in molecular
events that are pivotal to endothelial function and, therefore, to vascular
integrity.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2010.01.022
PMID: 20185128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
