---
pmid: '21565616'
title: A hormone-dependent module regulating energy balance.
authors:
- Wang B
- Moya N
- Niessen S
- Hoover H
- Mihaylova MM
- Shaw RJ
- Yates JR 3rd
- Fischer WH
- Thomas JB
- Montminy M
journal: Cell
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3129781
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.04.013
---

# A hormone-dependent module regulating energy balance.
**Authors:** Wang B, Moya N, Niessen S, Hoover H, Mihaylova MM, Shaw RJ, Yates JR 3rd, Fischer WH, Thomas JB, Montminy M
**Journal:** Cell (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2011.04.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2011.04.013)
**PMC:** [PMC3129781](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3129781/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2011 May 13;145(4):596-606. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.04.013.

A hormone-dependent module regulating energy balance.

Wang B(1), Moya N, Niessen S, Hoover H, Mihaylova MM, Shaw RJ, Yates JR 3rd, 
Fischer WH, Thomas JB, Montminy M.

Author information:
(1)Peptide Biology Laboratories, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 
10010 N. Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2011 May 13;145(4):497-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.04.017.
    Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2011 Jul 01;10(7):492. doi: 10.1038/nrd3483.

Under fasting conditions, metazoans maintain energy balance by shifting from 
glucose to fat burning. In the fasted state, SIRT1 promotes catabolic gene 
expression by deacetylating the forkhead factor FOXO in response to stress and 
nutrient deprivation. The mechanisms by which hormonal signals regulate FOXO 
deacetylation remain unclear, however. We identified a hormone-dependent module, 
consisting of the Ser/Thr kinase SIK3 and the class IIa deacetylase HDAC4, which 
regulates FOXO activity in Drosophila. During feeding, HDAC4 is phosphorylated 
and sequestered in the cytoplasm by SIK3, whose activity is upregulated in 
response to insulin. SIK3 is inactivated during fasting, leading to the 
dephosphorylation and nuclear translocation of HDAC4 and to FOXO deacetylation. 
SIK3 mutant flies are starvation sensitive, reflecting FOXO-dependent increases 
in lipolysis that deplete triglyceride stores; reducing HDAC4 expression 
restored lipid accumulation. Our results reveal a hormone-regulated pathway that 
functions in parallel with the nutrient-sensing SIRT1 pathway to maintain energy 
balance.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.04.013
PMCID: PMC3129781
PMID: 21565616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
