---
pmid: '28263186'
title: Loss of DDRGK1 modulates SOX9 ubiquitination in spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia.
authors:
- Egunsola AT
- Bae Y
- Jiang MM
- Liu DS
- Chen-Evenson Y
- Bertin T
- Chen S
- Lu JT
- Nevarez L
- Magal N
- Raas-Rothschild A
- Swindell EC
- Cohn DH
- Gibbs RA
- Campeau PM
- Shohat M
- Lee BH
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5373861
doi: 10.1172/JCI90193
---

# Loss of DDRGK1 modulates SOX9 ubiquitination in spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia.
**Authors:** Egunsola AT, Bae Y, Jiang MM, Liu DS, Chen-Evenson Y, Bertin T, Chen S, Lu JT, Nevarez L, Magal N, Raas-Rothschild A, Swindell EC, Cohn DH, Gibbs RA, Campeau PM, Shohat M, Lee BH
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI90193](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI90193)
**PMC:** [PMC5373861](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5373861/)

## Abstract

1. J Clin Invest. 2017 Apr 3;127(4):1475-1484. doi: 10.1172/JCI90193. Epub 2017
Mar  6.

Loss of DDRGK1 modulates SOX9 ubiquitination in spondyloepimetaphyseal 
dysplasia.

Egunsola AT, Bae Y, Jiang MM, Liu DS, Chen-Evenson Y, Bertin T, Chen S, Lu JT, 
Nevarez L, Magal N, Raas-Rothschild A, Swindell EC, Cohn DH, Gibbs RA, Campeau 
PM, Shohat M, Lee BH.

Shohat-type spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia (SEMD) is a skeletal dysplasia that 
affects cartilage development. Similar skeletal disorders, such as 
spondyloepiphyseal dysplasias, are linked to mutations in type II collagen 
(COL2A1), but the causative gene in SEMD is not known. Here, we have performed 
whole-exome sequencing to identify a recurrent homozygous c.408+1G>A donor 
splice site loss-of-function mutation in DDRGK domain containing 1 (DDRGK1) in 4 
families affected by SEMD. In zebrafish, ddrgk1 deficiency disrupted 
craniofacial cartilage development and led to decreased levels of the 
chondrogenic master transcription factor sox9 and its downstream target, col2a1. 
Overexpression of sox9 rescued the zebrafish chondrogenic and craniofacial 
phenotype generated by ddrgk1 knockdown, thus identifying DDRGK1 as a regulator 
of SOX9. Consistent with these results, Ddrgk1-/- mice displayed delayed limb 
bud chondrogenic condensation, decreased SOX9 protein expression and Col2a1 
transcript levels, and increased apoptosis. Furthermore, we determined that 
DDRGK1 can directly bind to SOX9 to inhibit its ubiquitination and proteasomal 
degradation. Taken together, these data indicate that loss of DDRGK1 decreases 
SOX9 expression and causes a human skeletal dysplasia, identifying a mechanism 
that regulates chondrogenesis via modulation of SOX9 ubiquitination.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI90193
PMCID: PMC5373861
PMID: 28263186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.
