---
pmid: '16957230'
title: Characterization of (R)-2-hydroxyisocaproate dehydrogenase and a family III
  coenzyme A transferase involved in reduction of L-leucine to isocaproate by Clostridium
  difficile.
authors:
- Kim J
- Darley D
- Selmer T
- Buckel W
journal: Appl Environ Microbiol
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1563608
doi: 10.1128/AEM.00772-06
---

# Characterization of (R)-2-hydroxyisocaproate dehydrogenase and a family III coenzyme A transferase involved in reduction of L-leucine to isocaproate by Clostridium difficile.
**Authors:** Kim J, Darley D, Selmer T, Buckel W
**Journal:** Appl Environ Microbiol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1128/AEM.00772-06](https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.00772-06)
**PMC:** [PMC1563608](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1563608/)

## Abstract

1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2006 Sep;72(9):6062-9. doi: 10.1128/AEM.00772-06.

Characterization of (R)-2-hydroxyisocaproate dehydrogenase and a family III 
coenzyme A transferase involved in reduction of L-leucine to isocaproate by 
Clostridium difficile.

Kim J(1), Darley D, Selmer T, Buckel W.

Author information:
(1)Laboratorium für Mikrobiologie, Fachbereich Biologie, Philipps-Universität, 
D-35032 Marburg, Germany. buckel@staff.uni-marburg.de.

The strictly anaerobic pathogenic bacterium Clostridium difficile occurs in the 
human gut and is able to thrive from fermentation of leucine. Thereby the amino 
acid is both oxidized to isovalerate plus CO(2) and reduced to isocaproate. In 
the reductive branch of this pathway, the dehydration of 
(R)-2-hydroxyisocaproyl-coenzyme A (CoA) to (E)-2-isocaprenoyl-CoA is probably 
catalyzed via radical intermediates. The dehydratase requires activation by an 
ATP-dependent one-electron transfer (J. Kim, D. Darley, and W. Buckel, FEBS J. 
272:550-561, 2005). Prior to the dehydration, a dehydrogenase and a CoA 
transferase are supposed to be involved in the formation of 
(R)-2-hydroxyisocaproyl-CoA. Deduced amino acid sequences of ldhA and hadA from 
the genome of C. difficile showed high identities to d-lactate dehydrogenase and 
family III CoA transferase, respectively. Both putative genes encoding the 
dehydrogenase and CoA transferase were cloned and overexpressed in Escherichia 
coli; the recombinant Strep tag II fusion proteins were purified to homogeneity 
and characterized. The substrate specificity of the monomeric LdhA (36.5 kDa) 
indicated that 2-oxoisocaproate (K(m) = 68 muM, k(cat) = 31 s(-1)) and NADH were 
the native substrates. For the reverse reaction, the enzyme accepted (R)- but 
not (S)-2-hydroxyisocaproate and therefore was named (R)-2-hydroxyisocaproate 
dehydrogenase. HadA showed CoA transferase activity with 
(R)-2-hydroxyisocaproyl-CoA as a donor and isocaproate or (E)-2-isocaprenoate as 
an acceptor. By site-directed mutagenesis, the conserved D171 was identified as 
an essential catalytic residue probably involved in the formation of a mixed 
anhydride with the acyl group of the thioester substrate. However, neither 
hydroxylamine nor sodium borohydride, both of which are inactivators of the CoA 
transferase, modified this residue. The dehydrogenase and the CoA transferase 
fit well into the proposed pathway of leucine reduction to isocaproate.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.00772-06
PMCID: PMC1563608
PMID: 16957230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
