---
pmid: '12893776'
title: 'Control of cell number by Drosophila FOXO: downstream and feedback regulation
  of the insulin receptor pathway.'
authors:
- Puig O
- Marr MT
- Ruhf ML
- Tjian R
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC196255
doi: 10.1101/gad.1098703
---

# Control of cell number by Drosophila FOXO: downstream and feedback regulation of the insulin receptor pathway.
**Authors:** Puig O, Marr MT, Ruhf ML, Tjian R
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.1098703](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.1098703)
**PMC:** [PMC196255](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC196255/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2003 Aug 15;17(16):2006-20. doi: 10.1101/gad.1098703. Epub 2003 Jul
 31.

Control of cell number by Drosophila FOXO: downstream and feedback regulation of 
the insulin receptor pathway.

Puig O(1), Marr MT, Ruhf ML, Tjian R.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, 
University of California, Berkeley, California 94720, USA.

The Drosophila insulin receptor (dInR) regulates cell growth and proliferation 
through the dPI3K/dAkt pathway, which is conserved in metazoan organisms. Here 
we report the identification and functional characterization of the Drosophila 
forkhead-related transcription factor dFOXO, a key component of the insulin 
signaling cascade. dFOXO is phosphorylated by dAkt upon insulin treatment, 
leading to cytoplasmic retention and inhibition of its transcriptional activity. 
Mutant dFOXO lacking dAkt phosphorylation sites no longer responds to insulin 
inhibition, remains in the nucleus, and is constitutively active. dFOXO 
activation in S2 cells induces growth arrest and activates two key players of 
the dInR/dPI3K/dAkt pathway: the translational regulator d4EBP and the dInR 
itself. Induction of d4EBP likely leads to growth inhibition by dFOXO, whereas 
activation of dInR provides a novel transcriptionally induced feedback control 
mechanism. Targeted expression of dFOXO in fly tissues regulates organ size by 
specifying cell number with no effect on cell size. Our results establish dFOXO 
as a key transcriptional regulator of the insulin pathway that modulates growth 
and proliferation.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.1098703
PMCID: PMC196255
PMID: 12893776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
