---
pmid: '15231740'
title: Loss of C. elegans BBS-7 and BBS-8 protein function results in cilia defects
  and compromised intraflagellar transport.
authors:
- Blacque OE
- Reardon MJ
- Li C
- McCarthy J
- Mahjoub MR
- Ansley SJ
- Badano JL
- Mah AK
- Beales PL
- Davidson WS
- Johnsen RC
- Audeh M
- Plasterk RH
- Baillie DL
- Katsanis N
- Quarmby LM
- Wicks SR
- Leroux MR
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC443524
doi: 10.1101/gad.1194004
---

# Loss of C. elegans BBS-7 and BBS-8 protein function results in cilia defects and compromised intraflagellar transport.
**Authors:** Blacque OE, Reardon MJ, Li C, McCarthy J, Mahjoub MR, Ansley SJ, Badano JL, Mah AK, Beales PL, Davidson WS, Johnsen RC, Audeh M, Plasterk RH, Baillie DL, Katsanis N, Quarmby LM, Wicks SR, Leroux MR
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.1194004](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.1194004)
**PMC:** [PMC443524](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC443524/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2004 Jul 1;18(13):1630-42. doi: 10.1101/gad.1194004.

Loss of C. elegans BBS-7 and BBS-8 protein function results in cilia defects and 
compromised intraflagellar transport.

Blacque OE(1), Reardon MJ, Li C, McCarthy J, Mahjoub MR, Ansley SJ, Badano JL, 
Mah AK, Beales PL, Davidson WS, Johnsen RC, Audeh M, Plasterk RH, Baillie DL, 
Katsanis N, Quarmby LM, Wicks SR, Leroux MR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Simon Fraser University, 
Burnaby, B.C. V5A 1S6, Canada.

Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a genetically heterogeneous developmental 
disorder whose molecular basis is largely unknown. Here, we show that mutations 
in the Caenorhabditis elegans bbs-7 and bbs-8 genes cause structural and 
functional defects in cilia. C. elegans BBS proteins localize predominantly at 
the base of cilia, and like proteins involved in intraflagellar transport (IFT), 
a process necessary for cilia biogenesis and maintenance, move bidirectionally 
along the ciliary axoneme. Importantly, we demonstrate that BBS-7 and BBS-8 are 
required for the normal localization/motility of the IFT proteins OSM-5/Polaris 
and CHE-11, and to a notably lesser extent, CHE-2. We propose that BBS proteins 
play important, selective roles in the assembly and/or function of IFT particle 
components. Our findings also suggest that some of the cardinal and secondary 
symptoms of BBS, such as obesity, diabetes, cardiomyopathy, and learning defects 
may result from cilia dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.1194004
PMCID: PMC443524
PMID: 15231740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
