---
pmid: '19602593'
title: Cetuximab/C225-induced intracellular trafficking of epidermal growth factor
  receptor.
authors:
- Liao HJ
- Carpenter G
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2753411
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0049
---

# Cetuximab/C225-induced intracellular trafficking of epidermal growth factor receptor.
**Authors:** Liao HJ, Carpenter G
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0049](https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0049)
**PMC:** [PMC2753411](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2753411/)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Res. 2009 Aug 1;69(15):6179-83. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0049.
Epub  2009 Jul 14.

Cetuximab/C225-induced intracellular trafficking of epidermal growth factor 
receptor.

Liao HJ(1), Carpenter G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, 
Nashville, Tenessee 37232-0146, USA.

The monoclonal antibody C225 interacts with the ectodomain of the epidermal 
growth factor (EGF) receptor (EGFR) to block ligand binding and initiates 
receptor endocytosis and intracellular trafficking. The data herein show that 
C225-dependent EGFR trafficking relocalizes the receptor to the endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER) and nucleus. This mechanism, which also involves interaction of 
the C225-internalized receptor with the Sec61 translocon within the ER, is, in 
most respects, analogous to the pathway previously described for EGF-induced 
trafficking to the ER and nucleus. However, although inhibition of receptor 
tyrosine kinase activity blocks EGF-induced nuclear localization of the 
receptor, the same kinase inhibitors stimulate C225-dependent nuclear 
localization of EGFR in the nucleus. In contrast, the kinase inhibitor Lapatinib 
fails to stimulate nuclear accumulation of the receptor in C225-treated cells 
and does not provoke receptor dimerization as do inhibitors that recognize the 
open conformation of the receptor kinase. This suggests that inhibitor-dependent 
receptor dimerization may facilitate C225-induced receptor trafficking.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0049
PMCID: PMC2753411
PMID: 19602593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The monoclonal antibody C225 interacts with the ectodomain of the EGF receptor to block ligand binding and initiates receptor endocytosis and intracellular trafficking. The data herein show that C225-dependent EGF receptor trafficking relocalizes the receptor to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and nucleus. This mechanism, which also involves interaction of the C225-internalized receptor with the Sec61 translocon within the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), is, in most respect, analogous to the pathway previously described for EGF-induced trafficking to the ER and nucleus (Liao HJ and Carpenter G. Mol Biol Cell 2007; 18: 1064-1072), However, while inhibition of receptor tyrosine kinase activity blocks EGF-induced nuclear localization of the receptor, the same kinase inhibitors stimulate C225-dependent nuclear localization of EGF receptor in the nucleus. In contrast, the kinase inhibitor Lapatinib fails to stimulate nuclear accumulation of the receptor in C225-treated cells and does not provoke receptor dimerization as do inhibitors that recognizing the open conformation of the receptor kinase. This suggests that inhibitor-dependent receptor dimerization may facilitate C225-induced receptor trafficking.

INTRODUCTION

Agents that prevent the activation of the EGF receptor and ErbB-2 receptor tyrosine kinases are prominent in current clinical practice and trials. Among these is the C225 monoclonal antibody (Cetuximab, Erbitux©) that blocks growth factor binding to EGF receptor ( 1 , 2 ). Crystallographic analysis demonstrates that the antibody binding site overlaps the ligand binding site ( 3 ). This reagent is approved for the treatment of colon and head and neck tumors and is in clinical trials for other cancers ( 4 ). In many tumor cell lines, C225 provokes growth arrest ( 5 – 11 ), while in a few, cell death is induced ( 12 , 13 ). Whether these responses are mediated by the antibody’s capacity to interact with the EGF receptor ligand binding site is unclear. The binding of C225 to the ectodomain of EGF receptor does not provoke a significant level of receptor tyrosine phosphorylation, but does bring about receptor internalization by an uncertain route ( 14 , 15 ). The internalized receptor is not extensively processed to the lysosome, but rather is recycled to the cell surface ( 16 ). Whether the bound antibody is also recycled is not known. Also, it is not known whether antibody-induced trafficking of the receptor is related to the antibody’s biologic activity.

EGF provokes nuclear localization of full-length EGF receptor ( 17 ) and a novel intracellular trafficking pathway has been identified for this intracellular destination ( 18 ). This pathway involves sorting of the internalized cell surface receptor to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and its interaction with the Sec61 translocon, which facilitates bidirectional movement of proteins, including transmembrane proteins, between the cytoplasm and the ER. The Sec61 complex is able to retrotranslocate the mature EGF receptor from the ER to the cytosol, as a prerequisite for receptor translocation to the nucleus ( 18 ). This pathway is required for EGF to induce cyclin D and therefore constitutes a signal transduction pathway ( 17 ).

In this manuscript we present an evaluation of the capacity of C225 to induce intracellular translocation of EGF receptor to the ER, its interaction with the Sec61 trafficking pathway, and nuclear localization.

DISCUSSION

The manner in which EGF induces internalization and intracellular trafficking of the EGF receptor has been described in detail ( 19 ). The ligand induces rapid receptor internalization in a manner that requires receptor tyrosine kinase activity for entrance into clathrin-coated pits. When the receptor is overexpressed there is evidence that kinase-independent slow internalization can occur, but the mechanism of internalization is unclear. In the case of C225 antibody-induced internalization, it is known that receptor kinase activity is not necessary and that the internalization process is slow compared to ligand-dependent internalization ( 16 ).

Once endocytosis has occurred it is well established that ligand: receptor complexes are trafficked primarily to the lysosome, but also can be recycled to the cell surface ( 19 ). Recently, it has been reported that EGF also induces intracellular trafficking of a small fraction of the receptor to the ER ( 18 ). In the ER the receptor interacts with the Sec61 translocon and is thereby exported from the ER to the cytosol and subsequently translocates into the nucleus. Nuclear localization sequences have been reported for residues within the intracellular domain ( 25 ).

In the case of antibody-dependent intracellular trafficking of the EGF receptor, most of the internalized antibody: receptor complex is recycled to the cell surface ( 16 ). Whether any of the antibody-internalized receptor is trafficked to the lysosome is not known directly. However, since C225 and other receptor antibodies provoke a slow down-regulation of the receptor ( 8 , 16 , 26 , 27 ), it seems likely that some receptor is degraded in the lysosomes. The data in this manuscript show an additional destination for antibody-dependent internalized EGF receptor. In this trafficking route the receptor is trafficked to the ER, interacts with the Sec61 translocon, and is ultimate found in the nucleus. The most significant difference for trafficking of the receptor through this pathway under the influence ligand or antibody is tyrosine kinase activity requirement for EGF-induced nuclear localization, but not for antibody-induced nuclear localization. This difference in kinase activity requirement is most likely due to the kinase requirement for ligand-dependent entry of receptor into coated pits, while C225-induced cellular entry may occur through a different cell surface portal. Whether C225 translocation of the EGF receptor to the nucleus influences the biologic responses of cells to the antibody is not known.

Other extracellular ligands that are trafficked by their receptors from the cell surface to the ER include certain toxins ( 28 ) and the SV40 virus ( 29 ). In neither case is there a reported requirement for tyrosine kinase activity and for each of these two different ligands, the Sec61 translocon mediates export from the ER. In the case of toxins export is to the cytoplasm, while for the virus cytoplasmic localization would seem to be a precursor step for nuclear localization. Neither toxin nor virus is internalized though coated pits, but rather are internalized through caveolae. Based on our results with C225-dependent receptor trafficking it would seem that receptor trafficking to the ER and nucleus occurs in the absence of tyrosine kinase activity.

The mechanism by which some tyrosine kinase inhibitors potentiate antibody-induced receptor trafficking to nucleus is not clear. Based on the fact that Lapatinib, which binds to a closed kinase conformation, fails to provoke receptor dimerization or C225-dependent nuclear localization of the receptor, the most likely mechanism might seem to be that inhibitors, such as, AG1478 stabilize an inactive open form of receptor dimer at the cell surface and this may provide for either enhanced antibody association and /or for a more efficiently internalized antibody: receptor complex.
