---
pmid: '8692979'
title: Cloning and expression of human deoxyguanosine kinase cDNA.
authors:
- Johansson M
- Karlsson A
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC38970
doi: 10.1073/pnas.93.14.7258
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Cloning and expression of human deoxyguanosine kinase cDNA.
**Authors:** Johansson M, Karlsson A
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.93.14.7258](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.93.14.7258)
**PMC:** [PMC38970](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC38970/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Jul 9;93(14):7258-62. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.93.14.7258.

Cloning and expression of human deoxyguanosine kinase cDNA.

Johansson M(1), Karlsson A.

Author information:
(1)Medical Nobel Institute, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, 
Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.

A human cDNA sequence homologous to human deoxycytidine kinase (dCK; EC 
2.7.1.74) was identified in the GenBank sequence data base. The longest open 
reading frame encoded a protein that was 48% identical to dCK at the amino acid 
level. The cDNA was expressed in Escherichia coli and shown to encode a protein 
with the same substrate specificity as described for the mitochondrial 
deoxyguanosine kinase (dGK; EC 2.7.1.113). The N terminus of the deduced amino 
acid sequence had properties characteristic for a mitochondrial translocation 
signal, and cleavage at a putative mitochondrial peptidase cleavage site would 
give a mature protein size of 28 kDa. Northern blot analysis determined the 
length of dGK mRNA to 1.3 kbp with no cross-hybridization to the 2.8-kbp dCK 
mRNA. dGK mRNA was detected in all tissues investigated with the highest 
expression levels in muscle, brain, liver, and lymphoid tissues. Alignment of 
the dGK and herpes simplex virus type 1 thymidine kinase amino acid sequences 
showed that five regions, including the substrate-binding pocket and the 
ATP-binding glycine loop, were also conserved in dGK. To our knowledge, this is 
the first report of a cloned mitochondrial nucleoside kinase and the first 
demonstration of a general sequence homology between two mammalian 
deoxyribonucleoside kinases. Our findings suggest that dCK and dGK are 
evolutionarily related, as well as related to the family of herpes virus 
thymidine kinases.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.93.14.7258
PMCID: PMC38970
PMID: 8692979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
