---
pmid: '29725819'
title: Senataxin mutations elicit motor neuron degeneration phenotypes and yield TDP-43
  mislocalization in ALS4 mice and human patients.
authors:
- Bennett CL
- Dastidar SG
- Ling SC
- Malik B
- Ashe T
- Wadhwa M
- Miller DB
- Lee C
- Mitchell MB
- van Es MA
- Grunseich C
- Chen Y
- Sopher BL
- Greensmith L
- Cleveland DW
- La Spada AR
journal: Acta Neuropathol
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6098723
doi: 10.1007/s00401-018-1852-9
---

# Senataxin mutations elicit motor neuron degeneration phenotypes and yield TDP-43 mislocalization in ALS4 mice and human patients.
**Authors:** Bennett CL, Dastidar SG, Ling SC, Malik B, Ashe T, Wadhwa M, Miller DB, Lee C, Mitchell MB, van Es MA, Grunseich C, Chen Y, Sopher BL, Greensmith L, Cleveland DW, La Spada AR
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00401-018-1852-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00401-018-1852-9)
**PMC:** [PMC6098723](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6098723/)

## Abstract

1. Acta Neuropathol. 2018 Sep;136(3):425-443. doi: 10.1007/s00401-018-1852-9.
Epub  2018 May 3.

Senataxin mutations elicit motor neuron degeneration phenotypes and yield TDP-43 
mislocalization in ALS4 mice and human patients.

Bennett CL(1), Dastidar SG(1), Ling SC(2), Malik B(3), Ashe T(4), Wadhwa M(1), 
Miller DB(4), Lee C(4), Mitchell MB(4), van Es MA(5), Grunseich C(6), Chen Y(7), 
Sopher BL(8), Greensmith L(3)(9), Cleveland DW(10)(11)(12), La Spada 
AR(13)(14)(15)(16)(17).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, USA.
(2)Department of Physiology, National University of Singapore, Singapore, 
Singapore.
(3)Sobell Department of Motor Neuroscience and Movement Disorders, University 
College London Institute of Neurology, London, UK.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, LA JOLLA, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, Brain Center Rudolf Magnus, University Medical 
Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(6)Neurogenetics Branch, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and 
Stroke, NIH, Bethesda, USA.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington Medical Center, Seattle, 
USA.
(8)Department of Neurology, University of Washington Medical Center, Seattle, 
USA.
(9)The MRC Centre for Neuromuscular Diseases, University College London 
Institute of Neurology, London, UK.
(10)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California, San 
Diego, La Jolla, USA.
(11)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
USA.
(12)The Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, University of California, San 
Diego, La Jolla, USA.
(13)Department of Neurology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, USA. 
al.laspada@duke.edu.
(14)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, LA JOLLA, 
USA. al.laspada@duke.edu.
(15)Department of Neurobiology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, USA. 
al.laspada@duke.edu.
(16)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, USA. 
al.laspada@duke.edu.
(17)Duke Center for Neurodegeneration and Neurotherapeutics, Duke University 
School of Medicine, Bryan Building, Room 401-E, DUMC 2900, Durham, NC, 27710, 
USA. al.laspada@duke.edu.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis type 4 (ALS4) is a rare, early-onset, autosomal 
dominant form of ALS, characterized by slow disease progression and sparing of 
respiratory musculature. Dominant, gain-of-function mutations in the senataxin 
gene (SETX) cause ALS4, but the mechanistic basis for motor neuron toxicity is 
unknown. SETX is a RNA-binding protein with a highly conserved helicase domain, 
but does not possess a low-complexity domain, making it unique among ALS-linked 
disease proteins. We derived ALS4 mouse models by expressing two different 
senataxin gene mutations (R2136H and L389S) via transgenesis and knock-in gene 
targeting. Both approaches yielded SETX mutant mice that develop neuromuscular 
phenotypes and motor neuron degeneration. Neuropathological characterization of 
SETX mice revealed nuclear clearing of TDP-43, accompanied by TDP-43 cytosolic 
mislocalization, consistent with the hallmark pathology observed in human ALS 
patients. Postmortem material from ALS4 patients exhibited TDP-43 
mislocalization in spinal cord motor neurons, and motor neurons from SETX ALS4 
mice displayed enhanced stress granule formation. Immunostaining analysis for 
nucleocytoplasmic transport proteins Ran and RanGAP1 uncovered nuclear membrane 
abnormalities in the motor neurons of SETX ALS4 mice, and nuclear import was 
delayed in SETX ALS4 cortical neurons, indicative of impaired nucleocytoplasmic 
trafficking. SETX ALS4 mice thus recapitulated ALS disease phenotypes in 
association with TDP-43 mislocalization and provided insight into the basis for 
TDP-43 histopathology, linking SETX dysfunction to common pathways of ALS motor 
neuron degeneration.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-018-1852-9
PMCID: PMC6098723
PMID: 29725819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
