---
pmid: '33499731'
title: Subcellular relocalization and nuclear redistribution of the RNA methyltransferases
  TRMT1 and TRMT1L upon neuronal activation.
authors:
- Jonkhout N
- Cruciani S
- Santos Vieira HG
- Tran J
- Liu H
- Liu G
- Pickford R
- Kaczorowski D
- Franco GR
- Vauti F
- Camacho N
- Abedini SS
- Najmabadi H
- Ribas de Pouplana L
- Christ D
- Schonrock N
- Mattick JS
- Novoa EM
journal: RNA Biol
year: '2021'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC8583002
doi: 10.1080/15476286.2021.1881291
---

# Subcellular relocalization and nuclear redistribution of the RNA methyltransferases TRMT1 and TRMT1L upon neuronal activation.
**Authors:** Jonkhout N, Cruciani S, Santos Vieira HG, Tran J, Liu H, Liu G, Pickford R, Kaczorowski D, Franco GR, Vauti F, Camacho N, Abedini SS, Najmabadi H, Ribas de Pouplana L, Christ D, Schonrock N, Mattick JS, Novoa EM
**Journal:** RNA Biol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15476286.2021.1881291](https://doi.org/10.1080/15476286.2021.1881291)
**PMC:** [PMC8583002](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8583002/)

## Abstract

1. RNA Biol. 2021 Nov;18(11):1905-1919. doi: 10.1080/15476286.2021.1881291. Epub 
2021 Feb 15.

Subcellular relocalization and nuclear redistribution of the RNA 
methyltransferases TRMT1 and TRMT1L upon neuronal activation.

Jonkhout N(1)(2)(3), Cruciani S(3)(4), Santos Vieira HG(1)(3), Tran J(1), Liu 
H(3), Liu G(1)(5), Pickford R(6), Kaczorowski D(1), Franco GR(7), Vauti F(8), 
Camacho N(9), Abedini SS(10), Najmabadi H(10)(11), Ribas de Pouplana L(9)(12), 
Christ D(1)(2), Schonrock N(1), Mattick JS(1)(2), Novoa EM(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Darlinghurst, NSW, Australia.
(2)School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South 
Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(3)Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and 
Technology, Dr. Aiguader 88, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)University Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Current Address: School of Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, 
Guangdong, China.
(6)Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Facility, Mark Wainwright Analytical Centre, 
University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(7)Departamento De Bioquímica E Imunologia, Universidade Federal De Minas 
Gerais,Belo Horizonte,Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(8)Division of Cellular & Molecular Neurobiology, Zoological Institute, 
Technische Universität Braunschweig, 38106 Braunschweig, Germany.
(9)Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(10)Department of Genetics, Genetics Research Center, University of Social 
Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(11)Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Iran.
(12)Catalan Institution for Research and Advanced Studies, Barcelona, Catalonia, 
Spain.

RNA modifications are dynamic chemical entities that expand the RNA lexicon and 
regulate RNA fate. The most abundant modification present in mRNAs, 
N6-methyladenosine (m6A), has been implicated in neurogenesis and memory 
formation. However, whether additional RNA modifications may be playing a role 
in neuronal functions and in response to environmental queues is largely 
unknown. Here we characterize the biochemical function and cellular dynamics of 
two human RNA methyltransferases previously associated with neurological 
dysfunction, TRMT1 and its homolog, TRMT1-like (TRMT1L). Using a combination of 
next-generation sequencing, LC-MS/MS, patient-derived cell lines and knockout 
mouse models, we confirm the previously reported dimethylguanosine (m2,2G) 
activity of TRMT1 in tRNAs, as well as reveal that TRMT1L, whose activity was 
unknown, is responsible for methylating a subset of cytosolic tRNAAla(AGC) 
isodecoders at position 26. Using a cellular in vitro model that mimics neuronal 
activation and long term potentiation, we find that both TRMT1 and TRMT1L change 
their subcellular localization upon neuronal activation. Specifically, we 
observe a major subcellular relocalization from mitochondria and other 
cytoplasmic domains (TRMT1) and nucleoli (TRMT1L) to different small punctate 
compartments in the nucleus, which are as yet uncharacterized. This phenomenon 
does not occur upon heat shock, suggesting that the relocalization of TRMT1 and 
TRMT1L is not a general reaction to stress, but rather a specific response to 
neuronal activation. Our results suggest that subcellular relocalization of RNA 
modification enzymes may play a role in neuronal plasticity and transmission of 
information, presumably by addressing new targets.

DOI: 10.1080/15476286.2021.1881291
PMCID: PMC8583002
PMID: 33499731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the authors.
