---
pmid: '10850497'
title: The SHORT-ROOT gene controls radial patterning of the Arabidopsis root through
  radial signaling.
authors:
- Helariutta Y
- Fukaki H
- Wysocka-Diller J
- Nakajima K
- Jung J
- Sena G
- Hauser MT
- Benfey PN
journal: Cell
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80865-x
---

# The SHORT-ROOT gene controls radial patterning of the Arabidopsis root through radial signaling.
**Authors:** Helariutta Y, Fukaki H, Wysocka-Diller J, Nakajima K, Jung J, Sena G, Hauser MT, Benfey PN
**Journal:** Cell (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80865-x](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80865-x)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2000 May 26;101(5):555-67. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80865-x.

The SHORT-ROOT gene controls radial patterning of the Arabidopsis root through 
radial signaling.

Helariutta Y(1), Fukaki H, Wysocka-Diller J, Nakajima K, Jung J, Sena G, Hauser 
MT, Benfey PN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, New York University, New York 10003, USA.

Asymmetric cell divisions play an important role in the establishment and 
propagation of the cellular pattern of plant tissues. The SHORT-ROOT (SHR) gene 
is required for the asymmetric cell division responsible for formation of ground 
tissue (endodermis and cortex) as well as specification of endodermis in the 
Arabidopsis root. We show that SHR encodes a putative transcription factor with 
homology to SCARECROW (SCR). From analyses of gene expression and cell identity 
in genetically stable and unstable alleles of shr, we conclude that SHR 
functions upstream of SCR and participates in a radial signaling pathway. 
Consistent with a regulatory role in radial patterning, ectopic expression of 
SHR results in supernumerary cell divisions and abnormal cell specification in 
the root meristem.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80865-x
PMID: 10850497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
