---
pmid: '30193097'
title: Dynamic Acetylation of Phosphoenolpyruvate Carboxykinase Toggles Enzyme Activity
  between Gluconeogenic and Anaplerotic Reactions.
authors:
- Latorre-Muro P
- Baeza J
- Armstrong EA
- Hurtado-Guerrero R
- Corzana F
- Wu LE
- Sinclair DA
- López-Buesa P
- Carrodeguas JA
- Denu JM
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6188669
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2018.07.031
---

# Dynamic Acetylation of Phosphoenolpyruvate Carboxykinase Toggles Enzyme Activity between Gluconeogenic and Anaplerotic Reactions.
**Authors:** Latorre-Muro P, Baeza J, Armstrong EA, Hurtado-Guerrero R, Corzana F, Wu LE, Sinclair DA, López-Buesa P, Carrodeguas JA, Denu JM
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2018.07.031](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2018.07.031)
**PMC:** [PMC6188669](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6188669/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2018 Sep 6;71(5):718-732.e9. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2018.07.031.

Dynamic Acetylation of Phosphoenolpyruvate Carboxykinase Toggles Enzyme Activity 
between Gluconeogenic and Anaplerotic Reactions.

Latorre-Muro P(1), Baeza J(2), Armstrong EA(2), Hurtado-Guerrero R(3), Corzana 
F(4), Wu LE(5), Sinclair DA(6), López-Buesa P(1), Carrodeguas JA(7), Denu JM(8).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Producción Animal y Ciencia de los Alimentos, Facultad de 
Veterinaria, Universidad de Zaragoza, 50013 Zaragoza, Spain; Instituto de 
Biocomputación y Física de Sistemas Complejos (BIFI), BIFIIQFR (CSIC) Joint 
Unit, Universidad de Zaragoza, 50018 Zaragoza, Spain.
(2)Wisconsin Institute for Discovery and Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, 
University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health-Madison, Madison, 
WI 53715, USA.
(3)Instituto de Biocomputación y Física de Sistemas Complejos (BIFI), BIFIIQFR 
(CSIC) Joint Unit, Universidad de Zaragoza, 50018 Zaragoza, Spain; Fundación 
ARAID, Government of Aragón, Zaragoza, Spain.
(4)Departamento de Química, Centro de Investigación en Síntesis Química, 
Universidad de La Rioja, 26006 Logroño, Spain.
(5)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medical Sciences, The University of New 
South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia.
(6)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medical Sciences, The University of New 
South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia; Department of Genetics, Paul F. Glenn 
Laboratories for the Biological Mechanisms of Aging, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(7)Instituto de Biocomputación y Física de Sistemas Complejos (BIFI), BIFIIQFR 
(CSIC) Joint Unit, Universidad de Zaragoza, 50018 Zaragoza, Spain; Departamento 
de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular y Celular, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad 
de Zaragoza, 50009 Zaragoza, Spain; IIS Aragón, Zaragoza, Spain. Electronic 
address: carrode@unizar.es.
(8)Wisconsin Institute for Discovery and Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, 
University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health-Madison, Madison, 
WI 53715, USA; Morgridge Institute for Research, Madison, WI 53715, USA. 
Electronic address: john.denu@wisc.edu.

Cytosolic phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PCK1) is considered a gluconeogenic 
enzyme; however, its metabolic functions and regulatory mechanisms beyond 
gluconeogenesis are poorly understood. Here, we describe that dynamic 
acetylation of PCK1 interconverts the enzyme between gluconeogenic and 
anaplerotic activities. Under high glucose, p300-dependent hyperacetylation of 
PCK1 did not lead to protein degradation but instead increased the ability of 
PCK1 to perform the anaplerotic reaction, converting phosphoenolpyruvate to 
oxaloacetate. Lys91 acetylation destabilizes the active site of PCK1 and favors 
the reverse reaction. At low energy input, we demonstrate that SIRT1 
deacetylates PCK1 and fully restores the gluconeogenic ability of PCK1. 
Additionally, we found that GSK3β-mediated phosphorylation of PCK1 decreases 
acetylation and increases ubiquitination. Biochemical evidence suggests that 
serine phosphorylation adjacent to Lys91 stimulates SIRT1-dependent 
deacetylation of PCK1. This work reveals an unexpected capacity of 
hyperacetylated PCK1 to promote anaplerotic activity, and the intersection of 
post-translational control of PCK1 involving acetylation, phosphorylation, and 
ubiquitination.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2018.07.031
PMCID: PMC6188669
PMID: 30193097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.
