---
pmid: '21947882'
title: Expression analysis of MAP2K9 and MAPK6 during pathogenesis of Alternaria blight
  in Arabidopsis thaliana ecotype Columbia.
authors:
- Kannan P
- Pandey D
- Gupta AK
- Punetha H
- Taj G
- Kumar A
journal: Mol Biol Rep
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s11033-011-1232-1
---

# Expression analysis of MAP2K9 and MAPK6 during pathogenesis of Alternaria blight in Arabidopsis thaliana ecotype Columbia.
**Authors:** Kannan P, Pandey D, Gupta AK, Punetha H, Taj G, Kumar A
**Journal:** Mol Biol Rep (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11033-011-1232-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11033-011-1232-1)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Apr;39(4):4439-44. doi: 10.1007/s11033-011-1232-1. Epub
2011  Sep 25.

Expression analysis of MAP2K9 and MAPK6 during pathogenesis of Alternaria blight 
in Arabidopsis thaliana ecotype Columbia.

Kannan P(1), Pandey D, Gupta AK, Punetha H, Taj G, Kumar A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology & Genetic Engineering, College of Basic 
Sciences & Humanities, G.B. Pant University of Agriculture & Technology, 
Pantnagar, Uttarakhand, 263145, India.

Arabidopsis thaliana ecotype Columbia was used as a host in order to investigate 
the involvement of MAP kinase machinery in the pathogenesis of Alternaria 
blight. Semi-quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction and 
quantitative real time PCR based approaches were used to determine the change in 
transcript profile of MAP2K9 and MAPK6 in leaves of A. thaliana ecotpe Columbia 
at early, middle and late stages of Alternaria blight infection. It was observed 
that the expression of both MAP2K9 and MAPK6 simultaneously increased up to 
middle stage of disease progression. There was observed a positive correlation 
between the expression of MAPK6 and MAP2K9 as disease progressed from initial to 
middle stage of infection. Then, the expression of MAP2K9 decreased and that of 
MAPK6 increased as disease progressed towards late stage of infection. The 
increased levels of MAP2K9 and MAPK6, seem to be necessary for plant to defend 
the pathogen up to middle stage of infection. However, MAP2K9 may be down 
regulated at late stage of infection by pathogen to promote it's efficient 
colonization. Since MAPK6 expression remains unaltered till late stage, it 
suggests that it's expression is not only regulated by MAP2K9 but also by other 
MAP2K's. The above results are consistent with observations of earlier studies. 
In conclusion, the present study has suggested MAP2K9/MAPK6 module as possible 
target, which is influenced during pathogenesis of Alternaria blight in A. 
thaliana ecotype Columbia. Hence genetic modulation in expression levels of 
these components in Arabidopsis or Brassica could be a possible strategy for 
engineering defense against Alternaria blight disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-011-1232-1
PMID: 21947882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
