---
pmid: '14715275'
title: Rpp20 interacts with SMN and is re-distributed into SMN granules in response
  to stress.
authors:
- Hua Y
- Zhou J
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2003.12.084
---

# Rpp20 interacts with SMN and is re-distributed into SMN granules in response to stress.
**Authors:** Hua Y, Zhou J
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2003.12.084](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2003.12.084)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Jan 30;314(1):268-76. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2003.12.084.

Rpp20 interacts with SMN and is re-distributed into SMN granules in response to 
stress.

Hua Y(1), Zhou J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Program in Neuroscience, University of Massachusetts, 
Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a neurodegenerative disorder resulting from 
homozygous loss of the SMN1 gene. To investigate SMN functions, we undertook the 
yeast two-hybrid screens and identified Drosophila Rpp20, a subunit of the RNase 
P and RNase MRP holoenzymes, to interact with the Drosophila SMN protein. 
Interaction between human SMN and Rpp20 was validated by in vitro binding assays 
and co-immunoprecipitation. The exons 3-4 of SMN are necessary and sufficient 
for binding to Rpp20. Binding efficiency between Rpp20 and SMNs with mutations 
in the Y-G domain is abrogated or reduced and correlated with severity of SMA 
disease. Immunofluorescence results indicate that Rpp20 is diffusely distributed 
throughout the cytoplasm with higher concentration observed in the nucleus. 
However, in response to stress, SMN forms aggregates and redistributes Rpp20 
into punctuated cytoplasmic SMN granules. Our findings suggest a possible 
functional association of SMN with RNase P and RNase MRP complexes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2003.12.084
PMID: 14715275 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
