---
pmid: '10369681'
title: Aiolos transcription factor controls cell death in T cells by regulating Bcl-2
  expression and its cellular localization.
authors:
- Romero F
- Martínez-A C
- Camonis J
- Rebollo A
journal: EMBO J
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1171421
doi: 10.1093/emboj/18.12.3419
---

# Aiolos transcription factor controls cell death in T cells by regulating Bcl-2 expression and its cellular localization.
**Authors:** Romero F, Martínez-A C, Camonis J, Rebollo A
**Journal:** EMBO J (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/18.12.3419](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/18.12.3419)
**PMC:** [PMC1171421](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1171421/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 1999 Jun 15;18(12):3419-30. doi: 10.1093/emboj/18.12.3419.

Aiolos transcription factor controls cell death in T cells by regulating Bcl-2 
expression and its cellular localization.

Romero F(1), Martínez-A C, Camonis J, Rebollo A.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire d'Oncologie Cellulaire et Moleculaire, INSERM U363, Hôpital 
Cochin, 27 rue du Faubourg Saint-Jacques, F-75014 Paris, France.

We searched for proteins that interact with Ras in interleukin (IL)-2-stimulated 
or IL-2-deprived cells, and found that the transcription factor Aiolos interacts 
with Ras. The Ras-Aiolos interaction was confirmed in vitro and in vivo by 
co-immunoprecipitation. Indirect immunofluorescence shows that IL-2 controls the 
cellular distribution of Aiolos and induces its tyrosine phosphorylation, 
required for dissociation from Ras. We also identified functional Aiolos-binding 
sites in the Bcl-2 promoter, which are able to activate the luciferase reporter 
gene. Mutation of Aiolos-binding sites within the Bcl-2 promoter inhibits 
transactivation of the reporter gene luciferase, suggesting direct control of 
Bcl-2 expression by Aiolos. Co-transfection experiments confirm that Aiolos 
induces Bcl-2 expression and prevents apoptosis in IL-2-deprived cells. We 
propose a model for the regulation of Bcl-2 expression via Aiolos.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/18.12.3419
PMCID: PMC1171421
PMID: 10369681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
