---
pmid: '21071669'
title: Conserved molecular components for pollen tube reception and fungal invasion.
authors:
- Kessler SA
- Shimosato-Asano H
- Keinath NF
- Wuest SE
- Ingram G
- Panstruga R
- Grossniklaus U
journal: Science
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.1195211
---

# Conserved molecular components for pollen tube reception and fungal invasion.
**Authors:** Kessler SA, Shimosato-Asano H, Keinath NF, Wuest SE, Ingram G, Panstruga R, Grossniklaus U
**Journal:** Science (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1195211](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1195211)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2010 Nov 12;330(6006):968-71. doi: 10.1126/science.1195211.

Conserved molecular components for pollen tube reception and fungal invasion.

Kessler SA(1), Shimosato-Asano H, Keinath NF, Wuest SE, Ingram G, Panstruga R, 
Grossniklaus U.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Plant Biology and Zürich Basel Plant Science Center, University 
of Zürich, Zollikerstrasse 107, CH-8008 Zürich, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Science. 2010 Nov 12;330(6006):922-3. doi: 10.1126/science.1198347.

During sexual reproduction in flowering plants such as Arabidopsis, a 
tip-growing pollen tube (PT) is guided to the synergid cells of the female 
gametophyte, where it bursts and releases the two sperm. Here we show that PT 
reception and powdery mildew (PM) infection, which involves communication 
between a tip-growing hypha and a plant epidermal cell, share molecular 
components. NORTIA (NTA), a member of the MLO family originally discovered in 
the context of PM resistance, and FERONIA (FER), a receptor-like kinase, both 
control PT reception in synergids. Homozygous fer mutants also display PM 
resistance, revealing a new function for FER and suggesting that conserved 
components, such as FER and distinct MLO proteins, are involved in both PT 
reception and PM infection.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1195211
PMID: 21071669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
