---
reference_id: PMID:35789385
title: "The incorrect use of CD75 as a synonym for ST6GAL1 has fostered the expansion of commercial \"ST6GAL1\" antibodies that do not recognize ST6GAL1."
authors:
- Haldar B
- Hwang J
- Narimatsu Y
- Clausen H
- Bellis SL
journal: Glycobiology
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwac043
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antigens, CD/metabolism"
- Epitopes
- Humans
- Mice
- Polysaccharides
- Sialyltransferases/metabolism
- Urinary Bladder Neoplasms
- beta-D-Galactoside alpha 2-6-Sialyltransferase
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# The incorrect use of CD75 as a synonym for ST6GAL1 has fostered the expansion of commercial "ST6GAL1" antibodies that do not recognize ST6GAL1.
**Authors:** Haldar B, Hwang J, Narimatsu Y, Clausen H, Bellis SL
**Journal:** Glycobiology (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/glycob/cwac043](https://doi.org/10.1093/glycob/cwac043)

## Content

1. Glycobiology. 2022 Aug 18;32(9):736-742. doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwac043.

The incorrect use of CD75 as a synonym for ST6GAL1 has fostered the expansion of 
commercial "ST6GAL1" antibodies that do not recognize ST6GAL1.

Haldar B(1), Hwang J(1), Narimatsu Y(2), Clausen H(2), Bellis SL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell, Developmental and Integrative Biology, University of 
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.
(2)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Copenhagen Center for 
Glycomics, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, DK-1165, Denmark.

The ST6GAL1 Golgi sialyltransferase is upregulated in many human malignancies, 
however, detection of ST6GAL1 protein in cancer tissues has been hindered by the 
prior lack of antibodies. Recently, numerous commercial antibodies for ST6GAL1 
have become available, however, many of these do not, in fact, recognize 
ST6GAL1. Decades ago, the CD75 cell-surface epitope was mistakenly suggested to 
be the same molecule as ST6GAL1. While this was rapidly disproven, the use of 
CD75 as a synonym for ST6GAL1 has persisted, particularly by companies selling 
"ST6GAL1" antibodies. CD75 is reportedly a sialylated epitope which appears to 
encompass a range of glycan structures and glycan carriers. In this study, we 
evaluated the LN1 and ZB55 monoclonal antibodies, which are advertised as 
ST6GAL1 antibodies but were initially developed as CD75-recognizing antibodies 
(neither was raised against ST6GAL1 as the immunogen). Importantly, the LN1 and 
ZB55 antibodies have been widely used by investigators, as well as the Human 
Protein Atlas database, to characterize ST6GAL1 expression. Herein, we used cell 
and mouse models with controlled expression of ST6GAL1 to compare LN1 and ZB55 
with an extensively validated polyclonal antibody to ST6GAL1. We find that LN1 
and ZB55 do not recognize ST6GAL1, and furthermore, these 2 antibodies recognize 
different targets. Additionally, we utilized the well-validated ST6GAL1 antibody 
to determine that ST6GAL1 is overexpressed in bladder cancer, a finding that 
contradicts prior studies which employed LN1 to suggest ST6GAL1 is downregulated 
in bladder cancer. Collectively, our studies underscore the need for careful 
validation of antibodies purported to recognize ST6GAL1.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/glycob/cwac043
PMCID: PMC9387509
PMID: 35789385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]