---
pmid: '14729668'
title: 'The crystal structure of the hydrolase domain of 10-formyltetrahydrofolate
  dehydrogenase: mechanism of hydrolysis and its interplay with the dehydrogenase
  domain.'
authors:
- Chumanevich AA
- Krupenko SA
- Davies C
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M313934200
---

# The crystal structure of the hydrolase domain of 10-formyltetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase: mechanism of hydrolysis and its interplay with the dehydrogenase domain.
**Authors:** Chumanevich AA, Krupenko SA, Davies C
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M313934200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M313934200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 2;279(14):14355-64. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M313934200. Epub
2004  Jan 16.

The crystal structure of the hydrolase domain of 10-formyltetrahydrofolate 
dehydrogenase: mechanism of hydrolysis and its interplay with the dehydrogenase 
domain.

Chumanevich AA(1), Krupenko SA, Davies C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425, USA.

10-Formyltetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase (FDH) converts 
10-formyltetrahydrofolate, a precursor for nucleotide biosynthesis, to 
tetrahydrofolate. The protein comprises two functional domains: a hydrolase 
domain that removes a formyl group from 10-formyltetrahydrofolate and a 
NADP(+)-dependent dehydrogenase domain that reduces the formyl to carbon 
dioxide. As a first step toward deciphering the catalytic mechanism of the 
enzyme, we have determined the crystal structure of the hydrolase domain of FDH 
from rat, solved to 2.3-A resolution. The structure comprises two domains. As 
expected, domain 1 shares the same Rossmann fold as the related enzymes, 
methionyl-tRNA-formyltransferase and glycinamide ribonucleotide 
formyltransferase, but, unexpectedly, the structural similarity between the 
amino-terminal domain of 10-formyltetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase and 
methionyl-tRNA-formyltransferase extends to the C terminus of both proteins. The 
active site contains a molecule of beta-mercaptoethanol that is positioned 
between His-106 and Asp-142 and that appears to mimic the formate product. We 
propose a catalytic mechanism for the hydrolase reaction in which Asp-142 
polarizes the catalytic water molecule and His-106 orients the carbonyl group of 
formyl. The structure also provides clues as to how, in the native enzyme, the 
hydrolase domain transfers its product to the dehydrogenase domain.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M313934200
PMID: 14729668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
