---
pmid: '10497187'
title: Human 70-kDa SHP-1L differs from 68-kDa SHP-1 in its C-terminal structure and
  catalytic activity.
authors:
- Jin YJ
- Yu CL
- Burakoff SJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.40.28301
---

# Human 70-kDa SHP-1L differs from 68-kDa SHP-1 in its C-terminal structure and catalytic activity.
**Authors:** Jin YJ, Yu CL, Burakoff SJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.274.40.28301](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.40.28301)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Oct 1;274(40):28301-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.40.28301.

Human 70-kDa SHP-1L differs from 68-kDa SHP-1 in its C-terminal structure and 
catalytic activity.

Jin YJ(1), Yu CL, Burakoff SJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. yong-jiu_jin@dfci.harvard.edu

The tyrosine phosphatase SHP-1 functions as a negative regulator in 
hematopoietic cell development, proliferation, and receptor-mediated cellular 
activation. In Jurkat T cells, a major 68-kDa band and a minor 70-kDa band were 
immunoprecipitated by a monoclonal antibody against the SHP-1 protein-tyrosine 
phosphatase domain, while an antibody against the SHP-1 C-terminal 19 amino 
acids recognized only the 68-kDa SHP-1. The SDS-gel-purified 70-kDa protein was 
subjected to tryptic mapping and microsequencing, which was followed by 
molecular cloning. It revealed that the 70-kDa protein, termed SHP-1L, is a 
C-terminal alternatively spliced form of SHP-1. SHP-1L is 29 amino acids longer 
than SHP-1, and its 66 C-terminal amino acids are different from SHP-1. The C 
terminus of SHP-1L contains a proline-rich motif PVPGPPVLSP, a potential Src 
homology 3 domain-binding site. In contrast to SHP-1, tyrosine phosphorylation 
of SHP-1L is not detected upon stimulation in Jurkat T cells. This is apparently 
due to the lack of a single in vivo tyrosine phosphorylation site, which only 
exists in the C terminus of SHP-1 (Y564). COS cell-expressed glutathione 
S-transferase-SHP-1L can dephosphorylate tyrosine-phosphorylated ZAP70. At pH 
7.4, SHP-1L was shown to be more active than SHP-1 in the dephosphorylation of 
ZAP70. At pH 5.4, SHP-1L and SHP-1 exhibited similar catalytic activity. It is 
likely that these two isoforms play different roles in the regulation of 
hematopoietic cell signal transduction.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.40.28301
PMID: 10497187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
