---
pmid: '24413555'
title: The SCFSlimb E3 ligase complex regulates asymmetric division to inhibit neuroblast
  overgrowth.
authors:
- Li S
- Wang C
- Sandanaraj E
- Aw SS
- Koe CT
- Wong JJ
- Yu F
- Ang BT
- Tang C
- Wang H
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3989862
doi: 10.1002/embr.201337966
---

# The SCFSlimb E3 ligase complex regulates asymmetric division to inhibit neuroblast overgrowth.
**Authors:** Li S, Wang C, Sandanaraj E, Aw SS, Koe CT, Wong JJ, Yu F, Ang BT, Tang C, Wang H
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1002/embr.201337966](https://doi.org/10.1002/embr.201337966)
**PMC:** [PMC3989862](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3989862/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2014 Feb;15(2):165-74. doi: 10.1002/embr.201337966. Epub 2014 Jan
10.

The SCFSlimb E3 ligase complex regulates asymmetric division to inhibit 
neuroblast overgrowth.

Li S(1), Wang C, Sandanaraj E, Aw SS, Koe CT, Wong JJ, Yu F, Ang BT, Tang C, 
Wang H.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience & Behavioral Disorders Program, Duke-National University of 
Singapore Graduate Medical School Singapore, Singapore City, Singapore.

Drosophila larval brain neuroblasts divide asymmetrically to balance between 
self-renewal and differentiation. Here, we demonstrate that the SCF(Slimb) E3 
ubiquitin ligase complex, which is composed of Cul1, SkpA, Roc1a and the F-box 
protein Supernumerary limbs (Slimb), inhibits ectopic neuroblast formation and 
regulates asymmetric division of neuroblasts. Hyperactivation of Akt leads to 
similar neuroblast overgrowth and defects in asymmetric division. Slimb 
associates with Akt in a protein complex, and SCF(S)(limb) acts through SAK and 
Akt to inhibit neuroblast overgrowth. Moreover, Beta-transducin repeat 
containing, the human ortholog of Slimb, is frequently deleted in highly 
aggressive gliomas, suggesting a conserved tumor suppressor-like function.

DOI: 10.1002/embr.201337966
PMCID: PMC3989862
PMID: 24413555 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
