---
pmid: '19838188'
title: Crystal structure of TNFalpha complexed with a poxvirus MHC-related TNF binding
  protein.
authors:
- Yang Z
- West AP Jr
- Bjorkman PJ
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC2819277
doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1683
---

# Crystal structure of TNFalpha complexed with a poxvirus MHC-related TNF binding protein.
**Authors:** Yang Z, West AP Jr, Bjorkman PJ
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nsmb.1683](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb.1683)
**PMC:** [PMC2819277](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2819277/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2009 Nov;16(11):1189-91. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1683. Epub
2009  Oct 18.

Crystal structure of TNFalpha complexed with a poxvirus MHC-related TNF binding 
protein.

Yang Z(1), West AP Jr, Bjorkman PJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biology 114-96, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, 
California, USA.

The poxvirus 2L protein binds tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFalpha) to inhibit 
host antiviral and immune responses. The 2.8-A 2L-TNFalpha structure reveals 
three symmetrically arranged 2L molecules per TNFalpha trimer. 2L resembles 
class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules but lacks a 
peptide-binding groove and beta2-microglobulin light chain. Overlap between the 
2L and host TNF receptor-binding sites on TNFalpha rationalizes 2L inhibition of 
TNFalpha-TNF receptor interactions and prevention of TNFalpha-induced immune 
responses.

DOI: 10.1038/nsmb.1683
PMCID: PMC2819277
PMID: 19838188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The poxvirus 2L protein binds tumor necrosis factor-α (TNFα) to inhibit host antiviral and immune responses. The 2.8-Å 2L–TNFα structure reveals three symmetrically arranged 2L molecules per TNFα trimer. 2L resembles class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules but lacks a peptide-binding groove and β2-microglobulin light chain. Overlap between the 2L and host TNF receptor-binding sites on TNFα rationalizes 2L inhibition of TNFα–TNF receptor interactions and prevention of TNFα-induced immune responses.
