---
pmid: '21357570'
title: Epigallocatechin-3-gallate potently inhibits the in vitro activity of hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl-CoA
  reductase.
authors:
- Cuccioloni M
- Mozzicafreddo M
- Spina M
- Tran CN
- Falconi M
- Eleuteri AM
- Angeletti M
journal: J Lipid Res
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3073461
doi: 10.1194/jlr.M011817
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Epigallocatechin-3-gallate potently inhibits the in vitro activity of hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl-CoA reductase.
**Authors:** Cuccioloni M, Mozzicafreddo M, Spina M, Tran CN, Falconi M, Eleuteri AM, Angeletti M
**Journal:** J Lipid Res (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1194/jlr.M011817](https://doi.org/10.1194/jlr.M011817)
**PMC:** [PMC3073461](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3073461/)

## Abstract

1. J Lipid Res. 2011 May;52(5):897-907. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M011817. Epub 2011 Feb
25.

Epigallocatechin-3-gallate potently inhibits the in vitro activity of 
hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl-CoA reductase.

Cuccioloni M(1), Mozzicafreddo M, Spina M, Tran CN, Falconi M, Eleuteri AM, 
Angeletti M.

Author information:
(1)School of Biosciences and Biotechnology, University of Camerino, Camerino, 
Italy. massimiliano.cuccioloni@unicam.it

Hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl-CoA reductase (HMGR) is the rate-controlling enzyme of 
cholesterol synthesis, and owing to its biological and pharmacological 
relevance, researchers have investigated several compounds capable of modulating 
its activity with the hope of developing new hypocholesterolemic drugs. In 
particular, polyphenol-rich extracts were extensively tested for their 
cholesterol-lowering effect as alternatives, or adjuvants, to the conventional 
statin therapies, but a full understanding of the mechanism of their action has 
yet to be reached. Our work reports on a detailed kinetic and equilibrium study 
on the modulation of HMGR by the most-abundant catechin in green tea, 
epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG). Using a concerted approach involving 
spectrophotometric, optical biosensor, and chromatographic analyses, molecular 
docking, and site-directed mutagenesis on the cofactor site of HMGR, we have 
demonstrated that EGCG potently inhibits the in vitro activity of HMGR (K(i) in 
the nanomolar range) by competitively binding to the cofactor site of the 
reductase. Finally, we evaluated the effect of combined EGCG-statin 
administration.

DOI: 10.1194/jlr.M011817
PMCID: PMC3073461
PMID: 21357570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
