---
pmid: '16920624'
title: CDC2 phosphorylation of the fission yeast dis1 ensures accurate chromosome
  segregation.
authors:
- Aoki K
- Nakaseko Y
- Kinoshita K
- Goshima G
- Yanagida M
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2006.06.065
---

# CDC2 phosphorylation of the fission yeast dis1 ensures accurate chromosome segregation.
**Authors:** Aoki K, Nakaseko Y, Kinoshita K, Goshima G, Yanagida M
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cub.2006.06.065](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2006.06.065)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2006 Aug 22;16(16):1627-35. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2006.06.065.

CDC2 phosphorylation of the fission yeast dis1 ensures accurate chromosome 
segregation.

Aoki K(1), Nakaseko Y, Kinoshita K, Goshima G, Yanagida M.

Author information:
(1)Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology Research Program of 
Japan Science and Technology Corporation, Department of Gene Mechanisms, 
Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8502, 
Japan.

Shortened kinetochore microtubules take separated chromatids to the opposing 
spindle poles in anaphase. Fission yeast Dis1 belongs to the Dis1/XMAP215/TOG 
family that is required for proper microtubule dynamics. Here, we report that 
Dis1is regulated by Cdc2 phosphorylation and that this mitotic phosphorylation 
ensures the fidelity of chromosome segregation. Whereas mutants Dis1(6A) and 
Dis1(6E) that substitute all of the six Cdc2 sites for Ala or Glu, respectively, 
produce colonies at 22 degrees C-36 degrees C, Dis1(6A) but not Dis1(6E) loses a 
minichromosome and reveals aberrant chromosome segregation at significant 
frequencies. Dis1(WT) is recruited to two regions of the mitotic spindle: 
kinetochores (possibly also kinetochore microtubules) in metaphase and the 
pole-to-pole microtubule lattice in anaphase. Mutant Dis1(6E) preferentially 
binds to metaphase kinetochores, whereas Dis1(6A), which is located along 
microtubules, fails in its accumulation at kinetochores. Dis1(6A) displays 
synthetic lethality with the mis12-537, which is a mutant that compromises 
kinetochore function. Dis1(6E) mimics the Cdc2-phosphorylated form of Dis1(WT), 
whereas Dis1(6A) can partially rescue the phenotype resulting form deletion of 
Mtc1/Alp14, another XMAP215-like protein. In anaphase, dephosphorylated Dis1 and 
Dis1(6A), but not Dis1(6E), move to the spindle microtubule lattice near the 
SPBs. Cdc2 thus directly phosphorylates Dis1, and this phosphorylation regulates 
Dis1 localization in both metaphase and anaphase and ensures high-fidelity 
segregation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2006.06.065
PMID: 16920624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
