---
pmid: '12917293'
title: A network of redundant bHLH proteins functions in all TTG1-dependent pathways
  of Arabidopsis.
authors:
- Zhang F
- Gonzalez A
- Zhao M
- Payne CT
- Lloyd A
journal: Development
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/dev.00681
---

# A network of redundant bHLH proteins functions in all TTG1-dependent pathways of Arabidopsis.
**Authors:** Zhang F, Gonzalez A, Zhao M, Payne CT, Lloyd A
**Journal:** Development (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.00681](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.00681)

## Abstract

1. Development. 2003 Oct;130(20):4859-69. doi: 10.1242/dev.00681. Epub 2003 Aug
13.

A network of redundant bHLH proteins functions in all TTG1-dependent pathways of 
Arabidopsis.

Zhang F(1), Gonzalez A, Zhao M, Payne CT, Lloyd A.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Cell and Developmental Biology, and The Institute for Cellular and 
Molecular Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA.

GLABRA3 (GL3) encodes a bHLH protein that interacts with the WD repeat protein, 
TTG1. GL3 overexpression suppresses the trichome defect of the pleiotropic ttg1 
mutations. However, single gl3 mutations only affect the trichome pathway with a 
modest trichome number reduction. A novel unlinked bHLH-encoding locus is 
described here, ENHANCER OF GLABRA3 (EGL3). When mutated, egl3 gives totally 
glabrous plants only in the gl3 mutant background. The double bHLH mutant, gl3 
egl3, has a pleiotropic phenotype like ttg1 having defective anthocyanin 
production, seed coat mucilage production, and position-dependent root hair 
spacing. Furthermore, the triple bHLH mutant, gl3 egl3 tt8, phenocopies the ttg1 
mutation. Yeast two-hybrid and plant overexpression studies show that EGL3, like 
GL3, interacts with TTG1, the myb proteins GL1, PAP1 and 2, CPC and TRY, and it 
will form heterodimers with GL3. These results suggest a combinatorial model for 
TTG1-dependent pathway regulation by this trio of partially functionally 
redundant bHLH proteins.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.00681
PMID: 12917293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
