---
pmid: '9521656'
title: 'Substrate specificity of deubiquitinating enzymes: ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolases.'
authors:
- Larsen CN
- Krantz BA
- Wilkinson KD
journal: Biochemistry
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi972274d
---

# Substrate specificity of deubiquitinating enzymes: ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolases.
**Authors:** Larsen CN, Krantz BA, Wilkinson KD
**Journal:** Biochemistry (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi972274d](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi972274d)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 1998 Mar 10;37(10):3358-68. doi: 10.1021/bi972274d.

Substrate specificity of deubiquitinating enzymes: ubiquitin C-terminal 
hydrolases.

Larsen CN(1), Krantz BA, Wilkinson KD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

Ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolases (UCH) are deubiquitinating enzymes which 
hydrolyze C-terminal esters and amides of ubiquitin. Here we report the 
processing of a number of ubiquitin derivatives by two human UCH isozymes 
(isozymes L1 and L3) and find that these enzymes show little discrimination 
based on the P1' amino acid, except that proline is cleaved slowly. 
Ubiquitinyllysine derivatives linked by the alpha- or epsilon-amino group are 
hydrolyzed at identical rates. Isozyme-specific hydrolytic preferences are only 
evident when the leaving group is large. The ubiquitin gene products can be 
cotranslationally processed by one or both of these UCH isozymes, and purified 
UbCEP52 can be hydrolyzed by UCH isozyme L3. Binding of nucleic acid by UbCEP52 
converts it to a form resistant to processing by these enzymes, apparently 
because of the formation of a larger, more tightly folded substrate. Consistent 
with this postulate is the observation that these enzymes do not hydrolyze large 
ubiquitin derivatives such as N epsilon-ubiquitinyl-cytochrome-c, N 
epsilon-K48polyubiquitinyl-lysozyme, or an N 
alpha-ubiquitinyl-beta-galactosidase fusion protein. Thus, these enzymes rapidly 
and preferentially cleave small leaving groups such as amino acids and 
oligopeptides from the C-terminus of ubiquitin, but not larger leaving groups 
such as proteins. These data suggest that the physiological role of UCH is to 
hydrolyze small adducts of ubiquitin and to generate free monomeric ubiquitin 
from ubiquitin proproteins, but not to deubiquitinate ubiquitin-protein 
conjugates or disassemble polyubiquitin chains.

DOI: 10.1021/bi972274d
PMID: 9521656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
