---
pmid: '17055437'
title: Redox regulation facilitates optimal peptide selection by MHC class I during
  antigen processing.
authors:
- Park B
- Lee S
- Kim E
- Cho K
- Riddell SR
- Cho S
- Ahn K
journal: Cell
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.08.041
---

# Redox regulation facilitates optimal peptide selection by MHC class I during antigen processing.
**Authors:** Park B, Lee S, Kim E, Cho K, Riddell SR, Cho S, Ahn K
**Journal:** Cell (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2006.08.041](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2006.08.041)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2006 Oct 20;127(2):369-82. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.08.041.

Redox regulation facilitates optimal peptide selection by MHC class I during 
antigen processing.

Park B(1), Lee S, Kim E, Cho K, Riddell SR, Cho S, Ahn K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, National Creative Research Center for 
Antigen Presentation, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-747, South Korea.

Comment in
    Cell. 2006 Oct 20;127(2):249-51. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.10.001.

Activated CD8(+) T cells discriminate infected and tumor cells from normal self 
by recognizing MHC class I-bound peptides on the surface of antigen-presenting 
cells. The mechanism by which MHC class I molecules select optimal peptides 
against a background of prevailing suboptimal peptides and in a considerably 
proteolytic ER environment remained unknown. Here, we identify protein disulfide 
isomerase (PDI), an enzyme critical to the formation of correct disulfide bonds 
in proteins, as a component of the peptide-loading complex. We show that PDI 
stabilizes a peptide-receptive site by regulating the oxidation state of the 
disulfide bond in the MHC peptide-binding groove, a function that is essential 
for selecting optimal peptides. Furthermore, we demonstrate that human 
cytomegalovirus US3 protein inhibits CD8(+) T cell recognition by mediating PDI 
degradation, verifying the functional relevance of PDI-catalyzed peptide editing 
in controlling intracellular pathogens. These results establish a link between 
thiol-based redox regulation and antigen processing.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.08.041
PMID: 17055437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
