---
pmid: '12553908'
title: X-ray structures of Myc-Max and Mad-Max recognizing DNA. Molecular bases of
  regulation by proto-oncogenic transcription factors.
authors:
- Nair SK
- Burley SK
journal: Cell
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(02)01284-9
---

# X-ray structures of Myc-Max and Mad-Max recognizing DNA. Molecular bases of regulation by proto-oncogenic transcription factors.
**Authors:** Nair SK, Burley SK
**Journal:** Cell (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(02)01284-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(02)01284-9)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2003 Jan 24;112(2):193-205. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(02)01284-9.

X-ray structures of Myc-Max and Mad-Max recognizing DNA. Molecular bases of 
regulation by proto-oncogenic transcription factors.

Nair SK(1), Burley SK.

Author information:
(1)Laboratories of Molecular Biophysics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The 
Rockefeller University, 1230 York Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.

X-ray structures of the basic/helix-loop-helix/leucine zipper (bHLHZ) domains of 
Myc-Max and Mad-Max heterodimers bound to their common DNA target (Enhancer or E 
box hexanucleotide, 5'-CACGTG-3') have been determined at 1.9 A and 2.0 A 
resolution, respectively. E box recognition by these two structurally similar 
transcription factor pairs determines whether a cell will divide and proliferate 
(Myc-Max) or differentiate and become quiescent (Mad-Max). Deregulation of Myc 
has been implicated in the development of many human cancers, including 
Burkitt's lymphoma, neuroblastomas, and small cell lung cancers. Both 
quasisymmetric heterodimers resemble the symmetric Max homodimer, albeit with 
marked structural differences in the coiled-coil leucine zipper regions that 
explain preferential homo- and heteromeric dimerization of these three 
evolutionarily related DNA-binding proteins. The Myc-Max heterodimer, but not 
its Mad-Max counterpart, dimerizes to form a bivalent heterotetramer, which 
explains how Myc can upregulate expression of genes with promoters bearing 
widely separated E boxes.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(02)01284-9
PMID: 12553908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
