---
pmid: '12554878'
title: 'Characterization of human Smg5/7a: a protein with similarities to Caenorhabditis
  elegans SMG5 and SMG7 that functions in the dephosphorylation of Upf1.'
authors:
- Chiu SY
- Serin G
- Ohara O
- Maquat LE
journal: RNA
year: '2003'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1370372
doi: 10.1261/rna.2137903
---

# Characterization of human Smg5/7a: a protein with similarities to Caenorhabditis elegans SMG5 and SMG7 that functions in the dephosphorylation of Upf1.
**Authors:** Chiu SY, Serin G, Ohara O, Maquat LE
**Journal:** RNA (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1261/rna.2137903](https://doi.org/10.1261/rna.2137903)
**PMC:** [PMC1370372](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1370372/)

## Abstract

1. RNA. 2003 Jan;9(1):77-87. doi: 10.1261/rna.2137903.

Characterization of human Smg5/7a: a protein with similarities to Caenorhabditis 
elegans SMG5 and SMG7 that functions in the dephosphorylation of Upf1.

Chiu SY(1), Serin G, Ohara O, Maquat LE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, School of Medicine and Dentistry, 
University of Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) in mammalian cells depends on phosphorylation 
of Upf1, an RNA-dependent ATPase and 5'-to-3' helicase. Upf1 phosphorylation is 
mediated by Smg1, a phosphoinositol 3-kinase-related protein kinase. Here, we 
describe a human protein, which we call hSmg5/7a, that manifests similarity to 
Caenorhabditis elegans NMD factors CeSMG5 and CeSMG7, as well as two Drosophila 
melanogaster proteins that are also similar to the C. elegans NMD factors. 
Results indicate that hSmg5/7a functions in the dephosphorylation of Upf1. 
Furthermore, hSmg5/7a copurifies with Upf1, Upf2, Upf3X, Smg1, and the catalytic 
subunit of protein phosphatase 2A. We also demonstrate that Upf2, another factor 
involved in NMD, is a phosphoprotein. However, hSmg5/7a plays no role in the 
dephosphorylation of Upf2. These data indicate that hSmg5/7a targets protein 
phosphatase 2A to Upf1 but not Upf2. Results of Western blotting reveal that 
hSmg5/7a is mostly cytoplasmic in HEK293T cells.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.2137903
PMCID: PMC1370372
PMID: 12554878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) in mammalian cells depends on phosphorylation of Upf1, an RNA-dependent ATPase and 5′-to-3′ helicase. Upf1 phosphorylation is mediated by Smg1, a phosphoinositol 3-kinase–related protein kinase. Here, we describe a human protein, which we call hSmg5/7a, that manifests similarity to Caenorhabditis elegans NMD factors CeSMG5 and CeSMG7, as well as two Drosophila melanogaster proteins that are also similar to the C. elegans NMD factors. Results indicate that hSmg5/7a functions in the dephosphorylation of Upf1. Furthermore, hSmg5/7a copurifies with Upf1, Upf2, Upf3X, Smg1, and the catalytic subunit of protein phosphatase 2A. We also demonstrate that Upf2, another factor involved in NMD, is a phosphoprotein. However, hSmg5/7a plays no role in the dephosphorylation of Upf2. These data indicate that hSmg5/7a targets protein phosphatase 2A to Upf1 but not Upf2. Results of Western blotting reveal that hSmg5/7a is mostly cytoplasmic in HEK293T cells.

INTRODUCTION

Eucaryotic cells eliminate mRNAs that prematurely terminate translation by using a mechanism called nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD; Maquat 1995 ; Culbertson 1999 ; Frischmeyer and Dietz 1999 ; Hentze and Kulozik 1999 ; Hilleren and Parker 1999 ; Maquat and Carmichael 2001 ; Wilusz et al. 2001 ; Maquat 2002 ). Aberrant mRNAs that prematurely terminate translation can arise from routine abnormalities in gene expression, such as inefficient or inaccurate pre-mRNA splicing, or mutation. It behooves cells to eliminate these mRNAs, given their potential to encode proteins that are deleterious to cellular metabolism.

In NMD, a termination codon is generally identified as premature by its distance relative to the 3′-most exon-exon junction of the mRNA in which it resides: Termination codons located >50 to 55 nt upstream of this junction usually elicit NMD, whereas termination codons located <50 to 55 nt upstream of or downstream of this junction usually fail to elicit NMD ( Cheng et al. 1994 ; Carter et al. 1996 ; Nagy and Maquat 1998 ; Thermann et al. 1998 ; Zhang et al. 1998a , b ; Sun et al. 2000 ). The role of exon-exon junctions in NMD is attributed to an exon junction complex (EJC) that is deposited ∼20 to 24 nt upstream of junctions as a consequence of pre-mRNA splicing ( Kataoka et al. 2000 ; Le Hir et al. 2000a , b ; McGarvey et al. 2000 ; Zhou et al. 2000 ). The EJC recruits the NMD factor Upf3/3X (also called Upf3a/b), which in turn recruits the NMD factor Upf2 ( Lykke-Andersen et al. 2000 , 2001 ; Mendell et al. 2000 ; Ishigaki et al. 2001 ; Kim et al. 2001 ; Serin et al. 2001 ; Lejeune et al. 2002 ). According to the current model, when translation termination is sufficiently premature, components of the termination complex, including but possibly not limited to the NMD factor Upf1, interact with EJC-bound Upf2 to trigger NMD.

Upf1, the most thoroughly characterized NMD factor, is a polysome-associated RNA-dependent ATPase and 5′-to-3′ helicase ( Bhattacharya et al. 2000 ; Pal et al. 2001 ) that is required for NMD ( Sun et al. 1998 ) and detected primarily in the cytoplasm ( Lykke-Andersen et al. 2000 ; Serin et al. 2001 ). Studies of Upf orthologs in Saccharomyces cerevisiae indicate that (1) Upf1 interacts with eukaryotic release factors (eRFs) 1 and 3; (2) Upf2 and Upf3 interact with RF3 in a way that competes with the eRF1-eRF3 interaction; and (3) all three Upf proteins influence the translation termination efficiency of premature termination codon-containing transcripts ( Czaplinski et al. 1998 ; Maderazo et al. 2000 ; Wang et al. 2001 ). Mammalian Upf1 is a phosphoprotein ( Pal et al. 2001 ) that is targeted by the phosphoinositol 3-kinase (PIK)–related protein kinase Smg1 ( Denning et al. 2001 ; Yamashita et al. 2001 ). Smg1 is named after its ortholog in Caenorhabditis elegans (Ce), CeSMG1, which phosphorylates CeSMG2, the C. elegans ortholog of mammalian Upf1 ( Page et al. 1999 ). Data indicate that Upf1/CeSMG2 phosphorylation is critical for NMD: NMD is inhibited in mammalian cells by either overexpression of kinase-inactive Smg1 ( Yamashita et al. 2001 ) or inhibition of Smg1 production using antisense RNA (K.M. Brumbaugh, D.M. Otterness, X. Li, L.E.M., and R.T. Abraham, unpubl. data), and NMD in C. elegans is inhibited by disruption of the CeSMG1 gene ( Page et al. 1999 ). Although nothing is known about Upf1 dephosphorylation, mutation of CeSMG5, CeSMG6, or CeSMG7 in C. elegans , each of which functions in CeSMG2 dephosphorylation, inhibits NMD ( Page et al. 1999 ).

The present study aimed to gain insight into factors involved in mammalian Upf1 dephosphorylation. A database search for human cDNAs encoding proteins related to CeSMG5, CeSMG6, or CeSMG7 generated a protein that we named human (h) Smg5/7a. Consistent with a role in Upf1 dephosphorylation, Flag-tagged hSmg5/7a immunopurifies with Upf1, as well as Upf2, Upf3X, and Smg1. Flag-hSmg5/7a also immunopurifies with the catalytic subunit of protein phosphatase (PP) 2A and binds microcystin, indicating that it may be a PP2A subunit or target. In fact, transient expression of hSmg5/7a results in Upf1 dephosphorylation, indicating a role in targeting PP2A to Upf1. As demonstrated by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, Upf2 is also a phosphoprotein but is insensitive to transient expression of hSmg5/7a. Western blotting indicates that Flag-hSmg5/7a is detected primarily in the cytoplasmic fraction of HEK293T cells.

DISCUSSION

The present study provides the first description of hSmg5/7a (Fig. 1A ▶ ), which has limited and localized identity and similarity to both CeSMG5 and CeSMG7 (Fig. 2 ▶ ). We show that hSmg5/7a functions in the dephosphorylation of Upf1, as would be predicted if it were a functional ortholog to the C. elegans proteins (Fig. 4 ▶ ). Additionally, we show that Upf2 is a phosphoprotein but is not subject to hSmg5/7a-mediated dephosphorylation (Fig. 5 ▶ ).

Consistent with a role in Upf protein dephosphorylation, hSmg5/7a interacts with PP2Ac (Fig. 3 ▶ ). The PP2As are a large and diverse family of multimeric serine/threonine phosphatases that function to regulate many cellular processes in eukaryotes ( Millward et al. 1999 ; Janssens and Goris 2001 ). PP2A contains two subunits in addition to the catalytic (C) subunit: a structural or scaffolding (A) subunit and a regulatory (B) subunit, the latter of which can influence phosphatase activity, substrate specificity, and subcellular location. Holoenzyme interacting proteins include substrates. Therefore, the finding that hSmg5/7a immunopurifies with Upf proteins, coupled with the finding that overexpression of hSmg5/7a causes Upf1 protein dephosphorylation, indicates that hSmg5/7a delivers PP2A to Upf1 similarly to the way that eRF1 has been proposed to deliver PP2A to polysomes ( Lechward et al. 1999 ). Along similar lines, co-immunopurification of hSmg5/7a and the PIK-related protein kinase hSmg1 (Fig. 3 ▶ ) probably reflects that both effectors target Upf1. Alternatively or additionally, hSmg5/7a could target hSmg1, in keeping with the observation that the majority of PP2A substrates identified to date are protein kinases ( Lechward et al. 1999 ). It is also possible that hSmg5/7a is itself a substrate of PP2A.

eRF1 and eRF3 were not detected in the immunopurification of Flag-hSmg5/7a using anti-Flag antibody (Fig. 3A ▶ ). In S. cerevisiae , both eRF1 and eRF3 interact with Upf1 ( Wang et al. 2001 ). It has been proposed that dissociation of eRF1 from eRF3 allows binding of Upf2 and Upf3 to a putative surveillance complex through interactions with eRF3 ( Wang et al. 2001 ). In fact, the dissociation of eRF3 from Upf1 activates the Upf1 ATPase activity ( Wang et al. 2001 ). If Upf1 interacts with eRF1 and eRF3 in mammalian cells, then our inability to detect either release factor in association with Flag-hSmg5/7a suggests that hSmg5/7a binds to Upf1 after eRF1 and eRF3 dissociate from Upf1.

Flag-hSmg5/7a is mostly cytoplasmic in HEK293T cells when produced from a transiently introduced plasmid that generates Flag-hSMG5/7a RNA at only 1.6-fold the level of endogenous hSMG5/7a RNA (Fig. 6 ▶ ). Notably, this finding does not preclude the possibility that Flag-hSmg5/7a is imported into nuclei, as would be predicted from a computer-based analysis demonstrating the presence of three nuclear localization sequences (Fig. 1A ▶ ). In fact, Flag-hSmg5/7a is mostly nuclear in Cos cells, but under conditions in which the exact level of expression relative to endogenous hSmg5/7a could not be accessed because primer pairs used to amplify hSMG5/7a transcripts did not cross-react with Cos-cell RNA (data not shown).

A database search revealed two other human proteins that are similar to CeSMG5 and CeSMG7 (Fig. 7 ▶ ). We call these proteins hSmg5/7b (KIAA1089) and hSmg5/7c (KIAA0250). The hSMG5/ 7b gene maps to chromosome 1 and encodes a protein of 1016 amino acids with a predicted molecular weight of 114 kD and a putative PIN domain that spans amino acids 873–972. The hSMG5/7c gene also maps to chromosome 1 and encodes a protein of at least 1122 amino acids (to date, only a partial sequence is available). An interspecies comparative analysis revealed that amino acids 853–924 of hSmg5/7b can be aligned to amino acids 425–480 of CeSMG5 and amino acids 1009–1081 of DmCG8954 (Fig. 7A ▶ ). Amino acids 173–257 of hSmg5/7b can be aligned to amino acids 130–208 of CeSMG7, amino acids 286–370 of DmCG6369, and amino acids 211–298 of DmCG8954 (Fig. 7A ▶ ). Additionally, amino acids 186–257 of hSmg5/7c can be aligned to amino acids 133–208 of CeSMG7, amino acids 288–361 of DmCG6369, and amino acids 213–299 of DmCG8954 (Fig. 7B ▶ ). An intraspecies comparative analysis revealed that amino acids 636–823 of hSmg5/7a, 65–268 of hSmg5/7b, and 84–274 of hSmg5/7c can be aligned with 21% identity and 45% similarity between hSmg5/7a and hSmg5/7b, 25% identity and 47% similarity between hSmg5/7b and hSmg5/7c, and 28% identity and 48% similarity between hSmg5/7a and hSmg5/7c (data not shown). However, we were unable to identify a conserved functional motif within these regions.

The presence of human proteins that contain regions related to both CeSMG5 and CeSMG7 indicates that the C. elegans proteins may function as a heterodimer. In fact, CeSMG5 interacts with CeSMG7 ( Cali et al. 1999 ), and the interaction is direct (A. Grimson and P. Anderson, pers. comm.). The finding that mutation of either C. elegans protein abolishes NMD ( Pulak and Anderson 1993 ) and prevents the dephosphorylation of CeSMG2 ( Page et al. 1999 ) reinforces the idea of cooperative function in NMD. Future studies aim to assess the functional significance of hSmg5/7b and hSmg5/7c to the extent of Upf protein phosphorylation. We also aim to determine if all three hSmg5/7 proteins function in NMD.
