---
pmid: '16601695'
title: Conformational changes in the AAA ATPase p97-p47 adaptor complex.
authors:
- Beuron F
- Dreveny I
- Yuan X
- Pye VE
- McKeown C
- Briggs LC
- Cliff MJ
- Kaneko Y
- Wallis R
- Isaacson RL
- Ladbury JE
- Matthews SJ
- Kondo H
- Zhang X
- Freemont PS
journal: EMBO J
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1456939
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601055
---

# Conformational changes in the AAA ATPase p97-p47 adaptor complex.
**Authors:** Beuron F, Dreveny I, Yuan X, Pye VE, McKeown C, Briggs LC, Cliff MJ, Kaneko Y, Wallis R, Isaacson RL, Ladbury JE, Matthews SJ, Kondo H, Zhang X, Freemont PS
**Journal:** EMBO J (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7601055](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7601055)
**PMC:** [PMC1456939](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1456939/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2006 May 3;25(9):1967-76. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601055. Epub 2006 Apr
 6.

Conformational changes in the AAA ATPase p97-p47 adaptor complex.

Beuron F(1), Dreveny I, Yuan X, Pye VE, McKeown C, Briggs LC, Cliff MJ, Kaneko 
Y, Wallis R, Isaacson RL, Ladbury JE, Matthews SJ, Kondo H, Zhang X, Freemont 
PS.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Structural Biology, Division of Molecular Biosciences, Imperial 
College London, South Kensington, UK.

The AAA+ATPase p97/VCP, helped by adaptor proteins, exerts its essential role in 
cellular events such as endoplasmic reticulum-associated protein degradation or 
the reassembly of Golgi, ER and the nuclear envelope after mitosis. Here, we 
report the three-dimensional cryo-electron microscopy structures at 
approximately 20 Angstroms resolution in two nucleotide states of the endogenous 
hexameric p97 in complex with a recombinant p47 trimer, one of the major p97 
adaptor proteins involved in membrane fusion. Depending on the nucleotide state, 
we observe the p47 trimer to be in two distinct arrangements on top of the p97 
hexamer. By combining the EM data with NMR and other biophysical measurements, 
we propose a model of ATP-dependent p97(N) domain motions that lead to a 
rearrangement of p47 domains, which could result in the disassembly of target 
protein complexes.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601055
PMCID: PMC1456939
PMID: 16601695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
