---
reference_id: PMID:33117186
title: Diversity of Light Sensing Molecules and Their Expression During the Embryogenesis of the Cuttlefish (Sepia officinalis).
authors:
- Bonadè M
- Ogura A
- Corre E
- Bassaglia Y
- Bonnaud-Ponticelli L
journal: Front Physiol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2020.521989
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diversity of Light Sensing Molecules and Their Expression During the Embryogenesis of the Cuttlefish (Sepia officinalis).
**Authors:** Bonadè M, Ogura A, Corre E, Bassaglia Y, Bonnaud-Ponticelli L
**Journal:** Front Physiol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fphys.2020.521989](https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2020.521989)

## Content

1. Front Physiol. 2020 Sep 29;11:521989. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2020.521989. 
eCollection 2020.

Diversity of Light Sensing Molecules and Their Expression During the 
Embryogenesis of the Cuttlefish (Sepia officinalis).

Bonadè M(1), Ogura A(2), Corre E(3), Bassaglia Y(1)(4), Bonnaud-Ponticelli L(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire Biologie des Organismes et Ecosystèmes Aquatiques, Muséum 
National d'Histoire Naturelle, Sorbonne Université, Centre National de la 
Recherche Française (FRE2030), Université de Caen Normandie, Institut de 
Recherche pour le Développement (IRD 207), Université des Antilles, Paris, 
France.
(2)Department of Computer Bioscience, Nagahama Institute of Bio-Science and 
Technology, Nagahama, Japan.
(3)Station biologique de Roscoff, plateforme ABiMS, FR2424 CNRS-Sorbonne 
Université (UPMC), Roscoff, France.
(4)Université Paris Est Créteil-Val de Marne (UPEC), Créteil, France.

Eyes morphologies may differ but those differences are not reflected at the 
molecular level. Indeed, the ability to perceive light is thought to come from 
the same conserved gene families: opsins and cryptochromes. Even though 
cuttlefish (Cephalopoda) are known for their visually guided behaviors, there is 
a lack of data about the different opsins and cryptochromes orthologs 
represented in the genome and their expressions. Here we studied the 
evolutionary history of opsins, cryptochromes but also visual arrestins in 
molluscs with an emphasis on cephalopods. We identified 6 opsins, 2 
cryptochromes and 1 visual arrestin in Sepia officinalis and we showed these 
families undergo several duplication events in Mollusca: one duplication in the 
arrestin family and two in the opsin family. In cuttlefish, we studied the 
temporal expression of these genes in the eyes of embryos from stage 23 to 
hatching and their expression in two extraocular tissues, skin and central 
nervous system (CNS = brain + optic lobes). We showed in embryos that some of 
these genes (Sof_CRY6, Sof_reti-1, Sof_reti-2, Sof_r-opsin1 and Sof_v-arr) are 
expressed in the eyes and not in the skin or CNS. By looking at a juvenile and 
an adult S. officinalis, it seems that some of these genes (Sof_r-opsin1 and 
Sof_reti1) are used for light detection in these extraocular tissues but that 
they set-up later in development than in the eyes. We also showed that their 
expression (except for Sof_CRY6) undergoes an increase in the eyes from stage 25 
to 28 thus confirming their role in the ability of the cuttlefish embryos to 
perceive light through the egg capsule. This study raises the question of the 
role of Sof_CRY6 in the developing eyes in cuttlefish embryos and the role and 
localization of xenopsins and r-opsin2. Consequently, the diversity of molecular 
actors involved in light detection both in the eyes and extraocular tissues is 
higher than previously known. These results open the way for studying new 
molecules such as those of the signal transduction cascade.

Copyright © 2020 Bonadè, Ogura, Corre, Bassaglia and Bonnaud-Ponticelli.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2020.521989
PMCID: PMC7553075
PMID: 33117186