---
pmid: '21412257'
title: MiR-125b, a microRNA downregulated in psoriasis, modulates keratinocyte proliferation
  by targeting FGFR2.
authors:
- Xu N
- Brodin P
- Wei T
- Meisgen F
- Eidsmo L
- Nagy N
- Kemeny L
- Ståhle M
- Sonkoly E
- Pivarcsi A
journal: J Invest Dermatol
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/jid.2011.55
---

# MiR-125b, a microRNA downregulated in psoriasis, modulates keratinocyte proliferation by targeting FGFR2.
**Authors:** Xu N, Brodin P, Wei T, Meisgen F, Eidsmo L, Nagy N, Kemeny L, Ståhle M, Sonkoly E, Pivarcsi A
**Journal:** J Invest Dermatol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/jid.2011.55](https://doi.org/10.1038/jid.2011.55)

## Abstract

1. J Invest Dermatol. 2011 Jul;131(7):1521-9. doi: 10.1038/jid.2011.55. Epub 2011
 Mar 17.

MiR-125b, a microRNA downregulated in psoriasis, modulates keratinocyte 
proliferation by targeting FGFR2.

Xu N(1), Brodin P, Wei T, Meisgen F, Eidsmo L, Nagy N, Kemeny L, Ståhle M, 
Sonkoly E, Pivarcsi A.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Dermatology Research Group, Unit of Dermatology and Venereology, 
Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short, single-stranded, noncoding RNAs that play 
important roles in the regulation of gene expression. We previously identified a 
characteristic miRNA expression profile in psoriasis, distinct from that of 
healthy skin. One of the most downregulated miRNAs in psoriasis skin was 
microRNA-125b (miR-125b). In this study, we aimed to identify the potential 
role(s) of miR-125b in psoriasis pathogenesis. In situ hybridization results 
showed that the major cell type responsible for decreased miR-125b levels in 
psoriasis lesions was the keratinocyte. Overexpression of miR-125b in primary 
human keratinocytes suppressed proliferation and induced the expression of 
several known differentiation markers. Conversely, inhibition of endogenous 
miR-125b promoted cell proliferation and delayed differentiation. Fibroblast 
growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) was identified as one of the direct targets for 
suppression by miR-125b by luciferase reporter assay. The expression of miR-125b 
and FGFR2 was inversely correlated in both transfected keratinocytes and in 
psoriatic skin. Knocking down FGFR2 expression by siRNA suppressed keratinocyte 
proliferation, but did not enhance differentiation. Altogether, our results 
demonstrate a role for miR-125b in the regulation of keratinocyte proliferation 
and differentiation, partially through the regulation of FGFR2. Loss of miR-125b 
in psoriasis skin may contribute to hyperproliferation and aberrant 
differentiation of keratinocytes.

DOI: 10.1038/jid.2011.55
PMID: 21412257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
