---
pmid: '12077419'
title: Disassembly of transcriptional regulatory complexes by molecular chaperones.
authors:
- Freeman BC
- Yamamoto KR
journal: Science
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.1073051
---

# Disassembly of transcriptional regulatory complexes by molecular chaperones.
**Authors:** Freeman BC, Yamamoto KR
**Journal:** Science (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1073051](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1073051)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2002 Jun 21;296(5576):2232-5. doi: 10.1126/science.1073051.

Disassembly of transcriptional regulatory complexes by molecular chaperones.

Freeman BC(1), Yamamoto KR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Structural Biology, University of Illinois, 
Urbana-Champaign, 601 South Goodwin Avenue, Urbana, IL 61801, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2002 Jun 21;296(5576):2125. doi: 10.1126/science.296.5576.2125.

Many biological processes are initiated by cooperative assembly of large 
multicomponent complexes; however, mechanisms for modulating or terminating the 
actions of these complexes are not well understood. For example, hormone-bound 
intracellular receptors (IRs) nucleate formation of transcriptional regulatory 
complexes whose actions cease promptly upon hormone withdrawal. Here, we show 
that the p23 molecular chaperone localizes in vivo to genomic response elements 
in a hormone-dependent manner, disrupting receptor-mediated transcriptional 
activation in vivo and in vitro; Hsp90 weakly displayed similar activities. 
Indeed, p23 and Hsp90 also disrupted the activities of some non-IR-containing 
transcriptional regulatory complexes. We suggest that molecular chaperones 
promote disassembly of transcriptional regulatory complexes, thus enabling 
regulatory machineries to detect and respond to signaling changes.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1073051
PMID: 12077419 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
