---
pmid: '16278450'
title: Assembly of the Hap2p/Hap3p/Hap4p/Hap5p-DNA complex in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
authors:
- McNabb DS
- Pinto I
journal: Eukaryot Cell
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1287863
doi: 10.1128/EC.4.11.1829-1839.2005
---

# Assembly of the Hap2p/Hap3p/Hap4p/Hap5p-DNA complex in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** McNabb DS, Pinto I
**Journal:** Eukaryot Cell (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1128/EC.4.11.1829-1839.2005](https://doi.org/10.1128/EC.4.11.1829-1839.2005)
**PMC:** [PMC1287863](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1287863/)

## Abstract

1. Eukaryot Cell. 2005 Nov;4(11):1829-39. doi: 10.1128/EC.4.11.1829-1839.2005.

Assembly of the Hap2p/Hap3p/Hap4p/Hap5p-DNA complex in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

McNabb DS(1), Pinto I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, SCEN601, University of Arkansas, 
Fayetteville, AR 72701, USA. dmcnabb@uark.edu

The CCAAT-binding factor (CBF) is an evolutionarily conserved multimeric 
transcriptional activator in eukaryotes. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the 
CCAAT-binding factor is composed of four subunits, termed Hap2p, Hap3p, Hap4p, 
and Hap5p. The Hap2p/Hap3p/Hap5p heterotrimer is the DNA-binding component of 
the complex that binds to the consensus 5'-CCAAT-3' sequence in the promoter of 
target genes. The Hap4p subunit contains the transcriptional activation domain 
necessary for stimulating transcription after interacting with 
Hap2p/Hap3p/Hap5p. In this report, we demonstrate that Hap2p, Hap3p, and Hap5p 
assemble via a one-step pathway requiring all three subunits simultaneously, as 
opposed to the mammalian CCAAT-binding factor which has been shown to assemble 
via a two-step pathway with CBF-A (Hap3p homolog) and CBF-C (Hap5p homolog) 
forming a stable dimer before CBF-B (Hap2p homolog) can interact. We have also 
found that the interaction of Hap4p with Hap2p/Hap3p/Hap5p requires DNA binding 
as a prerequisite. To further understand the protein-protein and protein-DNA 
interactions of this transcription factor, we identified the minimal domain of 
Hap4p necessary for interaction with the Hap2p/Hap3p/Hap5p-DNA complex, and we 
demonstrate that this domain is sufficient to complement the respiratory 
deficiency of a hap4Delta mutant and activate transcription when fused with the 
VP16 activation domain. These studies provide a further understanding of the 
assembly of the yeast CCAAT-binding factor at target promoters and raise a 
number of questions concerning the protein-protein and protein-DNA interactions 
of this multisubunit transcription factor.

DOI: 10.1128/EC.4.11.1829-1839.2005
PMCID: PMC1287863
PMID: 16278450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
