---
pmid: '19470702'
title: Chronic intermittent hypoxia induces 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase in
  rat heart.
authors:
- Klusonová P
- Reháková L
- Borchert G
- Vagnerová K
- Neckár J
- Ergang P
- Miksík I
- Kolár F
- Pácha J
journal: Endocrinology
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1210/en.2008-1493
---

# Chronic intermittent hypoxia induces 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase in rat heart.
**Authors:** Klusonová P, Reháková L, Borchert G, Vagnerová K, Neckár J, Ergang P, Miksík I, Kolár F, Pácha J
**Journal:** Endocrinology (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1210/en.2008-1493](https://doi.org/10.1210/en.2008-1493)

## Abstract

1. Endocrinology. 2009 Sep;150(9):4270-7. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-1493. Epub 2009
May  21.

Chronic intermittent hypoxia induces 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase in rat 
heart.

Klusonová P(1), Reháková L, Borchert G, Vagnerová K, Neckár J, Ergang P, Miksík 
I, Kolár F, Pácha J.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Physiology, Czech Academy of Sciences, 142 20 Prague 4, Krc, 
Czech Republic.

Corticosteroids are known to not only regulate electrolyte homeostasis but also 
play a role in the cardiovascular system, including myocardial remodeling. 
Because transgenic mice that overexpress 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 
(11HSD) type 2 in cardiomyocytes have been shown to spontaneously develop 
cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis, we investigated whether changes in the cardiac 
metabolism of glucocorticoids accompany remodeling of the heart under 
physiological conditions. In the present study, glucocorticoid metabolism and 
11HSD2 were explored in the hearts of rats exposed to chronic intermittent 
hypobaric hypoxia (CIH), which induces hypertrophy and fibrosis of the right and 
less of the left ventricle. We first demonstrated that adaptation to CIH led to 
a significant increase in 11HSD2 transcript levels and activity in the 
myocardium. In contrast, neither 11HSD1 activity and mRNA level nor the 
abundance of mineralocorticoid and glucocorticoid receptor mRNA were 
up-regulated. The adaptation to CIH also led to an increase of 11HSD2 mRNA in 
isolated cardiomyocytes, whereas 11HSD1, glucocorticoid receptor, and 
mineralocorticoid receptor mRNA levels were not changed in comparison with the 
cardiomyocytes of control normoxic rats. The changes in cardiac metabolism of 
glucocorticoids were accompanied by inflammatory responses. The expression 
levels of the proinflammatory markers cyclooxygenase-2 and osteopontin were 
significantly increased in both the myocardium and the cardiomyocytes isolated 
from rats exposed to CIH. These findings suggest that myocardial remodeling 
induced by CIH is associated with the up-regulation of cardiac 11HSD2. 
Consequently, local metabolism of glucocorticoids could indeed play a role in 
cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis.

DOI: 10.1210/en.2008-1493
PMID: 19470702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
