---
pmid: '37296100'
title: A multicentric consortium study demonstrates that dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase
  2 is not a dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase.
authors:
- Ragavan VN
- Nair PC
- Jarzebska N
- Angom RS
- Ruta L
- Bianconi E
- Grottelli S
- Tararova ND
- Ryazanskiy D
- Lentz SR
- Tommasi S
- Martens-Lobenhoffer J
- Suzuki-Yamamoto T
- Kimoto M
- Rubets E
- Chau S
- Chen Y
- Hu X
- Bernhardt N
- Spieth PM
- Weiss N
- Bornstein SR
- Mukhopadhyay D
- Bode-Böger SM
- Maas R
- Wang Y
- Macchiarulo A
- Mangoni AA
- Cellini B
- Rodionov RN
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2023'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC10256801
doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-38467-9
---

# A multicentric consortium study demonstrates that dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase 2 is not a dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase.
**Authors:** Ragavan VN, Nair PC, Jarzebska N, Angom RS, Ruta L, Bianconi E, Grottelli S, Tararova ND, Ryazanskiy D, Lentz SR, Tommasi S, Martens-Lobenhoffer J, Suzuki-Yamamoto T, Kimoto M, Rubets E, Chau S, Chen Y, Hu X, Bernhardt N, Spieth PM, Weiss N, Bornstein SR, Mukhopadhyay D, Bode-Böger SM, Maas R, Wang Y, Macchiarulo A, Mangoni AA, Cellini B, Rodionov RN
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-023-38467-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-38467-9)
**PMC:** [PMC10256801](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10256801/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Commun. 2023 Jun 9;14(1):3392. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-38467-9.

A multicentric consortium study demonstrates that dimethylarginine 
dimethylaminohydrolase 2 is not a dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase.

Ragavan VN(#)(1)(2), Nair PC(#)(2)(3)(4)(5), Jarzebska N(1), Angom RS(6), Ruta 
L(7), Bianconi E(7), Grottelli S(8), Tararova ND(9), Ryazanskiy D(9), Lentz 
SR(10), Tommasi S(2), Martens-Lobenhoffer J(11), Suzuki-Yamamoto T(12), Kimoto 
M(12), Rubets E(1), Chau S(13), Chen Y(14), Hu X(15), Bernhardt N(16), Spieth 
PM(17), Weiss N(1), Bornstein SR(1)(18), Mukhopadhyay D(6), Bode-Böger SM(11), 
Maas R(19)(20), Wang Y(13), Macchiarulo A(7), Mangoni AA(2), Cellini B(8), 
Rodionov RN(21)(22).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, 
Germany.
(2)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, College of Medicine and Public Health, 
Flinders University and Flinders Medical Centre, Bedford Park, Adelaide, SA, 
Australia.
(3)Flinders Health and Medical Research Institute (FHMRI), College of Medicine 
and Public Health, Flinders University, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(4)Cancer Program, South Australian Health and Medical Research Institute 
(SAHMRI), University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(5)Discipline of Medicine, Adelaide Medical School, University of Adelaide, 
Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of 
Medicine and Science, Jacksonville, FL, USA.
(7)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Perugia, via del Liceo 
1, Perugia, Italy.
(8)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Perugia, P.le L. Sevari 1, 
Perugia, Italy.
(9)DAPCEL, Inc., Cleveland, OH, USA.
(10)Department of Internal Medicine, The University of Iowa Carver College of 
Medicine, Iowa City, IA, USA.
(11)Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Otto von Guericke University, Magdeburg, 
Germany.
(12)Department of Nutritional Science, Faculty of Health and Welfare Science, 
Okayama Prefectural University, Okayama, Japan.
(13)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and 
Science, Rochester, NY, USA.
(14)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Mississippi Medical 
Center, Jackson, MS, USA.
(15)Institute of Molecular Medicine, Beijing University, Beijing, China.
(16)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Hospital Carl Gustav 
Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(17)Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, University Hospital 
Dresden, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(18)School of Cardiovascular and Metabolic Medicine and Sciences, Faculty of 
Life Sciences & Medicine, King's College London, London, UK.
(19)Institute of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, 
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(20)FAU New - Research Center for New Bioactive Compounds, 
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(21)Department of Internal Medicine III, Technische Universität Dresden, 
Dresden, Germany. Roman.Rodionov@uniklinikum-dresden.de.
(22)College of Medicine and Public Health, Flinders University and Flinders 
Medical Center, Adelaide, SA, Australia. Roman.Rodionov@uniklinikum-dresden.de.
(#)Contributed equally

Dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase 1 (DDAH1) protects against 
cardiovascular disease by metabolising the risk factor asymmetric 
dimethylarginine (ADMA). However, the question whether the second DDAH isoform, 
DDAH2, directly metabolises ADMA has remained unanswered. Consequently, it is 
still unclear if DDAH2 may be a potential target for ADMA-lowering therapies or 
if drug development efforts should focus on DDAH2's known physiological 
functions in mitochondrial fission, angiogenesis, vascular remodelling, insulin 
secretion, and immune responses. Here, an international consortium of research 
groups set out to address this question using in silico, in vitro, cell culture, 
and murine models. The findings uniformly demonstrate that DDAH2 is incapable of 
metabolising ADMA, thus resolving a 20-year controversy and providing a starting 
point for the investigation of alternative, ADMA-independent functions of DDAH2.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-023-38467-9
PMCID: PMC10256801
PMID: 37296100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
