---
pmid: '30478225'
title: TBX2 and TBX3 act downstream of canonical WNT signaling in patterning and differentiation
  of the mouse ureteric mesenchyme.
authors:
- Aydoğdu N
- Rudat C
- Trowe MO
- Kaiser M
- Lüdtke TH
- Taketo MM
- Christoffels VM
- Moon A
- Kispert A
journal: Development
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/dev.171827
---

# TBX2 and TBX3 act downstream of canonical WNT signaling in patterning and differentiation of the mouse ureteric mesenchyme.
**Authors:** Aydoğdu N, Rudat C, Trowe MO, Kaiser M, Lüdtke TH, Taketo MM, Christoffels VM, Moon A, Kispert A
**Journal:** Development (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.171827](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.171827)

## Abstract

1. Development. 2018 Nov 26;145(23):dev171827. doi: 10.1242/dev.171827.

TBX2 and TBX3 act downstream of canonical WNT signaling in patterning and 
differentiation of the mouse ureteric mesenchyme.

Aydoğdu N(1), Rudat C(1), Trowe MO(1), Kaiser M(1), Lüdtke TH(1), Taketo MM(2), 
Christoffels VM(3), Moon A(4)(5), Kispert A(6).

Author information:
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, 30625 
Hannover, Germany.
(2)Division of Experimental Therapeutics, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto 
University, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.
(3)Department of Anatomy, Embryology and Physiology, Academic Medical Center, 
University of Amsterdam, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Molecular and Functional Genomics, Weis Center for Research, 
Geisinger Clinic, Danville PA 17822, USA.
(5)Departments of Pediatrics and Human Genetics, University of Utah School of 
Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.
(6)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, 30625 
Hannover, Germany kispert.andreas@mh-hannover.de.

The organized array of smooth muscle cells (SMCs) and fibroblasts in the walls 
of visceral tubular organs arises by patterning and differentiation of 
mesenchymal progenitors surrounding the epithelial lumen. Here, we show that the 
TBX2 and TBX3 transcription factors have novel and required roles in regulating 
these processes in the murine ureter. Co-expression of TBX2 and TBX3 in the 
inner mesenchymal region of the developing ureter requires canonical WNT 
signaling. Loss of TBX2/TBX3 in this region disrupts activity of two crucial 
drivers of the SMC program, Foxf1 and BMP4 signaling, resulting in decreased SMC 
differentiation and increased extracellular matrix. Transcriptional profiling 
and chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that TBX2/TBX3 directly 
repress expression of the WNT antagonists Dkk2 and Shisa2, the BMP antagonist 
Bmper and the chemokine Cxcl12 These findings suggest that TBX2/TBX3 are 
effectors of canonical WNT signaling in the ureteric mesenchyme that promote SMC 
differentiation by maintaining BMP4 and WNT signaling in the inner region, while 
restricting CXCL12 signaling to the outer layer of fibroblast-fated mesenchyme.

© 2018. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.171827
PMID: 30478225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.
