---
pmid: '16603259'
title: Physical and functional interactions of Arabidopsis ADA2 transcriptional coactivator
  proteins with the acetyltransferase GCN5 and with the cold-induced transcription
  factor CBF1.
authors:
- Mao Y
- Pavangadkar KA
- Thomashow MF
- Triezenberg SJ
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbaexp.2006.02.006
---

# Physical and functional interactions of Arabidopsis ADA2 transcriptional coactivator proteins with the acetyltransferase GCN5 and with the cold-induced transcription factor CBF1.
**Authors:** Mao Y, Pavangadkar KA, Thomashow MF, Triezenberg SJ
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbaexp.2006.02.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbaexp.2006.02.006)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006 Jan-Feb;1759(1-2):69-79. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbaexp.2006.02.006. Epub 2006 Mar 27.

Physical and functional interactions of Arabidopsis ADA2 transcriptional 
coactivator proteins with the acetyltransferase GCN5 and with the cold-induced 
transcription factor CBF1.

Mao Y(1), Pavangadkar KA, Thomashow MF, Triezenberg SJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI 48824-1319, USA.

The Arabidopsis GCN5, ADA2a and ADA2b proteins are homologs of components of 
several yeast and animal transcriptional coactivator complexes. Previous work 
has implicated these plant coactivator proteins in the stimulation of 
cold-regulated gene expression by the transcriptional activator protein CBF1. 
Surprisingly, protein interaction studies demonstrate that the DNA-binding 
domain of CBF1 (and of a related protein, TINY), rather than its transcriptional 
activation domain, can bind directly to the Arabidopsis ADA2 proteins. The ADA2a 
and ADA2b proteins can also bind directly to GCN5 through their N-terminal 
regions (comparable to a region previously defined in yeast Ada2) and through 
previously unmapped regions in the middle of the ADA2 proteins, which bind to 
the HAT domain of GCN5. The ADA2 proteins enhance the ability of GCN5 to 
acetylate histones in vitro and enable GCN5 to acetylate nucleosomal histones. 
Moreover, GCN5 can acetylate the ADA2 proteins at a motif unique to the plant 
homologs and absent from fungal and animal homologs. We speculate that this 
modification may represent a novel autoregulatory mechanism for the plant 
SAGA-like transcriptional coactivator complexes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbaexp.2006.02.006
PMID: 16603259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
