---
pmid: '10889023'
title: Structural basis of plasticity in protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B substrate
  recognition.
authors:
- Sarmiento M
- Puius YA
- Vetter SW
- Keng YF
- Wu L
- Zhao Y
- Lawrence DS
- Almo SC
- Zhang ZY
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi000319w
---

# Structural basis of plasticity in protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B substrate recognition.
**Authors:** Sarmiento M, Puius YA, Vetter SW, Keng YF, Wu L, Zhao Y, Lawrence DS, Almo SC, Zhang ZY
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi000319w](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi000319w)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2000 Jul 18;39(28):8171-9. doi: 10.1021/bi000319w.

Structural basis of plasticity in protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B substrate 
recognition.

Sarmiento M(1), Puius YA, Vetter SW, Keng YF, Wu L, Zhao Y, Lawrence DS, Almo 
SC, Zhang ZY.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, The Albert Einstein 
College of Medicine of Yeshiva University, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, New 
York 10461, USA.

Protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B) displays a preference for peptides 
containing acidic as well as aromatic/aliphatic residues immediately 
NH(2)-terminal to phosphotyrosine. The structure of PTP1B bound with 
DADEpYL-NH(2) (EGFR(988)(-)(993)) offers a structural explanation for PTP1B's 
preference for acidic residues [Jia, Z., Barford, D., Flint, A. J., and Tonks, 
N. K. (1995) Science 268, 1754-1758]. We report here the crystal structures of 
PTP1B in complex with Ac-ELEFpYMDYE-NH(2) (PTP1B.Con) and Ac-DAD(Bpa)pYLIPQQG 
(PTP1B.Bpa) determined to 1.8 and 1.9 A resolution, respectively. A structural 
analysis of PTP1B.Con and PTP1B.Bpa shows how aromatic/aliphatic residues at the 
-1 and -3 positions of peptide substrates are accommodated by PTP1B. A 
comparison of the structures of PTP1B.Con and PTP1B.Bpa with that of 
PTP1B.EGFR(988)(-)(993) reveals the structural basis for the plasticity of PTP1B 
substrate recognition. PTP1B is able to bind phosphopeptides by utilizing common 
interactions involving the aromatic ring and phosphate moiety of phosphotyrosine 
itself, two conserved hydrogen bonds between the Asp48 carboxylate side chain 
and the main chain nitrogens of the pTyr and residue 1, and a third between the 
main chain nitrogen of Arg47 and the main chain carbonyl of residue -2. The 
ability of PTP1B to accommodate both acidic and hydrophobic residues immediately 
NH(2)-terminal to pTyr appears to be conferred upon PTP1B by a single residue, 
Arg47. Depending on the nature of the NH(2)-terminal amino acids, the side chain 
of Arg47 can adopt one of two different conformations, generating two sets of 
distinct peptide binding surfaces. When an acidic residue is positioned at 
position -1, a preference for a second acidic residue is also observed at 
position -2. However, when a large hydrophobic group occupies position -1, Arg47 
adopts a new conformation so that it can participate in hydrophobic interactions 
with both positions -1 and -3.

DOI: 10.1021/bi000319w
PMID: 10889023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
