---
pmid: '18316368'
title: Protein encoded by the Axin(Fu) allele effectively down-regulates Wnt signaling
  but exerts a dominant negative effect on c-Jun N-terminal kinase signaling.
authors:
- Lu Z
- Liu W
- Huang H
- He Y
- Han Y
- Rui Y
- Wang Y
- Li Q
- Ruan K
- Ye Z
- Low BC
- Meng A
- Lin SC
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M710595200
---

# Protein encoded by the Axin(Fu) allele effectively down-regulates Wnt signaling but exerts a dominant negative effect on c-Jun N-terminal kinase signaling.
**Authors:** Lu Z, Liu W, Huang H, He Y, Han Y, Rui Y, Wang Y, Li Q, Ruan K, Ye Z, Low BC, Meng A, Lin SC
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M710595200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M710595200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2008 May 9;283(19):13132-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M710595200. Epub
2008  Mar 3.

Protein encoded by the Axin(Fu) allele effectively down-regulates Wnt signaling 
but exerts a dominant negative effect on c-Jun N-terminal kinase signaling.

Lu Z(1), Liu W, Huang H, He Y, Han Y, Rui Y, Wang Y, Li Q, Ruan K, Ye Z, Low BC, 
Meng A, Lin SC.

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian 361005, China.

Axin plays an architectural role in many important signaling pathways that 
control various aspects of development and tumorigenesis, including the Wnt, 
transforming growth factor-beta, MAP kinase pathways, as well as p53 activation 
cascades. It is encoded by the mouse Fused (Fu) locus; the Axin(Fu) allele is 
caused by insertion of an IAP transposon. Axin(Fu/Fu) mice display varying 
phenotypes ranging from embryonic lethality to relatively normal adulthood with 
kinky tails. However, the protein product(s) has not been identified or 
characterized. In the present study, we conducted immunoprecipitation using 
brain extracts from the Axin(Fu) mice with specific antibodies against different 
regions of Axin and found that a truncated Axin containing amino acids 1-596 
(designated as Axin(Fu-NT)) and the full-length complement of Axin (Axin(WT)) 
can both be generated from the Axin(Fu) allele. When tested for functionality 
changes, Axin(Fu-NT) was found to abolish Axin-mediated activation of JNK, which 
plays a critical role in dorsoventral patterning. Together with a proteomics 
approach, we found that Axin(Fu-NT) contains a previously uncharacterized 
dimerization domain and can form a heterodimeric interaction with Axin(WT). The 
Axin(Fu-NT)/Axin(WT) is not conducive to JNK activation, providing a molecular 
explanation for the dominant negative effect of Axin(Fu-NT) on JNK activation by 
wild-type Axin. Importantly, Axin(Fu-NT) exhibits no difference in the 
inhibition of Wnt signaling compared with Axin(WT) as determined by reporter 
gene assays, interaction with key Wnt regulators, and expression of Wnt marker 
genes in zebrafish embryos, suggesting that altered JNK signaling contributes, 
at least in part, to the developmental defects seen in Axin(Fu) mice.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M710595200
PMID: 18316368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
