---
pmid: '23404500'
title: Structural basis for the recognition of tyrosine-based sorting signals by the
  μ3A subunit of the AP-3 adaptor complex.
authors:
- Mardones GA
- Burgos PV
- Lin Y
- Kloer DP
- Magadán JG
- Hurley JH
- Bonifacino JS
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3611023
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.450775
---

# Structural basis for the recognition of tyrosine-based sorting signals by the μ3A subunit of the AP-3 adaptor complex.
**Authors:** Mardones GA, Burgos PV, Lin Y, Kloer DP, Magadán JG, Hurley JH, Bonifacino JS
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M113.450775](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M113.450775)
**PMC:** [PMC3611023](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3611023/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Mar 29;288(13):9563-71. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.450775. Epub 
2013 Feb 12.

Structural basis for the recognition of tyrosine-based sorting signals by the 
μ3A subunit of the AP-3 adaptor complex.

Mardones GA(1), Burgos PV, Lin Y, Kloer DP, Magadán JG, Hurley JH, Bonifacino 
JS.

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Fisiología, Facultad de Medicina, and Centro de Investigación 
Sur-Austral en Enfermedades del Sistema Nervioso, Universidad Austral de Chile, 
Valdivia 5110566, Chile.

Tyrosine-based signals fitting the YXXØ motif mediate sorting of transmembrane 
proteins to endosomes, lysosomes, the basolateral plasma membrane of polarized 
epithelial cells, and the somatodendritic domain of neurons through interactions 
with the homologous μ1, μ2, μ3, and μ4 subunits of the corresponding AP-1, AP-2, 
AP-3, and AP-4 complexes. Previous x-ray crystallographic analyses identified 
distinct binding sites for YXXØ signals on μ2 and μ4, which were located on 
opposite faces of the proteins. To elucidate the mode of recognition of YXXØ 
signals by other members of the μ family, we solved the crystal structure at 
1.85 Å resolution of the C-terminal domain of the μ3 subunit of AP-3 (isoform A) 
in complex with a peptide encoding a YXXØ signal (SDYQRL) from the trans-Golgi 
network protein TGN38. The μ3A C-terminal domain consists of an 
immunoglobulin-like β-sandwich organized into two subdomains, A and B. The YXXØ 
signal binds in an extended conformation to a site on μ3A subdomain A, at a 
location similar to the YXXØ-binding site on μ2 but not μ4. The binding sites on 
μ3A and μ2 exhibit similarities and differences that account for the ability of 
both proteins to bind distinct sets of YXXØ signals. Biochemical analyses 
confirm the identification of the μ3A site and show that this protein binds YXXØ 
signals with 14-19 μm affinity. The surface electrostatic potential of μ3A is 
less basic than that of μ2, in part explaining the association of AP-3 with 
intracellular membranes having less acidic phosphoinositides.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.450775
PMCID: PMC3611023
PMID: 23404500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
