---
pmid: '19592253'
title: The mammalian Cos2 homolog Kif7 plays an essential role in modulating Hh signal
  transduction during development.
authors:
- Endoh-Yamagami S
- Evangelista M
- Wilson D
- Wen X
- Theunissen JW
- Phamluong K
- Davis M
- Scales SJ
- Solloway MJ
- de Sauvage FJ
- Peterson AS
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2009.06.046
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The mammalian Cos2 homolog Kif7 plays an essential role in modulating Hh signal transduction during development.
**Authors:** Endoh-Yamagami S, Evangelista M, Wilson D, Wen X, Theunissen JW, Phamluong K, Davis M, Scales SJ, Solloway MJ, de Sauvage FJ, Peterson AS
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cub.2009.06.046](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2009.06.046)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2009 Aug 11;19(15):1320-6. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2009.06.046. Epub
2009  Jul 9.

The mammalian Cos2 homolog Kif7 plays an essential role in modulating Hh signal 
transduction during development.

Endoh-Yamagami S(1), Evangelista M, Wilson D, Wen X, Theunissen JW, Phamluong K, 
Davis M, Scales SJ, Solloway MJ, de Sauvage FJ, Peterson AS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Genentech, Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San 
Francisco, CA 94080, USA.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2009 Sep 15;19(17):R729-31. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2009.07.060.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway regulates development in animals ranging 
from flies to humans. Although its framework is conserved, differences in 
pathway components have been reported. A kinesin-like protein, Costal2 (Cos2), 
plays a central role in the Hh pathway in flies. Knockdown of a zebrafish 
homolog of Cos2, Kif7, results in ectopic Hh signaling, suggesting that Kif7 
acts primarily as a negative regulator of Hh signal transduction. However, in 
vitro analysis of the function of mammalian Kif7 and the closely related Kif27 
has led to the conclusion that neither protein has a role in Hh signaling. Using 
Kif7 knockout mice, we demonstrate that mouse Kif7, like its zebrafish and 
Drosophila homologs, plays a role in transducing the Hh signal. We show that 
Kif7 accumulates at the distal tip of the primary cilia in a Hh-dependent 
manner. We also demonstrate a requirement for Kif7 in the efficient localization 
of Gli3 to cilia in response to Hh and for the processing of Gli3 to its 
repressor form. These results suggest a role for Kif7 in coordinating Hh signal 
transduction at the tip of cilia and preventing Gli3 cleavage into a repressor 
form in the presence of Hh.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2009.06.046
PMID: 19592253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
