---
pmid: '19734368'
title: Two novel techniques for determination of polysaccharide cross-links show that
  Crh1p and Crh2p attach chitin to both beta(1-6)- and beta(1-3)glucan in the Saccharomyces
  cerevisiae cell wall.
authors:
- Cabib E
journal: Eukaryot Cell
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2772413
doi: 10.1128/EC.00228-09
---

# Two novel techniques for determination of polysaccharide cross-links show that Crh1p and Crh2p attach chitin to both beta(1-6)- and beta(1-3)glucan in the Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell wall.
**Authors:** Cabib E
**Journal:** Eukaryot Cell (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1128/EC.00228-09](https://doi.org/10.1128/EC.00228-09)
**PMC:** [PMC2772413](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2772413/)

## Abstract

1. Eukaryot Cell. 2009 Nov;8(11):1626-36. doi: 10.1128/EC.00228-09. Epub 2009 Sep
 4.

Two novel techniques for determination of polysaccharide cross-links show that 
Crh1p and Crh2p attach chitin to both beta(1-6)- and beta(1-3)glucan in the 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell wall.

Cabib E(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Genetics, NIDDK, National Institutes of 
Health, Department of Health andHuman Services, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. 
enricoc@bdg10.niddk.nih.gov

Previous work, using solubilization of yeast cell walls by carboxymethylation, 
before or after digestion with beta(1-3)- or beta(1-6)glucanase, followed by 
size chromatography, showed that the transglycosylases Crh1p and Crh2p/Utr2p 
were redundantly required for the attachment of chitin to beta(1-6)glucan. With 
this technique, crh1Delta crh2Delta mutants still appeared to contain a 
substantial percentage of chitin linked to beta(1-3)glucan. Two novel procedures 
have now been developed for the analysis of polysaccharide cross-links in the 
cell wall. One is based on the affinity of curdlan, a beta(1-3)glucan, for 
beta(1-3)glucan chains in carboxymethylated cell walls. The other consists of in 
situ deacetylation of cell wall chitin, generating chitosan, which can be 
extracted with acetic acid, either directly (free chitosan) or after digestion 
with different glucanases (bound chitosan). Both methodologies indicated that 
all of the chitin in crh1Delta crh2Delta strains is free. Reexamination of the 
previously used procedure revealed that the beta(1-3)glucanase preparation used 
(zymolyase) is contaminated with a small amount of endochitinase, which caused 
erroneous results with the double mutant. After removing the chitinase from the 
zymolyase, all three procedures gave coincident results. Therefore, Crh1p and 
Crh2p catalyze the transfer of chitin to both beta(1-3)- and beta(1-6)glucan, 
and the biosynthetic mechanism for all chitin cross-links in the cell wall has 
been established.

DOI: 10.1128/EC.00228-09
PMCID: PMC2772413
PMID: 19734368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
