---
pmid: '11722572'
title: Elevated lysosomal pH in neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs).
authors:
- Holopainen JM
- Saarikoski J
- Kinnunen PK
- Järvelä I
journal: Eur J Biochem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1046/j.0014-2956.2001.02530.x
---

# Elevated lysosomal pH in neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs).
**Authors:** Holopainen JM, Saarikoski J, Kinnunen PK, Järvelä I
**Journal:** Eur J Biochem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.0014-2956.2001.02530.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.0014-2956.2001.02530.x)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Biochem. 2001 Nov;268(22):5851-6. doi: 10.1046/j.0014-2956.2001.02530.x.

Elevated lysosomal pH in neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs).

Holopainen JM(1), Saarikoski J, Kinnunen PK, Järvelä I.

Author information:
(1)Helsinki Biomembrane & Biophysics Group, Institute of Biomedicine, Biomedicum 
Helsinki, Finland. jmholopa@rock.helsinki.fi

We report here the intracellular (pHi) and lysosomal pH in fibroblasts of six 
forms of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs). Acid extrusion rate and pH(i) 
values were measured by the membrane-permeant acetoxymethyl ester of the 
indicator dye, 2',7'-bis(carboxyethyl)-5-(and-6)-carboxy-fluorescein (BCECF) and 
lysosomal pH by a spectrofluorometric assay utilizing a novel acidotropic probe, 
Lysosensor yellow/blue. Intracellular pH was normal in all NCLs. Elevated 
lysosomal pH was detected in all NCL forms except CLN2 and CLN8. Elevated pH 
most probably disturbs the catalytic activity of lysosomes and is one important 
factor in explaining accumulation of ceroid and lipofuscin-like autofluorescent 
lipopigments characteristic of NCLs. Using the novel spectrofluorometric assay 
introduced in this study provides a fast and repeatable technique to measure 
intralysosomal pH from cell suspensions.

DOI: 10.1046/j.0014-2956.2001.02530.x
PMID: 11722572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
