---
pmid: '7890749'
title: Substrate specificity of beta 1,4-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase in vitro
  and in cDNA-transfected cells. GM2/GD2 synthase efficiently generates asialo-GM2
  in certain cells.
authors:
- Yamashiro S
- Haraguchi M
- Furukawa K
- Takamiya K
- Yamamoto A
- Nagata Y
- Lloyd KO
- Shiku H
- Furukawa K
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.11.6149
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Substrate specificity of beta 1,4-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase in vitro and in cDNA-transfected cells. GM2/GD2 synthase efficiently generates asialo-GM2 in certain cells.
**Authors:** Yamashiro S, Haraguchi M, Furukawa K, Takamiya K, Yamamoto A, Nagata Y, Lloyd KO, Shiku H, Furukawa K
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.270.11.6149](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.270.11.6149)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1995 Mar 17;270(11):6149-55. doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.11.6149.

Substrate specificity of beta 1,4-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase in vitro and 
in cDNA-transfected cells. GM2/GD2 synthase efficiently generates asialo-GM2 in 
certain cells.

Yamashiro S(1), Haraguchi M, Furukawa K, Takamiya K, Yamamoto A, Nagata Y, Lloyd 
KO, Shiku H, Furukawa K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Nagasaki University School of Medicine, Japan.

The substrate specificity of beta 1,4-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase has been 
analyzed using a fusion enzyme which consisted of the catalytic domain of the 
enzyme and the IgG binding domain of protein A, and also by extracts from cDNA 
transfectants. Both enzyme sources were capable of producing not only GM2 and 
GD2, but also asialo-GM2, GalNAc-sialylparagloboside, and Gal-NAc-GD1a from 
appropriate acceptors, although the efficiencies were at most 1-3% of those of 
GM2/GD2. The biological significance of these low specificities was studied with 
transient and stable transfectant cells. From the results of transient 
expression of the cDNA, asialo-GM2 expression appeared to inversely correlate 
with GM2 synthase levels in those lines. Consequently, GM2 seemed to be 
preferentially synthesized when both GM3 and lactosylceramide are available, and 
asialo-GM2 is synthesized in the absence of GM3 synthesis. However, the results 
of double immunostaining of CHO transfectants with anti-GM2 and anti-asialo-GM2 
antibodies indicated that another factor may be involved in asialo-GM2 
synthesis. From the in vitro assay using mixed acceptors, it was concluded that 
the presence of certain levels of GM2 might enhance the asialo-GM2 synthesis. 
These results suggest that even acceptors showing low efficiencies in vitro 
might be used in certain cells depending on the availability of precursors, 
expression levels of other gangliosides, as well as the kinetic properties of 
the enzyme, and the compartmentation of the glycosylation machineries in the 
cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.270.11.6149
PMID: 7890749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
