---
pmid: '22342905'
title: PAN-1, a P-granule component important for C. elegans fertility, has dual roles
  in the germline and soma.
authors:
- Gao G
- Deeb F
- Mercurio JM
- Parfenova A
- Smith PA
- Bennett KL
journal: Dev Biol
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.02.006
---

# PAN-1, a P-granule component important for C. elegans fertility, has dual roles in the germline and soma.
**Authors:** Gao G, Deeb F, Mercurio JM, Parfenova A, Smith PA, Bennett KL
**Journal:** Dev Biol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.02.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.02.006)

## Abstract

1. Dev Biol. 2012 Apr 15;364(2):202-13. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.02.006. Epub
2012  Feb 10.

PAN-1, a P-granule component important for C. elegans fertility, has dual roles 
in the germline and soma.

Gao G(1), Deeb F, Mercurio JM, Parfenova A, Smith PA, Bennett KL.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Microbiology and Immunology Department, University of Missouri, 
Columbia, MO 65212, USA.

In Caenorhabditis elegans, P granules are germline-specific, RNA-containing 
granules that segregate into the germline precursor cell during early 
embryogenesis. In this short report, PAN-1, which previously has been found by 
others in screens for genes causing larval molting defects, is identified here 
as a novel P-granule component and a binding partner of GLH-1 (Germline RNA 
Helicase-1), a constitutive, germline-specific, P-granule protein. The PAN-1 
predicted protein contains multiple leucine-rich repeats (LRRs) and regions with 
similarities to F-box proteins. Antibodies raised against PAN-1 reveal it is 
present both in the soma and the germline. In the germline, PAN-1 uniquely 
localizes to P granules from the first larval stage onward and is unusual for a 
P-granule component in lacking recognizable RNA binding motifs. Homozygous 
pan-1(gk142) deletion worms arrest as larvae that are unable to molt and this 
phenotype is also seen with pan-1(RNAi) into wild type worms. pan-1(RNAi) into 
the somatic RNAi-defective strain rrf-1(pk1417) bypasses the larval arrest and 
allows an assessment of PAN-1 function in the germline. We find pan-1(RNAi) is 
variably effective in knocking down PAN-1 protein and results in adult progeny 
that display multiple germline defects. These phenocopies range from 
under-proliferation of the germline, as also seen with loss of GLH-1, to the 
induction of endomitotic replication in oocytes, both defects that result in 
sterility, to fertile animals with significantly reduced progeny numbers. Thus, 
while loss of PAN-1 in the soma inhibits molting, this report demonstrates that 
PAN-1 is also a P-granule component that is essential for fertility.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.02.006
PMID: 22342905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
