---
pmid: '19352026'
title: Analysis of the regulation of target genes by an Arabidopsis heat shock transcription
  factor, HsfA2.
authors:
- Nishizawa-Yokoi A
- Yoshida E
- Yabuta Y
- Shigeoka S
journal: Biosci Biotechnol Biochem
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1271/bbb.80809
---

# Analysis of the regulation of target genes by an Arabidopsis heat shock transcription factor, HsfA2.
**Authors:** Nishizawa-Yokoi A, Yoshida E, Yabuta Y, Shigeoka S
**Journal:** Biosci Biotechnol Biochem (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1271/bbb.80809](https://doi.org/10.1271/bbb.80809)

## Abstract

1. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2009 Apr 23;73(4):890-5. doi: 10.1271/bbb.80809.
Epub  2009 Apr 7.

Analysis of the regulation of target genes by an Arabidopsis heat shock 
transcription factor, HsfA2.

Nishizawa-Yokoi A(1), Yoshida E, Yabuta Y, Shigeoka S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Advanced Bioscience, Faculty of Agriculture, Kinki University, 
3327-204 Nakamachi, Nara 631-8505, Japan.

We have isolated a high-light and heat-shock inducible gene, Arabidopsis heat 
shock transcription factor (HsfA2), which induces expression of various types of 
target gene such as heat shock protein 18.2-CI (Hsp18.1-CI), galactinol synthase 
1 (GolS1), and Bcl-2-associated athanogene 6 (Bag6). Here we investigated the 
regulatory system of target genes operating via HsfA2. A transient reporter 
assay using a luciferase reporter construct with different fragments of the 
Hsp18.1-CI, the GolS1, or the Bag6 promoter showed that two modules of a 
TATA-proximal heat shock element (HSE) are essential for transcriptional 
activation by HsfA2. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay demonstrated that the 
increase in protein complex formation onto the HSE was markedly suppressed 
during high-light stress and recovery from the stress in knockout HsfA2 plants. 
HsfA2 appears to function not only in the triggering of response to 
environmental stress, but also in the amplification of the signal in the 
response.

DOI: 10.1271/bbb.80809
PMID: 19352026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
