---
pmid: '26283774'
title: Regulation of Nitrite Stress Response in Desulfovibrio vulgaris Hildenborough,
  a Model Sulfate-Reducing Bacterium.
authors:
- Rajeev L
- Chen A
- Kazakov AE
- Luning EG
- Zane GM
- Novichkov PS
- Wall JD
- Mukhopadhyay A
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4621071
doi: 10.1128/JB.00319-15
---

# Regulation of Nitrite Stress Response in Desulfovibrio vulgaris Hildenborough, a Model Sulfate-Reducing Bacterium.
**Authors:** Rajeev L, Chen A, Kazakov AE, Luning EG, Zane GM, Novichkov PS, Wall JD, Mukhopadhyay A
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JB.00319-15](https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.00319-15)
**PMC:** [PMC4621071](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4621071/)

## Abstract

1. J Bacteriol. 2015 Nov;197(21):3400-8. doi: 10.1128/JB.00319-15. Epub 2015 Aug 
17.

Regulation of Nitrite Stress Response in Desulfovibrio vulgaris Hildenborough, a 
Model Sulfate-Reducing Bacterium.

Rajeev L(1), Chen A(1), Kazakov AE(1), Luning EG(1), Zane GM(2), Novichkov 
PS(1), Wall JD(2), Mukhopadhyay A(3).

Author information:
(1)Physical Biosciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 
Berkeley, California, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, USA.
(3)Physical Biosciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 
Berkeley, California, USA amukhopadhyay@lbl.gov.

Sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB) are sensitive to low concentrations of nitrite, 
and nitrite has been used to control SRB-related biofouling in oil fields. 
Desulfovibrio vulgaris Hildenborough, a model SRB, carries a cytochrome c-type 
nitrite reductase (nrfHA) that confers resistance to low concentrations of 
nitrite. The regulation of this nitrite reductase has not been directly examined 
to date. In this study, we show that DVU0621 (NrfR), a sigma54-dependent 
two-component system response regulator, is the positive regulator for this 
operon. NrfR activates the expression of the nrfHA operon in response to nitrite 
stress. We also show that nrfR is needed for fitness at low cell densities in 
the presence of nitrite because inactivation of nrfR affects the rate of nitrite 
reduction. We also predict and validate the binding sites for NrfR upstream of 
the nrfHA operon using purified NrfR in gel shift assays. We discuss possible 
roles for NrfR in regulating nitrate reductase genes in nitrate-utilizing 
Desulfovibrio spp.
IMPORTANCE: The NrfA nitrite reductase is prevalent across several bacterial 
phyla and required for dissimilatory nitrite reduction. However, regulation of 
the nrfA gene has been studied in only a few nitrate-utilizing bacteria. Here, 
we show that in D. vulgaris, a bacterium that does not respire nitrate, the 
expression of nrfHA is induced by NrfR upon nitrite stress. This is the first 
report of regulation of nrfA by a sigma54-dependent two-component system. Our 
study increases our knowledge of nitrite stress responses and possibly of the 
regulation of nitrate reduction in SRB.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00319-15
PMCID: PMC4621071
PMID: 26283774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
