---
pmid: '11389905'
title: Functional redundancy of the zinc fingers of A20 for inhibition of NF-kappaB
  activation and protein-protein interactions.
authors:
- Klinkenberg M
- Van Huffel S
- Heyninck K
- Beyaert R
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(01)02504-2
---

# Functional redundancy of the zinc fingers of A20 for inhibition of NF-kappaB activation and protein-protein interactions.
**Authors:** Klinkenberg M, Van Huffel S, Heyninck K, Beyaert R
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0014-5793(01)02504-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0014-5793(01)02504-2)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2001 Jun 1;498(1):93-7. doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(01)02504-2.

Functional redundancy of the zinc fingers of A20 for inhibition of NF-kappaB 
activation and protein-protein interactions.

Klinkenberg M(1), Van Huffel S, Heyninck K, Beyaert R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Unit for Molecular Signal Transduction in 
Inflammation, University of Ghent, Flanders Interuniversity Institute for 
Biotechnology, K.L. Ledeganckstraat 35, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium.

The tumor necrosis factor (TNF) inducible protein A20 is a potent inhibitor of 
nuclear factor-kappaB (IkappaB)-mediated gene expression in response to TNF and 
several other stimuli. The C-terminal domain of A20 is characterized by seven 
zinc finger structures. Here, we show that a minimum of four zinc fingers is 
required to inhibit TNF-induced nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) activation to 
a level that is comparable to that obtained with the wild-type A20 protein. 
However, there was no strict requirement for a particular zinc finger structure, 
since a mutant A20 protein containing only the first four zinc fingers was as 
potent as a mutant protein containing only the last four zinc fingers. A similar 
functional redundancy of the A20 zinc fingers was also observed for binding of 
A20 to a number of other proteins, including two novel NF-kappaB inhibitory 
proteins (ABIN-1, ABIN-2), A20 itself, the anti-apoptotic protein TXBP151, and a 
regulatory component of the IkappaB kinase complex, IKKgamma. Moreover, we 
demonstrate that complete loss of binding of any of these proteins correlates 
with complete loss of A20's ability to inhibit TNF-induced NF-kappaB activation. 
However, binding of IKKgamma as such is not sufficient for inhibition of 
NF-kappaB dependent gene expression in response to TNF.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(01)02504-2
PMID: 11389905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
