---
pmid: '12421946'
title: Regulation of virus-induced IL-12 and IL-23 expression in human macrophages.
authors:
- Pirhonen J
- Matikainen S
- Julkunen I
journal: J Immunol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.169.10.5673
---

# Regulation of virus-induced IL-12 and IL-23 expression in human macrophages.
**Authors:** Pirhonen J, Matikainen S, Julkunen I
**Journal:** J Immunol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.4049/jimmunol.169.10.5673](https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.169.10.5673)

## Abstract

1. J Immunol. 2002 Nov 15;169(10):5673-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.169.10.5673.

Regulation of virus-induced IL-12 and IL-23 expression in human macrophages.

Pirhonen J(1), Matikainen S, Julkunen I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, National Public Health Institute, Mannerheimintie 
166, FIN-00300 Helsinki, Finland. jaana.pirhonen@ktl.fi

IL-23 is a novel cytokine that promotes the proliferation of naive and memory T 
cells and stimulates their IFN-gamma production. Besides functional 
similarities, IL-23 bears structural resemblance to IL-12. Biologically active 
IL-23 is a heterodimer whose p40 subunit is identical to IL-12p40 while its p19 
subunit is distantly related to IL-12p35. In the present study we demonstrate 
that human monocyte-derived macrophages are able to produce IL-23 in response to 
virus infection. Sendai virus stimulates the expression of p19 and p40 mRNAs in 
macrophages. Furthermore, it enhances p35 mRNA expression and the production of 
IL-12. Influenza A virus, in contrast, fails to stimulate IL-12 or IL-23 
expression in macrophages. IL-12 and IL-23 contribute to the IFN-gamma-inducing 
activity that cell culture supernatant from Sendai virus-infected macrophages 
show in NK-92 cells. The induction of IFN-gamma production occurs in concert 
with IFN-alphabeta and IL-18, which are also secreted from the virus-infected 
cells. The IFN-gamma-inducing activity is inhibited by IL-4, which 
down-regulates the transcription of p19 and p40 genes and the secretion of 
IFN-alphabeta, IL-12, and IL-18. IFN-gamma, in contrast, up-regulates the p19 
and p40 mRNA expression in Sendai virus infection. Thus, IL-4 and IFN-gamma 
serve as opposing factors in the regulation of IFN-gamma-inducing cytokines, 
including IL-23, in macrophages.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.169.10.5673
PMID: 12421946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
