---
pmid: '15619606'
title: Physical and genetic interactions link the yeast protein Zds1p with mRNA nuclear
  export.
authors:
- Estruch F
- Hodge CA
- Rodríguez-Navarro S
- Cole CN
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M413025200
---

# Physical and genetic interactions link the yeast protein Zds1p with mRNA nuclear export.
**Authors:** Estruch F, Hodge CA, Rodríguez-Navarro S, Cole CN
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M413025200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M413025200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Mar 11;280(10):9691-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M413025200. Epub
2004  Dec 24.

Physical and genetic interactions link the yeast protein Zds1p with mRNA nuclear 
export.

Estruch F(1), Hodge CA, Rodríguez-Navarro S, Cole CN.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Facultad de Biología, 
Universitat de Valencia, Dr. Moliner, 50. Burjassot 46100, Spain. 
francisco.estruch@uv.es

Eukaryotic gene expression requires the export of mRNA from the nucleus to the 
cytoplasm. The DEAD box protein Dbp5p is an essential export factor conserved 
from yeast to man. A fraction of Dbp5p forms a complex with nucleoporins of the 
cytoplasmic filaments of the nuclear pore complex. Gfd1p was identified 
originally as a multicopy suppressor of the rat8-2 ts allele of DBP5. Here we 
reported that Dbp5p and Gfd1p interact with Zds1p, a protein previously 
identified as a multicopy suppressor in several yeast genetic screens. By using 
the two-hybrid system, we showed that Zds1p interacts in vivo with both Gfd1p 
and Dbp5p. In vitro binding experiments revealed that Gfd1p and Dbp5p bind 
directly to the C-terminal part of Zds1p. In addition, ZDS1 interacted 
genetically with mutant alleles of genes encoding key factors in mRNA export, 
including DBP5 and MEX67. Furthermore, deletion of ZDS1 or of both ZDS1 and the 
closely related ZDS2 exacerbated the poly(A)+ export defects shown by dbp5-2 and 
mex67-5 mutants. We proposed that Zds1p associates with the complex formed by 
Dbp5p, Gfd1p, and nucleoporins at the cytosolic fibrils of the nuclear pore 
complex and is required for optimal mRNA export.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M413025200
PMID: 15619606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
