---
pmid: '12242434'
title: Nucleotide control of interdomain interactions in the conformational reaction
  cycle of SecA.
authors:
- Hunt JF
- Weinkauf S
- Henry L
- Fak JJ
- McNicholas P
- Oliver DB
- Deisenhofer J
journal: Science
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.1074424
---

# Nucleotide control of interdomain interactions in the conformational reaction cycle of SecA.
**Authors:** Hunt JF, Weinkauf S, Henry L, Fak JJ, McNicholas P, Oliver DB, Deisenhofer J
**Journal:** Science (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1074424](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1074424)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2002 Sep 20;297(5589):2018-26. doi: 10.1126/science.1074424.

Nucleotide control of interdomain interactions in the conformational reaction 
cycle of SecA.

Hunt JF(1), Weinkauf S, Henry L, Fak JJ, McNicholas P, Oliver DB, Deisenhofer J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, 702A Fairchild Center, MC2434, Columbia 
University, New York, NY 10027, USA. hunt@sid.bio.columbia.edu

The SecA adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) mediates extrusion of the amino 
termini of secreted proteins from the eubacterial cytosol based on cycles of 
reversible binding to the SecYEG translocon. We have determined the crystal 
structure of SecA with and without magnesium-adenosine diphosphate bound to the 
high-affinity ATPase site at 3.0 and 2.7 angstrom resolution, respectively. 
Candidate sites for preprotein binding are located on a surface containing the 
SecA epitopes exposed to the periplasm upon binding to SecYEG and are thus 
positioned to deliver preprotein to SecYEG. Comparisons with structurally 
related ATPases, including superfamily I and II ATP-dependent helicases, suggest 
that the interaction geometry of the tandem motor domains in SecA is modulated 
by nucleotide binding, which is shown by fluorescence anisotropy experiments to 
reverse an endothermic domain-dissociation reaction hypothesized to gate binding 
to SecYEG.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1074424
PMID: 12242434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
