---
pmid: '16968739'
title: IFTA-2 is a conserved cilia protein involved in pathways regulating longevity
  and dauer formation in Caenorhabditis elegans.
authors:
- Schafer JC
- Winkelbauer ME
- Williams CL
- Haycraft CJ
- Desmond RA
- Yoder BK
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.03187
---

# IFTA-2 is a conserved cilia protein involved in pathways regulating longevity and dauer formation in Caenorhabditis elegans.
**Authors:** Schafer JC, Winkelbauer ME, Williams CL, Haycraft CJ, Desmond RA, Yoder BK
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.03187](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.03187)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2006 Oct 1;119(Pt 19):4088-100. doi: 10.1242/jcs.03187. Epub 2006 
Sep 12.

IFTA-2 is a conserved cilia protein involved in pathways regulating longevity 
and dauer formation in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Schafer JC(1), Winkelbauer ME, Williams CL, Haycraft CJ, Desmond RA, Yoder BK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham Medical 
Center, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

Defects in cilia are associated with diseases and developmental abnormalities. 
Proper cilia function is required for sonic hedgehog and PDGFRalpha signaling in 
mammals and for insulin-like growth factor (IGF) signaling in Caenorhabditis 
elegans. However, the role of cilia in these pathways remains unknown. To begin 
addressing this issue, we are characterizing putative cilia proteins in C. 
elegans that are predicted to have regulatory rather than structural functions. 
In this report, we characterized the novel cilia protein T28F3.6 (IFTA-2, 
intraflagellar transport associated protein 2), which is homologous to the 
mammalian Rab-like 5 protein. We found that, unlike the intraflagellar transport 
(IFT) genes, disruption of ifta-2 does not result in overt cilia assembly 
abnormalities, nor did it cause chemotaxis or osmotic avoidance defects typical 
of cilia mutants. Rather, ifta-2 null mutants have an extended lifespan 
phenotype and are defective in dauer formation. Our analysis indicates that 
these phenotypes result from defects in the DAF-2 (insulin-IGF-1-like) receptor 
signaling pathway in ciliated sensory neurons. We conclude that IFTA-2 is not a 
ciliogenic protein but rather is a regulator of specific cilia signaling 
activities. Interestingly, a mammalian IFTA-2 homolog is also found in cilia, 
raising the possibility that its function has been conserved during evolution.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.03187
PMID: 16968739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
