---
pmid: '27353360'
title: The FNIP co-chaperones decelerate the Hsp90 chaperone cycle and enhance drug
  binding.
authors:
- Woodford MR
- Dunn DM
- Blanden AR
- Capriotti D
- Loiselle D
- Prodromou C
- Panaretou B
- Hughes PF
- Smith A
- Ackerman W
- Haystead TA
- Loh SN
- Bourboulia D
- Schmidt LS
- Marston Linehan W
- Bratslavsky G
- Mollapour M
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4931344
doi: 10.1038/ncomms12037
---

# The FNIP co-chaperones decelerate the Hsp90 chaperone cycle and enhance drug binding.
**Authors:** Woodford MR, Dunn DM, Blanden AR, Capriotti D, Loiselle D, Prodromou C, Panaretou B, Hughes PF, Smith A, Ackerman W, Haystead TA, Loh SN, Bourboulia D, Schmidt LS, Marston Linehan W, Bratslavsky G, Mollapour M
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncomms12037](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms12037)
**PMC:** [PMC4931344](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4931344/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Commun. 2016 Jun 29;7:12037. doi: 10.1038/ncomms12037.

The FNIP co-chaperones decelerate the Hsp90 chaperone cycle and enhance drug 
binding.

Woodford MR(1)(2), Dunn DM(1)(2)(3), Blanden AR(2)(3), Capriotti D(1)(2), 
Loiselle D(4), Prodromou C(5), Panaretou B(6), Hughes PF(4), Smith A(4), 
Ackerman W(7), Haystead TA(4), Loh SN(2)(3), Bourboulia D(1)(2)(3), Schmidt 
LS(8)(9), Marston Linehan W(9), Bratslavsky G(1)(2), Mollapour M(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, SUNY Upstate Medical University, 750 East Adams 
Street, Syracuse, New York 13210, USA.
(2)Cancer Research Institute, SUNY Upstate Medical University, 750 East Adams 
Street, Syracuse, New York 13210, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, SUNY Upstate Medical 
University, 750 East Adams Street, Syracuse, New York 13210, USA.
(4)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University Medical 
Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.
(5)Genome Damage and Stability Centre, University of Sussex, Brighton BN1 9RQ, 
UK.
(6)Institute of Pharmaceutical Science, King's College London, London SE1 9NH, 
UK.
(7)Health Sciences Library, SUNY Upstate Medical University, 750 East Adams 
Street, Syracuse, New York 13210, USA.
(8)Basic Science Program, Leidos Biomedical Research, Inc., Frederick National 
Laboratory for Cancer Research, Frederick, Maryland 21702, USA.
(9)Urologic Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer 
Institute, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Heat shock protein-90 (Hsp90) is an essential molecular chaperone in eukaryotes 
involved in maintaining the stability and activity of numerous signalling 
proteins, also known as clients. Hsp90 ATPase activity is essential for its 
chaperone function and it is regulated by co-chaperones. Here we show that the 
tumour suppressor FLCN is an Hsp90 client protein and its binding partners 
FNIP1/FNIP2 function as co-chaperones. FNIPs decelerate the chaperone cycle, 
facilitating FLCN interaction with Hsp90, consequently ensuring FLCN stability. 
FNIPs compete with the activating co-chaperone Aha1 for binding to Hsp90, 
thereby providing a reciprocal regulatory mechanism for chaperoning of client 
proteins. Lastly, downregulation of FNIPs desensitizes cancer cells to Hsp90 
inhibitors, whereas FNIPs overexpression in renal tumours compared with adjacent 
normal tissues correlates with enhanced binding of Hsp90 to its inhibitors. Our 
findings suggest that FNIPs expression can potentially serve as a predictive 
indicator of tumour response to Hsp90 inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms12037
PMCID: PMC4931344
PMID: 27353360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
