---
pmid: '15013782'
title: Candida albicans Cdc37 interacts with the Crk1 kinase and is required for Crk1
  production.
authors:
- Ni J
- Gao Y
- Liu H
- Chen J
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/S0014-5793(04)00172-3
---

# Candida albicans Cdc37 interacts with the Crk1 kinase and is required for Crk1 production.
**Authors:** Ni J, Gao Y, Liu H, Chen J
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0014-5793(04)00172-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0014-5793(04)00172-3)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2004 Mar 12;561(1-3):223-30. doi: 10.1016/S0014-5793(04)00172-3.

Candida albicans Cdc37 interacts with the Crk1 kinase and is required for Crk1 
production.

Ni J(1), Gao Y, Liu H, Chen J.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, 320 Yue-yang Road, Shanghai 200031, PR China.

Crk1, a Cdc2-related protein kinase from the human pathogenic fungus Candida 
albicans, plays an important role in hyphal development and virulence. To 
address its regulatory mechanisms, we searched for Crk1 interacting proteins by 
two-hybrid screening. A CDC37 ortholog (CaCDC37) was cloned from the screening 
with the Crk1 kinase domain as the bait. The CaCdc37 interacted preferentially 
with the kinase domain of Crk1 (Crk1N) as shown by two-hybrid and 
immunoprecipitation experiments. CaCDC37 could complement a cdc37 
thermosensitive mutant (cdc37-34) of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Importantly, Crk1 
protein was hardly detectable in the cdc37-34 mutant at restrictive temperature. 
However, upon expression of CaCdc37 in the cdc37 mutant, Crk1 protein was 
detected even at restrictive temperature. Our data suggested that CaCdc37 was 
required for the production of Crk1 kinase. Like Cdc37 proteins of S. cerevisiae 
and higher eukaryotes, CaCdc37 might function as a molecular chaperone that 
stabilized Crk1 and other protein kinases in C. albicans. In support of this, 
CaSTI1 was identified from a two-hybrid screen with the full-length Crk1 as the 
bait. CaSti1 showed two-hybrid interactions with both Crk1 and the CaCdc37.

DOI: 10.1016/S0014-5793(04)00172-3
PMID: 15013782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
