---
pmid: '19298085'
title: Interrogating the molecular details of the peroxiredoxin activity of the Escherichia
  coli bacterioferritin comigratory protein using high-resolution mass spectrometry.
authors:
- Clarke DJ
- Mackay CL
- Campopiano DJ
- Langridge-Smith P
- Brown AR
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi900189e
---

# Interrogating the molecular details of the peroxiredoxin activity of the Escherichia coli bacterioferritin comigratory protein using high-resolution mass spectrometry.
**Authors:** Clarke DJ, Mackay CL, Campopiano DJ, Langridge-Smith P, Brown AR
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi900189e](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi900189e)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2009 May 12;48(18):3904-14. doi: 10.1021/bi900189e.

Interrogating the molecular details of the peroxiredoxin activity of the 
Escherichia coli bacterioferritin comigratory protein using high-resolution mass 
spectrometry.

Clarke DJ(1), Mackay CL, Campopiano DJ, Langridge-Smith P, Brown AR.

Author information:
(1)School of Chemistry, University of Edinburgh, West Mains Road, Edinburgh EH9 
3JJ, UK. dave.clarke@ed.ac.uk

Bacterioferritin comigratory protein (BCP) is a bacterial thioredoxin-dependent 
thiol peroxidase that reduces a variety of peroxide substrates. Using 
high-resolution Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry 
coupled with top-down fragmentation techniques, we have analyzed the mechanistic 
details of hydrogen peroxide reduction by E. coli BCP. We show here that 
catalysis occurs via an atypical two-cysteine peroxiredoxin pathway. A transient 
sulfenic acid is initially formed on Cys-45, before resolution by the formation 
of an intramolecular disulfide bond between Cys-45 and Cys-50. This oxidized BCP 
intermediate is shown to be a substrate for reduction by thioredoxin, completing 
the catalytic cycle. Although we invoke Cys-50 in the catalytic cycle of 
Escherichia coli bacterioferritin comigratory protein (BCP), a previous study 
had shown that this residue was not absolutely required for peroxiredoxin 
activity. In order to explain these apparently conflicting phenomena, we 
analyzed the reaction of a C50S BCP mutant with peroxide. We show that this 
mutant BCP enzyme adopts a different and novel mechanistic pathway. The C50S BCP 
mutant reacts with peroxide to form a sulfenic acid on Cys-45, in the same 
manner as wild-type BCP. However, the nascent intermediate is then resolved by 
reaction with Cys-45 from a second BCP molecule, resulting in a dimeric 
intermediate containing an intermolecular disulfide bond. We further show that 
this novel resolving complex is a substrate for reduction by thioredoxin. The 
importance of our results in furthering the understanding of catalysis within 
BCP family is discussed.

DOI: 10.1021/bi900189e
PMID: 19298085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
