---
pmid: '16632486'
title: Association of PINK1 and DJ-1 confers digenic inheritance of early-onset Parkinson's
  disease.
authors:
- Tang B
- Xiong H
- Sun P
- Zhang Y
- Wang D
- Hu Z
- Zhu Z
- Ma H
- Pan Q
- Xia JH
- Xia K
- Zhang Z
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddl104
---

# Association of PINK1 and DJ-1 confers digenic inheritance of early-onset Parkinson's disease.
**Authors:** Tang B, Xiong H, Sun P, Zhang Y, Wang D, Hu Z, Zhu Z, Ma H, Pan Q, Xia JH, Xia K, Zhang Z
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddl104](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddl104)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2006 Jun 1;15(11):1816-25. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddl104. Epub 2006
Apr  21.

Association of PINK1 and DJ-1 confers digenic inheritance of early-onset 
Parkinson's disease.

Tang B(1), Xiong H, Sun P, Zhang Y, Wang D, Hu Z, Zhu Z, Ma H, Pan Q, Xia JH, 
Xia K, Zhang Z.

Author information:
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, Hunan 410078, China.

Mutations in genes encoding both DJ-1 and pten-induced kinase 1 (PINK1) are 
independently linked to autosomal recessive early-onset familial forms of 
Parkinson's disease (PD). We here report identification of a family with PD 
patients harboring novel heterozygous missense mutations in both PINK1 and DJ-1 
genes encoding DJ-1A39S and PINK1P399L, respectively. In transfected cells, DJ-1 
interacts with PINK1. PINK1P399L is less stable than the wild-type protein and 
is degraded via the ubiquitin-mediated proteasomal pathway. Expression of 
wild-type DJ-1 increased steady-state levels of PINK1, whereas expression of 
DJ-1A39S reduced steady-state levels of PINK1. Furthermore, co-expression of 
wild-type DJ-1 and PINK1 suppresses neurotoxin 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium 
(MPP(+))-induced death of dopaminergic SH-SY5Y cells. In contrast, co-expression 
of PD-associated DJ-1A39S and PINK1P399L significantly potentiated 
susceptibility of SH-SY5Y cells to MPP(+)-induced cell death. This study reports 
the first case of autosomal recessive PD with digenic inheritance and 
demonstrates that DJ-1 and PINK1 physically associate and collaborate to protect 
cells against stress via complex formation.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddl104
PMID: 16632486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
