---
pmid: '22303461'
title: 'LRRK2 phosphorylates tubulin-associated tau but not the free molecule: LRRK2-mediated
  regulation of the tau-tubulin association and neurite outgrowth.'
authors:
- Kawakami F
- Yabata T
- Ohta E
- Maekawa T
- Shimada N
- Suzuki M
- Maruyama H
- Ichikawa T
- Obata F
journal: PLoS One
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3267742
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030834
---

# LRRK2 phosphorylates tubulin-associated tau but not the free molecule: LRRK2-mediated regulation of the tau-tubulin association and neurite outgrowth.
**Authors:** Kawakami F, Yabata T, Ohta E, Maekawa T, Shimada N, Suzuki M, Maruyama H, Ichikawa T, Obata F
**Journal:** PLoS One (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0030834](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0030834)
**PMC:** [PMC3267742](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3267742/)

## Abstract

1. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e30834. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030834. Epub 2012 Jan
27.

LRRK2 phosphorylates tubulin-associated tau but not the free molecule: 
LRRK2-mediated regulation of the tau-tubulin association and neurite outgrowth.

Kawakami F(1), Yabata T, Ohta E, Maekawa T, Shimada N, Suzuki M, Maruyama H, 
Ichikawa T, Obata F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kitasato 
University, Sagamihara, Japan. kawakami@kitasato-u.ac.jp

Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2), a large protein kinase containing 
multi-functional domains, has been identified as the causal molecule for 
autosomal-dominant Parkinson's disease (PD). In the present study, we 
demonstrated for the first time that (i) LRRK2 interacts with tau in a 
tubulin-dependent manner; (ii) LRRK2 directly phosphorylates tubulin-associated 
tau, but not free tau; (iii) LRRK2 phosphorylates tau at Thr181 as one of the 
target sites; and (iv) The PD-associated LRRK2 mutations, G2019S and I2020T, 
elevated the degree of tau-phosphorylation. These results provide direct proof 
that tau is a physiological substrate for LRRK2. Furthermore, we revealed that 
LRRK2-mediated phosphorylation of tau reduces its tubulin-binding ability. Our 
results suggest that LRRK2 plays an important role as a physiological regulator 
for phosphorylation-mediated dissociation of tau from microtubules, which is an 
integral aspect of microtubule dynamics essential for neurite outgrowth and 
axonal transport.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030834
PMCID: PMC3267742
PMID: 22303461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.
