---
pmid: '17082457'
title: Protrudin induces neurite formation by directional membrane trafficking.
authors:
- Shirane M
- Nakayama KI
journal: Science
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.1134027
---

# Protrudin induces neurite formation by directional membrane trafficking.
**Authors:** Shirane M, Nakayama KI
**Journal:** Science (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1134027](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1134027)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2006 Nov 3;314(5800):818-21. doi: 10.1126/science.1134027.

Protrudin induces neurite formation by directional membrane trafficking.

Shirane M(1), Nakayama KI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Medical Institute of 
Bioregulation, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, Fukuoka 
812-8582, Japan.

Guanosine triphosphatases of the Rab family are key regulators of membrane 
trafficking, with Rab11 playing a specific role in membrane recycling. We 
identified a mammalian protein, protrudin, that promoted neurite formation 
through interaction with the guanosine diphosphate (GDP)-bound form of Rab11. 
Phosphorylation of protrudin by extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) in 
response to nerve growth factor promoted protrudin association with Rab11-GDP. 
Down-regulation of protrudin by RNA interference induced membrane extension in 
all directions and inhibited neurite formation. Thus, protrudin regulates 
Rab11-dependent membrane recycling to promote the directional membrane 
trafficking required for neurite formation.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1134027
PMID: 17082457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
