---
pmid: '19805038'
title: The transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 control alternative pathways of
  T-cell differentiation through a shared set of target genes.
authors:
- Jenner RG
- Townsend MJ
- Jackson I
- Sun K
- Bouwman RD
- Young RA
- Glimcher LH
- Lord GM
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2764903
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0909357106
---

# The transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 control alternative pathways of T-cell differentiation through a shared set of target genes.
**Authors:** Jenner RG, Townsend MJ, Jackson I, Sun K, Bouwman RD, Young RA, Glimcher LH, Lord GM
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0909357106](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0909357106)
**PMC:** [PMC2764903](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2764903/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Oct 20;106(42):17876-81. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0909357106. Epub 2009 Oct 5.

The transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 control alternative pathways of 
T-cell differentiation through a shared set of target genes.

Jenner RG(1), Townsend MJ, Jackson I, Sun K, Bouwman RD, Young RA, Glimcher LH, 
Lord GM.

Author information:
(1)MRC/UCL Centre for Medical Molecular Virology, Division of Infection and 
Immunity, University College London, London W1T 4JF, United Kingdom. 
r.jenner@ucl.ac.uk

Upon detection of antigen, CD4(+) T helper (Th) cells can differentiate into a 
number of effector types that tailor the immune response to different pathogens. 
Alternative Th1 and Th2 cell fates are specified by the transcription factors 
T-bet and GATA-3, respectively. Only a handful of target genes are known for 
these two factors and because of this, the mechanism through which T-bet and 
GATA-3 induce differentiation toward alternative cell fates is not fully 
understood. Here, we provide a genomic map of T-bet and GATA-3 binding in 
primary human T cells and identify their target genes, most of which are 
previously unknown. In Th1 cells, T-bet associates with genes of diverse 
function, including those with roles in transcriptional regulation, chemotaxis 
and adhesion. GATA-3 occupies genes in both Th1 and Th2 cells and, unexpectedly, 
shares a large proportion of targets with T-bet. Re-complementation of T-bet 
alters the expression of these genes in a manner that mirrors their differential 
expression between Th1 and Th2 lineages. These data show that the choice between 
Th1 and Th2 lineage commitment is the result of the opposing action of T-bet and 
GATA-3 at a shared set of target genes and may provide a general paradigm for 
the interaction of lineage-specifying transcription factors.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0909357106
PMCID: PMC2764903
PMID: 19805038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: L.H.G. is a 
member of the Board of Directors of and holds equity in the Bristol Myers Squibb 
Corporation.

## Full Text

Abstract

Upon detection of antigen, CD4 + T helper (Th) cells can differentiate into a number of effector types that tailor the immune response to different pathogens. Alternative Th1 and Th2 cell fates are specified by the transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3, respectively. Only a handful of target genes are known for these two factors and because of this, the mechanism through which T-bet and GATA-3 induce differentiation toward alternative cell fates is not fully understood. Here, we provide a genomic map of T-bet and GATA-3 binding in primary human T cells and identify their target genes, most of which are previously unknown. In Th1 cells, T-bet associates with genes of diverse function, including those with roles in transcriptional regulation, chemotaxis and adhesion. GATA-3 occupies genes in both Th1 and Th2 cells and, unexpectedly, shares a large proportion of targets with T-bet. Re-complementation of T-bet alters the expression of these genes in a manner that mirrors their differential expression between Th1 and Th2 lineages. These data show that the choice between Th1 and Th2 lineage commitment is the result of the opposing action of T-bet and GATA-3 at a shared set of target genes and may provide a general paradigm for the interaction of lineage-specifying transcription factors.

Discussion

We have identified the target genes of T-bet and GATA-3 in primary human Th1 and Th2 cells, greatly increasing our understanding of how these two factors govern Th1 and Th2 differentiation. T-bet and GATA-3 occupy many of the same genes, including those that are differentially expressed between Th1 and Th2 cells and play key roles in T-cell biology. This indicates that the choice between Th1 and Th2 lineage commitment is perhaps best viewed as the result of the opposing action of these two transcription factors at a set of shared target genes. These data demonstrate a role for T-bet and GATA-3 in T-cell differentiation that extends beyond the regulation of IFNG and IL4 .

Consistent with previous results, we have shown that GATA-3 is present in both human Th2 and Th1 cells ( 31 – 33 ). We have also shown that almost all Th1 cells that express GATA-3 also express T-bet. The co-expression of T-bet and GATA-3 is analogous to recent data showing that FoxP3 and RORγt are co-expressed in murine T cells ( 41 ) and that T-bet and FoxP3 function together in a subset of regulatory T cells ( 42 ) and this suggests that this co-expression is functionally significant. We find that not only are T-bet and GATA-3 expressed in the same cells, they occupy highly overlapping sets of genes, including those that show differential expression between Th1 and Th2 cells. We have not been able to use ChIP-ReChIP to test whether T-bet and GATA-3 bind to genes simultaneously in Th1 cells due to failure of our positive control ReChIP RNA polymerase II experiments. However, the co-expression of T-bet and GATA-3 in primary human Th1 cells provides each factor with the potential to act upon their shared target genes in these cells. T-bet directly activates IFNG and represses IL4 ( Fig. 5 E ) ( 23 , 27 ) whereas GATA3 acts in the opposite manner to activate IL4 and represses IFNG ( 22 , 28 ). Although both factors are coexpressed in human Th1 cells, T-bet activity would appear to be dominant and these cells exhibit an expression pattern that can be recapitulated in murine T-cells by expression of T-bet in the absence of IFNγ. These results indicate that it may be the absence or presence of T-bet that determines T-cell lineage ( 16 , 43 ) and provides a potential mechanistic rationale that explains why T cells default to the Th2 lineage in the absence of T-bet ( 3 – 5 ). The extension of these findings to vivo polarized human Th1 and Th2 cells is currently under active investigation, but has been limited by the cell numbers required for this type of analysis.

Human T-cell immune responses define pathological outcomes in a wide number of disease states. Identification of novel T-bet and GATA-3 target genes offers the prospect of defining rational therapeutic approaches in these conditions. Indeed, the identification of TNF-α as a direct T-bet target in T cells lead us to the definition of the transcriptional mechanism of a new model of ulcerative colitis ( 34 ), providing evidence of the utility of this approach. Other gene targets of T-bet and GATA-3 that we have identified here are also likely to play important roles in infectious disease and autoimmune conditions.

In conclusion, we have shown that Th1 and Th2 lineage-specific genes that play key roles in T-cell biology are targeted by both T-bet and GATA-3. The action of opposing master regulators through a shared set of target genes may prove to be a general mechanism in other cell types and biological systems.
