---
pmid: '9003423'
title: Glucose induces the translocation of glycogen synthase to the cell cortex in
  rat hepatocytes.
authors:
- Fernández-Novell JM
- Bellido D
- Vilaró S
- Guinovart JJ
journal: Biochem J
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1218058
doi: 10.1042/bj3210227
---

# Glucose induces the translocation of glycogen synthase to the cell cortex in rat hepatocytes.
**Authors:** Fernández-Novell JM, Bellido D, Vilaró S, Guinovart JJ
**Journal:** Biochem J (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1042/bj3210227](https://doi.org/10.1042/bj3210227)
**PMC:** [PMC1218058](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1218058/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 1997 Jan 1;321 ( Pt 1)(Pt 1):227-31. doi: 10.1042/bj3210227.

Glucose induces the translocation of glycogen synthase to the cell cortex in rat 
hepatocytes.

Fernández-Novell JM(1), Bellido D, Vilaró S, Guinovart JJ.

Author information:
(1)Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular, Universitat de Barcelona, 
Spain.

After incubation with glucose a dramatic change in the intracellular 
distribution of glycogen synthase was observed in rat hepatocytes. Confocal 
laser scanning microscopy showed that glycogen synthase existed diffusely in the 
cytosol of control cells, whereas in cells incubated with glucose it accumulated 
at the cell periphery. Colocalization analysis between glycogen synthase 
immunostaining and actin filaments showed that the change in glycogen synthase 
distribution induced by glucose correlated with a marked increase in the 
co-distribution of the two proteins, indicating that, in response to glucose, 
glycogen synthase moves to the actin-rich area close to the membrane. When 
glycogen synthase was immunostained with rabbit anti-(glycogen synthase) and 
Protein A-colloidal gold, few particles were observed close to the membrane in 
control cells. In contrast, in cells incubated with glucose most of the gold 
particles were found near the membrane, confirming that glycogen synthase had 
moved to the cell cortex. Furthermore, in agreement with the glycogen synthase 
distribution, glycogen deposition appeared to be more active at the periphery of 
the cell.

DOI: 10.1042/bj3210227
PMCID: PMC1218058
PMID: 9003423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
