---
pmid: '9685725'
title: Genomic structure of the spermatid-specific hsp70 homolog gene located in the
  class III region of the major histocompatibility complex of mouse and man.
authors:
- Ito Y
- Ando A
- Ando H
- Ando J
- Saijoh Y
- Inoko H
- Fujimoto H
journal: J Biochem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.jbchem.a022118
---

# Genomic structure of the spermatid-specific hsp70 homolog gene located in the class III region of the major histocompatibility complex of mouse and man.
**Authors:** Ito Y, Ando A, Ando H, Ando J, Saijoh Y, Inoko H, Fujimoto H
**Journal:** J Biochem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1093/oxfordjournals.jbchem.a022118](https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.jbchem.a022118)

## Abstract

1. J Biochem. 1998 Aug;124(2):347-53. doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.jbchem.a022118.

Genomic structure of the spermatid-specific hsp70 homolog gene located in the 
class III region of the major histocompatibility complex of mouse and man.

Ito Y(1), Ando A, Ando H, Ando J, Saijoh Y, Inoko H, Fujimoto H.

Author information:
(1)Mitsubishi Kasei Institute of Life Sciences, Machida, Tokyo, 194-8511, Japan.

The Hsc70t gene is a Hsp70 homolog gene expressed constitutively in spermatids 
in mice. This gene is linked to two heat-inducible Hsp70 genes, Hsp70.1 and 
Hsp70.3, located in the MHC class III region. The syntenic region of human 
chromosome 6 contains the HSPA1B, HSPA1A, and HSPA1L genes. Here, we have 
isolated a HSPA1L cDNA clone from human testicular cells. The HSPA1L gene 
contained an intron 13 bp upstream of the initiating ATG. A similar genomic 
structure was found in the Hsc70t gene. The transcription initiation site of the 
Hsc70t gene was located at ca. 600 bp upstream of the heat-inducible Hsp70.3 
gene, linked head-to-head. Sequence alignment of the mouse and human genes 
revealed that the human HSPA1L and HSPA1A genes were orthologous to the mouse 
Hsc70t and Hsp70.3 genes, respectively. Conserved sequence stretches observed in 
the 5' flanking region and the first exon of the spermatid-specific Hsp70 gene 
may be involved in regulation of the specific gene expression.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.jbchem.a022118
PMID: 9685725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
