---
pmid: '17510399'
title: Angiostatin-like activity of a monoclonal antibody to the catalytic subunit
  of F1F0 ATP synthase.
authors:
- Chi SL
- Wahl ML
- Mowery YM
- Shan S
- Mukhopadhyay S
- Hilderbrand SC
- Kenan DJ
- Lipes BD
- Johnson CE
- Marusich MF
- Capaldi RA
- Dewhirst MW
- Pizzo SV
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-1094
---

# Angiostatin-like activity of a monoclonal antibody to the catalytic subunit of F1F0 ATP synthase.
**Authors:** Chi SL, Wahl ML, Mowery YM, Shan S, Mukhopadhyay S, Hilderbrand SC, Kenan DJ, Lipes BD, Johnson CE, Marusich MF, Capaldi RA, Dewhirst MW, Pizzo SV
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-1094](https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-1094)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Res. 2007 May 15;67(10):4716-24. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-1094.

Angiostatin-like activity of a monoclonal antibody to the catalytic subunit of 
F1F0 ATP synthase.

Chi SL(1), Wahl ML, Mowery YM, Shan S, Mukhopadhyay S, Hilderbrand SC, Kenan DJ, 
Lipes BD, Johnson CE, Marusich MF, Capaldi RA, Dewhirst MW, Pizzo SV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, 
USA.

The antiangiogenic protein angiostatin inhibits ATP synthase on the endothelial 
cell surface, blocking cellular proliferation. To examine the specificity of 
this interaction, we generated monoclonal antibodies (mAb) directed against ATP 
synthase. mAb directed against the beta-catalytic subunit of ATP synthase 
(MAb3D5AB1) inhibits the activity of the F(1) domain of ATP synthase and 
recognizes the catalytic beta-subunit of ATP synthase. We located the antibody 
recognition site of MAb3D5AB1 in domains containing the active site of the 
beta-subunit. MAb3D5AB1 also binds to purified Escherichia coli F(1) with an 
affinity 25-fold higher than the affinity of angiostatin for this protein. 
MAb3D5AB1 inhibits the hydrolytic activity of F(1) ATP synthase at lower 
concentrations than angiostatin. Like angiostatin, MAb3D5AB1 inhibits ATP 
generation by ATP synthase on the endothelial cell surface in acidic conditions, 
the typical tumor microenvironment where cell surface ATP synthase exhibits 
greater activity. MAb3D5AB1 disrupts tube formation and decreases intracellular 
pH in endothelial cells exposed to low extracellular pH. Neither angiostatin nor 
MAb3D5AB1 showed an antiangiogenic effect in the corneal neovascularization 
assay; however, both were effective in the low-pH environment of the chicken 
chorioallantoic membrane assay. Thus, MAb3D5AB1 shows angiostatin-like 
properties superior to angiostatin and may be exploited in cancer chemotherapy.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-1094
PMID: 17510399 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
