---
pmid: '21527675'
title: Human cytomegalovirus directly induces the antiviral protein viperin to enhance
  infectivity.
authors:
- Seo JY
- Yaneva R
- Hinson ER
- Cresswell P
journal: Science
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.1202007
---

# Human cytomegalovirus directly induces the antiviral protein viperin to enhance infectivity.
**Authors:** Seo JY, Yaneva R, Hinson ER, Cresswell P
**Journal:** Science (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1202007](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1202007)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2011 May 27;332(6033):1093-7. doi: 10.1126/science.1202007. Epub 2011
 Apr 28.

Human cytomegalovirus directly induces the antiviral protein viperin to enhance 
infectivity.

Seo JY(1), Yaneva R, Hinson ER, Cresswell P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale University 
School of Medicine, 300 Cedar Street, New Haven, CT 06520-8011, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Microbiol. 2011 Jun;9(6):400. doi: 10.1038/nrmicro2585.
    Dev Cell. 2011 Jun 14;20(6):737-8. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2011.05.016.

Viperin is an interferon-inducible protein that is directly induced in cells by 
human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection. Why HCMV would induce viperin, which has 
antiviral activity, is unknown. We show that HCMV-induced viperin disrupts 
cellular metabolism to enhance the infectious process. Viperin interaction with 
the viral protein vMIA resulted in viperin relocalization from the endoplasmic 
reticulum to the mitochondria. There, viperin interacted with the mitochondrial 
trifunctional protein that mediates β-oxidation of fatty acids to generate 
adenosine triphosphate (ATP). This interaction with viperin, but not with a 
mutant lacking the viperin iron-sulfur cluster-binding motif, reduced cellular 
ATP generation, which resulted in actin cytoskeleton disruption and enhancement 
of infection. This function of viperin, which was previously attributed to vMIA, 
suggests that HCMV has coopted viperin to facilitate the infectious process.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1202007
PMID: 21527675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
