---
pmid: '16429154'
title: Allosteric signaling of ATP hydrolysis in GroEL-GroES complexes.
authors:
- Ranson NA
- Clare DK
- Farr GW
- Houldershaw D
- Horwich AL
- Saibil HR
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2871290
doi: 10.1038/nsmb1046
---

# Allosteric signaling of ATP hydrolysis in GroEL-GroES complexes.
**Authors:** Ranson NA, Clare DK, Farr GW, Houldershaw D, Horwich AL, Saibil HR
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nsmb1046](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb1046)
**PMC:** [PMC2871290](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2871290/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2006 Feb;13(2):147-52. doi: 10.1038/nsmb1046. Epub 2006
Jan  22.

Allosteric signaling of ATP hydrolysis in GroEL-GroES complexes.

Ranson NA(1), Clare DK, Farr GW, Houldershaw D, Horwich AL, Saibil HR.

Author information:
(1)Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology and Institute of Molecular & 
Cellular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK.

The double-ring chaperonin GroEL and its lid-like cochaperonin GroES form 
asymmetric complexes that, in the ATP-bound state, mediate productive folding in 
a hydrophilic, GroES-encapsulated chamber, the so-called cis cavity. Upon ATP 
hydrolysis within the cis ring, the asymmetric complex becomes able to accept 
non-native polypeptides and ATP in the open, trans ring. Here we have examined 
the structural basis for this allosteric switch in activity by cryo-EM and 
single-particle image processing. ATP hydrolysis does not change the 
conformation of the cis ring, but its effects are transmitted through an 
inter-ring contact and cause domain rotations in the mobile trans ring. These 
rigid-body movements in the trans ring lead to disruption of its intra-ring 
contacts, expansion of the entire ring and opening of both the nucleotide pocket 
and the substrate-binding domains, admitting ATP and new substrate protein.

DOI: 10.1038/nsmb1046
PMCID: PMC2871290
PMID: 16429154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
