---
pmid: '18022362'
title: IAP antagonists induce autoubiquitination of c-IAPs, NF-kappaB activation,
  and TNFalpha-dependent apoptosis.
authors:
- Varfolomeev E
- Blankenship JW
- Wayson SM
- Fedorova AV
- Kayagaki N
- Garg P
- Zobel K
- Dynek JN
- Elliott LO
- Wallweber HJ
- Flygare JA
- Fairbrother WJ
- Deshayes K
- Dixit VM
- Vucic D
journal: Cell
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.10.030
---

# IAP antagonists induce autoubiquitination of c-IAPs, NF-kappaB activation, and TNFalpha-dependent apoptosis.
**Authors:** Varfolomeev E, Blankenship JW, Wayson SM, Fedorova AV, Kayagaki N, Garg P, Zobel K, Dynek JN, Elliott LO, Wallweber HJ, Flygare JA, Fairbrother WJ, Deshayes K, Dixit VM, Vucic D
**Journal:** Cell (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2007.10.030](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2007.10.030)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2007 Nov 16;131(4):669-81. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.10.030.

IAP antagonists induce autoubiquitination of c-IAPs, NF-kappaB activation, and 
TNFalpha-dependent apoptosis.

Varfolomeev E(1), Blankenship JW, Wayson SM, Fedorova AV, Kayagaki N, Garg P, 
Zobel K, Dynek JN, Elliott LO, Wallweber HJ, Flygare JA, Fairbrother WJ, 
Deshayes K, Dixit VM, Vucic D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Protein Engineering, Genentech, Inc., South San Francisco, CA 
94080, USA.

Inhibitor of apoptosis (IAP) proteins are antiapoptotic regulators that block 
cell death in response to diverse stimuli. They are expressed at elevated levels 
in human malignancies and are attractive targets for the development of novel 
cancer therapeutics. Herein, we demonstrate that small-molecule IAP antagonists 
bind to select baculovirus IAP repeat (BIR) domains resulting in dramatic 
induction of auto-ubiquitination activity and rapid proteasomal degradation of 
c-IAPs. The IAP antagonists also induce cell death that is dependent on TNF 
signaling and de novo protein biosynthesis. Additionally, the c-IAP proteins 
were found to function as regulators of NF-kappaB signaling. Through their 
ubiquitin E3 ligase activities c-IAP1 and c-IAP2 promote proteasomal degradation 
of NIK, the central ser/thr kinase in the noncanonical NF-kappaB pathway.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.10.030
PMID: 18022362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
