---
pmid: '28141967'
title: Telomerase Mechanism of Telomere Synthesis.
authors:
- Wu RA
- Upton HE
- Vogan JM
- Collins K
journal: Annu Rev Biochem
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5812681
doi: 10.1146/annurev-biochem-061516-045019
---

# Telomerase Mechanism of Telomere Synthesis.
**Authors:** Wu RA, Upton HE, Vogan JM, Collins K
**Journal:** Annu Rev Biochem (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev-biochem-061516-045019](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-biochem-061516-045019)
**PMC:** [PMC5812681](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5812681/)

## Abstract

1. Annu Rev Biochem. 2017 Jun 20;86:439-460. doi: 
10.1146/annurev-biochem-061516-045019. Epub 2017 Jan 30.

Telomerase Mechanism of Telomere Synthesis.

Wu RA(1), Upton HE(1), Vogan JM(1), Collins K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
California 94720-3202; email: rawu@berkeley.edu , hupton@berkeley.edu , 
jacob.vogan@berkeley.edu , kcollins@berkeley.edu.

Telomerase is the essential reverse transcriptase required for linear chromosome 
maintenance in most eukaryotes. Telomerase supplements the tandem array of 
simple-sequence repeats at chromosome ends to compensate for the DNA erosion 
inherent in genome replication. The template for telomerase reverse 
transcriptase is within the RNA subunit of the ribonucleoprotein complex, which 
in cells contains additional telomerase holoenzyme proteins that assemble the 
active ribonucleoprotein and promote its function at telomeres. Telomerase is 
distinct among polymerases in its reiterative reuse of an internal template. The 
template is precisely defined, processively copied, and regenerated by release 
of single-stranded product DNA. New specificities of nucleic acid handling that 
underlie the catalytic cycle of repeat synthesis derive from both active site 
specialization and new motif elaborations in protein and RNA subunits. Studies 
of telomerase provide unique insights into cellular requirements for genome 
stability, tissue renewal, and tumorigenesis as well as new perspectives on 
dynamic ribonucleoprotein machines.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev-biochem-061516-045019
PMCID: PMC5812681
PMID: 28141967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
