---
pmid: '12115476'
title: Identification of a new proliferation-associated protein NET-1/C4.8 characteristic
  for a subset of high-grade cervical intraepithelial neoplasia and cervical carcinomas.
authors:
- Wollscheid V
- Kühne-Heid R
- Stein I
- Jansen L
- Köllner S
- Schneider A
- Dürst M
journal: Int J Cancer
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/ijc.10442
---

# Identification of a new proliferation-associated protein NET-1/C4.8 characteristic for a subset of high-grade cervical intraepithelial neoplasia and cervical carcinomas.
**Authors:** Wollscheid V, Kühne-Heid R, Stein I, Jansen L, Köllner S, Schneider A, Dürst M
**Journal:** Int J Cancer (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ijc.10442](https://doi.org/10.1002/ijc.10442)

## Abstract

1. Int J Cancer. 2002 Jun 20;99(6):771-5. doi: 10.1002/ijc.10442.

Identification of a new proliferation-associated protein NET-1/C4.8 
characteristic for a subset of high-grade cervical intraepithelial neoplasia and 
cervical carcinomas.

Wollscheid V(1), Kühne-Heid R, Stein I, Jansen L, Köllner S, Schneider A, Dürst 
M.

Author information:
(1)Gynäkologische Molekularbiologie, Abteilung Frauenheilkunde, Klinik für 
Frauenheilkunde und Geburtshilfe der Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena, Jena, 
Germany.

A large number of genes are known to be differentially expressed at distinct 
steps of carcinogenesis. By using a cell culture model system for cervical 
cancer, we had previously identified several genes that were more strongly 
expressed when comparing normal cervical epithelium with cervical 
intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) and cervical cancer. In our study, we show that 
one of these genes, C4.8, is identical to NET-1, which is a new member of the 
tetraspanin family of proteins. By generating a mouse polyclonal antiserum 
against the major extracellular domain of the protein, we could detect 
NET-1/C4.8 expression both after ectopic expression of the gene in cell cultures 
and in cryostat sections of cervical biopsies. Moreover, immunohistochemic 
analyses of normal cervical epithelium, metaplasia, condyloma and CIN of 
different severity suggest that NET-1/C4.8 expression is associated with 
neoplastic cell proliferation. Notably, expression of the protein throughout the 
entire epithelium is only evident for a subset of CIN3. The potential importance 
for this gene in cervical carcinogenesis is underlined by an invariably strong 
expression in all undifferentiated squamous cell cancers examined. This 
indicates that this gene may be of prognostic value.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.10442
PMID: 12115476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
