---
pmid: '17062675'
title: Prognostic value of prostate secretory protein of 94 amino acids and its binding
  protein after radical prostatectomy.
authors:
- Reeves JR
- Dulude H
- Panchal C
- Daigneault L
- Ramnani DM
journal: Clin Cancer Res
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-06-0625
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Prognostic value of prostate secretory protein of 94 amino acids and its binding protein after radical prostatectomy.
**Authors:** Reeves JR, Dulude H, Panchal C, Daigneault L, Ramnani DM
**Journal:** Clin Cancer Res (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-06-0625](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-06-0625)

## Abstract

1. Clin Cancer Res. 2006 Oct 15;12(20 Pt 1):6018-22. doi: 
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-06-0625.

Prognostic value of prostate secretory protein of 94 amino acids and its binding 
protein after radical prostatectomy.

Reeves JR(1), Dulude H, Panchal C, Daigneault L, Ramnani DM.

Author information:
(1)Ambrilia Biopharma Inc., Chemin du Golf, Verdun, Quebec, Canada. 
jonathan.reeves@sympatico.ca

PURPOSE: To establish the prognostic value of total and free prostate secretory 
protein of 94 amino acids (PSP94) and the PSP94-binding protein (PSPBP) 
following radical prostatectomy.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: One hundred and eighty-five serum samples were obtained 
from patients with localized prostate cancer prior to treatment with radical 
prostatectomy at Virginia Urology (Richmond, VA). Patients were followed up for 
a median of 48 months (range, 1-66 months) and biochemical relapse was indicated 
as total prostate-specific antigen (tPSA) levels increasing to > 0.1 ng/mL. The 
available clinical variables included initial tPSA, Gleason score, surgical 
margin status, and clinical stage. Total PSP94, free PSP94, and the PSPBP were 
quantified in the pretreatment serum using new ELISA tests (Medicorp, Inc. and 
Ambrilia Biopharma, Inc., Montreal, Quebec, Canada). Univariate and multivariate 
Cox proportional hazards models were used to assess the ability of PSP94 and 
PSPBP to predict time to recurrence.
RESULTS: Thirty-one patients had biochemical recurrence. Gleason score, margin 
status, clinical stage, and initial tPSA significantly predicted recurrence risk 
(all P < 0.001). In addition, PSPBP was negatively associated with recurrence 
risk (P = 0.005), and, consistent with previous studies, the bound/free PSP94 
ratio was positively associated with recurrence risk (P = 0.008). Multivariate 
analysis showed that PSPBP, as well as the bound/free PSP94 ratio, were 
independent predictors of biochemical relapse risk adjusting for tPSA, Gleason 
score, and margin status.
CONCLUSIONS: Bound/free PSP94 and PSPBP are novel and independent prognostic 
markers following radical prostatectomy for prostate cancer.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-06-0625
PMID: 17062675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
