---
pmid: '32165630'
title: FAM111A protects replication forks from protein obstacles via its trypsin-like
  domain.
authors:
- Kojima Y
- Machida Y
- Palani S
- Caulfield TR
- Radisky ES
- Kaufmann SH
- Machida YJ
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC7067828
doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-15170-7
---

# FAM111A protects replication forks from protein obstacles via its trypsin-like domain.
**Authors:** Kojima Y, Machida Y, Palani S, Caulfield TR, Radisky ES, Kaufmann SH, Machida YJ
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-020-15170-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-15170-7)
**PMC:** [PMC7067828](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7067828/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Commun. 2020 Mar 12;11(1):1318. doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-15170-7.

FAM111A protects replication forks from protein obstacles via its trypsin-like 
domain.

Kojima Y(1), Machida Y(1), Palani S(2), Caulfield TR(3), Radisky ES(4), Kaufmann 
SH(1)(5), Machida YJ(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
55905, USA.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, 32224, USA.
(4)Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, 32224, USA.
(5)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA.
(6)Department of Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA. 
machida.yuichi@mayo.edu.
(7)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA. machida.yuichi@mayo.edu.

Persistent protein obstacles on genomic DNA, such as DNA-protein crosslinks 
(DPCs) and tight nucleoprotein complexes, can block replication forks. DPCs can 
be removed by the proteolytic activities of the metalloprotease SPRTN or the 
proteasome in a replication-coupled manner; however, additional proteolytic 
mechanisms may exist to cope with the diversity of protein obstacles. Here, we 
show that FAM111A, a PCNA-interacting protein, plays an important role in 
mitigating the effect of protein obstacles on replication forks. This function 
of FAM111A requires an intact trypsin-like protease domain, the PCNA 
interaction, and the DNA-binding domain that is necessary for protease activity 
in vivo. FAM111A, but not SPRTN, protects replication forks from stalling at 
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1)-DNA complexes trapped by PARP inhibitors, 
thereby promoting cell survival after drug treatment. Altogether, our findings 
reveal a role of FAM111A in overcoming protein obstacles to replication forks, 
shedding light on cellular responses to anti-cancer therapies.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-020-15170-7
PMCID: PMC7067828
PMID: 32165630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: S.H. Kaufmann is an inventor on U.S. patent No. 
8,530,172 held by Mayo Clinic that deals with use of antibodies to protein–DNA 
complexes as diagnostic reagents to predict responsiveness to topoisomerase 
inhibitors. The remaining authors declare no competing interests.
