---
pmid: '3036867'
title: Primary structure of the human 4F2 antigen heavy chain predicts a transmembrane
  protein with a cytoplasmic NH2 terminus.
authors:
- Teixeira S
- Di Grandi S
- Kühn LC
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1987'
full_text_available: false
---

# Primary structure of the human 4F2 antigen heavy chain predicts a transmembrane protein with a cytoplasmic NH2 terminus.
**Authors:** Teixeira S, Di Grandi S, Kühn LC
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1987)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1987 Jul 15;262(20):9574-80.

Primary structure of the human 4F2 antigen heavy chain predicts a transmembrane 
protein with a cytoplasmic NH2 terminus.

Teixeira S, Di Grandi S, Kühn LC.

The human cell surface antigen 4F2 is a disulfide-linked heterodimer consisting 
of a glycosylated heavy chain and a nonglycosylated light chain. The antigen is 
ubiquitously expressed on proliferating cells but only in resting cells from 
certain tissues. Its function has been proposed to relate to cellular Ca2+/Na+ 
exchange. We describe the molecular cloning of the 4F2 heavy chain gene and cDNA 
by a gene transfer approach. Part of the gene was isolated from a genomic lambda 
library constructed with DNA of a secondary transfectant L cell line that 
expresses 4F2 antigen. A gene-specific probe derived from the phage inserts was 
used to isolate two full length cDNA clones. Both cDNA clones directed the 
expression of 4F2 antigen in transfected mouse L cells. The 4F2 antigen heavy 
chain gene specifies a 2.1-kilobase mRNA with an open reading frame coding for a 
529-residue protein of 58 kDa. The protein lacks an NH2-terminal signal peptide 
but contains an internal transmembrane-spanning region and four potential 
glycosylation sites in its COOH-terminal domain. We predict that the 4F2 antigen 
heavy chain is a transmembrane protein with a cytoplasmic NH2 terminus of 81 
amino acids. The antigen shows no homology to known protein sequences.

PMID: 3036867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
