---
pmid: '9242535'
title: The Fanconi anemia polypeptide, FAC, binds to the cyclin-dependent kinase,
  cdc2.
authors:
- Kupfer GM
- Yamashita T
- Naf D
- Suliman A
- Asano S
- D'Andrea AD
journal: Blood
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The Fanconi anemia polypeptide, FAC, binds to the cyclin-dependent kinase, cdc2.
**Authors:** Kupfer GM, Yamashita T, Naf D, Suliman A, Asano S, D'Andrea AD
**Journal:** Blood (1997)

## Abstract

1. Blood. 1997 Aug 1;90(3):1047-54.

The Fanconi anemia polypeptide, FAC, binds to the cyclin-dependent kinase, cdc2.

Kupfer GM(1), Yamashita T, Naf D, Suliman A, Asano S, D'Andrea AD.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology and Cellular and Molecular Biology, 
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by 
developmental defects, bone marrow failure, and cancer susceptibility. Cells 
derived from FA patients are sensitive to crosslinking agents and have a 
prolonged G2 phase, suggesting a cell cycle abnormality. Although transfection 
of type-C FA cells with the FAC cDNA corrects these cellular abnormalities, the 
molecular function of the FAC polypeptide remains unknown. In the current study 
we show that expression of the FAC polypeptide is regulated during cell cycle 
progression. In synchronized HeLa cells, FAC protein expression increased during 
S phase, was maximal at the G2/M transition, and declined during M phase. In 
addition, the FAC protein coimmunoprecipitated with the cyclin-dependent kinase, 
cdc2. We next tested various mutant forms of the FAC polypeptide for binding to 
cdc2. A patient-derived mutant FAC polypeptide, containing a point mutation at 
L554P, failed to bind to cdc2. The FAC/cdc2 binding interaction therefore 
correlated with the functional activity of the FAC protein. Moreover, binding of 
FAC to cdc2 was mediated by the carboxyl-terminal 50 amino acids of FAC in a 
region of the protein required for FAC function. Taken together, our results 
suggest that the binding of FAC and cdc2 is required for normal G2/M progression 
in mammalian cells. Absence of a functional interaction between FAC and cdc2 in 
FA cells may underlie the cell cycle abnormality and clinical abnormalities of 
FA.

PMID: 9242535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
