---
pmid: '15383541'
title: INCA, a novel human caspase recruitment domain protein that inhibits interleukin-1beta
  generation.
authors:
- Lamkanfi M
- Denecker G
- Kalai M
- D'hondt K
- Meeus A
- Declercq W
- Saelens X
- Vandenabeele P
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M407891200
---

# INCA, a novel human caspase recruitment domain protein that inhibits interleukin-1beta generation.
**Authors:** Lamkanfi M, Denecker G, Kalai M, D'hondt K, Meeus A, Declercq W, Saelens X, Vandenabeele P
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M407891200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M407891200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Dec 10;279(50):51729-38. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M407891200. Epub 
2004 Sep 21.

INCA, a novel human caspase recruitment domain protein that inhibits 
interleukin-1beta generation.

Lamkanfi M(1), Denecker G, Kalai M, D'hondt K, Meeus A, Declercq W, Saelens X, 
Vandenabeele P.

Author information:
(1)Unit of Molecular Signalling and Cell Death, Department for Molecular 
Biomedical Research, VIB-Ghent University, Technologiepark 927, Zwijnaarde 
B-9052, Belgium.

Using in silico methods for screening the human genome for new caspase 
recruitment domain (CARD) proteins, we have identified INCA (Inhibitory CARD) as 
a protein that shares 81% identity with the prodomain of caspase-1. The INCA 
gene is located on chromosome 11q22 between the genes of COP/Pseudo-ICE and 
ICEBERG, two other CARD proteins that arose from caspase-1 gene duplications. We 
show that INCA mRNA is expressed in many tissues. INCA is specifically 
upregulated by interferon-gamma in the monocytic cell lines THP-1 and U937. INCA 
physically interacts with procaspase-1 and blocks the release of mature IL-1beta 
from LPS-stimulated macrophages. Unlike COP/Pseudo-ICE and procaspase-1, INCA 
does not interact with RIP2 and does not induce NF-kappaB activation. Our data 
show that INCA is a novel intracellular regulator of procaspase-1 activation, 
involved in the regulation of pro-IL-1beta processing and its release during 
inflammation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M407891200
PMID: 15383541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
