---
pmid: '27841881'
title: Transient transcription in the early embryo sets an epigenetic state that programs
  postnatal growth.
authors:
- Greenberg MV
- Glaser J
- Borsos M
- Marjou FE
- Walter M
- Teissandier A
- Bourc'his D
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ng.3718
---

# Transient transcription in the early embryo sets an epigenetic state that programs postnatal growth.
**Authors:** Greenberg MV, Glaser J, Borsos M, Marjou FE, Walter M, Teissandier A, Bourc'his D
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.3718](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.3718)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 2017 Jan;49(1):110-118. doi: 10.1038/ng.3718. Epub 2016 Nov 14.

Transient transcription in the early embryo sets an epigenetic state that 
programs postnatal growth.

Greenberg MV(1), Glaser J(1), Borsos M(1), Marjou FE(2), Walter M(1), 
Teissandier A(1)(3), Bourc'his D(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut Curie, PSL Research University, INSERM, CNRS, Paris, France.
(2)Institut Curie, CNRS, Paris, France.
(3)École des Mines, Paris, France.

The potential for early embryonic events to program epigenetic states that 
influence adult physiology remains an important question in health and 
development. Using the imprinted Zdbf2 locus as a paradigm for the early 
programming of phenotypes, we demonstrate here that chromatin changes that occur 
in the pluripotent embryo can be dispensable for embryogenesis but instead 
signal essential regulatory information in the adult. The Liz (long isoform of 
Zdbf2) transcript is transiently expressed in early embryos and embryonic stem 
cells (ESCs). This transcription locally promotes de novo DNA methylation 
upstream of the Zdbf2 promoter, which antagonizes Polycomb-mediated repression 
of Zdbf2. Strikingly, mouse embryos deficient for Liz develop normally but fail 
to activate Zdbf2 in the postnatal brain and show indelible growth reduction, 
implying a crucial role for a Liz-dependent epigenetic switch. This work 
provides evidence that transcription during an early embryonic timeframe can 
program a stable epigenetic state with later physiological consequences.

DOI: 10.1038/ng.3718
PMID: 27841881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
