---
pmid: '8376330'
title: Regulation of the pcaIJ genes for aromatic acid degradation in Pseudomonas
  putida.
authors:
- Parales RE
- Harwood CS
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '1993'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC206662
doi: 10.1128/jb.175.18.5829-5838.1993
---

# Regulation of the pcaIJ genes for aromatic acid degradation in Pseudomonas putida.
**Authors:** Parales RE, Harwood CS
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1128/jb.175.18.5829-5838.1993](https://doi.org/10.1128/jb.175.18.5829-5838.1993)
**PMC:** [PMC206662](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC206662/)

## Abstract

1. J Bacteriol. 1993 Sep;175(18):5829-38. doi: 10.1128/jb.175.18.5829-5838.1993.

Regulation of the pcaIJ genes for aromatic acid degradation in Pseudomonas 
putida.

Parales RE(1), Harwood CS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Iowa, Iowa City 52242.

Six of the genes encoding enzymes of the beta-ketoadipate pathway for benzoate 
and 4-hydroxybenzoate degradation in Pseudomonas putida are organized into at 
least three separate transcriptional units. As an initial step to defining this 
pca regulon at the molecular level, lacZ fusions were made with the pcaI and 
pcaJ genes, which encode the two subunits of beta-ketoadipate:succinyl-coenzyme 
A transferase, the enzyme catalyzing the next-to-last step in the 
beta-ketoadipate pathway. Fusion analyses showed that pcaI and pcaJ constitute 
an operon which requires beta-ketoadipate or its nonmetabolizable analog, 
adipate, as well as the pcaR regulatory gene for induction. The pcaIJ promoter 
is likely to be a sigma 70-type promoter; it has a sigma 70-type consensus 
sequence and did not require the alternative sigma factor, RpoN, for induction. 
Deletion analysis of the promoter region of a pcaI-lacZ transcriptional fusion 
indicated that no specific DNA sequences upstream of the -35 region were 
required for full induction. This implies that the binding site for the 
activator protein, PcaR, is unusually close to the transcriptional start site of 
pcaIJ.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.175.18.5829-5838.1993
PMCID: PMC206662
PMID: 8376330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
