---
pmid: '18184587'
title: Extended polypeptide linkers establish the spatial architecture of a pyruvate
  dehydrogenase multienzyme complex.
authors:
- Lengyel JS
- Stott KM
- Wu X
- Brooks BR
- Balbo A
- Schuck P
- Perham RN
- Subramaniam S
- Milne JL
journal: Structure
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.str.2007.10.017
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Extended polypeptide linkers establish the spatial architecture of a pyruvate dehydrogenase multienzyme complex.
**Authors:** Lengyel JS, Stott KM, Wu X, Brooks BR, Balbo A, Schuck P, Perham RN, Subramaniam S, Milne JL
**Journal:** Structure (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.str.2007.10.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2007.10.017)

## Abstract

1. Structure. 2008 Jan;16(1):93-103. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2007.10.017.

Extended polypeptide linkers establish the spatial architecture of a pyruvate 
dehydrogenase multienzyme complex.

Lengyel JS(1), Stott KM, Wu X, Brooks BR, Balbo A, Schuck P, Perham RN, 
Subramaniam S, Milne JL.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cell Biology, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Icosahedral pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) enzyme complexes are molecular machines 
consisting of a central E2 core decorated by a shell of peripheral enzymes (E1 
and E3) found localized at a distance of approximately 75-90 A from the core. 
Using a combination of biochemical, biophysical, and cryo-electron microscopic 
techniques, we show here that the gap between the E2 core and the shell of 
peripheral enzymes is maintained by the flexible but extended conformation 
adopted by 60 linker polypeptides that radiate outwards from the inner E2 core, 
irrespective of the E1 or E3 occupancy. The constancy of the gap is thus not due 
to protein-protein interactions in the outer protein shell. The extended nature 
of the E2 inner-linker regions thereby creates the restricted annular space in 
which the lipoyl domains of E2 that carry catalytic intermediates shuttle 
between E1, E2, and E3 active sites, while their conformational flexibility 
facilitates productive encounters.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2007.10.017
PMID: 18184587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
