---
pmid: '28625552'
title: Coordinated circRNA Biogenesis and Function with NF90/NF110 in Viral Infection.
authors:
- Li X
- Liu CX
- Xue W
- Zhang Y
- Jiang S
- Yin QF
- Wei J
- Yao RW
- Yang L
- Chen LL
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2017.05.023
---

# Coordinated circRNA Biogenesis and Function with NF90/NF110 in Viral Infection.
**Authors:** Li X, Liu CX, Xue W, Zhang Y, Jiang S, Yin QF, Wei J, Yao RW, Yang L, Chen LL
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2017.05.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2017.05.023)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2017 Jul 20;67(2):214-227.e7. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2017.05.023.
Epub  2017 Jun 15.

Coordinated circRNA Biogenesis and Function with NF90/NF110 in Viral Infection.

Li X(1), Liu CX(1), Xue W(2), Zhang Y(1), Jiang S(1), Yin QF(1), Wei J(2), Yao 
RW(1), Yang L(3), Chen LL(4).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology and Shanghai Key Laboratory of 
Molecular Andrology, CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell Science, 
Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, University of Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320 Yueyang Road, Shanghai 
200031, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Computational Biology, CAS-MPG Partner Institute for 
Computational Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, University 
of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320 Yueyang Road, 
Shanghai 200031, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Computational Biology, CAS-MPG Partner Institute for 
Computational Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, University 
of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320 Yueyang Road, 
Shanghai 200031, China; School of Life Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech 
University, 100 Haike Road, Shanghai 201210, China. Electronic address: 
liyang@picb.ac.cn.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology and Shanghai Key Laboratory of 
Molecular Andrology, CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell Science, 
Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, University of Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320 Yueyang Road, Shanghai 
200031, China; School of Life Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, 
100 Haike Road, Shanghai 201210, China. Electronic address: 
linglingchen@sibcb.ac.cn.

Circular RNAs (circRNAs) generated via back-splicing are enhanced by flanking 
complementary sequences. Expression levels of circRNAs vary under different 
conditions, suggesting participation of protein factors in their biogenesis. 
Using genome-wide siRNA screening that targets all human unique genes and an 
efficient circRNA expression reporter, we identify double-stranded RNA-binding 
domain containing immune factors NF90/NF110 as key regulators in circRNA 
biogenesis. NF90/NF110 promote circRNA production in the nucleus by associating 
with intronic RNA pairs juxtaposing the circRNA-forming exon(s); they also 
interact with mature circRNAs in the cytoplasm. Upon viral infection, circRNA 
expression is decreased, in part owing to the nuclear export of NF90/NF110 to 
the cytoplasm. Meanwhile, NF90/NF110 released from circRNP complexes bind to 
viral mRNAs as part of their functions in antiviral immune response. Our results 
therefore implicate a coordinated regulation of circRNA biogenesis and function 
by NF90/NF110 in viral infection.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2017.05.023
PMID: 28625552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
