---
pmid: '22178386'
title: TRIM13 regulates ER stress induced autophagy and clonogenic ability of the
  cells.
authors:
- Tomar D
- Singh R
- Singh AK
- Pandya CD
- Singh R
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2011.11.015
---

# TRIM13 regulates ER stress induced autophagy and clonogenic ability of the cells.
**Authors:** Tomar D, Singh R, Singh AK, Pandya CD, Singh R
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbamcr.2011.11.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbamcr.2011.11.015)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Feb;1823(2):316-26. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2011.11.015. Epub 2011 Dec 8.

TRIM13 regulates ER stress induced autophagy and clonogenic ability of the 
cells.

Tomar D(1), Singh R, Singh AK, Pandya CD, Singh R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, 
Indian Institute of Advanced Research, Gandhinagar, India.

Autophagy is one of the cellular adaptive processes that provide protection 
against many pathological conditions like infection, cancer, neurodegeneration, 
and aging. Recent evidences suggest that ubiquitination plays an important role 
in degradation of proteins or defective organelle either through proteasome or 
autophagy. In this study, we describe the role of TRIM13, ER resident ubiquitin 
E3 ligase in induction of autophagy and its role during ER stress. The ectopic 
expression of TRIM13 in HEK-293 cells induces autophagy. Domain mapping showed 
that coiled-coil (CC) domain is required for induction of autophagy. TRIM13 is 
stabilized during ER stress, interacts with p62/SQSTM1 and co-localizes with 
DFCP1. TRIM13 regulates initiation of autophagy during ER stress and decreases 
the clonogenic ability of the cells. This study for the first time demonstrates 
the role of TRIM13 in induction of autophagy which may play an important role in 
regulation of ER stress and may act as tumor suppressor.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2011.11.015
PMID: 22178386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
