---
pmid: '15916964'
title: ATM-dependent phosphorylation of ATF2 is required for the DNA damage response.
authors:
- Bhoumik A
- Takahashi S
- Breitweiser W
- Shiloh Y
- Jones N
- Ronai Z
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2954254
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.04.015
---

# ATM-dependent phosphorylation of ATF2 is required for the DNA damage response.
**Authors:** Bhoumik A, Takahashi S, Breitweiser W, Shiloh Y, Jones N, Ronai Z
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2005.04.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2005.04.015)
**PMC:** [PMC2954254](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2954254/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2005 May 27;18(5):577-87. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.04.015.

ATM-dependent phosphorylation of ATF2 is required for the DNA damage response.

Bhoumik A(1), Takahashi S, Breitweiser W, Shiloh Y, Jones N, Ronai Z.

Author information:
(1)Signal Transduction Program, The Burnham Institute, La Jolla, California 
92037, USA.

Activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) is regulated by JNK/p38 in response to 
stress. Here, we demonstrate that the protein kinase ATM phosphorylates ATF2 on 
serines 490 and 498 following ionizing radiation (IR). Phosphoantibodies to 
ATF2(490/8) reveal dose- and time-dependent phosphorylation of ATF2 by ATM that 
results in its rapid colocalization with gamma-H2AX and MRN components into 
IR-induced foci (IRIF). Inhibition of ATF2 expression decreased recruitment of 
Mre11 to IRIF, abrogated S phase checkpoint, reduced activation of ATM, Chk1, 
and Chk2, and impaired radioresistance. ATF2 requires neither JNK/p38 nor its 
DNA binding domain for recruitment to IRIF and the S phase checkpoint. Our 
findings identify a role for ATF2 in the DNA damage response that is uncoupled 
from its transcriptional activity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.04.015
PMCID: PMC2954254
PMID: 15916964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
