---
pmid: '20923837'
title: The cargo-selective retromer complex is a recruiting hub for protein complexes
  that regulate endosomal tubule dynamics.
authors:
- Harbour ME
- Breusegem SY
- Antrobus R
- Freeman C
- Reid E
- Seaman MN
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2964111
doi: 10.1242/jcs.071472
---

# The cargo-selective retromer complex is a recruiting hub for protein complexes that regulate endosomal tubule dynamics.
**Authors:** Harbour ME, Breusegem SY, Antrobus R, Freeman C, Reid E, Seaman MN
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.071472](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.071472)
**PMC:** [PMC2964111](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2964111/)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2010 Nov 1;123(Pt 21):3703-17. doi: 10.1242/jcs.071472. Epub 2010 
Oct 5.

The cargo-selective retromer complex is a recruiting hub for protein complexes 
that regulate endosomal tubule dynamics.

Harbour ME(1), Breusegem SY, Antrobus R, Freeman C, Reid E, Seaman MN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge 
Institute for Medical Research, Wellcome Trust/MRC Building, Addenbrookes 
Hospital, Cambridge CB2 0XY, UK.

The retromer complex is required for the efficient endosome-to-Golgi retrieval 
of the CIMPR, sortilin, SORL1, wntless and other physiologically important 
membrane proteins. Retromer comprises two protein complexes that act together in 
endosome-to-Golgi retrieval; the cargo-selective complex is a trimer of VPS35, 
VPS29 and VPS26 that sorts cargo into tubules for retrieval to the Golgi. 
Tubules are produced by the oligomerization of sorting nexin dimers. Here, we 
report the identification of five endosomally-localised proteins that modulate 
tubule formation and are recruited to the membrane via interactions with the 
cargo-selective retromer complex. One of the retromer-interacting proteins, 
strumpellin, is mutated in hereditary spastic paraplegia, a progressive 
length-dependent axonopathy. Here, we show that strumpellin regulates endosomal 
tubules as part of a protein complex with three other proteins that include 
WASH1, an actin-nucleating promoting factor. Therefore, in addition to a direct 
role in endosome-to-Golgi retrieval, the cargo-selective retromer complex also 
acts as a platform for recruiting physiologically important proteins to 
endosomal membranes that regulate membrane tubule dynamics.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.071472
PMCID: PMC2964111
PMID: 20923837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
