---
pmid: '28891065'
title: IL4-induced gene 1 is secreted at the immune synapse and modulates TCR activation
  independently of its enzymatic activity.
authors:
- Aubatin A
- Sako N
- Decrouy X
- Donnadieu E
- Molinier-Frenkel V
- Castellano F
journal: Eur J Immunol
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/eji.201646769
---

# IL4-induced gene 1 is secreted at the immune synapse and modulates TCR activation independently of its enzymatic activity.
**Authors:** Aubatin A, Sako N, Decrouy X, Donnadieu E, Molinier-Frenkel V, Castellano F
**Journal:** Eur J Immunol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/eji.201646769](https://doi.org/10.1002/eji.201646769)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Immunol. 2018 Jan;48(1):106-119. doi: 10.1002/eji.201646769. Epub 2017
Oct  11.

IL4-induced gene 1 is secreted at the immune synapse and modulates TCR 
activation independently of its enzymatic activity.

Aubatin A(1)(2), Sako N(1)(2), Decrouy X(3)(2), Donnadieu E(4)(5)(6), 
Molinier-Frenkel V(1)(2)(7), Castellano F(1)(2)(8).

Author information:
(1)INSERM, U955, Equipe 09, Créteil, France.
(2)Faculté de Médecine, Université Paris Est, Créteil, France.
(3)INSERM, U955, Plateforme d'imagerie, Créteil, France.
(4)INSERM, U1016, Institut Cochin, Paris, France.
(5)CNRS, UMR8104, Paris, France.
(6)Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(7)AP-HP, Hôpital H. Mondor - A. Chenevier, Service d'Immunologie Biologique, 
Créteil, France.
(8)AP-HP, Hôpital H. Mondor - A. Chenevier, Plateforme de Ressources 
Biologiques, Créteil, France.

Amino-acid catabolizing enzymes produced by mononuclear phagocytes play a 
central role in regulating the immune response. The mammalian 
phenylalanine-catabolizing enzyme IL4-induced gene 1 (IL4I1) inhibits effector T 
lymphocyte proliferation and facilitates regulatory T-cell development. IL4I1 
expression by macrophages of various human tumors may affect patient prognosis 
as it facilitates tumor escape from the T-cell response in murine models. Its 
enzymatic activity appears to participate in its effects, but some actions of 
IL4I1 remain unclear. Here, we show that the presence of IL4I1 during T-cell 
activation decreases early signaling events downstream of TCR stimulation, 
resulting in global T-cell inhibition which is more pronounced when there is 
CD28 costimulation. Surprisingly, the enzymatic activity of IL4I1 is not 
involved. Focal secretion of IL4I1 into the immune synaptic cleft and its 
binding to CD3+ lymphocytes could be important in IL4I1 immunosuppressive 
mechanism of action.

© 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201646769
PMID: 28891065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
