---
pmid: '31397519'
title: Expression and functional characterization of missense mutations in ATP8A2
  linked to severe neurological disorders.
authors:
- Choi H
- Andersen JP
- Molday RS
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/humu.23889
---

# Expression and functional characterization of missense mutations in ATP8A2 linked to severe neurological disorders.
**Authors:** Choi H, Andersen JP, Molday RS
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.23889](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.23889)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mutat. 2019 Dec;40(12):2353-2364. doi: 10.1002/humu.23889. Epub 2019 Aug
23.

Expression and functional characterization of missense mutations in ATP8A2 
linked to severe neurological disorders.

Choi H(1), Andersen JP(2), Molday RS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(2)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus C, Denmark.

ATP8A2 is a P4-ATPase (adenosine triphosphate) that actively flips 
phosphatidylserine and phosphatidylethanolamine from the exoplasmic to the 
cytoplasmic leaflet of cell membranes to generate and maintain phospholipid 
asymmetry. Mutations in the ATP8A2 gene have been reported to cause severe 
autosomal recessive neurological diseases in humans characterized by 
intellectual disability, hypotonia, chorea, and hyperkinetic movement disorders 
with or without optic and cerebellar atrophy. To determine the effect of 
disease-associated missense mutations on ATP8A2, we expressed six variants with 
the accessory subunit CDC50A in HEK293T cells. The level of expression, cellular 
localization, and functional activity were analyzed by western blot analysis, 
immunofluorescence microscopy, and ATPase activity assays. Two variants 
(p.Ile376Met and p.Lys429Met) expressed at normal ATP8A2 levels and 
preferentially localized to the Golgi-recycling endosomes, but were devoid of 
ATPase activity. Four variants (p.Lys429Asn, pAla544Pro, p.Arg625Trp, and 
p.Trp702Arg) expressed poorly, localized to the endoplasmic reticulum, and 
lacked ATPase activity. The expression of these variants was increased twofold 
by the addition of the proteasome inhibitor MG132. We conclude that the 
p.Ile376Met and p.Lys429Met variants fold in a native-like conformation, but 
lack key amino acid residues required for ATP-dependent lipid transport. In 
contrast, the p.Lys429Asn, pAla544Pro, p.Arg625Trp, and p.Trp702Arg variants are 
highly misfolded and undergo rapid proteosomal degradation.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.23889
PMID: 31397519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
