---
pmid: '18325333'
title: CDK5 activator p35 downregulates E-cadherin precursor independently of CDK5.
authors:
- Lin S
- Wang J
- Ye Z
- Ip NY
- Lin SC
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2008.02.053
---

# CDK5 activator p35 downregulates E-cadherin precursor independently of CDK5.
**Authors:** Lin S, Wang J, Ye Z, Ip NY, Lin SC
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2008.02.053](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2008.02.053)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2008 Apr 9;582(8):1197-202. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2008.02.053.
Epub  2008 Mar 4.

CDK5 activator p35 downregulates E-cadherin precursor independently of CDK5.

Lin S(1), Wang J, Ye Z, Ip NY, Lin SC.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education for Cell Biology and Tumor Cell 
Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Fujian 361005, China.

Dysfunction of E-cadherins often results in metastasis of cancerous cells. Here 
we show that p35, a critical regulator of cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5), 
specifically depletes the precursor form of E-cadherin, but not the mature form, 
by using a precursor-specific antibody. Most intriguingly, this downregulation 
of precursor E-cadherin by p35 is unequivocally independent of CDK5. Moreover, 
we found that p35 forms complexes with E-cadherin proteins. We also found that 
p35 co-expression can target E-cadherin to lysosomes and that p35-triggered 
disappearance of E-cadherin precursor can be blocked specifically by lysosomal 
protease inhibitors, indicating that p35 induces endocytosis and subsequent 
degradation of precursor E-cadherin.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2008.02.053
PMID: 18325333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
