---
pmid: '10908327'
title: Dmc1 of Schizosaccharomyces pombe plays a role in meiotic recombination.
authors:
- Fukushima K
- Tanaka Y
- Nabeshima K
- Yoneki T
- Tougan T
- Tanaka S
- Nojima H
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2000'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC102652
doi: 10.1093/nar/28.14.2709
---

# Dmc1 of Schizosaccharomyces pombe plays a role in meiotic recombination.
**Authors:** Fukushima K, Tanaka Y, Nabeshima K, Yoneki T, Tougan T, Tanaka S, Nojima H
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/28.14.2709](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/28.14.2709)
**PMC:** [PMC102652](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC102652/)

## Abstract

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Jul 15;28(14):2709-16. doi: 10.1093/nar/28.14.2709.

Dmc1 of Schizosaccharomyces pombe plays a role in meiotic recombination.

Fukushima K(1), Tanaka Y, Nabeshima K, Yoneki T, Tougan T, Tanaka S, Nojima H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, 
Osaka University, 3-1 Yamadaoka, Suita City, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

We report here a Schizosaccharomyces pombe gene (dmc1(+)) that resembles budding 
yeast DMC1 in the region immediately upstream of the rad24(+) gene. We showed by 
northern and Southern blot analysis that dmc1(+) and rad24(+) are co-transcribed 
as a bicistronic mRNA of 2.8 kb with meiotic specificity, whereas rad24(+) 
itself is constitutively transcribed as a 1.0-kb mRNA species during meiosis. 
Induction of the bicistronic transcript is under the control of a 
meiosis-specific transcription factor, Ste11. Disruption of both dmc1(+) and 
rad24(+) had no effect on mitosis or spore formation, and dmc1Delta cells 
displayed no change in sensitivity to UV or gamma irradiation relative to the 
wild type. Tetrad analysis indicated that Dmc1 is involved in meiotic 
recombination. Analysis of gene conversion frequencies using single and double 
mutants of dmc1 and rhp51 indicated that both Dmc1 and Rhp51 function in meiotic 
gene conversion. These observations, together with a high level of sequence 
identity, indicate that the dmc1(+) gene of S. POMBE: is a structural homolog of 
budding yeast DMC1, sharing both similar and distinct functions in meiosis.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/28.14.2709
PMCID: PMC102652
PMID: 10908327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

We report here a Schizosaccharomyces pombe gene ( dmc1 + ) that resembles budding yeast DMC1 in the region immediately upstream of the rad24 + gene. We showed by northern and Southern blot analysis that dmc1 + and rad24 + are co-transcribed as a bicistronic mRNA of 2.8 kb with meiotic specificity, whereas rad24 + itself is constitutively transcribed as a 1.0-kb mRNA species during meiosis. Induction of the bicistronic transcript is under the control of a meiosis-specific transcription factor, Ste11. Disruption of both dmc1 + and rad24 + had no effect on mitosis or spore formation, and dmc1 Δ cells displayed no change in sensitivity to UV or γ irradiation relative to the wild type. Tetrad analysis indicated that Dmc1 is involved in meiotic recombination. Analysis of gene conversion frequencies using single and double mutants of dmc1 and rhp51 indicated that both Dmc1 and Rhp51 function in meiotic gene conversion. These observations, together with a high level of sequence identity, indicate that the dmc1 + gene of S.pombe is a structural homolog of budding yeast DMC1 , sharing both similar and distinct functions in meiosis.

INTRODUCTION

During meiosis, between DNA replication and prophase of meiosis I, a number of lengthy events which are specific to meiosis, including pairing and recombination of homologous chromosomes, are observed. The budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae has been extensively used to study the molecular mechanisms of genetic recombination during meiosis. Several proteins with sequence similarity to RecA, such as Dmc1 and Rad51, have been isolated and their essential roles in recombination have been characterized ( 1 – 4 ). Dmc1 and Rad51 share significant amino acid sequence homology, particularly within the core region, and similar conserved sequences are also observed in RecA, which plays a pivotal role in homologous recombination in Escherichia coli . Despite this level of similarity, sequence divergence in the N-terminal domain distinguishes the Rad51 from the Dmc1 family. Similar RecA-like proteins have also been isolated from mammals ( 5 , 6 ) and from plants (Lim15, a lily homolog of Dmc1) ( 7 , 8 ), indicating that the structure of factors involved in recombination is conserved among a wide variety of species.

Expression of DMC1 , unlike that of RAD51 , is meiosis specific. Dmc1 has no role in the repair of double-strand breaks (DSBs) during vegetative growth, but dmc1 mutants are defective in reciprocal meiotic recombination, accumulate DSB recombination intermediates, fail to initiate normal synaptonemal complex (SC) formation, and arrest late in meiotic prophase ( 1 ). Both Rad51 and Dmc1 are required for meiotic recombination and promote the synapsis of homologous chromosomes of budding yeast and side-by-side joining of lateral elements in pachytene chromosomes ( 9 ). Double mutation of rad51 dmc1 causes more severe meiotic defects ( 4 ). Lim15 and Rad51 are also involved in the recombination reaction during meiotic prophase in the lily, and are colocalized at multiple sites on meiotic chromosomes at prophase 1, suggesting that they may be components of early recombination nodules ( 7 , 8 ). Analysis of dmc1 gene knockout mice revealed that both homozygous mutant males and females were sterile, with gametogenesis arrested in meiotic prophase ( 10 , 11 ). This strong similarity in the effects of dmc1 null mutation between yeast and mouse suggests the existence of an evolutionarily conserved mechanism of regulation of meiotic recombination.

Although most organisms form SCs, fission yeast is an intriguing exception in which no SC formation has been reported to date. Thus, it is of interest to investigate whether meiotic recombination regulatory mechanisms are also conserved in fission yeast and, if so, how regulation is achieved without a proteinaceous scaffold such as the SC. Structural and functional analysis of rhp51 + , a fission yeast homolog of RAD51 , has been carried out ( 6 , 12 ), but no functional analysis of a fission yeast DMC1 homolog has been reported to date. In the course of a systematic search for genes whose transcription is induced in a meiosis-specific manner in fission yeast, we isolated a cDNA clone whose sequence closely resembled that of DMC1 . Here we report the structural and functional analysis of this clone. We show that the fission yeast dmc1 gene is transcribed as a bicistronic mRNA in a meiosis-specific manner and carries an additional open reading frame (ORF) downstream of the dmc1 -like ORF. The second ORF encodes Rad24, a 14-3-3 protein which is required for a variety of cellular events such as DNA damage checkpoint regulation ( 13 ), and which is also known to associate with target proteins via phosphoserine residues ( 14 , 15 ).
