---
pmid: '23740243'
title: Activation of the transcription factor GLI1 by WNT signaling underlies the
  role of SULFATASE 2 as a regulator of tissue regeneration.
authors:
- Nakamura I
- Fernandez-Barrena MG
- Ortiz-Ruiz MC
- Almada LL
- Hu C
- Elsawa SF
- Mills LD
- Romecin PA
- Gulaid KH
- Moser CD
- Han JJ
- Vrabel A
- Hanse EA
- Akogyeram NA
- Albrecht JH
- Monga SPS
- Sanderson SO
- Prieto J
- Roberts LR
- Fernandez-Zapico ME
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2013'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3774406
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.443440
---

# Activation of the transcription factor GLI1 by WNT signaling underlies the role of SULFATASE 2 as a regulator of tissue regeneration.
**Authors:** Nakamura I, Fernandez-Barrena MG, Ortiz-Ruiz MC, Almada LL, Hu C, Elsawa SF, Mills LD, Romecin PA, Gulaid KH, Moser CD, Han JJ, Vrabel A, Hanse EA, Akogyeram NA, Albrecht JH, Monga SPS, Sanderson SO, Prieto J, Roberts LR, Fernandez-Zapico ME
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M112.443440](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M112.443440)
**PMC:** [PMC3774406](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3774406/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jul 19;288(29):21389-21398. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.443440.
Epub  2013 Jun 5.

Activation of the transcription factor GLI1 by WNT signaling underlies the role 
of SULFATASE 2 as a regulator of tissue regeneration.

Nakamura I(1), Fernandez-Barrena MG(2), Ortiz-Ruiz MC(3), Almada LL(2), Hu C(1), 
Elsawa SF(4), Mills LD(2), Romecin PA(3), Gulaid KH(1), Moser CD(1), Han JJ(2), 
Vrabel A(2), Hanse EA(5), Akogyeram NA(1), Albrecht JH(5), Monga SPS(6), 
Sanderson SO(7), Prieto J(8), Roberts LR(9), Fernandez-Zapico ME(10).

Author information:
(1)From the Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic and Mayo 
Clinic Cancer Center, Rochester, Minnesota 55905.
(2)the Schulze Center for Novel Therapeutics and.
(3)the Departamento de Fisiología Facultad de Medicina Universidad de Murcia, 
30100 Murcia, Spain.
(4)the Department of Biological Sciences, Northern Illinois University, Illinois 
60115.
(5)the Division of Gastroenterology, Hennepin County Medical Center, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota 55404.
(6)the Departments of Pathology and Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of 
Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15216, and.
(7)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota 55905.
(8)the Centro de Investigacion Medica Aplicada, 31008 Pamplona, Spain.
(9)From the Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic and Mayo 
Clinic Cancer Center, Rochester, Minnesota 55905,. Electronic address: 
roberts.lewis@mayo.edu.
(10)From the Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic and Mayo 
Clinic Cancer Center, Rochester, Minnesota 55905,; the Schulze Center for Novel 
Therapeutics and. Electronic address: fernandezzapico.martin@mayo.edu.

Tissue regeneration requires the activation of a set of specific growth 
signaling pathways. The identity of these cascades and their biological roles 
are known; however, the molecular mechanisms regulating the interplay between 
these pathways remain poorly understood. Here, we define a new role for 
SULFATASE 2 (SULF2) in regulating tissue regeneration and define the WNT-GLI1 
axis as a novel downstream effector for this sulfatase in a liver model of 
tissue regeneration. SULF2 is a heparan sulfate 6-O-endosulfatase, which 
releases growth factors from extracellular storage sites turning active multiple 
signaling pathways. We demonstrate that SULF2-KO mice display delayed 
regeneration after partial hepatectomy (PH). Mechanistic analysis of the 
SULF2-KO phenotype showed a decrease in WNT signaling pathway activity in vivo. 
In isolated hepatocytes, SULF2 deficiency blocked WNT-induced β-CATENIN nuclear 
translocation, TCF activation, and proliferation. Furthermore, we identified the 
transcription factor GLI1 as a novel target of the SULF2-WNT cascade. WNT 
induces GLI1 expression in a SULF2- and β-CATENIN-dependent manner. GLI1-KO mice 
phenocopied the SULF2-KO, showing delayed regeneration and decreased hepatocyte 
proliferation. Moreover, we identified CYCLIN D1, a key mediator of cell growth 
during tissue regeneration, as a GLI1 transcriptional target. GLI1 binds to the 
cyclin d1 promoter and regulates its activity and expression. Finally, restoring 
GLI1 expression in the liver of SULF2-KO mice after PH rescues CYCLIN D1 
expression and hepatocyte proliferation to wild-type levels. Thus, together 
these findings define a novel pathway in which SULF2 regulates tissue 
regeneration in part via the activation of a novel WNT-GLI1-CYCLIN D1 pathway.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.443440
PMCID: PMC3774406
PMID: 23740243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Tissue regeneration requires the activation of a set of specific growth signaling pathways. The identity of these cascades and their biological roles are known; however, the molecular mechanisms regulating the interplay between these pathways remain poorly understood. Here, we define a new role for SULFATASE 2 (SULF2) in regulating tissue regeneration and define the WNT-GLI1 axis as a novel downstream effector for this sulfatase in a liver model of tissue regeneration. SULF2 is a heparan sulfate 6- O -endosulfatase, which releases growth factors from extracellular storage sites turning active multiple signaling pathways. We demonstrate that SULF2-KO mice display delayed regeneration after partial hepatectomy (PH). Mechanistic analysis of the SULF2-KO phenotype showed a decrease in WNT signaling pathway activity in vivo . In isolated hepatocytes, SULF2 deficiency blocked WNT-induced β-CATENIN nuclear translocation, TCF activation, and proliferation. Furthermore, we identified the transcription factor GLI1 as a novel target of the SULF2-WNT cascade. WNT induces GLI1 expression in a SULF2- and β-CATENIN-dependent manner. GLI1-KO mice phenocopied the SULF2-KO, showing delayed regeneration and decreased hepatocyte proliferation. Moreover, we identified CYCLIN D1, a key mediator of cell growth during tissue regeneration, as a GLI1 transcriptional target. GLI1 binds to the cyclin d1 promoter and regulates its activity and expression. Finally, restoring GLI1 expression in the liver of SULF2-KO mice after PH rescues CYCLIN D1 expression and hepatocyte proliferation to wild-type levels. Thus, together these findings define a novel pathway in which SULF2 regulates tissue regeneration in part via the activation of a novel WNT-GLI1-CYCLIN D1 pathway.

Introduction

Regulation of tissue regeneration involves the ligand-dependent activation of multiple growth factor pathways ( 1 – 4 ). Release from extracellular storage is one of the most frequent mechanisms modulating the activity of these ligands ( 5 ). The SULFATASE 2 (SULF2) 4 is a heparan sulfate (HS) endosulfatase enzyme that removes 6- O -sulfate moieties from disaccharide units in HS proteoglycans (HSPGs) ( 6 , 7 ). HSPGs are present on the cell surface and in the extracellular matrix of virtually all animal cells and act both as storage or sequestration sites for growth factors and as co-receptors in growth factor-receptor interactions ( 5 ). The storage and co-receptor activities of HSPGs are dependent on the sulfation state of the HS polymers ( 5 , 8 ). The enzymatic removal of 6- O -sulfate by SULF2 regulates binding of growth factors to HS, and therefore has significant effects on the local extracellular concentration and activity of a number of heparan sulfate-binding growth factors ( 8 – 12 ). In this study, we used liver after partial hepatectomy (PH) as a model of tissue regeneration. This model has been extensively characterized at the biological level, and the kinetics of cell proliferation, and activation of ligands and pathways involved in the process of liver regeneration post-hepatectomy are well known ( 1 – 4 , 16 ). However, the molecular mechanisms regulating the interplay between these ligand-activated pathways and the downstream effectors remain elusive.

Here, we demonstrate that SULF2 expression is elevated during the early stages of liver regeneration after PH, and that its loss decreases cellular proliferation and impairs tissue regeneration. Analysis of the mechanism identifies a novel WNT-GLI1 axis as a downstream effector for this sulfatase. SULF2-KO mice show a decrease in WNT pathway activity in vivo and in vitro after PH. Expression studies demonstrate that the transcription factor GLI1 is a novel transcriptional target of the SULF2-WNT cascade. GLI1 belongs to the GLI family of transcription factors, which are known effectors of different developmental-regulated pathways such as the HEDGEHOG pathway ( 13 – 14 ). Similar to SULF2-KO, GLI1-KO mice show delayed liver regeneration after PH. In isolated hepatocytes, GLI1 knockdown decreases proliferation and CYCLIN D1 expression. Further, we identified CYCLIN D1 as a transcriptional target of GLI1 downstream of WNT3a. GLI1 binds to the cyclin d1 promoter and regulates its expression in vitro and in vivo . Finally, using a transposase-based transfection system combined with hydrodynamic delivery of the expression vectors, we restored GLI1, and rescued CYCLIN D1 expression and hepatocyte proliferation in the SULF2-KO liver after PH. Together, these results demonstrate a novel role for SULF2 in tissue regeneration and define the WNT-GLI1 pathway as an effector of this phenomenon.

DISCUSSION

This study identified a novel SULF2-WNT-GLI1 pathway involved in the regulation of early stages of liver regeneration ( Fig. 6 D ). We made the following key observations: 1) knock-out of SULF2 delays liver regeneration after PH; 2) knock-out of SULF2 down-regulates WNT pathway signaling during liver regeneration after PH; 3) the WNT3a proliferative response in hepatocytes involves the up-regulation of GLI1; 4) knock-out of GLI1 also delays liver regeneration after PH and acts as an effector of this SULF2-WNT axis; and 5) CYCLIN D1 is a direct transcriptional target of the SULF2-WNT-GLI1 pathway.

SULF1 and SULF2 are the known members of the heparan sulfate endosulfatase family. Although SULF1 and SULF2 both desulfate HSPGs by removing 6-O-sulfates from mature HS chains and appear to show redundancy in certain effects, they do not have completely overlapping effects. In vivo experiments using the double SULF1/SULF2-KO demonstrate a functional cooperation at the level of 6- O -sulfation where HS is significantly higher than in mice with knock-out of either SULF1 or SULF2 ( 7 , 36 ). We have observed that liver regeneration is delayed in the absence of SULF2, but it eventually recovers without an apparent contribution of SULF1. We measured the SULF1 mRNA levels in both WT and SULF2-KO mice after PH. The level of SULF1 in both WT and SULF2-KO mice increased 1.5 fold after PH, peaking at 24 h; however, no significant difference was noted in SULF1 mRNA between WT and SULF2-KO mice at any individual time point ( supplemental Fig. 1 B ). Thus, SULF2 deficiency is not accompanied by a major compensatory increase in SULF1 expression during liver regeneration. The factors determining the selective role of SULF2 in this cellular process will require further exploration.

The accumulation of hepatocellular fat (“transient steatosis”) occurring in the liver after PH is known to play a role in the regenerative response ( 22 – 24 ). This accumulation is concomitant with hepatocyte proliferation, and it can contribute to the regulation cell growth ( 23 ). Blockade of hepatic fat accumulation after PH using pharmacological and genetic means causes inhibition of liver regeneration ( 24 , 27 ). Lipids are used as an energy source by the hepatocyte for DNA replication and phospholipids synthesis. The most important source of lipids that accumulates in the regenerating liver is mainly free fatty acids supplied from adipose tissue. However, de novo hepatic fatty acid synthesis has also been reported ( 26 ). According to these observations, our study shows a delay in fat accumulation that is accompanied by a delay in cell proliferation. These data suggest that SULF2 may play additional roles in the regulation of cell growth independent of the regulation of CYCLIN D1, and may involve the modulation of lipid accumulation in the liver.

Previous studies show that mice with conditional knock-out of β-CATENIN in hepatocytes display suboptimal regeneration or delayed onset of regeneration. Additionally, they exhibit a biphasic trend in proliferation that peaked at day 3 and increased slightly again at day 14 ( 32 , 33 ). We found that SULF2-KO significantly delayed liver regeneration post PH. The delay in liver regeneration correlates with decreased translocation of β-CATENIN to the hepatocyte nuclei, thus suggesting that SULF2 regulates liver regeneration in part through effects on the WNT/β-CATENIN signaling pathway ( Fig. 2 ). In addition, we have identified a novel regulatory mechanism for CYCLIN D1 in this cellular process. This mechanism involves the transcription factor GLI1 acting downstream of β-CATENIN, thus expanding the repertoire of transcriptional regulators controlled by this pathway.

The WNT/β-CATENIN and HEDGEHOG signaling pathways are important in the coordination of developmental transitions and have been postulated to interact at multiple levels ( 37 – 39 ). However, these interactions have not been completely elucidated. We found that SULF2 deficiency substantially inhibits the WNT/β-CATENIN signaling pathway post PH, resulting in lower expression of GLI1. Interestingly, hepatocytes isolated from WT mice treated with WNT3a show an increase in GLI1 expression, and SULF2 is necessary for WNT induction of GLI1 in a HEDGEHOG-independent manner. Similar to the SULF2-KO, GLI1-KO also delayed liver regeneration after PH suggesting that WNT/β-CATENIN signaling regulates GLI1, and GLI1 plays an important role in liver regeneration. Finally, we demonstrate that this axis acts on the cell cycle regulator CYCLIN D1. In SULF2-KO and GLI1-KO mice the levels of CYCLIN D1 are lower compared with WT controls. GLI1 binds to the promoter of cyclin d1 and regulates the expression of this cyclin and the activity of its promoter. Additional experiments beyond the scope of this study are needed to investigate the epigenetics mechanism regulated by GLI1 and define the possible interplay between HEDGEHOG signaling and SULF2/GLI1 in cells having both pathways active.

In summary, our results show that SULF2-WNT3a-GLI1 regulates liver regeneration after PH through activation of the WNT/β-CATENIN signaling pathway, and consequent downstream activation of GLI1 by regulating CYCLIN D1 ( Fig. 6 D ). Together these findings provide new insight into the mechanisms controlling liver regeneration and could serve as a foundation for the development of novel therapeutic regimens aimed at improving tissue regeneration.
