---
pmid: '30107486'
title: CD21 and FCRL5 form a receptor complex with robust B-cell activating capacity.
authors:
- Franco A
- Kraus Z
- Li H
- Seibert N
- Dement-Brown J
- Tolnay M
journal: Int Immunol
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxy052
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# CD21 and FCRL5 form a receptor complex with robust B-cell activating capacity.
**Authors:** Franco A, Kraus Z, Li H, Seibert N, Dement-Brown J, Tolnay M
**Journal:** Int Immunol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/intimm/dxy052](https://doi.org/10.1093/intimm/dxy052)

## Abstract

1. Int Immunol. 2018 Nov 14;30(12):569-578. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxy052.

CD21 and FCRL5 form a receptor complex with robust B-cell activating capacity.

Franco A(1), Kraus Z(1), Li H(1), Seibert N(2), Dement-Brown J(1), Tolnay M(1).

Author information:
(1)Office of Biotechnology Products, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, 
Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, MD, USA.
(2)Fina Biosolutions LLC, Rockville, MD, USA.

The B-cell response to antigen is critically regulated by co-receptors. CD21 
(complement receptor 2) amplifies the response to antigen linked to its ligands, 
specific C3 fragments. In contrast, human Fc receptor-like 5 (FCRL5), a novel 
IgG receptor, was reported to inhibit B-cell receptor (BCR) signaling. Here, we 
show that CD21 and FCRL5 physically associate, suggesting that immune complexes 
containing both C3 fragment and IgG could simultaneously engage the 
pre-assembled receptors. We found that activating signaling molecules such as 
CD19, active PLCγ2 and BTK were rapidly recruited to FCRL5 upon engagement, 
suggesting a novel activating function for FCRL5. We confirmed that FCRL5 
through its ITIMs (immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motif) inhibited BCR 
signaling in the absence of CD21 stimulation. In contrast, triple engagement of 
FCRL5, CD21 and the BCR led to a superior calcium response compared to CD21 and 
BCR co-stimulation, in both cell lines and tonsil B cells. Furthermore, the 
novel activating function was independent of established FCRL5 signaling motifs. 
While human peripheral B cells express either FCRL5 or CD21, we identified a 
sizable subset of tonsil B cells which co-express the two receptors. We propose 
that FCRL5 has dual signaling capacity, while CD21 co-engagement serves as 
molecular switch, converting FCRL5 from a negative to a positive co-receptor. In 
tissues, B cells that co-express FCRL5 and CD21 could robustly respond to IgG 
immune complexes loaded with C3 fragments.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/dxy052
PMID: 30107486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
