---
pmid: '1898048'
title: Coordinate- and elicitor-dependent expression of stilbene synthase and phenylalanine
  ammonia-lyase genes in Vitis cv. Optima.
authors:
- Melchior F
- Kindl H
journal: Arch Biochem Biophys
year: '1991'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0003-9861(91)90234-a
---

# Coordinate- and elicitor-dependent expression of stilbene synthase and phenylalanine ammonia-lyase genes in Vitis cv. Optima.
**Authors:** Melchior F, Kindl H
**Journal:** Arch Biochem Biophys (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0003-9861(91)90234-a](https://doi.org/10.1016/0003-9861(91)90234-a)

## Abstract

1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1991 Aug 1;288(2):552-7. doi: 
10.1016/0003-9861(91)90234-a.

Coordinate- and elicitor-dependent expression of stilbene synthase and 
phenylalanine ammonia-lyase genes in Vitis cv. Optima.

Melchior F(1), Kindl H.

Author information:
(1)University of Marburg, Department of Chemistry, Germany.

The mechanisms controlling the induction of stilbene synthase and phenylalanine 
ammonia-lyase (PAL), two putative key regulatory enzymes of the biosynthetic 
pathway to stilbene phytoalexins, have been investigated. The induction was 
studied in cell suspension cultures of grape (Vitis cv. Optima) by treatment 
with fungal cell wall. Several independent cDNA clones for PAL and stilbene 
synthase were isolated from a cDNA library of fungal cell wall-induced grape 
cells and identified by sequence analysis. The stilbene synthase cDNA sequence 
of pSV21 predicted a protein of 392 amino acids and Mr 42,791, similar in size 
to that observed experimentally for immunodetected stilbene synthase. The cDNA 
sequences of pSV21 and pSV25 differed in 76 bp in the coding region. The 
sequences of grape stilbene synthase cDNAs exhibited significant homology to the 
sequence reported for the peanut stilbene synthase cDNA. Both PAL and stilbene 
synthase mRNA, measured by RNA blot hybridizations, were induced within 1 h of 
addition of fungal cell wall preparations to the cell cultures, rose to a 
maximum by the sixth hour, then declined slowly over the next 20 h. The 
activities of PAL and stilbene synthase were also induced in parallel, but 
reached their maximum at different times after fungal cell wall addition to the 
cell cultures. The induction patterns of stilbene synthase and PAL in grape and 
peanut are discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/0003-9861(91)90234-a
PMID: 1898048 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
