---
pmid: '21969592'
title: Tumor suppressor down-regulated in renal cell carcinoma 1 (DRR1) is a stress-induced
  actin bundling factor that modulates synaptic efficacy and cognition.
authors:
- Schmidt MV
- Schülke JP
- Liebl C
- Stiess M
- Avrabos C
- Bock J
- Wochnik GM
- Davies HA
- Zimmermann N
- Scharf SH
- Trümbach D
- Wurst W
- Zieglgänsberger W
- Turck C
- Holsboer F
- Stewart MG
- Bradke F
- Eder M
- Müller MB
- Rein T
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3193257
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1103318108
---

# Tumor suppressor down-regulated in renal cell carcinoma 1 (DRR1) is a stress-induced actin bundling factor that modulates synaptic efficacy and cognition.
**Authors:** Schmidt MV, Schülke JP, Liebl C, Stiess M, Avrabos C, Bock J, Wochnik GM, Davies HA, Zimmermann N, Scharf SH, Trümbach D, Wurst W, Zieglgänsberger W, Turck C, Holsboer F, Stewart MG, Bradke F, Eder M, Müller MB, Rein T
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1103318108](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1103318108)
**PMC:** [PMC3193257](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3193257/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Oct 11;108(41):17213-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1103318108. Epub 2011 Oct 3.

Tumor suppressor down-regulated in renal cell carcinoma 1 (DRR1) is a 
stress-induced actin bundling factor that modulates synaptic efficacy and 
cognition.

Schmidt MV(1), Schülke JP, Liebl C, Stiess M, Avrabos C, Bock J, Wochnik GM, 
Davies HA, Zimmermann N, Scharf SH, Trümbach D, Wurst W, Zieglgänsberger W, 
Turck C, Holsboer F, Stewart MG, Bradke F, Eder M, Müller MB, Rein T.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, 80804 Munich, Germany.

Stress has been identified as a major causal factor for many mental disorders. 
However, our knowledge about the chain of molecular and cellular events 
translating stress experience into altered behavior is still rather scant. Here, 
we have characterized a murine ortholog of the putative tumor suppressor gene 
DRR1 as a unique stress-induced protein in brain. It binds to actin, promotes 
bundling and stabilization of actin filaments, and impacts on actin-dependent 
neurite outgrowth. Endogenous DRR1 localizes to some, but not all, synapses, 
with preference for the presynaptic region. Hippocampal virus-mediated 
enhancement of DRR1 expression reduced spine density, diminished the probability 
of synaptic glutamate release, and altered cognitive performance. DRR1 emerges 
as a protein to link stress with actin dynamics, which in addition is able to 
act on synaptic function and cognition.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1103318108
PMCID: PMC3193257
PMID: 21969592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Stress has been identified as a major causal factor for many mental disorders. However, our knowledge about the chain of molecular and cellular events translating stress experience into altered behavior is still rather scant. Here, we have characterized a murine ortholog of the putative tumor suppressor gene DRR1 as a unique stress-induced protein in brain. It binds to actin, promotes bundling and stabilization of actin filaments, and impacts on actin-dependent neurite outgrowth. Endogenous DRR1 localizes to some, but not all, synapses, with preference for the presynaptic region. Hippocampal virus-mediated enhancement of DRR1 expression reduced spine density, diminished the probability of synaptic glutamate release, and altered cognitive performance. DRR1 emerges as a protein to link stress with actin dynamics, which in addition is able to act on synaptic function and cognition.

Discussion

Deciphering the molecular players is paramount to understanding how stress ultimately leads to changes at the behavioral level. We identified DRR1 as a stress- and glucocorticoid-responsive protein that impacts on F-actin formation, providing a direct molecular link between stress and actin-dependent processes. DRR1, moreover, is able to modify synaptic efficacy and to improve cognition. DRR1 was proposed previously as a tumor suppressor and is thus another example of a multifunctional protein. Given the importance of actin filament reorganization in mitosis and cancer ( 10 ), the elucidation of DRR1's molecular function as an actin modulatory factor may also provide further insights into its role in tumorigenesis ( 11 ).

As a major cytoskeletal protein expressed in pre- and postsynaptic structures, actin is a key molecule for shaping neuronal morphology and function. DRR1 has the potential to directly affect information processing of single neurons by altering the interplay between presynaptic elements and dendritic spines. Modulation of actin dynamics may thus function as a highly effective way to control synaptic efficacy and complex behavior ( 5 , 12 ).

Mechanistically, we consider it unlikely that DRR1 acts indirectly on actin, as we observed the bundling effect with purified recombinant DRR1 and purified actin preparations. DRR1 may instead act similarly to the known actin cross-linking proteins β-actinin, filamin, or spectrin ( 5 , 13 ), with either two binding sites for actin or the ability to dimerize. Our in silico search revealed also a predicted coiled coil region, pointing to the possibility of the protein to dimerize or even oligomerize ( Fig. S2 A ).

DRR1 RNA levels are highest in brain ( 14 ). Its brain region-specific expression and stress regulation suggests a rather distinct function, which may be additionally under epigenetic control ( 6 ). Of particular relevance to stress physiology is the prominent expression and induction of DRR1 in the hippocampus, as this brain region is particularly rich in corticosteroid receptors and critically influences the stress hormone cascade and cognition ( 1 ). The use of a viral expression system allowed us to specifically mimic the stress-induced increase of DRR1 in this brain region, thereby distinguishing its effects from those of the plethora of other stress-induced factors ( 15 ).

Enhancing DRR1 reduced the number of spines. A similar reduction in the number of spines is induced after stress exposure in rodents ( 16 ) and in depression in humans ( 17 ). Because enhanced levels of DRR1 in neuronal cells hampered neurite outgrowth, but had no effect on already developed neurites, it is likely that DRR1 affects the formation and stability of spines, a process recently discovered as essential for learning and memory ( 18 – 20 ). Thus, DRR1 can influence actin dynamics in axon growth and spine dynamics, processes that occur at different developmental stages but that are based on remarkably similar molecular mechanisms ( 21 ). In general, the timing and magnitude of DRR1 increase might be crucial, and—similar to stress—long-term exposure may also have maladaptive consequences.

By changing actin dynamics, presynaptic DRR1 has the ability to use an efficient way to impact on the efficacy of neurotransmitter release ( 9 ) and adds to the emerging concept of regulation of actin dynamics as a pivotal element in controlling dendritic structure and synaptic transmission ( 22 ). For example, latrunculin A—a substance that, by promoting actin depolymerization, exerts an effect on actin dynamics opposite to that of DRR1—also caused the opposite electrophysiological effects, i.e., a decreased paired-pulse ratio and an increased input–output relationship ( 9 ). In hippocampal synaptic boutons, vesicle mobility has been shown to be increased upon depolymerization of F-actin ( 9 ). We therefore hypothesize that DRR1 reduces the likelihood of synaptic vesicles being recruited into the readily releasable pool at the presynaptic terminal.

It is not unexpected that a multifunctional, actin modulatory protein impacts on cognition ( 23 ). However, although there are numerous ways to disrupt memory, factors enhancing cognition have rarely been identified and are of great interest ( 24 ). Enhancement of DRR1 in the hippocampus produced increased cognitive capacity and flexibility, as indicated by our data from the Morris water maze, the Y-maze, and the object relocation test. The exact molecular mechanism of DRR1 in enhancing memory still remains to be elucidated in detail, in particular because the combination with the structural and electrophysiological alterations induced by enhanced DRR1 levels is rather unusual. Improved memory is often associated with increased LTP ( 25 ). However, there is also evidence that hippocampal LTP in brain-slice preparations does not fully picture the in vivo processes underlying learning and memory ( 26 ). For example, mice lacking the AMPA receptor subunit GluR1 have deficits in LTP at CA3-CA1 synapses, but display normal spatial reference memory ( 27 ). Thus, although decreased LTP in slices from mice with enhanced levels of DRR1 indicates an impact of DRR1 on hippocampal long-term synaptic plasticity, the data cannot be directly correlated to the behavioral phenotype of the animals.

It is notable that the F-actin–stabilizing capability of DRR1 did not affect memory acquisition, but is apparently important during consolidation or retrieval. Therefore, DRR1 may be involved in mediating the observed time- and context-dependent positive effects of stress on cognition ( 28 , 29 ).

In sum, among a number of actin-binding proteins ( 30 ), DRR1 is specified by its stress-regulation. We suggest it as a candidate protein that translates experience of stressful life events into cellular and structural adaptive mechanisms and the modulation of complex behavioral traits. This proposed molecular route in stress adaptation has to be considered when designing compounds and regimes for drug treatment to prevent activity-dependent, long-term changes in transducing and suppressive systems for stress.

Materials and Methods

Detailed information on experimental procedures is provided in SI Materials and Methods .
