---
pmid: '17309880'
title: Over-expression of alpha-synuclein in human neural progenitors leads to specific
  changes in fate and differentiation.
authors:
- Schneider BL
- Seehus CR
- Capowski EE
- Aebischer P
- Zhang SC
- Svendsen CN
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddm008
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Over-expression of alpha-synuclein in human neural progenitors leads to specific changes in fate and differentiation.
**Authors:** Schneider BL, Seehus CR, Capowski EE, Aebischer P, Zhang SC, Svendsen CN
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddm008](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddm008)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 Mar 15;16(6):651-66. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddm008. Epub 2007
Feb  19.

Over-expression of alpha-synuclein in human neural progenitors leads to specific 
changes in fate and differentiation.

Schneider BL(1), Seehus CR, Capowski EE, Aebischer P, Zhang SC, Svendsen CN.

Author information:
(1)Waisman Center and Department of Anatomy, University of Wisconsin, Madison, 
WI 53705, USA.

Missense mutations and extra copies of the alpha-Synuclein gene result in 
Parkinson disease (PD). Human stem and progenitor cells can be expanded from 
embryonic tissues and provide a source of non-transformed neural cells to 
explore the effects of these pathogenic mutations specifically in human nervous 
tissue. We over-expressed the wild type, A53T and A30P forms of alpha-synuclein 
in expanded populations of progenitors derived from the human fetal cortex. The 
protein localized in the nucleus and around microvesicles. Only the A53T form 
was acutely toxic, suggesting a unique vulnerability of these progenitors to 
this mutation. Interestingly, constitutive over-expression of wild-type 
alpha-synuclein progressively impaired the innate ability of progenitors to 
switch toward gliogenesis at later passages. To explore the effect of 
alpha-synuclein on neuronal subtypes selectively affected in PD, such as 
dopaminergic neurons, alpha-synuclein and its mutations were also over-expressed 
in terminally differentiating neuroectodermal cultures derived from human 
embryonic stem cells (hESC). Alpha-synuclein induced acute cytotoxicity and 
reduced the number of neurons expressing either tyrosine hydroxylase or 
gamma-aminobutyric acid over time. Consistent with the selective vulnerability 
of ventral midbrain dopaminergic neurons, alpha-synuclein cytotoxicity appeared 
most pronounced following FGF8/SHH specification and was decreased by inhibition 
of dopamine synthesis. Together, these data show that alpha-synuclein 
over-expressed in human neural embryonic cells results in patterns of 
degeneration that in some cases match features of Parkinson Disease. Thus, 
neural cells derived from hESC provide a useful model system to understand the 
development of alpha-synuclein-related pathologies and allow therapeutic drug 
screening.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddm008
PMID: 17309880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
