---
pmid: '18045539'
title: 'Integrating patterning signals: Wnt/GSK3 regulates the duration of the BMP/Smad1
  signal.'
authors:
- Fuentealba LC
- Eivers E
- Ikeda A
- Hurtado C
- Kuroda H
- Pera EM
- De Robertis EM
journal: Cell
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2200633
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.09.027
---

# Integrating patterning signals: Wnt/GSK3 regulates the duration of the BMP/Smad1 signal.
**Authors:** Fuentealba LC, Eivers E, Ikeda A, Hurtado C, Kuroda H, Pera EM, De Robertis EM
**Journal:** Cell (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2007.09.027](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2007.09.027)
**PMC:** [PMC2200633](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2200633/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2007 Nov 30;131(5):980-93. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.09.027.

Integrating patterning signals: Wnt/GSK3 regulates the duration of the BMP/Smad1 
signal.

Fuentealba LC(1), Eivers E, Ikeda A, Hurtado C, Kuroda H, Pera EM, De Robertis 
EM.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Biological Chemistry, 
University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1662, USA.

BMP receptors determine the intensity of BMP signals via Smad1 C-terminal 
phosphorylations. Here we show that a finely controlled cell biological pathway 
terminates this activity. The duration of the activated pSmad1(Cter) signal was 
regulated by sequential Smad1 linker region phosphorylations at conserved MAPK 
and GSK3 sites required for its polyubiquitinylation and transport to the 
centrosome. Proteasomal degradation of activated Smad1 and total 
polyubiquitinated proteins took place in the centrosome. Inhibitors of the Erk, 
p38, and JNK MAPKs, as well as GSK3 inhibitors, prolonged the duration of a 
pulse of BMP7. Wnt signaling decreased pSmad1(GSK3) antigen levels and 
redistributed it from the centrosome to cytoplasmic LRP6 signalosomes. In 
Xenopus embryos, it was found that Wnts induce epidermis and that this required 
an active BMP-Smad pathway. Epistatic experiments suggested that the 
dorsoventral (BMP) and anteroposterior (Wnt/GSK3) patterning gradients are 
integrated at the level of Smad1 phosphorylations during embryonic pattern 
formation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.09.027
PMCID: PMC2200633
PMID: 18045539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
