---
pmid: '23677992'
title: 'High specificity in CheR methyltransferase function: CheR2 of Pseudomonas
  putida is essential for chemotaxis, whereas CheR1 is involved in biofilm formation.'
authors:
- García-Fontana C
- Reyes-Darias JA
- Muñoz-Martínez F
- Alfonso C
- Morel B
- Ramos JL
- Krell T
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3696673
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.472605
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# High specificity in CheR methyltransferase function: CheR2 of Pseudomonas putida is essential for chemotaxis, whereas CheR1 is involved in biofilm formation.
**Authors:** García-Fontana C, Reyes-Darias JA, Muñoz-Martínez F, Alfonso C, Morel B, Ramos JL, Krell T
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M113.472605](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M113.472605)
**PMC:** [PMC3696673](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3696673/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jun 28;288(26):18987-99. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.472605. Epub 
2013 May 15.

High specificity in CheR methyltransferase function: CheR2 of Pseudomonas putida 
is essential for chemotaxis, whereas CheR1 is involved in biofilm formation.

García-Fontana C(1), Reyes-Darias JA, Muñoz-Martínez F, Alfonso C, Morel B, 
Ramos JL, Krell T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Protection, Estación Experimental del Zaidín, 
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, C/ Prof. Albareda, 1, 18008 
Granada, Spain.

Chemosensory pathways are a major signal transduction mechanism in bacteria. 
CheR methyltransferases catalyze the methylation of the cytosolic signaling 
domain of chemoreceptors and are among the core proteins of chemosensory 
cascades. These enzymes have primarily been studied Escherichia coli and 
Salmonella typhimurium, which possess a single CheR involved in chemotaxis. Many 
other bacteria possess multiple cheR genes. Because the sequences of 
chemoreceptor signaling domains are highly conserved, it remains to be 
established with what degree of specificity CheR paralogues exert their 
activity. We report here a comparative analysis of the three CheR paralogues of 
Pseudomonas putida. Isothermal titration calorimetry studies show that these 
paralogues bind the product of the methylation reaction, S-adenosylhomocysteine, 
with much higher affinity (KD of 0.14-2.2 μM) than the substrate 
S-adenosylmethionine (KD of 22-43 μM), which indicates product feedback 
inhibition. Product binding was particularly tight for CheR2. Analytical 
ultracentrifugation experiments demonstrate that CheR2 is monomeric in the 
absence and presence of S-adenosylmethionine or S-adenosylhomocysteine. 
Methylation assays show that CheR2, but not the other paralogues, methylates the 
McpS and McpT chemotaxis receptors. The mutant in CheR2 was deficient in 
chemotaxis, whereas mutation of CheR1 and CheR3 had either no or little effect 
on chemotaxis. In contrast, biofilm formation of the CheR1 mutant was largely 
impaired but not affected in the other mutants. We conclude that CheR2 forms 
part of a chemotaxis pathway, and CheR1 forms part of a chemosensory route that 
controls biofilm formation. Data suggest that CheR methyltransferases act with 
high specificity on their cognate chemoreceptors.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.472605
PMCID: PMC3696673
PMID: 23677992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
