---
pmid: '8058740'
title: Expression cloning of a CMP-NeuAc:NeuAc alpha 2-3Gal beta 1-4Glc beta 1-1'Cer
  alpha 2,8-sialyltransferase (GD3 synthase) from human melanoma cells.
authors:
- Nara K
- Watanabe Y
- Maruyama K
- Kasahara K
- Nagai Y
- Sanai Y
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC44522
doi: 10.1073/pnas.91.17.7952
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Expression cloning of a CMP-NeuAc:NeuAc alpha 2-3Gal beta 1-4Glc beta 1-1'Cer alpha 2,8-sialyltransferase (GD3 synthase) from human melanoma cells.
**Authors:** Nara K, Watanabe Y, Maruyama K, Kasahara K, Nagai Y, Sanai Y
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.91.17.7952](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.91.17.7952)
**PMC:** [PMC44522](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC44522/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Aug 16;91(17):7952-6. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.91.17.7952.

Expression cloning of a CMP-NeuAc:NeuAc alpha 2-3Gal beta 1-4Glc beta 1-1'Cer 
alpha 2,8-sialyltransferase (GD3 synthase) from human melanoma cells.

Nara K(1), Watanabe Y, Maruyama K, Kasahara K, Nagai Y, Sanai Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemical Cell Research, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of 
Medical Science, Japan.

Using an expression cloning approach, we have isolated a cDNA encoding GD3 
synthase (CMP-NeuAc:NeuAc alpha 2-3Gal beta 1-4Glc beta 1-1'Cer alpha 
2,8-sialyltransferase, EC 2.4.99.8), which is a key regulatory enzyme 
determining the prominence of the ganglioside biosynthesis pathway. The cloned 
cDNA encodes a 341-amino acid protein containing a single transmembrane domain 
at its N-terminal region, suggesting that the protein has a type II 
transmembrane topology. The sequence of alpha 2,8-sialyltransferase showed a 
high level of similarity with other sialyltransferases at two conserved regions 
typical in the sialyltransferase family. Transfected cells containing the cloned 
cDNA expressed GD3 ganglioside on the cell surface, which was detectable with 
specific anti-GD3 antibody by immunofluorescence and immunostaining after 
separation of isolated glycolipids on thin-layer chromatography. The cDNA 
hybridized to a single mRNA species of 2.4 kb in melanoma cells. This 
sialyltransferase is distinctive in catalyzing the formation of the alpha 2-8 
linkage of sialic acids.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.91.17.7952
PMCID: PMC44522
PMID: 8058740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Using an expression cloning approach, we have isolated a cDNA encoding GD3 synthase (CMP-NeuAc:NeuAc alpha 2-3Gal beta 1-4Glc beta 1-1'Cer alpha 2,8-sialyltransferase, EC 2.4.99.8), which is a key regulatory enzyme determining the prominence of the ganglioside biosynthesis pathway. The cloned cDNA encodes a 341-amino acid protein containing a single transmembrane domain at its N-terminal region, suggesting that the protein has a type II transmembrane topology. The sequence of alpha 2,8-sialyltransferase showed a high level of similarity with other sialyltransferases at two conserved regions typical in the sialyltransferase family. Transfected cells containing the cloned cDNA expressed GD3 ganglioside on the cell surface, which was detectable with specific anti-GD3 antibody by immunofluorescence and immunostaining after separation of isolated glycolipids on thin-layer chromatography. The cDNA hybridized to a single mRNA species of 2.4 kb in melanoma cells. This sialyltransferase is distinctive in catalyzing the formation of the alpha 2-8 linkage of sialic acids.
