---
pmid: '22997150'
title: Proteomic analysis of interactors for yeast protein arginine methyltransferase
  Hmt1 reveals novel substrate and insights into additional biological roles.
authors:
- Jackson CA
- Yadav N
- Min S
- Li J
- Milliman EJ
- Qu J
- Chen YC
- Yu MC
journal: Proteomics
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/pmic.201200132
---

# Proteomic analysis of interactors for yeast protein arginine methyltransferase Hmt1 reveals novel substrate and insights into additional biological roles.
**Authors:** Jackson CA, Yadav N, Min S, Li J, Milliman EJ, Qu J, Chen YC, Yu MC
**Journal:** Proteomics (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pmic.201200132](https://doi.org/10.1002/pmic.201200132)

## Abstract

1. Proteomics. 2012 Nov;12(22):3304-14. doi: 10.1002/pmic.201200132.

Proteomic analysis of interactors for yeast protein arginine methyltransferase 
Hmt1 reveals novel substrate and insights into additional biological roles.

Jackson CA(1), Yadav N, Min S, Li J, Milliman EJ, Qu J, Chen YC, Yu MC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, State University of New York at Buffalo, 
Buffalo, New York 14260, USA.

Protein arginine methylation is a PTM catalyzed by an evolutionarily conserved 
family of enzymes called protein arginine methyltransferases (PRMTs), with PRMT1 
being the most conserved member of this enzyme family. This modification has 
emerged to be an important regulator of protein functions. To better understand 
the role of PRMTs in cellular pathways and functions, we have carried out a 
proteomic profiling experiment to comprehensively identify the physical 
interactors of Hmt1, the budding yeast homolog for human PRMT1. Using a 
dual-enzymatic digestion linear trap quadrupole/Orbitrap proteomic strategy, we 
identified a total of 108 proteins that specifically copurify with Hmt1 by 
tandem affinity purification. A reverse coimmunoprecipitation experiment was 
used to confirm Hmt1's physical association with Bre5, Mtr4, Snf2, Sum1, and 
Ssd1, five proteins that were identified as Hmt1-specific interactors in 
multiple biological replicates. To determine whether the identified 
Hmt1-interactors had the potential to act as an Hmt1 substrate, we used 
published bioinformatics algorithms that predict the presence and location of 
potential methylarginines for each identified interactor. One of the top hits 
from this analysis, Snf2, was experimentally confirmed as a robust substrate of 
Hmt1 in vitro. Overall, our data provide a feasible proteomic approach that aid 
in the better understanding of PRMT1's roles within a cell.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/pmic.201200132
PMID: 22997150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
