---
pmid: '15632193'
title: SIRT1 deacetylation and repression of p300 involves lysine residues 1020/1024
  within the cell cycle regulatory domain 1.
authors:
- Bouras T
- Fu M
- Sauve AA
- Wang F
- Quong AA
- Perkins ND
- Hay RT
- Gu W
- Pestell RG
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M408748200
---

# SIRT1 deacetylation and repression of p300 involves lysine residues 1020/1024 within the cell cycle regulatory domain 1.
**Authors:** Bouras T, Fu M, Sauve AA, Wang F, Quong AA, Perkins ND, Hay RT, Gu W, Pestell RG
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M408748200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M408748200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Mar 18;280(11):10264-76. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M408748200. Epub 
2005 Jan 4.

SIRT1 deacetylation and repression of p300 involves lysine residues 1020/1024 
within the cell cycle regulatory domain 1.

Bouras T(1), Fu M, Sauve AA, Wang F, Quong AA, Perkins ND, Hay RT, Gu W, Pestell 
RG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown 
University, 3970 Reservoir Rd.,Washington, DC 20057, USA.

The SIR2 family of nicotinamide adenosine dinucleotide (NAD)-dependent 
deacetylases modulates diverse biological functions in different species, 
including longevity, apoptosis, cell cycle exit, and cellular differentiation. 
SIRT1, the closest mammalian ortholog of the yeast SIR2 (silent information 
regulator 2) gene, represses several transcription factors, including p53, 
NFkappaB and forkhead proteins. The p300 protein serves as a rate-limiting 
transcriptional cointegrator of diverse transcription factors either to activate 
or to repress transcription through modular subdomains. Herein, SIRT1 physically 
interacted with and repressed p300 transactivation, requiring the NAD-dependent 
deacetylase activity of SIRT1. SIRT1 repression involved the CRD1 
transcriptional repression domain of p300. Two residues within the CRD1 domain 
(Lys-1020 and Lys-1024) were required for SIRT1 repression and served as 
substrates for SIRT1 deacetylation. These residues also serve as acceptor 
lysines for modification by the ubiquitin-like SUMO protein. The SUMO-specific 
protease SSP3 relieved SIRT1 repression of p300. SSP3 antagonism of SIRT1 
required the SUMO-deconjugating function of SSP3. Thus, p300 serves as a 
deacetylase substrate for SIRT1 through a conserved SUMO consensus motif. 
Because p300 is a limiting transcriptional cofactor, deacetylation and 
repression of p300 by SIRT1 may serve an important integration point during 
metabolism and cellular differentiation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M408748200
PMID: 15632193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
