---
pmid: '19734305'
title: Polar positioning of a conjugation protein from the integrative and conjugative
  element ICEBs1 of Bacillus subtilis.
authors:
- Berkmen MB
- Lee CA
- Loveday EK
- Grossman AD
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2798270
doi: 10.1128/JB.00860-09
---

# Polar positioning of a conjugation protein from the integrative and conjugative element ICEBs1 of Bacillus subtilis.
**Authors:** Berkmen MB, Lee CA, Loveday EK, Grossman AD
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JB.00860-09](https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.00860-09)
**PMC:** [PMC2798270](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2798270/)

## Abstract

1. J Bacteriol. 2010 Jan;192(1):38-45. doi: 10.1128/JB.00860-09.

Polar positioning of a conjugation protein from the integrative and conjugative 
element ICEBs1 of Bacillus subtilis.

Berkmen MB(1), Lee CA, Loveday EK, Grossman AD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 
02139, USA.

Comment in
    J Bacteriol. 2010 Jan;192(1):23-5. doi: 10.1128/JB.01305-09.

ICEBs1 is an integrative and conjugative element found in the chromosome of 
Bacillus subtilis. ICEBs1 encodes functions needed for its excision and transfer 
to recipient cells. We found that the ICEBs1 gene conE (formerly yddE) is 
required for conjugation and that conjugative transfer of ICEBs1 requires a 
conserved ATPase motif of ConE. ConE belongs to the HerA/FtsK superfamily of 
ATPases, which includes the well-characterized proteins FtsK, SpoIIIE, VirB4, 
and VirD4. We found that a ConE-GFP (green fluorescent protein) fusion 
associated with the membrane predominantly at the cell poles in ICEBs1 donor 
cells. At least one ICEBs1 product likely interacts with ConE to target it to 
the membrane and cell poles, as ConE-GFP was dispersed throughout the cytoplasm 
in a strain lacking ICEBs1. We also visualized the subcellular location of 
ICEBs1. When integrated in the chromosome, ICEBs1 was located near midcell along 
the length of the cell, a position characteristic of that chromosomal region. 
Following excision, ICEBs1 was more frequently found near a cell pole. Excision 
of ICEBs1 also caused altered positioning of at least one component of the 
replisome. Taken together, our findings indicate that ConE is a critical 
component of the ICEBs1 conjugation machinery, that conjugative transfer of 
ICEBs1 from B. subtilis likely initiates at a donor cell pole, and that ICEBs1 
affects the subcellular position of the replisome.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00860-09
PMCID: PMC2798270
PMID: 19734305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
