---
pmid: '31468675'
title: H3K14 ubiquitylation promotes H3K9 methylation for heterochromatin assembly.
authors:
- Oya E
- Nakagawa R
- Yoshimura Y
- Tanaka M
- Nishibuchi G
- Machida S
- Shirai A
- Ekwall K
- Kurumizaka H
- Tagami H
- Nakayama JI
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2019'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC6776926
doi: 10.15252/embr.201948111
---

# H3K14 ubiquitylation promotes H3K9 methylation for heterochromatin assembly.
**Authors:** Oya E, Nakagawa R, Yoshimura Y, Tanaka M, Nishibuchi G, Machida S, Shirai A, Ekwall K, Kurumizaka H, Tagami H, Nakayama JI
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2019)
**DOI:** [10.15252/embr.201948111](https://doi.org/10.15252/embr.201948111)
**PMC:** [PMC6776926](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6776926/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2019 Oct 4;20(10):e48111. doi: 10.15252/embr.201948111. Epub 2019
Aug  29.

H3K14 ubiquitylation promotes H3K9 methylation for heterochromatin assembly.

Oya E(1)(2), Nakagawa R(3), Yoshimura Y(4), Tanaka M(4), Nishibuchi G(1), 
Machida S(5), Shirai A(6), Ekwall K(2), Kurumizaka H(5)(7), Tagami H(1), 
Nakayama JI(1)(4)(8).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Natural Sciences, Nagoya City University, Nagoya, Japan.
(2)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, 
Sweden.
(3)Laboratory for Phyloinformatics, RIKEN Center for Biosystems Dynamics 
Research, Kobe, Japan.
(4)Division of Chromatin Regulation, National Institute for Basic Biology, 
Okazaki, Japan.
(5)Laboratory of Structural Biology, Graduate School of Advanced Science and 
Engineering, Waseda University, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Cellular Memory Laboratory, RIKEN, Wako, Japan.
(7)Laboratory of Chromatin Structure and Function, Institute for Quantitative 
Biosciences, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(8)Department of Basic Biology, School of Life Science, The Graduate University 
for Advanced Studies (SOKENDAI), Okazaki, Japan.

The methylation of histone H3 at lysine 9 (H3K9me), performed by the 
methyltransferase Clr4/SUV39H, is a key event in heterochromatin assembly. In 
fission yeast, Clr4, together with the ubiquitin E3 ligase Cul4, forms the Clr4 
methyltransferase complex (CLRC), whose physiological targets and biological 
role are currently unclear. Here, we show that CLRC-dependent H3 ubiquitylation 
regulates Clr4's methyltransferase activity. Affinity-purified CLRC 
ubiquitylates histone H3, and mass spectrometric and mutation analyses reveal 
that H3 lysine 14 (H3K14) is the preferred target of the complex. Chromatin 
immunoprecipitation analysis shows that H3K14 ubiquitylation (H3K14ub) is 
closely associated with H3K9me-enriched chromatin. Notably, the CLRC-mediated H3 
ubiquitylation promotes H3K9me by Clr4, suggesting that H3 ubiquitylation is 
intimately linked to the establishment and/or maintenance of H3K9me. These 
findings demonstrate a cross-talk mechanism between histone ubiquitylation and 
methylation that is involved in heterochromatin assembly.

© 2019 The Authors.

DOI: 10.15252/embr.201948111
PMCID: PMC6776926
PMID: 31468675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

The methylation of histone H3 at lysine 9 (H3K9me), performed by the methyltransferase Clr4/SUV39H, is a key event in heterochromatin assembly. In fission yeast, Clr4, together with the ubiquitin E3 ligase Cul4, forms the Clr4 methyltransferase complex (CLRC), whose physiological targets and biological role are currently unclear. Here, we show that CLRC‐dependent H3 ubiquitylation regulates Clr4's methyltransferase activity. Affinity‐purified CLRC ubiquitylates histone H3, and mass spectrometric and mutation analyses reveal that H3 lysine 14 (H3K14) is the preferred target of the complex. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis shows that H3K14 ubiquitylation (H3K14ub) is closely associated with H3K9me‐enriched chromatin. Notably, the CLRC‐mediated H3 ubiquitylation promotes H3K9me by Clr4, suggesting that H3 ubiquitylation is intimately linked to the establishment and/or maintenance of H3K9me. These findings demonstrate a cross‐talk mechanism between histone ubiquitylation and methylation that is involved in heterochromatin assembly.

Introduction

In eukaryotic cells, the formation of higher‐order chromatin structure, known as heterochromatin, plays an important role in diverse chromosomal processes. Heterochromatin assembly is intimately associated with changes in post‐translational histone‐tail modifications 1 , 2 , 3 . Histone H3 lysine 9 methylation (H3K9me), a hallmark of heterochromatin structure, is catalyzed by SUV39H‐family histone methyltransferases (HMTases) and functions as a binding site for recruiting heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1) family proteins 4 , 5 , 6 . Heterochromatic structures are epigenetically inherited through cell division in a metastable manner 7 , 8 .

In the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe ( S. pombe ), heterochromatin plays critical roles in the assembly of functional chromosomal domains such as centromeres, telomeres, and the mating‐type loci 3 , 9 . Clr4, a homolog of mammalian SUV39H, is the sole H3K9 methyltransferase expressed in S. pombe and plays a central role in heterochromatin assembly 4 , 6 , 10 . H3K9me creates binding sites for the chromodomain (CD) proteins Swi6, Chp1, and Chp2, and these proteins further recruit a variety of chromatin proteins to form repressive higher‐order chromatin 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 . Clr4 also possesses a CD that can bind H3K9me, and it has been suggested that the ability of Clr4 and other HMTases to “write” and “read” H3K9me facilitates heterochromatin spreading and the maintenance of H3K9me during cell division 15 .

In fission yeast, the assembly and maintenance of pericentromeric heterochromatin is directly linked to the RNA interference (RNAi) pathway 3 , 16 , 17 , 18 . Pericentromeric repeats are transcribed by RNA polymerase II, and the nascent RNAs are converted to small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) through the actions of the RNA‐dependent RNA polymerase complex (RDRC) and Dicer (Dcr1) ribonuclease. The siRNAs are then loaded onto Argonaute (Ago1), the catalytic component of the RNA‐induced transcriptional silencing (RITS) complex, which targets pericentromeric repeats through base‐pairing interaction between the siRNAs and nascent transcripts. In addition to Ago1, the RITS complex contains the GW motif protein Tas3 and the chromodomain protein Chp1, and the association of the RITS complex with chromatin is facilitated by the Chp1‐CD's H3K9me‐binding and nucleic acid‐binding activities 19 . The deletion of RNAi pathway components leads to a loss of silencing and reduced H3K9me at the pericentromeric regions, indicating that the RNAi pathway and recruitment of the siRNA‐bound RITS complex to chromatin are coupled with the targeting of Clr4. While RNAi also targets the silent mating‐type loci and telomeres, alternative pathways act redundantly with the RNAi pathway to recruit the Clr4 HMTase activity 20 , 21 .

Clr4 forms a multi‐protein complex called the Clr4 methyltransferase complex (CLRC). The CLRC consists of the cullin scaffold protein Cul4, the β‐propeller protein Rik1, the WD‐40 protein Raf1 (Dos1/Cmc1/Clr8), the replication foci targeting sequence (RFTS)‐like domain‐containing protein Raf2 (Dos2/Cmc2/Clr7), and the RING‐box protein Rbx1 (Pip1) 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 . All of these CLRC components except Rbx1 have been shown to be required for heterochromatic silencing. Cul4, Rik1, and Raf1 in fission yeast show a strong structural resemblance to the conserved CUL4‐DDB1‐DDB2 E3 ubiquitin ligase (CRL4 DDB1 ) 27 , 28 . While Raf2 has no analogous component in the CRL4 DDB1 complex, it interacts with Cul4, Rik1, and Raf1, and thus is proposed to be a hub for the core components in the CLRC 28 , 29 . Deleting genes encoding CLRC components results in the loss of both H3K9 methylation and siRNA 24 , 30 , indicating that a physical interaction between CLRC and RITS couples the siRNA production with H3K9 methylation. Stc1, a tandem zinc finger domain‐containing protein, was not identified among the CLRC components, but was shown to mediate the interaction between the CLRC and RITS, presumably through interactions with Raf2 and Ago1 31 , 32 . On the other hand, studies using cul4 mutant cells suggested that Rik1 is loaded onto heterochromatic repeats in an RNAi‐dependent manner and targets other CLRC components to heterochromatic loci 15 , 25 . Intriguingly, analyses of cells expressing mutant histone H3 (H3K9R) or CLRC components demonstrated that the CLRC complex promotes siRNA production, independently of H3K9 methylation 27 , 29 , 33 , although the details of the mechanism remain unknown.

As predicted from its structural similarity to CRL4 DDB1 , the CLRC exhibits ubiquitin ligase activity in vitro 22 . In addition, heterochromatin defects in Cul4 mutants cannot be rescued by expressing a Cul4 protein lacking Nedd8 modification, which is essential for its ubiquitin ligase activity 25 , 34 . These data show that the CLRC is an active ubiquitin ligase whose ligase activity is required for heterochromatin formation. Structural and functional studies also suggested that Raf1 plays a critical role in target recognition by the CLRC 27 , 28 . However, whether the CLRC acts as an E3 ubiquitin ligase in vivo and how ubiquitylation modulates Clr4's HMTase activity remain unclear.

Here, we demonstrated that affinity‐purified CLRC preferentially ubiquitylates lysine 14 on histone H3 (H3K14) in vitro , and the H3K14 ubiquitylation is tightly associated with H3K9me‐enriched heterochromatin in vivo . Importantly, the K14‐ubiquitylated H3 promotes H3K9's methylation by Clr4. This study demonstrates a cross‐talk mechanism between histone methylation and ubiquitylation for heterochromatin assembly.

Discussion

Here, we demonstrated that a novel modification regulates H3K9me. Our study revealed that the CLRC preferentially ubiquitylates histone H3K14 and, more importantly, that H3K14ub promotes H3K9me generation for heterochromatin assembly.

H3K14 was previously shown to play a critical role in heterochromatin assembly, and this residue is also the acetylation site associated with transcriptional activation. Either mutations in clr3 , which encodes an H3K14‐specific deacetylase, or the H3K14A substitution, which mimics the acetylated lysine, cause reduced H3K9me and defects in heterochromatic silencing 6 , 42 , 43 , 46 , 47 . These findings suggest that the deacetylation of H3K14 by Clr3 is required for H3K9's methylation by Clr4. In contrast, Clr4 efficiently methylates a K14‐acetylated H3 peptide 6 , and the H3K14R substitution, which mimics unacetylated lysine, also leads to a severe silencing defect 42 . These results indicated that the unacetylated state of H3K14 is not sufficient for efficient H3K9me. These apparently conflicting findings suggested that there is a gap in our understanding of how H3K14 is involved in heterochromatin assembly. Here, we demonstrated that H3K14 is modified by ubiquitylation, which promotes H3K9's methylation by Clr4. Since H3K9me did not noticeably affect the H3K14ub by CLRC (Fig EV5 ), H3K14ub is likely to be a prerequisite modification for H3K9me.

The chromodomain (CD) is a highly conserved protein module that is critical for targeting proteins to their action sites in chromatin. CD's best‐known role is its binding to methylated histone tails. As demonstrated for the CDs in HP1 family proteins, Clr4‐CD also binds K9‐methylated histone H3 15 , and this activity is critical for CLRC's heterochromatic association and for stable inheritance of the H3K9me mark 15 , 48 . Since Clr4 and its homologs contain both CD (H3K9me reader) and SET (H3K9me writer) domains, a direct read–write mechanism has been suggested for heterochromatin spreading and epigenetic inheritance 15 , 48 . According to this model, Clr4 recruited by preexisting H3K9me provides new K9me on H3 in the same or neighboring nucleosomes. However, in the present study we demonstrated that Clr4's HMTase activity was enhanced by the presence of H3K14ub (Fig 5 ). These results suggested that the simple read–write mechanism could be revised to include the involvement of ubiquitylation. Since we also demonstrated that Clr4‐CD and its neighboring regions contribute to the recognition of ubiquitylated H3 (Fig 6 A–C), it is possible that Clr4‐CD has multiple functions that modulate its HMTase activity for heterochromatin spreading and epigenetic inheritance 19 . In this study, we also demonstrated that Clr4 binds directly to ubiquitin via its N‐terminal region (Fig 6 D) and that the CD‐adjacent region is critical for heterochromatic silencing (Fig 6 E–I). Considering that N‐terminally deleted Clr4 mutants showed a preference for unmodified H3, it is also possible that CD or a CD‐adjacent region plays an inhibitory role for the SET domain's HMTase activity for unmodified H3 and that ubiquitylated H3 somehow suppresses this activity. This notion is consistent with a very recent study on SUV39H1 49 . Another recent study demonstrated that Clr4's catalytic activity is inhibited by an internal loop and that the automethylation of a specific lysine in the loop promotes a conformational switch that enhances Clr4's H3K9me activity 50 . Thus, the coordination of auto‐regulation mechanisms may help to suppress Clr4's promiscuous activity and provide an additional system ensuring the read–write mechanism. While we clearly showed the importance of H3K14Ub and Clr4's CD‐adjacent region for Clr4's function, the effect was limited to the mating‐type region, and only a negligible effect was seen for centromeric heterochromatin (Fig EV4 E and L). It is possible that there are additional CLRC's targets for ubiquitylation, which may redundantly promote Clr4's activity. Alternatively, Clr4's activity may also be regulated by mechanisms other than ubiquitylation 19 , 51 .

An important issue requiring further investigation is the dynamics of H3K14ub. Since H3K9me is coupled with the deposition of newly synthesized histones after DNA synthesis, H3K14's ubiquitylation and de‐ubiquitylation may be cell‐cycle‐dependent, as well. Although 20 de‐ubiquitylating enzymes are expressed in S. pombe , a specific de‐ubiquitylating enzyme(s) that targets heterochromatin have not been identified yet. Multiple enzymes may act cooperatively in this process. Another issue requiring clarification is the mechanism by which the CLRC is recruited to specific regions of chromatin. Although Raf1 and Raf2 have been implicated in substrate recognition 27 , 28 , 29 , the identity of their target(s) remains unclear. Raf2 contains a domain that shows weak similarity to the RFTS of DNMT1 (a methyltransferase involved in maintaining DNA methylation) 29 , and DNMT1's RFTS is known to play a role in recognizing ubiquitylated H3 52 , 53 . Raf2's RFTS‐like domain may also have a role in targeting ubiquitylated H3. Alternatively, it is possible that Raf2's RFTS has a distinct role in CLRC function, unrelated to H3 ubiquitylation 29 .

In Neurospora crassa , the H3K9 methyltransferase Dim‐5 forms a complex with Cul4 and DDB1 called the DCDC, which is required for Dim‐5‐mediated H3K9me 54 . In human cells, CUL4 is associated with SUV39H1 55 , and depleting CUL4 or DDB1 impairs H3K9me 56 . In addition, CUL4‐DDB1 has been shown to have ubiquitin ligase activity for H3 57 , and proteomic surveys using human cells revealed that H3K14 is ubiquitylated in vivo 40 . It is therefore likely that H3 ubiquitylation mediated by CUL4‐DDB1 plays an important role in the methylation of H3K9 in other systems. The ubiquitin ligase activity of CUL4‐DDB1 promotes H3 poly‐ubiquitylation 58 , which appears to be distinct from the CLRC‐mediated ubiquitylation we observed. In our in vitro ubiquitylation assay, the major products detected were mono‐ and di‐ubiquitylated species, and other multiply ubiquitylated species were not clearly detected (Fig 1 C). However, it is possible that the combination of appropriate DCAF(s) (DDB1 and CUL4‐associated factors) modulates CUL4‐DDB1's activity and provides substrate specificity 59 .

Cross‐talk between histone ubiquitylation and methylation is well known to occur for H2B mono‐ubiquitylation and H3K4 methylation 36 . It was also recently reported that histone H2A's mono‐ubiquitylation promotes H3K27's methylation 37 and that H3's ubiquitylation plays a role in the maintenance of DNA methylation 52 , 53 . Although it has been suggested that ubiquitin functions as an adaptor to recruit other modifying enzymes, the underlying molecular mechanisms of this action are not fully understood. Further analysis of the functional interactions between H3K14ub and H3K9me will provide additional insight into the cross‐talk between histone ubiquitylation and methylation and the role it plays in chromatin assembly.
