---
pmid: '20208556'
title: Presenilin modulates EGFR signaling and cell transformation by regulating the
  ubiquitin ligase Fbw7.
authors:
- Rocher-Ros V
- Marco S
- Mao JH
- Gines S
- Metzger D
- Chambon P
- Balmain A
- Saura CA
journal: Oncogene
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4162408
doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.57
---

# Presenilin modulates EGFR signaling and cell transformation by regulating the ubiquitin ligase Fbw7.
**Authors:** Rocher-Ros V, Marco S, Mao JH, Gines S, Metzger D, Chambon P, Balmain A, Saura CA
**Journal:** Oncogene (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/onc.2010.57](https://doi.org/10.1038/onc.2010.57)
**PMC:** [PMC4162408](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4162408/)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2010 May 20;29(20):2950-61. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.57. Epub 2010 Mar
8.

Presenilin modulates EGFR signaling and cell transformation by regulating the 
ubiquitin ligase Fbw7.

Rocher-Ros V(1), Marco S, Mao JH, Gines S, Metzger D, Chambon P, Balmain A, 
Saura CA.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Neurociències, Department de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular, 
Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas, 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona 08193, Spain.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and Notch signaling pathways have 
antagonistic roles during epidermal differentiation and carcinogenesis. The 
molecular mechanisms regulating the crosstalk between EGFR and Notch during 
epidermal transformation are largely unknown. We found enhanced EGFR-dependent 
signaling, proliferation and oncogenic transformation caused by loss of 
presenilins (PS), the catalytic components of gamma-secretase that generates the 
Notch1 intracellular domain (NICD). The underlying mechanism for abnormal EGFR 
signaling in PS-deficient cells involves gamma-secretase-independent 
transcriptional upregulation of the E3 ubiquitin ligase Fbw7. Fbw7alpha, which 
targets NICD for degradation, regulates positively EGFR by affecting a 
proteasome-dependent ubiquitination step essential for constitutive degradation 
and stability of EGFR. To investigate the pathological relevance of this 
findings in vivo, we generated a novel epidermal conditional PS-deficient (ePS 
cDKO) mouse by deleting both PS in keratinocytes of the basal layer of the 
epidermis. The ePS cDKO mice develop epidermal hyperplasia associated with 
enhanced expression of both EGFR and Fbw7 and reduced NICD levels in 
keratinocytes. These findings establish a novel role for PS on epidermal growth 
and transformation by reciprocally regulating the EGFR and Notch signaling 
pathways through Fbw7.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2010.57
PMCID: PMC4162408
PMID: 20208556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
