---
pmid: '12427836'
title: p73 is required for survival and maintenance of CNS neurons.
authors:
- Pozniak CD
- Barnabé-Heider F
- Rymar VV
- Lee AF
- Sadikot AF
- Miller FD
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6757829
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-22-09800.2002
---

# p73 is required for survival and maintenance of CNS neurons.
**Authors:** Pozniak CD, Barnabé-Heider F, Rymar VV, Lee AF, Sadikot AF, Miller FD
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-22-09800.2002](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-22-09800.2002)
**PMC:** [PMC6757829](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6757829/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2002 Nov 15;22(22):9800-9. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-22-09800.2002.

p73 is required for survival and maintenance of CNS neurons.

Pozniak CD(1), Barnabé-Heider F, Rymar VV, Lee AF, Sadikot AF, Miller FD.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Neuronal Survival, Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill 
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 2B4.

Here, we show that the p53 family member, p73, is necessary for survival and 
long-term maintenance of CNS neurons, including postnatal cortical neurons. In 
p73-/- animals, cortical neuron number is normal at birth but decreases 
significantly by postnatal day 14 (P14)-P16 because of enhanced apoptosis. This 
decrease continues into adulthood, when p73-/- animals have approximately 
one-half as many cortical cells as their wild-type littermates. Cortical neurons 
express the DeltaNp73alpha protein, and overexpression of DeltaNp73 isoforms 
rescues cortical neurons from diverse apoptotic stimuli. Thus, DeltaNp73 
isoforms are survival proteins in cortical neurons, and their deletion causes a 
gradual loss of cortical neurons in the weeks and months after birth. This 
decrease in CNS neuron number in p73-/- animals is not limited to the cortex; 
facial motor neuron number is decreased, and postnatal development of the 
olfactory bulb is greatly perturbed. These findings, together with our previous 
work showing that DeltaNp73 is essential for survival of peripheral sympathetic 
neurons (Pozniak et al., 2000), indicate that p73 isoforms are essential 
survival proteins in CNS as well as PNS neurons, and that they likely play a 
role not only during developmental cell death but also in the long-term 
maintenance of at least some adult neurons.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-22-09800.2002
PMCID: PMC6757829
PMID: 12427836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
