---
pmid: '7896830'
title: Vacuolar H(+)-ATPase mutants transform cells and define a binding site for
  the papillomavirus E5 oncoprotein.
authors:
- Andresson T
- Sparkowski J
- Goldstein DJ
- Schlegel R
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.12.6830
---

# Vacuolar H(+)-ATPase mutants transform cells and define a binding site for the papillomavirus E5 oncoprotein.
**Authors:** Andresson T, Sparkowski J, Goldstein DJ, Schlegel R
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.270.12.6830](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.270.12.6830)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1995 Mar 24;270(12):6830-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.12.6830.

Vacuolar H(+)-ATPase mutants transform cells and define a binding site for the 
papillomavirus E5 oncoprotein.

Andresson T(1), Sparkowski J, Goldstein DJ, Schlegel R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Georgetown University Medical School, Washington, 
D.C. 20007.

The 16K subunit of the vacuolar H(+)-ATPase binds specifically to the bovine 
(BPV) and human (HPV) papillomavirus E5 oncoproteins, and it has been suggested 
that this interaction may contribute to cell transformation (Goldstein, D. J., 
and Schlegel, R. (1990) EMBO J. 9, 137-146; Goldstein, D. J., Finbow, M. E., 
Andresson, T., McLean, P., Smith, K., Bubb, V. J., and Schlegel, R. (1991) 
Nature 352, 347-349; Conrad, M., Bubb, V. J., and Schlegel, R. (1993) J. Virol. 
67, 6170-6178; Goldstein, D. J., Toyama, R., Schlegel, R., and Dhar, R. (1992) 
Virology 190, 889-893). We generated mutations within the 16K protein to define 
binding domains for BPV-1 E5 as well as to characterize the role of 16K in cell 
transformation. 16K consists predominantly of 4 transmembrane (TM) domains. We 
showed that mutations within the TM4 domain severely inhibited E5 binding. More 
specifically, conversion of glutamic acid 143 to arginine within TM4 severely 
reduced 16K/E5 binding, suggesting that charged interactions facilitated 
efficient binding. This hypothesis was confirmed by demonstrating that binding 
to the defective 16K arginine mutant could be restored by complementary charge 
mutations in E5; conversion of E5 glutamine 17 to glutamic acid or aspartic acid 
enhanced interactions with the 16K arginine mutant. Surprisingly, mutants in TM4 
not only bound poorly to wild-type E5 but were converted into an oncoprotein and 
induced anchorage-independent growth of NIH 3T3 cells. These data define 
glutamic acid 143 in the 16K TM4 domain and glutamine 17 within E5 as important 
contributors to E5/16K binding and suggest a role for the 16K protein in the 
regulation of cell proliferation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.270.12.6830
PMID: 7896830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
