---
pmid: '19559761'
title: Interaction of elongation factor 1-alpha with leucine-rich repeat kinase 2
  impairs kinase activity and microtubule bundling in vitro.
authors:
- Gillardon F
journal: Neuroscience
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.06.051
---

# Interaction of elongation factor 1-alpha with leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 impairs kinase activity and microtubule bundling in vitro.
**Authors:** Gillardon F
**Journal:** Neuroscience (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.06.051](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.06.051)

## Abstract

1. Neuroscience. 2009 Oct 6;163(2):533-9. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.06.051.  Epub 2009 Jun 25.

Interaction of elongation factor 1-alpha with leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 
impairs kinase activity and microtubule bundling in vitro.

Gillardon F(1).

Author information:
(1)Boehringer-Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, CNS Research, Birkendorfer St. 65, 
88397 Biberach an der Riss, Germany. frank.gillardon@bc.boehringer-ingelheim.com

Autosomal dominant mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the 
most common genetic cause of late-onset Parkinson's disease. However, the 
regulators/effectors contributing to the (patho-)physiological functions of 
LRRK2 remain poorly defined. Here we show that human LRRK2 
co-purifies/co-immunoprecipitates with elongation factor 1-alpha (EF1A). 
Co-incubation of recombinant LRRK2 and EF1A significantly reduces the kinase 
activity of LRRK2, whereas its GTPase activity remains unchanged. In addition to 
its canonical role in mRNA translation, EF1A maintains stability of the 
microtubule cytoskeleton. In the present study, EF1A promotes microtubule 
assembly in an in vitro tubulin polymerization assay which is impaired by 
co-incubation with LRRK2 at sub-stoichiometric concentrations. These findings 
suggest that the interaction between LRRK2 and EF1A may reciprocally modulate 
their physiological function.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.06.051
PMID: 19559761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
