---
pmid: '27727273'
title: Zfp423 Regulates Sonic Hedgehog Signaling via Primary Cilium Function.
authors:
- Hong CJ
- Hamilton BA
journal: PLoS Genet
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5065120
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006357
---

# Zfp423 Regulates Sonic Hedgehog Signaling via Primary Cilium Function.
**Authors:** Hong CJ, Hamilton BA
**Journal:** PLoS Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pgen.1006357](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1006357)
**PMC:** [PMC5065120](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5065120/)

## Abstract

1. PLoS Genet. 2016 Oct 11;12(10):e1006357. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006357. 
eCollection 2016 Oct.

Zfp423 Regulates Sonic Hedgehog Signaling via Primary Cilium Function.

Hong CJ(1)(2)(3)(4), Hamilton BA(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular & Molecular Medicine, University of California, San 
Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla, California, United States of America.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego School of 
Medicine, La Jolla, California, United States of America.
(3)Moores UCSD Cancer Center, University of California, San Diego School of 
Medicine, La Jolla, California, United States of America.
(4)Institute for Genomic Medicine, University of California, San Diego School of 
Medicine, La Jolla, California, United States of America.

Zfp423 encodes a 30-zinc finger transcription factor that intersects several 
canonical signaling pathways. Zfp423 mutations result in ciliopathy-related 
phenotypes, including agenesis of the cerebellar vermis in mice and Joubert 
syndrome (JBTS19) and nephronophthisis (NPHP14) in humans. Unlike most 
ciliopathy genes, Zfp423 encodes a nuclear protein and its developmental 
expression is complex, leading to alternative proposals for cellular mechanisms. 
Here we show that Zfp423 is expressed by cerebellar granule cell precursors, 
that loss of Zfp423 in these precursors leads to cell-intrinsic reduction in 
proliferation, loss of response to Shh, and primary cilia abnormalities that 
include diminished frequency of both Smoothened and IFT88 localization. Loss of 
Zfp423 alters expression of several genes encoding key cilium components, 
including increased expression of Tulp3. Tulp3 is a direct binding target of 
Zfp423 and reducing the overexpression of Tulp3 in Zfp423-deficient cells 
suppresses Smoothened translocation defects. These results define Zfp423 
deficiency as a bona fide ciliopathy, acting upstream of Shh signaling, and 
indicate a mechanism intrinsic to granule cell precursors for the resulting 
cerebellar hypoplasia.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006357
PMCID: PMC5065120
PMID: 27727273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.
