---
pmid: '22982048'
title: Lipofuscin is formed independently of macroautophagy and lysosomal activity
  in stress-induced prematurely senescent human fibroblasts.
authors:
- Höhn A
- Sittig A
- Jung T
- Grimm S
- Grune T
journal: Free Radic Biol Med
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2012.08.591
---

# Lipofuscin is formed independently of macroautophagy and lysosomal activity in stress-induced prematurely senescent human fibroblasts.
**Authors:** Höhn A, Sittig A, Jung T, Grimm S, Grune T
**Journal:** Free Radic Biol Med (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2012.08.591](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2012.08.591)

## Abstract

1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2012 Nov 1;53(9):1760-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2012.08.591. Epub 2012 Sep 1.

Lipofuscin is formed independently of macroautophagy and lysosomal activity in 
stress-induced prematurely senescent human fibroblasts.

Höhn A(1), Sittig A, Jung T, Grimm S, Grune T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutritional Toxicology, Institute of Nutrition, Friedrich 
Schiller University Jena, Germany. ahoehn@uni-hohenheim.de

In the current literature, the lysosomal system is considered to be involved in 
the intracellular formation and accumulation of lipofuscin, a highly oxidized 
and covalently cross-linked aggregate of proteins that fills the lysosomal 
volume during aging. In contrast, our experimental results presented here 
suggest that both the autophagosomes and the lysosomal system are not mandatory 
for the formation of lipofuscin, since that material accumulates in the 
cytosolic volume if autophagy or lysosomal activity is inhibited. However, such 
an inhibition is accompanied by an enhanced toxicity of the formed protein 
aggregates. Furthermore, it could be proven that macroautophagy is responsible 
for the uptake of lipofuscin into the lysosomes.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2012.08.591
PMID: 22982048 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
