---
pmid: '8228242'
title: 70 kDa heat shock cognate protein is a transformation-associated antigen and
  a possible target for the host's anti-tumor immunity.
authors:
- Tamura Y
- Tsuboi N
- Sato N
- Kikuchi K
journal: J Immunol
year: '1993'
full_text_available: false
---

# 70 kDa heat shock cognate protein is a transformation-associated antigen and a possible target for the host's anti-tumor immunity.
**Authors:** Tamura Y, Tsuboi N, Sato N, Kikuchi K
**Journal:** J Immunol (1993)

## Abstract

1. J Immunol. 1993 Nov 15;151(10):5516-24.

70 kDa heat shock cognate protein is a transformation-associated antigen and a 
possible target for the host's anti-tumor immunity.

Tamura Y(1), Tsuboi N, Sato N, Kikuchi K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine, 
Japan.

We previously investigated a novel heat-inducible transformation-associated cell 
surface Ag that is expressed on the activated H-ras oncogene-transformed rat 
fibrosarcoma W31, but not its parental nontransformed fibroblast WFB. This Ag 
was detected by mAb 067. Herein, we characterized the molecular nature of the Ag 
by using anti-heat shock protein (HSP) mAb. The accumulated data indicated that 
the cell surface expression of Ag was clearly enhanced by several stressors, 
such as TNF, L-azetidine-2-carboxylic acid, and sodium arsenite. The 
immunoprecipitate made with mAb 067 and W31 cell lysates reacted with anti-rat 
70 kDa heat shock cognate (HSC) mAb, TG5E, indicating that 067-defined Ag may be 
a rat 70 kDa HSC. Because this Ag seemed to be one of the 
transformation-associated Ag of WFB, we further studied whether it could play an 
important role in the host's anti-tumor immunity. Peripheral T cells of rats 
primed with live BCG showed cytotoxicity to W31 but not to WFB. Because the 
possibility existed that HSP may interact with certain populations of T cells, 
we focused on the reactivity of CD4-CD8- double negative T (DNT) cells against 
067-defined molecule. DNT cells from spleen and PBL of live BCG-primed rats 
showed the cytotoxicity against W31 cells. This cytotoxicity was completely 
blocked by mAb 067 and anti-CD3 mAb. However, it was not blocked by mAb R48B1 
and 109, which detect the MHC class I nonpolymorphic determinant and a target 
molecule of the cytolysis by poly I:C-induced NK cells, respectively. 
Furthermore, brefeldin A was able to block the cytotoxicity against W31 targets 
by DNT cells, but not by NK cells. These data suggest that 70 kDa HSC may be a 
tumor Ag and may act as a presenting molecule perhaps complexed with cellular 
peptides to certain DNT cells.

PMID: 8228242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
