---
pmid: '11116152'
title: A mouse homologue of the Drosophila tumor suppressor l(2)tid gene defines a
  novel Ras GTPase-activating protein (RasGAP)-binding protein.
authors:
- Trentin GA
- Yin X
- Tahir S
- Lhotak S
- Farhang-Fallah J
- Li Y
- Rozakis-Adcock M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M009267200
---

# A mouse homologue of the Drosophila tumor suppressor l(2)tid gene defines a novel Ras GTPase-activating protein (RasGAP)-binding protein.
**Authors:** Trentin GA, Yin X, Tahir S, Lhotak S, Farhang-Fallah J, Li Y, Rozakis-Adcock M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M009267200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M009267200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Apr 20;276(16):13087-95. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M009267200. Epub 
2000 Dec 14.

A mouse homologue of the Drosophila tumor suppressor l(2)tid gene defines a 
novel Ras GTPase-activating protein (RasGAP)-binding protein.

Trentin GA(1), Yin X, Tahir S, Lhotak S, Farhang-Fallah J, Li Y, Rozakis-Adcock 
M.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences and Department of Pathology and Molecular 
Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, L8N 3Z5, Canada.

p120 GTPase-activating protein (GAP) down-regulates Ras by stimulating GTP 
hydrolysis of active Ras. In addition to its association with Ras, GAP has been 
shown to bind to several tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins in cells stimulated by 
growth factors or expressing transforming tyrosine kinase variants. Here we 
report the cloning and characterization of a novel GAP-binding protein, mTid-1, 
a DnaJ chaperone protein that represents the murine homolog of the Drosophila 
tumor suppressor l(2)tid gene. Three alternatively spliced variants of mTid-1 
were isolated, two of which correspond to the recently identified hTid-1(L) and 
hTid-1(S) forms of the human TID1 gene that exhibit opposing effects on 
apoptosis. We demonstrate that both cytoplasmic precursor and mitochondrial 
mature forms of mTid-1 associate with GAP in vivo. Interestingly, although 
mTid-1 is found tyrosine-phosphorylated in v-src-transformed fibroblast cells, 
GAP selectively binds to the unphosphorylated form of mTid-1. In 
immunofluorescence experiments, GAP and Tid-1 were shown to colocalize at 
perinuclear mitochondrial membranes in response to epidermal growth factor 
stimulation. These findings raise the possibility that Tid chaperone proteins 
may play a role in governing the conformation, activity, and/or subcellular 
distribution of GAP, thereby influencing its biochemical and biological activity 
within cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M009267200
PMID: 11116152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
