---
pmid: '8943045'
title: The tumor necrosis factor receptor 2 signal transducers TRAF2 and c-IAP1 are
  components of the tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 signaling complex.
authors:
- Shu HB
- Takeuchi M
- Goeddel DV
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC19479
doi: 10.1073/pnas.93.24.13973
---

# The tumor necrosis factor receptor 2 signal transducers TRAF2 and c-IAP1 are components of the tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 signaling complex.
**Authors:** Shu HB, Takeuchi M, Goeddel DV
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.93.24.13973](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.93.24.13973)
**PMC:** [PMC19479](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC19479/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Nov 26;93(24):13973-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.93.24.13973.

The tumor necrosis factor receptor 2 signal transducers TRAF2 and c-IAP1 are 
components of the tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 signaling complex.

Shu HB(1), Takeuchi M, Goeddel DV.

Author information:
(1)Tularik, Inc., South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.

The two cell surface receptors for tumor necrosis factor (TNF) interact with a 
number of intracellular signal transducing proteins. The association of TRADD, a 
34-kDa cytoplasmic protein containing a C-terminal death domain, with aggregated 
TNF receptor 1 (TNF-R1) through their respective death domains leads to NF-kappa 
B activation and programmed cell death. In contrast, TNF receptor 2 (TNF-R2) 
interacts with the TNF receptor associated factors 2/1 (TRAF2/TRAF1) 
heterocomplex, which mediates the recruitment of two cellular inhibitor of 
apoptosis proteins (c-IAP1 and c-IAP2) to TNF-R2. Here we show that the TNF-R2 
signal transducers TRAF2 and c-IAP1 are a part of the TNF-R1 signaling complex. 
The recruitment of TRAF2 and c-IAP1 to TNF-R1 is TNF-dependent, is mediated by 
TRADD, and is independent of TNF-R2. These data establish the physiological 
involvement of TRAF2 and c-IAP1 in TNF-R1 signaling and help provide a molecular 
explanation for both the overlapping and distinct signals generated by the two 
TNF receptors.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.93.24.13973
PMCID: PMC19479
PMID: 8943045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
