---
pmid: '23925298'
title: The TFEB orthologue HLH-30 regulates autophagy and modulates longevity in Caenorhabditis
  elegans.
authors:
- Lapierre LR
- De Magalhaes Filho CD
- McQuary PR
- Chu CC
- Visvikis O
- Chang JT
- Gelino S
- Ong B
- Davis AE
- Irazoqui JE
- Dillin A
- Hansen M
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3866206
doi: 10.1038/ncomms3267
---

# The TFEB orthologue HLH-30 regulates autophagy and modulates longevity in Caenorhabditis elegans.
**Authors:** Lapierre LR, De Magalhaes Filho CD, McQuary PR, Chu CC, Visvikis O, Chang JT, Gelino S, Ong B, Davis AE, Irazoqui JE, Dillin A, Hansen M
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncomms3267](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms3267)
**PMC:** [PMC3866206](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3866206/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Commun. 2013;4:2267. doi: 10.1038/ncomms3267.

The TFEB orthologue HLH-30 regulates autophagy and modulates longevity in 
Caenorhabditis elegans.

Lapierre LR(1), De Magalhaes Filho CD, McQuary PR, Chu CC, Visvikis O, Chang JT, 
Gelino S, Ong B, Davis AE, Irazoqui JE, Dillin A, Hansen M.

Author information:
(1)Program of Development and Aging, Del E Webb Neuroscience, Aging and Stem 
Cell Research Center, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, 10901 North 
Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA, USA.

Autophagy is a cellular recycling process that has an important anti-aging role, 
but the underlying molecular mechanism is not well understood. The mammalian 
transcription factor EB (TFEB) was recently shown to regulate multiple genes in 
the autophagy process. Here we show that the predicted TFEB orthologue HLH-30 
regulates autophagy in Caenorhabditis elegans and, in addition, has a key role 
in lifespan determination. We demonstrate that hlh-30 is essential for the 
extended lifespan of Caenorhabditis elegans in six mechanistically distinct 
longevity models, and overexpression of HLH-30 extends lifespan. Nuclear 
localization of HLH-30 is increased in all six Caenorhabditis elegans models 
and, notably, nuclear TFEB levels are augmented in the livers of mice subjected 
to dietary restriction, a known longevity-extending regimen. Collectively, our 
results demonstrate a conserved role for HLH-30 and TFEB in autophagy, and 
possibly longevity, and identify HLH-30 as a uniquely important transcription 
factor for lifespan modulation in Caenorhabditis elegans.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms3267
PMCID: PMC3866206
PMID: 23925298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing financial interests: The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.
