---
pmid: '22783022'
title: The Sin3a repressor complex is a master regulator of STAT transcriptional activity.
authors:
- Icardi L
- Mori R
- Gesellchen V
- Eyckerman S
- De Cauwer L
- Verhelst J
- Vercauteren K
- Saelens X
- Meuleman P
- Leroux-Roels G
- De Bosscher K
- Boutros M
- Tavernier J
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3409767
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1206458109
---

# The Sin3a repressor complex is a master regulator of STAT transcriptional activity.
**Authors:** Icardi L, Mori R, Gesellchen V, Eyckerman S, De Cauwer L, Verhelst J, Vercauteren K, Saelens X, Meuleman P, Leroux-Roels G, De Bosscher K, Boutros M, Tavernier J
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1206458109](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1206458109)
**PMC:** [PMC3409767](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3409767/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jul 24;109(30):12058-63. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1206458109. Epub 2012 Jul 10.

The Sin3a repressor complex is a master regulator of STAT transcriptional 
activity.

Icardi L(1), Mori R, Gesellchen V, Eyckerman S, De Cauwer L, Verhelst J, 
Vercauteren K, Saelens X, Meuleman P, Leroux-Roels G, De Bosscher K, Boutros M, 
Tavernier J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Protein Research, Vlaams Instituut voor Biotechnologie, 
9000 Ghent, Belgium.

Tyrosine phosphorylation is a hallmark for activation of STAT proteins, but 
their transcriptional activity also depends on other secondary modifications. 
Type I IFNs can activate both the ISGF3 (STAT1:STAT2:IRF9) complex and STAT3, 
but with cell-specific, selective triggering of only the ISGF3 transcriptional 
program. Following a genome-wide RNAi screen, we identified the SIN3 
transcription regulator homolog A (Sin3a) as an important mediator of this 
STAT3-targeted transcriptional repression. Sin3a directly interacts with STAT3 
and promotes its deacetylation. SIN3A silencing results in a prolonged nuclear 
retention of activated STAT3 and enhances its recruitment to the SOCS3 promoter, 
concomitant with histone hyperacetylation and enhanced STAT3-dependent 
transcription. Conversely, Sin3a is required for ISGF3-dependent gene 
transcription and for an efficient IFN-mediated antiviral protection against 
influenza A and hepatitis C viruses. The Sin3a complex therefore acts as a 
context-dependent ISGF3/STAT3 transcriptional switch.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1206458109
PMCID: PMC3409767
PMID: 22783022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
