---
pmid: '14985854'
title: Functional characterization of the human atrial essential myosin light chain
  (hALC-1) in a transgenic rat model.
authors:
- Abdelaziz AI
- Segaric J
- Bartsch H
- Petzhold D
- Schlegel WP
- Kott M
- Seefeldt I
- Klose J
- Bader M
- Haase H
- Morano I
journal: J Mol Med (Berl)
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s00109-004-0525-4
---

# Functional characterization of the human atrial essential myosin light chain (hALC-1) in a transgenic rat model.
**Authors:** Abdelaziz AI, Segaric J, Bartsch H, Petzhold D, Schlegel WP, Kott M, Seefeldt I, Klose J, Bader M, Haase H, Morano I
**Journal:** J Mol Med (Berl) (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00109-004-0525-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00109-004-0525-4)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Med (Berl). 2004 Apr;82(4):265-74. doi: 10.1007/s00109-004-0525-4. Epub 
2004 Feb 24.

Functional characterization of the human atrial essential myosin light chain 
(hALC-1) in a transgenic rat model.

Abdelaziz AI(1), Segaric J, Bartsch H, Petzhold D, Schlegel WP, Kott M, Seefeldt 
I, Klose J, Bader M, Haase H, Morano I.

Author information:
(1)Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine (MDC), Molecular Muscle 
Physiology, Robert-Rössle-Strasse 10, 13125 Berlin, Germany. 
a.abdelaziz@mdc-berlin.de

Most patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and congenital heart diseases 
express the atrial essential myosin light chains (ALC-1) in their ventricles, 
partially replacing the ventricular essential light chains (VLC-1). This 
VLC-1/ALC-1 isoform shift is correlated with an increase in cross-bridge cycling 
kinetics as measured using skinned fibers from the hypertrophied ventricles of 
human hearts. To study the functional importance of hALC-1 in the intact 
perfused heart, we generated a transgenic rat model (TGR) overexpressing hALC-1 
in the heart. Twelve-week-old TGR rats expressed 17 +/- 4 microg hALC-1 per mg 
of whole SDS-soluble protein. Their perfused heart contractility parameters were 
evaluated using the Langendorff preparation. Expression of hALC-1 was 
accompanied by statistically significant improvements (P<0.001) in the 
contractile parameters of the hearts of the TGR compared to the age matched 
control (WKY) animals, represented by increases from 20.8 +/- 2.3 to 45.1 +/- 
3.6 mmHg/g heart weight in the developed left ventricular pressure, 1,035.7 +/- 
89.8 to 2,181 +/- 135.4 mmHg/s in the contraction rate, and 713 +/- 60.2 to 
1,364 +/- 137.4 mmHg/s in the relaxation rate in the WKY and the TGR groups 
respectively. Characterizing the functional effects of hALC-1 at the whole organ 
level represents a step towards gene therapy of heart failure.

Copyright 2004 Springer-Verlag

DOI: 10.1007/s00109-004-0525-4
PMID: 14985854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
