---
pmid: '29511089'
title: TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) liquid-liquid phase separation is mediated
  by just a few aromatic residues.
authors:
- Li HR
- Chiang WC
- Chou PC
- Wang WJ
- Huang JR
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5912450
doi: 10.1074/jbc.AC117.001037
---

# TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) liquid-liquid phase separation is mediated by just a few aromatic residues.
**Authors:** Li HR, Chiang WC, Chou PC, Wang WJ, Huang JR
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.AC117.001037](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.AC117.001037)
**PMC:** [PMC5912450](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5912450/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2018 Apr 20;293(16):6090-6098. doi: 10.1074/jbc.AC117.001037.
Epub  2018 Mar 6.

TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) liquid-liquid phase separation is mediated 
by just a few aromatic residues.

Li HR(1), Chiang WC(1), Chou PC(1), Wang WJ(1), Huang JR(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)From the Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and.
(2)From the Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and 
jierongh@ym.edu.tw.
(3)the Institute of Biomedical Informatics, National Yang-Ming University, No. 
155 Section 2, Li-nong Street, Taipei 11221, Taiwan.

Eukaryotic cells contain distinct organelles, but not all of these compartments 
are enclosed by membranes. Some intrinsically disordered proteins mediate 
membraneless organelle formation through liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS). 
LLPS facilitates many biological functions such as regulating RNA stability and 
ribonucleoprotein assembly, and disruption of LLPS pathways has been implicated 
in several diseases. Proteins exhibiting LLPS typically have low sequence 
complexity and specific repeat motifs. These motifs promote multivalent 
connections with other molecules and the formation of higher-order oligomers, 
and their removal usually prevents LLPS. The intrinsically disordered C-terminal 
domain of TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43), a protein involved in motor 
neuron disease and dementia lacks a dominant LLPS motif, however, and how this 
domain forms condensates is unclear. Using extensive mutagenesis of TDP-43, we 
demonstrate here that three tryptophan residues and, to a lesser extent, four 
other aromatic residues are most important for TDP-43 to undergo LLPS. Our 
results also suggested that only a few residues may be required for TDP-43 LLPS 
because the α-helical segment (spanning ∼20 residues) in the middle part of the 
C-terminal domain tends to self-assemble, reducing the number of motifs required 
for forming a multivalent connection. Our results indicating that a 
self-associating α-helical element with a few key residues regulates condensate 
formation highlight a different type of LLPS involving intrinsically disordered 
regions. The C-terminal domain of TDP-43 contains ∼50 disease-related mutations, 
with no clear physicochemical link between them. We propose that they may 
disrupt LLPS indirectly by interfering with the key residues identified here.

© 2018 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.AC117.001037
PMCID: PMC5912450
PMID: 29511089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article
