---
pmid: '12657046'
title: Genes required for mycobacterial growth defined by high density mutagenesis.
authors:
- Sassetti CM
- Boyd DH
- Rubin EJ
journal: Mol Microbiol
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2003.03425.x
---

# Genes required for mycobacterial growth defined by high density mutagenesis.
**Authors:** Sassetti CM, Boyd DH, Rubin EJ
**Journal:** Mol Microbiol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1365-2958.2003.03425.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2958.2003.03425.x)

## Abstract

1. Mol Microbiol. 2003 Apr;48(1):77-84. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2003.03425.x.

Genes required for mycobacterial growth defined by high density mutagenesis.

Sassetti CM(1), Boyd DH, Rubin EJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public 
Health, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Despite over a century of research, tuberculosis remains a leading cause of 
infectious death worldwide. Faced with increasing rates of drug resistance, the 
identification of genes that are required for the growth of this organism should 
provide new targets for the design of antimycobacterial agents. Here, we 
describe the use of transposon site hybridization (TraSH) to comprehensively 
identify the genes required by the causative agent, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 
for optimal growth. These genes include those that can be assigned to essential 
pathways as well as many of unknown function. The genes important for the growth 
of M. tuberculosis are largely conserved in the degenerate genome of the leprosy 
bacillus, Mycobacterium leprae, indicating that non-essential functions have 
been selectively lost since this bacterium diverged from other mycobacteria. In 
contrast, a surprisingly high proportion of these genes lack identifiable 
orthologues in other bacteria, suggesting that the minimal gene set required for 
survival varies greatly between organisms with different evolutionary histories.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2003.03425.x
PMID: 12657046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
