---
pmid: '37293153'
title: Structural, topological, and functional characterization of transmembrane proteins
  TMEM213, 207, 116, 72 and 30B provides a potential link to ccRCC etiology.
authors:
- Wesoly J
- Pstrąg N
- Derylo K
- Michalec-Wawiórka B
- Derebecka N
- Nowicka H
- Kajdasz A
- Kluzek K
- Srebniak M
- Tchórzewski M
- Kwias Z
- Bluyssen H
journal: Am J Cancer Res
year: '2023'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC10244102
---

# Structural, topological, and functional characterization of transmembrane proteins TMEM213, 207, 116, 72 and 30B provides a potential link to ccRCC etiology.
**Authors:** Wesoly J, Pstrąg N, Derylo K, Michalec-Wawiórka B, Derebecka N, Nowicka H, Kajdasz A, Kluzek K, Srebniak M, Tchórzewski M, Kwias Z, Bluyssen H
**Journal:** Am J Cancer Res (2023)
**PMC:** [PMC10244102](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10244102/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Cancer Res. 2023 May 15;13(5):1863-1883. eCollection 2023.

Structural, topological, and functional characterization of transmembrane 
proteins TMEM213, 207, 116, 72 and 30B provides a potential link to ccRCC 
etiology.

Wesoly J(1), Pstrąg N(1), Derylo K(2), Michalec-Wawiórka B(2), Derebecka N(1), 
Nowicka H(1), Kajdasz A(3), Kluzek K(3), Srebniak M(4), Tchórzewski M(2), Kwias 
Z(5), Bluyssen H(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of High Throughput Technologies, Adam Mickiewicz University 
Poznan, Poland.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology, Maria Curie-Sklodowska University Lublin, 
Poland.
(3)Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, Adam Mickiewicz University Poznan, 
Poland.
(4)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Urology and Urological Oncology, Poznan University of Medical 
Sciences Poznan, Poland.

Erratum in
    Am J Cancer Res. 2024 May 15;14(5):2665. doi: 10.62347/CRED7532.

Due to their involvement in the development of various cancers Transmembrane 
Proteins (TMEMs) are the focus of many recent studies. Previously we reported 
TMEM de-regulation in clear cell Renal Cell Carcinoma (ccRCC) with TMEM213, 207, 
116, 72 and 30B being among the most downregulated on mRNA level. TMEM 
down-regulation was also more pronounced in advanced ccRCC tumors and was 
potentially linked to clinical parameters such as: metastasis (TMEM72 and 116), 
Fuhrman grade (TMEM30B) and overall survival (TMEM30B). To further investigate 
these findings, first, we set off to prove experimentally that selected TMEMs 
are indeed membrane-bound as predicted in silico, we verified the presence of 
signaling peptides on their N-termini, orientation of TMEMs within the membrane 
and validated their predicted cellular localization. To investigate the 
potential role of selected TMEMs in cellular processes overexpression studies in 
HEK293 and HK-2 cell lines were carried out. Additionally, we tested TMEM 
isoform expression in ccRCC tumors, identified mutations in TMEM genes and 
examined chromosomal aberrations in their loci. We confirmed the membrane-bound 
status of all selected TMEMs, assigned TMEM213, and 207 to early endosomes, 
TMEM72 to early endosomes and plasma membrane, TMEM116 and 30B to the 
endoplasmic reticulum. The N-terminus of TMEM213 was found to be exposed to the 
cytoplasm, the C-terminus of TMEM207, 116 and 72 were directed toward the 
cytoplasm, and both termini of TMEM30B faced the cytoplasm. Interestingly, TMEM 
mutations and chromosomal aberrations were infrequent in ccRCC tumors, yet we 
identified potentially damaging mutations in TMEM213 and TMEM30B and found 
deletions in the TMEM30B locus in nearly 30% of the tumors. Overexpression 
studies suggested selected TMEMs may take part in carcinogenesis processes such 
as cell adhesion, regulation of epithelial cell proliferation, and regulation of 
adaptive immune response, which could indicate a link to the development and 
progression of ccRCC.

AJCR Copyright © 2023.

PMCID: PMC10244102
PMID: 37293153

Conflict of interest statement: None.
