---
pmid: '15695332'
title: Suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS)-5 is a potential negative regulator
  of epidermal growth factor signaling.
authors:
- Nicholson SE
- Metcalf D
- Sprigg NS
- Columbus R
- Walker F
- Silva A
- Cary D
- Willson TA
- Zhang JG
- Hilton DJ
- Alexander WS
- Nicola NA
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC549009
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0409675102
---

# Suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS)-5 is a potential negative regulator of epidermal growth factor signaling.
**Authors:** Nicholson SE, Metcalf D, Sprigg NS, Columbus R, Walker F, Silva A, Cary D, Willson TA, Zhang JG, Hilton DJ, Alexander WS, Nicola NA
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0409675102](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0409675102)
**PMC:** [PMC549009](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC549009/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Feb 15;102(7):2328-33. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0409675102. Epub 2005 Feb 3.

Suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS)-5 is a potential negative regulator of 
epidermal growth factor signaling.

Nicholson SE(1), Metcalf D, Sprigg NS, Columbus R, Walker F, Silva A, Cary D, 
Willson TA, Zhang JG, Hilton DJ, Alexander WS, Nicola NA.

Author information:
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Cooperative Research 
Centre for Cellular Growth Factors, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia. 
snicholson@wehi.edu.au

The suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS) proteins are a family of SH2 
domain-containing intracellular inhibitors of cytokine signal transduction that 
act by several different mechanisms. Recent evidence suggests that the action of 
the SOCS proteins may extend beyond the cytokine receptors to signaling 
initiated by members of the tyrosine kinase receptor family. In this study, the 
ability of SOCS-5 to negatively regulate signaling cascades downstream of the 
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGF-R) has been examined by using an 
EGF-responsive cell line engineered to constitutively express the EGF-R and 
SOCS-5 or SOCS-5 mutants. SOCS-5 associated with the EGF-R complex in an 
EGF-independent manner, and the mitogenic response to EGF of all 
SOCS-5-expressing cell lines was dramatically inhibited when compared with 
control cell lines. Furthermore, this effect was abrogated after deletion of the 
SOCS-5 SOCS box. This result suggests that the inhibition of signaling occurs 
through enhanced proteasomal degradation of the EGF-R through SOCS box 
recruitment of E3 ubiquitin ligase activity.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0409675102
PMCID: PMC549009
PMID: 15695332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
