---
pmid: '19251652'
title: Ecological modulation of plant defense via phytochrome control of jasmonate
  sensitivity.
authors:
- Moreno JE
- Tao Y
- Chory J
- Ballaré CL
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2660767
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0900701106
---

# Ecological modulation of plant defense via phytochrome control of jasmonate sensitivity.
**Authors:** Moreno JE, Tao Y, Chory J, Ballaré CL
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0900701106](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0900701106)
**PMC:** [PMC2660767](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2660767/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Mar 24;106(12):4935-40. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0900701106. Epub 2009 Feb 27.

Ecological modulation of plant defense via phytochrome control of jasmonate 
sensitivity.

Moreno JE(1), Tao Y, Chory J, Ballaré CL.

Author information:
(1)Ifeva, Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, and 
Universidad de Buenos Aires, Avenida San Martín 4453 C1417DSE Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.

For plants, the tradeoff between resource investment in defense and increased 
growth to out-compete neighbors creates an allocation dilemma. How plants 
resolve this dilemma, at the mechanistic level, is unclear. We found that 
Arabidopsis plants produced an attenuated defense phenotype under conditions of 
crowding and when exposed to far-red (FR) radiation, a light signal that plants 
use to detect the proximity of neighbors via the photoreceptor phytochrome. This 
phenotype was detectable through standard bioassays that measured the growth of 
Spodoptera frugiperda caterpillars. Two possible explanations for the effect of 
FR are: (i) a simple by-product of the diversion of resources to competition, 
and (ii) a specific effect of phytochrome on defense signaling. The first 
possibility was ruled out by the fact that the auxin-deficient sav3 mutant, 
which fails to induce growth responses to FR, still responded to FR with an 
attenuated defense phenotype. In support of the second hypothesis, we found that 
phytochrome inactivation by FR caused a strong reduction of plant sensitivity to 
jasmonates, which are key regulators of plant immunity. The effects of FR on 
jasmonate sensitivity were restricted to certain elements of the pathway. 
Supporting the idea that the FR effects on jasmonate signaling are functionally 
significant, we found that FR failed to increase tissue quality in jar1, a 
mutant impaired in jasmonate response. We conclude that the plant modulates its 
investment in defense as a function of the perceived risk of competition, and 
that this modulation is effected by phytochrome via selective desensitization to 
jasmonates.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0900701106
PMCID: PMC2660767
PMID: 19251652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

For plants, the tradeoff between resource investment in defense and increased growth to out-compete neighbors creates an allocation dilemma. How plants resolve this dilemma, at the mechanistic level, is unclear. We found that Arabidopsis plants produced an attenuated defense phenotype under conditions of crowding and when exposed to far-red (FR) radiation, a light signal that plants use to detect the proximity of neighbors via the photoreceptor phytochrome. This phenotype was detectable through standard bioassays that measured the growth of Spodoptera frugiperda caterpillars. Two possible explanations for the effect of FR are: ( i ) a simple by-product of the diversion of resources to competition, and ( ii ) a specific effect of phytochrome on defense signaling. The first possibility was ruled out by the fact that the auxin-deficient sav3 mutant, which fails to induce growth responses to FR, still responded to FR with an attenuated defense phenotype. In support of the second hypothesis, we found that phytochrome inactivation by FR caused a strong reduction of plant sensitivity to jasmonates, which are key regulators of plant immunity. The effects of FR on jasmonate sensitivity were restricted to certain elements of the pathway. Supporting the idea that the FR effects on jasmonate signaling are functionally significant, we found that FR failed to increase tissue quality in jar1 , a mutant impaired in jasmonate response. We conclude that the plant modulates its investment in defense as a function of the perceived risk of competition, and that this modulation is effected by phytochrome via selective desensitization to jasmonates.

Conclusions

Collectively, our findings suggest that, in physiological time, plants solve the dilemma of competition vs. antiherbivore defense allocation by modulating the sensitivity to jasmonates using information on the risk of competition sensed by phytochrome. Previous studies showed that the 2 best characterized plastic responses to low R:FR ratio (SAS and early-flowering) are triggered using different pathways ( 46 ). We conclude, based on analysis of the sav3–2 mutants (see Fig. 4 ), that the effect of phytochrome on plant defense also involves the activation of an SAS-divergent signaling circuit. Phytochrome modulation of induced defenses appears to be a general phenomenon ( 18 , 20 , 21 ), and is likely to be a master control of resource allocation in shade-intolerant plant species ( 47 ). Selective desensitization to jasmonates should save plant resources by curtailing investment in defense and, at the same time, avoid the inhibitory effects of jasmonates on cell growth ( 25 ). These inhibitory effects could be maladaptive under conditions where the plant has to elongate rapidly to escape shading by its neighbors. Therefore, the phenomenon described in this article may be essential for proper SAS expression, providing a major selective advantage for plants growing in the wild, but could increase vulnerability to insect pests and negatively impact crop yield in high-density plantings typical of modern agriculture.
