---
pmid: '10049847'
title: Molecular characterization of the genes pcaG and pcaH, encoding protocatechuate
  3,4-dioxygenase, which are essential for vanillin catabolism in Pseudomonas sp.
  strain HR199.
authors:
- Overhage J
- Kresse AU
- Priefert H
- Sommer H
- Krammer G
- Rabenhorst J
- Steinbüchel A
journal: Appl Environ Microbiol
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC91128
doi: 10.1128/AEM.65.3.951-960.1999
---

# Molecular characterization of the genes pcaG and pcaH, encoding protocatechuate 3,4-dioxygenase, which are essential for vanillin catabolism in Pseudomonas sp. strain HR199.
**Authors:** Overhage J, Kresse AU, Priefert H, Sommer H, Krammer G, Rabenhorst J, Steinbüchel A
**Journal:** Appl Environ Microbiol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1128/AEM.65.3.951-960.1999](https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.65.3.951-960.1999)
**PMC:** [PMC91128](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC91128/)

## Abstract

1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1999 Mar;65(3):951-60. doi: 
10.1128/AEM.65.3.951-960.1999.

Molecular characterization of the genes pcaG and pcaH, encoding protocatechuate 
3,4-dioxygenase, which are essential for vanillin catabolism in Pseudomonas sp. 
strain HR199.

Overhage J(1), Kresse AU, Priefert H, Sommer H, Krammer G, Rabenhorst J, 
Steinbüchel A.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Mikrobiologie der Westfälischen Wilhelms-Universität Münster, 
D-48149 Münster, Germany.

Pseudomonas sp. strain HR199 is able to utilize eugenol 
(4-allyl-2-methoxyphenol), vanillin (4-hydroxy-3-methoxybenzaldehyde), or 
protocatechuate as the sole carbon source for growth. Mutants of this strain 
which were impaired in the catabolism of vanillin but retained the ability to 
utilize eugenol or protocatechuate were obtained after nitrosoguanidine 
mutagenesis. One mutant (SK6169) was used as recipient of a Pseudomonas sp. 
strain HR199 genomic library in cosmid pVK100, and phenotypic complementation 
was achieved with a 5.8-kbp EcoRI fragment (E58). The amino acid sequences 
deduced from two corresponding open reading frames (ORF) identified on E58 
revealed high degrees of homology to pcaG and pcaH, encoding the two subunits of 
protocatechuate 3,4-dioxygenase. Three additional ORF most probably encoded a 
4-hydroxybenzoate 3-hydroxylase (PobA) and two putative regulatory proteins, 
which exhibited homology to PcaQ of Agrobacterium tumefaciens and PobR of 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, respectively. Since mutant SK6169 was also complemented 
by a subfragment of E58 that harbored only pcaH, this mutant was most probably 
lacking a functional beta subunit of the protocatechuate 3, 4-dioxygenase. Since 
this mutant was still able to grow on protocatechuate and lacked protocatechuate 
4,5-dioxygenase and protocatechuate 2,3-dioxygenase, the degradation had to be 
catalyzed by different enzymes. Two other mutants (SK6184 and SK6190), which 
were also impaired in the catabolism of vanillin, were not complemented by 
fragment E58. Since these mutants accumulated 3-carboxy muconolactone during 
cultivation on eugenol, they most probably exhibited a defect in a step of the 
catabolic pathway following the ortho cleavage. Moreover, in these mutants 
cyclization of 3-carboxymuconic acid seems to occur by a syn absolute 
stereochemical course, which is normally only observed for cis, cis-muconate 
lactonization in pseudomonads. In conclusion, vanillin is degraded through the 
ortho-cleavage pathway in Pseudomonas sp. strain HR199 whereas protocatechuate 
could also be metabolized via a different pathway in the mutants.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.65.3.951-960.1999
PMCID: PMC91128
PMID: 10049847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
