---
pmid: '10400692'
title: Requirement for Akt (protein kinase B) in insulin-induced activation of glycogen
  synthase and phosphorylation of 4E-BP1 (PHAS-1).
authors:
- Takata M
- Ogawa W
- Kitamura T
- Hino Y
- Kuroda S
- Kotani K
- Klip A
- Gingras AC
- Sonenberg N
- Kasuga M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.29.20611
---

# Requirement for Akt (protein kinase B) in insulin-induced activation of glycogen synthase and phosphorylation of 4E-BP1 (PHAS-1).
**Authors:** Takata M, Ogawa W, Kitamura T, Hino Y, Kuroda S, Kotani K, Klip A, Gingras AC, Sonenberg N, Kasuga M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.274.29.20611](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.29.20611)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jul 16;274(29):20611-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.29.20611.

Requirement for Akt (protein kinase B) in insulin-induced activation of glycogen 
synthase and phosphorylation of 4E-BP1 (PHAS-1).

Takata M(1), Ogawa W, Kitamura T, Hino Y, Kuroda S, Kotani K, Klip A, Gingras 
AC, Sonenberg N, Kasuga M.

Author information:
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Kobe University School of Medicine, 
7-5-1 Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0017, Japan.

The roles of Akt (protein kinase B) and the atypical lambda isoform of protein 
kinase C (PKClambda), both of which act downstream of phosphoinositide 3-kinase, 
in the activation of glycogen synthase and phosphorylation of 4E-BP1 (PHAS-1) in 
response to insulin were investigated. A mutant Akt (Akt-AA) in which the 
phosphorylation sites targeted by growth factors are replaced by alanine was 
shown to inhibit insulin-induced activation of both Akt and glycogen synthase in 
L6 myotubes. Expression of a mutant Akt in which Lys179 in the kinase domain was 
replaced by aspartate also inhibited insulin-induced activation of glycogen 
synthase but had no effect on insulin activation of endogenous Akt. A 
kinase-defective mutant of PKClambda (lambdaDeltaNKD), which prevents 
insulin-induced activation of PKClambda, did not affect the activation of 
glycogen synthase by insulin. Insulin-induced phosphorylation of 4E-BP1 was 
inhibited by Akt-AA in Chinese hamster ovary cells. However, lambdaDeltaNKD had 
no effect on 4E-BP1 phosphorylation induced by insulin. These data suggest that 
Akt, but not PKClambda, is required for insulin activation of glycogen synthase 
and for insulin-induced phosphorylation of 4E-BP1.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.29.20611
PMID: 10400692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
