---
pmid: '20878056'
title: Critical involvement of RQCD1 in the EGFR-Akt pathway in mammary carcinogenesis.
authors:
- Ajiro M
- Nishidate T
- Katagiri T
- Nakamura Y
journal: Int J Oncol
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.3892/ijo_00000760
---

# Critical involvement of RQCD1 in the EGFR-Akt pathway in mammary carcinogenesis.
**Authors:** Ajiro M, Nishidate T, Katagiri T, Nakamura Y
**Journal:** Int J Oncol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.3892/ijo_00000760](https://doi.org/10.3892/ijo_00000760)

## Abstract

1. Int J Oncol. 2010 Nov;37(5):1085-93. doi: 10.3892/ijo_00000760.

Critical involvement of RQCD1 in the EGFR-Akt pathway in mammary carcinogenesis.

Ajiro M(1), Nishidate T, Katagiri T, Nakamura Y.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical 
Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.

We previously reported an important role of RQCD1 in mammary carcinogenesis 
through the interaction with Grb10 interacting GYF protein 1 (GIGYF1), Grb10 
interacting GYF protein 2 (GIGYF2) and growth factor receptor binding protein 10 
(Grb10). In this study, we investigated the biological mechanism of RQCD1 in 
regulation of the Akt activity as the downstream signal of epidermal growth 
factor receptor (EGFR). Knockdown of RQCD1 reduced the Akt phosphorylation level 
that was induced by epidermal growth factor (EGF) stimulation. We found a 
possible formation of the big complex involved in the Akt activity including 
Akt, EGFR, GIGYF1 and GIGYF2, Grb10 and RQCD1. We subsequently defined that a 
region corresponding to 620-665th amino acids of GIGYF1 and 667-712th amino 
acids of GIGYF2 interacted with RQCD1. Furthermore, we found that RQCD1 was 
required for enhancement of the interaction of Grb10 with GIGYF1 and GIGYF2. Our 
findings in this study imply the functional mechanism of RQCD1 in the Akt 
activity regulation as a mediator in the EGFR-signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo_00000760
PMID: 20878056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
