---
pmid: '38484052'
title: Structural basis of U12-type intron engagement by the fully assembled human
  minor spliceosome.
authors:
- Bai R
- Yuan M
- Zhang P
- Luo T
- Shi Y
- Wan R
journal: Science
year: '2024'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.adn7272
---

# Structural basis of U12-type intron engagement by the fully assembled human minor spliceosome.
**Authors:** Bai R, Yuan M, Zhang P, Luo T, Shi Y, Wan R
**Journal:** Science (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.adn7272](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.adn7272)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2024 Mar 15;383(6688):1245-1252. doi: 10.1126/science.adn7272. Epub 
2024 Mar 14.

Structural basis of U12-type intron engagement by the fully assembled human 
minor spliceosome.

Bai R(1)(2)(3), Yuan M(4), Zhang P(4), Luo T(1)(2)(3), Shi Y(1)(2)(3)(4), Wan 
R(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Research Center for Industries of the Future, Key Zhejiang Key Laboratory of 
Structural Biology, School of Life Sciences, Westlake University, Xihu District, 
Hangzhou 310024, Zhejiang Province, China.
(2)Westlake Laboratory of Life Sciences and Biomedicine, Xihu District, Hangzhou 
310024, Zhejiang Province, China.
(3)Institute of Biology, Westlake Institute for Advanced Study, Xihu District, 
Hangzhou 310024, Zhejiang Province, China.
(4)Beijing Frontier Research Center for Biological Structure, Tsinghua-Peking 
Joint Center for Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, 
Beijing 100084, China.

The minor spliceosome, which is responsible for the splicing of U12-type 
introns, comprises five small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs), of which only one is shared 
with the major spliceosome. In this work, we report the 3.3-angstrom 
cryo-electron microscopy structure of the fully assembled human minor 
spliceosome pre-B complex. The atomic model includes U11 small nuclear 
ribonucleoprotein (snRNP), U12 snRNP, and U4atac/U6atac.U5 tri-snRNP. U11 snRNA 
is recognized by five U11-specific proteins (20K, 25K, 35K, 48K, and 59K) and 
the heptameric Sm ring. The 3' half of the 5'-splice site forms a duplex with 
U11 snRNA; the 5' half is recognized by U11-35K, U11-48K, and U11 snRNA. Two 
proteins, CENATAC and DIM2/TXNL4B, specifically associate with the minor 
tri-snRNP. A structural analysis uncovered how two conformationally similar 
tri-snRNPs are differentiated by the minor and major prespliceosomes for 
assembly.

DOI: 10.1126/science.adn7272
PMID: 38484052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
