---
pmid: '12526739'
title: Fyn tyrosine kinase is a critical regulator of disabled-1 during brain development.
authors:
- Arnaud L
- Ballif BA
- Förster E
- Cooper JA
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0960-9822(02)01397-0
---

# Fyn tyrosine kinase is a critical regulator of disabled-1 during brain development.
**Authors:** Arnaud L, Ballif BA, Förster E, Cooper JA
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0960-9822(02)01397-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0960-9822(02)01397-0)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2003 Jan 8;13(1):9-17. doi: 10.1016/s0960-9822(02)01397-0.

Fyn tyrosine kinase is a critical regulator of disabled-1 during brain 
development.

Arnaud L(1), Ballif BA, Förster E, Cooper JA.

Author information:
(1)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 1100 Fairview Avenue North, 98109, 
Seattle, WA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Disabled-1 (Dab1) is an intracellular adaptor protein that regulates 
migrations of various classes of neurons during mammalian brain development. 
Dab1 function depends on its tyrosine phosphorylation, which is stimulated by 
Reelin, an extracellular signaling molecule. Reelin increases the stoichiometry 
of Dab1 phosphorylation and downregulates Dab1 protein levels. Reelin binds to 
various cell surface receptors, including two members of the low-density 
lipoprotein receptor family that also bind to Dab1. Mutations in Dab1, its 
phosphorylation sites, Reelin, or the Reelin receptors cause a common phenotype. 
However, the molecular mechanism whereby Reelin regulates Dab1 tyrosine 
phosphorylation is poorly understood.
RESULTS: We found that Reelin-induced Dab1 tyrosine phosphorylation in neuron 
cultures is inhibited by acute treatment with pharmacological inhibitors of Src 
family, but not Abl family, kinases. In addition, Reelin stimulates Src family 
kinases by a mechanism involving Dab1. We analyzed the Dab1 protein level and 
tyrosine phosphorylation stoichiometry by using brain samples and cultured 
neurons that were obtained from mouse embryos carrying mutations in Src family 
tyrosine kinases. We found that fyn is required for proper Dab1 levels and 
phosphorylation in vivo and in vitro. When fyn copy number is reduced, src, but 
not yes, becomes important, reflecting a partial redundancy between fyn and src.
CONCLUSIONS: Reelin activates Fyn to phosphorylate and downregulate Dab1 during 
brain development. The results were unexpected because Fyn deficiency does not 
cause the same developmental phenotype as Dab1 or Reelin deficiency. This 
suggests additional complexity in the Reelin signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.1016/s0960-9822(02)01397-0
PMID: 12526739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
