---
pmid: '9258751'
title: 'Characterization of native and recombinant bone sialoprotein: delineation
  of the mineral-binding and cell adhesion domains and structural analysis of the
  RGD domain.'
authors:
- Stubbs JT 3rd
- Mintz KP
- Eanes ED
- Torchia DA
- Fisher LW
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1359/jbmr.1997.12.8.1210
---

# Characterization of native and recombinant bone sialoprotein: delineation of the mineral-binding and cell adhesion domains and structural analysis of the RGD domain.
**Authors:** Stubbs JT 3rd, Mintz KP, Eanes ED, Torchia DA, Fisher LW
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1359/jbmr.1997.12.8.1210](https://doi.org/10.1359/jbmr.1997.12.8.1210)

## Abstract

1. J Bone Miner Res. 1997 Aug;12(8):1210-22. doi: 10.1359/jbmr.1997.12.8.1210.

Characterization of native and recombinant bone sialoprotein: delineation of the 
mineral-binding and cell adhesion domains and structural analysis of the RGD 
domain.

Stubbs JT 3rd(1), Mintz KP, Eanes ED, Torchia DA, Fisher LW.

Author information:
(1)Craniofacial and Skeletal Diseases Branch, National Institute of Dental 
Research, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Bone sialoprotein is a small, sulfated, and phosphorylated integrin-binding 
glycoprotein apparently found only in tissues that eventually mineralize. 
Nondenatured bone sialoprotein (BSP) purified from rat osteosarcoma cell line 
(UMR 106-01 BSP) culture media is shown to have a hydroxyapatite Kd 
approximately 2.6 x 10(-9) M, perhaps the strongest affinity for this mineral of 
any of the matrix proteins. Both native BSP and a 47 kD fragment of UMR-BSP 
(Fragment 1 approximately 133A- approximately 265Y) are more potent inhibitors 
of seeded hydroxyapatite crystal growth than recombinant human BSP fragments 
lacking post-translational modifications. The recombinant proteins, however, do 
show reproducible inhibitory activity, suggesting that at least some of the 
strong mineral-binding properties are encoded directly within the protein 
sequence itself. BSP facilitates the adhesion of several cell types through its 
integrin binding (RGD) tripeptide sequence. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) 
analysis of a 15N-enriched 59 amino acid recombinant domain containing the RGD 
tripeptide shows that the structure of this isolated domain is highly flexible 
with or without 5 mM calcium. Previous work has also shown that an endogenous 
fragment of UMR-BSP (Fragment 1) supports cell adhesion in the absence of the 
RGD sequence. In this report, non-RGD cell adhesion sites are localized within 
conserved amino- and carboxy-terminal tyrosine-rich domains of recombinant human 
BSP. Given the proximity of the latter non-RGD cell adhesion site to the RGD 
tripeptide, a model of BSP-receptor interactions is presented.

DOI: 10.1359/jbmr.1997.12.8.1210
PMID: 9258751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
