---
pmid: '10672018'
title: Functional characterization and mechanism of action of recombinant human kynurenine
  3-hydroxylase.
authors:
- Breton J
- Avanzi N
- Magagnin S
- Covini N
- Magistrelli G
- Cozzi L
- Isacchi A
journal: Eur J Biochem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1046/j.1432-1327.2000.01104.x
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Functional characterization and mechanism of action of recombinant human kynurenine 3-hydroxylase.
**Authors:** Breton J, Avanzi N, Magagnin S, Covini N, Magistrelli G, Cozzi L, Isacchi A
**Journal:** Eur J Biochem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1432-1327.2000.01104.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1432-1327.2000.01104.x)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Biochem. 2000 Feb;267(4):1092-9. doi: 10.1046/j.1432-1327.2000.01104.x.

Functional characterization and mechanism of action of recombinant human 
kynurenine 3-hydroxylase.

Breton J(1), Avanzi N, Magagnin S, Covini N, Magistrelli G, Cozzi L, Isacchi A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Pharmacia & Upjohn, Nerviano, Italy. 
jerome.breton@eu.pnu.com

The mitochondrial outer membrane enzyme kynurenine 3-hydroxylase (K3H) is an 
NADPH-dependent flavin mono-oxygenase involved in the tryptophan pathway, where 
it catalyzes the hydroxylation of kynurenine. K3H was transiently expressed in 
COS-1 cells as a glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusion protein, and the pure 
recombinant protein (rec-K3H) was obtained with a specific activity of about 
2000 nmol.min-1.mg-1. Rec-K3H was shown to have an optimum pH at 7.5, to use 
NADPH more efficiently than NADH, and to contain one molecule of non-covalently 
bound FAD per molecule of enzyme. The mechanism of the rec-K3H-catalyzed 
reaction was investigated by overall initial-rate measurements, and a random 
mechanism in which combination of the enzyme with one substrate does not 
influence its affinity for the other is proposed. Further kinetic studies 
revealed that K3H activity was inhibited by both pyridoxal phosphate and Cl-, 
and that NADPH-catalyzed oxidation occurred even in the absence of kynurenine if 
3-hydroxykynurenine was present, suggesting an uncoupling effect of 
3-hydroxykynurenine with peroxide formation. This observation could be of 
clinical interest, as peroxide formation could explain the neurotoxicity of 
3-hydroxykynurenine in vivo.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1432-1327.2000.01104.x
PMID: 10672018 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
