---
pmid: '9731529'
title: Mass spectrometry and EST-database searching allows characterization of the
  multi-protein spliceosome complex.
authors:
- Neubauer G
- King A
- Rappsilber J
- Calvio C
- Watson M
- Ajuh P
- Sleeman J
- Lamond A
- Mann M
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/1700
---

# Mass spectrometry and EST-database searching allows characterization of the multi-protein spliceosome complex.
**Authors:** Neubauer G, King A, Rappsilber J, Calvio C, Watson M, Ajuh P, Sleeman J, Lamond A, Mann M
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1038/1700](https://doi.org/10.1038/1700)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 1998 Sep;20(1):46-50. doi: 10.1038/1700.

Mass spectrometry and EST-database searching allows characterization of the 
multi-protein spliceosome complex.

Neubauer G(1), King A, Rappsilber J, Calvio C, Watson M, Ajuh P, Sleeman J, 
Lamond A, Mann M.

Author information:
(1)Protein & Peptide Group, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, 
Germany.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 1998 Sep;20(1):5-6. doi: 10.1038/1651.

Many important cell mechanisms are carried out and regulated by multi-protein 
complexes, for example, transcription and RNA processing machinery, receptor 
complexes and cytoskeletal structures. Most of these complexes remain only 
partially characterized due to the difficulty of conventional protein analysis 
methods. The rapid expansion of DNA sequence databases now provides whole or 
partial gene sequences of model organisms, and recent advances in protein 
microcharacterization via mass spectrometry allow the possibility of linking 
these DNA sequences to the proteins in functional complexes. This approach has 
been demonstrated in organisms whose genomes have been sequenced, such as 
budding yeast. Here we report the first characterization of an entire mammalian 
multi-protein complex using these methods. The machinery that removes introns 
from mRNA precursors--the spliceosome--is a large multi-protein complex. 
Approximately half of the components excised from a two-dimensional gel 
separation of the spliceosome were found in protein sequence databases. Using 
nanoelectrospray mass spectrometry, the remainder were identified and cloned 
using public expressed sequence tag (EST) databases. Existing EST databases are 
thus already sufficiently complete to allow rapid characterization of large 
mammalian protein complexes via mass spectrometry.

DOI: 10.1038/1700
PMID: 9731529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
