---
pmid: '18343367'
title: 'P120-catenin is a novel desmoglein 3 interacting partner: identification of
  the p120-catenin association site of desmoglein 3.'
authors:
- Kanno M
- Isa Y
- Aoyama Y
- Yamamoto Y
- Nagai M
- Ozawa M
- Kitajima Y
journal: Exp Cell Res
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2008.01.031
---

# P120-catenin is a novel desmoglein 3 interacting partner: identification of the p120-catenin association site of desmoglein 3.
**Authors:** Kanno M, Isa Y, Aoyama Y, Yamamoto Y, Nagai M, Ozawa M, Kitajima Y
**Journal:** Exp Cell Res (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yexcr.2008.01.031](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yexcr.2008.01.031)

## Abstract

1. Exp Cell Res. 2008 May 1;314(8):1683-92. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2008.01.031.
Epub  2008 Feb 15.

P120-catenin is a novel desmoglein 3 interacting partner: identification of the 
p120-catenin association site of desmoglein 3.

Kanno M(1), Isa Y, Aoyama Y, Yamamoto Y, Nagai M, Ozawa M, Kitajima Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Gifu University School of Medicine, Gifu City 
501-1194, Japan.

P120-catenin (p120ctn) is an armadillo-repeat protein that directly binds to the 
intracytoplasmic domains of classical cadherins. p120ctn binding promotes the 
stabilization of cadherin complexes on the plasma membrane and thus positively 
regulates the adhesive activity of cadherins. Using co-immunoprecipitation, we 
show here that p120ctn associates to desmogleins (Dsg) 1 and 3. To determine 
which region is involved in the association between Dsg3 and p120ctn, we 
constructed mutant Dsg3 proteins, in which various cytoplasmic subdomains were 
removed. The tailless Dsg3 constructs Delta IA:AA1-641Dsg3 and Delta 
641-714Dsg3, which do not contain the intracellular anchor (IA) region, did not 
coprecipitate with p120cn, nor did they colocalize at the plasma membrane. 
Immunocytochemical analysis revealed that p120ctn does not localize to 
desmosomes, but colocalizes with Dsg3 at the cell surface. A biotinylation assay 
for Dsg3 showed that biotinylated Delta 641-714Dsg3 was turned over more rapidly 
than wild-type Dsg3. These results indicate that the membrane proximal region 
(corresponding to residues 641-714) in the IA region of Dsg3 is necessary for 
complex formation with p120ctn, and to maintain free Dsg3 at the cell surface 
before it is integrated into desmosomes. In summary, we show that p120ctn is a 
novel interactor of the Dsg proteins, and may play a role in desmosome 
remodeling.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2008.01.031
PMID: 18343367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
