---
pmid: '1752215'
title: Effects of interleukin-1 and tumor necrosis factor-alpha on astrocytes, microglia,
  oligodendrocytes, and glial precursors in vitro.
authors:
- Merrill JE
journal: Dev Neurosci
year: '1991'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1159/000112150
---

# Effects of interleukin-1 and tumor necrosis factor-alpha on astrocytes, microglia, oligodendrocytes, and glial precursors in vitro.
**Authors:** Merrill JE
**Journal:** Dev Neurosci (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000112150](https://doi.org/10.1159/000112150)

## Abstract

1. Dev Neurosci. 1991;13(3):130-7. doi: 10.1159/000112150.

Effects of interleukin-1 and tumor necrosis factor-alpha on astrocytes, 
microglia, oligodendrocytes, and glial precursors in vitro.

Merrill JE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Reed Neurological Research Center, UCLA School of 
Medicine.

Microglia and astrocytes undergo proliferative and differentiative changes in 
vivo after trauma or diseases such as multiple sclerosis (MS). Oligodendrocytes 
are destroyed in lesions in MS. Interleukin-1 (IL1) and tumor necrosis 
factor-alpha (TNF alpha) are involved in inflammation of the central nervous 
system and are elevated in MS. We have investigated the changes in cell 
morphology and cell number induced by IL1 and TNF alpha in purified and mixed 
populations of primary rat brain microglia, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and 
glial precursors. Depending on the target population, proliferation, 
differentiation, or inhibition of cultured cells was observed. The data also 
suggest that interactions among cell populations occur and support the 
hypothesis that IL1 and TNF alpha effects may be indirect, possibly through 
induction of other factors.

DOI: 10.1159/000112150
PMID: 1752215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
