---
pmid: '8943016'
title: The highly conserved skb1 gene encodes a protein that interacts with Shk1,
  a fission yeast Ste20/PAK homolog.
authors:
- Gilbreth M
- Yang P
- Wang D
- Frost J
- Polverino A
- Cobb MH
- Marcus S
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1996'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC19432
doi: 10.1073/pnas.93.24.13802
---

# The highly conserved skb1 gene encodes a protein that interacts with Shk1, a fission yeast Ste20/PAK homolog.
**Authors:** Gilbreth M, Yang P, Wang D, Frost J, Polverino A, Cobb MH, Marcus S
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.93.24.13802](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.93.24.13802)
**PMC:** [PMC19432](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC19432/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Nov 26;93(24):13802-7. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.93.24.13802.

The highly conserved skb1 gene encodes a protein that interacts with Shk1, a 
fission yeast Ste20/PAK homolog.

Gilbreth M(1), Yang P, Wang D, Frost J, Polverino A, Cobb MH, Marcus S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston 77030, USA.

The Shk1 protein kinase, a homolog of Saccharomyces cerevisiae Ste20 and 
mammalian p21Cdc42/Rac-activated kinases, is an essential component of a Ras- 
and Cdc42-dependent signaling cascade required for cell viability, normal 
morphology, and mitogen-activated protein kinase-mediated sexual responses in 
the fission yeast, Schizosaccharomyces pombe. To identify S. pombe proteins that 
modulate or mediate Shk1 functions, we conducted a two-hybrid screen for 
Shk1-interacting proteins. One of the genes identified as a result of this 
screen was skb1. We show that Skb1 interacts with a region of the N-terminal 
regulatory domain of Shk1 distinct from that to which Cdc42 binds, and that 
Shk1, Cdc42, and Skb1 are able to form a ternary complex in vivo. S.pombe cells 
carrying an skb1 null mutation are less elongate in morphology than wild-type 
cells and exhibit a moderate growth defect. The morphology defect of the skb1 
deletion mutant is suppressed by overexpression of Shk1. Overexpression of Skb1 
causes wild-type S. pombe cells to become hyperelongated. Additional genetic 
analyses described herein suggest that Skb1 is a component of the morphology 
control branch of the Ras signaling cascade in S. pombe and that it positively 
modulates Shk1 function. Homologs of Skb1 are encoded by open reading frames in 
the genomes of S. cerevisiae and Caenorhabditis elegans and by an 
uncharacterized human cDNA sequence. Thus, skb1 may be the first 
well-characterized member of a highly conserved family of genes encoding 
potential p21Cdc42/Rac-activated kinase regulators.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.93.24.13802
PMCID: PMC19432
PMID: 8943016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The Shk1 protein kinase, a homolog of Saccharomyces
 cerevisiae Ste20 and mammalian
 p21 Cdc42/Rac -activated kinases, is an essential component
 of a Ras- and Cdc42-dependent signaling cascade required for cell
 viability, normal morphology, and mitogen-activated protein
 kinase-mediated sexual responses in the fission yeast, Schizosaccharomyces pombe . To identify S.
 pombe proteins that modulate or mediate Shk1 functions, we
 conducted a two-hybrid screen for Shk1-interacting proteins. One of the
 genes identified as a result of this screen was skb1 . We
 show that Skb1 interacts with a region of the N-terminal regulatory
 domain of Shk1 distinct from that to which Cdc42 binds, and that Shk1,
 Cdc42, and Skb1 are able to form a ternary complex in
 vivo . S. pombe cells carrying an skb1 null mutation are less elongate in morphology than
 wild-type cells and exhibit a moderate growth defect. The morphology
 defect of the skb1 deletion mutant is suppressed by
 overexpression of Shk1. Overexpression of Skb1 causes wild-type S. pombe cells to become hyperelongated. Additional
 genetic analyses described herein suggest that Skb1 is a component of
 the morphology control branch of the Ras signaling cascade in S.
 pombe and that it positively modulates Shk1 function. Homologs
 of Skb1 are encoded by open reading frames in the genomes of S.
 cerevisiae and Caenorhabditis
 elegans and by an uncharacterized human cDNA sequence. Thus, skb1 may be the first well-characterized member of a
 highly conserved family of genes encoding potential
 p21 Cdc42/Rac -activated kinase regulators.

DISCUSSION

We have described the cloning and characterization of the fission
 yeast skb1 gene, which we identified from a two-hybrid
 screen for proteins that interact with the Ste20/PAK homolog Shk1.
 Our genetic analyses indicate that Skb1 is a component of the
 morphological control branch of the Ras1 signaling cascade in S.
 pombe and that it positively modulates Shk1 function. Skb1 is not
 required for either mating or sporulation in S. pombe . Our
 results are consistent with a role for Skb1 functioning as a Shk1
 activator, although we have thus far been unable to prove this
 hypothesis biochemically using epitope-tagged or glutathione S -transferase fusion proteins. Further insights into the
 nature of the Skb1–Shk1 interaction may be provided by the
 identification of additional factors that interact with each protein.

Based on our genetic analyses and two-hybrid experiments, we propose
 the model for Skb1 function depicted in Fig. 5 in which Skb1 functions downstream from Ras1 and Scd2, at the same
 level as Cdc42, and upstream of Shk1. Our results are also consistent
 with an alternative model for Skb1 function in which Skb1 participates
 in a morphological control pathway that parallels the Ras1 → Scd1 →
 Cdc42 pathway to Shk1. By identifying additional factors that regulate
 or physically associate with Skb1, it may become possible to
 distinguish between these two models for Skb1 function.

Our results indicate that Skb1 is only partially required for function
 of the Ras1 signaling cascade in S. pombe . Cells carrying a
 deletion of the skb1 gene exhibit only moderate defects in
 growth and morphology and no discernible defects in sexual responses.
 One explanation for this is that Cdc42 provides the dominant input to
 Shk1, while Skb1 fine-tunes Shk1 function. However, it should be noted
 that the relative contributions of other components of the S.
 pombe Ras1 cascade vary significantly (refs. 20 , 21 , 22 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 29 ,
 and 30 ; see Fig. 5 ). For example, with respect to MAPK functions, while
 Gpa1, Byr2, Byr1, and Spk1 are each essential for sporulation, Ras1
 function is partially dispensable. On the other hand, Scd1 and Scd2 are
 not required for sporulation at all, even though each is essential for
 mating. With respect to morphological functions, ras1 − cells are ellipsoid in morphology,
 whereas scd1 − and shk1 − mutants are much more spherical. scd2 − mutants
 more closely resemble skb1 − cells in morphology
 (stumpy, rather than ellipsoidal). With respect to cell growth, ras1 − , scd1 − , and scd2 − cells do not exhibit obvious growth
 defects, whereas skb1 − cells grow more slowly
 than wild-type cells and cdc42 and shk1 are each
 essential for cell viability. These and numerous other observations may
 provide an indication that the interactions among components of the
 Ras1 signaling cascade in S. pombe are substantially more
 complex than those depicted in Fig. 5 . It is also possible, if not
 likely, that additional components of the cascade remain to be
 identified.

Searches of computer data bases revealed that Skb1 is homologous in
 structure to proteins encoded by ORFs in the genomes of S.
 cerevisiae and C. elegans and by an uncharacterized
 human cDNA sequence. It will be of great interest to determine whether
 these proteins are also functionally related. Preliminary
 characterization of the S. cerevisiae Skb1 homolog, YBR1008,
 suggests that this may turn out to be the case. In collaborative
 studies, we have determined that null mutations in the YBR1008 gene cause readily discernible changes in cell
 morphology (C. Inouye, S.M., M. Shulewitz, P.Y., M.G., and J.
 Thorner, unpublished results). This phenotype resembles that of S. cerevisiae mutants carrying a null mutation of the
 PAK-encoding gene CLA4 ( 34 ). Thus, skb1 may be
 the first well-characterized member of a highly conserved family of
 genes encoding potential PAK regulators. Proteins like Skb1 could
 potentially function to impart functional specificity to PAKs—a
 specificity that might not be attained by interaction with Cdc42
 and/or Rac proteins alone. The identification of novel PAK regulators
 such as Skb1 should provide additional insights into the function and
 regulation of PAKs in both yeasts and in higher organisms.
