---
pmid: '9235900'
title: Insulin-like growth factor-I rapidly activates multiple signal transduction
  pathways in cultured rat cardiac myocytes.
authors:
- Foncea R
- Andersson M
- Ketterman A
- Blakesley V
- Sapag-Hagar M
- Sugden PH
- LeRoith D
- Lavandero S
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.31.19115
---

# Insulin-like growth factor-I rapidly activates multiple signal transduction pathways in cultured rat cardiac myocytes.
**Authors:** Foncea R, Andersson M, Ketterman A, Blakesley V, Sapag-Hagar M, Sugden PH, LeRoith D, Lavandero S
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.272.31.19115](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.272.31.19115)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1997 Aug 1;272(31):19115-24. doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.31.19115.

Insulin-like growth factor-I rapidly activates multiple signal transduction 
pathways in cultured rat cardiac myocytes.

Foncea R(1), Andersson M, Ketterman A, Blakesley V, Sapag-Hagar M, Sugden PH, 
LeRoith D, Lavandero S.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Facultad Ciencias Químicas y 
Farmacéuticas, Universidad de Chile, Olivos 1007, Santiago, Chile.

In response to insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I), neonatal rat cardiac 
myocytes exhibit a hypertrophic response. The elucidation of the IGF-I signal 
transduction system in these cells remains unknown. We show here that cardiac 
myocytes present a single class of high affinity receptors (12,446 +/- 3,669 
binding sites/cell) with a dissociation constant of 0.36 +/- 0.10 nM. Two 
different beta-subunits of IGF-I receptor were detected, and their 
autophosphorylation was followed by increases in the phosphotyrosine content of 
extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERKs), insulin receptor substrate 1, 
phospholipase C-gamma1, and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. IGF-I transiently 
activates c-Raf in cultured neonatal cardiac myocytes, whereas A-raf is 
activated much less than c-Raf. Two peaks of ERK activity (ERK1 and ERK2) were 
resolved in cardiac myocytes treated with IGF-I by fast protein liquid 
chromatography, both being stimulated by IGF-I (with EC50 values for the 
stimulation of ERK1 and ERK2 by IGF-I of 0.10 and 0. 12 nM, respectively). 
Maximal activation of ERK2 (12-fold) and ERK1 (8.3-fold) activities was attained 
after a 5-min exposure to IGF-I. Maximal activation of p90 S6 kinase by IGF-I 
was achieved after 10 min, and then the activity decreased slowly. 
Interestingly, IGF-I stimulates incorporation of [3H]phenylalanine (1.6-fold) 
without any effect on [3H]thymidine incorporation. These data suggest that IGF-I 
activates multiple signal transduction pathways in cardiac myocytes some of 
which may be relevant to the hypertrophic response of the heart.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.272.31.19115
PMID: 9235900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
