---
pmid: '17764659'
title: Inactivation of the mouse Atxn3 (ataxin-3) gene increases protein ubiquitination.
authors:
- Schmitt I
- Linden M
- Khazneh H
- Evert BO
- Breuer P
- Klockgether T
- Wuellner U
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2007.08.062
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Inactivation of the mouse Atxn3 (ataxin-3) gene increases protein ubiquitination.
**Authors:** Schmitt I, Linden M, Khazneh H, Evert BO, Breuer P, Klockgether T, Wuellner U
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2007.08.062](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2007.08.062)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Oct 26;362(3):734-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2007.08.062. Epub 2007 Aug 23.

Inactivation of the mouse Atxn3 (ataxin-3) gene increases protein 
ubiquitination.

Schmitt I(1), Linden M, Khazneh H, Evert BO, Breuer P, Klockgether T, Wuellner 
U.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Bonn, Neurobiology, Sigmund-Freud-Str. 
25, 53105 Bonn, Germany. i.schmitt@uni-bonn.de

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 is a neurodegenerative disease caused by expansion 
of a polyglutamine domain in the protein ataxin-3 (ATXN3). Physiological 
functions of ATXN3 presumably include ubiquitin protease and transcriptional 
corepressor activity. To gain insight into the function of ATXN3 and to test the 
hypothesis that loss of ATXN3 contributes to the pathology in SCA3 we generated 
Atxn3 knockout (ko) mice by targeted mutagenesis. Loss of Atxn3 did not affect 
viability or fertility and Atxn3 ko mice displayed no overt abnormalities. On 
the accelerating Rotarod Atxn3 ko mice performed as well as wildtype (wt) 
animals, but reduced exploratory behavior in the open field suggested a sense of 
heightened anxiety. While no gross deficits were apparent upon morphological 
examination, we found increased levels of ubiquitinated proteins in Atxn3 ko 
tissues. Thus Atxn3 ko mice provide the first in vivo reference to the 
deubiquitinating activity of ATXN3.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2007.08.062
PMID: 17764659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
