---
pmid: '17298945'
title: The conserved CPH domains of Cul7 and PARC are protein-protein interaction
  modules that bind the tetramerization domain of p53.
authors:
- Kaustov L
- Lukin J
- Lemak A
- Duan S
- Ho M
- Doherty R
- Penn LZ
- Arrowsmith CH
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M611297200
---

# The conserved CPH domains of Cul7 and PARC are protein-protein interaction modules that bind the tetramerization domain of p53.
**Authors:** Kaustov L, Lukin J, Lemak A, Duan S, Ho M, Doherty R, Penn LZ, Arrowsmith CH
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M611297200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M611297200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Apr 13;282(15):11300-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M611297200. Epub
2007  Feb 12.

The conserved CPH domains of Cul7 and PARC are protein-protein interaction 
modules that bind the tetramerization domain of p53.

Kaustov L(1), Lukin J, Lemak A, Duan S, Ho M, Doherty R, Penn LZ, Arrowsmith CH.

Author information:
(1)Ontario Cancer Institute and the Department of Medical Biophysics, University 
of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Cul7 is a member of the Cullin Ring Ligase (CRL) family and is required for 
normal mouse development and cellular proliferation. Recently, a region of Cul7 
that is highly conserved in the p53-associated, Parkin-like cytoplasmic protein 
PARC, was shown to bind p53 directly. Here we identify the CPH domains 
(conserved domain within Cul7, PARC, and HERC2 proteins) of both Cul7 and PARC 
as p53 interaction domains using size exclusion chromatography and NMR 
spectroscopy. We present the first structure of the evolutionarily conserved CPH 
domain and provide novel insight into the Cul7-p53 interaction. The NMR 
structure of the Cul7-CPH domain reveals a fold similar to peptide interaction 
modules such as the SH3, Tudor, and KOW domains. The p53 interaction surface of 
both Cul7 and PARC CPH domains was mapped to a conserved surface distinct from 
the analogous peptide-binding regions of SH3, KOW, and Tudor domains, suggesting 
a novel mode of interaction. The CPH domain interaction surface of p53 resides 
in the tetramerization domain and is formed by residues contributed by at least 
two subunits.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M611297200
PMID: 17298945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
