---
pmid: '1871153'
title: Characterization of transferrin receptor released by K562 erythroleukemia cells.
authors:
- Baynes RD
- Shih YJ
- Hudson BG
- Cook JD
journal: Proc Soc Exp Biol Med
year: '1991'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.3181/00379727-197-43276
---

# Characterization of transferrin receptor released by K562 erythroleukemia cells.
**Authors:** Baynes RD, Shih YJ, Hudson BG, Cook JD
**Journal:** Proc Soc Exp Biol Med (1991)
**DOI:** [10.3181/00379727-197-43276](https://doi.org/10.3181/00379727-197-43276)

## Abstract

1. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med. 1991 Sep;197(4):416-23. doi:
10.3181/00379727-197-43276.

Characterization of transferrin receptor released by K562 erythroleukemia cells.

Baynes RD(1), Shih YJ, Hudson BG, Cook JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Kansas University Medical Center, Kansas City 66103.

A soluble form of transferrin receptor has been detected in human serum and has 
been shown recently to be a truncated form of the intact membrane bound 
receptor. Mechanisms governing the release of transferrin receptor by cells are 
poorly understood and could be better defined by tissue culture. The present 
investigation was undertaken to characterize the transferrin receptor released 
by K562 erythroleukemic cells. In contrast with maturing sheep reticulocytes, 
which have been shown to release transferrin receptor in small vesicles termed 
exosomes, we demonstrated, with a monoclonal enzyme-linked immunoassay, that 
less than 30% of the transferrin receptor released by K562 cells in log phase 
growth was in a particulate form. The relative amounts of soluble and 
particulate receptor released to the supernatant did not change significantly 
during 48 hr of incubation. Soluble receptor was purified by immunoaffinity 
chromatography. On polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, its mobility was the same 
(85 kDa) as that of the truncated monomeric form recently identified in human 
serum. Further evidence that serum and soluble receptors released by K562 cells 
are identical was provided by amino acid sequence analysis, which demonstrated 
that 16 of the first 19 residues of the N-terminal sequence of soluble K562 
receptor are homologous with the serum receptor. The remaining three were not 
identifiable. K562 cells provide a useful in vitro model for studying the 
production of membrane-bound and soluble forms of released transferrin receptor.

DOI: 10.3181/00379727-197-43276
PMID: 1871153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
