---
pmid: '12176995'
title: MADM, a novel adaptor protein that mediates phosphorylation of the 14-3-3 binding
  site of myeloid leukemia factor 1.
authors:
- Lim R
- Winteringham LN
- Williams JH
- McCulloch RK
- Ingley E
- Tiao JY
- Lalonde JP
- Tsai S
- Tilbrook PA
- Sun Y
- Wu X
- Morris SW
- Klinken SP
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M206041200
---

# MADM, a novel adaptor protein that mediates phosphorylation of the 14-3-3 binding site of myeloid leukemia factor 1.
**Authors:** Lim R, Winteringham LN, Williams JH, McCulloch RK, Ingley E, Tiao JY, Lalonde JP, Tsai S, Tilbrook PA, Sun Y, Wu X, Morris SW, Klinken SP
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M206041200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M206041200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Oct 25;277(43):40997-1008. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M206041200. Epub
 2002 Aug 9.

MADM, a novel adaptor protein that mediates phosphorylation of the 14-3-3 
binding site of myeloid leukemia factor 1.

Lim R(1), Winteringham LN, Williams JH, McCulloch RK, Ingley E, Tiao JY, Lalonde 
JP, Tsai S, Tilbrook PA, Sun Y, Wu X, Morris SW, Klinken SP.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Cancer Medicine, Medical Research Foundation, Royal Perth 
Hospital, Western Australian Institute for Medical Research, Rear 50 Murray 
Street, Perth, WA 6000, Australia.

A yeast two-hybrid screen was conducted to identify binding partners of Mlf1, an 
oncoprotein recently identified in a translocation with nucleophosmin that 
causes acute myeloid leukemia. Two proteins isolated in this screen were 
14-3-3zeta and a novel adaptor, Madm. Mlf1 contains a classic RSXSXP sequence 
for 14-3-3 binding and is associated with 14-3-3zeta via this phosphorylated 
motif. Madm co-immunoprecipitated with Mlf1 and co-localized in the cytoplasm. 
In addition, Madm recruited a serine kinase, which phosphorylated both Madm and 
Mlf1 including the RSXSXP motif. In contrast to wild-type Mlf1, the oncogenic 
fusion protein nucleophosmin (NPM)-MLF1 did not bind 14-3-3zeta, had altered 
Madm binding, and localized exclusively in the nucleus. Ectopic expression of 
Madm in M1 myeloid cells suppressed cytokine-induced differentiation unlike 
Mlf1, which promotes maturation. Because the Mlf1 binding region of Madm and its 
own dimerization domain overlapped, the levels of Madm and Mlf1 may affect 
complex formation and regulate differentiation. In summary, this study has 
identified two partner proteins of Mlf1 that may influence its subcellular 
localization and biological function.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M206041200
PMID: 12176995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
