---
pmid: '19706687'
title: PDZ-domain-directed basolateral targeting of the peripheral membrane protein
  FRMPD2 in epithelial cells.
authors:
- Stenzel N
- Fetzer CP
- Heumann R
- Erdmann KS
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.046854
---

# PDZ-domain-directed basolateral targeting of the peripheral membrane protein FRMPD2 in epithelial cells.
**Authors:** Stenzel N, Fetzer CP, Heumann R, Erdmann KS
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.046854](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.046854)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2009 Sep 15;122(Pt 18):3374-84. doi: 10.1242/jcs.046854. Epub 2009
 Aug 25.

PDZ-domain-directed basolateral targeting of the peripheral membrane protein 
FRMPD2 in epithelial cells.

Stenzel N(1), Fetzer CP, Heumann R, Erdmann KS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry II, Ruhr-University Bochum, 44780 Bochum, Germany.

Multi-PDZ (PSD-95/Discs large/Zonula-occludens-1) domain proteins play a crucial 
role in the establishment and maintenance of cell polarization. The novel 
multi-PDZ domain protein FRMPD2 is a potential scaffolding protein consisting of 
an N-terminal KIND domain, a FERM domain and three PDZ domains. Here we show 
that FRMPD2 is localized in a polarized fashion in epithelial cells at the 
basolateral membrane and partially colocalizes with the tight-junction marker 
protein Zonula-occludens-1. Downregulation of FRMPD2 protein in Caco-2 cells is 
associated with an impairment of tight junction formation. We find that the FERM 
domain of FRMPD2 binds phosphatidylinositols and is sufficient for membrane 
localization. Moreover, we demonstrate that recruitment of FRMPD2 to cell-cell 
junctions is strictly E-cadherin-dependent, which is in line with our 
identification of catenin family proteins as binding partners for FRMPD2. We 
demonstrate that the FERM domain and binding of the PDZ2 domain to the armadillo 
protein p0071 are required for basolateral restriction of FRMPD2. Moreover, the 
PDZ2 domain of FRMPD2 is sufficient to partially redirect an apically localized 
protein to the basolateral membrane. Our results provide novel insights into the 
molecular function of FRMPD2 and into the targeting mechanism of peripheral 
membrane proteins in polarized epithelial cells.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.046854
PMID: 19706687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
