---
pmid: '2297768'
title: Sex steroid hormone modulation of NADPH pathways in MCF-7 cells.
authors:
- Thomas M
- Bader C
- Monet JD
journal: Cancer Res
year: '1990'
full_text_available: false
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Sex steroid hormone modulation of NADPH pathways in MCF-7 cells.
**Authors:** Thomas M, Bader C, Monet JD
**Journal:** Cancer Res (1990)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Res. 1990 Feb 15;50(4):1195-200.

Sex steroid hormone modulation of NADPH pathways in MCF-7 cells.

Thomas M(1), Bader C, Monet JD.

Author information:
(1)Equipe de Reconnaissance des Formes et de Microscopie Quantitative, 
Université Joseph Fourier, Grenoble, France.

Hormonal modulation of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) and of 
utilization pathways of NADPH generated by G6PD was studied in the MCF-7 human 
breast cancer cell line, using a quantitative cytochemical method. Our results 
show that G6PD is increased by 17 beta-estradiol (estradiol) and synthetic 
progestin (promegestone R5020). The synthetic antiestrogen tamoxifen has no 
effect on G6PD activity. When it is present in the medium with estradiol, 
tamoxifen can oppose the stimulatory effect of estradiol on G6PD activity. 
Mifepristone (RU 38486) has no effect on G6PD activity, but it inhibits the 
R5020 stimulation of G6PD activity. After MCF-7 pretreatment with estradiol, 
there is a much stronger stimulation of G6PD activity by R5020. When we studied 
the effect of the steroid on the two utilization pathways of NADPH generated by 
G6PD activity, we observed that, in the cells treated with estradiol, there is 
an increase in reducing equivalents generated by G6PD activity which only 
affects the NADPH2 pathway, and that there is cell growth stimulation. When 
tamoxifen is present in the medium, we found no effect on the NADPH utilization 
pathways, nor on cell growth. In the presence of R5020, the NADPH2 pathway 
activity is increased but, under our experimental conditions, there was no 
effect on cell growth. On the other hand, even though RU 38486 is without effect 
on total G6PD activity, it does cause a modification in the distribution of 
reducing equivalents: the NADPH2 pathway activity is decreased, while the NADPH1 
pathway is stimulated.

PMID: 2297768 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
