---
pmid: '10486279'
title: 'Molecular cloning and expression of human carnitine octanoyltransferase: evidence
  for its role in the peroxisomal beta-oxidation of branched-chain fatty acids.'
authors:
- Ferdinandusse S
- Mulders J
- IJlst L
- Denis S
- Dacremont G
- Waterham HR
- Wanders RJ
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/bbrc.1999.1340
---

# Molecular cloning and expression of human carnitine octanoyltransferase: evidence for its role in the peroxisomal beta-oxidation of branched-chain fatty acids.
**Authors:** Ferdinandusse S, Mulders J, IJlst L, Denis S, Dacremont G, Waterham HR, Wanders RJ
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1006/bbrc.1999.1340](https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.1999.1340)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Sep 16;263(1):213-8. doi: 
10.1006/bbrc.1999.1340.

Molecular cloning and expression of human carnitine octanoyltransferase: 
evidence for its role in the peroxisomal beta-oxidation of branched-chain fatty 
acids.

Ferdinandusse S(1), Mulders J, IJlst L, Denis S, Dacremont G, Waterham HR, 
Wanders RJ.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Clinical Chemistry and Pediatrics, Emma Children's Hospital, 
Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, 1100 DE, The Netherlands.

To study the putative role of human carnitine octanoyltransferase (COT) in the 
beta-oxidation of branched-chain fatty acids, we identified and cloned the cDNA 
encoding human COT and expressed it in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. 
Enzyme activity measurements showed that COT efficiently converts one of the end 
products of the peroxisomal beta-oxidation of pristanic acid, 4, 
8-dimethylnonanoyl-CoA, to its corresponding carnitine ester. Production of the 
carnitine ester of this branched/medium-chain acyl-CoA within the peroxisome is 
required for its transport to the mitochondrion where further beta-oxidation 
occurs. In contrast, 4, 8-dimethylnonanoyl-CoA is not a substrate for carnitine 
acetyltransferase, another acyltransferase localized in peroxisomes, which 
catalyzes the formation of carnitine esters of the other products of pristanic 
acid beta-oxidation, namely acetyl-CoA and propionyl-CoA. Our results shed new 
light on the function of COT in fatty acid metabolism and point to a crucial 
role of COT in the beta-oxidation of branched-chain fatty acids.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.1999.1340
PMID: 10486279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
