---
pmid: '21285945'
title: JTV1 co-activates FBP to induce USP29 transcription and stabilize p53 in response
  to oxidative stress.
authors:
- Liu J
- Chung HJ
- Vogt M
- Jin Y
- Malide D
- He L
- Dundr M
- Levens D
journal: EMBO J
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3049210
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.11
---

# JTV1 co-activates FBP to induce USP29 transcription and stabilize p53 in response to oxidative stress.
**Authors:** Liu J, Chung HJ, Vogt M, Jin Y, Malide D, He L, Dundr M, Levens D
**Journal:** EMBO J (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2011.11](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2011.11)
**PMC:** [PMC3049210](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3049210/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2011 Mar 2;30(5):846-58. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.11. Epub 2011 Feb 1.

JTV1 co-activates FBP to induce USP29 transcription and stabilize p53 in 
response to oxidative stress.

Liu J(1), Chung HJ, Vogt M, Jin Y, Malide D, He L, Dundr M, Levens D.

Author information:
(1)Gene Regulation Section, Laboratory of Pathology, National Cancer Institute, 
Bethesda, MD, USA. juhong.liu@fda.hhs.gov

c-myc and p53 networks control proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis and 
are responsive to, and cross-regulate a variety of stresses and metabolic and 
biosynthetic processes. At c-myc, the far upstream element binding protein (FBP) 
and FBP-interacting repressor (FIR) program transcription by looping to RNA 
polymerase II complexes engaged at the promoter. Another FBP partner, 
JTV1/AIMP2, a structural subunit of a multi-aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase (ARS) 
complex, has also been reported to stabilize p53 via an apparently independent 
mechanism. Here, we show that in response to oxidative stress, JTV1 dissociates 
from the ARS complex, translocates to the nucleus, associates with FBP and 
co-activates the transcription of a new FBP target, ubiquitin-specific peptidase 
29 (USP29). A previously uncharacterized deubiquitinating enzyme, USP29 binds 
to, cleaves poly-ubiquitin chains from, and stabilizes p53. The accumulated p53 
quickly induces apoptosis. Thus, FBP and JTV1 help to coordinate the molecular 
and cellular response to oxidative stress.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2011.11
PMCID: PMC3049210
PMID: 21285945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
