---
pmid: '17051583'
title: Proapoptotic effects of NARC 1 (= PCSK9), the gene encoding a novel serine
  proteinase.
authors:
- Bingham B
- Shen R
- Kotnis S
- Lo CF
- Ozenberger BA
- Ghosh N
- Kennedy JD
- Jacobsen JS
- Grenier JM
- DiStefano PS
- Chiang LW
- Wood A
journal: Cytometry A
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/cyto.a.20346
---

# Proapoptotic effects of NARC 1 (= PCSK9), the gene encoding a novel serine proteinase.
**Authors:** Bingham B, Shen R, Kotnis S, Lo CF, Ozenberger BA, Ghosh N, Kennedy JD, Jacobsen JS, Grenier JM, DiStefano PS, Chiang LW, Wood A
**Journal:** Cytometry A (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cyto.a.20346](https://doi.org/10.1002/cyto.a.20346)

## Abstract

1. Cytometry A. 2006 Nov 1;69(11):1123-31. doi: 10.1002/cyto.a.20346.

Proapoptotic effects of NARC 1 (= PCSK9), the gene encoding a novel serine 
proteinase.

Bingham B(1), Shen R, Kotnis S, Lo CF, Ozenberger BA, Ghosh N, Kennedy JD, 
Jacobsen JS, Grenier JM, DiStefano PS, Chiang LW, Wood A.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Discovery Research, Wyeth Research, Princeton, New Jersey 
08543-8000, USA. binghab@wyeth.com

BACKGROUND: NARC 1/PCSK9 encodes a novel serine proteinase known to play a role 
in cholesterol homeostasis. NARC 1 mRNA expression in cerebellar granule neurons 
(CGNs) was discovered to be induced following an apoptotic injury. Coregulation 
of known apoptotic mediators (caspase-3 and death receptor 6) raises the 
possibility that NARC 1 might be involved in the propagation of apoptotic 
signaling in neurons.
METHODS: CGNs were transfected with EGFP-fusion constructs of wild-type and 
mutant NARC 1, and a laser scanning cytometry-based method of scoring cell death 
in transfectants was applied. Use of the poly-caspase inhibitor BAF allowed 
assessment of the caspase-dependence of the NARC 1 proapoptotic effect.
RESULTS: Wild-type NARC 1 was found to have substantial proapoptotic effects 
that were only partially reversible by BAF. Mutation of the active site serine 
or deletion of the catalytic domain resulted in a reduced level of cell death, 
consistent with loss of the BAF-sensitive component of cell death. 
NH(2)-terminal deletion constructs of NARC 1 had effects similar to wild-type, 
both in the absence and presence of BAF, whereas expression of COOH-terminal 
deletion mutants produced a rate of cell death similar to wild-type in the 
absence of BAF treatment, but which lacked the capacity to be reduced by 
treatment with BAF.
CONCLUSION: The mechanism by which NARC 1-EGFP over-expression induces cell 
death in cultured CGNs remains unclear. Mutation analysis established a positive 
correlation between the presence of the Narc 1 active site serine in the 
transiently expressed protein and induction of the BAF-sensitive component of 
the cell death phenotype. A caspase-independent component proved sufficiently 
complex to map discretely within the Narc 1 protein.

(c) 2006 International Society for Analytical Cytology.

DOI: 10.1002/cyto.a.20346
PMID: 17051583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
