---
pmid: '11551941'
title: The large subunit of the mammalian mitochondrial ribosome. Analysis of the
  complement of ribosomal proteins present.
authors:
- Koc EC
- Burkhart W
- Blackburn K
- Moyer MB
- Schlatzer DM
- Moseley A
- Spremulli LL
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M106510200
---

# The large subunit of the mammalian mitochondrial ribosome. Analysis of the complement of ribosomal proteins present.
**Authors:** Koc EC, Burkhart W, Blackburn K, Moyer MB, Schlatzer DM, Moseley A, Spremulli LL
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M106510200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M106510200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 23;276(47):43958-69. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M106510200. Epub 
2001 Sep 10.

The large subunit of the mammalian mitochondrial ribosome. Analysis of the 
complement of ribosomal proteins present.

Koc EC(1), Burkhart W, Blackburn K, Moyer MB, Schlatzer DM, Moseley A, Spremulli 
LL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Campus Box 3290, University of North Carolina, 
Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599-3290, USA.

Identification of all the protein components of the large subunit (39 S) of the 
mammalian mitochondrial ribosome has been achieved by carrying out proteolytic 
digestions of whole 39 S subunits followed by analysis of the resultant peptides 
by liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry. Peptide sequence information was 
used to search the human EST data bases and complete coding sequences were 
assembled. The human mitochondrial 39 S subunit has 48 distinct proteins. Twenty 
eight of these are homologs of the Escherichia coli 50 S ribosomal proteins L1, 
L2, L3, L4, L7/L12, L9, L10, L11, L13, L14, L15, L16, L17, L18, L19, L20, L21, 
L22, L23, L24, L27, L28, L30, L32, L33, L34, L35, and L36. Almost all of these 
proteins have homologs in Drosophila melanogaster, Caenorhabditis elegans, and 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae mitochondrial ribosomes. No mitochondrial homologs to 
prokaryotic ribosomal proteins L5, L6, L25, L29, and L31 could be found either 
in the peptides obtained or by analysis of the available data bases. The 
remaining 20 proteins present in the 39 S subunits are specific to mitochondrial 
ribosomes. Proteins in this group have no apparent homologs in bacterial, 
chloroplast, archaebacterial, or cytosolic ribosomes. All but two of the 
proteins has a clear homolog in D. melanogaster while all can be found in the 
genome of C. elegans. Ten of the 20 mitochondrial specific 39 S proteins have 
homologs in S. cerevisiae. Homologs of 2 of these new classes of ribosomal 
proteins could be identified in the Arabidopsis thaliana genome.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M106510200
PMID: 11551941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
