---
pmid: '11687658'
title: The crystal structure of human protein farnesyltransferase reveals the basis
  for inhibition by CaaX tetrapeptides and their mimetics.
authors:
- Long SB
- Hancock PJ
- Kral AM
- Hellinga HW
- Beese LS
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC60805
doi: 10.1073/pnas.241407898
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The crystal structure of human protein farnesyltransferase reveals the basis for inhibition by CaaX tetrapeptides and their mimetics.
**Authors:** Long SB, Hancock PJ, Kral AM, Hellinga HW, Beese LS
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.241407898](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.241407898)
**PMC:** [PMC60805](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC60805/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Nov 6;98(23):12948-53. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.241407898. Epub 2001 Oct 30.

The crystal structure of human protein farnesyltransferase reveals the basis for 
inhibition by CaaX tetrapeptides and their mimetics.

Long SB(1), Hancock PJ, Kral AM, Hellinga HW, Beese LS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, 
USA.

Protein farnesyltransferase (FTase) catalyzes the attachment of a farnesyl lipid 
group to the cysteine residue located in the C-terminal tetrapeptide of many 
essential signal transduction proteins, including members of the Ras 
superfamily. Farnesylation is essential both for normal functioning of these 
proteins, and for the transforming activity of oncogenic mutants. Consequently 
FTase is an important target for anti-cancer therapeutics. Several FTase 
inhibitors are currently undergoing clinical trials for cancer treatment. Here, 
we present the crystal structure of human FTase, as well as ternary complexes 
with the TKCVFM hexapeptide substrate, CVFM non-substrate tetrapeptide, and 
L-739,750 peptidomimetic with either farnesyl diphosphate (FPP), or a 
nonreactive analogue. These structures reveal the structural mechanism of FTase 
inhibition. Some CaaX tetrapeptide inhibitors are not farnesylated, and are more 
effective inhibitors than farnesylated CaaX tetrapeptides. CVFM and L-739,750 
are not farnesylated, because these inhibitors bind in a conformation that is 
distinct from the TKCVFM hexapeptide substrate. This non-substrate binding mode 
is stabilized by an ion pair between the peptide N terminus and the 
alpha-phosphate of the FPP substrate. Conformational mapping calculations reveal 
the basis for the sequence specificity in the third position of the CaaX motif 
that determines whether a tetrapeptide is a substrate or non-substrate. The 
presence of beta-branched amino acids in this position prevents formation of the 
non-substrate conformation; all other aliphatic amino acids in this position are 
predicted to form the non-substrate conformation, provided their N terminus is 
available to bind to the FPP alpha-phosphate. These results may facilitate 
further development of FTase inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.241407898
PMCID: PMC60805
PMID: 11687658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
