---
pmid: '10611283'
title: Identification of a cytochrome b-type NAD(P)H oxidoreductase ubiquitously expressed
  in human cells.
authors:
- Zhu H
- Qiu H
- Yoon HW
- Huang S
- Bunn HF
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC24718
doi: 10.1073/pnas.96.26.14742
---

# Identification of a cytochrome b-type NAD(P)H oxidoreductase ubiquitously expressed in human cells.
**Authors:** Zhu H, Qiu H, Yoon HW, Huang S, Bunn HF
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.96.26.14742](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.96.26.14742)
**PMC:** [PMC24718](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC24718/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Dec 21;96(26):14742-7. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.96.26.14742.

Identification of a cytochrome b-type NAD(P)H oxidoreductase ubiquitously 
expressed in human cells.

Zhu H(1), Qiu H, Yoon HW, Huang S, Bunn HF.

Author information:
(1)Hematology Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
221 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Cytochrome b-type NAD(P)H oxidoreductases are involved in many physiological 
processes, including iron uptake in yeast, the respiratory burst, and perhaps 
oxygen sensing in mammals. We have identified a cytosolic cytochrome b-type 
NAD(P)H oxidoreductase in mammals, a flavohemoprotein (b5+b5R) containing 
cytochrome b5 (b5) and b5 reductase (b5R) domains. A genetic approach, using 
BLAST searches against DBEST for FAD-, NAD(P)H-binding sequences followed by 
reverse transcription-PCR, was used to clone the complete cDNA sequence of human 
b5+b5R from the hepatoma cell line Hep 3B. Compared with the classical 
single-domain b5 and b5R proteins localized on endoplasmic reticulum membrane, 
b5+b5R also has binding motifs for heme, FAD, and NAD(P)H prosthetic groups but 
no membrane anchor. The human b5+b5R transcript was expressed at similar levels 
in all tissues and cell lines that were tested. The two functional domains b5* 
and b5R* are linked by an approximately 100-aa-long hinge bearing no sequence 
homology to any known proteins. When human b5+b5R was expressed as c-myc adduct 
in COS-7 cells, confocal microscopy revealed a cytosolic localization at the 
perinuclear space. The recombinant b5+b5R protein can be reduced by NAD(P)H, 
generating spectrum typical of reduced cytochrome b with alpha, beta, and Soret 
peaks at 557, 527, and 425 nm, respectively. Human b5+b5R flavohemoprotein is a 
NAD(P)H oxidoreductase, demonstrated by superoxide production in the presence of 
air and excess NAD(P)H and by cytochrome c reduction in vitro. The properties of 
this protein make it a plausible candidate oxygen sensor.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.96.26.14742
PMCID: PMC24718
PMID: 10611283 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Cytochrome b -type NAD(P)H oxidoreductases are involved in many physiological processes, including iron uptake in yeast, the respiratory burst, and perhaps oxygen sensing in mammals. We have identified a cytosolic cytochrome b -type NAD(P)H oxidoreductase in mammals, a flavohemoprotein (b5+b5R) containing cytochrome b 5 (b5) and b 5 reductase (b5R) domains. A genetic approach, using blast searches against dbest for FAD-, NAD(P)H-binding sequences followed by reverse transcription–PCR, was used to clone the complete cDNA sequence of human b5+b5R from the hepatoma cell line Hep 3B. Compared with the classical single-domain b5 and b5R proteins localized on endoplasmic reticulum membrane, b5+b5R also has binding motifs for heme, FAD, and NAD(P)H prosthetic groups but no membrane anchor. The human b5+b5R transcript was expressed at similar levels in all tissues and cell lines that were tested. The two functional domains b5* and b5R* are linked by an approximately 100-aa-long hinge bearing no sequence homology to any known proteins. When human b5+b5R was expressed as c-myc adduct in COS-7 cells, confocal microscopy revealed a cytosolic localization at the perinuclear space. The recombinant b5+b5R protein can be reduced by NAD(P)H, generating spectrum typical of reduced cytochrome b with alpha, beta, and Soret peaks at 557, 527, and 425 nm, respectively. Human b5+b5R flavohemoprotein is a NAD(P)H oxidoreductase, demonstrated by superoxide production in the presence of air and excess NAD(P)H and by cytochrome c reduction in vitro . The properties of this protein make it a plausible candidate oxygen sensor.
