---
pmid: '17143272'
title: Cdk5 regulates EphA4-mediated dendritic spine retraction through an ephexin1-dependent
  mechanism.
authors:
- Fu WY
- Chen Y
- Sahin M
- Zhao XS
- Shi L
- Bikoff JB
- Lai KO
- Yung WH
- Fu AK
- Greenberg ME
- Ip NY
journal: Nat Neurosci
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nn1811
---

# Cdk5 regulates EphA4-mediated dendritic spine retraction through an ephexin1-dependent mechanism.
**Authors:** Fu WY, Chen Y, Sahin M, Zhao XS, Shi L, Bikoff JB, Lai KO, Yung WH, Fu AK, Greenberg ME, Ip NY
**Journal:** Nat Neurosci (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nn1811](https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1811)

## Abstract

1. Nat Neurosci. 2007 Jan;10(1):67-76. doi: 10.1038/nn1811. Epub 2006 Dec 3.

Cdk5 regulates EphA4-mediated dendritic spine retraction through an 
ephexin1-dependent mechanism.

Fu WY(1), Chen Y, Sahin M, Zhao XS, Shi L, Bikoff JB, Lai KO, Yung WH, Fu AK, 
Greenberg ME, Ip NY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Biotechnology Research Institute and Molecular 
Neuroscience Center, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water 
Bay, Hong Kong, China.

The development of dendritic spines is thought to be crucial for synaptic 
plasticity. Dendritic spines are retracted upon Eph receptor A4 (EphA4) 
activation, but the mechanisms that control this process are not well 
understood. Here we report an important function of cyclin-dependent kinase 5 
(Cdk5) in EphA4-dependent spine retraction in mice. We found that blocking Cdk5 
activity inhibits ephrin-A1-triggered spine retraction and reduction of mEPSC 
frequency at hippocampal synapses. The activation of EphA4 resulted in the 
recruitment of Cdk5 to EphA4, leading to the tyrosine phosphorylation and 
activation of Cdk5. EphA4 and Cdk5 then enhanced the activation of ephexin1, a 
guanine-nucleotide exchange factor that regulates activation of the small Rho 
GTPase RhoA. The association between EphA4 and ephexin1 was significantly 
reduced in Cdk5(-/-) brains and Cdk5-dependent phosphorylation of ephexin1 was 
required for the ephrin-A1-mediated regulation of spine density. These findings 
suggest that ephrin-A1 promotes EphA4-dependent spine retraction through the 
activation of Cdk5 and ephexin1, which in turn modulates actin cytoskeletal 
dynamics.

DOI: 10.1038/nn1811
PMID: 17143272 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
