---
pmid: '2974536'
title: The complete primary structure of the human snRNP E protein.
authors:
- Stanford DR
- Kehl M
- Perry CA
- Holicky EL
- Harvey SE
- Rohleder AM
- Rehder K Jr
- Luhrmann R
- Wieben ED
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '1988'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC338926
doi: 10.1093/nar/16.22.10593
---

# The complete primary structure of the human snRNP E protein.
**Authors:** Stanford DR, Kehl M, Perry CA, Holicky EL, Harvey SE, Rohleder AM, Rehder K Jr, Luhrmann R, Wieben ED
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (1988)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/16.22.10593](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/16.22.10593)
**PMC:** [PMC338926](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC338926/)

## Abstract

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 1988 Nov 25;16(22):10593-605. doi: 10.1093/nar/16.22.10593.

The complete primary structure of the human snRNP E protein.

Stanford DR(1), Kehl M, Perry CA, Holicky EL, Harvey SE, Rohleder AM, Rehder K 
Jr, Luhrmann R, Wieben ED.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic/Foundation, 
Rochester, MN 55905.

The snRNP E protein is one of four "core" proteins associated with the snRNAs of 
the U family (U1,U2,U4,U5, and U6). Screening of a human teratoma cDNA library 
with a partial cDNA for a human autoimmune antigen resulted in the isolation of 
a cDNA clone containing the entire coding region of this snRNP core protein. 
Comparison of the 5' end of this cDNA with the sequences of two processed 
pseudogenes and primer extension data suggest that the cDNA is nearly full 
length. The longest open reading frame in this clone codes for a basic 92 amino 
acid protein which is in perfect agreement with amino acid sequence data 
obtained from purified E protein. The predicted sequence of this protein reveals 
no extensive similarity to other snRNP proteins, but contains regions of 
similarity to a eukaryotic ribosomal protein.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/16.22.10593
PMCID: PMC338926
PMID: 2974536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
