---
pmid: '17121812'
title: CARPs are ubiquitin ligases that promote MDM2-independent p53 and phospho-p53ser20
  degradation.
authors:
- Yang W
- Rozan LM
- McDonald ER 3rd
- Navaraj A
- Liu JJ
- Matthew EM
- Wang W
- Dicker DT
- El-Deiry WS
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M610793200
---

# CARPs are ubiquitin ligases that promote MDM2-independent p53 and phospho-p53ser20 degradation.
**Authors:** Yang W, Rozan LM, McDonald ER 3rd, Navaraj A, Liu JJ, Matthew EM, Wang W, Dicker DT, El-Deiry WS
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M610793200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M610793200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Feb 2;282(5):3273-81. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M610793200. Epub 2006
 Nov 22.

CARPs are ubiquitin ligases that promote MDM2-independent p53 and 
phospho-p53ser20 degradation.

Yang W(1), Rozan LM, McDonald ER 3rd, Navaraj A, Liu JJ, Matthew EM, Wang W, 
Dicker DT, El-Deiry WS.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology and Cell Cycle Regulation, Department of 
Medicine, The Abramson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania 
School of Medicine, PA 19104, USA.

Caspase 8/10-associated RING proteins (CARPs) are a recently described family of 
protein ubiquitin ligases that interact with and negatively regulate death 
receptor-mediated apoptosis. Because CARPs are overexpressed in cancer and their 
silencing reduces cell viability and sensitizes tumor cells to chemotherapeutic 
agents, we investigated their relationship to p53 tumor suppressor signaling. 
p53 is a major determinant of chemosensitivity, and its levels are increased 
following DNA damage through N-terminal phosphorylation and inhibition of 
degradation. Although p53 is well known to be negatively regulated by several 
ubiquitin ligases including MDM2, none are known to target phosphorylated p53 
for degradation. CARPs physically interact with and ubiquitinate p53, targeting 
it for degradation in the absence of MDM2. Serine 20-phosphorylated p53 is also 
ubiquitinated by CARPs. CARP silencing stimulates p53 expression and promotes 
downstream effects, including transcriptional activation and tumor suppression.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M610793200
PMID: 17121812 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
