---
pmid: '16254249'
title: Assigning functions to distinct regions of the N-terminus of the prion protein
  that are involved in its copper-stimulated, clathrin-dependent endocytosis.
authors:
- Taylor DR
- Watt NT
- Perera WS
- Hooper NM
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.02627
---

# Assigning functions to distinct regions of the N-terminus of the prion protein that are involved in its copper-stimulated, clathrin-dependent endocytosis.
**Authors:** Taylor DR, Watt NT, Perera WS, Hooper NM
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.02627](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.02627)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2005 Nov 1;118(Pt 21):5141-53. doi: 10.1242/jcs.02627.

Assigning functions to distinct regions of the N-terminus of the prion protein 
that are involved in its copper-stimulated, clathrin-dependent endocytosis.

Taylor DR(1), Watt NT, Perera WS, Hooper NM.

Author information:
(1)Proteolysis Research Group, School of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Leeds 
Institute of Genetics, Health and Therapeutics, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 
9JT, UK.

The cellular prion protein (PrP(C)) is essential for the pathogenesis and 
transmission of prion diseases. Although PrP(C) is known to be located in 
detergent-insoluble lipid rafts at the surface of neuronal cells, the mechanism 
of its internalisation is unclear, with both raft/caveolae-based and 
clathrin-mediated processes being proposed. We have investigated the mechanism 
of copper-induced internalisation of PrP(C) in neuronal cells by 
immunofluorescence microscopy, surface biotinylation assays and buoyant sucrose 
density gradient centrifugation in the presence of Triton X-100. 
Clathrin-mediated endocytosis was selectively blocked with tyrphostin A23, which 
disrupts the interaction between tyrosine motifs in the cytosolic domains of 
integral membrane proteins and the adaptor complex AP2, and a dominant-negative 
mutant of the adaptor protein AP180. Both these agents inhibited the 
copper-induced endocytosis of PrP(C). Copper caused PrP(C) to move laterally out 
of detergent-insoluble lipid rafts into detergent-soluble regions of the plasma 
membrane. Using mutants of PrP(C) that lack either the octapeptide repeats or 
the N-terminal polybasic region, and a construct with a transmembrane anchor, we 
show that copper binding to the octapeptide repeats promotes dissociation of 
PrP(C) from lipid rafts, whereas the N-terminal polybasic region mediates its 
interaction with a transmembrane adaptor protein that engages the clathrin 
endocytic machinery. Our results provide an experimental basis for reconciling 
the apparently contradictory observations that the prion protein undergoes 
clathrin-dependent endocytosis despite being localised in lipid rafts. In 
addition, we have been able to assign distinct functions in the endocytic 
process to separate regions of the protein.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.02627
PMID: 16254249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
