---
pmid: '16964240'
title: Molecular architecture and assembly of the DDB1-CUL4A ubiquitin ligase machinery.
authors:
- Angers S
- Li T
- Yi X
- MacCoss MJ
- Moon RT
- Zheng N
journal: Nature
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature05175
---

# Molecular architecture and assembly of the DDB1-CUL4A ubiquitin ligase machinery.
**Authors:** Angers S, Li T, Yi X, MacCoss MJ, Moon RT, Zheng N
**Journal:** Nature (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature05175](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature05175)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2006 Oct 5;443(7111):590-3. doi: 10.1038/nature05175.

Molecular architecture and assembly of the DDB1-CUL4A ubiquitin ligase 
machinery.

Angers S(1), Li T, Yi X, MacCoss MJ, Moon RT, Zheng N.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Washington, School of 
Medicine, Box 357280, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.

Protein ubiquitination is a common form of post-translational modification that 
regulates a broad spectrum of protein substrates in diverse cellular pathways. 
Through a three-enzyme (E1-E2-E3) cascade, the attachment of ubiquitin to 
proteins is catalysed by the E3 ubiquitin ligase, which is best represented by 
the superfamily of the cullin-RING complexes. Conserved from yeast to human, the 
DDB1-CUL4-ROC1 complex is a recently identified cullin-RING ubiquitin ligase, 
which regulates DNA repair, DNA replication and transcription, and can also be 
subverted by pathogenic viruses to benefit viral infection. Lacking a canonical 
SKP1-like cullin adaptor and a defined substrate recruitment module, how the 
DDB1-CUL4-ROC1 E3 apparatus is assembled for ubiquitinating various substrates 
remains unclear. Here we present crystallographic analyses of the virally 
hijacked form of the human DDB1-CUL4A-ROC1 machinery, which show that DDB1 uses 
one beta-propeller domain for cullin scaffold binding and a variably attached 
separate double-beta-propeller fold for substrate presentation. Through 
tandem-affinity purification of human DDB1 and CUL4A complexes followed by mass 
spectrometry analysis, we then identify a novel family of WD40-repeat proteins, 
which directly bind to the double-propeller fold of DDB1 and serve as the 
substrate-recruiting module of the E3. Together, our structural and proteomic 
results reveal the structural mechanisms and molecular logic underlying the 
assembly and versatility of a new family of cullin-RING E3 complexes.

DOI: 10.1038/nature05175
PMID: 16964240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
