---
pmid: '2138977'
title: The regions of the retinoblastoma protein needed for binding to adenovirus
  E1A or SV40 large T antigen are common sites for mutations.
authors:
- Hu QJ
- Dyson N
- Harlow E
journal: EMBO J
year: '1990'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC551790
doi: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1990.tb08221.x
---

# The regions of the retinoblastoma protein needed for binding to adenovirus E1A or SV40 large T antigen are common sites for mutations.
**Authors:** Hu QJ, Dyson N, Harlow E
**Journal:** EMBO J (1990)
**DOI:** [10.1002/j.1460-2075.1990.tb08221.x](https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1460-2075.1990.tb08221.x)
**PMC:** [PMC551790](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC551790/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 1990 Apr;9(4):1147-55. doi: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1990.tb08221.x.

The regions of the retinoblastoma protein needed for binding to adenovirus E1A 
or SV40 large T antigen are common sites for mutations.

Hu QJ(1), Dyson N, Harlow E.

Author information:
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, NY 11724.

The protein product of the retinoblastoma (RB) gene is thought to function in a 
pathway that restricts cell proliferation. Recently, transforming proteins from 
three different classes of DNA tumor viruses have been shown to form complexes 
with the RB protein. Genetic studies suggest that these interactions with the RB 
protein are important steps in transformation by these viruses. In order to 
understand better the function of the RB-viral oncoprotein complexes, we have 
mapped the regions of the RB protein that are necessary for these associations. 
Two non-contiguous regions of RB were found to be essential for complex 
formation with adenovirus E1A or SV40 large T antigen. These two regions are 
found between amino acids 393 and 572 and 646 and 772. Interestingly, these 
binding sites on RB overlap with the positions of naturally occurring, 
inactivating mutations of the RB gene. These results strongly suggest that these 
viral oncoproteins are targeting a protein domain that is an important site in 
the normal function of the RB protein.

DOI: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1990.tb08221.x
PMCID: PMC551790
PMID: 2138977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The protein product of the retinoblastoma (RB) gene is thought to function in a pathway that restricts cell proliferation. Recently, transforming proteins from three different classes of DNA tumor viruses have been shown to form complexes with the RB protein. Genetic studies suggest that these interactions with the RB protein are important steps in transformation by these viruses. In order to understand better the function of the RB-viral oncoprotein complexes, we have mapped the regions of the RB protein that are necessary for these associations. Two non-contiguous regions of RB were found to be essential for complex formation with adenovirus E1A or SV40 large T antigen. These two regions are found between amino acids 393 and 572 and 646 and 772. Interestingly, these binding sites on RB overlap with the positions of naturally occurring, inactivating mutations of the RB gene. These results strongly suggest that these viral oncoproteins are targeting a protein domain that is an important site in the normal function of the RB protein.
