---
pmid: '16461343'
title: Identification of substrates of human protein-tyrosine phosphatase PTPN22.
authors:
- Wu J
- Katrekar A
- Honigberg LA
- Smith AM
- Conn MT
- Tang J
- Jeffery D
- Mortara K
- Sampang J
- Williams SR
- Buggy J
- Clark JM
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M600498200
---

# Identification of substrates of human protein-tyrosine phosphatase PTPN22.
**Authors:** Wu J, Katrekar A, Honigberg LA, Smith AM, Conn MT, Tang J, Jeffery D, Mortara K, Sampang J, Williams SR, Buggy J, Clark JM
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M600498200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M600498200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Apr 21;281(16):11002-10. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M600498200. Epub 
2006 Feb 6.

Identification of substrates of human protein-tyrosine phosphatase PTPN22.

Wu J(1), Katrekar A, Honigberg LA, Smith AM, Conn MT, Tang J, Jeffery D, Mortara 
K, Sampang J, Williams SR, Buggy J, Clark JM.

Author information:
(1)Celera Genomics, South San Francisco, California 94080, USA. 
lakedaly@yahoo.com

Stimulation of mature T cells activates a downstream signaling cascade involving 
temporally and spatially regulated phosphorylation and dephosphorylation events 
mediated by protein-tyrosine kinases and phosphatases, respectively. PTPN22 
(Lyp), a non-receptor protein-tyrosine phosphatase, is expressed exclusively in 
cells of hematopoietic origin, notably in T cells where it represses signaling 
through the T cell receptor. We used substrate trapping coupled with mass 
spectrometry-based peptide identification in an unbiased approach to identify 
physiological substrates of PTPN22. Several potential substrates were identified 
in lysates from pervanadate-stimulated Jurkat cells using PTPN22-D195A/C227S, an 
optimized substrate trap mutant of PTPN22. These included three novel PTPN22 
substrates (Vav, CD3epsilon, and valosin containing protein) and two known 
substrates of PEP, the mouse homolog of PTPN22 (Lck and Zap70). T cell antigen 
receptor (TCR) zeta was also identified as a potential substrate in Jurkat 
lysates by direct immunoblotting. In vitro experiments with purified recombinant 
proteins demonstrated that PTPN22-D195A/C227S interacted directly with activated 
Lck, Zap70, and TCRzeta, confirming the initial substrate trap results. Native 
PTPN22 dephosphorylated Lck and Zap70 at their activating tyrosine residues 
Tyr-394 and Tyr-493, respectively, but not at the regulatory tyrosines Tyr-505 
(Lck) or Tyr-319 (Zap70). Native PTPN22 also dephosphorylated TCRzeta in vitro 
and in cells, and its substrate trap variant co-immunoprecipitated with TCRzeta 
when both were coexpressed in 293T cells, establishing TCRzeta as a direct 
substrate of PTPN22.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M600498200
PMID: 16461343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
