---
pmid: '20392205'
title: Loose interaction between glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase and phosphoglycerate
  kinase revealed by fluorescence resonance energy transfer-fluorescence lifetime
  imaging microscopy in living cells.
authors:
- Tomokuni Y
- Goryo K
- Katsura A
- Torii S
- Yasumoto K
- Kemnitz K
- Takada M
- Fukumura H
- Sogawa K
journal: FEBS J
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07561.x
---

# Loose interaction between glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase and phosphoglycerate kinase revealed by fluorescence resonance energy transfer-fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy in living cells.
**Authors:** Tomokuni Y, Goryo K, Katsura A, Torii S, Yasumoto K, Kemnitz K, Takada M, Fukumura H, Sogawa K
**Journal:** FEBS J (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07561.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07561.x)

## Abstract

1. FEBS J. 2010 Mar;277(5):1310-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07561.x.

Loose interaction between glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase and 
phosphoglycerate kinase revealed by fluorescence resonance energy 
transfer-fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy in living cells.

Tomokuni Y(1), Goryo K, Katsura A, Torii S, Yasumoto K, Kemnitz K, Takada M, 
Fukumura H, Sogawa K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomolecular Sciences, Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku 
University, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Japan.

Loose interaction between the glycolytic enzymes glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate 
dehydrogenase (GAPDH) and phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK) was visualized in living 
CHO-K1 cells by fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET), using time-domain 
fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy. FRET between active tetrameric 
subunits of GAPDH linked to cerulean or citrine was observed, and this FRET 
signal was significantly attenuated by coexpression of PGK. Also, direct 
interaction between GAPDH-citrine and PGK-cerulean was observed by FRET. The 
strength of FRET signals between them was dependent on linkers that connect 
GAPDH to citrine and PGK to cerulean. A coimmunoprecipitation assay using 
hemagglutinin-tagged GAPDH and FLAG-tagged PGK coexpressed in CHO-K1 cells 
supported the FRET observation. Taken together, these results demonstrate that a 
complex of GAPDH and PGK is formed in the cytoplasm of living cells.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07561.x
PMID: 20392205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
