---
pmid: '16234315'
title: Microarray phenotyping in Dictyostelium reveals a regulon of chemotaxis genes.
authors:
- Booth EO
- Van Driessche N
- Zhuchenko O
- Kuspa A
- Shaulsky G
journal: Bioinformatics
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bti726
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Microarray phenotyping in Dictyostelium reveals a regulon of chemotaxis genes.
**Authors:** Booth EO, Van Driessche N, Zhuchenko O, Kuspa A, Shaulsky G
**Journal:** Bioinformatics (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1093/bioinformatics/bti726](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bti726)

## Abstract

1. Bioinformatics. 2005 Dec 15;21(24):4371-7. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bti726.
 Epub 2005 Oct 18.

Microarray phenotyping in Dictyostelium reveals a regulon of chemotaxis genes.

Booth EO(1), Van Driessche N, Zhuchenko O, Kuspa A, Shaulsky G.

Author information:
(1)Graduate Program in Structural and Computational Biology and Molecular 
Biophysics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

MOTIVATION: Coordinate regulation of gene expression can provide information on 
gene function. To begin a large-scale analysis of Dictyostelium gene function, 
we clustered genes based on their expression in wild-type and mutant strains and 
analyzed their functions.
RESULTS: We found 17 modes of wild-type gene expression and refined them into 57 
submodes considering mutant data. Annotation analyses revealed correlations 
between co-expression and function and an unexpected correlation between 
expression and function of genes involved in various aspects of chemotaxis. 
Co-regulation of chemotaxis genes was also found in published data from 
neutrophils. To test the predictive power of the analysis, we examined the 
phenotypes of mutations in seven co-regulated genes that had no published role 
in chemotaxis. Six mutants exhibited chemotaxis defects, supporting the idea 
that function can be inferred from co-expression. The clustering and annotation 
analyses provide a public resource for Dictyostelium functional genomics.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bti726
PMID: 16234315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
