---
pmid: '22302936'
title: Tel1(ATM) and Rad3(ATR) phosphorylate the telomere protein Ccq1 to recruit
  telomerase and elongate telomeres in fission yeast.
authors:
- Yamazaki H
- Tarumoto Y
- Ishikawa F
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2012'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3278891
doi: 10.1101/gad.177873.111
---

# Tel1(ATM) and Rad3(ATR) phosphorylate the telomere protein Ccq1 to recruit telomerase and elongate telomeres in fission yeast.
**Authors:** Yamazaki H, Tarumoto Y, Ishikawa F
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.177873.111](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.177873.111)
**PMC:** [PMC3278891](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3278891/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2012 Feb 1;26(3):241-6. doi: 10.1101/gad.177873.111.

Tel1(ATM) and Rad3(ATR) phosphorylate the telomere protein Ccq1 to recruit 
telomerase and elongate telomeres in fission yeast.

Yamazaki H(1), Tarumoto Y, Ishikawa F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gene Mechanisms, Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto 
University, Yoshida-Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan.

In fission yeast, the DNA damage sensor kinases Tel1(ATM) and Rad3(ATR) exist at 
telomeres and are required for telomere maintenance, but the biological role 
they play at telomeres is not known. Here we show that the telomere protein Ccq1 
is phosphorylated at Thr 93 (threonine residue at amino acid 93) by Tel1(ATM) 
and Rad3(ATR) both in vitro and in vivo. A ccq1 mutant in which alanine was 
substituted for Thr 93 failed to recruit telomerase to telomeres and showed 
gradual shortening of telomeres. These results indicate that the direct 
phosphorylation of Ccq1 Thr 93 by Tel1 and Rad3 is involved in the recruitment 
of telomerase to elongate telomeres.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.177873.111
PMCID: PMC3278891
PMID: 22302936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

In fission yeast, the DNA damage sensor kinases Tel1 ATM and Rad3 ATR exist at telomeres and are required for telomere maintenance, but the biological role they play at telomeres is not known. Here we show that the telomere protein Ccq1 is phosphorylated at Thr 93 (threonine residue at amino acid 93) by Tel1 ATM and Rad3 ATR both in vitro and in vivo. A ccq1 mutant in which alanine was substituted for Thr 93 failed to recruit telomerase to telomeres and showed gradual shortening of telomeres. These results indicate that the direct phosphorylation of Ccq1 Thr 93 by Tel1 and Rad3 is involved in the recruitment of telomerase to elongate telomeres.

Results and Discussion

PIKK proteins phosphorylate serine or threonine residues preceding a glutamine residue (SQ/TQ motif). Fission yeast Ccq1 contains 11 SQ/TQ motifs ( Fig. 1A ). We observed gradual telomere shortening in a ccq1 mutant strain ( ccq1-11A ) producing Ccq1-11A-Flag in which alanine was substituted for serine or threonine residues in all of the 11 SQ/TQ motifs (Supplemental Fig. 1), suggesting that one or more of the SQ/TQ motifs of Ccq1 are required for the maintenance of telomere length. The 11 SQ/TQ motifs are clustered in four regions of the Ccq1 protein (regions A–D in Fig. 1A ). We generated ccq1 mutants in which the SQ/TQ motifs present in individual regions were mutated to AQ and found that telomere shortening occurred only when we mutated residues Thr 93 and Thr 102 (threonine residue at amino acid 102) in region A (Supplemental Fig. 1). When Thr 93 and Thr 102 were individually replaced with alanine, ccq1 mutant cells producing Ccq1-T93A-Flag ( ccq1-T93A ), but not Ccq1-T102A-Flag ( ccq1-T102A ), showed gradual telomere shortening ( Fig. 1B ; Supplemental Fig. 1). Replacement of Thr 93 with aspartic acid or glutamic acid also resulted in gradual telomere shortening, suggesting that phosphorylation in a precise amino acid context is required for telomere maintenance (Supplemental Fig. 1). Conversely, when all SQ/TQ motifs except Thr 93 were mutated to AQ residues [ ccq1-93T(10A) ], the cells maintained telomere lengths similar to those in wild-type cells ( Fig. 1B ). These results strongly suggest that, of the 11 SQ/TQ motifs, Thr 93 plays a major role in telomere length homeostasis.

We cultured ccq1-T93A cells, ccq1 Δ cells, and cells deleted for trt1 + , which encodes the catalytic subunit of telomerase, for 12 d following the isolation of the respective strains. Aliquots of cells were harvested every day, counted, and monitored for telomere lengths and cell shapes (Supplemental Fig. 2A). Mutant ccq1-T93A clones showed gradual telomere shortening until days 5–7, when telomere signals were faint to undetectable. After this period, one strain regained telomere signals (T93A-1), but the other strain did not (T93A-2). ccq1 Δ and trt1 Δ cells underwent changes to telomere signals similarly to ccq1-T93A cells (Supplemental Fig. 2B). When we examined the estimated number of cell divisions calculated from the increase of cell numbers over 24-h intervals (see the Supplemental Material for details), all mutant cells showed retarded cell growth at the middle of the time course (Supplemental Fig. 2C), suggesting that ccq1-T93A , ccq1 Δ, and trt1 Δ cells underwent senescence. The increase of cell growth at later time points in some cells suggests the generation of survivor cells, although we do not know whether they bypassed senescence via homologous recombination or circular chromosome formation. We noted that ccq1 Δ cells elongated their cell morphology immediately after the deletion of ccq1 + . In contrast, both ccq1-T93A cells and trt1 Δ cells showed normal cell length for a while after the establishment of mutants, and the cell length gradually increased only when the telomere length was extremely shortened (data not shown). Consistently, ccq1 Δ cells showed retarded growth earlier (day 3 and thereafter) than ccq1-T93A cells and trt1 Δ cells (day 5 and thereafter, when the telomere length became very short) (Supplemental Fig. 2B). These results suggest that ccq1-T93A cells retain a residual activity that partially protects telomeres from the DNA damage checkpoint, whereas telomeres are deprotected in ccq1 Δ cells. It was reported that Ccq1 binds to histone deacetylase Clr3 ( Sugiyama et al. 2007 ). In immunoprecipitation–immunoblotting experiments, we found that Ccq1-T93A-Flag associates with Clr3 (Supplemental Fig. 3). Taken together, ccq1-T93A is not a ccq1 -null mutation; rather, it is a separation-of-function mutation that is specifically defective in telomere length homeostasis.

We raised a mouse monoclonal antibody (anti-T93-P antibody) against a phospho-peptide antigen [CLDHSENDFL(pT)QEVDEFPST] representing a short Ccq1 peptide sequence containing phosphorylated Thr 93. The antibody recognized affinity-purified wild-type 6xHis-tagged Ccq1 that had been incubated with immunoprecipitated wild-type Tel1 or Rad3, but not Ccq1 incubated with kinase-dead Tel1 or Rad3 ( Fig. 2A ). It did not recognize affinity-purified 6xHis-tagged Ccq1-T93A treated with wild-type Tel1 or Rad3. These results indicate that Thr 93 of Ccq1 is directly phosphorylated by Tel1 or Rad3 in vitro.

We next explored whether phosphorylation of Thr 93 is involved in telomere length homeostasis in vivo. When Ccq1-Flag was immunoprecipitated with anti-Flag antibody from trt1 + ccq1-Flag cells, the phosphorylated form was detected, albeit weakly, by the anti-T93-P antibody ( Fig. 2B , lane 2). The antibody did not detect immunoprecipitated Ccq1-T93A-Flag ( Fig. 2B , lane 3), although the T93A mutation by itself profoundly reduced telomere length in the trt1 + background ( Fig. 1B ). Similar results were obtained using a commercially available anti-phosphorylated SQ/TQ antibody [anti-p(SQ/TQ) antibody] ( Fig. 2C ). These results indicate that a small but detectable fraction of Ccq1 in wild-type cells is phosphorylated at Thr 93. We then deleted trt1 + in the ccq1-Flag background and found that anti-T93-P antibody readily detected immunoprecipitated Ccq1-Flag prepared from cells at day 2 after the establishment of clones but barely detected signals from cells at day 1, and this was sensitive to λ protein phosphatase (λPPase) treatment ( Fig. 2D , lanes 11,12). Taken together, these results indicate that Thr 93 is phosphorylated in vivo, and the antibody specifically recognizes the in vivo phosphorylation of Thr 93. The signal intensities with anti-T93-P antibody and anti-p(SQ/TQ) antibody were much stronger in trt1 Δ cells compared with trt1 + cells ( Fig. 2B [lanes 2,4], C [lanes 1,2], D [arrows and asterisks]), which can be explained by the fact that most trt1 Δ cells had short telomeres, while only a small fraction of trt1 + cells presumably possessed short telomeres at any given time point. The mobility of Ccq1 in the gel was noticeably retarded in trt1 Δ cells and Ccq1-T93A-Flag-expressing cells ( Fig. 2B,C , asterisks), and this retardation was sensitive to λPPase treatment and rad3 + deletion ( Fig. 2D , lanes 5–12; Supplemental Fig. 4), suggesting that Ccq1 is heavily phosphorylated at multiple sites, in addition to Thr 93, by a Rad3-dependent pathway in vivo when telomeres are shortened. Recall, however, that the telomere length was not shortened in Ccq-93T(10A)-Flag-expressing cells ( Fig. 1B ). These results indicate that the Ccq-93T(10A)-Flag is fully functional with regard to telomere length homeostasis and that phosphorylation at SQ/TQ sites other than Thr 93 does not play a major role in telomere length control. We investigated the contributions of Tel1 and Rad3 to Thr 93 phosphorylation in trt1 Δ cells. Heterozygous diploid strains for ccq1-Flag / ccq1 + trt1 Δ/ trt1 + in the tel1 Δ/ tel1 + or rad3 Δ/ rad3 + background were sporulated, and resulting haploid cells, ccq1-Flag trt1 Δ, ccq1-Flag trt1 Δ tel1 Δ, and ccq1-Flag trt1 Δ rad3 Δ were selected. Immunoprecipitated Ccq1-Flag from a lysate of each respective strain was analyzed by immunoblotting with anti-T93-P antibody. The intensity of the phosphorylation signal at Thr 93 was diminished in tel1 Δ cells and only minimally detected in rad3 Δ cells ( Fig. 2E ), suggesting that Tel1 and Rad3 phosphorylate Thr 93 in vivo and that Rad3 plays a relatively major role.

We examined the time course of Thr 93 phosphorylation during telomere shortening after the removal of trt1 + . A heterozygous diploid strain with ccq1-Flag / ccq1 + trt1 Δ/ trt1 + chk1-HA / chk1 + was sporulated, and haploid cells with ccq1-Flag chk1-HA trt1 Δ were selected. During 7 d of growth in culture after the establishment of mutants, telomere DNA length gradually shortened and was barely visible on days 6 and 7 ( Fig. 3A ). We found that Ccq1-Flag immunoprecipitates were positive with anti-T93-P antibody on days 3 and 4; the phosphorylation was barely apparent after day 5, when telomeres were extremely shortened ( Fig. 3B , arrows and asterisks). A simple interpretation of these results is that Ccq1 is phosphorylated at Thr 93 transiently on days 3 and 4, when the telomere length is moderately reduced. We found that activated Chk1 (asterisks in Fig. 3B , anti-HA blot) was first perceptible on day 2 and steadily increased thereafter until day 7. It was reported that even when telomeres are recognized as DNA damage and Rad3 is activated, Chk1 is not activated as long as Ccq1 is localized at the telomere ( Carneiro et al. 2010 ). If we assume that Ccq1 phosphorylation at Thr 93 occurs only when telomeres are moderately shortened, as suggested by Figure 3B , an interesting possibility arises: Telomeres undergoing gradual shortening first phosphorylate Ccq1 Thr 93 transiently to recruit telomerase, and then fully activate Chk1 to elicit a DNA damage response (DDR) when telomeres become critically shortened (Supplemental Fig. 5). In this scenario, Rad3 and Tel1 regulate Ccq1 and Chk1 differentially to achieve different tasks. Alternatively, we noticed that a fraction of Ccq1-Flag migrated slowly in gels (asterisks in Fig. 3B , anti-Flag blot). Such a broad distribution of Ccq1-Flag in a gel might have made it difficult to be detected with anti-T93-P antibody. In this case, both Ccq1 Thr 93 and Chk1 are phosphorylated by Tel1 and Rad3 when telomeres are shortened, as manifestations of DDR. Future studies are necessary to differentiate these two possibilities.

We previously reported that telomerase activity was coimmunoprecipitated with Ccq1 ( Miyoshi et al. 2008 ). We found that Trt1-myc was coimmunoprecipitated with the telomerase template RNA TER1 in Ccq1-T93A-Flag-expressing cells as efficiently as in wild-type Ccq1-Flag-expressing cells ( Fig. 4A ), indicating that the Trt1-TER1 telomerase core enzyme is formed in Ccq1-T93A-Flag-expressing cells. In contrast, the coimmunoprecipitation of Ccq1 and TER1 observed in wild-type Ccq1-Flag-expressing cells was almost eliminated in Ccq1-T93A-Flag-expressing cells, as demonstrated by RT–qPCR experiments using three independent TER1-specific RT primers ( Fig. 4A ; Supplemental Fig. 6). In ChIP (chromatin immunoprecipitation) experiments, both wild-type Ccq1-Flag and Ccq1-T93A-Flag were similarly localized at telomeres ( Fig. 4B ). In contrast, localization of Trt1-myc at telomeres was significantly less in Ccq1-T93A-Flag-expressing cells than in wild-type Ccq1-Flag-expressing cells ( Fig. 4B ). We ectopically tethered Ccq1-LacI-Flag fusion protein to lacO repeats inserted at the ade6 locus. We found that wild-type Ccq1-LacI-Flag, but not T93A Ccq1-LacI-Flag, recruited Trt1-myc to the ade6 locus, indicating that Ccq1 is sufficient for telomerase recruitment, independent of telomeric DNA ( Fig. 4C ). The Trt1 recruitment was moderately inefficient in tel1 Δ or rad3 Δ cells and mostly eliminated in tel1 Δ rad3 Δ double-mutant cells ( Fig. 4D ). We noticed that Ccq1 occupancy at lacO repeats was greater in tel1 Δ or rad3 Δ mutants compared with tel1 + rad3 + , the reason for which we do not know at present. Ccq1-T93D-Flag or T93E-LacI-Flag did not recruit Trt1-myc (Supplemental Fig. 7), consistent with the results that ccq1-T93D - or T93E-Flag cells showed gradual telomere shortening (Supplemental Fig. 1). Taken together, these results suggest that Ccq1 recruits telomerase via Tel1- and Rad3-dependent phosphorylation of Ccq1 Thr 93.

When we compared the predicted amino acid sequences of Ccq1 in three other Schizosaccharomyces species, we found that the 93 TQ motif of S. pombe Ccq1 is conserved in two other Schizosaccharomyces species but not in Schizosaccharomyces japonicus (Supplemental Fig. 8). S. japonicus Ccq1 may have an SQ/TQ motif functionally equivalent to 93 TQ in S. pombe (for example, 56 SQ). Alternatively, S. japonicus recruits telomerase in a manner distinct from that in S. pombe .

Collectively, we demonstrate that Tel1 ATM and Rad3 ATR phosphorylate Ccq1 Thr 93 to recruit telomerase. It remains to formally elucidate the biological significance of the Ccq1 phosphorylation. The phosphorylation may operate in wild-type cells as a homeostatic control mechanism to maintain the telomere length. Alternatively, it may occur only in global DDR, as in the case of deletion of the trt1 + gene. However, we prefer the former possibility because the telomere length of a population of cells becomes consistently reduced in the ccq1-T93A (and otherwise wild-type) background. In budding yeast, it was reported that telomerase extends only a small fraction of telomeres at a given time point in wild-type cells (<10% of telomeres with wild-type lengths) ( Teixeira et al. 2004 ). If we assume that fission yeast telomerase reacts to telomeres with similar frequencies, this accounts for our detection of a low level of Ccq1 Thr 93 phosphorylation in trt1 + cells. In mammalian cells, although an apparent mammalian homolog of fission yeast Ccq1 has not been identified, it has been reported that a reduced ATR activity leads to telomere instability ( McNees et al. 2010 ). It was suggested that the effect was not caused by a failure of telomerase recruitment to short telomeres in these settings, but future study is required to address whether mammalian cells regulate telomerase recruitment similarly, as revealed in this study. After we submitted this manuscript, we found that similar results were published by others ( Moser et al. 2011 ).
