---
pmid: '12764569'
title: Functional analyses of genes involved in the metabolism of ferulic acid in
  Pseudomonas putida KT2440.
authors:
- Plaggenborg R
- Overhage J
- Steinbüchel A
- Priefert H
journal: Appl Microbiol Biotechnol
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s00253-003-1260-4
---

# Functional analyses of genes involved in the metabolism of ferulic acid in Pseudomonas putida KT2440.
**Authors:** Plaggenborg R, Overhage J, Steinbüchel A, Priefert H
**Journal:** Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00253-003-1260-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-003-1260-4)

## Abstract

1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2003 Jun;61(5-6):528-35. doi: 
10.1007/s00253-003-1260-4. Epub 2003 Mar 27.

Functional analyses of genes involved in the metabolism of ferulic acid in 
Pseudomonas putida KT2440.

Plaggenborg R(1), Overhage J, Steinbüchel A, Priefert H.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Mikrobiologie der Westfälischen Wilhelms-Universität Münster, 
Corrensstrasse 3, 48149 Münster, Germany.

Pseudomonas putida KT2440 is a physiologically extremely versatile 
non-pathogenic bacterium that is applied as a "biosafety strain" in 
biotechnological processes, as authorized by the USA National Institute of 
Health. Analysis of the P. putida KT2440 whole-genome sequence revealed the 
genetic organization of the genes fcs, ech, and vdh, which are essential for 
ferulic acid conversion to vanillic acid via vanillin. To confirm the 
physiological function of these structural genes as feruloyl-CoA synthetase 
(Fcs), enoyl-CoA hydratase/aldolase (Ech), and vanillin dehydrogenase (Vdh), 
respectively, they were cloned and expressed in Escherichia coli. Recombinant 
strains harboring fcs and ech were able to transform ferulic acid to vanillin. 
The enzyme activities of Fcs and Vdh were determined in protein extracts of 
these cells. The essential involvement of fcs, ech and vdh in the catabolism of 
ferulic acid in P. putida KT2440 was proven by separately inactivating each gene 
by insertion of Omega-elements. The corresponding mutant strains KT2440 
fcsOmegaKm, KT2440 echOmegaKm, and KT2440 vdhOmegaKm were not able to grow on 
ferulic acid. The potential application of P. putida KT2440 and the mutant 
strains in biotechnological vanillin production process is discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-003-1260-4
PMID: 12764569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
