---
pmid: '20385133'
title: p53 inhibits tumor cell invasion via the degradation of snail protein in hepatocellular
  carcinoma.
authors:
- Lim SO
- Kim H
- Jung G
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2010.04.006
---

# p53 inhibits tumor cell invasion via the degradation of snail protein in hepatocellular carcinoma.
**Authors:** Lim SO, Kim H, Jung G
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2010.04.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2010.04.006)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2010 Jun 3;584(11):2231-6. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2010.04.006. Epub
 2010 Apr 10.

p53 inhibits tumor cell invasion via the degradation of snail protein in 
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Lim SO(1), Kim H, Jung G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic 
of Korea.

The tumor suppressor protein p53 is a key regulator of cell cycle arrest and 
apoptosis. Snail protein regulates cancer-associated malignancies. However, the 
relationship between p53 and Snail proteins in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) 
has not been completely understood. To determine whether Snail and p53 
contribute to hepatocarcinogenesis, we analyzed the expression of Snail proteins 
in p53-overexpressing HCC cells. We found that p53 wild-type (WT) induced the 
degradation of Snail protein via murine double minute 2-mediated ubiquitination, 
whereas p53 mutant did not induce Snail degradation. As we expected, only p53WT 
induced endogenous Snail protein degradation and inhibited tumor cell invasion. 
These findings contribute to a better understanding of the role of p53 mutation 
and Snail overexpression as a late event in hepatocarcinogenesis.

Copyright 2010 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2010.04.006
PMID: 20385133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
