---
pmid: '9891085'
title: Nip7p interacts with Nop8p, an essential nucleolar protein required for 60S
  ribosome biogenesis, and the exosome subunit Rrp43p.
authors:
- Zanchin NI
- Goldfarb DS
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC116080
doi: 10.1128/MCB.19.2.1518
---

# Nip7p interacts with Nop8p, an essential nucleolar protein required for 60S ribosome biogenesis, and the exosome subunit Rrp43p.
**Authors:** Zanchin NI, Goldfarb DS
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.19.2.1518](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.19.2.1518)
**PMC:** [PMC116080](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC116080/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Feb;19(2):1518-25. doi: 10.1128/MCB.19.2.1518.

Nip7p interacts with Nop8p, an essential nucleolar protein required for 60S 
ribosome biogenesis, and the exosome subunit Rrp43p.

Zanchin NI(1), Goldfarb DS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Rochester, Rochester, New York 14627, 
USA.

NIP7 encodes a conserved Saccharomyces cerevisiae nucleolar protein that is 
required for 60S subunit biogenesis (N. I. T. Zanchin, P. Roberts, A. DeSilva, 
F. Sherman, and D. S. Goldfarb, Mol. Cell. Biol. 17:5001-5015, 1997). Rrp43p and 
a second essential protein, Nop8p, were identified in a two-hybrid screen as 
Nip7p-interacting proteins. Biochemical evidence for an interaction was provided 
by the copurification on immunoglobulin G-Sepharose of Nip7p with protein 
A-tagged Rrp43p and Nop8p. Cells depleted of Nop8p contained reduced levels of 
free 60S ribosomes and polysomes and accumulated half-mer polysomes. 
Nop8p-depleted cells also accumulated 35S pre-rRNA and an aberrant 23S pre-rRNA. 
Nop8p-depleted cells failed to accumulate either 25S or 27S rRNA, although they 
did synthesize significant levels of 18S rRNA. These results indicate that 27S 
or 25S rRNA is degraded in Nop8p-depleted cells after the section containing 18S 
rRNA is removed. Nip7p-depleted cells exhibited the same defects as 
Nop8p-depleted cells, except that they accumulated 27S precursors. Rrp43p is a 
component of the exosome, a complex of 3'-to-5' exonucleases whose subunits have 
been implicated in 5.8S rRNA processing and mRNA turnover. Whereas both green 
fluorescent protein (GFP)-Nop8p and GFP-Nip7p localized to nucleoli, GFP-Rrp43p 
localized throughout the nucleus and to a lesser extent in the cytoplasm. 
Distinct pools of Rrp43p may interact both with the exosome and with Nip7p, 
possibly both in the nucleus and in the cytoplasm, to catalyze analogous 
reactions in the multistep process of 60S ribosome biogenesis and mRNA turnover.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.19.2.1518
PMCID: PMC116080
PMID: 9891085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
