---
pmid: '17037984'
title: Biosynthesis of the dystonia-associated AAA+ ATPase torsinA at the endoplasmic
  reticulum.
authors:
- Callan AC
- Bunning S
- Jones OT
- High S
- Swanton E
journal: Biochem J
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1820811
doi: 10.1042/BJ20061313
---

# Biosynthesis of the dystonia-associated AAA+ ATPase torsinA at the endoplasmic reticulum.
**Authors:** Callan AC, Bunning S, Jones OT, High S, Swanton E
**Journal:** Biochem J (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BJ20061313](https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20061313)
**PMC:** [PMC1820811](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1820811/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2007 Jan 15;401(2):607-12. doi: 10.1042/BJ20061313.

Biosynthesis of the dystonia-associated AAA+ ATPase torsinA at the endoplasmic 
reticulum.

Callan AC(1), Bunning S, Jones OT, High S, Swanton E.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, The Michael Smith 
Building, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, UK.

TorsinA is a widely expressed AAA(+) (ATPases associated with various cellular 
activities) ATPase of unknown function. Previous studies have described torsinA 
as a type II protein with a cleavable signal sequence, a single membrane 
spanning domain, and its C-terminus located in the ER (endoplasmic reticulum) 
lumen. However, in the present study we show that torsinA is not in fact an 
integral membrane protein. Instead we find that the mature protein associates 
peripherally with the ER membrane, most likely through an interaction with an 
integral membrane protein. Consistent with this model, we provide evidence that 
the signal peptidase complex cleaves the signal sequence of torsinA, and we show 
that the region previously suggested to form a transmembrane domain is 
translocated into the lumen of the ER. The finding that torsinA is a peripheral, 
and not an integral membrane protein as previously thought, has important 
implications for understanding the function of this novel ATPase.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20061313
PMCID: PMC1820811
PMID: 17037984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

TorsinA is a widely expressed AAA + (ATPases associated with various cellular activities) ATPase of unknown function. Previous studies have described torsinA as a type II protein with a cleavable signal sequence, a single membrane spanning domain, and its C-terminus located in the ER (endoplasmic reticulum) lumen. However, in the present study we show that torsinA is not in fact an integral membrane protein. Instead we find that the mature protein associates peripherally with the ER membrane, most likely through an interaction with an integral membrane protein. Consistent with this model, we provide evidence that the signal peptidase complex cleaves the signal sequence of torsinA, and we show that the region previously suggested to form a transmembrane domain is translocated into the lumen of the ER. The finding that torsinA is a peripheral, and not an integral membrane protein as previously thought, has important implications for understanding the function of this novel ATPase.

INTRODUCTION

TorsinA is the founding member of a novel family of four related proteins that belong to the AAA + (ATPases associated with various cellular activities) superfamily of ATPases. TorsinA was first identified as the protein mutated in early onset torsion dystonia, an inherited neurological disorder characterized by uncontrollable movements and twisted postures [ 1 ]. Although its biological role is unknown, torsinA is expressed in most tissues [ 1 ] and knockout mice die within 48 h of birth [ 2 ], suggesting that it performs an essential and ubiquitous cellular function. Interestingly, torsinA and its relative torsinB are the only AAA + ATPases known to be located inside the ER (endoplasmic reticulum) of eukaryotic cells. Experiments in cultured cells have established that torsinA is membrane-associated and faces the lumen of the ER [ 3 – 6 ]. However, the mechanisms that mediate the biosynthesis of torsinA and its association with the ER membrane remain unclear, and current evidence indicates that these may differ from conventional mechanisms of signal sequence cleavage and membrane integration. Hence, torsinA contains a 40 amino acid hydrophobic region at its N-terminus ( Figure 1 A), and recent studies have shown that the first 20 residues function as a signal sequence and are removed from the mature protein by cleavage of the polypeptide after Ala 20 [ 3 , 5 ]. The hydrophobic residues 21–40 that remain after cleavage are proposed to anchor torsinA in the ER membrane [ 1 , 7 ]. Consistent with this hypothesis, full-length torsinA has been shown to behave as an integral membrane protein upon alkaline sodium carbonate extraction, whereas a version lacking residues 24–40 behaves as a soluble ER luminal protein [ 3 ]. These data have lead to the conclusion that residues 21–40 form a membrane-spanning domain that anchors torsinA in the ER membrane in a type II orientation, with its C-terminus containing the AAA + domain located in the ER lumen. However, this model of torsinA biosynthesis appears to create a paradox, as cleavable signal sequences usually impose a type I orientation on a mature membrane protein [ 8 ]. Since signal sequence cleavage by the SPC (signal peptidase complex) generates a new N-terminus that resides in the lumen of the ER, it is difficult to envisage how a protein with a cleavable signal sequence could become integrated into the ER membrane with a type II orientation.

In order to address these issues, we have examined the signal sequence cleavage and membrane association of torsinA in mammalian cells. We provide evidence that the SPC is responsible for the N-terminal cleavage of torsinA, and demonstrate that the remaining hydrophobic region is fully translocated into the lumen of the ER. In contrast with previous work, the present study shows that torsinA is not a bona fide integral membrane protein. Instead, we find that the mature protein is peripherally associated with the ER membrane, most likely via binding to integral ER protein(s). This novel finding that torsinA is a peripheral and not an integral membrane protein as previously thought has important implications for our understanding of the function of torsinA, and will help to inform future studies aimed at defining the properties of this widely expressed AAA + ATPase.

DISCUSSION

Despite recent progress in understanding the biology of torsinA, several of its fundamental biochemical properties remain undefined. Previous studies have described torsinA as a type II protein with a single membrane spanning domain and its C-terminus located in the ER lumen [ 1 , 3 – 5 ]. This posed the question of how torsinA is both N-terminally cleaved and integrated into the ER membrane in the correct orientation. However, we now show that endogenous torsinA does not behave as a typical integral membrane protein, since it can be fully extracted from the ER membrane at pH 11.3. Under less stringent conditions, a proportion of torsinA does remain associated with the membrane, but we clearly show that the membrane-associated torsinA can be removed by a high-salt or urea wash. Based on these results, we conclude that torsinA is peripherally associated with the ER membrane, most likely via binding to an integral membrane protein. Consistent with this notion, we provide evidence that the SPC mediates the cleavage of torsinA after Ala 20 , as would be predicted for an ER luminal protein with a cleavable N-terminal signal sequence. Moreover, in the present study we show that the remaining hydrophobic residues are translocated into the ER lumen and available for N-glycosylation, and are not integrated laterally into the ER membrane as would be expected for a typical TMD.

The surprising finding that torsinA is not an integral membrane protein has some important implications. Although torsinA does not have an obvious ER retention motif, the wild-type protein is located primarily in the ER. It has been suggested that TMD-based signals may be responsible for its ER localization, as has been shown for a number of ER membrane proteins [ 18 , 19 ]. However, the lack of a TMD indicates that an alternative mechanism, such as binding to an ER resident protein, is responsible for retaining torsinA in the ER. The absence of a TMD, also raises the possibility that torsinA may interact dynamically with the ER membrane. Such behaviour is important during the catalytic cycle of several other AAA + ATPases, including NSF ( N -ethylmaleimide-sensitive fusion protein) and p97/VCP (97 kDa valosin-containing protein), which catalyse conformational changes in membrane-localized substrates [ 20 ]. This idea is supported by our finding that a significant pool of endogenous torsinA is not tightly associated with the ER membrane.

Based on the results detailed above, we propose a model for torsinA biogenesis whereby the nascent polypeptide is targeted to the ER via the hydrophobic sequence at its N-terminus. The first 20 amino acids of this sequence are then removed by the SPC, and the rest of the polypeptide is completely translocated into the ER lumen where it associates peripherally with the luminal face of the ER membrane, most likely via binding to an integral membrane protein. Future research will be aimed at identifying the protein(s) that torsinA binds to at the ER membrane, and establishing whether any such interaction is regulated by ATP binding and/or hydrolysis.
