---
pmid: '23932780'
title: The little elongation complex functions at initiation and elongation phases
  of snRNA gene transcription.
authors:
- Hu D
- Smith ER
- Garruss AS
- Mohaghegh N
- Varberg JM
- Lin C
- Jackson J
- Gao X
- Saraf A
- Florens L
- Washburn MP
- Eissenberg JC
- Shilatifard A
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4104523
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.07.003
---

# The little elongation complex functions at initiation and elongation phases of snRNA gene transcription.
**Authors:** Hu D, Smith ER, Garruss AS, Mohaghegh N, Varberg JM, Lin C, Jackson J, Gao X, Saraf A, Florens L, Washburn MP, Eissenberg JC, Shilatifard A
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2013.07.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2013.07.003)
**PMC:** [PMC4104523](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4104523/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2013 Aug 22;51(4):493-505. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.07.003. Epub 
2013 Aug 8.

The little elongation complex functions at initiation and elongation phases of 
snRNA gene transcription.

Hu D(1), Smith ER, Garruss AS, Mohaghegh N, Varberg JM, Lin C, Jackson J, Gao X, 
Saraf A, Florens L, Washburn MP, Eissenberg JC, Shilatifard A.

Author information:
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 East 50th Street, Kansas City, 
MO 64110, USA.

The small nuclear RNA (snRNA) genes have been widely used as a model system for 
understanding transcriptional regulation due to the unique aspects of their 
promoter structure, selectivity for either RNA polymerase (Pol) II or III, and 
because of their unique mechanism of termination that is tightly linked with the 
promoter. Recently, we identified the little elongation complex (LEC) in 
Drosophila that is required for the expression of Pol II-transcribed snRNA 
genes. Here, using Drosophila and mammalian systems, we provide genetic and 
molecular evidence that LEC functions in at least two phases of snRNA 
transcription: an initiation step requiring the ICE1 subunit, and an elongation 
step requiring ELL.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.07.003
PMCID: PMC4104523
PMID: 23932780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
