---
pmid: '17580304'
title: p62/SQSTM1 binds directly to Atg8/LC3 to facilitate degradation of ubiquitinated
  protein aggregates by autophagy.
authors:
- Pankiv S
- Clausen TH
- Lamark T
- Brech A
- Bruun JA
- Outzen H
- Øvervatn A
- Bjørkøy G
- Johansen T
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M702824200
---

# p62/SQSTM1 binds directly to Atg8/LC3 to facilitate degradation of ubiquitinated protein aggregates by autophagy.
**Authors:** Pankiv S, Clausen TH, Lamark T, Brech A, Bruun JA, Outzen H, Øvervatn A, Bjørkøy G, Johansen T
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M702824200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M702824200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Aug 17;282(33):24131-45. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M702824200. Epub 
2007 Jun 19.

p62/SQSTM1 binds directly to Atg8/LC3 to facilitate degradation of ubiquitinated 
protein aggregates by autophagy.

Pankiv S(1), Clausen TH, Lamark T, Brech A, Bruun JA, Outzen H, Øvervatn A, 
Bjørkøy G, Johansen T.

Author information:
(1)Biochemistry Department, Institute of Medical Biology, University of Tromsø, 
9037 Tromsø, Norway.

Protein degradation by basal constitutive autophagy is important to avoid 
accumulation of polyubiquitinated protein aggregates and development of 
neurodegenerative diseases. The polyubiquitin-binding protein p62/SQSTM1 is 
degraded by autophagy. It is found in cellular inclusion bodies together with 
polyubiquitinated proteins and in cytosolic protein aggregates that accumulate 
in various chronic, toxic, and degenerative diseases. Here we show for the first 
time a direct interaction between p62 and the autophagic effector proteins LC3A 
and -B and the related gamma-aminobutyrate receptor-associated protein and 
gamma-aminobutyrate receptor-associated-like proteins. The binding is mediated 
by a 22-residue sequence of p62 containing an evolutionarily conserved motif. To 
monitor the autophagic sequestration of p62- and LC3-positive bodies, we 
developed a novel pH-sensitive fluorescent tag consisting of a tandem fusion of 
the red, acid-insensitive mCherry and the acid-sensitive green fluorescent 
proteins. This approach revealed that p62- and LC3-positive bodies are degraded 
in autolysosomes. Strikingly, even rather large p62-positive inclusion bodies (2 
microm diameter) become degraded by autophagy. The specific interaction between 
p62 and LC3, requiring the motif we have mapped, is instrumental in mediating 
autophagic degradation of the p62-positive bodies. We also demonstrate that the 
previously reported aggresome-like induced structures containing ubiquitinated 
proteins in cytosolic bodies are dependent on p62 for their formation. In fact, 
p62 bodies and these structures are indistinguishable. Taken together, our 
results clearly suggest that p62 is required both for the formation and the 
degradation of polyubiquitin-containing bodies by autophagy.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M702824200
PMID: 17580304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
