---
pmid: '9872408'
title: The product of the mammalian orthologue of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae HBS1
  gene is phylogenetically related to eukaryotic release factor 3 (eRF3) but does
  not carry eRF3-like activity.
authors:
- Wallrapp C
- Verrier SB
- Zhouravleva G
- Philippe H
- Philippe M
- Gress TM
- Jean-Jean O
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(98)01492-6
---

# The product of the mammalian orthologue of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae HBS1 gene is phylogenetically related to eukaryotic release factor 3 (eRF3) but does not carry eRF3-like activity.
**Authors:** Wallrapp C, Verrier SB, Zhouravleva G, Philippe H, Philippe M, Gress TM, Jean-Jean O
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0014-5793(98)01492-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0014-5793(98)01492-6)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 1998 Dec 4;440(3):387-92. doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(98)01492-6.

The product of the mammalian orthologue of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae HBS1 
gene is phylogenetically related to eukaryotic release factor 3 (eRF3) but does 
not carry eRF3-like activity.

Wallrapp C(1), Verrier SB, Zhouravleva G, Philippe H, Philippe M, Gress TM, 
Jean-Jean O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, University of Ulm, Germany.

We describe here the cloning and sequencing of human and mouse cDNAs encoding a 
putative GTP binding protein. Sequence comparison shows that these cDNAs (named 
eRFS) are likely to represent the orthologues of the yeast Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae HBS1 gene and that the C-terminal domains of the encoded proteins 
share structural features with eukaryotic elongation factor eEF-1A and release 
factor 3 (eRF3) families. The phylogenetic analysis suggests that eRFS proteins 
and Hbs1p form a cluster of orthologous sequences branching with the eRF3 
family. Nevertheless, in yeast, the human eRFS protein and Hbs1p do not 
complement eRF3/Sup35p thermosensitive mutation and do not interact with eRF1.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(98)01492-6
PMID: 9872408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
