---
pmid: '10192398'
title: The gene encoding proline dehydrogenase modulates sensorimotor gating in mice.
authors:
- Gogos JA
- Santha M
- Takacs Z
- Beck KD
- Luine V
- Lucas LR
- Nadler JV
- Karayiorgou M
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/7777
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The gene encoding proline dehydrogenase modulates sensorimotor gating in mice.
**Authors:** Gogos JA, Santha M, Takacs Z, Beck KD, Luine V, Lucas LR, Nadler JV, Karayiorgou M
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1038/7777](https://doi.org/10.1038/7777)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 1999 Apr;21(4):434-9. doi: 10.1038/7777.

The gene encoding proline dehydrogenase modulates sensorimotor gating in mice.

Gogos JA(1), Santha M, Takacs Z, Beck KD, Luine V, Lucas LR, Nadler JV, 
Karayiorgou M.

Author information:
(1)The Rockefeller University, New York, New York 10021, USA.

Hemizygous cryptic deletions of the q11 band of human chromosome 22 have been 
associated with a number of psychiatric and behavioural phenotypes, including 
schizophrenia. Here we report the isolation and characterization of PRODH, a 
human homologue of Drosophila melanogaster sluggish-A (slgA), which encodes 
proline dehydrogenase responsible for the behavioural phenotype of the slgA 
mutant. PRODH is localized at chromosome 22q11 in a region deleted in some 
psychiatric patients. We also isolated the mouse homologue of slgA (Prodh), 
identified a mutation in this gene in the Pro/Re hyperprolinaemic mouse strain 
and found that these mice have a deficit in sensorimotor gating accompanied by 
regional neurochemical alterations in the brain. Sensorimotor gating is a neural 
filtering process that allows attention to be focused on a given stimulus, and 
is affected in patients with neuropsychiatric disorders. Furthermore, several 
lines of evidence suggest that proline may serve as a modulator of synaptic 
transmission in the mammalian brain. Our observations, in conjunction with the 
chromosomal location of PRODH, suggest a potential involvement of this gene in 
the 22q11-associated psychiatric and behavioural phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1038/7777
PMID: 10192398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
