---
pmid: '30911189'
title: Atg2 mediates direct lipid transfer between membranes for autophagosome formation.
authors:
- Osawa T
- Kotani T
- Kawaoka T
- Hirata E
- Suzuki K
- Nakatogawa H
- Ohsumi Y
- Noda NN
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/s41594-019-0203-4
---

# Atg2 mediates direct lipid transfer between membranes for autophagosome formation.
**Authors:** Osawa T, Kotani T, Kawaoka T, Hirata E, Suzuki K, Nakatogawa H, Ohsumi Y, Noda NN
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41594-019-0203-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41594-019-0203-4)

## Abstract

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2019 Apr;26(4):281-288. doi: 10.1038/s41594-019-0203-4. 
Epub 2019 Mar 25.

Atg2 mediates direct lipid transfer between membranes for autophagosome 
formation.

Osawa T(1), Kotani T(2), Kawaoka T(3), Hirata E(3), Suzuki K(3)(4)(5), 
Nakatogawa H(2), Ohsumi Y(6), Noda NN(7).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Microbial Chemistry (BIKAKEN), Tokyo, Japan.
(2)School of Life Science and Technology, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 
Yokohama, Japan.
(3)Department of Integrated Biosciences, Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, 
University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Japan.
(4)Life Science Data Research Center, Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, 
University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Japan.
(5)Collaborative Research Institute for Innovative Microbiology, University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Cell Biology Center, Institute of Innovative Research, Tokyo Institute of 
Technology, Yokohama, Japan.
(7)Institute of Microbial Chemistry (BIKAKEN), Tokyo, Japan. nn@bikaken.or.jp.

A key event in autophagy is autophagosome formation, whereby the newly 
synthesized isolation membrane (IM) expands to form a complete autophagosome 
using endomembrane-derived lipids. Atg2 physically links the edge of the 
expanding IM with the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), a role that is essential for 
autophagosome formation. However, the molecular function of Atg2 during ER-IM 
contact remains unclear, as does the mechanism of lipid delivery to the IM. Here 
we show that the conserved amino-terminal region of Schizosaccharomyces pombe 
Atg2 includes a lipid-transfer-protein-like hydrophobic cavity that accommodates 
phospholipid acyl chains. Atg2 bridges highly curved liposomes, thereby 
facilitating efficient phospholipid transfer in vitro, a function that is 
inhibited by mutations that impair autophagosome formation in vivo. These 
results suggest that Atg2 acts as a lipid-transfer protein that supplies 
phospholipids for autophagosome formation.

DOI: 10.1038/s41594-019-0203-4
PMID: 30911189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
