---
pmid: '31628181'
title: Protein Kinase C and Calmodulin Serve As Calcium Sensors for Calcium-Stimulated
  Endocytosis at Synapses.
authors:
- Jin YH
- Wu XS
- Shi B
- Zhang Z
- Guo X
- Gan L
- Chen Z
- Wu LG
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6880464
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0182-19.2019
---

# Protein Kinase C and Calmodulin Serve As Calcium Sensors for Calcium-Stimulated Endocytosis at Synapses.
**Authors:** Jin YH, Wu XS, Shi B, Zhang Z, Guo X, Gan L, Chen Z, Wu LG
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0182-19.2019](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0182-19.2019)
**PMC:** [PMC6880464](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6880464/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2019 Nov 27;39(48):9478-9490. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0182-19.2019.
 Epub 2019 Oct 18.

Protein Kinase C and Calmodulin Serve As Calcium Sensors for Calcium-Stimulated 
Endocytosis at Synapses.

Jin YH(1)(2), Wu XS(1), Shi B(1)(3), Zhang Z(1), Guo X(1), Gan L(4), Chen Z(2), 
Wu LG(5).

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, Bethesda, Maryland 
20892.
(2)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical 
University, Guangzhou, China 510515.
(3)Biological Sciences Graduate Program, College of Computer, Mathematical, and 
Natural Sciences, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland 20740, and.
(4)Flaum Eye Institute, University of Rochester School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, Rochester, New York 14642.
(5)National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, Bethesda, Maryland 
20892, wul@ninds.nih.gov.

Calcium influx triggers and facilitates endocytosis, which recycles vesicles and 
thus sustains synaptic transmission. Despite decades of studies, the underlying 
calcium sensor remained not well understood. Here, we examined two calcium 
binding proteins, protein kinase C (PKC) and calmodulin. Whether PKC is involved 
in endocytosis was unclear; whether calmodulin acts as a calcium sensor for 
endocytosis was neither clear, although calmodulin involvement in endocytosis 
had been suggested. We generated PKC (α or β-isoform) and calmodulin (calmodulin 
2 gene) knock-out mice of either sex and measured endocytosis with capacitance 
measurements, pHluorin imaging and electron microscopy. We found that these 
knock-outs inhibited slow (∼10-30 s) and rapid (<∼3 s) endocytosis at large 
calyx-type calyces, and inhibited slow endocytosis and bulk endocytosis (forming 
large endosome-like structures) at small conventional hippocampal synapses, 
suggesting the involvement of PKC and calmodulin in three most common forms of 
endocytosis-the slow, rapid and bulk endocytosis. Inhibition of slow endocytosis 
in PKC or calmodulin 2 knock-out hippocampal synapses was rescued by 
overexpressing wild-type PKC or calmodulin, but not calcium-binding-deficient 
PKC or calmodulin mutant, respectively, suggesting that calcium stimulates 
endocytosis by binding with its calcium sensor PKC and calmodulin. PKC and 
calmodulin 2 knock-out inhibited calcium-dependent vesicle mobilization to the 
readily releasable pool, suggesting that PKC and calmodulin may mediate 
calcium-dependent facilitation of vesicle mobilization. These findings shed 
light on the molecular signaling link among calcium, endocytosis and vesicle 
mobilization that are crucial in maintaining synaptic transmission and neuronal 
network activity.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Vesicle fusion releases 
neurotransmitters to mediate synaptic transmission. To sustain synaptic 
transmission, fused vesicles must be retrieved via endocytosis. Accumulating 
evidence suggests that calcium influx triggers synaptic vesicle endocytosis. 
However, how calcium triggers endocytosis is not well understood. Using genetic 
tools together with capacitance measurements, optical imaging and electron 
microscopy, we identified two calcium sensors, including protein kinase C (α and 
β isoforms) and calmodulin, for the most commonly observed forms of endocytosis: 
slow, rapid, and bulk. We also found that these two proteins are involved in 
calcium-dependent vesicle mobilization to the readily releasable pool. These 
results provide the molecular signaling link among calcium, endocytosis, and 
vesicle mobilization that are essential in sustaining synaptic transmission and 
neuronal network activity.

Copyright © 2019 the authors.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0182-19.2019
PMCID: PMC6880464
PMID: 31628181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
