---
pmid: '23512198'
title: SCF E3 ligase F-box protein complex SCF(FBXL19) regulates cell migration by
  mediating Rac1 ubiquitination and degradation.
authors:
- Zhao J
- Mialki RK
- Wei J
- Coon TA
- Zou C
- Chen BB
- Mallampalli RK
- Zhao Y
journal: FASEB J
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: pdf_partial
pmcid: PMC3688740
doi: 10.1096/fj.12-223099
---

# SCF E3 ligase F-box protein complex SCF(FBXL19) regulates cell migration by mediating Rac1 ubiquitination and degradation.
**Authors:** Zhao J, Mialki RK, Wei J, Coon TA, Zou C, Chen BB, Mallampalli RK, Zhao Y
**Journal:** FASEB J (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1096/fj.12-223099](https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.12-223099)
**PMC:** [PMC3688740](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3688740/)

## Abstract

1. FASEB J. 2013 Jul;27(7):2611-9. doi: 10.1096/fj.12-223099. Epub 2013 Mar 19.

SCF E3 ligase F-box protein complex SCF(FBXL19) regulates cell migration by 
mediating Rac1 ubiquitination and degradation.

Zhao J(1), Mialki RK, Wei J, Coon TA, Zou C, Chen BB, Mallampalli RK, Zhao Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 3459 
Fifth Ave., Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

Rac1, a member of the Rho family of GTPases, regulates diverse cellular 
functions, including cytoskeleton reorganization and cell migration. F-box 
proteins are major subunits within the Skp1-Cul1-F-box (SCF) E3 ubiquitin 
ligases that recognize specific substrates for ubiquitination. The role of F-box 
proteins in regulating Rac1 stability has not been studied. Mouse lung 
epithelial (MLE12) cells were used to investigate Rac1 stability and cell 
migration. Screening of an F-box protein library and in vitro ubiquitination 
assays identified FBXL19, a relatively new member of the F-box protein family 
that targets Rac1 for its polyubiquitination and proteasomal degradation. 
Overexpression of FBXL19 decreased both Rac1 active and inactive forms and 
significantly reduced cellular migration. Protein kinase AKT-mediated 
phosphorylation of Rac1 at serine(71) was essential for FBXL19-mediated Rac1 
ubiquitination and depletion. Lysine(166) within Rac1 was identified as a 
polyubiquitination acceptor site. Rac1(S71A) and Rac1(K166R) mutant proteins 
were resistant to FBXL19-mediated ubiquitination and degradation. Further, 
ectopically expressed FBXL19 reduced cell migration in Rac1-overexpressing cells 
(P<0.01, Rac1 cells vs. FBXL19+Rac1 cells), but not in Rac1 lysine(166) 
mutant-overexpressing cells. FBXL19 diminished formation of the migratory 
leading edge. Thus, SCF(FBXL19) targets Rac1 for its disposal, a process 
regulated by AKT. These findings provide the first evidence of an F-box protein 
targeting a small G protein for ubiquitination and degradation to modulate cell 
migration.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.12-223099
PMCID: PMC3688740
PMID: 23512198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Preparing to download ... HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
