---
pmid: '9724629'
title: 'DPM2 regulates biosynthesis of dolichol phosphate-mannose in mammalian cells:
  correct subcellular localization and stabilization of DPM1, and binding of dolichol
  phosphate.'
authors:
- Maeda Y
- Tomita S
- Watanabe R
- Ohishi K
- Kinoshita T
journal: EMBO J
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1170821
doi: 10.1093/emboj/17.17.4920
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# DPM2 regulates biosynthesis of dolichol phosphate-mannose in mammalian cells: correct subcellular localization and stabilization of DPM1, and binding of dolichol phosphate.
**Authors:** Maeda Y, Tomita S, Watanabe R, Ohishi K, Kinoshita T
**Journal:** EMBO J (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/17.17.4920](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/17.17.4920)
**PMC:** [PMC1170821](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1170821/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 1998 Sep 1;17(17):4920-9. doi: 10.1093/emboj/17.17.4920.

DPM2 regulates biosynthesis of dolichol phosphate-mannose in mammalian cells: 
correct subcellular localization and stabilization of DPM1, and binding of 
dolichol phosphate.

Maeda Y(1), Tomita S, Watanabe R, Ohishi K, Kinoshita T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunoregulation, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, 
Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Biosynthesis of glycosylphosphatidylinositol and N-glycan precursor is dependent 
upon a mannosyl donor, dolichol phosphate-mannose (DPM). The Thy-1negative class 
E mutant of mouse lymphoma and Lec15 mutant Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells 
are incapable of DPM synthesis. The class E mutant is defective in the DPM1 gene 
which encodes a mammalian homologue of Saccharomyces cerevisiae Dpm1p that is a 
DPM synthase, whereas Lec15 is a different mutant, indicating that mammalian 
DPM1 is not sufficient for DPM synthesis. Here we report expression cloning of a 
new gene, DPM2, which is defective in Lec15 cells. DPM2, an 84 amino acid 
membrane protein expressed in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), makes a complex 
with DPM1 that is essential for the ER localization and stable expression of 
DPM1. Moreover, DPM2 enhances binding of dolichol phosphate, a substrate of DPM 
synthase. Mammalian DPM1 is catalytic because a fusion protein of DPM1 that was 
stably expressed in the ER synthesized DPM without DPM2. Therefore, biosynthesis 
of DPM in mammalian cells is regulated by DPM2.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/17.17.4920
PMCID: PMC1170821
PMID: 9724629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
