---
pmid: '17305370'
title: The C-terminal lipid-binding domain of apolipoprotein E is a highly efficient
  mediator of ABCA1-dependent cholesterol efflux that promotes the assembly of high-density
  lipoproteins.
authors:
- Vedhachalam C
- Narayanaswami V
- Neto N
- Forte TM
- Phillips MC
- Lund-Katz S
- Bielicki JK
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi602407r
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The C-terminal lipid-binding domain of apolipoprotein E is a highly efficient mediator of ABCA1-dependent cholesterol efflux that promotes the assembly of high-density lipoproteins.
**Authors:** Vedhachalam C, Narayanaswami V, Neto N, Forte TM, Phillips MC, Lund-Katz S, Bielicki JK
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi602407r](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi602407r)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2007 Mar 13;46(10):2583-93. doi: 10.1021/bi602407r. Epub 2007
Feb  17.

The C-terminal lipid-binding domain of apolipoprotein E is a highly efficient 
mediator of ABCA1-dependent cholesterol efflux that promotes the assembly of 
high-density lipoproteins.

Vedhachalam C(1), Narayanaswami V, Neto N, Forte TM, Phillips MC, Lund-Katz S, 
Bielicki JK.

Author information:
(1)GI/Nutrition Division, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, University of 
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-4318, USA.

This study was undertaken to identify the alpha-helical domains of human apoE 
that mediate cellular cholesterol efflux and HDL assembly via ATP-binding 
cassette transporter A1 (ABCA1). The C-terminal (CT) domain (residues 222-299) 
of apoE was found to stimulate ABCA1-dependent cholesterol efflux in a manner 
similar to that of intact apoE2, -E3, and -E4 in studies using J774 macrophages 
and HeLa cells. The N-terminal (NT) four-helix bundle domain (residues 1-191) 
was a relatively poor mediator of cholesterol efflux. On a per molecule basis, 
the CT domain stimulated cholesterol efflux with the same efficiency (Km 
approximately 0.2 microM) as intact apoA-I and apoE. Gel filtration 
chromatography of conditioned medium from ABCA1-expressing J774 cells revealed 
that, like the intact apoE isoforms, the CT domain promoted the assembly of HDL 
particles with diameters of 8 and 13 nm. Removal of the CT domain abolished the 
formation of HDL-sized particles, and only larger particles eluting in the void 
volume were formed. Studies with CT truncation mutants of apoE3 and peptides 
indicated that hydrophobic helical segments governed the efficiency of cellular 
cholesterol efflux and that conjoined class A and G amphipathic alpha-helices 
were required for optimal efflux activity. Collectively, the data suggest that 
the CT lipid-binding domain of apoE encompassing amino acids 222-299 is 
necessary and sufficient for mediating ABCA1 lipid efflux and HDL particle 
assembly.

DOI: 10.1021/bi602407r
PMID: 17305370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
