---
pmid: '23001926'
title: Overexpression and cytoplasmic accumulation of Hepl is associated with clinicopathological
  parameters and poor prognosis in non-small cell lung cancer.
authors:
- Miao Y
- Wang L
- Liu Y
- Li AL
- Liu SL
- Cao HY
- Zhang XP
- Jiang GY
- Liu D
- Wang EH
journal: Tumour Biol
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s13277-012-0517-x
---

# Overexpression and cytoplasmic accumulation of Hepl is associated with clinicopathological parameters and poor prognosis in non-small cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Miao Y, Wang L, Liu Y, Li AL, Liu SL, Cao HY, Zhang XP, Jiang GY, Liu D, Wang EH
**Journal:** Tumour Biol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13277-012-0517-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13277-012-0517-x)

## Abstract

1. Tumour Biol. 2013 Feb;34(1):107-14. doi: 10.1007/s13277-012-0517-x. Epub 2012 
Sep 23.

Overexpression and cytoplasmic accumulation of Hepl is associated with 
clinicopathological parameters and poor prognosis in non-small cell lung cancer.

Miao Y(1), Wang L, Liu Y, Li AL, Liu SL, Cao HY, Zhang XP, Jiang GY, Liu D, Wang 
EH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital and College of Basic 
Medical Sciences, China Medical University, Shenyang, China.

Hepl, first described in 2008, is the fourth member of the Crk-associated 
substrate (CAS) family and is specifically expressed in the lung. Compared to 
other CAS proteins, Hepl has a varying effect on cell migration in different 
cell types. We speculated that Hepl may play a role in lung cancer invasion and 
metastasis. We quantified the expression and subcellular localization of Hepl in 
143 non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) tissues, adjacent noncancerous tissues, 
and eight lung cancer cell lines using Western blotting, immunohistochemistry, 
and immunofluorescent staining. Expression of Hepl was correlated with the 
clinicopathological features of NSCLC. Hepl was overexpressed in 72.3 % 
(103/143) of the NSCLC tissues, compared to the adjacent noncancerous lung 
tissues (P = 0.022). Overexpression of Hepl was associated with lymph node 
metastasis and high TNM stage (P = 0.005 and P = 0.045, respectively). 
Kaplan-Meier survival curves and the log-rank test indicated that overexpression 
of Hepl correlated with poorer overall survival in NSCLC (P < 0.001), and Cox 
regression analysis demonstrated that overexpression of Hepl was an independent 
prognostic factor in NSCLC. Furthermore, cytoplasmic accumulation of Hepl was 
observed in a high metastatic potential lung cancer cell lines (H1299 and BE1), 
but not in low metastatic potential cell lines (LTE and A549). This study 
reveals that Hepl is overexpressed in the nucleus and aberrantly accumulates in 
the cytoplasm of NSCLC cells, and indicates that Hepl may play a role in the 
progression of lung cancer, including lymph node metastasis and TNM stage. 
Additionally, Hepl may be a useful prognostic factor in lung cancer.

DOI: 10.1007/s13277-012-0517-x
PMID: 23001926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
