---
pmid: '9716408'
title: 'Human and mouse homologs of Schizosaccharomyces pombe rad1(+) and Saccharomyces
  cerevisiae RAD17: linkage to checkpoint control and mammalian meiosis.'
authors:
- Freire R
- Murguía JR
- Tarsounas M
- Lowndes NF
- Moens PB
- Jackson SP
journal: Genes Dev
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC317084
doi: 10.1101/gad.12.16.2560
---

# Human and mouse homologs of Schizosaccharomyces pombe rad1(+) and Saccharomyces cerevisiae RAD17: linkage to checkpoint control and mammalian meiosis.
**Authors:** Freire R, Murguía JR, Tarsounas M, Lowndes NF, Moens PB, Jackson SP
**Journal:** Genes Dev (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.12.16.2560](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.12.16.2560)
**PMC:** [PMC317084](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC317084/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 1998 Aug 15;12(16):2560-73. doi: 10.1101/gad.12.16.2560.

Human and mouse homologs of Schizosaccharomyces pombe rad1(+) and Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae RAD17: linkage to checkpoint control and mammalian meiosis.

Freire R(1), Murguía JR, Tarsounas M, Lowndes NF, Moens PB, Jackson SP.

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research Campaign Institute of Cancer and Developmental 
Biology, and Department of Zoology, Cambridge University, Cambridge CB2 1QR, UK.

Preventing or delaying progress through the cell cycle in response to DNA damage 
is crucial for eukaryotic cells to allow the damage to be repaired and not 
incorporated irrevocably into daughter cells. Several genes involved in this 
process have been discovered in fission and budding yeast. Here, we report the 
identification of human and mouse homologs of the Schizosaccharomyces pombe DNA 
damage checkpoint control gene rad1(+) and its Saccharomyces cerevisiae homolog 
RAD17. The human gene HRAD1 is located on chromosome 5p13 and is most homologous 
to S. pombe rad1(+). This gene encodes a 382-amino-acid residue protein that is 
localized mainly in the nucleus and is expressed at high levels in proliferative 
tissues. This human gene significantly complements the sensitivity to UV light 
of a S. pombe strain mutated in rad1(+). Moreover, HRAD1 complements the 
checkpoint control defect of this strain after UV exposure. In addition to 
functioning in DNA repair checkpoints, S. cerevisiae RAD17 plays a role during 
meiosis to prevent progress through prophase I when recombination is 
interrupted. Consistent with a similar role in mammals, Rad1 protein is abundant 
in testis, and is associated with both synapsed and unsynapsed chromosomes 
during meiotic prophase I of spermatogenesis, with a staining pattern distinct 
from that of the recombination proteins Rad51 and Dmc1. Together, these data 
imply an important role for hRad1 both in the mitotic DNA damage checkpoint and 
in meiotic checkpoint mechanisms, and suggest that these events are highly 
conserved from yeast to humans.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.12.16.2560
PMCID: PMC317084
PMID: 9716408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
