---
pmid: '30741634'
title: Human VPS13A is associated with multiple organelles and influences mitochondrial
  morphology and lipid droplet motility.
authors:
- Yeshaw WM
- van der Zwaag M
- Pinto F
- Lahaye LL
- Faber AI
- Gómez-Sánchez R
- Dolga AM
- Poland C
- Monaco AP
- van IJzendoorn SC
- Grzeschik NA
- Velayos-Baeza A
- Sibon OC
journal: Elife
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6389287
doi: 10.7554/eLife.43561
---

# Human VPS13A is associated with multiple organelles and influences mitochondrial morphology and lipid droplet motility.
**Authors:** Yeshaw WM, van der Zwaag M, Pinto F, Lahaye LL, Faber AI, Gómez-Sánchez R, Dolga AM, Poland C, Monaco AP, van IJzendoorn SC, Grzeschik NA, Velayos-Baeza A, Sibon OC
**Journal:** Elife (2019)
**DOI:** [10.7554/eLife.43561](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.43561)
**PMC:** [PMC6389287](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6389287/)

## Abstract

1. Elife. 2019 Feb 11;8:e43561. doi: 10.7554/eLife.43561.

Human VPS13A is associated with multiple organelles and influences mitochondrial 
morphology and lipid droplet motility.

Yeshaw WM(1), van der Zwaag M(1), Pinto F(1), Lahaye LL(1), Faber AI(1), 
Gómez-Sánchez R(1), Dolga AM(2), Poland C(3), Monaco AP(3)(4), van IJzendoorn 
SC(1), Grzeschik NA(1), Velayos-Baeza A(3), Sibon OC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Groningen, University Medical 
Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Groningen Research Institute of 
Pharmacy (GRIP), Faculty of Science and Engineering, University of Groningen, 
Groningen, The Netherlands.
(3)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(4)Office of the President, Tufts University, Medford, United States.

The VPS13A gene is associated with the neurodegenerative disorder Chorea 
Acanthocytosis. It is unknown what the consequences are of impaired function of 
VPS13A at the subcellular level. We demonstrate that VPS13A is a peripheral 
membrane protein, associated with mitochondria, the endoplasmic reticulum and 
lipid droplets. VPS13A is localized at sites where the endoplasmic reticulum and 
mitochondria are in close contact. VPS13A interacts with the ER residing protein 
VAP-A via its FFAT domain. Interaction with mitochondria is mediated via its 
C-terminal domain. In VPS13A-depleted cells, ER-mitochondria contact sites are 
decreased, mitochondria are fragmented and mitophagy is decreased. VPS13A also 
localizes to lipid droplets and affects lipid droplet motility. In 
VPS13A-depleted mammalian cells lipid droplet numbers are increased. Our data, 
together with recently published data from others, indicate that VPS13A is 
required for establishing membrane contact sites between various organelles to 
enable lipid transfer required for mitochondria and lipid droplet related 
processes.

© 2019, Yeshaw et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.43561
PMCID: PMC6389287
PMID: 30741634 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: WY, Mv, FP, LL, AF, RG, AD, CP, AM, Sv, NG, AV, 
OS No competing interests declared
