---
pmid: '12693930'
title: 'Crystal structure of eta-crystallin: adaptation of a class 1 aldehyde dehydrogenase
  for a new role in the eye lens.'
authors:
- Bateman OA
- Purkiss AG
- van Montfort R
- Slingsby C
- Graham C
- Wistow G
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi027367w
---

# Crystal structure of eta-crystallin: adaptation of a class 1 aldehyde dehydrogenase for a new role in the eye lens.
**Authors:** Bateman OA, Purkiss AG, van Montfort R, Slingsby C, Graham C, Wistow G
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi027367w](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi027367w)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2003 Apr 22;42(15):4349-56. doi: 10.1021/bi027367w.

Crystal structure of eta-crystallin: adaptation of a class 1 aldehyde 
dehydrogenase for a new role in the eye lens.

Bateman OA(1), Purkiss AG, van Montfort R, Slingsby C, Graham C, Wistow G.

Author information:
(1)Birkbeck College, School of Crystallography, Malet Street, London WC1E 7HX, 
UK.

Eta-crystallin is a retinal dehydrogenase that has acquired a role as a 
structural protein in the eye lens of elephant shrews, members of an ancient 
order of mammals. While it retains some activity toward retinal, which is 
oxidized to retinoic acid, the protein has acquired a number of specific 
sequence changes that have presumably been selected to enhance the lens role. 
The crystal structure of eta-crystallin, in common with class 1 and 2 ALDHs, is 
a dimer of dimers. It has a better-defined NAD binding site than those of 
related mammalian ALDH1 enzymes with the cofactor bound in the "hydride 
transfer" position in all four monomers with small differences about the dimer 
dyads. Although the active site is well conserved, the substrate-binding site is 
larger in eta-crystallin, and there are some mutations to the substrate access 
tunnel that might affect binding or release of substrate and product. It is 
possible that eta-crystallin has lost flexibility to improve its role in the 
lens. Enhanced binding of cofactor could enable it to act as a UV/blue light 
filter in the lens, improving visual acuity. The structure not only gives a view 
of a "natural mutant" of ALDH1 illustrating the adaptive conflict that can arise 
in multifunctional proteins, but also provides a well-ordered NAD binding site 
structure for this class of enzymes with important roles in development and 
health.

DOI: 10.1021/bi027367w
PMID: 12693930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
