---
pmid: '1730697'
title: Arabidopsis mutants deficient in polyunsaturated fatty acid synthesis. Biochemical
  and genetic characterization of a plant oleoyl-phosphatidylcholine desaturase.
authors:
- Miquel M
- Browse J
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1992'
full_text_available: false
---

# Arabidopsis mutants deficient in polyunsaturated fatty acid synthesis. Biochemical and genetic characterization of a plant oleoyl-phosphatidylcholine desaturase.
**Authors:** Miquel M, Browse J
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1992)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1992 Jan 25;267(3):1502-9.

Arabidopsis mutants deficient in polyunsaturated fatty acid synthesis. 
Biochemical and genetic characterization of a plant oleoyl-phosphatidylcholine 
desaturase.

Miquel M(1), Browse J.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biological Chemistry, Washington State University, Pullman 
99164-6340.

The overall fatty acid composition of leaf lipids in a mutant of Arabidopsis 
thaliana was characterized by reduced levels of polyunsaturated 18-carbon fatty 
acids and an increased proportion of oleate as a consequence of a single 
recessive nuclear mutation. Quantitative analysis of the fatty acid composition 
of individual lipids demonstrated that all the major phospholipids of the 
extrachloroplast membranes are affected by the mutation, whereas the chlorplast 
lipids show fatty acid compositions only slightly different from those of wild 
type plants. These results are consistent with the parallel operation of two 
pathways of lipid synthesis in plant leaf cells (the prokaryotic pathway in the 
chloroplast and the eukaryotic pathway in the endoplasmic reticulum) and with 
genetic evidence (Browse, J., Kunst, L., Anderson, S., Hugly, S., and 
Somerville, C.R. (1989) Plant Physiol 90, 522-529) that an independent 18:1/16:1 
desaturase operates on chloroplast membrane lipids. Direct enzyme assays 
confirmed that the mutant plants are deficient in the activity of a microsomal 
oleoyl-phosphatidycholine desaturase and demonstrated that this desaturase is 
the major enzyme responsible for the synthesis of polyunsaturated phospholipids. 
Despite this deficiency in 18:1-desaturase activity, mutant plants contained 
relatively high levels of 18:3 in their leaf phospholipids. This finding is 
interpreted as additional evidence that considerable two-way exchange of lipid 
occurs between the chloroplast and endoplasmic reticulum and that this exchange 
allows the chloroplast desaturases to provide lipids containing 18:3 to the 
extrachloroplast compartment, thus partially alleviating the deficiency in 18:1 
desaturase activity.

PMID: 1730697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
