---
pmid: '23431184'
title: BIK1 interacts with PEPRs to mediate ethylene-induced immunity.
authors:
- Liu Z
- Wu Y
- Yang F
- Zhang Y
- Chen S
- Xie Q
- Tian X
- Zhou JM
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3625333
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1215543110
---

# BIK1 interacts with PEPRs to mediate ethylene-induced immunity.
**Authors:** Liu Z, Wu Y, Yang F, Zhang Y, Chen S, Xie Q, Tian X, Zhou JM
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1215543110](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1215543110)
**PMC:** [PMC3625333](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3625333/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Apr 9;110(15):6205-10. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1215543110. Epub 2013 Feb 19.

BIK1 interacts with PEPRs to mediate ethylene-induced immunity.

Liu Z(1), Wu Y, Yang F, Zhang Y, Chen S, Xie Q, Tian X, Zhou JM.

Author information:
(1)School of Life Science, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Apr 9;110(15):5748-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1302659110.

Plants have evolved intricate immune mechanisms to combat pathogen infection. 
Upon perception of pathogen-derived signals, plants accumulate defense hormones 
such as ethylene (ET), jasmonate, salicylate, and damage-associated molecular 
patterns to amplify immune responses. In particular, the Arabidopsis peptide 
Pep1 and its family members are thought to be damage-associated molecular 
patterns that trigger immunity through Pep1 receptor kinases PEPR1 and PEPR2. 
Here we show that PEPR1 specifically interacts with receptor-like cytoplasmic 
kinases botrytis-induced kinase 1 (BIK1) and PBS1-like 1 (PBL1) to mediate 
Pep1-induced defenses. In vitro and in vivo studies suggested that PEPR1, and 
likely PEPR2, directly phosphorylates BIK1 in response to Pep1 treatment. 
Surprisingly, the pepr1/pepr2 double-mutant seedlings displayed reduced in 
sensitivity to ET, as indicated by the elongated hypocotyls. ET-induced 
expression of defense genes and resistance to Botrytis cinerea were compromised 
in pepr1/pepr2 and bik1 mutants, reenforcing an important role of PEPRs and BIK1 
in ET-mediated defense signaling. Pep treatment partially mimicked ET-induced 
seedling growth inhibition in a PEPR- and BIK1-dependent manner. Furthermore, 
both ET and Pep1 treatments induced BIK1 phosphorylation in a PEPR-dependent 
manner. However, the Pep1-induced BIK1 phosphorylation, seedling growth 
inhibition, and defense gene expression were independent of canonical ET 
signaling components. Together our results illustrate a mechanism by which ET 
and PEPR signaling pathways act in concert to amplify immune responses.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1215543110
PMCID: PMC3625333
PMID: 23431184 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
