---
pmid: '24262037'
title: Arl6IP1 has the ability to shape the mammalian ER membrane in a reticulon-like
  fashion.
authors:
- Yamamoto Y
- Yoshida A
- Miyazaki N
- Iwasaki K
- Sakisaka T
journal: Biochem J
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1042/BJ20131186
---

# Arl6IP1 has the ability to shape the mammalian ER membrane in a reticulon-like fashion.
**Authors:** Yamamoto Y, Yoshida A, Miyazaki N, Iwasaki K, Sakisaka T
**Journal:** Biochem J (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BJ20131186](https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20131186)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2014 Feb 15;458(1):69-79. doi: 10.1042/BJ20131186.

Arl6IP1 has the ability to shape the mammalian ER membrane in a reticulon-like 
fashion.

Yamamoto Y(1), Yoshida A(1), Miyazaki N(2), Iwasaki K(2), Sakisaka T(1).

Author information:
(1)*Division of Membrane Dynamics, Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, 
Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe 650-0017, Japan.
(2)†Laboratory of Protein Synthesis and Expression, Institute for Protein 
Research, Osaka University, Suita 565-0871, Japan.

The ER (endoplasmic reticulum) consists of the nuclear envelope and a peripheral 
network of membrane sheets and tubules. Two classes of the evolutionarily 
conserved ER membrane proteins, reticulons and REEPs (receptor 
expression-enhancing proteins)/DP1 (deleted in polyposis locus 1)/Yop1 (YIP 1 
partner), shape high-curvature ER tubules. In mammals, four members of the 
reticulon family and six members of the REEP family have been identified so far. 
In the present paper we report that Arl6IP1(ADP-ribosylation factor-like 6 
interacting protein 1), an anti-apoptotic protein specific to multicellular 
organisms, is a potential player in shaping the ER tubules in mammalian cells. 
Arl6IP1, which does not share an overall primary sequence homology with 
reticulons, harbours reticulon-like short hairpin transmembrane domains and 
binds to atlastin, a GTPase that mediates the formation of the tubular ER 
network. Overexpression of Arl6IP1 induced extensive tubular structures of the 
ER and excluded a luminal protein. Furthermore, overexpression of Arl6IP1 
stabilized the ER tubules, allowing the cells to maintain the ER tubules even in 
the absence of microtubules. Arl6IP1 constricted liposomes into tubules. The 
short hairpin structures of the transmembrane domains were required for the 
membrane-shaping activity of Arl6IP1. The results of the present study indicate 
that Arl6IP1 has the ability to shape high-curvature ER tubules in a 
reticulon-like fashion.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20131186
PMID: 24262037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
