---
pmid: '23329686'
title: Sequential duplications of an ancient member of the DnaJ-family expanded the
  functional chaperone network in the eukaryotic cytosol.
authors:
- Sahi C
- Kominek J
- Ziegelhoffer T
- Yu HY
- Baranowski M
- Marszalek J
- Craig EA
journal: Mol Biol Evol
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3670730
doi: 10.1093/molbev/mst008
---

# Sequential duplications of an ancient member of the DnaJ-family expanded the functional chaperone network in the eukaryotic cytosol.
**Authors:** Sahi C, Kominek J, Ziegelhoffer T, Yu HY, Baranowski M, Marszalek J, Craig EA
**Journal:** Mol Biol Evol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/molbev/mst008](https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/mst008)
**PMC:** [PMC3670730](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3670730/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Evol. 2013 May;30(5):985-98. doi: 10.1093/molbev/mst008. Epub 2013
Jan  16.

Sequential duplications of an ancient member of the DnaJ-family expanded the 
functional chaperone network in the eukaryotic cytosol.

Sahi C(1), Kominek J, Ziegelhoffer T, Yu HY, Baranowski M, Marszalek J, Craig 
EA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA.

Across eukaryotes, Hsp70-based chaperone machineries display an underlying unity 
in their sequence, structure, and biochemical mechanism of action, while working 
in a myriad of cellular processes. In good part, this extraordinary functional 
versatility is derived from the ability of a single Hsp70 to interact with an 
array of J-protein cochaperones to form a functional chaperone network. Among 
J-proteins, the DnaJ-type is the most prevalent, being present in all three 
kingdoms and in several different compartments of eukaryotic cells. However, 
because these ancient DnaJ-type proteins diverged at the base of the eukaryotic 
phylogeny, little is understood about the evolutionary basis of their 
diversification and thus the functional expansion of the chaperone network. 
Here, we report results of evolutionary and experimental analyses of two more 
recent members of the cytosolic DnaJ family of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Xdj1 
and Apj1, which emerged by sequential duplications of the ancient YDJ1 in 
Ascomycota. Sequence comparison and molecular modeling revealed that both Xdj1 
and Apj1 maintained a domain organization similar to that of multifunctional 
Ydj1. However, despite these similarities, both Xdj1 and Apj1 evolved highly 
specialized functions. Xdj1 plays a unique role in the translocation of proteins 
from the cytosol into mitochondria. Apj1's specialized role is related to 
degradation of sumolyated proteins. Together these data provide the first clear 
example of cochaperone duplicates that evolved specialized functions, allowing 
expansion of the chaperone functional network, while maintaining the overall 
structural organization of their parental gene.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/mst008
PMCID: PMC3670730
PMID: 23329686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
