---
pmid: '9990024'
title: The neurotransmitter receptor-anchoring protein gephyrin reconstitutes molybdenum
  cofactor biosynthesis in bacteria, plants, and mammalian cells.
authors:
- Stallmeyer B
- Schwarz G
- Schulze J
- Nerlich A
- Reiss J
- Kirsch J
- Mendel RR
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: pdf_partial
pmcid: PMC15463
doi: 10.1073/pnas.96.4.1333
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The neurotransmitter receptor-anchoring protein gephyrin reconstitutes molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis in bacteria, plants, and mammalian cells.
**Authors:** Stallmeyer B, Schwarz G, Schulze J, Nerlich A, Reiss J, Kirsch J, Mendel RR
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.96.4.1333](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.96.4.1333)
**PMC:** [PMC15463](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC15463/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Feb 16;96(4):1333-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.96.4.1333.

The neurotransmitter receptor-anchoring protein gephyrin reconstitutes 
molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis in bacteria, plants, and mammalian cells.

Stallmeyer B(1), Schwarz G, Schulze J, Nerlich A, Reiss J, Kirsch J, Mendel RR.

Author information:
(1)Botanical Institute, Technical University of Braunschweig, 38023 
Braunschweig, Germany.

The molybdenum cofactor (Moco), a highly conserved pterin compound complexing 
molybdenum, is required for the enzymatic activities of all molybdenum enzymes 
except nitrogenase. Moco is synthesized by a unique and evolutionarily old 
pathway that requires the activities of at least six gene products. Some of the 
proteins involved in bacterial, plant, and invertebrate Moco biosynthesis show 
striking homologies to the primary structure of gephyrin, a polypeptide required 
for the clustering of inhibitory glycine receptors in postsynaptic membranes in 
the rat central nervous system. Here, we show that gephyrin binds with high 
affinity to molybdopterin, the metabolic precursor of Moco. Furthermore, 
gephyrin expression can reconstitute Moco biosynthesis in Moco-deficient 
bacteria, a molybdenum-dependent mouse cell line, and a Moco-deficient plant 
mutant. Conversely, inhibition of gephyrin expression by antisense RNA 
expression in cultured murine cells reduces their Moco content significantly. 
These data indicate that in addition to clustering glycine receptors, gephyrin 
also is involved in Moco biosynthesis and illustrate the remarkable conservation 
of its function in Moco biosynthesis throughout phylogeny.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.96.4.1333
PMCID: PMC15463
PMID: 9990024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Preparing to download ... HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
