---
pmid: '15248232'
title: Expression and function of RANK in human monocyte chemotaxis.
authors:
- Mosheimer BA
- Kaneider NC
- Feistritzer C
- Sturn DH
- Wiedermann CJ
journal: Arthritis Rheum
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/art.20352
---

# Expression and function of RANK in human monocyte chemotaxis.
**Authors:** Mosheimer BA, Kaneider NC, Feistritzer C, Sturn DH, Wiedermann CJ
**Journal:** Arthritis Rheum (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1002/art.20352](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.20352)

## Abstract

1. Arthritis Rheum. 2004 Jul;50(7):2309-16. doi: 10.1002/art.20352.

Expression and function of RANK in human monocyte chemotaxis.

Mosheimer BA(1), Kaneider NC, Feistritzer C, Sturn DH, Wiedermann CJ.

Author information:
(1)University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.

OBJECTIVE: RANKL, a member of the tumor necrosis factor superfamily, is a 
central regulator of osteoclast recruitment and activation. Whether RANKL 
affects monocyte locomotion in vitro via RANK and a possible signaling pathway 
were investigated.
METHODS: Monocytes were obtained from venous blood of healthy donors. Cell 
migration was studied by micropore filter assays. The signaling mechanisms 
required for RANKL-dependent migration were tested using signaling enzyme 
blockers and Western blot analyses. Expression of RANK messenger RNA (mRNA) in 
monocytes was demonstrated by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, 
and receptor expression on cell surface was investigated by 
fluorescence-activated cell sorting analyses.
RESULTS: RANKL significantly stimulated monocyte chemotaxis via activation of 
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, phosphodiesterase, and Src kinase. The effect on 
migration was inhibited by osteoprotegerin, which is the decoy receptor for 
RANKL. Expression of RANK receptor mRNA was shown, and synthesis of RANK in 
monocytes was suggested by the detection of RANK immunoreactivity on the cell 
surface.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that RANK is expressed by monocytes whose 
activation by RANKL stimulates directed migration involving phosphatidylinositol 
3-kinase, phosphodiesterase, and Src kinases.

DOI: 10.1002/art.20352
PMID: 15248232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
