---
pmid: '11250896'
title: Cyclophilin A regulates HIV-1 infectivity, as demonstrated by gene targeting
  in human T cells.
authors:
- Braaten D
- Luban J
journal: EMBO J
year: '2001'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC145517
doi: 10.1093/emboj/20.6.1300
---

# Cyclophilin A regulates HIV-1 infectivity, as demonstrated by gene targeting in human T cells.
**Authors:** Braaten D, Luban J
**Journal:** EMBO J (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/20.6.1300](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/20.6.1300)
**PMC:** [PMC145517](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC145517/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2001 Mar 15;20(6):1300-9. doi: 10.1093/emboj/20.6.1300.

Cyclophilin A regulates HIV-1 infectivity, as demonstrated by gene targeting in 
human T cells.

Braaten D(1), Luban J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Columbia University College of Physicians and 
Surgeons, 701 W. 168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA.

The human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) Gag polyprotein binds most 
members of the cyclophilin family of peptidyl-prolyl isomerases. Of 15 known 
human cyclophilins, cyclophilin A (CypA) has been the focus of investigation 
because it was detected in HIV-1 virions. To determine whether CypA promotes 
HIV-1 replication, we deleted the gene encoding CypA (PPIA) in human CD4(+) T 
cells by homologous recombination. HIV-1 replication in PPIA(-/-) cells was 
decreased and not inhibited further by cyclosporin or gag mutations that disrupt 
Gag's interaction with cyclophilins, indicating that no other cyclophilin family 
members promote HIV-1 replication. The defective replication phenotype was 
specific for wild-type HIV-1 since HIV-2/SIV isolates, as well as HIV-1 bearing 
a gag mutation that confers cyclosporin resistance, replicated the same in 
PPIA(+/+) and PPIA(-/-) cells. Stable re-expression of CypA in PPIA(-/-) cells 
restored HIV-1 replication to an extent that correlated with steady-state levels 
of CypA. Finally, virions from PPIA(-/-) cells possessed no obvious biochemical 
abnormalities but were less infectious than virions from wild-type cells. These 
data formally demonstrate that CypA regulates the infectivity of HIV-1 virions.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/20.6.1300
PMCID: PMC145517
PMID: 11250896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) Gag polyprotein binds most members of the cyclophilin family of peptidyl-prolyl isomerases. Of 15 known human cyclophilins, cyclophilin A (CypA) has been the focus of investigation because it was detected in HIV-1 virions. To determine whether CypA promotes HIV-1 replication, we deleted the gene encoding CypA ( PPIA ) in human CD4 + T cells by homologous recombination. HIV-1 replication in PPIA –/– cells was decreased and not inhibited further by cyclosporin or gag mutations that disrupt Gag’s interaction with cyclophilins, indicating that no other cyclophilin family members promote HIV-1 replication. The defective replication phenotype was specific for wild-type HIV-1 since HIV-2/SIV isolates, as well as HIV-1 bearing a gag mutation that confers cyclosporin resistance, replicated the same in PPIA +/+ and PPIA –/– cells. Stable re-expression of CypA in PPIA –/– cells restored HIV-1 replication to an extent that correlated with steady-state levels of CypA. Finally, virions from PPIA –/– cells possessed no obvious biochemical abnormalities but were less infectious than virions from wild-type cells. These data formally demonstrate that CypA regulates the infectivity of HIV-1 virions.

Introduction

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) gag encodes proteins that play roles in practically every step of the virus life cycle ( Freed, 1998 ). The Gag polyprotein orchestrates the formation and release of enveloped virions from infected cells. Concurrent with budding of nascent virions, the Gag polyprotein is cleaved by the viral protease to produce, among other products, matrix, which lines the virion envelope; capsid, which forms the virion core; and nucleocapsid, which coats viral genomic RNA. To initiate infection, the mature virion binds to cell surface receptors on a susceptible target cell and fuses its membrane with the cell’s plasma membrane. A viral ribonucleoprotein complex then enters the target cell cytoplasm where gag -encoded proteins participate in reverse transcription, nuclear transport and establishment of the provirus.

Since viruses are obligate intracellular parasites, host– cell factors might be required for any of the HIV-1 gag -encoded functions mentioned above. Attempts to identify these putative factors have revealed a number of Gag-interacting proteins, including actin ( Rey et al., 1996 ; Liu et al., 1999 ; Wilk et al., 1999 ; Ott et al., 2000 ), ubiquitin ( Ott et al., 1998 ), calmodulin ( Radding et al., 2000 ), the motor protein KIF-4 ( Tang et al., 1999 ), the nuclear transporter karyopherin-α ( Gallay et al., 1996 ; Agostini et al., 2000 ), translation elongation factor 1-α ( Cimarelli and Luban, 1999 ), translation initiation factor 2 ( Wilson et al., 1999 ), the HO3 histidyl-tRNA synthetase ( Lama and Trono, 1998 ) and a human member of the trithorax/polycomb group of proteins ( Peytavi et al., 1999 ). Convincing evidence that any of these factors are required for HIV-1 replication has remained elusive. In contrast, it is instructive to consider studies that exploited CD4-negative or chemokine receptor-negative cells to demonstrate that these cell surface proteins are required for viral entry ( Maddon et al., 1986 ; Feng et al., 1996 ). To date, cells that do not express the Gag-binding factors have yet to be identified or generated.

In addition to the factors mentioned above, members of the large family of proteins known as the cyclophilins (Table I ) were found to bind to HIV-1 Gag in one of the first reported two-hybrid screens for a cDNA encoding an interacting protein ( Luban et al ., 1993 ). Cyclophilins were discovered originally because of their high affinity for cyclosporin ( Handschumacher et al ., 1984 ), an immunosuppressive drug used to prevent allograft rejection. The clinical effect of the drug is not thought to result from inhibition of a cyclophilin function. Instead, immunosuppression results when the cyclophilin–cyclosporin complex binds and inhibits calcineurin ( Friedman and Weissman, 1991 ; Liu et al ., 1991b ), a calcium-dependent, serine-threonine phosphatase required for transcriptional activation of many cytokine genes in stimulated T cells. Considering the immunosuppression associated with HIV-1 infection, cyclophilins seemed intriguing Gag-binding partners. Gag and cyclosporin were later found to compete for the same binding site on cyclophilin ( Gamble et al ., 1996 ; Braaten et al ., 1997 ; Dorfman et al ., 1997 ), but the Gag–cyclophilin complex does not interact with calcineurin ( Luban et al ., 1993 ).

Cyclophilins are defined by a conserved sequence of ∼150 amino acids that form an eight-stranded β-barrel with a hydrophobic pocket that serves as the binding site for cyclosporin and HIV-1 Gag ( Ke et al., 1991 ; Mikol et al., 1993 ; Gamble et al., 1996 ). Some cyclophilins, such as CypA, consist of just this core domain. In other cases, the cyclophilin domain is embedded within a more complex protein. Proteins containing a cyclophilin domain have been implicated in a number of cellular processes, including protein secretion, mitochondrial function, RNA processing and transcriptional regulation ( Colgan et al., 2000 ), but the exact biochemical function in cells of the core cyclophilin domain is unknown. One function is, presumably, the maintenance of proper protein conformation, since cyclophilins catalyze the cis – trans interconversion of peptide bonds N-terminal to proline, an activity that has been shown to stimulate the rate of refolding of model proteins in vitro ( Fischer et al., 1989 ; Takahashi et al., 1989 ). It has been suspected, therefore, that cyclophilins regulate the conformation of HIV-1 Gag ( Luban et al., 1993 ).

Following the discovery of the Gag–cyclophilin interaction, CypA in particular was found to be a constituent of the HIV-1 virion ( Franke et al., 1994 ; Thali et al., 1994 ). Additional studies have attempted to provide evidence of a functional role for CypA, either early in infection of susceptible cells ( Steinkasserer et al., 1995 ; Braaten et al., 1996b ; Sherry et al., 1998 ; Saphire et al., 1999 ) or in the assembly of HIV-1 virions ( Agresta and Carter, 1997 ; Streblow et al., 1998 ; Bristow et al., 1999 ). These studies relied largely on the use of mutations in gag or competitive inhibitors such as cyclosporin to block the Gag–cyclo philin interaction; however, neither of these experimental conditions abrogates the interaction completely and both potentially can cause pleiotropic effects. A third confounding issue is the number and abundance of cyclophilins in mammalian cells; at present there are 15 known human cyclophilins (Table I ) and nearly all that have been tested are capable of binding HIV-1 Gag ( Luban et al., 1993 ; Franke et al., 1994 ). Thus, it has not been possible to determine conclusively which cyclophilin family members, if any, promote HIV-1 replication.

As a means to address these issues, we produced PPIA –/– Jurkat T-cell lines by homologous recombination. These cell lines have enabled us formally to demonstrate that CypA is required for wild-type replication kinetics of HIV-1 and, more specifically, for the infectivity of HIV-1 virions. We also present data indicating that, with regard to replication of HIV-1, none of the 14 other known cyclophilins substitutes functionally for CypA in PPIA –/– Jurkat cells.

Rescue of HIV-1 replication kinetics in PPIA–/–cells by re-introduction of CypA

If the absence of CypA expression is the sole cause of the defective replication of HIV-1 in PPIA –/– Jurkat cells, re-expression of CypA in the cells should restore the replication kinetics to wild type. To test this, PPIA –/– cells were transfected with a CypA expression plasmid, and cell lines expressing CypA were derived by limit-dilution cloning; western blot analysis confirmed the presence of CypA in individual clones (Figure 5 A). The clones were screened for replication of HIV-2 to eliminate those with general defects unrelated to CypA; three clones not defective in this assay were then tested for replication of HIV-1. Compared with the parent PPIA –/– cells, clones re-expressing CypA demonstrated faster replication kinetics of HIV-1 NL4-3 (Figure 5 B); similar results were obtained with HIV-1 Eli as well as with another set of clones re-expressing CypA that had been generated with the second of the two PPIA –/– cell lines (data not shown). Importantly, the degree to which the replication kinetics was restored to wild type correlated with the level of CypA expression in the individual clones.

Discussion

We have produced PPIA –/– cell lines by homologous recombination in the widely used Jurkat T-cell line. As reagents for studying the biology of HIV-1, these cells have enabled us to address several issues concerning the role of cyclophilins in the replication of HIV-1.
