---
pmid: '10882138'
title: Structure of the dimerization and beta-catenin-binding region of alpha-catenin.
authors:
- Pokutta S
- Weis WI
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s1097-2765(00)80447-5
---

# Structure of the dimerization and beta-catenin-binding region of alpha-catenin.
**Authors:** Pokutta S, Weis WI
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1097-2765(00)80447-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1097-2765(00)80447-5)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2000 Mar;5(3):533-43. doi: 10.1016/s1097-2765(00)80447-5.

Structure of the dimerization and beta-catenin-binding region of alpha-catenin.

Pokutta S(1), Weis WI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Structural Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
California 94305, USA.

In adherens junctions, alpha-catenin links the cadherin-beta-catenin complex to 
the actin-based cytoskeleton. alpha-catenin is a homodimer in solution, but 
forms a 1:1 heterodimer with beta-catenin. The crystal structure of the 
alpha-catenin dimerization domain, residues 82-279, shows that alpha-catenin 
dimerizes through formation of a four-helix bundle in which two antiparallel 
helices are contributed by each protomer. A slightly larger fragment, comprising 
residues 57-264, binds to beta-catenin. A chimera consisting of the 
alpha-catenin-binding region of beta-catenin linked to the amino terminus of 
alpha-catenin 57-264 behaves as a monomer in solution, as expected, since 
beta-catenin binding disrupts the alpha-catenin dimer. The crystal structure of 
this chimera reveals the interaction between alpha- and beta-catenin, and 
provides a basis for understanding adherens junction assembly.

DOI: 10.1016/s1097-2765(00)80447-5
PMID: 10882138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
