---
pmid: '17504823'
title: 'Mutation of SOD1 in ALS: a gain of a loss of function.'
authors:
- Sau D
- De Biasi S
- Vitellaro-Zuccarello L
- Riso P
- Guarnieri S
- Porrini M
- Simeoni S
- Crippa V
- Onesto E
- Palazzolo I
- Rusmini P
- Bolzoni E
- Bendotti C
- Poletti A
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddm110
---

# Mutation of SOD1 in ALS: a gain of a loss of function.
**Authors:** Sau D, De Biasi S, Vitellaro-Zuccarello L, Riso P, Guarnieri S, Porrini M, Simeoni S, Crippa V, Onesto E, Palazzolo I, Rusmini P, Bolzoni E, Bendotti C, Poletti A
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddm110](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddm110)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 Jul 1;16(13):1604-18. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddm110. Epub 2007
May  15.

Mutation of SOD1 in ALS: a gain of a loss of function.

Sau D(1), De Biasi S, Vitellaro-Zuccarello L, Riso P, Guarnieri S, Porrini M, 
Simeoni S, Crippa V, Onesto E, Palazzolo I, Rusmini P, Bolzoni E, Bendotti C, 
Poletti A.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Endocrinology, Center of Excellence on Neurodegenerative 
Diseases, Division of Human Nutrition, University of Milan, Milan, Italy.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neurodegenerative disease caused by 
motoneuron loss. Some familial cases (fALS) are linked to mutations of 
superoxide dismutase type-1 (SOD1), an antioxidant enzyme whose activity is 
preserved in most mutant forms. Owing to the similarities in sporadic and fALS 
forms, mutant SOD1 animal and cellular models are a useful tool to study the 
disease. In transgenic mice expressing either wild-type (wt) human SOD1 or 
mutant G93A-SOD1, we found that wtSOD1 was present in cytoplasm and in nuclei of 
motoneurons, whereas mutant SOD1 was mainly cytoplasmic. Similar results were 
obtained in immortalized motoneurons (NSC34 cells) expressing either wtSOD1 or 
G93A-SOD1. Analyzing the proteasome activity, responsible for misfolded protein 
clearance, in the two subcellular compartments, we found proteasome impairment 
only in the cytoplasm. The effect of G93A-SOD1 exclusion from nuclei was then 
analyzed after oxidative stress. Cells expressing G93A-SOD1 showed a higher DNA 
damage compared with those expressing wtSOD1, possibly because of a loss of 
nuclear protection. The toxicity of mutant SOD1 might, therefore, arise from an 
initial misfolding (gain of function) reducing nuclear protection from the 
active enzyme (loss of function in the nuclei), a process that may be involved 
in ALS pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddm110
PMID: 17504823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
