---
pmid: '10438510'
title: Site-directed mutagenesis of the PsaC subunit of photosystem I. F(b) is the
  cluster interacting with soluble ferredoxin.
authors:
- Fischer N
- Sétif P
- Rochaix JD
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.33.23333
---

# Site-directed mutagenesis of the PsaC subunit of photosystem I. F(b) is the cluster interacting with soluble ferredoxin.
**Authors:** Fischer N, Sétif P, Rochaix JD
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.274.33.23333](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.33.23333)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Aug 13;274(33):23333-40. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.33.23333.

Site-directed mutagenesis of the PsaC subunit of photosystem I. F(b) is the 
cluster interacting with soluble ferredoxin.

Fischer N(1), Sétif P, Rochaix JD.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Molecular Biology and Plant Biology, University of Geneva, 30 
quai Ernest-Ansermet, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland.

The two [4Fe-4S] clusters F(A) and F(B) are the terminal electron acceptors of 
photosystem I (PSI) that are bound by the stromal subunit PsaC. Soluble 
ferredoxin (Fd) binds to PSI via electrostatic interactions and is reduced by 
the outermost iron-sulfur cluster of PsaC. We have generated six site-directed 
mutants of the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii in which residues located 
close to the iron-sulfur clusters of PsaC are changed. The acidic residues 
Asp(9) and Glu(46), which are located one residue upstream of the first cysteine 
liganding cluster F(B) and F(A), respectively, were changed to a neutral or a 
basic amino acid. Although Fd reduction is not affected by the E46Q and E46K 
mutations, a slight increase of Fd affinity (from 1.3- to 2-fold) was observed 
by flash absorption spectroscopy for the D9N and D9K mutant PSI complexes. In 
the FA(2) triple mutant (V49I/K52T/R53Q), modification of residues located next 
to the F(A) cluster leads to partial destabilization of the PSI complex. The 
electron paramagnetic resonance properties of cluster F(A) are affected, and a 
3-fold decrease of Fd affinity is observed. The introduction of positively 
charged residues close to the F(B) cluster in the FB(1) triple mutant 
(I12V/T15K/Q16R) results in a 60-fold increase of Fd affinity as measured by 
flash absorption spectroscopy and a larger amount of PsaC-Fd cross-linking 
product. The first-order kinetics are similar to wild type kinetics (two phases 
with t((1)/(2)) of <1 and approximately 4.5 microseconds) for all mutants except 
FB(1), where Fd reduction is almost monophasic with t((1)/(2)) < 1 microseconds. 
These data indicate that F(B) is the cluster interacting with Fd and therefore 
the outermost iron-sulfur cluster of PSI.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.33.23333
PMID: 10438510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
