---
pmid: '11559757'
title: A molecular chaperone complex at the lysosomal membrane is required for protein
  translocation.
authors:
- Agarraberes FA
- Dice JF
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.114.13.2491
---

# A molecular chaperone complex at the lysosomal membrane is required for protein translocation.
**Authors:** Agarraberes FA, Dice JF
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.114.13.2491](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.114.13.2491)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2001 Jul;114(Pt 13):2491-9. doi: 10.1242/jcs.114.13.2491.

A molecular chaperone complex at the lysosomal membrane is required for protein 
translocation.

Agarraberes FA(1), Dice JF.

Author information:
(1)The Sackler School of Graduate Biomedical Sciences, Department of Cellular 
and Molecular Physiology, Tufts University School of Medicine, 136 Harrison 
Avenue, Boston, MA 02111, USA.

A group of cytosolic proteins are targeted to lysosomes for degradation in 
response to serum withdrawal or prolonged starvation by a process termed 
chaperone-mediated autophagy. In this proteolytic pathway little is known about 
how proteins are translocated across lysosomal membranes. We now show that an 
isoform of the constitutively expressed protein of the heat shock family of 70 
kDa (Hsc70) is associated with the cytosolic side of the lysosomal membrane 
where it binds to substrates of this proteolytic pathway. Results from 
coimmunoprecipitation and colocalization studies indicate that this molecular 
chaperone forms complexes with other molecular chaperones and cochaperones, 
including Hsp90, Hsp40, the Hsp70-Hsp90 organizing protein (Hop), the 
Hsp70-interacting protein (Hip), and the Bcl2-associated athanogene 1 protein 
(BAG-1). Antibodies against Hip, Hop, Hsp40 and Hsc70 block transport of protein 
substrates into purified lysosomes.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.114.13.2491
PMID: 11559757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
