---
pmid: '14749716'
title: Characterization of the interactions between mammalian PAZ PIWI domain proteins
  and Dicer.
authors:
- Tahbaz N
- Kolb FA
- Zhang H
- Jaronczyk K
- Filipowicz W
- Hobman TC
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2004'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1298981
doi: 10.1038/sj.embor.7400070
---

# Characterization of the interactions between mammalian PAZ PIWI domain proteins and Dicer.
**Authors:** Tahbaz N, Kolb FA, Zhang H, Jaronczyk K, Filipowicz W, Hobman TC
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.embor.7400070](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.embor.7400070)
**PMC:** [PMC1298981](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1298981/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2004 Feb;5(2):189-94. doi: 10.1038/sj.embor.7400070. Epub 2004 Jan
16.

Characterization of the interactions between mammalian PAZ PIWI domain proteins 
and Dicer.

Tahbaz N(1), Kolb FA, Zhang H, Jaronczyk K, Filipowicz W, Hobman TC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

PAZ PIWI domain (PPD) proteins, together with the RNA cleavage products of 
Dicer, form ribonucleoprotein complexes called RNA-induced silencing complexes 
(RISCs). RISCs mediate gene silencing through targeted messenger RNA cleavage 
and translational suppression. The PAZ domains of PPD and Dicer proteins were 
originally thought to mediate binding between PPD proteins and Dicer, although 
no evidence exists to support this theory. Here we show that PAZ domains are not 
required for PPD protein-Dicer interactions. Rather, a subregion of the PIWI 
domain in PPD proteins, the PIWI-box, binds directly to the Dicer RNase III 
domain. Stable binding between PPD proteins and Dicer was dependent on the 
activity of Hsp90. Unexpectedly, binding of PPD proteins to Dicer inhibits the 
RNase activity of this enzyme in vitro. Lastly, we show that PPD proteins and 
Dicer are present in soluble and membrane-associated fractions, indicating that 
interactions between these two types of proteins may occur in multiple 
compartments.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.embor.7400070
PMCID: PMC1298981
PMID: 14749716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

PAZ PIWI domain (PPD) proteins, together with the RNA cleavage products of Dicer, form ribonucleoprotein complexes called RNA-induced silencing complexes (RISCs). RISCs mediate gene silencing through targeted messenger RNA cleavage and translational suppression. The PAZ domains of PPD and Dicer proteins were originally thought to mediate binding between PPD proteins and Dicer, although no evidence exists to support this theory. Here we show that PAZ domains are not required for PPD protein–Dicer interactions. Rather, a subregion of the PIWI domain in PPD proteins, the PIWI-box, binds directly to the Dicer RNase III domain. Stable binding between PPD proteins and Dicer was dependent on the activity of Hsp90. Unexpectedly, binding of PPD proteins to Dicer inhibits the RNase activity of this enzyme in vitro . Lastly, we show that PPD proteins and Dicer are present in soluble and membrane-associated fractions, indicating that interactions between these two types of proteins may occur in multiple compartments.

Introduction

The RNA interference (RNAi) machinery is used by eukaryotes to inhibit gene expression by sequence-specific cleavage of messenger RNA (mRNA) or translational repression ( Hannon, 2002 ; McManus & Sharp, 2002 ; Schwarz & Zamore, 2002 ). The specificity of these processes is dependent on 21–22-nt small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) or microRNAs (miRNAs) produced from doublestranded (ds) RNAs or hairpin precursors, respectively. In some eukaryotes, the RNAi apparatus also participates in the control of chromatin structure, although it is not clear how this process occurs ( Schramke & Allshire, 2003 , and references therein).

Two classes of proteins are central to RNAi: members of the PAZ PIWI domain (PPD) and Dicer families. PPD proteins are required at the effector stages of RNAi ( Hammond et al , 2001 ) and in some cases for maturation of miRNAs ( Grishok et al , 2001 ). Family members are defined by the presence of a central PAZ domain and a carboxy terminal PIWI domain ( Carmell et al , 2002 ). Perhaps the best-characterized proteins in RNAi pathways are the Dicer enzymes, which are dsRNAspecific RNases that cleave dsRNA into 21–25-nt base-paired fragments ( Bernstein et al , 2001 ; Billy et al , 2001 ; Ketting et al , 2001 ). Dicer cleavage products are incorporated into PPD-containing RNA-induced silencing complexes (RISCs), which presumably mediate mRNA degradation, translational suppression or chromatin silencing ( Hannon, 2002 ; McManus & Sharp, 2002 ).

Engagement of Dicer with PPD proteins is probably required for the transfer of siRNAs/miRNAs to RISCs ( Zamore, 2002 ). Indeed, physical interactions between PPD proteins and Dicer have been demonstrated ( Hammond et al , 2001 ; Sasaki et al , 2003 ), but such interactions have not been well characterized. The situation appears to be more complicated in some invertebrate metazoans in which dsRNA-binding proteins such as RDE-4 or R2D2 are thought to link Dicer enzymes to RISCs ( Tabara et al , 1999 ; Parrish & Fire, 2001 ; Liu et al , 2003 ). Interestingly, homologues of RDE-4 and R2D2 have not been identified in humans or other mammalian species, and thus transfer of siRNAs/miRNAs to mammalian RISCs may use different mechanisms. Initially, heterotypic PAZ–PAZ interactions were thought to mediate the formation of PPD–Dicer complexes, but this seems unlikely now because a number of Dicer isoforms that do not have PAZ domains have been described ( Schauer et al , 2002 ). In addition, a fragment of the human PPD protein EIF2C1 (AGO1) that contained the PIWI domain interacted more strongly with Dicer than a region containing only the PAZ domain ( Doi et al , 2003 ).

In this study, we have characterized in detail the interactions between Dicer and two distantly related PPD proteins, Hiwi and AGO2. We report that direct interactions between PPD proteins and Dicer do not require PAZ domains, but are rather mediated through their PIWI and RNase III domains. Surprisingly, the binding of PPD protein to Dicer inhibits RNase activity in vitro . Finally, we found that interactions between PPD and Dicer proteins are dependent on Hsp90 activity.

Conclusions and Speculation

Our data indicate for the first time that interactions between Dicer and PPD proteins are direct, and that the Dicer RNase III domain is required for binding to PPD proteins. Moreover, the results from this study point towards the existence of stable Dicer–PPD complexes in multiple locations (cytosol and membranes). The existence of two pools of Dicer–PPD complexes may reflect the roles of these proteins in mRNA degradation or translation taking place on free and membrane-associated polysomes. Indeed, association of RISC complexes and siRNAs with ribosomes has been previously documented ( Hammond et al , 2001 ; Djikeng et al , 2003 ). Likewise, a fraction of Dicer present in mouse P19 cell extracts sediments in the 80S region of gradients (our unpublished results), but the relevance of Dicer association with ribosomes is unclear.

Interactions between Dicer and PPD proteins ( Hammond et al , 2001 ; Doi et al , 2003 ; Sasaki et al , 2003 , and this work) are likely to be important for the transfer of siRNAs generated by Dicer to RISC complexes, of which PPD proteins are a part ( Hammond et al , 2001 ; Hutvagner & Zamore, 2002 ; Martinez et al , 2002 ). Notably, by interacting with the RNase III domain of Dicer, as demonstrated here, PPD proteins are brought to the proximity of siRNAs produced by the catalytic domain of the enzyme. In this context, it is important to note that, in reactions carried out with the purified recombinant Dicer, a considerable fraction of siRNA products was found to remain associated with the enzyme ( Zhang et al , 2002 ). Hence, the interaction with PPD proteins or RISC complexes might be expected to stimulate the activity of Dicer by facilitating the product release. However, rather unexpectedly, we found that PPD proteins inhibit the activity of the purified Dicer in vitro . It is possible that, physiologically, active Dicer molecules are not bound to PPD proteins or that Dicer–PPD protein complexes contain other components that activate Dicer or modulate the inhibitory role of PPD proteins. If the former is true, Hsp90 is a candidate that could indirectly influence Dicer activity by regulating the binding of PPD proteins.

In summary, the likely existence of two pools of Dicer–PPD complexes, together with a role for Hsp90 in PPD–Dicer associations and the inhibitory effect of PPD proteins on Dicer activity in vitro , indicates that Dicer and PPD proteins are parts of a rather complex and dynamic network of interactions important for executing siRNA and miRNA functions.

Materials and Methods

Materials. The list of materials and suppliers can be found in the supplementary information online.

Yeast two-hybrid assay. Coding regions for human Dicer or PPD protein (AGO2 and Hiwi) subdomains were fused with the Gal-4 activation domain of pGADT7 and the Gal-4 DNA-binding domain of pGBKT7, respectively (see supplementary information online). The resulting plasmid constructs were transformed into S. cerevisiae strain AH109 and plated on complete minimum media (CMM) lacking leucine and tryptophan for 2–3 days at 30°C. Transformants were then streaked onto media lacking leucine, tryptophan, histidine and adenine. In cases where colonies grew in less than 7 days, these combinations were deemed as evidence of positive interactions, whereas lack of growth after 14 days was deemed as a negative interaction.

In vitro Dicer activity assays. DsRNA processing assays were performed as previously described ( Zhang et al , 2002 ), and contained 130-bp dsRNA uniformly labelled with [α- 32 P]UTP, 20 ng of the recombinant human Dicer–HisC protein, and indicated amounts of GST–Hiwi, GST–AGO2 or GST.

Other procedures. Detailed methods including plasmid construction, GST-pulldowns and immunoprecipitations can be found in the supplementary information online.

Supplementary information is available at EMBO reports online ( http://www.emboreports.org ).
