---
pmid: '8901551'
title: Mechanism of activation for Zap-70 catalytic activity.
authors:
- LoGrasso PV
- Hawkins J
- Frank LJ
- Wisniewski D
- Marcy A
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC37961
doi: 10.1073/pnas.93.22.12165
---

# Mechanism of activation for Zap-70 catalytic activity.
**Authors:** LoGrasso PV, Hawkins J, Frank LJ, Wisniewski D, Marcy A
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.93.22.12165](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.93.22.12165)
**PMC:** [PMC37961](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC37961/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Oct 29;93(22):12165-70. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.93.22.12165.

Mechanism of activation for Zap-70 catalytic activity.

LoGrasso PV(1), Hawkins J, Frank LJ, Wisniewski D, Marcy A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Design and Diversity, Merck Research Laboratories, 
Rahway, NJ 07065, USA. lograsso@merck.com

There is a growing body of evidence, including data from human genetic and 
T-cell receptor function studies, which implicate a zeta-associated protein of 
M(r) 70,000 (Zap-70) as a critical protein tyrosine kinase in T-cell activation 
and development. During T-cell activation, Zap-70 becomes associated via its src 
homology type 2 (SH2) domains with tyrosine-phosphorylated immune-receptor 
tyrosine activating motif (ITAM) sequences in the cytoplasmic zeta chain of the 
T-cell receptor. An intriguing conundrum is how Zap-70 is catalytically 
activated for downstream phosphorylation events. To address this question, we 
have used purified Zap-70, tyrosine phosphorylated glutathione S-transferase 
(GST)-Zeta, and GST-Zeta-1 cytoplasmic domains, and various forms of 
ITAM-containing peptides to see what effect binding of zeta had upon Zap-70 
tyrosine kinase activity. The catalytic activity of Zap-70 with respect to 
autophosphorylation increased approximately 5-fold in the presence of 125 nM 
phosphorylated GST-Zeta or GST-Zeta-1 cytoplasmic domain. A 20-fold activity 
increase was observed for phosphorylation of an exogenous substrate. Both 
activity increases showed a GST-Zeta concentration dependence. The increase in 
activity was not produced with nonphosphorylated GST-Zeta, phosphorylated zeta, 
or phosphorylated ITAM-containing peptides. The increase in Zap-70 activity was 
SH2 mediated and was inhibited by phenylphosphate, Zap-70 SH2, and an antibody 
specific for Zap-70 SH2 domains. Since GST-Zeta and GST-Zeta-1 exist as dimers, 
the data suggest Zap-70 is activated upon binding a dimeric form of 
phosphorylated zeta and not by peptide fragments containing a single 
phosphorylated ITAM. Taken together, these data indicate that the catalytic 
activity of Zap-70 is most likely activated by a trans-phosphorylation 
mechanism.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.93.22.12165
PMCID: PMC37961
PMID: 8901551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

There is a growing body of evidence, including data from human genetic and T-cell receptor function studies, which implicate a zeta-associated protein of M(r) 70,000 (Zap-70) as a critical protein tyrosine kinase in T-cell activation and development. During T-cell activation, Zap-70 becomes associated via its src homology type 2 (SH2) domains with tyrosine-phosphorylated immune-receptor tyrosine activating motif (ITAM) sequences in the cytoplasmic zeta chain of the T-cell receptor. An intriguing conundrum is how Zap-70 is catalytically activated for downstream phosphorylation events. To address this question, we have used purified Zap-70, tyrosine phosphorylated glutathione S-transferase (GST)-Zeta, and GST-Zeta-1 cytoplasmic domains, and various forms of ITAM-containing peptides to see what effect binding of zeta had upon Zap-70 tyrosine kinase activity. The catalytic activity of Zap-70 with respect to autophosphorylation increased approximately 5-fold in the presence of 125 nM phosphorylated GST-Zeta or GST-Zeta-1 cytoplasmic domain. A 20-fold activity increase was observed for phosphorylation of an exogenous substrate. Both activity increases showed a GST-Zeta concentration dependence. The increase in activity was not produced with nonphosphorylated GST-Zeta, phosphorylated zeta, or phosphorylated ITAM-containing peptides. The increase in Zap-70 activity was SH2 mediated and was inhibited by phenylphosphate, Zap-70 SH2, and an antibody specific for Zap-70 SH2 domains. Since GST-Zeta and GST-Zeta-1 exist as dimers, the data suggest Zap-70 is activated upon binding a dimeric form of phosphorylated zeta and not by peptide fragments containing a single phosphorylated ITAM. Taken together, these data indicate that the catalytic activity of Zap-70 is most likely activated by a trans-phosphorylation mechanism.
