---
pmid: '9801304'
title: Characterization of photolyase/blue-light receptor homologs in mouse and human
  cells.
authors:
- Kobayashi K
- Kanno S
- Smit B
- van der Horst GT
- Takao M
- Yasui A
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC147960
doi: 10.1093/nar/26.22.5086
---

# Characterization of photolyase/blue-light receptor homologs in mouse and human cells.
**Authors:** Kobayashi K, Kanno S, Smit B, van der Horst GT, Takao M, Yasui A
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/26.22.5086](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/26.22.5086)
**PMC:** [PMC147960](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC147960/)

## Abstract

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Nov 15;26(22):5086-92. doi: 10.1093/nar/26.22.5086.

Characterization of photolyase/blue-light receptor homologs in mouse and human 
cells.

Kobayashi K(1), Kanno S, Smit B, van der Horst GT, Takao M, Yasui A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Development, Aging and Cancer, 
Tohoku University, 980 8575 Sendai, Japan.

We isolated and characterized mouse photolyase-like genes, mCRY1 (mPHLL1) and 
mCRY2 (mPHLL2), which belong to the photolyase family including plant blue-light 
receptors. The mCRY1 and mCRY2 genes are located on chromosome 10C and 2E, 
respectively, and are expressed in all mouse organs examined. We raised 
antibodies specific against each gene product using its C-terminal sequence, 
which differs completely between the genes. Immunofluorescent staining of 
cultured mouse cells revealed that mCRY1 is localized in mitochondria whereas 
mCRY2 was found mainly in the nucleus. The subcellular distribution of CRY 
proteins was confirmed by immunoblot analysis of fractionated mouse liver cell 
extracts. Using green fluorescent protein fused peptides we showed that the 
C-terminal region of the mouse CRY2 protein contains a unique nuclear 
localization signal, which is absent in the CRY1 protein. The N-terminal region 
of CRY1 was shown to contain the mitochondrial transport signal. Recombinant as 
well as native CRY1 proteins from mouse and human cells showed a tight binding 
activity to DNA Sepharose, while CRY2 protein did not bind to DNA Sepharose at 
all under the same condition as CRY1. The different cellular localization and 
DNA binding properties of the mammalian photolyase homologs suggest that despite 
the similarity in the sequence the two proteins have distinct function(s).

DOI: 10.1093/nar/26.22.5086
PMCID: PMC147960
PMID: 9801304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
