---
pmid: '21145461'
title: Dynamics of cullin-RING ubiquitin ligase network revealed by systematic quantitative
  proteomics.
authors:
- Bennett EJ
- Rush J
- Gygi SP
- Harper JW
journal: Cell
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3008586
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.11.017
---

# Dynamics of cullin-RING ubiquitin ligase network revealed by systematic quantitative proteomics.
**Authors:** Bennett EJ, Rush J, Gygi SP, Harper JW
**Journal:** Cell (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2010.11.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2010.11.017)
**PMC:** [PMC3008586](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3008586/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2010 Dec 10;143(6):951-65. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.11.017.

Dynamics of cullin-RING ubiquitin ligase network revealed by systematic 
quantitative proteomics.

Bennett EJ(1), Rush J, Gygi SP, Harper JW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Dynamic reorganization of signaling systems frequently accompanies pathway 
perturbations, yet quantitative studies of network remodeling by pathway stimuli 
are lacking. Here, we report the development of a quantitative proteomics 
platform centered on multiplex absolute quantification (AQUA) technology to 
elucidate the architecture of the cullin-RING ubiquitin ligase (CRL) network and 
to evaluate current models of dynamic CRL remodeling. Current models suggest 
that CRL complexes are controlled by cycles of CRL deneddylation and CAND1 
binding. Contrary to expectations, acute CRL inhibition with MLN4924, an 
inhibitor of the NEDD8-activating enzyme, does not result in a global 
reorganization of the CRL network. Examination of CRL complex stoichiometry 
reveals that, independent of cullin neddylation, a large fraction of cullins are 
assembled with adaptor modules, whereas only a small fraction are associated 
with CAND1. These studies suggest an alternative model of CRL dynamicity where 
the abundance of adaptor modules, rather than cycles of neddylation and CAND1 
binding, drives CRL network organization.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.11.017
PMCID: PMC3008586
PMID: 21145461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement J.W.H. is a 
consultant for Millennium Pharmaceuticals. J.R. is an employee of Cell Singaling 
Technolgies.
