---
pmid: '9601641'
title: Downregulation of beta-catenin by human Axin and its association with the APC
  tumor suppressor, beta-catenin and GSK3 beta.
authors:
- Hart MJ
- de los Santos R
- Albert IN
- Rubinfeld B
- Polakis P
journal: Curr Biol
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0960-9822(98)70226-x
---

# Downregulation of beta-catenin by human Axin and its association with the APC tumor suppressor, beta-catenin and GSK3 beta.
**Authors:** Hart MJ, de los Santos R, Albert IN, Rubinfeld B, Polakis P
**Journal:** Curr Biol (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0960-9822(98)70226-x](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0960-9822(98)70226-x)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 1998 May 7;8(10):573-81. doi: 10.1016/s0960-9822(98)70226-x.

Downregulation of beta-catenin by human Axin and its association with the APC 
tumor suppressor, beta-catenin and GSK3 beta.

Hart MJ(1), de los Santos R, Albert IN, Rubinfeld B, Polakis P.

Author information:
(1)Onyx Pharmaceuticals, Richmond, California 94806, USA.

BACKGROUND: Inactivation of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumor 
suppressor protein is responsible for both inherited and sporadic forms of colon 
cancer. Growth control by APC may relate to its ability to downregulate 
beta-catenin post-translationally. In cancer, mutations in APC ablate its 
ability to regulate beta-catenin, and mutations in beta-catenin prevent its 
downregulation by wild-type APC. Moreover, signaling by the protein product of 
the wnt-1 proto-oncogene upregulates beta-catenin and promotes tumorigenesis in 
mice. In a Xenopus developmental system, Wnt-1 signaling was inhibited by Axin, 
the product of the murine fused gene. This suggests a possible link between 
Axin, the Wnt-1 signaling components beta-catenin and glycogen synthase kinase 3 
beta (GSK3 beta), and APC.
RESULTS: Human Axin (hAxin) binds directly to beta-catenin, GSK3 beta, and APC 
in vitro, and the endogenous proteins are found in a complex in cells. Binding 
sites for Axin were mapped to a region of APC that is typically deleted due to 
cancer-associated mutations in the APC gene. Overexpression of hAxin strongly 
promoted the downregulation of wild-type beta-catenin in colon cancer cells, 
whereas mutant oncogenic beta-catenin was unaffected. The downregulation was 
increased by deletion of the APC-binding domain from Axin, suggesting that APC 
may function to derepress Axin activity. In addition, hAxin dramatically 
facilitated the phosphorylation of APC and beta-catenin by GSK3 beta in vitro.
CONCLUSIONS: Axin acts as a scaffold upon which APC, beta-catenin and GSK3 beta 
assemble to coordinate the regulation of beta-catenin signaling.

DOI: 10.1016/s0960-9822(98)70226-x
PMID: 9601641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
