---
pmid: '15231748'
title: Functional proteomics mapping of a human signaling pathway.
authors:
- Colland F
- Jacq X
- Trouplin V
- Mougin C
- Groizeleau C
- Hamburger A
- Meil A
- Wojcik J
- Legrain P
- Gauthier JM
journal: Genome Res
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC442148
doi: 10.1101/gr.2334104
---

# Functional proteomics mapping of a human signaling pathway.
**Authors:** Colland F, Jacq X, Trouplin V, Mougin C, Groizeleau C, Hamburger A, Meil A, Wojcik J, Legrain P, Gauthier JM
**Journal:** Genome Res (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gr.2334104](https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.2334104)
**PMC:** [PMC442148](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC442148/)

## Abstract

1. Genome Res. 2004 Jul;14(7):1324-32. doi: 10.1101/gr.2334104.

Functional proteomics mapping of a human signaling pathway.

Colland F(1), Jacq X, Trouplin V, Mougin C, Groizeleau C, Hamburger A, Meil A, 
Wojcik J, Legrain P, Gauthier JM.

Author information:
(1)Hybrigenics SA, 75014 Paris, France. fcolland@hybrigenics.fr

Access to the human genome facilitates extensive functional proteomics studies. 
Here, we present an integrated approach combining large-scale protein 
interaction mapping, exploration of the interaction network, and cellular 
functional assays performed on newly identified proteins involved in a human 
signaling pathway. As a proof of principle, we studied the Smad signaling 
system, which is regulated by members of the transforming growth factor beta 
(TGFbeta) superfamily. We used two-hybrid screening to map Smad signaling 
protein-protein interactions and to establish a network of 755 interactions, 
involving 591 proteins, 179 of which were poorly or not annotated. The 
exploration of such complex interaction databases is improved by the use of 
PIMRider, a dedicated navigation tool accessible through the Web. The biological 
meaning of this network is illustrated by the presence of 18 known 
Smad-associated proteins. Functional assays performed in mammalian cells 
including siRNA knock-down experiments identified eight novel proteins involved 
in Smad signaling, thus validating this integrated functional proteomics 
approach.

Copyright 2004 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press ISSN

DOI: 10.1101/gr.2334104
PMCID: PMC442148
PMID: 15231748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
