---
reference_id: PMID:38412259
title: Ribosomal quality control factors inhibit repeat-associated non-AUG translation from GC-rich repeats.
authors:
- Tseng YJ
- Krans A
- Malik I
- Deng X
- Yildirim E
- Ovunc S
- Tank EMH
- Jansen-West K
- Kaufhold R
- Gomez NB
- Sher R
- Petrucelli L
- Barmada SJ
- Todd PK
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkae137
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ribosomal quality control factors inhibit repeat-associated non-AUG translation from GC-rich repeats.
**Authors:** Tseng YJ, Krans A, Malik I, Deng X, Yildirim E, Ovunc S, Tank EMH, Jansen-West K, Kaufhold R, Gomez NB, Sher R, Petrucelli L, Barmada SJ, Todd PK
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkae137](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkae137)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2024 Jun 10;52(10):5928-5949. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkae137.

Ribosomal quality control factors inhibit repeat-associated non-AUG translation
from GC-rich repeats.

Tseng YJ(1)(2), Krans A(1)(3), Malik I(1)(4), Deng X(5), Yildirim E(1), Ovunc
S(1), Tank EMH(1), Jansen-West K(6), Kaufhold R(1)(7), Gomez NB(1)(7), Sher
R(8), Petrucelli L(6), Barmada SJ(1), Todd PK(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
(2)Cellular and Molecular Biology Graduate Program, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
(3)Ann Arbor Veterans Administration Healthcare, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
(4)Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, Kandi,
Sangareddy, 502284 Telangana, India.
(5)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
(6)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA.
(7)Medical Scientist Training Program, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
MI 48109, USA.
(8)Department of Neurobiology and Behavior & Center for Nervous System
Disorders, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Jun 07:2023.06.07.544135. doi: 10.1101/2023.06.07.544135.

A GGGGCC (G4C2) hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9ORF72 causes amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia (C9ALS/FTD), while a CGG
trinucleotide repeat expansion in FMR1 leads to the neurodegenerative disorder
Fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS). These GC-rich repeats form
RNA secondary structures that support repeat-associated non-AUG (RAN)
translation of toxic proteins that contribute to disease pathogenesis. Here we
assessed whether these same repeats might trigger stalling and interfere with
translational elongation. We find that depletion of ribosome-associated quality
control (RQC) factors NEMF, LTN1 and ANKZF1 markedly boost RAN translation
product accumulation from both G4C2 and CGG repeats while overexpression of
these factors reduces RAN production in both reporter assays and C9ALS/FTD
patient iPSC-derived neurons. We also detected partially made products from both
G4C2 and CGG repeats whose abundance increased with RQC factor depletion. Repeat
RNA sequence, rather than amino acid content, is central to the impact of RQC
factor depletion on RAN translation-suggesting a role for RNA secondary
structure in these processes. Together, these findings suggest that ribosomal
stalling and RQC pathway activation during RAN translation inhibits the
generation of toxic RAN products. We propose augmenting RQC activity as a
therapeutic strategy in GC-rich repeat expansion disorders.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkae137
PMCID: PMC11162809
PMID: 38412259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]