---
pmid: '947404'
title: Familial deficiency of glutathione reductase in human blood cells.
authors:
- Loos H
- Roos D
- Weening R
- Houwerzijl J
journal: Blood
year: '1976'
full_text_available: false
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Familial deficiency of glutathione reductase in human blood cells.
**Authors:** Loos H, Roos D, Weening R, Houwerzijl J
**Journal:** Blood (1976)

## Abstract

1. Blood. 1976 Jul;48(1):53-62.

Familial deficiency of glutathione reductase in human blood cells.

Loos H, Roos D, Weening R, Houwerzijl J.

A virtually complete absence of glutathione reductase activity was found in the 
erythrocytes of all three children (one male, two females) from a consanguineous 
marriage. Intermediate values were found in the erythrocytes of both parents. 
The enzyme activity could not be restored either by addition of FAD in vitro or 
by administration of riboflavin in vivo. The amount of reduced glutathione in 
the erythrocytes was normal in each case. Severely diminished glutathione 
stability during incubation with acetylphenylhydrazine was observed in the 
erythrocytes of the siblings, as well as intermediate stability in the parents' 
red cells. Clinically, this deficiency was manifested by hemolytic crises after 
eating fava beans in the eldest daughter (patient), and possibly by cataracts in 
her own and in her brother's eyes. Very low activities of glutathione reductase 
were also found in the leukocytes of this family: 13%-15% of normal values for 
the children and 64%-66% for the parents. Moreover, the same deficiency was 
found in the purified white blood cells of the propositus: 8% of normal values 
in the polymorphonuclear (PMN) cells, 4% in the lymphocytes, and 15% in the 
monocytes, together with 11% in the platelets. Finally, we found an abnormal 
oxygen consumption of the propositus' PMNs after phagocytosis of zymosan 
particles, suggesting that the glutathione reductase reaction was involved in 
the bactericidal capacity of these cells.

PMID: 947404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
