---
pmid: '23524952'
title: PtdIns(4)P regulates retromer-motor interaction to facilitate dynein-cargo
  dissociation at the trans-Golgi network.
authors:
- Niu Y
- Zhang C
- Sun Z
- Hong Z
- Li K
- Sun D
- Yang Y
- Tian C
- Gong W
- Liu JJ
journal: Nat Cell Biol
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ncb2710
---

# PtdIns(4)P regulates retromer-motor interaction to facilitate dynein-cargo dissociation at the trans-Golgi network.
**Authors:** Niu Y, Zhang C, Sun Z, Hong Z, Li K, Sun D, Yang Y, Tian C, Gong W, Liu JJ
**Journal:** Nat Cell Biol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncb2710](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb2710)

## Abstract

1. Nat Cell Biol. 2013 Apr;15(4):417-29. doi: 10.1038/ncb2710. Epub 2013 Mar 24.

PtdIns(4)P regulates retromer-motor interaction to facilitate dynein-cargo 
dissociation at the trans-Golgi network.

Niu Y(1), Zhang C, Sun Z, Hong Z, Li K, Sun D, Yang Y, Tian C, Gong W, Liu JJ.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology, Institute of 
Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, 
China.

The molecular mechanisms for the retrograde motor dynein-dynactin to unload its 
cargoes at their final destination remain to be elucidated. In this study, we 
have investigated the regulatory mechanism underlying release of 
retromer-associated cargoes at the trans-Golgi network (TGN). We report that 
phosphotidylinositol-4-phosphate (PtdIns(4)P), a Golgi-enriched 
phosphoinositide, negatively regulates the protein-protein interaction between 
the p150(Glued) subunit of dynein-dynactin and the retromer component SNX6. We 
show that PtdIns(4)P specifically facilitates dissociation of retromer-mediated 
membranous cargoes from the motor at the TGN and uncover an important function 
for PtdIns(4)P in the spatial control of retrograde vesicular trafficking to the 
TGN membrane. PtdIns(4)P also regulates SNX4-mediated retrograde vesicular 
trafficking to the endocytic recycling compartment by modulating its interaction 
with dynein. These results establish organelle-specific phosphoinositide 
regulation of motor-cargo interaction as a mechanism for cargo release by 
molecular motors at target membrane.

DOI: 10.1038/ncb2710
PMID: 23524952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
