---
pmid: '18456494'
title: Synthesis and structure based optimization of novel Akt inhibitors.
authors:
- Lippa B
- Pan G
- Corbett M
- Li C
- Kauffman GS
- Pandit J
- Robinson S
- Wei L
- Kozina E
- Marr ES
- Borzillo G
- Knauth E
- Barbacci-Tobin EG
- Vincent P
- Troutman M
- Baker D
- Rajamohan F
- Kakar S
- Clark T
- Morris J
journal: Bioorg Med Chem Lett
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2008.04.034
---

# Synthesis and structure based optimization of novel Akt inhibitors.
**Authors:** Lippa B, Pan G, Corbett M, Li C, Kauffman GS, Pandit J, Robinson S, Wei L, Kozina E, Marr ES, Borzillo G, Knauth E, Barbacci-Tobin EG, Vincent P, Troutman M, Baker D, Rajamohan F, Kakar S, Clark T, Morris J
**Journal:** Bioorg Med Chem Lett (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bmcl.2008.04.034](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bmcl.2008.04.034)

## Abstract

1. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2008 Jun 1;18(11):3359-63. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2008.04.034. Epub 2008 Apr 15.

Synthesis and structure based optimization of novel Akt inhibitors.

Lippa B(1), Pan G, Corbett M, Li C, Kauffman GS, Pandit J, Robinson S, Wei L, 
Kozina E, Marr ES, Borzillo G, Knauth E, Barbacci-Tobin EG, Vincent P, Troutman 
M, Baker D, Rajamohan F, Kakar S, Clark T, Morris J.

Author information:
(1)Pfizer, Inc., PGRD Groton, 558 Eastern Point Road, Groton, CT 06340, USA. 
blaise.lippa@cubist.com

Based on a high throughput screening hit, pyrrolopyrimidine inhibitors of the 
Akt kinase are explored. X-ray co-crystal structures of two lead series results 
in the understanding of key binding interactions, the design of new lead series, 
and enhanced potency. The syntheses of these series and their biological 
activities are described. Spiroindoline 13j is found to have an Akt1 kinase 
IC(50) of 2.4+/-0.6 nM, Akt cell potency of 50+/-19 nM, and provides 68% 
inhibition of tumor growth in a mouse xenograft model (50 mg/kg, qd, po).

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2008.04.034
PMID: 18456494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
