---
pmid: '25897080'
title: Sequential Amyloid-β Degradation by the Matrix Metalloproteases MMP-2 and MMP-9.
authors:
- Hernandez-Guillamon M
- Mawhirt S
- Blais S
- Montaner J
- Neubert TA
- Rostagno A
- Ghiso J
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4463451
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.610931
---

# Sequential Amyloid-β Degradation by the Matrix Metalloproteases MMP-2 and MMP-9.
**Authors:** Hernandez-Guillamon M, Mawhirt S, Blais S, Montaner J, Neubert TA, Rostagno A, Ghiso J
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M114.610931](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M114.610931)
**PMC:** [PMC4463451](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4463451/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jun 12;290(24):15078-91. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.610931. Epub 
2015 Apr 20.

Sequential Amyloid-β Degradation by the Matrix Metalloproteases MMP-2 and MMP-9.

Hernandez-Guillamon M(1), Mawhirt S(2), Blais S(3), Montaner J(4), Neubert 
TA(3), Rostagno A(2), Ghiso J(5).

Author information:
(1)From the Departments of Pathology, the Neurovascular Research Laboratory, 
Institut de Recerca, 08035 Barcelona, Spain.
(2)From the Departments of Pathology.
(3)Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, New York University School of 
Medicine, New York, New York 10016, the Kimmel Center for Biology and Medicine 
at the Skirball Institute, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New 
York 10016, and.
(4)the Neurovascular Research Laboratory, Institut de Recerca, 08035 Barcelona, 
Spain, the Neurovascular Unit, Neurology and Medicine Departments, Universitat 
Autònoma de Barcelona, Vall d'Hebron Hospital, 08035 Barcelona, Spain.
(5)From the Departments of Pathology, Psychiatry, and jorge.ghiso@nyumc.org.

Matrix metalloproteases (MMPs) MMP-2 and MMP-9 have been implicated in the 
physiological catabolism of Alzheimer's amyloid-β (Aβ). Conversely, their 
association with vascular amyloid deposits, blood-brain barrier disruption, and 
hemorrhagic transformations after ischemic stroke also highlights their 
involvement in pathological processes. To better understand this dichotomy, 
recombinant human (rh) MMP-2 and MMP-9 were incubated with Aβ40 and Aβ42, and 
the resulting proteolytic fragments were assessed via immunoprecipitation and 
quantitative mass spectrometry. Both MMPs generated Aβ fragments truncated only 
at the C terminus, ending at positions 34, 30, and 16. Using deuterated 
homologues as internal standards, we observed limited and relatively slow 
degradation of Aβ42 by rhMMP-2, although the enzyme cleaved >80% of Aβ40 during 
the 1st h of incubation. rhMMP-9 was significantly less effective, particularly 
in degrading Aβ(1-42), although the targeted peptide bonds were identical. Using 
Aβ(1-34) and Aβ(1-30), we demonstrated that these peptides are also substrates 
for both MMPs, cleaving Aβ(1-34) to produce Aβ(1-30) first and Aβ(1-16) 
subsequently. Consistent with the kinetics observed with full-length Aβ, rhMMP-9 
degraded only a minute fraction of Aβ(1-34) and was even less effective in 
producing Aβ(1-16). Further degradation of Aβ(1-16) by either MMP-2 or MMP-9 was 
not observed even after prolonged incubation times. Notably, all MMP-generated 
C-terminally truncated Aβ fragments were highly soluble and did not exhibit 
fibrillogenic properties or induce cytotoxicity in human cerebral microvascular 
endothelial or neuronal cells supporting the notion that these truncated Aβ 
species are associated with clearance mechanisms rather than being key elements 
in the fibrillogenesis process.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.610931
PMCID: PMC4463451
PMID: 25897080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
