---
pmid: '9103205'
title: Crystal structure of the nucleotide exchange factor GrpE bound to the ATPase
  domain of the molecular chaperone DnaK.
authors:
- Harrison CJ
- Hayer-Hartl M
- Di Liberto M
- Hartl F
- Kuriyan J
journal: Science
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.276.5311.431
---

# Crystal structure of the nucleotide exchange factor GrpE bound to the ATPase domain of the molecular chaperone DnaK.
**Authors:** Harrison CJ, Hayer-Hartl M, Di Liberto M, Hartl F, Kuriyan J
**Journal:** Science (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.276.5311.431](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.276.5311.431)

## Abstract

1. Science. 1997 Apr 18;276(5311):431-5. doi: 10.1126/science.276.5311.431.

Crystal structure of the nucleotide exchange factor GrpE bound to the ATPase 
domain of the molecular chaperone DnaK.

Harrison CJ(1), Hayer-Hartl M, Di Liberto M, Hartl F, Kuriyan J.

Author information:
(1)Laboratories of Molecular Biophysics and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 
Rockefeller University, 1230 York Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.

The crystal structure of the adenine nucleotide exchange factor GrpE in complex 
with the adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) domain of Escherichia coli DnaK [heat 
shock protein 70 (Hsp70)] was determined at 2.8 angstrom resolution. A dimer of 
GrpE binds asymmetrically to a single molecule of DnaK. The structure of the 
nucleotide-free ATPase domain in complex with GrpE resembles closely that of the 
nucleotide-bound mammalian Hsp70 homolog, except for an outward rotation of one 
of the subdomains of the protein. This conformational change is not consistent 
with tight nucleotide binding. Two long alpha helices extend away from the GrpE 
dimer and suggest a role for GrpE in peptide release from DnaK.

DOI: 10.1126/science.276.5311.431
PMID: 9103205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
