---
pmid: '12673624'
title: Screening and characterization of transposon-insertion mutants in a pseudohyphal
  strain of Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
authors:
- Suzuki C
- Hori Y
- Kashiwagi Y
journal: Yeast
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/yea.970
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Screening and characterization of transposon-insertion mutants in a pseudohyphal strain of Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Suzuki C, Hori Y, Kashiwagi Y
**Journal:** Yeast (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1002/yea.970](https://doi.org/10.1002/yea.970)

## Abstract

1. Yeast. 2003 Apr 15;20(5):407-15. doi: 10.1002/yea.970.

Screening and characterization of transposon-insertion mutants in a pseudohyphal 
strain of Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Suzuki C(1), Hori Y, Kashiwagi Y.

Author information:
(1)National Food Research Institute, 2-1-12 Kannondai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 
305-8642, Japan.

Strains of Saccharomyces cerevisiae with sigma1278b background are widely used 
for elucidation of pseudohyphal differentiation and signal transduction. 
However, information and resources on the strains are limited compared to the 
S288C strains. To facilitate functional analysis of strains with sigma1278b 
background, mutant strains were generated by using a mini-transposon3-3 x 
HA/LacZ (mTn3)-mutagenized library. Mutants with mTn3 insertions were screened 
for expression of beta-galactosidase activity under nitrogen starvation and the 
insertion sites were identified. One hundred and five heterozygous diploid 
strains were selected and subjected to tetrad analysis. Insertion of mTn3 in 11 
genes was lethal in the strain, including three genes, HAC1, TPS1 and UME6, 
which are non-essential genes according to the Saccharomyces Genome Database. 
Viable haploid strains with mTn3 insertions were examined for invasive growth, 
which is a differentiation process in haploid strains including agar penetration 
on rich medium, and cell morphology during invasive growth. We also examined 
homozygous diploid strains with mTn3-insertions for filamentous growth and 
sporulation.

Copyright 2003 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/yea.970
PMID: 12673624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
