---
pmid: '12829692'
title: A purified subfragment of yeast Atp11p retains full molecular chaperone activity.
authors:
- Hinton A
- Zuiderweg ER
- Ackerman SH
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M305353200
---

# A purified subfragment of yeast Atp11p retains full molecular chaperone activity.
**Authors:** Hinton A, Zuiderweg ER, Ackerman SH
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M305353200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M305353200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Sep 5;278(36):34110-3. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M305353200. Epub
2003  Jun 26.

A purified subfragment of yeast Atp11p retains full molecular chaperone 
activity.

Hinton A(1), Zuiderweg ER, Ackerman SH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, 
Michigan 48201, USA.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 2;279(14):14472.

Atp11p is a molecular chaperone of the mitochondrial matrix that participates in 
the biogenesis pathway to form F1, the catalytic unit of the ATP synthase. 
Affinity tag pull-down assays and yeast two-hybrid screens have shown that 
Atp11p binds to free beta subunits of F1 (Wang, Z. G., and Ackerman, S. H. 
(2000) J. Biol. Chem. 275, 5767-5772). This binding action prevents the beta 
subunit from associating with itself in non-productive complexes and fosters the 
formation of a (alpha beta)3 hexamer. Following the premise that Atp11p action 
is mediated primarily through a surface (as opposed to specific amino acids, as 
in an enzyme active site), solving its three-dimensional structure so that we 
may learn how the shape of the protein influences its function is a high 
priority. Recombinant yeast Atp11p has proven refractory for such analysis 
because of the presence of a disordered region in the protein. In this article, 
we show that removal of 67 residues from the amino terminus of recombinant 
Atp11p yields a subfragment of the protein (called Atp11pTRNC) that retains 
molecular chaperone function as determined in vitro with both a surrogate 
substrate (reduced insulin) and the natural substrate (F1 beta). Moreover, 
preliminary 15N-1H heteronuclear single quantum coherence spectra obtained with 
Atp11pTRNC indicate that the truncated protein is well ordered and amenable to 
structure determination by nuclear magnetic resonance.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M305353200
PMID: 12829692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
