---
pmid: '16352602'
title: Defining the role of the Escherichia coli chaperone SecB using comparative
  proteomics.
authors:
- Baars L
- Ytterberg AJ
- Drew D
- Wagner S
- Thilo C
- van Wijk KJ
- de Gier JW
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M509929200
---

# Defining the role of the Escherichia coli chaperone SecB using comparative proteomics.
**Authors:** Baars L, Ytterberg AJ, Drew D, Wagner S, Thilo C, van Wijk KJ, de Gier JW
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M509929200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M509929200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Apr 14;281(15):10024-34. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M509929200. Epub 
2005 Dec 13.

Defining the role of the Escherichia coli chaperone SecB using comparative 
proteomics.

Baars L(1), Ytterberg AJ, Drew D, Wagner S, Thilo C, van Wijk KJ, de Gier JW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Arrhenius Laboratories, Stockholm 
University SE-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden.

To improve understanding and identify novel substrates of the cytoplasmic 
chaperone SecB in Escherichia coli, we analyzed a secB null mutant using 
comparative proteomics. The secB null mutation did not affect cell growth but 
caused significant differences at the proteome level. In the absence of SecB, 
dynamic protein aggregates containing predominantly secretory proteins 
accumulated in the cytoplasm. Unprocessed secretory proteins were detected in 
radiolabeled whole cell lysates. Furthermore, the assembly of a large fraction 
of the outer membrane proteome was slowed down, whereas its steady state 
composition was hardly affected. In response to aggregation and delayed sorting 
of secretory proteins, cytoplasmic chaperones DnaK, GroEL/ES, ClpB, IbpA/B, and 
HslU were up-regulated severalfold, most likely to stabilize secretory proteins 
during their delayed translocation and/or rescue aggregated secretory proteins. 
The SecB/A dependence of 12 secretory proteins affected by the secB null 
mutation (DegP, FhuA, FkpA, OmpT, OmpX, OppA, TolB, TolC, YbgF, YcgK, YgiW, and 
YncE) was confirmed by "classical" pulse-labeling experiments. Our study more 
than triples the number of known SecB-dependent secretory proteins and shows 
that the primary role of SecB is to facilitate the targeting of secretory 
proteins to the Sec-translocase.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M509929200
PMID: 16352602 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
