---
pmid: '12615916'
title: Characterization of human constitutive photomorphogenesis protein 1, a RING
  finger ubiquitin ligase that interacts with Jun transcription factors and modulates
  their transcriptional activity.
authors:
- Bianchi E
- Denti S
- Catena R
- Rossetti G
- Polo S
- Gasparian S
- Putignano S
- Rogge L
- Pardi R
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M212681200
---

# Characterization of human constitutive photomorphogenesis protein 1, a RING finger ubiquitin ligase that interacts with Jun transcription factors and modulates their transcriptional activity.
**Authors:** Bianchi E, Denti S, Catena R, Rossetti G, Polo S, Gasparian S, Putignano S, Rogge L, Pardi R
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M212681200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M212681200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 30;278(22):19682-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M212681200. Epub 
2003 Mar 3.

Characterization of human constitutive photomorphogenesis protein 1, a RING 
finger ubiquitin ligase that interacts with Jun transcription factors and 
modulates their transcriptional activity.

Bianchi E(1), Denti S, Catena R, Rossetti G, Polo S, Gasparian S, Putignano S, 
Rogge L, Pardi R.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Leukocyte Biology, DIBIT and Universita' Vita-Salute San 
Raffaele, via Olgettina 58, 20132, Milan, Italy. ebianchi@pasteur.fr

RING finger proteins have been implicated in many fundamental cellular 
processes, including the control of gene expression. A key regulator of 
light-dependent development in Arabidopsis thaliana is the constitutive 
photomorphogenesis protein 1 (atCOP1), a RING finger protein that plays an 
essential role in translating light/dark signals into specific changes in gene 
transcription. atCOP1 binds the basic leucine zipper factor HY5 and suppresses 
its transcriptional activity through a yet undefined mechanism that results in 
HY5 degradation in response to darkness. Furthermore, the pleiotropic phenotype 
of atCOP1 mutants indicates that atCOP1 may be a central regulator of several 
transcriptional pathways. Here we report the cloning and characterization of the 
human orthologue of atCOP1. Human COP1 (huCOP1) distributes both to the 
cytoplasm and the nucleus of cells and shows a striking degree of sequence 
conservation with atCOP1, suggesting the possibility of a functional 
conservation as well. In co-immunoprecipitation assays huCOP1 specifically binds 
basic leucine zipper factors of the Jun family. As a functional consequence of 
this interaction, expression of huCOP1 in mammalian cells down-regulates 
c-Jun-dependent transcription and the expression of the AP-1 target genes, 
urokinase and matrix metalloproteinase 1. The RING domain of huCOP1 displays 
ubiquitin ligase activity in an autoubiquitination assay in vitro; however, 
suppression of AP-1-dependent transcription by huCOP1 occurs in the absence of 
changes in c-Jun protein levels, suggesting that this inhibitory effect is 
independent of c-Jun degradation. Our findings indicate that huCOP1 is a novel 
regulator of AP-1-dependent transcription sharing the important properties of 
Arabidopsis COP1 in the control of gene expression.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M212681200
PMID: 12615916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
