---
pmid: '14643199'
title: Crystal structure of SecB from Escherichia coli.
authors:
- Dekker C
- de Kruijff B
- Gros P
journal: J Struct Biol
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.jsb.2003.09.012
---

# Crystal structure of SecB from Escherichia coli.
**Authors:** Dekker C, de Kruijff B, Gros P
**Journal:** J Struct Biol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jsb.2003.09.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsb.2003.09.012)

## Abstract

1. J Struct Biol. 2003 Dec;144(3):313-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jsb.2003.09.012.

Crystal structure of SecB from Escherichia coli.

Dekker C(1), de Kruijff B, Gros P.

Author information:
(1)National Institute for Medical Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London, 
England, NW7 1AA, UK. cdekker@mimr.mrc.ac.uk

The chaperone SecB from Escherichia coli is primarily involved in passing 
precursor proteins into the Sec system via specific interactions with SecA. The 
crystal structure of SecB from E. coli has been solved to 2.35 A resolution. The 
structure shows flexibility in the crossover loop and the helix-connecting loop, 
regions that have been implicated to be part of the SecB substrate-binding site. 
Moreover conformational variability of Trp36 is observed as well as different 
loop conformations for the different monomers. Based on this, we speculate that 
SecB can regulate the access or extent of its hydrophobic substrate-binding 
site, by modulating the conformation of the crossover loop and the 
helix-connecting loop. The structure also clearly explains why the tetrameric 
equilibrium is shifted towards the dimeric state in the mutant SecBCys76Tyr. The 
buried cysteine residue is crucial for tight packing, and mutations are likely 
to disrupt the tetramer formation but not the dimer formation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jsb.2003.09.012
PMID: 14643199 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
