---
pmid: '20668094'
title: Characterization of the human HSC20, an unusual DnaJ type III protein, involved
  in iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis.
authors:
- Uhrigshardt H
- Singh A
- Kovtunovych G
- Ghosh M
- Rouault TA
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2935859
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq301
---

# Characterization of the human HSC20, an unusual DnaJ type III protein, involved in iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis.
**Authors:** Uhrigshardt H, Singh A, Kovtunovych G, Ghosh M, Rouault TA
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddq301](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddq301)
**PMC:** [PMC2935859](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2935859/)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Oct 1;19(19):3816-34. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq301. Epub 2010
Jul  28.

Characterization of the human HSC20, an unusual DnaJ type III protein, involved 
in iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis.

Uhrigshardt H(1), Singh A, Kovtunovych G, Ghosh M, Rouault TA.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Medicine Program, The Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of 
Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, 9000 
Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The importance of mitochondrial iron-sulfur cluster (ISC) biogenesis for human 
health has been well established, but the roles of some components of this 
critical pathway still remain uncharacterized in mammals. Among them is human 
heat shock cognate protein 20 (hHSC20), the putative human homolog of the 
specialized DnaJ type co-chaperones, which are crucial for bacterial and fungal 
ISC assembly. Here, we show that the human HSC20 protein can complement for its 
counterpart in yeast, Jac1p, and interacts with its proposed human partners, 
hISCU and hHSPA9. hHSC20 is expressed in various human tissues and localizes 
mainly to the mitochondria in HeLa cells. However, small amounts were also 
detected extra-mitochondrially. RNA interference-mediated depletion of hHSC20 
specifically reduced the activities of both mitochondrial and cytosolic 
ISC-containing enzymes. The recovery of inactivated ISC enzymes was markedly 
delayed after an oxidative insult of hHSC20-deficient cells. Conversely, 
overexpression of hHSC20 substantially protected cells from oxidative insults. 
These results imply that hHSC20 is an integral component of the human ISC 
biosynthetic machinery that is particularly important in the assembly of ISCs 
under conditions of oxidative stress. A cysteine-rich N-terminal domain, which 
clearly distinguishes hHSC20 from the specialized DnaJ type III proteins of 
fungi and most bacteria, was found to be important for the integrity and 
function of the human co-chaperone.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddq301
PMCID: PMC2935859
PMID: 20668094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
