---
pmid: '25533348'
title: Tolerance of deregulated G1/S transcription depends on critical G1/S regulon
  genes to prevent catastrophic genome instability.
authors:
- Caetano C
- Limbo O
- Farmer S
- Klier S
- Dovey C
- Russell P
- de Bruin RA
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.11.039
---

# Tolerance of deregulated G1/S transcription depends on critical G1/S regulon genes to prevent catastrophic genome instability.
**Authors:** Caetano C, Limbo O, Farmer S, Klier S, Dovey C, Russell P, de Bruin RA
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2014.11.039](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2014.11.039)

## Abstract

1. Cell Rep. 2014 Dec 24;9(6):2279-89. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.11.039. Epub
2014  Dec 18.

Tolerance of deregulated G1/S transcription depends on critical G1/S regulon 
genes to prevent catastrophic genome instability.

Caetano C(1), Limbo O(2), Farmer S(1), Klier S(1), Dovey C(2), Russell P(3), de 
Bruin RA(4).

Author information:
(1)MRC Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology, University College London, WC1E 
6BT London, UK.
(2)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La 
Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(3)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La 
Jolla, CA 92037, USA. Electronic address: prussell@scripps.edu.
(4)MRC Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology, University College London, WC1E 
6BT London, UK; The UCL Cancer Institute, University College London, WC1E 6BT 
London, UK. Electronic address: r.debruin@ucl.ac.uk.

Expression of a G1/S regulon of genes that are required for DNA replication is a 
ubiquitous mechanism for controlling cell proliferation; moreover, the 
pathological deregulated expression of E2F-regulated G1/S genes is found in 
every type of cancer. Cellular tolerance of deregulated G1/S transcription is 
surprising because this regulon includes many dosage-sensitive proteins. Here, 
we used the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe to investigate this issue. 
We report that deregulating the MBF G1/S regulon by eliminating the Nrm1 
corepressor increases replication errors. Homology-directed repair proteins, 
including MBF-regulated Ctp1(CtIP), are essential to prevent catastrophic genome 
instability. Surprisingly, the normally inconsequential MBF-regulated S-phase 
cyclin Cig2 also becomes essential in the absence of Nrm1. This requirement was 
traced to cyclin-dependent kinase inhibition of the MBF-regulated Cdc18(Cdc6) 
replication origin-licensing factor. Collectively, these results establish that, 
although deregulation of G1/S transcription is well tolerated by cells, 
nonessential G1/S target genes become crucial for preventing catastrophic genome 
instability.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.11.039
PMID: 25533348 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
