---
pmid: '10221900'
title: 'Cryptochromes: blue light receptors for plants and animals.'
authors:
- Cashmore AR
- Jarillo JA
- Wu YJ
- Liu D
journal: Science
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.284.5415.760
---

# Cryptochromes: blue light receptors for plants and animals.
**Authors:** Cashmore AR, Jarillo JA, Wu YJ, Liu D
**Journal:** Science (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.284.5415.760](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.284.5415.760)

## Abstract

1. Science. 1999 Apr 30;284(5415):760-5. doi: 10.1126/science.284.5415.760.

Cryptochromes: blue light receptors for plants and animals.

Cashmore AR(1), Jarillo JA, Wu YJ, Liu D.

Author information:
(1)Plant Science Institute, Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6018, USA. cashmore@upenn.sas.edu

Cryptochromes are blue, ultraviolet-A photoreceptors. They were first 
characterized for Arabidopsis and are also found in ferns and algae; they appear 
to be ubiquitous in the plant kingdom. They are flavoproteins similar in 
sequence to photolyases, their presumptive evolutionary ancestors. Cryptochromes 
mediate a variety of light responses, including entrainment of circadian rhythms 
in Arabidopsis, Drosophila, and mammals. Sequence comparison indicates that the 
plant and animal cryptochrome families have distinct evolutionary histories, 
with the plant cryptochromes being of ancient evolutionary origin and the animal 
cryptochromes having evolved relatively recently. This process of repeated 
evolution may have coincided with the origin in animals of a modified circadian 
clock based on the PERIOD, TIMELESS, CLOCK, and CYCLE proteins.

DOI: 10.1126/science.284.5415.760
PMID: 10221900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
