---
pmid: '20702712'
title: The Gata3 transcription factor is required for the survival of embryonic and
  adult sympathetic neurons.
authors:
- Tsarovina K
- Reiff T
- Stubbusch J
- Kurek D
- Grosveld FG
- Parlato R
- Schütz G
- Rohrer H
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2010'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC6634692
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0175-10.2010
---

# The Gata3 transcription factor is required for the survival of embryonic and adult sympathetic neurons.
**Authors:** Tsarovina K, Reiff T, Stubbusch J, Kurek D, Grosveld FG, Parlato R, Schütz G, Rohrer H
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0175-10.2010](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0175-10.2010)
**PMC:** [PMC6634692](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6634692/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2010 Aug 11;30(32):10833-43. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0175-10.2010.

The Gata3 transcription factor is required for the survival of embryonic and 
adult sympathetic neurons.

Tsarovina K(1), Reiff T, Stubbusch J, Kurek D, Grosveld FG, Parlato R, Schütz G, 
Rohrer H.

Author information:
(1)Research Group Developmental Neurobiology, Max-Planck-Institute for Brain 
Research, 60528 Frankfurt/M, Germany.

The transcription factor Gata3 is essential for the development of sympathetic 
neurons and adrenal chromaffin cells. As Gata3 expression is maintained up to 
the adult stage, we addressed its function in differentiated sympathoadrenal 
cells at embryonic and adult stages by conditional Gata3 elimination. 
Inactivation of Gata3 in embryonic DBH-expressing neurons elicits a strong 
reduction in neuron numbers due to apoptotic cell death and reduced 
proliferation. No selective effect on noradrenergic gene expression (TH and DBH) 
was observed. Interestingly, Gata3 elimination in DBH-expressing neurons of 
adult animals also results in a virtually complete loss of sympathetic neurons. 
In the Gata3-deficient population, the expression of anti-apoptotic genes 
(Bcl-2, Bcl-xL, and NFkappaB) is diminished, whereas the expression of 
pro-apoptotic genes (Bik, Bok, and Bmf) was increased. The expression of 
noradrenergic genes (TH and DBH) is not affected. These results demonstrate that 
Gata3 is continuously required for maintaining survival but not differentiation 
in the sympathetic neuron lineage up to mature neurons of adult animals.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0175-10.2010
PMCID: PMC6634692
PMID: 20702712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The transcription factor Gata3 is essential for the development of sympathetic neurons and adrenal chromaffin cells. As Gata3 expression is maintained up to the adult stage, we addressed its function in differentiated sympathoadrenal cells at embryonic and adult stages by conditional Gata3 elimination. Inactivation of Gata3 in embryonic DBH -expressing neurons elicits a strong reduction in neuron numbers due to apoptotic cell death and reduced proliferation. No selective effect on noradrenergic gene expression ( TH and DBH ) was observed. Interestingly, Gata3 elimination in DBH -expressing neurons of adult animals also results in a virtually complete loss of sympathetic neurons. In the Gata3-deficient population, the expression of anti-apoptotic genes ( Bcl-2 , Bcl-x L , and NF κ B ) is diminished, whereas the expression of pro-apoptotic genes ( Bik , Bok , and Bmf ) was increased. The expression of noradrenergic genes ( TH and DBH ) is not affected. These results demonstrate that Gata3 is continuously required for maintaining survival but not differentiation in the sympathetic neuron lineage up to mature neurons of adult animals.

Introduction

A fundamental aspect of neural development is the specification and maintenance of differentiated neuron types. Specification of neuron fate is mediated by networks of transcription factors that play essential roles in activating target genes of specific neuron fates ( Guillemot, 2007 ). However, it is unclear to what extent these regulatory networks are necessary to maintain specific neuronal properties after development has completed. Terminal selector genes expressed throughout the lifetime of a neuron and required for maintaining its differentiated state have been described in Caenorhabditis elegans ( Hobert, 2008 ). Also, in vertebrates, candidate terminal selector transcription factors were identified ( Cheng et al., 2005 ), including Gata2, which determines postmitotic neuronal identity of midbrain GABAergic neurons ( Kala et al., 2009 ).

From the Gata family of transcription factors, only Gata2 and Gata3 are found in the nervous system in overlapping expression patterns, with important roles in the development of specific neuronal populations, including neurons in the inner ear, midbrain, hindbrain, spinal cord, and sympathoadrenal system. Gata3 is involved in the generation of serotonergic neurons ( van Doorninck et al., 1999 ; Pattyn et al., 2004 ) and ear formation, affecting the morphogenesis of the inner ear, axonal navigation of inner ear efferent neurons, and cell survival of outer hair cells ( Karis et al., 2001 ; van der Wees et al., 2004 ). In the developing sympathoadrenal system Gata3 is essential for differentiation and cell survival ( Lim et al., 2000 ; Tsarovina et al., 2004 ; Moriguchi et al., 2006 ).

The initial development of sympathoadrenal cells is regulated by a network of transcription factors, including Phox2b, Ascl1, Hand2, Insm1, and Gata2/3 ( Goridis and Rohrer, 2002 ). Phox2b is essential for initial sympathoadrenal cell specification from neural crest progenitors ( Pattyn et al., 1999 ) and controls, together with Hand2, proliferation and noradrenergic differentiation ( Lucas et al., 2006 ; Morikawa et al., 2007 ; Hendershot et al., 2008 ; Schmidt et al., 2009 ; Reiff et al., 2010 ). Ascl1 and Insm1 affect proliferation and timing as their elimination results in delayed development and reduced ganglion size but normal differentiation ( Pattyn et al., 2006 ; Wildner et al., 2008 ; Morikawa et al., 2009 ). Gata3 controls the initial expression of the noradrenergic marker gene TH but also generic neuronal differentiation and survival ( Lim et al., 2000 ; Tsarovina et al., 2004 ; Moriguchi et al., 2006 ). Chromaffin cell development depends in a similar but not identical manner on the same transcriptional regulators identified in sympathetic ganglia ( Huber et al., 2009 ). The continued Gata3 expression in the sympathoadrenal system throughout the lifetime of the animal, together with the essential role of Gata3 in the maintenance of the differentiated state in other lineages ( Kouros-Mehr et al., 2006 ), raises the question as to the role of Gata3 in mature sympathetic neurons and chromaffin cells.

We now demonstrate that Gata3 elimination in both differentiated embryonic and adult sympathetic neurons results in a virtually complete neuron loss by apoptotic cell death. In contrast, chromaffin cell survival depends on Gata3 only during embryonic development. Our results indicate a survival function, which is of fundamental importance for the maintenance of the adult sympathetic nervous system.

Conditional Gata3 knock-out in adult sympathetic neurons results in rapid neuron death

The apoptotic death of cultured postmitotic sympathetic neurons upon Gata3 knockdown raised the question of whether sympathetic neuron survival depends on the persistent function of Gata3 also in the adult nervous system.

To address this issue, we generated a mouse line with a tamoxifen-inducible form of Cre under the control of the DBH promoter (DBH CreERT2 ) (Stubbusch et al., in preparation). Using RosaR26 as reporter and tamoxifen-injection for 3, 5, or 10 d revealed selective Cre activity in noradrenergic cells, i.e., sympathetic ganglia, adrenal chromaffin cells, and the locus ceruleus (Stubbusch et al., in preparation). Tamoxifen-induced activation of DBHCreERT2 in adult Gata3 fl/fl mice resulted in a massive reduction of sympathetic ganglion size leading to small residual superior cervical ganglia (SCG) ( Fig. 6 ) and stellate ganglia (data not shown). The remaining neuron population displayed a massive loss of Gata3 mRNA as revealed by RT-PCR analysis, which illustrates the efficient elimination of Gata3 in adult, tamoxifen-treated Gata3 DBHCreERT2 mice ( Fig. 6 ). The residual sympathetic neurons express normal levels of TH , DBH , and TUBB3 ( Fig. 6 E ) and most likely reflect cells that are Gata3 independent since Gata3 protein is undetectable in the mutants after 3 d of tamoxifen injection ( Fig. 6 F , G ). Interestingly, cell loss in the vast majority of cells proceeds very rapidly. A single tamoxifen injection was sufficient to produce significantly reduced sympathetic ganglia within 1 d. The functional deficit in SCG after 3 d of tamoxifen treatment is revealed by ptosis (data not shown), reflecting the absence of sympathetic innervation of the eyelid musculature. Gata3 DBHCreERT2 mice that are not tamoxifen injected do not display ptosis, and their sympathetic ganglia are of normal size, excluding the possibility that the DBHCreERT2 is active at low levels in the absence of tamoxifen ( Fig. 6 D ). In conclusion, sympathetic neuron survival is continuously dependent on Gata3 function also in the mature nervous system of the adult animal.

Discussion

Gata3 has important functions in the differentiation and survival of noradrenergic sympathetic neurons and chromaffin cells. Here, we show that the role of Gata3 in sympathetic neuron differentiation is restricted to initial development, whereas Gata3 is essential for survival of sympathetic progenitors and neurons throughout embryonic development up to the adult stage. This survival function seems to be largely restricted to sympathetic neurons and is only transiently observed in embryonic chromaffin cells.
