---
pmid: '15164362'
title: Transcriptional and post-translational regulation of neutral trehalase in Schizosaccharomyces
  pombe during thermal stress.
authors:
- Paredes V
- Franco A
- Madrid M
- Soto T
- Vicente-Soler J
- Gacto M
- Cansado J
journal: Yeast
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/yea.1128
---

# Transcriptional and post-translational regulation of neutral trehalase in Schizosaccharomyces pombe during thermal stress.
**Authors:** Paredes V, Franco A, Madrid M, Soto T, Vicente-Soler J, Gacto M, Cansado J
**Journal:** Yeast (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1002/yea.1128](https://doi.org/10.1002/yea.1128)

## Abstract

1. Yeast. 2004 May;21(7):593-603. doi: 10.1002/yea.1128.

Transcriptional and post-translational regulation of neutral trehalase in 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe during thermal stress.

Paredes V(1), Franco A, Madrid M, Soto T, Vicente-Soler J, Gacto M, Cansado J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Microbiology, Facultad de Biología, University of 
Murcia, 30071 Murcia, Spain.

In the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe, a heat shock enhances 
transcription of the ntp1(+) gene, encoding the hydrolytic enzyme neutral 
trehalase. As compared to wild-type cells, cells devoid of the MAP kinase Sty1p 
showed a strong decrease in ntp1(+) expression induced by the temperature 
upshift, indicating that the stress-activated protein kinase (SAPK) pathway 
regulates the expression of this gene during heat shock. The transcription 
factor Atf1p, which is the main downstream target for Sty1p in the SAPK pathway, 
appears to be involved in such control, since ntp1(+) expression under heat 
shock proved to be significantly blocked in atf1(+)-disrupted cells. Serial 
deletion and point mutation analyses of the ntp1(+) promoter, as well as 
electrophoretic mobility shift assays, revealed the existence of a CRE-like 
element as the target for Atf1p-mediated expression under thermal stress. The 
relevance of two putative HSE elements located in the ntp1(+) promoter was also 
investigated for their potential role in regulating ntp1(+) transcription during 
heat shock. The results support a model in which heat-induced Atf1p binding to 
the CRE-like element favours the subsequent interaction of the heat shock factor 
(HSF) with HSE elements in the ntp1(+) promoter. Unlike what happens under 
osmostress or oxidative treatments, Sty1p has no role in the post-translational 
activation of neutral trehalase induced by heat shock in the fission yeast.

Copyright 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/yea.1128
PMID: 15164362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
