---
pmid: '2470345'
title: Immunopurification and characterization of human alpha-L-iduronidase with the
  use of monoclonal antibodies.
authors:
- Clements PR
- Brooks DA
- McCourt PA
- Hopwood JJ
journal: Biochem J
year: '1989'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1138491
doi: 10.1042/bj2590199
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Immunopurification and characterization of human alpha-L-iduronidase with the use of monoclonal antibodies.
**Authors:** Clements PR, Brooks DA, McCourt PA, Hopwood JJ
**Journal:** Biochem J (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1042/bj2590199](https://doi.org/10.1042/bj2590199)
**PMC:** [PMC1138491](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1138491/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 1989 Apr 1;259(1):199-208. doi: 10.1042/bj2590199.

Immunopurification and characterization of human alpha-L-iduronidase with the 
use of monoclonal antibodies.

Clements PR(1), Brooks DA, McCourt PA, Hopwood JJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Pathology, Adelaide Children's Hospital, Australia.

alpha-L-Iduronidase from human liver was purified by a three-step five-column 
procedure and by immunoaffinity chromatography with a monoclonal antibody raised 
against purified enzyme. Seven bands identified by staining with Coomassie Blue 
had molecular masses of 74, 65, 60, 49, 44, 18 and 13 kDa and were present in 
both preparations of the liver enzyme. However, relative to the 
immunopurification procedure, alpha-L-iduronidase purified by the five-column 
procedure was considerably enriched in the 65 kDa polypeptide band. The seven 
bands were identified by Western-blot analysis with two different monoclonal 
antibodies raised against alpha-L-iduronidase. The chromatographic behaviour of 
alpha-L-iduronidase on the antibody column was dependent upon the quantity of 
enzyme loaded. Above a particular load concentration a single peak of enzyme 
activity was eluted, whereas at load concentrations below the critical value 
alpha-L-iduronidase was eluted in two peaks of activity, designated form I 
(eluted first) and form II (eluted second). The following properties of the two 
forms of alpha-L-iduronidase were determined. (1) The two forms from liver were 
composed of different proportions of the same seven polypeptides. (2) When 
individually rechromatographed on the antibody column, each form from liver 
shifted to a more retarded elution position but essentially retained its 
chromatographic behaviour relative to the other form. (3) Forms I and II of 
liver alpha-L-iduronidase showed no difference in their activities towards 
disaccharide substrates derived from two glycosaminoglycan sources, heparan 
sulphate and dermatan sulphate. (4) The native molecular size of forms I and II 
of liver alpha-L-iduronidase was 65 kDa as determined by gel-permeation 
chromatography. (5) Immunoaffinity chromatography of extracts of human lung and 
kidney resulted in the separation of alpha-L-iduronidase into two forms, each 
with different proportions of the seven common polypeptide species. (6) Lung 
forms I and II were taken up readily into cultured skin fibroblasts taken from a 
patient with alpha-L-iduronidase deficiency. Liver forms I and II were not taken 
up to any significant extent. Lung form II gave intracellular contents of 
alpha-L-iduronidase that were more than double those of normal control 
fibroblasts, whereas lung form I gave contents approximately equal to normal 
control values. We propose that all seven polypeptides are derived from a single 
alpha-L-iduronidase gene product, and that different proportions of these 
polypeptides can function as a single alpha-L-iduronidase entity.(ABSTRACT 
TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1042/bj2590199
PMCID: PMC1138491
PMID: 2470345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
