---
pmid: '34154323'
title: Dph3 Enables Aerobic Diphthamide Biosynthesis by Donating One Iron Atom to
  Transform a [3Fe-4S] to a [4Fe-4S] Cluster in Dph1-Dph2.
authors:
- Zhang Y
- Su D
- Dzikovski B
- Majer SH
- Coleman R
- Chandrasekaran S
- Fenwick MK
- Crane BR
- Lancaster KM
- Freed JH
- Lin H
journal: J Am Chem Soc
year: '2021'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: xml
pmcid: PMC8251694
doi: 10.1021/jacs.1c03956
---

# Dph3 Enables Aerobic Diphthamide Biosynthesis by Donating One Iron Atom to Transform a [3Fe-4S] to a [4Fe-4S] Cluster in Dph1-Dph2.
**Authors:** Zhang Y, Su D, Dzikovski B, Majer SH, Coleman R, Chandrasekaran S, Fenwick MK, Crane BR, Lancaster KM, Freed JH, Lin H
**Journal:** J Am Chem Soc (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1021/jacs.1c03956](https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.1c03956)
**PMC:** [PMC8251694](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8251694/)

## Abstract

1. J Am Chem Soc. 2021 Jun 30;143(25):9314-9319. doi: 10.1021/jacs.1c03956. Epub 
2021 Jun 21.

Dph3 Enables Aerobic Diphthamide Biosynthesis by Donating One Iron Atom to 
Transform a [3Fe-4S] to a [4Fe-4S] Cluster in Dph1-Dph2.

Zhang Y(1), Su D(1), Dzikovski B(1), Majer SH(1), Coleman R(1), Chandrasekaran 
S(1), Fenwick MK(1), Crane BR(1), Lancaster KM(1), Freed JH(1), Lin H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New 
York 14853, United States.
(2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, 
United States.

All radical S-adenosylmethionine (radical-SAM) enzymes, including the 
noncanonical radical-SAM enzyme diphthamide biosynthetic enzyme Dph1-Dph2, 
require at least one [4Fe-4S](Cys)3 cluster for activity. It is well-known in 
the radical-SAM enzyme community that the [4Fe-4S](Cys)3 cluster is extremely 
air-sensitive and requires strict anaerobic conditions to reconstitute activity 
in vitro. Thus, how such enzymes function in vivo in the presence of oxygen in 
aerobic organisms is an interesting question. Working on yeast Dph1-Dph2, we 
found that consistent with the known oxygen sensitivity, the [4Fe-4S] cluster is 
easily degraded into a [3Fe-4S] cluster. Remarkably, the small iron-containing 
protein Dph3 donates one Fe atom to convert the [3Fe-4S] cluster in Dph1-Dph2 to 
a functional [4Fe-4S] cluster during the radical-SAM enzyme catalytic cycle. 
This mechanism to maintain radical-SAM enzyme activity in aerobic environments 
is likely general, and Dph3-like proteins may exist to keep other radical-SAM 
enzymes functional in aerobic environments.

DOI: 10.1021/jacs.1c03956
PMCID: PMC8251694
PMID: 34154323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.

## Full Text

Radical S-adenosylmethionine
(radical-SAM) enzymes are found in all domains of life.1 They utilize a [4Fe–4S] cluster and SAM
to initiate a diverse set of radical reactions.2 In the active site, radical-SAM enzymes contain a [4Fe–4S]
cluster in which three of the four iron atoms are coordinated by cysteines
and the fourth iron is coordinated by SAM.2 In the absence of SAM, the fourth iron in the [4Fe–4S] cluster
is not coordinated, rendering it prone to oxidation.2 In most cases, a brief exposure of a radical-SAM enzyme
to air leads to the formation of an inactive [3Fe–4S] cluster
through the loss of the fourth iron.2,3 The instability
of the [4Fe–4S] cluster in air leads to the question how such
an unstable cluster could function well in aerobes.3

The Dph1–Dph2 heterodimer is a noncanonical
radical-SAM
enzyme in eukaryotes that is essential for the first step of biosynthesis
of diphthamide.4,5 Diphthamide is a unique post-translationally
modified histidine residue on eukaryotic elongation factor 2 (eEF2),
a GTPase that is essential in the elongation step of translation.6−10 The diphthamide biosynthesis in eukaryotes requires four steps involving
at least seven proteins.9,11 The Dph1–Dph2
heterodimer catalyzes the addition of an aminocarboxypropyl (ACP)
group to a specific histidine residue in eEF2 using SAM as a substrate
(Figure 1A,B).5 During the in vitro enzymatic reaction, the [4Fe–4S]2+ cluster in Dph1–Dph2 is reduced to [4Fe–4S]1+ using dithionite as the reductant.12 The [4Fe–4S]1+ cluster donates two electrons to
SAM, cleaving it, forming an organometallic complex (intermediate
I) and releasing methylthioadenosine (Figure 1A).13 The organometallic
intermediate serves as a stabilized ACP radical and reacts with eEF2
to form intermediate II, which is converted to the ACP-modified eEF2
product after loss of a hydrogen atom (Figure 1A).10,13

An old batch of Dph1–Dph2
required Dph3/Cbr1/NADH but not
dithionite for activity. (A) Reaction mechanism for the first step
of diphthamide biosynthesis. Intermediate I is organometallic in nature.
(B) Scheme showing the in vitro reconstitution of the Dph1–Dph2
enzymatic reaction. Dph1–Dph2 catalyzes the addition of the
ACP group to histidine using SAM as the substrate. eEF2 incorporates 14C-modified ACP when carboxy-14C-SAM is used as
the substrate. (C) In vitro reconstitution of the first step of diphthamide
biosynthesis on eEF2 with Dph1–Dph2 and carboxy-14C-SAM using Dph3/Cbr1/NADH (left four lanes) or dithionite (right
four lanes) as the reducing agent: (top) autoradiography showing labeled
eEF2 product; (bottom) eEF2 stained with Coomassie blue (CBB).

Under physiological conditions, the reduction of
the [4Fe–4S]
clusters in Dph1–Dph2 requires Dph3 and Cbr1.14,15 Dph3 contains a zinc finger domain that binds one iron with four
cysteine residues.16 The iron in Dph3 is
redox-active and can be reduced by FAD-bound Cbr1 with NADH in baker’s
yeast.14,15

In yeast and other aerobic eukaryotes,
Dph1–Dph2, Dph3,
and Cbr1 reside in the cytosol, a hostile environment for oxygen-sensitive
radical-SAM enzymes.17 How the first step
in diphthamide biosynthesis happens in yeast in the presence of oxygen
is an interesting question. Although Dph3 and Cbr1 may be able to
reduce the [4Fe–4S] cluster in Dph1–Dph2, maintaining
the [4Fe–4S] cluster in Dph1–Dph2 would be challenging
given that in vitro the [4Fe–4S] cluster is quickly degraded
to [3Fe–4S], a common property for all radical-SAM enzyme Fe–S
clusters. Here we propose a model in which Dph1–Dph2 maintains
a [3Fe–4S] cluster and Dph3 provides the fourth Fe during the
enzymatic reaction to form the active [4Fe–4S] cluster in situ
to catalyze the reaction. This strategy nicely solves the oxygen-sensitivity
problem of Dph1–Dph2 radical-SAM enzyme and may be generally
used to allow radical-SAM enzymes to function in aerobic environments.

In an attempt to reconstitute the first step of diphthamide biosynthesis,
we found that an old batch of anaerobically purified Dph1–Dph2
functions only with the physiological reducing system,15 Dph3/Cbr1/NADH, and not with the small-molecule
reductant dithionite (Figure 1C).

Dithionite is generally used for in vitro reconstitution
of radical-SAM
enzymes. Dithionite reduces [4Fe–4S]2+ into [4Fe–4S]1+, thus forming the active Fe–S cluster. Activation
of both Dph1–Dph2 and the archaeal homologue PhDph2 by dithionite
was achieved experimentally previously.4,5 The observation
that this particular batch of Dph1–Dph2 could be activated
with Dph3/Cbr1/NADH but not with dithionite led us to hypothesize
that the [4Fe–4S] cluster in Dph1–Dph2 was decomposed
to the [3Fe–4S] cluster as a result of accidental exposure
to oxygen, rendering dithionite unable to activate it. However, Dph3/Cbr1/NADH
could provide the fourth Fe to reconstitute the active [4Fe–4S]
cluster.

To test the hypothesis, we purified a batch of Dph1–Dph2
aerobically. The aerobically purified Dph1–Dph2 showed little
activity with dithionite but showed much higher activity with Dph3/Cbr1/NADH
(Figure 2A). In contrast,
Dph1–Dph2 purified anaerobically showed higher activity with
dithionite than with Dph3/Cbr1/NADH (Figure 2B). In line with the in vitro reconstitution
results, electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy showed
that aerobically purified Dph1–Dph2 contains mostly [3Fe–4S]1+ and after dithionite reduction produces very little [4Fe–4S]1+ EPR signal (Figure 2C). In contrast, the anaerobically purified Dph1–Dph2
contained very little [3Fe–4S]1+ signal and produced
a strong [4Fe–4S]1+ signal after dithionite reduction
(Figure 2D). For the
anaerobically purified Dph1–Dph2 containing mostly the [4Fe–4S]2+ cluster, dithionite can better reduce the [4Fe–4S]2+ cluster because of its lower reduction potential compared
with Dph3/Cbr1/NADH, explaining why the reaction worked better with
dithionite in the case of anaerobically purified Dph1–Dph2.

Dph3 activates
aerobically purified Dph1–Dph2. (A) In vitro
reconstitution of the first step of diphthamide biosynthesis with
aerobically purified Dph1–Dph2. The reaction was carried out
aerobically. The reaction time is labeled on the right. (B) In vitro
reconstitution of the first step of diphthamide biosynthesis with
anaerobically purified Dph1–Dph2. The reaction was carried
out anaerobically. The reaction time is labeled on the right. For
the reaction with dithionite, Dph1–Dph2 was mixed with eEF2
and carboxy-14C-SAM, and dithionite was added to initiate
the reaction. For the reaction with Dph3/Cbr1/NADH, Dph1–Dph2
was mixed with Dph3, Cbr1, eEF2, and carboxy-14C-SAM. NADH
was added to initiate the reaction. (top) Autoradiography showing
labeled eEF2 product. (bottom) eEF2 stained with Coomassie blue (CBB).
(C) X-band continuous wave (CW) EPR signal of aerobically purified
Dph1–Dph2 with or without dithionite obtained at 12 K. (D)
X-band CW EPR signal of anaerobically purified Dph1–Dph2 with
or without dithionite obtained at 12 K. The quantification of Fe–S
cluster species is included in Supplementary Table 1.

The above data confirmed that
the aerobically purified Dph1–Dph2
containing mostly [3Fe–4S]1+ shows high activity
with Dph3/Cbr1/NADH but little to no activity with dithionite. Thus,
the Dph3/Cbr1/NADH system is able to provide the fourth Fe to reconstitute
the active [4Fe–4S] cluster needed for the enzymatic activity.
The next question concerns the origin of the fourth Fe. Because Dph3
binds one Fe ion using four cysteine residues, we reasoned that this
Dph3-bound Fe could be transferred to Dph1–Dph2 to reconstitute
the [4Fe–4S] cluster from the [3Fe–4S] cluster. The
possibility that the fourth iron comes from adventitious Fe ions in
the solution is unlikely, as the dithionite-reduced aerobically purified
Dph1–Dph2 could not form the [4Fe–4S] cluster (Figure 2B). To further rule
out the possibility that the fourth Fe is from adventitious Fe in
the solution, we used citrate to limit the free iron in the solution.18,19 The activity of aerobically purified Dph1–Dph2 with Dph3/Cbr1/NADH
remained intact supporting the hypothesis that the fourth Fe is not
from adventitious iron in the reaction mixture (Figure 3A).

Dph3 provides the unique Fe to complete the
[4Fe–4S] cluster
during the reaction. (A) The activity of aerobically purified Dph1–Dph2
with Dph3 is not affected by citrate, as shown by in vitro reconstitution
of the first step of diphthamide biosynthesis on eEF2 using aerobically
purified Dph1–Dph2, carboxy-14C-SAM, Cbr1, NADH
and Dph3 in the presence or absence of 2 mM citrate: (top) autoradiography
showing labeled eEF2 product; (bottom) eEF2 stained with Coomassie
blue (CBB). (B) Dph1–Dph2, Dph3, eEF2, Cbr1, and NADH were
mixed at room temperature and subjected to rapid freeze quench (RFQ)
at 2 s. The quenched reaction mixture was monitored using X-band CW
EPR spectroscopy at 35 K in the region of 3100 to 3500 G. (C) The
quenched reaction mixture (2 s) was monitored using X-band CW EPR
spectroscopy at 12 K in the region of 1400 to 1700 G to detect the
Dph3 Fe signal. The spectrum was compared to the reaction mixture
before addition of NADH (0 s). (D) Intermediate I structure with (left) 56Fe or (right)57Fe at the unique iron position.
(E) Dph1–Dph2 (with 56Fe), 57Fe-Dph3,
eEF2, Cbr1, SAM, and NADH were mixed at room temperature and subjected
to RFQ at 2 s. The quenched reaction mixture was monitored using X-band
CW EPR spectroscopy at 12 K. The EPR signal was aligned to that obtained
with 56Fe-Dph3. A 5.9 G line broadening was observed with 57Fe-Dph3, indicating the incorporation of 57Fe
from Dph3 into the intermediate I signal.

To further confirm that Dph3 provides the fourth Fe to reconstitute
the [4Fe–4S] cluster in Dph1–Dph2, we sought to detect
the [4Fe–4S]1+ cluster signal by EPR spectroscopy.
Interestingly, in the solution with Dph1–Dph2 and Dph3/Cbr1/NADH
but without the substrates (eEF2 and SAM), we could not detect the
[4Fe–4S]1+ EPR signal (data not shown). We hypothesized
that the [4Fe–4S]1+ cluster is formed only when
both of the substrates (eEF2 and SAM) are present, which then quickly
react to form products. Thus, to detect any potential [4Fe–4S]
cluster EPR signal during the reaction, we performed rapid freeze
quench (RFQ). Previously, two intermediates, organometallic intermediate
I and organic radical intermediate II, were captured and characterized
(Figure 1A).13 If our hypothesis that Dph3 provides the fourth
iron to reconstitute the active [4Fe–4S] cluster in Dph1–Dph2
is true, we should be able capture and detect either the [4Fe–4S]1+ signal or the intermediate I signal by RFQ. Aerobically
purified Dph1–Dph2 was mixed with Dph3, eEF2, SAM, and a catalytic
amount of Cbr1. The reaction was triggered by mixing the protein mixture
with NADH and then quenched at 2 s, and the reaction mixture was analyzed
by EPR spectroscopy. The intermediate I signal was successfully detected
(Figure 3B), indicating
that the [4Fe–4S]1+ cluster was formed during the
reaction and then quickly converted to intermediate I13 (Figure 4). At the same time, there was a fast decrease in the Fe3+ signal in Dph3 (Figure 3C). The disappearance of the Fe3+ signal is mostly
due to reduction to Fe2+ in Dph3 right after NADH addition.

Proposed
mechanism for the Dph1–Dph2 reaction with Dph3
donating the fourth Fe for the [4Fe–4S] cluster. The aerobically
purified Dph1–Dph2 contains a [3Fe–4S]1+ cluster.
The [3Fe–4S]1+ cluster is reduced to [3Fe–4S]0 in the presence of Dph3/Cbr1/NADH. When both eEF2 and SAM
are present, Fe2+ from Dph3 is transferred to Dph1–Dph2,
forming the [4Fe–4S]2+ cluster, which at the same
time is reduced by Dph3/Cbr1/NADH. The [4Fe–4S]1+ cluster then forms intermediate I, which eventually leads to the
final product, ACP-modified eEF2.

To further confirm that Dph3 is the source of the unique iron in
intermediate I, we obtained 57Fe-labeled Dph3. If the 57Fe is transferred during the reaction, we should observe
line broadening of the intermediate I signal.13 We performed the same RFQ experiment with 57Fe-labeled
Dph3, and indeed, we saw a 5.9 G line broadening of the intermediate
I signal (Figure 3D,E).
The line broadening effect is similar to what we observed previously13 and falls within the range of 57Fe
hyperfine coupling.20,21 This result further supports
the conclusion that the unique iron essential for the reaction is
obtained from Dph3 during the reaction.

Thus, Dph3 enables the
radical-SAM enzyme Dph1–Dph2 to function
aerobically. Dph1–Dph2 in the resting state exists in [3Fe–4S]
form. During the reaction, Dph3 transfers an iron to Dph1–Dph2
to reconstitute the [4Fe–4S] cluster in situ. At the same time,
Dph3/Cbr1/NADH provides an electron to reduce the 4Fe–4S cluster.5 The reformed [4Fe–4S]1+ cluster
cleaves SAM and forms intermediate I (Figure 4).

When Dph1–Dph2 is purified
anaerobically, Dph1–Dph2
contains the full [4Fe–4S]2+ cluster.5 Dph3 mediated the electron transfer to reduce
[4Fe–4S]1+ and trigger the reaction.5 When Dph1–Dph2 is purified aerobically, Dph1–Dph2
contains the [3Fe–4S]1+ cluster. In this system,
Dph3 has two functions: it mediates the electron transfer and transfers
Fe to reform the active [4Fe–4S]1+ cluster to trigger
the reaction. Our current model reveals the additional function of
Dph3 to complete the [4Fe–4S] cluster along with its ability
to mediate the electron transfer. The detailed mechanism of electron
transfer mediated by Dph3 is still under investigation.

Our
model reveals an elegant solution that nature uses to allow
Dph1–Dph2 radical-SAM enzymes to function aerobically. The
[4Fe–4S] cluster is not stable in the presence of oxygen, while
the [3Fe–4S] cluster in Dph1–Dph2 and the Fe bound by
Dph3 are both stable. Furthermore, the reconstitution of the active
[4Fe–4S] cluster occurs only when both substrates (eEF2 and
SAM) are present, which allows maximum efficiency of the system (if
the active cluster were formed when eEF2 or SAM is not present, it
would be quickly destroyed by oxygen and thus wasted). This is likely
a general solution that aerobes use to cope with the oxygen-sensitivity
problem of radical-SAM enzymes, allowing oxygen-sensitive Fe–S
enzymes to function in an aerobic environment. In yeast and humans,
there are other radical-SAM enzymes that function in the cytosol,22 including tRNA wybutosine-synthesizing protein
(Tyw1),23 the elongator complex,24,25 viperin,26−28 and molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis protein 1 (MOCS1).29 These radical-SAM enzymes are also oxygen-sensitive,
and thus, they may also require proteins like Dph3 to help to keep
them active in an aerobic environment.
