---
pmid: '21242320'
title: The bHLH transcription factor MYC3 interacts with the Jasmonate ZIM-domain
  proteins to mediate jasmonate response in Arabidopsis.
authors:
- Cheng Z
- Sun L
- Qi T
- Zhang B
- Peng W
- Liu Y
- Xie D
journal: Mol Plant
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/mp/ssq073
---

# The bHLH transcription factor MYC3 interacts with the Jasmonate ZIM-domain proteins to mediate jasmonate response in Arabidopsis.
**Authors:** Cheng Z, Sun L, Qi T, Zhang B, Peng W, Liu Y, Xie D
**Journal:** Mol Plant (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1093/mp/ssq073](https://doi.org/10.1093/mp/ssq073)

## Abstract

1. Mol Plant. 2011 Mar;4(2):279-88. doi: 10.1093/mp/ssq073. Epub 2011 Jan 17.

The bHLH transcription factor MYC3 interacts with the Jasmonate ZIM-domain 
proteins to mediate jasmonate response in Arabidopsis.

Cheng Z(1), Sun L, Qi T, Zhang B, Peng W, Liu Y, Xie D.

Author information:
(1)MOE Key Laboratory of Protein Science, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua 
University, Beijing 100084, China.

The Arabidopsis Jasmonate ZIM-domain proteins (JAZs) act as substrates of 
SCF(COI1) complex to repress their downstream targets, which are essential for 
JA-regulated plant development and defense. The bHLH transcription factor MYC2 
was found to interact with JAZs and mediate JA responses including JA-inhibitory 
root growth. Here, we identified another bHLH transcription factor MYC3 which 
directly interacted with JAZs by virtue of its N-terminal region to regulate JA 
responses. The transgenic plants with overexpression of MYC3 exhibited 
hypersensitivity in JA-inhibitory root elongation and seedling development. The 
JAZ-interacting pattern and the JA-induced expression pattern of MYC3 were 
distinguishable from those of MYC2. We speculate that MYC3 and MYC2 may have 
redundant but also distinguishable functions in regulation of JA responses.

DOI: 10.1093/mp/ssq073
PMID: 21242320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
