---
pmid: '22392983'
title: Homology models guide discovery of diverse enzyme specificities among dipeptide
  epimerases in the enolase superfamily.
authors:
- Lukk T
- Sakai A
- Kalyanaraman C
- Brown SD
- Imker HJ
- Song L
- Fedorov AA
- Fedorov EV
- Toro R
- Hillerich B
- Seidel R
- Patskovsky Y
- Vetting MW
- Nair SK
- Babbitt PC
- Almo SC
- Gerlt JA
- Jacobson MP
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2012'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3306705
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1112081109
---

# Homology models guide discovery of diverse enzyme specificities among dipeptide epimerases in the enolase superfamily.
**Authors:** Lukk T, Sakai A, Kalyanaraman C, Brown SD, Imker HJ, Song L, Fedorov AA, Fedorov EV, Toro R, Hillerich B, Seidel R, Patskovsky Y, Vetting MW, Nair SK, Babbitt PC, Almo SC, Gerlt JA, Jacobson MP
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1112081109](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1112081109)
**PMC:** [PMC3306705](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3306705/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Mar 13;109(11):4122-7. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1112081109. Epub 2012 Mar 5.

Homology models guide discovery of diverse enzyme specificities among dipeptide 
epimerases in the enolase superfamily.

Lukk T(1), Sakai A, Kalyanaraman C, Brown SD, Imker HJ, Song L, Fedorov AA, 
Fedorov EV, Toro R, Hillerich B, Seidel R, Patskovsky Y, Vetting MW, Nair SK, 
Babbitt PC, Almo SC, Gerlt JA, Jacobson MP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, 
Urbana, IL 61801, USA.

The rapid advance in genome sequencing presents substantial challenges for 
protein functional assignment, with half or more of new protein sequences 
inferred from these genomes having uncertain assignments. The assignment of 
enzyme function in functionally diverse superfamilies represents a particular 
challenge, which we address through a combination of computational predictions, 
enzymology, and structural biology. Here we describe the results of a focused 
investigation of a group of enzymes in the enolase superfamily that are involved 
in epimerizing dipeptides. The first members of this group to be functionally 
characterized were Ala-Glu epimerases in Eschericiha coli and Bacillus subtilis, 
based on the operon context and enzymological studies; these enzymes are 
presumed to be involved in peptidoglycan recycling. We have subsequently studied 
more than 65 related enzymes by computational methods, including homology 
modeling and metabolite docking, which suggested that many would have divergent 
specificities;, i.e., they are likely to have different (unknown) biological 
roles. In addition to the Ala-Phe epimerase specificity reported previously, we 
describe the prediction and experimental verification of: (i) a new group of 
presumed Ala-Glu epimerases; (ii) several enzymes with specificity for 
hydrophobic dipeptides, including one from Cytophaga hutchinsonii that 
epimerizes D-Ala-D-Ala; and (iii) a small group of enzymes that epimerize 
cationic dipeptides. Crystal structures for certain of these enzymes further 
elucidate the structural basis of the specificities. The results highlight the 
potential of computational methods to guide experimental characterization of 
enzymes in an automated, large-scale fashion.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1112081109
PMCID: PMC3306705
PMID: 22392983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare a conflict of interest. 
M.P.J. is a consultant to Schrodinger LLC, which developed or licensed some of 
the software used in this study.

## Full Text

Abstract

The rapid advance in genome sequencing presents substantial challenges for protein functional assignment, with half or more of new protein sequences inferred from these genomes having uncertain assignments. The assignment of enzyme function in functionally diverse superfamilies represents a particular challenge, which we address through a combination of computational predictions, enzymology, and structural biology. Here we describe the results of a focused investigation of a group of enzymes in the enolase superfamily that are involved in epimerizing dipeptides. The first members of this group to be functionally characterized were Ala-Glu epimerases in Eschericiha coli and Bacillus subtilis , based on the operon context and enzymological studies; these enzymes are presumed to be involved in peptidoglycan recycling. We have subsequently studied more than 65 related enzymes by computational methods, including homology modeling and metabolite docking, which suggested that many would have divergent specificities;, i.e., they are likely to have different (unknown) biological roles. In addition to the Ala-Phe epimerase specificity reported previously, we describe the prediction and experimental verification of: ( i ) a new group of presumed Ala-Glu epimerases; ( ii ) several enzymes with specificity for hydrophobic dipeptides, including one from Cytophaga hutchinsonii that epimerizes D-Ala-D-Ala; and ( iii ) a small group of enzymes that epimerize cationic dipeptides. Crystal structures for certain of these enzymes further elucidate the structural basis of the specificities. The results highlight the potential of computational methods to guide experimental characterization of enzymes in an automated, large-scale fashion.

Discussion

Through a combination of bioinformatics, computational modeling, enzymology, and structural biology, we have identified several unique classes of dipeptide epimerases and characterized the structural and chemical determinants that underlie their specificity. The diversity of specificities, summarized in Fig. 2 , was unexpected and highlights challenges for functional assignment. Most of these sequences are annotated in Genbank generically as “mandelate racemase/muconate lactonizing enzyme” ( SI Appendix , Table S2 ), correctly establishing them as members of the enolase superfamily, but providing no information about their substrates, a critical first step in establishing their function. We were able to correctly identify these proteins as dipeptide epimerases based on the conservation of key residues in the binding sites, and homology models of the enzymes suggested a remarkable diversity of specificities. Some of the enzymes with divergent (i.e., not Ala-Glu) specificity are from plants or archaea, as well as a diverse group of bacterial species. The biological roles of these divergent specificities are unknown, but the in silico and in vitro studies presented here provide a starting point for in vivo studies.

The most important role of computational modeling in this work was to identify groups of enzymes likely to have novel substrate specificities, thereby guiding the experimental efforts by prioritizing specific enzymes for expression, purification, and screening. It is not feasible to experimentally characterize all or even most of the enzymes in this group, which is itself only a small fraction of the much larger functionally diverse enolase superfamily. Moreover, as is clear from Fig. 2 , there are no clear boundaries between specificities in the sequence map. That is, as has been seen for other classes of enzymes in the enolase superfamily ( 4 ), highly divergent enzymes can have the same substrates, such as the dominant specificity for L-Ala-L-Glu, which can be achieved with at least three different constellations of active site residues. Conversely, relatively closely related enzymes can exhibit different specificities.

For these reasons, functional annotation can benefit significantly from structural information, in addition to bioinformatics analysis of protein sequences, as also shown elsewhere ( 15 – 17 ). By constructing homology models and docking dipeptide substrates, we were able to generate specific hypotheses regarding substrate specificities. In particular, we correctly predicted the existence of three specificity groups, although the predictions were clearly qualitative; e.g., “cationic dipeptide epimerase.” It is not yet possible, in our hands at least, to predict the very best substrate; e.g., L-Lys-L-Arg, which has a value for k cat / K M 100 times larger than that of L-Lys-L-Lys for the dipeptide epimerase from M. capsulatus . Nonetheless, because these computational methods can be scaled to hundreds or thousands of sequences, this approach holds the potential to help guide large-scale functional assignment, particularly to identify enzymes likely to have novel substrate specificities, as we have demonstrated here.

The current efforts resulted in the identification of catalytic activities for a significant number of members of the enolase superfamily. However, more important than the discovery of these activities is the demonstrated synergy between computational modeling and informatics approaches, which represents an important step towards the realization of general strategies for functional annotation. The assignment of in vitro catalytic activities to individual enzymes affords an entry point for defining entire metabolic pathways. For example, in favorable cases, where interpretable genome/operon context exists, the determination of a single catalytic activity provides direct insights into the activities of proteins encoded by physically proximal genes and may ultimately lead to predictions regarding new metabolic pathways. In turn, these predictions offer significant cues for the design and interpretation of experiments to define the true in vivo functions of the initially annotated enzyme, as well as its associated metabolic pathway. Thus, the computational approaches described here are likely to represent an important component of the overall strategies needed to systematically define the metabolic repertoire present in nature.

Materials and Methods

The computational and experimental methods have been described previously ( 9 ) in the context of assigning the function of one member of this group. Detailed methods are described in SI Appendix .

Briefly, the computational predictions were generated using a multiple sequence alignment generated by Muscle ( 18 ). Homology models were created for all putative dipeptide epimerases with Prime (Schrodinger LLC), using the substrate-bound structure of B. subtilis AEE (PDB ID 1TKK) as the template. All 400 possible L/L-dipeptides were docked to the models using Glide SP (v4.0108, Schrodinger LLC). Consensus results were generated by analyzing the top hits (top 5%, i.e., top 20 hits) of all members of a phylogenetic group, characterizing the most prominent amino acids in the N-terminal and C-terminal positions for the dipeptides.

Network analyses were performed as previously described ( 11 ), modified as given in SI Appendix . Cytoscape networks ( 19 ) were created from these BLAST results at several different e-value cutoffs. Tools used for visualization of protein networks were created by the UCSF Resource for Biocomputing, Visualization, and Informatics and are available from the Resource ( http://www.rbvi.ucsf.edu ). All of the sequences considered in this study are available in the SFLD along with additional metadata for each by searching with the associated gi numbers, given in SI Appendix , Table S1 .
