---
pmid: '19154138'
title: The proline-rich N-terminal sequence of calcineurin Abeta determines substrate
  binding.
authors:
- Kilka S
- Erdmann F
- Migdoll A
- Fischer G
- Weiwad M
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi8019355
---

# The proline-rich N-terminal sequence of calcineurin Abeta determines substrate binding.
**Authors:** Kilka S, Erdmann F, Migdoll A, Fischer G, Weiwad M
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi8019355](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi8019355)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2009 Mar 10;48(9):1900-10. doi: 10.1021/bi8019355.

The proline-rich N-terminal sequence of calcineurin Abeta determines substrate 
binding.

Kilka S(1), Erdmann F, Migdoll A, Fischer G, Weiwad M.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Research Unit for Enzymology of Protein Folding, Weinbergweg 22, 
D-06120 Halle/Saale, Germany.

Three different genes of catalytic subunit A of the Ca(2+)-dependent 
serine/threonine protein phosphatase calcineurin (CaN) are encoded in the human 
genome forming heterodimers with regulatory subunit B. Even though physiological 
roles of CaN have been investigated extensively, less is known about the 
specific functions of the different catalytic isoforms. In this study, all human 
CaN holoenzymes containing either the alpha, beta, or gamma isoform of the 
catalytic subunit (CaN alpha, beta, or gamma, respectively) were expressed for 
the first time. Comparative kinetic analysis of the dephosphorylation of five 
specific CaN substrates provided evidence that the distinct isoforms of the 
catalytic subunit confer substrate specificities to the holoenzymes. CaN alpha 
dephosphorylates the transcription factor Elk-1 with 7- and 2-fold higher 
catalytic efficiencies than the beta and gamma isoforms, respectively. CaN gamma 
exhibits the highest k(cat)/K(m) value for DARPP-32, whereas the catalytic 
efficiencies for the dephosphorylation of NFAT and RII peptide were 3- and 
5-fold lower, respectively, when compared with the other isoforms. Elk-1 and 
NFAT reporter gene activity measurements revealed even more pronounced substrate 
preferences of CaNA isoforms. Moreover, kinetic analysis demonstrated that CaN 
beta exhibits for all tested protein substrates the lowest K(m) values. 
Enzymatic characterization of the CaN beta(P14G/P18G) variant as well as the 
N-terminal truncated form CaN beta(22-524) revealed that the proline-rich 
sequence of CaN beta is involved in substrate recognition. CaN beta(22-524) 
exhibits an at least 4-fold decreased substrate affinity and a 5-fold increased 
turnover number. Since this study demonstrates that all CaN isoforms display the 
same cytoplasmic subcellular distribution and are expressed in each tested cell 
line, differences in substrate specificities may determine specific 
physiological functions of the distinct isoforms.

DOI: 10.1021/bi8019355
PMID: 19154138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
