---
pmid: '7472523'
title: Bcl-2 overexpression prevents motoneuron cell body loss but not axonal degeneration
  in a mouse model of a neurodegenerative disease.
authors:
- Sagot Y
- Dubois-Dauphin M
- Tan SA
- de Bilbao F
- Aebischer P
- Martinou JC
- Kato AC
journal: J Neurosci
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6578059
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.15-11-07727.1995
---

# Bcl-2 overexpression prevents motoneuron cell body loss but not axonal degeneration in a mouse model of a neurodegenerative disease.
**Authors:** Sagot Y, Dubois-Dauphin M, Tan SA, de Bilbao F, Aebischer P, Martinou JC, Kato AC
**Journal:** J Neurosci (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.15-11-07727.1995](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.15-11-07727.1995)
**PMC:** [PMC6578059](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6578059/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 1995 Nov;15(11):7727-33. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.15-11-07727.1995.

Bcl-2 overexpression prevents motoneuron cell body loss but not axonal 
degeneration in a mouse model of a neurodegenerative disease.

Sagot Y(1), Dubois-Dauphin M, Tan SA, de Bilbao F, Aebischer P, Martinou JC, 
Kato AC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Centre Médical Universitaire, Geneva, 
Switzerland.

Bcl-2 and its analogs protect different classes of neurons from apoptosis in 
several experimental situations. These proteins may therefore provide a means 
for treatment of neurodegenerative diseases. We examined the effects of Bcl-2 
overexpression in a genetic mouse model with motor neuron disease (progressive 
motor neuronopathy/pmn). Pmn/pmn mice lose motoneurons and myelinated axons, and 
die at 6 weeks of age. When these mice were crossed with transgenic mice that 
overexpress human Bcl-2, there was a rescue of the facial motoneurons with a 
concomitant restoration of their normal soma size and expression of choline 
acetyltransferase. However, Bcl-2 overexpression did not prevent degeneration of 
myelinated axons in the facial and phrenic motor nerves and it did not increase 
the life span of the animals. Since Bcl-2 acts strictly on neuronal cell body 
survival without compensating for nerve degeneration in pmn/pmn/bcl-2 mice, this 
proto-oncogene would not in itself be sufficient for treatment of 
neurodegenerative diseases where axonal impairment is a major component.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.15-11-07727.1995
PMCID: PMC6578059
PMID: 7472523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
