---
reference_id: PMID:20132446
title: A bacterial elongation factor G homologue exclusively functions in ribosome recycling in the spirochaete Borrelia burgdorferi.
authors:
- Suematsu T
- Yokobori S
- Morita H
- Yoshinari S
- Ueda T
- Kita K
- Takeuchi N
- Watanabe Y
journal: Mol Microbiol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2010.07067.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A bacterial elongation factor G homologue exclusively functions in ribosome recycling in the spirochaete Borrelia burgdorferi.
**Authors:** Suematsu T, Yokobori S, Morita H, Yoshinari S, Ueda T, Kita K, Takeuchi N, Watanabe Y
**Journal:** Mol Microbiol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2958.2010.07067.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2958.2010.07067.x)

## Content

1. Mol Microbiol. 2010 Mar;75(6):1445-54. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2010.07067.x. 
Epub 2010 Feb 1.

A bacterial elongation factor G homologue exclusively functions in ribosome 
recycling in the spirochaete Borrelia burgdorferi.

Suematsu T(1), Yokobori S, Morita H, Yoshinari S, Ueda T, Kita K, Takeuchi N, 
Watanabe Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Chemistry, Graduate School of Medicine, the 
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Translation elongation factor G (EF-G) in bacteria plays two distinct roles in 
different phases of the translation system. EF-G catalyses the translocation of 
tRNAs on the ribosome in the elongation step, as well as the dissociation of the 
post-termination state ribosome into two subunits in the recycling step. In 
contrast to this conventional view, it has very recently been demonstrated that 
the dual functions of bacterial EF-G are distributed over two different EF-G 
paralogues in human mitochondria. In the present study, we show that the same 
division of roles of EF-G is also found in bacteria. Two EF-G paralogues are 
found in the spirochaete Borrelia burgdorferi, EF-G1 and EF-G2. We demonstrate 
that EF-G1 is a translocase, while EF-G2 is an exclusive recycling factor. We 
further demonstrate that B. burgdorferi EF-G2 does not require GTP hydrolysis 
for ribosome disassembly, provided that translation initiation factor 3 (IF-3) 
is present in the reaction. These results indicate that two B. burgdorferi EF-G 
paralogues are close relatives to mitochondrial EF-G paralogues rather than the 
conventional bacterial EF-G, in both their phylogenetic and biochemical 
features.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2010.07067.x
PMID: 20132446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]