---
pmid: '19575253'
title: Development of a high-density assay for long-chain fatty acyl-CoA elongases.
authors:
- Kitazawa H
- Miyamoto Y
- Shimamura K
- Nagumo A
- Tokita S
journal: Lipids
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s11745-009-3320-8
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Validation Study
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Development of a high-density assay for long-chain fatty acyl-CoA elongases.
**Authors:** Kitazawa H, Miyamoto Y, Shimamura K, Nagumo A, Tokita S
**Journal:** Lipids (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11745-009-3320-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11745-009-3320-8)

## Abstract

1. Lipids. 2009 Aug;44(8):765-73. doi: 10.1007/s11745-009-3320-8. Epub 2009 Jul
4.

Development of a high-density assay for long-chain fatty acyl-CoA elongases.

Kitazawa H(1), Miyamoto Y, Shimamura K, Nagumo A, Tokita S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Metabolic Disorder Research, Tsukuba Research Institute, BANYU 
Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Okubo 3, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

We established a convenient assay method for measuring elongation of very long 
chain fatty acids (ELOVLs) using a Unifilter-96 GF/C plate. The Unifilter GF/C 
plate preferentially interacts with hydrophobic end products of ELOVLs (i.e., 
long chain fatty acid), with minimal malonyl-CoA (C2 unit donor for fatty acid 
elongation) interaction. This new method results in the quick separation and 
detection of [(14)C] incorporated end products (e.g., [(14)C] palmitoyl-CoA) 
from reaction mixtures containing excessive amounts of [(14)C] malonyl-CoA. In 
the Unifilter-96 GF/C plate assay, recombinantly expressed human ELOVLs (i.e., 
ELOVL1,-2,-3,-5 and -6) displayed appreciable assay windows (>2-fold vs. 
mock-transfected control), enabling us to conduct comprehensive substrate 
profiling of ELOVLs. The substrate concentration profile of ELOVL6 in the 
Unifilter-96 GF/C plate assay is consistent with that obtained from the 
conventional liquid extraction method, thus, supporting the reliability of the 
Unifilter-96 GF/C plate assay. We then examined the substrate specificities of 
ELOVLs in a comprehensive fashion. As previously reported, ELOVL1, -3 and -6 
preferably elongated the saturated fatty acyl-CoAs while ELOVL2 and ELOVL5 
preferentially elongated the polyunsaturated fatty acyl-CoAs. This further 
confirms the Unifilter-96 GF/C plate assay reliability. Taken together, our 
newly developed assay provides a convenient and comprehensive assay platform for 
ELOVLs, allowing investigators to conduct high density screening and 
characterization of ELOVLs chemical tools.

DOI: 10.1007/s11745-009-3320-8
PMID: 19575253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
