---
pmid: '18203720'
title: Diversity in tissue expression, substrate binding, and SCF complex formation
  for a lectin family of ubiquitin ligases.
authors:
- Glenn KA
- Nelson RF
- Wen HM
- Mallinger AJ
- Paulson HL
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2442310
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M709508200
---

# Diversity in tissue expression, substrate binding, and SCF complex formation for a lectin family of ubiquitin ligases.
**Authors:** Glenn KA, Nelson RF, Wen HM, Mallinger AJ, Paulson HL
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M709508200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M709508200)
**PMC:** [PMC2442310](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2442310/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2008 May 9;283(19):12717-29. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M709508200. Epub
2008  Jan 18.

Diversity in tissue expression, substrate binding, and SCF complex formation for 
a lectin family of ubiquitin ligases.

Glenn KA(1), Nelson RF, Wen HM, Mallinger AJ, Paulson HL.

Author information:
(1)Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA. 
kevin-glenn@uiowa.edu

Post-translational modification of proteins regulates many cellular processes. 
Some modifications, including N-linked glycosylation, serve multiple functions. 
For example, the attachment of N-linked glycans to nascent proteins in the 
endoplasmic reticulum facilitates proper folding, whereas retention of high 
mannose glycans on misfolded glycoproteins serves as a signal for 
retrotranslocation and ubiquitin-mediated proteasomal degradation. Here we 
examine the substrate specificity of the only family of ubiquitin ligase 
subunits thought to target glycoproteins through their attached glycans. The 
five proteins comprising this FBA family (FBXO2, FBXO6, FBXO17, FBXO27, and 
FBXO44) contain a conserved G domain that mediates substrate binding. Using a 
variety of complementary approaches, including glycan arrays, we show that each 
family member has differing specificity for glycosylated substrates. 
Collectively, the F-box proteins in the FBA family bind high mannose and 
sulfated glycoproteins, with one FBA protein, FBX044, failing to bind any 
glycans on the tested arrays. Site-directed mutagenesis of two aromatic amino 
acids in the G domain demonstrated that the hydrophobic pocket created by these 
amino acids is necessary for high affinity glycan binding. All FBA proteins 
co-precipitated components of the canonical SCF complex (Skp1, Cullin1, and 
Rbx1), yet FBXO2 bound very little Cullin1, suggesting that FBXO2 may exist 
primarily as a heterodimer with Skp1. Using subunit-specific antibodies, we 
further demonstrate marked divergence in tissue distribution and developmental 
expression. These differences in substrate recognition, SCF complex formation, 
and tissue distribution suggest that FBA proteins play diverse roles in 
glycoprotein quality control.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M709508200
PMCID: PMC2442310
PMID: 18203720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Post-translational modification of proteins regulates many cellular
 processes. Some modifications, including N -linked glycosylation,
 serve multiple functions. For example, the attachment of N -linked
 glycans to nascent proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum facilitates proper
 folding, whereas retention of high mannose glycans on misfolded glycoproteins
 serves as a signal for retrotranslocation and ubiquitin-mediated proteasomal
 degradation. Here we examine the substrate specificity of the only family of
 ubiquitin ligase subunits thought to target glycoproteins through their
 attached glycans. The five proteins comprising this FBA family (FBXO2, FBXO6,
 FBXO17, FBXO27, and FBXO44) contain a conserved G domain that mediates
 substrate binding. Using a variety of complementary approaches, including
 glycan arrays, we show that each family member has differing specificity for
 glycosylated substrates. Collectively, the F-box proteins in the FBA family
 bind high mannose and sulfated glycoproteins, with one FBA protein, FBX044,
 failing to bind any glycans on the tested arrays. Site-directed mutagenesis of
 two aromatic amino acids in the G domain demonstrated that the hydrophobic
 pocket created by these amino acids is necessary for high affinity glycan
 binding. All FBA proteins co-precipitated components of the canonical SCF
 complex (Skp1, Cullin1, and Rbx1), yet FBXO2 bound very little Cullin1,
 suggesting that FBXO2 may exist primarily as a heterodimer with Skp1. Using
 subunit-specific antibodies, we further demonstrate marked divergence in
 tissue distribution and developmental expression. These differences in
 substrate recognition, SCF complex formation, and tissue distribution suggest
 that FBA proteins play diverse roles in glycoprotein quality control.

RESULTS

Divergent Binding of High Mannose Glycans —Previous studies
 have shown that FBXO2 and FBXO6 bind glycoproteins containing N -linked high mannose glycans
 ( 3 , 23 , 26 , 29 , 33 , 34 ). This raises the following
 important question. Do all five FBA family members bind similar substrate
 proteins and thus, like FBXO2 and FBXO6, have the capacity to participate in
 GERAD? To begin addressing this question, we first tested the ability of all
 five full-length FBA proteins to co-immunoprecipitate high mannose containing
 glycoproteins.

As anticipated, proteins co-precipitating with FBXO2 stained robustly with
 ConA, a lectin that specifically recognizes high mannose glycans
 ( Fig. 1 A ). Thus, many
 if not all proteins bound by FBXO2 are high mannose glycoproteins. As shown in Fig. 1 A , FBXO2 is also
 expressed at higher levels than other FBA proteins, consistent with our
 previous report ( 27 ). Both
 FBXO6 and FBXO27 displayed much more modest co-precipitation of ConA-staining
 proteins. In contrast, FBXO44 and FBXO17 displayed little if any binding to
 high mannose glycoproteins, validating earlier work performed with full-length
 FBXO44 and a truncated form of FBXO17
 ( 19 ). Similar results were
 also obtained when immunoprecipitations were performed in the presence of
 either the proteasome inhibitor lactacystin or
 benzyloxycarbonyl-VAD-fluoromethyl ketone, an inhibitor of the cytosolic
 glycosidase PNGase F (data not shown)
 ( 35 ). Thus, the absence of
 robust high mannose glycoprotein binding by some FBA family members is not
 because of rapid proteasomal degradation of substrates or the removal of
 ConA-binding sites by PNGase F.

To further characterize the binding of FBXO2, FBXO6, and FBXO27 to high
 mannose-containing glycoproteins, we created GST fusion proteins of these
 three FBA family members. After large scale purification from a bacterial
 expression system, aliquots of these recombinant proteins were incubated with
 COS-7 cell lysates. The GST-FBA fusion proteins were then precipitated with
 glutathione-Sepharose beads and the eluents separated on SDS-polyacrylamide
 gels. As shown in Fig.
 1 B , proteins co-precipitating with these fusion proteins
 again stained robustly with ConA, demonstrating that FBXO2, FBXO6, and FBXO27
 do not require eukaryotic post-translational modification to bind substrate.
 The prominent 37-kDa band found in the GST-FBXO27 pulldown is not consistently
 observed, and the continued presence of this band in the null mutant suggests
 that this binding may be nonspecific.

To verify the specificity of binding, we used site-directed mutagenesis on
 each FBA protein to replace two hydrophobic amino acids in the G domain shown
 to form the sugar binding pocket
 ( 23 ) (supplemental Fig. 1, A and B ). These predicted “Null” mutants of
 FBXO2 and FBXO6 demonstrated a loss of binding to ConA-detectable proteins
 ( Fig. 1 B ). FBXO27-Null
 showed reduced binding to ConA-detectable proteins; this residual binding
 suggests that other amino acids in its G domain may contribute to glycan
 binding ( 23 ). The loss of
 binding by Null mutants indicates that the binding of FBXO2, FBXO6, and FBXO27
 to ConA-detectable proteins is specific and mediated primarily by these two
 hydrophobic residues in the G domain.

N -Linked glycosylation is not the sole means of glycosylation in
 the cell. Another important type, O -linked glycosylation, occurs on
 serine or threonine residues. Although no lectins specifically recognize O -linked glycans, two antibodies recognize a subset of O -linked glycoproteins containing O -GlcNAc. Using these
 antibodies, we did not detect immunoreactive bands co-precipitating with any
 of the five FBA proteins (data not shown). This result suggests that the FBA
 family does not recognize O -GlcNAc glycans.

In summary, our ConA results suggest that FBA proteins differ in their
 affinity for glycoproteins decorated with high mannose glycans
 ( Table 2 ), and that this
 affinity is largely determined by two hydrophobic amino acids in the G domain.
 The FBA proteins broadly can be separated into the following three classes:
 robust binding (FBXO2), moderate binding (FBXO6 and FBXO27), and little or no
 binding (FBXO44 and FBXO17) to high mannose glycans.

Divergent Binding to Glycans —Although the above results show
 that some FBA proteins co-precipitate high mannose glycoproteins, they do not
 demonstrate that these proteins have a specific and direct affinity for high
 mannose glycans, nor do they answer the question whether any FBA proteins can
 bind other glycans. A powerful way to assess affinity for a wide range of
 glycans is the glycan array developed by the NIH-sponsored Consortium for
 Functional Glycomics. Carbohydrates on the array are chemically synthesized
 without a protein backbone, allowing the affinity of FBA proteins for
 individual glycan units to be assessed independent of protein context. Binding
 affinities are reported as RFUs, and can be used to determine the relative
 binding affinity of a given FBXO protein for different glycans on the array.
 Individual cutoff values for significant binding were set as explained under
 “Materials and Methods.” Glycan array experiments were performed
 using recombinant N-terminal GST-FBA fusion proteins except in the case of
 FBXO2, where GST was cleaved prior to final purification. Protein expression,
 confirmed by Direct Blue staining of purified fractions (supplemental Fig.
 2 A ), revealed an overall purity of 50% full-length fusion
 proteins.

As shown in Fig. 2 ,
 supplemental Fig. 2, B and C , and Table 3 , the five FBA proteins
 displayed diverse glycan binding. In contrast, GST as a negative control
 showed no affinity for any glycans on the array (supplemental Fig.
 2 B ).

FBXO2 reproducibly and specifically bound high mannose glycans with high
 affinity (high RFU value; Fig.
 2 A ). This result is consistent with our ConA results and
 previously published data ( 3 , 19 , 27 , 29 ). FBXO2 bound avidly to
 Man5-chitobiose through Man9-chitobiose (glycan numbers (GNs) 140–145)
 but did not bind Man3, Man4, or Man5 alone (GNs 135–139)
 ( Fig. 2 A ),
 demonstrating the importance of the chitobiose core. We also observed weaker
 binding to mannose 6-phosphate (GN 18). FBXO2 did not bind sulfated glycans
 (GNs 10–17, 19–22, 25–26) except for weak binding to
 3′-sulfated neolactosamine (GN 12) and 4′-sulfated lactosamine (GN
 17). Negligible binding of FBXO2 was observed to the six glycoproteins
 included in the array (GNs 1–6). These glycoproteins possess a wide
 range of complex carbohydrates, including single and multiple, biantennary,
 and triantennary oligosaccharides ( Table
 3 ). Overall, the results demonstrate that FBXO2 specifically and
 directly binds a narrow set of glycans: of the ∼200 sugars tested, high
 affinity binding was observed only for those glycans with a high mannose
 carbohydrate attached to a chitobiose core.

Using a newer version of the array, we found that FBXO6 binds a much
 broader range of glycans than FBXO2 ( Fig.
 2 B ). Like FBXO2, and consistent with our ConA results,
 FBXO6 bound high mannose glycans with relatively high affinity (GNs 194 and
 197–199) but did not bind conformations of trior penta-mannose lacking
 the chitobiose core (GNs 189–191 and 195–196). In contrast to
 FBXO2, however, FBXO6 also bound with high affinity to all six glycoproteins
 (GNs 1–6) and to di-sulfated lactose and lactosamine families of glycans
 (GNs 26–30, 35, 38–39, and 45). FBXO6 also showed more modest
 binding to mono-sulfated sugars (GNs 31–34, 36–37, 42–43,
 46–47, and 139–140) but negligible binding to the core lactose and
 lactosamine glycans (GNs 152–155) of these sulfated sugars, suggesting
 that FBXO6 binding is enhanced by sugar sulfation. Finally, mannose
 6-phosphate was also bound by FBXO6 (GN 41).

In contrast to FBXO2 and FBXO6, FBXO17 did not bind high mannose glycans
 (GNs 192–194 and 197–199) ( Fig.
 2 C ). In many other respects, however, FBXO17 displayed
 similar binding properties to that of FBXO6. For example, it bound with high
 affinity to glycoproteins (GNs 1–6) and modest affinity to polysulfated
 glycans (GNs 26, 28, 29, 30, 34, 35, 38, 39, and 45). Unlike FBXO6, however,
 FBXO17 showed markedly reduced affinity for 6′-mono-sulfated glycans and
 negligible affinity for 4′-mono-sulfated glycans.

FBXO27 did not bind appreciably to any family of glycans on the array,
 including high mannose glycans (GNs 194 and 197–199), although it did
 bind a single isolated sulfated protein (GN 26)
 ( Fig. 2 D ). The failure
 of FBXO27 to bind any other related sulfated glycans (GNs 27–30, 35,
 38–39, and 45) suggests that this binding to a single sulfated protein
 may be nonspecific. FBXO27 did bind several glycoproteins containing a mixture
 of glycan moieties (GNs 1–6) ( Table
 3 ). The absence of binding to the high mannose glycans of the
 array differs from our earlier IP data for FBXO27
 ( Fig. 1 ), which showed weak
 co-precipitation of high mannose-containing glycoproteins. Thus, the IP
 results may reflect binding of FBXO27 to other glycans on co-precipitated
 proteins that coincidentally also contain high mannose groups.

Unique among FBA proteins, FBXO44 demonstrated no significant binding to
 any of the >200 glycans on the array (supplemental Fig. 2 C ).
 Although we did not expect high mannose binding based upon our IP data
 ( Fig. 1 ), we did not anticipate
 a complete absence of binding to any glycans in the array. Three separate
 preparations of recombinant FBXO44 protein from two different expression
 vectors gave the same negative results.

In summary, the array results reveal surprising diversity in the range of
 glycan binding by the FBA family of proteins
 ( Table 3 ). FBXO2 and FBXO6
 bound high mannose glycans. FBXO6, FBXO17, and to a lesser degree FBXO27 bound
 a set of glycoproteins with undefined glycan moieties containing complex
 oligosaccharides. FBXO6, and to a lesser degree FBXO17, also bound sulfated
 glycans, a class of potential target substrates not previously described for
 any ubiquitin ligases. The results suggest that FBXO2 and FBXO6 regulate high
 mannose glycoproteins; FBXO6 and FBXO17 regulate sulfated glycoproteins,
 whereas FBXO6, FBXO17, and FBXO27 may regulate certain complex glycoproteins.
 This diversity of glycan binding expands the repertoire of potential
 substrates for this family of F-box proteins.

Divergent Binding to Model Glycans and Glycoproteins —The
 glycan array results demonstrated that members of the FBA protein family
 specifically and directly bind glycans. Although informative, glycan arrays
 are limited by the fact that each spot contains a single glycan homogeneously
 attached to an artificial matrix. In vivo, N -linked glycosylation is
 rarely complete and homogeneous; many glycoproteins contain multiple potential N -linked glycosylation sites that are partially occupied by a variety
 of oligosaccharides. To model FBA protein binding to actual glycoproteins, we
 selected potential candidate proteins that contain completely occupied N -linked sites with a fairly uniform set of oligosaccharides. Model
 glycoproteins selected for testing also possessed at least one glycan group to
 which one or more FBA proteins displayed significant binding on the glycan
 array.

To model high mannose glycan-containing glycoproteins, we chose bovine
 RNase B because it contains a single high mannose glycan
 ( 36 ). Because certain FBA
 proteins also bound some of the six arrayed glycoproteins containing
 heterogeneous, complex oligosaccharides (see Table 3 ), we also explored this
 binding, choosing two proteins: human α1-acid glycoprotein (AGP) and
 bovine lactoferrin. AGP, which on the array was bound with high affinity by
 three FBA proteins, contains a heterogeneous mixture of five complex glycans
 in multiple isoforms ( 37 ).
 Lactoferrin consists of two isoforms, each containing two high mannose glycans
 with variable additional complex glycans
 ( 38 ). To model sulfated
 glycans we chose heparin, a disaccharide repeat of GlcNAc and glucuronic acid
 (GlcUA) sulfated at the C-6 position and N position of GlcNAc, and at the C-2
 position of IdoUA, the epimerized form of GlcA
 ( 39 ). Finally, to exclude the
 possibility that FBA protein binding to sulfated glycans on the array merely
 reflected nonspecific interactions with charged sulfates, we tested binding to
 a sulfated glycoprotein with a different glycan core, chondroitin sulfate.
 Chondroitin sulfate is a glycosaminoglycan with disaccharide repeat of GalNAc
 and GlcUA, sulfated at the C-4 and C-6 positions of GalNAc and at the C-2
 position of IdoUA, again the epimerized form of GlcA
 ( 40 ).

We tested each individual FBA protein against this battery of test
 glycoproteins ( Fig.
 3 A ). These model glycoproteins were attached to Affi-Gel
 beads and incubated with GST-FBA fusion proteins, and Affi-Gel bound fractions
 were eluted. Only binding by the uppermost GST-FBA band is reported as it
 represents full-length fusion protein. Because the natural substrates for FBA
 proteins may be misfolded glycoproteins in which the chitobiose core is more
 accessible ( 19 ), we also
 simulated the unfolded state by denaturing aliquots of immobilized test
 glycoproteins and assessing FBA protein binding.

FBXO2, as expected, bound both high mannose-containing model glycoproteins,
 RNase B and lactoferrin. Denatured and native forms of RNase B were bound
 equally well, whereas denatured lactoferrin bound slightly more FBXO2 than
 native lactoferrin. This result suggests that glycoprotein denaturation may
 enhance FBXO2 binding by fully exposing the chitobiose core
 ( 19 ). FBXO2 did not bind test
 proteins containing sulfated glycans, underscoring its narrow binding profile
 for high mannose glycans.

Unexpectedly, FBXO6 displayed very low affinity for all test glycoproteins,
 binding only modestly to lactoferrin and negligibly to RNase B. This lack of
 binding suggests that the affinity of FBXO6 for a single high mannose glycan
 on a protein may be low. Lectins generally bind ligands with low affinity, and
 increasing the number of binding sites on a substrate (multivalency) can
 increase binding avidity by 1–3 orders of magnitude
 ( 41 ). Hence, FBXO6 may bind
 lactoferrin via its multiple high mannose sites but lack the ability to bind
 the single high mannose site present on RNase B. Alternatively, because FBXO6
 bound both complex and high mannose glycans on the array
 ( Fig. 2 B ), FBXO6 may
 bind lactoferrin through its complex glycans. When lactoferrin was denatured
 to fully expose the chitobiose core, FBXO6 binding was enhanced, highlighting
 the importance of the chitobiose core to binding. Although FBXO6 bound diand
 monosulfated glycans on the glycan array, it failed to bind the primarily
 tri-sulfated heparin and chondroitin sulfate, suggesting that polysulfation
 could inhibit FBXO6 binding.

FBXO17 bound heparin strongly and chondroitin sulfate weakly, suggesting
 that FBXO17 binds sulfated glycans. The preferential binding of FBXO17 to
 heparin may be due to differences in sulfation or in the underlying core
 sugars. FBXO17 bound strongly to lactoferrin but minimally to RNase B. Because
 FBXO17 did not bind high mannose glycans on the glycan array, its binding to
 lactoferrin likely reflects binding to the complex glycan moieties on the
 protein.

Consistent with the glycan array results, FBXO27 and FBXO44 did not bind
 test glycoproteins in our pulldown experiments. Weak binding of FBXO44 to
 denatured heparin was observed, but as discussed below, this binding may be
 nonspecific. These results suggest that these two FBA proteins may have a very
 limited set of target glycoproteins.

In these assays we focused on the binding of full-length recombinant
 GST-FBA proteins, avoiding any potential contributions from truncated fusion
 protein products. The results, which are generally consistent with our glycan
 array findings, again highlight the apparent diversity of glycan binding by
 this family of proteins.

A Hydrophobic Pocket in the G Domain Is Necessary for Glycoprotein
 Binding by FBA Proteins —The structure of FBXO2 suggests that it
 binds the chitobiose core of glycans via a hydrophobic pocket formed by two
 consecutive amino acids containing aromatic rings, tyrosine and tryptophan
 (Tyr-278 and Trp-279 in the human FBXO2 sequence) (supplemental Fig.
 1 A ) ( 23 , 33 ). Because of the high
 degree of amino acid identity among the G domains of the FBA family members
 (supplemental Fig. 4), we hypothesized that all five bind glycans in a similar
 manner requiring this hydrophobic pocket. To test this hypothesis, we mutated
 these two critical amino acids to alanine in the four family members that were
 shown to bind glycoproteins (FBXO2, FBXO6, FBXO17, and FBXO44) (supplemental
 Fig. 1 B ). As can be seen in Fig.
 3 B , these double alanine substitutions markedly reduced
 binding in the pulldown assays. Thus the hydrophobic pocket formed by these
 adjacent amino acids appears to be essential for core glycan binding by all
 FBA family members. The nearly complete elimination of glycan and glycoprotein
 binding by alanine substitutions in just two amino acids in the G domain
 suggests that the G domains assume a highly conserved structure that binds
 core glycans in a similar fashion for all FBA proteins.

Finally we tested binding of all FBA proteins to AGP because FBXO6, FBXO17,
 and FBXO27 all bound AGP on the arrays. Unexpectedly, however, none of the FBA
 proteins were pulled down significantly by immobilized AGP
 ( Fig. 3 C ). The lack of
 binding may be due to differences in glycoprotein attachment or presentation
 between the Affi-Gel beads and the array matrix. This negative result
 highlights the importance of confirming glycan array data by additional
 methods, including pulldown assays.

Divergent Binding of FBA Proteins to Components of the SCF
 Complex —As the substrate recognition subunits of multiprotein
 ubiquitin ligase complexes, F-box proteins have no intrinsic catalytic
 activity of their own. For F-box proteins, the canonical ubiquitin ligase is
 the assembled SCF complex (for S kp1, C ul1, F -box and Rbx1). The F-box domain interacts directly and primarily
 with Skp1 but also forms two hydrogen bonds with Cul1
 ( 42 ). Cul1 is a large bridging
 protein that interacts with Skp1 through its N-terminal region and with Rbx1
 through its C terminus. When an SCF complex binds a substrate protein, a
 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme associates with the complex via Rbx1 and
 ubiquitinates the substrate protein.

To examine the ability of all five FBA proteins to associate with SCF
 complexes, we first performed immunoprecipitations after transfecting COS-7
 cells with constructs encoding FLAG-tagged FBA proteins. All FBA proteins
 co-immunoprecipitated endogenous Skp1 ( Fig.
 4 A ). Although FBXO6, -44, -17, and -27 also
 co-immunoprecipitated Cullin1, FBXO2 failed to do so.

Very little Cullin1 was detected in our COS-7 cells
 ( Fig. 4 A ), although a
 band was observed upon longer exposure in the Control Long exp.
 lanes . To ensure that the lack of FBXO2 binding to Cullin1 was not due to
 reduced levels of SCF components in COS-7 cells, we co-transfected COS-7 cells
 with plasmids expressing FLAG-tagged FBA proteins and the other three proteins
 of the SCF complex and then assessed complex formation by co-IP. All FBA
 family members co-immunoprecipitated components of the SCF complex
 ( Fig. 4 B ), suggesting
 that they can assemble into an F-box ubiquitin ligase complex. However, not
 all FBA proteins co-precipitated SCF components identically. Although the
 amount of co-precipitated Skp1 correlated directly with the input for each FBA
 protein, FBXO2 bound far less Cul1 and Rbx1 than the other four FBA proteins.
 These results are consistent with recent work suggesting that FBXO2 exists
 primarily as a heterodimer with Skp1 in some tissues, such as the inner ear
 organ of Corti ( 30 , 43 , 44 ). This variation in Cul1
 binding likely results from differences in the F-box amino acid sequence
 (supplemental Fig. 4) and the linker sequence between the F-box and G domain
 ( 45 ).

Expression of the FBA Gene Family —The emergence of the FBA
 family in higher metazoans (supplemental Fig. 5), together with the evidence
 presented above, suggests an expansion of functional diversity during
 evolution. Levels of high mannose, complex, and sulfated glycoproteins vary in
 a tissue-specific manner. Accordingly, FBA family members might display
 tissue-specific distributions reflecting differences in glycoprotein
 distribution. To address this possibility, we analyzed the expression of the
 entire FBA protein family by Western blot.

For the five FBA proteins, antibodies have only been reported against mouse
 Fbxo2 (Fbxo and FBXO refer to mouse and human FBA proteins, respectively)
 ( 29 , 46 ). Rabbit polyclonal
 antibodies were thus generated against peptides specific for each mouse FBA
 protein (supplemental Fig. 3) and used to examine the tissue distribution for
 each FBA protein in adult mouse tissues
 ( Fig. 5 ).

A strong immunoreactive protein of the correct molecular weight for Fbxo2
 was expressed only in brain. On overexposed blots a faint signal was also
 detected in pancreas and adipose tissue (data not shown), suggesting weak
 Fbxo2 expression in these tissues
 ( 19 , 27 , 46 ).

An immunoreactive protein of the expected molecular weight for Fbxo6 was
 expressed in liver and kidney. The heart, brain, and pancreas contained
 immunoreactive bands of higher molecular weight. These bands could reflect
 post-translational modifications, higher molecular weight isoforms as noted
 for other F-box proteins ( 47 ),
 or antibody cross-reactivity to unrelated proteins.

Fbxo44 was expressed in diverse tissues, including brain, liver, pancreas,
 and adipose tissue, with weaker signals seen in other tissues after longer
 exposures. The major identified protein migrated ∼4–8 kDa larger
 than full-length Fbxo44 expressed in transfected COS-7 cells. However, when
 recombinant Fbxo44 was expressed in a murine hepatic cell line, it displayed
 the same apparent molecular weight as seen in tissue lysates (data not shown).
 This cell-specific difference in molecular weight may reflect a
 post-translational modification.

Like Fbxo2, Fbxo17 was primarily expressed in brain, where a single
 immunoreactive protein of the correct predicted molecular weight was detected.
 Much weaker Fbxo17 expression was also observed in lung.

The final FBA protein, Fbxo27, was expressed in muscle, heart, and brain.
 Endogenous Fbxo27 electrophoresed as a slightly larger protein than the
 truncated mouse Fbxo27 protein used as an antigenic marker.

Our expression analyses of the five FBA proteins yielded results similar,
 but not identical, to previously published mRNA expression analyses for the
 FBA genes ( 19 , 21 ). The differences may
 reflect cross-reactivity of the nucleic acid probes or antibodies, weak
 antibody detection at low protein expression levels, or tissue-specific
 differences in post-transcriptional regulation, as reported for many other
 ubiquitin ligases
 ( 48 – 53 ).

In summary, the expression patterns for the FBA proteins differ
 substantially. Contrary to earlier mRNA studies, at least one FBA protein is
 recognized by our polyclonal antibodies in every tissue we examined, and many
 tissues express several FBA proteins. This divergence in tissue distribution
 may reflect the need for different FBA proteins to regulate the cellular
 glycome in a tissue-specific manner. For instance, major
 glycoprotein-producing tissues include the brain, liver, and pancreas, all of
 which express multiple FBA family members. In contrast, production of
 sulfated, galactose-terminated glycoproteins is particularly robust in the
 brain
 ( 54 – 56 ).
 Fbxo6 and Fbxo17, the only two FBA proteins that bind sulfated,
 galactose-terminated glycoproteins based on our analysis (Tables 2 and 3 ), are both expressed in
 brain.

Developmental Expression of the Fbxo2/Fbxo44/Fbxo6 Gene
 Cluster —Because many glycoproteins and genes involved in
 glycoprotein synthesis are developmentally regulated, we wondered whether the
 expression of FBA family members likewise is developmentally regulated. To
 assess developmental expression, we chose brain and liver as target organs
 because each tissue expresses at least two FBA family members and supports
 robust production of glycoproteins. Developmental expression was examined for
 the three genes comprising the gene cluster on mouse chromosome 4
 ( Fbxo2/Fbxo6/Fbxo44 ), which is syntenic with the chromosome 1 cluster
 in humans. For this analysis, we used entire mouse embryo extracts at
 embryonic day 7 and brain or liver tissue isolated from embryonic day 16
 through various postnatal ages.

The results reveal marked differences in the developmental expression of
 the three genes comprising this cluster
 ( Fig. 6 ). Fbxo44 was
 expressed abundantly, Fbxo6 weakly, and Fbxo2 not at all in
 lysates from whole embryos. In brain, Fbxo2 protein was expressed
 predominantly in adult tissue and was absent from embryonic tissue, consistent
 with earlier Northern blot results
 ( 19 ). In contrast, Fbxo44 was maximally expressed in brain during embryonic development
 but declined thereafter. In the developing liver, however, Fbxo44 and Fbxo6 were coordinately expressed, increasing in parallel during
 development ( Fig. 6 ). The
 differing patterns of developmental and tissue-specific expression for the
 three FBA genes comprising this gene cluster parallel the similar, divergent
 patterns observed for glycosyltransferases involved in glycoprotein synthesis
 ( 57 – 60 ).

DISCUSSION

Among F-box ubiquitin ligase subunits, the FBA family displays a unique
 ability to bind glycoproteins. Our results reveal marked functional
 differences among the FBA proteins, beginning with differing affinity for high
 mannose-containing glycoproteins. Subsequent glycan array analysis
 demonstrated wide divergence in the glycans bound by individual FBA proteins;
 some FBA proteins only bound high mannose glycans whereas others bound a wider
 range, including complex, sulfated glycans. Guided by the array results, we
 further examined the ability of FBA proteins to bind model glycans in the
 context of native or denatured glycoproteins. This approach, coupled with
 site-directed mutagenesis, revealed that glycan binding requires the conserved
 hydrophobic pocket within the FBA domain. We also uncovered unexpected
 variability in the ability of FBA proteins to assemble into a full SCF
 complex, the canonical complex for F-box protein ubiquitin ligases. Finally,
 studies with newly generated antibodies specific for each FBA protein revealed
 differing expression patterns during development and in adult tissues.
 Overall, we observed wide diversity in glycan binding, SCF complex formation,
 and tissue distribution for this small family of proteins. This diversity is
 reminiscent of that seen with glycotransferases and glycoprotein degradation
 enzymes, which regulate tissue and cellular glycomes
 ( 57 – 60 ).

Our results lead us to conclude that only some members of the FBA family
 (FBXO2 and FBXO6) could function in GERAD by recognizing the signature high
 mannose glycan moiety present on retrotranslocated ER proteins. We suggest
 instead that collectively the FBA proteins recognize a broader array of
 glycoproteins. In contrast to the narrow specificity of FBXO2 for high mannose
 glycans, FBXO6 is a more promiscuous glycan binder that also recognizes
 sulfated glycans and glycoproteins. The failure of FBXO44 to bind glycans on
 the glycan array or the immobilized glycoprotein pulldown assay suggests it
 may not bind glycans. However, FBXO44 does contain the highly conserved G
 domain; moreover, phylogenetic analysis places it in the FBXO2 clade, and
 uniquely it does undergo tissue-specific post-translational modification.
 Hence, although we believe FBXO44 may bind glycans, and suspect our failure to
 observe this is either because of a failure to discover the appropriate
 glycoprotein substrate or because of a post-translational modification of
 FBXO44, we cannot formally exclude the possibility that FBXO44 alone among the
 FBA family does not bind glycoproteins. FBXO17 has a similar binding profile
 to FBXO6, except that it fails to bind high mannose glycoproteins.

Because sulfation and conversion to complex glycans occur in the Golgi, the
 affinity of FBXO6 and FBXO17 for these classes of glycoproteins implies that
 they may regulate secreted or membrane glycoproteins within or beyond the
 Golgi in the secretory pathway. It is intriguing to speculate how
 glycoproteins processed by the Golgi might become available to interact with
 cytoplasmic FBA proteins. Perhaps misfolded, complex (sulfated) glycoproteins
 are exported directly from the Golgi into the cytoplasm through an
 unidentified quality control process. Alternatively, misfolded proteins from
 the Golgi might return to the ER for release into the cytoplasm via
 conventional ER-associated degradation. Finally, because lysosomes process
 most complex and sulfated glycoproteins, FBXO6 and FBXO17 could perform a
 scavenger function and degrade proteins that escape the lysosome or are left
 in residual vesicular bodies. Further work is needed to examine these
 hypotheses, identify substrate proteins, and define the residues within the
 FBA domain critical for binding sulfated glycans.

Although all FBA family proteins were shown to bind core components of the
 SCF ubiquitin ligase complex, the degree of binding varied. Interestingly,
 FBXO2 showed much less binding of Cul1/Rbx1 than the rest of the FBA family
 members. An in silico explanation for this observation is that, among
 FBA proteins, FBXO2 lacks the glutamate residue required for hydrogen bonding
 to tyrosine in Cul1. In FBXO2 this glutamate is replaced by a proline, likely
 reducing affinity of FBXO2 for Cul1
 ( 42 ). Recent work has also
 shown that the linker region between the F box and G domain in FBXO2 may
 suppress Cul1 binding ( 45 ).
 Replacing the linker sequence in FBXO2 with that found in FBXO6 restores some
 Cul1 binding ( 45 ), suggesting
 that there may be multiple regions of contact between Cul1 and these FBA
 proteins. Thus, although all members of the FBA protein family can form SCF
 complexes, FBXO2 may also participate in heterodimeric complexes with Skp1, as
 we and others have found in the organ of Corti of the inner ear
 ( 30 , 61 , 62 ).

The variable yet widespread distribution of FBA proteins in post-mitotic
 tissues highlights their potential importance in regulating the cellular
 glycome. At the same time, however, their divergent tissue distribution
 suggests a degree of cell-specific substrate recognition for individual FBA
 proteins. It may be significant that in three tissues dedicated to heavy
 glycoprotein synthesis and secretion (brain, liver, and pancreas), we observed
 expression of multiple FBA family members.

In some tissues for certain FBA genes, there are discrepancies in
 expression at the RNA level
 ( 19 , 21 ) and at the protein level
 reported here. A similar discrepancy in expression patterns has been reported
 for other ubiquitin ligases
 ( 52 ), and tissue-specific
 distributions have been reported for different isoforms of lysosomal enzymes
 ( 63 – 65 ).
 These differences in expression could reflect tissue-specific
 auto-ubiquitination of ubiquitin-protein isopeptide ligases
 ( 50 , 51 ) or the expression of
 splice variants. Approximately 20% of all gene products are expressed as
 splice variants ( 66 ), and
 tissue-specific isoforms have been reported for other ubiquitin ligases
 ( 47 ). Consistent with this
 possibility, multiple FBA protein splice variants exist in the NCBI data base
 ( 67 ). Because our antibodies
 were raised against peptides, they may not recognize particular FBA splice
 variants. The functional characterization of these potential variants is an
 interesting subject for further study.

In summary, our analysis of the FBA family of F-box proteins demonstrates
 it to be a novel and functionally divergent group of lectin-like ubiquitin
 ligase subunits. One subset of this family recognizes high mannose glycans,
 whereas another subset preferentially recognizes sulfated glycans. Despite
 their close similarity at the sequence level, the F-box proteins differ
 markedly in spatial and temporal expression. This functional diversity
 suggests that although one or more FBA proteins may participate in GERAD, the
 family as a whole assumes a broader role in glycoprotein homeostasis. It will
 be important to define the substrate specificity in vivo for each
 member of this family of ubiquitin ligases to understand the specific role
 each protein plays in glycoprotein quality control.
