---
pmid: '8582630'
title: vph6 mutants of Saccharomyces cerevisiae require calcineurin for growth and
  are defective in vacuolar H(+)-ATPase assembly.
authors:
- Hemenway CS
- Dolinski K
- Cardenas ME
- Hiller MA
- Jones EW
- Heitman J
journal: Genetics
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1206848
doi: 10.1093/genetics/141.3.833
---

# vph6 mutants of Saccharomyces cerevisiae require calcineurin for growth and are defective in vacuolar H(+)-ATPase assembly.
**Authors:** Hemenway CS, Dolinski K, Cardenas ME, Hiller MA, Jones EW, Heitman J
**Journal:** Genetics (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1093/genetics/141.3.833](https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/141.3.833)
**PMC:** [PMC1206848](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1206848/)

## Abstract

1. Genetics. 1995 Nov;141(3):833-44. doi: 10.1093/genetics/141.3.833.

vph6 mutants of Saccharomyces cerevisiae require calcineurin for growth and are 
defective in vacuolar H(+)-ATPase assembly.

Hemenway CS(1), Dolinski K, Cardenas ME, Hiller MA, Jones EW, Heitman J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North 
Carolina 27710, USA.

We have characterized a Saccharomyces cerevisiae mutant strain that is 
hypersensitive to cyclosporin A (CsA) and FK506, immunosuppressants that inhibit 
calcineurin, a serine-threonine-specific phosphatase (PP2B). A single nuclear 
mutation, designated cev1 for calcineurin essential for viability, is 
responsible for the CsA-FK506-sensitive phenotype. The peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans 
isomerases cyclophilin A and FKBP12, respectively, mediate CsA and FK506 
toxicity in the cev1 mutant strain. We demonstrate that cev1 is an allele of the 
VPH6 gene and that vph6 mutant strains fail to assemble the vacuolar H(+)-ATPase 
(V-ATPase). The VPH6 gene was mapped on chromosome VIII and is predicted to 
encode a 181-amino acid (21 kD) protein with no identity to other known 
proteins. We find that calcineurin is essential for viability in many mutant 
strains with defects in V-ATPase function or vacuolar acidification. In 
addition, we find that calcineurin modulates extracellular acidification in 
response to glucose, which we propose occurs via calcineurin regulation of the 
plasma membrane H(+)-ATPase PMA1. Taken together, our findings suggest 
calcineurin plays a general role in the regulation of cation transport and 
homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1093/genetics/141.3.833
PMCID: PMC1206848
PMID: 8582630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
