---
pmid: '9765217'
title: Induction of Rb-associated protein (RbAp46) by Wilms' tumor suppressor WT1
  mediates growth inhibition.
authors:
- Guan LS
- Rauchman M
- Wang ZY
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.42.27047
---

# Induction of Rb-associated protein (RbAp46) by Wilms' tumor suppressor WT1 mediates growth inhibition.
**Authors:** Guan LS, Rauchman M, Wang ZY
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.273.42.27047](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.42.27047)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Oct 16;273(42):27047-50. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.42.27047.

Induction of Rb-associated protein (RbAp46) by Wilms' tumor suppressor WT1 
mediates growth inhibition.

Guan LS(1), Rauchman M, Wang ZY.

Author information:
(1)Division of Growth Regulation, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel-Deaconess 
Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

The Wilms' tumor suppressor gene, wt1, encodes a zinc-finger transcription 
factor, WT1, that plays an important role in controlling urogenital development. 
Previously, WT1 has been shown to inhibit cell growth and to repress 
transcription initiated from the promoters of a number of growth-promoting 
genes. However, few physiological target genes that are transcriptionally 
activated by WT1 have been established. Using suppression subtractive 
hybridization polymerase chain reaction, we isolated a WT1 target gene that is 
up-regulated about 15-fold in cells expressing WT1. The gene was identified as 
retinoblastoma suppressor (Rb)-associated protein 46 (RbAp46), a nuclear protein 
that interacts physically with Rb and is a component of the human mSin3 
co-repressor complex. Cells transfected with RbAp46 cDNA formed fewer colonies 
than the control cells, and RbAp46 suppressed the growth rate (by about 2-fold) 
of transfected cells. In the developing kidney and gonad, RbAp46 exhibits an 
expression pattern similar to that of WT1. We conclude that RbAp46 has strong 
growth inhibition activity and may function as an important mediator of WT1's 
function.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.42.27047
PMID: 9765217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
