---
pmid: '26711020'
title: 'Ethanol and acetaldehyde differentially alter extracellular dopamine and serotonin
  in Aldh2-knockout mouse dorsal striatum: A reverse microdialysis study.'
authors:
- Jamal M
- Ameno K
- Miki T
- Tanaka N
- Ito A
- Ono J
- Takakura A
- Kumihashi M
- Kinoshita H
journal: Neurotoxicology
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.neuro.2015.12.011
---

# Ethanol and acetaldehyde differentially alter extracellular dopamine and serotonin in Aldh2-knockout mouse dorsal striatum: A reverse microdialysis study.
**Authors:** Jamal M, Ameno K, Miki T, Tanaka N, Ito A, Ono J, Takakura A, Kumihashi M, Kinoshita H
**Journal:** Neurotoxicology (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuro.2015.12.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuro.2015.12.011)

## Abstract

1. Neurotoxicology. 2016 Jan;52:204-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neuro.2015.12.011. Epub
2015  Dec 19.

Ethanol and acetaldehyde differentially alter extracellular dopamine and 
serotonin in Aldh2-knockout mouse dorsal striatum: A reverse microdialysis 
study.

Jamal M(1), Ameno K(2), Miki T(3), Tanaka N(2), Ito A(2), Ono J(4), Takakura 
A(2), Kumihashi M(2), Kinoshita H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Forensic Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Kagawa University, 
1750-1, Ikenobe, Miki, Kita, Kagawa 761-0793, Japan. Electronic address: 
jamaldr68@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Forensic Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Kagawa University, 
1750-1, Ikenobe, Miki, Kita, Kagawa 761-0793, Japan.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Faculty of Medicine, Kagawa 
University, Japan.
(4)Department of Anesthesiology and Emergency Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
Kagawa University, Japan.

Dopamine (DA) and serotonin (5-HT) seem to be involved in several of the effects 
of ethanol (EtOH). Acetaldehyde (AcH), especially in the brain, induces effects 
that mimic those of EtOH. The purpose of this study was to investigate the 
effects of local perfusion of EtOH and AcH on extracellular DA and 5-HT in the 
dorsal striatum of Aldh2-knockout (Aldh2-KO) and wild-type (WT) mice. Aldh2-KO 
mice were used as a model of aldehyde dehydrogenase 2 deficiency in humans to 
examine the effects of AcH. Mice were perfused with Ringer's solution (control), 
EtOH (100, 200, or 500mM) and AcH (100, 200, or 500μM) into the dorsal striatum. 
Dialysate samples were collected every 5min, and then analyzed with HPLC coupled 
to an ECD. We found that local perfusion with 500mM EtOH increased extracellular 
levels of DA (p<0.05) in both Aldh2-KO and WT mice, while 5-HT levels remain 
unchanged. EtOH at a dose of 200mM also increased DA in WT mice, but this was 
limited to a 30-40-min time-point. In contrast, perfusion with 200 and 500μM AcH 
decreased both DA and 5-HT (p<0.05) in Aldh2-KO mice, but this decrease was not 
found in WT mice at any AcH dose, indicating an effect of AcH on DA and 5-HT 
levels. There were no genotype effects on the basal levels of DA and 5-HT. These 
results indicate that high EtOH can stimulate DA, whereas high AcH can depress 
both DA and 5-HT in the dorsal striatum of mice.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuro.2015.12.011
PMID: 26711020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
