---
pmid: '16488394'
title: WASP suppresses the growth defect of Saccharomyces cerevisiae las17Delta strain
  in the presence of WIP.
authors:
- Rajmohan R
- Meng L
- Yu S
- Thanabalu T
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.01.160
---

# WASP suppresses the growth defect of Saccharomyces cerevisiae las17Delta strain in the presence of WIP.
**Authors:** Rajmohan R, Meng L, Yu S, Thanabalu T
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.01.160](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.01.160)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Apr 7;342(2):529-36. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.01.160. Epub 2006 Feb 8.

WASP suppresses the growth defect of Saccharomyces cerevisiae las17Delta strain 
in the presence of WIP.

Rajmohan R(1), Meng L, Yu S, Thanabalu T.

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 
637551, Republic of Singapore.

Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome is caused by alterations in the Wiskott-Aldrich 
syndrome protein (WASP) and several of these mutations affect WASP's interaction 
with WIP (WASP-interacting protein), suggesting that loss of interaction between 
WASP and WIP is causal to the disease. Las17p is the yeast homologue of WASP and 
las17Delta strain is unable to grow at 37 degrees C. We show that Human WASP 
suppresses the growth defect of Saccharomyces cerevisiae las17Delta strain, only 
in the presence of WIP. WIP mediates cortical localisation of WASP as well as 
stabilise WASP in yeast cells. Mutations which affected WASP-WIP interaction 
abolished WASP's ability to suppress the growth defect of las17Delta strain. We 
have demonstrated that WASP-WIP is an active complex and WASP's ability to 
suppress the growth defect of las17Delta strain is dependent on the presence of 
a functional Arp2/3 activating domain of WASP and also the Verprolin domain (V) 
of WIP.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.01.160
PMID: 16488394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
