---
pmid: '11536335'
title: The putative monocarboxylate permeases of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae
  do not transport monocarboxylic acids across the plasma membrane.
authors:
- Makuc J
- Paiva S
- Schauen M
- Krämer R
- André B
- Casal M
- Leão C
- Boles E
journal: Yeast
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/yea.763
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The putative monocarboxylate permeases of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae do not transport monocarboxylic acids across the plasma membrane.
**Authors:** Makuc J, Paiva S, Schauen M, Krämer R, André B, Casal M, Leão C, Boles E
**Journal:** Yeast (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1002/yea.763](https://doi.org/10.1002/yea.763)

## Abstract

1. Yeast. 2001 Sep 15;18(12):1131-43. doi: 10.1002/yea.763.

The putative monocarboxylate permeases of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae do 
not transport monocarboxylic acids across the plasma membrane.

Makuc J(1), Paiva S, Schauen M, Krämer R, André B, Casal M, Leão C, Boles E.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Mikrobiologie, Heinrich-Heine-Universität, Universitätsstrasse 
1, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.

We have characterized the monocarboxylate permease family of Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae comprising five proteins. We could not find any evidence that the 
monocarboxylate transporter-homologous (Mch) proteins of S. cerevisiae are 
involved in the uptake or secretion of monocarboxylates such as lactate, 
pyruvate or acetate across the plasma membrane. A yeast mutant strain deleted 
for all five MCH genes exhibited no growth defects on monocarboxylic acids as 
the sole carbon and energy sources. Moreover, the uptake and secretion rates of 
monocarboxylic acids were indistinguishable from the wild-type strain. 
Additional deletion of the JEN1 lactate transporter gene completely blocked 
uptake of lactate and pyruvate. However, uptake of acetate was not even affected 
after the additional deletion of the gene YHL008c, which had been proposed to 
code for an acetate transporter. The mch1-5 mutant strain showed strongly 
reduced biomass yields in aerobic glucose-limited chemostat cultures, pointing 
to the involvement of Mch transporters in mitochondrial metabolism. Indeed, 
intracellular localization studies indicated that at least some of the Mch 
proteins reside in intracellular membranes. However, pyruvate uptake into 
isolated mitochondria was not affected in the mch1-5 mutant strain. It is 
concluded that the yeast monocarboxylate transporter-homologous proteins perform 
other functions than do their mammalian counterparts.

Copyright 2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/yea.763
PMID: 11536335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
