---
pmid: '19489741'
title: Endogenous cGMP regulates adult longevity via the insulin signaling pathway
  in Caenorhabditis elegans.
authors:
- Hahm JH
- Kim S
- Paik YK
journal: Aging Cell
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1474-9726.2009.00495.x
---

# Endogenous cGMP regulates adult longevity via the insulin signaling pathway in Caenorhabditis elegans.
**Authors:** Hahm JH, Kim S, Paik YK
**Journal:** Aging Cell (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1474-9726.2009.00495.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1474-9726.2009.00495.x)

## Abstract

1. Aging Cell. 2009 Aug;8(4):473-83. doi: 10.1111/j.1474-9726.2009.00495.x. Epub 
2009 May 31.

Endogenous cGMP regulates adult longevity via the insulin signaling pathway in 
Caenorhabditis elegans.

Hahm JH(1), Kim S, Paik YK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Yonsei Proteome Research Center, Yonsei 
University, Seoul, Korea.

G-proteins, including GPA-3, play an important role in regulating physiological 
responses in Caenorhabditis elegans. When confronted with an environmental 
stimulus such as dauer pheromone, or poor nutrients, C. elegans receives and 
integrates external signals through its nervous system (i.e. amphid neurons), 
which interprets and translates them into biological action. Here it is shown 
that a suppressed neuronal cGMP level caused by GPA-3 activation leads to a 
significant increase (47.3%) in the mean lifespan of adult C. elegans through 
forkhead transcription factor family O (FOXO)-mediated signal. A reduced 
neuronal cGMP level was found to be caused by an increased cGMP-specific 
phosphodiesterase activity at the transcriptional level. Our results using C. 
elegans mutants with specific deficits in TGF-beta and FOXO RNAi system suggest 
a mechanism in that cGMP, TGF-beta, and FOXO signaling interact to 
differentially produce the insulin-like molecules, ins-7 and daf-28, causing 
suppression of the insulin/IGF-1 pathway and promoting lifespan extension. Our 
findings provide not only a new mechanism of cGMP-mediated induction of 
longevity in adult C. elegans but also a possible therapeutic strategy for 
neuronal disease, which has been likened to brain diabetes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1474-9726.2009.00495.x
PMID: 19489741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
