---
pmid: '19652095'
title: Response gene to complement 32, a novel hypoxia-regulated angiogenic inhibitor.
authors:
- An X
- Jin Y
- Guo H
- Foo SY
- Cully BL
- Wu J
- Zeng H
- Rosenzweig A
- Li J
journal: Circulation
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2837511
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.841502
---

# Response gene to complement 32, a novel hypoxia-regulated angiogenic inhibitor.
**Authors:** An X, Jin Y, Guo H, Foo SY, Cully BL, Wu J, Zeng H, Rosenzweig A, Li J
**Journal:** Circulation (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.841502](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.841502)
**PMC:** [PMC2837511](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2837511/)

## Abstract

1. Circulation. 2009 Aug 18;120(7):617-27. doi:
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.841502.  Epub 2009 Aug 3.

Response gene to complement 32, a novel hypoxia-regulated angiogenic inhibitor.

An X(1), Jin Y, Guo H, Foo SY, Cully BL, Wu J, Zeng H, Rosenzweig A, Li J.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, Peking University, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Response gene to complement 32 (RGC-32) is induced by activation of 
complement and regulates cell proliferation. To determine the mechanism of 
RGC-32 in angiogenesis, we examined the role of RGC-32 in hypoxia-related 
endothelial cell function.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Hypoxia/ischemia is able to stimulate both angiogenesis and 
apoptosis. Hypoxia-inducible factor-1/vascular endothelial growth factor is a 
key transcriptional regulatory pathway for angiogenesis during hypoxia. We 
demonstrated that the increased RGC-32 expression by hypoxia was via 
hypoxia-inducible factor-1/vascular endothelial growth factor induction in 
cultured endothelial cells. However, overexpression of RGC-32 reduced the 
proliferation and migration and destabilized vascular structure formation in 
vitro and inhibited angiogenesis in Matrigel assays in vivo. Silencing RGC-32 
had an opposing, stimulatory effect. RGC-32 also stimulated apoptosis as shown 
by the increased apoptotic cells and caspase-3 cleavage. Mechanistic studies 
revealed that the effect of RGC-32 on the antiangiogenic response was via 
attenuating fibroblast growth factor 2 expression and further inhibiting 
expression of cyclin E without affecting vascular endothelial growth factor and 
fibroblast growth factor 2 signaling in endothelial cells. In the mouse 
hind-limb ischemia model, RGC-32 inhibited capillary density with a significant 
attenuation in blood flow. Additionally, treatment with RGC-32 in the xenograft 
tumor model resulted in reduced growth of blood vessels that is consistent with 
reduced colon tumor size.
CONCLUSIONS: We provide the first direct evidence for RGC-32 as a 
hypoxia-inducible gene and antiangiogenic factor in endothelial cells. These 
data suggest that RGC-32 plays an important homeostatic role in that it 
contributes to differentiating the pathways for vascular endothelial growth 
factor and fibroblast growth factor 2 in angiogenesis and provides a new target 
for ischemic disorder and tumor therapies.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.841502
PMCID: PMC2837511
PMID: 19652095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: None
