---
pmid: '25122793'
title: Apolipoprotein E likely contributes to a maturation step of infectious hepatitis
  C virus particles and interacts with viral envelope glycoproteins.
authors:
- Lee JY
- Acosta EG
- Stoeck IK
- Long G
- Hiet MS
- Mueller B
- Fackler OT
- Kallis S
- Bartenschlager R
journal: J Virol
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4248909
doi: 10.1128/JVI.01660-14
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Apolipoprotein E likely contributes to a maturation step of infectious hepatitis C virus particles and interacts with viral envelope glycoproteins.
**Authors:** Lee JY, Acosta EG, Stoeck IK, Long G, Hiet MS, Mueller B, Fackler OT, Kallis S, Bartenschlager R
**Journal:** J Virol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.01660-14](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.01660-14)
**PMC:** [PMC4248909](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4248909/)

## Abstract

1. J Virol. 2014 Nov;88(21):12422-37. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01660-14. Epub 2014 Aug
13.

Apolipoprotein E likely contributes to a maturation step of infectious hepatitis 
C virus particles and interacts with viral envelope glycoproteins.

Lee JY(1), Acosta EG(1), Stoeck IK(1), Long G(1), Hiet MS(1), Mueller B(2), 
Fackler OT(2), Kallis S(1), Bartenschlager R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Molecular Virology, University Hospital 
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Integrative Virology, University Hospital 
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, Molecular Virology, University Hospital 
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany Ralf_Bartenschlager@med.uni-heidelberg.de.

The assembly of infectious hepatitis C virus (HCV) particles is tightly linked 
to components of the very-low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) pathway. We and others 
have shown that apolipoprotein E (ApoE) plays a major role in production of 
infectious HCV particles. However, the mechanism by which ApoE contributes to 
virion assembly/release and how it gets associated with the HCV particle is 
poorly understood. We found that knockdown of ApoE reduces titers of infectious 
intra- and extracellular HCV but not of the related dengue virus. ApoE depletion 
also reduced amounts of extracellular HCV core protein without affecting 
intracellular core amounts. Moreover, we found that ApoE depletion affected 
neither formation of nucleocapsids nor their envelopment, suggesting that ApoE 
acts at a late step of assembly, such as particle maturation and infectivity. 
Importantly, we demonstrate that ApoE interacts with the HCV envelope 
glycoproteins, most notably E2. This interaction did not require any other viral 
proteins and depended on the transmembrane domain of E2 that also was required 
for recruitment of HCV envelope glycoproteins to detergent-resistant membrane 
fractions. These results suggest that ApoE plays an important role in HCV 
particle maturation, presumably by direct interaction with viral envelope 
glycoproteins.
IMPORTANCE: The HCV replication cycle is tightly linked to host cell lipid 
pathways and components. This is best illustrated by the dependency of HCV 
assembly on lipid droplets and the VLDL component ApoE. Although the role of 
ApoE for production of infectious HCV particles is well established, it is still 
poorly understood how ApoE contributes to virion formation and how it gets 
associated with HCV particles. Here, we provide experimental evidence that ApoE 
likely is required for an intracellular maturation step of HCV particles. 
Moreover, we demonstrate that ApoE associates with the viral envelope 
glycoproteins. This interaction appears to be dispensable for envelopment of 
virus particles but likely contributes to the quality control of secreted 
infectious virions. These results shed new light on the exploitation of host 
cell lipid pathways by HCV and the link of viral particle assembly to the VLDL 
component ApoE.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01660-14
PMCID: PMC4248909
PMID: 25122793 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
