---
pmid: '10820259'
title: 'GRID: a novel Grb-2-related adapter protein that interacts with the activated
  T cell costimulatory receptor CD28.'
authors:
- Ellis JH
- Ashman C
- Burden MN
- Kilpatrick KE
- Morse MA
- Hamblin PA
journal: J Immunol
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.164.11.5805
---

# GRID: a novel Grb-2-related adapter protein that interacts with the activated T cell costimulatory receptor CD28.
**Authors:** Ellis JH, Ashman C, Burden MN, Kilpatrick KE, Morse MA, Hamblin PA
**Journal:** J Immunol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.4049/jimmunol.164.11.5805](https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.164.11.5805)

## Abstract

1. J Immunol. 2000 Jun 1;164(11):5805-14. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.164.11.5805.

GRID: a novel Grb-2-related adapter protein that interacts with the activated T 
cell costimulatory receptor CD28.

Ellis JH(1), Ashman C, Burden MN, Kilpatrick KE, Morse MA, Hamblin PA.

Author information:
(1)Immunopathology and Immunology Units, GlaxoWellcome Medicines Research 
Centre, Stevenage, United Kingdom. jhe45655@glaxowellcome.co.uk

Adapter proteins such as Grb2 play a central role in the formation of signaling 
complexes through their association with multiple protein binding partners. 
These interactions are mediated by specialized domains such as the 
well-characterized Src homology SH2 and SH3 motifs. Using yeast three-hybrid 
technology, we have identified a novel adapter protein, expressed predominantly 
in T lymphocytes, that associates with the activated form of the costimulatory 
receptor, CD28. The protein is a member of the Grb2 family of adapter proteins 
and contains an SH3-SH2-SH3 domain structure. A unique glutamine/proline-rich 
domain (insert domain) of unknown function is situated between the SH2 and 
N-terminal SH3 domains. We term this protein GRID for Grb2-related protein with 
insert domain. GRID coimmunoprecipitates with CD28 from Jurkat cell lysates 
following activation of CD28. Using mutants of CD28 and GRID, we demonstrate 
that interaction between the proteins is dependent on phosphorylation of CD28 at 
tyrosine 173 and integrity of the GRID SH2 domain, although there are also 
subsidiary stabilizing contacts between the PXXP motifs of CD28 and the GRID 
C-terminal SH3 domain. In addition to CD28, GRID interacts with a number of 
other T cell signaling proteins, including SLP-76 (SH2 domain-containing 
leukocyte protein of 76 kDa), p62dok, and RACK-1 (receptor for activated protein 
kinase C-1). These findings suggest that GRID functions as an adapter protein in 
the CD28-mediated costimulatory pathway in T cells.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.164.11.5805
PMID: 10820259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
