---
pmid: '8054986'
title: Cystinuria caused by mutations in rBAT, a gene involved in the transport of
  cystine.
authors:
- Calonge MJ
- Gasparini P
- Chillarón J
- Chillón M
- Gallucci M
- Rousaud F
- Zelante L
- Testar X
- Dallapiccola B
- Di Silverio F
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ng0494-420
---

# Cystinuria caused by mutations in rBAT, a gene involved in the transport of cystine.
**Authors:** Calonge MJ, Gasparini P, Chillarón J, Chillón M, Gallucci M, Rousaud F, Zelante L, Testar X, Dallapiccola B, Di Silverio F
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng0494-420](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng0494-420)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 1994 Apr;6(4):420-5. doi: 10.1038/ng0494-420.

Cystinuria caused by mutations in rBAT, a gene involved in the transport of 
cystine.

Calonge MJ(1), Gasparini P, Chillarón J, Chillón M, Gallucci M, Rousaud F, 
Zelante L, Testar X, Dallapiccola B, Di Silverio F, et al.

Author information:
(1)Departament de Genética Molecular (IRO), Hospital Duran i Reynals, Barcelona, 
Spain.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 1994 Apr;6(4):328-9. doi: 10.1038/ng0494-328.

Cystinuria is a classic heritable aminoaciduria that involves the defective 
transepithelial transport of cystine and dibasic amino acids in the kidney and 
intestine. Six missense mutations in the human rBAT gene, which is involved in 
high-affinity transport of cystine and dibasic amino acids in kidney and 
intestine, segregate with cystinuria. These mutations account for 30% of the 
cystinuria chromosomes studied. Homozygosity for the most common mutation 
(M467T) was detected in three cystinuric siblings. Mutation M467T nearly 
abolished the amino acid transport activity induced by rBAT in Xenopus oocytes. 
These results establish rBAT as a cystinuria gene.

DOI: 10.1038/ng0494-420
PMID: 8054986 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
