---
pmid: '32439656'
title: Structural basis for membrane insertion by the human ER membrane protein complex.
authors:
- Pleiner T
- Tomaleri GP
- Januszyk K
- Inglis AJ
- Hazu M
- Voorhees RM
journal: Science
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC7547852
doi: 10.1126/science.abb5008
---

# Structural basis for membrane insertion by the human ER membrane protein complex.
**Authors:** Pleiner T, Tomaleri GP, Januszyk K, Inglis AJ, Hazu M, Voorhees RM
**Journal:** Science (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.abb5008](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abb5008)
**PMC:** [PMC7547852](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7547852/)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2020 Jul 24;369(6502):433-436. doi: 10.1126/science.abb5008. Epub
2020  May 21.

Structural basis for membrane insertion by the human ER membrane protein 
complex.

Pleiner T(#)(1), Tomaleri GP(#)(1), Januszyk K(#)(1), Inglis AJ(1), Hazu M(1), 
Voorhees RM(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of 
Technology, 1200 E. California Ave., Pasadena, CA 91125, USA.
(2)Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of 
Technology, 1200 E. California Ave., Pasadena, CA 91125, USA. 
voorhees@caltech.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2021 Jan 15;40(2):e107407. doi: 10.15252/embj.2020107407.

A defining step in the biogenesis of a membrane protein is the insertion of its 
hydrophobic transmembrane helices into the lipid bilayer. The nine-subunit 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane protein complex (EMC) is a conserved co- and 
posttranslational insertase at the ER. We determined the structure of the human 
EMC in a lipid nanodisc to an overall resolution of 3.4 angstroms by 
cryo-electron microscopy, permitting building of a nearly complete atomic model. 
We used structure-guided mutagenesis to demonstrate that substrate insertion 
requires a methionine-rich cytosolic loop and occurs via an enclosed hydrophilic 
vestibule within the membrane formed by the subunits EMC3 and EMC6. We propose 
that the EMC uses local membrane thinning and a positively charged patch to 
decrease the energetic barrier for insertion into the bilayer.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works.

DOI: 10.1126/science.abb5008
PMCID: PMC7547852
PMID: 32439656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
