---
pmid: '16461950'
title: Assessment of some tools for the characterization of the human osteoarthritic
  cartilage proteome.
authors:
- De Ceuninck F
- Marcheteau E
- Berger S
- Caliez A
- Dumont V
- Raes M
- Anract P
- Leclerc G
- Boutin JA
- Ferry G
journal: J Biomol Tech
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2291736
---

# Assessment of some tools for the characterization of the human osteoarthritic cartilage proteome.
**Authors:** De Ceuninck F, Marcheteau E, Berger S, Caliez A, Dumont V, Raes M, Anract P, Leclerc G, Boutin JA, Ferry G
**Journal:** J Biomol Tech (2005)
**PMC:** [PMC2291736](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2291736/)

## Abstract

1. J Biomol Tech. 2005 Sep;16(3):256-65.

Assessment of some tools for the characterization of the human osteoarthritic 
cartilage proteome.

De Ceuninck F(1), Marcheteau E, Berger S, Caliez A, Dumont V, Raes M, Anract P, 
Leclerc G, Boutin JA, Ferry G.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Recherches Servier, Division de Rhumatologie, 11 rue des 
Moulineaux, 92150 Suresnes, France. frederic.deceuninck@fr.netgrs.com

Since the proteome of osteoarthritic articular cartilage has been poorly 
investigated as yet, we adapted proteomic technologies to the study of the 
proteins secreted or released by fresh human osteoarthritic cartilage in 
culture. Fresh cartilage explants were obtained from three donors undergoing 
surgery for knee joint replacement. The explants were dissected out, minced, and 
incubated in serum-free culture medium. After 48 h, proteins in the medium were 
identified by two-dimensional or off-gel electrophoresis coupled to tandem mass 
spectrometry, or by using an antibody-based protein microarray designed to 
detect angiogenic factors, growth factors, chemokines, and cytokines. We 
identified a series of 43 proteins. Some of these proteins were already 
described as secretion products of chondrocytes, such as YKL-39 or 
osteoprotegerin, while several other were known proteins but have never been 
reported previously in cartilage, such as the serum amyloid P-component, the 
vitamin D binding protein, the pigment epithelium derived factor, the pulmonary 
and activation-regulated chemokine, lyl-1, thrombopoietin, fibrinogen, 
angiogenin, gelsolin, and osteoglycin/mimecan. While this study enabled the 
identification of novel proteins secreted or released by human osteoarthritic 
cartilage, the goal of the present work was essentially to describe the 
technical approach necessary for a systematic study of osteoarthritic cartilages 
from a large population of donors, in order to be able to select the good 
markers and/or targets for this poorly explored disease.

PMCID: PMC2291736
PMID: 16461950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
