---
pmid: '18433331'
title: Identification of a novel transcriptional repressor (HEPIS) that interacts
  with nsp-10 of SARS coronavirus.
authors:
- Hong M
- Li W
- Wang L
- Jiang L
- Liu L
- Zhao H
- Li Q
journal: Viral Immunol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1089/vim.2007.0108
---

# Identification of a novel transcriptional repressor (HEPIS) that interacts with nsp-10 of SARS coronavirus.
**Authors:** Hong M, Li W, Wang L, Jiang L, Liu L, Zhao H, Li Q
**Journal:** Viral Immunol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1089/vim.2007.0108](https://doi.org/10.1089/vim.2007.0108)

## Abstract

1. Viral Immunol. 2008 Jun;21(2):153-62. doi: 10.1089/vim.2007.0108.

Identification of a novel transcriptional repressor (HEPIS) that interacts with 
nsp-10 of SARS coronavirus.

Hong M(1), Li W, Wang L, Jiang L, Liu L, Zhao H, Li Q.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Biology, Chinese Academy of Medicine Science, Peking 
Union Medical College, Kunming, China.

A novel gene was previously isolated from a cDNA library of human embryo lung 
tissue by its encoded protein, which interacts with non-structural protein 10 
(nsp-10) of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV). The 
protein was named human embryo lung cellular protein interacting with SARS-CoV 
nsp-10 (HEPIS), and it is composed of 147 amino acids with several CK II 
phosphorylation sites. In the present study, we demonstrated that HEPIS was 
capable of suppressing chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) gene expression 
controlled by different enhancerelements in a transcription assay. HEPIS 
interacted specifically with the HSP70 TATA sequence, and not with various other 
enhancer elements in a binding test. Furthermore, we co-immunoprecipitated HEPIS 
with BTF3, a component of the RNA pol II initiation complex, and observed 
reduced proliferation of HeLa cells transfected with the HEPIS gene. Taken 
together, our results suggest that HEPIS may function as a potential 
transcriptional repressor.

DOI: 10.1089/vim.2007.0108
PMID: 18433331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
