---
reference_id: PMID:29491144
title: Post-translational modification of type IV collagen with 3-hydroxyproline affects its interactions with glycoprotein VI and nidogens 1 and 2.
authors:
- Montgomery NT
- Zientek KD
- Pokidysheva EN
- Bächinger HP
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA117.000406
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Post-translational modification of type IV collagen with 3-hydroxyproline affects its interactions with glycoprotein VI and nidogens 1 and 2.
**Authors:** Montgomery NT, Zientek KD, Pokidysheva EN, Bächinger HP
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.RA117.000406](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA117.000406)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2018 Apr 20;293(16):5987-5999. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA117.000406.
Epub  2018 Feb 28.

Post-translational modification of type IV collagen with 3-hydroxyproline
affects its interactions with glycoprotein VI and nidogens 1 and 2.

Montgomery NT(1)(2), Zientek KD(1), Pokidysheva EN(3), Bächinger HP(4)(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Research Department, Shriners Hospital for Children, Portland,
Oregon 97239.
(2)the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, Oregon 97239, and.
(3)the Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology and Hypertension,
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 37232.
(4)From the Research Department, Shriners Hospital for Children, Portland,
Oregon 97239, hpb@shcc.org.

Type IV collagen is a major component of the basement membrane and interacts
with numerous other basement membrane proteins. Many of these interactions are
poorly characterized. Type IV collagen is abundantly post-translationally
modified with 3-hydroxyproline (3-Hyp), but 3-Hyp's biochemical role in type IV
collagen's interactions with other proteins is not well established. In this
work, we present binding data consistent with a major role of 3-Hyp in
interactions of collagen IV with glycoprotein VI and nidogens 1 and 2. The
increased binding interaction between type IV collagen without 3-Hyp and
glycoprotein VI has been the subject of some controversy, which we sought to
explore, whereas the lack of binding of nidogens to type IV collagen without
3-Hyp is novel. Using tandem MS, we show that the putative glycoprotein
VI-binding site is 3-Hyp-modified in WT PFHR-9 type IV collagen, but not in
PFHR-9 cells in which prolyl-3-hydroxylase 2 (P3H2) has been knocked out (KO).
Moreover, we observed altered 3-Hyp occupancy across many other sites. Using
amino acid analysis of type IV collagen from the WT and P3H2 KO cell lines, we
confirm that P3H2 is the major, but not the only 3-Hyp-modifying enzyme of type
IV collagen. These findings underscore the importance of post-translational
modifications of type IV collagen for interactions with other proteins.

© 2018 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA117.000406
PMCID: PMC5912474
PMID: 29491144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest with the contents of this article