---
pmid: '27534431'
title: A novel amyotrophic lateral sclerosis mutation in OPTN induces ER stress and
  Golgi fragmentation in vitro.
authors:
- Fifita JA
- Williams KL
- Sundaramoorthy V
- Mccann EP
- Nicholson GA
- Atkin JD
- Blair IP
journal: Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1080/21678421.2016.1218517
---

# A novel amyotrophic lateral sclerosis mutation in OPTN induces ER stress and Golgi fragmentation in vitro.
**Authors:** Fifita JA, Williams KL, Sundaramoorthy V, Mccann EP, Nicholson GA, Atkin JD, Blair IP
**Journal:** Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1080/21678421.2016.1218517](https://doi.org/10.1080/21678421.2016.1218517)

## Abstract

1. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener. 2017 Feb;18(1-2):126-133. doi:
 10.1080/21678421.2016.1218517. Epub 2016 Aug 18.

A novel amyotrophic lateral sclerosis mutation in OPTN induces ER stress and 
Golgi fragmentation in vitro.

Fifita JA(1), Williams KL(1), Sundaramoorthy V(1), Mccann EP(1), Nicholson 
GA(1)(2)(3)(4), Atkin JD(1)(5), Blair IP(1).

Author information:
(1)a Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences , Macquarie University , Sydney , 
New South Wales , Australia.
(2)b Northcott Neuroscience Laboratory , ANZAC Research Institute , Sydney , New 
South Wales , Australia.
(3)c Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney , Sydney , New South Wales , 
Australia.
(4)d Molecular Medicine Laboratory , Concord Hospital , Concord , New South 
Wales , Australia , and.
(5)e Department of Biochemistry and Genetics , La Trobe Institute for Molecular 
Science, La Trobe University , Victoria , Australia.

Mutations in the optineurin gene (OPTN) have been identified in a small 
proportion (<1%) of sporadic and familial ALS cases, and the exact role of 
optineurin in the pathogenesis of ALS remains unclear. To further examine the 
role of OPTN in ALS, we sought to identify novel ALS variants in OPTN and 
examine their potential for pathogenicity in vitro. Whole exome sequence data 
from 74 familial ALS cases were analysed for the presence of novel OPTN 
mutations. Pathogenicity was assessed by analysing effects on Golgi 
fragmentation, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-linked CHOP activation, and 
cellular localization of optineurin in motor neuron-like NSC-34 cells expressing 
mutant optineurin. We identified a novel heterozygous missense mutation in OPTN 
(c.883G > T, p.Val295Phe) in a single familial ALS case. This mutation induced 
recognized cellular features of ALS pathogenesis including Golgi fragmentation 
and ER stress in NSC-34 cells. In conclusion, the identification of a novel OPTN 
mutation in an Australian ALS family, and its capacity to induce ALS-like 
pathological features in vitro, further strengthens evidence for the role of 
optineurin in the pathogenesis of ALS.

DOI: 10.1080/21678421.2016.1218517
PMID: 27534431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
