---
pmid: '11956071'
title: Forced expression of NESH suppresses motility and metastatic dissemination
  of malignant cells.
authors:
- Ichigotani Y
- Yokozaki S
- Fukuda Y
- Hamaguchi M
- Matsuda S
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
---

# Forced expression of NESH suppresses motility and metastatic dissemination of malignant cells.
**Authors:** Ichigotani Y, Yokozaki S, Fukuda Y, Hamaguchi M, Matsuda S
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2002)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Res. 2002 Apr 15;62(8):2215-9.

Forced expression of NESH suppresses motility and metastatic dissemination of 
malignant cells.

Ichigotani Y(1), Yokozaki S, Fukuda Y, Hamaguchi M, Matsuda S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pathogenesis, Nagoya University School of Medicine, 
65 Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya 466-8550, Japan.

To characterize the function of a novel Src homology 3 (SH3) adapter protein 
termed NESH, we have established transfectants stably expressing NESH. We 
observed that every clone of NESH transfectants caused a marked reduction in 
motility, although the clones exhibited no significant differences in intrinsic 
cell growth compared with the control cells in vitro. The NESH transfectants 
also exhibited significant reduction in tumor metastatic potential in vivo. We 
found that NESH expression is frequently lost in invasive cancer cell lines 
despite its ubiquitous expression in normal tissues. The SH3 domain of NESH 
seems to interact with p21-activated kinase (PAK), which is involved in 
regulation of cell motility. Furthermore, a significant decrease in PAK 
phosphorylation at (402)Thr was found in NESH transfectants. Taken together, 
these results suggest that NESH inhibits ectopic metastasis of tumor cells as 
well as cell migration through interaction with intracellular molecules such as 
PAK that are essential for cell motility.

PMID: 11956071 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
