---
pmid: '12130500'
title: Stomatin is a major lipid-raft component of platelet alpha granules.
authors:
- Mairhofer M
- Steiner M
- Mosgoeller W
- Prohaska R
- Salzer U
journal: Blood
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1182/blood.v100.3.897
---

# Stomatin is a major lipid-raft component of platelet alpha granules.
**Authors:** Mairhofer M, Steiner M, Mosgoeller W, Prohaska R, Salzer U
**Journal:** Blood (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood.v100.3.897](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.v100.3.897)

## Abstract

1. Blood. 2002 Aug 1;100(3):897-904. doi: 10.1182/blood.v100.3.897.

Stomatin is a major lipid-raft component of platelet alpha granules.

Mairhofer M(1), Steiner M, Mosgoeller W, Prohaska R, Salzer U.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Biochemistry, Vienna Biocenter, University of Vienna, 
Austria.

Lipid rafts are detergent-resistant, cholesterol- and sphingolipid-rich membrane 
domains that are involved in important cellular processes such as signal 
transduction and intracellular trafficking. Stomatin, a major lipid-raft 
component of erythrocytes and epithelial cells, is also an abundant platelet 
protein. Microscopical methods and subcellular fractionation showed that 
stomatin is located mainly at the alpha-granular membrane. The lipid-raft marker 
proteins flotillin-1 and flotillin-2 were also present in platelets but excluded 
from alpha granules. Stomatin and the flotillins were associated with Triton 
X-100-insoluble lipid rafts. Whereas stomatin was partly soluble in Triton 
X-100, it was insoluble in the detergents Lubrol and 
3-[(3-cholamidopropyl)dimethylamonio]-1-propyl sulfonate (CHAPS). Flotation 
experiments after CHAPS lysis of platelets revealed a distinct set of 
lipid-raft-associated proteins, which were identified by matrix-assisted laser 
desorption/ionization mass spectrometry as stomatin, flotillin-1, flotillin-2, 
CD36, CD9, integrin alpha(IIb)beta(3), and the glucose transporter GLUT-3. 
Stomatin, the flotillins, and CD36 were exclusively present in this lipid-raft 
fraction. Activation of platelets by calcium ionophore A23187 or thrombin led to 
translocation of stomatin to the plasma membrane, cleavage by calpain, and 
specific sorting into released microvesicles. In conclusion, this study 
demonstrated the existence of alpha-granular lipid rafts and suggests an 
important role for stomatin in the organization and function of alpha granules.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.v100.3.897
PMID: 12130500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
