---
pmid: '29768204'
title: An Amphipathic Helix Directs Cellular Membrane Curvature Sensing and Function
  of the BAR Domain Protein PICK1.
authors:
- Herlo R
- Lund VK
- Lycas MD
- Jansen AM
- Khelashvili G
- Andersen RC
- Bhatia V
- Pedersen TS
- Albornoz PBC
- Johner N
- Ammendrup-Johnsen I
- Christensen NR
- Erlendsson S
- Stoklund M
- Larsen JB
- Weinstein H
- Kjærulff O
- Stamou D
- Gether U
- Madsen KL
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2018.04.074
---

# An Amphipathic Helix Directs Cellular Membrane Curvature Sensing and Function of the BAR Domain Protein PICK1.
**Authors:** Herlo R, Lund VK, Lycas MD, Jansen AM, Khelashvili G, Andersen RC, Bhatia V, Pedersen TS, Albornoz PBC, Johner N, Ammendrup-Johnsen I, Christensen NR, Erlendsson S, Stoklund M, Larsen JB, Weinstein H, Kjærulff O, Stamou D, Gether U, Madsen KL
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2018.04.074](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2018.04.074)

## Abstract

1. Cell Rep. 2018 May 15;23(7):2056-2069. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2018.04.074.

An Amphipathic Helix Directs Cellular Membrane Curvature Sensing and Function of 
the BAR Domain Protein PICK1.

Herlo R(1), Lund VK(1), Lycas MD(1), Jansen AM(1), Khelashvili G(2), Andersen 
RC(1), Bhatia V(3), Pedersen TS(1), Albornoz PBC(2), Johner N(2), 
Ammendrup-Johnsen I(1), Christensen NR(1), Erlendsson S(1), Stoklund M(1), 
Larsen JB(3), Weinstein H(2), Kjærulff O(1), Stamou D(3), Gether U(4), Madsen 
KL(5).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Neuropharmacology and Genetics Laboratory, Lundbeck Foundation 
Center for Biomembranes in Nanomedicine, Department of Neuroscience, Faculty of 
Health and Medical Sciences, The Panum Institute - Mærsk Tower, University of 
Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark.
(2)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medical College, 
Cornell University, 1300 York Avenue, New York City, NY 10065, USA.
(3)Bionanotechnology and Nanomedicine Laboratory, Lundbeck Foundation Center for 
Biomembranes in Nanomedicine, Department of Chemistry, and Nano-Science Center, 
University of Copenhagen, 2300 Copenhagen Ø, Denmark.
(4)Molecular Neuropharmacology and Genetics Laboratory, Lundbeck Foundation 
Center for Biomembranes in Nanomedicine, Department of Neuroscience, Faculty of 
Health and Medical Sciences, The Panum Institute - Mærsk Tower, University of 
Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark. Electronic address: gether@sund.ku.dk.
(5)Molecular Neuropharmacology and Genetics Laboratory, Lundbeck Foundation 
Center for Biomembranes in Nanomedicine, Department of Neuroscience, Faculty of 
Health and Medical Sciences, The Panum Institute - Mærsk Tower, University of 
Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark. Electronic address: 
kennethma@sund.ku.dk.

BAR domains are dimeric protein modules that sense, induce, and stabilize lipid 
membrane curvature. Here, we show that membrane curvature sensing (MCS) directs 
cellular localization and function of the BAR domain protein PICK1. In PICK1, 
and the homologous proteins ICA69 and arfaptin2, we identify an amphipathic 
helix N-terminal to the BAR domain that mediates MCS. Mutational disruption of 
the helix in PICK1 impaired MCS without affecting membrane binding per se. In 
insulin-producing INS-1E cells, super-resolution microscopy revealed that 
disruption of the helix selectively compromised PICK1 density on insulin 
granules of high curvature during their maturation. This was accompanied by 
reduced hormone storage in the INS-1E cells. In Drosophila, disruption of the 
helix compromised growth regulation. By demonstrating size-dependent binding on 
insulin granules, our finding highlights the function of MCS for BAR domain 
proteins in a biological context distinct from their function, e.g., at the 
plasma membrane during endocytosis.

Copyright © 2018 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2018.04.074
PMID: 29768204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
