---
pmid: '11427532'
title: p53 Modulates the exonuclease activity of Werner syndrome protein.
authors:
- Brosh RM Jr
- Karmakar P
- Sommers JA
- Yang Q
- Wang XW
- Spillare EA
- Harris CC
- Bohr VA
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M103332200
---

# p53 Modulates the exonuclease activity of Werner syndrome protein.
**Authors:** Brosh RM Jr, Karmakar P, Sommers JA, Yang Q, Wang XW, Spillare EA, Harris CC, Bohr VA
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M103332200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M103332200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Sep 14;276(37):35093-102. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M103332200. Epub 
2001 Jun 26.

p53 Modulates the exonuclease activity of Werner syndrome protein.

Brosh RM Jr(1), Karmakar P, Sommers JA, Yang Q, Wang XW, Spillare EA, Harris CC, 
Bohr VA.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Gerontology, NIA, National Institutes of Health, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21224, USA.

Werner syndrome (WS) is characterized by the early onset of symptoms of 
premature aging, cancer, and genomic instability. The molecular basis of the 
defects is not understood but presumably relates to the DNA helicase and 
exonuclease activities of the protein encoded by the WRN gene that is mutated in 
the disease. The attenuation of p53-mediated apoptosis in WS cells and reported 
physical interaction between WRN and the tumor suppressor p53 suggest that p53 
and WRN functionally interact in a pathway necessary for the normal cellular 
response. In this study, we have demonstrated that p53 inhibits the exonuclease 
activity of the purified full-length recombinant WRN protein. p53 did not have 
an effect on a truncated amino-terminal WRN fragment that retains exonuclease 
activity but lacks the physical interaction domain for p53 located in the 
carboxyl terminus. Two naturally occurring p53 mutants found in human cancer 
displayed a reduced ability to inhibit WRN exonuclease activity. In cells 
arrested in S phase with hydroxyurea, WRN exits the nucleolus and colocalizes 
with p53 in the nucleoplasm. The regulation of WRN function by p53 is likely to 
play an important role in the maintenance of genomic integrity and prevention of 
cancer and other clinical symptoms associated with WS.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M103332200
PMID: 11427532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
