---
pmid: '23108668'
title: The RAD51 paralogs ensure cellular protection against mitotic defects and aneuploidy.
authors:
- Rodrigue A
- Coulombe Y
- Jacquet K
- Gagné JP
- Roques C
- Gobeil S
- Poirier G
- Masson JY
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.114595
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The RAD51 paralogs ensure cellular protection against mitotic defects and aneuploidy.
**Authors:** Rodrigue A, Coulombe Y, Jacquet K, Gagné JP, Roques C, Gobeil S, Poirier G, Masson JY
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.114595](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.114595)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2013 Jan 1;126(Pt 1):348-59. doi: 10.1242/jcs.114595. Epub 2012
Oct  29.

The RAD51 paralogs ensure cellular protection against mitotic defects and 
aneuploidy.

Rodrigue A(1), Coulombe Y, Jacquet K, Gagné JP, Roques C, Gobeil S, Poirier G, 
Masson JY.

Author information:
(1)Genome Stability Laboratory, Laval University Cancer Research Centre, 
Hôtel-Dieu de Québec Research Centre (CHUQ), 9 McMahon, Québec, QC G1R 2J6, 
Canada.

The interplay between homologous DNA recombination and mitotic progression is 
poorly understood. The five RAD51 paralogs (RAD51B, RAD51C, RAD51D, XRCC2 and 
XRCC3) are key enzymes for DNA double-strand break repair. In our search for 
specific functions of the various RAD51 paralogs, we found that inhibition of 
XRCC3 elicits checkpoint defects, while inhibition of RAD51B or RAD51C induces 
G2/M cell cycle arrest in HeLa cells. Using live-cell microscopy we show that in 
XRCC3-knockdown cells the spindle assembly checkpoint persists and there is a 
higher frequency of chromosome misalignments, anaphase bridges, and aneuploidy. 
We observed centrosome defects in the absence of XRCC3. While RAD51B and RAD51C 
act early in homologous recombination, XRCC3 functions jointly with GEN1 later 
in the pathway at the stage of Holliday junction resolution. Our data 
demonstrate that Holliday junction resolution has critical functions for 
preventing aberrant mitosis and aneuploidy in mitotic cells.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.114595
PMID: 23108668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
