---
pmid: '17179095'
title: Contribution of Trf4/5 and the nuclear exosome to genome stability through
  regulation of histone mRNA levels in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
authors:
- Reis CC
- Campbell JL
journal: Genetics
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1840065
doi: 10.1534/genetics.106.065987
---

# Contribution of Trf4/5 and the nuclear exosome to genome stability through regulation of histone mRNA levels in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Reis CC, Campbell JL
**Journal:** Genetics (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1534/genetics.106.065987](https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.106.065987)
**PMC:** [PMC1840065](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1840065/)

## Abstract

1. Genetics. 2007 Mar;175(3):993-1010. doi: 10.1534/genetics.106.065987. Epub
2006  Dec 18.

Contribution of Trf4/5 and the nuclear exosome to genome stability through 
regulation of histone mRNA levels in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Reis CC(1), Campbell JL.

Author information:
(1)Braun Laboratories, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 
91125, USA.

Balanced levels of histones are crucial for chromosome stability, and one major 
component of this control regulates histone mRNA amounts. The Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae poly(A) polymerases Trf4 and Trf5 are involved in a quality control 
mechanism that mediates polyadenylation and consequent degradation of various 
RNA species by the nuclear exosome. None of the known RNA targets, however, 
explains the fact that trf mutants have specific cell cycle defects consistent 
with a role in maintaining genome stability. Here, we investigate the role of 
Trf4/5 in regulation of histone mRNA levels. We show that loss of Trf4 and Trf5, 
or of Rrp6, a component of the nuclear exosome, results in elevated levels of 
transcripts encoding DNA replication-dependent histones. Suggesting that 
increased histone levels account for the phenotypes of trf mutants, we find that 
TRF4 shows synthetic genetic interactions with genes that negatively regulate 
histone levels, including RAD53. Moreover, synthetic lethality of trf4Delta 
rad53Delta is rescued by reducing histone levels whereas overproduction of 
histones is deleterious to trf's and rrp6Delta mutants. These results identify 
TRF4, TRF5, and RRP6 as new players in the regulation of histone mRNA levels in 
yeast. To our knowledge, the histone transcripts are the first mRNAs that are 
upregulated in Trf mutants.

DOI: 10.1534/genetics.106.065987
PMCID: PMC1840065
PMID: 17179095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
