---
pmid: '9305631'
title: BAG-1 modulates the chaperone activity of Hsp70/Hsc70.
authors:
- Takayama S
- Bimston DN
- Matsuzawa S
- Freeman BC
- Aime-Sempe C
- Xie Z
- Morimoto RI
- Reed JC
journal: EMBO J
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1170124
doi: 10.1093/emboj/16.16.4887
---

# BAG-1 modulates the chaperone activity of Hsp70/Hsc70.
**Authors:** Takayama S, Bimston DN, Matsuzawa S, Freeman BC, Aime-Sempe C, Xie Z, Morimoto RI, Reed JC
**Journal:** EMBO J (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/16.16.4887](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/16.16.4887)
**PMC:** [PMC1170124](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1170124/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 1997 Aug 15;16(16):4887-96. doi: 10.1093/emboj/16.16.4887.

BAG-1 modulates the chaperone activity of Hsp70/Hsc70.

Takayama S(1), Bimston DN, Matsuzawa S, Freeman BC, Aime-Sempe C, Xie Z, 
Morimoto RI, Reed JC.

Author information:
(1)The Burnham Institute, Program on Apoptosis and Cell Death Research, La 
Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

The 70 kDa heat shock family of molecular chaperones is essential to a variety 
of cellular processes, yet it is unclear how these proteins are regulated in 
vivo. We present evidence that the protein BAG-1 is a potential modulator of the 
molecular chaperones, Hsp70 and Hsc70. BAG-1 binds to the ATPase domain of Hsp70 
and Hsc70, without requirement for their carboxy-terminal peptide-binding 
domain, and can be co-immunoprecipitated with Hsp/Hsc70 from cell lysates. 
Purified BAG-1 and Hsp/Hsc70 efficiently form heteromeric complexes in vitro. 
BAG-1 inhibits Hsp/Hsc70-mediated in vitro refolding of an unfolded protein 
substrate, whereas BAG-1 mutants that fail to bind Hsp/Hsc70 do not affect 
chaperone activity. The binding of BAG-1 to one of its known cellular targets, 
Bcl-2, in cell lysates was found to be dependent on ATP, consistent with the 
possible involvement of Hsp/Hsc70 in complex formation. Overexpression of BAG-1 
also protected certain cell lines from heat shock-induced cell death. The 
identification of Hsp/Hsc70 as a partner protein for BAG-1 may explain the 
diverse interactions observed between BAG-1 and several other proteins, 
including Raf-1, steroid hormone receptors and certain tyrosine kinase growth 
factor receptors. The inhibitory effects of BAG-1 on Hsp/Hsc70 chaperone 
activity suggest that BAG-1 represents a novel type of chaperone regulatory 
proteins and thus suggest a link between cell signaling, cell death and the 
stress response.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/16.16.4887
PMCID: PMC1170124
PMID: 9305631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
