---
reference_id: PMID:38084826
title: Senecavirus A induces mitophagy to promote self-replication through direct interaction of 2C protein with K27-linked ubiquitinated TUFM catalyzed by RNF185.
authors:
- Chen M
- Zhang X
- Kong F
- Gao P
- Ge X
- Zhou L
- Han J
- Guo X
- Zhang Y
- Yang H
journal: Autophagy
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1080/15548627.2023.2293442
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Senecavirus A induces mitophagy to promote self-replication through direct interaction of 2C protein with K27-linked ubiquitinated TUFM catalyzed by RNF185.
**Authors:** Chen M, Zhang X, Kong F, Gao P, Ge X, Zhou L, Han J, Guo X, Zhang Y, Yang H
**Journal:** Autophagy (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15548627.2023.2293442](https://doi.org/10.1080/15548627.2023.2293442)

## Content

1. Autophagy. 2024 Jun;20(6):1286-1313. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2023.2293442. Epub
2024 Jan 3.

Senecavirus A induces mitophagy to promote self-replication through direct
interaction of 2C protein with K27-linked ubiquitinated TUFM catalyzed by
RNF185.

Chen M(1)(2), Zhang X(1)(2), Kong F(1)(2), Gao P(1)(2), Ge X(1)(2), Zhou
L(1)(2), Han J(1)(2), Guo X(1)(2), Zhang Y(1)(2), Yang H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)National Key Laboratory of Veterinary Public Health and Safety, College of
Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Animal Epidemiology of Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
Affairs, College of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing,
China.

Senecavirus A (SVA) is a newly emerging picornavirus associated with swine
vesicular lesions and neonatal mortality, threatening the global pig industry.
Despite sustained efforts, the molecular mechanisms of SVA pathogenesis have not
yet been fully elucidated. Here, we demonstrate for the first time that SVA
infection can induce complete mitophagy in host cells, which depends on SVA
replication. Mitophagy has been subsequently proven to promote SVA replication
in host cells. Genome-wide screening of SVA proteins involved in inducing
mitophagy showed that although VP2, VP3, 2C, and 3A proteins can independently
induce mitophagy, only the 2C protein mediates mitophagy through direct
interaction with TUFM (Tu translation elongation factor, mitochondrial). The
glutamic acids at positions 196 and 211 of TUFM were shown to be two key sites
for its interaction with 2C protein. Moreover, TUFM was discovered to interact
directly with BECN1 and indirectly with the ATG12-ATG5 conjugate. Further
experiments revealed that TUFM needs to undergo ubiquitination modification
before being recognized by the macroautophagy/autophagy receptor protein
SQSTM1/p62, and E3 ubiquitin ligase RNF185 catalyzes K27-linked
polyubiquitination of TUFM through the interaction between RNF185's
transmembrane domain 1 and TUFM to initiate SVA-induced mitophagy. The
ubiquitinated TUFM is recognized and bound by SQSTM1, which in turn interacts
with MAP1LC3/LC3, thereby linking the 2C-anchored mitochondria to the phagophore
for sequestration into mitophagosomes, which ultimately fuse with lysosomes to
achieve complete mitophagy. Overall, our results elucidated the molecular
mechanism by which SVA induces mitophagy to promote self-replication and provide
new insights into SVA pathogenesis.Abbreviations: aa: amino acid; Baf A1:
bafilomycin A1; BHK-21: baby hamster kidney-21; CCCP: carbonyl cyanide
m-chlorophenyl hydrazone; co-IP: co-immunoprecipitation; CQ: chloroquine; DAPI:
4',6-diamidino-2'-phenylindole; DMSO: dimethyl sulfoxide; EGFP: enhanced green
fluorescent protein; ER: endoplasmic reticulum; GAPDH:
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase; GFP: green fluorescent protein; GST:
glutathione S-transferase; HA: hemagglutinin; hpi: hours post-infection; hpt:
hours post-transfection; IPTG: isopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside; mAb:
monoclonal antibody; MAP1LC3/LC3: microtubule associated protein 1 light chain
3; MAVS: mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein; Mdivi-1: mitochondrial
division inhibitor-1; MOI: multiplicity of infection; mRFP: monomeric red
fluorescent protein; MS: mass spectrometry; ORF: open reading frame; PBS:
phosphate-buffered saline; SD: standard deviation; SQSTM1/p62: sequestosome 1;
ST: swine testis; SVA: Senecavirus A; TCID50: 50% tissue culture infectious
dose; TIMM23: translocase of inner mitochondrial membrane 23; TM: transmembrane;
TOMM20: translocase of outer mitochondrial membrane 20; TUFM: Tu translation
elongation factor, mitochondrial; Ub: ubiquitin; UV: ultraviolet; VDAC1: voltage
dependent anion channel 1; WT: wild-type; μg: microgram; μm: micrometer; μM:
micromole.

DOI: 10.1080/15548627.2023.2293442
PMCID: PMC11210902
PMID: 38084826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported
by the author(s).