---
pmid: '21868574'
title: Novel protein ADTRP regulates TFPI expression and function in human endothelial
  cells in normal conditions and in response to androgen.
authors:
- Lupu C
- Zhu H
- Popescu NI
- Wren JD
- Lupu F
journal: Blood
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3204913
doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-05-355370
---

# Novel protein ADTRP regulates TFPI expression and function in human endothelial cells in normal conditions and in response to androgen.
**Authors:** Lupu C, Zhu H, Popescu NI, Wren JD, Lupu F
**Journal:** Blood (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2011-05-355370](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2011-05-355370)
**PMC:** [PMC3204913](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3204913/)

## Abstract

1. Blood. 2011 Oct 20;118(16):4463-71. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-05-355370. Epub
2011  Aug 25.

Novel protein ADTRP regulates TFPI expression and function in human endothelial 
cells in normal conditions and in response to androgen.

Lupu C(1), Zhu H, Popescu NI, Wren JD, Lupu F.

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Biology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research 
Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA. cristina-lupu@omrf.org

Thrombosis and cardiovascular disease (CVD) represent major causes of morbidity 
and mortality. Low androgen correlates with higher incidence of CVD/thrombosis. 
Tissue Factor Pathway Inhibitor (TFPI) is the major inhibitor of tissue 
factor-factor VIIa (TF-FVIIa)-dependent FXa generation. Because endothelial cell 
(EC) dysfunction leading to vascular disease correlates with low EC-associated 
TFPI, we sought to identify mechanisms that regulate the natural expression of 
TFPI. Data mining of NCBI's GEO microarrays revealed strong coexpression between 
TFPI and the uncharacterized protein encoded by C6ORF105, which is predicted to 
be multispan, palmitoylated and androgen-responsive. We demonstrate that this 
protein regulates both the native and androgen-enhanced TFPI expression and 
activity in cultured ECs, and we named it androgen-dependent TFPI-regulating 
protein (ADTRP). We confirm ADTRP expression and colocalization with TFPI and 
caveolin-1 in ECs. ADTRP-shRNA reduces, while over-expression of ADTRP enhances, 
TFPI mRNA and activity and the colocalization of TF-FVIIa-FXa-TFPI with 
caveolin-1. Imaging and Triton X-114-extraction confirm TFPI and ADTRP 
association with lipid rafts/caveolae. Dihydrotestosterone up-regulates TFPI and 
ADTRP expression, and increases FXa inhibition by TFPI in an ADTRP- and 
caveolin-1-dependent manner. We conclude that the ADTRP-dependent up-regulation 
of TFPI expression and activity by androgen represents a novel mechanism of 
increasing the anticoagulant protection of the endothelium.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2011-05-355370
PMCID: PMC3204913
PMID: 21868574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
