---
pmid: '1730878'
title: Surface expression of functional IgE binding protein, an endogenous lectin,
  on mast cells and macrophages.
authors:
- Frigeri LG
- Liu FT
journal: J Immunol
year: '1992'
full_text_available: false
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Surface expression of functional IgE binding protein, an endogenous lectin, on mast cells and macrophages.
**Authors:** Frigeri LG, Liu FT
**Journal:** J Immunol (1992)

## Abstract

1. J Immunol. 1992 Feb 1;148(3):861-7.

Surface expression of functional IgE binding protein, an endogenous lectin, on 
mast cells and macrophages.

Frigeri LG(1), Liu FT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, Research Institute of 
Scripps Clinic, La Jolla, CA 92037.

IgE-binding protein (epsilon BP) is a galactoside-specific lectin containing an 
S-type carbohydrate-recognition domain. It was originally identified in rat 
basophilic leukemia cells and is now known to be identical to a macrophage 
surface Ag, Mac-2, and lectins designated as CBP 35/L-34/RL-29. It has also been 
related to a nonintegrin laminin-binding protein isolated from mouse 
macrophages. In this report we have shown the following: epsilon BP is present 
in variable amounts in several mast cell lines, and the surface expression of 
epsilon BP in these cell lines is quite variable and does not correlate with the 
total amount of epsilon BP in the cell. epsilon BP is displayed on the cell 
surface in a manner that is reversible by lactose, most likely through 
attachment to yet unidentified glycoconjugates. The putative epsilon BP binding 
sites on the cell surface can be readily demonstrated by using radiolabeled 
epsilon BP, and the sites are present in comparable amounts in various cell 
lines. Expression of epsilon BP on the cell surface can be regulated; the most 
notable example is the upregulation of surface epsilon BP on RBL cells activated 
through the high-affinity IgE receptor by IgE immune complexes. Cell-surface 
epsilon BP is functional as measured by its ability to promote adhesion of 
trypsinized rabbit erythrocytes to mast cells and macrophages. On the basis of 
these results and reported properties of related lectins, we propose that the 
lectin represented by epsilon BP is a new class of cell-adhesion protein.

PMID: 1730878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
