---
pmid: '12434153'
title: An ACF1-ISWI chromatin-remodeling complex is required for DNA replication through
  heterochromatin.
authors:
- Collins N
- Poot RA
- Kukimoto I
- García-Jiménez C
- Dellaire G
- Varga-Weisz PD
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ng1046
---

# An ACF1-ISWI chromatin-remodeling complex is required for DNA replication through heterochromatin.
**Authors:** Collins N, Poot RA, Kukimoto I, García-Jiménez C, Dellaire G, Varga-Weisz PD
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1046](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1046)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 2002 Dec;32(4):627-32. doi: 10.1038/ng1046. Epub 2002 Nov 18.

An ACF1-ISWI chromatin-remodeling complex is required for DNA replication 
through heterochromatin.

Collins N(1), Poot RA, Kukimoto I, García-Jiménez C, Dellaire G, Varga-Weisz PD.

Author information:
(1)Marie Curie Research Institute, The Chart, Oxted, Surrey RH8 0TL, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2002 Dec;32(4):560-2. doi: 10.1038/ng1202-560.

The mechanism by which the eukaryotic DNA-replication machinery penetrates 
condensed chromatin structures to replicate the underlying DNA is poorly 
understood. Here we provide evidence that an ACF1-ISWI chromatin-remodeling 
complex is required for replication through heterochromatin in mammalian cells. 
ACF1 (ATP-utilizing chromatin assembly and remodeling factor 1) and an ISWI 
isoform, SNF2H (sucrose nonfermenting-2 homolog), become specifically enriched 
in replicating pericentromeric heterochromatin. RNAi-mediated depletion of ACF1 
specifically impairs the replication of pericentromeric heterochromatin. 
Accordingly, depletion of ACF1 causes a delay in cell-cycle progression through 
the late stages of S phase. In vivo depletion of SNF2H slows the progression of 
DNA replication throughout S phase, indicating a functional overlap with ACF1. 
Decondensing the heterochromatin with 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine reverses the effects 
of ACF1 and SNF2H depletion. Expression of an ACF1 mutant that cannot interact 
with SNF2H also interferes with replication of condensed chromatin. Our data 
suggest that an ACF1-SNF2H complex is part of a dedicated mechanism that enables 
DNA replication through highly condensed regions of chromatin.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1046
PMID: 12434153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
