---
pmid: '10871843'
title: Transcriptional modulation of the anti-apoptotic protein BCL-XL by the paired
  box transcription factors PAX3 and PAX3/FKHR.
authors:
- Margue CM
- Bernasconi M
- Barr FG
- Sch채fer BW
journal: Oncogene
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1203607
---

# Transcriptional modulation of the anti-apoptotic protein BCL-XL by the paired box transcription factors PAX3 and PAX3/FKHR.
**Authors:** Margue CM, Bernasconi M, Barr FG, Sch채fer BW
**Journal:** Oncogene (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1203607](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1203607)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2000 Jun 8;19(25):2921-9. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1203607.

Transcriptional modulation of the anti-apoptotic protein BCL-XL by the paired 
box transcription factors PAX3 and PAX3/FKHR.

Margue CM(1), Bernasconi M, Barr FG, Sch채fer BW.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, ETH Z체rich, Switzerland.

The aberrant expression of the transcription factors PAX3 and PAX3/FKHR 
associated with rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS), solid tumors displaying muscle cell 
features, suggests that these proteins play an important role in the 
pathogenesis of RMS. We could previously demonstrate that one of the oncogenic 
functions of PAX3 and PAX3/FKHR in RMS is protection from apoptosis. BCL-XL is a 
prominent anti-apoptotic protein present in normal skeletal muscle and RMS 
cells. In the present study, we establish that BCL-XL is transcriptionally 
modulated by PAX3 and PAX3/FKHR, since enhanced expression of both PAX proteins 
stimulates transcription of endogenous BCL-XL mRNA in a cell type specific 
manner. Further, we present evidence that both PAX3 and PAX3/FKHR can 
transcriptionally activate the Bcl-x gene promoter in cotransfection assays. 
Using electrophoretic mobility shift assays, an ATTA binding site for PAX3 and 
PAX3/FKHR could be localized in the upstream promoter region (position -42 to 
-39). Finally, ectopic overexpression of either PAX3, PAX3/FKHR or BCL-XL can 
rescue tumor cells from apoptosis induced by antisense treatment. These results 
suggest that at least part of the anti-apoptotic effect of PAX3 and PAX3/FKHR is 
mediated through direct transcriptional modulation of the prominent 
anti-apoptotic protein BCL-XL. Oncogene (2000).

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1203607
PMID: 10871843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
