---
pmid: '23729669'
title: Inducible interleukin 32 (IL-32) exerts extensive antiviral function via selective
  stimulation of interferon λ1 (IFN-λ1).
authors:
- Li Y
- Xie J
- Xu X
- Liu L
- Wan Y
- Liu Y
- Zhu C
- Zhu Y
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3774363
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.440115
---

# Inducible interleukin 32 (IL-32) exerts extensive antiviral function via selective stimulation of interferon λ1 (IFN-λ1).
**Authors:** Li Y, Xie J, Xu X, Liu L, Wan Y, Liu Y, Zhu C, Zhu Y
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M112.440115](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M112.440115)
**PMC:** [PMC3774363](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3774363/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jul 19;288(29):20927-20941. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.440115.
Epub  2013 May 31.

Inducible interleukin 32 (IL-32) exerts extensive antiviral function via 
selective stimulation of interferon λ1 (IFN-λ1).

Li Y(1), Xie J(2), Xu X(2), Liu L(2), Wan Y(2), Liu Y(2), Zhu C(2), Zhu Y(3).

Author information:
(1)From The State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, and 
Chinese-French Liver Disease Research Institute at Zhongnan Hospital, Wuhan 
University, Wuhan 430072, China and; the Research Center for Tissue Engineering 
and Regenerative Medicine, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430022, China.
(2)From The State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, and 
Chinese-French Liver Disease Research Institute at Zhongnan Hospital, Wuhan 
University, Wuhan 430072, China and.
(3)From The State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, and 
Chinese-French Liver Disease Research Institute at Zhongnan Hospital, Wuhan 
University, Wuhan 430072, China and. Electronic address: yingzhu@whu.edu.cn.

Interleukin (IL)-32 has been recognized as a proinflammatory cytokine that 
participates in responses to viral infection. However, little is known about how 
IL-32 is induced in response to viral infection and the mechanisms of 
IL-32-mediated antiviral activities. We discovered that IL-32 is elevated by 
hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection both in vitro and in vivo and that HBV induced 
IL-32 expression at the level of both transcription and post-transcription. 
Furthermore, microRNA-29b was found to be a key factor in HBV-regulated IL-32 
expression by directly targeting the mRNA 3'-untranslated region of IL-32. 
Antiviral analysis showed that IL-32 was not sufficient to alter HBV replication 
in HepG2.2.15 cells. To mimic the viremic phase of viral infection, freshly 
isolated peripheral blood mononuclear cells were treated with IL-32γ, the 
secretory isoform, and the supernatants were used for antiviral assays. 
Surprisingly, these supernatants exhibited extensive antiviral activity against 
multiplex viruses besides HBV. Thus, we speculated that the IL-32γ-treated 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells produced and secreted an unknown antiviral 
factor. Using antibody neutralization assays, we identified the factor as 
interferon (IFN)-λ1 and not IFN-α. Further studies indicated that IL-32γ 
effectively inhibited HBV replication in a hydrodynamic injection mouse model. 
Clinical data showed that elevated levels of IFN-λ1 both in serum and liver 
tissue of HBV patients were positively correlated to the increased levels of 
IL-32. Our results demonstrate that elevated IL-32 levels during viral infection 
mediate antiviral effects by stimulating the expression of IFN-λ1.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.440115
PMCID: PMC3774363
PMID: 23729669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
