---
pmid: '3090033'
title: Determination of the signal peptidase cleavage site in the preprosubtilisin
  of Bacillus subtilis.
authors:
- Wong SL
- Doi RH
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1986'
full_text_available: false
---

# Determination of the signal peptidase cleavage site in the preprosubtilisin of Bacillus subtilis.
**Authors:** Wong SL, Doi RH
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1986)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1986 Aug 5;261(22):10176-81.

Determination of the signal peptidase cleavage site in the preprosubtilisin of 
Bacillus subtilis.

Wong SL, Doi RH.

Bacillus subtilis subtilisin is predicted to be synthesized as a preproenzyme 
according to the sequence analysis of its gene. We have synthesized the [35S] 
methionine-labeled preprosubtilisin in vitro and processed the precursor to 
prosubtilisin by the addition of membrane vesicles derived from vegetative cells 
of B. subtilis and Triton X-100. Radiosequencing of the prosubtilisin allowed 
the precise determination of the signal peptidase cleavage site. The 
preprosubtilisin was found to have a 29-amino-acid-long signal peptide with the 
signal peptidase cleavage sequence of AlaGln-AlaAla. Fusion of the signal 
peptide sequence to the mature TEM beta-lactamase structural gene allowed the 
production of an active and secreted form of beta-lactamase in vivo. An 
N-terminal sequence analysis of this product indicated that the observed in vivo 
signal peptidase cleavage site was exactly the same as that determined by in 
vitro analysis. During the development of the in vitro processing system, we 
demonstrated that the replacement of the subtilisin transcription regulatory 
sequence by a vegetative promoter allowed the vegetative expression and 
secretion of subtilisin. Thus, the late expression of the native subtilisin gene 
is mainly controlled at the transcription level and the secretion/processing 
systems are available for vegetative production of subtilisin.

PMID: 3090033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
