---
reference_id: PMID:17439972
title: CAF1 plays an important role in mRNA deadenylation separate from its contact to CCR4.
authors:
- Ohn T
- Chiang YC
- Lee DJ
- Yao G
- Zhang C
- Denis CL
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkm196
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CAF1 plays an important role in mRNA deadenylation separate from its contact to CCR4.
**Authors:** Ohn T, Chiang YC, Lee DJ, Yao G, Zhang C, Denis CL
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkm196](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkm196)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(9):3002-15. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkm196. Epub 2007 Apr
16.

CAF1 plays an important role in mRNA deadenylation separate from its contact to
CCR4.

Ohn T(1), Chiang YC, Lee DJ, Yao G, Zhang C, Denis CL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of New
Hampshire, Rudman Hall, Durham, NH 03824, USA.

The CAF1 protein is a component of the CCR4-NOT deadenylase complex. While yeast
CAF1 displays deadenylase activity, this activity is not required for its
deadenylation function in vivo, and CCR4 is the primary deadenylase in the
complex. In order to identify CAF1-specific functional regions required for
deadenylation in vivo, we targeted for mutagenesis six regions of CAF1 that are
specifically conserved among CAF1 orthologs. Defects in residues 213-215, found
to be a site required for binding CCR4, reduced the rate of deadenylation to a
lesser extent and resulted in in vivo phenotypes that were less severe than did
defects in other regions of CAF1 that displayed greater contact to CCR4. These
results imply that CAF1, while affecting deadenylation through its contact to
CCR4, has functions in deadenylation separate from its contact to CCR4.
Synthetic lethalities of caf1Delta, but not that of ccr4Delta, with defects in
DHH1 or PAB1, both of which are involved in translation, further supports a role
of CAF1 separate from that of CCR4. Importantly, other mutations in PAB1 that
reduced translation, while not affecting deadenylation by themselves or when
combined with ccr4Delta, severely blocked deadenylation when coupled with a caf1
deletion. These results indicate that both CAF1 and factors involved in
translation are required for deadenylation.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkm196
PMCID: PMC1888822
PMID: 17439972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]