---
pmid: '28167675'
title: ARPP-16 Is a Striatal-Enriched Inhibitor of Protein Phosphatase 2A Regulated
  by Microtubule-Associated Serine/Threonine Kinase 3 (Mast 3 Kinase).
authors:
- Andrade EC
- Musante V
- Horiuchi A
- Matsuzaki H
- Brody AH
- Wu T
- Greengard P
- Taylor JR
- Nairn AC
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2017'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC5354324
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4559-15.2017
---

# ARPP-16 Is a Striatal-Enriched Inhibitor of Protein Phosphatase 2A Regulated by Microtubule-Associated Serine/Threonine Kinase 3 (Mast 3 Kinase).
**Authors:** Andrade EC, Musante V, Horiuchi A, Matsuzaki H, Brody AH, Wu T, Greengard P, Taylor JR, Nairn AC
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4559-15.2017](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4559-15.2017)
**PMC:** [PMC5354324](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5354324/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2017 Mar 8;37(10):2709-2722. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4559-15.2017. 
Epub 2017 Feb 6.

ARPP-16 Is a Striatal-Enriched Inhibitor of Protein Phosphatase 2A Regulated by 
Microtubule-Associated Serine/Threonine Kinase 3 (Mast 3 Kinase).

Andrade EC(1)(2), Musante V(1), Horiuchi A(3), Matsuzaki H(1), Brody AH(3), Wu 
T(4), Greengard P(3), Taylor JR(1), Nairn AC(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut 06508.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut 06520.
(3)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience, Rockefeller University, 
New York, New York 10065, and.
(4)Keck Biotechnology Resource Center, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 
06511.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut 06508, angus.nairn@yale.edu.

ARPP-16 (cAMP-regulated phospho-protein of molecular weight 16 kDa) is one of 
several small acid-soluble proteins highly expressed in medium spiny neurons of 
striatum that are phosphorylated in response to dopamine acting via D1 
receptor/protein kinase A (PKA) signaling. We show here that ARPP-16 is also 
phosphorylated in vitro and in vivo by microtubule-associated serine/threonine 
kinase 3 (MAST3 kinase), an enzyme of previously unknown function that is 
enriched in striatum. We find that ARPP-16 interacts directly with the 
scaffolding A subunit of the serine/threonine protein phosphatase, PP2A, and 
that phosphorylation of ARPP-16 at Ser46 by MAST3 kinase converts the protein 
into a selective inhibitor of B55α- and B56δ-containing heterotrimeric forms of 
PP2A. Ser46 of ARPP-16 is phosphorylated to a high basal stoichiometry in 
striatum, suggestive of basal inhibition of PP2A in striatal neurons. In support 
of this hypothesis, conditional knock-out of ARPP-16 in CaMKIIα::cre/floxed 
ARPP-16/19 mice results in dephosphorylation of a subset of PP2A substrates 
including phospho-Thr75-DARPP-32, phospho-T308-Akt, and phospho-T202/Y204-ERK. 
Conditional knock-out of ARPP-16/19 is associated with increased motivation 
measured on a progressive ratio schedule of food reinforcement, yet an 
attenuated locomotor response to acute cocaine. Our previous studies have shown 
that ARPP-16 is phosphorylated at Ser88 by PKA. Activation of PKA in striatal 
slices leads to phosphorylation of Ser88, and this is accompanied by marked 
dephosphorylation of Ser46. Together, these studies suggest that 
phospho-Ser46-ARPP-16 acts to basally control PP2A in striatal medium spiny 
neurons but that dopamine acting via PKA inactivates ARPP-16 leading to 
selective potentiation of PP2A signaling.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT We describe a 
novel mechanism of signal transduction enriched in medium spiny neurons of 
striatum that likely mediates effects of the neurotransmitter dopamine acting on 
these cells. We find that the protein ARPP-16, which is highly expressed in 
striatal medium spiny neurons, acts as a selective inhibitor of certain forms of 
the serine/threonine protein phosphatase, PP2A, when phosphorylated by the 
kinase, MAST3. Under basal conditions, ARPP-16 is phosphorylated by MAST3 to a 
very high stoichiometry. However, the actions of MAST3 are antagonized by 
dopamine and cAMP-regulated signaling leading to disinhibition of ARPP-16 and 
increased PP2A action.

Copyright © 2017 the authors 0270-6474/17/372709-14$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4559-15.2017
PMCID: PMC5354324
PMID: 28167675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

ARPP-16 (cAMP-regulated phospho-protein of molecular weight 16 kDa) is one of several small acid-soluble proteins highly expressed in medium spiny neurons of striatum that are phosphorylated in response to dopamine acting via D1 receptor/protein kinase A (PKA) signaling. We show here that ARPP-16 is also phosphorylated in vitro and in vivo by microtubule-associated serine/threonine kinase 3 (MAST3 kinase), an enzyme of previously unknown function that is enriched in striatum. We find that ARPP-16 interacts directly with the scaffolding A subunit of the serine/threonine protein phosphatase, PP2A, and that phosphorylation of ARPP-16 at Ser46 by MAST3 kinase converts the protein into a selective inhibitor of B55α- and B56δ-containing heterotrimeric forms of PP2A. Ser46 of ARPP-16 is phosphorylated to a high basal stoichiometry in striatum, suggestive of basal inhibition of PP2A in striatal neurons. In support of this hypothesis, conditional knock-out of ARPP-16 in CaMKIIα::cre/floxed ARPP-16/19 mice results in dephosphorylation of a subset of PP2A substrates including phospho-Thr75-DARPP-32, phospho-T308-Akt, and phospho-T202/Y204-ERK. Conditional knock-out of ARPP-16/19 is associated with increased motivation measured on a progressive ratio schedule of food reinforcement, yet an attenuated locomotor response to acute cocaine. Our previous studies have shown that ARPP-16 is phosphorylated at Ser88 by PKA. Activation of PKA in striatal slices leads to phosphorylation of Ser88, and this is accompanied by marked dephosphorylation of Ser46. Together, these studies suggest that phospho-Ser46-ARPP-16 acts to basally control PP2A in striatal medium spiny neurons but that dopamine acting via PKA inactivates ARPP-16 leading to selective potentiation of PP2A signaling.

SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT We describe a novel mechanism of signal transduction enriched in medium spiny neurons of striatum that likely mediates effects of the neurotransmitter dopamine acting on these cells. We find that the protein ARPP-16, which is highly expressed in striatal medium spiny neurons, acts as a selective inhibitor of certain forms of the serine/threonine protein phosphatase, PP2A, when phosphorylated by the kinase, MAST3. Under basal conditions, ARPP-16 is phosphorylated by MAST3 to a very high stoichiometry. However, the actions of MAST3 are antagonized by dopamine and cAMP-regulated signaling leading to disinhibition of ARPP-16 and increased PP2A action.

Introduction

Our previous studies have identified a family of phospho-protein substrates for cAMP-dependent protein kinase (protein kinase A [PKA]) in striatal medium spiny neurons (MSNs) ( Walaas et al., 1983a , b ). These include DARPP-32 (dopamine and cAMP-regulated phospho-protein of apparent molecular weight 32 kDa), ARPP-21 (now termed RCS for regulator of calmodulin signaling), ARPP-16, and ARPP-90 (now known to be RAP1GAP) ( Walaas et al., 1983a ; Hemmings et al., 1984a , b ; Hemmings and Greengard, 1989 ; Horiuchi et al., 1990 ; McAvoy et al., 2009 ). The roles of DARPP-32 and RCS have been well documented; DARPP-32, when phosphorylated by PKA, acts as a potent inhibitor of protein phosphatase-1 (PP1) ( Hemmings et al., 1984a ), whereas RCS, when phosphorylated by PKA, acts to sequester calmodulin and to inhibit calmodulin signaling, including the regulation of PP2B (also known as calcineurin) ( Rakhilin et al., 2004 ). Extensive studies have indicated that DARPP-32 and RCS play critical roles in mediating the effects of dopamine in the brain ( Greengard et al., 1999 ; Rakhilin et al., 2004 ; Walaas et al., 2011 ; Yger and Girault, 2011 ; Davis et al., 2012 ). However, little is known about the role of ARPP-16 in the striatum.

ARPP-16 is closely related to ARPP-19, an alternatively spliced variant that contains an additional 16 amino acids at the N terminus. ARPP-16/19 are also related to α-endosulfine (ENSA or ARPP19e), a distinct gene product that is highly conserved within the common region of ARPP-16/19 but contains an N-terminal region distinct from that of ARPP-19 ( Horiuchi et al., 1990 ; Dulubova et al., 2001 ). ARPP-16 is highly expressed in MSNs in the dorsal striatum, nucleus accumbens, and also to a lesser extent in amygdala and frontal cortex ( Girault et al., 1990 ; Brené et al., 1994 ). In contrast, ARPP-19 is expressed in non-neuronal cells. ENSA is widely distributed in brain and represents most of the 19 kDa form of the ARPP-16/ENSA proteins in striatum ( Dulubova et al., 2001 ).

In the current study, we have used proteomic methods to demonstrate a direct interaction between ARPP-16 and the A subunit of the serine/threonine phosphatase, PP2A. Moreover, we find that ARPP-16 is phosphorylated at Ser46 by MAST3 kinase, an enzyme of previously unknown function, and that phosphorylation converts ARPP-16 into a selective inhibitor of heterotrimeric forms of PP2A (catalytic C subunit, plus core A subunit, and accessory B subunits). Biochemical experiments and behavioral studies of mice lacking ARPP-16 in forebrain suggest that phospho-Ser46-ARPP-16 acts to basally inhibit PP2A activity toward selected substrates and that this can be attenuated via cAMP-mediated dephosphorylation of Ser46. These results complement recent studies that have identified a role for ARPP-19, ENSA and the Greatwall (Gwl) kinase, as regulators of PP2A during mitosis ( Gharbi-Ayachi et al., 2010 ; Mochida et al., 2010 ) but show that in striatal neurons this PP2A regulatory system is regulated and used in a distinct manner.

Discussion

The results obtained in this study identify ARPP-16 as an inhibitor of specific heterotrimeric forms of the serine-threonine phosphatase, PP2A ( Fig. 8 ). Inhibition of PP2A is dependent on phosphorylation of ARPP-16 at Ser46 by MAST3 kinase, an enzyme that is highly expressed in striatum. Consistent with a high basal activity of MAST3, phosphorylation of Ser46 is very high, suggesting that phospho-Ser46-ARPP-16 acts normally to selectively suppress PP2A activity in striatum. In support of this, biochemical studies of ARPP-16 cKO mice indicate that the phosphorylation of a subset of specific striatal substrates for PP2A are increased and that this is associated with altered behavior in the ARPP-16/19 cKO mice. These results complement and extend recent studies that highlight critical roles for phosphorylation of the ARPP-16-related proteins, ARPP-19 and ENSA, by Gwl in the inhibition of PP2A during mitosis and meiosis ( Gharbi-Ayachi et al., 2010 ; Mochida et al., 2010 ; Dupré et al., 2014 ). Strikingly, we show that, in striatal neurons, the ARPP-16/PP2A regulatory system is regulated by MAST3 kinase in an opposing manner to that found in regulation of the cell cycle by ARPP-19/ENSA by Gwl.

Previous studies have suggested functions for the ARPP-16 homolog, ARPP-19, in GAP-43 mRNA stabilization ( Irwin et al., 2002 ) and as a binding partner for α-synuclein ( Woods et al., 2007 ). ENSA was originally identified as being a potential extracellular ligand for the K ATP -coupled sulfonylurea receptor ( Virsolvy-Vergine et al., 1992 ). However, there is no evidence that ENSA is found extracellularly. Moreover, the ubiquitous distribution of ARPP-19 and ENSA would suggest a broader function than regulation of the neuronal GAP-43 mRNA or interactions with the neuronal protein, α-synuclein. Indeed, the recent studies that have found that ARPP-19 or ENSA is required for the ability of the Gwl kinase to regulate PP2A during mitosis in frog oocytes, together with our results, suggest that the function of the ARPP-16/19/ENSA family of proteins is limited to control of PP2A activity.

Heterotrimeric forms of PP2A contain a catalytic C, a scaffolding A, and various B subunits that influence the substrate specificity of the different PP2A isoforms ( Janssens and Goris, 2001 ; Xing et al., 2006 ; Xu et al., 2006 ; Xu et al., 2008 ). Our studies indicated that ARPP-16 can bind directly to the A subunit but that the dephospho- or phospho-Ser46-forms of the protein have little effect on the activity of the isolated AC dimer. However, we find that phospho-Ser46-ARPP-16, but not dephospho-ARPP-16, can inhibit heterotrimeric forms of the enzyme, especially those containing either the Bα or B56δ subunits. ARPP-16 interacts with HEAT repeats 3–7 of the A subunit, the same general region that binds both B subunits and ST. Given that only the heterotrimeric forms of the enzyme are inhibited by phospho-Ser46-ARPP-16, this would suggest that, although ARPP-16 can bind directly to the A subunit, it does not compete for binding with the B subunit. Moreover, given the variable effect on different heterotrimeric forms of PP2A, there presumably must be specific interactions between phospho-ARPP-16 and some, but not all, B subunits that combine to inhibit substrate interaction. Recent studies of Gwl-mediated inhibition of PP2A in frog oocytes suggested that the Bα isoform form of PP2A might be selectively regulated ( Castilho et al., 2009 ; Mochida et al., 2010 ). However, our results suggest that, in striatal neurons, the B56δ form of PP2A may also be subject to regulation by ARPP-16. Thus, the efficacy and selectivity of phospho-ARPP-16 (or ARPP-19 or ENSA) are likely influenced by the nature of phospho-protein substrate used in combination with a specific B subunit isoform.

We identified MAST3 kinase as being involved in regulation of ARPP-16 in striatum from the studies of the Gwl kinase and ARPP-19 and ENSA in frog oocytes ( Gharbi-Ayachi et al., 2010 ; Mochida et al., 2010 ). The MASTL kinase has greatest similarity to Gwl and is likely functionally equivalent to Gwl in dividing mammalian cells ( Voets and Wolthuis, 2010 ). There are four MAST kinases, all of which are expressed in brain, with MAST3 kinase being selectively found in striatum ( Garland et al., 2008 ). Based on our biochemical studies that indicate MAST3 efficiently phosphorylates Ser46 of ARPP-16, and that MAST3, but not other related MAST kinase isoforms, is highly expressed in striatum, it is likely that MAST3 is responsible for regulation of ARPP-16 in situ .

Phosphorylation of Ser88 of ARPP-16 does not influence PP2A activity (V. Musante, A.C. Nairn, unpublished results), raising the question of how this might contribute to ARPP-16 function. Our studies indicate that Ser46 is phosphorylated basally to a high stoichiometry in striatum. Treatment of striatal slices with forskolin led to a substantial dephosphorylation at Ser46 of ARPP-16 (and also Ser62 of ENSA). These results suggest that rather than regulate ARPP-16 activity directly, cAMP-dependent signaling serves to attenuate phosphorylation of Ser46 leading to disinhibition of PP2A ( Fig. 8 ). It is possible that phosphorylation of ARPP-16 acts in an intramolecular fashion to inhibit Ser46 phosphorylation by MAST3 or to increase the dephosphorylation of this site. Alternatively, MAST3 kinase may be suppressed by cAMP signaling, or the activity of a phosphatase could be increased. With respect to the latter situation, PKA-mediated activation of the B56δ form of PP2A ( Ahn et al., 2007a ) could be involved. Dephosphorylation of Ser46 of ARPP-16 was also regulated by NMDA receptor activation in striatal slices, indicating that ARPP-16 is controlled by multiple signaling pathways.

In support of the hypothesis that phospho-Ser46-ARPP-16 acts to basally inhibit selected PP2A heterotrimeric isoforms, we found that conditional knock-out of ARPP-16/19 led to decreased phosphorylation of a subset of PP2A substrates. ARPP-16 is important for the PP2A-dependent regulation of DARPP-32, Akt, and ERK, although it does not affect tau and EF2. Additionally, calcineurin regulation of DARPP-32 and PP1 regulation of GluA1 are not affected in ARPP-16/19 cKO mice. It is likely that the selective effect of ARPP-16 knock-out on phosphorylation of PP2A targets is linked to the ability of ARPP-16/19 to regulate specific B subunits while leaving others unaffected. However, although dephosphorylation of DARPP-32 by PP2A involves both B56δ (or B′δ) and PR72/B″, it is not known whether Bα confers any specificity for DARPP-32 ( Ahn et al., 2007a , b ). Dephosphorylation of tau by PP2A appears to be dependent on Bα, but not B′γ ( Sontag et al., 2004 ; Xu et al., 2008 ). However, dephosphorylation of Akt or ERK by PP2A exhibits dependence on both Bα and B56 subunits that is variable in different cell types ( Van Kanegan et al., 2005 ; Letourneux et al., 2006 ; Rocher et al., 2007 ; Kuo et al., 2008 ; Rodgers et al., 2011 ). It is possible, therefore, that the relative expression levels of these different B subunits in MSNs may be important in terms of the forms of PP2A that are targeted by ARPP-16. In this regard, B56δ is known to be highly expressed in striatal neurons ( Ahn et al., 2007a ; Louis et al., 2011 ).

Consistent with its high expression in MSNs, ARPP-16 is involved in regulation of behaviors associated with striatal function. Thus, conditional knock-out of this selective PP2A inhibitor enhanced motivation for food measured by progressive ratio responding yet attenuated locomotor response to acute cocaine injection. The motivational effects of ARPP-16/19 knock-out are opposite to that of genetic manipulation of the two other PKA substrates enriched in MSNs, namely, DARPP-32 and RCS. DARPP-32 S97A mutant mice show reduced motivation for a food reinforcement ( Stipanovich et al., 2008 ) as did RCS knock-out mice ( Davis et al., 2012 ). However, DARPP-32 S97A mutant mice also show reduced preference for cocaine, as well as reduced cocaine sensitization, although direct studies of psychostimulant action in RCS knock-out mice have yet to be performed. These various behavioral consequences of genetic manipulation of DARPP-32, RCS, and ARPP-16 therefore suggest specific functions in the striatum that likely reflect their ability to regulate the actions of different serine/threonine phosphatases and/or reflect the different signaling pathways that regulate their activities.

The regulation of PP2A by ARPP-16 in striatum adds to our previous studies that have found that DARPP-32 and RCS control the actions of PP1 and calcineurin (PP2B), respectively. Notably, these three small, intrinsically disordered, PKA substrates collectively control the activities of three of the four major classes of serine/threonine protein phosphatases in striatal neurons, albeit by different mechanisms. Phosphorylation of DARPP-32 by PKA generates a pseudosubstrate inhibitor of PP1, whereas phosphorylation of RCS by PKA acts indirectly to inhibit PP2B. In contrast, ARPP-16 acts basally to inhibit PP2A, and this activity is likely relieved by suppression of MAST3 phosphorylation of ARPP-16 by cAMP signaling. The coevolution of an enrichment of regulators of serine/threonine protein phosphatases in MSNs is striking and is presumably a reflection of the temporal and possibly spatial requirements for intracellular signaling responding to dopamine and other neurotransmitter inputs that coordinate with dopamine action in striatal MSNs. Several important questions remain to be answered. ENSA is expressed in similar levels as ARPP-16 in striatum and presumably may have complimentary or distinct biochemical and behavioral roles. Elucidation of the mechanistic details of the interaction between the phosphorylation of ARPP-16/ENSA by PKA and MAST3 will also be needed to fully understand the functional role of regulation of PP2A by dopamine and other neurotransmitters in striatal neurons.
