---
pmid: '9525610'
title: Adenovirus preterminal protein binds to the CAD enzyme at active sites of viral
  DNA replication on the nuclear matrix.
authors:
- Angeletti PC
- Engler JA
journal: J Virol
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC109735
doi: 10.1128/JVI.72.4.2896-2904.1998
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Adenovirus preterminal protein binds to the CAD enzyme at active sites of viral DNA replication on the nuclear matrix.
**Authors:** Angeletti PC, Engler JA
**Journal:** J Virol (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.72.4.2896-2904.1998](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.72.4.2896-2904.1998)
**PMC:** [PMC109735](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC109735/)

## Abstract

1. J Virol. 1998 Apr;72(4):2896-904. doi: 10.1128/JVI.72.4.2896-2904.1998.

Adenovirus preterminal protein binds to the CAD enzyme at active sites of viral 
DNA replication on the nuclear matrix.

Angeletti PC(1), Engler JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, School of Medicine, 
University of Alabama at Birmingham, 35294-0005, USA.

Adenovirus (Ad) replicative complexes form at discrete sites on the nuclear 
matrix (NM) via an interaction mediated by the precursor of the terminal protein 
(pTP). The identities of cellular proteins involved in these complexes have 
remained obscure. We present evidence that pTP binds to a multifunctional 
pyrimidine biosynthesis enzyme found at replication domains on the NM. 
Far-Western blotting identified proteins of 150 and 240 kDa that had pTP binding 
activity. Amino acid sequencing of the 150-kDa band revealed sequence identity 
to carbamyl phosphate synthetase I (CPS I) and a high degree of homology to the 
related trifunctional enzyme known as CAD (for carbamyl phosphate synthetase, 
aspartate transcarbamylase, and dihydroorotase). Western blotting with an 
antibody directed against CAD detected a 240-kDa band that comigrated with that 
detected by pTP far-Western blotting. Binding experiments showed that a pTP-CAD 
complex was immunoprecipitable from cell extracts in which pTP was expressed by 
a vaccinia virus recombinant. Additionally, in vitro-translated epitope-tagged 
pTP and CAD were immunoprecipitable as a complex, indicating the occurrence of a 
protein-protein interaction. Confocal fluorescence microscopy of Ad-infected NM 
showed that pTP and CAD colocalized in nuclear foci. Both pTP and CAD were 
confirmed to colocalize with active sites of replication detected by 
bromodeoxyuridine incorporation. These data support the concept that the pTP-CAD 
interaction may allow anchorage of Ad replication complexes in the proximity of 
required cellular factors and may help to segregate replicated and unreplicated 
viral DNA.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.72.4.2896-2904.1998
PMCID: PMC109735
PMID: 9525610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
