---
pmid: '23999306'
title: The structure of human α-2,6-sialyltransferase reveals the binding mode of
  complex glycans.
authors:
- Kuhn B
- Benz J
- Greif M
- Engel AM
- Sobek H
- Rudolph MG
journal: Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1107/S0907444913015412
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The structure of human α-2,6-sialyltransferase reveals the binding mode of complex glycans.
**Authors:** Kuhn B, Benz J, Greif M, Engel AM, Sobek H, Rudolph MG
**Journal:** Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1107/S0907444913015412](https://doi.org/10.1107/S0907444913015412)

## Abstract

1. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2013 Sep;69(Pt 9):1826-38. doi: 
10.1107/S0907444913015412. Epub 2013 Aug 17.

The structure of human α-2,6-sialyltransferase reveals the binding mode of 
complex glycans.

Kuhn B(1), Benz J, Greif M, Engel AM, Sobek H, Rudolph MG.

Author information:
(1)pRED Pharma Research and Early Development, Discovery Technologies, F. 
Hoffmann-La Roche AG, Grenzacher Strasse 124, 4070 Basel, Switzerland.

Human β-galactoside α-2,6-sialyltransferase I (ST6Gal-I) establishes the final 
glycosylation pattern of many glycoproteins by transferring a sialyl moiety to a 
terminal galactose. Complete sialylation of therapeutic immunoglobulins is 
essential for their anti-inflammatory activity and protein stability, but is 
difficult to achieve in vitro owing to the limited activity of ST6Gal-I towards 
some galactose acceptors. No structural information on ST6Gal-I that could help 
to improve the enzymatic properties of ST6Gal-I for biotechnological purposes is 
currently available. Here, the crystal structures of human ST6Gal-I in complex 
with the product cytidine 5'-monophosphate and in complex with cytidine and 
phosphate are described. These complexes allow the rationalization of the 
inhibitory activity of cytosine-based nucleotides. ST6Gal-I adopts a variant of 
the canonical glycosyltransferase A fold and differs from related 
sialyltransferases by several large insertions and deletions that determine its 
regiospecificity and substrate specificity. A large glycan from a symmetry mate 
localizes to the active site of ST6Gal-I in an orientation compatible with 
catalysis. The glycan binding mode can be generalized to any glycoprotein that 
is a substrate of ST6Gal-I. Comparison with a bacterial sialyltransferase in 
complex with a modified sialyl donor lends insight into the Michaelis complex. 
The results support an SN2 mechanism with inversion of configuration at the 
sialyl residue and suggest substrate-assisted catalysis with a charge-relay 
mechanism that bears a conceptual similarity to serine proteases.

DOI: 10.1107/S0907444913015412
PMID: 23999306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
