---
pmid: '25522312'
title: Forced expression of Nanog or Esrrb preserves the ESC status in the absence
  of nucleostemin expression.
authors:
- Katano M
- Ema M
- Nakachi Y
- Mizuno Y
- Hirasaki M
- Suzuki A
- Ueda A
- Nishimoto M
- Takahashi S
- Okazaki Y
- Okuda A
journal: Stem Cells
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4409032
doi: 10.1002/stem.1918
---

# Forced expression of Nanog or Esrrb preserves the ESC status in the absence of nucleostemin expression.
**Authors:** Katano M, Ema M, Nakachi Y, Mizuno Y, Hirasaki M, Suzuki A, Ueda A, Nishimoto M, Takahashi S, Okazaki Y, Okuda A
**Journal:** Stem Cells (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/stem.1918](https://doi.org/10.1002/stem.1918)
**PMC:** [PMC4409032](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4409032/)

## Abstract

1. Stem Cells. 2015 Apr;33(4):1089-101. doi: 10.1002/stem.1918.

Forced expression of Nanog or Esrrb preserves the ESC status in the absence of 
nucleostemin expression.

Katano M(1), Ema M, Nakachi Y, Mizuno Y, Hirasaki M, Suzuki A, Ueda A, Nishimoto 
M, Takahashi S, Okazaki Y, Okuda A.

Author information:
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Saitama Medical University, Yamane, 
Hidaka, Saitama, Japan.

Comment in
    Stem Cells. 2015 Jul;33(7):2358-9. doi: 10.1002/stem.2008.

Nucleostemin (NS) is a nucleolar GTP-binding protein that is involved in a 
plethora of functions including ribosomal biogenesis and maintenance of telomere 
integrity. In addition to its expression in cancerous cells, the NS gene is 
expressed in stem cells including embryonic stem cells (ESCs). Previous 
knockdown and knockout studies have demonstrated that NS is important to 
preserve the self-renewality and high expression levels of pluripotency marker 
genes in ESCs. Here, we found that forced expression of Nanog or Esrrb, but not 
other pluripotency factors, resulted in the dispensability of NS expression in 
ESCs. However, the detrimental phenotypes of ESCs associated with ablation of NS 
expression were not mitigated by forced expression of Rad51 or a nucleolar 
localization-defective NS mutant that counteracts the damage associated with 
loss of NS expression in other NS-expressing cells such as neural 
stem/progenitor cells. Thus, our results indicate that NS participates in 
preservation of the viability and integrity of ESCs, which is distinct from that 
in other NS-expressing cells.

© 2014 The Authors. STEM CELLS Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of 
AlphaMed Press.

DOI: 10.1002/stem.1918
PMCID: PMC4409032
PMID: 25522312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
