---
pmid: '21509660'
title: HSV-1 stimulation-related protein HSRG1 inhibits viral gene transcriptional
  elongation by interacting with Cyclin T2.
authors:
- Wu W
- Yu X
- Li W
- Guo L
- Liu L
- Wang L
- Li Q
journal: Sci China Life Sci
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s11427-011-4160-3
---

# HSV-1 stimulation-related protein HSRG1 inhibits viral gene transcriptional elongation by interacting with Cyclin T2.
**Authors:** Wu W, Yu X, Li W, Guo L, Liu L, Wang L, Li Q
**Journal:** Sci China Life Sci (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11427-011-4160-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11427-011-4160-3)

## Abstract

1. Sci China Life Sci. 2011 Apr;54(4):359-65. doi: 10.1007/s11427-011-4160-3.
Epub  2011 Apr 21.

HSV-1 stimulation-related protein HSRG1 inhibits viral gene transcriptional 
elongation by interacting with Cyclin T2.

Wu W(1), Yu X, Li W, Guo L, Liu L, Wang L, Li Q.

Author information:
(1)Department of Viral Immunology, Institute of Medical Biology, Chinese Academy 
of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Kunming 650118, China.

The protein encoded by HSRG1 (HSV-1 stimulation-related gene 1) is a virally 
induced protein expressed in HSV-1-infected cells. We have already reported that 
HSRG1 is capable of interacting with transcriptional regulator proteins. To 
further analyze the effects of HSRG1 on the regulation of viral gene 
transcription, we expressed the HSRG1 protein in transfected cells and found 
that it postpones the proliferation of HSV-1. CAT (chloramphenicol 
acetyltransferase) assays also revealed that HSRG1 reduces transcription from 
HSV-1 promoters. Yeast two-hybrid and immunoprecipitation assays indicated that 
HSRG1 interacts with Cyclin T2, the regulatory subunit of P-TEFb, which is 
required for transcription elongation by RNA Pol II (RNAP II), and that amino 
acid residues 1-420 in Cyclin T2 are important for binding with HSRG1. 
Fluorescence assays suggested that the cellular localizations of those two 
proteins are influenced by their interaction. Further analyses with CAT assays 
revealed that HSRG1 inhibits the transcriptional activation by Cyclin T2 of 
viral promoters. Our results suggested that the inhibitory effects of HSRG1 on 
viral replication and proliferation are probably induced by its binding to 
Cyclin T2. Therefore, it is likely that HSRG1 inhibits viral gene 
transcriptional elongation by interacting with Cyclin T2.

DOI: 10.1007/s11427-011-4160-3
PMID: 21509660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
