---
pmid: '9598324'
title: Cloning, expression, and chromosomal localization of human long-chain fatty
  acid-CoA ligase 4 (FACL4).
authors:
- Cao Y
- Traer E
- Zimmerman GA
- McIntyre TM
- Prescott SM
journal: Genomics
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/geno.1998.5268
---

# Cloning, expression, and chromosomal localization of human long-chain fatty acid-CoA ligase 4 (FACL4).
**Authors:** Cao Y, Traer E, Zimmerman GA, McIntyre TM, Prescott SM
**Journal:** Genomics (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1006/geno.1998.5268](https://doi.org/10.1006/geno.1998.5268)

## Abstract

1. Genomics. 1998 Apr 15;49(2):327-30. doi: 10.1006/geno.1998.5268.

Cloning, expression, and chromosomal localization of human long-chain fatty 
acid-CoA ligase 4 (FACL4).

Cao Y(1), Traer E, Zimmerman GA, McIntyre TM, Prescott SM.

Author information:
(1)Program in Human Molecular Biology & Genetics, Huntsman Cancer Institute, 
University of Utah, Salt Lake City 84112, USA.

Long-chain fatty acid-CoA ligase (also called fatty acid acyl-CoA synthetase) 
plays an essential role in lipid biosynthesis and fatty acid degradation. We 
report herein the cDNA cloning of the human long-chain fatty acid-CoA ligase 4 
from a brain library. The cDNA encodes a functional long-chain fatty acid-CoA 
ligase that shows preference for arachidonic acid as substrate. We also studied 
the tissue distribution of gene expression by Northern hybridization. Human 
placenta, brain, testis, ovary, spleen, and adrenal cortex have the highest 
levels of expression of the long-chain fatty acid-CoA ligase 4, whereas the GI 
system has the lowest. Finally, this gene was localized to chromosome Xq23 in 
human by FISH analysis.

DOI: 10.1006/geno.1998.5268
PMID: 9598324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
