---
pmid: '16186822'
title: MDC1 interacts with Rad51 and facilitates homologous recombination.
authors:
- Zhang J
- Ma Z
- Treszezamsky A
- Powell SN
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nsmb991
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# MDC1 interacts with Rad51 and facilitates homologous recombination.
**Authors:** Zhang J, Ma Z, Treszezamsky A, Powell SN
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nsmb991](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb991)

## Abstract

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2005 Oct;12(10):902-9. doi: 10.1038/nsmb991. Epub 2005
Sep  25.

MDC1 interacts with Rad51 and facilitates homologous recombination.

Zhang J(1), Ma Z, Treszezamsky A, Powell SN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, MGH Cancer Center, Massachusetts General 
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 149 13th Street, Charlestown, Massachusetts 
02129, USA.

Mediator of DNA damage checkpoint protein-1 (MDC1) is a recently identified 
nuclear protein that participates in DNA-damage sensing and signaling. Here we 
report that knockdown of MDC1 by RNA interference results in cellular 
hypersensitivity to the DNA cross-linking agent mitomycin C and ionizing 
radiation and in impaired homology-mediated repair of double-strand breaks in 
DNA. MDC1 forms a complex with Rad51 through a direct interaction with the 
forkhead-associated domain of MDC1, not the BRCA1 C-terminal domain. Depletion 
of MDC1 results in impaired formation of Rad51 ionizing radiation-induced foci, 
reduced amounts of nuclear and chromatin-bound Rad51, and a corresponding 
increase in Rad51 protein degradation. Together, our findings suggest that MDC1 
functions in Rad51-mediated homologous recombination by retaining Rad51 in 
chromatin.

DOI: 10.1038/nsmb991
PMID: 16186822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
