---
pmid: '12871209'
title: Functional characterization and regulation of the taurine transporter and cysteine
  dioxygenase in human hepatoblastoma HepG2 cells.
authors:
- Satsu H
- Terasawa E
- Hosokawa Y
- Shimizu M
journal: Biochem J
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1223695
doi: 10.1042/BJ20030535
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Functional characterization and regulation of the taurine transporter and cysteine dioxygenase in human hepatoblastoma HepG2 cells.
**Authors:** Satsu H, Terasawa E, Hosokawa Y, Shimizu M
**Journal:** Biochem J (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BJ20030535](https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20030535)
**PMC:** [PMC1223695](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1223695/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2003 Oct 15;375(Pt 2):441-7. doi: 10.1042/BJ20030535.

Functional characterization and regulation of the taurine transporter and 
cysteine dioxygenase in human hepatoblastoma HepG2 cells.

Satsu H(1), Terasawa E, Hosokawa Y, Shimizu M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Agricultural 
and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 
113-8657, Japan. asatsu@mail.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

We investigated the characterization and the regulation of TAUT (taurine 
transporter) and CDO (cysteine dioxygenase), one of the key enzymes of taurine 
biosynthesis, in human hepatoblastoma HepG2 cells. The activity of TAUT in the 
HepG2 cells was evaluated by means of a sodium- and chloride-dependent 
high-affinity transport system, the characteristics of which were similar to 
those of the beta amino-acid-specific taurine transport system described 
previously for various tissues [Uchida, Kwon, Yamauchi, Preston, Marumo and 
Handler (1992) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 89, 8230-8234; Ramamoorthy, 
Leibach, Mahesh, Han, Yang-Feng, Blakely and Ganapathy (1994) Biochem. J. 300, 
893-900; and Satsu, Watanabe, Arai and Shimizu (1997) J. Biochem. (Tokyo) 121, 
1082-1087]. By culturing in a hypertonic medium, the intracellular taurine 
content of HepG2 cells was markedly increased. Under hypertonic conditions, the 
activity of TAUT was up-regulated, and the results of the kinetic analysis 
suggested that this up-regulation was associated with an increase in the amount 
of TAUT. The expression level of TAUT mRNA was markedly higher than that of the 
control cells. The expression level of CDO mRNA was also up-regulated under the 
hypertonic conditions. Culturing the cells in a taurine-rich medium resulted in 
both the activity of TAUT and the expression level of TAUT mRNA being 
down-regulated in HepG2 cells. On the other hand, the expression level of CDO 
mRNA was not affected under a taurine-rich condition. The present results show 
that both TAUT and CDO were co-operatively regulated in response to 
hypertonicity, but did not co-operatively respond to the change in extracellular 
taurine concentration. Generally, the TAUT and taurine biosynthetic enzymes have 
independent regulatory systems, but under certain conditions, they could be 
regulated in harmony with each other.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20030535
PMCID: PMC1223695
PMID: 12871209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
