---
pmid: '36417879'
title: Calreticulin mutations affect its chaperone function and perturb the glycoproteome.
authors:
- Schürch PM
- Malinovska L
- Hleihil M
- Losa M
- Hofstetter MC
- Wildschut MHE
- Lysenko V
- Lakkaraju AKK
- Maat CA
- Benke D
- Aguzzi A
- Wollscheid B
- Picotti P
- Theocharides APA
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2022'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2022.111689
---

# Calreticulin mutations affect its chaperone function and perturb the glycoproteome.
**Authors:** Schürch PM, Malinovska L, Hleihil M, Losa M, Hofstetter MC, Wildschut MHE, Lysenko V, Lakkaraju AKK, Maat CA, Benke D, Aguzzi A, Wollscheid B, Picotti P, Theocharides APA
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2022.111689](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2022.111689)

## Abstract

1. Cell Rep. 2022 Nov 22;41(8):111689. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2022.111689.

Calreticulin mutations affect its chaperone function and perturb the 
glycoproteome.

Schürch PM(1), Malinovska L(2), Hleihil M(3), Losa M(4), Hofstetter MC(1), 
Wildschut MHE(5), Lysenko V(1), Lakkaraju AKK(4), Maat CA(2), Benke D(3), Aguzzi 
A(4), Wollscheid B(6), Picotti P(2), Theocharides APA(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology and Hematology, University of Zurich and 
University Hospital Zurich, Raemistrasse 100, 8091 Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Institute of Molecular Systems Biology (IMSB), Department of Biology, ETH 
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(4)Institute of Neuropathology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(5)Department of Medical Oncology and Hematology, University of Zurich and 
University Hospital Zurich, Raemistrasse 100, 8091 Zurich, Switzerland; 
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology (IMSB), Department of Biology, ETH 
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland; Institute of Translational Medicine (ITM), 
Department of Health Sciences and Technology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(6)Institute of Translational Medicine (ITM), Department of Health Sciences and 
Technology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland; Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics 
(SIB), Lausanne, Switzerland.
(7)Department of Medical Oncology and Hematology, University of Zurich and 
University Hospital Zurich, Raemistrasse 100, 8091 Zurich, Switzerland. 
Electronic address: alexandre.theocharides@usz.ch.

Calreticulin (CALR) is an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-retained chaperone that 
assists glycoproteins in obtaining their structure. CALR mutations occur in 
patients with myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs), and the ER retention of CALR 
mutants (CALR MUT) is reduced due to a lacking KDEL sequence. Here, we 
investigate the impact of CALR mutations on protein structure and protein levels 
in MPNs by subjecting primary patient samples and CALR-mutated cell lines to 
limited proteolysis-coupled mass spectrometry (LiP-MS). Especially glycoproteins 
are differentially expressed and undergo profound structural alterations in 
granulocytes and cell lines with homozygous, but not with heterozygous, CALR 
mutations. Furthermore, homozygous CALR mutations and loss of CALR equally 
perturb glycoprotein integrity, suggesting that loss-of-function attributes of 
mutated CALR chaperones (CALR MUT) lead to glycoprotein maturation defects. 
Finally, by investigating the misfolding of the CALR glycoprotein client 
myeloperoxidase (MPO), we provide molecular proof of protein misfolding in the 
presence of homozygous CALR mutations.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2022.111689
PMID: 36417879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.
