---
pmid: '18674544'
title: The Cys3-Cys4 loop of the hydrophobin EAS is not required for rodlet formation
  and surface activity.
authors:
- Kwan AH
- Macindoe I
- Vukasin PV
- Morris VK
- Kass I
- Gupte R
- Mark AE
- Templeton MD
- Mackay JP
- Sunde M
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.07.034
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The Cys3-Cys4 loop of the hydrophobin EAS is not required for rodlet formation and surface activity.
**Authors:** Kwan AH, Macindoe I, Vukasin PV, Morris VK, Kass I, Gupte R, Mark AE, Templeton MD, Mackay JP, Sunde M
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmb.2008.07.034](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2008.07.034)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Biol. 2008 Oct 10;382(3):708-20. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.07.034. Epub
2008  Jul 22.

The Cys3-Cys4 loop of the hydrophobin EAS is not required for rodlet formation 
and surface activity.

Kwan AH(1), Macindoe I, Vukasin PV, Morris VK, Kass I, Gupte R, Mark AE, 
Templeton MD, Mackay JP, Sunde M.

Author information:
(1)School of Molecular and Microbial Biosciences, University of Sydney, Sydney, 
New South Wales 2006, Australia.

Class I hydrophobins are fungal proteins that self-assemble into robust 
amphipathic rodlet monolayers on the surface of aerial structures such as spores 
and fruiting bodies. These layers share many structural characteristics with 
amyloid fibrils and belong to the growing family of functional amyloid-like 
materials produced by microorganisms. Although the three-dimensional structure 
of the soluble monomeric form of a class I hydrophobin has been determined, 
little is known about the molecular structure of the rodlets or their assembly 
mechanism. Several models have been proposed, some of which suggest that the 
Cys3-Cys4 loop has a critical role in the initiation of assembly or in the 
polymeric structure. In order to provide insight into the relationship between 
hydrophobin sequence and rodlet assembly, we investigated the role of the 
Cys3-Cys4 loop in EAS, a class I hydrophobin from Neurospora crassa. Remarkably, 
deletion of up to 15 residues from this 25-residue loop does not impair rodlet 
formation or reduce the surface activity of the protein, and the physicochemical 
properties of rodlets formed by this mutant are indistinguishable from those of 
its full-length counterpart. In addition, the core structure of the truncation 
mutant is essentially unchanged. Molecular dynamics simulations carried out on 
the full-length protein and this truncation mutant binding to an air-water 
interface show that, although it is hydrophobic, the loop does not play a role 
in positioning the protein at the surface. These results demonstrate that the 
Cys3-Cys4 loop does not have an integral role in the formation or structure of 
the rodlets and that the major determinant of the unique properties of these 
proteins is the amphipathic core structure, which is likely to be preserved in 
all hydrophobins despite the high degree of sequence variation across the 
family.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.07.034
PMID: 18674544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
