---
pmid: '18628206'
title: 'ERp16, an endoplasmic reticulum-resident thiol-disulfide oxidoreductase: biochemical
  properties and role in apoptosis induced by endoplasmic reticulum stress.'
authors:
- Jeong W
- Lee DY
- Park S
- Rhee SG
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2533083
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M803804200
---

# ERp16, an endoplasmic reticulum-resident thiol-disulfide oxidoreductase: biochemical properties and role in apoptosis induced by endoplasmic reticulum stress.
**Authors:** Jeong W, Lee DY, Park S, Rhee SG
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M803804200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M803804200)
**PMC:** [PMC2533083](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2533083/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Sep 12;283(37):25557-25566. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M803804200.
Epub  2008 Jul 15.

ERp16, an endoplasmic reticulum-resident thiol-disulfide oxidoreductase: 
biochemical properties and role in apoptosis induced by endoplasmic reticulum 
stress.

Jeong W(1), Lee DY(2), Park S(1), Rhee SG(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Life and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ewha Womans University, Seoul 
120-750, Korea and the.
(2)Laboratory of Biochemistry, NHLBI, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
Maryland 20892.
(3)Division of Life and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ewha Womans University, Seoul 
120-750, Korea and the. Electronic address: rheesg@ewha.ac.kr.

We have characterized the properties and putative role of a mammalian 
thioredoxin-like protein, ERp16 (previously designated ERp18, ERp19, or hTLP19). 
The predicted amino acid sequence of the 172-residue human protein contains an 
NH(2)-terminal signal peptide, a thioredoxin-like domain with an active site 
motif (CGAC), and a COOH-terminal endoplasmic reticulum (ER) retention sequence 
(EDEL). Analyses indicated that the mature protein (comprising 146 residues) is 
generated by cleavage of the 26-residue signal peptide and is localized in the 
lumen of the ER. Biochemical experiments with the recombinant mature protein 
revealed it to be a thioldisulfide oxidoreductase. Its redox potential was about 
-165 mV; its active site cysteine residue Cys(66) was nucleophilic with a pK(a) 
value of approximately 6.6; it catalyzed the formation, reduction, and 
isomerization of disulfide bonds, with the unusual CGAC active site motif being 
responsible for these activities; and it existed as a dimer and underwent a 
redox-dependent conformational change. The observations that the redox potential 
of ERp16 (-165 mV) was within the range of that of the ER (-135 to -185 mV) and 
that ERp16 catalyzed disulfide isomerization of scrambled ribonuclease A suggest 
a role for ERp16 in protein disulfide isomerization in the ER. Expression of 
ERp16 in HeLa cells inhibited the induction of apoptosis by agents that elicit 
ER stress, including brefeldin A, tunicamycin, and dithiothreitol. In contrast, 
expression of a catalytically inactive mutant of ERp16 potentiated such 
apoptosis, as did depletion of ERp16 by RNA interference. Our results suggest 
that ERp16 mediates disulfide bond formation in the ER and plays an important 
role in cellular defense against prolonged ER stress.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M803804200
PMCID: PMC2533083
PMID: 18628206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

We have characterized the properties and putative role of a mammalian
 thioredoxin-like protein, ERp16 (previously designated ERp18, ERp19, or
 hTLP19). The predicted amino acid sequence of the 172-residue human protein
 contains an NH 2 -terminal signal peptide, a thioredoxin-like domain
 with an active site motif (CGAC), and a COOH-terminal endoplasmic reticulum
 (ER) retention sequence (EDEL). Analyses indicated that the mature protein
 (comprising 146 residues) is generated by cleavage of the 26-residue signal
 peptide and is localized in the lumen of the ER. Biochemical experiments with
 the recombinant mature protein revealed it to be a thioldisulfide
 oxidoreductase. Its redox potential was about -165 mV; its active site
 cysteine residue Cys 66 was nucleophilic with a
 p K a value of ∼6.6; it catalyzed the formation,
 reduction, and isomerization of disulfide bonds, with the unusual CGAC active
 site motif being responsible for these activities; and it existed as a dimer
 and underwent a redox-dependent conformational change. The observations that
 the redox potential of ERp16 (-165 mV) was within the range of that of the ER
 (-135 to -185 mV) and that ERp16 catalyzed disulfide isomerization of
 scrambled ribonuclease A suggest a role for ERp16 in protein disulfide
 isomerization in the ER. Expression of ERp16 in HeLa cells inhibited the
 induction of apoptosis by agents that elicit ER stress, including brefeldin A,
 tunicamycin, and dithiothreitol. In contrast, expression of a catalytically
 inactive mutant of ERp16 potentiated such apoptosis, as did depletion of ERp16
 by RNA interference. Our results suggest that ERp16 mediates disulfide bond
 formation in the ER and plays an important role in cellular defense against
 prolonged ER stress.

RESULTS

Identification and NH 2 -terminal Sequencing of
 ERp16 —A search of the Conserved Domain Data base with the human
 Trx1 sequence and with the use of the reverse position-specific BLAST program
 identified a Trx-like protein (GenBank™ accession number AAH08953 ; also
 represented as AAH01493 , AAD20035 , NP_056997 , and AAN34781 ). A human BLAST
 search for this protein yielded the clone 24952 mRNA sequence (accession
 number AF131758 ), which consists of an open reading frame of 516 bp, a
 5′-untranslated region of 110 bp including an in-frame stop codon (TAG),
 and a 3′-untranslated region containing a putative polyadenylation
 signal (AATAAA). The predicted open reading frame encodes a protein of 172
 amino acids with a calculated molecular mass of 19.2 kDa. Although this
 protein has been described previously with three different names (ERp19,
 ERp18, and hTLP19), it was renamed ERp16, as described below. ERp19 was
 identified as a new ER protein during mass spectral analysis of ER proteins
 from mouse liver ( 27 ), ERp18
 as the result of a data base search for new human PDI-like proteins
 ( 28 ), and hTLP19 as a novel
 human Trx-like secretory protein.

Alignment of the predicted amino acid sequences of human and mouse ERp16 is
 shown in Fig. 1 A . Both
 proteins contain a putative NH 2 -terminal signal sequence and
 COOH-terminal ER retention motif (EDEL and QDEL in the human and mouse
 proteins, respectively). Prediction of the NH 2 -terminal amino acid
 of the mature ERp16 protein by the PSORT and SignalP programs was not
 conclusive, with the former identifying Ser 24 as the
 NH 2 -terminal residue of the human protein and the latter
 identifying His 27 ( 28 , 29 ). This ambiguous prediction
 of the cleavage site led the three previous groups that identified ERp16 to
 prepare recombinant proteins with different NH 2 termini and sizes:
 a 149-residue human protein (Ser 24 -Leu 172 )
 ( 28 ), a 150-residue mouse
 protein (Ser 21 -Leu 170 , equivalent to
 Ser 23 -Leu 172 of the human sequence)
 ( 27 ), and a 146-residue human
 protein (His 27 -Leu 172 )
 ( 30 ).

To determine the NH 2 -terminal sequence of mature ERp16
 unambiguously, we purified the protein from an ER fraction of mouse liver by
 two HPLC steps ( Fig.
 1 B ). The protein preparation was further fractionated by
 SDS-PAGE, and the band corresponding to ERp16 was excised and subjected to
 NH 2 -terminal sequencing. The first five residues were determined to
 be RTGLG (data not shown), indicating that the cleavage site is located
 between positions 24 and 25 of the mouse sequence, corresponding to positions
 26 and 27 of the human sequence. The molecular mass of the predicted mature
 human protein (amino acids 27-172) was thus calculated to be 16.4 kDa. We
 therefore renamed this protein ERp16. It possesses a Trx-like domain with a
 putative active site sequence, CGAC, that has not been previously detected in
 Trx family members. A BLAST homology search yielded several ERp16 orthologs,
 multiple sequence alignment of which revealed that the CGAC motif is
 completely conserved ( 28 ).

Total soluble fractions prepared from rat tissues and cultured human cells
 were subjected to immunoblot analysis with antibodies to ERp16. ERp16 was
 detected in most of the tissues examined, being especially abundant in testis,
 lung, uterus, heart, thyroid, and placenta
 ( Fig. 2 A ). It was also
 detected in all human cell lines examined
 ( Fig. 2 B ). Its
 abundance in HeLa cells was assessed by immunoblot analysis with the use of
 recombinant mature human ERp16 (amino acids 27-172) as a reference
 ( Fig. 2 C ). HeLa cell
 lysate was thus found to contain 0.15 μg of ERp16/mg of protein (0.015% of
 total HeLa cell proteins).

Subcellular Distribution and ER Topology of ERp16 —The
 subcellular localization of ERp16 had not been completely resolved by the
 previous studies
 ( 24 - 26 );
 ERp18 and ERp19 were found in the ER, whereas hTLP19 was shown to be a
 secretory protein. To determine the localization of ERp16, we fractionated
 HeLa cell homogenates into nuclear, organellar, plasma membrane, and cytosolic
 fractions. Each fraction was then subjected to immunoblot analysis with
 antibodies to ERp16, and successful preparation of the organellar fraction was
 confirmed with antibodies to PDI ( Fig.
 3 A ). ERp16 was detected predominantly in the heavy
 membrane fraction containing the ER, mitochondria, peroxisomes, and other
 organelles, suggesting that it is probably localized in the ER. The small
 amount of ERp16 detected in the cytosolic fraction was probably attributable
 to leakage from the ER during fractionation, given that a similar amount of
 PDI also was detected in the cytosolic fraction.

To confirm the ER residency of ERp16, we transiently transfected HeLa cells
 with a vector for an ER-targeted form of green fluorescent protein (ER-GFP).
 The cells were then permeabilized and subjected to immunofluorescence analysis
 with antibodies to ERp16. The pattern of ERp16 immunoreactivity was typical of
 that for ER marker proteins ( Fig.
 3 B ). The cells expressing ER-GFP showed a similar pattern
 of GFP fluorescence present both surrounding the nucleus and in a network of
 reticular structures. Moreover, merged images showed that endogenous ERp16
 colocalized with ER-GFP. These findings are thus consistent with those of
 subcellular fractionation.

The putative ER retention sequence of human ERp16 was EDEL, whereas the
 conventional sequence is KDEL in mammalian cells
 ( 31 ). Given that secretory
 proteins also reside in the ER until they are secreted, we investigated
 whether the EDEL sequence is able to mediate ER retention. We transfected HeLa
 cells with a vector for a COOH-terminal deletion mutant of human ERp16 lacking
 the EDEL sequence (ERp16ΔC4) and compared the steady state levels of
 ERp16 in cell culture medium and cell lysates. Whereas endogenous ERp16 was
 detected almost exclusively in cell lysates, ERp16ΔC4 was distributed
 equally in both fractions ( Fig.
 3 C ). To exclude the possibility that ERp16ΔC4 was
 secreted because of its overexpression, we also examined HeLa cells
 overexpressing wild-type ERp16. The overexpressed wild-type protein was
 detected only in cell lysates. These results thus indicated that the EDEL
 sequence is responsible for ER retention of ERp16.

To determine the localization of ERp16 within the ER, we performed a
 protease protection assay with microsomes isolated from HeLa cells. ERp16 was
 protected from trypsin digestion in the absence of detergent, whereas it was
 completely digested by trypsin in the presence of 1% Triton X-100
 ( Fig. 3 D ). These
 results indicated that, like PDI, ERp16 is present in the luminal compartment
 of the ER. High concentrations of nonionic detergents in combination with high
 salt concentrations solubilize most integral membrane proteins of the ER
 ( 32 ), whereas milder treatment
 with deoxycholate releases only the cisternal content, with integral membrane
 proteins remaining in the particulate fraction
 ( 33 ). Both treatments resulted
 in solubilization of ERp16 ( Fig.
 3 E ), indicating that ERp16 is not a membrane protein but
 rather is an ER luminal protein.

Redox Potential and pK a Values of ERp16 —Trx-like
 proteins function as disulfide reductases, thiol oxidases, or disulfide
 isomerases, as exemplified by Trx, DsbA, and PDI, respectively. The reductase
 reaction results in the formation of two free thiols, whereas oxidases
 catalyze the reverse reaction. The isomerization (oxidoreductase) reaction, a
 linked cycle of reductionoxidation, does not alter the overall number of
 disulfides but results in rearrangement of their positions within the
 substrate protein. Previous observations did not provide a clear indication of
 the function of ERp16. The 146-residue recombinant hTLP19 protein was found to
 manifest disulfide reductase activity with insulin as the substrate
 ( 30 ), whereas the 149-residue
 recombinant ERp18 exhibited thiol oxidase activity with a peptide containing
 two cysteine residues ( 28 ).
 The 150-residue recombinant ERp19 was tested for neither oxidase nor reductase
 activity, but when tested for PDI function by yeast complementation analysis,
 it was found not to be able to substitute for yeast PDI, whereas other
 mammalian PDI-like proteins could
 ( 27 ). Whether Trx-like
 proteins act as a reductant or oxidant is largely dependent on their redox
 potential. The redox potential of cellular reductants ranges from -270 mV for E. coli Trx to -240 mV for GSH, whereas the redox potential of the
 strong oxidant DsbA of E. coli is -124 mV
 ( 34 ). The redox potential of
 ERp16 was determined to be about -165 mV by measurement of the equilibrium
 constant of ERp16 with glutathione at pH 7.0 and 25 °C
 ( Fig. 4 A ), based on a
 value of -240 mV for the redox potential of the glutathione redox couple.

The p K a value of the NH 2 -terminal cysteine
 residue within the C XX C motif is also an important determinant of
 thiol-disulfide oxidoreductase activity. Initial nucleophilic attack of the
 substrate disulfide by the NH 2 -terminal thiolate anion is required
 for reductase activity. The thiolate ion can be readily detected on the basis
 of its absorbance at ∼240 nm
 ( 35 ). We therefore determined
 the p K a values for the active site cysteines of ERp16 by
 monitoring its UV absorbance during pH titration
 ( Fig. 4 B ). To measure
 only thiolate-dependent A 240 , we subtracted the absorbance
 of the ERp16-CS mutant, in which the two active site cysteines are replaced by
 serine. The values of ε 240 were plotted as a function of pH
 and fitted according to the Henderson-Hasselbach equation, revealing the
 p K a values of ERp16 to be 6.63 and 8.96. The
 NH 2 -terminal cysteine (Cys 66 ) of the CGAC motif appears
 to be responsible for the lower p K a value, given that the
 p K a of the C69S mutant was calculated to be 6.60
 ( Fig. 4 B ).

Reductase, Oxidase, and Isomerase Activities of ERp16 —The
 insulin disulfide reductase activity of ERp16 was measured by monitoring the
 increase in the turbidity of reaction mixtures due to the formation of fine
 precipitates of the dissociated B chain of insulin
 ( Fig. 5 A ). In a
 negative control with dithiothreitol alone, no precipitation was observed
 during incubation for up to 50 min. The addition of ERp16 or Trx1 resulted in
 an increase in optical density at 650 nm, whereas the double cysteine mutant
 of ERp16 (ERp16-CS) failed to reduce insulin. Oxidized Trx1 is reduced by
 TrxR1 (thioredoxin reductase 1) with electrons of NADPH, and TrxR1 is known to
 have broad substrate specificity and to reduce oxidized PDI
 ( 36 ). Although ERp16 as an ER
 luminal protein would not be expected to encounter TrxR1 in the cytosol of
 cells, TrxR1 was found to reduce oxidized ERp16 in the presence of NADPH in vitro (data not shown). We were therefore able to evaluate the
 insulin reductase activity of ERp16 in a more quantitative manner by coupling
 NADPH oxidation to insulin reduction in the presence of TrxR1. Determination
 of the initial rates of NADPH oxidation suggested that the insulin reductase
 activity of ERp16 was ∼6% of that of Trx1
 ( Fig. 5 B ).

The oxidase activity of ERp16 was determined by measuring its ability to
 mediate the oxidative refolding of reduced, denatured RNase A and thereby to
 yield the catalytically active enzyme. The isomerase activity of ERp16 was
 similarly determined by measuring its ability to reactivate scrambled RNase A
 by rearranging its undefined disulfide bonds. PDI from bovine liver was used
 as a positive control for both activities. ERp16 exhibited ∼22% of the
 oxidase activity and ∼20% of the isomerase activity of PDI
 ( Fig. 5, C and D ). On a per mole active site basis (PDI contains two
 C XX C domains), these activities of ERp16 correspond to ∼44 and
 ∼40% of those of PDI, respectively. The cysteine mutant ERp16-CS showed no
 detectable oxidase or isomerase activity in comparison with the control
 lacking any enzyme. These results suggested that ERp16 possesses oxidase and
 isomerase activities for which two cysteine residues (Cys 66 and
 Cys 69 ) are required.

The intracellular redox status of thiol-disulfide oxidoreductases is
 thought to be an important predictor of their cellular function. To determine
 the redox state of ERp16 in HeLa cells, we used
 4-acetamido-4′-maleimidylstilbene-2,2′-disulfonate, which
 alkylates free thiol groups and thereby lowers the electrophoretic mobility of
 proteins ( 37 ), given that each
 bound 4-acetamido-4′-maleimidylstilbene-2,2′-disulfonate moiety
 theoretically increases the molecular mass of the target protein by 490 Da.
 ERp16 was found to be partially oxidized in resting cells
 ( Fig. 5 E ), whereas PDI
 was present almost exclusively in the reduced form (data not shown). Treatment
 of cells with dithiothreitol or H 2 O 2 resulted in the
 complete reduction or oxidation of both proteins, respectively.

Physical Properties of ERp16 —Gel filtration chromatography
 was performed to determine the molecular size of recombinant mature human
 ERp16. Its retention time of 41.03 min was less than that (46.2 min) of
 chymotrypsinogen A (25 kDa). Linear regression of the data for the set of gel
 filtration markers yielded a molecular mass of 34.9 kDa for ERp16
 ( Fig. 6 A ), suggesting
 that the native protein exists as a homodimer. We examined whether the two
 active site cysteine residues (Cys 66 and Cys 69 ) of ERp16
 might contribute to such dimerization through formation of intermolecular
 disulfide bonds. The mobility of ERp16 during SDS-PAGE under nonreducing
 conditions was identical to that under reducing conditions
 ( Fig. 6 B ), however,
 suggesting that ERp16 exists as a dimer in the ER and forms an intramolecular
 disulfide upon oxidation.

Fluorescence spectroscopy has shown that reduction of oxidized Trx1 is
 accompanied by a localized conformational change, as revealed by a 2.5-fold
 increase in the strongly quenched tryptophan emission of the oxidized protein
 ( 38 ). ERp16 contains two
 tryptophan residues (Trp 40 and Trp 65 in the human
 protein). The fluorescence spectra of ERp16 showed a peak with a
 λ max of 335 nm (excitation wavelength of 285 nm) under both
 oxidized and reduced conditions ( Fig.
 6 C ). The reduction of oxidized ERp16 was accompanied by a
 1.4-fold increase in fluorescence intensity at 335 nm, suggesting that the
 microenvironment around Trp 40 or Trp 65 might be changed
 upon reduction. In addition, oxidized and reduced forms of ERp16 behaved
 differently on anion exchange chromatography
 ( Fig. 6 D ). The redox
 status of ERp16 in each peak was confirmed by spectrophotometric titration
 with 5,5′-dithiobis-(2-nitrobenzoic acid) under denaturing conditions.
 These results thus suggested that ERp16 undergoes a local conformational
 change that affects its surface properties during a change in redox
 status.

Inhibition of ER Stress-induced Apoptosis by ERp16 —To
 explore the biological function of ERp16, we established HeLa cell lines
 stably expressing the wild-type protein or the enzymatically inactive mutant
 ERp16-CS. We isolated clones in which the wild-type or mutant proteins were
 expressed at a level >10 times that apparent in mock-transfected cells
 ( Fig. 7 A ). WT-12 and
 CS-4 were chosen as clones expressing wild-type and mutant ERp16,
 respectively, because of their similar expression levels for the exogenous
 proteins. Given that ERp16 is an ER luminal protein with substantial PDI
 activity, we first examined the effects of its overexpression on ER
 stress-induced apoptosis. ER stress can be induced by agents such as brefeldin
 A (which inhibits ER-Golgi transport), tunicamycin (which blocks N -linked protein glycosylation), and dithiothreitol (which prevents
 the formation of disulfide bonds). Cells were treated with 0.2
 μ m brefeldin A for 28 h and then stained with propidium iodide
 for the detection of apoptotic cells (those with a subdiploid (<2 n ) DNA content) by flow cytometry. Overexpression of wild-type
 ERp16 inhibited brefeldin A-induced apoptosis by ∼50%, whereas expression
 of ERp16-CS increased the level of apoptosis by a factor of ∼1.5
 ( Fig. 7 B ).

We next examined the effects of forced expression of ERp16 on PARP cleavage
 to probe further its role in brefeldin A-induced apoptosis. The cleavage of
 PARP was inhibited by overexpression of wild-type ERp16 but was markedly
 potentiated by expression of ERp16-CS ( Fig.
 7 C ). All cells responded to ER stress by eliciting the
 unfolded protein response, as revealed by induction of BiP (GRP78). The
 brefeldin A-induced increase in caspase-3-like activity, measured with a
 fluorogenic substrate (DEVD-AMC), was also inhibited by wild-type ERp16 and
 enhanced by ERp16-CS ( Fig.
 7 D ). Furthermore, these effects of the wild-type and
 mutant forms of ERp16 were apparent in another pair of stable cell lines, WT-3
 and CS-7 ( Fig. 7 E ).
 Together, these results thus suggested that wild-type ERp16 suppresses
 brefeldin A-induced apoptosis, whereas the inactive mutant ERp16-CS augments
 it.

We also investigated the effects of ERp16 expression on apoptosis induced
 by tunicamycin or dithiothreitol. Flow cytometric analysis revealed that
 overexpression of wild-type ERp16 inhibited apoptosis induced by treatment of
 cells with 3 μ m tunicamycin for 54 h or with 6 m m dithiothreitol for 12 h ( Fig.
 8 A ). Expression of ERp16-CS potentiated
 dithiothreitol-induced apoptosis but inhibited that induced by tunicamycin.
 Similar effects of ERp16 and ERp16-CS were also apparent on caspase-3-like
 activity ( Fig. 8 B ) and
 PARP cleavage ( Fig.
 8 C ). The induction of BiP (GRP78) by tunicamycin or
 dithiothreitol in all cells confirmed that these agents elicited ER stress
 ( Fig. 8 C ).

To investigate the possible role of endogenous ERp16 in ER stress-induced
 apoptosis, we examined the effect of depletion of ERp16 by RNA interference on
 this process. About 60 h after transfection of cells with a small interfering
 RNA specific for ERp16 mRNA, the abundance of ERp16 was reduced by ∼90%
 compared with that in cells transfected with a control RNA
 ( Fig. 9 A ). Such
 depletion of ERp16 resulted in ∼2-fold increases in both the number of
 apoptotic cells and caspase-3-like activity in cells treated with brefeldin A
 or dithiothreitol ( Fig. 9, B and C ). The cleavage of both procaspase-3 and PARP induced by
 these two agents was also enhanced by depletion of ERp16
 ( Fig. 9 D ). These
 results thus indicated that endogenous ERp16 suppresses apoptosis induced by
 ER stress.

DISCUSSION

In this study, we have characterized a Trx-like protein that harbors a
 putative NH 2 -terminal signal sequence and COOH-terminal ER
 retention motif (EDEL in the human protein) and was previously described with
 the name ERp18, ERp19, or hTLP19
 ( 27 , 28 , 30 ). Direct determination of
 the NH 2 -terminal sequence of the purified mouse protein indicated
 that the 172-residue human precursor is processed to a mature form comprising
 146 amino acids by cleavage of the 26-residue signal peptide. The calculated
 molecular mass of the mature form of the human protein is 16.4 kDa. We
 therefore renamed the protein ERp16 (ER-resident protein of 16 kDa). The
 previous names of ERp19 and ERp18 were assigned on the basis of the molecular
 mass of the precursor protein and of the recombinant protein consisting of 149
 amino acids (assuming that cleavage of the signal peptide occurs between
 residues 23 and 24) attached to a His 6 tag, respectively. Our
 subcellular fractionation and immunofluorescence analyses revealed ERp16 to be
 an ER protein, as previously demonstrated for ERp19 and ERp18
 ( 27 , 28 ). The specific localization
 of ERp16 in the luminal compartment of the ER was demonstrated on the basis of
 its sensitivity to trypsin digestion. Although the typical ER retention
 sequence is KDEL in mammalian cells
 ( 39 ), deletion analysis showed
 that the EDEL sequence at the COOH terminus of human ERp16 mediates ER
 retention of the protein. The previous identification of hTLP19 as a secretory
 protein may have been an artifact resulting from overexpression of Myc-tagged
 hTLP19 and its detection with antibodies to Myc
 ( 30 ).

We found that ERp16 is widely expressed in rat tissues and human cell
 lines, and its cDNA was detected in several human tissues, including kidney,
 brain, prostate, pancreas, ovary, colon, skin, and placenta, suggesting that
 ERp16 may be ubiquitous in mammalian cells. Although the active site sequence
 of ERp16, CGAC, has not been found in other Trx family members, this motif was
 shown to be required for disulfide reductase, thiol oxidase, and disulfide
 isomerase activities, as revealed by assays based on the reduction of insulin,
 oxidation of reduced RNase A, and isomerization of scrambled RNase A. In
 addition, the active site cysteine Cys 66 of human ERp16 was shown
 to be nucleophilic, with a p K a value of ∼6.6.

Comparison of the relative redox potentials of Trx-like proteins is a means
 of predicting whether they function as reductants, oxidants, or isomerases in vivo . For example, a role for Trx1 as a cytosolic reductase is
 predicted from the finding that its redox potential (-270 mV) is more reducing
 than that of the cytoplasm (-220 to -240 mV), whereas the redox potential of
 the strong oxidant DsbA is -124 mV
 ( 34 ). The redox potential of
 ERp16 as determined by an assay based on redox equilibrium with glutathione
 was about -165 mV. The redox potential of the ER is in the range of -135 to
 -185 mV ( 3 ). The intracellular
 redox status of oxidoreductases is also an important predictor of cellular
 function. The cellular reductant Trx1 exists predominantly in the reduced form
 ( 40 ), whereas the oxidant DsbA
 is present exclusively in the oxidized form
 ( 37 ). In resting cells, most
 ERp16 was present in the reduced form, but a substantial proportion was found
 to be in the oxidized form, suggesting that this protein functions as both a
 reductase and an oxidase. Together, these various observations indicate that
 ERp16 may function as a disulfide isomerase in the ER, as does PDI, which has
 a redox potential of -150 mV
 ( 3 ). Indeed, ERp16 exhibited
 disulfide isomerase activity with scrambled RNase A that was ∼40% of that
 of PDI on a per mole active site (C XX C) basis. Reshuffling of
 disulfide bonds first requires reduction of these bonds by an isomerase. PDI
 was previously shown to possess 1-2% of the insulin disulfide reductase
 activity of mammalian Trx1
 ( 36 ), whereas we found that
 ERp16 exhibited 6% of the insulin disulfide reductase activity of Trx1. The
 disulfide reduction step is thus not likely to be responsible for the slower
 isomerase activity of ERp16 compared with that of PDI. Instead, a difference
 in the rates of formation of disulfides between the correct pairs of cysteine
 residues might be largely responsible for the slower isomerase activity of
 ERp16. The oxidase activity of ERp16 was only ∼44% of that of PDI on a per
 mole active site basis. PDI possesses b and b ′ domains
 in addition to the catalytic a and a ′ domains, whereas
 ERp16 does not contain b and b ′ domains. The b ′ domain is implicated in substrate binding
 ( 41 ).

Accumulation of misfolded proteins in the ER induces ER stress, with
 prolonged ER stress leading to apoptosis
 ( 12 , 42 ). Several ER-resident
 proteins, including BiP, PDI, ERp57, and ERp72, are induced by ER stress, but
 we found that ERp16 was not inducible. We have now shown that overexpression
 of ERp16 in HeLa cells attenuated the induction of apoptosis by brefeldin A,
 tunicamycin, or dithiothreitol, whereas depletion of ERp16 potentiated ER
 stress-induced apoptosis. This inhibitory role of ERp16 in apoptosis induced
 by ER stress is probably dependent on its thiol-disulfide oxidoreductase
 activity, given that expression of the catalytically inactive mutant ERp16-CS
 enhanced the apoptotic response to brefeldin A or dithiothreitol. The dominant
 negative effect of this mutant protein on apoptosis is probably due to the
 formation of a heterodimer with the endogenous wild-type protein or to
 competition with the wild-type protein for association with substrates. Given
 that dithiothreitol penetrates cell membranes and reversibly inhibits protein
 oxidation in the ER, inhibition of dithiothreitol-induced apoptosis by ERp16
 suggests that this protein contributes to disulfide bond formation by nascent
 proteins. ERp16-CS inhibited tunicamycin-induced apoptosis, suggesting that
 ERp16 may affect the tunicamycin-induced apoptosis in an
 oxidoreductase-independent manner.

Our results suggest that ERp16 is a novel thiol-disulfide oxidoreductase in
 the ER and plays an important role in cellular defense against prolonged ER
 stress. PDI and related proteins, such as ERp57 and ERp44, interact with other
 ER proteins and regulate their functions. For example, PDI and ERp57 interact
 with calreticulin and regulate its chaperone function
 ( 43 ); ERp57 interacts with
 SERCA (sarcoendoplasmic reticulum Ca 2+ -ATPase) and modulates the
 redox state of thiol groups of this protein that face the lumen of the ER,
 providing dynamic control of Ca 2+ homeostasis in the ER in a manner
 dependent on ER redox status
 ( 44 ); and ERp44 interacts with
 the inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor and thereby inhibits its
 Ca 2+ release function
 ( 45 ). The redox
 status-dependent changes in the conformation and chromatographic behavior of
 ERp16 observed in the present study suggest that its potential interaction
 with target proteins may be regulated by changes in its redox state. Further
 characterization of the precise biological function of ERp16 will require the
 identification of interacting proteins as well as structural comparison of the
 reduced and oxidized forms of ERp16.
