---
pmid: '17210579'
title: Apoptosis signal-regulating kinase (ASK) 2 functions as a mitogen-activated
  protein kinase kinase kinase in a heteromeric complex with ASK1.
authors:
- Takeda K
- Shimozono R
- Noguchi T
- Umeda T
- Morimoto Y
- Naguro I
- Tobiume K
- Saitoh M
- Matsuzawa A
- Ichijo H
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M607177200
---

# Apoptosis signal-regulating kinase (ASK) 2 functions as a mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase in a heteromeric complex with ASK1.
**Authors:** Takeda K, Shimozono R, Noguchi T, Umeda T, Morimoto Y, Naguro I, Tobiume K, Saitoh M, Matsuzawa A, Ichijo H
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M607177200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M607177200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Mar 9;282(10):7522-31. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M607177200. Epub
2007  Jan 8.

Apoptosis signal-regulating kinase (ASK) 2 functions as a mitogen-activated 
protein kinase kinase kinase in a heteromeric complex with ASK1.

Takeda K(1), Shimozono R, Noguchi T, Umeda T, Morimoto Y, Naguro I, Tobiume K, 
Saitoh M, Matsuzawa A, Ichijo H.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of Tokyo, CREST, 
Japan Science and Technology Corporation, and Strategic Approach to Drug 
Discovery and Development in Pharmaceutical Sciences, Center of Excellence 
Program, Japan.

Apoptosis signal-regulating kinase (ASK) 1 is a mitogen-activated protein kinase 
kinase kinase (MAP3K) in the c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38 
mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways that play multiple important roles in 
cytokine and stress responses. Here we show that ASK2, a highly related 
serine/threonine kinase to ASK1, also functions as a MAP3K only in a heteromeric 
complex with ASK1. We found that endogenous ASK2 was constitutively degraded in 
ASK1-deficient cells, suggesting that ASK1 is required for the stability of 
ASK2. ASK2 in a heteromeric complex with a kinase-negative mutant of ASK1 
(ASK1-KN) effectively activated MAP2K and was more competent to respond to 
oxidative stress than ASK2 alone. Knockdown of ASK2 revealed that ASK2 was 
required for oxidative stress-induced JNK activation. These results suggest that 
ASK2 forms a functional MAP3K complex with ASK1, in which ASK1 supports the 
stability and the active configuration of ASK2. Moreover, ASK2 was found to 
activate ASK1 by direct phosphorylation, suggesting that ASK1 and ASK2 in a 
heteromeric complex facilitate their activities to each other by distinct 
mechanisms. Such a formation of functional heteromeric complex between different 
MAP3Ks may be advantageous for cells to cope with a wide variety of stimuli by 
fine regulation of cellular responses.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M607177200
PMID: 17210579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
