---
pmid: '26919556'
title: Acyldepsipeptide antibiotics kill mycobacteria by preventing the physiological
  functions of the ClpP1P2 protease.
authors:
- Famulla K
- Sass P
- Malik I
- Akopian T
- Kandror O
- Alber M
- Hinzen B
- Ruebsamen-Schaeff H
- Kalscheuer R
- Goldberg AL
- Brötz-Oesterhelt H
journal: Mol Microbiol
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5469208
doi: 10.1111/mmi.13362
---

# Acyldepsipeptide antibiotics kill mycobacteria by preventing the physiological functions of the ClpP1P2 protease.
**Authors:** Famulla K, Sass P, Malik I, Akopian T, Kandror O, Alber M, Hinzen B, Ruebsamen-Schaeff H, Kalscheuer R, Goldberg AL, Brötz-Oesterhelt H
**Journal:** Mol Microbiol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1111/mmi.13362](https://doi.org/10.1111/mmi.13362)
**PMC:** [PMC5469208](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5469208/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Microbiol. 2016 Jul;101(2):194-209. doi: 10.1111/mmi.13362. Epub 2016 Apr
1.

Acyldepsipeptide antibiotics kill mycobacteria by preventing the physiological 
functions of the ClpP1P2 protease.

Famulla K(1), Sass P(1), Malik I(1), Akopian T(2), Kandror O(2), Alber M(3), 
Hinzen B(4), Ruebsamen-Schaeff H(5), Kalscheuer R(3), Goldberg AL(2), 
Brötz-Oesterhelt H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbial Bioactive Compounds, Interfaculty Institute of 
Microbiology and Infection Medicine, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, 
Germany.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Institute for Medical Microbiology and Hospital Hygiene, University of 
Duesseldorf, Duesseldorf, Germany.
(4)Bayer Pharma AG, Wuppertal, Germany.
(5)AiCuris GmbH & Co. KG, Wuppertal, Germany.

Comment in
    Mol Microbiol. 2016 Jul;101(2):183-5. doi: 10.1111/mmi.13382.

The Clp protease complex in Mycobacterium tuberculosis is unusual in its 
composition, functional importance and activation mechanism. Whilst most 
bacterial species contain a single ClpP protein that is dispensable for normal 
growth, mycobacteria have two ClpPs, ClpP1 and ClpP2, which are essential for 
viability and together form the ClpP1P2 tetradecamer. Acyldepsipeptide 
antibiotics of the ADEP class inhibit the growth of Gram-positive firmicutes by 
activating ClpP and causing unregulated protein degradation. Here we show that, 
in contrast, mycobacteria are killed by ADEP through inhibition of ClpP 
function. Although ADEPs can stimulate purified M. tuberculosis ClpP1P2 to 
degrade larger peptides and unstructured proteins, this effect is weaker than 
for ClpP from other bacteria and depends on the presence of an additional 
activating factor (e.g. the dipeptide benzyloxycarbonyl-leucyl-leucine in vitro) 
to form the active ClpP1P2 tetradecamer. The cell division protein FtsZ, which 
is a particularly sensitive target for ADEP-activated ClpP in firmicutes, is not 
degraded in mycobacteria. Depletion of the ClpP1P2 level in a conditional 
Mycobacterium bovis BCG mutant enhanced killing by ADEP unlike in other 
bacteria. In summary, ADEPs kill mycobacteria by preventing interaction of 
ClpP1P2 with the regulatory ATPases, ClpX or ClpC1, thus inhibiting essential 
ATP-dependent protein degradation.

© 2016 The Authors Molecular Microbiology Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.13362
PMCID: PMC5469208
PMID: 26919556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: all other authors declare no competing financial 
interests.
