---
pmid: '17507929'
title: MicroRNA silencing through RISC recruitment of eIF6.
authors:
- Chendrimada TP
- Finn KJ
- Ji X
- Baillat D
- Gregory RI
- Liebhaber SA
- Pasquinelli AE
- Shiekhattar R
journal: Nature
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature05841
---

# MicroRNA silencing through RISC recruitment of eIF6.
**Authors:** Chendrimada TP, Finn KJ, Ji X, Baillat D, Gregory RI, Liebhaber SA, Pasquinelli AE, Shiekhattar R
**Journal:** Nature (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature05841](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature05841)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2007 Jun 14;447(7146):823-8. doi: 10.1038/nature05841. Epub 2007 May
16.

MicroRNA silencing through RISC recruitment of eIF6.

Chendrimada TP(1), Finn KJ, Ji X, Baillat D, Gregory RI, Liebhaber SA, 
Pasquinelli AE, Shiekhattar R.

Author information:
(1)The Wistar Institute, 3601 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, 
USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of small RNAs that act post-transcriptionally to 
regulate messenger RNA stability and translation. To elucidate how miRNAs 
mediate their repressive effects, we performed biochemical and functional assays 
to identify new factors in the miRNA pathway. Here we show that human RISC 
(RNA-induced silencing complex) associates with a multiprotein complex 
containing MOV10--which is the homologue of Drosophila translational repressor 
Armitage--and proteins of the 60S ribosome subunit. Notably, this complex 
contains the anti-association factor eIF6 (also called ITGB4BP or p27BBP), a 
ribosome inhibitory protein known to prevent productive assembly of the 80S 
ribosome. Depletion of eIF6 in human cells specifically abrogates miRNA-mediated 
regulation of target protein and mRNA levels. Similarly, depletion of eIF6 in 
Caenorhabditis elegans diminishes lin-4 miRNA-mediated repression of the 
endogenous LIN-14 and LIN-28 target protein and mRNA levels. These results 
uncover an evolutionarily conserved function of the ribosome anti-association 
factor eIF6 in miRNA-mediated post-transcriptional silencing.

DOI: 10.1038/nature05841
PMID: 17507929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
