---
pmid: '23126280'
title: Regulation of adipogenesis by cytoskeleton remodelling is facilitated by acetyltransferase
  MEC-17-dependent acetylation of α-tubulin.
authors:
- Yang W
- Guo X
- Thein S
- Xu F
- Sugii S
- Baas PW
- Radda GK
- Han W
journal: Biochem J
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5573127
doi: 10.1042/BJ20121121
---

# Regulation of adipogenesis by cytoskeleton remodelling is facilitated by acetyltransferase MEC-17-dependent acetylation of α-tubulin.
**Authors:** Yang W, Guo X, Thein S, Xu F, Sugii S, Baas PW, Radda GK, Han W
**Journal:** Biochem J (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BJ20121121](https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20121121)
**PMC:** [PMC5573127](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5573127/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2013 Feb 1;449(3):605-12. doi: 10.1042/BJ20121121.

Regulation of adipogenesis by cytoskeleton remodelling is facilitated by 
acetyltransferase MEC-17-dependent acetylation of α-tubulin.

Yang W(1), Guo X, Thein S, Xu F, Sugii S, Baas PW, Radda GK, Han W.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Metabolic Medicine, Singapore Bioimaging Consortium, Agency for 
Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore.

Cytoskeleton remodelling is a prerequisite step for the morphological transition 
from preadipocytes to mature adipocytes. Although microtubules play a pivotal 
role in organizing cellular structure, regulation of microtubule dynamics during 
adipogenesis remains unclear. In the present paper we show that acetylation of 
α-tubulin is up-regulated during adipogenesis, and adipocyte development is 
dependent on α-tubulin acetylation, as expression of an acetylation-resistant 
α-tubulin mutant significantly inhibits adipogenesis. Moreover, acetylation of 
α-tubulin is under the control of the acetyltransferase MEC-17 and deacetylases 
SIRT2 (Sirtuin 2) and HDAC6 (histone deacetylase 6). Adipocyte development is 
inhibited in MEC-17-knockdown cells, but enhanced in MEC-17-overexpressing 
cells. Finally, we show that katanin, a microtubule-severing protein with 
enhanced activity on acetylated α-tubulin, is actively involved in adipogenesis. 
We propose that co-ordinated up-regulation of α-tubulin acetylation initiates 
cytoskeleton remodelling by promoting α-tubulin severing by katanin which, in 
turn, allows expansion of lipid droplets and accelerates the morphological 
transition toward mature adipocytes.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20121121
PMCID: PMC5573127
PMID: 23126280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
