---
pmid: '31121216'
title: Activity of N-acylneuraminate-9-phosphatase (NANP) is not essential for de
  novo sialic acid biosynthesis.
authors:
- Willems AP
- Sun L
- Schulz MA
- Tian W
- Ashikov A
- van Scherpenzeel M
- Hermans E
- Clausen H
- Yang Z
- Lefeber DJ
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta Gen Subj
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2019.05.011
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Activity of N-acylneuraminate-9-phosphatase (NANP) is not essential for de novo sialic acid biosynthesis.
**Authors:** Willems AP, Sun L, Schulz MA, Tian W, Ashikov A, van Scherpenzeel M, Hermans E, Clausen H, Yang Z, Lefeber DJ
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta Gen Subj (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbagen.2019.05.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbagen.2019.05.011)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta Gen Subj. 2019 Oct;1863(10):1471-1479. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbagen.2019.05.011. Epub 2019 May 20.

Activity of N-acylneuraminate-9-phosphatase (NANP) is not essential for de novo 
sialic acid biosynthesis.

Willems AP(1), Sun L(2), Schulz MA(2), Tian W(2), Ashikov A(3), van Scherpenzeel 
M(4), Hermans E(4), Clausen H(2), Yang Z(2), Lefeber DJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, 
Radboud University Medical Center, 6525, GA, Nijmegen, the Netherlands; 
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Translational Metabolic Laboratory, Radboud 
Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, 6525, 
GA, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(2)Copenhagen Center for Glycomics, Department of Cellular and Molecular 
Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, DK-2200 
Copenhagen N, Denmark.
(3)Department of Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, 
Radboud University Medical Center, 6525, GA, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Translational Metabolic Laboratory, 
Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical 
Center, 6525, GA, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, 
Radboud University Medical Center, 6525, GA, Nijmegen, the Netherlands; 
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Translational Metabolic Laboratory, Radboud 
Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, 6525, 
GA, Nijmegen, the Netherlands. Electronic address: yang@sund.ku.dk.

BACKGROUND: Sialylation of glycoproteins and glycolipids is important for 
biological processes such as cellular communication, cell migration and protein 
function. Biosynthesis of CMP-sialic acid, the essential substrate, comprises 
five enzymatic steps, involving ManNAc and sialic acid and their phosphorylated 
forms as intermediates. Genetic diseases in this pathway result in different and 
tissue-restricted phenotypes, which is poorly understood.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We aimed to study the mechanisms of sialic acid metabolism 
in knockouts (KO) of the sialic acid pathway in two independent cell lines. 
Sialylation of cell surface glycans was reduced by KO of GNE 
(UDP-N-acetylglucosamine 2-epimerase/N-acetylmannosamine kinase), NANS (sialic 
acid synthase) and CMAS (N-acylneuraminate cytidylyltransferase) genes, but was 
largely unaffected in NANP (N-acylneuraminate-9-phosphatase) KO, as studied by 
MAA and PNA lectin binding. NANP is the third enzyme in sialic acid biosynthesis 
and dephosphorylates sialic acid 9-phosphate to free sialic acid. LC-MS analysis 
of sialic acid metabolites showed that CMP-sialic acid was dramatically reduced 
in GNE and NANS KO cells and undetectable in CMAS KO. In agreement with normal 
cell surface sialylation, CMP-sialic acid levels in NANP KO were comparable to 
WT cells, even though sialic acid 9-phosphate, the substrate of NANP 
accumulated. Metabolic flux analysis with 13C6-labelled ManNAc showed a lower, 
but significant conversion of ManNAc into sialic acid.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data provide evidence that NANP activity is not essential for 
de novo sialic acid production and point towards an alternative phosphatase 
activity, bypassing NANP.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: This report contributes to a better understanding of 
sialic acid biosynthesis in humans.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2019.05.011
PMID: 31121216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
