---
pmid: '26251176'
title: 'Clinical, biochemical and metabolic characterisation of a mild form of human
  short-chain enoyl-CoA hydratase deficiency: significance of increased N-acetyl-S-(2-carboxypropyl)cysteine
  excretion.'
authors:
- Yamada K
- Aiba K
- Kitaura Y
- Kondo Y
- Nomura N
- Nakamura Y
- Fukushi D
- Murayama K
- Shimomura Y
- Pitt J
- Yamaguchi S
- Yokochi K
- Wakamatsu N
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103231
pubmed_publication_types:
- Case Reports
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: CASE_REPORT
---

# Clinical, biochemical and metabolic characterisation of a mild form of human short-chain enoyl-CoA hydratase deficiency: significance of increased N-acetyl-S-(2-carboxypropyl)cysteine excretion.
**Authors:** Yamada K, Aiba K, Kitaura Y, Kondo Y, Nomura N, Nakamura Y, Fukushi D, Murayama K, Shimomura Y, Pitt J, Yamaguchi S, Yokochi K, Wakamatsu N
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103231](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103231)

## Abstract

1. J Med Genet. 2015 Oct;52(10):691-8. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103231. Epub 
2015 Aug 6.

Clinical, biochemical and metabolic characterisation of a mild form of human 
short-chain enoyl-CoA hydratase deficiency: significance of increased 
N-acetyl-S-(2-carboxypropyl)cysteine excretion.

Yamada K(1), Aiba K(2), Kitaura Y(3), Kondo Y(3), Nomura N(1), Nakamura Y(2), 
Fukushi D(1), Murayama K(4), Shimomura Y(3), Pitt J(5), Yamaguchi S(6), Yokochi 
K(7), Wakamatsu N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Institute for Developmental Research, Aichi Human 
Service Center, Kasugai, Aichi, Japan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Toyohashi Municipal Hospital, Toyohashi, Aichi, 
Japan.
(3)Department of Applied Molecular Biosciences, Graduate School of 
Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya University, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan.
(4)Department of Metabolism, Chiba Children's Hospital, Chiba, Japan.
(5)Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, 
Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Shimane University, Izumo, 
Shimane, Japan.
(7)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Seirei-Mikatahara General Hospital, 
Hamamatsu, Shizuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Short-chain enoyl-CoA hydratase-ECHS1-catalyses many metabolic 
pathways, including mitochondrial short-chain fatty acid β-oxidation and 
branched-chain amino acid catabolic pathways; however, the metabolic products 
essential for the diagnosis of ECHS1 deficiency have not yet been determined. 
The objective of this report is to characterise ECHS1 and a mild form of its 
deficiency biochemically, and to determine the candidate metabolic product that 
can be efficiently used for neonatal diagnosis.
METHODS: We conducted a detailed clinical, molecular genetics, biochemical and 
metabolic analysis of sibling patients with ECHS1 deficiency. Moreover, we 
purified human ECHS1, and determined the substrate specificity of ECHS1 for five 
substrates via different metabolic pathways.
RESULTS: Human ECHS1 catalyses the hydration of five substrates via different 
metabolic pathways, with the highest specificity for crotonyl-CoA and the lowest 
specificity for tiglyl-CoA. The patients had relatively high (∼7%) residual 
ECHS1 enzyme activity for crotonyl-CoA and methacrylyl-CoA caused by the 
compound heterozygous mutations (c.176A>G, (p.N59S) and c.413C>T, (p.A138V)) 
with normal mitochondrial complex I-IV activities. Affected patients excrete 
large amounts of N-acetyl-S-(2-carboxypropyl)cysteine, a metabolite of 
methacrylyl-CoA.
CONCLUSIONS: Laboratory data and clinical features demonstrated that the 
patients have a mild form of ECHS1 deficiency harbouring defective valine 
catabolic and β-oxidation pathways. N-Acetyl-S-(2-carboxypropyl) cysteine level 
was markedly high in the urine of the patients, and therefore, 
N-acetyl-S-(2-carboxypropyl)cysteine was regarded as a candidate metabolite for 
the diagnosis of ECHS1 deficiency. This metabolite is not part of current 
routine metabolic screening protocols, and its inclusion, therefore, holds 
immense potential in accurate diagnosis.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103231
PMID: 26251176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
