---
pmid: '17135716'
title: Co-expression of tyrosine hydroxylase and GTP cyclohydrolase I in arginine
  vasopressin-synthesizing neurons of the human supraoptic nucleus demonstrated by
  laser microdissection and real-time PCR.
authors:
- Kontostavlaki DP
- Panayotacopoulou MT
- Sluijs JA
- Unmehopa UA
- Huitinga I
- Hol EM
- Swaab DF
journal: Neuroendocrinology
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1159/000097487
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Co-expression of tyrosine hydroxylase and GTP cyclohydrolase I in arginine vasopressin-synthesizing neurons of the human supraoptic nucleus demonstrated by laser microdissection and real-time PCR.
**Authors:** Kontostavlaki DP, Panayotacopoulou MT, Sluijs JA, Unmehopa UA, Huitinga I, Hol EM, Swaab DF
**Journal:** Neuroendocrinology (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000097487](https://doi.org/10.1159/000097487)

## Abstract

1. Neuroendocrinology. 2006;84(6):386-95. doi: 10.1159/000097487. Epub 2006 Aug
28.

Co-expression of tyrosine hydroxylase and GTP cyclohydrolase I in arginine 
vasopressin-synthesizing neurons of the human supraoptic nucleus demonstrated by 
laser microdissection and real-time PCR.

Kontostavlaki DP(1), Panayotacopoulou MT, Sluijs JA, Unmehopa UA, Huitinga I, 
Hol EM, Swaab DF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Athens, Athens, Greece. 
dkontost@med.uoa.gr

Tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), the first and limiting enzyme for catecholamine 
synthesis, has been identified immunohistochemically (IHC) in human 
neurosecretory neurons where it is found to colocalize with vasopressin (AVP) or 
oxytocin. TH expression shows striking interindividual variability and appears 
to depend on neuronal activation. Since GTP cyclohydrolase I (GCHI), the first 
enzyme for tetrahydrobiopterin synthesis, the essential cofactor of TH, and 
aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) have so far not been detected in 
neurosecretory neurons, the functional role of TH in catecholamine synthesis is 
still questionable. Our purpose was to investigate in postmortem hypothalamus 
whether GCHI and AADC mRNAs are co-expressed with TH in human AVP-synthesizing 
neurons. Total RNA was extracted from laser microdissected TH-IHC-identified 
neurons as well as from dissected parts of the dorsolateral supraoptic nucleus 
(dl-SON) of 12 control subjects, i.e. without known neurological, psychiatric or 
endocrinological illness. GCHI, AADC and TH mRNA expression was determined by 
real-time PCR. Our results showed that GCHI mRNA is co-expressed with TH in 
almost all cases that had a considerable number of TH-immunoreactive (TH-IR) 
neurosecretory neurons. A positive correlation was found between 
TH-immunohistochemical intensity and the presence of GCHI mRNA. AADC mRNA 
expression was detected only in microdissected areas of dl-SON in 2 cases that 
showed an increased number of TH-IR neurons. The co-expression of GCHI with TH 
indicates that TH is indeed active in human neurosecretory neurons. The apparent 
limited expression of AADC indicates that dopamine might be produced in human 
neurosecretory neurons under activation of the hypothalamoneurohypophyseal 
system, although the possibility that L-dopa is the final product cannot be 
excluded.

Copyright 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000097487
PMID: 17135716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
