---
pmid: '7929244'
title: A novel GTP-binding protein which is selectively repressed in SV40 transformed
  fibroblasts.
authors:
- Schenker T
- Lach C
- Kessler B
- Calderara S
- Trueb B
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
---

# A novel GTP-binding protein which is selectively repressed in SV40 transformed fibroblasts.
**Authors:** Schenker T, Lach C, Kessler B, Calderara S, Trueb B
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1994)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1994 Oct 14;269(41):25447-53.

A novel GTP-binding protein which is selectively repressed in SV40 transformed 
fibroblasts.

Schenker T(1), Lach C, Kessler B, Calderara S, Trueb B.

Author information:
(1)Laboratorium für Biochemie I, Eidenössische Technische Hochschule Zürich, 
Switzerland.

We have used a subtractive hybridization procedure to isolate cDNA clones for 
proteins that are produced by human fibroblasts, but not by their 
SV40-transformed counterparts. With this technique we found, in addition to 
fibronectin and collagen VI, a novel GTP-binding protein. Sequencing of 
overlapping cDNA clones demonstrated that this protein is composed of 364 amino 
acids with a molecular mass of 41 kDa and a calculated isoelectric point of 9.4. 
It contains the five sequence motifs G1-G5 that are conserved in all GTP-binding 
proteins. Apart from these characteristic motifs the amino acid sequence differs 
substantially from those of the well characterized G-proteins, but it is similar 
to those of some recently identified proteins from Caenorhabditis elegans, from 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe, and from an archaebacterium, suggesting the existence 
of a new subfamily within the superfamily of the GTP-binding proteins. The 
striking conservation of the primary structure between distantly related species 
indicates a fundamental function of the new protein. Since it is produced in 
normal, but not in virally transformed fibroblasts, it may play a role in the 
expression of the transformed phenotype or in growth control.

PMID: 7929244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
