---
pmid: '9742223'
title: Nerve growth factor- and epidermal growth factor-stimulated translocation of
  the ADP-ribosylation factor-exchange factor GRP1 to the plasma membrane of PC12
  cells requires activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and the GRP1 pleckstrin
  homology domain.
authors:
- Venkateswarlu K
- Gunn-Moore F
- Oatey PB
- Tavaré JM
- Cullen PJ
journal: Biochem J
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1219762
doi: 10.1042/bj3350139
---

# Nerve growth factor- and epidermal growth factor-stimulated translocation of the ADP-ribosylation factor-exchange factor GRP1 to the plasma membrane of PC12 cells requires activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and the GRP1 pleckstrin homology domain.
**Authors:** Venkateswarlu K, Gunn-Moore F, Oatey PB, Tavaré JM, Cullen PJ
**Journal:** Biochem J (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1042/bj3350139](https://doi.org/10.1042/bj3350139)
**PMC:** [PMC1219762](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1219762/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 1998 Oct 1;335 ( Pt 1)(Pt 1):139-46. doi: 10.1042/bj3350139.

Nerve growth factor- and epidermal growth factor-stimulated translocation of the 
ADP-ribosylation factor-exchange factor GRP1 to the plasma membrane of PC12 
cells requires activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and the GRP1 
pleckstrin homology domain.

Venkateswarlu K(1), Gunn-Moore F, Oatey PB, Tavaré JM, Cullen PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medical Sciences, University of 
Bristol, Bristol BS8 1TD, UK.

ADP-ribosylation factors (ARFs) are small GTP-binding proteins that are 
regulators of vesicle trafficking in eukaryotic cells. GRP1 is a member of a 
family of ARF guanine-nucleotide-exchange factors that binds in vitro the lipid 
second messenger phosphatidylinositol 3,4, 5-trisphosphate [PtdIns(3,4,5)P3]. In 
order to study the effects of PtdIns(3,4,5)P3 on the function of GRP1, we have 
cloned the human homologue of GRP1, encoding for a protein which is 98.8% 
identical to mouse brain GRP1. Human GRP1 binds, via its pleckstrin homology 
(PH) domain, the inositol head group of PtdIns(3,4,5)P3, inositol 1, 
3,4,5-tetrakisphosphate [Ins(1,3,4,5)P4], with high affinity (Kd 32. 2+/-5.2 nM) 
and inositol phosphate specificity [Kd values for Ins(1, 3,4,5,6)P5, InsP6, 
Ins(1,3,4)P3 and Ins(1,4,5)P3: 283+/-32, >10000, >10000 and >10000 nM, 
respectively). Furthermore, GRP1 can accommodate addition of glycerol or 
diacetylglycerol to the 1-phosphate of Ins(1,3,4,5)P4, data that are consistent 
with its proposed role as a putative PtdIns(3,4,5)P3 receptor. To address 
whether GRP1 binds PtdIns(3,4,5)P3 in vivo, we have expressed a chimaera of 
green fluorescent protein (GFP) fused to the N-terminus of GRP1 in PC12 cells 
and, using confocal microscopy, examined its resultant localization in live 
cells. Stimulation with either nerve growth factor or epidermal growth factor 
(both at 100 ng/ml) results in a rapid, PH-domain dependent, translocation of 
GFP-GRP1 from the cytosol to the plasma membrane, which occurs with a time 
course that parallels the production of PtdIns(3,4,5)P3. This translocation is 
dependent on the activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, since it is 
inhibited by wortmannin (100 nM), LY294002 (50 microM) and by the co-expression 
with dominant negative p85. Taken together these data strongly suggest that GRP1 
interacts in vivo with plasma membrane-located PtdIns(3,4,5)P3 and hence 
constitutes a true PtdIns(3,4,5)P3 receptor.

DOI: 10.1042/bj3350139
PMCID: PMC1219762
PMID: 9742223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
