---
pmid: '20335166'
title: The Salmonella type III secretion effector, salmonella leucine-rich repeat
  protein (SlrP), targets the human chaperone ERdj3.
authors:
- Bernal-Bayard J
- Cardenal-Muñoz E
- Ramos-Morales F
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2871503
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.100669
---

# The Salmonella type III secretion effector, salmonella leucine-rich repeat protein (SlrP), targets the human chaperone ERdj3.
**Authors:** Bernal-Bayard J, Cardenal-Muñoz E, Ramos-Morales F
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110.100669](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.100669)
**PMC:** [PMC2871503](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2871503/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2010 May 21;285(21):16360-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.100669. Epub 
2010 Mar 24.

The Salmonella type III secretion effector, salmonella leucine-rich repeat 
protein (SlrP), targets the human chaperone ERdj3.

Bernal-Bayard J(1), Cardenal-Muñoz E, Ramos-Morales F.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Genética, Facultad de Biología, Universidad de Sevilla, 
Apartado 1095, 41080 Sevilla, Spain.

Effectors of the type III secretion systems (T3SS) are key elements in the 
interaction between many Gram-negative pathogens and their hosts. SlrP is an 
effector that is translocated into the eukaryotic host cell through the two 
virulence-associated T3SS of Salmonella enterica. We found previously that this 
effector is an E3 ubiquitin ligase for mammalian thioredoxin. Here, we 
identified ERdj3, an endoplasmic reticulum lumenal chaperone of the Hsp40/DnaJ 
family, as a new target for SlrP. Experiments with truncated forms of ERdj3 
showed that domain II was essential for the interaction with SlrP. Confocal 
microscopy and subcellular fractionation demonstrated that, in transfected HeLa 
cells, SlrP was partially located in the endoplasmic reticulum. The presence of 
SlrP interfered with the binding of ERdj3 to a denatured substrate. Taken 
together, these data suggest that the role of SlrP in the interaction between 
Salmonella and the host cell is exerted through the modulation of the function 
of two independent targets: thioredoxin in the cytosol, and ERdj3 in the 
endoplasmic reticulum.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.100669
PMCID: PMC2871503
PMID: 20335166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
