---
pmid: '12941272'
title: Cyclin E ablation in the mouse.
authors:
- Geng Y
- Yu Q
- Sicinska E
- Das M
- Schneider JE
- Bhattacharya S
- Rideout WM
- Bronson RT
- Gardner H
- Sicinski P
journal: Cell
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(03)00645-7
---

# Cyclin E ablation in the mouse.
**Authors:** Geng Y, Yu Q, Sicinska E, Das M, Schneider JE, Bhattacharya S, Rideout WM, Bronson RT, Gardner H, Sicinski P
**Journal:** Cell (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(03)00645-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(03)00645-7)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2003 Aug 22;114(4):431-43. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(03)00645-7.

Cyclin E ablation in the mouse.

Geng Y(1), Yu Q, Sicinska E, Das M, Schneider JE, Bhattacharya S, Rideout WM, 
Bronson RT, Gardner H, Sicinski P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Department of 
Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2003 Aug 22;114(4):398-9. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(03)00649-4.

E type cyclins (E1 and E2) are believed to drive cell entry into the S phase. It 
is widely assumed that the two E type cyclins are critically required for 
proliferation of all cell types. Here, we demonstrate that E type cyclins are 
largely dispensable for mouse development. However, endoreplication of 
trophoblast giant cells and megakaryocytes is severely impaired in the absence 
of cyclin E. Cyclin E-deficient cells proliferate actively under conditions of 
continuous cell cycling but are unable to reenter the cell cycle from the 
quiescent G(0) state. Molecular analyses revealed that cells lacking cyclin E 
fail to normally incorporate MCM proteins into DNA replication origins during 
G(0)-->S progression. We also found that cyclin E-deficient cells are relatively 
resistant to oncogenic transformation. These findings define a molecular 
function for E type cyclins in cell cycle reentry and reveal a differential 
requirement for cyclin E in normal versus oncogenic proliferation.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(03)00645-7
PMID: 12941272 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
