---
pmid: '28497540'
title: Meikin-associated polo-like kinase specifies Bub1 distribution in meiosis I.
authors:
- Miyazaki S
- Kim J
- Yamagishi Y
- Ishiguro T
- Okada Y
- Tanno Y
- Sakuno T
- Watanabe Y
journal: Genes Cells
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/gtc.12496
---

# Meikin-associated polo-like kinase specifies Bub1 distribution in meiosis I.
**Authors:** Miyazaki S, Kim J, Yamagishi Y, Ishiguro T, Okada Y, Tanno Y, Sakuno T, Watanabe Y
**Journal:** Genes Cells (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/gtc.12496](https://doi.org/10.1111/gtc.12496)

## Abstract

1. Genes Cells. 2017 Jun;22(6):552-567. doi: 10.1111/gtc.12496. Epub 2017 May 12.

Meikin-associated polo-like kinase specifies Bub1 distribution in meiosis I.

Miyazaki S(1)(2), Kim J(2)(3), Yamagishi Y(2)(4), Ishiguro T(2), Okada Y(5), 
Tanno Y(2), Sakuno T(1)(2), Watanabe Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Program in Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate School of Science, 
University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Tokyo, 113-0033, Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Chromosome Dynamics, Institute of Molecular and Cellular 
Biosciences, University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Tokyo, 113-0032, Japan.
(3)Research Institute, National Cancer Center, Goyang, Gyeonggi, 410-769, Korea.
(4)Laboratory of Brain Development and Repair, Rockefeller University, 1230 York 
Ave, New York, NY, 10065, USA.
(5)Laboratory of Pathology and Development, Institute of Molecular and Cellular 
Biosciences, University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Tokyo, 113-0032, Japan.

In meiosis I, sister chromatids are captured by microtubules emanating from the 
same pole (mono-orientation), and centromeric cohesion is protected throughout 
anaphase. Shugoshin, which is localized to centromeres depending on the 
phosphorylation of histone H2A by Bub1 kinase, plays a central role in 
protecting meiotic cohesin Rec8 from separase cleavage. Another key meiotic 
kinetochore factor, meikin, may regulate cohesion protection, although the 
underlying molecular mechanisms remain elusive. Here, we show that fission yeast 
Moa1 (meikin), which associates stably with CENP-C during meiosis I, recruits 
Plo1 (polo-like kinase) to the kinetochores and phosphorylates Spc7 (KNL1) to 
accumulate Bub1. Consequently, in contrast to the transient kinetochore 
localization of mitotic Bub1, meiotic Bub1 persists at kinetochores until 
anaphase I. The meiotic Bub1 pool ensures robust Sgo1 (shugoshin) localization 
and cohesion protection at centromeres by cooperating with heterochromatin 
protein Swi6, which binds and stabilizes Sgo1. Furthermore, molecular genetic 
analyses show a hierarchical regulation of centromeric cohesion protection by 
meikin and shugoshin that is important for establishing meiosis-specific 
chromosome segregation. We provide evidence that the meiosis-specific Bub1 
regulation is conserved in mouse.

© 2017 Molecular Biology Society of Japan and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/gtc.12496
PMID: 28497540 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
