---
pmid: '15196008'
title: Three-dimensional structure of human adenine phosphoribosyltransferase and
  its relation to DHA-urolithiasis.
authors:
- Silva M
- Silva CH
- Iulek J
- Thiemann OH
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi0360758
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Three-dimensional structure of human adenine phosphoribosyltransferase and its relation to DHA-urolithiasis.
**Authors:** Silva M, Silva CH, Iulek J, Thiemann OH
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi0360758](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi0360758)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2004 Jun 22;43(24):7663-71. doi: 10.1021/bi0360758.

Three-dimensional structure of human adenine phosphoribosyltransferase and its 
relation to DHA-urolithiasis.

Silva M(1), Silva CH, Iulek J, Thiemann OH.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Protein Crystallography and Structural Biology, Physics 
Institute of São Carlos, University of São Paulo, Av. Trabalhador Sãocarlense 
400, P.O. Box 369, 13566-590 São Carlos, SP, Brazil.

In mammals, adenine phosphoribosyltransferase (APRT, EC 2.4.2.7) is present in 
all tissues and provides the only known mechanism for the metabolic salvage of 
adenine resulting from the polyamine biosynthesis pathway or from dietary 
sources. In humans, APRT deficiency results in serious kidney illness such as 
nephrolithiasis, interstitial nephritis, and chronic renal failure as a result 
of 2,8-dihydroxyadenine (DHA) precipitation in the renal interstitium. To 
address the molecular basis of DHA-urolithiasis, the recombinant human APRT was 
crystallized in complex with adenosine 5'-monophosphate (AMP). Refinement of 
X-ray diffraction data extended to 2.1 A resolution led to a final 
crystallographic R(factor) of 13.3% and an R(free) of 17.6%. This structure is 
composed of nine beta-strands and six alpha-helices, and the active site pocket 
opens slightly to accommodate the AMP product. The core of APRT is similar to 
that of other phosphoribosyltransferases (PRTases), although the adenine-binding 
domain is quite different. Structural comparisons between the human APRT and 
other "type I" PRTases of known structure revealed several important features of 
the biochemistry of PRTases. We propose that the residues located at positions 
corresponding to Leu159 and Ala131 in hAPRT are responsible for the base 
specificities of type I PRTases. The comparative analysis shown here also 
provides structural information for the mechanism by which mutations in the 
human APRT lead to DHA-urolithiasis.

DOI: 10.1021/bi0360758
PMID: 15196008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
