---
pmid: '10745074'
title: Cytosolic Hsp70s are involved in the transport of aminopeptidase 1 from the
  cytoplasm into the vacuole.
authors:
- Satyanarayana C
- Schröder-Köhne S
- Craig EA
- Schu PV
- Horst M
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(00)01324-7
---

# Cytosolic Hsp70s are involved in the transport of aminopeptidase 1 from the cytoplasm into the vacuole.
**Authors:** Satyanarayana C, Schröder-Köhne S, Craig EA, Schu PV, Horst M
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0014-5793(00)01324-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0014-5793(00)01324-7)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2000 Mar 31;470(3):232-8. doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(00)01324-7.

Cytosolic Hsp70s are involved in the transport of aminopeptidase 1 from the 
cytoplasm into the vacuole.

Satyanarayana C(1), Schröder-Köhne S, Craig EA, Schu PV, Horst M.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Molekulare Zellbiologie und Biochemie, Abteilung Biochemie II, 
Universität Göttingen, Heinrich-Düker Weg 12, D-37073, Göttingen, Germany.

Eukaryotic 70 kDa heat shock proteins (Hsp70s) are localized in various cellular 
compartments and exhibit functions such as protein translocation across 
membranes, protein folding and assembly. Here we demonstrate that the 
constitutively expressed members of the yeast cytoplasmic Ssa subfamily, 
Ssa1/2p, are involved in the transport of the vacuolar hydrolase aminopeptidase 
1 from the cytoplasm into the vacuole. The Ssap family members displayed 
overlapping functions in the transport of aminopeptidase 1. In SSAI and SSAII 
deletion mutants the precursor of aminopeptidase 1 accumulated in a dodecameric 
complex that is packaged in prevacuolar transport vesicles. Ssa1/2p was 
prominently localized to the vacuolar membrane, consistent with the role we 
propose for Ssa proteins in the fusion of transport vesicles with the vacuolar 
membrane.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(00)01324-7
PMID: 10745074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
