---
pmid: '20133653'
title: No difference in kinetics of tau or histone phosphorylation by CDK5/p25 versus
  CDK5/p35 in vitro.
authors:
- Peterson DW
- Ando DM
- Taketa DA
- Zhou H
- Dahlquist FW
- Lew J
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2840295
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0912718107
---

# No difference in kinetics of tau or histone phosphorylation by CDK5/p25 versus CDK5/p35 in vitro.
**Authors:** Peterson DW, Ando DM, Taketa DA, Zhou H, Dahlquist FW, Lew J
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0912718107](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0912718107)
**PMC:** [PMC2840295](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2840295/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Feb 16;107(7):2884-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0912718107. Epub 2010 Feb 1.

No difference in kinetics of tau or histone phosphorylation by CDK5/p25 versus 
CDK5/p35 in vitro.

Peterson DW(1), Ando DM, Taketa DA, Zhou H, Dahlquist FW, Lew J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of 
California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA.

CDK5/p35 is a cyclin-dependent kinase essential for normal neuron function. 
Proteolysis of the p35 subunit in vivo results in CDK5/p25 that causes 
neurotoxicity associated with a number of neurodegenerative diseases. Whereas 
the mechanism by which conversion of p35 to p25 leads to toxicity is unknown, 
there is common belief that CDK5/p25 is catalytically hyperactive compared to 
CDK5/p35. Here, we have compared the steady-state kinetic parameters of CDK5/p35 
and CDK5/p25 towards both histone H1, the best known substrate for both enzymes, 
and the microtubule-associated protein, tau, a physiological substrate whose in 
vivo phosphorylation is relevant to Alzheimer's disease. We show that the 
kinetics of both enzymes are the same towards either substrate in vitro. 
Furthermore, both enzymes display virtually identical kinetics towards 
individual phosphorylation sites in tau monitored by NMR. We conclude that 
conversion of p35 to p25 does not alter the catalytic efficiency of the CDK5 
catalytic subunit by using histone H1 or tau as substrates, and that 
neurotoxicity associated with CDK5/p25 is unlikely attributable to CDK5 
hyperactivation, as measured in vitro.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0912718107
PMCID: PMC2840295
PMID: 20133653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
