---
pmid: '9461583'
title: Tor, a phosphatidylinositol kinase homologue, controls autophagy in yeast.
authors:
- Noda T
- Ohsumi Y
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.7.3963
---

# Tor, a phosphatidylinositol kinase homologue, controls autophagy in yeast.
**Authors:** Noda T, Ohsumi Y
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.273.7.3963](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.7.3963)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Feb 13;273(7):3963-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.7.3963.

Tor, a phosphatidylinositol kinase homologue, controls autophagy in yeast.

Noda T(1), Ohsumi Y.

Author information:
(1)National Institute for Basic Biology, Department of Cell Biology, Nishigonaka 
38, Myodaijicho, Okazaki 444, Japan.

Autophagy is a bulk protein degradation process that is induced by starvation. 
The control mechanism for induction of autophagy is not well understood. We 
found that Tor, a phosphatidylinositol kinase homologue, is involved in the 
control of autophagy in the yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae. When rapamycin, an 
inhibitor of Tor function, is added, autophagy is induced even in cells growing 
in nutrient-rich medium. A temperature-sensitive tor mutant also leads to 
induction of autophagy at a nonpermissive temperature. These results indicate 
that Tor negatively regulates the induction of autophagy. Tor is the first 
molecule that is identified as a pivotal player in the starvation-signaling 
pathway of autophagy. Furthermore, we found that a high concentration of cAMP is 
inhibitory for induction of autophagy. APG gene products are involved in 
autophagy induced by starvation. Autophagy was not induced in apg mutants in the 
presence of rapamycin, indicating that the site of action of Tor is upstream of 
those of Apg proteins. In nutrient-rich medium, Apg proteins are involved also 
in the transport of aminopeptidase I from the cytosol to the vacuole. Tor may 
act to switch Apg function between autophagy and transport of aminopeptidase I.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.7.3963
PMID: 9461583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
