---
pmid: '16140914'
title: Valosin-containing protein phosphorylation at Ser784 in response to DNA damage.
authors:
- Livingstone M
- Ruan H
- Weiner J
- Clauser KR
- Strack P
- Jin S
- Williams A
- Greulich H
- Gardner J
- Venere M
- Mochan TA
- DiTullio RA Jr
- Moravcevic K
- Gorgoulis VG
- Burkhardt A
- Halazonetis TD
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-3729
---

# Valosin-containing protein phosphorylation at Ser784 in response to DNA damage.
**Authors:** Livingstone M, Ruan H, Weiner J, Clauser KR, Strack P, Jin S, Williams A, Greulich H, Gardner J, Venere M, Mochan TA, DiTullio RA Jr, Moravcevic K, Gorgoulis VG, Burkhardt A, Halazonetis TD
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-3729](https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-3729)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Res. 2005 Sep 1;65(17):7533-40. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-3729.

Valosin-containing protein phosphorylation at Ser784 in response to DNA damage.

Livingstone M(1), Ruan H, Weiner J, Clauser KR, Strack P, Jin S, Williams A, 
Greulich H, Gardner J, Venere M, Mochan TA, DiTullio RA Jr, Moravcevic K, 
Gorgoulis VG, Burkhardt A, Halazonetis TD.

Author information:
(1)Cell Signaling Technology, Inc., Beverly, Massachusetts, USA.

The response of eukaryotic cells to DNA damage includes the activation of 
phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase-related kinases (PIKK), such as ATM, ATR, and 
DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK). These three kinases have very similar 
substrate specificities in vitro, but in vivo, their substrates overlap only 
partially. Several in vivo substrates of ATM and ATR have been identified and 
almost all of them are involved in DNA damage-induced cell cycle arrest and/or 
apoptosis. In contrast, few in vivo substrates of DNA-PK have been identified. 
These include histone H2AX and DNA-PK itself. We identify here 
valosin-containing protein (VCP) as a novel substrate of DNA-PK and other PIKK 
family members. VCP is phosphorylated at Ser784 within its COOH terminus, a 
region previously shown to target VCP to specific intracellular compartments. 
Furthermore, VCP phosphorylated at Ser784 accumulated at sites of DNA 
double-strand breaks (DSBs). VCP is a protein chaperone that unfolds and 
translocates proteins. Its phosphorylation in response to DNA damage and its 
recruitment to sites of DNA DSBs could indicate a role of VCP in DNA repair.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-3729
PMID: 16140914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
