---
pmid: '37486705'
title: Human Aha1's N-terminal extension confers it holdase activity in vitro.
authors:
- Tang J
- Hu H
- Zhou C
- Zhang N
journal: Protein Sci
year: '2023'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC10443363
doi: 10.1002/pro.4735
---

# Human Aha1's N-terminal extension confers it holdase activity in vitro.
**Authors:** Tang J, Hu H, Zhou C, Zhang N
**Journal:** Protein Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pro.4735](https://doi.org/10.1002/pro.4735)
**PMC:** [PMC10443363](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10443363/)

## Abstract

1. Protein Sci. 2023 Sep;32(9):e4735. doi: 10.1002/pro.4735.

Human Aha1's N-terminal extension confers it holdase activity in vitro.

Tang J(1)(2), Hu H(2)(3), Zhou C(2), Zhang N(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Chinese Materia Medica, Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine, 
Nanjing, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Chemical Biology, Analytical Research Center for 
Organic and Biological Molecules, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(3)University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Molecular chaperones are key components of protein quality control system, which 
plays an essential role in controlling protein homeostasis. Aha1 has been 
identified as a co-chaperone of Hsp90 known to strongly accelerate Hsp90's 
ATPase activity. Meanwhile, it is reported that Aha1 could also act as an 
autonomous chaperone and protect stressed or disordered proteins from 
aggregation. Here, in this article, a series of in vitro experiments were 
conducted to verify whether Aha1 has a non-Hsp90-dependent holdase activity and 
to elucidate the associated molecular mechanism for substrate recognition. 
According to the results of the refolding assay, the highly conserved N-terminal 
extension spanning M1 to R16 in Aha1 from higher eukaryotes is responsible for 
the holdase activity of the protein. As revealed by the NMR data, Aha1's 
N-terminal extension mainly adopts a disordered conformation in solution and 
shows no tight contacts with the core structure of Aha1's N-terminal domain. 
Based on the intrinsically disordered structure feature and the primary sequence 
of Aha1's N-terminal extension, the fuzzy-type protein-protein interactions 
involving this specific region and the unfolded substrate proteins are expected. 
The following mutation analysis data demonstrated that the Van der Waals 
contacts potentially involving two tryptophans including W4 and W11 do not play 
a dominant role in the interaction between Aha1 and unfolded maltose binding 
protein (MBP). Meanwhile, since the high concentration of NaCl could abolish the 
holdase activity of Aha1, the electrostatic interactions mediated by those 
charged residues in Aha1's N-terminal extension are thus indicated to play a 
crucial role in the substrate recognition.

© 2023 The Protein Society.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.4735
PMCID: PMC10443363
PMID: 37486705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this article.
