---
pmid: '15525992'
title: Insight into steroid scaffold formation from the structure of human oxidosqualene
  cyclase.
authors:
- Thoma R
- Schulz-Gasch T
- D'Arcy B
- Benz J
- Aebi J
- Dehmlow H
- Hennig M
- Stihle M
- Ruf A
journal: Nature
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature02993
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Insight into steroid scaffold formation from the structure of human oxidosqualene cyclase.
**Authors:** Thoma R, Schulz-Gasch T, D'Arcy B, Benz J, Aebi J, Dehmlow H, Hennig M, Stihle M, Ruf A
**Journal:** Nature (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature02993](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature02993)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2004 Nov 4;432(7013):118-22. doi: 10.1038/nature02993.

Insight into steroid scaffold formation from the structure of human 
oxidosqualene cyclase.

Thoma R(1), Schulz-Gasch T, D'Arcy B, Benz J, Aebi J, Dehmlow H, Hennig M, 
Stihle M, Ruf A.

Author information:
(1)F. Hoffmann-La Roche AG, Pharma Research Discovery Chemistry, 4070 Basel, 
Switzerland.

In higher organisms the formation of the steroid scaffold is catalysed 
exclusively by the membrane-bound oxidosqualene cyclase (OSC; lanosterol 
synthase). In a highly selective cyclization reaction OSC forms lanosterol with 
seven chiral centres starting from the linear substrate 2,3-oxidosqualene. 
Valuable data on the mechanism of the complex cyclization cascade have been 
collected during the past 50 years using suicide inhibitors, mutagenesis studies 
and homology modelling. Nevertheless it is still not fully understood how the 
enzyme catalyses the reaction. Because of the decisive role of OSC in 
cholesterol biosynthesis it represents a target for the discovery of novel 
anticholesteraemic drugs that could complement the widely used statins. Here we 
present two crystal structures of the human membrane protein OSC: the target 
protein with an inhibitor that showed cholesterol lowering in vivo opens the way 
for the structure-based design of new OSC inhibitors. The complex with the 
reaction product lanosterol gives a clear picture of the way in which the enzyme 
achieves product specificity in this highly exothermic cyclization reaction.

DOI: 10.1038/nature02993
PMID: 15525992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
