---
pmid: '16045902'
title: Expression and regulation of murine macrophage angiopoietin-2.
authors:
- Hubbard NE
- Lim D
- Mukutmoni M
- Cai A
- Erickson KL
journal: Cell Immunol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cellimm.2005.06.001
---

# Expression and regulation of murine macrophage angiopoietin-2.
**Authors:** Hubbard NE, Lim D, Mukutmoni M, Cai A, Erickson KL
**Journal:** Cell Immunol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cellimm.2005.06.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cellimm.2005.06.001)

## Abstract

1. Cell Immunol. 2005 Apr;234(2):102-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cellimm.2005.06.001.

Expression and regulation of murine macrophage angiopoietin-2.

Hubbard NE(1), Lim D, Mukutmoni M, Cai A, Erickson KL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Human Anatomy, University of California, 
School of Medicine, Davis, CA 95616-8643, USA. nehubbard@ucdavis.edu

Our understanding of angiogenesis has increased significantly in the past few 
years with the discovery of angiopoietins (Ang). Specifically, Ang2 has been 
associated with pathologic as well as normal vascularization. While previous 
studies have shown that a major source of Ang2 has been endothelial cells and 
tumor cells, we reasoned that macrophages would also have the ability to express 
angiopoietins, specifically Ang2, due to that cell's role in wound healing, 
tumor angiogenesis, and a number of non-oncological diseases, such as rheumatoid 
arthritis and psoriasis. In this study, murine macrophages constitutively 
expressed both transcripts and protein for Ang2 but not Ang1 or Ang3. The 
secretion of Ang2 was enhanced by treatment with lipopolysaccharide, 
interferon-gamma, prostaglandin E2 and other cyclic AMP-elevating agents, as 
well as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Cyclic AMP-dependent protein 
kinase (PKA) played a major role in this enhancement since the PKA inhibitor, 
H89, blocked secretion of Ang2. Since stimulation of the PKA pathway can lead to 
macrophage production of VEGF, it is possible that enhancement of Ang2 
production by macrophages may be due to autocrine responsiveness to VEGF. Adding 
anti-VEGF antibodies to the supernatants of stimulated macrophages blocked 
secretion of Ang2. This study is the first to show murine macrophage production 
of Ang2 and to provide evidence that it can be regulated. Understanding the 
regulation of macrophage Ang2 production is especially important in an effort to 
target the pathologic role of macrophages while preserving their role in 
immunity and homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellimm.2005.06.001
PMID: 16045902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
