---
pmid: '10329722'
title: A novel nuclear export signal sensitive to oxidative stress in the fission
  yeast transcription factor Pap1.
authors:
- Kudo N
- Taoka H
- Toda T
- Yoshida M
- Horinouchi S
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.21.15151
---

# A novel nuclear export signal sensitive to oxidative stress in the fission yeast transcription factor Pap1.
**Authors:** Kudo N, Taoka H, Toda T, Yoshida M, Horinouchi S
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.274.21.15151](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.21.15151)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1999 May 21;274(21):15151-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.21.15151.

A novel nuclear export signal sensitive to oxidative stress in the fission yeast 
transcription factor Pap1.

Kudo N(1), Taoka H, Toda T, Yoshida M, Horinouchi S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Graduate School of Agriculture and Life 
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113, Japan.

Pap1, a fission yeast AP-1-like transcription factor, is negatively regulated by 
CRM1/exportin 1, the nuclear export factor. Pap1 was localized normally in the 
cytoplasm but was accumulated in the nucleus when Crm1 was inactivated by a 
temperature-sensitive mutation or by treatment with leptomycin B, a specific 
export inhibitor. Deletion of the C-terminal cysteine-rich domain (CRD) resulted 
in nuclear accumulation of Pap1, while a glutathione S-transferase-green 
fluorescent protein-CRD fusion protein was localized in the cytoplasm in a 
Crm1-dependent manner. Deletion and mutational analyses identified several 
important amino acids in a 19-amino acid region in the CRD as a nuclear export 
signal (NES). Strikingly, a cysteine residue (Cys-532), in addition to two 
leucines and an isoleucine, was important for the NES function and the presence 
of at least one of the two cysteine residues was essential. Unlike classical 
NESs such as the human immunodeficiency virus Rev NES, the Pap1 NES lost the 
function upon treatment with oxidants such as diethyl maleate. The oxidative 
stress response is conserved through evolution, as green fluorescent 
protein-fused proteins bearing the Pap1 NES expressed in mammalian cells 
responded to diethyl maleate. These results show that the hydrophobic amino 
acid-rich region containing two important cysteines in Pap1 serves as a novel 
NES, which is sensitive to oxidative stress.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.21.15151
PMID: 10329722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
