---
pmid: '16462750'
title: Completing the uric acid degradation pathway through phylogenetic comparison
  of whole genomes.
authors:
- Ramazzina I
- Folli C
- Secchi A
- Berni R
- Percudani R
journal: Nat Chem Biol
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nchembio768
---

# Completing the uric acid degradation pathway through phylogenetic comparison of whole genomes.
**Authors:** Ramazzina I, Folli C, Secchi A, Berni R, Percudani R
**Journal:** Nat Chem Biol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nchembio768](https://doi.org/10.1038/nchembio768)

## Abstract

1. Nat Chem Biol. 2006 Mar;2(3):144-8. doi: 10.1038/nchembio768. Epub 2006 Feb 5.

Completing the uric acid degradation pathway through phylogenetic comparison of 
whole genomes.

Ramazzina I(1), Folli C, Secchi A, Berni R, Percudani R.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica e Biologia molecolare, Università di Parma, 43100 
Parma, Italy.

Comment in
    Nat Chem Biol. 2006 Mar;2(3):124-5. doi: 10.1038/nchembio0306-124.

Mammals that degrade uric acid are not affected by gout or urate kidney stones. 
It is not fully understood how they convert uric acid into the much more soluble 
allantoin. Until recently, it had long been thought that urate oxidase was the 
only enzyme responsible for this conversion. However, detailed studies of the 
mechanism and regiochemistry of urate oxidation have called this assumption into 
question, suggesting the existence of other distinct enzymatic activities. 
Through phylogenetic genome comparison, we identify here two genes that share 
with urate oxidase a common history of loss or gain events. We show that the two 
proteins encoded by mouse genes catalyze two consecutive steps following urate 
oxidation to 5-hydroxyisourate (HIU): hydrolysis of HIU to give 
2-oxo-4-hydroxy-4-carboxy-5-ureidoimidazoline (OHCU) and decarboxylation of OHCU 
to give S-(+)-allantoin. Urate oxidation produces racemic allantoin on a time 
scale of hours, whereas the full enzymatic complement produces dextrorotatory 
allantoin on a time scale of seconds. The use of these enzymes in association 
with urate oxidase could improve the therapy of hyperuricemia.

DOI: 10.1038/nchembio768
PMID: 16462750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
