---
pmid: '30111536'
title: DCAF13 promotes pluripotency by negatively regulating SUV39H1 stability during
  early embryonic development.
authors:
- Zhang YL
- Zhao LW
- Zhang J
- Le R
- Ji SY
- Chen C
- Gao Y
- Li D
- Gao S
- Fan HY
journal: EMBO J
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6138440
doi: 10.15252/embj.201898981
---

# DCAF13 promotes pluripotency by negatively regulating SUV39H1 stability during early embryonic development.
**Authors:** Zhang YL, Zhao LW, Zhang J, Le R, Ji SY, Chen C, Gao Y, Li D, Gao S, Fan HY
**Journal:** EMBO J (2018)
**DOI:** [10.15252/embj.201898981](https://doi.org/10.15252/embj.201898981)
**PMC:** [PMC6138440](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6138440/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2018 Sep 14;37(18):e98981. doi: 10.15252/embj.201898981. Epub 2018 Aug
 14.

DCAF13 promotes pluripotency by negatively regulating SUV39H1 stability during 
early embryonic development.

Zhang YL(1)(2), Zhao LW(1), Zhang J(1), Le R(3), Ji SY(1), Chen C(3), Gao Y(3), 
Li D(4), Gao S(3), Fan HY(5).

Author information:
(1)Life Sciences Institute, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Assisted Reproduction Unit, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sir Run 
Run Shaw Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(3)Clinical and Translational Research Center of Shanghai First Maternity & 
Infant Hospital, School of Life Sciences and Technology, Tongji University, 
Shanghai, China.
(4)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Regulatory Biology, Institute of Biomedical 
Sciences and School of Life Sciences, East China Normal University, Shanghai, 
China.
(5)Life Sciences Institute, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China 
hyfan@zju.edu.cn.

Comment in
    Biol Reprod. 2019 Jan 1;100(1):13-14. doi: 10.1093/biolre/ioy201.

Mammalian oocytes and zygotes have the unique ability to reprogram a somatic 
cell nucleus into a totipotent state. SUV39H1/2-mediated histone H3 lysine-9 
trimethylation (H3K9me3) is a major barrier to efficient reprogramming. How 
SUV39H1/2 activities are regulated in early embryos and during generation of 
induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) remains unclear. Since expression of the 
CRL4 E3 ubiquitin ligase in oocytes is crucial for female fertility, we analyzed 
putative CRL4 adaptors (DCAFs) and identified DCAF13 as a novel CRL4 adaptor 
that is essential for preimplantation embryonic development. Dcaf13 is expressed 
from eight-cell to morula stages in both murine and human embryos, and Dcaf13 
knockout in mice causes preimplantation-stage mortality. Dcaf13 knockout embryos 
are arrested at the eight- to sixteen-cell stage before compaction, and this 
arrest is accompanied by high levels of H3K9me3. Mechanistically, CRL4-DCAF13 
targets SUV39H1 for polyubiquitination and proteasomal degradation and therefore 
facilitates H3K9me3 removal and zygotic gene expression. Taken together, 
CRL4-DCAF13-mediated SUV39H1 degradation is an essential step for progressive 
genome reprogramming during preimplantation embryonic development.

© 2018 The Authors.

DOI: 10.15252/embj.201898981
PMCID: PMC6138440
PMID: 30111536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
