---
pmid: '11145879'
title: The COP/DET/FUS proteins-regulators of eukaryotic growth and development.
authors:
- Schwechheimer C
- Deng XW
journal: Semin Cell Dev Biol
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/scdb.2000.0203
---

# The COP/DET/FUS proteins-regulators of eukaryotic growth and development.
**Authors:** Schwechheimer C, Deng XW
**Journal:** Semin Cell Dev Biol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1006/scdb.2000.0203](https://doi.org/10.1006/scdb.2000.0203)

## Abstract

1. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2000 Dec;11(6):495-503. doi: 10.1006/scdb.2000.0203.

The COP/DET/FUS proteins-regulators of eukaryotic growth and development.

Schwechheimer C(1), Deng XW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, Yale University, 
New Haven, CT 06520-8104, USA.

Eleven recessive mutant loci define the class of cop / det / fus mutants of 
Arabidopsis. The cop / det / fus mutants mimic the phenotype of light-grown 
seedlings when grown in the dark. At least four cop / det / fus mutants carry 
mutations in subunits of the COP9 signalosome, a multiprotein complex paralogous 
to the 'lid' subcomplex of the 26S proteasome. COP1, another COP/DET/FUS 
protein, is itself not a subunit of the COP9 signalosome. In the dark, COP1 
accumulates in the nucleus where it is required for the degradation of the HY5 
protein, a positive regulator of photomorphogenesis. In the light, COP1 is 
excluded from the nucleus and the constitutively nuclear HY5 protein can 
accumulate. Nuclear accumulation of COP1 and degradation of HY5 are impaired in 
the cop / det / fus mutants that carry mutations in subunits of the COP9 
signalosome. Although the cellular function of the COP/DET/FUS proteins is not 
yet well understood, taken together the current findings suggest that the 
COP/DET/FUS proteins repress photomorphogenesis in the dark by mediating 
specific protein degradation.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/scdb.2000.0203
PMID: 11145879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
