---
pmid: '20150892'
title: Genetic analysis of Ras signalling pathways in cell proliferation, migration
  and survival.
authors:
- Drosten M
- Dhawahir A
- Sum EY
- Urosevic J
- Lechuga CG
- Esteban LM
- Castellano E
- Guerra C
- Santos E
- Barbacid M
journal: EMBO J
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2845279
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.7
---

# Genetic analysis of Ras signalling pathways in cell proliferation, migration and survival.
**Authors:** Drosten M, Dhawahir A, Sum EY, Urosevic J, Lechuga CG, Esteban LM, Castellano E, Guerra C, Santos E, Barbacid M
**Journal:** EMBO J (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2010.7](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2010.7)
**PMC:** [PMC2845279](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2845279/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2010 Mar 17;29(6):1091-104. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.7. Epub 2010 Feb
11.

Genetic analysis of Ras signalling pathways in cell proliferation, migration and 
survival.

Drosten M(1), Dhawahir A, Sum EY, Urosevic J, Lechuga CG, Esteban LM, Castellano 
E, Guerra C, Santos E, Barbacid M.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Oncology Programme, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas, 
Melchor Fernández Almagro 3, Madrid, Spain.

We have used mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) devoid of Ras proteins to 
illustrate that they are essential for proliferation and migration, but not for 
survival, at least in these cells. These properties are unique to the Ras 
subfamily of proteins because ectopic expression of other Ras-like small 
GTPases, even when constitutively active, could not compensate for the absence 
of Ras proteins. Only constitutive activation of components of the Raf/Mek/Erk 
pathway was sufficient to sustain normal proliferation and migration of MEFs 
devoid of Ras proteins. Activation of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase 
(PI3K)/PTEN/Akt and Ral guanine exchange factor (RalGEF)/Ral pathways, either 
alone or in combination, failed to induce proliferation or migration of Rasless 
cells, although they cooperated with Raf/Mek/Erk signalling to reproduce the 
full response mediated by Ras signalling. In contrast to current hypotheses, Ras 
signalling did not induce proliferation by inducing expression of D-type 
Cyclins. Rasless MEFs had normal levels of Cyclin D1/Cdk4 and Cyclin E/Cdk2. 
However, these complexes were inactive. Inactivation of the pocket proteins or 
knock down of pRb relieved MEFs from their dependence on Ras signalling to 
proliferate.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2010.7
PMCID: PMC2845279
PMID: 20150892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
