---
reference_id: PMID:35409131
title: Targeting of Proteins for Translocation at the Endoplasmic Reticulum.
authors:
- Pool MR
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijms23073773
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeting of Proteins for Translocation at the Endoplasmic Reticulum.
**Authors:** Pool MR
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms23073773](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23073773)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Mar 29;23(7):3773. doi: 10.3390/ijms23073773.

Targeting of Proteins for Translocation at the Endoplasmic Reticulum.

Pool MR(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Science, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health,
University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, UK.

The endoplasmic reticulum represents the gateway to the secretory pathway. Here,
proteins destined for secretion, as well as soluble and membrane proteins that
reside in the endomembrane system and plasma membrane, are triaged from proteins
that will remain in the cytosol or be targeted to other cellular organelles.
This process requires the faithful recognition of specific targeting signals and
subsequent delivery mechanisms to then target them to the translocases present
at the ER membrane, which can either translocate them into the ER lumen or
insert them into the lipid bilayer. This review focuses on the current
understanding of the first step in this process representing the targeting
phase. Targeting is typically mediated by cleavable N-terminal hydrophobic
signal sequences or internal membrane anchor sequences; these can either be
captured co-translationally at the ribosome or recognised post-translationally
and then delivered to the ER translocases. Location and features of the
targeting sequence dictate which of several overlapping targeting pathway
substrates will be used. Mutations in the targeting machinery or targeting
signals can be linked to diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23073773
PMCID: PMC8998515
PMID: 35409131 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflict of interest.