---
pmid: '23512986'
title: Cytosolic proteins lose solubility as amyloid deposits in a transgenic mouse
  model of Alzheimer-type amyloidosis.
authors:
- Xu G
- Stevens SM Jr
- Moore BD
- McClung S
- Borchelt DR
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3690965
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt121
---

# Cytosolic proteins lose solubility as amyloid deposits in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer-type amyloidosis.
**Authors:** Xu G, Stevens SM Jr, Moore BD, McClung S, Borchelt DR
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddt121](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddt121)
**PMC:** [PMC3690965](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3690965/)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Jul 15;22(14):2765-74. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt121. Epub 2013 
Mar 19.

Cytosolic proteins lose solubility as amyloid deposits in a transgenic mouse 
model of Alzheimer-type amyloidosis.

Xu G(1), Stevens SM Jr, Moore BD, McClung S, Borchelt DR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, 
USA.

The extracellular accumulation of β-amyloid peptide is a key trigger in the 
pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). In humans, amyloid deposition precedes 
the appearance of intracellular inclusion pathology formed by cytosolic proteins 
such as Tau, α-synuclein and TDP-43. These secondary pathologies have not been 
observed in mice that model Alzheimer-type amyloidosis by expressing mutant 
amyloid precursor protein, with or without mutant presenilin 1. The lack of 
secondary pathology in these models has made it difficult to establish how 
amyloid deposition initiates the cascade of events that leads to secondary 
intracellular pathology that characterizes human AD. In transgenic mice that 
model Alzheimer-type amyloidosis, we sought to determine whether there is 
evidence of altered cytosolic protein folding by assessing whether amyloid 
deposition causes normally soluble proteins to misfold. Using a method that 
involved detergent extraction and sedimentation coupled with proteomic 
approaches, we identified numerous cytosolic proteins that show specific losses 
in solubility as amyloid accumulates. The proteins identified included 
glycolytic enzymes and members of the 14-3-3 chaperone family. A substantial 
accumulation of lysine 48-linked polyubiquitin was also detected. Overall, the 
data demonstrate that the accumulation of amyloid by some manner causes the loss 
of solubility intracellular cytosolic proteins.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddt121
PMCID: PMC3690965
PMID: 23512986 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
