---
pmid: '32298923'
title: E3 ubiquitin ligase ASB8 negatively regulates interferon via regulating TBK1/IKKi
  homeostasis.
authors:
- Guo Y
- Li R
- Tan Z
- Shi J
- Fu Y
- Song Y
- Zhu M
- Zhang L
- Huang J
journal: Mol Immunol
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2020.03.011
---

# E3 ubiquitin ligase ASB8 negatively regulates interferon via regulating TBK1/IKKi homeostasis.
**Authors:** Guo Y, Li R, Tan Z, Shi J, Fu Y, Song Y, Zhu M, Zhang L, Huang J
**Journal:** Mol Immunol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molimm.2020.03.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molimm.2020.03.011)

## Abstract

1. Mol Immunol. 2020 May;121:195-203. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2020.03.011. Epub
2020  Apr 14.

E3 ubiquitin ligase ASB8 negatively regulates interferon via regulating 
TBK1/IKKi homeostasis.

Guo Y(1), Li R(1), Tan Z(1), Shi J(1), Fu Y(1), Song Y(1), Zhu M(1), Zhang L(1), 
Huang J(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300072, China.
(2)School of Life Sciences, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300072, China. 
Electronic address: jinhaih@tju.edu.cn.

Cells recognize virus nucleic acid by pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), 
virus involve in the activation of signaling cascade of variable adaptor 
proteins, TANK-binding kinase1(TBK1)/ inhibitor of nuclear factor kappa-B kinase 
subunit epsilon(IKKi) complex, IκB kinase(IKKs) to trigger activation of 
transcription factor, interferon regulatory factor 3/7(IRF3/7), ultimately, 
leading to the production of type I interferon and exert anti-viral effects. In 
this study, E3 ubiquitin ligase ankyrin repeat and SOCS box-containing 8(ASB8) 
interacted with TBK1/IKKi and phosphorylation modification of ASB8 at site of 
Ser17 to further strengthen its ubiquitination activity were verified. 
Conversely, phosphorylated ASB8 accelerate K48-linked ubiquitination and 
degradation of TBK1/IKKi, which further reduces phosphorylation level of IRF3 
and inhibits production of IFN-β. At the same time, a new bridge molecule 
Leucine-rich repeat containing protein 10B(LRRC10B) upregulated after viral 
infection are involved in the formation and interaction with ASB8-TBK1/IKKi 
complex was reported. Our study reveals a new mechanism of ubiquitin ligase ASB8 
modulating antiviral innate immunity by altering stability of TBK1/IKKi kinase 
complex.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2020.03.011
PMID: 32298923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare no competing interests.
