---
pmid: '22016389'
title: Protein interactions and localization of the Escherichia coli accessory protein
  HypA during nickel insertion to [NiFe] hydrogenase.
authors:
- Chan Chung KC
- Zamble DB
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3234881
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.290726
---

# Protein interactions and localization of the Escherichia coli accessory protein HypA during nickel insertion to [NiFe] hydrogenase.
**Authors:** Chan Chung KC, Zamble DB
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M111.290726](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M111.290726)
**PMC:** [PMC3234881](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3234881/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Dec 16;286(50):43081-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.290726. Epub 
2011 Oct 20.

Protein interactions and localization of the Escherichia coli accessory protein 
HypA during nickel insertion to [NiFe] hydrogenase.

Chan Chung KC(1), Zamble DB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3H6, 
Canada.

Nickel delivery during maturation of Escherichia coli [NiFe] hydrogenase 3 
includes the accessory proteins HypA, HypB, and SlyD. Although the isolated 
proteins have been characterized, little is known about how they interact with 
each other and the hydrogenase 3 large subunit, HycE. In this study the 
complexes of HypA and HycE were investigated after modification with the 
Strep-tag II. Multiprotein complexes containing HypA, HypB, SlyD, and HycE were 
observed, consistent with the assembly of a single nickel insertion cluster. An 
interaction between HypA and HycE did not require the other nickel insertion 
proteins, but HypB was not found with the large subunit in the absence of HypA. 
The HypA-HycE complex was not detected in the absence of the HypC or HypD 
proteins, involved in the preceding iron insertion step, and this interaction is 
enhanced by nickel brought into the cell by the NikABCDE membrane transporter. 
Furthermore, without the hydrogenase 1, 2, and 3 large subunits, complexes 
between HypA, HypB, and SlyD were observed. These results support the hypothesis 
that HypA acts as a scaffold for assembly of the nickel insertion proteins with 
the hydrogenase precursor protein after delivery of the iron center. At 
different stages of the hydrogenase maturation process, HypA was observed at or 
near the cell membrane by using fluorescence confocal microscopy, as was HycE, 
suggesting membrane localization of the nickel insertion event.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.290726
PMCID: PMC3234881
PMID: 22016389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
