---
pmid: '8620869'
title: The expression of mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme-A synthase
  in neonatal rat intestine and liver is under transcriptional control.
authors:
- Serra D
- Bellido D
- Asins G
- Arias G
- Vilaró S
- Hegardt FG
journal: Eur J Biochem
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1996.0016n.x
---

# The expression of mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme-A synthase in neonatal rat intestine and liver is under transcriptional control.
**Authors:** Serra D, Bellido D, Asins G, Arias G, Vilaró S, Hegardt FG
**Journal:** Eur J Biochem (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1432-1033.1996.0016n.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1432-1033.1996.0016n.x)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Biochem. 1996 Apr 1;237(1):16-24. doi: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1996.0016n.x.

The expression of mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme-A synthase 
in neonatal rat intestine and liver is under transcriptional control.

Serra D(1), Bellido D, Asins G, Arias G, Vilaró S, Hegardt FG.

Author information:
(1)Unit of Biochemistry, School of Pharmacy, University of Barcelona, Spain.

Mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA (HOMeGlt-CoA) synthase regulates 
ketogenesis in the liver of adult rat and in the intestine and liver of neonatal 
animals but whose mechanisms of regulation have not been fully defined. To 
investigate transcriptional control of this gene in intestine and liver of 
suckling rats a quantitative PCR amplification of the pre-mRNA (heteronuclear 
RNA), compose of part of the first exon and of the first intron, was carried 
out. Results show that the intestinal pre-mRNA for mitochondrial HOMeGlt-CoA 
synthase from suckling rats follows a pattern that is nearly identical to that 
of mature mRNA, with maximum levels on the ninth postnatal day then decreasing 
smoothly so that at weaning there is no transcriptional activity. Mitochondrial 
HOMeGlt-CoA synthase protein follows a pattern that is identical to the pre-mRNA 
and mature mRNA, suggesting no translational regulation. The changes in 
transcriptional activity are not produced by the presence of an alternative 
promoter, since the transcription-initiation site is identical in several 
tissues assayed, including intestine and liver. Enterocytes are the only 
intestinal cells that express this ketogenic enzyme, as deduced from 
immunolocalization experiments. The mature intestinal protein is located in 
mitochondria and not in the cytosol, which coincides with what is found in 
liver. By using analogous techniques we conclude that hepatic pre-mRNA of 
mitochondrial HOMeGlt-CoA synthase from suckling rats follows a pattern of 
expression identical to that of mature hepatic mRNA, which also suggests a 
transcriptional modulation of this gene in the liver of neonatal rats.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1996.0016n.x
PMID: 8620869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
