---
pmid: '8631945'
title: Altered structural and mechanistic properties of mutant dihydropteridine reductases.
authors:
- Kiefer PM
- Varughese KI
- Su Y
- Xuong NH
- Chang CF
- Gupta P
- Bray T
- Whiteley JM
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.7.3437
---

# Altered structural and mechanistic properties of mutant dihydropteridine reductases.
**Authors:** Kiefer PM, Varughese KI, Su Y, Xuong NH, Chang CF, Gupta P, Bray T, Whiteley JM
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.271.7.3437](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.271.7.3437)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1996 Feb 16;271(7):3437-44. doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.7.3437.

Altered structural and mechanistic properties of mutant dihydropteridine 
reductases.

Kiefer PM(1), Varughese KI, Su Y, Xuong NH, Chang CF, Gupta P, Bray T, Whiteley 
JM.

Author information:
(1)University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093-0317, USA.

Nine single genetic mutants of rat dihydropteridine reductase (EC 1.6.99.7), 
D37I, W86I, Y146F, Y146H, K150Q, K150I, K150M, N186A, and A133S and one double 
mutant, Y146F/K150Q, have been engineered, overexpressed in Escherichia coli and 
their proteins purified. Of these, five, W86I, Y146F, Y146H, Y146F/K150Q, and 
A133S, have been crystallized and structurally characterized. Kinetic constants 
for each of the mutant enzyme forms, except N186A, which was too unstable to 
isolate in a homogeneous form, have been derived and in the five instances where 
structures are available the altered activities have been interpreted by 
correlation with these structures. It is readily apparent that specific 
interactions of the apoenzyme with the cofactor, NADH, are vital to the 
integrity of the total protein tertiary structure and that the generation of the 
active site requires bound cofactor in addition to a suitably placed W86. Thus 
when the three major centers for hydrogen bonding to the cofactor are mutated, 
i.e. 37, 150, and 186, an unstable partially active enzyme is formed. It is also 
apparent that tyrosine 146 is vital to the activity of the enzyme, as the Y146F 
mutant is almost inactive having only 1.1% of wild-type activity. However, when 
an additional mutation, K150Q, is made, the rearrangement of water molecules in 
the vicinity of Lys150 is accompanied by the recovery of 50% of the wild-type 
activity. It is suggested that the involvement of a water molecule compensates 
for the loss of the tyrosyl hydroxyl group. The difference between tyrosine and 
histidine groups at 146 is seen in the comparably unfavorable geometry of 
hydrogen bonds exhibited by the latter to the substrate, reducing the activity 
to 15% of the wild type. The mutant A133S shows little alteration in activity; 
however, its hydroxyl substituent contributes to the active site by providing a 
possible additional proton sink. This is of little value to dihydropteridine 
reductase but may be significant in the sequentially analogous short chain 
dehydrogenases/reductases, where a serine is the amino acid of choice for this 
position.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.7.3437
PMID: 8631945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
