---
pmid: '11935339'
title: 'CIA30 complex I assembly factor: a candidate for human complex I deficiency?'
authors:
- Janssen R
- Smeitink J
- Smeets R
- van Den Heuvel L
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s00439-001-0673-3
---

# CIA30 complex I assembly factor: a candidate for human complex I deficiency?
**Authors:** Janssen R, Smeitink J, Smeets R, van Den Heuvel L
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00439-001-0673-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-001-0673-3)

## Abstract

1. Hum Genet. 2002 Mar;110(3):264-70. doi: 10.1007/s00439-001-0673-3. Epub 2002
Feb  1.

CIA30 complex I assembly factor: a candidate for human complex I deficiency?

Janssen R(1), Smeitink J, Smeets R, van Den Heuvel L.

Author information:
(1)Nijmegen Center for Mitochondrial Disorders, Department of Pediatrics, 
University Medical Center Nijmegen, PO Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.

The human mitochondrial NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I), the first 
complex of the oxidative phosphorylation system, is composed of at least 42 
subunits. Little is known about the assembly process of these subunits into the 
mature complex. Recently, two proteins in Neurospora crassa have been found to 
be involved in the assembly of complex I. These proteins are not constituent 
parts of the mature complex but are associated with smaller intermediate 
complexes of the assembly process and have a chaperone-like function. We have 
characterized the human homologue of one of these two complex I intermediate 
associated proteins, named CIA30, and show that expression of the human CIA30 
protein is ubiquitous with a slightly higher expression in various heart 
tissues, kidney, lung and liver. As deletion of the Neurospora crassa CIA genes 
results in severe disruption of the assembly process, human CIA30 can be 
considered as a candidate gene related to complex I deficiency. Thirteen 
patients with an isolated complex I deficiency, but who were ruled out for 
mutations in the 35 nuclear genes of the complex and mtDNA, were subjected to 
mutational analysis of the gene coding for the human CIA30 protein. Four new 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were detected but no functional mutation 
was found.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-001-0673-3
PMID: 11935339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
