---
pmid: '3895227'
title: Arginine in the leader peptide is required for both import and proteolytic
  cleavage of a mitochondrial precursor.
authors:
- Horwich AL
- Kalousek F
- Rosenberg LE
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1985'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC390471
doi: 10.1073/pnas.82.15.4930
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Arginine in the leader peptide is required for both import and proteolytic cleavage of a mitochondrial precursor.
**Authors:** Horwich AL, Kalousek F, Rosenberg LE
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1985)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.82.15.4930](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.82.15.4930)
**PMC:** [PMC390471](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC390471/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1985 Aug;82(15):4930-3. doi:
10.1073/pnas.82.15.4930.

Arginine in the leader peptide is required for both import and proteolytic 
cleavage of a mitochondrial precursor.

Horwich AL, Kalousek F, Rosenberg LE.

Most mitochondrial proteins are encoded in the nucleus and translated in the 
cytoplasm as larger precursors containing NH2-terminal "leader" peptides, which 
are strikingly basic in overall amino acid composition. Recent experiments 
indicate that these leader peptides are both necessary and sufficient to direct 
post-translational recognition and import of precursors by mitochondria. In this 
report, we demonstrate a critical role for one or more of the basic arginine 
residues in the leader peptide of the subunit precursor for the human 
mitochondrial matrix enzyme, ornithine transcarbamoylase (ornithine 
carbamoyltransferase, carbamoylphosphate: L-ornithine carbamoyltransferase, EC 
2.1.3.3). The distal three of four basic residues, all arginines, in the leader 
peptide of ornithine transcarbamoylase were replaced at once with charge-neutral 
glycine residues. The altered ornithine transcarbamoylase precursor failed to be 
taken up by intact mitochondria in vitro. Moreover, it also failed to be 
proteolytically cleaved upon incubation with a mitochondrial matrix fraction 
containing the Zn2+-dependent protease, which normally cleaves the leader 
peptide.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.82.15.4930
PMCID: PMC390471
PMID: 3895227 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
