---
pmid: '14747722'
title: Expression, purification and crystallization of human 3'-phosphoadenosine-5'-phosphosulfate
  synthetase 1.
authors:
- Harjes S
- Scheidig A
- Bayer P
journal: Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1107/S0907444903027628
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Expression, purification and crystallization of human 3'-phosphoadenosine-5'-phosphosulfate synthetase 1.
**Authors:** Harjes S, Scheidig A, Bayer P
**Journal:** Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1107/S0907444903027628](https://doi.org/10.1107/S0907444903027628)

## Abstract

1. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2004 Feb;60(Pt 2):350-2. doi: 
10.1107/S0907444903027628. Epub 2004 Jan 23.

Expression, purification and crystallization of human 
3'-phosphoadenosine-5'-phosphosulfate synthetase 1.

Harjes S(1), Scheidig A, Bayer P.

Author information:
(1)Molekulare und Strukturelle Biophysik, Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare 
Physiologie, Otto-Hahn-Strasse 11, 44227 Dortmund, Germany. 
stefan.harjes@mpi-dortmund.mpg.de

3'-Phosphoadenosine-5'-phosphosulfate (PAPS) is used to incorporate sulfate into 
biomolecules. The human PAPS synthetase 1 catalyzes two steps leading from 
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and sulfate to PAPS. The ATP sulfurylase domain 
catalyzes the formation of the intermediate adenosine-5'-phosphosulfate (APS). 
The APS kinase domain then adds a phosphate group to the 3'-ribose and releases 
PAPS. In this article, the recombinant expression, purification and 
crystallization of the full-length protein is described. In Escherichia coli the 
protein is only partly soluble and copurifies with GroEL. The pure protein 
migrates as a dimer in gel-filtration chromatography. It is moderately active, 
forming 25 nmol PAPS per minute per milligram. Crystals grow to 100 x 100 x 300 
micro m and diffract to 1.75 A.

DOI: 10.1107/S0907444903027628
PMID: 14747722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
