---
pmid: '18656546'
title: Ubxd1 is a novel co-factor of the human p97 ATPase.
authors:
- Madsen L
- Andersen KM
- Prag S
- Moos T
- Semple CA
- Seeger M
- Hartmann-Petersen R
journal: Int J Biochem Cell Biol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2008.06.008
---

# Ubxd1 is a novel co-factor of the human p97 ATPase.
**Authors:** Madsen L, Andersen KM, Prag S, Moos T, Semple CA, Seeger M, Hartmann-Petersen R
**Journal:** Int J Biochem Cell Biol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.biocel.2008.06.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocel.2008.06.008)

## Abstract

1. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2008;40(12):2927-42. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2008.06.008.  Epub 2008 Jul 5.

Ubxd1 is a novel co-factor of the human p97 ATPase.

Madsen L(1), Andersen KM, Prag S, Moos T, Semple CA, Seeger M, Hartmann-Petersen 
R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Universitetsparken 13, 
DK-2100 Copenhagen Ø, Denmark.

The AAA ATPase complex known as p97 or VCP in mammals and Cdc48 in yeast is 
connected to a multitude of cellular pathways, including membrane fusion, 
protein folding, protein degradation and activation of membrane-bound 
transcription factors. The mechanism by which p97 participates in such a broad 
spectrum of cellular functions appears to be via recruiting certain specific 
co-factors. Here we isolate and characterize the human protein Ubxd1, a novel 
co-factor of p97. We show that Ubxd1 is a stable protein that localizes to the 
cytoplasm and nucleus and is highly enriched in centrosomes. In mice Ubxd1 is 
widely expressed, but especially abundant in brain. Curiously, Ubxd1 does not 
associate with p97 via its UBX domain, but via its PUB domain which binds the 
extreme C-terminus of p97. Phosphorylation of the penultimate tyrosine residue 
in p97 completely abolishes Ubxd1 interaction. Ternary complexes of Ubxd1, p47, 
and p97 were detected in vitro. Inhibition of Ubxd1 expression by siRNA did not 
affect the degradation of bulk protein or a model substrate of the ERAD pathway, 
indicating that Ubxd1 directs p97 activity to specialized functions in vivo.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biocel.2008.06.008
PMID: 18656546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
