---
pmid: '24186333'
title: Binding to E1 and E3 is mutually exclusive for the human autophagy E2 Atg3.
authors:
- Qiu Y
- Hofmann K
- Coats JE
- Schulman BA
- Kaiser SE
journal: Protein Sci
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3843624
doi: 10.1002/pro.2381
---

# Binding to E1 and E3 is mutually exclusive for the human autophagy E2 Atg3.
**Authors:** Qiu Y, Hofmann K, Coats JE, Schulman BA, Kaiser SE
**Journal:** Protein Sci (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pro.2381](https://doi.org/10.1002/pro.2381)
**PMC:** [PMC3843624](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3843624/)

## Abstract

1. Protein Sci. 2013 Dec;22(12):1691-7. doi: 10.1002/pro.2381.

Binding to E1 and E3 is mutually exclusive for the human autophagy E2 Atg3.

Qiu Y(1), Hofmann K, Coats JE, Schulman BA, Kaiser SE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Structural Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, Tennessee.

Ubiquitin-like proteins (UBLs) are activated, transferred and conjugated by 
E1-E2-E3 enzyme cascades. E2 enzymes for canonical UBLs such as ubiquitin, SUMO, 
and NEDD8 typically use common surfaces to bind to E1 and E3 enzymes. Thus, 
canonical E2s are required to disengage from E1 prior to E3-mediated UBL 
ligation. However, E1, E2, and E3 enzymes in the autophagy pathway are 
structurally and functionally distinct from canonical enzymes, and it has not 
been possible to predict whether autophagy UBL cascades are organized according 
to the same principles. Here, we address this question for the pathway mediating 
lipidation of the human autophagy UBL, LC3. We utilized bioinformatic and 
experimental approaches to identify a distinctive region in the autophagy E2, 
Atg3, that binds to the autophagy E3, Atg12∼Atg5-Atg16. Short peptides 
corresponding to this Atg3 sequence inhibit LC3 lipidation in vitro. Notably, 
the E3-binding site on Atg3 overlaps with the binding site for the E1, Atg7. 
Accordingly, the E3 competes with Atg7 for binding to Atg3, implying that Atg3 
likely cycles back and forth between binding to Atg7 for loading with the UBL 
LC3 and binding to E3 to promote LC3 lipidation. The results show that common 
organizational principles underlie canonical and noncanonical UBL transfer 
cascades, but are established through distinct structural features.

© 2013 The Protein Society.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.2381
PMCID: PMC3843624
PMID: 24186333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
