---
pmid: '10222120'
title: Paradoxical locomotor behavior of dopamine D1 receptor transgenic mice.
authors:
- Dracheva S
- Xu M
- Kelley KA
- Haroutunian V
- Holstein GR
- Haun S
- Silverstein JH
- Sealfon SC
journal: Exp Neurol
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/exnr.1999.7037
---

# Paradoxical locomotor behavior of dopamine D1 receptor transgenic mice.
**Authors:** Dracheva S, Xu M, Kelley KA, Haroutunian V, Holstein GR, Haun S, Silverstein JH, Sealfon SC
**Journal:** Exp Neurol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1006/exnr.1999.7037](https://doi.org/10.1006/exnr.1999.7037)

## Abstract

1. Exp Neurol. 1999 May;157(1):169-79. doi: 10.1006/exnr.1999.7037.

Paradoxical locomotor behavior of dopamine D1 receptor transgenic mice.

Dracheva S(1), Xu M, Kelley KA, Haroutunian V, Holstein GR, Haun S, Silverstein 
JH, Sealfon SC.

Author information:
(1)Dr. Arthur M. Fishberg Research Center for Neurobiology, Mount Sinai School 
of Medicine, New York, New York 10029, USA.

The behavioral effects of augmenting dopamine D1 receptor expression in the 
brain were investigated in mice incorporating additional copies of the mouse D1 
receptor gene. Two transgenic lines showed increases in brain D1 receptor 
binding sites, which were greatest in extrastriatal regions. The full D1 agonist 
SKF 81297, when administered systemically to control animals, stimulated a 
dose-dependent increase in locomotor activity. In contrast, in D1 receptor 
overexpressing transgenic mice, this drug caused a marked suppression of 
locomotion due to a decrease in the frequency of movement initiation. 
Amphetamine and cocaine induced comparable locomotor activation in both 
transgenic animals and their control littermates. In the transgenic animals, D1 
agonist-induced rearing and climbing behaviors were suppressed. However, on 
rotarod testing, the agonist-treated transgenic and control mice performed 
comparably, indicating that sensorimotor coordination was unaffected. These 
studies demonstrate that altering the levels of D1 receptor expression reverses 
the effects of D1 agonism on locomotor initiation and rearing.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/exnr.1999.7037
PMID: 10222120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
