---
pmid: '15647280'
title: The mammalian YL1 protein is a shared subunit of the TRRAP/TIP60 histone acetyltransferase
  and SRCAP complexes.
authors:
- Cai Y
- Jin J
- Florens L
- Swanson SK
- Kusch T
- Li B
- Workman JL
- Washburn MP
- Conaway RC
- Conaway JW
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M500001200
---

# The mammalian YL1 protein is a shared subunit of the TRRAP/TIP60 histone acetyltransferase and SRCAP complexes.
**Authors:** Cai Y, Jin J, Florens L, Swanson SK, Kusch T, Li B, Workman JL, Washburn MP, Conaway RC, Conaway JW
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M500001200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M500001200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 8;280(14):13665-70. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M500001200. Epub
2005  Jan 11.

The mammalian YL1 protein is a shared subunit of the TRRAP/TIP60 histone 
acetyltransferase and SRCAP complexes.

Cai Y(1), Jin J, Florens L, Swanson SK, Kusch T, Li B, Workman JL, Washburn MP, 
Conaway RC, Conaway JW.

Author information:
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, Missouri 64110, USA.

The multiprotein mammalian TRRAP/TIP60-containing histone acetyltransferase 
(HAT) complex performs critical functions in a variety of cellular processes 
including transcriptional activation, double strand DNA break repair, and 
apoptosis. We previously isolated the TRRAP/TIP60 complex from HeLa cells (Cai, 
Y., Jin, J., Tomomori-Sato, C., Sato, S., Sorokina, I., Parmely, T. J., Conaway, 
R. C., and Conaway, J. W. (2003) J. Biol. Chem. 278, 42733-42736). Analysis of 
proteins present in preparations of the TRRAP/TIP60 complex led to the 
identification of several new subunits, as well as several potential subunits 
including the YL1 protein. Here we present evidence that the YL1 protein is a 
previously unrecognized subunit of the TRRAP/TIP60 HAT complex. In addition, we 
present evidence that YL1 is also a component of a novel mammalian multiprotein 
complex that includes the SNF2-related helicase SRCAP and resembles the recently 
described Saccharomyces cerevisiae SWR1 chromatin remodeling complex. Taken 
together, our findings identify the YL1 protein as a new subunit of the 
TRRAP/TIP60 HAT complex, and they suggest that YL1 plays multiple roles in 
chromatin modification and remodeling in cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M500001200
PMID: 15647280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
