---
pmid: '23006999'
title: 'Tyrosine phosphorylation of a SNARE protein, syntaxin 17: implications for
  membrane trafficking in the early secretory pathway.'
authors:
- Muppirala M
- Gupta V
- Swarup G
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2012.09.003
---

# Tyrosine phosphorylation of a SNARE protein, syntaxin 17: implications for membrane trafficking in the early secretory pathway.
**Authors:** Muppirala M, Gupta V, Swarup G
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbamcr.2012.09.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbamcr.2012.09.003)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Dec;1823(12):2109-19. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2012.09.003. Epub 2012 Sep 21.

Tyrosine phosphorylation of a SNARE protein, syntaxin 17: implications for 
membrane trafficking in the early secretory pathway.

Muppirala M(1), Gupta V, Swarup G.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research, Uppal Road, Hyderabad 500 007, India.

The T-cell protein tyrosine phosphatase is expressed as two splice variants - 
TC45, a nuclear protein, and TC48, which is localized predominantly in the ER 
(endoplasmic reticulum). Yeast two-hybrid screening revealed direct interaction 
of TC48 with Syntaxin17, a SNARE (soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor 
attachment protein receptor) protein localized predominantly in the ER and to 
some extent in the ER-Golgi intermediate compartment. Syntaxin 17 did not 
interact with TC45. C-terminal 40 amino acids of TC48 were sufficient for 
interaction with syntaxin 17. Overexpressed syntaxin 17 was phosphorylated at 
tyrosine upon pervanadate treatment (a tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor/tyrosine 
kinase activator) of COS-1 cells. Mutational analysis identified Tyr156 in the 
cytoplasmic domain as the major site of phosphorylation. Endogenous syntaxin 17 
was phosphorylated by pervanadate treatment in CHO and MIN6 cells but was not 
phosphorylated in a variety of other cell lines tested. c-Abl was identified as 
one of the kinases, which phosphorylates syntaxin 17 in MIN6 cells. 
Phosphorylation of endogenous and overexpressed syntaxin 17 was reduced in the 
presence of IGF receptor and EGF receptor kinase inhibitors. Serum depletion 
reduced pervanadate-induced phosphorylation of endogenous syntaxin 17. TC48 
coexpression reduced phosphorylation of syntaxin 17 by pervanadate and purified 
TC48 directly dephosphorylated syntaxin 17. β-COP dispersal by overexpressed 
syntaxin 17 was reduced after pervanadate-induced phosphorylation. A 
phospho-mimicking mutant (Y156E) of syntaxin 17 showed reduced interaction with 
COPI vesicles. These results suggest that tyrosine phosphorylation of syntaxin 
17 is likely to have a role in regulating syntaxin 17 dependent membrane 
trafficking in the early secretory pathway.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2012.09.003
PMID: 23006999 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
