---
pmid: '24596097'
title: A disease-causing mutation illuminates the protein membrane topology of the
  kidney-expressed prohibitin homology (PHB) domain protein podocin.
authors:
- Schurek EM
- Völker LA
- Tax J
- Lamkemeyer T
- Rinschen MM
- Ungrue D
- Kratz JE 3rd
- Sirianant L
- Kunzelmann K
- Chalfie M
- Schermer B
- Benzing T
- Höhne M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4036264
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.521773
---

# A disease-causing mutation illuminates the protein membrane topology of the kidney-expressed prohibitin homology (PHB) domain protein podocin.
**Authors:** Schurek EM, Völker LA, Tax J, Lamkemeyer T, Rinschen MM, Ungrue D, Kratz JE 3rd, Sirianant L, Kunzelmann K, Chalfie M, Schermer B, Benzing T, Höhne M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M113.521773](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M113.521773)
**PMC:** [PMC4036264](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4036264/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Apr 18;289(16):11262-11271. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.521773.
Epub  2014 Mar 4.

A disease-causing mutation illuminates the protein membrane topology of the 
kidney-expressed prohibitin homology (PHB) domain protein podocin.

Schurek EM(1), Völker LA(1), Tax J(1), Lamkemeyer T(2), Rinschen MM(1), Ungrue 
D(2), Kratz JE 3rd(3), Sirianant L(4), Kunzelmann K(4), Chalfie M(3), Schermer 
B(5), Benzing T(6), Höhne M(7).

Author information:
(1)Department II of Internal Medicine and Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, 
University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(2)Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Ageing-associated 
Diseases, University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, New York 
10027-6902, and.
(4)Department of Physiology, University of Regensburg, 93053 Regensburg, 
Germany.
(5)Department II of Internal Medicine and Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, 
University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany,; Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular 
Stress Responses in Ageing-associated Diseases, University of Cologne, 50931 
Cologne, Germany,; Systems Biology of Ageing Cologne, University of Cologne, 
50931 Cologne, Germany.
(6)Department II of Internal Medicine and Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, 
University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany,; Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular 
Stress Responses in Ageing-associated Diseases, University of Cologne, 50931 
Cologne, Germany,; Systems Biology of Ageing Cologne, University of Cologne, 
50931 Cologne, Germany,. Electronic address: thomas.benzing@uk-koeln.de.
(7)Systems Biology of Ageing Cologne, University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, 
Germany,; Department II of Internal Medicine and Center for Molecular Medicine 
Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.

Mutations in the NPHS2 gene are a major cause of steroid-resistant nephrotic 
syndrome, a severe human kidney disorder. The NPHS2 gene product podocin is a 
key component of the slit diaphragm cell junction at the kidney filtration 
barrier and part of a multiprotein-lipid supercomplex. A similar complex with 
the podocin ortholog MEC-2 is required for touch sensation in Caenorhabditis 
elegans. Although podocin and MEC-2 are membrane-associated proteins with a 
predicted hairpin-like structure and amino and carboxyl termini facing the 
cytoplasm, this membrane topology has not been convincingly confirmed. One 
particular mutation that causes kidney disease in humans (podocin(P118L)) has 
also been identified in C. elegans in genetic screens for touch insensitivity 
(MEC-2(P134S)). Here we show that both mutant proteins, in contrast to the 
wild-type variants, are N-glycosylated because of the fact that the mutant C 
termini project extracellularly. Podocin(P118L) and MEC-2(P134S) did not 
fractionate in detergent-resistant membrane domains. Moreover, mutant podocin 
failed to activate the ion channel TRPC6, which is part of the 
multiprotein-lipid supercomplex, indicative of the fact that cholesterol 
recruitment to the ion channels, an intrinsic function of both proteins, 
requires C termini facing the cytoplasmic leaflet of the plasma membrane. Taken 
together, this study demonstrates that the carboxyl terminus of podocin/MEC-2 
has to be placed at the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane to mediate 
cholesterol binding and contribute to ion channel activity, a prerequisite for 
mechanosensation and the integrity of the kidney filtration barrier.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.521773
PMCID: PMC4036264
PMID: 24596097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
