---
pmid: '31867824'
title: CrRLK1L receptor-like kinases HERK1 and ANJEA are female determinants of pollen
  tube reception.
authors:
- Galindo-Trigo S
- Blanco-Touriñán N
- DeFalco TA
- Wells ES
- Gray JE
- Zipfel C
- Smith LM
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2020'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC7001495
doi: 10.15252/embr.201948466
---

# CrRLK1L receptor-like kinases HERK1 and ANJEA are female determinants of pollen tube reception.
**Authors:** Galindo-Trigo S, Blanco-Touriñán N, DeFalco TA, Wells ES, Gray JE, Zipfel C, Smith LM
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2020)
**DOI:** [10.15252/embr.201948466](https://doi.org/10.15252/embr.201948466)
**PMC:** [PMC7001495](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7001495/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2020 Feb 5;21(2):e48466. doi: 10.15252/embr.201948466. Epub 2019 Dec
 23.

CrRLK1L receptor-like kinases HERK1 and ANJEA are female determinants of pollen 
tube reception.

Galindo-Trigo S(1)(2), Blanco-Touriñán N(3), DeFalco TA(4)(5), Wells ES(1), Gray 
JE(6), Zipfel C(4)(5), Smith LM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal and Plant Sciences and the Plant Production and 
Protection Centre, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.
(2)Department of Biosciences, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Plantas, Consejo Superior de 
Investigaciones Científicas, Universidad Politécnica de Valencia, Valencia, 
Spain.
(4)The Sainsbury Laboratory, University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK.
(5)Department of Molecular and Cellular Plant Physiology, Zurich-Basel Plant 
Science Center, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(6)Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield, 
Sheffield, UK.

Communication between the gametophytes is vital for angiosperm fertilisation. 
Multiple CrRLK1L-type receptor kinases prevent premature pollen tube burst, 
while another CrRLK1L protein, FERONIA (FER), is required for pollen tube 
reception in the female gametophyte. We report here the identification of two 
additional CrRLK1L homologues, HERCULES RECEPTOR KINASE 1 (HERK1) and ANJEA 
(ANJ), which act redundantly to promote pollen tube growth arrest at the 
synergid cells. HERK1 and ANJ localise to the filiform apparatus of the synergid 
cells in unfertilised ovules, and in herk1 anj mutants, a majority of ovules 
remain unfertilised due to pollen tube overgrowth, together indicating that 
HERK1 and ANJ act as female determinants for fertilisation. As in fer mutants, 
the synergid cell-specific, endomembrane protein NORTIA (NTA) is not relocalised 
after pollen tube reception; however, unlike fer mutants, reactive oxygen 
species levels are unaffected in herk1 anj double mutants. Both ANJ and HERK1 
associate with FER and its proposed co-receptor LORELEI (LRE) in planta. 
Together, our data indicate that HERK1 and ANJ act with FER to mediate 
female-male gametophyte interactions during plant fertilisation.

© 2019 The Authors.

DOI: 10.15252/embr.201948466
PMCID: PMC7001495
PMID: 31867824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Communication between the gametophytes is vital for angiosperm fertilisation. Multiple Cr RLK1L‐type receptor kinases prevent premature pollen tube burst, while another Cr RLK1L protein, FERONIA (FER), is required for pollen tube reception in the female gametophyte. We report here the identification of two additional Cr RLK1L homologues, HERCULES RECEPTOR KINASE 1 (HERK1) and ANJEA (ANJ), which act redundantly to promote pollen tube growth arrest at the synergid cells. HERK1 and ANJ localise to the filiform apparatus of the synergid cells in unfertilised ovules, and in herk1 anj mutants, a majority of ovules remain unfertilised due to pollen tube overgrowth, together indicating that HERK1 and ANJ act as female determinants for fertilisation. As in fer mutants, the synergid cell‐specific, endomembrane protein NORTIA (NTA) is not relocalised after pollen tube reception; however, unlike fer mutants, reactive oxygen species levels are unaffected in herk1 anj double mutants. Both ANJ and HERK1 associate with FER and its proposed co‐receptor LORELEI (LRE) in planta . Together, our data indicate that HERK1 and ANJ act with FER to mediate female–male gametophyte interactions during plant fertilisation.

Introduction

Fertilisation is a critical point in the life cycle of any sexually reproducing organism. In flowering plants, gametes are enclosed in gametophytes, multicellular structures that develop in the reproductive organs of the flower. The pollen grain constitutes the male gametophyte, with each grain generating a pollen tube in the form of a rapidly growing cellular protrusion that delivers the male gametes, or sperm cells, through the style tissues into the ovule. Female gametophytes develop inside the ovule and contain the female gametes within an embryo sac; the egg cell and central cell. The process of double fertilisation in angiosperms consists of the fusion of a sperm cell with each of the female gametes. If fertilisation is successful, the embryo and endosperm develop from the egg cell and central cell fertilisations, respectively. For double fertilisation to occur, the male and female gametophytes must engage in a molecular dialog that controls pollen tube attraction towards the ovule entrance, or micropyle, the arrest of pollen tube growth and the release of the sperm cells in the correct location within the ovule (see Refs 1 , 2 for a detailed review).

The synergid cells occupy the micropylar portion of the female gametophyte and aid communication between the gametophytes. As such, their cytoplasm is densely occupied by endomembrane compartments, reflective of a highly active secretion system generating messenger molecules 3 . The filiform apparatus appears at the outermost pole, a thickened and intricate cell wall structure that represents the first contact point between female and male gametophytes prior to fertilisation 4 . Synergid cells secrete small cysteine‐rich LURE and XIUQIU peptides to guide pollen tubes towards the embryo sac 5 , 6 . AtLURE1 peptides are sensed by two pairs of pollen‐specific receptor‐like kinases (RLKs), MALE DISCOVERER 1 (MDIS1) and MDIS1‐INTERACTING RLK 1 (MIK1), and POLLEN‐SPECIFIC RECEPTOR KINASE 6 (PRK6) and PRK3 in Arabidopsis 7 , 8 . These RLKs bind AtLURE1 peptides through their extracellular domains at the growing tip of the pollen tubes, promoting their exit from the transmitting tract in a species‐specific manner 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 . XIUQIU peptides, on the other hand, attract pollen tubes towards the synergid cells regardless of the species, and signal through a pollen tube receptor that is yet to be described 6 .

Within the expanded family of RLKs in Arabidopsis , the Catharanthus roseus RLK1‐like ( Cr RLK1L) subfamily has been demonstrated to play several roles during fertilisation (see Ref. 10 for a detailed review). Two pairs of functionally redundant Cr RLK1Ls are integral in controlling pollen tip growth; ANXUR1 and 2 (ANX1/2), and BUDDHA'S PAPER SEAL 1 and 2 (BUPS1/2), heterodimerise and ensure pollen tube growth by sensing of two autocrine secreted peptides belonging to the RAPID ALKALINIZATION FACTOR (RALF) family, RALF4 and RALF19 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 . A fifth Cr RLK1L protein, ERULUS (ERU), has also been implicated in male‐determined pollen tube growth via regulation of Ca 2+ oscillations 15 . The Cr RLK1L protein FERONIA (FER) accumulates in the filiform apparatus of the synergids where it functions as a female determinant of pollen tube reception and subsequent sperm cell release 16 , 17 . Although no extracellular ligand has been identified for FER in a reproductive context, there is evidence for FER activation of a synergid‐specific signalling cascade upon pollen tube arrival. This signalling pathway involves the glycosyl‐phosphatidylinositol (GPI)‐anchored protein LORELEI (LRE) 18 , 19 , activation of NADPH oxidases to generate reactive oxygen species (ROS) in the micropyle 20 , generation of specific Ca 2+ signatures in the synergid cytoplasm 21 , and relocalisation of the Mildew resistance locus O (MLO)‐like NORTIA (NTA), an endomembrane compartment protein that affects pollen tube‐induced Ca 2+ signatures in the synergids 21 , 22 , 23 .

Cr RLK1L receptor kinases have also been assigned a number of other functions beyond fertilisation. For example, cell elongation during vegetative growth requires several members of the Cr RLK1L family; HERCULES RECEPTOR KINASE 1 and 2 (HERK1 and 2), THESEUS1 (THE1) and FER 24 , 25 . FER has also been linked to pathogen responses 26 , while THE1 and other Cr RLK1L receptors detect cell wall integrity 27 .

Many questions remain about the nature of the communication between gametophytes that controls sperm cell release, and Cr RLK1Ls FER, ANX1/2 and BUPS1/2 are potential receptor candidates to mediate this dialog. Here, we report the characterisation of Cr RLK1Ls HERK1 and ANJEA (AT5G59700; ANJ) as female determinants of pollen tube reception in Arabidopsis . We show that HERK1 and ANJ act redundantly at the filiform apparatus of the synergids to control pollen tube growth arrest, representing two new mediators of gametophytic communication and therefore expanding the female‐specific toolbox required for fertilisation.

Discussion

Successful reproduction in angiosperms relies on tightly controlled communication between gametophytes through the exchange of chemical and mechanical cues 1 . Here, we describe the role of the RLKs HERK1 and ANJ in early stages of fertilisation in Arabidopsis . HERK1 and ANJ are widely expressed in female reproductive tissues including the synergid cells of ovules, where they are polarly localised to the filiform apparatus. herk1 anj plants fail to produce seeds from most ovules due to a maternally derived pollen tube overgrowth defect. As female gametophytes develop normally in herk1 anj mutants, pollen tube overgrowth is likely due to impaired signalling. To clarify the position of HERK1/ANJ in relation to the previously characterised signalling elements of the pollen tube reception pathway, we have shown that NTA relocalisation after pollen tube reception is impaired in herk1 anj as described for FER, whereas ROS production at the micropylar entrance of ovules prior to pollen arrival is not affected. Interactions between HERK1/ANJ, FER and LRE lead us to propose receptor complexes containing HERK1‐LRE‐FER and ANJ‐LRE‐FER at the filiform apparatus.

Associated with diverse hormonal, developmental and stress responses, FER is regarded as a connective hub of cellular responses through its interactions with multiple partners, including small secreted peptides, cell wall components, other RLKs, GPI‐anchored proteins and ROPGEFs 18 , 38 , 39 , 40 , 41 , 42 . As related members of the Cr RLK1L family, HERK1 and ANJ have the potential to perform similar roles to FER, and as reported here control pollen tube rupture. Interestingly, control of tip growth in pollen tubes depends on two redundant pairs of Cr RLK1Ls: ANX1 and ANX2; and BUPS1 and BUPS2 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 . ANX1/2 and BUPS1/2 form ANX‐BUPS heterodimers to control pollen tube growth by sensing autocrine RALF signals 12 . In turn, ovular RALF34 efficiently induces pollen tube rupture at the pollen tip, likely through competition with autocrine RALF4/19 12 . LEUCINE‐RICH REPEAT EXTENSINS (LRXs) constitute an additional layer of regulation during pollen tube growth 14 . LRXs interact physically with RALF4/19 and are thought to facilitate RALF sensing during pollen tube growth [ 14 , 43 , preprint: 44 ]. Here, we propose that female control of pollen tube reception is executed by an analogous mechanism, where Cr RLK1L heterocomplexes of FER with either HERK1 or ANJ potentially sense pollen tube‐derived cues to trigger the female gametophyte to induce pollen tube rupture. Given the multiple Cr RLK1L‐RALF interactions identified to date 12 , 14 , 38 , 45 , pollen tube‐derived RALF signals constitute a potential candidate to induce synergid responses to pollen tube perception. RALF4/19 are continuously secreted at the growing tip of the pollen tube and, while their involvement in pollen growth has been thoroughly studied 12 , 14 , their possible dual role as synergid‐signalling activators remains unexplored. Disruption of synergid autocrine RALF signalling upon pollen arrival constitutes another possible model, comparable to that hypothesised for RALF34 and RALF4/19 during pollen growth 12 . Additionally, LRXs could facilitate RALF perception at the synergid cell to control pollen tube reception.

A second category of putative pollen tube cues involves changes in cell wall properties of the filiform apparatus. As a polarised fast‐growing structure, pollen tubes present cell walls that differ from stationary cell types, with particular emphasis on the growing tip where active cell wall remodelling rapidly takes place 46 . When the growing tip reaches the filiform apparatus, it temporarily arrests growth, subsequently growing along the receptive synergid cell prior to rupture 21 . The prolonged direct physical contact between the growing tip and the filiform apparatus likely allows a direct exchange of signals which could result in modification of the filiform apparatus cell wall structure. Cr RLK1L receptors present an extracellular malectin‐like domain 47 , a tandem organisation of two malectin domains with structural similarity to the di‐glucose binding malectin protein 48 . The malectin di‐glucose binding residues are not conserved in the malectin‐like domains of ANX1/2 according to structural data 49 , 50 . However, direct interactions of FER, ANX1/2 and BUPS1/2 malectin‐like domains with the pectin building block polygalacturonic acid have been recently reported [ 39 , preprint: 51 ]. An extracellular domain anchored to cell wall components and a cytoplasmic kinase domain capable of inducing downstream signalling make FER and the other Cr RLK1L proteins a putative link between cell wall status and cellular responses 52 . Involvement of FER in root mechanosensing provides additional support for this hypothesis 53 . Therefore, FER and the related receptors HERK1 and ANJ may be fulfilling a cell wall integrity surveillance function in the filiform apparatus, triggering cellular responses upon changes in the composition or mechanical forces registered at this specialised cell wall structure.

Receptor complexes are a common feature in signal transduction in multiple cellular processes 54 , 55 , 56 . Our genetic and biochemical results support possible HERK1‐LRE‐FER/ANJ‐LRE‐FER heterocomplexes (Figs 5 and 6 ). LRE and related proteins form complexes with RLKs FER, FLS2 and EFR, making them versatile co‐receptors that mediate signal perception in multiple processes 18 , 34 . LRE functions in the maternal control of fertilisation and early seed development 31 , 57 , whereas its homolog LLG1 is restricted to vegetative growth and plant–pathogen interactions 34 . Uncharacterised LLG2 and LLG3 show pollen‐specific expression in microarray data and therefore constitute likely candidates as ANX1/2 and BUPS1/2 receptor complex partners to control pollen tube growth. LRE proteins are thought to stabilise their receptor partners in the plasma membrane and act as direct co‐receptors for the extracellular cues sensed by the RLK 18 , 35 . As we found that FER localisation in the filiform apparatus is unaltered in lre‐5 plants, with HERK1/ANJ localisation also not affected, our results do not support the role previously reported for LRE as a chaperone for FER localisation in synergid cells 18 . A strict requirement for LRE as a FER chaperone in the synergid cells has also been challenged by a previous report evidencing that the fertility defect in lre female gametophytes could be partially rescued by pollen‐expressed LRE 58 . In the absence of synergid‐expressed LRE, the authors speculate that sufficient FER is still localised to the filiform apparatus to interact with LRE on the pollen tube plasma membrane, demonstrating a more minor role for LRE intracellular activity in the synergid cells to correctly localise FER 58 . We hypothesise that LRE could act as co‐receptor for FER and HERK1 or ANJ at the filiform apparatus, forming tripartite HERK1‐LRE‐FER or ANJ‐LRE‐FER complexes that sense pollen‐derived ligands such as RALF peptides or cell wall components, in a mechanism analogous to that described for pollen tube growth through BUPS1/2‐ANX1/2‐LLG2/3‐RALF4/19 signalling. Further verification of the protein–protein interactions described here could be done via Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) analysis, cryo‐electron microscopy 59 , or super‐resolution microscopy techniques such as Stimulated Emission‐Depletion Measurements (STED 60 ).

Confirmation of the role of Cr RLK1Ls and LRE proteins as RALF peptide sensors has been recently obtained through an elegant combination of crystallographic and biochemical techniques 35 . By solving the structure of a FER‐LLG1‐RALF23 complex, Xiao et al 35 have demonstrated that (i) LRE proteins play a central role in the recognition of RALFs; (ii) the N‐terminal region of a subgroup of RALFs is sufficient to induce the interaction between LRE proteins and FER; (iii) while LLG1‐3 proteins are capable of binding RALF23, interaction between LRE and RALF23 was not detected; and (iv) specific amino acid differences between LRE and LLG1‐3 proteins are responsible for such affinity differences. These findings reinforced the hypothesis that signalling specificity can be achieved by the combinatorial action of different Cr RLK1Ls, LRE proteins, RALFs and their respective expression patterns and affinities towards each other. Pollen tube reception provides another layer of complexity to this scenario, as two independent cellular systems come into contact, with two putative RALF‐sensing complexes (BUPS1/2‐ANX1/2‐LLG2/3; HERK1/ANJ‐FER‐LRE) and RALF peptides secreted from both the pollen tube tip and the female gametophyte are brought together. The differences in affinity towards certain RALFs observed between LRE and LLG1‐3 allows us to speculate that the pollen‐derived RALF4/19 may not activate HERK1/ANJ‐FER‐LRE signalling, and rather, this activation may instead depend on maternally derived RALFs. Detailed dissection of the affinity of LRE towards pollen and ovule‐derived RALFs will shed light on how pollen tube reception is mediated. Additionally, while the molecular nature of the tripartite Cr RLK1L‐LRE protein–RALF complex is now well understood, data presented in this report and previous studies point at Cr RLK1L‐to‐ Cr RLK1L direct interactions 12 , for which structural data remains elusive. It will be necessary to address how these higher order complexes are formed, whether there are tripartite complexes composed by two Cr RLK1Ls and a single LRE protein, or whether two Cr RLK1L‐LRE protein heterodimers dimerise to form a functional signalling unit.

Our results indicate that HERK1, ANJ and LRE are not required to generate the ROS‐enriched environment in the micropyle of mature ovules under our experimental conditions, while FER is involved in this process (Fig 4 20 ). The role of FER in ROS production has also been characterised in root hairs, where FER activates NADPH oxidase activity via ROPGEF and RAC/ROP GTPase signalling, ensuring root hair growth stability 40 . Micropylar ROS accumulation prior to pollen tube arrival depends on NADPH oxidase activity and FER, suggesting a similar pathway to root hairs may take place in synergid cells 20 . This evidence places FER upstream of ROS production, whereas FER, HERK1/ANJ and LRE would function upstream of pollen tube reception. One possible explanation is that FER is a dual regulator in synergid cells, promoting ROS production and regulating pollen tube reception, while HERK1/ANJ and LRE functions are restricted to the latter under our environmental conditions. Kinase‐inactive mutants of FER rescue the pollen tube overgrowth defect in fer mutants, but cannot restore the sensitivity to exogenous RALF1 in root elongation 61 . These recent findings support multiple signal transduction mechanisms for FER in a context‐dependent manner 61 . It would thus be informative to test whether the kinase‐inactive version of FER can restore the ovular ROS production defect in fer mutants. The use of genetic ROS reporters expressed in synergid cells and pollen tubes in live imaging experiments would allow us to observe specific changes in ROS production at the different stages of pollen tube perception in ovules, as performed with Ca 2+ sensors 21 , 62 , 63 . ROS production and Ca 2+ pump activation in plant cells have been linked during plant–pathogen interactions and are thought to take place during gametophyte communication 64 , 65 . Thus, given the dynamic changes in Ca 2+ during the different stages of pollen tube reception in synergids and pollen, it is likely that ROS production variations also take place in parallel. Studying ROS production profiles during pollen perception in the fer‐4 , herk1 anj and lre‐5 backgrounds would provide the resolution required to link these receptors to dynamic ROS regulation during pollen reception. Induction of specific Ca 2+ signatures in the synergids upon pollen tube arrival is dependent on FER, LRE and NTA 21 . Given that NTA relocalisation after pollen reception depends on functional HERK1/ANJ and NTA is involved in modulating Ca 2+ signatures in the synergids, it is possible that HERK1 and ANJ might also be required for Ca 2+ signalling during pollen perception.

Downstream signalling after pollen tube reception in the synergid cells likely involves interactions of HERK1, ANJ and FER with cytoplasmic components through their kinase domain. Our results indicate that the kinase activity of HERK1/ANJ is not required for controlling pollen tube rupture ( Appendix Fig S4B ), as has been reported for FER 29 . The fer‐1 pollen tube overgrowth defect could also be rescued with a chimeric protein comprising the FER extracellular domain and the HERK1 kinase domain 29 . This implies that the FER and HERK1/ANJ kinase domains are likely redundant in controlling pollen tube reception and may transduce the signal in a similar manner. Testing whether FER‐dependent induction of ROS production in the micropyle is also independent of its kinase activity and whether the HERK1/ANJ kinase domains can also substitute for the FER kinase domain in this process would provide insight into how this signalling network is organised.

Our results suggest a model where FER and LRE form functionally redundant complexes with HERK1 and ANJ in the plasma membrane of synergid cells (Fig 6 A and B). These complexes could sense maternally or paternally derived RALF peptides as has been characterised for analogous protein complexes involved in pollen tube growth. Alternatively, the HERK1/ANJ‐FER‐LRE complexes may sense changes in cell wall integrity through mechanosensing. As kinase‐inactive versions of FER can rescue the pollen tube reception phenotype in fer , and kinase‐inactive HERK1 or ANJ can likewise complement a herk1‐1 anj‐1 mutant, we envisage four possible signalling scenarios (Fig 6 C). Firstly, the kinase activity of at least one Cr RLK1L receptor may be required for activation of downstream signalling through phosphorylation. Secondly, the kinase activity of none of the Cr RLK1L receptors may be required if they act as a scaffold to recruit cytoplasmic kinases. Thirdly, additional receptor kinases (either Cr RLK1L or other families) may be present in the complex and be phosphorylated by either FER, or HERK1/ANJ to then activate downstream signalling. And lastly, if we combine scenarios two and three, additional receptor kinases along with the HERK1/ANJ‐FER‐LRE complex could recruit cytoplasmic kinases to trigger downstream events. Thus, a number of scenarios exist for the function of HERK and ANJ in pollen tube reception.

This study provides evidence for the involvement of multiple Cr RLK1L detectors of pollen tube arrival at the female gametophyte, implicating HERK1 and ANJ as co‐receptors of FER. The action of multiple Cr RLK1L proteins at the filiform apparatus highlights the relevance of the Cr RLK1Ls in controlling reproduction in flowering plants. Future research in this field will undoubtedly provide new views on how these RLKs integrate pollen‐derived cues to ensure tight control of fertilisation.
