---
pmid: '17482557'
title: Effect of vitamin B6 availability on serine hydroxymethyltransferase in MCF-7
  cells.
authors:
- Perry C
- Yu S
- Chen J
- Matharu KS
- Stover PJ
journal: Arch Biochem Biophys
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1976282
doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2007.04.005
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Effect of vitamin B6 availability on serine hydroxymethyltransferase in MCF-7 cells.
**Authors:** Perry C, Yu S, Chen J, Matharu KS, Stover PJ
**Journal:** Arch Biochem Biophys (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.abb.2007.04.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.abb.2007.04.005)
**PMC:** [PMC1976282](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1976282/)

## Abstract

1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2007 Jun 1;462(1):21-7. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2007.04.005. 
Epub 2007 Apr 20.

Effect of vitamin B6 availability on serine hydroxymethyltransferase in MCF-7 
cells.

Perry C(1), Yu S, Chen J, Matharu KS, Stover PJ.

Author information:
(1)Cornell University, Division of Nutritional Science, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.

Folate-activated one-carbon units are derived from serine through the activity 
of the pyridoxal-phosphate (PLP)-dependent isozymes of serine 
hydroxymethyltransferase (SHMT). The effect of vitamin B(6) availability on the 
activity and expression of the human mitochondrial and cytoplasmic SHMT isozymes 
was investigated in human MCF-7 cells. Cells were cultured for 6 months in 
vitamin B(6) replete (4.9 microM pyridoxine) minimal essential medium (alphaMEM) 
or vitamin B(6)-deficient medium containing 49, 4.9 or 0.49 nM pyridoxine. Total 
cellular PLP levels and SHMT activity were reduced 72% and 7%, respectively, 
when medium pyridoxine was decreased from 4.9 microM to 49 nM. Cells cultured in 
medium containing 4.9 nM pyridoxine exhibited 75%, 27% and 60% reduced levels of 
PLP, SHMT activity and S-adenosylmethionine, respectively, compared to cells 
cultured in alphaMEM. Cytoplasmic SHMT activity and protein levels, but not mRNA 
levels, were decreased in cells cultured in vitamin B(6) deficient medium, 
whereas mitochondrial SHMT activity and protein levels were less sensitive to 
vitamin B(6) availability. PLP bound to cytoplasmic SHMT with a K(d)=850 nM, a 
value two orders of magnitude lower than previously reported for the bovine 
cytoplasmic SHMT isozyme. Collectively, these data indicate that vitamin B(6) 
restriction decreases the activity and stability of SHMT, and that the 
cytoplasmic isozyme is more sensitive to vitamin B(6) deficiency than the 
mitochondrial isozyme in MCF-7 cells.

DOI: 10.1016/j.abb.2007.04.005
PMCID: PMC1976282
PMID: 17482557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
