---
pmid: '17184779'
title: Identification of differential proteins in nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells with
  p53 silence by proteome analysis.
authors:
- Sun Y
- Yi H
- Zhang PF
- Li MY
- Li C
- Li F
- Peng F
- Feng XP
- Yang YX
- Yang F
- Xiao ZQ
- Chen ZC
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2006.12.008
---

# Identification of differential proteins in nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells with p53 silence by proteome analysis.
**Authors:** Sun Y, Yi H, Zhang PF, Li MY, Li C, Li F, Peng F, Feng XP, Yang YX, Yang F, Xiao ZQ, Chen ZC
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2006.12.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2006.12.008)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2007 Jan 9;581(1):131-9. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2006.12.008. Epub 
2006 Dec 13.

Identification of differential proteins in nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells with 
p53 silence by proteome analysis.

Sun Y(1), Yi H, Zhang PF, Li MY, Li C, Li F, Peng F, Feng XP, Yang YX, Yang F, 
Xiao ZQ, Chen ZC.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Cancer Proteomics of Chinese Ministry of Health, Xiangya 
Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan Province, China.

Although mutation of p53 tumor-suppressor gene is rare in nasopharyngeal 
carcinoma (NPC), NPC has a high frequency of overexpression of p53 protein. 
There seem to be complex mechanisms of inactivation and stabilization of p53 in 
NPC. To detect proteins associated with the function of p53 in high throughout 
screening, we succeeded in establishing p53 knockdown human NPC CNE2 cell line 
(CNE2sip53) using stable RNA interference, and compared the proteomic changes 
between CNE2sip53 and control cell line CNE2/pSUPER using two-dimensional gel 
electrophoresis. Twenty-two differentially expressed proteins between the two 
cell lines were identified by both matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization 
time-of-flight mass spectrometry and electrospray ionization tandem mass 
spectrometry, some of which are known to be associated with the p53 function 
(HSP27, hnRNP K, 14-3-3sigma, etc.), and others may be novel proteins associated 
with p53 function (eIF4B, TPT1, hnRNP H3, SFRS1 etc.). Furthermore, several 
differential proteins including HSP27, HSP70, GRP75 and GRP78 were verified as 
p53 interacting proteins in NPC by immunoprecipitation and Western blot 
analysis, and the suppression of HSP27 expression by HSP27 antisense 
oligonucleotides could decrease the p53 protein level. Our data suggest that 
these differential proteins may be associated with the function of p53 in NPC, 
and provide new clues to elucidate the mechanisms of inactivation and 
stabilization of p53 in NPC.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2006.12.008
PMID: 17184779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
