---
pmid: '25745174'
title: Protein targeting. Structure of the Get3 targeting factor in complex with its
  membrane protein cargo.
authors:
- Mateja A
- Paduch M
- Chang HY
- Szydlowska A
- Kossiakoff AA
- Hegde RS
- Keenan RJ
journal: Science
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4413028
doi: 10.1126/science.1261671
---

# Protein targeting. Structure of the Get3 targeting factor in complex with its membrane protein cargo.
**Authors:** Mateja A, Paduch M, Chang HY, Szydlowska A, Kossiakoff AA, Hegde RS, Keenan RJ
**Journal:** Science (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1261671](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1261671)
**PMC:** [PMC4413028](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4413028/)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2015 Mar 6;347(6226):1152-5. doi: 10.1126/science.1261671.

Protein targeting. Structure of the Get3 targeting factor in complex with its 
membrane protein cargo.

Mateja A(1), Paduch M(1), Chang HY(1), Szydlowska A(1), Kossiakoff AA(1), Hegde 
RS(2), Keenan RJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Chicago, 
929 East 57th Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
(2)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Francis Crick Avenue, Cambridge CB2 0QH, 
UK. rhegde@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk bkeenan@uchicago.edu.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Chicago, 
929 East 57th Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. rhegde@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk 
bkeenan@uchicago.edu.

Tail-anchored (TA) proteins are a physiologically important class of membrane 
proteins targeted to the endoplasmic reticulum by the conserved guided-entry of 
TA proteins (GET) pathway. During transit, their hydrophobic transmembrane 
domains (TMDs) are chaperoned by the cytosolic targeting factor Get3, but the 
molecular nature of the functional Get3-TA protein targeting complex remains 
unknown. We reconstituted the physiologic assembly pathway for a functional 
targeting complex and showed that it comprises a TA protein bound to a Get3 
homodimer. Crystal structures of Get3 bound to different TA proteins showed an 
α-helical TMD occupying a hydrophobic groove that spans the Get3 homodimer. Our 
data elucidate the mechanism of TA protein recognition and shielding by Get3 and 
suggest general principles of hydrophobic domain chaperoning by cellular 
targeting factors.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1261671
PMCID: PMC4413028
PMID: 25745174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
