---
pmid: '10611343'
title: Engagement of p75/AIRM1 or CD33 inhibits the proliferation of normal or leukemic
  myeloid cells.
authors:
- Vitale C
- Romagnani C
- Falco M
- Ponte M
- Vitale M
- Moretta A
- Bacigalupo A
- Moretta L
- Mingari MC
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: pdf_partial
pmcid: PMC24778
doi: 10.1073/pnas.96.26.15091
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Engagement of p75/AIRM1 or CD33 inhibits the proliferation of normal or leukemic myeloid cells.
**Authors:** Vitale C, Romagnani C, Falco M, Ponte M, Vitale M, Moretta A, Bacigalupo A, Moretta L, Mingari MC
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.96.26.15091](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.96.26.15091)
**PMC:** [PMC24778](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC24778/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Dec 21;96(26):15091-6. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.96.26.15091.

Engagement of p75/AIRM1 or CD33 inhibits the proliferation of normal or leukemic 
myeloid cells.

Vitale C(1), Romagnani C, Falco M, Ponte M, Vitale M, Moretta A, Bacigalupo A, 
Moretta L, Mingari MC.

Author information:
(1)Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Cancro, 16132 Genova, Italy.

P75/AIRM1 is a recently identified surface molecule that belongs to the 
sialoadhesin family and displays homology with the myeloid cell antigen CD33. In 
lymphoid cells, p75/AIRM1 is confined to natural killer cells and mediates 
inhibition of their cytolytic activity. In this study, we show that p75/AIRM1 is 
also expressed by cells of the myelomonocytic cell lineage, in which it appears 
at a later stage as compared with CD33. In vitro proliferation and 
differentiation of cord blood-derived CD34(+) cells (induced by stem cell factor 
and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor) were consistently 
inhibited by the addition of anti-p75/AIRM1 mAb. Engagement of CD33 led to 
inhibition in some experiments. A sharp decrease of cell proliferation/survival 
was detected in all three p75/AIRM1+ chronic myeloid leukemias analyzed when 
cultured in the presence of either anti-p75/AIRM1 or anti-CD33 mAbs. Thus, the 
present study suggests that p75/AIRM1 and CD33 may play a regulatory role in 
normal myelopoiesis and may be viewed as suitable target molecules to counteract 
the proliferation/survival of chronic myeloid leukemias.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.96.26.15091
PMCID: PMC24778
PMID: 10611343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Preparing to download ... HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
