---
pmid: '29042459'
title: Environmental and Genetic Factors Regulating Localization of the Plant Plasma
  Membrane H(+)-ATPase.
authors:
- Haruta M
- Tan LX
- Bushey DB
- Swanson SJ
- Sussman MR
journal: Plant Physiol
year: '2018'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC5761788
doi: 10.1104/pp.17.01126
---

# Environmental and Genetic Factors Regulating Localization of the Plant Plasma Membrane H(+)-ATPase.
**Authors:** Haruta M, Tan LX, Bushey DB, Swanson SJ, Sussman MR
**Journal:** Plant Physiol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1104/pp.17.01126](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.17.01126)
**PMC:** [PMC5761788](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5761788/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Physiol. 2018 Jan;176(1):364-377. doi: 10.1104/pp.17.01126. Epub 2017
Oct  17.

Environmental and Genetic Factors Regulating Localization of the Plant Plasma 
Membrane H(+)-ATPase.

Haruta M(1)(2), Tan LX(3), Bushey DB(4), Swanson SJ(5), Sussman MR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, 
Wisconsin 53706 miyoshi.haruta@gmail.com msussman@wisc.edu.
(2)Biotechnology Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 
53706.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 53706.
(4)Janelia Research Campus, HHMI, Ashburn, Virginia 20147.
(5)Department of Botany, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 
53706.

A P-type H+-ATPase is the primary transporter that converts ATP to 
electrochemical energy at the plasma membrane of higher plants. Its product, the 
proton-motive force, is composed of an electrical potential and a pH gradient. 
Many studies have demonstrated that this proton-motive force not only drives the 
secondary transporters required for nutrient uptake, but also plays a direct 
role in regulating cell expansion. Here, we have generated a transgenic 
Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) plant expressing H+-ATPase isoform 2 (AHA2) 
that is translationally fused with a fluorescent protein and examined its 
cellular localization by live-cell microscopy. Using a 3D imaging approach with 
seedlings grown for various times under a variety of light intensities, we 
demonstrate that AHA2 localization at the plasma membrane of root cells requires 
light. In dim light conditions, AHA2 is found in intracellular compartments, in 
addition to the plasma membrane. This localization profile was age-dependent and 
specific to cell types found in the transition zone located between the meristem 
and elongation zones. The accumulation of AHA2 in intracellular compartments is 
consistent with reduced H+ secretion near the transition zone and the 
suppression of root growth. By examining AHA2 localization in a knockout mutant 
of a receptor protein kinase, FERONIA, we found that the intracellular 
accumulation of AHA2 in the transition zone is dependent on a functional 
FERONIA-dependent inhibitory response in root elongation. Overall, this study 
provides a molecular underpinning for understanding the genetic, environmental, 
and developmental factors influencing root growth via localization of the plasma 
membrane H+-ATPase.

© 2018 American Society of Plant Biologists. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1104/pp.17.01126
PMCID: PMC5761788
PMID: 29042459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

A P-type H + -ATPase is the primary transporter that converts ATP to electrochemical energy at the plasma membrane of higher plants. Its product, the proton-motive force, is composed of an electrical potential and a pH gradient. Many studies have demonstrated that this proton-motive force not only drives the secondary transporters required for nutrient uptake, but also plays a direct role in regulating cell expansion. Here, we have generated a transgenic Arabidopsis ( Arabidopsis thaliana ) plant expressing H + -ATPase isoform 2 (AHA2) that is translationally fused with a fluorescent protein and examined its cellular localization by live-cell microscopy. Using a 3D imaging approach with seedlings grown for various times under a variety of light intensities, we demonstrate that AHA2 localization at the plasma membrane of root cells requires light. In dim light conditions, AHA2 is found in intracellular compartments, in addition to the plasma membrane. This localization profile was age-dependent and specific to cell types found in the transition zone located between the meristem and elongation zones. The accumulation of AHA2 in intracellular compartments is consistent with reduced H + secretion near the transition zone and the suppression of root growth. By examining AHA2 localization in a knockout mutant of a receptor protein kinase, FERONIA, we found that the intracellular accumulation of AHA2 in the transition zone is dependent on a functional FERONIA-dependent inhibitory response in root elongation. Overall, this study provides a molecular underpinning for understanding the genetic, environmental, and developmental factors influencing root growth via localization of the plasma membrane H + -ATPase.

DISCUSSION

In this study, we investigated when and where plasma membrane H + -ATPase function is regulated at the cellular level in Arabidopsis roots. The H + -ATPase is long known to be localized at the plasma membrane, as this enzyme fulfills the essential role in secreting protons into the apoplast to generate both the charge and pH gradients necessary to energize nutrient uptake. However, the dynamic regulation of pump localization at the cellular and subcellular levels is poorly understood. By visualizing fluorescently labeled AHA2 protein with a 3D live-cell imaging approach, we have found that AHA2 localization in roots is influenced by light during elongating growth, which is specifically observed in a particular region of the root, the transition zone. We also demonstrate that this light- and cell-type-dependent localization of AHA2 requires the function of the FERONIA receptor kinase localized at the plasma membrane.

CONCLUSIONS

Altogether, we have produced imaging tools and methods to analyze spatial regulation of the plasma membrane H + -ATPase molecule localization in vivo. The use of 3D imaging and intensity profiling approaches provide an unbiased view of AHA2 localization. Many previous studies have provided observations that support an acid growth model in which there is a positive correlation between H + -ATPase activity and cell expansion ( Rayle and Cleland, 1992 ; Hager, 2003 ). Although the model has been extensively examined and discussed, no single experimental system has shown live-cell measurement of apoplastic pH and H + -ATPase localization in vivo. Our experiment uncovered differential localization of the H + -ATPase protein within root regions, in which this protein is subject to accumulation in intracellular vesicles that cannot contribute to events at the plasma membrane surface. Together with the previous discussion from a study of high-resolution analysis of cell elongation control by auxin and the H + -ATPase in hypocotyls ( Fendrych et al., 2016 ), our result highlights the importance of the experimental approach for testing a causal relationship between H + -ATPase activation/inactivation and cell growth in cell-type specific or single cell levels. Future development of a higher resolution imaging assay will allow us to directly examine how individual H + -ATPase proteins move within the plane of the membrane and overall, how their function influences cell elongation in planta.
