---
pmid: '12214252'
title: Roles of BRCA1 in centrosome duplication.
authors:
- Deng CX
journal: Oncogene
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1205713
---

# Roles of BRCA1 in centrosome duplication.
**Authors:** Deng CX
**Journal:** Oncogene (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1205713](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1205713)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2002 Sep 9;21(40):6222-7. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1205713.

Roles of BRCA1 in centrosome duplication.

Deng CX(1).

Author information:
(1)Genetics of Development and Diseases Branch, National Institute of Diabetes 
and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 10/9N105, 10 
Center Drive, Bethesda, Maryland, MD 20892, USA. chuxiad@bdg10.niddk.nih.gov

Centrosome duplication is under precise control and occurs only once in a normal 
mammalian cell cycle. Disruption of this process causes centrosome 
amplification, unequal segregation of chromosomes and, ultimately, 
tumorigenesis. Recent studies indicate that breast cancer suppressor gene 1 
(BRCA1) plays an important role in regulating centrosome duplication. BRCA1 is 
located in the centrosome and binds to gamma-tubulin. It interacts with a 
variety of proteins that regulate centrosome duplication, including BRCA2, 
CDK2-Cyclin A, CDK2-Cyclin E, Gadd45, p21, p53 and Rb. Furthermore, targeted 
disruption of murine BRCA1 results in centrosome amplification, suggesting that 
BRCA1 serves as a negative regulator for centrosome duplication. This review 
will examine these data and discuss possible relationships between BRCA1 and its 
interacting proteins in centrosome duplication.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1205713
PMID: 12214252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
