---
pmid: '17507406'
title: Cerberus is a feedback inhibitor of Nodal asymmetric signaling in the chick
  embryo.
authors:
- Tavares AT
- Andrade S
- Silva AC
- Belo JA
journal: Development
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/dev.000901
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Cerberus is a feedback inhibitor of Nodal asymmetric signaling in the chick embryo.
**Authors:** Tavares AT, Andrade S, Silva AC, Belo JA
**Journal:** Development (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.000901](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.000901)

## Abstract

1. Development. 2007 Jun;134(11):2051-60. doi: 10.1242/dev.000901.

Cerberus is a feedback inhibitor of Nodal asymmetric signaling in the chick 
embryo.

Tavares AT(1), Andrade S, Silva AC, Belo JA.

Author information:
(1)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, 2781-901 Oeiras, Portugal. 
atavares@igc.gulbenkian.pt

The TGF-beta-related molecule Nodal plays an essential and conserved role in 
left-right patterning of the vertebrate embryo. Previous reports have shown that 
the zebrafish and mouse Cerberus-related proteins Charon and Cerberus-like-2 
(Cerl-2), respectively, act in the node region to prevent the Nodal signal from 
crossing to the right side, whereas chick Cerberus (cCer) has an unclear 
function in the left-side mesoderm. In this study, we investigate the 
transcriptional regulation and function of cCer in left-right development. By 
analyzing the enhancer activity of cCer 5' genomic sequences in electroporated 
chick embryos, we identified a cCer left-side enhancer that contains two FoxH1 
and one SMAD binding site. We show that these Nodal-responsive elements are 
necessary and sufficient for the activation of transcription in the left-side 
mesoderm. In transgenic mouse embryos, cCer regulatory sequences behave as in 
chick embryos, suggesting that the cis-regulatory sequences of Cerberus-related 
genes have diverged during vertebrate evolution. Moreover, our findings from 
cCer overexpression and knockdown experiments indicate that cCer is a 
negative-feedback regulator of Nodal asymmetric signaling. We propose that cCer 
and mouse Cerl-2 have evolved distinct regulatory mechanisms but retained a 
conserved function in left-right development, which is to restrict Nodal 
activity to the left side of the embryo.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.000901
PMID: 17507406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
