---
pmid: '11606552'
title: Synergistic derepression of gibberellin signaling by removing RGA and GAI function
  in Arabidopsis thaliana.
authors:
- Dill A
- Sun T
journal: Genetics
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC1461816
doi: 10.1093/genetics/159.2.777
---

# Synergistic derepression of gibberellin signaling by removing RGA and GAI function in Arabidopsis thaliana.
**Authors:** Dill A, Sun T
**Journal:** Genetics (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1093/genetics/159.2.777](https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/159.2.777)
**PMC:** [PMC1461816](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1461816/)

## Abstract

1. Genetics. 2001 Oct;159(2):777-85. doi: 10.1093/genetics/159.2.777.

Synergistic derepression of gibberellin signaling by removing RGA and GAI 
function in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Dill A(1), Sun T.

Author information:
(1)Developmental, Cell and Molecular Biology Group, Department of Biology, Duke 
University, Durham, North Carolina 27708-1000, USA.

RGA and GAI are negative regulators of the gibberellin (GA) signal transduction 
pathway in Arabidopsis thaliana. These genes may have partially redundant 
functions because they are highly homologous, and plants containing single null 
mutations at these loci are phenotypically similar to wild type. Previously, rga 
loss-of-function mutations were shown to partially suppress defects of the 
GA-deficient ga1-3 mutant. Phenotypes rescued include abaxial trichome 
initiation, rosette radius, flowering time, stem elongation, and apical 
dominance. Here we present work showing that the rga-24 and gai-t6 null 
mutations have a synergistic effect on plant growth. Although gai-t6 alone has 
little effect, when combined with rga-24, they completely rescued the above 
defects of ga1-3 to wild-type or GA-overdose phenotype. However, seed 
germination and flower development defects were not restored. Additionally, 
rga-24 and rga-24/gai-t6 but not gai-t6 alone caused increased feedback 
inhibition of expression of a GA biosynthetic gene in both the ga1-3 and 
wild-type backgrounds. These results demonstrate that RGA and GAI have partially 
redundant functions in maintaining the repressive state of the GA-signaling 
pathway, but RGA plays a more dominant role than GAI. Removing both RGA and GAI 
function allows for complete derepression of many aspects of GA signaling.

DOI: 10.1093/genetics/159.2.777
PMCID: PMC1461816
PMID: 11606552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

RGA and GAI are negative regulators of the gibberellin (GA) signal transduction pathway in Arabidopsis thaliana. These genes may have partially redundant functions because they are highly homologous, and plants containing single null mutations at these loci are phenotypically similar to wild type. Previously, rga loss-of-function mutations were shown to partially suppress defects of the GA-deficient ga1-3 mutant. Phenotypes rescued include abaxial trichome initiation, rosette radius, flowering time, stem elongation, and apical dominance. Here we present work showing that the rga-24 and gai-t6 null mutations have a synergistic effect on plant growth. Although gai-t6 alone has little effect, when combined with rga-24, they completely rescued the above defects of ga1-3 to wild-type or GA-overdose phenotype. However, seed germination and flower development defects were not restored. Additionally, rga-24 and rga-24/gai-t6 but not gai-t6 alone caused increased feedback inhibition of expression of a GA biosynthetic gene in both the ga1-3 and wild-type backgrounds. These results demonstrate that RGA and GAI have partially redundant functions in maintaining the repressive state of the GA-signaling pathway, but RGA plays a more dominant role than GAI. Removing both RGA and GAI function allows for complete derepression of many aspects of GA signaling.
