---
pmid: '21676746'
title: Changes in Nuclear Receptor and Vitellogenin Gene Expression in Response to
  Steroids and Heavy Metal in Caenorhabditis elegans.
authors:
- Novillo A
- Won SJ
- Li C
- Callard IP
journal: Integr Comp Biol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/icb/45.1.61
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Changes in Nuclear Receptor and Vitellogenin Gene Expression in Response to Steroids and Heavy Metal in Caenorhabditis elegans.
**Authors:** Novillo A, Won SJ, Li C, Callard IP
**Journal:** Integr Comp Biol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1093/icb/45.1.61](https://doi.org/10.1093/icb/45.1.61)

## Abstract

1. Integr Comp Biol. 2005 Jan;45(1):61-71. doi: 10.1093/icb/45.1.61.

Changes in Nuclear Receptor and Vitellogenin Gene Expression in Response to 
Steroids and Heavy Metal in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Novillo A(1), Won SJ, Li C, Callard IP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts 02215.

To gain basic understanding of the reproductive and developmental effects of 
endocrine disrupting chemicals in invertebrates, we have used C. elegans as an 
animal model. The completion of the C. elegans genome sequence brings to bear 
microarray analysis as a tool for these studies. We previously showed that the 
C. elegans genome was responsive to vertebrate steroid hormones, and changes in 
gene expression of traditional biomarkers used in environmental studies were 
detected; i.e., vitellogenin (vtg), cytochrome P450 (cyp450), 
glutathione-S-transferase (gst) and heat shock proteins (hsp). The data were 
interpreted to suggest that exogenous lipophilic compounds can be metabolized 
via cytochrome P450 proteins, and that the resulting metabolites can bind to 
members of the Nuclear Receptor (NR) class of proteins and regulate gene 
expression. In the present study, using DNA microarrays, we examined the pattern 
of gene expression after progesterone (10(-5), 10(-7) M), estradiol (10(-5) M), 
cholesterol (10(-9) M) and cadmium (0.1, 1 and 10 μM) exposure, with special 
attention to the members of NRs. Of approximately 284 NRs in C. elegans, 
expression of 25 NR genes (representing 9% of the total NRs in C. elegans) was 
altered after exposure to steroids. Of note, each steroid activated or inhibited 
different subsets of NR genes, and only estradiol regulated NR genes implicated 
in neurogenesis. These results suggest that NRs respond to a variety of 
exogenous steroids, which regulate important metabolic and developmental 
pathways. The response of the C. elegans genome to cholesterol and cadmium was 
analyzed in more detail. Cholesterol is a probable precursor to signaling 
molecules that may interact with NRs and we focused on expression of genes 
related to lipid metabolism (cyp450), transport and storage (i.e., 
vitellogenin). Worms exposed to cadmium respond principally by activating the 
expression of genes encoding stress-responsive proteins, such as mtl-2 and 
cdr-1, and no significant changes in expression of NRs or vtg genes were 
observed. The possible implications of these results with regard to the 
evolution of steroid receptors, endocrine disruption and the role of 
vitellogenin as a lipid transporter are discussed.

DOI: 10.1093/icb/45.1.61
PMID: 21676746
