---
pmid: '36716868'
title: The neonicotinoid insecticide imidacloprid has unexpected effects on the growth
  and development of soil amoebae.
authors:
- Wang Z
- Huang W
- Liu Z
- Zeng J
- He Z
- Shu L
journal: Sci Total Environ
year: '2023'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2023.161884
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The neonicotinoid insecticide imidacloprid has unexpected effects on the growth and development of soil amoebae.
**Authors:** Wang Z, Huang W, Liu Z, Zeng J, He Z, Shu L
**Journal:** Sci Total Environ (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.scitotenv.2023.161884](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2023.161884)

## Abstract

1. Sci Total Environ. 2023 Apr 15;869:161884. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2023.161884.  Epub 2023 Jan 28.

The neonicotinoid insecticide imidacloprid has unexpected effects on the growth 
and development of soil amoebae.

Wang Z(1), Huang W(1), Liu Z(2), Zeng J(1), He Z(1), Shu L(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Southern Marine Science and 
Engineering Guangdong Laboratory (Zhuhai), Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory 
of Environmental Pollution Control and Remediation Technology, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou 510006, China.
(2)School of Life Sciences, Jiaying University, Meizhou 514015, China.
(3)School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Southern Marine Science and 
Engineering Guangdong Laboratory (Zhuhai), Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory 
of Environmental Pollution Control and Remediation Technology, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou 510006, China. Electronic address: shulf@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

Neonicotinoid pesticides are the most widely used insecticides worldwide and 
have become a global environmental issue. Previous studies have shown that 
imidacloprid, the most used neonicotinoid, can negatively affect a wide range of 
organisms, including non-target insects, fish, invertebrates, and mammals. 
Imidacloprid can also accumulate and persist in soils, posing threats to the 
terrestrial ecosystem. However, we know little about one ecologically important 
group of organisms, the single-celled soil protists. In this study, we used a 
soil amoeba, Dictyostelium discoideum, to test whether and how imidacloprid 
affects the growth and development of soil amoebae. We provide the first 
empirical evidence that environmental concentrations of imidacloprid negatively 
impact the fitness and development of soil amoebae. In addition, the adverse 
effects did not show a dose-response relationship with increased imidacloprid 
concentrations, where no significant difference was observed among the treatment 
groups. Further transcriptome analyses showed that imidacloprid affected 
amoeba's key DEGs related to phagocytosis, cell division, morphogenesis, and 
cytochrome P450. Moreover, soil amoebae show both conserved and novel 
transcriptional responses to imidacloprid. In conclusion, this study has 
expanded the non-target list of imidacloprid from animals and plants to 
single-celled protists, and we believe the impact of neonicotinoid pesticides on 
the microbiome is significantly underestimated and deserves more studies.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2023.161884
PMID: 36716868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare no conflicts of interest.
