---
pmid: '11279242'
title: The human homologue of the yeast DNA repair and TFIIH regulator MMS19 is an
  AF-1-specific coactivator of estrogen receptor.
authors:
- Wu X
- Li H
- Chen JD
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M101041200
---

# The human homologue of the yeast DNA repair and TFIIH regulator MMS19 is an AF-1-specific coactivator of estrogen receptor.
**Authors:** Wu X, Li H, Chen JD
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M101041200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M101041200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 29;276(26):23962-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M101041200. Epub
2001  Mar 28.

The human homologue of the yeast DNA repair and TFIIH regulator MMS19 is an 
AF-1-specific coactivator of estrogen receptor.

Wu X(1), Li H, Chen JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of 
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01655, USA.

Steroid/nuclear hormone receptors are ligand-dependent transcriptional 
regulators that control gene expression in a wide array of biological processes. 
The transcriptional activity of the receptors is mediated by an N-terminal 
ligand-independent transcriptional activation function AF-1 and a C-terminal 
ligand-dependent transcriptional activation function AF-2. The nuclear receptor 
coactivator RAC3 (also known as AIB1/ACTR/pCIP/TRAM-1/SRC-3) is amplified in 
breast cancer cells, where it forms a complex with estrogen receptor (ER) and 
enhances AF-2 activity of the receptor. Here, we identify a putative human 
homologue of the yeast DNA repair and transcriptional regulator MMS19 as a 
RAC3-interacting protein. The human MMS19 interacts with the N-terminal PAS-A/B 
domain of RAC3 in vivo and in vitro through a conserved C-terminal domain. 
Interestingly, the human MMS19 also interacts with estrogen receptors in a 
ligand-independent manner but not with retinoic acid receptor or thyroid hormone 
receptor. Overexpression of the interacting domain of hMMS19 strongly inhibits 
ER-mediated transcriptional activation, indicating a dominant negative activity. 
In contrast, over expression of the full-length hMMS19 enhances ER-mediated 
transcriptional activation. We find that hMMS19 stimulates the AF-1 activity of 
ERalpha, but not the AF-2 activity, suggesting that hMMS19 may be an 
AF-1-specific transcriptional coactivator of estrogen receptor.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M101041200
PMID: 11279242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
