---
reference_id: PMID:37295401
title: RNA recoding in cephalopods tailors microtubule motor protein function.
authors:
- Rangan KJ
- Reck-Peterson SL
journal: Cell
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2023.04.032
content_type: abstract_only
---

# RNA recoding in cephalopods tailors microtubule motor protein function.
**Authors:** Rangan KJ, Reck-Peterson SL
**Journal:** Cell (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2023.04.032](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2023.04.032)

## Content

1. Cell. 2023 Jun 8;186(12):2531-2543.e11. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2023.04.032. Epub 
2023 Jun 8.

RNA recoding in cephalopods tailors microtubule motor protein function.

Rangan KJ(1), Reck-Peterson SL(2).

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA; Department of 
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA 92093, USA. Electronic address: krangan@health.ucsd.edu.
(2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA; Department of 
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA 92093, USA; Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of 
California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. Electronic address: 
sreckpeterson@health.ucsd.edu.

Comment in
    Cell. 2023 Jun 8;186(12):2518-2520. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2023.05.021.
    Signal Transduct Target Ther. 2023 Oct 16;8(1):387. doi: 
10.1038/s41392-023-01632-z.

RNA editing is a widespread epigenetic process that can alter the amino acid 
sequence of proteins, termed "recoding." In cephalopods, most transcripts are 
recoded, and recoding is hypothesized to be an adaptive strategy to generate 
phenotypic plasticity. However, how animals use RNA recoding dynamically is 
largely unexplored. We investigated the function of cephalopod RNA recoding in 
the microtubule motor proteins kinesin and dynein. We found that squid rapidly 
employ RNA recoding in response to changes in ocean temperature, and kinesin 
variants generated in cold seawater displayed enhanced motile properties in 
single-molecule experiments conducted in the cold. We also identified 
tissue-specific recoded squid kinesin variants that displayed distinct motile 
properties. Finally, we showed that cephalopod recoding sites can guide the 
discovery of functional substitutions in non-cephalopod kinesin and dynein. 
Thus, RNA recoding is a dynamic mechanism that generates phenotypic plasticity 
in cephalopods and can inform the characterization of conserved non-cephalopod 
proteins.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2023.04.032
PMCID: PMC10467349
PMID: 37295401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare 
that they have no competing interests.