---
pmid: '22494997'
title: Age-related guanine nucleotide exchange factor, mouse Zizimin2, induces filopodia
  in bone marrow-derived dendritic cells.
authors:
- Sakabe I
- Asai A
- Iijima J
- Maruyama M
journal: Immun Ageing
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3359169
doi: 10.1186/1742-4933-9-2
---

# Age-related guanine nucleotide exchange factor, mouse Zizimin2, induces filopodia in bone marrow-derived dendritic cells.
**Authors:** Sakabe I, Asai A, Iijima J, Maruyama M
**Journal:** Immun Ageing (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1742-4933-9-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/1742-4933-9-2)
**PMC:** [PMC3359169](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3359169/)

## Abstract

1. Immun Ageing. 2012 Apr 11;9:2. doi: 10.1186/1742-4933-9-2.

Age-related guanine nucleotide exchange factor, mouse Zizimin2, induces 
filopodia in bone marrow-derived dendritic cells.

Sakabe I(1), Asai A, Iijima J, Maruyama M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Mechanism of Aging, Research Institute - National Center for 
Geriatrics and Gerontology, 35, Gengo, Morioka-Machi, Obu-city, Aichi 474-8511, 
Japan. michan@ncgg.go.jp.

BACKGROUND: We recently isolated and identified Zizimin2 as a functional factor 
that is highly expressed in murine splenic germinal center B cells after 
immunization with T-cell-dependent antigen. Zizimin2 was revealed to be a new 
family member of Dock (dedicator of cytokinesis), Dock11, which is the guanine 
nucleotide exchange factor for Cdc42, a low-molecular-weight GTPase. However, 
the molecular function of Zizimin2 in acquired immunity has not been elucidated.
RESULTS: In this study, we show that the protein expression of Zizimin2, which 
is also restricted to lymphoid tissues and lymphocytes, is reduced in aged mice. 
Over-expression of full-length Zizimin2 induced filopodial formation in 293T 
cells, whereas expression of CZH2 domain inhibited it. Stimulation of Fcγ 
receptor and Toll-like receptor 4 triggered Zizimin2 up-regulation and Cdc42 
activation in bone marrow-derived dendritic cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that Zizimin2 is an immune-related and 
age-regulated guanine nucleotide exchange factor, which facilitates filopodial 
formation through activation of Cdc42, which results in activation of cell 
migration.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-4933-9-2
PMCID: PMC3359169
PMID: 22494997
