---
pmid: '19479899'
title: Pex3p-dependent peroxisomal biogenesis initiates in the endoplasmic reticulum
  of human fibroblasts.
authors:
- Toro AA
- Araya CA
- Córdova GJ
- Arredondo CA
- Cárdenas HG
- Moreno RE
- Venegas A
- Koenig CS
- Cancino J
- Gonzalez A
- Santos MJ
journal: J Cell Biochem
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/jcb.22210
---

# Pex3p-dependent peroxisomal biogenesis initiates in the endoplasmic reticulum of human fibroblasts.
**Authors:** Toro AA, Araya CA, Córdova GJ, Arredondo CA, Cárdenas HG, Moreno RE, Venegas A, Koenig CS, Cancino J, Gonzalez A, Santos MJ
**Journal:** J Cell Biochem (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jcb.22210](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcb.22210)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Aug 15;107(6):1083-96. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22210.

Pex3p-dependent peroxisomal biogenesis initiates in the endoplasmic reticulum of 
human fibroblasts.

Toro AA(1), Araya CA, Córdova GJ, Arredondo CA, Cárdenas HG, Moreno RE, Venegas 
A, Koenig CS, Cancino J, Gonzalez A, Santos MJ.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Biología Celular y Molecular, Centro de Regulación Celular y 
Patología, Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas, Pontificia Universidad Católica de 
Chile, and MIFAB, Chile.

The mechanisms of peroxisomal biogenesis remain incompletely understood, 
specially regarding the role of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in human cells, 
where genetic disorders of peroxisome biogenesis lead to Zellweger syndrome 
(ZS). The Pex3p peroxisomal membrane protein (PMP) required for early steps of 
peroxisome biogenesis has been detected in the ER in yeast but not in mammalian 
cells. Here, we show that Pex3p-GFP expressed in a new ZS cell line (MR), which 
lacks peroxisomes due to a mutation in the PEX3 gene, localizes first in the ER 
and subsequently in newly formed peroxisomes. Pex3p bearing an artificial 
N-glycosylation site shows an electrophoretic shift indicative of ER targeting 
while en route to preformed peroxisomes in normal fibroblast. A signal peptide 
that forces its entry into the ER does not eliminate its capability to drive 
peroxisome biogenesis in ZS cells. Thus, Pex3p is able to drive peroxisome 
biogenesis from the ER and its ER pathway is not privative of ZS cells. 
Cross-expression experiments of Pex3p in GM623 cells lacking Pex16p or Pex16p in 
MR cells lacking Pex3p, showed evidence that Pex3p requires Pex16p for ER 
location but is dispensable for the ER location of Pex16p. These results 
indicate that Pex3p follows the ER-to-peroxisomal route in mammalian cells and 
provides new clues to understand its function.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.22210
PMID: 19479899 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
