---
pmid: '20852615'
title: Asterless is a scaffold for the onset of centriole assembly.
authors:
- Dzhindzhev NS
- Yu QD
- Weiskopf K
- Tzolovsky G
- Cunha-Ferreira I
- Riparbelli M
- Rodrigues-Martins A
- Bettencourt-Dias M
- Callaini G
- Glover DM
journal: Nature
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature09445
---

# Asterless is a scaffold for the onset of centriole assembly.
**Authors:** Dzhindzhev NS, Yu QD, Weiskopf K, Tzolovsky G, Cunha-Ferreira I, Riparbelli M, Rodrigues-Martins A, Bettencourt-Dias M, Callaini G, Glover DM
**Journal:** Nature (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature09445](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature09445)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2010 Oct 7;467(7316):714-8. doi: 10.1038/nature09445. Epub 2010 Sep
19.

Asterless is a scaffold for the onset of centriole assembly.

Dzhindzhev NS(1), Yu QD, Weiskopf K, Tzolovsky G, Cunha-Ferreira I, Riparbelli 
M, Rodrigues-Martins A, Bettencourt-Dias M, Callaini G, Glover DM.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research UK Cell Cycle Genetics Group, University of Cambridge, 
Department of Genetics, Downing Street, Cambridge CB2 3EH, UK. nsd23@cam.ac.uk

Centrioles are found in the centrosome core and, as basal bodies, at the base of 
cilia and flagella. Centriole assembly and duplication is controlled by 
Polo-like-kinase 4 (Plk4): these processes fail if Plk4 is downregulated and are 
promoted by Plk4 overexpression. Here we show that the centriolar protein 
Asterless (Asl; human orthologue CEP152) provides a conserved molecular 
platform, the amino terminus of which interacts with the cryptic Polo box of 
Plk4 whereas the carboxy terminus interacts with the centriolar protein Sas-4 
(CPAP in humans). Drosophila Asl and human CEP152 are required for the 
centrosomal loading of Plk4 in Drosophila and CPAP in human cells, respectively. 
Depletion of Asl or CEP152 caused failure of centrosome duplication; their 
overexpression led to de novo centriole formation in Drosophila eggs, 
duplication of free centrosomes in Drosophila embryos, and centrosome 
amplification in cultured Drosophila and human cells. Overexpression of a 
Plk4-binding-deficient mutant of Asl prevented centriole duplication in cultured 
cells and embryos. However, this mutant protein was able to promote microtubule 
organizing centre (MTOC) formation in both embryos and oocytes. Such MTOCs had 
pericentriolar material and the centriolar protein Sas-4, but no centrioles at 
their core. Formation of such acentriolar MTOCs could be phenocopied by 
overexpression of Sas-4 in oocytes or embryos. Our findings identify independent 
functions for Asl as a scaffold for Plk4 and Sas-4 that facilitates 
self-assembly and duplication of the centriole and organization of 
pericentriolar material.

DOI: 10.1038/nature09445
PMID: 20852615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
