---
pmid: '8666233'
title: Mammalian p50Cdc37 is a protein kinase-targeting subunit of Hsp90 that binds
  and stabilizes Cdk4.
authors:
- Stepanova L
- Leng X
- Parker SB
- Harper JW
journal: Genes Dev
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1101/gad.10.12.1491
---

# Mammalian p50Cdc37 is a protein kinase-targeting subunit of Hsp90 that binds and stabilizes Cdk4.
**Authors:** Stepanova L, Leng X, Parker SB, Harper JW
**Journal:** Genes Dev (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.10.12.1491](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.10.12.1491)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 1996 Jun 15;10(12):1491-502. doi: 10.1101/gad.10.12.1491.

Mammalian p50Cdc37 is a protein kinase-targeting subunit of Hsp90 that binds and 
stabilizes Cdk4.

Stepanova L(1), Leng X, Parker SB, Harper JW.

Author information:
(1)Verna and Marrs McLean Department of Biochemistry, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

CDC37, an essential gene in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, interacts genetically with 
multiple protein kinases and is required for production of Cdc28p/cyclin 
complexes through an unknown mechanism. We have identified mammalian p50Cdc37 as 
a protein kinase-targeting subunit of the molecular chaperone Hsp90. Previously, 
p50 was observed in complexes with pp60v-src and Raf-1, but its identity and 
function have remained elusive. In mouse fibroblasts, a primary target of Cdc37 
is Cdk4. This kinase is activated by D-type cyclins and functions in passage 
through G1. In insect cells, Cdc37 is sufficient to target Hsp90 to Cdk4 and 
both in vitro and in vivo, Cdc37/Hsp90 associates preferentially with the 
fraction of Cdk4 not bound to D-type cyclins. Cdc37 is coexpressed with cyclin 
Dl in cells undergoing programmed proliferation in vivo, consistent with a 
positive role in cell cycle progression. Pharmacological inactivation of 
Cdc37/Hsp90 function decreases the half-life of newly synthesized Cdk4, 
indicating a role for Cdc37/Hsp90 in Cdk4 stabilization. This study suggests a 
general role for p50Cdc37 in signaling pathways dependent on intrinsically 
unstable protein kinases and reveals a previously unrecognized 
chaperone-dependent step in the production of Cdk4/cyclin D complexes.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.10.12.1491
PMID: 8666233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
