---
pmid: '27797818'
title: The MMS22L-TONSL heterodimer directly promotes RAD51-dependent recombination
  upon replication stress.
authors:
- Piwko W
- Mlejnkova LJ
- Mutreja K
- Ranjha L
- Stafa D
- Smirnov A
- Brodersen MM
- Zellweger R
- Sturzenegger A
- Janscak P
- Lopes M
- Peter M
- Cejka P
journal: EMBO J
year: '2016'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC5283591
doi: 10.15252/embj.201593132
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The MMS22L-TONSL heterodimer directly promotes RAD51-dependent recombination upon replication stress.
**Authors:** Piwko W, Mlejnkova LJ, Mutreja K, Ranjha L, Stafa D, Smirnov A, Brodersen MM, Zellweger R, Sturzenegger A, Janscak P, Lopes M, Peter M, Cejka P
**Journal:** EMBO J (2016)
**DOI:** [10.15252/embj.201593132](https://doi.org/10.15252/embj.201593132)
**PMC:** [PMC5283591](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5283591/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2016 Dec 1;35(23):2584-2601. doi: 10.15252/embj.201593132. Epub 2016
Oct  26.

The MMS22L-TONSL heterodimer directly promotes RAD51-dependent recombination 
upon replication stress.

Piwko W(1), Mlejnkova LJ(2), Mutreja K(2), Ranjha L(2), Stafa D(3), Smirnov 
A(2), Brodersen MM(3), Zellweger R(2), Sturzenegger A(2), Janscak P(2), Lopes 
M(2), Peter M(1), Cejka P(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Institute of Biochemistry ETH Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland petr.cejka@irb.usi.ch matthias.peter@bc.biol.ethz.ch 
wojciech.piwko@bc.biol.ethz.ch.
(2)Institute of Molecular Cancer Research University of Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(3)Department of Biology, Institute of Biochemistry ETH Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(4)Institute of Molecular Cancer Research University of Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland petr.cejka@irb.usi.ch matthias.peter@bc.biol.ethz.ch 
wojciech.piwko@bc.biol.ethz.ch.

Homologous recombination (HR) is a key pathway that repairs DNA double-strand 
breaks (DSBs) and helps to restart stalled or collapsed replication forks. How 
HR supports replication upon genotoxic stress is not understood. Using in vivo 
and in vitro approaches, we show that the MMS22L-TONSL heterodimer localizes to 
replication forks under unperturbed conditions and its recruitment is increased 
during replication stress in human cells. MMS22L-TONSL associates with 
replication protein A (RPA)-coated ssDNA, and the MMS22L subunit directly 
interacts with the strand exchange protein RAD51. MMS22L is required for proper 
RAD51 assembly at DNA damage sites in vivo, and HR-mediated repair of stalled 
forks is abrogated in cells expressing a MMS22L mutant deficient in RAD51 
interaction. Similar to the recombination mediator BRCA2, recombinant 
MMS22L-TONSL limits the assembly of RAD51 on dsDNA, which stimulates RAD51-ssDNA 
nucleoprotein filament formation and RAD51-dependent strand exchange activity 
in vitro Thus, by specifically regulating RAD51 activity at uncoupled 
replication forks, MMS22L-TONSL stabilizes perturbed replication forks by 
promoting replication fork reversal and stimulating their HR-mediated restart 
in vivo.

© 2016 The Authors.

DOI: 10.15252/embj.201593132
PMCID: PMC5283591
PMID: 27797818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Homologous recombination (HR) is a key pathway that repairs DNA double‐strand breaks (DSBs) and helps to restart stalled or collapsed replication forks. How HR supports replication upon genotoxic stress is not understood. Using in vivo and in vitro approaches, we show that the MMS22L–TONSL heterodimer localizes to replication forks under unperturbed conditions and its recruitment is increased during replication stress in human cells. MMS22L–TONSL associates with replication protein A (RPA)‐coated ssDNA, and the MMS22L subunit directly interacts with the strand exchange protein RAD51. MMS22L is required for proper RAD51 assembly at DNA damage sites in vivo , and HR‐mediated repair of stalled forks is abrogated in cells expressing a MMS22L mutant deficient in RAD51 interaction. Similar to the recombination mediator BRCA2, recombinant MMS22L–TONSL limits the assembly of RAD51 on dsDNA, which stimulates RAD51‐ssDNA nucleoprotein filament formation and RAD51‐dependent strand exchange activity in vitro . Thus, by specifically regulating RAD51 activity at uncoupled replication forks, MMS22L–TONSL stabilizes perturbed replication forks by promoting replication fork reversal and stimulating their HR‐mediated restart in vivo .

Introduction

All cells must replicate their DNA before each round of cell division. In humans, genome duplication is critically dependent on homologous recombination (HR), which protects stalled replication forks or restores integrity of collapsed forks (San Filippo et al , 2008 ). Recombination mechanisms are largely studied in the context of DSB repair, yet endogenous two‐ended DSBs are relatively rare and usually repaired by a non‐homologous end‐joining pathway in mammals. In contrast, HR is required for the completion of replication even in the absence of exogenous DNA damage, as recombination‐deficient human cells undergo only a very limited number of DNA replication rounds. However, how recombination supports replication remains mostly undefined (Petermann & Helleday, 2010 ; Neelsen & Lopes, 2015 ). Furthermore, mutations in several regulatory HR genes including breast cancer susceptibility protein 2 (BRCA2) or RAD51C predispose affected individuals to cancer, demonstrating that aberrant HR results in genome instability that drives tumorigenesis (Wooster et al , 1995 ; Meindl et al , 2010 ).

A key player in the HR‐mediated processes is the RAD51 recombinase, which assembles on ssDNA upon nuclease‐mediated resection of the broken DNA ends. RAD51 nucleoprotein filament then invades homologous DNA, which serves as the repair template. The assembly of RAD51 filaments on ssDNA is regulated at multiple levels. First, resected ssDNA is rapidly coated and protected by RPA, which coordinates DNA damage signaling and repair. However, as RPA also competes with RAD51 for binding to ssDNA, proteins termed recombination mediators are required to load RAD51 on the RPA‐coated ssDNA. This overcomes the inhibitory effect of RPA on RAD51‐mediated DNA strand exchange and represents an important regulatory step that allows recombination on appropriate DNA substrates. These mediators including BRCA2 and the five RAD51 paralogues RAD51B/C/D and XRCC2/3 (San Filippo et al , 2008 ) help to form the RAD51‐ssDNA filament in the presence of RPA, and particularly BRCA2 also prevents assembly of RAD51 on dsDNA (Sigurdsson et al , 2001b ; Jensen et al , 2010 ; Liu et al , 2010 ; Thorslund et al , 2010 ; Taylor et al , 2015 ). However, although the recombination mediators appear to be key to understand how HR is fine‐tuned, their exact roles and interplay at DNA damage sites are still poorly understood.

The human MMS22L–TONSL complex and its budding yeast counterpart Mms22 play essential roles during DNA replication stress but their precise function remains elusive (Luke et al , 2006 ; Duro et al , 2008 , 2010 ; O'Connell et al , 2010 ; O'Donnell et al , 2010 ; Piwko et al , 2010 ). Yeast Mms22 was proposed to be a putative substrate adaptor of the Rtt101 cullin E3 ubiquitin ligase functioning downstream of the histone H3‐K56 acetylation pathway, which marks newly replicated DNA and is required for genome stability maintenance (Collins et al , 2007 ; Zaidi et al , 2008 ). Human cells expressing low levels of MMS22L or TONSL as well as yeast mms22 Δ mutants are hypersensitive to drugs such as camptothecin (CPT) inducing replication fork reversal or DSBs at replication forks, but not to ionizing radiation, suggesting specific defects in dealing with replication fork stalling or collapse (Luke et al , 2006 ; Duro et al , 2008 , 2010 ; O'Connell et al , 2010 ; O'Donnell et al , 2010 ; Piwko et al , 2010 ; Ray Chaudhuri et al , 2012 ; Buser et al , 2016 ). Cells lacking MMS22L were unable to restart replication forks stalled upon treatment with CPT and were defective in RAD51 foci formation at collapsed replication forks and DSBs, and thus, MMS22L was suggested to act as a recombination mediator (Duro et al , 2010 ; O'Donnell et al , 2010 ). The TONSL subunit is a reader of unmethylated histone H4 tails that mark newly replicated DNA, which was proposed to facilitate recombination when newly replicated DNA is available as a template for HR‐based repair (Saredi et al , 2016 ). However, evidence for a direct involvement of MMS22L–TONSL in recombination has been missing. To this point, Arabidopsis thaliana TONSL homologue TONSOKU/BRU1 was implicated in reestablishing the chromatin state after DNA replication and TONSOKU mutants are characterized by loss of a transcriptional silencing phenotype closely resembling the phenotype exhibited with defects in chromatin assembly factor 1 (CAF‐1) (Takeda et al , 2004 ). Moreover, both yeast Mms22 and human MMS22L–TONSL were found in complexes with histones and chromatin remodeling factors, raising the possibility that they may act indirectly by regulating the chromatin milieu or the mobility of broken DNA (Duro et al , 2010 ; O'Connell et al , 2010 ; O'Donnell et al , 2010 ; Piwko et al , 2010 ; Buser et al , 2016 ).

Here, we report that MMS22L–TONSL is present at replication forks under unperturbed conditions and its presence is enhanced at collapsed replication forks that had undergone extensive resection. MMS22L–TONSL recruitment to replication fork stall sites is facilitated via a direct interaction with RPA‐coated ssDNA. Its activity at stalled replication forks leads to replication fork protection by RAD51‐dependent fork reversal. We demonstrate that purified MMS22L–TONSL directly binds the RAD51 recombinase and favors the interaction of RAD51 with ssDNA, which promotes the formation of RAD51 presynaptic filaments and invasion of homologous DNA. These data demonstrate a direct involvement of MMS22L–TONSL in RAD51‐dependent recombination and establish the heterodimer as a key factor that functions as a recombination regulator at stalled replication forks.

Discussion

The integrity and repair of stalled or collapsed replication forks is assured by homologous recombination through largely undefined mechanisms. Previous reports indicated that the human MMS22L–TONSL heterodimer plays a crucial role in this process. Here, we demonstrate that MMS22L–TONSL directly promotes DNA recombination upon replication stress. We show that MMS22L–TONSL is present at nascent DNA under unperturbed conditions, and MMS22L specifically interacts with RPA‐coated ssDNA and the strand exchange protein RAD51. These interactions are required for the accumulation of MMS22L–TONSL at DNA damage sites during replication stress, as well as for efficient RAD51 foci formation upon DNA damage. Mechanistically, MMS22L–TONSL promotes replication fork reversal upon stalling at DNA damage sites, which helps to prevent replication fork collapse. Our data suggest that MMS22L–TONSL directly stimulates invasion of homologous DNA by limiting the capacity of RAD51 to interact with dsDNA. This activity promotes recombination leading to replication fork reversal, which permits fork restoration or repair (Fig 7 ).

Why is MMS22L–TONSL particularly important for the repair of replication forks? A unique feature of MMS22L is its ability to preferentially bind RPA‐coated ssDNA. This interaction may allow MMS22L–TONSL to dynamically associate with ssDNA produced by DNA unwinding during DNA replication or with extended ssDNA tracts that accumulate upon replication fork stalling. Indeed, in our iPOND experiments MMS22L–TONSL and RPA2 abundances correlate at replication forks (Fig 3 ). The interaction with RPA‐coated ssDNA also enables the enrichment of MMS22L at collapsed replication forks that had undergone extensive resection. In addition, TONSL has been shown to directly bind histones (Duro et al , 2010 ) and the specific interaction with histone H4 unmethylated at K20 contributes to the recruitment of the MMS22L–TONSL complex to newly replicated DNA, when a homologous template is available for repair (Saredi et al , 2016 ). This interaction could also facilitate the access of MMS22L–TONSL to post‐replicative ssDNA gaps. Thus, the MMS22L–TONSL complex seems ideally equipped to participate in the repair of stalled and collapsed replication forks that accumulate stretches of ssDNA. Since the basal fork localization of the complex precedes the activation of the S‐phase checkpoint, MMS22L–TONSL may be among the first factors helping to nucleate RAD51 filaments not only upon replication stress but also upon endogenous fork pausing conditions. In support of this, depletion of human MMS22L or TONSL, as well as the deletion of yeast MMS22 gene, leads to accumulation of spontaneous DNA breaks during unperturbed S phase (Luke et al , 2006 ; Duro et al , 2010 ; O'Connell et al , 2010 ; O'Donnell et al , 2010 ; Piwko et al , 2010 ). This is in agreement with our observations that MMS22L–TONSL promotes fork reversal (Fig 4 ), which emerged as an important global response to replication stress and can occur in the absence of DNA breaks (Ray Chaudhuri et al , 2012 ; Neelsen & Lopes, 2015 ; Zellweger et al , 2015 ). Given that MMS22L‐ or TONSL‐depleted cells are hypersensitive to low nanomolar CPT treatments that induce robust fork reversal but not to ionizing radiation causing DSBs (Duro et al , 2010 ), it is tempting to speculate that promotion of RAD51‐dependent fork reversal represents the essential activity of the MMS22L–TONSL complex. Interestingly, a recent study found that BRCA2‐deficient cells still load RAD51 on nascent DNA on stressed replication forks, which is sufficient to promote sister chromatid exchange (Chaudhuri et al , 2016 ). This infers BRCA2‐independent mechanisms to load RAD51 on DNA and promote recombination upon replication stress. It will be of particular interest to investigate the role of MMS22L–TONSL heterodimer under these conditions. Our data suggest that MMS22L–TONSL‐facilitated nucleation of RAD51 on extended RPA‐coated ssDNA prevents DSB formation by assisting fork reversal, but we cannot exclude that it may also function at a subset of forks that unavoidably collapsed, as MMS22L–TONSL‐depleted cells are also impaired in homologous recombination reporter assays initiated by a dsDNA break (Duro et al , 2010 ; O'Connell et al , 2010 ; O'Donnell et al , 2010 ).

How does MMS22L–TONSL promote recombination? We demonstrate that recombinant MMS22L directly binds the RAD51 recombinase, and provide evidence for a direct involvement of MMS22L–TONSL in promoting DNA strand exchange by RAD51 (Fig 6 ). The activity of the complex favors interaction of RAD51 with ssDNA over dsDNA, therefore promoting the formation of RAD51‐ssDNA presynaptic nucleoprotein filaments at high RAD51 concentrations. This process is a prerequisite for the invasion of homologous DNA and further steps in the HR pathway. MMS22L–TONSL thus acts as a regulator by a mechanism similar to human BRCA2 (Jensen et al , 2010 ). However, unlike BRCA2, MMS22L–TONSL cannot catalyze the assembly of RAD51 filaments on ssDNA coated with RPA, even though it is directly recruited to such substrates in vitro and in vivo . This suggests that MMS22L–TONSL does not regulate RAD51 on its own, but the process likely requires the interplay with additional factors. We hypothesize that the MMS22L–TONSL heterodimer might functionally interact with other recombination mediators such as the RAD51 paralogues in the efficient assembly of RAD51 filaments upon replication stress in vivo . Recently, it has been demonstrated that the yeast RAD51 paralogues Rad55‐Rad57 protect Rad51‐ssDNA filaments from disruption by the antirecombinase Srs2 (Liu et al , 2011 ), while the RAD51 paralogues RFS‐1/RIP‐1 from Cenorabditis elegans are able to directly remodel and stabilize open conformation of ssDNA‐RAD‐51 filaments (Taylor et al , 2015 ). Human RAD51 paralogues have functions that partially overlap with those of BRCA2 (Sigurdsson et al , 2001b ). Our data establish that MMS22L–TONSL belongs to the growing group of factors that regulate recombination, but in contrast to the other mediators, its function seems highly specific to stalled or collapsed replication forks. Elucidating the precise relationship between the various recombination mediators and the MMS22L–TONSL complex at stalled replication forks represents an exciting future challenge.

The strong connections between defects in HR and tumorigenesis suggest that mutations in the MMS22L and TONSL genes might be associated with cancer development. It has been demonstrated that defects in recombination mediators including BRCA2, RAD51B, and RAD51C frequently associate with breast and ovarian cancers (Wooster et al , 1995 ; Meindl et al , 2010 ; Golmard et al , 2013 ). Indeed, cancer genome sequencing projects identified several somatic mutations in the MMS22L and TONSL genes (Forbes et al , 2015 ), but at present none of these alterations has been confirmed as tumorigenic. Here, we demonstrate that the two point mutations in TONSL (E1089K D1104N) identified in a genome of an ovarian cancer patient could potentially be tumorigenic (Forbes et al , 2015 ), as they abolish the interaction with MMS22L and negatively influence the recruitment of RAD51 to distressed replication forks (Fig EV4 ). Moreover, we identified several additional cancer patient‐derived point mutations in both MMS22L and TONSL that affect protein stability, suggesting that misregulation of the MMS22L–TONSL‐dependent processes might be involved in promoting carcinogenesis. We therefore speculate that genome instability in some types of ovarian and possibly breast cancers might be promoted by MMS22L or TONSL mutations.
