---
pmid: '16307917'
title: Chaperoned ubiquitylation--crystal structures of the CHIP U box E3 ubiquitin
  ligase and a CHIP-Ubc13-Uev1a complex.
authors:
- Zhang M
- Windheim M
- Roe SM
- Peggie M
- Cohen P
- Prodromou C
- Pearl LH
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.09.023
---

# Chaperoned ubiquitylation--crystal structures of the CHIP U box E3 ubiquitin ligase and a CHIP-Ubc13-Uev1a complex.
**Authors:** Zhang M, Windheim M, Roe SM, Peggie M, Cohen P, Prodromou C, Pearl LH
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2005.09.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2005.09.023)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2005 Nov 23;20(4):525-38. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.09.023.

Chaperoned ubiquitylation--crystal structures of the CHIP U box E3 ubiquitin 
ligase and a CHIP-Ubc13-Uev1a complex.

Zhang M(1), Windheim M, Roe SM, Peggie M, Cohen P, Prodromou C, Pearl LH.

Author information:
(1)Section of Structural Biology, Institute of Cancer Research, Chester Beatty 
Laboratories, 237 Fulham Road, London SW3 6JB, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2005 Dec 9;20(5):653-5. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.11.019.

CHIP is a dimeric U box E3 ubiquitin ligase that binds Hsp90 and/or Hsp70 via 
its TPR-domain, facilitating ubiquitylation of chaperone bound client proteins. 
We have determined the crystal structure of CHIP bound to an Hsp90 C-terminal 
decapeptide. The structure explains how CHIP associates with either chaperone 
type and reveals an unusual asymmetric homodimer in which the protomers adopt 
radically different conformations. Additionally, we identified CHIP as a 
functional partner of Ubc13-Uev1a in formation of Lys63-linked polyubiquitin 
chains, extending CHIP's roles into ubiquitin regulation as well as targeted 
destruction. The structure of Ubc13-Uev1a bound to the CHIP U box domain defines 
the basis for selective cooperation of CHIP with specific ubiquitin-conjugating 
enzymes. Remarkably, the asymmetric arrangement of the TPR domains in the CHIP 
dimer occludes one Ubc binding site, so that CHIP operates with half-of-sites 
activity, providing an elegant means for coupling a dimeric chaperone to a 
single ubiquitylation system.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.09.023
PMID: 16307917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
