---
pmid: '11448767'
title: Light-dependent interaction between Drosophila CRY and the clock protein PER
  mediated by the carboxy terminus of CRY.
authors:
- Rosato E
- Codd V
- Mazzotta G
- Piccin A
- Zordan M
- Costa R
- Kyriacou CP
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0960-9822(01)00259-7
---

# Light-dependent interaction between Drosophila CRY and the clock protein PER mediated by the carboxy terminus of CRY.
**Authors:** Rosato E, Codd V, Mazzotta G, Piccin A, Zordan M, Costa R, Kyriacou CP
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0960-9822(01)00259-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0960-9822(01)00259-7)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2001 Jun 26;11(12):909-17. doi: 10.1016/s0960-9822(01)00259-7.

Light-dependent interaction between Drosophila CRY and the clock protein PER 
mediated by the carboxy terminus of CRY.

Rosato E(1), Codd V, Mazzotta G, Piccin A, Zordan M, Costa R, Kyriacou CP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Leicester, University Road, LE1 7RH, 
Leicester, United Kingdom. er6@le.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: The biological clock synchronizes the organism with the environment, 
responding to changes in light and temperature. Drosophila CRYPTOCHROME (CRY), a 
putative circadian photoreceptor, has previously been reported to interact with 
the clock protein TIMELESS (TIM) in a light-dependent manner. Although TIM 
dimerizes with PERIOD (PER), no association between CRY and PER has previously 
been revealed, and aspects of the light dependence of the TIM/CRY interaction 
are still unclear.
RESULTS: Behavioral analysis of double mutants of per and cry suggested a 
genetic interaction between the two loci. To investigate whether this was 
reflected in a physical interaction, we employed a yeast-two-hybrid system that 
revealed a dimerization between PER and CRY. This was further supported by a 
coimmunoprecipitation assay in tissue culture cells. We also show that the 
light-dependent nuclear interactions of PER and TIM with CRY require the C 
terminus of CRY and may involve a trans-acting repressor.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that, as in mammals, Drosophila CRY interacts with 
PER, and, as in plants, the C terminus of CRY is involved in mediating light 
responses. A model for the light dependence of CRY is discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/s0960-9822(01)00259-7
PMID: 11448767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
