---
pmid: '21785459'
title: DJ-1 inhibits TRAIL-induced apoptosis by blocking pro-caspase-8 recruitment
  to FADD.
authors:
- Fu K
- Ren H
- Wang Y
- Fei E
- Wang H
- Wang G
journal: Oncogene
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.315
---

# DJ-1 inhibits TRAIL-induced apoptosis by blocking pro-caspase-8 recruitment to FADD.
**Authors:** Fu K, Ren H, Wang Y, Fei E, Wang H, Wang G
**Journal:** Oncogene (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/onc.2011.315](https://doi.org/10.1038/onc.2011.315)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2012 Mar 8;31(10):1311-22. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.315. Epub 2011 Jul 
25.

DJ-1 inhibits TRAIL-induced apoptosis by blocking pro-caspase-8 recruitment to 
FADD.

Fu K(1), Ren H, Wang Y, Fei E, Wang H, Wang G.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neuropathology, Department of Neurobiology, Key 
Laboratory of Brain Function and Disease and School of Life Sciences, University 
of Science & Technology of China, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei, Anhui, PR 
China.

DJ-1 was initially identified as an oncogene product involved in human 
tumorigenesis in cooperation with Ras. Increased DJ-1 expression is associated 
with tumorigenesis in many cancers, whereas the loss of DJ-1 function is linked 
to an autosomal recessive form of Parkinson's disease (PD). It has been reported 
that DJ-1 protects cells from TRAIL (tumor necrosis factor-related 
apoptosis-inducing ligand)-induced apoptosis. However, the mechanism by which 
DJ-1 is involved is still largely unknown. Here we show that DJ-1 inhibits 
TRAIL-induced apoptosis by blocking Fas-associated protein death domain 
(FADD)-mediated pro-caspase-8 activation. Wild-type DJ-1, but not the 
PD-associated mutant L166P, binds to FADD to inhibit the formation of the 
death-inducing signaling complex (DISC). DJ-1 competes with pro-caspase-8 to 
bind to FADD at the death effector domain, thereby repressing the recruitment 
and activation of pro-caspase-8 to the active form of caspase-8. Thus, our study 
suggests that DJ-1 protects against TRAIL-induced apoptosis through the 
regulation of DISC formation.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2011.315
PMID: 21785459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
