---
pmid: '20437234'
title: Effects of biocides on gene expression in the sulfate-reducing bacterium Desulfovibrio
  vulgaris Hildenborough.
authors:
- Lee MH
- Caffrey SM
- Voordouw JK
- Voordouw G
journal: Appl Microbiol Biotechnol
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s00253-010-2596-1
---

# Effects of biocides on gene expression in the sulfate-reducing bacterium Desulfovibrio vulgaris Hildenborough.
**Authors:** Lee MH, Caffrey SM, Voordouw JK, Voordouw G
**Journal:** Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00253-010-2596-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-010-2596-1)

## Abstract

1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2010 Jul;87(3):1109-18. doi: 
10.1007/s00253-010-2596-1. Epub 2010 May 2.

Effects of biocides on gene expression in the sulfate-reducing bacterium 
Desulfovibrio vulgaris Hildenborough.

Lee MH(1), Caffrey SM, Voordouw JK, Voordouw G.

Author information:
(1)Petroleum Microbiology Research Group, Department of Biological Sciences, 
University of Calgary, 2500 University Drive NW, Calgary, AB T2N 1N4, Canada.

Although sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB), such as Desulfovibrio vulgaris 
Hildenborough (DvH) are often eradicated in oil and gas operations with 
biocides, such as glutaraldehyde (Glut), tetrakis (hydroxymethyl) phosphonium 
sulfate (THPS), and benzalkonium chloride (BAC), their response to these agents 
is not well known. Whole genome microarrays of D. vulgaris treated with biocides 
well below the minimum inhibitory concentration showed that 256, 96, and 198 
genes were responsive to Glut, THPS, and BAC, respectively, and that these three 
commonly used biocides affect the physiology of the cell quite differently. Glut 
induces expression of genes required to degrade or refold proteins inactivated 
by either chemical modification or heat shock, whereas BAC appears to target 
ribosomal structure. THPS appears to primarily affect energy metabolism of SRB. 
Mutants constructed for genes strongly up-regulated by Glut, were killed by Glut 
to a similar degree as the wild type. Hence, it is difficult to achieve 
increased sensitivity to this biocide by single gene mutations, because Glut 
affects so many targets. Our results increase understanding of the biocide's 
mode of action, allowing a more intelligent combination of mechanistically 
different agents. This can reduce stress on budgets for chemicals and on the 
environment.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-010-2596-1
PMID: 20437234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
