---
pmid: '19299511'
title: Specific activation of mTORC1 by Rheb G-protein in vitro involves enhanced
  recruitment of its substrate protein.
authors:
- Sato T
- Nakashima A
- Guo L
- Tamanoi F
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2676008
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M809207200
---

# Specific activation of mTORC1 by Rheb G-protein in vitro involves enhanced recruitment of its substrate protein.
**Authors:** Sato T, Nakashima A, Guo L, Tamanoi F
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M809207200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M809207200)
**PMC:** [PMC2676008](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2676008/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2009 May 8;284(19):12783-91. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M809207200. Epub
2009  Mar 19.

Specific activation of mTORC1 by Rheb G-protein in vitro involves enhanced
recruitment of its substrate protein.

Sato T(1), Nakashima A, Guo L, Tamanoi F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology & Molecular Genetics, Molecular
Biology Institute, Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Rheb G-protein plays critical roles in the TSC/Rheb/mTOR signaling pathway by
activating mTORC1. The activation of mTORC1 by Rheb can be faithfully reproduced
in vitro by using mTORC1 immunoprecipitated by the use of anti-raptor antibody
from mammalian cells starved for nutrients. The low in vitro kinase activity
against 4E-BP1 of this mTORC1 preparation is dramatically increased by the
addition of recombinant Rheb. On the other hand, the addition of Rheb does not
activate mTORC2 immunoprecipitated from mammalian cells by the use of
anti-rictor antibody. The activation of mTORC1 is specific to Rheb, because
other G-proteins such as KRas, RalA/B, and Cdc42 did not activate mTORC1. Both
Rheb1 and Rheb2 activate mTORC1. In addition, the activation is dependent on the
presence of bound GTP. We also find that the effector domain of Rheb is required
for the mTORC1 activation. FKBP38, a recently proposed mediator of Rheb action,
appears not to be involved in the Rheb-dependent activation of mTORC1 in vitro,
because the preparation of mTORC1 that is devoid of FKBP38 is still activated by
Rheb. The addition of Rheb results in a significant increase of binding of the
substrate protein 4E-BP1 to mTORC1. PRAS40, a TOR signaling (TOS)
motif-containing protein that competes with the binding of 4EBP1 to mTORC1,
inhibits Rheb-induced activation of mTORC1. A preparation of mTORC1 that is
devoid of raptor is not activated by Rheb. Rheb does not induce
autophosphorylation of mTOR. These results suggest that Rheb induces alteration
in the binding of 4E-BP1 with mTORC1 to regulate mTORC1 activation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M809207200
PMCID: PMC2676008
PMID: 19299511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
