---
pmid: '10508408'
title: Structural consequences of the B5 histidine --> tyrosine mutation in human
  insulin characterized by X-ray crystallography and conformational analysis.
authors:
- Tang L
- Whittingham JL
- Verma CS
- Caves LS
- Dodson GG
journal: Biochemistry
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi990700k
---

# Structural consequences of the B5 histidine --> tyrosine mutation in human insulin characterized by X-ray crystallography and conformational analysis.
**Authors:** Tang L, Whittingham JL, Verma CS, Caves LS, Dodson GG
**Journal:** Biochemistry (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi990700k](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi990700k)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 1999 Sep 14;38(37):12041-51. doi: 10.1021/bi990700k.

Structural consequences of the B5 histidine --> tyrosine mutation in human 
insulin characterized by X-ray crystallography and conformational analysis.

Tang L(1), Whittingham JL, Verma CS, Caves LS, Dodson GG.

Author information:
(1)Protein Structure Division, National Institute for Medical Research, London, 
England.

The addition of phenols to hexameric insulin solutions produces a particularly 
stable hexamer, resulting from a rearrangement in which residues B1-B8 change 
from an extended conformation (T-state) to form an alpha-helix (R-state). The 
R-state is, in part, stabilized by nonpolar interactions between the phenolic 
molecule and residue B5 His at the dimer-dimer interface. The B5 His --> Tyr 
mutant human insulin was constructed to see if the tyrosine side chain would 
mimic the effect of phenol binding in the hexamer and induce the R-state. In 
partial support of this hypothesis, the molecule crystallized as a half-helical 
hexamer (T(3)R(3)) in conditions that conventionally promote the fully 
nonhelical (T6) form. As expected, in the presence of phenol or resorcinol, the 
B5 Tyr hexamers adopt the fully helical (R6) conformation. Molecular modeling 
calculations were performed to investigate the conformational preference of the 
T-state B5 Tyr side chain in the T(3)R(3) form, this side chain being associated 
with structural perturbations of the A7-A10 loop in an adjacent hexamer. For an 
isolated dimer, several different orientations of the side chain were found, 
which were close in energy and readily interconvertible. In the crystal 
environment only one of these conformations remains low in energy; this 
conformation corresponds to that observed in the crystal structure. This 
suggests that packing constraints around residue B5 Tyr result in the observed 
structural rearrangements. Thus, rather than promoting the R-state in a manner 
analogous to phenol, the mutation appears to destabilize the T-state. These 
studies highlight the role of B5 His in determining hexamer conformation and in 
mediating crystal packing interactions, properties that are likely be important 
in vivo.

DOI: 10.1021/bi990700k
PMID: 10508408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
