---
pmid: '10092873'
title: ATP and phosphate reciprocally affect subunit association of human recombinant
  High Km 5'-nucleotidase. Role for the C-terminal polyglutamic acid tract in subunit
  association and catalytic activity.
authors:
- Spychala J
- Chen V
- Oka J
- Mitchell BS
journal: Eur J Biochem
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1046/j.1432-1327.1999.00099.x
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# ATP and phosphate reciprocally affect subunit association of human recombinant High Km 5'-nucleotidase. Role for the C-terminal polyglutamic acid tract in subunit association and catalytic activity.
**Authors:** Spychala J, Chen V, Oka J, Mitchell BS
**Journal:** Eur J Biochem (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1432-1327.1999.00099.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1432-1327.1999.00099.x)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Biochem. 1999 Feb;259(3):851-8. doi: 10.1046/j.1432-1327.1999.00099.x.

ATP and phosphate reciprocally affect subunit association of human recombinant 
High Km 5'-nucleotidase. Role for the C-terminal polyglutamic acid tract in 
subunit association and catalytic activity.

Spychala J(1), Chen V, Oka J, Mitchell BS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 
27599-7365, USA. jozek@med.unc.edu

IMP-specific, High Km 5'-nucleotidase (EC 3.1.3.5) is an ubiquitous enzyme, the 
activity of which is highly regulated by substrate, ATP, and inorganic 
phosphate. The cDNA encoding this enzyme has recently been cloned and found to 
contain a unique stretch of nine glutamic and four aspartic acid residues at the 
C-terminus. To study the effects of this acidic tail, and of ATP and inorganic 
phosphate on enzyme function, we generated several structural modifications of 
the 5'-nucleotidase cDNA, expressed the corresponding proteins in Escherichia 
coli and compared their molecular and kinetic properties. As with the enzyme 
purified from human placenta, all recombinant proteins were activated by ATP and 
inhibited by inorganic phosphate. Although the S0.5-values were higher, the 
specific activities of the purified protein variants (except that truncated at 
the C-terminus) were similar. The molecular mass of the full-length enzyme 
subunit has been estimated at 57.3 kDa and the molecular mass of the native 
protein, as determined by gel-filtration chromatography, was estimated to be 195 
kDa. Increasing the concentration of NaCl to 0.3 M promoted oligomerization of 
the protein and the formation of aggregates of 332 kDa. ATP induced further 
oligomerization to 715 kDa, while inorganic phosphate reduced the estimated 
molecular mass to 226 kDa. In contrast to the truncation of 30 amino acids at 
the N-terminus, which did not alter enzyme properties, the removal of the 
polyglutamic/aspartic acid tail of 13 residues at the C-terminus caused profound 
kinetic and structural changes, including a 29-fold decrease in specific 
activity and a significant increase in the sensitivity to inhibition by 
inorganic phosphate in the presence of AMP. Structurally, there was a dramatic 
loss of the ability to form oligomers at physiological salt concentration which 
was only partially restored by the addition of NaCl or ATP. These data suggest 
an important function of the polyglutamic acid tract in the process of 
association and dissociation of 5'-nucleotidase subunits.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1432-1327.1999.00099.x
PMID: 10092873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
