---
pmid: '8530069'
title: Cloning of the cDNAs for the small subunits of bovine and human DNA polymerase
  delta and chromosomal location of the human gene (POLD2).
authors:
- Zhang J
- Tan CK
- McMullen B
- Downey KM
- So AG
journal: Genomics
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/geno.1995.1229
---

# Cloning of the cDNAs for the small subunits of bovine and human DNA polymerase delta and chromosomal location of the human gene (POLD2).
**Authors:** Zhang J, Tan CK, McMullen B, Downey KM, So AG
**Journal:** Genomics (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1006/geno.1995.1229](https://doi.org/10.1006/geno.1995.1229)

## Abstract

1. Genomics. 1995 Sep 1;29(1):179-86. doi: 10.1006/geno.1995.1229.

Cloning of the cDNAs for the small subunits of bovine and human DNA polymerase 
delta and chromosomal location of the human gene (POLD2).

Zhang J(1), Tan CK, McMullen B, Downey KM, So AG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Miami School of Medicine, Florida 
33101, USA.

cDNAs encoding the small subunit of bovine and human DNA polymerase delta have 
been cloned and sequenced. The predicted polypeptides, 50,885 and 51,289 
Daltons, respectively, are 94% identical, similar to the catalytic subunits. The 
high degree of conservation of the polypeptides suggests an essential function 
for the small subunit in the heterodimeric core enzyme. Although the catalytic 
subunit of DNA polymerase delta shares significant homology with those of the 
herpes virus family of DNA polymerases, the small subunit of mammalian DNA 
polymerase delta is not homologous to the small subunit of either herpes simplex 
virus type 1 DNA polymerase (UL42 protein) or the Epstein-Barr virus DNA 
polymerase (BMRF1 protein). Searches of the protein databases failed to detect 
significant homology with any protein sequenced thus far. PCR analysis of DNA 
from a panel of human-hamster hybrid cell lines localized the gene (POLD2) for 
the small subunit of DNA polymerase delta to human chromosome 7.

DOI: 10.1006/geno.1995.1229
PMID: 8530069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
