---
pmid: '23624715'
title: The Arabidopsis B-BOX protein BBX25 interacts with HY5, negatively regulating
  BBX22 expression to suppress seedling photomorphogenesis.
authors:
- Gangappa SN
- Crocco CD
- Johansson H
- Datta S
- Hettiarachchi C
- Holm M
- Botto JF
journal: Plant Cell
year: '2013'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3663265
doi: 10.1105/tpc.113.109751
---

# The Arabidopsis B-BOX protein BBX25 interacts with HY5, negatively regulating BBX22 expression to suppress seedling photomorphogenesis.
**Authors:** Gangappa SN, Crocco CD, Johansson H, Datta S, Hettiarachchi C, Holm M, Botto JF
**Journal:** Plant Cell (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1105/tpc.113.109751](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.113.109751)
**PMC:** [PMC3663265](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3663265/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell. 2013 Apr;25(4):1243-57. doi: 10.1105/tpc.113.109751. Epub 2013 Apr
 26.

The Arabidopsis B-BOX protein BBX25 interacts with HY5, negatively regulating 
BBX22 expression to suppress seedling photomorphogenesis.

Gangappa SN(1), Crocco CD, Johansson H, Datta S, Hettiarachchi C, Holm M, Botto 
JF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences, Gothenburg University, 
Gothenburg SE 40530, Sweden.

Comment in
    Plant Cell. 2013 Apr;25(4):1192-5. doi: 10.1105/tpc.113.250412.

ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL5 (HY5) is a basic domain/leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription 
factor, central for the regulation of seedling photomorphogenesis. Here, we 
identified a B-BOX (BBX)-containing protein, BBX25/SALT TOLERANCE HOMOLOG, as an 
interacting partner of HY5, which has been previously found to physically 
interact with CONSTITUTIVE PHOTOMORPHOGENIC1 (COP1). BBX25 physically interacts 
with HY5 both in vitro and in vivo. By physiological and genetic approaches, we 
showed that BBX25 is a negative regulator of seedling photomorphogenesis. BBX25 
and its homolog BBX24 regulate deetiolation processes and hypocotyl shade 
avoidance response in an additive manner. Moreover, genetic relationships of 
bbx25 and bbx24 with hy5 and cop1 revealed that BBX25 and BBX24 additively 
enhance COP1 and suppress HY5 functions. BBX25 accumulates in a light-dependent 
manner and undergoes COP1-mediated degradation in dark and light conditions. 
Furthermore, a protoplast cotransfection assay showed that BBX24 and BBX25 
repress BBX22 expression by interfering with HY5 transcriptional activity. As 
HY5 binds to the BBX22 promoter and promotes its expression, our results 
identify a direct mechanism through which the expression of BBX22 is regulated. 
We suggest that BBX25 and BBX24 function as transcriptional corepressors, 
probably by forming inactive heterodimers with HY5, downregulating BBX22 
expression for the fine-tuning of light-mediated seedling development.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.113.109751
PMCID: PMC3663265
PMID: 23624715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL5 (HY5) is a basic domain/leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription factor, central for the regulation of seedling photomorphogenesis. Here, we identified a B-BOX (BBX)–containing protein, BBX25/SALT TOLERANCE HOMOLOG, as an interacting partner of HY5, which has been previously found to physically interact with CONSTITUTIVE PHOTOMORPHOGENIC1 (COP1). BBX25 physically interacts with HY5 both in vitro and in vivo. By physiological and genetic approaches, we showed that BBX25 is a negative regulator of seedling photomorphogenesis. BBX25 and its homolog BBX24 regulate deetiolation processes and hypocotyl shade avoidance response in an additive manner. Moreover, genetic relationships of bbx25 and bbx24 with hy5 and cop1 revealed that BBX25 and BBX24 additively enhance COP1 and suppress HY5 functions. BBX25 accumulates in a light-dependent manner and undergoes COP1-mediated degradation in dark and light conditions. Furthermore, a protoplast cotransfection assay showed that BBX24 and BBX25 repress BBX22 expression by interfering with HY5 transcriptional activity. As HY5 binds to the BBX22 promoter and promotes its expression, our results identify a direct mechanism through which the expression of BBX22 is regulated. We suggest that BBX25 and BBX24 function as transcriptional corepressors, probably by forming inactive heterodimers with HY5, downregulating BBX22 expression for the fine-tuning of light-mediated seedling development.

INTRODUCTION

Plants have evolved a network of sophisticated and highly complex mechanisms to cope with fluctuating abiotic (e.g., light and temperature) and biotic (e.g., pathogens and insects) conditions. To withstand the constant diurnal and seasonal variations in quality, quantity, duration, and direction of light, plants have a battery of photoreceptors to perceive and integrate light signals to optimize growth and development. In Arabidopsis thaliana , red:far-red ( R:FR ) light is perceived by phytochromes (phyA to phyE), blue/UV-A light is perceived by cryptochromes (cry1 and cry2) and phototropins (phot1 and phot2), and UV-B is perceived by UVR8 photoreceptor ( Casal, 2013 ).

Genetic, molecular, and biochemical studies have led to the identification of several light signaling intermediates, which act downstream of photoreceptors ( Jiao et al., 2007 ; Chen and Chory, 2011 ). CONSTITUTIVE PHOTOMORPHOGENIC (COP)/DE-ETIOLATED/FUSCA function downstream of multiple photoreceptors and act as suppressors of photomorphogenesis. COP1 is an E3 ubiquitin ligase, which suppresses photomorphogenesis in dark conditions by targeting many photomorphogenesis-promoting factors, such as ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL5 (HY5), HY5 HOMOLOG, LONG AFTER FAR-RED LIGHT1, LONG HYPOCOTYL IN FAR- RED1 (HFR1) and B-Box22 (BBX22) for degradation ( Lau and Deng, 2012 ). In light-grown seedlings, multiple photoreceptors repress COP1 activity by inactivating and relocating COP1 to the cytosol ( Osterlund and Deng, 1998 ), thus stabilizing photomorphogenesis-promoting factors in the nucleus. SUPPRESSOR OF PHYTOCHROME A (SPA1 to SPA4) proteins act redundantly and can physically interact with COP1 to suppress photomorphogenic growth in the dark ( Seo et al., 2003 ; Laubinger et al., 2004 ; Zhu et al., 2008 ). Furthermore, COP1 promotes the hypocotyl shade avoidance syndrome ( SAS ) response by regulating early shade transcription factors ( Crocco et al., 2010 ). The COP1/SPA ubiquitylation complex targets HFR1 but not HY5 to promote hypocotyl and leaf petiole elongation in response to low R:FR light, suggesting that different COP1 signaling pathways mediate deetiolation and SAS ( Rolauffs et al., 2012 ). Phytochrome interacting factors (PIFs) collaborate redundantly with COP1 to suppress photomorphogenesis in the dark and promote SAS ( Lorrain et al., 2008 ; Leivar et al., 2009 ). In light conditions, PIFs physically interact with Pfr, the active form of phytochromes, and are then phosphorylated as a prelude to induce a rapid degradation of these proteins via ubiquitin-proteasome system-mediated proteolysis ( Al-Sady et al., 2008 ; Lorrain et al., 2008 ; Shen et al., 2008 ). However, in dark conditions, PIF4, PIF5, and PIF7 dephosphorylated forms accumulate in the nucleus, activating the expression of genes for cell elongation ( Lorrain et al., 2008 ; Li et al., 2012 ).

The basic domain/leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription factor HY5 functions as a positive regulator of photomorphogenesis downstream of all the photoreceptors and COP1 ( Lau and Deng, 2010 ). HY5 regulates several physiological processes, such as inhibition of hypocotyl elongation, anthocyanin and chlorophyll synthesis, and lateral root formation ( Oyama et al., 1997 ; Holm et al., 2002 ). HY5 chromatin immunoprecipitation–chip studies have suggested that HY5 preferentially binds to promoter regions throughout the genome ( Lee et al., 2007 ; Zhang et al., 2011 ), including genes involved in photosynthesis and pigment synthesis, like CAB , RBCS1A , F3H , CHS , and CHI , as well as genes involved in the regulation of the circadian clock ( Ang et al., 1998 ; Chattopadhyay et al., 1998 ; Lee et al., 2007 ). However, while HY5 binding is required, it is not sufficient for the transcriptional regulation of the promoters, and HY5 appears to require other cofactors or modifications to regulate the expression of target genes ( Lee et al., 2007 ). For example, HY5 has been reported to act cooperatively with HYH, HFR1, and CAM7 ( Holm et al., 2002 ; Kim et al., 2002 ; Kushwaha et al., 2008 ).

B-BOX proteins (BBX), which contain the N-terminal zinc binding B-box motif, function as transcriptional regulators in response to light, circadian cues, and brassinosteroid–light crosstalk signaling. BBX1/CONSTANS (CO) and BBX4/CONSTANS-LIKE3 contain two B-boxes at the N terminus and a CCT domain in the C terminus ( Khanna et al., 2009 ). CO regulates the expression of FT, a flowering time gene, and genetically interacts with COP1. The co-10 allele can suppress the early flowering phenotype of cop1-4 in both long- and short-day conditions, and COP1 targets CO for degradation ( Jang et al., 2008 ; Liu et al., 2008 ). BBX4, which is a positive regulator of photomorphogenesis in red light, physically interacts with COP1 and partially suppresses the cop1 phenotype in the dark ( Datta et al., 2006 ). Eight of the BBX proteins that belong to structural group IV contain two tandem repeat B-box motifs in the N terminus but lack the CCT domain ( Khanna et al., 2009 ). Among these, BBX21/SALT TOLERANCE HOMOLOG2 (STH2) and BBX22/STH3/LZF1 function as positive regulators ( Datta et al., 2007 , 2008 ; Chang et al., 2008 , 2011 ), and BBX18/DBB1a, BBX19/DBB1b, BBX24/STO, and BBX25/STH act as negative regulators of photomorphogenesis ( Indorf et al., 2007 ; Kumagai et al., 2008 ; Yan et al., 2011 ; Jiang et al., 2012 ). BBX21 and BBX22 physically interact with HY5 through their B-box motifs and colocalize with COP1 in nuclear speckles ( Datta et al., 2007 , 2008 ; Chang et al., 2008 ). COP1 ubiquitinates and targets BBX22 protein for 26S proteosome–mediated degradation ( Datta et al., 2008 ; Chang et al., 2011 ). BBX21 and BBX22 are also involved in transcriptional activation of CAB and CHI in transient protoplast assays ( Datta et al., 2007 , 2008 ). Furthermore, BBX21 and BBX22 inhibit elongation, whereas BBX18 and BBX24 play an opposite function by promoting hypocotyl length in shady conditions ( Crocco et al., 2010 , 2011 ).

Although the function of BBX24 in light signaling has been investigated in some detail, less is known about the physiological and molecular function of BBX25 in light signaling. Here, we report that BBX25 physically interacts with HY5. BBX25 acts additively with BBX24 during deetiolation and the hypocotyl shade avoidance response. BBX25 enhances COP1 and suppresses HY5 functions through a BBX24-independent genetic pathway. Furthermore, BBX25 and BBX24, both alone and together, regulate the expression of BBX22 via HY5 by interfering with HY5 transcriptional activity. Collectively, we suggest that BBX25 and BBX24 act as transcriptional corepressors of HY5 by downregulating BBX22 expression, probably forming inactive heterodimers with HY5.

DISCUSSION

BBX25 acts as a negative regulator of photomorphogenesis and works independently of BBX24. BBX25 and BBX24 enhance COP1 and suppress HY5 functions. Furthermore, BBX25 and BBX24 additively downregulate the expression of BBX22 by interfering with HY5 transcriptional activity to modulate seedling photomorphogenesis in Arabidopsis . This notion is supported by the fact that BBX25 interacts with HY5, as detected by yeast two-hybrid, pull-down, and FRET assays. Furthermore, both B-box domains of BBX25 are necessary to mediate the interaction with the bZIP domain of HY5 ( Figure 1 ). Similar conserved residues in BBX21 and BBX22 have been shown to mediate the interaction with HY5 ( Datta et al., 2007 , 2008 ). BBX21, BX22, and BBX24 also interact with HY5 through the bZIP domain ( Datta et al., 2007 , 2008 ; Jiang et al., 2012 ). Considering that BBX24 and BBX25 inhibit and that BBX21 and BBX22 promote seedling photomorphogenesis, our results suggest that B-Box domains and interaction partners of BBX proteins are conserved but that the functions of BBX proteins diverge in the control of plant development.

Yeast Two-Hybrid Method andFRETExperiments

For yeast two-hybrid experiments, we cloned full-length and mutated versions of BBX25 ( BBX25D20A and BBX25D72A ) and BBX25 ( D20A and D72A ) cDNA into the yeast expression vector pYX141 and full-length HY5 cDNA into the Gal4 DNA binding domain (Gal4-DBD) vector pAS2-1 (see Supplemental Table 1 online for primers). The constructs used for HY5 are described elsewhere ( Holm et al., 2002 ; Datta et al., 2007 ). We confirmed the expression of different wild-type and mutated versions of BBX25 proteins by immunoblotting, using polyclonal rabbit antibodies raised against full-length BBX25. Meanwhile, full-length and truncated versions of HY5 proteins were examined by immunoblotting using anti-Gal4-DBD antibody. The β-galactosidase assays were performed as described by Holm et al. (2001) in yeast strain Y187.

For the FRET acceptor photobleaching experiments, the pAM- PAT-35SS-YFP-HY5 ( Datta et al., 2008 ) and pAM-PAT-35SS-CFP-BBX25 constructs were introduced into onion epidermal cells by particle bombardment and incubated. Cells were visualized 30 h after particle bombardment using the confocal microscope through a Plan-Neofluor 403/1.3 oil (differential interference contrast) objective. Live-cell images were acquired using an Axiovert 200 microscope equipped with an LSM 510 META laser scanning confocal imaging system (Carl Zeiss). The multitracking mode was used to eliminate spillover between fluorescence channels. The CFP was excited by a diode 405 laser and the YFP by an argon-ion laser (514 nm), both at low intensities. After increasing the intensity of the 514-nm laser, the YFP fluorescence from the acceptor, YFP-HY5, was bleached. The bleaching of the acceptor resulted in an increased emission from CFP-BBX25, indicating that FRET had occurred between the two proteins prior to the bleach. Similarly, in control photobleaching experiments using the microscopic settings, FRET between untagged CFP and YFP was examined. Regions of interest were selected and bleached with 100 iterations using the argon-ion laser at 100%. At least 10 different nuclei were subjected to FRET , and average intensities before and after bleaching were plotted on the graph.
