---
pmid: '18307834'
title: Cathepsin C propeptide interacts with intestinal alkaline phosphatase and heat
  shock cognate protein 70 in human Caco-2 cells.
authors:
- Hirasaka K
- Tokuoka K
- Nakao R
- Yamada C
- Oarada M
- Imagawa T
- Ishidoh K
- Okumura Y
- Kishi K
- Nikawa T
journal: J Physiol Sci
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.2170/physiolsci.RP013007
---

# Cathepsin C propeptide interacts with intestinal alkaline phosphatase and heat shock cognate protein 70 in human Caco-2 cells.
**Authors:** Hirasaka K, Tokuoka K, Nakao R, Yamada C, Oarada M, Imagawa T, Ishidoh K, Okumura Y, Kishi K, Nikawa T
**Journal:** J Physiol Sci (2008)
**DOI:** [10.2170/physiolsci.RP013007](https://doi.org/10.2170/physiolsci.RP013007)

## Abstract

1. J Physiol Sci. 2008 Apr;58(2):105-11. doi: 10.2170/physiolsci.RP013007. Epub 
2008 Mar 1.

Cathepsin C propeptide interacts with intestinal alkaline phosphatase and heat 
shock cognate protein 70 in human Caco-2 cells.

Hirasaka K(1), Tokuoka K, Nakao R, Yamada C, Oarada M, Imagawa T, Ishidoh K, 
Okumura Y, Kishi K, Nikawa T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutritional Physiology, Institute of Health Biosciences, The 
University of Tokushima Graduate School, Tokushima, Japan.

The oligomeric structure and the residual propeptide are distinct 
characteristics of cathepsin C from other members in the papain superfamily. In 
this study, we examined the physiological role of the cathepsin C propeptide. 
The stable overexpression of cathepsin C propeptide significantly decreased the 
activities of intestinal alkaline phosphatase (IAP) and sucrase in human Caco-2 
intestinal epithelial cells, whereas it did not change the proliferation and 
cathepsin C activity. The overexpression of cathepsin C propeptide significantly 
decreased the amounts of IAP protein in differentiated Caco-2 cells, compared 
with the transfection of mock vector, whereas the amounts of IAP transcripts 
were not changed. Pulse-chase analysis confirmed that the reduction in IAP 
activity was due to an increase in IAP degradation, but not a decrease in IAP 
expression. For the mechanism of the enhanced IAP degradation, we identified 
proteins interacting with cathepsin C propeptide in Caco-2 cells by 
immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry. Cathepsin C propeptide interacted 
with proteins with a molecular mass of approximately 70 kDa, including IAP and 
heat shock cognate protein 70. Our present results suggest that the propeptide 
of cathepsin C may stimulate the sorting to the lysosome, at least in part, 
contributing to the degradation of IAP in Caco-2 cells.

DOI: 10.2170/physiolsci.RP013007
PMID: 18307834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
