---
pmid: '11737778'
title: Maize VP1 complements Arabidopsis abi3 and confers a novel ABA/auxin interaction
  in roots.
authors:
- Suzuki M
- Kao CY
- Cocciolone S
- McCarty DR
journal: Plant J
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-313x.2001.01165.x
---

# Maize VP1 complements Arabidopsis abi3 and confers a novel ABA/auxin interaction in roots.
**Authors:** Suzuki M, Kao CY, Cocciolone S, McCarty DR
**Journal:** Plant J (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1365-313x.2001.01165.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-313x.2001.01165.x)

## Abstract

1. Plant J. 2001 Nov;28(4):409-18. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-313x.2001.01165.x.

Maize VP1 complements Arabidopsis abi3 and confers a novel ABA/auxin interaction 
in roots.

Suzuki M(1), Kao CY, Cocciolone S, McCarty DR.

Author information:
(1)Plant Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, Horticultural Sciences 
Department, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA. masaharu@ufl.edu

The maize Vp1 gene and abi3 gene of Arabidopsis are believed to be orthologs 
based on similarities of the mutant phenotypes and amino acid sequence 
conservation. Here we show that expression of VP1 driven by the 35S promoter can 
partially complement abi3-6, a deletion mutant allele of abi3. The visible 
phenotype of seed produced from VP1 expression in the abi3 mutant background is 
nearly indistinguishable from wild type. VP1 fully restores abscisic acid (ABA) 
sensitivity of abi3 during seed germination and suppresses the early flowering 
phenotype of abi3. The temporal regulation of C1-beta-glucuronidase (GUS) and 
chlorophyll a/b binding protein (cab3)-GUS reporter genes in developing seeds of 
35S-VP1 lines were similar to wild type. On the other hand, two qualitative 
differences are observed between the 35S-VP1 line and wild type. The levels of 
CRC and C1-GUS expression are markedly lower in the seeds of 35S-VP1 lines than 
in wild type suggesting incomplete complementation of gene activation functions. 
Similar to ectopic expression of ABI3 (Parcy et al., 1994), ectopic expression 
of VP1 in vegetative tissue enhances ABA inhibition of root growth. In addition, 
35S-VP1 confers strong ABA inducible expression of the normally seed-specific 
cruciferin C (CRC) gene in leaves. In contrast, ectopic ABA induction of C1-GUS 
is restricted to a localized region of the root elongation zone. The 
ABA-dependent C1-GUS expression expanded to a broader area in the root tissues 
treated with exogenous application of auxin. Interestingly, auxin-induced 
lateral root formation is completely suppressed by ABA in 35S-VP1 plants but not 
in wild type. These results indicate VP1 mediates a novel interaction between 
ABA and auxin signaling that results in developmental arrest and altered 
patterns of gene expression.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-313x.2001.01165.x
PMID: 11737778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
