---
pmid: '23563491'
title: A global analysis of SNX27-retromer assembly and cargo specificity reveals
  a function in glucose and metal ion transport.
authors:
- Steinberg F
- Gallon M
- Winfield M
- Thomas EC
- Bell AJ
- Heesom KJ
- Tavaré JM
- Cullen PJ
journal: Nat Cell Biol
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4052425
doi: 10.1038/ncb2721
---

# A global analysis of SNX27-retromer assembly and cargo specificity reveals a function in glucose and metal ion transport.
**Authors:** Steinberg F, Gallon M, Winfield M, Thomas EC, Bell AJ, Heesom KJ, Tavaré JM, Cullen PJ
**Journal:** Nat Cell Biol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncb2721](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb2721)
**PMC:** [PMC4052425](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4052425/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Cell Biol. 2013 May;15(5):461-71. doi: 10.1038/ncb2721. Epub 2013 Apr 7.

A global analysis of SNX27-retromer assembly and cargo specificity reveals a 
function in glucose and metal ion transport.

Steinberg F(1), Gallon M, Winfield M, Thomas EC, Bell AJ, Heesom KJ, Tavaré JM, 
Cullen PJ.

Author information:
(1)The Henry Wellcome Integrated Signalling Laboratories, School of 
Biochemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1TD, UK.

Erratum in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2014 Aug;16(8):821.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2013 May;15(5):446-8. doi: 10.1038/ncb2751.

The PDZ-domain-containing sorting nexin 27 (SNX27) promotes recycling of 
internalized transmembrane proteins from endosomes to the plasma membrane by 
linking PDZ-dependent cargo recognition to retromer-mediated transport. Here, we 
employed quantitative proteomics of the SNX27 interactome and quantification of 
the surface proteome of SNX27- and retromer-suppressed cells to dissect the 
assembly of the SNX27 complex and provide an unbiased global view of 
SNX27-mediated sorting. Over 100 cell surface proteins, many of which interact 
with SNX27, including the glucose transporter GLUT1, the Menkes disease copper 
transporter ATP7A, various zinc and amino acid transporters, and numerous 
signalling receptors, require SNX27-retromer to prevent lysosomal degradation 
and maintain surface levels. Furthermore, we establish that direct interaction 
of the SNX27 PDZ domain with the retromer subunit VPS26 is necessary and 
sufficient to prevent lysosomal entry of SNX27 cargo. Our data identify the 
SNX27-retromer as a major endosomal recycling hub required to maintain cellular 
nutrient homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1038/ncb2721
PMCID: PMC4052425
PMID: 23563491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
