---
pmid: '3771793'
title: Familial apolipoprotein E deficiency.
authors:
- Schaefer EJ
- Gregg RE
- Ghiselli G
- Forte TM
- Ordovas JM
- Zech LA
- Brewer HB Jr
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '1986'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC423806
doi: 10.1172/JCI112704
pubmed_publication_types:
- Case Reports
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
publication_type: CASE_REPORT
---

# Familial apolipoprotein E deficiency.
**Authors:** Schaefer EJ, Gregg RE, Ghiselli G, Forte TM, Ordovas JM, Zech LA, Brewer HB Jr
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (1986)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI112704](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI112704)
**PMC:** [PMC423806](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC423806/)

## Abstract

1. J Clin Invest. 1986 Nov;78(5):1206-19. doi: 10.1172/JCI112704.

Familial apolipoprotein E deficiency.

Schaefer EJ, Gregg RE, Ghiselli G, Forte TM, Ordovas JM, Zech LA, Brewer HB Jr.

A unique kindred with premature cardiovascular disease, tubo-eruptive xanthomas, 
and type III hyperlipoproteinemia (HLP) associated with familial apolipoprotein 
(apo) E deficiency was examined. Homozygotes (n = 4) had marked increases in 
cholesterol-rich very low density lipoproteins (VLDL) and intermediate density 
lipoproteins (IDL), which could be effectively lowered with diet and medication 
(niacin, clofibrate). Homozygotes had only trace amounts of plasma apoE, and 
accumulations of apoB-48 and apoA-IV in VLDL, IDL, and low density lipoproteins. 
Radioiodinated VLDL apoB and apoE kinetic studies revealed that the homozygous 
proband had markedly retarded fractional catabolism of VLDL apoB-100, apoB-48 
and plasma apoE, as well as an extremely low apoE synthesis rate as compared to 
normals. Obligate heterozygotes (n = 10) generally had normal plasma lipids and 
mean plasma apoE concentrations that were 42% of normal. The data indicate that 
homozygous familial apoE deficiency is a cause of type III HLP, is associated 
with markedly decreased apoE production, and that apoE is essential for the 
normal catabolism of triglyceride-rich lipoprotein constituents.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI112704
PMCID: PMC423806
PMID: 3771793 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
