---
pmid: '16680093'
title: Tumour necrosis factor receptor 1 mediates endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced
  activation of the MAP kinase JNK.
authors:
- Yang Q
- Kim YS
- Lin Y
- Lewis J
- Neckers L
- Liu ZG
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1479600
doi: 10.1038/sj.embor.7400687
---

# Tumour necrosis factor receptor 1 mediates endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced activation of the MAP kinase JNK.
**Authors:** Yang Q, Kim YS, Lin Y, Lewis J, Neckers L, Liu ZG
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.embor.7400687](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.embor.7400687)
**PMC:** [PMC1479600](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1479600/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2006 Jun;7(6):622-7. doi: 10.1038/sj.embor.7400687. Epub 2006 May 5.

Tumour necrosis factor receptor 1 mediates endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced 
activation of the MAP kinase JNK.

Yang Q(1), Kim YS, Lin Y, Lewis J, Neckers L, Liu ZG.

Author information:
(1)Cell and Cancer Biology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer 
Institute, National Institutes of Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, 
Maryland 20892, USA.

Tumour necrosis factor receptor (TNFR)1 is the main receptor responsible for 
TNF-induced diverse cellular events. In this study, we report that TNFR1 has a 
crucial role in endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-induced Jun amino-terminal 
kinase (JNK) activation. Although ER stress leads to JNK activation in wild-type 
mouse embryo fibroblasts, we failed to detect any JNK activation in TNFR1-/- 
cells. ER stress-induced JNK activation is restored in TNFR1-/- cells when TNFR1 
expression is reconstituted. We also found that TNFR1 functions downstream of 
IRE1 and that IRE1 is present in the same complex with TNFR1 under ER stress 
condition. Therefore, our study shows a novel role of TNFR1 in mediating ER 
stress-induced JNK activation.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.embor.7400687
PMCID: PMC1479600
PMID: 16680093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
