---
pmid: '18403318'
title: Intracellular cholesterol transporter StarD4 binds free cholesterol and increases
  cholesteryl ester formation.
authors:
- Rodriguez-Agudo D
- Ren S
- Wong E
- Marques D
- Redford K
- Gil G
- Hylemon P
- Pandak WM
journal: J Lipid Res
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2431108
doi: 10.1194/jlr.M700537-JLR200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Intracellular cholesterol transporter StarD4 binds free cholesterol and increases cholesteryl ester formation.
**Authors:** Rodriguez-Agudo D, Ren S, Wong E, Marques D, Redford K, Gil G, Hylemon P, Pandak WM
**Journal:** J Lipid Res (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1194/jlr.M700537-JLR200](https://doi.org/10.1194/jlr.M700537-JLR200)
**PMC:** [PMC2431108](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2431108/)

## Abstract

1. J Lipid Res. 2008 Jul;49(7):1409-19. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M700537-JLR200. Epub
2008  Apr 9.

Intracellular cholesterol transporter StarD4 binds free cholesterol and 
increases cholesteryl ester formation.

Rodriguez-Agudo D(1), Ren S, Wong E, Marques D, Redford K, Gil G, Hylemon P, 
Pandak WM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Veterans Affairs Medical Center and Virginia 
Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA.

StarD4 protein is a member of the StarD4 subfamily of steroidogenic acute 
regulatory-related lipid transfer (START) domain proteins that includes StarD5 
and StarD6, proteins whose functions remain poorly defined. The objective of 
this study was to isolate and characterize StarD4's sterol binding and to 
determine in a hepatocyte culture model its sterol transport capabilities. 
Utilizing purified full-length StarD4, in vitro binding assays demonstrated a 
concentration-dependent binding of [(14)C]cholesterol by StarD4 similar to that 
of the cholesterol binding START domain proteins StarD1 and StarD5. Other tested 
sterols showed no detectable binding to StarD4, except for 
7alpha-hydroxycholesterol, for which StarD4 demonstrated weak binding on lipid 
protein overlay assays. Subsequently, an isolated mouse hepatocyte model was 
used to study the ability of StarD4 to bind/mobilize/distribute cellular 
cholesterol. Increased expression of StarD4 in primary mouse hepatocytes led to 
a marked increase in the intracellular cholesteryl ester concentration and in 
the rates of bile acid synthesis. The ability and specificity of StarD4 to bind 
cholesterol and, as a function of its level of expression, to direct endogenous 
cellular cholesterol suggest that StarD4 plays an important role as a 
directional cholesterol transporter in the maintenance of cellular cholesterol 
homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1194/jlr.M700537-JLR200
PMCID: PMC2431108
PMID: 18403318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
