---
pmid: '25660232'
title: miR-487b promotes human umbilical vein endothelial cell proliferation, migration,
  invasion and tube formation through regulating THBS1.
authors:
- Feng N
- Wang Z
- Zhang Z
- He X
- Wang C
- Zhang L
journal: Neurosci Lett
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2015.02.002
---

# miR-487b promotes human umbilical vein endothelial cell proliferation, migration, invasion and tube formation through regulating THBS1.
**Authors:** Feng N, Wang Z, Zhang Z, He X, Wang C, Zhang L
**Journal:** Neurosci Lett (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neulet.2015.02.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2015.02.002)

## Abstract

1. Neurosci Lett. 2015 Mar 30;591:1-7. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2015.02.002. Epub
2015  Feb 4.

miR-487b promotes human umbilical vein endothelial cell proliferation, 
migration, invasion and tube formation through regulating THBS1.

Feng N(1), Wang Z(2), Zhang Z(3), He X(3), Wang C(3), Zhang L(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, First Clinical Hospital, Harbin Medical University, 
Harbin 150001, China; Department of Neurology, Second Clinical Hospital, Harbin 
Medical University, Harbin 150086, China.
(2)Department of Cerebropathy, Qiqihaer City Hospital of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine, Qiqihaer 161000, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research 
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin 150001, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, First Clinical Hospital, Harbin Medical University, 
Harbin 150001, China. Electronic address: hydsjk@126.com.

Angiogenesis is essential for recovery from various neurovascular diseases, such 
as ischemic stroke. Previous studies have revealed the regulatory role of 
MicroRNAs in angiogenesis in various types of cancer cells. However, the role of 
miR-487b in angiogenesis and how it regulates the angiogenic process of 
endothelial cells remain unclear. In this study, we found miR-487b was 
up-regulated in the plasma of ischemic stroke patients. Further, over-expression 
of miR-487b enhanced cell proliferation, migration, invasion and tube formation 
in human umbilical vein endothelial cells. Using bioinformatic analysis, we 
found a putative binding site of miR-487b in the 3' untranslated regions of 
Thrombospondin 1 mRNA, an endogenous inhibitor of angiogenesis. This direct 
binding was confirmed by luciferase assay. These results demonstrate that 
miR-487b regulates angiogenesis by directly targeting THBS1 in HUVECs, 
indicating that miR-487b may contribute to angiogenesis and the functional 
recovery from ischemic stroke. miR-487b could represent a potential therapeutic 
option for neurovascular disease.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2015.02.002
PMID: 25660232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
