---
pmid: '17242201'
title: Coupled release of eukaryotic translation initiation factors 5B and 1A from
  80S ribosomes following subunit joining.
authors:
- Fringer JM
- Acker MG
- Fekete CA
- Lorsch JR
- Dever TE
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1820483
doi: 10.1128/MCB.02254-06
---

# Coupled release of eukaryotic translation initiation factors 5B and 1A from 80S ribosomes following subunit joining.
**Authors:** Fringer JM, Acker MG, Fekete CA, Lorsch JR, Dever TE
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.02254-06](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.02254-06)
**PMC:** [PMC1820483](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1820483/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Mar;27(6):2384-97. doi: 10.1128/MCB.02254-06. Epub 2007
Jan  22.

Coupled release of eukaryotic translation initiation factors 5B and 1A from 80S 
ribosomes following subunit joining.

Fringer JM(1), Acker MG, Fekete CA, Lorsch JR, Dever TE.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Gene Regulation and Development, National Institute of Child 
Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, 
USA.

The translation initiation GTPase eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5B 
(eIF5B) binds to the factor eIF1A and catalyzes ribosomal subunit joining in 
vitro. We show that rapid depletion of eIF5B in Saccharomyces cerevisiae results 
in the accumulation of eIF1A and mRNA on 40S subunits in vivo, consistent with a 
defect in subunit joining. Substituting Ala for the last five residues in eIF1A 
(eIF1A-5A) impairs eIF5B binding to eIF1A in cell extracts and to 40S complexes 
in vivo. Consistently, overexpression of eIF5B suppresses the growth and 
translation initiation defects in yeast expressing eIF1A-5A, indicating that 
eIF1A helps recruit eIF5B to the 40S subunit prior to subunit joining. The 
GTPase-deficient eIF5B-T439A mutant accumulated on 80S complexes in vivo and was 
retained along with eIF1A on 80S complexes formed in vitro. Likewise, eIF5B and 
eIF1A remained associated with 80S complexes formed in the presence of 
nonhydrolyzable GDPNP, whereas these factors were released from the 80S 
complexes in assays containing GTP. We propose that eIF1A facilitates the 
binding of eIF5B to the 40S subunit to promote subunit joining. Following 80S 
complex formation, GTP hydrolysis by eIF5B enables the release of both eIF5B and 
eIF1A, and the ribosome enters the elongation phase of protein synthesis.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.02254-06
PMCID: PMC1820483
PMID: 17242201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
