---
pmid: '14688263'
title: TRIP6 enhances lysophosphatidic acid-induced cell migration by interacting
  with the lysophosphatidic acid 2 receptor.
authors:
- Xu J
- Lai YJ
- Lin WC
- Lin FT
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3904432
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M311891200
---

# TRIP6 enhances lysophosphatidic acid-induced cell migration by interacting with the lysophosphatidic acid 2 receptor.
**Authors:** Xu J, Lai YJ, Lin WC, Lin FT
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M311891200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M311891200)
**PMC:** [PMC3904432](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3904432/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 12;279(11):10459-68. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M311891200. Epub 
2003 Dec 18.

TRIP6 enhances lysophosphatidic acid-induced cell migration by interacting with 
the lysophosphatidic acid 2 receptor.

Xu J(1), Lai YJ, Lin WC, Lin FT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Alabama 
35294-0005, USA.

Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) induces actin rearrangement, focal adhesion 
assembly, and cell migration through the activation of small G protein Rho and 
its downstream effectors. These diverse cellular responses are mediated by its 
associated G protein-coupled receptors. However, the mechanisms and specificity 
by which these LPA receptors mediate LPA actions are still poorly understood. 
Here we show that LPA stimulation promotes the interaction of the LPA(2) 
receptor with a focal adhesion molecule, TRIP6 (thyroid receptor interacting 
protein 6)/ZRP-1 (zyxin-related protein 1). TRIP6 directly binds to the 
carboxyl-terminal tail of the LPA(2) receptor through its LIM domains. 
LPA-dependent recruitment of TRIP6 to the plasma membrane promotes its targeting 
to focal adhesions and co-localization with actin stress fibers. In addition, 
TRIP6 associates with the components of focal complexes including paxillin, 
focal adhesion kinase, c-Src, and p130(cas) in an agonist-dependent manner. 
Overexpression of TRIP6 augments LPA-induced cell migration; in contrast, 
suppression of endogenous TRIP6 expression by a TRIP6-specific small interfering 
RNA reduces it in SKOV3 ovarian cancer cells. Strikingly, the association with 
TRIP6 is specific to the LPA(2) receptor but not LPA(1) or LPA(3) receptor, 
indicating a specific role for TRIP6 in regulating LPA(2) receptor-mediated 
signaling. Taken together, our results suggest that TRIP6 functions at a point 
of convergence between the activated LPA(2) receptor and downstream signals 
involved in cell adhesion and migration.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M311891200
PMCID: PMC3904432
PMID: 14688263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
