---
pmid: '23954414'
title: Beclin 2 functions in autophagy, degradation of G protein-coupled receptors,
  and metabolism.
authors:
- He C
- Wei Y
- Sun K
- Li B
- Dong X
- Zou Z
- Liu Y
- Kinch LN
- Khan S
- Sinha S
- Xavier RJ
- Grishin NV
- Xiao G
- Eskelinen EL
- Scherer PE
- Whistler JL
- Levine B
journal: Cell
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4231430
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.07.035
---

# Beclin 2 functions in autophagy, degradation of G protein-coupled receptors, and metabolism.
**Authors:** He C, Wei Y, Sun K, Li B, Dong X, Zou Z, Liu Y, Kinch LN, Khan S, Sinha S, Xavier RJ, Grishin NV, Xiao G, Eskelinen EL, Scherer PE, Whistler JL, Levine B
**Journal:** Cell (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2013.07.035](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2013.07.035)
**PMC:** [PMC4231430](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4231430/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2013 Aug 29;154(5):1085-1099. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.07.035. Epub 2013
 Aug 15.

Beclin 2 functions in autophagy, degradation of G protein-coupled receptors, and 
metabolism.

He C(1), Wei Y(1), Sun K(2), Li B(3), Dong X(4), Zou Z(1), Liu Y(4), Kinch 
LN(5), Khan S(3), Sinha S(6), Xavier RJ(7), Grishin NV(5), Xiao G(8), Eskelinen 
EL(9), Scherer PE(2), Whistler JL(10), Levine B(11).

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA; Center for Autophagy Research, University of 
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA; Department of Internal 
Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, 
USA.
(2)Touchstone Diabetes Center, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX 75390, USA; Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.
(4)Center for Autophagy Research, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA; Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.
(5)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA; Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA; Department of Biophysics, 
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.
(6)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, North Dakota State University, 
Fargo, ND 58102, USA.
(7)Center for Computational and Integrative Biology, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Gastrointestinal Unit, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA; 
Broad Institute of Harvard and Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
MA 02142, USA.
(8)Department of Clinical Sciences, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.
(9)Department of Biosciences, Division of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, 
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, FI-00014 Finland.
(10)Ernest Gallo Clinic and Research Center, University of California San 
Francisco, Emeryville, CA 94608, USA.
(11)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA; Center for Autophagy Research, University of 
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA; Department of Internal 
Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, 
USA; Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. Electronic address: 
beth.levine@utsouthwestern.edu.

Comment in
    Cell Res. 2013 Dec;23(12):1341-2. doi: 10.1038/cr.2013.129.

The molecular mechanism of autophagy and its relationship to other lysosomal 
degradation pathways remain incompletely understood. Here, we identified a 
previously uncharacterized mammalian-specific protein, Beclin 2, which, like 
Beclin 1, functions in autophagy and interacts with class III PI3K complex 
components and Bcl-2. However, Beclin 2, but not Beclin 1, functions in an 
additional lysosomal degradation pathway. Beclin 2 is required for 
ligand-induced endolysosomal degradation of several G protein-coupled receptors 
(GPCRs) through its interaction with GASP1. Beclin 2 homozygous knockout mice 
have decreased embryonic viability, and heterozygous knockout mice have 
defective autophagy, increased levels of brain cannabinoid 1 receptor, elevated 
food intake, and obesity and insulin resistance. Our findings identify Beclin 2 
as a converging regulator of autophagy and GPCR turnover and highlight the 
functional and mechanistic diversity of Beclin family members in autophagy, 
endolysosomal trafficking, and metabolism.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.07.035
PMCID: PMC4231430
PMID: 23954414 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
