---
pmid: '12525535'
title: 'A third MRX family (MRX68) is the result of mutation in the long chain fatty
  acid-CoA ligase 4 (FACL4) gene: proposal of a rapid enzymatic assay for screening
  mentally retarded patients.'
authors:
- Longo I
- Frints SG
- Fryns JP
- Meloni I
- Pescucci C
- Ariani F
- Borghgraef M
- Raynaud M
- Marynen P
- Schwartz C
- Renieri A
- Froyen G
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1735250
doi: 10.1136/jmg.40.1.11
---

# A third MRX family (MRX68) is the result of mutation in the long chain fatty acid-CoA ligase 4 (FACL4) gene: proposal of a rapid enzymatic assay for screening mentally retarded patients.
**Authors:** Longo I, Frints SG, Fryns JP, Meloni I, Pescucci C, Ariani F, Borghgraef M, Raynaud M, Marynen P, Schwartz C, Renieri A, Froyen G
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.40.1.11](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.40.1.11)
**PMC:** [PMC1735250](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1735250/)

## Abstract

1. J Med Genet. 2003 Jan;40(1):11-7. doi: 10.1136/jmg.40.1.11.

A third MRX family (MRX68) is the result of mutation in the long chain fatty 
acid-CoA ligase 4 (FACL4) gene: proposal of a rapid enzymatic assay for 
screening mentally retarded patients.

Longo I(1), Frints SG, Fryns JP, Meloni I, Pescucci C, Ariani F, Borghgraef M, 
Raynaud M, Marynen P, Schwartz C, Renieri A, Froyen G.

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics, Department of Molecular Biology, University of Siena, 
Italy.

BACKGROUND: The gene encoding fatty acid CoA ligase 4 (FACL4) is mutated in 
families with non-specific X linked mental retardation (MRX) and is responsible 
for cognitive impairment in the contiguous gene syndrome ATS-MR (Alport syndrome 
and mental retardation), mapped to Xq22.3. This finding makes this gene a good 
candidate for other mental retardation disorders mapping in this region.
METHODS: We have screened the FACL4 gene in eight families, two MRX and six 
syndromic X linked mental retardation (MRXS), mapping in a large interval 
encompassing Xq22.3.
RESULTS: We have found a missense mutation in MRX68. The mutation (c.1001C>T in 
the brain isoform) cosegregates with the disease and changes a highly conserved 
proline into a leucine (p.P375L) in the first luciferase domain, which markedly 
reduces the enzymatic activity. Furthermore, all heterozygous females showed 
completely skewed X inactivation in blood leucocytes, as happens in all reported 
females with other FACL4 point mutations or deletions.
CONCLUSIONS: Since the FACL4 gene is highly expressed in brain, where it encodes 
a brain specific isoform, and is located in hippocampal and cerebellar neurones, 
a role for this gene in cognitive processes can be expected. Here we report the 
third MRX family with a FACL4 mutation and describe the development of a rapid 
enzymatic assay on peripheral blood that we propose as a sensitive, robust, and 
efficient diagnostic tool in mentally retarded males.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.40.1.11
PMCID: PMC1735250
PMID: 12525535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
