---
pmid: '10801173'
title: Identification of target antigen for SLA/LP autoantibodies in autoimmune hepatitis.
authors:
- Wies I
- Brunner S
- Henninger J
- Herkel J
- Kanzler S
- Meyer zum Büschenfelde KH
- Lohse AW
journal: Lancet
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(00)02166-8
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Identification of target antigen for SLA/LP autoantibodies in autoimmune hepatitis.
**Authors:** Wies I, Brunner S, Henninger J, Herkel J, Kanzler S, Meyer zum Büschenfelde KH, Lohse AW
**Journal:** Lancet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0140-6736(00)02166-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0140-6736(00)02166-8)

## Abstract

1. Lancet. 2000 Apr 29;355(9214):1510-5. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(00)02166-8.

Identification of target antigen for SLA/LP autoantibodies in autoimmune 
hepatitis.

Wies I(1), Brunner S, Henninger J, Herkel J, Kanzler S, Meyer zum Büschenfelde 
KH, Lohse AW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2000 Apr 29;355(9214):1475-6. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(00)02156-5.

BACKGROUND: Autoantibodies are a hallmark of autoimmune hepatitis, but most are 
not disease specific. Autoantibodies to soluble liver antigen (SLA) and to liver 
and pancreas antigen (LP) have been described as disease specific, occurring in 
about 30% of all patients with autoimmune hepatitis, but no standardised assays 
are available. Methods We tested 2000 serum samples from patients with various 
liver diseases and controls for SLA autoantibodies by inhibition ELISA. Serum 
samples positive for SLA antibodies were used for immunoscreening of cDNA 
expression libraries. Identified clones were tested against a panel of serum 
samples positive for SLA and LP autoantibodies and control serum samples, and 
the epitope mapped by deletion mutants and exonuclease digestion.
FINDINGS: SLA and LP autoantibodies were identical. Of 2000 serum samples 
screened, 35 were positive for SLA autoantibodies. These positive samples came 
from patients with autoimmune hepatitis; three from patients with an overlap 
syndrome (primary biliary cirrhosis and secondary autoimmune hepatitis). 
Expression cloning and absorption experiments identified a 422 aminoacid protein 
present in two splice variants as the sole target antigen. Aminoacids 371-409 
were critical for immune recognition.
INTERPRETATION: The identified cDNA encodes the primary target antigen of SLA/LP 
autoantibodies. The SLA/LP antigen has a previously unknown aminoacid sequence, 
and presumably codes for an unindentified enzyme, suggested to be UGA-suppressor 
tRNA-associated protein. SLA/LP autoantibodies are disease specific and 
recognise a dominant epitope, suggesting a specific antigen-driven immune 
response. Identification of the SLA/LP target antigen will allow establishment 
of a reliable, widely available diagnostic assay. Furthermore, its role in the 
pathogenesis of autoimmune hepatitis can now be studied.

DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(00)02166-8
PMID: 10801173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
