---
pmid: '25351493'
title: Nod factor receptors form heteromeric complexes and are essential for intracellular
  infection in medicago nodules.
authors:
- Moling S
- Pietraszewska-Bogiel A
- Postma M
- Fedorova E
- Hink MA
- Limpens E
- Gadella TW
- Bisseling T
journal: Plant Cell
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4247574
doi: 10.1105/tpc.114.129502
---

# Nod factor receptors form heteromeric complexes and are essential for intracellular infection in medicago nodules.
**Authors:** Moling S, Pietraszewska-Bogiel A, Postma M, Fedorova E, Hink MA, Limpens E, Gadella TW, Bisseling T
**Journal:** Plant Cell (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1105/tpc.114.129502](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.114.129502)
**PMC:** [PMC4247574](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4247574/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell. 2014 Oct;26(10):4188-99. doi: 10.1105/tpc.114.129502. Epub 2014
Oct  28.

Nod factor receptors form heteromeric complexes and are essential for 
intracellular infection in medicago nodules.

Moling S(1), Pietraszewska-Bogiel A(2), Postma M(2), Fedorova E(1), Hink MA(2), 
Limpens E(1), Gadella TW(2), Bisseling T(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Wageningen University, 6708 PB Wageningen, 
The Netherlands.
(2)Section of Molecular Cytology and van Leeuwenhoek Centre for Advanced 
Microscopy, Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, University of Amsterdam, 
1090 GE Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology, Wageningen University, 6708 PB Wageningen, 
The Netherlands College of Science, King Saud University, Riyadh 11451, Saudi 
Arabia ton.bisseling@wur.nl.

Rhizobial Nod factors are the key signaling molecules in the legume-rhizobium 
nodule symbiosis. In this study, the role of the Nod factor receptors NOD FACTOR 
PERCEPTION (NFP) and LYSIN MOTIF RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE3 (LYK3) in establishing 
the symbiotic interface in root nodules was investigated. It was found that 
inside Medicago truncatula nodules, NFP and LYK3 localize at the cell periphery 
in a narrow zone of about two cell layers at the nodule apex. This restricted 
accumulation is narrower than the region of promoter activity/mRNA accumulation 
and might serve to prevent the induction of defense-like responses and/or to 
restrict the rhizobium release to precise cell layers. The distal cell layer 
where the receptors accumulate at the cell periphery is part of the meristem, 
and the proximal layer is part of the infection zone. In these layers, the 
receptors can most likely perceive the bacterial Nod factors to regulate the 
formation of symbiotic interface. Furthermore, our Förster resonance energy 
transfer-fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy analysis indicates that NFP 
and LYK3 form heteromeric complexes at the cell periphery in M. truncatula 
nodules.

© 2014 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.114.129502
PMCID: PMC4247574
PMID: 25351493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
