---
pmid: '9094096'
title: Analysis of expression and function of topoisomerase I and II during meiosis
  in male mice.
authors:
- Cobb J
- Reddy RK
- Park C
- Handel MA
journal: Mol Reprod Dev
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1098-2795(199704)46:4<489::AID-MRD7>3.0.CO;2-K
---

# Analysis of expression and function of topoisomerase I and II during meiosis in male mice.
**Authors:** Cobb J, Reddy RK, Park C, Handel MA
**Journal:** Mol Reprod Dev (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1002/(SICI)1098-2795(199704)46:4<489::AID-MRD7>3.0.CO;2-K](https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1098-2795(199704)46:4<489::AID-MRD7>3.0.CO;2-K)

## Abstract

1. Mol Reprod Dev. 1997 Apr;46(4):489-98. doi: 
10.1002/(SICI)1098-2795(199704)46:4<489::AID-MRD7>3.0.CO;2-K.

Analysis of expression and function of topoisomerase I and II during meiosis in 
male mice.

Cobb J(1), Reddy RK, Park C, Handel MA.

Author information:
(1)Dept. Biochemistry and Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of 
Tennessee, Knoxville 37996-0840, USA.

Topoisomerases are nuclear enzymes that remove torsional stress in DNA. Their 
function is important for replication, transcription, chromosome condensation, 
and chromosome segregation during mitosis and meiosis. The goal of this work is 
to analyze both expression and function of topoisomerases during the meiotic 
stages of mammalian spermatogenesis. The patterns of expression of topoisomerase 
I and topoisomerase II alpha genes were followed on Northern blots of RNA from 
testes of mice of different ages and from specific germ cell populations. The 
transcript of the topoisomerase I gene was highest in somatic cells of the 
testis and in the mitotically proliferating spermatogonia and meiotic prophase 
spermatocytes, with the level of transcript decreasing dramatically in 
postmeiotic spermatids. In contrast, the levels of topoisomerase II alpha 
transcript were negligible in germ-cell free testes and highest in late meiotic 
prophase cells and round spermatids. Enzyme activity for both topoisomerase I 
and topoisomerase II was detected in both pachytene spermatocytes and in round 
spermatids; topoisomerase II exhibited a higher level of activity in meiotic 
spermatocytes than in round spermatids. In cultured cells, camptothecin, an 
inhibitor of topoisomerase I, caused some abnormalities of paired meiotic 
homologs, but did not inhibit the transition to metaphase. In contrast, 
teniposide and ICRF-193, inhibitors of topoisomerase II, dramatically inhibited 
the formation of metaphase chromosomes in cells induced to progress from 
prophase to metaphase. However, the disassembly of the synaptonemal complex was 
not inhibited, indicating that this process could be uncoupled from condensation 
of chromatin to form chromosomes. These studies constitute evidence for a 
functional requirement for topoisomerase II activity in the transition from 
meiotic prophase to meiotic metaphase I in mammalian spermatocytes.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1098-2795(199704)46:4<489::AID-MRD7>3.0.CO;2-K
PMID: 9094096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
