---
pmid: '15226430'
title: Circadian and light-induced transcription of clock gene Per1 depends on histone
  acetylation and deacetylation.
authors:
- Naruse Y
- Oh-hashi K
- Iijima N
- Naruse M
- Yoshioka H
- Tanaka M
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC434252
doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.14.6278-6287.2004
---

# Circadian and light-induced transcription of clock gene Per1 depends on histone acetylation and deacetylation.
**Authors:** Naruse Y, Oh-hashi K, Iijima N, Naruse M, Yoshioka H, Tanaka M
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.24.14.6278-6287.2004](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.24.14.6278-6287.2004)
**PMC:** [PMC434252](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC434252/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jul;24(14):6278-87. doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.14.6278-6287.2004.

Circadian and light-induced transcription of clock gene Per1 depends on histone 
acetylation and deacetylation.

Naruse Y(1), Oh-hashi K, Iijima N, Naruse M, Yoshioka H, Tanaka M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, 
Kawaramachi-Hirokoji, Kamikyo-ku, Kyoto 602-0841, Japan.

Circadian clock genes are regulated through a transcriptional-translational 
feedback loop. Alterations of the chromatin structure by histone 
acetyltransferases and histone deacetylases (HDACs) are commonly implicated in 
the regulation of gene transcription. However, little is known about the 
transcriptional regulation of mammalian clock genes by chromatin modification. 
Here, we show that the state of acetylated histones fluctuated in parallel with 
the rhythm of mouse Per1 (mPer1) or mPer2 expression in fibroblast cells and 
liver. Mouse CRY1 (mCRY1) repressed transcription with HDACs and mSin3B, which 
was relieved by the HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA). In turn, TSA induced 
endogenous mPer1 expression as well as the acetylation of histones H3 and H4, 
which interacted with the mPer1 promoter region in fibroblast cells. Moreover, a 
light pulse stimulated rapid histone acetylation associated with the promoters 
of mPer1 or mPer2 in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) and the binding of 
phospho-CREB in the CRE of mPer1. We also showed that TSA administration into 
the lateral ventricle induced mPer1 and mPer2 expression in the SCN. Taken 
together, these data indicate that the rhythmic transcription and light 
induction of clock genes are regulated by histone acetylation and deacetylation.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.24.14.6278-6287.2004
PMCID: PMC434252
PMID: 15226430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
