---
pmid: '15720133'
title: Monochloroacetic acid inhibits liver gluconeogenesis by inactivating glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
  dehydrogenase.
authors:
- Sakai A
- Shimizu H
- Kono K
- Furuya E
journal: Chem Res Toxicol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/tx0497705
---

# Monochloroacetic acid inhibits liver gluconeogenesis by inactivating glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase.
**Authors:** Sakai A, Shimizu H, Kono K, Furuya E
**Journal:** Chem Res Toxicol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1021/tx0497705](https://doi.org/10.1021/tx0497705)

## Abstract

1. Chem Res Toxicol. 2005 Feb;18(2):277-82. doi: 10.1021/tx0497705.

Monochloroacetic acid inhibits liver gluconeogenesis by inactivating 
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase.

Sakai A(1), Shimizu H, Kono K, Furuya E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Osaka Medical College, 2-7 Daigakumachi, Takatsuki, 
Osaka 569-8686, Japan. asakai@art.osaka-med.ac.jp

We previously reported that a lethal dose of monochloroacetate (MCA) causes 
severe hypoglycemia and lactic acidosis. MCA has been thought to inhibit 
mitochondrial aconitase; however, the exact effect of MCA on hepatic glucose 
metabolism is not clear. In this study, we investigated the effects of MCA on 
liver gluconeogenesis using an isolated perfused rat liver system. 
Gluconeogenesis from 2.5 mM lactate was inhibited by 1 mM MCA and was completely 
abolished after 2 h of perfusion. Levels of citric acid cycle intermediates such 
as citrate, isocitrate, and 2-oxoglutarate (2-OG) were significantly reduced by 
MCA. The finding that the levels of citrate and 2-OG were similarly reduced (to 
31 and 36% of control, respectively) indicates that aconitase was not inhibited 
by MCA. On the contrary, gluconeogenesis from glycerol, which can be converted 
to glucose without glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), was not 
inhibited by MCA. GAPDH was inactivated by MCA in vitro, but enolase, 
phosphoglycerate mutase, and phosphoglycerate kinase were not inactivated at the 
same or higher concentrations of MCA. Furthermore, GAPDH activity in the 
MCA-perfused liver decreased to 33-42% of control and that in the liver of rats 
exposed to MCA was reduced to 19% of control. We concluded that MCA inactivates 
GAPDH, and this is the cause of the inhibition of liver gluconeogenesis.

DOI: 10.1021/tx0497705
PMID: 15720133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
