---
pmid: '18199581'
title: Polo kinases regulate C. elegans embryonic polarity via binding to DYRK2-primed
  MEX-5 and MEX-6.
authors:
- Nishi Y
- Rogers E
- Robertson SM
- Lin R
journal: Development
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/dev.013425
---

# Polo kinases regulate C. elegans embryonic polarity via binding to DYRK2-primed MEX-5 and MEX-6.
**Authors:** Nishi Y, Rogers E, Robertson SM, Lin R
**Journal:** Development (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.013425](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.013425)

## Abstract

1. Development. 2008 Feb;135(4):687-97. doi: 10.1242/dev.013425. Epub 2008 Jan
16.

Polo kinases regulate C. elegans embryonic polarity via binding to DYRK2-primed 
MEX-5 and MEX-6.

Nishi Y(1), Rogers E, Robertson SM, Lin R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Polo kinases are known key regulators of cell divisions. Here we report a novel, 
non-cell division function for polo kinases in embryonic polarity of newly 
fertilized Caenorhabditis elegans embryos. We show that polo kinases, via their 
polo box domains, bind to and regulate the activity of two key polarity 
proteins, MEX-5 and MEX-6. These polo kinases are asymmetrically localized along 
the anteroposterior axis of newly fertilized C. elegans embryos in a pattern 
identical to that of MEX-5 and MEX-6. This asymmetric localization of polo 
kinases depends on MEX-5 and MEX-6, as well as genes regulating MEX-5 and MEX-6 
asymmetry. We identify an amino acid of MEX-5, T(186), essential for polo 
binding and show that T(186) is important for MEX-5 function in vivo. We also 
show that MBK-2, a developmentally regulated DYRK2 kinase activated at meiosis 
II, primes T(186) for subsequent polo kinase-dependent phosphorylation. Prior 
phosphorylation of MEX-5 at T(186) greatly enhances phosphorylation of MEX-5 by 
polo kinases in vitro. Our results provide a mechanism by which MEX-5 and MEX-6 
function is temporally regulated during the crucial oocyte-to-embryo transition.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.013425
PMID: 18199581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
