---
pmid: '10497248'
title: The N-terminal anchor sequences of 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases determine
  their orientation in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane.
authors:
- Odermatt A
- Arnold P
- Stauffer A
- Frey BM
- Frey FJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.40.28762
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The N-terminal anchor sequences of 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases determine their orientation in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane.
**Authors:** Odermatt A, Arnold P, Stauffer A, Frey BM, Frey FJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.274.40.28762](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.40.28762)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Oct 1;274(40):28762-70. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.40.28762.

The N-terminal anchor sequences of 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases 
determine their orientation in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane.

Odermatt A(1), Arnold P, Stauffer A, Frey BM, Frey FJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, University of Berne, 3010 
Berne, Switzerland. alex.odermatt@dkf2.unibe.ch

11beta-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase enzymes (11beta- HSD) regulate the ratio of 
active endogenous glucocorticoids to their inactive keto-metabolites, thereby 
controlling the access of glucocorticoids to their cognate receptors. In this 
study, the topology and intracellular localization of 11beta-HSD1 and 
11beta-HSD2 have been analyzed by immunohistochemistry and protease protection 
assays of in vitro transcription/translation products. 11beta-HSD constructs, 
tagged with the FLAG epitope, were transiently expressed in HEK-293 cells. The 
enzymatic characteristics of tagged and native enzymes were indistinguishable. 
Fluorescence microscopy demonstrated the localization of both 11beta-HSD1 and 
11beta-HSD2 exclusively to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane. To examine 
the orientation of tagged 11beta-HSD enzymes within the ER membrane, we stained 
selectively permeabilized HEK-293 cells with anti-FLAG antibody. 
Immunohistochemistry revealed that the N terminus of 11beta-HSD1 is cytoplasmic, 
and the catalytic domain containing the C terminus is protruding into the ER 
lumen. In contrast, the N terminus of 11beta-HSD2 is lumenal, and the catalytic 
domain is facing the cytoplasm. Chimeric proteins where the N-terminal anchor 
sequences of 11beta-HSD1 and 11beta-HSD2 were exchanged adopted inverted 
orientation in the ER membrane. However, both chimeric proteins were not 
catalytically active. Furthermore, mutation of a tyrosine motif to alanine in 
the transmembrane segment of 11beta-HSD1 significantly reduced V(max). The 
subcellular localization of 11beta-HSD1 was not affected by mutations of the 
tyrosine motif or of a di-lysine motif in the N terminus. However, residue 
Lys(5), but not Lys(6), turned out to be critical for the topology of 
11beta-HSD1. Mutation of Lys(5) to Ser inverted the orientation of 11beta-HSD1 
in the ER membrane without loss of catalytic activity. Our results emphasize the 
importance of the N-terminal transmembrane segments of 11beta-HSD enzymes for 
their proper function and demonstrate that they are sufficient to determine 
their orientation in the ER membrane.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.40.28762
PMID: 10497248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
