---
pmid: '17087506'
title: Human cystathionine beta-synthase is a target for sumoylation.
authors:
- Kabil O
- Zhou Y
- Banerjee R
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi0615644
---

# Human cystathionine beta-synthase is a target for sumoylation.
**Authors:** Kabil O, Zhou Y, Banerjee R
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi0615644](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi0615644)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2006 Nov 14;45(45):13528-36. doi: 10.1021/bi0615644.

Human cystathionine beta-synthase is a target for sumoylation.

Kabil O(1), Zhou Y, Banerjee R.

Author information:
(1)Redox Biology Center, Biochemistry Department, University of Nebraska, 
Lincoln, Nebraska 68588-0664, USA.

Cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS) catalyzes the first irreversible step in the 
transsulfuration pathway and commits the toxic metabolite, homocysteine, to the 
synthesis of cysteine. Mutations in CBS are the most common cause of severe 
hereditary hyperhomocysteinemia. The molecular basis of the organ-specific 
pathologies associated with CBS deficiency is unknown as is the significance of 
the reported interaction between CBS and Huntingtin protein. In this study, we 
have used the yeast two-hybrid approach to screen for proteins that interact 
with CBS and have identified several components of the sumoylation pathway 
including Ubc9, PIAS1, PIAS3, Pc2, and RanBPM. We demonstrate that CBS is 
modified by the small ubiquitin-like modifier-1 protein (SUMO-I) under both in 
vitro and in vivo conditions. Deletion analysis of CBS indicates that the 
C-terminal regulatory domain is required for interaction with proteins in the 
sumoylation machinery. Sumoylated CBS is present in the nucleus where it is 
associated with the nuclear scaffold. The discovery that CBS is a target of 
sumoylation adds another layer to the complex regulation of this enzyme and 
reveals a previously unknown residence for this protein, i.e., in the nucleus.

DOI: 10.1021/bi0615644
PMID: 17087506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
