---
pmid: '11231009'
title: Identification of mouse Jun dimerization protein 2 as a novel repressor of
  ATF-2.
authors:
- Jin C
- Ugai H
- Song J
- Murata T
- Nili F
- Sun K
- Horikoshi M
- Yokoyama KK
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(00)02387-5
---

# Identification of mouse Jun dimerization protein 2 as a novel repressor of ATF-2.
**Authors:** Jin C, Ugai H, Song J, Murata T, Nili F, Sun K, Horikoshi M, Yokoyama KK
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0014-5793(00)02387-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0014-5793(00)02387-5)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2001 Jan 26;489(1):34-41. doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(00)02387-5.

Identification of mouse Jun dimerization protein 2 as a novel repressor of 
ATF-2.

Jin C(1), Ugai H, Song J, Murata T, Nili F, Sun K, Horikoshi M, Yokoyama KK.

Author information:
(1)RIKEN, The Institute of Physical and Chemical Research, Tsukuba Institute, 
Tsukuba, Japan.

A mouse cDNA that encodes a DNA-binding protein was identified by yeast 
two-hybrid screening, using activating transcription factor-2 (ATF-2) as the 
bait. The protein contained a bZIP (basic amino acid-leucine zipper region) 
domain and its amino acid sequence was almost identical to that of rat Jun 
dimerization protein 2 (JDP2). Mouse JDP2 interacted with ATF-2 both in vitro 
and in vivo via its bZIP domain. It was encoded by a single gene and various 
transcripts were expressed in all tested tissues of adult mice, as well as in 
embryos, albeit at different levels in various tissues. Furthermore, mouse JDP2 
bound to the cAMP-response element (CRE) as a homodimer or as a heterodimer with 
ATF-2, and repressed CRE-dependent transcription that was mediated by ATF-2. 
JDP2 was identified as a novel repressor protein that affects ATF-2-mediated 
transcription.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(00)02387-5
PMID: 11231009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
