---
pmid: '21051298'
title: Spatio-temporal composition of the mitotic Chromosomal Passenger Complex detected
  using in situ proximity ligation assay.
authors:
- Vuoriluoto M
- Laine LJ
- Saviranta P
- Pouwels J
- Kallio MJ
journal: Mol Oncol
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5528271
doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2010.10.002
---

# Spatio-temporal composition of the mitotic Chromosomal Passenger Complex detected using in situ proximity ligation assay.
**Authors:** Vuoriluoto M, Laine LJ, Saviranta P, Pouwels J, Kallio MJ
**Journal:** Mol Oncol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molonc.2010.10.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molonc.2010.10.002)
**PMC:** [PMC5528271](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5528271/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Oncol. 2011 Feb;5(1):105-11. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2010.10.002. Epub 2010 
Oct 16.

Spatio-temporal composition of the mitotic Chromosomal Passenger Complex 
detected using in situ proximity ligation assay.

Vuoriluoto M(1), Laine LJ, Saviranta P, Pouwels J, Kallio MJ.

Author information:
(1)VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, Medical Biotechnology, Itäinen 
Pitkäkatu 4C, 20520 Turku, Finland.

Cell division is orchestrated by a complex protein network that aims to 
maintenance of genomic stability. Visualisation of mitotic protein-protein 
associations in space and time has been limited due to the lack of proper 
biochemical and easy-to-use imaging tools. Here we report adaptation of the in 
situ proximity ligation assay (is-PLA) to study mitotic protein interactions 
with spatio-temporal resolution. We examined the composition of the Chromosomal 
Passenger Complex (CPC) at various mitotic phases and after chemical treatments 
using is-PLA with antibodies against the core CPC subunits Aurora B, INCENP, 
Survivin and Borealin. Our results support the notion that the core CPC 
functions as a single structural unit at centromeres in early mitosis and at 
central spindle after the onset of anaphase. Treatment of cells with the Aurora 
B inhibitor ZM447439 diminished the is-PLA signals at centromeres suggesting 
that Aurora B activity contributes to structural maintenance and/or proper 
subcellular localization of the core CPC. Is-PLA-based analysis of interaction 
between INCENP and Polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1) proposes that the kinase co-travels 
with CPC during late mitosis. The data illustrates both the strengths and 
limitations of the is-PLA in the analysis of mitotic macromolecule associations 
at sub-organelle level.

Copyright © 2010 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molonc.2010.10.002
PMCID: PMC5528271
PMID: 21051298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
