---
pmid: '1057175'
title: A protein factor essential for microtubule assembly.
authors:
- Weingarten MD
- Lockwood AH
- Hwo SY
- Kirschner MW
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1975'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC432646
doi: 10.1073/pnas.72.5.1858
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# A protein factor essential for microtubule assembly.
**Authors:** Weingarten MD, Lockwood AH, Hwo SY, Kirschner MW
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1975)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.72.5.1858](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.72.5.1858)
**PMC:** [PMC432646](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC432646/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1975 May;72(5):1858-62. doi: 10.1073/pnas.72.5.1858.

A protein factor essential for microtubule assembly.

Weingarten MD, Lockwood AH, Hwo SY, Kirschner MW.

A heat stable protein essentail for microtubule assembly has been isolated. This 
protein, which we designate tau (tau), is present in association with tubulin 
purified from porcine brain by repeated cycles of polymerization. Tau is 
separated from tubulin by ion exchange chromatography on phosphocellulose. In 
the absence of tau, tubulin exists entirely as a 6S dimer of two polypeptide 
chains (alpha and beta tubulin) with a molecular weight of 120,000, which will 
not assemble into microtubules in vitro. Addition of tau completely restores 
tubule-forming capacity. Under nonpolymerizing conditions, tau converts 6S 
dimers to 36S rings-structures which have been implicated as intermediates in 
tubule formation. Hence, tau appears to act on the 6S tubulin dimer, activating 
it for polymerization. The unique ability of tau to restore the normal features 
of in vitro microtubule assembly makes it likely that tau is a major regulator 
of microtubule formation in cells.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.72.5.1858
PMCID: PMC432646
PMID: 1057175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

A heat stable protein essentail for microtubule assembly has been isolated. This protein, which we designate tau (tau), is present in association with tubulin purified from porcine brain by repeated cycles of polymerization. Tau is separated from tubulin by ion exchange chromatography on phosphocellulose. In the absence of tau, tubulin exists entirely as a 6S dimer of two polypeptide chains (alpha and beta tubulin) with a molecular weight of 120,000, which will not assemble into microtubules in vitro. Addition of tau completely restores tubule-forming capacity. Under nonpolymerizing conditions, tau converts 6S dimers to 36S rings-structures which have been implicated as intermediates in tubule formation. Hence, tau appears to act on the 6S tubulin dimer, activating it for polymerization. The unique ability of tau to restore the normal features of in vitro microtubule assembly makes it likely that tau is a major regulator of microtubule formation in cells.
