---
reference_id: PMID:34757425
title: The F-box protein Bard (CG14317) targets the Smaug RNA-binding protein for destruction during the Drosophila maternal-to-zygotic transition.
authors:
- Cao WX
- Karaiskakis A
- Lin S
- Angers S
- Lipshitz HD
journal: Genetics
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/genetics/iyab177
keywords:
- Animals
- "Drosophila Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- "Drosophila melanogaster/genetics, metabolism"
- Zygote/metabolism
- "RNA-Binding Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- Female
- "F-Box Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Proteolysis
- Protein Binding
- Repressor Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# The F-box protein Bard (CG14317) targets the Smaug RNA-binding protein for destruction during the Drosophila maternal-to-zygotic transition.
**Authors:** Cao WX, Karaiskakis A, Lin S, Angers S, Lipshitz HD
**Journal:** Genetics (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/genetics/iyab177](https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyab177)

## Content

1. Genetics. 2022 Jan 4;220(1):iyab177. doi: 10.1093/genetics/iyab177.

The F-box protein Bard (CG14317) targets the Smaug RNA-binding protein for 
destruction during the Drosophila maternal-to-zygotic transition.

Cao WX(1), Karaiskakis A(1), Lin S(2), Angers S(2), Lipshitz HD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G 1M1, 
Canada.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences & Donnelly Centre, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3E1, Canada.

During the maternal-to-zygotic transition (MZT), which encompasses the earliest 
stages of animal embryogenesis, a subset of maternally supplied gene products is 
cleared, thus permitting activation of zygotic gene expression. In the 
Drosophila melanogaster embryo, the RNA-binding protein Smaug (SMG) plays an 
essential role in progression through the MZT by translationally repressing and 
destabilizing a large number of maternal mRNAs. The SMG protein itself is 
rapidly cleared at the end of the MZT by a Skp/Cullin/F-box (SCF) E3-ligase 
complex. Clearance of SMG requires zygotic transcription and is required for an 
orderly MZT. Here, we show that an F-box protein, which we name Bard (encoded by 
CG14317), is required for degradation of SMG. Bard is expressed zygotically and 
physically interacts with SMG at the end of the MZT, coincident with binding of 
the maternal SCF proteins, SkpA and Cullin1, and with degradation of SMG. 
shRNA-mediated knock-down of Bard or deletion of the bard gene in the early 
embryo results in stabilization of SMG protein, a phenotype that is rescued by 
transgenes expressing Bard. Bard thus times the clearance of SMG at the end of 
the MZT.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Genetics 
Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/genetics/iyab177
PMCID: PMC8733446
PMID: 34757425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]