---
pmid: '15632412'
title: Collecting duct-specific knockout of endothelin-1 alters vasopressin regulation
  of urine osmolality.
authors:
- Ge Y
- Ahn D
- Stricklett PK
- Hughes AK
- Yanagisawa M
- Verbalis JG
- Kohan DE
journal: Am J Physiol Renal Physiol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1152/ajprenal.00432.2004
---

# Collecting duct-specific knockout of endothelin-1 alters vasopressin regulation of urine osmolality.
**Authors:** Ge Y, Ahn D, Stricklett PK, Hughes AK, Yanagisawa M, Verbalis JG, Kohan DE
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Renal Physiol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajprenal.00432.2004](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajprenal.00432.2004)

## Abstract

1. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2005 May;288(5):F912-20. doi: 
10.1152/ajprenal.00432.2004. Epub 2005 Jan 4.

Collecting duct-specific knockout of endothelin-1 alters vasopressin regulation 
of urine osmolality.

Ge Y(1), Ahn D, Stricklett PK, Hughes AK, Yanagisawa M, Verbalis JG, Kohan DE.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, University of Utah Health Sciences Center, 30 North 
1900 East, Salt Lake City, Utah 84132, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2005 May;288(5):F910-1. doi: 
10.1152/ajprenal.00014.2005.

In vitro studies suggest that endothelin-1 (ET-1) inhibits vasopressin 
(AVP)-stimulated water permeability in the collecting duct (CD). To evaluate the 
role of CD-derived ET-1 in regulating renal water metabolism, the ET-1 gene was 
selectively disrupted in the CD (CD ET-1 KO). During normal water intake, 
urinary osmolality (Uosm), plasma Na concentration, urine volume, and renal 
aquaporin-2 (AQP2) levels were unchanged, but plasma AVP concentration was 
reduced in CD ET-1 KO animals. CD ET-1 KO mice had impaired ability to excrete 
an acute, but not a chronic, water load, and this was associated with increased 
CD ET-1 mRNA in control, but not CD ET-1 KO, mice. In response to continuous 
infusion of 1-desamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin, CD ET-1 KO mice had greater 
increases in Uosm, V2 and AQP2 mRNA, and phosphorylation of AQP2. CD suspensions 
from CD ET-1 KO mice had enhanced AVP- and forskolin-stimulated cAMP 
accumulation. These data indicate that CD ET-1 KO increases renal sensitivity to 
the urinary concentrating effects of AVP and suggest that ET-1 functions as a 
physiological autocrine regulator of AVP action in the CD.

DOI: 10.1152/ajprenal.00432.2004
PMID: 15632412 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
