---
pmid: '10501658'
title: 'Platelet glycoprotein Ib: a zinc-dependent binding protein for the heavy chain
  of high-molecular-weight kininogen.'
authors:
- Joseph K
- Nakazawa Y
- Bahou WF
- Ghebrehiwet B
- Kaplan AP
journal: Mol Med
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2230456
---

# Platelet glycoprotein Ib: a zinc-dependent binding protein for the heavy chain of high-molecular-weight kininogen.
**Authors:** Joseph K, Nakazawa Y, Bahou WF, Ghebrehiwet B, Kaplan AP
**Journal:** Mol Med (1999)
**PMC:** [PMC2230456](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2230456/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Med. 1999 Aug;5(8):555-63.

Platelet glycoprotein Ib: a zinc-dependent binding protein for the heavy chain 
of high-molecular-weight kininogen.

Joseph K(1), Nakazawa Y, Bahou WF, Ghebrehiwet B, Kaplan AP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Asthma and 
Allergy, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 
29425-2220, USA.

Domains 3 and 5 of high-molecular-weight kininogen (HK) have been shown to bind 
to platelets in a zinc-dependent reaction. However, the platelet-binding 
proteins responsible for this interaction have not been identified. We have 
focused on the platelet-binding site for the heavy chain (domain 3), which we 
approached using a domain 3-derived peptide ligand and isolated binding proteins 
by affinity chromatography. The domain 3-derived peptide, thrombin, HK, factor 
XII, as well as antibody to glycocalicin (the N-terminal portion of the alpha 
chain of GPIb) recognized a protein at 74 kD. We also isolated the thrombin 
receptor (PAR 1) at 45 kD, however, none of the above-mentioned ligands bound to 
this protein. Isolation of platelet membrane proteins using a monoclonal 
anti-glycocalicin antibody column revealed the same HK binding protein at 74 kD, 
which was reactive with anti-GPIb and represents a GPIb fragment. By 
photoaffinity labeling, HK interacted with membrane GPIb, which was then 
isolated in native form (135 kD) along with gC1qR, a ligand for the HK light 
chain. Finally, (125)I-HK binding to platelets was significantly inhibited by 
the anti-GPIb antibody. These results suggest that the GPIb alpha chain, a known 
thrombin binding protein, is also one of the zinc-dependent platelet membrane 
binding sites for HK domain 3.

PMCID: PMC2230456
PMID: 10501658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
