---
pmid: '11841548'
title: Role of the nude gene in epithelial terminal differentiation.
authors:
- Baxter RM
- Brissette JL
journal: J Invest Dermatol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1046/j.0022-202x.2001.01662.x
---

# Role of the nude gene in epithelial terminal differentiation.
**Authors:** Baxter RM, Brissette JL
**Journal:** J Invest Dermatol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.0022-202x.2001.01662.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.0022-202x.2001.01662.x)

## Abstract

1. J Invest Dermatol. 2002 Feb;118(2):303-9. doi:
10.1046/j.0022-202x.2001.01662.x.

Role of the nude gene in epithelial terminal differentiation.

Baxter RM(1), Brissette JL.

Author information:
(1)Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129, USA.

Loss-of-function mutations in Whn (Hfh11, Foxn1), a winged-helix/forkhead 
transcription factor, cause the nude phenotype, which is characterized by the 
abnormal morphogenesis of the epidermis, hair follicles, and thymus. To 
delineate the biochemical pathway of Whn, we investigated its upstream 
regulation and downstream effects using primary keratinocytes from wild-type and 
transgenic mice. The transgenic animals express whn from the involucrin 
promoter, which is active in keratinocytes undergoing terminal differentiation. 
In wild-type cultures, as in the epidermis, Whn was induced during the early 
stages of terminal differentiation and declined during later stages. In 
transgenic keratinocytes, whn overexpression altered the terminal 
differentiation program, stimulating an early differentiation marker (keratin 1) 
and suppressing later markers (profilaggrin, loricrin, and involucrin). These 
results suggest a role for Whn in the stepwise or temporal regulation of 
differentiation, as Whn can ensure that the differentiation program is carried 
out in proper sequence. Before the start of differentiation, Whn levels were 
suppressed by the p42/p44 mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade, and this 
signaling pathway was rapidly inactivated as differentiation began. Thus, as 
keratinocytes commit to terminal differentiation, mitogen-activated protein 
kinase signaling decreases, which permits the induction of Whn; Whn then 
activates early features of the differentiation program.

DOI: 10.1046/j.0022-202x.2001.01662.x
PMID: 11841548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
