---
pmid: '12566319'
title: Lanthionine synthetase components C-like 2 increases cellular sensitivity to
  adriamycin by decreasing the expression of P-glycoprotein through a transcription-mediated
  mechanism.
authors:
- Park S
- James CD
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
---

# Lanthionine synthetase components C-like 2 increases cellular sensitivity to adriamycin by decreasing the expression of P-glycoprotein through a transcription-mediated mechanism.
**Authors:** Park S, James CD
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2003)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Res. 2003 Feb 1;63(3):723-7.

Lanthionine synthetase components C-like 2 increases cellular sensitivity to 
adriamycin by decreasing the expression of P-glycoprotein through a 
transcription-mediated mechanism.

Park S(1), James CD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology and Tumor Biology Program, 
Mayo Clinic and Foundation, Rochester, Minnesota 55905.

Although the coincidental amplification and accompanying overexpression of 
bystander genes that neighbor oncogene targets occur frequently during the 
development of human tumors, little has been done to investigate the functional 
or biological consequences of amplified bystander gene overexpression. LANCL2 
(LANC-like 2) is a bystander gene that is coamplified and overexpressed with 
epidermal growth factor receptor in approximately 20% of all glioblastomas. This 
gene has also been designated as Testis Adriamycin Sensitivity Protein because 
it is most highly expressed in testis and its expression has been noted to 
increase cellular sensitivity to Adriamycin. Because of the latter association, 
we have examined potential relationships between LANCL2 and the expression of 
multidrug-resistance (MDR)1, as well as its cognate protein, P-glycoprotein 
(P-gp), because elevated expression of P-gp is known to increase cell resistance 
to many cytotoxic drugs, including Adriamycin. Using the Dx5 derivative of 
MES-SA cells in which P-gp is overexpressed, we show that the level of 
endogenous P-gp decreases with increased expression of exogenous LanCl-2 and 
that cells with reduced P-gp show increased sensitivity to Adriamycin. Results 
from reverse transcription-PCR and MDR1 promoter activity analyses suggest that 
LanCl-2 transcriptionally suppresses MDR1, and this interpretation of LanCl-2 
function is consistent with results from immunofluorescence analysis, which 
shows that LanCl-2 resides in the nucleus, as well as at the plasma membrane. 
With respect to this study, our data indicate that LanCl-2 increases cellular 
sensitivity to Adriamycin by decreasing the expression of P-gp, but more 
generally, these results indicate that the identification of bystander gene 
amplification in human tumors can have clinical implications.

PMID: 12566319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
