---
pmid: '15935759'
title: Cryptic pol II transcripts are degraded by a nuclear quality control pathway
  involving a new poly(A) polymerase.
authors:
- Wyers F
- Rougemaille M
- Badis G
- Rousselle JC
- Dufour ME
- Boulay J
- Régnault B
- Devaux F
- Namane A
- Séraphin B
- Libri D
- Jacquier A
journal: Cell
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.04.030
---

# Cryptic pol II transcripts are degraded by a nuclear quality control pathway involving a new poly(A) polymerase.
**Authors:** Wyers F, Rougemaille M, Badis G, Rousselle JC, Dufour ME, Boulay J, Régnault B, Devaux F, Namane A, Séraphin B, Libri D, Jacquier A
**Journal:** Cell (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2005.04.030](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2005.04.030)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2005 Jun 3;121(5):725-37. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.04.030.

Cryptic pol II transcripts are degraded by a nuclear quality control pathway 
involving a new poly(A) polymerase.

Wyers F(1), Rougemaille M, Badis G, Rousselle JC, Dufour ME, Boulay J, Régnault 
B, Devaux F, Namane A, Séraphin B, Libri D, Jacquier A.

Author information:
(1)Equipe Labelisée La Ligue, Avenue de la Terrasse, 91190 Gif sur Yvette, 
Paris, France.

Comment in
    Cell. 2005 Jun 3;121(5):660-2. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.05.018.

Since detection of an RNA molecule is the major criterion to define 
transcriptional activity, the fraction of the genome that is expressed is 
generally considered to parallel the complexity of the transcriptome. We show 
here that several supposedly silent intergenic regions in the genome of S. 
cerevisiae are actually transcribed by RNA polymerase II, suggesting that the 
expressed fraction of the genome is higher than anticipated. Surprisingly, 
however, RNAs originating from these regions are rapidly degraded by the 
combined action of the exosome and a new poly(A) polymerase activity that is 
defined by the Trf4 protein and one of two RNA binding proteins, Air1p or Air2p. 
We show that such a polyadenylation-assisted degradation mechanism is also 
responsible for the degradation of several Pol I and Pol III transcripts. Our 
data strongly support the existence of a posttranscriptional quality control 
mechanism limiting inappropriate expression of genetic information.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.04.030
PMID: 15935759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
