---
pmid: '16037064'
title: 'CCM1 and CCM2 protein interactions in cell signaling: implications for cerebral
  cavernous malformations pathogenesis.'
authors:
- Zawistowski JS
- Stalheim L
- Uhlik MT
- Abell AN
- Ancrile BB
- Johnson GL
- Marchuk DA
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddi256
---

# CCM1 and CCM2 protein interactions in cell signaling: implications for cerebral cavernous malformations pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Zawistowski JS, Stalheim L, Uhlik MT, Abell AN, Ancrile BB, Johnson GL, Marchuk DA
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddi256](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddi256)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Sep 1;14(17):2521-31. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddi256. Epub 2005
Jul  21.

CCM1 and CCM2 protein interactions in cell signaling: implications for cerebral 
cavernous malformations pathogenesis.

Zawistowski JS(1), Stalheim L, Uhlik MT, Abell AN, Ancrile BB, Johnson GL, 
Marchuk DA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical 
Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Cerebral cavernous malformations (CCMs) are sporadically acquired or inherited 
vascular lesions of the central nervous system consisting of clusters of dilated 
thin-walled blood vessels that predispose individuals to seizures and stroke. 
Familial CCM is caused by mutations in KRIT1 (CCM1) or in malcavernin (CCM2), 
the murine ortholog of which was concurrently characterized as osmosensing 
scaffold for MEKK3 (OSM). The roles of the CCM proteins in the pathogenesis of 
the disorder remain largely unknown. Here, we use co-immunoprecipitation, 
fluorescence resonance energy transfer and subcellular localization strategies 
to show that the CCM1 gene product, KRIT1, interacts with the CCM2 gene product, 
malcavernin/OSM. Analogous to the established interactions of CCM1 and beta1 
integrin with ICAP1, the CCM1/CCM2 association is dependent upon the 
phosphotyrosine binding (PTB) domain of CCM2. A familial CCM2 missense mutation 
abrogates the CCM1/CCM2 interaction, suggesting that loss of this interaction 
may be critical in CCM pathogenesis. CCM2 and ICAP1 bound to CCM1 via their 
respective PTB domains differentially influence the subcellular localization of 
CCM1. Furthermore, we expand upon the established involvement of CCM2 in the p38 
mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling module by demonstrating that CCM1 
associates with CCM2 and MEKK3 in a ternary complex. These data indicate that 
the genetic heterogeneity observed in familial CCM may reflect mutation of 
different molecular members of a coordinated signaling complex.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddi256
PMID: 16037064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
