---
pmid: '15147878'
title: Ubiquilin interacts with ubiquitylated proteins and proteasome through its
  ubiquitin-associated and ubiquitin-like domains.
authors:
- Ko HS
- Uehara T
- Tsuruma K
- Nomura Y
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2004.04.031
---

# Ubiquilin interacts with ubiquitylated proteins and proteasome through its ubiquitin-associated and ubiquitin-like domains.
**Authors:** Ko HS, Uehara T, Tsuruma K, Nomura Y
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2004.04.031](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2004.04.031)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2004 May 21;566(1-3):110-4. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2004.04.031.

Ubiquilin interacts with ubiquitylated proteins and proteasome through its 
ubiquitin-associated and ubiquitin-like domains.

Ko HS(1), Uehara T, Tsuruma K, Nomura Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.

Mammalian cells acquire tolerance against multiple stressors through the 
high-level expression of stress-responsible genes. We have previously 
demonstrated that protein-disulfide isomerase (PDI) together with ubiquilin are 
up-regulated in response to hypoxia/brain ischemia, and play critical roles in 
resistance to these damages. We show here that ubiquilin interacts 
preferentially with poly-ubiquitin chains and 19S proteasome subunits. Taken 
together, these results suggest that ubiquitin could serve as an adaptor protein 
that both interacts with PDI and mediates the delivery of poly-ubiquitylated 
proteins to the proteasome in the cytosol in the vicinity of the endoplasmic 
reticulum membrane.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2004.04.031
PMID: 15147878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
