---
pmid: '12194869'
title: Akt1 regulates a JNK scaffold during excitotoxic apoptosis.
authors:
- Kim AH
- Yano H
- Cho H
- Meyer D
- Monks B
- Margolis B
- Birnbaum MJ
- Chao MV
journal: Neuron
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(02)00821-8
---

# Akt1 regulates a JNK scaffold during excitotoxic apoptosis.
**Authors:** Kim AH, Yano H, Cho H, Meyer D, Monks B, Margolis B, Birnbaum MJ, Chao MV
**Journal:** Neuron (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0896-6273(02)00821-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0896-6273(02)00821-8)

## Abstract

1. Neuron. 2002 Aug 15;35(4):697-709. doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(02)00821-8.

Akt1 regulates a JNK scaffold during excitotoxic apoptosis.

Kim AH(1), Yano H, Cho H, Meyer D, Monks B, Margolis B, Birnbaum MJ, Chao MV.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Program, Skirball Institute for Biomolecular Medicine, 
New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Cell survival is determined by a balance among signaling cascades, including 
those that recruit the Akt and JNK pathways. Here we describe a novel 
interaction between Akt1 and JNK interacting protein 1 (JIP1), a JNK pathway 
scaffold. Direct association between Akt1 and JIP1 was observed in primary 
neurons. Neuronal exposure to an excitotoxic stimulus decreased the Akt1-JIP1 
interaction and concomitantly increased association between JIP1 and JNK. Akt1 
interaction with JIP1 inhibited JIP1-mediated potentiation of JNK activity by 
decreasing JIP1 binding to specific JNK pathway kinases. Consistent with this 
view, neurons from Akt1-deficient mice exhibited higher susceptibility to 
kainate than wild-type littermates. Overexpression of Akt1 mutants that bind 
JIP1 reduced excitotoxic apoptosis. These results suggest that Akt1 binding to 
JIP1 acts as a regulatory gate preventing JNK activation, which is released 
under conditions of excitotoxic injury.

DOI: 10.1016/s0896-6273(02)00821-8
PMID: 12194869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
