---
pmid: '9838244'
title: Homozygous deletion of arginine-173 in the CYP11B2 gene in a girl with congenital
  hypoaldosteronism. Corticosterone methyloxidase deficiency type II.
authors:
- Peter M
- Nikischin W
- Heinz-Erian P
- Fussenegger W
- Kapelari K
- Sippell WG
journal: Horm Res
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1159/000023278
pubmed_publication_types:
- Case Reports
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: CASE_REPORT
---

# Homozygous deletion of arginine-173 in the CYP11B2 gene in a girl with congenital hypoaldosteronism. Corticosterone methyloxidase deficiency type II.
**Authors:** Peter M, Nikischin W, Heinz-Erian P, Fussenegger W, Kapelari K, Sippell WG
**Journal:** Horm Res (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000023278](https://doi.org/10.1159/000023278)

## Abstract

1. Horm Res. 1998;50(4):222-5. doi: 10.1159/000023278.

Homozygous deletion of arginine-173 in the CYP11B2 gene in a girl with 
congenital hypoaldosteronism. Corticosterone methyloxidase deficiency type II.

Peter M(1), Nikischin W, Heinz-Erian P, Fussenegger W, Kapelari K, Sippell WG.

Author information:
(1)Division of Paediatric Endocrinology, Department of Paediatrics, Christian 
Albrechts University of Kiel, Germany. m.peter@pediatrics.uni-kiel.de

The first child of consanguineous parents presented with failure to thrive and 
feeding problems at age 6 weeks. Important laboratory findings were low plasma 
sodium and elevated potassium and renin. Salt wasting was caused by an enzymatic 
defect in the terminal aldosterone biosynthesis. The biochemical diagnosis of 
corticosterone methyloxidase (CMO) deficiency type II was established on the 
basis of plasma multisteroid analysis, showing a pathologic increase of 
18-OH-corticosterone/aldosterone ratio. Sequence analysis of the CYP11B2 gene 
which encodes aldosterone synthase (P450c11Aldo), the enzyme required for the 
terminal steps in aldosterone biosynthesis, revealed a hitherto undescribed 
homozygous deletion of codon 173. CYP11B2 is polymorphic at this position, 
encoding arginine or lysine. Both parents were heterozygous carriers of the 
mutation. Amino acid residue 173 in P450c11Aldo is positioned in alpha-helix D. 
We presume that the secondary structure of the enzyme is changed by the single 
amino acid deletion. This report describes a novel mutation in the CYP11B2 gene, 
the third known mutation associated with CMO deficiency type II.

DOI: 10.1159/000023278
PMID: 9838244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
