---
pmid: '8106351'
title: cDNA cloning and expression of rat and human protein geranylgeranyltransferase
  type-I.
authors:
- Zhang FL
- Diehl RE
- Kohl NE
- Gibbs JB
- Giros B
- Casey PJ
- Omer CA
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# cDNA cloning and expression of rat and human protein geranylgeranyltransferase type-I.
**Authors:** Zhang FL, Diehl RE, Kohl NE, Gibbs JB, Giros B, Casey PJ, Omer CA
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1994)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1994 Feb 4;269(5):3175-80.

cDNA cloning and expression of rat and human protein geranylgeranyltransferase 
type-I.

Zhang FL(1), Diehl RE, Kohl NE, Gibbs JB, Giros B, Casey PJ, Omer CA.

Author information:
(1)Section of Cell Growth, Regulation and Oncogenesis, Duke University Medical 
Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710.

Protein geranylgeranyltransferase type-I (GGTase-I) transfers a geranylgeranyl 
group to the cysteine residue of candidate proteins containing a 
carboxyl-terminal CAAX (C, cysteine; A, aliphatic amino acid; X, any amino acid) 
motif in which the "X" residue is leucine. The enzyme is composed of a 
48-kilodalton alpha subunit and a 43-kilodalton beta subunit. Peptides isolated 
from the alpha subunit of GGTase-I were shown to be identical with the alpha 
subunit of a related enzyme, protein farnesyltransferase. Overlapping cDNA 
clones containing the complete coding sequence for the beta subunit of GGTase-I 
were obtained from rat and human cDNA libraries. The cDNA clones from both 
species each predicted a protein of 377 amino acids with molecular masses of 
42.4 kilodaltons (human) and 42.5 kilodaltons (rat). Amino acid sequence 
comparison suggests that the protein encoded by the Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
gene CDC43 is the yeast counterpart of the mammalian GGTase-I beta subunit. 
Co-expression of the GGTase-I beta subunit cDNA together with the alpha subunit 
of protein farnesyltransferase in Escherichia coli produced recombinant GGTase-I 
with electrophoretic and enzymatic properties indistinguishable from native 
GGTase-I.

PMID: 8106351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
