---
pmid: '23392768'
title: Influence of periplasmic oxidation of glucose on pyoverdine synthesis in Pseudomonas
  putida S11.
authors:
- Ponraj P
- Shankar M
- Ilakkiam D
- Rajendhran J
- Gunasekaran P
journal: Appl Microbiol Biotechnol
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s00253-013-4737-9
---

# Influence of periplasmic oxidation of glucose on pyoverdine synthesis in Pseudomonas putida S11.
**Authors:** Ponraj P, Shankar M, Ilakkiam D, Rajendhran J, Gunasekaran P
**Journal:** Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00253-013-4737-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-013-4737-9)

## Abstract

1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2013 Jun;97(11):5027-41. doi: 
10.1007/s00253-013-4737-9. Epub 2013 Feb 8.

Influence of periplasmic oxidation of glucose on pyoverdine synthesis in 
Pseudomonas putida S11.

Ponraj P(1), Shankar M, Ilakkiam D, Rajendhran J, Gunasekaran P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Centre for Excellence in Genomic Sciences, School of 
Biological Sciences, Madurai Kamaraj University, Madurai 625021, Tamil Nadu, 
India.

Fluorescent pseudomonads catabolize glucose simultaneously by two different 
pathways, namely, the oxidative pathway in periplasm and the phosphorylative 
pathway in cytoplasm. This study provides evidence for the role of glucose 
metabolism in the regulation of pyoverdine synthesis in Pseudomonas putida S11. 
We have characterized the influence of direct oxidation of glucose in periplasm 
on pyoverdine synthesis in P. putida S11. We identified a Tn5 transposon mutant 
of P. putida S11 showing increased pyoverdine production in minimal glucose 
medium (MGM). This mutant designated as IST1 had Tn5 insertion in glucose 
dehydrogenase (gcd) gene. To verify the role of periplasmic oxidation of glucose 
on pyoverdine synthesis, we constructed mutants S11 Gcd(-) and S11 PqqF(-) by 
antibiotic cassette mutagenesis. These mutants of P. putida S11 with loss of 
glucose dehydrogenase gene (gcd) or cofactor pyrroloquinoline quinone 
biosynthesis gene (pqqF) showed increased pyoverdine synthesis and impaired acid 
production in MGM. In minimal gluconate medium, the pyoverdine production of 
wild-type strain S11 and mutants S11 Gcd(-) and S11 PqqF(-) was higher than in 
MGM indicating that gluconate did not affect pyoverdine synthesis. In MGM 
containing PIPES-NaOH (pH 7.5) buffer which prevent pH changes due to gluconic 
acid production, strain S11 produced higher amount of pyoverdine similar to 
mutants S11 Gcd(-) and S11 PqqF(-). Therefore, it is proposed that periplasmic 
oxidation of glucose to gluconic acid decreases the pH of MGM and thereby 
influences pyoverdine synthesis of strain S11. The increased pyoverdine 
synthesis enhanced biotic and abiotic surface colonization of the strain S11.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-013-4737-9
PMID: 23392768 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
