---
pmid: '12773305'
title: Characterization of rat iodothyronine sulfotransferases.
authors:
- Kester MH
- Kaptein E
- Roest TJ
- van Dijk CH
- Tibboel D
- Meinl W
- Glatt H
- Coughtrie MW
- Visser TJ
journal: Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.00046.2003
---

# Characterization of rat iodothyronine sulfotransferases.
**Authors:** Kester MH, Kaptein E, Roest TJ, van Dijk CH, Tibboel D, Meinl W, Glatt H, Coughtrie MW, Visser TJ
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpendo.00046.2003](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpendo.00046.2003)

## Abstract

1. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2003 Sep;285(3):E592-8. doi: 
10.1152/ajpendo.00046.2003. Epub 2003 May 28.

Characterization of rat iodothyronine sulfotransferases.

Kester MH(1), Kaptein E, Roest TJ, van Dijk CH, Tibboel D, Meinl W, Glatt H, 
Coughtrie MW, Visser TJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center, 3015 GE Rotterdam, 
The Netherlands.

Sulfation appears to be an important pathway for the reversible inactivation of 
thyroid hormone during fetal development. The rat is an often used animal model 
to study the regulation of fetal thyroid hormone status. The present study was 
done to determine which sulfotransferases (SULTs) are important for 
iodothyronine sulfation in the rat, using radioactive T4, T3, rT3, and 3,3'-T2 
as substrates, 3'-phosphoadenosine-5'-phosphosulfate (PAPS) as cofactor, and rat 
liver, kidney and brain cytosol, and recombinant rat SULT1A1, -1B1, -1C1, -1E1, 
-2A1, -2A2, and -2A3 as enzymes. Recombinant rat SULT1A1, -1E1, -2A1, -2A2, and 
-2A3 failed to catalyze iodothyronine sulfation. For all tissue SULTs and for 
rSULT1B1 and rSULT1C1, 3,3'-T2 was by far the preferred substrate. Apparent Km 
values for 3,3'-T2 amounted to 1.9 microM in male liver, 4.4 microM in female 
liver, 0.76 microM in male kidney, 0.23 microM in male brain, 7.7 microM for 
SULT1B1, and 0.62 microM for SULT1C1, whereas apparent Km values for PAPS showed 
less variation (2.0-6.9 microM). Sulfation of 3,3'-T2 was inhibited dose 
dependently by other iodothyronines, with similar structure-activity 
relationships for most enzymes except for the SULT activity in rat brain. The 
apparent Km values of 3,3'-T2 in liver cytosol were between those determined for 
SULT1B1 and -1C1, supporting the importance of these enzymes for the sulfation 
of iodothyronines in rat liver, with a greater contribution of SULT1C1 in male 
than in female rat liver. The results further suggest that rSULT1C1 also 
contributes to iodothyronine sulfation in rat kidney, whereas other, 
yet-unidentified forms appear more important for the sulfation of thyroid 
hormone in rat brain.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpendo.00046.2003
PMID: 12773305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
