---
pmid: '12486173'
title: Mice lacking D5 dopamine receptors have increased sympathetic tone and are
  hypertensive.
authors:
- Hollon TR
- Bek MJ
- Lachowicz JE
- Ariano MA
- Mezey E
- Ramachandran R
- Wersinger SR
- Soares-da-Silva P
- Liu ZF
- Grinberg A
- Drago J
- Young WS 3rd
- Westphal H
- Jose PA
- Sibley DR
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6758465
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-24-10801.2002
---

# Mice lacking D5 dopamine receptors have increased sympathetic tone and are hypertensive.
**Authors:** Hollon TR, Bek MJ, Lachowicz JE, Ariano MA, Mezey E, Ramachandran R, Wersinger SR, Soares-da-Silva P, Liu ZF, Grinberg A, Drago J, Young WS 3rd, Westphal H, Jose PA, Sibley DR
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-24-10801.2002](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-24-10801.2002)
**PMC:** [PMC6758465](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6758465/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2002 Dec 15;22(24):10801-10. doi: 
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-24-10801.2002.

Mice lacking D5 dopamine receptors have increased sympathetic tone and are 
hypertensive.

Hollon TR(1), Bek MJ, Lachowicz JE, Ariano MA, Mezey E, Ramachandran R, 
Wersinger SR, Soares-da-Silva P, Liu ZF, Grinberg A, Drago J, Young WS 3rd, 
Westphal H, Jose PA, Sibley DR.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Neuropharmacology Section and Basic Neurosciences Program, National 
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1406, USA.

Dopamine is an important transmitter in the CNS and PNS, critically regulating 
numerous neuropsychiatric and physiological functions. These actions of dopamine 
are mediated by five distinct receptor subtypes. Of these receptors, probably 
the least understood in terms of physiological functions is the D5 receptor 
subtype. To better understand the role of the D5 dopamine receptor (DAR) in 
normal physiology and behavior, we have now used gene-targeting technology to 
create mice that lack this receptor subtype. We find that the D5 
receptor-deficient mice are viable and fertile and appear to develop normally. 
No compensatory alterations in other dopamine receptor subtypes were observed. 
We find, however, that the mutant mice develop hypertension and exhibit 
significantly elevated blood pressure (BP) by 3 months of age. This hypertension 
appears to be caused by increased sympathetic tone, primarily attributable to a 
CNS defect. Our data further suggest that this defect involves an 
oxytocin-dependent sensitization of V1 vasopressin and non-NMDA glutamatergic 
receptor-mediated pathways, potentially within the medulla, leading to increased 
sympathetic outflow. These results indicate that D5 dopamine receptors modulate 
neuronal pathways regulating blood pressure responses and may provide new 
insights into mechanisms for some forms of essential hypertension in humans, a 
disease that afflicts up to 25% of the aged adult population in industrialized 
societies.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-24-10801.2002
PMCID: PMC6758465
PMID: 12486173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
