---
pmid: '15537790'
title: Human EDEM2, a novel homolog of family 47 glycosidases, is involved in ER-associated
  degradation of glycoproteins.
authors:
- Mast SW
- Diekman K
- Karaveg K
- Davis A
- Sifers RN
- Moremen KW
journal: Glycobiology
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwi014
---

# Human EDEM2, a novel homolog of family 47 glycosidases, is involved in ER-associated degradation of glycoproteins.
**Authors:** Mast SW, Diekman K, Karaveg K, Davis A, Sifers RN, Moremen KW
**Journal:** Glycobiology (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1093/glycob/cwi014](https://doi.org/10.1093/glycob/cwi014)

## Abstract

1. Glycobiology. 2005 Apr;15(4):421-36. doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwi014. Epub 2004 Nov
 10.

Human EDEM2, a novel homolog of family 47 glycosidases, is involved in 
ER-associated degradation of glycoproteins.

Mast SW(1), Diekman K, Karaveg K, Davis A, Sifers RN, Moremen KW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Complex Carbohydrate 
Research Center, University of Georgia, 315 Riverbend Road, Athens, GA 
30602-4712, USA.

Erratum in
    Glycobiology. 2005 May;15(5):13G.

In the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), misfolded proteins are retrotranslocated to 
the cytosol and degraded by the proteasome in a process known as ER-associated 
degradation (ERAD). Early in this pathway, a proposed lumenal ER lectin, EDEM, 
recognizes misfolded glycoproteins in the ER, disengages the nascent molecules 
from the folding pathway, and facilitates their targeting for disposal. In 
humans there are a total of three EDEM homologs. The amino acid sequences of 
these proteins are different from other lectins but are closely related to the 
Class I mannosidases (family 47 glycosidases). In this study, we characterize 
one of the EDEM homologs from Homo sapiens, which we have termed EDEM2 
(C20orf31). Using recombinantly generated EDEM2, no alpha-1,2 mannosidase 
activity was observed. In HEK293 cells, recombinant EDEM2 is localized to the ER 
where it can associate with misfolded alpha1-antitrypsin. Overexpression of 
EDEM2 accelerates the degradation of misfolded alpha1-antitrypsin, indicating 
that the protein is involved in ERAD.

DOI: 10.1093/glycob/cwi014
PMID: 15537790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
