---
pmid: '8786104'
title: Sequence analysis of the cDNA for the human casein kinase I delta (CSNK1D)
  gene and its chromosomal localization.
authors:
- Kusuda J
- Hidari N
- Hirai M
- Hashimoto K
journal: Genomics
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/geno.1996.0091
---

# Sequence analysis of the cDNA for the human casein kinase I delta (CSNK1D) gene and its chromosomal localization.
**Authors:** Kusuda J, Hidari N, Hirai M, Hashimoto K
**Journal:** Genomics (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1006/geno.1996.0091](https://doi.org/10.1006/geno.1996.0091)

## Abstract

1. Genomics. 1996 Feb 15;32(1):140-3. doi: 10.1006/geno.1996.0091.

Sequence analysis of the cDNA for the human casein kinase I delta (CSNK1D) gene 
and its chromosomal localization.

Kusuda J(1), Hidari N, Hirai M, Hashimoto K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetic Resources, National Institute of Health, Tokyo, Japan.

A cDNA clone coding for human casein kinase I (CK1) has been isolated and 
sequenced. The insert of 1911 bp contained an open reading frame of 415 amino 
acids. The entire amino acid sequence of human CK1 was 97% homologous to that of 
rat CK1 delta, and their sequences in the kinase domain (284 amino acid 
residues) were completely identical, predicting that the obtained cDNA is for a 
human homolog of the CK1 delta isoform (CSNKID). The considerable similarity in 
the amino acid sequence of the kinase domain of human CK1 delta to the 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae CK1, HRR25 (66%), and to the Saccharomyces pombe CK1, 
HHP1 (78%), which are involved in the repair of DNA strand break, supports the 
speculation that human CK1 delta might also act in DNA metabolism through 
excision and recombinational repair. The human CK1 delta gene was mapped to 
chromosome 17q25.2-q25.3 by fluorescence in situ hybridization and polymerase 
chain reaction analysis of the human/rodent hybrid cell panels.

DOI: 10.1006/geno.1996.0091
PMID: 8786104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
