---
pmid: '33129760'
title: Transmembrane and Immunoglobulin Domain Containing 1, a Putative Tumor Suppressor,
  Induces G2/M Cell Cycle Checkpoint Arrest in Colon Cancer Cells.
authors:
- De La Cena KOC
- Ho RX
- Amraei R
- Woolf N
- Tashjian JY
- Zhao Q
- Richards S
- Walker J
- Huang J
- Chitalia VC
- Rahimi N
journal: Am J Pathol
year: '2021'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC7788663
doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2020.09.015
---

# Transmembrane and Immunoglobulin Domain Containing 1, a Putative Tumor Suppressor, Induces G2/M Cell Cycle Checkpoint Arrest in Colon Cancer Cells.
**Authors:** De La Cena KOC, Ho RX, Amraei R, Woolf N, Tashjian JY, Zhao Q, Richards S, Walker J, Huang J, Chitalia VC, Rahimi N
**Journal:** Am J Pathol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajpath.2020.09.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajpath.2020.09.015)
**PMC:** [PMC7788663](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7788663/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Pathol. 2021 Jan;191(1):157-167. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2020.09.015. Epub 
2020 Oct 29.

Transmembrane and Immunoglobulin Domain Containing 1, a Putative Tumor 
Suppressor, Induces G2/M Cell Cycle Checkpoint Arrest in Colon Cancer Cells.

De La Cena KOC(1), Ho RX(1), Amraei R(1), Woolf N(1), Tashjian JY(1), Zhao Q(1), 
Richards S(2), Walker J(2), Huang J(1), Chitalia VC(3), Rahimi N(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Boston University Medical 
Campus, Boston, Massachusetts.
(2)Renal Section, Department of Medicine, Boston Medical Center, Boston, 
Massachusetts.
(3)Renal Section, Department of Medicine, Boston Medical Center, Boston, 
Massachusetts; Boston Veterans Affairs Healthcare System, Boston, Massachusetts.
(4)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Boston University Medical 
Campus, Boston, Massachusetts. Electronic address: nrahimi@bu.edu.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a leading nonfamilial cause of cancer mortality among 
men and women. Although various genetic and epigenetic mechanisms have been 
identified, the full molecular mechanisms deriving CRC tumorigenesis are not 
fully understood. This study demonstrates that cell adhesion molecule 
transmembrane and immunoglobulin domain containing 1 (TMIGD1) are highly 
expressed in mouse and human normal intestinal epithelial cells. TMIGD1 knockout 
mice were developed, and the loss of TMIGD1 in mice was shown to result in the 
development of adenomas in small intestine and colon. In addition, the loss of 
TMIGD1 significantly impaired intestinal epithelium brush border membrane, 
junctional polarity, and maturation. Mechanistically, TMIGD1 inhibits tumor cell 
proliferation and cell migration, arrests cell cycle at the G2/M phase, and 
induces expression of p21CIP1 (cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1), and p27KIP1 
(cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1B) expression, key cell cycle inhibitor 
proteins involved in the regulation of the cell cycle. Moreover, TMIGD1 is shown 
to be progressively down-regulated in sporadic human CRC, and its downregulation 
correlates with poor overall survival. The findings herein identify TMIGD1 as a 
novel tumor suppressor gene and provide new insights into the pathogenesis of 
colorectal cancer and a novel potential therapeutic target.

Copyright © 2021 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2020.09.015
PMCID: PMC7788663
PMID: 33129760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
