---
pmid: '1454804'
title: Binding and transport of gangliosides by prosaposin.
authors:
- Hiraiwa M
- Soeda S
- Kishimoto Y
- O'Brien JS
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1992'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC50528
doi: 10.1073/pnas.89.23.11254
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Binding and transport of gangliosides by prosaposin.
**Authors:** Hiraiwa M, Soeda S, Kishimoto Y, O'Brien JS
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.89.23.11254](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.89.23.11254)
**PMC:** [PMC50528](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC50528/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 Dec 1;89(23):11254-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.89.23.11254.

Binding and transport of gangliosides by prosaposin.

Hiraiwa M(1), Soeda S, Kishimoto Y, O'Brien JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, School of 
Medicine, La Jolla 92093.

Prosaposin, the precursor of saposins A, B, C, and D, which activate lysosomal 
hydrolysis of sphingolipids, exists in various tissues and body fluids and is 
especially abundant in the nervous system. Prosaposin and saposins A,B, C, and D 
formed stable complexes with 13 different gangliosides as measured by an assay 
using column chromatography. Gangliosides of the gangliotetraose type (a series) 
were bound with high affinity, whereas b series gangliosides, O-acetylated 
gangliosides, and gangliosides with shorter carbohydrate chains, were bound with 
lower affinity. Prosaposin and saposins transferred gangliosides from donor 
liposomes to erythrocyte ghost membranes. Prosaposin also stimulated ganglioside 
GM1 beta-galactosidase more than mature saposins. Prosaposin exists as a 
secretory protein and as an integral membrane protein, and we propose that 
prosaposin is active as a ganglioside binding and transport protein in vivo.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.89.23.11254
PMCID: PMC50528
PMID: 1454804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
