---
pmid: '18353782'
title: Crystal structure of Escherichia coli MazG, the regulator of nutritional stress
  response.
authors:
- Lee S
- Kim MH
- Kang BS
- Kim JS
- Kim GH
- Kim YG
- Kim KJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3258883
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M800479200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Crystal structure of Escherichia coli MazG, the regulator of nutritional stress response.
**Authors:** Lee S, Kim MH, Kang BS, Kim JS, Kim GH, Kim YG, Kim KJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M800479200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M800479200)
**PMC:** [PMC3258883](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3258883/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2008 May 30;283(22):15232-40. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M800479200. Epub 
2008 Mar 18.

Crystal structure of Escherichia coli MazG, the regulator of nutritional stress 
response.

Lee S(1), Kim MH, Kang BS, Kim JS, Kim GH, Kim YG, Kim KJ.

Author information:
(1)Pohang Accelerator Laboratory, Pohang University of Science and Technology, 
Pohang, Kyungbuk, Korea.

MazG is a nucleoside triphosphate pyrophosphohydrolase that hydrolyzes all 
canonical nucleoside triphosphates. The mazG gene located downstream from the 
chromosomal mazEF "addiction module," that mediated programmed cell death in 
Escherichia coli. MazG activity is inhibited by the MazEF complex both in vivo 
and in vitro. Enzymatic activity of MazG in vivo affects the cellular level of 
guanosine 3',5'-bispyrophosphate (ppGpp), synthesized by RelA under amino acid 
starvation. The reduction of ppGpp, caused by MazG, may extend the period of 
cell survival under nutritional stress. Here we describe the first crystal 
structure of active MazG from E. coli, which is composed of two similarly folded 
globular domains in tandem. Among the two putative catalytic domains, only the 
C-terminal domain has well ordered active sites and exhibits an NTPase activity. 
The MazG-ATP complex structure and subsequent mutagenesis studies explain the 
peculiar active site environment accommodating all eight canonical NTPs as 
substrates. In vivo nutrient starvation experiments show that the C terminus 
NTPase activity is responsible for the regulation of bacterial cell survival 
under nutritional stress.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M800479200
PMCID: PMC3258883
PMID: 18353782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
