---
pmid: '11707436'
title: Physiological substrates for human lysosomal beta -hexosaminidase S.
authors:
- Hepbildikler ST
- Sandhoff R
- Kolzer M
- Proia RL
- Sandhoff K
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M105457200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Physiological substrates for human lysosomal beta -hexosaminidase S.
**Authors:** Hepbildikler ST, Sandhoff R, Kolzer M, Proia RL, Sandhoff K
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M105457200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M105457200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jan 25;277(4):2562-72. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M105457200. Epub
2001  Nov 13.

Physiological substrates for human lysosomal beta -hexosaminidase S.

Hepbildikler ST(1), Sandhoff R, Kolzer M, Proia RL, Sandhoff K.

Author information:
(1)Kekulé-Institut für Organische Chemie und Biochemie, Universität Bonn, 
Gerhard-Domagk-Str. 1, 53121 Bonn, Germany.

Human lysosomal beta-hexosaminidases remove terminal beta-glycosidically bound 
N-acetylhexosamine residues from a number of glycoconjugates. Three different 
isozymes composed of two noncovalently linked subunits alpha and beta exist: Hex 
A (alphabeta), Hex B (betabeta), and Hex S (alphaalpha). While the role of Hex A 
and B for the degradation of several anionic and neutral glycoconjugates has 
been well established, the physiological significance of labile Hex S has 
remained unclear. However, the striking accumulation of anionic oligosaccharides 
in double knockout mice totally deficient in hexosaminidase activity but not in 
mice expressing Hex S (Sango, K., McDonald, M. P., Crawley, J. N., Mack, M. L., 
Tifft, C.J., Skop, E., Starr, C. M., Hoffmann, A., Sandhoff, K., Suzuki, K., and 
Proia, R. L., (1996) Nat. Genet. 14, 348-352) prompted us to reinvestigate the 
substrate specificity of Hex S. To identify physiological substrates of Hex S, 
anionic and neutral oligosaccharides excreted in the urine of the double 
knockout mice were isolated and analyzed. Using ESI-MS/MS and glycosidase 
digestion the anionic glycans were identified as products of incomplete dermatan 
sulfate degradation whereas the neutral storage oligosaccharides were found to 
be fragments of N-glycan degradation. In vitro, recombinant Hex S was highly 
active on water-soluble and amphiphilic glycoconjugates including artificial 
substrates, sulfated GAG fragments, and the sulfated glycosphingolipid SM2. 
Hydrolysis of membrane-bound SM2 by the recombinant Hex S was synergistically 
stimulated by the GM2 activator protein and the lysosomal anionic phospholipid 
bis(monoacylglycero)phosphate.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M105457200
PMID: 11707436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
