---
pmid: '11682607'
title: Signal recognition particle protein 19 is imported into the nucleus by importin
  8 (RanBP8) and transportin.
authors:
- Dean KA
- von Ahsen O
- Görlich D
- Fried HM
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.114.19.3479
---

# Signal recognition particle protein 19 is imported into the nucleus by importin 8 (RanBP8) and transportin.
**Authors:** Dean KA, von Ahsen O, Görlich D, Fried HM
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.114.19.3479](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.114.19.3479)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2001 Oct;114(Pt 19):3479-85. doi: 10.1242/jcs.114.19.3479.

Signal recognition particle protein 19 is imported into the nucleus by importin 
8 (RanBP8) and transportin.

Dean KA(1), von Ahsen O, Görlich D, Fried HM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, The University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

The signal recognition particle (SRP) is a cytoplasmic RNA-protein complex that 
targets proteins to the rough endoplasmic reticulum. Although SRP functions in 
the cytoplasm, RNA microinjection and cDNA transfection experiments in animal 
cells, as well as genetic analyses in yeast, have indicated that SRP assembles 
in the nucleus. Nonetheless, the mechanisms responsible for nuclear-cytoplasmic 
transport of SRP RNA and SRP proteins are largely unknown. Here we show that the 
19 kDa protein subunit of mammalian SRP, SRP19, was efficiently imported into 
the nucleus in vitro by two members of the importin beta superfamily of 
transport receptors, importin 8 and transportin; SRP19 was also imported less 
efficiently by several other members of the importin beta family. Although 
transportin is known to import a variety of proteins, SRP19 import is the first 
function assigned to importin 8. Furthermore, we show that a significant pool of 
endogenous SRP19 is located in the nucleus, as well as the nucleolus. Our 
results show that at least one mammalian SRP protein is specifically imported 
into the nucleus, by members of the importin beta family of transport receptors, 
and the findings add additional evidence for nuclear assembly of SRP.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.114.19.3479
PMID: 11682607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
