---
pmid: '17130295'
title: Distinct subdomain organization and molecular composition of a tight junction
  with adherens junction features.
authors:
- Nunes FD
- Lopez LN
- Lin HW
- Davies C
- Azevedo RB
- Gow A
- Kachar B
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.03233
---

# Distinct subdomain organization and molecular composition of a tight junction with adherens junction features.
**Authors:** Nunes FD, Lopez LN, Lin HW, Davies C, Azevedo RB, Gow A, Kachar B
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.03233](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.03233)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2006 Dec 1;119(Pt 23):4819-27. doi: 10.1242/jcs.03233.

Distinct subdomain organization and molecular composition of a tight junction 
with adherens junction features.

Nunes FD(1), Lopez LN, Lin HW, Davies C, Azevedo RB, Gow A, Kachar B.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Biology, National Institute on Deafness and Other 
Communication Disorders, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Most polarized epithelia constrain solute diffusion between luminal and 
interstitial compartments using tight junctions and generate mechanical strength 
using adherens junctions. These intercellular junctions are typically portrayed 
as incongruent macromolecular complexes with distinct protein components. 
Herein, we delineate the molecular composition and subdomain architecture of an 
intercellular junction between sensory and non-sensory cells of the inner ear. 
In this junction, claudins partition into claudin-14 and claudin-9/6 subdomains 
that are distinguishable by strand morphology, which contrasts with in vitro 
data that most claudins co-assemble into heteromeric strands. Surprisingly, 
canonical adherens junction proteins (p120ctn, alpha- and beta-catenins) 
colocalize with the claudin-9/6 subdomain and recruit a dense cytoskeletal 
network. We also find that catenins colocalize with claudin-9 and claudin-6, but 
not claudin-14, in a heterologous system. Together, our data demonstrate that 
canonical tight junction and adherens junction proteins can be recruited to a 
single junction in which claudins partition into subdomains and form a novel 
hybrid tight junction with adherens junction organization.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.03233
PMID: 17130295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
