---
pmid: '22559303'
title: Kinetics of GADD45α, TP53 and CASP3 gene expression in the rat lens in vivo
  in response to exposure to double threshold dose of UV-B radiation.
authors:
- Galichanin K
- Svedlund J
- Söderberg P
journal: Exp Eye Res
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2012.02.003
---

# Kinetics of GADD45α, TP53 and CASP3 gene expression in the rat lens in vivo in response to exposure to double threshold dose of UV-B radiation.
**Authors:** Galichanin K, Svedlund J, Söderberg P
**Journal:** Exp Eye Res (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.exer.2012.02.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.exer.2012.02.003)

## Abstract

1. Exp Eye Res. 2012 Apr;97(1):19-23. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2012.02.003. Epub 2012 
Feb 13.

Kinetics of GADD45α, TP53 and CASP3 gene expression in the rat lens in vivo in 
response to exposure to double threshold dose of UV-B radiation.

Galichanin K(1), Svedlund J, Söderberg P.

Author information:
(1)St. Erik's Eye Hospital, Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska 
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. konstantin.galichanin@neuro.uu.se

The purpose of the present study was to investigate the evolution of expression 
of mRNA message for the genes for the genome stress sensor GADD45α, the 
apoptosis initiator TP53 and the apoptosis executor CASP3 in the rat lens in 
vivo in response to exposure to UVR around 300 nm. Forty six week old female 
albino Sprague-Dawley rats were unilaterally exposed to double threshold dose 
for cataract induction, 8 kJ/m(2) (8.9 W/m(2) for 15 min), of UVR (λ(max) = 300 
nm). The animals were sacrificed at 1, 5, 24 and 120 h following exposure to 
UVR-B. For each of the GADD45α, TP53 and CASP3 genes, respectively, mRNA 
expression in the lenses was measured by quantitative RT-PCR. It was found that 
expression of mRNA for GADD45α transiently increases between 5 and 24 h after 
exposure. TP53 is slightly downregulated in exposed lenses at 1 and 5 h after 
exposure and thereafter the mRNA expression increases with a constant rate of 
9.4\ 10(-3) rel. units/h to a 1.8 fold increase at 120 h after exposure. 
Expression of mRNA for CASP3 is downregulated at 1, 5 and 24 h after in vivo 
exposure and then increases with a constant rate of 4.7 10(-3) rel. units/h, 
upto a 1.3 fold upregulation at 120 h. Double threshold dose of UVR, for short 
delay onset of cataract, in vivo causes a transient upregulation of the stress 
sensor GADD45α, a concurrent downregulation of TP53 and CASP3, followed by a 
constant upregulation of TP53 that precedes a constant upregulation of CASP3.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exer.2012.02.003
PMID: 22559303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
