---
pmid: '19706438'
title: Mental retardation linked to mutations in the HSD17B10 gene interfering with
  neurosteroid and isoleucine metabolism.
authors:
- Yang SY
- He XY
- Olpin SE
- Sutton VR
- McMenamin J
- Philipp M
- Denman RB
- Malik M
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2728107
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0902377106
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Mental retardation linked to mutations in the HSD17B10 gene interfering with neurosteroid and isoleucine metabolism.
**Authors:** Yang SY, He XY, Olpin SE, Sutton VR, McMenamin J, Philipp M, Denman RB, Malik M
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0902377106](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0902377106)
**PMC:** [PMC2728107](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2728107/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Sep 1;106(35):14820-4. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0902377106. Epub 2009 Aug 17.

Mental retardation linked to mutations in the HSD17B10 gene interfering with 
neurosteroid and isoleucine metabolism.

Yang SY(1), He XY, Olpin SE, Sutton VR, McMenamin J, Philipp M, Denman RB, Malik 
M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurochemistry, New York State Institute for Basic Research in 
Developmental Disabilities, Staten Island, NY 10314, USA. 
syang@mail.csi.cuny.edu

Mutations in the HSD17B10 gene were identified in two previously described 
mentally retarded males. A point mutation c.776G>C was found from a survivor 
(SV), whereas a potent mutation, c.419C>T, was identified in another deceased 
case (SF) with undetectable hydroxysteroid (17beta) dehydrogenase 10 (HSD10) 
activity. Protein levels of mutant HSD10(R130C) in patient SF and HSD10(E249Q) 
in patient SV were about half that of HSD10 in normal controls. The E249Q 
mutation appears to affect HSD10 subunit interactions, resulting in an 
allosteric regulatory enzyme. For catalyzing the oxidation of allopregnanolone 
by NAD+ the Hill coefficient of the mutant enzyme is approximately 1.3. 
HSD10(E249Q) was unable to catalyze the dehydrogenation of 
2-methyl-3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA and the oxidation of allopregnanolone, a positive 
modulator of the gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptor, at low substrate 
concentrations. Neurosteroid homeostasis is critical for normal cognitive 
development, and there is increasing evidence that a blockade of isoleucine 
catabolism alone does not commonly cause developmental disabilities. The results 
support the theory that an imbalance in neurosteroid metabolism could be a major 
cause of the neurological handicap associated with hydroxysteroid (17beta) 
dehydrogenase 10 deficiency.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0902377106
PMCID: PMC2728107
PMID: 19706438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
