---
pmid: '1818768'
title: Expression of bone sialoprotein (BSP) in developing human tissues.
authors:
- Bianco P
- Fisher LW
- Young MF
- Termine JD
- Robey PG
journal: Calcif Tissue Int
year: '1991'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/BF02555854
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Expression of bone sialoprotein (BSP) in developing human tissues.
**Authors:** Bianco P, Fisher LW, Young MF, Termine JD, Robey PG
**Journal:** Calcif Tissue Int (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF02555854](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02555854)

## Abstract

1. Calcif Tissue Int. 1991 Dec;49(6):421-6. doi: 10.1007/BF02555854.

Expression of bone sialoprotein (BSP) in developing human tissues.

Bianco P(1), Fisher LW, Young MF, Termine JD, Robey PG.

Author information:
(1)Bone Research Branch, National Institute of Dental Research, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

Bone sialoprotein (BSP) and its messenger RNA were localized in developing human 
skeletal and nonskeletal tissues by means of immunohistochemistry and in situ 
hybridization. Both protein and mRNA were found in mature, bone-forming cells 
but not in their immature precursors. In addition, osteoclasts displayed 
positive immunostaining and high densities of autoradiographic grains by in situ 
hybridization experiments. BSP was expressed in fetal epiphyseal cartilage 
cells, particularly in hypertrophic chondrocytes of growth plates. Though 
neither the protein nor the mRNA were identified in a variety of other 
connective and nonconnective tissues, an unexpected finding was the expression 
of BSP in the trophoblast cells of placenta. These findings show that BSP is 
primarily an osteoblast-derived component of the bone matrix expressed at late 
stages of differentiation. We have also found that osteoclasts produce BSP, 
possibly as a mediator of cell attachment to bone.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02555854
PMID: 1818768 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
