---
pmid: '28143796'
title: Clr4 specificity and catalytic activity beyond H3K9 methylation.
authors:
- Kusevic D
- Kudithipudi S
- Iglesias N
- Moazed D
- Jeltsch A
journal: Biochimie
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2017.01.013
---

# Clr4 specificity and catalytic activity beyond H3K9 methylation.
**Authors:** Kusevic D, Kudithipudi S, Iglesias N, Moazed D, Jeltsch A
**Journal:** Biochimie (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.biochi.2017.01.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biochi.2017.01.013)

## Abstract

1. Biochimie. 2017 Apr;135:83-88. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2017.01.013. Epub 2017
Jan  29.

Clr4 specificity and catalytic activity beyond H3K9 methylation.

Kusevic D(1), Kudithipudi S(1), Iglesias N(2), Moazed D(2), Jeltsch A(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, University Stuttgart, 
Stuttgart, Germany.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, United States.
(3)Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, University Stuttgart, 
Stuttgart, Germany. Electronic address: albert.jeltsch@ibc.uni-stuttgart.de.

In fission yeast, the catalytic activity of the protein lysine methyltransferase 
(PKMT) Clr4, the sole homolog of the mammalian SUV39H1 and SUV39H2 enzymes, 
majorly contributes to the formation of heterochromatin. The enzyme introduces 
histone 3 lysine 9 (H3K9) di- and tri-methylation, a central heterochromatic 
histone modification, and later it was also found to methylate the Mlo3 protein, 
which has a role in heterochromatin formation as well. Herein, we have 
investigated the substrate specificity of Clr4 using custom made mutational 
scanning peptide arrays. Our data show, that Clr4 recognizes an RK core motif, 
showing high preference for R8. In addition, it exhibits specific contacts at 
the S10, T11, G12 and G13 positions of the H3 peptide recognizing an 
R-K-SKRT-TCS-G sequence. Based on the specificity profile and in vitro 
methyltransferase assay targeted searches, 11 putative methylation sites in 
S. pombe proteins were identified from reported Clr4 interacting proteins 
including Mlo3. Peptide methylation was observed on Mlo3 and 7 novel target 
sites with strongest methylation signals on Spbc28F2.11 (HMG box-containing 
protein) at lysine 292 and Hrp3 (Chromodomain ATP-dep DNA helicase) at lysine 
89. These data suggest that Clr4 has additional methylation substrates and it 
will be important to study the biological function of these novel methylation 
events. Furthermore, the specificity profile of Clr4 has been used to develop a 
quantitative method to compare and cluster specificity profiles of PKMTs. It 
shows that the specificity profile of Clr4 is most similar to that of the 
SUV39H2 enzyme, one of its human homologs. This approach will be helpful in the 
comparison of the recognition profiles of other families of PKMTs as well.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. and Société Française de Biochimie et Biologie 
Moléculaire (SFBBM). All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biochi.2017.01.013
PMID: 28143796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
