---
reference_id: PMID:17386266
title: PRAS40 is an insulin-regulated inhibitor of the mTORC1 protein kinase.
authors:
- Sancak Y
- Thoreen CC
- Peterson TR
- Lindquist RA
- Kang SA
- Spooner E
- Carr SA
- Sabatini DM
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.03.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PRAS40 is an insulin-regulated inhibitor of the mTORC1 protein kinase.
**Authors:** Sancak Y, Thoreen CC, Peterson TR, Lindquist RA, Kang SA, Spooner E, Carr SA, Sabatini DM
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2007.03.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2007.03.003)

## Content

1. Mol Cell. 2007 Mar 23;25(6):903-15. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.03.003.

PRAS40 is an insulin-regulated inhibitor of the mTORC1 protein kinase.

Sancak Y(1), Thoreen CC, Peterson TR, Lindquist RA, Kang SA, Spooner E, Carr SA,
Sabatini DM.

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Department of Biology,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Nine Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA
02142, USA.

The heterotrimeric mTORC1 protein kinase nucleates a signaling network that
promotes cell growth in response to insulin and becomes constitutively active in
cells missing the TSC1 or TSC2 tumor suppressors. Insulin stimulates the
phosphorylation of S6K1, an mTORC1 substrate, but it is not known how mTORC1
kinase activity is regulated. We identify PRAS40 as a raptor-interacting protein
that binds to mTORC1 in insulin-deprived cells and whose in vitro interaction
with mTORC1 is disrupted by high salt concentrations. PRAS40 inhibits cell
growth, S6K1 phosphorylation, and rheb-induced activation of the mTORC1 pathway,
and in vitro it prevents the great increase in mTORC1 kinase activity induced by
rheb1-GTP. Insulin stimulates Akt/PKB-mediated phosphorylation of PRAS40, which
prevents its inhibition of mTORC1 in cells and in vitro. We propose that the
relative strengths of the rheb- and PRAS40-mediated inputs to mTORC1 set overall
pathway activity and that insulin activates mTORC1 through the coordinated
regulation of both.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.03.003
PMID: 17386266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]