---
pmid: '8186247'
title: 'Purification of peroxisomal acyl-CoA: dihydroxyacetonephosphate acyltransferase
  from human placenta.'
authors:
- Ofman R
- Wanders RJ
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0167-4838(94)90068-x
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Purification of peroxisomal acyl-CoA: dihydroxyacetonephosphate acyltransferase from human placenta.
**Authors:** Ofman R, Wanders RJ
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0167-4838(94)90068-x](https://doi.org/10.1016/0167-4838(94)90068-x)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1994 May 18;1206(1):27-34. doi: 
10.1016/0167-4838(94)90068-x.

Purification of peroxisomal acyl-CoA: dihydroxyacetonephosphate acyltransferase 
from human placenta.

Ofman R(1), Wanders RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, University Hospital Amsterdam, AMC, The 
Netherlands.

The peroxisomal enzyme acyl-CoA:dihydroxyacetonephosphate acyltransferase 
(DHAPAT) was extracted from human placental membranes using CHAPS as a detergent 
in the presence of 1 M KCl. Prior to assay dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine was 
added to the sample as eluted from the various columns in order to stabilize the 
protein for subsequent enzyme activity measurements at 37 degrees C. The enzyme 
was purified from the placental membrane using ocytl-Sepharose CL-4B 
chromatography, Hydroxyapatite HTP chromatography, CM-Sepharose CL-6B, PBE 94 
chromatofocusing and TSK G3000 SW size exclusion chromatography. A final 
purification of more than 8000-fold with respect to the placental membranes was 
achieved with a final yield of about 5%. Upon chromatofocusing the peak of 
activity eluted at a pH of 5.1-5.3 indicating a low isoelectric point. A native 
M(r) of 60-80 kDa was calculated from HPLC size exclusion chromatography. 
SDS-PAGE of the final purified fraction showed one major band with a M(r) of 65 
kDa. These results suggest that DHAPAT is a monomeric protein. A polyclonal 
antiserum raised against the purified fraction was prepared in rabbits. 
Immunoprecipitation experiments showed complete precipitation of DHAPAT activity 
in fractions prepared from human placenta, liver and skin fibroblasts. 
Immunoprecipitation was also used to determine the residual amount of DHAPAT 
protein in liver from a patient with the Zellweger syndrome. A value of about 
10% was found, which closely corresponds to the residual amount of enzyme 
activity.

DOI: 10.1016/0167-4838(94)90068-x
PMID: 8186247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
