---
reference_id: PMID:37196677
title: EMC chaperone-Ca(V) structure reveals an ion channel assembly intermediate.
authors:
- Chen Z
- Mondal A
- Abderemane-Ali F
- Jang S
- Niranjan S
- Montaño JL
- Zaro BW
- Minor DL Jr
journal: Nature
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06175-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# EMC chaperone-Ca(V) structure reveals an ion channel assembly intermediate.
**Authors:** Chen Z, Mondal A, Abderemane-Ali F, Jang S, Niranjan S, Montaño JL, Zaro BW, Minor DL Jr
**Journal:** Nature (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41586-023-06175-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06175-5)

## Content

1. Nature. 2023 Jul;619(7969):410-419. doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06175-5. Epub 2023
 May 17.

EMC chaperone-Ca(V) structure reveals an ion channel assembly intermediate.

Chen Z(1), Mondal A(1), Abderemane-Ali F(1)(2), Jang S(1), Niranjan S(1), 
Montaño JL(3), Zaro BW(1)(3), Minor DL Jr(4)(5)(6)(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California, San Francisco, 
CA, USA.
(2)Department of Physiology, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of California, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(4)Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California, San Francisco, 
CA, USA. daniel.minor@ucsf.edu.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California, San 
Francisco, CA, USA. daniel.minor@ucsf.edu.
(6)California Institute for Quantitative Biomedical Research, University of 
California, San Francisco, CA, USA. daniel.minor@ucsf.edu.
(7)Kavli Institute for Fundamental Neuroscience, University of California, San 
Francisco, CA, USA. daniel.minor@ucsf.edu.
(8)Molecular Biophysics and Integrated Bio-imaging Division, Lawrence Berkeley 
National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, USA. daniel.minor@ucsf.edu.
(9)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California, 
San Francisco, CA, USA. daniel.minor@ucsf.edu.

Voltage-gated ion channels (VGICs) comprise multiple structural units, the 
assembly of which is required for function1,2. Structural understanding of how 
VGIC subunits assemble and whether chaperone proteins are required is lacking. 
High-voltage-activated calcium channels (CaVs)3,4 are paradigmatic multisubunit 
VGICs whose function and trafficking are powerfully shaped by interactions 
between pore-forming CaV1 or CaV2 CaVα1 (ref. 3), and the auxiliary CaVβ5 and 
CaVα2δ subunits6,7. Here we present cryo-electron microscopy structures of human 
brain and cardiac CaV1.2 bound with CaVβ3 to a chaperone-the endoplasmic 
reticulum membrane protein complex (EMC)8,9-and of the assembled 
CaV1.2-CaVβ3-CaVα2δ-1 channel. These structures provide a view of an EMC-client 
complex and define EMC sites-the transmembrane (TM) and cytoplasmic (Cyto) 
docks; interaction between these sites and the client channel causes partial 
extraction of a pore subunit and splays open the CaVα2δ-interaction site. The 
structures identify the CaVα2δ-binding site for gabapentinoid anti-pain and 
anti-anxiety drugs6, show that EMC and CaVα2δ interactions with the channel are 
mutually exclusive, and indicate that EMC-to-CaVα2δ hand-off involves a divalent 
ion-dependent step and CaV1.2 element ordering. Disruption of the EMC-CaV 
complex compromises CaV function, suggesting that the EMC functions as a channel 
holdase that facilitates channel assembly. Together, the structures reveal a CaV 
assembly intermediate and EMC client-binding sites that could have wide-ranging 
implications for the biogenesis of VGICs and other membrane proteins.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-023-06175-5
PMCID: PMC10896479
PMID: 37196677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]