---
pmid: '22266820'
title: The E3 ligase RNF8 regulates KU80 removal and NHEJ repair.
authors:
- Feng L
- Chen J
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3888515
doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2211
---

# The E3 ligase RNF8 regulates KU80 removal and NHEJ repair.
**Authors:** Feng L, Chen J
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nsmb.2211](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb.2211)
**PMC:** [PMC3888515](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3888515/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2012 Jan 22;19(2):201-6. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2211.

The E3 ligase RNF8 regulates KU80 removal and NHEJ repair.

Feng L(1), Chen J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.

The ubiquitination cascade has a key role in the assembly of repair and 
signaling proteins at sites of double-strand DNA breaks. The E3 ubiquitin ligase 
RING finger protein 8 (RNF8) triggers the initial ubiquitination at 
double-strand DNA breaks, whereas sustained ubiquitination requires the 
downstream E3 ligase RING finger protein 168 (RNF168). It is not known whether 
RNF8 and RNF168 have discrete substrates and/or form different ubiquitin chains. 
Here we show that RNF168 acts with the ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme E2 13 
(UBC13) and specifically synthesizes Lys63-linked chains, whereas RNF8 primarily 
forms Lys48-linked chains on chromatin, which promote substrate degradation. We 
also find that RNF8 regulates the abundance of the nonhomologous end-joining 
(NHEJ) repair protein KU80 at sites of DNA damage, and that RNF8 depletion 
results in prolonged retention of KU80 at damage sites and impaired 
nonhomologous end-joining repair. These findings reveal a distinct feature of 
RNF8 and indicate the involvement of the ubiquitination-mediated degradation 
pathway in DNA damage repair.

DOI: 10.1038/nsmb.2211
PMCID: PMC3888515
PMID: 22266820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
