---
pmid: '9974395'
title: A copper cofactor for the ethylene receptor ETR1 from Arabidopsis.
authors:
- Rodríguez FI
- Esch JJ
- Hall AE
- Binder BM
- Schaller GE
- Bleecker AB
journal: Science
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.283.5404.996
---

# A copper cofactor for the ethylene receptor ETR1 from Arabidopsis.
**Authors:** Rodríguez FI, Esch JJ, Hall AE, Binder BM, Schaller GE, Bleecker AB
**Journal:** Science (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.283.5404.996](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.283.5404.996)

## Abstract

1. Science. 1999 Feb 12;283(5404):996-8. doi: 10.1126/science.283.5404.996.

A copper cofactor for the ethylene receptor ETR1 from Arabidopsis.

Rodríguez FI(1), Esch JJ, Hall AE, Binder BM, Schaller GE, Bleecker AB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany, 430 Lincoln Drive, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 
53706, USA.

The ETR1 receptor from Arabidopsis binds the gaseous hormone ethylene. A copper 
ion associated with the ethylene-binding domain is required for high-affinity 
ethylene-binding activity. A missense mutation in the domain that renders the 
plant insensitive to ethylene eliminates both ethylene binding and the 
interaction of copper with the receptor. A sequence from the genome of the 
cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. strain 6803 that shows homology to the 
ethylene-binding domain of ETR1 encodes a functional ethylene-binding protein. 
On the basis of sequence conservation between the Arabidopsis and the 
cyanobacterial ethylene-binding domains and on in vitro mutagenesis of ETR1, a 
structural model for this copper-based ethylene sensor domain is presented.

DOI: 10.1126/science.283.5404.996
PMID: 9974395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
