---
pmid: '18936296'
title: Structural insight into acute intermittent porphyria.
authors:
- Song G
- Li Y
- Cheng C
- Zhao Y
- Gao A
- Zhang R
- Joachimiak A
- Shaw N
- Liu ZJ
journal: FASEB J
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1096/fj.08-115469
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Structural insight into acute intermittent porphyria.
**Authors:** Song G, Li Y, Cheng C, Zhao Y, Gao A, Zhang R, Joachimiak A, Shaw N, Liu ZJ
**Journal:** FASEB J (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1096/fj.08-115469](https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.08-115469)

## Abstract

1. FASEB J. 2009 Feb;23(2):396-404. doi: 10.1096/fj.08-115469. Epub 2008 Oct 20.

Structural insight into acute intermittent porphyria.

Song G(1), Li Y, Cheng C, Zhao Y, Gao A, Zhang R, Joachimiak A, Shaw N, Liu ZJ.

Author information:
(1)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, 15 Datun 
Lu, Beijing 100101, China.

Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP), an inherited disease of heme biosynthesis, 
is one of the most common types of porphyria. Reduced activity of the enzyme 
porphobilinogen deaminase (PBGD), which catalyzes the sequential condensation of 
4 molecules of porphobilinogen to yield preuroporphyrinogen, has been linked to 
the symptoms of AIP. We have determined the 3-dimensional structure of human 
PBGD at 2.2 A resolution. Analysis of the structure revealed a dipyrromethane 
cofactor molecule covalently linked to C261, sitting in a positively charged 
cleft region. In addition to the critical catalytic D99, a number of other 
residues are seen hydrogen bonded to the cofactor and play a role in catalysis. 
Sequential entry of 4 pyrrole molecules into the active site is accomplished by 
movement of the domains around the hinges. H120P mutation resulted in an 
inactive enzyme, supporting the role of H120 as a hinge residue. Interestingly, 
some of the mutations of the human PBGD documented in patients suffering from 
AIP are located far away from the active site. The structure provides insights 
into the mechanism of action of PBGD at the molecular level and could aid the 
development of potential drugs for the up-regulation of PBGD activity in AIP.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.08-115469
PMID: 18936296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
