---
pmid: '10775527'
title: Identification of the alpha-aminoadipic semialdehyde synthase gene, which is
  defective in familial hyperlysinemia.
authors:
- Sacksteder KA
- Biery BJ
- Morrell JC
- Goodman BK
- Geisbrecht BV
- Cox RP
- Gould SJ
- Geraghty MT
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC1378037
doi: 10.1086/302919
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Identification of the alpha-aminoadipic semialdehyde synthase gene, which is defective in familial hyperlysinemia.
**Authors:** Sacksteder KA, Biery BJ, Morrell JC, Goodman BK, Geisbrecht BV, Cox RP, Gould SJ, Geraghty MT
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1086/302919](https://doi.org/10.1086/302919)
**PMC:** [PMC1378037](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1378037/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2000 Jun;66(6):1736-43. doi: 10.1086/302919. Epub 2000 Apr 20.

Identification of the alpha-aminoadipic semialdehyde synthase gene, which is 
defective in familial hyperlysinemia.

Sacksteder KA(1), Biery BJ, Morrell JC, Goodman BK, Geisbrecht BV, Cox RP, Gould 
SJ, Geraghty MT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.

The first two steps in the mammalian lysine-degradation pathway are catalyzed by 
lysine-ketoglutarate reductase and saccharopine dehydrogenase, respectively, 
resulting in the conversion of lysine to alpha-aminoadipic semialdehyde. Defects 
in one or both of these activities result in familial hyperlysinemia, an 
autosomal recessive condition characterized by hyperlysinemia, lysinuria, and 
variable saccharopinuria. In yeast, lysine-ketoglutarate reductase and 
saccharopine dehydrogenase are encoded by the LYS1 and LYS9 genes, respectively, 
and we searched the available sequence databases for their human homologues. We 
identified a single cDNA that encoded an apparently bifunctional protein, with 
the N-terminal half similar to that of yeast LYS1 and with the C-terminal half 
similar to that of yeast LYS9. This bifunctional protein has previously been 
referred to as "alpha-aminoadipic semialdehyde synthase," and we have 
tentatively designated this gene "AASS." The AASS cDNA contains an open reading 
frame of 2,781 bp predicted to encode a 927-amino-acid-long protein. The gene 
has been sequenced and contains 24 exons scattered over 68 kb and maps to 
chromosome 7q31.3. Northern blot analysis revealed the presence of several 
transcripts in all tissues examined, with the highest expression occurring in 
the liver. We sequenced the genomic DNA from a single patient with 
hyperlysinemia (JJa). The patient is the product of a consanguineous mating and 
is homozygous for an out-of-frame 9-bp deletion in exon 15, which results in a 
premature stop codon at position 534 of the protein. On the basis of these and 
other results, we propose that AASS catalyzes the first two steps of the major 
lysine-degradation pathway in human cells and that inactivating mutations in the 
AASS gene are a cause of hyperlysinemia.

DOI: 10.1086/302919
PMCID: PMC1378037
PMID: 10775527 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The first two steps in the mammalian lysine-degradation pathway are catalyzed by lysine-ketoglutarate reductase and saccharopine dehydrogenase, respectively, resulting in the conversion of lysine to alpha-aminoadipic semialdehyde. Defects in one or both of these activities result in familial hyperlysinemia, an autosomal recessive condition characterized by hyperlysinemia, lysinuria, and variable saccharopinuria. In yeast, lysine-ketoglutarate reductase and saccharopine dehydrogenase are encoded by the LYS1 and LYS9 genes, respectively, and we searched the available sequence databases for their human homologues. We identified a single cDNA that encoded an apparently bifunctional protein, with the N-terminal half similar to that of yeast LYS1 and with the C-terminal half similar to that of yeast LYS9. This bifunctional protein has previously been referred to as "alpha-aminoadipic semialdehyde synthase," and we have tentatively designated this gene "AASS." The AASS cDNA contains an open reading frame of 2,781 bp predicted to encode a 927-amino-acid-long protein. The gene has been sequenced and contains 24 exons scattered over 68 kb and maps to chromosome 7q31.3. Northern blot analysis revealed the presence of several transcripts in all tissues examined, with the highest expression occurring in the liver. We sequenced the genomic DNA from a single patient with hyperlysinemia (JJa). The patient is the product of a consanguineous mating and is homozygous for an out-of-frame 9-bp deletion in exon 15, which results in a premature stop codon at position 534 of the protein. On the basis of these and other results, we propose that AASS catalyzes the first two steps of the major lysine-degradation pathway in human cells and that inactivating mutations in the AASS gene are a cause of hyperlysinemia.
