---
pmid: '17045821'
title: CD44 is the signaling component of the macrophage migration inhibitory factor-CD74
  receptor complex.
authors:
- Shi X
- Leng L
- Wang T
- Wang W
- Du X
- Li J
- McDonald C
- Chen Z
- Murphy JW
- Lolis E
- Noble P
- Knudson W
- Bucala R
journal: Immunity
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3707630
doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2006.08.020
---

# CD44 is the signaling component of the macrophage migration inhibitory factor-CD74 receptor complex.
**Authors:** Shi X, Leng L, Wang T, Wang W, Du X, Li J, McDonald C, Chen Z, Murphy JW, Lolis E, Noble P, Knudson W, Bucala R
**Journal:** Immunity (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.immuni.2006.08.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2006.08.020)
**PMC:** [PMC3707630](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3707630/)

## Abstract

1. Immunity. 2006 Oct;25(4):595-606. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2006.08.020.

CD44 is the signaling component of the macrophage migration inhibitory 
factor-CD74 receptor complex.

Shi X(1), Leng L, Wang T, Wang W, Du X, Li J, McDonald C, Chen Z, Murphy JW, 
Lolis E, Noble P, Knudson W, Bucala R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut 06520, USA.

The macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) receptor (CD74) was cloned 
recently, but the signaling mechanism is not evident. We hypothesized that 
signaling requires an additional molecule such as CD44, which activates 
nonreceptor tyrosine kinases. We utilized the CD74- and CD44-deficient COS-7/M6 
cell to create stable transfectants expressing CD74, CD44, and a truncated CD44 
lacking its intracytoplasmic signaling domain. CD74 alone mediated MIF binding; 
however, MIF-induced ERK1 and ERK2 kinase phosphorylation required the 
coexpression of full-length CD44. MIF binding was associated with the serine 
phosphorylation of CD74 and CD44. Investigations that used siRNA or kinase 
inhibitors indicate that MIF-induced ERK1 and ERK2 activation through CD44 
required the Src tyrosine kinase. Studies of CD74, CD44, and CD74-CD44 
transformants and corresponding mutant cells showed that CD74 and CD44 were 
necessary for MIF protection from apoptosis. These data establish CD44 as an 
integral member of the CD74 receptor complex leading to MIF signal transduction.

DOI: 10.1016/j.immuni.2006.08.020
PMCID: PMC3707630
PMID: 17045821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
