---
pmid: '23698361'
title: Small molecule inhibition of the KRAS-PDEδ interaction impairs oncogenic KRAS
  signalling.
authors:
- Zimmermann G
- Papke B
- Ismail S
- Vartak N
- Chandra A
- Hoffmann M
- Hahn SA
- Triola G
- Wittinghofer A
- Bastiaens PI
- Waldmann H
journal: Nature
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature12205
---

# Small molecule inhibition of the KRAS-PDEδ interaction impairs oncogenic KRAS signalling.
**Authors:** Zimmermann G, Papke B, Ismail S, Vartak N, Chandra A, Hoffmann M, Hahn SA, Triola G, Wittinghofer A, Bastiaens PI, Waldmann H
**Journal:** Nature (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature12205](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature12205)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2013 May 30;497(7451):638-42. doi: 10.1038/nature12205. Epub 2013 May 
22.

Small molecule inhibition of the KRAS-PDEδ interaction impairs oncogenic KRAS 
signalling.

Zimmermann G(1), Papke B, Ismail S, Vartak N, Chandra A, Hoffmann M, Hahn SA, 
Triola G, Wittinghofer A, Bastiaens PI, Waldmann H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Biology, Max Planck Institute of Molecular Physiology, 
D-44227 Dortmund, Germany.

Comment in
    Nature. 2013 May 30;497(7451):577-8. doi: 10.1038/nature12248.
    Cell. 2013 Jun 6;153(6):1191-3. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.05.029.
    Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2013 Jul;12(7):506. doi: 10.1038/nrd4054.

The KRAS oncogene product is considered a major target in anticancer drug 
discovery. However, direct interference with KRAS signalling has not yet led to 
clinically useful drugs. Correct localization and signalling by farnesylated 
KRAS is regulated by the prenyl-binding protein PDEδ, which sustains the spatial 
organization of KRAS by facilitating its diffusion in the cytoplasm. Here we 
report that interfering with binding of mammalian PDEδ to KRAS by means of small 
molecules provides a novel opportunity to suppress oncogenic RAS signalling by 
altering its localization to endomembranes. Biochemical screening and subsequent 
structure-based hit optimization yielded inhibitors of the KRAS-PDEδ interaction 
that selectively bind to the prenyl-binding pocket of PDEδ with nanomolar 
affinity, inhibit oncogenic RAS signalling and suppress in vitro and in vivo 
proliferation of human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma cells that are dependent 
on oncogenic KRAS. Our findings may inspire novel drug discovery efforts aimed 
at the development of drugs targeting oncogenic RAS.

DOI: 10.1038/nature12205
PMID: 23698361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
