---
pmid: '20534510'
title: Structures of a platelet-derived growth factor/propeptide complex and a platelet-derived
  growth factor/receptor complex.
authors:
- Shim AH
- Liu H
- Focia PJ
- Chen X
- Lin PC
- He X
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2895058
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1000806107
---

# Structures of a platelet-derived growth factor/propeptide complex and a platelet-derived growth factor/receptor complex.
**Authors:** Shim AH, Liu H, Focia PJ, Chen X, Lin PC, He X
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1000806107](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1000806107)
**PMC:** [PMC2895058](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2895058/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jun 22;107(25):11307-12. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1000806107. Epub 2010 Jun 2.

Structures of a platelet-derived growth factor/propeptide complex and a 
platelet-derived growth factor/receptor complex.

Shim AH(1), Liu H, Focia PJ, Chen X, Lin PC, He X.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Biological Chemistry, Northwestern 
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Searle 8-417, 303 East Chicago Avenue, 
Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Platelet-derived growth factors (PDGFs) and their receptors (PDGFRs) are 
prototypic growth factors and receptor tyrosine kinases which have critical 
functions in development. We show that PDGFs share a conserved region in their 
prodomain sequences which can remain noncovalently associated with the mature 
cystine-knot growth factor domain after processing. The structure of the 
PDGF-A/propeptide complex reveals this conserved, hydrophobic association mode. 
We also present the structure of the complex between PDGF-B and the first three 
Ig domains of PDGFRbeta, showing that two PDGF-B protomers clamp PDGFRbeta at 
their dimerization seam. The PDGF-B:PDGFRbeta interface is predominantly 
hydrophobic, and PDGFRs and the PDGF propeptides occupy overlapping positions on 
mature PDGFs, rationalizing the need of propeptides by PDGFs to cover 
functionally important hydrophobic surfaces during secretion. A large-scale 
structural organization and rearrangement is observed for PDGF-B upon receptor 
binding, in which the PDGF-B L1 loop, disordered in the structure of the free 
form, adopts a highly specific conformation to form hydrophobic interactions 
with the third Ig domain of PDGFRbeta. Calorimetric data also shows that the 
membrane-proximal homotypic PDGFRalpha interaction, albeit required for 
activation, contributes negatively to ligand binding. The structural and 
biochemical data together offer insights into PDGF-PDGFR signaling, as well as 
strategies for PDGF-antagonism.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1000806107
PMCID: PMC2895058
PMID: 20534510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
