---
pmid: '24784232'
title: A new transcriptional role for matrix metalloproteinase-12 in antiviral immunity.
authors:
- Marchant DJ
- Bellac CL
- Moraes TJ
- Wadsworth SJ
- Dufour A
- Butler GS
- Bilawchuk LM
- Hendry RG
- Robertson AG
- Cheung CT
- Ng J
- Ang L
- Luo Z
- Heilbron K
- Norris MJ
- Duan W
- Bucyk T
- Karpov A
- Devel L
- Georgiadis D
- Hegele RG
- Luo H
- Granville DJ
- Dive V
- McManus BM
- Overall CM
journal: Nat Med
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nm.3508
---

# A new transcriptional role for matrix metalloproteinase-12 in antiviral immunity.
**Authors:** Marchant DJ, Bellac CL, Moraes TJ, Wadsworth SJ, Dufour A, Butler GS, Bilawchuk LM, Hendry RG, Robertson AG, Cheung CT, Ng J, Ang L, Luo Z, Heilbron K, Norris MJ, Duan W, Bucyk T, Karpov A, Devel L, Georgiadis D, Hegele RG, Luo H, Granville DJ, Dive V, McManus BM, Overall CM
**Journal:** Nat Med (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nm.3508](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.3508)

## Abstract

1. Nat Med. 2014 May;20(5):493-502. doi: 10.1038/nm.3508. Epub 2014 Apr 28.

A new transcriptional role for matrix metalloproteinase-12 in antiviral 
immunity.

Marchant DJ(1), Bellac CL(2), Moraes TJ(3), Wadsworth SJ(4), Dufour A(2), Butler 
GS(2), Bilawchuk LM(5), Hendry RG(5), Robertson AG(6), Cheung CT(4), Ng J(4), 
Ang L(4), Luo Z(4), Heilbron K(4), Norris MJ(3), Duan W(3), Bucyk T(5), Karpov 
A(4), Devel L(7), Georgiadis D(8), Hegele RG(3), Luo H(4), Granville DJ(4), Dive 
V(7), McManus BM(9), Overall CM(10).

Author information:
(1)1] Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, UBC James Hogg Research 
Centre, Institute for Heart + Lung Health, St. Paul's Hospital/Providence Health 
Care/University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. [2] Li 
Ka Shing Institute of Virology, Department of Medical Microbiology and 
Immunology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(2)1] Department of Oral Biological & Medical Sciences, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. [2] Department of Biochemistry & 
Molecular Biology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, 
Canada. [3] Centre for Blood Research, Life Sciences Institute, Faculty of 
Dentistry, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, UBC James Hogg Research 
Centre, Institute for Heart + Lung Health, St. Paul's Hospital/Providence Health 
Care/University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(5)Li Ka Shing Institute of Virology, Department of Medical Microbiology and 
Immunology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(6)Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, British Columbia Cancer 
Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(7)Commissariat a l'Energie Atomique, Labex LERMIT, Service d'Ingenierie 
Moleculaire des Proteines, Gif/Yvette, France.
(8)1] Commissariat a l'Energie Atomique, Labex LERMIT, Service d'Ingenierie 
Moleculaire des Proteines, Gif/Yvette, France. [2].
(9)1] Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, UBC James Hogg Research 
Centre, Institute for Heart + Lung Health, St. Paul's Hospital/Providence Health 
Care/University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. [2].
(10)1] Department of Oral Biological & Medical Sciences, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. [2] Department of Biochemistry & 
Molecular Biology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, 
Canada. [3] Centre for Blood Research, Life Sciences Institute, Faculty of 
Dentistry, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. 
[4].

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2014 May;20(5):470-2. doi: 10.1038/nm.3561.

Interferon-α (IFN-α) is essential for antiviral immunity, but in the absence of 
matrix metalloproteinase-12 (MMP-12) or IκBα (encoded by NFKBIA) we show that 
IFN-α is retained in the cytosol of virus-infected cells and is not secreted. 
Our findings suggest that activated IκBα mediates the export of IFN-α from 
virus-infected cells and that the inability of cells in Mmp12(-/-) but not 
wild-type mice to express IκBα and thus export IFN-α makes coxsackievirus type 
B3 infection lethal and renders respiratory syncytial virus more pathogenic. We 
show here that after macrophage secretion, MMP-12 is transported into 
virus-infected cells. In HeLa cells MMP-12 is also translocated to the nucleus, 
where it binds to the NFKBIA promoter, driving transcription. We also identified 
dual-regulated substrates that are repressed both by MMP-12 binding to the 
substrate's gene exons and by MMP-12-mediated cleavage of the substrate protein 
itself. Whereas intracellular MMP-12 mediates NFKBIA transcription, leading to 
IFN-α secretion and host protection, extracellular MMP-12 cleaves off the IFN-α 
receptor 2 binding site of systemic IFN-α, preventing an unchecked immune 
response. Consistent with an unexpected role for MMP-12 in clearing systemic 
IFN-α, treatment of coxsackievirus type B3-infected wild-type mice with a 
membrane-impermeable MMP-12 inhibitor elevates systemic IFN-α levels and reduces 
viral replication in pancreas while sparing intracellular MMP-12. These findings 
suggest that inhibiting extracellular MMP-12 could be a new avenue for the 
development of antiviral treatments.

DOI: 10.1038/nm.3508
PMID: 24784232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
