---
pmid: '25752541'
title: Ankyrin repeats of ANKRA2 recognize a PxLPxL motif on the 3M syndrome protein
  CCDC8.
authors:
- Nie J
- Xu C
- Jin J
- Aka JA
- Tempel W
- Nguyen V
- You L
- Weist R
- Min J
- Pawson T
- Yang XJ
journal: Structure
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.str.2015.02.001
---

# Ankyrin repeats of ANKRA2 recognize a PxLPxL motif on the 3M syndrome protein CCDC8.
**Authors:** Nie J, Xu C, Jin J, Aka JA, Tempel W, Nguyen V, You L, Weist R, Min J, Pawson T, Yang XJ
**Journal:** Structure (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.str.2015.02.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2015.02.001)

## Abstract

1. Structure. 2015 Apr 7;23(4):700-12. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2015.02.001. Epub 2015 
Mar 5.

Ankyrin repeats of ANKRA2 recognize a PxLPxL motif on the 3M syndrome protein 
CCDC8.

Nie J(1), Xu C(2), Jin J(3), Aka JA(4), Tempel W(2), Nguyen V(3), You L(4), 
Weist R(4), Min J(5), Pawson T(6), Yang XJ(7).

Author information:
(1)The Rosalind & Morris Goodman Cancer Research Center, Department of Medicine, 
McGill University, Montréal, QC H3A 1A3, Canada; Department of Breast Cancer, 
The Third Affiliated Hospital, Kunming Medical University, Yunnan 650118, China.
(2)Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Toronto, 101 College Street, 
Toronto, ON M5G 1L7, Canada.
(3)Lunenfeld-tanenbaum Research Institute, Toronto, ON M5G 1X5, Canada.
(4)The Rosalind & Morris Goodman Cancer Research Center, Department of Medicine, 
McGill University, Montréal, QC H3A 1A3, Canada.
(5)Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Toronto, 101 College Street, 
Toronto, ON M5G 1L7, Canada; Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, Canada. Electronic address: jr.min@utoronto.ca.
(6)Lunenfeld-tanenbaum Research Institute, Toronto, ON M5G 1X5, Canada; 
Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G 1L7, 
Canada.
(7)The Rosalind & Morris Goodman Cancer Research Center, Department of Medicine, 
McGill University, Montréal, QC H3A 1A3, Canada; Department of Biochemistry, 
McGill University, Montréal, QC H3A 1A3, Canada; McGill University Health 
Center, Montréal, QC H3A 1A3, Canada. Electronic address: 
xiang-jiao.yang@mcgill.ca.

Peptide motifs are often used for protein-protein interactions. We have recently 
demonstrated that ankyrin repeats of ANKRA2 and the paralogous bare lymphocyte 
syndrome transcription factor RFXANK recognize PxLPxL/I motifs shared by 
megalin, three histone deacetylases, and RFX5. We show here that that CCDC8 is a 
major partner of ANKRA2 but not RFXANK in cells. The CCDC8 gene is mutated in 3M 
syndrome, a short-stature disorder with additional facial and skeletal 
abnormalities. Two other genes mutated in this syndrome encode CUL7 and OBSL1. 
While CUL7 is a ubiquitin ligase and OBSL1 associates with the cytoskeleton, 
little is known about CCDC8. Binding and structural analyses reveal that the 
ankyrin repeats of ANKRA2 recognize a PxLPxL motif at the C-terminal region of 
CCDC8. The N-terminal part interacts with OBSL1 to form a CUL7 ligase complex. 
These results link ANKRA2 unexpectedly to 3M syndrome and suggest novel 
regulatory mechanisms for histone deacetylases and RFX7.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2015.02.001
PMID: 25752541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
