---
reference_id: PMID:12972329
title: "Octopus, which owns the most advanced brain in invertebrates, has two members of vasopressin/oxytocin superfamily as in vertebrates."
authors:
- Takuwa-Kuroda K
- Iwakoshi-Ukena E
- Kanda A
- Minakata H
journal: Regul Pept
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1016/s0167-0115(03)00151-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Octopus, which owns the most advanced brain in invertebrates, has two members of vasopressin/oxytocin superfamily as in vertebrates.
**Authors:** Takuwa-Kuroda K, Iwakoshi-Ukena E, Kanda A, Minakata H
**Journal:** Regul Pept (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0167-0115(03)00151-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0167-0115(03)00151-4)

## Content

1. Regul Pept. 2003 Sep 15;115(2):139-49. doi: 10.1016/s0167-0115(03)00151-4.

Octopus, which owns the most advanced brain in invertebrates, has two members of 
vasopressin/oxytocin superfamily as in vertebrates.

Takuwa-Kuroda K(1), Iwakoshi-Ukena E, Kanda A, Minakata H.

Author information:
(1)Suntory Institute for Bioorganic Research, 1-1-1 Wakayamadai, Shimamotocho, 
Mishimagun, 618-8503, Osaka, Japan.

A novel member of the vasopressin/oxytocin superfamily, octopressin (OP), has 
been isolated from Octopus vulgaris. Since another peptide of this superfamily, 
cephalotocin (CT), was isolated from the same species [Neurosci. Lett. 134 
(1992) 191], Octopus has two members of the superfamily as in vertebrates, an 
observation made for the first time in invertebrates. Octopressin caused 
contractions of the Octopus peripheral tissues such as oviduct, aorta, rectum, 
etc. Cephalotocin had no effects on tested tissues. The octopressin and 
cephalotocin precursors were composed of a signal peptide, a nonapeptide, and a 
neurophysin domain-the typical structural organizations of the superfamily 
precursors. Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)/Southern 
blot analysis revealed that octopressin mRNA was expressed in the 
supraesophageal and subesophageal brains, and the buccal and gastric ganglia. 
Cephalotocin mRNA was expressed mostly in the subesophageal brain. In situ 
hybridization in the brain showed that octopressin mRNA was localized in many 
lobes. Expression of cephalotocin mRNA was almost limited in the ventral median 
vasomotor lobe. Some of the neurons in this lobe are the source of the 
neurosecretory system of the vena cava, where cephalotocin was originally 
isolated. These results suggest that octopressin may be a multifunctional 
neuropeptide contributing to reproduction, cardiac circulation, and feeding. 
Cephalotocin may play important roles in metabolism, homeostasis, etc., as a 
neurohormone.

DOI: 10.1016/s0167-0115(03)00151-4
PMID: 12972329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]