---
pmid: '12370315'
title: Identification of a family of mastermind-like transcriptional coactivators
  for mammalian notch receptors.
authors:
- Wu L
- Sun T
- Kobayashi K
- Gao P
- Griffin JD
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC135662
doi: 10.1128/MCB.22.21.7688-7700.2002
---

# Identification of a family of mastermind-like transcriptional coactivators for mammalian notch receptors.
**Authors:** Wu L, Sun T, Kobayashi K, Gao P, Griffin JD
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.22.21.7688-7700.2002](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.22.21.7688-7700.2002)
**PMC:** [PMC135662](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC135662/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Nov;22(21):7688-700. doi:
10.1128/MCB.22.21.7688-7700.2002.

Identification of a family of mastermind-like transcriptional coactivators for 
mammalian notch receptors.

Wu L(1), Sun T, Kobayashi K, Gao P, Griffin JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The molecular mechanisms by which Notch receptors induce diverse biological 
responses are not fully understood. We recently cloned a mammalian homologue of 
the Mastermind gene of Drosophila melanogaster, MAML1 (Mastermind-like-1 
molecule) and determined that it functions as a transcriptional coactivator for 
Notch receptors. In this report, we characterize two additional genes in this 
Mastermind-like gene family: MAML2 and MAML3. The three MAML genes are widely 
expressed in adult tissues but exhibit distinct expression patterns in mouse 
early spinal cord development. All MAML proteins localize to nuclear bodies, 
share a conserved basic domain in their N termini that binds to the ankyrin 
repeat domain of Notch, and contain a transcriptional activation domain in their 
C termini. Moreover, as determined by using coimmunoprecipitation assays, each 
MAML protein was found to be capable of forming a multiprotein complex with the 
intracellular domain of each Notch receptor (ICN1 to -4) and CSL in vivo. 
However, MAML3 bound less efficiently to the ankyrin repeat domain of Notch1. 
Also, in U20S cells, whereas MAML1 and MAML2 functioned efficiently as 
coactivators with each of the Notch receptors to transactivate a Notch target 
HES1 promoter construct, MAML3 functioned more efficiently with ICN4 than with 
other forms of ICN. Similarly, MAML1 and MAML2 amplified Notch ligand (both 
Jagged2 and Delta1)-induced transcription of the HES-1 gene, whereas MAML3 
displayed little effect. Thus, MAML proteins may modify Notch signaling in 
different cell types based on their own expression levels and differential 
activities and thereby contribute to the diversity of the biological effects 
resulting from Notch activation.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.22.21.7688-7700.2002
PMCID: PMC135662
PMID: 12370315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
