---
pmid: '10601238'
title: Identification and functional characterization of a novel, tissue-specific
  NAD(+)-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase beta subunit isoform.
authors:
- Kim YO
- Koh HJ
- Kim SH
- Jo SH
- Huh JW
- Jeong KS
- Lee IJ
- Song BJ
- Huh TL
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.52.36866
---

# Identification and functional characterization of a novel, tissue-specific NAD(+)-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase beta subunit isoform.
**Authors:** Kim YO, Koh HJ, Kim SH, Jo SH, Huh JW, Jeong KS, Lee IJ, Song BJ, Huh TL
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.274.52.36866](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.52.36866)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Dec 24;274(52):36866-75. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.52.36866.

Identification and functional characterization of a novel, tissue-specific 
NAD(+)-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase beta subunit isoform.

Kim YO(1), Koh HJ, Kim SH, Jo SH, Huh JW, Jeong KS, Lee IJ, Song BJ, Huh TL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetic Engineering, College of Natural Sciences, Kyungpook 
National University, Taegu 702-701, Korea.

To understand the interactions and functional role of each of the three 
mitochondrial NAD(+)-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) subunits (alpha, 
beta, and gamma), we have characterized human cDNAs encoding two beta isoforms 
(beta(1) and beta(2)) and the gamma subunit. Analysis of deduced amino acid 
sequences revealed that beta(1) and beta(2) encode 349 and 354 amino acids, 
respectively, and the two isoforms only differ in the most carboxyl 28 amino 
acids. The gamma cDNA encodes 354 amino acids and is almost identical to monkey 
IDHgamma. Northern analyses revealed that the smaller beta(2) transcript (1.3 
kilobases) is primarily expressed in heart and skeletal muscle, whereas the 
larger beta(1) mRNA (1.6 kilobases) is prevalent in nonmuscle tissues. Sequence 
analysis of the IDHbeta gene indicates that the difference in the C-terminal 28 
amino acids between beta(1) and beta(2) proteins results from alternative 
splicing of a single transcript. Among the various combinations of human IDH 
subunits co-expressed in bacteria, alphabetagamma, alphabeta, and alphagamma 
combinations exhibited significant amounts of IDH activity, whereas subunits 
produced alone and betagamma showed no detectable activity. These data suggest 
that the alpha is the catalytic subunit and that at least one of the other two 
subunits plays an essential supporting role for activity. Substitution of 
beta(1) with beta(2) in the co-expression system lowered the pH optimum for IDH 
activity from 8.0 to 7.6. This difference in optimal pH was analogous to what 
was observed in mouse kidney and brain (beta(1) prevalent; optimal pH 8.0) 
versus heart (beta(2) prevalent; pH 7.6) mitochondria. Experiments with a 
specially designed splicing reporter construct stably transfected into HT1080 
cells indicate that acidic conditions favor a splicing pattern responsible for 
the muscle- and heart-specific beta(2) isoform. Taken together, these data 
indicate a regulatory role of IDHbeta isoforms in determining the pH optimum for 
IDH activity through the tissue-specific alternative splicing.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.52.36866
PMID: 10601238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
