---
pmid: '16249387'
title: LIME acts as a transmembrane adapter mediating BCR-dependent B-cell activation.
authors:
- Ahn E
- Lee H
- Yun Y
journal: Blood
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1182/blood-2005-05-1859
---

# LIME acts as a transmembrane adapter mediating BCR-dependent B-cell activation.
**Authors:** Ahn E, Lee H, Yun Y
**Journal:** Blood (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2005-05-1859](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2005-05-1859)

## Abstract

1. Blood. 2006 Feb 15;107(4):1521-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2005-05-1859. Epub 2005
Oct  25.

LIME acts as a transmembrane adapter mediating BCR-dependent B-cell activation.

Ahn E(1), Lee H, Yun Y.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Life Science, Ewha Womans University, 11-1, 
Daehyun-dong, Seodaemoon-gu, Seoul, 120-750, Korea.

Assembly of a signaling complex around the transmembrane adapter LAT is 
essential for the transmission of T-cell receptor (TCR)-mediated signaling. 
However, a LAT-like molecule responsible for the initial activation events in 
B-cell receptor (BCR) signaling has not yet been identified. Here, we show that 
LIME is a transmembrane adaptor required for BCR-mediated B-cell activation. 
LIME was found to be expressed in mouse splenic B cells. Upon BCR cross-linking, 
LIME was tyrosine phosphorylated by Lyn and associated with Lyn, Grb2, 
PLC-gamma2, and PI3K. Reduction of LIME expression by the introduction of siRNA 
resulted in the disruption of BCR-mediated activation of MAPK, calcium flux, 
NF-AT, PI3K, and NF-kappaB. Taken together, these results establish that LIME is 
an essential transmembrane adaptor linking BCR ligation to the downstream 
signaling events that lead to B-cell activation.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2005-05-1859
PMID: 16249387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
