---
pmid: '7507921'
title: Genetic and molecular characterization of the Escherichia coli secD operon
  and its products.
authors:
- Pogliano KJ
- Beckwith J
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC205118
doi: 10.1128/jb.176.3.804-814.1994
---

# Genetic and molecular characterization of the Escherichia coli secD operon and its products.
**Authors:** Pogliano KJ, Beckwith J
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1128/jb.176.3.804-814.1994](https://doi.org/10.1128/jb.176.3.804-814.1994)
**PMC:** [PMC205118](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC205118/)

## Abstract

1. J Bacteriol. 1994 Feb;176(3):804-14. doi: 10.1128/jb.176.3.804-814.1994.

Genetic and molecular characterization of the Escherichia coli secD operon and 
its products.

Pogliano KJ(1), Beckwith J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts 02115.

The secD operon of Escherichia coli is required for the efficient export of 
proteins. We have characterized this operon, and found that, in addition to secD 
and secF, it contains the upstream gene yajC, but not the genes queA or tgt, in 
contrast to previous reports. An analysis of yajC mutations constructed in vitro 
and recombined onto the chromosome indicates that yajC is neither essential nor 
a sec gene. The secD operon is not induced in response to either secretion 
defects or temperature changes. TnphoA fusions have been used to analyze the 
topology of SecD in the inner membrane; the protein contains six transmembrane 
stretches and a large periplasmic domain. TnphoA fusions to SecD and SecF have 
also been recombined onto the chromosome and used to determine the level of 
these proteins within the cell. Our results indicate that there are fewer than 
30 SecD and SecF molecules per cell.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.176.3.804-814.1994
PMCID: PMC205118
PMID: 7507921 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
