---
pmid: '17412732'
title: The myopathic form of coenzyme Q10 deficiency is caused by mutations in the
  electron-transferring-flavoprotein dehydrogenase (ETFDH) gene.
authors:
- Gempel K
- Topaloglu H
- Talim B
- Schneiderat P
- Schoser BG
- Hans VH
- Pálmafy B
- Kale G
- Tokatli A
- Quinzii C
- Hirano M
- Naini A
- DiMauro S
- Prokisch H
- Lochmüller H
- Horvath R
journal: Brain
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4345103
doi: 10.1093/brain/awm054
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The myopathic form of coenzyme Q10 deficiency is caused by mutations in the electron-transferring-flavoprotein dehydrogenase (ETFDH) gene.
**Authors:** Gempel K, Topaloglu H, Talim B, Schneiderat P, Schoser BG, Hans VH, Pálmafy B, Kale G, Tokatli A, Quinzii C, Hirano M, Naini A, DiMauro S, Prokisch H, Lochmüller H, Horvath R
**Journal:** Brain (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awm054](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awm054)
**PMC:** [PMC4345103](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4345103/)

## Abstract

1. Brain. 2007 Aug;130(Pt 8):2037-44. doi: 10.1093/brain/awm054. Epub 2007 Apr 5.

The myopathic form of coenzyme Q10 deficiency is caused by mutations in the 
electron-transferring-flavoprotein dehydrogenase (ETFDH) gene.

Gempel K(1), Topaloglu H, Talim B, Schneiderat P, Schoser BG, Hans VH, Pálmafy 
B, Kale G, Tokatli A, Quinzii C, Hirano M, Naini A, DiMauro S, Prokisch H, 
Lochmüller H, Horvath R.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Disease Center Munich-Schwabing, Institutes of Clinical Chemistry, 
Molecular Diagnostics and Mitochondrial Genetics; Academic Hospital Schwabing, 
Munich, Germany.

Coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder with 
heterogenous phenotypic manifestations and genetic background. We describe seven 
patients from five independent families with an isolated myopathic phenotype of 
CoQ10 deficiency. The clinical, histological and biochemical presentation of our 
patients was very homogenous. All patients presented with exercise intolerance, 
fatigue, proximal myopathy and high serum CK. Muscle histology showed lipid 
accumulation and subtle signs of mitochondrial myopathy. Biochemical measurement 
of muscle homogenates showed severely decreased activities of respiratory chain 
complexes I and II + III, while complex IV (COX) was moderately decreased. CoQ10 
was significantly decreased in the skeletal muscle of all patients. Tandem mass 
spectrometry detected multiple acyl-CoA deficiency, leading to the analysis of 
the electron-transferring-flavoprotein dehydrogenase (ETFDH) gene, previously 
shown to result in another metabolic disorder, glutaric aciduria type II (GAII). 
All of our patients carried autosomal recessive mutations in ETFDH, suggesting 
that ETFDH deficiency leads to a secondary CoQ10 deficiency. Our results 
indicate that the late-onset form of GAII and the myopathic form of CoQ10 
deficiency are allelic diseases. Since this condition is treatable, correct 
diagnosis is of the utmost importance and should be considered both in children 
and in adults. We suggest to give patients both CoQ10 and riboflavin 
supplementation, especially for long-term treatment.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awm054
PMCID: PMC4345103
PMID: 17412732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
