---
pmid: '21190939'
title: The interferon stimulated gene 54 promotes apoptosis.
authors:
- Stawowczyk M
- Van Scoy S
- Kumar KP
- Reich NC
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3044982
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.207068
---

# The interferon stimulated gene 54 promotes apoptosis.
**Authors:** Stawowczyk M, Van Scoy S, Kumar KP, Reich NC
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110.207068](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.207068)
**PMC:** [PMC3044982](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3044982/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Mar 4;286(9):7257-66. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.207068. Epub
2010  Dec 29.

The interferon stimulated gene 54 promotes apoptosis.

Stawowczyk M(1), Van Scoy S, Kumar KP, Reich NC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Stony Brook University 
Stony Brook, New York 11794, USA.

The ability of interferons (IFNs) to inhibit viral replication and cellular 
proliferation is well established, but the specific contribution of each 
IFN-stimulated gene (ISG) to these biological responses remains to be completely 
understood. In this report we demonstrate that ISG54, also known as IFN-induced 
protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 2 (IFIT2), is a mediator of apoptosis. 
Expression of ISG54, independent of IFN stimulation, elicits apoptotic cell 
death. Cell death and apoptosis were quantified by propidium iodide uptake and 
annexin-V staining, respectively. The activation of caspase-3, a key mediator of 
the execution phase of apoptosis, was clearly apparent in cells expressing 
ISG54. The anti-apoptotic B cell lymphoma-xl (Bcl-xl) protein inhibited the 
apoptotic effects of ISG54 as did the anti-apoptotic adenoviral E1B-19K protein. 
In addition, ISG54 was not able to promote cell death in the absence of 
pro-apoptotic Bcl family members, Bax and Bak. Analyses of binding partners of 
ISG54 revealed association with two homologous proteins, ISG56/IFIT1 and 
ISG60/IFIT3. In addition, ISG60 binding negatively regulates the apoptotic 
effects of ISG54. The results reveal a previously unidentified role of ISG54 in 
the induction of apoptosis via a mitochondrial pathway and shed new light on the 
mechanism by which IFN elicits anti-viral and anti-cancer effects.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.207068
PMCID: PMC3044982
PMID: 21190939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The ability of interferons (IFNs) to inhibit viral replication and cellular proliferation is well established, but the specific contribution of each IFN-stimulated gene (ISG) to these biological responses remains to be completely understood. In this report we demonstrate that ISG54, also known as IFN-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 2 (IFIT2), is a mediator of apoptosis. Expression of ISG54, independent of IFN stimulation, elicits apoptotic cell death. Cell death and apoptosis were quantified by propidium iodide uptake and annexin-V staining, respectively. The activation of caspase-3, a key mediator of the execution phase of apoptosis, was clearly apparent in cells expressing ISG54. The anti-apoptotic B cell lymphoma-xl (Bcl-xl) protein inhibited the apoptotic effects of ISG54 as did the anti-apoptotic adenoviral E1B-19K protein. In addition, ISG54 was not able to promote cell death in the absence of pro-apoptotic Bcl family members, Bax and Bak. Analyses of binding partners of ISG54 revealed association with two homologous proteins, ISG56/IFIT1 and ISG60/IFIT3. In addition, ISG60 binding negatively regulates the apoptotic effects of ISG54. The results reveal a previously unidentified role of ISG54 in the induction of apoptosis via a mitochondrial pathway and shed new light on the mechanism by which IFN elicits anti-viral and anti-cancer effects.

Introduction

Interferons (IFNs) are well recognized as essential mediators of innate immunity by their ability to inhibit viral replication and stimulate immune effector cells ( 1 , 2 ). They are also known for their ability to inhibit cellular proliferation, and for this reason they have been used clinically as anti-neoplastic agents for decades ( 3 – 7 ). There are three main types of IFN, classified by their ability to bind distinct receptors ( 8 ). IFNs elicit these biological responses by binding to cell surface receptors that activate a Janus kinase signal transducer and activator of transcription (JAK-STAT) pathway and other signal pathways to regulate gene expression ( 9 – 13 ). Genes that are induced transcriptionally by IFNs, often referred to as IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs), 4 can play roles that affect both the inhibition of viral replication and the inhibition of cellular proliferation. For example, genes that promote apoptosis can impact viral replication by sacrificing the cell for the survival of the host and impact the progression of cancer by reducing transformed cell survival.

Type I and type III IFNs confer their biological effects by stimulating the activation of a transcription factor complex called IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3)( 14 , 15 ). ISGF3 contains tyrosine-phosphorylated dimers of STAT1 and STAT2, and the STAT2-associated factor IFN regulatory factor 9 (IRF-9) ( 9 , 16 , 17 ). ISGF3 is responsible for the transcriptional induction of a set of ISGs, one of which is ISG54 ( 18 – 21 ). Notably, the ISG54 gene is also induced in response to viral infection, independent of IFN but dependent on activation of the IRF-3 transcription factor, a documented stimulator of apoptosis ( 22 – 26 ).

The response of cells to IFN is complex and can depend on tissue type and state of cellular transformation. Although IFN has been found to promote apoptosis in cancerous cells, conversely it has been shown to stimulate the proliferation of primary normal human cells ( 21 ). The biological response to IFN is a concerted effect of multiple induced genes, both antiproliferative and proliferative, and has been the subject of many investigations ( 21 , 27 , 28 ). Some of the IFN-induced genes that have been described for their roles in apoptosis include promyelocytic leukemia (PML), protein kinase R (PKR), IRF-1, 2′-5′ oligoadenylate synthase (OAS), and TNF-related apoptosis inducing ligand (TRAIL) among others ( 3 , 29 – 32 ). IFN-mediated apoptosis also was found to be associated with activation of caspases by way of a mitochondrial cell death pathway. Treatment of cancer cells with IFN caused a loss of mitochondrial membrane potential and release of cytochrome c ( 6 ). Still, a direct link of ISGs to mitochondrial-mediated cell death remains to be characterized. In this report we identify ISG54 as a mediator of mitochondrial cell death.

The ISG54 gene codes for a protein of ∼54 kDa (472 aa) with tetratricopeptide repeats (TPR) and has also been designated IFN-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 2 (IFIT2). It is one of four related human ISGs with characteristic TPR motifs ( 33 ). This motif is a sequence of 34 moderately conserved amino acids that form a structure composed of two antiparallel helices and is involved in protein-protein interactions ( 34 ). The function of the TPR motifs in ISG54 remains to be ascertained. However, a TPR motif of a related family member, ISG56, has been reported to bind to the human Papillomavirus E1 replication protein and inhibit its function ( 35 ). In addition, studies addressing the function of ISG54 and ISG56 have indicated a negative effect on translation by interacting with the eukaryotic initiation factor 3 ( 36 – 38 ). In this study we have determined that ISG54 forms a multiprotein complex with the related proteins ISG56 and ISG60 and stimulates cell death via a mitochondrial pathway. The results indicate that ISG54 plays a significant role in the mediation of cellular apoptosis in response to viral infection or IFN signaling.

DISCUSSION

IFNs are unique among the cytokines for their ability to confer cellular resistance to viral infections and for their ability to inhibit the growth of cancer cells. Several IFN-induced genes have been recognized for their role in viral defense ( 64 , 65 ), but a clear understanding of the mechanisms by which IFNs are effective in the treatment of cancer remains to be determined. Type I IFN has been reported to induce gene products that can lead to growth arrest, apoptotic signaling, or alternatively, proliferation ( 3 , 20 , 21 , 66 , 67 ). The biological response to IFN is complex, which is evident in its ability to stimulate immunosurveillance and cancer immuno-editing as part of its anti-tumor effects ( 68 ). In this report we focused our attention on ISG54 in view of the fact that this gene is robustly induced by type I IFNs ( 18 , 19 ), viral infection ( 22 ), or DNA damage ( 25 ) and that apoptosis can occur coordinately in reaction to each stimulus.

Our study demonstrates that expression of ISG54 promotes cell death via apoptosis. Flow cytometry was used to quantify cell viability by PI staining and cellular apoptosis by annexin V staining. Because caspase activation is central to the execution phase of apoptosis, we evaluated the activation of caspase-3 by immunofluorescence. Cells expressing ISG54 developed morphological changes that accompany apoptosis, and caspase-3 activity became apparent with these changes. This is the first description of the pro-apoptotic function of ISG54. Previous studies linked ISG54 and ISG56 to the inhibition of translation, particularly translation initiated via an IRES ( 36 – 38 , 69 , 70 ). However, in our system ISG54 did not decrease cap-dependent or IRES-dependent translation. Therefore although ISG54-induced cell death may be connected to inhibition of protein synthesis, it appears to be triggered by other cellular pathways.

Pathways that lead to caspase activation and apoptosis are often designated as either extrinsic or intrinsic ( 52 , 57 , 58 , 71 ). The extrinsic pathway initiates outside the cell by transmembrane death receptors and the subsequent activation of caspases. The intrinsic pathway, also called the mitochondrial pathway, is dependent on pro-apoptotic proteins such as Bax or Bak that induce mitochondrial outer membrane permeability, release of apoptogenic molecules, and activation of caspases. The designations are not completely accurate as the receptor-mediated extrinsic pathway can also trigger the intrinsic pathway. We have found that overexpression of the anti-apoptotic Bcl-xl protein dramatically decreases cell death induced by ISG54 ( 59 ). In addition, cells that lack expression of pro-apoptotic Bax and Bak proteins are resistant to the apoptotic effects of ISG54. These data indicate that ISG54 functions to directly or indirectly trigger a mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis. Because the p53 tumor suppressor induces the transcription of pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 proteins NOXA and PUMA, we evaluated the possible contribution of p53 using a dominant negative mutant ( 43 , 53 , 72 – 75 ). ISG54-induced apoptosis was found to continue unabated in the presence of the p53 interfering mutant. These effects also were apparent with anti-apoptotic viral genes. The adenoviral Bcl-2 homologue, E1B-19K, was able to block the apoptotic effects of ISG54. However, the adenoviral E1B-55K and E4 orf6 proteins that inhibit the function of p53 did not influence the ability of ISG54 to promote apoptosis.

ISG54 triggers cell death via a mitochondrial response that appears to initiate in the cytoplasm. To investigate the means by which ISG54 stimulates this biological response, we explored protein-protein interactions by affinity tag purification and mass spectrometry. This approach identified interactions with two other TPR-containing family members, ISG56 and ISG60, but not with the fourth member of this family, ISG58. The interactions were verified with co-immunoprecipitation methods and revealed that ISG54 also forms complexes with itself. The protein-protein interaction between ISG54 and ISG60 is distinct from that of ISG54 and ISG56 or with ISG54 and itself. The first TPR domain of ISG54 is essential for binding to ISG60, but it is not required for binding ISG54 or ISG56. We have also determined that ISG56 can bind to ISG60 and that both ISG54 and ISG60 are able to form homomeric complexes (data not shown).

The numerous possibilities for protein-protein interactions among these three ISGs led us to estimate the mass of the complex. Glycerol gradient sedimentation indicated the presence of ISG54, ISG56, and ISG60 in multimeric complexes of ∼150–200 kDa. Considering the molecular mass of these ISG proteins, they may form trimeric or tetrameric complexes. The exact stoichiometry and composition of the complex remain to be established, and the range of possible protein interactions evokes many theoretical combinations. Considering the fact that TPR motifs are known to play a role in formation of multiprotein complexes, the concept that these ISGs create a scaffold for docking target proteins is intriguing.

Expression of ISG54 clearly destines the cell for apoptotic death. Notably, however, IFNα is not a strong apoptotic agent, although it induces the transcription of ISG54. In fact IFNα can stimulate cellular proliferation of normal primary cells ( 21 ) The biological responses to IFN are cell context-specific and the result of induced expression of many diverse genes. Because ISG54 physically interacts with two other IFN-induced genes, ISG56 and ISG60, we evaluated the effect of these genes on ISG54-induced apoptosis. ISG60 was found to significantly reduce the ability of ISG54 to promote apoptosis. This effect required the first TPR domain of ISG54, which is also required for ISG60 binding to ISG54. Treatment with IFNα elicited a similar pro-survival response, suggesting that ISG60 induced by IFNα is a primary regulator of ISG54-induced cell death.

Results with the shRNA knockdown of ISG54 suggest that it is one of the factors responsible for IFN-stimulated cell death. By promoting apoptosis, ISG54 may also play a critical role in defense of viral infections. The sacrifice of an infected cell can ensure survival of the host, evident in the fact that many viruses have evolved mechanisms to block the cellular apoptotic defense ( 76 , 77 ). Deciphering the mechanisms by which IFN can promote apoptosis in cancer cells or infected cells can define new therapeutic targets of intervention. Our findings with ISG54 and its interactive partners have identified new possibilities for directed therapy development.
