---
pmid: '16273080'
title: JNK pathway mediates apoptotic cell death induced by tumor suppressor LKB1
  in Drosophila.
authors:
- Lee JH
- Koh H
- Kim M
- Park J
- Lee SY
- Lee S
- Chung J
journal: Cell Death Differ
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.cdd.4401790
---

# JNK pathway mediates apoptotic cell death induced by tumor suppressor LKB1 in Drosophila.
**Authors:** Lee JH, Koh H, Kim M, Park J, Lee SY, Lee S, Chung J
**Journal:** Cell Death Differ (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.cdd.4401790](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.cdd.4401790)

## Abstract

1. Cell Death Differ. 2006 Jul;13(7):1110-22. doi: 10.1038/sj.cdd.4401790. Epub 
2005 Nov 4.

JNK pathway mediates apoptotic cell death induced by tumor suppressor LKB1 in 
Drosophila.

Lee JH(1), Koh H, Kim M, Park J, Lee SY, Lee S, Chung J.

Author information:
(1)National Creative Research Initiatives Center for Cell Growth Regulation and 
Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and 
Technology, 373-1 Kusong-dong, Yusong, Taejon, Korea.

Although recent progresses have unveiled the diverse in vivo functions of LKB1, 
detailed molecular mechanisms governing these processes still remain enigmatic. 
Here, we showed that Drosophila LKB1 negatively regulates organ growth by 
caspase-dependent apoptosis, without affecting cell size and cell cycle 
progression. Through genetic screening for LKB1 modifiers, we discovered the JNK 
pathway as a novel component of LKB1 signaling; the JNK pathway was activated by 
LKB1 and mediated the LKB1-dependent apoptosis. Consistently, LKB1-null mutant 
was defective in embryonic apoptosis and displayed a drastic hyperplasia in the 
central nervous system; these phenotypes were fully rescued by ectopic JNK 
activation as well as wild-type LKB1 expression. Furthermore, inhibition of LKB1 
resulted in epithelial morphogenesis failure, which was associated with a 
decrease in JNK activity. Collectively, our studies unprecedentedly elucidate 
JNK as the downstream mediator of the LKB1-dependent apoptosis, and provide a 
new paradigm for understanding the diverse LKB1 functions in vivo.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.cdd.4401790
PMID: 16273080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
