---
pmid: '21251912'
title: An interaction between human Sec63 and nucleoredoxin may provide the missing
  link between the SEC63 gene and polycystic liver disease.
authors:
- Müller L
- Funato Y
- Miki H
- Zimmermann R
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2011.01.024
---

# An interaction between human Sec63 and nucleoredoxin may provide the missing link between the SEC63 gene and polycystic liver disease.
**Authors:** Müller L, Funato Y, Miki H, Zimmermann R
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2011.01.024](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2011.01.024)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2011 Feb 18;585(4):596-600. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2011.01.024.
Epub  2011 Jan 18.

An interaction between human Sec63 and nucleoredoxin may provide the missing 
link between the SEC63 gene and polycystic liver disease.

Müller L(1), Funato Y, Miki H, Zimmermann R.

Author information:
(1)Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Saarland University, Homburg, 
Germany.

The formation of multiple cysts in one or several organs is a characteristic of 
several human inherited diseases. Recent research suggests that problems in 
planar cell polarity may be the common denominator in polycystic diseases. 
Mutations in at least two genes are linked to autosomal dominant polycystic 
liver disease (PCLD), PRKCSH and SEC63. A recent study linked PRKCSH to the 
signaling- and cytoskeletal adaptor-component β-catenin. In a yeast two hybrid 
screen we identified the cytosolic protein nucleoredoxin (NRX) as an interaction 
partner of human Sec63. Since NRX is involved in the Wnt signaling pathways, we 
characterized this interaction. Thus, Sec63 is linked to the Wnt signaling 
pathways and this interaction may be the reason why mutations in SEC63 can lead 
to PCLD.

Copyright © 2011 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2011.01.024
PMID: 21251912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
