---
pmid: '7566652'
title: ApoE3 binding to tau tandem repeat I is abolished by tau serine262 phosphorylation.
authors:
- Huang DY
- Weisgraber KH
- Goedert M
- Saunders AM
- Roses AD
- Strittmatter WJ
journal: Neurosci Lett
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0304-3940(95)11649-h
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# ApoE3 binding to tau tandem repeat I is abolished by tau serine262 phosphorylation.
**Authors:** Huang DY, Weisgraber KH, Goedert M, Saunders AM, Roses AD, Strittmatter WJ
**Journal:** Neurosci Lett (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0304-3940(95)11649-h](https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-3940(95)11649-h)

## Abstract

1. Neurosci Lett. 1995 Jun 16;192(3):209-12. doi: 10.1016/0304-3940(95)11649-h.

ApoE3 binding to tau tandem repeat I is abolished by tau serine262 
phosphorylation.

Huang DY(1), Weisgraber KH, Goedert M, Saunders AM, Roses AD, Strittmatter WJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine (Neurology), Joseph and Kathleen Bryan Alzheimer's 
Disease Research Center, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

The risk of Alzheimer's disease is determined, in part, by inheritance of 
specific alleles of ApoE. Isoform specific interactions of ApoE have been shown 
with the microtubule-associated protein tau, which forms the neurofibrillary 
tangle in this disease. Synthetic peptides representing each of the four 
microtubule-binding domains of tau more avidly bind ApoE3 than ApoE4. 
Phosphorylation of serine262 in domain I of tau decreases tau binding to 
microtubules and also abolishes binding by ApoE3. Understanding the molecular 
mechanisms of the high avidity, isoform-specific interactions of ApoE with tau 
may help in developing approaches for disease intervention.

DOI: 10.1016/0304-3940(95)11649-h
PMID: 7566652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
