---
pmid: '20124405'
title: G-protein-coupled receptor kinase 5 phosphorylates p53 and inhibits DNA damage-induced
  apoptosis.
authors:
- Chen X
- Zhu H
- Yuan M
- Fu J
- Zhou Y
- Ma L
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2010'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2857122
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.094243
---

# G-protein-coupled receptor kinase 5 phosphorylates p53 and inhibits DNA damage-induced apoptosis.
**Authors:** Chen X, Zhu H, Yuan M, Fu J, Zhou Y, Ma L
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M109.094243](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.094243)
**PMC:** [PMC2857122](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2857122/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 23;285(17):12823-30. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.094243. Epub 
2010 Feb 2.

G-protein-coupled receptor kinase 5 phosphorylates p53 and inhibits DNA 
damage-induced apoptosis.

Chen X(1), Zhu H, Yuan M, Fu J, Zhou Y, Ma L.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology and Pharmacology Research 
Center, Shanghai Medical College and Institutes of Brain Science, Fudan 
University, Shanghai 200032, China.

G-protein-coupled receptor kinases (GRKs) are an important family of Ser/Thr 
kinases that specifically phosphorylate and desensitize the activated receptor 
in response to environmental stimulation. Here we identify p53, a key tumor 
suppressor, as a novel GRK substrate in vivo, revealing a previously unknown 
function of GRKs in regulation of genome stability. Knockdown GRK5 in 
osteosarcoma cells inhibits DNA damage-induced apoptosis via a p53-mediated 
mechanism. Furthermore, GRK5, but not GRK2 or GRK6, phosphorylates p53 at 
Thr-55, which promotes the degradation of p53, leading to inhibition of 
p53-dependent apoptotic response to genotoxic damage. Consistently, the increase 
of p53 and irradiation-induced apoptosis were observed in GRK5-deficient mice. 
These results demonstrate GRK5 as a novel kinase of p53, as well as a negative 
regulator of p53-mediated signal transduction.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.094243
PMCID: PMC2857122
PMID: 20124405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

G-protein-coupled receptor kinases (GRKs) are an important family of Ser/Thr kinases that specifically phosphorylate and desensitize the activated receptor in response to environmental stimulation. Here we identify p53, a key tumor suppressor, as a novel GRK substrate in vivo , revealing a previously unknown function of GRKs in regulation of genome stability. Knockdown GRK5 in osteosarcoma cells inhibits DNA damage-induced apoptosis via a p53-mediated mechanism. Furthermore, GRK5, but not GRK2 or GRK6, phosphorylates p53 at Thr-55, which promotes the degradation of p53, leading to inhibition of p53-dependent apoptotic response to genotoxic damage. Consistently, the increase of p53 and irradiation-induced apoptosis were observed in GRK5-deficient mice. These results demonstrate GRK5 as a novel kinase of p53, as well as a negative regulator of p53-mediated signal transduction.

Introduction

G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) 2 kinases (GRKs) are known as a family of serine/threonine kinases that catalyze phosphorylation of seven-transmembrane-spanning G-protein-coupled receptors. They play important roles in the initiation of homologous desensitization of stimulated receptors and thus act as crucial negative regulators of GPCRs ( 1 ). GRKs have been demonstrated to phosphorylate and sequester a variety of GPCRs, including adrenergic receptor, muscarinic receptor, dopamine receptors, opioid receptors, chemokine receptor ( 2 – 6 ), etc.

Regulation of receptors other than GPCR family by GRKs has also been shown recently by others and our laboratory ( 7 – 9 ). GRK2 can phosphorylate tyrosine kinase-coupled receptors, including epidermal growth factor receptor and platelet-derived growth factor receptor ( 7 , 8 ), and regulate 12-transmembrane receptor Patched 1 ( 9 ). Transgenic or knock-out studies have demonstrated that deletion or overexpression of GRK in mice causes dysfunction of cardiovascular, nervous, respiratory, optical, and immune systems or even embryonic lethality ( 3 , 10 – 13 ). In addition to their well established roles in the regulation of receptor-mediated signaling, emerging evidence indicates that GRKs are also capable of phosphorylating non-receptor substrates, such as synuclein ( 14 ) and β-arrestin 1 ( 15 ). However, the physiological significance of these phosphorylation events mediated by GRKs remains unclear.

Seven subtypes of GRKs (GRK1–7) have been identified to date. Members of the GRK family share highly homologous structure and similar function in the regulation of GPCR signaling ( 10 ). Most subtypes of GRKs, including GRK2, GRK3, GRK5, and GRK6, are ubiquitously expressed in most tissues ( 1 , 16 ). Deletion of most individual GRK subtypes, such as GRK1, GRK3, GRK4, GRK5, GRK6, and GRK7, does not result in serious phenotype in mice ( 10 ), which indicates a redundancy of GRK subtypes in the regulation of GPCR signaling. In this regard, the functional specificity of an individual GRK subtype remains to be explored. Johnson et al. ( 17 ) and Yi et al. ( 18 ) showed recently that GRK5 contains a putative nuclear localization sequence and displays a nuclear distribution in the cardiomyocytes. Martini et al. ( 19 ) reported that GRK5 phosphorylates histone deacetylase 5 (HDAC5), a repressor of myocyte enhancer factor 2 (MEF2), and thus leads to nuclear export of HDAC5 and allows MEF2-mediated transcription. These observations suggest that GRK5 may have novel functions in the nucleus, distinct from other GRK subtypes.

In the present study, we demonstrate that GRK5 phosphorylates p53, a transcriptional factor and tumor suppressor, and thus down-regulates p53 and inhibits p53-mediated apoptosis in cultured osteosarcoma cells and in mice. Our study reveals a novel substrate of GRK5 and demonstrates that GRK5 plays a role in physiological functions.

DISCUSSION

GRKs are recognized as critical regulators of GPCR signaling, based on their roles on phosphorylating and sequestering these receptors demonstrated by numerous studies ( 1 , 10 , 31 ). As the most widely expressed and best characterized member of the GRK4 subfamily, GRK5 plays important roles in GPCR-mediated physiological processes, especially in the central nervous and cardiovascular systems. Transgenic mice with cardiomyocyte-specific GRK5 overexpression exhibit marked β-adrenergic receptor desensitization ( 32 ) and exaggerated hypertrophic response ( 19 ). Deletion of GRK5 in mice results in enhanced cholinergic responses mediated by muscarinic M2 receptor, such as hypothermia, hypoactivity, tremor, and salivation ( 3 ). Aged GRK5 knock-out mice show an Alzheimer-like pathology and working memory impairment ( 33 ). In addition, recent evidence indicates that GRK5 is capable of phosphorylating non-receptor substrates. Barthet et al. ( 15 ) reported phosphorylation of β-arrestin 1 by GRK5 in vitro and in COS-1 cells. Martini et al. ( 19 ) demonstrated that GRK5 catalyzes histone deacetylase 5 in vitro and in cardiac fibroblasts. These findings indicate that GRK5 may have broader non-receptor substrate selectivity and more functions than assumed. In the current study, we reveal a previously unknown function of GRK5 to phosphorylate p53, a crucial tumor suppressor, and inhibit p53-mediated apoptosis. Moreover, GRK5 knock-out mice showed an elevated p53 level in multiple tissue types and an enhanced sensitivity to irradiation. Our results suggest that GRK5 may play an essential role in the regulation of genome integrity and tumorigenesis.

The tumor suppressor p53, serving as a cell fate determinant, induces cell cycle arrest or apoptosis in response to diverse stress ( 23 , 24 ). The function of p53 is regulated primarily at the level of protein stability. Posttranslational modifications of p53, especially phosphorylation and acetylation, have been shown to tightly regulate p53 stabilization and activation ( 26 , 34 ). GRK5 has been shown to phosphorylate HDAC5 and regulate HDAC5-mediated transcriptional activation ( 19 ). Unchanged acetylation of p53 was observed in cells overexpressing or deficient in GRK5 (data not shown), suggesting that the effect of p53 by GRK5 is unlikely via the regulation of the p53 acetylation level mediated by HDAC. Phosphorylation within the p53 N terminus, catalyzed by ATM ( 27 ), ATM- and Rad3-related ( 28 ), DNA-dependent protein kinase ( 35 ), or CHK2 ( 29 ), enhances p53 stability by preventing MDM2 binding. In the present study, we show that GRK5, a well known kinase of GPCRs, phosphorylates p53 and promotes p53 degradation. Thus, we identified GRK5 as a new p53 kinase, and our results suggest that GRK5 may serve as an indispensable member of the complex regulatory network of p53 ( Fig. 6 ). How GRK5 coordinates with other p53 regulators in response to various genotoxic stresses to maintain genomic stability remains to be further explored.

Sharing conserved structure and regulation pattern, members of GRK family have a common role in phosphorylating GPCRs; however, their selectivity of non-GPCR substrates appears to be specific ( 14 , 19 , 36 ). Hall et al. ( 36 ) show that GRK6, but not GRK2, is capable of phosphorylating Na + /H + exchanger regulatory factor. GRK5 has been demonstrated to catalyze the phosphorylation of HDAC5 in vitro 19 ), whereas purified GRK2 does not. Our results also show that GRK5 subtype specifically regulates the function of p53, whereas GRK2 and GRK6 have no catalytic activity toward p53 nor any effect on p53-mediated apoptotic response. Unlike GRK5, GRK2 mainly distributes in cytoplasm. However, our in vitro binding assays indicated that both GRK2 and GRK6 can interact with p53 (data not shown); thus, the specificity of GRK5 to catalyze p53 phosphorylation may be attributed to its structural characters rather than its distribution abundance in the nucleus. The variability in GRK structure among different subtypes mainly exists in their C-terminal domain. Unlike other subtypes, The C-terminal domain of GRK5 is rich in basic residues and contains unique autophosphorylation sites, conserved in human, bovine, and mouse GRK5 ( 37 ), which is associated with the regulation of GRK5 by calmodulin ( 38 , 39 ), phospholipids ( 40 ), and protein kinase C ( 41 ). In our study, both bovine and human GRK5 can phosphorylate p53, and the regulation of p53 by GRK5 was also found in mice, indicating that the role of GRK5 on p53 is conserved across species.

Cellular response to genotoxic stress, especially apoptosis and cell cycle arrest, is pivotal for protection of genomic integrity and avoiding oncogenic mutations. It has been well established that the misregulation of p53 level or activity compromises cellular apoptotic response and contributes to tumorigenesis. Chao et al. ( 42 ) reported that mutation of phosphorylation sites in the N terminus of p53 impairs apoptotic response to DNA damage and alters susceptibility to spontaneous tumorigenesis. Johnson et al. ( 43 ) demonstrated that the p53 QS mutant, which cannot bind MDM2 and has transactivation deficiency, induces embryonic lethality in mice. In our study, animals deficient in GRK5 show abnormal p53 level. Furthermore, enhanced susceptibility in response to irradiation was found in GRK5 knock-out mice. These findings support an essential role for GRK5 in restricting of p53 and protecting genomic stability under physiological conditions.
