---
pmid: '12213826'
title: Tapasin interacts with the membrane-spanning domains of both TAP subunits and
  enhances the structural stability of TAP1 x TAP2 Complexes.
authors:
- Raghuraman G
- Lapinski PE
- Raghavan M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M207128200
---

# Tapasin interacts with the membrane-spanning domains of both TAP subunits and enhances the structural stability of TAP1 x TAP2 Complexes.
**Authors:** Raghuraman G, Lapinski PE, Raghavan M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M207128200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M207128200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 1;277(44):41786-94. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M207128200. Epub
2002  Sep 3.

Tapasin interacts with the membrane-spanning domains of both TAP subunits and 
enhances the structural stability of TAP1 x TAP2 Complexes.

Raghuraman G(1), Lapinski PE, Raghavan M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical 
School, Ann Arbor 48109-0620, USA.

The transporter associated with antigen processing (TAP) proteins are involved 
in transport of peptides from the cytosol into the endoplasmic reticulum. Two 
subunits, TAP1 and TAP2, are necessary and sufficient for peptide binding and 
peptide translocation across the endoplasmic reticulum membrane. TAP1 and TAP2 
contain an N-terminal hydrophobic membrane-spanning region and a C-terminal 
nucleotide binding domain. Tapasin is an endoplasmic reticulum resident protein 
that has been found associated with the TAP subunits and shown to increase 
expression levels of TAP. Here we investigated TAP-tapasin interactions and 
their effects on TAP function in insect cells. We show tapasin binding to both 
TAP1 and TAP2 and to the corresponding nucleotide binding domain-exchanged 
chimeras as well as to a truncated TAP1.TAP2 complex containing just the 
membrane-spanning regions of TAP1 and TAP2. However, tapasin interactions with 
either the truncated TAP construct containing just the nucleotide binding domain 
are not observed. Tapasin is not required for high affinity peptide binding to 
TAP1.TAP2 complexes, and in fact, the presence of tapasin slightly reduces the 
affinity of TAP complexes for peptides. However, at near physiological 
temperatures, both tapasin and nucleotides stabilize the peptide binding site of 
TAP1.TAP2 complexes against inactivation, and enhanced thermostability of both 
TAP subunits is observed in the presence of tapasin. The enhanced structural 
stability of TAP1.TAP2 complexes in the presence of tapasin might explain the 
observations that tapasin increases TAP protein expression levels in mammalian 
cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M207128200
PMID: 12213826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
