---
pmid: '16357442'
title: Soluble form of heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor contributes to retinoic
  acid-induced epidermal hyperplasia.
authors:
- Kimura R
- Iwamoto R
- Mekada E
journal: Cell Struct Funct
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1247/csf.30.35
---

# Soluble form of heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor contributes to retinoic acid-induced epidermal hyperplasia.
**Authors:** Kimura R, Iwamoto R, Mekada E
**Journal:** Cell Struct Funct (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1247/csf.30.35](https://doi.org/10.1247/csf.30.35)

## Abstract

1. Cell Struct Funct. 2005;30(2):35-42. doi: 10.1247/csf.30.35.

Soluble form of heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor contributes to retinoic 
acid-induced epidermal hyperplasia.

Kimura R(1), Iwamoto R, Mekada E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka 
University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor (HB-EGF), a member of the EGF-family, is 
thought to be important for keratinocyte functions. HB-EGF is first synthesized 
as a membrane-anchored form, and its soluble form is released by ectodomain 
shedding. Here we investigate the role of HB-EGF in epidermal hyperplasia 
induced by all-trans retinoic acid (tRA) treatment. HB-EGF is normally expressed 
in epidermis of normal adult mice at very low levels, but topical tRA treatment 
results in epidermal hyperplasia, concomitant with the strong induction of 
HB-EGF expression in the suprabasal layer. tRA-induced epidermal hyperplasia was 
reduced both in the keratinocyte-specific HB-EGF null mice (K5-HB(del/del)) and 
knock-in mice expressing the uncleavable mutant form of HB-EGF (HB(uc/uc)), as 
compared with wild-type HB-EGF knock-in mice (HB(lox/lox)). Among ErbB tyrosine 
kinase receptors, EGF receptor (EGFR) and ErbB2 were selectively activated by 
tRA treatment in skin from wild-type mice, while the activation of these ErbB 
receptors was significantly reduced in the skin of HB-EGF null mice. These 
results indicate that expression of HB-EGF and generation of its soluble form, 
followed by activation of EGFR and ErbB2, are pivotal processes in tRA-induced 
epidermal hyperplasia.

DOI: 10.1247/csf.30.35
PMID: 16357442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
