---
pmid: '28001042'
title: Human Mitochondrial Ferredoxin 1 (FDX1) and Ferredoxin 2 (FDX2) Both Bind Cysteine
  Desulfurase and Donate Electrons for Iron-Sulfur Cluster Biosynthesis.
authors:
- Cai K
- Tonelli M
- Frederick RO
- Markley JL
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2017'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: xml
pmcid: PMC5267338
doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.6b00447
---

# Human Mitochondrial Ferredoxin 1 (FDX1) and Ferredoxin 2 (FDX2) Both Bind Cysteine Desulfurase and Donate Electrons for Iron-Sulfur Cluster Biosynthesis.
**Authors:** Cai K, Tonelli M, Frederick RO, Markley JL
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1021/acs.biochem.6b00447](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.biochem.6b00447)
**PMC:** [PMC5267338](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5267338/)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2017 Jan 24;56(3):487-499. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.6b00447.
Epub  2017 Jan 11.

Human Mitochondrial Ferredoxin 1 (FDX1) and Ferredoxin 2 (FDX2) Both Bind 
Cysteine Desulfurase and Donate Electrons for Iron-Sulfur Cluster Biosynthesis.

Cai K(1), Tonelli M(1), Frederick RO(1), Markley JL(1).

Author information:
(1)Mitochondrial Protein Partnership, Center for Eukaryotic Structural Genomics, 
and ‡National Magnetic Resonance Facility at Madison, Biochemistry Department, 
University of Wisconsin-Madison , Madison, Wisconsin 53706, United States.

Ferredoxins play an important role as an electron donor in iron-sulfur (Fe-S) 
cluster biosynthesis. Two ferredoxins, human mitochondrial ferredoxin 1 (FDX1) 
and human mitochondrial ferredoxin 2 (FDX2), are present in the matrix of human 
mitochondria. Conflicting results have been reported regarding their respective 
function in mitochondrial iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis. We report here 
biophysical studies of the interaction of these two ferredoxins with other 
proteins involved in mitochondrial iron-sulfur cluster assembly. Results from 
nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy show that both FDX1 and FDX2 (in both 
their reduced and oxidized states) interact with the protein complex responsible 
for cluster assembly, which contains cysteine desulfurase (NFS1), ISD11 (also 
known as LYRM4), and acyl carrier protein (Acp). In all cases, ferredoxin 
residues close to the Fe-S cluster are involved in the interaction with this 
complex. Isothermal titration calorimetry results showed that FDX2 binds more 
tightly to the cysteine desulfurase complex than FDX1 does. The reduced form of 
each ferredoxin became oxidized in the presence of the cysteine desulfurase 
complex when l-cysteine was added, leading to its conversion to l-alanine and 
the generation of sulfide. In an in vitro reaction, the reduced form of each 
ferredoxin was found to support Fe-S cluster assembly on ISCU; the rate of 
cluster assembly was faster with FDX2 than with FDX1. Taken together, these 
results show that both FDX1 and FDX2 can function in Fe-S cluster assembly in 
vitro.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.6b00447
PMCID: PMC5267338
PMID: 28001042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.

## Full Text

Iron–sulfur (Fe–S)
clusters are versatile protein prosthetic groups that are critical
for multiple biological processes, including respiration, electron
transfer, DNA replication and repair, cofactor biosynthesis, and gene
regulation.1,2 Because of the toxicity
of free sulfide and iron ions, Fe–S cluster biosynthesis in
cells is a strictly regulated process requiring
the participation of many proteins. In eukaryotic cells, the mitochondria
are the major sites for Fe–S cluster biogenesis by the ISC
(iron–sulfur
cluster) machinery.3,4 The eukaryotic mitochondrial
ISC system is believed to have originated from the prokaryotic ISC
system, and the two systems share many similar features.5,6 Defects in protein components
in the human ISC machinery are associated with numerous diseases.7,8

The human mitochondrial ISC machinery can be divided into
two steps:
(1) the assembly of a cluster on the scaffold protein (ISCU) and (2)
the subsequent transfer of the cluster to an acceptor protein.9 The first step involves the scaffold protein
ISCU and a protein complex containing cysteine desulfurase (NFS1),
a small accessory protein (ISD11, also known as LYRM4),10−12 and acyl carrier protein (ACP).13 Recently,
it was discovered that NFS1 and ISD11 co-expressed in Escherichia
coli cells form a complex containing the holo-form of E. coli acyl carrier protein (Acp) with the an [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 stoichiometry (K.
Cai, R. O. Frederick, and M. Tonelli, manuscript submitted for publication).
Apparently, E. coli Acp substitutes for human ACP,
despite their 40% sequence identity and 60% sequence similarity over
69 common residues. The sulfur atoms in an Fe–S cluster are
generated by the transformation of cysteine to alanine
catalyzed by the cysteine desulfurase, and the iron ions are donated
by an unidentified iron protein.14 A reductant
is required for cluster formation, and ferredoxin has been shown to
be the electron donor for cluster assembly.15 Frataxin (FXN), whose defects are associated with the neurodegenerative
disease Friedreich’s ataxia, is known to be important for this
process,16 although its exact role is still
under debate. FXN has been proposed to be either an allosteric switch17 or an iron donor18 for Fe–S cluster biogenesis. A recent study showed that FXN
stimulates sulfur
transfer within the cysteine desulfurase complex when ISCU is present.19 Interestingly, CyaY (the bacterial homologue
of FXN) has been shown to be a negative regulator for Fe–S
cluster assembly.20 This finding has
been explained on the basis of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) studies
of the E. coli system that showed that the binding
of CyaY to the cysteine desulfurase (IscS) displaces the scaffold
protein IscU from the IscS:IscU complex or ferredoxin (Fdx) from the
IscS:Fdx complex.15,21 However, a recent study has reported
that CyaY contributes positively to the maturation of Fe–S
proteins in vivo.22

The second step of human ISC machinery is the transfer of nascent
Fe–S
clusters from ISCU to other acceptor Fe–S proteins facilitated
by a mitochondrial HSP70–HSC20 chaperone–cochaperone
system.23,24 It has been shown that
the cochaperone HSC20 guides Fe–S cluster delivery by binding
to a conserved leucine–tyrosine–arginine (LYR) motif
present in specific recipient Fe–S proteins or in accessory
factors.25

Ferredoxins were among
the first Fe–S proteins to be identified and characterized. E. coli ferredoxin (Fdx), which is encoded within the isc operon, is involved in Fe–S cluster biogenesis.26 Recent studies
have shown that E. coli Fdx binds directly to cysteine
desulfurase IscS and supplies electrons for Fe–S cluster assembly.15,21 Yeast ferredoxin Yah1 has also
been shown to be involved in mitochondrial Fe–S cluster biosynthesis.27 Human mitochondria
possess two ferredoxins, FDX1 and FDX2. The X-ray structures of the
two ferredoxins, Protein Data Bank (PDB) entries 3P1M (FDX1) and 2Y5C (FDX2),
are very similar, but the two ferredoxins share only 33% protein sequence
identity28 (Figure 1). FDX1 is known to be a versatile electron
mediator involved in multiple physiological processes such as donating
electrons to cytochrome P450 enzymes as part of steroid hormone biosynthesis
and vitamin D metabolism.29 FDX2 is the
more recently characterized mitochondrial ferredoxin.28 A deleterious mutation on FDX2 has been shown to be associated
with a novel mitochondrial muscle myopathy.30 Conflicting studies regarding the functions of these two ferredoxins
have been reported. Shi and co-workers provided evidence that both
FDX1 and FDX2 are important for Fe–S cluster biogenesis,31 whereas Sheftel
et al. claimed that FDX1 is specifically involved in the
production of steroid hormones. FDX2 has been shown to be essential
for the biosynthesis of heme A as well as Fe–S cluster assembly.28 It has been shown
that FDX1 has a thermal stability higher than that of FDX2 and that
FDX2 exhibits a temperature-induced conformational transition, not
observed with FDX1, that increases its binding affinity for adrenodoxin
reductase.32

Sequence alignment of
ferredoxins and crystal structures of FDX1
and FDX2. (A) Sequence alignment of ferredoxins. Human FDX1 and FDX2
are highlighted in black boxes. Color code: red, conserved; blue,
partially conserved. The four conserved cysteine residues that ligate
the [2Fe-2S] cluster are indicated by red arrows. The secondary structure
prediction is based on the structure of human FDX1. Abbreviations: Xa, Xenopus laevis; Mm, Mus musculus; Bt, Bos taurus; Sc, Saccharomyces cerevisiae; Ec, E. coli; Hs, Homo sapiens; At, Arabidopsis thaliana. (B) Crystal
structures of human ox-FDX1 (left, PDB entry 3P1M) and ox-FDX2 (right,
PDB entry 2Y5C). The [2Fe-2S] clusters are shown as spheres, and the cysteine ligands
are colored red.

Here we demonstrate by
NMR spectroscopy that FDX1 and FDX2, in
both their oxidized (ox) and reduced (re) states, interact directly
with the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex.
We identified the sites on ox-FDX1 and ox-FDX2 where the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex binds, by
following the chemical shift perturbations and line broadening of
NMR signals from the ferredoxins resulting from the addition of a
substoichiometric quantity of the cysteine desulfurase complex. We
used isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) to further quantify the
interaction of the two ferredoxins in their oxidized states with the
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex.
The reduced form of either FDX1 or FDX2, when added to a solution
of the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex
and l-cysteine, became oxidized, indicating that both ferredoxins
are capable of
donating an electron leading to the reduction of S0. We
have developed a physiologically relevant Fe–S cluster assembly
reaction that utilizes either reduced FDX1 or FDX2
as the reductant in place of DTT. Our results show that reduced FDX1
and reduced FDX2 each support in vitro Fe–S
cluster assembly on ISCU; however, the reaction rate was higher
in the presence of reduced FDX2 than in the presence of reduced FDX1.
Our results show that both FDX1 and FDX2 can function in Fe–S
cluster assembly in vitro; however, because FDX2
exhibits both a higher binding affinity for the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex and a much higher efficiency in
assisting Fe–S cluster assembly, it is more likely to be physiologically
relevant
in Fe–S cluster assembly.

MethodsProtein Expression
and PurificationInformation about
the proteins used in this study is provided in Table 1, which identifies the vectors and tags used
in their production, lists the sizes of the proteins produced, and
specifies their amino acid sequences. Published methods23 were used to prepare the protein samples of
unlabeled ISCU. The protein targets NFS1, FDX1, and FDX2 were cloned
into pE-SUMO (Lifesensors) vectors using polymerase chain reaction
(PCR)-based methods. ISD11 was cloned into the pET14b vector (Novagen)
containing a noncleavable C-terminal hexahistidine tag.Table 1Proteins Studied, Properties, and
Production DetailsabbreviationnameUniProt entryresidue composition
of the protein studiedvectortagcleaved?MWpIFDX1H. sapiens ferredoxin 1P1010961–184pE-SUMOHis6-SUMO-yes135614.36FDX2H.
sapiens ferredoxin 2Q6P4F253–183pE-SUMOHis6-SUMO-yes142634.57NFS1H.
sapiens cysteine desulfuraseQ9Y69753–457pE-SUMOHis6-SUMO-yes449146.94ISD11H.
sapiens LYRM4Q9HD341–91pET14b-His6no1158110.73ISCUH. sapiens scaffold
proteinQ9H1K135–167pE-SUMOHis6-SUMO-yes143868.99FXNH.
sapiens frataxinQ1659581–210pE-SUMOHis6-SUMO-yes188264.72AcpE.
coli acyl carrier proteinP0A6A82–78noneN/AN/A85083.98For co-expression and protein
production of
the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex,
NFS1-pE-SUMO and ISD11-pET14b were cotransformed into Rosetta2(DE3)pLysS
cells and spread onto YT plates with the
appropriate antibiotics (50 μg/mL kanamycin, 50 μg/mL
ampicillin, and 35 μg/mL chloramphenicol) and grown overnight
at 37 °C. E. coli colonies were picked from
the plates and grown in 1 mL of YT medium with 1% glucose and appropriate
antibiotics for ∼4 h at 37 °C (250 rpm). One milliliter
starters were added to overnight MDAG inoculums of 50
mL and grown at 25 °C. The next day, these were used to inoculate
2 L of YT protein production medium. The large-scale cultures usually
reached an OD600 of 1–2 after growth for 3–6
h at 37 °C while being shaken at 250 rpm. At that point, 0.4
mM isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) was
added to induce overexpression
of NFS1 and ISD11. After being incubated for an additional 12 h, the
cells were harvested by centrifugation and stored at −80 °C
until they were used.FDX1 and FDX2 were produced as follows.
Single colonies containing
validated genes for the target proteins were picked from the YT or
MDAG plates and grown in 1 mL of YT medium with 1% glucose (supplemented
with 50 μg/mL kanamycin and 35 μg/mL
chloramphenicol) for 1–3 h at 37 °C while being shaken
at 250 rpm and then transferred to 50–100 mL of MDAG medium
(with appropriate antibiotics) and grown overnight
at 25 °C. For large-scale protein production, the overnight MDAG
starter culture was transferred to one of the following media. (1)
For the production of unlabeled proteins, 25 mL of MDAG culture was
transferred to 1 L of LB liquid medium supplemented with appropriate
antibiotics. (2) For the production of [U-15N]FDX1 or -FDX2,
25 mL of MDAG culture was transferred
to 1 L of M9 minimal medium containing 1 g/L 15NH4Cl, 3 g/L glucose, and appropriate antibiotics. (3) For the production
of [U-13C,U-15N]FDX1 or -FDX2, 25 mL of MDAG
culture was transferred
to 1 L of M9 minimal medium containing 1 g/L 15NH4Cl and 2 g/L [U-13C]glucose. The cell cultures described
above were grown
at 37 °C (while being shaken at 250–320 rpm) for 2–5
h until the OD600 reached 1.0–1.5. The temperature
was then decreased to 18
°C, and 0.4 mM IPTG, 1 mM l-cysteine, and 0.1 mg/mL
ferric ammonium citrate were added to induce the overexpression
of the proteins. After being incubated for an additional 12 h, the
cells were harvested by centrifugation and stored at −80
°C until they were used.BuffersThe buffer
used for the first immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC)
step (1st IMAC buffer) consisted of 20 mM Tris (pH 8), 300–500
mM NaCl, 0.1% NP-40 (Sigma-Aldrich),
1–2 mM β-mercaptoethanol or DTT, 1 mM PMSF, 5–10%
glycerol, and 5 mM imidazole. The lysis buffer had this same composition
except that it was supplemented with Benzonase (Novagen, Millipore,
Billerica, MA) or OmniCleave nuclease (Epicenter, Illumina, Madison,
WI), rLysozyme (Novagen), 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF)
(Sigma-Aldrich), and RNase (Qiagen, Valencia, CA).
The buffer used for the second IMAC step (2nd IMAC buffer) had the
same composition
as the first except that it contained 250 mM imidazole. The SUMO fusion
cleavage buffer consisted of 20 mM Tris buffer (pH 8) containing 150
mM NaCl, 2 mM DTT (or β-mercaptoethanol), and 5–10% glycerol.
The HN buffer [50 mM HEPES (pH 7.8) and 150 mM NaCl] and HNT buffer
[50 mM HEPES (pH 7.8), 150 mM NaCl, and 5 mM TCEP] used in this study
were clarified by being passed through a 0.2 μm filter (Millipore)
and thoroughly degassed. For anaerobic experiments,
the buffers were equilibrated for at least 24 h in an anaerobic chamber
(Coy Laboratory, Farmingdale, NY) filled with 95% N2 gas
and 5% H2 gas. An O2 detector was installed
inside the anaerobic chamber to ensure an O2 concentration
of <1 ppm.Protein PurificationThe [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex, FDX1, and
FDX2 were purified
as follows. All E. coli cell pastes were quickly
thawed at room temperature and then resuspended in 60 mL of lysis
buffer. To break open the resuspended cells, we used sonication with
a total time of 15 min at 4 °C, with a duty cycle of 2 s on and
4 s off. Cell lysates were clarified by high-speed centrifugation
at 25000 rpm for 30 min using a Beckman Coulter centrifuge with a
JA 30.5Ti rotor (Beckman Coulter). The clear cell lysate was then
treated with 70% (w/v) saturation of (NH4)2SO4 to precipitate
total protein. Then the sample was spun at 25000 rpm for 30 min. The
protein pellet was resuspended in 30–50 mL of 1st IMAC buffer,
and
any debris was discarded after a final centrifugation at 25000 rpm
for 30 min. The clarified protein solution was loaded onto a Qiagen Ni-NTA
Superflow FF or Ni-Sepharose column (GE Amersham Pharmacia, Piscataway,
NJ) with IMAC resin at a rate of 1 mL/min. The IMAC column was washed
first with ∼10 column volumes of 1st IMAC buffer and second
with 5–10 column volumes of wash buffer (1st IMAC buffer and
30 mM imidazole). The target protein was eluted with the 2nd IMAC
buffer, and fractions were collected. The His-tagged, N-terminal
SUMO fusion protein was treated with 0.5 mg of SUMO protease and extensively
dialyzed against the SUMO fusion cleavage buffer. For the purification
of FDX1 and FDX2, the SUMO-cleaved sample was loaded onto a freshly
equilibrated subtractive IMAC column, which bound the cleaved His-tagged
SUMO domain and allowed the cleaved target protein to be eluted. The
proteins were further purified by size exclusion chromatography (SEC).
For the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex,
the subtractive IMAC step was omitted and the SUMO-cleaved sample
was purified by SEC. The purities of the target protein fractions
were assessed by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). As noted elsewhere (K. Cai, R. O. Frederick, and
M. Tonelli, manuscript submitted for publication), the presence of
Acp in the complex was determined by mass spectrometry, and the stoichiometry
of the proteins in the complex was determined by a combination of amino acid analysis and
molecular weight estimation from small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS)
data.FDX1 and FDX2 were reduced by
adding a 10-fold excess of sodium dithionite to oxidized FDX1 or FDX2
in an anaerobic chamber (Coy Laboratory). The reduction of FDX1 or
FDX2 was monitored by the color change from dark brown to light pink
and by recording UV/vis spectra before and after reduction. The sample was dialyzed extensively
against anaerobic HN buffer to remove excess sodium dithionite. Apo-FDX1
and -FDX2 were prepared by incubating ox-FDX1 and -FDX2, respectively,
with 10% trichloroacetic acid and 10 mM DTT on ice for 10 min, pelleting
the sample, rinsing the pellet twice with water, and resuspending
the pellet in HNT buffer. The soluble sample was then dialyzed against
HNT buffer to remove trichloroacetic acid and further purified by
SEC. Mass spectrometry was used to determine the level of 15N isotope labeling.NMR SpectroscopyThe HNT buffer
used for NMR samples
contained 8% D2O for the frequency lock. All NMR spectra
were recorded on 500 or 750 MHz (1H) Bruker BioSpin (Billerica,
MA) or 600, 800, or 900 MHz Varian (Palo Alto, CA) NMR spectrometers
equipped with a z-gradient cryogenic probe. All sample
temperatures were regulated at 25 °C. NMRPipe was used to process
the raw NMR data,33 and NMRFAM-SPARKY34 was utilized to visualize and analyze the processed
NMR data.Samples of 0.3 mM uniformly 15N-labeled
apo-FDX1, apo-FDX2, ox-FDX1, and ox-FDX2 were placed in Shigemi NMR
tubes (Shigemi Inc.). Samples of 0.3 mM re-FDX1 and re-FDX2 were prepared
in an anaerobic chamber and transferred to anaerobic NMR tubes (Wilmad-Labglass)
equipped with robust seals. 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC
spectra of each sample were collected. To investigate the interaction
between the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex and ferredoxins, 0.5–1 equiv (subunit) of unlabeled
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 was
titrated into the uniformly 15N-labeled
ferredoxin samples described above, and 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC spectra were collected.The chemical shift
perturbations, ΔδHN (absolute
value in parts per million), were calculated with eq 1:1where ΔδH and ΔδN are the chemical shift changes
in the 1H and 15N dimensions, respectively.The backbone signals of [U-13C,U-15N]FDX1 or
-FDX2 in its oxidized and reduced states were
assigned by collecting and analyzing the following NMR spectra: two-dimensional
(2D) 1H–15N HSQC, three-dimensional (3D)
HNCA, 3D HNCACB, and 3D CBCA(CO)NH. All 3D spectra were recorded using
nonuniform
sampling with a sampling rate of 36% and were processed
using NESTA35 and NMRPipe. The PINE server36 was used for the automatic assignment of the
backbone signals followed by manual correction. The backbone signals
from residues close to the Fe–S cluster were not observed because
of the paramagnetic effect of
the [2Fe-2S] cluster.Isothermal Titration Calorimetry (ITC) MeasurementA Nano ITC (TA Instrument, Schaumburg, IL) system was used to investigate
interactions between the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex and ox-FDX1 and ox-FDX2. Proteins were dialyzed overnight
in the same HNT buffer. The experiments were conducted at 25 °C.
The syringe contained 0.8 mM [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2, and the sample cell (169 μL) contained
0.03 mM ox-FDX1 or 0.09 mM ox-FDX2. Twenty aliquots of 2.5 μM
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 were injected
into the sample cell, and the heat generated was measured. Processing
and fitting of ITC data were conducted using NanoAnalyse Software
(TA Instrument).Electron Transfer Experiment, Cysteine Desulfurase
Assay, and in Vitro Fe–S Cluster Assembly
ReactionThe protein samples used in electron
transfer and in vitro cysteine desulfurase assay
and Fe–S cluster reconstitution experiments were prepared in
an anaerobic
chamber (Coy Laboratory) with samples buffer-exchanged extensively
with anaerobic HN buffer prior to the experiments. The reaction volumes
in all the experiments were kept to 1 mL. A UV-1700 UV/visible spectrophotometer
(Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan)
with a temperature control unit was used to collect the spectra, and
UVProbe version 2.21 (Shimadzu) was used to collect and analyze the
data.Electron transfer from re-FDX1 or re-FDX2 to the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex was monitored
as follows. re-FDX1 or re-FDX2 (25 μM) was mixed with 25 μM
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2, and 125
μM l-cysteine was added to initiate the reaction. Samples
were then transferred
to 1 cm path-length quartz cuvettes, sealed with rubber septa, and
UV/vis
spectra were collected at 25 °C. Control experiments without l-cysteine were also conducted.The cysteine desulfurase
assay reaction mixtures (300 μL in HN buffer) contained 1 μM
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 and 50 μM l-cysteine. The reductant was 10 μM re-FDX1, 10 μM
re-FDX2, 10 μM DTT, or 1 mM DTT. The l-cysteine was
added
last to initiate the reaction. One or more of
the following components were added to assess their effects on sulfide
production: 10 μM ISCU, 10 μM FXN, and 50 μM Fe2(NH4)2(SO4)2.
After anaerobic incubation for 20 min at room temperature, the
reaction mixture was diluted to 800 μL, and 100 μL of
20 mM N,N-dimethyl-p-phenylenediamine in 7.2 M HCl and 100 μL of 30 mM FeCl3 in 1.2 M HCl were added to quench the reaction and convert
sulfide to methylene blue. The quenched reaction mixture was incubated
for 15 min at room temperature, and then the absorbance at 670 nm
was measured and used to estimate the amount of sulfide by comparison
to a standard curve obtained from known concentrations of Na2S.The in vitro Fe–S cluster reconstitution
assays were performed as follows. Reaction
mixtures (1 mL) prepared in the anaerobic chamber contained 25 μM
re-FDX1 or re-FDX2, 0.5 μM [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2, 25 μM ISCU, and 125 μM Fe2(NH4)2(SO4)2. l-cysteine (final concentration of 125 μM) was added to initiate
the experiment. Samples were then transferred
to 1 cm path-length quartz cuvettes, sealed with rubber septa, and
UV/vis
spectra were collected at 25 °C. Control experiments were conducted
without l-cysteine.

Protein Expression
and PurificationInformation about
the proteins used in this study is provided in Table 1, which identifies the vectors and tags used
in their production, lists the sizes of the proteins produced, and
specifies their amino acid sequences. Published methods23 were used to prepare the protein samples of
unlabeled ISCU. The protein targets NFS1, FDX1, and FDX2 were cloned
into pE-SUMO (Lifesensors) vectors using polymerase chain reaction
(PCR)-based methods. ISD11 was cloned into the pET14b vector (Novagen)
containing a noncleavable C-terminal hexahistidine tag.Table 1Proteins Studied, Properties, and
Production DetailsabbreviationnameUniProt entryresidue composition
of the protein studiedvectortagcleaved?MWpIFDX1H. sapiens ferredoxin 1P1010961–184pE-SUMOHis6-SUMO-yes135614.36FDX2H.
sapiens ferredoxin 2Q6P4F253–183pE-SUMOHis6-SUMO-yes142634.57NFS1H.
sapiens cysteine desulfuraseQ9Y69753–457pE-SUMOHis6-SUMO-yes449146.94ISD11H.
sapiens LYRM4Q9HD341–91pET14b-His6no1158110.73ISCUH. sapiens scaffold
proteinQ9H1K135–167pE-SUMOHis6-SUMO-yes143868.99FXNH.
sapiens frataxinQ1659581–210pE-SUMOHis6-SUMO-yes188264.72AcpE.
coli acyl carrier proteinP0A6A82–78noneN/AN/A85083.98For co-expression and protein
production of
the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex,
NFS1-pE-SUMO and ISD11-pET14b were cotransformed into Rosetta2(DE3)pLysS
cells and spread onto YT plates with the
appropriate antibiotics (50 μg/mL kanamycin, 50 μg/mL
ampicillin, and 35 μg/mL chloramphenicol) and grown overnight
at 37 °C. E. coli colonies were picked from
the plates and grown in 1 mL of YT medium with 1% glucose and appropriate
antibiotics for ∼4 h at 37 °C (250 rpm). One milliliter
starters were added to overnight MDAG inoculums of 50
mL and grown at 25 °C. The next day, these were used to inoculate
2 L of YT protein production medium. The large-scale cultures usually
reached an OD600 of 1–2 after growth for 3–6
h at 37 °C while being shaken at 250 rpm. At that point, 0.4
mM isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) was
added to induce overexpression
of NFS1 and ISD11. After being incubated for an additional 12 h, the
cells were harvested by centrifugation and stored at −80 °C
until they were used.FDX1 and FDX2 were produced as follows.
Single colonies containing
validated genes for the target proteins were picked from the YT or
MDAG plates and grown in 1 mL of YT medium with 1% glucose (supplemented
with 50 μg/mL kanamycin and 35 μg/mL
chloramphenicol) for 1–3 h at 37 °C while being shaken
at 250 rpm and then transferred to 50–100 mL of MDAG medium
(with appropriate antibiotics) and grown overnight
at 25 °C. For large-scale protein production, the overnight MDAG
starter culture was transferred to one of the following media. (1)
For the production of unlabeled proteins, 25 mL of MDAG culture was
transferred to 1 L of LB liquid medium supplemented with appropriate
antibiotics. (2) For the production of [U-15N]FDX1 or -FDX2,
25 mL of MDAG culture was transferred
to 1 L of M9 minimal medium containing 1 g/L 15NH4Cl, 3 g/L glucose, and appropriate antibiotics. (3) For the production
of [U-13C,U-15N]FDX1 or -FDX2, 25 mL of MDAG
culture was transferred
to 1 L of M9 minimal medium containing 1 g/L 15NH4Cl and 2 g/L [U-13C]glucose. The cell cultures described
above were grown
at 37 °C (while being shaken at 250–320 rpm) for 2–5
h until the OD600 reached 1.0–1.5. The temperature
was then decreased to 18
°C, and 0.4 mM IPTG, 1 mM l-cysteine, and 0.1 mg/mL
ferric ammonium citrate were added to induce the overexpression
of the proteins. After being incubated for an additional 12 h, the
cells were harvested by centrifugation and stored at −80
°C until they were used.

Protein Expression
and Purification

Information about
the proteins used in this study is provided in Table 1, which identifies the vectors and tags used
in their production, lists the sizes of the proteins produced, and
specifies their amino acid sequences. Published methods23 were used to prepare the protein samples of
unlabeled ISCU. The protein targets NFS1, FDX1, and FDX2 were cloned
into pE-SUMO (Lifesensors) vectors using polymerase chain reaction
(PCR)-based methods. ISD11 was cloned into the pET14b vector (Novagen)
containing a noncleavable C-terminal hexahistidine tag.

Proteins Studied, Properties, and
Production Details

For co-expression and protein
production of
the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex,
NFS1-pE-SUMO and ISD11-pET14b were cotransformed into Rosetta2(DE3)pLysS
cells and spread onto YT plates with the
appropriate antibiotics (50 μg/mL kanamycin, 50 μg/mL
ampicillin, and 35 μg/mL chloramphenicol) and grown overnight
at 37 °C. E. coli colonies were picked from
the plates and grown in 1 mL of YT medium with 1% glucose and appropriate
antibiotics for ∼4 h at 37 °C (250 rpm). One milliliter
starters were added to overnight MDAG inoculums of 50
mL and grown at 25 °C. The next day, these were used to inoculate
2 L of YT protein production medium. The large-scale cultures usually
reached an OD600 of 1–2 after growth for 3–6
h at 37 °C while being shaken at 250 rpm. At that point, 0.4
mM isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) was
added to induce overexpression
of NFS1 and ISD11. After being incubated for an additional 12 h, the
cells were harvested by centrifugation and stored at −80 °C
until they were used.

FDX1 and FDX2 were produced as follows.
Single colonies containing
validated genes for the target proteins were picked from the YT or
MDAG plates and grown in 1 mL of YT medium with 1% glucose (supplemented
with 50 μg/mL kanamycin and 35 μg/mL
chloramphenicol) for 1–3 h at 37 °C while being shaken
at 250 rpm and then transferred to 50–100 mL of MDAG medium
(with appropriate antibiotics) and grown overnight
at 25 °C. For large-scale protein production, the overnight MDAG
starter culture was transferred to one of the following media. (1)
For the production of unlabeled proteins, 25 mL of MDAG culture was
transferred to 1 L of LB liquid medium supplemented with appropriate
antibiotics. (2) For the production of [U-15N]FDX1 or -FDX2,
25 mL of MDAG culture was transferred
to 1 L of M9 minimal medium containing 1 g/L 15NH4Cl, 3 g/L glucose, and appropriate antibiotics. (3) For the production
of [U-13C,U-15N]FDX1 or -FDX2, 25 mL of MDAG
culture was transferred
to 1 L of M9 minimal medium containing 1 g/L 15NH4Cl and 2 g/L [U-13C]glucose. The cell cultures described
above were grown
at 37 °C (while being shaken at 250–320 rpm) for 2–5
h until the OD600 reached 1.0–1.5. The temperature
was then decreased to 18
°C, and 0.4 mM IPTG, 1 mM l-cysteine, and 0.1 mg/mL
ferric ammonium citrate were added to induce the overexpression
of the proteins. After being incubated for an additional 12 h, the
cells were harvested by centrifugation and stored at −80
°C until they were used.

BuffersThe buffer
used for the first immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC)
step (1st IMAC buffer) consisted of 20 mM Tris (pH 8), 300–500
mM NaCl, 0.1% NP-40 (Sigma-Aldrich),
1–2 mM β-mercaptoethanol or DTT, 1 mM PMSF, 5–10%
glycerol, and 5 mM imidazole. The lysis buffer had this same composition
except that it was supplemented with Benzonase (Novagen, Millipore,
Billerica, MA) or OmniCleave nuclease (Epicenter, Illumina, Madison,
WI), rLysozyme (Novagen), 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF)
(Sigma-Aldrich), and RNase (Qiagen, Valencia, CA).
The buffer used for the second IMAC step (2nd IMAC buffer) had the
same composition
as the first except that it contained 250 mM imidazole. The SUMO fusion
cleavage buffer consisted of 20 mM Tris buffer (pH 8) containing 150
mM NaCl, 2 mM DTT (or β-mercaptoethanol), and 5–10% glycerol.
The HN buffer [50 mM HEPES (pH 7.8) and 150 mM NaCl] and HNT buffer
[50 mM HEPES (pH 7.8), 150 mM NaCl, and 5 mM TCEP] used in this study
were clarified by being passed through a 0.2 μm filter (Millipore)
and thoroughly degassed. For anaerobic experiments,
the buffers were equilibrated for at least 24 h in an anaerobic chamber
(Coy Laboratory, Farmingdale, NY) filled with 95% N2 gas
and 5% H2 gas. An O2 detector was installed
inside the anaerobic chamber to ensure an O2 concentration
of <1 ppm.

The buffer
used for the first immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC)
step (1st IMAC buffer) consisted of 20 mM Tris (pH 8), 300–500
mM NaCl, 0.1% NP-40 (Sigma-Aldrich),
1–2 mM β-mercaptoethanol or DTT, 1 mM PMSF, 5–10%
glycerol, and 5 mM imidazole. The lysis buffer had this same composition
except that it was supplemented with Benzonase (Novagen, Millipore,
Billerica, MA) or OmniCleave nuclease (Epicenter, Illumina, Madison,
WI), rLysozyme (Novagen), 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF)
(Sigma-Aldrich), and RNase (Qiagen, Valencia, CA).
The buffer used for the second IMAC step (2nd IMAC buffer) had the
same composition
as the first except that it contained 250 mM imidazole. The SUMO fusion
cleavage buffer consisted of 20 mM Tris buffer (pH 8) containing 150
mM NaCl, 2 mM DTT (or β-mercaptoethanol), and 5–10% glycerol.
The HN buffer [50 mM HEPES (pH 7.8) and 150 mM NaCl] and HNT buffer
[50 mM HEPES (pH 7.8), 150 mM NaCl, and 5 mM TCEP] used in this study
were clarified by being passed through a 0.2 μm filter (Millipore)
and thoroughly degassed. For anaerobic experiments,
the buffers were equilibrated for at least 24 h in an anaerobic chamber
(Coy Laboratory, Farmingdale, NY) filled with 95% N2 gas
and 5% H2 gas. An O2 detector was installed
inside the anaerobic chamber to ensure an O2 concentration
of <1 ppm.

Protein PurificationThe [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex, FDX1, and
FDX2 were purified
as follows. All E. coli cell pastes were quickly
thawed at room temperature and then resuspended in 60 mL of lysis
buffer. To break open the resuspended cells, we used sonication with
a total time of 15 min at 4 °C, with a duty cycle of 2 s on and
4 s off. Cell lysates were clarified by high-speed centrifugation
at 25000 rpm for 30 min using a Beckman Coulter centrifuge with a
JA 30.5Ti rotor (Beckman Coulter). The clear cell lysate was then
treated with 70% (w/v) saturation of (NH4)2SO4 to precipitate
total protein. Then the sample was spun at 25000 rpm for 30 min. The
protein pellet was resuspended in 30–50 mL of 1st IMAC buffer,
and
any debris was discarded after a final centrifugation at 25000 rpm
for 30 min. The clarified protein solution was loaded onto a Qiagen Ni-NTA
Superflow FF or Ni-Sepharose column (GE Amersham Pharmacia, Piscataway,
NJ) with IMAC resin at a rate of 1 mL/min. The IMAC column was washed
first with ∼10 column volumes of 1st IMAC buffer and second
with 5–10 column volumes of wash buffer (1st IMAC buffer and
30 mM imidazole). The target protein was eluted with the 2nd IMAC
buffer, and fractions were collected. The His-tagged, N-terminal
SUMO fusion protein was treated with 0.5 mg of SUMO protease and extensively
dialyzed against the SUMO fusion cleavage buffer. For the purification
of FDX1 and FDX2, the SUMO-cleaved sample was loaded onto a freshly
equilibrated subtractive IMAC column, which bound the cleaved His-tagged
SUMO domain and allowed the cleaved target protein to be eluted. The
proteins were further purified by size exclusion chromatography (SEC).
For the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex,
the subtractive IMAC step was omitted and the SUMO-cleaved sample
was purified by SEC. The purities of the target protein fractions
were assessed by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). As noted elsewhere (K. Cai, R. O. Frederick, and
M. Tonelli, manuscript submitted for publication), the presence of
Acp in the complex was determined by mass spectrometry, and the stoichiometry
of the proteins in the complex was determined by a combination of amino acid analysis and
molecular weight estimation from small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS)
data.FDX1 and FDX2 were reduced by
adding a 10-fold excess of sodium dithionite to oxidized FDX1 or FDX2
in an anaerobic chamber (Coy Laboratory). The reduction of FDX1 or
FDX2 was monitored by the color change from dark brown to light pink
and by recording UV/vis spectra before and after reduction. The sample was dialyzed extensively
against anaerobic HN buffer to remove excess sodium dithionite. Apo-FDX1
and -FDX2 were prepared by incubating ox-FDX1 and -FDX2, respectively,
with 10% trichloroacetic acid and 10 mM DTT on ice for 10 min, pelleting
the sample, rinsing the pellet twice with water, and resuspending
the pellet in HNT buffer. The soluble sample was then dialyzed against
HNT buffer to remove trichloroacetic acid and further purified by
SEC. Mass spectrometry was used to determine the level of 15N isotope labeling.

Protein Purification

The [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex, FDX1, and
FDX2 were purified
as follows. All E. coli cell pastes were quickly
thawed at room temperature and then resuspended in 60 mL of lysis
buffer. To break open the resuspended cells, we used sonication with
a total time of 15 min at 4 °C, with a duty cycle of 2 s on and
4 s off. Cell lysates were clarified by high-speed centrifugation
at 25000 rpm for 30 min using a Beckman Coulter centrifuge with a
JA 30.5Ti rotor (Beckman Coulter). The clear cell lysate was then
treated with 70% (w/v) saturation of (NH4)2SO4 to precipitate
total protein. Then the sample was spun at 25000 rpm for 30 min. The
protein pellet was resuspended in 30–50 mL of 1st IMAC buffer,
and
any debris was discarded after a final centrifugation at 25000 rpm
for 30 min. The clarified protein solution was loaded onto a Qiagen Ni-NTA
Superflow FF or Ni-Sepharose column (GE Amersham Pharmacia, Piscataway,
NJ) with IMAC resin at a rate of 1 mL/min. The IMAC column was washed
first with ∼10 column volumes of 1st IMAC buffer and second
with 5–10 column volumes of wash buffer (1st IMAC buffer and
30 mM imidazole). The target protein was eluted with the 2nd IMAC
buffer, and fractions were collected. The His-tagged, N-terminal
SUMO fusion protein was treated with 0.5 mg of SUMO protease and extensively
dialyzed against the SUMO fusion cleavage buffer. For the purification
of FDX1 and FDX2, the SUMO-cleaved sample was loaded onto a freshly
equilibrated subtractive IMAC column, which bound the cleaved His-tagged
SUMO domain and allowed the cleaved target protein to be eluted. The
proteins were further purified by size exclusion chromatography (SEC).
For the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex,
the subtractive IMAC step was omitted and the SUMO-cleaved sample
was purified by SEC. The purities of the target protein fractions
were assessed by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). As noted elsewhere (K. Cai, R. O. Frederick, and
M. Tonelli, manuscript submitted for publication), the presence of
Acp in the complex was determined by mass spectrometry, and the stoichiometry
of the proteins in the complex was determined by a combination of amino acid analysis and
molecular weight estimation from small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS)
data.

FDX1 and FDX2 were reduced by
adding a 10-fold excess of sodium dithionite to oxidized FDX1 or FDX2
in an anaerobic chamber (Coy Laboratory). The reduction of FDX1 or
FDX2 was monitored by the color change from dark brown to light pink
and by recording UV/vis spectra before and after reduction. The sample was dialyzed extensively
against anaerobic HN buffer to remove excess sodium dithionite. Apo-FDX1
and -FDX2 were prepared by incubating ox-FDX1 and -FDX2, respectively,
with 10% trichloroacetic acid and 10 mM DTT on ice for 10 min, pelleting
the sample, rinsing the pellet twice with water, and resuspending
the pellet in HNT buffer. The soluble sample was then dialyzed against
HNT buffer to remove trichloroacetic acid and further purified by
SEC. Mass spectrometry was used to determine the level of 15N isotope labeling.

NMR SpectroscopyThe HNT buffer
used for NMR samples
contained 8% D2O for the frequency lock. All NMR spectra
were recorded on 500 or 750 MHz (1H) Bruker BioSpin (Billerica,
MA) or 600, 800, or 900 MHz Varian (Palo Alto, CA) NMR spectrometers
equipped with a z-gradient cryogenic probe. All sample
temperatures were regulated at 25 °C. NMRPipe was used to process
the raw NMR data,33 and NMRFAM-SPARKY34 was utilized to visualize and analyze the processed
NMR data.Samples of 0.3 mM uniformly 15N-labeled
apo-FDX1, apo-FDX2, ox-FDX1, and ox-FDX2 were placed in Shigemi NMR
tubes (Shigemi Inc.). Samples of 0.3 mM re-FDX1 and re-FDX2 were prepared
in an anaerobic chamber and transferred to anaerobic NMR tubes (Wilmad-Labglass)
equipped with robust seals. 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC
spectra of each sample were collected. To investigate the interaction
between the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex and ferredoxins, 0.5–1 equiv (subunit) of unlabeled
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 was
titrated into the uniformly 15N-labeled
ferredoxin samples described above, and 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC spectra were collected.The chemical shift
perturbations, ΔδHN (absolute
value in parts per million), were calculated with eq 1:1where ΔδH and ΔδN are the chemical shift changes
in the 1H and 15N dimensions, respectively.The backbone signals of [U-13C,U-15N]FDX1 or
-FDX2 in its oxidized and reduced states were
assigned by collecting and analyzing the following NMR spectra: two-dimensional
(2D) 1H–15N HSQC, three-dimensional (3D)
HNCA, 3D HNCACB, and 3D CBCA(CO)NH. All 3D spectra were recorded using
nonuniform
sampling with a sampling rate of 36% and were processed
using NESTA35 and NMRPipe. The PINE server36 was used for the automatic assignment of the
backbone signals followed by manual correction. The backbone signals
from residues close to the Fe–S cluster were not observed because
of the paramagnetic effect of
the [2Fe-2S] cluster.

NMR Spectroscopy

The HNT buffer
used for NMR samples
contained 8% D2O for the frequency lock. All NMR spectra
were recorded on 500 or 750 MHz (1H) Bruker BioSpin (Billerica,
MA) or 600, 800, or 900 MHz Varian (Palo Alto, CA) NMR spectrometers
equipped with a z-gradient cryogenic probe. All sample
temperatures were regulated at 25 °C. NMRPipe was used to process
the raw NMR data,33 and NMRFAM-SPARKY34 was utilized to visualize and analyze the processed
NMR data.

Samples of 0.3 mM uniformly 15N-labeled
apo-FDX1, apo-FDX2, ox-FDX1, and ox-FDX2 were placed in Shigemi NMR
tubes (Shigemi Inc.). Samples of 0.3 mM re-FDX1 and re-FDX2 were prepared
in an anaerobic chamber and transferred to anaerobic NMR tubes (Wilmad-Labglass)
equipped with robust seals. 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC
spectra of each sample were collected. To investigate the interaction
between the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex and ferredoxins, 0.5–1 equiv (subunit) of unlabeled
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 was
titrated into the uniformly 15N-labeled
ferredoxin samples described above, and 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC spectra were collected.

The chemical shift
perturbations, ΔδHN (absolute
value in parts per million), were calculated with eq 1:1where ΔδH and ΔδN are the chemical shift changes
in the 1H and 15N dimensions, respectively.

The backbone signals of [U-13C,U-15N]FDX1 or
-FDX2 in its oxidized and reduced states were
assigned by collecting and analyzing the following NMR spectra: two-dimensional
(2D) 1H–15N HSQC, three-dimensional (3D)
HNCA, 3D HNCACB, and 3D CBCA(CO)NH. All 3D spectra were recorded using
nonuniform
sampling with a sampling rate of 36% and were processed
using NESTA35 and NMRPipe. The PINE server36 was used for the automatic assignment of the
backbone signals followed by manual correction. The backbone signals
from residues close to the Fe–S cluster were not observed because
of the paramagnetic effect of
the [2Fe-2S] cluster.

Isothermal Titration Calorimetry (ITC) MeasurementA Nano ITC (TA Instrument, Schaumburg, IL) system was used to investigate
interactions between the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex and ox-FDX1 and ox-FDX2. Proteins were dialyzed overnight
in the same HNT buffer. The experiments were conducted at 25 °C.
The syringe contained 0.8 mM [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2, and the sample cell (169 μL) contained
0.03 mM ox-FDX1 or 0.09 mM ox-FDX2. Twenty aliquots of 2.5 μM
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 were injected
into the sample cell, and the heat generated was measured. Processing
and fitting of ITC data were conducted using NanoAnalyse Software
(TA Instrument).

Isothermal Titration Calorimetry (ITC) Measurement

A Nano ITC (TA Instrument, Schaumburg, IL) system was used to investigate
interactions between the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex and ox-FDX1 and ox-FDX2. Proteins were dialyzed overnight
in the same HNT buffer. The experiments were conducted at 25 °C.
The syringe contained 0.8 mM [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2, and the sample cell (169 μL) contained
0.03 mM ox-FDX1 or 0.09 mM ox-FDX2. Twenty aliquots of 2.5 μM
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 were injected
into the sample cell, and the heat generated was measured. Processing
and fitting of ITC data were conducted using NanoAnalyse Software
(TA Instrument).

Electron Transfer Experiment, Cysteine Desulfurase
Assay, and in Vitro Fe–S Cluster Assembly
ReactionThe protein samples used in electron
transfer and in vitro cysteine desulfurase assay
and Fe–S cluster reconstitution experiments were prepared in
an anaerobic
chamber (Coy Laboratory) with samples buffer-exchanged extensively
with anaerobic HN buffer prior to the experiments. The reaction volumes
in all the experiments were kept to 1 mL. A UV-1700 UV/visible spectrophotometer
(Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan)
with a temperature control unit was used to collect the spectra, and
UVProbe version 2.21 (Shimadzu) was used to collect and analyze the
data.Electron transfer from re-FDX1 or re-FDX2 to the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex was monitored
as follows. re-FDX1 or re-FDX2 (25 μM) was mixed with 25 μM
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2, and 125
μM l-cysteine was added to initiate the reaction. Samples
were then transferred
to 1 cm path-length quartz cuvettes, sealed with rubber septa, and
UV/vis
spectra were collected at 25 °C. Control experiments without l-cysteine were also conducted.The cysteine desulfurase
assay reaction mixtures (300 μL in HN buffer) contained 1 μM
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 and 50 μM l-cysteine. The reductant was 10 μM re-FDX1, 10 μM
re-FDX2, 10 μM DTT, or 1 mM DTT. The l-cysteine was
added
last to initiate the reaction. One or more of
the following components were added to assess their effects on sulfide
production: 10 μM ISCU, 10 μM FXN, and 50 μM Fe2(NH4)2(SO4)2.
After anaerobic incubation for 20 min at room temperature, the
reaction mixture was diluted to 800 μL, and 100 μL of
20 mM N,N-dimethyl-p-phenylenediamine in 7.2 M HCl and 100 μL of 30 mM FeCl3 in 1.2 M HCl were added to quench the reaction and convert
sulfide to methylene blue. The quenched reaction mixture was incubated
for 15 min at room temperature, and then the absorbance at 670 nm
was measured and used to estimate the amount of sulfide by comparison
to a standard curve obtained from known concentrations of Na2S.The in vitro Fe–S cluster reconstitution
assays were performed as follows. Reaction
mixtures (1 mL) prepared in the anaerobic chamber contained 25 μM
re-FDX1 or re-FDX2, 0.5 μM [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2, 25 μM ISCU, and 125 μM Fe2(NH4)2(SO4)2. l-cysteine (final concentration of 125 μM) was added to initiate
the experiment. Samples were then transferred
to 1 cm path-length quartz cuvettes, sealed with rubber septa, and
UV/vis
spectra were collected at 25 °C. Control experiments were conducted
without l-cysteine.

Electron Transfer Experiment, Cysteine Desulfurase
Assay, and in Vitro Fe–S Cluster Assembly
Reaction

The protein samples used in electron
transfer and in vitro cysteine desulfurase assay
and Fe–S cluster reconstitution experiments were prepared in
an anaerobic
chamber (Coy Laboratory) with samples buffer-exchanged extensively
with anaerobic HN buffer prior to the experiments. The reaction volumes
in all the experiments were kept to 1 mL. A UV-1700 UV/visible spectrophotometer
(Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan)
with a temperature control unit was used to collect the spectra, and
UVProbe version 2.21 (Shimadzu) was used to collect and analyze the
data.

Electron transfer from re-FDX1 or re-FDX2 to the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex was monitored
as follows. re-FDX1 or re-FDX2 (25 μM) was mixed with 25 μM
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2, and 125
μM l-cysteine was added to initiate the reaction. Samples
were then transferred
to 1 cm path-length quartz cuvettes, sealed with rubber septa, and
UV/vis
spectra were collected at 25 °C. Control experiments without l-cysteine were also conducted.

The cysteine desulfurase
assay reaction mixtures (300 μL in HN buffer) contained 1 μM
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 and 50 μM l-cysteine. The reductant was 10 μM re-FDX1, 10 μM
re-FDX2, 10 μM DTT, or 1 mM DTT. The l-cysteine was
added
last to initiate the reaction. One or more of
the following components were added to assess their effects on sulfide
production: 10 μM ISCU, 10 μM FXN, and 50 μM Fe2(NH4)2(SO4)2.
After anaerobic incubation for 20 min at room temperature, the
reaction mixture was diluted to 800 μL, and 100 μL of
20 mM N,N-dimethyl-p-phenylenediamine in 7.2 M HCl and 100 μL of 30 mM FeCl3 in 1.2 M HCl were added to quench the reaction and convert
sulfide to methylene blue. The quenched reaction mixture was incubated
for 15 min at room temperature, and then the absorbance at 670 nm
was measured and used to estimate the amount of sulfide by comparison
to a standard curve obtained from known concentrations of Na2S.

The in vitro Fe–S cluster reconstitution
assays were performed as follows. Reaction
mixtures (1 mL) prepared in the anaerobic chamber contained 25 μM
re-FDX1 or re-FDX2, 0.5 μM [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2, 25 μM ISCU, and 125 μM Fe2(NH4)2(SO4)2. l-cysteine (final concentration of 125 μM) was added to initiate
the experiment. Samples were then transferred
to 1 cm path-length quartz cuvettes, sealed with rubber septa, and
UV/vis
spectra were collected at 25 °C. Control experiments were conducted
without l-cysteine.

ResultsBiophysical
Characterization of FDX1 and FDX2 and Their Apo
Forms by NMRWe prepared uniformly 15N-labeled
samples of FDX1 and
FDX2 and collected 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC
spectra of these proteins in both their oxidized and reduced states.
Spectra of ox-FDX1 and re-FDX1 are shown in the left and middle panels
of Figure 2A, respectively,
and spectra of ox-FDX2 and re-FDX2 are shown in the left and middle
panels of Figure 2B,
respectively. The difference in redox state resulted in significant
changes in the chemical shifts (CS) and line widths of the 1H–15N cross peaks. Careful analysis of the CS perturbations
and peak broadenings revealed that, for both FDX1 and FDX2, most affected
residues are located close to the Fe–S cluster; more peaks
from FDX1 disappeared (Figure 3A) than from FDX2 (Figure 3C). When mapped onto the structures of FDX1
and FDX2, these CS perturbations and peak broadenings showed similar
patterns (Figure 3BD).
The hyperfine 1H NMR signals of FDX1 and FDX2 in both their
oxidized and reduced states were found to be very similar, indicating
similar patterns of electron delocalization in both ferredoxins (Figure S1).Figure 2750 MHz (1H) 2D 1H–15N
TROSY-HSQC NMR spectra of different states of FXD1 and FDX2. (A) FDX1
in its oxidized (left), reduced (middle), and apo (right) states.
(B) FDX2 in its oxidized (left), reduced (middle), and apo (right)
states.Figure 3Redox state differences in the backbone chemical
shifts of FDX1
and FDX2. 1H and 15N chemical shifts were obtained
from assigned 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC spectra
acquired at 750 MHz of uniformly 15N-labeled FDX1 and FDX2
before (oxidized) and after reduction with sodium dithionite. The
differences in these chemical shifts (ΔδH and
ΔδN) were converted to chemical shift perturbations
(ΔδHN) as described in Methods. (A) ΔδHN values for FDX1 plotted as a function
of residue number. The red ovals denote residues whose signals were
broadened beyond detection. (B) ΔδHN results
from panel A mapped onto the structure of FDX1 (PDB entry 3P1M). Color code: green,
not significantly affected (ΔδNH < 0.1 ppm);
blue, significant chemical shift changes (ΔδNH > 0.1 ppm); red, severe line broadening; black, no assignments.
(C) ΔδHN values for FDX2 plotted as a function
of residue number. The red ovals denote residues whose signals were
broadened beyond detection. (D) ΔδHN results
from panel C mapped onto the structure of FDX2 (PDB entry 2Y5C). Color code: green,
not significantly affected (ΔδNH < 0.05
ppm); blue, significant chemical shift changes (ΔδNH > 0.05 ppm); red, severe line broadening; black, no assignments.We also prepared uniformly 15N-labeled apo-FDX1 and apo-FDX2 by removing the Fe–S
cluster from each protein. The 1H–15N
TROSY-HSQC spectra of both apoproteins (Figure 2A,B, right panels) showed the reduced level
of dispersion of 1H NMR signals characteristic of a partially
unfolded protein; this result suggests the importance of the Fe–S
cluster in stabilizing the protein structure.Oxidized and Reduced Forms
of FDX1 and FDX2 Interact Directly
with the Cysteine Desulfurase–ISD11 ComplexIt has
been shown that E. coli ferredoxin (Fdx) interacts
directly with E. coli cysteine desulfurase (IscS)15,21 and that reduced Fdx donates an electron for Fe–S cluster
biosynthesis.15 It is thus of
interest to perform analogous NMR investigations of the interactions
of FDX1 and FDX2 with the human cysteine desulfurase complex.We co-expressed the genes encoding human NFS1 and ISD11 in E. coli cells and isolated and purified the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex. Upon purification,
the complex
exhibited a yellow color because of the presence of the bound cofactor,
pyridoxal phosphate (PLP).We employed NMR titration to investigate
the interaction between
the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex
and the ferredoxins. Aliquots (0.20–1.0 subunit equivalent)
of the unlabeled [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex were titrated into each of the [U-15N]ferredoxins,
and 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC spectra were recorded
before and after the addition
of each aliquot.The addition of one subunit equivalent of unlabeled
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex led
to severe broadening
of 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC signals from either
[U-15N]ox-FDX1 (Figure 4A) or [U-15N]re-FDX1 (Figure 4B). However, the addition of substoichiometric
amounts
of the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex
to [U-15N]ox-FDX1 resulted in CS perturbations (Figure 4C) that allowed the
identification
of the regions of FDX1 that interact with the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex (Figure 4D). The backbone 1H–15N signals of FDX1 residues F11, N13, R14, L57–I63,
I71–L90, L96, T97, and N102 were
significantly shifted or broadened as a result of binding to [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2. Most of these residues
are close to the [2Fe-2S] cluster. The progressive CS changes of signals
from FDX1 residues A81, L84, D76, and D79 as a function of added [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 concentration (Figure 5A) are shown in Figure 5B.Figure 4NMR evidence showing
that both ox-FDX1 and re-FDX1 interact with
the cysteine desulfurase complex ([Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2). (A) Left, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC NMR spectrum of [U-15N]ox-FDX1; right, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC spectrum of [U-15N]ox-FDX1 following addition of 1 subunit equivalent of unlabeled
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2. (B) Left, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC NMR spectrum of [U-15N]re-FDX1; right, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC
spectrum of [U-15N]re-FDX1 following the addition of 1
subunit equivalent of unlabeled [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2. (C) CS perturbation of the 1H–15N signals (ΔδNH) of [U-15N]ox-FDX1 resulting from the interaction with [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2. The red ovals denote the residues whose
signals were broadened beyond detection. (D) CS perturbation results
from panel C mapped onto the structure of FDX1 (PDB entry 3P1M). Color code: green,
not significantly affected (ΔδNH < 0.03
ppm); blue, significant chemical shift changes (ΔδNH > 0.03 ppm); red, severe line broadening; black, no assignments.
All NMR data were collected at 750 MHz (1H).Figure 5Identification of residues of FDX1 that interact with
the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex.
(A) Left, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC NMR spectrum
of [U-15N]ox-FDX1; middle, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC
spectrum of [U-15N]ox-FDX1 following the addition of 0.4
subunit equivalent of unlabeled [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2; right, overlay of the left and middle panels.
(B) Signals from residues D76, D79, A81, and L84 as a function of
added [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2: 0
(red), 0.2 (magenta), 0.4 (blue), and 0.8 (green) subunit equivalent.
NMR spectra were acquired at 750 MHz (1H).The addition of one subunit equivalent of unlabeled
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 led to severe
broadening of 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC signals
from either [U-15N]ox-FDX2 or [U-15N]re-FDX2
(Figure 6A,B). The
addition of a substoichiometric amount of
unlabeled [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 to [U-15N]ox-FDX2 led to the shifting or broadening of
signals
from the following residues: L38–I40, L50, Y64, and A81–L97
(Figure 6C). As with
FDX1, most of these residues correspond to the regions close to the
[2Fe-2S] cluster (Figure 6D). The progressive CS changes of signals from FDX2 residues
E81, E83, L91, and Q92 as the result of added [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 (Figure 7A) are shown in Figure 7B.Figure 6NMR evidence showing that both ox-FDX2 and re-FDX2 interact
with
the cysteine desulfurase complex ([Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2). (A) Left, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC NMR spectrum of [U-15N]ox-FDX2; right, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC spectrum of [U-15N]ox-FDX2 following addition of 1 subunit equivalent of unlabeled
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2. (B) Left, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC NMR spectra of [U-15N]re-FDX2; right, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC
spectrum of [U-15N]re-FDX2 following addition of 1 subunit
equivalent of unlabeled [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2. (C) CS perturbation of the 1H–15N signals (ΔδNH) of [U-15N]ox-FDX2
resulting from the interaction with [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2. The red ovals denote the residues whose
signals were broadened beyond detection. (D) CS perturbation results
from panel C mapped onto the structure of FDX2 (PDB entry 2Y5C). Color code: green,
not significantly affected (ΔδNH < 0.03
ppm); blue, significant chemical shift changes (ΔδNH > 0.03 ppm); red, severe line broadening; black, no assignments.
All NMR data were collected at 750 MHz (1H).Figure 7Identification of residues of FDX2 that interact with
the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex.
(A) Left, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC NMR spectrum
of [U-15N]ox-FDX2; middle, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC
spectrum of [U-15N]ox-FDX2 following the addition of 0.4
subunit equivalent of unlabeled [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2; right, overlay of the left and middle panels.
(B) Signals from residues E81, E83, L91, and Q92 as a function of
added [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2: 0
(red), 0.2 (magenta), 0.4 (blue), and 0.8 (green) subunit equivalent.
NMR spectra were acquired at 750 MHz (1H).No interactions were found between apo-FDX1 or
apo-FDX2 and [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 (data not shown).We used isothermal titration calorimetry
(ITC) to quantify the
nature of the interactions between the highly stable [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex and the two more
weakly binding human ferredoxins. Titration of the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex with ox-FDX1 or ox-FDX2
resulted in exothermic binding that could be fitted to a 1:1 binding
model and yielded Kd values of 41.7 ±
2.6 and 14.9 ± 1.2 μM for FDX1 and FDX2, respectively (Figure 8). The ITC experiments
indicate that ox-FDX1
has a binding affinity for the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex lower than that of ox-FDX2. Attempts
to perform ITC with reduced ferredoxins failed because the ferredoxins
became oxidized by air during the course of the experiment.Figure 8ITC analysis
of the interaction of the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex with (A) ox-FDX1 and (B) ox-FDX2.
The top panels show peaks indicating heat released after each injection
of the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex
into the solution of ox-FDX1 or ox-FDX2. The bottom panels show data
points fitted to a single binding constant to yield thermodynamic
parameters.Reduced FDX1 and FDX2 Each
Donate Electrons to the Cysteine
Desulfurase Complex in Vitro and Facilitate Iron–Sulfur
Cluster AssemblyTo investigate the physiological relevance
of the interactions between the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex and ferredoxins, we took advantage of
the distinct UV/vis spectra of oxidized and reduced human ferredoxins
(Figure S2) to determine whether electrons
can be transferred
from the reduced ferredoxins to the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex. The UV/vis spectra of re-FDX1
and re-FDX2 did not change over the time period
of 30 min following the addition of one subunit equivalent of the
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex (Figure 9A,B, black traces),
indicating that both FDX1 and FDX2 remained reduced under this condition.
The addition of 5 equiv of l-cysteine
to the reaction mixtures mentioned above led to the oxidation of re-FDX1
(Figure 9A, blue traces)
and re-FDX2 (Figure 9B, red traces). The results indicate that both re-FDX1
and re-FDX2 can donate electrons to the product of the human cysteine
desulfurase reaction.Figure 9UV/vis spectra taken to monitor the oxidation state of
ferredoxins
under different conditions. (A) Results for FDX1: (blue lines) UV/vis
spectra taken every 5 min for 60 min of the reaction mixture containing
25 μM re-FDX1 and 25 μM [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 following the addition of a 5-fold excess
of l-cysteine and (black lines) control reaction without l-cysteine, with UV/vis spectra taken every 5 min for 30 min.
(B) Results for FDX2: (red lines) UV/vis spectra taken every 5 min
for 60 min of the reaction mixture containing 25 μM re-FDX2
and 25 μM [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 following the addition of a 5-fold excess of l-cysteine
and (black lines) control reaction without l-cysteine, with
UV/vis spectra taken every 5 min for 30 min. (C) Results for FDX1
in the presence of ISCU: (blue lines) UV/vis spectra taken every 5
min for 50 min of the reaction mixture containing 25 μM re-FDX1
and 25 μM ISCU in the presence of a catalytic quantity (0.02
subunit equivalent) of [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 and 5 equiv of ferrous ammonium sulfate following the addition
of a 5-fold excess of l-cysteine and (black lines) control
reaction without l-cysteine, with UV/vis spectra taken every
5 min for 30 min. (D) Results for FDX2 in the presence of ISCU: (red
lines) UV/vis spectra taken every 5 min for 50 min of the reaction
mixture containing 25 μM re-FDX2 and 25 μM ISCU in the
presence of a catalytic quantity (0.02 subunit equivalent) of [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 and 5 equiv of ferrous
ammonium sulfate following the addition of a 5-fold excess of l-cysteine and (black lines) control reaction without l-cysteine, with UV/vis spectra taken every 5 min for 30 min. The
results show that neither reduced ferredoxin is oxidized by the reaction
mixture when l-cysteine is absent. The results also demonstrate
that both re-FDX1 and re-FDX2 can transfer an electron to [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 in the presence of l-cysteine and that both ferredoxins facilitate Fe–S
cluster assembly on the scaffold protein ISCU.To determine whether FDX1 and FDX2 can donate
the electrons required for Fe–S cluster assembly on human ISCU,
we performed an in vitro Fe–S cluster assembly
reaction. The reaction mixture contained ISCU,
a catalytic quantity of [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 (0.02 subunit equivalent), 5 equiv of ferrous ammonium sulfate,
and 1 equiv of either re-FDX1 or re-FDX2 as the reductant. The UV/vis
spectra of re-FDX1 or re-FDX2 mixed with ISCU, ferrous ammonium
sulfate, and [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 remained unchanged over the time period of 30 min (Figure 9C,D, black traces). With both
re-FDX1 and re-FDX2, following the addition of 5 equiv of l-cysteine,
we observed a progressive increase in the absorbance at 400 and 456
nm (Figure 9C,D) that
was indicative of Fe–S cluster formation and the oxidation
of reduced ferredoxin. Notably,
the absorbance at 400 and 456 nm increased significantly more rapidly
in the reaction mixture
containing re-FDX2 (Figure 9D, red traces) than in the reaction mixture containing re-FDX1
(Figure 9C, blue traces),
indicating that FDX2 is more efficient in donating an electron to
assist in vitro Fe–S cluster assembly. The
reaction mixtures were subjected to anion-exchange
FPLC to isolate holo-ISCU for analysis by UV/vis spectroscopy,
which confirmed that the reactions
involving both FDX1 and FDX2 led to the formation
of holo-ISCU (Figure S3).Both FDX1 and
FDX2 Stimulate Cysteine Desulfurase Activity,
and Both Serve as Reductants for Fe–S Cluster AssemblyWe explored the effect of three different
reductants (re-FDX1, re-FDX2, and DTT) on the cysteine desulfurase
activity of [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 as monitored by sulfide production. The control reactions without
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 or a reductant
(Figure 10A, black
bars) produced little sulfide. With excess re-FDX1 (10 times the amount
of [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2) as the
reducing agent (Figure 10A, blue bars), the addition of either FXN or ISCU only slightly
stimulated the cysteine desulfurase activity of [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2; however, the concomitant addition of
ISCU and FXN led to a significant stimulation of cysteine desulfurase
activity. With excess re-FDX2 (10 times the amount of [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2) as the reducing agent (Figure 10A, red bars), the
addition of ISCU alone led to a slight stimulation of cysteine desulfurase
activity, whereas the addition of FXN alone had no effect; however,
the concomitant addition of ISCU and FXN led to a significant stimulation
of cysteine desulfurase activity (Figure 10A). In the reactions with excess DTT (10
μM) as the reducing agent (Figure 9B), FXN alone slightly stimulated the cysteine
desulfurase activity, whereas ISCU alone depressed the cysteine desulfurase
activity of [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2; however, the addition of both FXN and ISCU increased in the cysteine
desulfurase activity by a factor of ∼2. The large increase
in the level of production of sulfide when the DTT concentration was
increased from 10 μM to 1 mM suggests that the reaction was
limited by the amount of reductant. The presence of added Fe2+ had an opposite effect on the cysteine desulfurase activity depending
on the nature of the reductant. When either re-FDX1 or re-FDX2 was
the reductant, the addition of Fe2+ depressed cysteine
desulfurase activity; however, when DTT was the reductant, the addition
of Fe2+ increased cysteine desulfurase activity.Figure 10Cysteine
desulfurase activities and in vitro Fe–S
cluster assembly rates of different reaction mixtures. (A) Cysteine
desulfurase activity assay of [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 with either re-FDX1 or re-FDX2 as the reducing
agent. The composition of each reaction mixture is denoted below the x-axis. The components of the 300 μL reaction mixture
were [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 (1 μM),
re-FDX1 (10 μM), re-FDX2 (10 μM), FXN (10 μM), ISCU
(10 μM), Fe2(NH4)2(SO4)2 (50 μM), and l-cysteine (50 μM)
added last to initiate the reaction. (B) Cysteine desulfurase activity
assay of [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 using
DTT as the reducing agent. The composition of each reaction mixture
is denoted below the x-axis. The components of the
reaction mixture were [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 (300 μL), DTT (as shown in the figure), FXN (10 μM),
ISCU (10 μM), Fe2(NH4)2(SO4)2 (50 μM), and l-cysteine (50 μM)
added last to initiate the reaction. (C) Time course of the in vitro Fe–S cluster assembly reaction as monitored
by absorbance at 456 nm. The reaction mixture contained [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 (0.5 μM), ISCU
(25 μM), Fe2(NH4)2(SO4)2 (125 μM), either re-FDX1 (25 μM) or re-FDX2
(25 μM), and l-cysteine (125 μM) added last to
initiate the reaction. FXN, if present, was at a concentration of
25 μM. Reaction with re-FDX1 as the reducing agent, with (solid
blue line) or without (dashed blue line) FXN. Reaction with re-FDX2
as the reducing agent, with (solid red line) or without (dashed red
line) FXN.We then used the in vitro Fe–S cluster assembly reaction to investigate
the effect of FXN on cluster
assembly catalyzed by [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 with re-FDX1 or re-FDX2 as the reductant. With either reductant,
the presence of FXN accelerated the cluster assembly as monitored
by the absorbance at 456 nm (Figure 10C). Notably, cluster assembly was faster with re-FDX2,
with or without FXN, than with re-FDX1 as the reductant.

Biophysical
Characterization of FDX1 and FDX2 and Their Apo
Forms by NMRWe prepared uniformly 15N-labeled
samples of FDX1 and
FDX2 and collected 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC
spectra of these proteins in both their oxidized and reduced states.
Spectra of ox-FDX1 and re-FDX1 are shown in the left and middle panels
of Figure 2A, respectively,
and spectra of ox-FDX2 and re-FDX2 are shown in the left and middle
panels of Figure 2B,
respectively. The difference in redox state resulted in significant
changes in the chemical shifts (CS) and line widths of the 1H–15N cross peaks. Careful analysis of the CS perturbations
and peak broadenings revealed that, for both FDX1 and FDX2, most affected
residues are located close to the Fe–S cluster; more peaks
from FDX1 disappeared (Figure 3A) than from FDX2 (Figure 3C). When mapped onto the structures of FDX1
and FDX2, these CS perturbations and peak broadenings showed similar
patterns (Figure 3BD).
The hyperfine 1H NMR signals of FDX1 and FDX2 in both their
oxidized and reduced states were found to be very similar, indicating
similar patterns of electron delocalization in both ferredoxins (Figure S1).Figure 2750 MHz (1H) 2D 1H–15N
TROSY-HSQC NMR spectra of different states of FXD1 and FDX2. (A) FDX1
in its oxidized (left), reduced (middle), and apo (right) states.
(B) FDX2 in its oxidized (left), reduced (middle), and apo (right)
states.Figure 3Redox state differences in the backbone chemical
shifts of FDX1
and FDX2. 1H and 15N chemical shifts were obtained
from assigned 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC spectra
acquired at 750 MHz of uniformly 15N-labeled FDX1 and FDX2
before (oxidized) and after reduction with sodium dithionite. The
differences in these chemical shifts (ΔδH and
ΔδN) were converted to chemical shift perturbations
(ΔδHN) as described in Methods. (A) ΔδHN values for FDX1 plotted as a function
of residue number. The red ovals denote residues whose signals were
broadened beyond detection. (B) ΔδHN results
from panel A mapped onto the structure of FDX1 (PDB entry 3P1M). Color code: green,
not significantly affected (ΔδNH < 0.1 ppm);
blue, significant chemical shift changes (ΔδNH > 0.1 ppm); red, severe line broadening; black, no assignments.
(C) ΔδHN values for FDX2 plotted as a function
of residue number. The red ovals denote residues whose signals were
broadened beyond detection. (D) ΔδHN results
from panel C mapped onto the structure of FDX2 (PDB entry 2Y5C). Color code: green,
not significantly affected (ΔδNH < 0.05
ppm); blue, significant chemical shift changes (ΔδNH > 0.05 ppm); red, severe line broadening; black, no assignments.We also prepared uniformly 15N-labeled apo-FDX1 and apo-FDX2 by removing the Fe–S
cluster from each protein. The 1H–15N
TROSY-HSQC spectra of both apoproteins (Figure 2A,B, right panels) showed the reduced level
of dispersion of 1H NMR signals characteristic of a partially
unfolded protein; this result suggests the importance of the Fe–S
cluster in stabilizing the protein structure.

Biophysical
Characterization of FDX1 and FDX2 and Their Apo
Forms by NMR

We prepared uniformly 15N-labeled
samples of FDX1 and
FDX2 and collected 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC
spectra of these proteins in both their oxidized and reduced states.
Spectra of ox-FDX1 and re-FDX1 are shown in the left and middle panels
of Figure 2A, respectively,
and spectra of ox-FDX2 and re-FDX2 are shown in the left and middle
panels of Figure 2B,
respectively. The difference in redox state resulted in significant
changes in the chemical shifts (CS) and line widths of the 1H–15N cross peaks. Careful analysis of the CS perturbations
and peak broadenings revealed that, for both FDX1 and FDX2, most affected
residues are located close to the Fe–S cluster; more peaks
from FDX1 disappeared (Figure 3A) than from FDX2 (Figure 3C). When mapped onto the structures of FDX1
and FDX2, these CS perturbations and peak broadenings showed similar
patterns (Figure 3BD).
The hyperfine 1H NMR signals of FDX1 and FDX2 in both their
oxidized and reduced states were found to be very similar, indicating
similar patterns of electron delocalization in both ferredoxins (Figure S1).

750 MHz (1H) 2D 1H–15N
TROSY-HSQC NMR spectra of different states of FXD1 and FDX2. (A) FDX1
in its oxidized (left), reduced (middle), and apo (right) states.
(B) FDX2 in its oxidized (left), reduced (middle), and apo (right)
states.

Redox state differences in the backbone chemical
shifts of FDX1
and FDX2. 1H and 15N chemical shifts were obtained
from assigned 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC spectra
acquired at 750 MHz of uniformly 15N-labeled FDX1 and FDX2
before (oxidized) and after reduction with sodium dithionite. The
differences in these chemical shifts (ΔδH and
ΔδN) were converted to chemical shift perturbations
(ΔδHN) as described in Methods. (A) ΔδHN values for FDX1 plotted as a function
of residue number. The red ovals denote residues whose signals were
broadened beyond detection. (B) ΔδHN results
from panel A mapped onto the structure of FDX1 (PDB entry 3P1M). Color code: green,
not significantly affected (ΔδNH < 0.1 ppm);
blue, significant chemical shift changes (ΔδNH > 0.1 ppm); red, severe line broadening; black, no assignments.
(C) ΔδHN values for FDX2 plotted as a function
of residue number. The red ovals denote residues whose signals were
broadened beyond detection. (D) ΔδHN results
from panel C mapped onto the structure of FDX2 (PDB entry 2Y5C). Color code: green,
not significantly affected (ΔδNH < 0.05
ppm); blue, significant chemical shift changes (ΔδNH > 0.05 ppm); red, severe line broadening; black, no assignments.

We also prepared uniformly 15N-labeled apo-FDX1 and apo-FDX2 by removing the Fe–S
cluster from each protein. The 1H–15N
TROSY-HSQC spectra of both apoproteins (Figure 2A,B, right panels) showed the reduced level
of dispersion of 1H NMR signals characteristic of a partially
unfolded protein; this result suggests the importance of the Fe–S
cluster in stabilizing the protein structure.

Oxidized and Reduced Forms
of FDX1 and FDX2 Interact Directly
with the Cysteine Desulfurase–ISD11 ComplexIt has
been shown that E. coli ferredoxin (Fdx) interacts
directly with E. coli cysteine desulfurase (IscS)15,21 and that reduced Fdx donates an electron for Fe–S cluster
biosynthesis.15 It is thus of
interest to perform analogous NMR investigations of the interactions
of FDX1 and FDX2 with the human cysteine desulfurase complex.We co-expressed the genes encoding human NFS1 and ISD11 in E. coli cells and isolated and purified the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex. Upon purification,
the complex
exhibited a yellow color because of the presence of the bound cofactor,
pyridoxal phosphate (PLP).We employed NMR titration to investigate
the interaction between
the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex
and the ferredoxins. Aliquots (0.20–1.0 subunit equivalent)
of the unlabeled [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex were titrated into each of the [U-15N]ferredoxins,
and 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC spectra were recorded
before and after the addition
of each aliquot.The addition of one subunit equivalent of unlabeled
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex led
to severe broadening
of 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC signals from either
[U-15N]ox-FDX1 (Figure 4A) or [U-15N]re-FDX1 (Figure 4B). However, the addition of substoichiometric
amounts
of the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex
to [U-15N]ox-FDX1 resulted in CS perturbations (Figure 4C) that allowed the
identification
of the regions of FDX1 that interact with the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex (Figure 4D). The backbone 1H–15N signals of FDX1 residues F11, N13, R14, L57–I63,
I71–L90, L96, T97, and N102 were
significantly shifted or broadened as a result of binding to [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2. Most of these residues
are close to the [2Fe-2S] cluster. The progressive CS changes of signals
from FDX1 residues A81, L84, D76, and D79 as a function of added [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 concentration (Figure 5A) are shown in Figure 5B.Figure 4NMR evidence showing
that both ox-FDX1 and re-FDX1 interact with
the cysteine desulfurase complex ([Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2). (A) Left, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC NMR spectrum of [U-15N]ox-FDX1; right, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC spectrum of [U-15N]ox-FDX1 following addition of 1 subunit equivalent of unlabeled
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2. (B) Left, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC NMR spectrum of [U-15N]re-FDX1; right, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC
spectrum of [U-15N]re-FDX1 following the addition of 1
subunit equivalent of unlabeled [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2. (C) CS perturbation of the 1H–15N signals (ΔδNH) of [U-15N]ox-FDX1 resulting from the interaction with [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2. The red ovals denote the residues whose
signals were broadened beyond detection. (D) CS perturbation results
from panel C mapped onto the structure of FDX1 (PDB entry 3P1M). Color code: green,
not significantly affected (ΔδNH < 0.03
ppm); blue, significant chemical shift changes (ΔδNH > 0.03 ppm); red, severe line broadening; black, no assignments.
All NMR data were collected at 750 MHz (1H).Figure 5Identification of residues of FDX1 that interact with
the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex.
(A) Left, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC NMR spectrum
of [U-15N]ox-FDX1; middle, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC
spectrum of [U-15N]ox-FDX1 following the addition of 0.4
subunit equivalent of unlabeled [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2; right, overlay of the left and middle panels.
(B) Signals from residues D76, D79, A81, and L84 as a function of
added [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2: 0
(red), 0.2 (magenta), 0.4 (blue), and 0.8 (green) subunit equivalent.
NMR spectra were acquired at 750 MHz (1H).The addition of one subunit equivalent of unlabeled
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 led to severe
broadening of 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC signals
from either [U-15N]ox-FDX2 or [U-15N]re-FDX2
(Figure 6A,B). The
addition of a substoichiometric amount of
unlabeled [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 to [U-15N]ox-FDX2 led to the shifting or broadening of
signals
from the following residues: L38–I40, L50, Y64, and A81–L97
(Figure 6C). As with
FDX1, most of these residues correspond to the regions close to the
[2Fe-2S] cluster (Figure 6D). The progressive CS changes of signals from FDX2 residues
E81, E83, L91, and Q92 as the result of added [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 (Figure 7A) are shown in Figure 7B.Figure 6NMR evidence showing that both ox-FDX2 and re-FDX2 interact
with
the cysteine desulfurase complex ([Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2). (A) Left, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC NMR spectrum of [U-15N]ox-FDX2; right, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC spectrum of [U-15N]ox-FDX2 following addition of 1 subunit equivalent of unlabeled
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2. (B) Left, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC NMR spectra of [U-15N]re-FDX2; right, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC
spectrum of [U-15N]re-FDX2 following addition of 1 subunit
equivalent of unlabeled [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2. (C) CS perturbation of the 1H–15N signals (ΔδNH) of [U-15N]ox-FDX2
resulting from the interaction with [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2. The red ovals denote the residues whose
signals were broadened beyond detection. (D) CS perturbation results
from panel C mapped onto the structure of FDX2 (PDB entry 2Y5C). Color code: green,
not significantly affected (ΔδNH < 0.03
ppm); blue, significant chemical shift changes (ΔδNH > 0.03 ppm); red, severe line broadening; black, no assignments.
All NMR data were collected at 750 MHz (1H).Figure 7Identification of residues of FDX2 that interact with
the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex.
(A) Left, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC NMR spectrum
of [U-15N]ox-FDX2; middle, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC
spectrum of [U-15N]ox-FDX2 following the addition of 0.4
subunit equivalent of unlabeled [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2; right, overlay of the left and middle panels.
(B) Signals from residues E81, E83, L91, and Q92 as a function of
added [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2: 0
(red), 0.2 (magenta), 0.4 (blue), and 0.8 (green) subunit equivalent.
NMR spectra were acquired at 750 MHz (1H).No interactions were found between apo-FDX1 or
apo-FDX2 and [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 (data not shown).We used isothermal titration calorimetry
(ITC) to quantify the
nature of the interactions between the highly stable [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex and the two more
weakly binding human ferredoxins. Titration of the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex with ox-FDX1 or ox-FDX2
resulted in exothermic binding that could be fitted to a 1:1 binding
model and yielded Kd values of 41.7 ±
2.6 and 14.9 ± 1.2 μM for FDX1 and FDX2, respectively (Figure 8). The ITC experiments
indicate that ox-FDX1
has a binding affinity for the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex lower than that of ox-FDX2. Attempts
to perform ITC with reduced ferredoxins failed because the ferredoxins
became oxidized by air during the course of the experiment.Figure 8ITC analysis
of the interaction of the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex with (A) ox-FDX1 and (B) ox-FDX2.
The top panels show peaks indicating heat released after each injection
of the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex
into the solution of ox-FDX1 or ox-FDX2. The bottom panels show data
points fitted to a single binding constant to yield thermodynamic
parameters.

Oxidized and Reduced Forms
of FDX1 and FDX2 Interact Directly
with the Cysteine Desulfurase–ISD11 Complex

It has
been shown that E. coli ferredoxin (Fdx) interacts
directly with E. coli cysteine desulfurase (IscS)15,21 and that reduced Fdx donates an electron for Fe–S cluster
biosynthesis.15 It is thus of
interest to perform analogous NMR investigations of the interactions
of FDX1 and FDX2 with the human cysteine desulfurase complex.

We co-expressed the genes encoding human NFS1 and ISD11 in E. coli cells and isolated and purified the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex. Upon purification,
the complex
exhibited a yellow color because of the presence of the bound cofactor,
pyridoxal phosphate (PLP).

We employed NMR titration to investigate
the interaction between
the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex
and the ferredoxins. Aliquots (0.20–1.0 subunit equivalent)
of the unlabeled [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex were titrated into each of the [U-15N]ferredoxins,
and 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC spectra were recorded
before and after the addition
of each aliquot.

The addition of one subunit equivalent of unlabeled
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex led
to severe broadening
of 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC signals from either
[U-15N]ox-FDX1 (Figure 4A) or [U-15N]re-FDX1 (Figure 4B). However, the addition of substoichiometric
amounts
of the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex
to [U-15N]ox-FDX1 resulted in CS perturbations (Figure 4C) that allowed the
identification
of the regions of FDX1 that interact with the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex (Figure 4D). The backbone 1H–15N signals of FDX1 residues F11, N13, R14, L57–I63,
I71–L90, L96, T97, and N102 were
significantly shifted or broadened as a result of binding to [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2. Most of these residues
are close to the [2Fe-2S] cluster. The progressive CS changes of signals
from FDX1 residues A81, L84, D76, and D79 as a function of added [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 concentration (Figure 5A) are shown in Figure 5B.

NMR evidence showing
that both ox-FDX1 and re-FDX1 interact with
the cysteine desulfurase complex ([Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2). (A) Left, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC NMR spectrum of [U-15N]ox-FDX1; right, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC spectrum of [U-15N]ox-FDX1 following addition of 1 subunit equivalent of unlabeled
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2. (B) Left, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC NMR spectrum of [U-15N]re-FDX1; right, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC
spectrum of [U-15N]re-FDX1 following the addition of 1
subunit equivalent of unlabeled [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2. (C) CS perturbation of the 1H–15N signals (ΔδNH) of [U-15N]ox-FDX1 resulting from the interaction with [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2. The red ovals denote the residues whose
signals were broadened beyond detection. (D) CS perturbation results
from panel C mapped onto the structure of FDX1 (PDB entry 3P1M). Color code: green,
not significantly affected (ΔδNH < 0.03
ppm); blue, significant chemical shift changes (ΔδNH > 0.03 ppm); red, severe line broadening; black, no assignments.
All NMR data were collected at 750 MHz (1H).

Identification of residues of FDX1 that interact with
the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex.
(A) Left, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC NMR spectrum
of [U-15N]ox-FDX1; middle, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC
spectrum of [U-15N]ox-FDX1 following the addition of 0.4
subunit equivalent of unlabeled [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2; right, overlay of the left and middle panels.
(B) Signals from residues D76, D79, A81, and L84 as a function of
added [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2: 0
(red), 0.2 (magenta), 0.4 (blue), and 0.8 (green) subunit equivalent.
NMR spectra were acquired at 750 MHz (1H).

The addition of one subunit equivalent of unlabeled
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 led to severe
broadening of 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC signals
from either [U-15N]ox-FDX2 or [U-15N]re-FDX2
(Figure 6A,B). The
addition of a substoichiometric amount of
unlabeled [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 to [U-15N]ox-FDX2 led to the shifting or broadening of
signals
from the following residues: L38–I40, L50, Y64, and A81–L97
(Figure 6C). As with
FDX1, most of these residues correspond to the regions close to the
[2Fe-2S] cluster (Figure 6D). The progressive CS changes of signals from FDX2 residues
E81, E83, L91, and Q92 as the result of added [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 (Figure 7A) are shown in Figure 7B.

NMR evidence showing that both ox-FDX2 and re-FDX2 interact
with
the cysteine desulfurase complex ([Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2). (A) Left, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC NMR spectrum of [U-15N]ox-FDX2; right, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC spectrum of [U-15N]ox-FDX2 following addition of 1 subunit equivalent of unlabeled
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2. (B) Left, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC NMR spectra of [U-15N]re-FDX2; right, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC
spectrum of [U-15N]re-FDX2 following addition of 1 subunit
equivalent of unlabeled [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2. (C) CS perturbation of the 1H–15N signals (ΔδNH) of [U-15N]ox-FDX2
resulting from the interaction with [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2. The red ovals denote the residues whose
signals were broadened beyond detection. (D) CS perturbation results
from panel C mapped onto the structure of FDX2 (PDB entry 2Y5C). Color code: green,
not significantly affected (ΔδNH < 0.03
ppm); blue, significant chemical shift changes (ΔδNH > 0.03 ppm); red, severe line broadening; black, no assignments.
All NMR data were collected at 750 MHz (1H).

Identification of residues of FDX2 that interact with
the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex.
(A) Left, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC NMR spectrum
of [U-15N]ox-FDX2; middle, 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC
spectrum of [U-15N]ox-FDX2 following the addition of 0.4
subunit equivalent of unlabeled [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2; right, overlay of the left and middle panels.
(B) Signals from residues E81, E83, L91, and Q92 as a function of
added [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2: 0
(red), 0.2 (magenta), 0.4 (blue), and 0.8 (green) subunit equivalent.
NMR spectra were acquired at 750 MHz (1H).

No interactions were found between apo-FDX1 or
apo-FDX2 and [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 (data not shown).

We used isothermal titration calorimetry
(ITC) to quantify the
nature of the interactions between the highly stable [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex and the two more
weakly binding human ferredoxins. Titration of the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex with ox-FDX1 or ox-FDX2
resulted in exothermic binding that could be fitted to a 1:1 binding
model and yielded Kd values of 41.7 ±
2.6 and 14.9 ± 1.2 μM for FDX1 and FDX2, respectively (Figure 8). The ITC experiments
indicate that ox-FDX1
has a binding affinity for the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex lower than that of ox-FDX2. Attempts
to perform ITC with reduced ferredoxins failed because the ferredoxins
became oxidized by air during the course of the experiment.

ITC analysis
of the interaction of the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex with (A) ox-FDX1 and (B) ox-FDX2.
The top panels show peaks indicating heat released after each injection
of the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex
into the solution of ox-FDX1 or ox-FDX2. The bottom panels show data
points fitted to a single binding constant to yield thermodynamic
parameters.

Reduced FDX1 and FDX2 Each
Donate Electrons to the Cysteine
Desulfurase Complex in Vitro and Facilitate Iron–Sulfur
Cluster AssemblyTo investigate the physiological relevance
of the interactions between the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex and ferredoxins, we took advantage of
the distinct UV/vis spectra of oxidized and reduced human ferredoxins
(Figure S2) to determine whether electrons
can be transferred
from the reduced ferredoxins to the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex. The UV/vis spectra of re-FDX1
and re-FDX2 did not change over the time period
of 30 min following the addition of one subunit equivalent of the
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex (Figure 9A,B, black traces),
indicating that both FDX1 and FDX2 remained reduced under this condition.
The addition of 5 equiv of l-cysteine
to the reaction mixtures mentioned above led to the oxidation of re-FDX1
(Figure 9A, blue traces)
and re-FDX2 (Figure 9B, red traces). The results indicate that both re-FDX1
and re-FDX2 can donate electrons to the product of the human cysteine
desulfurase reaction.Figure 9UV/vis spectra taken to monitor the oxidation state of
ferredoxins
under different conditions. (A) Results for FDX1: (blue lines) UV/vis
spectra taken every 5 min for 60 min of the reaction mixture containing
25 μM re-FDX1 and 25 μM [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 following the addition of a 5-fold excess
of l-cysteine and (black lines) control reaction without l-cysteine, with UV/vis spectra taken every 5 min for 30 min.
(B) Results for FDX2: (red lines) UV/vis spectra taken every 5 min
for 60 min of the reaction mixture containing 25 μM re-FDX2
and 25 μM [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 following the addition of a 5-fold excess of l-cysteine
and (black lines) control reaction without l-cysteine, with
UV/vis spectra taken every 5 min for 30 min. (C) Results for FDX1
in the presence of ISCU: (blue lines) UV/vis spectra taken every 5
min for 50 min of the reaction mixture containing 25 μM re-FDX1
and 25 μM ISCU in the presence of a catalytic quantity (0.02
subunit equivalent) of [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 and 5 equiv of ferrous ammonium sulfate following the addition
of a 5-fold excess of l-cysteine and (black lines) control
reaction without l-cysteine, with UV/vis spectra taken every
5 min for 30 min. (D) Results for FDX2 in the presence of ISCU: (red
lines) UV/vis spectra taken every 5 min for 50 min of the reaction
mixture containing 25 μM re-FDX2 and 25 μM ISCU in the
presence of a catalytic quantity (0.02 subunit equivalent) of [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 and 5 equiv of ferrous
ammonium sulfate following the addition of a 5-fold excess of l-cysteine and (black lines) control reaction without l-cysteine, with UV/vis spectra taken every 5 min for 30 min. The
results show that neither reduced ferredoxin is oxidized by the reaction
mixture when l-cysteine is absent. The results also demonstrate
that both re-FDX1 and re-FDX2 can transfer an electron to [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 in the presence of l-cysteine and that both ferredoxins facilitate Fe–S
cluster assembly on the scaffold protein ISCU.To determine whether FDX1 and FDX2 can donate
the electrons required for Fe–S cluster assembly on human ISCU,
we performed an in vitro Fe–S cluster assembly
reaction. The reaction mixture contained ISCU,
a catalytic quantity of [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 (0.02 subunit equivalent), 5 equiv of ferrous ammonium sulfate,
and 1 equiv of either re-FDX1 or re-FDX2 as the reductant. The UV/vis
spectra of re-FDX1 or re-FDX2 mixed with ISCU, ferrous ammonium
sulfate, and [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 remained unchanged over the time period of 30 min (Figure 9C,D, black traces). With both
re-FDX1 and re-FDX2, following the addition of 5 equiv of l-cysteine,
we observed a progressive increase in the absorbance at 400 and 456
nm (Figure 9C,D) that
was indicative of Fe–S cluster formation and the oxidation
of reduced ferredoxin. Notably,
the absorbance at 400 and 456 nm increased significantly more rapidly
in the reaction mixture
containing re-FDX2 (Figure 9D, red traces) than in the reaction mixture containing re-FDX1
(Figure 9C, blue traces),
indicating that FDX2 is more efficient in donating an electron to
assist in vitro Fe–S cluster assembly. The
reaction mixtures were subjected to anion-exchange
FPLC to isolate holo-ISCU for analysis by UV/vis spectroscopy,
which confirmed that the reactions
involving both FDX1 and FDX2 led to the formation
of holo-ISCU (Figure S3).

Reduced FDX1 and FDX2 Each
Donate Electrons to the Cysteine
Desulfurase Complex in Vitro and Facilitate Iron–Sulfur
Cluster Assembly

To investigate the physiological relevance
of the interactions between the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex and ferredoxins, we took advantage of
the distinct UV/vis spectra of oxidized and reduced human ferredoxins
(Figure S2) to determine whether electrons
can be transferred
from the reduced ferredoxins to the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex. The UV/vis spectra of re-FDX1
and re-FDX2 did not change over the time period
of 30 min following the addition of one subunit equivalent of the
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex (Figure 9A,B, black traces),
indicating that both FDX1 and FDX2 remained reduced under this condition.
The addition of 5 equiv of l-cysteine
to the reaction mixtures mentioned above led to the oxidation of re-FDX1
(Figure 9A, blue traces)
and re-FDX2 (Figure 9B, red traces). The results indicate that both re-FDX1
and re-FDX2 can donate electrons to the product of the human cysteine
desulfurase reaction.

UV/vis spectra taken to monitor the oxidation state of
ferredoxins
under different conditions. (A) Results for FDX1: (blue lines) UV/vis
spectra taken every 5 min for 60 min of the reaction mixture containing
25 μM re-FDX1 and 25 μM [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 following the addition of a 5-fold excess
of l-cysteine and (black lines) control reaction without l-cysteine, with UV/vis spectra taken every 5 min for 30 min.
(B) Results for FDX2: (red lines) UV/vis spectra taken every 5 min
for 60 min of the reaction mixture containing 25 μM re-FDX2
and 25 μM [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 following the addition of a 5-fold excess of l-cysteine
and (black lines) control reaction without l-cysteine, with
UV/vis spectra taken every 5 min for 30 min. (C) Results for FDX1
in the presence of ISCU: (blue lines) UV/vis spectra taken every 5
min for 50 min of the reaction mixture containing 25 μM re-FDX1
and 25 μM ISCU in the presence of a catalytic quantity (0.02
subunit equivalent) of [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 and 5 equiv of ferrous ammonium sulfate following the addition
of a 5-fold excess of l-cysteine and (black lines) control
reaction without l-cysteine, with UV/vis spectra taken every
5 min for 30 min. (D) Results for FDX2 in the presence of ISCU: (red
lines) UV/vis spectra taken every 5 min for 50 min of the reaction
mixture containing 25 μM re-FDX2 and 25 μM ISCU in the
presence of a catalytic quantity (0.02 subunit equivalent) of [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 and 5 equiv of ferrous
ammonium sulfate following the addition of a 5-fold excess of l-cysteine and (black lines) control reaction without l-cysteine, with UV/vis spectra taken every 5 min for 30 min. The
results show that neither reduced ferredoxin is oxidized by the reaction
mixture when l-cysteine is absent. The results also demonstrate
that both re-FDX1 and re-FDX2 can transfer an electron to [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 in the presence of l-cysteine and that both ferredoxins facilitate Fe–S
cluster assembly on the scaffold protein ISCU.

To determine whether FDX1 and FDX2 can donate
the electrons required for Fe–S cluster assembly on human ISCU,
we performed an in vitro Fe–S cluster assembly
reaction. The reaction mixture contained ISCU,
a catalytic quantity of [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 (0.02 subunit equivalent), 5 equiv of ferrous ammonium sulfate,
and 1 equiv of either re-FDX1 or re-FDX2 as the reductant. The UV/vis
spectra of re-FDX1 or re-FDX2 mixed with ISCU, ferrous ammonium
sulfate, and [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 remained unchanged over the time period of 30 min (Figure 9C,D, black traces). With both
re-FDX1 and re-FDX2, following the addition of 5 equiv of l-cysteine,
we observed a progressive increase in the absorbance at 400 and 456
nm (Figure 9C,D) that
was indicative of Fe–S cluster formation and the oxidation
of reduced ferredoxin. Notably,
the absorbance at 400 and 456 nm increased significantly more rapidly
in the reaction mixture
containing re-FDX2 (Figure 9D, red traces) than in the reaction mixture containing re-FDX1
(Figure 9C, blue traces),
indicating that FDX2 is more efficient in donating an electron to
assist in vitro Fe–S cluster assembly. The
reaction mixtures were subjected to anion-exchange
FPLC to isolate holo-ISCU for analysis by UV/vis spectroscopy,
which confirmed that the reactions
involving both FDX1 and FDX2 led to the formation
of holo-ISCU (Figure S3).

Both FDX1 and
FDX2 Stimulate Cysteine Desulfurase Activity,
and Both Serve as Reductants for Fe–S Cluster AssemblyWe explored the effect of three different
reductants (re-FDX1, re-FDX2, and DTT) on the cysteine desulfurase
activity of [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 as monitored by sulfide production. The control reactions without
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 or a reductant
(Figure 10A, black
bars) produced little sulfide. With excess re-FDX1 (10 times the amount
of [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2) as the
reducing agent (Figure 10A, blue bars), the addition of either FXN or ISCU only slightly
stimulated the cysteine desulfurase activity of [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2; however, the concomitant addition of
ISCU and FXN led to a significant stimulation of cysteine desulfurase
activity. With excess re-FDX2 (10 times the amount of [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2) as the reducing agent (Figure 10A, red bars), the
addition of ISCU alone led to a slight stimulation of cysteine desulfurase
activity, whereas the addition of FXN alone had no effect; however,
the concomitant addition of ISCU and FXN led to a significant stimulation
of cysteine desulfurase activity (Figure 10A). In the reactions with excess DTT (10
μM) as the reducing agent (Figure 9B), FXN alone slightly stimulated the cysteine
desulfurase activity, whereas ISCU alone depressed the cysteine desulfurase
activity of [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2; however, the addition of both FXN and ISCU increased in the cysteine
desulfurase activity by a factor of ∼2. The large increase
in the level of production of sulfide when the DTT concentration was
increased from 10 μM to 1 mM suggests that the reaction was
limited by the amount of reductant. The presence of added Fe2+ had an opposite effect on the cysteine desulfurase activity depending
on the nature of the reductant. When either re-FDX1 or re-FDX2 was
the reductant, the addition of Fe2+ depressed cysteine
desulfurase activity; however, when DTT was the reductant, the addition
of Fe2+ increased cysteine desulfurase activity.Figure 10Cysteine
desulfurase activities and in vitro Fe–S
cluster assembly rates of different reaction mixtures. (A) Cysteine
desulfurase activity assay of [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 with either re-FDX1 or re-FDX2 as the reducing
agent. The composition of each reaction mixture is denoted below the x-axis. The components of the 300 μL reaction mixture
were [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 (1 μM),
re-FDX1 (10 μM), re-FDX2 (10 μM), FXN (10 μM), ISCU
(10 μM), Fe2(NH4)2(SO4)2 (50 μM), and l-cysteine (50 μM)
added last to initiate the reaction. (B) Cysteine desulfurase activity
assay of [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 using
DTT as the reducing agent. The composition of each reaction mixture
is denoted below the x-axis. The components of the
reaction mixture were [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 (300 μL), DTT (as shown in the figure), FXN (10 μM),
ISCU (10 μM), Fe2(NH4)2(SO4)2 (50 μM), and l-cysteine (50 μM)
added last to initiate the reaction. (C) Time course of the in vitro Fe–S cluster assembly reaction as monitored
by absorbance at 456 nm. The reaction mixture contained [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 (0.5 μM), ISCU
(25 μM), Fe2(NH4)2(SO4)2 (125 μM), either re-FDX1 (25 μM) or re-FDX2
(25 μM), and l-cysteine (125 μM) added last to
initiate the reaction. FXN, if present, was at a concentration of
25 μM. Reaction with re-FDX1 as the reducing agent, with (solid
blue line) or without (dashed blue line) FXN. Reaction with re-FDX2
as the reducing agent, with (solid red line) or without (dashed red
line) FXN.We then used the in vitro Fe–S cluster assembly reaction to investigate
the effect of FXN on cluster
assembly catalyzed by [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 with re-FDX1 or re-FDX2 as the reductant. With either reductant,
the presence of FXN accelerated the cluster assembly as monitored
by the absorbance at 456 nm (Figure 10C). Notably, cluster assembly was faster with re-FDX2,
with or without FXN, than with re-FDX1 as the reductant.

Both FDX1 and
FDX2 Stimulate Cysteine Desulfurase Activity,
and Both Serve as Reductants for Fe–S Cluster Assembly

We explored the effect of three different
reductants (re-FDX1, re-FDX2, and DTT) on the cysteine desulfurase
activity of [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 as monitored by sulfide production. The control reactions without
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 or a reductant
(Figure 10A, black
bars) produced little sulfide. With excess re-FDX1 (10 times the amount
of [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2) as the
reducing agent (Figure 10A, blue bars), the addition of either FXN or ISCU only slightly
stimulated the cysteine desulfurase activity of [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2; however, the concomitant addition of
ISCU and FXN led to a significant stimulation of cysteine desulfurase
activity. With excess re-FDX2 (10 times the amount of [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2) as the reducing agent (Figure 10A, red bars), the
addition of ISCU alone led to a slight stimulation of cysteine desulfurase
activity, whereas the addition of FXN alone had no effect; however,
the concomitant addition of ISCU and FXN led to a significant stimulation
of cysteine desulfurase activity (Figure 10A). In the reactions with excess DTT (10
μM) as the reducing agent (Figure 9B), FXN alone slightly stimulated the cysteine
desulfurase activity, whereas ISCU alone depressed the cysteine desulfurase
activity of [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2; however, the addition of both FXN and ISCU increased in the cysteine
desulfurase activity by a factor of ∼2. The large increase
in the level of production of sulfide when the DTT concentration was
increased from 10 μM to 1 mM suggests that the reaction was
limited by the amount of reductant. The presence of added Fe2+ had an opposite effect on the cysteine desulfurase activity depending
on the nature of the reductant. When either re-FDX1 or re-FDX2 was
the reductant, the addition of Fe2+ depressed cysteine
desulfurase activity; however, when DTT was the reductant, the addition
of Fe2+ increased cysteine desulfurase activity.

Cysteine
desulfurase activities and in vitro Fe–S
cluster assembly rates of different reaction mixtures. (A) Cysteine
desulfurase activity assay of [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 with either re-FDX1 or re-FDX2 as the reducing
agent. The composition of each reaction mixture is denoted below the x-axis. The components of the 300 μL reaction mixture
were [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 (1 μM),
re-FDX1 (10 μM), re-FDX2 (10 μM), FXN (10 μM), ISCU
(10 μM), Fe2(NH4)2(SO4)2 (50 μM), and l-cysteine (50 μM)
added last to initiate the reaction. (B) Cysteine desulfurase activity
assay of [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 using
DTT as the reducing agent. The composition of each reaction mixture
is denoted below the x-axis. The components of the
reaction mixture were [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 (300 μL), DTT (as shown in the figure), FXN (10 μM),
ISCU (10 μM), Fe2(NH4)2(SO4)2 (50 μM), and l-cysteine (50 μM)
added last to initiate the reaction. (C) Time course of the in vitro Fe–S cluster assembly reaction as monitored
by absorbance at 456 nm. The reaction mixture contained [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 (0.5 μM), ISCU
(25 μM), Fe2(NH4)2(SO4)2 (125 μM), either re-FDX1 (25 μM) or re-FDX2
(25 μM), and l-cysteine (125 μM) added last to
initiate the reaction. FXN, if present, was at a concentration of
25 μM. Reaction with re-FDX1 as the reducing agent, with (solid
blue line) or without (dashed blue line) FXN. Reaction with re-FDX2
as the reducing agent, with (solid red line) or without (dashed red
line) FXN.

We then used the in vitro Fe–S cluster assembly reaction to investigate
the effect of FXN on cluster
assembly catalyzed by [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 with re-FDX1 or re-FDX2 as the reductant. With either reductant,
the presence of FXN accelerated the cluster assembly as monitored
by the absorbance at 456 nm (Figure 10C). Notably, cluster assembly was faster with re-FDX2,
with or without FXN, than with re-FDX1 as the reductant.

DiscussionHuman mitochondria contain two ferredoxins (FDX1 and FDX2) whose
physiological functions have been subject to debate.28,31 We have employed various biophysical techniques and functional assays
to elucidate the properties of the two ferredoxins and to determine
their interactions with other protein components in human mitochondrial
Fe–S
cluster biosynthesis. NMR titration data revealed that both FDX1
and FDX2, in their oxidized and reduced states, interact directly
with the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex
(Figures 4 and 6). ITC results revealed that ox-FDX2 binds [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 much more tightly
(Kd = 14.9 ± 1.2 μM) than ox-FDX1
does (Kd = 41.7 ± 2.6 μM) (Figure 8).NMR chemical
shift changes and peak broadenings allowed us to identify
sites on ox-FDX1 and ox-FDX2 that interact with the cysteine desulfurase
complex. For both ox-FDX1 and ox-FDX2, most of these sites map to
regions close to the Fe–S cluster (Figures 4 and 6) and include
residues in helix α3
and strand β4, which are highly conserved among ferredoxins
(Figure 1). Interestingly,
helix α3 on FDX1 has also been shown to interact with ferredoxin
reductase and cytochrome P450;37 thus,
this conserved region appears to interact with multiple protein partners.38 This result suggests that the oxidized ferredoxins
must dissociate from the cysteine desulfurase to be reduced by ferredoxin
reductase. Although the regions on ox-FDX1 and ox-FDX2 affected by
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 binding are
similar, differences exist, particularly with regard to residues in
strand β2 and helices α1 and α2 (Figures 4 and 6). These regions are less conserved among ferredoxins (Figure 1), and they also exhibit the
largest geometric deviation in the superimposed 3D structures of ox-FDX1
and ox-FDX2. Differences in these regions may explain the observed
differences between FDX1 and FDX2 in their binding affinity for [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 and efficiency in
electron donation.Our in vitro Fe–S
cluster assembly assays showed that both reduced FDX1 and FDX2 were
capable of donating electrons to [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 (Figure 9) and that both facilitate Fe–S cluster assembly (Figure 10C).In conclusion,
our experimental results indicate that both human
mitochondrial ferredoxins (FDX1 and FDX2) can donate electrons to
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 and assist
Fe–S
cluster assembly in vitro; however, FDX2 is more
efficient than FDX1 in these processes. The situation in vivo may depend on other factors, including the relative concentrations
of the two ferredoxins.

Human mitochondria contain two ferredoxins (FDX1 and FDX2) whose
physiological functions have been subject to debate.28,31 We have employed various biophysical techniques and functional assays
to elucidate the properties of the two ferredoxins and to determine
their interactions with other protein components in human mitochondrial
Fe–S
cluster biosynthesis. NMR titration data revealed that both FDX1
and FDX2, in their oxidized and reduced states, interact directly
with the [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 complex
(Figures 4 and 6). ITC results revealed that ox-FDX2 binds [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 much more tightly
(Kd = 14.9 ± 1.2 μM) than ox-FDX1
does (Kd = 41.7 ± 2.6 μM) (Figure 8).

NMR chemical
shift changes and peak broadenings allowed us to identify
sites on ox-FDX1 and ox-FDX2 that interact with the cysteine desulfurase
complex. For both ox-FDX1 and ox-FDX2, most of these sites map to
regions close to the Fe–S cluster (Figures 4 and 6) and include
residues in helix α3
and strand β4, which are highly conserved among ferredoxins
(Figure 1). Interestingly,
helix α3 on FDX1 has also been shown to interact with ferredoxin
reductase and cytochrome P450;37 thus,
this conserved region appears to interact with multiple protein partners.38 This result suggests that the oxidized ferredoxins
must dissociate from the cysteine desulfurase to be reduced by ferredoxin
reductase. Although the regions on ox-FDX1 and ox-FDX2 affected by
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 binding are
similar, differences exist, particularly with regard to residues in
strand β2 and helices α1 and α2 (Figures 4 and 6). These regions are less conserved among ferredoxins (Figure 1), and they also exhibit the
largest geometric deviation in the superimposed 3D structures of ox-FDX1
and ox-FDX2. Differences in these regions may explain the observed
differences between FDX1 and FDX2 in their binding affinity for [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 and efficiency in
electron donation.

Our in vitro Fe–S
cluster assembly assays showed that both reduced FDX1 and FDX2 were
capable of donating electrons to [Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 (Figure 9) and that both facilitate Fe–S cluster assembly (Figure 10C).

In conclusion,
our experimental results indicate that both human
mitochondrial ferredoxins (FDX1 and FDX2) can donate electrons to
[Acp]2:[ISD11]2:[NFS1]2 and assist
Fe–S
cluster assembly in vitro; however, FDX2 is more
efficient than FDX1 in these processes. The situation in vivo may depend on other factors, including the relative concentrations
of the two ferredoxins.
