---
pmid: '15604419'
title: Cytokine-stimulated GTP cyclohydrolase I expression in endothelial cells requires
  coordinated activation of nuclear factor-kappaB and Stat1/Stat3.
authors:
- Huang A
- Zhang YY
- Chen K
- Hatakeyama K
- Keaney JF Jr
journal: Circ Res
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1161/01.RES.0000153669.24827.DF
---

# Cytokine-stimulated GTP cyclohydrolase I expression in endothelial cells requires coordinated activation of nuclear factor-kappaB and Stat1/Stat3.
**Authors:** Huang A, Zhang YY, Chen K, Hatakeyama K, Keaney JF Jr
**Journal:** Circ Res (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1161/01.RES.0000153669.24827.DF](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.0000153669.24827.DF)

## Abstract

1. Circ Res. 2005 Feb 4;96(2):164-71. doi: 10.1161/01.RES.0000153669.24827.DF.
Epub  2004 Dec 16.

Cytokine-stimulated GTP cyclohydrolase I expression in endothelial cells 
requires coordinated activation of nuclear factor-kappaB and Stat1/Stat3.

Huang A(1), Zhang YY, Chen K, Hatakeyama K, Keaney JF Jr.

Author information:
(1)Evans Memorial Department of Medicine and Whitaker Cardiovascular Institute, 
Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Mass 02118, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2005 Feb 4;96(2):141-3. doi: 10.1161/01.RES.0000156078.12390.44.

Endothelial production of nitric oxide (NO) is dependent on adequate cellular 
levels of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4), an important cofactor for the nitric oxide 
synthases. Vascular diseases are often characterized by vessel wall inflammation 
and cytokine treatment of endothelial cells increases BH4 levels, in part 
through the induction of GTP cyclohydrolase I (GTPCH I), the rate-limiting 
enzyme for BH4 biosynthesis. However, the molecular mechanisms of 
cytokine-mediated GTPCH I induction in the endothelium are not entirely clear. 
We sought to investigate the signaling pathways whereby cytokines induce GTPCH I 
expression in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). Interferon-gamma 
(IFN-gamma) induced endothelial cell GTPCH I protein and BH4 modestly, whereas 
high-level induction required combinations of IFN-gamma and tumor necrosis 
factor-alpha (TNF-alpha). In the presence of IFN-gamma, TNF-alpha increased 
GTPCH I mRNA in a manner dependent on nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB), as this 
effect was abrogated by overexpression of a dominant-negative IkappaB construct. 
HUVEC IFN-gamma treatment resulted in signal transducer and activator of 
transcription 1 (Stat1) activation and DNA binding in a Jak2-dependent manner, 
as this was inhibited by AG490. Conversely, overexpression of Jak2 effectively 
substituted for IFN-gamma in supporting TNF-alpha-mediated GTPCH I induction. 
The role of IFN-gamma was also Stat1-dependent as Stat1-null cells exhibited no 
GTPCH I induction in response to cytokines. However, Stat1 activation with 
oncostatin M failed to support TNF-alpha-mediated GTPCH I induction because of 
concomitant Stat3 activation. Consistent with this notion, siRNA-mediated Stat3 
gene silencing allowed oncostatin M to substitute for IFN-gamma in this system. 
These data implicate both NF-kappaB and Stat1 in endothelial cell 
cytokine-stimulated GTPCH I induction and highlight the role of Stat3 in 
modulating Stat1-supported gene transcription. Thus, IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha 
exert distinct but cooperative roles for BH4 biosynthesis in endothelium that 
may have important implications for vascular function during vascular 
inflammation.

DOI: 10.1161/01.RES.0000153669.24827.DF
PMID: 15604419 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
