---
pmid: '11923312'
title: Complete reconstitution of the human coenzyme A biosynthetic pathway via comparative
  genomics.
authors:
- Daugherty M
- Polanuyer B
- Farrell M
- Scholle M
- Lykidis A
- de Crécy-Lagard V
- Osterman A
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M201708200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Complete reconstitution of the human coenzyme A biosynthetic pathway via comparative genomics.
**Authors:** Daugherty M, Polanuyer B, Farrell M, Scholle M, Lykidis A, de Crécy-Lagard V, Osterman A
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M201708200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M201708200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 14;277(24):21431-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M201708200. Epub
2002  Mar 28.

Complete reconstitution of the human coenzyme A biosynthetic pathway via 
comparative genomics.

Daugherty M(1), Polanuyer B, Farrell M, Scholle M, Lykidis A, de Crécy-Lagard V, 
Osterman A.

Author information:
(1)Integrated Genomics, Incorporated, Chicago, Illinois 60612 and the Scripps 
Research Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

The biosynthesis of CoA from pantothenic acid (vitamin B5) is an essential 
universal pathway in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. The CoA biosynthetic genes in 
bacteria have all recently been identified, but their counterparts in humans and 
other eukaryotes remained mostly unknown. Using comparative genomics, we have 
identified human genes encoding the last four enzymatic steps in CoA 
biosynthesis: phosphopantothenoylcysteine synthetase (EC ), 
phosphopantothenoylcysteine decarboxylase (EC ), phosphopantetheine 
adenylyltransferase (EC ), and dephospho-CoA kinase (EC ). Biological functions 
of these human genes were verified using a complementation system in Escherichia 
coli based on transposon mutagenesis. The individual human enzymes were 
overexpressed in E. coli and purified, and the corresponding activities were 
experimentally verified. In addition, the entire pathway from 
phosphopantothenate to CoA was successfully reconstituted in vitro using a 
mixture of purified recombinant enzymes. Human recombinant bifunctional 
phosphopantetheine adenylyltransferase/dephospho-CoA kinase was kinetically 
characterized. This enzyme was previously suggested as a point of CoA 
biosynthesis regulation, and we have observed significant differences in mRNA 
levels of the corresponding human gene in normal and tumor cells by Northern 
blot analysis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M201708200
PMID: 11923312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
