---
pmid: '15601820'
title: VHL-box and SOCS-box domains determine binding specificity for Cul2-Rbx1 and
  Cul5-Rbx2 modules of ubiquitin ligases.
authors:
- Kamura T
- Maenaka K
- Kotoshiba S
- Matsumoto M
- Kohda D
- Conaway RC
- Conaway JW
- Nakayama KI
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC535916
doi: 10.1101/gad.1252404
---

# VHL-box and SOCS-box domains determine binding specificity for Cul2-Rbx1 and Cul5-Rbx2 modules of ubiquitin ligases.
**Authors:** Kamura T, Maenaka K, Kotoshiba S, Matsumoto M, Kohda D, Conaway RC, Conaway JW, Nakayama KI
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.1252404](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.1252404)
**PMC:** [PMC535916](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC535916/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2004 Dec 15;18(24):3055-65. doi: 10.1101/gad.1252404.

VHL-box and SOCS-box domains determine binding specificity for Cul2-Rbx1 and 
Cul5-Rbx2 modules of ubiquitin ligases.

Kamura T(1), Maenaka K, Kotoshiba S, Matsumoto M, Kohda D, Conaway RC, Conaway 
JW, Nakayama KI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Medical Institute of 
Bioregulation, Kyushu University, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

The ECS (Elongin B/C-Cul2/Cul5-SOCS-box protein) complex is a member of a family 
of ubiquitin ligases that share a Cullin-Rbx module. SOCS-box proteins recruit 
substrates to the ECS complex and are linked to Cullin-Rbx via Elongin B/C. VHL 
has been implicated as a SOCS-box protein, but lacks a C-terminal sequence 
(downstream of the BC box) of the SOCS box. We now show that VHL specifically 
interacts with endogenous Cul2-Rbx1 in mammalian cells, whereas SOCS-box 
proteins associate with Cul5-Rbx2. We also identify LRR-1 and FEM1B as proteins 
that share a region of homology with VHL (the VHL box, including the BC box and 
downstream residues) and associate with Cul2-Rbx1. ECS complexes can thus be 
classified into two distinct protein assemblies, that is, those that contain a 
subunit with a VHL box (composed of the BC box and a downstream Cul2 box) that 
interacts with Cul2-Rbx1, and those that contain a subunit with a SOCS box (BC 
box and downstream Cul5 box) that interacts with Cul5-Rbx2. Domain-swapping 
analyses showed that the specificity of interaction of VHL-box and SOCS-box 
proteins with Cullin-Rbx modules is determined by the Cul2 and Cul5 boxes, 
respectively. Finally, RNAi-mediated knockdown of the Cul2-Rbx1 inhibited the 
VHL-mediated degradation of HIF-2alpha, whereas knockdown of Cul5-Rbx2 did not 
affect it. These data suggest that the functions of the Cul2-Rbx1 and Cul5-Rbx2 
modules are distinct.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.1252404
PMCID: PMC535916
PMID: 15601820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
