---
pmid: '8741837'
title: TOR controls translation initiation and early G1 progression in yeast.
authors:
- Barbet NC
- Schneider U
- Helliwell SB
- Stansfield I
- Tuite MF
- Hall MN
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC278610
doi: 10.1091/mbc.7.1.25
---

# TOR controls translation initiation and early G1 progression in yeast.
**Authors:** Barbet NC, Schneider U, Helliwell SB, Stansfield I, Tuite MF, Hall MN
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.7.1.25](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.7.1.25)
**PMC:** [PMC278610](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC278610/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Cell. 1996 Jan;7(1):25-42. doi: 10.1091/mbc.7.1.25.

TOR controls translation initiation and early G1 progression in yeast.

Barbet NC(1), Schneider U, Helliwell SB, Stansfield I, Tuite MF, Hall MN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Basel, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Mol Biol Cell. 2012 Aug;23(16):3026. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E12-03-0189.

Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells treated with the immunosuppressant rapamycin or 
depleted for the targets of rapamycin TOR1 and TOR2 arrest growth in the early 
G1 phase of the cell cycle. Loss of TOR function also causes an early inhibition 
of translation initiation and induces several other physiological changes 
characteristic of starved cells entering stationary phase (G0). A G1 cyclin mRNA 
whose translational control is altered by substitution of the UBI4 5' leader 
region (UBI4 is normally translated under starvation conditions) suppresses the 
rapamycin-induced G1 arrest and confers starvation sensitivity. These results 
suggest that the block in translation initiation is a direct consequence of loss 
of TOR function and the cause of the G1 arrest. We propose that the TORs, two 
related phosphatidylinositol kinase homologues, are part of a novel signaling 
pathway that activates eIF-4E-dependent protein synthesis and, thereby, G1 
progression in response to nutrient availability. Such a pathway may constitute 
a checkpoint that prevents early G1 progression and growth in the absence of 
nutrients.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.7.1.25
PMCID: PMC278610
PMID: 8741837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
