---
pmid: '21454712'
title: Noxa/Bcl-2 protein interactions contribute to bortezomib resistance in human
  lymphoid cells.
authors:
- Smith AJ
- Dai H
- Correia C
- Takahashi R
- Lee SH
- Schmitz I
- Kaufmann SH
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3093844
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.189092
---

# Noxa/Bcl-2 protein interactions contribute to bortezomib resistance in human lymphoid cells.
**Authors:** Smith AJ, Dai H, Correia C, Takahashi R, Lee SH, Schmitz I, Kaufmann SH
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110.189092](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.189092)
**PMC:** [PMC3093844](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3093844/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2011 May 20;286(20):17682-92. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.189092. Epub 
2011 Mar 22.

Noxa/Bcl-2 protein interactions contribute to bortezomib resistance in human 
lymphoid cells.

Smith AJ(1), Dai H, Correia C, Takahashi R, Lee SH, Schmitz I, Kaufmann SH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 
55905, USA.

Previous studies have suggested that the BH3 domain of the proapoptotic Bcl-2 
family member Noxa only interacts with the anti-apoptotic proteins Mcl-1 and A1 
but not Bcl-2. In view of the similarity of the BH3 binding domains of these 
anti-apoptotic proteins as well as recent evidence that studies of isolated BH3 
domains can potentially underestimate the binding between full-length Bcl-2 
family members, we examined the interaction of full-length human Noxa with 
anti-apoptotic human Bcl-2 family members. Surface plasmon resonance using 
bacterially expressed proteins demonstrated that Noxa binds with mean 
dissociation constants (K(D)) of 3.4 nm for Mcl-1, 70 nm for Bcl-x(L), and 250 
nm for wild type human Bcl-2, demonstrating selectivity but not absolute 
specificity of Noxa for Mcl-1. Further analysis showed that the Noxa/Bcl-2 
interaction reflected binding between the Noxa BH3 domain and the Bcl-2 BH3 
binding groove. Analysis of proteins expressed in vivo demonstrated that Noxa 
and Bcl-2 can be pulled down together from a variety of cells. Moreover, when 
compared with wild type Bcl-2, certain lymphoma-derived Bcl-2 mutants bound Noxa 
up to 20-fold more tightly in vitro, pulled down more Noxa from cells, and 
protected cells against killing by transfected Noxa to a greater extent. When 
killing by bortezomib (an agent whose cytotoxicity in Jurkat T-cell leukemia 
cells is dependent on Noxa) was examined, apoptosis was enhanced by the 
Bcl-2/Bcl-x(L) antagonist ABT-737 or by Bcl-2 down-regulation and diminished by 
Bcl-2 overexpression. Collectively, these observations not only establish the 
ability of Noxa and Bcl-2 to interact but also identify Bcl-2 overexpression as 
a potential mechanism of bortezomib resistance.

© 2011 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.189092
PMCID: PMC3093844
PMID: 21454712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
