---
pmid: '8878479'
title: Increased amyloid-beta42(43) in brains of mice expressing mutant presenilin
  1.
authors:
- Duff K
- Eckman C
- Zehr C
- Yu X
- Prada CM
- Perez-tur J
- Hutton M
- Buee L
- Harigaya Y
- Yager D
- Morgan D
- Gordon MN
- Holcomb L
- Refolo L
- Zenk B
- Hardy J
- Younkin S
journal: Nature
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/383710a0
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Increased amyloid-beta42(43) in brains of mice expressing mutant presenilin 1.
**Authors:** Duff K, Eckman C, Zehr C, Yu X, Prada CM, Perez-tur J, Hutton M, Buee L, Harigaya Y, Yager D, Morgan D, Gordon MN, Holcomb L, Refolo L, Zenk B, Hardy J, Younkin S
**Journal:** Nature (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1038/383710a0](https://doi.org/10.1038/383710a0)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 1996 Oct 24;383(6602):710-3. doi: 10.1038/383710a0.

Increased amyloid-beta42(43) in brains of mice expressing mutant presenilin 1.

Duff K(1), Eckman C, Zehr C, Yu X, Prada CM, Perez-tur J, Hutton M, Buee L, 
Harigaya Y, Yager D, Morgan D, Gordon MN, Holcomb L, Refolo L, Zenk B, Hardy J, 
Younkin S.

Author information:
(1)Suncoast Alzheimer's Disease Laboratories, University of South Florida, 
Tampa, 33612, USA.

Mutations in the genes encoding amyloid-beta precursor protein (APP), presenilin 
1 (PS1) and presenilin 2 (PS2) are known to cause early-onset, autosomal 
dominant Alzheimer's disease. Studies of plasma and fibroblasts from subjects 
with these mutations have established that they all alter amyloid beta-protein 
(beta APP) processing, which normally leads to the secretion of amyloid-beta 
protein (relative molecular mass 4,000; M(r) 4K; approximately 90% A beta1-40, 
approximately 10% A beta1-42(43)), so that the extracellular concentration of A 
beta42(43) is increased. This increase in A beta42(43) is believed to be the 
critical change that initiates Alzheimer's disease pathogenesis because A 
beta42(43) is deposited early and selectively in the senile plaques that are 
observed in the brains of patients with all forms of the disease. To establish 
that the presenilin mutations increase the amount of A beta42(43) in the brain 
and to test whether presenilin mutations act as true (gain of function) 
dominants, we have now constructed mice expressing wild-type and mutant 
presenilin genes. Analysis of these mice showed that overexpression of mutant, 
but not wild-type, PS1 selectively increases brain A beta42(43). These results 
indicate that the presenilin mutations probably cause Alzheimer's disease 
through a gain of deleterious function that increases the amount of A beta42(43) 
in the brain.

DOI: 10.1038/383710a0
PMID: 8878479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
