---
pmid: '14980704'
title: Cyp1a2 protects against reactive oxygen production in mouse liver microsomes.
authors:
- Shertzer HG
- Clay CD
- Genter MB
- Schneider SN
- Nebert DW
- Dalton TP
journal: Free Radic Biol Med
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2003.11.013
---

# Cyp1a2 protects against reactive oxygen production in mouse liver microsomes.
**Authors:** Shertzer HG, Clay CD, Genter MB, Schneider SN, Nebert DW, Dalton TP
**Journal:** Free Radic Biol Med (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2003.11.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2003.11.013)

## Abstract

1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2004 Mar 1;36(5):605-17. doi: 
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2003.11.013.

Cyp1a2 protects against reactive oxygen production in mouse liver microsomes.

Shertzer HG(1), Clay CD, Genter MB, Schneider SN, Nebert DW, Dalton TP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Health and Center for Environmental Genetics, 
University of Cincinnati Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA. 
shertzhg@ucmail.uc.edu

H(2)O(2) production was evaluated in liver microsomes prepared from 
Cyp1a1/1a2(+/+) wild-type and Cyp1a1(-/-) and Cyp1a2(-/-) knockout mice 
pretreated with 5 microg dioxin (TCDD)/kg body wt or vehicle alone. 
NADPH-dependent H(2)O(2) production in TCDD-induced microsomes from wild-type 
mice was about one-third of that in noninduced microsomes. In Cyp1a2(-/-) mice, 
H(2)O(2) production was the same for induced and noninduced microsomes, with 
levels significantly higher than those in wild-type mice. Cyp1a1(-/-) microsomes 
displayed markedly lower levels of H(2)O(2) production in both induced and 
noninduced microsomes, compared with those in wild-type and Cyp1a2(-/-) 
microsomes. The CYP1A2 inhibitor furafylline in vitro exacerbated microsomal 
H(2)O(2) production proportional to the degree of CYP1A2 inhibition, and the 
CYP2E1 inhibitor diethyldithiocarbamate decreased H(2)O(2) production 
proportional to the degree of CYP2E1 inhibition. Microsomal H(2)O(2) production 
was strongly correlated to NADPH-stimulated production of thiobarbituric 
acid-reactive substances, as well as to decreases in microsomal membrane 
polarization anisotropy, indicative of peroxidation of unsaturated membrane 
lipids. Our results suggest that possibly acting as an "electron sink," CYP1A2 
might decrease CYP2E1-and CYP1A1-mediated H(2)O(2) production and oxidative 
stress. In this regard, CYP1A2 may be considered an antioxidant enzyme.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2003.11.013
PMID: 14980704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
