---
pmid: '9554852'
title: Functional interaction of an axin homolog, conductin, with beta-catenin, APC,
  and GSK3beta.
authors:
- Behrens J
- Jerchow BA
- Würtele M
- Grimm J
- Asbrand C
- Wirtz R
- Kühl M
- Wedlich D
- Birchmeier W
journal: Science
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.280.5363.596
---

# Functional interaction of an axin homolog, conductin, with beta-catenin, APC, and GSK3beta.
**Authors:** Behrens J, Jerchow BA, Würtele M, Grimm J, Asbrand C, Wirtz R, Kühl M, Wedlich D, Birchmeier W
**Journal:** Science (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.280.5363.596](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.280.5363.596)

## Abstract

1. Science. 1998 Apr 24;280(5363):596-9. doi: 10.1126/science.280.5363.596.

Functional interaction of an axin homolog, conductin, with beta-catenin, APC, 
and GSK3beta.

Behrens J(1), Jerchow BA, Würtele M, Grimm J, Asbrand C, Wirtz R, Kühl M, 
Wedlich D, Birchmeier W.

Author information:
(1)Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Robert-Rössle-Strasse 10, 13122 
Berlin, Germany.

Control of stability of beta-catenin is central in the wnt signaling pathway. 
Here, the protein conductin was found to form a complex with both beta-catenin 
and the tumor suppressor gene product adenomatous polyposis coli (APC). 
Conductin induced beta-catenin degradation, whereas mutants of conductin that 
were deficient in complex formation stabilized beta-catenin. Fragments of APC 
that contained a conductin-binding domain also blocked beta-catenin degradation. 
Thus, conductin is a component of the multiprotein complex that directs 
beta-catenin to degradation and is located downstream of APC. In Xenopus 
embryos, conductin interfered with wnt-induced axis formation.

DOI: 10.1126/science.280.5363.596
PMID: 9554852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
