---
reference_id: PMID:21308844
title: Protein disulfide isomerase isomerizes non-native disulfide bonds in human proinsulin independent of its peptide-binding activity.
authors:
- Winter J
- Gleiter S
- Klappa P
- Lilie H
journal: Protein Sci
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1002/pro.592
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Protein disulfide isomerase isomerizes non-native disulfide bonds in human proinsulin independent of its peptide-binding activity.
**Authors:** Winter J, Gleiter S, Klappa P, Lilie H
**Journal:** Protein Sci (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pro.592](https://doi.org/10.1002/pro.592)

## Content

1. Protein Sci. 2011 Mar;20(3):588-96. doi: 10.1002/pro.592.

Protein disulfide isomerase isomerizes non-native disulfide bonds in human
proinsulin independent of its peptide-binding activity.

Winter J(1), Gleiter S, Klappa P, Lilie H.

Author information:
(1)Center for Integrated Protein Science Munich at the Department Chemie,
Technische Universität München, 85747 Garching, Germany. jeannette.winter@tum.de

Protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) supports proinsulin folding as chaperone and
isomerase. Here, we focus on how the two PDI functions influence individual
steps in the complex folding process of proinsulin. We generated a PDI mutant
(PDI-aba'c) where the b' domain was partially deleted, thus abolishing peptide
binding but maintaining a PDI-like redox potential. PDI-aba'c catalyzes the
folding of human proinsulin by increasing the rate of formation and the final
yield of native proinsulin. Importantly, PDI-aba'c isomerizes non-native
disulfide bonds in completely oxidized folding intermediates, thereby
accelerating the formation of native disulfide bonds. We conclude that peptide
binding to PDI is not essential for disulfide isomerization in fully oxidized
proinsulin folding intermediates.

Copyright © 2011 The Protein Society.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.592
PMCID: PMC3064837
PMID: 21308844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]