---
pmid: '19640926'
title: LRRK2 regulates autophagic activity and localizes to specific membrane microdomains
  in a novel human genomic reporter cellular model.
authors:
- Alegre-Abarrategui J
- Christian H
- Lufino MM
- Mutihac R
- Venda LL
- Ansorge O
- Wade-Martins R
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2758136
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp346
---

# LRRK2 regulates autophagic activity and localizes to specific membrane microdomains in a novel human genomic reporter cellular model.
**Authors:** Alegre-Abarrategui J, Christian H, Lufino MM, Mutihac R, Venda LL, Ansorge O, Wade-Martins R
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddp346](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddp346)
**PMC:** [PMC2758136](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2758136/)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Nov 1;18(21):4022-34. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp346. Epub 2009
Jul  29.

LRRK2 regulates autophagic activity and localizes to specific membrane 
microdomains in a novel human genomic reporter cellular model.

Alegre-Abarrategui J(1), Christian H, Lufino MM, Mutihac R, Venda LL, Ansorge O, 
Wade-Martins R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford 
OX1 3QX, UK.

Leucine rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) mutations are the most common genetic cause 
of Parkinson's disease (PD) although LRRK2 function remains unclear. We report a 
new role for LRRK2 in regulating autophagy and describe the recruitment of LRRK2 
to the endosomal-autophagic pathway and specific membrane subdomains. Using a 
novel human genomic reporter cellular model, we found LRRK2 to locate to 
membrane microdomains such as the neck of caveolae, microvilli/filopodia and 
intraluminal vesicles of multivesicular bodies (MVBs). In human brain and in 
cultured human cells LRRK2 was present in cytoplasmic puncta corresponding to 
MVBs and autophagic vacuoles (AVs). Expression of the common R1441C mutation 
from a genomic DNA construct caused impaired autophagic balance evident by the 
accumulation of MVBs and large AVs containing incompletely degraded material and 
increased levels of p62. Furthermore, the R1441C mutation induced the formation 
of skein-like abnormal MVBs. Conversely, LRRK2 siRNA knockdown increased 
autophagic activity and prevented cell death caused by inhibition of autophagy 
in starvation conditions. The work necessitated developing a new, more efficient 
recombineering strategy, which we termed Sequential insertion of Target with 
ovErlapping Primers (STEP) to seamlessly fuse the green fluorescent 
protein-derivative YPet to the human LRRK2 protein in the LRRK2 genomic locus 
carried by a bacterial artificial chromosome. Taken together our data 
demonstrate the functional involvement of LRRK2 in the endosomal-autophagic 
pathway and the recruitment to specific membrane microdomains in a physiological 
human gene expression model suggesting a novel function for this important 
PD-related protein.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddp346
PMCID: PMC2758136
PMID: 19640926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
