---
reference_id: PMID:12004067
title: X-ray structure of a neuronal complexin-SNARE complex from squid.
authors:
- Bracher A
- Kadlec J
- Betz H
- Weissenhorn W
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M203460200
content_type: abstract_only
---

# X-ray structure of a neuronal complexin-SNARE complex from squid.
**Authors:** Bracher A, Kadlec J, Betz H, Weissenhorn W
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M203460200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M203460200)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 19;277(29):26517-23. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M203460200. Epub 
2002 May 9.

X-ray structure of a neuronal complexin-SNARE complex from squid.

Bracher A(1), Kadlec J, Betz H, Weissenhorn W.

Author information:
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 6 rue Jules Horowitz, 38042 Grenoble, 
France.

Nerve terminals release neurotransmitters from vesicles into the synaptic cleft 
upon transient increases in intracellular Ca(2+). This exocytotic process 
requires the formation of trans SNARE complexes and is regulated by accessory 
proteins including the complexins. Here we report the crystal structure of a 
squid core complexin-SNARE complex at 2.95-A resolution. A helical segment of 
complexin binds in anti-parallel fashion to the four-helix bundle of the core 
SNARE complex and interacts at its C terminus with syntaxin and synaptobrevin 
around the ionic zero layer of the SNARE complex. We propose that this structure 
is part of a multiprotein fusion machinery that regulates vesicle fusion at a 
late pre-fusion stage. Accordingly, Ca(2+) may initiate membrane fusion by 
acting directly or indirectly on complexin, thus allowing the conformational 
transitions of the trans SNARE complex that are thought to drive membrane 
fusion.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M203460200
PMID: 12004067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]