---
pmid: '17374725'
title: Missense mutation of the COQ2 gene causes defects of bioenergetics and de novo
  pyrimidine synthesis.
authors:
- López-Martín JM
- Salviati L
- Trevisson E
- Montini G
- DiMauro S
- Quinzii C
- Hirano M
- Rodriguez-Hernandez A
- Cordero MD
- Sánchez-Alcázar JA
- Santos-Ocaña C
- Navas P
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4345105
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddm058
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Missense mutation of the COQ2 gene causes defects of bioenergetics and de novo pyrimidine synthesis.
**Authors:** López-Martín JM, Salviati L, Trevisson E, Montini G, DiMauro S, Quinzii C, Hirano M, Rodriguez-Hernandez A, Cordero MD, Sánchez-Alcázar JA, Santos-Ocaña C, Navas P
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddm058](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddm058)
**PMC:** [PMC4345105](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4345105/)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 May 1;16(9):1091-7. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddm058. Epub 2007 Mar
 20.

Missense mutation of the COQ2 gene causes defects of bioenergetics and de novo 
pyrimidine synthesis.

López-Martín JM(1), Salviati L, Trevisson E, Montini G, DiMauro S, Quinzii C, 
Hirano M, Rodriguez-Hernandez A, Cordero MD, Sánchez-Alcázar JA, Santos-Ocaña C, 
Navas P.

Author information:
(1)Centro Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo, Universidad Pablo de Olavide-CSIC, 
41013 Sevilla, Spain.

Coenzyme Q(10) (CoQ(10)) deficiency has been associated with an increasing 
number of clinical phenotypes that respond to CoQ(10) supplementation. In two 
siblings with encephalomyopathy, nephropathy and severe CoQ(10) deficiency, a 
homozygous mutation was identified in the CoQ(10) biosynthesis gene COQ2, 
encoding polyprenyl-pHB transferase. To confirm the pathogenicity of this 
mutation, we have demonstrated that human wild-type, but not mutant COQ2, 
functionally complements COQ2 defective yeast. In addition, an equivalent 
mutation introduced in the yeast COQ2 gene also decreases both CoQ(6) 
concentration and growth in respiratory-chain dependent medium. Polyprenyl-pHB 
transferase activity was 33-45% of controls in COQ2 mutant fibroblasts. 
CoQ-dependent mitochondrial complexes activities were restored in deficient 
fibroblasts by CoQ(10) supplementation, and growth rate was restored in these 
cells by either CoQ(10) or uridine supplementation. This work is the first 
direct demonstration of the pathogenicity of a COQ2 mutation involved in human 
disease, and establishes yeast as a useful model to study human CoQ(10) 
deficiency. Moreover, we demonstrate that CoQ(10) deficiency in addition to the 
bioenergetics defect also impairs de novo pyrimidine synthesis, which may 
contribute to the pathogenesis of the disease.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddm058
PMCID: PMC4345105
PMID: 17374725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Coenzyme Q 10 (CoQ 10 ) deficiency has been associated with an increasing number of clinical phenotypes that respond to CoQ 10 supplementation. In two siblings with encephalomyopathy, nephropathy and severe CoQ 10 deficiency, a homozygous mutation was identified in the CoQ 10 biosynthesis gene COQ2 , encoding polyprenyl- pHB transferase. To confirm the pathogenicity of this mutation, we have demonstrated that human wild-type, but not mutant COQ2 , functionally complements COQ2 defective yeast. In addition, an equivalent mutation introduced in the yeast COQ2 gene also decreases both CoQ 6 concentration and growth in respiratory-chain dependent medium. Polyprenyl- pHB transferase activity was 33–45% of controls in COQ2 mutant fibroblasts. CoQ-dependent mitochondrial complexes activities were restored in deficient fibroblasts by CoQ 10 supplementation, and growth rate was restored in these cells by either CoQ 10 or uridine supplementation. This work is the first direct demonstration of the pathogenicity of a COQ2 mutation involved in human disease, and establishes yeast as a useful model to study human CoQ 10 deficiency. Moreover, we demonstrate that CoQ 10 deficiency in addition to the bioenergetics defect also impairs de novo pyrimidine synthesis, which may contribute to the pathogenesis of the disease.

INTRODUCTION

Coenzyme Q 10 (CoQ 10 ) is a vital molecule that transports electrons from mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes I and II to complex III ( 1 ). In addition, it functions as a cofactor for uncoupling proteins ( 2 ), as an antioxidant stabilizing plasma membrane and a regulator of the extracellularly-induced ceramide-dependent apoptotic pathway ( 1 , 3 ). CoQ 10 also enhances survival of chemotherapy-treated cells ( 4 ) and is required for the stabilization of complex III in mitochondria ( 5 ). At least nine nuclear gene ( COQ ) products are involved in the CoQ biosynthesis complex pathway in yeast, which have homologous genes in all the species currently studied ( 6 ). This pathway and its regulation are still incompletely understood ( 1 ). CoQ 10 deficiency (MIM 607426) has been associated with clinically heterogeneous diseases, which have been delineated into five major phenotypes: (i) an encephalomyopathic form ( 7 , 8 ), (ii) a predominantly ataxic form with cerebellar atrophy ( 9 , 10 ), (iii) a multisystem infantile variant with brain and renal disease ( 11 , 12 ), (iv) Leigh syndrome ( 13 ) and (v) isolated myopathy ( 14 , 15 ). It is anticipated that mutations in COQ genes or other components of the CoQ 10 biosynthetic pathway are likely to cause these diverse syndromes ( 1 ).

We have recently demonstrated that two siblings with CoQ 10 deficiency harbor a homozygous c.890 A>G mutation in the COQ2 gene (MIM 609825) ( 16 ), which encodes polyprenyl- p -hydroxybenzoate transferase ( 17 ). This mutation changes amino acid 297 from tyrosine into cysteine, in a conserved trans -membrane domain ( 16 ). To demonstrate pathogenicity of this mutation, we performed functional complementation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae using the BY4741Δ coq2 strain, which is unable to grow in nonfermentable carbon source. We have studied the role of CoQ 10 supplementation on both respiratory chain complexes I + III and II + III and growth in deficient fibroblasts. Also, we have shown the requirement of uridine for maintaining growth of deficient fibroblasts demonstrating the dependence of these cells on pyrimidine biosynthesis.

DISCUSSION

Despite the fact that CoQ 10 deficiency has been described more than 15 years ago, its genetic bases have remained elusive until this year, when mutations were identified in two genes involved in CoQ 10 biosynthesis, COQ2 and PDSS2 ( 16 , 22 ). The product of COQ2 catalyzes the transfer of para -hydroxybenzoate to the polyprenyl chain, one of the initial steps of CoQ biosynthesis. The aim of this work was to demonstrate the pathogenicity of the missense COQ2 mutation found in our patients using a functional complementation approach in S. cerevisiae , and to analyze its consequences on the mitochondrial electron transport chain and cell proliferation.

Human COQ2 contains four possible ATG codons on exon 1. The reported hCOQ2 sequence starts from ATG number 1. We observed complementation with constructs initiating from each of the first three ATG, but not with ATG number 4 possibly because the sequence between the third to fourth ATGs contains a critical signal for mitochondrial importation in yeast ( 18 ).

The highest complementation efficiency was achieved with constructs initiating at the third ATG, this sequence is the most similar to the yeast mitochondrial importation pre-sequence. However, analysis of COQ2 genes in other mammalian species such as dog and rat revealed that they contain only one possible ATG initiation codon, which corresponds to the human fourth ATG. We are currently investigating the functional significance of the four ATG codons in human cells.

Both the mutated human COQ2 gene and its yeast homolog engineered to harbor the corresponding mutation, failed to fully complement COQ2 deficient yeast strain. Nevertheless, complementation studies clearly indicate that mutated proteins still retain some enzymatic activity because yeast can grow on non-fermentable substrates and accumulate some amount of CoQ 6 , although at a significantly lower rate than the wild-type strains. Direct biochemical assays on patients P1 and P2 fibro-blasts confirm the presence of residual enzymatic activity, which correlates with the amount of Coq2p detected by western blot. The residual Coq2 function is probably essential for embryogenesis, and may explain why the patients did not present symptoms of the disease until 1 year of age. In both patients P1 and P2, COQ2 mRNA and Coq2 peptides are also hyper-expressed, suggesting that there is a feedback control mechanism regulating COQ2 expression in cells.

Interestingly, yeast cells transformed with the mutated genes show accumulation of DMQ, an intermediate of coenzyme Q biosynthesis that is synthesized by reactions downstream of Coq2p. This apparent paradox can be explained by the fact that enzymes that catalyze coenzyme Q biosynthesis in yeast are thought to function in a multienzyme complex ( 20 ). In this case, the mutation in Coq2 proteins not only impairs enzymatic function of Coq2p, but probably affects the whole complex, interfering also with some of the downstream enzymatic steps.

In a second set of experiments, we analyzed the effect of COQ2 deficiency in fibroblasts. We have previously shown that a CoQ 10 analogue, decyl-ubiquinone, can rescue the complex II + III enzymatic defect in vitro ( 12 ). We have now checked the effect of ubiquinone supplementation in vivo on cell proliferation and mitochondrial complexes activities. Supplementation of human cells with different isoforms of CoQ shows that a small amount can reach inner mitochondrial membrane ( 23 ). Using this approach, we have shown that long-term incubation of deficient fibroblasts with CoQ 10 increases significantly the activity of both complexes I + III and II + III. These results support the cause of mitochondrial dysfunction on the deficiency, and would explain the positive results observed after the treatment of deficient patients with CoQ 10 ( 10 , 12 ).

We then analyzed if we could modulate the growth deficient phenotype in these cells. Surprisingly, the effect of uridine addition was even more pronounced than that of CoQ 10 suggesting that this phenotype is largely due to an insufficient supply of nucleotides rather than to an impairment of ATP production. We believe that the relative lower efficiency of CoQ 10 in rescuing the defect in proliferation is probably due to a low efficiency of its incorporation in cells ( 1 , 23 ).

Taken together, our results demonstrate the pathogenicity of the COQ2 mutation and that yeast is an optimal model to study the effects of mutations in COQ genes, because it is sensitive enough to unveil defects due to missense mutations. The high homology of yeast and human COQ genes may allow complementation studies to identify other human genes involved in CoQ 10 deficiency. Moreover, we demonstrate that the pathogenesis of CoQ 10 deficiency is related not only to a defect in bioenergetics, but also to an impairment of pyrimidine metabolism.
