---
pmid: '25484098'
title: PHF23 (plant homeodomain finger protein 23) negatively regulates cell autophagy
  by promoting ubiquitination and degradation of E3 ligase LRSAM1.
authors:
- Wang Z
- Hu J
- Li G
- Qu L
- He Q
- Lou Y
- Song Q
- Ma D
- Chen Y
journal: Autophagy
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4502667
doi: 10.4161/auto.36439
---

# PHF23 (plant homeodomain finger protein 23) negatively regulates cell autophagy by promoting ubiquitination and degradation of E3 ligase LRSAM1.
**Authors:** Wang Z, Hu J, Li G, Qu L, He Q, Lou Y, Song Q, Ma D, Chen Y
**Journal:** Autophagy (2014)
**DOI:** [10.4161/auto.36439](https://doi.org/10.4161/auto.36439)
**PMC:** [PMC4502667](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4502667/)

## Abstract

1. Autophagy. 2014;10(12):2158-70. doi: 10.4161/auto.36439.

PHF23 (plant homeodomain finger protein 23) negatively regulates cell autophagy 
by promoting ubiquitination and degradation of E3 ligase LRSAM1.

Wang Z(1), Hu J, Li G, Qu L, He Q, Lou Y, Song Q, Ma D, Chen Y.

Author information:
(1)a Key Laboratory of Medical Immunology; Ministry of Health ; Peking 
University Health Science Center ; Beijing , China.

Autophagy is a multistep process that involves the degradation and digestion of 
intracellular components by the lysosome. It has been proved that many core 
autophagy-related molecules participate in this event. However, new component 
proteins that regulate autophagy are still being discovered. At present, we 
report PHF23 (PHD finger protein 23) with a PHD-like zinc finger domain that can 
negatively regulate autophagy. Data from experiments indicated that the 
overexpression of PHF23 impaired autophagy, as characterized by decreased levels 
of LC3B-II and weakened degradation of endogenous and exogenous autophagic 
substrates. Conversely, knockdown of PHF23 resulted in opposite effects. 
Molecular mechanism studies suggested that PHF23 interacts with LRSAM1, which is 
an E3 ligase key for ubiquitin-dependent autophagy against invading bacteria. 
PHF23 promotes the ubiquitination and proteasome degradation of LRSAM1. We also 
show that the PHD finger of PHF23 is a functional domain needed for the 
interaction with LRSAM1. Altogether, our results indicate that PHF23 is a 
negative regulator associated in autophagy via the LRSAM1 signaling pathway. The 
physical and functional connection between the PHF23 and LRSAM1 needs further 
investigation.

DOI: 10.4161/auto.36439
PMCID: PMC4502667
PMID: 25484098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
