---
pmid: '9602068'
title: Characterisation of the mouse homologue of CD151 (PETA-3/SFA-1); genomic structure,
  chromosomal localisation and identification of 2 novel splice forms.
authors:
- Fitter S
- Seldin MF
- Ashman LK
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0167-4781(98)00034-7
---

# Characterisation of the mouse homologue of CD151 (PETA-3/SFA-1); genomic structure, chromosomal localisation and identification of 2 novel splice forms.
**Authors:** Fitter S, Seldin MF, Ashman LK
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0167-4781(98)00034-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0167-4781(98)00034-7)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998 May 29;1398(1):75-85. doi: 
10.1016/s0167-4781(98)00034-7.

Characterisation of the mouse homologue of CD151 (PETA-3/SFA-1); genomic 
structure, chromosomal localisation and identification of 2 novel splice forms.

Fitter S(1), Seldin MF, Ashman LK.

Author information:
(1)The Hanson Centre for Cancer Research, Institute of Medical and Veterinary 
Science, Post Office Box 14, Rundle Mall, Adelaide, South Australia 5000, 
Australia. stephen.fitter@imvs.sa.gov.au

CD151 (PETA-3/SFA-1) is a member of the Transmembrane 4 Superfamily (TM4SF) of 
cell-surface proteins and, like other TM4SF members CD9 and CD63, is expressed 
by platelets, megakaryocytes and endothelial cells. The precise function of 
CD151 is unknown however complexes containing CD151 and beta1 integrins have 
been isolated from a number of cell systems and studies using anti-CD151 
monoclonal antibodies have suggested a role in transmembrane signalling and cell 
adhesion. To further investigate the function of CD151 we have determined the 
genomic organisation of mouse CD151 (Cd151). Cd151 spans 4 kb and contains six 
coding region exons. Using 5' RACE and reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain 
reaction (RT-PCR) we have identified three 5' UTR splice variants which arise 
through alternate splicing of three exons. Splice variants were detected in a 
number of mouse tissues by RT-PCR. Analysis of the Cd151 genomic structure 
reveals a high degree of structural conservation with other TM4SF molecules 
supporting the theory that family members have arisen from gene duplication of a 
common ancestral gene. Cd151 maps to chromosome 7, in close linkage to the p 
gene (OCA2 in humans), and helps define a boundary in the human/mouse homology 
relationships.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/s0167-4781(98)00034-7
PMID: 9602068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
