---
pmid: '11955429'
title: RIN4 interacts with Pseudomonas syringae type III effector molecules and is
  required for RPM1-mediated resistance in Arabidopsis.
authors:
- Mackey D
- Holt BF 3rd
- Wiig A
- Dangl JL
journal: Cell
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(02)00661-x
---

# RIN4 interacts with Pseudomonas syringae type III effector molecules and is required for RPM1-mediated resistance in Arabidopsis.
**Authors:** Mackey D, Holt BF 3rd, Wiig A, Dangl JL
**Journal:** Cell (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(02)00661-x](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(02)00661-x)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2002 Mar 22;108(6):743-54. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(02)00661-x.

RIN4 interacts with Pseudomonas syringae type III effector molecules and is 
required for RPM1-mediated resistance in Arabidopsis.

Mackey D(1), Holt BF 3rd, Wiig A, Dangl JL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, 
USA.

In Arabidopsis, RPM1 confers resistance against Pseudomonas syringae expressing 
either of two sequence unrelated type III effectors, AvrRpm1 or AvrB. An 
RPM1-interacting protein (RIN4) coimmunoprecipitates from plant cell extracts 
with AvrB, AvrRpm1, or RPM1. Reduction of RIN4 protein levels inhibits both the 
hypersensitive response and the restriction of pathogen growth controlled by 
RPM1. RIN4 reduction causes diminution of RPM1. RIN4 reduction results in 
heightened resistance to virulent Peronospora parasitica and P. syringae, and 
ectopic defense gene expression. Thus, RIN4 positively regulates RPM1-mediated 
resistance yet is, formally, a negative regulator of basal defense responses. 
AvrRpm1 and AvrB induce RIN4 phosphorylation. This may enhance RIN4 activity as 
a negative regulator of plant defense, facilitating pathogen growth. RPM1 may 
"guard" against pathogens that use AvrRpm1 and AvrB to manipulate RIN4 activity.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(02)00661-x
PMID: 11955429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
