---
pmid: '35202461'
title: Bi-allelic variants in CHKA cause a neurodevelopmental disorder with epilepsy
  and microcephaly.
authors:
- Klöckner C
- Fernández-Murray JP
- Tavasoli M
- Sticht H
- Stoltenburg-Didinger G
- Scholle LM
- Bakhtiari S
- Kruer MC
- Darvish H
- Firouzabadi SG
- Pagnozzi A
- Shukla A
- Girisha KM
- Narayanan DL
- Kaur P
- Maroofian R
- Zaki MS
- Noureldeen MM
- Merkenschlager A
- Gburek-Augustat J
- Cali E
- Banu S
- Nahar K
- Efthymiou S
- Houlden H
- Jamra RA
- Williams J
- McMaster CR
- Platzer K
journal: Brain
year: '2022'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC9630884
doi: 10.1093/brain/awac074
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Bi-allelic variants in CHKA cause a neurodevelopmental disorder with epilepsy and microcephaly.
**Authors:** Klöckner C, Fernández-Murray JP, Tavasoli M, Sticht H, Stoltenburg-Didinger G, Scholle LM, Bakhtiari S, Kruer MC, Darvish H, Firouzabadi SG, Pagnozzi A, Shukla A, Girisha KM, Narayanan DL, Kaur P, Maroofian R, Zaki MS, Noureldeen MM, Merkenschlager A, Gburek-Augustat J, Cali E, Banu S, Nahar K, Efthymiou S, Houlden H, Jamra RA, Williams J, McMaster CR, Platzer K
**Journal:** Brain (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awac074](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awac074)
**PMC:** [PMC9630884](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9630884/)

## Abstract

1. Brain. 2022 Jun 30;145(6):1916-1923. doi: 10.1093/brain/awac074.

Bi-allelic variants in CHKA cause a neurodevelopmental disorder with epilepsy 
and microcephaly.

Klöckner C(1), Fernández-Murray JP(2), Tavasoli M(2), Sticht H(3), 
Stoltenburg-Didinger G(4), Scholle LM(5), Bakhtiari S(6)(7), Kruer MC(6)(7), 
Darvish H(8), Firouzabadi SG(9), Pagnozzi A(10), Shukla A(11), Girisha KM(11), 
Narayanan DL(11), Kaur P(11), Maroofian R(12), Zaki MS(13), Noureldeen MM(14), 
Merkenschlager A(15), Gburek-Augustat J(15), Cali E(16), Banu S(16), Nahar 
K(16), Efthymiou S(12), Houlden H(12), Jamra RA(1), Williams J(2), McMaster 
CR(2), Platzer K(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Leipzig Medical Center, 04103 
Leipzig, Germany.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia B3N 
0A1, Canada.
(3)Institute of Biochemistry, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, 
91058 Erlangen, Germany.
(4)Institute of Cell Biology and Neurobiology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, 10117 Berlin, Germany.
(5)Department of Neurology, University of Halle/S., 06120 Halle, Germany.
(6)Pediatric Movement Disorders Program, Division of Pediatric Neurology, Barrow 
Neurological Institute, Phoenix Children's Hospital, Phoenix, Arizona 85004, 
USA.
(7)Departments of Child Health, Neurology, Cellular & Molecular Medicine and 
Program in Genetics, University of Arizona College of Medicine, Phoenix, Arizona 
85004, USA.
(8)Neuroscience Research Center, Faculty of Medicine, Golestan University of 
Medical Sciences, Gorgan, Iran.
(9)Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(10)CSIRO Health and Biosecurity, The Australian e-Health Research Centre, 
Brisbane, QLD 4029, Australia.
(11)Department of Medical Genetics, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal Academy of 
Higher Education, Manipal 576104, India.
(12)Department of Neuromuscular Disorders, UCL Queen Square Institute of 
Neurology, London WC1N 3BG, UK.
(13)Clinical Genetics Department, Human Genetics and Genome Research Division, 
National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt.
(14)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Beni-Suef University, 
Beni-Suef, Egypt.
(15)Division of Neuropaediatrics, Hospital for Children and Adolescents, 
University Hospital Leipzig, 04103 Leipzig, Germany.
(16)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Dr. M.R. Khan Shishu (Children) Hospital 
and ICH, Mirpur, Dhaka, Bangladesh.

The Kennedy pathways catalyse the de novo synthesis of phosphatidylcholine and 
phosphatidylethanolamine, the most abundant components of eukaryotic cell 
membranes. In recent years, these pathways have moved into clinical focus 
because four of ten genes involved have been associated with a range of 
autosomal recessive rare diseases such as a neurodevelopmental disorder with 
muscular dystrophy (CHKB), bone abnormalities and cone-rod dystrophy (PCYT1A) 
and spastic paraplegia (PCYT2, SELENOI). We identified six individuals from five 
families with bi-allelic variants in CHKA presenting with severe global 
developmental delay, epilepsy, movement disorders and microcephaly. Using 
structural molecular modelling and functional testing of the variants in a 
cell-based Saccharomyces cerevisiae model, we determined that these variants 
reduce the enzymatic activity of CHKA and confer a significant impairment of the 
first enzymatic step of the Kennedy pathway. In summary, we present CHKA as a 
novel autosomal recessive gene for a neurodevelopmental disorder with epilepsy 
and microcephaly.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awac074
PMCID: PMC9630884
PMID: 35202461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
