---
pmid: '22713602'
title: MUT-16 promotes formation of perinuclear mutator foci required for RNA silencing
  in the C. elegans germline.
authors:
- Phillips CM
- Montgomery TA
- Breen PC
- Ruvkun G
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3403012
doi: 10.1101/gad.193904.112
---

# MUT-16 promotes formation of perinuclear mutator foci required for RNA silencing in the C. elegans germline.
**Authors:** Phillips CM, Montgomery TA, Breen PC, Ruvkun G
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.193904.112](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.193904.112)
**PMC:** [PMC3403012](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3403012/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2012 Jul 1;26(13):1433-44. doi: 10.1101/gad.193904.112. Epub 2012
Jun  19.

MUT-16 promotes formation of perinuclear mutator foci required for RNA silencing 
in the C. elegans germline.

Phillips CM(1), Montgomery TA, Breen PC, Ruvkun G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02114, USA.

RNA silencing can be initiated by endogenous or exogenously delivered siRNAs. In 
Caenorhabditis elegans, RNA silencing guided by primary siRNAs is inefficient 
and therefore requires an siRNA amplification step involving RNA-dependent RNA 
polymerases (RdRPs). Many factors involved in RNA silencing localize to protein- 
and RNA-rich nuclear pore-associated P granules in the germline, where they are 
thought to surveil mRNAs as they exit the nucleus. Mutator class genes are 
required for siRNA-mediated RNA silencing in both germline and somatic cells, 
but their specific roles and relationship to other siRNA factors are unclear. 
Here we show that each of the six mutator proteins localizes to punctate foci at 
the periphery of germline nuclei. The Mutator foci are adjacent to P granules 
but are not dependent on core P-granule components or other RNAi pathway factors 
for their formation or stability. The glutamine/asparagine (Q/N)-rich protein 
MUT-16 is specifically required for the formation of a protein complex 
containing the mutator proteins, and in its absence, Mutator foci fail to form 
at the nuclear periphery. The RdRP RRF-1 colocalizes with MUT-16 at Mutator 
foci, suggesting a role for Mutator foci in siRNA amplification. Furthermore, we 
demonstrate that genes that yield high levels of siRNAs, indicative of multiple 
rounds of siRNA amplification, are disproportionally affected in mut-16 mutants 
compared with genes that yield low levels of siRNAs. We propose that the mutator 
proteins and RRF-1 constitute an RNA processing compartment required for siRNA 
amplification and RNA silencing.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.193904.112
PMCID: PMC3403012
PMID: 22713602 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
