---
pmid: '21873652'
title: 'Human 1-acylglycerol-3-phosphate O-acyltransferase isoforms 1 and 2: biochemical
  characterization and inability to rescue hepatic steatosis in Agpat2(-/-) gene lipodystrophic
  mice.'
authors:
- Agarwal AK
- Sukumaran S
- Cortés VA
- Tunison K
- Mizrachi D
- Sankella S
- Gerard RD
- Horton JD
- Garg A
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3199511
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.250449
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Human 1-acylglycerol-3-phosphate O-acyltransferase isoforms 1 and 2: biochemical characterization and inability to rescue hepatic steatosis in Agpat2(-/-) gene lipodystrophic mice.
**Authors:** Agarwal AK, Sukumaran S, Cortés VA, Tunison K, Mizrachi D, Sankella S, Gerard RD, Horton JD, Garg A
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M111.250449](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M111.250449)
**PMC:** [PMC3199511](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3199511/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Oct 28;286(43):37676-91. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.250449. Epub 
2011 Aug 27.

Human 1-acylglycerol-3-phosphate O-acyltransferase isoforms 1 and 2: biochemical 
characterization and inability to rescue hepatic steatosis in Agpat2(-/-) gene 
lipodystrophic mice.

Agarwal AK(1), Sukumaran S, Cortés VA, Tunison K, Mizrachi D, Sankella S, Gerard 
RD, Horton JD, Garg A.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nutrition and Metabolic Diseases, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA. 
Anil.Agarwal@UTSouthwestern.edu

Loss-of-function mutations in 1-acylglycerol-3-phosphate O-acyltransferase 
(AGPAT) 2 in humans and mice result in loss of both the white and brown adipose 
tissues from birth. AGPAT2 generates precursors for the synthesis of 
glycerophospholipids and triacylglycerols. Loss of adipose tissue, or 
lipodystrophy, results in hyperinsulinemia, diabetes mellitus, and severe 
hepatic steatosis. Here, we analyzed biochemical properties of human AGPAT2 and 
its close homolog, AGPAT1, and we studied their role in liver by transducing 
their expression via recombinant adenoviruses in Agpat2(-/-) mice. The in vitro 
substrate specificities of AGPAT1 and AGPAT2 are quite similar for 
lysophosphatidic acid and acyl-CoA. Protein homology modeling of both the AGPATs 
with glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase 1 (GPAT1) revealed that they have 
similar tertiary protein structure, which is consistent with their similar 
substrate specificities. When co-expressed, both isoforms co-localize to the 
endoplasmic reticulum. Despite such similarities, restoring AGPAT activity in 
liver by overexpression of either AGPAT1 or AGPAT2 in Agpat2(-/-) mice failed to 
ameliorate the hepatic steatosis. From these studies, we suggest that the role 
of AGPAT1 or AGPAT2 in liver lipogenesis is minimal and that accumulation of 
liver fat is primarily a consequence of insulin resistance and loss of adipose 
tissue in Agpat2(-/-) mice.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.250449
PMCID: PMC3199511
PMID: 21873652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
