---
pmid: '12869556'
title: Human homologues of LAG1 reconstitute Acyl-CoA-dependent ceramide synthesis
  in yeast.
authors:
- Guillas I
- Jiang JC
- Vionnet C
- Roubaty C
- Uldry D
- Chuard R
- Wang J
- Jazwinski SM
- Conzelmann A
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M307554200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Human homologues of LAG1 reconstitute Acyl-CoA-dependent ceramide synthesis in yeast.
**Authors:** Guillas I, Jiang JC, Vionnet C, Roubaty C, Uldry D, Chuard R, Wang J, Jazwinski SM, Conzelmann A
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M307554200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M307554200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Sep 26;278(39):37083-91. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M307554200. Epub 
2003 Jul 17.

Human homologues of LAG1 reconstitute Acyl-CoA-dependent ceramide synthesis in 
yeast.

Guillas I(1), Jiang JC, Vionnet C, Roubaty C, Uldry D, Chuard R, Wang J, 
Jazwinski SM, Conzelmann A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Fribourg, CH-1700 Fribourg, 
Switzerland.

Lag1p and Lac1p are two highly homologous membrane proteins of the endoplasmic 
reticulum. lag1delta lac1delta double mutants in Saccharomyces cerevisiae lack 
an acyl-CoA-dependent ceramide synthase and are either very sick or nonviable, 
depending on the genetic background. LAG1 and LAC1 are members of a large 
eukaryotic gene family that shares the Lag1 motif, and some members of this 
family additionally contain a DNA-binding HOX homeodomain. Here we show that 
several human LAG1 homologues can rescue the viability of lag1delta lac1delta 
yeast cells and restore acyl-CoA-dependent ceramide and sphingolipid 
biosynthesis. When tested in a microsomal assay, Lac1p and Lag1p had a strong 
preference for C26:0-CoA over C24:0-CoA, C20-CoA, and C16-CoA, whereas some 
human homologues preferred C24:0-CoA and CoA derivatives with shorter fatty 
acids. This suggests that LAG1 proteins are related to substrate recognition and 
to the catalytic activity of ceramide synthase enzymes. CLN8, another human LAG1 
homologue implicated in ceroid lipofuscinosis, could not restore viability to 
lag1delta lac1delta yeast mutants.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M307554200
PMID: 12869556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
