---
pmid: '34462738'
title: Multiple Roles of SARS-CoV-2 N Protein Facilitated by Proteoform-Specific Interactions
  with RNA, Host Proteins, and Convalescent Antibodies.
authors:
- Lutomski CA
- El-Baba TJ
- Bolla JR
- Robinson CV
journal: JACS Au
year: '2021'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: xml
pmcid: PMC8231660
doi: 10.1021/jacsau.1c00139
---

# Multiple Roles of SARS-CoV-2 N Protein Facilitated by Proteoform-Specific Interactions with RNA, Host Proteins, and Convalescent Antibodies.
**Authors:** Lutomski CA, El-Baba TJ, Bolla JR, Robinson CV
**Journal:** JACS Au (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1021/jacsau.1c00139](https://doi.org/10.1021/jacsau.1c00139)
**PMC:** [PMC8231660](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8231660/)

## Abstract

1. JACS Au. 2021 Jun 15;1(8):1147-1157. doi: 10.1021/jacsau.1c00139. eCollection 
2021 Aug 23.

Multiple Roles of SARS-CoV-2 N Protein Facilitated by Proteoform-Specific 
Interactions with RNA, Host Proteins, and Convalescent Antibodies.

Lutomski CA(1), El-Baba TJ(1), Bolla JR(1), Robinson CV(1).

Author information:
(1)Physical and Theoretical Chemistry Laboratory, University of Oxford, South 
Parks Road, OX13QZ Oxford, U.K.

The SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid (N) protein is a highly immunogenic viral protein 
that plays essential roles in replication and virion assembly. Here, using 
native mass spectrometry, we show that dimers are the functional unit of 
ribonucleoprotein assembly and that N protein binds RNA with a preference for 
GGG motifs, a common motif in coronavirus packaging signals. Unexpectedly, 
proteolytic processing of N protein resulted in the formation of additional 
proteoforms. The N-terminal proteoforms bind RNA, with the same preference for 
GGG motifs, and bind to cyclophilin A, an interaction which can be abolished by 
approved immunosuppressant cyclosporin A. Furthermore, N proteoforms showed 
significantly different interactions with IgM, IgG, and IgA antibodies from 
convalescent plasma. Notably, the C-terminal proteoform exhibited a heightened 
interaction with convalescent antibodies, suggesting the antigenic epitope is 
localized to the C-terminus. Overall, the different interactions of N 
proteoforms highlight potential avenues for therapeutic intervention and 
identify a stable and immunogenic proteoform as a possible candidate for 
immune-directed therapies.

© 2021 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/jacsau.1c00139
PMCID: PMC8231660
PMID: 34462738

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.

## Full Text

Severe acute
respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is the etiological agent of coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19), which reached pandemic status in fewer than
3 months following its discovery. As of March 2021, there were >100
million infected and more than 2.5 million deaths.1 SARS-CoV-2 packages a large RNA genome of ∼30 kb,
which encodes for 25 nonstructural and 4 structural proteins (spike,
nucleocapsid, membrane, and envelope proteins). The structural and
genetic makeup of SARS-CoV-2 is highly homologous to SARS-CoV, the
virus responsible for the 2002 SARS pandemic.2 Despite striking similarities between SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2, the
unique biological and molecular features that have contributed to
increased infectivity of SARS-CoV-2 are not well-understood.

Much attention has focused on the spike glycoprotein trimer, as
it is the largest structural protein that plays a critical role in
virus attachment to host cells.3 The nucleocapsid
(N) protein, on the other hand, is one of the most abundant viral
proteins; hundreds of copies of N make up the viral core that encapsulates
the genomic RNA. N protein consists of two structured domains separated
by a long flexible linker, giving rise to a high degree of conformational
freedom. The separated domains allow the N protein to carry out many
functions in the viral lifecycle such as RNA replication/transcription,
virion assembly, and immune system interference.4 Interestingly, the nucleocapsid and spike proteins are
the main immunogens in COVID-19 patients.5 Quantitative measurements of plasma or serum from SARS-CoV-2 patients
found that the adaptive immune response to the N protein is more sensitive
than to the spike protein, making it a better indicator of early disease.6 Antibodies against N protein are sensitive targets
for COVID-19 diagnostics; however, the modes of action of anti-N antibodies
in immunity and viral clearance are not well-understood.7

Efforts to elucidate the structure of N
protein aim to understand
how the individual domains interact with RNA and other proteins.8,9 However, N protein is highly sensitive to proteolysis10 due to the intrinsically disordered linker region,
and therefore, the structure of the full-length nucleocapsid protein
remains elusive.11 Proteolysis is a key
strategy in viral proliferation12 and often
begets a change in protein function. Understanding the unique biological
features of SARS-CoV-2, and the ability to target specific viral processes,
relies on an understanding of the sequence of interactions between
viral and host proteins, inclusive of viral proteoforms.

Here,
we present a comprehensive analysis of the SARS-CoV-2 N protein
using native mass spectrometry (MS), top-down fragmentation, and bottom-up
sequencing. We find that the full-length N protein undergoes proteolysis
at highly specific sites to generate at least five unique proteoforms.
We identify various stoichiometries of the proteoforms that are influenced
by pH and evaluate the propensity for N proteoforms to bind different
RNA sequences. We find that only the dimeric form of full-length N
binds to RNA, suggesting it is the functional unit of ribonucleoprotein
assembly. In addition, we show that an N-terminal proteoform directly
interacts with cyclophilin A, a highly abundant cytosolic host protein
implicated in viral replication. Moreover, cyclosporin A, an immunosuppressive
drug, abolishes the interaction between N and cyclophilin A. Finally,
using convalescent plasma from patients >6 months from initial
COVID-19
diagnosis, we found that N proteoforms produced significantly different
responses to IgM, IgG, and IgA antibodies. Notably, the C-terminal
proteoform exhibited a heightened interaction with convalescent antibodies,
suggesting the antigenic epitope is localized to the C-terminus. Our
results contribute proteoform-specific information that may guide
some of the many therapies against COVID-19 that are under investigation.

Results
and DiscussionN Protein Undergoes Proteolysis in the Vicinity
of the Linker
RegionNucleocapsid proteins of coronaviruses share similar
topological organization13 and show high
sequence homology among related coronaviruses.14 The N protein is characterized by two major structural
domains, the RNA binding and oligomerization domains. Similar to other
coronavirus nucleocapsid proteins, the two domains are separated by
a long and flexible linker region thought to be devoid of secondary
structure.8 An N-terminal arm and a C-terminal
tail flank the RNA binding and oligomerization domains, respectively.
We constructed plasmids consisting of the full-length nucleocapsid
protein with a cleavable N-terminal purification tag and expressed
the constructs in both Escherichia coli and human
embryonic kidney (HEK) 293T cells.For the Escherichia
coli construct, we purified the protein and verified the
cleavage of the affinity tag via SDS-PAGE (Figure S1). Before removal of the purification tag, three distinct
protein bands were detected at ∼49, ∼38, and ∼28
kDa. Following removal of the tag, all three protein bands migrated
by ∼3 kDa less, or the mass of the tag (Figure S1B). We confirmed that each band corresponded to N
protein by in-gel trypsin digestion followed by LC–MS-based
bottom-up proteomics. All three bands contained peptides from the
N protein, resulting in 78.1, 49.9, and 43.2% sequence coverage for
bands 1, 2, and 3, respectively. To determine the representation of
protein domains in each gel band, we plotted the distribution of the
peptides detected across the five protein domains (Figure S1C). As anticipated, we observe an unbiased distribution
of peptides across all five domains for band 1, consistent with the
expectation that tryptic peptides would be reasonably distributed
across the full-length protein. Over 50% of the total peptides detected
in bands 2 and 3 were localized to the RNA binding domain, suggesting
that the proteins are predominantly N-terminal derivatives. However,
in all three bands, peptides located in the 58-residue C-terminal
domain were detected, indicating the purified protein is made up of
a diverse mixture of N proteoforms15 and
not biased to N-terminal species due to the location of the purification
tag.We recorded a native mass spectrum to identify the stoichiometry
of N protein from E. coli (Figure 1A) and observed two main charge state envelopes
centered at 13+ and 20+. Deconvolution of the m/z signals provided experimental masses of 45 769
± 1 and 91 537 ± 2 Da, respectively, which are in
excellent agreement with the theoretical monomeric (45 769.83
Da) and dimeric (91 539.66 Da) masses of full-length N protein.
A second distribution of monomers and dimers was observed and found
to have deconvoluted masses of 28 735 ± 2 and 57 534
± 1 Da, respectively.Figure 1SARS-CoV-2 N protein exists as an ensemble of
proteoforms. (A)
Scheme depicting the full-length construct for expression in E. coli and native mass spectrum of the full-length N protein.
Four charge state distributions correspond to monomers and dimers
of full-length N protein (red circle, MW 45 769 Da) and a proteoform
of N protein (blue circle, MW 28 735 Da). (B) Mass spectrum
of N protein after several days at room temperature reveals the coexistence
of five distinct charge state distributions corresponding to N proteoforms.
The chemical composition of each proteoform was determined using top-down
MS (C,D). (C) Charge-reduced mass spectrum resulting from electron-transfer
dissociation (ETD) of the selected 9+ charge state at m/z 2616.79. (D) Mass spectrum of sequence ions for
the same parent ion generated by higher-energy collision induced dissociation
(HCD). (E) Scheme representing the composition of protein domains
for the observed proteoforms as determined by top-down MS. Five distinct
proteoforms are observed: N1–209, N1–220, N1–273, N156–419, and N1–392. The exact site of cleavage, including the five
residues flanking either side of each cleavage site, is indicated
below each construct.Additional N proteoforms
were observed immediately upon protein
purification and continued to develop further over time (Figure S2). The mass spectrum evolved to reveal
a series of peaks corresponding to five unique protein distributions
(Figure 1B). The high
baseline in this mass spectrum suggests the presence of additional
proteolytic products; however, their low signal-to-noise precludes
their characterization. Furthermore, it is likely that C-terminal
proteoforms, containing the oligomerization domain, participate in
the formation of higher-order oligomers that become insoluble and
are therefore not detected at later time points. We instead sought
to characterize the most stable and prominent proteoforms.To
determine the identity of each proteoform, we adapted a two-tiered
tandem mass spectrometry approach16 to
determine the intact mass and amino acid sequence for each series
of peaks in the mixture. An individual peak in the mass spectrum was
first isolated and subjected to charge reduction via electron-transfer
dissociation (ETD) under conditions that do not result in the formation
of fragments but instead produce a series of charge-reduced peaks
(Figure 1C). The charge-reduced
spectrum was necessary to confirm the assignment of the charge state
series for each proteoform. The assigned charge states were then used
to obtain deconvoluted masses of each proteoform present in solution
(Table 1).Table 1Deconvoluted and Sequence Masses of
NFL and N Proteoformsproteindeconvoluted
massa ±
s.d. (Da)sequence mass (Da)NFL45 769 ± 245 769.83NFL dimer91 537 ± 291 539.66N156–41928 735 ± 228 696.12N156–419 dimer57 534 ± 157 392.24N1–20922 611 ± 122 612.71N1–22023 540 ± 0.323 541.73N1–27329 402 ± 0.629 382.43N1–39242 922 ± 142 918.74aDetermined using at least three
adjacent charge states.We tentatively assigned the proteoforms based on their intact masses
and then generated sequence ions to confirm our assignment. Individual
proteoforms were subjected to fragmentation by higher-energy collision
induced dissociation (HCD), which accelerates the isolated ions into
an inert gas to induce fragmentation along the amide backbone. The
fragmentation products were then used to determine the molecular composition
and to localize the exact site of cleavage. The HCD spectrum results
in a series of singly, doubly, and triply charged sequence ions exemplified
by the fragmentation of the 9+ charge state at m/z 2616.79 (Figure 1D). Fragmentation of intact proteins under native conditions
is expected to yield 3–10% sequence coverage at the termini,17 and the propensity for fragmentation differs
depending on several criteria (e.g., mass, charge, composition, structure)
for natively folded proteins.18 Here, we
achieved ∼4% sequence coverage of the proteoforms by native
top-down MS (Tables S1–S5). Fragmentation
at the termini was complementary to our goal—to confirm the
chemical identity of the distinct proteoforms of N protein.To confirm that N proteoforms exist in a human-derived cell line,
we expressed N protein in HEK 293T cells. We assessed N protein expression
by Western blot using a monoclonal antibody raised against the highly
homologous SARS-CoV N protein with cross-reactivity to SARS-CoV-2
N protein (Figure S3). Analysis of the
whole cell lysate of cells stably expressing N protein produced mainly
full-length N protein with evidence of lower-molecular-weight proteoforms
(Figure S3A). Notably, when N is coexpressed
with the membrane and envelope viral structural proteins, N proteoforms
are generated in high abundance (Figure S3B). The enhanced cleavage of the full-length N protein in the presence
of known interactors19 suggests that N
proteoforms are primed for viral protein–protein interactions.Having demonstrated that a number of proteoforms of N are generated
in E. coli and HEK 293 cells, we continued our studies
using protein derived from E. coli to characterize
the proteoforms generated as a consequence of N protein primary structure.
We reasoned that N from human cells is subject to additional post-translational
modifications depending on the presence of co-interactors and the
biological state of the cell during an infection.20 Considering the proteoforms identified in E. coli, we note that three result from cleavage after alanine (residue
pairs A|L, A|F, and A|A), one results from cleavage following an arginine
(R|M), and one results from cleavage in the C-terminal tail following
a valine (V|T), (Figure 1E). Proteoforms N1–209 and N1–220 contain primarily the RNA binding domain, as they cleave within
the flexible linker region. The major component of N1–273 is also the RNA binding domain but, in this case, is followed by
the linker region and a small portion of the oligomerization domain.
Conversely, N156–419 comprises mainly the oligomerization
domain while still retaining a small portion of the RNA binding domain.Although we find no sequence similarity in the residues that flank
each cleavage site, a commonality is that cleavage occurs immediately
adjacent to a hydrophobic residue. The specificity of cleavage at
the residues identified here, despite no common motif, suggests that
there may be a structural or conformational component directing proteolysis;
however, the exact mechanism is unclear. While the exact chemical
identity of N proteoforms implicated in SARS-CoV-2 infection may vary,
we suggest that proteolytic processing of N protein, which liberates
the two major domains, produces functionally relevant proteoforms
that are important antiviral targets.Oligomeric States of N
Proteoforms Are Influenced by pHTo better understand the
role of the individual proteoforms, we expressed
and purified four of the proteoforms identified by top-down MS. As
almost all biological processes are influenced by pH, we recorded
native mass spectra of N1–209, N1–220, N1–273, and N156–419 from solutions
at different pH (Figures S4–S8)
to mimic the pH of different intracellular environments that N might
encounter during viral infection.21 Mass
spectra for N1–209 and N1–220 recorded
at pH 5.0, 7.4, and 8.0 reveal highly abundant charge state series
centered at 9+ and a low-abundance distribution of signals centered
at the 13+ charge state corresponding to monomers and dimers, respectively.
The mass spectra for N1–273 show that it is predominantly
monomeric with no significant change in charge state distribution
or oligomeric state across the range of pH values tested. However,
we observe two low-abundance charge state series corresponding to
N1–209 and N1–220, suggesting
that N1–273 continues to undergo cleavage at the
previously mapped residues (Figure S6).In contrast to the N-terminal proteoforms, mass spectra for N156–419 reveal multiple charge state distributions at
pH 5.0, 7.4, and 8.0 (Figure S7). At pH
8, the mass spectrum reveals three charge state distributions centered
at 10+, 18+, and 27+ with average masses corresponding to monomers,
trimers, and a low population of hexamers (Table S6). At pH 7.4, monomers, dimers, and trimers persist. At the
lowest pH (pH 5.0) N156–419 is exclusively trimeric.
Finally, the mass spectra for full-length N at pH 5.0 and 8.0 reveal
broadened and featureless peaks suggesting that NFL is
likely aggregated (Figure S8). A low-abundance
series of highly charged peaks centered at 18+ at pH 8.0 indicates
some protein unfolding. Overall, we conclude that N1–209, N1–220, and N1–273 do not undergo
significant pH-dependent changes in oligomeric state, while the C-terminal
proteoform is highly sensitive with trimers predominating under both
high- and low-pH conditions.RNA Sequence Influences Binding StoichiometryRNA binding
and ribonucleoprotein complex formation is the primary function of
coronavirus N proteins. The N protein binds nucleic acid nonspecifically;22 however, the production of infectious virions
relies on N protein forming specific interactions with viral RNA among
an abundance of different cellular RNA species. With knowledge of
the stoichiometries of N proteoforms, we sought to determine the propensity
for N to bind specific RNA sequences. We created single-stranded RNA
oligonucleotides consisting of 20 nucleotides of repeating sequences
(4 × −GAUGG, 4 × −GAGAA). Considering the
promiscuity of N protein, we chose sequences shown to interact with
the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) polyprotein (which includes
a nucleocapsid domain) at the different stages of virus assembly23 and hypothesized that N proteins of different
oligomeric states would exhibit similar bias toward artificial RNA
motifs.We incubated N proteoforms and RNA oligonucleotides
at a molar ratio of 4:1 protein/RNA and recorded native mass spectra
for all N protein–RNA complexes. The mass spectrum for N1–209 bound to 4 × −GAUGG (Figure 2A) reveals three charge state
distributions with masses that correspond to the apo N1–209 monomer and N1–209 bound to one and two 4 ×
−GAUGG RNA oligonucleotides. The charge state distribution
corresponding to N1–209 bound to two 4 × −GAUGG
RNA predominates over the single RNA-bound protein. Conducting the
same experiment with a different oligonucleotide (4 × −GAGAA)
reveals only one additional charge state distribution for N1–209 bound to one oligonucleotide (Figure 2B). Similar RNA binding stoichiometries are observed
for N1–220 and N1–273; the mass
spectra for N1–220 and N1–273 reveal
distributions corresponding to the binding of one and two 4 ×
−GAUGG oligonucleotides. Only one additional distribution is
observed for N1–220 or N1–273 incubated
with a 4 × −GAGAA oligonucleotide, which corresponds to
one oligonucleotide bound (Figures S9–10, Table S7), confirming the preference for the 4 × −GAUGG
sequence for all N-terminal constructs.Figure 2RNA sequence influences
the binding stoichiometry to N protein.
(A) Mass spectrum of N1–209 after incubation with
4 × −GAUGG RNA oligonucleotides in a molar ratio of 1:4
RNA:protein. Two additional charge state distributions are observed
that correspond to one and two RNA oligonucleotides bound to N1–209. The mass spectrum at m/z > 2700 was magnified 3× and offset for clarity
(red
trace). (B) Mass spectrum of N1–209 after incubation
with 4 × −GAGAA RNA oligonucleotides in a molar ratio
of 1:4. One additional charge state distribution is observed that
corresponds to one RNA oligonucleotide bound to N1–209. The mass spectrum at m/z >
2700
was magnified 3× and offset for clarity (red trace). (C) Mass
spectrum of NFL after incubation with 4 × −GAUGG
RNA oligonucleotides in a molar ratio of 1:4. Monomers and dimers
of NFL (red circles) and N156–419 (blue
circles) are observed. An additional peak series between 4300 and
5600 m/z corresponds to two 4 ×
−GAUGG RNA oligonucleotides bound to NFL dimer.
The scheme in the inset of (C) depicts NFL dimer bound
to RNA as the functional unit of the ribonucleoprotein assembly.To examine if this preference was also observed
for full-length
N, we incubated the protein with a 4 × −GAUGG oligonucleotide.
A series of peaks was identified corresponding to the N protein dimer
bound to two 4 × −GAUGG oligonucleotides (Figure 2C). Similarly, in the presence
of the 4 × −GAGAA RNA oligonucleotide, an additional RNA-bound
distribution is observed; however, the deconvoluted mass indicates
that only one 4 × −GAGAA oligonucleotide is bound to the
NFL dimer (Figure S11, Table S7). No RNA binding to the monomeric form of NFL is observed,
regardless of oligonucleotide sequence. Considering the different
properties of the two RNA oligonucleotides, the 4 × −GAUGG
oligonucleotide contains three GGG motifs, which form short stem loops
and are known to contribute additively to the efficiency of genome
packaging in related viruses.24 Furthermore,
selective RNA packaging has been described as a feature of innate
immune response evasion.25 Our results
emphasize that RNA sequence, and likely the secondary structure, is
important for interactions with the N-protein. Notably, only the NFL dimer binds RNA, suggesting that the dimer is the functional
unit of the SARS-CoV-2 ribonucleoprotein assembly. The preference
for the RNA sequence known to form stem loops also has implications
in efficient genome packaging and likely contributes to an optimized
packing density in the intact virion.N1–209 Interacts Directly with Cyclophilin
ACyclophilin A (CypA), a highly abundant immunophilin found
in host cells, has been implicated in the replication cycle of coronaviruses26 and is known to aid in assembly of other viruses.27 We sought to determine if CypA could play a
role in SARS-CoV-2 infection through monitoring direct interactions
of CypA with N proteoforms. We incubated N1–209 and
CypA in a 1:1 molar ratio and used native mass spectrometry to measure
possible interactions. The mass spectrum reveals charge state distributions
that correspond to monomeric N1–209 and CypA and
three distinct charge state distributions at m/z > 3000 (Figure 3A). The three higher-m/z distributions correspond to (i) heterodimers of N1–209 and CypA, (ii) homodimers of CypA, and (iii) a low population of
homodimers of N1–209 (Table 2). Notably, we do not observe evidence of
CypA interacting with N1–220, N1–273, nor NFL under the same conditions (Figure S12–15).Figure 3N proteoforms directly interact with cyclophilin
A. (A) Mass spectrum
of N1–209 after incubation with cyclophilin A (CypA)
in a 1:1 molar ratio. The mass spectrum at m/z > 3000 was magnified 5× and offset for clarity
(red
trace). Three charge state distributions that correspond to a low
population of homodimers of N1–209, homodimers of
CypA, and heterodimers of N1–209–CypA. (B)
Mass spectrum of N1–209 after incubation with CypA
and cyclosporin A (CsA) in a molar ratio of 1:1:2. CypA preferentially
binds CsA as demonstrated by the charge state distribution centered
at 8+, which corresponds to the CypA–CsA complex. The mass
spectrum at m/z > 3500 was magnified
5× and offset (red trace) to highlight the exceedingly low abundance
of N1–209–CypA heterodimers that persist
after CsA treatment. The scheme (inset of B) depicts CsA competitively
binding to CypA and abolishing the N1–209–CypA
interaction.Table 2Deconvoluted and
Sequence Masses for
N Proteoform Complexesprotein/complexdeconvoluted massa ±
s.d. (Da)expected mass (Da)4 × −GAUGG RNA--6622.004 × −GAGAA
RNA--6650.20N1–209 + one 4 × −GAUGG RNA29 233 ± 0.429 234.71N1–209 + two 4 × −GAUGG RNA35 917 ± 1035 856.71N1–209 + one 4 × −GAGAA
RNA29 262 ± 129 262.91NFL dimer + two 4 × −GAUGG RNA105 131 ± 60104 783.66cyclophilin A (CypA)20 084 ± 0.420 175.8220 220 ± 0.8CypA dimers40 373 ± 6240 351.64N1–209 + CypA42 867 ± 1542 696.71N1–209 dimers45 356 ± 1545 225.42cyclosporin
A1202.85 ± 01202.63CypA + CsA21 287 ± 0.521 286.63mAb (monomer)137 990 ± 125--145 193 ± 109NFL + mAb183 931 ± 102183 759190 9622NFL + mAb229 984 ± 36229 528236 731aDetermined using
at least three
adjacent charge states.To determine if the interaction between N1–209 and
CypA could be inhibited by an approved immunosuppressant cyclosporin
A (CsA), we incubated the N1–209:CypA complex with
a 2-fold molar excess of the drug (Figure 3B). The mass spectrum reveals three abundant
charge state distributions: (i) a distribution centered at 9+ corresponding
to N1–209 monomers, (ii) a highly abundant distribution
centered at a charge state of 8+ that corresponds to CypA bound to
CsA, and (iii) a low-abundance distribution that corresponds to monomeric
CypA (Table 2). Very
low-abundance distributions of N1–209 homodimers,
CypA homodimers, and N1–209-CypA heterodimers are
barely detected following magnification >3000 m/z. Therefore, we can conclude that the 1:1 interaction
between
CypA and N1–209 can be inhibited by CsA binding
to CypA.Antigenic Regions of N Are Located at the C-TerminusSince N protein is detected by antibodies with higher sensitivity
than any other structural proteins of SARS-CoV-2, we sought to determine
if all N proteoforms were similarly recognized by immunoglobulins.
We first incubated NFL with a monoclonal antibody (mAb)
raised against the full-length protein in molar ratios of 1:1 (Figure 4A). The mass spectrum
reveals three distributions >6000 m/z with deconvoluted masses that correspond to the apo antibody as
well as one and two NFL proteins bound (Table 2, Figure S16). When the same mAb was incubated with three N-terminal
proteoforms (N1–209, N1–220, and
N1–273) we did not observe any mAb binding in the
mass spectrum (Figure 4B). To validate these results with conventional methods, we turned
to protein detection by Coomassie stain and immunoblotting (Figure 4B, inset). The Coomassie
stain detected NFL and all proteoforms in high abundance.
In contrast, the immunoblot revealed detection of only NFL and N156–419, including higher-order oligomers
of N156–419, which were not detected by Coomassie
staining or mass spectrometry. N1–209 and N1–273 are barely detectable by the mAb, and N1–220 completely evades mAb detection. This suggests that the binding
epitope recognized by immunoglobulins is localized near the C-terminus
of N protein. If this were the case, then we would expect to see a
heightened antibody response to the C-terminal proteoform relative
to other proteoforms in convalescent plasma from patients with COVID-19.Figure 4N proteoforms
show significantly different interactions with antibodies.
(A) Mass spectrum of NFL after incubation with a monoclonal
antibody raised against the full-length N protein in a molar ratio
of 1:1. We observe five charge state distributions that correspond
to NFL monomers (centered at 13+), NFL dimers
(centered at 19+), a monomeric antibody (centered at 21+), an antibody
bound to one NFL (centered at 24+), and a population of antibodies
bound to NFL dimer (centered at 30+). (B) Mass spectrum
of a mixture of N1–209, N1–220, and N1–273 incubated with a monoclonal antibody
in a molar ratio of 1:1:1:1. Charge state distributions are observed
for antibody monomers and dimers. No binding to the antibody is observed
for N proteoforms. This result was confirmed by immunoblot (see inset).
SDS-PAGE shows that NFL, N1–209, N1–220, N1–273, and N156–419 are detected in high abundance by Coomassie stain. The same proteins
analyzed by immunoblot show that only NFL and N156–419 are detected by the antibody. The box-and-whisker plots depict the
antibody response for (C) IgM antibodies, (D) IgG antibodies, and
(E) IgA antibodies from plasma from eight patients collected >6
months
following initial COVID-19 diagnosis. The antibody response was determined
using the absorbance following colorimetric detection of a sandwich
ELISA where the immobilized antigen was NFL, N1–209, N1–220, N1–273, or N156–419. The squares represent the mean, the center line represents the
median, and the box represents the first quartile (25–75%)
of the distributed data. Asterisks represent statistically significant
differences when compared to NFL; p-values
denoted by asterisks are defined as * p < 0.05,
** p < 0.01, and *** p < 0.001.To test this hypothesis, we obtained convalescent
plasma from eight
patients >6 months after an initial diagnosis of COVID-19 and studied
the antibody response to the N proteoforms characterized herein. The
experiment was carried out using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) using all five proteoforms (NFL, N1–209, N1–220, N1–273, N156–419) as the antigen and considering all three antibody responses (IgM,
IgG, and IgA). The plasma antibodies were “sandwiched”
using an anti-IgM, anti-IgG, or anti-IgA detection antibody conjugated
with horseradish peroxidase for colorimetric detection. The antibody
response for all eight patients was measured as a function of the
absorbance and displayed as box plots (Figure 4C–E). More than 6 months after an
initial diagnosis of COVID-19, there are still detectable levels of
IgM, IgG, and IgA antibodies present against all N proteoforms in
convalescent plasma. IgM antibodies were detected in the highest abundance
with a statistically significant increase in detection for antibodies
against C-terminal proteoforms N1–273 and N156–419. Furthermore, when compared to NFL, the N-terminal proteoforms (N1–209, N1–220, N1–273) exhibited a significantly attenuated
IgG response. Interestingly, antibody interactions with NFL and N156–419 were not statistically different,
suggesting that the antigenic site for IgG recognition is localized
to the C-terminus of the N protein. Finally, serum IgA antibodies
were detected for all N proteoforms and showed a heightened response
to N156–419. These results allow us to conclude
that while all three antibodies are present, IgM antibodies are the
most prevalent for all N proteoforms and IgG antibodies exhibit significant
preference for the C-terminal proteoform.

Results
and Discussion

N Protein Undergoes Proteolysis in the Vicinity
of the Linker
RegionNucleocapsid proteins of coronaviruses share similar
topological organization13 and show high
sequence homology among related coronaviruses.14 The N protein is characterized by two major structural
domains, the RNA binding and oligomerization domains. Similar to other
coronavirus nucleocapsid proteins, the two domains are separated by
a long and flexible linker region thought to be devoid of secondary
structure.8 An N-terminal arm and a C-terminal
tail flank the RNA binding and oligomerization domains, respectively.
We constructed plasmids consisting of the full-length nucleocapsid
protein with a cleavable N-terminal purification tag and expressed
the constructs in both Escherichia coli and human
embryonic kidney (HEK) 293T cells.For the Escherichia
coli construct, we purified the protein and verified the
cleavage of the affinity tag via SDS-PAGE (Figure S1). Before removal of the purification tag, three distinct
protein bands were detected at ∼49, ∼38, and ∼28
kDa. Following removal of the tag, all three protein bands migrated
by ∼3 kDa less, or the mass of the tag (Figure S1B). We confirmed that each band corresponded to N
protein by in-gel trypsin digestion followed by LC–MS-based
bottom-up proteomics. All three bands contained peptides from the
N protein, resulting in 78.1, 49.9, and 43.2% sequence coverage for
bands 1, 2, and 3, respectively. To determine the representation of
protein domains in each gel band, we plotted the distribution of the
peptides detected across the five protein domains (Figure S1C). As anticipated, we observe an unbiased distribution
of peptides across all five domains for band 1, consistent with the
expectation that tryptic peptides would be reasonably distributed
across the full-length protein. Over 50% of the total peptides detected
in bands 2 and 3 were localized to the RNA binding domain, suggesting
that the proteins are predominantly N-terminal derivatives. However,
in all three bands, peptides located in the 58-residue C-terminal
domain were detected, indicating the purified protein is made up of
a diverse mixture of N proteoforms15 and
not biased to N-terminal species due to the location of the purification
tag.We recorded a native mass spectrum to identify the stoichiometry
of N protein from E. coli (Figure 1A) and observed two main charge state envelopes
centered at 13+ and 20+. Deconvolution of the m/z signals provided experimental masses of 45 769
± 1 and 91 537 ± 2 Da, respectively, which are in
excellent agreement with the theoretical monomeric (45 769.83
Da) and dimeric (91 539.66 Da) masses of full-length N protein.
A second distribution of monomers and dimers was observed and found
to have deconvoluted masses of 28 735 ± 2 and 57 534
± 1 Da, respectively.Figure 1SARS-CoV-2 N protein exists as an ensemble of
proteoforms. (A)
Scheme depicting the full-length construct for expression in E. coli and native mass spectrum of the full-length N protein.
Four charge state distributions correspond to monomers and dimers
of full-length N protein (red circle, MW 45 769 Da) and a proteoform
of N protein (blue circle, MW 28 735 Da). (B) Mass spectrum
of N protein after several days at room temperature reveals the coexistence
of five distinct charge state distributions corresponding to N proteoforms.
The chemical composition of each proteoform was determined using top-down
MS (C,D). (C) Charge-reduced mass spectrum resulting from electron-transfer
dissociation (ETD) of the selected 9+ charge state at m/z 2616.79. (D) Mass spectrum of sequence ions for
the same parent ion generated by higher-energy collision induced dissociation
(HCD). (E) Scheme representing the composition of protein domains
for the observed proteoforms as determined by top-down MS. Five distinct
proteoforms are observed: N1–209, N1–220, N1–273, N156–419, and N1–392. The exact site of cleavage, including the five
residues flanking either side of each cleavage site, is indicated
below each construct.Additional N proteoforms
were observed immediately upon protein
purification and continued to develop further over time (Figure S2). The mass spectrum evolved to reveal
a series of peaks corresponding to five unique protein distributions
(Figure 1B). The high
baseline in this mass spectrum suggests the presence of additional
proteolytic products; however, their low signal-to-noise precludes
their characterization. Furthermore, it is likely that C-terminal
proteoforms, containing the oligomerization domain, participate in
the formation of higher-order oligomers that become insoluble and
are therefore not detected at later time points. We instead sought
to characterize the most stable and prominent proteoforms.To
determine the identity of each proteoform, we adapted a two-tiered
tandem mass spectrometry approach16 to
determine the intact mass and amino acid sequence for each series
of peaks in the mixture. An individual peak in the mass spectrum was
first isolated and subjected to charge reduction via electron-transfer
dissociation (ETD) under conditions that do not result in the formation
of fragments but instead produce a series of charge-reduced peaks
(Figure 1C). The charge-reduced
spectrum was necessary to confirm the assignment of the charge state
series for each proteoform. The assigned charge states were then used
to obtain deconvoluted masses of each proteoform present in solution
(Table 1).Table 1Deconvoluted and Sequence Masses of
NFL and N Proteoformsproteindeconvoluted
massa ±
s.d. (Da)sequence mass (Da)NFL45 769 ± 245 769.83NFL dimer91 537 ± 291 539.66N156–41928 735 ± 228 696.12N156–419 dimer57 534 ± 157 392.24N1–20922 611 ± 122 612.71N1–22023 540 ± 0.323 541.73N1–27329 402 ± 0.629 382.43N1–39242 922 ± 142 918.74aDetermined using at least three
adjacent charge states.We tentatively assigned the proteoforms based on their intact masses
and then generated sequence ions to confirm our assignment. Individual
proteoforms were subjected to fragmentation by higher-energy collision
induced dissociation (HCD), which accelerates the isolated ions into
an inert gas to induce fragmentation along the amide backbone. The
fragmentation products were then used to determine the molecular composition
and to localize the exact site of cleavage. The HCD spectrum results
in a series of singly, doubly, and triply charged sequence ions exemplified
by the fragmentation of the 9+ charge state at m/z 2616.79 (Figure 1D). Fragmentation of intact proteins under native conditions
is expected to yield 3–10% sequence coverage at the termini,17 and the propensity for fragmentation differs
depending on several criteria (e.g., mass, charge, composition, structure)
for natively folded proteins.18 Here, we
achieved ∼4% sequence coverage of the proteoforms by native
top-down MS (Tables S1–S5). Fragmentation
at the termini was complementary to our goal—to confirm the
chemical identity of the distinct proteoforms of N protein.To confirm that N proteoforms exist in a human-derived cell line,
we expressed N protein in HEK 293T cells. We assessed N protein expression
by Western blot using a monoclonal antibody raised against the highly
homologous SARS-CoV N protein with cross-reactivity to SARS-CoV-2
N protein (Figure S3). Analysis of the
whole cell lysate of cells stably expressing N protein produced mainly
full-length N protein with evidence of lower-molecular-weight proteoforms
(Figure S3A). Notably, when N is coexpressed
with the membrane and envelope viral structural proteins, N proteoforms
are generated in high abundance (Figure S3B). The enhanced cleavage of the full-length N protein in the presence
of known interactors19 suggests that N
proteoforms are primed for viral protein–protein interactions.Having demonstrated that a number of proteoforms of N are generated
in E. coli and HEK 293 cells, we continued our studies
using protein derived from E. coli to characterize
the proteoforms generated as a consequence of N protein primary structure.
We reasoned that N from human cells is subject to additional post-translational
modifications depending on the presence of co-interactors and the
biological state of the cell during an infection.20 Considering the proteoforms identified in E. coli, we note that three result from cleavage after alanine (residue
pairs A|L, A|F, and A|A), one results from cleavage following an arginine
(R|M), and one results from cleavage in the C-terminal tail following
a valine (V|T), (Figure 1E). Proteoforms N1–209 and N1–220 contain primarily the RNA binding domain, as they cleave within
the flexible linker region. The major component of N1–273 is also the RNA binding domain but, in this case, is followed by
the linker region and a small portion of the oligomerization domain.
Conversely, N156–419 comprises mainly the oligomerization
domain while still retaining a small portion of the RNA binding domain.Although we find no sequence similarity in the residues that flank
each cleavage site, a commonality is that cleavage occurs immediately
adjacent to a hydrophobic residue. The specificity of cleavage at
the residues identified here, despite no common motif, suggests that
there may be a structural or conformational component directing proteolysis;
however, the exact mechanism is unclear. While the exact chemical
identity of N proteoforms implicated in SARS-CoV-2 infection may vary,
we suggest that proteolytic processing of N protein, which liberates
the two major domains, produces functionally relevant proteoforms
that are important antiviral targets.

N Protein Undergoes Proteolysis in the Vicinity
of the Linker
Region

Nucleocapsid proteins of coronaviruses share similar
topological organization13 and show high
sequence homology among related coronaviruses.14 The N protein is characterized by two major structural
domains, the RNA binding and oligomerization domains. Similar to other
coronavirus nucleocapsid proteins, the two domains are separated by
a long and flexible linker region thought to be devoid of secondary
structure.8 An N-terminal arm and a C-terminal
tail flank the RNA binding and oligomerization domains, respectively.
We constructed plasmids consisting of the full-length nucleocapsid
protein with a cleavable N-terminal purification tag and expressed
the constructs in both Escherichia coli and human
embryonic kidney (HEK) 293T cells.

For the Escherichia
coli construct, we purified the protein and verified the
cleavage of the affinity tag via SDS-PAGE (Figure S1). Before removal of the purification tag, three distinct
protein bands were detected at ∼49, ∼38, and ∼28
kDa. Following removal of the tag, all three protein bands migrated
by ∼3 kDa less, or the mass of the tag (Figure S1B). We confirmed that each band corresponded to N
protein by in-gel trypsin digestion followed by LC–MS-based
bottom-up proteomics. All three bands contained peptides from the
N protein, resulting in 78.1, 49.9, and 43.2% sequence coverage for
bands 1, 2, and 3, respectively. To determine the representation of
protein domains in each gel band, we plotted the distribution of the
peptides detected across the five protein domains (Figure S1C). As anticipated, we observe an unbiased distribution
of peptides across all five domains for band 1, consistent with the
expectation that tryptic peptides would be reasonably distributed
across the full-length protein. Over 50% of the total peptides detected
in bands 2 and 3 were localized to the RNA binding domain, suggesting
that the proteins are predominantly N-terminal derivatives. However,
in all three bands, peptides located in the 58-residue C-terminal
domain were detected, indicating the purified protein is made up of
a diverse mixture of N proteoforms15 and
not biased to N-terminal species due to the location of the purification
tag.

We recorded a native mass spectrum to identify the stoichiometry
of N protein from E. coli (Figure 1A) and observed two main charge state envelopes
centered at 13+ and 20+. Deconvolution of the m/z signals provided experimental masses of 45 769
± 1 and 91 537 ± 2 Da, respectively, which are in
excellent agreement with the theoretical monomeric (45 769.83
Da) and dimeric (91 539.66 Da) masses of full-length N protein.
A second distribution of monomers and dimers was observed and found
to have deconvoluted masses of 28 735 ± 2 and 57 534
± 1 Da, respectively.

SARS-CoV-2 N protein exists as an ensemble of
proteoforms. (A)
Scheme depicting the full-length construct for expression in E. coli and native mass spectrum of the full-length N protein.
Four charge state distributions correspond to monomers and dimers
of full-length N protein (red circle, MW 45 769 Da) and a proteoform
of N protein (blue circle, MW 28 735 Da). (B) Mass spectrum
of N protein after several days at room temperature reveals the coexistence
of five distinct charge state distributions corresponding to N proteoforms.
The chemical composition of each proteoform was determined using top-down
MS (C,D). (C) Charge-reduced mass spectrum resulting from electron-transfer
dissociation (ETD) of the selected 9+ charge state at m/z 2616.79. (D) Mass spectrum of sequence ions for
the same parent ion generated by higher-energy collision induced dissociation
(HCD). (E) Scheme representing the composition of protein domains
for the observed proteoforms as determined by top-down MS. Five distinct
proteoforms are observed: N1–209, N1–220, N1–273, N156–419, and N1–392. The exact site of cleavage, including the five
residues flanking either side of each cleavage site, is indicated
below each construct.

Additional N proteoforms
were observed immediately upon protein
purification and continued to develop further over time (Figure S2). The mass spectrum evolved to reveal
a series of peaks corresponding to five unique protein distributions
(Figure 1B). The high
baseline in this mass spectrum suggests the presence of additional
proteolytic products; however, their low signal-to-noise precludes
their characterization. Furthermore, it is likely that C-terminal
proteoforms, containing the oligomerization domain, participate in
the formation of higher-order oligomers that become insoluble and
are therefore not detected at later time points. We instead sought
to characterize the most stable and prominent proteoforms.

To
determine the identity of each proteoform, we adapted a two-tiered
tandem mass spectrometry approach16 to
determine the intact mass and amino acid sequence for each series
of peaks in the mixture. An individual peak in the mass spectrum was
first isolated and subjected to charge reduction via electron-transfer
dissociation (ETD) under conditions that do not result in the formation
of fragments but instead produce a series of charge-reduced peaks
(Figure 1C). The charge-reduced
spectrum was necessary to confirm the assignment of the charge state
series for each proteoform. The assigned charge states were then used
to obtain deconvoluted masses of each proteoform present in solution
(Table 1).

Deconvoluted and Sequence Masses of
NFL and N Proteoforms

Determined using at least three
adjacent charge states.

We tentatively assigned the proteoforms based on their intact masses
and then generated sequence ions to confirm our assignment. Individual
proteoforms were subjected to fragmentation by higher-energy collision
induced dissociation (HCD), which accelerates the isolated ions into
an inert gas to induce fragmentation along the amide backbone. The
fragmentation products were then used to determine the molecular composition
and to localize the exact site of cleavage. The HCD spectrum results
in a series of singly, doubly, and triply charged sequence ions exemplified
by the fragmentation of the 9+ charge state at m/z 2616.79 (Figure 1D). Fragmentation of intact proteins under native conditions
is expected to yield 3–10% sequence coverage at the termini,17 and the propensity for fragmentation differs
depending on several criteria (e.g., mass, charge, composition, structure)
for natively folded proteins.18 Here, we
achieved ∼4% sequence coverage of the proteoforms by native
top-down MS (Tables S1–S5). Fragmentation
at the termini was complementary to our goal—to confirm the
chemical identity of the distinct proteoforms of N protein.

To confirm that N proteoforms exist in a human-derived cell line,
we expressed N protein in HEK 293T cells. We assessed N protein expression
by Western blot using a monoclonal antibody raised against the highly
homologous SARS-CoV N protein with cross-reactivity to SARS-CoV-2
N protein (Figure S3). Analysis of the
whole cell lysate of cells stably expressing N protein produced mainly
full-length N protein with evidence of lower-molecular-weight proteoforms
(Figure S3A). Notably, when N is coexpressed
with the membrane and envelope viral structural proteins, N proteoforms
are generated in high abundance (Figure S3B). The enhanced cleavage of the full-length N protein in the presence
of known interactors19 suggests that N
proteoforms are primed for viral protein–protein interactions.

Having demonstrated that a number of proteoforms of N are generated
in E. coli and HEK 293 cells, we continued our studies
using protein derived from E. coli to characterize
the proteoforms generated as a consequence of N protein primary structure.
We reasoned that N from human cells is subject to additional post-translational
modifications depending on the presence of co-interactors and the
biological state of the cell during an infection.20 Considering the proteoforms identified in E. coli, we note that three result from cleavage after alanine (residue
pairs A|L, A|F, and A|A), one results from cleavage following an arginine
(R|M), and one results from cleavage in the C-terminal tail following
a valine (V|T), (Figure 1E). Proteoforms N1–209 and N1–220 contain primarily the RNA binding domain, as they cleave within
the flexible linker region. The major component of N1–273 is also the RNA binding domain but, in this case, is followed by
the linker region and a small portion of the oligomerization domain.
Conversely, N156–419 comprises mainly the oligomerization
domain while still retaining a small portion of the RNA binding domain.

Although we find no sequence similarity in the residues that flank
each cleavage site, a commonality is that cleavage occurs immediately
adjacent to a hydrophobic residue. The specificity of cleavage at
the residues identified here, despite no common motif, suggests that
there may be a structural or conformational component directing proteolysis;
however, the exact mechanism is unclear. While the exact chemical
identity of N proteoforms implicated in SARS-CoV-2 infection may vary,
we suggest that proteolytic processing of N protein, which liberates
the two major domains, produces functionally relevant proteoforms
that are important antiviral targets.

Oligomeric States of N
Proteoforms Are Influenced by pHTo better understand the
role of the individual proteoforms, we expressed
and purified four of the proteoforms identified by top-down MS. As
almost all biological processes are influenced by pH, we recorded
native mass spectra of N1–209, N1–220, N1–273, and N156–419 from solutions
at different pH (Figures S4–S8)
to mimic the pH of different intracellular environments that N might
encounter during viral infection.21 Mass
spectra for N1–209 and N1–220 recorded
at pH 5.0, 7.4, and 8.0 reveal highly abundant charge state series
centered at 9+ and a low-abundance distribution of signals centered
at the 13+ charge state corresponding to monomers and dimers, respectively.
The mass spectra for N1–273 show that it is predominantly
monomeric with no significant change in charge state distribution
or oligomeric state across the range of pH values tested. However,
we observe two low-abundance charge state series corresponding to
N1–209 and N1–220, suggesting
that N1–273 continues to undergo cleavage at the
previously mapped residues (Figure S6).In contrast to the N-terminal proteoforms, mass spectra for N156–419 reveal multiple charge state distributions at
pH 5.0, 7.4, and 8.0 (Figure S7). At pH
8, the mass spectrum reveals three charge state distributions centered
at 10+, 18+, and 27+ with average masses corresponding to monomers,
trimers, and a low population of hexamers (Table S6). At pH 7.4, monomers, dimers, and trimers persist. At the
lowest pH (pH 5.0) N156–419 is exclusively trimeric.
Finally, the mass spectra for full-length N at pH 5.0 and 8.0 reveal
broadened and featureless peaks suggesting that NFL is
likely aggregated (Figure S8). A low-abundance
series of highly charged peaks centered at 18+ at pH 8.0 indicates
some protein unfolding. Overall, we conclude that N1–209, N1–220, and N1–273 do not undergo
significant pH-dependent changes in oligomeric state, while the C-terminal
proteoform is highly sensitive with trimers predominating under both
high- and low-pH conditions.

Oligomeric States of N
Proteoforms Are Influenced by pH

To better understand the
role of the individual proteoforms, we expressed
and purified four of the proteoforms identified by top-down MS. As
almost all biological processes are influenced by pH, we recorded
native mass spectra of N1–209, N1–220, N1–273, and N156–419 from solutions
at different pH (Figures S4–S8)
to mimic the pH of different intracellular environments that N might
encounter during viral infection.21 Mass
spectra for N1–209 and N1–220 recorded
at pH 5.0, 7.4, and 8.0 reveal highly abundant charge state series
centered at 9+ and a low-abundance distribution of signals centered
at the 13+ charge state corresponding to monomers and dimers, respectively.
The mass spectra for N1–273 show that it is predominantly
monomeric with no significant change in charge state distribution
or oligomeric state across the range of pH values tested. However,
we observe two low-abundance charge state series corresponding to
N1–209 and N1–220, suggesting
that N1–273 continues to undergo cleavage at the
previously mapped residues (Figure S6).

In contrast to the N-terminal proteoforms, mass spectra for N156–419 reveal multiple charge state distributions at
pH 5.0, 7.4, and 8.0 (Figure S7). At pH
8, the mass spectrum reveals three charge state distributions centered
at 10+, 18+, and 27+ with average masses corresponding to monomers,
trimers, and a low population of hexamers (Table S6). At pH 7.4, monomers, dimers, and trimers persist. At the
lowest pH (pH 5.0) N156–419 is exclusively trimeric.
Finally, the mass spectra for full-length N at pH 5.0 and 8.0 reveal
broadened and featureless peaks suggesting that NFL is
likely aggregated (Figure S8). A low-abundance
series of highly charged peaks centered at 18+ at pH 8.0 indicates
some protein unfolding. Overall, we conclude that N1–209, N1–220, and N1–273 do not undergo
significant pH-dependent changes in oligomeric state, while the C-terminal
proteoform is highly sensitive with trimers predominating under both
high- and low-pH conditions.

RNA Sequence Influences Binding StoichiometryRNA binding
and ribonucleoprotein complex formation is the primary function of
coronavirus N proteins. The N protein binds nucleic acid nonspecifically;22 however, the production of infectious virions
relies on N protein forming specific interactions with viral RNA among
an abundance of different cellular RNA species. With knowledge of
the stoichiometries of N proteoforms, we sought to determine the propensity
for N to bind specific RNA sequences. We created single-stranded RNA
oligonucleotides consisting of 20 nucleotides of repeating sequences
(4 × −GAUGG, 4 × −GAGAA). Considering the
promiscuity of N protein, we chose sequences shown to interact with
the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) polyprotein (which includes
a nucleocapsid domain) at the different stages of virus assembly23 and hypothesized that N proteins of different
oligomeric states would exhibit similar bias toward artificial RNA
motifs.We incubated N proteoforms and RNA oligonucleotides
at a molar ratio of 4:1 protein/RNA and recorded native mass spectra
for all N protein–RNA complexes. The mass spectrum for N1–209 bound to 4 × −GAUGG (Figure 2A) reveals three charge state
distributions with masses that correspond to the apo N1–209 monomer and N1–209 bound to one and two 4 ×
−GAUGG RNA oligonucleotides. The charge state distribution
corresponding to N1–209 bound to two 4 × −GAUGG
RNA predominates over the single RNA-bound protein. Conducting the
same experiment with a different oligonucleotide (4 × −GAGAA)
reveals only one additional charge state distribution for N1–209 bound to one oligonucleotide (Figure 2B). Similar RNA binding stoichiometries are observed
for N1–220 and N1–273; the mass
spectra for N1–220 and N1–273 reveal
distributions corresponding to the binding of one and two 4 ×
−GAUGG oligonucleotides. Only one additional distribution is
observed for N1–220 or N1–273 incubated
with a 4 × −GAGAA oligonucleotide, which corresponds to
one oligonucleotide bound (Figures S9–10, Table S7), confirming the preference for the 4 × −GAUGG
sequence for all N-terminal constructs.Figure 2RNA sequence influences
the binding stoichiometry to N protein.
(A) Mass spectrum of N1–209 after incubation with
4 × −GAUGG RNA oligonucleotides in a molar ratio of 1:4
RNA:protein. Two additional charge state distributions are observed
that correspond to one and two RNA oligonucleotides bound to N1–209. The mass spectrum at m/z > 2700 was magnified 3× and offset for clarity
(red
trace). (B) Mass spectrum of N1–209 after incubation
with 4 × −GAGAA RNA oligonucleotides in a molar ratio
of 1:4. One additional charge state distribution is observed that
corresponds to one RNA oligonucleotide bound to N1–209. The mass spectrum at m/z >
2700
was magnified 3× and offset for clarity (red trace). (C) Mass
spectrum of NFL after incubation with 4 × −GAUGG
RNA oligonucleotides in a molar ratio of 1:4. Monomers and dimers
of NFL (red circles) and N156–419 (blue
circles) are observed. An additional peak series between 4300 and
5600 m/z corresponds to two 4 ×
−GAUGG RNA oligonucleotides bound to NFL dimer.
The scheme in the inset of (C) depicts NFL dimer bound
to RNA as the functional unit of the ribonucleoprotein assembly.To examine if this preference was also observed
for full-length
N, we incubated the protein with a 4 × −GAUGG oligonucleotide.
A series of peaks was identified corresponding to the N protein dimer
bound to two 4 × −GAUGG oligonucleotides (Figure 2C). Similarly, in the presence
of the 4 × −GAGAA RNA oligonucleotide, an additional RNA-bound
distribution is observed; however, the deconvoluted mass indicates
that only one 4 × −GAGAA oligonucleotide is bound to the
NFL dimer (Figure S11, Table S7). No RNA binding to the monomeric form of NFL is observed,
regardless of oligonucleotide sequence. Considering the different
properties of the two RNA oligonucleotides, the 4 × −GAUGG
oligonucleotide contains three GGG motifs, which form short stem loops
and are known to contribute additively to the efficiency of genome
packaging in related viruses.24 Furthermore,
selective RNA packaging has been described as a feature of innate
immune response evasion.25 Our results
emphasize that RNA sequence, and likely the secondary structure, is
important for interactions with the N-protein. Notably, only the NFL dimer binds RNA, suggesting that the dimer is the functional
unit of the SARS-CoV-2 ribonucleoprotein assembly. The preference
for the RNA sequence known to form stem loops also has implications
in efficient genome packaging and likely contributes to an optimized
packing density in the intact virion.

RNA Sequence Influences Binding Stoichiometry

RNA binding
and ribonucleoprotein complex formation is the primary function of
coronavirus N proteins. The N protein binds nucleic acid nonspecifically;22 however, the production of infectious virions
relies on N protein forming specific interactions with viral RNA among
an abundance of different cellular RNA species. With knowledge of
the stoichiometries of N proteoforms, we sought to determine the propensity
for N to bind specific RNA sequences. We created single-stranded RNA
oligonucleotides consisting of 20 nucleotides of repeating sequences
(4 × −GAUGG, 4 × −GAGAA). Considering the
promiscuity of N protein, we chose sequences shown to interact with
the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) polyprotein (which includes
a nucleocapsid domain) at the different stages of virus assembly23 and hypothesized that N proteins of different
oligomeric states would exhibit similar bias toward artificial RNA
motifs.

We incubated N proteoforms and RNA oligonucleotides
at a molar ratio of 4:1 protein/RNA and recorded native mass spectra
for all N protein–RNA complexes. The mass spectrum for N1–209 bound to 4 × −GAUGG (Figure 2A) reveals three charge state
distributions with masses that correspond to the apo N1–209 monomer and N1–209 bound to one and two 4 ×
−GAUGG RNA oligonucleotides. The charge state distribution
corresponding to N1–209 bound to two 4 × −GAUGG
RNA predominates over the single RNA-bound protein. Conducting the
same experiment with a different oligonucleotide (4 × −GAGAA)
reveals only one additional charge state distribution for N1–209 bound to one oligonucleotide (Figure 2B). Similar RNA binding stoichiometries are observed
for N1–220 and N1–273; the mass
spectra for N1–220 and N1–273 reveal
distributions corresponding to the binding of one and two 4 ×
−GAUGG oligonucleotides. Only one additional distribution is
observed for N1–220 or N1–273 incubated
with a 4 × −GAGAA oligonucleotide, which corresponds to
one oligonucleotide bound (Figures S9–10, Table S7), confirming the preference for the 4 × −GAUGG
sequence for all N-terminal constructs.

RNA sequence influences
the binding stoichiometry to N protein.
(A) Mass spectrum of N1–209 after incubation with
4 × −GAUGG RNA oligonucleotides in a molar ratio of 1:4
RNA:protein. Two additional charge state distributions are observed
that correspond to one and two RNA oligonucleotides bound to N1–209. The mass spectrum at m/z > 2700 was magnified 3× and offset for clarity
(red
trace). (B) Mass spectrum of N1–209 after incubation
with 4 × −GAGAA RNA oligonucleotides in a molar ratio
of 1:4. One additional charge state distribution is observed that
corresponds to one RNA oligonucleotide bound to N1–209. The mass spectrum at m/z >
2700
was magnified 3× and offset for clarity (red trace). (C) Mass
spectrum of NFL after incubation with 4 × −GAUGG
RNA oligonucleotides in a molar ratio of 1:4. Monomers and dimers
of NFL (red circles) and N156–419 (blue
circles) are observed. An additional peak series between 4300 and
5600 m/z corresponds to two 4 ×
−GAUGG RNA oligonucleotides bound to NFL dimer.
The scheme in the inset of (C) depicts NFL dimer bound
to RNA as the functional unit of the ribonucleoprotein assembly.

To examine if this preference was also observed
for full-length
N, we incubated the protein with a 4 × −GAUGG oligonucleotide.
A series of peaks was identified corresponding to the N protein dimer
bound to two 4 × −GAUGG oligonucleotides (Figure 2C). Similarly, in the presence
of the 4 × −GAGAA RNA oligonucleotide, an additional RNA-bound
distribution is observed; however, the deconvoluted mass indicates
that only one 4 × −GAGAA oligonucleotide is bound to the
NFL dimer (Figure S11, Table S7). No RNA binding to the monomeric form of NFL is observed,
regardless of oligonucleotide sequence. Considering the different
properties of the two RNA oligonucleotides, the 4 × −GAUGG
oligonucleotide contains three GGG motifs, which form short stem loops
and are known to contribute additively to the efficiency of genome
packaging in related viruses.24 Furthermore,
selective RNA packaging has been described as a feature of innate
immune response evasion.25 Our results
emphasize that RNA sequence, and likely the secondary structure, is
important for interactions with the N-protein. Notably, only the NFL dimer binds RNA, suggesting that the dimer is the functional
unit of the SARS-CoV-2 ribonucleoprotein assembly. The preference
for the RNA sequence known to form stem loops also has implications
in efficient genome packaging and likely contributes to an optimized
packing density in the intact virion.

N1–209 Interacts Directly with Cyclophilin
ACyclophilin A (CypA), a highly abundant immunophilin found
in host cells, has been implicated in the replication cycle of coronaviruses26 and is known to aid in assembly of other viruses.27 We sought to determine if CypA could play a
role in SARS-CoV-2 infection through monitoring direct interactions
of CypA with N proteoforms. We incubated N1–209 and
CypA in a 1:1 molar ratio and used native mass spectrometry to measure
possible interactions. The mass spectrum reveals charge state distributions
that correspond to monomeric N1–209 and CypA and
three distinct charge state distributions at m/z > 3000 (Figure 3A). The three higher-m/z distributions correspond to (i) heterodimers of N1–209 and CypA, (ii) homodimers of CypA, and (iii) a low population of
homodimers of N1–209 (Table 2). Notably, we do not observe evidence of
CypA interacting with N1–220, N1–273, nor NFL under the same conditions (Figure S12–15).Figure 3N proteoforms directly interact with cyclophilin
A. (A) Mass spectrum
of N1–209 after incubation with cyclophilin A (CypA)
in a 1:1 molar ratio. The mass spectrum at m/z > 3000 was magnified 5× and offset for clarity
(red
trace). Three charge state distributions that correspond to a low
population of homodimers of N1–209, homodimers of
CypA, and heterodimers of N1–209–CypA. (B)
Mass spectrum of N1–209 after incubation with CypA
and cyclosporin A (CsA) in a molar ratio of 1:1:2. CypA preferentially
binds CsA as demonstrated by the charge state distribution centered
at 8+, which corresponds to the CypA–CsA complex. The mass
spectrum at m/z > 3500 was magnified
5× and offset (red trace) to highlight the exceedingly low abundance
of N1–209–CypA heterodimers that persist
after CsA treatment. The scheme (inset of B) depicts CsA competitively
binding to CypA and abolishing the N1–209–CypA
interaction.Table 2Deconvoluted and
Sequence Masses for
N Proteoform Complexesprotein/complexdeconvoluted massa ±
s.d. (Da)expected mass (Da)4 × −GAUGG RNA--6622.004 × −GAGAA
RNA--6650.20N1–209 + one 4 × −GAUGG RNA29 233 ± 0.429 234.71N1–209 + two 4 × −GAUGG RNA35 917 ± 1035 856.71N1–209 + one 4 × −GAGAA
RNA29 262 ± 129 262.91NFL dimer + two 4 × −GAUGG RNA105 131 ± 60104 783.66cyclophilin A (CypA)20 084 ± 0.420 175.8220 220 ± 0.8CypA dimers40 373 ± 6240 351.64N1–209 + CypA42 867 ± 1542 696.71N1–209 dimers45 356 ± 1545 225.42cyclosporin
A1202.85 ± 01202.63CypA + CsA21 287 ± 0.521 286.63mAb (monomer)137 990 ± 125--145 193 ± 109NFL + mAb183 931 ± 102183 759190 9622NFL + mAb229 984 ± 36229 528236 731aDetermined using
at least three
adjacent charge states.To determine if the interaction between N1–209 and
CypA could be inhibited by an approved immunosuppressant cyclosporin
A (CsA), we incubated the N1–209:CypA complex with
a 2-fold molar excess of the drug (Figure 3B). The mass spectrum reveals three abundant
charge state distributions: (i) a distribution centered at 9+ corresponding
to N1–209 monomers, (ii) a highly abundant distribution
centered at a charge state of 8+ that corresponds to CypA bound to
CsA, and (iii) a low-abundance distribution that corresponds to monomeric
CypA (Table 2). Very
low-abundance distributions of N1–209 homodimers,
CypA homodimers, and N1–209-CypA heterodimers are
barely detected following magnification >3000 m/z. Therefore, we can conclude that the 1:1 interaction
between
CypA and N1–209 can be inhibited by CsA binding
to CypA.

N1–209 Interacts Directly with Cyclophilin
A

Cyclophilin A (CypA), a highly abundant immunophilin found
in host cells, has been implicated in the replication cycle of coronaviruses26 and is known to aid in assembly of other viruses.27 We sought to determine if CypA could play a
role in SARS-CoV-2 infection through monitoring direct interactions
of CypA with N proteoforms. We incubated N1–209 and
CypA in a 1:1 molar ratio and used native mass spectrometry to measure
possible interactions. The mass spectrum reveals charge state distributions
that correspond to monomeric N1–209 and CypA and
three distinct charge state distributions at m/z > 3000 (Figure 3A). The three higher-m/z distributions correspond to (i) heterodimers of N1–209 and CypA, (ii) homodimers of CypA, and (iii) a low population of
homodimers of N1–209 (Table 2). Notably, we do not observe evidence of
CypA interacting with N1–220, N1–273, nor NFL under the same conditions (Figure S12–15).

N proteoforms directly interact with cyclophilin
A. (A) Mass spectrum
of N1–209 after incubation with cyclophilin A (CypA)
in a 1:1 molar ratio. The mass spectrum at m/z > 3000 was magnified 5× and offset for clarity
(red
trace). Three charge state distributions that correspond to a low
population of homodimers of N1–209, homodimers of
CypA, and heterodimers of N1–209–CypA. (B)
Mass spectrum of N1–209 after incubation with CypA
and cyclosporin A (CsA) in a molar ratio of 1:1:2. CypA preferentially
binds CsA as demonstrated by the charge state distribution centered
at 8+, which corresponds to the CypA–CsA complex. The mass
spectrum at m/z > 3500 was magnified
5× and offset (red trace) to highlight the exceedingly low abundance
of N1–209–CypA heterodimers that persist
after CsA treatment. The scheme (inset of B) depicts CsA competitively
binding to CypA and abolishing the N1–209–CypA
interaction.

Deconvoluted and
Sequence Masses for
N Proteoform Complexes

Determined using
at least three
adjacent charge states.

To determine if the interaction between N1–209 and
CypA could be inhibited by an approved immunosuppressant cyclosporin
A (CsA), we incubated the N1–209:CypA complex with
a 2-fold molar excess of the drug (Figure 3B). The mass spectrum reveals three abundant
charge state distributions: (i) a distribution centered at 9+ corresponding
to N1–209 monomers, (ii) a highly abundant distribution
centered at a charge state of 8+ that corresponds to CypA bound to
CsA, and (iii) a low-abundance distribution that corresponds to monomeric
CypA (Table 2). Very
low-abundance distributions of N1–209 homodimers,
CypA homodimers, and N1–209-CypA heterodimers are
barely detected following magnification >3000 m/z. Therefore, we can conclude that the 1:1 interaction
between
CypA and N1–209 can be inhibited by CsA binding
to CypA.

Antigenic Regions of N Are Located at the C-TerminusSince N protein is detected by antibodies with higher sensitivity
than any other structural proteins of SARS-CoV-2, we sought to determine
if all N proteoforms were similarly recognized by immunoglobulins.
We first incubated NFL with a monoclonal antibody (mAb)
raised against the full-length protein in molar ratios of 1:1 (Figure 4A). The mass spectrum
reveals three distributions >6000 m/z with deconvoluted masses that correspond to the apo antibody as
well as one and two NFL proteins bound (Table 2, Figure S16). When the same mAb was incubated with three N-terminal
proteoforms (N1–209, N1–220, and
N1–273) we did not observe any mAb binding in the
mass spectrum (Figure 4B). To validate these results with conventional methods, we turned
to protein detection by Coomassie stain and immunoblotting (Figure 4B, inset). The Coomassie
stain detected NFL and all proteoforms in high abundance.
In contrast, the immunoblot revealed detection of only NFL and N156–419, including higher-order oligomers
of N156–419, which were not detected by Coomassie
staining or mass spectrometry. N1–209 and N1–273 are barely detectable by the mAb, and N1–220 completely evades mAb detection. This suggests that the binding
epitope recognized by immunoglobulins is localized near the C-terminus
of N protein. If this were the case, then we would expect to see a
heightened antibody response to the C-terminal proteoform relative
to other proteoforms in convalescent plasma from patients with COVID-19.Figure 4N proteoforms
show significantly different interactions with antibodies.
(A) Mass spectrum of NFL after incubation with a monoclonal
antibody raised against the full-length N protein in a molar ratio
of 1:1. We observe five charge state distributions that correspond
to NFL monomers (centered at 13+), NFL dimers
(centered at 19+), a monomeric antibody (centered at 21+), an antibody
bound to one NFL (centered at 24+), and a population of antibodies
bound to NFL dimer (centered at 30+). (B) Mass spectrum
of a mixture of N1–209, N1–220, and N1–273 incubated with a monoclonal antibody
in a molar ratio of 1:1:1:1. Charge state distributions are observed
for antibody monomers and dimers. No binding to the antibody is observed
for N proteoforms. This result was confirmed by immunoblot (see inset).
SDS-PAGE shows that NFL, N1–209, N1–220, N1–273, and N156–419 are detected in high abundance by Coomassie stain. The same proteins
analyzed by immunoblot show that only NFL and N156–419 are detected by the antibody. The box-and-whisker plots depict the
antibody response for (C) IgM antibodies, (D) IgG antibodies, and
(E) IgA antibodies from plasma from eight patients collected >6
months
following initial COVID-19 diagnosis. The antibody response was determined
using the absorbance following colorimetric detection of a sandwich
ELISA where the immobilized antigen was NFL, N1–209, N1–220, N1–273, or N156–419. The squares represent the mean, the center line represents the
median, and the box represents the first quartile (25–75%)
of the distributed data. Asterisks represent statistically significant
differences when compared to NFL; p-values
denoted by asterisks are defined as * p < 0.05,
** p < 0.01, and *** p < 0.001.To test this hypothesis, we obtained convalescent
plasma from eight
patients >6 months after an initial diagnosis of COVID-19 and studied
the antibody response to the N proteoforms characterized herein. The
experiment was carried out using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) using all five proteoforms (NFL, N1–209, N1–220, N1–273, N156–419) as the antigen and considering all three antibody responses (IgM,
IgG, and IgA). The plasma antibodies were “sandwiched”
using an anti-IgM, anti-IgG, or anti-IgA detection antibody conjugated
with horseradish peroxidase for colorimetric detection. The antibody
response for all eight patients was measured as a function of the
absorbance and displayed as box plots (Figure 4C–E). More than 6 months after an
initial diagnosis of COVID-19, there are still detectable levels of
IgM, IgG, and IgA antibodies present against all N proteoforms in
convalescent plasma. IgM antibodies were detected in the highest abundance
with a statistically significant increase in detection for antibodies
against C-terminal proteoforms N1–273 and N156–419. Furthermore, when compared to NFL, the N-terminal proteoforms (N1–209, N1–220, N1–273) exhibited a significantly attenuated
IgG response. Interestingly, antibody interactions with NFL and N156–419 were not statistically different,
suggesting that the antigenic site for IgG recognition is localized
to the C-terminus of the N protein. Finally, serum IgA antibodies
were detected for all N proteoforms and showed a heightened response
to N156–419. These results allow us to conclude
that while all three antibodies are present, IgM antibodies are the
most prevalent for all N proteoforms and IgG antibodies exhibit significant
preference for the C-terminal proteoform.

Antigenic Regions of N Are Located at the C-Terminus

Since N protein is detected by antibodies with higher sensitivity
than any other structural proteins of SARS-CoV-2, we sought to determine
if all N proteoforms were similarly recognized by immunoglobulins.
We first incubated NFL with a monoclonal antibody (mAb)
raised against the full-length protein in molar ratios of 1:1 (Figure 4A). The mass spectrum
reveals three distributions >6000 m/z with deconvoluted masses that correspond to the apo antibody as
well as one and two NFL proteins bound (Table 2, Figure S16). When the same mAb was incubated with three N-terminal
proteoforms (N1–209, N1–220, and
N1–273) we did not observe any mAb binding in the
mass spectrum (Figure 4B). To validate these results with conventional methods, we turned
to protein detection by Coomassie stain and immunoblotting (Figure 4B, inset). The Coomassie
stain detected NFL and all proteoforms in high abundance.
In contrast, the immunoblot revealed detection of only NFL and N156–419, including higher-order oligomers
of N156–419, which were not detected by Coomassie
staining or mass spectrometry. N1–209 and N1–273 are barely detectable by the mAb, and N1–220 completely evades mAb detection. This suggests that the binding
epitope recognized by immunoglobulins is localized near the C-terminus
of N protein. If this were the case, then we would expect to see a
heightened antibody response to the C-terminal proteoform relative
to other proteoforms in convalescent plasma from patients with COVID-19.

N proteoforms
show significantly different interactions with antibodies.
(A) Mass spectrum of NFL after incubation with a monoclonal
antibody raised against the full-length N protein in a molar ratio
of 1:1. We observe five charge state distributions that correspond
to NFL monomers (centered at 13+), NFL dimers
(centered at 19+), a monomeric antibody (centered at 21+), an antibody
bound to one NFL (centered at 24+), and a population of antibodies
bound to NFL dimer (centered at 30+). (B) Mass spectrum
of a mixture of N1–209, N1–220, and N1–273 incubated with a monoclonal antibody
in a molar ratio of 1:1:1:1. Charge state distributions are observed
for antibody monomers and dimers. No binding to the antibody is observed
for N proteoforms. This result was confirmed by immunoblot (see inset).
SDS-PAGE shows that NFL, N1–209, N1–220, N1–273, and N156–419 are detected in high abundance by Coomassie stain. The same proteins
analyzed by immunoblot show that only NFL and N156–419 are detected by the antibody. The box-and-whisker plots depict the
antibody response for (C) IgM antibodies, (D) IgG antibodies, and
(E) IgA antibodies from plasma from eight patients collected >6
months
following initial COVID-19 diagnosis. The antibody response was determined
using the absorbance following colorimetric detection of a sandwich
ELISA where the immobilized antigen was NFL, N1–209, N1–220, N1–273, or N156–419. The squares represent the mean, the center line represents the
median, and the box represents the first quartile (25–75%)
of the distributed data. Asterisks represent statistically significant
differences when compared to NFL; p-values
denoted by asterisks are defined as * p < 0.05,
** p < 0.01, and *** p < 0.001.

To test this hypothesis, we obtained convalescent
plasma from eight
patients >6 months after an initial diagnosis of COVID-19 and studied
the antibody response to the N proteoforms characterized herein. The
experiment was carried out using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) using all five proteoforms (NFL, N1–209, N1–220, N1–273, N156–419) as the antigen and considering all three antibody responses (IgM,
IgG, and IgA). The plasma antibodies were “sandwiched”
using an anti-IgM, anti-IgG, or anti-IgA detection antibody conjugated
with horseradish peroxidase for colorimetric detection. The antibody
response for all eight patients was measured as a function of the
absorbance and displayed as box plots (Figure 4C–E). More than 6 months after an
initial diagnosis of COVID-19, there are still detectable levels of
IgM, IgG, and IgA antibodies present against all N proteoforms in
convalescent plasma. IgM antibodies were detected in the highest abundance
with a statistically significant increase in detection for antibodies
against C-terminal proteoforms N1–273 and N156–419. Furthermore, when compared to NFL, the N-terminal proteoforms (N1–209, N1–220, N1–273) exhibited a significantly attenuated
IgG response. Interestingly, antibody interactions with NFL and N156–419 were not statistically different,
suggesting that the antigenic site for IgG recognition is localized
to the C-terminus of the N protein. Finally, serum IgA antibodies
were detected for all N proteoforms and showed a heightened response
to N156–419. These results allow us to conclude
that while all three antibodies are present, IgM antibodies are the
most prevalent for all N proteoforms and IgG antibodies exhibit significant
preference for the C-terminal proteoform.

ConclusionWe
present a comprehensive characterization of SARS-CoV-2 N protein
and highlight molecular features that may influence the unique biology
of SARS-CoV-2 infection (Figure 5). Specifically, we find that N protein undergoes proteolysis
in the vicinity of the linker region, separating the two major domains
(the RNA binding and oligomerization domains). We identify various
stoichiometries of N proteoforms that are influenced by pH, explicitly
N156–419, which forms oligomers under both high-
and low-pH solution conditions. We also show that N proteoforms bind
RNA with a preference for GGG motifs and present evidence for NFL dimers being the functional unit of assembly in ribonucleoprotein
complexes. Furthermore, we determined that immunophilin CypA binds
directly to N1–209, an interaction that can be inhibited
through addition of the immunosuppressant cyclosporin A. To test the
immunogenicity of N proteoforms, we used a recombinant antibody and
immunoblot techniques to demonstrate that the antigenic site of SARS-CoV-2
N protein resides toward the C-terminus. To test this in an in vivo scenario, we obtained convalescent plasma from eight
patients >6 months after initial COVID-19 diagnosis. We discovered
a heightened IgG and IgA response for the NFL and N156–419 relative to N-terminal proteoforms N1–209, N1–220, and N1–273.Figure 5Scheme depicting
features of SARS-CoV-2 N protein during infection.
N protein undergoes proteolysis to produce N1–209, N1–220, N1–273, N156–419, and N1–392. NFL and N proteoforms
bind RNA with a preference for structured RNA, and NFL dimers
are likely functional unit of assembly in ribonucleoprotein complexes.
Immunophilin CypA binds directly to N1–209 but not
NFL, and the interaction can be inhibited through addition
of cyclosporin A (CsA). N156–419 and NFL interact with antibodies from convalescent plasma, while proteoforms
N1–209, N1–220, and N1–273 fail to induce the same antibody response.The flexibility of the intrinsically disordered regions in proteins
serves to provide conformational freedom for making favorable protein–protein
interactions while making proteins highly susceptible to proteolytic
cleavage. The nucleocapsid protein of SARS-CoV, responsible for the
SARS pandemic of 2002, was shown to undergo similar proteolytic cleavage;
however, the precise role of proteolysis in SARS-CoV N protein remains
elusive.28−30 New approaches in proteomics have revealed proteolytic
cleavage of multiple viral proteins during SARS-CoV-2 infection, including
extensive proteolysis of the N protein.31 Furthermore, our results share striking similarities with the cleavage
sites observed for both SARS-CoV and N protein from SARS-CoV-2-infected
cells.31One of the most critical
steps of viral proliferation is the packaging
of genomic material and its assembly into new virions. Genome packaging
of RNA viruses is highly selective and depends on specific nucleotide
sequences and complex structural elements called packaging signals
(Psi).32 It has recently been demonstrated
that HIV polyproteins have a stronger tendency to oligomerize in complex
with Psi-RNA relative to non-Psi RNA.33 Our results indicate that NFL and N proteoforms exhibit
preference for RNA sequences that mimic key structural features of
the genomic RNA.34 We anticipate that the
more efficient binding of N protein dimers to RNA with GGG motifs
underlies the selective packaging of genomic RNA in SARS-CoV-2. The
disruption of structural features of viral RNA has been proven to
inhibit replication in some viruses.35 In
the case of SARS-CoV-2, disruption of preferred RNA structures, and
therefore disruption of N protein–RNA interactions, presents
a promising strategy to intervene in replication and the potential
to develop live attenuated vaccines.Our results demonstrate
highly specific interactions between cyclophilin
A and N1–209. Cyclophilin A has been found in mature
virions of HIV and is known to play a key role in the replication
of HIV, hepatitis B, and other coronaviruses27 Interestingly, the interaction between cyclophilin A and the HIV
capsid protein is known to be conformation-dependent;36 we anticipate such parallels with SARS-CoV-2 and speculate
that other N proteoforms do not interact with CypA because of a conformational
change or restricted access to the interacting domains. Intervention
of the specific interactions between N proteoforms and cyclophilin
A could therefore prove beneficial as a component of treatment strategies.Considering antibody responses, proteoforms N1–209, N1–220, and N1–273 show a diminished
interaction with IgG antibodies in convalescent plasma when compared
to the full-length protein. These proteoforms could thereby contribute
to virtually unchecked virus proliferation, depending on their functional
roles and the protective properties of anti-N IgG. By contrast, N156–419 resulted in a heightened IgM response and an
IgG response that could not be differentiated from the full-length
protein, suggesting that the antigenic site is localized to the C-terminus.
This finding is in accord with epitope mapping of the homologous SARS-CoV
N protein.37−40 The significant differences in IgM, IgG, and IgA detection highlight
new avenues for therapies to direct immune responses and represent
potential targets for next-generation vaccine development.41Beyond the identification of potential
vaccine targets, several
additional therapeutic avenues are highlighted by this study. First,
inhibition of the proteolysis reaction would prevent the formation
of viral proteoforms that may be fine-tuned for various functions
within the viral lifecycle. While the mechanism behind the proteolysis
of N-protein is not yet understood, systematic mutation of cleavage
sites defined here could lead to mechanistic and structural insights
to enable small molecule screening of potential protease inhibitors.
Knowledge of N-protein-structured RNA interactions could also aid
the design of new therapeutics that would inhibit successful replication.
However, since N protein oligomerizes in the absence of RNA,42de novo drug design of assembly
inhibitors is complex, as it is necessary to consider the oligomerization
propensity of the various proteoforms at the pH regimes encountered
in the cellular environment. CsA and cyclosporine derivatives, such
as Alisporivir, however are more straightforward to track and have
become attractive candidates to treat COVID-19.43 Disruption of the cyclophilin A–N-proteoform interactions
shown here provides a convenient means of screening potential inhibitors
for hit-to-lead optimization. Given the likelihood that no one intervention
is likely to ameliorate the complex symptoms of COVID-19 infection,
our findings contribute proteoform-specific information that may guide
some of the many therapies under investigation.

We
present a comprehensive characterization of SARS-CoV-2 N protein
and highlight molecular features that may influence the unique biology
of SARS-CoV-2 infection (Figure 5). Specifically, we find that N protein undergoes proteolysis
in the vicinity of the linker region, separating the two major domains
(the RNA binding and oligomerization domains). We identify various
stoichiometries of N proteoforms that are influenced by pH, explicitly
N156–419, which forms oligomers under both high-
and low-pH solution conditions. We also show that N proteoforms bind
RNA with a preference for GGG motifs and present evidence for NFL dimers being the functional unit of assembly in ribonucleoprotein
complexes. Furthermore, we determined that immunophilin CypA binds
directly to N1–209, an interaction that can be inhibited
through addition of the immunosuppressant cyclosporin A. To test the
immunogenicity of N proteoforms, we used a recombinant antibody and
immunoblot techniques to demonstrate that the antigenic site of SARS-CoV-2
N protein resides toward the C-terminus. To test this in an in vivo scenario, we obtained convalescent plasma from eight
patients >6 months after initial COVID-19 diagnosis. We discovered
a heightened IgG and IgA response for the NFL and N156–419 relative to N-terminal proteoforms N1–209, N1–220, and N1–273.

Scheme depicting
features of SARS-CoV-2 N protein during infection.
N protein undergoes proteolysis to produce N1–209, N1–220, N1–273, N156–419, and N1–392. NFL and N proteoforms
bind RNA with a preference for structured RNA, and NFL dimers
are likely functional unit of assembly in ribonucleoprotein complexes.
Immunophilin CypA binds directly to N1–209 but not
NFL, and the interaction can be inhibited through addition
of cyclosporin A (CsA). N156–419 and NFL interact with antibodies from convalescent plasma, while proteoforms
N1–209, N1–220, and N1–273 fail to induce the same antibody response.

The flexibility of the intrinsically disordered regions in proteins
serves to provide conformational freedom for making favorable protein–protein
interactions while making proteins highly susceptible to proteolytic
cleavage. The nucleocapsid protein of SARS-CoV, responsible for the
SARS pandemic of 2002, was shown to undergo similar proteolytic cleavage;
however, the precise role of proteolysis in SARS-CoV N protein remains
elusive.28−30 New approaches in proteomics have revealed proteolytic
cleavage of multiple viral proteins during SARS-CoV-2 infection, including
extensive proteolysis of the N protein.31 Furthermore, our results share striking similarities with the cleavage
sites observed for both SARS-CoV and N protein from SARS-CoV-2-infected
cells.31

One of the most critical
steps of viral proliferation is the packaging
of genomic material and its assembly into new virions. Genome packaging
of RNA viruses is highly selective and depends on specific nucleotide
sequences and complex structural elements called packaging signals
(Psi).32 It has recently been demonstrated
that HIV polyproteins have a stronger tendency to oligomerize in complex
with Psi-RNA relative to non-Psi RNA.33 Our results indicate that NFL and N proteoforms exhibit
preference for RNA sequences that mimic key structural features of
the genomic RNA.34 We anticipate that the
more efficient binding of N protein dimers to RNA with GGG motifs
underlies the selective packaging of genomic RNA in SARS-CoV-2. The
disruption of structural features of viral RNA has been proven to
inhibit replication in some viruses.35 In
the case of SARS-CoV-2, disruption of preferred RNA structures, and
therefore disruption of N protein–RNA interactions, presents
a promising strategy to intervene in replication and the potential
to develop live attenuated vaccines.

Our results demonstrate
highly specific interactions between cyclophilin
A and N1–209. Cyclophilin A has been found in mature
virions of HIV and is known to play a key role in the replication
of HIV, hepatitis B, and other coronaviruses27 Interestingly, the interaction between cyclophilin A and the HIV
capsid protein is known to be conformation-dependent;36 we anticipate such parallels with SARS-CoV-2 and speculate
that other N proteoforms do not interact with CypA because of a conformational
change or restricted access to the interacting domains. Intervention
of the specific interactions between N proteoforms and cyclophilin
A could therefore prove beneficial as a component of treatment strategies.

Considering antibody responses, proteoforms N1–209, N1–220, and N1–273 show a diminished
interaction with IgG antibodies in convalescent plasma when compared
to the full-length protein. These proteoforms could thereby contribute
to virtually unchecked virus proliferation, depending on their functional
roles and the protective properties of anti-N IgG. By contrast, N156–419 resulted in a heightened IgM response and an
IgG response that could not be differentiated from the full-length
protein, suggesting that the antigenic site is localized to the C-terminus.
This finding is in accord with epitope mapping of the homologous SARS-CoV
N protein.37−40 The significant differences in IgM, IgG, and IgA detection highlight
new avenues for therapies to direct immune responses and represent
potential targets for next-generation vaccine development.41

Beyond the identification of potential
vaccine targets, several
additional therapeutic avenues are highlighted by this study. First,
inhibition of the proteolysis reaction would prevent the formation
of viral proteoforms that may be fine-tuned for various functions
within the viral lifecycle. While the mechanism behind the proteolysis
of N-protein is not yet understood, systematic mutation of cleavage
sites defined here could lead to mechanistic and structural insights
to enable small molecule screening of potential protease inhibitors.
Knowledge of N-protein-structured RNA interactions could also aid
the design of new therapeutics that would inhibit successful replication.
However, since N protein oligomerizes in the absence of RNA,42de novo drug design of assembly
inhibitors is complex, as it is necessary to consider the oligomerization
propensity of the various proteoforms at the pH regimes encountered
in the cellular environment. CsA and cyclosporine derivatives, such
as Alisporivir, however are more straightforward to track and have
become attractive candidates to treat COVID-19.43 Disruption of the cyclophilin A–N-proteoform interactions
shown here provides a convenient means of screening potential inhibitors
for hit-to-lead optimization. Given the likelihood that no one intervention
is likely to ameliorate the complex symptoms of COVID-19 infection,
our findings contribute proteoform-specific information that may guide
some of the many therapies under investigation.

Materials
and MethodsEthicsPatients were recruited from the John Radcliffe
Hospital in Oxford, United Kingdom, between March and May 2020 with
written and informed consent. Participants were identified from hospitalization
during the SARS-COV-2 pandemic and recruited into the Sepsis Immunomics
and International Severe Acute Respiratory and Emerging Infection
Consortium World Health Organization Clinical Characterization Protocol
UK (IRAS260007 and IRAS126600). Patient samples were collected at
least 28 days from the start of their symptoms. Ethical approval was
given by the South Central–Oxford C Research Ethics Committee
in England (reference: 13/SC/0149), Scotland A Research Ethics Committee
(reference: 20/SS/0028), and World Health Organization Ethics Review
Committee (RPC571 and RPC572l; 25 April 2013).Plasmid Construction and
Cell GrowthA codon-optimized
synthetic gene corresponding to the full-length nucleocapsid protein
(Thermo GeneArt, Regensburg, Germany) was cloned into a modified pET28a
vector using the In-Fusion cloning kit (Takara Bio Saint-Germain-en-Laye,
France). The resulting plasmid encoded for an N-terminal His6 tag followed by thrombin and tobacco etch virus cleavage sequences
upstream of the full-length nucleocapsid protein sequence. To generate
the nucleocapsid proteoforms, the desired sequences pertaining to
the truncated forms of the N protein were subcloned from the synthetic
gene using polymerase chain reaction (Phusion polymerase, New England
Biolabs, Hertfordshire, UK). All genes were cloned into the modified
pet28 vector, and gene sequences were confirmed by Sanger sequencing.Plasmids were transformed into BL21 (DE3) and streaked onto LB
agar plates supplemented with 50 mg mL–1 of kanamycin.
Several colonies were used to inoculate 100 mL of LB broth supplemented
with kanamycin and grown at 37 °C overnight. Aliquots of 10 mL
of the overnight precultures were used to inoculate 1 L of LB broth
supplemented with kanamycin. Cell cultures were grown to OD600 ≈ 0.6 before protein expression was induced with 0.5 μg
mL–1 of IPTG. Cells were grown for an additional
4 h at 37 °C before being harvested via centrifugation (5000g, 10 min, 4 °C). Cell pellets were flash frozen in
liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C until use.Protein
PurificationCell pellets were resuspended
in lysis buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 500 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 5 mM imidazole, 10% v/v glycerol)
containing EDTA-free protease inhibitor tablets (Roche). Cells were
lysed by five passes through a microfluidizer (prechilled to 4 °C)
at 20 000 psi. Cell debris was pelleted by centrifugation (20 000g, 20 min, 4 °C). The supernatant containing soluble
nucleocapsid protein was passed through a 0.45 μm filter.Supernatant was loaded onto a Ni-NTA column pre-equilibrated in loading
buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 500 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2,
5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 20 mM imidazole, 10% v/v glycerol) and
allowed to pass via gravity flow. To remove common contaminating proteins,
a heat-treated BL21 (DE3) E. coli lysate in loading
buffer containing 10 mM MgATP was passed over the immobilized nucleocapsid
protein using a protocol by Rial and Ceccarelli.44 The resin was washed with 10 column volumes of wash buffer
(25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 500 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol,
80 mM imidazole, 10% v/v glycerol) and then eluted twice with 10 mL
of elution buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 500 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 400 mM imidazole, 10% v/v
glycerol).The eluted protein was mixed with TEV protease in
a 100:1 (w/w)
ratio and loaded into a 3 kDa MWCO dialysis cassette (Thermo Fisher
Scientific, United Kingdom). Cleavage of the His6–thrombin–TEV
tag was carried out overnight at 4 °C in lysis buffer. The cleaved
tag and TEV protease were separated from the untagged protein using
reverse immobilized metal affinity chromatography on a Ni-NTA column
prepared in loading buffer. The flow-through containing the untagged
protein was collected and concentrated in a 10k MWCO centrifugal filter
before MS analysis. Protein concentration was determined using UV–vis
spectroscopy by monitoring the absorbance at 280 nm with a theoretical
extinction coefficient (ε ≈ 43 890 M–1 cm–1) determined using the Expasy Protparam tool.Native Mass SpectrometryRNA oligonucleotides of repeating
sequences (4 × −GAUGG, 4 × −GAGAA) were purchased
from Integrated DNA Technologies. Recombinant human cyclophilin A
(product ab86219) was purchased from Abcam (Cambridge, United Kingdom).
Cyclosporine A purchased from Merck Life Science (Dorset, United Kingdom).
N protein and all binding partners were buffer exchanged or diluted
into 500 mM NH4OAc pH 5.0, 7.4, or 8.0. Buffer exchange
was carried out using Zeba Spin Desalting Columns, 7K MWCO (Thermo
Fisher Scientific, United Kingdom).Measurements were carried
out on a Q Exactive UHMR or Orbitrap Eclipse. The Q Exactive instrument
was operated in the positive ion mode using the manufacturer’s
recommended parameters for native MS. The instrument was operated
at a resolving power of 12 500 (at m/z 200). An electrospray was generated by applying a slight
(∼0.5 mbar) backing pressure to an in-house-prepared gold-coated
electrospray capillary held at ∼1.2 kV relative to the instrument
orifice (heated to ∼100 °C). The mass spectra were deconvoluted
using in-house software (the Mass and Charge State Evaluation and
Determination tool, available for download at http://benesch.chem.ox.ac.uk/resources.html).An Eclipse Tribrid instrument was also used for native MS
and top-down
sequencing. The instrument was set to intact protein mode at a standard
ion routing multipole pressure of 10 mTorr. Ion voltages were set
to transmit and detect positive ions at a resolving power of 12 500
(at m/z 200). An electrospray voltage
of ∼1.2 kV and backing pressure of ∼0.5 mbar were used
for ion formation; desolvation was assisted using an instrument capillary
temperature of ∼100 °C. To identify the accurate mass
and sequence of each proteoform, we used a similar approach to that
described by Huguet et al.16 Briefly, a
desired signal was isolated using the ion trap (10 m/z isolation window, charge state set to 10) and
subjected to (i) electron-transfer dissociation (ETD, 3 ms activation
time, 1.0 × 106 ETD reagent target) to generate a
charge-reduced series for accurate intact mass determination and (ii)
higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) using ∼30–50
V HCD collision energy to generate fragment ions.Monoisotopic
masses of fragment ions generated by HCD having a
normalized intensity of 10% or higher were fed into Prosite Lite software.45 A series of candidate sequences that best matched
the measured intact masses for each proteoform were generated. The
monoisotopic fragment masses were matched to expected ions generated
in silico based on the provided candidate sequence. Internal fragments
(peptides resulting from multiple fragmentation events that include
neither the C-terminus nor the N-terminus of the protein) were excluded
from the analysis. Comparison of the statistical likelihood for each
match compared to a series of candidate sequences (Tables S1–S5) localized the cleavage sites to those
outlined in Figure 1E.Western BlotRecombinant antibody generated from the
full-length SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein (product ab272852) and
antihuman secondary antibody were purchased from Abcam. An additional
recombinant monoclonal antibody raised against the SARS-CoV nucleocapsid
protein (Invitrogen, MA5-29982) with cross-reactivity to the SARS-CoV-2
N protein was used for detection of N protein from HEK 293T cells.
Proteins were resolved on a 4–12% Bis-tris gel using SDS-PAGE
and transferred to a PVDF membrane (pore size 0.45 μm). The
membrane was blocked in 5% milk in TPBS for 1 h at RT, incubated with
primary antibody in 1:2000 dilution into blocking buffer (also 1 h,
RT) washed with TPBS, and incubated with secondary antibody (1:10 000)
in blocking buffer (also 1 h, RT). The PVDF membrane was incubated
with horseradish peroxidase chemiluminescent substrate (Pierce ECL
Western Blotting Substrate, Thermo Scientific) before detection on
photographic film and developed by an X-ray film processor (Xograph
Compact X4).Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent AssayRecombinant antibody
generated from the full-length SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein (product
ab272852) and goat antihuman IgM (ab97210), goat antihuman IgG (ab97160),
and goat antihuman IgA (ab8510) conjugated with horseradish peroxidase
(HRP) were purchased from Abcam. Nickel-coated clear 96-well plates
were purchased from Thermo Scientific (Thermo Fisher Scientific, United
Kingdom). Each well was loaded with 5 μg of his-tagged N protein
or N proteoform and incubated at room temperature for 1 h. Plates
were washed three times with 200 μL of phosphate buffered saline
(PBS) containing 0.05% Tween-20 (PBST). Patient plasma was diluted
10-fold with PBS, and 100 μL was added to each well. Negative
controls (five replicates) were run on each plate to assess absorbance
due to nonspecific binding of secondary antibodies. In the negative
controls, five wells were coated with NFL and incubated
with PBS instead of convalescent plasma. Antibodies from patient plasma
and the controls were incubated overnight at 4 °C. Plates were
washed three times with PBST. Goat antihuman IgG, IgM, and IgA secondary
antibodies were diluted 1:50 000 in PBS, 100 μL was added
to each well, including the controls, and the plates were incubated
at room temperature for 1 h. Plates were washed a further three times
with PBST. Colorimetric detection was carried out using a TMB chromogenic
substrate kit for HRP detection (Thermo Fisher Scientific, United
Kingdom). The reaction was quenched after 5 min using 2 M sulfuric
acid, resulting in a yellow color. Absorbance measurements were immediately
carried out at 450 nm using a microplate reader (BMG Labtech, Aylesbury,
United Kingdom).

Materials
and Methods

EthicsPatients were recruited from the John Radcliffe
Hospital in Oxford, United Kingdom, between March and May 2020 with
written and informed consent. Participants were identified from hospitalization
during the SARS-COV-2 pandemic and recruited into the Sepsis Immunomics
and International Severe Acute Respiratory and Emerging Infection
Consortium World Health Organization Clinical Characterization Protocol
UK (IRAS260007 and IRAS126600). Patient samples were collected at
least 28 days from the start of their symptoms. Ethical approval was
given by the South Central–Oxford C Research Ethics Committee
in England (reference: 13/SC/0149), Scotland A Research Ethics Committee
(reference: 20/SS/0028), and World Health Organization Ethics Review
Committee (RPC571 and RPC572l; 25 April 2013).

Patients were recruited from the John Radcliffe
Hospital in Oxford, United Kingdom, between March and May 2020 with
written and informed consent. Participants were identified from hospitalization
during the SARS-COV-2 pandemic and recruited into the Sepsis Immunomics
and International Severe Acute Respiratory and Emerging Infection
Consortium World Health Organization Clinical Characterization Protocol
UK (IRAS260007 and IRAS126600). Patient samples were collected at
least 28 days from the start of their symptoms. Ethical approval was
given by the South Central–Oxford C Research Ethics Committee
in England (reference: 13/SC/0149), Scotland A Research Ethics Committee
(reference: 20/SS/0028), and World Health Organization Ethics Review
Committee (RPC571 and RPC572l; 25 April 2013).

Plasmid Construction and
Cell GrowthA codon-optimized
synthetic gene corresponding to the full-length nucleocapsid protein
(Thermo GeneArt, Regensburg, Germany) was cloned into a modified pET28a
vector using the In-Fusion cloning kit (Takara Bio Saint-Germain-en-Laye,
France). The resulting plasmid encoded for an N-terminal His6 tag followed by thrombin and tobacco etch virus cleavage sequences
upstream of the full-length nucleocapsid protein sequence. To generate
the nucleocapsid proteoforms, the desired sequences pertaining to
the truncated forms of the N protein were subcloned from the synthetic
gene using polymerase chain reaction (Phusion polymerase, New England
Biolabs, Hertfordshire, UK). All genes were cloned into the modified
pet28 vector, and gene sequences were confirmed by Sanger sequencing.Plasmids were transformed into BL21 (DE3) and streaked onto LB
agar plates supplemented with 50 mg mL–1 of kanamycin.
Several colonies were used to inoculate 100 mL of LB broth supplemented
with kanamycin and grown at 37 °C overnight. Aliquots of 10 mL
of the overnight precultures were used to inoculate 1 L of LB broth
supplemented with kanamycin. Cell cultures were grown to OD600 ≈ 0.6 before protein expression was induced with 0.5 μg
mL–1 of IPTG. Cells were grown for an additional
4 h at 37 °C before being harvested via centrifugation (5000g, 10 min, 4 °C). Cell pellets were flash frozen in
liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C until use.

Plasmid Construction and
Cell Growth

A codon-optimized
synthetic gene corresponding to the full-length nucleocapsid protein
(Thermo GeneArt, Regensburg, Germany) was cloned into a modified pET28a
vector using the In-Fusion cloning kit (Takara Bio Saint-Germain-en-Laye,
France). The resulting plasmid encoded for an N-terminal His6 tag followed by thrombin and tobacco etch virus cleavage sequences
upstream of the full-length nucleocapsid protein sequence. To generate
the nucleocapsid proteoforms, the desired sequences pertaining to
the truncated forms of the N protein were subcloned from the synthetic
gene using polymerase chain reaction (Phusion polymerase, New England
Biolabs, Hertfordshire, UK). All genes were cloned into the modified
pet28 vector, and gene sequences were confirmed by Sanger sequencing.

Plasmids were transformed into BL21 (DE3) and streaked onto LB
agar plates supplemented with 50 mg mL–1 of kanamycin.
Several colonies were used to inoculate 100 mL of LB broth supplemented
with kanamycin and grown at 37 °C overnight. Aliquots of 10 mL
of the overnight precultures were used to inoculate 1 L of LB broth
supplemented with kanamycin. Cell cultures were grown to OD600 ≈ 0.6 before protein expression was induced with 0.5 μg
mL–1 of IPTG. Cells were grown for an additional
4 h at 37 °C before being harvested via centrifugation (5000g, 10 min, 4 °C). Cell pellets were flash frozen in
liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C until use.

Protein
PurificationCell pellets were resuspended
in lysis buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 500 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 5 mM imidazole, 10% v/v glycerol)
containing EDTA-free protease inhibitor tablets (Roche). Cells were
lysed by five passes through a microfluidizer (prechilled to 4 °C)
at 20 000 psi. Cell debris was pelleted by centrifugation (20 000g, 20 min, 4 °C). The supernatant containing soluble
nucleocapsid protein was passed through a 0.45 μm filter.Supernatant was loaded onto a Ni-NTA column pre-equilibrated in loading
buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 500 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2,
5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 20 mM imidazole, 10% v/v glycerol) and
allowed to pass via gravity flow. To remove common contaminating proteins,
a heat-treated BL21 (DE3) E. coli lysate in loading
buffer containing 10 mM MgATP was passed over the immobilized nucleocapsid
protein using a protocol by Rial and Ceccarelli.44 The resin was washed with 10 column volumes of wash buffer
(25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 500 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol,
80 mM imidazole, 10% v/v glycerol) and then eluted twice with 10 mL
of elution buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 500 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 400 mM imidazole, 10% v/v
glycerol).The eluted protein was mixed with TEV protease in
a 100:1 (w/w)
ratio and loaded into a 3 kDa MWCO dialysis cassette (Thermo Fisher
Scientific, United Kingdom). Cleavage of the His6–thrombin–TEV
tag was carried out overnight at 4 °C in lysis buffer. The cleaved
tag and TEV protease were separated from the untagged protein using
reverse immobilized metal affinity chromatography on a Ni-NTA column
prepared in loading buffer. The flow-through containing the untagged
protein was collected and concentrated in a 10k MWCO centrifugal filter
before MS analysis. Protein concentration was determined using UV–vis
spectroscopy by monitoring the absorbance at 280 nm with a theoretical
extinction coefficient (ε ≈ 43 890 M–1 cm–1) determined using the Expasy Protparam tool.

Protein
Purification

Cell pellets were resuspended
in lysis buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 500 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 5 mM imidazole, 10% v/v glycerol)
containing EDTA-free protease inhibitor tablets (Roche). Cells were
lysed by five passes through a microfluidizer (prechilled to 4 °C)
at 20 000 psi. Cell debris was pelleted by centrifugation (20 000g, 20 min, 4 °C). The supernatant containing soluble
nucleocapsid protein was passed through a 0.45 μm filter.

Supernatant was loaded onto a Ni-NTA column pre-equilibrated in loading
buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 500 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2,
5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 20 mM imidazole, 10% v/v glycerol) and
allowed to pass via gravity flow. To remove common contaminating proteins,
a heat-treated BL21 (DE3) E. coli lysate in loading
buffer containing 10 mM MgATP was passed over the immobilized nucleocapsid
protein using a protocol by Rial and Ceccarelli.44 The resin was washed with 10 column volumes of wash buffer
(25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 500 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol,
80 mM imidazole, 10% v/v glycerol) and then eluted twice with 10 mL
of elution buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 500 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 400 mM imidazole, 10% v/v
glycerol).

The eluted protein was mixed with TEV protease in
a 100:1 (w/w)
ratio and loaded into a 3 kDa MWCO dialysis cassette (Thermo Fisher
Scientific, United Kingdom). Cleavage of the His6–thrombin–TEV
tag was carried out overnight at 4 °C in lysis buffer. The cleaved
tag and TEV protease were separated from the untagged protein using
reverse immobilized metal affinity chromatography on a Ni-NTA column
prepared in loading buffer. The flow-through containing the untagged
protein was collected and concentrated in a 10k MWCO centrifugal filter
before MS analysis. Protein concentration was determined using UV–vis
spectroscopy by monitoring the absorbance at 280 nm with a theoretical
extinction coefficient (ε ≈ 43 890 M–1 cm–1) determined using the Expasy Protparam tool.

Native Mass SpectrometryRNA oligonucleotides of repeating
sequences (4 × −GAUGG, 4 × −GAGAA) were purchased
from Integrated DNA Technologies. Recombinant human cyclophilin A
(product ab86219) was purchased from Abcam (Cambridge, United Kingdom).
Cyclosporine A purchased from Merck Life Science (Dorset, United Kingdom).
N protein and all binding partners were buffer exchanged or diluted
into 500 mM NH4OAc pH 5.0, 7.4, or 8.0. Buffer exchange
was carried out using Zeba Spin Desalting Columns, 7K MWCO (Thermo
Fisher Scientific, United Kingdom).Measurements were carried
out on a Q Exactive UHMR or Orbitrap Eclipse. The Q Exactive instrument
was operated in the positive ion mode using the manufacturer’s
recommended parameters for native MS. The instrument was operated
at a resolving power of 12 500 (at m/z 200). An electrospray was generated by applying a slight
(∼0.5 mbar) backing pressure to an in-house-prepared gold-coated
electrospray capillary held at ∼1.2 kV relative to the instrument
orifice (heated to ∼100 °C). The mass spectra were deconvoluted
using in-house software (the Mass and Charge State Evaluation and
Determination tool, available for download at http://benesch.chem.ox.ac.uk/resources.html).An Eclipse Tribrid instrument was also used for native MS
and top-down
sequencing. The instrument was set to intact protein mode at a standard
ion routing multipole pressure of 10 mTorr. Ion voltages were set
to transmit and detect positive ions at a resolving power of 12 500
(at m/z 200). An electrospray voltage
of ∼1.2 kV and backing pressure of ∼0.5 mbar were used
for ion formation; desolvation was assisted using an instrument capillary
temperature of ∼100 °C. To identify the accurate mass
and sequence of each proteoform, we used a similar approach to that
described by Huguet et al.16 Briefly, a
desired signal was isolated using the ion trap (10 m/z isolation window, charge state set to 10) and
subjected to (i) electron-transfer dissociation (ETD, 3 ms activation
time, 1.0 × 106 ETD reagent target) to generate a
charge-reduced series for accurate intact mass determination and (ii)
higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) using ∼30–50
V HCD collision energy to generate fragment ions.Monoisotopic
masses of fragment ions generated by HCD having a
normalized intensity of 10% or higher were fed into Prosite Lite software.45 A series of candidate sequences that best matched
the measured intact masses for each proteoform were generated. The
monoisotopic fragment masses were matched to expected ions generated
in silico based on the provided candidate sequence. Internal fragments
(peptides resulting from multiple fragmentation events that include
neither the C-terminus nor the N-terminus of the protein) were excluded
from the analysis. Comparison of the statistical likelihood for each
match compared to a series of candidate sequences (Tables S1–S5) localized the cleavage sites to those
outlined in Figure 1E.

Native Mass Spectrometry

RNA oligonucleotides of repeating
sequences (4 × −GAUGG, 4 × −GAGAA) were purchased
from Integrated DNA Technologies. Recombinant human cyclophilin A
(product ab86219) was purchased from Abcam (Cambridge, United Kingdom).
Cyclosporine A purchased from Merck Life Science (Dorset, United Kingdom).
N protein and all binding partners were buffer exchanged or diluted
into 500 mM NH4OAc pH 5.0, 7.4, or 8.0. Buffer exchange
was carried out using Zeba Spin Desalting Columns, 7K MWCO (Thermo
Fisher Scientific, United Kingdom).

Measurements were carried
out on a Q Exactive UHMR or Orbitrap Eclipse. The Q Exactive instrument
was operated in the positive ion mode using the manufacturer’s
recommended parameters for native MS. The instrument was operated
at a resolving power of 12 500 (at m/z 200). An electrospray was generated by applying a slight
(∼0.5 mbar) backing pressure to an in-house-prepared gold-coated
electrospray capillary held at ∼1.2 kV relative to the instrument
orifice (heated to ∼100 °C). The mass spectra were deconvoluted
using in-house software (the Mass and Charge State Evaluation and
Determination tool, available for download at http://benesch.chem.ox.ac.uk/resources.html).

An Eclipse Tribrid instrument was also used for native MS
and top-down
sequencing. The instrument was set to intact protein mode at a standard
ion routing multipole pressure of 10 mTorr. Ion voltages were set
to transmit and detect positive ions at a resolving power of 12 500
(at m/z 200). An electrospray voltage
of ∼1.2 kV and backing pressure of ∼0.5 mbar were used
for ion formation; desolvation was assisted using an instrument capillary
temperature of ∼100 °C. To identify the accurate mass
and sequence of each proteoform, we used a similar approach to that
described by Huguet et al.16 Briefly, a
desired signal was isolated using the ion trap (10 m/z isolation window, charge state set to 10) and
subjected to (i) electron-transfer dissociation (ETD, 3 ms activation
time, 1.0 × 106 ETD reagent target) to generate a
charge-reduced series for accurate intact mass determination and (ii)
higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) using ∼30–50
V HCD collision energy to generate fragment ions.

Monoisotopic
masses of fragment ions generated by HCD having a
normalized intensity of 10% or higher were fed into Prosite Lite software.45 A series of candidate sequences that best matched
the measured intact masses for each proteoform were generated. The
monoisotopic fragment masses were matched to expected ions generated
in silico based on the provided candidate sequence. Internal fragments
(peptides resulting from multiple fragmentation events that include
neither the C-terminus nor the N-terminus of the protein) were excluded
from the analysis. Comparison of the statistical likelihood for each
match compared to a series of candidate sequences (Tables S1–S5) localized the cleavage sites to those
outlined in Figure 1E.

Western BlotRecombinant antibody generated from the
full-length SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein (product ab272852) and
antihuman secondary antibody were purchased from Abcam. An additional
recombinant monoclonal antibody raised against the SARS-CoV nucleocapsid
protein (Invitrogen, MA5-29982) with cross-reactivity to the SARS-CoV-2
N protein was used for detection of N protein from HEK 293T cells.
Proteins were resolved on a 4–12% Bis-tris gel using SDS-PAGE
and transferred to a PVDF membrane (pore size 0.45 μm). The
membrane was blocked in 5% milk in TPBS for 1 h at RT, incubated with
primary antibody in 1:2000 dilution into blocking buffer (also 1 h,
RT) washed with TPBS, and incubated with secondary antibody (1:10 000)
in blocking buffer (also 1 h, RT). The PVDF membrane was incubated
with horseradish peroxidase chemiluminescent substrate (Pierce ECL
Western Blotting Substrate, Thermo Scientific) before detection on
photographic film and developed by an X-ray film processor (Xograph
Compact X4).

Western Blot

Recombinant antibody generated from the
full-length SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein (product ab272852) and
antihuman secondary antibody were purchased from Abcam. An additional
recombinant monoclonal antibody raised against the SARS-CoV nucleocapsid
protein (Invitrogen, MA5-29982) with cross-reactivity to the SARS-CoV-2
N protein was used for detection of N protein from HEK 293T cells.
Proteins were resolved on a 4–12% Bis-tris gel using SDS-PAGE
and transferred to a PVDF membrane (pore size 0.45 μm). The
membrane was blocked in 5% milk in TPBS for 1 h at RT, incubated with
primary antibody in 1:2000 dilution into blocking buffer (also 1 h,
RT) washed with TPBS, and incubated with secondary antibody (1:10 000)
in blocking buffer (also 1 h, RT). The PVDF membrane was incubated
with horseradish peroxidase chemiluminescent substrate (Pierce ECL
Western Blotting Substrate, Thermo Scientific) before detection on
photographic film and developed by an X-ray film processor (Xograph
Compact X4).

Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent AssayRecombinant antibody
generated from the full-length SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein (product
ab272852) and goat antihuman IgM (ab97210), goat antihuman IgG (ab97160),
and goat antihuman IgA (ab8510) conjugated with horseradish peroxidase
(HRP) were purchased from Abcam. Nickel-coated clear 96-well plates
were purchased from Thermo Scientific (Thermo Fisher Scientific, United
Kingdom). Each well was loaded with 5 μg of his-tagged N protein
or N proteoform and incubated at room temperature for 1 h. Plates
were washed three times with 200 μL of phosphate buffered saline
(PBS) containing 0.05% Tween-20 (PBST). Patient plasma was diluted
10-fold with PBS, and 100 μL was added to each well. Negative
controls (five replicates) were run on each plate to assess absorbance
due to nonspecific binding of secondary antibodies. In the negative
controls, five wells were coated with NFL and incubated
with PBS instead of convalescent plasma. Antibodies from patient plasma
and the controls were incubated overnight at 4 °C. Plates were
washed three times with PBST. Goat antihuman IgG, IgM, and IgA secondary
antibodies were diluted 1:50 000 in PBS, 100 μL was added
to each well, including the controls, and the plates were incubated
at room temperature for 1 h. Plates were washed a further three times
with PBST. Colorimetric detection was carried out using a TMB chromogenic
substrate kit for HRP detection (Thermo Fisher Scientific, United
Kingdom). The reaction was quenched after 5 min using 2 M sulfuric
acid, resulting in a yellow color. Absorbance measurements were immediately
carried out at 450 nm using a microplate reader (BMG Labtech, Aylesbury,
United Kingdom).

Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay

Recombinant antibody
generated from the full-length SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein (product
ab272852) and goat antihuman IgM (ab97210), goat antihuman IgG (ab97160),
and goat antihuman IgA (ab8510) conjugated with horseradish peroxidase
(HRP) were purchased from Abcam. Nickel-coated clear 96-well plates
were purchased from Thermo Scientific (Thermo Fisher Scientific, United
Kingdom). Each well was loaded with 5 μg of his-tagged N protein
or N proteoform and incubated at room temperature for 1 h. Plates
were washed three times with 200 μL of phosphate buffered saline
(PBS) containing 0.05% Tween-20 (PBST). Patient plasma was diluted
10-fold with PBS, and 100 μL was added to each well. Negative
controls (five replicates) were run on each plate to assess absorbance
due to nonspecific binding of secondary antibodies. In the negative
controls, five wells were coated with NFL and incubated
with PBS instead of convalescent plasma. Antibodies from patient plasma
and the controls were incubated overnight at 4 °C. Plates were
washed three times with PBST. Goat antihuman IgG, IgM, and IgA secondary
antibodies were diluted 1:50 000 in PBS, 100 μL was added
to each well, including the controls, and the plates were incubated
at room temperature for 1 h. Plates were washed a further three times
with PBST. Colorimetric detection was carried out using a TMB chromogenic
substrate kit for HRP detection (Thermo Fisher Scientific, United
Kingdom). The reaction was quenched after 5 min using 2 M sulfuric
acid, resulting in a yellow color. Absorbance measurements were immediately
carried out at 450 nm using a microplate reader (BMG Labtech, Aylesbury,
United Kingdom).
