---
pmid: '17683935'
title: ESCRT-III dysfunction causes autophagosome accumulation and neurodegeneration.
authors:
- Lee JA
- Beigneux A
- Ahmad ST
- Young SG
- Gao FB
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2007.07.029
---

# ESCRT-III dysfunction causes autophagosome accumulation and neurodegeneration.
**Authors:** Lee JA, Beigneux A, Ahmad ST, Young SG, Gao FB
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cub.2007.07.029](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2007.07.029)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2007 Sep 18;17(18):1561-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2007.07.029. Epub
2007  Aug 2.

ESCRT-III dysfunction causes autophagosome accumulation and neurodegeneration.

Lee JA(1), Beigneux A, Ahmad ST, Young SG, Gao FB.

Author information:
(1)Gladstone Institute of Neurological Disease and Department of Neurology, 
University of California, San Francisco, California 94158, USA.

Erratum in
    Curr Biol. 2007 Sep 18;17(18):1622.

Defects in the endosomal-lysosomal pathway have been implicated in a number of 
neurodegenerative disorders. A key step in the endocytic regulation of 
transmembrane proteins occurs in a subset of late-endosomal compartments known 
as multivesicular bodies (MVBs), whose formation is controlled by endosomal 
sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT). The roles of ESCRT in dendritic 
maintenance and neurodegeneration remain unknown. Here, we show that mSnf7-2, a 
key component of ESCRT-III, is highly expressed in most mammalian neurons. Loss 
of mSnf7-2 in mature cortical neurons caused retraction of dendrites and 
neuronal cell loss. mSnf7-2 binds to CHMP2B, another ESCRT-III subunit, in which 
a rare dominant mutation is associated with frontotemporal dementia linked to 
chromosome 3 (FTD3). Ectopic expression of the mutant protein CHMP2B(Intron5) 
also caused dendritic retraction prior to neurodegeneration. CHMP2B(Intron5) was 
associated more avidly than CHMP2B(WT) with mSnf7-2, resulting in sequestration 
of mSnf7-2 in ubiquitin-positive late-endosomal vesicles in cortical neurons. 
Moreover, loss of mSnf7-2 or CHMP2B(Intron5) expression caused the accumulation 
of autophagosomes in cortical neurons and flies. These findings indicate that 
ESCRT-III dysfunction is associated with the autophagy pathway, suggesting a 
novel neurodegeneration mechanism that may have important implications for 
understanding FTD and other age-dependent neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2007.07.029
PMID: 17683935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
