---
pmid: '2805070'
title: The human telomere terminal transferase enzyme is a ribonucleoprotein that
  synthesizes TTAGGG repeats.
authors:
- Morin GB
journal: Cell
year: '1989'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(89)90035-4
---

# The human telomere terminal transferase enzyme is a ribonucleoprotein that synthesizes TTAGGG repeats.
**Authors:** Morin GB
**Journal:** Cell (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0092-8674(89)90035-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(89)90035-4)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 1989 Nov 3;59(3):521-9. doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(89)90035-4.

The human telomere terminal transferase enzyme is a ribonucleoprotein that 
synthesizes TTAGGG repeats.

Morin GB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06510.

I have identified an activity in crude HeLa cell extracts that satisfies the 
requirements for a human telomere terminal transferase or telomerase. It 
catalyzes the addition of a 6 nucleotide repeating pattern to oligonucleotide 
primers containing human or nonhuman telomeric repeat sequences. Direct sequence 
analyses of reaction products reveal the added sequence to be TTAGGG in all 
cases. Under optimal conditions 65-70 repeats can be synthesized. The enzyme has 
the properties of a ribonucleoprotein. Telomerase has previously been observed 
only in ciliated protozoans, which possess 10(4) - 10(7) macronuclear telomeres. 
The identification of telomerase in HeLa cells with only approximately 100 
telomeres indicates that telomerase-mediated telomere maintenance is conserved 
throughout eukaryotes.

DOI: 10.1016/0092-8674(89)90035-4
PMID: 2805070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
