---
pmid: '34738170'
title: Overexpression of cell-wall GPI-anchored proteins restores cell growth of N-glycosylation-defective
  och1 mutants in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
authors:
- Fukunaga T
- Sakurai Y
- Ohashi T
- Higuchi Y
- Maekawa H
- Takegawa K
journal: Appl Microbiol Biotechnol
year: '2021'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s00253-021-11649-5
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Overexpression of cell-wall GPI-anchored proteins restores cell growth of N-glycosylation-defective och1 mutants in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
**Authors:** Fukunaga T, Sakurai Y, Ohashi T, Higuchi Y, Maekawa H, Takegawa K
**Journal:** Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00253-021-11649-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-021-11649-5)

## Abstract

1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2021 Dec;105(23):8771-8781. doi: 
10.1007/s00253-021-11649-5. Epub 2021 Nov 5.

Overexpression of cell-wall GPI-anchored proteins restores cell growth of 
N-glycosylation-defective och1 mutants in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.

Fukunaga T(#)(1), Sakurai Y(#)(1), Ohashi T(1)(2), Higuchi Y(1), Maekawa H(1), 
Takegawa K(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Faculty of Agriculture, Kyushu 
University, 744 Motooka, Nishi-ku, Fukuoka, 819-0395, Japan.
(2)Department of Life Science, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Setsunan 
University, 17-8 Ikeda-Nakamachi, Neyagawa, Osaka, 572-8508, Japan.
(3)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Faculty of Agriculture, Kyushu 
University, 744 Motooka, Nishi-ku, Fukuoka, 819-0395, Japan. 
takegawa@agr.kyushu-u.ac.jp.
(#)Contributed equally

The glycoproteins of yeast contain a large outer chain on N-linked 
oligosaccharides; therefore, yeast is not suitable for producing therapeutic 
glycoproteins for human use. Using a deletion mutant strain of 
α1,6-mannosyltransferase (och1Δ), we previously produced humanized N-glycans in 
fission yeast; however, the Schizosaccharomyces pombe och1Δ cells displayed a 
growth delay even during vegetative growth, resulting in reduced productivity of 
heterologous proteins. To overcome this problem, here we performed a genome-wide 
screen for genes that would suppress the growth defect of temperature-sensitive 
och1Δ cells. Using a genomic library coupled with screening of 18,000 
transformants, we identified two genes (pwp1+, SPBC1E8.05), both encoding 
GPI-anchored proteins, that increased the growth rate of och1Δ cells, lacking 
the outer chain. We further showed that a high copy number of the genes was 
needed to improve the growth rate. Mutational analysis of Pwp1p revealed that 
the GPI-anchored region of Pwp1p is important in attenuating the growth defect. 
Analysis of disruptants of pwp1+ and SPBC1E8.05 showed that neither gene was 
essential for cell viability; however, both mutants were sensitive β-glucanase, 
suggesting that Pwp1p and the protein encoded by SPBC1E8.05 non-enzymatically 
support β-glucan on the cell-surface of S. pombe. Collectively, our work not 
only sheds light on the functional relationships between GPI-anchored proteins 
and N-linked oligosaccharides of glycoproteins in S. pombe, but also supports 
the application of S. pombe to the production of human glycoprotein. KEY POINTS: 
• We screened for genes that suppress the growth defect of fission yeast och1Δ 
cells. • Appropriate expression of GPI-anchored proteins alleviates the growth 
delay of och1Δ cells. • The GPI-anchor domain of Pwp1p is important for 
suppressing the growth defect of och1Δ cells.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-021-11649-5
PMID: 34738170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
