---
pmid: '2562955'
title: Cloning and expression of human arylsulfatase A.
authors:
- Stein C
- Gieselmann V
- Kreysing J
- Schmidt B
- Pohlmann R
- Waheed A
- Meyer HE
- O'Brien JS
- von Figura K
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1989'
full_text_available: false
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Cloning and expression of human arylsulfatase A.
**Authors:** Stein C, Gieselmann V, Kreysing J, Schmidt B, Pohlmann R, Waheed A, Meyer HE, O'Brien JS, von Figura K
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1989)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1989 Jan 15;264(2):1252-9.

Cloning and expression of human arylsulfatase A.

Stein C(1), Gieselmann V, Kreysing J, Schmidt B, Pohlmann R, Waheed A, Meyer HE, 
O'Brien JS, von Figura K.

Author information:
(1)Biochemie II, Universität Göttingen, Federal Republic of Germany.

A full length cDNA for human arylsulfatase A was cloned and sequenced. The 
predicted amino acid sequence comprises 507 residues. A putative signal peptide 
of 18 residues is followed by the NH2-terminal sequence of placental 
arylsulfatase A. One of the arylsulfatase A peptides ends 3 residues ahead of 
the predicted COOH terminus. This indicates that proteolytic processing of 
arylsulfatase A is confined to the cleavage of the signal peptide. The predicted 
sequence contains three potential N-glycosylation sites, two of which are likely 
to be utilized. The sequence shows no homology to any of the known sequences of 
lysosomal enzymes but a 35% identity to human steroid sulfatase. Transfection of 
monkey and baby hamster kidney cells resulted in an up to 200-fold increase of 
the arylsulfatase A activity. The arylsulfatase A was located in lysosome-like 
structures and transported to dense lysosomes in a mannose 6-phosphate 
receptor-dependent manner. The arylsulfatase A cDNA hybridizes to 2.0- and 
3.9-kilobase species in RNA from human fibroblasts and human liver. RNA species 
of similar size were detected in metachromatic leukodystrophy fibroblasts of two 
patients, in which synthesis of arylsulfatase A polypeptides was either 
detectable or absent.

PMID: 2562955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
