---
pmid: '18045908'
title: Lack of self-administration of cocaine in dopamine D1 receptor knock-out mice.
authors:
- Caine SB
- Thomsen M
- Gabriel KI
- Berkowitz JS
- Gold LH
- Koob GF
- Tonegawa S
- Zhang J
- Xu M
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2747091
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2284-07.2007
---

# Lack of self-administration of cocaine in dopamine D1 receptor knock-out mice.
**Authors:** Caine SB, Thomsen M, Gabriel KI, Berkowitz JS, Gold LH, Koob GF, Tonegawa S, Zhang J, Xu M
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2284-07.2007](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2284-07.2007)
**PMC:** [PMC2747091](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2747091/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2007 Nov 28;27(48):13140-50. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2284-07.2007.

Lack of self-administration of cocaine in dopamine D1 receptor knock-out mice.

Caine SB(1), Thomsen M, Gabriel KI, Berkowitz JS, Gold LH, Koob GF, Tonegawa S, 
Zhang J, Xu M.

Author information:
(1)Alcohol and Drug Abuse Research Center, McLean Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Belmont, Massachusetts 02478, USA. barak@mclean.harvard.edu

Evidence suggests a critical role for dopamine in the reinforcing effects of 
cocaine in rats and primates. However, self-administration has been less often 
studied in the mouse species, and, to date, "knock-out" of individual 
dopamine-related genes in mice has not been reported to reduce the reinforcing 
effects of cocaine. We studied the dopamine D1 receptor and cocaine 
self-administration in mice using a combination of gene-targeted mutation and 
pharmacological tools. Two cohorts with varied breeding and experimental 
histories were tested, and, in both cohorts, there was a significant decrease in 
the number of D1 receptor knock-out mice that met criteria for acquisition of 
cocaine self-administration (2 of 23) relative to wild-type mice (27 of 32). 
After extinction of responding with saline self-administration, dose-response 
studies showed that cocaine reliably and dose dependently maintained responding 
greater than saline in all wild-type mice but in none of the D1 receptor 
knock-out mice. The D1-like agonist SKF 82958 
(2,3,4,5,-tetrahydro-6-chloro-7,8-dihydroxy-1-phenyl-1H-3-benzazepine 
hydrobromide) and the D2-like agonist quinelorane both functioned as positive 
reinforcers in wild-type mice but not in D1 receptor mutant mice, whereas food 
and intravenous injections of the opioid agonist remifentanil functioned as 
positive reinforcers in both genotypes. Finally, pretreatment with the D1-like 
antagonist SCH 23390 
[R-(+)-8-chloro-2,3,4,5-tetrahydro-3-methyl-5-phenyl-1H-3-benzazepine-7-01] 
produced surmountable antagonism of the reinforcing effects of cocaine in the 
commonly used strain C57BL/6J. We conclude that D1 receptor knock-out mice do 
not reliably self-administer cocaine and that the D1 receptor is critical for 
the reinforcing effects of cocaine and other dopamine agonists, but not food or 
opioids, in mice.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2284-07.2007
PMCID: PMC2747091
PMID: 18045908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
