---
pmid: '25378478'
title: The mammalian tRNA ligase complex mediates splicing of XBP1 mRNA and controls
  antibody secretion in plasma cells.
authors:
- Jurkin J
- Henkel T
- Nielsen AF
- Minnich M
- Popow J
- Kaufmann T
- Heindl K
- Hoffmann T
- Busslinger M
- Martinez J
journal: EMBO J
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4282640
doi: 10.15252/embj.201490332
---

# The mammalian tRNA ligase complex mediates splicing of XBP1 mRNA and controls antibody secretion in plasma cells.
**Authors:** Jurkin J, Henkel T, Nielsen AF, Minnich M, Popow J, Kaufmann T, Heindl K, Hoffmann T, Busslinger M, Martinez J
**Journal:** EMBO J (2014)
**DOI:** [10.15252/embj.201490332](https://doi.org/10.15252/embj.201490332)
**PMC:** [PMC4282640](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4282640/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2014 Dec 17;33(24):2922-36. doi: 10.15252/embj.201490332. Epub 2014
Nov  6.

The mammalian tRNA ligase complex mediates splicing of XBP1 mRNA and controls 
antibody secretion in plasma cells.

Jurkin J(1), Henkel T(1), Nielsen AF(2), Minnich M(3), Popow J(4), Kaufmann 
T(1), Heindl K(5), Hoffmann T(3), Busslinger M(3), Martinez J(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences 
(IMBA), Vienna, Austria.
(2)European Molecular Biology Organization (EMBO), Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna, Austria.
(4)European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), Heidelberg, Germany.
(5)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(6)Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences 
(IMBA), Vienna, Austria javier.martinez@imba.oeaw.ac.at.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2014 Dec 17;33(24):2887-9. doi: 10.15252/embj.201490425.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a conserved stress-signaling pathway 
activated after accumulation of unfolded proteins within the endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER). Active UPR signaling leads to unconventional, enzymatic splicing 
of XBP1 mRNA enabling expression of the transcription factor XBP1s to control ER 
homeostasis. While IRE1 has been identified as the endoribonuclease required for 
cleavage of this mRNA, the corresponding ligase in mammalian cells has remained 
elusive. Here, we report that RTCB, the catalytic subunit of the tRNA ligase 
complex, and its co-factor archease mediate XBP1 mRNA splicing both in vitro and 
in vivo. Depletion of RTCB in plasma cells of Rtcb(fl/fl) Cd23-Cre mice prevents 
XBP1s expression, which normally is strongly induced during plasma cell 
development. RTCB-depleted plasma cells show reduced and disorganized ER 
structures as well as severe defects in antibody secretion. Targeting RTCB 
and/or archease thus represents a promising strategy for the treatment of a 
growing number of diseases associated with elevated expression of XBP1s.

© 2014 IMBA ‐ Institute of Molecular Biotechnology GmbH. Published under the 
terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

DOI: 10.15252/embj.201490332
PMCID: PMC4282640
PMID: 25378478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
