---
pmid: '2567699'
title: Cloning of full-length methylmalonyl-CoA mutase from a cDNA library using the
  polymerase chain reaction.
authors:
- Jansen R
- Kalousek F
- Fenton WA
- Rosenberg LE
- Ledley FD
journal: Genomics
year: '1989'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0888-7543(89)90300-5
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Cloning of full-length methylmalonyl-CoA mutase from a cDNA library using the polymerase chain reaction.
**Authors:** Jansen R, Kalousek F, Fenton WA, Rosenberg LE, Ledley FD
**Journal:** Genomics (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0888-7543(89)90300-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/0888-7543(89)90300-5)

## Abstract

1. Genomics. 1989 Feb;4(2):198-205. doi: 10.1016/0888-7543(89)90300-5.

Cloning of full-length methylmalonyl-CoA mutase from a cDNA library using the 
polymerase chain reaction.

Jansen R(1), Kalousek F, Fenton WA, Rosenberg LE, Ledley FD.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College 
of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030.

The polymerase chain reaction was used to clone a full-length human 
methylmalonyl-CoA mutase cDNA from a human liver library by priming with 
sequences from the 5' end of a partial cDNA and sequences in the phage vector. 
The amino acid sequence predicted from the cDNA corresponds to the authentic 
amino acid sequences of peptide fragment from purified methylmalonyl-CoA mutase. 
The open reading frame of the cDNA encodes 742 amino acids (82,283 Da) 
comprising a 32 amino acid mitochondrial leader sequence and a mature protein of 
710 amino acids (78,489 Da). The use of the polymerase chain reaction to 
"screen" the cDNA library represents a novel application of this technique. The 
full length will enable analysis of mutations underlying inherited methylmalonic 
acidemias caused by deficiency of the methylmalonyl-CoA mutase apoenzyme.

DOI: 10.1016/0888-7543(89)90300-5
PMID: 2567699 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
