---
pmid: '18160438'
title: Human butyrate-induced transcript 1 interacts with hepatitis C virus NS5A and
  regulates viral replication.
authors:
- Taguwa S
- Okamoto T
- Abe T
- Mori Y
- Suzuki T
- Moriishi K
- Matsuura Y
journal: J Virol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2259004
doi: 10.1128/JVI.02153-07
---

# Human butyrate-induced transcript 1 interacts with hepatitis C virus NS5A and regulates viral replication.
**Authors:** Taguwa S, Okamoto T, Abe T, Mori Y, Suzuki T, Moriishi K, Matsuura Y
**Journal:** J Virol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.02153-07](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.02153-07)
**PMC:** [PMC2259004](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2259004/)

## Abstract

1. J Virol. 2008 Mar;82(6):2631-41. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02153-07. Epub 2007 Dec 26.

Human butyrate-induced transcript 1 interacts with hepatitis C virus NS5A and 
regulates viral replication.

Taguwa S(1), Okamoto T, Abe T, Mori Y, Suzuki T, Moriishi K, Matsuura Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, 
Osaka University, 3-1 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) nonstructural protein 5A (NS5A) is required for the 
replication of the viral genome and is involved in several host signaling 
pathways. To gain further insight into the functional role of NS5A in HCV 
replication, we screened human cDNA libraries by a yeast two-hybrid system using 
NS5A as the bait and identified human butyrate-induced transcript 1 (hB-ind1) as 
a novel NS5A-binding protein. Endogenously and exogenously expressed hB-ind1 was 
coimmunoprecipitated with NS5A of various genotypes through the coiled-coil 
domain of hB-ind1. The small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated knockdown of 
hB-ind1 in human hepatoma cell lines suppressed the replication of HCV RNA 
replicons and the production of infectious particles of HCV genotype 2a strain 
JFH1. Furthermore, these reductions were canceled by the expression of an 
siRNA-resistant hB-ind1 mutant. Among the NS5A-binding host proteins involved in 
HCV replication, hB-ind1 exhibited binding with FKBP8, and hB-ind1 interacted 
with Hsp90 through the FxxW motif in its N-terminal p23 homology domain. The 
impairment of the replication of HCV RNA replicons and of the production of 
infectious particles of JFH1 virus in the hB-ind1 knockdown cell lines was not 
reversed by the expression of an siRNA-resistant hB-ind1 mutant in which the 
FxxW motif was replaced by AxxA. These results suggest that hB-ind1 plays a 
crucial role in HCV RNA replication and the propagation of JFH1 virus through 
interaction with viral and host proteins.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02153-07
PMCID: PMC2259004
PMID: 18160438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) nonstructural protein 5A (NS5A) is required for the replication of the viral genome and is involved in several host signaling pathways. To gain further insight into the functional role of NS5A in HCV replication, we screened human cDNA libraries by a yeast two-hybrid system using NS5A as the bait and identified human butyrate-induced transcript 1 (hB-ind1) as a novel NS5A-binding protein. Endogenously and exogenously expressed hB-ind1 was coimmunoprecipitated with NS5A of various genotypes through the coiled-coil domain of hB-ind1. The small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated knockdown of hB-ind1 in human hepatoma cell lines suppressed the replication of HCV RNA replicons and the production of infectious particles of HCV genotype 2a strain JFH1. Furthermore, these reductions were canceled by the expression of an siRNA-resistant hB-ind1 mutant. Among the NS5A-binding host proteins involved in HCV replication, hB-ind1 exhibited binding with FKBP8, and hB-ind1 interacted with Hsp90 through the FxxW motif in its N-terminal p23 homology domain. The impairment of the replication of HCV RNA replicons and of the production of infectious particles of JFH1 virus in the hB-ind1 knockdown cell lines was not reversed by the expression of an siRNA-resistant hB-ind1 mutant in which the FxxW motif was replaced by AxxA. These results suggest that hB-ind1 plays a crucial role in HCV RNA replication and the propagation of JFH1 virus through interaction with viral and host proteins.

DISCUSSION

In this study we have shown that hB-ind1 participates in HCV RNA replication and particle production through interaction with NS5A, FKBP8, and Hsp90. hB-ind1 was initially identified as a downstream transducer of Rac1, a member of the small GTP-binding proteins, in mouse fibroblasts treated with sodium butyrate, a multifunctional agent known to inhibit cell proliferation and to induce differentiation by modulating transcription ( 6 , 10 ). Rac1 possesses diverse biological functions, including cytoskeletal dynamics, membrane ruffling, cell cycle progression, gene transcription, and cell survival ( 4 , 31 , 49 ). Previous studies have suggested that hB-ind1 mediates Rac1 and Jun N-terminal protein kinase-NF-κB signaling and is involved in the regulation of gene expression ( 6 , 10 ). Inhibition of Rac1 function leads to disruption of cytoskeleton dynamics, resulting in impairment of cell growth ( 17 , 69 ).

Inhibition of cell growth downregulates HCV RNA replication in the replicon cell line ( 41 , 51 ), and cell cycle regulation affects HCV IRES-mediated translation ( 20 , 61 ). Furthermore, cytoskeletal regulation is required for HCV RNA synthesis ( 3 ). However, knockdown of hB-ind1 and expression of the deletion mutants exhibited neither morphological change nor suppression of cell growth, suggesting that the suppression of HCV replication by dysfunction of hB-ind1 is not due to cell growth arrest or cytoskeletal disruption. Murine B-ind1 has been reported to be expressed in all mouse tissues examined, with abundant expression detected in the testis, kidney, brain, and liver ( 10 ). Significant levels of endogenous hB-ind1 expression have been detected in the human hepatic cell lines Huh7, HepG2, Hep3B, and FLC4 and in the nonhepatic human cell lines HeLa, 293T, and THP-1 (data not shown); therefore, the tissue specificity of HCV replication could not be explained by the expression of hB-ind1.

Combination therapy with IFN and cyclosporine A has been shown to be effective for patients infected with a high viral load of HCV genotype 1b ( 24 ), and cyclosporine A has been shown to suppress HCV RNA replication in vitro through deactivation of the interaction between NS5B and cyclophilin B ( 66 ). Cyclophilin and FKBP are classified as immunophilins capable of binding to immunosuppressants cyclosporine A and FK506, respectively ( 33 ). The immunophilins do not share a homologous domain with each other, based on their amino acid sequences, substrate specificities, and inhibitor sensitivities. We have recently reported that NS5A binds specifically to FKBP8 but not to other homologous immunophilins such as FKBP52 and cyclophilin D. FKBP8 forms both a homomultimer and a heteromultimer with the chaperone protein Hsp90. Mutation analyses of FKBP8 and Hsp90 suggest that FKBP8 acts as an intermediate between NS5A and Hsp90 via the different position of the TPR domain in FKBP8 and regulates HCV genome replication ( 45 ).

The molecular chaperone Hsp90 is one of the most abundant proteins in unstressed cells and generally requires various cochaperone proteins in multiple steps to promote the folding, functional maturation, and stability of its client proteins. Newly synthesized unfolded client proteins are delivered to the Hsp70 complex via Hsp40. In most cases, Hsp70 is able to process the client proteins on its own. Certain substrates require Hsp90 for proper folding or activation. In this case, the scaffold protein Hop connects elements of the Hsp70 and Hsp90 machineries to form an intermediate complex ( 2 , 12 , 13 , 47 ). In the late stage, the Hsp70 component dissociates, and at the same time, p23 and immunophilins enter the complex ( 44 , 54 ) and the client proteins are refolded by Hsp90 chaperone activity to achieve the mature form. After that, p23 enhances the dissociation of the mature client protein from the final complex, and the released Hsp90 enters in the next chaperone cycle ( 72 ). It has been reported that Hsp90 cochaperone frequencies differ among client proteins ( 50 ). FKBP8 interacts with the C-terminal MEEVD motif of Hsp90 through the carboxylate clump position in the TPR domain of FKBP8 ( 45 ).

The C-terminal region of hB-ind1 shares homology with PTPLA ( 60 ). Protein tyrosine phosphatases are generally involved in the signaling pathways regulating metabolism, cell growth, differentiation, and cytoskeletal dynamics through the conserved HC(x) 5 R motif ( 57 ). NS5A also interacts with signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) and impairs IFN signaling through the suppression of STAT1 phosphorylation ( 30 ). In addition, intracellular uptake of apoptotic cells expressing NS5A by dendritic cells leads to an increase in the secretion of CXCL-8 and impairment of IFN-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT1 and STAT2 ( 67 ). Although hB-ind1 lacks the conserved active motif, the interaction of NS5A with the coiled-coil domain in the central region of hB-ind1 may have an effect on the phosphorylation of host proteins involved in the replication of HCV.

Hsp90 has been shown to be involved in the enzymatic activity and intracellular localization of several viral polymerases, including those of influenza virus ( 39 , 42 ), herpes simplex virus type 1 ( 5 ), and Flock house virus ( 25 ). Knockdown and treatment with an Hsp90 inhibitor have revealed that Hsp90 activity is important for the rapid growth of negative-strand RNA viruses ( 9 ). Furthermore, Hsp90 has been shown to be required for the activity of hepatitis B virus reverse transcriptase ( 21 , 22 ). Although the precise mechanisms by which Hsp90 and FKBP8 cooperate with NS5A to improve the in vivo replication of HCV have not been clarified yet, treatment with Hsp90 inhibitors in combination with IFN reduced HCV replication in mice xenotransplanted with human liver fragments ( 43 ).

In this study, hB-ind1 was shown to interact with Hsp90 through the FxxW motif in the N-terminal p23 homology domain, and the interaction of hB-ind1 with Hsp90 was shown to be further intensified by the expression of FKBP8, suggesting that FKBP8 and hB-ind1 cooperatively recruit Hsp90 to the HCV replication complex. Furthermore, hB-ind1 was shown to be involved in HCV genomic RNA replication and particle production through the interaction with NS5A and Hsp90. These results suggest that hB-ind1 may be involved in the Hsp90 chaperone pathway in a function similar to that of p23 in cooperation with immunophilins such as FKBP8 and that it plays a crucial role in HCV replication in terms of the correct folding of the replication complex required for efficient enzymatic activity. In addition, cyclophilin B may also participate in the translocation of NS5B, as seen in the polymerase subunits of influenza virus, to facilitate binding to the viral RNA. In contrast to cyclosporine A, FK506 per se exhibits no inhibition of RNA replication in HCV replicon cells ( 65 ). FKBP8 is a member of the FKBP family but lacks several amino acid residues required for peptidyl-prolyl cis - trans isomerase and FK506 binding activities ( 29 ). Therefore, nonimmunosuppressive FK506 derivatives that are capable of binding to FKBP8 may exhibit anti-HCV activity. Recently, geldanamycin, an inhibitor of Hsp90, was shown to drastically impair the replication of poliovirus without any escape mutant emerging ( 15 ). Therefore, elucidation of host proteins, including immunophilins, cochaperones, and chaperones, participating in the HCV replication complex may lead to the development of new therapeutics for chronic hepatitis C with a broad spectrum and a low possibility of emergence of breakthrough viruses against antiviral drugs.

In conclusion, in this study we demonstrated that hB-ind1 is involved in HCV replication through interactions with NS5A, FKBP8, and Hsp90. Further clarification of the relationship between viral and host proteins is needed in order to understand the precise mechanism of HCV replication.
