---
pmid: '19420709'
title: 'SLC39A9 (ZIP9) regulates zinc homeostasis in the secretory pathway: characterization
  of the ZIP subfamily I protein in vertebrate cells.'
authors:
- Matsuura W
- Yamazaki T
- Yamaguchi-Iwai Y
- Masuda S
- Nagao M
- Andrews GK
- Kambe T
journal: Biosci Biotechnol Biochem
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1271/bbb.80910
---

# SLC39A9 (ZIP9) regulates zinc homeostasis in the secretory pathway: characterization of the ZIP subfamily I protein in vertebrate cells.
**Authors:** Matsuura W, Yamazaki T, Yamaguchi-Iwai Y, Masuda S, Nagao M, Andrews GK, Kambe T
**Journal:** Biosci Biotechnol Biochem (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1271/bbb.80910](https://doi.org/10.1271/bbb.80910)

## Abstract

1. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2009 May;73(5):1142-8. doi: 10.1271/bbb.80910. Epub
 2009 May 7.

SLC39A9 (ZIP9) regulates zinc homeostasis in the secretory pathway: 
characterization of the ZIP subfamily I protein in vertebrate cells.

Matsuura W(1), Yamazaki T, Yamaguchi-Iwai Y, Masuda S, Nagao M, Andrews GK, 
Kambe T.

Author information:
(1)Division of Integrated Life Science, Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto 
University, Kyoto, Japan.

The SLC39A family of zinc transporters can be divided into four subfamilies (I, 
II, LIV-1, and gufA) in vertebrates, but studies of their functions have been 
restricted exclusively to members of subfamilies II and LIV-1. In this study, we 
characterized SLC39A9 (ZIP9), the only member of subfamily I in vertebrates. 
Confocal microscopy demonstrated that transiently expressed, HA-tagged human 
ZIP9 (hZIP9-HA) was localized to the trans-Golgi network regardless of zinc 
status. Disruption of the ZIP9 gene in DT40 cells did not change the growth 
rate, sensitivity to high zinc and manganese concentrations during long-term 
culture, or cellular zinc status after short-term incubation with zinc. The 
alkaline phosphatase activity of ZIP9(-/-) cells did not change in cells 
cultured in medium containing normal zinc levels. In contrast, the activity of 
this enzyme decreased in wild-type cells cultured in zinc deficient medium but 
less so in ZIP9(-/-) cells under these conditions. Stable over-expression of 
hZIP9-HA moderately decreased alkaline phophatase activity. These results 
suggest that ZIP9 functions to regulate zinc homeostasis in the secretory 
pathway without significantly altering cytosolic zinc homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1271/bbb.80910
PMID: 19420709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
