---
pmid: '25134449'
title: The PP4R1 subunit of protein phosphatase PP4 targets TRAF2 and TRAF6 to mediate
  inhibition of NF-κB activation.
authors:
- Hadweh P
- Habelhah H
- Kieff E
- Mosialos G
- Hatzivassiliou E
journal: Cell Signal
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.08.001
---

# The PP4R1 subunit of protein phosphatase PP4 targets TRAF2 and TRAF6 to mediate inhibition of NF-κB activation.
**Authors:** Hadweh P, Habelhah H, Kieff E, Mosialos G, Hatzivassiliou E
**Journal:** Cell Signal (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.08.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.08.001)

## Abstract

1. Cell Signal. 2014 Dec;26(12):2730-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.08.001. Epub 
2014 Aug 16.

The PP4R1 subunit of protein phosphatase PP4 targets TRAF2 and TRAF6 to mediate 
inhibition of NF-κB activation.

Hadweh P(1), Habelhah H(2), Kieff E(3), Mosialos G(4), Hatzivassiliou E(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Biology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 54124 Thessaloniki, 
Macedonia, Greece.
(2)Department of Pathology, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, IA 52242, United States.
(3)Department of Medicine and Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Channing 
Laboratory, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 
02115, United States.
(4)School of Biology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 54124 Thessaloniki, 
Macedonia, Greece. Electronic address: gmosialo@bio.auth.gr.
(5)Laboratory of Biological Chemistry, Medical School, Aristotle University of 
Thessaloniki, 54124 Thessaloniki, Macedonia, Greece. Electronic address: 
eudoxiah@auth.gr.

TRAFs constitute a family of proteins that have been implicated in signal 
transduction by immunomodulatory cellular receptors and viral proteins. TRAF2 
and TRAF6 have an E3-ubiquitin ligase activity, which is dependent on the 
integrity of their RING finger domain and it has been associated with their 
ability to activate the NF-κB and AP1 signaling pathways. A yeast two-hybrid 
screen with TRAF2 as bait, identified the regulatory subunit PP4R1 of protein 
phosphatase PP4 as a TRAF2-interacting protein. The interaction of TRAF2 with 
PP4R1 depended on the integrity of the RING finger domain of TRAF2. PP4R1 could 
interact also with the TRAF2-related factor TRAF6 in a RING domain-dependent 
manner. Exogenous expression of PP4R1 inhibited NF-κB activation by TRAF2, 
TRAF6, TNF and the Epstein-Barr virus oncoprotein LMP1. In addition, expression 
of PP4R1 downregulated IL8 induction by LMP1, whereas downregulation of PP4R1 by 
RNA interference enhanced the induction of IL8 by LMP1 and TNF. PP4R1 could 
mediate the dephosphorylation of TRAF2 Ser11, which has been previously 
implicated in TRAF2-mediated activation of NF-κB. Finally, PP4R1 could inhibit 
TRAF6 polyubiquitination, suggesting an interference with the E3 ubiquitin 
ligase activity of TRAF6. Taken together, our data identify a novel mechanism of 
NF-κB pathway inhibition which is mediated by PP4R1-dependent targeting of 
specific TRAF molecules.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.08.001
PMID: 25134449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
