---
pmid: '22405012'
title: Cdc6-induced conformational changes in ORC bound to origin DNA revealed by
  cryo-electron microscopy.
authors:
- Sun J
- Kawakami H
- Zech J
- Speck C
- Stillman B
- Li H
journal: Structure
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3299985
doi: 10.1016/j.str.2012.01.011
---

# Cdc6-induced conformational changes in ORC bound to origin DNA revealed by cryo-electron microscopy.
**Authors:** Sun J, Kawakami H, Zech J, Speck C, Stillman B, Li H
**Journal:** Structure (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.str.2012.01.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2012.01.011)
**PMC:** [PMC3299985](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3299985/)

## Abstract

1. Structure. 2012 Mar 7;20(3):534-44. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2012.01.011.

Cdc6-induced conformational changes in ORC bound to origin DNA revealed by 
cryo-electron microscopy.

Sun J(1), Kawakami H, Zech J, Speck C, Stillman B, Li H.

Author information:
(1)Biology Department, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY 11973, USA.

The eukaryotic origin recognition complex (ORC) interacts with and remodels 
origins of DNA replication prior to initiation in S phase. Here, we report a 
single-particle cryo-EM-derived structure of the supramolecular assembly 
comprising Saccharomyces cerevisiae ORC, the replication initiation factor Cdc6, 
and double-stranded ARS1 origin DNA in the presence of ATPγS. The six subunits 
of ORC are arranged as Orc1:Orc4:Orc5:Orc2:Orc3, with Orc6 binding to Orc2. Cdc6 
binding changes the conformation of ORC, in particular reorienting the Orc1 
N-terminal BAH domain. Segmentation of the 3D map of ORC-Cdc6 on DNA and docking 
with the crystal structure of the homologous archaeal Orc1/Cdc6 protein suggest 
an origin DNA binding model in which the DNA tracks along the interior surface 
of the crescent-like ORC. Thus, ORC bends and wraps the DNA. This model is 
consistent with the observation that binding of a single Cdc6 extends the ORC 
footprint on origin DNA from both ends.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2012.01.011
PMCID: PMC3299985
PMID: 22405012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
