---
pmid: '8887667'
title: Spindle pole body separation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae requires dephosphorylation
  of the tyrosine 19 residue of Cdc28.
authors:
- Lim HH
- Goh PY
- Surana U
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC231640
doi: 10.1128/MCB.16.11.6385
---

# Spindle pole body separation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae requires dephosphorylation of the tyrosine 19 residue of Cdc28.
**Authors:** Lim HH, Goh PY, Surana U
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.16.11.6385](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.16.11.6385)
**PMC:** [PMC231640](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC231640/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Nov;16(11):6385-97. doi: 10.1128/MCB.16.11.6385.

Spindle pole body separation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae requires 
dephosphorylation of the tyrosine 19 residue of Cdc28.

Lim HH(1), Goh PY, Surana U.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, National University of Singapore.

In eukaryotes, mitosis requires the activation of cdc2 kinase via association 
with cyclin B and dephosphorylation of the threonine 14 and tyrosine 15 
residues. It is known that in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, a 
homologous kinase, Cdc28, mediates the progression through M phase, but it is 
not clear what specific mitotic function its activation by the dephosphorylation 
of an equivalent tyrosine (Tyr-19) serves. We report here that cells expressing 
cdc28-E19 (in which Tyr-19 is replaced by glutamic acid) perform Start-related 
functions, complete DNA synthesis, and exhibit high levels of Clb2-associated 
kinase activity but are unable to form bipolar spindles. The failure of these 
cells to form mitotic spindles is due to their inability to segregate duplicated 
spindle pole bodies (SPBs), a phenotype strikingly similar to that exhibited by 
a previously reported mutant defective in both kinesin-like motor proteins Cin8 
and Kip1. We also find that the overexpression of SWE1, the budding-yeast 
homolog of wee1, also leads to a failure to segregate SPBs. These results imply 
that dephosphorylation of Tyr-19 is required for the segregation of SPBs. The 
requirement of Tyr-19 dephosphorylation for spindle assembly is also observed 
under conditions in which spindle formation is independent of mitosis, 
suggesting that the involvement of Cdc28/Clb kinase in SPB separation is direct. 
On the basis of these results, we propose that one of the roles of Tyr-19 
dephosphorylation is to promote SPB separation.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.16.11.6385
PMCID: PMC231640
PMID: 8887667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

In eukaryotes, mitosis requires the activation of cdc2 kinase via association with cyclin B and dephosphorylation of the threonine 14 and tyrosine 15 residues. It is known that in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, a homologous kinase, Cdc28, mediates the progression through M phase, but it is not clear what specific mitotic function its activation by the dephosphorylation of an equivalent tyrosine (Tyr-19) serves. We report here that cells expressing cdc28-E19 (in which Tyr-19 is replaced by glutamic acid) perform Start-related functions, complete DNA synthesis, and exhibit high levels of Clb2-associated kinase activity but are unable to form bipolar spindles. The failure of these cells to form mitotic spindles is due to their inability to segregate duplicated spindle pole bodies (SPBs), a phenotype strikingly similar to that exhibited by a previously reported mutant defective in both kinesin-like motor proteins Cin8 and Kip1. We also find that the overexpression of SWE1, the budding-yeast homolog of wee1, also leads to a failure to segregate SPBs. These results imply that dephosphorylation of Tyr-19 is required for the segregation of SPBs. The requirement of Tyr-19 dephosphorylation for spindle assembly is also observed under conditions in which spindle formation is independent of mitosis, suggesting that the involvement of Cdc28/Clb kinase in SPB separation is direct. On the basis of these results, we propose that one of the roles of Tyr-19 dephosphorylation is to promote SPB separation.
