---
pmid: '14627991'
title: Serine mutations that abrogate ligand-induced ubiquitination and internalization
  of the EGF receptor do not affect c-Cbl association with the receptor.
authors:
- Oksvold MP
- Thien CB
- Widerberg J
- Chantry A
- Huitfeldt HS
- Langdon WY
journal: Oncogene
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1207117
---

# Serine mutations that abrogate ligand-induced ubiquitination and internalization of the EGF receptor do not affect c-Cbl association with the receptor.
**Authors:** Oksvold MP, Thien CB, Widerberg J, Chantry A, Huitfeldt HS, Langdon WY
**Journal:** Oncogene (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1207117](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1207117)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2003 Nov 20;22(52):8509-18. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1207117.

Serine mutations that abrogate ligand-induced ubiquitination and internalization 
of the EGF receptor do not affect c-Cbl association with the receptor.

Oksvold MP(1), Thien CB, Widerberg J, Chantry A, Huitfeldt HS, Langdon WY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Western Australia, Queen Elizabeth II 
Medical Center, Nedlands, Western Australia 6009, Australia. 
m.p.oksvold@labmed.uio.no

In the present study, we examined EGF-induced internalization, degradation and 
trafficking of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutated at serines 
1046, 1047, 1057 and 1142 located in its cytoplasmic carboxy-terminal region. We 
found the serine-mutated EGFR to be inhibited in EGF-induced internalization and 
degradation in NIH3T3 cells. We therefore tested the hypothesis that these 
mutations affect ligand-induced c-Cbl association with the receptor, leading to 
inhibited receptor ubiquitination. EGF was unable to induce ubiquitination of 
the serine-mutated EGFR, yet EGF-induced phosphorylation of the c-Cbl-binding 
site at tyrosine 1045, and c-Cbl-EGFR association, was unaffected. To compare 
the relevance of these serine residues with tyrosine 1045 in their regulation of 
c-Cbl binding and receptor ubiquitination, we analysed an EGFR mutated at 
tyrosine 1045 (Y1045F). EGF-induced c-Cbl-EGFR binding was partially inhibited, 
and receptor ubiquitination was abrogated in cells expressing Y1045F-EGFR. In 
contrast, ligand-induced internalization and degradation of the Y1045F mutant 
was similar to that of wild-type EGFR. Together, our data indicate that the 
serine residues and tyrosine 1045 are essential for EGF-induced receptor 
ubiquitination, but only the serine residues are critical for EGFR 
internalization and degradation.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1207117
PMID: 14627991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
