---
pmid: '11318877'
title: p48 subunit of mouse PTF1 binds to RBP-Jkappa/CBF-1, the intracellular mediator
  of Notch signalling, and is expressed in the neural tube of early stage embryos.
authors:
- Obata J
- Yano M
- Mimura H
- Goto T
- Nakayama R
- Mibu Y
- Oka C
- Kawaichi M
journal: Genes Cells
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2443.2001.00422.x
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# p48 subunit of mouse PTF1 binds to RBP-Jkappa/CBF-1, the intracellular mediator of Notch signalling, and is expressed in the neural tube of early stage embryos.
**Authors:** Obata J, Yano M, Mimura H, Goto T, Nakayama R, Mibu Y, Oka C, Kawaichi M
**Journal:** Genes Cells (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1365-2443.2001.00422.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2443.2001.00422.x)

## Abstract

1. Genes Cells. 2001 Apr;6(4):345-60. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2443.2001.00422.x.

p48 subunit of mouse PTF1 binds to RBP-Jkappa/CBF-1, the intracellular mediator 
of Notch signalling, and is expressed in the neural tube of early stage embryos.

Obata J(1), Yano M, Mimura H, Goto T, Nakayama R, Mibu Y, Oka C, Kawaichi M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gene Function in Animals, Nara Institute of Science and 
Technology, 8916-5 Takayama, Ikoma, Nara 630-0101, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Development of the pancreas and the nervous tissues is regulated by 
common transcription factors. A basic helix-loop-helix protein, p48 of pancreas 
transcription factor 1 (PTF1), is essential for differentiation of the exocrine 
acinar cells.
RESULTS: We isolated PTF1 p48 from 9.5-day mouse embryos as a binding protein of 
RBP-Jkappa, a mediator of Notch signalling. p48 bound to RBP-Jkappa more 
strongly than and in a distinct way from Notch1. In 9.5-12.5 day embryos, p48 
was expressed in the dorsal part of the neural tube as well as in the pancreatic 
buds. Two lines of evidence suggested functions of p48 in neurogenesis: (i) 
expression of p48 was induced in P19 cells when they committed to neural fate 
upon retinoic acid treatment, and (ii) p48 over-expressed in Xenopus embryos 
repressed the development of neuronal precursors. p48 inhibited the 
MASH1-activated transcription from the E-box, while p48 stimulated transcription 
from the PTF1 motif synergistically with E47. The p48/E47-activated 
transcription from the PTF1 motif was stimulated further by RBP-Jkappa and 
RBP-Jkappa derivatives that mimicked the active RBP-Jkappa/Notch complex.
CONCLUSIONS: In developing embryos, p48 is expressed in both the nervous system 
and the pancreas. p48 inhibits neuronal differentiation. We propose possible 
mechanisms for this inhibition.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2443.2001.00422.x
PMID: 11318877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
