---
pmid: '12535337'
title: Biochemical and functional analysis of CTR1, a protein kinase that negatively
  regulates ethylene signaling in Arabidopsis.
authors:
- Huang Y
- Li H
- Hutchison CE
- Laskey J
- Kieber JJ
journal: Plant J
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-313x.2003.01620.x
---

# Biochemical and functional analysis of CTR1, a protein kinase that negatively regulates ethylene signaling in Arabidopsis.
**Authors:** Huang Y, Li H, Hutchison CE, Laskey J, Kieber JJ
**Journal:** Plant J (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1365-313x.2003.01620.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-313x.2003.01620.x)

## Abstract

1. Plant J. 2003 Jan;33(2):221-33. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-313x.2003.01620.x.

Biochemical and functional analysis of CTR1, a protein kinase that negatively
regulates ethylene signaling in Arabidopsis.

Huang Y(1), Li H, Hutchison CE, Laskey J, Kieber JJ.

Collaborators: Kieber JJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Illinois at Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60607, USA.
(2)U IL, Chicago

CTR1 encodes a negative regulator of the ethylene response pathway in
Arabidopsis thaliana. The C-terminal domain of CTR1 is similar to the Raf family
of protein kinases, but its first two-thirds encodes a novel protein domain. We
used a variety of approaches to investigate the function of these two CTR1
domains. Recombinant CTR1 protein was purified from a baculoviral expression
system, and shown to possess intrinsic Ser/Thr protein kinase activity with
enzymatic properties similar to Raf-1. Deletion of the N-terminal domain did not
elevate the kinase activity of CTR1, indicating that, at least in vitro, this
domain does not autoinhibit kinase function. Molecular analysis of
loss-of-function ctr1 alleles indicated that several mutations disrupt the
kinase catalytic domain, and in vitro studies confirmed that at least one of
these eliminates kinase activity, which indicates that kinase activity is
required for CTR1 function. One missense mutation, ctr1-8, was found to result
from an amino acid substitution within a new conserved motif within the
N-terminal domain. Ctr1-8 has no detectable effect on the kinase activity of
CTR1 in vitro, but rather disrupts the interaction with the ethylene receptor
ETR1. This mutation also disrupts the dominant negative effect that results from
overexpression of the CTR1 amino-terminal domain in transgenic Arabidopsis.
These results suggest that CTR1 interacts with ETR1 in vivo, and that this
association is required to turn off the ethylene-signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-313x.2003.01620.x
PMID: 12535337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
