---
reference_id: PMID:16282323
title: Evidence that Ser87 of BimEL is phosphorylated by Akt and regulates BimEL apoptotic function.
authors:
- Qi XJ
- Wildey GM
- Howe PH
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M505546200
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evidence that Ser87 of BimEL is phosphorylated by Akt and regulates BimEL apoptotic function.
**Authors:** Qi XJ, Wildey GM, Howe PH
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M505546200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M505546200)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jan 13;281(2):813-23. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M505546200. Epub 2005
 Nov 10.

Evidence that Ser87 of BimEL is phosphorylated by Akt and regulates BimEL
apoptotic function.

Qi XJ(1), Wildey GM, Howe PH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine,
Cleveland Clinic Foundation, OH 44195, USA.

Bim, the Bcl-2 interacting mediator of cell death, is a member of the BH3-only
family of pro-apoptotic proteins. Recent studies have demonstrated that the
apoptotic activity of Bim can be regulated through a post-translational
mechanism whereby ERK phosphorylation serves as a signal for Bim ubiquitination
and proteasomal degradation. In this report, we investigated the signaling
pathways leading to Bim phosphorylation in Ba/F3 cells, an interleukin-3
(IL-3)-dependent B-cell line. IL-3 stimulation induced phosphorylation of
Bim(EL), one of the predominant isoforms of Bim expressed in cells, at multiple
sites, as evidenced by the formation of at least three to four bands by Western
blotting that were sensitive to phosphatase digestion. The appearance of
multiple, phosphorylated species of Bim(EL) correlated with Akt, and not ERK,
activation. The PI3K inhibitor, LY294002, blocked IL-3-stimulated Akt activity
and partially blocked Bim(EL) phosphorylation. In vitro kinase assays showed
that recombinant Akt could directly phosphorylate a GST-Bim(EL) fusion protein
and identified the Akt phosphorylation site in the Bim(EL) domain as Ser(87).
Further, we demonstrated that cytokine stimulation promotes Bim(EL) binding to
14-3-3 proteins. Finally, we show that mutation of Ser(87) dramatically
increases the apoptotic potency of Bim(EL). We propose that Ser(87) of Bim(EL)
is an important regulatory site that is targeted by Akt to attenuate the
pro-apoptotic function of Bim(EL), thereby promoting cell survival.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M505546200
PMID: 16282323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]