---
pmid: '20079829'
title: Cdk2 nitrosylation and loss of mitochondrial potential mediate NO-dependent
  biphasic effect on HL-60 cell cycle.
authors:
- Kumar S
- Barthwal MK
- Dikshit M
journal: Free Radic Biol Med
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2010.01.004
---

# Cdk2 nitrosylation and loss of mitochondrial potential mediate NO-dependent biphasic effect on HL-60 cell cycle.
**Authors:** Kumar S, Barthwal MK, Dikshit M
**Journal:** Free Radic Biol Med (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2010.01.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2010.01.004)

## Abstract

1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2010 Mar 15;48(6):851-61. doi: 
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2010.01.004. Epub 2010 Jan 15.

Cdk2 nitrosylation and loss of mitochondrial potential mediate NO-dependent 
biphasic effect on HL-60 cell cycle.

Kumar S(1), Barthwal MK, Dikshit M.

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Unit, Pharmacology Division, Central Drug Research Institute 
(Council of Scientific and Industrial Research), Lucknow 226 001, India.

Nitric oxide (NO), a multifaceted signaling molecule, regulates a wide array of 
cell functions, including proliferation, differentiation, cytostasis, and 
apoptosis, which depend on the cell type and redox status. This study 
systematically explores the effects of NO donors on promyelocytic HL-60 cell 
proliferation and apoptosis. The NO donor DETA-NO modulated the HL-60 cell cycle 
in a biphasic manner. DETA-NO in lower concentrations (1-100 microM) had a 
proliferative effect as investigated by [(3)H]thymidine incorporation, BrdU 
labeling, and cell cycle analysis, whereas cells treated with higher 
concentrations (250 microM-1 mM) showed cytostasis, apoptosis, mitochondrial 
membrane potential loss, caspase-3 activity, and dUTP nick-end labeling. The 
proliferative effect of DETA-NO was NO dependent and redox sensitive, as the 
effect was abolished by cPTIO and DTT pretreatment, respectively. Expression of 
various cell cycle regulators such as Cdk2, cyclin B, and cyclin E was 
significantly augmented in cells treated with 10-50 microM DETA-NO. The 
proliferative effect of NO was blocked by roscovitine, a Cdk2 inhibitor. 
S-nitrosylation of Cdk2 and an increase in the Cdk2-associated kinase activity 
was observed for the first time in DETA-NO-treated cells. This study 
demonstrates that the DETA-NO-mediated biphasic effect was dependent on Cdk2 
nitrosylation/activation and the loss of mitochondrial potential at low and high 
concentrations, respectively.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2010.01.004
PMID: 20079829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
