---
pmid: '11003656'
title: Inhibition of Daxx-mediated apoptosis by heat shock protein 27.
authors:
- Charette SJ
- Lavoie JN
- Lambert H
- Landry J
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC86317
doi: 10.1128/MCB.20.20.7602-7612.2000
---

# Inhibition of Daxx-mediated apoptosis by heat shock protein 27.
**Authors:** Charette SJ, Lavoie JN, Lambert H, Landry J
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.20.20.7602-7612.2000](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.20.20.7602-7612.2000)
**PMC:** [PMC86317](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC86317/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Oct;20(20):7602-12. doi: 10.1128/MCB.20.20.7602-7612.2000.

Inhibition of Daxx-mediated apoptosis by heat shock protein 27.

Charette SJ(1), Lavoie JN, Lambert H, Landry J.

Author information:
(1)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de l'Université Laval, L'Hôtel-Dieu de 
Québec, Québec, Canada G1R 2J6.

Heat shock protein 27 (HSP27) confers cellular protection against a variety of 
cytotoxic stresses and also against physiological stresses associated with 
growth arrest or receptor-mediated apoptosis. Phosphorylation modulates the 
activity of HSP27 by causing a major change in the supramolecular organization 
of the protein, which shifts from oligomers to dimers. Here we show that 
phosphorylated dimers of HSP27 interact with Daxx, a mediator of Fas-induced 
apoptosis, preventing the interaction of Daxx with both Ask1 and Fas and 
blocking Daxx-mediated apoptosis. No such inhibition was observed with an HSP27 
phosphorylation mutant that is only expressed as oligomers or when apoptosis was 
induced by transfection of a Daxx mutant lacking its HSP27 binding domain. HSP27 
expression had no effect on Fas-induced FADD- and caspase-dependent apoptosis. 
However, HSP27 blocked Fas-induced translocation of Daxx from the nucleus to the 
cytoplasm and Fas-induced Daxx- and Ask1-dependent apoptosis. The observations 
revealed a new level of regulation of the Fas pathway and suggest a mechanism 
for the phosphorylation-dependent protective function of HSP27 during stress and 
differentiation.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.20.20.7602-7612.2000
PMCID: PMC86317
PMID: 11003656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
