---
pmid: '12359889'
title: AP2 Gene Determines the Identity of Perianth Organs in Flowers of Arabidopsis
  thaliana.
authors:
- Kunst L
- Klenz JE
- Martinez-Zapater J
- Haughn GW
journal: Plant Cell
year: '1989'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC159855
doi: 10.1105/tpc.1.12.1195
---

# AP2 Gene Determines the Identity of Perianth Organs in Flowers of Arabidopsis thaliana.
**Authors:** Kunst L, Klenz JE, Martinez-Zapater J, Haughn GW
**Journal:** Plant Cell (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1105/tpc.1.12.1195](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.1.12.1195)
**PMC:** [PMC159855](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC159855/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell. 1989 Dec;1(12):1195-1208. doi: 10.1105/tpc.1.12.1195.

AP2 Gene Determines the Identity of Perianth Organs in Flowers of Arabidopsis 
thaliana.

Kunst L(1), Klenz JE, Martinez-Zapater J, Haughn GW.

Author information:
(1)Biology Department, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, S7N 
0W0, Canada.

We have examined the floral morphology and ontogeny of three mutants of 
Arabidopsis thaliana, Ap2-5, Ap2-6, and Ap2-7, that exhibit homeotic changes of 
the perianth organs because of single recessive mutations in the AP2 gene. 
Homeotic conversions observed are: sepals to carpels in all three mutants, 
petals to stamens in Ap2-5, and petals to carpels in Ap2-6. Our analysis of 
these mutants suggests that the AP2 gene is required early in floral development 
to direct primordia of the first and second whorls to develop as perianth rather 
than as reproductive organs. In addition, our results support one of the two 
conflicting hypotheses concerning the structures of the calyx and the gynoecium 
in the Brassicaceae.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.1.12.1195
PMCID: PMC159855
PMID: 12359889

## Full Text

Abstract

We have examined the floral morphology and ontogeny of three mutants of Arabidopsis thaliana, Ap2-5, Ap2-6, and Ap2-7, that exhibit homeotic changes of the perianth organs because of single recessive mutations in the AP2 gene. Homeotic conversions observed are: sepals to carpels in all three mutants, petals to stamens in Ap2-5, and petals to carpels in Ap2-6. Our analysis of these mutants suggests that the AP2 gene is required early in floral development to direct primordia of the first and second whorls to develop as perianth rather than as reproductive organs. In addition, our results support one of the two conflicting hypotheses concerning the structures of the calyx and the gynoecium in the Brassicaceae.
