---
pmid: '33331896'
title: Merlin cooperates with neurofibromin and Spred1 to suppress the Ras-Erk pathway.
authors:
- Cui Y
- Ma L
- Schacke S
- Yin JC
- Hsueh YP
- Jin H
- Morrison H
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2021'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddaa263
---

# Merlin cooperates with neurofibromin and Spred1 to suppress the Ras-Erk pathway.
**Authors:** Cui Y, Ma L, Schacke S, Yin JC, Hsueh YP, Jin H, Morrison H
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddaa263](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddaa263)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2021 Feb 4;29(23):3793-3806. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddaa263.

Merlin cooperates with neurofibromin and Spred1 to suppress the Ras-Erk pathway.

Cui Y(1), Ma L(1)(2), Schacke S(1), Yin JC(3), Hsueh YP(4), Jin H(5), Morrison 
H(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Leibniz Institute on Aging - Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI), 07745 Jena, 
Germany.
(2)College of Life Sciences, Capital Normal University, Beijing 100048, China.
(3)Laura and Isaac Perlmutter Cancer Center, NYU Langone Health, New York, NY 
10016, USA.
(4)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan.
(5)Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, Sir Run Run Shaw 
Hospital, Medical School of Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310016, China.
(6)Faculty of Biological Sciences, Friedrich Schiller University Jena, 07743, 
Germany.

The Ras-Erk pathway is frequently overactivated in human tumors. 
Neurofibromatosis types 1 and 2 (NF1, NF2) are characterized by multiple tumors 
of Schwann cell origin. The NF1 tumor suppressor neurofibromin is a principal 
Ras-GAP accelerating Ras inactivation, whereas the NF2 tumor suppressor merlin 
is a scaffold protein coordinating multiple signaling pathways. We have 
previously reported that merlin interacts with Ras and p120RasGAP. Here, we show 
that merlin can also interact with the neurofibromin/Spred1 complex via 
merlin-binding sites present on both proteins. Further, merlin can directly bind 
to the Ras-binding domain (RBD) and the kinase domain (KiD) of Raf1. As the 
third component of the neurofibromin/Spred1 complex, merlin cannot increase the 
Ras-GAP activity; rather, it blocks Ras binding to Raf1 by functioning as a 
'selective Ras barrier'. Merlin-deficient Schwann cells require the Ras-Erk 
pathway activity for proliferation. Accordingly, suppression of the Ras-Erk 
pathway likely contributes to merlin's tumor suppressor activity. Taken 
together, our results, and studies by others, support targeting or co-targeting 
of this pathway as a therapy for NF2 inactivation-related tumors.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddaa263
PMID: 33331896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
