---
pmid: '23085733'
title: Spatio-temporal cellular dynamics of the Arabidopsis flagellin receptor reveal
  activation status-dependent endosomal sorting.
authors:
- Beck M
- Zhou J
- Faulkner C
- MacLean D
- Robatzek S
journal: Plant Cell
year: '2012'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3516521
doi: 10.1105/tpc.112.100263
---

# Spatio-temporal cellular dynamics of the Arabidopsis flagellin receptor reveal activation status-dependent endosomal sorting.
**Authors:** Beck M, Zhou J, Faulkner C, MacLean D, Robatzek S
**Journal:** Plant Cell (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1105/tpc.112.100263](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.112.100263)
**PMC:** [PMC3516521](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3516521/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell. 2012 Oct;24(10):4205-19. doi: 10.1105/tpc.112.100263. Epub 2012
Oct  19.

Spatio-temporal cellular dynamics of the Arabidopsis flagellin receptor reveal 
activation status-dependent endosomal sorting.

Beck M(1), Zhou J, Faulkner C, MacLean D, Robatzek S.

Author information:
(1)The Sainsbury Laboratory, Norwich NR4 7UH, United Kingdom.

The activity of surface receptors is location specific, dependent upon the 
dynamic membrane trafficking network and receptor-mediated endocytosis (RME). 
Therefore, the spatio-temporal dynamics of RME are critical to receptor 
function. The plasma membrane receptor flagellin sensing2 (FLS2) confers 
immunity against bacterial infection through perception of flagellin (flg22). 
Following elicitation, FLS2 is internalized into vesicles. To resolve FLS2 
trafficking, we exploited quantitative confocal imaging for colocalization 
studies and chemical interference. FLS2 localizes to bona fide endosomes via two 
distinct endocytic trafficking routes depending on its activation status. FLS2 
receptors constitutively recycle in a Brefeldin A (BFA)-sensitive manner, while 
flg22-activated receptors traffic via ARA7/Rab F2b- and ARA6/Rab F1-positive 
endosomes insensitive to BFA. FLS2 endocytosis required a functional Rab5 GTPase 
pathway as revealed by dominant-negative ARA7/Rab F2b. Flg22-induced FLS2 
endosomal numbers were increased by Concanamycin A treatment but reduced by 
Wortmannin, indicating that activated FLS2 receptors are targeted to late 
endosomes. RME inhibitors Tyrphostin A23 and Endosidin 1 altered but did not 
block induced FLS2 endocytosis. Additional inhibitor studies imply the 
involvement of the actin-myosin system in FLS2 internalization and trafficking. 
Altogether, we report a dynamic pattern of subcellular trafficking for FLS2 and 
reveal a defined framework for ligand-dependent endocytosis of this receptor.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.112.100263
PMCID: PMC3516521
PMID: 23085733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The activity of surface receptors is location specific, dependent upon the dynamic membrane trafficking network and receptor-mediated endocytosis ( RME ). Therefore, the spatio-temporal dynamics of RME are critical to receptor function. The plasma membrane receptor FLAGELLIN SENSING2 (FLS2) confers immunity against bacterial infection through perception of flagellin (flg22). Following elicitation, FLS2 is internalized into vesicles. To resolve FLS2 trafficking, we exploited quantitative confocal imaging for colocalization studies and chemical interference. FLS2 localizes to bona fide endosomes via two distinct endocytic trafficking routes depending on its activation status. FLS2 receptors constitutively recycle in a Brefeldin A ( BFA )–sensitive manner, while flg22-activated receptors traffic via ARA7/Rab F2b– and ARA6/Rab F1–positive endosomes insensitive to BFA . FLS2 endocytosis required a functional Rab5 GTPase pathway as revealed by dominant-negative ARA7/Rab F2b. Flg22-induced FLS2 endosomal numbers were increased by Concanamycin A treatment but reduced by Wortmannin, indicating that activated FLS2 receptors are targeted to late endosomes. RME inhibitors Tyrphostin A23 and Endosidin 1 altered but did not block induced FLS2 endocytosis. Additional inhibitor studies imply the involvement of the actin-myosin system in FLS2 internalization and trafficking. Altogether, we report a dynamic pattern of subcellular trafficking for FLS2 and reveal a defined framework for ligand-dependent endocytosis of this receptor.

INTRODUCTION

Receptor-mediated endocytosis ( RME ) plays important roles in development, growth, and pathogen defense, regulating the levels and distribution of cell surface receptors ( Geldner and Robatzek, 2008 ; Kleine-Vehn and Friml, 2008 ; Frei dit Frey and Robatzek, 2009 ; Sorkin and von Zastrow, 2009 ). In plants, these include members of the Leu-rich repeat receptor-like kinase ( RLK ) family, such as BRASSINOSTEROID INSENSITIVE1 (BRI1), which is responsible for brassinosteroid hormone signaling ( Li and Chory, 1997 ); FLAGELLIN SENSING2 (FLS2), which mediates the perception of a conserved domain of bacterial flagellin ( Gómez-Gómez and Boller, 2000 ; Chinchilla et al., 2006 ); and BRI1-ASSOCIATED KINASE1 (BAK1; also called SERK3 for SOMATIC EMBRYO RECEPTOR KINASE3), which forms a complex with BRI1 and FLS2 and is required for downstream signaling ( Li et al., 2002 ; Chinchilla et al., 2007b ). Localization studies using BRI1 fused to the green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) showed that BRI1-GFP is found both at the plasma membrane and in endosomal compartments. These endosomal compartments can be labeled with the endocytic tracer FM4-64 and the trans -Golgi network ( TGN ) and early endosome ( EE ) marker VHAa1 ( Geldner et al., 2007 ). Subcellular localization of BRI1 is sensitive to Brefeldin A ( BFA ). BFA is an inhibitor of endosomal recycling to the plasma membrane, acting by targeting the ADP-ribosylation factor–GTP exchange factor GNOM and leading to the accumulation of so-called BFA bodies ( Geldner et al., 2003 ; Robinson et al., 2008 ). Plasma membrane and BFA -sensitive endosomal localization patterns were also described for BAK1/SERK3 ( Russinova et al., 2004 ), SERK1 ( Kwaaitaal et al., 2005 ), and the non-Leu-rich repeat RLK CRINKLY4 (ACR4) ( Gifford et al., 2005 ; Karlova et al., 2006 ), demonstrating that many described receptors undergo constitutive recycling. Coexpression of BRI1 and BAK1/SERK3 in protoplasts revealed distinct endosomal populations either containing both receptors together or each individually ( Russinova et al., 2004 ). This highlights that RME is directed through different endosomal compartments, and intracellular receptor localization is transient in nature and depends on the maturation of these highly dynamic membrane compartments along the endocytic pathways ( Robatzek, 2007 ; Geldner and Robatzek, 2008 ; Irani and Russinova, 2009 ). The nature of these different endosomes and the extent to which they contribute to the receptor’s function remain mostly unknown.

FLS2 functions as an important cell surface receptor in plant immunity against bacterial infection and triggers plant defenses following elicitation by bacterial flagellin or the flagellin-derived peptide flg22 ( Zipfel et al., 2004 ). Impairment of FLS2 internalization correlates with altered flg22 responses ( Robatzek et al., 2006 ; Salomon and Robatzek, 2006 ; Chinchilla et al., 2007a ). Thus, it is essential to identify the key steps of the endocytic trafficking pathway of FLS2 that can regulate aspects of plant immunity. Endosomal markers for FLS2 compartments and a dissection of the FLS2 endosomal trafficking pathway have not been described so far. FLS2-GFP is translocated from the plasma membrane into small mobile vesicles only when flg22 is applied, unlike BRI1 endocytic trafficking ( Geldner et al., 2007 ), which is constitutive and independent of its ligand brassinosteroid ( Robatzek et al., 2006 ). The internalization of FLS2 requires BAK1/SERK3 and can be abolished by single amino acid substitutions in the FLS2 kinase domain that may be subject to posttranslational modifications, such as phosphorylation and ubiquitination ( Robatzek et al., 2006 ; Salomon and Robatzek, 2006 ; Chinchilla et al., 2007b ). Flg22-induced subcellular trafficking is sensitive to Wortmannin ( Wm ), a phosphatidylphosphate-3-kinase inhibitor that interferes with vesicle formation from the plasma membrane and the maturation of late endosomes (LEs) and multivesicular bodies (MVBs), resulting in their enlargement ( Tse et al., 2004 ; Wang et al., 2009 ). Considering that flg22-activated FLS2-GFP signals decrease over time and that FLS2 internalization is insensitive to BFA , ligand-induced FLS2 endosomal trafficking must occur in a different pathway to that of BRI1. Notably, most RLKs, including BRI1 and BAK1, carry the conserved tetrapeptide YxxΦ motif in their cytoplasmic domains, which are known to mediate the endocytosis of cell surface proteins ( Geldner and Robatzek, 2008 ; Reyes et al., 2011 ). This motif is not present in FLS2, providing additional evidence for differences in endosomal trafficking between receptors ( Geldner and Robatzek, 2008 ; Reyes et al., 2011 ).

In plants, the occurrence of endocytic trafficking is well established. A key example is root cell polarity, which is based on the asymmetric localization of the PIN FORMED (PIN) proteins ( Kleine-Vehn and Friml, 2008 ). Plasma membrane–resident PIN proteins enter an endocytic trafficking pathway in a clathrin-dependent manner, localize to TGN / EE compartments, and recycle through a BFA -sensitive pathway, resulting in their polar localization at one side of the cell ( Geldner et al., 2001 , 2003 ; Dhonukshe et al., 2007 ). PIN proteins can also enter endocytosis for vacuolar degradation ( Petrásek et al., 2006 ; Kleine-Vehn et al., 2008 ; Laxmi et al., 2008 ); thus, endosomes resemble a population of varying distinct compartments transiently present in specific trafficking pathways. Endocytosis of PIN proteins depends on ARA7/Rab F2b ( Dhonukshe et al., 2008 ), and members of this Rab5 GTPase family are known to label distinct endosomal compartments ( Ueda et al., 2001 ; Ueda and Nakano, 2002 ; Pfeffer, 2005 ). In Arabidopsis thaliana , the Rab5 homologs ARA6/Rab F1 and ARA7/Rab F2b localize to different endosomal populations with a small degree of overlap ( Ueda et al., 2004 ; Ebine et al., 2011 ). ARA6/Rab F1 localizes mainly to LE , while ARA7/Rab F2b is found at both EE and LE compartments, thus representing suitable markers for these endosomal populations ( Ueda et al., 2004 ; Ebine et al., 2011 ). Defining the endosomal pathways of cell surface proteins is important for understanding their function, in particular in ligand-induced RLK signaling.

In this study, we defined the endocytic trafficking pathway of the A. thaliana FLS2 receptor in the absence of flg22 ligand and upon flg22-induced activation. The transient behavior of FLS2 endocytosis raises technical challenges for studying this process in detail. To address this issue, we employed cutting-edge quantitative, high-throughput, live-cell imaging techniques and developed EndomembraneQuantifier and EndomembraneCoLocQuantifier algorithms and software implementations for quantifying and identifying colocalized small membrane objects, respectively. With EndomembraneCoLocQuantifier, we were able to follow the spatial and temporal dynamics of FLS2 subcellular trafficking in detached Arabidopsis cotyledons by evaluating endosomal numbers over time compared with those of ARA6/Rab F1 and ARA7/Rab F2b endosomal markers. In addition, experiments involving FM4-64 colocalization and membrane trafficking inhibitors showed that activated FLS2 receptors traffic along the endosomal pathway and mature into LE / MVB compartments in a BFA -insensitive manner. By contrast, FLS2 recycles via a BFA -sensitive endocytic route in the absence of flg22. Overall, our study demonstrates that trafficking of FLS2 is subject to targeted endosomal sorting that is dependent on the activation status of the receptor.

DISCUSSION

In this study, we resolved the endocytic pathway of FLS2 in an activation-state and time-dependent manner. In its nonactivated state, FLS2 enters the endocytic route and constitutively cycles between the plasma membrane and EE compartments via the common endocytic pathway under the control of GNOM, being the ADP-ribosylation factor-guanine-nucleotide exchange factor target of BFA ( Geldner et al., 2003 ). Cycling via this common endocytic route is known for a number of plasma membrane proteins, including the PIN proteins, to mediate patterns of subcellular localization ( Dhonukshe et al., 2007 ), and for cell surface receptors, such as BRI1, BAK1/SERK3, SERK1, and ACR4, to regulate the abundance of receptors at the plasma membrane and maintain a constant pool of signaling receptors ( Russinova et al., 2004 ; Reyes et al., 2011 ). The latter may be particularly relevant for BRI1 recognizing an endogenous ligand ( Geldner et al., 2007 ), while BAK1/SERK3 endocytic recycling may allow the retrieval of this protein from the activated receptor complex to allow de novo interactions with other ligand binding receptors ( Russinova et al., 2004 ; Geldner and Robatzek, 2008 ). In the case of FLS2, endocytic recycling occurs in the absence of both its ligand and its coreceptor BAK1 and is likely linked to the maintenance of steady state levels of FLS2 at the plasma membrane. When activated by flg22, FLS2 enters the endocytic pathway and accumulates in bona fide endosomes, as revealed by FM4-64 tracing. BFA treatment does not alter FLS2 endosome numbers, and flg22-induced FLS2 endosomes appear not to be part of the BFA body, demonstrating that activated FLS2 is endocytosed via a GNOM-insensitive pathway. Therefore, our results indicate that endocytosis of the same cargo, FLS2, can occur in both a GNOM-sensitive and -insensitive manner, depending on its activation status ( Figure 9 ), which suggests differential regulation at the transition from a plasma membrane–resident receptor complex to endosomes.

A similar observation of a regulatory switch between the recycling and degradation pathways of endocytosis was reported for the boron exporter BOR1 ( Takano et al., 2005 , 2010 ). Under steady state conditions and low boron concentrations, BOR1 localizes primarily to the plasma membrane with a small proportion undergoing constitutive endocytic recycling. In response to high boron, BOR1 is rapidly internalized and targeted for vacuolar degradation and thereby prevents boron toxicity ( Takano et al., 2005 ). Also, although BRI1 is mainly subject to constitutive endocytic recycling, a proportion of endocytosed BRI1 is targeted for vacuolar degradation ( Geldner et al., 2007 ). Thus, BOR1 and BRI1 subcellular trafficking provided evidence that distinct modes of RME coexist in plants but the respective pathways remain to be defined ( Jürgens and Geldner, 2007 ).

To date, our understanding of RLK localization is based largely on qualitative information gained from interpretation and analysis of confocal image series. To measure quantitative differences in endosomal localization patterns over time, we developed a robust and sensitive method for dissecting endocytic trafficking by defined parameters. Determining the numbers and area of endomembrane compartments over time takes into consideration the transient nature of endosomes, exemplified by induced FLS2 endocytosis ( Robatzek et al., 2006 ). In combination with chemical interference of membrane trafficking and comparative analysis of known endosomal markers, this enables defined dissection of endocytic trafficking. Previously, ARA7/Rab F2b has been described to localize to EE / TGN as well as to LE /MVBs compartments ( Ebine et al., 2011 ), and while ARA7/Rab F2b– and ARA6/Rab F1–positive endosomes mostly overlapped ( Ueda et al., 2004 ; Ebine et al., 2011 ), ARA6/Rab F1 was more specifically associated with LE /MVBs ( Ueda et al., 2004 ; Ebine et al., 2011 ). Both TyrA23 and Wm treatments reduced ARA6/Rab F1 and ARA7/Rab F2b endosomal numbers, while BFA treatment specifically reduced ARA7/Rab F2b endosomal numbers. This observation is consistent with the notion that a proportion of ARA7/Rab F2b–positive compartments are EEs that incorporate into BFA bodies, and another proportion mature into LE /MVBs, while ARA6/Rab F1 more specifically localizes to LE /MVBs ( Ebine et al., 2011 ). These localization patterns suggest that these two Rab5 GTPases have partially redundant but distinct roles in endosomal trafficking.

Our quantitative imaging approach allows the dissection of such partially overlapping but otherwise distinct pathways in time and thus provides comprehensive insights into the dynamics of the endosomal network. Applying this methodology to dissect the FLS2 trafficking pathway, we determined that induced FLS2 endocytosis peaks at ∼60 to 75 min after induction, coincident with the maximal overlap of ARA7/Rab F2b–positive endosomes. Maximal overlap with ARA6/Rab F1–positive endosomes occurred at ∼45 to 60 min and, in contrast with the sustained overlap between ARA7/Rab F2b and FLS2, decreased by 75 to 90 min of flg22 elicitation. The large overlap between ARA6/Rab F1 and ARA7/Rab F2b compartments and their transient behavior indicates that activated FLS2 is sequentially trafficked from ARA7/Rab F2b–positive compartments to endosomes labeled by both Rab5 GTPases. Using transient expression of DN-ARA7/Rab F2b to genetically interfere with endocytic trafficking confirmed that this Rab5 GTPase pathway is required for endocytosis of activated FLS2 receptors, similar to findings with PIN1 and BRI1 ( Dhonukshe et al., 2008 ; Irani et al., 2012 ). The significant reduction in number and enlargement in area of flg22-induced FLS2 endosomes upon Wm treatment shows that activated FLS2 is sorted and accumulates at LE /MVBs, in agreement with previous data ( Robatzek et al., 2006 ). It is currently thought that activated FLS2 is degraded in a ubiquitin-dependant manner by the PUB12 and PUB13 E3 ligases ( Göhre et al., 2008 ; Lu et al., 2011 ), possibly in association with vacuolar degradation ( Robatzek et al., 2006 ; Geldner and Robatzek, 2008 ). Our data show that ConcA treatments increase flg22-induced FLS2 endosomes, forming clusters around small round structures, putatively of vacuolar nature. Genetic interference of PUB12/13 will be required to determine the mechanics of FLS2 degradation with respect to FLS2 endocytic trafficking.

Chemical inhibition is often employed to dissect membrane trafficking and is widely used in plant cell biology ( Geldner et al., 2003 ; Robert et al., 2008 ; Drakakaki et al., 2009 ; von Kleist and Haucke, 2011 ). ES1 was found to specifically trigger the aggregation of PIN2, AUX1, and BRI1 into SYP61- and VHAa1-positive endosomes ( Robert et al., 2008 ), but it did not alter FLS2 subcellular localization, as it does for PIN1 and PIN7. We identified that ES1 disrupts the actin cytoskeleton, which is a significant observation and a likely explanation for the reduced motility of FLS2 endosomes observed following ES1 treatment. Likewise, our refined analysis now shows that the actin depolymerizing drug LatB does not inhibit internalization and instead impairs the motility of FLS2-GFP endosomes. As a consequence, these immobile FLS2-GFP endosomes remain in close proximity to the plasma membrane, which may have been overlooked in previous studies ( Robatzek et al., 2006 ). However, the internalization of FLS2 endosomes was arrested upon interference with the general activity of myosins by BDM treatment. This provides evidence that the actin-myosin system is critical for FLS2 endocytosis, whereby myosin functions in internalizing endosomes and actin is required for intracellular trafficking.

The differential effect of BFA and ES1 on BRI1 and flg22-induced FLS2 trafficking, respectively, shows that endocytosis of both receptors is routed via distinct endosomal pathways. This raises an interesting issue in light of the observation that BAK1/SERK3 forms a complex with BRI1 and FLS2 in a ligand-dependent manner ( Russinova et al., 2004 ; Chinchilla et al., 2007b ). Differential regulation of RME is likely associated with sequence motifs present in the cytosolic domains of the cell surface receptors ( Geldner and Robatzek, 2008 ). FLS2 lacks the conserved endocytic motif YxxΦ, while this is present in most plant RLKs and receptor-like proteins. The role of the YxxΦ motif in regulating RME in plants was revealed by mutational analysis inhibiting the function of the tomato ( Solanum lycopersicum ) xylanase receptor LeEix2 ( Ron and Avni, 2004 ) and by TyrA23 -mediated inhibition of endocytic trafficking of in planta expressed human transferrin receptor, hTfR ( Ortiz-Zapater et al., 2006 ). Although described as an inhibitor of clathrin-mediated endocytosis, and thus expected to fully block RME processes in plants ( Chen et al., 2011 ), TyrA23 treatment only partially impaired flg22-induced FLS2 endocytosis. In plants, TyrA23 interferes with the recognition of the YxxΦ residues, a motif involved in specific cargo recruitment to clathrin-coated vesicles and known to interact with μ2 adaptin in the AP2 complex ( Banbury et al., 2003 ; Happel et al., 2004 ; Chen et al., 2011 ). This specific YxxΦ motif is absent from FLS2 ( Geldner and Robatzek, 2008 ). Our data suggest that in general the uptake of 30 to 40% of endocytic vesicles in the Arabidopsis cotyledon seem to depend on the μ2 adaptin-AP2 complex, and additional adaptins-AP2 complexes could be involved in mediating FLS2 endosome biogenesis. Alternatively, we cannot exclude the possibility of endocytic pathways mediated by components other than clathrin ( Bandmann and Homann, 2012 ; Li et al., 2012 ). In summary, using quantitative imaging combined with subcellular markers and chemical inhibition, we established seedling cotyledons as a suitable model for studying cell biological processes in plants. We identified dynamic and transient FLS2 endosomal pathways that revealed distinct endocytic trafficking routes of nonactivated and ligand-activated FLS2 receptors. These data provide a well-defined framework for future research to investigate the role of FLS2 endocytosis in flg22-triggered responses.
