---
reference_id: PMID:16139227
title: Akt/PKB regulates actin organization and cell motility via Girdin/APE.
authors:
- Enomoto A
- Murakami H
- Asai N
- Morone N
- Watanabe T
- Kawai K
- Murakumo Y
- Usukura J
- Kaibuchi K
- Takahashi M
journal: Dev Cell
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2005.08.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Akt/PKB regulates actin organization and cell motility via Girdin/APE.
**Authors:** Enomoto A, Murakami H, Asai N, Morone N, Watanabe T, Kawai K, Murakumo Y, Usukura J, Kaibuchi K, Takahashi M
**Journal:** Dev Cell (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.devcel.2005.08.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2005.08.001)

## Content

1. Dev Cell. 2005 Sep;9(3):389-402. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2005.08.001.

Akt/PKB regulates actin organization and cell motility via Girdin/APE.

Enomoto A(1), Murakami H, Asai N, Morone N, Watanabe T, Kawai K, Murakumo Y,
Usukura J, Kaibuchi K, Takahashi M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Center for Neurological Disease and Cancer, Nagoya
University Graduate School of Medicine, Showa-ku, Aichi, Japan.

The serine/threonine kinase Akt (also called protein kinase B) is well known as
an important regulator of cell survival and growth and has also been shown to be
required for cell migration in different organisms. However, the mechanism by
which Akt functions to promote cell migration is not understood. Here, we
identify an Akt substrate, designated Girdin/APE (Akt-phosphorylation enhancer),
which is an actin binding protein. Girdin expresses ubiquitously and plays a
crucial role in the formation of stress fibers and lamellipodia. Akt
phosphorylates serine at position 1416 in Girdin, and phosphorylated Girdin
accumulates at the leading edge of migrating cells. Cells expressing mutant
Girdin, in which serine 1416 was replaced with alanine, formed abnormal
elongated shapes and exhibited limited migration and lamellipodia formation.
These findings suggest that Girdin is essential for the integrity of the actin
cytoskeleton and cell migration and provide a direct link between Akt and cell
motility.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2005.08.001
PMID: 16139227 [Indexed for MEDLINE]