---
pmid: '11206550'
title: Complexes of MADS-box proteins are sufficient to convert leaves into floral
  organs.
authors:
- Honma T
- Goto K
journal: Nature
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/35054083
---

# Complexes of MADS-box proteins are sufficient to convert leaves into floral organs.
**Authors:** Honma T, Goto K
**Journal:** Nature (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1038/35054083](https://doi.org/10.1038/35054083)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2001 Jan 25;409(6819):525-9. doi: 10.1038/35054083.

Complexes of MADS-box proteins are sufficient to convert leaves into floral 
organs.

Honma T(1), Goto K.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University, Uji, Japan.

Comment in
    Nature. 2001 Jan 25;409(6819):469-71. doi: 10.1038/35054172.

Genetic studies, using floral homeotic mutants, have led to the ABC model of 
flower development. This model proposes that the combinatorial action of three 
sets of genes, the A, B and C function genes, specify the four floral organs 
(sepals, petals, stamens and carpels) in the concentric floral whorls. However, 
attempts to convert vegetative organs into floral organs by altering the 
expression of ABC genes have been unsuccessful. Here we show that the class B 
proteins of Arabidopsis, PISTILLATA (PI) and APETALA3 (AP3), interact with 
APETALA1 (AP1, a class A protein) and SEPALLATA3 (SEP3, previously AGL9), and 
with AGAMOUS (AG, a class C protein) through SEP3. We also show that vegetative 
leaves of triply transgenic plants, 35S::PI;35S::AP3;35S::AP1 or 
35S::PI;35S::AP3;35S::SEP3, are transformed into petaloid organs and that those 
of 35S::PI;35S::AP3;35S::SEP3;35S::AG are transformed into staminoid organs. Our 
findings indicate that the formation of ternary and quaternary complexes of ABC 
proteins may be the molecular basis of the ABC model, and that the 
flower-specific expression of SEP3 restricts the action of the ABC genes to the 
flower.

DOI: 10.1038/35054083
PMID: 11206550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
