---
pmid: '23288039'
title: Mechanisms controlling the temporal degradation of Nek2A and Kif18A by the
  APC/C-Cdc20 complex.
authors:
- Sedgwick GG
- Hayward DG
- Di Fiore B
- Pardo M
- Yu L
- Pines J
- Nilsson J
journal: EMBO J
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3553385
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2012.335
---

# Mechanisms controlling the temporal degradation of Nek2A and Kif18A by the APC/C-Cdc20 complex.
**Authors:** Sedgwick GG, Hayward DG, Di Fiore B, Pardo M, Yu L, Pines J, Nilsson J
**Journal:** EMBO J (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2012.335](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2012.335)
**PMC:** [PMC3553385](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3553385/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2013 Jan 23;32(2):303-14. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2012.335. Epub 2013 Jan
4.

Mechanisms controlling the temporal degradation of Nek2A and Kif18A by the 
APC/C-Cdc20 complex.

Sedgwick GG(1), Hayward DG, Di Fiore B, Pardo M, Yu L, Pines J, Nilsson J.

Author information:
(1)The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

The Anaphase Promoting Complex/Cyclosome (APC/C) in complex with its 
co-activator Cdc20 is responsible for targeting proteins for ubiquitin-mediated 
degradation during mitosis. The activity of APC/C-Cdc20 is inhibited during 
prometaphase by the Spindle Assembly Checkpoint (SAC) yet certain substrates 
escape this inhibition. Nek2A degradation during prometaphase depends on direct 
binding of Nek2A to the APC/C via a C-terminal MR dipeptide but whether this 
motif alone is sufficient is not clear. Here, we identify Kif18A as a novel 
APC/C-Cdc20 substrate and show that Kif18A degradation depends on a C-terminal 
LR motif. However in contrast to Nek2A, Kif18A is not degraded until anaphase 
showing that additional mechanisms contribute to Nek2A degradation. We find that 
dimerization via the leucine zipper, in combination with the MR motif, is 
required for stable Nek2A binding to and ubiquitination by the APC/C. Nek2A and 
the mitotic checkpoint complex (MCC) have an overlap in APC/C subunit 
requirements for binding and we propose that Nek2A binds with high affinity to 
apo-APC/C and is degraded by the pool of Cdc20 that avoids inhibition by the 
SAC.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2012.335
PMCID: PMC3553385
PMID: 23288039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
