---
pmid: '10625637'
title: Distinct classes of phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinases are involved in signaling
  pathways that control macroautophagy in HT-29 cells.
authors:
- Petiot A
- Ogier-Denis E
- Blommaart EF
- Meijer AJ
- Codogno P
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.275.2.992
---

# Distinct classes of phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinases are involved in signaling pathways that control macroautophagy in HT-29 cells.
**Authors:** Petiot A, Ogier-Denis E, Blommaart EF, Meijer AJ, Codogno P
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.275.2.992](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.275.2.992)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jan 14;275(2):992-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.275.2.992.

Distinct classes of phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinases are involved in signaling 
pathways that control macroautophagy in HT-29 cells.

Petiot A(1), Ogier-Denis E, Blommaart EF, Meijer AJ, Codogno P.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U504, Glycobiologie et Signalisation Cellulaire, 16 avenue 
Paul-Vaillant-Couturier, 94807 Villejuif, Cedex, France.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem 2000 Apr 21;275(16):12360.

3-Methyladenine which stops macroautophagy at the sequestration step in 
mammalian cells also inhibits the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) activity 
raising the possibility that PI3K signaling controls the macroautophagic pathway 
(Blommaart, E. F. C., Krause, U., Schellens, J. P. M., Vreeling-Sindelárová, H., 
and Meijer, A. J. (1997) Eur. J. Biochem. 243, 240-246). The aim of this study 
was to identify PI3Ks involved in the control of macroautophagic sequestration 
in human colon cancer HT-29 cells. An increase of class I PI3K products 
(phosphatidylinositol 3,4-bisphosphate and phosphatidylinositol 
3,4,5-triphosphate) caused by either feeding cells with synthetic lipids 
(dipalmitoyl phosphatidylinositol 3, 4-bisphosphate and dipalmitoyl 
phosphatidylinositol 3,4, 5-triphosphate) or by stimulating the enzymatic 
activity by interleukin-13 reduced macroautophagy. In contrast, an increase in 
the class III PI3K product (phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate), either by feeding 
cells with a synthetic lipid or by overexpressing the p150 adaptor, stimulates 
macroautophagy. Transfection of a specific class III PI3K antisense 
oligonucleotide greatly inhibited the rate of macroautophagy. In accordance with 
a role of class III PI3K, wortmannin (an inhibitor of PI3Ks) inhibits 
macroautophagic sequestration and protein degradation in the low nanomolar range 
(IC(50) 5-15 nM). Further in vitro enzymatic assay showed that 3-methyladenine 
inhibits the class III PI3K activity. Dipalmitoyl phosphatidylinositol 
3-phosphate supplementation or p150 overexpression rescued the macroautophagic 
pathway in HT-29 cells overexpressing a GTPase-deficient mutant of the 
Galpha(i3) protein suggesting that both class III PI3K and trimeric G(i3) 
protein signaling are required in the control macroautophagy in HT-29 cells. In 
conclusion, our results demonstrate that distinct classes of PI3K control the 
macroautophagic pathway in opposite directions. The roles of PI3Ks in 
macroautophagy are discussed in the context of membrane recycling.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.275.2.992
PMID: 10625637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
