---
pmid: '11698262'
title: Lung epithelial barrier function and wound healing are decreased by IL-4 and
  IL-13 and enhanced by IFN-gamma.
authors:
- Ahdieh M
- Vandenbos T
- Youakim A
journal: Am J Physiol Cell Physiol
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.2001.281.6.C2029
---

# Lung epithelial barrier function and wound healing are decreased by IL-4 and IL-13 and enhanced by IFN-gamma.
**Authors:** Ahdieh M, Vandenbos T, Youakim A
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Cell Physiol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpcell.2001.281.6.C2029](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.2001.281.6.C2029)

## Abstract

1. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2001 Dec;281(6):C2029-38. doi: 
10.1152/ajpcell.2001.281.6.C2029.

Lung epithelial barrier function and wound healing are decreased by IL-4 and 
IL-13 and enhanced by IFN-gamma.

Ahdieh M(1), Vandenbos T, Youakim A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomolecular Screening, Immunex Corporation, Seattle, 
Washington 98101, USA.

To understand the effects of cytokines on epithelial cells in asthma, we have 
investigated the effects of interleukin (IL)-4, IL-13, and interferon 
(IFN)-gamma on barrier function and wound healing in Calu-3 human lung 
epithelial cells. IL-4 and IL-13 treatment of Calu-3 cells grown on Transwell 
filters resulted in a 70-75% decrease in barrier function as assessed by 
electrophysiological and [(14)C]mannitol flux measurements. In contrast, 
IFN-gamma enhanced barrier function threefold using these same parameters. Cells 
treated concurrently with IFN-gamma and IL-4 or IL-13 showed an initial decline 
in barrier function that was reversed within 2 days, resulting in barrier levels 
comparable to control cells. Analysis of the tight junction-associated proteins 
ZO-1 and occludin showed that IL-4 and IL-13 significantly reduced ZO-1 
expression and modestly decreased occludin expression compared with controls. 
IFN-gamma, quite unexpectedly given its enhancing effect on barrier function, 
reduced expression of ZO-1 and occludin to almost undetectable levels compared 
with controls. In wound-healing assays of cells grown on collagen I, IL-4 and 
IL-13 decreased migration, whereas IFN-gamma treatment enhanced migration, 
compared with control cells. Addition of IFN-gamma, in combination with IL-4 or 
IL-13, restored migration of cells to control levels. Migration differences 
observed between the various cytokine treatments was correlated with expression 
of the collagen I-binding alpha(2)beta(1)-integrin at the leading edge of cells 
at the wound front; alpha(2)beta(1)-integrin expression was decreased in 
IFN-gamma-treated cells compared with controls, whereas it was highest in IL-4- 
and IL-13-treated cells. These results demonstrate that IL-4 and IL-13 diminish 
the capacity of Calu-3 cells to maintain barrier function and repair wounds, 
whereas IFN-gamma promotes epithelial restitution by enhancing barrier function 
and wound healing.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpcell.2001.281.6.C2029
PMID: 11698262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
