---
pmid: '17600318'
title: BMP4 induces HO-1 via a Smad-independent, p38MAPK-dependent pathway in pulmonary
  artery myocytes.
authors:
- Yang X
- Lee PJ
- Long L
- Trembath RC
- Morrell NW
journal: Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2006-0360OC
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# BMP4 induces HO-1 via a Smad-independent, p38MAPK-dependent pathway in pulmonary artery myocytes.
**Authors:** Yang X, Lee PJ, Long L, Trembath RC, Morrell NW
**Journal:** Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1165/rcmb.2006-0360OC](https://doi.org/10.1165/rcmb.2006-0360OC)

## Abstract

1. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2007 Nov;37(5):598-605. doi: 
10.1165/rcmb.2006-0360OC. Epub 2007 Jun 28.

BMP4 induces HO-1 via a Smad-independent, p38MAPK-dependent pathway in pulmonary 
artery myocytes.

Yang X(1), Lee PJ, Long L, Trembath RC, Morrell NW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's and Papworth 
Hospitals, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are multifunctional cytokines, which play a 
key role in vascular development and remodeling. Heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1), the 
rate-limiting enzyme in heme catabolism, has been shown to be protective against 
vascular and lung injury. In a microarray study, we identified HO-1 as a major 
target of BMP4 signaling in human pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells (PASMCs), 
and confirmed the induction of HO-1 mRNA and protein by RT-PCR and Western 
blotting, respectively. Immunoblotting demonstrated that incubation of PASMCs 
with BMP4 rapidly phosphorylated Smad1/5 and activated the mitogen-activated 
protein kinases, p38(MAPK) and ERK1/2, in PASMCs, but not JNK. Using pathway 
selective inhibitors, the induction of HO-1 mRNA and protein was shown to be 
dependent on activation of p38(MAPK). Induction was independent of Smad1/5 
signaling, since HO-1 mRNA and protein induction was intact in PASMCs harboring 
mutations in the kinase domain of BMP type II receptor, with disrupted Smad 
signaling. In addition, adenoviral transfection of kinase-deficient BMPR-II also 
failed to inhibit BMP4-induced HO-1 expression. In functional studies, the HO-1 
inhibitor, ZnPP-IX, partly reversed the growth-inhibitory effects of BMP4, and 
overexpression of HO-1 in PASMCs inhibited serum-stimulated [3H]-thymidine 
incorporation. Taken together, these findings show that HO-1 is an important 
Smad-independent target of BMP signaling in vascular smooth muscle. Inhibition 
of HO-1 function or expression will further increase the proproliferative 
capacity of BMPR-II-deficient PASMCs and may thus represent a potential "second 
hit" necessary for disease manifestation.

DOI: 10.1165/rcmb.2006-0360OC
PMID: 17600318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
