---
pmid: '19217408'
title: TAF12 recruits Gadd45a and the nucleotide excision repair complex to the promoter
  of rRNA genes leading to active DNA demethylation.
authors:
- Schmitz KM
- Schmitt N
- Hoffmann-Rohrer U
- Schäfer A
- Grummt I
- Mayer C
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.01.015
---

# TAF12 recruits Gadd45a and the nucleotide excision repair complex to the promoter of rRNA genes leading to active DNA demethylation.
**Authors:** Schmitz KM, Schmitt N, Hoffmann-Rohrer U, Schäfer A, Grummt I, Mayer C
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2009.01.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2009.01.015)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2009 Feb 13;33(3):344-53. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.01.015.

TAF12 recruits Gadd45a and the nucleotide excision repair complex to the 
promoter of rRNA genes leading to active DNA demethylation.

Schmitz KM(1), Schmitt N, Hoffmann-Rohrer U, Schäfer A, Grummt I, Mayer C.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Biology of the Cell II, German Cancer Research Center, 
DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance, INF 581, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Many studies have detailed the repressive effects of DNA methylation on gene 
expression. However, the mechanisms that promote active demethylation are just 
beginning to emerge. Here, we show that methylation of the rDNA promoter is a 
dynamic and reversible process. Demethylation of rDNA is initiated by 
recruitment of Gadd45a (growth arrest and DNA damage inducible protein 45 alpha) 
to the rDNA promoter by TAF12, a TBP-associated factor that is contained in Pol 
I- and Pol II-specific TBP-TAF complexes. Once targeted to rDNA, Gadd45a 
triggers demethylation of promoter-proximal DNA by recruiting the nucleotide 
excision repair (NER) machinery to remove methylated cytosines. Knockdown of 
Gadd45a, XPA, XPG, XPF, or TAF12 or treatment with drugs that inhibit NER causes 
hypermethylation of rDNA, establishes heterochromatic histone marks, and impairs 
transcription. The results reveal a mechanism that recruits the DNA repair 
machinery to the promoter of active genes, keeping them in a hypomethylated 
state.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.01.015
PMID: 19217408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
