---
pmid: '2168878'
title: The human fibroblast adenine nucleotide translocator gene. Molecular cloning
  and sequence.
authors:
- Ku DH
- Kagan J
- Chen ST
- Chang CD
- Baserga R
- Wurzel J
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1990'
full_text_available: false
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The human fibroblast adenine nucleotide translocator gene. Molecular cloning and sequence.
**Authors:** Ku DH, Kagan J, Chen ST, Chang CD, Baserga R, Wurzel J
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1990)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1990 Sep 25;265(27):16060-3.

The human fibroblast adenine nucleotide translocator gene. Molecular cloning and 
sequence.

Ku DH(1), Kagan J, Chen ST, Chang CD, Baserga R, Wurzel J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Temple University Medical School, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania 19140.

The human adenine nucleotide translocator multigene family consists of three 
transcribed genes and at least seven pseudogenes. We report the cloning and 
sequencing of the gene expressed in human fibroblasts. Like the other two 
transcribed genes, it has four exons. The 5'-flanking region of the fibroblast 
translocase gene contains a functional promoter. The promoter has a TATA motif 
beginning 30 base pairs upstream of the transcription initiation site and five 
potential SP1 binding sites, but lacks a canonical CCAAT box immediately 
upstream of the TATA sequence. Differences among the sequence motifs of the 
5'-flanking region of the three human translocase genes could account for 
differences in their cell type-specific and proliferation-associated expression.

PMID: 2168878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
