---
pmid: '20437145'
title: NtrC-sensed nitrogen availability is important for oxidative stress defense
  in Pseudomonas putida KT2440.
authors:
- Yeom S
- Yeom J
- Park W
journal: J Microbiol
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s12275-010-0075-0
---

# NtrC-sensed nitrogen availability is important for oxidative stress defense in Pseudomonas putida KT2440.
**Authors:** Yeom S, Yeom J, Park W
**Journal:** J Microbiol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12275-010-0075-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12275-010-0075-0)

## Abstract

1. J Microbiol. 2010 Apr;48(2):153-9. doi: 10.1007/s12275-010-0075-0. Epub 2010
May  1.

NtrC-sensed nitrogen availability is important for oxidative stress defense in 
Pseudomonas putida KT2440.

Yeom S(1), Yeom J, Park W.

Author information:
(1)Division of Environmental Science and Ecological Engineering, Korea 
University, Seoul, 136-713, Republic of Korea.

The zwf, which encodes glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, is repressed by NtrC 
under nitrogen-limited condition. Previously, we demonstrated that induction of 
zwf-1 is required for protecting Pseudomonas putida cells under oxidative 
stress, which could be possible probably because of derepression of HexR on the 
zwf-1 gene under oxidative stress. These findings led us investigate that NtrC 
still represses the zwf-1 under nitrogen-limited oxidative stress condition, 
which makes cells more sensitive under such condition. Interestingly, deletion 
of the ntrC gene significantly reduces growth rate, but renders cells more 
resistant to oxidative stress, under nitrogen limited condition in P. putida. 
More vitality of the ntrC mutant under oxidative stress condition was also 
confirmed by the fluorogenic redox dye using flow cytometry. The results of 
transcriptome analysis demonstrated that the derepression of several oxidative 
stress genes along with the zwf-1 gene might confer high resistance to oxidative 
stress in the ntrC mutant. Here, we presented the data for the first time, 
showing that different sets of genes are involved in nitrogen-rich and 
nitrogen-limited oxidative stress conditions and NtrC-sensed nitrogen 
availability is one of the most important prerequisite for full cellular defense 
against oxidative stress in P. putida.

DOI: 10.1007/s12275-010-0075-0
PMID: 20437145 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
