---
pmid: '13679151'
title: Roles of MGMT and MLH1 proteins in alkylation-induced apoptosis and mutagenesis.
authors:
- Takagi Y
- Takahashi M
- Sanada M
- Ito R
- Yamaizumi M
- Sekiguchi M
journal: DNA Repair (Amst)
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s1568-7864(03)00134-4
---

# Roles of MGMT and MLH1 proteins in alkylation-induced apoptosis and mutagenesis.
**Authors:** Takagi Y, Takahashi M, Sanada M, Ito R, Yamaizumi M, Sekiguchi M
**Journal:** DNA Repair (Amst) (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1568-7864(03)00134-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1568-7864(03)00134-4)

## Abstract

1. DNA Repair (Amst). 2003 Oct 7;2(10):1135-46. doi:
10.1016/s1568-7864(03)00134-4.

Roles of MGMT and MLH1 proteins in alkylation-induced apoptosis and mutagenesis.

Takagi Y(1), Takahashi M, Sanada M, Ito R, Yamaizumi M, Sekiguchi M.

Author information:
(1)Frontier Research Center, Fukuoka Dental College, Fukuoka 814-0193, Japan. 
ytaka@college.fdcnet.ac.jp

To examine involvement of mismatch repair system in alkylation-induced apoptosis 
and mutagenesis, cell lines defective in the Mgmt gene encoding a DNA repair 
enzyme, O(6)-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase, and/or the Mlh1 gene encoding 
a protein involved in mismatch repair were established from gene-targeted mice. 
Mgmt(-/-) cells are hypersensitive to the killing effect of 
N-methyl-N-nitrosourea (MNU) and this effect of MNU was overcome by introducing 
an additional mutation in the Mlh1 gene. Mgmt(-/-)Mlh1(-/-) cells are more 
resistant to MNU than are wild-type cells. When the human Mgmt cDNA sequence 
with a strong promoter was introduced, the wild-type cells acquired the same 
high level of resistance to MNU as that of Mgmt(-/-)Mlh1(-/-) cells. Although no 
apparent increase in MNU-induced mutant frequency was observed in such 
methyltransferase-overproducing wild-type cells, mutant frequency of 
Mgmt(-/-)Mlh1(-/-) cells became 10-fold higher after being treated with MNU. 
Mgmt(-/-)Mlh1(+/-) cells carrying approximately half the normal level of MLH1 
protein showed a normal level of spontaneous mutant frequency, yet were still 
highly responsive to the mutagenic effect of the alkylating carcinogen. This 
haploinsufficient character of Mlh1 mutation was also observed in cell survival 
assays; Mgmt(-/-)Mlh1(+/-) cells were as resistant to MNU as were 
Mgmt(-/-)Mlh1(-/-) cells. While caspase-3 was induced in Mgmt(-/-)Mlh1(+/+) 
cells after treatment with MNU, no induction occurred in Mgmt(-/-)Mlh1(+/-) 
cells or in Mgmt(-/-)Mlh1(-/-) cells. The cellular content of MLH1 protein seems 
to be critical for determining if damaged cells enter into either a death or 
mutation-inducing pathway. The haploinsufficient phenotype of Mlh1-heterozygous 
cells may be explained by competition in heterodimer formation between MLH1 
homologues.

DOI: 10.1016/s1568-7864(03)00134-4
PMID: 13679151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
