---
pmid: '36692217'
title: Stress granule homeostasis is modulated by TRIM21-mediated ubiquitination of
  G3BP1 and autophagy-dependent elimination of stress granules.
authors:
- Yang C
- Wang Z
- Kang Y
- Yi Q
- Wang T
- Bai Y
- Liu Y
journal: Autophagy
year: '2023'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: pdf_partial
pmcid: PMC10283440
doi: 10.1080/15548627.2022.2164427
---

# Stress granule homeostasis is modulated by TRIM21-mediated ubiquitination of G3BP1 and autophagy-dependent elimination of stress granules.
**Authors:** Yang C, Wang Z, Kang Y, Yi Q, Wang T, Bai Y, Liu Y
**Journal:** Autophagy (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15548627.2022.2164427](https://doi.org/10.1080/15548627.2022.2164427)
**PMC:** [PMC10283440](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10283440/)

## Abstract

1. Autophagy. 2023 Jul;19(7):1934-1951. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2022.2164427. Epub 
2023 Jan 24.

Stress granule homeostasis is modulated by TRIM21-mediated ubiquitination of 
G3BP1 and autophagy-dependent elimination of stress granules.

Yang C(1)(2)(3), Wang Z(1), Kang Y(1), Yi Q(1), Wang T(1), Bai Y(1), Liu Y(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, 
China.
(2)CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell Science, Shanghai Institute of 
Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(3)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Eukaryotic stress granules (SGs) are highly dynamic assemblies of untranslated 
mRNAs and proteins that form through liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) under 
cellular stress. SG formation and elimination process is a conserved cellular 
strategy to promote cell survival, although the precise regulation of this 
process is poorly understood. Here, we screened six E3 ubiquitin ligases present 
in SGs and identified TRIM21 (tripartite motif containing 21) as a central 
regulator of SG homeostasis that is highly enriched in SGs of cells under 
arsenite-induced oxidative stress. Knockdown of TRIM21 promotes SG formation 
whereas overexpression of TRIM21 inhibits the formation of physiological and 
pathological SGs associated with neurodegenerative diseases. TRIM21 catalyzes 
K63-linked ubiquitination of the SG core protein, G3BP1 (G3BP stress granule 
assembly factor 1), and G3BP1 ubiquitination can effectively inhibit LLPS, in 
vitro. Recent reports suggested the involvement of macroautophagy/autophagy, as 
a stress response pathway, in the regulation of SG homeostasis. We 
systematically investigated well-defined autophagy receptors and identified 
SQSTM1/p62 (sequestosome 1) and CALCOCO2/NDP52 (calcium binding and coiled-coil 
domain 2) as the primary receptors that directly interact with G3BP1 during 
arsenite-induced stress. Endogenous SQSTM1 and CALCOCO2 localize to the 
periphery of SGs under oxidative stress and mediate SG elimination, as single 
knockout of each receptor causes accumulation of physiological and pathological 
SGs. Collectively, our study broadens the understanding in the regulation of SG 
homeostasis by showing that TRIM21 and autophagy receptors modulate SG formation 
and elimination respectively, suggesting the possibility of clinical targeting 
of these molecules in therapeutic strategies for neurodegenerative 
diseases.Abbreviations: ACTB: actin beta; ALS: amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; 
BafA1: bafilomycin A1; BECN1: beclin 1; C9orf72: C9orf72-SMCR8 complex subunit; 
CALCOCO2/NDP52: calcium binding and coiled-coil domain 2; Co-IP: 
co-immunoprecipitation; DAPI: 4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; FTD: frontotemporal 
dementia; FUS: FUS RNA binding protein; G3BP1: G3BP stress granule assembly 
factor 1; GFP: green fluorescent protein; LLPS: liquid-liquid phase separation; 
MAP1LC3/LC3: microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3; NBR1: NBR1 
autophagy cargo receptor; NES: nuclear export signal; OPTN: optineurin; RFP: red 
fluorescent protein; SQSTM1/p62: sequestosome 1; SG: stress granule; TAX1BP1: 
Tax1 binding protein 1; TOLLIP: toll interacting protein; TRIM21: tripartite 
motif containing 21; TRIM56: tripartite motif containing 56; UB: ubiquitin; 
ULK1: unc-51 like autophagy activating kinase 1; WT: wild-type.

DOI: 10.1080/15548627.2022.2164427
PMCID: PMC10283440
PMID: 36692217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

## Full Text

Preparing to download ... HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
