---
pmid: '26884868'
title: MAPK1 up-regulates the expression of MALAT1 to promote the proliferation of
  cardiomyocytes through PI3K/AKT signaling pathway.
authors:
- Zhao J
- Li L
- Peng L
journal: Int J Clin Exp Pathol
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4730081
---

# MAPK1 up-regulates the expression of MALAT1 to promote the proliferation of cardiomyocytes through PI3K/AKT signaling pathway.
**Authors:** Zhao J, Li L, Peng L
**Journal:** Int J Clin Exp Pathol (2015)
**PMC:** [PMC4730081](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4730081/)

## Abstract

1. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Dec 1;8(12):15947-53. eCollection 2015.

MAPK1 up-regulates the expression of MALAT1 to promote the proliferation of 
cardiomyocytes through PI3K/AKT signaling pathway.

Zhao J(1), Li L(1), Peng L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Medicine, Sichuan Provincial Cancer Hospital Chengdu 
610041, China.

The previous studies identify mammalian heart is terminal differentiation organs 
without regenerative capacity. Recently, there is some evidence point that 
cardiomyocytes are not terminally differentiated cells and cell proliferation 
may be stimulated in the pathologic heart. The aim of this study is to discover 
the possible mechanism which involved in cardiomyocytes proliferation process. 
In this study, the proliferation assay and cell cycle assay showed the 
proliferation of cardiomyocytes was inhibited when the cells treated with MAPK1 
inhibitor. Moreover, the bioinformatics analysis revealed MAPK1 was positively 
correlated with MALAT1. Meanwhile, the expression of MALAT1 in H9C2 cells with 
the treatment of MAPK1 siRNA was obvious lower than scramble siRNA treated 
group. Finally further study suggested H9C2 cells treated with Wortmannin in 
combination with LY294002 (PI3K/AKT signaling pathway inhibitor), the expression 
of MALAT1 was dramatically decreased. These results indicated that MAPK1 was 
able to increase the proliferation of cardiomyocytes via up-regulating the 
expression of MALAT1 through PI3K/AKT signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC4730081
PMID: 26884868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
