---
pmid: '28628108'
title: Germline hypomorphic CARD11 mutations in severe atopic disease.
authors:
- Ma CA
- Stinson JR
- Zhang Y
- Abbott JK
- Weinreich MA
- Hauk PJ
- Reynolds PR
- Lyons JJ
- Nelson CG
- Ruffo E
- Dorjbal B
- Glauzy S
- Yamakawa N
- Arjunaraja S
- Voss K
- Stoddard J
- Niemela J
- Zhang Y
- Rosenzweig SD
- McElwee JJ
- DiMaggio T
- Matthews HF
- Jones N
- Stone KD
- Palma A
- Oleastro M
- Prieto E
- Bernasconi AR
- Dubra G
- Danielian S
- Zaiat J
- Marti MA
- Kim B
- Cooper MA
- Romberg N
- Meffre E
- Gelfand EW
- Snow AL
- Milner JD
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5664152
doi: 10.1038/ng.3898
---

# Germline hypomorphic CARD11 mutations in severe atopic disease.
**Authors:** Ma CA, Stinson JR, Zhang Y, Abbott JK, Weinreich MA, Hauk PJ, Reynolds PR, Lyons JJ, Nelson CG, Ruffo E, Dorjbal B, Glauzy S, Yamakawa N, Arjunaraja S, Voss K, Stoddard J, Niemela J, Zhang Y, Rosenzweig SD, McElwee JJ, DiMaggio T, Matthews HF, Jones N, Stone KD, Palma A, Oleastro M, Prieto E, Bernasconi AR, Dubra G, Danielian S, Zaiat J, Marti MA, Kim B, Cooper MA, Romberg N, Meffre E, Gelfand EW, Snow AL, Milner JD
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.3898](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.3898)
**PMC:** [PMC5664152](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5664152/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 2017 Aug;49(8):1192-1201. doi: 10.1038/ng.3898. Epub 2017 Jun 19.

Germline hypomorphic CARD11 mutations in severe atopic disease.

Ma CA(1), Stinson JR(2), Zhang Y(1), Abbott JK(3), Weinreich MA(1), Hauk PJ(3), 
Reynolds PR(3), Lyons JJ(1), Nelson CG(1), Ruffo E(2)(4), Dorjbal B(2), Glauzy 
S(5), Yamakawa N(5), Arjunaraja S(2), Voss K(2), Stoddard J(6), Niemela J(6), 
Zhang Y(7), Rosenzweig SD(6), McElwee JJ(8), DiMaggio T(1), Matthews HF(7), 
Jones N(9), Stone KD(1), Palma A(10), Oleastro M(10), Prieto E(10), Bernasconi 
AR(10), Dubra G(10), Danielian S(10), Zaiat J(10), Marti MA(10), Kim B(11), 
Cooper MA(12), Romberg N(13), Meffre E(5), Gelfand EW(3), Snow AL(2), Milner 
JD(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Allergic Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Therapeutics, Uniformed Services 
University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(3)Immunodeficiency Diagnosis and Treatment Program, Department of Pediatrics, 
National Jewish Health, Denver, Colorado, USA.
(4)Department of Translational Medicine, University of Piemonte Orientale, 
Novara, Italy.
(5)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut, USA.
(6)Immunology Service, Department of Laboratory Medicine, NIH Clinical Center, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(7)Human Immunological Disease Section, National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(8)Merck Research Laboratories, Merck and Co., Inc., Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(9)Clinical Research Directorate/Clinical Monitoring Research Program, Leidos 
Biomedical Research, Inc., NCI Campus at Frederick, Frederick, Maryland, USA.
(10)Servicio de Immunología y Reumatología, Hospital Nacional de Pediatría Prof. 
Dr. Juan P. Garrahan, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(11)Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Rheumatology and Department of 
Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
Missouri, USA.
(13)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet. 2017 Oct 27;49(11):1661. doi: 10.1038/ng1117-1661b.

Few monogenic causes for severe manifestations of common allergic diseases have 
been identified. Through next-generation sequencing on a cohort of patients with 
severe atopic dermatitis with and without comorbid infections, we found eight 
individuals, from four families, with novel heterozygous mutations in CARD11, 
which encodes a scaffolding protein involved in lymphocyte receptor signaling. 
Disease improved over time in most patients. Transfection of mutant CARD11 
expression constructs into T cell lines demonstrated both loss-of-function and 
dominant-interfering activity upon antigen receptor-induced activation of 
nuclear factor-κB and mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1). Patient 
T cells had similar defects, as well as low production of the cytokine 
interferon-γ (IFN-γ). The mTORC1 and IFN-γ production defects were partially 
rescued by supplementation with glutamine, which requires CARD11 for import into 
T cells. Our findings indicate that a single hypomorphic mutation in CARD11 can 
cause potentially correctable cellular defects that lead to atopic dermatitis.

DOI: 10.1038/ng.3898
PMCID: PMC5664152
PMID: 28628108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest disclosure The authors 
declare no conflict of interests.
