---
pmid: '18757814'
title: Membrane-association determinants of the omega-amino acid monooxygenase PvdA,
  a pyoverdine biosynthetic enzyme from Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
authors:
- Imperi F
- Putignani L
- Tiburzi F
- Ambrosi C
- Cipollone R
- Ascenzi P
- Visca P
journal: Microbiology (Reading)
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1099/mic.0.2008/018804-0
---

# Membrane-association determinants of the omega-amino acid monooxygenase PvdA, a pyoverdine biosynthetic enzyme from Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
**Authors:** Imperi F, Putignani L, Tiburzi F, Ambrosi C, Cipollone R, Ascenzi P, Visca P
**Journal:** Microbiology (Reading) (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1099/mic.0.2008/018804-0](https://doi.org/10.1099/mic.0.2008/018804-0)

## Abstract

1. Microbiology (Reading). 2008 Sep;154(Pt 9):2804-2813. doi: 
10.1099/mic.0.2008/018804-0.

Membrane-association determinants of the omega-amino acid monooxygenase PvdA, a 
pyoverdine biosynthetic enzyme from Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Imperi F(1)(2), Putignani L(1), Tiburzi F(1)(2), Ambrosi C(2), Cipollone R(2), 
Ascenzi P(1)(2), Visca P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)National Institute for Infectious Diseases IRCCS, 'Lazzaro Spallanzani', Via 
Portuense 292, I-00149 Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Biology, University 'Roma Tre', Viale G. Marconi 446, I-00146 
Rome, Italy.

The L-ornithine N(delta)-oxygenase PvdA catalyses the N(delta)-hydroxylation of 
L-ornithine in many Pseudomonas spp., and thus provides an essential enzymic 
function in the biogenesis of the pyoverdine siderophore. Here, we report a 
detailed analysis of the membrane topology of the PvdA enzyme from the bacterial 
pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Membrane topogenic determinants of PvdA were 
identified by computational analysis, and verified in Escherichia coli by 
constructing a series of translational fusions between PvdA and the PhoA 
(alkaline phosphatase) reporter enzyme. The inferred topological model resembled 
a eukaryotic reverse signal-anchor (type III) protein, with a single N-terminal 
domain anchored to the inner membrane, and the bulk of the protein spanning the 
cytosol. According to this model, the predicted transmembrane region should 
overlap the putative FAD-binding site. Cell fractionation and proteinase K 
accessibility experiments in P. aeruginosa confirmed the membrane-bound nature 
of PvdA, but excluded the transmembrane topology of its N-terminal hydrophobic 
region. Mutational analysis of PvdA, and complementation assays in a P. 
aeruginosa DeltapvdA mutant, demonstrated the dual (structural and functional) 
role of the PvdA N-terminal domain.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.2008/018804-0
PMID: 18757814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
