---
pmid: '18571452'
title: PRG-1 and 21U-RNAs interact to form the piRNA complex required for fertility
  in C. elegans.
authors:
- Batista PJ
- Ruby JG
- Claycomb JM
- Chiang R
- Fahlgren N
- Kasschau KD
- Chaves DA
- Gu W
- Vasale JJ
- Duan S
- Conte D Jr
- Luo S
- Schroth GP
- Carrington JC
- Bartel DP
- Mello CC
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2570341
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2008.06.002
---

# PRG-1 and 21U-RNAs interact to form the piRNA complex required for fertility in C. elegans.
**Authors:** Batista PJ, Ruby JG, Claycomb JM, Chiang R, Fahlgren N, Kasschau KD, Chaves DA, Gu W, Vasale JJ, Duan S, Conte D Jr, Luo S, Schroth GP, Carrington JC, Bartel DP, Mello CC
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2008.06.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2008.06.002)
**PMC:** [PMC2570341](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2570341/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2008 Jul 11;31(1):67-78. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2008.06.002. Epub
2008  Jun 19.

PRG-1 and 21U-RNAs interact to form the piRNA complex required for fertility in 
C. elegans.

Batista PJ(1), Ruby JG, Claycomb JM, Chiang R, Fahlgren N, Kasschau KD, Chaves 
DA, Gu W, Vasale JJ, Duan S, Conte D Jr, Luo S, Schroth GP, Carrington JC, 
Bartel DP, Mello CC.

Author information:
(1)Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

In metazoans, Piwi-related Argonaute proteins have been linked to germline 
maintenance, and to a class of germline-enriched small RNAs termed piRNAs. Here 
we show that an abundant class of 21 nucleotide small RNAs (21U-RNAs) are 
expressed in the C. elegans germline, interact with the C. elegans Piwi family 
member PRG-1, and depend on PRG-1 activity for their accumulation. The PRG-1 
protein is expressed throughout development and localizes to nuage-like 
structures called P granules. Although 21U-RNA loci share a conserved upstream 
sequence motif, the mature 21U-RNAs are not conserved and, with few exceptions, 
fail to exhibit complementarity or evidence for direct regulation of other 
expressed sequences. Our findings demonstrate that 21U-RNAs are the piRNAs of C. 
elegans and link this class of small RNAs and their associated Piwi Argonaute to 
the maintenance of temperature-dependent fertility.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2008.06.002
PMCID: PMC2570341
PMID: 18571452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
