---
pmid: '15465819'
title: Ubiquitin ligase activity of c-Cbl guides the epidermal growth factor receptor
  into clathrin-coated pits by two distinct modes of Eps15 recruitment.
authors:
- de Melker AA
- van der Horst G
- Borst J
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M409765200
---

# Ubiquitin ligase activity of c-Cbl guides the epidermal growth factor receptor into clathrin-coated pits by two distinct modes of Eps15 recruitment.
**Authors:** de Melker AA, van der Horst G, Borst J
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M409765200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M409765200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Dec 31;279(53):55465-73. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M409765200. Epub 
2004 Oct 1.

Ubiquitin ligase activity of c-Cbl guides the epidermal growth factor receptor 
into clathrin-coated pits by two distinct modes of Eps15 recruitment.

de Melker AA(1), van der Horst G, Borst J.

Author information:
(1)Division of Immunology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, 
1066 CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

We have demonstrated previously that c-Cbl requires the presence of a functional 
ubiquitin interacting motif (UIM) in Eps15 to mediate epidermal growth factor 
receptor (EGFR) endocytosis. Both the ubiquitin ligase activity of c-Cbl and the 
UIM of Eps15 were necessary for plasma membrane recruitment of Eps15 and entry 
of ligand-bound EGFR into coated pits and vesicles containing Eps15. This is 
consistent with a scenario in which ubiquitin moieties appended to activated 
EGFR complexes act as docking sites for Eps15 and thereby recruit receptors into 
clathrin coated pits. Here, we have investigated which additional structural 
features of c-Cbl are required for this process. We find that c-Cbl can guide 
ligand-bound EGFR into the Eps15 internalization route by two distinct 
mechanisms. These are either dependent on the phosphotyrosine binding domain of 
c-Cbl that directly binds to the EGFR or on the region C-terminal of the Ring 
finger, which allows for indirect binding to an alternative site on the 
receptor. No strict requirement exists for either ubiquitin modified EGFR or the 
Cbl binding ubiquitination substrate CIN85 as docking site for the UIM of Eps15. 
Only in the phosphotyrosine binding-dependent pathway, the EGFR is ubiquitinated 
and may serve as a site of recruitment for Eps15. Only in this pathway, Eps15 is 
tyrosine-phosphorylated, but this appears unrelated to its capacity to 
participate in EGFR internalization.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M409765200
PMID: 15465819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
