---
pmid: '17242360'
title: Activation of human mitochondrial pantothenate kinase 2 by palmitoylcarnitine.
authors:
- Leonardi R
- Rock CO
- Jackowski S
- Zhang YM
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1785270
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0607621104
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Activation of human mitochondrial pantothenate kinase 2 by palmitoylcarnitine.
**Authors:** Leonardi R, Rock CO, Jackowski S, Zhang YM
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0607621104](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0607621104)
**PMC:** [PMC1785270](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1785270/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jan 30;104(5):1494-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0607621104. Epub 2007 Jan 22.

Activation of human mitochondrial pantothenate kinase 2 by palmitoylcarnitine.

Leonardi R(1), Rock CO, Jackowski S, Zhang YM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

The human isoform 2 of pantothenate kinase (PanK2) is localized to the 
mitochondria, and mutations in this protein are associated with a progressive 
neurodegenerative disorder. PanK2 inhibition by acetyl-CoA is so stringent (IC50 
< 1 microM) that it is unclear how the enzyme functions in the presence of 
intracellular CoA concentrations. Palmitoylcarnitine was discovered to be a 
potent activator of PanK2 that functions to competitively antagonize acetyl-CoA 
inhibition. Acetyl-CoA was a competitive inhibitor of purified PanK2 with 
respect to ATP. The interaction between PanK2 and acetyl-CoA was stable enough 
that a significant proportion of the purified protein was isolated as the 
PanK2.acetyl-CoA complex. The long-chain acylcarnitine activation of PanK2 
explains how PanK2 functions in vivo, by providing a positive regulatory 
mechanism to counteract the negative regulation of PanK2 activity by acetyl-CoA. 
Our results suggest that PanK2 is located in the mitochondria to sense the 
levels of palmitoylcarnitine and up-regulate CoA biosynthesis in response to an 
increased mitochondrial demand for the cofactor to support beta-oxidation.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0607621104
PMCID: PMC1785270
PMID: 17242360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
