---
pmid: '21236673'
title: LUX ARRHYTHMO encodes a nighttime repressor of circadian gene expression in
  the Arabidopsis core clock.
authors:
- Helfer A
- Nusinow DA
- Chow BY
- Gehrke AR
- Bulyk ML
- Kay SA
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3057456
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2010.12.021
---

# LUX ARRHYTHMO encodes a nighttime repressor of circadian gene expression in the Arabidopsis core clock.
**Authors:** Helfer A, Nusinow DA, Chow BY, Gehrke AR, Bulyk ML, Kay SA
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cub.2010.12.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2010.12.021)
**PMC:** [PMC3057456](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3057456/)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2011 Jan 25;21(2):126-33. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2010.12.021. Epub 2011
 Jan 13.

LUX ARRHYTHMO encodes a nighttime repressor of circadian gene expression in the 
Arabidopsis core clock.

Helfer A(1), Nusinow DA, Chow BY, Gehrke AR, Bulyk ML, Kay SA.

Author information:
(1)Section of Cell and Developmental Biology, Division of Biological Sciences, 
Center for Chronobiology, 9500 Gilman Drive, University of California San Diego, 
La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Circadian clocks provide an adaptive advantage by allowing organisms to 
anticipate daily and seasonal environmental changes [1, 2]. Eukaryotic 
oscillators rely on complex hierarchical networks composed of transcriptional 
and posttranslational regulatory circuits [3]. In Arabidopsis, current 
representations of the circadian clock consist of three or four interlocked 
transcriptional feedback loops [3, 4]. Although molecular components 
contributing to different domains of these circuits have been described, how the 
loops are connected at the molecular level is not fully understood. Genetic 
screens previously identified LUX ARRHYTHMO (LUX) [5], also known as PHYTOCLOCK1 
(PCL1) [6], an evening-expressed putative transcription factor essential for 
circadian rhythmicity. We determined the in vitro DNA-binding specificity for 
LUX by using universal protein binding microarrays; we then demonstrated that 
LUX directly regulates the expression of PSEUDO RESPONSE REGULATOR9 (PRR9), a 
major component of the morning transcriptional feedback circuit, through 
association with the newly discovered DNA binding site. We also show that LUX 
binds to its own promoter, defining a new negative autoregulatory feedback loop 
within the core clock. These novel connections between the archetypal loops of 
the Arabidopsis clock represent a significant advance toward defining the 
molecular dynamics underlying the circadian network in plants and provide the 
first mechanistic insight into the molecular function of the previously orphan 
clock factor LUX.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2010.12.021
PMCID: PMC3057456
PMID: 21236673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
