---
pmid: '29292239'
title: Rat d-aspartate oxidase is more similar to the human enzyme than the mouse
  enzyme.
authors:
- Katane M
- Kuwabara H
- Nakayama K
- Saitoh Y
- Miyamoto T
- Sekine M
- Homma H
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta Proteins Proteom
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2017.12.009
---

# Rat d-aspartate oxidase is more similar to the human enzyme than the mouse enzyme.
**Authors:** Katane M, Kuwabara H, Nakayama K, Saitoh Y, Miyamoto T, Sekine M, Homma H
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta Proteins Proteom (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbapap.2017.12.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbapap.2017.12.009)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta Proteins Proteom. 2018 Jul;1866(7):806-812. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbapap.2017.12.009. Epub 2017 Dec 29.

Rat d-aspartate oxidase is more similar to the human enzyme than the mouse 
enzyme.

Katane M(1), Kuwabara H(1), Nakayama K(1), Saitoh Y(1), Miyamoto T(1), Sekine 
M(1), Homma H(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biomolecular Science, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Kitasato University, 5-9-1 Shirokane, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8641, 
Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Biomolecular Science, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Kitasato University, 5-9-1 Shirokane, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8641, 
Japan. Electronic address: hommah@pharm.kitasato-u.ac.jp.

d-Aspartate oxidase (DDO) is a degradative enzyme that is stereospecific for the 
acidic amino acid d-aspartate, an endogenous agonist of the N-methyl-d-aspartate 
(NMDA) receptor. Dysregulation of NMDA receptor-mediated neurotransmission has 
been implicated in the onset of various neuropsychiatric disorders including 
schizophrenia, as well as chronic pain. Thus, appropriate regulation of 
d-aspartate is believed to be important for maintaining proper neural activity 
in the nervous system. Accordingly, much attention has been paid to the role(s) 
of DDO in the metabolism of d-aspartate in vivo, and the physiological functions 
of DDO have been actively investigated using experimental rats and mice. 
However, detailed characterisation of rat DDO has not yet been performed, and 
little is known about species-specific differences in the properties of 
mammalian DDOs. In this study, the structural and enzymatic properties of 
purified recombinant rat, mouse and human DDOs were examined and compared. The 
results showed that rat DDO is more similar to human DDO than to mouse DDO. This 
work provides useful insight into the use of rats as an experimental model for 
investigating the biological significance of human DDO and/or d-aspartate. This 
article is part of a Special Issue entitled: d-Amino acids: biology in the 
mirror, edited by Dr. Loredano Pollegioni, Dr. Jean-Pierre Mothet and Dr. Molla 
Gianluca.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2017.12.009
PMID: 29292239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
