---
pmid: '19153231'
title: Ebola virus protein VP35 impairs the function of interferon regulatory factor-activating
  kinases IKKepsilon and TBK-1.
authors:
- Prins KC
- Cárdenas WB
- Basler CF
journal: J Virol
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2655579
doi: 10.1128/JVI.01875-08
---

# Ebola virus protein VP35 impairs the function of interferon regulatory factor-activating kinases IKKepsilon and TBK-1.
**Authors:** Prins KC, Cárdenas WB, Basler CF
**Journal:** J Virol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.01875-08](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.01875-08)
**PMC:** [PMC2655579](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2655579/)

## Abstract

1. J Virol. 2009 Apr;83(7):3069-77. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01875-08. Epub 2009 Jan 19.

Ebola virus protein VP35 impairs the function of interferon regulatory 
factor-activating kinases IKKepsilon and TBK-1.

Prins KC(1), Cárdenas WB, Basler CF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New 
York 10029, USA.

The Ebola virus (EBOV) VP35 protein antagonizes the early antiviral alpha/beta 
interferon (IFN-alpha/beta) response. We previously demonstrated that VP35 
inhibits the virus-induced activation of the IFN-beta promoter by blocking the 
phosphorylation of IFN-regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3), a transcription factor that 
is crucial for the induction of IFN-alpha/beta expression. Furthermore, VP35 
blocks IFN-beta promoter activation induced by any of several components of the 
retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I)/melanoma differentiation-associated gene 
5 (MDA-5)-activated signaling pathways including RIG-I, IFN-beta promoter 
stimulator 1 (IPS-1), TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK-1), and IkappaB kinase epsilon 
(IKKepsilon). These results suggested that VP35 may target the IRF kinases TBK-1 
and IKKepsilon. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments now demonstrate physical 
interactions of VP35 with IKKepsilon and TBK-1, and the use of an IKKepsilon 
deletion construct further demonstrates that the amino-terminal kinase domain of 
IKKepsilon is sufficient for interactions with either IRF-3 or VP35. In vitro, 
either IKKepsilon or TBK-1 phosphorylates not only IRF-3 but also VP35. 
Moreover, VP35 overexpression impairs IKKepsilon-IRF-3, IKKepsilon-IRF-7, and 
IKKepsilon-IPS-1 interactions. Finally, lysates from cells overexpressing 
IKKepsilon contain kinase activity that can phosphorylate IRF-3 in vitro. When 
VP35 is expressed in the IKKepsilon-expressing cells, this kinase activity is 
suppressed. These data suggest that VP35 exerts its IFN-antagonist function, at 
least in part, by blocking necessary interactions between the kinases IKKepsilon 
and TBK-1 and their normal interaction partners, including their substrates, 
IRF-3 and IRF-7.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01875-08
PMCID: PMC2655579
PMID: 19153231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The Ebola virus (EBOV) VP35 protein antagonizes the early antiviral alpha/beta interferon (IFN-α/β) response. We previously demonstrated that VP35 inhibits the virus-induced activation of the IFN-β promoter by blocking the phosphorylation of IFN-regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3), a transcription factor that is crucial for the induction of IFN-α/β expression. Furthermore, VP35 blocks IFN-β promoter activation induced by any of several components of the retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I)/melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA-5)-activated signaling pathways including RIG-I, IFN-β promoter stimulator 1 (IPS-1), TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK-1), and IκB kinase epsilon (IKKɛ). These results suggested that VP35 may target the IRF kinases TBK-1 and ΙΚΚɛ. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments now demonstrate physical interactions of VP35 with ΙΚΚɛ and TBK-1, and the use of an ΙΚΚɛ deletion construct further demonstrates that the amino-terminal kinase domain of ΙΚΚɛ is sufficient for interactions with either IRF-3 or VP35. In vitro, either ΙΚΚɛ or TBK-1 phosphorylates not only IRF-3 but also VP35. Moreover, VP35 overexpression impairs ΙΚΚɛ-IRF-3, ΙΚΚɛ-IRF-7, and ΙΚΚɛ-IPS-1 interactions. Finally, lysates from cells overexpressing IKKɛ contain kinase activity that can phosphorylate IRF-3 in vitro. When VP35 is expressed in the IKKɛ-expressing cells, this kinase activity is suppressed. These data suggest that VP35 exerts its IFN-antagonist function, at least in part, by blocking necessary interactions between the kinases ΙΚΚɛ and TBK-1 and their normal interaction partners, including their substrates, IRF-3 and IRF-7.

DISCUSSION

The EBOV VP35 protein antagonizes the IFN-α/β antiviral response ( 2 , 3 ). This occurs, at least in part, because VP35 inhibits the virus-induced activation of an IFN-β promoter by blocking the activation of IRF-3 ( 2 ). This report demonstrates that VP35 can block the activation of an IRF-7-dependent promoter as well. Further studies showed that VP35 can block the activation of the IFN-β promoter induced by the expression of any of several components of the RIG-I/MDA-5 signaling pathway ( 7 ). However, VP35 did not detectably inhibit IFN-β promoter activation induced by the expression of a constitutively active IRF-3 ( 2 , 7 ). These observations suggested that VP35 acts at the level of the IRF kinases TBK-1 and IKKɛ. This report provides the first evidence that VP35 physically interacts with and is phosphorylated by the cellular kinases IKKɛ and TBK-1 and suggests that the VP35 interaction with IKKɛ and TBK-1 contributes to the suppression of IFN-α/β gene expression by EBOV.

We determined that VP35 binds to both IKKɛ and TBK-1, each of which can activate IRF-3 and IRF-7 in response to RNA virus infection. Several cellular signaling pathways, including Toll-like receptor 3, Toll-like receptor 4, and the RIG-I- and MDA-5-activated pathways, signal through IKKɛ and/or TBK-1, cellular kinases that phosphorylate IRF-3 and induce IFN-α/β production ( 10 , 20 , 32 , 38 , 46 , 49 ). However, the two kinases are not functionally identical. TBK-1-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts have impaired IFN-α/β responses to virus infection, although residual IKKɛ may partially compensate for the loss of TBK-1. In contrast, TBK-1 was completely dispensable for IFN-α/β responses to virus infection in mouse bone marrow-derived macrophages where IKKɛ function was predominant ( 20 , 32 , 38 ). Because of this cell type-specific activity, it may benefit EBOV, which productively infects numerous cell types in vivo, to encode a mechanism to target both kinases. Our co-IP data suggest that VP35 may succeed in targeting both kinases by interacting with their kinase domains, which are relatively homologous to one another. The presumed consequence of these observations would be the loss of IFN-α/β production in many cell types. It should be noted, however, that Toll-like receptors 7 and 9 activate IFN-α production through a pathway in which IKKα activates IRF-7 in some cell types, such as plasmacytoid dendritic cells ( 21 ). Our data do not determine the impact of VP35 on this alternate source of IFN-α. IKKɛ also phosphorylates STAT1, affecting the function of the IFN-α/β-activated transcription factor complex ISGF3 ( 48 ). It will be of interest to determine whether VP35, via its ability to interact with IKKɛ, might also affect its ability to phosphorylate STAT1.

The EBOV VP35 protein is functionally equivalent to the phosphoproteins (P proteins) of other members of the Mononegavirales , a family that includes rhabdoviruses, paramyxoviruses, and Borna disease virus. Like other P proteins, VP35 plays an essential role in viral RNA synthesis and interacts with the viral nucleoprotein and the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. It is notable, therefore, that the P proteins of rabies virus (a rhabdovirus) and Borna disease virus also target IKKɛ and/or TBK-1. Additionally, the V proteins of several paramyxoviruses (V proteins are encoded by the P gene and share a common amino-terminal domain with P proteins) also target IKKɛ and/or TBK-1. For example, the rabies virus P protein blocks IRF-3 phosphorylation by TBK-1, thereby blocking the production of IFN-β ( 6 ). Similarly, the Borna disease virus P protein and paramyxovirus V proteins block IRF-3 phosphorylation by acting as alternative substrates for TBK-1 and IKKɛ ( 31 , 51 ). Thus, the ability to block IKKɛ and TBK-1 interactions with and phosphorylation of IRF-3 and/or IRF-7 appears to be a function common to this class of viral proteins.

However, VP35-kinase interactions may have broader effects on the activation of IKKɛ, as higher levels of VP35 also disrupted IKKɛ-IPS-1 interactions (Fig. 6 ). IPS-1 is an upstream binding partner of ΙΚΚɛ and TBK-1 that is important for the activation of these kinases via the RIG-I and MDA-5 pathways and for the production of IFN-β during the antiviral response ( 10 , 20 , 25 , 32 , 33 , 45 , 46 , 52 ). The capacity of VP35 to target the IKKɛ-IPS-1 interaction suggests that VP35 may be able to at least partially prevent the activation of ΙΚΚɛ and TBK-1 kinases when high concentrations of VP35 are present.

The observation that VP35 is phosphorylated by IKKɛ and TBK-1 suggests the possibility that VP35 function may be modulated by these kinases. Consistent with this possibility, metabolic labeling of 293T cells transfected with VP35 plasmid with 32 P i resulted in VP35 labeling (data not shown). Whether VP35 becomes phosphorylated in EBOV-infected cells is not certain. However, previous studies demonstrated the phosphorylation of NP and VP30 ( 4 , 8 ) and demonstrated a functional significance for VP30 phosphorylation ( 34 ). The extent to which VP35 may be phosphorylated by IKKɛ or TBK-1 in EBOV-infected cells will obviously be influenced by the extent to which VP35 prevents kinase activation (e.g., by blocking kinase-IPS-1 interactions) versus the extent to which VP35 serves as a decoy substrate for these kinases.

Recent studies employing recombinant EBOVs highlight the importance of VP35 for suppressing host IFN responses. EBOVs with single-amino-acid substitutions that impair VP35 IFN-antagonist function activated IRF-3 more fully and induced a stronger IFN response, as indicated by a global analysis of host gene expression, than did a parental virus with wild-type VP35 ( 17 , 18 ). Mutation of VP35 also impaired virus replication in vivo in a nonlethal mouse model of infection ( 16 ). The mutations tested in the context of EBOV infection have thus far been demonstrated to impair VP35 dsRNA binding activity ( 7 , 16 - 18 ). It will be of interest to determine whether these mutations also impair VP35-IKKɛ and/or VP35-TBK-1 interactions or whether dsRNA binding and kinase interactions are independent activities of the VP35 protein.

In humans and nonhuman primates, fatal EBOV infections are marked by unchecked viral replication and a lack of an effective antiviral response. In order for the virus to overtake the host, it must presumably suppress early antiviral innate immune responses. Blocking the phosphorylation of IRF-3 and/or IRF-7 by physically disrupting their interaction with the upstream kinases IKKɛ and TBK-1 would presumably accomplish this. We and others therefore hypothesized that VP35 will play a critical role in pathogenesis ( 1 , 5 ). The direct demonstration of a role for VP35 in the development of Ebola hemorrhagic fever awaits testing of VP35 mutant viruses in appropriate animal models using VP35 mutant viruses. However, the data in this report showing that VP35 targets IKKɛ and TBK-1 shed light on at least one of the mechanisms of IFN antagonism by VP35. Further studies of this protein suggest novel vaccine or antiviral strategies.
