---
pmid: '23329839'
title: Gadd45a suppresses tumor angiogenesis via inhibition of the mTOR/STAT3 protein
  pathway.
authors:
- Yang F
- Zhang W
- Li D
- Zhan Q
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2013'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3585088
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.418335
---

# Gadd45a suppresses tumor angiogenesis via inhibition of the mTOR/STAT3 protein pathway.
**Authors:** Yang F, Zhang W, Li D, Zhan Q
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M112.418335](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M112.418335)
**PMC:** [PMC3585088](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3585088/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Mar 1;288(9):6552-60. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.418335. Epub
2013  Jan 17.

Gadd45a suppresses tumor angiogenesis via inhibition of the mTOR/STAT3 protein 
pathway.

Yang F(1), Zhang W, Li D, Zhan Q.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory Molecular Oncology, Cancer Institute and Hospital, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Science and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 
100021, China.

Gadd45a, a p53-regulated and DNA damage-inducible gene, is implicated in 
protection against tumor malignancy, although the underlying mechanism remains 
to be defined further. Here we demonstrate that Gadd45a plays an important role 
in suppression of tumor angiogenesis. Gadd45a deletion significantly increases 
microvessel density in tumors and stimulates an angiogenic response in a chicken 
embryo chorioallantoic membrane assay. Disruption of endogenous Gadd45a promotes 
tube formation and migration of endothelial cells. We further show that Gadd45a 
deletion increases phosphorylation of STAT3 at Ser-727 and, in turn, elevates 
the STAT3 transcriptional activity. This process substantially induces both 
expression and secretion of VEGFa, a STAT3 responsive gene, and promotes tumor 
angiogenesis. Interestingly, Gadd45a is able to physically associate with 
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), a kinase that mediates Ser-727 
phosphorylation of STAT3. The interaction of Gadd45a with mTOR suppresses STAT3 
phosphorylation at Ser-727 and leads to down-regulated expression of VEGFa. 
Further analysis reveals that Gadd45a overexpression attenuates the association 
between mTOR and STAT3, whereas Gadd45a disruption strengthens this interaction, 
indicating that Gadd45a suppression of STAT3 phosphorylation is mainly through 
the dissociation of mTOR with STAT3. Taken together, these findings provide the 
first evidence that Gadd45a inhibits tumor angiogenesis via blocking of the 
mTOR/STAT3 pathway.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.418335
PMCID: PMC3585088
PMID: 23329839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Gadd45a , a p53 -regulated and DNA damage-inducible gene, is implicated in protection against tumor malignancy, although the underlying mechanism remains to be defined further. Here we demonstrate that Gadd45a plays an important role in suppression of tumor angiogenesis. Gadd45a deletion significantly increases microvessel density in tumors and stimulates an angiogenic response in a chicken embryo chorioallantoic membrane assay. Disruption of endogenous Gadd45a promotes tube formation and migration of endothelial cells. We further show that Gadd45a deletion increases phosphorylation of STAT3 at Ser-727 and, in turn, elevates the STAT3 transcriptional activity. This process substantially induces both expression and secretion of VEGFa, a STAT3 responsive gene, and promotes tumor angiogenesis. Interestingly, Gadd45a is able to physically associate with mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), a kinase that mediates Ser-727 phosphorylation of STAT3. The interaction of Gadd45a with mTOR suppresses STAT3 phosphorylation at Ser-727 and leads to down-regulated expression of VEGFa. Further analysis reveals that Gadd45a overexpression attenuates the association between mTOR and STAT3, whereas Gadd45a disruption strengthens this interaction, indicating that Gadd45a suppression of STAT3 phosphorylation is mainly through the dissociation of mTOR with STAT3. Taken together, these findings provide the first evidence that Gadd45a inhibits tumor angiogenesis via blocking of the mTOR/STAT3 pathway.

Introduction

Gadd45a, a ubiquitously expressed and DNA damage-responsive protein, is induced by varieties of genotoxic stress agents such as UV radiation, ionizing radiation, methyl methanesulfonate, and hydroxyurea. It plays important roles in suppressing cell proliferation, mediating cell cycle arrest, promoting apoptosis, inducing DNA repair, and stabilizing genomics ( 1 – 4 ). Mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) 2 , derived from Gadd45a knockouts, exhibit centrosome amplification, incomplete cytokinesis, increase of cell proliferation, loss of normal cellular senescence, and reduction in DNA repair ( 5 ). Gadd45a is an especially dominant factor in protecting against carcinogenesis. High-frequency mutations or abnormal epigenetic modification of the Gadd45a locus have been identified in pancreatic cancer, breast cancer, and prostate cancer ( 6 – 8 ). It has also been found that Gadd45a suppresses tumor invasion and metastasis by decreasing MMPs and maintaining cell-to-cell adhesion in vitro ( 9 , 10 ). In vivo experiments have demonstrated that Gadd45a knockout mice display an increase in ionizing radiation- and chemical carcinogen-induced tumors. Most of them are more aggressively malignant than the control mice ( 5 , 11 ). To date, vast implications unveil the key roles of Gadd45a in tumor initiation and progression. However, little insight has been gained into Gadd45a regulation of tumor angiogenesis, which needs further investigation.

Angiogenesis takes place in series of pathological processes, including inflammatory reactions, ischemic diseases, and cancer. In early research it has been demonstrated that invasive tumor growth and metastasis depend on the formation of new blood vessels ( 12 ). It is expected that the growth of avascular tumors can be delayed effectively by restricting nutrient supply and waste exchange. Angiogenesis also assists tumor cells to leave the primary site and enter circulation and, therefore, facilitates tumor metastasis. On the other hand, these results imply that suppressing angiogenesis can be a potential strategy in tumor progression control.

Tumor angiogenesis is a complex process involving the interplay between environmental and genetic signals. Various mutations in cancer may abnormally activate stimulators of angiogenesis and result in switching on the neovasculature. Among all pluripotent transcription factors, STAT3 plays a critical role in tumor angiogenesis, development, and metastasis ( 13 , 14 ). Its constitutive activation has been frequently observed in various cancers, which generally indicates a poor prognosis ( 15 , 16 ). STAT3 has also been confirmed to activate the expression of angiogenic stimulators, including VEGFa and MMPs ( 14 ). The transcriptional activity of STAT3 is suggested to be activated by its phosphorylation at Tyr-705 and maximized by its phosphorylation at Ser-727 ( 17 ). It is noted that the second process can be mediated by mTOR ( 18 ), which is a serine/threonine protein kinase and controls cell growth, motility, survival protein synthesis, and transcription ( 19 ). The mTOR growth signals are abnormally hyperactive in cancers, rendering mTOR a potential target in cancer therapy ( 19 ). It has also been found that mTOR promotes angiogenesis by stabilizing HIF-1a and stimulating VEGFa expression ( 20 ).

In this report we show that Gadd45a inhibits tumor angiogenesis by comprehensively considering the functionalities from both STAT3 and mTOR at the same time. We demonstrate that Gadd45a disruption increases expression of VEGFa and promotes formation of tumor blood vessels. Moreover, Gadd45a expression disrupts the interaction between mTOR and STAT3 and suppresses phosphorylation of STAT3 at Ser-727. These findings provide the first demonstration that Gadd45a plays a negative role in tumor angiogenesis by blocking the mTOR/STAT3 pathway.

DISCUSSION

As a multifunctional protein, Gadd45a is one of the most critical downstream targets of tumor suppressors p53 and BRCA1 and plays a key role in regulation of cell proliferation, apoptosis, cell cycle checkpoint, and genomic stability. Several lines of investigations demonstrate that Gadd45a suppresses metastasis via maintaining cell-to-cell adhesion and cell contact inhibition ( 10 ) and participates in protecting against tumor malignancy ( 5 , 11 ). Gadd45a knockout mice are susceptible to DNA damage-inducible tumors ( 11 ). However, the investigations about Gadd45a suppressing tumor formation are increasing, but the mechanisms still need further understanding.

Angiogenesis symbolizes the tumor malignant transformation and contributes to tumor expansion and metastasis. Growth of new blood vessels takes place in a complex process, including the cooperation between genomic and environmental factors. A series of mutations and abnormal genomic modifications are involved to stimulate its formation in malignant tumors by promoting expression of angiogenic factors. In this study, we find that Gadd45a deletion significantly increases the microvessel formation in xenograft tumors and a CAM assay in vivo . Meanwhile, Gadd45a-defect cell CM promotes migration and tube formation of endothelial cells in vitro . Moreover, Gadd45a is involved in regulating the expression of VEGFa, which is a key stimulator of angiogenesis. By endogenously disrupting Gadd45a, both the expression and the secretion of VEGFa are enhanced. Meanwhile, neutralizing antibody against VEGFa suppresses endothelial cell tube formation and migration by CM from both Gadd45a +/+ and Gadd45a −/− MEFs. These evidences prove that Gadd45a functioned as a suppressor of tumor angiogenesis via decreasing VEGFa expression. VEGFa is regulated by various transcriptional factors including HIF1a, TWIST, and STAT3, which are commonly dysregulated in human cancers. However, Gadd45a has little effect on HIF1a and TWIST expression (data not shown). Our observation demonstrates that the regulation effect of Gadd45a on angiogenesis is closely related to the correlation between Gadd45a and STAT3. Knockdown of STAT3 obviously decreases the expression of VEGFa. The multiple pieces of evidence in this study show that the STAT3 phosphorylation at Ser-727 is largely affected by the status of cellular Gadd45a ( Fig. 6 , a–d ). Thus, it can be concluded that Gadd45a regulation of VEGFa expression is mainly related to STAT3.

It has been well known that STAT3 activation is sufficient to induce tumor development ( 13 ) and contributes to cancer expansion and tumor angiogenesis ( 25 ). The activation of STAT3 directly promotes the expression VEGFa. Therefore, it is critical to unveil the factors in determination of STAT3 activity. The transcriptional activity depends highly on phosphorylation of two key residues. Tyr-705 phosphorylation, typically mediated by JAK, participates in STAT3 dimerization and activation, whereas Ser-727 phosphorylation accounts for achieving the maximal transcriptional activity by affecting the recruitment of cofactors ( 17 , 28 ). Besides, a recent study suggests that Ser-727 phosphorylation can also activate STAT3 without the presence of P-Tyr705 ( 29 ). For the key roles of both P-Ser and P-Tyr, much effort has been made to elucidate the Gadd45 action on P-Ser and P-Tyr of STAT3. We show that Gadd45a deletion or knockdown increase the P-Ser STAT3, whereas Gadd45a overexpression reduces P-Ser STAT3. However, Gadd45a has little effect on P-Tyr STAT3. The transcriptional activity of STAT3 shows the similar trend in relation to Gadd45a in the STAT3 reporter luciferase assay experiment ( Fig. 6 , f–h ). Furthermore, disruption of endogenous Gadd45a enhances both expression and secretion of VEGFa, which is a key target of STAT3 ( Fig. 4 , c–f ).

Gadd45a is known to be induced by serum starvation. A crucial step is to examine how Gadd45a suppresses angiogenesis under this condition. Our study reveals that P-Ser STAT3 and VEGFa are rapidly decreased by Gadd45a induction in the Gadd45a +/+ MEFs after serum withdrawal ( Fig. 6 d ). These findings suggest that Gadd45a suppresses VEGFa expression by decreasing P-Ser STAT3 to inhibit the transcriptional activity. Considering that the phosphorylation of STAT3 on Ser-727 is mediated by a series of kinases, such as p38 and mTOR ( 26 ), Gadd45a suppressed P-Ser STAT3 is likely mediated through its action on these upstream kinases of STAT3. Therefore, we have hypothesized that Gadd45a regulation of STAT3 might be via its interaction with mTOR/STAT3 pathway. Sequence analysis of STAT3 revealed a putative mTOR signaling (TOS) motif that indicates STAT3 as a target of raptor recruitment and mTORC1-mediated phosphorylation ( 30 ). The STAT3 transcriptional activity is strengthened by mTOR via inducing P-Ser727. This process is sensitive to rapamycin, a specific mTOR inhibitor ( 18 ). In agreement with our hypothesis, we have found that P-Ser STAT3 is obviously decreased after rapamycin treatment in Gadd45a +/+ and Gadd45a −/− MEFs, whereas it is not affected by the p38 inhibitor. Accordingly, STAT3 reporter luciferase activity and VEGFa in both MEFs are also suppressed by rapamycin treatment ( Fig. 7 , c and d ), indicating the role of mTOR in phosphorylation of STAT3 in this cell model. Interestingly, the GST pull-down and immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrate strong interactions between Gadd45a and mTOR that lead to dissociation of mTOR/STAT3 complexes ( Fig. 8 , d and e ). Consequently, it can be explained that the disruption of mTOR/STAT3 abrogates the STAT3 phosphorylation at Ser-727 by mTOR and down-regulates the transcriptional activity of STAT3.

In summary, we have demonstrated that Gadd45a may functions as a negative regulator in tumor angiogenesis via blocking of the mTOR/STAT3 pathway. Gadd45a disruption strengthens the association between mTOR and STAT3 and then induces the phosphorylation of STAT3 on Ser-727 to enhance its transcriptional activity. This process leads to an increase in both expression and secretion of VEGFa. These findings show a new correlation between Gadd45a and tumor angiogenesis and unveil the mechanisms of Gadd45a in protecting against carcinogenesis. As revealed by this research, it is emphasized that Gadd45a is an important target in conceiving effective anticancer treatment.
