---
pmid: '17603487'
title: Selective loading of high-affinity peptides onto major histocompatibility complex
  class I molecules by the tapasin-ERp57 heterodimer.
authors:
- Wearsch PA
- Cresswell P
journal: Nat Immunol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ni1485
---

# Selective loading of high-affinity peptides onto major histocompatibility complex class I molecules by the tapasin-ERp57 heterodimer.
**Authors:** Wearsch PA, Cresswell P
**Journal:** Nat Immunol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ni1485](https://doi.org/10.1038/ni1485)

## Abstract

1. Nat Immunol. 2007 Aug;8(8):873-81. doi: 10.1038/ni1485. Epub 2007 Jul 1.

Selective loading of high-affinity peptides onto major histocompatibility 
complex class I molecules by the tapasin-ERp57 heterodimer.

Wearsch PA(1), Cresswell P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520-8011, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2007 Aug;8(8):793-4. doi: 10.1038/ni0807-793.

Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I glycoproteins bind peptides in 
the endoplasmic reticulum after incorporation into the peptide-loading complex, 
whose core is the transporter associated with antigen processing. Other 
components are the chaperone calreticulin, the thiol oxidoreductase ERp57, and 
tapasin. Tapasin and ERp57 have been shown to exist in the peptide-loading 
complex as a disulfide-linked heterodimer. Here, using a cell-free system, we 
demonstrate that although recombinant tapasin was ineffective in recruiting MHC 
class I molecules and facilitating peptide binding, recombinant tapasin-ERp57 
conjugates accomplished both of those functions and also 'edited' the repertoire 
of bound peptides to maximize their affinity. Thus, the tapasin-ERp57 conjugate 
is the functional unit of the peptide-loading complex that generates MHC class I 
molecules with stably associated peptides.

DOI: 10.1038/ni1485
PMID: 17603487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
