---
reference_id: PMID:16431915
title: "EDEM3, a soluble EDEM homolog, enhances glycoprotein endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation and mannose trimming."
authors:
- Hirao K
- Natsuka Y
- Tamura T
- Wada I
- Morito D
- Natsuka S
- Romero P
- Sleno B
- Tremblay LO
- Herscovics A
- Nagata K
- Hosokawa N
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M512191200
content_type: abstract_only
---

# EDEM3, a soluble EDEM homolog, enhances glycoprotein endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation and mannose trimming.
**Authors:** Hirao K, Natsuka Y, Tamura T, Wada I, Morito D, Natsuka S, Romero P, Sleno B, Tremblay LO, Herscovics A, Nagata K, Hosokawa N
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M512191200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M512191200)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Apr 7;281(14):9650-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M512191200. Epub 2006
 Jan 23.

EDEM3, a soluble EDEM homolog, enhances glycoprotein endoplasmic
reticulum-associated degradation and mannose trimming.

Hirao K(1), Natsuka Y, Tamura T, Wada I, Morito D, Natsuka S, Romero P, Sleno B,
Tremblay LO, Herscovics A, Nagata K, Hosokawa N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Institute for Frontier Medical
Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8397, Japan, CREST, JST, Saitama 332-0012,
Japan.

Quality control in the endoplasmic reticulum ensures that only properly folded
proteins are retained in the cell through mechanisms that recognize and discard
misfolded or unassembled proteins in a process called endoplasmic
reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD). We previously cloned EDEM (ER
degradation-enhancing alpha-mannosidase-like protein) and showed that it
accelerates ERAD of misfolded glycoproteins. We now cloned mouse EDEM3, a
soluble homolog of EDEM. EDEM3 consists of 931 amino acids and has all the
signature motifs of Class I alpha-mannosidases (glycosyl hydrolase family 47) in
its N-terminal domain and a protease-associated motif in its C-terminal region.
EDEM3 accelerates glycoprotein ERAD in transfected HEK293 cells, as shown by
increased degradation of misfolded alpha1-antitrypsin variant (null (Hong Kong))
and of TCRalpha. Overexpression of EDEM3 also greatly stimulates mannose
trimming not only from misfolded alpha1-AT null (Hong Kong) but also from total
glycoproteins, in contrast to EDEM, which has no apparent alpha1,2-mannosidase
activity. Furthermore, overexpression of the E147Q EDEM3 mutant, which has the
mutation in one of the conserved acidic residues essential for enzyme activity
of alpha1,2-mannosidases, abolishes the stimulation of mannose trimming and
greatly decreases the stimulation of ERAD by EDEM3. These results show that
EDEM3 has alpha1,2-mannosidase activity in vivo, suggesting that the mechanism
whereby EDEM3 accelerates glycoprotein ERAD is different from that of EDEM.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M512191200
PMID: 16431915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]