---
pmid: '8621661'
title: Cloning, characterization, and expression of cDNAs encoding human delta 1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate
  dehydrogenase.
authors:
- Hu CA
- Lin WW
- Valle D
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.16.9795
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Cloning, characterization, and expression of cDNAs encoding human delta 1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate dehydrogenase.
**Authors:** Hu CA, Lin WW, Valle D
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.271.16.9795](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.271.16.9795)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1996 Apr 19;271(16):9795-800. doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.16.9795.

Cloning, characterization, and expression of cDNAs encoding human delta 
1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate dehydrogenase.

Hu CA(1), Lin WW, Valle D.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Delta 1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate dehydrogenase (P5CDh; EC 1.5.1.12), a 
mitochondrial matrix NAD(+)-dependent dehydrogenase, catalyzes the second step 
of the proline degradation pathway. Deficiency of this enzyme is associated with 
type II hyperprolinemia (HPII), an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by 
accumulation of delta 1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate (P5C) and proline. As an initial 
step in understanding the biochemistry of human P5CDh and molecular basis of 
HPII, we utilized published peptide sequence data and degenerate primer 
polymerase chain reaction to clone two full-length human P5CDh cDNAs, differing 
in length by 1 kilobase pair (kb). Both cDNAs have the identical 1689-base pair 
open reading frame encoding a protein of 563 residues with a predicted molecular 
mass of 62 kDa. The long cDNA contains an additional 1-kb insert in the 
3'-untranslated region that appears to be an alternatively spliced intron. The 
conceptual translation of human P5CDh has 89% sequence identity with the 
published human P5CDh peptide sequences and 42 and 26% identity with 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Escherichia coli P5CDhs, respectively, as well as 
homology to several other aldehyde dehydrogenases. Both P5CDh cDNA clones detect 
a single 3.2-kb transcript on Northern blots of multiple human tissues, 
indicating the long cDNA containing the 3'-untranslated intron represents the 
predominant transcript. The P5CDh structural gene appears to be single copy with 
a size of about 20 kb localized to chromosome 1. To confirm the identity of the 
putative P5CDh cDNAs, we expressed them in a P5CDh-deficient strain of S. 
cerevisiae. Both conferred measurable P5CDh activity and the ability to grow on 
proline as a sole nitrogen source.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.16.9795
PMID: 8621661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
