---
pmid: '23929946'
title: Molecular mechanism for plant steroid receptor activation by somatic embryogenesis
  co-receptor kinases.
authors:
- Santiago J
- Henzler C
- Hothorn M
journal: Science
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.1242468
---

# Molecular mechanism for plant steroid receptor activation by somatic embryogenesis co-receptor kinases.
**Authors:** Santiago J, Henzler C, Hothorn M
**Journal:** Science (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1242468](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1242468)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2013 Aug 23;341(6148):889-92. doi: 10.1126/science.1242468. Epub 2013
 Aug 8.

Molecular mechanism for plant steroid receptor activation by somatic 
embryogenesis co-receptor kinases.

Santiago J(1), Henzler C, Hothorn M.

Author information:
(1)Structural Plant Biology Lab, Friedrich Miescher Laboratory of the Max Planck 
Society, Spemannstraße 39, Tübingen 72076, Germany.

Brassinosteroids, which control plant growth and development, are sensed by the 
leucine-rich repeat (LRR) domain of the membrane receptor kinase BRASSINOSTEROID 
INSENSITIVE 1 (BRI1), but it is unknown how steroid binding at the cell surface 
activates the cytoplasmic kinase domain of the receptor. A family of somatic 
embryogenesis receptor kinases (SERKs) has been genetically implicated in 
mediating early brassinosteroid signaling events. We found a direct and 
steroid-dependent interaction between the BRI1 and SERK1 LRR domains by analysis 
of their complex crystal structure at 3.3 angstrom resolution. We show that the 
SERK1 LRR domain is involved in steroid sensing and, through 
receptor-co-receptor heteromerization, in the activation of the BRI1 signaling 
pathway. Our work reveals how known missense mutations in BRI1 and in SERKs 
modulate brassinosteroid signaling and the targeting mechanism of BRI1 receptor 
antagonists.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1242468
PMID: 23929946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
