---
pmid: '8227052'
title: Characterization of the cell adhesion molecule gp24 in Dictyostelium discoideum.
  Mediation of cell-cell adhesion via a Ca(2+)-dependent mechanism.
authors:
- Brar SK
- Siu CH
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1993'
full_text_available: false
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Characterization of the cell adhesion molecule gp24 in Dictyostelium discoideum. Mediation of cell-cell adhesion via a Ca(2+)-dependent mechanism.
**Authors:** Brar SK, Siu CH
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1993)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1993 Nov 25;268(33):24902-9.

Characterization of the cell adhesion molecule gp24 in Dictyostelium discoideum. 
Mediation of cell-cell adhesion via a Ca(2+)-dependent mechanism.

Brar SK(1), Siu CH.

Author information:
(1)Banting and Best Department of Medical Research, University of Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.

Dictyostelium discoideum cells express EDTA-sensitive cell-cell adhesion sites 
soon after the initiation of development and EDTA-resistant adhesion sites later 
at the aggregation stage. A glycoprotein of M(r) 24,000 (gp24) has been 
implicated in the mediation of the EDTA-sensitive type of intercellular 
cohesiveness (Knecht, D. A., Fuller, D. L., and Loomis, W. F. (1987) Dev. Biol. 
121, 277-283). In this study, a relatively simple procedure was developed to 
purify gp24 to homogeneity. A highly specific rabbit antiserum was raised 
against gp24, and the localization of gp24 at the cell surface was shown by 
quantitative binding of the anti-gp24 antibodies to intact cells. To demonstrate 
the cell binding activity of gp24, the binding of solubilized gp24 to intact 
cells was examined. 125I-Labeled gp24 bound to cells in a dose-dependent and 
saturable manner, and the binding was displaced specifically by unlabeled gp24. 
Purified gp24 was capable of inhibiting the reassociation of dispersed cells 
previously undergoing EDTA-sensitive aggregation. Moreover, precoating cells 
with anti-gp24 IgG and Fab fragments blocked the binding of 125I-labeled gp24 to 
cells. Collectively, these in vitro assays provide direct evidence that gp24 is 
a cell adhesion molecule that most likely functions through a homophilic mode of 
interaction. The binding of gp24 to cells was sensitive to EGTA, suggesting that 
the activity of gp24 may involve calcium ions. Binding studies showed that 
45Ca2+ could bind to gp24 blotted onto nitrocellulose membrane. In addition, 
preincubation of the native protein with calcium ions resulted in a shift in its 
gel mobility. It is therefore likely that gp24 mediates cell-cell interactions 
via a Ca(2+)-dependent mechanism, rendering gp24 the first cell adhesion 
molecule in D. discoideum to utilize a Ca(2+)-based adhesion system.

PMID: 8227052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
