---
pmid: '30759361'
title: 5' processing of Saccharomyces cerevisiae mitochondrial tRNAs requires expression
  of multiple genes.
authors:
- Guedes-Monteiro RF
- Franco LVR
- Moda BS
- Tzagoloff A
- Barros MH
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Cell Res
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2019.02.002
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# 5' processing of Saccharomyces cerevisiae mitochondrial tRNAs requires expression of multiple genes.
**Authors:** Guedes-Monteiro RF, Franco LVR, Moda BS, Tzagoloff A, Barros MH
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Cell Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbamcr.2019.02.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbamcr.2019.02.002)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Cell Res. 2019 May;1866(5):806-818. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2019.02.002. Epub 2019 Feb 10.

5' processing of Saccharomyces cerevisiae mitochondrial tRNAs requires 
expression of multiple genes.

Guedes-Monteiro RF(1), Franco LVR(2), Moda BS(1), Tzagoloff A(2), Barros MH(3).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Microbiologia - Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, University 
of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, USA.
(3)Departamento de Microbiologia - Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, University 
of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address: mariohb@usp.br.

Mitochondrial tRNAs are processed at their 5'ends by highly divergent but 
ubiquitous RNase P. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Rpm2p is the protein component 
of RNase P. Here, we identify four novel genes MTA1, MTA2, GEP5 and PET130 of 
the Saccharomycetaceae family that are necessary for an efficient processing of 
mitochondrial tRNAs. Null mutants of mta1, mta2 and gep5 have severely reduced 
levels of mitochondrial tRNAs; in addition, temperature sensitive (ts) mutants 
of mta1, mta2, pet130 and gep5 accumulated tRNAs precursor transcripts at the 
restrictive but not at the permissive temperature. The same mitochondrial tRNAs 
precursors were also identified in rpm2 ts mutants or in the double ts mutants 
mta1 rpm2 and mta2 rpm2. The genetic and physical association of these four 
novel genes corroborate the hypothesis that they have their function associated. 
Different combinations of mta1, mta2, pet130 and gep5 ts alleles display a 
synthetic respiratory deficient phenotype, an indication of genetic interactions 
of the genes. Indeed, Mta1p, Mta2p, Pet130p, and Gep5p are associated with the 
mitochondrial inner membrane and are all extracted and sediment in sucrose 
gradients as high molecular weight complexes, where they may be present in a 
common complex with Rpm2p. This is supported by pull-down assays showing 
co-immunopurification of Rpm2 with Mta1p.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2019.02.002
PMID: 30759361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
