---
pmid: '18414036'
title: 'IAPs: more than just inhibitors of apoptosis proteins.'
authors:
- Dubrez-Daloz L
- Dupoux A
- Cartier J
journal: Cell Cycle
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.4161/cc.7.8.5783
---

# IAPs: more than just inhibitors of apoptosis proteins.
**Authors:** Dubrez-Daloz L, Dupoux A, Cartier J
**Journal:** Cell Cycle (2008)
**DOI:** [10.4161/cc.7.8.5783](https://doi.org/10.4161/cc.7.8.5783)

## Abstract

1. Cell Cycle. 2008 Apr 15;7(8):1036-46. doi: 10.4161/cc.7.8.5783. Epub 2008 Feb 
11.

IAPs: more than just inhibitors of apoptosis proteins.

Dubrez-Daloz L(1), Dupoux A, Cartier J.

Author information:
(1)INSERM, UMR 866, Institut Fédératif de Recherche (IFR) Santé-STIC, University 
of Burgundy, Dijon, France. Laurence.Dubrez-Daloz@u-bourgogne.fr

Inhibitors of apoptosis proteins (IAPs) are a conserved family of proteins 
identified in species ranging from virus, yeasts, nematodes, fishes, flies and 
mammals. The common structural feature is the presence of at least one 
Baculovirus IAP Repeat (BIR) domain. Hence, IAPs are also known as 
BIR-containing proteins (BIRCs). Most of them display anti-apoptotic properties 
when overexpressed. In drosophila, IAPs are sufficient and necessary to promote 
cell survival through a direct regulation of apoptotic proteases called 
caspases. In mammals, BIRC4/XIAP, the most studied IAP member can directly 
inhibit the activity of caspase-3, 7 and 9. However, this activity is not 
conserved in other IAPs and physiological relevancies of such anti-caspase 
activities are still discussed. A detailed analysis of IAP-deficient mice or 
derived cells, deletion experiments performed in drosophila and zebrafish, or 
research of protein partners have revealed the importance of IAPs in adaptive 
response to cellular stress, in cell proliferation, differentiation, signaling, 
motility and in immune response. This review discusses recent data that help 
understanding of cellular functions of IAPs.

DOI: 10.4161/cc.7.8.5783
PMID: 18414036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
