---
pmid: '17611230'
title: Attenuation of brassinosteroid signaling enhances FLC expression and delays
  flowering.
authors:
- Domagalska MA
- Schomburg FM
- Amasino RM
- Vierstra RD
- Nagy F
- Davis SJ
journal: Development
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/dev.02866
---

# Attenuation of brassinosteroid signaling enhances FLC expression and delays flowering.
**Authors:** Domagalska MA, Schomburg FM, Amasino RM, Vierstra RD, Nagy F, Davis SJ
**Journal:** Development (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.02866](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.02866)

## Abstract

1. Development. 2007 Aug;134(15):2841-50. doi: 10.1242/dev.02866. Epub 2007 Jul
4.

Attenuation of brassinosteroid signaling enhances FLC expression and delays 
flowering.

Domagalska MA(1), Schomburg FM, Amasino RM, Vierstra RD, Nagy F, Davis SJ.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research, Carl-von-Linné-Weg 10, 
50829 Cologne, Germany.

A main developmental switch in the life cycle of a flowering plant is the 
transition from vegetative to reproductive growth. In Arabidopsis thaliana, 
distinct genetic pathways regulate the timing of this transition. We report here 
that brassinosteroid (BR) signaling establishes an unexpected and previously 
unidentified genetic pathway in the floral-regulating network. We isolated two 
alleles of brassinosteroid-insensitive 1 (bri1) as enhancers of the 
late-flowering autonomous-pathway mutant luminidependens (ld). bri1 was found to 
predominantly function as a flowering-time enhancer. Further analyses of double 
mutants between bri1 and known flowering-time mutants revealed that bri1 also 
enhances the phenotype of the autonomous mutant fca and of the dominant FRI 
line. Moreover, all of these double mutants exhibited elevated expression of the 
potent floral repressor FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC). This molecular response could 
be efficiently suppressed by vernalization, leading to accelerated flowering. 
Additionally, specific reduction of the expression of FLC via RNA interference 
accelerated flowering in bri1 ld double mutants. Importantly, combining the 
BR-deficient mutant cpd with ld also resulted in delayed flowering and led to 
elevated FLC expression. Finally, we found increased histone H3 acetylation at 
FLC chromatin in bri1 ld mutants, as compared with ld single mutants. In 
conclusion, we propose that BR signaling acts to repress FLC expression, 
particularly in genetic situations, with, for example, dominant FRI alleles or 
autonomous-pathway mutants, in which FLC is activated.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.02866
PMID: 17611230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
