---
pmid: '32461058'
title: 'ATP synthase c-subunit ring as the channel of mitochondrial permeability transition:
  Regulator of metabolism in development and degeneration.'
authors:
- Mnatsakanyan N
- Jonas EA
journal: J Mol Cell Cardiol
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC7877492
doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2020.05.013
---

# ATP synthase c-subunit ring as the channel of mitochondrial permeability transition: Regulator of metabolism in development and degeneration.
**Authors:** Mnatsakanyan N, Jonas EA
**Journal:** J Mol Cell Cardiol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yjmcc.2020.05.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yjmcc.2020.05.013)
**PMC:** [PMC7877492](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7877492/)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2020 Jul;144:109-118. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2020.05.013.
Epub  2020 May 24.

ATP synthase c-subunit ring as the channel of mitochondrial permeability 
transition: Regulator of metabolism in development and degeneration.

Mnatsakanyan N(1), Jonas EA(2).

Author information:
(1)Section of Endocrinology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University, 
New Haven, CT, USA. Electronic address: nelli.mnatsakanyan@yale.edu.
(2)Section of Endocrinology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University, 
New Haven, CT, USA. Electronic address: elizabeth.jonas@yale.edu.

The mitochondrial permeability transition pore (mPTP) or mitochondrial 
megachannel is arguably one of the most mysterious phenomena in biology today. 
mPTP has been at the center of ongoing extensive scientific research for the 
last several decades. In this review we will discuss recent advances in the 
field that enhance our understanding of the molecular composition of mPTP, its 
regulatory mechanisms and its pathophysiological role. We will describe our 
recent findings on the role of ATP synthase c-subunit ring as a central player 
in mitochondrial permeability transition and as an important metabolic regulator 
during development and in degenerative diseases.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2020.05.013
PMCID: PMC7877492
PMID: 32461058 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
