---
pmid: '18406404'
title: Lengsin expression and function during zebrafish lens formation.
authors:
- Harding RL
- Howley S
- Baker LJ
- Murphy TR
- Archer WE
- Wistow G
- Hyde DR
- Vihtelic TS
journal: Exp Eye Res
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2435080
doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2008.02.009
---

# Lengsin expression and function during zebrafish lens formation.
**Authors:** Harding RL, Howley S, Baker LJ, Murphy TR, Archer WE, Wistow G, Hyde DR, Vihtelic TS
**Journal:** Exp Eye Res (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.exer.2008.02.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.exer.2008.02.009)
**PMC:** [PMC2435080](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2435080/)

## Abstract

1. Exp Eye Res. 2008 May;86(5):807-18. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2008.02.009. Epub 2008
 Mar 2.

Lengsin expression and function during zebrafish lens formation.

Harding RL(1), Howley S, Baker LJ, Murphy TR, Archer WE, Wistow G, Hyde DR, 
Vihtelic TS.

Author information:
(1)University of Notre Dame, Department of Biological Sciences and Center for 
Zebrafish Research, Galvin Life Science Center, Notre Dame, IN 46556-0369, USA.

A zebrafish ortholog of human lengsin was identified by EST analysis of an adult 
lens cDNA library. During zebrafish development, lengsin transcription is first 
detected at 24 h post-fertilization (hpf). Immunolocalization, using polyclonal 
antiserum generated against a Lengsin bacterial fusion protein, detects 
lens-specific protein in whole-mount embryos at 30 hpf. Lengsin expression in 
zebrafish follows the temporal expression of the alphaA- alphaB1- and 
betaB1-crystallin proteins in the lens. At 72 hpf, Lengsin is localized to a 
subpopulation of differentiating secondary fiber cells, while no expression is 
detected in the lens epithelial cells or central lens fibers. In the adult lens, 
Lengsin is restricted to a narrow band of cortical fibers and co-localizes with 
actin at the lateral faces of these interdigitating cells. Stable transgenic 
lines, using a 3 kb lengsin genomic fragment to regulate EGFP expression, 
recapitulate the Lengsin temporal and spatial expression patterns. Lengsin 
function in zebrafish lens formation was examined by antisense 
morpholino-mediated translation and mRNA splice inhibition. At 72 hpf, the 
lengsin morphant lenses are reduced in size and exhibit separations within the 
cortex due to defects in secondary fiber morphogenesis. The location of the 
morphant lens defects correlates with the Lengsin protein localization at this 
age. These results demonstrate Lengsin is required for proper fiber cell 
differentiation by playing roles in either cell elongation or the establishment 
of cell interactions.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exer.2008.02.009
PMCID: PMC2435080
PMID: 18406404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
