---
pmid: '20335479'
title: Protogenin defines a transition stage during embryonic neurogenesis and prevents
  precocious neuronal differentiation.
authors:
- Wong YH
- Lu AC
- Wang YC
- Cheng HC
- Chang C
- Chen PH
- Yu JY
- Fann MJ
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6634505
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0473-10.2010
---

# Protogenin defines a transition stage during embryonic neurogenesis and prevents precocious neuronal differentiation.
**Authors:** Wong YH, Lu AC, Wang YC, Cheng HC, Chang C, Chen PH, Yu JY, Fann MJ
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0473-10.2010](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0473-10.2010)
**PMC:** [PMC6634505](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6634505/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2010 Mar 24;30(12):4428-39. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0473-10.2010.

Protogenin defines a transition stage during embryonic neurogenesis and prevents 
precocious neuronal differentiation.

Wong YH(1), Lu AC, Wang YC, Cheng HC, Chang C, Chen PH, Yu JY, Fann MJ.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroscience and Department of Life Sciences and Institute of 
Genome Sciences, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei 112, Taiwan.

Many Ig superfamily members are expressed in the developing nervous system, but 
the functions of these molecules during neurogenesis are not all clear. Here, we 
explore the expression and function of one of members of this superfamily, 
protogenin (PRTG), in the developing nervous system. Expression of PRTG protein 
is strong in the neural tube of mouse embryos between embryonic days 7.75 and 
9.5 but disappears after embryonic day 10.5 when the neural progenitor marker 
nestin expresses prominently. Perturbation of PRTG activity in P19 embryonal 
carcinoma cells and in chick embryos, by either RNA interference or a 
dominant-negative PRTG mutant, increases neuronal differentiation. Using yeast 
two-hybrid screening and an in situ binding assay, we were able to identify 
ERdj3 (a stress-inducible endoplasmic reticulum DnaJ homolog) as a putative PRTG 
ligand. Addition of purified ERdj3 protein into the P19 differentiation assay 
reduced neurogenesis. This effect was blocked by addition of either a 
neutralizing antibody against PRTG or purified PRTG ectodomain protein, 
indicating that the effect of ERdj3 on neurogenesis is mediated through PRTG. 
Forced expression of ERdj3 in the chick neural tube also impairs neuronal 
differentiation. Together, these results suggest that expression of PRTG defines 
a stage between pluripotent epiblasts and committed neural progenitors, and its 
signaling plays a critical role in suppressing premature neuronal 
differentiation during early neural development.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0473-10.2010
PMCID: PMC6634505
PMID: 20335479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
