---
pmid: '9524206'
title: Cloning and chromosomal localization of a paralog and a mouse homolog of the
  human transaldolase gene.
authors:
- Kusuda J
- Hirai M
- Toyoda A
- Tanuma R
- Nomura-Kitabayashi A
- Hashimoto K
journal: Gene
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0378-1119(97)00639-2
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Cloning and chromosomal localization of a paralog and a mouse homolog of the human transaldolase gene.
**Authors:** Kusuda J, Hirai M, Toyoda A, Tanuma R, Nomura-Kitabayashi A, Hashimoto K
**Journal:** Gene (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0378-1119(97)00639-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0378-1119(97)00639-2)

## Abstract

1. Gene. 1998 Mar 16;209(1-2):13-21. doi: 10.1016/s0378-1119(97)00639-2.

Cloning and chromosomal localization of a paralog and a mouse homolog of the 
human transaldolase gene.

Kusuda J(1), Hirai M, Toyoda A, Tanuma R, Nomura-Kitabayashi A, Hashimoto K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetic Resources, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, 
1-23-1, Toyama-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162, Japan. jkusuda@nih.go.jp

A sequence homologous to the transaldolase gene (TALDO) was identified in a 
polymorphic cosmid DNA mapped on human chromosome 11p15 by exon trapping with 
pSPL3. Analysis of lambda clones contiguous to the cosmid clone showed that the 
related gene (TALDOR) consists of 8 exons spanning approximately 19kb from the 
translation start site to the polyadenylation signal. The exon sequence of 
TALDOR was almost identical with that of TALDO localized on 1p33-34. 1, but its 
exons corresponding to exons 4 and 5 of TALDO were found to be split by 4 
introns in TALDOR. To examine the evolutionary conservation of two genes for 
transaldolase, we have isolated the cDNA for its mouse homolog and determined 
the nucleotide sequence covering the complete coding region. Fluorescence in 
situ hybridization using the cDNA as a probe showed that the mouse transaldolase 
gene (Taldo) is localized on chromosome 7 F3-F4 as a single copy gene. This 
chromosomal region is known to be syntenic to human chromosome 11p15 rather than 
to 1p33-p34.1, suggesting that TALDOR is the ancestral form. The existence of 
TALDOR implies a duplication of the mammalian transaldolase gene after 
divergence of rodent and primate.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-1119(97)00639-2
PMID: 9524206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
