---
pmid: '27258785'
title: The long noncoding RNA NRF regulates programmed necrosis and myocardial injury
  during ischemia and reperfusion by targeting miR-873.
authors:
- Wang K
- Liu F
- Liu CY
- An T
- Zhang J
- Zhou LY
- Wang M
- Dong YH
- Li N
- Gao JN
- Zhao YF
- Li PF
journal: Cell Death Differ
year: '2016'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4947670
doi: 10.1038/cdd.2016.28
---

# The long noncoding RNA NRF regulates programmed necrosis and myocardial injury during ischemia and reperfusion by targeting miR-873.
**Authors:** Wang K, Liu F, Liu CY, An T, Zhang J, Zhou LY, Wang M, Dong YH, Li N, Gao JN, Zhao YF, Li PF
**Journal:** Cell Death Differ (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/cdd.2016.28](https://doi.org/10.1038/cdd.2016.28)
**PMC:** [PMC4947670](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4947670/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Death Differ. 2016 Aug;23(8):1394-405. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2016.28. Epub
2016  Jun 3.

The long noncoding RNA NRF regulates programmed necrosis and myocardial injury 
during ischemia and reperfusion by targeting miR-873.

Wang K(1), Liu F(2), Liu CY(1), An T(3), Zhang J(3), Zhou LY(1), Wang M(1), Dong 
YH(1), Li N(1), Gao JN(1), Zhao YF(1), Li PF(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Developmental Cardiology, Institute for Translational Medicine, 
College of Medicine, Qingdao University, Qingdao 266021, China.
(2)Department of Anatomy, College of Basic Medicine, Guilin Medical University, 
Guilin 541004, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, Heart Failure Center, Fuwai 
Hospital, National Center for Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of 
Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100037, China.

Emerging evidences suggest that necrosis is programmed and is one of the main 
forms of cell death in the pathological process in cardiac diseases. Long 
noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) are emerging as new players in gene regulation. 
However, it is not yet clear whether lncRNAs can regulate necrosis in 
cardiomyocytes. Here, we report that a long noncoding RNA, named 
necrosis-related factor (NRF), regulates cardiomyocytes necrosis by targeting 
miR-873 and RIPK1 (receptor-interacting serine/threonine-protein kinase 1)/RIPK3 
(receptor-interacting serine/threonine-protein kinase 3). Our results show that 
RIPK1 and RIPK3 participate in H2O2-induced cardiomyocytes necrosis. miR-873 
suppresses the translation of RIPK1/RIPK3 and inhibits RIPK1/RIPK3-mediated 
necrotic cell death in cardiomyocytes. miR-873 reduces myocardial infarct size 
upon ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury in the animal model. In exploring the 
molecular mechanism by which miR-873 expression is regulated, we identify NRF as 
an endogenous sponge RNA and repress miR-873 expression. NRF directly binds to 
miR-873 and regulates RIPK1/RIPK3 expression and necrosis. Knockdown of NRF 
antagonizes necrosis in cardiomyocytes and reduces necrosis and myocardial 
infarction upon I/R injury. Further, we identify that p53 transcriptionally 
activates NRF expression. P53 regulates cardiomyocytes necrosis and myocardial 
I/R injury through NRF and miR-873.Our results identify a novel mechanism 
involving NRF and miR-873 in regulating programmed necrosis in the heart and 
suggest a potential therapeutic avenue for cardiovascular diseases.

DOI: 10.1038/cdd.2016.28
PMCID: PMC4947670
PMID: 27258785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Emerging evidences suggest that necrosis is programmed and is one of the main forms of cell death in the pathological process in cardiac diseases. Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) are emerging as new players in gene regulation. However, it is not yet clear whether lncRNAs can regulate necrosis in cardiomyocytes. Here, we report that a long noncoding RNA, named necrosis-related factor (NRF), regulates cardiomyocytes necrosis by targeting miR-873 and RIPK1 (receptor-interacting serine/threonine-protein kinase 1)/RIPK3 (receptor-interacting serine/threonine-protein kinase 3). Our results show that RIPK1 and RIPK3 participate in H 2 O 2 -induced cardiomyocytes necrosis. miR-873 suppresses the translation of RIPK1/RIPK3 and inhibits RIPK1/RIPK3-mediated necrotic cell death in cardiomyocytes. miR-873 reduces myocardial infarct size upon ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury in the animal model. In exploring the molecular mechanism by which miR-873 expression is regulated, we identify NRF as an endogenous sponge RNA and repress miR-873 expression. NRF directly binds to miR-873 and regulates RIPK1/RIPK3 expression and necrosis. Knockdown of NRF antagonizes necrosis in cardiomyocytes and reduces necrosis and myocardial infarction upon I/R injury. Further, we identify that p53 transcriptionally activates NRF expression. P53 regulates cardiomyocytes necrosis and myocardial I/R injury through NRF and miR-873.Our results identify a novel mechanism involving NRF and miR-873 in regulating programmed necrosis in the heart and suggest a potential therapeutic avenue for cardiovascular diseases.

Discussion

Although the function of miRNAs has been widely studied in cardiomyocytes, the mechanism of miRNAs regulating programmed necrosis in the heart remains largely unknown. miR-873 has been demonstrated to be involved in the pathogenesis of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis 42 and human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1). 43 But the function of miR-873 in the heart is unclear. Our present study demonstrated that miR-873 participated in the regulation of programmed necrosis and myocardial infarction through targeting RIPK1/RIPK3 in cardiomyocyte. miR-873 has been revealed to be downregulated in colorectal cancer and glioblastoma. 44 , 45 Whether miR-873 is involved in the regulation of necrosis in other tissues or cell types such as cancer is an interesting question for future investigation. Our study has provided important evidences about the function of miRNAs in the programmed necrosis pathway, a step toward better understanding the miRNA-based therapy for I/R injury and heart failure.

The major breakthrough in the study of programmed necrosis comes from the discovery RIPK1 46 and RIPK3, 10 , 12 the enzymatic activity of which are important in the execution of necrosis. RIPK1 and RIPK3 are essential for TNF α -induced programmed necrosis. 46 , 47 Knockdown of RIPK1 and RIPK3 significantly attenuates TNF-induced necrosis in human and mouse cells. 48 The present study demonstrated that RIPK1 and RIPK3 participated in the regulation of programmed necrosis induced by H 2 O 2 in cardiomyocytes. Consistent with previous studies, data from this study further supported the critical role of RIPK1 and RIPK3 in necrotic cell death. In addition, several death receptors have been reported to mediate necrotic cell death upon activation of RIPK1 and RIPK3, such as TNFR1, 49 TNFR2 50 and DR4/5. 51 RIP and TRAF2 form a complex upon oxidative stress-induced cell death, but without the participation of TNFR1. 50 It remains to be further determined whether the programmed necrosis induced by H 2 O 2 treatment in cardiomyocyte also require some of the signaling molecules such TRAF2/ TNFR1/TNFR2 to convey the cell death signals.

LncRNAs have been defined to play critical roles in diverse physiological and pathological processes. 27 , 28 , 29 , 52 Despite the biological importance of lncRNAs, it is not yet clear whether lncRNAs is involved in the regulation of necrosis. The present work reveals a novel function of lncRNA in regulating cardiomyocyte necrosis. Our results showed that knockdown of lncRNA NRF attenuated H 2 O 2 -induced necrotic responses in cardiomyocytes and reduced myocardial infracted sizes upon I/R injury. This work provides a new clue for the understanding of lncRNAs-controlled cellular events. The discovery of NRF in necrotic cell death may shed new light on understanding the complex molecular mechanisms of cardiac infarction.

Emerging evidences suggest that lncRNAs may act as endogenous sponge RNAs to interact with miRNAs and influence the expression of miRNA target genes. Hmga2 regulates let-7 activity and promotes lung cancer progression by acting like an endogenous competing RNA for let-7. 53 Highly upregulated liver cancer acts as an endogenous ‘sponge', which downregulates miR-372 leading to reducing translational repression of its target gene, PRKACB. 40 Consist with these reports, our results showed that lncRNA NRF served as a miR-873 sponge and reduced the expression of miR-873. We speculate that there may exist some mechanisms that can degrade part of the binding miRNA, which is similar to the function of antagomirs that promote the degradation of miRNA. 54 , 55 , 56 But the exact mechanism is still unclear. It is also an interesting scientific topic and we will focus on that in our future research.

The importance of p53 has been found in all major human cancers. It is a tumor suppressor that enforces normal growth control and genomic stability. Also, p53 acts as a transcription factor and regulates a number of genes that promote apoptosis. 57 However, few studies have been focused on the p53 function in cell necrosis. A recent study shows that p53 promotes necrotic cell death by interacting with CypD in mouse embryo fibroblasts. 58 Consistent with the previous study, our present work further demonstrated the role of p53 in promoting necrotic cell death. In addition, a couple of studies have revealed that H 2 O 2 caused the alteration of p53 modifications other than its protein level. For example, H 2 O 2 increases p53 acetylation by NAD(+)-dependent deacetylase SIRT1. 59 H 2 O 2 can induce p53 acetylation at Lys-305 and Lys-382. 60 Exposure of fibroblast to H 2 O 2 induces phosphorylation of p53. 61 And H 2 O 2 promotes translocation of p53 from cytosol into the nuclei in the oligodendroglia-like cell line. 62 In cardiomyocytes, H 2 O 2 not only can markedly increase the expression level of p53 but also can enhance phosphorylation of p53. 63 In our study, the increase in p53 expression level upon H 2 O 2 treatment is the major contributor to the transcription activation of NRF. Modulation of p53 or NRF levels may provide a new approach for tackling necrotic cell death and myocardial infarction. It is of great interesting to study whether modifications of p53, such as acetylation and phosphorylation, are also changed during activation of NRF signaling pathway. And in the future we will exert our effort to elucidate the functions of p53 modifications in necrosis.

Hitherto, knowledge about regulators of programmed necrosis remains glaringly incomplete. Our results provide novel evidences demonstrating that p53–NRF–miR-873–RIPK1/RIPK3 constitutes an axis in regulating cardiomyocyte necrosis. Our results reveal that transcription factors, lncRNAs, miRNAs and protein kinases work in concert and orchestrate a cardiomyocyte necrosis pathway. This pathway defines physiological and pathological roles of programmed necrosis in cardiomyocyte in greater detail. Future studies are needed to elucidate how this pathway is integrated into complex necrotic cascades. Our discovery promotes therapeutic interventions for cardiac diseases based on the knowledge of programmed necrosis in the heart. With time, we will discover more and more de novo and inspiring mechanisms that modify necrotic pathways in the heart.
