---
reference_id: PMID:16176796
title: Molecular characterization of FK-506 binding protein 38 and its potential regulatory role on the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2.
authors:
- Kang CB
- Feng L
- Chia J
- Yoon HS
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.09.023
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Molecular characterization of FK-506 binding protein 38 and its potential regulatory role on the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2.
**Authors:** Kang CB, Feng L, Chia J, Yoon HS
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.09.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.09.023)

## Content

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Nov 11;337(1):30-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.09.023.

Molecular characterization of FK-506 binding protein 38 and its potential
regulatory role on the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2.

Kang CB(1), Feng L, Chia J, Yoon HS.

Author information:
(1)Division of Structural and Computational Biology, School of Biological
Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637511,
Singapore.

The immunosuppressant FK-506 binding protein 38 (FKBP38) is localized at the
mitochondrial membrane and appears to play an important role in apoptosis.
Recent reports about the potential functions of FKBP38 in apoptosis appear to be
controversial. To further understand the biological function of FKBP38, here, we
studied its molecular characteristics and a potential regulatory role on the
anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2. Our results suggest that FKBP38 appears to show
chaperone activities in the citrate synthase aggregation assays during thermal
denaturation and affect solubility of Bcl-2 when they are co-expressed. The FKBP
family proteins bind the immunosuppressive drug FK-506 through the FK-506
binding domain and consequently inhibit the activity of calcineurin. In this
study, from our NMR studies and calcineurin assays in vitro, we demonstrate that
the N-terminal fragment of FKBP38 which contains the FK-506 binding domain does
not bind FK-506 at molecular level. Lastly, to investigate the effect of FKBP38
on Bcl-2, we suppressed FKBP38 by RNA interference (RNAi) of FKBP38. Our results
suggest that the suppression of FKBP38 appears to make Bcl-2 unstable or
unprotected from degradation in an unknown mechanism.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.09.023
PMID: 16176796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]