---
pmid: '9488696'
title: Substrate specificity of human nucleoside-diphosphate kinase revealed by transient
  kinetic analysis.
authors:
- Schaertl S
- Konrad M
- Geeves MA
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.10.5662
---

# Substrate specificity of human nucleoside-diphosphate kinase revealed by transient kinetic analysis.
**Authors:** Schaertl S, Konrad M, Geeves MA
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.273.10.5662](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.10.5662)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Mar 6;273(10):5662-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.10.5662.

Substrate specificity of human nucleoside-diphosphate kinase revealed by 
transient kinetic analysis.

Schaertl S(1), Konrad M, Geeves MA.

Author information:
(1)Max-Planck Institut fur biophysikalische Chemie, Abteilung Molekulare 
Genetik, D-37070 Gottingen, Germany.

Nucleoside-diphosphate kinases (NDKs) catalyze the transfer of gamma-phosphoryl 
groups from NTPs via an active site histidine to NDPs using a ping-pong 
mechanism. We have used the change of intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence that 
occurs upon phosphorylation of NDK to measure the rates of phosphorylation and 
dephosphorylation with a range of nucleotides and nucleotide analogues. For 
natural nucleotides, the rates of phosphorylation and dephosphorylation were 
linearly dependent upon nucleotide concentration until they became too fast to 
measure. The second order rate constants for phosphorylation by natural NTPs 
varied between 0.7 and 13 x 10(6) M-1 s-1. Dephosphorylation by NDPs was 
2-3-fold faster than the corresponding phosphorylation reaction, and 
dephosphorylation by dNDPs was 3-4-fold slower than the equivalent NDPs. In all 
cases, second order rate constants were highest for guanine followed by adenine 
and lowest for cytosine nucleotides. NDK also catalyzes the transfer of 
thiophosphate from adenosine 5'-O-(thiotriphosphate) (ATPgammaS) and guanosine 
5'-O-(thiotriphosphate) (GTPgammaS) to NDP, but at (1)/(1000) of the equivalent 
phosphoryl transfer rates. In this case, the observed rate constants of 
phosphorylation and dephosphorylation were hyperbolically dependent on 
nucleotide concentration. Thiophosphorylation by ATPgammaS and GTPgammaS 
occurred with kmax of 2.8 and 1.35 s-1 and Kd of 145 and 36 muM respectively. 
For dethiophosphorylation by a range of NDPs, kmax was in the range of 5-30 s-1, 
whereas Kd varied between 0.16 and 3.3 mM. Guanine had the lowest Kd values, and 
cytosine had the highest. The data are consistent with fast reversible binding 
of the nucleotide followed by the rate-limiting phosphoryl transfer. 
Thiophosphates change only the rate of the phosphoryl transfer step, whereas 
both events are influenced by the base. Modification at the 2'-hydroxyl of 
ribose has only a small effect, while the overall rate of phosphoryl transfer is 
reduced 1000-fold by modification at the 3'-ribose.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.10.5662
PMID: 9488696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
