---
pmid: '24398681'
title: Catalytic mechanism and mode of action of the periplasmic alginate epimerase
  AlgG.
authors:
- Wolfram F
- Kitova EN
- Robinson H
- Walvoort MT
- Codée JD
- Klassen JS
- Howell PL
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3937668
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.533158
---

# Catalytic mechanism and mode of action of the periplasmic alginate epimerase AlgG.
**Authors:** Wolfram F, Kitova EN, Robinson H, Walvoort MT, Codée JD, Klassen JS, Howell PL
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M113.533158](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M113.533158)
**PMC:** [PMC3937668](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3937668/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Feb 28;289(9):6006-19. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.533158. Epub
2014  Jan 7.

Catalytic mechanism and mode of action of the periplasmic alginate epimerase 
AlgG.

Wolfram F(1), Kitova EN, Robinson H, Walvoort MT, Codée JD, Klassen JS, Howell 
PL.

Author information:
(1)From the Program in Molecular Structure and Function, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa is an opportunistic pathogen that forms chronic biofilm 
infections in the lungs of cystic fibrosis patients. A major component of the 
biofilm during these infections is the exopolysaccharide alginate, which is 
synthesized at the inner membrane as a homopolymer of 1-4-linked 
β-D-mannuronate. As the polymer passages through the periplasm, 22-44% of the 
mannuronate residues are converted to α-L-guluronate by the C5-epimerase AlgG to 
produce a polymer of alternating β-D-mannuronate and α-L-guluronate blocks and 
stretches of polymannuronate. To understand the molecular basis of alginate 
epimerization, the structure of Pseudomonas syringae AlgG has been determined at 
2.1-Å resolution, and the protein was functionally characterized. The structure 
reveals that AlgG is a long right-handed parallel β-helix with an elaborate lid 
structure. Functional analysis of AlgG mutants suggests that His(319) acts as 
the catalytic base and that Arg(345) neutralizes the acidic group during the 
epimerase reaction. Water is the likely catalytic acid. Electrostatic surface 
potential and residue conservation analyses in conjunction with activity and 
substrate docking studies suggest that a conserved electropositive groove 
facilitates polymannuronate binding and contains at least nine substrate binding 
subsites. These subsites likely align the polymer in the correct register for 
catalysis to occur. The presence of multiple subsites, the electropositive 
groove, and the non-random distribution of guluronate in the alginate polymer 
suggest that AlgG is a processive enzyme. Moreover, comparison of AlgG and the 
extracellular alginate epimerase AlgE4 of Azotobacter vinelandii provides a 
structural rationale for the differences in their Ca(2+) dependence.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.533158
PMCID: PMC3937668
PMID: 24398681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
