---
pmid: '1538784'
title: Kinesin-related cut7 protein associates with mitotic and meiotic spindles in
  fission yeast.
authors:
- Hagan I
- Yanagida M
journal: Nature
year: '1992'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/356074a0
---

# Kinesin-related cut7 protein associates with mitotic and meiotic spindles in fission yeast.
**Authors:** Hagan I, Yanagida M
**Journal:** Nature (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1038/356074a0](https://doi.org/10.1038/356074a0)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 1992 Mar 5;356(6364):74-6. doi: 10.1038/356074a0.

Kinesin-related cut7 protein associates with mitotic and meiotic spindles in 
fission yeast.

Hagan I(1), Yanagida M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biophysics, Faculty of Science, Kyoto University, Japan.

Several mitotic and meiotic gene products are related to the microtubule motor 
kinesin, providing insight into the molecular basis of the complex motile events 
responsible for spindle formation and function. Of these genes, three have been 
shown to affect spindle structure when mutated. The most severe phenotype is 
seen in Aspergillus nidulans bimC and Schizosaccharomyces pombe cut7 mutants. In 
both fungi the intranuclear spindle is bipolar, with microtubules that emanate 
from spindle pole bodies at either pole, interdigitating in a central overlap 
zone. In bimC and cut7 mutants, microtubule interdigitation does not appear to 
take place, instead two unconnected half spindles form and chromosome separation 
fails. Here we report that cut7 protein concentrates on or near the spindle pole 
bodies throughout mitotic and meiotic nuclear division and associates with 
mitotic spindle microtubules in a stage-specific manner, associating with the 
mid-anaphase B midzone. In cut7ts mutants, spindle pole bodies stain but mitotic 
microtubules do not.

DOI: 10.1038/356074a0
PMID: 1538784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
