---
pmid: '18048451'
title: Neuronal nitric oxide synthase control mechanisms in the cutaneous vasculature
  of humans in vivo.
authors:
- Kellogg DL Jr
- Zhao JL
- Wu Y
journal: J Physiol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2375621
doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2007.144642
---

# Neuronal nitric oxide synthase control mechanisms in the cutaneous vasculature of humans in vivo.
**Authors:** Kellogg DL Jr, Zhao JL, Wu Y
**Journal:** J Physiol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1113/jphysiol.2007.144642](https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2007.144642)
**PMC:** [PMC2375621](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2375621/)

## Abstract

1. J Physiol. 2008 Feb 1;586(3):847-57. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2007.144642. Epub 
2007 Nov 29.

Neuronal nitric oxide synthase control mechanisms in the cutaneous vasculature 
of humans in vivo.

Kellogg DL Jr(1), Zhao JL, Wu Y.

Author information:
(1)Division of Geriatrics and Gerontology, Department of Medicine, University of 
Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, 7703 Floyd Curl Dr, San Antonio, TX 
78229, USA. kelloggd@uthscsa.edu

Comment in
    J Physiol. 2008 Feb 1;586(3):689-90. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2007.149658.

The physiological roles of constitutively expressed nitric oxide synthase (NOS) 
isoforms in humans, in vivo, are unknown. Cutaneous vasodilatation during both 
central nervous system-mediated, thermoregulatory reflex responses to whole-body 
heat stress and during peripheral axon reflex-mediated, local responses to skin 
warming in humans depend on nitric oxide (NO) generation by constitutively 
expressed NOS of uncertain isoform. We hypothesized that neuronal NOS (nNOS, NOS 
I) effects cutaneous vasodilatation during whole-body heat stress, but not 
during local skin warming. We examined the effects of the nNOS inhibitor 
7-nitroindazole (7-NI) administered by intradermal microdialysis on 
vasodilatation induced by whole-body heat stress or local skin warming. Skin 
blood flow (SkBF) was monitored by laser-Doppler flowmetry (LDF). Blood pressure 
(MAP) was monitored and cutaneous vascular conductance calculated (CVC = 
LDF/MAP). In protocol 1, whole-body heat stress was induced with water-perfused 
suits. In protocol 2, local skin warming was induced through local warming units 
at LDF sites. At the end of each protocol, 56 mm sodium nitroprusside was 
perfused at microdialysis sites to raise SkBF to maximal levels for data 
normalization. 7-NI significantly attenuated CVC increases during whole-body 
heat stress (P < 0.05), but had no effect on CVC increases induced by local skin 
warming (P > 0.05). These diametrically opposite effects of 7-NI on two 
NO-dependent processes verify selective nNOS antagonism, thus proving that the 
nNOS isoform affects NO increases and hence vasodilatation during centrally 
mediated, reflex responses to whole-body heat stress, but not during locally 
mediated, axon reflex responses to local skin warming. We conclude that the 
constitutively expressed nNOS isoform has distinct physiological roles in 
cardiovascular control mechanisms in humans, in vivo.

DOI: 10.1113/jphysiol.2007.144642
PMCID: PMC2375621
PMID: 18048451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The physiological roles of constituitively expressed nitric oxide synthase (NOS) isoforms in humans, in vivo , are unknown. Cutaneous vasodilatation during both central nervous system-mediated, thermoregulatory reflex responses to whole-body heat stress and during peripheral axon reflex-mediated, local responses to skin warming in humans depend on nitric oxide (NO) generation by constituitively expressed NOS of uncertain isoform. We hypothesized that neuronal NOS (nNOS, NOS I) effects cutaneous vasodilatation during whole-body heat stress, but not during local skin warming. We examined the effects of the nNOS inhibitor 7-nitroindazole (7-NI) administered by intradermal microdialysis on vasodilatation induced by whole-body heat stress or local skin warming. Skin blood flow (SkBF) was monitored by laser–Doppler flowmetry (LDF). Blood pressure (MAP) was monitored and cutaneous vascular conductance calculated (CVC = LDF/MAP). In protocol 1, whole-body heat stress was induced with water-perfused suits. In protocol 2, local skin warming was induced through local warming units at LDF sites. At the end of each protocol, 56 m m sodium nitroprusside was perfused at microdialysis sites to raise SkBF to maximal levels for data normalization. 7-NI significantly attenuated CVC increases during whole-body heat stress ( P < 0.05), but had no effect on CVC increases induced by local skin warming ( P > 0.05). These diametrically opposite effects of 7-NI on two NO-dependent processes verify selective nNOS antagonism, thus proving that the nNOS isoform affects NO increases and hence vasodilatation during centrally mediated, reflex responses to whole-body heat stress, but not during locally mediated, axon reflex responses to local skin warming. We conclude that the constituitively expressed nNOS isoform has distinct physiological roles in cardiovascular control mechanisms in humans, in vivo .

Methods

To test our hypotheses, we examined whether increases in SkBF during heat stress (Protocol 1) and local skin warming (Protocol 2) were altered by blockade of nNOS with the selective antagonist 7-nitroindazole (7-NI). 7-NI is minimally soluble in purely aqueous solution and therefore it is often dissolved in vehicles that contain dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) ( Kurihara et al. 1998 ). For example, Shastry et al. ( Shastry & Joyner, 2002 ) used the addition of DMSO to microdialysis perfusates to enhance aqueous solubility of geldanamycin successfully, although they did find DMSO to possess minor vasodilating properties. In a series of preliminary experiments, we tested the effect of 5% DMSO in Ringer solution on SkBF under normothermic, cold stress, and heat stress conditions identical to those used subsequently in protocol 1 (see below). Our findings confirmed that DMSO possessed some vasodilating effects in normothermia ( Shastry & Joyner, 2002 ). Under such conditions, the mean SkBF increase induced by DMSO was 10 ± 2%. This concentration of DMSO did not alter reductions in SkBF in response to cold stress. Heat stress responses were also unaltered by the addition of 5% DMSO to the microdialysis perfusate as evidenced by SkBF reaching 65 ± 6% of maximal cutaneous vascular conductance (%max CVC) at sites perfused with Ringer solution alone and 64 ± 5%max CVC at sites perfused with 5% DMSO in Ringer solution in our preliminary studies. As 5% DMSO allowed significantly higher concentrations of 7-NI in Ringer solution than were otherwise possible, yet did not alter thermoregulatory reflex responses, we chose to use 5% DMSO in Ringer solution as our vehicle.

Based on our preliminary experiments, we chose a 2 m m concentration of 7-NI for our studies; the maximal concentration of 7-NI possible in solution with 5% DMSO in Ringer solution. We did not increase our concentration of 7-NI further because this would have required increased concentrations of DMSO, consequently increasing the potential for confounding vasodilator effects of this agent on baseline blood flow. The 7-NI was administered by intradermal microdialysis, a technique that permits the local administration of pharmacological agents into a small volume of skin. This technique allows a relatively large local drug concentration to exert purely local effects at the site of administration with no risk of systemic effects. Intradermal microdialysis probes of our own manufacture were used. Each probe was made from polyimide tubing with a 1 cm length of capillary microdialysis membrane (regenerated cellulose, 200 μm diameter, molecular cut-off 20 kDa) with reinforcement by a 51 μm diameter stainless steel wire inserted through the lumen of the membrane and tubing. Microdialysis probes were placed approximately 5 cm apart in the ventral forearm skin so that manipulations at one site did not influence the others. To place the microdialysis probe, a 25 gauge needle was inserted through the dermis using sterile technique after the topical application of ice for anaesthesia. Entry and exit points for each probe were approximately 2–3 cm apart. The microdialysis probe was threaded through the lumen of the needle that was then withdrawn, leaving the microdialysis probe in place ( Kellogg et al. 1998 ). The microdialysis membrane was situated entirely within the dermis, with entry and exit points through the skin via the polyimide tubing. In prior studies, ultrasound measurements revealed that probes placed with such a technique were 0.3–1.0 mm under the epidermal surface, and thus were within the dermal layer ( Kellogg et al. 1999 ). The microdialysis probes were perfused with Ringer solution at a rate of 2 μl min −1 using a microinfusion pump (Harvard Apparatus, South Natick, MA, USA). Subjects then waited 140 min or more to allow for insertion trauma to resolve before additional instrumentation was placed ( Anderson et al. 1994 ). After insertion trauma resolved, subjects were placed in the supine position and instrumented to monitor SkBF by laser–Doppler flowmetry (LDF) at all microdialysis sites (Moorlab Flowmeter, Moor Instruments Ltd, Devon, UK). A Finapres cuff was placed on a finger for pulse rate (PR) and mean arterial pressure (MAP) measurement by photoplethysmography (Ohmeda, Madison, WI, USA).

All subjects who volunteered for the protocols were in good health, were non-smokers, and were taking no medications. Prior to participation, written, informed consent was obtained from all subjects. The studies conformed to the standards set by the Declaration of Helsinki and institutional ethics committees approved all procedures. Subjects were instructed to forego caffeinated products on the day of the study. The menstrual phase of the female subjects was not assessed. All studies were performed in an air-conditioned laboratory with a constant ambient temperature of 24°C. Studies were done at the same time of day to control for any circadian variations in responses ( Aoki et al. 2001 ).

Results

The physical characteristics (age, height and weight) of the subject groups in protocols 1 and 2 were not statistically different. Within each protocol, no differences were noted between responses of male or female subjects, therefore data from the two were combined for statistical analysis.

Discussion

Selective blockade of the nNOS isoform attenuated cutaneous active vasodilatation induced by whole-body heat stress, but did not alter the vasodilatation induced by local warming of the skin. These results clarify how different constituitively expressed NOS isoforms are used to control specific vasomotor responses in humans, in vivo : the nNOS isoform is responsible for NO generation during centrally mediated, reflex cutaneous active vasodilatation in whole-body heat stress, but is not involved in increasing SkBF in response to axon reflex-mediated, local warming of the skin.

The results of protocol 1 show that the administration of 7-NI by intradermal microdialysis did not alter the cutaneous vasoconstriction induced by whole-body cold stress. This demonstrates that 7-NI did not measurably alter the function of noradrenergic vasoconstrictor nerves. The preservation of this response also demonstrates that 7-NI did not alter the responsiveness of skin vessels to neural inputs, thus obviating any concerns that reduced vascular responsiveness could explain attenuation of cutaneous active vasodilatation during whole-body heat stress.

While the extent of cutaneous active vasodilatation was attenuated by 7-NI treatment, the internal temperature threshold at which that active vasodilator system was first activated was unaltered by nNOS antagonism. The T or at which CVC began to rise during whole-body heating did not differ between sites treated with 7-NI and untreated control sites. This finding shows that nNOS activation coincides with the initiation of cutaneous active vasodilatation. This finding is consistent with prior studies that used non-isoform-specific NOS antagonists, such as N G. -nitro- l -arginine-methyl ester ( l -NAME) and N G. -monomethyl- l -arginine ( l -NMMA), that found the initiation of cutaneous active vasodilatation was not altered by NOS blockade ( Dietz et al. 1994 ; Kellogg et al. 1998 ; Shastry et al. 1998 ; Wilkins et al. 2003 ). While non-isoform-specific antagonists also attenuated cutaneous active vasodilatation during prolonged heat stress, it was unclear whether nNOS, eNOS or both isoforms were involved in the process. Given that 7-NI attenuated cutaneous active vasodilatation during prolonged heat stress, but did not alter the initiation of cutaneous active vasodilatation, our results show that the nNOS isoform generates NO from the very initial phase of cutaneous active vasodilatation and continues during prolonged whole-body heat stress.

Protocol 2 tested the hypothesis that nNOS is involved in increasing SkBF in response to local skin warming. In contrast to protocol 1, the results of protocol 2 show that nNOS antagonism did not alter the vasodilatation induced by local skin warming and leads us to conclude that the nNOS isoform is not involved in the generation of the NO required for increasing SkBF during local warming. Our finding in protocol 2 contrasts directly with prior studies that used the non-isoform-specific NOS antagonist l -NAME and found non-isoform-specific NOS antagonism greatly attenuated the extent of local, axon reflex vasodilatation during local skin warming ( Kellogg et al. 1999 ; Minson et al. 2001 , 2002 ; Houghton et al. 2007 ). Given that iNOS is not constituitively expressed in skin and that nNOS antagonism was without effect, our results strongly suggest that eNOS is the isoform that mediates peripheral, axon reflex vasodilatation during local skin heating.

The increase in CVC by 5% DSMO in normothemia for protocol 1 was not observed in protocol 2 with T loc maintained at 34°C. This difference is attributable to T loc being slightly lower in protocol 1 (where local LDF/heater probe holders were not used) than in protocol 2. The slightly warmer T loc in protocol 2 masked the increase in CVC that was observed with 5% DMSO in protocol 1. Whole-body T sk may also have differed slightly between the normothermic period of protocol 1 and the initial period of protocol 2. This difference is unlikely to confound the separate results of the two protocols because the vasodilator effect of increased T loc is known to be unaltered by whole-body cooling or warming ( Wenger et al. 1985 ; Pérgola et al. 1993 ).

Our conclusions regarding the physiological roles of the nNOS isoform in vasomotor control mechanisms in humans, in vivo , are predicated on the specificity of nNOS isoform blockade as administered by intradermal microdialysis. Since pharmacological agents such as acetylcholine can activate both nNOS and eNOS, there is no pharmacological method to definitively characterize the extent to which selective nNOS blockade was achieved ( Moore et al. 1993 b ). The selectivity of 7-NI for the nNOS isoform lies in the differential uptake of this inhibitor into neurons, but not endothelial cells ( Babbage et al. 1993 ; Moore et al. 1993 a , b ; Yoshida et al. 1994 ; Southan & Szabo, 1996 ; Jiang et al. 1999 ). Although in vitro studies on the isolated enzymes have demonstrated that 7-NI can inhibit both the eNOS and nNOS, in vivo studies have consistently shown no evidence of an effect of 7-NI on eNOS ( Babbage et al. 1993 ; Moore et al. 1993 a , b ; Yoshida et al. 1994 ; Southan & Szabo, 1996 ; Jiang et al. 1999 ). For example, in vivo , 7-NI has no effects on blood pressure or on endothelium-dependent relaxation of blood vessels ( Babbage et al. 1993 ; Moore et al. 1993 a , b ; Yoshida et al. 1994 ; Southan & Szabo, 1996 ; Jiang et al. 1999 ).

Beyond the above evidence for the selectivity of 7-NI as an in vivo nNOS antagonist, the dichotomous results of protocols 1 and 2 verify the specificity of nNOS antagonism in our studies. We found the same concentration of 7-NI that significantly attenuated cutaneous active vasodilatation during whole-body heat stress failed to have any effect on skin vasodilatation induced by local skin warming. Both of these responses are known to be dependent on NO generation by NOS based on studies with non-isoform-specific antagonists ( Kellogg et al. 1998 , 1999 , 2003 ; Shastry et al. 1998 , 2000 ; Minson et al. 2001 , 2002 ; Houghton et al. 2007 ). The divergent findings of an attenuating effect of 2 m m 7-NI in whole-body heat stress, but yet no effect of 2 m m 7-NI in local skin warming shows that selective nNOS had been achieved. If this were not the case, and only non-selective NOS blockade had been achieved, the vasodilatations induced by both whole-body heat stress and local skin warming would have been attenuated.

Immunohistochemical studies of human skin have found nNOS in cutaneous nerves around dermal microvessels ( Ibba-Manneschi et al. 2006 ). In addition, nNOS has been found to be co-localized with VIP in cholinergic nerves ( Ventura et al. 1997 ) such as those that mediate cutaneous active vasodilatation through a co-transmitter system ( Kellogg et al. 1995 ). Considering the results of the present study, these observations suggest that nNOS located in cutaneous cholinergic nerves is activated to generate NO during cutaneous active vasodilatation.

Another possibility is that nNOS located in sweat glands is activated to generate NO as an adjunct to sweat production. The nNOS isoform has been found in myoepithelial cells in eccrine sweat glands in the dermis ( Zancanaro et al. 1999 ). Activation of nNOS in this location could also contribute to NO generation during heat stress. Increases in NO near sweat glands could effect periglandular hyperaemia and thus contribute not only to cutaneous vasodilatation, but also to increased fluid delivery to the sweat glands to maintain sweat production. This possibility is consistent with the longstanding idea that cutaneous active vasodilatation and sweat gland activation are mechanistically linked ( Grant & Holling, 1938 ; Brengelmann et al. 1981 ; Sugenoya et al. 1995 , 1998 ; Shibasaki et al. 2002 ; Kamijo et al. 2005 ).

When combined with findings of prior studies, the finding that nNOS is mechanistically involved in cutaneous active vasodilatation has a number of implications. The observation that treatment of skin with botulinum toxin abolishes cutaneous active vasodilatation shows that the neurotransmitters required for the initiation and maintenance of active vasodilatation must be stored in small and large vesicles within cholinergic nerve terminals ( Kellogg et al. 1995 ; Morris et al. 2001 ). NO cannot be stored in vesicles in nerve terminals and hence, nitrergic transmission by NO is insensitive to botulinum toxin. These observations mean that the generation and release of NO is not the primary neurotransmitter mechanism for initiating or maintaining cutaneous active vasodilatation; rather, one or more neurotransmitters stored in vesicles within cutaneous cholinergic nerve terminals must be released to initiate and maintain the process. If nitrergic transmission by NO directly initiated and maintained cutaneous active vasodilatation, cutaneous active vasodilatation would be preserved after botulinum treatment, which it is not ( Kellogg et al. 1995 ).

Given the foregoing findings, one or more neurotransmitters stored within the vesicles of cholinergic nerve terminals must be released to initiate and maintain cutaneous active vasodilatation. One such stored cholinergic neurotransmitter is ACh. ACh might cause NO generation through nNOS activation via pre-junctional muscarinic receptors on skin nerves or on sweat gland myoepithelial cells; however, prior observations obviate such a role for ACh. In the present study, we found that although nNOS antagonism attenuated the extent of cutaneous active vasodilatation during whole-body heating, NOS blockade did not delay the initiation of the process; this was also found in studies using non-isoform-specific antagonists ( Dietz et al. 1994 ; Kellogg et al. 1998 ; Shastry et al. 1998 ; Wilkins et al. 2003 ). In addition, bioavailable NO measurements increase simultaneously with the onset of active vasodilatation during whole-body heating ( Kellogg et al. 2003 ). In contrast, blockade of muscarinic receptors with atropine before whole-body heating delays the initiation of active vasodilatation ( Roddie et al. 1957 ; Fox & Hilton, 1958 ; Kellogg et al. 1995 ), but has no effect once cutaneous active vasodilatation is established and SkBF has risen to high levels ( Shastry et al. 2000 ). If ACh release and muscarinic receptor activation were involved in NO generation, both atropine and NOS antagonism should delay the onset of active vasodilatation and attenuate established active vasodilatation. Instead, the effects of atropine and NOS antagonists are dichotomous, therefore ACh activation of NOS isoforms via muscarinic receptors cannot be involved in cutaneous active vasodilatation; ACh-dependent mechanisms and NO-dependent mechanisms clearly must be separate. This suggests that either one or more co-transmitters released from cholinergic nerves activates nNOS with consequent NO generation during whole-body heat stress and raises the possibility that ACh contributes to cutaneous active vasodilatation through other mechanisms, that perhaps include prostaglandin production ( McCord et al. 2005 ).

While it is clear from the foregoing discussion that NO does not directly initiate or maintain cutaneous active vasodilatation, our findings strongly suggest that rather than acting as a direct mediator of vasodilatation, NO acts to increase synergistically the vasodilating effects of other neurotransmitters. NO generated by nNOS in cholinergic nerves and/or sweat glands could increase pre-junctional neurotransmitter release or magnify the post-junctional effects of released neurotransmitters as has been found with VIP and other peptide transmitters ( Grider et al. 1992 ; Jia & Stamler, 1999 ; Toda & Herman, 2005 ). The existence of synergistic effects between NO and the neurotransmitters that cause cutaneous active vasodilatation during heat stress in humans is consistent with the foregoing model of nNOS mechanisms.

Finally, could eNOS have a role in centrally mediated reflex cutaneous active vasodilatation? The non-selective NOS antagonist, l -NAME, attenuates the increase in SkBF induced by whole-body heat stress by about 30–40% ( Kellogg et al. 1998 ; Shastry et al. 1998 , 2000 ). With the selective nNOS antagonist 7-NI, we were able to attenuate SkBF increases by approximately 30%. The similarity of attenuation reported for l -NAME and our finding with 7-NI suggests the possibility that nNOS is the sole NOS isoform involved in NO generation during centrally mediated reflex vasodilatation as effected by whole-body heat stress. However, in contrast to the nNOS isoform, no specific inhibitor of the eNOS isoform is available for in vivo studies at present. We therefore cannot exclude a role for eNOS in thermoregulatory control of the cutaneous circulation at this time.

In summary, we found that nNOS antagonism with 7-NI significantly attenuated cutaneous active vasodilatation during heat stress, but did not attenuate the vasodilatation induced by local warming of the skin. Collectively, these results show that NO generation required for cutaneous active vasodilatation in heat stress is mediated by the nNOS isoform. This result demonstrates a specific role for nNOS activation in centrally mediated thermoregulatory reflex cutaneous vasodilatation in humans. Whether only this isoform effects NO increases during cutaneous active vasodilatation remains to be proven. In contrast, generation of NO to effect the vasodilatation induced by local skin warming is not through the nNOS isoform. Whether the eNOS isoform effects NO increases during local skin warming remains to be proven. These results demonstrate a specific mechanistic role for nNOS activation in the vasomotor control of the human vasculature.
