---
pmid: '18160537'
title: p53 and TFIIEalpha share a common binding site on the Tfb1/p62 subunit of TFIIH.
authors:
- Di Lello P
- Miller Jenkins LM
- Mas C
- Langlois C
- Malitskaya E
- Fradet-Turcotte A
- Archambault J
- Legault P
- Omichinski JG
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2224167
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0707892105
---

# p53 and TFIIEalpha share a common binding site on the Tfb1/p62 subunit of TFIIH.
**Authors:** Di Lello P, Miller Jenkins LM, Mas C, Langlois C, Malitskaya E, Fradet-Turcotte A, Archambault J, Legault P, Omichinski JG
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0707892105](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0707892105)
**PMC:** [PMC2224167](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2224167/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Jan 8;105(1):106-11. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0707892105. Epub 2007 Dec 26.

p53 and TFIIEalpha share a common binding site on the Tfb1/p62 subunit of TFIIH.

Di Lello P(1), Miller Jenkins LM, Mas C, Langlois C, Malitskaya E, 
Fradet-Turcotte A, Archambault J, Legault P, Omichinski JG.

Author information:
(1)Département de Biochimie, Université de Montréal, C.P. 6128 Succursale 
Centre-Ville, Montréal, QC, Canada.

The general transcription factor IIH is recruited to the transcription 
preinitiation complex through an interaction between its p62/Tfb1 subunit and 
the alpha-subunit of the general transcription factor IIE (TFIIEalpha). We have 
determined that the acidic carboxyl terminus of TFIIEalpha (TFIIEalpha(336-439)) 
directly binds the amino-terminal PH domain of p62/Tfb1 with nanomolar affinity. 
NMR mapping and mutagenesis studies demonstrate that the TFIIEalpha binding site 
on p62/Tfb1 is identical to the binding site for the second transactivation 
domain of p53 (p53 TAD2). In addition, we demonstrate that TFIIEalpha(336-439) 
is capable of competing with p53 for a common binding site on p62/Tfb1 and that 
TFIIEalpha(336-439) and the diphosphorylated form (pS46/pT55) of p53 TAD2 have 
similar binding constants. NMR structural studies reveal that 
TFIIEalpha(336-439) contains a small domain (residues 395-433) folded in a novel 
betabetaalphaalphaalpha topology. NMR mapping studies demonstrate that two 
unstructured regions (residues 377-393 and residues 433-439) located on either 
side of the folded domain appear to be required for TFIIEalpha(336-439) binding 
to p62/Tfb1 and that these two unstructured regions are held close to each other 
in three-dimensional space by the novel structured domain. We also demonstrate 
that, like p53, TFIIEalpha(336-439) can activate transcription in vivo. These 
results point to an important interplay between the general transcription factor 
TFIIEalpha and the tumor suppressor protein p53 in regulating transcriptional 
activation that may be modulated by the phosphorylation status of p53.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0707892105
PMCID: PMC2224167
PMID: 18160537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
