---
pmid: '15189154'
title: 'Flap endonuclease 1: a central component of DNA metabolism.'
authors:
- Liu Y
- Kao HI
- Bambara RA
journal: Annu Rev Biochem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1146/annurev.biochem.73.012803.092453
---

# Flap endonuclease 1: a central component of DNA metabolism.
**Authors:** Liu Y, Kao HI, Bambara RA
**Journal:** Annu Rev Biochem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev.biochem.73.012803.092453](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.biochem.73.012803.092453)

## Abstract

1. Annu Rev Biochem. 2004;73:589-615. doi: 
10.1146/annurev.biochem.73.012803.092453.

Flap endonuclease 1: a central component of DNA metabolism.

Liu Y(1), Kao HI, Bambara RA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Rochester School of 
Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York 14642, USA. liu14@niehs.nih.gov

One strand of cellular DNA is generated as RNA-initiated discontinuous segments 
called Okazaki fragments that later are joined. The RNA terminated region is 
displaced into a 5' single-stranded flap, which is removed by the 
structure-specific flap endonuclease 1 (FEN1), leaving a nick for ligation. 
Similarly, in long-patch base excision repair, a damaged nucleotide is displaced 
into a flap and removed by FEN1. FEN1 is a genome stabilization factor that 
prevents flaps from equilibrating into structures that lead to duplications and 
deletions. As an endonuclease, FEN1 enters the flap from the 5' end and then 
tracks to cleave the flap base. Cleavage is oriented by the formation of a 
double flap. Analyses of FEN1 crystal structures suggest mechanisms for tracking 
and cleavage. Some flaps can form self-annealed and template bubble structures 
that interfere with FEN1. FEN1 interacts with other nucleases and helicases that 
allow it to act efficiently on structured flaps. Genetic and biochemical 
analyses continue to reveal many roles of FEN1.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev.biochem.73.012803.092453
PMID: 15189154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
