---
reference_id: PMID:38776655
title: "A Na(+) channel receptor of FMRFamide in the cephalopod Sepiella japonica: Identification, characterisation, and expression profiling during different stages of gonadal development."
authors:
- Cao HM
- Wu JH
- Li S
- Zhou X
- Zheng LB
- Chi CF
journal: Neuropeptides
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.npep.2024.102437
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Na(+) channel receptor of FMRFamide in the cephalopod Sepiella japonica: Identification, characterisation, and expression profiling during different stages of gonadal development.
**Authors:** Cao HM, Wu JH, Li S, Zhou X, Zheng LB, Chi CF
**Journal:** Neuropeptides (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.npep.2024.102437](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.npep.2024.102437)

## Content

1. Neuropeptides. 2024 Aug;106:102437. doi: 10.1016/j.npep.2024.102437. Epub 2024
 May 9.

A Na(+) channel receptor of FMRFamide in the cephalopod Sepiella japonica:
Identification, characterisation, and expression profiling during different
stages of gonadal development.

Cao HM(1), Wu JH(1), Li S(1), Zhou X(1), Zheng LB(1), Chi CF(2).

Author information:
(1)National and Provincial Joint Engineering Research Centre for Marine
Germplasm Resources Exploration and Utilization, School of Marine Science and
Technology, Zhejiang Ocean University, 1st Haidanan Road, Changzhi Island,
Lincheng, Zhoushan 316022, China.
(2)National and Provincial Joint Engineering Research Centre for Marine
Germplasm Resources Exploration and Utilization, School of Marine Science and
Technology, Zhejiang Ocean University, 1st Haidanan Road, Changzhi Island,
Lincheng, Zhoushan 316022, China. Electronic address: chichangfeng@hotmail.com.

FMRFamide, a member of the neuropeptide family, is involved in numerous
physiological processes. FMRFamide-activated sodium channels (FaNaCs) are a
family of non-voltage-gated, amiloride-sensitive, Na+-selective channels
triggered by the neuropeptide FMRFamide. In the present study, the full-length
cDNA of the FaNaC receptor of Sepiella japonica (SjFaNaC) was cloned. The cDNA
of SjFaNaC was 3004 bp long with an open reading frame (ORF) of 1812 bp,
encoding 603 amino acid residues with no signal peptide at the N-terminus.
Sequence analysis indicated that SjFaNaC shared a high identity with other
cephalopods FaNaCs and formed a sister clade with bivalves. The protein
structure was predicted using SWISS-MODEL with AcFaNaC as the template.
Quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) revealed that SjFaNaC transcripts were
highly expressed in both female and male reproductive organs, as well as in the
optic lobe and brain of the central nervous system (CNS). Results of in situ
hybridisation (ISH) showed that SjFaNaC mRNA was mainly distributed in the
medulla and deep retina of the optic lobe and in both the supraesophageal and
subesophageal masses of the brain. Subcellular localisation indicated that the
SjFaNaC protein was localised intracellularly and on the cell surface of HEK293T
cells. In summary, these findings may lay the foundation for future exploration
of the functions of SjFaNaC in cephalopods.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.npep.2024.102437
PMID: 38776655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare no conflicts of interest.