---
reference_id: PMID:26929408
title: Structural and Functional Analysis of a Novel Interaction Motif within UFM1-activating Enzyme 5 (UBA5) Required for Binding to Ubiquitin-like Proteins and Ufmylation.
authors:
- Habisov S
- Huber J
- Ichimura Y
- Akutsu M
- Rogova N
- Loehr F
- McEwan DG
- Johansen T
- Dikic I
- Doetsch V
- Komatsu M
- Rogov VV
- Kirkin V
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.715474
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Structural and Functional Analysis of a Novel Interaction Motif within UFM1-activating Enzyme 5 (UBA5) Required for Binding to Ubiquitin-like Proteins and Ufmylation.
**Authors:** Habisov S, Huber J, Ichimura Y, Akutsu M, Rogova N, Loehr F, McEwan DG, Johansen T, Dikic I, Doetsch V, Komatsu M, Rogov VV, Kirkin V
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M116.715474](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M116.715474)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2016 Apr 22;291(17):9025-41. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.715474. Epub
2016 Feb 29.

Structural and Functional Analysis of a Novel Interaction Motif within
UFM1-activating Enzyme 5 (UBA5) Required for Binding to Ubiquitin-like Proteins
and Ufmylation.

Habisov S(1), Huber J(2), Ichimura Y(3), Akutsu M(4), Rogova N(2), Loehr F(2),
McEwan DG(5), Johansen T(6), Dikic I(4), Doetsch V(2), Komatsu M(3), Rogov
VV(7), Kirkin V(8).

Author information:
(1)From Translational Innovation Platform Oncology, Merck KGaA, Frankfurter
Strasse 250, 64293 Darmstadt, Germany, the Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe
University School of Medicine, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt am Main,
Germany, the BMLS Buchmann Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Goethe
University Frankfurt, Riedberg Campus, Max-von-Laue-Strasse 15, 60438 Frankfurt
am Main, Germany.
(2)the Institute of Biophysical Chemistry and Center for Biomolecular Magnetic
Resonance, Goethe University, Max-von-Laue-Strasse 9, 60438 Frankfurt am Main,
Germany.
(3)the Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Niigata University,
Chuo-ku, Niigata 951-8510, Japan.
(4)the Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University School of Medicine,
Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, the BMLS Buchmann
Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Goethe University Frankfurt, Riedberg
Campus, Max-von-Laue-Strasse 15, 60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(5)the Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University School of Medicine,
Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, the Division of Cell
Signaling and Immunology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee,
DD1 4HN United Kingdom, and.
(6)the Molecular Cancer Research Group, Institute of Medical Biology, University
of Tromsø-The Arctic University of Norway, 9037 Tromsø, Norway.
(7)the Institute of Biophysical Chemistry and Center for Biomolecular Magnetic
Resonance, Goethe University, Max-von-Laue-Strasse 9, 60438 Frankfurt am Main,
Germany, rogov@bpc.uni-frankfurt.de.
(8)From Translational Innovation Platform Oncology, Merck KGaA, Frankfurter
Strasse 250, 64293 Darmstadt, Germany, vladimir.kirkin@merckgroup.com.

The covalent conjugation of ubiquitin-fold modifier 1 (UFM1) to proteins
generates a signal that regulates transcription, response to cell stress, and
differentiation. Ufmylation is initiated by ubiquitin-like modifier activating
enzyme 5 (UBA5), which activates and transfers UFM1 to ubiquitin-fold
modifier-conjugating enzyme 1 (UFC1). The details of the interaction between
UFM1 and UBA5 required for UFM1 activation and its downstream transfer are
however unclear. In this study, we described and characterized a combined linear
LC3-interacting region/UFM1-interacting motif (LIR/UFIM) within the C terminus
of UBA5. This single motif ensures that UBA5 binds both UFM1 and light chain
3/γ-aminobutyric acid receptor-associated proteins (LC3/GABARAP), two ubiquitin
(Ub)-like proteins. We demonstrated that LIR/UFIM is required for the full
biological activity of UBA5 and for the effective transfer of UFM1 onto UFC1 and
a downstream protein substrate both in vitro and in cells. Taken together, our
study provides important structural and functional insights into the interaction
between UBA5 and Ub-like modifiers, improving the understanding of the biology
of the ufmylation pathway.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M116.715474
PMCID: PMC4861472
PMID: 26929408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]