---
pmid: '12852865'
title: Caveolae and caveolin-1 in human term villous trophoblast.
authors:
- Linton EA
- Rodriguez-Linares B
- Rashid-Doubell F
- Ferguson DJ
- Redman CW
journal: Placenta
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0143-4004(03)00106-1
---

# Caveolae and caveolin-1 in human term villous trophoblast.
**Authors:** Linton EA, Rodriguez-Linares B, Rashid-Doubell F, Ferguson DJ, Redman CW
**Journal:** Placenta (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0143-4004(03)00106-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0143-4004(03)00106-1)

## Abstract

1. Placenta. 2003 Aug;24(7):745-57. doi: 10.1016/s0143-4004(03)00106-1.

Caveolae and caveolin-1 in human term villous trophoblast.

Linton EA(1), Rodriguez-Linares B, Rashid-Doubell F, Ferguson DJ, Redman CW.

Author information:
(1)Nuffield Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Women's Centre, University 
of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Headington, OX3 9DU, Oxford, UK. 
elizabeth.linton@obs-gyn.ox.ac.uk

Caveolae are flask-shaped invaginations of the plasma membrane found in many 
cell types, particularly endothelium. A major structural component is the 
membrane protein caveolin-1 which associates with numerous signalling molecules, 
including endothelial nitric oxide (eNOS). Caveolin-1, which 
co-immunoprecipitates with eNOS in preparations from endothelial cells, 
regulates eNOS activity, holding it inactive. Controversy now exists regarding 
the presence of caveolae and caveolin-1 in trophoblasts, hence this study was 
carried out to examine whether the high levels of eNOS expressed in human 
syncytiotrophoblast are associated with caveolin-1, and to find out if caveolae 
are present in villous cytotrophoblasts and syncytiotrophoblast. 
Immunohistochemistry of term placentae revealed only weak labelling for 
caveolin-1 in the syncytiotrophoblast although the endothelium of the terminal 
villus vessels stained strongly. By electron microscopy, numerous caveolae were 
identified in the villus capillary endothelium but were extremely rare in the 
syncytium. Caveolin-1 staining was extensive in purified, isolated term villous 
cytotrophoblasts, with the purity of these cytokeratin positive cells confirmed 
by cytospin analysis and flow cytometry. Caveolae were clearly demonstrated in 
ultrastructural sections of the purified cytotrophoblasts. The time course of 
expression of caveolin-1 and eNOS during differentiation of villous 
cytotrophoblast into syncytiotrophoblast in culture was studied. Western 
analysis showed that caveolin-1 expression evident in day 1 whole cell lysates 
decreased at day 3 when the cells had syncytialized and declined further by day 
6, while the levels of actin (control) remained high. eNOS expression in the 
same samples followed a different pattern, with the low levels in day 1 cells 
increasing substantially by 3 days in culture, subsiding again by day 6. eNOS 
association with caveolin-1 in day 1 and day 3 trophoblast cultures was 
evidenced by the demonstration that eNOS co-immunoprecipitates with caveolin-1 
and vice versa. We conclude that human villous cytotrophoblasts express 
caveolin-1, which assembles into caveolae. Differentiation into syncytium 
results in a decrease, but not disappearance, of expression of caveolin-1 and a 
marked reduction of the caveolae.

DOI: 10.1016/s0143-4004(03)00106-1
PMID: 12852865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
