---
pmid: '15238518'
title: The PGL family proteins associate with germ granules and function redundantly
  in Caenorhabditis elegans germline development.
authors:
- Kawasaki I
- Amiri A
- Fan Y
- Meyer N
- Dunkelbarger S
- Motohashi T
- Karashima T
- Bossinger O
- Strome S
journal: Genetics
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC1470885
doi: 10.1534/genetics.103.023093
---

# The PGL family proteins associate with germ granules and function redundantly in Caenorhabditis elegans germline development.
**Authors:** Kawasaki I, Amiri A, Fan Y, Meyer N, Dunkelbarger S, Motohashi T, Karashima T, Bossinger O, Strome S
**Journal:** Genetics (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1534/genetics.103.023093](https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.103.023093)
**PMC:** [PMC1470885](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1470885/)

## Abstract

1. Genetics. 2004 Jun;167(2):645-61. doi: 10.1534/genetics.103.023093.

The PGL family proteins associate with germ granules and function redundantly in 
Caenorhabditis elegans germline development.

Kawasaki I(1), Amiri A, Fan Y, Meyer N, Dunkelbarger S, Motohashi T, Karashima 
T, Bossinger O, Strome S.

Author information:
(1)PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Kawaguchi, Saitama 332-0012, 
Japan. ikawasak@gen.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp

PGL-1 is a constitutive protein component of C. elegans germ granules, also 
known as P granules. Maternally supplied PGL-1 is essential for germline 
development but only at elevated temperature, raising the possibility that 
redundant factors provide sufficient function at lower temperatures. We have 
identified two PGL-1-related proteins, PGL-2 and PGL-3, by sequence analysis of 
the C. elegans genome and by a yeast two-hybrid screen for proteins that 
interact with PGL-1. PGL-3 is associated with P granules at all stages of 
development, while PGL-2 is associated with P granules only during postembryonic 
development. All three PGL proteins interact with each other in vitro. 
Furthermore, PGL-1 and PGL-3 are co-immunoprecipitated from embryo extracts, 
indicating that they are indeed in the same protein complex in vivo. 
Nevertheless, each PGL protein localizes to P granules independently of the 
other two. pgl-2 or pgl-3 single-mutant worms do not show obvious defects in 
germline development. However, pgl-1; pgl-3 (but not pgl-2; pgl-1) double-mutant 
hermaphrodites and males show significantly enhanced sterility at all 
temperatures, compared to pgl-1 alone. Mutant hermaphrodites show defects in 
germline proliferation and in production of healthy gametes and viable embryos. 
Our findings demonstrate that both PGL-2 and PGL-3 are components of P granules, 
both interact with PGL-1, and at least PGL-3 functions redundantly with PGL-1 to 
ensure fertility in both sexes of C. elegans.

DOI: 10.1534/genetics.103.023093
PMCID: PMC1470885
PMID: 15238518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

PGL-1 is a constitutive protein component of C. elegans germ granules, also known as P granules. Maternally supplied PGL-1 is essential for germline development but only at elevated temperature, raising the possibility that redundant factors provide sufficient function at lower temperatures. We have identified two PGL-1-related proteins, PGL-2 and PGL-3, by sequence analysis of the C. elegans genome and by a yeast two-hybrid screen for proteins that interact with PGL-1. PGL-3 is associated with P granules at all stages of development, while PGL-2 is associated with P granules only during postembryonic development. All three PGL proteins interact with each other in vitro. Furthermore, PGL-1 and PGL-3 are co-immunoprecipitated from embryo extracts, indicating that they are indeed in the same protein complex in vivo. Nevertheless, each PGL protein localizes to P granules independently of the other two. pgl-2 or pgl-3 single-mutant worms do not show obvious defects in germline development. However, pgl-1; pgl-3 (but not pgl-2; pgl-1) double-mutant hermaphrodites and males show significantly enhanced sterility at all temperatures, compared to pgl-1 alone. Mutant hermaphrodites show defects in germline proliferation and in production of healthy gametes and viable embryos. Our findings demonstrate that both PGL-2 and PGL-3 are components of P granules, both interact with PGL-1, and at least PGL-3 functions redundantly with PGL-1 to ensure fertility in both sexes of C. elegans.
