---
pmid: '15123429'
title: Structural analysis of the human Golgi-associated plant pathogenesis related
  protein GAPR-1 implicates dimerization as a regulatory mechanism.
authors:
- Serrano RL
- Kuhn A
- Hendricks A
- Helms JB
- Sinning I
- Groves MR
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2004.03.015
---

# Structural analysis of the human Golgi-associated plant pathogenesis related protein GAPR-1 implicates dimerization as a regulatory mechanism.
**Authors:** Serrano RL, Kuhn A, Hendricks A, Helms JB, Sinning I, Groves MR
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmb.2004.03.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2004.03.015)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Biol. 2004 May 21;339(1):173-83. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2004.03.015.

Structural analysis of the human Golgi-associated plant pathogenesis related 
protein GAPR-1 implicates dimerization as a regulatory mechanism.

Serrano RL(1), Kuhn A, Hendricks A, Helms JB, Sinning I, Groves MR.

Author information:
(1)Biochemie-Zentrum Heidelberg, University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimerfeld 
328, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

The plant pathogenesis related proteins group 1 (PR-1) and a variety of related 
mammalian proteins constitute a PR-1 protein family that share sequence and 
structural similarities. GAPR-1 is a unique family member as thus far it is the 
only PR-1 family member that is not co-translationally targeted to the lumen of 
the endoplasmic reticulum before trafficking to either vacuoles or secretion. 
Here we report that GAPR-1 may form dimers in vitro and in vivo, as determined 
by yeast two-hybrid screening, biochemical and biophysical assays. The 1.55A 
crystal structure demonstrates that GAPR-1 is structurally homologous to the 
other PR-1 family members previously solved (p14a and Ves V 5). Through an 
examination of inter-molecular interactions between GAPR-1 molecules in the 
crystal lattice, we propose a number of the highly conserved amino acid residues 
of the PR-1 family to be involved in the regulation of dimer formation of GAPR-1 
with potential implications for other PR-1 family members. We show that 
mutagenesis of these conserved amino acid residues leads to a greatly increased 
dimer population. A recent report suggests that PR-1 family members may exhibit 
serine protease activity and further examination of the dimer interface of 
GAPR-1 indicates that a catalytic triad similar to that of serine proteases may 
be formed across the dimer interface by residues from both molecules within the 
dimer.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2004.03.015
PMID: 15123429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
