---
pmid: '31652307'
title: Kelch-like protein 5-mediated ubiquitination of lysine 183 promotes proteasomal
  degradation of sphingosine kinase 1.
authors:
- Powell JA
- Pitman MR
- Zebol JR
- Moretti PAB
- Neubauer HA
- Davies LT
- Lewis AC
- Dagley LF
- Webb AI
- Costabile M
- Pitson SM
journal: Biochem J
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1042/BCJ20190245
---

# Kelch-like protein 5-mediated ubiquitination of lysine 183 promotes proteasomal degradation of sphingosine kinase 1.
**Authors:** Powell JA, Pitman MR, Zebol JR, Moretti PAB, Neubauer HA, Davies LT, Lewis AC, Dagley LF, Webb AI, Costabile M, Pitson SM
**Journal:** Biochem J (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BCJ20190245](https://doi.org/10.1042/BCJ20190245)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2019 Nov 15;476(21):3211-3226. doi: 10.1042/BCJ20190245.

Kelch-like protein 5-mediated ubiquitination of lysine 183 promotes proteasomal 
degradation of sphingosine kinase 1.

Powell JA(1)(2), Pitman MR(1), Zebol JR(1), Moretti PAB(1), Neubauer HA(1), 
Davies LT(1), Lewis AC(1), Dagley LF(3)(4), Webb AI(3)(4), Costabile M(1)(5), 
Pitson SM(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Cancer Biology, University of South Australia and SA Pathology, 
Adelaide, Australia.
(2)Adelaide Medical School, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia.
(3)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia.
(4)Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia.
(5)School of Pharmacy and Medical Sciences, Division of Health Sciences, 
University of South Australia, Adelaide, Australia.
(6)School of Biological Sciences, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia.

Sphingosine kinase 1 (SK1) is a signalling enzyme that catalyses the 
phosphorylation of sphingosine to generate the bioactive lipid sphingosine 
1-phosphate (S1P). A number of SK1 inhibitors and chemotherapeutics can induce 
the degradation of SK1, with the loss of this pro-survival enzyme shown to 
significantly contribute to the anti-cancer properties of these agents. Here we 
define the mechanistic basis for this degradation of SK1 in response to SK1 
inhibitors, chemotherapeutics, and in natural protein turnover. Using an 
inducible SK1 expression system that enables the degradation of pre-formed SK1 
to be assessed independent of transcriptional or translational effects, we found 
that SK1 was degraded primarily by the proteasome since several proteasome 
inhibitors blocked SK1 degradation, while lysosome, cathepsin B or pan caspase 
inhibitors had no effect. Importantly, we demonstrate that this proteasomal 
degradation of SK1 was enabled by its ubiquitination at Lys183 that appears 
facilitated by SK1 inhibitor-induced conformational changes in the structure of 
SK1 around this residue. Furthermore, using yeast two-hybrid screening, we 
identified Kelch-like protein 5 (KLHL5) as an important protein adaptor linking 
SK1 to the cullin 3 (Cul3) ubiquitin ligase complex. Notably, knockdown of KLHL5 
or Cul3, use of a cullin inhibitor or a dominant-negative Cul3 all attenuated 
SK1 degradation. Collectively this data demonstrates the KLHL5/Cul3-based E3 
ubiquitin ligase complex is important for regulation of SK1 protein stability 
via Lys183 ubiquitination, in response to SK1 inhibitors, chemotherapy and for 
normal SK1 protein turnover.

© 2019 The Author(s). Published by Portland Press Limited on behalf of the 
Biochemical Society.

DOI: 10.1042/BCJ20190245
PMID: 31652307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
