---
pmid: '23432463'
title: NFP, a LysM protein controlling Nod factor perception, also intervenes in Medicago
  truncatula resistance to pathogens.
authors:
- Rey T
- Nars A
- Bonhomme M
- Bottin A
- Huguet S
- Balzergue S
- Jardinaud MF
- Bono JJ
- Cullimore J
- Dumas B
- Gough C
- Jacquet C
journal: New Phytol
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/nph.12198
---

# NFP, a LysM protein controlling Nod factor perception, also intervenes in Medicago truncatula resistance to pathogens.
**Authors:** Rey T, Nars A, Bonhomme M, Bottin A, Huguet S, Balzergue S, Jardinaud MF, Bono JJ, Cullimore J, Dumas B, Gough C, Jacquet C
**Journal:** New Phytol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/nph.12198](https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.12198)

## Abstract

1. New Phytol. 2013 May;198(3):875-886. doi: 10.1111/nph.12198. Epub 2013 Feb 25.

NFP, a LysM protein controlling Nod factor perception, also intervenes in 
Medicago truncatula resistance to pathogens.

Rey T(1)(2), Nars A(1)(2), Bonhomme M(1)(2), Bottin A(1)(2), Huguet S(3), 
Balzergue S(3), Jardinaud MF(4), Bono JJ(4)(5), Cullimore J(4)(5), Dumas 
B(1)(2), Gough C(4)(5), Jacquet C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Université de Toulouse, UPS, UMR 5546, Laboratoire de Recherche en Sciences 
Végétales, BP42617, Auzeville, F-31326, Castanet-Tolosan, France.
(2)CNRS, UMR 5546, Laboratoire de Recherche en Sciences Végétales, BP42617, 
Auzeville, F-31326, Castanet-Tolosan, France.
(3)Unité de Recherche en Génomique Végétale (URGV), UMR INRA 1165, Université 
d'Evry Val d'Essonne, ERL CNRS 8196, CP 5708, F-91057, Evry Cedex, France.
(4)INRA, Laboratoire des Interactions Plantes-Microorganismes (LIPM), UMR441, 
F-31326, Castanet-Tolosan, France.
(5)CNRS, Laboratoire des Interactions Plantes-Microorganismes (LIPM), UMR2594, 
F-31326, Castanet-Tolosan, France.

Plant LysM proteins control the perception of microbial-derived 
N-acetylglucosamine compounds for the establishment of symbiosis or activation 
of plant immunity. This raises questions about how plants, and notably legumes, 
can differentiate friends and foes using similar molecular actors and whether 
any receptors can intervene in both symbiosis and resistance. To study this 
question, nfp and lyk3 LysM-receptor like kinase mutants of Medicago truncatula 
that are affected in the early steps of nodulation, were analysed following 
inoculation with Aphanomyces euteiches, a root oomycete. The role of NFP in this 
interaction was further analysed by overexpression of NFP and by transcriptome 
analyses. nfp, but not lyk3, mutants were significantly more susceptible than 
wildtype plants to A. euteiches, whereas NFP overexpression increased 
resistance. Transcriptome analyses on A. euteiches inoculation showed that 
mutation in the NFP gene led to significant changes in the expression of c. 500 
genes, notably involved in cell dynamic processes previously associated with 
resistance to pathogen penetration. nfp mutants also showed an increased 
susceptibility to the fungus Colletotrichum trifolii. These results demonstrate 
that NFP intervenes in M. truncatula immunity, suggesting an unsuspected role 
for NFP in the perception of pathogenic signals.

© 2013 The Authors. New Phytologist © 2013 New Phytologist Trust.

DOI: 10.1111/nph.12198
PMID: 23432463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
