---
pmid: '18234692'
title: BART is essential for nuclear retention of STAT3.
authors:
- Muromoto R
- Sekine Y
- Imoto S
- Ikeda O
- Okayama T
- Sato N
- Matsuda T
journal: Int Immunol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxm154
---

# BART is essential for nuclear retention of STAT3.
**Authors:** Muromoto R, Sekine Y, Imoto S, Ikeda O, Okayama T, Sato N, Matsuda T
**Journal:** Int Immunol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1093/intimm/dxm154](https://doi.org/10.1093/intimm/dxm154)

## Abstract

1. Int Immunol. 2008 Mar;20(3):395-403. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxm154. Epub 2008 Jan
 29.

BART is essential for nuclear retention of STAT3.

Muromoto R(1), Sekine Y, Imoto S, Ikeda O, Okayama T, Sato N, Matsuda T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Hokkaido University, Kita-Ku Kita 12 Nishi 6, Sapporo, Hokkaido 060-0812, Japan.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) mediate cell 
proliferation, differentiation and survival in immune responses, hematopoiesis, 
neurogenesis and other biological processes. STAT3, for example, is involved in 
the epithelial-mesenchymal transition during gastrulation, organogenesis, wound 
healing and cancer progression. STAT activity is regulated by a variety of 
mechanisms, including nuclear translocation. To clarify the molecular mechanisms 
underlying the regulation of STAT activity, we performed yeast two-hybrid 
screening. Here, we identified binder of ADP-ribosylation factor-like two (BART) 
as a novel STAT-binding partner. Importantly, we showed that BART is essential 
for the transcriptional activity and nuclear retention of STAT3. Furthermore, an 
effector of BART, ADP-ribosylation factor-like 2 (ARL2) was also involved in 
nuclear retention of STAT3. These results indicate that BART plays an essential 
role in the nuclear retention of STAT3 through interaction with ARL2.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/dxm154
PMID: 18234692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
