---
pmid: '25344754'
title: ASPP2 controls epithelial plasticity and inhibits metastasis through β-catenin-dependent
  regulation of ZEB1.
authors:
- Wang Y
- Bu F
- Royer C
- Serres S
- Larkin JR
- Soto MS
- Sibson NR
- Salter V
- Fritzsche F
- Turnquist C
- Koch S
- Zak J
- Zhong S
- Wu G
- Liang A
- Olofsen PA
- Moch H
- Hancock DC
- Downward J
- Goldin RD
- Zhao J
- Tong X
- Guo Y
- Lu X
journal: Nat Cell Biol
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ncb3050
---

# ASPP2 controls epithelial plasticity and inhibits metastasis through β-catenin-dependent regulation of ZEB1.
**Authors:** Wang Y, Bu F, Royer C, Serres S, Larkin JR, Soto MS, Sibson NR, Salter V, Fritzsche F, Turnquist C, Koch S, Zak J, Zhong S, Wu G, Liang A, Olofsen PA, Moch H, Hancock DC, Downward J, Goldin RD, Zhao J, Tong X, Guo Y, Lu X
**Journal:** Nat Cell Biol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncb3050](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb3050)

## Abstract

1. Nat Cell Biol. 2014 Nov;16(11):1092-104. doi: 10.1038/ncb3050. Epub 2014 Oct
26.

ASPP2 controls epithelial plasticity and inhibits metastasis through 
β-catenin-dependent regulation of ZEB1.

Wang Y(1), Bu F(2), Royer C(1), Serres S(3), Larkin JR(3), Soto MS(3), Sibson 
NR(3), Salter V(1), Fritzsche F(4), Turnquist C(1), Koch S(1), Zak J(1), Zhong 
S(1), Wu G(5), Liang A(5), Olofsen PA(1), Moch H(6), Hancock DC(7), Downward 
J(7), Goldin RD(8), Zhao J(2), Tong X(2), Guo Y(2), Lu X(1).

Author information:
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Ltd, Nuffield Department of Clinical 
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7DQ, UK.
(2)1] International Joint Cancer Institute &Eastern Hospital of Hepatobiliary 
Surgery, The Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 200433, China [2] PLA 
General Hospital Cancer Center, PLA Postgraduate School of Medicine, 28 Fuxing 
Road Beijing 100853, China.
(3)Cancer Research UK and Medical Research Council Oxford Institute for 
Radiation Oncology, Department of Oncology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 
7LE, UK.
(4)1] Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Ltd, Nuffield Department of Clinical 
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7DQ, UK [2] Institute of Surgical 
Pathology, University Hospital Zurich, CH-8091 Zurich, Switzerland.
(5)Guangxi Cancer Hospital, Guangxi Medical University, Guangxi 530021, China.
(6)Institute of Surgical Pathology, University Hospital Zurich, CH-8091 Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(7)Cancer Research UK London Research Institute, 44 Lincoln's Inn Fields London 
WC2A 3LY, UK.
(8)Centre for Pathology, St Mary's Hospital, Imperial College, London W2 1NY, 
UK.

Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), and the reverse mesenchymal to 
epithelial transition (MET), are known examples of epithelial plasticity that 
are important in kidney development and cancer metastasis. Here we identify 
ASPP2, a haploinsufficient tumour suppressor, p53 activator and PAR3 binding 
partner, as a molecular switch of MET and EMT. ASPP2 contributes to MET in mouse 
kidney in vivo. Mechanistically, ASPP2 induces MET through its PAR3-binding 
amino-terminus, independently of p53 binding. ASPP2 prevents β-catenin from 
transactivating ZEB1, directly by forming an ASPP2-β-catenin-E-cadherin ternary 
complex and indirectly by inhibiting β-catenin's N-terminal phosphorylation to 
stabilize the β-catenin-E-cadherin complex. ASPP2 limits the pro-invasive 
property of oncogenic RAS and inhibits tumour metastasis in vivo. Reduced ASPP2 
expression results in EMT, and is associated with poor survival in 
hepatocellular carcinoma and breast cancer patients. Hence, ASPP2 is a key 
regulator of epithelial plasticity that connects cell polarity to the 
suppression of WNT signalling, EMT and tumour metastasis.

DOI: 10.1038/ncb3050
PMID: 25344754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
