---
pmid: '17224163'
title: Octameric structure of the human bifunctional enzyme PAICS in purine biosynthesis.
authors:
- Li SX
- Tong YP
- Xie XC
- Wang QH
- Zhou HN
- Han Y
- Zhang ZY
- Gao W
- Li SG
- Zhang XC
- Bi RC
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2006.12.027
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Octameric structure of the human bifunctional enzyme PAICS in purine biosynthesis.
**Authors:** Li SX, Tong YP, Xie XC, Wang QH, Zhou HN, Han Y, Zhang ZY, Gao W, Li SG, Zhang XC, Bi RC
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmb.2006.12.027](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2006.12.027)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Biol. 2007 Mar 9;366(5):1603-14. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2006.12.027. Epub
2006  Dec 16.

Octameric structure of the human bifunctional enzyme PAICS in purine 
biosynthesis.

Li SX(1), Tong YP, Xie XC, Wang QH, Zhou HN, Han Y, Zhang ZY, Gao W, Li SG, 
Zhang XC, Bi RC.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 15 Datun Road, Beijing 
100101, China.

Phosphoribosylaminoimidazole carboxylase/phosphoribosylaminoimidazole 
succinocarboxamide synthetase (PAICS) is an important bifunctional enzyme in de 
novo purine biosynthesis in vertebrate with both 5-aminoimidazole ribonucleotide 
carboxylase (AIRc) and 4-(N-succinylcarboxamide)-5-aminoimidazole ribonucleotide 
synthetase (SAICARs) activities. It becomes an attractive target for rational 
anticancer drug design, since rapidly dividing cancer cells rely heavily on the 
purine de novo pathway for synthesis of adenine and guanine, whereas normal 
cells favor the salvage pathway. Here, we report the crystal structure of human 
PAICS, the first in the entire PAICS family, at 2.8 A resolution. It revealed 
that eight PAICS subunits, each composed of distinct AIRc and SAICARs domains, 
assemble a compact homo-octamer with an octameric-carboxylase core and four 
symmetric periphery dimers formed by synthetase domains. Based on structural 
comparison and functional complementation analyses, the active sites of SAICARs 
and AIRc were identified, including a putative substrate CO(2)-binding site. 
Furthermore, four symmetry-related, separate tunnel systems in the PAICS octamer 
were found that connect the active sites of AIRc and SAICARs. This study 
illustrated the octameric nature of the bifunctional enzyme. Each carboxylase 
active site is formed by structural elements from three AIRc domains, 
demonstrating that the octamer structure is essential for the carboxylation 
activity. Furthermore, the existence of the tunnel system implies a mechanism of 
intermediate channeling and suggests that the quaternary structure arrangement 
is crucial for effectively executing the sequential reactions. In addition, this 
study provides essential structural information for designing PAICS-specific 
inhibitors for use in cancer chemotherapy.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2006.12.027
PMID: 17224163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
