---
pmid: '25216679'
title: Architecture of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae SAGA transcription coactivator
  complex.
authors:
- Han Y
- Luo J
- Ranish J
- Hahn S
journal: EMBO J
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4283410
doi: 10.15252/embj.201488638
---

# Architecture of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae SAGA transcription coactivator complex.
**Authors:** Han Y, Luo J, Ranish J, Hahn S
**Journal:** EMBO J (2014)
**DOI:** [10.15252/embj.201488638](https://doi.org/10.15252/embj.201488638)
**PMC:** [PMC4283410](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4283410/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2014 Nov 3;33(21):2534-46. doi: 10.15252/embj.201488638. Epub 2014 Sep
 12.

Architecture of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae SAGA transcription coactivator 
complex.

Han Y(1), Luo J(2), Ranish J(2), Hahn S(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, 
WA, USA Biological Physics, Structure and Design Program, University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(2)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA, USA.
(3)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, 
WA, USA shahn@fhcrc.org.

The conserved transcription coactivator SAGA is comprised of several modules 
that are involved in activator binding, TBP binding, histone acetylation (HAT) 
and deubiquitination (DUB). Crosslinking and mass spectrometry, together with 
genetic and biochemical analyses, were used to determine the molecular 
architecture of the SAGA-TBP complex. We find that the SAGA Taf and Taf-like 
subunits form a TFIID-like core complex at the center of SAGA that makes 
extensive interactions with all other SAGA modules. SAGA-TBP binding involves a 
network of interactions between subunits Spt3, Spt8, Spt20, and Spt7. The HAT 
and DUB modules are in close proximity, and the DUB module modestly stimulates 
HAT function. The large activator-binding subunit Tra1 primarily connects to the 
TFIID-like core via its FAT domain. These combined results were used to derive a 
model for the arrangement of the SAGA subunits and its interactions with TBP. 
Our results provide new insight into SAGA function in gene regulation, its 
structural similarity with TFIID, and functional interactions between the SAGA 
modules.

© 2014 The Authors.

DOI: 10.15252/embj.201488638
PMCID: PMC4283410
PMID: 25216679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
