---
pmid: '22084112'
title: Different levels of the Tripartite motif protein, Anomalies in sensory axon
  patterning (Asap), regulate distinct axonal projections of Drosophila sensory neurons.
authors:
- Morikawa RK
- Kanamori T
- Yasunaga K
- Emoto K
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3228480
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1109843108
---

# Different levels of the Tripartite motif protein, Anomalies in sensory axon patterning (Asap), regulate distinct axonal projections of Drosophila sensory neurons.
**Authors:** Morikawa RK, Kanamori T, Yasunaga K, Emoto K
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1109843108](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1109843108)
**PMC:** [PMC3228480](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3228480/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Nov 29;108(48):19389-94. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1109843108. Epub 2011 Nov 14.

Different levels of the Tripartite motif protein, Anomalies in sensory axon 
patterning (Asap), regulate distinct axonal projections of Drosophila sensory 
neurons.

Morikawa RK(1), Kanamori T, Yasunaga K, Emoto K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Osaka Bioscience Institute, Suita, Osaka 
565-0874, Japan.

The axonal projection pattern of sensory neurons typically is regulated by 
environmental signals, but how different sensory afferents can establish 
distinct projections in the same environment remains largely unknown. Drosophila 
class IV dendrite arborization (C4da) sensory neurons project subtype-specific 
axonal branches in the ventral nerve cord, and we show that the Tripartite motif 
protein, Anomalies in sensory axon patterning (Asap) is a critical determinant 
of the axonal projection patterns of different C4da neurons. Asap is highly 
expressed in C4da neurons with both ipsilateral and contralateral axonal 
projections, but the Asap level is low in neurons that have only ipsilateral 
projections. Mutations in asap cause a specific loss of contralateral 
projections, whereas overexpression of Asap induces ectopic contralateral 
projections in C4da neurons. We also show by biochemical and genetic analysis 
that Asap regulates Netrin signaling, at least in part by linking the Netrin 
receptor Frazzled to the downstream effector Pico. In the absence of Asap, the 
sensory afferent connectivity within the ventral nerve cord is disrupted, 
resulting in specific larval behavioral deficits. These results indicate that 
different levels of Asap determine distinct patterns of axonal projections of 
C4da neurons by modulating Netrin signaling and that the Asap-mediated axonal 
projection is critical for assembly of a functional sensory circuit.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1109843108
PMCID: PMC3228480
PMID: 22084112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
