---
pmid: '20103767'
title: TNF-alpha, IL-6, and IL-1 expression is inhibited by GAS6 in monocytes/macrophages.
authors:
- Alciato F
- Sainaghi PP
- Sola D
- Castello L
- Avanzi GC
journal: J Leukoc Biol
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1189/jlb.0909610
---

# TNF-alpha, IL-6, and IL-1 expression is inhibited by GAS6 in monocytes/macrophages.
**Authors:** Alciato F, Sainaghi PP, Sola D, Castello L, Avanzi GC
**Journal:** J Leukoc Biol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1189/jlb.0909610](https://doi.org/10.1189/jlb.0909610)

## Abstract

1. J Leukoc Biol. 2010 May;87(5):869-75. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0909610. Epub 2010 Jan 
26.

TNF-alpha, IL-6, and IL-1 expression is inhibited by GAS6 in 
monocytes/macrophages.

Alciato F(1), Sainaghi PP, Sola D, Castello L, Avanzi GC.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Immunology, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, 
Università del Piemonte Orientale A. Avogadro, Novara, Italy.

GAS6 protein has been described to be involved in immune modulation in vitro and 
in vivo. Some of these effects are probably mediated through the involvement of 
monocytes/macrophages. To understand the role of GAS6 in modulating the immune 
response, we evaluated the effect on cytokine secretion by monocytes/macrophages 
and the molecular pathways involved. GAS6 inhibits TNF-alpha and IL-6 secretion 
by LPS-stimulated U937 cells and monocytes/macrophages. We evidenced that among 
GAS6 receptors, only Mer (but not Axl or Tyro3) is expressed on differentiated 
U937 cells, and its activation is responsible for the reduction of cytokine 
expression. In immunoblot analysis, Mer was activated after GAS6 stimulation, 
giving rise to an increased phosphorylation of Akt. We also observed GSK3 beta 
phosphorylation and consequent inhibition of NF-kappaB nuclear translocation. 
Therefore, GAS6 modulates macrophage cytokine secretion, triggering an 
"anti-inflammatory pathway" involving PI3K/Akt/GSK3 beta and NF-kappaB.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.0909610
PMID: 20103767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
