---
pmid: '10602503'
title: The cloning, mapping and expression of a novel gene, BRL, related to the AF10
  leukaemia gene.
authors:
- McCullagh P
- Chaplin T
- Meerabux J
- Grenzelias D
- Lillington D
- Poulsom R
- Gregorini A
- Saha V
- Young BD
journal: Oncogene
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1203117
---

# The cloning, mapping and expression of a novel gene, BRL, related to the AF10 leukaemia gene.
**Authors:** McCullagh P, Chaplin T, Meerabux J, Grenzelias D, Lillington D, Poulsom R, Gregorini A, Saha V, Young BD
**Journal:** Oncogene (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1203117](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1203117)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 1999 Dec 9;18(52):7442-52. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1203117.

The cloning, mapping and expression of a novel gene, BRL, related to the AF10 
leukaemia gene.

McCullagh P(1), Chaplin T, Meerabux J, Grenzelias D, Lillington D, Poulsom R, 
Gregorini A, Saha V, Young BD.

Author information:
(1)Imperial Cancer Research Fund, Department of Medical Oncology, St 
Bartholomew's and the Royal London School of Medicine and Dentistry, 
Charterhouse Square, London ECIM 6BQ, UK.

The MLL gene is reciprocally translocated with one of a number of different 
partner genes in a proportion of human acute leukaemias. The precise mechanism 
of oncogenic transformation is unclear since most of the partner genes encode 
unrelated proteins. However, two partner genes, AF10 and AF17 are related 
through the presence of a cysteine rich region and a leucine zipper. The 
identification of other proteins with these structures will aid our 
understanding of their role in normal and leukaemic cells. We report the cloning 
of a novel human gene (BRL) which encodes a protein containing a cysteine rich 
region related to that of AF10 and AF17 and is overall most closely related to 
the previously known protein BR140. BRL maps to chromosome 22q13 and shows high 
levels of expression in testis and several cell lines. The deduced protein 
sequence also contains a bromodomain, four potential LXXLL motifs and four 
predicted nuclear localization signals. A monoclonal antibody raised to a BRL 
peptide sequence confirmed its widespread expression as a 120 Kd protein and 
demonstrated localization to the nucleus within spermatocytes.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1203117
PMID: 10602503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
