---
pmid: '9744475'
title: Characterization of N93S, I312T, and A333P missense mutations in two Japanese
  families with mitochondrial acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase deficiency.
authors:
- Fukao T
- Nakamura H
- Song XQ
- Nakamura K
- Orii KE
- Kohno Y
- Kano M
- Yamaguchi S
- Hashimoto T
- Orii T
- Kondo N
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1098-1004(1998)12:4<245::AID-HUMU5>3.0.CO;2-E
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Characterization of N93S, I312T, and A333P missense mutations in two Japanese families with mitochondrial acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase deficiency.
**Authors:** Fukao T, Nakamura H, Song XQ, Nakamura K, Orii KE, Kohno Y, Kano M, Yamaguchi S, Hashimoto T, Orii T, Kondo N
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1002/(SICI)1098-1004(1998)12:4<245::AID-HUMU5>3.0.CO;2-E](https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1098-1004(1998)12:4<245::AID-HUMU5>3.0.CO;2-E)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mutat. 1998;12(4):245-54. doi: 
10.1002/(SICI)1098-1004(1998)12:4<245::AID-HUMU5>3.0.CO;2-E.

Characterization of N93S, I312T, and A333P missense mutations in two Japanese 
families with mitochondrial acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase deficiency.

Fukao T(1), Nakamura H, Song XQ, Nakamura K, Orii KE, Kohno Y, Kano M, Yamaguchi 
S, Hashimoto T, Orii T, Kondo N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Gifu University School of Medicine, Japan. 
toshi-gif@umim.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Mitochondrial acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase (T2) deficiency is an inborn error of 
ketone body and isoleucine catabolisms. Japanese patients, GK01 and GK19, were 
found to be compound heterozygotes of 149delC and A333P, and N93S and I312T, 
respectively. The latter three missense mutations were individually 
characterized by analyses of transient expression of the cDNAs and heat 
stability. A333P and I312T subunits showed aberrant electrophoretic mobility on 
SDS-PAGE. T2 protein was destabilized by A333P and existed as an insoluble form 
in the mitochondria. I312T mutation also destabilized T2 protein; however, some 
T2 protein was retained in soluble form and reduced residual activity was 
apparent. N93S mutation did not change the heat stability of T2 activity and the 
reduced residual activity was retained, however a considerable amount was 
observed in an insoluble form. The effects of mutations were interpreted based 
on a tertiary structural model of a subunit of the human T2. This model was 
constructed from the X-ray crystal structure of the homologous peroxisomal 
3-ketoacyl-CoA thiolase of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. On the basis of this model, 
the positions of Ala333 and Ile312 were far from the active site and the 
mutations would be expected to destabilize the tertiary structure of T2 subunit. 
By contrast, Asn93 is located near the active site and may function to maintain 
a local loop structure. The mutation of Asn93 could directly disrupt disposition 
of the active site.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1098-1004(1998)12:4<245::AID-HUMU5>3.0.CO;2-E
PMID: 9744475 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
