---
pmid: '18593899'
title: The cullin 4B-based UV-damaged DNA-binding protein ligase binds to UV-damaged
  chromatin and ubiquitinates histone H2A.
authors:
- Guerrero-Santoro J
- Kapetanaki MG
- Hsieh CL
- Gorbachinsky I
- Levine AS
- Rapić-Otrin V
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6162
---

# The cullin 4B-based UV-damaged DNA-binding protein ligase binds to UV-damaged chromatin and ubiquitinates histone H2A.
**Authors:** Guerrero-Santoro J, Kapetanaki MG, Hsieh CL, Gorbachinsky I, Levine AS, Rapić-Otrin V
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6162](https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6162)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Res. 2008 Jul 1;68(13):5014-22. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6162.

The cullin 4B-based UV-damaged DNA-binding protein ligase binds to UV-damaged 
chromatin and ubiquitinates histone H2A.

Guerrero-Santoro J(1), Kapetanaki MG, Hsieh CL, Gorbachinsky I, Levine AS, 
Rapić-Otrin V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, School of Medicine, Cancer 
Institute, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

By removing UV-induced lesions from DNA, the nucleotide excision repair (NER) 
pathway preserves the integrity of the genome. The UV-damaged DNA-binding 
(UV-DDB) protein complex is involved in the recognition of chromatin-embedded 
UV-damaged DNA, which is the least understood step of NER. UV-DDB consists of 
DDB1 and DDB2, and it is a component of the cullin 4A (CUL4A)-based ubiquitin 
ligase, DDB1-CUL4A(DDB2). We previously showed that DDB1-CUL4A(DDB2) 
ubiquitinates histone H2A at the sites of UV lesions in a DDB2-dependent manner. 
Mutations in DDB2 cause a cancer prone syndrome, xeroderma pigmentosum group E 
(XP-E). CUL4A and its paralog, cullin 4B (CUL4B), copurify with the UV-DDB 
complex, but it is unclear whether CUL4B has a role in NER as a separate E3 
ubiquitin ligase. Here, we present evidence that CUL4A and CUL4B form two 
individual E3 ligases, DDB1-CUL4A(DDB2) and DDB1-CUL4B(DDB2). To investigate 
CUL4B's possible role in NER, we examined its subcellular localization in 
unirradiated and irradiated cells. CUL4B colocalizes with DDB2 at UV-damaged DNA 
sites. Furthermore, CUL4B binds to UV-damaged chromatin as a part of the 
DDB1-CUL4B(DDB2) E3 ligase in the presence of functional DDB2. In contrast to 
CUL4A, CUL4B is localized in the nucleus and facilitates the transfer of DDB1 
into the nucleus independently of DDB2. Importantly, DDB1-CUL4B(DDB2) is more 
efficient than DDB1-CUL4A(DDB2) in monoubiquitinating histone H2A in vitro. 
Overall, this study suggests that DDB1-CUL4B(DDB2) E3 ligase may have a 
distinctive function in modifying the chromatin structure at the site of UV 
lesions to promote efficient NER.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6162
PMID: 18593899 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
