---
pmid: '23764002'
title: Epidermal growth factor receptor potentiates MCM7-mediated DNA replication
  through tyrosine phosphorylation of Lyn kinase in human cancers.
authors:
- Huang TH
- Huo L
- Wang YN
- Xia W
- Wei Y
- Chang SS
- Chang WC
- Fang YF
- Chen CT
- Lang JY
- Tu C
- Wang Y
- Hsu MC
- Kuo HP
- Ko HW
- Shen J
- Lee HH
- Lee PC
- Wu Y
- Chen CH
- Hung MC
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2013'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3703149
doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2013.04.027
---

# Epidermal growth factor receptor potentiates MCM7-mediated DNA replication through tyrosine phosphorylation of Lyn kinase in human cancers.
**Authors:** Huang TH, Huo L, Wang YN, Xia W, Wei Y, Chang SS, Chang WC, Fang YF, Chen CT, Lang JY, Tu C, Wang Y, Hsu MC, Kuo HP, Ko HW, Shen J, Lee HH, Lee PC, Wu Y, Chen CH, Hung MC
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccr.2013.04.027](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2013.04.027)
**PMC:** [PMC3703149](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3703149/)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Cell. 2013 Jun 10;23(6):796-810. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2013.04.027.

Epidermal growth factor receptor potentiates MCM7-mediated DNA replication 
through tyrosine phosphorylation of Lyn kinase in human cancers.

Huang TH(1), Huo L, Wang YN, Xia W, Wei Y, Chang SS, Chang WC, Fang YF, Chen CT, 
Lang JY, Tu C, Wang Y, Hsu MC, Kuo HP, Ko HW, Shen J, Lee HH, Lee PC, Wu Y, Chen 
CH, Hung MC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, The 
University of Texas, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) initiates a signaling cascade that leads 
to DNA synthesis and cell proliferation, but its role in regulating DNA 
replication licensing is unclear. Here, we show that activated EGFR 
phosphorylates the p56 isoform of Lyn, p56(Lyn), at Y32, which then 
phosphorylates MCM7, a licensing factor critical for DNA replication, at Y600 to 
increase its association with other minichromosome maintenance complex proteins, 
thereby promoting DNA synthesis complex assembly and cell proliferation. Both 
p56(Lyn) Y32 and MCM7 Y600 phosphorylation are enhanced in proliferating cells 
and correlated with poor survival of breast cancer patients. These results 
establish a signaling cascade in which EGFR enhances MCM7 phosphorylation and 
DNA replication through Lyn phosphorylation in human cancer cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccr.2013.04.027
PMCID: PMC3703149
PMID: 23764002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Introduction

MCM7 is a member of the mini-chromosome maintenance (MCM) proteins, which were originally identified through a yeast genetic screen aimed to identify mutants defective in MCM ( Maine et al., 1984 ). The MCM proteins were subsequently found to be expressed in all eukaryotic organisms and are critical for licensing DNA replication in proliferating cells ( Tye, 1999 ). MCM proteins 2-7 are highly conserved from yeast to humans and form a hexameric complex during the G1 phase, which is then loaded onto the replication origin to form a pre-replication complex (pre-RC) that is indispensable for initiation of DNA replication ( Lei and Tye, 2001 ). Assembly of the MCM protein complex is essential for cell survival and proliferation, and suppressing expression of individual MCM proteins resulted in compromised DNA replication ( Shi et al., 2010 ; Tsuji et al., 2006 ), possibly due to lack of stable hexameric MCM complex. In addition to its role in initiation of replication, the MCM complex has been shown to serve as a putative replication fork helicase melting DNA origins in preparation for replication ( Ishimi, 1997 ; Labib et al., 2000 ; Lee and Hurwitz, 2001 ; Yan et al., 1993 ). Recent studies suggest that MCM2-7 complex interacts with CDC45 and GINS to form the CDC45-MCM-GINS complex ( Moyer et al., 2006 ), which is required for the activation of DNA helicase ( Dang and Li, 2011 ; Kang et al., 2012 ). MCM2-7 also forms a double-hexameric complex during pre-RC formation, which may be potentially required for the initiation of bidirectional replication forks in S phase ( Evrin et al., 2009 ; Gambus et al., 2011 ).

Deregulation of DNA replication machinery components causes chromosome instability and tumorigenesis ( Bergoglio et al., 2002 ; Rajagopalan et al., 2004 ), and the oncogenic potential of MCM7 deregulation has been well described ( Luo, 2011 ). A transgenic mouse model demonstrates that expression of exogenous MCM7 in the epidermis accelerates squamous cell carcinoma development upon carcinogen challenge ( Honeycutt et al., 2006 ). Additionally, increased MCM7 copy number and protein level are associated with prostate cancer relapse and metastasis, and a prostate cancer cell line ectopically expressing MCM7 exhibits increased proliferation and invasiveness ( Ren et al., 2006 ). Similarly, MCM7 serves as a proliferation maker and is associated with tumorigenesis in various human cancers, including oral squamous cell carcinoma, colorectal cancer, ovarian cancer, glioblastoma, and esophageal carcinoma ( Facoetti et al., 2006 ; Feng et al., 2008 ; Kan et al., 2009 ; Nishihara et al., 2008 ; Ota et al., 2011 ). MCM7 has recently been demonstrated as a prognostic marker that predicts poor cancer patient survival and a therapeutic target of non–small cell lung carcinomas ( Toyokawa et al., 2011 ). Interestingly, MCM7 protein is a critical target of some oncogenic, e.g, androgen receptor ( Shi et al., 2008 ), and tumor suppressor, e.g., integrin α7 and retinoblastoma ( Han et al., 2010 ; Sterner et al., 1998 ), signaling pathways, implying that multiple layers of regulation may be involved in MCM7 biology and its oncogenic properties.

EGFR initiates a signaling cascade that leads to DNA synthesis and cell proliferation upon activation, and EGFR pathways are frequently deregulated in human cancers ( Paez et al., 2004 ; Yarden, 2001 ). Previously, our mass spectrum analysis detected members of MCM hexameric ring complex in the EGFR immunoprecipitates from A431 cancer cells ( Huo et al., 2010 ), thereby raising the possibility that EGFR signaling is functionally involved in DNA replication licensing. Since MCM7 is critical in DNA replication and involved in oncogenic signaling pathways, we set out to determine whether MCM7 is a downstream target of EGFR signaling.

Discussion

Deregulated MCM7 expression can increase cancer cell proliferation and contribute to tumorigenesis; however, how specific oncogenic pathways regulate MCM7 functions is not well understood. Here, we show that Lyn-mediated MCM7 Y600 phosphorylation increases MCM7’s association with other MCM members, consequently enhancing DNA synthesis and cell proliferation. Furthermore, the activity of p56 Lyn is upregulated via Y32 phosphorylation by EGFR, resulting in potentiation of MCM7 Y600 phosphorylation. In human breast cancer, phosphorylation of both p56 Lyn Y32 and MCM7 Y600 correlate with EGFR expression level in tumor samples and with poor survival of patients. Thus, we propose a Tyr phosphorylation cascade triggered by EGFR for licensing DNA replication in proliferating cells, which is augmented in cancer cells with deregulated EGFR activity. These findings suggest that Lyn may be a critical EGFR downstream mediator in licensing DNA replication and therefore may be a promising therapeutic target in treating EGFR activated cancers.

Although the therapeutic efficacy of pan-Src family kinase inhibitors is currently being evaluated in the clinic, the Lyn specific inhibitor is not yet available for treatment of human cancers. Together with the previous reports in prostate cancer ( Goldenberg-Furmanov et al., 2004 ; Park et al., 2008 ), this study further identifies Lyn as a therapeutic target in breast and lung cancers. It is worthwhile to mention that EGFR Tyr kinase inhibitors (TKIs) such as erlotinib and gefitinib are well-established therapeutics for treating human cancers with deregulated EGFR, yet patients frequently develop resistance ( Balak et al., 2006 ). Several oncogenic pathways have been shown to be involved in TKI resistance, but the detailed mechanisms are not yet completed. The current study also raises an interesting possibility that the identified Lyn→ MCM7→DNA replication licensing pathway is one of the underlying mechanisms contributing to the TKIs resistance, and therefore the Lyn specific inhibitor may be effective against the EGFR activating human cancers that have developed TKI resistance and is worthy of further development.

Several post-translational modifications have been identified in other MCM family members and shown to be functionally important in initiating DNA replication. Specifically, phosphorylation of MCM2 at Ser27, Ser41, and Ser139 by CDC7/DBF4 kinase during G1/S phase enhances the ATPase activity of MCM complex and is essential for initiating DNA replication ( Tsuji et al., 2006 ) whereas phosphorylation of MCM2 at Ser5 by CDC7/DBF4 kinase promotes chromatin loading of MCM2 and MCM complex assembly ( Chuang et al., 2009 ). Additionally, CDK1-dependent MCM3 phosphorylation at Ser112 regulates its incorporation into the MCM2-7 complex ( Lin et al., 2008 ) and CDK2-dependent MCM3 phosphorylation at Thr722 regulates its loading onto chromatin in mammalian cells ( Li et al., 2011 ). While Y600 phosphorylation that enhances MCM7 interaction with other MCM members contributes to the cancer cell proliferation triggered by the EGFR-Lyn signaling axis, the nonphosphorylatable mutant MCM7 Y600F still maintains its basal interaction with other MCM members, suggesting that MCM7 Y600F is a mutant insensitive to EGF stimulation rather than a dominant negative mutant. Thus, the EGFR/Lyn mediated-MCM7 Y600 phosphorylation plays a positive regulatory role but not an indispensable role in the MCM7 functions. Besides, MCM7 regulates other biological processes independent of its DNA replication licensing function ( Hubbi et al., 2011 ) and other post-translational modifications of MCM7 could also regulate MCM7 functions in response to different mitogenic stimuli. Further investigation would be necessary to elucidate their biological functions.

Lyn is overexpressed in prostate cancer cells, and inhibition of Lyn expression suppresses prostate cancer cell proliferation ( Goldenberg-Furmanov et al., 2004 ; Park et al., 2008 ). Intriguingly, while siRNA-mediated inhibition of Lyn suppresses cellular proliferation, siRNA inhibition of Src suppresses primarily cell migration in prostate cancer cells ( Park et al., 2008 ). These observations indicate that Lyn and Src may not be functionally redundant and may regulate a different subset of substrates in cancer cells. In the present study, we found that Lyn is necessary for the MCM7 Y600 phosphorylation, and the expression of Lyn, but not other Src family kinases, correlated significantly with the phosphorylation level of MCM7 Y600 in both human lung tumor tissues and breast tumor tissues, suggesting that Lyn is the predominant Src family kinase to phosphorylate MCM7 Y600. The identification of Lyn specific substrate, MCM7, provides rationale for the Lyn-associated cell proliferation and implies the existence of other Lyn kinase substrates involved in cancer cell proliferation. We predict that further elucidation of the Lyn kinase substrates and their Tyr phosphorylation status would help us to understand the oncogenic functions of Lyn.

An important observation in our current study is that the activity of Lyn in MCM7 phosphorylation and cancer cell proliferation is directly regulated by EGFR-mediated Tyr phosphorylation, which suggests that Lyn may be indispensable for the cancer cells that rely on EGFR signaling to proliferate. In support of this notion, we and others have shown that Lyn knockdown significantly compromised the proliferation of Du145 and MDA-MB-468 cells ( Goldenberg-Furmanov et al., 2004 ), both of which rely on EGFR signaling to proliferate ( Matar et al., 2004 ). In contrast, Lyn knockdown had no growth inhibitory effect on certain cancer cell lines including HCC1954, BT-549, and MDA-MB-231 ( Hochgrafe et al., 2010 ) that are less dependent on EGFR signaling for their proliferation ( Hochgrafe et al., 2010 ; Krol et al., 2007 ; Sahin et al., 2009 ). Taken together, the oncogenic activity of Lyn in DNA synthesis and cell proliferation is potentiated in cancer cells that depend on EGFR signaling for their survival, and targeting Lyn may demonstrate synergistic efficacy with EGFR TKIs for treatment of this subset of cancer cells. Given that MCM7 deregulation is frequently associated with human cancers and tumorigenesis, these observations also provide clinical implications for the treatment of human cancers with deregulated MCM7 status using EGFR and Lyn kinase inhibitors.
