---
pmid: '20089856'
title: Substrate specificity, membrane topology, and activity regulation of human
  alkaline ceramidase 2 (ACER2).
authors:
- Sun W
- Jin J
- Xu R
- Hu W
- Szulc ZM
- Bielawski J
- Obeid LM
- Mao C
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2838321
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.069203
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Substrate specificity, membrane topology, and activity regulation of human alkaline ceramidase 2 (ACER2).
**Authors:** Sun W, Jin J, Xu R, Hu W, Szulc ZM, Bielawski J, Obeid LM, Mao C
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M109.069203](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.069203)
**PMC:** [PMC2838321](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2838321/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Mar 19;285(12):8995-9007. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.069203. Epub
 2010 Jan 20.

Substrate specificity, membrane topology, and activity regulation of human 
alkaline ceramidase 2 (ACER2).

Sun W(1), Jin J, Xu R, Hu W, Szulc ZM, Bielawski J, Obeid LM, Mao C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, 
South Carolina 29425, USA.

Human alkaline ceramidase 2 (ACER2) plays an important role in cellular 
responses by regulating the hydrolysis of ceramides in cells. Here we report its 
biochemical characterization, membrane topology, and activity regulation. 
Recombinant ACER2 was expressed in yeast mutant cells (Deltaypc1Deltaydc1) that 
lack endogenous ceramidase activity, and microsomes from ACER2-expressiong yeast 
cells were used to biochemically characterize ACER2. ACER2 catalyzed the 
hydrolysis of various ceramides and followed Michaelis-Menten kinetics. ACER2 
required Ca(2+) for both its in vitro and cellular activities. ACER2 has 7 
putative transmembrane domains, and its amino (N) and carboxyl (C) termini were 
found to be oriented in the lumen of the Golgi complex and cytosol, 
respectively. ACER2 mutant (ACER2DeltaN36) lacking the N-terminal tail (the 
first 36 amino acid residues) exhibited undetectable activity and was 
mislocalized to the endoplasmic reticulum, suggesting that the N-terminal tail 
is necessary for both ACER2 activity and Golgi localization. ACER2 mutant 
(ACER2DeltaN13) lacking the first 13 residues was also mislocalized to the 
endoplasmic reticulum although it retained ceramidase activity. Overexpression 
of ACER2, ACER2DeltaN13, but not ACER2DeltaN36 increased the release of 
sphingosine 1-phosphate from cells, suggesting that its mislocalization does not 
affect the ability of ACER2 to regulate sphingosine 1-phosphate secretion. 
However, overexpression of ACER2 but not ACER2DeltaN13 or ACER2DeltaN36 
inhibited the glycosylation of integrin beta1 subunit and Lamp1, suggesting that 
its mistargeting abolishes the ability of ACER2 to regulation protein 
glycosylation. These data suggest that ACER2 has broad substrate specificity and 
requires Ca(2+) for its activity and that ACER2 has the cytosolic C terminus and 
luminal N terminus, which are essential for its activity, correct cellular 
localization, and regulation for protein glycosylation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.069203
PMCID: PMC2838321
PMID: 20089856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
