---
pmid: '35418675'
title: Structure of active human telomerase with telomere shelterin protein TPP1.
authors:
- Liu B
- He Y
- Wang Y
- Song H
- Zhou ZH
- Feigon J
journal: Nature
year: '2022'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC9912816
doi: 10.1038/s41586-022-04582-8
---

# Structure of active human telomerase with telomere shelterin protein TPP1.
**Authors:** Liu B, He Y, Wang Y, Song H, Zhou ZH, Feigon J
**Journal:** Nature (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41586-022-04582-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-04582-8)
**PMC:** [PMC9912816](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9912816/)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2022 Apr;604(7906):578-583. doi: 10.1038/s41586-022-04582-8. Epub 2022
 Apr 13.

Structure of active human telomerase with telomere shelterin protein TPP1.

Liu B(#)(1), He Y(#)(1)(2), Wang Y(1), Song H(1), Zhou ZH(2)(3), Feigon J(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, USA.
(3)California NanoSystems Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. feigon@mbi.ucla.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Human telomerase is a RNA-protein complex that extends the 3' end of linear 
chromosomes by synthesizing multiple copies of the telomeric repeat TTAGGG1. Its 
activity is a determinant of cancer progression, stem cell renewal and cellular 
aging2-5. Telomerase is recruited to telomeres and activated for telomere repeat 
synthesis by the telomere shelterin protein TPP16,7. Human telomerase has a 
bilobal structure with a catalytic core ribonuclear protein and a H and ACA box 
ribonuclear protein8,9. Here we report cryo-electron microscopy structures of 
human telomerase catalytic core of telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) 
and telomerase RNA (TER (also known as hTR)), and of telomerase with the 
shelterin protein TPP1. TPP1 forms a structured interface with the TERT-unique 
telomerase essential N-terminal domain (TEN) and the telomerase RAP motif (TRAP) 
that are unique to TERT, and conformational dynamics of TEN-TRAP are damped upon 
TPP1 binding, defining the requirements for recruitment and activation. The 
structures further reveal that the elements of TERT and TER that are involved in 
template and telomeric DNA handling-including the TEN domain and the TRAP-thumb 
helix channel-are largely structurally homologous to those in Tetrahymena 
telomerase10, and provide unique insights into the mechanism of telomerase 
activity. The binding site of the telomerase inhibitor BIBR153211,12 overlaps a 
critical interaction between the TER pseudoknot and the TERT thumb domain. 
Numerous mutations leading to telomeropathies13,14 are located at the TERT-TER 
and TEN-TRAP-TPP1 interfaces, highlighting the importance of TER-TERT and TPP1 
interactions for telomerase activity, recruitment and as drug targets.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-022-04582-8
PMCID: PMC9912816
PMID: 35418675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.
