---
pmid: '27086506'
title: 'HiQuant: Rapid Postquantification Analysis of Large-Scale MS-Generated Proteomics
  Data.'
authors:
- Bryan K
- Jarboui MA
- Raso C
- Bernal-Llinares M
- McCann B
- Rauch J
- Boldt K
- Lynn DJ
journal: J Proteome Res
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b01008
---

# HiQuant: Rapid Postquantification Analysis of Large-Scale MS-Generated Proteomics Data.
**Authors:** Bryan K, Jarboui MA, Raso C, Bernal-Llinares M, McCann B, Rauch J, Boldt K, Lynn DJ
**Journal:** J Proteome Res (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b01008](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b01008)

## Abstract

1. J Proteome Res. 2016 Jun 3;15(6):2072-9. doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b01008. 
Epub 2016 May 16.

HiQuant: Rapid Postquantification Analysis of Large-Scale MS-Generated 
Proteomics Data.

Bryan K(1), Jarboui MA(2), Raso C(3), Bernal-Llinares M(1), McCann B(3), Rauch 
J(3), Boldt K(2), Lynn DJ(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)EMBL Australia Biomedical Informatics Group, Infection & Immunity Theme, 
South Australian Health and Medical Research Institute , North Terrace, 
Adelaide, South Australia 5000, Australia.
(2)Medical Proteome Center Institute for Ophthalmic Research, Eberhard-Karls 
Universit채t T체bingen , N채gelestrasse 5, D-72074 T체bingen, Germany.
(3)Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin , Belfield, Dublin 4, 
Ireland.
(4)School of Medicine, Flinders University , Bedford Park, South Australia 5042, 
Australia.

Recent advances in mass-spectrometry-based proteomics are now facilitating 
ambitious large-scale investigations of the spatial and temporal dynamics of the 
proteome; however, the increasing size and complexity of these data sets is 
overwhelming current downstream computational methods, specifically those that 
support the postquantification analysis pipeline. Here we present HiQuant, a 
novel application that enables the design and execution of a postquantification 
workflow, including common data-processing steps, such as assay normalization 
and grouping, and experimental replicate quality control and statistical 
analysis. HiQuant also enables the interpretation of results generated from 
large-scale data sets by supporting interactive heatmap analysis and also the 
direct export to Cytoscape and Gephi, two leading network analysis platforms. 
HiQuant may be run via a user-friendly graphical interface and also supports 
complete one-touch automation via a command-line mode. We evaluate HiQuant's 
performance by analyzing a large-scale, complex interactome mapping data set and 
demonstrate a 200-fold improvement in the execution time over current methods. 
We also demonstrate HiQuant's general utility by analyzing proteome-wide 
quantification data generated from both a large-scale public tyrosine kinase 
siRNA knock-down study and an in-house investigation into the temporal dynamics 
of the KSR1 and KSR2 interactomes. Download HiQuant, sample data sets, and 
supporting documentation at http://hiquant.primesdb.eu .

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b01008
PMID: 27086506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
