---
pmid: '15470429'
title: Pleiotropy as a mechanism to stabilize cooperation.
authors:
- Foster KR
- Shaulsky G
- Strassmann JE
- Queller DC
- Thompson CR
journal: Nature
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature02894
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Pleiotropy as a mechanism to stabilize cooperation.
**Authors:** Foster KR, Shaulsky G, Strassmann JE, Queller DC, Thompson CR
**Journal:** Nature (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature02894](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature02894)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2004 Oct 7;431(7009):693-6. doi: 10.1038/nature02894.

Pleiotropy as a mechanism to stabilize cooperation.

Foster KR(1), Shaulsky G, Strassmann JE, Queller DC, Thompson CR.

Author information:
(1)Ecology and Evolution, Rice University, Houston, Texas 77005, USA. 
krfoster@rice.edu

Most genes affect many traits. This phenomenon, known as pleiotropy, is a major 
constraint on evolution because adaptive change in one trait may be prevented 
because it would compromise other traits affected by the same genes. Here we 
show that pleiotropy can have an unexpected effect and benefit one of the most 
enigmatic of adaptations--cooperation. A spectacular act of cooperation occurs 
in the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum, in which some cells die to form a 
stalk that holds the other cells aloft as reproductive spores. We have 
identified a gene, dimA, in D. discoideum that has two contrasting effects. It 
is required to receive the signalling molecule DIF-1 that causes differentiation 
into prestalk cells. Ignoring DIF-1 and not becoming prestalk should allow cells 
to cheat by avoiding the stalk. However, we find that in aggregations containing 
the wild-type cells, lack of the dimA gene results in exclusion from spores. 
This pleiotropic linkage of stalk and spore formation limits the potential for 
cheating in D. discoideum because defecting on prestalk cell production results 
in an even greater reduction in spores. We propose that the evolution of 
pleiotropic links between cheating and personal costs can stabilize cooperative 
adaptations.

DOI: 10.1038/nature02894
PMID: 15470429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
