---
pmid: '19188449'
title: hSirT1-dependent regulation of the PCAF-E2F1-p73 apoptotic pathway in response
  to DNA damage.
authors:
- Pediconi N
- Guerrieri F
- Vossio S
- Bruno T
- Belloni L
- Schinzari V
- Scisciani C
- Fanciulli M
- Levrero M
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2663319
doi: 10.1128/MCB.00552-08
---

# hSirT1-dependent regulation of the PCAF-E2F1-p73 apoptotic pathway in response to DNA damage.
**Authors:** Pediconi N, Guerrieri F, Vossio S, Bruno T, Belloni L, Schinzari V, Scisciani C, Fanciulli M, Levrero M
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.00552-08](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.00552-08)
**PMC:** [PMC2663319](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2663319/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Apr;29(8):1989-98. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00552-08. Epub 2009
Feb  2.

hSirT1-dependent regulation of the PCAF-E2F1-p73 apoptotic pathway in response 
to DNA damage.

Pediconi N(1), Guerrieri F, Vossio S, Bruno T, Belloni L, Schinzari V, Scisciani 
C, Fanciulli M, Levrero M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Gene Expression, Fondazione A Cesalpino, Viale del Policlinico 
155, 00161 Rome, Italy.

The NAD(+)-dependent histone deacetylase hSirT1 regulates cell survival and 
stress responses by inhibiting p53-, NF-kappaB-, and E2F1-dependent 
transcription. Here we show that the hSirT1/PCAF interaction controls the 
E2F1/p73 apoptotic pathway. hSirT1 represses E2F1-dependent P1p73 promoter 
activity in untreated cells and inhibits its activation in response to DNA 
damage. hSirT1, PCAF, and E2F1 are corecruited in vivo on theP1p73 promoter. 
hSirT1 deacetylates PCAF in vitro and modulates PCAF acetylation in vivo. In 
cells exposed to apoptotic DNA damage, nuclear NAD(+) levels decrease and 
inactivate hSirT1 without altering the hSirT1 interaction with PCAF and hSirT1 
binding to the P1p73 promoter. The reactivation of hSirT1 by pyruvate that 
increases the [NAD(+)]/[NADH] ratio completely abolished the DNA damage-induced 
activation of TAp73 expression, thus linking the modulation of chromatin-bound 
hSirT1 deacetylase activity by the intracellular redox state with P1p73 promoter 
activity. The release of PCAF from hSirT1 repression favors the assembly of 
transcriptionally active PCAF/E2F1 complexes onto the P1p73 promoter and 
p53-independent apoptosis. Our results identify hSirT1 and PCAF as potential 
targets to modulate tumor cell survival and chemoresistance irrespective of p53 
status.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00552-08
PMCID: PMC2663319
PMID: 19188449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
