---
pmid: '15448137'
title: Atf1-Pcr1-M26 complex links stress-activated MAPK and cAMP-dependent protein
  kinase pathways via chromatin remodeling of cgs2+.
authors:
- Davidson MK
- Shandilya HK
- Hirota K
- Ohta K
- Wahls WP
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC3141327
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M409079200
---

# Atf1-Pcr1-M26 complex links stress-activated MAPK and cAMP-dependent protein kinase pathways via chromatin remodeling of cgs2+.
**Authors:** Davidson MK, Shandilya HK, Hirota K, Ohta K, Wahls WP
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M409079200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M409079200)
**PMC:** [PMC3141327](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3141327/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Dec 3;279(49):50857-63. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M409079200. Epub
2004  Sep 23.

Atf1-Pcr1-M26 complex links stress-activated MAPK and cAMP-dependent protein 
kinase pathways via chromatin remodeling of cgs2+.

Davidson MK(1), Shandilya HK, Hirota K, Ohta K, Wahls WP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas for 
Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas 72205, USA.

Although co-ordinate interaction between different signal transduction pathways 
is essential for developmental decisions, interpathway connections are often 
obscured and difficult to identify due to cross-talk. Here signals from the 
fission yeast stress-activated MAPK Spc1 are shown to regulate Cgs2, a negative 
regulator of the cAMP-dependent protein kinase (protein kinase A) pathway. 
Pathway integration is achieved via Spc1-dependent binding of Atf1-Pcr1 
heterodimer to an M26 DNA site in the cgs2+ promoter, which remodels chromatin 
to regulate expression of cgs2+ and targets downstream of protein kinase A. This 
direct interpathway connection co-ordinates signals of nitrogen and carbon 
source depletion to affect a G0 cell-cycle checkpoint and sexual 
differentiation. The Atf1-Pcr1-M26 complex-dependent chromatin remodeling 
provides a molecular mechanism whereby Atf1-Pcr1 heterodimer can function 
differentially as either a transcriptional activator, or as a transcriptional 
repressor, or as an inducer of meiotic recombination. We also show that the 
Atf1-Pcr1-M26 complex functions as both an inducer and repressor of chromatin 
remodeling, which provides a way for various chromatin remodeling-dependent 
effector functions to be regulated.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M409079200
PMCID: PMC3141327
PMID: 15448137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Although co-ordinate interaction between different signal transduction pathways is essential for developmental decisions, interpathway connections are often obscured and difficult to identify due to cross-talk. Here signals from the fission yeast stress-activated MAPK Spc1 are shown to regulate Cgs2, a negative regulator of the cAMP-dependent protein kinase (protein kinase A) pathway. Pathway integration is achieved via Spc1-dependent binding of Atf1-Pcr1 heterodimer to an M26 DNA site in the cgs2 + promoter, which remodels chromatin to regulate expression of cgs2 + and targets downstream of protein kinase A. This direct interpathway connection co-ordinates signals of nitrogen and carbon source depletion to affect a G 0 cell-cycle checkpoint and sexual differentiation. The Atf1-Pcr1- M26 complex-dependent chromatin remodeling provides a molecular mechanism whereby Atf1-Pcr1 heterodimer can function differentially as either a transcriptional activator, or as a transcriptional repressor, or as an inducer of meiotic recombination. We also show that the Atf1-Pcr1- M26 complex functions as both an inducer and repressor of chromatin remodeling, which provides a way for various chromatin remodeling-dependent effector functions to be regulated.

RESULTS

A candidate gene approach for targets of Atf1-Pcr1 was used. We searched S. pombe genomic DNA sequence for genes that met two criteria: First, the genes should contain at least one copy of the M26 DNA site in the promoter region. Second, there should be some indication (experimental or hypothetical) that the genes have a role in sexual differentiation in response to nutritional stress conditions.

The cgs2 + ( pde1 + ) gene was selected as a good candidate for further study: It was identified in a screen for mutants unable to undergo normal meiosis ( 26 ) and independently in a screen for S. pombe cDNA clones that could suppress the heat-shock-sensitive phenotypes of ira Δ mutants of Saccharomyces cerevisiae ( 27 , 28 ). Cgs2 protein is a phosphodiesterase that has a major role in regulating the single cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) pathway of fission yeast ( 9 , 26 , 28 , 29 ). Cgs2 cleaves an essential cofactor (cyclic AMP) to negatively regulate PKA, which is itself a negative regulator of mating and meiosis. As a consequence, cgs2 Δ null mutants are partially sterile and are unable to undergo meiosis. They also c ontinue to grow in s tationary phase under stress conditions in which wild-type cells undergo a G 0 cell-cycle arrest ( 26 ). The presence of an M26 DNA site located at positions −66 to −72 of the cgs2 + promoter region ( Fig. 2 A ) suggested to us that Atf1-Pcr1 heterodimer (and the nitrogen stress-activated MAPK cascade) helps to regulate cgs2 + (and the energy-sensing PKA cascade) in response to nutritional deprivation.
