---
pmid: '9367673'
title: 'The human extracellular matrix gene 1 (ECM1): genomic structure, cDNA cloning,
  expression pattern, and chromosomal localization.'
authors:
- Smits P
- Ni J
- Feng P
- Wauters J
- Van Hul W
- Boutaibi ME
- Dillon PJ
- Merregaert J
journal: Genomics
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/geno.1997.4918
---

# The human extracellular matrix gene 1 (ECM1): genomic structure, cDNA cloning, expression pattern, and chromosomal localization.
**Authors:** Smits P, Ni J, Feng P, Wauters J, Van Hul W, Boutaibi ME, Dillon PJ, Merregaert J
**Journal:** Genomics (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1006/geno.1997.4918](https://doi.org/10.1006/geno.1997.4918)

## Abstract

1. Genomics. 1997 Nov 1;45(3):487-95. doi: 10.1006/geno.1997.4918.

The human extracellular matrix gene 1 (ECM1): genomic structure, cDNA cloning, 
expression pattern, and chromosomal localization.

Smits P(1), Ni J, Feng P, Wauters J, Van Hul W, Boutaibi ME, Dillon PJ, 
Merregaert J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Department of Medicine, Universitaire Instelling 
Antwerpen, Universiteitsplein 1, Wilrijk, 2610, Belgium.

The Ecm1 gene encodes an 85-kDa protein of unknown function that was originally 
identified as a secretory protein of the murine osteogenic stromal cell line 
MN7. This paper describes the isolation of a genomic clone containing the human 
ECM1 gene from a chromosome 1 cosmid library and the characterization of its 
exon-intron structure. The protein coding region comprises 10 exons. The ECM1 
gene maps at chromosome 1q21 outside the epidermal differentiation complex 
region. The ECM1 gene appears to be expressed as a 1.8-kb transcript 
predominantly in placenta and heart, while an additional 1.4-kb alternatively 
spliced message was detected in tonsils. The full-length human ECM1 transcript 
contains 1838 bp and has an overall homology of 79.6% with the mouse Ecm1 cDNA. 
This transcript codes for a protein of 540 amino acids that is 69.4% identical 
and 81.3% similar to the corresponding mouse protein. The alternatively spliced 
variant, 1450 bp long, encodes a protein of 415 amino acids.

Copyright Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/geno.1997.4918
PMID: 9367673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
