---
pmid: '12666205'
title: Hes1 but not Hes5 regulates an astrocyte versus oligodendrocyte fate choice
  in glial restricted precursors.
authors:
- Wu Y
- Liu Y
- Levine EM
- Rao MS
journal: Dev Dyn
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/dvdy.10278
---

# Hes1 but not Hes5 regulates an astrocyte versus oligodendrocyte fate choice in glial restricted precursors.
**Authors:** Wu Y, Liu Y, Levine EM, Rao MS
**Journal:** Dev Dyn (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1002/dvdy.10278](https://doi.org/10.1002/dvdy.10278)

## Abstract

1. Dev Dyn. 2003 Apr;226(4):675-89. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.10278.

Hes1 but not Hes5 regulates an astrocyte versus oligodendrocyte fate choice in 
glial restricted precursors.

Wu Y(1), Liu Y, Levine EM, Rao MS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Utah School of 
Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.

To determine the role of Hes genes in the differentiation process of 
neuroepithelial (NEP) cells to glial restricted precursor cells (GRPs) and 
subsequently GRPs to oligodendrocytes and astrocytes, we have examined the 
effects of Hes1 and Hes5 on glial differentiation. We find that both Hes1 and 
Hes5 are expressed by GRPs and that Hes1 can drive GRPs to an astrocyte cell 
fate at the expense of oligodendrocyte differentiation. Overexpression of Hes1 
in GRPs results in the up-regulation of the astrocyte markers glial fibrillary 
acidic protein and CD44 and the down-regulation of oligodendrocyte markers 
myelin proteolipid protein/DM20, GalC, and CNPase. Transcription factors 
involved in oligodendrocyte differentiation, such as Nkx2.2, Olig1, and Mash1, 
are also down-regulated in Hes1-overexpressing cells. The effect of Hes1 on 
gliogenesis is stage-specific as Hes1 does not direct NEP cells to an astrocytic 
fate. In contrast to Hes1, Hes5 does not promote astrocyte differentiation. 
Instead, it inhibits both astrocyte and oligodendrocyte differentiation. 
Overexpression of Notch1 has an effect on gliogenesis similar to that of Hes1 
and the mRNA levels of Hes1 are up-regulated in cells overexpressing Notch1, 
suggesting that Notch1 could be an upstream activator of Hes1.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/dvdy.10278
PMID: 12666205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
