---
pmid: '19017795'
title: An endothelin-1 switch specifies maxillomandibular identity.
authors:
- Sato T
- Kurihara Y
- Asai R
- Kawamura Y
- Tonami K
- Uchijima Y
- Heude E
- Ekker M
- Levi G
- Kurihara H
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2596216
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0807345105
---

# An endothelin-1 switch specifies maxillomandibular identity.
**Authors:** Sato T, Kurihara Y, Asai R, Kawamura Y, Tonami K, Uchijima Y, Heude E, Ekker M, Levi G, Kurihara H
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0807345105](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0807345105)
**PMC:** [PMC2596216](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2596216/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Dec 2;105(48):18806-11. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0807345105. Epub 2008 Nov 18.

An endothelin-1 switch specifies maxillomandibular identity.

Sato T(1), Kurihara Y, Asai R, Kawamura Y, Tonami K, Uchijima Y, Heude E, Ekker 
M, Levi G, Kurihara H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry and Metabolism, Graduate School of 
Medicine, University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Articulated jaws are highly conserved structures characteristic of gnathostome 
evolution. Epithelial-mesenchymal interactions within the first pharyngeal arch 
(PA1) instruct cephalic neural crest cells (CNCCs) to form the different 
skeletal elements of the jaws. The endothelin-1 (Edn1)/endothelin receptor 
type-A (Ednra)-->Dlx5/6-->Hand2 signaling pathway is necessary for lower jaw 
formation. Here, we show that the Edn1 signaling is sufficient for the 
conversion of the maxillary arch to mandibular identity. Constitutive activation 
of Ednra induced the transformation of upper jaw, maxillary, structures into 
lower jaw, mandibular, structures with duplicated Meckel's cartilage and 
dermatocranial jaws constituted by 4 dentary bones. Misexpression of Hand2 in 
the Ednra domain caused a similar transformation. Skeletal transformations are 
accompanied by neuromuscular remodeling. Ednra is expressed by most CNCCs, but 
its constitutive activation affects predominantly PA1. We conclude that after 
migration CNCCs are not all equivalent, suggesting that their specification 
occurs in sequential steps. Also, we show that, within PA1, CNCCs are competent 
to form both mandibular and maxillary structures and that an Edn1 switch is 
responsible for the choice of either morphogenetic program.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0807345105
PMCID: PMC2596216
PMID: 19017795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
