---
pmid: '1718266'
title: Molecular basis of acid sphingomyelinase deficiency in a patient with Niemann-Pick
  disease type A.
authors:
- Ferlinz K
- Hurwitz R
- Sandhoff K
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '1991'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0006-291x(91)91697-b
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Molecular basis of acid sphingomyelinase deficiency in a patient with Niemann-Pick disease type A.
**Authors:** Ferlinz K, Hurwitz R, Sandhoff K
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0006-291x(91)91697-b](https://doi.org/10.1016/0006-291x(91)91697-b)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1991 Sep 30;179(3):1187-91. doi: 
10.1016/0006-291x(91)91697-b.

Molecular basis of acid sphingomyelinase deficiency in a patient with 
Niemann-Pick disease type A.

Ferlinz K(1), Hurwitz R, Sandhoff K.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Organische Chemie und Biochemie, Universität Bonn, Germany.

Niemann-Pick disease, an autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disorder, is 
caused by deficiency of acid sphingomyelinase. Sequence analysis of mRNA and 
genomic DNA of fibroblasts of a type A patient showed a single G1729 to A 
nucleotide transition. This mutation resulted in a substitution of serine for 
normal glycine at position 577 of the peptide sequence. Amplification of the 
genomic DNA region around the mutation and subsequent sequencing yielded 
exclusively the same base change found at the cDNA level. Expression studies 
with this abnormal cDNA in COS-1 cells revealed a complete loss of enzymatic 
activity of the mutated protein. These findings indicate that this mutation is 
responsible for the clinical disease of the patient.

DOI: 10.1016/0006-291x(91)91697-b
PMID: 1718266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
