---
pmid: '15671068'
title: Nesprin-2 is a multi-isomeric protein that binds lamin and emerin at the nuclear
  envelope and forms a subcellular network in skeletal muscle.
authors:
- Zhang Q
- Ragnauth CD
- Skepper JN
- Worth NF
- Warren DT
- Roberts RG
- Weissberg PL
- Ellis JA
- Shanahan CM
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.01642
---

# Nesprin-2 is a multi-isomeric protein that binds lamin and emerin at the nuclear envelope and forms a subcellular network in skeletal muscle.
**Authors:** Zhang Q, Ragnauth CD, Skepper JN, Worth NF, Warren DT, Roberts RG, Weissberg PL, Ellis JA, Shanahan CM
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.01642](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.01642)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2005 Feb 15;118(Pt 4):673-87. doi: 10.1242/jcs.01642. Epub 2005
Jan  25.

Nesprin-2 is a multi-isomeric protein that binds lamin and emerin at the nuclear 
envelope and forms a subcellular network in skeletal muscle.

Zhang Q(1), Ragnauth CD, Skepper JN, Worth NF, Warren DT, Roberts RG, Weissberg 
PL, Ellis JA, Shanahan CM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, ACCI, Box 110, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Hills Road, 
Cambridge, CB2 2QQ, UK.

Nesprin-2 is a multi-isomeric, modular protein composed of variable numbers of 
spectrin-repeats linked to a C-terminal transmembrane domain and/or to 
N-terminal paired calponin homology (CH) domains. The smaller isoforms of 
nesprin-2 co-localize with and bind lamin A and emerin at the inner nuclear 
envelope (NE). In SW-13 cells, which lack lamin A/C, nesprin-2 epitopes and 
emerin were both mislocalized and formed aggregates in the endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER). The larger isoforms and other CH-domain-containing isoforms co-localize 
with heterochromatin within the nucleus and are also present at the outer NE and 
in multiple cytoplasmic compartments. Nesprin-2 isoforms relocalize during in 
vitro muscle differentiation of C2C12 myoblasts to the sarcomere of myotubes. 
Immunogold electron microscopy using antibodies specific for three different 
epitopes detected nesprin-2 isoforms at multiple locations including 
intranuclear foci, both membranes of the NE, mitochondria, sarcomeric structures 
and plasma membrane foci. In adult skeletal muscle, confocal immunolocalization 
studies demonstrated that nesprin-2 epitopes were present at the Z-line and were 
also associated with the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) in close apposition to 
SERCA2. These data suggest that nesprin-2 isoforms form a linking network 
between organelles and the actin cytoskeleton and thus may be important for 
maintaining sub-cellular spatial organisation. Moreover, its association at the 
NE with lamin and emerin, the genes mutated in Emery-Dreifuss muscular 
dystrophy, suggests a mechanism to explain how disruption of the NE leads to 
muscle dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.01642
PMID: 15671068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
