---
pmid: '21190736'
title: The non-conventional MHC class I MR1 molecule controls infection by Klebsiella
  pneumoniae in mice.
authors:
- Georgel P
- Radosavljevic M
- Macquin C
- Bahram S
journal: Mol Immunol
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2010.12.002
---

# The non-conventional MHC class I MR1 molecule controls infection by Klebsiella pneumoniae in mice.
**Authors:** Georgel P, Radosavljevic M, Macquin C, Bahram S
**Journal:** Mol Immunol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molimm.2010.12.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molimm.2010.12.002)

## Abstract

1. Mol Immunol. 2011 Feb;48(5):769-75. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2010.12.002. Epub
2010  Dec 28.

The non-conventional MHC class I MR1 molecule controls infection by Klebsiella 
pneumoniae in mice.

Georgel P(1), Radosavljevic M, Macquin C, Bahram S.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire d'Immunogénétique Moléculaire Humaine, Centre de Recherche 
d'Immunologie et d'Hématologie, Faculté de Médecine, Université de Strasbourg, 4 
rue Kirschleger, 67085 Strasbourg Cedex, France.

As opposed to the well established role of MHC-linked, polymorphic, class I 
(MHC-I) genes in adaptive immunity, a universal role for non-conventional MHC-I 
is unknown, thus requiring a case-by-case study. The MHC unlinked, monomorphic, 
but β₂microglobulin (β₂m)-associated "MHC class I related" MR1 molecule 
interacts with a semi-invariant TCR. The pathophysiology of this interaction or 
more importantly of this peculiar MHC-I remains mostly unknown. Recently it was 
shown that β₂m deficient mice were more susceptible to infection by Klebsiella 
pneumoniae, a widely spread Gram-negative bacteria that causes diverse and often 
severe ailments in man. Here we demonstrate, using both an in vivo imaging 
system and survival tests, the increased susceptibility to K. pneumoniae (but 
not to several other Gram negative bacteria) of MR1 deficient mice. This is 
accompanied by a consequent change in body temperature and systemic cytokine 
profile. Hence MR1 controls K. pneumoniae infection in vivo.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2010.12.002
PMID: 21190736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
