---
pmid: '16237198'
title: Identification of the sequence encoding N-acetylneuraminate-9-phosphate phosphatase.
authors:
- Maliekal P
- Vertommen D
- Delpierre G
- Van Schaftingen E
journal: Glycobiology
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwj050
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Identification of the sequence encoding N-acetylneuraminate-9-phosphate phosphatase.
**Authors:** Maliekal P, Vertommen D, Delpierre G, Van Schaftingen E
**Journal:** Glycobiology (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1093/glycob/cwj050](https://doi.org/10.1093/glycob/cwj050)

## Abstract

1. Glycobiology. 2006 Feb;16(2):165-72. doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwj050. Epub 2005 Oct
 19.

Identification of the sequence encoding N-acetylneuraminate-9-phosphate 
phosphatase.

Maliekal P(1), Vertommen D, Delpierre G, Van Schaftingen E.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Physiological Chemistry, Université Catholique de Louvain and 
the Christian de Duve Institute of Cellular Pathology, Avenue Hippocrate 75, 
B-1200 Brussels, Belgium.

The synthesis of N-acetylneuraminate (Neu5Ac), the main form of sialic acid, 
proceeds in vertebrates through the condensation of N-acetylmannosamine 
6-phosphate and phosphoenolpyruvate to Neu5Ac-9-phosphate, followed by the 
dephosphorylation of the latter by a specific phosphatase. The sequence encoding 
Neu5Ac-9-phosphate phosphatase (Neu5Ac-9-Pase; E.C. 3.1.3.29) has not been 
determined until now. In this work, we have purified Neu5Ac-9-Pase more than 
1000-fold from rat liver. Its dependency on Mg2+ and the fact that it was 
inhibited by vanadate and Ca2+ suggested that it belonged to the haloacid 
dehalogenase family of phosphatases. Trypsin digestion and mass spectrometry 
analysis of a polypeptide of about 30 kDa that co-eluted with the activity in 
the last purification step indicated the presence of a protein designated 
"haloacid dehalogenase-like hydrolase domain containing 4." The human ortholog 
of this protein is encoded by a 2-exon gene present on chromosome 20p11. The 
human protein was overexpressed in Escherichia coli as a fusion protein with a 
polyHis tag and purified to homogeneity. The recombinant enzyme displayed a 
>230-fold higher catalytic efficiency on Neu5Ac-9-phosphate than on its second 
best substrate. Its properties were similar to those of the enzyme purified from 
rat liver. Neu5Ac inhibited the enzymatic activity by 50% at 15 mM, indicating 
that no significant inhibition is exerted at physiological concentrations of 
Neu5Ac. The identification of the gene encoding Neu5Ac-9-Pase will facilitate 
studies aimed at testing its potential implication in unexplained forms of 
glycosylation deficiency.

DOI: 10.1093/glycob/cwj050
PMID: 16237198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
