---
pmid: '14532270'
title: A product of the human gene adjacent to parkin is a component of Lewy bodies
  and suppresses Pael receptor-induced cell death.
authors:
- Imai Y
- Soda M
- Murakami T
- Shoji M
- Abe K
- Takahashi R
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M309655200
---

# A product of the human gene adjacent to parkin is a component of Lewy bodies and suppresses Pael receptor-induced cell death.
**Authors:** Imai Y, Soda M, Murakami T, Shoji M, Abe K, Takahashi R
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M309655200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M309655200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Dec 19;278(51):51901-10. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M309655200. Epub 
2003 Oct 7.

A product of the human gene adjacent to parkin is a component of Lewy bodies and 
suppresses Pael receptor-induced cell death.

Imai Y(1), Soda M, Murakami T, Shoji M, Abe K, Takahashi R.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Motor System Neurodegeneration, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, 
Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

Parkin, a RING-type ubiquitin ligase, is the product of the gene responsible for 
autosomal recessive juvenile parkinsonism. A reverse strand gene located 
upstream of the parkin gene in the human genome has been identified. The gene 
product, termed Glup/PACRG, forms a large molecular chaperone complex containing 
heat shock proteins 70 and 90 and chaperonin components. Glup suppressed cell 
death induced by accumulation of unfolded Pael receptor (Pael-R), a substrate of 
Parkin. On the other hand, Glup facilitated the formation of inclusions 
consisting of Pael-R, molecular chaperones, protein degradation molecules, and 
Glup itself, when proteasome is inhibited. Glup knockdown attenuated the 
formation of Pael-R inclusions, which resulted in the promotion of cell death 
with extensive vacuolization. Moreover, Glup turned out to be a component of 
Lewy bodies in Parkinson's disease cases. These data suggest that Glup may play 
an important role in the formation of Lewy bodies and protection of dopaminergic 
neurons against Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M309655200
PMID: 14532270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
