---
pmid: '23410832'
title: Genetic networks inducing invasive growth in Saccharomyces cerevisiae identified
  through systematic genome-wide overexpression.
authors:
- Shively CA
- Eckwahl MJ
- Dobry CJ
- Mellacheruvu D
- Nesvizhskii A
- Kumar A
journal: Genetics
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3606104
doi: 10.1534/genetics.112.147876
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Genetic networks inducing invasive growth in Saccharomyces cerevisiae identified through systematic genome-wide overexpression.
**Authors:** Shively CA, Eckwahl MJ, Dobry CJ, Mellacheruvu D, Nesvizhskii A, Kumar A
**Journal:** Genetics (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1534/genetics.112.147876](https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.112.147876)
**PMC:** [PMC3606104](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3606104/)

## Abstract

1. Genetics. 2013 Apr;193(4):1297-310. doi: 10.1534/genetics.112.147876. Epub
2013  Feb 14.

Genetic networks inducing invasive growth in Saccharomyces cerevisiae identified 
through systematic genome-wide overexpression.

Shively CA(1), Eckwahl MJ, Dobry CJ, Mellacheruvu D, Nesvizhskii A, Kumar A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1048, USA.

The budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae can respond to nutritional and 
environmental stress by implementing a morphogenetic program wherein cells 
elongate and interconnect, forming pseudohyphal filaments. This growth 
transition has been studied extensively as a model signaling system with 
similarity to processes of hyphal development that are linked with virulence in 
related fungal pathogens. Classic studies have identified core pseudohyphal 
growth signaling modules in yeast; however, the scope of regulatory networks 
that control yeast filamentation is broad and incompletely defined. Here, we 
address the genetic basis of yeast pseudohyphal growth by implementing a 
systematic analysis of 4909 genes for overexpression phenotypes in a filamentous 
strain of S. cerevisiae. Our results identify 551 genes conferring exaggerated 
invasive growth upon overexpression under normal vegetative growth conditions. 
This cohort includes 79 genes lacking previous phenotypic characterization. 
Pathway enrichment analysis of the gene set identifies networks mediating 
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling and cell cycle progression. In 
particular, overexpression screening suggests that nuclear export of the 
osmoresponsive MAPK Hog1p may enhance pseudohyphal growth. The function of 
nuclear Hog1p is unclear from previous studies, but our analysis using a 
nuclear-depleted form of Hog1p is consistent with a role for nuclear Hog1p in 
repressing pseudohyphal growth. Through epistasis and deletion studies, we also 
identified genetic relationships with the G2 cyclin Clb2p and phenotypes in 
filamentation induced by S-phase arrest. In sum, this work presents a unique and 
informative resource toward understanding the breadth of genes and pathways that 
collectively constitute the molecular basis of filamentation.

DOI: 10.1534/genetics.112.147876
PMCID: PMC3606104
PMID: 23410832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
