---
pmid: '27291868'
title: Characterization of a Relatively Malignant Form of Osteopetrosis Caused by
  a Novel Mutation in the PLEKHM1 Gene.
authors:
- Bo T
- Yan F
- Guo J
- Lin X
- Zhang H
- Guan Q
- Wang H
- Fang L
- Gao L
- Zhao J
- Xu C
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2885
---

# Characterization of a Relatively Malignant Form of Osteopetrosis Caused by a Novel Mutation in the PLEKHM1 Gene.
**Authors:** Bo T, Yan F, Guo J, Lin X, Zhang H, Guan Q, Wang H, Fang L, Gao L, Zhao J, Xu C
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jbmr.2885](https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.2885)

## Abstract

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2016 Nov;31(11):1979-1987. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2885. Epub 2016
 Jul 13.

Characterization of a Relatively Malignant Form of Osteopetrosis Caused by a 
Novel Mutation in the PLEKHM1 Gene.

Bo T(1)(2), Yan F(3), Guo J(2)(4), Lin X(5), Zhang H(2)(4), Guan Q(2)(4), Wang 
H(2)(4), Fang L(2)(4), Gao L(2)(4), Zhao J(2)(4), Xu C(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Scientific Center, Shandong Provincial Hospital affiliated to Shandong 
University, Jinan, Shandong, China.
(2)Institute of Endocrinology, Shandong Academy of Clinical Medicine, Jinan, 
Shandong, China.
(3)Department of Pain Management, Shandong Provincial Hospital affiliated to 
Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China.
(4)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shandong Provincial Hospital 
affiliated to Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China.
(5)Pathology Department, Shandong Provincial Hospital affiliated to Shandong 
University, Jinan, Shandong, China.

Osteopetrosis (OMIM: 611497), literally "stone bone," is a group of inherited 
bone disorders characterized by increased skeletal mass due to defective 
osteoclast function. A patient who reported a history of frequent fractures, 
weakness and fatigue was admitted to our hospital in 2011. The patient presented 
with the typical features of osteopetrosis: fractures after minor trauma, early 
tooth loss, anemia, hepatosplenomegaly, and a generalized increase in bone 
mineral density (BMD). Aside from his father's complaint of excessive tooth 
loss, his mother, two sisters, son, and daughter were healthy. Blood samples of 
the family members were drawn for genetic analyses. The entire coding region and 
adjacent splice sites of the pleckstrin homology domain-containing family M 
(with RUN domain) member 1 (PLEKHM1) gene were sequenced. One mutation, a 
heterozygous deletion mutation in exon 11 (c.3051_3052delCA), was identified in 
the patient but not in his relatives. The mutation leads to a translation 
product with a highly impaired Rubicon homology domain. Co-immunoprecipitation 
and immunofluorescence analyses using HEK293 cells showed that overexpression of 
a PLEKHM1 CA-deletion mutant resulted in a dramatic decrease in the interaction 
between PLEKHM1 and the small GTPase Rab7 compared to wild-type PLEKHM1. The 
normal processes of endocytosis and autophagy were disturbed in cells expressing 
the mutant (transfected HEK293 and U937 cells), as indicated by epidermal growth 
factor receptor (EGFR) degradation and an altered LC3-I/II ratio, respectively, 
which may lead to a defect in osteoclast function. A four-year follow-up study 
of the patient showed that the PLEKHM1-dependent osteopetrosis was relatively 
malignant, with significant symptoms of pancytopenia and hepatosplenomegaly. © 
2016 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

© 2016 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.2885
PMID: 27291868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
