---
pmid: '11278489'
title: Biochemical characterization of the reverse activity of rat brain ceramidase.
  A CoA-independent and fumonisin B1-insensitive ceramide synthase.
authors:
- El Bawab S
- Birbes H
- Roddy P
- Szulc ZM
- Bielawska A
- Hannun YA
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M009331200
---

# Biochemical characterization of the reverse activity of rat brain ceramidase. A CoA-independent and fumonisin B1-insensitive ceramide synthase.
**Authors:** El Bawab S, Birbes H, Roddy P, Szulc ZM, Bielawska A, Hannun YA
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M009331200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M009331200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 May 18;276(20):16758-66. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M009331200. Epub 
2001 Feb 8.

Biochemical characterization of the reverse activity of rat brain ceramidase. A 
CoA-independent and fumonisin B1-insensitive ceramide synthase.

El Bawab S(1), Birbes H, Roddy P, Szulc ZM, Bielawska A, Hannun YA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, South Carolina 29425, USA.

We have previously purified a membrane-bound ceramidase from rat brain and 
recently cloned the human homologue. We also observed that the same enzyme is 
able to catalyze the reverse reaction of ceramide synthesis. To obtain insight 
into the biochemistry of this enzyme, we characterized in this study this 
reverse activity. Using sphingosine and palmitic acid as substrates, the enzyme 
exhibited Michaelis-Menten kinetics; however, the enzyme did not utilize 
palmitoyl-CoA as substrate. Also, the activity was not inhibited in vitro and in 
cells by fumonisin B1, an inhibitor of the CoA-dependent ceramide synthase. The 
enzyme showed a narrow pH optimum in the neutral range, and there was very low 
activity in the alkaline range. Substrate specificity studies were performed, 
and the enzyme showed the highest activity with d-erythro-sphingosine (Km of 
0.16 mol %, and Vmax of 0.3 micromol/min/mg), but d-erythro-dihydrosphingosine 
and the three unnatural stereoisomers of sphingosine were poor substrates. The 
specificity for the fatty acid was also studied, and the highest activity was 
observed for myristic acid with a Km of 1.7 mol % and a Vmax of 0.63 
micromol/min/mg. Kinetic studies were performed to investigate the mechanism of 
the reaction, and Lineweaver-Burk plots indicated a sequential mechanism. Two 
competitive inhibitors of the two substrates were identified, 
l-erythro-sphingosine and myristaldehyde, and inhibition studies indicated that 
the reaction followed a random sequential mechanism. The effect of lipids were 
also tested. Most of these lipids showed moderate inhibition, whereas the 
effects of phosphatidic acid and cardiolipin were more potent with total 
inhibition at around 2.5-5 mol %. Paradoxically, cardiolipin stimulated 
ceramidase activity. These results define the biochemical characteristics of 
this reverse activity. The results are discussed in view of a possible 
regulation of this enzyme by the intracellular pH or by an interaction with 
cardiolipin and/or phosphatidic acid.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M009331200
PMID: 11278489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
