---
pmid: '9286711'
title: Localization of the squalene epoxidase gene (SQLE) to human chromosome region
  8q24.1.
authors:
- Nagai M
- Sakakibara J
- Wakui K
- Fukushima Y
- Igarashi S
- Tsuji S
- Arakawa M
- Ono T
journal: Genomics
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/geno.1997.4825
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Localization of the squalene epoxidase gene (SQLE) to human chromosome region 8q24.1.
**Authors:** Nagai M, Sakakibara J, Wakui K, Fukushima Y, Igarashi S, Tsuji S, Arakawa M, Ono T
**Journal:** Genomics (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1006/geno.1997.4825](https://doi.org/10.1006/geno.1997.4825)

## Abstract

1. Genomics. 1997 Aug 15;44(1):141-3. doi: 10.1006/geno.1997.4825.

Localization of the squalene epoxidase gene (SQLE) to human chromosome region 
8q24.1.

Nagai M(1), Sakakibara J, Wakui K, Fukushima Y, Igarashi S, Tsuji S, Arakawa M, 
Ono T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Niigata University School of Medicine, Japan.

Squalene epoxidase (EC 1.14.99.7) catalyzes the first oxygenation step in sterol 
biosynthesis and is suggested to be one of the rate-limiting enzymes in this 
pathway. We previously isolated the mammalian squalene epoxidase cDNAs and 
demonstrated the transcriptional regulation of human squalene epoxidase by 
sterols and inhibitors. The present study was undertaken to determine the 
chromosomal mapping of the human squalene epoxidase gene (SQLE). PCR evidence 
localizes human SQLE to chromosome 8 by using the NIGMS (National Institute of 
General Medical Sciences) Human/Rodent Somatic Cell Hybrid Mapping Panel 2 as 
template. To refine the localization of human SQLE further, PCR on the Stanford 
G3 Radiation Hybrid Panel was performed. The result shows that human SQLE is 
most tightly linked to D8S508, which is reported to be located at 8q24.13-qter 
(lod score 7.87). Moreover, fluorescence in situ hybridization also maps human 
SQLE to 8q24.1.

DOI: 10.1006/geno.1997.4825
PMID: 9286711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
