---
pmid: '8567683'
title: The human purH gene product, 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide
  formyltransferase/IMP cyclohydrolase. Cloning, sequencing, expression, purification,
  kinetic analysis, and domain mapping.
authors:
- Rayl EA
- Moroson BA
- Beardsley GP
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.4.2225
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The human purH gene product, 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide formyltransferase/IMP cyclohydrolase. Cloning, sequencing, expression, purification, kinetic analysis, and domain mapping.
**Authors:** Rayl EA, Moroson BA, Beardsley GP
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.271.4.2225](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.271.4.2225)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jan 26;271(4):2225-33. doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.4.2225.

The human purH gene product, 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide 
formyltransferase/IMP cyclohydrolase. Cloning, sequencing, expression, 
purification, kinetic analysis, and domain mapping.

Rayl EA(1), Moroson BA, Beardsley GP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06510, USA.

We report here the cloning and sequencing of the cDNA, purification, steady 
state kinetic analysis, and truncation mapping studies of the human 
5-aminoimidazole- 4-carboxamide ribonucleotide formyltransferase/IMP 
cyclohydrolase (AICARFT/IMPCHase). These steps of de novo purine biosynthesis, 
respectively. In all species of both prokaryotes and eukaryotes studied, these 
two activities are present on a single bifunctional polypeptide encoded on the 
purH gene. The human purH cDNA is 1776 base pairs in length encoding for a 
591-amino acid polypeptic (Mr = 64,425). The human and avian purH cDNAs are 75 
and 81% similar on the nucleotide and amino acid sequence level, respectively. 
The Km values for AICAR and (6R,6S)10-formyltetrahydrofolate are 16.8 microM +/- 
1.5 and 60.2 microM +/- 5.0, respectively, for the cloned, purified human 
enzyme. A 10-amino acid sequence within the COOH-terminal portion of human 
AICARFT/IMPCHase has some degree of homology to a previously noted "folate 
binding site." Site directed mutagenesis studies indicate that this sequence 
plays no role in enzymatic activity. We have constructed truncation mutants 
which demonstrate that each of the two enzyme activities can be expressed 
independent of the other. IMPCHase and AICARFT activities are located within the 
NH2-terminal 223 and COOH-terminal 406 amino acids, respectively. The truncation 
mutant possessing AICARFT activity displays steady state kinetic parameters 
identical to those of the holoenzyme.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.4.2225
PMID: 8567683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
