---
pmid: '24200403'
title: The role of EDEM2 compared with EDEM1 in ricin transport from the endoplasmic
  reticulum to the cytosol.
authors:
- Słomińska-Wojewódzka M
- Pawlik A
- Sokołowska I
- Antoniewicz J
- Węgrzyn G
- Sandvig K
journal: Biochem J
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1042/BJ20130155
---

# The role of EDEM2 compared with EDEM1 in ricin transport from the endoplasmic reticulum to the cytosol.
**Authors:** Słomińska-Wojewódzka M, Pawlik A, Sokołowska I, Antoniewicz J, Węgrzyn G, Sandvig K
**Journal:** Biochem J (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BJ20130155](https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20130155)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2014 Feb 1;457(3):485-96. doi: 10.1042/BJ20130155.

The role of EDEM2 compared with EDEM1 in ricin transport from the endoplasmic 
reticulum to the cytosol.

Słomińska-Wojewódzka M(1), Pawlik A(1), Sokołowska I(1), Antoniewicz J(1), 
Węgrzyn G(1), Sandvig K.

Author information:
(1)*Department of Molecular Biology, University of Gdańsk, 80-308 Gdańsk, 
Poland.

EDEM1 [ER (endoplasmic reticulum)-degradation-enhancing α-mannosidase I-like 
protein 1] and EDEM2 are crucial regulators of ERAD (ER-associated degradation) 
that extracts non-native glycoproteins from the calnexin chaperone system. Ricin 
is a potent plant cytotoxin composed of an A-chain (RTA) connected by a 
disulfide bond to a cell-binding lectin B-chain (RTB). After endocytic uptake, 
the toxin is transported retrogradely to the ER, where the enzymatically active 
RTA is translocated to the cytosol in a similar manner as misfolded ER proteins. 
This transport is promoted by EDEM1. In the present study we report that EDEM2 
is also involved in ricin retrotranslocation out of the ER. However, the role of 
EDEM1 and EDEM2 in ricin transport to the cytosol seems to differ. EDEM2 
promotes ricin retrotranslocation irrespectively of ER translocon accessibility; 
moreover, co-immunoprecipitation and pull-down studies revealed that more ricin 
can interact with EDEM2 in comparison with EDEM1. On the other hand, 
interactions of both lectins with RTA are dependent on the structure of the RTA. 
Thus our data display a newly discovered role for EDEM2. Moreover, analysis of 
the involvement of EDEM1 and EDEM2 in ricin retrotranslocation to the cytosol 
may provide crucial information about general mechanisms of the recognition of 
ERAD substrates in the ER.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20130155
PMID: 24200403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
