---
pmid: '17125737'
title: Angiogenin-induced protein kinase B/Akt activation is necessary for angiogenesis
  but is independent of nuclear translocation of angiogenin in HUVE cells.
authors:
- Kim HM
- Kang DK
- Kim HY
- Kang SS
- Chang SI
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.11.047
---

# Angiogenin-induced protein kinase B/Akt activation is necessary for angiogenesis but is independent of nuclear translocation of angiogenin in HUVE cells.
**Authors:** Kim HM, Kang DK, Kim HY, Kang SS, Chang SI
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.11.047](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.11.047)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Jan 12;352(2):509-13. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.11.047. Epub 2006 Nov 17.

Angiogenin-induced protein kinase B/Akt activation is necessary for angiogenesis 
but is independent of nuclear translocation of angiogenin in HUVE cells.

Kim HM(1), Kang DK, Kim HY, Kang SS, Chang SI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju 361-763, 
Republic of Korea.

Angiogenin, a potent angiogenic factor, binds to endothelial cells and is 
endocytosed and rapidly translocated to and concentrated in the nucleolus where 
it binds to DNA. In this study, we report that angiogenin induces transient 
phosphorylation of protein kinase B/Akt in cultured human umbilical vein 
endothelial (HUVE) cells. LY294002 inhibits the angiogenin-induced protein 
kinase B/Akt activation and also angiogenin-induced cell migration in vitro as 
well as angiogenesis in chick embryo chorioallantoic membrane in vivo without 
affecting nuclear translocation of angiogenin in HUVE cells. These results 
suggest that cross-talk between angiogenin and protein kinase B/Akt signaling 
pathways is essential for angiogenin-induced angiogenesis in vitro and in vivo, 
and that angiogenin-induced PKB/Akt activation is independent of nuclear 
translocation of angiogenin in HUVE cells.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.11.047
PMID: 17125737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
