---
pmid: '14610074'
title: Aurora-B phosphorylation in vitro identifies a residue of survivin that is
  essential for its localization and binding to inner centromere protein (INCENP)
  in vivo.
authors:
- Wheatley SP
- Henzing AJ
- Dodson H
- Khaled W
- Earnshaw WC
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M311299200
---

# Aurora-B phosphorylation in vitro identifies a residue of survivin that is essential for its localization and binding to inner centromere protein (INCENP) in vivo.
**Authors:** Wheatley SP, Henzing AJ, Dodson H, Khaled W, Earnshaw WC
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M311299200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M311299200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 13;279(7):5655-60. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M311299200. Epub
2003  Nov 10.

Aurora-B phosphorylation in vitro identifies a residue of survivin that is 
essential for its localization and binding to inner centromere protein (INCENP) 
in vivo.

Wheatley SP(1), Henzing AJ, Dodson H, Khaled W, Earnshaw WC.

Author information:
(1)Chromosome Structure Laboratory, Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, Institute 
of Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Edinburgh, Mayfield Road, Edinburgh 
EH9 3JR, Scotland, United Kingdom. s.p.wheatley@sussex.ac.uk

The chromosomal passengers, aurora-B kinase, inner centromere protein (INCENP), 
and survivin, are essential proteins that have been implicated in the regulation 
of metaphase chromosome alignment, spindle checkpoint function, and cytokinesis. 
All three share a common pattern of localization, and it was recently 
demonstrated that aurora-B, INCENP, and survivin are present in a complex in 
Xenopus eggs and Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The presence of aurora-B kinase in 
the complex and its ability to bind the other components directly suggest that 
INCENP and survivin could potentially be aurora-B substrates. This hypothesis 
was recently proven for INCENP in vitro. Here we report that human survivin is 
specifically phosphorylated in vitro by aurora-B kinase at threonine 117 in its 
carboxyl alpha-helical coil. Mutation of threonine 117 to alanine prevents 
survivin phosphorylation by aurora-B in vitro but does not alter its 
localization in HeLa cells. By contrast, a phospho-mimic, in which threonine 117 
was mutated to glutamic acid, was unable to localize correctly at any stage in 
mitosis. Mutation at threonine 117 also prevented immunoprecipitation of INCENP 
with survivin in vivo. These data suggest that phosphorylation of survivin at 
threonine 117 by aurora-B may regulate targeting of survivin, and possibly the 
entire passenger complex, in mammals.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M311299200
PMID: 14610074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
