---
reference_id: PMID:15140893
title: Spatial and temporal regulation of RACK1 function and N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor activity through WD40 motif-mediated dimerization.
authors:
- Thornton C
- Tang KC
- Phamluong K
- Luong K
- Vagts A
- Nikanjam D
- Yaka R
- Ron D
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M402316200
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Dimerization
- GTP-Binding Protein beta Subunits/metabolism
- Hippocampus
- In Vitro Techniques
- "Models, Molecular"
- Protein Binding
- Protein Kinase C/metabolism
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- Rats
- "Rats, Sprague-Dawley"
- Receptors for Activated C Kinase
- "Receptors, Cell Surface/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "Receptors, N-Methyl-D-Aspartate/metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Spatial and temporal regulation of RACK1 function and N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor activity through WD40 motif-mediated dimerization.
**Authors:** Thornton C, Tang KC, Phamluong K, Luong K, Vagts A, Nikanjam D, Yaka R, Ron D
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M402316200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M402316200)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 23;279(30):31357-64. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M402316200. Epub 
2004 May 12.

Spatial and temporal regulation of RACK1 function and N-methyl-D-aspartate 
receptor activity through WD40 motif-mediated dimerization.

Thornton C(1), Tang KC, Phamluong K, Luong K, Vagts A, Nikanjam D, Yaka R, Ron 
D.

Author information:
(1)Ernest Gallo Research Center, Emeryville, California 94608, USA.

Efficient signaling requires accurate spatial and temporal compartmentalization 
of proteins. RACK1 is a scaffolding protein that fulfils this role through 
interaction of binding partners with one of its seven WD40 domains. We recently 
identified the kinase Fyn and the NR2B subunit of the N-methyl-D-Aspartate 
receptor (NMDAR) as binding partners of RACK1. Scaffolding of Fyn near its 
substrate NR2B by RACK1 inhibits Fyn phosphorylation of NR2B and thereby 
negatively regulates channel function. We found that Fyn and NR2B share the same 
binding site on RACK1; however, their binding to RACK1 is not mutually exclusive 
(Yaka, R., Thornton, C., Vagts, A. J., Phamluong, K., Bonci, A., and Ron, D. 
(2002) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 99, 5710-5715). We therefore tested the 
hypothesis that RACK1 forms a homodimer that allows the simultaneous binding of 
Fyn and NR2B. We found that RACK1 binds to itself both in vitro and in the 
brain. Deletion analyses identified a RACK1-RACK1 dimer-binding site within the 
4th WD40 repeat, and application of the 4th WD40 repeat or a peptide derivative 
to hippocampal slices inhibited NMDAR activity. We further found that in 
hippocampal slices, both RACK1 and NR2B associated with another WD40 protein, 
the beta-subunit of G protein (Gbeta), previously shown to heterodimerize with 
RACK1 in vitro (Dell, E. J., Connor, J., Chen, S., Stebbins, E. G., Skiba, N. 
P., Mochly-Rosen, D., and Hamm, H. E. (2002) J. Biol. Chem. 277, 49888-49895). 
However, activation of the pituitary adenylate cyclase polypeptide (1-38) G 
protein-coupled receptor, previously found to induce the dissociation of RACK1 
from the NMDAR complex (Yaka, R., He, D. Y., Phamluong, K., and Ron, D. (2003) 
J. Biol. Chem. 278, 9630-9638), attenuated the association of Gbeta with RACK1 
and NR2B. Based on these results, we propose that WD40-mediated homo- and 
heterodimerization of RACK1 mediate the formation of a transient signaling 
complex that includes the NMDAR, a G protein and Fyn.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M402316200
PMID: 15140893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]