---
pmid: '12050673'
title: Structural basis for the recognition of hydroxyproline in HIF-1 alpha by pVHL.
authors:
- Hon WC
- Wilson MI
- Harlos K
- Claridge TD
- Schofield CJ
- Pugh CW
- Maxwell PH
- Ratcliffe PJ
- Stuart DI
- Jones EY
journal: Nature
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature00767
---

# Structural basis for the recognition of hydroxyproline in HIF-1 alpha by pVHL.
**Authors:** Hon WC, Wilson MI, Harlos K, Claridge TD, Schofield CJ, Pugh CW, Maxwell PH, Ratcliffe PJ, Stuart DI, Jones EY
**Journal:** Nature (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature00767](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature00767)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2002 Jun 27;417(6892):975-8. doi: 10.1038/nature00767. Epub 2002 Jun
5.

Structural basis for the recognition of hydroxyproline in HIF-1 alpha by pVHL.

Hon WC(1), Wilson MI, Harlos K, Claridge TD, Schofield CJ, Pugh CW, Maxwell PH, 
Ratcliffe PJ, Stuart DI, Jones EY.

Author information:
(1)Division of Structural Biology, Henry Wellcome Building of Genomic Medicine, 
Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) is a transcriptional complex that controls 
cellular and systemic homeostatic responses to oxygen availability. HIF-1 alpha 
is the oxygen-regulated subunit of HIF-1, an alpha beta heterodimeric complex. 
HIF-1 alpha is stable in hypoxia, but in the presence of oxygen it is targeted 
for proteasomal degradation by the ubiquitination complex pVHL, the protein of 
the von Hippel Lindau (VHL) tumour suppressor gene and a component of an E3 
ubiquitin ligase complex. Capture of HIF-1 alpha by pVHL is regulated by 
hydroxylation of specific prolyl residues in two functionally independent 
regions of HIF-1 alpha. The crystal structure of a hydroxylated HIF-1 alpha 
peptide bound to VCB (pVHL, elongins C and B) and solution binding assays reveal 
a single, conserved hydroxyproline-binding pocket in pVHL. Optimized hydrogen 
bonding to the buried hydroxyprolyl group confers precise discrimination between 
hydroxylated and unmodified prolyl residues. This mechanism provides a new focus 
for development of therapeutic agents to modulate cellular responses to hypoxia.

DOI: 10.1038/nature00767
PMID: 12050673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
