---
pmid: '24038671'
title: The crystal structure of human quinolinic acid phosphoribosyltransferase in
  complex with its inhibitor phthalic acid.
authors:
- Malik SS
- Patterson DN
- Ncube Z
- Toth EA
journal: Proteins
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/prot.24406
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The crystal structure of human quinolinic acid phosphoribosyltransferase in complex with its inhibitor phthalic acid.
**Authors:** Malik SS, Patterson DN, Ncube Z, Toth EA
**Journal:** Proteins (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1002/prot.24406](https://doi.org/10.1002/prot.24406)

## Abstract

1. Proteins. 2014 Mar;82(3):405-14. doi: 10.1002/prot.24406. Epub 2013 Oct 17.

The crystal structure of human quinolinic acid phosphoribosyltransferase in 
complex with its inhibitor phthalic acid.

Malik SS(1), Patterson DN, Ncube Z, Toth EA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Maryland 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21201.

Quinolinic acid (QA), a biologically potent but neurodestructive metabolite is 
catabolized by quinolinic acid phosphoribosyltransferase (QPRT) in the first 
step of the de novo NAD(+) biosynthesis pathway. This puts QPRT at the junction 
of two different pathways, that is, de novo NAD(+) biosynthesis and the 
kynurenine pathway of tryptophan degradation. Thus, QPRT is an important enzyme 
in terms of its biological impact and its potential as a therapeutic target. 
Here, we report the crystal structure of human QPRT bound to its inhibitor 
phthalic acid (PHT) and kinetic analysis of PHT inhibition of human QPRT. This 
structure, determined at 2.55 Å resolution, shows an elaborate hydrogen bonding 
network that helps in recognition of PHT and consequently its substrate QA. In 
addition to this hydrogen bonding network, we observe extensive van der Waals 
contacts with the PHT ring that might be important for correctly orientating the 
substrate QA during catalysis. Moreover, our crystal form allows us to observe 
an intact hexamer in both the apo- and PHT-bound forms in the same crystal 
system, which provides a direct comparison of unique subunit interfaces formed 
in hexameric human QPRT. We call these interfaces "nondimeric interfaces" to 
distinguish them from the typical dimeric interfaces observed in all QPRTs. We 
observe significant changes in the nondimeric interfaces in the QPRT hexamer 
upon binding PHT. Thus, the new structural and functional features of this 
enzyme we describe here will aid in understanding the function of hexameric 
QPRTs, which includes all eukaryotic and select prokaryotic QPRTs.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.24406
PMID: 24038671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
