---
pmid: '8407975'
title: Coproporphyrinogen oxidase. Purification, molecular cloning, and induction
  of mRNA during erythroid differentiation.
authors:
- Kohno H
- Furukawa T
- Yoshinaga T
- Tokunaga R
- Taketani S
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1993'
full_text_available: false
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Coproporphyrinogen oxidase. Purification, molecular cloning, and induction of mRNA during erythroid differentiation.
**Authors:** Kohno H, Furukawa T, Yoshinaga T, Tokunaga R, Taketani S
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1993)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1993 Oct 5;268(28):21359-63.

Coproporphyrinogen oxidase. Purification, molecular cloning, and induction of 
mRNA during erythroid differentiation.

Kohno H(1), Furukawa T, Yoshinaga T, Tokunaga R, Taketani S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hygiene, Kansai Medical University, Osaka, Japan.

Coproporphyrinogen oxidase (EC 1.3.3.3), the enzyme involved in the sixth step 
of heme biosynthesis, was purified to apparent homogeneity from bovine liver; it 
has a molecular mass of 37,000 daltons. Partial amino acid sequences were 
determined. Two degenerate oligonucleotides based on the sequences of 
trypsin-digested peptides were used in a polymerase chain reaction to amplify a 
198-base pair fragment of coproporphyrinogen oxidase DNA, using bovine kidney 
cells cDNA as a starting template. This fragment was used as a hybridization 
probe to isolate full-length coproporphyrinogen oxidase clones from a mouse 
erythroleukemia (MEL) cell cDNA library. Sequence analysis revealed that 
coproporphyrinogen oxidase comprises 354 amino acid residues (M(r) 40,647), with 
a putative leader sequence of 31 amino acid residues, the result being a mature 
protein of 323 amino acid residues (M(r) 37,255). RNA blot analysis revealed a 
3.0-kilobase coproporphyrinogen oxidase mRNA in mouse liver and in MEL cells. 
Treatment of MEL cells with dimethyl sulfoxide led to an increase in 
coproporphyrinogen oxidase mRNA within 10 h, the induction reached a maximum at 
24 h, and was in parallel with the induction of ferrochelatase mRNA. The cDNA 
allows for the expression of active coproporphyrinogen oxidase, the activity of 
which is mainly present in mitochondria of transfected cultured cells, thereby 
indicating that mammalian coproporphyrinogen oxidase is mitochondrial enzyme.

PMID: 8407975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
