---
pmid: '16687577'
title: Cell cycle-dependent roles for the FCH-domain protein Cdc15p in formation of
  the actomyosin ring in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
authors:
- Wachtler V
- Huang Y
- Karagiannis J
- Balasubramanian MK
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '2006'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1483054
doi: 10.1091/mbc.e05-11-1086
---

# Cell cycle-dependent roles for the FCH-domain protein Cdc15p in formation of the actomyosin ring in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
**Authors:** Wachtler V, Huang Y, Karagiannis J, Balasubramanian MK
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.e05-11-1086](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.e05-11-1086)
**PMC:** [PMC1483054](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1483054/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Cell. 2006 Jul;17(7):3254-66. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e05-11-1086. Epub 2006
 May 10.

Cell cycle-dependent roles for the FCH-domain protein Cdc15p in formation of the 
actomyosin ring in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.

Wachtler V(1), Huang Y, Karagiannis J, Balasubramanian MK.

Author information:
(1)Cell Division Laboratory, Temasek Life Sciences Laboratory, Singapore 117604, 
Singapore.

Cell division in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe requires the 
formation and constriction of an actomyosin ring at the division site. The 
actomyosin ring is assembled in metaphase and anaphase A, is maintained 
throughout mitosis, and constricts after completion of anaphase. Maintenance of 
the actomyosin ring during late stages of mitosis depends on the septation 
initiation network (SIN), a signaling cascade that also regulates the deposition 
of the division septum. However, SIN is not active in metaphase and is not 
required for the initial assembly of the actomyosin ring early in mitosis. The 
FER/CIP4-homology (FCH) domain protein Cdc15p is a component of the actomyosin 
ring. Mutations in cdc15 lead to failure in cytokinesis and result in the 
formation of elongated, multinucleate cells without a division septum. Here we 
present evidence that the requirement of Cdc15p for actomyosin ring formation is 
dependent on the stage of mitosis. Although cdc15 mutants are competent to 
assemble actomyosin rings in metaphase, they are unable to maintain actomyosin 
rings late in mitosis when SIN is active. In the absence of functional Cdc15p, 
ring formation upon metaphase arrest depends on the anillin-like Mid1p. 
Interestingly, when cytokinesis is delayed due to perturbations to the division 
machinery, Cdc15p is maintained in a hypophosphorylated form. The 
dephosphorylation of Cdc15p, which occurs transiently in unperturbed 
cytokinesis, is partially dependent on the phosphatase Clp1p/Flp1p. This 
suggests a mechanism where both SIN and Clp1p/Flp1p contribute to maintenance of 
the actomyosin ring in late mitosis through Cdc15p, possibly by regulating its 
phosphorylation status.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e05-11-1086
PMCID: PMC1483054
PMID: 16687577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Cell division in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe requires the formation and constriction of an actomyosin ring at the division site. The actomyosin ring is assembled in metaphase and anaphase A, is maintained throughout mitosis, and constricts after completion of anaphase. Maintenance of the actomyosin ring during late stages of mitosis depends on the septation initiation network (SIN), a signaling cascade that also regulates the deposition of the division septum. However, SIN is not active in metaphase and is not required for the initial assembly of the actomyosin ring early in mitosis. The FER/CIP4-homology (FCH) domain protein Cdc15p is a component of the actomyosin ring. Mutations in cdc15 lead to failure in cytokinesis and result in the formation of elongated, multinucleate cells without a division septum. Here we present evidence that the requirement of Cdc15p for actomyosin ring formation is dependent on the stage of mitosis. Although cdc15 mutants are competent to assemble actomyosin rings in metaphase, they are unable to maintain actomyosin rings late in mitosis when SIN is active. In the absence of functional Cdc15p, ring formation upon metaphase arrest depends on the anillin-like Mid1p. Interestingly, when cytokinesis is delayed due to perturbations to the division machinery, Cdc15p is maintained in a hypophosphorylated form. The dephosphorylation of Cdc15p, which occurs transiently in unperturbed cytokinesis, is partially dependent on the phosphatase Clp1p/Flp1p. This suggests a mechanism where both SIN and Clp1p/Flp1p contribute to maintenance of the actomyosin ring in late mitosis through Cdc15p, possibly by regulating its phosphorylation status.

INTRODUCTION

The formation of a contractile actomyosin-based ring is a key feature of cytokinesis that is conserved from yeast to mammals ( Balasubramanian et al., 2004 ). Depending on the cell type studied, the actomyosin ring has different functions including force generation and targeted membrane addition. In the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe , the actomyosin ring is assembled upon entry into mitosis when its various components are recruited to the ring in a sequential manner ( Rajagopalan et al., 2003 ; Wu et al., 2003 ; Wolfe and Gould, 2005 ). The future division site is determined even earlier, in the G2 phase of the cell cycle, by localization of anillin-related Mid1p to a cortical band that overlays the interphase nucleus ( Sohrmann et al., 1996 ; Wu et al., 2003 ). The actomyosin ring is maintained through anaphase and begins constriction only after nuclear segregation to the cell ends in order to ensure faithful separation of the genetic material ( Wolfe and Gould, 2005 ). In S. pombe , the actomyosin ring is essential for cytokinesis. This has allowed for isolation of mutants that are defective in assembly or maintenance of the ring and hence display cell division arrest phenotypes, i.e., they fail to lay down a division septum and form elongated multinucleate cells. Such genetic screens have yielded several temperature-sensitive alleles of the cdc15 gene ( Nurse et al., 1976 ; Chang et al., 1996 ; Balasubramanian et al., 1998 ).

Cdc15p is the founding member of a protein family characterized by a FER/CIP4-homology domain at the N-terminus followed by a coiled-coil region and an SH3-domain at the C-terminus. Homologues have been identified in various organisms including budding yeast, chicken, mouse and human ( Fankhauser et al., 1995 ; Lippincott and Li, 2000 ). In S. pombe , Cdc15p itself localizes to the actomyosin ring during cell division, whereas it is found in patches concentrated at the cell tips during interphase ( Fankhauser et al., 1995 ; Carnahan and Gould, 2003 ). It is hyperphosphorylated in interphase and hypophosphorylated in dividing cells ( Fankhauser et al., 1995 ).

Several studies have examined the mutant phenotype of cdc15 with respect to the ability to form an actomyosin ring. This has led to conflicting results that may be due to differing experimental designs, e.g., use of synchronous versus asynchronous cultures, different mutant alleles, different markers for the actomyosin ring or sensitivity of the assays ( Fankhauser et al., 1995 ; Chang et al., 1996 ; Balasubramanian et al., 1998 ; Arai and Mabuchi, 2002 ; Carnahan and Gould, 2003 ). Using rhodamin-conjugated phalloidin to visualize F-actin in cdc15 -140 mutant cells, Fankhauser et al. (1995) noted infrequent formation of actin rings (ca. 5% of wild-type) that showed fainter staining than wild-type cells. Applying the same probe to another allele, cdc15 -287, Chang et al. (1996) observed up to 20% of mitotic cells with faint actin rings but attributed this to incomplete penetrance. Carnahan and Gould (2003) report detection of poorly organized and incomplete actin rings in <2% of cdc15 -140 mutant cells, but they did not detect any rings with Alexa 488–conjugated phalloidin in cdc15 Δ cells. Although all of the above-mentioned studies used asynchronous cultures that had been shifted to the restrictive temperature for varying periods of time, Balasubramanian et al. (1998) detected actin rings in mitotic cdc15 -A5 cells as well as in dividing cdc15 -140 cells obtained from synchronous cultures using rhodamin-conjugated phalloidin and α-Cdc4p antibodies to detect F-actin and myosin II, respectively. Similarly, Arai and Mabuchi (2002) observed Bodipy-phallacidin–stained F-actin rings in mitotic cdc15 -140 cells whose cell cycle stage was determined by costaining for a spindle pole body marker. These authors noted that although cdc15 -140 mutant cells were capable of assembling distorted F-actin rings comparable to those in anaphase A wild-type cells, they failed to form fully compacted and constricting rings, as seen in wild-type cells from anaphase B onward.

However, it appears unambiguous that Cdc15p promotes medial F-actin assembly because overexpression of cdc15 + during interphase results in ectopic formation of F-actin structures in the middle of the cell ( Fankhauser et al., 1995 ). The role of Cdc15p in the rearrangement of F-actin may be mediated by its ability to recruit F-actin nucleation pathways to the site of cell division. The activators of the Arp2/3 complex Myo1p (type I myosin), Wsp1p (Wiskott Aldrich Syndrome protein [WASP] homologue) and Vrp1p (homologue of verprolin/WASP interacting protein [WIP]) fail to localize to the medial region in a cdc15 mutant, and Myo1p has also been shown to interact directly with Cdc15p. Moreover, Cdc15p colocalizes with the formin Cdc12p in a medial spot and in the actomyosin ring, and these two proteins exhibit direct interaction ( Carnahan and Gould, 2003 ). Cdc15p has also been shown to organize sterol-rich membrane domains ( Takeda et al., 2004 ), although how these domains function in actomyosin ring maintenance is presently unclear.

The septation initiation network (SIN) is a signaling cascade that becomes activated in anaphase upon cyclin B degradation and is related to the mitotic exit network (MEN) in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae . It comprises a small GTPase and several protein kinases as well as regulatory and scaffolding proteins ( Krapp et al., 2004 ). In addition, the protein phosphatase Clp1p (also termed Flp1p) has been identified as a nonessential component of SIN under normal conditions but becomes important for cell survival upon perturbations to the cytokinetic machinery ( Cueille et al., 2001 ; Trautmann et al., 2001 ; Mishra et al., 2004 ). SIN appears to provide a link between cell cycle progression, actomyosin ring stability upon mitotic exit, and division septum assembly. As a result, SIN mutants do not assemble division septa because of the unstable nature of the actomyosin ring as well as the requirement for SIN signaling in septum assembly. How SIN affects actomyosin ring stability and septum assembly is currently unclear. Interestingly, genetic analysis of the interactions between cdc15 and components of SIN suggests that SIN may regulate the function of Cdc15p ( Marks et al., 1992 ).

Here we have reinvestigated Cdc15p function and present evidence that Cdc15p becomes essential for actomyosin ring assembly and maintenance only upon activation of SIN but not in early mitosis. Thus, Cdc15p may function downstream of SIN in ring formation to promote septation in unperturbed cells and may contribute to the long-term stability of the actomyosin ring in a SIN-dependent manner upon cytokinesis delay.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Media for cell culture were as described previously ( Moreno et al., 1991 ). Growth temperatures were 24°C (permissive) and 36°C (restrictive) for temperature-sensitive strains, 30°C (permissive) and 18°C (restrictive) for cold-sensitive strains, and 30°C for all other strains. Cells were arrested in S phase by addition of hydroxyurea (HU; Sigma, St. Louis, MO) to 12 mM final concentration to the medium followed by the same amount of HU after 4 h. For fluorescence microscopy, cells were fixed with 7% formaldehyde. We either observed GFP-epifluorescence or processed cells for immunostaining as described previously ( Balasubramanian et al., 1997 ). We visualized DNA with DAPI (Sigma) and F-actin with Alexa 488–conjugated phalloidin (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR). Antibodies were from Molecular Probes (α-GFP, Alexa 488–conjugated α-rabbit, Alexa 594–conjugated α-mouse), a kind gift of Dr Keith Gull (α-tubulin) or as described previously (α-Cdc4p; McCollum et al., 1995 ). Fluorescence microscopy was done with Leica DMLB or DMIRE2 (Deerfield, IL) or Olympus IX71 (Melville, NY) microscopes and appropriate sets of filters. Confocal microscopy was done with a Zeiss LSM 510 (Thornwood, NY). Images were captured using Photometrics CoolSNAP ES or HQ cameras (Tucson, AZ) and MetaVue or MetaMorph software (Universal Imaging, West Chester, PA). Quantitative data are based on counting of at least 200 cells per sample unless otherwise stated. Error bars represent SDs.

Cells were lysed by beating with glass beads in the presence of TNE buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, supplemented with protease inhibitors; Complete EDTA-free; Roche Diagnostics, Basel, Switzerland). Total protein lysates were prepared by addition of 2× Laemmli sample buffer and dithiothreitol ( Harlow and Lane, 1988 ). Proteins were separated by electrophoresis in gels of appropriate polyacrylamide concentration and blotted on PVDF membrane (Millipore, Bedford, MA). Antibodies for detection were from Roche Diagnostics (α-HA), Jackson ImmunoResearch (West Grove, PA; horseradish peroxidase–conjugated α-mouse and α-rabbit) or as described previously (α-Arp3p; McCollum et al., 1996 ).

DISCUSSION

We have shown that asynchronously growing cdc15 mutant cells assemble actomyosin rings upon entry into mitosis ( Figure 1 ). Results obtained from arrested cells indicate that cdc15 mutants maintain actomyosin rings for prolonged periods of time if progression through mitosis is halted at metaphase ( Figures 2 and 3). Although our observations support previous studies ( Balasubramanian et al., 1998 ; Arai and Mabuchi, 2002 ), our work seems to contradict some other studies ( Fankhauser et al., 1995 ; Chang et al., 1996 ; Carnahan and Gould, 2003 ). Given that actomyosin rings are assembled in germinating cdc15 Δ spores undergoing metaphase or anaphase ( Figure 1 ), we think it is unlikely that the differences between our work and that of others are due to the relative strengths of the mutant alleles used. We have observed rings using four different probes (GFP-tagged Rlc1p and Cdc12p to visualize myosin II and formin, respectively; Alexa 488–conjugated phalloidin to visualize F-actin and α-Cdc4p antibodies to visualize myosin II), and we have ensured that the cells monitored are in mitosis by microtubule staining. We have also shown that cdc15 -140 and cdc15 Δ mutants disassemble actomyosin rings upon mitotic exit. Examination of cells at different points in the cell cycle may have contributed to the observed phenotypic differences, in particular because entry into the next round of mitosis occurs only after a significant delay after cytokinesis failure in the absence of Cdc15p and other actomyosin ring proteins ( Cueille et al., 2001 ; Trautmann et al., 2001 ; Mishra et al., 2004 ). Thus, we conclude that Cdc15p is dispensable for actomyosin ring assembly at mitosis but is required for its maintenance and constriction upon mitotic exit.

We have found that in the absence of functional Cdc15p the anillin-related Mid1p becomes essential for assembly of the actomyosin ring ( Figure 4 ). Although Mid1p has previously been implicated in ring positioning ( Sohrmann et al., 1996 ), we have shown here that it has an additional role in ring formation that is only uncovered in a cdc15 mutant background. The fact that mid1 mutants assemble rings (albeit mispositioned and with a somewhat reduced frequency) and maintain them upon metaphase arrest ( Figure 4 ) suggests a functional redundancy for actomyosin ring formation: we propose that both Mid1p- and Cdc15p-dependent pathways contribute to ring assembly early in mitosis. Thus, transient ring formation in cdc15 mutants may be mediated by Mid1p. Inversely, because Cdc15p is present at the division site in metaphase ( Figure 3 , B and C), it may recruit Cdc12p and other ring components, and hence actomyosin rings assemble even in the absence of functional Mid1p. In the concomitant absence of both Mid1p and Cdc15p function, actomyosin ring formation is completely aborted. Given that mid1 mutants assemble rings later in mitosis ( Wu et al., 2003 ) compared with wild-type, the Mid1p-dependent mechanism may play a primary role in ring assembly in metaphase, although the Cdc15p-dependent mechanism may compensate for this if cells are held in metaphase.

In S. pombe , actomyosin ring assembly at metaphase is independent of the function of the SIN pathway but maintenance and constriction of the actomyosin ring upon mitotic exit requires SIN function ( Wu et al., 2003 ; Krapp et al., 2004 ). SIN is also indispensable for prolonged maintenance of the actomyosin ring in response to cytokinesis delay caused by mild perturbation of the cell division and septation apparatuses ( Le Goff et al., 1999 ; Liu et al., 2000 ). Finally, ectopic activation of SIN in interphase cells leads to actomyosin ring assembly and septation before entry into mitosis ( Fankhauser et al., 1993 ; Schmidt et al., 1997 ). Given that both SIN mutants and cdc15 mutants assemble actomyosin rings during mitosis but are unable to maintain these rings after anaphase, it seems likely that SIN-mediated actomyosin ring assembly and maintenance may function via Cdc15p. Consistently, we find that cps1 -191 mutants, which maintain actomyosin rings for prolonged periods in a SIN-dependent manner, are unable to do so in the absence of functional Cdc15p ( Figure 5 , D and E). Furthermore, SIN-dependent assembly of actomyosin rings and septa induced by ectopic SIN activation in interphase-arrested cells also depends on Cdc15p ( Figure 5 , A and B). On the basis of these studies we conclude that SIN-mediated actomyosin ring assembly and septation may depend on Cdc15p function. Interestingly, we have found that Mid1p is not detectable in rings induced by ectopic SIN activation ( Figure 5 C).

The phosphatase Clp1p is retained in the cytoplasm upon cytokinesis delay in a SIN-dependent manner ( Trautmann et al., 2001 ). This cytoplasmic retention is maintained even in the absence of Cdc15p function ( Figure 6 , A and B). Similarly, the protein kinase Cdc7p continues to localize to a single SPB upon cytokinesis delay in a Clp1p-dependent manner, suggesting a positive feedback loop between Clp1p and SIN to sustain each other's activity as well as stability of the actomyosin ring and delay of progression of the nuclear cycle ( Mishra et al., 2004 ). The SPB localization of Cdc7p is believed to indicate active SIN signaling ( McCollum and Gould, 2001 ) and is maintained even in the absence of Cdc15p function ( Figure 6 , C and D). The cytoplasmic retention of Clp1p and localization of Cdc7p in one SPB in cdc15 mutants suggests that Cdc15p does not act upstream of or as an integral part of the feedback loop between Clp1p and SIN because in that case loss of function of Cdc15p would abrogate the maintenance of their respective localization patterns. We hence conclude that SIN signaling may regulate Cdc15p function, which in turn may induce actomyosin ring formation and maintenance.

Previous studies have shown that Cdc15p undergoes dephosphorylation upon progression through mitosis ( Fankhauser et al., 1995 ). We have further characterized the mobility of Cdc15p at various stages of the cell cycle. We have shown that Cdc15p exists in at least three forms: a slow migrating hyperphosphorylated form in interphase, an intermediately phosphorylated form in metaphase, and a fast migrating hypophosphorylated form that appears during cytokinesis ( Figure 7 A). A fast migrating form of Cdc15p is also detected in cells delayed in cytokinesis although their nuclei have returned to a G2 configuration ( Figure 7 B). It is possible that increasing dephosphorylation of Cdc15p enhances its affinity toward the formin Cdc12p and activators of the Arp2/3 complex and may thus aid actomyosin ring assembly and maintenance. Alternatively, the stability of Cdc15p may be regulated by its phosphorylation status. Understanding the precise biochemical roles of these different phosphorylated and dephosphorylated forms depends on the identification and characterization of the phosphorylation sites. Interestingly, the Cdc15p homologue in S. cerevisiae , Hof1p, is degraded in late mitosis through a mechanism that includes the SCF-type E3 ubiquitin ligase Grr1p, the PEST-domain of Hof1p and possibly its phosphorylation ( Blondel et al., 2005 ). Future studies should also investigate the role of ubiquitination in S. pombe Cdc15p function.

Prolonged actomyosin ring maintenance upon cytokinesis delay depends on SIN and Clp1p, a protein phosphatase of the Cdc14p family ( Cueille et al., 2001 ; Trautmann et al., 2001 ). We have shown that although partial dephosphorylation of Cdc15p and the resulting shift in its mobility is detected in clp1 Δ mutants progressing through mitosis, the fastest migrating form indicating maximal dephosphorylation is not detected ( Figure 7 C). It is currently unclear if Clp1p is directly responsible for the dephosphorylation of Cdc15p or if Clp1p activates another phosphatase that in turn dephosphorylates Cdc15p. In either case, the change in phosphorylation brought about by Clp1p is not essential for cell division in conditions of unperturbed cytokinesis, because S. pombe cells form rings and divide under standard laboratory conditions in the absence of clp1 + ( Cueille et al., 2001 ; Trautmann et al., 2001 ). However, it may be important for prolonged maintenance of the actomyosin ring upon cytokinesis delay or for most efficient recruitment of other ring components to the division site.

In summary, we have shown that the FCH-domain protein Cdc15p is a key element downstream of SIN and plays an essential role in actomyosin ring assembly and maintenance after anaphase, although Cdc15p is dispensable for ring assembly early in mitosis. The activities of Cdc15p may in part be regulated by its phosphorylation status that changes upon progression through mitosis. Future studies should investigate the precise mechanism of SIN- and Cdc15p-mediated actomyosin ring maintenance upon mitotic exit as well as cytokinesis delay. Identification of the phosphorylation sites as well as characterization of the interacting protein kinases and phosphatases should help unravel the molecular function of Cdc15p in cytokinesis and its regulation through the cell cycle.
