---
pmid: '20080937'
title: A severe human metabolic disease caused by deficiency of the endoplasmatic
  mannosyltransferase hALG11 leads to congenital disorder of glycosylation-Ip.
authors:
- Rind N
- Schmeiser V
- Thiel C
- Absmanner B
- Lübbehusen J
- Hocks J
- Apeshiotis N
- Wilichowski E
- Lehle L
- Körner C
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq016
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# A severe human metabolic disease caused by deficiency of the endoplasmatic mannosyltransferase hALG11 leads to congenital disorder of glycosylation-Ip.
**Authors:** Rind N, Schmeiser V, Thiel C, Absmanner B, Lübbehusen J, Hocks J, Apeshiotis N, Wilichowski E, Lehle L, Körner C
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddq016](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddq016)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Apr 15;19(8):1413-24. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq016. Epub 2010
Jan  15.

A severe human metabolic disease caused by deficiency of the endoplasmatic 
mannosyltransferase hALG11 leads to congenital disorder of glycosylation-Ip.

Rind N(1), Schmeiser V, Thiel C, Absmanner B, Lübbehusen J, Hocks J, Apeshiotis 
N, Wilichowski E, Lehle L, Körner C.

Author information:
(1)Center for Child and Adolescent Medicine, Center for Metabolic Diseases 
Heidelberg, Department I, Im Neuenheimer Feld 153, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

A new type of congenital disorders of glycosylation, designated CDG-Ip, is 
caused by the deficiency of 
GDP-Man:Man3GlcNAc2-PP-dolichol-alpha1,2-mannosyltransferase, encoded by the 
human ortholog of ALG11 from yeast. The patient presented with a multisystemic 
disorder characterized by muscular hypotonia, seizures, developmental 
retardation and death at the age of 2 years. The isoelectric focusing pattern of 
the patient's serum transferrin showed the partial loss of complete N-glycan 
side chains, which is a characteristic sign for CDG-I. Analysis of 
dolichol-linked oligosaccharides in patient-derived fibroblasts revealed an 
accumulation of Man3GlcNAc2-PP-dolichol and Man4GlcNAc2-PP-dolichol. 
Determination of mannosyltransferase activities of early steps of lipid-linked 
oligosaccharide biosynthesis in fibroblasts indicated that the patient was 
deficient in elongating Man3GlcNAc2-PP-dolichol. These findings gave rise to 
genetic analysis of the hALG11 cDNA, in which homozygosity for mutation c.T257C 
(p.L86S) was identified. Verification of the mutation as a primary cause for the 
genetic defect was proved by retroviral expression of human wild-type and 
mutated ALG11 cDNA in patient-derived fibroblasts as well as using a yeast alg11 
deletion strain as a heterologous expression system for hALG11 variants. 
Immunofluorescence examinations combined with western blotting showed no 
differences of intracellular localization or expression of ALG11 between control 
and patient fibroblasts, respectively, indicating no mislocalization or 
degradation of the mutated transferase.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddq016
PMID: 20080937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
