---
reference_id: PMID:37914730
title: ARF1 prevents aberrant type I interferon induction by regulating STING activation and recycling.
authors:
- Hirschenberger M
- Lepelley A
- Rupp U
- Klute S
- Hunszinger V
- Koepke L
- Merold V
- Didry-Barca B
- Wondany F
- Bergner T
- Moreau T
- Rodero MP
- Rösler R
- Wiese S
- Volpi S
- Gattorno M
- Papa R
- Lynch SA
- Haug MG
- Houge G
- Wigby KM
- Sprague J
- Lenberg J
- Read C
- Walther P
- Michaelis J
- Kirchhoff F
- de Oliveira Mann CC
- Crow YJ
- Sparrer KMJ
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-42150-4
content_type: full_text_pdf
full_text_attempted: true
full_text_provider: openalex
full_text_url: "https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-023-42150-4.pdf"
oa_status: gold
license: cc-by
local_pdf_path: files/PMID_37914730.pdf
---

# ARF1 prevents aberrant type I interferon induction by regulating STING activation and recycling.
**Authors:** Hirschenberger M, Lepelley A, Rupp U, Klute S, Hunszinger V, Koepke L, Merold V, Didry-Barca B, Wondany F, Bergner T, Moreau T, Rodero MP, Rösler R, Wiese S, Volpi S, Gattorno M, Papa R, Lynch SA, Haug MG, Houge G, Wigby KM, Sprague J, Lenberg J, Read C, Walther P, Michaelis J, Kirchhoff F, de Oliveira Mann CC, Crow YJ, Sparrer KMJ
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-023-42150-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42150-4)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2023 Nov 1;14(1):6770. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-42150-4.

ARF1 prevents aberrant type I interferon induction by regulating STING
activation and recycling.

Hirschenberger M(1), Lepelley A(2), Rupp U(3), Klute S(1), Hunszinger V(1),
Koepke L(1), Merold V(4), Didry-Barca B(2), Wondany F(5), Bergner T(3), Moreau
T(2), Rodero MP(2), Rösler R(6), Wiese S(6), Volpi S(7)(8), Gattorno M(7), Papa
R(7), Lynch SA(9)(10), Haug MG(11), Houge G(12), Wigby KM(13)(14), Sprague
J(15)(16), Lenberg J(14), Read C(3), Walther P(3), Michaelis J(5), Kirchhoff
F(1), de Oliveira Mann CC(4), Crow YJ(17)(18), Sparrer KMJ(19).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Virology, Ulm University Medical Center, 89081, Ulm,
Germany.
(2)Université Paris Cité, Imagine Institute, Laboratory of Neurogenetics and
Neuroinflammation, INSERM UMR1163, F-75015, Paris, France.
(3)Central Facility for Electron Microscopy, Ulm University, 89081, Ulm,
Germany.
(4)Institute of Virology, Technical University of Munich, 81675, Munich,
Germany.
(5)Institute of Biophysics, Ulm University, 89081, Ulm, Germany.
(6)Core Unit Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Ulm University, 89081, Ulm,
Germany.
(7)UOC Reumatologia e Malattie Autoinfiammatorie, IRCCS Istituto Giannina
Gaslini, Genoa, Italy.
(8)Università degli Studi di Genova, Genoa, Italy.
(9)Children's Health Ireland, Crumlin, Dublin, Eire.
(10)University College Dublin, Dublin, Eire.
(11)Department of Medical Genetics, St. Olav's Hospital, Trondheim, Norway.
(12)Department of Medical Genetics, Haukeland University Hospital, 5021, Bergen,
Norway.
(13)Division of Genomic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, University of
California, Davis in Sacramento, CA, USA.
(14)Rady Children's Institute for Genomic Medicine, San Diego, CA, USA.
(15)Division of Pediatric and Adolescent Dermatology, Rady Children's Hospital
San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA.
(16)Department of Dermatology, University of California San Diego School of
Medicine, La Jolla, USA.
(17)Université Paris Cité, Imagine Institute, Laboratory of Neurogenetics and
Neuroinflammation, INSERM UMR1163, F-75015, Paris, France. yanickcrow@mac.com.
(18)MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Cancer, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. yanickcrow@mac.com.
(19)Institute of Molecular Virology, Ulm University Medical Center, 89081, Ulm,
Germany. Konstantin.Sparrer@uni-ulm.de.

Type I interferon (IFN) signalling is tightly controlled. Upon recognition of
DNA by cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS), stimulator of interferon genes (STING)
translocates along the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-Golgi axis to induce IFN
signalling. Termination is achieved through autophagic degradation or recycling
of STING by retrograde Golgi-to-ER transport. Here, we identify the GTPase
ADP-ribosylation factor 1 (ARF1) as a crucial negative regulator of cGAS-STING
signalling. Heterozygous ARF1 missense mutations cause a previously unrecognized
type I interferonopathy associated with enhanced IFN-stimulated gene expression.
Disease-associated, GTPase-defective ARF1 increases cGAS-STING dependent type I
IFN signalling in cell lines and primary patient cells. Mechanistically, mutated
ARF1 perturbs mitochondrial morphology, causing cGAS activation by aberrant
mitochondrial DNA release, and leads to accumulation of active STING at the
Golgi/ERGIC due to defective retrograde transport. Our data show an unexpected
dual role of ARF1 in maintaining cGAS-STING homeostasis, through promotion of
mitochondrial integrity and STING recycling.

© 2023. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-023-42150-4
PMCID: PMC10620153
PMID: 37914730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42150-4
ARF1 prevents aberrant type I interferon
induction by regulating STING activation and
recycling
Maximilian Hirschenberger1,A l i c eL e p e l l e y2,U l r i c hR u p p3,S u s a n n eK l u t e1,
Victoria Hunszinger 1, Lennart Koepke 1, Veronika Merold4,
Blaise Didry-Barca2, Fanny Wondany5,T i mB e r g n e r3, Tatiana Moreau2,
Mathieu P. Rodero2, Reinhild Rösler6, Sebastian Wiese 6,S t e f a n oV o l p i7,8,
Marco Gattorno7, Riccardo Papa 7, Sally-Ann Lynch 9,10,M a r t eG .H a u g11,
Gunnar Houge12, Kristen M. Wigby13,14,J e s s i c aS p r a g u e15,16, Jerica Lenberg14,
Clarissa Read 3,P a u lW a l t h e r3, Jens Michaelis 5, Frank Kirchhoff 1,
Carina C. de Oliveira Mann 4,Y a n i c kJ .C r o w2,17 &
Konstantin M. J. Sparrer 1
Type I interferon (IFN) signalling is tightly controlled. Upon recognition of
DNA by cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS), stimulator of interferon genes
(STING) translocates along the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-Golgi axis to
induce IFN signalling. Termination isachieved through autophagic degrada-
tion or recycling of STING by retrograde Golgi-to-ER transport. Here, we
identify the GTPase ADP-ribosylation factor 1 (ARF1) as a crucial negative
regulator of cGAS-STING signalling.Heterozygous ARF1 missense mutations
cause a previously unrecognized type I interferonopathy associated with
enhanced IFN-stimulated gene expression. Disease-associated, GTPase-
defective ARF1 increases cGAS-STING dependent type I IFN signalling in cell
lines and primary patient cells. Mechanistically, mutated ARF1 perturbs mito-
chondrial morphology, causing cGAS activation by aberrant mitochondrial
DNA release, and leads to accumulation ofactive STING at the Golgi/ERGIC due
to defective retrograde transport. Our data show an unexpected dual role of
ARF1 in maintaining cGAS-STING homeostasis, through promotion of mito-
chondrial integrity and STING recycling.
Type I interferon (IFN) mediated innate immunity constitutes an
essential element in the response to viral infection, establishing an
anti-viral state through the upregulation of hundreds of IFN stimulated
genes (ISGs)
1–3. Contrasting with this protective role against viral
infection, inappropriate activation of an IFN response is pathogenic,
eventually leading to tissue damage
4. This dichotomy is particularly
well illustrated by the type I interferonopathies, Mendelian diseases
characterised by chronically enhanced type I IFN signalling 4,5. Clini-
cally, these disorders often manifest with neurological features such as
encephalopathy, cerebral calciﬁcation, leukodystrophy and cerebral
atrophy. In addition, extra-neurological involvement can also be seen,
with chilblain-like skin lesions a particularly frequent association.
Notably, the study of the pathological basis of the type I inter-
feronopathies has provided molecular insight into the induction and
regulation of type I IFN signalling in human health and disease
4.
Type I IFNs can be induced through the sensing of foreign viral
nucleic acids by innate immune receptors, among them cyclic GMP-
AMP synthase (cGAS)2,6–8. Notably, cGAS can also be triggered by self-
Received: 17 April 2023
Accepted: 29 September 2023
Check for updates
A full list of af ﬁliations appears at the end of the paper. e-mail: yanickcrow@mac.com; Konstantin.Sparrer@uni-ulm.de
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:6770 1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

DNA that is erroneously present in the cytoplasm 9. Upon binding to
cytoplasmic DNA, cGAS catalyses the production of a second mes-
senger 2′−3′ cyclic guanosine monophosphate–adenosine monopho-
sphate (cGAMP) from GTP and ATP
6,10.c G A M Pi nt u r nb i n d st ot h e
signalling adaptor stimulator of IFN genes (STING), residing in its
inactive form at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), causing STING to
change conformation, oligomerise, and accumulate in the Golgi
7.
Trafﬁcking via the ER-Golgi axis is a major determinant of both STING
activation and signal termination11–13. Activated STING is transported
from the ER to the ER-Golgi intermediate compartment (ERGIC)/Golgi
via coatomer protein complex II (COPII) vesicles. At the Golgi/ERGIC,
STING recruits Tank binding kinase 1 (TBK1), which in turn activates the
transcription factors IRF3 and NF-κB. Both transcription factors even-
tually translocate into the nucleus, leading to the induction of type I
IFN and other (pro-)inﬂammatory cytokines. The current model pro-
poses that, after TBK1 activation, STING is transported to the trans-
Golgi network (TGN)/Golgi-associated vesicles where it is degraded via
the autophagic-lysosomal pathway for signal termination
13.I na d d i t i o n ,
increasing evidence suggests that STING can be recycled back to the
ER
14–17. Upon recruitment by Surfeit 4 (SURF4) to coatomer protein
complex I (COPI) vesicles, STING is transported in a retrograde manner
from the Golgi/ERGIC to the ER, thus also contributing to signal
termination
15–17. COPI trafﬁcking is a highly conserved pathway down
to yeast, functioning through the combined action of seven coatomer
subunits: α-COP, β-COP, β′-COP, γ-COP, δ-COP, ε-COP, and ζ-COP.
Despite these insights, the precise mechanism(s) and key players
involved in STING ﬂux and signal termination remain incompletely
understood.
Small GTPases are important mediators of intracellular trafﬁcking,
among them the family of ADP-ribosylation factors (ARFs) comprising
ﬁve highly homologous members in humans (ARF1, ARF2/4, ARF3,
ARF5 and ARF6)
18. These molecules have distinct but overlapping roles
generally deﬁned by their subcellular localisation19. For example, ARF1
is predominantly localised to the cis-Golgi, trans-Golgi and ERGIC 20,
whereas ARF6 is present at the plasma membrane 21. Their major
function is to recruit coat proteins, such as COPI components, and
mediate budding of transport vesicles from ER/Golgi surfaces. GTPase
activity is required for vesicle formation and cargo recruitment by ARF
proteins, cycling between a membrane-associated GTP-bound state
and a GDP-bound cytoplasmic state
22. GTPase activity, and GDP to GTP
exchange, are regulated by a distinct set of GTPase accelerating pro-
teins (GAP) and guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEF), respec-
tively, thereby in turn controlling the activity of ARF proteins
22.
Through the characterisation of a type I interferonopathy, we
have discovered that the small GTPase ARF1 plays a key role in reg-
ulating cGAS-STING activity. ARF1 prevents aberrant type I IFN induc-
tion and signalling via a dual mechanism. First, our data suggests that
ARF1 promotes mitochondrial dynamics, thus preventing aberrant
release and sensing of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). In addition, ARF1
mediates retrograde transport of activated STING from the ERGIC/
Golgi for signal termination. Mutation of the R99 residue in ARF1 is
associated with a type I interferonopathy state, demonstrating atte-
nuated GTPase activity and impaired function. Consequently, mtDNA
leaks into the cytoplasm where it triggers cGAS. In addition, signal
termination via ER-Golgi traf ﬁcking is defective, leading to elevated
ISG expression. Our results reveal roles for ARF1 in cGAS-STING acti-
vation and signal termination essential to the maintenance of cellular
homeostasis, and provide a mechanistic explanation for a previously
unrecognized auto-inﬂammatory disease.
Results
Mutations in ARF1 deﬁne a type I interferonopathy
As part of an ongoing protocol involving the agnostic screening of
patients with uncharacterized phenotypes for an upregulation of type I
IFN signalling, we identiﬁed a patient (AGS460) with skin lesions and
signiﬁcant developmental delay to harbour a de novo c.295C>T/
p.(R99C) substitution in ARF1 (Supplementary information). His skin
disease was consistent with a diagnosis of chilblain lupus, a clinical sign
frequently observed in a number of type I interferonopathies including
Aicardi–Goutières syndrome (AGS) and STING-associated vasculo-
pathy of infancy (SAVI) (Fig. 1a–c). Through Decipher and Gene-
Matcher/Matchmaker exchange
23, we ascertained two additional
patients (RH2003, KW2022) with the same p.(R99C) substitution, in
one of whom we could demonstrate that the variant arose de novo.
Both of these patients exhibited skin lesions (Fig.1d–g) similar to those
observed in AGS460, in association with signi ﬁcant developmental
delay. We then identiﬁed a further patient (AGS3133) with a de novo
c.296G>A/p.(R99H) substitution and a history of cold hands and feet,
without frank chilblains (Supplementary information).
ARF1 is a small GTPase with a myristylation anchor at the
N-terminus that mediates membrane association
22,24. This is followed
by an amphipathic helix and the GTPase domain, consisting of two
Switch domains (SW1 and 2) (Fig. 1h). Overall, ARF1 is highly con-
strained (pLi = 0.9). The arginine at position 99 is conserved from yeast
to humans (Fig. 1i and Supplementary Fig. 1a), there are no variants at
this residue on gnomAD, and a substitution for a cysteine or histidine is
predicted as damaging by in silico analyses (Supplementary Data 1).
Where tested, all (7 of 8) parents were found to be wild type (WT) on
both alleles of ARF1 (Supplementary Fig. 1b). Of note, the p.(R99H)
substitution was previously reported as a de novo mutation in a child
with developmental delay and periventricular nodular heterotopia
25.I n
AGS460 (Genotype ARF1 R99C), we observed increased ISG expression
in peripheral blood on the two occasions assayed (at 14 and 17 years of
age), and in AGS3133 (Genotype ARF1 R99H) on the one occasion
tested at 15 years of age (Fig. 1j and Supplementary information). IFN
signalling status could not be assessed in RH2003 or KW2022.
Taken together, these data indicate that mutation of the arginine
at position 99 in ARF1 underlies a previously unrecognized human type
I interferonopathy.
ARF1 R99C induces STING-dependent type I IFN activation
To understand the molecular basis of enhanced type I IFN signalling in
the context of this human type I in terferonopathy, we examined the
impact of ARF1 R99C expression on innate immune activation. The
activity of ARF1 R99C was compared with ARF1 Q71L, which locks the
protein in its GTP-bound state, and T31N which is trapped in the GDP-
bound state
26. In HEK293 cells stably expressing STING (293-Dual-
hSTING-R232), transient expression of ARF1 R99C was suf ﬁcient to
induce type I IFN signalling in a dose-dependent manner, as assessed
by IFN stimulated response element (ISRE) reporter activity (Fig.2a, b
and Supplementary Fig. 2a). Of note, mutation of ARF1 R99 to H, A, E or
K induced robust type I IFN signalling to a similar extent as R99C in
reporter assays. This suggests that any substitution at position 99
would lead to chronic type I IFN release (Supplementary Fig. 2b, c).
ARF1 Q71L also induced ISRE promoter activity, albeit less robustly
than R99C, while ARF1 T31N had only a minor effect. STING was
required for induction of type I IFN signalling by ARF1 R99C in
HEK293T cells (Fig.2c and Supplementary Fig. 2d). To avoid triggering
high background cGAS-STING dependent responses by plasmid
transfection, we then used a lentiviral transduction strategy.
Lentivirus-mediated expression of ARF1 R99C in A549-ISRE reporter
cells, that naturally express STING and cGAS, resulted in activation of
type I IFN signalling (Fig. 2d). These data suggest that endogenous
cGAS-STING proteins are sufﬁcient for signalling induction. Expression
of WT ARF1 had no effect, compared to treatment with IFN- β and
cGAMP used as positive controls. Besides inducing type I IFN via IRF3,
cGAS-STING signalling also enhances NF-κB activity
27. In line with this,
expression of ARF1 R99C in A549 cells induced NF- κB signalling
(Fig. 2e), whereas expression of ARF1 WT had no effect. Activity of the
kinase TBK1 is required downstream of cGAS-STING to activate NF-κB
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42150-4
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:6770 2

and IRF328. As expected, overexpression of either R99C or Q71L ARF1 in
HEK293T cells ectopically expressing cGAS and STING signi ﬁcantly
increased the amount of active (i.e. phosphorylated) TBK1 (Fig.2f, g).
Of note, a decreased amount of endogenous STING protein upon co-
transfection with ARF1 R99C is consistent with STING activation
leading to degradation, as observed for STING activation by cGAMP
stimulation (Fig.2e)
13.
To assess these observations in a more physiological setting, we
performed experiments using primary humanﬁbroblasts derived from
healthy individuals, and from an ARF1-mutated patient. First, primary
human lung cells from healthy donors were complemented with ARF1
WT and ARF1 R99C by lentiviral transduction. Only the expression of
ARF1 R99C, and exposure to the positive controls cGAMP and IFN- β,
resulted in upregulation of ISG mRNAs (OAS1, Mx1) in primary human
lung ﬁbroblasts (Fig. 2h, Supplementary Fig. 2e). To determine whe-
ther patient-derived primary ﬁbroblasts release type I IFN, we trans-
ferred supernatant fromﬁbroblast cultures of healthy donors (n1 and
f1, genotype ARF1 WT) and one patient (#AGS460, heterozygous ARF1
R99C) on to type I IFN signalling reporter HEK293T cells. Only
supernatants from the patient-derived cells resulted in a signi ﬁcant
induction of the reporter (Fig. 2i).
Taken together, these results indicate that expression of ARF1
R99C induces a STING-dependent type I IFN response in cell line
models and patient-derived primary cells.
Mitochondrial DNA released in the presence of ARF1 R99C
triggers cGAS activity
Since the induction of type I IFN signalling by ARF1 R99C was depen-
dent on STING (Fig. 2c), we wondered whether and how cGAS may be
involved. Inhibition of cGAS activity using a pharmacological inhibitor,
G140, signiﬁcantly reduced ISRE promoter activation by ARF1 R99C in
293-Dual-hSTING-R232 cells (Supplementary Fig. 3a). In line with this,
expression of ARF1 WT and R99C via lentiviral transduction in WT and
cGAS KO THP-1 monocytes revealed that IFN signalling was only
induced in the presence of cGAS (Fig. 3a). As expected, IFN signalling
upon stimulation with IFN- β and cGAMP was barely affected. These
results suggest that cGAS facilitates type I IFN signalling induced by
ARF1 R99C. ARF1 has been reported to regulate mitochondrial
amphipathic helix
SW1
interswitch
SW2
h
myristilation
anchor
1 181
R99
i j
IFI27
IFI44L
IFIT1
ISG15
RSAD2
SIGLEC1
CMPK2
DDX60
EPSTI1
FBXO39
HERC5
HES4
IFI44
IFI6
IFIH1
IRF7
LAMP3
LY6E
MX1
NRIR
OAS1
OASL
OTOF
SPATS2L
-5
0
5
10
Interferon signature genes
RQ Value
healthy controlsR99
human      DSNDRERVNEARE
Chimpanzee DSNDRERVNEARE
Gorilla    DSNDRERVNEARE
Rat        DSNDRERVNEARE
Mouse      DSNDRERVNEARE
Dog        DSNDRERVNEARE
Chicken    DSNDRERVNEARE
Lamprey    DSNDRERVNEARE
Yeast      DSNDRSRIGEARE
*****.*:.****
a
b c
d e
f
g
patient
GTPase
Fig. 1 | Genetic identiﬁcation of ARF1 R99C and clinical phenotype.
a–g Erythematous vasculitic chilblain-like lesions on the hands (a)a n df a c e(b)o f
AGS460 aged 9 years. Right hand of the same patient at age 18 years showing frank
tissue loss (c). Similar lesions were observed on the hands and feet of patients
RH2003 (d, e) and KW2022 (f, g) ,a tt h ea g e so f1 8a n d2y e a r sr e s p e c t i v e l y .
h Schematic overview of the domain structure of ARF1. Residue R99 is indicated by
a red arrow. SW, Switch domain. i Multiple sequence alignment showing the con-
servation of residue R99 of ARF1 in indicated species. j ISG proﬁle of patient
AGS3133 (red) compared to the average of 27 healthy donors (blue). n =2 7( b l u e
bars, healthy donors) ± SD; n = 1 (red bars, patient). See also Supplementary Fig. 1.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42150-4
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:6770 3

25-
25-
25-
25-
+ARF1
vector
d
vector
vector
WT
R99C
Q71L
T31N
0
1
2
3
pTBK1/TBK1 band intensity
[fold]
+STING
e
WT
T31N
Q71L
R99C FLAG 
c
+ARF1
vector
0
1
2
3
4
5ISRE-Fluc [fold]
WT
R99C
WT
R99C
- STING
+ STING
h
WT
R99C
Q71L
T31N
0
5
10
15AUC [fold]
b
vector
WT
R99C
IFN-β
cGAMP
0
5
10
15
40
60ISRE-LLuc [fold ]
STING
GAPDH
FLAG
*
**
**
**
WT
R99C
WT
***
***
***
[kDa] [kDa]
[kDa]
ARF1
*
+cGAS
nd
**
*** ** ***
vector
WT
R99C
cGAMP
IFN-β
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
OAS1 mRNA [log10 fold]
GAPDH
STING
FLAG 
*
*
*
[kDa]
pTBK1
FLAG
TBK1
IRF3
vector
GAPDH
STING
cGAS
ARF1
[kDa]
T31N
vector
WT
R99C
Q71L
+STINGvector
+cGAS
vector
f
R99C
vector
WT
R99C
IFN-β
cGAMP
0
1
2
3
4NF-kB-SEAP [fold]
FLAG
STING
GAPDH
* ***
[kDa]
g
n1
f1
R99C
cGAMP
1
10
100ISRE-SEAP [fold]
SN 
transfer
***
***
healthy
patient
i
0
1
2
3
4ISRE-SEAP [fold]
WT
R99C
Q71L
T31N
***
***
***
a
-STING
+STING
Fig. 2 | Expression of ARF1 R99C induces a STING-dependent type I IFN
response. aISRE promoter activity by SEAP reporter in 293-Dual-hSTING-R232 cells
transiently expressing FLAG-tagged ARF1 WT, R99C, Q71L or T31N on (32 h post
transfection and normalised to cell viability). Dots represent mean ofn =3±S E M
(biological replicates). Lower panel: Corresponding immunoblots of whole-cell
lysates (WCLs) stained with anti-FLAG.b Area under the curve analysis of the data in
(a). c ISRE promoter activity by Fireﬂy luciferase (Fluc) quantiﬁcation in
HEK293T cells transiently expressing STING (+STING) or empty vector (-STING) and
FLAG-tagged ARF1 WT and R99C (32 h post transfection and normalised to GAPDH-
Renilla luciferase). Dots represent mean ofn = 3 ± SEM (biological replicates).
Lower panel: Corresponding immunoblots of WCLs stained by anti-FLAG.d, e ISRE
(d)o rN F -κB( e) promoter activity in A549 Dual cells transduced with ARF1 WT and
R99C. IFN-β (1000 U/mL, 16 h) and cGAMP (10 µg/ml, 16 h) served as positive
controls. Bars represent mean of n = 3 ± SEM (biological replicates). Lower panels:
Corresponding immunoblots of WCLs stained by anti-FLAG, anti-STING and anti-
GAPDH. f Exemplary immunoblot of HEK293T WCLs transiently expressing
indicated ARF1 constructs, cGAS and STING. Blots were stained with anti-pTBK1,
anti-TBK1, anti-IRF3, anti-FLAG and anti-GAPDH.g Quantiﬁcation of the pTBK1 band
intensities in (f) normalized to TBK1. Bars represent mean of n = 4 (vector, WT),
n = 3 (R99C, Q71L, T31N) ± SEM (biological replicates).h qPCR of OAS1 mRNA in
primary normal human lungﬁbroblasts transduced to express ARF1 WT and R99C
72 h post transduction. IFN-β (1000 U/mL, 16 h) and cGAMP (10 µg/ml, 16 h). Bars
represent mean of n = 3 (cGAMP, IFN-β)a n d n = 6 (vector, WT, R99C) ± SEM (bio-
logical replicates). Lower panel: Corresponding immunoblots of WCLs stained with
anti-FLAG, anti-STING and anti-GAPDH.i Supernatant (SN) transfer of primary
ﬁbroblasts from healthy donors (n1, f1) or a patient (AGS460) to 293-Dual-hSTING-
R232 cells. IFN-β (100 U/mL, 48 h) and cGAMP (10µg/ml, 48 h). SEAP (ISRE) activity
48 h post transfer and normalised to cell viability. Bars represent mean ofn =5( n 1 )
and n = 6 (f1, R99C, cGAMP) ± SEM (biological replicates). See also Supplementary
Fig. 2. Statistical analysis was performed using two-tailed Student’s t test with
Welch’s correction. *p
<0 . 0 5 ;* *p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001. ExactP values and Source data
are provided in the Source data ﬁle.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42150-4
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:6770 4

homeostasis29,30. Thus, we examined whether mutation at R99 may
disrupt this function, promoting release of mtDNA, which in turn
might activate cGAS
31,32. Electron microscopy of HEK293T cells
revealed mitochondrial disruption in the presence of ARF1 R99C, but
not WT ARF1 (Fig. 3b). Indicative of mitochondrial damage, small
electron-dense granules were observed in the mitochondria of R99C-
expressing cells (Fig. 3b, left panel). With increasing mitochondrial
degeneration these granules became larger, and the intermembrane
space of the cristae more inﬂated (Fig. 3b, middle and right panel). To
determine the presence of mtDNA in the cytoplasm, we performed
fractionation of cells into nuclear, cytoplasmic and mitochondrial
fractions (Fig. 3c). We detected higher levels of mtDNA in the cyto-
plasm upon overexpression of ARF1 R99C and Q71L compared to WT
ARF1 (Fig. 3d). Treatment with ABT-737 and Q-VD-OPH (ABT/QVD), to
damage mitochondria and promote mtDNA release
33, was used as a
positive control. Notably, in primary ﬁbroblasts of a patient with a
vector
WT
R99C
Q71L
ABT/QVD
1
10cytoplasmic mtDNA [fold]
cd
ARF1 WT ARF1 R99C
1
10
100ISRE-LLuc [fold]
a
FLAG
STING
GAPDH
THP-1 WT
THP-1 cGAS KO
cGAS
vector
WT
R99C
IFN-β
cGAMP[kDa]
**
* *
e
b
GADPH 
TFAM 
LAMIN B1 
FLAG 
vector
WT
R99C
WCL
Q71L
cytosol mito.
vector
WT
R99C
Q71L
vector
WT
R99C
Q71L
ABT/QVD
38- 
[kDa]
70-
25-
25-
*
*
0.1
1
10
100cytoplasmic mtDNA [fold]
vector
WT
R99C
ABT/QVD
VCP+++ ----
vector
WT
R99C
0
1
2
3
MFN1/GAPDH band  intensity
[fold]
*
*
n2
f1
I7
R99C
0
1
2
3cytoplasmic mtDNA [fold]
healthy
patient
vector WT R99C
0
1
2
3
4
Relative expression
OAS1 mRNA  [fol d]
ARF1
**
vector
WT
R99C
GAPDH
MFN1
FLAG
RHOT1
FLAG-ARF1
f
*** ** **
**
ABT/QVD
ABT/QVD
38- 
90-
25-
70-
[kDa]
g
j
WT
R99C
0
100
200
300Branches (per cell)
WT
R99C
0
10
20
30Branch length (per cell)
*
***
WT
R99C
0
100
200
300
400
500Perimeter
WT
R99C
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Circularity
**
WTR99C
mitotracker
TagRFP+DAPI
mitotracker
skeleton Inset
i
h
*
NT
+ddC
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42150-4
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:6770 5

heterozygous R99C mutation in ARF1 (AGS460), cytoplasmic mtDNA
levels were signiﬁcantly elevated compared to control ARF1 WT donor
ﬁbroblasts (n2, f1, I7) (Fig. 3e). Depletion of mtDNA using 2 ′,3′
dideoxycytidine (ddC)34 in U2OS-STING cells reduced the induction of
the ISG OAS1 in the presence of ARF1 R99C (Fig. 3f, Supplementary
Fig. 3b). In line with this, expression ofIFNB1, Mx1 and RSAD2 induced
by ARF1 R99C expression was also reduced upon mtDNA depletion
(Supplementary Fig. 3d–f). Of note, mtDNA depletion did not change
the response to herring testis DNA (HT-DNA) (Supplementary Fig. 3c).
In summary, these data show that expression of ARF1 R99C pro-
motes mitochondrial disruption and leakage of mtDNA into the cyto-
plasm, and a subsequent induction of ISG expression.
ARF1 R99C destabilizes mitochondria by interfering with mito-
fusin 1 levels
Since ARF1 has been reported to be involved in mitophagy (i.e.
autophagic turnover of defective mitochondria), and in the regulation
of mitochondrial fusion and ﬁssion29,35, an impairment of either pro-
cess by ARF1 R99C might cause aberrant mtDNA release via disturbed
mitochondrial homeostasis
36–38. Thus, we explored whether mito-
phagy is altered by ARF1 R99C, with subsequent impact on mtDNA
release. In the presence of both ARF1 WT and R99C, autophagosomes
accumulated in HEK293T GFP-LC3B reporter cells (Supplementary
Fig. 3g). Baﬁlomycin A1 treatment masked the effect of both ARF1 WT
and R99C, suggesting that both proteins reduce autophagosome
turnover (Supplementary Fig. 3h). Notably, in autophagy-impaired
ATG5 KO cells, ARF1 R99C still mediated mtDNA release compared to
WT and vector conditions (Supplementary Fig. 3i), suggesting that a
defect in autophagy is not responsible for mtDNA release in the pre-
sence of ARF1 R99C. Mitotracker staining of mitochondria in trans-
fected HeLa cells revealed a signiﬁcant reduction in the mitochondrial
footprint in the presence of ARF1 R99C (Supplementary Fig. 3j, k),
indicating changes in mitochondrialﬁssion or fusion. In depth analysis
of the mitochondrial network stained by mitotracker in the presence of
WT or R99C ARF1 in HeLa cells revealed that the mitochondrial peri-
meter is signi ﬁcantly increased, whereas the circularity of the mito-
chondria is reduced (Fig. 3g, h). Furthermore, quanti ﬁcation of the
mitochondrial skeleton network showed that in the presence of ARF1
R99C the branch length is increased, and, conversely, the number of
branches in the network per cell reduced (Fig.3g, h). This suggests that
the mitochondria are elongated, typically expected either upon
decreased ﬁssion or increased fusion
39,40. Subsequent analysis of
phosphorylated levels of the mitochondrial ﬁssion factor Drp1
revealed no change in the presence of ARF1 R99C (Supplementary
Fig. 3l). In contrast, the mitochondrial fusion marker MFN1
accumulated signiﬁcantly in the presence of ARF1 R99C but not ARF1
WT (Fig. 3i). This suggests that increased fusion but not alterations in
ﬁssion explain the perturbation of mitochondria in the presence of
ARF1 R99C. Consistently, ER-mitochondria contacts, that occur during
mitochondrial fusion, were visibly increased (Fig. 3b). In yeast, ARF1
deﬁciency leads to Fzo1 (yeast equivalent of MFN1/2) misfolding and
aggregation
29. To understand whether this impacts mtDNA release by
ARF1 R99C, we induced MFN1 turnover by overexpression of the E3
ubiquitin ligase Valosin Containing Protein (VCP)
29. Notably, over-
expression of VCP reduced mtDNA release by ARF1 R99C almost back
to basal levels (Fig. 3j, Supplementary Fig. 3m).
Taken together, these data suggest that ARF1 R99C promotes
hyperfusion of mitochondria by MFN1 accumulation, leading to a
leakage of mtDNA into the cytoplasm.
Mutation of R99 impairs ARF1 GTPase activity and association
with the COPI complex
ARF1 is a small GTPase, and both GTP-GDP cycling and co-factor
binding are known to be crucial for its enzymatic activity18. Analyses of
ARF1 structures, based on PDB: 2J5941, indicated that residue R99 is not
directly involved in binding to GTP or other ARF1 interaction partners.
Instead, R99, located on helixα5, forms salt bridges with residue D26,
thereby stabilizing the loopβ1-α3 which is part of the GTP-binding site
of ARF1 (Fig. 4a). D26 is not directly involved in the coordination of
GTP binding (Fig.4a). However, correct positioning of the loopβ1-α3i s
crucial for the stability of ARF1 and GTP hydrolysis
41. To experimentally
assess the effects of the R99C mutation on protein stability, GTP
binding and GTP hydrolysis, we puriﬁed recombinant ARF1 WT, ARF1
R99C and ARF1 Q71L (Supplementary Fig. 4a), and performed com-
parative ﬂuorescence thermal shift assays as well as in vitro GTPase
assays. Both ARF1 WT and R99C proteins bind GTP with similar afﬁnity,
as revealed by an increase of the melting temperatures by ~16 °C of
both proteins in the presence of GTP (Fig. 4b, c). However, a 15 °C
lower melting temperature of ARF1 R99C compared to ARF1 WT or
ARF1 Q71L, indicates reduced conformational stability (Supplementary
Fig. 4b). Consequently, the in vitro GTPase activity of ARF1 R99C was
signiﬁcantly lower than that of WT ARF1 (Fig. 4d). Of note, reduced
conformational stability does not lead to low expression levels of
ectopically expressed R99C ARF1, which would be indicative of an
unstable protein (Figs.2–4). In addition, ARF1 dimerization, known to
be required for vesicle transport activity and GTP hydrolysis
18,42,w a s
similar between mutant and WT ARF1 (Supplementary Fig. 4c). To
promote the GTPase activity of ARF1 R99C, we co-expressed mutant
ARF1 with the ARF1 GTPase activating protein (GAP) ARFGAP1, and
with the GTP exchange factor (GEF) BIG1
22. Accelerating GTPase
Fig. 3 | ARF1 R99C disrupts mitochondria, releasing mtDNA into the cytoplasm.
a ISRE promoter activity quantiﬁed by Lucia luciferase (LLuc) in THP-1-Dual WT
(grey) or cGAS KO (pink) transduced to express ARF1 WT or R99C (72 h post
transduction). IFN-β (1000 U/mL, 16 h) and cGAMP (10µg/ml, 16 h). Bars represent
mean of n = 3 ± SEM (biological replicates). Lower panel: Corresponding immuno-
blots of WCLs stained by anti-FLAG, anti-STING, anti-cGAS and anti-GAPDH.
b Exemplary electron microscopy analysis of HEK293T cells transiently expressing
ARF1 WT or R99C. Electron-dense granules, black arrows. Inﬂated cristae, white
arrows. cp, cytoplasm. er, endoplasmic reticulum. g, Golgi apparatus. lv, large
vesicle. ly, lysosome. m, mitochondria. nc, nucleus.c Exemplary immunoblots
showing fractionation of HEK293T cells transiently expressing ARF1 WT, R99C,
Q71L or vector. WCLs and fraction blots stained with anti-FLAG, anti-TFAM, anti-
LAMIN B1 and anti-GAPDH. This experiment was repeated to similar results inde-
pendently at least two times. d qPCR of mtDNA (MT-D-Loop) in the cytosolic
fraction of (c) normalized to cellular mtDNA (mtDNA/nuclear DNA).n =3±S E M .
e qPCR of mtDNA (MT-D-Loop) in the cytosolic fraction of primary ﬁbroblasts of
healthy donors (n2, f1, I7) or patient (AGS460) relative to total normalized cellular
mtDNA (mtDNA/nuclear DNA).n = 5 ± SEM. f qPCR of OAS1 mRNA in U2OS cells
stably expressing STING and depleted of mtDNA by ddC, or untreated (NT).
Transiently transfected with empty vector, ARF1 WT or R99C. n =6±S E M .
g Exemplary live cell confocal laser scanning microscopy images of HeLa cells
transiently expressing TagRFP-tagged ARF1 WT, R99C or vector control (red). Cells
were stained with Mitotracker (grey, 1µM, 30 min, 37 °C). Nuclei, Hoechst (blue).
Scale bar, 10 μm. h Analysis of the perimeter, circularity, branch length (per cell)
and branches (per cell) of the images in ( g). Lines represent mean of n =3 7( W T ,
perimeter), n = 29 (R99C, perimeter), n = 80 (WT, circularity), n = 60 (R99C, circu-
larity), n = 40 (WT, branch length, branches), n = 29 (R99C, branch length, bran-
ches) ± SEM. i Exemplary immunoblot of WCLs of HEK293T cells transiently
expressing ARF1 WT, R99C or vector. Blots were stained with anti-MFN1, anti-
RHOT1, anti-FLAG and anti-GAPDH. Quantiﬁcation of the band intensities of MFN1
normalized to GAPDH. Bars represent mean of n = 6 ± SEM (biological replicates).
j qPCR of mtDNA (MT-D-Loop) in the cytosolic fraction of HEK293T cells transiently
expressing ARF1 WT, R99C or vector control as well as VCP normalized to cellular
mtDNA (mtDNA/nuclear DNA).n = 5 ± SEM. See also Supplementary Fig. 3. Statis-
tical analysis was performed using two-tailed Student’s t test with Welch’sc o r r e c -
tion or two-way ANOVA (f). *p
<0 . 0 5 ;* *p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001. Exact P values and
Source data are provided in the Source data ﬁle.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42150-4
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:6770 6

20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
0
1×105
2×105
3×105
4×105
5×105
Temperature (°C)
Normalized Fluorescence
a
b
FLAG
vector
WT
R99C
Q71L
T31N
0
50
100
150GTPase activity [%]
[kDa]
c
20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
0
2×105
4×105
6×105
8×105
1×106
Temperature (°C)
Normalized Fluorescence
ARF1 R99C
-GTP +GTP
59°C 75°C→
44°C 61°C→
ARF1 WT
-GTP +GTP
ARF1
R99
D26
GTP
α5
α3
β1
*
**
vector
ARFGAP1
ARFGEF1
vector
ARFGAP1
ARFGEF1
vector
ARFGAP1
ARFGEF1
0
2
4
6ISRE-SEAP [fold]
e
+WT +R99Cvector
HA (ARFGAP1)
FLAG (ARF1)
STING
GAPDH
* *
d
f
COPA
COPB1
COPB2
COPG1
tGFP (ARFGEF1)
g
[kDa]
02468 1 0
0
50
100
150
-log P (Enrichment)
enrichment [fold]
-4
-2
0
2
4
Gene rank
ratio ARF1 WT vs R99C
[fold change]
hCOPI-associated
GO terms
vector
WT
R99C
FLAG-ARF1
IP:
Anti-FLAG
WCL
COPB
ARF1
COPB
ARF1
GAPDH
[kDa]
*
Fig. 4 | GTPase activity of ARF1 R99C is reduced. aModel of ARF1 (PDB: 2J59) ATP-
bound (orange/yellow). R99 and D26 are highlighted.b, c Interaction of ARF1 WT
(b)o rR 9 9 C(c) with GTP and protein stability analysed by ﬂuorescence thermal
shift assay. Data are representative of two biological replicates.d GTPase activity of
indicated ARF1 mutants puriﬁed from HEK293T cells expressing FLAG-ARF1. Lower
panel: Corresponding immunoblot stained with anti-FLAG. Bars represent mean of
n = 4 ± SEM (biological replicates).e ISRE promoter activity in 293-Dual-hSTING-
R232 cells quantiﬁed by SEAP transiently expressing ARF1 WT or R99C with indi-
cated GEF or GAP normalized to cell viability. Corresponding immunoblots of WCLs
stained with anti-HA, anti-turboGFP (tGFP), anti-FLAG, anti-STING and anti-GAPDH.
Bars represent mean of n = 3 ± SEM (biological replicates).f Protein abundance in
ARF1 WT versus R99C large scale puriﬁcation from HEK293T cells as assessed by
SILAC mass spectrometry. Components of the COPI machinery are highlighted in
red. g Gene Ontology Analysis (PantherDB) of the top 30 proteins less associated
with ARF1 R99C in (f). Fold enrichment of individual GO terms versus the −log P
value. COPI-associated GO terms are highlighted in red.h Co-immunoprecipitation
using anti-FLAG beads from WCLs of HEK293T cells transiently expressing FLAG-
ARF1 WT, R99C or vector. Immunoblots stained with anti-COPB, anti-ARF1 and anti-
GAPDH. Asterisk denotes unspeciﬁc background band. The experiment was repe-
ated three times independently to similar results. See also Supplementary Fig. 4.
Statistical analysis was performed using two-tailed Student’s t test with Welch’s
correction. *p <0 . 0 5 ;* *p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001. Exact P values and Source data are
provided in the Source data ﬁle.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42150-4
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:6770 7

activity by a GAP, or increasing GDP/GTP exchange by a GEF, rescued
aberrant type I IFN induction by ARF1 R99C in 293-Dual-hSTING-R232
cells (Fig. 4e).
Destabilization of ARF1 may also result in decreased binding to
important effectors and co-factors. To explore this possibility, we
performed stable isotope labelling of amino acids in cell culture
(SILAC) mass spectrometry experiments, comparing the interaction
of endogenous proteins to either ARF1 WT or ARF1 R99C expressed
in HEK293T cells, in heavy and light arginine containing media,
respectively (Supplementary Fig. 4d). Proteins were puri ﬁed while
maintaining endogenous interaction partners (Supplementary
Fig. 4e), and ~1700 co-puri ﬁed proteins were identi ﬁed by mass
spectrometry analysis of the lysates of two independent pulldowns
(Supplementary Data 2). The ratio between ARF1 (heavy labelled)
and ARF1 R99C (light labelled) was at 1 and their intensity the highest
among the detected proteins, suggesting similar pulldown ef ﬁ-
ciency (Supplementary Fig. 4f). For further analysis, the 166 proteins
that were detected in both independent replicates were considered
(Fig. 4f and Supplementary Fig. 4f). This analysis suggested that
major protein components of COPI complex, COPA, COPB1, COPB2,
COPG1, showed 1.18, 1.32, 1.36 or 1.41-fold lower association
with ARF1 R99C. Panther DB aided Gene Ontology (GO) term ana-
lysis of the top 30 proteins binding with lower af ﬁnity to ARF1 R99C
showed that interaction with proteins of the COPI pathway was
signiﬁcantly reduced by the mutation R99C (GoTerm: COPI vesicle
coat (GO:0030126), >100-fold enrichment in analysed list, p = 7.42E-
09; COPI-coated vesicle membrane (GO:0030663), >100-fold
enrichment in analysed list, p = 2.27E-08; COPI-coated vesicle
(GO:0030137), 100-fold enrichment in analysed list, p = 5.42E-08)
(Fig. 4g, Supplementary Data 3). All human genes in the PantherDB
database were used as a reference list. In line with the SILAC
experiments, COPB associated less to overexpressed ARF1 R99C in
HEK293T cells than ARF1 WT in co-immunoprecipitation experi-
ments (Fig. 4h).
Altogether, biochemical characterization revealed that R99C
reduced conformational stability, GTPase activity and association of
ARF1 with components of the COPI complex.
ARF1 is required for retrograde transport from the ERGIC to
the ER
To understand whether the reduced association of ARF1 R99C with
components of the COPI transport machinery might affect STING
trafﬁcking and signalling directly, we sought to activate STING inde-
pendently of cGAS. Indeed, bypassing the requirement for cGAS by
treatment with cGAMP showed that ARF1 R99C further enhances IFN
signalling compared to WT ARF1 (Fig.5a, b). Consistently, we observed
elevated IFN signalling in the presence of ARF1 R99C upon expression
of an active STING mutant (R238A/Y240A) that does not bind or
require cGAMP
43,44 (Fig. 5c and Supplementary Fig. 5a). As expected,
STING with a mutation in S366A, that is unable to bind to TBK1, did not
induce type I IFN signalling, despite being expressed at similar levels to
WT STING (Supplementary Fig. 5b). Neither ARF1 WT nor R99C caused
further signalling activation. The above results suggest that, in addi-
tion to promoting mtDNA leakage to the cytoplasm, ARF1 R99C also
enhances type I IFN signalling through changes in STING traf ﬁcking
and signalling downstream of cGAS/cGAMP. As STING recycling has
been proposed to occur by retrograde transport via COPI vesicles
14–17,
we then asked if the decreased association of ARF1 R99C with COPI
vesicles might result in decreased STING recycling, and thus impaired
signal termination of STING and prolonged IFN induction. To this end,
we explored the impact of patient-associated mutant ARF1 on retro-
grade Golgi/ERGIC-ER transport. Electron microscopy analysis
revealed that ARF1 R99C expression led to altered Golgi/ERGIC
structures, whereas empty vector or ARF1 WT transfection had no
effect (Fig. 5d). Indeed, scanning-transmission-electron-microscopy
(STEM) tomography analysis revealed that, in the presence of ARF1
R99C, the volume density of the lumen of the Golgi is increased
(Fig. 5e), whereas the volume density of vesicles released from the
Golgi and the ER is signi ﬁcantly reduced compared to ARF1 WT
(Fig. 5f). Focusing on the ERGIC, confocal microscopy analysis con-
ﬁrmed the alteration of Golgi structure. Speciﬁcally, it showed that the
number of ERGIC-53 positive vesicles per cell i.e. ERGIC vesicles, was
signiﬁcantly reduced in the presence of ARF1 R99C and ARF1 Q71L
(Fig. 5g, left panel, Supplementary Fig. 5c). Conversely, the area
occupied by individual ERGIC-53 positive structures was increased
upon ARF1 R99C and Q71L expression (Fig.5g, middle panel), while the
total area of the ERGIC-53 positive structures per cell did not change
markedly (Fig. 5g, right panel). Thus, in the presence of ARF1 R99C,
fewer but larger vesicles/ERGIC structures are present, suggesting
impaired budding of vesicles from the ERGIC. To examine whether
ARF1 R99C impacts general ERGIC to ER traf ﬁcking, we used a ther-
molabile VSV-G protein fused to the KDEL retrograde traf ﬁcking
signal
45. Upon decreasing the temperature to 32 °C, the normally ER-
resident construct is transported to the Golgi, while shifting to 40 °C
partially unfolds VSV-G thereby inducing retrograde transport back to
the ER. Both ARF1 WT and R99C expression did not impact VSV-G
increased co-localisation with the cis-Golgi (marker GM130) upon
lowering the temperature (Fig. 5h, Supplementary Fig. 5d). However,
when raising the temperature to 40 °C, retrograde transport was
almost completely abrogated in the presence of ARF1 R99C, but
unaffected by ARF1 WT expression (Fig. 5h).
In summary, the above data demonstrate that ARF1 R99C causes a
defect in Golgi-ER retrograde traf ﬁcking and reduced vesicular bud-
ding from the Golgi/ERGIC.
Active STING is trapped at the Golgi/ERGIC by ARF1 R99C
To examine the consequences of defective retrograde transport on
STING in the presence of ARF1 R99C, we examined the co-localisation
of ARF1 and STING-eGFP in HeLa cells relative to endogenous markers
of the Golgi network (Fig.6a–f, Supplementary Fig. 6a–c). As controls,
ARF1 Q71L is expected to show increased membrane association with
the Golgi/ERGIC, whereas ARF1 T31N is thought to be more
cytoplasmic
18. While ARF1 WT, R99C and Q71L localised similarly to the
cis-Golgi as revealed by co-localisation with GM130, ARF1 T31N showed
a reduced co-localisation with GM130 (Fig.6a, b). Notably, expression
of both ARF1 R99C and Q71L led to a signi ﬁcant increase of eGFP-
STING localization at the cis-Golgi signal compared to WT and T31N
ARF1 (Fig. 6a, c). Analysis of ERGIC localisation revealed that ARF1
R99C and Q71L showed markedly increased co-localisation with the
ERGIC compared to ARF1 WT (Supplementary Fig. 6a –c). Consistent
with this, expression of ARF1 R99C and Q71L signiﬁcantly increased the
co-localisation between eGFP-STING and ERGIC-53, whereas ARF1 WT
and T31N had little or no impact on STING localisation at the ERGIC
(Supplementary Fig. 6a–c). The presence of ARF1 R99C did not alter
the localization of eGFP-STING with respect to the trans-Golgi network
(TGN46) (Supplementary Fig. 6d –f). In primary ﬁbroblasts from a
healthy donor (genotype ARF1 WT) , endogenous STING only accu-
mulates at the Golgi network (GM130) upon stimulation with cGAMP
(Fig. 6d, e). In contrast, in ﬁbroblasts from a patient heterozygous for
the R99C mutation in ARF1 (#AGS460), STING accumulated at the cis-
Golgi/ERGIC even in the absence of cGAMP stimulation. This is con-
sistent with the data from our cell line experiments (Fig. 6d, e). To
analyse the effect of ARF1 mutants on the localization of endogenous
STING in more detail, we employed super-resolution microscopy (sti-
mulated emission/depletion microscopy, STED). Two colour STED
microscopy in primary human lungﬁbroblasts transduced with empty,
ARF1 WT or ARF R99C expressing lentiviruses con ﬁrmed that, in the
presence of ARF1 R99C, endogenous STING accumulates at/around
the cis-Golgi (GM130) network (exemplary image in Fig. 6f, further
images in Supplementary Fig. 6g).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42150-4
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:6770 8

To determine whether STING accumulates in its active state at the
Golgi/ERGIC, we co-stained phospho-TBK1 (p-S172) as a marker of
STING activity in situ. Confocal analysis revealed that in the presence
of transduced ARF1 R99C, but not ARF1 WT, increased amounts of
activated TBK1 were present in the proximity of the ERGIC in primary
human lung ﬁbroblasts (Fig. 6g, h).
Taken together, these results suggest that ARF1 plays a role in the
retrograde transport of STING from the Golgi/ERGIC to the ER. When
trafﬁcking is affected due to impaired ARF1 GTPase activity (e.g. by
mutations at R99C or Q71L), STING accumulates at the cis-Golgi/ERGIC
in both cell models and primary cells isolated from patients, leading to
activation of TBK1 and sustained IFN induction/signalling.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Co-locali sation VSV-G/GM130
[Pearson' R value]
0
5
10
15
20ISRE-SEAP [fold]
WT R99C
a
f
g
STING
S366AR238A
Y240A
de
h
vector
WT
R99C
Q71L
T31N
0
200
400
600
ERGIC-53 particle count
ARF1
vector
WT
R99C
Q71L
T31N
0.01
0.1
1
10
ERGIC-53 particle size
vector
WT
R99C
Q71L
T31N
0
50
100
150
200ERGIC-53 total area
vector
0
10
20
30
40
Luminal Volume de nsity
[% of test fie ld]
WT
R99C
0
1
2
3
Vesicle Volume density
[%o ft e s tfield]
20
30
40
50
60AUC [fold]
b
0
5
10
15ISRE-SEAP [fold]
1.25
ARF1 ARF1
***
***
ns ns
**
***
***
***
ns
5
vector
FLAG
GAPDH
vector WT R99C
STING
more ER
more Golgi
ns
[kDa]
*
**
***
***
***
*** *** ** ** ** ns
+cGAMP
R99CWTR99CWT
*
vector
R99C
WT STING STING
***
vectorc
vector
vector
vectorWT
37°C
32°C
40°C
37°C 37°C
32°C
37°C
32°C
40°C
37°C 37°C
32°C
37°C
32°C
40°C
37°C 37°C
32°C
**
**
**
*
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42150-4
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:6770 9

Discussion
The avoidance of chronic activation of a type I IFN response is fun-
damental to immunological homeostasis4. Engagement of the cGAS-
STING pathway occurs through the recognition of DNA by cGAS
(‘Trigger’), and subsequent traf ﬁcking of STING from the ER to the
Golgi. To terminate such signalling, STING is transported back to the
ER (‘Recycling’) and degraded via autophagy (‘Removal’). Through an
analysis of the function of an ARF1 mutant associated with elevated IFN
signalling in vivo, we have identi ﬁed a previously unrecognised dual
role of the GTPase ARF1 in both preventing aberrant cGAS activation
and promoting signal termination by the recycling of STING (Supple-
mentary Fig 7). We show that functional ARF1 promotes mitochondrial
integrity, thereby preventing aberrant stimulation of cGAS by mtDNA.
In addition, we demonstrate a role for ARF1 in the termination of cGAS-
STING signalling, by facilitating COPI vesicle-mediated traf ﬁcking of
STING from the ERGIC to the ER. When the GTPase activity of ARF1 is
impaired, either by disease-associated mutations at R99 or by the
characterised GTP-locked Q71L mutation, type I IFN responses are
enhanced. Consequently, patients bearing a heterozygous R99 muta-
tion in ARF1 manifest features of chronic innate immune activation.
Complete disruption (e.g. by drugs such as Brefeldin A) or
depletion of ARF1 is well known to decrease STING-dependent
signalling
11,12,46.T h i se f f e c ti sm o s tl i k e l yd u et oag e n e r a l i s e dd i s -
turbance of the Golgi structure/transporting system 47, including the
anterograde transport of STING required for its activation. In contrast,
our investigation of a physiologically relevant human
interferonopathy-associated ARF1 mutant has allowed us to deﬁne an
ARF1-speciﬁc effect on retrograde STING traf ﬁcking, thus differ-
entiating it from a non-speciﬁc effect on anterograde transport.
GTPases are core components involved in the regulation of
mitochondrialﬁssion and fusion that include MFN1, MFN2, and OPA1.
A role of ARF1 in regulating Fzo1 (the yeast MFN1 homologue) was
previously proposed in yeast
29. In the absence of functional ARF1, Fzo1
accumulated, leading to a loss of mitochondrial fusion. Our data show
that human ARF1 also regulates mitochondrial fusion. Thus, non-
functional ARF1 leads to impaired mitochondrial integrity and aberrant
accumulation of MFN1. The human homologue of yeast Fzo1 asso-
ciated E3 ubiquitin ligase Cdc48, VCP, was able to resolve the mito-
chondrial fusion impairment consequent upon defective ARF1. These
data suggest that ARF1 plays an important role in mitochondrial fusion
and ﬁssion in mammals. Of note, it was recently shown that Golgi-
derived vesicles may aid mitochondrial fusion and ﬁssion, spatially
linking ARF1 and mitochondria
30,48. However, the precise role of ARF1
in mitochondrial fusion will require future study.
Previous work has shown that defects in retrograde transport can
mediate chronic type I IFN release in a cGAS dependent17 or indepen-
dent fashion14. Our mechanistic analyses indicate that IFN induction in
patients with ARF1 R99C is dependent on cGAS activity. Given
impaired mitochondrial integrity in both model and patient cells, our
data suggest that, even in the absence of a pathogen-derived cGAS
trigger, ARF1 dysfunction may lead to sterile inﬂammation. The relative
contribution of defects in mitochondrial maintenance and retrograde
transport of STING to an ARF1-dependent type I interferonopathy
disease-state remains to be determined. Although each process may be
sufﬁcient to cause disease
14,15,49, it is possible that these two aberrant
activities drive the mutant-associated phenotype synergistically, i.e.
stimulation of the cGAS-STING pathway via mtDNA is further exacer-
bated by defective signal termination. Improper termination of cGAS-
STING triggering in the presence of ARF1 R99C, e.g. after exogenous
triggers like viral infection, might accelerate and aggravate disease
progression. Future studies dissecting the different functions of ARF1
in the regulation of the IFN response to infectious diseases, and the
molecular mechanism by which ARF1 maintains mitochondrial integ-
rity, are warranted.
Our data add to the emerging evidence that impaired control of
cGAS-STING signal activation and termination is central to the patho-
genesis of a number of type I interferonopathies
4.T h e ﬁrst described
example of a Mendelian disease associated with chronic type I IFN
signalling was Aicardi–Goutières syndrome (AGS). Mutations in TREX1,
the RNase H2 complex, the deoxynucleoside triphosphate tripho-
sphohydrolase SAMHD1 and the U7 small nuclear RNP complex all
result in IFN induction by self DNA
4. Recently, we described pathogenic
mutations in mitochondrial ATPase family AAA domain-containing
protein 3 A (ATAD3A) to result in a leakage of mtDNA into the
cytosol
49. Furthermore, defects in STING trafﬁcking along the ER-Golgi
axis have been reported to underlie various type I interferonopathy
diseases. For example, activating mutations in STING cause SAVI
50–52,
where in vitro studies revealed that mutations in the oligomerisation
interface of STING (e.g. N154S, V155M and V147L, G207E, R281Q, R284G
and R284S) result in spontaneous cGAMP-independent accumulation
of STING at the Golgi, and aberrant induction of type I IFN signalling.
Related to this, dysregulation of STING retrieval from the Golgi, due to
heterozygous missense mutations in a component of COPI, coatomer
protein subunit alpha (COPA), lead to enhanced type I IFN
signalling
14,15,53. Here, STING has been suggested to be recruited to
COPA-containing COPI vesicles via SURF415,17, although other players
may also be involved in regulating and triggering retrograde transport
of STING. Besides recycling as a mechanism of signal termination,
active STING is captured for subsequent autophagy-dependent
degradation
11,13,54. Recently, it was shown that ARF1 may also have a
role in autophagy. However, our data show that cGAS-STING activation
by the ARF1 R99C mutation is not mediated by autophagy
55.F u t u r e
studies are needed to genetically dissect the relative contribution of
autophagy-mediated STING turnover and ARF1-mediated STING recy-
cling to overall cGAS/STING signal termination.
Our data indicate a general defect in retrograde trafﬁcking in the
presence of ARF1 R99C (Fig. 5g, h). Besides STING recycling, retro-
grade trafﬁcking retrieves key factors required for ER export
56,57,a n di s
central to ER and Golgi homeostasis 58.I ti st h u sl i k e l yt h a tn o n - I F N
mediated mechanisms also contribute to the disease phenotype
Fig. 5 | ARF1 is responsible for retrograde transport from the Golgi/ERGIC to
the ER. a ISRE promoter activity quantiﬁed by SEAP in 293-Dual-hSTING-R232 cells
transiently expressing FLAG-tagged ARF1 WT or R99C (32 h post transfection,
normalized to cell viability). cGAMP (1.25µg/ml or 5 µg/ml, 16 h). Bars represent
mean of n = 3 ± SEM (biological replicates). Lower panel: Representative corre-
sponding immunoblots stained with anti-FLAG, anti-STING and anti-GAPDH.b Area
under the curve analysis of the data in ( a). c ISRE-promoter activity quantiﬁed by
ﬁreﬂy luciferase in HEK93T cells transiently expressing ARF1 WT or R99C in the
presence of indicated STING mutants (32 h post transfection, normalised to
GAPDH-Renilla luciferase). Bars represent mean ofn = 3 ± SEM (biological repli-
cates). d Representative electron microscopic images of HEK293T cells transiently
expressing indicated ARF1 mutants. Luminal area (orange). Scale bar, 0.5μm.
e Golgi/ERGIC luminal volume and f associated vesicle volume quantiﬁed in
tomograms of cells in (d), as percentage of the total volume of the analysed section.
Bars represent mean ofn = 9 ± SEM (images).g Quantiﬁcation of particles of ERGIC-
53 staining (left panel), particle size (middle panel) or the total are (right panel), in
HeLa cells transiently expressing ARF1 WT, R99C, Q71L or T31N. Cells were stained
24 h post transfection with anti-ERGIC-53 and anti-FLAG. Black lines represent mean
of n = 61 (vector), n =3 9( W T ) ,n = 45 (R99C), n = 41 (Q71L, T31N) ± SEM (individual
cells).h Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient indicating co-localisation between GM130
and thermosensitive VSV-G (VSVG-ts045) in HeLa cells transiently expressing VSVG-
ts045-KDELR, ARF1 WT or ARF1 R99C. Temperature shifts (37 °C/32 °C/40 °C) as
indicated. Lines represent mean ofn = 27/19/27 (vector, 37 °C/32 °C/40 °C),n =2 4 /
27/14 (WT, 37 °C/32 °C/40 °C),n = 29/23/18 (R99C, 37 °C/32 °C/40 °C) ± SEM (cells).
See also Supplementary Fig. 5. Statistical analysis was performed using two-tailed
Student’s t test with Welch’s correction.: *p <0 . 0 5 ;* *p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001. Exact P
values and Source data are provided in the Source data ﬁle.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42150-4
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:6770 10

reported here, and that clinical disease caused by mutations in ARF1
may be variably accompanied by elevated type I IFN signalling. That
being said, the recording of elevated levels of ISGs in patient blood,
and the skin lesions present in three of the four cases that we ascer-
tained (Fig. 1), are highly characteristic of other Mendelian type I
interferonopathies
4,5. Some functions of ARF1 are redundant and may
be compensated by other ARF proteins 56,59,60. However, any such
compensation is clearly insuf ﬁcient in the case of the heterozygous
mutations at R99 of ARF1. We speculate that complete loss of ARF1
activity would not be viable. Of note, similar to other inter-
feronopathies with a defect in STING traf ﬁcking, such as the COPA
syndrome, one defective allele is suf ﬁcient for disease14.T h u s ,A R F 1
R99C and other disease-causing mutations in the STING traf ﬁcking
pathway may act in a dominant negative fashion in regards to DNA
vector
WT
R99C
cGAMP
1
10
100
1000
10000pTBK particle count per cell
ed
***
**
ns
ARF1
g pTBK1
vectorWTR99CcGAMP
FLAG mergeERGIC-53
R99C WTWT+cGAMP
STING GM130
merge +
DAPI
h
WT
WT
R99C
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Co-locali sation
[Pearson's R val ue]
cGAMP:
ARF1 
Genotype
STING/GM130
+--
***
***
primary ﬁbroblasts
ab
c
vector
WT
R99C
Q71L
T31N
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Co-localisation
[Pearson's R valu e]
ARF1
(FLAG) 
STING
-eGFP
merge 
+DAPI
vectorWTT31N Q71L R99C
GM130
vector
WT
R99C
Q71L
T31N
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Co-localisation
[Pearson's R v alue] ARF1/GM130
STING/GM130
* ns
***
*
***
***
ns
nd
GM130STINGmerge
vector WT R99C
f
Inset
Inset
Inset
Inset
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42150-4
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:6770 11

sensing, while the heterozygous presence of WT ARF1 may be suf ﬁ-
cient to maintain organismal viability.
In summary, through an exploration of the mechanistic basis of a
human type I interferonopathy, our data establish key roles of the small
GTPase ARF1 in both ensuring mitochondrial integrity and in Golgi-ER
retrograde STING trafﬁcking to prevent aberrant cGAS-STING pathway
activity. These data highlight the importance of recycling mechanisms
in innate immune homeostasis, and provide further evidence towards
involvement of Golgi-associated ARF GTPases in mitochondrial integ-
rity. As such, our results may inform a targeted treatment approach to
the ARF-dependent type I interferonopathy state.
Methods
Ethics statement
Clinical information and samples were obtained with informed con-
sent and consent to publish this research. Consent to participate in
research and consent to publish theﬁndings were obtained either from
the patients or, in the case of underage patients, from their respective
parent(s) or guardian(s). The study was approved by the Comite de
Protection des Personnes (ID-RCB/EUDRACT: 2014-A01017-40) in
France, and the Leeds (East) Research Ethics Committee (REC refer-
ence: 10/H1307/2 IRAS project ID: 62971) in the UK. ARF1 patient cells
were handled with approval of the Ethics Committee at Ulm University
(Approval 530/21). Sex and/or gender was not considered in the study
design and is of no relevance top the study. Information on each
individual patient is provided in the Supplementary Informationﬁle.
Cell culture
HEK293T (ATCC, CRL-3216), HEK293T ATG5 KO, Hela (ATCC, CCL-2),
293-Dual-hSTING-R232 (Invivogen, 293d-r232), A549-Dual (Invivogen,
a549d-nﬁs) cell lines, normal human lung ﬁbroblast primary cells
(Lonza, CC-2512) and normal human dermal ﬁbroblasts primary cells
(Thermo Fisher, C0045C; Innoprot, P10856; Promocell, C-12300) were
cultivated in Dulbecco ’sm o d iﬁed Eagle medium (DMEM) supple-
mented with 10% (v/v) foetal bovine serum (FBS), 100 U/ml penicillin,
100 µg/ml streptomycin, and 2 mM L-glutamine. THP-1-Dual (Invivo-
gen, thpd-nﬁs) and THP-1-Dual KO-cGAS (Invivogen, thpd-kocgas) cells
were cultivated in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% (v/v)
foetal bovine serum (FBS), 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 µg/ml streptomy-
cin, and 2 mM L-glutamine. U2OS cells (ATCC, HTB-96) were main-
tained in McCoy medium (Invitrogen, 16600082) supplemented with
10% (v/v) foetal bovine serum. All cells were incubated at 37 °C in a 5%
CO
2, 90% humidity atmosphere. Patient cells are from AGS640 were
isolated by skin punch biopsy and cultivated as the other dermal
ﬁbroblast cells.
Expression constructs and cloning
A construct coding for human ARF1 (pCMV6-hARF1-myc-FLAG) was
purchased from Origene (PS100012, kindly provided by Michaela
G a c k ,F l o r i d a ) .M u t a t i o n si nR 9 9 C ,R 9 9 H ,R 9 9 A ,R 9 9 E ,R 9 9 K ,Q 7 1 La n d
T31N were introduced by Q5 site-speciﬁc mutagenesis (see primers in
Table 1). Constructs coding for cGAS 3×-FLAG and STING-FLAG were
kindly provided by Jae U. Jung (University of Southern California).
STING-FLAG mutations R238A/Y240A and S366A were introduced by
Q5 site-speciﬁc mutagenesis (see primers in Table1). pEGFP-VSVG was
a gift from Jennifer Lippincott-Schwartz (Addgene plasmid # 11912
61).
ECFP-ELP1-25 was a gift from Michael Davidson (Addgene plasmid #
55341). The open reading frame (ORF) of KDELR (ELP1) was subcloned
into the pEGFP-VSVG vector using Gibson assembly (New England
Biolabs, E5520S). The insert was ampli ﬁed by PCR (see primers in
Table 1) and the vector linearized with EcoRI and ApaI restriction
enzymes. The ORF of TagRFP (from pCR3-TagRFP) was subcloned into
Fig. 6 | STING accumulates at the ERGIC in the presence of ARF1 R99C.
a Exemplary confocal laser scanning microscopy images of HeLa cells transiently
expressing STING-eGFP (green) and FLAG-tagged ARF1 mutants (red). Cells were
stained 24 h post transfection with anti-FLAG and anti-GM130 (grey). Nuclei, DAPI
(blue). Scale bar, 10 µmo r5 μm( i n s e t ) .b Quantiﬁcation of the co-localisation of
ARF1 and GM130 and c STING and GM130 from the images shown in ( a), as Pear-
son’s correlation coefﬁcient. Lines represent mean of n =2 6( v e c t o r ) ,n =2 1( W T ,
R99C), n =1 9( Q 7 1 L ) ,n = 20 (T31N) ± SEM (individual cells).d Exemplary confocal
laser scanning microscopy images of primaryﬁbroblasts from healthy donors or
patient. cGAMP (10µg/ml, 3 h). Cells were stained with anti-STING (green) and anti-
GM130 (grey). Nuclei, DAPI (blue). Scale bar, 10µmo r5 μm( i n s e t ) .e Quantiﬁcation
of the co-localisation of STING and GM130 from (d)a sP e a r s o n’s correlation coef-
ﬁcient. Lines represent mean of n =7 1( W T ) ,n = 70 (WT + cGAMP), n =7 5
(R99C) ± SEM (individual cells).f Exemplary STED super-resolution microscopy
images primary human lung ﬁbroblasts (NHLF) transduced with lentiviruses
expressing ARF1 constructs or empty vector. Cells were stained with anti-STING
(green), anti-FLAG (not shown) and anti-GM130 (red) 48 h post transduction. Scale
bar, 5 µmo r1 μm (inset merge, bottom panel). The experiment was repeated two
times independently to similar results.g pTBK1 (green) in NHLF cells transduced
with lentiviruses expressing indicated FLAG-tagged ARF1 constructs. Cells were
stained with anti-FLAG (red) and anti-ERGIC-53 (white). cGAMP (10µg/ml, 3 h). Scale
bar, 10 µmo r5 μm( i n s e t ) .h Quantiﬁcation of the area of pTBK1 in ( g). Lines
represent mean ofn =5 0( v e c t o r ) ,n =1 6( W T ) ,n = 27 (R99C),n = 61 (cGAMP) ± SEM
(individual cells). See also Supplementary Fig. 6. Statistical analysis was performed
using two-tailed Student’s t test with Welch
’s correction. *p <0 . 0 5 ;* *p <0 . 0 1 ;
***p <0 . 0 0 1 .E x a c tP values and Source data are provided in the Source data ﬁle.
Table 1 | Primers used for cloning
Name Sequence 5 ′–3′
ARF1-Q71Lfwd TTG GAC AAG ATC CGG CCC CTG TGG
ARF1-Q71Lrev GCC ACC CAC GTC CCA CAC AGT
ARF1-T31N-fwd AAT ACG ATC CTC TAC AAG CTT AAG CTG GGT
GAG A
ARF1-T31N-rev CTT CCC TGC AGC ATC CAG GCC
ARF1 R99Cfwd GAG TGT GTG AAC GAG GCC CGT GAG GAG C
ARF1 R99Crev TCT GTC ATT GCT GTC CAC CAC GAA GAT C
SDM-ARF1-R99K/E/A R TTG CTG TCC ACC ACG AAG
SDM-ARF1-R99A-F TGA CAG AGA GGC TGT GAA CGA GGC CC
SDM-ARF1-R99E-F TGA CAG AGA GGA GGT GAA CGA GGC C
SDM-ARF1-R99K-F TGA CAG AGA GAA GGT GAA CGA GGC C
STING-R238A/Y240A-fwd CAT CAA GGA TGC GGT TGC CAG CAA CAG
CAT C
STING-R238A/Y240A-rev CCA GCA CGG TCA GCG GTC TG
STING-S366A-fwd GCT CCT CAT CGC TGG AAT GGA AAA GCC C
STING-S366A-rev TCA GGC TCT TGG GAC ATC
VSVG(tsO45)-KDELR-fwd GAC TTG GAA ACA GAA TTC TGA TGG CCA TGA
ACA TTT TCC G
VSVG(tsO45)-KDELR-rev CTC ACC ATT GGA TCC CGG GCC CCT GCT GGC
AAA CTG AGC TTC T
ARF1-TagRFP-fwd GTC CAA TCA GCT CCG GAA CCA GAA GGC GGT
GTC TAA GGG CGA AG
ARF1-TaqRFP-rev CAG CTA TGA CCG CGG CCG GCC GT T TTT AAT
TAA GTT TGT GCC CC
pBOB-ARF1-fwd CCT CCA TAG AAG ACA CCG ACT CTA GAG CCA
CCA TGG GGA ACA TCT TCG CC
pBOB-ARF1-rev CTA TGA CCG CGG CCG GCC GTT TAA ACC TTA
TCG TCG TCA TCC
pBOB-IRES-Puro-fwd ACG GCC GGC CGC GGT CAT AGG CGG CCG
CTC TAG CCC AAT TCC
pBOB-IRES-Puro-rev GCT CCA TGT TTT TCC AGG TTT TCA GGC ACC
GGG CTT GCG
EGFP-STING-fwd ATT ACT CGA GAT GCC CCA CTC CAG
EGFP-STING-rev GAA TTC TCA AGA GAA ATC CGT GCG GA
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42150-4
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:6770 12

the pCMV6-hARF1-myc-FLAG vector and the pCMV6-hARF1-R99C-
myc-FLAG vector using Gibson assembly. The insert was ampliﬁed by
PCR (see primers in Table 1) and the vectors were linearized with MluI
and PmeI restriction enzymes. To insert the ORFs of ARF1 WT or ARF1
R99C (from pCMV6-ARF1) in a lentiviral backbone, both ORFs together
with IRES-Puro (from pIRES-TRIM2-FLAG) were subcloned into the
pBoB-hCas9-IRES-Bla vector using Gibson assembly. The inserts were
ampliﬁed by PCR (see primers in Table1) and the vector was linearized
with XbaI and PmeI restriction enzymes. Constructs coding for human
ARFGAP1 (pCMV3-ARFGAP1-HA, HG15006-CY) and VCP (pCMV3-VCP-
HA, HG17232-CY) were purchased from Sino Biologicals. pGAPDH_-
PROM_01_Renilla SP Luciferase, pISRE-FLuc, pIFNb-luc, and TK-RL
plasmids were described previously
62–64. Human STING ORF was
ampliﬁed from pMSCV-hygro-STING plasmid (Addgene #102598) by
PCR (see primers in Table 1) and inserted into linearized pEGFP-C3
(Clontech) using XhoI and EcoRI enzymes. pCMV6-ARFGEF1-TurboGFP
was purchased from Clinisciences (RG222817).
Transfection of mammalian cells
DNA of expression vectors was transiently transfected using either the
TransIT-LT1 Transfection Reagent (Mirus, MIR 2300) or Poly-
ethylenimine (PEI, 1 mg/ml in H
2O) according to the manufacturers
recommendations or as described previously65.
Transduction of mammalian cells
pMDLg, RSV-Rev, and pMD.G together with the generated pBOB con-
structs were used to rescue 3rd generation lentiviruses62,65.C e l l sw e r e
incubated with 3rd generation lentiviral particles for 16 h. Subse-
quently, the cells were washed three times with DMEM and incubated
for further 48 h.
Whole-cell lysates
Whole-cell lysates were prepared by harvesting cells in Phosphate-
Buffered Saline (PBS, Gibco, 14190144). If not mentioned otherwise,
the cell pellet (500 × g, 4 °C, 5 min) was lysed in transmembrane lysis
buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piper-
azineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) pH 7.4, 1% Triton X-100, 5 mM
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA)) by vortexing at maximum
speed for 30 s
65. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation
(20,000 ×g, 4 °C, 20 min), and the protein concentration of the
supernatants was quantiﬁed using a BCA assay (Pierce Rapid Gold BCA
Protein Assay Kit, Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, A53225). The lysates were
then stored until analysis at −20 °C.
SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting
SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting was performed using standard
techniques65. In brief, whole-cell lysates were mixed with 6x Protein
Sample Loading Buffer (at aﬁnal dilution of 1x) supplemented with 15%
β-mercaptoethanol, heated to 95 °C for 5 min, separated on NuPAGE
4–12% Bis-Tris Gels (Invitrogen, NP0321BOX) for 90 min at 90 V and
blotted onto Immobilon-FL PVDF membranes (Merck Millipore, 05317-
10EA). The transfer was performed at a constant voltage of 30 V for
30 min. After the transfer, the membrane was blocked in 1% Casein in
PBS. Proteins were stained with primary antibodies mouse anti-FLAG
M2 (1:5000, Sigma-Aldrich, F1804), sheep anti-STING (1:1000, Bio-
Techne, MAB7169), rabbit anti-pTBK1 (1:1000, Cell Signaling, 5483),
rabbit anti-TBK1 (1:1000, Cell Signaling, 3504), rabbit anti-IRF3 (1:1000,
Cell Signaling, 4302), rabbit anti-HA (1:1000, Cell Signaling, 3724),
rabbit anti-ARF1 (1:300, Proteintech, 20226-1-AP), rabbit anti-cGAS
(1:2000, Proteintech, 26416-1-AP), rabbit anti-RFP (1:1000, Abcam,
ab28664), mouse anti-turboGFP (1:1000, Origene, TA150041S), rabbit
anti-TFAM (1:1000, Proteintech, 22586-1-AP), mouse anti-Lamin B1
(1:10,000, Proteintech, 66095-1-Ig), rat anti-GAPDH (1:1000, BioLe-
gend, 607902), rabbit anti-MFN1 (1:1000, Cell Signaling, 14739), mouse
anti-RHOT1 (1:1000, Abnova, H00055288-M01), mouse anti-Drp1
(1:1000, Cell Signaling, 8570), rabbit anti-pDrp1 (1:1000, Cell Signal-
ing, 3455), rabbit anti-COPB (1:1000, Abcam, Ab2899) and subse-
quently Infrared Dye labelled secondary antibodies (LI-COR, IRDye
680RD Goat anti-Mouse IgG Secondary Antibody, 926-68070; IRDye
680RD Goat anti-Rabbit IgG Secondary Antibody, 926-68071; IRDye
800CW Goat anti-Mouse IgG Secondary Antibody, 926-32210; IRDye
800CW Goat anti-Rabbit IgG Secondary Antibody, 926-32211; IRDye
800CW Goat anti-Rat IgG Secondary Antibody, 926-32219), diluted in
0.05% Casein in PBS. Band intensities were quanti ﬁed using Image
Studio lite (LI-COR).
Luciferase reporter assays
HEK293T cells were either transiently transfected with luciferase
reporter constructs, or reporter cell lines (A549-Dual, 293-Dual hSTING-
R232, THP-1-Dual or TH P1-Dual KO-cGAS) were used. 32 h post-
transfection or 72 h post transduction, cells were lysed in passive lysis
buffer (Promega, E1941) and luciferase activities of theﬁreﬂyl u c i f e r a s e
(FFLuc), renilla luciferase, lucia luciferase or SEAP activity were
determined
64. For HEK293T cells ISRE- ﬁreﬂy luciferase activities nor-
malised to renilla activity were measured via DualGlo Luciferase Assay
System (Promega, E2980). For the reporter cell lines ISRE-lucia lucifer-
ase activity (IFNb-lucia luciferase for 293-Dual hSTING-R232 cells) was
measured 1 s after injecting 20 mM coelenterazine (PFK Biotech,
102173) and NF-κB-SEAP activity (ISRE-SEAP for 293-Dual hSTING-R232
cells) via Alkaline Phosphatase Blue Microwell Substrate (Sigma-Aldrich,
AB0100). Both were normalized to cell viability determined by the
CellTiter-Glo Luminescent Cell Viability Assay (Promega, G7570). Luci-
ferase and cell viability measurements were performed using an Orion II
microplate Luminometer and the Simplicity software (Berthold), SEAP
activity was measured at 650 nm by using a Vmax kinetic microplate
reader (Molecular Devices) and the SoftMax Pro 7.0.3 software.
Generation of U2OS cells stably expressing STING and mtDNA
depletion
The pMSCV-hygro plasmid carrying WT STING1 cDNA (Addgene plas-
mid #102598) or empty vector were used in combination with packa-
ging vector pCL-Ampho (Novus) and envelope vector pCMV-VSV-G
(Addgene plasmid #8454) to produce retroviral vectors as described
for lentiviral vectors. 100,000 U2OS cells were transduced with 0.5 mL
retroviral vectors, 8 μg/mL polybrene (Millipore, TR-1003-G) and
10 mM HEPES (Invitrogen, H3375) in 12-well plates, and medium
replaced 24 h later. Two days after transduction, transduced cells were
selected and maintained in culture with 200 μg/mL hygromycin B.
STING expression was veriﬁed by western blotting. mtDNA depletion
in U2OS and U2OS-STING cells was induced by 100 μM2 ′,3′ dideox-
ycytidine (ddC, Sigma-Aldrich, D5782) treatment in medium supple-
mented with 50 μg/mL uridine (Sigma-Aldrich, U3750) and 1 mM
sodium pyruvate (Gibco, 11360070) for seven to fourteen days before
use. To control for mtDNA depletion, total DNA from 500,000 cells
was extracted using the DNeasy Blood and Tissue Kit (Qiagen, 69506),
following the manufacturer’s instructions. DNA concentrations were
determined by photometry (Nanodrop) and 15 ng and 7.5 ng DNA were
used to perform qPCR for the mitochondrial gene MT-COXII and the
nuclear gene GAPDH (see primers in Table2). Quantitative PCR (qPCR)
was performed using Power SYBR Green (Invitrogen, A25742). Ratios
of ΔΔCt for MT-COXII over GAPDH for the different DNA concentra-
tions were averaged and the fold change to untreated (UT) is shown in
ﬁgures. U2OS cells were stimulated for 4 h with 2 μg/mL HT-DNA
(Sigma-Aldrich, D6898) complexed with Lipofectamine 2000 (Invi-
trogen, 11668019), according to the manufacturer ’s instructions, or
lipofectamine alone.
Generation of HEK293T ATG5 KO cells
HEK293T ATG5 KO cells were generated by genomic knock out using
CRISPR Cas9. To this end, 3rd generation lentiviral vectors were
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42150-4
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:6770 13

generated as described before65 using pSicoR-CRISPR-PuroR CRISPR/
Cas966 constructs harbouring an ATG5 targeting sgRNA or a non-
targeting (NT) sgRNA. (NT: ACGGAGGCTAAGCGTCGCAA, ATG5:
AACTTGTTTCACGCTATATC)67 as the transfer plasmid. HEK293T cells
were transduced with the lentiviral vectors and 3 days post-
transduction separated into individual cells using limited dilution.
The individual cells were grown into clonal cell lines and screened for
ATG5 KO using Western blot analysis (anti-ATG5 antibody, Cell Sig-
naling Technology, #2630). Clones with a conformed knock out were
expanded and stocks were conserved by cryo preservation.
Overexpression of WT and mutant ARF1 in U2OS cells
U2OS WT and U2OS-STING cells plated in 12-well plates were tran-
siently transfected with ARF1 WT, ARF1 R99C or empty vector. Cells
were collected 24 h later for RNA and protein analysis. Total RNA was
extracted using the RNAqueous-Micro Kit (Ambion, AM1931), and
reverse transcription performed with the High-Capacity cDNA Reverse
Transcription Kit (Applied Biosystems, 4368814). Levels of cDNA were
quantiﬁed by RT-qPCR using TaqMan Gene Expression Assay (Applied
Biosystems). Differences in cDNA inputs were corrected by normal-
ization to HPRT1 cDNA levels. Relative quantitation of target cDNA was
determined by the formula 2- ΔΔCT (see Taqman probes in Table 3).
For whole-cell lysate analysis, proteins were extracted from U2OS cells
using RIPA lysis buffer with 1% protease inhibitor and 1% phosphatase
inhibitor. Bolt LDS Sample Buffer (4X, Novex Life Technologies) and
Bolt Sample Reducing agent (10X, Novex Life Technologies) were
added to protein lysates, samples resolved on 4 –12% Bis-Tris Plus
NuPAGE gels (Invitrogen, B0007) and then transferred to nitrocellu-
lose membrane for 7 min at 20 V using the iBlot 2 Dry Blotting System
(Invitrogen). To analyse protein phosphorylation status, membranes
were blocked in LI-COR buffer, an d primary phospho-antibodies
(rabbit anti-pIRF3, 1:1000, Cell Signaling, 4947; rabbit anti-pSTING,
1:1000, Cell Signaling, 19781) incubated for 48 h in blocking solution.
For coﬁlin immunoblot, membranes were blocked with 5% non-fat milk
in TBS, and primary antibodies (rabbit anti-Co ﬁlin, 1:1000, Cell Sig-
naling, 5175) incubated overnight at 4 °C in 1.5% Bovine Serum Albumin
in TBS buffer supplemented with 0.1% Tween. After stripping, mem-
branes were reblotted with anti-STING antibodies (mouse anti-STING,
1:1000, R&D Systems, MAB7169; rabbit anti-IRF3, 1:1000, Cell Signal-
ling, 4302) in 2.5% non-fat milk in TBS buffer supplemented with 0.1%
Tween. After washing, membranes were incubated with appropriate
anti-mouse or anti-rabbit secondary antibodies for 45 min at room
temperature (LI-COR). Signal was detected using the OdysseyCLx
System (LI-COR) and Image Studio software. Comparative signal ana-
lyses were performed using Fiji (ImageJ).
Assessing mitochondrial DNA release into the cytosol
HEK293T WT or HEK293T ATG5 KO cells were transfected with
ARF1 WT, ARF1 R99C or empty vector. Alternatively, HEK293T
WT cells were transfected with ARF1 WT, ARF1 R99C or
empty together with VCP or empty vector. 24 h later, cells were
treated with 10 µM of ABT-737 (SYNkinase, 1001) and 10 µM
Quinoline-Val-Asp-Di ﬂuorophenoxymethylketone (Q-VD-OPH, Cay-
man Chemical, 15260) as a positive control. In the case of primary
human dermal ﬁbroblasts, cells from four healthy donors or from
patient AGS460 were used. On the next day, the cells were har-
vested and isolation and quanti ﬁcation of DNA from cytosolic,
mitochondrial and nuclear fractions was performed as described
previously
68 (basic protocol 2). Brie ﬂy, half of the cells were lysed in
SDS lysis buffer (20 mM Tris, pH 8, 1% (v/v) SDS, protease inhibitors)
to obtain WCLs for normalisation, whereas the other half was used
for fractionation. Cytosolic, mitochondrial and nuclear extracts
were isolated by subsequently incubating the cells with saponin
lysis buffer (1x PBS, pH 7.4, 0.05% saponin, protease inhibitors), NP-
40 lysis buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% (v/
v) NP-40, 10% (v/v) glycerol, protease inhibitors) and SDS lysis
buffer (20 mM Tris, pH 8, 1% (v/v) SDS, protease inhibitors),
respectively. Purity of the fractions was determined by immuno-
blotting for GAPDH (cytosolic extract), TFAM (mitochondrial
extract), and Lamin B1 (nuclear extract). DNA extraction of the
fractions and WCLs was performed using phenol-chloroform. DNA
concentrations were determined by photometry (Nanodrop) and
equal amounts of DNA were used to perform qPCR for mitochon-
drial DNA (MT-Dloop) and nuclear DNA (KCNJ10) (see primers in
Table 2). qPCR was performed using PowerUP SYBR Green (Applied
Biosystems, A25742) and the relative cytosolic mtDNA was calcu-
lated using the ΔΔCT method.
Expression of WT and mutant ARF1 in NHLF cells
NHLF cells were transduced with lentiviral particles coding for ARF1
WT, ARF1 R99C or empty vector. For qPCR analysis, total RNA was
extracted 72 h post transduction using the Quick-RNA Microprep Kit
(Zymo research, R1051) according to the manufacturer’si n s t r u c t i o n s .
Reverse transcription and qRT–PCR were performed in one step using
the SuperScript III Platinum Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, 11732088) on
a StepOnePlus Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems) according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. TaqMan probes for each individual
gene were acquired as premixed TaqMan Gene Expression Assays
(Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) and added to the reaction (See probes in
Table 3). Expression levels for each target gene were calculated, e.g. for
OAS1 expression levels by normalizing to GAPDH cDNA levels using the
ΔΔCT method.
Dimerization assay
HEK293T cells were transfected with ARF1 WT (pCMV6-ARF1-myc-
FLAG or pCMV6-ARF1-Tag-RFP, or with pCMV6-ARF1-myc-FLAG and
pCMV6-ARF1-Tag-RFP) or ARF1 R99C (pCMV6-ARF1-R99C-myc-FLAG
or pCMV6-ARF1-R99C-Tag-RFP, or with pCMV6-ARF1-R99C-myc-FLAG
and pCMV6-ARF1-R99C-Tag-RFP). 24 h post transfection, WCLs were
prepared and input samples were saved for western blotting. The
WCLs were incubated with anti-FLAG M2 magnetic beads (Sigma-
Aldrich, M8823) for 4 h at 4 °C on a rotating shaker. Subsequently, the
beads were washed ﬁve times with transmembrane lysis buffer and
incubated with 1x Protein Sample Loading Buffer supplemented with
15% β-mercaptoethanol. After heating to 95 °C for 10 min the samples
were applied to SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting.
Table 3 | Primers used for TaqMan qPCR
Type Primers Assay ID
TaqMan HPRT1 Hs03929096_g1
TaqMan IFI27 Hs01086370_m1
TaqMan RSAD2 Hs01057264_m1
TaqMan OAS1 Hs00973637_m1
TaqMan MX1 Hs00895608_m1
TaqMan IFNB1 Hs01077958_s1
Table 2 | Primers used for SYBR Green qPCR
Type Primers Sequence
SYBR Green MT-COXII_F CGTCTGAACTATCCTGCCCG
SYBR Green MT-COXII_R TGGTAAGGGAGGGATCGTTG
SYBR Green GAPDH_F ATGCTGCATTCGCCCTCTTA
SYBR Green GAPDH_R GCGCCCAATACGACCAAATC
SYBR Green KCNJ10 fwd GCGCAAAAGCCTCCTCATT
SYBR Green KCNJ10 rev CCTTCCTTGGTTTGGTGGG
SYBR Green MT-Dloop fwd CATAAAGCCTAAATAGCCCACACG
SYBR Green MT-Dloop rev CCGTGAGTGGTTAATAGGGTGATA
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42150-4
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:6770 14

In vitro GTPase assays
HEK293T cells were transfected with pCMV6-ARF1-myc-FLAG, pCMV6-
ARF1-R99C-myc-FLAG, pCMV6-ARF1-Q71L-myc-FLAG or pCMV6-ARF1-
T31N-myc-FLAG. 24 h later, WCLs were prepared in GTPase lysis buffer
(150 mM NaCl, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 1% Triton X-100, 5 mM MgCl
2,
5 mM EDTA) and incubated with anti-FLAG M2 magnetic beads (Sigma-
Aldrich, M8823) for 4 h at 4 °C on a rotating shaker. Subsequently, the
beads were washed three times with washing buffer I (500 mM NaCl,
50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 1% Triton X-100, 5 mM MgCl
2,5m ME D T A )a n d
twice with washing buffer II (100 mM NaCl, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 1%
Triton X-100, 5 mM MgCl
2, 5 mM EDTA). Next, the beads were incu-
bated with GTPase-Glo-GEF assay buffer (Promega, V7681) and the
GTPase reaction was performed according to the manufacturer ’s
recommendations (GTPase-Glo assay, Promega, V7681). In short, the
beads were incubated with 2x GTP solution for 16 h followed by the
addition of the GTPase-Glo reagent and the detection reagent. The
resulting luminescence was measured using an Orion II microplate
Luminometer and the Simplicity software (Berthold).
Stable isotope labelling of amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)
To analyse interaction partners of ARF1 WT and ARF1 R99C, stable
isotope labelling of amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based quanti-
tative mass spectrometry (MS) was performed. HEK293T cells were
cultivated in SILAC medium light (DMEM for SILAC (Thermo Fisher
Scientiﬁc, 88364) supplemented with 10% (v/v) dialysed FBS, 100 U/ml
penicillin, 100 µg/ml streptomycin, 2 mM L-glutamine, 200 mg/ml
proline (Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc, 88211), 84 mg/ml L-arginine
(Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, 88427), 146 mg/ml L-lysin (Thermo Fisher
Scientiﬁc, 89987)) or SILAC medium heavy (DMEM for SILAC supple-
mented with 10% (v/v) dialysed FBS, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 µg/ml
streptomycin, 2 mM L-glutamine, 200 mg/ml proline (Thermo Fisher
Scientiﬁc, 88211), 87.2 mg/ml 13C15N-labelled L-arginine (Carl Roth,
2063.1), 152.8 mg/ml 13C15N-labelled L-lysin (Carl Roth, 2085.1)) for
ﬁve passages to completely incorporate the labelled amino acids.
Complete incorporation was controlled by analysing a heavy sample
prior to immunoprecipitation as described below. Incorporation levels
reached 85% and no proline conversion was observed. The cells were
either transfected with ARF1 WT (heavy-labelled cells) or ARF1 R99C
(light-labelled cells). 24 h later, WCLs were prepared using trans-
membrane lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-
piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) pH 7.4, 1% Triton X-100, 5 mM
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA)) from 1 × 10
7 cells and incu-
bated with anti-FLAG M2 magnetic beads (Sigma-Aldrich, M8823) for
4 h at 4 °C on a rotating shaker. Subsequently, the beads were washed
ﬁve times with transmembrane lysis buffer and incubated with 1x
Protein Sample Loading Buffer supplemented with 15% β-
mercaptoethanol. After heating to 95 °C for 10 min the samples were
applied to SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting or MS.
Mass spectrometry (MS) and data analysis
SILAC labelled samples were combined in a 1-to-1 manner and proteins
were separated using standard 12.5% SDS-Page followed by colloidal
Coomassie staining and subsequent sample preparation as described
earlier
69. Samples were measured using an LTQ Orbitrap Elite system
(Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc) online coupled to an U3000 RSLCnano
(Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) employing an Acclaim PepMapTM analytical
column (ID: 75µm × 500 mm, 2µm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) in
combination with a C18 µ-precolumn (0.3 mm inner diameter (ID) × 5
mm; PepMap, Dionex LC Packings, Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc). Samples
were preconcentrated and washed with 0.1% TFA for 5 min at a ﬂow
rate of 30 µl/min. Subsequent separation was carried out employing a
ﬂow rate of 250 nl/min using a binary solvent gradient consisting of
solvent A (0.1% FA) and solvent B (86% ACN, 0.1% FA). The main column
was initially equilibrated in 5% B. The percentage of B was raised from 5
to 15% in 10 min, followed by an increase from 15 to 40% B in 20 min.
The column was washed with an increase to 95% B in 5 min and holding
at 95% B for 5 min. Finally, the column was re-equilibrated with 15% B
for 20 min.
The mass spectrometer was equipped with a nanoelectrospray
ion source and distal coated SilicaTips (FS360-20-10-D, New
Objective). The instrument was externally calibrated using standard
compounds (LTQ Velos ESI Positive Ion Calibration Solution, Pierce,
Thermo Scienti ﬁc) The system was operated using the following
parameters: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; capillary temperature, 250 °C;
S-Lens RF Level, 68.9%. XCalibur 2.2 SP1.48 (Thermo Fisher Scien-
tiﬁc) was used for data-dependent MS/MS analyses. Full scans ran-
ging from m/z 370 to 1700 were acquired in the Orbitrap at a
resolution of 30,000 (at m/z 400) with Automatic gain control
(AGC) enabled and set to 10
6 ions and a maximum ﬁll time of 500 ms.
For fragmentation in the linear ion trap the AGC was set to 10,000
ions and a maximum ﬁll time of 100 ms. For MS/MS fragmentation of
the top 20 most intense ions, a normalized collision energy of 35%
with an activation q of 0.25 and an activation time of 30 ms was used.
The resulting fragments were analysed using the LTQ part at rapid
scan speeds.
Database search was performed using MaxQuant Ver. 1.6.3.4
(www.maxquant.org)
70.F o rp e p t i d ei d e n t iﬁcation and quantitation,
MS/MS spectra were correlated with the UniProt human reference
proteome set ( www.uniprot.org, Version on March 16th 2021), sup-
plemented with the ARF1 sequences, employing the build-in Andro-
meda search engine
71. The respective SILAC modi ﬁcations and
carbamidomethylated cysteine were considered asﬁxed modiﬁcation
along with oxidation (M), and acetylated protein N-termini as variable
modiﬁcations. False discovery rates were set on both, peptide and
protein level, to 0.01. Subsequent data analysis was performed
e m p l o y i n gM SE x c e la n dG r a p h P a dP r i s m9 .F o rt h eﬁnal analysis the
mean of two replicates was considered and proteins with a mean log2
ratio of >1 or < −1 were considered as regulated.
Co-immunoprecipitation
HEK293T cells were transfected with ARF1 WT, ARF1 R99C or vector
control. 48 h post transfection, WCLs were prepared and input sam-
ples were saved for western blotting. The WCLs were incubated with
anti-FLAG M2 magnetic beads (Sigma-Aldrich, M8823) for 4 h at 4 °C
on a rotating shaker. Subsequently, the beads were washedﬁve times
with transmembrane lysis buffer (300 mM salt) and incubated with 1x
Protein Sample Loading Buffer supplemented with 15% β-
mercaptoethanol. After heating to 95 °C for 10 min the samples were
analysed by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting
Go-term analysis
T h et o p3 0g e n e sl e s sa s s o c i a t e dw i t hA R F 1R 9 9 Cc o m p a r e dt oA R F 1
WT according to the SILAC experiment were submitted to
PantherDB
72,73. Analysis Type: PANTHER Overrepresentation Test
(Released 20220202). GO Ontology database DOI: 10.5281/
zenodo.6399963, Released 2022-03-22. Reference List:Homo sapiens
(all genes in database).
Immunoﬂuorescence
Cells were seeded on coverslips in 24-well plates and treated as indi-
cated. Next, the samples were washed with PBS and ﬁxed in 4% par-
aformaldehyde solution (PFA) for 20 min at RT, permeabilized and
blocked with PBS containing 0.5% Triton X-100 and 5 FCS for 1 h at RT.
Afterwards, the cells were washed with PBS and incubated for 2 h at
4 °C with primary antibody (mouse anti-FLAG M2, 1:400, Sigma-
Aldrich, F1804; rabbit anti-GM130, 1:400, Cell Signaling, 12480; rabbit
anti-ERGIC-53, 1:400, Proteintech, 13364-1-AP; sheep anti-TGN46,
1:400, Bio-Rad, AHP500GT; rabbit anti-pTBK1, 1:100, Cell Signaling,
5483; mouse anti-STING, 1:100, Novus Biologicals, AF6516; rabbit anti-
STING, 1:200, Proteintech, 19851-1-AP) diluted in PBS with 1% FCS. After
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42150-4
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:6770 15

washing with PBS/0.1% Tween 20, the samples were incubated with the
secondary antibody donkey anti-mouse IgG (H + L) Alexa Fluor Plus
568 (A10037), donkey anti-mouse IgG (H + L) Alexa Fluor Plus 488
(A32766), donkey anti-rabbit IgG (H + L) Alexa Fluor Plus 647 (A32795),
donkey anti-sheep IgG (H + L) Alexa Fluor Plus 647 (A-21448 (1:400,
Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc) or with primary antibody-secondary anti-
body conjugates (rabbit anti-ERGIC-53, 1.25µg/ml; rabbit anti-GM130,
0.585 µg/ml; rabbit anti pTBK1, 1.42µg/ml; rabbit anti-STING, 3.5µg/ml;
mouse anti-FLAG M2, 0.35µg/ml; conjugated to equal amounts (µg/ml)
of Zenon Alexa Fluor 647 rabbit IgG labelling reagent (Z25308), Zenon
Alexa Fluor 568 rabbit IgG labelling reagent (Z25306), Zenon Alexa
Fluor 488 rabbit IgG labelling reagent (Z25002) or Zenon PaciﬁcB l u e
mouse IgG
2a labelling reagent (Z25313, Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) and
500 ng/ml DAPI (Invitrogen, D1306) for 2 h at 4 °C in the dark. Next, the
samples were washed with PBS/0.1% Tween 20 and water and
the coverslips were mounted onto microscopy slides. Images were
acquired using a Zeiss LSM 710 confocal laser scanning microscope
with ZEN 2010 imaging software (Zeiss). Images were analysed with
ImageJ (Fiji). The number of ERGIC-53 positive particles and the par-
ticle size was analysed using a custom ImageJ macro (Fiji). Co-
localization was determined with the Huygens Professional
19.04 software. In short, Pearson coefﬁcients were calculated with the
“Huygens Colocalization Analyzer ” using the Costes method
74 and
applying individual thresholds.
Live cell imaging of mitochondria and mitochondrial analysis
HeLa cells were seeded in 35 mmµ-Dishes (Ibidi, 81156) and transfected
with TagRFP-labelled ARF1 WT, ARF1 R99C or vector control. 24 h later,
all cells were treated with 1 µM Mitotracker (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc,
M22426) and 1µg/mL Hoechst 33342 (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, 62249)
for 30 min at 37 °C. Sequentially the medium was removed and
exchanged by fresh medium without phenol red. Images were then
acquired using a Zeiss LSM 710 confocal laser scanning microscope
with ZEN 2010 imaging software (Zeiss). Images analysis was per-
formed with ImageJ (Fiji). For analysis of the mitochondrial footprint,
the background subtractor tool (MOSAIC group) and the MiNA plugin
(StuartLab) were used. First, the background subtractor (length = 20)
was used, then the despeckle ( “Despeckle”, “slice”) command and
ﬁnally single cells were examined using the MiNA Analyse morphology
plugin (threshold=moments)
75. The values obtained for the mito-
chondrial footprint (area/volume consumed by mitochondrial signal)
were then used for visualization. Mitochondrial characteristics (peri-
meter, circularity) and network connectivity (branch length, branches
per cell) were analysed as reported elsewhere
76. In short, perimeter and
circularity of the mitochondria were analysed by applying an auto
threshold (“Triangle dark no-reset”), followed by the Convert to mask
(“Convert to Mask ”, “method=Triangle background=Dark calculate
black”), despeckle (“Despeckle”, “slice”) and remove outliers (“Remove
Outliers…”, “radius=2 threshold=50 which=Bright slice”) commands
and single cells were examined via the analyse particles ( “Analyze
Particles…”, “clear summarize”) command. Total branch length and
branches per cell were analysed by applying the Skeletonize Command
(“Skeletonize”, “slice”). Single cells were isolated and examined using
the Analyze skeleton command ( “Analyze Skeleton (2D/3D) ”,
“prune=none”).
VSVG transport assay
Retrograde transport of VSVG-ts045-KDELR was performed as descri-
bed previously45. In brief, HeLa cells were transfected with pEGFP-
VSVG-ts045-KDELR and ARF1 WT, ARF1 R99C or empty vector. The
cells were incubated at 37 °C for 24 h and then directly ﬁxed or incu-
bated at 32 °C for 2 h to accumulate the fusion protein at the Golgi
complex. Cells were then eitherﬁxed or shifted to 40 °C for 1 h to allow
one round of retrograde transport from the Golgi to the ER and
then ﬁxed.
STED sample preparation
Normal human lungﬁbroblasts (NHLF) were transduced with lentiviral
particles coding for ARF1 WT, ARF1 R99C or empty vector. 48 h later,
the samples were washed with PBS and ﬁxed in 4% paraformaldehyde
solution (PFA) for 20 min at RT. Next, the cells were permeabilized and
unspeciﬁc binding was blocked by incubation with blocking solution
(3% (w/v) BSA and 0.3% (v/v) Triton X-100 in PBS) for 2 h at RT. The
samples were incubated overnight at 4 °C with 1μg/ml of the primary
antibodies rabbit anti-GM130 (Cell Signaling, 12480) and mouse anti-
STING (Novus Biologicals, AF6516) dissolved in diluted blocking
solution (0.3% (w/v) BSA and 0.03% (v/v) Triton X-100 in PBS). After
three washing steps with PBS, the samples were incubated with 1μg/ml
secondary goat anti-mouse antibody conjugated with Atto647N
(Sigma-Aldrich, 50185), 1 µg/ml goat anti-rabbit antibody conjugated
with Atto594 (Sigma-Aldrich, 77671) and anti-rat antibody conjugated
with Alexa Fluor Plus 405 (Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc, A48268, trans-
fection control) dissolved in diluted blocking solution (0.3% (w/v) BSA
and 0.03% (v/v) Triton X-100 in PBS) for 1 h at RT. Unbound antibodies
were removed in three washing steps with PBS. For imaging, samples
were kept in 97% 2,2 ′-thiodiethanol (TDE, S igma Aldrich, 166782)
solution in PBS, pH 7.5.
STED imaging
Images were captured with a home-built dual-colour 3D-STED micro-
s c o p ew i t hh o m e - b u i l ts o f t w a r e
77. Typically, an average power of ~1μW
for each excitation beam (568 nm and 633 nm, respectively) and
~1.5 mW for each depletion beam (710 nm and 750 nm, respectively)
was used. STED images were captured at a pixel size of 20 nm and a
dwell time of 300μs with a typical peak photon number of ~150 counts.
Images were analysed by ImageJ (Fiji). For better visualization, a
Gaussian blur of σ = 1 was applied in each channel.
EM preparation
Sample preparation was performed according to a standardized
protocol78. HEK293T cells were cultivated on UV-sterilized 160µmt h i n
carbon-coated sapphire disks (Engineering Ofﬁce M.) and transfected
with ARF1 WT, ARF1 R99C or empty vector. 24 h later, the samples were
then cryo-ﬁxed at a pressure of 230 MPa within 30 ms using a high-
pressure freezer (HPF Compact 101). The samples were freeze sub-
stituted in a medium of acetone with 0.1% uranyl acetate (UA), 0.2%
osmium tetroxide (OsO4), and 5% double distilled water for improved
visibility of the membranes
79. Overnight (17 h), samples were gradually
warmed in an EM AFS2 (Leica Microsystems GmbH) freeze substitution
device from−90 to 0 °C. They were then left at 0 °C for 1 h and washed
3 times with acetone for 30 min each at room temperature and
embedded in EPON resin (Sigma-Aldrich, 45345). For embedding,
samples were incubated successively for one hour each in 33%, 50%
and 67% EPON resin in acetone, then overnight in 100% EPON and
polymerized for 48 h at 60 °C. By plunging the solidiﬁed specimens in
liquid nitrogen, the EPON block breaks in the region of the embedded
sapphire discs leaving the cells on the surface ready to be sectioned
with an ultramicrotome (Ultracut UC7, Leica Microsystems GmbH).
EM imaging
For TEM imaging, 70 nm thin sections were mounted on carbon-
coated Formvarﬁlms on copper grids (Plano GmbH) and imaged with a
JEM-1400 TEM operating at 120 kV acceleration voltage equipped with
a CCD camera (Veleta, Olympus Life Science). For STEM tomography,
800 nm thick sections were put on glow-discharged copper grids with
parallel bars (Plano GmbH), pre-treated with 10% (w/v) poly-L-lysine
(Sigma-Aldrich), followed by a second coating with poly-L-lysine to
attach 25 nm colloidal gold particles (AURION Immuno Gold Reagents)
on both sides of the cross-sections. A series of tilted images of the
sections from an angle of −72° to +72° with an increment of 1.5° were
recorded using a Jeol FEM 2100 F ﬁeld-emission TEM equipped with a
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42150-4
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:6770 16

Jeol STEM bright- ﬁeld detector (Jeol Ltd) and, EM-Menu 4.0 STEM
tomography software (TVIPS) at a resolution of 1024 px × 1024 px, an
illumination time of 20 s, and an acceleration voltage of 200 kV.
Alignment of the images with the gold particles as ﬁducial markers as
well as 3D-reconstruction of the tilt series was done using the IMOD
4.9 software
80,81.
EM stereology
According to the Delesse principle, stating that the volume density of
an organelle or component in a tissue can be estimated by measuring
the area fraction of the intersections of the component within a ran-
dom section of the tissue
82,83, volume fractions of luminal structures
and small vesicles were determined by counting grid points on pre-
deﬁned classes within square test ﬁelds of 16 µm2 size using the
recursive grid option implemented in the open-source software JMi-
croVision image analysis system. Since it is not possible to evaluate the
entire cell, the precondition for stereological evaluation was that the
section through the cell contained centrioles. The test ﬁelds were
chosen so that the centrioles were located in their centre. This ensured
that only similar areas in the cell were evaluated, as the distribution of
organelles may differ depending on the cell area.
Structural analysis
A model of the ARF1 crystal structure (2J59) retrieved from the Protein
Data Bank (PDB) and visualised in UCSF Chimera 1.15. Only Chain A was
displayed and R99C was highlighted by displaying the atom model.
Puriﬁcation of ARF1, ARF1 R99C and ARF1 Q71L
For bacterial protein expression, soluble human ARF1 wild-type and
mutants lacking its N-terminal 17 amino acids and human ARFGAP1
domain (1 –136) were cloned into modi ﬁed pET16 vector with
N-terminal His
6-MBP-SUMO tag. E. coli BL21 Rosetta cells were grown
at 37 °C in lysogenic broth medium until the culture reached an OD600
of 0.4–0 . 5a n dp r o t e i np r o d u c t i o nw a si n d u c e da t1 8 ° Cw i t h0 . 4 m M
isopropyl-β-thiogalactopyranoside (Sigma-Aldrich, I6758) for 16 h.
Harvested E. coli cells were resuspended in lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES
pH 7.5, 400 mM NaCl, 30 mM imidazole, 10% glycerol and 1 mM β-
mercaptoethanol) and lysed by sonication. Recombinant cell debris
was removed by centrifugation and recombinant hARF1 proteins were
puriﬁed over nickel-nitriloacetic acid (Ni-NTA, Qiagen, 30250) afﬁnity
chromatography and the His
6-MBP-SUMO tag was subsequently
removed by addition of SENP2 protease at 4 °C, followed by overnight
dialysis against 20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 250 mM NaCl and 2 mM β-
mercaptoethanol. The proteins were further puri ﬁed and separated
from His
6-MBP-SUMO tag and protease by a HiLoad 16/600 Superdex
75 size exclusion chromatography column (Cytiva) in 20 mM HEPES
pH 7.5, 250 mM NaCl, 1 mM TCEP. Puri ﬁed hARF1 were pooled, ali-
quoted and ﬂa s hf r o z e ni nl i q u i dn i t r o g e nb e f o r es t o r e da t−80 °C.
Thermal shift assay
The thermal stability of different hARF1 proteins in presence and
absence of GTP was analysed by ﬂuorescence thermal shift assays.
75 µM protein were incubated in 25 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl,
5m MM g C l2, 1 mM TCEP with or without 5 mM GTP. The ﬂuorescence
signal was detected after addition of SYPRO orange ( ﬁnal concentra-
tion 5x, Invitrogen, S6651) using gradient from 15 °C to 95 °C with
0.5 °C/30 s and one scan each 0.5 °C in a real time thermal cycler
(QuantStudio 3, Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc). The deﬂection point of the
curve and ﬁrst derivative was calculated by Prism 9 (GraphPad).
Autophagy reporter assay
The autophagosome levels of HEK293T cells stably expressing LC3B-
GFP were assessed byﬂow cytometry. HEK293T cells were transfected
with Tag-RFP ARF1 WT, Tag-RFP ARF1 R99C or empty vector using PEI.
6 h after transfection the medium was changed to reduce effects of
transfection reagents on the cells. For samples that were treated with
Baﬁlomycin A1, Baﬁlomycin A1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, sc-201550)
at a concentration of 625 µM was added to the medium. 24 h after
treatment, the samples were detached and transferred to 96-well V-
bottom plates. Treatment with 0.05% saponin in PBS and two sub-
sequent washes with PBS were used to remove cytosolic LC3B-GFP.
Fluorescence intensity of membrane-bound LC3B-GFP was measured
using a Beckman-Coulter CytoFLEX with attached high-throughput
sampler and set above 1000 to allow for detection of shifts in autop-
hagosome levels in both directions (more or less autophagosomes).
Intact single cells were gated using SSC-A/FSC-A and FSC-A/FSC-H,
respectively. Rawﬂuorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) data were
analysed using FlowJo 10. Median ﬂuorescence intensity shifts of all
samples were calculated by subtracting the LC3B-GFP-MFI of vector-
treated samples from the ARF1 WT and ARF1 R99C samples.
Quantiﬁcation and statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 9.P-values
were determined using a two-tailed Student’s t test with Welch’s cor-
rection or one-way ANOVA for multiple comparisons (Mann–Whitney
test). Statistics on qPCRs over multiple values (Fig. 3f and Supple-
mentary Fig. 3c –f) were performed using two-way ANOVA. Unless
otherwise stated, data are shown as the mean of at least three biolo-
gical replicates ± SEM. Signi ﬁcant differences are indicated as:
*p < 0.05; **p <0 . 0 1 ; * * *p < 0.001. Not signi ﬁcant differences are not
indicated. Speciﬁc statistical parameters are speci ﬁed in the ﬁgure
legends.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
The SILAC experiments were deposited to the MassIVE database under
accession code MSV000089711. Source data are provided in the Sup-
plementary Information and Source data ﬁles. Source data are pro-
vided with this paper.
References
1. Schoggins, J. W. Interferon-stimulated genes: what do they all do?
A n n u .R e v .V i r o l .6,5 6 7– 584 (2019).
2 . S p a r r e r ,K .M .J .&G a c k ,M .U .I n t r a c e l l u l a rd e t e c t i o no fv i r a ln u c l e i c
acids. Curr. Opin. Microbiol.26,1 – 9( 2 0 1 5 ) .
3 . K o e p k e ,L . ,G a c k ,M .U .&S p a r r e r ,K .M .T h ea n t i v i r a la c t i v i t i e so f
TRIM proteins. Curr. Opin. Microbiol.59,5 0– 57 (2021).
4. Crow, Y. J. & Stetson, D. B. The type I interferonopathies: 10 years
on. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 22,4 7 1– 483 (2022).
5. Crow, Y. J. Type I interferonopathies: a novel set of inborn errors of
immunity. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1238,9 1– 98 (2011).
6 . A b l a s s e r ,A .&C h e n ,Z .J .c G A Si na c t i o n :e x p a n d i n gr o l e si n
immunity and inﬂammation. Science 363,e a a t 8 6 5 7( 2 0 1 9 ) .
7. Hopfner, K.-P. & Hornung, V. Molecular mechanisms and cellular
functions of cGAS-STING signalling.Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 21,
501– 521 (2020).
8. Sun, L., Wu, J., Du, F., Chen, X. & Chen, Z. J. Cyclic GMP-AMP syn-
thase is a cytosolic DNA sensor that activates the type-I interferon
pathway. Science 339,7 8 6– 791 (2013).
9. Gao, D. et al. Activation of cyclic GMP-AMP synthase by self-DNA
causes autoimmune diseases.P r o c .N a t lA c a d .S c i .U S A112,
E5699– E5705 (2015).
10. Wu, J. et al. Cyclic GMP-AMP is an endogenous second messenger
in innate immune signaling by cytosolic DNA.Science 339,
826– 830 (2013).
11. Gui, X. et al. Autophagy induction via STING traf ﬁcking is a pri-
mordial function of the cGAS pathway.Nature567,2 6 2– 266 (2019).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42150-4
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:6770 17

12. Dobbs, N. et al. STING activation by translocation from the ER is
associated with infection and autoinﬂammatory disease.Cell Host
Microbe 18,1 5 7– 168 (2015).
13. Gonugunta, V. K. et al. Traf ﬁcking-mediated STING degradation
requires sorting to acidiﬁed endolysosomes and can be targeted to
enhance anti-tumor response.Cell Rep. 21,3 2 3 4– 3242 (2017).
14. Lepelley, A. et al. Mutatio ns in COPA lead to abnormal trafﬁcking of
STING to the Golgi and interferon signaling.J. Exp. Med. 217,
e20200600 (2020).
15. Deng, Z. et al. A defect in COPI-mediated transport of STING causes
i m m u n ed y s r e g u l a t i o ni nC O P As y n d r o m e .J. Exp. Med. 217,
e20201045 (2020).
1 6 . S t e i n e r ,A .e ta l .D eﬁciency in coatomer complex I causes aberrant
activation of STING signalling.Nat. Commun. 13, 2321 (2022).
1 7 . M u k a i ,K .e ta l .H o m e o s t a t i cregulation of STING by retrograde
membrane trafﬁct ot h eE R .Nat. Commun. 12,6 1( 2 0 2 1 ) .
1 8 . B e n t o ,C .F . ,P u r i ,C . ,M o r e a u ,K .&R u b i n s z t e i n ,D .C .T h er o l eo f
membrane-trafﬁcking small GTPases in the regulation of autop-
hagy. J. Cell Sci 126,1 0 5 9– 1069 (2013).
19. Pennauer, M., Buczak, K., Pre scianotto-Baschong, C. & Spiess, M.
Shared and speciﬁc functions of Arfs 1-5 at the Golgi revealed by
systematic knockouts.J. Cell Biol. 221, e202106100 (2022).
20. Kahn, R. A. Toward a model for Arf GTPases as regulators of trafﬁca t
the Golgi. FEBS Lett. 583, 3872– 3879 (2009).
21. Aikawa, Y. & Martin, T. F. J. ARF6 regulates a plasma membrane pool
of phosphatidylinositol(4,5)bisphosphate required for regulated
exocytosis.J. Cell Biol. 162, 647– 659 (2003).
22. Sztul, E. et al. ARF GTPases and their GEFs and GAPs: concepts and
challenges.Mol. Biol. Cell 30,1 2 4 9– 1271 (2019).
2 3 . S o b r e i r a ,N . ,S c h i e t t e c a t t e ,F . ,V a l l e ,D .&H a m o s h ,A .G e n e M a t c h e r :
a matching tool for connecting investigators with an interest in the
same gene. Hum. Mutat. 36,9 2 8
– 930 (2015).
24. Goldberg, J. Structural basis for activation of ARF GTPase:
mechanisms of guanine nucleotide exchange and GTP-myristoyl
switching.Cell 95,2 3 7– 248 (1998).
25. Ge, X. et al. Missense-depleted regions in population exomes
implicate ras superfamily nucleotide-binding protein alteration in
patients with brain malformation.NPJ Genomic Med. 1,1 6 0 3 6
(2016).
26. Dascher, C. & Balch, W. E. Dominant inhibitory mutants of ARF1
block endoplasmic reticulum to Golgi transport and trigger dis-
assembly of the Golgi apparatus.J. Biol. Chem. 269,1 4 3 7– 1448
(1994).
27. Ishikawa, H. & Barber, G. N. STING is an endoplasmic reticulum
adaptor that facilitates innate immune signalling.Nature 455,
674– 678 (2008).
2 8 . Y u m ,S . ,L i ,M . ,F a n g ,Y .&C h e n ,Z .J .T B K 1r e c r u i t m e n tt oS T I N G
activates both IRF3 and NF-κB that mediate immune defense
against tumors and viral infections.Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 118,
e2100225118 (2021).
29. Ackema, K. B. et al. The small GTPase Arf1 modulates mitochondrial
morphology and function.EMBO J. 33,2 6 5 9– 2675 (2014).
30. Nagashima, S. et al. Golgi-derive d PI(4)P-containing vesicles drive
late steps of mitochondrial division.Science367,1 3 6 6– 1371 (2020).
31. Huang, L. S. et al. mtDNA activates cGAS signaling and suppresses
the YAP-mediated endothelial cell proliferation program to pro-
mote inﬂammatory injury.Immunity 52,4 7 5– 486.e5 (2020).
32. West, A. P. et al. Mitochondrial DNA stress primes the antiviral
innate immune response.Nature 520,5 5 3– 557 (2015).
33. White, M. J. et al. Apoptotic caspases suppress mtDNA-induced
STING-mediated type I IFN production. Cell 159, 1549– 1562
(2014).
34. Nelson, I., Hanna, M. G., Wood, N. W. & Harding, A. E. Depletion of
mitochondrial DNA by ddC in untransformed human cell lines.
Somat. Cell Mol. Genet. 23,2 8 7– 290 (1997).
35. Rabouille, C. Old dog, new tricks : Arf1 required for mitochondria
homeostasis.EMBO J. 33,2 6 0 4– 2605 (2014).
36. Rai, P. et al. IRGM1 links mitochondrial quality control to auto-
immunity. Nat. Immunol. 22,3 1 2– 321 (2021).
37. Willemsen, J. et al. TNF leads to mtDNA release and cGAS/STING-
dependent interferon responses that support inﬂammatory arthri-
tis. Cell Rep. 37, 109977 (2021).
38. Bao, D. et al. Mitochondrial ﬁssion-induced mtDNA stress promotes
tumor-associated macrophage inﬁltration and HCC progression.
Oncogene 38,5 0 0 7– 5020 (2019).
39. Oanh, N. T. K., Park, Y.-Y. & Cho, H. Mitochondria elongation is
mediated through SIRT1-mediated MFN1 stabilization.Cell. Signal.
38,6 7– 75 (2017).
40. Sidarala, V. et al. Mitofusin 1 and 2 regulation of mitochondrial
DNA content is a critical determinant of glucose homeostasis.
Nat. Commun. 13, 2340 (2022).
41. Ménétrey, J. et al. Structural basis for ARF1-mediated recruitment of
ARHGAP21 to Golgi membranes.EMBO J. 26,1 9 5 3– 1962 (2007).
42. Brumm, S. et al. Coordinated activation of ARF1 GTPases by ARF-
GEF GNOM dimers is essential for vesicle trafﬁcking in arabidopsis.
Plant Cell 32,2 4 9 1– 2507 (2020).
43. Li, S. et al. Prolonged activation of innate immune pathways by a
polyvalent STING agonist.Nat. Biomed. Eng. 5,4 5 5– 466 (2021).
44. He, Y. et al. Self-assembled cGAMP-STING ΔTM signaling complex
as a bioinspired platform for cGAMP delivery.Sci. Adv.6,e a b a 7 5 8 9
(2020).
45. Cole, N. B., Ellenberg, J., Song, J.,DiEuliis, D. & Lippincott-Schwartz,
J. Retrograde transport of Golgi-localized proteins to the ER.J. Cell
Biol 140,1 – 15 (1998).
46. Decout, A., Katz, J. D., Venkatraman, S. & Ablasser, A. The
cGAS– STING pathway as a therapeutic target in inﬂammatory dis-
eases. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 21,5 4 8– 569 (2021).
47. Wood, S. A., Park, J. E. & Brown, W. J. Brefeldin A causes a
microtubule-mediated fusion of the trans-Golgi network and early
endosomes.Cell 67,5 9 1– 600 (1991).
48. Rasmussen, M. L., Robertson, G. L. & Gama, V. Break on through:
Golgi-derived vesicles aid in mitochondrialﬁssion.
Cell Metab 31,
1047– 1049 (2020).
49. Lepelley, A. et al. Enhanced cGAS-STING-dependent interferon
signaling associated with mutations in ATAD3A.J. Exp. Med. 218,
e20201560 (2021).
50. Frémond, M.-L. et al. Overview of STING-associated vasculopathy
with onset in infancy (SAVI) among 21 patients. J. Allergy Clin.
Immunol. Pract. 9,8 0 3– 818.e11 (2021).
51. Jeremiah, N. et al. Inherited STING-activating mutation underlies a
familial inﬂammatory syndrome with lupus-like manifestations.J.
Clin. Invest. 124, 5516– 5520 (2014).
52. Liu, Y. et al. Activated STING in a vascular and pulmonary syndrome.
N. Engl. J. Med. 371,5 0 7– 518 (2014).
53. Watkin, L. B. et al. COPA mutations impair ER-Golgi transport
causing hereditary autoimmune-mediated lung disease and arthri-
tis. Nat. Genet. 47,6 5 4– 660 (2015).
54. Prabakaran, T. et al. Attenuation of cGAS-STING signaling is medi-
ated by a p62/SQSTM1-dependent autophagy pathway activated by
TBK1. EMBO J. 37,e 9 7 8 5 8( 2 0 1 8 ) .
5 5 . J i a ,M .e ta l .M y r i s t i ca c i da sac h e c k p o i n tt or e g u l a t eS T I N G -
dependent autophagy and interferon responses by promoting
N-myristoylation.Nat. Commun. 14, 660 (2023).
56. Adarska, P., Wong-Dilworth, L. & Bottanelli, F. ARF GTPases and their
ubiquitous role in intracellular trafﬁcking beyond the Golgi. Front.
Cell Dev. Biol. 9, 679046 (2021).
57. Gilbert, C. E., Sztul, E. & Machamer, C. E. Commonly used traf-
ﬁcking blocks disrupt ARF1 activation and the localization and
function of speciﬁc Golgi proteins. Mol. Biol. Cell 29,9 3 7– 947
(2018).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42150-4
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:6770 18

58. Spang, A. Retrograde traf ﬁc from the Golgi to the endoplasmic
reticulum.Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol.5, a013391 (2013).
59. Nakai, W. et al. ARF1 and ARF4 regulate recycling endosomal
morphology and retrograde transport from endosomes to the Golgi
apparatus.Mol. Biol. Cell 24,2 5 7 0– 2581 (2013).
60. Sumiyoshi, M. et al. Arf1 and Arf6 synergistically maintain survival of
T cells during activation. J. Immunol. 206,3 6 6– 375 (2021).
6 1 . P r e s l e y ,J .F .e ta l .E R - t o - G o l g it r a n s p o r tv i s u a l i z e di nl i v i n gc e l l s .
Nature 389,8 1– 85 (1997).
62. Hayn, M. et al. Systematic functional analysis of SARS-CoV-2 pro-
teins uncovers viral innate immune antagonists and remaining
vulnerabilities.Cell Rep. 35, 109126 (2021).
63. Frémond, M.-L. et al. Brief Report: Blockade of TANK-binding kinase
1/IKKɛ inhibits mutant stimulator of interferon genes (STING)-medi-
ated inﬂammatory responses in human peripheral blood mono-
nuclear cells.Arthritis Rheumatol. Hoboken NJ69,1 4 9 5– 1501 (2017).
64. Hirschenberger, M. et al. Luciferase reporter assays to monitor
interferon signaling modulation by SARS-CoV-2 proteins.STAR
Proto.c 2,1 0 0 7 8 1( 2 0 2 1 ) .
65. Koepke, L. et al. An improved method for high-throughput quanti-
ﬁcation of autophagy in mammalian cells.Sci. Rep.10, 12241 (2020)
66. van Diemen, F. R. et al. CRISPR /Cas9-mediated genome editing of
h e r p e s v i r u s e sl i m i t sp r o d u c tive and latent infections.PLOS Pathog
12, e1005701 (2016).
67. Sanjana, N. E., Shalem, O. & Zhang, F. Improved vectors and
genome-wide libraries for CRISPR screening.Nat. Methods 11,
783– 784 (2014).
68. Bryant, J. D., Lei, Y., VanPort ﬂi e t ,J .J . ,W i n t e r s ,A .D .&W e s t ,A .P .
Assessing mitochondrial DNA release into the cytosol and sub-
sequent activation of innate immune-related pathways in mam-
malian cells. Curr. Protoc. 2, e372 (2022).
69. Radamaker, L. et al. Role of mutations and post-translational mod-
iﬁcations in systemic AL amyloidosis studied by cryo-EM.Nat.
Commun. 12, 6434 (2021).
70. Cox, J. & Mann, M. MaxQuant enables high peptide identi ﬁcation
rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-
wide protein quantiﬁcation. Nat. Biotechnol.26,1 3 6 7– 1372 (2008).
71. Cox, J. et al. Andromeda: a peptide search engine integrated into
the MaxQuant environment.J. Proteome Res. 10,1 7 9 4– 1805 (2011).
72. Mi, H. et al. PANTHER version 16: a revised family classiﬁcation, tree-
based classiﬁcation tool, enhancer regions and extensive API.
Nucleic Acids Res. 49,D 3 9 4– D403 (2021).
73. Mi, H. et al. Protocol Update for Large-scale genome and gene
function analysis with PANTHER Classiﬁcation System (v.14.0).Nat.
Protoc. 14,7 0 3– 721 (2019).
74. Costes, S. V. et al. Automatic and quantitative measurement of
protein-protein colocalization in live cells.Biophys. J. 86,
3993– 4003 (2004).
7 5 . V a l e n t e ,A .J . ,M a d d a l e n a ,L .A . ,R o b b ,E .L . ,M o r a d i ,F .&S t u a r t ,J .A .
A simple ImageJ macro tool for analyzing mitochondrial network
morphology in mammalian cell culture.Acta Histochem.119,
315– 326 (2017).
76. Chaudhry, A., Shi, R. & Luciani, D. S. A pipeline for multidimensional
confocal analysis of mitochondrial morphology, function, and
dynamics in pancreaticβ-cells. A m .J .P h y s i o l .-E n d o c r i n o l .M e t a b .
318,E 8 7– E101 (2020).
77. Osseforth, C., Mof ﬁtt, J. R., Schermelleh, L. & Michaelis, J. Simul-
taneous dual-color 3D STED microscopy.Opt. Express 22,
7028– 7039 (2014).
78. Read, C., Schau ﬂinger, M., Nikolaenko, D., Walther, P. & von Einem,
J. Regulation of human cytomegalovirus secondary envelopment
by a C-terminal tetralysine motif in pUL71.J. Virol. 93, e02244– 18
(2019).
79. Walther, P. & Ziegler, A. Freeze substitution of high-pressure frozen
samples: the visibility of biological membranes is improved when
the substitution medium contains water.J. Microsc. 208,3 – 10
(2002).
8 0 . W i e l a n d ,J .e ta l .Z i k av i r u sr e p l i c ation in glioblastoma cells: electron
microscopic tomography shows 3D arrangement of endoplasmic
reticulum, replication organelles, and viral ribonucleoproteins.
Histochem. Cell Biol.156,5 2 7– 538 (2021).
81. Kremer, J. R., Mastronarde, D. N. & McIntosh, J. R. Computer
visualization of three-dimensional image data using IMOD.J. Struct.
Biol. 116,7 1–
76 (1996).
82. Weibel, E. R. in International Review of Cytology(eds. Bourne, G. H.,
D a n i e l l i ,J .F .&J e o n ,K .W . )V o l .2 6 ,2 3 5– 302 (Academic Press, 1969).
83. Sun, W., Vanhooke, J. L., Sondek, J. & Zhang, Q. High-throughput
ﬂuorescence polarization assay for the enzymatic activity of
GTPase-activating protein of ADP-ribosylation factor (ARFGAP).J.
Biomol. Screen. 16,7 1 7– 723 (2011).
Acknowledgements
We thank Jana-Romana Fischer, BirgitOtt, Regina Burger, Daniela Krnavek,
Kerstin Regensburger, Martha Meyer and Nicola Schrott for excellent
technical assistance. This study was supported by DFG (German Research
Foundation) grants SP1600/4-1 (to K.M.J.S.), SPP1923 (to K.M.J.S. and F.K.),
CRC1279 (to K.M.J.S., F.K., J.M., C.R., S.W. and P.W.), as well as the BMBF to
F.K. (Restrict SARS-CoV-2) and K.M.J.S. (IMMUNOMOD 01KI2014) and the
DFG Emmy Noether Programme 458004906 to CCOM. Y.J.C. and K.M.J.S.
are additionally supported by a DFG/Agence Nationale de la Recherche
(ANR, France) joint grant (504830917). Y.J.C. acknowledges the European
Research Council (786142 E-T1IFNs), a UK Medical Research Council
Human Genetics Unit core grant (MC_UU_00035/11), a state subsidy from
the Agence Nationale de la Recherche (France) under the‘Investissements
d’avenir’ programme bearing the reference ANR-10-IAHU-01, and MSDA-
VENIR (Devo-Decode Project). Y.J.C. sincerely thanks Elizabeth Sztul and
Paul Randazzo for the generation of early preliminary data not included in
the manuscript, and Marine Depp andCarolina Uggenti for providing the
eGFP-STING plasmid. Y.J.C. also thanks Paolo Piccolo for expert clinical
phenotyping, Ignazia Prigione for experimental support, Gillian Rice for
deriving interferon scores, and Jean-Madeleine de Sainte Agathe for
clinical advice. This study makes use of data generated by the DECIPHER
community, with a full list of contributing centres available [https://www.
deciphergenomics.org/about/stats] and via email from con-
tact@deciphergenomics.org. S.V. acknowledges funding from the Italian
Ministry of University and Research (PRIN grant n.20175XHBPN). Funding
for the DECIPHER project was provided by the Wellcome Trust. A.L.
acknowledges Inserm International Research Project (Inserm IRP) pro-
gramme. M.H., L.K., S.K. and V.H. are part of the international graduate
school in molecular medicine, Ulm (IGradU).
Author contributions
Y.J.C., A.L., M.H. and K.M.J.S. conceived the project, and designed and
interpreted experiments. M.H. performed most of the experiments. A.L.,
V.H., L.K., S.K., V.M., T.M., M.P.R. and B.D.B. performed additional
experiments. U.R., T.B., C.R. and P.W. contributed the electron micro-
scopy studies. F.W. and J.M. provided super-resolution imaging. S.W.
and R.R. analysed and performed the mass spectrometry analysis for the
SILAC experiment. V.M. and C.C.d.O.M. performed and planned the in
vitro experiments. C.C.d.O.M., J.M.and F.K. supervised experiments and
helped interpret data. S.V., M.G., R.P., S.A.L., M.G.H., G.H., K.M.W., J.S.
and J.L. contributed patient data. Y.J.C., A.L., M.H. and K.M.J.S. wrote the
manuscript.
Funding
Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42150-4
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:6770 19

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary informationThe online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42150-4.
Correspondenceand requests for materials should be addressed to
Yanick J. Crow or Konstantin M. J. Sparrer.
Peer review informationNature Communicationsthanks the anon-
ymous reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
Ap e e rr e v i e wﬁle is available.
Reprints and permissions informationis available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visithttp://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2023
1Institute of Molecular Virology, Ulm University Medical Center, 89081 Ulm, Germany.2Université Paris Cité, Imagine Institute, Laboratory of Neurogenetics
and Neuroinﬂammation, INSERM UMR1163, F-75015 Paris, France.3Central Facility for Electron Microscopy, Ulm University, 89081 Ulm, Germany.4Institute of
Virology, Technical University of Munich, 81675 Munich, Germany.5Institute of Biophysics, Ulm University, 89081 Ulm, Germany.6Core Unit Mass Spec-
trometry and Proteomics, Ulm University, 89081 Ulm, Germany.7UOC Reumatologia e Malattie Autoinﬁammatorie, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini,
Genoa, Italy. 8Università degli Studi di Genova, Genoa, Italy.9Children’s Health Ireland, Crumlin, Dublin, Eire. 10University College Dublin, Dublin, Eire.
11Department of Medical Genetics, St. Olav’s Hospital, Trondheim, Norway.12Department of Medical Genetics, Haukeland University Hospital, 5021
Bergen, Norway.13Division of Genomic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, University of California, Davis in Sacramento, CA, USA.14Rady Children’sI n s t i t u t e
for Genomic Medicine, San Diego, CA, USA. 15Division of Pediatric and Adolescent Dermatology, Rady Children’s Hospital San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA.
16Department of Dermatology, University of California San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla, USA.17MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and
Cancer, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. e-mail: yanickcrow@mac.com; Konstantin.Sparrer@uni-ulm.de
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42150-4
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:6770 20