---
pmid: '33302159'
title: Functional dissection of the KRAS G12C mutation by comparison among multiple
  oncogenic driver mutations in a lung cancer cell line model.
authors:
- Kobayashi K
- Terai H
- Yasuda H
- Hamamoto J
- Hayashi Y
- Takeuchi O
- Mitsuishi Y
- Masuzawa K
- Manabe T
- Ikemura S
- Kawada I
- Suzuki Y
- Soejima K
- Fukunaga K
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2021'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.11.110
---

# Functional dissection of the KRAS G12C mutation by comparison among multiple oncogenic driver mutations in a lung cancer cell line model.
**Authors:** Kobayashi K, Terai H, Yasuda H, Hamamoto J, Hayashi Y, Takeuchi O, Mitsuishi Y, Masuzawa K, Manabe T, Ikemura S, Kawada I, Suzuki Y, Soejima K, Fukunaga K
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.11.110](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.11.110)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2021 Jan 1;534:1-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.11.110.  Epub 2020 Dec 8.

Functional dissection of the KRAS G12C mutation by comparison among multiple
oncogenic driver mutations in a lung cancer cell line model.

Kobayashi K(1), Terai H(2), Yasuda H(1), Hamamoto J(3), Hayashi Y(4), Takeuchi
O(5), Mitsuishi Y(6), Masuzawa K(1), Manabe T(1), Ikemura S(7), Kawada I(1),
Suzuki Y(8), Soejima K(9), Fukunaga K(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Medicine, Keio University,
School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, 160-8582, Japan.
(2)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Medicine, Keio University,
School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, 160-8582, Japan;
Clinical and Translational Research Center, Keio University School of Medicine,
35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, 160-8582, Japan; Division of Bioreguratory
Medicine, Kitasato University School of Pharmacy, 5-9-1, Shirokane, Minato-ku,
Tokyo, 108-8641, Japan. Electronic address: hidekit926@gmail.com.
(3)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Medicine, Keio University,
School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, 160-8582, Japan;
Division of Bioreguratory Medicine, Kitasato University School of Pharmacy,
5-9-1, Shirokane, Minato-ku, Tokyo, 108-8641, Japan.
(4)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Keio University School of Medicine, 35
Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, 160-8582, Japan.
(5)BioMedical Laboratory, Department of Research, Kitasato University, Kitasato
Institute Hospital, 5-9-1, Shirokane, Minato-ku, Tokyo, 108-8642, Japan.
(6)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Medicine, Juntendo University,
School of Medicine, 2-1-1, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8421, Japan.
(7)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Medicine, Keio University,
School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, 160-8582, Japan; Keio
Cancer Center, Keio University, School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi,
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, 160-8582, Japan.
(8)Division of Bioreguratory Medicine, Kitasato University School of Pharmacy,
5-9-1, Shirokane, Minato-ku, Tokyo, 108-8641, Japan.
(9)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Medicine, Keio University,
School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, 160-8582, Japan;
Clinical and Translational Research Center, Keio University School of Medicine,
35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, 160-8582, Japan.

The development of molecular targeted therapy has improved clinical outcomes in
patients with life-threatening advanced lung cancers with driver oncogenes.
However, selective treatment for KRAS-mutant lung cancer remains underdeveloped.
We have successfully characterised specific molecular and pathological features
of KRAS-mutant lung cancer utilising newly developed cell line models that can
elucidate the differences in driver oncogenes among tissues with identical
genetic backgrounds. Among these KRAS-mutation-associated specific features, we
focused on the IGF2-IGF1R pathway, which has been implicated in the drug
resistance mechanisms to AMG 510, a recently developed selective inhibitor of
KRAS G12C lung cancer. Experimental data derived from our cell line model can be
used as a tool for clinical treatment strategy development through understanding
of the biology of lung cancer. The model developed in this paper may help
understand the mechanism of anticancer drug resistance in KRAS-mutated lung
cancer and help develop new targeted therapies to treat patients with this
disease.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.11.110
PMID: 33302159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
