---
pmid: '19478182'
title: A role for the CHC22 clathrin heavy-chain isoform in human glucose metabolism.
authors:
- Vassilopoulos S
- Esk C
- Hoshino S
- Funke BH
- Chen CY
- Plocik AM
- Wright WE
- Kucherlapati R
- Brodsky FM
journal: Science
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2975026
doi: 10.1126/science.1171529
---

# A role for the CHC22 clathrin heavy-chain isoform in human glucose metabolism.
**Authors:** Vassilopoulos S, Esk C, Hoshino S, Funke BH, Chen CY, Plocik AM, Wright WE, Kucherlapati R, Brodsky FM
**Journal:** Science (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1171529](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1171529)
**PMC:** [PMC2975026](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2975026/)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2009 May 29;324(5931):1192-6. doi: 10.1126/science.1171529.

A role for the CHC22 clathrin heavy-chain isoform in human glucose metabolism.

Vassilopoulos S(1), Esk C, Hoshino S, Funke BH, Chen CY, Plocik AM, Wright WE, 
Kucherlapati R, Brodsky FM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, University of 
California, School of Pharmacy, San Francisco (UCSF), San Francisco, CA 94143, 
USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2009 May 29;324(5931):1155-6. doi: 10.1126/science.1174841.

Intracellular trafficking of the glucose transporter GLUT4 from storage 
compartments to the plasma membrane is triggered in muscle and fat during the 
body's response to insulin. Clathrin is involved in intracellular trafficking, 
and in humans, the clathrin heavy-chain isoform CHC22 is highly expressed in 
skeletal muscle. We found a role for CHC22 in the formation of 
insulin-responsive GLUT4 compartments in human muscle and adipocytes. CHC22 also 
associated with expanded GLUT4 compartments in muscle from type 2 diabetic 
patients. Tissue-specific introduction of CHC22 in mice, which have only a 
pseudogene for this protein, caused aberrant localization of GLUT4 transport 
pathway components in their muscle, as well as features of diabetes. Thus, 
CHC22-dependent membrane trafficking constitutes a species-restricted pathway in 
human muscle and fat with potential implications for type 2 diabetes.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1171529
PMCID: PMC2975026
PMID: 19478182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
