---
pmid: '17172799'
title: Autophagy genes protect against disease caused by polyglutamine expansion proteins
  in Caenorhabditis elegans.
authors:
- Jia K
- Hart AC
- Levine B
journal: Autophagy
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.4161/auto.3528
---

# Autophagy genes protect against disease caused by polyglutamine expansion proteins in Caenorhabditis elegans.
**Authors:** Jia K, Hart AC, Levine B
**Journal:** Autophagy (2007)
**DOI:** [10.4161/auto.3528](https://doi.org/10.4161/auto.3528)

## Abstract

1. Autophagy. 2007 Jan-Feb;3(1):21-5. doi: 10.4161/auto.3528. Epub 2007 Jan 23.

Autophagy genes protect against disease caused by polyglutamine expansion 
proteins in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Jia K(1), Hart AC, Levine B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Expanded polyglutamine (polyQ) proteins aggregate intracellularly in 
Huntington's disease and other neurodegenerative disorders. The lysosomal 
degradation pathway, autophagy, is known to promote clearance of polyQ protein 
aggregates in cultured cells. Moreover, basal autophagy in neuronal cells in 
mice prevents neurodegeneration by suppressing the accumulation of abnormal 
intracellular proteins. However, it is not yet known whether autophagy genes 
play a role in vivo in protecting against disease caused by mutant 
aggregate-prone, expanded polyQ proteins. To examine this question, we used two 
models of polyQ-induced toxicity in C. elegans, including the expression of 
polyQ40 aggregates in muscle and the expression of a human huntingtin disease 
fragment containing a polyQ tract of 150 residues (Htn-Q150) in ASH sensory 
neurons. Here, we show that genetic inactivation of autophagy genes accelerates 
the accumulation of polyQ40 aggregates in C. elegans muscle cells and 
exacerbates polyQ40-induced muscle dysfunction. Autophagy gene inactivation also 
increases the accumulation of Htn-Q150 aggregates in C. elegans ASH sensory 
neurons and results in enhanced neurodegeneration. These data provide in vivo 
genetic evidence that autophagy genes suppress the accumulation of polyQ 
aggregates and protect cells from disease caused by polyQ toxicity.

DOI: 10.4161/auto.3528
PMID: 17172799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
