---
reference_id: PMID:12095988
title: Role of ubiquilin associated with protein-disulfide isomerase in the endoplasmic reticulum in stress-induced apoptotic cell death.
authors:
- Ko HS
- Uehara T
- Nomura Y
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M203412200
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of ubiquilin associated with protein-disulfide isomerase in the endoplasmic reticulum in stress-induced apoptotic cell death.
**Authors:** Ko HS, Uehara T, Nomura Y
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M203412200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M203412200)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 20;277(38):35386-92. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M203412200. Epub
2002 Jul 2.

Role of ubiquilin associated with protein-disulfide isomerase in the endoplasmic
reticulum in stress-induced apoptotic cell death.

Ko HS(1), Uehara T, Nomura Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.

Up-regulation of several stress proteins such as heat-shock proteins and
glucose-regulated proteins participate in tolerance against environmental
stress. Previously, we found that protein-disulfide isomerase (PDI) is
specifically up-regulated in response to hypoxia/brain ischemia in astrocytes.
In addition, the overexpression of this gene into neurons protects against
apoptotic cell death induced by hypoxia/brain ischemia. To address the detailed
function of PDI, we screened for proteins that interact with PDI using the yeast
two-hybrid system. We report here that PDI interacts with ubiquilin, which has a
ubiquitin-like domain and a ubiquitin-associated domain. Interestingly,
ubiquilin is also up-regulated in response to hypoxia in glial cells with a time
course similar to that of PDI induction. In hypoxia-treated glial cells, the
endogenous ubiquilin and PDI were almost completely co-localized, suggesting
that ubiquilin is an endoplasmic reticulum-associated protein. Overexpression of
this gene in neuronal cells resulted in significant inhibition of the DNA
fragmentation triggered by hypoxia, but not that induced by nitric oxide or
staurosporine. Moreover, ubiquilin has the ability to attenuate CHOP induction
by hypoxia. These observations suggested that ubiquilin together with PDI have
critical functions as regulatory proteins for CHOP-mediated cell death, and
therefore up-regulation of these proteins may result in acquisition of tolerance
against ischemic stress in glial cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M203412200
PMID: 12095988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]