---
pmid: '16009360'
title: A unique role for 6-O sulfation modification in zebrafish vascular development.
authors:
- Chen E
- Stringer SE
- Rusch MA
- Selleck SB
- Ekker SC
journal: Dev Biol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2005.05.032
---

# A unique role for 6-O sulfation modification in zebrafish vascular development.
**Authors:** Chen E, Stringer SE, Rusch MA, Selleck SB, Ekker SC
**Journal:** Dev Biol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ydbio.2005.05.032](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2005.05.032)

## Abstract

1. Dev Biol. 2005 Aug 15;284(2):364-76. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2005.05.032.

A unique role for 6-O sulfation modification in zebrafish vascular development.

Chen E(1), Stringer SE, Rusch MA, Selleck SB, Ekker SC.

Author information:
(1)Arnold and Mabel Beckman Center for Transposon Research, Department of 
Genetics, Cell Biology and Development, University of Minnesota, 6-160 Jackson 
Hall, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Heparan sulfate proteoglycans are important modulators of growth factor 
signaling in a variety of patterning processes. Secreted growth factors that 
play critical roles in angiogenesis bind to heparan sulfate, and this 
association is affected by 6-O-sulfation of the heparan sulfate chains. Addition 
of 6-O-sulfate is catalyzed by a family of sulfotransferases (HS6STs), and 
genetic manipulation of their function permits an assessment of their 
contribution to vascular assembly. We report on the biochemical activity and 
expression patterns of two zebrafish HS6ST genes. In situ hybridization reveals 
dynamic and distinct expression patterns of these two genes during development. 
Structural analysis of heparan sulfate from wild-type and morpholino antisense 
'knockdown' embryos suggests that HS6ST-1 and HS6ST-2 have similar biochemical 
activity. HS6ST-2, but not HS6ST-1, morphants exhibit abnormalities in the 
branching morphogenesis of the caudal vein during embryonic development of the 
zebrafish. Our finding that HS6ST-2 is required for the branching morphogenesis 
of the caudal vein is the first in vivo evidence for an essential role of a gene 
encoding a heparan sulfate modifying enzyme in vertebrate angiogenesis. Our 
analysis of two zebrafish HS6ST genes suggests that a wide range of biological 
processes may be regulated by an array of sulfation-modifying enzymes in the 
vertebrate genome.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2005.05.032
PMID: 16009360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
