---
pmid: '15306853'
title: Mss51p and Cox14p jointly regulate mitochondrial Cox1p expression in Saccharomyces
  cerevisiae.
authors:
- Barrientos A
- Zambrano A
- Tzagoloff A
journal: EMBO J
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC516630
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600358
---

# Mss51p and Cox14p jointly regulate mitochondrial Cox1p expression in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Barrientos A, Zambrano A, Tzagoloff A
**Journal:** EMBO J (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7600358](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7600358)
**PMC:** [PMC516630](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC516630/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2004 Sep 1;23(17):3472-82. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600358. Epub 2004
Aug  12.

Mss51p and Cox14p jointly regulate mitochondrial Cox1p expression in 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Barrientos A(1), Zambrano A, Tzagoloff A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. 
abarrientos@med.miami.edu

Mutations in SURF1, the human homologue of yeast SHY1, are responsible for 
Leigh's syndrome, a neuropathy associated with cytochrome oxidase (COX) 
deficiency. Previous studies of the yeast model of this disease showed that 
mutant forms of Mss51p, a translational activator of COX1 mRNA, partially rescue 
the COX deficiency of shy1 mutants by restoring normal synthesis of the 
mitochondrially encoded Cox1p subunit of COX. Here we present evidence showing 
that Cox1p synthesis is reduced in most COX mutants but is restored to that of 
wild type by the same mss51 mutation that suppresses shy1 mutants. An important 
exception is a null mutation in COX14, which by itself or in combination with 
other COX mutations does not affect Cox1p synthesis. Cox14p and Mss51p are shown 
to interact with newly synthesized Cox1p and with each other. We propose that 
the interaction of Mss51p and Cox14p with Cox1p to form a transient 
Cox14p-Cox1p-Mss51p complex functions to downregulate Cox1p synthesis. The 
release of Mss51p from the complex occurs at a downstream step in the assembly 
pathway, probably catalyzed by Shy1p.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600358
PMCID: PMC516630
PMID: 15306853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
