---
pmid: '8692945'
title: Bcl-2 interacting protein, BAG-1, binds to and activates the kinase Raf-1.
authors:
- Wang HG
- Takayama S
- Rapp UR
- Reed JC
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC38936
doi: 10.1073/pnas.93.14.7063
---

# Bcl-2 interacting protein, BAG-1, binds to and activates the kinase Raf-1.
**Authors:** Wang HG, Takayama S, Rapp UR, Reed JC
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.93.14.7063](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.93.14.7063)
**PMC:** [PMC38936](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC38936/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Jul 9;93(14):7063-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.93.14.7063.

Bcl-2 interacting protein, BAG-1, binds to and activates the kinase Raf-1.

Wang HG(1), Takayama S, Rapp UR, Reed JC.

Author information:
(1)The Burnham Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

The Bcl-2 protein blocks programmed cell death (apoptosis) through an unknown 
mechanism. Previously we identified a Bcl-2 interacting protein BAG-1 that 
enhances the anti-apoptotic effects of Bcl-2. Like BAG-1, the serine/threonine 
protein kinase Raf-1 also can functionally cooperate with Bcl-2 in suppressing 
apoptosis. Here we show that Raf-1 and BAG-1 specifically interact in vitro and 
in yeast two-hybrid assays. Raf-1 and BAG-1 can also be coimmunoprecipitated 
from mammalian cells and from insect cells infected with recombinant 
baculoviruses encoding these proteins. Furthermore, bacterially-produced BAG-1 
protein can increase the kinase activity of Raf-1 in vitro. BAG-1 also activates 
this mammalian kinase in yeast. These observations suggest that the Bcl-2 
binding protein BAG-1 joins Ras and 14-3-3 proteins as potential activators of 
the kinase Raf-1.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.93.14.7063
PMCID: PMC38936
PMID: 8692945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
