---
pmid: '27008867'
title: Mutations in C8ORF37 cause Bardet Biedl syndrome (BBS21).
authors:
- Heon E
- Kim G
- Qin S
- Garrison JE
- Tavares E
- Vincent A
- Nuangchamnong N
- Scott CA
- Slusarski DC
- Sheffield VC
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2016'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC5081059
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddw096
---

# Mutations in C8ORF37 cause Bardet Biedl syndrome (BBS21).
**Authors:** Heon E, Kim G, Qin S, Garrison JE, Tavares E, Vincent A, Nuangchamnong N, Scott CA, Slusarski DC, Sheffield VC
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddw096](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddw096)
**PMC:** [PMC5081059](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5081059/)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2016 Jun 1;25(11):2283-2294. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddw096. Epub 2016
 Mar 22.

Mutations in C8ORF37 cause Bardet Biedl syndrome (BBS21).

Heon E(1), Kim G(2), Qin S(3), Garrison JE(2), Tavares E(3), Vincent A(4), 
Nuangchamnong N(5), Scott CA(6), Slusarski DC(6), Sheffield VC(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, M5G 1X8 Canada Department of Ophthalmology and Vision 
Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, M5G 1X8 Canada Program of Genetics and 
Genomic Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, M5G 1X8 Canada 
elise.heon@sickkids.ca.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics, Wynn Institute for 
Vision Research, Carver College of Medicine.
(3)Program of Genetics and Genomic Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, M5G 1X8 Canada.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, M5G 1X8 Canada Department of Ophthalmology and Vision 
Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, M5G 1X8 Canada.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Carver College of Medicine.
(6)Department of Biology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Bardet Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a multisystem genetically heterogeneous 
ciliopathy that most commonly leads to obesity, photoreceptor degeneration, 
digit anomalies, genito-urinary abnormalities, as well as cognitive impairment 
with autism, among other features. Sequencing of a DNA sample from a 17-year-old 
female affected with BBS did not identify any mutation in the known BBS genes. 
Whole-genome sequencing identified a novel loss-of-function disease-causing 
homozygous mutation (K102*) in C8ORF37, a gene coding for a cilia protein. The 
proband was overweight (body mass index 29.1) with a slowly progressive rod-cone 
dystrophy, a mild learning difficulty, high myopia, three limb post-axial 
polydactyly, horseshoe kidney, abnormally positioned uterus and elevated liver 
enzymes. Mutations in C8ORF37 were previously associated with severe autosomal 
recessive retinal dystrophies (retinitis pigmentosa RP64 and cone-rod dystrophy 
CORD16) but not BBS. To elucidate the functional role of C8ORF37 in a vertebrate 
system, we performed gene knockdown in Danio rerio and assessed the cardinal 
features of BBS and visual function. Knockdown of c8orf37 resulted in impaired 
visual behavior and BBS-related phenotypes, specifically, defects in the 
formation of Kupffer's vesicle and delays in retrograde transport. Specificity 
of these phenotypes to BBS knockdown was shown with rescue experiments. 
Over-expression of human missense mutations in zebrafish also resulted in 
impaired visual behavior and BBS-related phenotypes. This is the first 
functional validation and association of C8ORF37 mutations with the BBS 
phenotype, which identifies BBS21. The zebrafish studies hereby show that 
C8ORF37 variants underlie clinically diagnosed BBS-related phenotypes as well as 
isolated retinal degeneration.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddw096
PMCID: PMC5081059
PMID: 27008867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Bardet Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a multisystem genetically heterogeneous ciliopathy that most commonly leads to obesity, photoreceptor degeneration, digit anomalies, genito-urinary abnormalities, as well as cognitive impairment with autism, among other features. Sequencing of a DNA sample from a 17-year-old female affected with BBS did not identify any mutation in the known BBS genes. Whole-genome sequencing identified a novel loss-of-function disease-causing homozygous mutation (K102*) in C8ORF37 , a gene coding for a cilia protein. The proband was overweight (body mass index 29.1) with a slowly progressive rod-cone dystrophy, a mild learning difficulty, high myopia, three limb post-axial polydactyly, horseshoe kidney, abnormally positioned uterus and elevated liver enzymes. Mutations in C8ORF37 were previously associated with severe autosomal recessive retinal dystrophies (retinitis pigmentosa RP64 and cone-rod dystrophy CORD16) but not BBS. To elucidate the functional role of C8ORF37 in a vertebrate system, we performed gene knockdown in Danio rerio and assessed the cardinal features of BBS and visual function. Knockdown of c8orf37 resulted in impaired visual behavior and BBS-related phenotypes, specifically, defects in the formation of Kupffer’s vesicle and delays in retrograde transport. Specificity of these phenotypes to BBS knockdown was shown with rescue experiments. Over-expression of human missense mutations in zebrafish also resulted in impaired visual behavior and BBS-related phenotypes. This is the first functional validation and association of C8ORF37 mutations with the BBS phenotype, which identifies BBS21. The zebrafish studies hereby show that C8ORF37 variants underlie clinically diagnosed BBS-related phenotypes as well as isolated retinal degeneration.

Introduction

Bardet Biedl syndrome (BBS, MIM209900) is a genetically heterogeneous pleiotropic disorder of autosomal recessive inheritance and is primarily characterized by photoreceptor degeneration, obesity, digit anomalies, genito-urinary anomalies and cognitive impairment ( 1 , 2 ). BBS is considered a ciliopathy, as genes associated with the disease are associated with primary cilia function ( 3–22 ). BBS has been an important disease model to highlight the clinical and molecular overlaps that now characterize ciliopathies ( 23 , 24 ). Mutations in BBS genes may also cause other syndromic conditions that mimic BBS or other ciliopathies and result in non-syndromic (isolated) retinal dystrophies such as cone-rod dystrophy (CRD, MIM 120970) and retinitis pigmentosa (RP, MIM 268000) ( 25 , 26 ). The genetic heterogeneity of non-syndromic inherited retinal dystrophies involves over 250 causally associated genetic loci (RETNET, http://www.RETNET.org , last accessed April 19, 2016), a third of which are genes expressed in primary cilia ( 27 ).

RP and CRD are inherited photoreceptor degeneration diseases that differ by the predominant photoreceptor cell type involved. The prevalence of RP is 1 in 4000 individuals and 1 in 40 000 individuals for CRD. In both conditions, the vision loss is usually progressive and severe for which there is no treatment at this time. Mutations in C8ORF37 were recently identified in individuals with autosomal recessive RP type 64 (RP64) and CRD type 16 (CORD16) ( 27–32 ). Nine different C8ORF37 mutations have been reported ( Fig. 1 A), none of which were associated with BBS ( 27 , 32 ).

The C8ORF37 ( NP_808880.1 ) protein is encoded by six exons ( Fig. 1 A) and is 207 amino acids in length ( NM_177965.3 ). The overall function and functional domains of C8ORF37 are unknown. C8ORF37 is expressed ubiquitously in human tissues, with robust expression in the brain, heart and retina ( 27 ). C8ORF37 is localized to the base of the photoreceptor connecting cilium ( 27 ). As such, it is likely that mutations in this gene disturb intracellular trafficking and can contribute to the pathophysiology of RP, CRD as well as BBS.

In this study, we report that a novel homozygous C8ORF37 mutation causes BBS. Using gene knockdown in zebrafish, we observed visual impairment and BBS-specific phenotypes, specifically Kupffer’s vesicle (KV) formation defects and melanosome transport delay. We also tested the pathogenicity of two previously reported missense mutations associated with retinal dystrophies ( 32 ) by using established BBS-related phenotypes in zebrafish and visual function assessment ( 33 ). In this study, we took advantage of rapid disease modeling in zebrafish to elucidate the role of the Danio rerio c8orf37 in BBS-related functions and vision thus providing phenotype–genotype correlation for BBS21.

Knockdown ofc8orf37in zebrafish results in BBS-related phenotypes

To establish the functional role of c8orf37 in syndromic as well as non-syndromic retinal degeneration, we performed gene knockdown experiments in the zebrafish model. This approach was previously successful in evaluating hypomorphic mutations associated with RP in genes that also caused different syndromic disorders ( 37 ). For gene knockdown, antisense morpholino oligonucleotides (MO) targeting the c8orf37 translation start target (ATG MO) and the splice junction of intron1 and exon2 (Splice MO) were injected into 1–2 cell stage embryos at different doses. RT-PCR of splice morphants verified that knockdown persisted out through 5 dpf (data not shown). The gross morphology of both the ATG and splice morphants appeared normal without visible defects such as bent body axis and renal cysts. To verify our hypothesis that C8ORF37 causes BBS, we evaluated the c8orf37 morphants for BBS-related phenotypes such as defects in KV formation and retrograde melanosome transport, in addition to visual behavior.

Discussion

The novel C8ORF37 p.K102* variant reported here is the first association of BBS with C8ORF37 ( BBS21 ). C8ORF37 is not predicted to be a component of the BBSome nor based on homology would it be expected to be a component of the BBS gene network. However, our zebrafish model system showed that in vivo c8orf37 knockdown led to the zebrafish “BBS phenotypes,” which supports that the homozygous p.K102* variant found in a single BBS patient is likely the cause of the signs observed. Specifically, we determined that MO knockdown of c8orf37 results in delayed retrograde melanosome transport, abnormalities in KV morphogenesis, in addition to an abnormal visual function. In addition, we validated the pathogenicity of C8ORF37 mutations and showed that the K102*-containing transcript undergoes NMD. These findings support an interaction of C8ORF37 with the BBS gene network, yet to be characterized.

C8ORF37 (MIM614500) is a ciliary cytoplasmic protein that has no significant sequence homology to any other human protein. It has been given its own protein class: the retinal maintenance protein superfamily and has no known function. C8ORF37 is ubiquitously expressed ( http://www.gtexportal.org/home/gene/C8orf37 , last accessed April 19, 2016) and co-localizes with polyglutamylated tubulin at the base of the primary cilium in human retinal pigment epithelium cells and at the base of the photoreceptor connecting cilium ( 27 ). It is proposed to have interactions with NRF1 (alpha palindromic-binding protein), which function links the transcriptional modulation of key metabolic genes to cellular growth and development. The ubiquitous expression patterns throughout development are typical of BBS genes and further support C8ORF37 being involved with primary cilia function and implicated in the development of BBS [( http://bgee.unil.ch/bgee/bgee , last accessed April 19, 2016), ( http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/unigene , last accessed April 19, 2016), ( http://www.proteinatlas.org/ , last accessed April 19, 2016) and ( http://www.ebi.ac.uk , last accessed April 19, 2016)]. While C8ORF37 has not been previously reported to be involved in BBS, two siblings with retinal disease associated with a C8ORF37 mutation ( C8ORF37 c.156-2A->G) also had polydactyly on the right foot or hand ( 7 , 8 ). Whether this finding was truly isolated is unclear as signs of BBS may be mild and overlooked if not functionally significant ( 42 ).

In humans, allelic heterogeneity of C8ORF37 leads to different retinal degeneration phenotypes ( 27–32 ) and now includes that of BBS (BBS21). As study of other ciliary proteins has shown, mutations can lead to important phenotype heterogeneity ( 42 , 43 ). The effect of an early null mutation (p.K102*) may explain the full blown BBS phenotype. The potential modifying role of the likely benign heterozygous BBS4 (p.K46R) on C8ORF37 p.K102* expression is yet to be determined. The recent report of a known C8ORF37 mutation (R177W) associated with a BBS-like phenotype ( 44 ) also suggests that early disruption of C8ORF37 may lead to a more syndromic phenotype with extra-ocular features. Our work supports that C8ORF37 mutations associate with syndromic and non-syndromic retinal degeneration.

Zebrafish have been a useful model in allowing validation of a range of conserved novel variants. In this study, we find that WT c8orf37 can rescue knockdown defects related to BBS and to vision, unlike the missense mutations p.Q182R and p.R177W that do not globally suppress the knockdown phenotypes. Based on the zebrafish work, it could be that missense mutations result in a less deleterious effect than an early null mutation, as indicated by the human data.

Although C8ORF37 mutations are a rare cause of BBS (BBS21), such an association is important and suggests that patients with C8ORF37 mutations should have a medical workup to assess the potential presence of BBS features including obesity, renal abnormalities, diabetes and hypertension. Furthermore, this expands the components of the BBS-related network. How C8ORF37 interacts with the BBS protein network including the BBSome remains to be determined.

Materials and Methods

This work was approved by the Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto, Canada) Ethics Review Board respecting the Tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki and the University Animal Care and Use Committee at the University of Iowa (IA). All oligonucleotides used are listed in Supplementary Material, Table S1 .
