---
pmid: '16439210'
title: The evi5 oncogene regulates cyclin accumulation by stabilizing the anaphase-promoting
  complex inhibitor emi1.
authors:
- Eldridge AG
- Loktev AV
- Hansen DV
- Verschuren EW
- Reimann JD
- Jackson PK
journal: Cell
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.10.038
---

# The evi5 oncogene regulates cyclin accumulation by stabilizing the anaphase-promoting complex inhibitor emi1.
**Authors:** Eldridge AG, Loktev AV, Hansen DV, Verschuren EW, Reimann JD, Jackson PK
**Journal:** Cell (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2005.10.038](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2005.10.038)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2006 Jan 27;124(2):367-80. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.10.038.

The evi5 oncogene regulates cyclin accumulation by stabilizing the 
anaphase-promoting complex inhibitor emi1.

Eldridge AG(1), Loktev AV, Hansen DV, Verschuren EW, Reimann JD, Jackson PK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, CA 
94305, USA.

The anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C) inhibitor Emi1 controls 
progression to S phase and mitosis by stabilizing key APC/C ubiquitination 
substrates, including cyclin A. Examining Emi1 binding proteins, we identified 
the Evi5 oncogene as a regulator of Emi1 accumulation. Evi5 antagonizes 
SCF(betaTrCP)-dependent Emi1 ubiquitination and destruction by binding to a site 
adjacent to Emi1's DSGxxS degron and blocking both degron phosphorylation by 
Polo-like kinases and subsequent betaTrCP binding. Thus, Evi5 functions as a 
stabilizing factor maintaining Emi1 levels in S/G2 phase. Evi5 protein 
accumulates in early G1 following Plk1 destruction and is degraded in a Plk1- 
and ubiquitin-dependent manner in early mitosis. Ablation of Evi5 induces 
precocious degradation of Emi1 by the Plk/SCF(betaTrCP) pathway, causing 
premature APC/C activation; cyclin destruction; cell-cycle arrest; centrosome 
overduplication; and, finally, mitotic catastrophe. We propose that the balance 
of Evi5 and Polo-like kinase activities determines the timely accumulation of 
Emi1 and cyclin, ensuring mitotic fidelity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.10.038
PMID: 16439210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
