---
pmid: '23793062'
title: The lymphoid lineage-specific actin-uncapping protein Rltpr is essential for
  costimulation via CD28 and the development of regulatory T cells.
authors:
- Liang Y
- Cucchetti M
- Roncagalli R
- Yokosuka T
- Malzac A
- Bertosio E
- Imbert J
- Nijman IJ
- Suchanek M
- Saito T
- Wülfing C
- Malissen B
- Malissen M
journal: Nat Immunol
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ni.2634
---

# The lymphoid lineage-specific actin-uncapping protein Rltpr is essential for costimulation via CD28 and the development of regulatory T cells.
**Authors:** Liang Y, Cucchetti M, Roncagalli R, Yokosuka T, Malzac A, Bertosio E, Imbert J, Nijman IJ, Suchanek M, Saito T, Wülfing C, Malissen B, Malissen M
**Journal:** Nat Immunol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ni.2634](https://doi.org/10.1038/ni.2634)

## Abstract

1. Nat Immunol. 2013 Aug;14(8):858-66. doi: 10.1038/ni.2634. Epub 2013 Jun 23.

The lymphoid lineage-specific actin-uncapping protein Rltpr is essential for 
costimulation via CD28 and the development of regulatory T cells.

Liang Y(1), Cucchetti M, Roncagalli R, Yokosuka T, Malzac A, Bertosio E, Imbert 
J, Nijman IJ, Suchanek M, Saito T, Wülfing C, Malissen B, Malissen M.

Author information:
(1)Centre d'Immunologie de Marseille-Luminy, Aix Marseille Université, 
Marseille, France.

Although T cell activation can result from signaling via T cell antigen receptor 
(TCR) alone, physiological T cell responses require costimulation via the 
coreceptor CD28. Through the use of an N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea-mutagenesis screen, 
we identified a mutation in Rltpr. We found that Rltpr was a lymphoid 
cell-specific, actin-uncapping protein essential for costimulation via CD28 and 
the development of regulatory T cells. Engagement of TCR-CD28 at the 
immunological synapse resulted in the colocalization of CD28 with both wild-type 
and mutant Rltpr proteins. However, the connection between CD28 and protein 
kinase C-θ and Carma1, two key effectors of CD28 costimulation, was abrogated in 
T cells expressing mutant Rltpr, and CD28 costimulation did not occur in those 
cells. Our findings provide a more complete model of CD28 costimulation in which 
Rltpr has a key role.

DOI: 10.1038/ni.2634
PMID: 23793062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
