---
pmid: '11508704'
title: Expression and properties of human liver beta-ureidopropionase.
authors:
- Sakamoto T
- Sakata SF
- Matsuda K
- Horikawa Y
- Tamaki N
journal: J Nutr Sci Vitaminol (Tokyo)
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.3177/jnsv.47.132
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Expression and properties of human liver beta-ureidopropionase.
**Authors:** Sakamoto T, Sakata SF, Matsuda K, Horikawa Y, Tamaki N
**Journal:** J Nutr Sci Vitaminol (Tokyo) (2001)
**DOI:** [10.3177/jnsv.47.132](https://doi.org/10.3177/jnsv.47.132)

## Abstract

1. J Nutr Sci Vitaminol (Tokyo). 2001 Apr;47(2):132-8. doi: 10.3177/jnsv.47.132.

Expression and properties of human liver beta-ureidopropionase.

Sakamoto T(1), Sakata SF, Matsuda K, Horikawa Y, Tamaki N.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Nutrition and High Technology Research Center, Kobe Gakuin 
University, Japan.

A cDNA encoding beta-ureidopropionase (BUP) was isolated from a human liver cDNA 
library, expressed in E. coli, and purified from the culture extract. The 2,006 
bp cDNA contained a 1,152 bp open reading frame encoding a protein of 384 amino 
acids with a molecular weight of 43,165 Da. The subunit molecular weight of the 
enzyme expressed was about 43,000 Da. The enzyme was inhibited by 1 mM 
propionate, but not by 10 mM beta-alanine. Chemical analysis of the purified 
human BUP showed 0.54 zinc atoms per subunit, and the sequence of BUP cDNA 
contained one putative zinc-binding site motif. The purified enzyme had a pI of 
5.65, and exhibited positive cooperativity with N-carbamoyl-beta-alanine as the 
substrate with a Hill coefficient 2.0. These properties of human BUP, except the 
inhibition by beta-alanine, were similar to the rat liver purified enzyme. 
Beta-alanine inhibits rats BUP activity. The complex regulatory function and the 
negative cooperative mechanism of BUP by beta-alanine have been observed in 
rats. This kind of mechanism may not exist in humans, because beta-alanine did 
not inhibit human BUP.

DOI: 10.3177/jnsv.47.132
PMID: 11508704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
