---
pmid: '21396942'
title: Structural basis for the allosteric regulation and substrate recognition of
  human cytosolic 5'-nucleotidase II.
authors:
- Walldén K
- Nordlund P
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.02.059
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Structural basis for the allosteric regulation and substrate recognition of human cytosolic 5'-nucleotidase II.
**Authors:** Walldén K, Nordlund P
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmb.2011.02.059](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2011.02.059)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Biol. 2011 May 13;408(4):684-96. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.02.059. Epub
2011  Mar 17.

Structural basis for the allosteric regulation and substrate recognition of 
human cytosolic 5'-nucleotidase II.

Walldén K(1), Nordlund P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, 
17177 Stockholm, Sweden.

Cytosolic 5'-nucleotidase II (cN-II) catalyzes the dephosphorylation of 
6-hydroxypurine nucleoside 5'-monophosphates and participates in the regulation 
of purine nucleotide pools within the cell. It interferes with the 
phosphorylation-dependent activation of nucleoside analogues used in the 
treatment of cancer and viral diseases. It is allosterically activated by a 
number of phosphate-containing cellular metabolites such as ATP, diadenosine 
polyphosphates, and 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate, which couple its activity with the 
metabolic state of the cell. We present seven high-resolution structures of 
human cN-II, including a ligand-free form and complexes with various substrates 
and effectors. These structures reveal the structural basis for the allosteric 
activation of cN-II, uncovering a mechanism where an effector-induced 
disorder-to-order transition generates rearrangements within the catalytic site 
and the subsequent coordination of the catalytically essential magnesium. 
Central to the activation is the large transition of the catalytically essential 
Asp356. This study also provides the structural basis for the substrate 
specificity of cN-II, where Arg202, Asp206, and Phe157 seem to be important 
residues for purine/pyrimidine selectivity. These structures provide a 
comprehensive structural basis for the design of cN-II inhibitors. They also 
contribute to the understanding of how the nucleotide salvage pathway is 
regulated at a molecular level.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.02.059
PMID: 21396942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
