---
pmid: '2681202'
title: Mannose permease of Escherichia coli. Domain structure and function of the
  phosphorylating subunit.
authors:
- Erni B
- Zanolari B
- Graff P
- Kocher HP
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1989'
full_text_available: false
---

# Mannose permease of Escherichia coli. Domain structure and function of the phosphorylating subunit.
**Authors:** Erni B, Zanolari B, Graff P, Kocher HP
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1989)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1989 Nov 5;264(31):18733-41.

Mannose permease of Escherichia coli. Domain structure and function of the 
phosphorylating subunit.

Erni B(1), Zanolari B, Graff P, Kocher HP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Basel, Switzerland.

The mannose permease of Escherichia coli is a component of the 
phosphotransferase system. It transports mannose and related hexoses by a 
mechanism that couples sugar transport with sugar phosphorylation. It is a 
complex consisting of two transmembrane subunits (II-PMan and II-MMan) and a 
hydrophilic subunit (IIIMan). IIIMan also exists in a soluble form as dimer in 
the cytoplasm. Each monomer of IIIMan consists of two structurally and 
functionally distinct domains which are linked by a flexible hinge of the 
sequence KAAPAPAAAAPKAAPTPAKP. Both domains are transiently phosphorylated. The 
NH2-terminal domain (P13) is phosphorylated at N-3 of His-10 by the cytoplasmic 
phosphorylcarrier protein phospho-HPr. The COOH-terminal domain (P20) is 
phosphorylated by P13 at N-1 of His-175. Phosphoryltransfer occurs not only 
between P13 and P20 on the same IIIMan subunit but also between isolated domains 
and between domains on different subunits of the dimer. In the presence of the 
IIMan subunits, the phosphoryl group is directly transferred from His-175 of P20 
to the sugar substrates of the permease. The P13 domain contains the contact 
sites for dimerization of IIIMan. The P20 domain contains the contact sites for 
interaction with the IIMan subunits. By reconstructing the ptsL gene, the two 
domains were expressed as individual polypeptides and the length of the hinge 
between P13 and P20 was changed. The in vivo and in vitro activities of mutant 
IIIMan were little affected by these modifications. The hinge is highly 
sensitive to proteolytic cleavage in vitro and its specificity for proteases can 
be modified by introducing the appropriate specificity determinants.

PMID: 2681202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
