---
pmid: '24274578'
title: Human tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha-induced protein 8-like 2 suppresses
  hepatocellular carcinoma metastasis through inhibiting Rac1.
authors:
- Cao X
- Zhang L
- Shi Y
- Sun Y
- Dai S
- Guo C
- Zhu F
- Wang Q
- Wang J
- Wang X
- Chen YH
- Zhang L
journal: Mol Cancer
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4176125
doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-12-149
---

# Human tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha-induced protein 8-like 2 suppresses hepatocellular carcinoma metastasis through inhibiting Rac1.
**Authors:** Cao X, Zhang L, Shi Y, Sun Y, Dai S, Guo C, Zhu F, Wang Q, Wang J, Wang X, Chen YH, Zhang L
**Journal:** Mol Cancer (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1476-4598-12-149](https://doi.org/10.1186/1476-4598-12-149)
**PMC:** [PMC4176125](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4176125/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cancer. 2013 Nov 26;12(1):149. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-12-149.

Human tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha-induced protein 8-like 2 suppresses 
hepatocellular carcinoma metastasis through inhibiting Rac1.

Cao X(1), Zhang L, Shi Y, Sun Y, Dai S, Guo C, Zhu F, Wang Q, Wang J, Wang X, 
Chen YH, Zhang L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, Shandong University School of Medicine, 44# Wenhua 
Xi Road, Jinan 250012, China. zhanglining@sdu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Tumor invasion and metastasis are the major reasons for leading 
death of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Therefore, to identify 
molecules that can suppress invasion and metastasis of tumor will provide novel 
targets for HCC therapies. Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha-induced protein 
8-like 2, TIPE2, is a novel immune negative molecule and an inhibitor of the 
oncogenic Ras in mice but its function in human is unclear. Our previous 
research has shown that TIPE2 is downregulated in human primary HCC compared 
with the paired adjacent non-tumor tissues.
RESULTS: In present study, we provide evidence that TIPE2 inhibits effectively 
human hepatocellular carcinoma metastasis. The forced expression of TIPE2 in 
HCC-derived cell lines markedly inhibits tumor cell growth, migration and 
invasion in vitro and suppresses growth and metastasis of HCC in vivo. Clinical 
information from a cohort of 112 patients reveals that loss or reduced 
expression of TIPE2 in primary HCC tissues is significantly associated with 
tumor metastasis. Mechanically, TIPE2 inhibits the migration and invasion 
through targeting Rac1 and then reduces F-actin polymerization and expression of 
matrix metallopeptidase 9 (MMP9) and urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA).
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that human TIPE2 is endogenous inhibitor of 
Rac1 in HCC by which it attenuates invasion and metastasis of HCC. The data 
suggest that TIPE2 will be a new target for HCC therapy.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-4598-12-149
PMCID: PMC4176125
PMID: 24274578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
