---
pmid: '17064696'
title: 'Sphingosine kinase-1 is cleaved by cathepsin B in vitro: identification of
  the initial cleavage sites for the protease.'
authors:
- Taha TA
- El-Alwani M
- Hannun YA
- Obeid LM
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1732625
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2006.09.070
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Sphingosine kinase-1 is cleaved by cathepsin B in vitro: identification of the initial cleavage sites for the protease.
**Authors:** Taha TA, El-Alwani M, Hannun YA, Obeid LM
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2006.09.070](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2006.09.070)
**PMC:** [PMC1732625](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1732625/)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2006 Nov 13;580(26):6047-54. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2006.09.070.
Epub  2006 Oct 12.

Sphingosine kinase-1 is cleaved by cathepsin B in vitro: identification of the 
initial cleavage sites for the protease.

Taha TA(1), El-Alwani M, Hannun YA, Obeid LM.

Author information:
(1)Division of General Internal Medicine, Ralph H. Johnson Veterans 
Administration Hospital, Charleston, SC 29401, USA.

Previous work has identified sphingosine kinase-1 (SK1) as a substrate for the 
cysteine protease cathepsin B in vitro. In this study, the mechanism of SK1 
cleavage by cathepsin B was investigated. We identified two initial cleavage 
sites for the protease, the first at histidine 122 and the second at arginine 
199. Mutation analysis showed that replacement of histidine 122 with a tyrosine 
maintained the activity of SK1 while significantly reducing cleavage by 
cathepsin B at the initial cleavage site. The efficacy of cleavage of SK1 at 
arginine 199, however, was not affected. These studies demonstrate that SK1 is 
cleaved by cathepsin B in a sequential manner after basic amino acids, and that 
the initial cleavages at the two identified sites occur independently of each 
other.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2006.09.070
PMCID: PMC1732625
PMID: 17064696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
