---
pmid: '19559711'
title: The non-canonical Hop protein from Caenorhabditis elegans exerts essential
  functions and forms binary complexes with either Hsc70 or Hsp90.
authors:
- Gaiser AM
- Brandt F
- Richter K
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.06.051
---

# The non-canonical Hop protein from Caenorhabditis elegans exerts essential functions and forms binary complexes with either Hsc70 or Hsp90.
**Authors:** Gaiser AM, Brandt F, Richter K
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmb.2009.06.051](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2009.06.051)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Biol. 2009 Aug 21;391(3):621-34. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.06.051. Epub
2009  Jun 25.

The non-canonical Hop protein from Caenorhabditis elegans exerts essential 
functions and forms binary complexes with either Hsc70 or Hsp90.

Gaiser AM(1), Brandt F, Richter K.

Author information:
(1)Center for Integrated Protein Science and Department Chemie, Technische 
Universität München, 85747 Garching, Germany.

Heat shock protein (Hsp) 70/Hsp90-organizing proteins (Hop/Sti1) are thought to 
function as adaptor proteins to link the two chaperone machineries Hsp70 and 
Hsp90 during the processing of substrate proteins in eukaryotes. Hop 
(Hsp70/Hsp90-organizing protein) is composed of three tetratricopeptide repeat 
(TPR) domains, of which the first (TPR1) binds to Hsp70, the second (TPR2A) 
binds to Hsp90, and the third (TPR2B) is of unknown function. Contrary to most 
other eukaryotes, the homologue closest to the Caenorhabditis elegans Hop 
homologue R09E12.3 (CeHop) lacks the TPR1 domain and the short linker region 
connecting it to TPR2A, questioning the reported function as an Hsp90/Hsp70 
adaptor in vitro and in vivo. We observed high constitutive expression levels of 
CeHop and detected significant phenotypes upon knockdown, linking the protein to 
functions in gonad development. Interestingly, we observed physical interactions 
with both chaperones Hsp70 and Hsp90, albeit only the interaction with Hsp90 is 
strong and inhibition of the Hsp90 ATPase activity can be observed upon binding 
of CeHop. However, the formation of ternary complexes with both chaperone 
machineries is impaired, as Hsp70 and Hsp90 compete for CeHop interaction sites, 
in particular as Hsp90 binds to both TPR domains simultaneously and requires 
both TPR domains for ATPase regulation. These results imply that, at least in C. 
elegans, essential functions of Hop exist which apparently do not depend on the 
simultaneous binding of Hsp90 and Hsp70 to Hop.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.06.051
PMID: 19559711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
