---
pmid: '16373491'
title: Contributions of Trf4p- and Trf5p-dependent polyadenylation to the processing
  and degradative functions of the yeast nuclear exosome.
authors:
- Egecioglu DE
- Henras AK
- Chanfreau GF
journal: RNA
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1370882
doi: 10.1261/rna.2207206
---

# Contributions of Trf4p- and Trf5p-dependent polyadenylation to the processing and degradative functions of the yeast nuclear exosome.
**Authors:** Egecioglu DE, Henras AK, Chanfreau GF
**Journal:** RNA (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1261/rna.2207206](https://doi.org/10.1261/rna.2207206)
**PMC:** [PMC1370882](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1370882/)

## Abstract

1. RNA. 2006 Jan;12(1):26-32. doi: 10.1261/rna.2207206.

Contributions of Trf4p- and Trf5p-dependent polyadenylation to the processing 
and degradative functions of the yeast nuclear exosome.

Egecioglu DE(1), Henras AK, Chanfreau GF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry and the Molecular Biology Institute, 
University of California Los Angeles, Box 951569, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1569, 
USA.

The nuclear exosome is involved in a large number of RNA processing and 
surveillance pathways. RNase III cleavage intermediates destined to be 
3'-processed or degraded can be detected when the Rrp6p subunit of the nuclear 
exosome is absent. Here we show that these processing and degradation 
intermediates are polyadenylated, and that their polyadenylation is dependent on 
the activity of Trf4p and Trf5p, two variant poly(A) polymerases. 
Polyadenylation of cleavage intermediates was inhibited when Trf4p was absent, 
and reduced to various extents in the absence of Trf5p, suggesting that these 
two poly(A) polymerases play functionally distinct roles in the polyadenylation 
of these RNA species. Finally, in the absence of Trf4p, we observed 3'-extended 
forms of the U4 snRNA that are similar to those observed in the absence of 
Rrp6p. These results suggest that polyadenylation of RNA processing 
intermediates plays a functional role in RNA processing pathways and is not 
limited to RNA surveillance functions.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.2207206
PMCID: PMC1370882
PMID: 16373491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
