---
pmid: '19074266'
title: Mechanism of apoptosis induction by inhibition of the anti-apoptotic BCL-2
  proteins.
authors:
- Chipuk JE
- Fisher JC
- Dillon CP
- Kriwacki RW
- Kuwana T
- Green DR
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2629294
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0808036105
---

# Mechanism of apoptosis induction by inhibition of the anti-apoptotic BCL-2 proteins.
**Authors:** Chipuk JE, Fisher JC, Dillon CP, Kriwacki RW, Kuwana T, Green DR
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0808036105](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0808036105)
**PMC:** [PMC2629294](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2629294/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Dec 23;105(51):20327-32. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0808036105. Epub 2008 Dec 12.

Mechanism of apoptosis induction by inhibition of the anti-apoptotic BCL-2 
proteins.

Chipuk JE(1), Fisher JC, Dillon CP, Kriwacki RW, Kuwana T, Green DR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, 
Tennessee 38105, USA.

Normal cellular lifespan is contingent upon preserving outer mitochondrial 
membrane (OMM) integrity, as permeabilization promotes apoptosis. BCL-2 family 
proteins control mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization (MOMP) by 
regulating the activation of the pro-apoptotic BCL-2 effector molecules, BAX and 
BAK. Sustainable cellular stress induces proteins (e.g., BID, BIM, and cytosolic 
p53) capable of directly activating BAX and/or BAK, but these direct activators 
are sequestered by the anti-apoptotic BCL-2 proteins (e.g., BCL-2, BCL-xL, and 
MCL-1). In the event of accumulated or marked cellular stress, a coordinated 
effort between previously sequestered and nascent BH3-only proteins inhibits the 
anti-apoptotic BCL-2 repertoire to promote direct activator protein-mediated 
MOMP. We examined the effect of ABT-737, a BCL-2 antagonist, and PUMA, a 
BH3-only protein that inhibits the entire anti-apoptotic BCL-2 repertoire, with 
cells and mitochondria that sequestered direct activator proteins. ABT-737 and 
PUMA cooperated with sequestered direct activator proteins to promote MOMP and 
apoptosis, which in the absence of ABT-737 or PUMA did not influence OMM 
integrity or cellular survival. Our data show that the induction of apoptosis by 
inhibition of the anti-apoptotic BCL-2 repertoire requires "covert" levels of 
direct activators of BAX and BAK at the OMM.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0808036105
PMCID: PMC2629294
PMID: 19074266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
