---
pmid: '10938133'
title: Associations and interactions between bare lymphocyte syndrome factors.
authors:
- DeSandro AM
- Nagarajan UM
- Boss JM
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC86141
doi: 10.1128/MCB.20.17.6587-6599.2000
---

# Associations and interactions between bare lymphocyte syndrome factors.
**Authors:** DeSandro AM, Nagarajan UM, Boss JM
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.20.17.6587-6599.2000](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.20.17.6587-6599.2000)
**PMC:** [PMC86141](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC86141/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Sep;20(17):6587-99. doi: 10.1128/MCB.20.17.6587-6599.2000.

Associations and interactions between bare lymphocyte syndrome factors.

DeSandro AM(1), Nagarajan UM, Boss JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

The bare lymphocyte syndrome, a severe combined immunodeficiency due to loss of 
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II gene expression, is caused by 
inherited mutations in the genes encoding the heterotrimeric transcription 
factor RFX (RFX-B, RFX5, and RFXAP) and the class II transactivator CIITA. 
Mutagenesis of the RFX genes was performed, and the properties of the proteins 
were analyzed with regard to transactivation, DNA binding, and protein-protein 
interactions. The results identified specific domains within each of the three 
RFX subunits that were necessary for RFX complex formation, including the 
ankyrin repeats of RFX-B. DNA binding was dependent on RFX complex formation, 
and transactivation was dependent on a region of RFX5. RFX5 was found to 
interact with CIITA, and this interaction was dependent on a proline-rich domain 
within RFX5. Thus, these studies have defined the protein domains required for 
the functional regulation of MHC class II genes.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.20.17.6587-6599.2000
PMCID: PMC86141
PMID: 10938133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
