---
pmid: '14575709'
title: Identification of functional nuclear export sequences in human sphingosine
  kinase 1.
authors:
- Inagaki Y
- Li PY
- Wada A
- Mitsutake S
- Igarashi Y
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2003.09.194
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Identification of functional nuclear export sequences in human sphingosine kinase 1.
**Authors:** Inagaki Y, Li PY, Wada A, Mitsutake S, Igarashi Y
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2003.09.194](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2003.09.194)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Nov 7;311(1):168-73. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2003.09.194.

Identification of functional nuclear export sequences in human sphingosine 
kinase 1.

Inagaki Y(1), Li PY, Wada A, Mitsutake S, Igarashi Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomembrane and Biofunctional Chemistry, Graduate School of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.

Sphingosine kinase (SPHK) is an enzyme that phosphorylates sphingosine to form 
sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P). Human SPHK1 (hSPHK1) was localized predominantly 
in the cytoplasm when transiently expressed in Cos7 cells. In this study, we 
have found two functional nuclear export signal (NES) sequences in the middle 
region of hSPHK1. Deletion and mutagenesis studies revealed that the cytoplasmic 
localization of SPHK1 depends on its nuclear export, directed by the NES. 
Furthermore, upon treatment with leptomycin B, a specific inhibitor of the 
nuclear export receptor CRM1, a marked nuclear accumulation of hSPHK1 was 
observed, indicating that hSPHK1 shuttles between the cytoplasm and the nucleus. 
Our results provide the first evidence of the active nuclear export of SPHK1 and 
suggest it is mediated by a CRM1-dependent pathway.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2003.09.194
PMID: 14575709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
