---
pmid: '29046435'
title: 'Long-acting MIC-1/GDF15 molecules to treat obesity: Evidence from mice to
  monkeys.'
authors:
- Xiong Y
- Walker K
- Min X
- Hale C
- Tran T
- Komorowski R
- Yang J
- Davda J
- Nuanmanee N
- Kemp D
- Wang X
- Liu H
- Miller S
- Lee KJ
- Wang Z
- Véniant MM
journal: Sci Transl Med
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aan8732
---

# Long-acting MIC-1/GDF15 molecules to treat obesity: Evidence from mice to monkeys.
**Authors:** Xiong Y, Walker K, Min X, Hale C, Tran T, Komorowski R, Yang J, Davda J, Nuanmanee N, Kemp D, Wang X, Liu H, Miller S, Lee KJ, Wang Z, Véniant MM
**Journal:** Sci Transl Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1126/scitranslmed.aan8732](https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.aan8732)

## Abstract

1. Sci Transl Med. 2017 Oct 18;9(412):eaan8732. doi:
10.1126/scitranslmed.aan8732.

Long-acting MIC-1/GDF15 molecules to treat obesity: Evidence from mice to 
monkeys.

Xiong Y(1), Walker K(2), Min X(3), Hale C(4), Tran T(1), Komorowski R(4), Yang 
J(1), Davda J(5), Nuanmanee N(2), Kemp D(2), Wang X(6), Liu H(7), Miller S(7), 
Lee KJ(2), Wang Z(2), Véniant MM(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiometabolic Disorders, Amgen Inc., 1120 Veterans Boulevard, 
South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.
(2)Department of Therapeutic Discovery, Amgen Inc., One Amgen Center Drive, 
Thousand Oaks, CA 91320, USA.
(3)Department of Therapeutic Discovery, Amgen Inc., 1120 Veterans Boulevard, 
South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.
(4)Department of Cardiometabolic Disorders, Amgen Inc., One Amgen Center Drive, 
Thousand Oaks, CA 91320, USA.
(5)Department of Pharmacokinetics and Drug Metabolism, Amgen Inc., 1120 Veterans 
Boulevard, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.
(6)Department of Medical Sciences, Amgen Inc., 1120 Veterans Boulevard, South 
San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.
(7)Department of Neuroscience, Amgen Inc., One Amgen Center Drive, Thousand 
Oaks, CA 91320, USA.
(8)Department of Cardiometabolic Disorders, Amgen Inc., One Amgen Center Drive, 
Thousand Oaks, CA 91320, USA. mveniant@amgen.com.

Erratum in
    Sci Transl Med. 2018 Aug 29;10(456):eaav1069. doi: 
10.1126/scitranslmed.aav1069.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2017 Nov 28;16(12):827. doi: 10.1038/nrd.2017.241.

In search of metabolically regulated secreted proteins, we conducted a 
microarray study comparing gene expression in major metabolic tissues of fed and 
fasted ob/ob mice and C57BL/6 mice. The array used in this study included probes 
for ~4000 genes annotated as potential secreted proteins. Circulating macrophage 
inhibitory cytokine 1 (MIC-1)/growth differentiation factor 15 (GDF15) 
concentrations were increased in obese mice, rats, and humans in comparison to 
age-matched lean controls. Adeno-associated virus-mediated overexpression of 
GDF15 and recombinant GDF15 treatments reduced food intake and body weight and 
improved metabolic profiles in various metabolic disease models in mice, rats, 
and obese cynomolgus monkeys. Analysis of the GDF15 crystal structure suggested 
that the protein is not suitable for conventional Fc fusion at the carboxyl 
terminus of the protein. Thus, we used a structure-guided approach to design and 
successfully generate several Fc fusion molecules with extended half-life and 
potent efficacy. Furthermore, we discovered that GDF15 delayed gastric emptying, 
changed food preference, and activated area postrema neurons, confirming a role 
for GDF15 in the gut-brain axis responsible for the regulation of body energy 
intake. Our work provides evidence that GDF15 Fc fusion proteins could be 
potential therapeutic agents for the treatment of obesity and related 
comorbidities.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aan8732
PMID: 29046435 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
