---
pmid: '35440550'
title: Low complexity RGG-motif sequence is required for Processing body (P-body)
  disassembly.
authors:
- Roy R
- Das G
- Kuttanda IA
- Bhatter N
- Rajyaguru PI
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2022'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC9019020
doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-29715-5
---

# Low complexity RGG-motif sequence is required for Processing body (P-body) disassembly.
**Authors:** Roy R, Das G, Kuttanda IA, Bhatter N, Rajyaguru PI
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-022-29715-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-29715-5)
**PMC:** [PMC9019020](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9019020/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Commun. 2022 Apr 19;13(1):2077. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-29715-5.

Low complexity RGG-motif sequence is required for Processing body (P-body) 
disassembly.

Roy R(1), Das G(1), Kuttanda IA(1), Bhatter N(1), Rajyaguru PI(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, 560012, 
India.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, 560012, 
India. rajyaguru@iisc.ac.in.

P-bodies are conserved mRNP complexes that are implicated in determining mRNA 
fate by affecting translation and mRNA decay. In this report, we identify 
RGG-motif containing translation repressor protein Sbp1 as a disassembly factor 
of P-bodies since disassembly of P-bodies is defective in Δsbp1. RGG-motif is 
necessary and sufficient to rescue the PB disassembly defect in Δsbp1. Binding 
studies using purified proteins revealed that Sbp1 physically interacts with 
Edc3 and Sbp1-Edc3 interaction competes with Edc3-Edc3 interaction. Purified 
Edc3 forms assemblies, promoted by the presence of RNA and NADH and the addition 
of purified Sbp1, but not the RGG-deletion mutant, leads to significantly 
decreased Edc3 assemblies. We further note that the aggregates of human EWSR1 
protein, implicated in neurodegeneration, are more persistent in the absence of 
Sbp1 and overexpression of EWSR1 in Δsbp1 leads to a growth defect. Taken 
together, our observations suggest a role of Sbp1 in disassembly, which could 
apply to disease-relevant heterologous protein-aggregates.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-022-29715-5
PMCID: PMC9019020
PMID: 35440550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
