---
pmid: '10922363'
title: Molecular identification of cytosolic prostaglandin E2 synthase that is functionally
  coupled with cyclooxygenase-1 in immediate prostaglandin E2 biosynthesis.
authors:
- Tanioka T
- Nakatani Y
- Semmyo N
- Murakami M
- Kudo I
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M003504200
---

# Molecular identification of cytosolic prostaglandin E2 synthase that is functionally coupled with cyclooxygenase-1 in immediate prostaglandin E2 biosynthesis.
**Authors:** Tanioka T, Nakatani Y, Semmyo N, Murakami M, Kudo I
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M003504200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M003504200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Oct 20;275(42):32775-82. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M003504200.

Molecular identification of cytosolic prostaglandin E2 synthase that is 
functionally coupled with cyclooxygenase-1 in immediate prostaglandin E2 
biosynthesis.

Tanioka T(1), Nakatani Y, Semmyo N, Murakami M, Kudo I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Chemistry, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Showa 
University, 1-5-8 Hatanodai, Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo 142, Japan.

Here we report the molecular identification of cytosolic glutathione 
(GSH)-dependent prostaglandin (PG) E(2) synthase (cPGES), a terminal enzyme of 
the cyclooxygenase (COX)-1-mediated PGE(2) biosynthetic pathway. GSH-dependent 
PGES activity in the cytosol of rat brains, but not of other tissues, increased 
3-fold after lipopolysaccharide (LPS) challenge. Peptide microsequencing of 
purified enzyme revealed that it was identical to p23, which is reportedly the 
weakly bound component of the steroid hormone receptor/hsp90 complex. 
Recombinant p23 expressed in Escherichia coli and 293 cells exhibited all the 
features of PGES activity detected in rat brain cytosol. A tyrosine residue near 
the N terminus (Tyr(9)), which is known to be critical for the activity of 
cytosolic GSH S-transferases, was essential for PGES activity. The expression of 
cPGES/p23 was constitutive and was unaltered by proinflammatory stimuli in 
various cells and tissues, except that it was increased significantly in rat 
brain after LPS treatment. cPGES/p23 was functionally linked with COX-1 in 
marked preference to COX-2 to produce PGE(2) from exogenous and endogenous 
arachidonic acid, the latter being supplied by cytosolic phospholipase A(2) in 
the immediate response. Thus, functional coupling between COX-1 and cPGES/p23 
may contribute to production of the PGE(2) that plays a role in maintenance of 
tissue homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M003504200
PMID: 10922363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
