---
pmid: '18843046'
title: Distinct isoforms of the RFX transcription factor DAF-19 regulate ciliogenesis
  and maintenance of synaptic activity.
authors:
- Senti G
- Swoboda P
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2592639
doi: 10.1091/mbc.e08-04-0416
---

# Distinct isoforms of the RFX transcription factor DAF-19 regulate ciliogenesis and maintenance of synaptic activity.
**Authors:** Senti G, Swoboda P
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.e08-04-0416](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.e08-04-0416)
**PMC:** [PMC2592639](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2592639/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Cell. 2008 Dec;19(12):5517-28. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e08-04-0416. Epub
2008  Oct 8.

Distinct isoforms of the RFX transcription factor DAF-19 regulate ciliogenesis 
and maintenance of synaptic activity.

Senti G(1), Swoboda P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, S-14157 
Huddinge, Sweden.

Neurons form elaborate subcellular structures such as dendrites, axons, cilia, 
and synapses to receive signals from their environment and to transmit them to 
the respective target cells. In the worm Caenorhabditis elegans, lack of the RFX 
transcription factor DAF-19 leads to the absence of cilia normally found on 60 
sensory neurons. We now describe and functionally characterize three different 
isoforms of DAF-19. The short isoform DAF-19C is specifically expressed in 
ciliated sensory neurons and sufficient to rescue all cilia-related phenotypes 
of daf-19 mutants. In contrast, the long isoforms DAF-19A/B function in 
basically all nonciliated neurons. We discovered behavioral and cellular 
phenotypes in daf-19 mutants that depend on the isoforms daf-19a/b. These novel 
synaptic maintenance phenotypes are reminiscent of synaptic decline seen in many 
human neurodegenerative disorders. The C. elegans daf-19 mutant worms can thus 
serve as a molecular model for the mechanisms of functional neuronal decline.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e08-04-0416
PMCID: PMC2592639
PMID: 18843046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
