---
pmid: '16216487'
title: Differential action of 13-HPODE on PPARalpha downstream genes in rat Fao and
  human HepG2 hepatoma cell lines.
authors:
- König B
- Eder K
journal: J Nutr Biochem
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2005.08.011
---

# Differential action of 13-HPODE on PPARalpha downstream genes in rat Fao and human HepG2 hepatoma cell lines.
**Authors:** König B, Eder K
**Journal:** J Nutr Biochem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jnutbio.2005.08.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnutbio.2005.08.011)

## Abstract

1. J Nutr Biochem. 2006 Jun;17(6):410-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2005.08.011. Epub
 2005 Sep 23.

Differential action of 13-HPODE on PPARalpha downstream genes in rat Fao and 
human HepG2 hepatoma cell lines.

König B(1), Eder K.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Ernährungswissenschaften, Martin-Luther-Universität 
Halle-Wittenberg, D-06108 Halle (Saale), Germany. 
bettina.koenig@landw.uni-halle.de

In rats, oxidized fats activate the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor 
alpha (PPARalpha), leading to reduced triglyceride concentrations in liver, 
plasma and very low density lipoproteins. Oxidation products of linoleic acid 
constitute an important portion of oxidized dietary fats. This study was 
conducted to check whether the primary lipid peroxidation product of linoleic 
acid, 13-hydroperoxy-9,11-octadecadienoic acid (13-HPODE), might be involved in 
the PPARalpha-activating effect of oxidized fats. Therefore, we examined the 
effect of 13-HPODE on the expression of PPARalpha target genes in the rat Fao 
and the human HepG2 hepatoma cell lines. In Fao cells, 13-HPODE increased the 
mRNA concentration of the PPARalpha target genes acyl-CoA oxidase (ACO), 
cytochrome P450 4A1 and carnitine-palmitoyltransferase 1A (CPT1A). Furthermore, 
the concentration of cellular and secreted triglycerides was reduced in Fao 
cells treated with 13-HPODE. Because PPARalpha mRNA was not influenced, we 
conclude that these effects are due to an activation of PPARalpha by 13-HPODE. 
In contrast, HepG2 cells seemed to be resistant to PPARalpha activation by 
13-HPODE because no remarkable induction of the PPARalpha target genes ACO, 
CPT1A, mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase and delta9-desaturase was observed. 
Consequently, cellular and secreted triglyceride levels were not changed after 
incubation of HepG2 cells with 13-HPODE. In conclusion, this study shows that 
13-HPODE activates PPARalpha in rat Fao but not in human HepG2 hepatoma cells.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2005.08.011
PMID: 16216487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
