---
pmid: '21593871'
title: A novel protein family mediates Casparian strip formation in the endodermis.
authors:
- Roppolo D
- De Rybel B
- Dénervaud Tendon V
- Pfister A
- Alassimone J
- Vermeer JE
- Yamazaki M
- Stierhof YD
- Beeckman T
- Geldner N
journal: Nature
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature10070
---

# A novel protein family mediates Casparian strip formation in the endodermis.
**Authors:** Roppolo D, De Rybel B, Dénervaud Tendon V, Pfister A, Alassimone J, Vermeer JE, Yamazaki M, Stierhof YD, Beeckman T, Geldner N
**Journal:** Nature (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature10070](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature10070)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2011 May 19;473(7347):380-3. doi: 10.1038/nature10070.

A novel protein family mediates Casparian strip formation in the endodermis.

Roppolo D(1), De Rybel B, Dénervaud Tendon V, Pfister A, Alassimone J, Vermeer 
JE, Yamazaki M, Stierhof YD, Beeckman T, Geldner N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Molecular Biology, Biophore, UNIL-Sorge, University of 
Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Nature. 2011 May 19;473(7347):294-5. doi: 10.1038/473294a.

Polarized epithelia are fundamental to multicellular life. In animal epithelia, 
conserved junctional complexes establish membrane diffusion barriers, cellular 
adherence and sealing of the extracellular space. Plant cellular barriers are of 
independent evolutionary origin. The root endodermis strongly resembles a 
polarized epithelium and functions in nutrient uptake and stress resistance. Its 
defining features are the Casparian strips, belts of specialized cell wall 
material that generate an extracellular diffusion barrier. The mechanisms 
localizing Casparian strips are unknown. Here we identify and characterize a 
family of transmembrane proteins of previously unknown function. These 'CASPs' 
(Casparian strip membrane domain proteins) specifically mark a membrane domain 
that predicts the formation of Casparian strips. CASP1 displays numerous 
features required for a constituent of a plant junctional complex: it forms 
complexes with other CASPs; it becomes immobile upon localization; and it 
sediments like a large polymer. CASP double mutants display disorganized 
Casparian strips, demonstrating a role for CASPs in structuring and localizing 
this cell wall modification. To our knowledge, CASPs are the first molecular 
factors that are shown to establish a plasma membrane and extracellular 
diffusion barrier in plants, and represent a novel way of epithelial barrier 
formation in eukaryotes.

DOI: 10.1038/nature10070
PMID: 21593871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
