---
pmid: '17360592'
title: Differential binding of calmodulin-related proteins to their targets revealed
  through high-density Arabidopsis protein microarrays.
authors:
- Popescu SC
- Popescu GV
- Bachan S
- Zhang Z
- Seay M
- Gerstein M
- Snyder M
- Dinesh-Kumar SP
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1838668
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0611615104
---

# Differential binding of calmodulin-related proteins to their targets revealed through high-density Arabidopsis protein microarrays.
**Authors:** Popescu SC, Popescu GV, Bachan S, Zhang Z, Seay M, Gerstein M, Snyder M, Dinesh-Kumar SP
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0611615104](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0611615104)
**PMC:** [PMC1838668](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1838668/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Mar 13;104(11):4730-5. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0611615104. Epub 2007 Feb 23.

Differential binding of calmodulin-related proteins to their targets revealed 
through high-density Arabidopsis protein microarrays.

Popescu SC(1), Popescu GV, Bachan S, Zhang Z, Seay M, Gerstein M, Snyder M, 
Dinesh-Kumar SP.

Author information:
(1)Department of *Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Yale 
University, 219 Prospect Street, New Haven, CT 06520-8103, USA.

Calmodulins (CaMs) are the most ubiquitous calcium sensors in eukaryotes. A 
number of CaM-binding proteins have been identified through classical methods, 
and many proteins have been predicted to bind CaMs based on their structural 
homology with known targets. However, multicellular organisms typically contain 
many CaM-like (CML) proteins, and a global identification of their targets and 
specificity of interaction is lacking. In an effort to develop a platform for 
large-scale analysis of proteins in plants we have developed a protein 
microarray and used it to study the global analysis of CaM/CML interactions. An 
Arabidopsis thaliana expression collection containing 1,133 ORFs was generated 
and used to produce proteins with an optimized medium-throughput plant-based 
expression system. Protein microarrays were prepared and screened with several 
CaMs/CMLs. A large number of previously known and novel CaM/CML targets were 
identified, including transcription factors, receptor and intracellular protein 
kinases, F-box proteins, RNA-binding proteins, and proteins of unknown function. 
Multiple CaM/CML proteins bound many binding partners, but the majority of 
targets were specific to one or a few CaMs/CMLs indicating that different CaM 
family members function through different targets. Based on our analyses, the 
emergent CaM/CML interactome is more extensive than previously predicted. Our 
results suggest that calcium functions through distinct CaM/CML proteins to 
regulate a wide range of targets and cellular activities.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0611615104
PMCID: PMC1838668
PMID: 17360592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Calmodulins (CaMs) are the most ubiquitous calcium sensors in eukaryotes. A number of CaM-binding proteins have been identified through classical methods, and many proteins have been predicted to bind CaMs based on their structural homology with known targets. However, multicellular organisms typically contain many CaM-like (CML) proteins, and a global identification of their targets and specificity of interaction is lacking. In an effort to develop a platform for large-scale analysis of proteins in plants we have developed a protein microarray and used it to study the global analysis of CaM/CML interactions. An Arabidopsis thaliana expression collection containing 1,133 ORFs was generated and used to produce proteins with an optimized medium-throughput plant-based expression system. Protein microarrays were prepared and screened with several CaMs/CMLs. A large number of previously known and novel CaM/CML targets were identified, including transcription factors, receptor and intracellular protein kinases, F-box proteins, RNA-binding proteins, and proteins of unknown function. Multiple CaM/CML proteins bound many binding partners, but the majority of targets were specific to one or a few CaMs/CMLs indicating that different CaM family members function through different targets. Based on our analyses, the emergent CaM/CML interactome is more extensive than previously predicted. Our results suggest that calcium functions through distinct CaM/CML proteins to regulate a wide range of targets and cellular activities.

Discussion

Functional characterization of proteins depends on the identification of molecules that associate with them. The proteome interaction networks or interactomes will provide not only detailed information on how protein complexes form in the cell but will also help to understand how various cellular pathways communicate and influence each other. Extensive protein interaction maps have been generated for Saccharomyces cerevisiae , Drosophila melanogaster , Caenorhabditis elegans , and the human proteome by using automated yeast two-hybrid analyses and TAP followed by mass spectrometry analyses ( 10 – 12 ). Recently, protein microarrays containing the entire proteome of S. cerevisiae have been used to study protein–protein, protein–phospholipid, and protein–nucleic acid interactions and glycosylation (reviewed in ref. 4 ).

In this report, we developed and used a medium-throughput method to express and purify high-quality Arabidopsis proteins from a plant expression system. An important characteristic of our protein production method is the use of a homologous expression system for protein expression and purification. The large-scale production of purified recombinant proteins is an important step in many genome-wide approaches for analyzing protein function. In general, prokaryotic organisms are not well suited for eukaryotic protein expression. In addition to the protein solubility and stability challenges, the lack of eukaryotic posttranslational modifications and chaperones restrict the use of the Escherichia coli expression system in high-throughput proteomic studies. Only 48% of the 10,167 C. elegans ORFs were expressed in the E. coli expression system, and of these only 15% were soluble ( 13 ). Similar results were obtained for a small group of human proteins expressed in E. coli ( 14 ). Likewise we found that for protein kinases, the yeast expression system, although suitable for expression of proteins, did not produce them in an active state. Our results demonstrate that a homologous expression system is better for retaining the activity of purified proteins.

We used an Arabidopsis protein microarray containing 1,133 protein preparations to study protein–protein interactions involving seven CaMs/CMLs. In contrast with only a single isoform present in vertebrates, plants contain several CaM/CML proteins classified according to their similarity to the mammalian counterpart ( 1 ). Considering the functionally diverse range of plant CaM-binding proteins, it is expected that the variability in plant CaM sequences translates to variability in their target preferences. Indeed, a large fraction of the CaM targets described in the literature are unique to plant CaMs ( 2 , 3 ).

Conclusions

The results presented here not only reaffirm the known functions of plant CaMs/CMLs but also greatly expand our current knowledge of their role in growth, development, and during stress and defense responses. The information on novel potential CaM/CML targets generated in this project provides testable hypotheses in the area of CaM/Ca 2+ -regulated processes and represents a great resource of functional information. Identification of several known plant and homologs of mammalian CaM-binding proteins in our screens demonstrated the suitability of our protein expression system and the successful application of algorithms for protein–protein interaction prediction. However, further analyses are necessary to validate these predicted interactions, and a major challenge will be to experimentally characterize them in planta . Finally, our work demonstrates that plant protein microarrays are valid tools for the large-scale characterization of protein–protein interactions and that our system could be used further in developing the interactome of the entire Arabidopsis proteome.
