---
pmid: '32727915'
title: Activation of NRF2 ameliorates oxidative stress and cystogenesis in autosomal
  dominant polycystic kidney disease.
authors:
- Lu Y
- Sun Y
- Liu Z
- Lu Y
- Zhu X
- Lan B
- Mi Z
- Dang L
- Li N
- Zhan W
- Tan L
- Pi J
- Xiong H
- Zhang L
- Chen Y
journal: Sci Transl Med
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aba3613
---

# Activation of NRF2 ameliorates oxidative stress and cystogenesis in autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease.
**Authors:** Lu Y, Sun Y, Liu Z, Lu Y, Zhu X, Lan B, Mi Z, Dang L, Li N, Zhan W, Tan L, Pi J, Xiong H, Zhang L, Chen Y
**Journal:** Sci Transl Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1126/scitranslmed.aba3613](https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.aba3613)

## Abstract

1. Sci Transl Med. 2020 Jul 29;12(554):eaba3613. doi:
10.1126/scitranslmed.aba3613.

Activation of NRF2 ameliorates oxidative stress and cystogenesis in autosomal 
dominant polycystic kidney disease.

Lu Y(1), Sun Y(1), Liu Z(1), Lu Y(1), Zhu X(1), Lan B(1), Mi Z(1), Dang L(1), Li 
N(1), Zhan W(1), Tan L(2), Pi J(3), Xiong H(4), Zhang L(5), Chen Y(5).

Author information:
(1)2011 Collaborative Innovation Center of Tianjin for Medical Epigenetics, 
Tianjin Key Laboratory of Medical Epigenetics, Key Laboratory of Immune 
Microenvironment and Disease (Ministry of Education), Department of Biochemistry 
and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical 
University, Tianjin 300070, China.
(2)Department of Laboratory Animal Science and Technology, Tianjin Medical 
University, Tianjin 300070, China.
(3)School of Public Health, China Medical University, Shenyang 110122, China.
(4)Department of Urology, Shandong Provincial Hospital affiliated to Shandong 
University, Jinan, Shandong, 250001, China. xionghui@sdu.edu.cn 
lzhang@tmu.edu.cn ychen@tmu.edu.cn.
(5)2011 Collaborative Innovation Center of Tianjin for Medical Epigenetics, 
Tianjin Key Laboratory of Medical Epigenetics, Key Laboratory of Immune 
Microenvironment and Disease (Ministry of Education), Department of Biochemistry 
and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical 
University, Tianjin 300070, China. xionghui@sdu.edu.cn lzhang@tmu.edu.cn 
ychen@tmu.edu.cn.

Oxidative stress is emerging as a crucial contributor to the pathogenesis of 
autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD), but the molecular 
mechanisms underlying the disturbed redox homeostasis in cystic cells remain 
elusive. Here, we identified the impaired activity of the NRF2 (nuclear factor 
erythroid 2-related factor 2) antioxidant pathway as a driver of oxidative 
damage and ADPKD progression. Using a quantitative proteomic approach, together 
with biochemical analyses, we found that increased degradation of NRF2 protein 
suppressed the NRF2 antioxidant pathway in ADPKD mouse kidneys. In a cohort of 
patients with ADPKD, reactive oxygen species (ROS) frequently accumulated, and 
their production correlated negatively with NRF2 abundance and positively with 
disease severity. In an orthologous ADPKD mouse model, genetic deletion of Nrf2 
further increased ROS generation and promoted cyst growth, whereas 
pharmacological induction of NRF2 reduced ROS production and slowed cystogenesis 
and disease progression. Mechanistically, pharmacological induction of NRF2 
remodeled enhancer landscapes and activated NRF2-bound enhancer-associated genes 
in ADPKD cells. The activation domain of NRF2 formed phase-separated condensates 
with MEDIATOR complex subunit MED16 in vitro, and optimal Mediator recruitment 
to genomic loci depended on NRF2 in vivo. Together, these findings indicate that 
NRF2 remodels enhancer landscapes and activates its target genes through a phase 
separation mechanism and that activation of NRF2 represents a promising strategy 
for restoring redox homeostasis and combatting ADPKD.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aba3613
PMID: 32727915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
