---
pmid: '25936995'
title: Recurrent and novel GLB1 mutations in India.
authors:
- Bidchol AM
- Dalal A
- Trivedi R
- Shukla A
- Nampoothiri S
- Sankar VH
- Danda S
- Gupta N
- Kabra M
- Hebbar SA
- Bhat RY
- Matta D
- Ekbote AV
- Puri RD
- Phadke SR
- Gowrishankar K
- Aggarwal S
- Ranganath P
- Sharda S
- Kamate M
- Datar CA
- Bhat K
- Kamath N
- Shah H
- Krishna S
- Gopinath PM
- Verma IC
- Nagarajaram HA
- Satyamoorthy K
- Girisha KM
journal: Gene
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.04.078
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Recurrent and novel GLB1 mutations in India.
**Authors:** Bidchol AM, Dalal A, Trivedi R, Shukla A, Nampoothiri S, Sankar VH, Danda S, Gupta N, Kabra M, Hebbar SA, Bhat RY, Matta D, Ekbote AV, Puri RD, Phadke SR, Gowrishankar K, Aggarwal S, Ranganath P, Sharda S, Kamate M, Datar CA, Bhat K, Kamath N, Shah H, Krishna S, Gopinath PM, Verma IC, Nagarajaram HA, Satyamoorthy K, Girisha KM
**Journal:** Gene (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gene.2015.04.078](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gene.2015.04.078)

## Abstract

1. Gene. 2015 Aug 10;567(2):173-81. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.04.078. Epub 2015
Apr  30.

Recurrent and novel GLB1 mutations in India.

Bidchol AM(1), Dalal A(2), Trivedi R(3), Shukla A(1), Nampoothiri S(4), Sankar 
VH(5), Danda S(6), Gupta N(7), Kabra M(7), Hebbar SA(8), Bhat RY(8), Matta D(2), 
Ekbote AV(6), Puri RD(9), Phadke SR(10), Gowrishankar K(11), Aggarwal S(12), 
Ranganath P(12), Sharda S(13), Kamate M(14), Datar CA(15), Bhat K(16), Kamath 
N(16), Shah H(17), Krishna S(18), Gopinath PM(19), Verma IC(9), Nagarajaram 
HA(20), Satyamoorthy K(19), Girisha KM(21).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal University, 
Manipal, Karnataka, India.
(2)Diagnostics Division, Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics, 
Hyderabad, Telangana, India.
(3)Laboratory of Computational Biology & Bioinformatics Facility, Centre for DNA 
Fingerprinting and Diagnostics, Hyderabad, Telangana, India; Graduate Studies, 
Manipal University, Manipal, Karnataka, India.
(4)Department of Pediatric Genetics, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and 
Research Center, Kochi, AIMS Ponekkara, Kerala, India.
(5)Genetic Clinic, Department of Pediatrics, SAT Hospital, Government Medical 
College, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, India.
(6)Department of Clinical Genetics, Christian Medical College and Hospital, 
Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India.
(7)Genetics Unit, Department of Pediatrics, All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences, New Delhi, India.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal University, 
Manipal, Karnataka, India.
(9)Center of Medical Genetics, Sir Ganga Ram Hospital, New Delhi, India.
(10)Department of Medical Genetics, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of 
Medical Sciences, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(11)Department of Medical Genetics, Childs Trust Medical Research Foundation, 
Kanchi Kamakoti Childs Trust Hospital, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India.
(12)Diagnostics Division, Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics, 
Hyderabad, Telangana, India; Department of Medical Genetics, Nizam's Institute 
of Medical Sciences, Hyderabad, Telangana, India.
(13)Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, 
Punjab, India.
(14)Pediatric Neurology, KLE University's J N Medical College, Belgaum, 
Karnataka, India.
(15)Rare Genetic Disorder Clinic, Sahyadri Hospital, Pune, Maharashtra, India.
(16)Department of Pediatrics, Kasturba Medical College, Mangalore, Manipal 
University, Karnataka, India.
(17)Pediatric Orthopedics Services, Department of Orthopedics, Kasturba Medical 
College, Manipal, Manipal University, Karnataka, India.
(18)Strand Life Sciences Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru, Karnataka, India.
(19)Division of Biotechnology, School of Life Sciences, Manipal University, 
Manipal, Karnataka, India.
(20)Laboratory of Computational Biology & Bioinformatics Facility, Centre for 
DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics, Hyderabad, Telangana, India.
(21)Department of Medical Genetics, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal 
University, Manipal, Karnataka, India. Electronic address: 
girish.katta@manipal.edu.

GM1 gangliosidosis is a lysosomal storage disorder caused by mutations in the 
GLB1 gene, leading to the deficiency of the enzyme β-d-galactosidase. In this 
study, we report molecular findings in 50 Asian Indian families with GM1 
gangliosidosis. We sequenced all the exons and flanking intronic sequences of 
GLB1 gene. We identified 33 different mutations (20 novel and 13 previously 
reported). The novel mutations include 12 missense (p.M1?, p.E129Q, p.G134R, 
p.L236P, p.G262E, p.L297F, p.Y331C, p.G414V, p.K493N, p.L514P, p.P597L, 
p.T600I), four splicing (c.246-2A>G, c.397-2A>G, c.552+1G>T, c.956-2A>G), three 
indels (p.R22Qfs*8, p.L24Cfs*47, p.I489Qfs*4) and one nonsense mutation 
(p.Q452*). Most common mutations identified in this study were c.75+2InsT (14%) 
and p.L337P (10%). Known mutations accounted for 67% of allele frequency in our 
cohort of patients, suggesting that these mutations in GLB1 are recurrent across 
different populations. Twenty three mutations were localized in the TIM barrel 
domain, β-domain 1 and β-domain 2. In silico sequence and structure analysis of 
GLB1 reveal that all the novel mutations affect the function and structure of 
the protein. We hereby report on the largest series of patients with GM1 
gangliosidosis and the first from India.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.04.078
PMID: 25936995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
