---
pmid: '17334224'
title: SIRT1 promotes DNA repair activity and deacetylation of Ku70.
authors:
- Jeong J
- Juhn K
- Lee H
- Kim SH
- Min BH
- Lee KM
- Cho MH
- Park GH
- Lee KH
journal: Exp Mol Med
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/emm.2007.2
---

# SIRT1 promotes DNA repair activity and deacetylation of Ku70.
**Authors:** Jeong J, Juhn K, Lee H, Kim SH, Min BH, Lee KM, Cho MH, Park GH, Lee KH
**Journal:** Exp Mol Med (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emm.2007.2](https://doi.org/10.1038/emm.2007.2)

## Abstract

1. Exp Mol Med. 2007 Feb 28;39(1):8-13. doi: 10.1038/emm.2007.2.

SIRT1 promotes DNA repair activity and deacetylation of Ku70.

Jeong J(1), Juhn K, Lee H, Kim SH, Min BH, Lee KM, Cho MH, Park GH, Lee KH.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Korea Institute of Radiological and Medical 
Sciences, Seoul 139-706, Korea.

Human SIRT1 controls various physiological responses including cell fate, 
stress, and aging, through deacetylation of its specific substrate protein. In 
processing DNA damage signaling, SIRT1 attenuates a cellular apoptotic response 
by deacetylation of p53 tumor suppressor. The present study shows that, upon 
exposure to radiation, SIRT1 could enhance DNA repair capacity and deacetylation 
of repair protein Ku70. Ectopically over-expressed SIRT1 resulted in the 
increase of repair of DNA strand breakages produced by radiation. On the other 
hand, repression of endogenous SIRT1 expression by SIRT1 siRNA led to the 
decrease of this repair activity, indicating that SIRT1 can regulate DNA repair 
capacity of cells with DNA strand breaks. In addition, we found that SIRT1 
physically complexed with repair protein Ku70, leading to subsequent 
deacetylation. The dominant-negative SIRT1, a catalytically inactive form, did 
not induce deacetylation of Ku70 protein as well as increase of DNA repair 
capacity. These observations suggest that SIRT1 modulates DNA repair activity, 
which could be regulated by the acetylation status of repair protein Ku70 
following DNA damage.

DOI: 10.1038/emm.2007.2
PMID: 17334224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
