---
pmid: '11001585'
title: Isolation of a cDNA representing the Fanconi anemia complementation group E
  gene.
authors:
- de Winter JP
- Léveillé F
- van Berkel CG
- Rooimans MA
- van Der Weel L
- Steltenpool J
- Demuth I
- Morgan NV
- Alon N
- Bosnoyan-Collins L
- Lightfoot J
- Leegwater PA
- Waisfisz Q
- Komatsu K
- Arwert F
- Pronk JC
- Mathew CG
- Digweed M
- Buchwald M
- Joenje H
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC1288571
doi: 10.1016/S0002-9297(07)62959-0
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Isolation of a cDNA representing the Fanconi anemia complementation group E gene.
**Authors:** de Winter JP, Léveillé F, van Berkel CG, Rooimans MA, van Der Weel L, Steltenpool J, Demuth I, Morgan NV, Alon N, Bosnoyan-Collins L, Lightfoot J, Leegwater PA, Waisfisz Q, Komatsu K, Arwert F, Pronk JC, Mathew CG, Digweed M, Buchwald M, Joenje H
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0002-9297(07)62959-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0002-9297(07)62959-0)
**PMC:** [PMC1288571](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1288571/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2000 Nov;67(5):1306-8. doi: 10.1016/S0002-9297(07)62959-0.
Epub  2000 Sep 19.

Isolation of a cDNA representing the Fanconi anemia complementation group E 
gene.

de Winter JP(1), Léveillé F, van Berkel CG, Rooimans MA, van Der Weel L, 
Steltenpool J, Demuth I, Morgan NV, Alon N, Bosnoyan-Collins L, Lightfoot J, 
Leegwater PA, Waisfisz Q, Komatsu K, Arwert F, Pronk JC, Mathew CG, Digweed M, 
Buchwald M, Joenje H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics and Human Genetics, Free University Medical 
Center, NL-1081 BT Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is an autosomal recessive chromosomal instability syndrome 
with at least seven different complementation groups. Four FA genes (FANCA, 
FANCC, FANCF, and FANCG) have been identified, and two other FA genes (FANCD and 
FANCE) have been mapped. Here we report the identification, by complementation 
cloning, of the gene mutated in FA complementation group E (FANCE). FANCE has 10 
exons and encodes a novel 536-amino acid protein with two potential nuclear 
localization signals.

DOI: 10.1016/S0002-9297(07)62959-0
PMCID: PMC1288571
PMID: 11001585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Fanconi anemia (FA) is an autosomal recessive chromosomal instability syndrome with at least seven different complementation groups. Four FA genes ( FANCA, FANCC, FANCF, and FANCG ) have been identified,  and two other FA genes ( FANCD and FANCE ) have been mapped. Here we report the identification, by complementation cloning, of the gene mutated in FA complementation group E ( FANCE ). FANCE has 10 exons and encodes a novel 536–amino acid protein with two potential nuclear localization signals.
