---
pmid: '12736803'
title: Significant association of the arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase ( AA-NAT)
  gene with delayed sleep phase syndrome.
authors:
- Hohjoh H
- Takasu M
- Shishikura K
- Takahashi Y
- Honda Y
- Tokunaga K
journal: Neurogenetics
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s10048-002-0141-9
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Significant association of the arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase ( AA-NAT) gene with delayed sleep phase syndrome.
**Authors:** Hohjoh H, Takasu M, Shishikura K, Takahashi Y, Honda Y, Tokunaga K
**Journal:** Neurogenetics (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10048-002-0141-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10048-002-0141-9)

## Abstract

1. Neurogenetics. 2003 Apr;4(3):151-3. doi: 10.1007/s10048-002-0141-9. Epub 2002 
Nov 29.

Significant association of the arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase ( AA-NAT) gene 
with delayed sleep phase syndrome.

Hohjoh H(1), Takasu M, Shishikura K, Takahashi Y, Honda Y, Tokunaga K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of Medicine, University of 
Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. hohjohh@ncnp.go.jp

Arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase (AA-NAT) is a rate-limiting enzyme in 
melatonin hormone synthesis and participates in daily oscillations of the 
melatonin level. We studied the association between the AA-NAT gene and delayed 
sleep phase syndrome (DSPS). Results indicate that there is a significant 
difference in allele positivity at the single nucleotide polymorphism involved 
in an amino acid substitution from alanine to threonine at position 129 between 
patients with DSPS and healthy controls. The frequency of the 129 threonine 
allele is significantly higher in the patients than in the controls ( P=0.0029). 
The data suggest that AA-NAT could be a susceptibility gene for DSPS.

DOI: 10.1007/s10048-002-0141-9
PMID: 12736803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
