---
pmid: '21953451'
title: Identification of nicotinamide mononucleotide deamidase of the bacterial pyridine
  nucleotide cycle reveals a novel broadly conserved amidohydrolase family.
authors:
- Galeazzi L
- Bocci P
- Amici A
- Brunetti L
- Ruggieri S
- Romine M
- Reed S
- Osterman AL
- Rodionov DA
- Sorci L
- Raffaelli N
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3220592
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.275818
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Identification of nicotinamide mononucleotide deamidase of the bacterial pyridine nucleotide cycle reveals a novel broadly conserved amidohydrolase family.
**Authors:** Galeazzi L, Bocci P, Amici A, Brunetti L, Ruggieri S, Romine M, Reed S, Osterman AL, Rodionov DA, Sorci L, Raffaelli N
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M111.275818](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M111.275818)
**PMC:** [PMC3220592](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3220592/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Nov 18;286(46):40365-75. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.275818. Epub
2011 Sep 27.

Identification of nicotinamide mononucleotide deamidase of the bacterial
pyridine nucleotide cycle reveals a novel broadly conserved amidohydrolase
family.

Galeazzi L(1), Bocci P, Amici A, Brunetti L, Ruggieri S, Romine M, Reed S,
Osterman AL, Rodionov DA, Sorci L, Raffaelli N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology and Innovative Therapies, Section of
Biochemistry, Università Politecnica delle Marche, Ancona 60131, Italy.

The pyridine nucleotide cycle is a network of salvage and recycling routes
maintaining homeostasis of NAD(P) cofactor pool in the cell. Nicotinamide
mononucleotide (NMN) deamidase (EC 3.5.1.42), one of the key enzymes of the
bacterial pyridine nucleotide cycle, was originally described in Enterobacteria,
but the corresponding gene eluded identification for over 30 years. A
genomics-based reconstruction of NAD metabolism across hundreds of bacterial
species suggested that NMN deamidase reaction is the only possible way of
nicotinamide salvage in the marine bacterium Shewanella oneidensis. This
prediction was verified via purification of native NMN deamidase from S.
oneidensis followed by the identification of the respective gene, termed pncC.
Enzymatic characterization of the PncC protein, as well as phenotype analysis of
deletion mutants, confirmed its proposed biochemical and physiological function
in S. oneidensis. Of the three PncC homologs present in Escherichia coli, NMN
deamidase activity was confirmed only for the recombinant purified product of
the ygaD gene. A comparative analysis at the level of sequence and
three-dimensional structure, which is available for one of the PncC family
member, shows no homology with any previously described amidohydrolases.
Multiple alignment analysis of functional and nonfunctional PncC homologs,
together with NMN docking experiments, allowed us to tentatively identify the
active site area and conserved residues therein. An observed broad phylogenomic
distribution of predicted functional PncCs in the bacterial kingdom is
consistent with a possible role in detoxification of NMN, resulting from NAD
utilization by DNA ligase.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.275818
PMCID: PMC3220592
PMID: 21953451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The pyridine nucleotide cycle is a network of salvage and recycling routes maintaining homeostasis of NAD(P) cofactor pool in the cell. Nicotinamide mononucleotide (NMN) deamidase (EC 3.5.1.42), one of the key enzymes of the bacterial pyridine nucleotide cycle, was originally described in Enterobacteria, but the corresponding gene eluded identification for over 30 years. A genomics-based reconstruction of NAD metabolism across hundreds of bacterial species suggested that NMN deamidase reaction is the only possible way of nicotinamide salvage in the marine bacterium Shewanella oneidensis . This prediction was verified via purification of native NMN deamidase from S. oneidensis followed by the identification of the respective gene, termed pncC . Enzymatic characterization of the PncC protein, as well as phenotype analysis of deletion mutants, confirmed its proposed biochemical and physiological function in S. oneidensis . Of the three PncC homologs present in Escherichia coli , NMN deamidase activity was confirmed only for the recombinant purified product of the ygaD gene. A comparative analysis at the level of sequence and three-dimensional structure, which is available for one of the PncC family member, shows no homology with any previously described amidohydrolases. Multiple alignment analysis of functional and nonfunctional PncC homologs, together with NMN docking experiments, allowed us to tentatively identify the active site area and conserved residues therein. An observed broad phylogenomic distribution of predicted functional PncCs in the bacterial kingdom is consistent with a possible role in detoxification of NMN, resulting from NAD utilization by DNA ligase.

Introduction

The pyridine nucleotide cycle (PNC) 3 is a network of biochemical transformations that allow cells to recycle the by-products of endogenous NAD consumption back to the coenzyme and to salvage the available pyridine bases, nucleosides, and nucleotides as NAD precursors. The importance of NAD regeneration through recycling pathways is emphasized by the occurrence of an intense nonredox NAD consumption as suggested by the rapid turnover of the coenzyme pool within the cell ( 1 ). In bacteria, the pyridine by-products of the NAD-consuming enzymes NMN and Nm can be recycled back to NAD through the PNC depicted in Fig. 1 ( 2 , 3 ). Briefly, Nm can be converted to NAD through two different routes. The most commonly occurring pathway is initiated by Nm deamidation to Na, followed by Na conversion to NaMN, NaMN adenylation to NaAD, and NaAD amidation to NAD. The last three reactions comprise the so-called Preiss-Handler pathway ( 4 , 5 ). The second Nm recycling route is a relatively rare, nondeamidated pathway, whereby Nm is directly phosphoribosylated to NMN and NMN is then adenylated to NAD. NMN can be recycled back to NAD through two pathways shown to be functional in Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhymurium ( 6 ): the predominant route, PNC IV, proceeds via NMN deamidation to NaMN, which is then converted to NAD by entering the Preiss-Handler pathway; the alternative route, PNC VI, comprises NMN hydrolysis to Nam followed by Nam conversion to NAD through the deamidated pathway. The same routes described for pyridine recycling can be used by the cell to salvage exogenous pyridines, e.g. Na and Nm. NmR and NMN can also be exogenous NAD precursors, the latter being converted to NmR prior to uptake ( 7 ). Once inside the cell via the PnuC transporter, NmR may be directly phosphorylated to NMN or degraded to the free pyridine base ( 2 ).

A comprehensive genomic reconstruction of the potential NAD biosynthetic machinery in the sequenced bacterial genomes reveals the occurrence of different combinations of the various PNCs, depending on the bacterial species. Indeed salvage and recycling pathways appear to be a subject of substantial variations even between closely related species. Although most of the enzymes involved in such routes have been characterized, some of them, like NMN deamidase (EC 3.5.1.42) and NMN glycohydrolase (EC 3.2.2.14), have not yet been assigned to any gene and still belong to the family of “orphan enzymes,” i.e. enzymes included in the ExPASy database for which no corresponding gene has been so far reported ( 8 , 9 ). The existence of an enzyme endowed with NMN deamidase activity is supported by experimental evidence dating back to the early 1970s ( 10 – 13 ). In S. typhimurium and E. coli , it was suggested to be involved in NMN recycling through PNC IV ( 6 , 14 ) and to prevent inhibition of bacterial NAD-dependent DNA ligase by accumulated NMN, a well known ligase inhibitor ( 1 , 15 , 16 ). In addition, physiological studies in S. typhymurium suggested that NMN deamidase might play a key role in salvaging of NmR via NMN; in fact, NMN would be deamidated to NaMN and thus enter the Preiss-Handler pathway rather than being directly adenylated to NAD ( 7 , 17 ). Moreover, the product of the NMN deamidase-catalyzed reaction, e.g. NaMN, is used as the preferred phosphoribosyl donor by the enzyme CobT, which catalyzes a late step in adenosylcobalamin biosynthesis ( 18 ), thus conferring to NMN deamidase a role in the regulation of vitamin B12 biosynthesis.

The gene encoding NMN deamidase eluded identification for several years. In early genetic studies, a locus named pncC was proposed to code for the enzyme; however, it was found later to be involved in NMN uptake ( 7 , 12 , 19 , 20 ). Here we describe the identification of the NMN deamidase encoding gene, following purification and partial sequencing of the enzyme from Shewanella oneidensis MR-1. We found that its sequence corresponds to a protein annotated as CinA and proposed to be involved in bacterial competence induction ( 21 , 22 ). The availability of the three-dimensional structure of CinA from Agrobacterium tumefaciens , the only member of the CinA structural family as classified in the SCOPUS database, allowed us to annotate this fold as a novel amidohydrolase family.

DISCUSSION

The NMN deamidase-encoding gene has been identified through purification of the native enzyme from S. oneidensis cells, followed by partial protein sequencing. Biochemical studies, as well as growth phenotype analysis of S. oneidensis knock-out mutants, proved that in this bacterium the newly assigned enzyme is the only deamidase acting on NMN and confirmed its involvement in the Nm salvage/recycling route. We therefore named it PncC, the acronym first proposed by Foster et al. ( 19 ) to describe this enzyme in the PNC. Surprisingly, the results of this work assigned PncC activity to a protein currently annotated as “competence/damage-inducible protein,” CinA. The cinA gene was first described in Streptococcus pneumoniae as a component of the recA operon, a cin ( c ompetence in duced) operon involved in the bacterium genetic transformation ( 21 , 22 ). Although many studies reported that the gene was markedly induced during competence, contrasting evidence on the possible CinA-mediated targeting of RecA to the membrane favoring its early interaction with incoming ssDNA did not enable ultimate elucidation of CinA induction significance ( 39 – 41 ). Moreover, very recently, it was found that in Bacillus subtilis , a cinA deletion mutant, showed a reduction in the transformation efficiency, although less pronounced than in S. pneumoniae ( 42 ). However, no induction of the protein expression was observed during competence, and CinA was always found localized within the nucleoid, thus not affecting RecA targeting to the membrane. This led the authors to conclude that B. subtilis CinA might play only a minor role in competence ( 42 ).

Our results on the assignment of the NMN deamidase function to CinA might reconcile the phenotype of cinA deletion mutants with the enzyme's proposed role in preventing the inhibition of NAD-dependent DNA ligase by NMN ( 1 ). Indeed, the burst of DNA ligase activity during recombination events is likely to result in NMN level rise. By contributing to NMN scavenging, NMN deamidase would prevent the ligase inhibition and, given its involvement in NAD recycling, would also ensure continued NAD supply to the ligase reaction. Therefore, the observed reduction of transformation efficiency in cinA -deleted strains might be explained by the loss of NMN deamidase activity. The enzyme localization to the bacterial nucleoid ( 42 ) is in keeping with its proposed role in the recombination machinery. The phylogenetic analysis also confirms that the enzyme's role extends beyond that of a merely salvaging enzyme; in fact it is present in the majority of bacterial species, including those able to salvage/recycle Nm via alternative routes. On the other hand, the finding that PncC is absent in some species, including those lacking NadD and thus unable to utilize NaMN as an NAD precursor, clearly indicates that cells must rely on additional enzymes for NMN scavenging. This is in keeping with the observation that, even though S. oneidensis pncC deletion mutant shows NaMN levels significantly lower with respect to the wild type, NMN levels are comparable. 4

In this work, we have characterized two representative members of the PncC family: the S. oneidensis enzyme, where the domain responsible for the deamidating activity (PncC, formerly CinA) is fused to a domain similar to the molybdopterin binding domain of enzymes involved in MoCo biosynthesis, and the E. coli enzyme, comprising only the PncC domain. The functional role of the additional domain in the S. oneidensis protein remains to be determined, as well as its possible involvement in the allosteric behavior exhibited by the S. oneidensis enzyme, in contrast to E. coli PncC. Nonetheless, the different domain organization does not seem to affect the catalytic efficiency; in fact, both the E. coli and the S. oneidensis enzymes display similar K m values toward NMN and share the same k cat . The K m in the low micromolar range exhibited by both enzymes points to an efficient deamidating reaction even at very low NMN concentrations and is consistent with the proposed enzyme's role in contributing to NMN level regulation. The PncC family also comprises a few members with a nonfunctional PncC domain, bearing multiple mutations and deletions. The phylogenetic analysis suggests that the distribution of PncC domains is likely the result of multiple evolutionary events, including an ancient domain fusion and multiple posterior domain fissions ( e.g. PncC in the common ancestor of Proteobacteria), gene losses/horizontal transfers ( e.g. MocF/PncC in S. oneidensis and Mycobacterium tuberculosis ), gene duplications, and decay ( e.g. YdeJ in Enterobacteria).

The newly identified NMN deamidase is both phylogenetically and structurally distinct from enzymes catalyzing the hydrolysis of amide bonds belonging to known superfamilies. Indeed, in the SCOP database, the crystal structure of A. tumefaciens PncC is the only representative of the novel CinA-like superfamily. The inhibition data obtained in this work argue against PncC being either a thiol- or a metal-dependent amidohydrolase. Although the analysis of conserved residues located in the predicted active site of the A. tumefaciens PncC points to a possible Ser/Thr-dependent mechanism, full classification of NMN deamidase remains an open question and the subject of ongoing studies.
