---
pmid: '12815070'
title: Physical and functional interactions between polo kinase and the spindle pole
  component Cut12 regulate mitotic commitment in S. pombe.
authors:
- MacIver FH
- Tanaka K
- Robertson AM
- Hagan IM
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC196081
doi: 10.1101/gad.256003
---

# Physical and functional interactions between polo kinase and the spindle pole component Cut12 regulate mitotic commitment in S. pombe.
**Authors:** MacIver FH, Tanaka K, Robertson AM, Hagan IM
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.256003](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.256003)
**PMC:** [PMC196081](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC196081/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2003 Jun 15;17(12):1507-23. doi: 10.1101/gad.256003.

Physical and functional interactions between polo kinase and the spindle pole 
component Cut12 regulate mitotic commitment in S. pombe.

MacIver FH(1), Tanaka K, Robertson AM, Hagan IM.

Author information:
(1)Paterson Institute for Cancer Research, Manchester M20 4BX, UK.

Commitment to mitosis is regulated by a protein kinase complex called MPF. MPF 
is inhibited by Wee1-related kinases and activated by Cdc25 phosphatase. MPF 
activation further boosts Cdc25 and represses Wee1. This feedback control 
probably involves polo kinase. A dominant cut12.s11 mutation in the 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe spindle pole body (SPB) component Cut12 both 
suppresses the conditional lethal mitotic commitment defect of cdc25.22 and 
promotes premature association of the S. pombe polo kinase, Plo1, with the SPB. 
We now show that Cut12 associated with Plo1 in two hybrid and 
immunoprecipitation assays. Plo1 function was required for recognition of the 
mitotic SPB by the phospho-specific antibody MPM-2. In vivo MPM-2 staining and 
in vitro kinase assays established that the loss-of-function mutation, cut12.1, 
reduced mitotic activation of Plo1, whereas the gain-of-function mutation, 
cut12.s11, promoted higher levels of Plo1 activity than were normally seen in 
interphase. cut12.s11 could not promote mitotic commitment of cdc25.22 cells 
when Plo1 function was compromised. Expression of a constitutively active plo1 
allele suppressed the mitotic commitment defect of cdc25.22. These data suggest 
that cut12.s11 suppresses cdc25.22 by promoting Plo1 activity. Furthermore, the 
delayed mitotic commitment of plo1.ts2 cells suggests that Plo1 is an integral 
part of the core controls that modulate MPF activation in S. pombe.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.256003
PMCID: PMC196081
PMID: 12815070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Commitment to mitosis is regulated by a protein kinase complex called MPF.  MPF is inhibited by Wee1-related kinases and activated by Cdc25 phosphatase.  MPF activation further boosts Cdc25 and represses Wee1. This feedback control  probably involves polo kinase. A dominant cut12.s11 mutation in the Schizosaccharomyces pombe spindle pole body (SPB) component Cut12  both suppresses the conditional lethal mitotic commitment defect of cdc25.22 and promotes premature association of the S. pombe polo kinase, Plo1, with the SPB. We now show that Cut12 associated with Plo1  in two hybrid and immunoprecipitation assays. Plo1 function was required for  recognition of the mitotic SPB by the phospho-specific antibody MPM-2. In vivo  MPM-2 staining and in vitro kinase assays established that the  loss-of-function mutation, cut12.1 , reduced mitotic activation of  Plo1, whereas the gain-of-function mutation, cut12.s11 , promoted  higher levels of Plo1 activity than were normally seen in interphase. cut12.s11 could not promote mitotic commitment of cdc25.22 cells when Plo1 function was compromised. Expression of a constitutively  active plo1 allele suppressed the mitotic commitment defect of cdc25.22 . These data suggest that cut12.s11 suppresses cdc25.22 by promoting Plo1 activity. Furthermore, the delayed mitotic  commitment of plo1.ts2 cells suggests that Plo1 is an integral part  of the core controls that modulate MPF activation in S. pombe .
