---
pmid: '23245942'
title: Role of TAZ as mediator of Wnt signaling.
authors:
- Azzolin L
- Zanconato F
- Bresolin S
- Forcato M
- Basso G
- Bicciato S
- Cordenonsi M
- Piccolo S
journal: Cell
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.11.027
---

# Role of TAZ as mediator of Wnt signaling.
**Authors:** Azzolin L, Zanconato F, Bresolin S, Forcato M, Basso G, Bicciato S, Cordenonsi M, Piccolo S
**Journal:** Cell (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2012.11.027](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2012.11.027)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2012 Dec 21;151(7):1443-56. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.11.027. Epub 2012
Dec  13.

Role of TAZ as mediator of Wnt signaling.

Azzolin L(1), Zanconato F, Bresolin S, Forcato M, Basso G, Bicciato S, 
Cordenonsi M, Piccolo S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padua School of Medicine, 
viale Colombo 3, 35126 Padua, Italy.

Comment in
    Cell. 2012 Dec 21;151(7):1401-3. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.12.007.

Wnt growth factors are fundamental regulators of cell fate, but how the Wnt 
signal is translated into biological responses is incompletely understood. Here, 
we report that TAZ, a biologically potent transcriptional coactivator, serves as 
a downstream element of the Wnt/β-catenin cascade. This function of TAZ is 
independent from its well-established role as mediator of Hippo signaling. In 
the absence of Wnt activity, the components of the β-catenin destruction 
complex--APC, Axin, and GSK3--are also required to keep TAZ at low levels. TAZ 
degradation depends on phosphorylated β-catenin that bridges TAZ to its 
ubiquitin ligase β-TrCP. Upon Wnt signaling, escape of β-catenin from the 
destruction complex impairs TAZ degradation and leads to concomitant 
accumulation of β-catenin and TAZ. At the genome-wide level, a substantial 
portion of Wnt transcriptional responses is mediated by TAZ. TAZ activation is a 
general feature of Wnt signaling and is functionally relevant to mediate Wnt 
biological effects.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.11.027
PMID: 23245942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
