---
pmid: '7540613'
title: Molecular characterization of NDP52, a novel protein of the nuclear domain
  10, which is redistributed upon virus infection and interferon treatment.
authors:
- Korioth F
- Gieffers C
- Maul GG
- Frey J
journal: J Cell Biol
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: xml_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC2120522
doi: 10.1083/jcb.130.1.1
---

# Molecular characterization of NDP52, a novel protein of the nuclear domain 10, which is redistributed upon virus infection and interferon treatment.
**Authors:** Korioth F, Gieffers C, Maul GG, Frey J
**Journal:** J Cell Biol (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1083/jcb.130.1.1](https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.130.1.1)
**PMC:** [PMC2120522](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2120522/)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Biol. 1995 Jul;130(1):1-13. doi: 10.1083/jcb.130.1.1.

Molecular characterization of NDP52, a novel protein of the nuclear domain 10, 
which is redistributed upon virus infection and interferon treatment.

Korioth F(1), Gieffers C, Maul GG, Frey J.

Author information:
(1)University of Bielefeld, Faculty for Chemistry, Department of Biochemistry, 
Germany.

The nuclear domain (ND)10 also described as POD or Kr bodies is involved in the 
development of acute promyelocytic leukemia and virus-host interactions. 
Immunofluorescence analysis using a variety of human autoimmune sera and 
monoclonal antibodies showed a typical dot like nuclear staining for ND10, 
suggesting that this structure consists of several proteins. Two of the ND10 
proteins, Sp100 and PML are genetically characterized and show homology with 
several transcription factors. Here we describe NDP52, an additional novel 
protein of the ND10. We raised a new mAb C8A2, that specifically recognizes 
NDP52. Immunofluorescence analysis using this mAb showed a typical nuclear dot 
staining as it was described for ND10. Isolation and sequencing of the 
corresponding cDNA revealed that NDP52 has a predicted molecular mass of 52 kD. 
The deduced amino acid sequence exhibits an extended central coiled coil domain 
containing a leucine zipper motif. The COOH terminus of NDP52 shows homology 
with LIM domains, that have recently been described to mediate protein 
interactions, which let NDP52 appear as a suitable candidate for mediating 
interactions between ND10 proteins. In vivo, NDP52 is transcribed in all human 
tissues analyzed. Furthermore, we show that NDP52 colocalizes with the ND10 
protein PML and can be redistributed upon viral infection and interferon 
treatment. These data suggest that ND10 proteins play an important role in the 
viral life cycle.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.130.1.1
PMCID: PMC2120522
PMID: 7540613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

The nuclear domain (ND)10 also described as POD or Kr bodies is involved in the development of acute promyelocytic leukemia and virus- host interactions. Immunofluorescence analysis using a variety of human autoimmune sera and monoclonal antibodies showed a typical dot like nuclear staining for ND10, suggesting that this structure consists of several proteins. Two of the ND10 proteins, Sp100 and PML are genetically characterized and show homology with several transcription factors. Here we describe NDP52, an additional novel protein of the ND10. We raised a new mAb C8A2, that specifically recognizes NDP52. Immunofluorescence analysis using this mAb showed a typical nuclear dot staining as it was described for ND10. Isolation and sequencing of the corresponding cDNA revealed that NDP52 has a predicted molecular mass of 52 kD. The deduced amino acid sequence exhibits an extended central coiled coil domain containing a leucine zipper motif. The COOH terminus of NDP52 shows homology with LIM domains, that have recently been described to mediate protein interactions, which let NDP52 appear as a suitable candidate for mediating interactions between ND10 proteins. In vivo, NDP52 is transcribed in all human tissues analyzed. Furthermore, we show that NDP52 colocalizes with the ND10 protein PML and can be redistributed upon viral infection and interferon treatment. These data suggest that ND10 proteins play an important role in the viral life cycle.
