---
pmid: '15226394'
title: Notch signaling controls hepatoblast differentiation by altering the expression
  of liver-enriched transcription factors.
authors:
- Tanimizu N
- Miyajima A
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.01169
---

# Notch signaling controls hepatoblast differentiation by altering the expression of liver-enriched transcription factors.
**Authors:** Tanimizu N, Miyajima A
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.01169](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.01169)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2004 Jul 1;117(Pt 15):3165-74. doi: 10.1242/jcs.01169.

Notch signaling controls hepatoblast differentiation by altering the expression 
of liver-enriched transcription factors.

Tanimizu N(1), Miyajima A.

Author information:
(1)Stem Cell Regulation, Kanagawa Academy of Science and Technology, Teikyo 
University Biotechnology Research Center, 907 Nogawa, Kawasaki, 216-0001, Japan.

Hepatoblasts give rise to both mature hepatocytes and cholangiocytes. While 
Notch signaling has been implicated in the formation of bile ducts composed of 
cholangiocytes, little is known about the mechanism of lineage commitment of 
hepatoblasts. Here we describe the role of the Notch pathway in hepatoblast 
differentiation. Immunohistochemical analysis showed that Jagged1 was expressed 
in the cells surrounding the portal veins and Notch2 was expressed in most 
hepatic cells at mid gestation when ductal plates are formed surrounding the 
portal veins. Interestingly, the Jagged1+ cells were adjacent to ductal plates, 
suggesting that the Notch signaling is activated in hepatoblasts that undergo 
differentiation into cholangiocytes. In fact, expression of the Notch 
intracellular domain in Dlk+ hepatoblasts inhibited hepatic differentiation and 
significantly reduced the expression of albumin, a marker of both hepatoblasts 
and hepatocytes. Furthermore, the addition of Matrigel to the hepatoblast 
culture upregulated the expression of cytokeratin 7 and 19, integrin beta4, and 
HNF1beta, which are known to be expressed in cholangiocytes. By contrast, 
downregulation of the Notch signaling by siRNA specific for Notch2 mRNA as well 
as by the gamma-secretase inhibitor L-685,458 promoted the hepatic 
differentiation. Consistent with the previous finding that mature cholangiocytes 
strongly express HNF1beta, but barely express HNF1alpha, HNF4, and C/EBPalpha, 
activation of the Notch signaling upregulated HNF1beta expression, whereas it 
downregulated the expression of HNF1alpha, HNF4, and C/EBPalpha. These results 
suggest that the Notch signaling contributes to form a network of these 
transcription factors suitable for cholangiocyte differentiation.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.01169
PMID: 15226394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
