---
pmid: '15557274'
title: The interferon-inducible p204 protein acts as a transcriptional coactivator
  of Cbfa1 and enhances osteoblast differentiation.
authors:
- Liu CJ
- Chang E
- Yu J
- Carlson CS
- Prazak L
- Yu XP
- Ding B
- Lengyel P
- Di Cesare PE
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M412604200
---

# The interferon-inducible p204 protein acts as a transcriptional coactivator of Cbfa1 and enhances osteoblast differentiation.
**Authors:** Liu CJ, Chang E, Yu J, Carlson CS, Prazak L, Yu XP, Ding B, Lengyel P, Di Cesare PE
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M412604200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M412604200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jan 28;280(4):2788-96. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M412604200. Epub
2004  Nov 19.

The interferon-inducible p204 protein acts as a transcriptional coactivator of 
Cbfa1 and enhances osteoblast differentiation.

Liu CJ(1), Chang E, Yu J, Carlson CS, Prazak L, Yu XP, Ding B, Lengyel P, Di 
Cesare PE.

Author information:
(1)Musculoskeletal Research Center and Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, New 
York University, Hospital for Joint Diseases, New York, New York 10003, USA. 
Chuanju.liu@med.nyu.edu

The differentiation of uncommitted mesenchymal cells into osteoblasts is a 
fundamental molecular event governing both embryonic development and bone 
repair. The bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are important regulators of this 
process; they function by binding to cell surface receptors and signaling by 
means of Smad proteins. Core binding factor alpha-1 (Cbfa1), a member of the 
runt family of transcription factors, is an essential transcriptional regulator 
of osteoblast differentiation and bone formation, and this process is positively 
or negatively regulated by a variety of coactivators and corepressors. We report 
that p204, an interferon-inducible protein that was previously shown to inhibit 
cell proliferation and promote the differentiation of myoblasts to myotubes, is 
a novel regulator in the course of osteogenesis. p204 is expressed in embryonic 
osteoblasts and hypertrophic chondrocytes in the growth plate as well as in the 
calvaria osteoblasts of neonatal mice. Its level is increased in the course of 
the BMP-2-triggered osteoblast differentiation of pluripotent C2C12 cells. This 
increase is probably due to the activation of the gene encoding 204 (Ifi204) by 
Smad transcription factor, including Smad1, -4, and -5. Overexpression of p204 
enhances the BMP-2-induced osteoblast differentiation in vitro, as revealed by 
elevated alkaline phosphatase activity and osteocalcin production. p204 acts as 
a cofactor of Cbfa1: 1) high levels of p204 augment, whereas the lowering of 
p204 level decreases, the Cbfa1-dependent transcription, and 2) p204 associates 
with Cbfa1 both in vitro and in vivo. Two nonoverlapping segments in p204 bind 
to Cbfa1, and the N-terminal 88-amino acid segment of Cbfa1 is required for 
binding to p204. p204, which is the first interferon-inducible protein found to 
associate with Cbfa1, functions as a novel regulator of osteoblast 
differentiation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M412604200
PMID: 15557274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
