---
pmid: '18662700'
title: The positive transcription elongation factor b is an essential cofactor for
  the activation of transcription by myocyte enhancer factor 2.
authors:
- Nojima M
- Huang Y
- Tyagi M
- Kao HY
- Fujinaga K
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4118929
doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.07.017
---

# The positive transcription elongation factor b is an essential cofactor for the activation of transcription by myocyte enhancer factor 2.
**Authors:** Nojima M, Huang Y, Tyagi M, Kao HY, Fujinaga K
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmb.2008.07.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2008.07.017)
**PMC:** [PMC4118929](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4118929/)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Biol. 2008 Oct 3;382(2):275-87. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.07.017. Epub
2008  Jul 16.

The positive transcription elongation factor b is an essential cofactor for the 
activation of transcription by myocyte enhancer factor 2.

Nojima M(1), Huang Y, Tyagi M, Kao HY, Fujinaga K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Case Western Reserve 
University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, USA.

The positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb), composed of 
cyclin-dependent kinase 9 and cyclin T1, stimulates the elongation of 
transcription by hyperphosphorylating the C-terminal region of RNA polymerase 
II. Aberrant activation of P-TEFb results in manifestations of cardiac 
hypertrophy in mice, suggesting that P-TEFb is an essential factor for cardiac 
myocyte function and development. Here, we present evidence that P-TEFb 
selectively activates transcription mediated by the myocyte enhancer factor 2 
(MEF2) family of transcription factors, key regulatory factors for myocyte 
development. Knockdown of endogenous cyclin T1 in murine C2C12 cells abolishes 
MEF2-dependent reporter gene expression as well as transcription of endogenous 
MEF2 target genes, whereas overexpression of P-TEFb enhances MEF2-dependent 
transcription. P-TEFb interacts with MEF2 both in vitro and in vivo. Activation 
of MEF2-dependent transcription induced by serum starvation is mediated by a 
rapid dissociation of P-TEFb from its inhibitory subunit, HEXIM1, and a 
subsequent recruitment of P-TEFb to MEF2 binding sites in the promoter region of 
MEF2 target genes. These results indicate that recruitment of P-TEFb is a 
critical step for stimulation of MEF2-dependent transcription, therefore 
providing a fundamentally important regulatory mechanism underlying the 
transcriptional program in muscle cells.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.07.017
PMCID: PMC4118929
PMID: 18662700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
