---
pmid: '8629002'
title: Activation of BTK by a phosphorylation mechanism initiated by SRC family kinases.
authors:
- Rawlings DJ
- Scharenberg AM
- Park H
- Wahl MI
- Lin S
- Kato RM
- Fluckiger AC
- Witte ON
- Kinet JP
journal: Science
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.271.5250.822
---

# Activation of BTK by a phosphorylation mechanism initiated by SRC family kinases.
**Authors:** Rawlings DJ, Scharenberg AM, Park H, Wahl MI, Lin S, Kato RM, Fluckiger AC, Witte ON, Kinet JP
**Journal:** Science (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.271.5250.822](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.271.5250.822)

## Abstract

1. Science. 1996 Feb 9;271(5250):822-5. doi: 10.1126/science.271.5250.822.

Activation of BTK by a phosphorylation mechanism initiated by SRC family 
kinases.

Rawlings DJ(1), Scharenberg AM, Park H, Wahl MI, Lin S, Kato RM, Fluckiger AC, 
Witte ON, Kinet JP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of California, 
Los Angeles 90095-1662, USA.

Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK) is pivotal in B cell activation and development 
through its participation in the signaling pathways of multiple hematopoietic 
receptors. The mechanisms controlling BTK activation were studied here by 
examination of the biochemical consequences of an interaction between BTK and 
SRC family kinases. This interaction of BTK with SRC kinases transphosphorylated 
BTK on tyrosine at residue 551, which led to BTK activation. BTK then 
autophosphorylated at a second site. The same two sites were phosphorylated upon 
B cell antigen receptor cross-linking. The activated BTK was predominantly 
membrane-associated, which suggests that BTK integrates distinct receptor 
signals resulting in SRC kinase activation and BTK membrane targeting.

DOI: 10.1126/science.271.5250.822
PMID: 8629002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
