---
pmid: '9729437'
title: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs enhance glutathione S-transferase theta
  levels in rat colon.
authors:
- Van Lieshout EM
- Tiemessen DM
- Roelofs HM
- Peters WH
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0304-4165(98)00042-7
---

# Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs enhance glutathione S-transferase theta levels in rat colon.
**Authors:** Van Lieshout EM, Tiemessen DM, Roelofs HM, Peters WH
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0304-4165(98)00042-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0304-4165(98)00042-7)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998 Aug 24;1381(3):305-11. doi: 
10.1016/s0304-4165(98)00042-7.

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs enhance glutathione S-transferase theta 
levels in rat colon.

Van Lieshout EM(1), Tiemessen DM, Roelofs HM, Peters WH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, University Hospital St. Radboud, P.O. Box 
9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) have been claimed to reduce cancer 
rates in oesophagus, stomach and colon of humans and laboratory animals. 
Recently we showed that dietary administration of NSAIDs enhanced glutathione 
S-transferase (GST) class alpha, mu and pi levels in the upper part of the rat 
gastrointestinal tract, with minor effects in the colon. Enhancement of GSTs, a 
family of detoxification enzymes consisting of class alpha, mu, pi and theta 
isoforms, might be one of the mechanisms leading to cancer prevention. The 
recently cloned GST class theta levels have not yet been studied in this 
respect. We now investigated whether the NSAIDs indomethacin, relafen, sulindac, 
ibuprofen, piroxicam, and acetyl salicylic acid (ASA), incorporated individually 
into the diet at 25, 200, 320, 400, 400 and 400 mg/kg, respectively, affect 
gastrointestinal GSTT1-1 and GSTT2-2 levels in male Wistar rats. GSTT1-1 and 
GSTT2-2 levels were determined in cytosolic fractions of oesophagus, gastric, 
small intestinal and colonic mucosa and liver by densitometrical analyses of 
Western blots after immunodetection with a monoclonal (GSTT1-1) or a polyclonal 
(GSTT2-2) antibody. Gastric GSTT2-2 levels were induced by ibuprofen (1.6x) and 
indomethacin (1.5x), and colonic levels were induced by ASA (1.7x). Colonic 
GSTT1-1 levels were elevated by all NSAIDs tested except for relafen (1.5-6.4x). 
In conclusion, enhancement of colonic GSTT1-1 levels seems to be a common 
working mechanism of NSAIDs. Enhanced enzyme activity, which may result from 
these higher GSTT1-1 levels, might lead to a more efficient detoxification of 
potential carcinogens and hence contribute to the prevention of colon 
carcinogenesis.

Copyright Elsevier Science B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/s0304-4165(98)00042-7
PMID: 9729437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
