---
pmid: '25036637'
title: A quantitative chaperone interaction network reveals the architecture of cellular
  protein homeostasis pathways.
authors:
- Taipale M
- Tucker G
- Peng J
- Krykbaeva I
- Lin ZY
- Larsen B
- Choi H
- Berger B
- Gingras AC
- Lindquist S
journal: Cell
year: '2014'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4104544
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.05.039
---

# A quantitative chaperone interaction network reveals the architecture of cellular protein homeostasis pathways.
**Authors:** Taipale M, Tucker G, Peng J, Krykbaeva I, Lin ZY, Larsen B, Choi H, Berger B, Gingras AC, Lindquist S
**Journal:** Cell (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2014.05.039](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2014.05.039)
**PMC:** [PMC4104544](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4104544/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2014 Jul 17;158(2):434-448. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.05.039.

A quantitative chaperone interaction network reveals the architecture of 
cellular protein homeostasis pathways.

Taipale M(1), Tucker G(2), Peng J(2), Krykbaeva I(1), Lin ZY(3), Larsen B(3), 
Choi H(4), Berger B(2), Gingras AC(5), Lindquist S(6).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02114, USA.
(2)Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA; Department of Mathematics, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
(3)Centre for Systems Biology, Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute at Mount 
Sinai Hospital, Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON M5G 1X5, Canada.
(4)National University of Singapore and National University Health System, 
Singapore 117597, Singapore.
(5)Centre for Systems Biology, Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute at Mount 
Sinai Hospital, Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON M5G 1X5, Canada; Department of Molecular Genetics, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, Canada. Electronic address: gingras@lunenfeld.ca.
(6)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02114, USA; 
Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 
02139, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. 
Electronic address: lindquist_admin@wi.mit.edu.

Chaperones are abundant cellular proteins that promote the folding and function 
of their substrate proteins (clients). In vivo, chaperones also associate with a 
large and diverse set of cofactors (cochaperones) that regulate their 
specificity and function. However, how these cochaperones regulate protein 
folding and whether they have chaperone-independent biological functions is 
largely unknown. We combined mass spectrometry and quantitative high-throughput 
LUMIER assays to systematically characterize the chaperone-cochaperone-client 
interaction network in human cells. We uncover hundreds of chaperone clients, 
delineate their participation in specific cochaperone complexes, and establish a 
surprisingly distinct network of protein-protein interactions for cochaperones. 
As a salient example of the power of such analysis, we establish that NUDC 
family cochaperones specifically associate with structurally related but 
evolutionarily distinct β-propeller folds. We provide a framework for 
deciphering the proteostasis network and its regulation in development and 
disease and expand the use of chaperones as sensors for drug-target engagement.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.05.039
PMCID: PMC4104544
PMID: 25036637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Chaperones are abundant cellular proteins that promote the folding and function of their substrate proteins (clients). In vivo , chaperones also associate with a large and diverse set of co-factors (co-chaperones) that regulate their specificity and function. However, how these co-chaperones regulate protein folding and whether they have chaperone-independent biological functions is largely unknown. We have combined mass spectrometry and quantitative high-throughput LUMIER assays to systematically characterize the chaperone/co-chaperone/client interaction network in human cells. We uncover hundreds of novel chaperone clients, delineate their participation in specific co-chaperone complexes, and establish a surprisingly distinct network of protein/protein interactions for co-chaperones. As a salient example of the power of such analysis, we establish that NUDC family co-chaperones specifically associate with structurally related but evolutionarily distinct β-propeller folds. We provide a framework for deciphering the proteostasis network, its regulation in development and disease, and expand the use of chaperones as sensors for drug/target engagement.

INTRODUCTION

Perturbation of the proteostasis network has been implicated in many diseases ranging from neurodegeneration, to cancer, to Mendelian disorders ( Powers et al., 2009 ). At the same time, preclinical models and clinical results with drugs that target central modules of the network, such as proteasome or Hsp90 inhibitors, have shown that targeting the network has high therapeutic potential (Trepel et al., 2010). It is clear, however, that we need a more detailed understanding of the proteostasis network to decipher how exactly it is perturbed in disease and to develop more effective and specific therapeutics.

Chaperones are the most prominent class of proteins that shape this network. They transiently bind thousands of substrate proteins (clients) and promote their folding, trafficking, and degradation ( Saibil, 2013 ). Systematic proteomic approaches have started to uncover the client protein ensembles of chaperones ( Calloni et al., 2012 ; Yam et al., 2008 ; Zhao et al., 2005 ). However, previous studies have employed widely varying methods and model organisms, making it a challenge to quantitatively compare results and integrate them into a coherent model. Perhaps more importantly, however, chaperones do not function in isolation. Rather, they dynamically associate with a diverse set of cofactors, or co-chaperones. Co-chaperones provide a host of auxiliary functions to chaperones, ranging from regulating the rate of client release to recruiting specific clients to the core chaperone ( Echtenkamp and Freeman, 2012 ). A growing body of evidence suggests co-chaperones play much more than a supportive role. Some “co-chaperones” possess intrinsic chaperone activity themselves ( Freeman et al., 1996 ), and others independently regulate cellular processes that are distinct from those of the canonical chaperones ( Echtenkamp et al., 2011 ). Yet, both the client-protein specificity and possible chaperone-independent functions of most co-chaperones remain enigmatic.

Here, we have taken a systematic and integrative approach, surveying the physical interaction landscape of all known Hsp90 co-chaperones and several known Hsp70 cochaperones. We combine mass spectrometry and quantitative LUMIER assays to characterize the client specificity of co-chaperones and begin to decipher the proteostasis network as a whole.

RESULTS

To systematically characterize the cytoplasmic proteostasis network in human cells, we generated two sets of stable 293T cell lines. One set consisted of 54 proteins tagged with a 3xFLAG-V5 epitope for affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry (AP-MS), the other of 60 proteins fused to Renilla luciferase for a quantitative LUMIER assay ( Taipale et al., 2012 ; Figure 1A ). Importantly, almost all surveyed proteins were tagged in the C terminus. This ensured that the interactions represent steady-state post-translational chaperone/client interactions rather than transient co-translational interactions (as nascent chains cannot be captured with a C-terminal tag).

Proteins were selected for our analysis based on multiple criteria ( Figure 1B ). First, we cloned all previously identified and characterized Hsp90 co-chaperones and Hsp70 nucleotide-exchange factors. Second, we cloned a group of proteins with either a tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) domain or a CS (CHORD and Sgt1) domain, as most Hsp90 co-chaperones contain one or more of these domains ( Taipale et al., 2010 ). Third, we selected several other proteostasis regulators, including four subunits of the 19S proteasome regulatory particle, two subunits of the prefoldin complex, and six HSF family transcription factors. Finally, during the course of the project we identified eight prominent co-chaperone interactors, which were cloned for systematic analysis ( Figure 1B ).

DISCUSSION

We have systematically and quantitatively characterized the human chaperone/co-chaperone/client interactome in human cells. The broad and quantitative nature of our approach allowed the analysis of protein-protein interaction data by hierarchical clustering, illuminating unexpected and highly specific connections between chaperones and particular biological processes. We validated many novel interactions by orthogonal interaction assays and by functional assays, but as in any endeavor of this size, a large fraction of the network remains unexplored. We highlight here only the most salient insights our analysis uncovered, to encourage others to explore this resource in their own investigations.
