---
reference_id: PMID:36472247
title: Gut colonization by Bacteroides requires translation by an EF-G paralog lacking GTPase activity.
authors:
- Han W
- Peng BZ
- Wang C
- Townsend GE 2nd
- Barry NA
- Peske F
- Goodman AL
- Liu J
- Rodnina MV
- Groisman EA
journal: EMBO J
year: '2023'
doi: 10.15252/embj.2022112372
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gut colonization by Bacteroides requires translation by an EF-G paralog lacking GTPase activity.
**Authors:** Han W, Peng BZ, Wang C, Townsend GE 2nd, Barry NA, Peske F, Goodman AL, Liu J, Rodnina MV, Groisman EA
**Journal:** EMBO J (2023)
**DOI:** [10.15252/embj.2022112372](https://doi.org/10.15252/embj.2022112372)

## Content

1. EMBO J. 2023 Jan 16;42(2):e112372. doi: 10.15252/embj.2022112372. Epub 2022
Dec  6.

Gut colonization by Bacteroides requires translation by an EF-G paralog lacking 
GTPase activity.

Han W(1)(2), Peng BZ(3), Wang C(1)(2), Townsend GE 2nd(1)(2), Barry NA(1)(2), 
Peske F(3), Goodman AL(1)(2), Liu J(1)(2), Rodnina MV(3), Groisman EA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbial Pathogenesis, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 
USA.
(2)Yale Microbial Sciences Institute, West Haven, CT, USA.
(3)Department of Physical Biochemistry, Max Planck Institute for 
Multidisciplinary Sciences, Göttingen, Germany.

Protein synthesis is crucial for cell growth and survival yet one of the most 
energy-consuming cellular processes. How, then, do cells sustain protein 
synthesis under starvation conditions when energy is limited? To accelerate the 
translocation of mRNA-tRNAs through the ribosome, bacterial elongation factor G 
(EF-G) hydrolyzes energy-rich guanosine triphosphate (GTP) for every amino acid 
incorporated into a protein. Here, we identify an EF-G paralog-EF-G2-that 
supports translocation without hydrolyzing GTP in the gut commensal bacterium 
Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron. EF-G2's singular ability to sustain protein 
synthesis, albeit at slow rates, is crucial for bacterial gut colonization. 
EF-G2 is ~10-fold more abundant than canonical EF-G1 in bacteria harvested from 
murine ceca and, unlike EF-G1, specifically accumulates during carbon 
starvation. Moreover, we uncover a 26-residue region unique to EF-G2 that is 
essential for protein synthesis, EF-G2 dissociation from the ribosome, and 
responsible for the absence of GTPase activity. Our findings reveal how cells 
curb energy consumption while maintaining protein synthesis to advance fitness 
in nutrient-fluctuating environments.

© 2022 The Authors.

DOI: 10.15252/embj.2022112372
PMCID: PMC9841332
PMID: 36472247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]