---
pmid: '2821624'
title: A cytoplasmic protein stimulates normal N-ras p21 GTPase, but does not affect
  oncogenic mutants.
authors:
- Trahey M
- McCormick F
journal: Science
year: '1987'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.2821624
---

# A cytoplasmic protein stimulates normal N-ras p21 GTPase, but does not affect oncogenic mutants.
**Authors:** Trahey M, McCormick F
**Journal:** Science (1987)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.2821624](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.2821624)

## Abstract

1. Science. 1987 Oct 23;238(4826):542-5. doi: 10.1126/science.2821624.

A cytoplasmic protein stimulates normal N-ras p21 GTPase, but does not affect 
oncogenic mutants.

Trahey M(1), McCormick F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cetus Corporation, Emeryville, CA 94608.

The role of guanine nucleotides in ras p21 function was determined by using the 
ability of p21 protein to induce maturation of Xenopus oocytes as a quantitative 
assay for biological activity. Two oncogenic mutant human N-ras p21 proteins, 
Asp12 and Val12, actively induced maturation, whereas normal Gly12 p21 was 
relatively inactive in this assay. Both mutant proteins were found to be 
associated with guanosine triphosphate (GTP) in vivo. In contrast, Gly12 p21 was 
predominantly guanosine diphosphate (GDP)-bound because of a dramatic 
stimulation of Gly12 p21-associated guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) activity. 
A cytoplasmic protein was shown to be responsible for this increase in activity. 
This protein stimulated GTP hydrolysis by purified Gly12 p21 more than 200-fold 
in vitro, but had no effect on Asp12 or Val12 mutants. A similar factor could be 
detected in extracts from mammalian cells. It thus appears that, in Xenopus 
oocytes, this protein maintains normal p21 in a biologically inactive, GDP-bound 
state through its effect on GTPase activity. Furthermore, it appears that the 
major effect of position 12 mutations is to prevent this protein from 
stimulating p21 GTPase activity, thereby allowing these mutants to remain in the 
active GTP-bound state.

DOI: 10.1126/science.2821624
PMID: 2821624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
