---
pmid: '20587542'
title: PD-L1 and PD-L2 differ in their molecular mechanisms of interaction with PD-1.
authors:
- Ghiotto M
- Gauthier L
- Serriari N
- Pastor S
- Truneh A
- Nunès JA
- Olive D
journal: Int Immunol
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3168865
doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxq049
---

# PD-L1 and PD-L2 differ in their molecular mechanisms of interaction with PD-1.
**Authors:** Ghiotto M, Gauthier L, Serriari N, Pastor S, Truneh A, Nunès JA, Olive D
**Journal:** Int Immunol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1093/intimm/dxq049](https://doi.org/10.1093/intimm/dxq049)
**PMC:** [PMC3168865](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3168865/)

## Abstract

1. Int Immunol. 2010 Aug;22(8):651-60. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxq049. Epub 2010 Jun 
29.

PD-L1 and PD-L2 differ in their molecular mechanisms of interaction with PD-1.

Ghiotto M(1), Gauthier L, Serriari N, Pastor S, Truneh A, Nunès JA, Olive D.

Author information:
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité 891, Centre 
de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Marseille, France.

The programmed death-1 (PD-1) molecule is involved in peripheral tolerance and 
in the immune escape mechanisms during chronic viral infections and cancer. PD-1 
interacts with two ligands, PD-L1 and PD-L2. We have investigated the molecular 
mechanisms of PD-1 interactions with its ligands by surface plasmon resonance 
and cell surface binding as well as the ability of the two ligands to compete 
for PD-1 binding. PD-L1 and PD-L2 bound PD-1 with comparable affinities, but 
striking differences were observed at the level of the association and 
dissociation characteristics. PD-L1, but not PD-L2, had a delayed interaction 
reminiscent of a phenomenon of conformational transition. These mechanisms were 
confirmed by using PD-L1 mAbs that delayed the dissociation of PD-L1 from PD-1. 
This mechanism was not restricted to PD-1 binding since PD-L1 behaved in a 
similar manner with its second ligand, CD80. Finally, we could demonstrate that 
PD-L1 and PD-L2 competed for PD-1 binding and conversely, an antagonist PD-1 mAb 
blocked both PD-L1 and PD-L2 binding to PD-1 and strongly enhanced T-cell 
proliferation. These data further emphasize the differential molecular 
mechanisms of interaction of PD-L1 and PD-L2 with PD-1, and suggest possible new 
approach for the therapy of chronic infection, cancer and transplantation.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/dxq049
PMCID: PMC3168865
PMID: 20587542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
financial or commercial conflict of interest.
