---
pmid: '10574970'
title: LAT2, a new basolateral 4F2hc/CD98-associated amino acid transporter of kidney
  and intestine.
authors:
- Rossier G
- Meier C
- Bauch C
- Summa V
- Sordat B
- Verrey F
- Kühn LC
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.49.34948
---

# LAT2, a new basolateral 4F2hc/CD98-associated amino acid transporter of kidney and intestine.
**Authors:** Rossier G, Meier C, Bauch C, Summa V, Sordat B, Verrey F, Kühn LC
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.274.49.34948](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.49.34948)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Dec 3;274(49):34948-54. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.49.34948.

LAT2, a new basolateral 4F2hc/CD98-associated amino acid transporter of kidney 
and intestine.

Rossier G(1), Meier C, Bauch C, Summa V, Sordat B, Verrey F, Kühn LC.

Author information:
(1)Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research, CH-1066 Epalinges 
s/Lausanne, Switzerland.

Glycoprotein-associated amino acid transporters (gpaAT) are permease-related 
proteins that require heterodimerization to express their function. So far, four 
vertebrate gpaATs have been shown to associate with 4F2hc/CD98 for functional 
expression, whereas one gpaAT specifically associates with rBAT. In this study, 
we characterized a novel gpaAT, LAT2, for which mouse and human cDNAs were 
identified by expressed sequence tag data base searches. The encoded ortholog 
proteins are 531 and 535 amino acids long and 92% identical. They share 52 and 
48% residues with the gpaATs LAT1 and y(+)LAT1, respectively. When mouse LAT2 
and human 4F2hc cRNAs were co-injected into Xenopus oocytes, disulfide-linked 
heterodimers were formed, and an L-type amino acid uptake was induced, which 
differed slightly from that produced by LAT1-4F2hc: the apparent affinity for 
L-phenylalanine was higher, and L-alanine was transported at physiological 
concentrations. In the presence of an external amino acid substrate, LAT2-4F2hc 
also mediated amino acid efflux. LAT2 mRNA is expressed mainly in kidney and 
intestine, whereas LAT1 mRNA is expressed widely. Immunofluorescence experiments 
showed colocalization of 4F2hc and LAT2 at the basolateral membrane of kidney 
proximal tubules and small intestine epithelia. In conclusion, LAT2 forms with 
LAT1 a subfamily of L-type gpaATs. We propose that LAT1 is involved in cellular 
amino acid uptake, whereas LAT2 plays a role in epithelial amino acid 
(re)absorption.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.49.34948
PMID: 10574970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
