---
pmid: '10887109'
title: Myeloid specific human CD33 is an inhibitory receptor with differential ITIM
  function in recruiting the phosphatases SHP-1 and SHP-2.
authors:
- Paul SP
- Taylor LS
- Stansbury EK
- McVicar DW
journal: Blood
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
---

# Myeloid specific human CD33 is an inhibitory receptor with differential ITIM function in recruiting the phosphatases SHP-1 and SHP-2.
**Authors:** Paul SP, Taylor LS, Stansbury EK, McVicar DW
**Journal:** Blood (2000)

## Abstract

1. Blood. 2000 Jul 15;96(2):483-90.

Myeloid specific human CD33 is an inhibitory receptor with differential ITIM 
function in recruiting the phosphatases SHP-1 and SHP-2.

Paul SP(1), Taylor LS, Stansbury EK, McVicar DW.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Immunology, Division of Basic Sciences, National 
Cancer Institute, NCI-FCRDC, Frederick, Maryland 21702, USA.

CD33 is a myeloid specific member of the sialic acid-binding receptor family and 
is expressed highly on myeloid progenitor cells but at much lower levels in 
differentiated cells. Human CD33 has two tyrosine residues in its cytoplasmic 
domain (Y340 and Y358). When phosphorylated, these tyrosines could function as 
docking sites for the phosphatases, SHP-1 and/or SHP-2, enabling CD33 to 
function as an inhibitory receptor. Here we demonstrate that CD33 is tyrosine 
phosphorylated in the presence of the phosphatase inhibitor, pervanadate, and 
recruits SHP-1 and SHP-2. Co-expression studies suggest that the Src-family 
kinase Lck is effective at phosphorylating Y340, but not Y358, suggesting that 
these residues may function in the selective recruitment of adapter molecules 
and have distinct functions. Further support for overlapping, but nonredundant, 
roles for Y340 and Y358 comes from peptide-binding studies that revealed the 
recruitment of both SHP-1 and SHP-2 to Y340 but only SHP-2 to Y358. Analysis 
using mutants of SHP-1 demonstrated that binding Y340 of CD33 was primarily to 
the amino Src homology-2 domain of SHP-1. The potential of CD33 to function as 
an inhibitory receptor was demonstrated by its ability to down-regulate 
CD64-induced calcium mobilization in U937. The dependence of this inhibition on 
SHP-1 was demonstrated by blocking CD33-mediated effects with dominant negative 
SHP-1. This result implies that CD33 is an inhibitory receptor and also that 
SHP-1 phosphatase has a significant role in mediating CD33 function. Further 
studies are essential to identify the receptor(s) that CD33 inhibits in vivo and 
its function in myeloid lineage development. (Blood. 2000;96:483-490)

PMID: 10887109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
