---
pmid: '15878331'
title: Loss of the Dictyostelium RasC protein alters vegetative cell size, motility
  and endocytosis.
authors:
- Lim CJ
- Zawadzki KA
- Khosla M
- Secko DM
- Spiegelman GB
- Weeks G
journal: Exp Cell Res
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2005.02.002
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Loss of the Dictyostelium RasC protein alters vegetative cell size, motility and endocytosis.
**Authors:** Lim CJ, Zawadzki KA, Khosla M, Secko DM, Spiegelman GB, Weeks G
**Journal:** Exp Cell Res (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yexcr.2005.02.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yexcr.2005.02.002)

## Abstract

1. Exp Cell Res. 2005 May 15;306(1):47-55. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2005.02.002.

Loss of the Dictyostelium RasC protein alters vegetative cell size, motility and 
endocytosis.

Lim CJ(1), Zawadzki KA, Khosla M, Secko DM, Spiegelman GB, Weeks G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V6T1Z3. cjlim@ucsd.edu

In addition to its previously established roles in cAMP relay and cAMP 
chemotaxis, loss of signal transduction through the RasC protein was found to 
impact a number of vegetative cell functions. Vegetative rasC- cells exhibited 
reduced random motility, were less polarized and had altered F-actin 
distribution. Cells lacking RasC also contained more protein and were larger in 
size than wild type cells. These increases were associated with increased liquid 
phase endocytosis. Despite the increase in cell size, cytokinesis was relatively 
normal and there was no change in the rate of cell division. rasC- cells also 
chemotaxed poorly to folate and exhibited reduced F-actin accumulation, reduced 
ERK2 phosphorylation and reduced Akt/PKB phosphorylation in response to folate, 
indicating that RasC was also involved in transducing chemotactic signals in 
vegetative cells.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2005.02.002
PMID: 15878331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
