---
pmid: '15258597'
title: De-ubiquitination and ubiquitin ligase domains of A20 downregulate NF-kappaB
  signalling.
authors:
- Wertz IE
- O'Rourke KM
- Zhou H
- Eby M
- Aravind L
- Seshagiri S
- Wu P
- Wiesmann C
- Baker R
- Boone DL
- Ma A
- Koonin EV
- Dixit VM
journal: Nature
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature02794
---

# De-ubiquitination and ubiquitin ligase domains of A20 downregulate NF-kappaB signalling.
**Authors:** Wertz IE, O'Rourke KM, Zhou H, Eby M, Aravind L, Seshagiri S, Wu P, Wiesmann C, Baker R, Boone DL, Ma A, Koonin EV, Dixit VM
**Journal:** Nature (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature02794](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature02794)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2004 Aug 5;430(7000):694-9. doi: 10.1038/nature02794. Epub 2004 Jul
18.

De-ubiquitination and ubiquitin ligase domains of A20 downregulate NF-kappaB 
signalling.

Wertz IE(1), O'Rourke KM, Zhou H, Eby M, Aravind L, Seshagiri S, Wu P, Wiesmann 
C, Baker R, Boone DL, Ma A, Koonin EV, Dixit VM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, School of Medicine, University of 
California, Davis, Davis, California 95616, USA.

NF-kappaB transcription factors mediate the effects of pro-inflammatory 
cytokines such as tumour necrosis factor-alpha and interleukin-1beta. Failure to 
downregulate NF-kappaB transcriptional activity results in chronic inflammation 
and cell death, as observed in A20-deficient mice. A20 is a potent inhibitor of 
NF-kappaB signalling, but its mechanism of action is unknown. Here we show that 
A20 downregulates NF-kappaB signalling through the cooperative activity of its 
two ubiquitin-editing domains. The amino-terminal domain of A20, which is a 
de-ubiquitinating (DUB) enzyme of the OTU (ovarian tumour) family, removes 
lysine-63 (K63)-linked ubiquitin chains from receptor interacting protein (RIP), 
an essential mediator of the proximal TNF receptor 1 (TNFR1) signalling complex. 
The carboxy-terminal domain of A20, composed of seven C2/C2 zinc fingers, then 
functions as a ubiquitin ligase by polyubiquitinating RIP with K48-linked 
ubiquitin chains, thereby targeting RIP for proteasomal degradation. Here we 
define a novel ubiquitin ligase domain and identify two sequential mechanisms by 
which A20 downregulates NF-kappaB signalling. We also provide an example of a 
protein containing separate ubiquitin ligase and DUB domains, both of which 
participate in mediating a distinct regulatory effect.

DOI: 10.1038/nature02794
PMID: 15258597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
