---
pmid: '11504710'
title: Interaction of HRC (histidine-rich Ca(2+)-binding protein) and triadin in the
  lumen of sarcoplasmic reticulum.
authors:
- Lee HG
- Kang H
- Kim DH
- Park WJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M010664200
---

# Interaction of HRC (histidine-rich Ca(2+)-binding protein) and triadin in the lumen of sarcoplasmic reticulum.
**Authors:** Lee HG, Kang H, Kim DH, Park WJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M010664200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M010664200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Oct 26;276(43):39533-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M010664200. Epub
2001  Aug 14.

Interaction of HRC (histidine-rich Ca(2+)-binding protein) and triadin in the 
lumen of sarcoplasmic reticulum.

Lee HG(1), Kang H, Kim DH, Park WJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science and National Research Laboratory, Kwangju 
Institute of Science and Technology (K-JIST), 1 Oryong-dong, Puk-gu, Kwangju 
500-712, Korea.

HRC (histidine-rich Ca(2+) binding protein) has been identified from skeletal 
and cardiac muscle and shown to bind Ca(2+) with high capacity and low affinity. 
While HRC resides in the lumen of the sarcoplasmic reticulum, the physiological 
function of HRC is largely unknown. In the present study, we have performed 
co-immunoprecipitation experiments and show that HRC binds directly to triadin, 
which is an integral membrane protein of the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Using a 
fusion protein binding assay, we further identified the histidine-rich acidic 
repeats of HRC as responsible for the binding of HRC to triadin. These motifs 
may represent a novel protein-protein interaction domain. The HRC binding domain 
of triadin was also localized by fusion protein binding assay to the lumenal 
region containing the KEKE motif that was previously shown to be involved in the 
binding of triadin to calsequestrin. Notably, the interaction of HRC and triadin 
is Ca(2+)-sensitive. Our data suggest that HRC may play a role in the regulation 
of Ca(2+) release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum by interaction with triadin.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M010664200
PMID: 11504710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
