---
pmid: '19628791'
title: Induction of transglutaminase 2 by a liver X receptor/retinoic acid receptor
  alpha pathway increases the clearance of apoptotic cells by human macrophages.
authors:
- Rébé C
- Raveneau M
- Chevriaux A
- Lakomy D
- Sberna AL
- Costa A
- Bessède G
- Athias A
- Steinmetz E
- Lobaccaro JM
- Alves G
- Menicacci A
- Vachenc S
- Solary E
- Gambert P
- Masson D
journal: Circ Res
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.201855
---

# Induction of transglutaminase 2 by a liver X receptor/retinoic acid receptor alpha pathway increases the clearance of apoptotic cells by human macrophages.
**Authors:** Rébé C, Raveneau M, Chevriaux A, Lakomy D, Sberna AL, Costa A, Bessède G, Athias A, Steinmetz E, Lobaccaro JM, Alves G, Menicacci A, Vachenc S, Solary E, Gambert P, Masson D
**Journal:** Circ Res (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.201855](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.201855)

## Abstract

1. Circ Res. 2009 Aug 14;105(4):393-401. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.201855. Epub
 2009 Jul 23.

Induction of transglutaminase 2 by a liver X receptor/retinoic acid receptor 
alpha pathway increases the clearance of apoptotic cells by human macrophages.

Rébé C(1), Raveneau M, Chevriaux A, Lakomy D, Sberna AL, Costa A, Bessède G, 
Athias A, Steinmetz E, Lobaccaro JM, Alves G, Menicacci A, Vachenc S, Solary E, 
Gambert P, Masson D.

Author information:
(1)Institut Fédératif de Recherche Santé-STIC, Faculté de Médecine, Université 
de Bourgogne, Dijon, France. cedricrebe@yahoo.fr

RATIONALE: Liver X receptors (LXRs) are oxysterol-activated nuclear receptors 
that are involved in the control of cholesterol homeostasis and inflammatory 
response. Human monocytes and macrophages express high levels of these receptors 
and are appropriate cells to study the response to LXR agonists.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to identify new LXR targets in human 
primary monocytes and macrophages and the consequences of their activation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We show that LXR agonists significantly increase the mRNA 
and protein levels of the retinoic acid receptor (RAR)alpha in primary monocytes 
and macrophages. LXR agonists promote RARalpha gene transcription through 
binding to a specific LXR response element on RARalpha gene promoter. 
Preincubation of monocytes or macrophages with LXR agonists before RARalpha 
agonist treatment enhances synergistically the expression of several RARalpha 
target genes. One of these genes encodes transglutaminase (TGM)2, a key factor 
required for macrophage phagocytosis. Accordingly, the combination of LXR and 
RARalpha agonists at concentrations found in human atherosclerotic plaques 
markedly enhances the capabilities of macrophages to engulf apoptotic cells in a 
TGM2-dependent manner.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate an important role for LXRs in the control of 
phagocytosis through an RARalpha-TGM2-dependent mechanism. A combination of 
LXR/RARalpha agonists that may operate in atherosclerosis could also constitute 
a promising strategy to improve the clearance of apoptotic cells by macrophages 
in other pathological situations.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.201855
PMID: 19628791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
