---
pmid: '21075118'
title: Biochemical and structural characterization of β-catenin interactions with
  nonphosphorylated and CK2-phosphorylated Lef-1.
authors:
- Sun J
- Weis WI
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3017643
doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.11.010
---

# Biochemical and structural characterization of β-catenin interactions with nonphosphorylated and CK2-phosphorylated Lef-1.
**Authors:** Sun J, Weis WI
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmb.2010.11.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2010.11.010)
**PMC:** [PMC3017643](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3017643/)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Biol. 2011 Jan 14;405(2):519-30. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.11.010. Epub
2010  Nov 12.

Biochemical and structural characterization of β-catenin interactions with 
nonphosphorylated and CK2-phosphorylated Lef-1.

Sun J(1), Weis WI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Structural Biology, Stanford University School of 
Medicine,Stanford, CA 94305-5126, USA.

In the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway, β-catenin activates target genes through 
its interactions with the T-cell factor/lymphoid enhancer-binding factor 
(TCF/Lef) family of transcription factors. The crystal structures of complexes 
between the β-catenin armadillo domain and the Lef-1 N-terminal domain show that 
the overall conformation and many of the interactions are similar to other 
published structures of TCFs bound to β-catenin. However, a second salt bridge 
in other TCF-β-catenin structures is absent in the structure of β-catenin-Lef-1 
complex, indicating that this feature is not obligatory for β-catenin binding. 
Casein kinase II (CK2) has been shown to act as a positive regulator of Wnt 
signaling, and Lef-1 is a substrate of CK2. In vitro phosphorylation of purified 
Lef-1 was used to examine the effect of CK2 on the interaction of Lef-1 with 
β-catenin. Mass spectrometry data show that CK2 phosphorylation of Lef-1 
N-terminal domain results in a single phosphorylation site at Ser40. Isothermal 
titration calorimetry revealed that β-catenin binds to nonphosphorylated or 
CK2-phosphorylated Lef-1 with the same affinity, which is consistent with the 
absence of phospho-Ser40 interactions in the crystal structure of phosphorylated 
Lef-1 N-terminal domain bound to β-catenin. These data indicate that the effect 
of CK2 on the Wnt/β-catenin pathway does not appear to be at the level of the 
Lef-1-β-catenin interaction.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.11.010
PMCID: PMC3017643
PMID: 21075118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

In the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway, β-catenin activates target genes through its interactions with the TCF/Lef family of transcription factors. The crystal structures of complexes between the β-catenin armadillo domain and the Lef-1 N-terminal domain show that the overall conformation and many of the interactions are similar to other published structures of TCFs bound to β-catenin. However, a second salt bridge in other TCF–β-catenin structures is absent in the structure of β-catenin–Lef-1 complex, indicating that this feature is not obligatory for β-catenin binding. Casein Kinase II (CK2) has been shown to act as a positive regulator of Wnt signaling, and that Lef-1 is a substrate of CK2. In vitro phosphorylation of purified Lef-1 was used to examine the effect of CK2 on the interaction of Lef-1 with β-catenin. Mass spectrometry data show that CK2 phosphorylation of Lef-1 N-terminal domain results in a single phosphorylation site at Ser 40. Isothermal titration calorimetry revealed that β-catenin binds to non-phosphorylated or CK2 phosphorylated Lef-1 with the same affinity, which is consistent with the absence of phosphoSer40 interactions in the crystal structure of phosphorylated Lef-1 N-terminal domain bound to β-catenin. These data indicate that the effect of CK2 on the Wnt/β-catenin pathway does not appear to be at the level of the Lef-1–β-catenin interaction.

Introduction

The Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway has essential roles in specification of cell fate, stem cell differentiation, and oncogenesis 1 ; 2 . Binding of a Wnt protein to cell surface co-receptors results in the stabilization of cytosolic β-catenin, a transcriptional coactivator. The stabilized β-catenin enters the nucleus and binds the Tcf/Lef family of DNA binding proteins, which includes TCF1, LEF-1, TCF3, and TCF4 3 . The β-catenin/Tcf complex is thought to recruit general transcription factors that ultimately result in the activation of target genes. β-Catenin binds to a conserved N-terminal region present in Tcf family members. In the absence of Wnt/β-catenin signaling, TCF/Lef is bound to Groucho/TLE-family co-repressors, which keeps Wnt target genes turned off 3 ; 4 .

The primary structure of β-catenin features an N-terminal “tail” predicted to have no intrinsic three-dimensional structure, a central armadillo (arm) repeat domain and an unstructured C-terminal acidic tail that is essential for transcriptional activation. The arm domain, comprised of twelve armadillo repeats which form an elongated superhelix of α helices, mediates binding to TCF/LEF proteins, the β-catenin destruction complex components Axin and Adenomatous Polyposis Coli (APC), and the cytoplasmic domain of classical cadherins. TCFs, APC and cadherins share a characteristic amino acid sequence motif Dxθθxφx 2–7 E, where θ is an aliphatic hydrophobic and φ is an aromatic residue, which crystal structures have shown bind to the β-catenin superhelical groove that spans arm repeats 5–10 (see Refs. 5 ; 6 and references therein). The hydrophobic residues participate in non-polar contacts, and the conserved acids form salt bridges with positively charged residues of β-catenin. All Tcf/Lef family members feature a cluster of negatively charged amino acids in the sequence between 23–29 (human Tcf-4 numbering), which includes the conserved glutamate.

Casein Kinase II (CK2), a ubiquitous and highly conserved serine/threonine kinase, functions as a positive regulator of Wnt signaling, and appears to be upregulated in many cancers 7 ; 8 . CK2 enhances β-catenin mediated transcription activation by Lef-1. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments show that CK2 and β-catenin cycle on and off DNA out of phase with the co-repressor TLE1 9 , consistent with the competitive binding of β-catenin and TLE1 for Lef-1 10 . CK2 phosphorylates the Lef-1 N-terminal domain, which appears to increase the affinity of Lef-1 for β-catenin and so would favor activating complexes 9 ; 11 .

In order to compare the interactions of Tcf family members with β-catenin, we have determined crystal structures of non-phosphorylated and CK2-phosphorylated Lef-1 bound to the armadillo domain of β-catenin and Lef-1. Previous isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) experiments have suggested that the Tcf-4 and Lef-1 affinities for β-catenin are somewhat different 5 ; 12 . Here, we present ITC measurements of Lef-1 and Tcf4 binding to β-catenin under identical conditions, which show that Lef-1 binds slightly less strongly than Tcf4 to β-catenin. The small affinity difference correlates with the absence of a salt bridge in Lef-1 that is present in all other β-catenin ligands. We also find that CK2 phosphorylation of Lef-1 produces no change in affinity or in the structure of the complex, indicating that the effects of CK2 on β-catenin-mediated transcription are not at the level of the Lef-1–β-catenin interaction.

Discussion

Crystal structures have defined a consensus peptide motif Dxθθxφx 2–7 E for binding to the groove formed by arm repeats 5–10 of β-catenin. These ligands are intrinsically unstructured sequences that bind as extended peptides 28 ; 29 ; 30 . The hydrogen bonding potential of the peptide backbone amide and carbonyl groups is satisfied by a regular ladder of polar residues, typically asparagine, present in the groove of β-catenin in the same position of successive arm repeats. The side chains of the first four conserved residues of the sequence motif Dxθθxφx 2–7 E, i.e., the aspartate, the two adjacent aliphatic non-polar residues, and the aromatic are seen to mediate very similar interactions with β-catenin (the second aliphatic residue can be replaced by methylene groups of a polar side chain like lysine in some cases). Unlike the fixed position of the first four conserved residues in the motif, the conserved glutamate occurs at a variable spacing from the aromatic residue. The Lef-1 data demonstrate that this glutamate does not necessarily contribute to the binding interaction. It is possible that it contributes to the kinetics of binding by helping to correctly position the peptide in the initial encounter with β-catenin, or that Lef-1 represents a singular example in which changes in the surrounding sequence, such as insertion of prolines, renders it unable to form direct, stable contacts.

Various lines of evidence indicate that CK2 serves as an activator of Wnt signaling through its action on various components of the pathway, but the molecular details are not clear 8 ; 9 ; 11 ; 31 . CK2 phosphorylates β-catenin at Thr393 in the arm region, which results in increased stability of β-catenin and activation of Wnt signaling 32 ; 33 . Modeling shows that an acceptable phosphothreonine conformation can be accommodated on the structures presented here with no steric clash (data not shown). In this conformation, the closest approach to the bound Lef-1 ligand is 4.2 Å between a phosphate oxygen and Sγ of Met21; the Thr methyl group is in the same position as shown in Fig. 2d and contacts Cε of Met21. More interestingly, the phosphate group can form a hydrogen bond with β-catenin Asn430, which binds to the backbone of extended peptide β-catenin ligands, including Lef-1 Asp19 ( Fig. 2d ). The effect of this potential interaction is not easy to predict, but it might stabilize the conformation of Asn430. Note that the side chain of Glu20 points away from the protein and so is not expected to interact with a phosphorylated Thr393.

Although we find that CK2 phosphorylation of Lef-1 does not enhance its interaction with β-catenin, it has been shown that this modification decreases Lef-1 binding to the Gro/TLE1 co-repressor 9 . Since TLE1 binds antagonistically with β-catenin to DNA-bound Lef-1, decreasing affinity for TLE1 would also favor transcriptional activation. Further mechanistic studies will be required to explore this hypothesis.
