---
pmid: '20080625'
title: Protein refolding by pH-triggered chaperone binding and release.
authors:
- Tapley TL
- Franzmann TM
- Chakraborty S
- Jakob U
- Bardwell JC
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2803140
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0911610107
---

# Protein refolding by pH-triggered chaperone binding and release.
**Authors:** Tapley TL, Franzmann TM, Chakraborty S, Jakob U, Bardwell JC
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0911610107](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0911610107)
**PMC:** [PMC2803140](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2803140/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jan 19;107(3):1071-6. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0911610107. Epub 2009 Dec 31.

Protein refolding by pH-triggered chaperone binding and release.

Tapley TL(1), Franzmann TM, Chakraborty S, Jakob U, Bardwell JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Molecular chaperones are typically either adenosine triphosphate (ATP) dependent 
or rely heavily on their ATP-dependent chaperone counterparts in order to 
promote protein folding. This presents a challenge to chaperones that are 
localized to ATP-deficient cellular compartments. Here we describe a mechanism 
by which the pH-regulated acid stress chaperone HdeA is capable of independently 
facilitating the refolding of acid-denatured proteins in the bacterial 
periplasm, which lacks both ATP and ATP-dependent chaperone machines. Our 
results are consistent with a model in which HdeA stably binds substrates at low 
pH, thereby preventing their irreversible aggregation. pH neutralization 
subsequently triggers the slow release of substrate proteins from HdeA, keeping 
the concentration of aggregation-sensitive intermediates below the threshold 
where they begin to aggregate. This provides a straightforward and 
ATP-independent mechanism that allows HdeA to facilitate protein refolding. 
Unlike previously characterized chaperones, HdeA appears to facilitate protein 
folding by using a single substrate binding-release cycle. This cycle is 
entirely regulated by the external environment and is therefore energy-neutral 
for the bacteria.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0911610107
PMCID: PMC2803140
PMID: 20080625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
