---
pmid: '10958687'
title: Binding of Delta1, Jagged1, and Jagged2 to Notch2 rapidly induces cleavage,
  nuclear translocation, and hyperphosphorylation of Notch2.
authors:
- Shimizu K
- Chiba S
- Hosoya N
- Kumano K
- Saito T
- Kurokawa M
- Kanda Y
- Hamada Y
- Hirai H
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC88767
doi: 10.1128/MCB.20.18.6913-6922.2000
---

# Binding of Delta1, Jagged1, and Jagged2 to Notch2 rapidly induces cleavage, nuclear translocation, and hyperphosphorylation of Notch2.
**Authors:** Shimizu K, Chiba S, Hosoya N, Kumano K, Saito T, Kurokawa M, Kanda Y, Hamada Y, Hirai H
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.20.18.6913-6922.2000](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.20.18.6913-6922.2000)
**PMC:** [PMC88767](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC88767/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Sep;20(18):6913-22. doi: 10.1128/MCB.20.18.6913-6922.2000.

Binding of Delta1, Jagged1, and Jagged2 to Notch2 rapidly induces cleavage,
nuclear translocation, and hyperphosphorylation of Notch2.

Shimizu K(1), Chiba S, Hosoya N, Kumano K, Saito T, Kurokawa M, Kanda Y, Hamada
Y, Hirai H.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Japan.

Delta1, Jagged1, and Jagged2, commonly designated Delta/Serrate/LAG-2 (DSL)
proteins, are known to be ligands for Notch1. However, it has been less
understood whether they are ligands for Notch receptors other than Notch1.
Meanwhile, ligand-induced cleavage and nuclear translocation of the Notch
protein are considered to be fundamental for Notch signaling, yet direct
observation of the behavior of the Notch molecule after ligand binding,
including cleavage and nuclear translocation, has been lacking. In this report,
we investigated these issues for Notch2. All of the three DSL proteins bound to
endogenous Notch2 on the surface of BaF3 cells, although characteristics of
Jagged2 for binding to Notch2 apparently differed from that of Delta1 and
Jagged1. After binding, the three DSL proteins induced cleavage of the
membrane-spanning subunit of Notch2 (Notch2(TM)), which occurred within 15 min.
In a simultaneous time course, the cleaved fragment of Notch2(TM) was
translocated into the nucleus. Interestingly, the cleaved Notch2 fragment was
hyperphosphorylated also in a time-dependent manner. Finally, binding of DSL
proteins to Notch2 also activated the transcription of reporter genes driven by
the RBP-Jkappa-responsive promoter. Together, these data indicate that all of
these DSL proteins function as ligands for Notch2. Moreover, the findings of
rapid cleavage, nuclear translocation, and phosphorylation of Notch2 after
ligand binding facilitate the understanding of the Notch signaling.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.20.18.6913-6922.2000
PMCID: PMC88767
PMID: 10958687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Delta1, Jagged1, and Jagged2, commonly designated Delta/Serrate/LAG-2 (DSL) proteins, are known to be ligands for Notch1. However, it has been less understood whether they are ligands for Notch receptors other than Notch1. Meanwhile, ligand-induced cleavage and nuclear translocation of the Notch protein are considered to be fundamental for Notch signaling, yet direct observation of the behavior of the Notch molecule after ligand binding, including cleavage and nuclear translocation, has been lacking. In this report, we investigated these issues for Notch2. All of the three DSL proteins bound to endogenous Notch2 on the surface of BaF3 cells, although characteristics of Jagged2 for binding to Notch2 apparently differed from that of Delta1 and Jagged1. After binding, the three DSL proteins induced cleavage of the membrane-spanning subunit of Notch2 (Notch2 TM ), which occurred within 15 min. In a simultaneous time course, the cleaved fragment of Notch2 TM was translocated into the nucleus. Interestingly, the cleaved Notch2 fragment was hyperphosphorylated also in a time-dependent manner. Finally, binding of DSL proteins to Notch2 also activated the transcription of reporter genes driven by the RBP-Jκ-responsive promoter. Together, these data indicate that all of these DSL proteins function as ligands for Notch2. Moreover, the findings of rapid cleavage, nuclear translocation, and phosphorylation of Notch2 after ligand binding facilitate the understanding of the Notch signaling.

DISCUSSION

We show here that three mouse DSL proteins, Delta1, Jagged1, and Jagged2, function as ligands for Notch2. This conclusion was reached by studies on binding of the DSL proteins to Notch2 and observation of the ensuing signaling cascade, namely, cleavage of the Notch2 molecule, nuclear translocation of the cleaved Notch2 fragment and transactivation of a reporter gene driven by RBP-Jκ-responsive promoters. Unlike Delta1 or Jagged1, Jagged2 exhibited the unique characteristic that membrane-bound but not soluble Jagged2 efficiently bound to Notch2, suggesting the existence of a Jagged2-specific mechanism for binding to Notch2 at the cell surface. Another novel finding is hyperphosphorylation of the Notch2 fragment, which was rapidly induced by stimulation with the DSL proteins.
