---
pmid: '12938931'
title: Proteomic study of the Arabidopsis thaliana chloroplastic envelope membrane
  utilizing alternatives to traditional two-dimensional electrophoresis.
authors:
- Froehlich JE
- Wilkerson CG
- Ray WK
- McAndrew RS
- Osteryoung KW
- Gage DA
- Phinney BS
journal: J Proteome Res
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/pr034025j
---

# Proteomic study of the Arabidopsis thaliana chloroplastic envelope membrane utilizing alternatives to traditional two-dimensional electrophoresis.
**Authors:** Froehlich JE, Wilkerson CG, Ray WK, McAndrew RS, Osteryoung KW, Gage DA, Phinney BS
**Journal:** J Proteome Res (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1021/pr034025j](https://doi.org/10.1021/pr034025j)

## Abstract

1. J Proteome Res. 2003 Jul-Aug;2(4):413-25. doi: 10.1021/pr034025j.

Proteomic study of the Arabidopsis thaliana chloroplastic envelope membrane 
utilizing alternatives to traditional two-dimensional electrophoresis.

Froehlich JE(1), Wilkerson CG, Ray WK, McAndrew RS, Osteryoung KW, Gage DA, 
Phinney BS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Energy Plant Research Laboratory, Michigan Proteome Consortium, 
Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USA.

With the completion of the sequencing of the Arabidopsis genome and with the 
significant increase in the amount of other plant genome and expressed sequence 
tags (ESTs) data, plant proteomics is rapidly becoming a very active field. We 
have pursued a high-throughput mass spectrometry-based proteomics approach to 
identify and characterize membrane proteins localized to the Arabidopsis 
thaliana chloroplastic envelope membrane. In this study, chloroplasts were 
prepared from plate- or soil-grown Arabidopsis plants using a novel isolation 
procedure, and "mixed" envelopes were subsequently isolated using sucrose step 
gradients. We applied two alternative methodologies, off-line multidimensional 
protein identification technology (Off-line MUDPIT) and one-dimensional (1D) gel 
electrophoresis followed by proteolytic digestion and liquid chromatography 
coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (Gel-C-MS/MS), to identify envelope 
membrane proteins. This proteomic study enabled us to identify 392 nonredundant 
proteins.

DOI: 10.1021/pr034025j
PMID: 12938931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
