---
pmid: '26966233'
title: Unfolded protein response regulates yeast small GTPase Arl1p activation at
  late Golgi via phosphorylation of Arf GEF Syt1p.
authors:
- Hsu JW
- Tang PH
- Wang IH
- Liu CL
- Chen WH
- Tsai PC
- Chen KY
- Chen KJ
- Yu CJ
- Lee FJ
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4812715
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1518260113
---

# Unfolded protein response regulates yeast small GTPase Arl1p activation at late Golgi via phosphorylation of Arf GEF Syt1p.
**Authors:** Hsu JW, Tang PH, Wang IH, Liu CL, Chen WH, Tsai PC, Chen KY, Chen KJ, Yu CJ, Lee FJ
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1518260113](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1518260113)
**PMC:** [PMC4812715](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4812715/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Mar 22;113(12):E1683-90. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1518260113. Epub 2016 Mar 10.

Unfolded protein response regulates yeast small GTPase Arl1p activation at late 
Golgi via phosphorylation of Arf GEF Syt1p.

Hsu JW(1), Tang PH(1), Wang IH(1), Liu CL(1), Chen WH(1), Tsai PC(1), Chen 
KY(1), Chen KJ(1), Yu CJ(2), Lee FJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei 100, Taiwan; Department of Medical Research, National Taiwan 
University Hospital, Taipei 100, Taiwan;
(2)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, Chang Gung 
University, Tao-Yuan 333, Taiwan.
(3)Institute of Molecular Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei 100, Taiwan; Department of Medical Research, National Taiwan 
University Hospital, Taipei 100, Taiwan; fangjen@ntu.edu.tw.

ADP ribosylation factor (Arf) GTPases are key regulators of membrane traffic at 
the Golgi complex. In yeast, Arf guanine nucleotide-exchange factor (GEF) Syt1p 
activates Arf-like protein Arl1p, which was accompanied by accumulation of 
golgin Imh1p at late Golgi, but whether and how this function of Syt1p is 
regulated remains unclear. Here, we report that the inositol-requiring kinase 1 
(Ire1p)-mediated unfolded protein response (UPR) modulated Arl1p activation at 
late Golgi. Arl1p activation was dependent on both kinase and endo-RNase 
activities of Ire1p. Moreover, constitutively active transcription factor Hac1p 
restored the Golgi localization of Arl1p and Imh1p inIRE1-deleted cells. 
Elucidating the mechanism of Ire1p-Hac1p axis actions, we found that it 
regulated phosphorylation of Syt1p, which enhances Arl1p activation, recruitment 
of Imh1p to the Golgi, and Syt1p interaction with Arl1p. Consistent with these 
findings, the induction of UPR by tunicamycin treatment increases 
phosphorylation of Syt1p, resulting in Arl1p activation. Thus, these findings 
clarify how the UPR influences the roles of Syt1p, Arl1p, and Imh1p in Golgi 
transport.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1518260113
PMCID: PMC4812715
PMID: 26966233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
