---
pmid: '23169531'
title: Co-motif discovery identifies an Esrrb-Sox2-DNA ternary complex as a mediator
  of transcriptional differences between mouse embryonic and epiblast stem cells.
authors:
- Hutchins AP
- Choo SH
- Mistri TK
- Rahmani M
- Woon CT
- Ng CK
- Jauch R
- Robson P
journal: Stem Cells
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/stem.1279
---

# Co-motif discovery identifies an Esrrb-Sox2-DNA ternary complex as a mediator of transcriptional differences between mouse embryonic and epiblast stem cells.
**Authors:** Hutchins AP, Choo SH, Mistri TK, Rahmani M, Woon CT, Ng CK, Jauch R, Robson P
**Journal:** Stem Cells (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1002/stem.1279](https://doi.org/10.1002/stem.1279)

## Abstract

1. Stem Cells. 2013 Feb;31(2):269-81. doi: 10.1002/stem.1279.

Co-motif discovery identifies an Esrrb-Sox2-DNA ternary complex as a mediator of
transcriptional differences between mouse embryonic and epiblast stem cells.

Hutchins AP(1), Choo SH, Mistri TK, Rahmani M, Woon CT, Ng CK, Jauch R, Robson
P.

Author information:
(1)Developmental Cellomics Laboratory, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore.
ahutchins@ifrec.osaka-u.ac.jp

Transcription factors (TF) often bind in heterodimeric complexes with each TF
recognizing a specific neighboring cis element in the regulatory region of the
genome. Comprehension of this DNA motif grammar is opaque, yet recent
developments have allowed the interrogation of genome-wide TF binding sites. We
reasoned that within this data novel motif grammars could be identified that
controlled distinct biological programs. For this purpose, we developed a novel
motif-discovery tool termed fexcom that systematically interrogates ChIP-seq
data to discover spatially constrained TF-TF composite motifs occurring over
short DNA distances. We applied this to the extensive ChIP-seq data available
from mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs). In addition to the well-known and most
prevalent sox-oct motif, we also discovered a novel constrained spacer motif for
Esrrb and Sox2 with a gap of between 2 and 8 bps that Essrb and Sox2 cobind in a
selective fashion. Through the use of knockdown experiments, we argue that the
Esrrb-Sox2 complex is an arbiter of gene expression differences between ESCs and
epiblast stem cells (EpiSC). A number of genes downregulated upon dual
Esrrb/Sox2 knockdown (e.g., Klf4, Klf5, Jam2, Pecam1) are similarly
downregulated in the ESC to EpiSC transition and contain the esrrb-sox motif.
The prototypical Esrrb-Sox2 target gene, containing an esrrb-sox element
conserved throughout eutherian and metatherian mammals, is Nr0b1. Through
positive regulation of this transcriptional repressor, we argue the Esrrb-Sox2
complex promotes the ESC state through inhibition of the EpiSC transcriptional
program and the same trio may also function to maintain trophoblast stem cells.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

DOI: 10.1002/stem.1279
PMID: 23169531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
