---
pmid: '17626179'
title: The receptor-like kinase SERK3/BAK1 is a central regulator of innate immunity
  in plants.
authors:
- Heese A
- Hann DR
- Gimenez-Ibanez S
- Jones AM
- He K
- Li J
- Schroeder JI
- Peck SC
- Rathjen JP
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1924592
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0705306104
---

# The receptor-like kinase SERK3/BAK1 is a central regulator of innate immunity in plants.
**Authors:** Heese A, Hann DR, Gimenez-Ibanez S, Jones AM, He K, Li J, Schroeder JI, Peck SC, Rathjen JP
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0705306104](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0705306104)
**PMC:** [PMC1924592](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1924592/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jul 17;104(29):12217-22. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0705306104. Epub 2007 Jul 11.

The receptor-like kinase SERK3/BAK1 is a central regulator of innate immunity in 
plants.

Heese A(1), Hann DR, Gimenez-Ibanez S, Jones AM, He K, Li J, Schroeder JI, Peck 
SC, Rathjen JP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Missouri, 540G Bond Life Sciences 
Center,1201 Rollins Road, Columbia, MO 65211, USA. heesea@missouri.edu

In pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP)-triggered immunity (PTI), plant 
cell surface receptors sense potential microbial pathogens by recognizing 
elicitors called PAMPs. Although diverse PAMPs trigger PTI through distinct 
receptors, the resulting intracellular responses overlap extensively. Despite 
this, a common component(s) linking signal perception with transduction remains 
unknown. In this study, we identify SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR KINASE 
(SERK)3/brassinosteroid-associated kinase (BAK)1, a receptor-like kinase 
previously implicated in hormone signaling, as a component of plant PTI. In 
Arabidopsis thaliana, AtSERK3/BAK1 rapidly enters an elicitor-dependent complex 
with FLAGELLIN SENSING 2 (FLS2), the receptor for the bacterial PAMP flagellin 
and its peptide derivative flg22. In the absence of AtSERK3/BAK1, early 
flg22-dependent responses are greatly reduced in both A. thaliana and Nicotiana 
benthamiana. Furthermore, N. benthamiana Serk3/Bak1 is required for full 
responses to unrelated PAMPs and, importantly, for restriction of bacterial and 
oomycete infections. Thus, SERK3/BAK1 appears to integrate diverse perception 
events into downstream PAMP responses, leading to immunity against a range of 
invading microbes.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0705306104
PMCID: PMC1924592
PMID: 17626179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

In pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP)-triggered immunity (PTI), plant cell surface receptors sense potential microbial pathogens by recognizing elicitors called PAMPs. Although diverse PAMPs trigger PTI through distinct receptors, the resulting intracellular responses overlap extensively. Despite this, a common component(s) linking signal perception with transduction remains unknown. In this study, we identify SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR KINASE (SERK)3/brassinosteroid-associated kinase (BAK)1, a receptor-like kinase previously implicated in hormone signaling, as a component of plant PTI. In Arabidopsis thaliana , AtSERK3/BAK1 rapidly enters an elicitor-dependent complex with FLAGELLIN SENSING 2 (FLS2), the receptor for the bacterial PAMP flagellin and its peptide derivative flg22. In the absence of AtSERK3/BAK1 , early flg22-dependent responses are greatly reduced in both A. thaliana and Nicotiana benthamiana . Furthermore, N. benthamiana Serk3/Bak1 is required for full responses to unrelated PAMPs and, importantly, for restriction of bacterial and oomycete infections. Thus, SERK3/BAK1 appears to integrate diverse perception events into downstream PAMP responses, leading to immunity against a range of invading microbes.

Conclusions

Our data identify SERK3/BAK1 as a factor involved in PTI. SERK3/BAK1 is required for early PAMP responses and rapidly enters a flg22-induced complex. We therefore speculate that in PAMP responses, SERK3/BAK1 acts similarly to its role in BR signaling as a partner of the BRI1 receptor ( 33 ). In our model ( SI Fig. 4 ), SERK3/BAK1 may function in a complex with FLS2 and possibly other PRRs to provide a link between PAMP perception and subsequent early defense responses. Whether either RLK transactivates the other and/or recruits downstream factors to the complex remains unknown. Previous studies have shown a major role for FLS2 in flg22 binding ( 13 , 14 ), but it is formally possible that SERK3/BAK1 also contributes to ligand binding. Interestingly, FLS2 belongs to the non-RD kinases with proposed roles in innate immunity, whereas SERK3/BAK1 is an RD kinase, although the significance of this observation remains to be determined ( 1 ). The involvement of SERK3/BAK1 in PTI provides further evidence of commonalities between plant immunity and BR signaling, consistent with the known role of tomato SR160/tBRI1 in systemic wound signaling ( 34 ). BR signaling plays roles in cell expansion and division, differentiation, and reproductive development ( 35 ). In contrast, PAMP signaling is important for resistance to pathogens through activation of several defense-associated responses. So far, shared pathway components or responses between BR signaling and PAMP signaling have not been reported. Comparisons of gene expression in the presence of either brassinolide or flg22 revealed no apparent overlap in expression patterns ( 18 , 36 ). However, it is interesting to note that application of flg22 to the medium leads to a growth inhibition phenotype in Arabidopsis seedlings ( 37 ). This phenotype could suggest interplay between BR and flagellin signaling, potentially mediated by BAK1. Finally, the identification of a conserved component of multiple PAMP-PRR response pathways makes this protein a likely target of pathogen virulence factors to suppress PTI.
