---
pmid: '10862616'
title: Conformational requirements of collagenous peptides for recognition by the
  chaperone protein HSP47.
authors:
- Koide T
- Aso A
- Yorihuzi T
- Nagata K
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M003026200
---

# Conformational requirements of collagenous peptides for recognition by the chaperone protein HSP47.
**Authors:** Koide T, Aso A, Yorihuzi T, Nagata K
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M003026200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M003026200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Sep 8;275(36):27957-63. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M003026200.

Conformational requirements of collagenous peptides for recognition by the 
chaperone protein HSP47.

Koide T(1), Aso A, Yorihuzi T, Nagata K.

Author information:
(1)Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology (CREST), Japan.

The collagen binding chaperone HSP47 interacts with procollagen in the 
endoplasmic reticulum and plays a crucial role in the biosynthesis of collagen. 
We recently demonstrated that typical collagen model peptides, (Pro-Pro-Gly)(n), 
possess sufficient structural information for interaction with HSP47 (Koide, T., 
Asada, S., and Nagata, K. (1999) J. Biol. Chem. 274, 34523-34526). Here we show 
that binding of (Gly-Pro-Pro)(n) peptides to HSP47 can be detected using the 
two-hybrid system in yeast if a trimerizing domain is fused to the C termini of 
the peptides. Some peptides interacted with HSP47 at a lowered assay temperature 
at 24 degrees C but not at 30 degrees C, indicating the importance of 
conformational change of the substrate peptides. To analyze the spectrum of 
HSP47 substrate sequences, we performed two-hybrid screening of collagen-like 
peptides in designed random peptide libraries using HSP47 as a bait. In selected 
peptides, the enrichment ratio calculated for each amino acid residue correlated 
strongly with the contribution of the residue to triple-helix stability 
independently determined using synthetic collagen model peptides. Taken 
together, our results suggest that HSP47 preferentially recognizes collagenous 
Gly-X-Y repeats in triple-helical conformation. We also demonstrated that 
screening of combinatorial peptide libraries is a powerful strategy to determine 
conformational requirements as well as the elucidation of binding motifs in 
primary structure.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M003026200
PMID: 10862616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
