---
pmid: '22084092'
title: Effects of brefeldin A-inhibited guanine nucleotide-exchange (BIG) 1 and KANK1
  proteins on cell polarity and directed migration during wound healing.
authors:
- Li CC
- Kuo JC
- Waterman CM
- Kiyama R
- Moss J
- Vaughan M
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3228443
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1117011108
---

# Effects of brefeldin A-inhibited guanine nucleotide-exchange (BIG) 1 and KANK1 proteins on cell polarity and directed migration during wound healing.
**Authors:** Li CC, Kuo JC, Waterman CM, Kiyama R, Moss J, Vaughan M
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1117011108](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1117011108)
**PMC:** [PMC3228443](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3228443/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Nov 29;108(48):19228-33. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1117011108. Epub 2011 Nov 14.

Effects of brefeldin A-inhibited guanine nucleotide-exchange (BIG) 1 and KANK1 
proteins on cell polarity and directed migration during wound healing.

Li CC(1), Kuo JC, Waterman CM, Kiyama R, Moss J, Vaughan M.

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood 
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Brefeldin A-inhibited guanine nucleotide-exchange protein (BIG) 1 activates 
class I ADP ribosylation factors (ARFs) by accelerating the replacement of bound 
GDP with GTP to initiate recruitment of coat proteins for membrane vesicle 
formation. Among proteins that interact with BIG1, kinesin family member 21A 
(KIF21A), a plus-end-directed motor protein, moves cargo away from the 
microtubule-organizing center (MTOC) on microtubules. Because KANK1, a protein 
containing N-terminal KN, C-terminal ankyrin-repeat, and intervening coiled-coil 
domains, has multiple actions in cells and also interacts with KIF21A, we 
explored a possible interaction between it and BIG1. We obtained evidence for a 
functional and physical association between these proteins, and found that the 
effects of BIG1 and KANK1 depletion on cell migration in wound-healing assays 
were remarkably similar. Treatment of cells with BIG1- or KANK1-specific siRNA 
interfered significantly with directed cell migration and initial orientation of 
Golgi/MTOC toward the leading edge, which was not mimicked by KIF21A depletion. 
Although colocalization of overexpressed KANK1 and endogenous BIG1 in HeLa cells 
was not clear microscopically, their reciprocal immunoprecipitation (IP) is 
compatible with the presence of small percentages of each protein in the same 
complexes. Depletion or overexpression of BIG1 protein appeared not to affect 
KANK1 distribution. Our data identify actions of both BIG1 and KANK1 in 
regulating cell polarity during directed migration; these actions are consistent 
with the presence of both BIG1 and KANK1 in dynamic multimolecular complexes 
that maintain Golgi/MTOC orientation, differ from those that might contain all 
three proteins (BIG1, KIF21A, and KANK1), and function in directed transport 
along microtubules.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1117011108
PMCID: PMC3228443
PMID: 22084092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
