---
pmid: '20650889'
title: Analysis of the biogenesis of heparan sulfate acetyl-CoA:alpha-glucosaminide
  N-acetyltransferase provides insights into the mechanism underlying its complete
  deficiency in mucopolysaccharidosis IIIC.
authors:
- Durand S
- Feldhammer M
- Bonneil E
- Thibault P
- Pshezhetsky AV
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2951197
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.141150
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Analysis of the biogenesis of heparan sulfate acetyl-CoA:alpha-glucosaminide N-acetyltransferase provides insights into the mechanism underlying its complete deficiency in mucopolysaccharidosis IIIC.
**Authors:** Durand S, Feldhammer M, Bonneil E, Thibault P, Pshezhetsky AV
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110.141150](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.141150)
**PMC:** [PMC2951197](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2951197/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Oct 8;285(41):31233-42. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.141150. Epub 
2010 Jul 22.

Analysis of the biogenesis of heparan sulfate acetyl-CoA:alpha-glucosaminide 
N-acetyltransferase provides insights into the mechanism underlying its complete 
deficiency in mucopolysaccharidosis IIIC.

Durand S(1), Feldhammer M, Bonneil E, Thibault P, Pshezhetsky AV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, CHU Sainte-Justine, University of Montreal, 
Montreal H3T 1C5, Canada.

Heparan sulfate acetyl-CoA:α-glucosaminide N-acetyltransferase (HGSNAT) 
catalyzes the transmembrane acetylation of heparan sulfate in lysosomes required 
for its further catabolism. Inherited deficiency of HGSNAT in humans results in 
lysosomal storage of heparan sulfate and causes the severe neurodegenerative 
disease, mucopolysaccharidosis IIIC (MPS IIIC). Previously we have cloned the 
HGSNAT gene, identified molecular defects in MPS IIIC patients, and found that 
all missense mutations prevented normal folding and trafficking of the enzyme. 
Therefore characterization of HGSNAT biogenesis and intracellular trafficking 
became of central importance for understanding the molecular mechanism 
underlying the disease and developing future therapies. In the current study we 
show that HGSNAT is synthesized as a catalytically inactive 77-kDa precursor 
that is transported to the lysosomes via an adaptor protein-mediated pathway 
that involves conserved tyrosine- and dileucine-based lysosomal targeting 
signals in its C-terminal cytoplasmic domain with a contribution from a 
dileucine-based signal in the N-terminal cytoplasmic loop. In the lysosome, the 
precursor is cleaved into a 29-kDa N-terminal α-chain and a 48-kDa C-terminal 
β-chain, and assembled into active ∼440-kDa oligomers. The subunits are held 
together by disulfide bonds between at least two cysteine residues (Cys(123) and 
Cys(434)) in the lysosomal luminal loops of the enzyme. We speculate that 
proteolytic cleavage allows the nucleophile residue, His(269), in the active 
site to access the substrate acetyl-CoA in the cytoplasm, for further transfer 
of the acetyl group to the terminal glucosamine on heparan sulfate. Altogether 
our results identify intralysosomal oligomerization and proteolytic cleavage as 
two steps crucial for functional activation of HGSNAT.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.141150
PMCID: PMC2951197
PMID: 20650889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
