---
pmid: '22064321'
title: ERp29 induces breast cancer cell growth arrest and survival through modulation
  of activation of p38 and upregulation of ER stress protein p58IPK.
authors:
- Gao D
- Bambang IF
- Putti TC
- Lee YK
- Richardson DR
- Zhang D
journal: Lab Invest
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2011.163
---

# ERp29 induces breast cancer cell growth arrest and survival through modulation of activation of p38 and upregulation of ER stress protein p58IPK.
**Authors:** Gao D, Bambang IF, Putti TC, Lee YK, Richardson DR, Zhang D
**Journal:** Lab Invest (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/labinvest.2011.163](https://doi.org/10.1038/labinvest.2011.163)

## Abstract

1. Lab Invest. 2012 Feb;92(2):200-13. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2011.163. Epub 2011 
Nov 7.

ERp29 induces breast cancer cell growth arrest and survival through modulation 
of activation of p38 and upregulation of ER stress protein p58IPK.

Gao D(1), Bambang IF, Putti TC, Lee YK, Richardson DR, Zhang D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University 
of Singapore, Singapore.

Endoplasmic reticulum protein 29 (ERp29) is an ER luminal protein that has a 
role in protein unfolding and secretion, but its role in cancer is unclear. 
Recently, we reported that overexpression of ERp29 significantly inhibited cell 
proliferation and prevented tumorigenesis in highly proliferative MDA-MB-231 
breast cancer cells. Here, we show that ERp29-induced cancer cell growth arrest 
is modulated by the interplay between the concomitant phosphorylation of p38 and 
upregulation of the inhibitor of the interferon-induced, double-stranded 
RNA-activated protein kinase, p58(IPK). In this cell model, ERp29 overexpression 
significantly downregulates modulators of cell proliferation, namely urokinase 
plasminogen activator receptor, β(1)-integrin and epidermal growth factor 
receptor. Furthermore, ERp29 significantly (P<0.001) increases phosphorylation 
of p38 (p-p38) and reduces matrix metalloproteinase-9 secretion. The role of 
ERp29 in upregulating cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors (p15 and p21) and in 
downregulating cyclin D(2) is demonstrated in slowly proliferating 
ERp29-overexpressing MDA-MB-231 cells, whereas the opposite response was 
observed in ERp29-knockdown MCF-7 cells. Pharmacological inhibition of p-p38 
downregulates p15 and p21 and inhibits eIF2α phosphorylation, indicating a role 
for p-p38 in this process. Furthermore, p58(IPK) expression was increased in 
ERp29-overexpressing MDA-MB-231 cells and highly decreased in ERp29-knockdown 
MCF-7 cells. This upregulation of p58(IPK) by ERp29 suppresses the activation of 
p-p38/p-PERK/p-eIF2α by repressing eIF2α phosphorylation. In fact, reduction of 
p58(IPK) expression by RNA interference stimulated eIF2α phosphorylation. The 
repression of eIF2α phosphorylation by p58(IPK) prevents ERp29-transfected cells 
from undergoing ER-dependent apoptosis driven by the activation of 
ATF4/CHOP/caspase-3. Hence, the interplay between p38 phosphorylation and 
p58(IPK) upregulation has key roles in modulating ERp29-induced cell-growth 
arrest and survival.

DOI: 10.1038/labinvest.2011.163
PMID: 22064321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
