---
pmid: '14685263'
title: Identification of a family of animal sphingomyelin synthases.
authors:
- Huitema K
- van den Dikkenberg J
- Brouwers JF
- Holthuis JC
journal: EMBO J
year: '2004'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1271672
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600034
---

# Identification of a family of animal sphingomyelin synthases.
**Authors:** Huitema K, van den Dikkenberg J, Brouwers JF, Holthuis JC
**Journal:** EMBO J (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7600034](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7600034)
**PMC:** [PMC1271672](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1271672/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2004 Jan 14;23(1):33-44. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600034. Epub 2003 Dec 
18.

Identification of a family of animal sphingomyelin synthases.

Huitema K(1), van den Dikkenberg J, Brouwers JF, Holthuis JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Membrane Enzymology, Faculty of Chemistry, Institute of 
Biomembranes, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Sphingomyelin (SM) is a major component of animal plasma membranes. Its 
production involves the transfer of phosphocholine from phosphatidylcholine onto 
ceramide, yielding diacylglycerol as a side product. This reaction is catalysed 
by SM synthase, an enzyme whose biological potential can be judged from the 
roles of diacylglycerol and ceramide as anti- and proapoptotic stimuli, 
respectively. SM synthesis occurs in the lumen of the Golgi as well as on the 
cell surface. As no gene for SM synthase has been cloned so far, it is unclear 
whether different enzymes are present at these locations. Using a functional 
cloning strategy in yeast, we identified a novel family of integral membrane 
proteins exhibiting all enzymatic features previously attributed to animal SM 
synthase. Strikingly, human, mouse and Caenorhabditis elegans genomes each 
contain at least two different SM synthase (SMS) genes. Whereas human SMS1 is 
localised to the Golgi, SMS2 resides primarily at the plasma membrane. 
Collectively, these findings open up important new avenues for studying 
sphingolipid function in animals.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600034
PMCID: PMC1271672
PMID: 14685263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Sphingomyelin (SM) is a major component of animal plasma membranes. Its production involves the transfer of phosphocholine from phosphatidylcholine onto ceramide, yielding diacylglycerol as a side product. This reaction is catalysed by SM synthase, an enzyme whose biological potential can be judged from the roles of diacylglycerol and ceramide as anti- and proapoptotic stimuli, respectively. SM synthesis occurs in the lumen of the Golgi as well as on the cell surface. As no gene for SM synthase has been cloned so far, it is unclear whether different enzymes are present at these locations. Using a functional cloning strategy in yeast, we identified a novel family of integral membrane proteins exhibiting all enzymatic features previously attributed to animal SM synthase. Strikingly, human, mouse and Caenorhabditis elegans genomes each contain at least two different SM synthase (SMS) genes. Whereas human SMS1 is localised to the Golgi, SMS2 resides primarily at the plasma membrane. Collectively, these findings open up important new avenues for studying sphingolipid function in animals.

Introduction

Sphingomyelin (SM) is an abundant constituent of cellular membranes in a wide range of organisms, from mammals ( Ullman and Radin, 1974 ) and nematodes ( Satouchi et al , 1993 ) to protozoa like the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum ( Elmendorf and Haldar, 1994 ). SM is preferentially concentrated in the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane. Its high packing density and affinity for sterols help provide a rigid barrier to the extracellular environment and play a role in the formation of lipid rafts, specialised areas in cellular membranes with important functions in signal transduction and membrane trafficking ( Simons and Toomre, 2000 ; Holthuis et al , 2001 ). Since the discovery of the ‘SM cycle' as a putative signalling system analogous to well-known second messenger systems like the phosphoinositide pathway, SM has emerged to the focus of interest in many research laboratories ( Kolesnick and Hannun, 1999 ; Andrieu-Abadie and Levade, 2002 ).

SM synthesis is mediated by a phosphatidylcholine:ceramide cholinephosphotransferase, or SM synthase, which transfers the phosphorylcholine moiety from phosphatidylcholine (PC) onto the primary hydroxyl of ceramide, thus generating SM and diacylglycerol (DAG; Ullman and Radin, 1974 ; Voelker and Kennedy, 1982 ; Marggraf and Kanfer, 1984 ). Since the enzyme is also able to catalyse the reverse reaction, namely the formation of PC from SM and DAG ( Marggraf and Kanfer, 1984 ; van Helvoort et al , 1994 ), it may regulate, in opposite directions, the cellular levels of the bioactive lipids ceramide and DAG. The latter two are important regulators of membrane trafficking, cell proliferation and apoptosis ( Kolesnick and Hannun, 1999 ; Bankaitis, 2002 ; Brose and Rosenmund, 2002 ; Pettus et al , 2002 ). Hence, one may anticipate that the physiological significance of SM synthase goes beyond the formation of SM. The subcellular localisation of the enzyme has been the subject of numerous studies. After the initial debate had focused on whether SM synthase is located in the Golgi or at the plasma membrane ( Marggraf et al , 1981 ; Voelker and Kennedy, 1982 ; Lipsky and Pagano, 1985 ), subsequent work revealed evidence for the presence of SM synthase activity in both membranes ( Futerman et al , 1990 ; Jeckel et al , 1990 ; van Helvoort et al , 1994 ). Whether SM synthesis detected at these locations is due to the presence of more than one isoform of the enzyme has remained an open issue.

Progress in understanding the biological roles of SM synthesis and its regulation is hampered by the fact that no successful purification of the responsible enzyme has been achieved. Recent work has identified a bacterial SM synthase released from Pseudomonas aeruginosa ( Luberto et al , 2003 ). However, this activity is a soluble protein, hence in contrast to the animal enzyme that is tightly associated with the membrane ( Ullman and Radin, 1974 ; Voelker and Kennedy, 1982 ). Other efforts focused on the isolation of SM synthase mutants by screening Chinese hamster ovary cells for resistance to an SM-directed cytolysin ( Hanada et al , 1998 ). Instead of mutants with a primary defect in SM synthase, this method yielded mutants defective in serine palmitoyltransferase activity or blocked in ceramide transport to the site of SM synthesis ( Fukasawa et al , 1999 ).

Here, we pursued a complementary approach for the identification of animal SM synthase that takes advantage of structural information available for enzymes catalysing analogous reactions. In contrast to most animal cells, plants, fungi and yeast do not produce SM. Instead, these organisms add phosphoinositol to phytoceramide to generate inositolphosphorylceramide (IPC) ( Dickson, 1998 ). IPC production in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae requires the product of the AUR1 gene ( Nagiec et al , 1997 ). Sequence analysis of Aur1p proteins from different fungi revealed four conserved motifs ( Heidler and Radding, 2000 ), two of which are similar to the C2 and C3 domains present in members of the lipid phosphate phosphatase (LPP) family ( Waggoner et al , 1999 ). LPPs play a critical role in cell signalling by controlling the conversion of bioactive lipid phosphate esters such as (lyso)phosphatidic acid and sphingosine-1-phosphate to their dephosphorylated counterparts. The conserved C1, C2 and C3 domains in LPPs likely constitute the active site for cleavage of the bond between the lipid hydroxyl and phosphate groups ( Neuwald, 1997 ). In the case of Aur1p, this reaction would represent the first step in the transfer of inositolphosphate from PI, with the resulting enzyme-phosphate intermediate being subjected to nucleophilic attack by the oxygen of ceramide rather than the oxygen of water used by LPPs. The presence of LPP-like motifs, together with the IPC synthase activity found associated with affinity-purified Aur1p (van den Dikkenberg and Holthuis, in preparation), suggests that Aur1p is directly responsible for IPC synthesis.

The above considerations led us to develop a bioinformatics and functional cloning strategy to identify the enzyme responsible for SM synthesis in animals. By searching the database using a sequence motif shared by LPPs and Aur1p homologues, a set of 27 candidate SM synthase sequences from humans, mice and Caenorhabditis elegans was collected and assembled into different protein families. Several members from each family were cloned and analysed for their ability to mediate SM synthesis upon heterologous expression in S. cerevisiae , an organism lacking SM synthase activity. This approach resulted in the identification of multiple animal SM synthases. We find that animal genomes each contain at least two SM synthase genes and provide evidence that this multiplicity in enzymes is used to interconvert PC and ceramide to DAG and SM at different cellular locations.
