---
pmid: '10995572'
title: PLAC1, an Xq26 gene with placenta-specific expression.
authors:
- Cocchia M
- Huber R
- Pantano S
- Chen EY
- Ma P
- Forabosco A
- Ko MS
- Schlessinger D
journal: Genomics
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/geno.2000.6302
---

# PLAC1, an Xq26 gene with placenta-specific expression.
**Authors:** Cocchia M, Huber R, Pantano S, Chen EY, Ma P, Forabosco A, Ko MS, Schlessinger D
**Journal:** Genomics (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1006/geno.2000.6302](https://doi.org/10.1006/geno.2000.6302)

## Abstract

1. Genomics. 2000 Sep 15;68(3):305-12. doi: 10.1006/geno.2000.6302.

PLAC1, an Xq26 gene with placenta-specific expression.

Cocchia M(1), Huber R, Pantano S, Chen EY, Ma P, Forabosco A, Ko MS, 
Schlessinger D.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, 5600 Nathan Shock Drive, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21224, USA.

A novel human X-linked gene shows placenta-specific expression and has been 
named PLAC1. The gene maps 65 kb telomeric to HPRT at Xq26 and has been 
completely sequenced at the cDNA and genomic levels. The mouse orthologue Plac1 
maps to the syntenically equivalent region of the mouse X chromosome. In situ 
hybridization studies with the antisense mRNA during mouse embryogenesis detect 
Plac1 expression from 7.5 dpc (days postcoitum) to 14.5 dpc in ectoplacental 
cone, giant cells, and labyrinthine trophoblasts. The putative human and murine 
PLAC1 proteins are 60% identical and 77% homologous. Both include a signal 
peptide and a peptide sequence also found in an interaction domain of the ZP3 
(zona pellucida 3) protein. These results make PLAC1 a marker for placental 
development, with a possible role in the establishment of the mother-fetus 
interface.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/geno.2000.6302
PMID: 10995572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
