---
pmid: '24947010'
title: DJ-1 interacts with RACK1 and protects neurons from oxidative-stress-induced
  apoptosis.
authors:
- Ma J
- Wu R
- Zhang Q
- Wu JB
- Lou J
- Zheng Z
- Ding JQ
- Yuan Z
journal: Biochem J
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1042/BJ20140235
---

# DJ-1 interacts with RACK1 and protects neurons from oxidative-stress-induced apoptosis.
**Authors:** Ma J, Wu R, Zhang Q, Wu JB, Lou J, Zheng Z, Ding JQ, Yuan Z
**Journal:** Biochem J (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BJ20140235](https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20140235)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2014 Sep 15;462(3):489-97. doi: 10.1042/BJ20140235.

DJ-1 interacts with RACK1 and protects neurons from oxidative-stress-induced 
apoptosis.

Ma J(1), Wu R(1), Zhang Q(1), Wu JB(1), Lou J(1), Zheng Z(2), Ding JQ(3), Yuan 
Z(1).

Author information:
(1)*State Key Laboratory of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Institute of 
Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.
(2)†Beijing Institute of Geriatrics, Xuanwu Hospital of Capital Medical 
University, Beijing 100053, China.
(3)‡Department of Neurology and Institute of Neurology, Ruijin Hospital 
Affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, 
China.

Erratum in
    Biochem J. 2020 Dec 24;477(24):4813. doi: 10.1042/BCJ-2014-0235_COR.

PD (Parkinson's disease) is a complex disorder that is associated with neuronal 
loss or dysfunction caused by genetic risks, environmental factors and advanced 
aging. It has been reported that DJ-1 mutations rendered neurons sensitive to 
oxidative damage, which led to the onset of familiar PD. However, the molecular 
mechanism is still unclear. In the present study we show that DJ-1 interacts 
with RACK1 (receptor of activated C kinase 1) and increases its dimerization and 
protein stability. The DJ-1 transgene protects cortical neurons from 
H2O2-induced apoptosis, and this protective effect is abrogated by knocking down 
RACK1. Similarly, deletion of DJ-1 in cortical neurons increases the sensitivity 
to H2O2, and the damage can be significantly rescued by DJ-1 or DJ-1/RACK1 
co-transfection, but not by RACK1 alone. We observed further that the 
interaction of DJ-1 and RACK1 is disrupted by H2O2 or MPP+ 
(1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium) treatment, and the protein levels of DJ-1 and 
RACK1 decreased in neurodegenerative disease models. Taken together, the 
DJ-1-RACK1 complex protects neurons from oxidative stress-induced apoptosis, 
with the implication that DJ-1 and RACK1 might be novel targets in the treatment 
of neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20140235
PMID: 24947010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
