---
pmid: '17634540'
title: Association of cysteine-rich secretory protein 3 and beta-microseminoprotein
  with outcome after radical prostatectomy.
authors:
- Bjartell AS
- Al-Ahmadie H
- Serio AM
- Eastham JA
- Eggener SE
- Fine SW
- Udby L
- Gerald WL
- Vickers AJ
- Lilja H
- Reuter VE
- Scardino PT
journal: Clin Cancer Res
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2660867
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-06-3031
---

# Association of cysteine-rich secretory protein 3 and beta-microseminoprotein with outcome after radical prostatectomy.
**Authors:** Bjartell AS, Al-Ahmadie H, Serio AM, Eastham JA, Eggener SE, Fine SW, Udby L, Gerald WL, Vickers AJ, Lilja H, Reuter VE, Scardino PT
**Journal:** Clin Cancer Res (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-06-3031](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-06-3031)
**PMC:** [PMC2660867](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2660867/)

## Abstract

1. Clin Cancer Res. 2007 Jul 15;13(14):4130-8. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-06-3031.

Association of cysteine-rich secretory protein 3 and beta-microseminoprotein 
with outcome after radical prostatectomy.

Bjartell AS(1), Al-Ahmadie H, Serio AM, Eastham JA, Eggener SE, Fine SW, Udby L, 
Gerald WL, Vickers AJ, Lilja H, Reuter VE, Scardino PT.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Surgery (Urology), Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New 
York, New York 10021, USA. bjartela@mskcc.org

PURPOSE: It has been suggested that cysteine-rich secretory protein 3 (CRISP-3) 
and beta-microseminoprotein (MSP) are associated with outcome in prostate 
cancer. We investigated whether these markers are related to biochemical 
recurrence and whether addition of the markers improves prediction of recurring 
disease.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Tissue microarrays of radical prostatectomy specimens were 
analyzed for CRISP-3 and MSP by immunohistochemistry. Associations between 
marker positivity and postprostatectomy biochemical recurrence 
[prostate-specific antigen (PSA) >0.2 ng/mL with a confirmatory level] were 
evaluated by univariate and multivariable Cox proportional hazards regression. 
Multivariable analyses controlled for preoperative PSA and pathologic stage and 
grade.
RESULTS: Among 945 patients, 224 had recurrence. Median follow-up for survivors 
was 6.0 years. Patients positive for CRISP-3 had smaller recurrence-free 
probabilities, whereas MSP-positive patients had larger recurrence-free 
probabilities. On univariate analysis, the hazard ratio for patients positive 
versus negative for CRISP-3 was 1.53 (P=0.010) and for MSP was 0.63 (P=0.004). 
On multivariable analysis, both CRISP-3 (P=0.007) and MSP (P=0.002) were 
associated with recurrence. The hazard ratio among CRISP-3-positive/MSP-negative 
patients compared with CRISP-3-negative/MSP-positive patients was 2.38. Adding 
CRISP-3 to a base model that included PSA and pathologic stage and grade did not 
enhance the prediction of recurrence, but adding MSP increased the concordance 
index minimally from 0.778 to 0.781.
CONCLUSION: We report evidence that CRISP-3 and MSP are independent predictors 
of recurrence after radical prostatectomy for localized prostate cancer. 
However, addition of the markers does not importantly improve the performance of 
existing predictive models. Further research should aim to elucidate the 
functions of CRISP-3 and MSP in prostate cancer cells.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-06-3031
PMCID: PMC2660867
PMID: 17634540 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
