---
pmid: '7916014'
title: Several endoplasmic reticulum stress proteins, including ERp72, interact with
  thyroglobulin during its maturation.
authors:
- Kuznetsov G
- Chen LB
- Nigam SK
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
---

# Several endoplasmic reticulum stress proteins, including ERp72, interact with thyroglobulin during its maturation.
**Authors:** Kuznetsov G, Chen LB, Nigam SK
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1994)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1994 Sep 16;269(37):22990-5.

Several endoplasmic reticulum stress proteins, including ERp72, interact with 
thyroglobulin during its maturation.

Kuznetsov G(1), Chen LB, Nigam SK.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 
Boston, Massachusetts.

We have previously demonstrated that several endoplasmic reticulum (ER) 
proteins, including BiP, ERp72, grp94, and protein disulfide isomerase, bind to 
a denatured thyroglobulin (Tg) affinity column and can be specifically eluted by 
ATP (Nigam, S.K., Goldberg, A.L., Ho, S., Rohde, M.F., Bush, K.T., and Sherman, 
M.Y. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 269, 1744-1749). Using chemical cross-linking, we now 
demonstrate that BiP, ERp72, and grp94 associate with Tg in two types of 
cultured thyroid cells, FRTL-5 and PCC13. Whereas BiP could be 
coimmunoprecipitated with anti-Tg antibodies in the absence of cross-linking, 
only trace amounts of ERp72 and grp94 were coimmunoprecipitated. Likewise, in 
both cell types, anti-BiP antibodies were able to coimmunoprecipitate Tg in the 
absence of cross-linking, though ERp72 and grp94 were only minimally present. 
Coprecipitation of BiP and Tg was abolished when ATP and Mg2+ were added to cell 
lysates. In contrast, after cross-linking, there was a large increase in the 
amount of ERp72 and grp94 that coimmunoprecipitated with anti-Tg antibodies, 
although there was only a slight increase in BiP. Similarly, in cross-linked 
lysates, grp94 and ERp72 were also coimmunoprecipitated with anti-BiP 
antibodies. An apparently novel 200-kDa protein was also consistently 
immunoprecipitated by anti-BiP antibodies in both cell types. In addition, 
anti-ERp72 antibodies coimmunoprecipitated Tg, BiP, and grp94 only after 
cross-linking. Analysis of uncross-linked and cross-linked samples by sucrose 
density gradient centrifugation confirmed that Tg, BiP, grp94, and ERp72 are 
present together in high molecular weight complexes only after treatment of 
cells with cross-linking reagent. These results suggest that ERp72, as well as 
BiP and grp94, function as molecular chaperones in the maturation of Tg, 
potentially as part of a macromolecular complex.

PMID: 7916014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
