---
reference_id: PMID:9203579
title: "The Spg1p GTPase is an essential, dosage-dependent inducer of septum formation in Schizosaccharomyces pombe."
authors:
- Schmidt S
- Sohrmann M
- Hofmann K
- Woollard A
- Simanis V
journal: Genes Dev
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1101/gad.11.12.1519
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Spg1p GTPase is an essential, dosage-dependent inducer of septum formation in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
**Authors:** Schmidt S, Sohrmann M, Hofmann K, Woollard A, Simanis V
**Journal:** Genes Dev (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.11.12.1519](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.11.12.1519)

## Content

1. Genes Dev. 1997 Jun 15;11(12):1519-34. doi: 10.1101/gad.11.12.1519.

The Spg1p GTPase is an essential, dosage-dependent inducer of septum formation
in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.

Schmidt S(1), Sohrmann M, Hofmann K, Woollard A, Simanis V.

Author information:
(1)Cell Cycle Control Laboratory, Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer
Research (ISREC), Epalinges.

The spg1 gene (septum-promoting GTPase) was cloned as a multicopy suppressor of
a dominant-negative mutant of the Cdc7p kinase. It encodes a small GTPase of the
Ras superfamily. spg1 is an essential gene. Null or heat-sensitive alleles do
not make a division septum, but growth, S-phase, and mitosis continue in the
absence of cell division, producing elongated, multinucleate cells. Increased
expression of Spg1p induces septum formation in G2, S-phase, and pre-Start
G1-arrested cells. This requires the activity of Cdc7p kinase, but not
p34(cdc2). Increased expression of Cdc7p bypasses the requirement for Spg1p.
Spg1p and Cdc7p can be coimmunoprecipitated from cell extracts, and interact in
the two-hybrid system. These data indicate that Spg1p is a key element in
controlling the onset of septum formation in Schizosaccharomyces pombe, and that
it acts through the Cdc7p kinase.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.11.12.1519
PMID: 9203579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]