---
pmid: '22784711'
title: 'First evidence of sphingosine 1-phosphate lyase protein expression and activity
  downregulation in human neoplasm: implication for resistance to therapeutics in
  prostate cancer.'
authors:
- Brizuela L
- Ader I
- Mazerolles C
- Bocquet M
- Malavaud B
- Cuvillier O
journal: Mol Cancer Ther
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-0227
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# First evidence of sphingosine 1-phosphate lyase protein expression and activity downregulation in human neoplasm: implication for resistance to therapeutics in prostate cancer.
**Authors:** Brizuela L, Ader I, Mazerolles C, Bocquet M, Malavaud B, Cuvillier O
**Journal:** Mol Cancer Ther (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-0227](https://doi.org/10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-0227)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cancer Ther. 2012 Sep;11(9):1841-51. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-0227. 
Epub 2012 Jul 10.

First evidence of sphingosine 1-phosphate lyase protein expression and activity 
downregulation in human neoplasm: implication for resistance to therapeutics in 
prostate cancer.

Brizuela L(1), Ader I, Mazerolles C, Bocquet M, Malavaud B, Cuvillier O.

Author information:
(1)CNRS, Institut de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale, Université de 
Toulouse, UPS, IPBS Toulouse Cedex 4, France.

This is the first report of sphingosine 1-phosphate lyase (SPL) protein 
expression and enzymatic activity in human neoplasm. This enzyme drives 
irreversible degradation of sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P), a bioactive lipid 
associated with resistance to therapeutics in various cancers, including 
prostate adenocarcinoma. In fresh human prostatectomy specimens, a remarkable 
decrease in SPL enzymatic activity was found in tumor samples, as compared with 
normal adjacent tissues. A significant relationship between loss of SPL 
expression and higher Gleason score was confirmed in tissue microarray (TMA) 
analysis. Moreover, SPL protein expression and activity were inversely 
correlated with those of sphingosine kinase-1 (SphK1), the enzyme producing S1P. 
SPL and SphK1 expressions were independently predictive of aggressive cancer on 
TMA, supporting the relevance of S1P in prostate cancer. In human C4-2B and PC-3 
cell lines, silencing SPL enhanced survival after irradiation or chemotherapy by 
decreasing expression of proteins involved in sensing and repairing DNA damage 
or apoptosis, respectively. In contrast, enforced expression of SPL sensitized 
cancer cells to irradiation or docetaxel by tilting the ceramide/S1P balance 
toward cell death. Interestingly, the S1P degradation products failed to 
sensitize to chemo- and radiotherapy, supporting the crucial role of 
ceramide/S1P balance in cancer. Of note, the combination of SPL enforced 
expression with a SphK1 silencing strategy by further decreasing S1P content 
made prostate cancer cells even more sensitive to anticancer therapies, 
suggesting that a dual strategy aimed at stimulating SPL, and inhibiting SphK1 
could represent a future approach to sensitize cancer cells to cancer 
treatments.

©2012 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-0227
PMID: 22784711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
