---
pmid: '10064800'
title: Functional reconstitution of a heteromeric cyclic nucleotide-gated channel
  of Caenorhabditis elegans in cultured cells.
authors:
- Komatsu H
- Jin YH
- L'Etoile N
- Mori I
- Bargmann CI
- Akaike N
- Ohshima Y
journal: Brain Res
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0006-8993(99)01111-7
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Functional reconstitution of a heteromeric cyclic nucleotide-gated channel of Caenorhabditis elegans in cultured cells.
**Authors:** Komatsu H, Jin YH, L'Etoile N, Mori I, Bargmann CI, Akaike N, Ohshima Y
**Journal:** Brain Res (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0006-8993(99)01111-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0006-8993(99)01111-7)

## Abstract

1. Brain Res. 1999 Mar 6;821(1):160-8. doi: 10.1016/s0006-8993(99)01111-7.

Functional reconstitution of a heteromeric cyclic nucleotide-gated channel of 
Caenorhabditis elegans in cultured cells.

Komatsu H(1), Jin YH, L'Etoile N, Mori I, Bargmann CI, Akaike N, Ohshima Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 
812-8581, Japan.

The tax-4 and tax-2 genes of Caenorhabditis elegans are essential for normal 
olfaction, gustation, and thermosensation, suggesting that they have a role in 
sensory transduction. The predicted products of these genes are similar to the 
cyclic nucleotide-gated (CNG) channel subunits used in vertebrate vision and 
olfaction: TAX-4 is highly related to those alpha subunits, while TAX-2 is most 
closely related to the beta subunits of the rod phototransduction channels. 
TAX-4 has previously been shown to form a highly sensitive cGMP-gated channel 
when expressed in human HEK293 cells. Here we show that TAX-4 and TAX-2 form a 
heteromeric channel when expressed in HEK293 cells, but TAX-2 does not form a 
channel on its own. Since these genes are expressed in the same neurons, most of 
the native channels in C. elegans are likely to be hetero-oligomers of TAX-4 and 
TAX-2 subunits, with TAX-4 as the alpha subunit and TAX-2 acting as a modifying 
beta subunit. The heteromeric TAX-4/TAX-2 channel is 25-fold less sensitive to 
cGMP than the TAX-4 channel, but it remains highly selective for cGMP over cAMP. 
The heteromeric channel and the TAX-4 homomeric channel differ in their blockage 
by divalent cations and in their single channel properties. These results 
suggest that cGMP is used as the second messenger during sensory signal 
transduction in C. elegans, and that distinct roles for alpha and beta subunits 
of CNG channels are conserved in vertebrate and invertebrate signal 
transduction.

Copyright 1999 Elsevier Science B. V.

DOI: 10.1016/s0006-8993(99)01111-7
PMID: 10064800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
