---
pmid: '16127171'
title: FANCC, FANCE, and FANCD2 form a ternary complex essential to the integrity
  of the Fanconi anemia DNA damage response pathway.
authors:
- Gordon SM
- Alon N
- Buchwald M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M507758200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# FANCC, FANCE, and FANCD2 form a ternary complex essential to the integrity of the Fanconi anemia DNA damage response pathway.
**Authors:** Gordon SM, Alon N, Buchwald M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M507758200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M507758200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Oct 28;280(43):36118-25. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M507758200. Epub 
2005 Aug 26.

FANCC, FANCE, and FANCD2 form a ternary complex essential to the integrity of 
the Fanconi anemia DNA damage response pathway.

Gordon SM(1), Alon N, Buchwald M.

Author information:
(1)Program in Genetics and Genomic Biology, Research Institute, Hospital for 
Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada. susan.gordon@utoronto.ca

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a genetically heterogeneous disorder characterized by 
bone marrow failure, cancer predisposition, and increased cellular sensitivity 
to DNA-cross-linking agents. The products of seven of the nine identified FA 
genes participate in a protein complex required for monoubiquitination of the 
FANCD2 protein. Direct interaction of the FANCE protein with both fellow FA 
complex component FANCC and the downstream FANCD2 protein has been observed in 
the yeast two-hybrid system. Here, we demonstrate the ability of FANCE to 
mediate the interaction between FANCC and FANCD2 in the yeast three-hybrid 
system and confirm the FANCE-mediated association of FANCC with FANCD2 in human 
cells. A yeast two-hybrid system-based screen was devised to identify randomly 
mutagenized FANCE proteins capable of interaction with FANCC but not with 
FANCD2. Exogenous expression of these mutants in an FA-E cell line and 
subsequent evaluation of FANCD2 monoubiquitination and DNA cross-linker 
sensitivity indicated a critical role for the FANCE/FANCD2 interaction in 
maintaining FA pathway integrity. Three-hybrid experiments also demonstrated the 
ability of FANCE to mediate the interaction between FA core complex components 
FANCC and FANCF, indicating an additional role for FANCE in complex assembly. 
Thus, FANCE is shown to be a key mediator of protein interactions both in the 
architecture of the FA protein complex and in the connection of complex 
components to the putative downstream targets of complex activity.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M507758200
PMID: 16127171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
