---
pmid: '21157432'
title: Dephosphorylation of Carma1 by PP2A negatively regulates T-cell activation.
authors:
- Eitelhuber AC
- Warth S
- Schimmack G
- Düwel M
- Hadian K
- Demski K
- Beisker W
- Shinohara H
- Kurosaki T
- Heissmeyer V
- Krappmann D
journal: EMBO J
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3034008
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.331
---

# Dephosphorylation of Carma1 by PP2A negatively regulates T-cell activation.
**Authors:** Eitelhuber AC, Warth S, Schimmack G, Düwel M, Hadian K, Demski K, Beisker W, Shinohara H, Kurosaki T, Heissmeyer V, Krappmann D
**Journal:** EMBO J (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2010.331](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2010.331)
**PMC:** [PMC3034008](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3034008/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2011 Feb 2;30(3):594-605. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.331. Epub 2010 Dec
14.

Dephosphorylation of Carma1 by PP2A negatively regulates T-cell activation.

Eitelhuber AC(1), Warth S, Schimmack G, Düwel M, Hadian K, Demski K, Beisker W, 
Shinohara H, Kurosaki T, Heissmeyer V, Krappmann D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular Signal Integration, Helmholtz Zentrum München-German 
Research Center for Environmental Health, Institute of Toxicology, Neuherberg, 
Germany.

The Carma1-Bcl10-Malt1 (CBM) complex bridges T-cell receptor (TCR) signalling to 
the canonical IκB kinase (IKK)/NF-κB pathway. NF-κB activation is triggered by 
PKCθ-dependent phosphorylation of Carma1 after TCR/CD28 co-stimulation. 
PKCθ-phosphorylated Carma1 was suggested to function as a molecular scaffold 
that recruits preassembled Bcl10-Malt1 complexes to the membrane. We have 
identified the serine-threonine protein phosphatase PP2A regulatory subunit Aα 
(PPP2R1A) as a novel interaction partner of Carma1. PPP2R1A is associated with 
Carma1 in resting as well as activated T cells in the context of the active CBM 
complex. By siRNA-mediated knockdown and in vitro dephosphorylation, we 
demonstrate that PP2A removes PKCθ-dependent phosphorylation of Ser645 in 
Carma1, and show that maintenance of this phosphorylation is correlated with 
increased T-cell activation. As a result of PP2A inactivation, we find that 
enhanced Carma1 S645 phosphorylation augments CBM complex formation, NF-κB 
activation and IL-2 or IFN-γ production after stimulation of Jurkat T cells or 
murine Th1 cells. Thus, our data define PP2A-mediated dephosphorylation of 
Carma1 as a critical step to limit T-cell activation and effector cytokine 
production.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2010.331
PMCID: PMC3034008
PMID: 21157432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
