---
pmid: '11533444'
title: Phosphorylation-dependent ubiquitination of cyclin E by the SCFFbw7 ubiquitin
  ligase.
authors:
- Koepp DM
- Schaefer LK
- Ye X
- Keyomarsi K
- Chu C
- Harper JW
- Elledge SJ
journal: Science
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.1065203
---

# Phosphorylation-dependent ubiquitination of cyclin E by the SCFFbw7 ubiquitin ligase.
**Authors:** Koepp DM, Schaefer LK, Ye X, Keyomarsi K, Chu C, Harper JW, Elledge SJ
**Journal:** Science (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1065203](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1065203)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2001 Oct 5;294(5540):173-7. doi: 10.1126/science.1065203. Epub 2001
Aug  30.

Phosphorylation-dependent ubiquitination of cyclin E by the SCFFbw7 ubiquitin 
ligase.

Koepp DM(1), Schaefer LK, Ye X, Keyomarsi K, Chu C, Harper JW, Elledge SJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.

Erratum in
    Science. 2024 Apr 19;384(6693):eadp7159. doi: 10.1126/science.adp7159.

Comment in
    Science. 2001 Oct 5;294(5540):66-7. doi: 10.1126/science.1066237.

Cyclin E binds and activates the cyclin-dependent kinase Cdk2 and catalyzes the 
transition from the G1 phase to the S phase of the cell cycle. The amount of 
cyclin E protein present in the cell is tightly controlled by ubiquitin-mediated 
proteolysis. Here we identify the ubiquitin ligase responsible for cyclin E 
ubiquitination as SCFFbw7 and demonstrate that it is functionally conserved in 
yeast, flies, and mammals. Fbw7 associates specifically with phosphorylated 
cyclin E, and SCFFbw7 catalyzes cyclin E ubiquitination in vitro. Depletion of 
Fbw7 leads to accumulation and stabilization of cyclin E in vivo in human and 
Drosophila melanogaster cells. Multiple F-box proteins contribute to cyclin E 
stability in yeast, suggesting an overlap in SCF E3 ligase specificity that 
allows combinatorial control of cyclin E degradation.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1065203
PMID: 11533444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
