---
pmid: '11123798'
title: A MADS domain gene involved in the transition to flowering in Arabidopsis.
authors:
- Borner R
- Kampmann G
- Chandler J
- Gleissner R
- Wisman E
- Apel K
- Melzer S
journal: Plant J
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-313x.2000.00906.x
---

# A MADS domain gene involved in the transition to flowering in Arabidopsis.
**Authors:** Borner R, Kampmann G, Chandler J, Gleissner R, Wisman E, Apel K, Melzer S
**Journal:** Plant J (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1365-313x.2000.00906.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-313x.2000.00906.x)

## Abstract

1. Plant J. 2000 Dec;24(5):591-9. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-313x.2000.00906.x.

A MADS domain gene involved in the transition to flowering in Arabidopsis.

Borner R(1), Kampmann G, Chandler J, Gleissner R, Wisman E, Apel K, Melzer S.

Author information:
(1)Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Institute for Plant Sciences, 
Universitätstrasse 2, CH-8092 Zürich, Switzerland.

Flowering time in many plants is triggered by environmental factors that lead to 
uniform flowering in plant populations, ensuring higher reproductive success. So 
far, several genes have been identified that are involved in flowering time 
control. AGL20 (AGAMOUS LIKE 20) is a MADS domain gene from Arabidopsis that is 
activated in shoot apical meristems during the transition to flowering. By 
transposon tagging we have identified late flowering agl20 mutants, showing that 
AGL20 is involved in flowering time control. In previously described late 
flowering mutants of the long-day and constitutive pathways of floral induction 
the expression of AGL20 is down-regulated, demonstrating that AGL20 acts 
downstream to the mutated genes. Moreover, we can show that AGL20 is also 
regulated by the gibberellin (GA) pathway, indicating that AGL20 integrates 
signals of different pathways of floral induction and might be a central 
component for the induction of flowering. In addition, the constitutive 
expression of AGL20 in Arabidopsis is sufficient for photoperiod independent 
flowering and the over-expression of the orthologous gene from mustard, MADSA, 
in the classical short-day tobacco Maryland Mammoth bypasses the strict 
photoperiodic control of flowering.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-313x.2000.00906.x
PMID: 11123798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
