---
pmid: '18273058'
title: ShcA signalling is essential for tumour progression in mouse models of human
  breast cancer.
authors:
- Ursini-Siegel J
- Hardy WR
- Zuo D
- Lam SH
- Sanguin-Gendreau V
- Cardiff RD
- Pawson T
- Muller WJ
journal: EMBO J
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2274931
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.22
---

# ShcA signalling is essential for tumour progression in mouse models of human breast cancer.
**Authors:** Ursini-Siegel J, Hardy WR, Zuo D, Lam SH, Sanguin-Gendreau V, Cardiff RD, Pawson T, Muller WJ
**Journal:** EMBO J (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2008.22](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2008.22)
**PMC:** [PMC2274931](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2274931/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2008 Mar 19;27(6):910-20. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.22. Epub 2008 Feb
14.

ShcA signalling is essential for tumour progression in mouse models of human 
breast cancer.

Ursini-Siegel J(1), Hardy WR, Zuo D, Lam SH, Sanguin-Gendreau V, Cardiff RD, 
Pawson T, Muller WJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, McGill University, McGill University Health Center, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

To explore the in vivo significance of ShcA during mammary tumorigenesis, we 
used mice expressing several phosphotyrosine-deficient ShcA alleles under the 
control of their endogenous promoter. We show that all three ShcA tyrosine 
phosphorylation sites are involved in the early stages of mammary tumour 
progression, including loss of the myoepithelial cell layer surrounding 
hyperplasias and during progression to carcinoma. We have determined that 
signals emanating from Y313 are important for tumour cell survival, whereas 
Y239/240 transduce signals promoting tumour vascularization. We further 
demonstrate that loss of ShcA expression in mammary epithelial cells abrogates 
tumour development. This study is the first to directly demonstrate that 
signalling downstream from the ShcA adaptor protein is critical for breast 
cancer development.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2008.22
PMCID: PMC2274931
PMID: 18273058 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
