---
pmid: '19383940'
title: Multiple congenital malformations of Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome are recapitulated
  in Fgfrl1 null mice.
authors:
- Catela C
- Bilbao-Cortes D
- Slonimsky E
- Kratsios P
- Rosenthal N
- Te Welscher P
journal: Dis Model Mech
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2675798
doi: 10.1242/dmm.002287
---

# Multiple congenital malformations of Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome are recapitulated in Fgfrl1 null mice.
**Authors:** Catela C, Bilbao-Cortes D, Slonimsky E, Kratsios P, Rosenthal N, Te Welscher P
**Journal:** Dis Model Mech (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dmm.002287](https://doi.org/10.1242/dmm.002287)
**PMC:** [PMC2675798](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2675798/)

## Abstract

1. Dis Model Mech. 2009 May-Jun;2(5-6):283-94. doi: 10.1242/dmm.002287. Epub 2009
 Apr 21.

Multiple congenital malformations of Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome are recapitulated 
in Fgfrl1 null mice.

Catela C(1), Bilbao-Cortes D, Slonimsky E, Kratsios P, Rosenthal N, Te Welscher 
P.

Author information:
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Mouse Biology Unit, Monterotondo, 
Italy.

Comment in
    Dis Model Mech. 2009 Jul-Aug;2(7-8):315-6. doi: 10.1242/dmm.003491.

Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) is caused by deletions in the short arm of 
chromosome 4 (4p) and occurs in about one per 20,000 births. Patients with WHS 
display a set of highly variable characteristics including craniofacial 
dysgenesis, mental retardation, speech problems, congenital heart defects, short 
stature and a variety of skeletal anomalies. Analysis of patients with 4p 
deletions has identified two WHS critical regions (WHSCRs); however, deletions 
targeting mouse WHSCRs do not recapitulate the classical WHS defects, and the 
genes contributing to WHS have not been conclusively established. Recently, the 
human FGFRL1 gene, encoding a putative fibroblast growth factor (FGF) decoy 
receptor, has been implicated in the craniofacial phenotype of a WHS patient. 
Here, we report that targeted deletion of the mouse Fgfrl1 gene recapitulates a 
broad array of WHS phenotypes, including abnormal craniofacial development, 
axial and appendicular skeletal anomalies, and congenital heart defects. Fgfrl1 
null mutants also display a transient foetal anaemia and a fully penetrant 
diaphragm defect, causing prenatal and perinatal lethality. Together, these data 
support a wider role for Fgfrl1 in development, implicate FGFRL1 insufficiency 
in WHS, and provide a novel animal model to dissect the complex aetiology of 
this human disease.

DOI: 10.1242/dmm.002287
PMCID: PMC2675798
PMID: 19383940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

INTRODUCTION

Wolf-Hirschhorn Syndrome (WHS) is a contiguous gene disorder that results in craniofacial defects, microcephaly, mental retardation, congenital heart defects, problems in the development of speech, respiratory diseases, intra-uterine and postnatal growth retardation, and short stature, in combination with multiple skeletal anomalies ( Battaglia et al., 2001 ). WHS is estimated to occur in about one in every 20,000 births ( Maas et al., 2008 ). Correlations between the highly variable phenotypes of patients with WHS and their genotypes show that the disease is generally caused by deletions of the short arm of chromosome 4 (4p) ( Bergemann et al., 2005 ). Approximately 20% of cases carry chromosomal deletions that are restricted to 4p16.3, but larger deletions are more common and can extend as far as 4p14.

The comparison between interstitial and 4p terminal deletions resulted in the identification of two WHS critical regions (WHSCR-1 and -2) that are approximately 2 Mb from the telomeric end of the chromosome, and two genes located at this site have since been referred to as the Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome candidate 1 ( WHSC1 ) and 2 ( WHSC2 ) genes. Haploinsufficiency of WHSC1 is considered to be responsible for the typical craniofacial phenotype (‘Greek helmet face’) that is present in almost all WHS patients, but mouse models for WHS show that deletions targeting the WHSCRs on the mouse chromosome do not recapitulate the classical WHS defects ( Näf et al., 2001 ). Instead, the fibroblast growth factor receptor-like 1 ( FGFRL1 ) gene, located at 4p16.3, has been implicated recently as an important candidate gene contributing to the craniofacial phenotype of a WHS patient carrying a small telomeric deletion in chromosome 4 that included the FGFRL1 locus but left the WHSCRs unaffected ( Engbers et al., 2009 ). A role for FGFRL1 in human craniofacial development is supported further by the characterisation of a FGFRL1 mutation in a patient with craniosynostosis ( Rieckmann et al., 2009 ). Small telomeric deletions of chromosome 4 that exclude the WHSCRs but include FGFRL1 have also been associated with intra-uterine growth retardation and short stature in WHS patients ( Maas et al., 2008 ). As Fgfrl1 is preferentially expressed in skeletal tissues and is prominent in the primordia of the maxillae, the mandibles and the permanent cartilage of the trachea and nose during late stages of mouse development ( Trueb and Taeschler, 2006 ; Trueb et al., 2003 ), these data collectively point towards a potential role for FGFRL1 in craniofacial development and suggest that haploinsufficiency of FGFRL1 in humans with 4p16.3 deletions may contribute to the WHS craniofacial phenotype.

The fibroblast growth factor (FGF) family comprises a complex signalling system involving 22 different ligands in humans and mice that interact with tissue-specific splice variants of four different FGF receptors (FGFRs) to coordinate a wide range of cellular and developmental processes ( Bottcher and Niehrs, 2005 ; Thisse and Thisse, 2005 ). The independent identification of the FGFRL1 protein by several research groups added a potential component to the FGF signalling system ( Kim et al., 2001 ; Sleeman et al., 2001 ; Wiedemann and Trueb, 2000 ; Wiedemann and Trueb, 2001 ). The predicted extracellular domain of FGFRL1 is highly related to the FGFRs, which are cell surface receptor tyrosine kinases with three extracellular immunoglobulin-like domains and a heparin-binding sequence, but FGFRL1 lacks the intracellular protein tyrosine kinase domain that is essential for FGF signal transduction. Although FGFRL1 might not directly activate an intracellular signalling cascade, in vitro assays show that FGFRL1 interacts with FGF ligands and heparin, and thus may function as a decoy receptor in the FGF signalling pathway ( Sleeman et al., 2001 ; Trueb et al., 2003 ). A single Fgfrl1 gene was found in mammalian ( Sleeman et al., 2001 ), bird ( Trueb et al., 2003 ) and amphibian ( Hayashi et al., 2004 ) species, as well as in the cephalochordate Brachiostoma floridae ( Beyeler and Trueb, 2006 ), suggesting that the Fgfrl1 gene predates the two genome duplications that occurred early in vertebrate evolution. In fish species such as zebrafish and Fugu rubripes , two copies of the Fgfrl1 gene can be found ( Trueb et al., 2005 ), which is in line with the additional genome duplication during the evolution of ray-finned fish. Functional studies in zebrafish provided in vivo evidence for an essential role of Fgfrl1 in vertebrate craniofacial skeletal development ( Hall et al., 2006 ). Depletion of zebrafish fgfrl1a and fgfrl1b results in a craniofacial phenotype, including malformations of the lower jaw and developmental inhibition of the cartilage formed by the branchial arches, and the authors propose that fgfrl1a is required for FGF signal transduction to promote gill cartilage formation. Fgfrl1 -deficient mice, generated by Baertschi et al. ( Baertschi et al., 2007 ), unexpectedly did not reveal any defects in skeletal development. Instead, these Fgfrl1 -deficient mice display a prominent diaphragm defect and fail to inflate their lungs after birth, causing perinatal lethality.

To facilitate the analysis of Fgfrl1 function in more detail, we generated an Fgfrl1 mutant allele, targeting different exons from those described by Baertschi et al. ( Baertschi et al., 2007 ). The Fgfrl1 null mice display a broad array of phenotypes, including cardiac abnormalities and skeletal malformations. Defects in cardiac development and foetal anaemia probably caused the prenatal lethality that was observed in a subpopulation of Fgfrl1 −/− mutants. The diaphragm phenotype described by Baertschi et al. ( Baertschi et al., 2007 ) was fully penetrant in the Fgfrl1 −/− mice that develop until term and, together with the defects in cardiac and skeletal development, caused perinatal lethality. These congenital malformations underscore the crucial function of Fgfrl1 in embryonic development. The significant overlap of the phenotype of Fgfrl1 null mice with clinical WHS presentations confirms a central role for FGFRL1 in the human syndrome and implicates a gene outside of the WHSCRs in the WHS phenotype. Fgfrl1 null mice thus provide a model to study FGFRL1 activity in FGF signalling and to dissect the complex aetiology of WHS.

DISCUSSION

In this study we present an in-depth characterisation of Fgfrl1 −/− mice that recapitulate multiple aspects of human WHS. These data support a wider role for Fgfrl1 in development and implicate FGFRL1 insufficiency in the human syndrome. Here, the mouse model does not perfectly recapitulate the human syndrome: in human patients, FGFRL1 haploinsufficiency within the context of a large deletion has been implicated in the craniofacial phenotype of WHS ( Engbers et al., 2009 ), whereas, in the mouse mutants described in the present and previous studies ( Baertschi et al., 2007 ), heterozygous Fgfrl1 null mutants have no discernible phenotype. Several explanations for this discrepancy can be forwarded. First, developmental processes often involve threshold effects that can be influenced by the genetic background: the literature is rife with examples of null mutations in mice that cause lethal defects on one inbred background, but which are relatively harmless on another ( LeCouter et al., 1998 ; Becker et al., 2003 ; Teng et al., 2007 ). In this context, the lack of a phenotype in Fgfrl1 +/− mice may recapitulate those human genetic backgrounds where the deleterious effects of heterozygous Fgfrl1 mutations might be masked and go undetected.

Second, in a comparative analysis of WHSCRs, aligning mammalian genes that are orthologous to those at the human 4p16.3 locus ( Fig. 8 ) reveals that, in rodents, this region has been broken up, separating Fgfrl1 and its neighbouring genes from the WHSCRs over rather distant locations (~75 Mb) on the same chromosome, whereas primates and ungulates maintain a high degree of conservation in chromosomal organisation. A mammalian phylogeny based on molecular data has shown that primates and rodents are more closely linked to each other than to ungulates, which probably represent an ancestral outgroup to the primate-rodent clade ( Murphy et al., 2001 ). The separation of rodent Fgfrl1 from the WHSCRs may, therefore, be the result of a more recent event, perhaps involving an inversion. This complicates the interpretation of the large-scale mouse deletions, as described by Näf et al. ( Näf et al., 2001 ), since the emerging model of human WHS predicts that many mutations in this region are implicated in the syndrome: deletion of any of at least three non-overlapping regions in 4p16.3 can be pathogenic for the craniofacial features of WHS ( South et al., 2008 ). Thus, it is likely that in humans, heterozygous mutations in both FGFRL1 and a homologue of an undefined gene that is eliminated in WHS mouse models with large-scale deletions that do not target Fgfrl1 ( Näf et al., 2001 ), collectively contribute to the craniofacial features of WHS.

Finally, differential regulation of human FGFRL1 and mouse Fgfrl1 gene expression may account for the mouse-human differences. In this scenario, the human FGFRL1 gene may be controlled by proximal regulatory elements that are within the WHSCRs or further towards the centromere; these elements lie distal to the rearranged mouse Fgfrl1 gene locus, changing the regulatory landscape, thereby exacerbating the effects of haploinsufficiency.

These considerations notwithstanding, Fgfrl1 −/− mice recapitulate a remarkable number of malformations associated with WHS. Typical WHS skeletal phenotypes ( Battaglia et al., 2001 ) in mutants that develop to term include a short stature, associated shortening of the pelvic girdle and appendicular skeleton, craniofacial dysgenesis, malformed vertebrae, delayed ossification of cervical vertebrae, abnormal sternal ossification and an associated reduction of the thoracic diameter. Laryngeal cartilage elements in Fgfrl1 −/− mice are significantly reduced in size and provide an explanation for the problems in swallowing and speech development in WHS patients. The fully penetrant diaphragm phenotype of Fgfrl1 −/− mutants might underlie the diaphragmatic hernia observed in some WHS patients ( van Dooren et al., 2004 ) and, together with the abnormal laryngeal cartilage elements, contribute to WHS respiratory diseases. Fgfrl1 −/− mice also display ventricular septation defects and abnormal thickening of both atrioventricular and semilunar valves, in line with common congenital heart malformations, such as pulmonary stenosis and aortic insufficiency, in WHS patients ( Battaglia et al., 2001 ). Together with these cardiac defects, the surviving Fgfrl1 −/− neonates displayed a combination of congenital malformations including a small rib cage and a fully penetrant diaphragm phenotype that, cumulatively, cause respiratory problems which led to perinatal lethality. By contrast, the Fgfrl1 -deficient mice generated previously by Baertschi et al. ( Baertschi et al., 2007 ) display the same diaphragm phenotype observed here, but these mice did not reveal any further defects in skeletal or cardiac development. The discrepancy is probably the result of differences in mutant gene construction: in the study by Baertschi et al., the first two exons were removed, potentially preserving partial function of the remaining encoded protein.

The skeletal phenotype of Fgfrl1 −/− mice at E18.5 is similar to that of the achondroplasia-like dwarfism in transgenic mice that express a constitutively active mutant of MEK1 in chondrocytes, and phosphorylation of MEK1 in the growth plate chondrocytes is caused, at least in part, by signals originating from FGFR3 ( Murakami et al., 2004 ). Interestingly, the FGFR3 locus, which is proximal to WHSC1 on the short arm of chromosome 4, has also been cited as a candidate gene contributing to the WHS phenotype ( Bergemann et al., 2005 ). Different missense mutations of human FGFR3 underlie several skeletal dysplasias, including the most common form of human skeletal dysplasia, achondroplasia, which causes dwarfism ( Rousseau et al., 1994 ; Shiang et al., 1994 ). In mice , Fgfr3 is expressed in the proliferating chondrocytes of the growth plate, and gain-of-function mutations, identical to those found in humans, also cause achondroplasia, mimicking the human dwarf phenotype ( Naski et al., 1998 ). By contrast, Fgfrl1 is specifically expressed in the stem-like cells in the resting zone ( Lazarus et al., 2007 ), which provide the proliferating chondrocytes to the growth plate. The long bones in Fgfrl1−/− mice are significantly shorter than in wild-type littermates, whereas Fgfr3 -deficient mice show bone overgrowth ( Colvin et al., 1996 ). Together, Fgfrl1 and Fgfr3 might antagonize each other to control chondrocyte proliferation and it will be interesting to determine whether Fgfrl1 and Fgfr3 genetically interact to coordinate bone growth.

Our analysis of the early stages of development revealed that Fgfrl1 is expressed in the brain, the cranial placodes, the somites and the pharyngeal arches, suggesting that the Fgfrl1 expression pattern is conserved between mice, Xenopus ( Hayashi et al., 2004 ) and zebrafish ( Hall et al., 2006 ). Zebrafish fgfrl1a is also expressed in the arch 1- and 2-associated neural crest, and its depletion results in a craniofacial phenotype, including malformations of the lower jaw and developmental inhibition of the cartilage that is formed by the branchial arches that give rise to the gills ( Hall et al., 2006 ). In mice, the neural crest cells of the first pharyngeal arch form the jawbones and the bones of the face, whereas more posterior pharyngeal arches participate in the development of the hyoid bone and the permanent laryngeal cartilage elements ( Noden and Trainor, 2005 ). Fgfrl1 −/− mice show a phenotype in all these tissues, implicating Fgfrl1 in the WHS craniofacial phenotype and a neural crest component in the aetiology of WHS. Similar to fgfrl1a in zebrafish ( Hall et al., 2006 ), mouse Fgfrl1 might control differentiation of post-migratory neural crest cells to complete normal chondrogenesis.

Congenital heart defects at E14.5 probably contribute to prenatal lethality among Fgfrl1 −/− mice. Expression of Fgfrl1 in the endocardial cushions of the developing outflow tract might implicate neural crest-derived tissue in these defects. A role for FGF signalling in outflow tract development is illustrated by the persistent truncus arteriosus observed in Fgf8 mutants ( Frank et al., 2002 ). In addition, congenital heart diseases such as DiGeorge syndrome display persistent truncus arteriosus owing to a 22q11 deletion that results in the loss of TBX1 , which in mice genetically interacts with Fgf8 to coordinate cardiac neural crest cells for outflow tract remodelling ( Stoller and Epstein, 2005 ). Our analysis indicates that Fgfrl1 is not involved in this signalling network, since persistent truncus arteriosus was not present in Fgfrl1 −/− mice, suggesting that the cardiac neural crest cells that populate the endocardial cushions of the outflow tract were unaffected. Cardiac neural crest cells and endocardial cells both populate the outflow tract cushions, but cardiac valves and part of the ventricular septum are derived from the endocardial cell lineage without a contribution from neural crest cells ( de Lange et al., 2004 ). The specific expression of Fgfrl1 in the outflow tract and atrioventricular endocardial cushions, in combination with the consistent valve phenotype and ventricular septation defect in Fgfrl1 −/− mice, support a role for Fgfrl1 in coordinating cells that are derived from the endocardial lineage to form the valve complexes and to contribute to the ventricular septum.

Further investigation into the potential causes of prenatal lethality led us to focus on the haematopoietic system. At E16.5, Fgfrl1 −/− mice display anaemia, with the 37% decrease in haemoglobin evidently limiting the oxygen supply to embryonic tissues. The cause for this defect is likely to be the delayed maturation of erythroid progenitors at E14.5. This was a transient problem in Fgfrl1 −/− mice, because by E16.5 there was no abnormal pattern in liver cell distribution and, at E18.5, normal levels of red blood cells, haematocrit and haemoglobin were observed in the peripheral blood. Nevertheless, persistent haematological disorders have been observed in patients with WHS ( Sharathkumar et al., 2003 ) and our results further support the importance of evaluating children with WHS for haematopoietic dysfunction. Together with cardiac defects, foetal anaemia was present in all Fgfrl1 −/− mice at E14.5, with no distinction between the potential severely and mildly affected mutants. The varying severity of the combined congenital heart defects and transient foetal anaemia in Fgfrl1 −/− mice probably represents a stochastic process that underlies the observed prenatal lethality in a portion of mutant embryos.

FGF signalling plays a crucial role in a wide range of developmental processes, including cartilage formation in the vertebrate head ( Walshe and Mason, 2003 ), suture closure ( Connerney et al., 2008 ), bone growth ( Kronenberg, 2003 ) and cardiac valve formation ( Sugi et al., 2003 ). Although the molecular function of FGFLR1 in these processes remains unknown, Trueb et al. ( Trueb et al., 2003 ) have suggested that FGFRL1 might act as a decoy receptor to coordinate the distribution of free FGF ligand. This possibility is supported by the function of the FGFR-related gene nou-darake in planarian worms, which is similar to Fgfrl1 and inhibits FGF signalling in Xenopus eggs ( Cebria et al., 2002 ). Fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) studies demonstrate that FGFRL1 proteins form constitutive homodimers at the cell surface, which promote cell adhesion properties in a similar way to the nectins ( Rieckmann et al., 2008 ). This is consistent with the phenotypic alterations observed in Fgfrl1 −/− mice, where the absence of Fgfrl1 may adversely affect epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition of endocardial cells in the outflow tract cushions or the migration of neural crest cells in the pharyngeal arches. Our study thus provides an animal model to investigate mechanistic aspects of mammalian FGFRL1 function that could shed light on the complex aetiology of human WHS disease.
