---
pmid: '27018634'
title: Quantitative Mass Spectrometry Identifies Novel Host Binding Partners for Pathogenic
  Escherichia coli Type III Secretion System Effectors.
authors:
- Law RJ
- Law HT
- Scurll JM
- Scholz R
- Santos AS
- Shames SR
- Deng W
- Croxen MA
- Li Y
- de Hoog CL
- van der Heijden J
- Foster LJ
- Guttman JA
- Finlay BB
journal: J Proteome Res
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.6b00074
---

# Quantitative Mass Spectrometry Identifies Novel Host Binding Partners for Pathogenic Escherichia coli Type III Secretion System Effectors.
**Authors:** Law RJ, Law HT, Scurll JM, Scholz R, Santos AS, Shames SR, Deng W, Croxen MA, Li Y, de Hoog CL, van der Heijden J, Foster LJ, Guttman JA, Finlay BB
**Journal:** J Proteome Res (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1021/acs.jproteome.6b00074](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jproteome.6b00074)

## Abstract

1. J Proteome Res. 2016 May 6;15(5):1613-22. doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.6b00074. 
Epub 2016 Mar 28.

Quantitative Mass Spectrometry Identifies Novel Host Binding Partners for 
Pathogenic Escherichia coli Type III Secretion System Effectors.

Law RJ, Law HT(1), Scurll JM, Scholz R, Santos AS, Shames SR, Deng W, Croxen MA, 
Li Y, de Hoog CL, van der Heijden J, Foster LJ, Guttman JA(1), Finlay BB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Simon Fraser University , Burnaby, British 
Columbia, Canada V5A 1S6.

Enteropathogenic and enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli cause enteric diseases 
resulting in significant morbidity and mortality worldwide. These pathogens 
remain extracellular and translocate a set of type III secreted effector 
proteins into host cells to promote bacterial virulence. Effectors manipulate 
host cell pathways to facilitate infection by interacting with a variety of host 
targets, yet the binding partners and mechanism of action of many effectors 
remain elusive. We performed a mass spectrometry screen to identify host targets 
for a library of effectors. We found five known effector targets and discovered 
four novel interactions. Interestingly, we identified multiple effectors that 
interacted with the microtubule associated protein, ensconsin. Using 
co-immunoprecipitations, we confirmed that NleB1 and EspL interacted with 
ensconsin in a region that corresponded to its microtubule binding domain. 
Ensconsin is an essential cofactor of kinesin-1 that is required for 
intracellular trafficking, and we demonstrated that intracellular trafficking 
was severely disrupted during wild type EPEC infections but not during 
infections with ΔnleB1 or ΔespL mutants. Our findings demonstrate the efficacy 
of quantitative proteomics for identifying effector-host protein interactions 
and suggest that vesicular trafficking is a crucial cellular process that may be 
targeted by NleB1 and EspL through their interaction with ensconsin.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.6b00074
PMID: 27018634 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
