---
pmid: '12810672'
title: Testican 2 abrogates inhibition of membrane-type matrix metalloproteinases
  by other testican family proteins.
authors:
- Nakada M
- Miyamori H
- Yamashita J
- Sato H
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
---

# Testican 2 abrogates inhibition of membrane-type matrix metalloproteinases by other testican family proteins.
**Authors:** Nakada M, Miyamori H, Yamashita J, Sato H
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2003)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Res. 2003 Jun 15;63(12):3364-9.

Testican 2 abrogates inhibition of membrane-type matrix metalloproteinases by 
other testican family proteins.

Nakada M(1), Miyamori H, Yamashita J, Sato H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Oncology, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa 
920-0934, Japan.

Testican family proteins are putative extracellular heparan/chondroitin sulfate 
proteoglycans of unknown function. We identified recently N-Tes, which is a 
product of testican 3 splicing variant gene, as an inhibitor of membrane-type 
matrix metalloproteinases (MT-MMPs). The inhibitory function is common among 
testican family members except for testican 2, which was shown to uniquely 
abolish inhibition of MT1-MMP- or MT3-MMP-mediated pro-MMP-2 activation by other 
testican family members. Testican 2 inactivates N-Tes by binding to the 
COOH-terminal extracellular calcium-binding domain of N-Tes through its 
NH(2)-terminal unique domain as demonstrated by coimmunoprecipitation analysis, 
and, thus, testican 2 was unable to inactivate a N-Tes deletion mutant lacking 
the extracellular calcium-binding domain (N-Tes-Delta 122). Migration of U251 
cells on collagen, which was dependent on MT1-MMP activity under serum-free 
condition, was inhibited by N-Tes or N-Tes-Delta 122 deposited on collagen. 
Testican 2 was not incorporated into collagen by itself, and was deposited only 
in the presence of N-Tes, suggesting that testican 2 binds to N-Tes deposited on 
collagen. Binding of testican 2 to N-Tes deposited on collagen allowed migration 
of cells expressing MT1-MMP. Unlike wild-type N-Tes, N-Tes-Delta 122 did not 
bind to testican 2, and, thus, expression of testican 2 did not recover cell 
migration blocked by N-Tes-Delta 122. In situ hybridization showed that neurons 
are a major source of all of the testican family members in the normal brain. 
The quantitative reverse transcription-PCR analysis demonstrated that all of the 
testican family members are expressed prominently in normal brain, and their 
expression levels decrease as tumor grade increases. The expression level of 
testican 2 was the highest among testican family members regardless of 
histological grade of astrocytic tumors. These results suggest that abundant 
distribution of testican 2 may contribute to glioma invasion by inactivating 
other testican family members including N-Tes, which all inhibit MT-MMPs. We 
propose that N-Tes-Delta 122, which is resistant to testican 2, may have 
therapeutic potential as a barrier against glioma invasion.

PMID: 12810672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
