---
pmid: '23394829'
title: Identification of SIN pathway targets reveals mechanisms of crosstalk between
  NDR kinase pathways.
authors:
- Gupta S
- Mana-Capelli S
- McLean JR
- Chen CT
- Ray S
- Gould KL
- McCollum D
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3580008
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2013.01.014
---

# Identification of SIN pathway targets reveals mechanisms of crosstalk between NDR kinase pathways.
**Authors:** Gupta S, Mana-Capelli S, McLean JR, Chen CT, Ray S, Gould KL, McCollum D
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cub.2013.01.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2013.01.014)
**PMC:** [PMC3580008](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3580008/)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2013 Feb 18;23(4):333-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2013.01.014. Epub 2013 
Feb 7.

Identification of SIN pathway targets reveals mechanisms of crosstalk between 
NDR kinase pathways.

Gupta S(1), Mana-Capelli S, McLean JR, Chen CT, Ray S, Gould KL, McCollum D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Physiological Systems and Program in Cell 
Dynamics, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

The septum initiation network (SIN) regulates multiple functions during late 
mitosis to ensure successful completion of cytokinesis in Schizosaccharomyces 
pombe. One mechanism by which the SIN promotes cytokinesis is by inhibiting a 
competing polarity pathway called the MOR, which is required for initiation of 
polarized growth following completion of cytokinesis. Mutual antagonism between 
the two NDR kinase pathways, SIN and MOR, is required to coordinate cytoskeletal 
rearrangements during the mitosis-interphase transition. To determine how the 
SIN regulates the MOR pathway, we developed a proteomics approach that allowed 
us to identify multiple substrates of the SIN effector kinase Sid2, including 
the MOR pathway components Nak1 kinase and an associated protein, Sog2. We show 
that Sid2 phosphorylation of Nak1 causes removal of Nak1 from the spindle pole 
bodies, which may both relieve Nak1 inhibition of the SIN and block MOR 
signaling by preventing interaction of Nak1 with the scaffold protein Mor2. 
Because the SIN and MOR are conserved in mammalian cells (Hippo and Ndr1/2 
pathways, respectively), this work may provide important insight into how the 
activities of these essential pathways are coordinated.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2013.01.014
PMCID: PMC3580008
PMID: 23394829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
