---
pmid: '11287957'
title: C. elegans odour discrimination requires asymmetric diversity in olfactory
  neurons.
authors:
- Wes PD
- Bargmann CI
journal: Nature
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/35070581
---

# C. elegans odour discrimination requires asymmetric diversity in olfactory neurons.
**Authors:** Wes PD, Bargmann CI
**Journal:** Nature (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1038/35070581](https://doi.org/10.1038/35070581)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2001 Apr 5;410(6829):698-701. doi: 10.1038/35070581.

C. elegans odour discrimination requires asymmetric diversity in olfactory 
neurons.

Wes PD(1), Bargmann CI.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughs Medical Institute, Programs in Developmental Biology, 
Neuroscience, and Genetics, Department of Anatomy, The University of California, 
San Francisco, 94143-0452, USA.

Caenorhabditis elegans senses at least five attractive odours with a single pair 
of olfactory neurons, AWC, but can distinguish among these odours in behavioural 
assays. The two AWC neurons are structurally and functionally similar, but the 
G-protein-coupled receptor STR-2 is randomly expressed in either the left or the 
right AWC neuron, never in both. Here we describe the isolation of a mutant, 
ky542, with specific defects in odour discrimination and odour chemotaxis. ky542 
is an allele of nsy-1, a neuronal symmetry, or Nsy, mutant in which STR-2 is 
expressed in both AWC neurons. Other Nsy mutants exhibit discrimination and 
olfactory defects like those of nsy-1 mutants. Laser ablation of the AWC neuron 
that does not express STR-2 (AWCOFF) recapitulates the behavioural phenotype of 
Nsy mutants, whereas laser ablation of the STR-2-expressing AWC neuron (AWCON) 
causes different chemotaxis defects. We propose that odour discrimination can be 
achieved by segregating the detection of different odours into distinct 
olfactory neurons or into unique combinations of olfactory neurons.

DOI: 10.1038/35070581
PMID: 11287957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
