---
pmid: '38053494'
title: FLZ13 interacts with FLC and ABI5 to negatively regulate flowering time in
  Arabidopsis.
authors:
- Li X
- Lai M
- Li K
- Yang L
- Liao J
- Gao Y
- Wang Y
- Gao C
- Shen W
- Luo M
- Yang C
journal: New Phytol
year: '2024'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/nph.19445
---

# FLZ13 interacts with FLC and ABI5 to negatively regulate flowering time in Arabidopsis.
**Authors:** Li X, Lai M, Li K, Yang L, Liao J, Gao Y, Wang Y, Gao C, Shen W, Luo M, Yang C
**Journal:** New Phytol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/nph.19445](https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.19445)

## Abstract

1. New Phytol. 2024 Feb;241(3):1334-1347. doi: 10.1111/nph.19445. Epub 2023 Dec
6.

FLZ13 interacts with FLC and ABI5 to negatively regulate flowering time in 
Arabidopsis.

Li X(#)(1), Lai M(#)(1), Li K(1), Yang L(1), Liao J(1), Gao Y(2)(3), Wang 
Y(2)(3), Gao C(1), Shen W(1), Luo M(2)(3), Yang C(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Biotechnology for Plant Development, 
School of Life Sciences, South China Normal University, Guangzhou, 510631, 
China.
(2)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Applied Botany & Key Laboratory of 
South China Agricultural Plant Molecular Analysis and Genetic Improvement, South 
China Botanical Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, 510650, China.
(3)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
(#)Contributed equally

The transition from vegetative to reproductive growth, known as flowering, is a 
critical developmental process in flowering plants to ensure reproductive 
success. This process is strictly controlled by various internal and external 
cues; however, the underlying molecular regulatory mechanisms need to be further 
characterized. Here, we report a plant-specific protein, FCS-LIKE ZINC FINGER 
PROTEIN 13 (FLZ13), which functions as a hitherto unknown negative modulator of 
flowering time in Arabidopsis thaliana. Biochemical analysis showed that FLZ13 
directly interacts with FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC), a major flowering repressor, 
and that FLZ13 largely depends on FLC to repress the transcription of two core 
flowering integrators: FLOWERING LOCUS T and SUPPRESSOR OF OVEREXPRESSION OF 
CONSTANS 1. In addition, FLZ13 works together with ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE 5 
to activate FLC expression to delay flowering. Taken together, our findings 
suggest that FLZ13 is an important component of the gene regulatory network for 
flowering time control in plants.

© 2023 The Authors. New Phytologist © 2023 New Phytologist Foundation.

DOI: 10.1111/nph.19445
PMID: 38053494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
