---
pmid: '20937905'
title: ELOVL1 production of C24 acyl-CoAs is linked to C24 sphingolipid synthesis.
authors:
- Ohno Y
- Suto S
- Yamanaka M
- Mizutani Y
- Mitsutake S
- Igarashi Y
- Sassa T
- Kihara A
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2973002
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1005572107
---

# ELOVL1 production of C24 acyl-CoAs is linked to C24 sphingolipid synthesis.
**Authors:** Ohno Y, Suto S, Yamanaka M, Mizutani Y, Mitsutake S, Igarashi Y, Sassa T, Kihara A
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1005572107](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1005572107)
**PMC:** [PMC2973002](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2973002/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Oct 26;107(43):18439-44. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1005572107. Epub 2010 Oct 11.

ELOVL1 production of C24 acyl-CoAs is linked to C24 sphingolipid synthesis.

Ohno Y(1), Suto S, Yamanaka M, Mizutani Y, Mitsutake S, Igarashi Y, Sassa T, 
Kihara A.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido 
University, Kita 12-jo, Nishi 6-choume, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.

Very long-chain fatty acids (VLCFAs) exert a variety of cellular functions and 
are associated with numerous diseases. However, the precise pathway behind their 
elongation has remained elusive. Moreover, few regulatory mechanisms for VLCFAs 
synthesis have been identified. Elongases catalyze the first of four steps in 
the VLCFA elongation cycle; mammals have seven elongases (ELOVL1-7). In the 
present study, we determined the precise substrate specificities of all the 
ELOVLs by in vitro analyses. Particularly notable was the high activity 
exhibited by ELOVL1 toward saturated and monounsaturated C20- and C22-CoAs, and 
that it was essential for the production of C24 sphingolipids, which are unique 
in their capacity to interdigitate within the membrane as a result of their long 
chain length. We further established that ELOVL1 activity is regulated with the 
ceramide synthase CERS2, an enzyme essential for C24 sphingolipid synthesis. 
This regulation may ensure that the production of C24-CoA by elongation is 
coordinated with its utilization. Finally, knockdown of ELOVL1 caused a 
reduction in the activity of the Src kinase LYN, confirming that 
C24-sphingolipids are particularly important in membrane microdomain function.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1005572107
PMCID: PMC2973002
PMID: 20937905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
