---
pmid: '18667727'
title: Regulation of CONSTANS and FLOWERING LOCUS T expression in response to changing
  light quality.
authors:
- Kim SY
- Yu X
- Michaels SD
journal: Plant Physiol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2528114
doi: 10.1104/pp.108.122606
---

# Regulation of CONSTANS and FLOWERING LOCUS T expression in response to changing light quality.
**Authors:** Kim SY, Yu X, Michaels SD
**Journal:** Plant Physiol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1104/pp.108.122606](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.108.122606)
**PMC:** [PMC2528114](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2528114/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Physiol. 2008 Sep;148(1):269-79. doi: 10.1104/pp.108.122606. Epub 2008
Jul  30.

Regulation of CONSTANS and FLOWERING LOCUS T expression in response to changing 
light quality.

Kim SY(1), Yu X, Michaels SD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana 47405, USA.

In addition to pathways that regulate flowering in response to environmental 
signals such as photoperiod or cold temperatures (vernalization), flowering time 
is also regulated by light quality. In many species, far-red (FR) light is known 
to accelerate flowering. This is environmentally significant because leaves 
absorb more red light than FR light; thus, plants growing under a canopy 
experience light that is enriched in FR light. In this article, we have explored 
the promotion of flowering by FR-enriched light (FREL) in Arabidopsis 
(Arabidopsis thaliana). Previous work has shown that the floral promoter 
CONSTANS (CO) plays a critical role in day-length perception and exhibits 
complex regulation; CO mRNA is regulated by the circadian clock and CO protein 
is stabilized by light and degraded in darkness. We find that plants grown under 
FREL contain higher levels of CO mRNA in the early part of the day than plants 
under white light. Furthermore, transgenic plants expressing CO under the 
control of a constitutive promoter accumulate higher levels of CO protein under 
FREL, indicating that FREL can increase CO protein levels independently of 
transcription. Consistent with the model that FREL promotes flowering through 
CO, mutants for co or gigantea, which are required for CO transcript 
accumulation, are relatively insensitive to FREL. Because the red:FR ratios used 
in these experiments are in the range of what plants would experience under a 
canopy, these results indicate that the regulation of CO by light quality likely 
plays a key role in the regulation of flowering time in natural environments.

DOI: 10.1104/pp.108.122606
PMCID: PMC2528114
PMID: 18667727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
