---
pmid: '2556444'
title: An arginine to glutamine mutation in residue 109 of human ornithine transcarbamylase
  completely abolishes enzymatic activity in Cos1 cells.
authors:
- Lee JT
- Nussbaum RL
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '1989'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC304053
doi: 10.1172/JCI114360
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# An arginine to glutamine mutation in residue 109 of human ornithine transcarbamylase completely abolishes enzymatic activity in Cos1 cells.
**Authors:** Lee JT, Nussbaum RL
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI114360](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI114360)
**PMC:** [PMC304053](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC304053/)

## Abstract

1. J Clin Invest. 1989 Dec;84(6):1762-6. doi: 10.1172/JCI114360.

An arginine to glutamine mutation in residue 109 of human ornithine 
transcarbamylase completely abolishes enzymatic activity in Cos1 cells.

Lee JT(1), Nussbaum RL.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104.

Ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) is an important enzyme in the detoxification of 
ammonia to urea, and its deficiency is the most common inborn error of 
ureagenesis in humans. Among 24 cases of OTC deficiency previously examined, 
three unrelated individuals all showed loss of a Taq I site in the OTC gene 
corresponding to codon 109, suggesting that this Taq I site may be prone to 
mutation. Two of these patients demonstrated the same C----T transition (in 
antisense strand) converting Arg109 to Gln. Although these studies implied a 
strong association between the missense mutation and OTC-deficient phenotype, a 
causal relationship could not be firmly established. We have investigated this 
relationship by reconstructing the mutation in vitro. A full-length human OTC 
cDNA was cloned into an SV40-based expression vector and has been reproducibly 
expressed at high levels in the cell line Cos1. By site-directed mutagenesis of 
this wild type sequence, we constructed a missense mutation which contains the 
C----T transition. Electroporation and transient assay in Cos1 indicated that 
the specific activity of mutant OTC was 100-fold lower than that of wild type. 
This result confirms that the Taq I alteration leading to the Gln missense is 
responsible for the OTC deficiency affecting the above patients.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI114360
PMCID: PMC304053
PMID: 2556444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
