---
pmid: '33008889'
title: 'pH-dependent pyridoxine transport by SLC19A2 and SLC19A3: Implications for
  absorption in acidic microclimates.'
authors:
- Yamashiro T
- Yasujima T
- Said HM
- Yuasa H
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC7863892
doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.013610
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# pH-dependent pyridoxine transport by SLC19A2 and SLC19A3: Implications for absorption in acidic microclimates.
**Authors:** Yamashiro T, Yasujima T, Said HM, Yuasa H
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.RA120.013610](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA120.013610)
**PMC:** [PMC7863892](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7863892/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2020 Dec 11;295(50):16998-17008. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.013610. 
Epub 2020 Oct 2.

pH-dependent pyridoxine transport by SLC19A2 and SLC19A3: Implications for 
absorption in acidic microclimates.

Yamashiro T(1), Yasujima T(1), Said HM(2), Yuasa H(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biopharmaceutics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Nagoya City University, Nagoya, Japan.
(2)Departments of Medicine and Physiology/Biophysics, University of California, 
Irvine, California, USA; Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Long 
Beach, California, USA.
(3)Department of Biopharmaceutics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Nagoya City University, Nagoya, Japan. Electronic address: 
yuasa@phar.nagoya-cu.ac.jp.

SLC19A2 and SLC19A3, also known as thiamine transporters (THTR) 1 and 2, 
respectively, transport the positively charged thiamine (vitamin B1) into cells 
to enable its efficient utilization. SLC19A2 and SLC19A3 are also known to 
transport structurally unrelated cationic drugs, such as metformin, but whether 
this charge selectivity extends to other molecules, such as pyridoxine (vitamin 
B6), is unknown. We tested this possibility using Madin-Darby canine kidney II 
(MDCKII) cells and human embryonic kidney 293 (HEK293) cells for transfection 
experiments, and also using Caco-2 cells as human intestinal epithelial model 
cells. The stable expression of SLC19A2 and SLC19A3 in MDCKII cells (as well as 
their transient expression in HEK293 cells) led to a significant induction in 
pyridoxine uptake at pH 5.5 compared with control cells. The induced uptake was 
pH-dependent, favoring acidic conditions over neutral to basic conditions, and 
protonophore-sensitive. It was saturable as a function of pyridoxine 
concentration, with an apparent Km of 37.8 and 18.5 μm, for SLC19A2 and SLC19A3, 
respectively, and inhibited by the pyridoxine analogs pyridoxal and pyridoxamine 
as well as thiamine. We also found that silencing the endogenous SLC19A3, but 
not SLC19A2, of Caco-2 cells with gene-specific siRNAs lead to a significant 
reduction in carrier-mediated pyridoxine uptake. These results show that SLC19A2 
and SLC19A3 are capable of recognizing/transporting pyridoxine, favoring acidic 
conditions for operation, and suggest a possible role for these transporters in 
pyridoxine transport mainly in tissues with an acidic environment like the small 
intestine, which has an acidic surface microclimate.

© 2020 Yamashiro et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.013610
PMCID: PMC7863892
PMID: 33008889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest—The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.
