---
pmid: '18420585'
title: RACK1 and CIS mediate the degradation of BimEL in cancer cells.
authors:
- Zhang W
- Cheng GZ
- Gong J
- Hermanto U
- Zong CS
- Chan J
- Cheng JQ
- Wang LH
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2423247
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M802360200
---

# RACK1 and CIS mediate the degradation of BimEL in cancer cells.
**Authors:** Zhang W, Cheng GZ, Gong J, Hermanto U, Zong CS, Chan J, Cheng JQ, Wang LH
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M802360200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M802360200)
**PMC:** [PMC2423247](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2423247/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jun 13;283(24):16416-26. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M802360200. Epub 
2008 Apr 17.

RACK1 and CIS mediate the degradation of BimEL in cancer cells.

Zhang W(1), Cheng GZ, Gong J, Hermanto U, Zong CS, Chan J, Cheng JQ, Wang LH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New 
York 10029, USA.

RACK1 is a 7-WD motif-containing protein with numerous downstream effectors 
regulating various cellular functions. Using a yeast two-hybrid screen, we 
identified dynein light chain 1 as a novel interacting partner of RACK1. 
Additionally, we demonstrated that RACK1 formed a complex with DLC1 and Bim, 
specifically BimEL, in the presence of apoptotic agents. Upon paclitaxel 
treatment, RACK1, DLC1, and CIS mediated the degradation of BimEL through the 
ElonginB/C-Cullin2-CIS ubiquitin-protein isopeptide ligase complex. We further 
showed that RACK1 conferred paclitaxel resistance to breast cancer cells in 
vitro and in vivo. Finally, we observed an inverse correlation between CIS and 
BimEL levels in both ovarian and breast cancer cell lines and specimens. Our 
study suggests a role of RACK1 in protecting cancer cells from apoptosis by 
regulating the degradation of BimEL, which together with CIS could play an 
important role of drug resistance in chemotherapy.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M802360200
PMCID: PMC2423247
PMID: 18420585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

RACK1 is a 7-WD motif-containing protein with numerous downstream effectors
 regulating various cellular functions. Using a yeast two-hybrid screen, we
 identified dynein light chain 1 as a novel interacting partner of RACK1.
 Additionally, we demonstrated that RACK1 formed a complex with DLC1 and Bim,
 specifically BimEL, in the presence of apoptotic agents. Upon paclitaxel
 treatment, RACK1, DLC1, and CIS mediated the degradation of BimEL through the
 ElonginB/C-Cullin2-CIS ubiquitin-protein isopeptide ligase complex. We further
 showed that RACK1 conferred paclitaxel resistance to breast cancer cells in vitro and in vivo . Finally, we observed an inverse
 correlation between CIS and BimEL levels in both ovarian and breast cancer
 cell lines and specimens. Our study suggests a role of RACK1 in protecting
 cancer cells from apoptosis by regulating the degradation of BimEL, which
 together with CIS could play an important role of drug resistance in
 chemotherapy.

RESULTS

RACK1 Associated with DLC1 and BimEL upon Apoptotic
 Stimulation —To identify novel interacting partners for RACK1, we
 performed a yeast two-hybrid assay and found that DLC1 interacted with RACK1.
 Coimmunoprecipitation assay was carried out in HEK293T cells transiently
 transfected with FLAG-DLC1 to confirm the yeast two-hybrid result. The
 interaction between RACK1 and DLC1 was detected upon treatment of the cells
 with UV irradiation, paclitaxel, or staurosporine
 ( Fig. 1 A ). Based on
 this observation and a previous report of the Bim-DLC1 complex
 ( 4 ), we hypothesized that RACK1
 may be involved in the regulation of Bim-DLC1-related apoptosis. To test our
 hypothesis, we first examined whether RACK1 also interacted with Bim. In MCF7
 breast cancer cells, endogenous RACK1 was able to be coimmunoprecipitated with
 anti-Bim antibody, which was greatly enhanced upon paclitaxel or staurosporine
 treatment ( Fig. 1 B ).
 As previously reported by Puthalakath et al. ( 4 ), endogenous DLC1 associated
 with BimEL constitutively in HEK293T cells
 ( Fig. 1 C ). Interaction
 between endogenous DLC1 and RACK1 was significantly enhanced by paclitaxel
 treatment ( Fig. 1 C ).
 To examine whether RACK1 can interact with DLC1 and BimEL directly, in
 vitro binding assays were carried out with GST-DLC1, His-RACK1 or its
 C-terminal deletion mutant His-WD1–4, the N-terminal deletion mutant
 His-WD5–7, and His-BimEL. These constructs were expressed and purified
 from Escherichia coli . An equal amount of GST-DLC1 was incubated with
 GST (negative protein control), RACK1, or its deletion mutants. His-RACK1 and
 His-WD1–4 directly interacted with GST-DLC1
 ( Fig. 1 D , left
 panel ). His-WD5–7 failed to pull down DLC1
 ( Fig. 1 D , left
 panel ). Because His-WD1–4 is able to bind to GST-DLC1, we have
 focused our initial effort within this sequence. According to a predicted
 model of RACK1 ( 29 ), we
 synthesized a peptide, 138 CKYTVQDES 146 , including the
 entire outskirt β sheet of blade 3 and named pWD4. We found that pWD4 was
 able to inhibit the RACL1-DLC1 interaction in a dose-dependent manner
 ( Fig. 1 D , right
 panel ), suggesting that it may overlap with the RACK1 binding sequence
 for DLC1. By contrast, an unrelated peptide, pSH2, had no effect on the
 RACK1-DLC1 interaction. RACK1 also interacted with BimEL directly in
 vitro , which was further enhanced in the presence of DLC1
 ( Fig. 1 E ). The
 interaction between RACK1 and BimEL was also through the N-terminal portion of
 RACK1, the WD1–4 domain (supplemental Fig. S1). These in vitro binding data support the intracellular association of these proteins described
 above and suggest that RACK1 interacted directly with both DLC1 and BimEL.

Because Bim is sequestered to microtubules by DLC1 and released to
 mitochondria upon apoptotic stimulation, we tested whether RACK1 is involved
 in this process. To this end, velocity sedimentation in a glycerol gradient
 was performed with cell lysates from MCF7 cells and HEK293T cells
 overexpressing FLAG-DLC1. Under normal conditions, BimEL distributed along
 with DLC1 and β-tubulin, confirming that BimEL is sequestered to
 microtubules through DLC1 (supplemental Fig. S2 A ); upon paclitaxel
 treatment, both DLC1 and BimEL shifted from the heavier to the lighter
 fractions 16–20 (peaked at 18–19 and 18–20 for BimEL and
 DLC1, respectively) and corresponded to the sedimentation positions of a
 mitochondrial outer membrane protein, Tom20 (supplemental Fig. S2 A ).
 No global distribution change of tubulin, RACK1, BimL, and BimS (data not
 shown) was observed, suggesting the paclitaxel-induced release of BimEL and
 DLC1 from microtubules was specific in these two cell lines. To detect the
 distribution of RACK1-BimEL-DLC1 complexes, a coimmunoprecipitation experiment
 was done with the glycerol gradient fractions. Little interaction between
 RACK1 and BimEL (supplemental Fig. S2 B ) or between RACK1 and DLC1
 (supplemental Fig. S2 C ) was detected in the controlled cells;
 however, paclitaxel treatment led to the interaction between RACK1 and BimEL
 in MCF7 cells (supplemental Fig. S2 B ) and between RACK1 and DLC1 in
 HEK293T cells (supplemental Fig. S2 C ). Because of technical
 restriction, we failed to coimmunoprecipitate all three proteins in the same
 cells. The observation suggested that the interaction between RACK1 and the
 BimEL-DLC1 complex might be a regulatory step for BimEL translocation.

RACK1 Promoted BimEL Degradation in Paclitaxel-treated
 Cells —Having established that RACK1 interacts with both DLC1 and
 BimEL, we proceeded to examine the role of RACK1 in the BimEL level because we
 found that the proteasome inhibitor MG132 could significantly enhance the
 interaction between RACK1 and BimEL in MCF7 cells
 ( Fig. 1 F ). To further
 examine whether RACK1 is involved in controlling the BimEL level, different
 cancer cells were transiently transfected with either RACK1 or RACK1 siRNA. In
 the RACK1-overexpressing breast cancer lines, MDA-MB-468 and MCF7, BimEL
 expression decreased dramatically at 48 and 24 h after paclitaxel treatment,
 respectively ( Fig.
 2 A ). A similar observation was made in the ovarian cancer
 lines, SKOV3 and SW626, respectively (supplemental Fig. S3 A ). The
 reduction of BimEL by RACK1 overexpression was proteasome-dependent, because
 the proteasome inhibitor, MG-132, significantly reversed the BimEL level
 ( Fig. 2 A ). Reverse
 transcription-PCR was performed to assess whether the RACK1-mediated decrease
 of BimEL was due to reduced transcription. As shown in supplemental Fig.
 S3 B , the BimEL mRNA level did not change in RACK1-overexpressing
 paclitaxel-treated cells. These observations suggest that RACK1-mediated
 regulation was not at the level of mRNA but at the level of protein
 stability.

To confirm that RACK1 regulated the BimEL level in paclitaxel-treated
 cells, RACK1 siRNAs were transiently transfected into MDA-MB-468 cells.
 Knockdown of RACK1 resulted in a higher level of BimEL compared with the
 control in paclitaxel-treated MDA-MB-468 cells
 ( Fig. 2 B ). Analogous
 to RACK overexpression results, down-regulation of RACK1 by siRNA in MCF7
 cells did not affect the BimEL mRNA level (supplemental Fig. S3 B ).
 Similar results were observed in MCF7-I4 cells (a subline of MCF7) stably
 expressing short hairpin RNA of RACK1 (supplemental Fig. S3 C ).
 Additionally, we showed that overexpression of RACK1 in HEK293T cells promoted
 the polyubiquitination of BimEL upon paclitaxel treatment, which was further
 enhanced by the treatment of MG132 ( Fig.
 2 C ). Taken together, RACK1 reduced the BimEL protein
 level in paclitaxel-treated cells through a proteasome-dependent pathway.

CIS Regulated BimEL Ubiquitination and Degradation —RACK1 has
 been implicated as a component in the E3 ligase complex to enhance the
 ubiquitination and degradation of ΔNp63α, a member of the p53
 family ( 18 ). A recent report
 showed that RACK1 interacted with ElonginC and mediated the degradation of
 HIF-1α ( 19 ). We observed
 previously that paclitaxel enhanced the interaction between RACK1 and CIS in
 HEK293T cells (data not shown). CIS belongs to SOCS family and is implicated
 to be a subunit in the RING domain-based E3 ligase complex, containing
 ElonginB/C-Cullin2-SOCS family members
 ( 21 ). These observations
 prompted us to investigate whether RACK1 and CIS were involved in E3 ligase
 complex-mediated BimEL ubiquitination and degradation.

To determine whether CIS is involved in the degradation of BimEL, we
 overexpressed CIS in HEK293T cells. The overexpression of CIS led to a
 decreased BimEL level in a dose-dependent manner
 ( Fig. 3 A ). Inversely,
 transient knockdown of CIS resulted in significant accumulation of BimEL in
 MCF7 cells ( Fig. 3 A ).
 Similar results were also observed in SKOV3 and SW626 cells
 ( Fig. 3 B ), supporting
 that CIS plays a regulatory role in BimEL degradation. Furthermore, we found
 that CIS overexpression could significantly promote the ubiquitination of
 endogenous BimEL, which was further enhanced by paclitaxel and MG132 treatment
 ( Fig. 3 C ). These data
 point to the role of CIS as a component in the E3 ligase complex to regulate
 the degradation of BimEL.

CIS, RACK1, and DLC1 Were Mutually Dependent to Mediate the Degradation
 of BimEL via the E3 Ligase Complex —To examine whether RACK1, BimEL,
 and CIS form a protein complex, a coimmunoprecipitation assay was performed.
 The paclitaxel treatment caused enhanced interaction between RACK1 and CIS
 ( Fig. 4 A , left
 panel ), which confirmed our previous unpublished
 observation. 5 Reciprocal coimmunoprecipitation revealed that the interaction between BimEL
 and CIS was enhanced upon paclitaxel treatment
 ( Fig. 4 A , right
 panels ). Together with the observations described above, we have shown
 that 1) RACK1, CIS, and BimEL can interact and potentially form a
 triple-protein complex and 2) both CIS and RACK1 regulated BimEL protein
 levels via a proteasome-dependent pathway.

CIS, like other SOCS/CIS family members, contains a short N-terminal
 domain, a central SH2 domain, and a C-terminal SOCS-box. Because of the
 structural similarity, CIS can potentially associate, via its SOCS-box, with
 ElonginB and ElonginC (the Elongin B/C complex) and Cullin2, thereby forming
 the RING domain-based E3 ligase complex. Additionally, Cullin2 has already
 been shown to form an E3 ligase complex with other SOCS family members
 ( 21 ). Coimmunoprecipitation
 revealed that Cullin2 also interacted with CIS
 ( Fig. 4 B ). We also
 detected association of Cullin2 with RACK1 and BimEL
 ( Fig. 4 C ), which was
 enhanced upon paclitaxel treatment. These results suggest that CIS regulated
 BimEL degradation through the Cullin2-based E3 ligase-proteasome pathway.
 Indeed, overexpression of CIS and Cullin2 in HEK293T cells led to the
 decreased level of BimEL ( Fig.
 4 C ), supporting our hypothesis that Cullin2 participated
 in the degradation of BimEL.

To address whether RACK1- and CIS-mediated degradation of BimEL is mutually
 dependent, we transiently knocked down RACK1 to see whether this would revert
 the CIS-mediated degradation of BimEL ( Fig.
 4 D ). Overexpression of CIS enhanced degradation of BimEL
 upon 24-h paclitaxel treatment in MCF7 cells. However, knockdown of RACK1
 significantly reverted CIS-mediated degradation of BimEL
 ( Fig. 4 D ), suggesting
 that CIS-regulated degradation of BimEL is dependent on RACK1.

We also examined whether DLC1 is involved in this complex, as well as its
 role in the BimEL level. Endogenous DLC1 associated with CIS in a
 paclitaxel-dependent manner ( Fig.
 1 C ), in a similar way as its interaction with RACK1
 ( Fig. 1 C ). Knockdown
 of its expression by specific siRNAs of DLC1 resulted in accumulation of BimEL
 in MCF7 cells ( Fig.
 4 E ), consistent with previous observation
 ( 30 ). Paclitaxel-induced
 interaction between RACK1 and BimEL was significantly decreased in HEK293T
 cells expressing siRNAs of DLC1 ( Fig.
 4 F ), suggesting that DLC1 was involved in the interaction
 between RACK1 and BimEL, in agreement with in vitro binding
 experiment ( Fig. 1 E ).
 More importantly, down-regulation of DLC1 in HEK293T cells inhibited CIS- and
 RACK1-mediated BimEL degradation in paclitaxel-treated cells
 ( Fig. 4 G ), implicating
 DLC1 in the protein complex as controlling degradation of BimEL.

RACK1 and CIS Confer Paclitaxel Resistance and Anchorage-independent
 Survival through BimEL Degradation —To explore the biological role
 of RACK1-promoted BimEL degradation, we examined the effects of RACK1-mediated
 BimEL degradation on paclitaxel resistance and on anchorage-independent
 survival, as well as on growth by the assays for resistance to paclitaxel
 treatment, anoikis, and for formation of colonies in soft agar.
 Anchorage-independent survival and growth are important properties of cancer
 cells. A previous report has shown BimEL-mediated anoikis, a phenomenon of
 cell apoptosis and death due to deprivation of cells from attachment to the
 extracellular matrix ( 31 ).
 Because RACK1 and CIS mediated BimEL degradation, we hypothesized that RACK1
 and CIS may confer resistance to anoikis and paclitaxel treatment.

BimEL has been shown to be involved in paclitaxel-mediated cell death
 ( 8 ); we examined whether it is
 similarly implicated in breast and ovarian cancer cells studied here. A panel
 of normal epithelial or tumor cells were transiently transfected with BimEL.
 BimEL expression did not significantly lead to apoptosis under normal
 conditions (data not shown), whereas paclitaxel treatment resulted in massive
 cell death in cells overexpressing BimEL (supplemental Fig. S4 A ).
 Down-regulation of BimEL by siRNA in SW626 and SKOV3 cells (to 40 and 50%,
 respectively, data not shown) prevented paclitaxel-induced cell death by 20
 and 15%, respectively, at the 48-h time point (supplemental Fig.
 S4 B ), suggesting that BimEL is a significant mediator of
 paclitaxel-induced cell death. The effect of BimEL in paclitaxel-mediated cell
 death is underestimated, considering the inefficient knockdown of the BimEL
 level.

We tested the function of RACK1 in mediating resistance to paclitaxel
 treatment and anoikis. Three representative MCF7-I4 stable clones
 overexpressing RACK1 (the pooled stable cell culture RACK1-1 and two other
 single cell-derived stable clones, RACK1–2 and RACK1–3
 (supplemental Fig. S5 A )), showed a dramatically decreased BimEL level
 after paclitaxel treatment, which was reversed by the treatment of MG-132
 (supplemental Fig. S5 B ).

The anoikis assay was performed with the MCF7-I4 stable clones
 overexpressing RACK1. RACK1 overexpression in MCF7-I4 significantly protected
 the cells from anoikis ( Fig.
 5 A , left panel ), whereas MCF7 cells transiently
 transfected with two independent RACK1 siRNAs sensitized the cells to anoikis
 and paclitaxel treatment, as reflected by trypan blue staining to count the
 dead cells ( Fig. 5 A , right panel ) and by FACS analysis to quantify the cells in
 sub-G 1 fractions, reflecting apoptosing and dead cells
 (supplemental Fig. S5 C ). Another assay to measure the ability of
 anchorage-independent survival and growth is soft agar colony formation assay.
 In light of our observation that RACK1 could confer resistance to anoikis and
 paclitaxel, we hypothesized that RACK1 would increase cancer cell colony
 formation ability, especially in the presence of paclitaxel. No significant
 change in colony formation ability in soft agar was observed in the
 RACK1-overexpressing clones without concurrent treatment of paclitaxel (data
 not shown). By contrast, in the presence of 10 n m paclitaxel, all
 three RACK1 overexpression clones displayed greatly enhanced colony formation
 ability ( Fig. 5 B ).
 This result suggested that RACK1 was able to confer resistance to paclitaxel
 treatment of the cells, especially under anchorage-independent conditions. In
 terms of CIS-mediated effects, transient knockdown of CIS via siRNA in MCF7
 cells greatly sensitized the cells to anoikis and paclitaxel, as reflected by
 trypan blue staining of dead cells ( Fig.
 5 C ) and by FACS to quantify the cells in the
 sub-G 1 fractions (supplemental Fig. S5 D ). Similar to the
 situation with RACK1, down-regulation of CIS in MCF7 cells showed only an
 ∼25% reduction in colony formation without paclitaxel treatment
 ( Fig. 5 D , white
 bars ); however, down-regulation of CIS dramatically sensitized the cells
 to paclitaxel treatment in soft agar compared with the control
 siRNA-transfected cells ( Fig.
 5 D , gray bars ). The reduced
 anchorage-independent survival and growth were consistent with the increased
 BimEL in CIS knockdown cells ( Fig.
 5 D , right panel ). These results suggest that
 sufficient RACK1 and CIS expression in cells is essential for
 anchorage-independent survival and growth of cancer cells, especially in the
 presence of apoptosis-inducing drugs.

RACK1 Conferred Paclitaxel Resistance via Promoting BimEL Degradation
 in Tumorigenesis —To characterize the RACK1 stable clone
 (I4-RACK1–3) for further in vivo study, we performed annexin V
 staining to show whether the paclitaxel-induced cell death was due to
 apoptosis. I4-phEF and I4-RACK1–3 cells were either mock-treated with
 ethanol vehicle or treated with 200 n m paclitaxel for 72 h. Cells
 were costained with propidium iodide and anti-annexin V-fluorescein
 isothiocyanate. FACS analysis revealed a dramatic decrease of cells undergoing
 apoptosis (annexin V-positive and propidium iodide-negative) in the
 I4-RACK1–3 cells treated with paclitaxel, as compared with the similarly
 treated I4-phEF cells ( Fig.
 6 A and supplemental Fig. S6 A ).

To test whether RACK1 expression in breast cancer cells conferred
 paclitaxel resistance in vivo , we injected MCF7-I4-phEF cells and
 MCF7-I4-RACK1–3 cells into nude mice subcutaneously. Significant tumor
 growth was noticed 12–18 days after injection
 ( Fig. 6 B ). RACK1
 overexpression significantly enhanced tumor growth in vivo ( Fig. 6 B , left
 panel ), which was in agreement with our previous observation in the
 melanoma system ( 13 ).
 Intraperitoneal injection of paclitaxel led to dramatic inhibition of tumor
 growth in the MCF7-I4-phEF group but no significant inhibition of tumor growth
 in the MCF7-I4-RACK1–3 group ( Fig.
 6 B , right panel ). The daily average tumor growth
 rates were significantly different in MCF7-I4-phEF groups with or without
 paclitaxel treatment; however, the difference in the MCF7-I4-RACK1–3
 groups was not statistically significant, suggesting that RACK1 overexpression
 rendered the cells resistant to paclitaxel (supplemental Fig. S6 B ).
 Biochemical analysis revealed that in the paclitaxel-treated
 MCF7-I4-RACK1–3 tumors, the BimEL expression level was dramatically
 decreased when compared with that of the MCF7-I4-phEF group
 ( Fig. 6 C ).
 Additionally, cleavage of lamin B1, an apoptotic marker downstream of
 caspases, was greatly decreased in the I4-RACK1 tumors
 ( Fig. 6 C ), correlating
 with the reduced expression level of BimEL. These results strongly suggest
 that RACK1 plays an important role in paclitaxel resistance of cancer cells by
 promoting the degradation of BimEL.

In breast carcinomas and breast cancer cell lines, the CIS expression level
 is highly elevated compared with their corresponding counterparts
 ( 23 ). Moreover, the RACK1
 level has been shown to be up-regulated in various tumors and during
 angiogenesis ( 13 , 17 ). To explore the clinical
 significance of our observation of RACK1- and CIS-mediated BimEL degradation,
 we examined the expression levels of RACK1, CIS, and BimEL in 16 breast cancer
 lines, 60 breast tumors, and 53 ovarian tumors. RACK1 showed significant
 expression in 95% of all the samples ( Fig.
 6 D and data not shown). In agreement with a previous
 study ( 23 ), CIS was
 significantly expressed in more than 50% of the samples (supplemental Fig.
 S6 C ). BimEL and CIS expression were further quantified by Image J. We
 found an inverse correlation between the expression of CIS and BimEL
 ( Fig. 6, D and E , and supplemental Fig. S6 C ). The inverse
 correlation was found in 69% of the breast cancer lines, 57% of the breast
 carcinomas, and 63% of the ovarian carcinomas
 ( Fig. 6 E ). A
 chi-square test showed a significant difference between the actual expression
 pattern and expected expression pattern of CIS and BimEL in ovarian tumor
 samples and breast cancer cell lines, with p < 0.05
 ( Fig. 6 E and
 supplemental Fig. S6 C ). Breast tumors only showed marginal
 significance, with p = 0.07 ( Fig.
 6 D ). RACK1 expression is high in most of those samples,
 probably because of its critical roles in cells, especially its role in
 ribosome ( 11 , 12 ); thus no inverse
 correlation of RACK1 and BimEL was observed. These observations further
 support the regulatory roles of CIS in determining BimEL levels and implicate
 its potential role in the development of drug resistance in tumors.

DISCUSSION

We propose a model for RACK1- and CIS-mediated degradation of BimEL in
 cancer cells ( Fig. 7 ).
 Apoptotic agents, such as paclitaxel and staurosporine, cause the formation of
 the RACK1, BimEL, and DLC1 protein complex. Subsequently, RACK1 promotes
 degradation of BimEL in paclitaxel-treated cells, most likely by bridging
 BimEL to ElonginB/C-Cullin2-CIS E3 ligase complexes. Although it has been
 suggested that DLC1 and BimEL were coreleased from microtubules upon apoptotic
 conditions, we don't know yet whether DLC1 will be transferred to the ECS E3
 ligase with BimEL. Our data suggest that DLC1 could enhance the interaction
 between BimEL and RACK1 (Figs. 1 E and 4 F ), suggesting that
 DLC1 could be involved in the efficient degradation of BimEL mediated by
 RACK1. Additionally, our data are corroborated by the recent observation that
 RACK1 interacted with ElonginC to mediate the ubiquitination and degradation
 of HIF-1α ( 19 ). Liu et al. ( 19 ) showed
 that RACK1-mediated HIF-1α degradation was dependent on the treatment of
 HSP90 inhibitors. This suggests that RACK1-mediated degradation of its
 substrate occurs under the stressed condition, in agreement with our finding
 that RACK1-mediated degradation of BimEL was more prominently observed in the
 apoptotic agenttreated cells. CIS appears to play a more general role in BimEL
 degradation because modulating the CIS expression level negatively affected
 the BimEL level in cells under normal conditions
 ( Fig. 3 A ). In the
 paclitaxel-treated cells, the CIS-mediated degradation of BimEL is dependent
 on RACK1 because knockdown of the RACK1 expression level blocked the
 CIS-mediated degradation of BimEL ( Fig.
 4 D ). As to the trafficking of BimEL upon paclitaxel
 treatment, based on the data presented here and others not shown, we
 hypothesize that the paclitaxel-induced release of Bim-DLC1 complexes from
 microtubules to mitochondria is blocked by RACK1 by retaining the complexes at
 microtubules and subsequently leading to proteasome-mediated degradation of
 BimEL. The balance of RACK1-mediated retention and degradation of BimEL as
 opposed to its release to mitochondria to promote apoptosis upon paclitaxel
 treatment would depend, at least in part, on the RACK1 level.

Sunters et al. ( 32 ) reported that paclitaxel
 induced mRNA expression of BimEL through up-regulating FOXO expression in MCF7
 cells, contradictory to our observation that paclitaxel treatment did not
 significantly change the mRNA level of BimEL. The apparent paradox could be
 due to the amount of paclitaxel used in the experiment. Sunters et
 al. treated the cells with 10 n m paclitaxel, which might
 mainly target FOXO transcriptional factors and activate the gene expression
 from the transcriptional level, whereas under our condition, 100 n m paclitaxel might elicit signaling pathways other than FOXO. It has been
 proposed that, depending on dosage, paclitaxel can activate different set of
 signaling pathways ( 33 ).

Previously, we reported that overexpression of RACK1 led to inhibition of
 anchorage-independent growth in the insulin-like growth factor 1
 receptor-overexpressing mouse fibroblast cell line NIH3T3; however, knockdown
 of RACK1 led to inhibition of cellular growth. This observation suggests that
 RACK1 could be beneficial or inhibitory to cell growth depending on the cell
 type and absolute intracellular levels of RACK1
 ( 27 ). These observations point
 to the importance of the homeostatic equilibrium concentration of RACK1 in the
 normal physiology of cells. The notion that expression of a scaffold protein,
 depending on its level, could be either promoting or inhibitory in its
 functions has been demonstrated with KSR1 in mitogen-activated protein kinase
 signaling ( 34 ) and with c-Jun
 N-terminal kinase interacting protein (JIP) in c-Jun N-terminal kinase
 signaling ( 35 , 36 ). Our stable
 RACK1-expressing MCF7-I4 cells displayed an enhanced growth of tumor and
 resistance to paclitaxel. This is in agreement with the previously reported
 effect of RACK1 on cancer cell growth
 ( 14 ).

The molecular detail of how RACK1 mediates the formation of the BimEL and
 CIS-containing E3 ligase complex is still unclear. Although constitutive
 tyrosine phosphorylation of RACK1 in HEK293T cells has been reported before
 ( 27 ), which may provide a
 binding site for the SH2 domain of CIS, i.e . it brings BimEL to the
 CIS-containing E3 complex within the favorable proximity. If a competitive
 peptide or small molecule could be designed to abolish the specific
 RACK1-BimEL or RACK1-CIS interaction, it could be a potential choice for
 combinatorial chemotherapy with paclitaxel.

Although Bim knock-out mice mainly showed defects in hematopoietic cells
 ( 10 ), in vitro and in vivo experiments have established the roles of Bim in initiating
 apoptosis in neurons ( 37 ) and
 osteoclasts ( 38 ), in lumen
 formation in cultured mammary acini
 ( 39 ), and in
 paclitaxel-mediated tumor killing
 ( 8 , 9 ). Our study suggests that
 RACK1 and CIS play a critical role in regulating the BimEL level, which in
 turn confers drug resistance, and promote anchorage-independent survival and
 growth. This is corroborated by our observation of the negative correlation of
 the expression level between CIS and BimEL in cancer cells and tumor samples.
 It will be interesting to know whether those tumors with a high expression
 level of CIS correlate with paclitaxel resistance in patients. We hypothesize
 that overexpression of RACK1 in cancer cells would have a similar effect.
 Subsequent studies with fresh micro-dissected tumor cells and appropriate
 clinical treatment response data are needed to fully elucidate this
 condition.

The anti-apoptotic role of RACK1 is not restricted to epithelial cells.
 RACK1 has been shown to protect dexamethasone-induced apoptosis in T
 lymphocytes ( 40 ). In CD4
 promoter-driven CIS transgenic mice, elevated CIS expression promoted T cell
 proliferation and survival upon T cell receptor activation when compared with
 the T cells in the control mice
 ( 24 ). Bim-null mice showed
 perturbed T cell development and elevated mature T cells. Additionally, Bim is
 required for apoptosis of autoreactive thymocytes
 ( 10 , 41 ). Although elevated
 activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases has been proposed to explain
 the enhancement of T cell proliferation and survival in CIS transgenic mice
 ( 24 ), BimEL phosphorylation
 and RACK1/CIS-promoted degradation could be a major alternative mechanism.

Taken together, RACK1 plays an important role in the regulation of the
 pro-apoptotic protein BimEL in paclitaxel-treated cancer cells by mediating
 BimEL degradation via the ElonginB/C-Cullin2-CIS E3 ligase complex, leading to
 paclitaxel resistance. CIS appears to have a regulatory role in the BimEL
 level in cancer cells. Confirmation of our observation with freshly derived
 tumor cells will further underscore the clinical significance of
 RACK1/CIS-mediated regulation of BimEL. Intervention of RACK1-DLC1-BimEL or
 RACK1-CIS interaction presents a rational design for potential therapeutic
 regimen in combination with cancer drugs such as paclitaxel.
