---
pmid: '9593664'
title: The tumor suppressor, PTEN/MMAC1, dephosphorylates the lipid second messenger,
  phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate.
authors:
- Maehama T
- Dixon JE
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.22.13375
---

# The tumor suppressor, PTEN/MMAC1, dephosphorylates the lipid second messenger, phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate.
**Authors:** Maehama T, Dixon JE
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.273.22.13375](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.22.13375)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1998 May 29;273(22):13375-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.22.13375.

The tumor suppressor, PTEN/MMAC1, dephosphorylates the lipid second messenger, 
phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate.

Maehama T(1), Dixon JE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan 48109-0606, USA.

Phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate (PtdIns(3,4,5)P3) is a key molecule 
involved in cell growth signaling. We demonstrated that overexpression of PTEN, 
a putative tumor suppressor, reduced insulin-induced PtdIns(3,4,5)P3 production 
in human 293 cells without effecting insulin-induced phosphoinositide 3-kinase 
activation. Further, transfection of the catalytically inactive mutant of PTEN 
(C124S) caused PtdIns(3,4,5)P3 accumulation in the absence of insulin 
stimulation. Purified recombinant PTEN catalyzed dephosphorylation of 
PtdIns(3,4,5)P3, specifically at position 3 on the inositol ring. PTEN also 
exhibited 3-phosphatase activity toward inositol 1,3,4,5-tetrakisphosphate. Our 
results raise the possibility that PTEN acts in vivo as a phosphoinositide 
3-phosphatase by regulating PtdIns(3,4,5)P3 levels. As expected, the C124S 
mutant of PTEN was incapable of catalyzing dephosphorylation of PtdIns(3,4,5)P3 
consistent with the mechanism observed in protein-tyrosine phosphatase-catalyzed 
reactions.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.22.13375
PMID: 9593664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
