---
pmid: '19345744'
title: 'Downregulation of neutral ceramidase by gemcitabine: Implications for cell
  cycle regulation.'
authors:
- Wu BX
- Zeidan YH
- Hannun YA
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2788435
doi: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2009.03.012
---

# Downregulation of neutral ceramidase by gemcitabine: Implications for cell cycle regulation.
**Authors:** Wu BX, Zeidan YH, Hannun YA
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbalip.2009.03.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbalip.2009.03.012)
**PMC:** [PMC2788435](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2788435/)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Aug;1791(8):730-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbalip.2009.03.012.  Epub 2009 Apr 2.

Downregulation of neutral ceramidase by gemcitabine: Implications for cell cycle 
regulation.

Wu BX(1), Zeidan YH, Hannun YA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, 29425, USA.

Gemcitabine (GMZ) is a chemotherapeutic agent with well established effects on 
cell growth arrest and apoptosis. In this study, we investigated the potential 
roles of bioactive sphingolipids in mediating the growth suppressing effects of 
GMZ on a polyoma middle T transformed murine endothelial cell line. After 
12-hour GMZ (0.6 microM) treatment, cell growth was arrested at the G(0)/G(1) 
phase as detected by flow cytometric cell cycle analysis and MTT cell viability 
analysis, and this was accompanied by dephosphorylation of the retinoblastoma 
protein (Rb). Furthermore, GMZ treatment resulted in increased levels of 
specifically the very long chain ceramides as determined by mass spectrometry. 
Mechanistically, GMZ did not appear to affect the activities of many enzymes of 
ceramide metabolism; however, GMZ caused a selective reduction in the protein 
levels of neutral ceramidase (NCDase), as indicated by Western blot analysis, 
with a concomitant decrease in NCDase activity. The significance of NCDase loss 
on cell cycle regulation was investigated by specific knockdown of the enzyme 
using small interfering RNA (siRNA). Interestingly, NCDase siRNA transfection 
was sufficient to induce a cell cycle arrest at G(0)/G(1) and an increase in 
total ceramide levels, with significant elevation in very long chain ceramides 
(C(24:1) and C(24:0)). NCDase siRNA also induced Rb dephosphorylation. These 
data provide evidence for a novel mechanism of action for GMZ and highlight 
downregulation of NCDase as a critical step in GMZ-mediated ceramide elevation 
and cell cycle arrest.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2009.03.012
PMCID: PMC2788435
PMID: 19345744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
