---
pmid: '28712726'
title: Sengers Syndrome-Associated Mitochondrial Acylglycerol Kinase Is a Subunit
  of the Human TIM22 Protein Import Complex.
authors:
- Kang Y
- Stroud DA
- Baker MJ
- De Souza DP
- Frazier AE
- Liem M
- Tull D
- Mathivanan S
- McConville MJ
- Thorburn DR
- Ryan MT
- Stojanovski D
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2017.06.014
---

# Sengers Syndrome-Associated Mitochondrial Acylglycerol Kinase Is a Subunit of the Human TIM22 Protein Import Complex.
**Authors:** Kang Y, Stroud DA, Baker MJ, De Souza DP, Frazier AE, Liem M, Tull D, Mathivanan S, McConville MJ, Thorburn DR, Ryan MT, Stojanovski D
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2017.06.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2017.06.014)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2017 Aug 3;67(3):457-470.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2017.06.014. Epub
 2017 Jul 14.

Sengers Syndrome-Associated Mitochondrial Acylglycerol Kinase Is a Subunit of 
the Human TIM22 Protein Import Complex.

Kang Y(1), Stroud DA(2), Baker MJ(1), De Souza DP(3), Frazier AE(4), Liem M(5), 
Tull D(3), Mathivanan S(5), McConville MJ(3), Thorburn DR(6), Ryan MT(2), 
Stojanovski D(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and The Bio21 Molecular 
Science and Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, 
VIC, Australia.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash Biomedicine 
Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton, VIC Australia.
(3)Metabolomics Australia, The Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology 
Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(4)Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Royal Children's Hospital and 
Department of Paediatrics, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, 
Australia.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, La Trobe Institute for Molecular 
Science, La Trobe University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(6)Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Royal Children's Hospital and 
Department of Paediatrics, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, 
Australia; Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Royal Children's Hospital, 
Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(7)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and The Bio21 Molecular 
Science and Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, 
VIC, Australia. Electronic address: d.stojanovski@unimelb.edu.au.

Acylglycerol kinase (AGK) is a mitochondrial lipid kinase that catalyzes the 
phosphorylation of monoacylglycerol and diacylglycerol to lysophosphatidic acid 
and phosphatidic acid, respectively. Mutations in AGK cause Sengers syndrome, 
which is characterized by congenital cataracts, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 
skeletal myopathy, exercise intolerance, and lactic acidosis. Here we identified 
AGK as a subunit of the mitochondrial TIM22 protein import complex. We show that 
AGK functions in a kinase-independent manner to maintain the integrity of the 
TIM22 complex, where it facilitates the import and assembly of mitochondrial 
carrier proteins. Mitochondria isolated from Sengers syndrome patient cells and 
tissues show a destabilized TIM22 complex and defects in the biogenesis of 
carrier substrates. Consistent with this phenotype, we observe perturbations in 
the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle in cells lacking AGK. Our identification of 
AGK as a bona fide subunit of TIM22 provides an exciting and unexpected link 
between mitochondrial protein import and Sengers syndrome.

Crown Copyright © 2017. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2017.06.014
PMID: 28712726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
