---
pmid: '17996020'
title: Reactive oxygen species mediate Na+-induced SOS1 mRNA stability in Arabidopsis.
authors:
- Chung JS
- Zhu JK
- Bressan RA
- Hasegawa PM
- Shi H
journal: Plant J
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3128381
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2007.03364.x
---

# Reactive oxygen species mediate Na+-induced SOS1 mRNA stability in Arabidopsis.
**Authors:** Chung JS, Zhu JK, Bressan RA, Hasegawa PM, Shi H
**Journal:** Plant J (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-313X.2007.03364.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-313X.2007.03364.x)
**PMC:** [PMC3128381](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3128381/)

## Abstract

1. Plant J. 2008 Feb;53(3):554-65. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2007.03364.x. Epub
2007  Nov 7.

Reactive oxygen species mediate Na+-induced SOS1 mRNA stability in Arabidopsis.

Chung JS(1), Zhu JK, Bressan RA, Hasegawa PM, Shi H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX 
79409, USA.

Salt Overly Sensitive 1 (SOS1), a plasma membrane Na+/H+ antiporter in 
Arabidopsis, is a salt tolerance determinant crucial for the maintenance of ion 
homeostasis in saline stress conditions. SOS1 mRNA is unstable at normal growth 
conditions, but its stability is substantially increased under salt stress and 
other ionic and dehydration stresses. In addition, H2O2 treatment increases the 
stability of SOS1 mRNA. SOS1 mRNA is inherently unstable and rapidly degraded 
with a half-life of approximately 10 min. Rapid decay of SOS1 mRNA requires new 
protein synthesis. Stress-induced SOS1 mRNA stability is mediated by reactive 
oxygen species (ROS). NADPH oxidase is also involved in the upregulation of SOS1 
mRNA stability, presumably through the control of extracellular ROS production. 
The cis-element required for SOS1 mRNA instability resides in the 500-bp region 
within the 2.2 kb at the 3' end of the SOS1 mRNA. Furthermore, mutations in the 
SOS1 gene render sos1 mutants more tolerant to paraquat, a non-selective 
herbicide causing oxidative stress, indicating that SOS1 plays negative roles in 
tolerance of oxidative stress. A hypothetical model for the signaling pathway 
involving SOS1-mediated pH changes, NADPH oxidase activation, apoplastic ROS 
production and downstream signaling transduction is proposed, and the biological 
significance of ROS-mediated induction of SOS1 mRNA stability is discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2007.03364.x
PMCID: PMC3128381
PMID: 17996020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Introduction

Plants cope with environmental changes by activating signal transduction cascades that control and coordinate the physiological and biochemical responses necessary for adaptation ( Hasegawa et al. , 2000 ; Zhu, 2002 ). A number of signaling pathways have been implicated in abiotic stress responses in plants ( Yamaguchi-Shinozaki and Shinozaki, 2006 ). For example, the MAP kinase signaling pathway is involved in oxidative stress and other abiotic stress responses ( Nakagami et al. , 2005 ). Calcium signaling is incorporated in different signaling pathways during abiotic stress response, e.g. to heat, cold, drought, and salt ( Sanders et al. , 2002 ). The recently identified salt overly sensitive (SOS) signaling pathway is crucial for salt tolerance in plants ( Shi et al. , 2005 ). The SOS pathway includes three key components: SOS3, a Ca 2+ sensor ( Liu and Zhu, 1998 ); SOS2, a serine/threonine protein kinase ( Liu et al. , 2000 ); and SOS1, a plasma membrane Na + /H + antiporter ( Shi et al. , 2000 ). The plasma membrane-localized SOS1 contains a large cytosolic C-terminus that could interact with different molecules. Therefore, SOS1 might also serve as a signaling component to sense and transduce salt stress signals.

Signal perception and signal transduction mediate changes in gene expression. Gene regulation is controlled at several checkpoints, including transcription, pre-mRNA processing and editing, nuclear export, and mRNA stability and translational efficiency ( Fedoroff, 2002 ; Kuhn and Schroeder, 2003 ). The control mechanisms operating through post-transcriptional events are now emerging as important signal control nodes in eukaryotes ( Maniatis and Reed, 2002 ; Reed, 2003 ; Tourrière et al. , 2002 ). As an important checkpoint, mRNA decay is a highly regulated process and plays key roles in determining the expression pattern of many genes ( Wilusz and Wilusz, 2004 ). Differential RNA turnover contributes substantially to the control of gene expression during development and in response to chemical and environmental stimuli ( Guhaniyogi and Brewer, 2001 ; Shim and Karin, 2002 ; Tourrière et al. , 2002 ). In mammalian cells, mRNA decay machinery and signal transduction pathways that transduce environmental stimuli into changes in mRNA stability are now being identified and characterized. Ca 2+ -dependent signaling and involvement of c-Jun amino-terminal kinase (JNK), PKC, MAP kinase and calcineurin pathways are implicated ( Shim and Karin, 2002 ). The stability of mRNA is dependent on interactions between structural elements that exist in the 5′-untranslated region (UTR), coding, and 3′-UTR sequences ( cis -acting elements) and RNA-binding proteins ( trans -acting factors). Some cis -element and RNA-binding protein interactions are ubiquitous, e.g. 5′-cap structure and cap-binding proteins and poly(A) and poly(A)-binding proteins(PABPs), while others are mRNA-specific and mediate differential message decay. Studies of AUF1/hnRNPD, HuR, TIA-1 or tristetraprolin trans -acting proteins indicate that interaction with the cis -element may enhance the stability or decay of RNA ( Wilusz et al. , 2001 ). In plants, although a number of putative mRNA cis -elements have been identified ( Gutierrez et al. , 1999 ; Johnson et al. , 2000 ), there is little experimental evidence revealing trans -acting factors that bind to cis -elements and regulate mRNA stability, despite annotation that indicates the presence of more than 200 putative RNA-binding proteins in Arabidopsis ( Fedoroff, 2002 ; Kastenmayer and Green, 2000 ). Notable exceptions are the RNA-binding complex that mediates the light-regulated translation of chloroplast mRNA ( Rochaix, 2001 ) and the single-stranded RNA-binding protein AKIP1 that is activated by ABA-activated protein kinase (AAPK) to interact with dehydrin mRNA ( Li et al. , 2002 ). Besides AKIP, recent reports have implicated other RNA-binding proteins in stress and ABA signaling, including ABH1 ( Hugouvieux et al. , 2001 ), SAD1 ( Xiong et al. , 2001 ), HYL1 ( Lu et al. , 2002 ) and CPL1/FRY2 ( Koiwa et al. , 2002 ; Xiong et al. , 2002 ).

We previously found that SOS1 mRNA is unstable under normal growth conditions, and that its stability is substantially increased upon salt stress treatment ( Shi et al. , 2003a ). This finding suggests that, besides transcriptional regulation, post-transcriptional control of the mRNA stability of important salt determinant genes may also play a crucial role in the response of plants to salt stress. In this study, we attempted to initiate the identification of the cis -element in SOS1 mRNA responsible for the stability-regulation and signaling pathways mediating salt-induced mRNA stability.

Discussion

We have provided evidence that abiotic stress-induced stability of SOS1 mRNA is mediated by ROS. NADPH oxidase activity is at least partially required for the ROS generation needed to stabilize SOS1 transcripts. The role of SOS1 in tolerance of NaCl and oxidative stress is complex, apparently owing to the participation of SOS1 in the biochemistry of Na + homeostasis and perhaps in signal transduction as well. This is attested to by the fact that sos1 mutants are hypersensitive to NaCl ( Shi et al. , 2000 ), but more tolerant of MV ( Figure 6 ; Katiyar-Agarwal et al. , 2006 ).

Reactive oxygen species have long been proposed as signal molecules that regulate various processes such as growth, development, responses to biotic and abiotic environmental stimuli, and programmed cell death ( Apel and Hirt, 2004 ). Several lines of evidence indicate that the plant homolog of NADPH oxidase is involved in the respiratory burst (Rboh) and can initiate, and most likely amplify, ROS production for the purpose of signaling ( Foreman et al. , 2003 ; Sagi and Fluhr, 2006 ; Torres and Dangl, 2005 ). Plant Rboh proteins contain N-terminal EF-hand calcium-binding motifs and can be activated directly by Ca 2+ in vitro ( Sagi and Fluhr, 2001 ). Thus, Ca 2+ elevation may be an upstream signaling event that links environmental stimuli and ROS production via NADPH oxidases. Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) may transduce ROS signals through phosphorylation of target proteins ( Pitzschke and Hirt, 2006 ). The ROS-mediated regulation of mRNA stability can be a rapid signal transduction process, since ROS may mediate signals by affecting targets that are constitutively present in the cells including Ca 2+ channels, membrane-bound Rboh proteins, and substrate proteins that are phosphorylated by MAPKs. In fact, the elevation of SOS1 mRNA stability elicited by salt stress and H 2 O 2 treatment is quite rapid. The peak accumulation of SOS1 mRNA appears only about 10 min (or perhaps in an even shorter period of time) after NaCl or H 2 O 2 treatment ( Figures 1d and 2b ). The stabilization and resulting increase in SOS1 mRNAs could lead to accumulation of SOS1 transporter proteins in the plasma membrane and enhance Na + exclusion, thus rapidly conferring salt tolerance to plant cells. It has been reported that treatment of rice seedlings with low levels of H 2 O 2 could improve salt and heat tolerance ( Uchida et al. , 2002 ). The involvement of MAPKs in signaling control of the stability of SOS1 mRNA is supported by our observation that some MAPK inhibitors can reduce accumulation of SOS1 mRNA under conditions of salt stress (data not shown).

One of the most important functions of the human Na + /H + exchangers (NHE) is regulation of intracellular pH ( Counillon and Pouyssegur, 2000 ). In plants, vacuolar Na + /H + antiporters also have been implicated in pH regulation. A mutation in an NHX-like gene of Ipomoea nil ( InNHX1 ) that encodes a vacuolar Na + /H + antiporter abrogated the capacity of cells to increase vacuolar pH, a requirement for shift of the flower color from reddish-purple to blue ( Fukada-Tanaka et al. , 2000 ). The plasma membrane Na + /H + antiporter SOS1 has also been shown to affect H + transport even in the absence of salt stress ( Shabala et al. , 2005 ). Increased SOS1 activity would lead to apoplastic alkalinization and cytoplasmic acidification. It has been proposed that apoplastic alkalinization might be a general stress response and change in pH could serve as a signal to mediate gene regulation ( Felle, 2001 ; Felle and Hanstein, 2002 ; Felle et al. , 2004 , 2005 ). Thus, SOS1, by promoting apoplastic alkalinization, could play a signaling role in the stress response. Apoplastic alkalinization may also be essential for the activation and/or maintenance of Rboh NADPH oxidase activity and subsequent ROS production. Activation of NADPH oxidases was found to be preceded by apoplastic alkalinization, which is thought to result from elicitor-induced depolarization of the plasma membrane and subsequent K + /H + exchange, followed by Ca 2+ influx/Cl − efflux ( Nurnberger and Scheel, 2001 ; Simon-Plas et al. , 1997 ; Zhao et al. , 2005 ). Moreover, extracellular alkalinization has been shown to be required for the oxidative burst ( Bindschedler et al. , 2001 ; Bolwell et al. , 1995 , 1999 ). It appears that a change inpHis essential for the initiation of the apoplastic oxidative burst that occurs in response to biotic stress ( Bolwell et al. , 2002 ). A recent study has shown that touch stimulation triggers elevation of cytosolic Ca 2+ , which is required for rapid (within 1 sec) and transient apoplastic alkalinization and cytosolic acidification, as well as production of extracellular ROS in root hairs ( Monshausen et al. , 2006 ). In the Arabidopsis mutant rhd2 , which lacks the functional NADPH oxidase, touch stimulation can still trigger pH changes but not an increase in ROS production ( Monshausen et al. , 2006 ), suggesting that pH changes precede extracellular ROS production. It is conceivable that both biotic and abiotic stresses could activate a common signal transduction pathway that involves changes in pH and the production of extracellular ROS. SOS1 could be one of the signaling components upstream of apoplastic alkalinization.

Based on our results and previous studies, we propose the following hypothesis. Salt and other stresses elicit elevation of Ca 2+ , which activates the SOS signaling pathway. The activation of SOS1 would cause rapid apoplastic alkalinization and cytosolic acidification. This pH change may then activate the plasma membrane-bound NADPH oxidase. Alternatively, salt and other abiotic stresses capable of inducing stability of SOS1 mRNA (such as dehydration) may not employ the SOS signaling pathway, but instead could directly activate NADPH oxidase by inducing a Ca 2+ spike specifically localized to or recognized by NADPH oxidase. All plant NADPH oxidases carry a presumably cytosolic 300-amino-acid amino-terminal extension with two EF-hands that bind Ca 2+ ( Keller et al. , 1998 ). Activation of plasma membrane-bound NADPH oxidase promotes the production of apoplastic superoxide anion (O 2 − ). Superoxide is then catalytically converted by the action of superoxide dismutase (SOD) to hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ). In the presence of transition metals such as Fe 2+ , the extremely reactive hydroxyl radical (OH) can be generated from H 2 O 2 . It is likely that SOS1 serves as a fine-tuner of pH, thus maintaining NADPH oxidase activity and ROS production under stress conditions. This notion is supported by our results showing that H 2 O 2 concentrations are higher in SOS1 overexpression transgenic plants than in wild-type plants with or without salt stress (data not shown). Stabilization of SOS1 mRNA may also serve to activate a positive feedback loop. In this feedback loop, SOS1 would be required for activation and maintenance of NADPH oxidase activity. The ROS generated by NADPH oxidase would then stabilize SOS1 mRNA, thereby greatly increasing its activity and subsequently NADPH oxidase activity ( Figure 7a ). Rapid elevation of the level of SOS1 mRNA upon salt stress and fast degradation after release from stress could exert a fine control on SOS1 protein homeostasis. This could be crucial for maintaining optimal extracellular and intercellular pH during normal growth and after salt stress exposure.

This model may also explain why mutations in SOS1 confer tolerance to PQ/MV. Paraquat has a redox potential of −446 mV, which is critical to its function as a free-radical generator. In the presence of paraquat, NADPH oxidase could be an enzymatic source of electrons, causing the divalent cation paraquat 2+ (PQ 2+ ) to form a free radical paraquat 1+ (PQ + ). Since this molecule is unstable, it is rapidly reoxidized in the presence of oxygen to yield the original divalent cation. During this oxidation process, electrons are transferred to molecular oxygen to form superoxide anion radicals (O 2 − ). Superoxide radicals are then enzymatically converted to H 2 O 2 , which could subsequently produce toxic hydroxyl radicals ( Figure 7b ). The PQ 2+ ion would then be available again for another cycle. Thus this herbicide would function as a catalyst for transferring electrons to oxygen. In this paradigm, formation of free radicals promoted by PQ would require activity of the plasma membrane NADPH oxidase. In fact, NADPH oxidase has been identified as an enzymatic source of electrons that trigger PQ redox cycling and extracellular ROS production in mammalian cells ( Bonneh-Barkay et al. , 2005 ; Lee et al. , 1990 ; Wu et al. , 2005 ). According to our model ( Figure 7a ), SOS1 plays a pivotal role in control of NADPH oxidase activity and apoplastic ROS production. When SOS1 is functional, the activity of NADPH oxidase would be maintained, which enhances PQ redox cycling and extracellular ROS production. Since apoplastic ROS could either be signaling molecules at low concentration or cause cell damage by oxidative stress at high concentration, a large amount of ROS produced through PQ redox cycling would be extremely toxic to plant cells. In contrast, NADPH oxidase activity in the sos1 mutant, according to our model, would be lower than in the wild type due to lack (or reduction) of extracellular alkalinization, which results in less efficient PQ redox cycling and reduced production of extracellular ROS and consequently reduced damage to the plant cells. This is also consistent with our observation that inhibition of NADPH oxidase activity by DPI increased the resistance of Arabidopsis seedlings to PQ ( Figure 6f ).

Our study on the stability of SOS1 mRNA has revealed the early signaling events involving post-transcriptional control of gene expression. The possible role of SOS1 in regulating apoplastic pH and extracellular ROS production would putatively position SOS1 at a very early signaling step of a signal transduction pathway that is common to several abiotic stresses and is probably initiated by pH alterations. This hypothesis deserves further experimental validation. Moreover, identification of signaling components that mediate stress-induced SOS1 mRNA stability will greatly improve our understanding of stress adaptation.
