---
pmid: '2951378'
title: The mannose permease of Escherichia coli consists of three different proteins.
  Amino acid sequence and function in sugar transport, sugar phosphorylation, and
  penetration of phage lambda DNA.
authors:
- Erni B
- Zanolari B
- Kocher HP
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1987'
full_text_available: false
---

# The mannose permease of Escherichia coli consists of three different proteins. Amino acid sequence and function in sugar transport, sugar phosphorylation, and penetration of phage lambda DNA.
**Authors:** Erni B, Zanolari B, Kocher HP
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1987)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1987 Apr 15;262(11):5238-47.

The mannose permease of Escherichia coli consists of three different proteins. 
Amino acid sequence and function in sugar transport, sugar phosphorylation, and 
penetration of phage lambda DNA.

Erni B, Zanolari B, Kocher HP.

The mannose permease of the bacterial phosphotransferase system mediates sugar 
transport across the cytoplasmic membrane concomitant with sugar 
phosphorylation. It also functions as a receptor for bacterial chemotaxis and is 
required for infection of the cell by bacteriophage lambda where it most likely 
functions as a pore for penetration of lambda DNA. The permease consists of 
three different subunits, IIIMan, II-PMan, and II-MMan, which are encoded in a 
single transcriptional unit ptsLPM. The complete amino acid sequence of the 
subunits is deduced from the nucleotide sequence. IIIMan (35 kDa) is a 
hydrophilic protein which is transiently phosphorylated and most likely contains 
the active site for sugar phosphorylation. II-PMan (28 kDa) is very hydrophobic; 
II-MMan (31 kDa) is moderately hydrophobic. Both are integral membrane proteins 
and most likely form the transmembrane channel. All three subunits are required 
for sugar transport and phosphorylation; II-PMan and II-MMan alone are 
sufficient for penetration of lambda DNA. Truncated forms of II-MMan and II-PMan 
are described that mediate lambda DNA penetration but have no apparent sugar 
transport activity. Residual sugar phosphorylation activity is found with the 
truncated form of II-PMan. No obvious homologies at the level of amino acid 
sequence could be detected with other bacterial transport proteins.

PMID: 2951378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
