---
pmid: '21482778'
title: Quantification of receptor tyrosine kinase transactivation through direct dimerization
  and surface density measurements in single cells.
authors:
- Swift JL
- Godin AG
- Doré K
- Freland L
- Bouchard N
- Nimmo C
- Sergeev M
- De Koninck Y
- Wiseman PW
- Beaulieu JM
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3084083
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1018280108
---

# Quantification of receptor tyrosine kinase transactivation through direct dimerization and surface density measurements in single cells.
**Authors:** Swift JL, Godin AG, Doré K, Freland L, Bouchard N, Nimmo C, Sergeev M, De Koninck Y, Wiseman PW, Beaulieu JM
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1018280108](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1018280108)
**PMC:** [PMC3084083](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3084083/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Apr 26;108(17):7016-21. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1018280108. Epub 2011 Apr 11.

Quantification of receptor tyrosine kinase transactivation through direct 
dimerization and surface density measurements in single cells.

Swift JL(1), Godin AG, Doré K, Freland L, Bouchard N, Nimmo C, Sergeev M, De 
Koninck Y, Wiseman PW, Beaulieu JM.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Chemistry and Physics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada 
H3G 0B1.

Cell signaling involves dynamic changes in protein oligomerization leading to 
the formation of different signaling complexes and modulation of activity. 
Spatial intensity distribution analysis (SpIDA) is an image analysis method that 
can directly measure oligomerization and trafficking of endogenous proteins in 
single cells. Here, we show the use of SpIDA to quantify dimerization/activation 
and surface transport of receptor protein kinases--EGF receptor and TrkB--at 
early stages of their transactivation by several G protein-coupled receptors 
(GPCRs). Transactivation occurred on the same timescale and was directly limited 
by GPCR activation but independent of G-protein coupling types. Early receptor 
protein kinase transactivation and internalization were not interdependent for 
all receptor pairs tested, revealing heterogeneity between groups of GPCRs. 
SpIDA also detected transactivation of TrkB by dopamine receptors in intact 
neurons. By allowing for time and space resolved quantification of protein 
populations with heterogeneous oligomeric states, SpIDA provides a unique 
approach to undertake single cell multivariate quantification of signaling 
processes involving changes in protein interactions, trafficking, and activity.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1018280108
PMCID: PMC3084083
PMID: 21482778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Cell signaling involves dynamic changes in protein oligomerization leading to the formation of different signaling complexes and modulation of activity. Spatial intensity distribution analysis (SpIDA) is an image analysis method that can directly measure oligomerization and trafficking of endogenous proteins in single cells. Here, we show the use of SpIDA to quantify dimerization/activation and surface transport of receptor protein kinases—EGF receptor and TrkB—at early stages of their transactivation by several G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). Transactivation occurred on the same timescale and was directly limited by GPCR activation but independent of G-protein coupling types. Early receptor protein kinase transactivation and internalization were not interdependent for all receptor pairs tested, revealing heterogeneity between groups of GPCRs. SpIDA also detected transactivation of TrkB by dopamine receptors in intact neurons. By allowing for time and space resolved quantification of protein populations with heterogeneous oligomeric states, SpIDA provides a unique approach to undertake single cell multivariate quantification of signaling processes involving changes in protein interactions, trafficking, and activity.

Discussion

Rapid and localized changes in protein–protein interactions leading to the formation of oligomeric protein complexes are of central importance for cell signaling. To understand the fine regulation of signaling in vivo, it is essential to develop tools that are able to quantify interactions of endogenous cellular proteins in a time- and space-resolved fashion at the single-cell level. Here, we used the specific case of RTK transactivation by GPCRs to show the usefulness of SpIDA to achieve this goal. We have successfully used SpIDA to quantify EGFR dimerization and surface shuttling in response to stimulation of five different GPCRs (At1aR, β 2 AR, D1, D2R, and NK-1r) in transfected cells and have detected endogenous TrkB dimerization and internalization after endogenous dopamine receptor (D1R or D2R) stimulation in neurons. This validates SpIDA as a suitable tool for the quantitative analysis of cell surface oligomerization events associated with changes in activity in single cells for both transfected systems and endogenous expression.

SpIDA is compatible with antibody detection to obtain oligomerization data for endogenous cellular proteins ( 5 ) and presents substantial advantages over FRET and other imaging techniques used to study RTK-GPCR transactivation. We showed that both FRET and SpIDA are capable of measuring an increase in EGFR dimerization in response to GPCR stimulation in transfected cells. In addition, SpIDA is also suitable for single-color analysis, requiring only one type of fluorescent label, and it allows for measurements of proteins at native levels for which fluorescent probes exist (specific antibodies or fluorescent proteins). Furthermore, SpIDA can detect indirect protein–protein interactions within common assemblies, even in absence of energy transfer (e.g., in the presence of a third partner that increases the distance between the donor– acceptor pair). Finally, by monitoring both dimer density and total particle density, SpIDA allows one to obtain more information about processes within the cell (i.e., internalization and recruitment of more receptors to the cell surface). In contrast to SpIDA, techniques based on temporal fluctuations used to measure concentration and oligomerization states [e.g., fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS) ( 12 ), fluorescence intensity distribution analysis (FIDA) ( 13 ), and photon-counting histogram (PCH) ( 14 )] do not give reliable results on density at the membrane in biological systems undergoing rapid dynamic changes. By definition, these techniques require that the density of the system and the oligomerization state of the targeted proteins stay constant during the whole experiment (∼100 s because of the slow diffusion of RTKs at the membrane) ( 15 ). In RTK activation or transactivation, substantial changes in oligomerization states occur within the first few minutes after stimulation, and SpIDA, which is applied to single images, is useful for capturing and quantifying these processes.

SpIDA provides quantitative data on the dynamics of cell surface receptor transitions from monomeric to dimeric states at the single cell level. Using dimerization as an index of activation, we measured concentration response curves, allowing us to calculate both D 50 and D max values to compare and evaluate RTK activation occurring in response to direct stimulation or indirect GPCR stimulation. The measured D 50 values for EGFR direct stimulation as well as the FRET 50 value obtained under comparable conditions were similar and slightly higher than published K d values for EGF-EGFR binding interaction ( Fig. 3 and Table S1 ). Under our experimental conditions, we start with a small population of preformed dimers ( Fig. S3 H ) and a large population of monomeric EGFR. It is believed that preformed dimers account for high-affinity binding of EGF to EGFR, and monomeric ligand-induced dimerization accounts for a population of receptors with lower-affinity binding ( 16 , 17 ). Both SpIDA and FLIM/FRET measure the response (dimerization) of the low-affinity population. It is, thus, expected that the D 50 and FRET 50 values should be slightly lower than the reported K d value given the high-affinity population.

Most studies of RTK transactivation ( 4 , 18 , 19 ) focused mostly on specific RTK/GPCR pairs, and the methods used to study these pairs did not allow for the comparison of similarities and differences in the dynamics of RTK transactivation by different GPCRs. In contrast, the ease of application of SpIDA to large datasets allowed us to examine the activation of EGFR by five GPCRs, three class A (β 2 AR, D1R, and D2R) and two class B (At1aR and NK-1r) ( 20 ). The examination of D 50 values obtained for the EGFR/GPCR transactivation pairs indicates that the experimental values obtained using SpIDA all fall within the range of K d values reported in the literature. These observations were further supported by FRET 50 values obtained in separate transactivation experiments involving At1aR receptors. In contrast, D max values obtained for transactivation experiments were lower than those obtained after direct stimulation and were limited by GPCR expression level ( Fig. 3 ). Based on these findings, we conclude that, in most cases, the transactivation of EGFR happens rapidly after GPCR activation and may be closely related to the binding kinetics of these receptors by their respective agonists.

Prolonged stimulation (30 min) of β 2 AR induces some level of EGFR internalization detectable by biochemical methods in transfected cells, a phenomenon that has been associated with proposed mechanisms for transactivation ( 2 , 21 ). However, direct measurement of surface monomer, dimer, and total particle densities at early time points indicates that not all GPCRs are equal in their ability to induce the internalization of EGFR ( Fig. S3 ). D1R, D2R, and NK-1r receptors induced rapid EGFR internalization and required the addition of the Rab5 S34N mutant to obtain full concentration response curves. In contrast, At1aR and β 2 AR did not cause rapid EGFR internalization while inducing the formation of EGFR dimers through transactivation ( Fig. S3 and Fig. 3 ). Therefore, direct quantification at early stages of the transactivation process (1 min) shows that internalization is not necessary for EGFR dimerization and that it does not occur rapidly. Furthermore, because Rab5 S34N can also prevent full GPCR internalization ( 22 ), observation of RTK transactivation in cells expressing this mutant suggests that full GPCR internalization may not be required for RTK transactivation. Differences in the induction of EGFR internalization also provide a way to classify RTK-GPCR transactivation pairs by their ability to induce rapid endocytosis of the RTKs. Because RTKs are believed to be capable of signaling on endocytic vesicles ( 4 ), the differential ability of GPCRs to induce rapid internalization of transactivated RTK may also have functional consequences in vivo.

Most research conducted on RTK transactivation by GPCRs has been performed in overexpression recombinant cell systems, and few studies have addressed the relevance of these biochemical phenomena across cell types or in native conditions. Previous studies have shown that two G α -coupled GPCRs, the Adenosine A2a and the pituitary adenylate cyclase activating peptide receptors, can transactivate endogenous immature intracellular TrkA/B receptors in PC12 cells and hippocampal or cortical neurons ( 4 , 23 ). Our results show that the catecholamine receptors (D1R and D2R) increase the dimerization of cell surface-expressed EGFR in transfected CHO-k1 cells and TrkB in striatal neurons. These findings indicate that RTK transactivation by dopamine receptors is compatible with normal expression levels of these different receptors and is not restricted to a single cell type. Furthermore, because the D1R and D2R are coupled to G α and G αi/o , it also suggests that TrkB transactivation by GPCR in neurons is not strongly associated with a single type of G-protein coupling and may be compatible with G protein-independent mechanisms involving other signaling molecules like Src and/or β-arrestin ( 9 , 24 ). It has previously been reported that TrkB transactivation occurs at significantly longer timescales compared with EGFR. Here, we observe that dimerization of TrkB receptors occurs on a similar timescale (3 min) as was observed for EGFR (1 min) when stimulated with Apo, and this dimerization response was similar in magnitude to direct stimulation with BDNF ( 4 ). Activation of TrkB by BDNF has been associated with several biological processes, including neuronal survival and neurogenesis, and it is believed to play a role in several neuropsychiatric conditions and/or in the effects of drugs used for their management. Considering the central role of dopamine receptors in the action of drugs used to treat some of these same conditions ( 25 ), transactivation of TrkB by dopamine receptors may represent a yet unexplored avenue for the study and management of psychiatric mood disorders and schizophrenia.

We have shown using multiple techniques that quantification of RTK dimerization is a powerful approach to measure transactivation and that this can be applied to studies in native cells. Furthermore, SpIDA is ideally suited for monitoring this process. Indeed, the ability of SpIDA to provide quantitative information on every state of receptor densities, oligomerization state, and localization illuminated the relationship between transactivation and trafficking. These studies revealed that, in most cases, transactivation is directly limited by GPCR activation and expression and that the processes of activation and internalization are not necessarily interdependent, because GPCRs capable of inducing RTK dimerization differ in their ability to induce subsequent internalization. Furthermore, the regulation of RTK activation or internalization by GPCR is not defined by G-protein coupling in transfected cells and intact primary cultured neurons. Finally, by allowing for time and space resolved quantification of heterogeneous oligomeric states, SpIDA makes it possible to undertake quantitative mechanistic studies not only of RTK transactivation at the cell membrane but of other cell-signaling processes involving changes in protein oligomerization, trafficking, and activity in different subcellular localizations.
