---
pmid: '15849736'
title: A splice variant of the Drosophila vesicular monoamine transporter contains
  a conserved trafficking domain and functions in the storage of dopamine, serotonin,
  and octopamine.
authors:
- Greer CL
- Grygoruk A
- Patton DE
- Ley B
- Romero-Calderon R
- Chang HY
- Houshyar R
- Bainton RJ
- Diantonio A
- Krantz DE
journal: J Neurobiol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/neu.20146
---

# A splice variant of the Drosophila vesicular monoamine transporter contains a conserved trafficking domain and functions in the storage of dopamine, serotonin, and octopamine.
**Authors:** Greer CL, Grygoruk A, Patton DE, Ley B, Romero-Calderon R, Chang HY, Houshyar R, Bainton RJ, Diantonio A, Krantz DE
**Journal:** J Neurobiol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/neu.20146](https://doi.org/10.1002/neu.20146)

## Abstract

1. J Neurobiol. 2005 Sep 5;64(3):239-58. doi: 10.1002/neu.20146.

A splice variant of the Drosophila vesicular monoamine transporter contains a 
conserved trafficking domain and functions in the storage of dopamine, 
serotonin, and octopamine.

Greer CL(1), Grygoruk A, Patton DE, Ley B, Romero-Calderon R, Chang HY, Houshyar 
R, Bainton RJ, Diantonio A, Krantz DE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, The David Geffen School 
of Medicine at UCLA, Gonda (Goldschmied) Center for Genetic and Neuroscience 
Research, 695 Charles Young Drive, Los Angeles, California 90095-1761, USA.

Vesicular monoamine transporters (VMATs) mediate the transport of dopamine (DA), 
serotonin (5HT), and other monoamines into secretory vesicles. The regulation of 
mammalian VMAT and the related vesicular acetylcholine transporter (VAChT) has 
been proposed to involve membrane trafficking, but the mechanisms remain 
unclear. To facilitate a genetic analysis of vesicular transporter function and 
regulation, we have cloned the Drosophila homolog of the vesicular monoamine 
transporter (dVMAT). We identify two mRNA splice variants (DVMAT-A and B) that 
differ at their C-terminus, the domain responsible for endocytosis of mammalian 
VMAT and VAChT. DVMAT-A contains trafficking motifs conserved in mammals but not 
C. elegans, and internalization assays indicate that the DVMAT-A C-terminus is 
involved in endocytosis. DVMAT-B contains a divergent C-terminal domain and is 
less efficiently internalized from the cell surface. Using in vitro transport 
assays, we show that DVMAT-A recognizes DA, 5HT, octopamine, tyramine, and 
histamine as substrates, and similar to mammalian VMAT homologs, is inhibited by 
the drug reserpine and the environmental toxins 2,2,4,5,6-pentachlorobiphenyl 
and heptachlor. We have developed a specific antiserum to DVMAT-A, and find that 
it localizes to dopaminergic and serotonergic neurons as well as octopaminergic, 
type II terminals at the neuromuscular junction. Surprisingly, DVMAT-A is 
co-expressed at type II terminals with the Drosophila vesicular glutamate 
transporter. Our data suggest that DVMAT-A functions as a vesicular transporter 
for DA, 5HT, and octopamine in vivo, and will provide a powerful invertebrate 
model for the study of transporter trafficking and regulation.

DOI: 10.1002/neu.20146
PMID: 15849736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
