---
pmid: '12077334'
title: Yng1p modulates the activity of Sas3p as a component of the yeast NuA3 Hhistone
  acetyltransferase complex.
authors:
- Howe L
- Kusch T
- Muster N
- Chaterji R
- Yates JR 3rd
- Workman JL
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC139787
doi: 10.1128/MCB.22.14.5047-5053.2002
---

# Yng1p modulates the activity of Sas3p as a component of the yeast NuA3 Hhistone acetyltransferase complex.
**Authors:** Howe L, Kusch T, Muster N, Chaterji R, Yates JR 3rd, Workman JL
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.22.14.5047-5053.2002](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.22.14.5047-5053.2002)
**PMC:** [PMC139787](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC139787/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Jul;22(14):5047-53. doi: 10.1128/MCB.22.14.5047-5053.2002.

Yng1p modulates the activity of Sas3p as a component of the yeast NuA3 Hhistone 
acetyltransferase complex.

Howe L(1), Kusch T, Muster N, Chaterji R, Yates JR 3rd, Workman JL.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802-4500, USA.

The mammalian ING1 gene encodes a tumor suppressor required for the function of 
p53. In this study we report a novel function for YNG1, a yeast homolog of ING1. 
Yng1p is a stable component of the NuA3 histone acetyltransferase complex, which 
contains Sas3p, the yeast homolog of the mammalian MOZ proto-oncogene product, 
as its catalytic subunit. Yng1p is required for NuA3 function in vivo but 
surprisingly is not required for the integrity of the complex. Instead, we find 
that Yng1p mediates the interaction of Sas3p with nucleosomes and is thus 
required for the ability of NuA3 to modify histone tails. These data, and the 
observations that other ING1 homologs are found in additional yeast complexes 
that posttranslationally modify histones, suggest that members of the ING1 class 
of proteins may have broad roles in enhancing or modifying the activities of 
chromatin-modifying complexes, thereby regulating their activities in 
transcription control.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.22.14.5047-5053.2002
PMCID: PMC139787
PMID: 12077334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
