---
pmid: '11517196'
title: Opposite effect of prolactin and prostaglandin F(2 alpha) on the expression
  of luteal genes as revealed by rat cDNA expression array.
authors:
- Stocco C
- Callegari E
- Gibori G
journal: Endocrinology
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1210/endo.142.9.8493
---

# Opposite effect of prolactin and prostaglandin F(2 alpha) on the expression of luteal genes as revealed by rat cDNA expression array.
**Authors:** Stocco C, Callegari E, Gibori G
**Journal:** Endocrinology (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1210/endo.142.9.8493](https://doi.org/10.1210/endo.142.9.8493)

## Abstract

1. Endocrinology. 2001 Sep;142(9):4158-61. doi: 10.1210/endo.142.9.8493.

Opposite effect of prolactin and prostaglandin F(2 alpha) on the expression of 
luteal genes as revealed by rat cDNA expression array.

Stocco C(1), Callegari E, Gibori G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, College of Medicine, University of 
Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.

It is well established that prolactin (PRL) sustains, while prostaglandin F(2 
alpha) (PGF(2 alpha)) curtails, progesterone production by the rat corpus luteum 
(CL). We have previously shown that the actions of both molecules converge on 
the 20 alpha-HSD gene and control its expression in a dramatically opposed 
manner. In this investigation, we have found twelve more genes that are 
inversely regulated by PRL and PGF(2 alpha). In addition to 20 alpha-HSD, PGF(2 
alpha) stimulated and PRL inhibited PGF(2 alpha)-receptor, phospholipase C 
delta(1) and TGF beta(1) expression. In contrast PRL stimulated and PGF(2 alpha) 
inhibited the LH receptor, 11 beta-HSD2, sterol carrier protein 2, mitochondrial 
glutathione S-transferase (GST), GST mu(2), inhibitory DNA-binding proteins 1, 
2, and 3, and calcium binding protein 2. We have also identified new target 
genes for PRL and PGF(2 alpha). PGF(2 alpha) stimulated the expression of genes 
involved in cell signaling such as cell adhesion kinase-beta, ERK3, FRA2, IL-2 
receptor, and 14-3-3 proteins. PGF(2 alpha) also up-regulated the expression of 
the sodium channel beta(1), Na/K ATPase, annexin IV, GST7pi, and P450 reductase. 
In contrast PGF(2 alpha) inhibited the expression of two genes involved in cell 
cycle: cyclin D2 and retinoblastoma related protein (Rb2/p130). It also 
inhibited genes involved in estradiol (P-450(AROM)) and cholesterol biosynthesis 
(HMG-CoA synthase), as well as genes involved in tissue remodeling: VEGF and 
TIMP3. PRL had a profound inhibitory effect on the expression of genes encoding 
the ADP-ribosylation factor 3, annexin V and c-jun, yet increased the expression 
of P450scc, 3beta-HSD, and SR-B1 (HDL-receptor), all genes involved in 
steroidogenesis. PRL also stimulated the expression of beta(2)-microglobulin, 
TIMP2, cytochrome c oxidase IV, cathepsin H and L, and copper-zinc superoxide 
dismutase as well as elongation factor SIII, heat shock protein-60 and 
mitochondrial ATP synthase-D. In conclusion, this investigation has revealed a 
"yin-yang" relationship between PRL and PGF(2 alpha) in regulating certain 
critical genes in the rodent CL, and has demonstrated novel regulation by these 
factors of other important genes involved in luteal function.

DOI: 10.1210/endo.142.9.8493
PMID: 11517196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
