---
pmid: '9305894'
title: p32 protein, a splicing factor 2-associated protein, is localized in mitochondrial
  matrix and is functionally important in maintaining oxidative phosphorylation.
authors:
- Muta T
- Kang D
- Kitajima S
- Fujiwara T
- Hamasaki N
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.39.24363
---

# p32 protein, a splicing factor 2-associated protein, is localized in mitochondrial matrix and is functionally important in maintaining oxidative phosphorylation.
**Authors:** Muta T, Kang D, Kitajima S, Fujiwara T, Hamasaki N
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.272.39.24363](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.272.39.24363)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1997 Sep 26;272(39):24363-70. doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.39.24363.

p32 protein, a splicing factor 2-associated protein, is localized in 
mitochondrial matrix and is functionally important in maintaining oxidative 
phosphorylation.

Muta T(1), Kang D, Kitajima S, Fujiwara T, Hamasaki N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Kyushu University, 
Faculty of Medicine, Fukuoka 812-82, Japan.

Human p32, originally cloned as a splicing factor 2-associated protein, has been 
reported to interact with a variety of molecules including human 
immunodeficiency virus Tat and complement 1q (C1q). p32 protein is supposed to 
be in the nucleus and on the plasma membrane for the association with human 
immunodeficiency virus Tat and C1q, respectively. None of the interactions, 
however, is proven to have a physiological role. To investigate the 
physiological function of p32, we determined the intracellular localization of 
p32. The fractionation of cells, fluorescent immunocytochemistry, and electron 
microscopic immunostaining show that p32 is exclusively localized in the 
mitochondrial matrix. We cloned a Saccharomyces cerevisiae homologue of human 
p32 gene, referred to yeast p30 gene. The yeast p30 protein is also localized in 
the mitochondrial matrix. The disruption of the p30 gene caused the growth 
retardation of yeast cells in a glycerol medium but not in a glucose medium, 
i.e. the impairment of the mitochondrial ATP synthesis. The growth impairment 
was restored by the introduction of the human p32 cDNA, indicating that p30 is a 
functional yeast counterpart of human p32. Taken together, both p32 and p30 
reside in mitochondrial matrix and play an important role in maintaining 
mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.272.39.24363
PMID: 9305894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
