---
pmid: '12209855'
title: Cellular and subcellular distribution of D-aspartate oxidase in human and rat
  brain.
authors:
- Zaar K
- Köst HP
- Schad A
- Völkl A
- Baumgart E
- Fahimi HD
journal: J Comp Neurol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/cne.10320
---

# Cellular and subcellular distribution of D-aspartate oxidase in human and rat brain.
**Authors:** Zaar K, Köst HP, Schad A, Völkl A, Baumgart E, Fahimi HD
**Journal:** J Comp Neurol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cne.10320](https://doi.org/10.1002/cne.10320)

## Abstract

1. J Comp Neurol. 2002 Aug 26;450(3):272-82. doi: 10.1002/cne.10320.

Cellular and subcellular distribution of D-aspartate oxidase in human and rat 
brain.

Zaar K(1), Köst HP, Schad A, Völkl A, Baumgart E, Fahimi HD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology II, Division of Medical Cell Biology, 
University of Heidelberg, D-69115 Heidelberg, Germany. 
Kurt.Zaar@urz.uni-heidelberg.de

The unusual amino acid D-aspartate is present in significant amounts in brain 
and endocrine glands and is supposed to be involved in neurotransmission and 
neurosecretion (Wolosker et al. [2000] Neuroscience 100:183-189). D-aspartate 
oxidase is the only enzyme known to metabolize D-aspartate and could regulate 
its level in different regions of the brain. We examined the cellular and 
subcellular distribution of this enzyme and its mRNA in human and rat brain by 
immunohistochemistry, in situ hybridization, and immunoelectron microscopy. 
D-aspartate oxidase protein and mRNA are ubiquitous. The protein shows a 
granular pattern, particularly within neurons and to a significantly lesser 
extent in astrocytes and oligodendrocytes. No evidence for a synaptic 
association was observed. Whereas between most positive neurons only gradual 
differences were observed, in the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus, neurons 
with high enzyme content were found next to others with no labeling. cDNA 
cloning of D-aspartate oxidase corroborates an inherent targeting signal 
sequence for protein import into peroxisomes. Immunoelectron microscopy showed 
that the protein is localized in single membrane-bound organelles, apparently 
peroxisomes.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/cne.10320
PMID: 12209855 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
