---
pmid: '19912257'
title: A20 is an early responding negative regulator of Toll-like receptor 5 signalling
  in intestinal epithelial cells during inflammation.
authors:
- Oshima N
- Ishihara S
- Rumi MA
- Aziz MM
- Mishima Y
- Kadota C
- Moriyama I
- Ishimura N
- Amano Y
- Kinoshita Y
journal: Clin Exp Immunol
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2810387
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2009.04048.x
---

# A20 is an early responding negative regulator of Toll-like receptor 5 signalling in intestinal epithelial cells during inflammation.
**Authors:** Oshima N, Ishihara S, Rumi MA, Aziz MM, Mishima Y, Kadota C, Moriyama I, Ishimura N, Amano Y, Kinoshita Y
**Journal:** Clin Exp Immunol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2249.2009.04048.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2249.2009.04048.x)
**PMC:** [PMC2810387](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2810387/)

## Abstract

1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2010 Feb;159(2):185-98. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2249.2009.04048.x.  Epub 2009 Nov 12.

A20 is an early responding negative regulator of Toll-like receptor 5 signalling 
in intestinal epithelial cells during inflammation.

Oshima N(1), Ishihara S, Rumi MA, Aziz MM, Mishima Y, Kadota C, Moriyama I, 
Ishimura N, Amano Y, Kinoshita Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, Shimane University School of Medicine, 
Izumo, Shimane, Japan.

Several negative regulatory mechanisms control Toll-like receptor (TLR)-mediated 
inflammatory responses and restore immune system balance, including the 
zinc-finger protein A20, a negative regulator of TLR signalling that inhibits 
nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB) activity. In the present study, we 
investigated TLR-5-mediated A20 expression and its role in intestinal epithelial 
cells (IECs) during inflammation. HCT-15 and HT-29 cells were stimulated with 
flagellin, then the expressions of A20, interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase 
(IRAK-M) and Tollip were evaluated using RNase protection assay. Furthermore, 
experimental colitis was induced in tlr4-deficient CH3/HeJ mice by 
administration of dextran sodium sulphate (DSS), then flagellin was injected 
anally, and the colonic expression of A20 was examined by real-time polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) and immunohistochemistry. To confirm flagellin-induced 
expression of A20, we employed an organ culture system. The role of A20 in 
flagellin-induced tolerance induction was evaluated in vitro, using a gene 
knock-down method targeting A20. A20 expression increased rapidly and peaked at 
1 h after flagellin stimulation in cultured IECs, then declined gradually to the 
basal level. In vivo, anal injection of flagellin induced epithelial expression 
of A20 in injured colonic tissue, whereas flagellin did not cause a significant 
increase in A20 expression in non-injured normal tissue, which was also 
confirmed in vitro using the organ culture system. Gene knock-down using A20 
siRNA did not influence tolerance induced by restimulation with flagellin. A20 
is an early response negative regulator of TLR-5 signalling in IECs that 
functions during intestinal inflammation. Our results provide new insights into 
the negative feedback regulation of TLR-5 signalling that maintains the innate 
immune system in the gut.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2009.04048.x
PMCID: PMC2810387
PMID: 19912257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
