---
pmid: '21666598'
title: Shugoshin is a Mad1/Cdc20-like interactor of Mad2.
authors:
- Orth M
- Mayer B
- Rehm K
- Rothweiler U
- Heidmann D
- Holak TA
- Stemmann O
journal: EMBO J
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3160248
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.187
---

# Shugoshin is a Mad1/Cdc20-like interactor of Mad2.
**Authors:** Orth M, Mayer B, Rehm K, Rothweiler U, Heidmann D, Holak TA, Stemmann O
**Journal:** EMBO J (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2011.187](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2011.187)
**PMC:** [PMC3160248](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3160248/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2011 Jun 10;30(14):2868-80. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.187.

Shugoshin is a Mad1/Cdc20-like interactor of Mad2.

Orth M(1), Mayer B, Rehm K, Rothweiler U, Heidmann D, Holak TA, Stemmann O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Bayreuth, Bayreuth, Germany.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2011 Jul 20;30(14):2759-61. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.217.

Mammalian centromeric cohesin is protected from phosphorylation-dependent 
displacement in mitotic prophase by shugoshin-1 (Sgo1), while shugoshin-2 (Sgo2) 
protects cohesin from separase-dependent cleavage in meiosis I. In higher 
eukaryotes, progression and faithful execution of both mitosis and meiosis are 
controlled by the spindle assembly checkpoint, which delays anaphase onset until 
chromosomes have achieved proper attachment to microtubules. According to the 
so-called template model, Mad1-Mad2 complexes at unattached kinetochores 
instruct conformational change of soluble Mad2, thus catalysing Mad2 binding to 
its target Cdc20. Here, we show that human Sgo2, but not Sgo1, specifically 
interacts with Mad2 in a manner that strongly resembles the interactions of Mad2 
with Mad1 or Cdc20. Sgo2 contains a Mad1/Cdc20-like Mad2-interaction motif and 
competes with Mad1 and Cdc20 for binding to Mad2. NMR and biochemical analyses 
show that shugoshin binding induces similar conformational changes in Mad2 as do 
Mad1 or Cdc20. Mad2 binding regulates fine-tuning of Sgo2's sub-centromeric 
localization. Mad2 binding is conserved in the only known Xenopus laevis 
shugoshin homologue and, compatible with a putative meiotic function, the 
interaction occurs in oocytes.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2011.187
PMCID: PMC3160248
PMID: 21666598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
