---
pmid: '29883609'
title: PELI1 Selectively Targets Kinase-Active RIP3 for Ubiquitylation-Dependent Proteasomal
  Degradation.
authors:
- Choi SW
- Park HH
- Kim S
- Chung JM
- Noh HJ
- Kim SK
- Song HK
- Lee CW
- Morgan MJ
- Kang HC
- Kim YS
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2018.05.016
---

# PELI1 Selectively Targets Kinase-Active RIP3 for Ubiquitylation-Dependent Proteasomal Degradation.
**Authors:** Choi SW, Park HH, Kim S, Chung JM, Noh HJ, Kim SK, Song HK, Lee CW, Morgan MJ, Kang HC, Kim YS
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2018.05.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2018.05.016)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2018 Jun 7;70(5):920-935.e7. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2018.05.016. Epub
 2018 Jun 7.

PELI1 Selectively Targets Kinase-Active RIP3 for Ubiquitylation-Dependent
Proteasomal Degradation.

Choi SW(1), Park HH(2), Kim S(3), Chung JM(3), Noh HJ(2), Kim SK(4), Song HK(5),
Lee CW(6), Morgan MJ(7), Kang HC(8), Kim YS(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, Korea;
Genomic Instability Research Center, Ajou University, School of Medicine, Suwon,
Korea.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, Korea;
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Graduate School, Ajou University, Suwon,
Korea.
(3)Department of Physiology, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, Korea.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Ajou University, School of Medicine, Suwon, Korea.
(5)Department of Life Sciences, Korea University, Seoul, Korea.
(6)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Sungkyunkwan University School of
Medicine, Suwon, Korea.
(7)Department of Pharmacology, University of Colorado School of Medicine,
Aurora, CO, USA.
(8)Genomic Instability Research Center, Ajou University, School of Medicine,
Suwon, Korea; Department of Physiology, Ajou University School of Medicine,
Suwon, Korea. Electronic address: hckang@ajou.ac.kr.
(9)Department of Biochemistry, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, Korea;
Genomic Instability Research Center, Ajou University, School of Medicine, Suwon,
Korea; Department of Biomedical Sciences, Graduate School, Ajou University,
Suwon, Korea. Electronic address: yousunkim@ajou.ac.kr.

Receptor-interacting protein kinase-3 (RIP3 or RIPK3) is a central protein in
necroptosis, but posttranslational processes that regulate RIP3 activity and
stability remain poorly understood. Here, we identify pellino E3 ubiquitin
protein ligase 1 (PELI1) as an E3 ligase that targets RIP3 for
proteasome-dependent degradation. Phosphorylation of RIP3 on T182 leads to
interaction with the forkhead-associated (FHA) domain of PELI1 and
PELI1-mediated K48-linked polyubiquitylation of RIP3 on K363. This same
phosphorylation event is also important for RIP3 kinase activity; thus, PELI1
preferentially targets kinase-active RIP3 for degradation. PELI1-mediated RIP3
degradation effectively prevents cell death triggered by RIP3 hyperactivation.
Importantly, upregulated RIP3 expression in keratinocytes from toxic epidermal
necrolysis (TEN) patients is correlated with low expression of PELI1, suggesting
that loss of PELI1 may play a role in the pathogenesis of TEN. We propose that
PELI1 may function to control inadvertent activation of RIP3, thus preventing
aberrant cell death and maintaining cellular homeostasis.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2018.05.016
PMID: 29883609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
