---
pmid: '10966108'
title: Involvement of the TIP60 histone acetylase complex in DNA repair and apoptosis.
authors:
- Ikura T
- Ogryzko VV
- Grigoriev M
- Groisman R
- Wang J
- Horikoshi M
- Scully R
- Qin J
- Nakatani Y
journal: Cell
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)00051-9
---

# Involvement of the TIP60 histone acetylase complex in DNA repair and apoptosis.
**Authors:** Ikura T, Ogryzko VV, Grigoriev M, Groisman R, Wang J, Horikoshi M, Scully R, Qin J, Nakatani Y
**Journal:** Cell (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(00)00051-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(00)00051-9)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2000 Aug 18;102(4):463-73. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)00051-9.

Involvement of the TIP60 histone acetylase complex in DNA repair and apoptosis.

Ikura T(1), Ogryzko VV, Grigoriev M, Groisman R, Wang J, Horikoshi M, Scully R, 
Qin J, Nakatani Y.

Author information:
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

It is well known that histone acetylases are important chromatin modifiers and 
that they play a central role in chromatin transcription. Here, we present 
evidence for novel roles of histone acetylases. The TIP60 histone acetylase 
purifies as a multimeric protein complex. Besides histone acetylase activity on 
chromatin, the TIP60 complex possesses ATPase, DNA helicase, and structural DNA 
binding activities. Ectopic expression of mutated TIP60 lacking histone 
acetylase activity results in cells with defective double-strand DNA break 
repair. Importantly, the resulting cells lose their apoptotic competence, 
suggesting a defect in the cells' ability to signal the existence of DNA damage 
to the apoptotic machinery. These results indicate that the histone acetylase 
TIP60-containing complex plays a role in DNA repair and apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)00051-9
PMID: 10966108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
