---
pmid: '11375976'
title: Telomeric protein Pin2/TRF1 as an important ATM target in response to double
  strand DNA breaks.
authors:
- Kishi S
- Zhou XZ
- Ziv Y
- Khoo C
- Hill DE
- Shiloh Y
- Lu KP
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M011534200
---

# Telomeric protein Pin2/TRF1 as an important ATM target in response to double strand DNA breaks.
**Authors:** Kishi S, Zhou XZ, Ziv Y, Khoo C, Hill DE, Shiloh Y, Lu KP
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M011534200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M011534200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 3;276(31):29282-91. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M011534200. Epub
2001  May 25.

Telomeric protein Pin2/TRF1 as an important ATM target in response to double 
strand DNA breaks.

Kishi S(1), Zhou XZ, Ziv Y, Khoo C, Hill DE, Shiloh Y, Lu KP.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Biology Program, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of 
Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

ATM mutations are responsible for the genetic disease ataxia-telangiectasia 
(A-T). ATM encodes a protein kinase that is activated by ionizing 
radiation-induced double strand DNA breaks. Cells derived from A-T patients show 
many abnormalities, including accelerated telomere loss and hypersensitivity to 
ionizing radiation; they enter into mitosis and apoptosis after DNA damage. Pin2 
was originally identified as a protein involved in G(2)/M regulation and is 
almost identical to TRF1, a telomeric protein that negatively regulates telomere 
elongation. Pin2 and TRF1, probably encoded by the same gene, PIN2/TRF1, are 
regulated during the cell cycle. Furthermore, up-regulation of Pin2 or TRF1 
induces mitotic entry and apoptosis, a phenotype similar to that of A-T cells 
after DNA damage. These results suggest that ATM may regulate the function of 
Pin2/TRF1, but their exact relationship remains unknown. Here we show that 
Pin2/TRF1 coimmunoprecipitated with ATM, and its phosphorylation was increased 
in an ATM-dependent manner by ionizing DNA damage. Furthermore, activated ATM 
directly phosphorylated Pin2/TRF1 preferentially on the conserved Ser(219)-Gln 
site in vitro and in vivo. The biological significance of this phosphorylation 
is substantiated by functional analyses of the phosphorylation site mutants. 
Although expression of Pin2 and its mutants has no detectable effect on telomere 
length in transient transfection, a Pin2 mutant refractory to ATM 
phosphorylation on Ser(219) potently induces mitotic entry and apoptosis and 
increases radiation hypersensitivity of A-T cells. In contrast, Pin2 mutants 
mimicking ATM phosphorylation on Ser(219) completely fail to induce apoptosis 
and also reduce radiation hypersensitivity of A-T cells. Interestingly, the 
phenotype of the phosphorylation-mimicking mutants is the same as that which 
resulted from inhibition of endogenous Pin2/TRF1 in A-T cells by its 
dominant-negative mutants. These results demonstrate for the first time that ATM 
interacts with and phosphorylates Pin2/TRF1 and suggest that Pin2/TRF1 may be 
involved in the cellular response to double strand DNA breaks.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M011534200
PMID: 11375976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
