---
pmid: '22306971'
title: Rhodopsin 5- and Rhodopsin 6-mediated clock synchronization in Drosophila melanogaster
  is independent of retinal phospholipase C-β signaling.
authors:
- Szular J
- Sehadova H
- Gentile C
- Szabo G
- Chou WH
- Britt SG
- Stanewsky R
journal: J Biol Rhythms
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4405110
doi: 10.1177/0748730411431673
---

# Rhodopsin 5- and Rhodopsin 6-mediated clock synchronization in Drosophila melanogaster is independent of retinal phospholipase C-β signaling.
**Authors:** Szular J, Sehadova H, Gentile C, Szabo G, Chou WH, Britt SG, Stanewsky R
**Journal:** J Biol Rhythms (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0748730411431673](https://doi.org/10.1177/0748730411431673)
**PMC:** [PMC4405110](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4405110/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Rhythms. 2012 Feb;27(1):25-36. doi: 10.1177/0748730411431673.

Rhodopsin 5- and Rhodopsin 6-mediated clock synchronization in Drosophila 
melanogaster is independent of retinal phospholipase C-β signaling.

Szular J(1), Sehadova H, Gentile C, Szabo G, Chou WH, Britt SG, Stanewsky R.

Author information:
(1)School of Biological and Chemical Sciences, Queen Mary, University of London, 
London, United Kingdom.

Circadian clocks of most organisms are synchronized with the 24-hour solar day 
by the changes of light and dark. In Drosophila, both the visual photoreceptors 
in the compound eyes as well as the blue-light photoreceptor Cryptochrome 
expressed within the brain clock neurons contribute to this clock 
synchronization. A specialized photoreceptive structure located between the 
retina and the optic lobes, the Hofbauer-Buchner (H-B) eyelet, projects to the 
clock neurons in the brain and also participates in light synchronization. The 
compound eye photoreceptors and the H-B eyelet contain Rhodopsin photopigments, 
which activate the canonical invertebrate phototransduction cascade after being 
excited by light. We show here that 2 of the photopigments present in these 
photoreceptors, Rhodopsin 5 (Rh5) and Rhodopsin 6 (Rh6), contribute to light 
synchronization in a mutant (norpA(P41) ) that disrupts canonical 
phototransduction due to the absence of Phospholipase C-β (PLC-β). We reveal 
that norpA(P41) is a true loss-of-function allele, resulting in a truncated 
PLC-β protein that lacks the catalytic domain. Light reception mediated by Rh5 
and Rh6 must therefore utilize either a different (nonretinal) PLC-β enzyme or 
alternative signaling mechanisms, at least in terms of clock-relevant 
photoreception. This novel signaling mode may distinguish Rhodopsin-mediated 
irradiance detection from image-forming vision in Drosophila.

DOI: 10.1177/0748730411431673
PMCID: PMC4405110
PMID: 22306971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT The author(s) 
have no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, 
authorship, and/or publication of this article.
