---
pmid: '17662942'
title: MTERF3 is a negative regulator of mammalian mtDNA transcription.
authors:
- Park CB
- Asin-Cayuela J
- Cámara Y
- Shi Y
- Pellegrini M
- Gaspari M
- Wibom R
- Hultenby K
- Erdjument-Bromage H
- Tempst P
- Falkenberg M
- Gustafsson CM
- Larsson NG
journal: Cell
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.05.046
---

# MTERF3 is a negative regulator of mammalian mtDNA transcription.
**Authors:** Park CB, Asin-Cayuela J, Cámara Y, Shi Y, Pellegrini M, Gaspari M, Wibom R, Hultenby K, Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P, Falkenberg M, Gustafsson CM, Larsson NG
**Journal:** Cell (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2007.05.046](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2007.05.046)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2007 Jul 27;130(2):273-85. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.05.046.

MTERF3 is a negative regulator of mammalian mtDNA transcription.

Park CB(1), Asin-Cayuela J, Cámara Y, Shi Y, Pellegrini M, Gaspari M, Wibom R, 
Hultenby K, Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P, Falkenberg M, Gustafsson CM, Larsson 
NG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, S-141 86 Stockholm, 
Sweden.

Comment in
    Cell. 2007 Jul 27;130(2):211-3. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.07.002.

Regulation of mammalian mtDNA gene expression is critical for altering oxidative 
phosphorylation capacity in response to physiological demands and disease 
processes. The basal machinery for initiation of mtDNA transcription has been 
molecularly defined, but the mechanisms regulating its activity are poorly 
understood. In this study, we show that MTERF3 is a negative regulator of mtDNA 
transcription initiation. The MTERF3 gene is essential because homozygous 
knockout mouse embryos die in midgestation. Tissue-specific inactivation of 
MTERF3 in the heart causes aberrant mtDNA transcription and severe respiratory 
chain deficiency. MTERF3 binds the mtDNA promoter region and depletion of MTERF3 
increases transcription initiation on both mtDNA strands. This increased 
transcription initiation leads to decreased expression of critical 
promoter-distal tRNA genes, which is possibly explained by transcriptional 
collision on the circular mtDNA molecule. To our knowledge, MTERF3 is the first 
example of a mitochondrial protein that acts as a specific repressor of 
mammalian mtDNA transcription initiation in vivo.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.05.046
PMID: 17662942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
