---
pmid: '16808934'
title: OsBLE3, a brassinolide-enhanced gene, is involved in the growth of rice.
authors:
- Yang G
- Nakamura H
- Ichikawa H
- Kitano H
- Komatsu S
journal: Phytochemistry
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.phytochem.2006.05.026
---

# OsBLE3, a brassinolide-enhanced gene, is involved in the growth of rice.
**Authors:** Yang G, Nakamura H, Ichikawa H, Kitano H, Komatsu S
**Journal:** Phytochemistry (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.phytochem.2006.05.026](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phytochem.2006.05.026)

## Abstract

1. Phytochemistry. 2006 Jul;67(14):1442-54. doi: 10.1016/j.phytochem.2006.05.026.
 Epub 2006 Jun 30.

OsBLE3, a brassinolide-enhanced gene, is involved in the growth of rice.

Yang G(1), Nakamura H, Ichikawa H, Kitano H, Komatsu S.

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Agrobiological Sciences, 2-1-2 Kannondai, Tsukuba 
305-8602, Japan.

Brassinosteroids (BRs) are a group of plant hormones involved in a wide range of 
plant growth and developmental processes. To investigate the mechanism of BR 
action in monocots, a brassinolide (BL) upregulated gene designated OsBLE3 was 
identified, cloned and characterized in rice. It was mainly expressed in roots 
and leaf sheaths with levels of expression directly dependent on the dose of BL. 
In situ hybridization detected OsBLE3 mRNA in the shoot apical meristem, organ 
primordia and vascular tissue. Furthermore, its expression was enhanced by 
co-treatment with BL and low concentrations of IAA. These results, and the 
existence of auxin response elements in the 5'-flanking region of the OsBLE3 
gene, indicate that OsBLE3 expression is under control of both BR and auxin. The 
GUS reporter gene driven by a 2277 bp OsBLE3 putative promoter was mainly 
expressed in vascular tissues, branch root primordia and was responsive to 
exogenous BL treatment. OsBLE3 transcript levels were greatly reduced in brd1 
plants, a BL deficient mutant, compared to the wild type control. In OsBRI1 
antisense transgenic rice and OsBLE3, the BR-insensitive mutant expression of 
OsBLE3 in response to exogenous BL treatment was significantly lower compared to 
that in control plants transformed with a vacant vector. Reduced OsBLE3 
expression and growth retardation was also observed in OsBLE3 antisense 
transgenic rice plants. Internode cell length of the OsBLE3 antisense transgenic 
lines was about 70% of that in the vacant vector transformed control lines. 
These results suggest that OsBLE3 is involved in cell elongation in rice through 
dual regulation by BL and IAA.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phytochem.2006.05.026
PMID: 16808934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
