---
pmid: '7782287'
title: Mutagenesis studies of the phosphorylation sites of recombinant human pyruvate
  dehydrogenase. Site-specific regulation.
authors:
- Korotchkina LG
- Patel MS
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.24.14297
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Mutagenesis studies of the phosphorylation sites of recombinant human pyruvate dehydrogenase. Site-specific regulation.
**Authors:** Korotchkina LG, Patel MS
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.270.24.14297](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.270.24.14297)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1995 Jun 16;270(24):14297-304. doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.24.14297.

Mutagenesis studies of the phosphorylation sites of recombinant human pyruvate 
dehydrogenase. Site-specific regulation.

Korotchkina LG(1), Patel MS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, State 
University of New York at Buffalo 14214, USA.

Mammalian pyruvate dehydrogenase (alpha 2 beta 2) (E1) is regulated by 
phosphorylation-dephosphorylation, catalyzed by the E1-kinase and the 
phospho-E1-phosphatase. Using site-directed mutagenesis of the three 
phosphorylation sites (sites 1, 2, and 3) on E1 alpha, several human E1 mutants 
were made with single, double, and triple mutations by changing Ser to Ala. 
Mutation at site 1 but not at sites 2 and/or 3 decreased E1 specific activity 
and also increased Km values for thiamin pyrophosphate and pyruvate. Sites 1, 2, 
and 3 in the E1 mutants were phosphorylated either individually or in the 
presence of the other sites by the dihydrolipoamide acetyltransferase-protein 
X-E1 kinase indicating a site-independent mechanism of phosphorylation. 
Phosphorylation of each site resulted in complete inactivation of the E1. 
However, the rates of phosphorylation and inactivation were site-specific. Sites 
1, 2, and 3 were dephosphorylated either individually or in the presence of the 
other sites by the phospho-E1-phosphatase resulting in complete reactivation of 
the E1. The rates of dephosphorylation and reactivation were similar for sites 
1, 2, and 3, indicating a random dephosphorylation mechanism.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.270.24.14297
PMID: 7782287 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
