---
pmid: '23397142'
title: Analysis of protein-protein interactions in cross-talk pathways reveals CRKL
  protein as a novel prognostic marker in hepatocellular carcinoma.
authors:
- Liu CH
- Chen TC
- Chau GY
- Jan YH
- Chen CH
- Hsu CN
- Lin KT
- Juang YL
- Lu PJ
- Cheng HC
- Chen MH
- Chang CF
- Ting YS
- Kao CY
- Hsiao M
- Huang CY
journal: Mol Cell Proteomics
year: '2013'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3650343
doi: 10.1074/mcp.O112.020404
---

# Analysis of protein-protein interactions in cross-talk pathways reveals CRKL protein as a novel prognostic marker in hepatocellular carcinoma.
**Authors:** Liu CH, Chen TC, Chau GY, Jan YH, Chen CH, Hsu CN, Lin KT, Juang YL, Lu PJ, Cheng HC, Chen MH, Chang CF, Ting YS, Kao CY, Hsiao M, Huang CY
**Journal:** Mol Cell Proteomics (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1074/mcp.O112.020404](https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.O112.020404)
**PMC:** [PMC3650343](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3650343/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2013 May;12(5):1335-49. doi: 10.1074/mcp.O112.020404.
Epub  2013 Feb 8.

Analysis of protein-protein interactions in cross-talk pathways reveals CRKL 
protein as a novel prognostic marker in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Liu CH(1), Chen TC, Chau GY, Jan YH, Chen CH, Hsu CN, Lin KT, Juang YL, Lu PJ, 
Cheng HC, Chen MH, Chang CF, Ting YS, Kao CY, Hsiao M, Huang CY.

Author information:
(1)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Electronic and Bioinformatics, National 
Taiwan University, Taipei 106, Taiwan.

Deciphering the network of signaling pathways in cancer via protein-protein 
interactions (PPIs) at the cellular level is a promising approach but remains 
incomplete. We used an in situ proximity ligation assay to identify and quantify 
67 endogenous PPIs among 21 interlinked pathways in two hepatocellular carcinoma 
(HCC) cells, Huh7 (minimally migratory cells) and Mahlavu (highly migratory 
cells). We then applied a differential network biology analysis and determined 
that the novel interaction, CRKL-FLT1, has a high centrality ranking, and the 
expression of this interaction is strongly correlated with the migratory ability 
of HCC and other cancer cell lines. Knockdown of CRKL and FLT1 in HCC cells 
leads to a decrease in cell migration via ERK signaling and the 
epithelial-mesenchymal transition process. Our immunohistochemical analysis 
shows high expression levels of the CRKL and CRKL-FLT1 pair that strongly 
correlate with reduced disease-free and overall survival in HCC patient samples, 
and a multivariate analysis further established CRKL and the CRKL-FLT1 as novel 
prognosis markers. This study demonstrated that functional exploration of a 
disease network with interlinked pathways via PPIs can be used to discover novel 
biomarkers.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.O112.020404
PMCID: PMC3650343
PMID: 23397142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Deciphering the network of signaling pathways in cancer via protein-protein interactions (PPIs) at the cellular level is a promising approach but remains incomplete. We used an in situ proximity ligation assay to identify and quantify 67 endogenous PPIs among 21 interlinked pathways in two hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells, Huh7 (minimally migratory cells) and Mahlavu (highly migratory cells). We then applied a differential network biology analysis and determined that the novel interaction, CRKL-FLT1, has a high centrality ranking, and the expression of this interaction is strongly correlated with the migratory ability of HCC and other cancer cell lines. Knockdown of CRKL and FLT1 in HCC cells leads to a decrease in cell migration via ERK signaling and the epithelial-mesenchymal transition process. Our immunohistochemical analysis shows high expression levels of the CRKL and CRKL-FLT1 pair that strongly correlate with reduced disease-free and overall survival in HCC patient samples, and a multivariate analysis further established CRKL and the CRKL-FLT1 as novel prognosis markers. This study demonstrated that functional exploration of a disease network with interlinked pathways via PPIs can be used to discover novel biomarkers.

DISCUSSION

Our study was inspired by the notion that cross-talk connections (interlinked PPIs) with new pathways may lead to hallmark capabilities ( 6 ) in cancer and that the interlinking of signaling networks drives phenotypic alterations while maintaining the robustness of the network during tumor progression ( 32 ). Therefore, we applied a cost-effective computational method using existing PPI databases to infer the candidates are likely to be involved in HCC migration. We subsequently validated these candidates using an empirical method to boost the accuracy, followed by computational analysis to prioritize the candidates for a functional assay. This is the first systematic and quantitative measurement of PPIs at the cellular level via an in situ PLA assay. The resulting PPI data from highly migratory and minimally migratory HCC cells were used in differential network biology to study the fundamental biological responses and to reveal the architecture of an interactome, which can be massively rewired during a cellular or adaptive response ( 29 , 30 ). Finally, the identification and characterization of the CRKL-FLT1 interaction in HCC cell lines and patient specimens establish the CRKL and CRKL-FLT1 pair as new prognosis markers in HCC. We anticipate that this scalable and general approach will be applicable to other cancer types and complex diseases.

FLT1 is a therapeutic target for several clinically utilized tyrosine kinase inhibitors ( e.g. Vatalanib, Cediranib, and Sorafenib) and is detected on bone marrow-derived hematopoietic progenitor cells, which home to tumor-specific pre-metastatic sites and form clusters ( 33 ). CRKL is a molecular bridge connecting tyrosine kinases and their substrates to many cellular signaling processes ( 34 ). A recent study revealed that CRKL may be a potential druggable target for tumors resistant to kinase inhibitors ( 35 ) and that its CRKL amplification may be a mechanism of primary or acquired resistance to EGFR kinase inhibitors in non-small cell lung cancer ( 36 ). We also found that the knockdown of FLT1 in Mahlavu cells decreased the phosphorylation level of CRKL at Tyr-207 (data not shown), which is a well known site for regulating the signaling cascade triggered by CRKL. This finding suggests that FLT1 could regulate CRKL phosphorylation. Moreover, when CRKL was depleted, FLT1 expression was also down-regulated. These data indicate that CRKL and FLT1 might provide feedback regulation at a functional level in HCC; this finding warrants further investigation. Thus, a combination therapy of a kinase inhibitor and targeting CRKL may result in a better anti-cancer clinical response.

Clinically, CRKL amplification at the 22q11.21 is frequently detected in lung cancer patients with elevated CRKL expression in tumor cells ( 15 ). In previous studies, CRKL was demonstrated to facilitate migration/invasion in non-small cell lung cancer ( 15 ), colon cancer ( 37 ), and breast cancer ( 38 ). However, to our knowledge there are no data indicating that CRKL participates in the migration and progression of HCC. Despite the high degree of similarity of CRKL and CRK, recent structural investigations show that the intramolecular assembly of CRKL is entirely distinct from that of CRK ( 39 ). The review article also indicates that CRKL and CRK are expected to have different signaling characteristics ( 34 ). We characterized CRKL participating in migration via the ERK pathway in HCC, which is consistent with a previous study in hematopoietic cells. CRKL is also known to be a key effector in Bcr-Abl activity and a prognostic indicator for chronic myelogenous leukemia ( 41 ). However, the clinical relevance of CRKL in HCC remains unknown. We demonstrate that CRKL acts as a novel prognostic marker and that CRKL may be a therapeutic target in HCC. In some cancers, FLT1-mediated signaling could promote tumor invasion ( 42 , 43 ). The prognostic impact of FLT1 expression is significantly related to disease-free survival and trends toward overall survival. A recent study shows that FLT1 expression is significant for recurrence-free and overall survival in HCC patients who underwent surgical resection ( 44 ), but their study included a smaller patient cohort than our study as reported here. Overexpression of CRKL and FLT1 was also identified as a significant prognostic factor for HCC by our multivariate analysis and was associated with significantly worse disease-free and overall conditions. Collectively, these results indicate that CRKL expression is clinically associated with FLT1 expression and that such expression could be used as an independent prognostic factor to predict the treatment outcomes of patients with HCC.

Notably, HCC is frequently resistant to systemic therapies and recurs even after aggressive local therapies. The need for molecular markers to identify which groups of patients have a high recurrence probability and which groups have a high Sorafenib-resistant rate is an important unmet medical need ( 45 ). The feasibility of using CRKL or CRKL-FLT1 for risk stratification in clinical practice needs to be investigated.

Other interactions in the network might also contribute to the malignant phenotype of HCC. For example, a prioritized CRKL-EGFR interaction was found and may explain why combining Erlotinib (EGFR inhibitor) and Bevacizumab (VEGF inhibitor) in an HCC phase II study was more effective than single drug treatment ( 31 ). Another example is the HCK-CRKL interaction, which is a prioritized PPI and ranks as a third prioritization of pairwise degree centrality in the HCC PPI network ( supplemental Fig. 7 ). In addition, we found that HCK had several novel interaction partners, including CRKL, FLT1, EGFR, SOS1, PLCG1, and PIK3CB, in our PPI network. A recent study indicates that HCK mediates tumor-associated macrophage migration and matrix remodeling in the migratory capacity of tumor cells within the tumor environment in breast cancer ( 40 ). Although there is no evidence of a migratory role for HCK in HCC, functional analyses of these interactions may allow us to better characterize its role in cancer cell behaviors and responses.

In summary, we anticipate that our integrated approach and analysis will improve the interpretation of interlinked PPIs and pathways and facilitate the development of novel prognosis markers and drug targets in HCC research.
