---
pmid: '30664241'
title: Quantitative interaction proteomics reveals differences in the interactomes
  of amyloid precursor protein isoforms.
authors:
- Andrew RJ
- Fisher K
- Heesom KJ
- Kellett KAB
- Hooper NM
journal: J Neurochem
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/jnc.14666
---

# Quantitative interaction proteomics reveals differences in the interactomes of amyloid precursor protein isoforms.
**Authors:** Andrew RJ, Fisher K, Heesom KJ, Kellett KAB, Hooper NM
**Journal:** J Neurochem (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jnc.14666](https://doi.org/10.1111/jnc.14666)

## Abstract

1. J Neurochem. 2019 May;149(3):399-412. doi: 10.1111/jnc.14666. Epub 2019 Feb
14.

Quantitative interaction proteomics reveals differences in the interactomes of 
amyloid precursor protein isoforms.

Andrew RJ(1), Fisher K(1), Heesom KJ(2), Kellett KAB(1), Hooper NM(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neuroscience and Experimental Psychology, Faculty of Biology, 
Medicine and Health, School of Biological Sciences, Manchester Academic Health 
Science Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(2)Proteomics Facility, Faculty of Medical and Veterinary Sciences, University 
of Bristol, Bristol, UK.

The generation of the amyloid-β (Aβ) peptides from the amyloid precursor protein 
(APP) through sequential proteolysis by β- and γ-secretases is a key 
pathological event in the initiation and propagation of Alzheimer's disease. Aβ 
and the transcriptionally active APP intracellular domain are generated 
preferentially from the APP695 isoform compared to the longer APP751 isoform. As 
the Aβ and amyloid precursor protein intracellular domain produced from cleavage 
of APP695 and APP751 are identical we hypothesised that the two isoforms have 
differences within their interactomes which mediate the differential processing 
of the two isoforms. To investigate this, we applied a proteomics-based approach 
to identify differences in the interactomes of the APP695 and APP751 isoforms. 
Using stable isotope labelling of amino acids in cell culture and quantitative 
proteomics, we compared the interactomes of APP695 and APP751 expressed in human 
SH-SY5Y cells. Through this approach, we identified enrichment of proteins 
involved in mitochondrial function, the nuclear pore and nuclear transport 
specifically in the APP695 interactome. Further interrogation of the APP 
interactome and subsequent experimental validation (co-immunoprecipitation and 
siRNA knockdown) revealed GAP43 as a specific modulator of APP751 proteolysis, 
altering Aβ generation. Our data indicate that interrogation of the APP 
interactome can be exploited to identify proteins which influence APP 
proteolysis and Aβ production in an isoform dependent-manner. Cover Image for 
this issue: doi: 10.1111/jnc.14504.

© 2019 International Society for Neurochemistry.

DOI: 10.1111/jnc.14666
PMID: 30664241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
