---
pmid: '20813262'
title: Photoadaptation in Neurospora by competitive interaction of activating and
  inhibitory LOV domains.
authors:
- Malzahn E
- Ciprianidis S
- Káldi K
- Schafmeier T
- Brunner M
journal: Cell
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.08.010
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Photoadaptation in Neurospora by competitive interaction of activating and inhibitory LOV domains.
**Authors:** Malzahn E, Ciprianidis S, Káldi K, Schafmeier T, Brunner M
**Journal:** Cell (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2010.08.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2010.08.010)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2010 Sep 3;142(5):762-72. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.08.010.

Photoadaptation in Neurospora by competitive interaction of activating and 
inhibitory LOV domains.

Malzahn E(1), Ciprianidis S, Káldi K, Schafmeier T, Brunner M.

Author information:
(1)University of Heidelberg Biochemistry Center, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Light responses and photoadaptation of Neurospora depend on the photosensory 
light-oxygen-voltage (LOV) domains of the circadian transcription factor White 
Collar Complex (WCC) and its negative regulator VIVID (VVD). We found that light 
triggers LOV-mediated dimerization of the WCC. The activated WCC induces 
expression of VVD, which then disrupts and inactivates the WCC homodimers by the 
competitive formation of WCC-VVD heterodimers, leading to photoadaptation. 
During the day, expression levels of VVD correlate with light intensity, 
allowing photoadaptation over several orders of magnitude. At night, previously 
synthesized VVD serves as a molecular memory of the brightness of the preceding 
day and suppresses responses to light cues of lower intensity. We show that VVD 
is essential to discriminate between day and night, even in naturally ambiguous 
photoperiods with moonlight.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.08.010
PMID: 20813262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
