---
pmid: '10915768'
title: Ataxin-3, the MJD1 gene product, interacts with the two human homologs of yeast
  DNA repair protein RAD23, HHR23A and HHR23B.
authors:
- Wang G
- Sawai N
- Kotliarova S
- Kanazawa I
- Nukina N
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/9.12.1795
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Ataxin-3, the MJD1 gene product, interacts with the two human homologs of yeast DNA repair protein RAD23, HHR23A and HHR23B.
**Authors:** Wang G, Sawai N, Kotliarova S, Kanazawa I, Nukina N
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/9.12.1795](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/9.12.1795)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2000 Jul 22;9(12):1795-803. doi: 10.1093/hmg/9.12.1795.

Ataxin-3, the MJD1 gene product, interacts with the two human homologs of yeast 
DNA repair protein RAD23, HHR23A and HHR23B.

Wang G(1), Sawai N, Kotliarova S, Kanazawa I, Nukina N.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for CAG Repeat Diseases, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, 2-1 
Hirosawa, Wako-shi, Saitama, 351-0198, Japan.

Machado-Joseph disease (MJD) is an autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disorder 
caused by an expansion of the polyglutamine tract near the C-terminus of the 
MJD1 gene product, ataxin-3. The mutant ataxin-3 forms intranuclear inclusions 
in cultured cells as well as in diseased human brain and also causes cell death 
in transfected cells. However, the normal function of ataxin-3 remains unknown. 
To explore the function of ataxin-3, we used the two-hybrid system to screen for 
the protein(s) that interacts with ataxin-3. We found that ataxin-3 interacts 
with two human homologs of the yeast DNA repair protein RAD23, HHR23A and 
HHR23B. Furthermore, we confirmed that ataxin-3 interacts with the 
-ubiquitin-like domain at the N-terminus of the HHR23 proteins, which is 
important for nucleotide excision repair; however, ataxin-3 does not interact 
with -ubiquitin, implying that ataxin-3 might be functionally associated with 
the HHR23 proteins through this specific interaction. The normal and mutant 
ataxin-3 proteins show no difference in their ability to bind to the HHR23 
proteins. However, in 293 cells HHR23A is recruited to intranuclear inclusions 
formed by the mutant ataxin-3 through its interaction with ataxin-3. These 
results suggest that this interaction is associated with the normal function of 
ataxin-3 and that some functional abnormality of the HHR23 proteins might exist 
in MJD.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/9.12.1795
PMID: 10915768 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
