---
pmid: '10065153'
title: Covalent and noncovalent modifiers of the p53 protein.
authors:
- Jayaraman L
- Prives C
journal: Cell Mol Life Sci
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC11146848
doi: 10.1007/s000180050271
---

# Covalent and noncovalent modifiers of the p53 protein.
**Authors:** Jayaraman L, Prives C
**Journal:** Cell Mol Life Sci (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s000180050271](https://doi.org/10.1007/s000180050271)
**PMC:** [PMC11146848](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11146848/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 1999 Jan;55(1):76-87. doi: 10.1007/s000180050271.

Covalent and noncovalent modifiers of the p53 protein.

Jayaraman L(1), Prives C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, New York 
10027, USA.

Despite the massive attention it has received, there is still much to learn 
about the p53 tumour suppressor protein. Given that it plays complex and 
multiple roles in cells, it is not surprising that p53 is subjected to an 
intricate array of regulatory processes. p53 receives signals from cells in 
multiple ways, leading to its stabilization and activation. The functions of the 
protein are altered by phosphorylation and other covalent modifications. 
However, a number of proteins can regulate p53 function dramatically by 
noncovalent means. p53 is thus subjected to numerous signaling and regulatory 
pathways which we have only begun to decipher.

DOI: 10.1007/s000180050271
PMCID: PMC11146848
PMID: 10065153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract.

Despite the massive attention it has received, there is still much to learn about the p53 tumour suppressor protein. Given that it plays complex and multiple roles in cells, it is not surprising that p53 is subjected to an intricate array of regulatory processes. p53 receives signals from cells in multiple ways, leading to its stabilization and activation. The functions of the protein are altered by phosphorylation and other covalent modifications. However, a number of proteins can regulate p53 function dramatically by noncovalent means. p53 is thus subjected to numerous signalling and regulatory pathways which we have only begun to decipher.
