---
pmid: '10749975'
title: RBMY, a probable human spermatogenesis factor, and other hnRNP G proteins interact
  with Tra2beta and affect splicing.
authors:
- Venables JP
- Elliott DJ
- Makarova OV
- Makarov EM
- Cooke HJ
- Eperon IC
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/9.5.685
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# RBMY, a probable human spermatogenesis factor, and other hnRNP G proteins interact with Tra2beta and affect splicing.
**Authors:** Venables JP, Elliott DJ, Makarova OV, Makarov EM, Cooke HJ, Eperon IC
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/9.5.685](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/9.5.685)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2000 Mar 22;9(5):685-94. doi: 10.1093/hmg/9.5.685.

RBMY, a probable human spermatogenesis factor, and other hnRNP G proteins 
interact with Tra2beta and affect splicing.

Venables JP(1), Elliott DJ, Makarova OV, Makarov EM, Cooke HJ, Eperon IC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Leicester, University Road, 
Leicester LE1 7RH, UK.

The RBMY gene family is found on the Y chromosome of all mammals, and 
microdeletions are strongly associated with infertility in men. RBMY expresses 
RBM only in the nuclei of germ cells, whereas its X chromosome homologue, RBMX, 
expresses hnRNP G ubiquitously. We show here that RBM, hnRNP G and a novel 
testis-specific relative, termed hnRNP G-T, interact with Tra2beta, an activator 
of pre-mRNA splicing that is ubiquitous but highly expressed in testis. 
Endogenous hnRNP G and Tra2beta proteins are associated in HeLa nuclear 
extracts. RBM and Tra2beta co-localize in two major domains in human 
spermatocyte nuclei. Phosphorylation enhanced the interaction and reduced 
competing RNA binding to the interaction domains. Incubation with the protein 
interaction domain of RBM inhibited splicing in vitro of a specific pre-mRNA 
substrate containing an essential enhancer bound by Tra2beta. The RNA-binding 
domain of RBM affected 5' splice site selection. We conclude that the hnRNP G 
family of proteins is involved in pre-mRNA splicing and infer that RBM may be 
involved in Tra2beta-dependent splicing in spermatocytes.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/9.5.685
PMID: 10749975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
