---
pmid: '22057399'
title: Structural requirements for interaction of peroxisomal targeting signal 2 and
  its receptor PEX7.
authors:
- Kunze M
- Neuberger G
- Maurer-Stroh S
- Ma J
- Eck T
- Braverman N
- Schmid JA
- Eisenhaber F
- Berger J
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3247985
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.301853
---

# Structural requirements for interaction of peroxisomal targeting signal 2 and its receptor PEX7.
**Authors:** Kunze M, Neuberger G, Maurer-Stroh S, Ma J, Eck T, Braverman N, Schmid JA, Eisenhaber F, Berger J
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M111.301853](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M111.301853)
**PMC:** [PMC3247985](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3247985/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Dec 30;286(52):45048-62. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.301853. Epub 
2011 Nov 5.

Structural requirements for interaction of peroxisomal targeting signal 2 and 
its receptor PEX7.

Kunze M(1), Neuberger G, Maurer-Stroh S, Ma J, Eck T, Braverman N, Schmid JA, 
Eisenhaber F, Berger J.

Author information:
(1)Center for Brain Research, Medical University of Vienna, Spitalgasse 4, 1090 
Vienna, Austria.

The import of a subset of peroxisomal matrix proteins is mediated by the 
peroxisomal targeting signal 2 (PTS2). The results of our sequence and physical 
property analysis of known PTS2 signals and of a mutational study of the least 
characterized amino acids of a canonical PTS2 motif indicate that PTS2 forms an 
amphipathic helix accumulating all conserved residues on one side. 
Three-dimensional structural modeling of the PTS2 receptor PEX7 reveals a groove 
with an evolutionarily conserved charge distribution complementary to PTS2 
signals. Mammalian two-hybrid assays and cross-complementation of a mutation in 
PTS2 by a compensatory mutation in PEX7 confirm the interaction site. An 
unstructured linker region separates the PTS2 signal from the core protein. This 
additional information on PTS2 signals was used to generate a PTS2 prediction 
algorithm that enabled us to identify novel PTS2 signals within human proteins 
and to describe KChIP4 as a novel peroxisomal protein.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.301853
PMCID: PMC3247985
PMID: 22057399 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The import of a subset of peroxisomal matrix proteins is mediated by the p eroxisomal t argeting s ignal 2 (PTS2). The results of our sequence and physical property analysis of known PTS2 signals and of a mutational study of the least characterized amino acids of a canonical PTS2 motif indicate that PTS2 forms an amphipathic helix accumulating all conserved residues on one side. Three-dimensional structural modeling of the PTS2 receptor PEX7 reveals a groove with an evolutionarily conserved charge distribution complementary to PTS2 signals. Mammalian two-hybrid assays and cross-complementation of a mutation in PTS2 by a compensatory mutation in PEX7 confirm the interaction site. An unstructured linker region separates the PTS2 signal from the core protein. This additional information on PTS2 signals was used to generate a PTS2 prediction algorithm that enabled us to identify novel PTS2 signals within human proteins and to describe KChIP4 as a novel peroxisomal protein.

Introduction

Peroxisomes are single membrane-bound organelles, which are found in all nucleated cells. They host a variety of metabolic functions such as detoxification of hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ), the degradation of very long and branched chain fatty acids or d -amino acids, and the synthesis of plasmalogens, docosahexaenoic acid, or bile acids ( 1 ).

Soluble peroxisomal proteins contain cis-acting peroxisomal targeting signals that mediate their recognition and import into peroxisomes. These signals reside either at the extreme C terminus (PTS1) ( 2 , 3 ) or in proximity to the N terminus (PTS2) ( 4 , 5 ). PTS1 is recognized by its receptor, the peroxin 5 (PEX5) ( 6 , 7 ), and similarly, PTS2 is specifically bound by PEX7 ( 8 , 9 ). These soluble receptors mediate the transport of their cargo proteins to the peroxisomal surface. There they bind to a multimeric protein complex (docking complex) initiating the transfer of the proteins across the peroxisomal membrane ( 10 ). In contrast to many other transport mechanisms, the import machinery of peroxisomes can transport fully folded and even oligomerized proteins across the membrane ( 11 , 12 ).

Most of the proven peroxisomal matrix proteins of yeast and mammals harbor a PTS1, but in Arabidopsis thaliana 30% of the known peroxisomal proteins are transported via the PTS2 pathway ( 13 ). The PTS2 motif was originally inferred from the analysis of the first 40 amino acids of yeast ( 4 ) and rat thiolase ( 5 ). More detailed studies on the thiolase PTS2 of yeast ( 14 ), rat ( 15 ), and tobacco ( 16 ) identified relevant positions of the core nonapeptide, and the motif (R/K)(L/V/I) X 5 (Q/H)(L/A) was established as a canonical consensus sequence ( 14 ). Recent investigations took advantage of the increasing number of available sequence data and tried to extract a more restrictive consensus sequence based on sequence comparison ( 13 , 17 ), which finally led to the suggestion of R(L/V/I/Q) X 2 (L/V/I/H)(L/S/G/A) X (H/Q)(L/A) for the most common PTS2 variants and (R/K)(L/V/I/Q) X 2 (L/V/I/H/Q)(L/S/G/A/K) X (H/Q)(L/A/F) comprising essentially all known possibilities ( 17 ). The binding of PTS2 to PEX7 is mediated by a conserved WD-40 domain of PEX7 usually folding into a propeller-like structure, which is often found in peptide-binding proteins ( 18 ). The whole transport process appears saturable and can be inhibited by antibodies blocking chaperones of the Hsp70 and Hsp40 family ( 19 ). In most species the N-terminal part of the protein including the PTS2 (transit peptide) is processed inside peroxisomes ( 20 ), in mammals by the protease TYSND1 ( 21 ).

In humans, the selective defect in the PTS2-dependent import pathway due to mutations in PEX7 leads to the severe disease rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata type 1 (RCDP1) 3 ( 22 ). Patients suffer from congenital cataracts, growth, and mental retardation, shortening of the upper extremities (rhizomelia), and stippled foci of calcification in epiphyseal cartilage (chondrodysplasia punctata) ( 23 ). In mammals, three enzymes are known to harbor a PTS2, namely acyl-CoA thiolase exerting the last step of fatty acid β-oxidation, alkylglycerone-phosphate synthase (alkyldihydroxyacetone phosphate synthase) ( 24 ) participating in plasmalogen biosynthesis, and phytanoyl-CoA hydroxylase ( 25 ) exerting the first step of the α-oxidation of branched chain fatty acids. Mevalonate kinase, which participates in the synthesis of cholesterol, has been reported to be peroxisomal ( 26 ) and harbors a PTS2-like sequence ( 27 ), yet no interaction with PEX7 could be found ( 28 ).

The quality of algorithms evaluating putative targeting signals based on their similarity to naturally occurring signals depends on a large learning set. This can be compensated by implementation of structural characteristics. However, the quality of the prediction can also serve as criterion for the relevance of the implemented parameters. Recent investigations primarily analyzed the amino acid frequencies at each position of known PTS2 motifs and of putative PTS2 signals encoded in orthologues of PTS2-carrying proteins ( 13 , 17 ) without evaluation of physical property patterns of side chains or sequence segment-based properties.

Using biochemical, cell biological, and computational methods, we have revealed structural requirements for functional PTS2 signals that are important for their interaction with PEX7. This allowed us to generate a prediction algorithm that identified functional PTS2 signals and a novel peroxisomal protein demonstrating the relevance of the identified criteria.

RESULTS

The experimentally verified consensus sequence for PTS2 signals is dominated by the characterizations of positions S 1 , S 2 , S 3 , and S 4 in various species. 4 In contrast, restrictions of the central five positions of the signal ( X 1 – X 5 ) are hardly understood and primarily extrapolated from amino acid frequencies in naturally occurring PTS2 signals. However, mammalian proteins are usually under-represented in such comparisons.

DISCUSSION

Since its initial description, the PTS2 has attracted less attention than PTS1. Although major determinants for PTS2 motifs have been elucidated previously, the consensus sequence for this targeting signal was too loose to explain the low number of functional PTS2 signals. Here, important new properties of mammalian PTS2 signals were elucidated, and their binding site on the receptor PEX7 was identified.

The mutational analysis of the central five amino acids of a human thiolase PTS2 identified functional restrictions that exclude specific residues at individual positions of the motif. In contrast, the detailed sequence and physical property analysis of available PTS2 signals reveals the optimal shaping of PTS2 signals by evolutionary adaptation processes.

We can demonstrate experimentally that bulky aliphatic amino acids are not only preferred at position X 3 but are essential for a functional PTS2 as the conversion into a charged residue inactivates the signal. In contrast, at position X 2 , lysine is well tolerated, whereas aspartate inactivates the signal although the amino acid preference resembles that of position X 3 . However, basic residues at position X 2 generate an additional mitochondrial targeting signal, suggesting that the avoidance of a competing targeting signal is an additional reason for the under-representation of amino acid classes at individual positions. Similarly, basic residues at X 5 (arginine) can promote additional mitochondrial targeting, and large aliphatic residues (leucine) at X 1 can generate an additional targeting signal for the ER. In addition to the three type-changing substitutions that inactivate the PTS2, sequence alignment of known PTS2 motifs suggested further restrictions that are reflected by over- and under-representation of specific types of amino acids ( e.g. bulky residues are significantly underrepresented at position X 5 , but the large hydrophobic amino acid leucine is well tolerated).

It remains to be emphasized that our mutational analysis was performed in a reporter system that exposed the PTS2 at the extreme N terminus and thus might confer fewer restrictions than PTS2 signals located further away from the N terminus. Moreover, our investigations revealed a bipartite structural motif, which appears conserved across all PTS2 signals, namely a helical structure supposed to interact with PEX7 and an unstructured region connecting the core protein with the actual PEX7-interacting sequence segment.

The helical structure is indicated by the over-representation of amino acids supporting the formation of α-helices and the absence of the helix breaking amino acid proline in naturally occurring PTS2 signals. Furthermore, the PTS2 signal of human thiolase is sensitive to the insertion of proline at position X 4 , whereas large, small, acidic, and basic amino acids are well tolerated. In a helical structure, the two basic residues (S 1 and S 3 ) as well as the two large hydrophobic residues (S 2 and S 4 ) are aligned on one side of the helix, separated by two turns ( Fig. 3 , A and B ). Together with the important position X 3 , they comprise one side of the helix with a hydrophobic area aligned by positive charges. The other side of the helix appears less conserved, and functional PTS2 signals are compatible with all amino acid classes at positions X 1 , X 2 , X 4 , and X 5 , except for a negative charge at position X 2 . However, in an α-helix, X 2 is positioned in close proximity to the basic residues S 1 and S 3 , and a negative charge could neutralize one of these charges and thereby inactivate the PTS2. The helical structure of PTS2 signals resembles mitochondrial targeting signals, which have been described as positively charged amphipathic helices ( 53 ). This similarity is supported by our observation that single point mutations in PTS2 thiolase such as V( X 2 )K or G( X 5 )R can generate a mitochondrial targeting signal without affecting peroxisomal targeting. These mutations alter the side of the helix that is not required for peroxisomal targeting, whereas in rat thiolase PTS2 the substitution of histidine (S 3 ) by basic amino acids also generated mitochondrial targeting but destroyed the PTS2 ( 5 ).

As a helical PTS2 motif exposes all highly conserved residues on one face of the helix, the interaction with the receptor PEX7 should involve this side of the helix. Accordingly, the newly generated three-dimensional model of PEX7 revealed a groove on the most conserved surface area, which shows a charge distribution complementary to the conserved side of the PTS2 helix. Moreover, many missense mutations in PEX7 identified in patients suffering from RCDP1 ( 54 ) affect this region.

Overall, our refined three-dimensional model of PEX7 resembles structures suggested previously ( 29 , 55 ), but it identified conserved residues that appear concentrated on one side of the WD-40 structure and allowed the prediction of residues that contribute to the interaction. Two conserved glutamic acid residues of PEX7 (Glu-113 and Glu-200) are proposed to interact with arginine S 1 and histidine S 3 , respectively. Substitution of each of these glutamates by arginine reduced the interaction of PEX7 with PTS2 thiolase below the detection level of the mammalian two-hybrid assay, whereas another glutamate to arginine mutation at a similar position in the WD-40 domain largely retained the interaction. Moreover, the mutation E113R in myc-hPEX7 destroyed its ability to complement PEX7 deficiency in RCDP1 fibroblasts, and the mutation E200R can restore the import of a PTS2 thiolase variant harboring the reciprocal charge exchange HS 3 E, which normally inactivates the PTS2. Thus, we consider the predicted model of interaction highly probable despite the surprising finding that myc-hPEX7 (E200R) partially complements PEX7 deficiency. The latter could be due to residual binding between PTS2 thiolase and PEX7-E200R, which was below the detection limit of the two-hybrid assay. In the two-hybrid system, the PTS2 is fused to the VP16 activation domain, which dislocates the PTS2 from the extreme N terminus, and this might render the strength of the interaction with PEX7 more sensitive to mutations. Our prediction poses the PTS2 helix horizontally in the groove on top of the WD-40 domain of PEX7 and thus differs from the insertion of a linear unfolded peptide into the channel in the middle of the propeller as suggested previously ( 55 ). This orientation is supported by docking experiments and by the fact that the PTS2 signal of some proteins appears up to 37 amino acids away from the start (human alkylglycerone-phosphate synthase), which renders a linear insertion of the N terminus before the recognition of the PTS2 signal less probable.

The exposure of the PTS2 signal away from the bulk of the protein was concluded from predictions that indicate an unstructured linker region, as noticed between C-terminal PTS1 motifs and the core proteins. Our computational analysis is in agreement with three-dimensional structures of naturally occurring proteins, as in the available x-ray structures of human acyl-CoA thiolase (PDB code 2IIK) and human phytanoyl-CoA hydroxylase (PDB code 2A1X) the N-terminal sequences, including the putative linker regions, were not resolved suggesting that these sequences are not sufficiently structured. Such a linker has been shown to be of functional importance for the exposure of the PTS1 signal ( 56 , 57 ), but in the case of PTS2 the linker domain should also contain the cleavage site for the processing peptidase.

We are confident that the identified criteria are relevant for typical PTS2 signals because their implementation into an in silico screening algorithm allowed the generation of a preliminary PTS2 prediction program, which led to a hit rate of 4 out of 14 when testing a list of PTS2 signals with a high PTS2 score derived from the whole human proteome. Moreover, KChIP4 ( 58 ) was imported into peroxisomes when expressed as EGFP-tagged full-length protein, and thus the algorithm led to the identification of a novel peroxisomal protein. EGFP-tagged full-length TGFβ2 ( 59 ) was found predominantly in the ER, GLOXD1 in mitochondria, and RAI17 in the nucleus and cytosol as described recently ( 60 ) suggesting that the targeting signals for these organelles can over-rule PTS2 as previously demonstrated for PTS1 signals ( 56 ). Alternatively, the lack of peroxisomal targeting despite a functional PTS2 might be due to a modulating influence of the amino acids directly surrounding the PTS2.

The newly identified peroxisomal protein KChIP4 (Kv-channel interacting protein 4) was first described to interact with a potassium channel and presenilin ( 60 ). However, the protein appears in various splice variants, some of which have been described in the cytosol or at the plasma membrane ( 61 , 62 ). The subcellular localization of the variant analyzed in this study has not been investigated, although its expression is well described. KChIP4 belongs to a family of proteins harboring the structural motif of an EF-hand, which mediates structural changes upon Ca 2+ binding ( 63 ). The expression profile of KChIP4 ( 64 ) shows brain selectivity, which explains the absence of the protein from peroxisomal fractions analyzed by proteomic approaches.

In summary, this investigation refines structural requirements for functional PTS2 signals and suggests a model for the interaction with the receptor PEX7. These criteria allowed the identification of four functional PTS2 signals encoded in human proteins and a novel peroxisomal protein.
