---
pmid: '8106324'
title: Cloning and nucleotide sequence of the pvdA gene encoding the pyoverdin biosynthetic
  enzyme L-ornithine N5-oxygenase in Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
authors:
- Visca P
- Ciervo A
- Orsi N
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC205165
doi: 10.1128/jb.176.4.1128-1140.1994
---

# Cloning and nucleotide sequence of the pvdA gene encoding the pyoverdin biosynthetic enzyme L-ornithine N5-oxygenase in Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
**Authors:** Visca P, Ciervo A, Orsi N
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1128/jb.176.4.1128-1140.1994](https://doi.org/10.1128/jb.176.4.1128-1140.1994)
**PMC:** [PMC205165](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC205165/)

## Abstract

1. J Bacteriol. 1994 Feb;176(4):1128-40. doi: 10.1128/jb.176.4.1128-1140.1994.

Cloning and nucleotide sequence of the pvdA gene encoding the pyoverdin 
biosynthetic enzyme L-ornithine N5-oxygenase in Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Visca P(1), Ciervo A, Orsi N.

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Microbiologia, Università di Roma La Sapienza, Italy.

The enzyme L-ornithine N5-oxygenase catalyzes the hydroxylation of L-ornithine 
(L-Orn), which represents an early step in the biosynthesis of the peptidic 
moiety of the fluorescent siderophore pyoverdin in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. A 
gene bank of DNA from P. aeruginosa PAO1 (ATCC 15692) was constructed in the 
broad-host-range cosmid pLAFR3 and mobilized into the L-Orn 
N5-oxygenase-defective (pvdA) P. aeruginosa mutant PALS124. Screening for 
fluorescent transconjugants made it possible to identify the trans-complementing 
cosmid pPV4, which was able to restore pyoverdin synthesis and L-Orn 
N5-oxygenase activity in the pvdA mutant PALS124. The 17-kb PAO1 DNA insert of 
pPV4 contained at least two genetic determinants involved in pyoverdin 
synthesis, i.e., pvdA and pvdC4, as shown by complementation analysis of a set 
of mutants blocked in different steps of the pyoverdin biosynthetic pathway. 
Deletion analysis, subcloning, and transposon mutagenesis enabled us to locate 
the pvdA gene in a minimum DNA fragment of 1.7 kb flanked by two SphI 
restriction sites. Complementation of the pvdA mutation was under stringent iron 
control; both pyoverdin synthesis and L-Orn N5-oxygenase activity were 
undetectable in cells of the trans-complemented mutant which had been grown in 
the presence of 100 microM FeCl3. The entire nucleotide sequence of the pvdA 
gene, from which the primary structure of the encoded polypeptide was deduced, 
was determined. The pvdA structural gene is 1,278 bp; the cloned DNA fragment 
contains at the 5' end of the gene a putative ribosome-binding site but 
apparently lacks known promoterlike sequences. The P. aeruginosa L-Orn 
N5-oxygenase gene codes for a 426-amino-acid peptide with a predicted molecular 
mass of 47.7 kDa and an isoelectric point of 8.1. The enzyme shows approximately 
50% homology with functional analogs, i.e., L-lysine N6-hydroxylase of 
aerobactin-producing Escherichia coli and L-Orn N5-oxygenase of 
ferrichrome-producing Ustilago maydis. The pvdA gene was expressed in P. 
aeruginosa under the control of the T7 promoter. Induction of the T7 RNA 
polymerase system resulted in parallel increases of the L-Orn N5-oxygenase 
activity and of the amount of a 47.7-kDa polypeptide. We also constructed a 
site-specific pvdA mutant by insertion of a tetracycline-resistance cassette in 
the chromosomal pvdA gene of P. aeruginosa PAO1. Similarly to strain PALS124, 
the pvdA mutant obtained by gene disruption also disclosed no pyoverdin 
synthesis, lacked L-Orn N5-oxygenase activity, was complemented by the cloned 
pvdA gene, and produced pyoverdin at wild-type levels when fed with the 
biosynthetic precursor L-N5-OH-Orn. Southern blot analysis indicated that genes 
homologous to pvdA could be located within a 1.7-kb DNA fragment from 
SphI-digested genomic DNA of different hydroxamate-producing Pseudomonas spp. 
Our results suggest that omega-amino acid oxygenases have been conserved over a 
wide evolutionary range and probably evolved from a common ancestor.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.176.4.1128-1140.1994
PMCID: PMC205165
PMID: 8106324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
