---
pmid: '11782452'
title: Antiplasmin activity of a peptide that binds to the receptor-binding site of
  angiogenin.
authors:
- Gho YS
- Yoon WH
- Chae CB
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M105526200
---

# Antiplasmin activity of a peptide that binds to the receptor-binding site of angiogenin.
**Authors:** Gho YS, Yoon WH, Chae CB
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M105526200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M105526200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 22;277(12):9690-4. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M105526200. Epub
2002  Jan 8.

Antiplasmin activity of a peptide that binds to the receptor-binding site of 
angiogenin.

Gho YS(1), Yoon WH, Chae CB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science, Division of Molecular and Life Sciences, Pohang 
University of Science and Technology, Pohang 790-784, Korea.

It has been suggested that angiogenin binds to an actin-like molecule present on 
the surface of endothelial cells. Actin inhibits plasmin activity, but the 
angiogenin-actin complex is not active. In this report, we found that plasmin 
inhibits the interaction between angiogenin and actin suggesting a possibility 
that both angiogenin and plasmin may bind to a similar site on actin. Here we 
report that chANG, an antiangiogenin peptide that binds to the actin-binding 
site of angiogenin, inhibits the proteolytic activity of plasmin without any 
apparent effect on the activities of plasminogen activators and matrix 
metalloproteases. Its antiplasmin activity is comparable with that of actin. 
chANG inhibits plasmin activity via its binding to plasmin kringle domains while 
scrambled chANG does not bind to plasmin. chANG also inhibits the invasion of 
angiogenin-secreting human fibrosarcoma and colorectal carcinoma cells without 
effecting migration. Furthermore, chANG blocks angiogenesis induced by 
fibrosarcoma cells and metastasis of colorectal carcinoma cells to the liver. 
Therefore, the 11-amino acid peptide chANG has both antiangiogenin and 
antiplasmin activity, and could be useful in the development of anticancer 
agents.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M105526200
PMID: 11782452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
