---
pmid: '18223652'
title: T cell antigen receptor stimulation induces MALT1 paracaspase-mediated cleavage
  of the NF-kappaB inhibitor A20.
authors:
- Coornaert B
- Baens M
- Heyninck K
- Bekaert T
- Haegman M
- Staal J
- Sun L
- Chen ZJ
- Marynen P
- Beyaert R
journal: Nat Immunol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ni1561
---

# T cell antigen receptor stimulation induces MALT1 paracaspase-mediated cleavage of the NF-kappaB inhibitor A20.
**Authors:** Coornaert B, Baens M, Heyninck K, Bekaert T, Haegman M, Staal J, Sun L, Chen ZJ, Marynen P, Beyaert R
**Journal:** Nat Immunol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ni1561](https://doi.org/10.1038/ni1561)

## Abstract

1. Nat Immunol. 2008 Mar;9(3):263-71. doi: 10.1038/ni1561. Epub 2008 Jan 27.

T cell antigen receptor stimulation induces MALT1 paracaspase-mediated cleavage 
of the NF-kappaB inhibitor A20.

Coornaert B(1), Baens M, Heyninck K, Bekaert T, Haegman M, Staal J, Sun L, Chen 
ZJ, Marynen P, Beyaert R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Ghent University, B-9052 Ghent, Belgium.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2008 Mar;9(3):231-3. doi: 10.1038/ni0308-231.

The paracaspase MALT1 mediates T cell antigen receptor-induced signaling to the 
transcription factor NF-kappaB and is indispensable for T cell activation and 
proliferation. Enhanced expression of MALT1 or aberrant expression of a fusion 
protein of the apoptosis inhibitor API2 and MALT1 has been linked to 
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma. Despite the presence of a 
caspase-like domain, MALT1 proteolytic activity has not yet been demonstrated. 
Here we show that T cell antigen receptor stimulation induced recruitment of the 
NF-kappaB inhibitor A20 into a complex of MALT1 and the adaptor protein Bcl-10, 
leading to MALT1-mediated processing of A20. API2-MALT1 expression likewise 
resulted in cleavage of A20. MALT1 cleaved human A20 after arginine 439 and 
impaired its NF-kappaB-inhibitory function. Our studies identify A20 as a 
substrate of MALT1 and emphasize the importance of MALT1 proteolytic activity in 
the 'fine tuning' of T cell antigen receptor signaling.

DOI: 10.1038/ni1561
PMID: 18223652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
