---
pmid: '10700282'
title: Structure of the Mad2 spindle assembly checkpoint protein and its interaction
  with Cdc20.
authors:
- Luo X
- Fang G
- Coldiron M
- Lin Y
- Yu H
- Kirschner MW
- Wagner G
journal: Nat Struct Biol
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/73338
---

# Structure of the Mad2 spindle assembly checkpoint protein and its interaction with Cdc20.
**Authors:** Luo X, Fang G, Coldiron M, Lin Y, Yu H, Kirschner MW, Wagner G
**Journal:** Nat Struct Biol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1038/73338](https://doi.org/10.1038/73338)

## Abstract

1. Nat Struct Biol. 2000 Mar;7(3):224-9. doi: 10.1038/73338.

Structure of the Mad2 spindle assembly checkpoint protein and its interaction 
with Cdc20.

Luo X(1), Fang G, Coldiron M, Lin Y, Yu H, Kirschner MW, Wagner G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard 
Medical School, 240 Longwood Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The checkpoint protein Mad2 inhibits the activity of the anaphase promoting 
complex by sequestering Cdc20 until all chromosomes are aligned at the metaphase 
plate. We report the solution structure of human Mad2 and its interaction with 
Cdc20. Mad2 possesses a novel three-layered alpha/beta fold with three 
alpha-helices packed between two beta-sheets. Using deletion mutants we 
identified the minimal Mad2-binding region of human Cdc20 as a 40-residue 
segment immediately N-terminal to the WD40 repeats. Mutagenesis and NMR 
titration experiments show that a C-terminal flexible region of Mad2 is required 
for binding to Cdc20. Mad2 and Cdc20 form a tight 1:1 heterodimeric complex in 
which the C-terminal segment of Mad2 becomes folded. These results provide the 
first structural insight into mechanisms of the spindle assembly checkpoint.

DOI: 10.1038/73338
PMID: 10700282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
