---
pmid: '14557543'
title: Genomewide screening for fusogenic human endogenous retrovirus envelopes identifies
  syncytin 2, a gene conserved on primate evolution.
authors:
- Blaise S
- de Parseval N
- Bénit L
- Heidmann T
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC240736
doi: 10.1073/pnas.2132646100
---

# Genomewide screening for fusogenic human endogenous retrovirus envelopes identifies syncytin 2, a gene conserved on primate evolution.
**Authors:** Blaise S, de Parseval N, Bénit L, Heidmann T
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.2132646100](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2132646100)
**PMC:** [PMC240736](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC240736/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Oct 28;100(22):13013-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2132646100. Epub 2003 Oct 13.

Genomewide screening for fusogenic human endogenous retrovirus envelopes 
identifies syncytin 2, a gene conserved on primate evolution.

Blaise S(1), de Parseval N, Bénit L, Heidmann T.

Author information:
(1)Unité des Rétrovirus Endogènes et Eléments Rétroïdes des Eucaryotes 
Supérieurs, Unité Mixte de Recherche 8122, Centre National de la Recherche 
Scientifique, Institut Gustave Roussy, 39 Rue Camille Desmoulins, 94805 
Villejuif Cedex, France.

Screening human sequence databases for endogenous retroviral elements with 
coding envelope genes has revealed 16 candidate genes that we assayed for their 
fusogenic properties. All 16 genes were cloned in a eukaryotic expression vector 
and assayed for cell-cell fusion by using a large panel of mammalian cells in 
transient transfection assays. Fusion was observed for two human endogenous 
retrovirus (HERV) envelopes, the previously characterized HERV-W envelope, also 
called syncytin, and a previously uncharacterized gene from the HERV-FRD family. 
Cells prone to env-mediated fusion were different for the two envelopes, 
indicating different receptor usage. A search for the FRDenv gene in primates 
indicated that the corresponding proviral element is present in all simians, 
from New World monkeys to humans, being absent only in prosimians. Cloning of 
the corresponding env genes in simians disclosed conservation of the fully 
coding status of the gene, and most remarkably, conservation of its fusogenic 
property. Finally, a Northern blot analysis for the expression of the FRD family 
among a series of human tissues demonstrated specific expression in the 
placenta, as previously demonstrated for the other fusogenic human envelope of 
the HERV-W family. Altogether, the present data have identified a previously 
uncharacterized envelope (that we propose to name syncytin 2 after renaming 
syncytin as syncytin 1) with a potential role in placenta formation, and the 
identification of the complete set of retroviral envelopes with fusogenic 
properties now allows a definite analysis of the possible role of HERV in this 
physiological process, via classical genetic approaches.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2132646100
PMCID: PMC240736
PMID: 14557543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
