---
pmid: '12391145'
title: Sphingosine kinase mediates vascular endothelial growth factor-induced activation
  of ras and mitogen-activated protein kinases.
authors:
- Shu X
- Wu W
- Mosteller RD
- Broek D
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC134718
doi: 10.1128/MCB.22.22.7758-7768.2002
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Sphingosine kinase mediates vascular endothelial growth factor-induced activation of ras and mitogen-activated protein kinases.
**Authors:** Shu X, Wu W, Mosteller RD, Broek D
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.22.22.7758-7768.2002](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.22.22.7758-7768.2002)
**PMC:** [PMC134718](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC134718/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Nov;22(22):7758-68. doi: 10.1128/MCB.22.22.7758-7768.2002.

Sphingosine kinase mediates vascular endothelial growth factor-induced 
activation of ras and mitogen-activated protein kinases.

Shu X(1), Wu W, Mosteller RD, Broek D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, Keck School of Medicine at the University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, California 90089, USA.

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) signaling is critical to the processes 
of angiogenesis and tumor growth. Here, evidence is presented for VEGF 
stimulation of sphingosine kinase (SPK) that affects not only endothelial cell 
signaling but also tumor cells expressing VEGF receptors. VEGF or phorbol 
12-myristate 13-acetate treatment of the T24 bladder tumor cell line resulted in 
a time- and dose-dependent stimulation of SPK activity. In T24 cells, VEGF 
treatment reduced cellular sphingosine levels while raising that of 
sphingosine-1-phosphate. VEGF stimulation of T24 cells caused a slow and 
sustained accumulation of Ras-GTP and phosphorylated extracellular 
signal-regulated kinase (phospho-ERK) compared with that after EGF treatment. 
Small interfering RNA (siRNA) that targets SPK1, but not SPK2, blocks 
VEGF-induced accumulation of Ras-GTP and phospho-ERK in T24 cells. In contrast 
to EGF stimulation, VEGF stimulation of ERK1/2 phosphorylation was unaffected by 
dominant-negative Ras-N17. Raf kinase inhibition blocked both VEGF- and 
EGF-stimulated accumulation of phospho-ERK1/2. Inhibition of SPK by 
pharmacological inhibitors, a dominant-negative SPK mutant, or siRNA that 
targets SPK blocked VEGF, but not EGF, induction of phospho-ERK1/2. We conclude 
that VEGF induces DNA synthesis in a pathway which sequentially involves protein 
kinase C (PKC), SPK, Ras, Raf, and ERK1/2. These data highlight a novel 
mechanism by which SPK mediates signaling from PKC to Ras in a manner 
independent of Ras-guanine nucleotide exchange factor.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.22.22.7758-7768.2002
PMCID: PMC134718
PMID: 12391145 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
