---
pmid: '21931631'
title: Functional dissection of the TBK1 molecular network.
authors:
- Goncalves A
- Bürckstümmer T
- Dixit E
- Scheicher R
- Górna MW
- Karayel E
- Sugar C
- Stukalov A
- Berg T
- Kralovics R
- Planyavsky M
- Bennett KL
- Colinge J
- Superti-Furga G
journal: PLoS One
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3169550
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023971
---

# Functional dissection of the TBK1 molecular network.
**Authors:** Goncalves A, Bürckstümmer T, Dixit E, Scheicher R, Górna MW, Karayel E, Sugar C, Stukalov A, Berg T, Kralovics R, Planyavsky M, Bennett KL, Colinge J, Superti-Furga G
**Journal:** PLoS One (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0023971](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0023971)
**PMC:** [PMC3169550](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3169550/)

## Abstract

1. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e23971. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023971. Epub 2011 Sep
8.

Functional dissection of the TBK1 molecular network.

Goncalves A(1), Bürckstümmer T, Dixit E, Scheicher R, Górna MW, Karayel E, Sugar 
C, Stukalov A, Berg T, Kralovics R, Planyavsky M, Bennett KL, Colinge J, 
Superti-Furga G.

Author information:
(1)CeMM-Research Center for Molecular Medicine, Austrian Academy of Sciences, 
Vienna, Austria.

TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) and inducible IκB-kinase (IKK-i) are central 
regulators of type-I interferon induction. They are associated with three 
adaptor proteins called TANK, Sintbad (or TBKBP1) and NAP1 (or TBKBP2, AZI2) 
whose functional relationship to TBK1 and IKK-i is poorly understood. We 
performed a systematic affinity purification-mass spectrometry approach to 
derive a comprehensive TBK1/IKK-i molecular network. The most salient feature of 
the network is the mutual exclusive interaction of the adaptors with the 
kinases, suggesting distinct alternative complexes. Immunofluorescence data 
indicated that the individual adaptors reside in different subcellular 
locations. TANK, Sintbad and NAP1 competed for binding of TBK1. The binding site 
for all three adaptors was mapped to the C-terminal coiled-coil 2 region of 
TBK1. Point mutants that affect binding of individual adaptors were used to 
reconstitute TBK1/IKK-i-deficient cells and dissect the functional relevance of 
the individual kinase-adaptor edges within the network. Using a 
microarray-derived gene expression signature of TBK1 in response virus infection 
or poly(I∶C) stimulation, we found that TBK1 activation was strictly dependent 
on the integrity of the TBK1/TANK interaction.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023971
PMCID: PMC3169550
PMID: 21931631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.
