---
pmid: '19208625'
title: Properties of the ubiquitin-pex5p thiol ester conjugate.
authors:
- Grou CP
- Carvalho AF
- Pinto MP
- Huybrechts SJ
- Sá-Miranda C
- Fransen M
- Azevedo JE
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2667737
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M808978200
---

# Properties of the ubiquitin-pex5p thiol ester conjugate.
**Authors:** Grou CP, Carvalho AF, Pinto MP, Huybrechts SJ, Sá-Miranda C, Fransen M, Azevedo JE
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M808978200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M808978200)
**PMC:** [PMC2667737](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2667737/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Apr 17;284(16):10504-13. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M808978200. Epub 
2009 Feb 10.

Properties of the ubiquitin-pex5p thiol ester conjugate.

Grou CP(1), Carvalho AF, Pinto MP, Huybrechts SJ, Sá-Miranda C, Fransen M, 
Azevedo JE.

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular (IBMC), Universidade do Porto, Rua 
do Campo Alegre, 823, 4150-180 Porto, Portugal.

Pex5p, the peroxisomal protein cycling receptor, binds newly synthesized 
peroxisomal matrix proteins in the cytosol and promotes their translocation 
across the organelle membrane. During its transient passage through the 
membrane, Pex5p is monoubiquitinated at a conserved cysteine residue, a 
requisite for its subsequent ATP-dependent export back into the cytosol. Here we 
describe the properties of the soluble and membrane-bound monoubiquitinated 
Pex5p species (Ub-Pex5p). Our data suggest that 1) Ub-Pex5p is deubiquitinated 
by a combination of context-dependent enzymatic and nonenzymatic mechanisms; 2) 
soluble Ub-Pex5p retains the capacity to interact with the peroxisomal import 
machinery in a cargo-dependent manner; and 3) substitution of the conserved 
cysteine residue of Pex5p by a lysine results in a quite functional protein both 
in vitro and in vivo. Additionally, we show that MG132, a proteasome inhibitor, 
blocks the import of a peroxisomal reporter protein in vivo.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M808978200
PMCID: PMC2667737
PMID: 19208625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Pex5p, the peroxisomal protein cycling receptor, binds newly synthesized
 peroxisomal matrix proteins in the cytosol and promotes their translocation
 across the organelle membrane. During its transient passage through the
 membrane, Pex5p is monoubiquitinated at a conserved cysteine residue, a
 requisite for its subsequent ATP-dependent export back into the cytosol. Here
 we describe the properties of the soluble and membrane-bound monoubiquitinated
 Pex5p species (Ub-Pex5p). Our data suggest that 1) Ub-Pex5p is deubiquitinated
 by a combination of context-dependent enzymatic and nonenzymatic mechanisms;
 2) soluble Ub-Pex5p retains the capacity to interact with the peroxisomal
 import machinery in a cargo-dependent manner; and 3) substitution of the
 conserved cysteine residue of Pex5p by a lysine results in a quite functional
 protein both in vitro and in vivo . Additionally, we show
 that MG132, a proteasome inhibitor, blocks the import of a peroxisomal
 reporter protein in vivo .

RESULTS

Substitution of Cys 11 of Pex5p by a Lysine Results in a
 Peroxisomal Import/Export-competent Protein —To characterize the
 properties of the Ub-Pex5p thiol ester conjugate, we started our work by
 generating a mutant Pex5p protein, Pex5(C11K)p, in which the conserved
 cysteine residue at position 11 was replaced by a lysine. Our aim was to
 detect some ubiquitination in our in vitro system when using this
 mutated Pex5p species so that we could directly compare the properties of the
 Ub-Pex5p thiol ester conjugate with those of an almost identical molecule
 differing only in the covalent bond linking ubiquitin to the peroxin.
 Obviously, there was a risk that this mutant protein would no longer be
 recognized by the peroxisomal E3 ligase(s) catalyzing this ubiquitination
 event. However, and surpassing our expectations, this turned out not to be the
 case, as described below.

In addition to Pex5(C11K)p, we included in some experiments three other
 mutant versions, Pex5(C11S)p, Pex5(C11A)p and Pex5(C11R)p, all lacking the
 conserved Cys 11 residue and possessing at this position a serine,
 alanine, or arginine residue, respectively. The properties of Pex5(C11S)p have
 been described before ( 7 , 24 ). Because Pex5(C11S)p is a
 very poor substrate for peroxisome-dependent monoubiquitination, it
 accumulates at the peroxisomal membrane. The data in Fig. 2 ( upper panel )
 show precisely this behavior. When Pex5(C11S)p is incubated with a PNS
 fraction in the presence of ATP, conditions under which wild-type Pex5p
 continuously enters and exits the peroxisomal DTM
 ( 25 , 26 , 29 ), a significant fraction
 (45%) co-sediments with the organelles ( lane 5 ). A much smaller
 fraction of the wild-type peroxin (15%) is found in the organelle pellet
 because as the protein gets inserted into the DTM, it is also pumped out back
 into the cytosol ( lane 1 ). Large fractions of protein in the
 organelle pellets were also found for Pex5(C11A)p and Pex5(C11R)p (compare lane 1 with lanes 5 and 9 in lower panel ),
 emphasizing the importance of Cys 11 for the dislocation of Pex5p
 back into the cytosol.

Remarkably, Pex5(C11K)p behaves as the wild-type peroxin (15% in the
 organelle pellet; compare lanes 1 and 9 in upper
 panel ), suggesting that this variant enters the DTM and is actively
 dislocated into the cytosol by the peroxisomal export machinery. The presence
 of monoubiquitinated forms of both Pex5p and Pex5(C11K)p in the supernatant
 fractions ( lanes 2 and 10 ) indicates that a fraction of both
 proteins present in the soluble phase of these reactions has indeed passed
 through the peroxisomal DTM, because only Pex5p proteins that have inserted
 into the DTM are monoubiquitinated in this in vitro system
 ( 28 ). Thus, Pex5(C11K)p is as
 functional as Pex5p in this assay.

The Stage 4-to-Stage 0 Pex5p Transition Can Occur by Both Enzymatic and
 Nonenzymatic Mechanisms —Interestingly, the amounts of Ub-Pex5p and
 Ub-Pex5(C11K)p that can be detected in these reactions increase when Ubal, an
 inhibitor of DUBs ( 43 , 44 ), is included in the import
 buffer ( Fig. 2 , compare lanes 2 and 10 with 4 and 12 ,
 respectively). The fraction of ubiquitinated species undergoing this
 Ubal-sensitive deubiquitinating reaction in our standard conditions is,
 however, relatively modest (about 30%). A clearer result was obtained when the
 concentration of the PNS fraction in the assays (and so the concentration of
 DUBs) was increased by a factor of two and deubiquitination of Ub-Pex5p was
 allowed to proceed for 20 min in the absence of de novo ubiquitination. For this purpose, Pex5p was first incubated for 20 min with
 the PNS fraction in import buffer containing ATP to generate stage 3 and stage
 4 Pex5p. Apyrase and a vast excess of recombinant Pex5p were then added to the
 reaction ( Fig. 1 ). As shown in Fig. 3 , when this procedure is
 performed in the presence of Ubal both stage 3 and stage 4 Pex5p can be easily
 detected in the assay ( lanes 3 and 4 , respectively). In
 contrast, in the absence of the DUB inhibitor only stage 3 Ub-Pex5p is
 detected (compare lanes 1 and 2 ). This observation suggests
 that stage 3, unlike stage 4 Pex5p, is inaccessible to DUBs.

DUBs are not the only cellular components that are diluted in our assays.
 For the problem being addressed here, i.e. the lability of the
 Ub-Pex5p thiol ester conjugate, another potentially important variable is the
 GSH concentration. GSH is a major nucleophile in vivo ( 45 ), and as stated
 previously, it can disrupt ubiquitin-protein thiol ester conjugates quite
 efficiently ( 13 ). Thus, we
 determined the stability of both stage 3 and stage 4 Pex5p in the presence of
 5 m m GSH, the physiological concentration in rat liver
 ( 46 ). As shown in Fig. 4 A , stage 4 Pex5p
 is quite sensitive to GSH (half-life, 2.3 min; upper panel, lanes
 2–6 ). As expected, Ub-Pex5(C11K)p is destroyed neither by GSH
 ( lower panel, lanes 2–6 ) nor by dithiothreitol (DTT; lane
 7 ). The Ub-Pex5(C11K)p conjugate is also not destroyed by heat treatment
 in the presence of 100 m m DTT and 2% SDS ( lane 8 ) in
 agreement with the fact that in this conjugate an amide bond links Ub to
 Pex5(C11K)p. Interestingly, although stage 3 Pex5p still displays some
 sensitivity to GSH, its stability in the presence of this nucleophile is much
 higher than the one observed for stage 4 Pex5p (half-life, 10 min; Fig. 4 B , upper
 panel, lanes 2–6 ). Incubation of stage 3 Pex5p in the presence of
 the smaller and stronger nucleophile DTT leads, nevertheless, to the
 disruption of the thiol ester bond ( lane 7 ).

To further characterize the properties of stage 3 and stage 4 Pex5p, we
 have analyzed the steady-state levels of rat liver Pex5p and Ub-Pex5p in a PNS
 freshly prepared in the presence of 20 m m NEM. This alkylating
 agent inhibits DUBs and also blocks the thiol group of endogenous GSH. As
 shown in Fig. 4 C , a
 small fraction of total rat liver Pex5p can be detected as a 100-kDa species
 that, based on its molecular mass and DTT sensitivity, corresponds to Ub-Pex5p
 (compare lanes 1 and 4 ). Importantly, virtually all rat
 liver Ub-Pex5p is found in the organelle pellet after centrifugation of the
 PNS ( lane 2 ). Its absence in the supernatant fraction of this
 centrifugation ( lane 3 ) suggests that stage 4 Pex5p is rapidly
 deubiquitinated in vivo .

In conclusion, these data indicate that stage 3 Pex5p is much more
 resistant to the action of DUBs and GSH than stage 4 Pex5p. From another
 perspective, these results illustrate how a cysteine residue in one protein
 can be, at one time, sufficiently exposed to the cytosolic milieu allowing its
 derivatization with an 8.5-kDa protein ( i.e. ubiquitin) becoming,
 immediately after, protected from both nucleophilic attack by a 0.3-kDa
 molecule ( i.e. GSH) and the action of DUBs and, finally, after
 ATP-dependent extraction from a membrane-embedded protein complex (the DTM)
 again exposed and sensitive to GSH and DUBs.

Deubiquitination of Pex5p Is Not a Mandatory Step in the Pex5p-mediated
 Import Pathway —The experiment presented in Fig. 2 revealed yet another
 interesting aspect of the Pex5p-mediated protein import pathway. Indeed, the
 relative amounts of unconjugated and ubiquitinated Pex5p proteins detected in
 the organelle pellets seem to parallel the ones found in the supernatants.
 Considering that the organelle pellets are not significantly contaminated with
 soluble proteins (as assessed by the distribution of tubulin), this finding
 suggested to us that Ub-Pex5p and Ub-Pex5(C11K)p may have the capacity of
 reentering the DTM. To test this idea we produced soluble Ub-Pex5p in an in vitro reaction, treated the mixture of Ub-Pex5p and Pex5p with
 iodoacetamide, and performed a second in vitro assay at 16 °C to
 inhibit de novo ubiquitination
 ( Fig. 1 ). A vast excess of
 GST-Ub was also included in this second in vitro reaction, allowing
 us to assess the degree of inhibition of de novo ubiquitination. As
 shown in Fig. 5 A ,
 Ub-Pex5p does acquire a protease-resistant status when incubated with a PNS
 fraction, suggesting that it entered the DTM. Importantly, as observed for
 Pex5p ( lanes 4–6 ), insertion of Ub-Pex5p into the DTM is cargo
 protein-dependent (compare lanes 1 and 2 ; see also Fig. 1 ). Thus, deubiquitination
 of Pex5p is not a mandatory step in the Pex5p-mediated import pathway.

One implication of this finding is that ubiquitination of Pex5p does not
 change significantly its cargo binding capacity. The experiment presented in Fig. 5 B corroborates
 this interpretation. Here, a mixture of soluble Pex5p and Ub-Pex5p was
 subjected to sucrose gradient centrifugation in the presence or absence of a
 PTS1-containing recombinant protein (GST-SKL). As shown before
 ( 38 ), in the absence of
 GST-SKL, the majority of Pex5p sediments as a monomeric protein above bovine
 serum albumin ( Fig.
 5 B , lower panel, lane 5 ). The abnormal
 sedimentation behavior of Pex5p is due to the natively unfolded nature of a
 major part of its polypeptide chain
 ( 39 ). When GST-SKL is included
 in the gradient solution, a complex comprising one molecule of Pex5p and one
 of GST-SKL is formed ( 38 ), and
 this complex now sediments slightly below bovine serum albumin ( upper
 panel, lane 6 ; note that although both Pex5p and albumin are more
 abundant in lane 6 , there is more albumin in lane 5 than in lane 7 , whereas similar amounts of Pex5p are found in these two
 lanes). Importantly, the distributions of Ub-Pex5p in these gradients parallel
 those of Pex5p. Taken together, these observations suggest that Pex5p and
 Ub-Pex5p have similar cargo binding capacities.

The in Vivo Properties of Pex5(C11K)p and Pex5(C11S)p —The
 data presented above suggest that Pex5(C11K)p is as functional as Pex5p in our in vitro system. To determine whether the same is true in
 vivo , fibroblasts from Pex5-KO mice
 ( 35 ) were transiently
 transfected with bicistronic plasmids encoding EGFP-PTS1 (a protein
 efficiently targeted to the peroxisome in a Pex5p-dependent manner
 ( 47 )) and Pex5p, Pex5(C11S)p,
 or Pex5(C11K)p. Forty eight hours post-transfection, the cells were analyzed
 by (immuno)fluorescence microscopy. As shown in Fig. 6 , EGFP-PTS1 displays a
 peroxisomal localization in most cells transfected with the Pex5p- or
 Pex5(C11K)p-encoding plasmids, as assessed by its co-localization with Pex14p,
 a peroxisomal membrane protein
 ( 37 , 48 ). In contrast, no
 peroxisomal EGFP-PTS1 was detected when using the Pex5(C11S)p-encoding plasmid
 in these experiments ( Fig. 6 ).
 Our in vitro observations showing that this mutant protein is not a
 substrate for the peroxisomal ubiquitination machinery probably explain this
 result. Indeed, considering that peroxisomes contain very low amounts of DTM
 components compared with peroxisomal matrix proteins
 ( 21 ), i.e. peroxins
 are used in a catalytical manner, it is possible that Pex5(C11S)p undergoes
 one protein transport event becoming trapped at the DTM and thus blocking
 it.

In vivo data favoring this interpretation were obtained when CHO
 cells were transiently transfected with the above mentioned bicistronic
 plasmids ( Fig. 6 ). Whereas a
 peroxisomal localization for the EGFP-PTS1 reporter protein was obtained with
 the Pex5p- and Pex5(C11K)p-encoding constructs, this reporter protein was
 mainly detected in the cytosol of cells expressing Pex5(C11S)p. Thus,
 substitution of the conserved cysteine of Pex5p by a serine, but not by a
 lysine, results in a dominant negative protein, as expected.

The Proteasome Inhibitor MG132 Blocks the PTS1 Import Pathway in
 Vivo —The reason for the unconventional ubiquitination of Pex5p
 could be related to the chemical lability of stage 4 Pex5p. As proposed
 recently ( 18 ) (see also
 “Discussion”), the fact that the stage 4-to-stage 0 transition may
 occur by both an enzymatic and nonenzymatic mechanism could decrease the
 half-life of soluble Ub-Pex5p and thus its probability of being recognized by
 some component of the ubiquitin-proteasome system. If correct, this would
 imply that Pex5(C11K)p is less stable than Pex5p in vivo , a
 phenomenon that might be observed by comparing the levels of these proteins in
 cell cultures grown in the absence or presence of proteasome inhibitors.
 Unfortunately, despite several attempts using CHO cell lines stably expressing
 EGFP-PTS1 and Pex5p or Pex5(C11K)p, we have been unable to confirm this
 possibility (data not shown; see also “Discussion”). Nevertheless,
 an interesting finding was made during the course of that work: MG132, a
 proteasome inhibitor, interferes with the peroxisomal targeting of EGFP-PTS1.
 This phenomenon is illustrated in Fig.
 7 showing a CHO cell line stably expressing this peroxisomal
 reporter protein and grown in the presence or absence of MG132 for different
 periods of time.

Inhibition of the proteasome could lead to the accumulation of
 polyubiquitinated Pex5p molecules, which might block the peroxisomal DTM.
 Alternatively, the decrease in the cellular ubiquitin levels induced by MG132
 ( 49 ) could simply impede
 export of Pex5p from the DTM. Presently, we favor this last possibility
 because no ubiquitinated Pex5p protein could be detected in total protein
 extracts obtained from MG132-treated cell cultures (data not shown).

DISCUSSION

One of the aims of this work was to characterize the last step of the
 Pex5p-mediated import pathway, the deubiquitination of soluble Ub-Pex5p (stage
 4 Pex5p). Our data suggest that stage 4 Pex5p is indeed converted into stage 0
 Pex5p and that this deubiquitination process may occur by a combination of
 enzymatic and nonenzymatic mechanisms. Importantly, both mechanisms are
 context-dependent with the membrane-bound Ub-Pex5p (stage 3) displaying a
 higher resistance to both. The inaccessibility of stage 3 Pex5p to DUBs and
 GSH should avoid futile ubiquitination-deubiquitination cycles at the DTM.

The exact fractions of stage 4 Pex5p following each of these
 deubiquitinating pathways cannot be determined from our experiments. This
 would require knowing the identity and the in vivo concentration of
 the DUB(s) involved in this process. It seems clear, however, that the
 nonenzymatic pathway is not a crucial feature of the Pex5p-mediated import
 pathway because substitution of the conserved cysteine of Pex5p by a lysine
 results in a functional protein. This does not necessarily mean that the
 nonenzymatic deubiquitinating pathway has no importance at all, as discussed
 below.

Interestingly, deubiquitination of stage 4 Pex5p seems not to be a
 mandatory step in the Pex5p-mediated import pathway. Indeed, soluble Ub-Pex5p
 can still acquire a protease-resistant status when incubated with organelles
 in the presence of cargo proteins. We note that a bypass of the stage
 4-to-stage 0 transition probably does not occur in vivo because a
 steady-state level analysis of endogenous ubiquitinated Pex5p in PNS fractions
 revealed that stage 4 Pex5p is below the detection limit of our assays.
 Similar steady-state data have been reported for yeast Pex5p
 ( 10 ). Thus, in vivo the stage 4-to-stage 0 transition is probably much faster than the rate at
 which stage 4 is generated. Nevertheless, the in vitro assays and the
 sedimentation analyses reported here do suggest that ubiquitination of Pex5p
 does not alter its cargo protein binding capacity, a property that, if
 extrapolated to the membrane-bound Pex5p species, could imply that
 ubiquitination of stage 2 Pex5p is not linked to the cargo protein release
 step. Furthermore, the finding that stage 4 Pex5p can return to the DTM in a
 cargo-dependent manner together with its sedimentation behavior also supports
 the idea that Pex5p is released from the Pex1p/Pex6p protein complex still in
 its ubiquitinated form.

The most striking observations made in this work concern the properties of
 Pex5(C11K)p. The fact that this mutant protein enters the DTM, acquires a
 monoubiquitin, and is exported from the DTM as efficiently as the wild-type
 Pex5p protein suggests that neither Cys 11 nor the thiol ester bond
 in the Ub-Pex5p conjugate play a key role in any of the steps occurring at the
 DTM. The same conclusion can be drawn from our in vivo data showing
 that Pex5(C11K)p, but not Pex5(C11S)p, is capable of rescuing the phenotype of
 Pex5-KO cells. Thus, although sufficiently important to have been conserved
 throughout the evolution, it seems that the cysteine residue of Pex5p or the
 thiol ester bond in which it is involved has just an ancillary function in
 this protein sorting pathway. Alternatively, the reason why a cysteine and not
 a lysine is used in this ubiquitination event could be related to some
 regulatory pathway acting on Pex5p through its conserved cysteine rather than
 to the actual mechanism of protein translocation across the peroxisomal
 membrane. The exact nature of this ancillary function/regulatory role,
 however, remains unknown (but see below). Nevertheless, the results presented
 here do allow us to exclude some possibilities. For instance, our data argue
 strongly against the possibility of Pex5p being a HECT ( h omologous
 to E 6AP C t erminus)-like E3 ubiquitin ligase
 ( 50 ) because the stability of
 the isopeptide bond in the Ub-Pex5(C11K)p conjugate would make any
 Pex5(C11K)p-promoted ubiquitination extremely difficult. This same reasoning
 also suggests that the ubiquitination step of Pex5p at the DTM can be made
 irreversible without any deleterious effects. In fact, and in agreement with
 this conclusion, we have been unable to detect such putative reversibility
 when using the wild-type peroxin in in vitro assays, 5 suggesting
 that a kinetic barrier is raised immediately after the ubiquitination process.
 Our in vitro data also seem to exclude the possibility that the
 cysteine residue provides some advantage over a lysine residue in the stage
 2-to-stage 3 Pex5p transition. The thiol group of cysteine is a better
 nucleophile than the ε-amine of lysine, a property that, in principle,
 could result in a faster ubiquitination reaction of Pex5p at the DTM. However,
 ubiquitination of stage 2 Pex5p is a rate-limiting step in our in
 vitro system (see Ref. 7 ),
 and so any difference in the ubiquitination rates of Pex5p and Pex5(C11K)p
 would have been easily detected.

If Pex5p is not an HECT-like E3 protein, if there is no mechanistic need
 for a reversible ubiquitination step at the DTM, and if a cysteine residue
 presents no advantage over a lysine residue in the stage 2-to-stage 3
 transition, why is Pex5p ubiquitinated at a cysteine residue? Two different
 hypotheses can be raised, one centered on the chemical lability of the thiol
 ester bond of stage 4 Pex5p, and the other related to the biological
 properties of cysteine residues. In the first, one could assume that, although
 this protein import pathway can work with a lysine-based ubiquitination of
 Pex5p, there are advantages in disrupting the soluble Ub-Pex5p conjugate as
 fast as possible using for this purpose a nonenzymatic cleavage in addition to
 the DUB-mediated one. As discussed recently
 ( 18 ), these advantages could
 include a decreased half-life of stage 4 Pex5p, which might decrease its
 probability of being recognized by some component of the ubiquitin-proteasome
 system, like an E4 enzyme (ubiquitin-chain elongation factor)
 ( 51 ) or the proteasome itself
 ( 52 ). Considering the
 unavoidably high dilution factor of the ubiquitin-proteasome system in our in vitro assays and the high nonphysiological levels of Pex5p or
 Pex5(C11K)p attained in the transfection experiments, differences in the
 stabilities of the two proteins could have been easily missed in this
 work.

In the second hypothesis the biological properties of cysteine residues,
 and not the lability of the thiol ester bond in which the conserved cysteine
 of Pex5p is involved, is the important feature. Cysteine residues can be
 modified in numerous ways ( e.g. oxidation, glutathionylation,
 nitrosylation, acylation, etc.)
 ( 53 , 54 ), often resulting in the
 modulation of protein activity. In the case of Pex5p, modification of its
 conserved cysteine would have a dramatic effect because it would lead to a
 block of the peroxisomal DTM with the concomitant mislocalization of newly
 synthesized peroxisomal proteins into the cytosol. Coupled with an appropriate
 transcription regulation of peroxisomal protein-encoding genes, such a
 hypothetical mechanism could result in an advantageous mislocalization of some
 peroxisomal enzymes into the cytosol ( e.g. catalase in an oxidative
 stress situation). Clearly, further data are necessary to understand why the
 peroxisomal protein import machinery uses this peculiar type of
 ubiquitination.

In this work we describe some of the properties of an ubiquitin-protein
 thiol ester conjugate. In agreement with previous data on the sensitivity of
 the ubiquitin-E1 thiol ester conjugate to GSH (half-life of 1.4 min in 5
 m m GSH, pH 7.2; estimated from the data in Ref. 13 and assuming that the
 glutathiolate anion, p K a =∼9.0
 ( 55 ), is the attacking species
 in this reaction), we show that stage 4 Pex5p is also easily disrupted by GSH
 (half-life of 2.3 min in 5 m m GSH, pH 7.2). However, the results
 obtained with stage 3 Pex5p also suggest that thiol ester bonds in
 ubiquitin-protein conjugates may exist in environments inaccessible to GSH.
 Thus, although ubiquitination of proteins at cysteine residues seems
 particularly suited for transient events, as is the case in the Pex5p-mediated
 import pathway, it also has the potential to be as efficient and durable as
 the classical lysine-based ubiquitination, provided that some entity
 ( e.g. an interacting protein) protects the thiol ester bond from
 nucleophile attack. Considering that most current protocols aiming at
 identifying/characterizing ubiquitinated proteins include at least one
 reduction step with DTT/β-mercaptoethanol
 ( 56 ), reagents that also
 cleave thiol esters, it is thus possible that many more proteins ubiquitinated
 at cysteine residues will be found in the near future.
