---
pmid: '17218262'
title: Essential role for nuclear PTEN in maintaining chromosomal integrity.
authors:
- Shen WH
- Balajee AS
- Wang J
- Wu H
- Eng C
- Pandolfi PP
- Yin Y
journal: Cell
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.11.042
---

# Essential role for nuclear PTEN in maintaining chromosomal integrity.
**Authors:** Shen WH, Balajee AS, Wang J, Wu H, Eng C, Pandolfi PP, Yin Y
**Journal:** Cell (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2006.11.042](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2006.11.042)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2007 Jan 12;128(1):157-70. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.11.042.

Essential role for nuclear PTEN in maintaining chromosomal integrity.

Shen WH(1), Balajee AS, Wang J, Wu H, Eng C, Pandolfi PP, Yin Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, 
Columbia University, 630 West 168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2007 Jan 12;128(1):25-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.12.023.

A broad spectrum of mutations in PTEN, encoding a lipid phosphatase that 
inactivates the P13-K/AKT pathway, is found associated with primary tumors. Some 
of these mutations occur outside the phosphatase domain, suggesting that 
additional activities of PTEN function in tumor suppression. We report a nuclear 
function for PTEN in controlling chromosomal integrity. Disruption of Pten leads 
to extensive centromere breakage and chromosomal translocations. PTEN was found 
localized at centromeres and physically associated with CENP-C, an integral 
component of the kinetochore. C-terminal PTEN mutants disrupt the association of 
PTEN with centromeres and cause centromeric instability. Furthermore, Pten null 
cells exhibit spontaneous DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs). We show that PTEN 
acts on chromatin and regulates expression of Rad51, which reduces the incidence 
of spontaneous DSBs. Our results demonstrate that PTEN plays a fundamental role 
in the maintenance of chromosomal stability through the physical interaction 
with centromeres and control of DNA repair. We propose that PTEN acts as a 
guardian of genome integrity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.11.042
PMID: 17218262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
