---
pmid: '22142902'
title: Mdp3 is a novel microtubule-binding protein that regulates microtubule assembly
  and stability.
authors:
- Sun X
- Shi X
- Liu M
- Li D
- Zhang L
- Liu X
- Zhou J
journal: Cell Cycle
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.4161/cc.10.22.18106
---

# Mdp3 is a novel microtubule-binding protein that regulates microtubule assembly and stability.
**Authors:** Sun X, Shi X, Liu M, Li D, Zhang L, Liu X, Zhou J
**Journal:** Cell Cycle (2011)
**DOI:** [10.4161/cc.10.22.18106](https://doi.org/10.4161/cc.10.22.18106)

## Abstract

1. Cell Cycle. 2011 Nov 15;10(22):3929-37. doi: 10.4161/cc.10.22.18106. Epub 2011
 Nov 15.

Mdp3 is a novel microtubule-binding protein that regulates microtubule assembly 
and stability.

Sun X(1), Shi X, Liu M, Li D, Zhang L, Liu X, Zhou J.

Author information:
(1)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Protein Science, College of Life Sciences, Nankai 
University, Tianjin, China.

Microtubule-binding proteins are a group of molecules that associate with 
microtubules, regulate the structural properties of microtubules, and thereby 
participate in diverse microtubule-mediated cellular activities. A recent mass 
spectrometry-based proteomic study has identified microtubule-associated protein 
7 (MAP7) domain-containing 3 (Mdp3) as a potential microtubule-binding protein. 
However, its subcellular localization and functional importance are not 
characterized. In this study, by GST-pulldown assays, we found that Mdp3 
interacted with tubulin both in cells and in vitro. Immunofluorescence 
microscopy and microtubule cosedimentation assays revealed that Mdp3 also 
associated with microtubules. Serial deletion experiments showed that the two 
coiled coil motifs of Mdp3 were critical for its interaction with tubulin and 
microtubules. Cold recovery and nocodazole washout assays further demonstrated 
an important role for Mdp3 in regulating cellular microtubule assembly. Our data 
also showed that Mdp3 significantly enhanced the stability of cellular 
microtubules. By tubulin turbidity assay, we found that Mdp3 could promote 
microtubule assembly and stability in the purified system. In addition, we found 
that Mdp3 expression varied during the cell cycle and in primary tissues. These 
findings thus establish Mdp3 as a novel microtubule-binding protein that 
regulates microtubule assembly and stability.

DOI: 10.4161/cc.10.22.18106
PMID: 22142902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
