---
pmid: '31571211'
title: ATPase reaction cycle of P4-ATPases affects their transport from the endoplasmic
  reticulum.
authors:
- Tone T
- Nakayama K
- Takatsu H
- Shin HW
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/1873-3468.13629
---

# ATPase reaction cycle of P4-ATPases affects their transport from the endoplasmic reticulum.
**Authors:** Tone T, Nakayama K, Takatsu H, Shin HW
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/1873-3468.13629](https://doi.org/10.1002/1873-3468.13629)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2020 Feb;594(3):412-423. doi: 10.1002/1873-3468.13629. Epub 2019
Oct  14.

ATPase reaction cycle of P4-ATPases affects their transport from the endoplasmic 
reticulum.

Tone T(1), Nakayama K(1), Takatsu H(1), Shin HW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Kyoto University, Japan.

P4-ATPases belonging to the P-type ATPase superfamily mediate active transport 
of phospholipids across cellular membranes. Most P4-ATPases, except ATP9A and 
ATP9B proteins, form heteromeric complexes with CDC50 proteins, which are 
required for transport of P4-ATPases from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to 
their final destinations. P-type ATPases form autophosphorylated intermediates 
during the ATPase reaction cycle. However, the association of the catalytic 
cycle of P4-ATPases with their transport from the ER and their cellular 
localization has not been studied. Here, we show that transport of ATP9 and 
ATP11 proteins as well as that of ATP10A from the ER depends on the ATPase 
catalytic cycle, suggesting that conformational changes in P4-ATPases during the 
catalytic cycle are crucial for their transport from the ER.

© 2019 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1002/1873-3468.13629
PMID: 31571211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
