---
pmid: '23001144'
title: Inhibition of TLR signaling by a bacterial protein containing immunoreceptor
  tyrosine-based inhibitory motifs.
authors:
- Yan D
- Wang X
- Luo L
- Cao X
- Ge B
journal: Nat Immunol
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ni.2417
---

# Inhibition of TLR signaling by a bacterial protein containing immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motifs.
**Authors:** Yan D, Wang X, Luo L, Cao X, Ge B
**Journal:** Nat Immunol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ni.2417](https://doi.org/10.1038/ni.2417)

## Abstract

1. Nat Immunol. 2012 Nov;13(11):1063-71. doi: 10.1038/ni.2417. Epub 2012 Sep 23.

Inhibition of TLR signaling by a bacterial protein containing immunoreceptor 
tyrosine-based inhibitory motifs.

Yan D(1), Wang X, Luo L, Cao X, Ge B.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences & Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, 
Shanghai, China.

The protein Tir (translocated intimin receptor) in enteric bacteria shares 
sequence similarity with the host cellular immunoreceptor tyrosine-based 
inhibition motifs (ITIMs). Despite the importance of Tir in pedestal formation, 
relatively little is known about the role of Tir and its ITIMs in the regulation 
of the host immune response. Here we demonstrate that Tir from enteropathogenic 
Escherichia coli (EPEC) interacted with the host cellular tyrosine phosphatase 
SHP-1 in an ITIM phosphorylation-dependent manner. The association of Tir with 
SHP-1 facilitated the recruitment of SHP-1 to the adaptor TRAF6 and inhibited 
the ubiquitination of TRAF6. Moreover, the ITIMs of Tir suppressed 
EPEC-stimulated expression of proinflammatory cytokines and inhibited intestinal 
immunity to infection with Citrobacter rodentium. Our findings identify a 
previously unknown mechanism by which bacterial ITIM-containing proteins can 
inhibit innate immune responses.

DOI: 10.1038/ni.2417
PMID: 23001144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
