---
pmid: '11739746'
title: The RNA binding protein nuclear factor 90 functions as both a positive and
  negative regulator of gene expression in mammalian cells.
authors:
- Reichman TW
- Muñiz LC
- Mathews MB
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC134226
doi: 10.1128/MCB.22.1.343-356.2002
---

# The RNA binding protein nuclear factor 90 functions as both a positive and negative regulator of gene expression in mammalian cells.
**Authors:** Reichman TW, Muñiz LC, Mathews MB
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.22.1.343-356.2002](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.22.1.343-356.2002)
**PMC:** [PMC134226](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC134226/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Jan;22(1):343-56. doi: 10.1128/MCB.22.1.343-356.2002.

The RNA binding protein nuclear factor 90 functions as both a positive and 
negative regulator of gene expression in mammalian cells.

Reichman TW(1), Muñiz LC, Mathews MB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, New Jersey Medical School 
and Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Medicine and Dentistry 
of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey 07013-2714, USA.

Nuclear factor 90 (NF90) was originally isolated in a complex that binds to the 
antigen recognition response element (ARRE-2) present in the interleukin-2 
promoter. To characterize the transcriptional properties of NF90 in mammalian 
cells, we examined its ability to modulate promoter function in cellular 
transfection assays. NF90-Gal4 fusion proteins inhibited transcription from the 
adenovirus major late promoter in a fashion that was dependent on Gal4 
targeting. Conversely, NF90 activated the cytomegalovirus immediate-early 
promoter, to which it was not targeted. These effects required distinct but 
overlapping domains in the C terminus of NF90, which contains a functional 
nuclear localization signal and two double-stranded-RNA binding motifs. NF90 is 
present in cellular complexes together with the NF45 protein. Transfection 
assays showed that NF45 binds NF90 strongly and stimulates its ability to 
activate but not to inhibit gene expression. This report characterizes NF90 as 
both a positive and negative regulator of gene expression, depending on the 
promoter context, and suggests a role for NF45 as a regulator of NF90.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.22.1.343-356.2002
PMCID: PMC134226
PMID: 11739746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
