---
pmid: '14993286'
title: Cyclin F disruption compromises placental development and affects normal cell
  cycle execution.
authors:
- Tetzlaff MT
- Bai C
- Finegold M
- Wilson J
- Harper JW
- Mahon KA
- Elledge SJ
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC355860
doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.6.2487-2498.2004
---

# Cyclin F disruption compromises placental development and affects normal cell cycle execution.
**Authors:** Tetzlaff MT, Bai C, Finegold M, Wilson J, Harper JW, Mahon KA, Elledge SJ
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.24.6.2487-2498.2004](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.24.6.2487-2498.2004)
**PMC:** [PMC355860](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC355860/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Mar;24(6):2487-98. doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.6.2487-2498.2004.

Cyclin F disruption compromises placental development and affects normal cell 
cycle execution.

Tetzlaff MT(1), Bai C, Finegold M, Wilson J, Harper JW, Mahon KA, Elledge SJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human and Molecular Genetics, Texas Children's Hospital, Baylor 
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Human cyclin F was originally isolated as a cDNA capable of suppressing the 
temperature sensitivity of a Saccharomyces cerevisiae cdc4-1 mutant. Its tightly 
regulated expression and high conservation in the evolutionary progression from 
amphibians to mammals suggest that it coordinates the timing of a critical cell 
cycle event. The fact that it contains an F box and can form an SCF 
(Skp1-Cul1/Cdc53-F-box) complex in vivo further suggests that it may also 
function in proteolysis. To investigate the role of cyclin F in vivo, we 
generated mice deficient for cyclin F and conditionally deficient mice as well 
as mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) conditionally deficient for cyclin F. 
Heterozygous animals are normal and fertile, but CycF(-/-) animals, with a 
myriad of developmental anomalies due in large part to failures in yolk sac and 
chorioallantoic placentation, die around embryonic day 10.5. Tissue-specific 
deletion of cyclin F revealed that it was not required for the development and 
function of a number of different embryonic and adult tissues. In contrast, MEFs 
lacking cyclin F, while viable, do exhibit cell cycle defects, including reduced 
population-doubling time and a delay in cell cycle reentry from quiescence, 
indicating that cyclin F plays a role in cell cycle regulation.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.24.6.2487-2498.2004
PMCID: PMC355860
PMID: 14993286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
