---
pmid: '24076154'
title: Crystal structure of rat intestinal alkaline phosphatase--role of crown domain
  in mammalian alkaline phosphatases.
authors:
- Ghosh K
- Mazumder Tagore D
- Anumula R
- Lakshmaiah B
- Kumar PP
- Singaram S
- Matan T
- Kallipatti S
- Selvam S
- Krishnamurthy P
- Ramarao M
journal: J Struct Biol
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.jsb.2013.09.017
---

# Crystal structure of rat intestinal alkaline phosphatase--role of crown domain in mammalian alkaline phosphatases.
**Authors:** Ghosh K, Mazumder Tagore D, Anumula R, Lakshmaiah B, Kumar PP, Singaram S, Matan T, Kallipatti S, Selvam S, Krishnamurthy P, Ramarao M
**Journal:** J Struct Biol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jsb.2013.09.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsb.2013.09.017)

## Abstract

1. J Struct Biol. 2013 Nov;184(2):182-92. doi: 10.1016/j.jsb.2013.09.017. Epub
2013  Sep 27.

Crystal structure of rat intestinal alkaline phosphatase--role of crown domain 
in mammalian alkaline phosphatases.

Ghosh K(1), Mazumder Tagore D, Anumula R, Lakshmaiah B, Kumar PP, Singaram S, 
Matan T, Kallipatti S, Selvam S, Krishnamurthy P, Ramarao M.

Author information:
(1)Applied Biotechnology, Biocon Bristol-Myers Squibb Research and Development 
Center, Syngene International Ltd., Biocon Park, Bommasandra IV Phase, Jigani 
Link Road, Bangalore 560099, India. Electronic address: 
Kaushik.Ghosh@syngeneintl.com.

Intestinal alkaline phosphatases (IAPs) are involved in the cleavage of 
phosphate prodrugs to liberate the drug for absorption in the intestine. To 
facilitate in vitro characterization of phosphate prodrugs, we have cloned, 
expressed, purified and characterized IAPs from rat and cynomolgus monkey (rIAP 
and cIAP respectively) which are important pre-clinical species for drug 
metabolism studies. The recombinant rat and monkey enzymes expressed in Sf9 
insect cells (IAP-Ic) were found to be glycosylated and active. Expression of 
rat IAP in Escherichia coli (rIAP-Ec) led to ~200-fold loss of activity that was 
partially recovered by the addition of external Zn(2+) and Mg(2+) ions. Crystal 
structures of rIAP-Ec and rIAP-Ic were determined and they provide rationale for 
the discrepancy in enzyme activities. Rat IAP-Ic retains its activity in 
presence of both Zn(2+) and Mg(2+) whereas activity of most other alkaline 
phosphatases (APs) including the cIAP was strongly inhibited by excess Zn(2+). 
Based on our crystal structure, we hypothesized the residue Q317 in rIAP, 
present within 7 Å of the Mg(2+) at M3, to be important for this difference in 
activity. The Q317H rIAP and H317Q cIAP mutants showed reversal in effect of 
Zn(2+), corroborating the hypothesis. Further analysis of the two structures 
indicated a close linkage between glycosylation and crown domain stability. A 
triple mutant of rIAP, where all the three putative N-linked glycosylation sites 
were mutated showed thermal instability and reduced activity.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jsb.2013.09.017
PMID: 24076154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
