---
pmid: '16581798'
title: Structure and function of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae Sir3 BAH domain.
authors:
- Connelly JJ
- Yuan P
- Hsu HC
- Li Z
- Xu RM
- Sternglanz R
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1446965
doi: 10.1128/MCB.26.8.3256-3265.2006
---

# Structure and function of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae Sir3 BAH domain.
**Authors:** Connelly JJ, Yuan P, Hsu HC, Li Z, Xu RM, Sternglanz R
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.26.8.3256-3265.2006](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.26.8.3256-3265.2006)
**PMC:** [PMC1446965](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1446965/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Apr;26(8):3256-65. doi: 10.1128/MCB.26.8.3256-3265.2006.

Structure and function of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae Sir3 BAH domain.

Connelly JJ(1), Yuan P, Hsu HC, Li Z, Xu RM, Sternglanz R.

Author information:
(1)W. M. Keck Structural Biology Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold 
Spring Harbor, NY 11724, USA .

Previous work has shown that the N terminus of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae Sir3 
protein is crucial for the function of Sir3 in transcriptional silencing. Here, 
we show that overexpression of N-terminal fragments of Sir3 in strains lacking 
the full-length protein can lead to some silencing of HML and HMR. Sir3 contains 
a BAH (bromo-adjacent homology) domain at its N terminus. Overexpression of this 
domain alone can lead to silencing as long as Sir1 is overexpressed and Sir2 and 
Sir4 are present. Overexpression of the closely related Orc1 BAH domain can also 
silence in the absence of any Sir3 protein. A previously characterized 
hypermorphic sir3 mutation, D205N, greatly improves silencing by the Sir3 BAH 
domain and allows it to bind to DNA and oligonucleosomes in vitro. A previously 
uncharacterized region in the Sir1 N terminus is required for silencing by both 
the Sir3 and Orc1 BAH domains. The structure of the Sir3 BAH domain has been 
determined. In the crystal, the molecule multimerizes in the form of a 
left-handed superhelix. This superhelix may be relevant to the function of the 
BAH domain of Sir3 in silencing.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.26.8.3256-3265.2006
PMCID: PMC1446965
PMID: 16581798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
