---
pmid: '10567391'
title: The role of human MBF1 as a transcriptional coactivator.
authors:
- Kabe Y
- Goto M
- Shima D
- Imai T
- Wada T
- Morohashi Ki
- Shirakawa M
- Hirose S
- Handa H
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.48.34196
---

# The role of human MBF1 as a transcriptional coactivator.
**Authors:** Kabe Y, Goto M, Shima D, Imai T, Wada T, Morohashi Ki, Shirakawa M, Hirose S, Handa H
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.274.48.34196](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.48.34196)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Nov 26;274(48):34196-202. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.48.34196.

The role of human MBF1 as a transcriptional coactivator.

Kabe Y(1), Goto M, Shima D, Imai T, Wada T, Morohashi Ki, Shirakawa M, Hirose S, 
Handa H.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Bioscience, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259 Nagatsuta-cho, 
Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan.

Multiprotein bridging factor 1 (MBF1) is a coactivator which mediates 
transcriptional activation by interconnecting the general transcription factor 
TATA element-binding protein and gene-specific activators such as the Drosophila 
nuclear receptor FTZ-F1 or the yeast basic leucine zipper protein GCN4. The 
human homolog of MBF1 (hMBF1) has been identified but its function, especially 
in transcription, remains unclear. Here we report the cDNA cloning and 
functional analysis of hMBF1. Two isoforms, which we term hMBF1alpha and 
hMBF1beta, have been identified. hMBF1alpha mRNA was detected in a number of 
tissues, whereas hMBF1beta exhibited tissue-specific expression. Both isoforms 
bound to TBP and Ad4BP/SF-1, a mammalian counterpart of FTZ-F1, and mediated 
Ad4BP/SF-1-dependent transcriptional activation. While hMBF1 was detected in the 
cytoplasm by immunostaining, coexpression of the nuclear protein Ad4BP/SF-1 with 
hMBF1 induced accumulation of hMBF1 in the nucleus, suggesting that hMBF1 is 
localized in the nucleus through its binding to Ad4BP/SF-1. hMBF1 also bound to 
ATF1, a member of the basic leucine zipper protein family, and mediated its 
activity as a transcriptional activator. These data establish that the 
coactivator MBF1 is functionally conserved in eukaryotes.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.48.34196
PMID: 10567391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
