---
pmid: '14585980'
title: Cardiomyocyte-specific endothelin A receptor knockout mice have normal cardiac
  function and an unaltered hypertrophic response to angiotensin II and isoproterenol.
authors:
- Kedzierski RM
- Grayburn PA
- Kisanuki YY
- Williams CS
- Hammer RE
- Richardson JA
- Schneider MD
- Yanagisawa M
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC262340
doi: 10.1128/MCB.23.22.8226-8232.2003
---

# Cardiomyocyte-specific endothelin A receptor knockout mice have normal cardiac function and an unaltered hypertrophic response to angiotensin II and isoproterenol.
**Authors:** Kedzierski RM, Grayburn PA, Kisanuki YY, Williams CS, Hammer RE, Richardson JA, Schneider MD, Yanagisawa M
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.23.22.8226-8232.2003](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.23.22.8226-8232.2003)
**PMC:** [PMC262340](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC262340/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Nov;23(22):8226-32. doi: 10.1128/MCB.23.22.8226-8232.2003.

Cardiomyocyte-specific endothelin A receptor knockout mice have normal cardiac 
function and an unaltered hypertrophic response to angiotensin II and 
isoproterenol.

Kedzierski RM(1), Grayburn PA, Kisanuki YY, Williams CS, Hammer RE, Richardson 
JA, Schneider MD, Yanagisawa M.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Even though endothelin is recognized as an important vasoregulatory molecule, 
the roles of endothelin receptors in specific cell types are not yet fully 
understood. Mice with a null mutation in endothelin A receptor gene (ET(A)) or 
in the gene of its ligand (endothelin 1) die neonatally due to craniofacial and 
cardiac abnormalities. This early lethality has in the past hindered studies on 
the role of endothelin in cardiovascular physiology and pathophysiology. To 
overcome this obstacle, we utilized the cre/loxP technology to generate mice in 
which the ET(A) gene could be deleted specifically in cardiomyocytes. The cre 
recombinase transgene driven by the alpha-myosin heavy-chain promoter deleted 
the floxed ET(A) allele specifically in the hearts of these mice, resulting in a 
78% reduction in cardiac ET(A) mRNA level compared to wild-type controls. 
Cardiomyocyte-specific ET(A) knockout animals are viable and exhibit normal 
growth, cardiac anatomy, and cardiac contractility, as assessed by 
echocardiography. In addition, these animals exhibit hypertrophic and 
contractile responses to 10-day infusion of angiotensin II or isoproterenol 
similar to those observed in control animals. These results indicate that in 
adult mice cardiac ET(A) receptors are not necessary for either baseline cardiac 
function or stress-induced response to angiotensin II or isoproterenol.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.23.22.8226-8232.2003
PMCID: PMC262340
PMID: 14585980 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
