---
pmid: '39630868'
title: The essential role of TTC28 in maintaining chromosomal stability via HSPA8
  chaperone-mediated autophagy.
authors:
- Zhang G
- Xiang M
- Gu L
- Zhou J
- Zhang B
- Tian W
- Deng D
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2024'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: xml
pmcid: PMC11648667
doi: 10.1073/pnas.2409447121
---

# The essential role of TTC28 in maintaining chromosomal stability via HSPA8 chaperone-mediated autophagy.
**Authors:** Zhang G, Xiang M, Gu L, Zhou J, Zhang B, Tian W, Deng D
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.2409447121](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2409447121)
**PMC:** [PMC11648667](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11648667/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2024 Dec 10;121(50):e2409447121. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2409447121. Epub 2024 Dec 4.

The essential role of TTC28 in maintaining chromosomal stability via HSPA8 
chaperone-mediated autophagy.

Zhang G(1), Xiang M(1), Gu L(1), Zhou J(1), Zhang B(1), Tian W(1), Deng D(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cancer Etiology, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and 
Translational Research (Ministry of Education/Beijing), Peking University Cancer 
Hospital and Institute, Beijing 100142, China.

There are three distinct forms of autophagy, namely, macroautophagy, 
microautophagy, and HSPA8 chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA). While 
macroautophagy is widely recognized as a regulator of chromosomal instability 
(CIN) through various pathways, the contributions of CMA and microautophagy to 
CIN remain uncertain. TTC28, a conserved gene in vertebrates, is frequently 
mutated and down-regulated in numerous human cancers. This study presents 
findings demonstrating the interaction between human tetratricopeptide repeat 
domain 28 (TTC28) and heat shock protein member 8 (HSPA8) and 
lysosomal-associated membrane protein 2A proteins. The tetratricopeptide repeat 
domains of TTC28 bind to the C-terminal motif (PTIEEVD) in HSPA8, resulting in 
the subsequent degradation of TTC28 via CMA/microautophagy. Notably, the 
baseline frequency of micronuclei (FMN) in human cancer cells with TTC28 
knockout cells was three times greater than that in cells with wild-type TTC28 
(7.7% vs. 2.3%, P = 4.86E-09). Furthermore, the overexpression of Ttc28 
mitigated the impact of TTC28 knockout on FMN (11.9% vs. 4.8%, P = 2.83E-11). 
Our findings also demonstrate that CMA has a protective effect on genome 
stability and that TTC28 plays an essential role in the effect of CMA. These 
results were further supported by the quantification of γH2AX and comet analyses 
and the analysis of The Cancer Genome Atlas data via bioinformatics. 
Mechanistically, TTC28 regulates mitosis and cytokinesis, which are involved in 
the maintenance of genome integrity by CMA. In conclusion, our study 
demonstrated that TTC28 is not only an HSPA8-mediated CMA/microautophagy 
substrate but also essential for maintaining chromosomal stability via CMA. 
Comprehensive TTC28 downregulation may lead to CIN in cancer cells.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2409447121
PMCID: PMC11648667
PMID: 39630868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests statement:The authors 
declare no competing interest.

## Full Text

Autophagy is an indispensable, conserved process that degrades intracellular components, such as long-lived proteins, DNA/RNA fragments, and dysfunctional organelles (1). There are three types of autophagy, namely, macroautophagy, microautophagy, and chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA), each involving different mechanisms of substrate delivery to lysosomes (2). CMA is a selective process of autophagy mediated through interactions of substrate proteins with the chaperone protein heat shock protein member 8 (HSPA8/HSC70) (3). The substrate–HSPA8 complexes on the lysosome surface further interact with lysosomal-associated membrane protein 2A (LAMP2A) and are transported into the lysosome for degradation (4). CMA can be induced in response to stress, such as starvation (5), oxidative stress (6), or proteotoxicity (7), and plays an important role in multiple physiological processes (8). CMA deficiency has been linked to the pathogenesis of certain diseases, including neurodegenerative diseases (9), cancers (10), atherosclerosis (11), aging (12), and liver metabolic dysfunction (13). Macroautophagy functions as one of the responses of host cells to DNA damage stress through multiple pathways (14–17). However, the contributions of CMA and microautophagy to DNA damage are unclear (18, 19).

Tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) domain 28 (TTC28) is a large protein (270,884 Da) containing 28 TPR domains, which makes studies on its functions very difficult. In fact, it has rarely been studied since it was identified in 2012 (20). TTC28 can interact with Aurora B (AURKB), which is essential for the progression of mitosis and cytokinesis (20). According to public datasets in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), TTC28 is a gene with recurrent somatic mutations and copy number variations in several kinds of human cancers (SI Appendix, Fig. S1 A and B) (21, 22). These changes in TTC28 have also been frequently detected in digestive system cancers included in non-TCGA studies, including esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (23), colorectal cancer (24), liver cancer (25), and gastric cancer (26). Furthermore, the mRNA expression of TTC28 is comprehensively down-regulated in many human cancers, according to analysis of TCGA transcriptome datasets with the gene expression profiling and interactive analyses (GEPIA) server (SI Appendix, Fig. S2A) (27). A low level of TTC28 expression was significantly associated with poor overall survival (OS) in patients with lung or ovarian cancer (SI Appendix, Fig. S2B), according to the KM plotter analysis (28). The TTC28 gene may be a target of TP53, a crucial gatekeeper of genome integrity (29). However, the biological functions of the TTC28 gene and the mechanisms underlying its downregulation in cancers remain to be studied.

Here, we found that TTC28 is not only an HSPA8-mediated CMA/microautophagy substrate but also an essential component for CMA to maintain chromosomal stability through binding AURKB and regulating mitosis and cytokinesis. TTC28 downregulation may contribute to the increase in genome instability in human cancers.

ResultsTTC28 Directly Interacts with HSPA8.TTC28 messenger RNA (mRNA) levels are significantly decreased in many human cancers and are associated with the OS of lung cancer patients (SI Appendix, Figs. S1 and S2). Hence, we initially analyzed the baseline level of TTC28 expression in a set of lung cancer cell lines. The protein and mRNA levels of TTC28 were the highest and lowest, respectively, in H1299 and H292 cells, as determined by quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qRT–PCR) and Western blotting (Fig. 1 A and B). A positive correlation between the protein and mRNA of TTC28 levels was consistently observed among the cancer cell lines and pancancer tissues in the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) and TCGA databases (Spearman R = 0.78 and 0.43; SI Appendix, Fig. S3). In addition, the TTC28 protein was detected mainly in the cytoplasm in H1299 (Fig. 1C), and this location was confirmed by confocal analysis. Both endogenous TTC28 and overexpressed TTC28-Flag were distributed mainly in the perinuclear cytoplasm (SI Appendix, Fig. S4). A few endogenous TTC28 signals were also detected in nucleoli.Fig. 1.Characterization of the TTC28–HSPA8 interaction. (A and B) The baseline levels of TTC28 mRNA and protein, as determined by qRT-PCR and Western blot analyses. (C) Comparison of the amount of TTC28 in the cytoplasm (Cyto) and nucleus (Nuc) of H1299 cells. (D) Images of SDS–PAGE gels containing proteins immunoprecipitated from H1299 cells with the anti-TTC28 antibody or control IgG. The protein bands were stained with Coomassie blue. Six differential bands were excised, pooled into the yellow or red subgroup, and prepared for LC–MS/MS analysis, as shown by the yellow and red arrows. The names of the top nine candidate proteins characterized in each subgroup are displayed on the right side. (E) CoIP detection of the interaction of endogenous TTC28 with a set of candidate proteins, including HSPA8, in H1299 cells. (F) CoIP detection of the interaction of TTC28 with HSPA8 or c-Myc-HSPA8 in H1299 cells. (G) Colocalization status of endogenous HSPA8 (red) and TTC28 (green) in H1299 and H460 cells.We subsequently immunoprecipitated endogenous TTC28-binding protein complexes in H1299 cells using an anti-TTC28 antibody, separated these complexes on sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE) gels, and excised and pooled the differential bands into red and yellow subgroups for liquid chromatography–mass/mass (LC–MS/MS) identification. MS/MS analysis revealed that 222 candidate proteins might interact with TTC28 (Fig. 1D and Datasets S1 and S2). Co-immuno-precipitation (CoIP) analysis confirmed that endogenous TTC28 indeed interacted with the endogenous HSPA8, Vimentin, and DDX41 proteins (Fig. 1E). Conversely, the TTC28 protein was also found in protein complexes immunoprecipitated with an anti-HSPA8 antibody in H1299 cells overexpressing cMyc-HSPA8 (Fig. 1F). Confocal microscopy analysis further revealed that most endogenous TTC28 and endogenous HSPA8 were colocalized in the cytoplasm in both H1299 and H460 cells (Fig. 1G and SI Appendix, Fig. S5).In contrast to the abundance of the TTC28 transcript, the abundance of the HSPA8 transcript was increased in many cancers in the TCGA project (SI Appendix, Fig. S6). Because HSPA8 is an essential protein for CMA and performs important functions in protein degradation (30), we investigated the possibility that the TTC28–HSPA8 interaction might contribute to TTC28 downregulation in cancer cells through the CMA pathway, as described below.Characterization of TTC28–HSPA8 Binding Domains.TTC28 is a highly conserved protein in vertebrates and contains 28 TPR domains (Fig. 2A). These TPRs contain 16 Lys-Phe-Glu-Arg-Gln (KFERQ)-like motifs (SI Appendix, Fig. S7), which may be involved in the degradation of CMA substrates (31). There is 96% sequence similarity and 91% sequence identity in the TPR domains between zebrafish (Danio rerio) ttc28 and human TTC28 (32). Therefore, we used a set of established zebrafish ttc28 (HA-ttc28) and its truncation mutants, namely, HA-ttc28-N, HA-ttc28-N-1, HA-ttc28-N-2, HA-ttc28-N-3, HA-ttc28-ΔN, and HA-ttc28-ΔN-1, to evaluate the binding of ttc28 to HSPA8 (Fig. 2A). The CoIP results demonstrated that HSPA8 not only bound to the full-length zebrafish ttc28 but also bound to five kinds of TPR-containing ttc28 mutants in H1299 cells. However, HSPA8 did not bind to the HA-ttc28-ΔN mutant, which does not contain the TPR domain (Fig. 2B). These results indicated that HSPA8 may indiscriminately interact with these TPR domains in TTC28.Fig. 2.HSPA8 interacts with the TPR domains of TTC28 mainly via its PTIEEVD motif in the C terminus. (A) Illustration of the functional domains of human TTC28 and zebrafish ttc28 and its truncation mutants. (B) CoIP results showing the interaction of HSPA8 with various HA-ttc28 mutants and full-length ttc28 in H1299 cells 48 h posttransfection. (C) 3D structural image of HSPA8 predicted by AlphaFold (alphafold.ebi.ac.uk). Locations of the main functional parts, point mutations in amino acids in cancers (SI Appendix, Fig. S6B), and the PTIEEVD motif in the C terminus are labeled. (D) CoIP results indicating the interaction of TTC28 with wild-type (wt) Myc-HSPA8, its PTIEEVD truncation mutant (mut) and the PTIEEVD-containing mutant (ΔN) in H1299 cells 48 h posttransfection. (E) Bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC) analysis of the interaction of pYC-TTC28 with pVN-HSPA8.The C-terminal Pro-Thr-Ile-Glu-Glu-Val-Asp (PTIEEVD) motif (Fig. 2C, highlighted with a pink circle) of human HSPA8 is the amino acid sequence that binds many TPR-containing proteins (33). To confirm whether the PTIEEVD motif contributes to the TTC28–HSPA8 interaction, we constructed a PTIEEVD-truncated HSPA8 mutant (HSPA8-mut). While wild-type HSPA8 (HSPA8-wt) bound strongly to human TTC28, HSPA8-mut bound very weakly to TTC28 in H1299 cells (Fig. 2D). In contrast, the short HSPA8-ΔN mutant (107 aa) containing the PTIEEVD motif maintained the binding affinity of TTC28, further indicating that the PTIEEVD motif is the TTC28 TPR-binding motif.Bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC) is an assay developed to detect direct molecular interactions between two proteins in situ within cells. BiFC analysis confirmed the TTC28–HSPA8 interaction. Yellow fluorescence was observed only in the cytoplasm of H1299 and H661 cells transfected with the pVN-HSPA8 and pYC-TTC28 vectors and was not observed in cells transfected with the pVN and pYC control vectors 48 h posttransfection (Fig. 2E).HSPA8 Binding Participates in the Stabilization and CMA-Mediated Degradation of TTC28.By Western blot analysis, the abundance of TTC28 increased in H460 and H661 cells overexpressing HSPA8-wt but not in those overexpressing HSPA8-mut (Fig. 3A) and decreased in H1299 and H661 cells with siRNA-mediated knockdown of HSPA8 (siHSPA8) (Fig. 3B). In contrast, HSPA8 knockdown even weakly increased TTC28 mRNA levels (SI Appendix, Fig. S8A). In addition, HSPA8 is a chaperone with adenosinetriphosphate (ATP) synthase (ATPase) activity that has a protective effect on oxidative stress by facilitating protein refolding. Apoptozole is an inhibitor of the ATPase activity of HSPA8, and the inhibition of ATPase activity by apoptozole disrupts the interaction of HSPA8 with some target proteins in cells (34, 35). We found that the abundance of TTC28 was significantly reduced in H1299 and H661 cells after apoptozole treatment (at a final concentration of 10 μM; Fig. 3C). These results suggest that TTC28 is stabilized through binding to HSPA8, probably in an ATPase activity-dependent fashion. Furthermore, treatment with the lysosome inhibitor chloroquine (at a final concentration of 50 μM) for 4 h led to the accumulation of TTC28 only in cells without siHSPA8 and not in cells with siHSPA8 (Fig. 3D), suggesting that the inhibition of TTC28 degradation by chloroquine is dependent on HSPA8.Fig. 3.Effect of the essential CMA genes HSPA8 and LAMP2A on TTC28 expression. (A) The abundance of TTC28 in H460 and H661 cells overexpressing HSPA8 for 48 h, as determined by western blot analysis. The band density of TTC28 was normalized to that of the β-Actin B protein (ACTB) as the reference. (B) The abundance of TTC28 in H1299 and H661 cells in which HSPA8 was down-regulated by siRNA for 48 h. (C) Effect of treatment with apoptozole (final concentration, 10 μM) on the abundance of TTC28 in H1299 and H661 cells. (D) The abundance of TTC28 in cells with or without siHSPA8 transfection and/or chloroquine treatment (final concentration, 50 μM) for 4 h. (E) The abundance of TTC28 in H1299 and H661 cells treated with siLAMP2A for 48 h. The knockdown status of LAMP2A was determined by qRT-PCR (Top) and Western blotting (Middle and Bottom). Only significant p values are labeled for three biological replicates. (F) Effect of treatment with CHX (50 μg/mL) on the abundance of TTC28 in H1299 and H661 cells with and without siLAMP2A treatment.LAMP2A, encoded by the LAMP2 gene, is another protein essential for CMA (36) that is frequently up-regulated in many cancers (SI Appendix, Figs. S3 and S9). The abundance of TTC28 was markedly increased in H1299 and H661 cells with siRNA-mediated knockdown of LAMP2A (siLAMP2A) (Fig. 3E), whereas TTC28 mRNA levels were not affected by LAMP2A knockdown (SI Appendix, Fig. S8B). In addition, LAMP2A was coimmunoprecipitated with TTC28 in H1299 cells (SI Appendix, Fig. S10A). Confocal microscopy analysis further revealed that Flag-TTC28 and endogenous LAMP2A were colocalized in both H1299 and H661 cells (SI Appendix, Fig. S10B). When nascent synthesis of the TTC28 protein was blocked by the ribosomal inhibitor cycloheximide (CHX, 50 μg/mL), the amount of TTC28 was much greater in siLAMP2A cells than in scramble cells at baseline, and the half-life of the TTC28 protein was also greater in siLAMP2A cells than in scramble cells after CHX treatment (4.6 h and 9.6 h in scramble H661 and H1299 cells; >12 h in siLAMP2A counterparts; Fig. 3F). Together, the above results indicate that TTC28 is a CMA substrate and that HSPA8 is not only necessary for TTC28 degradation by CMA but also necessary for TTC28 stabilization.TTC28 Plays an Essential Role in Preventing the Frequency of Micronuclei (FMN) Induced by CMA.Both macroautophagy and zebrafish ttc28 are regulators of genome stability (32, 37). However, the effects of CMA and its cooperation with TTC28 on baseline genome stability have not been reported. FMN in cells is an indicator of DNA damage and the activation of DNA damage responses (37, 38). Therefore, we analyzed baseline FMN in interphase cells with functional alterations in TTC28 and two essential CMA genes as described below.We knocked out the TTC28 gene by introducing an ins/del mutation within exon 3 through CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing (Fig. 4A and SI Appendix, Fig. S11). Notably, the FMN in TTC28 knockout (TTC28-KO) H1299 cells was more than 3-fold greater than that in TTC28 wild-type (TTC28-WT) cells (7.7% vs. 2.3%, P = 4.86E−09), whereas the FMN in TTC28-KO cells with ttc28 overexpression was significantly lower than that in TTC28-KO cells without ttc28 overexpression in the rescue experiment (11.9% vs. 4.8%, P = 2.83E−11; Fig. 4A and SI Appendix, Table S1), indicating that TTC28 plays a role in maintaining genome stability.Fig. 4.TTC28 and CMA affect the FMN in cancer cells. (A) Effect of TTC28 KO on the FMN in H1299 cells with and without zebrafish ttc28 overexpression. The knockout status of TTC28 exon 3 by CRISPR-Cas9 was checked via PCR sequencing and confirmed via western blotting. (B and C) Effects of the overexpression of HSPA8 and its mutant on the FMN in TTC28-WT H1299 cells. (D) Effect of HSPA8 overexpression on FMN in TTC28-KO H1299 cells. (E) Effects of siHSPA8 and siLAMP2A treatment on FMN in H1299 and H661 cells with and without TTC28 KO. The knockdown of HSPA8 and LAMP2A by siRNA for 48 h was assessed via western blotting. (F) Image of a representative toroidal nucleus. The red arrows within the middle images point to micronuclei visualized by DAPI. The cytoplasm was visualized by tubulin (green or red), as shown. The cells with target protein overexpression were visualized with the HA or c-Myc tag (green) and labeled with the “+” symbol. Other cells are labeled with the “−” symbol. The exact numbers of cells with and without micronuclei (or toroidal nuclei) in each graph are listed in SI Appendix, Table S1. Significant p values in the chi-square test are also labeled.The overexpression of HSPA8-wt, but not its PTIEEVD-truncated mutant, increased the baseline FMN in TTC28-WT H1299 cells (14.2% vs. 22.0%, P = 1.08E−10; Fig. 4 B and C). This difference could not be induced by the overexpression of HSPA8-wt in TTC28-KO H1299 cells (22.5% vs. 20.7%; Fig. 4D). However, a significant difference in FMN was not induced by siHSPA8 in H1299 or H661 cells (Fig. 4E and SI Appendix, Table S1). In addition, individual siLAMP2A expression significantly increased FMN only in TTC28-WT H1299 and H661 cells (6.5% vs. 13.0%, P = 5.26E−07 and 3.5% vs. 9.3%, P = 5.30E−08) but not in their TTC28-KO counterparts (16.4% vs. 17.2% and 9.3% vs. 9.6%). These results indicate that the CMA defects caused by LAMP2A depletion can increase FMN in cancer cells in a TTC28-dependent manner.Although treatment with chloroquine (at the final concentration of 10 μM) for 48 h significantly increased the frequency of toroidal nuclei (FTN) in H1299 cells, no change in FTN was induced in TTC28-KO or siLAMP2A cells relative to scramble control cells (Fig. 4F and SI Appendix, Table S2).Validation of the Essential Role of TTC28 in Preventing Cancer Genome Instability via CMA.The abundance of phosphorylated H2A.X Variant Histone (γH2AX) represents the activity of DNA damage responses to double-strand breaks (39). To confirm the roles of TTC28 and two essential CMA genes in maintaining genome stability, we measured the changes in γH2AX in H1299 and H661 cells with the above gene functional alterations via Western blot analysis. The abundance of γH2AX was markedly decreased in TTC28-OE H1299 and H661 cells, increased in TTC28-KO and siTTC28 cells, and decreased in siHSPA8 cells (Fig. 5A). In addition, the abundance of γH2AX was markedly increased in cells overexpressing HSPA8-wt but only slightly increased in cells overexpressing HSPA8-mut (Fig. 5B). Moreover, the abundance of γH2AX increased in H1299 and H661 cells treated with siLAMP2A (Fig. 5A). In addition, we also observed a significant increase in the level of γH2AX in siTTC28 HeLa and HepG2 cells (SI Appendix, Fig. S12), demonstrating that the maintenance of genomic stability by TTC28 is a common phenomenon. Consistent with the above data for FMN, a significant increase in the abundance of γH2AX was induced by siLAMP2A treatment only in TTC28-WT cells and not in TTC28-KO cells (Fig. 5C).Fig. 5.Effects of TTC28 and two essential CMA genes, HSPA8 and LAMP2A, on the abundance of γH2AX. (A) The abundance of γH2AX in H1299 and H661 cells with TTC28 overexpression and depletion, siHSPA8 transfection, and siLAMP2A transfection for 48 h, as determined by Western blot analysis. The band densities of TTC28 and γH2AX were normalized to that of ACTB as a reference. (B) The abundance of γH2AX in H1299 and H661 cells overexpressing HSPA8 for 48 h. (C) The abundance of γH2AX in TTC28-WT and TTC28-KO H1299 cells with and without siLAMP2A treatment. Only significant p values are labeled between two groups.Comet analysis (SI Appendix, Fig. S13) revealed that the tail DNA density and tail/head length ratio were significantly greater in TTC28-KO cells than in TTC28-WT cells. While siLAMP2A treatment increased the tail DNA density and tail/head length ratio in TTC28-WT cells, it even decreased these values in TTC28-KO cells compared with those in scramble control cells. Similar to the FMN results, siHSPA8 did not affect these comet values in TTC28-WT cells but decreased them in TTC28-KO cells.To evaluate the contribution of dysfunction of these genes to cancer genome instability in vivo, we performed bioinformatic analysis using TCGA genome and transcriptome datasets. The transcript level of TTC28 was inversely associated with the mutation count across the informative pancancer samples (n = 10,071; Spearman correlation coefficient: −0.29, P = 1.25E−186; SI Appendix, Fig. S14A). In contrast, the HSPA8 transcript level was positively associated with the mutation count (Spearman correlation coefficient: 0.13, P = 2.08E−39). However, no association was observed between the LAMP2 transcript level and mutation count. Similar relationships between the expression levels of these genes and the tumor mutation burden (TMB) and aneuploidy score were also observed (SI Appendix, Fig. S14 B and C). Furthermore, the correlation coefficient (R) between the levels of TTC28 mRNA and these genomic instability items was the 30th lowest, whereas that for AURKB was near the highest among 719 genes (including DNA damage response genes, oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes, and RNA/DNA modification genes; Dataset S4), implying a core role of TTC28 in maintaining genome stability (SI Appendix, Fig. S15).Taken together, the results of the above series of experimental and bioinformatics analyses strongly indicate that the TTC28–HSPA8 axis controls cancer genome instability and that TTC28 is essential for CMA to maintain genome stability.TTC28 Maintains Genome Stability by Regulating Mitosis and Cytokinesis, Probably via TUBB Binding.It was previously reported that the overexpression of zebrafish ttc28 resulted in mitosis and cytokinesis defects via the binding of AURKB with the atypical cadherin Dachsous (Dchs) and decreased microtubule turnover during embryonic cleavage (32). To explore the mechanisms by which TTC28 maintains genome stability, we further screened for DEGs in H1299 cells with and without TTC28 KO. Our RNA-seq results revealed that the transcript levels of several Tubulin-related genes, including TUBB6 [fold change: +0.7 (adj-P value, 5.98e−24)], TUBA1A [+0.62 (5.88e−16)], and TTL [+0.55 (4.34e−11)], were significantly altered by TTC28 KO (Dataset S3). LC–MS/MS analysis revealed that the TUBB ß-chain was one of the TTC28-binding candidates (Fig. 1D). Thus, we further studied whether TTC28 maintains genome stability via mitosis and cytokinesis.Confocal microscopy analysis revealed that the TTC28 and TUBB proteins highly overlapped in the perinuclear cytoplasm and midbody of H1299 and H661 cells at interphase in the cell cycle (Fig. 6A). However, a difference in the abundance of TUBB was not observed between TTC28-WT and TTC28-KO cells (SI Appendix, Fig. S16). In addition, TTC28 and AURKB also partially overlapped in the perinuclear cytoplasm in cells at interphase, the midzone in cells at anaphase, and the midbody in cells at telophase (SI Appendix, Fig. S17). Weak binding of TTC28 with AURKB was also detected (SI Appendix, Fig. S18). In cells with siRNA-mediated knockdown of AURKB (siAURKB), cytokinesis was blocked in the majority of cells. While FMN was significantly induced by siTTC28, siAURKB mitigated the impact of siTTC28 on FMN (Fig. 6B and SI Appendix, Table S1), suggesting that TTC28 regulates genome stability, probably via cell mitosis.Fig. 6.Effects of TTC28 downregulation on the genomic stability of H1299 cells with and without blockade of mitosis and cytokinesis. (A) Colocalization of TTC28 and TUBB proteins in H1299 and H661 cells, as determined by confocal microscopy analysis; (B) Effect of TTC28 downregulation on the FMN of H1299 and H661 cells with and without siAURKB pretreatment for 20 h. (C and D) Effects of TTC28 downregulation on the viability and the FMN of H1299 cells treated with or without Taxol and CDDP treatment for 72 h. (E) Effect of TTC28 downregulation on the abundance of γH2AX in H1299 cells treated with or without Taxol and CDDP for 72 h.Furthermore, paclitaxel (Taxol) is a cancer chemotherapeutic agent that blocks mitosis and cytokinesis by inhibiting microtubule disassembly (40, 41). Cisplatin (CDDP) is another cancer chemotherapeutic agent that induces DNA strand crosslinking but does not affect microtubule assembly (42). To investigate whether TTC28 affects genome stability at the mitosis level, we pretreated cells with paclitaxel and CDDP before siTTC28 treatment. We found that siTTC28 (or TTC28-KO) not only significantly inhibited the proliferation (growth) of cancer cells in vitro (or in vivo) (SI Appendix, Fig. S19) but also increased the sensitivity of cancer cells to both paclitaxel and CDDP (Fig. 6 C and D, Left). However, siTTC28 did not affect FMN in H1299 cells pretreated with paclitaxel (at final concentrations of 2.5, 5.0, or 10.0 nM; P > 0.05), whereas siTTC28 still significantly increased the FMN in H1299 cells pretreated with CDDP (at a final concentration of 1.0 μM; 21.5% vs. 17.9%, P = 4.36e−02) (SI Appendix, Table S1; Fig. 6 C and D, Middle and Right). Similarly, we found that paclitaxel treatment abolished the increase in the abundance of γH2AX in siTTC28 H1299 cells, whereas CDDP treatment did not (Fig. 6E).We further compared the level of γH2AX in H1299 and H661 cells synchronized at the G1/S and G2/M phases and found that the abundance of γH2AX significantly increased only in TTC28-KO cells at the G1/S but not the G2/M phase (SI Appendix, Fig. S20). A similar difference was also observed in TTC28-WT cells treated with paclitaxel (2.5 nM). Interestingly, we found that the abundance of TTC28 was greater in cells in the G1/S phase than in those in the G2/M phase, suggesting that TTC28 expression is related to the cell cycle (SI Appendix, Fig. S21). These results support our hypothesis that both TTC28-KO and paclitaxel treatment may decrease genome stability by disrupting microtubule dynamics.These results indicate that TTC28 may regulate genome stability by affecting the progression of mitosis and cytokinesis through TUBB binding.

TTC28 Directly Interacts with HSPA8.TTC28 messenger RNA (mRNA) levels are significantly decreased in many human cancers and are associated with the OS of lung cancer patients (SI Appendix, Figs. S1 and S2). Hence, we initially analyzed the baseline level of TTC28 expression in a set of lung cancer cell lines. The protein and mRNA levels of TTC28 were the highest and lowest, respectively, in H1299 and H292 cells, as determined by quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qRT–PCR) and Western blotting (Fig. 1 A and B). A positive correlation between the protein and mRNA of TTC28 levels was consistently observed among the cancer cell lines and pancancer tissues in the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) and TCGA databases (Spearman R = 0.78 and 0.43; SI Appendix, Fig. S3). In addition, the TTC28 protein was detected mainly in the cytoplasm in H1299 (Fig. 1C), and this location was confirmed by confocal analysis. Both endogenous TTC28 and overexpressed TTC28-Flag were distributed mainly in the perinuclear cytoplasm (SI Appendix, Fig. S4). A few endogenous TTC28 signals were also detected in nucleoli.Fig. 1.Characterization of the TTC28–HSPA8 interaction. (A and B) The baseline levels of TTC28 mRNA and protein, as determined by qRT-PCR and Western blot analyses. (C) Comparison of the amount of TTC28 in the cytoplasm (Cyto) and nucleus (Nuc) of H1299 cells. (D) Images of SDS–PAGE gels containing proteins immunoprecipitated from H1299 cells with the anti-TTC28 antibody or control IgG. The protein bands were stained with Coomassie blue. Six differential bands were excised, pooled into the yellow or red subgroup, and prepared for LC–MS/MS analysis, as shown by the yellow and red arrows. The names of the top nine candidate proteins characterized in each subgroup are displayed on the right side. (E) CoIP detection of the interaction of endogenous TTC28 with a set of candidate proteins, including HSPA8, in H1299 cells. (F) CoIP detection of the interaction of TTC28 with HSPA8 or c-Myc-HSPA8 in H1299 cells. (G) Colocalization status of endogenous HSPA8 (red) and TTC28 (green) in H1299 and H460 cells.We subsequently immunoprecipitated endogenous TTC28-binding protein complexes in H1299 cells using an anti-TTC28 antibody, separated these complexes on sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE) gels, and excised and pooled the differential bands into red and yellow subgroups for liquid chromatography–mass/mass (LC–MS/MS) identification. MS/MS analysis revealed that 222 candidate proteins might interact with TTC28 (Fig. 1D and Datasets S1 and S2). Co-immuno-precipitation (CoIP) analysis confirmed that endogenous TTC28 indeed interacted with the endogenous HSPA8, Vimentin, and DDX41 proteins (Fig. 1E). Conversely, the TTC28 protein was also found in protein complexes immunoprecipitated with an anti-HSPA8 antibody in H1299 cells overexpressing cMyc-HSPA8 (Fig. 1F). Confocal microscopy analysis further revealed that most endogenous TTC28 and endogenous HSPA8 were colocalized in the cytoplasm in both H1299 and H460 cells (Fig. 1G and SI Appendix, Fig. S5).In contrast to the abundance of the TTC28 transcript, the abundance of the HSPA8 transcript was increased in many cancers in the TCGA project (SI Appendix, Fig. S6). Because HSPA8 is an essential protein for CMA and performs important functions in protein degradation (30), we investigated the possibility that the TTC28–HSPA8 interaction might contribute to TTC28 downregulation in cancer cells through the CMA pathway, as described below.

TTC28 Directly Interacts with HSPA8.

TTC28 messenger RNA (mRNA) levels are significantly decreased in many human cancers and are associated with the OS of lung cancer patients (SI Appendix, Figs. S1 and S2). Hence, we initially analyzed the baseline level of TTC28 expression in a set of lung cancer cell lines. The protein and mRNA levels of TTC28 were the highest and lowest, respectively, in H1299 and H292 cells, as determined by quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qRT–PCR) and Western blotting (Fig. 1 A and B). A positive correlation between the protein and mRNA of TTC28 levels was consistently observed among the cancer cell lines and pancancer tissues in the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) and TCGA databases (Spearman R = 0.78 and 0.43; SI Appendix, Fig. S3). In addition, the TTC28 protein was detected mainly in the cytoplasm in H1299 (Fig. 1C), and this location was confirmed by confocal analysis. Both endogenous TTC28 and overexpressed TTC28-Flag were distributed mainly in the perinuclear cytoplasm (SI Appendix, Fig. S4). A few endogenous TTC28 signals were also detected in nucleoli.

Characterization of the TTC28–HSPA8 interaction. (A and B) The baseline levels of TTC28 mRNA and protein, as determined by qRT-PCR and Western blot analyses. (C) Comparison of the amount of TTC28 in the cytoplasm (Cyto) and nucleus (Nuc) of H1299 cells. (D) Images of SDS–PAGE gels containing proteins immunoprecipitated from H1299 cells with the anti-TTC28 antibody or control IgG. The protein bands were stained with Coomassie blue. Six differential bands were excised, pooled into the yellow or red subgroup, and prepared for LC–MS/MS analysis, as shown by the yellow and red arrows. The names of the top nine candidate proteins characterized in each subgroup are displayed on the right side. (E) CoIP detection of the interaction of endogenous TTC28 with a set of candidate proteins, including HSPA8, in H1299 cells. (F) CoIP detection of the interaction of TTC28 with HSPA8 or c-Myc-HSPA8 in H1299 cells. (G) Colocalization status of endogenous HSPA8 (red) and TTC28 (green) in H1299 and H460 cells.

We subsequently immunoprecipitated endogenous TTC28-binding protein complexes in H1299 cells using an anti-TTC28 antibody, separated these complexes on sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE) gels, and excised and pooled the differential bands into red and yellow subgroups for liquid chromatography–mass/mass (LC–MS/MS) identification. MS/MS analysis revealed that 222 candidate proteins might interact with TTC28 (Fig. 1D and Datasets S1 and S2). Co-immuno-precipitation (CoIP) analysis confirmed that endogenous TTC28 indeed interacted with the endogenous HSPA8, Vimentin, and DDX41 proteins (Fig. 1E). Conversely, the TTC28 protein was also found in protein complexes immunoprecipitated with an anti-HSPA8 antibody in H1299 cells overexpressing cMyc-HSPA8 (Fig. 1F). Confocal microscopy analysis further revealed that most endogenous TTC28 and endogenous HSPA8 were colocalized in the cytoplasm in both H1299 and H460 cells (Fig. 1G and SI Appendix, Fig. S5).

In contrast to the abundance of the TTC28 transcript, the abundance of the HSPA8 transcript was increased in many cancers in the TCGA project (SI Appendix, Fig. S6). Because HSPA8 is an essential protein for CMA and performs important functions in protein degradation (30), we investigated the possibility that the TTC28–HSPA8 interaction might contribute to TTC28 downregulation in cancer cells through the CMA pathway, as described below.

Characterization of TTC28–HSPA8 Binding Domains.TTC28 is a highly conserved protein in vertebrates and contains 28 TPR domains (Fig. 2A). These TPRs contain 16 Lys-Phe-Glu-Arg-Gln (KFERQ)-like motifs (SI Appendix, Fig. S7), which may be involved in the degradation of CMA substrates (31). There is 96% sequence similarity and 91% sequence identity in the TPR domains between zebrafish (Danio rerio) ttc28 and human TTC28 (32). Therefore, we used a set of established zebrafish ttc28 (HA-ttc28) and its truncation mutants, namely, HA-ttc28-N, HA-ttc28-N-1, HA-ttc28-N-2, HA-ttc28-N-3, HA-ttc28-ΔN, and HA-ttc28-ΔN-1, to evaluate the binding of ttc28 to HSPA8 (Fig. 2A). The CoIP results demonstrated that HSPA8 not only bound to the full-length zebrafish ttc28 but also bound to five kinds of TPR-containing ttc28 mutants in H1299 cells. However, HSPA8 did not bind to the HA-ttc28-ΔN mutant, which does not contain the TPR domain (Fig. 2B). These results indicated that HSPA8 may indiscriminately interact with these TPR domains in TTC28.Fig. 2.HSPA8 interacts with the TPR domains of TTC28 mainly via its PTIEEVD motif in the C terminus. (A) Illustration of the functional domains of human TTC28 and zebrafish ttc28 and its truncation mutants. (B) CoIP results showing the interaction of HSPA8 with various HA-ttc28 mutants and full-length ttc28 in H1299 cells 48 h posttransfection. (C) 3D structural image of HSPA8 predicted by AlphaFold (alphafold.ebi.ac.uk). Locations of the main functional parts, point mutations in amino acids in cancers (SI Appendix, Fig. S6B), and the PTIEEVD motif in the C terminus are labeled. (D) CoIP results indicating the interaction of TTC28 with wild-type (wt) Myc-HSPA8, its PTIEEVD truncation mutant (mut) and the PTIEEVD-containing mutant (ΔN) in H1299 cells 48 h posttransfection. (E) Bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC) analysis of the interaction of pYC-TTC28 with pVN-HSPA8.The C-terminal Pro-Thr-Ile-Glu-Glu-Val-Asp (PTIEEVD) motif (Fig. 2C, highlighted with a pink circle) of human HSPA8 is the amino acid sequence that binds many TPR-containing proteins (33). To confirm whether the PTIEEVD motif contributes to the TTC28–HSPA8 interaction, we constructed a PTIEEVD-truncated HSPA8 mutant (HSPA8-mut). While wild-type HSPA8 (HSPA8-wt) bound strongly to human TTC28, HSPA8-mut bound very weakly to TTC28 in H1299 cells (Fig. 2D). In contrast, the short HSPA8-ΔN mutant (107 aa) containing the PTIEEVD motif maintained the binding affinity of TTC28, further indicating that the PTIEEVD motif is the TTC28 TPR-binding motif.Bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC) is an assay developed to detect direct molecular interactions between two proteins in situ within cells. BiFC analysis confirmed the TTC28–HSPA8 interaction. Yellow fluorescence was observed only in the cytoplasm of H1299 and H661 cells transfected with the pVN-HSPA8 and pYC-TTC28 vectors and was not observed in cells transfected with the pVN and pYC control vectors 48 h posttransfection (Fig. 2E).

Characterization of TTC28–HSPA8 Binding Domains.

TTC28 is a highly conserved protein in vertebrates and contains 28 TPR domains (Fig. 2A). These TPRs contain 16 Lys-Phe-Glu-Arg-Gln (KFERQ)-like motifs (SI Appendix, Fig. S7), which may be involved in the degradation of CMA substrates (31). There is 96% sequence similarity and 91% sequence identity in the TPR domains between zebrafish (Danio rerio) ttc28 and human TTC28 (32). Therefore, we used a set of established zebrafish ttc28 (HA-ttc28) and its truncation mutants, namely, HA-ttc28-N, HA-ttc28-N-1, HA-ttc28-N-2, HA-ttc28-N-3, HA-ttc28-ΔN, and HA-ttc28-ΔN-1, to evaluate the binding of ttc28 to HSPA8 (Fig. 2A). The CoIP results demonstrated that HSPA8 not only bound to the full-length zebrafish ttc28 but also bound to five kinds of TPR-containing ttc28 mutants in H1299 cells. However, HSPA8 did not bind to the HA-ttc28-ΔN mutant, which does not contain the TPR domain (Fig. 2B). These results indicated that HSPA8 may indiscriminately interact with these TPR domains in TTC28.

HSPA8 interacts with the TPR domains of TTC28 mainly via its PTIEEVD motif in the C terminus. (A) Illustration of the functional domains of human TTC28 and zebrafish ttc28 and its truncation mutants. (B) CoIP results showing the interaction of HSPA8 with various HA-ttc28 mutants and full-length ttc28 in H1299 cells 48 h posttransfection. (C) 3D structural image of HSPA8 predicted by AlphaFold (alphafold.ebi.ac.uk). Locations of the main functional parts, point mutations in amino acids in cancers (SI Appendix, Fig. S6B), and the PTIEEVD motif in the C terminus are labeled. (D) CoIP results indicating the interaction of TTC28 with wild-type (wt) Myc-HSPA8, its PTIEEVD truncation mutant (mut) and the PTIEEVD-containing mutant (ΔN) in H1299 cells 48 h posttransfection. (E) Bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC) analysis of the interaction of pYC-TTC28 with pVN-HSPA8.

The C-terminal Pro-Thr-Ile-Glu-Glu-Val-Asp (PTIEEVD) motif (Fig. 2C, highlighted with a pink circle) of human HSPA8 is the amino acid sequence that binds many TPR-containing proteins (33). To confirm whether the PTIEEVD motif contributes to the TTC28–HSPA8 interaction, we constructed a PTIEEVD-truncated HSPA8 mutant (HSPA8-mut). While wild-type HSPA8 (HSPA8-wt) bound strongly to human TTC28, HSPA8-mut bound very weakly to TTC28 in H1299 cells (Fig. 2D). In contrast, the short HSPA8-ΔN mutant (107 aa) containing the PTIEEVD motif maintained the binding affinity of TTC28, further indicating that the PTIEEVD motif is the TTC28 TPR-binding motif.

Bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC) is an assay developed to detect direct molecular interactions between two proteins in situ within cells. BiFC analysis confirmed the TTC28–HSPA8 interaction. Yellow fluorescence was observed only in the cytoplasm of H1299 and H661 cells transfected with the pVN-HSPA8 and pYC-TTC28 vectors and was not observed in cells transfected with the pVN and pYC control vectors 48 h posttransfection (Fig. 2E).

HSPA8 Binding Participates in the Stabilization and CMA-Mediated Degradation of TTC28.By Western blot analysis, the abundance of TTC28 increased in H460 and H661 cells overexpressing HSPA8-wt but not in those overexpressing HSPA8-mut (Fig. 3A) and decreased in H1299 and H661 cells with siRNA-mediated knockdown of HSPA8 (siHSPA8) (Fig. 3B). In contrast, HSPA8 knockdown even weakly increased TTC28 mRNA levels (SI Appendix, Fig. S8A). In addition, HSPA8 is a chaperone with adenosinetriphosphate (ATP) synthase (ATPase) activity that has a protective effect on oxidative stress by facilitating protein refolding. Apoptozole is an inhibitor of the ATPase activity of HSPA8, and the inhibition of ATPase activity by apoptozole disrupts the interaction of HSPA8 with some target proteins in cells (34, 35). We found that the abundance of TTC28 was significantly reduced in H1299 and H661 cells after apoptozole treatment (at a final concentration of 10 μM; Fig. 3C). These results suggest that TTC28 is stabilized through binding to HSPA8, probably in an ATPase activity-dependent fashion. Furthermore, treatment with the lysosome inhibitor chloroquine (at a final concentration of 50 μM) for 4 h led to the accumulation of TTC28 only in cells without siHSPA8 and not in cells with siHSPA8 (Fig. 3D), suggesting that the inhibition of TTC28 degradation by chloroquine is dependent on HSPA8.Fig. 3.Effect of the essential CMA genes HSPA8 and LAMP2A on TTC28 expression. (A) The abundance of TTC28 in H460 and H661 cells overexpressing HSPA8 for 48 h, as determined by western blot analysis. The band density of TTC28 was normalized to that of the β-Actin B protein (ACTB) as the reference. (B) The abundance of TTC28 in H1299 and H661 cells in which HSPA8 was down-regulated by siRNA for 48 h. (C) Effect of treatment with apoptozole (final concentration, 10 μM) on the abundance of TTC28 in H1299 and H661 cells. (D) The abundance of TTC28 in cells with or without siHSPA8 transfection and/or chloroquine treatment (final concentration, 50 μM) for 4 h. (E) The abundance of TTC28 in H1299 and H661 cells treated with siLAMP2A for 48 h. The knockdown status of LAMP2A was determined by qRT-PCR (Top) and Western blotting (Middle and Bottom). Only significant p values are labeled for three biological replicates. (F) Effect of treatment with CHX (50 μg/mL) on the abundance of TTC28 in H1299 and H661 cells with and without siLAMP2A treatment.LAMP2A, encoded by the LAMP2 gene, is another protein essential for CMA (36) that is frequently up-regulated in many cancers (SI Appendix, Figs. S3 and S9). The abundance of TTC28 was markedly increased in H1299 and H661 cells with siRNA-mediated knockdown of LAMP2A (siLAMP2A) (Fig. 3E), whereas TTC28 mRNA levels were not affected by LAMP2A knockdown (SI Appendix, Fig. S8B). In addition, LAMP2A was coimmunoprecipitated with TTC28 in H1299 cells (SI Appendix, Fig. S10A). Confocal microscopy analysis further revealed that Flag-TTC28 and endogenous LAMP2A were colocalized in both H1299 and H661 cells (SI Appendix, Fig. S10B). When nascent synthesis of the TTC28 protein was blocked by the ribosomal inhibitor cycloheximide (CHX, 50 μg/mL), the amount of TTC28 was much greater in siLAMP2A cells than in scramble cells at baseline, and the half-life of the TTC28 protein was also greater in siLAMP2A cells than in scramble cells after CHX treatment (4.6 h and 9.6 h in scramble H661 and H1299 cells; >12 h in siLAMP2A counterparts; Fig. 3F). Together, the above results indicate that TTC28 is a CMA substrate and that HSPA8 is not only necessary for TTC28 degradation by CMA but also necessary for TTC28 stabilization.

HSPA8 Binding Participates in the Stabilization and CMA-Mediated Degradation of TTC28.

By Western blot analysis, the abundance of TTC28 increased in H460 and H661 cells overexpressing HSPA8-wt but not in those overexpressing HSPA8-mut (Fig. 3A) and decreased in H1299 and H661 cells with siRNA-mediated knockdown of HSPA8 (siHSPA8) (Fig. 3B). In contrast, HSPA8 knockdown even weakly increased TTC28 mRNA levels (SI Appendix, Fig. S8A). In addition, HSPA8 is a chaperone with adenosinetriphosphate (ATP) synthase (ATPase) activity that has a protective effect on oxidative stress by facilitating protein refolding. Apoptozole is an inhibitor of the ATPase activity of HSPA8, and the inhibition of ATPase activity by apoptozole disrupts the interaction of HSPA8 with some target proteins in cells (34, 35). We found that the abundance of TTC28 was significantly reduced in H1299 and H661 cells after apoptozole treatment (at a final concentration of 10 μM; Fig. 3C). These results suggest that TTC28 is stabilized through binding to HSPA8, probably in an ATPase activity-dependent fashion. Furthermore, treatment with the lysosome inhibitor chloroquine (at a final concentration of 50 μM) for 4 h led to the accumulation of TTC28 only in cells without siHSPA8 and not in cells with siHSPA8 (Fig. 3D), suggesting that the inhibition of TTC28 degradation by chloroquine is dependent on HSPA8.

Effect of the essential CMA genes HSPA8 and LAMP2A on TTC28 expression. (A) The abundance of TTC28 in H460 and H661 cells overexpressing HSPA8 for 48 h, as determined by western blot analysis. The band density of TTC28 was normalized to that of the β-Actin B protein (ACTB) as the reference. (B) The abundance of TTC28 in H1299 and H661 cells in which HSPA8 was down-regulated by siRNA for 48 h. (C) Effect of treatment with apoptozole (final concentration, 10 μM) on the abundance of TTC28 in H1299 and H661 cells. (D) The abundance of TTC28 in cells with or without siHSPA8 transfection and/or chloroquine treatment (final concentration, 50 μM) for 4 h. (E) The abundance of TTC28 in H1299 and H661 cells treated with siLAMP2A for 48 h. The knockdown status of LAMP2A was determined by qRT-PCR (Top) and Western blotting (Middle and Bottom). Only significant p values are labeled for three biological replicates. (F) Effect of treatment with CHX (50 μg/mL) on the abundance of TTC28 in H1299 and H661 cells with and without siLAMP2A treatment.

LAMP2A, encoded by the LAMP2 gene, is another protein essential for CMA (36) that is frequently up-regulated in many cancers (SI Appendix, Figs. S3 and S9). The abundance of TTC28 was markedly increased in H1299 and H661 cells with siRNA-mediated knockdown of LAMP2A (siLAMP2A) (Fig. 3E), whereas TTC28 mRNA levels were not affected by LAMP2A knockdown (SI Appendix, Fig. S8B). In addition, LAMP2A was coimmunoprecipitated with TTC28 in H1299 cells (SI Appendix, Fig. S10A). Confocal microscopy analysis further revealed that Flag-TTC28 and endogenous LAMP2A were colocalized in both H1299 and H661 cells (SI Appendix, Fig. S10B). When nascent synthesis of the TTC28 protein was blocked by the ribosomal inhibitor cycloheximide (CHX, 50 μg/mL), the amount of TTC28 was much greater in siLAMP2A cells than in scramble cells at baseline, and the half-life of the TTC28 protein was also greater in siLAMP2A cells than in scramble cells after CHX treatment (4.6 h and 9.6 h in scramble H661 and H1299 cells; >12 h in siLAMP2A counterparts; Fig. 3F). Together, the above results indicate that TTC28 is a CMA substrate and that HSPA8 is not only necessary for TTC28 degradation by CMA but also necessary for TTC28 stabilization.

TTC28 Plays an Essential Role in Preventing the Frequency of Micronuclei (FMN) Induced by CMA.Both macroautophagy and zebrafish ttc28 are regulators of genome stability (32, 37). However, the effects of CMA and its cooperation with TTC28 on baseline genome stability have not been reported. FMN in cells is an indicator of DNA damage and the activation of DNA damage responses (37, 38). Therefore, we analyzed baseline FMN in interphase cells with functional alterations in TTC28 and two essential CMA genes as described below.We knocked out the TTC28 gene by introducing an ins/del mutation within exon 3 through CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing (Fig. 4A and SI Appendix, Fig. S11). Notably, the FMN in TTC28 knockout (TTC28-KO) H1299 cells was more than 3-fold greater than that in TTC28 wild-type (TTC28-WT) cells (7.7% vs. 2.3%, P = 4.86E−09), whereas the FMN in TTC28-KO cells with ttc28 overexpression was significantly lower than that in TTC28-KO cells without ttc28 overexpression in the rescue experiment (11.9% vs. 4.8%, P = 2.83E−11; Fig. 4A and SI Appendix, Table S1), indicating that TTC28 plays a role in maintaining genome stability.Fig. 4.TTC28 and CMA affect the FMN in cancer cells. (A) Effect of TTC28 KO on the FMN in H1299 cells with and without zebrafish ttc28 overexpression. The knockout status of TTC28 exon 3 by CRISPR-Cas9 was checked via PCR sequencing and confirmed via western blotting. (B and C) Effects of the overexpression of HSPA8 and its mutant on the FMN in TTC28-WT H1299 cells. (D) Effect of HSPA8 overexpression on FMN in TTC28-KO H1299 cells. (E) Effects of siHSPA8 and siLAMP2A treatment on FMN in H1299 and H661 cells with and without TTC28 KO. The knockdown of HSPA8 and LAMP2A by siRNA for 48 h was assessed via western blotting. (F) Image of a representative toroidal nucleus. The red arrows within the middle images point to micronuclei visualized by DAPI. The cytoplasm was visualized by tubulin (green or red), as shown. The cells with target protein overexpression were visualized with the HA or c-Myc tag (green) and labeled with the “+” symbol. Other cells are labeled with the “−” symbol. The exact numbers of cells with and without micronuclei (or toroidal nuclei) in each graph are listed in SI Appendix, Table S1. Significant p values in the chi-square test are also labeled.The overexpression of HSPA8-wt, but not its PTIEEVD-truncated mutant, increased the baseline FMN in TTC28-WT H1299 cells (14.2% vs. 22.0%, P = 1.08E−10; Fig. 4 B and C). This difference could not be induced by the overexpression of HSPA8-wt in TTC28-KO H1299 cells (22.5% vs. 20.7%; Fig. 4D). However, a significant difference in FMN was not induced by siHSPA8 in H1299 or H661 cells (Fig. 4E and SI Appendix, Table S1). In addition, individual siLAMP2A expression significantly increased FMN only in TTC28-WT H1299 and H661 cells (6.5% vs. 13.0%, P = 5.26E−07 and 3.5% vs. 9.3%, P = 5.30E−08) but not in their TTC28-KO counterparts (16.4% vs. 17.2% and 9.3% vs. 9.6%). These results indicate that the CMA defects caused by LAMP2A depletion can increase FMN in cancer cells in a TTC28-dependent manner.Although treatment with chloroquine (at the final concentration of 10 μM) for 48 h significantly increased the frequency of toroidal nuclei (FTN) in H1299 cells, no change in FTN was induced in TTC28-KO or siLAMP2A cells relative to scramble control cells (Fig. 4F and SI Appendix, Table S2).

TTC28 Plays an Essential Role in Preventing the Frequency of Micronuclei (FMN) Induced by CMA.

Both macroautophagy and zebrafish ttc28 are regulators of genome stability (32, 37). However, the effects of CMA and its cooperation with TTC28 on baseline genome stability have not been reported. FMN in cells is an indicator of DNA damage and the activation of DNA damage responses (37, 38). Therefore, we analyzed baseline FMN in interphase cells with functional alterations in TTC28 and two essential CMA genes as described below.

We knocked out the TTC28 gene by introducing an ins/del mutation within exon 3 through CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing (Fig. 4A and SI Appendix, Fig. S11). Notably, the FMN in TTC28 knockout (TTC28-KO) H1299 cells was more than 3-fold greater than that in TTC28 wild-type (TTC28-WT) cells (7.7% vs. 2.3%, P = 4.86E−09), whereas the FMN in TTC28-KO cells with ttc28 overexpression was significantly lower than that in TTC28-KO cells without ttc28 overexpression in the rescue experiment (11.9% vs. 4.8%, P = 2.83E−11; Fig. 4A and SI Appendix, Table S1), indicating that TTC28 plays a role in maintaining genome stability.

TTC28 and CMA affect the FMN in cancer cells. (A) Effect of TTC28 KO on the FMN in H1299 cells with and without zebrafish ttc28 overexpression. The knockout status of TTC28 exon 3 by CRISPR-Cas9 was checked via PCR sequencing and confirmed via western blotting. (B and C) Effects of the overexpression of HSPA8 and its mutant on the FMN in TTC28-WT H1299 cells. (D) Effect of HSPA8 overexpression on FMN in TTC28-KO H1299 cells. (E) Effects of siHSPA8 and siLAMP2A treatment on FMN in H1299 and H661 cells with and without TTC28 KO. The knockdown of HSPA8 and LAMP2A by siRNA for 48 h was assessed via western blotting. (F) Image of a representative toroidal nucleus. The red arrows within the middle images point to micronuclei visualized by DAPI. The cytoplasm was visualized by tubulin (green or red), as shown. The cells with target protein overexpression were visualized with the HA or c-Myc tag (green) and labeled with the “+” symbol. Other cells are labeled with the “−” symbol. The exact numbers of cells with and without micronuclei (or toroidal nuclei) in each graph are listed in SI Appendix, Table S1. Significant p values in the chi-square test are also labeled.

The overexpression of HSPA8-wt, but not its PTIEEVD-truncated mutant, increased the baseline FMN in TTC28-WT H1299 cells (14.2% vs. 22.0%, P = 1.08E−10; Fig. 4 B and C). This difference could not be induced by the overexpression of HSPA8-wt in TTC28-KO H1299 cells (22.5% vs. 20.7%; Fig. 4D). However, a significant difference in FMN was not induced by siHSPA8 in H1299 or H661 cells (Fig. 4E and SI Appendix, Table S1). In addition, individual siLAMP2A expression significantly increased FMN only in TTC28-WT H1299 and H661 cells (6.5% vs. 13.0%, P = 5.26E−07 and 3.5% vs. 9.3%, P = 5.30E−08) but not in their TTC28-KO counterparts (16.4% vs. 17.2% and 9.3% vs. 9.6%). These results indicate that the CMA defects caused by LAMP2A depletion can increase FMN in cancer cells in a TTC28-dependent manner.

Although treatment with chloroquine (at the final concentration of 10 μM) for 48 h significantly increased the frequency of toroidal nuclei (FTN) in H1299 cells, no change in FTN was induced in TTC28-KO or siLAMP2A cells relative to scramble control cells (Fig. 4F and SI Appendix, Table S2).

Validation of the Essential Role of TTC28 in Preventing Cancer Genome Instability via CMA.The abundance of phosphorylated H2A.X Variant Histone (γH2AX) represents the activity of DNA damage responses to double-strand breaks (39). To confirm the roles of TTC28 and two essential CMA genes in maintaining genome stability, we measured the changes in γH2AX in H1299 and H661 cells with the above gene functional alterations via Western blot analysis. The abundance of γH2AX was markedly decreased in TTC28-OE H1299 and H661 cells, increased in TTC28-KO and siTTC28 cells, and decreased in siHSPA8 cells (Fig. 5A). In addition, the abundance of γH2AX was markedly increased in cells overexpressing HSPA8-wt but only slightly increased in cells overexpressing HSPA8-mut (Fig. 5B). Moreover, the abundance of γH2AX increased in H1299 and H661 cells treated with siLAMP2A (Fig. 5A). In addition, we also observed a significant increase in the level of γH2AX in siTTC28 HeLa and HepG2 cells (SI Appendix, Fig. S12), demonstrating that the maintenance of genomic stability by TTC28 is a common phenomenon. Consistent with the above data for FMN, a significant increase in the abundance of γH2AX was induced by siLAMP2A treatment only in TTC28-WT cells and not in TTC28-KO cells (Fig. 5C).Fig. 5.Effects of TTC28 and two essential CMA genes, HSPA8 and LAMP2A, on the abundance of γH2AX. (A) The abundance of γH2AX in H1299 and H661 cells with TTC28 overexpression and depletion, siHSPA8 transfection, and siLAMP2A transfection for 48 h, as determined by Western blot analysis. The band densities of TTC28 and γH2AX were normalized to that of ACTB as a reference. (B) The abundance of γH2AX in H1299 and H661 cells overexpressing HSPA8 for 48 h. (C) The abundance of γH2AX in TTC28-WT and TTC28-KO H1299 cells with and without siLAMP2A treatment. Only significant p values are labeled between two groups.Comet analysis (SI Appendix, Fig. S13) revealed that the tail DNA density and tail/head length ratio were significantly greater in TTC28-KO cells than in TTC28-WT cells. While siLAMP2A treatment increased the tail DNA density and tail/head length ratio in TTC28-WT cells, it even decreased these values in TTC28-KO cells compared with those in scramble control cells. Similar to the FMN results, siHSPA8 did not affect these comet values in TTC28-WT cells but decreased them in TTC28-KO cells.To evaluate the contribution of dysfunction of these genes to cancer genome instability in vivo, we performed bioinformatic analysis using TCGA genome and transcriptome datasets. The transcript level of TTC28 was inversely associated with the mutation count across the informative pancancer samples (n = 10,071; Spearman correlation coefficient: −0.29, P = 1.25E−186; SI Appendix, Fig. S14A). In contrast, the HSPA8 transcript level was positively associated with the mutation count (Spearman correlation coefficient: 0.13, P = 2.08E−39). However, no association was observed between the LAMP2 transcript level and mutation count. Similar relationships between the expression levels of these genes and the tumor mutation burden (TMB) and aneuploidy score were also observed (SI Appendix, Fig. S14 B and C). Furthermore, the correlation coefficient (R) between the levels of TTC28 mRNA and these genomic instability items was the 30th lowest, whereas that for AURKB was near the highest among 719 genes (including DNA damage response genes, oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes, and RNA/DNA modification genes; Dataset S4), implying a core role of TTC28 in maintaining genome stability (SI Appendix, Fig. S15).Taken together, the results of the above series of experimental and bioinformatics analyses strongly indicate that the TTC28–HSPA8 axis controls cancer genome instability and that TTC28 is essential for CMA to maintain genome stability.

Validation of the Essential Role of TTC28 in Preventing Cancer Genome Instability via CMA.

The abundance of phosphorylated H2A.X Variant Histone (γH2AX) represents the activity of DNA damage responses to double-strand breaks (39). To confirm the roles of TTC28 and two essential CMA genes in maintaining genome stability, we measured the changes in γH2AX in H1299 and H661 cells with the above gene functional alterations via Western blot analysis. The abundance of γH2AX was markedly decreased in TTC28-OE H1299 and H661 cells, increased in TTC28-KO and siTTC28 cells, and decreased in siHSPA8 cells (Fig. 5A). In addition, the abundance of γH2AX was markedly increased in cells overexpressing HSPA8-wt but only slightly increased in cells overexpressing HSPA8-mut (Fig. 5B). Moreover, the abundance of γH2AX increased in H1299 and H661 cells treated with siLAMP2A (Fig. 5A). In addition, we also observed a significant increase in the level of γH2AX in siTTC28 HeLa and HepG2 cells (SI Appendix, Fig. S12), demonstrating that the maintenance of genomic stability by TTC28 is a common phenomenon. Consistent with the above data for FMN, a significant increase in the abundance of γH2AX was induced by siLAMP2A treatment only in TTC28-WT cells and not in TTC28-KO cells (Fig. 5C).

Effects of TTC28 and two essential CMA genes, HSPA8 and LAMP2A, on the abundance of γH2AX. (A) The abundance of γH2AX in H1299 and H661 cells with TTC28 overexpression and depletion, siHSPA8 transfection, and siLAMP2A transfection for 48 h, as determined by Western blot analysis. The band densities of TTC28 and γH2AX were normalized to that of ACTB as a reference. (B) The abundance of γH2AX in H1299 and H661 cells overexpressing HSPA8 for 48 h. (C) The abundance of γH2AX in TTC28-WT and TTC28-KO H1299 cells with and without siLAMP2A treatment. Only significant p values are labeled between two groups.

Comet analysis (SI Appendix, Fig. S13) revealed that the tail DNA density and tail/head length ratio were significantly greater in TTC28-KO cells than in TTC28-WT cells. While siLAMP2A treatment increased the tail DNA density and tail/head length ratio in TTC28-WT cells, it even decreased these values in TTC28-KO cells compared with those in scramble control cells. Similar to the FMN results, siHSPA8 did not affect these comet values in TTC28-WT cells but decreased them in TTC28-KO cells.

To evaluate the contribution of dysfunction of these genes to cancer genome instability in vivo, we performed bioinformatic analysis using TCGA genome and transcriptome datasets. The transcript level of TTC28 was inversely associated with the mutation count across the informative pancancer samples (n = 10,071; Spearman correlation coefficient: −0.29, P = 1.25E−186; SI Appendix, Fig. S14A). In contrast, the HSPA8 transcript level was positively associated with the mutation count (Spearman correlation coefficient: 0.13, P = 2.08E−39). However, no association was observed between the LAMP2 transcript level and mutation count. Similar relationships between the expression levels of these genes and the tumor mutation burden (TMB) and aneuploidy score were also observed (SI Appendix, Fig. S14 B and C). Furthermore, the correlation coefficient (R) between the levels of TTC28 mRNA and these genomic instability items was the 30th lowest, whereas that for AURKB was near the highest among 719 genes (including DNA damage response genes, oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes, and RNA/DNA modification genes; Dataset S4), implying a core role of TTC28 in maintaining genome stability (SI Appendix, Fig. S15).

Taken together, the results of the above series of experimental and bioinformatics analyses strongly indicate that the TTC28–HSPA8 axis controls cancer genome instability and that TTC28 is essential for CMA to maintain genome stability.

TTC28 Maintains Genome Stability by Regulating Mitosis and Cytokinesis, Probably via TUBB Binding.It was previously reported that the overexpression of zebrafish ttc28 resulted in mitosis and cytokinesis defects via the binding of AURKB with the atypical cadherin Dachsous (Dchs) and decreased microtubule turnover during embryonic cleavage (32). To explore the mechanisms by which TTC28 maintains genome stability, we further screened for DEGs in H1299 cells with and without TTC28 KO. Our RNA-seq results revealed that the transcript levels of several Tubulin-related genes, including TUBB6 [fold change: +0.7 (adj-P value, 5.98e−24)], TUBA1A [+0.62 (5.88e−16)], and TTL [+0.55 (4.34e−11)], were significantly altered by TTC28 KO (Dataset S3). LC–MS/MS analysis revealed that the TUBB ß-chain was one of the TTC28-binding candidates (Fig. 1D). Thus, we further studied whether TTC28 maintains genome stability via mitosis and cytokinesis.Confocal microscopy analysis revealed that the TTC28 and TUBB proteins highly overlapped in the perinuclear cytoplasm and midbody of H1299 and H661 cells at interphase in the cell cycle (Fig. 6A). However, a difference in the abundance of TUBB was not observed between TTC28-WT and TTC28-KO cells (SI Appendix, Fig. S16). In addition, TTC28 and AURKB also partially overlapped in the perinuclear cytoplasm in cells at interphase, the midzone in cells at anaphase, and the midbody in cells at telophase (SI Appendix, Fig. S17). Weak binding of TTC28 with AURKB was also detected (SI Appendix, Fig. S18). In cells with siRNA-mediated knockdown of AURKB (siAURKB), cytokinesis was blocked in the majority of cells. While FMN was significantly induced by siTTC28, siAURKB mitigated the impact of siTTC28 on FMN (Fig. 6B and SI Appendix, Table S1), suggesting that TTC28 regulates genome stability, probably via cell mitosis.Fig. 6.Effects of TTC28 downregulation on the genomic stability of H1299 cells with and without blockade of mitosis and cytokinesis. (A) Colocalization of TTC28 and TUBB proteins in H1299 and H661 cells, as determined by confocal microscopy analysis; (B) Effect of TTC28 downregulation on the FMN of H1299 and H661 cells with and without siAURKB pretreatment for 20 h. (C and D) Effects of TTC28 downregulation on the viability and the FMN of H1299 cells treated with or without Taxol and CDDP treatment for 72 h. (E) Effect of TTC28 downregulation on the abundance of γH2AX in H1299 cells treated with or without Taxol and CDDP for 72 h.Furthermore, paclitaxel (Taxol) is a cancer chemotherapeutic agent that blocks mitosis and cytokinesis by inhibiting microtubule disassembly (40, 41). Cisplatin (CDDP) is another cancer chemotherapeutic agent that induces DNA strand crosslinking but does not affect microtubule assembly (42). To investigate whether TTC28 affects genome stability at the mitosis level, we pretreated cells with paclitaxel and CDDP before siTTC28 treatment. We found that siTTC28 (or TTC28-KO) not only significantly inhibited the proliferation (growth) of cancer cells in vitro (or in vivo) (SI Appendix, Fig. S19) but also increased the sensitivity of cancer cells to both paclitaxel and CDDP (Fig. 6 C and D, Left). However, siTTC28 did not affect FMN in H1299 cells pretreated with paclitaxel (at final concentrations of 2.5, 5.0, or 10.0 nM; P > 0.05), whereas siTTC28 still significantly increased the FMN in H1299 cells pretreated with CDDP (at a final concentration of 1.0 μM; 21.5% vs. 17.9%, P = 4.36e−02) (SI Appendix, Table S1; Fig. 6 C and D, Middle and Right). Similarly, we found that paclitaxel treatment abolished the increase in the abundance of γH2AX in siTTC28 H1299 cells, whereas CDDP treatment did not (Fig. 6E).We further compared the level of γH2AX in H1299 and H661 cells synchronized at the G1/S and G2/M phases and found that the abundance of γH2AX significantly increased only in TTC28-KO cells at the G1/S but not the G2/M phase (SI Appendix, Fig. S20). A similar difference was also observed in TTC28-WT cells treated with paclitaxel (2.5 nM). Interestingly, we found that the abundance of TTC28 was greater in cells in the G1/S phase than in those in the G2/M phase, suggesting that TTC28 expression is related to the cell cycle (SI Appendix, Fig. S21). These results support our hypothesis that both TTC28-KO and paclitaxel treatment may decrease genome stability by disrupting microtubule dynamics.These results indicate that TTC28 may regulate genome stability by affecting the progression of mitosis and cytokinesis through TUBB binding.

TTC28 Maintains Genome Stability by Regulating Mitosis and Cytokinesis, Probably via TUBB Binding.

It was previously reported that the overexpression of zebrafish ttc28 resulted in mitosis and cytokinesis defects via the binding of AURKB with the atypical cadherin Dachsous (Dchs) and decreased microtubule turnover during embryonic cleavage (32). To explore the mechanisms by which TTC28 maintains genome stability, we further screened for DEGs in H1299 cells with and without TTC28 KO. Our RNA-seq results revealed that the transcript levels of several Tubulin-related genes, including TUBB6 [fold change: +0.7 (adj-P value, 5.98e−24)], TUBA1A [+0.62 (5.88e−16)], and TTL [+0.55 (4.34e−11)], were significantly altered by TTC28 KO (Dataset S3). LC–MS/MS analysis revealed that the TUBB ß-chain was one of the TTC28-binding candidates (Fig. 1D). Thus, we further studied whether TTC28 maintains genome stability via mitosis and cytokinesis.

Confocal microscopy analysis revealed that the TTC28 and TUBB proteins highly overlapped in the perinuclear cytoplasm and midbody of H1299 and H661 cells at interphase in the cell cycle (Fig. 6A). However, a difference in the abundance of TUBB was not observed between TTC28-WT and TTC28-KO cells (SI Appendix, Fig. S16). In addition, TTC28 and AURKB also partially overlapped in the perinuclear cytoplasm in cells at interphase, the midzone in cells at anaphase, and the midbody in cells at telophase (SI Appendix, Fig. S17). Weak binding of TTC28 with AURKB was also detected (SI Appendix, Fig. S18). In cells with siRNA-mediated knockdown of AURKB (siAURKB), cytokinesis was blocked in the majority of cells. While FMN was significantly induced by siTTC28, siAURKB mitigated the impact of siTTC28 on FMN (Fig. 6B and SI Appendix, Table S1), suggesting that TTC28 regulates genome stability, probably via cell mitosis.

Effects of TTC28 downregulation on the genomic stability of H1299 cells with and without blockade of mitosis and cytokinesis. (A) Colocalization of TTC28 and TUBB proteins in H1299 and H661 cells, as determined by confocal microscopy analysis; (B) Effect of TTC28 downregulation on the FMN of H1299 and H661 cells with and without siAURKB pretreatment for 20 h. (C and D) Effects of TTC28 downregulation on the viability and the FMN of H1299 cells treated with or without Taxol and CDDP treatment for 72 h. (E) Effect of TTC28 downregulation on the abundance of γH2AX in H1299 cells treated with or without Taxol and CDDP for 72 h.

Furthermore, paclitaxel (Taxol) is a cancer chemotherapeutic agent that blocks mitosis and cytokinesis by inhibiting microtubule disassembly (40, 41). Cisplatin (CDDP) is another cancer chemotherapeutic agent that induces DNA strand crosslinking but does not affect microtubule assembly (42). To investigate whether TTC28 affects genome stability at the mitosis level, we pretreated cells with paclitaxel and CDDP before siTTC28 treatment. We found that siTTC28 (or TTC28-KO) not only significantly inhibited the proliferation (growth) of cancer cells in vitro (or in vivo) (SI Appendix, Fig. S19) but also increased the sensitivity of cancer cells to both paclitaxel and CDDP (Fig. 6 C and D, Left). However, siTTC28 did not affect FMN in H1299 cells pretreated with paclitaxel (at final concentrations of 2.5, 5.0, or 10.0 nM; P > 0.05), whereas siTTC28 still significantly increased the FMN in H1299 cells pretreated with CDDP (at a final concentration of 1.0 μM; 21.5% vs. 17.9%, P = 4.36e−02) (SI Appendix, Table S1; Fig. 6 C and D, Middle and Right). Similarly, we found that paclitaxel treatment abolished the increase in the abundance of γH2AX in siTTC28 H1299 cells, whereas CDDP treatment did not (Fig. 6E).

We further compared the level of γH2AX in H1299 and H661 cells synchronized at the G1/S and G2/M phases and found that the abundance of γH2AX significantly increased only in TTC28-KO cells at the G1/S but not the G2/M phase (SI Appendix, Fig. S20). A similar difference was also observed in TTC28-WT cells treated with paclitaxel (2.5 nM). Interestingly, we found that the abundance of TTC28 was greater in cells in the G1/S phase than in those in the G2/M phase, suggesting that TTC28 expression is related to the cell cycle (SI Appendix, Fig. S21). These results support our hypothesis that both TTC28-KO and paclitaxel treatment may decrease genome stability by disrupting microtubule dynamics.

These results indicate that TTC28 may regulate genome stability by affecting the progression of mitosis and cytokinesis through TUBB binding.

DiscussionMacroautophagy, a type of DNA damage response, contributes to maintaining genome stability via multiple mechanisms (43, 44). However, the effects of CMA and microautophagy on the baseline genome stability of mammalian cells are unclear. In the present study, we found that TTC28 is not only an HSPA8-binding protein and CMA/microautophagy substrate but also essential for CMA to maintain chromosomal stability through TTC28-mediated mitosis and cytokinesis.While HSPA8 binding is involved in both CMA and microautophagy, LAMP2A is a CMA-specific protein. We observed that inhibition of CMA by LAMP2A knockdown increased the abundance of TTC28 and consistently increased DNA damage in a TTC28-dependent manner via FMN, γH2AX, and comet analyses. These conflicting findings indicate that TTC28 is not only a CMA substrate but also crucial for the ability of CMA to maintain the genome stability of cells.Both CMA and microautophagy are responsible for the selective degradation of the KFERQ-like motif present in soluble cytosolic proteins (12). Approximately 35% of proteins in the mammalian proteome contain a canonical KFERQ-like motif. We found that the C-terminal PTIEEVD motif of HSPA8 directly interacted with the TPR domains of TTC28, which not only facilitated TTC28 degradation but also stabilized TTC28 in human cells, suggesting the presence of other functions of TTC28–HSPA8 binding in addition to the HSPA8-mediated degradation of TTC28. The detailed mechanisms by which HSPA8 stabilizes TTC28 should be studied further.It was previously reported that the overexpression of zebrafish ttc28 resulted in mitotic and cytokinesis defects during embryonic cleavage through AURKB binding and midbody dynamics (32), but mammalian Ttc28 was found to be essential for the progression of mitosis and cytokinesis (20). We observed that blockade of mitosis and cytokinesis in cells with siRNAs against AURKB mRNA or the microtubule assembly inhibitor paclitaxel strongly abolished the protective effect of TTC28 on genome stability, whereas treatment with the genotoxic CDDP (without inhibiting microtubule assembly activity) did not affect the protective effect of TTC28. Moreover, we found that both TTC28 loss and paclitaxel treatment increased γH2AX levels in cells in the G1/S phase but not in those in the G2/M phase and that the abundance of TTC28 in cells in the G1/S phase was much greater than that in cells in the G2/M phase. These findings suggest that TTC28 likely maintains genome stability by regulating mitosis and cytokinesis.The RNA helicase DDX41 contributes to R-loop-induced DNA damage responses via a RNA m6A-medicated mechanism in bone marrow cells (45). We found that DDX41 is a TTC28-binding protein. Whether TTC28 maintains genome stability via the DDX41-mediated pathway is also worth studying.FMN, γH2AX, and comet assays are often used to detect the genotoxicity of clastogens and aneugens (46). Our series of experiments on micronuclei and γH2AX revealed that upregulation (and downregulation) of the essential CMA gene HSPA8 increased (and decreased) the genome instability of cancer cells in a TTC28-dependent manner. The TCGA bioinformatics analyses also revealed that TTC28 downregulation or HSPA8 upregulation significantly correlated with decreased genome stability in cancer tissues. However, such an effect was not observed in siHSPA8 cells in the MN and comet analyses, suggesting differences in genotoxicity results between these assays. In contrast to that of the AURKB gene, the correlation coefficient (R) of the expression level of the TTC28 gene with the aneuploidy score and mutation burden across thousands of TCGA cancers was the lowest among a number of known tumor-related or DNA repair genes, implying that TTC28 downregulation is crucial for cancer genome instability.By mining publicly available data on pharmacogenomics across hundreds of cancer cell lines (47, 48), we found that high TTC28 expression in cancer cell lines significantly affected sensitive to cisplatin (targeting DNA replication), GSK269962A (targeting the cytokine skeleton), and olaparib (targeting genome integrity) and small molecules targeting EGFR, ERBB2, and AURKA (SI Appendix, Fig. S22). In addition, cancer patients with a high TMB or MSI may generally benefit from immunotherapy. These phenomena suggest that TTC28 may increase the resistance of cancer cells to anticancer drugs. It is interesting to study whether TTC28 may affect the susceptibility of cancer cells to these chemicals in vivo and whether cancer cells with TTC28 downregulation/inactivation may be sensitive to immunotherapy.The LAMP2 transcript isoforms include the mRNAs LAMP2A, LAMP2B, and LAMP2C, which vary in distribution and function (49). While LAMP2A is the rate-limiting component of CMA, LAMP2B is involved in autophagosome-lysosome fusion, and LAMP2C is involved in DNautophagy and RNautophagy. According to the TCGA RNA-seq datasets produced with the next-generation sequencing platform, the LAMP2A, LAMP2B, and LAMP2C transcript levels (calculated with GEPIA software) differ among cancers (SI Appendix, Fig. S23) (27). This may account for the lack of a significant association between the total LAMP2 transcript level and the mutation count in our TCGA bioinformatics analysis.OS is affected by many factors, including the proliferation, local invasion, and metastasis of cancer cells and treatment efficiency. The finding that siTTC28 inhibited the proliferation of cancer cells contradicted the findings of the bioinformatics analysis that TTC28 downregulation was a poor survival factor, suggesting that cell proliferation may not be a dominant factor of survival. Increasing genome instability generally results in more mutated cells and greater fitness of cancer cells to the microenvironment, which is essential for cancer cell invasion and metastasis. This may account for the poor survival of cancer patients with TTC28 downregulation.In summary, we identified TTC28 as a CMA/microautophagy substrate. HSPA8 directly binds TTC28 through interactions of TTC28 TPR domains with the HSPA8 PTIEEVD motif and subsequently promotes TTC28 degradation via CMA/microautophagy. Notably, our findings also revealed that TTC28 is essential for the ability of CMA to maintain genome stability. Comprehensive downregulation of TTC28 expression may contribute to the high genomic instability of cancer cells.

Macroautophagy, a type of DNA damage response, contributes to maintaining genome stability via multiple mechanisms (43, 44). However, the effects of CMA and microautophagy on the baseline genome stability of mammalian cells are unclear. In the present study, we found that TTC28 is not only an HSPA8-binding protein and CMA/microautophagy substrate but also essential for CMA to maintain chromosomal stability through TTC28-mediated mitosis and cytokinesis.

While HSPA8 binding is involved in both CMA and microautophagy, LAMP2A is a CMA-specific protein. We observed that inhibition of CMA by LAMP2A knockdown increased the abundance of TTC28 and consistently increased DNA damage in a TTC28-dependent manner via FMN, γH2AX, and comet analyses. These conflicting findings indicate that TTC28 is not only a CMA substrate but also crucial for the ability of CMA to maintain the genome stability of cells.

Both CMA and microautophagy are responsible for the selective degradation of the KFERQ-like motif present in soluble cytosolic proteins (12). Approximately 35% of proteins in the mammalian proteome contain a canonical KFERQ-like motif. We found that the C-terminal PTIEEVD motif of HSPA8 directly interacted with the TPR domains of TTC28, which not only facilitated TTC28 degradation but also stabilized TTC28 in human cells, suggesting the presence of other functions of TTC28–HSPA8 binding in addition to the HSPA8-mediated degradation of TTC28. The detailed mechanisms by which HSPA8 stabilizes TTC28 should be studied further.

It was previously reported that the overexpression of zebrafish ttc28 resulted in mitotic and cytokinesis defects during embryonic cleavage through AURKB binding and midbody dynamics (32), but mammalian Ttc28 was found to be essential for the progression of mitosis and cytokinesis (20). We observed that blockade of mitosis and cytokinesis in cells with siRNAs against AURKB mRNA or the microtubule assembly inhibitor paclitaxel strongly abolished the protective effect of TTC28 on genome stability, whereas treatment with the genotoxic CDDP (without inhibiting microtubule assembly activity) did not affect the protective effect of TTC28. Moreover, we found that both TTC28 loss and paclitaxel treatment increased γH2AX levels in cells in the G1/S phase but not in those in the G2/M phase and that the abundance of TTC28 in cells in the G1/S phase was much greater than that in cells in the G2/M phase. These findings suggest that TTC28 likely maintains genome stability by regulating mitosis and cytokinesis.

The RNA helicase DDX41 contributes to R-loop-induced DNA damage responses via a RNA m6A-medicated mechanism in bone marrow cells (45). We found that DDX41 is a TTC28-binding protein. Whether TTC28 maintains genome stability via the DDX41-mediated pathway is also worth studying.

FMN, γH2AX, and comet assays are often used to detect the genotoxicity of clastogens and aneugens (46). Our series of experiments on micronuclei and γH2AX revealed that upregulation (and downregulation) of the essential CMA gene HSPA8 increased (and decreased) the genome instability of cancer cells in a TTC28-dependent manner. The TCGA bioinformatics analyses also revealed that TTC28 downregulation or HSPA8 upregulation significantly correlated with decreased genome stability in cancer tissues. However, such an effect was not observed in siHSPA8 cells in the MN and comet analyses, suggesting differences in genotoxicity results between these assays. In contrast to that of the AURKB gene, the correlation coefficient (R) of the expression level of the TTC28 gene with the aneuploidy score and mutation burden across thousands of TCGA cancers was the lowest among a number of known tumor-related or DNA repair genes, implying that TTC28 downregulation is crucial for cancer genome instability.

By mining publicly available data on pharmacogenomics across hundreds of cancer cell lines (47, 48), we found that high TTC28 expression in cancer cell lines significantly affected sensitive to cisplatin (targeting DNA replication), GSK269962A (targeting the cytokine skeleton), and olaparib (targeting genome integrity) and small molecules targeting EGFR, ERBB2, and AURKA (SI Appendix, Fig. S22). In addition, cancer patients with a high TMB or MSI may generally benefit from immunotherapy. These phenomena suggest that TTC28 may increase the resistance of cancer cells to anticancer drugs. It is interesting to study whether TTC28 may affect the susceptibility of cancer cells to these chemicals in vivo and whether cancer cells with TTC28 downregulation/inactivation may be sensitive to immunotherapy.

The LAMP2 transcript isoforms include the mRNAs LAMP2A, LAMP2B, and LAMP2C, which vary in distribution and function (49). While LAMP2A is the rate-limiting component of CMA, LAMP2B is involved in autophagosome-lysosome fusion, and LAMP2C is involved in DNautophagy and RNautophagy. According to the TCGA RNA-seq datasets produced with the next-generation sequencing platform, the LAMP2A, LAMP2B, and LAMP2C transcript levels (calculated with GEPIA software) differ among cancers (SI Appendix, Fig. S23) (27). This may account for the lack of a significant association between the total LAMP2 transcript level and the mutation count in our TCGA bioinformatics analysis.

OS is affected by many factors, including the proliferation, local invasion, and metastasis of cancer cells and treatment efficiency. The finding that siTTC28 inhibited the proliferation of cancer cells contradicted the findings of the bioinformatics analysis that TTC28 downregulation was a poor survival factor, suggesting that cell proliferation may not be a dominant factor of survival. Increasing genome instability generally results in more mutated cells and greater fitness of cancer cells to the microenvironment, which is essential for cancer cell invasion and metastasis. This may account for the poor survival of cancer patients with TTC28 downregulation.

In summary, we identified TTC28 as a CMA/microautophagy substrate. HSPA8 directly binds TTC28 through interactions of TTC28 TPR domains with the HSPA8 PTIEEVD motif and subsequently promotes TTC28 degradation via CMA/microautophagy. Notably, our findings also revealed that TTC28 is essential for the ability of CMA to maintain genome stability. Comprehensive downregulation of TTC28 expression may contribute to the high genomic instability of cancer cells.

Materials and MethodsCell Culture.The human lung cancer cell lines H1299 and A549 and the human cervical cancer cell line HeLa were kindly provided by Professors Chengchao Shou, Zhiqian Zhang, and Qimin Zhan, respectively, at Peking University Cancer Hospital. The H661, H460, and H292 lung cancer cell lines were purchased from the National Laboratory Cell Resource Sharing Platform (Beijing, China). The human lung cancer cell line H1975 and the human liver cancer cell line HepG2 were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA, USA). These cell lines were cultured in Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI) 1640 medium (Gibco, Carlsbad, CA, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Gibco) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. The HEK293FT cell line (kindly provided by Professor Zhiqian Zhang) was grown in DMEM (Gibco) supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. All the cell cultures were maintained at 37 °C in a humidified incubator with 5% CO2.RNA Extraction and qRT–PCR.Total RNA was extracted via a Direct-Zol RNA MiniPrep Kit (Tianmo Sci & Tech Develop, Beijing, China) and reverse transcribed into complementary DNA (cDNA) via a First-Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (TransGen Biotech, Beijing, China). Then, triplicate cDNA samples were amplified by qRT–PCR via Synergy Brands (SYBR) Green PCR Master Mix reagents (Roche, Mannheim, Germany). The relative expression levels of the tested genes were normalized to that of the Alu reference gene via the classical ΔΔCt method (50). The sequences (5′-3′) of the primers used were as follows: LAMP2A forward: atttg gttaa tggct ccgttt and LAMP2A reverse: cacat tgaaa ggctg aaccc (51); Alu forward: gaggc tgagg cagga gaatcg and Alu reverse: gtcgc ccagg ctgga gtg (52); AURKB forward: ggagt tggca gatgc tctaat and AURKB reverse: caatc ttcag ctctc ccttg ag (53); and TTC28 forward: gacaa acagg acaac aagac tc and TTC28 reverse: gagtt ttcca ctgtg ttctc ac.Western Blotting.For Western blot analysis, protein lysates from treated cells were loaded on 8 to 12% SDS–PAGE gels and subjected to immunoblotting with the indicated antibodies. For nuclear-cytoplasmic fractionation, the cells were homogenized, and the lysates were fractionated with a nuclear/cytosol fractionation kit (P1200, Applygen Tech, Beijing, China) to prepare cytoplasmic and nuclear extracts. The purities of the cytoplasmic and nuclear extracts were verified by immunoblotting with anti-β-Tubulin and anti-Lamin B1 (10094-1-AP and 66095-1-Ig, Proteintech, USA) antibodies, respectively, at a dilution of 1:5,000. The Western blot raw images were presented as SI Appendix, metadata.The following antibodies were used at dilutions of 1:1,000 unless otherwise stated: anti-TTC28 and anti-LAMP2A (ab197076 and ab125068, Abcam, UK); anti-HSPA8, anti-VIM, anti-DDX41, and anti-EF-1 α1 (sc-7298, sc-6260, sc-166225, and sc-21758, Santa Cruz, USA); anti-γH2AX (AP0687, ABclonal Technology, Wuhan, China); anti-AURKB (A19539, ABclonal Technology, Wuhan, China); anti-HA-tag (1:5,000, C29F4, Cell Signaling Technology, USA); anti-c-Myc (1:3,000, 631206, Takara, USA); and anti-ACTB (1:15,000) and anti-GAPDH (1:15,000) (66009-1-Ig and 60004-1-Ig, Proteintech, USA).Plasmids and siRNA Transfection.The porcine cytomegalovirus (pCMV)-HA-ttc28 (2,365 aa; with a truncation of 105 aa and an insertion of 7 aa at the N terminus according to our clone sequencing), pCMV-HA-ttc28-N, pCMV-HA-ttc28-N-1, and pCMV-HA-ttc28-ΔN-1 vectors were kindly provided by Professor Lilianna Solnica-Krezel (32). The pCMV-HA-ttc28-ΔN, pCMV-HA-ttc28-N-2, pCMV-HA-ttc28-N-3, pVN-HSPA8, pYC-TTC28, pCMV-multiple cloning site (MCS)-Myc-HSPA8-wt, pCMV-MCS-Myc-HSPA8-mut, and pCMV-MCS-3Flag-TTC28 vectors were purchased from Maijin Bio. (Beijing, China). The AURKB expression vector and its empty control vector were kindly provided by Professor Jiadong Wang at Peking University Basic Medical School. The cells were transfected with the plasmids (at a final concentration of 1 μg/mL for each plasmid) via X-tremeGENE HP DNA Transfection Reagent (Roche, Mannheim, Germany) or linear polyethylenimine hydrochloride (MW 4,000; Polysciences Inc., Warrington, PA) according to the manufacturer’s manual when the confluence was 50 to 70%.The siRNAs were transfected via Omifection-R Transfection Reagent (Omc-02, Omiget, Beijing, China) according to the manufacturer’s manual. The following siRNAs (5′-3′; GenePharma, Suzhou, China) were used: LAMP2A#1: cugca accug auuga uuatt and LAMP2A#2: gacug cagug cagau gacgtt (54); HSPA8#1: ggccc uuuau ggugg ugaatt and HSPA8#2: ggagg ugucu ucuau gguutt; TTC28#1: cccga gaacu uggca acautt and TTC28#2: gcccau uacug ccuug gaatt; AURKB#1: ccugc gucuc uacaa cuautt and AURKB#2: ucguc aaggu ggacc uaaatt (55); scramble control: uucuc cgaac guguc acgutt. Gene-specific siRNAs were used individually or mixed before the transfection experiments.TTC28-KO.To generate TTC28-KO cells, the CRISPR/Cas9 editing system was used according to a published protocol (56). Briefly, the single guide RNA (gRNA) sequence 5′-tggac gtcat gccga tgccc-3′ (Future Biotherapeutics, Shanghai, China) was cloned and inserted into the lenti-CRISPR-V2 vector. Next, HEK293FT cells were transfected with lentiviral vectors encoding the single guide RNA (sgRNA) and Cas9. After 48 h and 72 h, the viruses were collected to infect H1299 and H661 cells. The cells were selected with puromycin (1 μg/mL) for at least 1 wk. The surviving cells were seeded into 96-well plates for the formation of cell clones and further expansion. The expanded monoclonal cell populations were named TTC28-KO subclones. The status of the gene knockouts was determined via PCR sequencing and Western blotting.Micronucleus Assay.For detailed analysis, image acquisition was performed via a confocal microscope and Zeiss ZEN software (Oberkochen, Germany). Image analysis was performed via FIJI ImageJ software (NIH, USA) (57). For each group, at least 1,000 cells were chosen randomly, and the number of cells with micronuclei was counted: FMN = (micronucleated cells/total counted cells) × 100%. For scoring of MNs, we adopted the criteria of Al-Sabti and Metcalfe (58). Briefly, the MNs should be free in the cytoplasm, not connected to or overlapping the main nucleus, and the color depth of the MNs should be the same as that of the main nucleus or slightly shallow. The size of the MN should be less than one-third that of the main nucleus. In the case of a cytokinesis defect induced by AURKB knockdown (siAURKB), a cell containing two main nuclei was defined as a single cell.Comet Assay.The cells were harvested by trypsinization, and the comet assay was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Iphase, Beijing, China). Briefly, 3 × 105 single cells were layered into low-melting agarose (at 37 °C) at a 1:10 volume:volume ratio and immobilized onto a comet assay glass slide. After lysis and alkaline electrophoresis (200 mA for 10 min), the slides were dried and fixed in ethanol. After being stained with GelStain reagent (1:3,000 dilution for 30 min at room temperature), the slides were imaged under a confocal microscope. The comet images were automatically analyzed with the open-source software OpenComet (v1.3.1) (59). In addition to the DNA density of the tail, we used the normalized length of the tail for each cell with the nuclear length.Statistical Analysis.The statistical significance of differences between two groups was determined via two-tailed Student’s t test. The data are presented as the mean ± SD of three independent experiments calculated via GraphPad Prism 9. The statistical significance of the difference in the FMN was determined via the chi-square test. The statistical significance threshold was set at P < 0.05; significance levels are presented in the figures.

Materials and Methods

Cell Culture.The human lung cancer cell lines H1299 and A549 and the human cervical cancer cell line HeLa were kindly provided by Professors Chengchao Shou, Zhiqian Zhang, and Qimin Zhan, respectively, at Peking University Cancer Hospital. The H661, H460, and H292 lung cancer cell lines were purchased from the National Laboratory Cell Resource Sharing Platform (Beijing, China). The human lung cancer cell line H1975 and the human liver cancer cell line HepG2 were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA, USA). These cell lines were cultured in Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI) 1640 medium (Gibco, Carlsbad, CA, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Gibco) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. The HEK293FT cell line (kindly provided by Professor Zhiqian Zhang) was grown in DMEM (Gibco) supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. All the cell cultures were maintained at 37 °C in a humidified incubator with 5% CO2.

Cell Culture.

The human lung cancer cell lines H1299 and A549 and the human cervical cancer cell line HeLa were kindly provided by Professors Chengchao Shou, Zhiqian Zhang, and Qimin Zhan, respectively, at Peking University Cancer Hospital. The H661, H460, and H292 lung cancer cell lines were purchased from the National Laboratory Cell Resource Sharing Platform (Beijing, China). The human lung cancer cell line H1975 and the human liver cancer cell line HepG2 were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA, USA). These cell lines were cultured in Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI) 1640 medium (Gibco, Carlsbad, CA, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Gibco) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. The HEK293FT cell line (kindly provided by Professor Zhiqian Zhang) was grown in DMEM (Gibco) supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. All the cell cultures were maintained at 37 °C in a humidified incubator with 5% CO2.

RNA Extraction and qRT–PCR.Total RNA was extracted via a Direct-Zol RNA MiniPrep Kit (Tianmo Sci & Tech Develop, Beijing, China) and reverse transcribed into complementary DNA (cDNA) via a First-Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (TransGen Biotech, Beijing, China). Then, triplicate cDNA samples were amplified by qRT–PCR via Synergy Brands (SYBR) Green PCR Master Mix reagents (Roche, Mannheim, Germany). The relative expression levels of the tested genes were normalized to that of the Alu reference gene via the classical ΔΔCt method (50). The sequences (5′-3′) of the primers used were as follows: LAMP2A forward: atttg gttaa tggct ccgttt and LAMP2A reverse: cacat tgaaa ggctg aaccc (51); Alu forward: gaggc tgagg cagga gaatcg and Alu reverse: gtcgc ccagg ctgga gtg (52); AURKB forward: ggagt tggca gatgc tctaat and AURKB reverse: caatc ttcag ctctc ccttg ag (53); and TTC28 forward: gacaa acagg acaac aagac tc and TTC28 reverse: gagtt ttcca ctgtg ttctc ac.

RNA Extraction and qRT–PCR.

Total RNA was extracted via a Direct-Zol RNA MiniPrep Kit (Tianmo Sci & Tech Develop, Beijing, China) and reverse transcribed into complementary DNA (cDNA) via a First-Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (TransGen Biotech, Beijing, China). Then, triplicate cDNA samples were amplified by qRT–PCR via Synergy Brands (SYBR) Green PCR Master Mix reagents (Roche, Mannheim, Germany). The relative expression levels of the tested genes were normalized to that of the Alu reference gene via the classical ΔΔCt method (50). The sequences (5′-3′) of the primers used were as follows: LAMP2A forward: atttg gttaa tggct ccgttt and LAMP2A reverse: cacat tgaaa ggctg aaccc (51); Alu forward: gaggc tgagg cagga gaatcg and Alu reverse: gtcgc ccagg ctgga gtg (52); AURKB forward: ggagt tggca gatgc tctaat and AURKB reverse: caatc ttcag ctctc ccttg ag (53); and TTC28 forward: gacaa acagg acaac aagac tc and TTC28 reverse: gagtt ttcca ctgtg ttctc ac.

Western Blotting.For Western blot analysis, protein lysates from treated cells were loaded on 8 to 12% SDS–PAGE gels and subjected to immunoblotting with the indicated antibodies. For nuclear-cytoplasmic fractionation, the cells were homogenized, and the lysates were fractionated with a nuclear/cytosol fractionation kit (P1200, Applygen Tech, Beijing, China) to prepare cytoplasmic and nuclear extracts. The purities of the cytoplasmic and nuclear extracts were verified by immunoblotting with anti-β-Tubulin and anti-Lamin B1 (10094-1-AP and 66095-1-Ig, Proteintech, USA) antibodies, respectively, at a dilution of 1:5,000. The Western blot raw images were presented as SI Appendix, metadata.The following antibodies were used at dilutions of 1:1,000 unless otherwise stated: anti-TTC28 and anti-LAMP2A (ab197076 and ab125068, Abcam, UK); anti-HSPA8, anti-VIM, anti-DDX41, and anti-EF-1 α1 (sc-7298, sc-6260, sc-166225, and sc-21758, Santa Cruz, USA); anti-γH2AX (AP0687, ABclonal Technology, Wuhan, China); anti-AURKB (A19539, ABclonal Technology, Wuhan, China); anti-HA-tag (1:5,000, C29F4, Cell Signaling Technology, USA); anti-c-Myc (1:3,000, 631206, Takara, USA); and anti-ACTB (1:15,000) and anti-GAPDH (1:15,000) (66009-1-Ig and 60004-1-Ig, Proteintech, USA).

Western Blotting.

For Western blot analysis, protein lysates from treated cells were loaded on 8 to 12% SDS–PAGE gels and subjected to immunoblotting with the indicated antibodies. For nuclear-cytoplasmic fractionation, the cells were homogenized, and the lysates were fractionated with a nuclear/cytosol fractionation kit (P1200, Applygen Tech, Beijing, China) to prepare cytoplasmic and nuclear extracts. The purities of the cytoplasmic and nuclear extracts were verified by immunoblotting with anti-β-Tubulin and anti-Lamin B1 (10094-1-AP and 66095-1-Ig, Proteintech, USA) antibodies, respectively, at a dilution of 1:5,000. The Western blot raw images were presented as SI Appendix, metadata.

The following antibodies were used at dilutions of 1:1,000 unless otherwise stated: anti-TTC28 and anti-LAMP2A (ab197076 and ab125068, Abcam, UK); anti-HSPA8, anti-VIM, anti-DDX41, and anti-EF-1 α1 (sc-7298, sc-6260, sc-166225, and sc-21758, Santa Cruz, USA); anti-γH2AX (AP0687, ABclonal Technology, Wuhan, China); anti-AURKB (A19539, ABclonal Technology, Wuhan, China); anti-HA-tag (1:5,000, C29F4, Cell Signaling Technology, USA); anti-c-Myc (1:3,000, 631206, Takara, USA); and anti-ACTB (1:15,000) and anti-GAPDH (1:15,000) (66009-1-Ig and 60004-1-Ig, Proteintech, USA).

Plasmids and siRNA Transfection.The porcine cytomegalovirus (pCMV)-HA-ttc28 (2,365 aa; with a truncation of 105 aa and an insertion of 7 aa at the N terminus according to our clone sequencing), pCMV-HA-ttc28-N, pCMV-HA-ttc28-N-1, and pCMV-HA-ttc28-ΔN-1 vectors were kindly provided by Professor Lilianna Solnica-Krezel (32). The pCMV-HA-ttc28-ΔN, pCMV-HA-ttc28-N-2, pCMV-HA-ttc28-N-3, pVN-HSPA8, pYC-TTC28, pCMV-multiple cloning site (MCS)-Myc-HSPA8-wt, pCMV-MCS-Myc-HSPA8-mut, and pCMV-MCS-3Flag-TTC28 vectors were purchased from Maijin Bio. (Beijing, China). The AURKB expression vector and its empty control vector were kindly provided by Professor Jiadong Wang at Peking University Basic Medical School. The cells were transfected with the plasmids (at a final concentration of 1 μg/mL for each plasmid) via X-tremeGENE HP DNA Transfection Reagent (Roche, Mannheim, Germany) or linear polyethylenimine hydrochloride (MW 4,000; Polysciences Inc., Warrington, PA) according to the manufacturer’s manual when the confluence was 50 to 70%.The siRNAs were transfected via Omifection-R Transfection Reagent (Omc-02, Omiget, Beijing, China) according to the manufacturer’s manual. The following siRNAs (5′-3′; GenePharma, Suzhou, China) were used: LAMP2A#1: cugca accug auuga uuatt and LAMP2A#2: gacug cagug cagau gacgtt (54); HSPA8#1: ggccc uuuau ggugg ugaatt and HSPA8#2: ggagg ugucu ucuau gguutt; TTC28#1: cccga gaacu uggca acautt and TTC28#2: gcccau uacug ccuug gaatt; AURKB#1: ccugc gucuc uacaa cuautt and AURKB#2: ucguc aaggu ggacc uaaatt (55); scramble control: uucuc cgaac guguc acgutt. Gene-specific siRNAs were used individually or mixed before the transfection experiments.

Plasmids and siRNA Transfection.

The porcine cytomegalovirus (pCMV)-HA-ttc28 (2,365 aa; with a truncation of 105 aa and an insertion of 7 aa at the N terminus according to our clone sequencing), pCMV-HA-ttc28-N, pCMV-HA-ttc28-N-1, and pCMV-HA-ttc28-ΔN-1 vectors were kindly provided by Professor Lilianna Solnica-Krezel (32). The pCMV-HA-ttc28-ΔN, pCMV-HA-ttc28-N-2, pCMV-HA-ttc28-N-3, pVN-HSPA8, pYC-TTC28, pCMV-multiple cloning site (MCS)-Myc-HSPA8-wt, pCMV-MCS-Myc-HSPA8-mut, and pCMV-MCS-3Flag-TTC28 vectors were purchased from Maijin Bio. (Beijing, China). The AURKB expression vector and its empty control vector were kindly provided by Professor Jiadong Wang at Peking University Basic Medical School. The cells were transfected with the plasmids (at a final concentration of 1 μg/mL for each plasmid) via X-tremeGENE HP DNA Transfection Reagent (Roche, Mannheim, Germany) or linear polyethylenimine hydrochloride (MW 4,000; Polysciences Inc., Warrington, PA) according to the manufacturer’s manual when the confluence was 50 to 70%.

The siRNAs were transfected via Omifection-R Transfection Reagent (Omc-02, Omiget, Beijing, China) according to the manufacturer’s manual. The following siRNAs (5′-3′; GenePharma, Suzhou, China) were used: LAMP2A#1: cugca accug auuga uuatt and LAMP2A#2: gacug cagug cagau gacgtt (54); HSPA8#1: ggccc uuuau ggugg ugaatt and HSPA8#2: ggagg ugucu ucuau gguutt; TTC28#1: cccga gaacu uggca acautt and TTC28#2: gcccau uacug ccuug gaatt; AURKB#1: ccugc gucuc uacaa cuautt and AURKB#2: ucguc aaggu ggacc uaaatt (55); scramble control: uucuc cgaac guguc acgutt. Gene-specific siRNAs were used individually or mixed before the transfection experiments.

TTC28-KO.To generate TTC28-KO cells, the CRISPR/Cas9 editing system was used according to a published protocol (56). Briefly, the single guide RNA (gRNA) sequence 5′-tggac gtcat gccga tgccc-3′ (Future Biotherapeutics, Shanghai, China) was cloned and inserted into the lenti-CRISPR-V2 vector. Next, HEK293FT cells were transfected with lentiviral vectors encoding the single guide RNA (sgRNA) and Cas9. After 48 h and 72 h, the viruses were collected to infect H1299 and H661 cells. The cells were selected with puromycin (1 μg/mL) for at least 1 wk. The surviving cells were seeded into 96-well plates for the formation of cell clones and further expansion. The expanded monoclonal cell populations were named TTC28-KO subclones. The status of the gene knockouts was determined via PCR sequencing and Western blotting.

To generate TTC28-KO cells, the CRISPR/Cas9 editing system was used according to a published protocol (56). Briefly, the single guide RNA (gRNA) sequence 5′-tggac gtcat gccga tgccc-3′ (Future Biotherapeutics, Shanghai, China) was cloned and inserted into the lenti-CRISPR-V2 vector. Next, HEK293FT cells were transfected with lentiviral vectors encoding the single guide RNA (sgRNA) and Cas9. After 48 h and 72 h, the viruses were collected to infect H1299 and H661 cells. The cells were selected with puromycin (1 μg/mL) for at least 1 wk. The surviving cells were seeded into 96-well plates for the formation of cell clones and further expansion. The expanded monoclonal cell populations were named TTC28-KO subclones. The status of the gene knockouts was determined via PCR sequencing and Western blotting.

Micronucleus Assay.For detailed analysis, image acquisition was performed via a confocal microscope and Zeiss ZEN software (Oberkochen, Germany). Image analysis was performed via FIJI ImageJ software (NIH, USA) (57). For each group, at least 1,000 cells were chosen randomly, and the number of cells with micronuclei was counted: FMN = (micronucleated cells/total counted cells) × 100%. For scoring of MNs, we adopted the criteria of Al-Sabti and Metcalfe (58). Briefly, the MNs should be free in the cytoplasm, not connected to or overlapping the main nucleus, and the color depth of the MNs should be the same as that of the main nucleus or slightly shallow. The size of the MN should be less than one-third that of the main nucleus. In the case of a cytokinesis defect induced by AURKB knockdown (siAURKB), a cell containing two main nuclei was defined as a single cell.

Micronucleus Assay.

For detailed analysis, image acquisition was performed via a confocal microscope and Zeiss ZEN software (Oberkochen, Germany). Image analysis was performed via FIJI ImageJ software (NIH, USA) (57). For each group, at least 1,000 cells were chosen randomly, and the number of cells with micronuclei was counted: FMN = (micronucleated cells/total counted cells) × 100%. For scoring of MNs, we adopted the criteria of Al-Sabti and Metcalfe (58). Briefly, the MNs should be free in the cytoplasm, not connected to or overlapping the main nucleus, and the color depth of the MNs should be the same as that of the main nucleus or slightly shallow. The size of the MN should be less than one-third that of the main nucleus. In the case of a cytokinesis defect induced by AURKB knockdown (siAURKB), a cell containing two main nuclei was defined as a single cell.

Comet Assay.The cells were harvested by trypsinization, and the comet assay was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Iphase, Beijing, China). Briefly, 3 × 105 single cells were layered into low-melting agarose (at 37 °C) at a 1:10 volume:volume ratio and immobilized onto a comet assay glass slide. After lysis and alkaline electrophoresis (200 mA for 10 min), the slides were dried and fixed in ethanol. After being stained with GelStain reagent (1:3,000 dilution for 30 min at room temperature), the slides were imaged under a confocal microscope. The comet images were automatically analyzed with the open-source software OpenComet (v1.3.1) (59). In addition to the DNA density of the tail, we used the normalized length of the tail for each cell with the nuclear length.

Comet Assay.

The cells were harvested by trypsinization, and the comet assay was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Iphase, Beijing, China). Briefly, 3 × 105 single cells were layered into low-melting agarose (at 37 °C) at a 1:10 volume:volume ratio and immobilized onto a comet assay glass slide. After lysis and alkaline electrophoresis (200 mA for 10 min), the slides were dried and fixed in ethanol. After being stained with GelStain reagent (1:3,000 dilution for 30 min at room temperature), the slides were imaged under a confocal microscope. The comet images were automatically analyzed with the open-source software OpenComet (v1.3.1) (59). In addition to the DNA density of the tail, we used the normalized length of the tail for each cell with the nuclear length.

Statistical Analysis.The statistical significance of differences between two groups was determined via two-tailed Student’s t test. The data are presented as the mean ± SD of three independent experiments calculated via GraphPad Prism 9. The statistical significance of the difference in the FMN was determined via the chi-square test. The statistical significance threshold was set at P < 0.05; significance levels are presented in the figures.

Statistical Analysis.

The statistical significance of differences between two groups was determined via two-tailed Student’s t test. The data are presented as the mean ± SD of three independent experiments calculated via GraphPad Prism 9. The statistical significance of the difference in the FMN was determined via the chi-square test. The statistical significance threshold was set at P < 0.05; significance levels are presented in the figures.

Supplementary MaterialAppendix 01 (PDF)Appendix 02 (PDF)Dataset S01 (XLSX)Dataset S02 (XLSX)Dataset S03 (XLSX)Dataset S04 (XLSX)

Supplementary Material

Appendix 01 (PDF)

Appendix 02 (PDF)

Dataset S01 (XLSX)

Dataset S02 (XLSX)

Dataset S03 (XLSX)

Dataset S04 (XLSX)
