---
pmid: '26775844'
title: Salivary protein histatin 3 regulates cell proliferation by enhancing p27(Kip1)
  and heat shock cognate protein 70 ubiquitination.
authors:
- Imamura Y
- Wang PL
- Masuno K
- Sogawa N
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.01.072
---

# Salivary protein histatin 3 regulates cell proliferation by enhancing p27(Kip1) and heat shock cognate protein 70 ubiquitination.
**Authors:** Imamura Y, Wang PL, Masuno K, Sogawa N
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.01.072](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.01.072)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2016 Feb 5;470(2):269-274. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.01.072. Epub 2016 Jan 14.

Salivary protein histatin 3 regulates cell proliferation by enhancing p27(Kip1) 
and heat shock cognate protein 70 ubiquitination.

Imamura Y(1), Wang PL(2), Masuno K(3), Sogawa N(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Matsumoto Dental University, Shiojiri, Nagano 
399-0781, Japan. Electronic address: yimamura@po.mdu.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Bacteriology, Osaka Dental University, Hirakata, Osaka 
573-1121, Japan.
(3)Department of Dental Education Innovation, Osaka Dental University, Hirakata, 
Osaka 573-1121, Japan.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, Matsumoto Dental University, Shiojiri, Nagano 
399-0781, Japan.

Histatins are salivary proteins with antimicrobial activities. We previously 
reported that histatin 3 binds to heat shock cognate protein 70 (HSC70), which 
is constitutively expressed, and induces DNA synthesis stimulation and promotes 
human gingival fibroblast (HGF) survival. However, the underlying mechanisms of 
histatin 3 remain largely unknown. Here, we found that the KRHH sequence of 
histatin 3 at the amino acid positions 5-8 was essential for enhancing p27(Kip1) 
(a cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor) binding to HSC70 that occurred in a 
dose-dependent manner; histatin 3 enhanced the binding between p27(Kip1) and 
HSC70 during the G1/S transition of HGFs as opposed to histatin 3-M(5-8) 
(substitution of KRHH for EEDD in histatin 3). Histatin 3, but not histatin 
3-M(5-8), stimulated DNA synthesis and promoted HGF survival. Histatin 3 
dose-dependently enhanced both p27(Kip1) and HSC70 ubiquitination, whereas 
histatin 3-M(5-8) did not. These findings provide further evidence that histatin 
3 may be involved in the regulation of cell proliferation, particularly during 
G1/S transition, via the ubiquitin-proteasome system of p27(Kip1) and HSC70.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.01.072
PMID: 26775844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
