---
pmid: '8499633'
title: Human interleukin-10 can directly inhibit T-cell growth.
authors:
- Taga K
- Mostowski H
- Tosato G
journal: Blood
year: '1993'
full_text_available: false
---

# Human interleukin-10 can directly inhibit T-cell growth.
**Authors:** Taga K, Mostowski H, Tosato G
**Journal:** Blood (1993)

## Abstract

1. Blood. 1993 Jun 1;81(11):2964-71.

Human interleukin-10 can directly inhibit T-cell growth.

Taga K(1), Mostowski H, Tosato G.

Author information:
(1)Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, FDA, Bethesda, MD 20892.

Human interleukin-10 (IL-10) inhibits T-cell proliferation and cytokine 
production in the presence of monocytes. In this study, we have investigated 
whether IL-10 can directly inhibit T cells. Highly purified peripheral blood T 
cells containing less than 0.1% CD14+ cells and unresponsive to 
phytohemagglutinin (PHA), were growth-inhibited by IL-10 when stimulated with 
immobilized OKT3 monoclonal antibody (MoAb; 55.4% inhibition). This effect was 
neutralized by the murine MoAb 19F1 directed against human IL-10. In addition, 
IL-10 inhibited by 52.5% the proliferation of a human tetanus toxoid-specific 
T-cell clone (TM11) induced by immobilized OKT3 MoAb in the absence of 
antigen-presenting function. T-cell growth inhibition by IL-10 did not reflect a 
cytokine-induced change in the kinetics of T-cell response to immobilized OKT3 
MoAb, and was observed over a wide range of cell and OKT3 MoAb concentrations. 
Addition of 1% to 5% monocytes to highly purified peripheral blood T cells 
resulted in the emergence of proliferation to PHA and to soluble OKT3 MoAb, but 
did not significantly affect levels of growth inhibition by IL-10 in the 
presence of immobilized OKT3 MoAb. Similarly, addition of 10% monocytes to the 
TM11 T-cell clone resulted in the emergence of proliferation in response to 
tetanus toxoid, but did not significantly influence growth inhibition by IL-10 
in the presence of immobilized OKT3 MoAb. When stimulated with immobilized OKT3 
MoAb in the absence of accessory cells, T cells secreted IL-2. Secretion of IL-2 
under these conditions was inhibited by IL-10 (51.5% inhibition). Thus, IL-10 
can directly inhibit growth and IL-2 production in T cells triggered by 
immobilized OKT3 MoAb in the absence of monocytes.

PMID: 8499633 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
