---
pmid: '16474848'
title: ST7-mediated suppression of tumorigenicity of prostate cancer cells is characterized
  by remodeling of the extracellular matrix.
authors:
- Hooi CF
- Blancher C
- Qiu W
- Revet IM
- Williams LH
- Ciavarella ML
- Anderson RL
- Thompson EW
- Connor A
- Phillips WA
- Campbell IG
journal: Oncogene
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1209418
---

# ST7-mediated suppression of tumorigenicity of prostate cancer cells is characterized by remodeling of the extracellular matrix.
**Authors:** Hooi CF, Blancher C, Qiu W, Revet IM, Williams LH, Ciavarella ML, Anderson RL, Thompson EW, Connor A, Phillips WA, Campbell IG
**Journal:** Oncogene (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1209418](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1209418)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2006 Jun 29;25(28):3924-33. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1209418. Epub 2006
Feb  13.

ST7-mediated suppression of tumorigenicity of prostate cancer cells is 
characterized by remodeling of the extracellular matrix.

Hooi CF(1), Blancher C, Qiu W, Revet IM, Williams LH, Ciavarella ML, Anderson 
RL, Thompson EW, Connor A, Phillips WA, Campbell IG.

Author information:
(1)VBCRC Cancer Genetics Laboratory, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, East 
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

Multiple lines of evidence have provided compelling evidence for the existence 
of a tumor suppressor gene (TSG) on chromosome 7q31.1. ST7 may be the target of 
this genetic instability but its designation as a TSG is controversial. In this 
study, we show that, functionally, ST7 behaves as a tumor suppressor in human 
cancer. ST7 suppressed growth of PC-3 prostate cancer cells inoculated 
subcutaneously into severe combined immunodeficient mice, and increased the 
latency of tumor detection from 13 days in control tumors to 23 days. 
Re-expression of ST7 was also associated with suppression of colony formation 
under anchorage-independent conditions in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells and ST7 
mRNA expression was downregulated in 44% of primary breast cancers. Expression 
profiling of PC-3 cells revealed that ST7 predominantly induces changes in genes 
involved in re-modeling the extracellular matrix such as SPARC, IGFBP5 and 
several matrix metalloproteinases. These data indicate that ST7 may mediate 
tumor suppression through modification of the tumor microenvironment.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1209418
PMID: 16474848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
