---
pmid: '31974167'
title: Structure-function analyses of alkylhydroperoxidase D from Streptococcus pneumoniae
  reveal an unusual three-cysteine active site architecture.
authors:
- Meng Y
- Sheen CR
- Magon NJ
- Hampton MB
- Dobson RCJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC7062192
doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.012226
---

# Structure-function analyses of alkylhydroperoxidase D from Streptococcus pneumoniae reveal an unusual three-cysteine active site architecture.
**Authors:** Meng Y, Sheen CR, Magon NJ, Hampton MB, Dobson RCJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.RA119.012226](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA119.012226)
**PMC:** [PMC7062192](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7062192/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2020 Mar 6;295(10):2984-2999. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.012226. Epub
 2020 Jan 23.

Structure-function analyses of alkylhydroperoxidase D from Streptococcus 
pneumoniae reveal an unusual three-cysteine active site architecture.

Meng Y(1), Sheen CR(2), Magon NJ(3), Hampton MB(4), Dobson RCJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Biomolecular Interaction Centre and School of Biological Sciences, University 
of Canterbury, Christchurch 8041, New Zealand.
(2)Callaghan Innovation, University of Canterbury, Christchurch 8041, New 
Zealand.
(3)Centre for Free Radical Research, Department of Pathology and Biomedical 
Science, University of Otago, Christchurch 8011, New Zealand.
(4)Centre for Free Radical Research, Department of Pathology and Biomedical 
Science, University of Otago, Christchurch 8011, New Zealand. Electronic 
address: mark.hampton@otago.ac.nz.
(5)Biomolecular Interaction Centre and School of Biological Sciences, University 
of Canterbury, Christchurch 8041, New Zealand; Department of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, 
University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia. Electronic address: 
renwick.dobson@canterbury.ac.nz.

During aerobic growth, the Gram-positive facultative anaerobe and opportunistic 
human pathogen Streptococcus pneumoniae generates large amounts of hydrogen 
peroxide that can accumulate to millimolar concentrations. The mechanism by 
which this catalase-negative bacterium can withstand endogenous hydrogen 
peroxide is incompletely understood. The enzyme alkylhydroperoxidase D (AhpD) 
has been shown to contribute to pneumococcal virulence and oxidative stress 
responses in vivo We demonstrate here that SpAhpD exhibits weak thiol-dependent 
peroxidase activity and, unlike the previously reported Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis AhpC/D system, SpAhpD does not mediate electron transfer to SpAhpC. 
A 2.3-Å resolution crystal structure revealed several unusual structural 
features, including a three-cysteine active site architecture that is buried in 
a deep pocket, in contrast to the two-cysteine active site found in other AhpD 
enzymes. All single-cysteine SpAhpD variants remained partially active, and 
LC-MS/MS analyses revealed that the third cysteine, Cys-163, formed disulfide 
bonds with either of two cysteines in the canonical Cys-78-X-X-Cys-81 motif. We 
observed that SpAhpD formed a dimeric quaternary structure both in the crystal 
and in solution, and that the highly conserved Asn-76 of the AhpD core motif is 
important for SpAhpD folding. In summary, SpAhpD is a weak peroxidase and does 
not transfer electrons to AhpC, and therefore does not fit existing models of 
bacterial AhpD antioxidant defense mechanisms. We propose that it is unlikely 
that SpAhpD removes peroxides either directly or via AhpC, and that SpAhpD 
cysteine oxidation may act as a redox switch or mediate electron transfer with 
other thiol proteins.

© 2020 Meng et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.012226
PMCID: PMC7062192
PMID: 31974167 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article
