---
pmid: '15340920'
title: 'Glycine N-methyltransferases: a comparison of the crystal structures and kinetic
  properties of recombinant human, mouse and rat enzymes.'
authors:
- Pakhomova S
- Luka Z
- Grohmann S
- Wagner C
- Newcomer ME
journal: Proteins
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/prot.20209
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Glycine N-methyltransferases: a comparison of the crystal structures and kinetic properties of recombinant human, mouse and rat enzymes.
**Authors:** Pakhomova S, Luka Z, Grohmann S, Wagner C, Newcomer ME
**Journal:** Proteins (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1002/prot.20209](https://doi.org/10.1002/prot.20209)

## Abstract

1. Proteins. 2004 Nov 1;57(2):331-7. doi: 10.1002/prot.20209.

Glycine N-methyltransferases: a comparison of the crystal structures and kinetic 
properties of recombinant human, mouse and rat enzymes.

Pakhomova S(1), Luka Z, Grohmann S, Wagner C, Newcomer ME.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, 
Louisiana, USA.

Glycine N-methyltransferases (GNMTs) from three mammalian sources were compared 
with respect to their crystal structures and kinetic parameters. The crystal 
structure for the rat enzyme was published previously. Human and mouse GNMT were 
expressed in Escherichia coli in order to determine their crystal structures. 
Mouse GNMT was crystallized in two crystal forms, a monoclinic form and a 
tetragonal form. Comparison of the three structures reveals subtle differences, 
which may relate to the different kinetic properties of the enzymes. The 
flexible character of several loops surrounding the active site, along with an 
analysis of the active site boundaries, indicates that the observed 
conformations of human and mouse GNMTs are more open than that of the rat 
enzyme. There is an increase in kcat when going from rat to mouse to human, 
suggesting a correlation with the increased flexibility of some structural 
elements of the respective enzymes.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.20209
PMID: 15340920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
