---
pmid: '21205830'
title: A systematic search for endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane-associated RING
  finger proteins identifies Nixin/ZNRF4 as a regulator of calnexin stability and
  ER homeostasis.
authors:
- Neutzner A
- Neutzner M
- Benischke AS
- Ryu SW
- Frank S
- Youle RJ
- Karbowski M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3048745
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.197459
---

# A systematic search for endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane-associated RING finger proteins identifies Nixin/ZNRF4 as a regulator of calnexin stability and ER homeostasis.
**Authors:** Neutzner A, Neutzner M, Benischke AS, Ryu SW, Frank S, Youle RJ, Karbowski M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110.197459](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.197459)
**PMC:** [PMC3048745](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3048745/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Mar 11;286(10):8633-8643. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.197459. Epub
 2011 Jan 4.

A systematic search for endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane-associated RING 
finger proteins identifies Nixin/ZNRF4 as a regulator of calnexin stability and 
ER homeostasis.

Neutzner A(1), Neutzner M(2), Benischke AS(3), Ryu SW(4), Frank S(5), Youle 
RJ(6), Karbowski M(7).

Author information:
(1)From the Biochemistry Section, Surgical Neurological Branch, NINDS, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892,; the Department of Biomedicine, 
and the University Eye Clinic, University Hospital Basel, Hebelstrasse 20, 4031 
Basel, Switzerland,. Electronic address: albert.neutzner@unibas.ch.
(2)the Department of Biomedicine, and the University Eye Clinic, University 
Hospital Basel, Hebelstrasse 20, 4031 Basel, Switzerland,; the Department of 
Neuropathology, Institute of Pathology, University of Basel, Schönbeinstrasse 
40, 4031 Basel, Switzerland.
(3)the Department of Biomedicine, and the University Eye Clinic, University 
Hospital Basel, Hebelstrasse 20, 4031 Basel, Switzerland.
(4)From the Biochemistry Section, Surgical Neurological Branch, NINDS, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892,; the Department of Bio and Brain 
Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon 
305-701, South Korea, and.
(5)the Department of Neuropathology, Institute of Pathology, University of 
Basel, Schönbeinstrasse 40, 4031 Basel, Switzerland.
(6)From the Biochemistry Section, Surgical Neurological Branch, NINDS, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.
(7)From the Biochemistry Section, Surgical Neurological Branch, NINDS, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892,; the Center for Biomedical 
Engineering and Technology and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21201. Electronic 
address: mkarbowski@umaryland.edu.

To identify novel regulators of endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-linked protein 
degradation and ER function, we determined the entire inventory of 
membrane-spanning RING finger E3 ubiquitin ligases localized to the ER. We 
identified 24 ER membrane-anchored ubiquitin ligases and found Nixin/ZNRF4 to be 
central for the regulation of calnexin turnover. Ectopic expression of wild type 
Nixin induced a dramatic down-regulation of the ER-localized chaperone calnexin 
that was prevented by inactivation of the Nixin RING domain. Importantly, Nixin 
physically interacts with calnexin in a glycosylation-independent manner, 
induces calnexin ubiquitination, and p97-dependent degradation, indicating an 
ER-associated degradation-like mechanism of calnexin turnover.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.197459
PMCID: PMC3048745
PMID: 21205830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

To identify novel regulators of endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-linked protein degradation and ER function, we determined the entire inventory of membrane-spanning RING finger E3 ubiquitin ligases localized to the ER. We identified 24 ER membrane-anchored ubiquitin ligases and found Nixin/ZNRF4 to be central for the regulation of calnexin turnover. Ectopic expression of wild type Nixin induced a dramatic down-regulation of the ER-localized chaperone calnexin that was prevented by inactivation of the Nixin RING domain. Importantly, Nixin physically interacts with calnexin in a glycosylation-independent manner, induces calnexin ubiquitination, and p97-dependent degradation, indicating an ER-associated degradation-like mechanism of calnexin turnover.

Introduction

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) 3 is a major cellular site for production, folding, quality control, and distribution of proteins. Many regulatory mechanisms are in place to keep these processes in balance and therefore to ensure cellular fitness and survival, with ubiquitin-dependent protein degradation playing an important part ( 1 ). One major challenge the ER faces is an overload with unfolded or folding proteins. An excess of folding proteins in the ER triggers a cellular response called the unfolded protein response (UPR) ( 2 , 3 ). UPR entails lowering of the protein load by the attenuation of protein translation and the up-regulation of chaperones thereby increasing the protein folding capacity of the cells. If the capacity of UPR is exceeded, the cell utilizes ER-associated degradation (ERAD), a system for the recognition of terminally misfolded proteins and their disposal ( 4 ). Misfolded proteins destined for ERAD are ubiquitinated by the RING domain containing ubiquitin ligases ( 5 ), Hrd1 ( 6 ), and Doa1 ( 7 , 8 ), retrotranslocated across the ER membrane into the cytosol by the AAA-ATPase p97 ( 9 ), and then degraded by the 26 S proteasome.

Upon entry into the ER, most nascent polypeptides are recognized by glycosidases and modified on specific asparagine residues (Asn-Xaa-(Thr/Ser)) with the N -glycan GlcNAc 2 Man 9 Gluc 3 ( 10 ). Core glycosylation of nascent polypeptides decreases their overall hydrophobicity. Trimming of the terminal two glucose residues by glucosidase I allows for binding of the lectins/chaperones calreticulin and calnexin thereby facilitating the proper folding of the newly synthesized protein ( 10 , 11 ).

Although the importance of regulated degradation of ER resident proteins is firmly established, only a small number of RING finger-containing ubiquitin ligases are known to be involved in such processes to date, namely SYVN1/hHrd1 ( 6 , 12 ), AMFR/gp78 ( 13 ), TEB4/MARCH6 ( 14 ), RNF5/Rma1 ( 15 ), RNF77/TRIM13 ( 16 ), and RNF13 ( 17 ). Given the importance of protein metabolism and degradation in the ER and the vast number of ubiquitin ligases encoded in the human genome, we asked whether other ubiquitin ligases are involved in the regulation of ER-related degradation processes.

Based on the assumption that the ER lumen is devoid of E1 and E2 ubiquitination activity and on the fact that all known ubiquitin ligases on the ER possess a RING finger domain, we compiled a list of all human R ING finger-containing proteins with at least one predicted t rans m embrane region (RTM). We found that 24 of 49 analyzed RTMs localize to the ER, and we uncovered a novel regulatory mechanism for ER protein folding via the ubiquitin-dependent regulation of the steady state levels of the chaperone calnexin by the RTM Nixin/ZNRF4.

RESULTS

The human genome encodes several hundred putative E3 ubiquitin ligases belonging to different protein families such as RING finger and HECT domain-containing proteins ( 21 , 22 ). RING finger domain-containing ubiquitin ligases, encoded by more than 300 genes, form the largest of these protein families. RING fingers are highly conserved zinc-coordinating domains between 40 and 60 amino acids in length. These domains are thought to provide a platform for the binding of ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes to their substrates, thereby conferring substrate specificity to the ubiquitination machinery ( 23 ). Many RING finger ubiquitin ligases contain membrane-spanning domains consistent with a role in the regulation of membrane- and organelle-related processes.
