---
pmid: '11845407'
title: Mutations in a novel factor, glomulin, are responsible for glomuvenous malformations
  ("glomangiomas").
authors:
- Brouillard P
- Boon LM
- Mulliken JB
- Enjolras O
- Ghassibé M
- Warman ML
- Tan OT
- Olsen BR
- Vikkula M
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2002'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC379115
doi: 10.1086/339492
---

# Mutations in a novel factor, glomulin, are responsible for glomuvenous malformations ("glomangiomas").
**Authors:** Brouillard P, Boon LM, Mulliken JB, Enjolras O, Ghassibé M, Warman ML, Tan OT, Olsen BR, Vikkula M
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1086/339492](https://doi.org/10.1086/339492)
**PMC:** [PMC379115](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC379115/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2002 Apr;70(4):866-74. doi: 10.1086/339492. Epub 2002 Feb 13.

Mutations in a novel factor, glomulin, are responsible for glomuvenous 
malformations ("glomangiomas").

Brouillard P(1), Boon LM, Mulliken JB, Enjolras O, Ghassibé M, Warman ML, Tan 
OT, Olsen BR, Vikkula M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, Christian de Duve Institute of 
Cellular Pathology and Université catholique de Louvain, Avenue Hippocrate 
74(+5), B-1200 Brussels, Belgium.

Glomuvenous malformations (GVMs) are cutaneous venous lesions characterized by 
the presence of smooth-muscle--like glomus cells in the media surrounding 
distended vascular lumens. We have shown that heritable GVMs link to a 4--6-cM 
region in chromosome 1p21-22. We also identified linkage disequilibrium that 
allowed a narrowing of this VMGLOM locus to 1.48 Mb. Herein, we report the 
identification of the mutated gene, glomulin, localized on the basis of the YAC 
and PAC maps. An incomplete cDNA sequence for glomulin had previously been 
designated "FAP48," for "FKBP-associated protein of 48 kD." The complete cDNA 
for glomulin contains an open reading frame of 1,785 nt encoding a predicted 
protein of 68 kD. The gene consists of 19 exons in which we identified 14 
different germline mutations in patients with GVM. In addition, we found a 
somatic "second hit" mutation in affected tissue of a patient with an inherited 
genomic deletion. Since all but one of the mutations result in premature stop 
codons, and since the localized nature of the lesions could be explained by 
Knudson's two-hit model, GVMs are likely caused by complete loss of function of 
glomulin. The abnormal phenotype of vascular smooth-muscle cells (VSMCs) in GVMs 
suggests that glomulin plays an important role in differentiation of these 
cells--and, thereby, in vascular morphogenesis--especially in cutaneous veins.

DOI: 10.1086/339492
PMCID: PMC379115
PMID: 11845407 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Glomuvenous malformations (GVMs) are cutaneous venous lesions characterized by the presence of smooth-muscle–like glomus cells in the media surrounding distended vascular lumens. We have shown that heritable GVMs link to a 4–6-cM region in chromosome 1p21-22. We also identified linkage disequilibrium that allowed a narrowing of this VMGLOM locus to 1.48 Mb. Herein, we report the identification of the mutated gene, glomulin, localized on the basis of the YAC and PAC maps. An incomplete cDNA sequence for glomulin had previously been designated “ FAP48 ,” for “ F KBP- a ssociated p rotein of 48 kD.” The complete cDNA for glomulin contains an open reading frame of 1,785 nt encoding a predicted protein of 68 kD. The gene consists of 19 exons in which we identified 14 different germline mutations in patients with GVM. In addition, we found a somatic “second hit” mutation in affected tissue of a patient with an inherited genomic deletion. Since all but one of the mutations result in premature stop codons, and since the localized nature of the lesions could be explained by Knudson's two-hit model, GVMs are likely caused by complete loss of function of glomulin. The abnormal phenotype of vascular smooth-muscle cells (VSMCs) in GVMs suggests that glomulin plays an important role in differentiation of these cells—and, thereby, in vascular morphogenesis—especially in cutaneous veins.

Introduction

Venous malformations (VMs) are localized defects of vascular morphogenesis that present as multiple bluish-purple lesions, mainly in skin and mucosa. The lesions can be single or multiple, varying in size from a small blue spot to an extensive abnormality (Enjolras and Mulliken 1996 ). They are often present at birth and grow proportionally with the patient (Mulliken 1988 ). Histologically, they show enlarged endothelial-lined veinlike channels with defects in the smooth-muscle cell (SMC) layer (Vikkula et al. 1996 ). These lesions are commonly seen in centers that specialize in treatment of vascular anomalies. Most appear to be sporadic, but they can also be dominantly inherited (Boon et al. 1994 ; Gallione et al. 1995 ; Vikkula et al. 1996 ). In a previous study (Vikkula et al. 1996 ), we identified the endothelial-specific angiopoietin receptor TIE2/TEK, located on 9p21, as the cause of familial mucocutaneous VMs (VMCMs [MIM 600195 ]).

Glomuvenous malformations (GVMs [MIM 138000 ], also known as “venous malformations with glomus cells,” or “glomangiomas”) are similar to VMs (Gorlin et al. 1960 ; Gupta et al. 1965 ; Rudolph 1993 ; Boon et al. 1999 ; Calvert et al. 1999 ; Vikkula et al. 2001 ), yet, clinically, they are distinguishable: they have a cobblestone appearance ( fig. 1 A and B ), they have a consistency harder than that of VMs, and they are painful on palpation (authors' unpublished data). Histologically, GVMs are distinguished by the presence of pathognomonic rounded cells—glomus cells—around the distended veinlike channels ( fig. 1 C – F ) (Rudolph 1993 ; Vikkula et al. 1998 ; Boon et al. 1999 ). The term “glomus” (Latin for “ball”) stems from the morphologically similar contractile cells of the Sucquet-Hoyer arteriovenous anastomoses in glomus bodies that are involved in cutaneous thermoregulation (Pepper and Lantis 1977 ). Glomus cells in GVMs appear to be incompletely or improperly differentiated vascular SMCs (VSMCs), since they stain positively for SMC α-actin ( fig. 1 F ) and vimentin but are negative for desmin, von Willebrand factor, and S-100 (Kato et al. 1990 ). In addition, on electron microscopy, glomus cells show smooth-muscle myofibrils and “dense bodies” (Goodman and Abele 1971 ).

In a previous study, we showed, in five families, that GVMs cosegregate with a 4–6-cM locus, VMGLOM, on chromosome 1p21-22 (Boon et al. 1999 ), and we excluded three candidate genes in the region: DR1 (encoding depressor of trancription 1), TGFBR3 (encoding transforming growth factor-β receptor, type 3), and TFA (encoding tissue factor). Four other families, with linkage to a 24-cM region overlapping the VMGLOM locus, were independently reported by another group (Calvert et al. 2001 ). To localize new STSs and ESTs, we generated YAC- and PAC-based physical maps (Brouillard et al. 2000 ). In seven additional families with linkage to the region, we performed haplotype analysis and identified linkage disequilibrium that narrowed the area to <1.48 Mb (Irrthum et al. 2001 ). Using STSs, we mapped three new positional candidate genes to this region: EVI5 (the proto-oncogene), GFI1 (the growth-factor–independence gene), and RPL5 (encoding ribosomal protein L5) (Brouillard et al. 2000 ). Moreover, FAP48 ( GenBank accession number U73704 ), which encodes an FKBP-associated protein of 48 kD, was localized to the region on the basis of the sequence obtained from one end of clone 775d17 that was used for construction of the PAC map. Since FAP48 was easily amplifiable from lymphoblast RNA, it was screened first. We identified several mutations but, also, important discrepancies versus the published FAP48 sequence. Therefore, we propose to call this gene “glomulin.”

Discussion

The data that have been presented clearly demonstrate that mutations in glomulin are the cause of GVMs. Since the first truncating mutation occurs as early as at the first 31 bp of coding sequence, the disease is very likely due to loss of glomulin function; however, the expressivity of the phenotype is variable for the same mutation, and not all individuals harboring a mutation are affected ( fig. 2 ). Thus, haploinsufficiency is not sufficient to explain the ethiopathogenesis of GVMs. In fact, we have shown that a mutation on the second allele is needed, suggesting that GVM lesions are caused by complete, localized loss of glomulin function. The defined nature and the variability, in both number and size, of the lesions (authors' unpublished data) could be explained by the frequency and the time of appearance of somatic mutations; however, additional tissue samples must be collected in order to prove this promising hypothesis. Indeed, cellular heterogeneity of GVMs may be important for the detection of somatic mutation. The lesion in family Ad contained a high number of glomus cells ( fig. 1 D ), which may explain the fact that, to date, a somatic mutation has been identified only in that tissue. It also remains to be revealed why, despite the ubiquitous tissue distribution of glomulin, only cutaneous lesions are seen in patients with GVMs.

Since only individuals who reported having cutaneous lesions were examined, it could be that many of the unaffected carriers have a small, asymptomatic lesion. However, since it is known that lesions may not be obvious at birth and may appear later in life (Enjolras and Mulliken 1996 ) and that the condition may express as only a single tiny blue lesion anywhere on the body (Boon et al. 1999 ), this could explain the unaffected status of the younger carriers, such as Sch-1020 (examined at age 1 year), Bln-1070 (examined at age 2 years), Blo-52 (examined at age 12 years), Blo-51 (examined at age 14 years), Lml-223 (examined at age 14 years), and Chn-201 (examined at age 18 years).

To date, little is known about glomulin. Since no paralogues were identified on the basis of database searches, glomulin seems to be unique and not a member of a family of homologous genes. Glomulin seems to be present only in higher organisms, such as vertebrates and the fly. One possible partial homologue in humans is FAP48; however, in the tested cDNAs, we have not found any transcript specific for this protein, nor have we found any FAP48-specific EST in the databases. Since mutations in the glomulin gene result in GVMs regardless of whether they would affect the coding sequence of FAP48, the development of GVMs is independent of FAP48.

The primary cellular defect in GVMs is the presence of the SMC-like glomus cells. As mesenchymal cells differentiate and acquire an elongated cell shape, they express markers such as SMC α-actin, desmin, calponin, SM22, and SM myosin (Yang et al. 1999 ). Glomus cells express many SMC markers, and, as shown by electron microscopy, they display a cellular structure reminiscent of that of SMCs (Goodman and Abele 1971 ; Miettinen et al. 1983 ). However, glomus cells are round or polygonal (Goodman and Abele 1971 ; Kato et al. 1990 ). In addition, whereas SMCs of normal veins express desmin (Nanaev et al. 1991 ), glomus cells do not (Miettinen et al. 1983 ). This partial expression of VSMC markers, associated with an abnormal morphology and mural organization, suggests that the important role of glomulin is played at a late stage in VSMC maturation.

Although the cell type(s) expressing glomulin remain(s) to be defined, loss of function seems to be the cause of the specific VSMC phenotype. This effect can be direct, since we found that VSMCs express glomulin. Furthermore, the glomulin gene contains a CArG-like element in its promoter (i.e., one A/T is replaced by a G or a C). The same motif is present in SMC-expressed genes, such as α-actin and myosin heavy chains (Hill and Treisman 1995 ; Miano et al. 2000 ). Thus, glomulin could have a cell-type–specific expression pattern that would explain why mutations in glomulin affect only VSMCs.

If glomulin has interactions similar to those shown for FAP48 (a truncated form of glomulin), it is interesting to note that, in vitro and in vivo, in a yeast-two-hybrid system, FAP48 interacts with FKBP59 and FKBP12 (Chambraud et al. 1996 ). FKBP12 is known to bind to—and, thereby, inhibit signaling through—the TGFβ type I receptor (TβRI) (Chen et al. 1997 ), and TGFβ signaling is important for both SMC maturation and expression of SMC cytoskeletal markers. Indeed, TβRI-deficient murine embryos lack SMCs around endothelial-lined yolk-sac vessels (Larsson et al. 2001 ), and, when endothelial cells and SMCs are cocultured with an antibody to TGFβ, SMC differentiation does not occur (Hirschi et al. 1998 ). Glomulin, like FAP48, may function to repress this inhibition. Accordingly, complete loss of glomulin function would result in increased binding of FKBP12 to TGFβ receptors, inhibition of TGFβ signaling, altered expression of SMC proteins such as desmin, and altered differentiation of VSMCs.

In summary, the data that have been presented here demonstrate that a novel gene, glomulin, plays a role in normal VSMC differentiation, since mutations in this gene are responsible for the presence of SMC-like glomus cells in inherited GVMs (“glomangiomas”). Developmental studies of normal and glomulin-deficient mice, as well as functional studies of resected GVM tissues and of in vitro expression systems are needed to get further insights into the role and function of glomulin in both vascular morphogenesis and vascular pathologies.
