---
pmid: '30692130'
title: The E3 ligase Highwire promotes synaptic transmission by targeting the NAD-synthesizing
  enzyme dNmnat.
authors:
- Russo A
- Goel P
- Brace EJ
- Buser C
- Dickman D
- DiAntonio A
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6399608
doi: 10.15252/embr.201846975
---

# The E3 ligase Highwire promotes synaptic transmission by targeting the NAD-synthesizing enzyme dNmnat.
**Authors:** Russo A, Goel P, Brace EJ, Buser C, Dickman D, DiAntonio A
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2019)
**DOI:** [10.15252/embr.201846975](https://doi.org/10.15252/embr.201846975)
**PMC:** [PMC6399608](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6399608/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2019 Mar;20(3):e46975. doi: 10.15252/embr.201846975. Epub 2019 Jan
28.

The E3 ligase Highwire promotes synaptic transmission by targeting the 
NAD-synthesizing enzyme dNmnat.

Russo A(1), Goel P(2), Brace EJ(1), Buser C(3), Dickman D(2), DiAntonio A(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University in St. Louis 
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(2)Department of Neurobiology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA.
(3)Oak Crest Institute of Science, Monrovia, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University in St. Louis 
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA diantonio@wustl.edu.

The ubiquitin ligase Highwire restrains synaptic growth and promotes evoked 
neurotransmission at NMJ synapses in Drosophila Highwire regulates synaptic 
morphology by downregulating the MAP3K Wallenda, but excess Wallenda signaling 
does not account for the decreased presynaptic release observed in highwire 
mutants. Hence, Highwire likely has a second substrate that inhibits 
neurotransmission. Highwire targets the NAD+ biosynthetic and axoprotective 
enzyme dNmnat to regulate axonal injury responses. dNmnat localizes to synapses 
and interacts with the active zone protein Bruchpilot, leading us to hypothesize 
that Highwire promotes evoked release by downregulating dNmnat. Here, we show 
that excess dNmnat is necessary in highwire mutants and sufficient in wild-type 
larvae to reduce quantal content, likely via disruption of active zone 
ultrastructure. Catalytically active dNmnat is required to drive defects in 
evoked release, and depletion of a second NAD+ synthesizing enzyme is sufficient 
to suppress these defects in highwire mutants, suggesting that excess NAD+ 
biosynthesis is the mechanism inhibiting neurotransmission. Thus, Highwire 
downregulates dNmnat to promote evoked synaptic release, suggesting that 
Highwire balances the axoprotective and synapse-inhibitory functions of dNmnat.

© 2019 The Authors.

DOI: 10.15252/embr.201846975
PMCID: PMC6399608
PMID: 30692130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
