---
pmid: '15240819'
title: The growth-regulatory protein HCRP1/hVps37A is a subunit of mammalian ESCRT-I
  and mediates receptor down-regulation.
authors:
- Bache KG
- Slagsvold T
- Cabezas A
- Rosendal KR
- Raiborg C
- Stenmark H
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC515363
doi: 10.1091/mbc.e04-03-0250
---

# The growth-regulatory protein HCRP1/hVps37A is a subunit of mammalian ESCRT-I and mediates receptor down-regulation.
**Authors:** Bache KG, Slagsvold T, Cabezas A, Rosendal KR, Raiborg C, Stenmark H
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.e04-03-0250](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.e04-03-0250)
**PMC:** [PMC515363](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC515363/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Cell. 2004 Sep;15(9):4337-46. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e04-03-0250. Epub 2004
 Jul 7.

The growth-regulatory protein HCRP1/hVps37A is a subunit of mammalian ESCRT-I 
and mediates receptor down-regulation.

Bache KG(1), Slagsvold T, Cabezas A, Rosendal KR, Raiborg C, Stenmark H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Montebello, N-0310 
Oslo, Norway.

The biogenesis of multivesicular bodies and endosomal sorting of membrane cargo 
are driven forward by the endosomal sorting complexes required for transport, 
ESCRT-I, -II, and -III. ESCRT-I is characterized in yeast as a complex 
consisting of Vps23, Vps28, and Vps37. Whereas mammalian homologues of Vps23 and 
Vps28 (named Tsg101 and hVps28, respectively) have been identified and 
characterized, a mammalian counterpart of Vps37 has not yet been identified. 
Here, we show that a regulator of proliferation, hepatocellular carcinoma 
related protein 1 (HCRP1), interacts with Tsg101, hVps28, and their upstream 
regulator Hrs. The ability of HCRP1 (which we assign the alternative name 
hVps37A) to interact with Tsg101 is conferred by its mod(r) domain and is shared 
with hVps37B and hVps37C, two other mod(r) domain-containing proteins. HCRP1 
cofractionates with Tsg101 and hVps28 by size exclusion chromatography and 
colocalizes with hVps28 on LAMP1-positive endosomes. Whereas depletion of Tsg101 
by siRNA reduces cellular levels of both hVps28 and HCRP1, depletion of HCRP1 
has no effect on Tsg101 or hVps28. Nevertheless, HCRP1 depletion strongly 
retards epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor degradation. Together, these 
results indicate that HCRP1 is a subunit of mammalian ESCRT-I and that its 
function is essential for lysosomal sorting of EGF receptors.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e04-03-0250
PMCID: PMC515363
PMID: 15240819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
