---
pmid: '20098414'
title: Animal cryptochromes mediate magnetoreception by an unconventional photochemical
  mechanism.
authors:
- Gegear RJ
- Foley LE
- Casselman A
- Reppert SM
journal: Nature
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2820607
doi: 10.1038/nature08719
---

# Animal cryptochromes mediate magnetoreception by an unconventional photochemical mechanism.
**Authors:** Gegear RJ, Foley LE, Casselman A, Reppert SM
**Journal:** Nature (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature08719](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature08719)
**PMC:** [PMC2820607](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2820607/)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2010 Feb 11;463(7282):804-7. doi: 10.1038/nature08719. Epub 2010 Jan
24.

Animal cryptochromes mediate magnetoreception by an unconventional photochemical 
mechanism.

Gegear RJ(1), Foley LE, Casselman A, Reppert SM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 364 
Plantation Street, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA. 
robert.gegear@umassmed.edu

Understanding the biophysical basis of animal magnetoreception has been one of 
the greatest challenges in sensory biology. Recently it was discovered that the 
light-dependent magnetic sense of Drosophila melanogaster is mediated by the 
ultraviolet (UV)-A/blue light photoreceptor cryptochrome (Cry). Here we show, 
using a transgenic approach, that the photoreceptive, Drosophila-like type 1 Cry 
and the transcriptionally repressive, vertebrate-like type 2 Cry of the monarch 
butterfly (Danaus plexippus) can both function in the magnetoreception system of 
Drosophila and require UV-A/blue light (wavelength below 420 nm) to do so. The 
lack of magnetic responses for both Cry types at wavelengths above 420 nm does 
not fit the widely held view that tryptophan triad-generated radical pairs 
mediate the ability of Cry to sense a magnetic field. We bolster this assessment 
by using a mutant form of Drosophila and monarch type 1 Cry and confirm that the 
tryptophan triad pathway is not crucial in magnetic transduction. Together, 
these results suggest that animal Crys mediate light-dependent magnetoreception 
through an unconventional photochemical mechanism. This work emphasizes the 
utility of Drosophila transgenesis for elucidating the precise mechanisms of 
Cry-mediated magnetosensitivity in insects and also in vertebrates such as 
migrating birds.

DOI: 10.1038/nature08719
PMCID: PMC2820607
PMID: 20098414 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
