---
pmid: '18042364'
title: TSG-6 binds via its CUB_C domain to the cell-binding domain of fibronectin
  and increases fibronectin matrix assembly.
authors:
- Kuznetsova SA
- Mahoney DJ
- Martin-Manso G
- Ali T
- Nentwich HA
- Sipes JM
- Zeng B
- Vogel T
- Day AJ
- Roberts DD
journal: Matrix Biol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2384166
doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2007.10.003
---

# TSG-6 binds via its CUB_C domain to the cell-binding domain of fibronectin and increases fibronectin matrix assembly.
**Authors:** Kuznetsova SA, Mahoney DJ, Martin-Manso G, Ali T, Nentwich HA, Sipes JM, Zeng B, Vogel T, Day AJ, Roberts DD
**Journal:** Matrix Biol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.matbio.2007.10.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matbio.2007.10.003)
**PMC:** [PMC2384166](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2384166/)

## Abstract

1. Matrix Biol. 2008 Apr;27(3):201-10. doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2007.10.003. Epub
2007  Oct 25.

TSG-6 binds via its CUB_C domain to the cell-binding domain of fibronectin and 
increases fibronectin matrix assembly.

Kuznetsova SA(1), Mahoney DJ, Martin-Manso G, Ali T, Nentwich HA, Sipes JM, Zeng 
B, Vogel T, Day AJ, Roberts DD.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Pathology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer 
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, United States.

Human plasma fibronectin binds with high affinity to the inflammation-induced 
secreted protein TSG-6. Fibronectin binds to the CUB_C domain of TSG-6 but not 
to its Link module. TSG-6 can thus act as a bridging molecule to facilitate 
fibronectin association with the TSG-6 Link module ligand thrombospondin-1. 
Fibronectin binding to TSG-6 is divalent cation-independent and is conserved in 
cellular fibronectins. Based on competition binding studies using recombinant 
and proteolytic fragments of fibronectin, TSG-6 binding localizes to type III 
repeats 9-14 of fibronectin. This region of fibronectin contains the Arg-Gly-Asp 
sequence recognized by alpha5beta1 integrin, but deletion of that sequence does 
not prevent TSG-6 binding, and TSG-6 does not inhibit cell adhesion on 
fibronectin substrates mediated by this integrin. This region of fibronectin is 
also involved in fibronectin matrix assembly, and addition of TSG-6 enhances 
exogenous and endogenous fibronectin matrix assembly by human fibroblasts. 
Therefore, TSG-6 is a high affinity ligand that can mediate fibronectin 
interactions with other matrix components and modulate some interactions of 
fibronectin with cells.

DOI: 10.1016/j.matbio.2007.10.003
PMCID: PMC2384166
PMID: 18042364 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Human plasma fibronectin binds with high affinity to the inflammation-induced secreted protein TSG-6. Fibronectin binds to the CUB_C domain of TSG-6 but not to its Link module. TSG-6 can thus act as a bridging molecule to facilitate fibronectin association with the TSG-6 Link module ligand thrombospondin-1. Fibronectin binding to TSG-6 is divalent cation-independent and is conserved in cellular fibronectins. Based on competition binding studies using recombinant and proteolytic fragments of fibronectin, TSG-6 binding localizes to type III repeats 9–14 of fibronectin. This region of fibronectin contains the Arg-Gly-Asp sequence recognized by α5β1 integrin, but deletion of that sequence does not prevent TSG-6 binding, and TSG-6 does not inhibit cell adhesion on fibronectin substrates mediated by this integrin. This region of fibronectin is also involved in fibronectin matrix assembly, and addition of TSG-6 enhances exogenous and endogenous fibronectin matrix assembly by human fibroblasts. Therefore, TSG-6 is a high affinity ligand that can mediate fibronectin interactions with other matrix components and modulate some interactions of fibronectin with cells.

1. Introduction

Tumor necrosis factor-stimulated gene 6 (TSG-6) is a ~35 kDa secreted protein that is produced during inflammation and related processes. TSG-6 has anti-inflammatory activity and protects joint tissues from destruction in in vivo models ( Wisniewski et al. , 1996 ; Milner and Day, 2003 ; Szanto et al. , 2004 ; Milner et al. , 2006 ). TSG-6 is also expressed in the ovary during ovulation and plays an important role in female fertility by regulating cumulus cell-oocyte complex expansion ( Fulop et al. , 2003 ; Ochsner et al. , 2003 ). The protein consists mainly of contiguous Link and CUB (complement component Clr/Cls, Uegf, and bone morphogenetic protein 1) domains. The Link module contains a hyaluronan-binding site and also interacts with heparin/heparan sulfate and thrombospondins-1 and -2 ( Blundell et al. , 2005 ; Kuznetsova et al. , 2005 ; Mahoney et al. , 2005 ). Interaction with the Link module of TSG-6 is mediated by the N-modules of thrombospondin-1, which also recognize the Link module-containing domains of versican and aggrecan ( Kuznetsova et al. , 2006 ). TSG-6 is a catalyst and cofactor in the covalent transfer of the heavy chains (HC) of inter-α-trypsin inhibitor onto a hyaluronan acceptor ( Rugg et al. , 2005 ). Thrombospondin-1 enhances the initial covalent modification of inter-α-trypsin inhibitor by TSG-6 (i.e., HC-TSG-6 complex formation) and transfer of HC to hyaluronan, suggesting a physiological function of thrombospondin-1 binding to TSG-6 in regulation of hyaluronan metabolism at sites of inflammation ( Kuznetsova et al. , 2005 ).

To date, no ligands have been identified that bind to the TSG-6 CUB module. Paralogous CUB modules in other proteins have been implicated in protein-protein and protein-carbohydrate interactions ( Bork and Beckmann, 1993 ; Solis et al. , 1998 ; Sieron et al. , 2000 ).

While characterizing TSG-6 interactions with thrombospondin-1, we tested several extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins as controls and unexpectedly found that TSG-6 interacts avidly with fibronectin (FN). FN is a prominent component of ECM and a major circulating protein in plasma that regulates a variety of cellular activities through direct interactions with cell surface integrin and proteoglycan receptors ( Mao and Schwarzbauer, 2005 ). Here we demonstrate that the CUB_C domain of TSG-6 (comprised of the CUB module and C-terminal segment) interacts with the cell- and heparin-binding domains of FN. FN is synthesized by many adherent cells, some of which assemble it into a fibrillar network ( Mao and Schwarzbauer, 2005 ). The assembly process is integrin-dependent, and FN-integrin interactions initiate a step-wise process involving conformational changes that expose FN-binding sites and promote the intermolecular interactions needed for fibril formation ( Schwarzbauer and Sechler, 1999 ). We further show that TSG-6 binding enhances FN fibril assembly by cultured human fibroblasts. These results provide evidence for an additional level of control of FN matrix assembly under conditions where TSG-6 is present.

3. Discussion

We previously showed that TSG-6 specifically interacts with N-modules of thrombospondin-1 and to a lesser extent with thrombospondin-2, two transient components of ECM ( Kuznetsova et al. , 2005 ). In the present study we addressed the possibility that TSG-6 might interact with other components of ECM and thereby modulate ECM-dependent regulation of cell behavior. FN is an abundant and ubiquitous plasma and ECM component that is organized into a fibrillar network by some cell types through direct interactions with cell surface receptors ( Mao and Schwarzbauer, 2005 ; Midwood et al. , 2006 ). This study demonstrates that TSG-6 binds human plasma and cellular FN. FN was found to directly interact with full-length TSG-6 protein and its CUB_C domain with high affinity, whereas it did not bind avidly to the isolated Link domain of TSG-6.

Inhibition studies using recombinant and proteolytic fragments of FN localized TSG-6 binding to the central region of FN in its type 3 repeats, which contains integrin and heparin-binding sites. Since this domain of FN is required for the initial steps of FN matrix assembly ( Midwood et al. , 2006 ), effects of TSG-6 on the formation of FN fibrils were investigated. We found that TSG-6 enhances FN fibril formation mediated by human Hs68 fibroblasts. Furthermore, TSG-6 is incorporated into the detergent-insoluble ECM of fibroblasts and co-localizes with FN (data not shown). Therefore, TSG-6 may interact with FN in the ECM surrounding cultured human fibroblasts. Such binding would target TSG-6 deposition into fibrillar FN and appears to enhance FN matrix assembly.

Interactions of FN with both α5β1 integrin and syndecan-4 are important for fibrillogenesis ( Midwood et al. , 2006 ). Because the Link module of TSG-6 binds avidly to glycosaminoglycans (e.g., heparan sulfate ( Mahoney et al. , 2005 )), TSG-6 may facilitate FN fibrillogenesis either by directly engaging the glycosaminoglycans of syndecan-4 or by facilitating syndecan-4 binding to FN. Alternatively, the enhanced integrin-dependent adhesion on a FN substrate that we observed in the presence of TSG-6 could enhance FN fibrillogenesis by promoting the integrin function in this process ( Clark et al. , 2005 ; Mao and Schwarzbauer, 2005 ). However, latter is less likely because Link_TSG-6 enhances adhesion on immobilized FN but does not enhance fibrillogenesis.

The Link module of TSG-6 interacts with hyaluronan, chondroitin-4-sulfate, dermatan sulfate, heparin/heparan sulfate, aggrecan, versican, pentraxin-3, thrombospondin-1 and inter-α-trypsin inhibitor ( Milner and Day, 2003 ; Kuznetsova et al. , 2005 ; Kuznetsova et al. , 2006 ; Milner et al. , 2006 ). FN is the first known ligand for TSG-6 that does not bind within the Link module domain, but rather associates with the CUB_C domain, i.e. the C-terminal half of the protein. Our data indicates that at least one of these Link module ligands, thrombospondin-1, can form a ternary complex where TSG-6 acts as bridging molecule between thrombospondin-1 and FN. This resembles the bridging function of versican to mediate thrombospondin-1 association with elastin-containing microfibrils on the surface of poly-I:C-stimulated vascular smooth muscle cells ( Kuznetsova et al. , 2006 ). Thus, TSG-6 can serve to increase FN association with at least one ligand of the TSG-6 Link module. Further studies are needed to determine whether this function generalizes to other TSG-6 ligands that interact with the Link module. Additional work is also required to investigate whether binding of TSG-6 alters the conformation of FN or its interactions with other ECM or cell surface receptors other than α5β1 integrin.

TSG-6 is a regulated component of ECM that is induced under specific physiological and pathological conditions ( Milner and Day, 2003 ; Milner et al. , 2006 ). This raises the question of whether the FN binding activities of TSG-6 might play important roles in modulating fibrillar FN assembly or other ECM structures in inflammatory conditions or during ovulation. Considering the biological significance of ECM in regulating the compartmentalization of tissues into functional units, the possibility that TSG-6 modulates additional aspects of ECM structure and function merits further investigation.
