---
pmid: '24862572'
title: Mammalian microtubule P-body dynamics are mediated by nesprin-1.
authors:
- Rajgor D
- Mellad JA
- Soong D
- Rattner JB
- Fritzler MJ
- Shanahan CM
journal: J Cell Biol
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4033771
doi: 10.1083/jcb.201306076
---

# Mammalian microtubule P-body dynamics are mediated by nesprin-1.
**Authors:** Rajgor D, Mellad JA, Soong D, Rattner JB, Fritzler MJ, Shanahan CM
**Journal:** J Cell Biol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1083/jcb.201306076](https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201306076)
**PMC:** [PMC4033771](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4033771/)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Biol. 2014 May 26;205(4):457-75. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201306076.

Mammalian microtubule P-body dynamics are mediated by nesprin-1.

Rajgor D(1), Mellad JA(1), Soong D(1), Rattner JB(2), Fritzler MJ(2), Shanahan 
CM(3).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Division, BHF Centre of Excellence, James Black Centre, King's 
College London, London SE5 9NU, England, UK.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary, 
Calgary T2N 4N1, Alberta, Canada.
(3)Cardiovascular Division, BHF Centre of Excellence, James Black Centre, King's 
College London, London SE5 9NU, England, UK cathy.shanahan@kcl.ac.uk.

Nesprins are a multi-isomeric family of spectrin-repeat (SR) proteins, 
predominantly known as nuclear envelope scaffolds. However, isoforms that 
function beyond the nuclear envelope remain poorly examined. Here, we 
characterize p50(Nesp1), a 50-kD isoform that localizes to processing bodies 
(PBs), where it acts as a microtubule-associated protein capable of linking mRNP 
complexes to microtubules. Overexpression of dominant-negative p50(Nesp1) caused 
Rck/p54, but not GW182, displacement from microtubules, resulting in reduced PB 
movement and cross talk with stress granules (SGs). These cells disassembled 
canonical SGs induced by sodium arsenite, but not those induced by hydrogen 
peroxide, leading to cell death and revealing PB-microtubule attachment is 
required for hydrogen peroxide-induced SG anti-apoptotic functions. Furthermore, 
p50(Nesp1) was required for miRNA-mediated silencing and interacted with core 
miRISC silencers Ago2 and Rck/p54 in an RNA-dependent manner and with GW182 in a 
microtubule-dependent manner. These data identify p50(Nesp1) as a 
multi-functional PB component and microtubule scaffold necessary for RNA granule 
dynamics and provides evidence for PB and SG micro-heterogeneity.

© 2014 Rajgor et al.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.201306076
PMCID: PMC4033771
PMID: 24862572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
