---
pmid: '20870719'
title: Methylation of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor by SMYD2.
authors:
- Saddic LA
- West LE
- Aslanian A
- Yates JR 3rd
- Rubin SM
- Gozani O
- Sage J
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2988378
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.137612
---

# Methylation of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor by SMYD2.
**Authors:** Saddic LA, West LE, Aslanian A, Yates JR 3rd, Rubin SM, Gozani O, Sage J
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110.137612](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.137612)
**PMC:** [PMC2988378](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2988378/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Nov 26;285(48):37733-40. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.137612. Epub 
2010 Sep 24.

Methylation of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor by SMYD2.

Saddic LA(1), West LE, Aslanian A, Yates JR 3rd, Rubin SM, Gozani O, Sage J.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pediatrics, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, 
USA.

The retinoblastoma tumor suppressor (RB) is a central cell cycle regulator and 
tumor suppressor. RB cellular functions are known to be regulated by a diversity 
of post-translational modifications such as phosphorylation and acetylation, 
raising the possibility that RB may also be methylated in cells. Here we 
demonstrate that RB can be methylated by SMYD2 at lysine 860, a highly conserved 
and novel site of modification. This methylation event occurs in vitro and in 
cells, and it is regulated during cell cycle progression, cellular 
differentiation, and in response to DNA damage. Furthermore, we show that RB 
monomethylation at lysine 860 provides a direct binding site for the 
methyl-binding domain of the transcriptional repressor L3MBTL1. These results 
support the idea that a code of post-translational modifications exists for RB 
and helps guide its functions in mammalian cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.137612
PMCID: PMC2988378
PMID: 20870719 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
