---
pmid: '11940579'
title: Insulin-like growth factor-binding protein-3 activates a phosphotyrosine phosphatase.
  Effects on the insulin-like growth factor signaling pathway.
authors:
- Ricort JM
- Binoux M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M200439200
---

# Insulin-like growth factor-binding protein-3 activates a phosphotyrosine phosphatase. Effects on the insulin-like growth factor signaling pathway.
**Authors:** Ricort JM, Binoux M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M200439200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M200439200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 31;277(22):19448-54. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M200439200. Epub 
2002 Apr 8.

Insulin-like growth factor-binding protein-3 activates a phosphotyrosine 
phosphatase. Effects on the insulin-like growth factor signaling pathway.

Ricort JM(1), Binoux M.

Author information:
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité 515, 
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Université Paris VI, Hôpital 
Saint-Antoine, 184 rue du Faubourg Saint-Antoine, 75571 Paris CEDEX 12, France. 
ricort@st-antoine.inserm.fr

The proliferative action of insulin-like growth factors (IGF-I and -II) is 
mediated via the type I IGF receptor (IGF-IR) and is modulated by their 
association with high affinity binding proteins, IGFBP-1 to -6. We recently 
found that, in addition to its ability to bind IGFs, IGFBP-3 also inhibits 
IGF-IR activation independently of IGF binding and without interacting directly 
with IGF-IR. Here, we show that IGFBP-3 is capable of blocking the signal 
triggered by IGFs. Breast carcinoma-derived cells (MCF-7) were stimulated by 
des(1-3)IGF-I or [Gln(3),Ala(4),Tyr(15),Leu(16)]IGF-I, two IGF analogues with 
intact affinity for IGF-IR, but with weak or virtually no affinity for IGFBPs, 
then incubated with IGFBP-3. The activated IGF-IR was desensitized through 
reversal of its autophosphorylation, following which both phosphatidylinositol 
3-kinase and p42(MAPK) activities were depressed. Direct measurement of 
phosphotyrosine phosphatase activity and reconstitution experiments using 
tyrosine-phosphorylated insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) indicated that 
IGFBP-3 activated a phosphotyrosine phosphatase (PTPase). This action appeared 
to be peculiar to IGFBP-3 among the IGFBPs, since neither IGFBP-1 nor IGFBP-5 
(structurally the closest to IGFBP-3), had any such effect. Several cell lines 
derived from normal or tumor cells responsive to IGF-I were used to show that 
IGFBP-3-stimulated PTPase is cell type-specific. Although the precise nature of 
the phosphatase remains to be determined, the results of this study demonstrate 
that IGFBP-3 stimulates a phosphotyrosine phosphatase activity that 
down-regulates the IGF-I signaling pathway, suggesting a major role for IGFBP-3 
in regulating cell proliferation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M200439200
PMID: 11940579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
