---
pmid: '17431506'
title: Familial Alzheimer disease-linked mutations specifically disrupt Ca2+ leak
  function of presenilin 1.
authors:
- Nelson O
- Tu H
- Lei T
- Bentahir M
- de Strooper B
- Bezprozvanny I
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1847535
doi: 10.1172/JCI30447
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Familial Alzheimer disease-linked mutations specifically disrupt Ca2+ leak function of presenilin 1.
**Authors:** Nelson O, Tu H, Lei T, Bentahir M, de Strooper B, Bezprozvanny I
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI30447](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI30447)
**PMC:** [PMC1847535](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1847535/)

## Abstract

1. J Clin Invest. 2007 May;117(5):1230-9. doi: 10.1172/JCI30447. Epub 2007 Apr
12.

Familial Alzheimer disease-linked mutations specifically disrupt Ca2+ leak 
function of presenilin 1.

Nelson O(1), Tu H, Lei T, Bentahir M, de Strooper B, Bezprozvanny I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at 
Dallas, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Mutations in presenilins are responsible for approximately 40% of all 
early-onset familial Alzheimer disease (FAD) cases in which a genetic cause has 
been identified. In addition, a number of mutations in presenilin-1 (PS1) have 
been suggested to be associated with the occurrence of frontal temporal dementia 
(FTD). Presenilins are highly conserved transmembrane proteins that support 
cleavage of the amyloid precursor protein by gamma-secretase. Recently, we 
discovered that presenilins also function as passive ER Ca(2+) leak channels. 
Here we used planar lipid bilayer reconstitution assays and Ca(2+) imaging 
experiments with presenilin-null mouse embryonic fibroblasts to analyze ER 
Ca(2+) leak function of 6 FAD-linked PS1 mutants and 3 known FTD-associated PS1 
mutants. We discovered that L166P, A246E, E273A, G384A, and P436Q FAD mutations 
in PS1 abolished ER Ca(2+) leak function of PS1. In contrast, A79V FAD mutation 
or FTD-associated mutations (L113P, G183V, and Rins352) did not appear to affect 
ER Ca(2+) leak function of PS1 in our experiments. We validated our findings in 
Ca(2+) imaging experiments with primary fibroblasts obtained from an FAD patient 
possessing mutant PS1-A246E. Our results indicate that many FAD mutations in 
presenilins are loss-of-function mutations affecting ER Ca(2+) leak activity. In 
contrast, none of the FTD-associated mutations affected ER Ca(2+) leak function 
of PS1, indicating that the observed effects are disease specific. Our 
observations are consistent with the potential role of disturbed Ca(2+) 
homeostasis in Alzheimer disease pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI30447
PMCID: PMC1847535
PMID: 17431506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
