---
pmid: '16540464'
title: The X-ray crystal structures of human alpha-phosphomannomutase 1 reveal the
  structural basis of congenital disorder of glycosylation type 1a.
authors:
- Silvaggi NR
- Zhang C
- Lu Z
- Dai J
- Dunaway-Mariano D
- Allen KN
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M601505200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The X-ray crystal structures of human alpha-phosphomannomutase 1 reveal the structural basis of congenital disorder of glycosylation type 1a.
**Authors:** Silvaggi NR, Zhang C, Lu Z, Dai J, Dunaway-Mariano D, Allen KN
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M601505200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M601505200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2006 May 26;281(21):14918-26. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M601505200. Epub 
2006 Mar 15.

The X-ray crystal structures of human alpha-phosphomannomutase 1 reveal the 
structural basis of congenital disorder of glycosylation type 1a.

Silvaggi NR(1), Zhang C, Lu Z, Dai J, Dunaway-Mariano D, Allen KN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Boston University School of 
Medicine, 715 Albany Street, Boston, MA 02118, USA.

Congenital disorder of glycosylation type 1a (CDG-1a) is a congenital disease 
characterized by severe defects in nervous system development. It is caused by 
mutations in alpha-phosphomannomutase (of which there are two isozymes, 
alpha-PMM1 and alpha-PPM2). Here we report the x-ray crystal structures of human 
alpha-PMM1 in the open conformation, with and without the bound substrate, 
alpha-D-mannose 1-phosphate. Alpha-PMM1, like most haloalkanoic acid 
dehalogenase superfamily (HADSF) members, consists of two domains, the cap and 
core, which open to bind substrate and then close to provide a solvent-exclusive 
environment for catalysis. The substrate phosphate group is observed at a 
positively charged site of the cap domain, rather than at the core domain 
phosphoryl-transfer site defined by the Asp(19) nucleophile and Mg(2+) cofactor. 
This suggests that substrate binds first to the cap and then is swept into the 
active site upon cap closure. The orientation of the acid/base residue Asp(21) 
suggests that alpha-phosphomannomutase (alpha-PMM) uses a different method of 
protecting the aspartylphosphate from hydrolysis than the HADSF member 
beta-phosphoglucomutase. It is hypothesized that the electrostatic repulsion of 
positive charges at the interface of the cap and core domains stabilizes 
alpha-PMM1 in the open conformation and that the negatively charged substrate 
binds to the cap, thereby facilitating its closure over the core domain. The two 
isozymes, alpha-PMM1 and alpha-PMM2, are shown to have a conserved active-site 
structure and to display similar kinetic properties. Analysis of the known 
mutation sites in the context of the structures reveals the genotype-phenotype 
relationship underlying CDG-1a.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M601505200
PMID: 16540464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
