---
pmid: '12761212'
title: Functional characterization of ERp18, a new endoplasmic reticulum-located thioredoxin
  superfamily member.
authors:
- Alanen HI
- Williamson RA
- Howard MJ
- Lappi AK
- Jäntti HP
- Rautio SM
- Kellokumpu S
- Ruddock LW
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M304598200
---

# Functional characterization of ERp18, a new endoplasmic reticulum-located thioredoxin superfamily member.
**Authors:** Alanen HI, Williamson RA, Howard MJ, Lappi AK, Jäntti HP, Rautio SM, Kellokumpu S, Ruddock LW
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M304598200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M304598200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 1;278(31):28912-20. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M304598200. Epub
2003  May 21.

Functional characterization of ERp18, a new endoplasmic reticulum-located 
thioredoxin superfamily member.

Alanen HI(1), Williamson RA, Howard MJ, Lappi AK, Jäntti HP, Rautio SM, 
Kellokumpu S, Ruddock LW.

Author information:
(1)Biocenter Oulu and Department of Biochemistry, University of Oulu, P.O. Box 
3000, Oulu FIN-90014 Finland.

Native disulfide bond formation in the endoplasmic reticulum is a critical 
process in the maturation of many secreted and outer membrane proteins. Although 
a large number of proteins have been implicated in this process, it is clear 
that our current understanding is far from complete. Here we describe the 
functional characterization of a new 18-kDa protein (ERp18) related to 
protein-disulfide isomerase. We show that ERp18 is located in the endoplasmic 
reticulum and that it contains a single catalytic domain with an unusual CGAC 
active site motif and a probable insertion between beta3 and alpha3 of the 
thioredoxin fold. From circular dichroism and NMR measurements, ERp18 is well 
structured and undergoes only a minor conformational change upon 
dithioldisulfide exchange in the active site. Guanidinium chloride denaturation 
curves indicate that the reduced form of the protein is more stable than the 
oxidized form, suggesting that it is involved in disulfide bond formation. 
Furthermore, in vitro ERp18 possesses significant peptide thiol-disulfide 
oxidase activity, which is dependent on the presence of both active site 
cysteine residues. This activity differs from that of the human PDI family in 
that under standard assay conditions it is limited by substrate oxidation and 
not by enzyme reoxidation. A putative physiological role for Erp18 in native 
disulfide bond formation is discussed.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M304598200
PMID: 12761212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
