---
pmid: '30817134'
title: Analysis of the Cellular Roles of MOCS3 Identifies a MOCS3-Independent Localization
  of NFS1 at the Tips of the Centrosome.
authors:
- Neukranz Y
- Kotter A
- Beilschmidt L
- Marelja Z
- Helm M
- Gräf R
- Leimkühler S
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b01160
---

# Analysis of the Cellular Roles of MOCS3 Identifies a MOCS3-Independent Localization of NFS1 at the Tips of the Centrosome.
**Authors:** Neukranz Y, Kotter A, Beilschmidt L, Marelja Z, Helm M, Gräf R, Leimkühler S
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1021/acs.biochem.8b01160](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.biochem.8b01160)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2019 Apr 2;58(13):1786-1798. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b01160. 
Epub 2019 Mar 13.

Analysis of the Cellular Roles of MOCS3 Identifies a MOCS3-Independent 
Localization of NFS1 at the Tips of the Centrosome.

Neukranz Y, Kotter A(1), Beilschmidt L, Marelja Z, Helm M(1), Gräf R, Leimkühler 
S.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmacy and Biochemistry , Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz 
, 55128 Mainz , Germany.

The deficiency of the molybdenum cofactor (Moco) is an autosomal recessive 
disease, which leads to the loss of activity of all molybdoenzymes in humans 
with sulfite oxidase being the essential protein. Moco deficiency generally 
results in death in early childhood. Moco is a sulfur-containing cofactor 
synthesized in the cytosol with the sulfur being provided by a sulfur relay 
system composed of the l-cysteine desulfurase NFS1, MOCS3, and MOCS2A. Human 
MOCS3 is a dual-function protein that was shown to play an important role in 
Moco biosynthesis and in the mcm5s2U thio modifications of nucleosides in 
cytosolic tRNAs for Lys, Gln, and Glu. In this study, we constructed a 
homozygous MOCS3 knockout in HEK293T cells using the CRISPR/Cas9 system. The 
effects caused by the absence of MOCS3 were analyzed in detail. We show that 
sulfite oxidase activity was almost completely abolished, on the basis of the 
absence of Moco in these cells. In addition, mcm5s2U thio-modified tRNAs were 
not detectable. Because the l-cysteine desulfurase NFS1 was shown to act as a 
sulfur donor for MOCS3 in the cytosol, we additionally investigated the impact 
of a MOCS3 knockout on the cellular localization of NFS1. By different methods, 
we identified a MOCS3-independent novel localization of NFS1 at the centrosome.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b01160
PMID: 30817134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
