---
pmid: '10903140'
title: The heterodimeric amino acid transporter 4F2hc/y+LAT2 mediates arginine efflux
  in exchange with glutamine.
authors:
- Bröer A
- Wagner CA
- Lang F
- Bröer S
journal: Biochem J
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1221206
doi: 10.1042/bj3490787
---

# The heterodimeric amino acid transporter 4F2hc/y+LAT2 mediates arginine efflux in exchange with glutamine.
**Authors:** Bröer A, Wagner CA, Lang F, Bröer S
**Journal:** Biochem J (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1042/bj3490787](https://doi.org/10.1042/bj3490787)
**PMC:** [PMC1221206](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1221206/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2000 Aug 1;349 Pt 3(Pt 3):787-95. doi: 10.1042/bj3490787.

The heterodimeric amino acid transporter 4F2hc/y+LAT2 mediates arginine efflux 
in exchange with glutamine.

Bröer A(1), Wagner CA, Lang F, Bröer S.

Author information:
(1)Universität Tübingen, Physiologisches Institut, Gmelinstr. 5, 72076 Tübingen, 
Germany.

The cationic amino acid arginine, due to its positive charge, is usually 
accumulated in the cytosol. Nevertheless, arginine has to be released by a 
number of cell types, e.g. kidney cells, which supply other organs with this 
amino acid, or the endothelial cells of the blood-brain barrier which release 
arginine into the brain. Arginine release in mammalian cells can be mediated by 
two different transporters, y(+)LAT1 and y(+)LAT2. For insertion into the plasma 
membrane, these transporters have to be associated with the type-II membrane 
glycoprotein 4F2hc [Torrents, Estevez, Pineda, Fernandez, Lloberas, Shi, Zorzano 
and Palacin (1998) J. Biol. Chem. 273, 32437-32445]. The present study 
elucidates the function and distribution of y(+)LAT2. In contrast to y(+)LAT1, 
which is expressed mainly in kidney epithelial cells, lung and leucocytes, 
y(+)LAT2 has a wider tissue distribution, including brain, heart, testis, 
kidney, small intestine and parotis. When co-expressed with 4F2hc in Xenopus 
laevis oocytes, y(+)LAT2 mediated uptake of arginine, leucine and glutamine. 
Arginine uptake was inhibited strongly by lysine, glutamate, leucine, glutamine, 
methionine and histidine. Mutual inhibition was observed when leucine or 
glutamine was used as substrate. Inhibition of arginine uptake by neutral amino 
acids depended on the presence of Na(+), which is a hallmark of y(+)LAT-type 
transporters. Although arginine transport was inhibited strongly by glutamate, 
this anionic amino acid was only weakly transported by 4F2hc/y(+)LAT2. Amino 
acid transport via 4F2hc/y(+)LAT2 followed an antiport mechanism similar to the 
other members of this new family. Only preloaded arginine could be released in 
exchange for extracellular amino acids, whereas marginal release of glutamine or 
leucine was observed under identical conditions. These results indicated that 
arginine has the highest affinity for the intracellular binding site and that 
arginine release may be the main physiological function of this transporter.

DOI: 10.1042/bj3490787
PMCID: PMC1221206
PMID: 10903140 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
