---
pmid: '21803845'
title: PMLRARα binds to Fas and suppresses Fas-mediated apoptosis through recruiting
  c-FLIP in vivo.
authors:
- Tao RH
- Berkova Z
- Wise JF
- Rezaeian AH
- Daniluk U
- Ao X
- Hawke DH
- Karp JE
- Lin HK
- Molldrem JJ
- Samaniego F
journal: Blood
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3291494
doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-04-349670
---

# PMLRARα binds to Fas and suppresses Fas-mediated apoptosis through recruiting c-FLIP in vivo.
**Authors:** Tao RH, Berkova Z, Wise JF, Rezaeian AH, Daniluk U, Ao X, Hawke DH, Karp JE, Lin HK, Molldrem JJ, Samaniego F
**Journal:** Blood (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2011-04-349670](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2011-04-349670)
**PMC:** [PMC3291494](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3291494/)

## Abstract

1. Blood. 2011 Sep 15;118(11):3107-18. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-04-349670. Epub
2011  Jul 29.

PMLRARα binds to Fas and suppresses Fas-mediated apoptosis through recruiting 
c-FLIP in vivo.

Tao RH(1), Berkova Z, Wise JF, Rezaeian AH, Daniluk U, Ao X, Hawke DH, Karp JE, 
Lin HK, Molldrem JJ, Samaniego F.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Lymphoma and Myeloma, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Defective Fas signaling leads to resistance to various anticancer therapies. 
Presence of potential inhibitors of Fas which could block Fas signaling can 
explain cancer cells resistance to apoptosis. We identified promyelocytic 
leukemia protein (PML) as a Fas-interacting protein using mass spectrometry 
analysis. The function of PML is blocked by its dominant-negative form 
PML-retinoic acid receptor α (PMLRARα). We found PMLRARα interaction with Fas in 
acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL)-derived cells and APL primary cells, and 
PML-Fas complexes in normal tissues. Binding of PMLRARα to Fas was mapped to the 
B-box domain of PML moiety and death domain of Fas. PMLRARα blockage of Fas 
apoptosis was demonstrated in U937/PR9 cells, human APL cells and transgenic 
mouse APL cells, in which PMLRARα recruited c-FLIP(L/S) and excluded procaspase 
8 from Fas death signaling complex. PMLRARα expression in mice protected the 
mice against a lethal dose of agonistic anti-Fas antibody (P < .001) and the 
protected tissues contained Fas-PMLRARα-cFLIP complexes. Taken together, PMLRARα 
binds to Fas and blocks Fas-mediated apoptosis in APL by forming an apoptotic 
inhibitory complex with c-FLIP. The presence of PML-Fas complexes across 
different tissues implicates that PML functions in apoptosis regulation and 
tumor suppression are mediated by direct interaction with Fas.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2011-04-349670
PMCID: PMC3291494
PMID: 21803845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
