---
pmid: '11395460'
title: Three efflux pumps are required to provide efficient tolerance to toluene in
  Pseudomonas putida DOT-T1E.
authors:
- Rojas A
- Duque E
- Mosqueda G
- Golden G
- Hurtado A
- Ramos JL
- Segura A
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC95279
doi: 10.1128/JB.183.13.3967-3973.2001
---

# Three efflux pumps are required to provide efficient tolerance to toluene in Pseudomonas putida DOT-T1E.
**Authors:** Rojas A, Duque E, Mosqueda G, Golden G, Hurtado A, Ramos JL, Segura A
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JB.183.13.3967-3973.2001](https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.183.13.3967-3973.2001)
**PMC:** [PMC95279](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC95279/)

## Abstract

1. J Bacteriol. 2001 Jul;183(13):3967-73. doi: 10.1128/JB.183.13.3967-3973.2001.

Three efflux pumps are required to provide efficient tolerance to toluene in 
Pseudomonas putida DOT-T1E.

Rojas A(1), Duque E, Mosqueda G, Golden G, Hurtado A, Ramos JL, Segura A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular and Cell Biology of Plants, Estación 
Experimental del Zaidín, CSIC, E-18008 Granada, Spain.

In Pseudomonas putida DOT-T1E multidrug efflux pumps of the 
resistance-nodulation-division family make a major contribution to solvent 
resistance. Two pumps have been identified: TtgABC, expressed constitutively, 
and TtgDEF, induced by aromatic hydrocarbons. A double mutant lacking both 
efflux pumps was able to survive a sudden toluene shock if and only if 
preinduced with small amounts of toluene supplied via the gas phase. In this 
article we report the identification and characterization in this strain of a 
third efflux pump, named TtgGHI. The ttgGHI genes form an operon that is 
expressed constitutively at high levels from a single promoter. In the presence 
of toluene the operon is expressed at an even higher level from two promoters, 
the constitutive one and a previously unreported one that is inducible and that 
partially overlaps the constitutive promoter. By site-directed mutagenesis we 
constructed a single ttgH mutant which was shown to be unable to survive sudden 
0.3% (vol/vol) toluene shocks regardless of the preculture conditions. The 
mutation was transferred to single and double mutants to construct mutant 
strains in which two or all three pumps are knocked out. Survival analysis of 
induced and noninduced cells revealed that the TtgABC and TtgGHI pumps extruded 
toluene, styrene, m-xylene, ethylbenzene, and propylbenzene, whereas the TtgDEF 
pump removed only toluene and styrene. The triple mutant was hypersensitive to 
toluene, as shown by its inability to grow with toluene supplied via the vapor 
phase.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.183.13.3967-3973.2001
PMCID: PMC95279
PMID: 11395460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
