---
pmid: '26100909'
title: BEND3 represses rDNA transcription by stabilizing a NoRC component via USP21
  deubiquitinase.
authors:
- Khan A
- Giri S
- Wang Y
- Chakraborty A
- Ghosh AK
- Anantharaman A
- Aggarwal V
- Sathyan KM
- Ha T
- Prasanth KV
- Prasanth SG
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2015'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4500215
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1424705112
---

# BEND3 represses rDNA transcription by stabilizing a NoRC component via USP21 deubiquitinase.
**Authors:** Khan A, Giri S, Wang Y, Chakraborty A, Ghosh AK, Anantharaman A, Aggarwal V, Sathyan KM, Ha T, Prasanth KV, Prasanth SG
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1424705112](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1424705112)
**PMC:** [PMC4500215](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4500215/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jul 7;112(27):8338-43. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1424705112. Epub 2015 Jun 22.

BEND3 represses rDNA transcription by stabilizing a NoRC component via USP21 
deubiquitinase.

Khan A(1), Giri S(1), Wang Y(1), Chakraborty A(1), Ghosh AK(1), Anantharaman 
A(1), Aggarwal V(2), Sathyan KM(1), Ha T(3), Prasanth KV(1), Prasanth SG(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801;
(2)Center for Biophysics and Computational Biology, University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801;
(3)Center for Biophysics and Computational Biology, University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801; Department of Physics, University of 
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801.
(4)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801; supriyap@life.illinois.edu.

Ribosome biogenesis dictates the translational capacity of cells. Several 
mechanisms establish and maintain transcriptional output from eukaryotic 
ribosomal DNA (rDNA) loci. rDNA silencing is one such mechanism that ensures the 
inactivity and hence the maintenance of a silenced state of a subset of rRNA 
gene copies. Whereas oncogenic agents stimulate rRNA gene transcription, tumor 
suppressors decrease rRNA gene transcription. We demonstrate in mammalian cells 
that BANP, E5R, and Nac1 (BEN) domain 3 (BEND3), a quadruple BEN 
domain-containing protein, localizes in nucleoli and binds to ribosomal RNA gene 
promoters to help repress rRNA genes. Loss of BEND3 increases histone H3K4 
trimethylation and, correspondingly, decreases rDNA promoter DNA methylation, 
consistent with a role for BEND3 in rDNA silencing. BEND3 associates with the 
nucleolar-remodeling complex (NoRC), and SUMOylated BEND3 stabilizes NoRC 
component TTF-1-interacting protein 5 via association with ubiquitin specific 
protease 21 (USP21) debiquitinase. Our results provide mechanistic insights into 
how the novel rDNA transcription repressor BEND3 acts together with NoRC to 
actively coordinate the establishment of rDNA silencing.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1424705112
PMCID: PMC4500215
PMID: 26100909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Ribosome biogenesis dictates the translational capacity of cells. Several mechanisms establish and maintain transcriptional output from eukaryotic ribosomal DNA (rDNA) loci. rDNA silencing is one such mechanism that ensures the inactivity and hence the maintenance of a silenced state of a subset of rRNA gene copies. Whereas oncogenic agents stimulate rRNA gene transcription, tumor suppressors decrease rRNA gene transcription. We demonstrate in mammalian cells that B ANP, E 5R, and N ac1 (BEN) domain 3 (BEND3), a quadruple BEN domain-containing protein, localizes in nucleoli and binds to ribosomal RNA gene promoters to help repress rRNA genes. Loss of BEND3 increases histone H3K4 trimethylation and, correspondingly, decreases rDNA promoter DNA methylation, consistent with a role for BEND3 in rDNA silencing. BEND3 associates with the nucleolar-remodeling complex (NoRC), and SUMOylated BEND3 stabilizes NoRC component TTF-1–interacting protein 5 via association with ubiquitin specific protease 21 (USP21) debiquitinase. Our results provide mechanistic insights into how the novel rDNA transcription repressor BEND3 acts together with NoRC to actively coordinate the establishment of rDNA silencing.

Discussion

Chromatin architecture dictates gene expression, and the accurate regulation of transcription is crucial for genomic stability ( 25 ). Heterochromatin represents a major repressive chromatin domain in the cell nucleus and typically consists of repetitive elements ( 26 , 27 ). In human cells, heterochromatic regions are located predominantly at centromeres, telomeres, and at rDNA loci. We previously demonstrated that BEND3 associated with heterochromatic regions in mouse cells and repressed transcription at an in vivo reporter locus ( 11 ). However, the role of BEND3 in vivo and its potential repressive nature in the endogenous context remained to be addressed.

We demonstrate that a fraction of BEND3 localizes to nucleoli, decorates the rDNA cluster, and binds to the rDNA promoter. Furthermore, BEND3-overexpressed cells showed reduced H3K4Me3 and acetylH4, with a concomitant increase in H4K20me3 and H3K27me3 at rDNA loci, and was consistent with the down-regulation of rDNA transcription. Depletion of BEND3 showed elevated levels of pre-rRNA and increased H3K4me3, suggesting that BEND3 functions as an rDNA transcription repressor. Our results are consistent with the recent observations that BEND3 allows polycomb recruitment and H3K27me3 to specific chromatin to generate repressive chromatin, especially in the absence of H3K9me3 and DNA methylation ( 15 ).

Transcription of rRNA gene loci by RNA polymerase I is modulated by several players. rDNA loci switch between an active and a silenced state, and more than 50% of the nucleolar organizing regions contain active rDNA clusters. However, both the active and inactive rRNA genes are thought to associate with one another to form higher-order chromatin within the nucleoli ( 6 ). NoRC, a chromatin-remodeling complex comprising of the ATPase SNF2h and TIP5, is required for establishing repressive chromatin structure at rDNA promoters ( 9 ). Elegant work conducted almost a decade ago by Grummt and colleagues demonstrated that NoRC establishes heterochromatic histone modifications and de novo DNA methylation at rDNA loci and that this leads to chromatin compaction and transcription silencing of the rDNA repeats ( 9 ). Whether NoRC silences active rRNA genes, maintains the silent state of inactive genes, or is required for both activities remains to be determined ( 2 , 6 , 28 ). Recent work argues that NoRC is required for the inheritance or maintenance of silent epigenetic status at rDNA gene clusters ( 21 ).

We observed that BEND3 associates with NoRC and that, in the absence of BEND3, Tip5 association to the rDNA promoter is severely compromised. Similarly, NoRC coordinates the binding of BEND3 to the rDNA promoter. These data suggest that BEND3 and NoRC cooperate to establish rDNA silencing. Our results demonstrate that BEND3 stabilizes the Tip5 component of NoRC by modulating ubiquitination of Tip5. Furthermore, SUMOylation of BEND3 is critical for preventing this modification on Tip5. We suggest that SUMOylation of BEND3 is important for stabilizing NoRC and that this in turn is critical for rDNA silencing ( Fig. 5 ).

Protein ubiquitination is a reversible posttranslational modification (PTM) that plays a critical role in many cellular processes. A class of proteases known as deubiquitinases (DUBs) catalyzes the removal of ubiquitin from target proteins ( 29 – 31 ). Of these, ubiquitin-specific proteases (USP) form the largest group that is characterized by the presence of a USP domain ( 32 , 33 ). USP21 was initially identified as a histone H2A deubiquitinase ( 34 ), but has been shown to regulate the deubiquitination of several other substrates including RIG-1, RIP1, and GATA-3 ( 35 – 37 ). USP21 is thought to modulate target protein stability by modulating E3 deubiquitinase activity, thereby affecting the transfer of ubiquitin from the E3 ligase to its target protein ( 36 ). We have identified USP21 as a specific DUB of the Tip5/NoRC complex. USP21 interacts with BEND3, and the levels of USP21 are strongly affected by the presence of BEND3. A dramatic destabilization of USP21 was observed in the presence of BEND3-SDM, suggesting that the USP21 level is modulated by the SUMOylation status of BEND3. USP21 can interact with and deubiquitinate Tip5, thereby stabilizing the total levels of Tip5. We propose that SUMOylated BEND3 stabilizes the Tip5/NoRC complex by stabilizing USP21 deubiquitinase. At present, it is not clear how SUMOylated BEND3 stabilizes USP21. Although it is not uncommon for DUBs to undergo PTMs that affect their stability as well as activity, there is a lack of precedence in the case of USP21 to be modulated through any such modifications ( 38 ).

We also observed that overexpression of BEND3 causes hyper-heterochromatinization and chromatin compaction. The fact that BEND3 associates with most heterochromatic regions, and recalling the similarities between the genomic organization at centromeres, telomeres, and rRNA genes, we suggest that BEND3 may play important roles in assembling higher-order chromatin structure. The general role of NoRC in the establishment of higher-order chromatin structure by acting as a scaffold to coordinate modification of histones has recently been proposed ( 39 ). This has been supported by the role of Tip5 in maintaining the functional integrity of telomeres and centromeres ( 39 ). Many other mechanisms have been implicated in the targeting of NoRC to specific heterochromatic sites. The recruitment of NoRC to the rDNA promoter is mediated by the transcription factor TTF1, whereas Trf2 and CENP-A are known to regulate NoRC association to telomeres and centromeres, respectively ( 7 , 28 , 39 ). Furthermore, nucleolar retention of Tip5 has been shown to require pRNA, and this depends on PARP1, a protein recently shown to be critical for the inheritance of silent chromatin ( 21 , 40 ). That enhanced expression of BEND3 changes the chromatin environment at the rDNA is also evident by an increased rDNA methylation state, suggesting that BEND3 is a potent repressor of transcription. Furthermore, loss of BEND3 results in hyperactivation of transcription at the rDNA loci. This is similar to what has been observed for JHDM1B, a demethylase implicated in transcriptional repression of rRNA genes ( 41 ). Taken together, we propose that BEND3 and NoRC play a highly concerted role in the maintenance of heterochromatin architecture at several genomic regions and that the rDNA locus provides an excellent insight into this phenomenon.

Materials and Methods

A detailed description of all of the plasmids, antibodies, primers, and experimental procedures can be found in SI Materials and Methods . Experimental procedures include immunoprecipitation, ChIP, immunofluorescence, FISH, DNA methylation assay, SimPull, EMSA, and psoralen cross-linking assay.
