---
pmid: '15210711'
title: 'Cytosolic thioredoxin peroxidase I and II are important defenses of yeast
  against organic hydroperoxide insult: catalases and peroxiredoxins cooperate in
  the decomposition of H2O2 by yeast.'
authors:
- Munhoz DC
- Netto LE
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M313773200
---

# Cytosolic thioredoxin peroxidase I and II are important defenses of yeast against organic hydroperoxide insult: catalases and peroxiredoxins cooperate in the decomposition of H2O2 by yeast.
**Authors:** Munhoz DC, Netto LE
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M313773200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M313773200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Aug 20;279(34):35219-27. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M313773200. Epub 
2004 Jun 21.

Cytosolic thioredoxin peroxidase I and II are important defenses of yeast 
against organic hydroperoxide insult: catalases and peroxiredoxins cooperate in 
the decomposition of H2O2 by yeast.

Munhoz DC(1), Netto LE.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Biologia, Instituto de Biociências, USP, 05508-900, São 
Paulo, Brazil.

The cytosolic thioredoxin peroxidase II (cTPxII/Tsa2p) from Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae shares 86% identity with the relatively well characterized cytosolic 
thioredoxin peroxidase I (cTPxI/Tsa1p). In contrast to cTPxI protein, cTPxII is 
not abundant and is highly inducible by peroxides. Here, we describe a unique 
phenotype for DeltacTPxII strain; these cells were highly sensitive to 
tert-butylhydroperoxide (TBHP) but presented resistance to H(2)O(2) in 
fermentative and respiratory conditions. In contrast, DeltacTPxI strain was very 
sensitive to both TBHP and H(2)O(2), whatever the carbon source present in the 
media. These differences in the response of mutant cells to the different kinds 
of peroxide insult could not be attributed to enzymatic properties of cTPxI and 
cTPxII since the recombinant proteins showed similar in vitro efficiencies 
(K(cat) /K(m)) in the removals of both kinds of peroxide. This specific 
sensitivity of DeltacTPxII cells to TBHP could not be related to the expression 
pattern of TSA2 (cytosolic thioredoxin peroxidase II gene) either, since this 
gene is highly inducible by both H(2)O(2) and TBHP when cells were grown in 
different conditions. Finally, peroxide-removing assays were performed and 
showed that catalase activity increased significantly only in DeltacTPxII cells, 
which appear to be related with the resistance of this strain to H(2)O(2). Taken 
together, present data indicate that cTPxII and cTPxI are key components of the 
yeast defense system against organic peroxide insult. In regard to the stress 
induced by H(2)O(2), catalases (peroxisomal and/or cytosolic) and cTPxII seemed 
to cooperate with cTPxI in the defense of yeast against this oxidant.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M313773200
PMID: 15210711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
