---
pmid: '7812968'
title: 'bcl-2 deficiency in mice leads to pleiotropic abnormalities: accelerated lymphoid
  cell death in thymus and spleen, polycystic kidney, hair hypopigmentation, and distorted
  small intestine.'
authors:
- Kamada S
- Shimono A
- Shinto Y
- Tsujimura T
- Takahashi T
- Noda T
- Kitamura Y
- Kondoh H
- Tsujimoto Y
journal: Cancer Res
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
---

# bcl-2 deficiency in mice leads to pleiotropic abnormalities: accelerated lymphoid cell death in thymus and spleen, polycystic kidney, hair hypopigmentation, and distorted small intestine.
**Authors:** Kamada S, Shimono A, Shinto Y, Tsujimura T, Takahashi T, Noda T, Kitamura Y, Kondoh H, Tsujimoto Y
**Journal:** Cancer Res (1995)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Res. 1995 Jan 15;55(2):354-9.

bcl-2 deficiency in mice leads to pleiotropic abnormalities: accelerated 
lymphoid cell death in thymus and spleen, polycystic kidney, hair 
hypopigmentation, and distorted small intestine.

Kamada S(1), Shimono A, Shinto Y, Tsujimura T, Takahashi T, Noda T, Kitamura Y, 
Kondoh H, Tsujimoto Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Biomedical Research Center, Osaka University 
Medical School, Yamadaoka, Japan.

Transgenic mice homozygously lacking in the bcl-2 gene were generated using 
homologous recombination in embryonal stem cells. The complete absence of Bcl-2 
alpha and -beta proteins did not interfere with normal embryonic development. 
Abnormalities became evident after birth, although the severity varied among 
homozygous null mice, bcl-2-/- mice displayed pleiotropic abnormalities similar 
to those in the previously described bcl-2-/- mice, including growth 
retardation, smaller ears, short lives, polycystic kidney, atrophic thymus and 
spleen with accelerated apoptotic cell death of lymphocytes, and hair 
hypopigmentation in the second hair follicle cycle. Our bcl-2-/- mice also 
revealed novel defects in the small intestine, characterized by retarded 
development, accelerated exfoliation of epithelial cells, and very few mitotic 
progenitor cells.

PMID: 7812968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
