---
pmid: '25612671'
title: Identification and characterization of TMEM33 as a reticulon-binding protein.
authors:
- Urade T
- Yamamoto Y
- Zhang X
- Ku Y
- Sakisaka T
journal: Kobe J Med Sci
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
---

# Identification and characterization of TMEM33 as a reticulon-binding protein.
**Authors:** Urade T, Yamamoto Y, Zhang X, Ku Y, Sakisaka T
**Journal:** Kobe J Med Sci (2014)

## Abstract

1. Kobe J Med Sci. 2014 Nov 6;60(3):E57-65.

Identification and characterization of TMEM33 as a reticulon-binding protein.

Urade T(1), Yamamoto Y, Zhang X, Ku Y, Sakisaka T.

Author information:
(1)Division of Membrane Dynamics, Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, 
Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe 650-0017 Japan.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is an organelle that has an elaborate and continuous 
membrane system composed of sheet-like cisternae and a network of interconnected 
tubules. The ER tubules are shaped by reticulons, a conserved ER membrane 
protein family. However, how the membrane-shaping activity is regulated remains 
to be elucidated. To understand the mode of action of reticulons, we isolated 
TMEM33, a conserved protein harboring three transmembrane domains, as a 
reticulon 4C-binding protein by affinity chromatography. In addition to 
reticulon 4C, TMEM33 binds to reticulon 1A, -2B, -3C and a reticulon homology 
domain-containing protein Arl6IP1. Exogenously expressed TMEM33 localizes at 
both the ER membrane and the nuclear envelope. Exogenously expressed TMEM33 
co-localizes with exogenously expressed reticulon 4C well at the ER sheets and 
partially at the ER tubules. Exogenously expressed TMEM33 suppresses the 
exogenously expressed reticulon 4C-induced tubulation of ER. These results 
suggest that TMEM33 has a potency to suppress the membrane-shaping activity of 
reticulons, thereby regulating the tubular structure of ER.

PMID: 25612671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
