---
pmid: '15272078'
title: Simultaneous absence of dopamine D1 and D2 receptor-mediated signaling is lethal
  in mice.
authors:
- Kobayashi M
- Iaccarino C
- Saiardi A
- Heidt V
- Bozzi Y
- Picetti R
- Vitale C
- Westphal H
- Drago J
- Borrelli E
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC509223
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0402028101
---

# Simultaneous absence of dopamine D1 and D2 receptor-mediated signaling is lethal in mice.
**Authors:** Kobayashi M, Iaccarino C, Saiardi A, Heidt V, Bozzi Y, Picetti R, Vitale C, Westphal H, Drago J, Borrelli E
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0402028101](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0402028101)
**PMC:** [PMC509223](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC509223/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Aug 3;101(31):11465-70. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0402028101. Epub 2004 Jul 22.

Simultaneous absence of dopamine D1 and D2 receptor-mediated signaling is lethal 
in mice.

Kobayashi M(1), Iaccarino C, Saiardi A, Heidt V, Bozzi Y, Picetti R, Vitale C, 
Westphal H, Drago J, Borrelli E.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, 1 Rue Laurent 
Fries, 67404 Illkirch, France.

Dopamine (DA) controls a wide variety of physiological functions in the central 
nervous system as well as in the neuroendocrine and gastrointestinal systems. DA 
signaling is mediated by five cloned receptors named D1-D5. Knockout mouse 
models for the five receptors have been generated, and, albeit impaired for some 
important DA-mediated functions, they are viable and can reproduce. D1 and D2 
receptors are the most abundant and widely expressed DA receptors. 
Cooperative/synergistic effects mediated by these receptors have been suggested, 
in particular, in the control of motor behaviors. To analyze the extent of such 
interrelationship, we have generated double D1/D2 receptor mutants. 
Interestingly, in contrast to single knockouts, we found that concurrent 
ablation of the D1 and D2 receptors is lethal during the second or third week 
after birth. This dramatic phenotype is likely to be related to altered feeding 
behavior and dysfunction of the gastrointestinal system, especially because 
major anatomical changes were not identified in the brain. Similarly, in the 
absence of functional D1, heterozygous D2 mutants (D1r(-/-);D2r(+/-)) showed 
severe growth retardation and did not survive their postweaning period. The 
analysis of motor behavior in D1r/D2r compound mutants showed that loss of 
D2-mediated functions reduces motor abilities, whereas the effect of D1r 
ablation on locomotion strongly depends on the experimental paradigms used. 
These studies highlight the interrelationship between D1 and D2 
receptor-mediated control of motor activity, food intake, and gastrointestinal 
functions, which has been elusive in the single-gene ablation studies.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0402028101
PMCID: PMC509223
PMID: 15272078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
