---
pmid: '18307065'
title: Decidual expression and maternal serum levels of heme oxygenase 1 are increased
  in pre-eclampsia.
authors:
- Eide IP
- Isaksen CV
- Salvesen KA
- Langaas M
- Schønberg SA
- Austgulen R
journal: Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1080/00016340701763015
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Decidual expression and maternal serum levels of heme oxygenase 1 are increased in pre-eclampsia.
**Authors:** Eide IP, Isaksen CV, Salvesen KA, Langaas M, Schønberg SA, Austgulen R
**Journal:** Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1080/00016340701763015](https://doi.org/10.1080/00016340701763015)

## Abstract

1. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2008;87(3):272-9. doi: 10.1080/00016340701763015.

Decidual expression and maternal serum levels of heme oxygenase 1 are increased 
in pre-eclampsia.

Eide IP(1), Isaksen CV, Salvesen KA, Langaas M, Schønberg SA, Austgulen R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Children's and Women's 
Health, Trondheim, Norway. irina.p.eide@ntnu.no

BACKGROUND: Pre-eclampsia (PE) is associated with increased oxidative stress and 
excessive maternal inflammatory response. Heme oxygenase 1 (HMOX1) is an 
important stress response enzyme and a mediator of cytoprotection against a wide 
variety of tissue injuries.
METHODS: In the present study, microarray technology was used to compare the 
expression of HMOX1 and other genes involved in stress and inflammatory 
responses in decidua basalis from 16 pregnancies complicated by PE and 17 
healthy controls. In addition, the presence of HMOX1 protein in decidua basalis 
was examined by means of immunohistochemistry, and ELISA was used to measure the 
maternal serum concentration of HMOX1.
RESULTS: Fifteen transcripts involved in stress response including HMOX1 were 
up-regulated in cases, using a cut-off value at p=0.01. HMOX1 protein expression 
in decidua basalis was significantly increased in cases compared to controls 
reflected by more pronounced intensity of HMOX1 positive decidual cells 
(1.8+/-0.3 versus 1.5+/-0.4, p=0.02) and an increased proportion of HMOX1 
positive decidual leukocytes (31+/-29 versus 9+/-6%, p=0.001). Finally, serum 
HMOX1 levels were significantly higher among cases compared to controls 
(3.1+/-1.3 versus 1.9+/-0.5 ng/ml, p=0.008).
CONCLUSIONS: Increased decidual and serum HMOX1 levels, together with altered 
decidual expression of some stress-related genes in cases, support the role of 
oxidative stress and excessive maternal inflammatory response in the 
pathogenesis of PE.

DOI: 10.1080/00016340701763015
PMID: 18307065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
