---
pmid: '20596610'
title: Involvement of vascular endothelial growth factor signaling in CLR/RAMP1 and
  CLR/RAMP2-mediated pro-angiogenic effect of intermedin on human vascular endothelial
  cells.
authors:
- Albertin G
- Sorato E
- Oselladore B
- Mascarin A
- Tortorella C
- Guidolin D
journal: Int J Mol Med
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.3892/ijmm_00000464
---

# Involvement of vascular endothelial growth factor signaling in CLR/RAMP1 and CLR/RAMP2-mediated pro-angiogenic effect of intermedin on human vascular endothelial cells.
**Authors:** Albertin G, Sorato E, Oselladore B, Mascarin A, Tortorella C, Guidolin D
**Journal:** Int J Mol Med (2010)
**DOI:** [10.3892/ijmm_00000464](https://doi.org/10.3892/ijmm_00000464)

## Abstract

1. Int J Mol Med. 2010 Aug;26(2):289-94. doi: 10.3892/ijmm_00000464.

Involvement of vascular endothelial growth factor signaling in CLR/RAMP1 and 
CLR/RAMP2-mediated pro-angiogenic effect of intermedin on human vascular 
endothelial cells.

Albertin G(1), Sorato E, Oselladore B, Mascarin A, Tortorella C, Guidolin D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Anatomy and Physiology, Section of Anatomy, University of 
Padova-Medical School, I-35121 Padova, Italy.

Intermedin (IMD) is a recently discovered peptide closely related to 
adrenomedullin. Its principal physiological activity is its role in the 
regulation of the cardiovascular system, where it exerts a potent hypotensive 
effect. In addition, data were recently provided showing that this peptide is 
able to exert a clearcut pro-angiogenic effect both in vitro and in vivo. IMD 
acts through the non-selective interaction with receptor complexes formed by the 
dimerization of calcitonin-like receptor (CLR) with the receptor 
activity-modifying proteins RAMP1, 2 or 3. Thus, in the present study, the role 
of CLR/RAMP complexes in mediating the pro-angiogenic effect induced by IMD on 
human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) cultured on Matrigel was 
examined. Real-time PCR demonstrated the expression of IMD, CLR/RAMP1 and 
CLR/RAMP2 (but not CLR/RAMP3) mRNA in HUVECs. IMD exerted a significant in vitro 
angiogenic action, specifically triggered by the binding of the peptide to 
CLR/RAMP complexes. Both CLR/RAMP1 and CLR/RAMP2 appeared to mediate the 
pro-angiogenic effect, which was associated with a significant increase of 
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) mRNA expression 18 h following IMD 
administration, indicating that the observed pro-angiogenic effects are related, 
at least in part, to an increased synthesis of this growth factor promoted by 
the peptide. Western blot analysis, however, showed a significant increase of 
VEGF receptor-2 phosphorylation as early as 5 min following IMD administration, 
indicating that IMD induces a pro-angiogenic response in human vascular 
endothelial cells not only via CLR/RAMP-induced release of VEGF, but also during 
signal initiation and propagation by transactivating the VEGF receptor-2 
machinery.

DOI: 10.3892/ijmm_00000464
PMID: 20596610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
