---
pmid: '10823886'
title: Transforming growth factor beta -inducible independent binding of SMAD to the
  Smad7 promoter.
authors:
- Denissova NG
- Pouponnot C
- Long J
- He D
- Liu F
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC18614
doi: 10.1073/pnas.090099297
---

# Transforming growth factor beta -inducible independent binding of SMAD to the Smad7 promoter.
**Authors:** Denissova NG, Pouponnot C, Long J, He D, Liu F
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.090099297](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.090099297)
**PMC:** [PMC18614](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC18614/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Jun 6;97(12):6397-402. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.090099297.

Transforming growth factor beta -inducible independent binding of SMAD to the 
Smad7 promoter.

Denissova NG(1), Pouponnot C, Long J, He D, Liu F.

Author information:
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, and Laboratory for Cancer 
Research, Department of Chemical Biology, College of Pharmacy, Rutgers, The 
State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

SMAD proteins can mediate transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta)-inducible 
transcriptional responses. Whereas SMAD can recognize specific DNA sequences, it 
is usually recruited to a promoter through interaction with a DNA-binding 
partner. In an effort to search for TGF-beta-inducible genes, we used a 
subtractive screening method and identified human Smad7, which can antagonize 
TGF-beta signaling and is rapidly up-regulated by TGF-beta. In this report, we 
show that TGF-beta can stabilize Smad7 mRNA and activate Smad7 transcription. 
The Smad7 promoter is the first TGF-beta responsive promoter identified in 
vertebrates that contains the 8-bp palindromic SMAD-binding element (SBE), an 
optimal binding site previously identified by a PCR-based selection from random 
oligonucleotides by using recombinant Smad3 and Smad4. We demonstrate that on 
TGF-beta treatment, endogenous SMAD complex can bind to a Smad7 promoter DNA as 
short as 14 or 16 bp that contains the 8-bp SBE in gel mobility shift and 
supershift assays. Our studies provide strong evidence that SMAD proteins can 
bind to a natural TGF-beta responsive promoter independent of other 
sequencespecific transcription factors. We further show that, whereas 
recombinant Smad3 binds to the SBE, endogenous or even transfected Smad3 cannot 
bind to the SBE in the absence of Smad4. These findings have important 
implications in the identification of target genes of the TGF-beta/SMAD 
signaling pathways.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.090099297
PMCID: PMC18614
PMID: 10823886 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
