---
pmid: '33384352'
title: QRICH1 dictates the outcome of ER stress through transcriptional control of
  proteostasis.
authors:
- You K
- Wang L
- Chou CH
- Liu K
- Nakata T
- Jaiswal A
- Yao J
- Lefkovith A
- Omar A
- Perrigoue JG
- Towne JE
- Regev A
- Graham DB
- Xavier RJ
journal: Science
year: '2021'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC8315080
doi: 10.1126/science.abb6896
---

# QRICH1 dictates the outcome of ER stress through transcriptional control of proteostasis.
**Authors:** You K, Wang L, Chou CH, Liu K, Nakata T, Jaiswal A, Yao J, Lefkovith A, Omar A, Perrigoue JG, Towne JE, Regev A, Graham DB, Xavier RJ
**Journal:** Science (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.abb6896](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abb6896)
**PMC:** [PMC8315080](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8315080/)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2021 Jan 1;371(6524):eabb6896. doi: 10.1126/science.abb6896.

QRICH1 dictates the outcome of ER stress through transcriptional control of 
proteostasis.

You K(1), Wang L(1), Chou CH(1), Liu K(2)(3), Nakata T(2)(3), Jaiswal A(1), Yao 
J(2)(3), Lefkovith A(1), Omar A(2)(3), Perrigoue JG(4), Towne JE(4), Regev 
A(5)(6), Graham DB(7)(2)(3), Xavier RJ(7)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Center for Computational and Integrative Biology, Massachusetts General 
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Janssen Research and Development, LLC, Spring House, PA, USA.
(5)Klarman Cell Observatory, Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA. 
dgraham@broadinstitute.org aregev@broadinstitute.org 
xavier@molbio.mgh.harvard.edu.
(6)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biology, MIT, Cambridge, MA, 
USA.
(7)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA. 
dgraham@broadinstitute.org aregev@broadinstitute.org 
xavier@molbio.mgh.harvard.edu.

Tissue homeostasis is perturbed in a diversity of inflammatory pathologies. 
These changes can elicit endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, protein misfolding, 
and cell death. ER stress triggers the unfolded protein response (UPR), which 
can promote recovery of ER proteostasis and cell survival or trigger programmed 
cell death. Here, we leveraged single-cell RNA sequencing to define dynamic 
transcriptional states associated with the adaptive versus terminal UPR in the 
mouse intestinal epithelium. We integrated these transcriptional programs with 
genome-scale CRISPR screening to dissect the UPR pathway functionally. We 
identified QRICH1 as a key effector of the PERK-eIF2α axis of the UPR. QRICH1 
controlled a transcriptional program associated with translation and secretory 
networks that were specifically up-regulated in inflammatory pathologies. Thus, 
QRICH1 dictates cell fate in response to pathological ER stress.

Copyright © 2021, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/science.abb6896
PMCID: PMC8315080
PMID: 33384352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: R.J.X. is a consultant to 
Novartis and Nestle. A.R. is a founder and equity holder of Celsius 
Therapeutics, an equity holder in Immunitas Therapeutics and until August 31, 
2020 was an SAB member of Syros Pharmaceuticals, Neogene Therapeutics, Asimov 
and ThermoFisher Scientific. From August 1, 2020, A.R. is an employee of 
Genentech, a member of the Roche Group.
