---
pmid: '29042515'
title: Structural basis for regulation of the nucleo-cytoplasmic distribution of Bag6
  by TRC35.
authors:
- Mock JY
- Xu Y
- Ye Y
- Clemons WM Jr
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2017'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC5676875
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1702940114
---

# Structural basis for regulation of the nucleo-cytoplasmic distribution of Bag6 by TRC35.
**Authors:** Mock JY, Xu Y, Ye Y, Clemons WM Jr
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1702940114](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1702940114)
**PMC:** [PMC5676875](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5676875/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017 Oct 31;114(44):11679-11684. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1702940114. Epub 2017 Oct 17.

Structural basis for regulation of the nucleo-cytoplasmic distribution of Bag6 
by TRC35.

Mock JY(1), Xu Y(2), Ye Y(2), Clemons WM Jr(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, California Institute of 
Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institute of Health, Bethesda, MD 75534.
(3)Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, California Institute of 
Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125; clemons@caltech.edu.

The metazoan protein BCL2-associated athanogene cochaperone 6 (Bag6) forms a 
hetero-trimeric complex with ubiquitin-like 4A and transmembrane domain 
recognition complex 35 (TRC35). This Bag6 complex is involved in tail-anchored 
protein targeting and various protein quality-control pathways in the cytosol as 
well as regulating transcription and histone methylation in the nucleus. Here we 
present a crystal structure of Bag6 and its cytoplasmic retention factor TRC35, 
revealing that TRC35 is remarkably conserved throughout the opisthokont lineage 
except at the C-terminal Bag6-binding groove, which evolved to accommodate Bag6, 
a unique metazoan factor. While TRC35 and its fungal homolog, guided entry of 
tail-anchored protein 4 (Get4), utilize a conserved hydrophobic patch to bind 
their respective partners, Bag6 wraps around TRC35 on the opposite face relative 
to the Get4-5 interface. We further demonstrate that TRC35 binding is critical 
not only for occluding the Bag6 nuclear localization sequence from karyopherin α 
to retain Bag6 in the cytosol but also for preventing TRC35 from succumbing to 
RNF126-mediated ubiquitylation and degradation. The results provide a mechanism 
for regulation of Bag6 nuclear localization and the functional integrity of the 
Bag6 complex in the cytosol.

Published under the PNAS license.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1702940114
PMCID: PMC5676875
PMID: 29042515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

The metazoan protein BCL2-associated athanogene cochaperone 6 (Bag6) forms a hetero-trimeric complex with ubiquitin-like 4A and transmembrane domain recognition complex 35 (TRC35). This Bag6 complex is involved in tail-anchored protein targeting and various protein quality-control pathways in the cytosol as well as regulating transcription and histone methylation in the nucleus. Here we present a crystal structure of Bag6 and its cytoplasmic retention factor TRC35, revealing that TRC35 is remarkably conserved throughout the opisthokont lineage except at the C-terminal Bag6-binding groove, which evolved to accommodate Bag6, a unique metazoan factor. While TRC35 and its fungal homolog, guided entry of tail-anchored protein 4 (Get4), utilize a conserved hydrophobic patch to bind their respective partners, Bag6 wraps around TRC35 on the opposite face relative to the Get4–5 interface. We further demonstrate that TRC35 binding is critical not only for occluding the Bag6 nuclear localization sequence from karyopherin α to retain Bag6 in the cytosol but also for preventing TRC35 from succumbing to RNF126-mediated ubiquitylation and degradation. The results provide a mechanism for regulation of Bag6 nuclear localization and the functional integrity of the Bag6 complex in the cytosol.

Discussion

Bag6 is a critical scaffolding factor that forms a stable complex with TRC35 and Ubl4A and is involved in protein targeting, protein quality control, and transcription regulation. While there is ample evidence that Bag6 plays both cytosolic and nuclear roles, it is unclear how the localization of Bag6 is regulated. Here we report the structure of the Bag6 NLS region bound to its cytosolic retention factor TRC35, and suggest a mechanism for the regulation of Bag6 localization.

The remarkable conservation of TRC35 both in sequence ( Fig. S3 ) and at the structural level ( Fig. S1 ) from yeast to human can be attributed to the role of TRC35 as a hub of protein–protein interactions in the TRC pathway. The most important interaction, based on its conservation, is between TRC35 and TRC40 ( Fig. S2 ). This interaction is critical for the regulation of TA protein transfer ( 3 , 13 ) and, as shown in fungal Get4, for release of Get3/TRC40 from the ER membrane to restore the cytosolic pool of complex ready for TA protein transfer ( 34 ). The importance of linking TRC35 homologs to Ubl4A homologs is sustained in humans despite the differences in structural features ( 15 ). In metazoans, the component Bag6 acts as a scaffold to link TRC35 to Ubl4A. The Bag6–TRC35 structure reveals that TRC35 binds this binding partner utilizing conserved patches in a distinct fashion ( Fig. 1 ). This led to the expansion of the TRC35 protein–protein interaction network while maintaining its crucial interaction with TRC40.

Our results also show that TRC35 acts as an intermolecular mask to Bag6 NLS in a role similarly performed in other pathways. Examples of other cytosolic retention factor pairs include IκB and NF-κB ( 35 ) and BRAP2 that retains HMG20A ( 36 ). Unlike other cytoplasmic retention factors, which have only been shown to bind their target NLS-containing proteins for occlusion of the NLS, TRC35 also plays a distinct role in the cytoplasmic TA targeting and protein quality control when in complex with Bag6. This dual functionality may be evolutionarily conserved. In yeast, fungal Get4 binds the NTD of Get5, which appears to contain a functional NLS that directs Get5 to the nucleus during a Get5-mediated stress response ( 37 ).

These results allow speculation of possible regulatory mechanism for Bag6 nuclear localization. First, disrupting the Bag6–TRC35 interface by introducing alanine mutations led to ubiquitylation of TRC35 ( Fig. S5 ), which is mediated by RNF126. Knocking down Bag6 has been shown to reduce levels of TRC35 in HeLa cells ( 22 ), suggesting that Bag6 is required for TRC35 stability in vivo. We also showed that KPNA2 has a lower affinity for Bag6 than TRC35 ( Fig. 5 ), which suggests that for Bag6 to bind KPNA and translocate into the nucleus, it needs to be free of TRC35. The most likely explanation is that cells regulate Bag6 localization by modulating Bag6 levels or decreasing TRC35 levels. In humans, the Bag6 rs3117582 single nucleotide polymorphism found in the promoter region of Bag6 likely affects expression levels and is associated with higher incidence of lung cancer ( 38 – 40 ) and osteoarthritis ( 41 ). The localization could also be pretranslationally regulated with differential splicing. In brain and breast tissue, for instance, Bag6 isoforms that lack the NLS are expressed at higher levels than isoforms with the NLS ( 42 ).

Our findings establish TRC35 as a universally conserved protein in the opisthokont lineage in both structure and function. These findings support the model in which TRC35 is an important hub of a protein–protein interaction network with its interaction with TRC40 at the core. Higher eukaryotes expanded on this network by the addition of Bag6. Our biochemical studies unequivocally establish TRC35 as a cytosolic retention factor of Bag6 and suggest that Bag6 needs to be in excess for nuclear localization. However, how different cell types regulate Bag6 localization, whether the regulation can be mediated by specific stress, and the biological implications of differential distribution of Bag6 are important questions for future studies.

Materials and Methods

Detailed descriptions of experiments are provided in SI Materials and Methods . Briefly, for crystallization and in vitro binding assays human genes were subcloned and expressed in Escherichia coli . Proteins were purified using affinity chromatography, anion-exchange, and size-exclusion chromatography. Truncated fragments of Bag6 and TRC35 were crystallized, and the structure was determined using molecular-replacement single-wavelength anomalous dispersion. The genomes were surveyed using MEME suite ( 43 ). The IP assays were carried out using 293T cell extracts. A combination of three siRNAs against RNF126 was added to 293T cells. MG132 (10 µM) was added to inhibit the proteasome. Cos7 cells were used for localization assays.
