---
pmid: '10802064'
title: Functional characterization of human sphingosine kinase-1.
authors:
- Nava VE
- Lacana E
- Poulton S
- Liu H
- Sugiura M
- Kono K
- Milstien S
- Kohama T
- Spiegel S
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(00)01510-6
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Functional characterization of human sphingosine kinase-1.
**Authors:** Nava VE, Lacana E, Poulton S, Liu H, Sugiura M, Kono K, Milstien S, Kohama T, Spiegel S
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0014-5793(00)01510-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0014-5793(00)01510-6)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2000 May 4;473(1):81-4. doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(00)01510-6.

Functional characterization of human sphingosine kinase-1.

Nava VE(1), Lacana E, Poulton S, Liu H, Sugiura M, Kono K, Milstien S, Kohama T, 
Spiegel S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Georgetown University 
Medical Center, 353 Basic Science Building, 3900 Reservoir Road NW, Washington, 
DC 20007, USA.

Sphingosine kinase catalyzes the phosphorylation of sphingosine to form 
sphingosine 1-phosphate (SPP), a novel lipid mediator with both intra- and 
extracellular functions. Based on sequence identity to murine sphingosine kinase 
(mSPHK1a), we cloned and characterized the first human sphingosine kinase 
(hSPHK1). The open reading frame of hSPHK1 encodes a 384 amino acid protein with 
85% identity and 92% similarity to mSPHK1a at the amino acid level. Similar to 
mSPHK1a, when HEK293 cells were transfected with hSPHK1, there were marked 
increases in sphingosine kinase activity resulting in elevated SPP levels. 
hSPHK1 also specifically phosphorylated D-erythro-sphingosine and to a lesser 
extent sphinganine, but not other lipids, such as D,L-threo-dihydrosphingosine, 
N, N-dimethylsphingosine, diacylglycerol, ceramide, or phosphatidylinositol. 
Northern analysis revealed that hSPHK1 was widely expressed with highest levels 
in adult liver, kidney, heart and skeletal muscle. Thus, hSPHK1 belongs to a 
highly conserved unique lipid kinase family that regulates diverse biological 
functions.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(00)01510-6
PMID: 10802064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
