---
pmid: '17318177'
title: A novel TBP-associated factor of SL1 functions in RNA polymerase I transcription.
authors:
- Gorski JJ
- Pathak S
- Panov K
- Kasciukovic T
- Panova T
- Russell J
- Zomerdijk JC
journal: EMBO J
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1829371
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601601
---

# A novel TBP-associated factor of SL1 functions in RNA polymerase I transcription.
**Authors:** Gorski JJ, Pathak S, Panov K, Kasciukovic T, Panova T, Russell J, Zomerdijk JC
**Journal:** EMBO J (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7601601](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7601601)
**PMC:** [PMC1829371](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1829371/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2007 Mar 21;26(6):1560-8. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601601. Epub 2007 Feb
 22.

A novel TBP-associated factor of SL1 functions in RNA polymerase I 
transcription.

Gorski JJ(1), Pathak S, Panov K, Kasciukovic T, Panova T, Russell J, Zomerdijk 
JC.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gene Regulation and Expression, College of Life Sciences, 
Wellcome Trust Biocentre, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK.

In mammalian RNA polymerase I transcription, SL1, an assembly of TBP and 
associated factors (TAFs), is essential for preinitiation complex formation at 
ribosomal RNA gene promoters in vitro. We provide evidence for a novel component 
of SL1, TAF(I)41 (MGC5306), which functions in Pol I transcription. TAF(I)41 
resides at the rDNA promoter in the nucleolus and co-purifies and 
co-immunoprecipitates with SL1. TAF(I)41 immunodepletion from nuclear extracts 
dramatically reduces Pol I transcription; addition of SL1 restores the ability 
of these extracts to support Pol I transcription. In cells, siRNA-mediated 
decreased expression of TAF(I)41 leads to loss of SL1 from the rDNA promoter in 
vivo, with concomitant loss of Pol I from the rDNA and reduced synthesis of the 
pre-rRNA. Extracts from these cells support reduced levels of Pol I 
transcription; addition of SL1 to the extracts raises the level of Pol I 
transcription. These data suggest that TAF(I)41 is integral to transcriptionally 
active SL1 and imply a role for SL1, including the TAF(I)41 subunit, in Pol I 
recruitment and, therefore, preinitiation complex formation in vivo.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601601
PMCID: PMC1829371
PMID: 17318177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
