---
pmid: '30703347'
title: LncRNA KCNQ1OT1 promoted BMP2 expression to regulate osteogenic differentiation
  by sponging miRNA-214.
authors:
- Wang CG
- Liao Z
- Xiao H
- Liu H
- Hu YH
- Liao QD
- Zhong D
journal: Exp Mol Pathol
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2019.01.012
---

# LncRNA KCNQ1OT1 promoted BMP2 expression to regulate osteogenic differentiation by sponging miRNA-214.
**Authors:** Wang CG, Liao Z, Xiao H, Liu H, Hu YH, Liao QD, Zhong D
**Journal:** Exp Mol Pathol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yexmp.2019.01.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yexmp.2019.01.012)

## Abstract

1. Exp Mol Pathol. 2019 Apr;107:77-84. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2019.01.012. Epub
2019  Jan 28.

LncRNA KCNQ1OT1 promoted BMP2 expression to regulate osteogenic differentiation 
by sponging miRNA-214.

Wang CG(1), Liao Z(1), Xiao H(1), Liu H(1), Hu YH(1), Liao QD(1), Zhong D(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha 410008, PR China.
(2)Department of Orthopaedics, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha 410008, PR China. Electronic address: Dr_Zhongda@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Osteogenic differentiation of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells 
(BMSCs) is of much significance for bone formation, the imbalance of it would 
result in osteoporosis and other pathological bone defects. Increasing evidences 
showed that long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) and miRNAs played vital roles in the 
regulation of osteogenic differentiation. LncRNA KCNQ1OT1 was often regarded as 
an imprinted lncRNA and was related to tumor progression, while its function in 
osteogenic differentiation remained unclear.
METHOD: qRT-PCR was performed to detect the expression of KCNQ1OT1, miR-214 and 
osteogenesis-related genes BMP2, Runx2, OPN, and OCN. Western blotting was 
carried out to detect osteogenesis-related markers. The osteoblastic phenotype 
was evidenced by alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity and Alizarin Red S 
accumulation detection. Bioinformatics and luciferase assays were used to 
predict and validate the interaction between KCNQ1OT1 and miR-214 as well as 
BMP2 and miR-214.
RESULTS: KCNQ1OT1 was significantly up-regulated during the process of 
osteogenic induction while miR-214 was contrarily down-regulated. Knockdown of 
KCNQ1OT1 inhibited osteogenic differentiation and down-regulated BMP2 and 
osteogenesis-related genes. It was also confirmed that KCNQ1OT1 directly 
interacted with miR-214. Meanwhile, miR-214 could bind to 3'UTR of BMP2 and 
therefore inhibited its expression. Furthermore, co-transfection of miR-214 
inhibitor could rescue the down-regulation of BMP2 and osteogenesis-related 
genes and osteogenic differentiation suppression induced by KCNQ1OT1 knockdown. 
Moreover, miR-214 inhibitor significantly reversed the decreased protein levels 
of p-Smad1/5/8, Runx2 and Osterix induced by shKCNQ1OT1.
CONCLUSIONS: KCNQ1OT1 positively regulated osteogenic differentiation of BMSCs 
by acting as a ceRNA to regulate BMP2 expression through sponging miR-214.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2019.01.012
PMID: 30703347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
