---
pmid: '17689535'
title: The interaction between endogenous calcineurin and the plasma membrane calcium-dependent
  ATPase is isoform specific in breast cancer cells.
authors:
- Holton M
- Yang D
- Wang W
- Mohamed TM
- Neyses L
- Armesilla AL
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2007.07.054
---

# The interaction between endogenous calcineurin and the plasma membrane calcium-dependent ATPase is isoform specific in breast cancer cells.
**Authors:** Holton M, Yang D, Wang W, Mohamed TM, Neyses L, Armesilla AL
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2007.07.054](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2007.07.054)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2007 Aug 21;581(21):4115-9. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2007.07.054.
Epub  2007 Jul 31.

The interaction between endogenous calcineurin and the plasma membrane 
calcium-dependent ATPase is isoform specific in breast cancer cells.

Holton M(1), Yang D, Wang W, Mohamed TM, Neyses L, Armesilla AL.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Pharmacology Group, Research Institute in Healthcare Sciences, 
School of Applied Sciences, University of Wolverhampton, Wulfruna Street, 
Wolverhampton WV1 1SB, UK.

Plasma membrane calcium/calmodulin-dependent ATPases (PMCAs) are high affinity 
calcium pumps that extrude calcium from the cell. Emerging evidence suggests a 
novel role for PMCAs as regulators of calcium/calmodulin-dependent signal 
transduction pathways via interaction with specific partner proteins. In this 
work, we demonstrate that endogenous human PMCA2 and -4 both interact with the 
signal transduction phosphatase, calcineurin, whereas, no interaction was 
detected with PMCA1. The strongest interaction was observed between PMCA2 and 
calcineurin. The domain of PMCA2 involved in the interaction is equivalent to 
that reported for PMCA4b. PMCA2-calcineurin interaction results in inhibition of 
the calcineurin/nuclear factor of activated T-cells signalling pathway.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2007.07.054
PMID: 17689535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
