---
pmid: '37080964'
title: Molecular characterization of AIFM2/FSP1 inhibition by iFSP1-like molecules.
authors:
- Xavier da Silva TN
- Schulte C
- Alves AN
- Maric HM
- Friedmann Angeli JP
journal: Cell Death Dis
year: '2023'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC10119282
doi: 10.1038/s41419-023-05787-z
---

# Molecular characterization of AIFM2/FSP1 inhibition by iFSP1-like molecules.
**Authors:** Xavier da Silva TN, Schulte C, Alves AN, Maric HM, Friedmann Angeli JP
**Journal:** Cell Death Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41419-023-05787-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41419-023-05787-z)
**PMC:** [PMC10119282](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10119282/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Death Dis. 2023 Apr 21;14(4):281. doi: 10.1038/s41419-023-05787-z.

Molecular characterization of AIFM2/FSP1 inhibition by iFSP1-like molecules.

Xavier da Silva TN(1), Schulte C(1), Alves AN(2), Maric HM(1), Friedmann Angeli 
JP(3).

Author information:
(1)Rudolf Virchow Zentrum; Center for Integrative and Translational Bioimaging, 
University of Würzburg, Josef-Schneider-Str. 2, 97080, Würzburg, Germany.
(2)Technische Universität Berlin; Institute of Chemistry, Straße des 17. Juni 
124, 10623, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Rudolf Virchow Zentrum; Center for Integrative and Translational Bioimaging, 
University of Würzburg, Josef-Schneider-Str. 2, 97080, Würzburg, Germany. 
pedro.angeli@virchow.uni-wuerzburg.de.

Ferroptosis is a form of cell death characterized by phospholipid peroxidation, 
where numerous studies have suggested that the induction of ferroptosis is a 
therapeutic strategy to target therapy refractory cancer entities. Ferroptosis 
suppressor protein 1 (FSP1), an NAD(P)H-ubiquinone reductase, is a key 
determinant of ferroptosis vulnerability, and its pharmacological inhibition was 
shown to strongly sensitize cancer cells to ferroptosis. A first generation of 
FSP1 inhibitors, exemplified by the small molecule iFSP1, has been reported; 
however, the molecular mechanisms underlying inhibition have not been 
characterized in detail. In this study, we explore the species-specific 
inhibition of iFSP1 on the human isoform to gain insights into its mechanism of 
action. Using a combination of cellular, biochemical, and computational methods, 
we establish a critical contribution of a species-specific aromatic architecture 
that is essential for target engagement. The results described here provide 
valuable insights for the rational development of second-generation FSP1 
inhibitors combined with a tracer for screening the druggable pocket. In 
addition, we pose a cautionary notice for using iFSP1 in animal models, 
specifically murine models.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41419-023-05787-z
PMCID: PMC10119282
PMID: 37080964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
