---
pmid: '11779465'
title: Complementary signaling pathways regulate the unfolded protein response and
  are required for C. elegans development.
authors:
- Shen X
- Ellis RE
- Lee K
- Liu CY
- Yang K
- Solomon A
- Yoshida H
- Morimoto R
- Kurnit DM
- Mori K
- Kaufman RJ
journal: Cell
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00612-2
---

# Complementary signaling pathways regulate the unfolded protein response and are required for C. elegans development.
**Authors:** Shen X, Ellis RE, Lee K, Liu CY, Yang K, Solomon A, Yoshida H, Morimoto R, Kurnit DM, Mori K, Kaufman RJ
**Journal:** Cell (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00612-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00612-2)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2001 Dec 28;107(7):893-903. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00612-2.

Complementary signaling pathways regulate the unfolded protein response and are 
required for C. elegans development.

Shen X(1), Ellis RE, Lee K, Liu CY, Yang K, Solomon A, Yoshida H, Morimoto R, 
Kurnit DM, Mori K, Kaufman RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical School, 
Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a transcriptional and translational 
intracellular signaling pathway activated by the accumulation of unfolded 
proteins in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). We have used C. elegans 
as a genetic model system to dissect UPR signaling in a multicellular organism. 
C. elegans requires ire-1-mediated splicing of xbp-1 mRNA for UPR gene 
transcription and survival upon ER stress. In addition, ire-1/xbp-1 acts with 
pek-1, a protein kinase that mediates translation attenuation, in complementary 
pathways that are essential for worm development and survival. We propose that 
UPR transcriptional activation by ire-1 as well as translational attenuation by 
pek-1 maintain ER homeostasis. The results demonstrate that the UPR and ER 
homeostasis are essential for metazoan development.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00612-2
PMID: 11779465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
