---
pmid: '9430585'
title: Import of mitochondrial carriers mediated by essential proteins of the intermembrane
  space.
authors:
- Koehler CM
- Jarosch E
- Tokatlidis K
- Schmid K
- Schweyen RJ
- Schatz G
journal: Science
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.279.5349.369
---

# Import of mitochondrial carriers mediated by essential proteins of the intermembrane space.
**Authors:** Koehler CM, Jarosch E, Tokatlidis K, Schmid K, Schweyen RJ, Schatz G
**Journal:** Science (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.279.5349.369](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.279.5349.369)

## Abstract

1. Science. 1998 Jan 16;279(5349):369-73. doi: 10.1126/science.279.5349.369.

Import of mitochondrial carriers mediated by essential proteins of the 
intermembrane space.

Koehler CM(1), Jarosch E, Tokatlidis K, Schmid K, Schweyen RJ, Schatz G.

Author information:
(1)Biozentrum, University of Basel, Klingelbergstrasse 70, CH-4056 Basel, 
Switzerland.

In order to reach the inner membrane of the mitochondrion, multispanning carrier 
proteins must cross the aqueous intermembrane space. Two essential proteins of 
that space, Tim10p and Tim12p, were shown to mediate import of multispanning 
carriers into the inner membrane. Both proteins formed a complex with the inner 
membrane protein Tim22p. Tim10p readily dissociated from the complex and was 
required to transport carrier precursors across the outer membrane; Tim12p was 
firmly bound to Tim22p and mediated the insertion of carriers into the inner 
membrane. Neither protein was required for protein import into the other 
mitochondrial compartments. Both proteins may function as intermembrane space 
chaperones for the highly insoluble carrier proteins.

DOI: 10.1126/science.279.5349.369
PMID: 9430585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
