---
pmid: '28249159'
title: Composition and Function of Mutant Swi/Snf Complexes.
authors:
- Dutta A
- Sardiu M
- Gogol M
- Gilmore J
- Zhang D
- Florens L
- Abmayr SM
- Washburn MP
- Workman JL
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5837817
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2017.01.058
---

# Composition and Function of Mutant Swi/Snf Complexes.
**Authors:** Dutta A, Sardiu M, Gogol M, Gilmore J, Zhang D, Florens L, Abmayr SM, Washburn MP, Workman JL
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2017.01.058](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2017.01.058)
**PMC:** [PMC5837817](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5837817/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Rep. 2017 Feb 28;18(9):2124-2134. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2017.01.058.

Composition and Function of Mutant Swi/Snf Complexes.

Dutta A(1), Sardiu M(2), Gogol M(2), Gilmore J(2), Zhang D(3), Florens L(2), 
Abmayr SM(4), Washburn MP(5), Workman JL(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Rhode Island, 120 
Flagg Road, Kingston, RI 02881, USA. Electronic address: arnob@uri.edu.
(2)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 East 50th Street, Kansas City, 
MO 64110, USA.
(3)Institute of Cancer Biological Therapy, Xuzhou Medical University, Jiangsu 
221002, China.
(4)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 East 50th Street, Kansas City, 
MO 64110, USA; Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Kansas 
Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.
(5)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 East 50th Street, Kansas City, 
MO 64110, USA; Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of 
Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.
(6)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 East 50th Street, Kansas City, 
MO 64110, USA. Electronic address: jlw@stowers.org.

The 12-subunit Swi/Snf chromatin remodeling complex is conserved from yeast to 
humans. It functions to alter nucleosome positions by either sliding nucleosomes 
on DNA or evicting histones. Interestingly, 20% of all human cancers carry 
mutations in subunits of the Swi/Snf complex. Many of these mutations cause 
protein instability and loss, resulting in partial Swi/Snf complexes. Although 
several studies have shown that histone acetylation and activator-dependent 
recruitment of Swi/Snf regulate its function, it is less well understood how 
subunits regulate stability and function of the complex. Using functional 
proteomic and genomic approaches, we have assembled the network architecture of 
yeast Swi/Snf. In addition, we find that subunits of the Swi/Snf complex 
regulate occupancy of the catalytic subunit Snf2, thereby modulating gene 
transcription. Our findings have direct bearing on how cancer-causing mutations 
in orthologous subunits of human Swi/Snf may lead to aberrant regulation of gene 
expression by this complex.

Copyright © 2017 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2017.01.058
PMCID: PMC5837817
PMID: 28249159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
