---
pmid: '23667151'
title: Using natural variation in Drosophila to discover previously unknown endoplasmic
  reticulum stress genes.
authors:
- Chow CY
- Wolfner MF
- Clark AG
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2013'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3670321
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1307125110
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Using natural variation in Drosophila to discover previously unknown endoplasmic reticulum stress genes.
**Authors:** Chow CY, Wolfner MF, Clark AG
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1307125110](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1307125110)
**PMC:** [PMC3670321](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3670321/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 May 28;110(22):9013-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1307125110. Epub 2013 May 10.

Using natural variation in Drosophila to discover previously unknown endoplasmic 
reticulum stress genes.

Chow CY(1), Wolfner MF, Clark AG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 
14853-2703, USA.

Natural genetic variation is a rich resource for identifying novel elements of 
cellular pathways such as endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. ER stress occurs 
when misfolded proteins accumulate in the ER and cells respond with the 
conserved unfolded protein response (UPR), which includes large-scale gene 
expression changes. Although ER stress can be a cause or a modifying factor of 
human disease, little is known of the amount of variation in the response to ER 
stress and the genes contributing to such variation. To study natural variation 
in ER stress response in a model system, we measured the survival time in 
response to tunicamycin-induced ER stress in flies from 114 lines from the 
sequenced Drosophila Genetic Reference Panel of wild-derived inbred strains. 
These lines showed high heterogeneity in survival time under ER stress 
conditions. To identify the genes that may be driving this phenotypic variation, 
we profiled ER stress-induced gene expression and performed an association 
study. Microarray analysis identified variation in transcript levels of numerous 
known and previously unknown ER stress-responsive genes. Survival time was 
significantly associated with polymorphisms in candidate genes with known (i.e., 
Xbp1) and unknown roles in ER stress. Functional testing found that 17 of 25 
tested candidate genes from the association study have putative roles in ER 
stress. In both approaches, one-third of ER stress genes had human orthologs 
that contribute to human disease. This study establishes Drosophila as a useful 
model for studying variation in ER stress and identifying ER stress genes that 
may contribute to human disease.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1307125110
PMCID: PMC3670321
PMID: 23667151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Natural genetic variation is a rich resource for identifying novel elements of cellular pathways such as endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. ER stress occurs when misfolded proteins accumulate in the ER and cells respond with the conserved unfolded protein response (UPR), which includes large-scale gene expression changes. Although ER stress can be a cause or a modifying factor of human disease, little is known of the amount of variation in the response to ER stress and the genes contributing to such variation. To study natural variation in ER stress response in a model system, we measured the survival time in response to tunicamycin-induced ER stress in flies from 114 lines from the sequenced Drosophila Genetic Reference Panel of wild-derived inbred strains. These lines showed high heterogeneity in survival time under ER stress conditions. To identify the genes that may be driving this phenotypic variation, we profiled ER stress-induced gene expression and performed an association study. Microarray analysis identified variation in transcript levels of numerous known and previously unknown ER stress-responsive genes. Survival time was significantly associated with polymorphisms in candidate genes with known (i.e., Xbp1 ) and unknown roles in ER stress. Functional testing found that 17 of 25 tested candidate genes from the association study have putative roles in ER stress. In both approaches, one-third of ER stress genes had human orthologs that contribute to human disease. This study establishes Drosophila as a useful model for studying variation in ER stress and identifying ER stress genes that may contribute to human disease.

Discussion

We report a screen of genetic variation in ER stress response in Drosophila . We find that survival under TM-induced ER stress conditions is highly variable across the DGRP lines. We took two complementary approaches to identify the genetic elements contributing to this variation in TM-induced ER stress response. By profiling TM-induced ER stress gene expression changes, we sought to catalog, across genotypes, the genes that responded the most variably to TM-induced ER stress. However, it is impossible to know from expression data alone whether these variable responsive genes are a cause or effect of the survival differences observed. Thus, we also took a genetic-association approach to identify polymorphisms that may contribute to the variability in survival on TM-induced ER stress conditions. This combined approach of quantifying gene expression and genetic variation identified numerous putative ER stress genes that may be particularly important in understanding inter-individual variation in ER stress response.

Although the canonical ER stress pathway is well studied, there are likely numerous aspects of this process that remain undiscovered. Both methods used in this study identified known ER stress genes, indicating that at least some genes previously unknown to be involved in ER stress have also been identified here. In addition to the many individual ERSRGs identified in the microarray analysis, we found enrichment for genes encoding CHK kinase-like proteins, a subfamily of choline kinases (16 genes; Zinc finger C4, and HLH domain containing kinases domain). The function of these CHK kinase-like proteins is unknown in any organism. A study in Caenorhabditis elegans demonstrated that two genes with choline kinase activity are up-regulated by ER stress ( 45 ), but the exact role of choline kinase genes in ER stress is unknown. Choline kinases catalyze the first reaction in phosphatidylcholine (PC) biosynthesis ( 46 ). PC is a major component of cellular membranes, and levels of PC can trigger growth arrest and apoptosis ( 46 ). Abnormal PC/phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) ratios contribute to impaired ER function and chronic ER stress ( 47 ). Regulation of genes encoding CHK kinase-like proteins by ER stress might be a way to normalize PC/PE ratios to relieve ER stress. These genes also contain a zinc finger domain, suggesting a possible role in transcription.

Although survival on a drug might reflect a number of causes, we believe that our assay was actually reflective of ER stress. For example, our association analysis identified a SNP in the classic UPR gene Xbp1 . Furthermore, some of the candidate genes identified induce or disrupt the ER stress response when gene function is perturbed. These observations suggest that the 78% of the association candidate genes not previously known to contribute to the ER stress response might be important to this response. Some of these ER stress candidates are within broad functional groups with previously known roles in ER stress. Of note, we identified four genes ( CG11594 , CG9003 , RunxA , and CG11873 ) that had no prior known function in ER stress, but had been previously identified as candidate genes in oxidative stress response in the same DGRP lines ( 23 ). There are functional links between oxidative and ER stress ( 42 ), and the fact that these genes appeared as candidates in both processes suggests that there may be a genetic convergence of these two pathways in the DGRP. We also identified six association candidates ( CG12428 , bgm , Egm , CG9518 , RdgA , and CG5162 ) with known or putative roles in lipid metabolism. Aberrant lipid metabolism is increasingly recognized as a critical cause and effect of ER stress ( 39 , 47 , 48 ). This observation, combined with the overrepresentation of CHK-kinase-like genes in the expression analysis (see above), suggests that lipid metabolism may play a particularly important role in variation in TM-induced ER stress response.

Functional testing demonstrated that many of the candidates identified in our association study have potential roles in TM-induced ER stress response. We found that 76% of the tested candidates with an effect on survival have no known role in ER stress. For example, CG15611 encodes a putative Rho guanyl-nucleotide exchange factor (RhoGEF) that is thought to regulate vesicle budding from the Golgi ( 34 ). CG15611 may regulate protein trafficking between the ER and Golgi and function in eliminating misfolded proteins. Megator encodes a nuclear pore protein ( 49 ). Megator has no known function in ER stress, but Ire1 has been shown to interact with some components of the nuclear pore complex in yeast ( 50 ). Although extensive functional studies are needed to identify specific functions in ER stress response, these verified candidates provide a promising pool of unstudied ER stress genes.

Nominating genes for future study can be challenging. Genes identified by both approaches in this study might be especially important. There were four genes in common between the candidate genes in the association study and genes whose expression was induced during the early time point ( CG10962 , CG11594 , KrT95D , and tkv ). There were two genes in common between the association study and the late time point ( CG10962 and CG34228 ). Strikingly, CG10962 was found in the association study and both time points. CG10962 is orthologous to the human gene DHRS11 and is a member of the short-chain dehydrogenases/reductases (SDR) family. Proteins in the SDR family may have a previously unappreciated role in ER stress.

The ultimate goal of this study was to use Drosophila natural variation as a model to identify ER stress genes that may contribute to variation in the human ER stress response. Because the basic UPR pathways are well conserved between Drosophila and human, Drosophila is a good model for studying ER stress. We quantified the potential relevance of our study to humans by identifying the genes with human orthologs. We found that 52%, 68%, and 63% of ER stress genes in this study have human orthologs (early response, late response, and association study, respectively) ( Datasets S2 and S5 ). The majority of genes that contribute to variation in ER stress response in Drosophila are conserved and are very likely to have similar roles in the human ER stress response. To test the parallels between our in vivo Drosophila results and those in mammals, we compared our results to in vivo TM-induced responses in the mouse. Of the genes in our study with clear mouse orthologs, 47%, 48%, and 21% (early response, late response, and association study, respectively) overlap with the in vivo TM-induced liver transcriptional response in mouse ( Datasets S2 and S5 ) ( 51 ).

Only one other published study investigated variation in ER stress response in any organism ( 15 ). That study measured the variation in ER stress transcriptional response in a collection of human cell lines. A comparison of the transcriptional response of whole flies to that of immortalized cell lines might nominate candidates for important conserved genes that show variation across species. To determine the overlap in variable ER stress genes in Drosophila and human, we compared our results with those reported by Dombroski et al. for human cells ( 15 ). Of the conserved genes from our microarray study, 29% and 27% (early and late response, respectively) also showed expression variation in ER-stressed human cells ( Dataset S2 ), as did, strikingly, 17% of the candidate ER stress genes from our association study ( Dataset S5 ). The association candidates found in our Drosophila study, which also showed variation in human cells, might be particularly important candidates. We also performed a PubMed literature search and found that 10%, 12%, and 21% of genes with human orthologs (early response, late response, and association study, respectively), not listed in Dombroski et al. ( 15 ), have been implicated in ER stress ( Datasets S2 and S5 ). This high level of conservation between Drosophila and human suggests that results on ER stress variation in Drosophila have promise to be translatable to human biology.

Because ER stress is a major contributor to disease, we also identified the genes detected in our study whose human orthologs have been implicated in human disease. Genes that cause Mendelian-inherited disease, or are associated with disease, have entries in the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man database (OMIM). We found that 32%, 23%, and 28% of conserved ER stress genes in our study (early response, late response, and association, respectively) have orthologs with entries in OMIM and contribute to human disease ( Datasets S2 and S5 ). Many diseases are affected by these ER stress genes. For example, orthologs of genes associated with neurological disease were identified in the microarray and association study, including RhoGEF3 (human gene: ARHGEF9 ; disease: epileptic encephalopathy), CG7804 ( TARDBP ; ALS), CG10420 ( SIL1 ; Marinesco–Sjogren syndrome), Tsp29Fb ( TSPAN7 ; X-linked mental retardation), CG13423 ( BLMH ; Alzheimer’s disease), and Cbs ( CBS ; homocystinuria). Orthologs of genes associated with cancer were also identified, including l(2)37Cc ( PHB ; breast cancer), and RunxA ( RUNX1 ; leukemia). We also identified orthologs involved in diabetes, metabolic disorders, and developmental disorders. Knowledge of the role of these genes in ER stress may lead to a better understanding of how ER stress contributes to the pathophysiology of their associated diseases.

Our results highlight the value of using genetic variation in ER stress response as an avenue to identify genes and understand mechanisms mediating this cellular response. By taking advantage of the rich DGRP resource, we identified numerous genes shared with the human ER stress response as well as many candidate putative ER stress genes. A subset of genes involved in TM-induced ER stress variation in Drosophila also contributes to variation in human cultured cells. Further study of the role of genes identified here in mediating differences among genetic lines in TM-induced ER stress response could proceed rapidly in the Drosophila model. Understanding the genes contributing to variation in ER stress response will not only further our understanding of this basic, conserved pathway, but will also contribute to the understanding of the mechanistic link between ER stress and different diseases.

Materials and Methods

We used 114 lines from the DGRP in this study ( Dataset S1 ). To measure survival under constant ER stress, 3-d-old male flies were fed a diet with or without the ER stress-inducing drug TM (Sigma). The drug exposure protocol was similar to that used by Girardot et al. ( 16 ). Details of fly maintenance, drug exposure, and statistical analysis of survival can be found in SI Materials and Methods . Expression was measured on Agilent 4 × 44K Drosophila Gene Expression Microarrays at two time points: 8 h (early time point) and 20 h (late time point) of drug exposure. Details of microarray analysis can be found in SI Materials and Methods . To associate TM-induced ER stress survival time with genome-wide SNPs, we used a web tool developed for the DGRP, which applies a simple linear model to test the null hypothesis that the means of the genotypes at each SNP, tested one at a time, were homogeneous ( http://dgrp.gnets.ncsu.edu/ ). To validate association candidates for a potential role in ER stress, P -element insertion lines for 25 candidate genes were tested for survival on TM. To standardize genetic background, all P -element insertion lines that were not isogenic with the laboratory strain w 1118 were backcrossed to the w 1118 background for more than five generations. Because many of the P elements were homozygous lethal, we assessed effect of each P element in heterozygotes (over the w 1118 background), comparing them to control w 1118 flies. Survival analysis was performed as described above. Details of association analysis and functional analysis can be found in SI Materials and Methods .
