---
pmid: '22483113'
title: The structure of the XPF-ssDNA complex underscores the distinct roles of the
  XPF and ERCC1 helix- hairpin-helix domains in ss/ds DNA recognition.
authors:
- Das D
- Folkers GE
- van Dijk M
- Jaspers NG
- Hoeijmakers JH
- Kaptein R
- Boelens R
journal: Structure
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.str.2012.02.009
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The structure of the XPF-ssDNA complex underscores the distinct roles of the XPF and ERCC1 helix- hairpin-helix domains in ss/ds DNA recognition.
**Authors:** Das D, Folkers GE, van Dijk M, Jaspers NG, Hoeijmakers JH, Kaptein R, Boelens R
**Journal:** Structure (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.str.2012.02.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2012.02.009)

## Abstract

1. Structure. 2012 Apr 4;20(4):667-75. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2012.02.009. Epub 2012 
Apr 3.

The structure of the XPF-ssDNA complex underscores the distinct roles of the XPF 
and ERCC1 helix- hairpin-helix domains in ss/ds DNA recognition.

Das D(1), Folkers GE, van Dijk M, Jaspers NG, Hoeijmakers JH, Kaptein R, Boelens 
R.

Author information:
(1)Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 
3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Structure. 2012 Apr 4;20(4):566-8. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2012.03.004.

Human XPF/ERCC1 is a structure-specific DNA endonuclease that nicks the damaged 
DNA strand at the 5' end during nucleotide excision repair. We determined the 
structure of the complex of the C-terminal domain of XPF with 10 nt ssDNA. A 
positively charged region within the second helix of the first HhH motif 
contacts the ssDNA phosphate backbone. One guanine base is flipped out of 
register and positioned in a pocket contacting residues from both HhH motifs of 
XPF. Comparison to other HhH-containing proteins indicates a one-residue 
deletion in the second HhH motif of XPF that has altered the hairpin 
conformation, thereby permitting ssDNA interactions. Previous nuclear magnetic 
resonance studies showed that ERCC1 in the XPF-ERCC1 heterodimer can bind dsDNA. 
Combining the two observations gives a model that underscores the asymmetry of 
the human XPF/ERCC1 heterodimer in binding at an ss/ds DNA junction.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2012.02.009
PMID: 22483113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
