---
pmid: '11377428'
title: Binding of a peptide from a Streptococcus dysgalactiae MSCRAMM to the N-terminal
  F1 module pair of human fibronectin involves both modules.
authors:
- Schwarz-Linek U
- Plevin MJ
- Pickford AR
- Höök M
- Campbell ID
- Potts JR
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(01)02418-8
---

# Binding of a peptide from a Streptococcus dysgalactiae MSCRAMM to the N-terminal F1 module pair of human fibronectin involves both modules.
**Authors:** Schwarz-Linek U, Plevin MJ, Pickford AR, Höök M, Campbell ID, Potts JR
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0014-5793(01)02418-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0014-5793(01)02418-8)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2001 May 25;497(2-3):137-40. doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(01)02418-8.

Binding of a peptide from a Streptococcus dysgalactiae MSCRAMM to the N-terminal 
F1 module pair of human fibronectin involves both modules.

Schwarz-Linek U(1), Plevin MJ, Pickford AR, Höök M, Campbell ID, Potts JR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, UK.

Host invasion by a number of pathogenic bacteria such as staphylococci and 
streptococci involves binding to fibronectin, a ubiquitous extracellular matrix 
protein. On the bacterial side, host extracellular matrix adherence is mediated 
by MSCRAMMs (microbial surface components recognizing adhesive matrix molecules) 
which, in some cases, have been identified to be important virulence factors. In 
this study we used nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy to characterize the 
interaction of B3, a synthetic peptide derived from an adhesin of Streptococcus 
dysgalactiae, with the N-terminal module pair 1F12F1 of human fibronectin. 
1F12F1 chemical shift changes occurring on formation of the 1F12F1/B3 complex 
indicate that both modules bind to the peptide and that a similar region of each 
module is involved. A similar surface of the 4F15F1 module pair had previously 
been identified as the binding site for a fibronectin-binding peptide from 
Staphylococcus aureus.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(01)02418-8
PMID: 11377428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
