---
pmid: '10958686'
title: Regulation of histone deacetylase 4 by binding of 14-3-3 proteins.
authors:
- Wang AH
- Kruhlak MJ
- Wu J
- Bertos NR
- Vezmar M
- Posner BI
- Bazett-Jones DP
- Yang XJ
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC88766
doi: 10.1128/MCB.20.18.6904-6912.2000
---

# Regulation of histone deacetylase 4 by binding of 14-3-3 proteins.
**Authors:** Wang AH, Kruhlak MJ, Wu J, Bertos NR, Vezmar M, Posner BI, Bazett-Jones DP, Yang XJ
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.20.18.6904-6912.2000](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.20.18.6904-6912.2000)
**PMC:** [PMC88766](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC88766/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Sep;20(18):6904-12. doi: 10.1128/MCB.20.18.6904-6912.2000.

Regulation of histone deacetylase 4 by binding of 14-3-3 proteins.

Wang AH(1), Kruhlak MJ, Wu J, Bertos NR, Vezmar M, Posner BI, Bazett-Jones DP, 
Yang XJ.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, Department of Medicine, McGill University Health 
Centre, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Histone (de)acetylation is important for the regulation of fundamental 
biological processes such as gene expression and DNA recombination. Distinct 
classes of histone deacetylases (HDACs) have been identified, but how they are 
regulated in vivo remains largely unexplored. Here we describe results 
demonstrating that HDAC4, a member of class II human HDACs, is localized in the 
cytoplasm and/or the nucleus. Moreover, we have found that HDAC4 interacts with 
the 14-3-3 family of proteins that are known to bind specifically to conserved 
phosphoserine-containing motifs. Deletion analyses suggested that S246, S467, 
and S632 of HDAC4 mediate this interaction. Consistent with this, alanine 
substitutions of these serine residues abrogated 14-3-3 binding. Although these 
substitutions had minimal effects on the deacetylase activity of HDAC4, they 
stimulated its nuclear localization and thus led to enhanced transcriptional 
repression. These results indicate that 14-3-3 proteins negatively regulate 
HDAC4 by preventing its nuclear localization and thereby uncover a novel 
regulatory mechanism for HDACs.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.20.18.6904-6912.2000
PMCID: PMC88766
PMID: 10958686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
