---
pmid: '18440304'
title: LYRIC/AEG-1 overexpression modulates BCCIPalpha protein levels in prostate
  tumor cells.
authors:
- Ash SC
- Yang DQ
- Britt DE
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2573900
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.04.084
---

# LYRIC/AEG-1 overexpression modulates BCCIPalpha protein levels in prostate tumor cells.
**Authors:** Ash SC, Yang DQ, Britt DE
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.04.084](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.04.084)
**PMC:** [PMC2573900](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2573900/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Jun 27;371(2):333-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.04.084. Epub 2008 Apr 25.

LYRIC/AEG-1 overexpression modulates BCCIPalpha protein levels in prostate tumor 
cells.

Ash SC(1), Yang DQ, Britt DE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Rhode Island 
Hospital, and The Alpert Medical School, Brown University, 593 Eddy Street, Geo. 
362, Providence RI 02903, USA.

LYRIC/AEG-1 is a unique protein that has been shown to promote tumor cell 
migration and invasion through activation of the transcription factor NF-kappaB. 
We performed yeast two-hybrid screening to detect LYRIC/AEG-1 associated 
proteins, and identified BCCIP, a CDKN1A and BRCA2-associated protein involved 
in cell cycle regulation and DNA repair. Here, we demonstrate association 
between LYRIC/AEG-1 and BCCIP in mammalian cells, and define the region of 
interaction. Co-expression of the two proteins resulted in decreased levels of 
BCCIPalpha, an effect partially abrogated by proteasome inhibition. A truncated 
LYRIC/AEG-1 construct lacking the interaction region did not alter BCCIPalpha 
protein levels. Coincidentally, it was observed that overexpression of 
BCCIPalpha in DU145 prostate tumor cells induced an apparent neuroendocrine 
differentiation. In summary, our data suggest LYRIC/AEG-1 is a negative 
regulator of BCCIPalpha, promoting proteasomal degradation either through direct 
interaction, or potentially through an indirect mechanism involving downstream 
effects of the NF-kappaB signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.04.084
PMCID: PMC2573900
PMID: 18440304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
