---
pmid: '16794575'
title: Trans-activation of the DNA-damage signalling protein kinase Chk2 by T-loop
  exchange.
authors:
- Oliver AW
- Paul A
- Boxall KJ
- Barrie SE
- Aherne GW
- Garrett MD
- Mittnacht S
- Pearl LH
journal: EMBO J
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1500991
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601209
---

# Trans-activation of the DNA-damage signalling protein kinase Chk2 by T-loop exchange.
**Authors:** Oliver AW, Paul A, Boxall KJ, Barrie SE, Aherne GW, Garrett MD, Mittnacht S, Pearl LH
**Journal:** EMBO J (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7601209](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7601209)
**PMC:** [PMC1500991](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1500991/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2006 Jul 12;25(13):3179-90. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601209. Epub 2006
Jun  22.

Trans-activation of the DNA-damage signalling protein kinase Chk2 by T-loop 
exchange.

Oliver AW(1), Paul A, Boxall KJ, Barrie SE, Aherne GW, Garrett MD, Mittnacht S, 
Pearl LH.

Author information:
(1)Section of Structural Biology, Cancer Research UK DNA Repair Enzymes Group, 
The Institute of Cancer Research, Chelsea, London, UK. antony.oliver@icr.ac.uk

The protein kinase Chk2 (checkpoint kinase 2) is a major effector of the 
replication checkpoint. Chk2 activation is initiated by phosphorylation of 
Thr68, in the serine-glutamine/threonine-glutamine cluster domain (SCD), by ATM. 
The phosphorylated SCD-segment binds to the FHA domain of a second Chk2 
molecule, promoting dimerisation of the protein and triggering phosphorylation 
of the activation segment/T-loop in the kinase domain. We have now determined 
the structure of the kinase domain of human Chk2 in complexes with ADP and a 
small-molecule inhibitor debromohymenialdisine. The structure reveals a 
remarkable dimeric arrangement in which T-loops are exchanged between protomers, 
to form an active kinase conformation in trans. Biochemical data suggest that 
this dimer is the biologically active state promoted by ATM-phosphorylation, and 
also suggests a mechanism for dimerisation-driven activation of Chk2 by 
trans-phosphorylation.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601209
PMCID: PMC1500991
PMID: 16794575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
