---
pmid: '23404889'
title: The PP6 phosphatase regulates ABI5 phosphorylation and abscisic acid signaling
  in Arabidopsis.
authors:
- Dai M
- Xue Q
- Mccray T
- Margavage K
- Chen F
- Lee JH
- Nezames CD
- Guo L
- Terzaghi W
- Wan J
- Deng XW
- Wang H
journal: Plant Cell
year: '2013'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3608775
doi: 10.1105/tpc.112.105767
---

# The PP6 phosphatase regulates ABI5 phosphorylation and abscisic acid signaling in Arabidopsis.
**Authors:** Dai M, Xue Q, Mccray T, Margavage K, Chen F, Lee JH, Nezames CD, Guo L, Terzaghi W, Wan J, Deng XW, Wang H
**Journal:** Plant Cell (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1105/tpc.112.105767](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.112.105767)
**PMC:** [PMC3608775](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3608775/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell. 2013 Feb;25(2):517-34. doi: 10.1105/tpc.112.105767. Epub 2013 Feb 
12.

The PP6 phosphatase regulates ABI5 phosphorylation and abscisic acid signaling 
in Arabidopsis.

Dai M(1), Xue Q, Mccray T, Margavage K, Chen F, Lee JH, Nezames CD, Guo L, 
Terzaghi W, Wan J, Deng XW, Wang H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Yale 
University, New Haven, CT 06520-8104, USA.

The basic Leucine zipper transcription factor ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE5 (ABI5) 
is a key regulator of abscisic acid (ABA)-mediated seed germination and 
postgermination seedling growth. While a family of SUCROSE 
NONFERMENTING1-related protein kinase2s (SnRK2s) is responsible for ABA-induced 
phosphorylation and stabilization of ABI5, the phosphatase(s) responsible for 
dephosphorylating ABI5 is still unknown. Here, we demonstrate that mutations in 
FyPP1 (for Phytochrome-associated serine/threonine protein phosphatase1) and 
FyPP3, two homologous genes encoding the catalytic subunits of Ser/Thr PROTEIN 
PHOSPHATASE6 (PP6), cause an ABA hypersensitive phenotype in Arabidopsis 
thaliana, including ABA-mediated inhibition of seed germination and seedling 
growth. Conversely, overexpression of FyPP causes reduced sensitivity to ABA. 
The ABA hypersensitive phenotype of FyPP loss-of-function mutants is ABI5 
dependent, and the amount of phosphorylated and total ABI5 proteins inversely 
correlates with the levels of FyPP proteins. Moreover, FyPP proteins physically 
interact with ABI5 in vitro and in vivo, and the strength of the interaction 
depends on the ABI5 phosphorylation status. In vitro phosphorylation assays show 
that FyPP proteins directly dephosphorylate ABI5. Furthermore, genetic and 
biochemical assays show that FyPP proteins act antagonistically with SnRK2 
kinases to regulate ABI5 phosphorylation and ABA responses. Thus, Arabidopsis 
PP6 phosphatase regulates ABA signaling through dephosphorylation and 
destabilization of ABI5.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.112.105767
PMCID: PMC3608775
PMID: 23404889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The basic Leucine zipper transcription factor ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE5 (ABI5) is a key regulator of abscisic acid ( ABA )–mediated seed germination and postgermination seedling growth. While a family of SUCROSE NONFERMENTING1-related protein kinase2s (SnRK2s) is responsible for ABA -induced phosphorylation and stabilization of ABI5, the phosphatase(s) responsible for dephosphorylating ABI5 is still unknown. Here, we demonstrate that mutations in FyPP1 (for Phytochrome-associated serine/threonine protein phosphatase1 ) and FyPP3 , two homologous genes encoding the catalytic subunits of Ser/Thr PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE6 (PP6), cause an ABA hypersensitive phenotype in Arabidopsis thaliana , including ABA -mediated inhibition of seed germination and seedling growth. Conversely, overexpression of FyPP causes reduced sensitivity to ABA . The ABA hypersensitive phenotype of FyPP loss-of-function mutants is ABI5 dependent, and the amount of phosphorylated and total ABI5 proteins inversely correlates with the levels of FyPP proteins. Moreover, FyPP proteins physically interact with ABI5 in vitro and in vivo, and the strength of the interaction depends on the ABI5 phosphorylation status. In vitro phosphorylation assays show that FyPP proteins directly dephosphorylate ABI5. Furthermore, genetic and biochemical assays show that FyPP proteins act antagonistically with SnRK2 kinases to regulate ABI5 phosphorylation and ABA responses. Thus, Arabidopsis PP6 phosphatase regulates ABA signaling through dephosphorylation and destabilization of ABI5.

INTRODUCTION

The phytohormone abscisic acid ( ABA ) is a major phytohormone that regulates plant growth and development, including seed dormancy, seed germination, seedling growth, and stomatal aperture, as well as plant responses to various abiotic and biotic stresses, such as drought, salt, and cold stresses and pathogen infection ( Mauch-Mani and Mauch, 2005 ; Fujita et al., 2011 ; Hauser et al., 2011 ). Molecular genetic studies in Arabidopsis thaliana have led to the identification of a number of mutants affected in ABA signaling. Among them, the type-2C protein phosphatases ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE1 (ABI1) and ABI2 were identified initially through the analysis of the dominant ABA -insensitive abi1-1 and abi2-1 mutants ( Koornneef et al., 1982 ; Leung et al., 1994 , 1997 ; Meyer et al., 1994 ). Subsequent characterization of loss-of-function alleles indicated that ABI1 and ABI2 negatively regulate many ABA responses, including inhibition of seed germination, seedling growth, and promotion of stomatal closure ( Sheen, 1998 ; Gosti et al., 1999 ; Merlot et al., 2001 ). On the other hand, abi3 , abi4 , and abi5 were identified as recessive mutants that show ABA insensitivity during seed germination and early seedling development ( Koornneef et al., 1982 ; Giraudat et al., 1992 ; Finkelstein et al., 1998 ; Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000 ).

The ABI3 , ABI4 , and ABI5 genes encode B3-type, APETALA2 domain and basic Leucine zipper ( bZIP )–type transcription factors ( Giraudat et al., 1992 ; Finkelstein et al., 1998 ; Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000 ; Lopez-Molina and Chua, 2000 ). ABI5 is a protein that functions as a transcriptional activator by binding to an ABA -responsive element ( ABRE ; Giraudat, 1995 ; Busk and Pagès, 1998 ; Hattori et al., 2002 ), a conserved cis -acting element found in the promoters of many ABA -induced genes ( Yamaguchi-Shinozaki and Shinozaki, 1994 ). Consistent with a dominant role in seed germination and seedling development, ABI3, ABI4, and ABI5 are expressed mainly in seeds, with only low levels of expression in vegetative tissues ( Giraudat et al., 1992 ; Finkelstein et al., 1998 ; Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000 ).

In addition, a number of bZIP transcription factors involved in ABA signaling have been identified through characterization of the ABRE binding factors (ABFs; also referred to as AREBs), including ABF1, ABF2/AREB1, ABF3, ABF4/AREB2, and ABI5 ( Guiltinan et al., 1990 ; Yamaguchi-Shinozaki and Shinozaki, 1994 ). ABF2/AREB1, ABF3, and ABF4/AREB2 have been reported to play key roles in the response to drought stress ( Yoshida et al., 2010 ). Plants overexpressing ABF3 and ABF4 exhibit enhanced drought tolerance and altered expression of ABA /stress-regulated genes ( Kang et al., 2002 ). ABF2/AREB1 regulates ABRE -dependent ABA signaling that enhances drought tolerance in vegetative tissues ( Fujita et al., 2005 ). In addition, ABI5 is regulated by sugar and stress ( Brocard et al., 2002 ; Arroyo et al., 2003 ), indicating that ABI5 also plays a role in stress response adjustment ( Fujita et al., 2011 ).

Among these bZIP transcription factors, ABI5 plays a central role in regulating seed germination and postgermination seedling growth ( Finkelstein and Lynch, 2000 ; Lopez-Molina and Chua, 2000 ; Lopez-Molina et al., 2001 , 2002 ). ABI5 protein levels are tightly regulated. They accumulate to high levels in dry seeds or young seedlings treated with ABA ; however, after germination or removal of ABA from the seedlings, ABI5 proteins are rapidly degraded ( Lopez-Molina et al., 2001 ; Piskurewicz et al., 2008 ), suggesting that the levels of ABI5 protein play an important role in regulating ABA signaling. In support of this notion, several mutants affected in ABI5 degradation show a hypersensitive ABA response ( Stone et al., 2006 ; Lee et al., 2010 ). A REALLY INTERESTING NEW GENE-ANKYRIN E3 ligase, KEEP ON GOING (KEG), was identified as a negative regulator of ABA signaling that is required for ABI5 degradation ( Stone et al., 2006 ; Liu and Stone, 2010 ). Lee et al. (2010) reported that DWD HYPERSENSITIVE TO ABA1 (DWA1) and DWA2 are negative regulators of ABA signaling and function as the substrate receptors for a CULLIN4 E3 ligase that targets ABI5 for degradation. The ABI5-interacting protein (AFP) was reported to facilitate ABI5 degradation through the 26S proteasome–dependent pathway ( Lopez-Molina et al., 2003 ). However, a recent study proposed that NOVEL INTERACTOR OF JAZ and its related AFP proteins act as transcriptional corepressors of TOPLESS proteins to regulate ABA responses through direct interaction with ABI5 ( Pauwels et al., 2010 ). ABI5 abundance is also regulated by SMALL UBIQUITIN-RELATED MODIFIER modification ( Miura et al., 2009 ). The requirement of multiple E3 ligases (for ubiquitination and sumoylation) for regulation of ABI5 levels illustrates the complexity of ABI5 regulation and its importance in regulating ABA signaling in plants.

Given the importance of ABI5 protein levels in ABA signaling, it is striking to note that ABI5 overaccumulation is not sufficient to confer postgerminative growth arrest. Transgenic plants overexpressing ABI5 show increased ABI5 protein levels but grow normally in the absence of ABA ( Lopez-Molina et al., 2001 ; Stone et al., 2006 ). Notably, additional higher molecular mass forms of ABI5 were observed in the keg-1 mutant but not observed in ABI5 -overexpressing plants ( Stone et al., 2006 ). Together with the previous observation that ABA is necessary to stimulate ABI5 activity ( Lopez-Molina et al., 2001 ), it was speculated that the severe postgerminative growth arrest of keg-1 mutants might be caused by the accumulation of additional, presumably phosphorylated and active forms of ABI5 ( Stone et al., 2006 ; Liu and Stone, 2010 ). Collectively, these data suggest that ABI5 is phosphorylated in response to ABA , and phosphorylation activates the transcription factor and enhances its stability and activity ( Lopez-Molina et al., 2001 ; Piskurewicz et al., 2008 ).

Recent studies showed that three SUCROSE NONFERMENTING1-related protein kinases, SnRK2.2 (SRK2D), OPEN STOMATA1 (OST1/SnRK2.6/SRK2E), and SnRK2.3 (SRK2I), are responsible for phosphorylation of ABI5 and ABI5-like bZIP transcription factors in response to ABA ( Kobayashi et al., 2005 ; Fujii et al., 2007 ; Fujii and Zhu, 2009 ; Nakashima et al., 2009 ). The triple mutants of snrk2 . 2/2 . 3/2 . 6 are much more resistant to ABA and hypersensitive to drought stress than any single or double mutants ( Furihata et al., 2006 ; Fujii and Zhu, 2009 ; Nakashima et al., 2009 ), indicating that SnRK2.2, SnRK2.6, and SnRK2.3 are positive regulators of ABA signaling and they have overlapping functions in ABA signaling. Given the importance of SnRK2-mediated phosphorylation and activation of ABI5 in the inhibition of seed germination, dephosphorylation and subsequent degradation of ABI5 should be critical for the initiation of seed germination. However, the phosphatase(s) responsible for dephosphorylation of ABI5 has not yet been identified. In addition, it is not yet clear whether other phosphatases in addition to those already characterized function in ABA signaling.

The Ser/Thr-specific phosphoprotein phosphatases ( PPPs ) execute the major phosphatase activities in eukaryotes ( Olsen et al., 2006 ). The Arabidopsis genome encodes 26 catalytic (C) subunits of PPPs related to type 1 (PP1), type 2A (PP2A), PP2B, and the so-called novel phosphatases, including PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE4 (PP4), PP5, PP6, and PP7 ( Farkas et al., 2007 ). The PP2A holoenzyme consists of an enzymatically active catalytic subunit (PP2Ac), a 65-kD regulatory A subunit (PP2A A), and a variable regulatory B subunit (PP2AB) ( Farkas et al., 2007 ). Although there are high sequence similarities among the C subunits of PP6 and PP2A phosphatases, they were classified as different phosphatases because PP6 requires Zn 2+ for its activity, whereas PP2A does not require any cation ( Kim et al., 2002 ; Wang et al., 2007 ; Dai et al., 2012a ). PPPs are ubiquitous enzymes in all eukaryotes, but their regulatory functions are largely unknown in plants ( Farkas et al., 2007 ).

In a recent study, we showed that Arabidopsis FyPP1 (for Phytochrome-associated serine/threonine protein phosphatase1) and FyPP3, two homologous catalytic subunits of PP6, physically interact with SAL (for SAPS-domain like protein) and PP2AA proteins (RCN1/PP2AA1, PP2AA2, and PP2AA3) to form a PP6-type heterotrimeric holoenzyme that directly regulates the phosphorylation status of PIN-FORMED (PIN) proteins (auxin efflux carriers) and subsequently affects auxin efflux and plant development ( Dai et al., 2012a , 2012b ). In this study, we extend these findings by showing that FyPP also plays a critical role in regulating ABA signaling in Arabidopsis . We show that mutants without FyPP activity accumulate higher levels of ABI5 protein and display an ABA -hypersensitive phenotype in seed germination and postgermination seedling growth. We further show that FyPP proteins directly interact with and dephosphorylate ABI5. Genetic interaction studies demonstrate an antagonistic interaction between FyPP1/3 with SnRK2 in regulating ABA responses. Our findings suggest that FyPP1 and FyPP3 function as two negative regulators of ABA signaling through the dephosphorylation of ABI5.

DISCUSSION

In this study, we characterized the function of FyPP1 and FyPP3 , two homologous genes encoding the catalytic subunits of PP6 in ABA signaling. We showed that the FyPP dominant-negative and f1 f3 double mutants are ABA hypersensitive. FyPP1 and FyPP3 protein levels are downregulated by ABA . We also showed that FyPP1 and FyPP3 interact with ABI5 in yeast and in planta and directly dephosphorylate ABI5 in vitro. Furthermore, we demonstrated that the ABA -hypersensitive phenotype of the f1 f3 mutants is ABI5 dependent, and FyPPs function antagonistically with SnRK2 in regulating ABI5 phosphorylation and ABA signaling.
