---
pmid: '19180116'
title: DAP-kinase-mediated phosphorylation on the BH3 domain of beclin 1 promotes
  dissociation of beclin 1 from Bcl-XL and induction of autophagy.
authors:
- Zalckvar E
- Berissi H
- Mizrachy L
- Idelchuk Y
- Koren I
- Eisenstein M
- Sabanay H
- Pinkas-Kramarski R
- Kimchi A
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2658558
doi: 10.1038/embor.2008.246
---

# DAP-kinase-mediated phosphorylation on the BH3 domain of beclin 1 promotes dissociation of beclin 1 from Bcl-XL and induction of autophagy.
**Authors:** Zalckvar E, Berissi H, Mizrachy L, Idelchuk Y, Koren I, Eisenstein M, Sabanay H, Pinkas-Kramarski R, Kimchi A
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/embor.2008.246](https://doi.org/10.1038/embor.2008.246)
**PMC:** [PMC2658558](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2658558/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2009 Mar;10(3):285-92. doi: 10.1038/embor.2008.246. Epub 2009 Jan
30.

DAP-kinase-mediated phosphorylation on the BH3 domain of beclin 1 promotes 
dissociation of beclin 1 from Bcl-XL and induction of autophagy.

Zalckvar E(1), Berissi H, Mizrachy L, Idelchuk Y, Koren I, Eisenstein M, Sabanay 
H, Pinkas-Kramarski R, Kimchi A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 
76100, Israel.

Autophagy, an evolutionarily conserved process, has functions both in 
cytoprotective and programmed cell death mechanisms. Beclin 1, an essential 
autophagic protein, was recently identified as a BH3-domain-only protein that 
binds to Bcl-2 anti-apoptotic family members. The dissociation of beclin 1 from 
its Bcl-2 inhibitors is essential for its autophagic activity, and therefore 
should be tightly controlled. Here, we show that death-associated protein kinase 
(DAPK) regulates this process. The activated form of DAPK triggers autophagy in 
a beclin-1-dependent manner. DAPK phosphorylates beclin 1 on Thr 119 located at 
a crucial position within its BH3 domain, and thus promotes the dissociation of 
beclin 1 from Bcl-XL and the induction of autophagy. These results reveal a 
substrate for DAPK that acts as one of the core proteins of the autophagic 
machinery, and they provide a new phosphorylation-based mechanism that reduces 
the interaction of beclin 1 with its inhibitors to activate the autophagic 
machinery.

DOI: 10.1038/embor.2008.246
PMCID: PMC2658558
PMID: 19180116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
