---
pmid: '24610814'
title: A human short open reading frame (sORF)-encoded polypeptide that stimulates
  DNA end joining.
authors:
- Slavoff SA
- Heo J
- Budnik BA
- Hanakahi LA
- Saghatelian A
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4036235
doi: 10.1074/jbc.C113.533968
---

# A human short open reading frame (sORF)-encoded polypeptide that stimulates DNA end joining.
**Authors:** Slavoff SA, Heo J, Budnik BA, Hanakahi LA, Saghatelian A
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.C113.533968](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.C113.533968)
**PMC:** [PMC4036235](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4036235/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Apr 18;289(16):10950-10957. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C113.533968.
Epub  2014 Mar 7.

A human short open reading frame (sORF)-encoded polypeptide that stimulates DNA 
end joining.

Slavoff SA(1), Heo J(2), Budnik BA(3), Hanakahi LA(4), Saghatelian A(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology and Harvard University, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138.
(2)Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy, University of Illinois 
College of Pharmacy, Rockford, Illinois 60612.
(3)Faculty of Arts and Sciences (FAS) Center for Systems Biology, Harvard 
University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138 and.
(4)Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy, University of Illinois 
College of Pharmacy, Rockford, Illinois 60612. Electronic address: 
hanakahi@uic.edu.
(5)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology and Harvard University, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138. Electronic address: 
saghatelian@chemistry.harvard.edu.

The recent discovery of numerous human short open reading frame (sORF)-encoded 
polypeptides (SEPs) has raised important questions about the functional roles of 
these molecules in cells. Here, we show that a 69-amino acid SEP, MRI-2, 
physically interacts with the Ku heterodimer to stimulate DNA double-strand 
break ligation via nonhomologous end joining. The characterization of MRI-2 
suggests that this SEP may participate in DNA repair and underscores the 
potential of SEPs to serve important biological functions in mammalian cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.C113.533968
PMCID: PMC4036235
PMID: 24610814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
