---
pmid: '24764305'
title: TMTC1 and TMTC2 are novel endoplasmic reticulum tetratricopeptide repeat-containing
  adapter proteins involved in calcium homeostasis.
authors:
- Sunryd JC
- Cheon B
- Graham JB
- Giorda KM
- Fissore RA
- Hebert DN
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2014'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4047382
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.554071
---

# TMTC1 and TMTC2 are novel endoplasmic reticulum tetratricopeptide repeat-containing adapter proteins involved in calcium homeostasis.
**Authors:** Sunryd JC, Cheon B, Graham JB, Giorda KM, Fissore RA, Hebert DN
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M114.554071](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M114.554071)
**PMC:** [PMC4047382](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4047382/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jun 6;289(23):16085-99. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.554071. Epub 
2014 Apr 24.

TMTC1 and TMTC2 are novel endoplasmic reticulum tetratricopeptide 
repeat-containing adapter proteins involved in calcium homeostasis.

Sunryd JC(1), Cheon B(2), Graham JB(1), Giorda KM(1), Fissore RA(2), Hebert 
DN(3).

Author information:
(1)From the Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Program in 
Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, 
Massachusetts 01003.
(2)Program in Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Massachusetts, 
Amherst, Massachusetts 01003 Veterinary and Animal Sciences.
(3)From the Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Program in 
Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, 
Massachusetts 01003 dhebert@biochem.umass.edu.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is organized in part by adapter proteins that 
nucleate the formation of large protein complexes. Tetratricopeptide repeats 
(TPR) are well studied protein structural motifs that support intermolecular 
protein-protein interactions. TMTC1 and TMTC2 were identified by an in silico 
search as TPR-containing proteins possessing N-terminal ER targeting signal 
sequences and multiple hydrophobic segments, suggestive of polytopic membrane 
proteins that are targeted to the secretory pathway. A variety of cell 
biological and biochemical assays was employed to demonstrate that TMTC1 and 
TMTC2 are both ER resident integral membrane proteins with multiple clusters of 
TPR domains oriented within the ER lumen. Proteomic analysis followed by 
co-immunoprecipitation verification found that both proteins associated with the 
ER calcium uptake pump SERCA2B, and TMTC2 also bound to the carbohydrate-binding 
chaperone calnexin. Live cell calcium measurements revealed that overexpression 
of either TMTC1 or TMTC2 caused a reduction of calcium released from the ER 
following stimulation, whereas the knockdown of TMTC1 or TMTC2 increased the 
stimulated calcium released. Together, these results implicate TMTC1 and TMTC2 
as ER proteins involved in ER calcium homeostasis.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.554071
PMCID: PMC4047382
PMID: 24764305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is organized in part by adapter proteins that nucleate the formation of large protein complexes. Tetratricopeptide repeats (TPR) are well studied protein structural motifs that support intermolecular protein-protein interactions. TMTC1 and TMTC2 were identified by an in silico search as TPR-containing proteins possessing N-terminal ER targeting signal sequences and multiple hydrophobic segments, suggestive of polytopic membrane proteins that are targeted to the secretory pathway. A variety of cell biological and biochemical assays was employed to demonstrate that TMTC1 and TMTC2 are both ER resident integral membrane proteins with multiple clusters of TPR domains oriented within the ER lumen. Proteomic analysis followed by co-immunoprecipitation verification found that both proteins associated with the ER calcium uptake pump SERCA2B, and TMTC2 also bound to the carbohydrate-binding chaperone calnexin. Live cell calcium measurements revealed that overexpression of either TMTC1 or TMTC2 caused a reduction of calcium released from the ER following stimulation, whereas the knockdown of TMTC1 or TMTC2 increased the stimulated calcium released. Together, these results implicate TMTC1 and TMTC2 as ER proteins involved in ER calcium homeostasis.

Introduction

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) 3 is an organelle composed of a continuous membrane envelope and lumen that is compartmentalized into numerous functional regions ( 1 ). The organization of the ER is directed in part by extrinsic factors that organize the rough ER (ribosomes) and the contiguous nuclear envelope (lamina and lamina receptors), as well as through interactions with the cytoskeleton (microtubules), organelles (Golgi and mitochondria), or the plasma membrane ( 2 ). ER resident adapter proteins that nucleate the formation of large protein complexes also support the compartmentalization of the ER ( 3 – 5 ). The organization of the ER contributes to its ability to efficiently perform functions in the maturation, quality control, and trafficking of secretory pathway cargo, calcium regulation, and lipid synthesis ( 6 – 8 ). These activities contribute to the maintenance of general cellular homeostasis; however, many questions still remain as to how the organization of the ER is maintained.

Tetratricopeptide repeats (TPR) are protein structural motifs that support protein-protein interactions. A single TPR domain consists of a degenerate 34-amino acid sequence that is composed of two anti-parallel helices ( 9 , 10 ). A minimum of three consecutive TPR domains is required to form a functional unit, and this is the most common number of TPR found in a cluster ( 9 ). Clusters composed of up to 16 sequential TPR have been observed. Proteins with three TPR domains in a cluster favor the recognition of short and defined sequences, whereas proteins with long stretches of consecutive TPR domains tend to be more promiscuous in their selectivity. For example, the H sp70-Hsp90 o rganizing p rotein (HOP) uses two separate clusters of three consecutive TPR domains to bind the EEVD sequence located at the C termini of Hsp70 and Hsp90, facilitating the handoff of a substrate from one chaperone to another ( 11 , 12 ). In contrast, the O- linked N -acetylglucosamine transferase possesses 12 consecutive TPR domains that are proposed to bind and prepare substrates for modification ( 13 ). Tom70 displays a combination of TPR clusters as it uses a cluster of three TPR domains to recognize the C terminus of Hsp70 for substrate delivery and a second cluster of seven TPR domains to potentially prepare substrates for mitochondrial import ( 14 ). These diverse cellular functions are coordinated by TPR domains and their ability to bind to a range of ligands.

SEL1L and p58 IPK (also called ERdj6) are the only ER TPR-containing proteins that have been characterized in mammalian cells. SEL1L nucleates a large ER membrane complex involved in ER-associated degradation ( 4 ). p58 IPK is an ER co-chaperone that interacts with BiP to facilitate protein folding ( 15 , 16 ). Given the extensive utilization of TPR domains in metazoans to support protein-protein interactions, the ER is expected to contain additional TPR domain proteins that contribute to complex formation and ER organization.

An in silico approach was used to expand our understanding of ER adapters that participate in the organization of the ER using TPR domains. TMTC1 and TMTC2 were identified as TPR-containing proteins that possess potential N-terminal ER targeting sequences and multimembrane spanning regions. They were both found to reside in the ER membrane with their TPR domains oriented within the ER lumen. A role for TMTC1 and TMTC2 as adapter proteins was supported by their appearance in large molecular weight complexes. A shotgun proteomics approach was employed that identified SERCA2B as a potential binding partner for TMTC1 and TMTC2, as well as calnexin for TMTC2. Manipulation of the expression levels of TMTC1 and TMTC2 combined with live cell calcium measurements demonstrated that TMTC1 and TMTC2 influenced calcium sequestering in the ER. Collectively, these findings showed that TMTC1 and TMTC2 are two novel TPR-containing ER adapters involved in calcium homeostasis.

DISCUSSION

We identified and characterized two novel TPR-rich ER proteins, TMTC1 and TMTC2. They share a 54% similarity and 27% identity in the amino acid sequence, suggestive of a common evolutionary origin ( 21 ). Basic Local Alignment Search Tool analysis indicated that TMTC1 and TMTC2 homologues are conserved in the chordata phylum and are absent in lower eukaryotes such as yeast as is their most prominent associated protein SERCA2B ( 37 ). Published microarray data shows that TMTC1 and TMTC2 are transcribed in a wide range of human tissues ( 38 ). TMTC1 and TMTC2 are divided into two regions that appear to create two functionally distinct domains, an N-terminal hydrophobic region and a C-terminal domain that contains multiple TPR clusters ( Fig. 1 A ).

Alkaline extraction of total membrane preparations demonstrated that TMTC1 and TMTC2 are integral membrane proteins. ΔG analysis predicts that the N termini of TMTC1 and TMTC2 have 10 and 11 potential transmembrane domains, respectively. A negative ΔG associated with a high probability of membrane integration was calculated for five (TMTC1) and three (TMTC2) of these hydrophobic segments. Hydrophobic domains with a positive ΔG frequently insert into membranes upon stabilization by efficiently inserted transmembrane domains ( 19 ). Therefore, TMTC1 and TMTC2 appear to be polytopic membrane proteins with their hydrophobic N termini providing a long stretch of multiple transmembrane segments. The presence of a number of hydrophilic and charged residues within some of the hydrophobic domains of TMTC1 and TMTC2 imply that these residues could be used for intramembrane interactions, such as the TMTC2-calnexin interaction.

The single natural N -glycosylation site present in the N-terminal hydrophobic portion of either TMTC1 or TMTC2 was not modified as probed by a glycosidase mobility shift assay. Lack of apparent glycosylation could be due to positioning of the consensus sites in the cytoplasm or being too close to the membrane for recognition by the oligosaccharyltransferase ( 39 ). Alternatively, the shift caused by glycosidase treatment and the removal of a single glycan might be too slight to be visualized for these large hydrophobic proteins. However, ER targeting was verified by placing efficiently modified glycosylation sites in the C-terminal TPR-rich regions of both TMTC1 and TMTC2 and by confocal immunofluorescence microscopy.

The glycosylation of sites added to the TPR regions of TMTC1 and TMTC2, combined with the trypsin protection of the C-terminal domains from isolated membranes, placed the TPR domains within the ER lumen for both TMTC1 and TMTC2. The trypsin-protected fragments of 63 kDa (TMTC1) and 52 kDa (TMTC2) corresponded to the complete C-terminal TPR domains ( Fig. 1 A ). UniProt predicted that TMTC1 has a total of 10 TPR domains organized into clusters of seven and three, while TMTC2 has 10 total TPR domains found in clusters of four and six. In contrast, analysis of TMTC1 by TPR domain prediction software TPRpred did not recognize the second and sixth TPR domains of TMTC1 as bona fide TPR domains. The space between the seventh and eighth TPR domains in TMTC1, which was not identified by UniProt, was predicted to be an additional TPR domain by TPRpred; UniProt and TPRpred predictions are in strong agreement for TMTC2. The only discrepancy between the analyses was that TPRpred did not recognize the first TPR motif of TMTC2. The differences in organization of the TPR domains of TMTC1 and TMTC2 could have implications for their functions.

TPR domains are found in proteins across species and organelles and participate in a plethora of activities, including protein folding, post-translational modification, translocation, and signal transduction. Clusters of TPR domains form discrete domains that nucleate protein-protein interactions ( 9 , 11 , 40 ). Sucrose sedimentation analysis suggested that both TMTC1 and TMTC2 resided in large molecular weight complexes. SERCA2B was the most prominent associated proteins for both TMTC1 and TMTC2, and this interaction was mediated through the TPR domains as the association persisted with a soluble construct composed solely of the TPR-rich C-terminal region. The dependence of the TPR domains of TMTC1/TMTC2 for the interactions with SERCA2B was unexpected given the hydrophobic nature of TMTC1/TMTC2 and SERCA2B, and the small portion of SERCA2B that is exposed to the ER lumen. It cannot be ruled out at this time that the TMTC1 or TMTC2 interaction with SERCA2B is mediated through an additional protein in the large complex.

The carbohydrate-binding ER chaperone, calnexin, was also found to interact with the nonglycosylated TMTC2 but not TMTC1. Binding was reduced by 50% in the presence of glucosidase inhibition. Calnexin did not interact with the soluble TPR domain construct of TMTC2. The interaction could be mediated through the transmembrane segments of SERCA2B and calnexin (a type I membrane protein) as calnexin has been proposed to monitor proteins within the ER bilayer ( 41 ). Alternatively, an additional glycosylated substrate such as SERCA2B may be involved in the interaction between TMTC2 and calnexin, as calnexin is known to associate with SERCA2B ( 42 ).

TMTC1 and TMTC2 overexpression reduced the amount of calcium released from the ER after stimulation with carbachol and ATP. This reduction might be caused by a decrease in the total amount of calcium stored in the ER, implying a defect in calcium uptake and/or storage. This is consistent with the observed higher baseline calcium values, especially in cells overexpressing TMTC2. Elevated baselines and reduced calcium release was also seen in studies using ionomycin implying that overexpression of TMTC1 or TMTC2 disrupts calcium homeostasis in these cells. It is unclear how these proteins might interfere with calcium ER levels, although SERCA2B is likely a target, given the evidence of direct interaction between these two molecules.

In contrast, knockdown of TMTC1 and TMTC2 caused an increase in the calcium response to the same agonists. Although the amplitude of the peak response was not higher, it was longer, especially after TMTC2 knockdown. An interpretation of these results is that the knockdown of TMTC2 promotes greater calcium influx, possibly caused by an initial larger calcium release and robust activation of the stored calcium entry mechanism. The other interpretation of the results, that knockdown of TMTC1 or TMTC2 reduces the capacity for SERCA2B to sequester cytoplasmic calcium, is not supported by the comparable amplitude of the calcium rise induced by the agonists. The observation that no additive effect was observed with either co-expression or co-knockdown of both TMTC1 and TMTC2 implies that TMTC1 and TMTC2 do not act synergistically. It is worth noting that in both overexpression and knockdown studies, TMTC2 gave a stronger response than TMTC1, which may be attributed to the interaction between TMTC2 and calnexin. Future studies should address the role of calnexin on the function of TMTC2.

The interaction between calnexin and SERCA2B can be modified by reversible post-translational phosphorylation or palmitoylation of calnexin ( 8 , 42 ). Phosphorylation of the C-terminal cytoplasmic tail of calnexin is believed to reduce sequestering by SERCA2B, whereas palmitoylation of calnexin is proposed to increase SERCA2B activity. Because knockdown of TMTC2 increased calcium release, it is possible that this is accompanied by changes in post-translational modifications of calnexin. Furthermore, the decreased interaction between TMTC2 and calnexin caused by inhibition of glucosidase could be due to changes in post-translational modifications on either SERCA2B or calnexin ( Fig. 5 C ). Collectively, these modifications allow for a dynamic control of calcium sequestering adjustable to the current needs of the cell.

An RNAi-based screen for proteins that effect protein trafficking found that knockdown of TMTC1 caused a reduction in the level of a viral glycoprotein localized to the cell surface and that the Golgi appeared dispersed ( 43 ). In our study, knockdown of TMTC1 or TMTC2 in HeLa cells did not cause a significant defect in either ER or Golgi morphology. This discrepancy could be caused by differences in the cell lines employed ( 44 ).

The identification of TMTC1 and TMTC2 as ER membrane adapters and their interactions with SERCA2B highlights the exquisite organization and functional regulation of the ER and its components to carry out specific functions. The discovery of two additional regulators of intracellular calcium further highlights how central calcium signaling is to many aspects of cell biology and how carefully the signal is controlled and regulated. Although both TMTC1 and TMTC2 appeared to disrupt calcium sequestering, only TMTC2 appeared to do so in cohort with calnexin. The precise mechanism for how TMTC1 and TMTC2 regulate SERCA2B activity is unclear, and future studies will be aimed to further investigate how TMTC1 and TMTC2 influence calcium homeostasis.
