---
pmid: '15282295'
title: Budding yeast silencing complexes and regulation of Sir2 activity by protein-protein
  interactions.
authors:
- Tanny JC
- Kirkpatrick DS
- Gerber SA
- Gygi SP
- Moazed D
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC479720
doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.16.6931-6946.2004
---

# Budding yeast silencing complexes and regulation of Sir2 activity by protein-protein interactions.
**Authors:** Tanny JC, Kirkpatrick DS, Gerber SA, Gygi SP, Moazed D
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.24.16.6931-6946.2004](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.24.16.6931-6946.2004)
**PMC:** [PMC479720](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC479720/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Aug;24(16):6931-46. doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.16.6931-6946.2004.

Budding yeast silencing complexes and regulation of Sir2 activity by 
protein-protein interactions.

Tanny JC(1), Kirkpatrick DS, Gerber SA, Gygi SP, Moazed D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Gene silencing in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae requires the 
enzymatic activity of the Sir2 protein, a highly conserved NAD-dependent 
deacetylase. In order to study the activity of native Sir2, we purified and 
characterized two budding yeast Sir2 complexes: the Sir2/Sir4 complex, which 
mediates silencing at mating-type loci and at telomeres, and the RENT complex, 
which mediates silencing at the ribosomal DNA repeats. Analyses of the protein 
compositions of these complexes confirmed previously described interactions. We 
show that the assembly of Sir2 into native silencing complexes does not alter 
its selectivity for acetylated substrates, nor does it allow the deacetylation 
of nucleosomal histones. The inability of Sir2 complexes to deacetylate 
nucleosomes suggests that additional factors influence Sir2 activity in vivo. In 
contrast, Sir2 complexes show significant enhancement in their affinities for 
acetylated substrates and their sensitivities to the physiological inhibitor 
nicotinamide relative to recombinant Sir2. Reconstitution experiments showed 
that, for the Sir2/Sir4 complex, these differences stem from the physical 
interaction of Sir2 with Sir4. Finally, we provide evidence that the different 
nicotinamide sensitivities of Sir2/Sir4 and RENT in vitro could contribute to 
locus-specific differences in how Sir2 activity is regulated in vivo.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.24.16.6931-6946.2004
PMCID: PMC479720
PMID: 15282295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
