---
pmid: '1998338'
title: 'Cloning and expression of the cDNA encoding human fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase,
  the enzyme deficient in hereditary tyrosinemia: assignment of the gene to chromosome
  15.'
authors:
- Phaneuf D
- Labelle Y
- Bérubé D
- Arden K
- Cavenee W
- Gagné R
- Tanguay RM
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '1991'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC1682993
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Cloning and expression of the cDNA encoding human fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase, the enzyme deficient in hereditary tyrosinemia: assignment of the gene to chromosome 15.
**Authors:** Phaneuf D, Labelle Y, Bérubé D, Arden K, Cavenee W, Gagné R, Tanguay RM
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (1991)
**PMC:** [PMC1682993](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1682993/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Hum Genet. 1991 Mar;48(3):525-35.

Cloning and expression of the cDNA encoding human fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase, 
the enzyme deficient in hereditary tyrosinemia: assignment of the gene to 
chromosome 15.

Phaneuf D(1), Labelle Y, Bérubé D, Arden K, Cavenee W, Gagné R, Tanguay RM.

Author information:
(1)Ontogénèse et Génétique Moléculaire, Centre de Recherche du CHUL, Ste-Foy, 
Québec, Canada.

Type 1 hereditary tyrosinemia (HT) is an autosomal recessive disease 
characterized by a deficiency of the enzyme fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase (FAH; 
E.C.3.7.1.2). We have isolated human FAH cDNA clones by screening a liver cDNA 
expression library using specific antibodies and plaque hybridization with a rat 
FAH cDNA probe. A 1,477-bp cDNA was sequenced and shown to code for FAH by an in 
vitro transcription-translation assay and sequence homology with tryptic 
fragments of purified FAH. Transient expression of this FAH cDNA in transfected 
CV-1 mammalian cells resulted in the synthesis of an immunoreactive protein 
comigrating with purified human liver FAH on SDS-PAGE and having enzymatic 
activity as shown by the hydrolysis of the natural substrate 
fumarylacetoacetate. This indicates that the single polypeptide chain encoded by 
the FAH gene contains all the genetic information required for functional 
activity, suggesting that the dimer found in vivo is a homodimer. The human FAH 
cDNA was used as a probe to determine the gene's chromosomal localization using 
somatic cell hybrids and in situ hybridization. The human FAH gene maps to the 
long arm of chromosome 15 in the region q23-q25.

PMCID: PMC1682993
PMID: 1998338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Type 1 hereditary tyrosinemia (HT) is an autosomal recessive disease characterized by a deficiency of the enzyme fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase (FAH; E.C.3.7.1.2). We have isolated human FAH cDNA clones by screening a liver cDNA expression library using specific antibodies and plaque hybridization with a rat FAH cDNA probe. A 1,477-bp cDNA was sequenced and shown to code for FAH by an in vitro transcription-translation assay and sequence homology with tryptic fragments of purified FAH. Transient expression of this FAH cDNA in transfected CV-1 mammalian cells resulted in the synthesis of an immunoreactive protein comigrating with purified human liver FAH on SDS-PAGE and having enzymatic activity as shown by the hydrolysis of the natural substrate fumarylacetoacetate. This indicates that the single polypeptide chain encoded by the FAH gene contains all the genetic information required for functional activity, suggesting that the dimer found in vivo is a homodimer. The human FAH cDNA was used as a probe to determine the gene's chromosomal localization using somatic cell hybrids and in situ hybridization. The human FAH gene maps to the long arm of chromosome 15 in the region q23-q25.
