---
pmid: '18458339'
title: Mitochondrial copper(I) transfer from Cox17 to Sco1 is coupled to electron
  transfer.
authors:
- Banci L
- Bertini I
- Ciofi-Baffoni S
- Hadjiloi T
- Martinelli M
- Palumaa P
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2383975
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0800019105
---

# Mitochondrial copper(I) transfer from Cox17 to Sco1 is coupled to electron transfer.
**Authors:** Banci L, Bertini I, Ciofi-Baffoni S, Hadjiloi T, Martinelli M, Palumaa P
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0800019105](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0800019105)
**PMC:** [PMC2383975](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2383975/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 May 13;105(19):6803-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0800019105. Epub 2008 May 5.

Mitochondrial copper(I) transfer from Cox17 to Sco1 is coupled to electron 
transfer.

Banci L(1), Bertini I, Ciofi-Baffoni S, Hadjiloi T, Martinelli M, Palumaa P.

Author information:
(1)Magnetic Resonance Center (CERM) and Department of Chemistry, University of 
Florence, Via Luigi Sacconi 6, 50019 Sesto Fiorentino, Florence, Italy.

The human protein Cox17 contains three pairs of cysteines. In the mitochondrial 
intermembrane space (IMS) it exists in a partially oxidized form with two S-S 
bonds and two reduced cysteines (HCox17(2S-S)). HCox17(2S-S) is involved in 
copper transfer to the human cochaperones Sco1 and Cox11, which are implicated 
in the assembly of cytochrome c oxidase. We show here that Cu(I)HCox17(2S-S), 
i.e., the copper-loaded form of the protein, can transfer simultaneously 
copper(I) and two electrons to the human cochaperone Sco1 (HSco1) in the 
oxidized state, i.e., with its metal-binding cysteines forming a disulfide bond. 
The result is Cu(I)HSco1 and the fully oxidized apoHCox17(3S-S), which can be 
then reduced by glutathione to apoHCox17(2S-S). The HSco1/HCox17(2S-S) redox 
reaction is thermodynamically driven by copper transfer. These reactions may 
occur in vivo because HSco1 can be found in the partially oxidized state within 
the IMS, consistent with the variable redox properties of the latter 
compartment. The electron transfer-coupled metallation of HSco1 can be a 
mechanism within the IMS for an efficient specific transfer of the metal to 
proteins, where metal-binding thiols are oxidized. The same reaction of 
copper-electron-coupled transfer does not occur with the human homolog of Sco1, 
HSco2, for kinetic reasons that may be ascribed to the lack of a specific 
metal-bridged protein-protein complex, which is instead observed in the 
Cu(I)HCox17(2S-S)/HSco1 interaction.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0800019105
PMCID: PMC2383975
PMID: 18458339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
