---
pmid: '29162697'
title: EB1-binding-myomegalin protein complex promotes centrosomal microtubules functions.
authors:
- Bouguenina H
- Salaun D
- Mangon A
- Muller L
- Baudelet E
- Camoin L
- Tachibana T
- Cianférani S
- Audebert S
- Verdier-Pinard P
- Badache A
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5740655
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1705682114
---

# EB1-binding-myomegalin protein complex promotes centrosomal microtubules functions.
**Authors:** Bouguenina H, Salaun D, Mangon A, Muller L, Baudelet E, Camoin L, Tachibana T, Cianférani S, Audebert S, Verdier-Pinard P, Badache A
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1705682114](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1705682114)
**PMC:** [PMC5740655](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5740655/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017 Dec 12;114(50):E10687-E10696. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1705682114. Epub 2017 Nov 21.

EB1-binding-myomegalin protein complex promotes centrosomal microtubules 
functions.

Bouguenina H(1), Salaun D(1), Mangon A(1), Muller L(2), Baudelet E(1), Camoin 
L(1), Tachibana T(3), Cianférani S(2), Audebert S(1), Verdier-Pinard P(4), 
Badache A(4).

Author information:
(1)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille (CRCM), INSERM, Institut 
Paoli-Calmettes, CNRS, Aix-Marseille Université,13009 Marseille, France.
(2)Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, CNRS, Institut 
Pluridisciplinaire Hubert Curien UMR 7178, Université de Strasbourg, 67087 
Strasbourg, France.
(3)Department of Bioengineering, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka City 
University, Osaka 558-8585, Japan.
(4)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille (CRCM), INSERM, Institut 
Paoli-Calmettes, CNRS, Aix-Marseille Université,13009 Marseille, France; 
pascal.verdier-pinard@inserm.fr ali.badache@inserm.fr.

Control of microtubule dynamics underlies several fundamental processes such as 
cell polarity, cell division, and cell motility. To gain insights into the 
mechanisms that control microtubule dynamics during cell motility, we 
investigated the interactome of the microtubule plus-end-binding protein 
end-binding 1 (EB1). Via molecular mapping and cross-linking mass spectrometry 
we identified and characterized a large complex associating a specific isoform 
of myomegalin termed "SMYLE" (for short myomegalin-like EB1 binding protein), 
the PKA scaffolding protein AKAP9, and the pericentrosomal protein CDK5RAP2. 
SMYLE was associated through an evolutionarily conserved N-terminal domain with 
AKAP9, which in turn was anchored at the centrosome via CDK5RAP2. SMYLE 
connected the pericentrosomal complex to the microtubule-nucleating complex 
(γ-TuRC) via Galectin-3-binding protein. SMYLE associated with nascent 
centrosomal microtubules to promote microtubule assembly and acetylation. 
Disruption of SMYLE interaction with EB1 or AKAP9 prevented microtubule 
nucleation and their stabilization at the leading edge of migrating cells. In 
addition, SMYLE depletion led to defective astral microtubules and abnormal 
orientation of the mitotic spindle and triggered G1 cell-cycle arrest, which 
might be due to defective centrosome integrity. As a consequence, SMYLE loss of 
function had a profound impact on tumor cell motility and proliferation, 
suggesting that SMYLE might be an important player in tumor progression.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1705682114
PMCID: PMC5740655
PMID: 29162697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
