---
pmid: '19270272'
title: Genetic identification of factors that modulate ribosomal DNA transcription
  in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
authors:
- Hontz RD
- Niederer RO
- Johnson JM
- Smith JS
journal: Genetics
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2674809
doi: 10.1534/genetics.108.100313
---

# Genetic identification of factors that modulate ribosomal DNA transcription in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Hontz RD, Niederer RO, Johnson JM, Smith JS
**Journal:** Genetics (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1534/genetics.108.100313](https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.108.100313)
**PMC:** [PMC2674809](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2674809/)

## Abstract

1. Genetics. 2009 May;182(1):105-19. doi: 10.1534/genetics.108.100313. Epub 2009 
Mar 6.

Genetic identification of factors that modulate ribosomal DNA transcription in 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Hontz RD(1), Niederer RO, Johnson JM, Smith JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Virginia 
Health System, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.

Ribosomal RNA (rRNA) is transcribed from the ribosomal DNA (rDNA) genes by RNA 
polymerase I (Pol I). Despite being responsible for the majority of 
transcription in growing cells, Pol I regulation is poorly understood compared 
to Pol II. To gain new insights into rDNA transcriptional regulation, we 
developed a genetic assay in Saccharomyces cerevisiae that detects alterations 
in transcription from the centromere-proximal rDNA gene of the tandem array. 
Changes in Pol I transcription at this gene alter the expression of an adjacent, 
modified URA3 reporter cassette (mURA3) such that reductions in Pol I 
transcription induce growth on synthetic media lacking uracil. Increases in Pol 
I transcription induce growth on media containing 5-FOA. A transposon 
mutagenesis screen was performed with the reporter strain to identify genes that 
play a role in modulating rDNA transcription. Mutations in 68 different genes 
were identified, several of which were already known to function in chromatin 
modification and the regulation of Pol II transcription. Among the other classes 
of genes were those encoding proteasome subunits and multiple kinases and 
phosphatases that function in nutrient and stress signaling pathways. Fourteen 
genes were previously uncharacterized and have been named as regulators of rDNA 
transcription (RRT).

DOI: 10.1534/genetics.108.100313
PMCID: PMC2674809
PMID: 19270272 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
