---
pmid: '10848592'
title: Involvement of Ras and Ral in chemotactic migration of skeletal myoblasts.
authors:
- Suzuki J
- Yamazaki Y
- Li G
- Kaziro Y
- Koide H
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC85875
doi: 10.1128/MCB.20.13.4658-4665.2000
---

# Involvement of Ras and Ral in chemotactic migration of skeletal myoblasts.
**Authors:** Suzuki J, Yamazaki Y, Li G, Kaziro Y, Koide H
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.20.13.4658-4665.2000](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.20.13.4658-4665.2000)
**PMC:** [PMC85875](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC85875/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jul;20(13):4658-65. doi: 10.1128/MCB.20.13.4658-4665.2000.

Involvement of Ras and Ral in chemotactic migration of skeletal myoblasts.

Suzuki J(1), Yamazaki Y, Li G, Kaziro Y, Koide H.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 
Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol 2000 Sep;20(18):7049. Guang, L [corrected to Li, G].

In skeletal myoblasts, Ras has been considered to be a strong inhibitor of 
myogenesis. Here, we demonstrate that Ras is involved also in the chemotactic 
response of skeletal myoblasts. Expression of a dominant-negative mutant of Ras 
inhibited chemotaxis of C2C12 myoblasts in response to basic fibroblast growth 
factor (bFGF), hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), and insulin-like growth factor 1 
(IGF-1), key regulators of limb muscle development and skeletal muscle 
regeneration. A dominant-negative Ral also decreased chemotactic migration by 
these growth factors, while inhibitors for phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and 
mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK) showed no effect. Activation of 
the Ras-Ral pathway by expression of an activated mutant of either Ras, the 
guanine-nucleotide dissociation stimulator for Ral, or Ral resulted in increased 
motility of myoblasts. The ability of Ral to stimulate motility was reduced by 
introduction of a mutation which prevents binding to Ral-binding protein 1 or 
phospholipase D. These results suggest that the Ras-Ral pathway is essential for 
the migration of myoblasts. Furthermore, we found that Ras and Ral are activated 
in C2C12 cells by bFGF, HGF and IGF-1 and that the Ral activation is regulated 
by the Ras- and the intracellular Ca(2+)-mediated pathways. Taken together, our 
data indicate that Ras and Ral regulate the chemotactic migration of skeletal 
muscle progenitors.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.20.13.4658-4665.2000
PMCID: PMC85875
PMID: 10848592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
