---
pmid: '16286452'
title: Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker disease amyloid protein polymerizes according
  to the "dock-and-lock" model.
authors:
- Gobbi M
- Colombo L
- Morbin M
- Mazzoleni G
- Accardo E
- Vanoni M
- Del Favero E
- Cantù L
- Kirschner DA
- Manzoni C
- Beeg M
- Ceci P
- Ubezio P
- Forloni G
- Tagliavini F
- Salmona M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M506164200
---

# Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker disease amyloid protein polymerizes according to the "dock-and-lock" model.
**Authors:** Gobbi M, Colombo L, Morbin M, Mazzoleni G, Accardo E, Vanoni M, Del Favero E, Cantù L, Kirschner DA, Manzoni C, Beeg M, Ceci P, Ubezio P, Forloni G, Tagliavini F, Salmona M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M506164200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M506164200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jan 13;281(2):843-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M506164200. Epub 2005 
Nov 10.

Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker disease amyloid protein polymerizes according to 
the "dock-and-lock" model.

Gobbi M(1), Colombo L, Morbin M, Mazzoleni G, Accardo E, Vanoni M, Del Favero E, 
Cantù L, Kirschner DA, Manzoni C, Beeg M, Ceci P, Ubezio P, Forloni G, 
Tagliavini F, Salmona M.

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri, Milano, Italy. 
Gobbi@marionegri.it

Prion protein (PrP) amyloid formation is a central feature of genetic and 
acquired prion diseases such as Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker disease (GSS) and 
variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. The major component of GSS amyloid is a PrP 
fragment spanning residues approximately 82-146, which when synthesized as a 
peptide, readily forms fibrils featuring GSS amyloid. The present study employed 
surface plasmon resonance (SPR) to characterize the binding events underlying 
PrP82-146 oligomerization at the first stages of fibrillization, according to 
evidence suggesting a pathogenic role of prefibrillar oligomers rather than 
mature amyloid fibrils. We followed in real time the binding reactions occurring 
during short term (seconds) addition of PrP82-146 small oligomers (1-5-mers, 
flowing species) onto soluble prefibrillar PrP82-146 aggregates immobilized on 
the sensor surface. SPR data confirmed very efficient aggregation/elongation, 
consistent with the hypothesis of nucleation-dependent polymerization process. 
Much lower binding was observed when PrP82-146 flowed onto the scrambled 
sequence of PrP82-146 or onto prefibrillar Abeta42 aggregates. As previously 
found with Abeta40, SPR data could be adequately fitted by equations modeling 
the "dock-and-lock" mechanism, in which the "locking" step is due to sequential 
conformational changes, each increasing the affinity of the monomer for the 
fibril until a condition of irreversible binding is reached. However, these 
conformational changes (i.e. the locking steps) appear to be faster and easier 
with PrP82-146 than with Abeta40. Such differences suggest that PrP82-146 has a 
greater propensity to polymerize and greater stability of the aggregates.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M506164200
PMID: 16286452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
