---
pmid: '15456889'
title: The ribosome-bound chaperones RAC and Ssb1/2p are required for accurate translation
  in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
authors:
- Rakwalska M
- Rospert S
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC517888
doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.20.9186-9197.2004
---

# The ribosome-bound chaperones RAC and Ssb1/2p are required for accurate translation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Rakwalska M, Rospert S
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.24.20.9186-9197.2004](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.24.20.9186-9197.2004)
**PMC:** [PMC517888](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC517888/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Oct;24(20):9186-97. doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.20.9186-9197.2004.

The ribosome-bound chaperones RAC and Ssb1/2p are required for accurate 
translation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Rakwalska M(1), Rospert S.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Biochemie und Molekularbiologie, Universität Freiburg, 
Hermann-Herder-Strasse 7, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany.

The chaperone homologs RAC (ribosome-associated complex) and Ssb1/2p are 
anchored to ribosomes; Ssb1/2p directly interacts with nascent polypeptides. The 
absence of RAC or Ssb1/2p results in a similar set of phenotypes, including 
hypersensitivity against the aminoglycoside paromomycin, which binds to the 
small ribosomal subunit and compromises the fidelity of translation. In order to 
understand this phenomenon we measured the frequency of translation termination 
and misincorporation in vivo and in vitro with a novel reporter system. 
Translational fidelity was impaired in the absence of functional RAC or Ssb1/2p, 
and the effect was further enhanced by paromomycin. The mutant strains suffered 
primarily from a defect in translation termination, while misincorporation was 
compromised to a lesser extent. Consistently, a low level of soluble translation 
termination factor Sup35p enhanced growth defects in the mutant strains. Based 
on the combined data we conclude that RAC and Ssb1/2p are crucial in maintaining 
translational fidelity beyond their postulated role as chaperones for nascent 
polypeptides.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.24.20.9186-9197.2004
PMCID: PMC517888
PMID: 15456889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
