---
pmid: '32616651'
title: The autophagy protein Ambra1 regulates gene expression by supporting novel
  transcriptional complexes.
authors:
- Schoenherr C
- Byron A
- Griffith B
- Loftus A
- Wills JC
- Munro AF
- von Kriegsheim A
- Frame MC
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC7443501
doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.012565
---

# The autophagy protein Ambra1 regulates gene expression by supporting novel transcriptional complexes.
**Authors:** Schoenherr C, Byron A, Griffith B, Loftus A, Wills JC, Munro AF, von Kriegsheim A, Frame MC
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.RA120.012565](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA120.012565)
**PMC:** [PMC7443501](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7443501/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2020 Aug 21;295(34):12045-12057. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.012565. 
Epub 2020 Jul 2.

The autophagy protein Ambra1 regulates gene expression by supporting novel 
transcriptional complexes.

Schoenherr C(1), Byron A(1), Griffith B(1), Loftus A(1), Wills JC(1), Munro 
AF(1), von Kriegsheim A(1), Frame MC(2).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research UK Edinburgh Centre, Institute of Genetics and Molecular 
Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(2)Cancer Research UK Edinburgh Centre, Institute of Genetics and Molecular 
Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. Electronic 
address: m.frame@ed.ac.uk.

Ambra1 is considered an autophagy and trafficking protein with roles in 
neurogenesis and cancer cell invasion. Here, we report that Ambra1 also 
localizes to the nucleus of cancer cells, where it has a novel nuclear 
scaffolding function that controls gene expression. Using biochemical 
fractionation and proteomics, we found that Ambra1 binds to multiple classes of 
proteins in the nucleus, including nuclear pore proteins, adaptor proteins such 
as FAK and Akap8, chromatin-modifying proteins, and transcriptional regulators 
like Brg1 and Atf2. We identified biologically important genes, such as Angpt1, 
Tgfb2, Tgfb3, Itga8, and Itgb7, whose transcription is regulated by 
Ambra1-scaffolded complexes, likely by altering histone modifications and Atf2 
activity. Therefore, in addition to its recognized roles in autophagy and 
trafficking, Ambra1 scaffolds protein complexes at chromatin, regulating 
transcriptional signaling in the nucleus. This novel function for Ambra1, and 
the specific genes impacted, may help to explain the wider role of Ambra1 in 
cancer cell biology.

© 2020 Schoenherr et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.012565
PMCID: PMC7443501
PMID: 32616651 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest—The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.
