---
pmid: '21123823'
title: Knockdown of Hspa9, a del(5q31.2) gene, results in a decrease in hematopoietic
  progenitors in mice.
authors:
- Chen TH
- Kambal A
- Krysiak K
- Walshauser MA
- Raju G
- Tibbitts JF
- Walter MJ
journal: Blood
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3056590
doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-06-293167
---

# Knockdown of Hspa9, a del(5q31.2) gene, results in a decrease in hematopoietic progenitors in mice.
**Authors:** Chen TH, Kambal A, Krysiak K, Walshauser MA, Raju G, Tibbitts JF, Walter MJ
**Journal:** Blood (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2010-06-293167](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2010-06-293167)
**PMC:** [PMC3056590](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3056590/)

## Abstract

1. Blood. 2011 Feb 3;117(5):1530-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-06-293167. Epub 2010 
Dec 1.

Knockdown of Hspa9, a del(5q31.2) gene, results in a decrease in hematopoietic 
progenitors in mice.

Chen TH(1), Kambal A, Krysiak K, Walshauser MA, Raju G, Tibbitts JF, Walter MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Oncology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, 660 South Euclid Ave., St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Heterozygous deletions spanning chromosome 5q31.2 occur frequently in the 
myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) and are highly associated with progression to 
acute myeloid leukemia (AML) when p53 is mutated. Mutagenesis screens in 
zebrafish and mice identified Hspa9 as a del(5q31.2) candidate gene that may 
contribute to MDS and AML pathogenesis, respectively. To test whether HSPA9 
haploinsufficiency recapitulates the features of ineffective hematopoiesis 
observed in MDS, we knocked down the expression of HSPA9 in primary human 
hematopoietic cells and in a murine bone marrow-transplantation model using 
lentivirally mediated gene silencing. Knockdown of HSPA9 in human cells 
significantly delayed the maturation of erythroid precursors, but not myeloid or 
megakaryocytic precursors, and suppressed cell growth by 6-fold secondary to an 
increase in apoptosis and a decrease in the cycling of cells compared with 
control cells. Erythroid precursors, B lymphocytes, and the bone marrow 
progenitors c-kit(+)/lineage(-)/Sca-1(+) (KLS) and megakaryocyte/erythrocyte 
progenitor (MEP) were significantly reduced in a murine Hspa9-knockdown model. 
These abnormalities suggest that cooperating gene mutations are necessary for 
del(5q31.2) MDS cells to gain clonal dominance in the bone marrow. Our results 
demonstrate that Hspa9 haploinsufficiency alters the hematopoietic progenitor 
pool in mice and contributes to abnormal hematopoiesis.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2010-06-293167
PMCID: PMC3056590
PMID: 21123823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
