---
pmid: '34565296'
title: Role of adaptin protein complexes in intracellular trafficking and their impact
  on diseases.
authors:
- Shin J
- Nile A
- Oh JW
journal: Bioengineered
year: '2021'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC8806629
doi: 10.1080/21655979.2021.1982846
---

# Role of adaptin protein complexes in intracellular trafficking and their impact on diseases.
**Authors:** Shin J, Nile A, Oh JW
**Journal:** Bioengineered (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1080/21655979.2021.1982846](https://doi.org/10.1080/21655979.2021.1982846)
**PMC:** [PMC8806629](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8806629/)

## Abstract

1. Bioengineered. 2021 Dec;12(1):8259-8278. doi: 10.1080/21655979.2021.1982846.

Role of adaptin protein complexes in intracellular trafficking and their impact 
on diseases.

Shin J(1), Nile A(1), Oh JW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biotechnology and Animal Resources 
Research Center, Konkuk University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Adaptin proteins (APs) play a crucial role in intracellular cell trafficking. 
The 'classical' role of APs is carried out by AP1‒3, which bind to clathrin, 
cargo, and accessory proteins. Accordingly, AP1-3 are crucial for both vesicle 
formation and sorting. All APs consist of four subunits that are indispensable 
for their functions. In fact, based on studies using cells, model organism 
knockdown/knock-out, and human variants, each subunit plays crucial roles and 
contributes to the specificity of each AP. These studies also revealed that the 
sorting and intracellular trafficking function of AP can exert varying effects 
on pathology by controlling features such as cell development, signal 
transduction related to the apoptosis and proliferation pathways in cancer 
cells, organelle integrity, receptor presentation, and viral infection. Although 
the roles and functions of AP1‒3 are relatively well studied, the functions of 
the less abundant and more recently identified APs, AP4 and AP5, are still to be 
investigated. Further studies on these APs may enable a better understanding and 
targeting of specific diseases.APs known or suggested locations and functions.

DOI: 10.1080/21655979.2021.1982846
PMCID: PMC8806629
PMID: 34565296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declare no conflict of interest.
