---
pmid: '24434550'
title: Release of protein A from the cell wall of Staphylococcus aureus.
authors:
- Becker S
- Frankel MB
- Schneewind O
- Missiakas D
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2014'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3910568
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1317181111
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Release of protein A from the cell wall of Staphylococcus aureus.
**Authors:** Becker S, Frankel MB, Schneewind O, Missiakas D
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1317181111](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1317181111)
**PMC:** [PMC3910568](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3910568/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jan 28;111(4):1574-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1317181111. Epub 2014 Jan 13.

Release of protein A from the cell wall of Staphylococcus aureus.

Becker S(1), Frankel MB, Schneewind O, Missiakas D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637.

Staphylococcal protein A (SpA) is anchored to the cell wall envelope of 
Staphylococcus aureus by sortase A, which links the threonyl (T) of its 
C-terminal LPXTG motif to peptidoglycan cross-bridges (i.e., Gly5). SpA binds 
the Fcγ domains of IgG and protects staphylococci from opsonophagocytic 
clearance. Moreover, SpA cross-links B-cell receptors to modify host adaptive 
immune responses. The mechanisms whereby SpA is released from the bacterial 
surface to access the host's immune system are not known. Here we demonstrate 
that SpA is released with murein tetrapeptide-tetraglycyl 
[L-Ala-D-iGln-(SpA-Gly5)L-Lys-D-Ala-Gly4] linked to its C-terminal threonyl. 
LytN, a cross-wall murein hydrolase, contributes to the release of SpA by 
removing amino sugars [i.e., N-acetylmuramic acid-N-acetylglucosamine 
(MurNAc-GlcNAc)] from attached peptidoglycan, whereas LytM, a 
pentaglycyl-endopeptidase, triggers polypeptide release from the bacterial 
envelope. A model is proposed whereby murein hydrolases cleave the anchor 
structure of released SpA to modify host immune responses.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1317181111
PMCID: PMC3910568
PMID: 24434550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Staphylococcal protein A (SpA) is anchored to the cell wall envelope of Staphylococcus aureus by sortase A, which links the threonyl (T) of its C-terminal LPXTG motif to peptidoglycan cross-bridges (i.e., Gly 5 ). SpA binds the Fcγ domains of IgG and protects staphylococci from opsonophagocytic clearance. Moreover, SpA cross-links B-cell receptors to modify host adaptive immune responses. The mechanisms whereby SpA is released from the bacterial surface to access the host’s immune system are not known. Here we demonstrate that SpA is released with murein tetrapeptide-tetraglycyl [ l -Ala- d -iGln-(SpA-Gly 5 ) l -Lys- d -Ala-Gly 4 ] linked to its C-terminal threonyl. LytN, a cross-wall murein hydrolase, contributes to the release of SpA by removing amino sugars [i.e., N -acetylmuramic acid- N -acetylglucosamine (MurNAc-GlcNAc)] from attached peptidoglycan, whereas LytM, a pentaglycyl-endopeptidase, triggers polypeptide release from the bacterial envelope. A model is proposed whereby murein hydrolases cleave the anchor structure of released SpA to modify host immune responses.

Discussion

Bacterial peptidoglycan is a potent activator of the mammalian immune system ( 40 ). Muropeptides released during bacterial growth are recognized by nucleotide-binding and oligomerization domain containing proteins 1 (NOD1) and 2 (NOD2), two members of the NLR family in the cytoplasm of mammalian cells that specialize in recognizing peptidoglycan fragments from Gram-negative (i.e., NOD1) or Gram-positive bacteria (i.e., NOD2) ( 41 , 42 ). Activated by muropeptides with MurNAc, NOD1 and NOD2 initiate intracellular signaling pathways that induce NF-κB and the expression of immune response genes encoding proinflammatory cytokines and antimicrobial peptides ( 40 , 43 ). For example, neutrophil-derived IL-1β production, a key defense against S . aureus ( 44 ), requires staphylococcal peptidoglycan-induced activation of NOD2 ( 45 ). The importance of this pathway is illustrated by defects in NOD2 signaling, which increases the disease susceptibility of mutant mice to S . aureus infection ( 46 ).

The NOD2 signaling pathway presents a challenge to the pathogenesis of S . aureus infections, in particular the suppression of B-cell responses ( 24 , 25 ). How can pathogen-released protein A activate the clonal expansion of B cells and their subsequent apoptotic collapse without simultaneously triggering a systemic activation of the immune system? We show here that protein A is released from the envelope with linked peptidoglycan fragments, i.e., l -Ala- d -iGln-(Gly 5 ) l -Lys- d -Ala-Gly 4 and l -Ala- d -iGln-(Gly 5 ) l -Lys- d -Ala- d -Ala. Of note these peptidoglycan fragments lack the amino sugars (MurNAc-GlcNAc) of peptidoglycan, which function as potent inducers of NOD2 ( 42 ). Pulse-labeling experiments indicate that protein A is initially tethered to the bacterial envelope, which occurs at the cross-wall between dividing daughter cells ( 14 ). Mutants lacking the cross-wall murein hydrolases—Atl, Sle1, or LytN—released SpA with altered peptidoglycan structures but did not affect the overall release of protein A. Thus, cross-wall murein hydrolases shape the cell wall anchor structure of protein A without affecting its release. The purpose of these activities appears to be the synthesis of SpA anchor structures that cannot stimulate host immune responses. When these tasks are completed, protein A remains tethered to the murein sacculi via its anchoring point, the peptidoglycan pentaglycine cross-bridge, which also connects neighboring wall peptides ( 7 ). LytM eventually cleaves these cross-bridges and releases protein A into the extracellular medium.

LytM is a secreted glycyl-glycine endopeptidase that cuts the cross-bridges of staphylococcal peptidoglycan without contributing to autolysis ( 39 ). Recent work revealed that lytM is a WalKR-regulated gene ( 47 ). In WalKR mutants, in which expression of the essential two-component regulator is limiting, LytM can suppress associated growth defects presumably by relaxing the cross-linking of peptidoglycan ( 48 ). Here, we suggest an important function for LytM: the release of biologically active sortase-anchored proteins from the bacterial envelope. As lytM mutants continue to release small amounts of protein A from the envelope, we surmise the existence of additional enzymes with gycyl-glycine endopeptidase activity that may impact the release of surface proteins.
