---
pmid: '10858451'
title: Studies on the specificity of the tetrapyrrole substrate for human biliverdin-IXalpha
  reductase and biliverdin-IXbeta reductase. Structure-activity relationships define
  models for both active sites.
authors:
- Cunningham O
- Dunne A
- Sabido P
- Lightner D
- Mantle TJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.275.25.19009
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Studies on the specificity of the tetrapyrrole substrate for human biliverdin-IXalpha reductase and biliverdin-IXbeta reductase. Structure-activity relationships define models for both active sites.
**Authors:** Cunningham O, Dunne A, Sabido P, Lightner D, Mantle TJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.275.25.19009](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.275.25.19009)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jun 23;275(25):19009-17. doi: 10.1074/jbc.275.25.19009.

Studies on the specificity of the tetrapyrrole substrate for human 
biliverdin-IXalpha reductase and biliverdin-IXbeta reductase. Structure-activity 
relationships define models for both active sites.

Cunningham O(1), Dunne A, Sabido P, Lightner D, Mantle TJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Trinity College, Dublin 2, Ireland and the 
Departments of Chemistry & Biochemistry, University of Nevada, Reno, Nevada 
89557-0020, USA.

A comparison of the initial rate kinetics for human biliverdin-IXalpha reductase 
and biliverdin-IXbeta reductase with a series of synthetic biliverdins with 
propionate side chains "moving" from a bridging position across the central 
methene bridge (alpha isomers) to a "gamma-configuration" reveals characteristic 
behavior that allows us to propose distinct models for the two active sites. For 
human biliverdin-IXalpha reductase, as previously discussed for the rat and ox 
enzymes, it appears that at least one "bridging propionate" is necessary for 
optimal binding and catalytic activity, whereas two are preferred. All other 
configurations studied were substrates for human biliverdin-IXalpha reductase, 
albeit poor ones. In the case of mesobiliverdin-XIIIalpha, extending the 
propionate side chains to hexanoate resulted in a significant loss of activity, 
whereas the butyrate derivative retained high activity. For human 
biliverdin-IXalpha reductase, we suggest that a pair of positively charged side 
chains play a key role in optimally binding the IXalpha isomers. In the case of 
human biliverdin-IXbeta reductase, the enzyme cannot tolerate even one 
propionate in the bridging position, suggesting that two negatively charged 
residues on the enzyme surface may preclude productive binding in this case. The 
flavin reductase activity of biliverdin-IXbeta reductase is potently inhibited 
by mesobiliverdin-XIIIalpha and protohemin, which is consistent with the 
hypothesis that the tetrapyrrole and flavin substrate bind at a common site.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.275.25.19009
PMID: 10858451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
