---
pmid: '20168092'
title: p62/SQSTM1 and ALFY interact to facilitate the formation of p62 bodies/ALIS
  and their degradation by autophagy.
authors:
- Clausen TH
- Lamark T
- Isakson P
- Finley K
- Larsen KB
- Brech A
- Øvervatn A
- Stenmark H
- Bjørkøy G
- Simonsen A
- Johansen T
journal: Autophagy
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.4161/auto.6.3.11226
---

# p62/SQSTM1 and ALFY interact to facilitate the formation of p62 bodies/ALIS and their degradation by autophagy.
**Authors:** Clausen TH, Lamark T, Isakson P, Finley K, Larsen KB, Brech A, Øvervatn A, Stenmark H, Bjørkøy G, Simonsen A, Johansen T
**Journal:** Autophagy (2010)
**DOI:** [10.4161/auto.6.3.11226](https://doi.org/10.4161/auto.6.3.11226)

## Abstract

1. Autophagy. 2010 Apr;6(3):330-44. doi: 10.4161/auto.6.3.11226. Epub 2010 Apr
11.

p62/SQSTM1 and ALFY interact to facilitate the formation of p62 bodies/ALIS and 
their degradation by autophagy.

Clausen TH(1), Lamark T, Isakson P, Finley K, Larsen KB, Brech A, Øvervatn A, 
Stenmark H, Bjørkøy G, Simonsen A, Johansen T.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Cancer Research Group, Department of Medical Biology, University of 
Tromsø, Tromsø, Norway.

Accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins in cytoplasmic and/or nuclear inclusions 
is a hallmark of several diseases associated with premature cell death. 
SQSTM1/p62 is known to bind ubiquitinated substrates and aid their aggregation 
and degradation by macroautophagy. We show here that p62 is required to recruit 
the large phosphoinositide-binding protein ALFY to cytoplasmic p62 bodies 
generated upon amino acid starvation or puromycin-treatment. ALFY, as well as 
p62, is required for formation and autophagic degradation of cytoplasmic 
ubiquitin-positive inclusions. Moreover, both p62 and ALFY localize to nuclear 
promyleocytic leukemia (PML) bodies. The Drosophila p62 homologue Ref(2) P 
accumulates in ubiquitinated inclusions in the brain of flies carrying mutations 
in the ALFY homologue Blue cheese, demonstrating that ALFY is required for 
autophagic degradation of p62-associated ubiquitinated proteins in vivo. We 
conclude that p62 and ALFY interact to organize misfolded, ubiquitinated 
proteins into protein bodies that become degraded by autophagy.

DOI: 10.4161/auto.6.3.11226
PMID: 20168092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
