---
pmid: '21911577'
title: A physical interaction network of dengue virus and human proteins.
authors:
- Khadka S
- Vangeloff AD
- Zhang C
- Siddavatam P
- Heaton NS
- Wang L
- Sengupta R
- Sahasrabudhe S
- Randall G
- Gribskov M
- Kuhn RJ
- Perera R
- LaCount DJ
journal: Mol Cell Proteomics
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3237087
doi: 10.1074/mcp.M111.012187
---

# A physical interaction network of dengue virus and human proteins.
**Authors:** Khadka S, Vangeloff AD, Zhang C, Siddavatam P, Heaton NS, Wang L, Sengupta R, Sahasrabudhe S, Randall G, Gribskov M, Kuhn RJ, Perera R, LaCount DJ
**Journal:** Mol Cell Proteomics (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1074/mcp.M111.012187](https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M111.012187)
**PMC:** [PMC3237087](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3237087/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2011 Dec;10(12):M111.012187. doi:
10.1074/mcp.M111.012187.  Epub 2011 Sep 12.

A physical interaction network of dengue virus and human proteins.

Khadka S(1), Vangeloff AD, Zhang C, Siddavatam P, Heaton NS, Wang L, Sengupta R, 
Sahasrabudhe S, Randall G, Gribskov M, Kuhn RJ, Perera R, LaCount DJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Purdue 
University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA.

Dengue virus (DENV), an emerging mosquito-transmitted pathogen capable of 
causing severe disease in humans, interacts with host cell factors to create a 
more favorable environment for replication. However, few interactions between 
DENV and human proteins have been reported to date. To identify DENV-human 
protein interactions, we used high-throughput yeast two-hybrid assays to screen 
the 10 DENV proteins against a human liver activation domain library. From 45 
DNA-binding domain clones containing either full-length viral genes or partially 
overlapping gene fragments, we identified 139 interactions between DENV and 
human proteins, the vast majority of which are novel. These interactions 
involved 105 human proteins, including six previously implicated in DENV 
infection and 45 linked to the replication of other viruses. Human proteins with 
functions related to the complement and coagulation cascade, the centrosome, and 
the cytoskeleton were enriched among the DENV interaction partners. To determine 
if the cellular proteins were required for DENV infection, we used small 
interfering RNAs to inhibit their expression. Six of 12 proteins targeted (CALR, 
DDX3X, ERC1, GOLGA2, TRIP11, and UBE2I) caused a significant decrease in the 
replication of a DENV replicon. We further showed that calreticulin colocalized 
with viral dsRNA and with the viral NS3 and NS5 proteins in DENV-infected cells, 
consistent with a direct role for calreticulin in DENV replication. Human 
proteins that interacted with DENV had significantly higher average degree and 
betweenness than expected by chance, which provides additional support for the 
hypothesis that viruses preferentially target cellular proteins that occupy 
central position in the human protein interaction network. This study provides a 
valuable starting point for additional investigations into the roles of human 
proteins in DENV infection.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M111.012187
PMCID: PMC3237087
PMID: 21911577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
