---
pmid: '11146504'
title: 'Pro- and anti-apoptotic members of the Bcl-2 family in skeletal muscle: a
  distinct role for Bcl-2 in later stages of myogenesis.'
authors:
- Dominov JA
- Houlihan-Kawamoto CA
- Swap CJ
- Miller JB
journal: Dev Dyn
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/1097-0177(2000)9999:9999<::AID-DVDY1088>3.0.CO;2-#
---

# Pro- and anti-apoptotic members of the Bcl-2 family in skeletal muscle: a distinct role for Bcl-2 in later stages of myogenesis.
**Authors:** Dominov JA, Houlihan-Kawamoto CA, Swap CJ, Miller JB
**Journal:** Dev Dyn (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1002/1097-0177(2000)9999:9999<::AID-DVDY1088>3.0.CO;2-#](https://doi.org/10.1002/1097-0177(2000)9999:9999<::AID-DVDY1088>3.0.CO;2-#)

## Abstract

1. Dev Dyn. 2001 Jan;220(1):18-26. doi: 
10.1002/1097-0177(2000)9999:9999<::AID-DVDY1088>3.0.CO;2-#.

Pro- and anti-apoptotic members of the Bcl-2 family in skeletal muscle: a 
distinct role for Bcl-2 in later stages of myogenesis.

Dominov JA(1), Houlihan-Kawamoto CA, Swap CJ, Miller JB.

Author information:
(1)Myogenesis Research Laboratory, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, 
Massachusetts 02129, USA.

Apoptotic myonuclei appear during myogenesis and in diseased muscles. To 
investigate cell death regulation in skeletal muscle, we examined how members of 
the Bcl-2 family of apoptosis regulators are expressed and function in the C2C12 
muscle cell line and in primary muscle cells at different stages of development. 
Both anti-apoptotic (Bcl-W, Bcl-X(L)) and pro-apoptotic (Bad, Bak, Bax) members 
of the Bcl-2 family were expressed in developing skeletal muscle in vivo. Each 
was also expressed in embryonic (E11-12), fetal (E15-16), and neonatal muscle 
stem cells, myoblasts, and myotubes in vitro. In contrast, Bcl-2 expression was 
limited to a small group of mononucleate, desmin-positive, myogenin-negative 
muscle cells that were seen in fetal and neonatal, but not embryonic, muscle 
cell cultures. The cell surface protein Sca-1, which is associated with muscle 
and blood stem cells, was found on approximately 1/2 of these Bcl-2-positive 
cells. Loss of Bcl-2 did not affect expression of other family members, because 
neonatal muscles of wild-type and Bcl-2-null mice had similar amounts of 
Bcl-X(L), Bcl-W, Bad, Bak, and Bax mRNAs. Loss of Bcl-2 did have functional 
consequences; however, because neonatal muscles of Bcl-2-null mice had only 
approximately 2/3 as many fast muscle fibers as muscles in wild-type mice. Thus, 
Bcl-2 function is required for particular stages of fetal and postnatal 
myogenesis.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/1097-0177(2000)9999:9999<::AID-DVDY1088>3.0.CO;2-#
PMID: 11146504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
