---
pmid: '32973004'
title: A cortex-like canonical circuit in the avian forebrain.
authors:
- Stacho M
- Herold C
- Rook N
- Wagner H
- Axer M
- Amunts K
- Güntürkün O
journal: Science
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.abc5534
---

# A cortex-like canonical circuit in the avian forebrain.
**Authors:** Stacho M, Herold C, Rook N, Wagner H, Axer M, Amunts K, Güntürkün O
**Journal:** Science (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.abc5534](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abc5534)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2020 Sep 25;369(6511):eabc5534. doi: 10.1126/science.abc5534.

A cortex-like canonical circuit in the avian forebrain.

Stacho M(#)(1)(2), Herold C(#)(3), Rook N(4), Wagner H(5), Axer M(6), Amunts 
K(3)(6), Güntürkün O(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biopsychology, Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, Faculty of 
Psychology, Ruhr-University Bochum, 44801 Bochum, Germany. martin.stacho@rub.de.
(2)Department of Neurophysiology, Institute of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, 
Ruhr-University Bochum, 44801 Bochum, Germany.
(3)Cécile and Oskar Vogt Institute for Brain Research, Medical Faculty, Heinrich 
Heine University of Düsseldorf, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.
(4)Department of Biopsychology, Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, Faculty of 
Psychology, Ruhr-University Bochum, 44801 Bochum, Germany.
(5)Institute for Biology II, RWTH Aachen University, 52074 Aachen, Germany.
(6)Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine INM-1, Research Center Jülich, 52425 
Jülich, Germany.
(#)Contributed equally

Although the avian pallium seems to lack an organization akin to that of the 
cerebral cortex, birds exhibit extraordinary cognitive skills that are 
comparable to those of mammals. We analyzed the fiber architecture of the avian 
pallium with three-dimensional polarized light imaging and subsequently 
reconstructed local and associative pallial circuits with tracing techniques. We 
discovered an iteratively repeated, column-like neuronal circuitry across the 
layer-like nuclear boundaries of the hyperpallium and the sensory dorsal 
ventricular ridge. These circuits are connected to neighboring columns and, via 
tangential layer-like connections, to higher associative and motor areas. Our 
findings indicate that this avian canonical circuitry is similar to its 
mammalian counterpart and might constitute the structural basis of neuronal 
computation.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works.

DOI: 10.1126/science.abc5534
PMID: 32973004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
