---
pmid: '7787244'
title: 'Characterization of kinectin, a kinesin-binding protein: primary sequence
  and N-terminal topogenic signal analysis.'
authors:
- Yu H
- Nicchitta CV
- Kumar J
- Becker M
- Toyoshima I
- Sheetz MP
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC275827
doi: 10.1091/mbc.6.2.171
---

# Characterization of kinectin, a kinesin-binding protein: primary sequence and N-terminal topogenic signal analysis.
**Authors:** Yu H, Nicchitta CV, Kumar J, Becker M, Toyoshima I, Sheetz MP
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.6.2.171](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.6.2.171)
**PMC:** [PMC275827](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC275827/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Cell. 1995 Feb;6(2):171-83. doi: 10.1091/mbc.6.2.171.

Characterization of kinectin, a kinesin-binding protein: primary sequence and 
N-terminal topogenic signal analysis.

Yu H(1), Nicchitta CV, Kumar J, Becker M, Toyoshima I, Sheetz MP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North 
Carolina 27710, USA.

Kinectin is a kinesin-binding protein (Toyoshima et al., 1992) that is required 
for kinesin-based motility (Kumar et al., 1995). A kinectin cDNA clone 
containing a 4.7-kilobase insert was isolated from an embryonic chick brain cDNA 
library by immunoscreening with a panel of monoclonal antibodies. The cDNA 
contained an open reading frame of 1364 amino acids encoding a protein of 156 
kDa. A bacterially expressed product of the full length cDNA bound purified 
kinesin. Transient expression in CV-1 cells gave an endoplasmic reticulum 
distribution that depended upon the N-terminal domain. Analysis of the predicted 
amino acid sequence indicated a highly hydrophobic near N-terminal stretch of 28 
amino acids and a large portion (326-1248) of predicted alpha helical coiled 
coils. The 30-kDa fragment containing the N-terminal hydrophobic region was 
produced by cell-free in vitro translation and found to assemble with canine 
pancreas rough microsomes. Cleavage of the N terminus was not observed 
confirming its role as a potential transmembrane domain. Thus, the kinectin cDNA 
encodes a cytoplasmic-oriented integral membrane protein that binds kinesin and 
is likely to be a coiled-coil dimer.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.6.2.171
PMCID: PMC275827
PMID: 7787244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
