---
pmid: '1940799'
title: 'Interleukin 10(IL-10) inhibits cytokine synthesis by human monocytes: an autoregulatory
  role of IL-10 produced by monocytes.'
authors:
- de Waal Malefyt R
- Abrams J
- Bennett B
- Figdor CG
- de Vries JE
journal: J Exp Med
year: '1991'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: xml_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC2119001
doi: 10.1084/jem.174.5.1209
---

# Interleukin 10(IL-10) inhibits cytokine synthesis by human monocytes: an autoregulatory role of IL-10 produced by monocytes.
**Authors:** de Waal Malefyt R, Abrams J, Bennett B, Figdor CG, de Vries JE
**Journal:** J Exp Med (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1084/jem.174.5.1209](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.174.5.1209)
**PMC:** [PMC2119001](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2119001/)

## Abstract

1. J Exp Med. 1991 Nov 1;174(5):1209-20. doi: 10.1084/jem.174.5.1209.

Interleukin 10(IL-10) inhibits cytokine synthesis by human monocytes: an 
autoregulatory role of IL-10 produced by monocytes.

de Waal Malefyt R(1), Abrams J, Bennett B, Figdor CG, de Vries JE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Immunology, DNAX Research Institute, Palo Alto, 
California 94304.

In the present study we demonstrate that human monocytes activated by 
lipopolysaccharides (LPS) were able to produce high levels of interleukin 10 
(IL-10), previously designated cytokine synthesis inhibitory factor (CSIF), in a 
dose dependent fashion. IL-10 was detectable 7 h after activation of the 
monocytes and maximal levels of IL-10 production were observed after 24-48 h. 
These kinetics indicated that the production of IL-10 by human monocytes was 
relatively late as compared to the production of IL-1 alpha, IL-1 beta, IL-6, 
IL-8, tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF alpha), and granulocyte 
colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), which were all secreted at high levels 4-8 h 
after activation. The production of IL-10 by LPS activated monocytes was, 
similar to that of IL-1 alpha, IL-1 beta, IL-6, IL-8, TNF alpha, 
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and G-CSF, inhibited 
by IL-4. Furthermore we demonstrate here that IL-10, added to monocytes, 
activated by interferon gamma (IFN-gamma), LPS, or combinations of LPS and 
IFN-gamma at the onset of the cultures, strongly inhibited the production of 
IL-1 alpha, IL-1 beta, IL-6, IL-8, TNF alpha, GM-CSF, and G-CSF at the 
transcriptional level. Viral-IL-10, which has similar biological activities on 
human cells, also inhibited the production of TNF alpha and GM-CSF by monocytes 
following LPS activation. Activation of monocytes by LPS in the presence of 
neutralizing anti-IL-10 monoclonal antibodies resulted in the production of 
higher amounts of cytokines relative to LPS treatment alone, indicating that 
endogenously produced IL-10 inhibited the production of IL-1 alpha, IL-1 beta, 
IL-6, IL-8, TNF alpha, GM-CSF, and G-CSF. In addition, IL-10 had autoregulatory 
effects since it strongly inhibited IL-10 mRNA synthesis in LPS activated 
monocytes. Furthermore, endogenously produced IL-10 was found to be responsible 
for the reduction in class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) expression 
following activation of monocytes with LPS. Taken together our results indicate 
that IL-10 has important regulatory effects on immunological and inflammatory 
responses because of its capacity to downregulate class II MHC expression and to 
inhibit the production of proinflammatory cytokines by monocytes.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.174.5.1209
PMCID: PMC2119001
PMID: 1940799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

In the present study we demonstrate that human monocytes activated by lipopolysaccharides (LPS) were able to produce high levels of interleukin 10 (IL-10), previously designated cytokine synthesis inhibitory factor (CSIF), in a dose dependent fashion. IL-10 was detectable 7 h after activation of the monocytes and maximal levels of IL-10 production were observed after 24-48 h. These kinetics indicated that the production of IL-10 by human monocytes was relatively late as compared to the production of IL-1 alpha, IL-1 beta, IL-6, IL-8, tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF alpha), and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), which were all secreted at high levels 4-8 h after activation. The production of IL-10 by LPS activated monocytes was, similar to that of IL-1 alpha, IL-1 beta, IL-6, IL-8, TNF alpha, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and G-CSF, inhibited by IL-4. Furthermore we demonstrate here that IL-10, added to monocytes, activated by interferon gamma (IFN-gamma), LPS, or combinations of LPS and IFN-gamma at the onset of the cultures, strongly inhibited the production of IL-1 alpha, IL-1 beta, IL-6, IL-8, TNF alpha, GM-CSF, and G-CSF at the transcriptional level. Viral-IL-10, which has similar biological activities on human cells, also inhibited the production of TNF alpha and GM-CSF by monocytes following LPS activation. Activation of monocytes by LPS in the presence of neutralizing anti-IL-10 monoclonal antibodies resulted in the production of higher amounts of cytokines relative to LPS treatment alone, indicating that endogenously produced IL-10 inhibited the production of IL-1 alpha, IL-1 beta, IL-6, IL-8, TNF alpha, GM-CSF, and G-CSF. In addition, IL-10 had autoregulatory effects since it strongly inhibited IL-10 mRNA synthesis in LPS activated monocytes. Furthermore, endogenously produced IL-10 was found to be responsible for the reduction in class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) expression following activation of monocytes with LPS. Taken together our results indicate that IL-10 has important regulatory effects on immunological and inflammatory responses because of its capacity to downregulate class II MHC expression and to inhibit the production of proinflammatory cytokines by monocytes.
