---
reference_id: PMID:8507831
title: Identification and expression of a cDNA from Daucus carota encoding a bifunctional aspartokinase-homoserine dehydrogenase.
authors:
- Weisemann JM
- Matthews BF
journal: Plant Mol Biol
year: '1993'
doi: 10.1007/BF00014937
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification and expression of a cDNA from Daucus carota encoding a bifunctional aspartokinase-homoserine dehydrogenase.
**Authors:** Weisemann JM, Matthews BF
**Journal:** Plant Mol Biol (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF00014937](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00014937)

## Content

1. Plant Mol Biol. 1993 May;22(2):301-12. doi: 10.1007/BF00014937.

Identification and expression of a cDNA from Daucus carota encoding a 
bifunctional aspartokinase-homoserine dehydrogenase.

Weisemann JM(1), Matthews BF.

Author information:
(1)United States Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, 
Beltsville, MD 20705-2350.

Aspartokinase (EC 2.7.2.4) and homoserine dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.3) catalyze 
steps in the pathway for the synthesis of lysine, threonine, and methionine from 
aspartate. Homoserine dehydrogenase was purified from carrot (Daucus carota L.) 
cell cultures and portions of it were subjected to amino acid sequencing. 
Oligonucleotides deduced from the amino acid sequences were used as primers in a 
polymerase chain reaction to amplify a DNA fragment using DNA derived from 
carrot cell culture mRNA as template. The amplification product was 
radiolabelled and used as a probe to identify cDNA clones from libraries derived 
from carrot cell culture and root RNA. Two overlapping clones were isolated. 
Together the cDNA clones delineate a 3089 bp long sequence encompassing an open 
reading frame encoding 921 amino acids, including the mature protein and a long 
chloroplast transit peptide. The deduced amino acid sequence has high homology 
with the Escherichia coli proteins aspartokinase I-homoserine dehydrogenase I 
and aspartokinase II-homoserine dehydrogenase II. Like the E. coli genes the 
isolated carrot cDNA appears to encode a bifunctional aspartokinase-homoserine 
dehydrogenase enzyme.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00014937
PMID: 8507831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]