---
pmid: '16023096'
title: The effect of the disruption of a gene encoding a PI4 kinase on the developmental
  defect exhibited by Dictyostelium rasC(-) cells.
authors:
- Khosla M
- Spiegelman GB
- Weeks G
journal: Dev Biol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2005.05.037
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The effect of the disruption of a gene encoding a PI4 kinase on the developmental defect exhibited by Dictyostelium rasC(-) cells.
**Authors:** Khosla M, Spiegelman GB, Weeks G
**Journal:** Dev Biol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ydbio.2005.05.037](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2005.05.037)

## Abstract

1. Dev Biol. 2005 Aug 15;284(2):412-20. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2005.05.037.

The effect of the disruption of a gene encoding a PI4 kinase on the 
developmental defect exhibited by Dictyostelium rasC(-) cells.

Khosla M(1), Spiegelman GB, Weeks G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of British Columbia, , 
300-6174 University Boulevard, Vancouver, BC, Canada V6T 1Z3.

The disruption of the gene encoding the Dictyostelium Ras subfamily protein, 
RasC results in a strain that fails to aggregate with defects in both cAMP 
signal relay and chemotaxis. Restriction enzyme mediated integration disruption 
of a second gene in the rasC(-) strain resulted in cells that were capable of 
forming multicellular structures in plaques on bacterial lawns. The disrupted 
gene, designated pikD(1), encodes a member of the phosphatidyl-inositol-4-kinase 
beta subfamily. Although the rasC(-)/pikD(1) cells were capable of progressing 
through early development, when starved on a plastic surface under submerged 
conditions, they did not form aggregation streams or exhibit pulsatile motion. 
The rasC(-)/pikD(1) cells were extremely efficient in their ability to chemotax 
to cAMP in a spatial gradient, although the reduced phosphorylation of PKB in 
response to cAMP observed in rasC(-) cells, was unchanged. In addition, the 
activation of adenylyl cyclase, which was greatly reduced in the rasC(-) cells, 
was only minimally increased in the rasC(-)/pikD(1) strain. Thus, although the 
rasC(-)/pikD(-) cells were capable of associating to form multicellular 
structures, normal cell signaling was clearly not restored. The disruption of 
the pikD gene in a wild type background resulted in a strain that was delayed in 
aggregation and formed large aggregation streams, when starved on a plastic 
surface under submerged conditions. This strain also exhibited a slight defect 
in terminal development. In conclusion, disruption of the pikD gene in a rasC(-) 
strain resulted in cells that were capable of forming multicellular structures, 
but which did so in the absence of normal signaling and aggregation stream 
formation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2005.05.037
PMID: 16023096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
