---
pmid: '32519347'
title: Identification of novel seed longevity genes related to oxidative stress and
  seed coat by genome-wide association studies and reverse genetics.
authors:
- Renard J
- Niñoles R
- Martínez-Almonacid I
- Gayubas B
- Mateos-Fernández R
- Bissoli G
- Bueso E
- Serrano R
- Gadea J
journal: Plant Cell Environ
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/pce.13822
---

# Identification of novel seed longevity genes related to oxidative stress and seed coat by genome-wide association studies and reverse genetics.
**Authors:** Renard J, Niñoles R, Martínez-Almonacid I, Gayubas B, Mateos-Fernández R, Bissoli G, Bueso E, Serrano R, Gadea J
**Journal:** Plant Cell Environ (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/pce.13822](https://doi.org/10.1111/pce.13822)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell Environ. 2020 Oct;43(10):2523-2539. doi: 10.1111/pce.13822. Epub
2020  Aug 4.

Identification of novel seed longevity genes related to oxidative stress and 
seed coat by genome-wide association studies and reverse genetics.

Renard J(1), Niñoles R(1), Martínez-Almonacid I(1), Gayubas B(1), 
Mateos-Fernández R(1), Bissoli G(1), Bueso E(1), Serrano R(1), Gadea J(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Plantas (IBMCP), Universitat 
Politècnica de València-C.S.I.C., Valencia, Spain.

Seed longevity is a polygenic trait of relevance for agriculture and for 
understanding the effect of environment on the ageing of biological systems. In 
order to identify novel longevity genes, we have phenotyped the natural 
variation of 270 ecotypes of the model plant, Arabidopsis thaliana, for natural 
ageing and for three accelerated ageing methods. Genome-wide analysis, using 
publicly available single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) data sets, identified 
multiple genomic regions associated with variation in seed longevity. Reverse 
genetics of 20 candidate genes in Columbia ecotype resulted in seven genes 
positive for seed longevity (PSAD1, SSLEA, SSTPR, DHAR1, CYP86A8, MYB47 and 
SPCH) and five negative ones (RBOHD, RBOHE, RBOHF, KNAT7 and SEP3). In this 
uniform genetic background, natural and accelerated ageing methods provided 
similar results for seed-longevity in knock-out mutants. The NADPH oxidases 
(RBOHs), the dehydroascorbate reductase (DHAR1) and the photosystem I subunit 
(PSAD1) highlight the important role of oxidative stress on seed ageing. The 
cytochrome P-450 hydroxylase, CYP86A8, and the transcription factors, MYB47, 
KNAT7 and SEP3, support the protecting role of the seed coat during seed ageing.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pce.13822
PMID: 32519347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
