---
pmid: '21401524'
title: Functional analysis of Dictyostelium IBARa reveals a conserved role of the
  I-BAR domain in endocytosis.
authors:
- Veltman DM
- Auciello G
- Spence HJ
- Machesky LM
- Rappoport JZ
- Insall RH
journal: Biochem J
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1042/BJ20101684
---

# Functional analysis of Dictyostelium IBARa reveals a conserved role of the I-BAR domain in endocytosis.
**Authors:** Veltman DM, Auciello G, Spence HJ, Machesky LM, Rappoport JZ, Insall RH
**Journal:** Biochem J (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BJ20101684](https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20101684)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2011 May 15;436(1):45-52. doi: 10.1042/BJ20101684.

Functional analysis of Dictyostelium IBARa reveals a conserved role of the I-BAR 
domain in endocytosis.

Veltman DM(1), Auciello G, Spence HJ, Machesky LM, Rappoport JZ, Insall RH.

Author information:
(1)Beatson Institute for Cancer Research, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK.

I-BAR (inverse-Bin/amphiphysin/Rvs)-domain-containing proteins such as IRSp53 
(insulin receptor substrate of 53 kDa) associate with outwardly curved membranes 
and connect them to proteins involved in actin dynamics. Research on I-BAR 
proteins has focussed on possible roles in filopod and lamellipod formation, but 
their full physiological function remains unclear. The social amoeba 
Dictyostelium encodes a single I-BAR/SH3 (where SH3 is Src homology 3) protein, 
called IBARa, along with homologues of proteins that interact with IRSp53 family 
proteins in mammalian cells, providing an excellent model to study its cellular 
function. Disruption of the gene encoding IBARa leads to a mild defect in 
development, but filopod and pseudopod dynamics are unaffected. Furthermore, 
ectopically expressed IBARa does not induce filopod formation and does not 
localize to filopods. Instead, IBARa associates with clathrin puncta immediately 
before they are endocytosed. This role is conserved: human BAIAP2L2 
(brain-specific angiogenesis inhibitor 1-associated protein 2-like 2) also 
tightly co-localizes with clathrin plaques, although its homologues IRSp53 and 
IRTKS (insulin receptor tyrosine kinase substrate) associate with other punctate 
structures. The results from the present study suggest that I-BAR-containing 
proteins help generate the membrane curvature required for endocytosis and 
implies an unexpected role for IRSp53 family proteins in vesicle trafficking.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20101684
PMID: 21401524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
