---
pmid: '10417378'
title: Light-dependent sequestration of TIMELESS by CRYPTOCHROME.
authors:
- Ceriani MF
- Darlington TK
- Staknis D
- Más P
- Petti AA
- Weitz CJ
- Kay SA
journal: Science
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.285.5427.553
---

# Light-dependent sequestration of TIMELESS by CRYPTOCHROME.
**Authors:** Ceriani MF, Darlington TK, Staknis D, Más P, Petti AA, Weitz CJ, Kay SA
**Journal:** Science (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.285.5427.553](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.285.5427.553)

## Abstract

1. Science. 1999 Jul 23;285(5427):553-6. doi: 10.1126/science.285.5427.553.

Light-dependent sequestration of TIMELESS by CRYPTOCHROME.

Ceriani MF(1), Darlington TK, Staknis D, Más P, Petti AA, Weitz CJ, Kay SA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and NSF Center for Biological Timing, The Scripps 
Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 1999 Jul 23;285(5427):506-7. doi: 10.1126/science.285.5427.506.

Most organisms have circadian clocks consisting of negative feedback loops of 
gene regulation that facilitate adaptation to cycles of light and darkness. In 
this study, CRYPTOCHROME (CRY), a protein involved in circadian photoperception 
in Drosophila, is shown to block the function of PERIOD/TIMELESS (PER/TIM) 
heterodimeric complexes in a light-dependent fashion. TIM degradation does not 
occur under these conditions; thus, TIM degradation is uncoupled from abrogation 
of its function by light. CRY and TIM are part of the same complex and directly 
interact in yeast in a light-dependent fashion. PER/TIM and CRY influence the 
subcellular distribution of these protein complexes, which reside primarily in 
the nucleus after the perception of a light signal. Thus, CRY acts as a 
circadian photoreceptor by directly interacting with core components of the 
circadian clock.

DOI: 10.1126/science.285.5427.553
PMID: 10417378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
