---
reference_id: PMID:27137929
title: Structure of the GTP Form of Elongation Factor 4 (EF4) Bound to the Ribosome.
authors:
- Kumar V
- Ero R
- Ahmed T
- Goh KJ
- Zhan Y
- Bhushan S
- Gao YG
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.725945
keywords:
- Bacterial Proteins/chemistry
- Catalytic Domain
- Cryoelectron Microscopy
- GTP Phosphohydrolase-Linked Elongation Factors/chemistry
- Guanosine Diphosphate/chemistry
- Guanosine Triphosphate/chemistry
- Hydrogen Bonding
- Hydrolysis
- "Models, Molecular"
- Protein Binding
- "Ribosome Subunits, Large, Bacterial/chemistry"
- "Ribosome Subunits, Small, Bacterial/chemistry"
- Thermus thermophilus
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Structure of the GTP Form of Elongation Factor 4 (EF4) Bound to the Ribosome.
**Authors:** Kumar V, Ero R, Ahmed T, Goh KJ, Zhan Y, Bhushan S, Gao YG
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M116.725945](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M116.725945)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2016 Jun 17;291(25):12943-50. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.725945. Epub 
2016 May 2.

Structure of the GTP Form of Elongation Factor 4 (EF4) Bound to the Ribosome.

Kumar V(1), Ero R(2), Ahmed T(2), Goh KJ(2), Zhan Y(2), Bhushan S(3), Gao YG(4).

Author information:
(1)From the Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, The Agency for Science, 
Technology and Research (A*STAR), 61 Biopolis Drive, 138673 Singapore, the 
School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang 
Drive, 637551 Singapore, and.
(2)the School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 60 
Nanyang Drive, 637551 Singapore, and.
(3)the School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 60 
Nanyang Drive, 637551 Singapore, and the Institute of Structural Biology, 
Nanyang Technological University, 636921 Singapore.
(4)From the Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, The Agency for Science, 
Technology and Research (A*STAR), 61 Biopolis Drive, 138673 Singapore, the 
School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang 
Drive, 637551 Singapore, and the Institute of Structural Biology, Nanyang 
Technological University, 636921 Singapore ygao@ntu.edu.sg.

Elongation factor 4 (EF4) is a member of the family of ribosome-dependent 
translational GTPase factors, along with elongation factor G and BPI-inducible 
protein A. Although EF4 is highly conserved in bacterial, mitochondrial, and 
chloroplast genomes, its exact biological function remains controversial. Here 
we present the cryo-EM reconstitution of the GTP form of EF4 bound to the 
ribosome with P and E site tRNAs at 3.8-Å resolution. Interestingly, our 
structure reveals an unrotated ribosome rather than a clockwise-rotated 
ribosome, as observed in the presence of EF4-GDP and P site tRNA. In addition, 
we also observed a counterclockwise-rotated form of the above complex at 5.7-Å 
resolution. Taken together, our results shed light on the interactions formed 
between EF4, the ribosome, and the P site tRNA and illuminate the GTPase 
activation mechanism at previously unresolved detail.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M116.725945
PMCID: PMC4933213
PMID: 27137929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]