---
pmid: '17014843'
title: DIPA, which can localize to the centrosome, associates with p78/MCRS1/MSP58
  and acts as a repressor of gene transcription.
authors:
- Du X
- Wang Q
- Hirohashi Y
- Greene MI
journal: Exp Mol Pathol
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2006.07.008
---

# DIPA, which can localize to the centrosome, associates with p78/MCRS1/MSP58 and acts as a repressor of gene transcription.
**Authors:** Du X, Wang Q, Hirohashi Y, Greene MI
**Journal:** Exp Mol Pathol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yexmp.2006.07.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yexmp.2006.07.008)

## Abstract

1. Exp Mol Pathol. 2006 Dec;81(3):184-90. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2006.07.008. Epub 
2006 Oct 2.

DIPA, which can localize to the centrosome, associates with p78/MCRS1/MSP58 and 
acts as a repressor of gene transcription.

Du X(1), Wang Q, Hirohashi Y, Greene MI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, 252 John Morgan Building, 
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

DIPA (delta-interacting protein A) was initially identified as a protein that 
associates with the hepatitis delta antigen. In this study, we found that DIPA 
can associate with p78/MCRS/MSP58, a Forkhead-associated domain containing 
protein implicated in malignant transformation as well as in regulation of gene 
transcription and translation. We analyzed the interaction between DIPA and p78 
by co-immunoprecipitation and identified the structural regions involved in the 
interaction. Consistent with the physical interaction, we found that DIPA is 
predominant co-localized with p78 to the nucleus. In addition, a fraction of 
DIPA can be detected on the centrosome. Furthermore, we demonstrate that DIPA 
can act as a repressor of gene transcription, an activity that appears to be 
enhanced by p78. Taken together, our results revealed a novel protein complex 
that plays a role in regulation of gene expression and cell proliferation. We 
propose that dysfunction of DIPA may contribute to malignant transformation by 
affecting the functions of p78.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2006.07.008
PMID: 17014843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
