---
pmid: '11883941'
title: Two splice variants of human PEX19 exhibit distinct functions in peroxisomal
  assembly.
authors:
- Mayerhofer PU
- Kattenfeld T
- Roscher AA
- Muntau AC
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/bbrc.2002.6568
---

# Two splice variants of human PEX19 exhibit distinct functions in peroxisomal assembly.
**Authors:** Mayerhofer PU, Kattenfeld T, Roscher AA, Muntau AC
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1006/bbrc.2002.6568](https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.2002.6568)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Mar 15;291(5):1180-6. doi: 
10.1006/bbrc.2002.6568.

Two splice variants of human PEX19 exhibit distinct functions in peroxisomal 
assembly.

Mayerhofer PU(1), Kattenfeld T, Roscher AA, Muntau AC.

Author information:
(1)Dr. v. Hauner Children's Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, 
Lindwurmstrasse 4, D-80337 Munich, Germany.

PEX19 has been shown to play a central role in the early steps of peroxisomal 
membrane synthesis. Computational database analysis of the PEX19 sequence 
revealed three different conserved domains: D1 (aa 1--87), D2 (aa 88--272), and 
D3 (aa 273--299). However, these domains have not yet been linked to specific 
biological functions. We elected to functionally characterize the proteins 
derived from two naturally occurring PEX19 splice variants: PEX19DeltaE2 lacking 
the N-terminal domain D1 and PEX19DeltaE8 lacking the domain D3. Both interact 
with peroxisomal ABC transporters (ALDP, ALDRP, PMP70) and with full-length PEX3 
as shown by in vitro protein interaction studies. PEX19DeltaE8 also interacts 
with a PEX3 protein lacking the peroxisomal targeting region located at the 
N-terminus (Delta66aaPEX3), whereas PEX19DeltaE2 does not. Functional 
complementation studies in PEX19-deficient human fibroblasts revealed that 
transfection of PEX19DeltaE8-cDNA leads to restoration of both peroxisomal 
membranes and of functional peroxisomes, whereas transfection of 
PEX19DeltaE2-cDNA does not restore peroxisomal biogenesis. Human PEX19 is partly 
farnesylated in vitro and in vivo. The farnesylation consensus motif CLIM is 
located in the PEX19 domain D3. The finding that the protein derived from the 
splice variant lacking D3 is able to interact with several peroxisomal membrane 
proteins and to restore peroxisomal biogenesis challenges the previous 
assumption that farnesylation of PEX19 is essential for its biological 
functionality. The data presented demonstrate a considerable functional 
diversity of the proteins encoded by two PEX19 splice variants and thereby 
provide first experimental evidence for specific biological functions of the 
different predicted domains of the PEX19 protein.

(C)2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.2002.6568
PMID: 11883941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
