---
pmid: '22343915'
title: 'FAAP20: a novel ubiquitin-binding FA nuclear core-complex protein required
  for functional integrity of the FA-BRCA DNA repair pathway.'
authors:
- Ali AM
- Pradhan A
- Singh TR
- Du C
- Li J
- Wahengbam K
- Grassman E
- Auerbach AD
- Pang Q
- Meetei AR
journal: Blood
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3321854
doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-10-385963
---

# FAAP20: a novel ubiquitin-binding FA nuclear core-complex protein required for functional integrity of the FA-BRCA DNA repair pathway.
**Authors:** Ali AM, Pradhan A, Singh TR, Du C, Li J, Wahengbam K, Grassman E, Auerbach AD, Pang Q, Meetei AR
**Journal:** Blood (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2011-10-385963](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2011-10-385963)
**PMC:** [PMC3321854](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3321854/)

## Abstract

1. Blood. 2012 Apr 5;119(14):3285-94. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-10-385963. Epub
2012  Feb 17.

FAAP20: a novel ubiquitin-binding FA nuclear core-complex protein required for 
functional integrity of the FA-BRCA DNA repair pathway.

Ali AM(1), Pradhan A, Singh TR, Du C, Li J, Wahengbam K, Grassman E, Auerbach 
AD, Pang Q, Meetei AR.

Author information:
(1)Experimental Hematology and Cancer Biology, Cancer and Blood Diseases 
Institute, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, 
USA.

Fanconi anemia (FA) nuclear core complex is a multiprotein complex required for 
the functional integrity of the FA-BRCA pathway regulating DNA repair. This 
pathway is inactivated in FA, a devastating genetic disease, which leads to 
hematologic defects and cancer in patients. Here we report the isolation and 
characterization of a novel 20-kDa FANCA-associated protein (FAAP20). We show 
that FAAP20 is an integral component of the FA nuclear core complex. We identify 
a region on FANCA that physically interacts with FAAP20, and show that FANCA 
regulates stability of this protein. FAAP20 contains a conserved 
ubiquitin-binding zinc-finger domain (UBZ), and binds K-63-linked ubiquitin 
chains in vitro. The FAAP20-UBZ domain is not required for interaction with 
FANCA, but is required for DNA-damage-induced chromatin loading of FANCA and the 
functional integrity of the FA pathway. These findings reveal critical roles for 
FAAP20 in the FA-BRCA pathway of DNA damage repair and genome maintenance.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2011-10-385963
PMCID: PMC3321854
PMID: 22343915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
