---
pmid: '26711270'
title: A Novel Interaction of Ecdysoneless (ECD) Protein with R2TP Complex Component
  RUVBL1 Is Required for the Functional Role of ECD in Cell Cycle Progression.
authors:
- Mir RA
- Bele A
- Mirza S
- Srivastava S
- Olou AA
- Ammons SA
- Kim JH
- Gurumurthy CB
- Qiu F
- Band H
- Band V
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4810467
doi: 10.1128/MCB.00594-15
---

# A Novel Interaction of Ecdysoneless (ECD) Protein with R2TP Complex Component RUVBL1 Is Required for the Functional Role of ECD in Cell Cycle Progression.
**Authors:** Mir RA, Bele A, Mirza S, Srivastava S, Olou AA, Ammons SA, Kim JH, Gurumurthy CB, Qiu F, Band H, Band V
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.00594-15](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.00594-15)
**PMC:** [PMC4810467](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4810467/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Dec 28;36(6):886-99. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00594-15.

A Novel Interaction of Ecdysoneless (ECD) Protein with R2TP Complex Component 
RUVBL1 Is Required for the Functional Role of ECD in Cell Cycle Progression.

Mir RA(1), Bele A(1), Mirza S(1), Srivastava S(1), Olou AA(1), Ammons SA(1), Kim 
JH(1), Gurumurthy CB(1), Qiu F(2), Band H(3), Band V(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, and Anatomy, College of Medicine, 
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, USA.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, College of Public Health, University of Nebraska 
Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, USA.
(3)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, and Anatomy, College of Medicine, 
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, USA Department of 
Pathology and Microbiology, College of Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical 
Center, Omaha, Nebraska, USA Department of Pharmacology and Experimental 
Therapeutics, College of Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, 
Nebraska, USA Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of 
Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, USA Eppley 
Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of Nebraska 
Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, USA Fred and Pamela Buffett Cancer Center, 
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, USA.
(4)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, and Anatomy, College of Medicine, 
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, USA Fred and Pamela 
Buffett Cancer Center, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, 
USA vband@unmc.edu.

Ecdysoneless (ECD) is an evolutionarily conserved protein whose germ line 
deletion is embryonic lethal. Deletion of Ecd in cells causes cell cycle arrest, 
which is rescued by exogenous ECD, demonstrating a requirement of ECD for normal 
mammalian cell cycle progression. However, the exact mechanism by which ECD 
regulates cell cycle is unknown. Here, we demonstrate that ECD protein levels 
and subcellular localization are invariant during cell cycle progression, 
suggesting a potential role of posttranslational modifications or 
protein-protein interactions. Since phosphorylated ECD was recently shown to 
interact with the PIH1D1 adaptor component of the R2TP cochaperone complex, we 
examined the requirement of ECD phosphorylation in cell cycle progression. 
Notably, phosphorylation-deficient ECD mutants that failed to bind to PIH1D1 in 
vitro fully retained the ability to interact with the R2TP complex and yet 
exhibited a reduced ability to rescue Ecd-deficient cells from cell cycle 
arrest. Biochemical analyses demonstrated an additional 
phosphorylation-independent interaction of ECD with the RUVBL1 component of the 
R2TP complex, and this interaction is essential for ECD's cell cycle progression 
function. These studies demonstrate that interaction of ECD with RUVBL1, and its 
CK2-mediated phosphorylation, independent of its interaction with PIH1D1, are 
important for its cell cycle regulatory function.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00594-15
PMCID: PMC4810467
PMID: 26711270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
