---
pmid: '1560001'
title: Specific associations of T4 bacteriophage proteins with immobilized deoxycytidylate
  hydroxymethylase.
authors:
- Wheeler L
- Wang Y
- Mathews CK
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1992'
full_text_available: false
---

# Specific associations of T4 bacteriophage proteins with immobilized deoxycytidylate hydroxymethylase.
**Authors:** Wheeler L, Wang Y, Mathews CK
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1992)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1992 Apr 15;267(11):7664-70.

Specific associations of T4 bacteriophage proteins with immobilized 
deoxycytidylate hydroxymethylase.

Wheeler L(1), Wang Y, Mathews CK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Oregon State University, Corvallis 
97331-6503.

Is the enzymatic machinery for DNA precursor biosynthesis linked to the DNA 
replication apparatus? To identify intermolecular associations among 
deoxyribonucleotide biosynthetic enzymes and to ask whether these enzymes are 
linked to replication proteins, we analyzed radiolabeled T4 bacteriophage 
proteins that bind specifically to a column of immobilized T4 deoxycytidylate 
hydroxymethylase. More than a dozen T4 proteins and a few Escherichia coli 
proteins are adsorbed specifically by this column. Several of the T4 proteins 
were identified by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and radioautography. 
These include five enzymes involved in DNA precursor biosynthesis, dCMP 
hydroxymethylase, thymidylate synthase, dihydrofolate reductase, 
dCTPase-dUTPase, and ribonucleotide reductase large and small subunits, plus 
several proteins of DNA metabolism and replication. Analysis of extracts of 
cells infected with phage amber mutants defective in specific proteins suggested 
a specific association involving thymidylate synthase and the gene 32 
single-strand DNA-binding protein.

PMID: 1560001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
