---
pmid: '26472928'
title: Assembly of Multi-tRNA Synthetase Complex via Heterotetrameric Glutathione
  Transferase-homology Domains.
authors:
- Cho HY
- Maeng SJ
- Cho HJ
- Choi YS
- Chung JM
- Lee S
- Kim HK
- Kim JH
- Eom CY
- Kim YG
- Guo M
- Jung HS
- Kang BS
- Kim S
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4705937
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.690867
---

# Assembly of Multi-tRNA Synthetase Complex via Heterotetrameric Glutathione Transferase-homology Domains.
**Authors:** Cho HY, Maeng SJ, Cho HJ, Choi YS, Chung JM, Lee S, Kim HK, Kim JH, Eom CY, Kim YG, Guo M, Jung HS, Kang BS, Kim S
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M115.690867](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M115.690867)
**PMC:** [PMC4705937](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4705937/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2015 Dec 4;290(49):29313-28. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.690867. Epub 
2015 Oct 15.

Assembly of Multi-tRNA Synthetase Complex via Heterotetrameric Glutathione 
Transferase-homology Domains.

Cho HY(1), Maeng SJ(1), Cho HJ(1), Choi YS(1), Chung JM(2), Lee S(2), Kim HK(3), 
Kim JH(3), Eom CY(4), Kim YG(5), Guo M(6), Jung HS(2), Kang BS(7), Kim S(8).

Author information:
(1)From the School of Life Science and Biotechnology, KNU Creative BioResearch 
Group, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 702-701, Korea.
(2)the Department of Biochemistry, College of Natural Sciences, Kangwon National 
University, Chuncheon 200-701, Korea.
(3)the Department of Molecular Medicine and Biopharmaceutical Sciences, 
Medicinal Bioconvergence Research Center, Graduate School of Convergence 
Technology, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea.
(4)the NanoBio Convergence Research Team, Western Seoul Center, Korea Basic 
Science Institute, Seoul 120-750, Korea.
(5)the Pohang Accelerator Laboratory, Pohang University of Science and 
Technology, Pohang 790-834, Korea.
(6)the Department of Cancer Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, 
Florida 33458, and.
(7)From the School of Life Science and Biotechnology, KNU Creative BioResearch 
Group, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 702-701, Korea, bskang2@knu.ac.kr.
(8)the Department of Molecular Medicine and Biopharmaceutical Sciences, 
Medicinal Bioconvergence Research Center, Graduate School of Convergence 
Technology, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea, the The National 
Center for Drug Screening, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Shanghai 
201203, China sungkim@snu.ac.kr.

Many multicomponent protein complexes mediating diverse cellular processes are 
assembled through scaffolds with specialized protein interaction modules. The 
multi-tRNA synthetase complex (MSC), consisting of nine different aminoacyl-tRNA 
synthetases and three non-enzymatic factors (AIMP1-3), serves as a hub for many 
signaling pathways in addition to its role in protein synthesis. However, the 
assembly process and structural arrangement of the MSC components are not well 
understood. Here we show the heterotetrameric complex structure of the 
glutathione transferase (GST) domains shared among the four MSC components, 
methionyl-tRNA synthetase (MRS), glutaminyl-prolyl-tRNA synthetase (EPRS), AIMP2 
and AIMP3. The MRS-AIMP3 and EPRS-AIMP2 using interface 1 are bridged via 
interface 2 of AIMP3 and EPRS to generate a unique linear complex of 
MRS-AIMP3:EPRS-AIMP2 at the molar ratio of (1:1):(1:1). Interestingly, the 
affinity at interface 2 of AIMP3:EPRS can be varied depending on the occupancy 
of interface 1, suggesting the dynamic nature of the linear GST tetramer. The 
four components are optimally arranged for maximal accommodation of additional 
domains and proteins. These characteristics suggest the GST tetramer as a unique 
and dynamic structural platform from which the MSC components are assembled. 
Considering prevalence of the GST-like domains, this tetramer can also provide a 
tool for the communication of the MSC with other GST-containing cellular 
factors.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M115.690867
PMCID: PMC4705937
PMID: 26472928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
