---
pmid: '9528852'
title: 'BAP1: a novel ubiquitin hydrolase which binds to the BRCA1 RING finger and
  enhances BRCA1-mediated cell growth suppression.'
authors:
- Jensen DE
- Proctor M
- Marquis ST
- Gardner HP
- Ha SI
- Chodosh LA
- Ishov AM
- Tommerup N
- Vissing H
- Sekido Y
- Minna J
- Borodovsky A
- Schultz DC
- Wilkinson KD
- Maul GG
- Barlev N
- Berger SL
- Prendergast GC
- Rauscher FJ 3rd
journal: Oncogene
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1201861
---

# BAP1: a novel ubiquitin hydrolase which binds to the BRCA1 RING finger and enhances BRCA1-mediated cell growth suppression.
**Authors:** Jensen DE, Proctor M, Marquis ST, Gardner HP, Ha SI, Chodosh LA, Ishov AM, Tommerup N, Vissing H, Sekido Y, Minna J, Borodovsky A, Schultz DC, Wilkinson KD, Maul GG, Barlev N, Berger SL, Prendergast GC, Rauscher FJ 3rd
**Journal:** Oncogene (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1201861](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1201861)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 1998 Mar 5;16(9):1097-112. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1201861.

BAP1: a novel ubiquitin hydrolase which binds to the BRCA1 RING finger and 
enhances BRCA1-mediated cell growth suppression.

Jensen DE(1), Proctor M, Marquis ST, Gardner HP, Ha SI, Chodosh LA, Ishov AM, 
Tommerup N, Vissing H, Sekido Y, Minna J, Borodovsky A, Schultz DC, Wilkinson 
KD, Maul GG, Barlev N, Berger SL, Prendergast GC, Rauscher FJ 3rd.

Author information:
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

We have identified a novel protein, BAP1, which binds to the RING finger domain 
of the Breast/Ovarian Cancer Susceptibility Gene product, BRCA1. BAP1 is a 
nuclear-localized, ubiquitin carboxy-terminal hydrolase, suggesting that 
deubiquitinating enzymes may play a role in BRCA1 function. BAP1 binds to the 
wild-type BRCA1-RING finger, but not to germline mutants of the BRCA1-RING 
finger found in breast cancer kindreds. BAP1 and BRCA1 are temporally and 
spatially co-expressed during murine breast development and remodeling, and show 
overlapping patterns of subnuclear distribution. BAP1 resides on human 
chromosome 3p21.3; intragenic homozygous rearrangements and deletions of BAP1 
have been found in lung carcinoma cell lines. BAP1 enhances BRCA1-mediated 
inhibition of breast cancer cell growth and is the first nuclear-localized 
ubiquitin carboxy-terminal hydrolase to be identified. BAP1 may be a new tumor 
suppressor gene which functions in the BRCA1 growth control pathway.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1201861
PMID: 9528852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
