---
pmid: '18395422'
title: Endogenous Gas6 and Ca2+ -channel activation modulate phagocytosis by retinal
  pigment epithelium.
authors:
- Karl MO
- Kroeger W
- Wimmers S
- Milenkovic VM
- Valtink M
- Engelmann K
- Strauss O
journal: Cell Signal
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2008.02.005
---

# Endogenous Gas6 and Ca2+ -channel activation modulate phagocytosis by retinal pigment epithelium.
**Authors:** Karl MO, Kroeger W, Wimmers S, Milenkovic VM, Valtink M, Engelmann K, Strauss O
**Journal:** Cell Signal (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cellsig.2008.02.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cellsig.2008.02.005)

## Abstract

1. Cell Signal. 2008 Jun;20(6):1159-68. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2008.02.005. Epub 
2008 Feb 16.

Endogenous Gas6 and Ca2+ -channel activation modulate phagocytosis by retinal 
pigment epithelium.

Karl MO(1), Kroeger W, Wimmers S, Milenkovic VM, Valtink M, Engelmann K, Strauss 
O.

Author information:
(1)University Eye Hospital Hamburg, Martinistrasse 52, 20246 Hamburg, Germany. 
mail@mikeology.de

Mutation or loss of MerTK as well as deficiency of alphavbeta5-integrins, gives 
rise to retinal-degeneration due to inefficient phagocytosis of photoreceptor 
outer-segment fragments by the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). This study 
shows that Gas6 expressed endogenously by human RPE promotes phagocytosis. The 
RPE expresses Gas6 more highly in vivo and in serum-reduced conditions in vitro 
than in high-serum conditions, suggesting a negative-feedback control. An 
antibody-blockage approach revealed that Gas6-expressing RPE phagocytizes 
photoreceptor outer-segment fragments due to stimulation of MerTK by endogenous 
Gas6 in vitro. MerTK- and Gas6-antibodies reduced phagocytosis. Blocking L-type 
Ca(2+)-channels with nifedipine inhibited MerTK dependent phagocytosis in vitro. 
Application of integrin inhibitory, soluble, RGD-containing peptides or soluble 
vitronectin reduced L-type Ca(2+)-channel currents in RPE. Herbimycin A, which 
reduces phosphorylation of integrin receptor-associated proteins and decreases 
L-type Ca(2+)-channel currents in RPE, eliminates the inhibiting vitronectin 
effect and abolishes phagocytosis. Thus, Gas6-promoted phagocytosis was 
inhibited by L-type Ca(2+)-channel blockage, which in turn may be activated by 
integrin receptor stimulation. These results suggest that L-type Ca(2+)-channels 
could be regulated downstream of both MerTK and alphavbeta5-integrin, indicating 
that the binding and uptake mechanisms of phagocytosis are part of a converging 
pathway.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2008.02.005
PMID: 18395422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
