---
pmid: '11782478'
title: Differential activities of murine single minded 1 (SIM1) and SIM2 on a hypoxic
  response element. Cross-talk between basic helix-loop-helix/per-Arnt-Sim homology
  transcription factors.
authors:
- Woods SL
- Whitelaw ML
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110752200
---

# Differential activities of murine single minded 1 (SIM1) and SIM2 on a hypoxic response element. Cross-talk between basic helix-loop-helix/per-Arnt-Sim homology transcription factors.
**Authors:** Woods SL, Whitelaw ML
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110752200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110752200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 22;277(12):10236-43. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110752200. Epub 
2002 Jan 8.

Differential activities of murine single minded 1 (SIM1) and SIM2 on a hypoxic 
response element. Cross-talk between basic helix-loop-helix/per-Arnt-Sim 
homology transcription factors.

Woods SL(1), Whitelaw ML.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular BioSciences, Center for the Molecular Genetics of 
Development, Adelaide University, South Australia 5005, Australia.

The basic helix-loop-helix/Per-Arnt-Sim homology (bHLH/PAS) protein family 
comprises a group of transcriptional regulators that often respond to a variety 
of developmental and environmental stimuli. Two murine members of this family, 
Single Minded 1 (SIM1) and Single Minded 2 (SIM2), are essential for postnatal 
survival but differ from other prototypical family members such as the dioxin 
receptor (DR) and hypoxia-inducible factors, in that they behave as 
transcriptional repressors in mammalian one-hybrid experiments and have yet to 
be ascribed a regulating signal. In cell lines engineered to stably express SIM1 
and SIM2, we show that both are nuclear proteins that constitutively complex 
with the general bHLH/PAS partner factor, ARNT. We report that the murine SIM 
factors, in combination with ARNT, attenuate transcription from the 
hypoxia-inducible erythropoietin (EPO) enhancer during hypoxia. Such cross-talk 
between coexpressed bHLH/PAS factors can occur through competition for ARNT, 
which we find evident in SIM repression of DR-induced transcription from a 
xenobiotic response element reporter gene. However, SIM1/ARNT, but not 
SIM2/ARNT, can activate transcription from the EPO enhancer at normoxia, 
implying that the SIM proteins have the ability to bind hypoxia response 
elements and affect either activation or repression of transcription. This 
notion is supported by co-immunoprecipitation of EPO enhancer sequences with the 
SIM2 protein. SIM protein levels decrease with hypoxia treatment in our stable 
cell lines, although levels of the transcripts encoding SIM1 and SIM2 and the 
approximately 2-h half-lives of each protein are unchanged during hypoxia. 
Inhibition of protein synthesis, known to occur in cells during hypoxic stress 
in order to decrease ATP utilization, appears to account for the fall in SIM 
levels. Our data suggest the existence of a hypoxic switch mechanism in cells 
that coexpress hypoxia-inducible factor and SIM proteins, where up-regulation 
and activation of hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha is concomitant with 
attenuation of SIM activities.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110752200
PMID: 11782478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
