---
pmid: '11870213'
title: 'Perinuclear localization of huntingtin as a consequence of its binding to
  microtubules through an interaction with beta-tubulin: relevance to Huntington''s
  disease.'
authors:
- Hoffner G
- Kahlem P
- Djian P
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.115.5.941
---

# Perinuclear localization of huntingtin as a consequence of its binding to microtubules through an interaction with beta-tubulin: relevance to Huntington's disease.
**Authors:** Hoffner G, Kahlem P, Djian P
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.115.5.941](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.115.5.941)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2002 Mar 1;115(Pt 5):941-8. doi: 10.1242/jcs.115.5.941.

Perinuclear localization of huntingtin as a consequence of its binding to 
microtubules through an interaction with beta-tubulin: relevance to Huntington's 
disease.

Hoffner G(1), Kahlem P, Djian P.

Author information:
(1)CNRS --- UPR 2228, Régulation de la Transcription et Maladies Génétiques, 
Université René Descartes, 45 rue des Saints-Pères, 75270 Paris Cedex 06, 
France.

Huntington's disease results from an expansion of a series of glutamine repeats 
in the protein huntingtin. We have discovered from immunopurification studies 
that huntingtin combines specifically with the beta subunit of tubulin. This 
binding explains why huntingtin can be shown on assembled microtubules by 
electron microscopy. Immunostaining shows that most of the huntingtin in the 
cytoplasm is associated with microtubules. Huntingtin is particularly abundant 
in the perinuclear region, where it is also associated with microtubules and in 
the centrosomal region, where it co-localizes with gamma-tubulin. In 
Huntington's disease, inclusions are often nuclear or perinuclear. Since the 
perinuclear concentration of huntingtin does not depend on the number of its 
glutamine repeats, we propose that inclusions are found in perinuclear and 
intranuclear locations because the beta-tubulin binding property of huntingtin 
brings it to the perinuclear region, from which it readily gains access to the 
nucleus. The mutational glutamine expansion then promotes insolubility and 
results in an inclusion.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.115.5.941
PMID: 11870213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
