---
pmid: '20439545'
title: Differential auxin-transporting activities of PIN-FORMED proteins in Arabidopsis
  root hair cells.
authors:
- Ganguly A
- Lee SH
- Cho M
- Lee OR
- Yoo H
- Cho HT
journal: Plant Physiol
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC2899906
doi: 10.1104/pp.110.156505
---

# Differential auxin-transporting activities of PIN-FORMED proteins in Arabidopsis root hair cells.
**Authors:** Ganguly A, Lee SH, Cho M, Lee OR, Yoo H, Cho HT
**Journal:** Plant Physiol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1104/pp.110.156505](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.110.156505)
**PMC:** [PMC2899906](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2899906/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Physiol. 2010 Jul;153(3):1046-61. doi: 10.1104/pp.110.156505. Epub 2010 
May 3.

Differential auxin-transporting activities of PIN-FORMED proteins in Arabidopsis 
root hair cells.

Ganguly A(1), Lee SH, Cho M, Lee OR, Yoo H, Cho HT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Genomics and Breeding Institute, Seoul 
National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea.

The Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) genome includes eight PIN-FORMED (PIN) 
members that are molecularly diverged. To comparatively examine their 
differences in auxin-transporting activity and subcellular behaviors, we 
expressed seven PIN proteins specifically in Arabidopsis root hairs and analyzed 
their activities in terms of the degree of PIN-mediated root hair inhibition or 
enhancement and determined their subcellular localization. Expression of six 
PINs (PIN1-PIN4, PIN7, and PIN8) in root hair cells greatly inhibited root hair 
growth, most likely by lowering auxin levels in the root hair cell by their 
auxin efflux activities. The auxin efflux activity of PIN8, which had not been 
previously demonstrated, was further confirmed using a tobacco (Nicotiana 
tabacum) cell assay system. In accordance with these results, those PINs were 
localized in the plasma membrane, where they likely export auxin to the apoplast 
and formed internal compartments in response to brefeldin A. These six PINs 
conferred different degrees of root hair inhibition and sensitivities to auxin 
or auxin transport inhibitors. Conversely, PIN5 mostly localized to internal 
compartments, and its expression in root hair cells rather slightly stimulated 
hair growth, implying that PIN5 enhanced internal auxin availability. These 
results suggest that different PINs behave differentially in catalyzing auxin 
transport depending upon their molecular activity and subcellular localization 
in the root hair cell.

DOI: 10.1104/pp.110.156505
PMCID: PMC2899906
PMID: 20439545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The Arabidopsis ( Arabidopsis thaliana ) genome includes eight PIN-FORMED (PIN) members that are molecularly diverged. To comparatively examine their differences in auxin-transporting activity and subcellular behaviors, we expressed seven PIN proteins specifically in Arabidopsis root hairs and analyzed their activities in terms of the degree of PIN-mediated root hair inhibition or enhancement and determined their subcellular localization. Expression of six PINs (PIN1–PIN4, PIN7, and PIN8) in root hair cells greatly inhibited root hair growth, most likely by lowering auxin levels in the root hair cell by their auxin efflux activities. The auxin efflux activity of PIN8, which had not been previously demonstrated, was further confirmed using a tobacco ( Nicotiana tabacum ) cell assay system. In accordance with these results, those PINs were localized in the plasma membrane, where they likely export auxin to the apoplast and formed internal compartments in response to brefeldin A. These six PINs conferred different degrees of root hair inhibition and sensitivities to auxin or auxin transport inhibitors. Conversely, PIN5 mostly localized to internal compartments, and its expression in root hair cells rather slightly stimulated hair growth, implying that PIN5 enhanced internal auxin availability. These results suggest that different PINs behave differentially in catalyzing auxin transport depending upon their molecular activity and subcellular localization in the root hair cell.
