---
pmid: '36640363'
title: Phase separation of SGS3 drives siRNA body formation and promotes endogenous
  gene silencing.
authors:
- Tan H
- Luo W
- Yan W
- Liu J
- Aizezi Y
- Cui R
- Tian R
- Ma J
- Guo H
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2023'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2022.111985
---

# Phase separation of SGS3 drives siRNA body formation and promotes endogenous gene silencing.
**Authors:** Tan H, Luo W, Yan W, Liu J, Aizezi Y, Cui R, Tian R, Ma J, Guo H
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2022.111985](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2022.111985)

## Abstract

1. Cell Rep. 2023 Jan 31;42(1):111985. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2022.111985. Epub
2023  Jan 9.

Phase separation of SGS3 drives siRNA body formation and promotes endogenous
gene silencing.

Tan H(1), Luo W(2), Yan W(2), Liu J(3), Aizezi Y(2), Cui R(4), Tian R(3), Ma
J(4), Guo H(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Plant and Food Science, Department of Biology, School of Life
Sciences, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, Guangdong
518055, China; Laboratory of Molecular Design for Plant Cell Factory of
Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Southern University of Science and
Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China; Institute for Advanced Studies, Wuhan
University, Wuhan 430072, China.
(2)Institute of Plant and Food Science, Department of Biology, School of Life
Sciences, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, Guangdong
518055, China; Laboratory of Molecular Design for Plant Cell Factory of
Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Southern University of Science and
Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China.
(3)Department of Chemistry, College of Science, Southern University of Science
and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China.
(4)Huashan Hospital affiliated to Fudan University, State Key Laboratory of
Genetic Engineering, Collaborative Innovation Center of Genetics and
Development, Multiscale Research Institute of Complex Systems, Department of
Biochemistry and Biophysics, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai
200438, China.
(5)Institute of Plant and Food Science, Department of Biology, School of Life
Sciences, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, Guangdong
518055, China; Laboratory of Molecular Design for Plant Cell Factory of
Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Southern University of Science and
Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China. Electronic address: guohw@sustech.edu.cn.

The generation of small interfering RNA (siRNA) involves many RNA processing
components, including SUPPRESSOR OF GENE SILENCING 3 (SGS3), RNA-DEPENDENT RNA
POLYMERASE 6 (RDR6), and DICER-LIKE proteins (DCLs). Nonetheless, how these
components are coordinated to produce siRNAs is unclear. Here, we show that SGS3
forms condensates via phase separation in vivo and in vitro. SGS3 interacts with
RDR6 and drives it to form siRNA bodies in cytoplasm, which is promoted by
SGS3-targeted RNAs. Disrupting SGS3 phase separation abrogates siRNA body
assembly and siRNA biogenesis, whereas coexpression of SGS3 and RDR6 induces
siRNA body formation in tobacco and yeast cells. Dysfunction in translation and
mRNA decay increases the number of siRNA bodies, whereas DCL2/4 mutations
enhance their size. Purification of SGS3 condensates identifies numerous
RNA-binding proteins and siRNA processing components. Together, our findings
reveal that SGS3 phase separation-mediated formation of siRNA bodies is
essential for siRNA production and gene silencing.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2022.111985
PMID: 36640363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no
competing interests.
