---
pmid: '15983381'
title: Interaction of DJ-1 with Daxx inhibits apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1
  activity and cell death.
authors:
- Junn E
- Taniguchi H
- Jeong BS
- Zhao X
- Ichijo H
- Mouradian MM
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1172235
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0409635102
---

# Interaction of DJ-1 with Daxx inhibits apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 activity and cell death.
**Authors:** Junn E, Taniguchi H, Jeong BS, Zhao X, Ichijo H, Mouradian MM
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0409635102](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0409635102)
**PMC:** [PMC1172235](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1172235/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Jul 5;102(27):9691-6. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0409635102. Epub 2005 Jun 27.

Interaction of DJ-1 with Daxx inhibits apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 
activity and cell death.

Junn E(1), Taniguchi H, Jeong BS, Zhao X, Ichijo H, Mouradian MM.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurodegenerative and Neuroimmunologic Diseases, Department of 
Neurology, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey-Robert Wood 
Johnson Medical School, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

Investigations into the cellular and molecular biology of genes that cause 
inherited forms of Parkinson's disease, as well as the downstream pathways that 
they trigger, shed considerable light on our understanding the fundamental 
determinants of life and death in dopaminergic neurons. Homozygous deletion or 
missense mutation in DJ-1 results in autosomal recessively inherited Parkinson's 
disease, suggesting that wild-type DJ-1 has a favorable role in maintaining 
these neurons. Here, we show that DJ-1 protects against oxidative stress-induced 
cell death, but that its relatively modest ability to quench reactive oxygen 
species is insufficient to account for its more robust cytoprotective effect. To 
elucidate the mechanism of this cell-preserving function, we have screened out 
the death protein Daxx as a DJ-1-interacting partner. We demonstrate that 
wild-type DJ-1 sequesters Daxx in the nucleus, prevents it from gaining access 
to the cytoplasm, from binding to and activating its effector kinase apoptosis 
signal-regulating kinase 1, and therefore, from triggering the ensuing death 
pathway. All these steps are impaired by the disease-causing L166P mutant 
isoform of DJ-1. These findings suggest that the regulated sequestration of Daxx 
in the nucleus and keeping apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 activation in 
check is a critical mechanism by which DJ-1 exerts its cytoprotective function.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0409635102
PMCID: PMC1172235
PMID: 15983381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
