---
pmid: '31848300'
title: CD13/Aminopeptidase N Is a Potential Therapeutic Target for Inflammatory Disorders.
authors:
- Lu C
- Amin MA
- Fox DA
journal: J Immunol
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6997018
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1900868
---

# CD13/Aminopeptidase N Is a Potential Therapeutic Target for Inflammatory Disorders.
**Authors:** Lu C, Amin MA, Fox DA
**Journal:** J Immunol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.4049/jimmunol.1900868](https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.1900868)
**PMC:** [PMC6997018](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6997018/)

## Abstract

1. J Immunol. 2020 Jan 1;204(1):3-11. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1900868.

CD13/Aminopeptidase N Is a Potential Therapeutic Target for Inflammatory 
Disorders.

Lu C(1)(2), Amin MA(1), Fox DA(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Clinical Autoimmunity Center of Excellence, 
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109; and.
(2)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, West China Hospital, Sichuan 
University, Chengdu 610041, Sichuan, China.
(3)Division of Rheumatology, Clinical Autoimmunity Center of Excellence, 
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109; and 
dfox@med.umich.edu.

CD13/aminopeptidase N is a widely expressed ectoenzyme with multiple functions. 
As an enzyme, CD13 regulates activities of numerous cytokines by cleaving their 
N-terminals and is involved in Ag processing by trimming the peptides bound to 
MHC class II. Independent of its enzymatic activity, cell membrane CD13 
functions by cross-linking-induced signal transduction, regulation of receptor 
recycling, enhancement of FcγR-mediated phagocytosis, and acting as a receptor 
for cytokines. Moreover, soluble CD13 has multiple proinflammatory roles 
mediated by binding to G-protein-coupled receptors. CD13 not only modulates 
development and activities of immune-related cells, but also regulates functions 
of inflammatory mediators. Therefore, CD13 is important in the pathogenesis of 
various inflammatory disorders. Inhibitors of CD13 have shown impressive 
anti-inflammatory effects, but none of them has yet been used for clinical 
therapy of human inflammatory diseases. We reevaluate CD13's regulatory role in 
inflammation and suggest that CD13 could be a potential therapeutic target for 
inflammatory disorders.

Copyright © 2019 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1900868
PMCID: PMC6997018
PMID: 31848300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: The authors have no financial 
conflicts of interest.
