---
pmid: '24768165'
title: WLS retrograde transport to the endoplasmic reticulum during Wnt secretion.
authors:
- Yu J
- Chia J
- Canning CA
- Jones CM
- Bard FA
- Virshup DM
journal: Dev Cell
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2014.03.016
---

# WLS retrograde transport to the endoplasmic reticulum during Wnt secretion.
**Authors:** Yu J, Chia J, Canning CA, Jones CM, Bard FA, Virshup DM
**Journal:** Dev Cell (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.devcel.2014.03.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2014.03.016)

## Abstract

1. Dev Cell. 2014 May 12;29(3):277-91. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2014.03.016. Epub
2014  Apr 24.

WLS retrograde transport to the endoplasmic reticulum during Wnt secretion.

Yu J(1), Chia J(2), Canning CA(3), Jones CM(3), Bard FA(2), Virshup DM(4).

Author information:
(1)Program in Cancer and Stem Cell Biology, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, 
Singapore 169857, Singapore.
(2)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, A(∗)STAR, Singapore 138673, 
Singapore.
(3)Institute of Medical Biology, A(∗)STAR, Singapore 138648, Singapore.
(4)Program in Cancer and Stem Cell Biology, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, 
Singapore 169857, Singapore; Institute of Medical Biology, A(∗)STAR, Singapore 
138648, Singapore; Department of Biochemistry, National University of Singapore, 
Singapore 117597, Singapore; Department of Pediatrics, Duke University, Durham, 
NC 27710, USA. Electronic address: david.virshup@duke-nus.edu.sg.

Wnts are transported to the cell surface by the integral membrane protein WLS 
(also known as Wntless, Evi, and GPR177). Previous studies of WLS trafficking 
have emphasized WLS movement from the Golgi to the plasma membrane (PM) and then 
back to the Golgi via retromer-mediated endocytic recycling. We find that 
endogenous WLS binds Wnts in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), cycles to the PM, 
and then returns to the ER through the Golgi. We identify an ER-targeting 
sequence at the carboxyl terminus of native WLS that is critical for ER 
retrograde recycling and contributes to Wnt secretory function. Golgi-to-ER 
recycling of WLS requires the COPI regulator ARF as well as ERGIC2, an ER-Golgi 
intermediate compartment protein that is also required for the retrograde 
trafficking of the KDEL receptor and certain toxins. ERGIC2 is required for 
efficient Wnt secretion. ER retrieval is an integral part of the WLS transport 
cycle.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2014.03.016
PMID: 24768165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
