---
pmid: '38654926'
title: Proteomic biomarkers in seminal plasma as predictors of reproductive potential
  in azoospermic men.
authors:
- Fietz D
- Sgaier R
- O'Donnell L
- Stanton PG
- Dagley LF
- Webb AI
- Schuppe HC
- Diemer T
- Pilatz A
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2024'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC11035875
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2024.1327800
---

# Proteomic biomarkers in seminal plasma as predictors of reproductive potential in azoospermic men.
**Authors:** Fietz D, Sgaier R, O'Donnell L, Stanton PG, Dagley LF, Webb AI, Schuppe HC, Diemer T, Pilatz A
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2024.1327800](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2024.1327800)
**PMC:** [PMC11035875](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11035875/)

## Abstract

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2024 Apr 9;15:1327800. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2024.1327800. eCollection 2024.

Proteomic biomarkers in seminal plasma as predictors of reproductive potential 
in azoospermic men.

Fietz D(1), Sgaier R(1)(2)(3), O'Donnell L(2)(4), Stanton PG(2)(4), Dagley 
LF(5)(6), Webb AI(5)(6), Schuppe HC(3), Diemer T(3), Pilatz A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, Justus Liebig 
University Giessen, Giessen, Germany.
(2)Centre for Reproductive Health, Hudson Institute of Medical Research, 
Clayton, VIC, Australia.
(3)Department of Urology, Pediatric Urology and Andrology, Justus Liebig 
University Giessen, Giessen, Germany.
(4)Department of Molecular and Translational Sciences, Monash University, 
Clayton, VIC, Australia.
(5)Advanced Technology and Biology Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute, 
Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(6)Department of Molecular and Translational Sciences, School of Clinical 
Sciences, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, Australia.

INTRODUCTION: Azoospermia, characterized by an absence of sperm in the 
ejaculate, represents the most severe form of male infertility. While surgical 
sperm retrieval in obstructive azoospermia (OA) is successful in the majority of 
cases, patients with non-obstructive azoospermia (NOA) show retrieval rates of 
only about 50% and thus frequently have unnecessary surgery. Surgical 
intervention could be avoided if patients without preserved spermatogenesis are 
identified preoperatively. This prospective study aimed to discover biomarkers 
in seminal plasma that could be employed for a non-invasive differential 
diagnosis of OA/NOA in order to rationalize surgery recommendations and improve 
success rates.
METHODS: All patients signed written informed consent, underwent comprehensive 
andrological evaluation, received human genetics to exclude relevant 
pathologies, and patients with azoospermia underwent surgical sperm retrieval. 
Using label-free LC-MS/MS, we compared the proteomes of seminal plasma samples 
from fertile men (healthy controls (HC), n=8) and infertile men diagnosed with 
1) OA (n=7), 2) NOA with successful sperm retrieval (mixed testicular atrophy 
(MTA), n=8), and 3) NOA without sperm retrieval (Sertoli cell-only phenotype 
(SCO), n=7). Relative abundance changes of two candidate markers of sperm 
retrieval, HSPA2 and LDHC, were confirmed by Western Blot.
RESULTS: We found the protein expression levels of 42 proteins to be 
significantly down-regulated (p ≤ 0.05) in seminal plasma from SCO NOA patients 
relative to HC whereas only one protein was down-regulated in seminal plasma 
from MTA patients. Analysis of tissue and cell expression suggested that the 
testis-specific proteins LDHC, PGK2, DPEP3, and germ-cell enriched heat-shock 
proteins HSPA2 and HSPA4L are promising biomarkers of spermatogenic function. 
Western blotting revealed a significantly lower abundance of LDHC and HSPA2 in 
the seminal plasma of men with NOA (SCO and MTA) compared to controls.
DISCUSSION: The results indicate that certain testis-specific proteins when 
measured in seminal plasma, could serve as indicators of the presence of sperm 
in the testis and predict the success of sperm retrieval. Used in conjunction 
with conventional clinical assessments, these proteomic biomarkers may assist in 
the non-invasive diagnosis of idiopathic male infertility.

Copyright © 2024 Fietz, Sgaier, O’Donnell, Stanton, Dagley, Webb, Schuppe, 
Diemer and Pilatz.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2024.1327800
PMCID: PMC11035875
PMID: 38654926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
