---
pmid: '8769125'
title: Cloning and expression of a human placenta inositol 1,3,4,5-tetrakisphosphate
  and phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate 5-phosphatase.
authors:
- Drayer AL
- Pesesse X
- De Smedt F
- Woscholski R
- Parker P
- Erneux C
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/bbrc.1996.1161
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Cloning and expression of a human placenta inositol 1,3,4,5-tetrakisphosphate and phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate 5-phosphatase.
**Authors:** Drayer AL, Pesesse X, De Smedt F, Woscholski R, Parker P, Erneux C
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1006/bbrc.1996.1161](https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.1996.1161)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1996 Aug 5;225(1):243-9. doi: 
10.1006/bbrc.1996.1161.

Cloning and expression of a human placenta inositol 1,3,4,5-tetrakisphosphate 
and phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate 5-phosphatase.

Drayer AL(1), Pesesse X, De Smedt F, Woscholski R, Parker P, Erneux C.

Author information:
(1)Interdisciplinary Research Institute (IRIBHN), Université Libre de Bruxelles, 
Belgium.

Distinct inositol and phosphatidylinositol polyphosphate 5-phosphatases have 
recently been cloned. Primers were designated coding for highly conserved amino 
acid regions that are shared between sequences of 5-phosphatases. We used 
degenerate primers to amplify polymerase chain reaction products from rat brain 
cDNA. A product with a novel sequence was identified and used to clone a 4.9 kb 
cDNA from human placenta cDNA libraries (hp51CN). COS-7 cells transfected with a 
C-terminal truncated form of this cDNA showed an increase in Ins(1,3,4,5)P4 and 
PtdIns(3,4,5)P3 hydrolyzing activity, but not in Ins(1,4,5)P3 5-phosphatase. 
Enzymatic activity was inhibited in the presence of 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate and 
p-hydroxymercuribenzoate. The presence of an SH2 domain and proline-rich 
sequence motifs within hp51CN suggests that this 5-phosphatase interacts with 
various proteins in signal transduction.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.1996.1161
PMID: 8769125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
