---
pmid: '18573177'
title: The FtsEX ABC transporter directs cellular differentiation in Bacillus subtilis.
authors:
- Garti-Levi S
- Hazan R
- Kain J
- Fujita M
- Ben-Yehuda S
journal: Mol Microbiol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2008.06340.x
---

# The FtsEX ABC transporter directs cellular differentiation in Bacillus subtilis.
**Authors:** Garti-Levi S, Hazan R, Kain J, Fujita M, Ben-Yehuda S
**Journal:** Mol Microbiol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2958.2008.06340.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2958.2008.06340.x)

## Abstract

1. Mol Microbiol. 2008 Aug;69(4):1018-28. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2008.06340.x. 
Epub 2008 Jun 28.

The FtsEX ABC transporter directs cellular differentiation in Bacillus subtilis.

Garti-Levi S(1), Hazan R, Kain J, Fujita M, Ben-Yehuda S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, POB 12272, The Hebrew 
University of Jerusalem, 9112 Jerusalem, Israel.

A fundamental challenge in developmental biology is to elucidate the regulatory 
events that trigger cellular differentiation. Sporulation in the Gram-positive 
bacterium Bacillus subtilis serves as a simple experimental model system to 
address this challenge. The hallmark of sporulation is the formation of an 
asymmetrically positioned septum that divides the cell into unequally sized 
progeny. Here we describe the role of an ABC transporter, comprising the FtsE 
and FtsX proteins, in the initiation of spore formation. We discovered that in 
the absence of this transporter, entry into sporulation is delayed and an 
atypical symmetric septum is formed instead of a polar one. We show that this 
phenotype can be suppressed by artificially activating the master regulator of 
sporulation, Spo0A, or by activating the histidine kinases that function 
upstream of Spo0A. Our data indicate that the FtsEX transporter is one of the 
top components in the hierarchy of factors required to initiate sporulation, and 
thus it is essential for establishing proper temporal activation of the process.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2008.06340.x
PMID: 18573177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
