---
pmid: '1417831'
title: Identification of the KDR tyrosine kinase as a receptor for vascular endothelial
  cell growth factor.
authors:
- Terman BI
- Dougher-Vermazen M
- Carrion ME
- Dimitrov D
- Armellino DC
- Gospodarowicz D
- Böhlen P
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '1992'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0006-291x(92)90483-2
---

# Identification of the KDR tyrosine kinase as a receptor for vascular endothelial cell growth factor.
**Authors:** Terman BI, Dougher-Vermazen M, Carrion ME, Dimitrov D, Armellino DC, Gospodarowicz D, Böhlen P
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0006-291x(92)90483-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/0006-291x(92)90483-2)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1992 Sep 30;187(3):1579-86. doi: 
10.1016/0006-291x(92)90483-2.

Identification of the KDR tyrosine kinase as a receptor for vascular endothelial 
cell growth factor.

Terman BI(1), Dougher-Vermazen M, Carrion ME, Dimitrov D, Armellino DC, 
Gospodarowicz D, Böhlen P.

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Division, Lederle Laboratories, Pearl River, New York 10965.

Vascular endothelial cell growth factor (VEGF), also known as vascular 
permeability factor, is an endothelial cell mitogen which stimulates 
angiogenesis. Here we report that a previously identified receptor tyrosine 
kinase gene, KDR, encodes a receptor for VEGF. Expression of KDR in CMT-3 (cells 
which do not contain receptors for VEGF) allows for saturable 125I-VEGF binding 
with high affinity (KD = 75 pM). Affinity cross-linking of 125I-VEGF to 
KDR-transfected CMT-3 cells results in specific labeling of two proteins of M(r) 
= 195 and 235 kDa. The KDR receptor tyrosine kinase shares structural 
similarities with a recently reported receptor for VEGF, flt, in a manner 
reminiscent of the similarities between the alpha and beta forms of the PDGF 
receptors.

DOI: 10.1016/0006-291x(92)90483-2
PMID: 1417831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
