---
pmid: '25132385'
title: A MYB-domain protein EFM mediates flowering responses to environmental cues
  in Arabidopsis.
authors:
- Yan Y
- Shen L
- Chen Y
- Bao S
- Thong Z
- Yu H
journal: Dev Cell
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2014.07.004
---

# A MYB-domain protein EFM mediates flowering responses to environmental cues in Arabidopsis.
**Authors:** Yan Y, Shen L, Chen Y, Bao S, Thong Z, Yu H
**Journal:** Dev Cell (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.devcel.2014.07.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2014.07.004)

## Abstract

1. Dev Cell. 2014 Aug 25;30(4):437-48. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2014.07.004. Epub
2014  Aug 14.

A MYB-domain protein EFM mediates flowering responses to environmental cues in 
Arabidopsis.

Yan Y(1), Shen L(1), Chen Y(1), Bao S(1), Thong Z(1), Yu H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Temasek Life Sciences Laboratory, 
National University of Singapore, Singapore 117543, Singapore.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences and Temasek Life Sciences Laboratory, 
National University of Singapore, Singapore 117543, Singapore. Electronic 
address: dbsyuhao@nus.edu.sg.

Plants adjust the timing of the transition to flowering to ensure their 
reproductive success in changing environments. Temperature and light are major 
environmental signals that affect flowering time through converging on the 
transcriptional regulation of FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT) encoding the florigen 
in Arabidopsis. Here, we show that a MYB transcription factor EARLY FLOWERING 
MYB PROTEIN (EFM) plays an important role in directly repressing FT expression 
in the leaf vasculature. EFM mediates the effect of ambient temperature on 
flowering and is directly promoted by another major FT repressor, SHORT 
VEGETATIVE PHASE. EFM interacts with an H3K36me2 demethylase JMJ30, which forms 
a negative feedback regulatory loop with the light-responsive circadian clock, 
to specifically demethylate an active mark H3K36me2 at FT. Our results suggest 
that EFM is an important convergence point that mediates plant responses to 
temperature and light to determine the timing of reproduction.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2014.07.004
PMID: 25132385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
