---
pmid: '15383543'
title: Zim17, a novel zinc finger protein essential for protein import into mitochondria.
authors:
- Burri L
- Vascotto K
- Fredersdorf S
- Tiedt R
- Hall MN
- Lithgow T
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M409194200
---

# Zim17, a novel zinc finger protein essential for protein import into mitochondria.
**Authors:** Burri L, Vascotto K, Fredersdorf S, Tiedt R, Hall MN, Lithgow T
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M409194200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M409194200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Nov 26;279(48):50243-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M409194200. Epub
2004  Sep 21.

Zim17, a novel zinc finger protein essential for protein import into 
mitochondria.

Burri L(1), Vascotto K, Fredersdorf S, Tiedt R, Hall MN, Lithgow T.

Author information:
(1)Russell Grimwade School of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of 
Melbourne, Parkville 3010, Australia.

Translocation of precursor proteins across the mitochondrial membranes requires 
the coordinated action of multisubunit translocases in the outer and inner 
membrane, and the driving force for translocation across the inner membrane is 
provided by the matrix-located heat shock protein 70 (mtHsp70). The central 
components of the protein import machinery are essential. Here we describe 
Zim17, an essential protein with a zinc finger motif involved in protein import 
into mitochondria. Comparative genomics suggested a correction to the open 
reading frame of YNL310c, the gene encoding Zim17 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. 
The revised open reading frame codes for a classic mitochondrial targeting 
signal, which is processed from Zim17 in the mitochondrial matrix. Loss of Zim17 
selectively diminishes import of proteins into the matrix of mitochondria, but 
this loss of Zim17 is partially suppressed by overexpression of the J-protein 
Pam18/Tim14. We propose that Zim17 functions as an example of a "fractured" 
J-protein, where a protein like Zim17 contributes a zinc finger domain to Type 
III J-proteins, in toto providing for substrate loading onto Hsp70.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M409194200
PMID: 15383543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
