---
pmid: '23746849'
title: Structures of Drosophila cryptochrome and mouse cryptochrome1 provide insight
  into circadian function.
authors:
- Czarna A
- Berndt A
- Singh HR
- Grudziecki A
- Ladurner AG
- Timinszky G
- Kramer A
- Wolf E
journal: Cell
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.05.011
---

# Structures of Drosophila cryptochrome and mouse cryptochrome1 provide insight into circadian function.
**Authors:** Czarna A, Berndt A, Singh HR, Grudziecki A, Ladurner AG, Timinszky G, Kramer A, Wolf E
**Journal:** Cell (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2013.05.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2013.05.011)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2013 Jun 6;153(6):1394-405. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.05.011.

Structures of Drosophila cryptochrome and mouse cryptochrome1 provide insight 
into circadian function.

Czarna A(1), Berndt A, Singh HR, Grudziecki A, Ladurner AG, Timinszky G, Kramer 
A, Wolf E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry and Centre for Integrated Protein 
Science Munich (CIPSM), Butenandt Institute, Ludwig Maximilians University of 
Munich, Butenandtstrasse 5, 81377 Munich, Germany.

Drosophila cryptochrome (dCRY) is a FAD-dependent circadian photoreceptor, 
whereas mammalian cryptochromes (CRY1/2) are integral clock components that 
repress mCLOCK/mBMAL1-dependent transcription. We report crystal structures of 
full-length dCRY, a dCRY loop deletion construct, and the photolyase homology 
region of mouse CRY1 (mCRY1). Our dCRY structures depict Phe534 of the 
regulatory tail in the same location as the photolesion in DNA-repairing 
photolyases and reveal that the sulfur loop and tail residue Cys523 plays key 
roles in the dCRY photoreaction. Our mCRY1 structure visualizes previously 
characterized mutations, an NLS, and MAPK and AMPK phosphorylation sites. We 
show that the FAD and antenna chromophore-binding regions, a predicted 
coiled-coil helix, the C-terminal lid, and charged surfaces are involved in 
FAD-independent mPER2 and FBXL3 binding and mCLOCK/mBMAL1 transcriptional 
repression. The structure of a mammalian cryptochrome1 protein may catalyze the 
development of CRY chemical probes and the design of therapeutic metabolic 
modulators.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.05.011
PMID: 23746849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
