---
pmid: '9659918'
title: Molecular interaction between COP1 and HY5 defines a regulatory switch for
  light control of Arabidopsis development.
authors:
- Ang LH
- Chattopadhyay S
- Wei N
- Oyama T
- Okada K
- Batschauer A
- Deng XW
journal: Mol Cell
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s1097-2765(00)80022-2
---

# Molecular interaction between COP1 and HY5 defines a regulatory switch for light control of Arabidopsis development.
**Authors:** Ang LH, Chattopadhyay S, Wei N, Oyama T, Okada K, Batschauer A, Deng XW
**Journal:** Mol Cell (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1097-2765(00)80022-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1097-2765(00)80022-2)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 1998 Jan;1(2):213-22. doi: 10.1016/s1097-2765(00)80022-2.

Molecular interaction between COP1 and HY5 defines a regulatory switch for light 
control of Arabidopsis development.

Ang LH(1), Chattopadhyay S, Wei N, Oyama T, Okada K, Batschauer A, Deng XW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Yale 
University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

Arabidopsis COP1 acts as a light-inactivable repressor of photomorphogenic 
development, but its molecular mode of action remains unclear. Here, we show 
that COP1 negatively regulates HY5, a bZIP protein and a positive regulator of 
photomorphogenic development. Both in vitro and in vivo assays indicate that 
COP1 interacts directly and specifically with HY5. The hyperphotomorphogenic 
phenotype caused by the over-expression of a mutant HY5, which lacks the 
COP1-interactive domain, supports the regulatory role of HY5-COP1 interaction. 
Further, HY5 is capable of directly interacting with the CHS1 minimal promoter 
and is essential for its light activation. We propose that the direct 
interaction with and regulation of transcription factors by COP1 may represent 
the molecular mechanism for its control of gene expression and photomorphogenic 
development.

DOI: 10.1016/s1097-2765(00)80022-2
PMID: 9659918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
