---
pmid: '7518560'
title: Hierarchy of binding sites for Grb2 and Shc on the epidermal growth factor
  receptor.
authors:
- Batzer AG
- Rotin D
- Ureña JM
- Skolnik EY
- Schlessinger J
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC359038
doi: 10.1128/mcb.14.8.5192-5201.1994
---

# Hierarchy of binding sites for Grb2 and Shc on the epidermal growth factor receptor.
**Authors:** Batzer AG, Rotin D, Ureña JM, Skolnik EY, Schlessinger J
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1128/mcb.14.8.5192-5201.1994](https://doi.org/10.1128/mcb.14.8.5192-5201.1994)
**PMC:** [PMC359038](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC359038/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Aug;14(8):5192-201. doi: 10.1128/mcb.14.8.5192-5201.1994.

Hierarchy of binding sites for Grb2 and Shc on the epidermal growth factor 
receptor.

Batzer AG(1), Rotin D, Ureña JM, Skolnik EY, Schlessinger J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, New York University Medical Center, New York 
10016.

We analyzed the binding site(s) for Grb2 on the epidermal growth factor (EGF) 
receptor (EGFR), using cell lines overexpressing EGFRs containing various point 
and deletion mutations in the carboxy-terminal tail. Results of 
co-immunoprecipitation experiments suggest that phosphotyrosines Y-1068 and 
Y-1173 mediate the binding of Grb2 to the EGFR. Competition experiments with 
synthetic phosphopeptides corresponding to known autophosphorylation sites on 
the EGFR demonstrated that phosphopeptides containing Y-1068, and to a lesser 
extent Y-1086, were able to inhibit the binding of Grb2 to the EGFR, while a 
Y-1173 peptide did not. These findings were confirmed by using a 
dephosphorylation protection assay and by measuring the dissociation constants 
of Grb2's SH2 domain to tyrosine-phosphorylated peptides, using real-time 
biospecific interaction analysis (BIAcore). From these studies, we concluded 
that Grb2 binds directly to the EGFR at Y-1068, to a lesser extent at Y-1086, 
and indirectly at Y-1173. Since Grb2 also binds Shc after EGF stimulation, we 
investigated whether Y-1173 is a binding site for the SH2 domain of Shc on the 
EGFR. Both competition experiments with synthetic phosphopeptides and 
dephosphorylation protection analysis demonstrated that Y-1173 and Y-992 are 
major and minor binding sites, respectively, for Shc on the EGFR. However, other 
phosphorylation sites in the carboxy-terminal tail of the EGFR are able to 
compensate for the loss of the main binding sites for Shc. These analyses reveal 
a hierarchy of interactions between Grb2 and Shc with the EGFR and indicate that 
Grb2 can bind the tyrosine-phosphorylated EGFR directly, as well as indirectly 
via Shc.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.14.8.5192-5201.1994
PMCID: PMC359038
PMID: 7518560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

We analyzed the binding site(s) for Grb2 on the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor (EGFR), using cell lines overexpressing EGFRs containing various point and deletion mutations in the carboxy-terminal tail. Results of co-immunoprecipitation experiments suggest that phosphotyrosines Y-1068 and Y-1173 mediate the binding of Grb2 to the EGFR. Competition experiments with synthetic phosphopeptides corresponding to known autophosphorylation sites on the EGFR demonstrated that phosphopeptides containing Y-1068, and to a lesser extent Y-1086, were able to inhibit the binding of Grb2 to the EGFR, while a Y-1173 peptide did not. These findings were confirmed by using a dephosphorylation protection assay and by measuring the dissociation constants of Grb2's SH2 domain to tyrosine-phosphorylated peptides, using real-time biospecific interaction analysis (BIAcore). From these studies, we concluded that Grb2 binds directly to the EGFR at Y-1068, to a lesser extent at Y-1086, and indirectly at Y-1173. Since Grb2 also binds Shc after EGF stimulation, we investigated whether Y-1173 is a binding site for the SH2 domain of Shc on the EGFR. Both competition experiments with synthetic phosphopeptides and dephosphorylation protection analysis demonstrated that Y-1173 and Y-992 are major and minor binding sites, respectively, for Shc on the EGFR. However, other phosphorylation sites in the carboxy-terminal tail of the EGFR are able to compensate for the loss of the main binding sites for Shc. These analyses reveal a hierarchy of interactions between Grb2 and Shc with the EGFR and indicate that Grb2 can bind the tyrosine-phosphorylated EGFR directly, as well as indirectly via Shc.
