---
pmid: '33387577'
title: Species-specific differences in the inhibition of 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
  2 by itraconazole and posaconazole.
authors:
- Inderbinen SG
- Zogg M
- Kley M
- Smieško M
- Odermatt A
journal: Toxicol Appl Pharmacol
year: '2021'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2020.115387
---

# Species-specific differences in the inhibition of 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 2 by itraconazole and posaconazole.
**Authors:** Inderbinen SG, Zogg M, Kley M, Smieško M, Odermatt A
**Journal:** Toxicol Appl Pharmacol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.taap.2020.115387](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.taap.2020.115387)

## Abstract

1. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2021 Feb 1;412:115387. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2020.115387.  Epub 2020 Dec 31.

Species-specific differences in the inhibition of 11β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase 2 by itraconazole and posaconazole.

Inderbinen SG(1), Zogg M(1), Kley M(1), Smieško M(2), Odermatt A(3).

Author information:
(1)Swiss Centre for Applied Human Toxicology and Division of Molecular and 
Systems Toxicology, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Basel, 
Klingelbergstrasse 50, Basel 4056, Switzerland.
(2)Computational Pharmacy, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of 
Basel, Klingelbergstrasse 61, Basel 4056, Switzerland.
(3)Swiss Centre for Applied Human Toxicology and Division of Molecular and 
Systems Toxicology, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Basel, 
Klingelbergstrasse 50, Basel 4056, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
Alex.Odermatt@unibas.ch.

11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 2 (11β-HSD2) converts active 
11β-hydroxyglucocorticoids to their inactive 11-keto forms, thereby preventing 
inappropriate mineralocorticoid receptor activation by glucocorticoids. 
Disruption of 11β-HSD2 activity by genetic defects or inhibitors causes the 
syndrome of apparent mineralocorticoid excess (AME), characterized by 
hypokalemia, hypernatremia and hypertension. Recently, the azole antifungals 
itraconazole and posaconazole were identified to potently inhibit human 
11β-HSD2, and several case studies described patients with acquired AME. To 
begin to understand why this adverse drug effect was missed during preclinical 
investigations, the inhibitory potential of itraconazole, its main metabolite 
hydroxyitraconazole (OHI) and posaconazole against 11β-HSD2 from human and three 
commonly used experimental animals was assessed. Whilst human 11β-HSD2 was 
potently inhibited by all three compounds (IC50 values in the nanomolar range), 
the rat enzyme was moderately inhibited (1.5- to 6-fold higher IC50 values 
compared to human), and mouse and zebrafish 11β-HSD2 were very weakly inhibited 
(IC50 values above 7 μM). Sequence alignment and application of newly generated 
homology models for human and mouse 11β-HSD2 revealed significant differences in 
the C-terminal region and the substrate binding pocket. Exchange of the 
C-terminus and substitution of residues Leu170,Ile172 in mouse 11β-HSD2 by the 
corresponding residues His170,Glu172 of the human enzyme resulted in a gain of 
sensitivity to itraconazole and posaconazole, resembling human 11β-HSD2. The 
results provide an explanation for the observed species-specific 11β-HSD2 
inhibition by the studied azole antifungals. The obtained structure-activity 
relationship information should facilitate future assessments of 11β-HSD2 
inhibitors and aid choosing adequate animal models for efficacy and safety 
studies.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.taap.2020.115387
PMID: 33387577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
