---
pmid: '7598724'
title: Phorbol ester stimulates rapid intracellular phosphorylation of glia maturation
  factor.
authors:
- Lim R
- Zaheer A
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/bbrc.1995.1901
---

# Phorbol ester stimulates rapid intracellular phosphorylation of glia maturation factor.
**Authors:** Lim R, Zaheer A
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1006/bbrc.1995.1901](https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.1995.1901)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1995 Jun 26;211(3):928-34. doi: 
10.1006/bbrc.1995.1901.

Phorbol ester stimulates rapid intracellular phosphorylation of glia maturation 
factor.

Lim R(1), Zaheer A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology (Division of Neurochemistry and Neurobiology), 
University of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa City, USA.

We report that recombinant glia maturation factor (GMF), a 17-kD brain protein, 
can be phosphorylated in vitro at the serine residue by protein kinase C (PKC), 
protein kinase A (PKA), and casein kinase II (CKII), and at the threonine 
residue by p90 ribosomal S6 kinase (RSK). Endogenous GMF in astrocytes is 
phosphorylated at the serine (major) and threonine (minor) residues within 15 
min after stimulation by phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA). Phosphorylation 
gradually subsides over the next 24 h. The increased phosphorylation is not 
blocked by the protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide and is not accompanied 
by a rise in the mRNA for GMF and is therefore strictly a posttranslational 
regulatory phenomenon. The rapid and transient phosphorylation of GMF upon 
cellular activation suggests an intracellular role, possibly with involvement in 
signal transduction.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.1995.1901
PMID: 7598724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
