---
pmid: '18434413'
title: The Arabidopsis COP9 signalosome is essential for G2 phase progression and
  genomic stability.
authors:
- Dohmann EM
- Levesque MP
- De Veylder L
- Reichardt I
- Jürgens G
- Schmid M
- Schwechheimer C
journal: Development
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/dev.020743
---

# The Arabidopsis COP9 signalosome is essential for G2 phase progression and genomic stability.
**Authors:** Dohmann EM, Levesque MP, De Veylder L, Reichardt I, Jürgens G, Schmid M, Schwechheimer C
**Journal:** Development (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.020743](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.020743)

## Abstract

1. Development. 2008 Jun;135(11):2013-22. doi: 10.1242/dev.020743. Epub 2008 Apr 
23.

The Arabidopsis COP9 signalosome is essential for G2 phase progression and 
genomic stability.

Dohmann EM(1), Levesque MP, De Veylder L, Reichardt I, Jürgens G, Schmid M, 
Schwechheimer C.

Author information:
(1)Tübingen University, Center for Plant Molecular Biology, Department of 
Developmental Genetics, Auf der Morgenstelle 3-5, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.

The COP9 signalosome (CSN) is required for the full activity of cullin-RING E3 
ubiquitin ligases (CRLs) in eukaryotes. CSN exerts its function on CRLs by 
removing the ubiquitin-related NEDD8 conjugate from the cullin subunit of CRLs. 
CSN seems, thereby, to control CRL disassembly or CRL subunit stability. In 
Arabidopsis thaliana, loss of CSN function leads to constitutive 
photomorphogenic (cop) seedling development and a post-germination growth 
arrest. The underlying molecular cause of this growth arrest is currently 
unknown. Here, we show that Arabidopsis csn mutants are delayed in G2 phase 
progression. This cell cycle arrest correlates with the induction of the DNA 
damage response pathway and is suggestive of the activation of a DNA damage 
checkpoint. In support of this hypothesis, we detected gene conversion events in 
csn mutants that are indicative of DNA double-strand breaks. DNA damage is also 
apparent in mutants of the NEDD8 conjugation pathway and in mutants of the E3 
ligase subunits CULLIN4, COP1 and DET1, which share phenotypes with csn mutants. 
In summary, our data suggest that Arabidopsis csn mutants undergo DNA damage, 
which might be the cause of the delay in G2 cell cycle progression.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.020743
PMID: 18434413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
