---
pmid: '23839946'
title: Intrinsic selectivity of Notch 1 for Delta-like 4 over Delta-like 1.
authors:
- Andrawes MB
- Xu X
- Liu H
- Ficarro SB
- Marto JA
- Aster JC
- Blacklow SC
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3757209
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.454850
---

# Intrinsic selectivity of Notch 1 for Delta-like 4 over Delta-like 1.
**Authors:** Andrawes MB, Xu X, Liu H, Ficarro SB, Marto JA, Aster JC, Blacklow SC
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M113.454850](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M113.454850)
**PMC:** [PMC3757209](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3757209/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Aug 30;288(35):25477-25489. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.454850.
Epub  2013 Jul 9.

Intrinsic selectivity of Notch 1 for Delta-like 4 over Delta-like 1.

Andrawes MB(1), Xu X(1), Liu H(2), Ficarro SB(1), Marto JA(1), Aster JC(3), 
Blacklow SC(4).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115,; the Department of Cancer 
Biology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, and.
(2)the Department of Cancer Biology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02115, and.
(3)the Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114.
(4)From the Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115,; the Department of Cancer 
Biology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, and. 
Electronic address: Stephen_blacklow@hms.harvard.edu.

Notch signaling makes critical contributions to cell fate determination in all 
metazoan organisms, yet remarkably little is known about the binding affinity of 
the four mammalian Notch receptors for their three Delta-like and two Jagged 
family ligands. Here, we utilized signaling assays and biochemical studies of 
purified recombinant ligand and receptor molecules to investigate the 
differences in signaling behavior and intrinsic affinity between Notch1-Dll1 and 
Notch1-Dll4 complexes. Systematic deletion mutagenesis of the human Notch1 
ectodomain revealed that epidermal growth factor (EGF) repeats 6-15 are 
sufficient to maintain signaling in a reporter assay at levels comparable with 
the full-length receptor, and identified important contributions from EGF 
repeats 8-10 in conveying an activating signal in response to either Dll1 or 
Dll4. Truncation studies of the Dll1 and Dll4 ectodomains showed that the 
MNNL-EGF3 region was both necessary and sufficient for full activation. 
Plate-based and cell binding assays revealed a specific, calcium-dependent 
interaction between cell-surface and recombinant Notch receptors and ligand 
molecules. Finally, direct measurement of the binding affinity of Notch1 EGF 
repeats 6-15 for Dll1 and Dll4 revealed that Dll4 binds with at least an order 
of magnitude higher affinity than Dll1. Together, these studies give new 
insights into the features of ligand recognition by Notch1, and highlight how 
intrinsic differences in the biochemical behavior of receptor-ligand complexes 
can influence receptor-mediated responses of developmental signaling pathways.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.454850
PMCID: PMC3757209
PMID: 23839946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
