---
pmid: '10725382'
title: The Arabidopsis thaliana SOS2 gene encodes a protein kinase that is required
  for salt tolerance.
authors:
- Liu J
- Ishitani M
- Halfter U
- Kim CS
- Zhu JK
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2000'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC16308
doi: 10.1073/pnas.97.7.3730
---

# The Arabidopsis thaliana SOS2 gene encodes a protein kinase that is required for salt tolerance.
**Authors:** Liu J, Ishitani M, Halfter U, Kim CS, Zhu JK
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.97.7.3730](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.97.7.3730)
**PMC:** [PMC16308](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC16308/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Mar 28;97(7):3730-4. doi:
10.1073/pnas.97.7.3730.

The Arabidopsis thaliana SOS2 gene encodes a protein kinase that is required for 
salt tolerance.

Liu J(1), Ishitani M, Halfter U, Kim CS, Zhu JK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Sciences, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721, USA.

In Arabidopsis thaliana, the Salt Overly Sensitive 2 (SOS2) gene is required for 
intracellular Na(+) and K(+) homeostasis. Mutations in SOS2 cause Na(+) and K(+) 
imbalance and render plants more sensitive toward growth inhibition by high 
Na(+) and low K(+) environments. We isolated the SOS2 gene through positional 
cloning. SOS2 is predicted to encode a serine/threonine type protein kinase with 
an N-terminal catalytic domain similar to that of the yeast SNF1 kinase. 
Sequence analyses of sos2 mutant alleles reveal that both the N-terminal 
catalytic domain and the C-terminal regulatory domain of SOS2 are functionally 
essential. The steady-state level of SOS2 transcript is up-regulated by salt 
stress in the root. Autophosphorylation assays show that SOS2 is an active 
protein kinase. In the recessive sos2-5 allele, a conserved glycine residue in 
the kinase catalytic domain is changed to glutamate. This mutation abolishes 
SOS2 autophosphorylation, indicating that SOS2 protein kinase activity is 
required for salt tolerance.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.97.7.3730
PMCID: PMC16308
PMID: 10725382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

In Arabidopsis thaliana , the Salt Overly Sensitive 2 ( SOS2 ) gene is required for intracellular Na + and K + homeostasis. Mutations in SOS2 cause Na + and K + imbalance and render plants more sensitive toward growth inhibition by high Na + and low K + environments. We isolated the SOS2 gene through positional cloning. SOS2 is predicted to encode a serine/threonine type protein kinase with an N-terminal catalytic domain similar to that of the yeast SNF1 kinase. Sequence analyses of sos2 mutant alleles reveal that both the N-terminal catalytic domain and the C-terminal regulatory domain of SOS2 are functionally essential. The steady-state level of SOS2 transcript is up-regulated by salt stress in the root. Autophosphorylation assays show that SOS2 is an active protein kinase. In the recessive sos2 - 5 allele, a conserved glycine residue in the kinase catalytic domain is changed to glutamate. This mutation abolishes SOS2 autophosphorylation, indicating that SOS2 protein kinase activity is required for salt tolerance.

Discussion

SOS2 is a major salt tolerance locus in A. thaliana ( 18 ). Mutations in the SOS2 gene drastically reduce plant tolerance to high Na + stress and to low K + stress. Based on mutant characterization, we have postulated previously that SOS2 might encode a regulatory protein that controls the expression and/or activities of certain K + and Na + transporters ( 18 ). In the present study, we have isolated the SOS2 gene through positional cloning. Indeed, SOS2 encodes a regulatory protein, a protein kinase. Protein phosphorylation is a frequent theme of cellular signal transduction, and its involvement in plant ion homeostasis and salt tolerance has been hypothesized ( 31 ). Our results provide direct evidence that protein phosphorylation is involved in Na + and K + homeostasis and plant salt tolerance. Future identification of protein substrate(s) that are phosphorylated by the SOS2 kinase will help understand how plant salt tolerance is regulated by protein phosphorylation. Candidate physiological substrates of SOS2 might include K + and Na + transporters and/or transcription factor(s) that control their expression.

The similar phenotypes of sos2 and sos3 mutants suggested that SOS2 and SOS3 may function in the same regulatory pathway ( 18 ). We tested and found that SOS3 is not phosphorylated by SOS2, nor did it affect SOS2 autophosphorylation (Fig. 4 ). Nevertheless, we have discovered that SOS2 physically interacts with SOS3, and SOS2 phosphorylation of peptide substrates is activated by SOS3 in a calcium-dependent manner ( 30 ).

SOS2 transcript is present in both roots and shoots. This is consistent with the observation that both the root and the shoot of sos2 mutant plants are hypersensitive to NaCl stress ( 18 ). SOS2 expression in the root appears to be up-regulated by NaCl stress. The significance of this up-regulation is unclear. There is certainly a very low level of expression in the root even without stress treatment, which could be detected by very long exposures in the Northern blot analysis or by reverse transcription–PCR (data not shown). The expression of SOS2 in the absence of stress is consistent with its role in primary signal transduction leading to salt adaptation. The slight up-regulation of SOS2 transcript may be important to maintain a sufficient level of SOS2 protein during salt stress. Like SOS2 , SOS3 expression level is also very low (J.-K.Z., unpublished results). This probably reflects that SOS3 and SOS2 play regulatory roles that do not necessarily require abundant expression.

SOS2 encodes a protein kinase with a catalytic domain at the N terminus and a regulatory domain at the C terminus. The kinase catalytic domain is essential for SOS2 function. The sos2 - 5 mutation causes a single amino acid substitution within the catalytic domain that abolishes kinase autophosphorylation, resulting in the loss of SOS2 function and therefore increased sensitivity to salt stress. The regulatory domain also appears to be essential for SOS2 function because mutations that truncate ( sos2 - 2 and sos2 - 3 ) or disrupt this domain ( sos2 - 1 ) render plants hypersensitive to high Na + and low K + stresses. The catalytic domain of SOS2 is highly similar to the catalytic domains of SNF1/AMPK kinases (Fig. 3 A ). SNF1/AMPK kinases function to protect cells against nutritional or environmental stresses that deplete cellular ATP by regulating both metabolism and gene expression ( 23 , 24 ). Although the catalytic domain of SOS2 is very similar to those of yeast SNF1 and mammalian AMPK kinases, SOS2 clearly is not a plant homolog of SNF1/AMPK. This is because true plant SNF1/AMPK kinases, such as SnRK1, share substantial sequence similarity with yeast SNF1 and mammalian AMPK at their C-terminal regulatory domain in addition to very high similarity at the N-terminal catalytic domain ( 32 ). Part of the regulatory domain of SOS2 is similar to the DNA repair and replication checkpoint kinase CHK1 (Fig. 3 B ), which is required for cell cycle arrest in response to DNA damage ( 27 – 29 ). The sequence similarity with CHK1 kinase is interesting because sos2 mutants show cell cycle defect at the root meristem in the presence of Na + stress (J.-K.Z., unpublished data).

Although several protein kinases were previously reported to play roles in plant stress responses, none of them functions in ion homeostasis ( 33 – 36 ). The AtDBF2 protein kinase was identified by its ability to increase not only salt tolerance but also osmotic, heat and cold stress tolerance when overexpressed in Saccharomyces cerevisiae or in cultured tobacco cells ( 33 ). The mitogen-activated protein kinase MKK4 from alfalfa was shown to be activated by cold and drought but not by salt stress ( 34 ). Ectopic expression of a calcium-dependent protein kinase in maize protoplasts activates the expression of cold- and abscisic acid-responsive genes ( 36 ). The transcript levels of several protein kinases were shown to be up-regulated by various stresses, including touch, cold, and osmotic stress ( 35 ); however, their functions remain unknown. In contrast to these previously reported protein kinases that are involved in either general stress responses or in osmotic and cold stress responses, the SOS2 kinase has specific roles in plant adaptation to high Na + and low K + stresses ( 18 ).
