---
pmid: '20873783'
title: Characterization of hNek6 interactome reveals an important role for its short
  N-terminal domain and colocalization with proteins at the centrosome.
authors:
- Vaz Meirelles G
- Ferreira Lanza DC
- da Silva JC
- Santana Bernachi J
- Paes Leme AF
- Kobarg J
journal: J Proteome Res
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/pr100562w
---

# Characterization of hNek6 interactome reveals an important role for its short N-terminal domain and colocalization with proteins at the centrosome.
**Authors:** Vaz Meirelles G, Ferreira Lanza DC, da Silva JC, Santana Bernachi J, Paes Leme AF, Kobarg J
**Journal:** J Proteome Res (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1021/pr100562w](https://doi.org/10.1021/pr100562w)

## Abstract

1. J Proteome Res. 2010 Dec 3;9(12):6298-316. doi: 10.1021/pr100562w. Epub 2010
Oct  22.

Characterization of hNek6 interactome reveals an important role for its short 
N-terminal domain and colocalization with proteins at the centrosome.

Vaz Meirelles G(1), Ferreira Lanza DC, da Silva JC, Santana Bernachi J, Paes 
Leme AF, Kobarg J.

Author information:
(1)Laboratório Nacional de Biociências, Instituto de Biologia, Universidade 
Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil.

Physical protein-protein interactions are fundamental to all biological 
processes and are organized in complex networks. One branch of the kinome 
network is the evolutionarily conserved NIMA-related serine/threonine kinases 
(Neks). Most of the 11 mammalian Neks studied so far are related to cell cycle 
regulation, and due to association with diverse human pathologies, Neks are 
promising chemotherapeutic targets. Human Nek6 was associated to carcinogenesis, 
but its interacting partners and signaling pathways remain elusive. Here we 
introduce hNek6 as a highly connected member in the human kinase interactome. In 
a more global context, we performed a broad data bank comparison based on degree 
distribution analysis and found that the human kinome is enriched in hubs. Our 
networks include a broad set of novel hNek6 interactors as identified by our 
yeast two-hybrid screens classified into 18 functional categories. All of the 
tested interactions were confirmed, and the majority of tested substrates were 
phosphorylated in vitro by hNek6. Notably, we found that hNek6 N-terminal is 
important to mediate the interactions with its partners. Some novel interactors 
also colocalized with hNek6 and γ-tubulin in human cells, pointing to a possible 
centrosomal interaction. The interacting proteins link hNek6 to novel pathways, 
for example, Notch signaling and actin cytoskeleton regulation, or give new 
insights on how hNek6 may regulate previously proposed pathways such as cell 
cycle regulation, DNA repair response, and NF-κB signaling. Our findings open 
new perspectives in the study of hNek6 role in cancer by analyzing its novel 
interactions in specific pathways in tumor cells, which may provide important 
implications for drug design and cancer therapy.

DOI: 10.1021/pr100562w
PMID: 20873783 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
