---
pmid: '12050162'
title: The nephroblastoma overexpressed gene (NOV/ccn3) protein associates with Notch1
  extracellular domain and inhibits myoblast differentiation via Notch signaling pathway.
authors:
- Sakamoto K
- Yamaguchi S
- Ando R
- Miyawaki A
- Kabasawa Y
- Takagi M
- Li CL
- Perbal B
- Katsube K
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M203727200
---

# The nephroblastoma overexpressed gene (NOV/ccn3) protein associates with Notch1 extracellular domain and inhibits myoblast differentiation via Notch signaling pathway.
**Authors:** Sakamoto K, Yamaguchi S, Ando R, Miyawaki A, Kabasawa Y, Takagi M, Li CL, Perbal B, Katsube K
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M203727200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M203727200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 16;277(33):29399-405. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M203727200. Epub 
2002 Jun 5.

The nephroblastoma overexpressed gene (NOV/ccn3) protein associates with Notch1 
extracellular domain and inhibits myoblast differentiation via Notch signaling 
pathway.

Sakamoto K(1), Yamaguchi S, Ando R, Miyawaki A, Kabasawa Y, Takagi M, Li CL, 
Perbal B, Katsube K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Graduate School of Tokyo Medical and 
Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8549, Japan.

We demonstrate a novel interaction of the nephroblastoma overexpressed gene 
(NOV), a member of the CCN gene family, with the Notch signaling pathway. NOV 
associates with the epidermal growth factor-like repeats of Notch1 by the CT 
(C-terminal cysteine knot) domain. The promoters of HES1 and HES5, which are the 
downstream transducers of Notch signaling, were activated by NOV. Expressions of 
NOV and Notch1 were concomitant in the presomitic mesoderm and later in the 
myocytes and chondrocytes, suggesting their synergistic effects in mesenchymal 
cell differentiation. In C2/4 myogenic cells, elevated expression of NOV led to 
down-regulation of MyoD and myogenin, resulting in inhibition of myotube 
formation. These results indicate that NOV-Notch1 association exerts a positive 
effect on Notch signaling and consequently suppresses myogenesis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M203727200
PMID: 12050162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
