---
pmid: '36882524'
title: C4orf19 inhibits colorectal cancer cell proliferation by competitively binding
  to Keap1 with TRIM25 via the USP17/Elk-1/CDK6 axis.
authors:
- Huang S
- Li J
- Wu S
- Zheng Z
- Wang C
- Li H
- Zhao L
- Zhang X
- Huang H
- Huang C
- Xie Q
journal: Oncogene
year: '2023'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/s41388-023-02656-z
---

# C4orf19 inhibits colorectal cancer cell proliferation by competitively binding to Keap1 with TRIM25 via the USP17/Elk-1/CDK6 axis.
**Authors:** Huang S, Li J, Wu S, Zheng Z, Wang C, Li H, Zhao L, Zhang X, Huang H, Huang C, Xie Q
**Journal:** Oncogene (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41388-023-02656-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41388-023-02656-z)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2023 Apr;42(17):1333-1346. doi: 10.1038/s41388-023-02656-z. Epub
2023  Mar 7.

C4orf19 inhibits colorectal cancer cell proliferation by competitively binding 
to Keap1 with TRIM25 via the USP17/Elk-1/CDK6 axis.

Huang S(1), Li J(1), Wu S(2), Zheng Z(2), Wang C(2), Li H(2), Zhao L(2), Zhang 
X(3), Huang H(2), Huang C(2), Xie Q(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Second Affiliated Hospital and Yuying 
Children's Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, 325027, Zhejiang, 
China.
(2)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Key Laboratory of 
Laboratory Medicine, Ministry of Education, School of Laboratory Medicine and 
Life Sciences, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, 325035, Zhejiang, China.
(3)The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, 325035, 
Zhejiang, China.
(4)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Second Affiliated Hospital and Yuying 
Children's Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, 325027, Zhejiang, 
China. pandon2002@163.com.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common malignant tumors in the 
gastrointestinal tract, and has been attracted a great deal attention and 
extensive investigation due to its high morbidity and mortality rates. The 
C4orf19 gene encodes a protein with uncharacterized function. Our preliminary 
exploration of the TCGA database indicated that C4orf19 is markedly 
downregulated in CRC tissues in comparison to that observed in normal colonic 
tissues, suggesting its potential association with CRC behaviors. Further 
studies showed a significant positive correlation between C4orf19 expression 
levels and CRC patient prognosis. Ectopic expression of C4orf19 inhibited the 
growth of CRC cells in vitro and tumorigenic ability in vivo. Mechanistic 
studies showed that C4orf19 binds to Keap1 at near the Lys615, which prevents 
the ubiquitination of Keap1 by TRIM25, thus protecting the Keap1 protein from 
degradation. The accumulated Keap1 results in USP17 degradation and in turn 
leading to the degradation of Elk-1, further attenuates its regulated CDK6 mRNA 
transcription and protein expression, as well as its mediated proliferation of 
CRC cells. Collectively, the present studies characterize function of C4orf19 as 
a tumor suppressor for CRC cell proliferation by targeting 
Keap1/USP17/Elk-1/CDK6 axis.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41388-023-02656-z
PMID: 36882524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
