---
pmid: '6583682'
title: 'A pheromone-induced developmental switch in Caenorhabditis elegans: Temperature-sensitive
  mutants reveal a wild-type temperature-dependent process.'
authors:
- Golden JW
- Riddle DL
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1984'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC344929
doi: 10.1073/pnas.81.3.819
---

# A pheromone-induced developmental switch in Caenorhabditis elegans: Temperature-sensitive mutants reveal a wild-type temperature-dependent process.
**Authors:** Golden JW, Riddle DL
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1984)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.81.3.819](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.81.3.819)
**PMC:** [PMC344929](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC344929/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1984 Feb;81(3):819-23. doi: 10.1073/pnas.81.3.819.

A pheromone-induced developmental switch in Caenorhabditis elegans: 
Temperature-sensitive mutants reveal a wild-type temperature-dependent process.

Golden JW, Riddle DL.

Formation of a developmentally arrested dispersal stage called the dauer larva 
is enhanced by a Caenorhabditis-specific pheromone and is inhibited by 
increasing amounts of food. Pheromone-induced dauer larva formation of three 
tested wild-type strains is temperature-dependent, so that an increased 
percentage of the population forms dauer larvae at 25 degrees C compared to 
lower temperatures. Dauer-defective mutants fail to respond to added pheromone, 
and some behavioral mutants affected in thermotaxis or egg-laying also exhibit 
abnormal responses. Temperature-sensitive (ts) dauer-constitutive mutants form 
dauer larvae at a restrictive temperature regardless of environmental stimuli. 
At the permissive temperature (17.5 degrees C), alleles of six out of seven 
dauer-constitutive genes tested overrespond to the dauer-inducing pheromone. All 
known mutations in daf-4 (eight alleles) and daf-7 (five alleles) produce a ts 
dauer-constitutive phenotype. One daf-4 and one daf-7 allele are suppressed by 
the amber nonsense suppressor, sup-7(st5). At least these two dauer-constitutive 
mutations are likely to cause production of nonfunctional rather than ts gene 
products. These mutations appear to indirectly result in a ts phenotype by 
enhancing the expression of a wild-type ts developmental process.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.81.3.819
PMCID: PMC344929
PMID: 6583682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
