---
pmid: '1550553'
title: Human liver long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase is a multifunctional
  membrane-bound beta-oxidation enzyme of mitochondria.
authors:
- Carpenter K
- Pollitt RJ
- Middleton B
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '1992'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0006-291x(92)90501-b
---

# Human liver long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase is a multifunctional membrane-bound beta-oxidation enzyme of mitochondria.
**Authors:** Carpenter K, Pollitt RJ, Middleton B
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0006-291x(92)90501-b](https://doi.org/10.1016/0006-291x(92)90501-b)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1992 Mar 16;183(2):443-8. doi: 
10.1016/0006-291x(92)90501-b.

Human liver long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase is a 
multifunctional membrane-bound beta-oxidation enzyme of mitochondria.

Carpenter K(1), Pollitt RJ, Middleton B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Nottingham Medical School, Queen's 
Medical Centre, England, U.K.

We have purified to homogeneity the long-chain specific 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA 
dehydrogenase from mitochondrial membranes of human infant liver. The enzyme is 
composed of non-identical subunits of 71 kDa and 47 kDa within a native 
structure of 230 kDa. The pure enzyme is active with 3-ketohexanoyl-CoA and 
gives maximum activity with 3-ketoacyl-CoA substrates of C10 to C16 acyl-chain 
length but is inactive with acetoacetyl-CoA. In addition to 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA 
dehydrogenase activity, the enzyme possesses 2-enoyl-CoA hydratase and 
3-ketoacyl-CoA thiolase activities which cannot be separated from the 
dehydrogenase. None of these enzymes show activity with C4 substrates but all 
are active with C6 and longer acyl-chain length substrates. They are thus 
distinct from any described previously. This human liver mitochondrial 
membrane-bound enzyme catalyses the conversion of medium- and long-chain 
2-enoyl-CoA compounds to: 1) 3-ketoacyl-CoA in the presence of NAD alone and 2) 
to acetyl-CoA (plus the corresponding acyl-CoA derivatives) in the presence of 
NAD and CoASH. It is therefore a multifunctional enzyme, resembling the 
beta-oxidation enzyme of E. coli, but unique in its membrane location and 
substrate specificity. We propose that its existence explains the repeated 
failure to detect any intermediates of mitochondrial beta-oxidation.

DOI: 10.1016/0006-291x(92)90501-b
PMID: 1550553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
