---
pmid: '15950758'
title: Regulation of ApoE receptor proteolysis by ligand binding.
authors:
- Hoe HS
- Rebeck GW
journal: Brain Res Mol Brain Res
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molbrainres.2005.02.013
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Regulation of ApoE receptor proteolysis by ligand binding.
**Authors:** Hoe HS, Rebeck GW
**Journal:** Brain Res Mol Brain Res (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molbrainres.2005.02.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molbrainres.2005.02.013)

## Abstract

1. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2005 Jun 13;137(1-2):31-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.molbrainres.2005.02.013. Epub 2005 Mar 23.

Regulation of ApoE receptor proteolysis by ligand binding.

Hoe HS(1), Rebeck GW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Georgetown University, 3970 Reservoir Road NW, 
Washington, DC 20057-1464, USA.

Two brain receptors for apolipoprotein E (apoE), the apoE receptor 2 (apoEr2) 
and the very low density lipoprotein receptor (VLDLr), are important in neuronal 
migration during development. Using a series of tagged constructs, we found that 
these two receptors undergo extracellular cleavages to release secreted forms of 
the receptors and intramembranous cleavages to degrade the C-terminal fragments. 
Release of the extracellular domains was blocked by an inhibitor of 
metalloproteinases and increased by PMA. Accumulation of the intracellular 
domain was increased by the presence of an inhibitor of gamma-secretase. ApoE 
binding to these receptors caused increased release of the extracellular domain 
and accumulation of the intracellular domains; similar increases in receptor 
proteolytic domains were observed from endogenous apoEr2 after treatment of 
primary neurons or rat hippocampus with an apoE-derived peptide. The human apoE 
isoforms promoted proteolysis to different degrees, with apoE2 resulting in a 
greater accumulation of the C-terminal fragments of apoEr2 compared with apoE4. 
These effects of apoE on receptor proteolysis were mediated by the ligand 
binding domain of the receptor. Similar promotion of receptor cleavage was seen 
with two other ligands, reelin and activated alpha2-macroglobulin. We suggest 
that signaling promoted by these receptors depends in part on these regulated 
proteolytic events.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbrainres.2005.02.013
PMID: 15950758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
