---
pmid: '14751237'
title: Human DDB2 splicing variants are dominant negative inhibitors of UV-damaged
  DNA repair.
authors:
- Inoki T
- Yamagami S
- Inoki Y
- Tsuru T
- Hamamoto T
- Kagawa Y
- Mori T
- Endo H
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2004.01.003
---

# Human DDB2 splicing variants are dominant negative inhibitors of UV-damaged DNA repair.
**Authors:** Inoki T, Yamagami S, Inoki Y, Tsuru T, Hamamoto T, Kagawa Y, Mori T, Endo H
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2004.01.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2004.01.003)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Feb 20;314(4):1036-43. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2004.01.003.

Human DDB2 splicing variants are dominant negative inhibitors of UV-damaged DNA 
repair.

Inoki T(1), Yamagami S, Inoki Y, Tsuru T, Hamamoto T, Kagawa Y, Mori T, Endo H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Jichi Medical School, Tochigi, Japan.

Damaged DNA-binding protein (DDB) is a heterodimer (DDB1 and DDB2), which is 
implicated in the repair of UV-irradiated DNA damage. Here we have identified 
four DDB2 variants from HeLa cells (D1-D4) that are generated by alternative 
splicing. Analysis of tissue distribution by RT-PCR indicates that D1 is the 
most highly expressed in human brain and heart. A DNA repair assay revealed that 
both D1 and D2 are dominant negative inhibitors. Electrophoresis mobility shift 
assays indicated that D1 and D2 are not part of the damaged DNA-protein complex. 
Co-immunoprecipitation studies show that DDB2-WT interacts with D1 and itself. 
Nuclear import of DDB1 was less induced by transfection with D1 than WT. Based 
on these results, D1 and D2 are dominant negative inhibitors of DNA repair, 
which is probably due to disruption of complex formation between DDB1 and 
DDB2-WT and of DDB1 nuclear import.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2004.01.003
PMID: 14751237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
