---
pmid: '17671182'
title: Haploinsufficiency of Krüppel-like factor 4 promotes adenomatous polyposis
  coli dependent intestinal tumorigenesis.
authors:
- Ghaleb AM
- McConnell BB
- Nandan MO
- Katz JP
- Kaestner KH
- Yang VW
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2373271
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-1302
---

# Haploinsufficiency of Krüppel-like factor 4 promotes adenomatous polyposis coli dependent intestinal tumorigenesis.
**Authors:** Ghaleb AM, McConnell BB, Nandan MO, Katz JP, Kaestner KH, Yang VW
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-1302](https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-1302)
**PMC:** [PMC2373271](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2373271/)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Res. 2007 Aug 1;67(15):7147-54. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-1302.

Haploinsufficiency of Krüppel-like factor 4 promotes adenomatous polyposis coli 
dependent intestinal tumorigenesis.

Ghaleb AM(1), McConnell BB, Nandan MO, Katz JP, Kaestner KH, Yang VW.

Author information:
(1)Division of Digestive Diseases, Department of Medicine, and Winship Cancer 
Institute, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia 30033, USA.

The zinc finger transcription factor Krüppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) is frequently 
down-regulated in colorectal cancer. Previous studies showed that the expression 
of KLF4 was activated by the colorectal cancer tumor suppressor adenomatous 
polyposis coli (APC) and that KLF4 repressed the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway. Here, 
we examined whether KLF4 plays a role in modulating intestinal tumorigenesis by 
comparing the tumor burdens in mice heterozygous for the Apc(Min) allele 
(Apc(Min/+)) and those heterozygous for both the Apc(Min) and Klf4 alleles 
(Klf4(+/-)/Apc(Min/+)). Between 10 and 20 weeks of age, Klf4(+/-)/Apc(Min/+) 
mice developed, on average, 59% more intestinal adenomas than Apc(Min/+) mice (P 
< 0.0001). Immunohistochemical staining showed that Klf4 protein levels were 
lower in the normal-appearing intestinal tissues of Klf4(+/-)/Apc(Min/+) mice 
compared with wild-type, Klf4(+/-), or Apc(Min/+) mice. In contrast, the levels 
of beta-catenin and cyclin D1 were higher in the normal-appearing intestinal 
tissues of Klf4(+/-)/Apc(Min/+) mice compared with the other three genotypes. 
Klf4 levels were further decreased in adenomas from both Apc(Min/+) and 
Klf4(+/-)/Apc(Min/+) mice compared with their corresponding normal-appearing 
tissues. Reverse transcription-PCR showed an inverse correlation between adenoma 
size and Klf4 mRNA levels in both Klf4(+/-)/Apc(Min/+) and Apc(Min/+) mice. 
There was also a progressive loss of heterozygosity of the wild-type Apc allele 
in adenomas with increasing size from Klf4(+/-)/Apc(Min/+) and Apc(Min/+) mice. 
Results from this study show that KLF4 plays an important role in promoting the 
development of intestinal adenomas in the presence of Apc(Min) mutation.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-1302
PMCID: PMC2373271
PMID: 17671182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The zinc finger transcription factor Krüppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) is frequently down-regulated in colorectal cancer. Previous studies showed that the expression of KLF4 was activated by the colorectal cancer tumor suppressor adeno-matous polyposis coli (APC) and that KLF4 repressed the Wnt/β-catenin pathway. Here, we examined whether KLF4 plays a role in modulating intestinal tumorigenesis by comparing the tumor burdens in mice heterozygous for the Apc Min allele ( Apc Min/+ ) and those heterozygous for both the Apc Min and Klf4 alleles ( Klf4 +/ − /Apc Min/+ ). Between 10 and 20 weeks of age, Klf4 +/ − /Apc Min/+ mice developed, on average, 59% more intestinal adenomas than Apc Min/+ mice ( P < 0.0001). Immunohistochemical staining showed that Klf4 protein levels were lower in the normal-appearing intestinal tissues of Klf4 +/ − /Apc Min/+ mice compared with wild-type, Klf4 +/ − , or Apc Min/+ mice. In contrast, the levels of β-catenin and cyclin D1 were higher in the normal-appearing intestinal tissues of Klf4 +/ − /Apc Min/+ mice compared with the other three genotypes. Klf4 levels were further decreased in adenomas from both Apc Min/+ and Klf4 +/ − /Apc Min/+ mice compared with their corresponding normal-appearing tissues. Reverse transcription-PCR showed an inverse correlation between adenoma size and Klf4 mRNA levels in both Klf4 +/ − /Apc Min/+ and Apc Min/+ mice. There was also a progressive loss of heterozygosity of the wild-type Apc allele in adenomas with increasing size from Klf4 +/ − /Apc Min/+ and Apc Min/+ mice. Results from this study show that KLF4 plays an important role in promoting the development of intestinal adenomas in the presence of Apc Min mutation.

Introduction

Colorectal cancer is a major cause of cancer mortality in the United States. More than 80% of colorectal cancers contain mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli ( APC ) tumor suppressor gene ( 1 ). APC is present in the normal intestinal mucosa with an increasing gradient of expression in mature epithelial cells located in the upper crypt region ( 2 ). Overexpression of APC leads to cell cycle arrest at the G 1 -S and G 2 -M boundaries ( 3 – 6 ). In addition, APC antagonizes the pro-proliferative Wnt pathway by negatively regulating the steady-state level of intracellular β-catenin ( 7 – 9 ). When APC is inactivated by mutation, Wnt signaling is unimpeded, resulting in the nuclear accumulation of β-catenin and subsequent activation of downstream target genes such as cyclin D1 and c-MYC that promote cell proliferation ( 10 , 11 ).

The nuclear transcription factor Krüppel-like factor 4 (KLF4; also known as gut-enriched Krüppel-like factor or GKLF), is a member of the C 2 H 2 -zinc finger–containing proteins exhibiting homology to the Drosophila melanogaster segmentation gene product, Krüppel ( 12 – 16 ). KLF4 is highly expressed in the terminally differentiated, postmitotic intestinal epithelial cells and is an inhibitor of cell proliferation ( 17 , 18 ). We previously showed that KLF4 was transcrip-tionally activated by p53 following DNA damage ( 19 ) and caused cell cycle arrest at both the G 1 -S and G 2 -M boundaries ( 20 , 21 ). These results indicate that KLF4 is an important factor in mediating the checkpoint functions of p53 following DNA damage. In the intestine, the KLF4 promoter is regulated by APC in a CDX2-dependent manner; CDX2 is an intestine-specific transcription factor that controls intestinal development ( 22 ). Conversely, KLF4 has been shown to regulate colonic cell growth by inhibiting β-catenin activity ( 23 , 24 ). Accordingly, studies have shown a potentially causal relationship between KLF4 and several kinds of human cancers. For example, the expression of KLF4 is often reduced in tumors of the gastrointestinal tract ( 25 – 29 ). In addition, loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and promoter hypermethylation are thought to be possible reasons for the reduced expression of KLF4 in a subset of colorectal cancers ( 25 ). However, whether KLF4 plays an in vivo role in the development of intestinal tumors has not been established.

The Apc Min/+ mice are an excellent model for studying intestinal tumorigenesis ( 30 ). The mutant mice, multiple intestinal neoplasia (Min; ref. 30 ), carry a truncating mutation at codon 850 of the murine Apc gene ( 31 ). In a C57BL/6J background, Apc Min/+ mice develop, on average, 30 adenomatous polyps in the intestines, with a predominant distribution in the small intestine ( 30 ). All intestinal adenomas are established by 100 days of age or sooner and new tumors do not arise continuously over the remaining life span of the animals ( 32 ). In the current study, we investigated the in vivo role of KLF4 in intestinal tumorigenesis in the setting of the Apc Min mutation.

Discussion

Previous studies indicate that KLF4 inhibits cell proliferation by activating crucial checkpoints in the cell cycle ( 18 , 20 , 21 , 38 – 40 ). These findings led to the suggestion that KLF4 may function as a tumor suppressor. Indeed, expression of KLF4 was found to be significantly reduced in intestinal adenomas from Apc Min/+ mice and patients with familial adenomatous polyposis when compared with their respective matched normal-appearing tissues ( 41 ). Similarly, the levels of KLF4 mRNA were reduced in a panel of human colorectal cancers when compared with their matched control tissues ( 25 ). Moreover, there is evidence for LOH of the KLF4 locus as well as promoter hypermethylation in a subset of colorectal cancer specimens ( 25 ). Conversely, reexpression of KLF4 in a colorectal cancer cell line resulted in reduced tumorigenecity in a xenotransplantation model ( 42 ). Results from the current study provide the first in vivo evidence that haploinsufficiency of Klf4 promotes intestinal tumorigenesis in the setting of the Apc Min mutation, thus further solidifying the concept that KLF4 exerts a tumor-suppressive function in the gastrointestinal system.

The Apc Min mouse, which carries a germ line nonsense mutation in the murine Apc gene ( 31 ), has served as a remarkably useful model for the study of intestinal tumorigenesis. Similar to the Apc Min model, familial adenomatous polyposis is a human disorder in which germ line mutations of the APC gene lead to polyposis early in life ( 1 , 43 ). A notable difference between the human syndrome and the mouse model is the much higher prevalence of adenomas in the small intestine than in the colon in Apc Min/+ mice ( 32 ), whereas it is the reverse in humans. Another unique nature of the Apc Min mouse model is that all adenomas were established by 100 days of age or sooner; no new tumors were formed over the remaining life span of the animals ( 32 ), a finding confirmed by the current study. Our study also shows that Klf4 +/ − / Apc Min/+ mice developed significantly more intestinal adenomas than Apc Min/+ mice in as early as 10 weeks of age ( Supplementary Fig. S1 ). This increase was maintained later in life, at 16 and 20 weeks. However, the size distribution of the adenomas in the two groups of mice were comparable at all time points ( Supplementary Fig. S2 ), suggesting that the rates of tumor growth in both Apc Min/+ and Klf4 +/ − / Apc Min/+ mice were similar. In the colon, although there was no statistically significant difference in the number of tumors between the two groups, the Klf4 +/ − / Apc Min/+ mice tended to have more tumors than the Apc Min/+ mice at 16 and 20 weeks ( Supplementary Fig. S2 ). Analysis of intestinal tumor multiplicity in the Apc Min/+ mice suggests that tumor number does not significantly increase over time ( 32 , 44 ). The fact that Klf4 +/− /Apc Min/+ mice maintained a higher number of intestinal adenomas, but a similar size distribution when compared with Apc Min/+ mice throughout the course of the study, suggests that haploinsufficiency of Klf4 contributes to the initiation but not the subsequent progression of adenomas.

The results of this study show that the levels of Klf4 protein and mRNA were reduced in the normal-appearing small intestinal tissues from Klf4 +/ − / Apc Min/+ mice as compared with Apc Min/+ mice ( Fig. 2 ; Supplementary Fig. S3 ). In addition, the level of Klf4 mRNA decreased progressively as the size of the adenomas increased in both Apc Min/+ and Klf4 +/ − / Apc Min/+ mice ( Supplementary Fig. S3 ). The reduced level of Klf4 in the normal-appearing small intestinal tissues of the Klf4 +/ − / Apc Min/+ mice, as compared with the Apc Min/+ mice, may be a contributing factor to the early formation of intestinal adenomas in mice that are heterozygous for the Klf4 and Apc Min alleles. Reduced expression or loss of KLF4 has been reported in gastrointestinal tumors and other types of solid tumors ( 25 – 29 , 45 , 46 ). Our findings are not only consistent with these reports, but provide direct evidence to show an in vivo effect of KLF4 reduction in promoting intestinal tumorigenesis.

The human APC gene was mutated in a majority of colorectal cancer ( 1 ). Loss of the normal APC allele occurred in up to 70% of colorectal adenomas ( 47 – 49 ) and 80% of colorectal cancer cell lines ( 2 ). These studies also indicate that one mechanism of adenoma formation is the inactivation of both alleles of the APC tumor suppressor gene. Consistent with this, quantitative site-specific PCR assays showed extensive loss of the wild-type Apc allele in adenomas derived from Apc Min/+ mice ( 36 ). Using the same assay, we were able to show that LOH of the Apc allele occurred not only in the normal-appearing intestines of Apc Min/+ mice but also in those of Klf4 +/ − /ApcMin/+ mice ( Fig. 6 ). Moreover, the LOH increased progressively as tumor size increased in both groups of mice ( Fig. 6 ). It is of interest to note that in the largest adenomas (>3 mm), the LOH of Apc was greater in Klf4 +/− /Apc Min/+ than in Apc Min/+ mice ( Fig. 6 ). This finding raises the possibility that reduced KLF4 levels may help facilitate LOH of APC .

The results of our study support a role for KLF4 in suppressing intestinal tumorigenesis by modulating β-catenin and cyclin D1 activity. KLF4 has been shown to regulate the Wnt/β-catenin pathway by inhibiting the expression of β-catenin ( 23 ). In addition, KLF4 binds the transcriptional activation domain of β-catenin and inhibits β-catenin–mediated transcription ( 24 ). Both of these findings were confirmed by the in vivo data in the current study showing the significant increase in the levels of β-catenin in the normal-appearing small intestinal tissues in the Klf4 +/ − /Apc Min/+ mice. Moreover, β-catenin staining in the normal-appearing intestine of Klf4 +/− / Apc Min/+ mice changes from a membranous pattern in the villi to a cytoplasmic pattern in the crypts ( Fig. 3 ). This is further changed to a cytoplasmic/nuclear distribution in the adenomas ( Fig. 4 ). A previous study showed that both the cytoplasmic and cytoplasmic/nuclear patterns of β-catenin staining were associated with increased proliferative index ( 50 ). The different staining patterns of β-catenin in the Klf4 +/− / ApcMin/+ mice may thus represent different mechanisms of cyclin D1 induction. In cells with membranous β-catenin, Klf4 may directly repress cyclin D1 promoter; and the decrease in Klf4 releases cyclin D1 from repression. In contrast, in cells with cytoplasmic and cytoplasmic/nuclear distribution of β-catenin, cyclin D1 may be directly induced by β-catenin.

It has also been previously shown that the expression of KLF4 was dependent on APC ( 22 ). Our observations that Klf4 mRNA and protein levels were decreased in the normal-appearing intestinal tissues of Klf4 +/ − /Apc Min/+ mice compared with wild-type, Klf4 +/− , and Apc Min/+ mice also supports the notion that Klf4 is regulated by Apc. Moreover, the cellular localization of KLF4 and APC in the intestinal epithelium was similar to each other ( 2 , 17 ). Taken together, the findings of the previous studies and the current study suggest a synergistic mechanism by which KLF4 and APC may function to regulate intestinal epithelial cell proliferation.

The increase in adenoma formation in Klf4 +/ − / Apc Min/+ mice may thus be viewed in the context of crosstalk between KLF4 and the Wnt/β-catenin pathway. The decrease in the wild-type Apc level by LOH in the Klf4 +/ − / Apc Min/+ mice leads to a decrease in Klf4 to a level below that of Apc Min/+ mice. This decrease is accentuated by having only one wild-type Klf4 allele in the Klf4 +/ − / Apc Min/+ mice compared with Apc Min/+ mice. As KLF4 has been shown to inhibit β-catenin–mediated gene expression ( 23 , 24 ), the simultaneous reduction in Klf4 and Apc could exacerbate the dysregulation of β-catenin in the intestinal epithelium, leading to an increased rate of proliferation, a greater chance for early LOH, and earlier initiation of tumorigenesis. We also speculate that mutations in the APC gene, along with haploinsufficiency of the KLF4 gene in the intestine, would result in the constitutive activation of other β-catenin target genes that promote cell proliferation, and eventually, transformation.

In conclusion, we show for the first time that reduced Klf4 expression in vivo plays a role in the onset of intestinal adenoma formation in Apc Min/+ mice. Our findings suggest that genetic events which inactivate KLF4 may promote tumorigenesis in human colorectal cancers, particularly in those with mutations in the APC gene. Examination of human colorectal cancer tissues for evidence of KLF4 mutations may further help to substantiate the role of KLF4 in colorectal carcinogenesis.
