---
pmid: '18515193'
title: The histone methylase Set2p and the histone deacetylase Rpd3p repress meiotic
  recombination at the HIS4 meiotic recombination hotspot in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
authors:
- Merker JD
- Dominska M
- Greenwell PW
- Rinella E
- Bouck DC
- Shibata Y
- Strahl BD
- Mieczkowski P
- Petes TD
journal: DNA Repair (Amst)
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2518087
doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2008.04.009
---

# The histone methylase Set2p and the histone deacetylase Rpd3p repress meiotic recombination at the HIS4 meiotic recombination hotspot in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Merker JD, Dominska M, Greenwell PW, Rinella E, Bouck DC, Shibata Y, Strahl BD, Mieczkowski P, Petes TD
**Journal:** DNA Repair (Amst) (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.dnarep.2008.04.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dnarep.2008.04.009)
**PMC:** [PMC2518087](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2518087/)

## Abstract

1. DNA Repair (Amst). 2008 Aug 2;7(8):1298-308. doi:
10.1016/j.dnarep.2008.04.009.  Epub 2008 Jun 2.

The histone methylase Set2p and the histone deacetylase Rpd3p repress meiotic 
recombination at the HIS4 meiotic recombination hotspot in Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae.

Merker JD(1), Dominska M, Greenwell PW, Rinella E, Bouck DC, Shibata Y, Strahl 
BD, Mieczkowski P, Petes TD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 
27599-3280, USA.

The rate of meiotic recombination in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae varies 
widely in different regions of the genome with some genes having very high 
levels of recombination (hotspots). A variety of experiments done in yeast 
suggest that hotspots are a feature of chromatin structure rather than a feature 
of primary DNA sequence. We examined the effects of mutating a variety of 
enzymes that affect chromatin structure on the recombination activity of the 
well-characterized HIS4 hotspot including the Set2p and Dot1p histone 
methylases, the Hda1p and Rpd3p histone deacetylases, the Sin4p global 
transcription regulator, and a deletion of one of the two copies of the genes 
encoding histone H3-H4. Loss of Set2p or Rpd3p substantially elevated HIS4 
hotspot activity, and loss of Hda1p had a smaller stimulatory effect; none of 
the other alterations had a significant effect. The increase of HIS4 hotspot 
activity in set2 and rpd3 strains is likely to be related to the recent finding 
that histone H3 methylation by Set2p directs deacetylation of histones by Rpd3p.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2008.04.009
PMCID: PMC2518087
PMID: 18515193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
