---
pmid: '10723141'
title: Identification of Mad as a repressor of the human telomerase (hTERT) gene.
authors:
- Oh S
- Song YH
- Yim J
- Kim TK
journal: Oncogene
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1203439
---

# Identification of Mad as a repressor of the human telomerase (hTERT) gene.
**Authors:** Oh S, Song YH, Yim J, Kim TK
**Journal:** Oncogene (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1203439](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1203439)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2000 Mar 9;19(11):1485-90. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1203439.

Identification of Mad as a repressor of the human telomerase (hTERT) gene.

Oh S(1), Song YH, Yim J, Kim TK.

Author information:
(1)National Creative Research Initiative Center for Genetic Reprogramming, 
Institute for Molecular Biology and Genetics, Seoul National University, Seoul 
151-742, Korea.

Activation of telomerase, which has been frequently associated with cellular 
immortality, may constitute a key step in the development of human cancer. 
De-repression in the expression of its catalytic subunit hTERT gene has been 
proposed to directly link to the telomerase activation in tumor cells. Little is 
known about the mechanism how the hTERT gene is repressed in telomerase-negative 
mortal cells. This study was conducted, using an expression cloning approach, 
with the aim of identifying the gene(s) responsible for repressing the hTERT 
gene expression. Using this genetic screen, we isolated the transcription factor 
Mad as a repressor. Mutation of its DNA binding sites caused significant 
de-repression of hTERT promoter activity in mortal cells. This Mad-mediated 
repression of the hTERT promoter in mortal cells was counteracted by ectopic 
expression of Myc. The antagonism between Mad and Myc was also observed with an 
endogenous hTERT promoter. Their potential roles in differential hTERT promoter 
activities were further supported by the relative amounts of Mad and Myc 
proteins detected in immortal and mortal cells. Thus, Mad may be a direct 
negative regulator of hTERT in mortal cells and this repression mechanism can be 
inhibited by induction of Myc in immortal cells.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1203439
PMID: 10723141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
