---
pmid: '18259216'
title: The nucleolar SUMO-specific protease SENP3 reverses SUMO modification of nucleophosmin
  and is required for rRNA processing.
authors:
- Haindl M
- Harasim T
- Eick D
- Muller S
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2267381
doi: 10.1038/embor.2008.3
---

# The nucleolar SUMO-specific protease SENP3 reverses SUMO modification of nucleophosmin and is required for rRNA processing.
**Authors:** Haindl M, Harasim T, Eick D, Muller S
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/embor.2008.3](https://doi.org/10.1038/embor.2008.3)
**PMC:** [PMC2267381](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2267381/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2008 Mar;9(3):273-9. doi: 10.1038/embor.2008.3. Epub 2008 Feb 8.

The nucleolar SUMO-specific protease SENP3 reverses SUMO modification of 
nucleophosmin and is required for rRNA processing.

Haindl M(1), Harasim T, Eick D, Muller S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, 
Am Klopferspitz 18, D-82152 Martinsried, Germany.

The ubiquitin-like SUMO system functions by a cyclic process of modification and 
demodification, and recent data suggest that the nucleolus is a site of 
sumoylation-desumoylation cycles. For example, the tumour suppressor ARF 
stimulates sumoylation of nucleolar proteins. Here, we show that the nucleolar 
SUMO-specific protease SENP3 is associated with nucleophosmin (NPM1), a crucial 
factor in ribosome biogenesis. SENP3 catalyses desumoylation of NPM1-SUMO2 
conjugates in vitro and counteracts ARF-induced modification of NPM1 by SUMO2 in 
vivo. Intriguingly, depletion of SENP3 by short interfering RNA interferes with 
nucleolar ribosomal RNA processing and inhibits the conversion of the 32S rRNA 
species to the 28S form, thus phenocopying the processing defect observed on 
depletion of NPM1. Moreover, mimicking constitutive modification of NPM1 by 
SUMO2 interferes with 28S rRNA maturation. These results define SENP3 as an 
essential factor for ribosome biogenesis and suggest that deconjugation of SUMO2 
from NPM1 by SENP3 is critically involved in 28S rRNA maturation.

DOI: 10.1038/embor.2008.3
PMCID: PMC2267381
PMID: 18259216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
