---
pmid: '18681827'
title: The WNT receptor FZD7 contributes to self-renewal signaling of human embryonic
  stem cells.
authors:
- Melchior K
- Weiss J
- Zaehres H
- Kim YM
- Lutzko C
- Roosta N
- Hescheler J
- Müschen M
journal: Biol Chem
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1515/BC.2008.108
---

# The WNT receptor FZD7 contributes to self-renewal signaling of human embryonic stem cells.
**Authors:** Melchior K, Weiss J, Zaehres H, Kim YM, Lutzko C, Roosta N, Hescheler J, Müschen M
**Journal:** Biol Chem (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1515/BC.2008.108](https://doi.org/10.1515/BC.2008.108)

## Abstract

1. Biol Chem. 2008 Jul;389(7):897-903. doi: 10.1515/BC.2008.108.

The WNT receptor FZD7 contributes to self-renewal signaling of human embryonic 
stem cells.

Melchior K(1), Weiss J, Zaehres H, Kim YM, Lutzko C, Roosta N, Hescheler J, 
Müschen M.

Author information:
(1)Leukemia Research Program, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, University of 
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90027, USA.

A number of recent studies identified nuclear factors that together have the 
unique ability to induce pluripotency in differentiated cell types. However, 
little is known about the factors that are needed to maintain human embryonic 
stem (ES) cells in an undifferentiated state. In a search for such requirements, 
we performed a comprehensive meta-analysis of publicly available SAGE and 
microarray data. The rationale for this analysis was to identify genes that are 
exclusively expressed in human ES cell lines compared to 30 differentiated 
tissue types. The WNT receptor FZD7 was found among the genes with an ES 
cell-specific expression profile in both SAGE and microarray analyses. 
Subsequent validation by quantitative RT-PCR and flow cytometry confirmed that 
FZD7 mRNA levels in human ES cells are up to 200-fold higher compared to 
differentiated cell types. ShRNA-mediated knockdown of FZD7 in human ES cells 
induced dramatic changes in the morphology of ES cell colonies, perturbation of 
expression levels of germ layer-specific marker genes, and a rapid loss of 
expression of the ES cell-specific transcription factor OCT4. These findings 
identify the WNT receptor FZD7 as a novel ES cell-specific surface antigen with 
a likely important role in the maintenance of ES cell self-renewal capacity.

DOI: 10.1515/BC.2008.108
PMID: 18681827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
