---
pmid: '16511568'
title: Mutual regulation of c-Jun and ATF2 by transcriptional activation and subcellular
  localization.
authors:
- Liu H
- Deng X
- Shyu YJ
- Li JJ
- Taparowsky EJ
- Hu CD
journal: EMBO J
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1409714
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601020
---

# Mutual regulation of c-Jun and ATF2 by transcriptional activation and subcellular localization.
**Authors:** Liu H, Deng X, Shyu YJ, Li JJ, Taparowsky EJ, Hu CD
**Journal:** EMBO J (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7601020](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7601020)
**PMC:** [PMC1409714](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1409714/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2006 Mar 8;25(5):1058-69. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601020. Epub 2006 Mar
 2.

Mutual regulation of c-Jun and ATF2 by transcriptional activation and 
subcellular localization.

Liu H(1), Deng X, Shyu YJ, Li JJ, Taparowsky EJ, Hu CD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Purdue 
University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA.

Erratum in
    EMBO J. 2006 Jun 21;25(12):2952.

ATF2 and c-Jun are key components of activating protein-1 and function as 
homodimers or heterodimers. c-Jun-ATF2 heterodimers activate the expression of 
many target genes, including c-jun, in response to a variety of cellular and 
environmental signals. Although it has been believed that c-Jun and ATF2 are 
constitutively localized in the nucleus, where they are phosphorylated and 
activated by mitogen-activated protein kinases, the molecular mechanisms 
underlying the regulation of their transcriptional activities remain to be 
defined. Here we show that ATF2 possesses a nuclear export signal in its leucine 
zipper region and two nuclear localization signals in its basic region, 
resulting in continuous shuttling between the cytoplasm and the nucleus. 
Dimerization with c-Jun in the nucleus prevents the export of ATF2 and is 
essential for the transcriptional activation of the c-jun promoter. Importantly, 
c-Jun-dependent nuclear localization of ATF2 occurs during retinoic acid-induced 
differentiation and UV-induced cell death in F9 cells. Together, these findings 
demonstrate that ATF2 and c-Jun mutually regulate each other by altering the 
dynamics of subcellular localization and by positively impacting transcriptional 
activity.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601020
PMCID: PMC1409714
PMID: 16511568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
