---
pmid: '11461119'
title: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha-responsive genes induced in
  the newborn but not prenatal liver of peroxisomal fatty acyl-CoA oxidase null mice.
authors:
- Cook WS
- Jain S
- Jia Y
- Cao WQ
- Yeldandi AV
- Reddy JK
- Rao MS
journal: Exp Cell Res
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/excr.2001.5266
---

# Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha-responsive genes induced in the newborn but not prenatal liver of peroxisomal fatty acyl-CoA oxidase null mice.
**Authors:** Cook WS, Jain S, Jia Y, Cao WQ, Yeldandi AV, Reddy JK, Rao MS
**Journal:** Exp Cell Res (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1006/excr.2001.5266](https://doi.org/10.1006/excr.2001.5266)

## Abstract

1. Exp Cell Res. 2001 Aug 1;268(1):70-6. doi: 10.1006/excr.2001.5266.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha-responsive genes induced in the 
newborn but not prenatal liver of peroxisomal fatty acyl-CoA oxidase null mice.

Cook WS(1), Jain S, Jia Y, Cao WQ, Yeldandi AV, Reddy JK, Rao MS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University Medical School, 303 East 
Chicago Avenue, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Mice deficient in fatty acyl-CoA oxidase (AOX(-/-)), the first enzyme of the 
peroxisomal beta-oxidation system, develop specific morphological and molecular 
changes in the liver characterized by microvesicular fatty change, increased 
mitosis, spontaneous peroxisome proliferation, increased mRNA and protein levels 
of genes regulated by peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha 
(PPARalpha), and hepatocellular carcinoma. Based on these findings it is 
proposed that substrates for AOX function as ligands for PPARalpha. In this 
study we examined the sequential changes in morphology and gene expression in 
the liver of wild-type and AOX(-/-) mice at Embryonic Day 17.5, and during 
postnatal development up to 2 months of age. In AOX(-/-) mice high levels of 
expression of PPARalpha-responsive genes in the liver commenced on the day of 
birth and persisted throughout the postnatal period. We found no indication of 
PPARalpha activation in the livers of AOX(-/-) mice at embryonic age E17.5. In 
AOX(-/-) mice microvesicular fatty change in liver cells was evident at 7 days. 
At 2 months of age livers showed extensive steatosis and the presence in the 
periportal areas of clusters of hepatocytes with abundant granular eosinophilic 
cytoplasm rich in peroxisomes. These results suggest that the biological ligands 
for PPARalpha vis a vis substrates for AOX either are not functional in fetal 
liver or do not cross the placental barrier during the fetal development and 
that postnatally they are likely derived from milk and diet.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/excr.2001.5266
PMID: 11461119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
