---
pmid: '18760998'
title: Gas6-mediated signaling is dependent on the engagement of its gamma-carboxyglutamic
  acid domain with phosphatidylserine.
authors:
- Rajotte I
- Hasanbasic I
- Blostein M
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.08.083
---

# Gas6-mediated signaling is dependent on the engagement of its gamma-carboxyglutamic acid domain with phosphatidylserine.
**Authors:** Rajotte I, Hasanbasic I, Blostein M
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.08.083](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.08.083)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Nov 7;376(1):70-3. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.08.083. Epub 2008 Aug 28.

Gas6-mediated signaling is dependent on the engagement of its 
gamma-carboxyglutamic acid domain with phosphatidylserine.

Rajotte I(1), Hasanbasic I, Blostein M.

Author information:
(1)The Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, Sir Mortimer B. Davis-Jewish 
General Hospital, 3755 Cote Sainte Catherine, Montreal, Que., Canada H3T1E2.

Gas6 is a vitamin K-dependent protein containing gamma-carboxyglutamic acid 
(Gla) at its N-terminus and a receptor binding domain at its C-terminus. 
Gas6-Axl binding is necessary but not sufficient to support endothelial cell 
survival as decarboxylated gas6 inhibits the pro-survival function of gas6 by 
binding and inhibiting Axl, even though decarboxylated gas6 cannot support 
endothelial cell survival itself. It is hypothesized that interactions between 
the Gla domain of gas6 and phosphatidylserine (PS), though not required for gas6 
binding to Axl, are necessary for gas6-Axl function. In support of this 
hypothesis are results showing that (1) two specific inhibitors of Gla-PS 
interactions, namely soluble PS and Annexin V, abrogate gas6-mediated 
endothelial cell survival and (2) Soluble PS inhibits Akt activation, a 
downstream intracellular event triggered by gas6-Axl binding. In conclusion, we 
propose a heretofore unknown function of Gla, where Gla-PS binding on the 
N-terminus of gas6 is necessary for a gas6 function mediated through its binding 
to Axl via its C-terminus.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.08.083
PMID: 18760998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
