---
pmid: '24521463'
title: A genetic approach to study H2O2 scavenging in fission yeast--distinct roles
  of peroxiredoxin and catalase.
authors:
- Paulo E
- García-Santamarina S
- Calvo IA
- Carmona M
- Boronat S
- Domènech A
- Ayté J
- Hidalgo E
journal: Mol Microbiol
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/mmi.12548
---

# A genetic approach to study H2O2 scavenging in fission yeast--distinct roles of peroxiredoxin and catalase.
**Authors:** Paulo E, García-Santamarina S, Calvo IA, Carmona M, Boronat S, Domènech A, Ayté J, Hidalgo E
**Journal:** Mol Microbiol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1111/mmi.12548](https://doi.org/10.1111/mmi.12548)

## Abstract

1. Mol Microbiol. 2014 Apr;92(2):246-57. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12548. Epub 2014 Mar 6.

A genetic approach to study H2O2 scavenging in fission yeast--distinct roles of 
peroxiredoxin and catalase.

Paulo E(1), García-Santamarina S, Calvo IA, Carmona M, Boronat S, Domènech A, 
Ayté J, Hidalgo E.

Author information:
(1)Oxidative Stress and Cell Cycle Group, Departament de Ciències Experimentals 
i de la Salut, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, C/ Dr. Aiguader 88, E-08003, Barcelona, 
Spain.

The main peroxiredoxin in Schizosaccharomyces pombe, Tpx1, is important to 
sustain aerobic growth, and cells lacking this protein are only able to grow on 
solid plates under anaerobic conditions. We have found that deletion of the gene 
coding for thioredoxin reductase, trr1, is a suppressor of the sensitivity to 
aerobic growth of Δtpx1 cells, so that cells lacking both proteins are able to 
grow on solid plates in the presence of oxygen. We have investigated this 
suppression effect, and determined that it depends on the presence of catalase, 
which is constitutively expressed in Δtrr1 cells in a transcription factor 
Pap1-dependent manner. A complete characterization of the repertoire of hydrogen 
peroxide scavenging activities in fission yeast suggests that Tpx1 is the only 
enzyme with sufficient sensitivity for peroxides and cellular abundance as to 
control the low levels produced during aerobic growth, catalase being the next 
barrier of detoxification when the steady-state levels of peroxides are 
increased in Δtpx1 cells. Gpx1, the only glutathione peroxidase encoded by the 
S. pombe genome, only has a minor secondary role when extracellular peroxides 
are added. Our study proposes non-overlapping roles for the different hydrogen 
peroxide scavenging activities of this eukaryotic organism.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.12548
PMID: 24521463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
