---
pmid: '16300740'
title: Interaction of the stress protein p8 with Jab1 is required for Jab1-dependent
  p27 nuclear-to-cytoplasm translocation.
authors:
- Malicet C
- Hoffmeister A
- Moreno S
- Closa D
- Dagorn JC
- Vasseur S
- Iovanna JL
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.11.018
---

# Interaction of the stress protein p8 with Jab1 is required for Jab1-dependent p27 nuclear-to-cytoplasm translocation.
**Authors:** Malicet C, Hoffmeister A, Moreno S, Closa D, Dagorn JC, Vasseur S, Iovanna JL
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.11.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.11.018)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Jan 6;339(1):284-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.11.018. Epub 2005 Nov 15.

Interaction of the stress protein p8 with Jab1 is required for Jab1-dependent 
p27 nuclear-to-cytoplasm translocation.

Malicet C(1), Hoffmeister A, Moreno S, Closa D, Dagorn JC, Vasseur S, Iovanna 
JL.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U.624, Stress Cellulaire, 163 Avenue de Luminy, Case 915, Parc 
Scientifique et Technologique de Luminy, 13288 Marseille Cedex 9, France.

p8 is an 80 amino-acid polypeptide identified because of its remarkable 
over-expression in the stressed pancreas. This protein, apparently devoid of 
enzymatic activity, is a powerful regulator of several intracellular pathways, 
suggesting that it has to interact with several molecular partners to modulate 
their activity. We used two-hybrid screening of a pre-transformed human testes 
cDNA library to identify some of these partners. One of them was the 
multifunctional protein Jab1, its interaction with p8 being confirmed by 
His6-pull down and co-immunoprecipitation assays. In addition, we could show 
that the two proteins co-localized in the cell. Our functional data demonstrate 
that Jab1 requires direct interaction with p8 to induce the translocation of p27 
from nucleus to cytoplasm and its subsequent degradation. Experiments showing 
that the knock-down of p8 expression results in a strong inhibition of Jab1 
activity confirmed that the mechanism by which Jab1 promotes cell growth by 
decreasing p27 level is p8-dependent.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.11.018
PMID: 16300740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
