---
pmid: '12869585'
title: SKN-1 links C. elegans mesendodermal specification to a conserved oxidative
  stress response.
authors:
- An JH
- Blackwell TK
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC196237
doi: 10.1101/gad.1107803
---

# SKN-1 links C. elegans mesendodermal specification to a conserved oxidative stress response.
**Authors:** An JH, Blackwell TK
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.1107803](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.1107803)
**PMC:** [PMC196237](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC196237/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2003 Aug 1;17(15):1882-93. doi: 10.1101/gad.1107803. Epub 2003 Jul 
17.

SKN-1 links C. elegans mesendodermal specification to a conserved oxidative 
stress response.

An JH(1), Blackwell TK.

Author information:
(1)Center for Blood Research and Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

During the earliest stages of Caenorhabditis elegans embryogenesis, the 
transcription factor SKN-1 initiates development of the digestive system and 
other mesendodermal tissues. Postembryonic SKN-1 functions have not been 
elucidated. SKN-1 binds to DNA through a unique mechanism, but is distantly 
related to basic leucine-zipper proteins that orchestrate the major oxidative 
stress response in vertebrates and yeast. Here we show that despite its distinct 
mode of target gene recognition, SKN-1 functions similarly to resist oxidative 
stress in C. elegans. During postembryonic stages, SKN-1 regulates a key Phase 
II detoxification gene through constitutive and stress-inducible mechanisms in 
the ASI chemosensory neurons and intestine, respectively. SKN-1 is present in 
ASI nuclei under normal conditions, and accumulates in intestinal nuclei in 
response to oxidative stress. skn-1 mutants are sensitive to oxidative stress 
and have shortened lifespans. SKN-1 represents a connection between 
developmental specification of the digestive system and one of its most basic 
functions, resistance to oxidative and xenobiotic stress. This oxidative stress 
response thus appears to be both widely conserved and ancient, suggesting that 
the mesendodermal specification role of SKN-1 was predated by its function in 
these detoxification mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.1107803
PMCID: PMC196237
PMID: 12869585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
