---
pmid: '9670014'
title: The molecular chaperone Ssb from Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a component of
  the ribosome-nascent chain complex.
authors:
- Pfund C
- Lopez-Hoyo N
- Ziegelhoffer T
- Schilke BA
- Lopez-Buesa P
- Walter WA
- Wiedmann M
- Craig EA
journal: EMBO J
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1170732
doi: 10.1093/emboj/17.14.3981
---

# The molecular chaperone Ssb from Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a component of the ribosome-nascent chain complex.
**Authors:** Pfund C, Lopez-Hoyo N, Ziegelhoffer T, Schilke BA, Lopez-Buesa P, Walter WA, Wiedmann M, Craig EA
**Journal:** EMBO J (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/17.14.3981](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/17.14.3981)
**PMC:** [PMC1170732](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1170732/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 1998 Jul 15;17(14):3981-9. doi: 10.1093/emboj/17.14.3981.

The molecular chaperone Ssb from Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a component of the 
ribosome-nascent chain complex.

Pfund C(1), Lopez-Hoyo N, Ziegelhoffer T, Schilke BA, Lopez-Buesa P, Walter WA, 
Wiedmann M, Craig EA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 
53706, USA.

The 70 kDa heat shock proteins (Hsp70s) are a ubiquitous class of molecular 
chaperones. The Ssbs of Saccharomyces cerevisiae are an abundant type of Hsp70 
found associated with translating ribosomes. To understand better the function 
of Ssb in association with ribosomes, the Ssb-ribosome interaction was 
characterized. Incorporation of the aminoacyl-tRNA analog puromycin by 
translating ribosomes caused the release of Ssb concomitant with the release of 
nascent chains. In addition, Ssb could be cross-linked to nascent chains 
containing a modified lysine residue with a photoactivatable cross-linker. 
Together, these results suggest an interaction of Ssb with the nascent chain. 
The interaction of Ssb with the ribosome-nascent chain complex was stable, as 
demonstrated by resistance to treatment with high salt; however, Ssb interaction 
with the ribosome in the absence of nascent chain was salt sensitive. We propose 
that Ssb is a core component of the translating ribosome which interacts with 
both the nascent polypeptide chain and the ribosome. These interactions allow 
Ssb to function as a chaperone on the ribosome, preventing the misfolding of 
newly synthesized proteins.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/17.14.3981
PMCID: PMC1170732
PMID: 9670014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
