---
pmid: '1459996'
title: Thrombospondin 1 and thrombospondin 2 are expressed as both homo- and heterotrimers.
authors:
- O'Rourke KM
- Laherty CD
- Dixit VM
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1992'
full_text_available: false
---

# Thrombospondin 1 and thrombospondin 2 are expressed as both homo- and heterotrimers.
**Authors:** O'Rourke KM, Laherty CD, Dixit VM
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1992)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1992 Dec 15;267(35):24921-4.

Thrombospondin 1 and thrombospondin 2 are expressed as both homo- and 
heterotrimers.

O'Rourke KM(1), Laherty CD, Dixit VM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor 
48109.

There exist two distinct thrombospondin molecules (designated TSP1 and TSP2) 
which are encoded by separate genes. TSP1 is a trimeric cell surface and 
extracellular matrix molecule. Sequence comparison reveals that the 2 cysteines 
involved in interchain disulfide linkage and trimer assembly in TSP1 are 
conserved in TSP2 (Laherty, C. D., O'Rourke, K., Wolf, F. W., Katz, R., Seldin, 
M. F., and Dixit, V. M. (1992) J. Biol. Chem. 267, 3274-3281). Swiss 3T3 
fibroblasts express both TSP1 and TSP2, and, therefore, an important question is 
whether TSP in such cells is expressed as homotrimers or as heterotrimers. We 
find that Swiss 3T3 cells and epithelial cells transfected with TSP expression 
vectors express both homo- and heterotrimeric forms of TSP. In addition, 
homotrimeric TSP2 has a lower affinity for heparin than homotrimeric TSP1. Thus, 
the heparin affinity of TSP can be modulated by the expression of TSP as homo- 
or heterotrimers.

PMID: 1459996 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
