---
pmid: '17369395'
title: 'Re-evaluating AKT regulation: role of TOR complex 2 in tissue growth.'
authors:
- Hietakangas V
- Cohen SM
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1820936
doi: 10.1101/gad.416307
---

# Re-evaluating AKT regulation: role of TOR complex 2 in tissue growth.
**Authors:** Hietakangas V, Cohen SM
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.416307](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.416307)
**PMC:** [PMC1820936](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1820936/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2007 Mar 15;21(6):632-7. doi: 10.1101/gad.416307.

Re-evaluating AKT regulation: role of TOR complex 2 in tissue growth.

Hietakangas V(1), Cohen SM.

Author information:
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory Meyerhofstrasse 1, D-69117 Heidelberg, 
Germany.

Phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT signaling is essential for growth and 
metabolism and is elevated in many cancers. Enzymatic activity of AKT has been 
shown to depend on phosphorylation of two conserved sites by PDK1 and TOR 
(target of rapamycin) complex 2 (TORC2) in a PI3K-dependent manner. Here we 
analyze the role of TORC2-mediated AKT phosphorylation in Drosophila. Mutants 
removing critical TORC2 components, rictor and sin1, strongly reduced AKT 
hydrophobic motif (HM) phosphorylation and AKT activity, but showed only minor 
growth impairment. A mutant form of AKT lacking the HM phosphorylation site 
displayed comparable activity. In contrast to the mild effects of removing HM 
site phosphorylation at normal levels of PI3K activity, loss of TORC2 activity 
strongly inhibited hyperplasia caused by elevated pathway activity, as in 
mutants of the tumor suppressor PTEN. Thus, TORC2 acts as a rheostat to broaden 
the range of AKT signaling at the high end of its range.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.416307
PMCID: PMC1820936
PMID: 17369395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
