---
pmid: '19782045'
title: The nuclear pore complex protein ALADIN is anchored via NDC1 but not via POM121
  and GP210 in the nuclear envelope.
authors:
- Kind B
- Koehler K
- Lorenz M
- Huebner A
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.09.080
---

# The nuclear pore complex protein ALADIN is anchored via NDC1 but not via POM121 and GP210 in the nuclear envelope.
**Authors:** Kind B, Koehler K, Lorenz M, Huebner A
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.09.080](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.09.080)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Dec 11;390(2):205-10. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.09.080. Epub 2009 Sep 24.

The nuclear pore complex protein ALADIN is anchored via NDC1 but not via POM121 
and GP210 in the nuclear envelope.

Kind B(1), Koehler K, Lorenz M, Huebner A.

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital, Technical University Dresden, D-01307 Dresden, Germany. 
barbara.kind@uniklinikum-dresden.de

The nuclear pore complex (NPC) consists of approximately 30 different proteins 
and provides the only sites for macromolecular transport between cytoplasm and 
nucleus. ALADIN was discovered as a new member of the NPC. Mutations in ALADIN 
are known to cause triple A syndrome, a rare autosomal recessive disorder 
characterized by adrenal insufficiency, alacrima, and achalasia. The function 
and exact location of the nucleoporin ALADIN within the NPC multiprotein complex 
is still unclear. Using a siRNA-based approach we downregulated the three known 
membrane integrated nucleoporins NDC1, GP210, and POM121 in stably expressing 
GFP-ALADIN HeLa cells. We identified NDC1 but not GP210 and POM121 as the main 
anchor of ALADIN within the NPC. Solely the depletion of NDC1 caused 
mislocalization of ALADIN. Vice versa, the depletion of ALADIN led also to 
disappearance of NDC1 at the NPC. However, the downregulation of two further 
membrane-integral nucleoporins GP210 and POM121 had no effect on ALADIN 
localization. Furthermore, we could show a direct association of NDC1 and ALADIN 
in NPCs by fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) measurements. Based on 
our findings we conclude that ALADIN is anchored in the nuclear envelope via 
NDC1 and that this interaction gets lost, if ALADIN is mutated. The loss of 
integration of ALADIN in the NPC is a main pathogenetic aspect for the 
development of the triple A syndrome and suggests that the interaction between 
ALADIN and NDC1 may be involved in the pathogenesis of the disease.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.09.080
PMID: 19782045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
