---
pmid: '10219089'
title: Isolation of Ku70-binding proteins (KUBs).
authors:
- Yang CR
- Yeh S
- Leskov K
- Odegaard E
- Hsu HL
- Chang C
- Kinsella TJ
- Chen DJ
- Boothman DA
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC148436
doi: 10.1093/nar/27.10.2165
---

# Isolation of Ku70-binding proteins (KUBs).
**Authors:** Yang CR, Yeh S, Leskov K, Odegaard E, Hsu HL, Chang C, Kinsella TJ, Chen DJ, Boothman DA
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/27.10.2165](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/27.10.2165)
**PMC:** [PMC148436](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC148436/)

## Abstract

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 1999 May 15;27(10):2165-74. doi: 10.1093/nar/27.10.2165.

Isolation of Ku70-binding proteins (KUBs).

Yang CR(1), Yeh S, Leskov K, Odegaard E, Hsu HL, Chang C, Kinsella TJ, Chen DJ,
Boothman DA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology and Department of Pharmacology and the
Ireland Cancer Center,Laboratory of Molecular Stress Responses, Case Western
Reserve University, BRB-326 East,10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106-4942,
USA.

DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) plays a critical role in resealing DNA
double-stand breaks by non-homologous end joining. Aside from DNA-PK, XRCC4 and
DNA ligase IV, other proteins which play a role(s) in this repair pathway remain
unknown; DNA-PK contains a catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs) and a DNA binding
subunit (Ku70 and Ku80). We isolated Ku70-binding proteins (KUB1-KUB4) using
yeast two-hybrid analyses. Sequence analyses revealed KUB1 to be apolipoprotein
J (apoJ), also known as X-ray-inducible transcript 8 (XIP8),
testosterone-repressed prostate message-2 (TRPM-2) and clusterin. KUB2 is Ku80.
KUB3 and KUB4 are unknown, >10 kb trans-cripts. Interactions of apoJ/XIP8 or
KUB3 with Ku70 were confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation analyses in MCF-7:WS8
breast cancer or IMR-90 normal lung fibroblast cells, respectively. The
interaction of apoJ/XIP8 with Ku70 was confirmed by far-western analyses. Stable
over-expression of full-length apoJ/XIP8 in MCF-7:WS8 caused decreased Ku70/Ku80
DNA end binding that was restored by apoJ/XIP8 monoclonal antibodies. The role
of apoJ/XIP8 in ionizing radiation resistance/sensitivity is under
investigation.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/27.10.2165
PMCID: PMC148436
PMID: 10219089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
