---
pmid: '16949367'
title: A family of diverse Cul4-Ddb1-interacting proteins includes Cdt2, which is
  required for S phase destruction of the replication factor Cdt1.
authors:
- Jin J
- Arias EE
- Chen J
- Harper JW
- Walter JC
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2006.08.010
---

# A family of diverse Cul4-Ddb1-interacting proteins includes Cdt2, which is required for S phase destruction of the replication factor Cdt1.
**Authors:** Jin J, Arias EE, Chen J, Harper JW, Walter JC
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2006.08.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2006.08.010)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2006 Sep 1;23(5):709-21. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2006.08.010.

A family of diverse Cul4-Ddb1-interacting proteins includes Cdt2, which is 
required for S phase destruction of the replication factor Cdt1.

Jin J(1), Arias EE, Chen J, Harper JW, Walter JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, 
USA.

Cul4 E3 ubiquitin ligases contain the cullin 4 scaffold and the triple beta 
propeller Ddb1 adaptor protein, but few substrate receptors have been 
identified. Here, we identify 18 Ddb1- and Cul4-associated factors (DCAFs), 
including 14 containing WD40 repeats. DCAFs interact with multiple surfaces on 
Ddb1, and the interaction of WD40-containing DCAFs with Ddb1 requires a 
conserved "WDXR" motif. DCAF2/Cdt2, which is related to S. pombe Cdt2, functions 
in Xenopus egg extracts and human cells to destroy the replication licensing 
protein Cdt1 in S phase and after DNA damage. Depletion of human Cdt2 causes 
rereplication and checkpoint activation. In Xenopus, Cdt2 is recruited to 
replication forks via Cdt1 and PCNA, where Cdt1 ubiquitylation occurs. These 
studies uncover diverse substrate receptors for Cul4 and identify Cdt2 as a 
conserved component of the Cul4-Ddb1 E3 that is essential to destroy Cdt1 and 
ensure proper cell cycle regulation of DNA replication.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2006.08.010
PMID: 16949367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
