---
pmid: '11585385'
title: 'Human leptin signaling in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells: activation
  of the JAK-STAT pathway.'
authors:
- Sanchez-Margalet V
- Martin-Romero C
journal: Cell Immunol
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/cimm.2001.1815
---

# Human leptin signaling in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells: activation of the JAK-STAT pathway.
**Authors:** Sanchez-Margalet V, Martin-Romero C
**Journal:** Cell Immunol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1006/cimm.2001.1815](https://doi.org/10.1006/cimm.2001.1815)

## Abstract

1. Cell Immunol. 2001 Jul 10;211(1):30-6. doi: 10.1006/cimm.2001.1815.

Human leptin signaling in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells: activation 
of the JAK-STAT pathway.

Sanchez-Margalet V(1), Martin-Romero C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, 
Investigation Unit, University of Seville, 41009-Seville, Spain. 
vsanchez@cica.es

Leptin is an adipocyte-secreted hormone that centrally regulates weight control. 
However, the leptin receptor is expressed not only in the central nervous 
system, but also in other systems, such as reproductive, hematopoietic, and 
immune tissues, suggesting various roles in addition to the regulation of food 
intake and energy expenditure. The leptin receptor bears homology to members of 
the class I cytokine receptor family. Leptin has previously been shown to 
enhance cytokine production by murine peritoneal macrophages and human 
circulating monocytes, where human leptin promotes activation and proliferation. 
We have recently found that the leptin receptor is expressed not only in 
monocytes but also in both CD4(+) and CD8(+) T lymphocytes. Besides, leptin 
enhances proliferation and activation of T lymphocytes when they are 
costimulated by PHA or Con A. In this paper, we have studied the signal 
transduction of the leptin receptor in peripheral blood mononuclear cells. We 
found that leptin stimulation activates the JAK-STAT signaling pathway. More 
specifically, we found that JAK-2/3 and STAT-3 are activated by tyrosine 
phosphorylation upon leptin stimulation. Moreover, leptin stimulated tyrosine 
phosphorylation of the RNA binding protein Sam68 and its association with 
STAT-3. These effects were dose-dependent (0.1-10 nM) and transient (5-30 min). 
We also observed the leptin stimulated translocation of activated STAT-3 from 
the cytoplasm to the nucleus. These results indicate that human leptin receptor 
in circulating mononuclear cells has the signaling capacity to activate JAK-STAT 
cascade. This pathway may mediate, at least in part, the action of human leptin 
in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/cimm.2001.1815
PMID: 11585385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
