---
pmid: '19136564'
title: Phospholipase Cgamma2 is critical for Dectin-1-mediated Ca2+ flux and cytokine
  production in dendritic cells.
authors:
- Xu S
- Huo J
- Lee KG
- Kurosaki T
- Lam KP
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2652331
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M806650200
---

# Phospholipase Cgamma2 is critical for Dectin-1-mediated Ca2+ flux and cytokine production in dendritic cells.
**Authors:** Xu S, Huo J, Lee KG, Kurosaki T, Lam KP
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M806650200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M806650200)
**PMC:** [PMC2652331](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2652331/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Mar 13;284(11):7038-46. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M806650200. Epub
2009  Jan 9.

Phospholipase Cgamma2 is critical for Dectin-1-mediated Ca2+ flux and cytokine 
production in dendritic cells.

Xu S(1), Huo J, Lee KG, Kurosaki T, Lam KP.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, Bioprocessing Technology Institute, Agency for 
Science, Technology and Research, Singapore 138668.

Dectin-1 is a C-type lectin that recognizes beta-glucan in the cell walls of 
fungi and plays an important role in anti-fungal immunity. It signals via 
tyrosine kinase Syk and adaptor protein Card9 to activate NF-kappaB leading to 
proinflammatory cytokine production in dendritic cells (DCs). Other than this, 
not much else is known of the mechanism of Dectin-1 signaling. We demonstrate 
here that stimulation of DCs with zymosan triggers an intracellular Ca2+ flux 
that can be attenuated by a blocking anti-Dectin-1 antibody or by pre-treatment 
of cells with the phospholipase C (PLC) gamma-inhibitor U73122, suggesting that 
Dectin-1 signals via a PLCgamma pathway to induce Ca2+ flux in DCs. 
Interestingly, treatment of DCs with particulate curdlan, which specifically 
engages Dectin-1, results in the phosphorylation of both PLCgamma1 and 
PLCgamma2. However, we show that PLCgamma2 is the critical enzyme for Dectin-1 
signaling in DCs. PLCgamma2-deficient DCs have drastic impairment of Ca2+ 
signaling and are defective in their secretion of interleukin 2 (IL-2), IL-6, 
IL-10, IL-12, IL-23, and tumor necrosis factor alpha. PLCgamma2-deficient DCs 
also exhibit impaired activation of ERK and JNK MAPKs and AP-1 and NFAT 
transcription factors in response to Dectin-1 stimulation. In addition, 
PLCgamma2-deficient DCs are also impaired in their activation of NF-kappaB upon 
Dectin-1 engagement due to defective assembly of the Card9-Bcl10-Malt1 complex 
and impaired IKKalpha/beta activation and IkappaBalpha degradation. Thus, our 
data indicate that pattern recognition receptors such as Dectin-1 could elicit 
Ca2+ signaling and that PLCgamma2 is a critical player in the Dectin-1 signal 
transduction pathway.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M806650200
PMCID: PMC2652331
PMID: 19136564 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Dectin-1 is a C-type lectin that recognizes β-glucan in the cell walls
 of fungi and plays an important role in anti-fungal immunity. It signals via
 tyrosine kinase Syk and adaptor protein Card9 to activate NF-κB leading
 to proinflammatory cytokine production in dendritic cells (DCs). Other than
 this, not much else is known of the mechanism of Dectin-1 signaling. We
 demonstrate here that stimulation of DCs with zymosan triggers an
 intracellular Ca 2+ flux that can be attenuated by a blocking
 anti-Dectin-1 antibody or by pre-treatment of cells with the phospholipase C
 (PLC) γ-inhibitor U73122, suggesting that Dectin-1 signals via a
 PLCγ pathway to induce Ca 2+ flux in DCs. Interestingly,
 treatment of DCs with particulate curdlan, which specifically engages
 Dectin-1, results in the phosphorylation of both PLCγ1 and PLCγ2.
 However, we show that PLCγ2 is the critical enzyme for Dectin-1
 signaling in DCs. PLCγ2-deficient DCs have drastic impairment of
 Ca 2+ signaling and are defective in their secretion of interleukin
 2 (IL-2), IL-6, IL-10, IL-12, IL-23, and tumor necrosis factor α.
 PLCγ2-deficient DCs also exhibit impaired activation of ERK and JNK
 MAPKs and AP-1 and NFAT transcription factors in response to Dectin-1
 stimulation. In addition, PLCγ2-deficient DCs are also impaired in their
 activation of NF-κB upon Dectin-1 engagement due to defective assembly
 of the Card9-Bcl10-Malt1 complex and impaired IKKα/β activation and
 IκBα degradation. Thus, our data indicate that pattern recognition
 receptors such as Dectin-1 could elicit Ca 2+ signaling and that
 PLCγ2 is a critical player in the Dectin-1 signal transduction
 pathway.

RESULTS

Dectin-1 Engagement Induces Ca 2 + Flux
 and Activates PLC γ in BMDCs —It has been speculated
 that Dectin-1 could signal in a manner analogous to the lymphocyte antigen
 receptor as it possesses an ITAM-like motif in its cytoplasmic tail and
 activates Syk when stimulated by its ligands
 ( 11 , 16 , 17 ). Because Ca 2+ mobilization is one of the most important signaling events after BCR or TCR
 engagement, we first investigated if the activation of Dectin-1 could induce
 Ca 2+ flux in DCs. As shown in Fig. 1 , stimulation of BMDCs by
 zymosan, a yeast derivative that is commonly used as an agonist of Dectin-1
 ( 8 , 10 , 15 ), led to an induction of
 intracellular Ca 2+ flux in these cells. As zymosan is also thought
 to engage TLR2 ( 10 , 15 ), we next clarified if
 zymosan-induced Ca 2+ flux in BMDC is elicited through Dectin-1 or
 TLR2. To address this, we treated BMDCs with Pam3Csk, which is a pure TLR2
 agonist. It was readily apparent that Pam3Csk could also trigger
 Ca 2+ flux in BMDCs but the transient nature of the Ca 2+ flux elicited by Pam3Csk was quite different from the sustained pattern of
 Ca 2+ flux elicited by zymosan. Although one might argue that the
 stimulation of TLR2 by Pam3Csk might not be equivalent to the engagement of
 TLR2 or TLR2 and Dectin-1 together with zymosan, the different nature of the
 Ca 2+ flux elicited by Pam3Csk and zymosan nevertheless suggested
 that Dectin-1 activation could possibly induce Ca 2+ signaling in
 BMDCs. To confirm that the engagement of Dectin-1 could induce Ca 2+ flux in BMDCs, we preincubated the cells with a blocking anti-Dectin-1
 antibody ( 8 ) or with laminarin,
 a soluble β-glucan that could effectively inhibit the binding of zymosan
 to Dectin-1 ( 7 ), prior to
 stimulating them with zymosan. As revealed in Fig. 1 , both the soluble
 β-glucan and the blocking anti-Dectin-1 antibody could dampen the
 Ca 2+ flux elicited by zymosan treatment in BMDCs, implying that
 stimulation through Dectin-1 could indeed trigger Ca 2+ signaling in
 these cells.

The Ca 2+ flux induced by lymphocyte antigen receptors such as
 the BCR and TCR is mainly mediated by PLCγ2 and PLCγ1,
 respectively ( 21 , 22 ). Because the stimulation
 of Dectin-1 could activate Ca 2+ flux in BMDCs, we determined if the
 enzymatic activity of any PLCγ might be involved in this process. To
 this end, we preincubated BMDCs with the PLCγ inhibitor U73122 and
 showed that this prior treatment could completely abolish the Ca 2+ flux elicited by stimulation with zymosan
 ( Fig. 1 ). BMDCs express both
 PLCγ1 and PLCγ2. Hence, we examined the activation of these two
 enzymes by treating BMDCs with curdlan, a pure particulate β-glucan that
 has been shown to trigger Dectin-1 signaling
 ( 27 , 28 ). Interestingly,
 stimulation of BMDCs with curdlan led to the activation of both PLCγ2
 ( Fig. 2 A ) and
 PLCγ1 ( Fig. 2 B )
 in these cells as indicated by their phosphorylation status. Thus, the data
 suggest that the engagement of Dectin-1 could activate PLCγ and trigger
 Ca 2+ flux in BMDCs.

PLC γ 2 Is Required for Dectin-1-triggered
 Ca 2 + Flux in BMDCs —We next examined
 to what extent PLCγ2, the main enzyme activated by Syk and responsible
 for BCR-induced Ca 2+ mobilization in B cells, contributed to
 Dectin-1-mediated Ca 2+ signaling in BMDC. To address this question,
 we stimulated BMDCs from plc γ 2 -/- mice with
 zymosan. As shown in Fig.
 3 A and compared with wild-type control (red histogram), plc γ 2 -/- BMDCs exhibited only a residual
 Ca 2+ flux when stimulated with zymosan (blue histogram), suggesting
 that PLCγ2 contributes substantially to the Ca 2+ flux in
 BMDCs upon Dectin-1 engagement.

The residual Ca 2+ flux in zymosan-stimulated plc γ 2 -/- BMDCs was unlikely to be
 contributed by TLR2 as Pam3Csk-induced Ca 2+ flux was completely
 abrogated in these cells compared with that seen in wild-type controls
 ( Fig. 3 B , blue
 versus red histogram ), indicating that the Ca 2+ flux triggered
 by TLR2 also critically depends on PLCγ2. It was possible that the
 residual Ca 2+ flux in zymosan-stimulated plc γ 2 -/- BMDCs was mediated by PLCγ1.
 Indeed, as shown in Fig.
 3 C , PLCγ1 was activated and its phosphorylation
 appeared sustained in zymosan-stimulated plc γ 2 -/- BMDCs. Although the activation of
 PLCγ1 could possibly account for the residual Ca 2+ flux seen
 in zymosan-stimulated plc γ 2 -/- BMDCs, it
 could not completely compensate for the lack of PLCγ2 in
 Dectin-1-induced Ca 2+ signaling.

As control to ensure that wild-type and plc γ 2 -/- DCs were equivalently stimulated
 via Dectin-1, we also analyzed the cell surface expression level of Dectin-1
 in wild-type and mutant BMDCs. As shown in Fig. 3 D , the cell
 surface expression level of Dectin-1 in plc γ 2 -/- BMDCs was normal and not different
 from that found in wild-type BMDCs and thus could not have contributed to the
 defect in Ca 2+ signaling seen in the mutant cells.

Syk and Src Family Kinases but Not Btk Are Important for
 Dectin-1-induced PLC γ 2 Activation —We next explored
 how PLC γ 2 is activated by determining which upstream
 kinase is required for its activation in the Dectin-1 signal transduction
 pathway. During BCR signaling, Src family kinases, Syk and Btk are important
 for PLCγ2 activation and Ca 2+ flux in B cells
 ( 29 , 30 ). Recent studies
 demonstrated that Syk and probably Src family kinases played critical roles in
 Dectin-1 signaling ( 16 , 17 ). To assess if these
 tyrosine kinases are important for Dectin-1-induced activation of PLCγ2,
 we pretreated wild-type BMDCs with specific inhibitors for the individual
 kinase, followed by stimulation of the cells with curdlan and examination of
 the phosphorylation status of PLCγ2. As shown in Fig. 4 , curdlan-stimulated
 phosphorylation of PLCγ2 in BMDCs was markedly reduced when Src family
 kinases and Syk were inhibited by their specific inhibitors PP2 and
 Piceatannol, respectively. In contrast, Btk inhibitor LFM-A13 had no
 detectable effect on the phosphorylation of PLCγ2 in curdlan-stimulated
 BMDCs ( Fig. 4 ), indicating that
 Btk might not be required for PLCγ2 activation in the Dectin-1 signaling
 pathway. Consistent with the finding that Syk and Src family kinases play
 important roles in Dectin-1 signaling, our results further suggest that Syk
 and Src family kinases act upstream of PLCγ2 in the Dectin-1 signaling
 pathway as their activities are crucial for the activation of PLCγ2.

PLC γ 2 Is Essential for Dectin-1-induced Up-regulation of
 Activation Markers and Cytokine Production in BMDCs —It is known
 that stimulation of BMDCs by zymosan or curdlan leads to their maturation and
 up-regulation of activation markers
 ( 27 ). Thus we assessed whether
 signal transduced via PLCγ2 was involved in this process. As shown in Fig. 5 A , stimulation
 with either zymosan (blue histogram) or curdlan (red histogram) up-regulated
 the expression of CD40, CD80, and CD86 on wild-type BMDCs. By contrast, the
 up-regulation of these activation markers was significantly inhibited in
 curdlan-treated plc γ 2 -/- BMDCs.
 Interestingly, the up-regulation of CD80 and CD86 was only slightly reduced,
 whereas the up-regulation of CD40 was not affected in zymosan-treated plc γ 2 -/- BMDCs compared with wild-type
 BMDCs. This again reflects the fact that zymosan is a more complex agonist and
 part of its stimulatory effect is through other innate receptors such as TLR2.
 Nevertheless, the data derived from the study with curdlan indicate that
 PLCγ2 signaling is important for the up-regulation of activation markers
 on BMDCs upon Dectin-1 engagement.

Stimulation of Dectin-1 by β-glucan also induces the production of
 various cytokines in DCs ( 10 , 27 ). Thus we next determined
 if PLCγ2 regulates Dectin-1-mediated cytokine secretion in BMDCs. As
 seen in Fig. 5 B , the
 production of IL-2, IL-10, IL-23p19, tumor necrosis factor-α, IL-6, and
 IL-12p40 was either completely abrogated or significantly reduced in
 curdlan-treated plc γ 2 -/- BMDCs compared
 with wild-type controls. Similarly, the production of IL-2 and IL-23p19 was
 almost completely abolished in zymosan-stimulated plc γ 2 -/- BMDCs suggesting that PLCγ2
 signaling critically regulates these two cytokines in antifungal immunity. The
 production of IL-6, IL-10, and tumor necrosis factor-α was also
 significantly decreased in zymosan-treated plc γ 2 -/- BMDCs. Interestingly, the
 production of IL-12p40 was not perturbed in zymosan-stimulated plc γ 2 -/- BMDCs. This latter finding was
 quite similar to the situation found in syk -/- ( 27 ) or card9 -/- ( 18 ) DCs, suggesting that
 zymosan-induced production of IL-12p40 only partially relied on Dectin-1
 signaling. Taken together, our data collectively indicate that PLCγ2
 plays a critical role in regulating Ca 2+ mobilization and cytokine
 production in response to Dectin-1 stimulation in DCs.

Impaired Activation of NF-κB and Assembly of Card9-Bcl10-Malt1
 Complex in Dectin-1-stimulated Plc γ 2 -/- BMDCs —As Ca 2+ mobilization, the up-regulation of
 activation markers and secretion of critical cytokines were defective in
 Dectin-1-stimulated plc γ 2 -/- BMDCs, we were
 interested to determine the downstream signaling pathways affected by
 PLCγ2 deficiency. Dectin-1 stimulation is known to activate NF-κB
 and it has been established that both Syk and Card9 are essential for the
 activation of NF-κB following treatment of BMDCs with curdlan or zymosan
 ( 18 , 27 ). To investigate whether
 this signaling pathway is perturbed by the lack of PLCγ2, we performed
 an electromobility shift assay to examine DNA binding by activated NF-κB
 transcription factors using nuclear extracts prepared from wild-type and plc γ 2 -/- BMDCs after 2 h of curdlan
 treatment. We were able to detect robust DNA-binding by NF-κB factors in
 Dectin-1-stimulated wild-type BMDCs but this NF-κB DNA-binding activity
 was severely reduced in plc γ 2 -/- BMDCs
 ( Fig. 6 A ). Consistent
 with this finding, we were also able to show that curdlan-induced degradation
 of the NF-κB inhibitor protein, IκBα, was also significantly
 blocked in plc γ 2 -/- BMDCs
 ( Fig. 6 B ). During BCR
 signaling, the activation of the upstream IKKα/β was crucial for
 the phosphorylation and subsequent degradation of IκBα
 ( 31 , 32 ). Thus we assessed the
 activation of IKKα/β in Dectin-1-stimulated wild-type and plc γ 2 -/- BMDCs. As shown in Fig. 6 C ,
 Dectin-1-induced activation of IKKα/β as indicated by the
 phosphorylation of the serine residues 180/181 was markedly reduced in plc γ 2 -/- BMDCs compared with the wild-type
 controls.

It has been well established that BCR-induced activation of NF-κB is
 mediated by the Carma1-Bcl10-Malt1 complex
 ( 31 , 32 ). Card9 is shown to be
 important for Dectin-1 signaling and it was further proposed that during
 Dectin-1 signaling, an analogous Card9-Bcl10-Malt1 complex was formed instead
 to activate NF-κB, although direct evidence for Dectin-1-induced
 formation of this complex was still not available
 ( 18 ). Hence, we assessed if
 there was formation of this complex and if it would be compromised during
 Dectin-1 signaling in the absence of PLCγ2. To address this, we
 immunoprecipitated Bcl10 from curdlan-stimulated wild-type and plc γ 2 -/- BMDCs and examined the
 interactions between Bcl10 and Card9 as well as Bcl10 and Malt1. As shown in Fig. 6 D , we could
 detect increasing association of Card9 with Bcl10 and Malt1 with Bcl10 that
 peaked at the 20-min time point in curdlan-treated wild-type BMDCs. This
 suggests that increasing amounts of these three proteins were induced to form
 a complex upon Dectin-1 engagement in wild-type DCs. Interestingly, the
 interaction of Card9 and Bcl10 was not affected but the interaction of Malt1
 and Bcl10 was significantly reduced by the lack of PLCγ2 signaling in
 the mutant BMDCs that were similarly treated with curdlan. This suggested that
 PLCγ2 signaling might be important to induce the association of Malt1
 with Bcl10 but not Card9 with Bcl10. Although we do not know the hierarchy of
 the interactions of these three proteins, our data nonetheless indicate that
 PLCγ2 signaling is required for proper stoichiometry and stable assembly
 of the Card9-Bcl10-Malt1 complex in Dectin-1 signaling.

Taken together, the data presented in this section indicate that
 PLCγ2 plays an important role in coupling Dectin-1 recognition of fungal
 pathogen-associated molecular patterns to the activation of NF-κB in
 BMDCs via inducing the assembly of the Card9-Bcl10-Malt1 complex and the
 subsequent activation of IKKα/β and degradation of IκB
 proteins.

Defective Activation of ERK and JNK MAPKs and AP-1 Transcription
 Factors in Dectin-1-stimulated Plc γ 2 -/- BMDCs — Besides inducing NF-κB, Dectin-1 also activates
 MAPKs, which are important for signaling the production of inflammatory
 cytokines in BMDCs. It was demonstrated previously that the production of IL-2
 and IL-10 by zymosan-stimulated BMDCs was dependent on Dectin-1-Syk but not
 MyD88 signaling ( 16 ) and that
 in curdlan-treated syk -/- cells, the activation of ERK,
 JNK, and p38 MAPKs was substantially impaired
 ( 27 ). More recently, it was
 shown that ERK signaling was required for zymosan-induced production of IL-2
 and IL-10 in murine BMDCs
 ( 33 ). Because we have shown
 that PLCγ2 is downstream of Syk in Dectin-1 signaling
 ( Fig. 4 ) and that plc γ 2 -/- BMDCs were defective in cytokine
 secretion upon Dectin-1 activation ( Fig.
 5 B ), we further examined if the activation of MAPKs was
 affected in plc γ 2 -/- BMDCs upon Dectin-1
 stimulation.

As shown in Fig.
 7 A , the activation of ERK and JNK was severely attenuated
 across all time points tested in curdlan-stimulated plc γ 2 -/- BMDCs compared with similarly
 treated wild-type controls. However, the activation of p38 was apparently
 comparable in both curdlan-stimulated wild-type and mutant BMDCs. Thus, the
 absence of PLCγ2 specifically impaired the activation of ERK and JNK
 MAPKs in BMDCs upon Dectin-1 engagement.

In TLR signaling, the activation of ERK and JNK can lead to the induction
 of transcription factor AP-1 that contributes substantially to the production
 of inflammatory cytokines ( 34 , 35 ). Consistent with this, the
 engagement of Dectin-1 by curdlan could also lead to the induction of AP-1 as
 demonstrated by the robust binding of consensus DNA sequences by nuclear
 extract prepared from wild-type BMDCs ( Fig.
 7 B ). In contrast, the activation of AP-1 was minimal in
 curdlan-treated plc γ 2 -/- BMDCs, suggesting
 that the signal transduced by PLCγ2 is required to activate AP-1 during
 Dectin-1 signaling.

Defective Activation of NFAT Transcription Factors in
 Dectin-1-stimulated BMDCs —Finally, Ca 2+ mobilization
 during BCR and TCR signaling pathways also activates the
 Ca 2+ -dependent phosphatase calcineurin, which in turn
 dephosphorylates and activates the NFAT family of transcription factors. A
 more recent report showed that the engagement of Dectin-1 led to the
 activation of NFAT, which contributes to the production of IL-2, IL-10, and
 IL-12 ( 36 ). Because plc γ 2 -/- BMDCs had severely compromised
 Ca 2+ flux and cytokine production upon Dectin-1 stimulation, we
 next determined if the activation of NFAT was affected by PLCγ2
 deficiency. We first examined which isoform of NFAT was expressed in wild-type
 BMDCs. Among the four closely related and immune cell-expressed NFAT members
 (NFATc1 through NFATc4), we found that BMDCs expressed NFATc1, NFATc2, and
 NFATc3 but very little NFATc4 (data not shown). As dephosphorylated NFAT
 proteins translocate into nucleus to regulate the expression of their target
 genes, we further studied the activation of NFAT by examining the nuclear
 translocalization of NFAT proteins in curdlan-treated wild-type and plc γ 2 -/- BMDCs. As shown in Fig. 8 , the nuclear
 translocalization of NFATc2 and NFATc3 was almost completely abrogated in plc γ 2 -/- BMDCs compared with wild-type
 controls upon Dectin-1 stimulation. Although NFATc1 could be mildly activated
 by curdlan treatment of wild-type BMDCs, its activation was not substantially
 compromised in plc γ 2 -/- BMDCs.
 Collectively, our results indicate that the activation of NFATc2 and NFATc3
 are important in Dectin-1 signaling and they are impaired in the absence of
 PLCγ2.

DISCUSSION

Dectin-1, a NK cell-receptor-like C-type lectin, has been shown to be
 important for the recognition of β-glucans found in the cell wall of
 pathogenic fungi ( 8 , 10 , 15 ). Its engagement could
 trigger intracellular signaling that activates NF-κB and MAPKs and leads
 to the production of inflammatory cytokines in DCs as well as phagocytosis and
 the production of reactive oxygen species in macrophages
 ( 1 , 14 ). So far, only Syk and
 Card9 have been identified to be involved in Dectin-1 signaling
 ( 16 – 18 , 27 ). In this report, we
 provide definitive evidence that PLCγ2 also plays a critical role in
 Dectin-1 signaling. PLCγ2 is required not only for the induction of
 Ca 2+ flux in Dectin-1-activated DCs
 ( Fig. 3 A ) but also for
 the activation of ERK and JNK MAPKs and the induction of NF-κB, AP-1,
 and NFAT transcription factors (Figs. 6 and 7 ). In the absence of
 PLCγ2, BMDCs have an impaired production of IL-2, IL-6, IL-10, IL-23,
 and tumor necrosis factor α ( Fig.
 5 ). Thus, PLCγ2 plays a central role in coupling Dectin-1
 recognition of fungal pathogen-associated molecular patterns to the
 mobilization of intracellular Ca 2+ and activation of inflammation
 signaling in DCs, which leads ultimately to their secretion of inflammatory
 cytokines.

It is interesting to note that although DCs express both PLCγ1 and
 PLCγ2, and either enzyme could mobilize Ca 2+ in various cell
 types, only PLCγ2 seems to be important for signaling Ca 2+ flux during Dectin-1 or TLR2 or both engagements in DCs
 ( Fig. 3 ). It is not clear why
 PLCγ1 could not fully compensate for the lack of PLCγ2 during
 Dectin-1 signaling even though PLCγ1 is clearly activated upon treatment
 of DCs with curdlan that engages Dectin-1
 ( Fig. 2 ). Future experiments
 using plc γ 1 -/- DCs or plc γ 1 -/- plc γ 2 -/- DCs may help to shed light on this puzzle.

Another interesting finding that arises from the current study is the
 discovery that stimulation of Dectin-1 by zymosan could elicit intracellular
 Ca 2+ flux in DCs. Zymosan is also known to activate TLR2 other than
 Dectin-1. Interestingly, TLR2 engagement by Pam3Csk could also induce
 Ca 2+ flux in DCs, although the pattern of Ca 2+ flux is
 much more transient compared with the more sustained Ca 2+ flux
 elicited by zymosan stimulation. It is possible that zymosan triggering of
 Dectin-1 and TLR2 together contribute to a more synergistic activation of
 Ca 2+ flux in DCs. However, blocking experiments using laminarin and
 anti-Dectin-1 antibody clearly demonstrated that Dectin-1 engagement alone
 could contribute substantially to the induction of Ca 2+ flux in
 these cells. Taken together, our data indicate that innate pathogen
 recognition receptors such as Dectin-1 and TLR (TLR2 in this case) could also
 elicit intracellular Ca 2+ flux in DCs, thus suggesting that
 intracellular Ca 2+ mobilization, as a mechanism of cellular
 signaling in the immune system, is not confined to lymphocytes and their
 antigen receptors.

Dectin-1 possesses a hemi-ITAM in its cytoplasmic tail and has been
 postulated to signal in a lymphocyte antigen-receptor manner
 ( 11 , 16 , 17 ). Adding to this hypothesis
 is the discovery that the phosphorylated hemi-ITAM of Dectin-1 could recruit
 Syk, a tyrosine kinase that plays a critical role in BCR signaling
 ( 30 , 37 ). Activated Syk
 subsequently leads to the downstream activation of MAPKs and NF-κB
 ( 27 ). Here, we identified
 PLCγ2 as a critical component downstream of Syk in Dectin-1 signaling as
 the inhibition of Syk abrogated curdlan-induced phosphorylation of PLCγ2
 ( Fig. 2 E ). In further
 support of this, the cellular and molecular defects of Dectin-1-activated plc γ 2 -/- DCs are quite similar to that of syk -/- DCs. When compared with wild-type DCs, both mutant
 DCs have defective up-regulation of activation markers and secretion of
 inflammatory cytokines upon curdlan stimulation. With regard to the molecular
 defects, both plc γ 2 -/- and syk -/- DCs
 ( 27 ) have impaired activation
 of ERK and JNK MAPKs and NF-κB transcription factor when stimulated with
 curdlan. The only signaling difference appears to be the normal activation of
 p38 MAPK in plc γ 2 -/- DCs (our current
 study) but compromised activation of this MAPK in syk -/- DCs. The reason for this difference is not apparent but it could be that other
 signaling pathways downstream of Syk but independent of PLCγ2 control
 the activation of p38 MAPK in response to Dectin-1 engagement. Nevertheless,
 our data largely supported the idea that PLCγ2 acts downstream and
 transduces most of the signals emanated from the Syk pathway during Dectin-1
 signaling.

The defective responses of plc γ 2 -/- DCs
 to Dectin-1 stimulation are also reminiscent of the defects found in card9 -/- DCs treated in a similar manner
 ( 18 ). Card9 has been shown to
 be important for NF-κB activation in certain ITAM-bearing receptors such
 as the FcγR and was thought to be the functional homologue of Card11 in
 NF-κB activation induced by the cross-linking of lymphocyte antigen
 receptors ( 18 , 38 , 39 ). A dectin-1-Syk-Card9
 signaling cascade has been delineated based on the studies of mutant DCs
 deficient for the individual molecule
 ( 27 ). However, it has not been
 established how Dectin-1/Syk signals trigger Card9 and consequently activate
 NF-κB. In our current study, we found that PLCγ2 is important in
 signaling NF-κB activation in response to Dectin-1 engagement and this
 occurs via the induction of the assembly of a Card9-Bcl10-Malt1 complex
 ( Fig. 4 ). Together with the
 finding that Syk is crucial for PLCγ2 activation upon Detctin-1
 stimulation ( Fig. 5 ), a more
 detailed signaling cascade emerges: Dectin-1 engagement triggers Syk that
 further activates PLCγ2, leading to the formation of the
 Card9-Bcl10-Malt1 complex that mediates the activation of NF-κB.
 However, it is currently still not known how Dectin-1/Syk/PLCγ2 signals
 induce the three proteins to form a complex and what the other intermediate
 signaling events and players are involved. Moreover, our data show that
 PLCγ2 signaling seems to be critical for the recruitment of Malt1 to the
 protein complex as in its absence, the interaction of Malt1 with Bcl10 was
 compromised, whereas the interaction of Card9 with Bcl10 appears normal,
 suggesting that there might be some other signaling pathways contributing to
 the formation of this multiprotein complex. Nevertheless, our data clearly
 indicate that PLCγ2 is required for at least inducing the association of
 Bcl10 with Malt1, and therefore it plays an essential role in mediating
 Dectin-1/Syk signals to the activation of NF-κB.

Last but not least, it is increasingly being appreciated that C-type
 lectins might play crucial roles in initiating and sustaining immune responses
 against various pathogens. For example, Dectin-1 is important for host
 recognition of fungi and Mycobacterium tuberculosis ( 1 , 14 , 40 , 41 ), whereas DC-SIGN and
 CLEC5A are known to bind HIV and Dengue virus
 ( 42 , 43 ), respectively. Therefore
 the elucidation of the signaling of these CLRs would be important for our
 understanding of host defense and microbial spread in the organism. Our
 current study demonstrating a role for PLCγ2 in Dectin-1 signal
 transduction and possibly the signaling of other CLRs could provide new
 targets for therapeutic intervention to enhance or suppress the host
 response.
