---
pmid: '12189148'
title: A p21-activated kinase-controlled metabolic switch up-regulates phagocyte NADPH
  oxidase.
authors:
- Shalom-Barak T
- Knaus UG
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M206650200
---

# A p21-activated kinase-controlled metabolic switch up-regulates phagocyte NADPH oxidase.
**Authors:** Shalom-Barak T, Knaus UG
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M206650200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M206650200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Oct 25;277(43):40659-65. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M206650200. Epub 
2002 Aug 19.

A p21-activated kinase-controlled metabolic switch up-regulates phagocyte NADPH 
oxidase.

Shalom-Barak T(1), Knaus UG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology IMM28, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 N. 
Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Chemoattractant-stimulated phagocytes increase their glucose uptake and divert 
energy production from glycolysis to the pentose phosphate pathway to generate 
NADPH. NADPH is a required cofactor for the NADPH oxidase to produce reactive 
oxygen metabolites, an important microbicidal tool in host defense. 
p21-Activated kinases (Paks) are regulated by the GTPases Rac and Cdc42 and 
control actin dynamics and phosphorylation of the oxidase component p47(phox). 
Here we report the interaction of Pak with phosphoglycerate mutase (PGAM)-B, an 
enzyme of the glycolytic pathway. Activated Pak1 inhibits glycolysis by 
association of its catalytic domain with PGAM-B and subsequent phosphorylation 
of the enzyme on serine residues 23 and 118, thereby abolishing PGAM activity. 
Leukocyte activation through chemoattractant receptors leads to Pak activation 
and transient inhibition of endogenous PGAM-B activity. Consistent with these 
observations, treatment of neutrophils with phosphoglycolic acid, a competitive 
PGAM-B inhibitor, increases upstream intermediates, thereby amplifying the 
respiratory burst. These results demonstrate that Rho GTPases regulate the 
glycolytic pathway through Pak and suggest a link between chemoattractant 
signaling and metabolic responses to enhance host defense.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M206650200
PMID: 12189148 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
