---
pmid: '8172617'
title: Molecular cloning of two human liver 3 alpha-hydroxysteroid/dihydrodiol dehydrogenase
  isoenzymes that are identical with chlordecone reductase and bile-acid binder.
authors:
- Deyashiki Y
- Ogasawara A
- Nakayama T
- Nakanishi M
- Miyabe Y
- Sato K
- Hara A
journal: Biochem J
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1138306
doi: 10.1042/bj2990545
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Molecular cloning of two human liver 3 alpha-hydroxysteroid/dihydrodiol dehydrogenase isoenzymes that are identical with chlordecone reductase and bile-acid binder.
**Authors:** Deyashiki Y, Ogasawara A, Nakayama T, Nakanishi M, Miyabe Y, Sato K, Hara A
**Journal:** Biochem J (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1042/bj2990545](https://doi.org/10.1042/bj2990545)
**PMC:** [PMC1138306](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1138306/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 1994 Apr 15;299 ( Pt 2)(Pt 2):545-52. doi: 10.1042/bj2990545.

Molecular cloning of two human liver 3 alpha-hydroxysteroid/dihydrodiol 
dehydrogenase isoenzymes that are identical with chlordecone reductase and 
bile-acid binder.

Deyashiki Y(1), Ogasawara A, Nakayama T, Nakanishi M, Miyabe Y, Sato K, Hara A.

Author information:
(1)Biochemistry Laboratory, Gifu Pharmaceutical University, Japan.

Human liver contains two dihydrodiol dehydrogenases, DD2 and DD4, associated 
with 3 alpha-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase activity. We have raised polyclonal 
antibodies that cross-reacted with the two enzymes and isolated two 1.2 kb cDNA 
clones (C9 and C11) for the two enzymes from a human liver cDNA library using 
the antibodies. The clones of C9 and C11 contained coding sequences 
corresponding to 306 and 321 amino acid residues respectively, but lacked 
5'-coding regions around the initiation codon. Sequence analyses of several 
peptides obtained by enzymic and chemical cleavages of the two purified enzymes 
verified that the C9 and C11 clones encoded DD2 and DD4 respectively, and 
further indicated that the sequence of DD2 had at least additional 16 residues 
upward from the N-terminal sequence deduced from the cDNA. There was 82% amino 
acid sequence identity between the two enzymes, indicating that the enzymes are 
genetic isoenzymes. A computer-based comparison of the cDNAs of the isoenzymes 
with the DNA sequence database revealed that the nucleotide and amino acid 
sequences of DD2 and DD4 are virtually identical with those of human bile-acid 
binder and human chlordecone reductase cDNAs respectively.

DOI: 10.1042/bj2990545
PMCID: PMC1138306
PMID: 8172617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
