---
pmid: '23929950'
title: SGK196 is a glycosylation-specific O-mannose kinase required for dystroglycan
  function.
authors:
- Yoshida-Moriguchi T
- Willer T
- Anderson ME
- Venzke D
- Whyte T
- Muntoni F
- Lee H
- Nelson SF
- Yu L
- Campbell KP
journal: Science
year: '2013'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: xml
pmcid: PMC3848040
doi: 10.1126/science.1239951
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# SGK196 is a glycosylation-specific O-mannose kinase required for dystroglycan function.
**Authors:** Yoshida-Moriguchi T, Willer T, Anderson ME, Venzke D, Whyte T, Muntoni F, Lee H, Nelson SF, Yu L, Campbell KP
**Journal:** Science (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1239951](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1239951)
**PMC:** [PMC3848040](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3848040/)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2013 Aug 23;341(6148):896-9. doi: 10.1126/science.1239951. Epub 2013 
Aug 8.

SGK196 is a glycosylation-specific O-mannose kinase required for dystroglycan 
function.

Yoshida-Moriguchi T(1), Willer T, Anderson ME, Venzke D, Whyte T, Muntoni F, Lee 
H, Nelson SF, Yu L, Campbell KP.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular Physiology and 
Biophysics, University of Iowa Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of Medicine, 
Iowa City, IA 52242-1101, USA.

Phosphorylated O-mannosyl trisaccharide 
[N-acetylgalactosamine-β3-N-acetylglucosamine-β4-(phosphate-6-)mannose] is 
required for dystroglycan to bind laminin-G domain-containing extracellular 
proteins with high affinity in muscle and brain. However, the enzymes that 
produce this structure have not been fully elucidated. We found that 
glycosyltransferase-like domain-containing 2 (GTDC2) is a protein O-linked 
mannose β 1,4-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase whose product could be extended by 
β 1,3-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase2 (B3GALNT2) to form the O-mannosyl 
trisaccharide. Furthermore, we identified SGK196 as an atypical kinase that 
phosphorylated the 6-position of O-mannose, specifically after the mannose had 
been modified by both GTDC2 and B3GALNT2. These findings suggest how mutations 
in GTDC2, B3GALNT2, and SGK196 disrupt dystroglycan receptor function and lead 
to congenital muscular dystrophy.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1239951
PMCID: PMC3848040
PMID: 23929950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Post-translational modification of proteins via stringently regulated biosynthetic pathways extends their range of function. Defects in the posttranslational modification of the dystroglycan (DG) protein are common to a variety of congenital muscular dystrophies (CMD)—including Walker-Warburg syndrome (WWS), Fukuyama CMD, Muscle-Eye- Brain disease (MEB), and certain types of limb-girdle muscular dystrophy— and result in the malfunction of DG as an extracellular matrix (ECM) receptor (1). DG is composed of a transmembrane β subunit and a cell-surface α subunit (2). α-DG serves as a receptor for laminin-G domain-containing ECM ligands, including laminin, perlecan, agrin, and neurexin (2), which involves various types of glycosylation of its mucin domain. In particular, phosphorylation at the 6-position of an O-mannose of the trisaccharide [N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc)-β3-N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc)-β4-mannose] produces a branch chain that is ultimately extended with repeating disaccharides [-α3-glucuronic acid (GlcA)-β3-xylose (Xyl)-] synthesized by likeacetylglucosaminyltransferase (LARGE), enabling α-DG to bind ECM ligands (3, 4). Mutations in several known and putative glycosyltransferases cause DG-related disorders. Recently genetic studies of the DGrelated diseases CMD and cobblestone lissencephaly identified several causative genes, including Isoprenoid Synthase Domain Containing (ISPD) (5), Transmembrane protein 5 (TMEM5) (6), β1,3-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (B3GNT1) (7), Glycosyltransferase-like domain containing 2 (GTDC2) (8), β3-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase2 (B3GALNT2) (9), and SGK196 (10). However, the functions of the genes’ products remain largely unknown.

O-Mannosyl glycosylation of α-DG is initiated by the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-resident Protein O-Mannosyl Transferase 1/2 complex (POMT1/2), which adds mannose to Ser/Thr residues (11). To help to clarify the functions of the recently identified causative proteins, we examined their subcellular localization. GTDC2 was present in the ER (Fig. 1A), suggesting that it might modify the above-described Omannose. Thus, we synthesized a peptide corresponding to the mucin-like domain of human α-DG (residues 316–329), in which Thr-317 was modified by O-mannose but the remaining Thr/Ser residues were replaced with Ala. The glycopeptide was incubated with c-Myc-tagged GTDC2 (GTDC2- Myc) purified from human embryonic kidney 293 (HEK293) cell lysates, as well as various nucleotide sugars. Matrix-assisted laser desorption-ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF/MS) analysis suggested that GTDC2-Myc transferred Nacetylhexosamine to the glycopeptide (fig. S1). Repetition of this assay using UDP-GlcNAc (Fig. 1B) or UDPGalNAc (fig. S2) as the donor confirmed that the transfer was specific to GlcNAc and that it did not occur when GTDC2-Myc carrying a mutation found in CMD patient was used (fig. S2). Next, we prepared a secreted form of GTDC2 (lacking the transmembrane domain; GTDC2dTM) in HEK293 cells (fig. S3) and conducted the transfer assay using fluorescently labeled mannoside (4-methylumbelliferyl-α-D-mannoside; Man-α-MU) as the acceptor. The product was purified by gel filtration (Fig. 1C) and then analyzed by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). The 1H and 13C resonances of the product were assigned using heteronuclear multiple quantum coherence (HMQC) and heteronuclear 2-bond correlation (H2BC) spectra (fig. S4, Fig. 1D–E, table S1). Rotating-frame Overhauser enhancement (ROE) data (fig. S5) confirmed that GlcNAc has a beta-configuration. A BH1/AC4 cross peak detected by the heteronuclear multiple bond correlation (HMBC) spectrum (Fig. 1F) indicated that the GlcNAc was linked to the 4-position of the mannose. Thus, GTDC2 possesses a protein O-mannose β1,4-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase activity.

Human B3GALNT2, mutations in which cause WWS (9), has been cloned based on its β3-glycosyltransferase motifs. This enzyme is thought to act as a β1,3-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase that uses β-linked GlcNAc as its acceptor in vitro (12). However, the GalNAc-β3- GlcNAc-β-R sequence had not been found in mammals when the gene was cloned, leaving the biological significance of this enzyme unclear. α-DG contains an O-mannosyl glycan (GalNAc-β3-GlcNAc-β4-Man), with the mannose phosphorylated at the 6-position (3). The ECM-ligand*binding moiety of α-DG extends from this phosphate residue (3). To test if B3GALNT2 and GTDC2 act coordinately on O-mannose to synthesize this trisaccharide, we prepared a secreted form of B3GALNT2 (B3GALNT2dTM) (fig. S6) and incubated this protein with UDPGalNAc and the GlcNAc-β4-Man-O-peptide produced by the GTDC2dTM reaction. MALDI-TOF/MS analysis confirmed that B3GALNT2 could transfer a GalNAc residue to the acceptor (Fig. 2A), suggesting that B3GALNT2 and GTDC2 can synthesize GalNAc-β3-GlcNAc-β4-Man. CMD patients who have mutations in these genes produce α-DG with pathological defects in ECM-binding (8, 9). We next used a solid-phase laminin-binding assay to test whether the GalNAc-β3-GlcNAc-β- terminus contributes directly to the binding of α-DG to ECM ligands. Whereas the GalNAc-β3-GlcNAc-β4-Man-modified peptide exhibited significant affinity for Wisteria floribunda lectin (WFA, which recognizes terminal GalNAc residues), this was not the case for laminin-111 (Fig. 2B). Next we asked if a defect in synthesis of the GalNAc-β3-GlcNAc-β-terminus prevented O-mannose from being further modified by phosphorylation. We expressed Fc-tagged recombinant DG (DGFc340), which contains the region in which the functional modification occurs (13), in [32P]-orthophosphate-labeled control fibroblasts and CMD patient fibroblasts with mutations in GTDC2 or B3GALNT2 (Fig. 2C). Indeed, the cells from the CMD patients did not produce [32P]-phosphorylated DGFc340, indicating that phosphorylation of the α-DG O-mannose is inhibited by lack of the GalNAc-β3-GlcNAc-β-terminus from the mannose.

To understand how the O-glycan on α-DG is phosphorylated, we synthesized fluorescently labeled GalNAc-β3-GlcNAc-β4-Man, using GTDC2dTM, B3GALNT2dTM and the acceptor Man-α-MU. We first tested ATP as a phosphate donor, performing the assay on total membrane fractions obtained from rabbit brain, using GalNAc-β3-GlcNAc- β4-Man-α-MU as the acceptor. Separation of the reactant on a C18 column revealed that GalNAc-β3-GlcNAc-β4-Man-α-MU (Fig. 2D) was phosphorylated in the presence of ATP. We further separated the ER and Golgi complex in mouse liver membrane fractions and found that the phophorylation activity resided in the ER fractions (fig. S7). Causative proteins of DG-related disorders whose functions remain unknown include FKRP, FKTN, TMEM5, ISPD, and SGK196. Among these, only SGK196 shares homology with known protein kinases, although it is believed to be inactive because of the high divergence of its putative kinase domains from the consensus sequence (14). We tested its phosphorylation activity in lysates from control fibroblasts and CMD patient fibroblasts with mutations in SGK196, GTDC2, or B3GALNT2. The activity toward GalNAc-β3-GlcNAc-β4-Man-α-MU was lacking only in the SGK196-mutated cells and this loss was rescued by ectopic expression of c-Myc-DDK-tagged SGK196 (SGK196-Myc-DDK) (Fig. 3A). When SGK196-Myc-DDK produced in HEK293 cells was incubated with ATP and/or Man-α-MU derivatives, SGK196 exhibited significant phosphorylation activity toward GalNAc-β3-GlcNAc-β4-Man-α-MU. Moreover, this activity was not observed when GlcNAc-β4-Man-α-MU or Man-α-MU was used as the acceptor (Fig. 3B). Phosphorylated Gal- NAc-β3-GlcNAc-β4-Man-α-MU was not detected when SGK196-Myc- DDK carrying a mutation (L137R) found in a CMD patient (10) was used in the assay (fig. S8). To elucidate the enzymatic properties of SGK196, we produced a soluble form of SGK196 (SGK196dTM, fig. S9). Its phosphorylation activity depended on divalent ions with an apparent Km for ATP of 4.1 ± 1.4 µM (fig. S10). To pinpoint which hydroxyl group of the trisaccharide is phosphorylated by SGK196, we isolated the product obtained in the experiment depicted in Fig. 3B and analyzed its structure by NMR. The 1H and 13C resonances of the product were assigned based on HMQC, HMBC and H2BC spectra (fig. S11 and table S2), and the anomeric configurations were determined by ROESY (fig. S12). The BH1/AC4 and CH1/BC3 cross peaks detected in the HMBC spectrum confirmed that the GalNAc and GlcNAc residues were attached to GlcNAc and Man via β1-3 and β1-4 linkages, respectively (fig. S11). The phosphate group added by SGK196 was attached to the 6-position of the mannose residue (Fig. 4A and B).

Here, we have shown that GTDC2 has a protein O-mannose β1,4-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase activity, which leads us to designate it as POMGNT2, and that GTDC2 and B3GALNT2 can synthesize a Gal- NAc-β3-GlcNAc-β-terminus at the 4-position of protein O-mannose. SGK196 phosphorylated the 6-position of O-mannose using ATP, based on which we propose to designate it as a protein O-mannose kinase (POMK). Because SGK196 lacks certain residues required for catalysis by kinases (14), the mechanism used to catalyze the phosphotransfer reaction is unclear. SGK196 exhibited the phosphorylation activity only when the GalNAc-β3-GlcNAc-β-terminus was linked to the 4-position of O-mannose, indicating that this disaccharide serves as the substrate recognition motif of SGK196. This strict specificity of SGK196 may explain why mutations in GTDC2 and B3GALNT2 cause DG-related disorders although their product does not directly recognize the ECM ligand. Because multiple types of O-mannosyl glycans exist, we propose to designate the O-mannosyl glycan structures as cores M1–M3 (Fig. 4C). Although sialylated core M1 of DG was originally proposed to be responsible for binding to ligands in the ECM (15), recent glycomics analysis suggests that proteins besides DG are subject to modification of sialylated cores M1 and M2 (16). The fact that LARGE alone could not modify phosphorylated GalNAc-β3-GlcNAc-β4-Man-α-MU using UDPXyl and UDP-GlcA as substrate (fig. S13) suggests that CMD causative proteins (FKRP, FKTN, TMEM5, and B3GNT1) besides LARGE are likely to contribute to maturation of the ECM-binding moiety on the phosphorylated core M3 glycan.

Supplementary MaterialSupplementary Data

Supplementary Material
