---
pmid: '8639624'
title: 'Substrate binding and catalysis by ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolases: identification
  of two active site residues.'
authors:
- Larsen CN
- Price JS
- Wilkinson KD
journal: Biochemistry
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi960099f
---

# Substrate binding and catalysis by ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolases: identification of two active site residues.
**Authors:** Larsen CN, Price JS, Wilkinson KD
**Journal:** Biochemistry (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi960099f](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi960099f)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 1996 May 28;35(21):6735-44. doi: 10.1021/bi960099f.

Substrate binding and catalysis by ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolases: 
identification of two active site residues.

Larsen CN(1), Price JS, Wilkinson KD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

Ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolases (UCH's) are a newly-defined class of thiol 
proteases implicated in the proteolytic processing of polymeric ubiquitin. They 
are important for the generation of monomeric ubiquitin, the active component of 
the eukaryotic ubiquitin-dependent proteolytic system. There are at least three 
mammalian isozymes which are tissue specific and developmentally regulated. To 
study the structure and functional roles of these highly homologous enzymes, we 
have subcloned and overexpressed two of these isozymes, UCH-L1 and UCH-L3. Here, 
we report their purification, physical characteristics, and the mutagenesis of 
UCH-L1. Site-directed mutagenesis of UCH-L1 reveals that C90 and H161 are 
involved in catalytic rate enhancement. Data from circular dichroic and Raman 
spectroscopy, as well as secondary structure prediction algorithms, indicate 
that both isozymes have a significant amount of alpha-helix (> 35%), and contain 
no disulfide bonds. Both enzymes are reasonably stable, undergoing a reversible 
thermal denaturation at 52 degrees C. These transitions are characterized by 
thermodynamic parameters typical of single domain globular proteins. Substrate 
binding affinity to UCH-L3 was directly measured by equilibrium gel filtration 
(Kd = 0.5 microM), and the results are similar to the kinetically determined Km 
for ubiquitin ethyl ester (o.6 microM). The binding is primarily electrostatic 
in nature and indicates the existence of a specific and extensive binding site 
for ubiquitin on the surface of the enzyme.

DOI: 10.1021/bi960099f
PMID: 8639624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
