---
pmid: '38570683'
title: Structural basis of Integrator-dependent RNA polymerase II termination.
authors:
- Fianu I
- Ochmann M
- Walshe JL
- Dybkov O
- Cruz JN
- Urlaub H
- Cramer P
journal: Nature
year: '2024'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC11062913
doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-07269-4
---

# Structural basis of Integrator-dependent RNA polymerase II termination.
**Authors:** Fianu I, Ochmann M, Walshe JL, Dybkov O, Cruz JN, Urlaub H, Cramer P
**Journal:** Nature (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41586-024-07269-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-07269-4)
**PMC:** [PMC11062913](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11062913/)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2024 May;629(8010):219-227. doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-07269-4. Epub 2024
 Apr 3.

Structural basis of Integrator-dependent RNA polymerase II termination.

Fianu I(1), Ochmann M(2), Walshe JL(2), Dybkov O(3), Cruz JN(2), Urlaub 
H(3)(4)(5), Cramer P(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary 
Sciences, Göttingen, Germany. isaac.fianu@mpinat.mpg.de.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology, Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary 
Sciences, Göttingen, Germany.
(3)Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry, Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary 
Sciences, Göttingen, Germany.
(4)Institute of Clinical Chemistry, Bioanalytics Group, University Medical 
Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.
(5)Cluster of Excellence 'Multiscale Bioimaging: from Molecular Machines to 
Networks of Excitable Cells' (MBExC), University of Göttingen, Göttingen, 
Germany.
(6)Department of Molecular Biology, Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary 
Sciences, Göttingen, Germany. patrick.cramer@mpinat.mpg.de.

The Integrator complex can terminate RNA polymerase II (Pol II) in the 
promoter-proximal region of genes. Previous work has shed light on how 
Integrator binds to the paused elongation complex consisting of Pol II, the DRB 
sensitivity-inducing factor (DSIF) and the negative elongation factor (NELF) and 
how it cleaves the nascent RNA transcript1, but has not explained how Integrator 
removes Pol II from the DNA template. Here we present three cryo-electron 
microscopy structures of the complete Integrator-PP2A complex in different 
functional states. The structure of the pre-termination complex reveals a 
previously unresolved, scorpion-tail-shaped INTS10-INTS13-INTS14-INTS15 module 
that may use its 'sting' to open the DSIF DNA clamp and facilitate termination. 
The structure of the post-termination complex shows that the previously 
unresolved subunit INTS3 and associated sensor of single-stranded DNA complex 
(SOSS) factors prevent Pol II rebinding to Integrator after termination. The 
structure of the free Integrator-PP2A complex in an inactive closed 
conformation2 reveals that INTS6 blocks the PP2A phosphatase active site. These 
results lead to a model for how Integrator terminates Pol II transcription in 
three steps that involve major rearrangements.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-024-07269-4
PMCID: PMC11062913
PMID: 38570683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
