---
pmid: '17310240'
title: Growth factor-induced MAPK network topology shapes Erk response determining
  PC-12 cell fate.
authors:
- Santos SD
- Verveer PJ
- Bastiaens PI
journal: Nat Cell Biol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ncb1543
---

# Growth factor-induced MAPK network topology shapes Erk response determining PC-12 cell fate.
**Authors:** Santos SD, Verveer PJ, Bastiaens PI
**Journal:** Nat Cell Biol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncb1543](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb1543)

## Abstract

1. Nat Cell Biol. 2007 Mar;9(3):324-30. doi: 10.1038/ncb1543. Epub 2007 Feb 18.

Growth factor-induced MAPK network topology shapes Erk response determining 
PC-12 cell fate.

Santos SD(1), Verveer PJ, Bastiaens PI.

Author information:
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), Cell Biology and Biophysics, 
Meyerhofstrasse 1, D-69117 Heidelberg, Germany.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2007 Mar;9(3):247-9. doi: 10.1038/ncb0307-247.

The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) network is a conserved signalling 
module that regulates cell fate by transducing a myriad of growth-factor 
signals. The ability of this network to coordinate and process a variety of 
inputs from different growth-factor receptors into specific biological responses 
is, however, still not understood. We investigated how the MAPK network brings 
about signal specificity in PC-12 cells, a model for neuronal differentiation. 
Reverse engineering by modular-response analysis uncovered topological 
differences in the MAPK core network dependent on whether cells were activated 
with epidermal or neuronal growth factor (EGF or NGF). On EGF stimulation, the 
network exhibited negative feedback only, whereas a positive feedback was 
apparent on NGF stimulation. The latter allows for bi-stable Erk activation 
dynamics, which were indeed observed. By rewiring these regulatory feedbacks, we 
were able to reverse the specific cell responses to EGF and NGF. These results 
show that growth factor context determines the topology of the MAPK signalling 
network and that the resulting dynamics govern cell fate.

DOI: 10.1038/ncb1543
PMID: 17310240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
