---
pmid: '20559325'
title: Arrestin domain-containing protein 3 recruits the NEDD4 E3 ligase to mediate
  ubiquitination of the beta2-adrenergic receptor.
authors:
- Nabhan JF
- Pan H
- Lu Q
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2920442
doi: 10.1038/embor.2010.80
---

# Arrestin domain-containing protein 3 recruits the NEDD4 E3 ligase to mediate ubiquitination of the beta2-adrenergic receptor.
**Authors:** Nabhan JF, Pan H, Lu Q
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/embor.2010.80](https://doi.org/10.1038/embor.2010.80)
**PMC:** [PMC2920442](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2920442/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2010 Aug;11(8):605-11. doi: 10.1038/embor.2010.80. Epub 2010 Jun 18.

Arrestin domain-containing protein 3 recruits the NEDD4 E3 ligase to mediate 
ubiquitination of the beta2-adrenergic receptor.

Nabhan JF(1), Pan H, Lu Q.

Author information:
(1)Program in Molecular and Integrative Physiological Sciences, Department of 
Environmental Health, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts 
02115, USA.

Prolonged stimulation of the beta2-adrenergic receptor (beta2AR) leads to 
receptor ubiquitination and downregulation. Using a genome-wide RNA interference 
screen, we identified arrestin domain-containing 3 (ARRDC3) as a gene required 
for beta2AR regulation. The ARRDC3 protein interacts with ubiquitin ligase 
neural precursor development downregulated protein 4 (NEDD4) through two 
conserved PPXY motifs and recruits NEDD4 to the activated receptor. The ARRDC3 
protein also interacts and co-localizes with activated beta2AR. Knockdown of 
ARRDC3 expression abolishes the association between NEDD4 and beta2AR. 
Furthermore, functional inactivation of ARRDC3, either through small interfering 
RNA (siRNA)-mediated knockdown or overexpression of a mutant that does not 
interact with NEDD4, blocks receptor ubiquitination and degradation. Our results 
establish ARRDC3 as an essential adaptor for beta2AR ubiquitination.

DOI: 10.1038/embor.2010.80
PMCID: PMC2920442
PMID: 20559325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
