---
pmid: '19251702'
title: Caenorhabditits elegans LRK-1 and PINK-1 act antagonistically in stress response
  and neurite outgrowth.
authors:
- Sämann J
- Hegermann J
- von Gromoff E
- Eimer S
- Baumeister R
- Schmidt E
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2713553
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M808255200
---

# Caenorhabditits elegans LRK-1 and PINK-1 act antagonistically in stress response and neurite outgrowth.
**Authors:** Sämann J, Hegermann J, von Gromoff E, Eimer S, Baumeister R, Schmidt E
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M808255200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M808255200)
**PMC:** [PMC2713553](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2713553/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jun 12;284(24):16482-16491. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M808255200.
Epub  2009 Feb 27.

Caenorhabditits elegans LRK-1 and PINK-1 act antagonistically in stress response 
and neurite outgrowth.

Sämann J(1), Hegermann J(2), von Gromoff E(1), Eimer S(2), Baumeister R(3), 
Schmidt E(1).

Author information:
(1)From Bioinformatics and Molecular Genetics (Faculty of Biology), ZBMZ 
(Faculty of Medicine), and ZBSA-Center for Systems Biology, 
Albert-Ludwigs-Universitaet Freiburg, 79104.
(2)Freiburg and the European Neuroscience Institute (ENI) and Deutsche Forsch 
ungs ge mein schaft (DFG) Research Center for Molecular Physiology of the Brain 
(CMPB), University Medical Faculty, 37077 Göttingen, Germany.
(3)From Bioinformatics and Molecular Genetics (Faculty of Biology), ZBMZ 
(Faculty of Medicine), and ZBSA-Center for Systems Biology, 
Albert-Ludwigs-Universitaet Freiburg, 79104; Freiburg Institute for Advanced 
Studies, School of Life Sciences (LIFENET), and Centre for Biological Signalling 
Studies (BIOSS), 79104. Electronic address: baumeister@celegans.de.

Mutations in two genes encoding the putative kinases LRRK2 and PINK1 have been 
associated with inherited variants of Parkinson disease. The physiological role 
of both proteins is not known at present, but studies in model organisms have 
linked their mutants to distinct aspects of mitochondrial dysfunction, increased 
vulnerability to oxidative and endoplasmic reticulum stress, and intracellular 
protein sorting. Here, we show that a mutation in the Caenorhabditits elegans 
homologue of the PTEN-induced kinase pink-1 gene resulted in reduced 
mitochondrial cristae length and increased paraquat sensitivity of the nematode. 
Moreover, the mutants also displayed defects in axonal outgrowth of a pair of 
canal-associated neurons. We demonstrate that in the absence of lrk-1, the C. 
elegans homologue of human LRRK2, all phenotypic aspects of pink-1 
loss-of-function mutants were suppressed. Conversely, the hypersensitivity of 
lrk-1 mutant animals to the endoplasmic reticulum stressor tunicamycin was 
reduced in a pink-1 mutant background. These results provide the first evidence 
of an antagonistic role of PINK-1 and LRK-1. Due to the similarity of the C. 
elegans proteins to human LRRK2 and PINK1, we suggest a common role of both 
factors in cellular functions including stress response and regulation of 
neurite outgrowth. This study might help to link pink-1/PINK1 and lrk-1/LRRK2 
function to the pathological processes resulting from Parkinson disease-related 
mutants in both genes, the first manifestations of which are cytoskeletal 
defects in affected neurons.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M808255200
PMCID: PMC2713553
PMID: 19251702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
