---
pmid: '23382219'
title: Structural basis for endosomal trafficking of diverse transmembrane cargos
  by PX-FERM proteins.
authors:
- Ghai R
- Bugarcic A
- Liu H
- Norwood SJ
- Skeldal S
- Coulson EJ
- Li SS
- Teasdale RD
- Collins BM
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2013'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3581954
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1216229110
---

# Structural basis for endosomal trafficking of diverse transmembrane cargos by PX-FERM proteins.
**Authors:** Ghai R, Bugarcic A, Liu H, Norwood SJ, Skeldal S, Coulson EJ, Li SS, Teasdale RD, Collins BM
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1216229110](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1216229110)
**PMC:** [PMC3581954](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3581954/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Feb 19;110(8):E643-52. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1216229110. Epub 2013 Feb 4.

Structural basis for endosomal trafficking of diverse transmembrane cargos by 
PX-FERM proteins.

Ghai R(1), Bugarcic A, Liu H, Norwood SJ, Skeldal S, Coulson EJ, Li SS, Teasdale 
RD, Collins BM.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, St. Lucia, 
QLD 4072, Australia.

Transit of proteins through the endosomal organelle following endocytosis is 
critical for regulating the homeostasis of cell-surface proteins and controlling 
signal transduction pathways. However, the mechanisms that control these 
membrane-transport processes are poorly understood. The Phox-homology (PX) 
domain-containing proteins sorting nexin (SNX) 17, SNX27, and SNX31 have emerged 
recently as key regulators of endosomal recycling and bind conserved 
Asn-Pro-Xaa-Tyr-sorting signals in transmembrane cargos via an atypical band, 
4.1/ezrin/radixin/moesin (FERM) domain. Here we present the crystal structure of 
the SNX17 FERM domain bound to the sorting motif of the P-selectin adhesion 
protein, revealing both the architecture of the atypical FERM domain and the 
molecular basis for recognition of these essential sorting sequences. We further 
show that the PX-FERM proteins share a promiscuous ability to bind a wide array 
of putative cargo molecules, including receptor tyrosine kinases, and propose a 
model for their coordinated molecular interactions with membrane, cargo, and 
regulatory proteins.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1216229110
PMCID: PMC3581954
PMID: 23382219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Transit of proteins through the endosomal organelle following endocytosis is critical for regulating the homeostasis of cell-surface proteins and controlling signal transduction pathways. However, the mechanisms that control these membrane-transport processes are poorly understood. The Phox-homology (PX) domain-containing proteins sorting nexin (SNX) 17, SNX27, and SNX31 have emerged recently as key regulators of endosomal recycling and bind conserved Asn-Pro-Xaa-Tyr–sorting signals in transmembrane cargos via an atypical band, 4.1/ezrin/radixin/moesin (FERM) domain. Here we present the crystal structure of the SNX17 FERM domain bound to the sorting motif of the P-selectin adhesion protein, revealing both the architecture of the atypical FERM domain and the molecular basis for recognition of these essential sorting sequences. We further show that the PX-FERM proteins share a promiscuous ability to bind a wide array of putative cargo molecules, including receptor tyrosine kinases, and propose a model for their coordinated molecular interactions with membrane, cargo, and regulatory proteins.

Discussion

PX-FERM proteins are critical regulators of recycling in the endosomal system, and here we report structural insights into the mechanism of NPxY/NxxY motif recognition by this family. Only one other structure has been solved of a sorting motif required for endosome to cell surface recycling of the SNX27 PDZ domain in complex with the Kir3.3 PDZbm ( 25 ). Overall, the atypical SNX17 FERM domain adopts an architecture similar to the canonical FERM domains despite the unique truncated F2 subdomain, and it will be interesting to ascertain if this variation in the F2 region has a functional significance through the regulation of novel interactions. Despite the common understanding that PX domain/SNX proteins regulate membrane trafficking ( 18 – 20 ), only a handful of transmembrane cargos have been found to bind these proteins directly via sorting motifs within their ICDs ( 18 ). Apart from the NPxY/NxxY and PDZbm sequences recruited by the PX-FERM proteins, the only other sequences shown to bind PX proteins directly are a short stretch within the α5 integrin that interacts with nischarin ( 41 ) and a poorly defined motif in PSGL-1 that associates with SNX20 ( 26 ). Our current molecular understanding of cargo recruitment by the PX-FERM proteins thus represents an important step toward a wider comprehension of the role of PX protein family members in membrane sorting.

The structure of SNX17 in complex with the ICD of P-selectin demonstrates how a wide array of NPxY/NxxY cargos are recognized and provides a foundation for understanding how they are sorted within the endosome by the PX-FERM proteins. A summary of previously identified cargos suggests a preferred binding sequence of ϕxNPx(F/Y) ( Fig. 2 A ). Notably, mouse P-selectin has an FTNAAY sequence, whereas the human P-selectin possesses an FTNAAF sequence. Although we have used the mouse P-selectin ICD in this study, it was demonstrated previously that SNX17 can interact with both human P-selectin ( 6 ) and FEEL1 ( 33 ), tolerating Phe instead of Tyr at the zero position. The cation–π interaction between the Arg319 and aromatic ring of Phe or Tyr thus appears to allow SNX17 to tolerate either of these aromatic residues. Residues upstream of the core NAAY sequence also are docked into complementary surfaces of the SNX17 protein. In particular the docking of the F -5 residue into a hydrophobic groove capped by SNX17 Trp321 is striking, and previous mutagenesis experiments suggest that SNX17 may have a preference for binding either aromatic or bulky hydrophobic side chains at this site ( 6 , 10 , 15 ).

In addition to previously identified cargos, including P-selectin ( 6 – 8 ), APP ( 9 , 10 ), integrins ( 11 , 12 ), and members of the LDLR family ( 13 – 17 ), we have used a screening approach to identify many other putative cargo proteins for SNX17, SNX27, and SNX31. These proteins include RTKs, integrins, GPCRs, hematocyte receptors, and phosphatases, among others. Although the possibility remains to be confirmed, these results strongly suggest that PX-FERM proteins are involved in the transport of these proteins within the endosomal system. Intriguingly we find that SNX27 has a bias toward phosphorylated sorting signals and enhanced binding to at least two RTKs (InsR and TrkA) following stimulation, suggesting a possible dichotomy in the PX-FERM family by which SNX17/SNX31 and SNX27 mediate different transport itineraries depending on receptor activation states. An alternative explanation for this increased binding is that activation-dependent RTK endocytosis leads to an increased colocalization with SNX27 rather than to a direct increase in binding affinity; further studies will be necessary to differentiate between these possibilities. Although endosomal sorting clearly is an important function of the PX-FERM proteins, the finding that various signaling receptors, including RTKs and GPCRs, bind these proteins and the previous report that small GTPases also can interact ( 9 , 45 ) point to an additional function in modulating endosomal signaling complexes that merits further study.

It is important to realize that NPxY/NxxY sequences are recognized within the same cargo proteins by many alternative transport adaptor and signal scaffolding proteins; for example, the LDLR receptor is recognized by ARH for internalization ( 5 ), and β integrins are bound by kindlin and talin molecules at the cell surface to regulate signal transduction ( 12 , 27 ). The emerging concept of coincidence detection, as discussed here for the PX-FERM proteins, thus is critical for beginning to understand the switching between competing cytoplasmic ligands depending on their specific membrane context ( Fig. 7 ). Because the K d for each of the individual ligands is only moderate (in the range of 1–10 μM), a coordinated interaction with the multiple membrane-tethered ligands is necessary for complex assembly; and, importantly, perturbation of only one or a small number of interactions can subsequently mediate rapid disassembly. We propose that, as the transmembrane cargos are internalized into maturing endosomal organelles, the turnover of associated proteins, and in particular membrane phosphoinositide lipids ( 46 ), will promote rapid exchange of cell-surface NPxY/NxxY-bound ligands with the endosomal PX-FERM proteins, which will assemble into stable complexes only in the presence of both PI3P and the cargo molecules themselves.

As discussed above, SNX17 promotes endosomal sorting of cargo molecules containing the NPxY/NxxY motif into Rab4-positive recycling compartments ( 7 , 9 – 13 , 15 , 17 , 33 ), whereas SNX27 has been found to enhance fast, Rab11-independent recycling of alternative cargo receptors via its unique N-terminal PDZ domain ( 22 , 23 ). However, how this trafficking is mediated is still poorly understood, and it even has been suggested that PX-FERM proteins may not regulate active recycling but rather act indirectly to impede lysosomal degradation ( 12 , 22 ). Although the recent finding that SNX27-dependent sorting may involve retromer and the WASH1 actin-remodeling complex is intriguing ( 22 ), SNX17-dependent integrin recycling does not appear to involve these molecules ( 11 ), so other components of the transport apparatus remain to be identified.

Materials and Methods

Detailed methods are provided in SI Materials and Methods .
