---
pmid: '20367751'
title: Polarized targeting of DNER into dendritic plasma membrane in hippocampal neurons
  depends on endocytosis.
authors:
- Kurisu J
- Fukuda T
- Yokoyama S
- Hirano T
- Kengaku M
journal: J Neurochem
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.06714.x
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Polarized targeting of DNER into dendritic plasma membrane in hippocampal neurons depends on endocytosis.
**Authors:** Kurisu J, Fukuda T, Yokoyama S, Hirano T, Kengaku M
**Journal:** J Neurochem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.06714.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.06714.x)

## Abstract

1. J Neurochem. 2010 Jun;113(6):1598-610. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.06714.x. 
Epub 2010 Mar 29.

Polarized targeting of DNER into dendritic plasma membrane in hippocampal 
neurons depends on endocytosis.

Kurisu J(1), Fukuda T, Yokoyama S, Hirano T, Kengaku M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Neural Cell Polarity, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Wako, 
Saitama, Japan.

The targeting of membrane proteins into axons and dendrites is of critical 
importance for directional signal transmission within specific neural circuits. 
Many dendritic proteins have been shown to reach the somatodendritic membrane 
based on selective sorting and transport of carrier vesicles. Using rat 
hippocampal neurons in culture, we investigated the trafficking pathways of 
Delta/Notch-like EGF-related receptor (DNER), a transmembrane Notch ligand which 
is specifically expressed in CNS dendrites. Mutations in the cytoplasmic domain 
of DNER that abolished somatodendritic localization also increased its surface 
expression. Furthermore, inhibition of endocytosis resulted in disruption of the 
somatodendritic localization of DNER, indicating that the somatodendritic 
targeting of DNER is dependent on endocytosis. The DNER cytoplasmic domain binds 
to a clathrin adaptor protein complex-2 via a proximal tyrosine motif and a 40 
amino acid stretch in the mid-domain, but not by the C-terminal tail. Molecular 
and pharmacological inhibition revealed that the surface expression of DNER is 
regulated by clathrin-dependent and -independent endocytosis. In contrast, the 
somatodendritic targeting of DNER is predominantly regulated by clathrin- and 
adaptor protein complex-2-independent endocytosis via the C-terminal tail of 
DNER. Our data suggest that clathrin-independent endocytosis is critical for the 
polarized targeting of somatodendritic proteins.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.06714.x
PMID: 20367751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
