---
pmid: '27846570'
title: Photoactivation and inactivation of Arabidopsis cryptochrome 2.
authors:
- Wang Q
- Zuo Z
- Wang X
- Gu L
- Yoshizumi T
- Yang Z
- Yang L
- Liu Q
- Liu W
- Han YJ
- Kim JI
- Liu B
- Wohlschlegel JA
- Matsui M
- Oka Y
- Lin C
journal: Science
year: '2016'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: xml
pmcid: PMC6180212
doi: 10.1126/science.aaf9030
---

# Photoactivation and inactivation of Arabidopsis cryptochrome 2.
**Authors:** Wang Q, Zuo Z, Wang X, Gu L, Yoshizumi T, Yang Z, Yang L, Liu Q, Liu W, Han YJ, Kim JI, Liu B, Wohlschlegel JA, Matsui M, Oka Y, Lin C
**Journal:** Science (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.aaf9030](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaf9030)
**PMC:** [PMC6180212](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6180212/)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2016 Oct 21;354(6310):343-347. doi: 10.1126/science.aaf9030.

Photoactivation and inactivation of Arabidopsis cryptochrome 2.

Wang Q(1)(2), Zuo Z(1)(3), Wang X(1)(2), Gu L(1), Yoshizumi T(4), Yang Z(1), 
Yang L(1)(3), Liu Q(1)(2)(3), Liu W(3), Han YJ(5), Kim JI(5), Liu B(6), 
Wohlschlegel JA(7), Matsui M(4), Oka Y(8)(4), Lin C(8)(2).

Author information:
(1)Basic Forestry and Proteomics Research Center, Fujian Agriculture and 
Forestry University, Fuzhou 350002, China.
(2)Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, University of 
California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(3)College of Plant Science, Jilin University, Changchun 130062, China.
(4)Biomass Engineering Research Division, RIKEN, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.
(5)Department of Biotechnology and Kumho Life Science Laboratory, Chonnam 
National University, Gwangju 61186, Republic of Korea.
(6)Institute of Crop Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing 
10081, China.
(7)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 
90095, USA.
(8)Basic Forestry and Proteomics Research Center, Fujian Agriculture and 
Forestry University, Fuzhou 350002, China. yoshitooka@fafu.edu.cn 
clin@mcdb.ucla.edu.

Comment in
    Science. 2016 Oct 21;354(6310):282-283. doi: 10.1126/science.aaj2077.

Cryptochromes are blue-light receptors that regulate development and the 
circadian clock in plants and animals. We found that Arabidopsis cryptochrome 2 
(CRY2) undergoes blue light-dependent homodimerization to become physiologically 
active. We identified BIC1 (blue-light inhibitor of cryptochromes 1) as an 
inhibitor of plant cryptochromes that binds to CRY2 to suppress the blue 
light-dependent dimerization, photobody formation, phosphorylation, degradation, 
and physiological activities of CRY2. We hypothesize that regulated dimerization 
governs homeostasis of the active cryptochromes in plants and other evolutionary 
lineages.

Copyright © 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/science.aaf9030
PMCID: PMC6180212
PMID: 27846570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

The Arabidopsis genome encodes two cryptochromes (CRYs), CRY1 and CRY2, which act as photoreceptors mediating blue-light inhibition of hypocotyl elongation and long-day (LD) stimulation of floral initiation (1–4). CRYs regulate light responses by interacting with CRY signaling partners, such as CIBs (cryptochromeinteracting basic helix-loop-helixes) and COP1/SPA (constitutive photomorphogenic 1/suppressor of PhyA-105), to regulate blue light-responsive gene expression changes and photophysiology responses (5–7). Homodimers are the physiologically active form of plant CRYs, but it has remained unclear how light affects CRY dimerization or photoactivation (8, 9). Photoactivated CRYs are also expected to undergo inactivation to maintain sustainable photosensitivity of the cell, which may be accomplished by thermal relaxation or other mechanisms (10).

We reasoned that identification of possible negative regulators of CRYs may help to elucidate the photoactivation and inactivation mechanisms of CRYs. We therefore screened for such genes in the Arabidopsis FOX (full-length cDNA overexpressing gene hunting system) library, which contains transgenic lines individually overexpressing about 10,000 independent full-length Arabidopsis cDNAs (11). We identified multiple FOX lines (bic1D-1, bic1D-2, and bic1D-3) that overexpress the same gene and exhibit similar phenotypes resembling that of the cry1cry2 mutant (12), including blue light–insensitive hypocotyl growth, reduced blue-light stimulation of anthocyanin accumulation and gene expression, and delayed floral initiation in LD photoperiod (Fig. 1 and figs. S1 and S2). The corresponding FOX gene was identified and referred to as BIC1 (Blue-light Inhibitor of Cryptochromes 1, At3G52740), which has an Arabidopsis homolog referred to as BIC2 (At3G44450) (fig. S3). BIC1 and BIC2 appear to be nuclear proteins (fig. S4).

Independent transgenic lines overexpressing various BIC fusion proteins under control of either the constitutive promoters or the respective BIC promoters recapitulated the light-insensitive phenotypes of the BIC1-overexpressing FOX lines and the cry1cry2 mutant (Fig. 1 and fig. S1). The bic1 and bic2 monogenic mutants showed no obvious phenotypic alterations, whereas the bic1bic2 double mutant and the BIC RNA interference lines exhibited phenotypes mimicking that of the CRY-overexpressing plants (Fig. 1 and figs. S2, S5, and S6), which suggests that BIC1 and BIC2 act redundantly to inhibit the function of CRYs. Analyses of the genetic interactions between the BIC and CRY genes support this hypothesis (fig. S7): Neither bic1bic2 mutation nor BIC overexpression altered the blue light–insensitive phenotypes of the cry1cry2 mutant (fig. S7, D to F), whereas overexpression of BIC1 or BIC2 effectively suppressed the blue light–hypersensitive phenotype of plants overexpressing CRY2 (fig. S7G).

The cry1cry2 mutation and BIC1 overexpression caused similar transcriptome changes in response to blue light (Fig. 2 and table S2), which suggests that BICs inhibit early photoreactions of CRYs. As reported previously (13–16), CRY1 and CRY2 underwent blue light–dependent phosphorylation and the phosphorylated CRY2 was degraded rapidly (Fig. 3, A to E, and fig. S8, upshifted bands). However, neither blue light–dependent phosphorylation of CRYs nor blue light–dependent degradation of CRY2 (15, 16) was detected in the plants overexpressing BIC1 or BIC2 (Fig. 3, A to E, and fig. S8); hence, BICs inhibit CRY phosphorylation. Consistent with those results, the bic1bic2 mutant plants grown in blue or white light accumulated lower levels of CRY2 (Fig. 1, G to J), which seems physiologically hyperactive because the bic1bic2 mutant is hypersensitive to blue light (Fig. 1, A to C) The BIC-overexpressing plants grown in blue or white light accumulated higher levels of CRY2 (Fig. 1, G to J), which appears mostly inactive because the BIC-overexpressing plants are insensitive to blue light (Fig. 1, A to C).

BICs also inhibit the blue light-induced formation of CRY2 photobodies (Fig. 3 and fig. S9), which is another early photoreaction of CRY2 (17–19). Figure 3 shows that CRY2-YFP (CRY2 fused to yellow fluorescent protein) formed photobodies within 60 s of blue-light exposure in the nucleus of the wild-type Arabidopsis protoplasts, whereas no CRY2-YFP photobodies were detected in the protoplasts overexpressing BIC1 or BIC2 after blue-light illumination for up to 60 min (Fig. 3, F and H). In both darkness and light, BIC1 interacted with CRY2 in yeast or HEK293T (human embryonic kidney) cells via the conserved CRY-interacting domain of BIC1 and the photolyase homologous region of CRY2 (Fig. 4, B and F, and fig. S10). The results of the coimmunoprecipitation (co-IP) experiments indicate that blue light enhances BIC1-CRY2 interaction in plants. BIC1 coimmunoprecipitated CRY2 in seedlings exposed to blue light, but little BIC1-CRY2 complex was coprecipitated in the dark (Fig. 4A). This observation suggests that BIC1 might interact with photoexcited CRY2 to inhibit its activity.

Homodimers are the physiologically active form of plant CRYs (8, 9), but the effect of light on CRY dimerization has not been detected in previous studies (9, 20). This could be explained by, among other interpretations, light-independent CRY dimerization or masking effects of regulatory proteins, such as BICs, on the light-dependent CRY dimerizationx (9, 20). We reexamined the blue-light dependence of CRY2 dimerization using multiple approaches. In the first experiment, we coexpressed Flag-CRY2 and Myc-CRY2 in HEK293T cells (21–24) and tested the interaction between the two differentially tagged CRY2s by co-IP assay. In the absence of blue light, antibody to Flag coprecipitated little Myc-CRY2 from HEK293T cells expressing similar amounts of Flag-CRY2 and Myc-CRY2 (Fig. 4B and fig. S12A). In contrast, antibody to Flag coprecipitated increasing amounts of Myc-CRY2 from HEK293T cells exposed to blue light for 10 to 120 min, thereby demonstrating the light-dependent CRY2 homodimerization in the absence of BIC or other plant proteins (Fig. 4B and fig. S12A). In a control experiment, human CRYs (hCRY1 and hCRY2) exhibited light-independent dimerization (Fig. 4C and fig. S12D), which appears consistent with the light-independent activity of hCRYs in cultured HEK293T cells (25). The blue light–dependent CRY2 dimerization was also detected by the two-hybrid assay in yeast cells (fig. S11) and the bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC) assay in Arabidopsis protoplasts (Fig. 3, G and I, and fig. S9). The BiFC assays revealed a more complex behavior of the intermolecular interaction of CRY2: The BiFC signal resulting from the interaction between nYFP-CRY2 (N terminus of YFP fused to CRY2) and cCFP-CRY2 (C terminus of cyan fluorescent protein fused to CRY2) was detected regardless of blue-light treatment, whereas the fluorescent photobodies resulting from the interaction between nYFP-CRY2 and cCFP-CRY2 were detected only after blue-light treatment (Fig. 3, G and I, and fig. S9).

Because photoexcited CRY2 is known to oligomerize into photobodies (18, 19, 23, 24), it is possible that in darkness nYFP-CRY2 and cCFP-CRY2 interact weakly in a manner sufficient to reconstitute the fluorescent BiFC signal but insufficient to enable oligomerization of CRY2 into photobodies. In response to blue light, nYFP-CRY2 and cCFP-CRY2 may interact with higher affinity to reconstitute not only the fluorescent BiFC signals but also fluorescent photobodies. To test this interpretation, we used co-IP assays to examine effects of blue light on CRY2 dimerization or oligomerization in plants coexpressing GFP-CRY2 (CRY2 fused to green fluorescent protein) and Myc-CRY2 (Fig. 4D). Antibody to GFP coprecipitated little Myc-CRY2 in etiolated seedlings, whereas the same antibody coprecipitated abundant Myc-CRY2 in etiolated seedlings exposed to blue light for 5 to 10 min (Fig. 4D). Similarly, the blue light–specific CRY2 homodimerization was also detected in adult plants (fig. S12B). We conclude that the high-affinity CRY2 dimerization is a photoreaction in plant cells.

We next investigated the effects of BIC1 on blue light–dependent CRY2 dimerization using the multiple assays described above. We first examined dimerization of Flag-CRY2 and Myc-CRY2 in HEK293T cells coexpressing BIC1. Figure 4B shows that in the cells coexpressing BIC1, antibody to Flag coprecipitated only residual Myc-CRY2 even after blue-light treatment for up to 120 min, thereby demonstrating that BIC1 suppresses blue light–dependent CRY2 dimerization. The specificity of BIC1 inhibition of CRY2 dimerization is verified by the result that CIB1, which also interacts with photoexcited CRY2 (6, 26), did not inhibit blue light–dependent CRY2 dimerization (Fig. 4E). The BIC1 inhibition of blue light–dependent CRY2 dimerization was also detected by the trihybrid assay in yeast cells (fig. S11) and by the BiFC photobody assay in Arabidopsis cells (Fig. 3, G and I, and fig. S9). Because physiologically active CRY2 dimers or oligomers are expected to interact with their signaling partners, such as CIB1 and SPA1 (7), we used co-IP assays to test the effects of BIC1 on the blue light–dependent CRY2-CIB1 and CRY2-SPA1 interactions. As expected, coexpression of BIC1 suppressed the blue light–dependent CRY2-CIB1 interaction (Fig. 4F) and CRY2-SPA1 interaction (fig. S12C), which explains how inhibition of CRY dimerization by BIC1 suppresses CRY2-dependent photoresponses of plants.

Homodimerization appears to be a common mechanism of photoreceptors (27–29). Our study supports a hypothesis that plant CRYs exist as inactive monomers in the absence of light, whereas photoexcited CRYs form active homodimers or oligomers that interact with CRY-signaling proteins to trigger transcriptome changes responsible for photomorphogenesis; the BIC proteins interact with CRYs to prevent CRY homodimerization and thereby maintain the appropriate homeostasis of the active and inactive pools of CRYs and sustainability of cellular photosensitivity (fig. S12E). It would be interesting to examine whether photoinsensitive mammalian CRYs and photosensitive insect CRYs undergo circadian phase–dependent and light-dependent dimerization, respectively.

Supplementary MaterialSci16-sup

Supplementary Material
