---
pmid: '7783616'
title: comK encodes the competence transcription factor, the key regulatory protein
  for competence development in Bacillus subtilis.
authors:
- van Sinderen D
- Luttinger A
- Kong L
- Dubnau D
- Venema G
- Hamoen L
journal: Mol Microbiol
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.1995.tb02259.x
---

# comK encodes the competence transcription factor, the key regulatory protein for competence development in Bacillus subtilis.
**Authors:** van Sinderen D, Luttinger A, Kong L, Dubnau D, Venema G, Hamoen L
**Journal:** Mol Microbiol (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2958.1995.tb02259.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2958.1995.tb02259.x)

## Abstract

1. Mol Microbiol. 1995 Feb;15(3):455-62. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.1995.tb02259.x.

comK encodes the competence transcription factor, the key regulatory protein for 
competence development in Bacillus subtilis.

van Sinderen D(1), Luttinger A, Kong L, Dubnau D, Venema G, Hamoen L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Groningen Biomolecular Sciences and Biotechnology 
Institute, University of Groningen, Haren, The Netherlands.

comK is a positive autoregulatory gene occupying a central position in the 
competence-signal-transduction network. All regulatory routes identified in this 
network converge at the level of comK expression. The ComK protein is required 
for the transcriptional induction of comK and the late competence genes, which 
specify morphogenetic and structural proteins necessary for construction of the 
DNA-binding and uptake apparatus. In this report we demonstrate that ComK 
specifically binds to DNA fragments containing promoter and upstream sequences 
of the genes it affects (comC, comE, comF, comG and comK). Using portions of the 
region upstream of comC we show that the ComK-binding sequences are essential 
for the expression of competence. Moreover, we demonstrate that the presence of 
ComK stimulates the expression of comF-lacZ and comG-lacZ translational fusions 
in vivo in Escherichia coli. These results indicate that the gene product of 
comK is identical to the previously inferred competence transcription factor 
(CTF).

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.1995.tb02259.x
PMID: 7783616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
