---
pmid: '35687874'
title: Rationally Guided Improvement of NOV1 Dioxygenase for the Conversion of Lignin-Derived
  Isoeugenol to Vanillin.
authors:
- De Simone M
- Alvigini L
- Alonso-Cotchico L
- Brissos V
- Caroli J
- Lucas MF
- Monza E
- Melo EP
- Mattevi A
- Martins LO
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2023'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: xml
pmcid: PMC9851154
doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.2c00168
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Rationally Guided Improvement of NOV1 Dioxygenase for the Conversion of Lignin-Derived Isoeugenol to Vanillin.
**Authors:** De Simone M, Alvigini L, Alonso-Cotchico L, Brissos V, Caroli J, Lucas MF, Monza E, Melo EP, Mattevi A, Martins LO
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1021/acs.biochem.2c00168](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.biochem.2c00168)
**PMC:** [PMC9851154](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9851154/)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2023 Jan 17;62(2):419-428. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.2c00168.
Epub  2022 Jun 10.

Rationally Guided Improvement of NOV1 Dioxygenase for the Conversion of 
Lignin-Derived Isoeugenol to Vanillin.

De Simone M(1), Alvigini L(2), Alonso-Cotchico L(3), Brissos V(1), Caroli J(2), 
Lucas MF(3), Monza E(3), Melo EP(4), Mattevi A(2), Martins LO(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica António Xavier, Universidade NOVA 
de Lisboa, Av. da República, 2780-157 Oeiras, Portugal.
(2)Department of Biology and Biotechnology, University of Pavia, Via Ferrata 9, 
27100 Pavia, Italy.
(3)Zymvol Biomodeling SL, Carrer Roc Boronat, 117, 08010 Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Centro de Ciências do Mar, Universidade do Algarve, 8005-139 Faro, Portugal.

Biocatalysis is a key tool in both green chemistry and biorefinery fields. NOV1 
is a dioxygenase that catalyzes the one-step, coenzyme-free oxidation of 
isoeugenol into vanillin and holds enormous biotechnological potential for the 
complete valorization of lignin as a sustainable starting material for biobased 
chemicals, polymers, and materials. This study integrates computational, 
kinetic, structural, and biophysical approaches to characterize a new NOV1 
variant featuring improved activity and stability compared to those of the wild 
type. The S283F replacement results in a 2-fold increased turnover rate (kcat) 
for isoeugenol and a 4-fold higher catalytic efficiency (kcat/Km) for molecular 
oxygen compared to those of the wild type. Furthermore, the variant exhibits a 
half-life that is 20-fold higher than that of the wild type, which most likely 
relates to the enhanced stabilization of the iron cofactor in the active site. 
Molecular dynamics supports this view, revealing that the S283F replacement 
decreases the optimal pKa and favors conformations of the iron-coordinating 
histidines compatible with an increased level of binding to iron. Importantly, 
whole cells containing the S283F variant catalyze the conversion of ≤100 mM 
isoeugenol to vanillin, yielding >99% molar conversion yields within 24 h. This 
integrative strategy provided a new enzyme for biotechnological applications and 
mechanistic insights that will facilitate the future design of robust and 
efficient biocatalysts.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.2c00168
PMCID: PMC9851154
PMID: 35687874 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.

## Full Text

The development
of biocatalysts
and bioprocesses that selectively use lignin as a feedstock for aromatic
chemicals is essential to support the economic sustainability of the
biorefineries of the 21st century. Lignin is, after cellulose, the
second most important source of carbon and the largest reserve of
aromatics on Earth and is, therefore, a critical renewable source
of chemicals. The pulp and paper industry produces ∼50 million
tons of lignin in a year. Most of this is burned for power; only 1
million tons reach the chemical market.1 The successful implementation of strategies for lignin depolymerization
enabled the extraction of a range of well-defined compounds in acceptable
quantities, bringing its valorization one step closer to reality.1−3 The enzymatic conversion of lignin-derived compounds into drop-in
chemicals, polymers, or emerging functional materials has the potential
to replace the current petroleum-based synthesis and simultaneously
valorize lignin biowaste.4−7

Vanillin exemplifies well the case of a compound
that can derive
from lignin biowaste and contribute to its valorization. The global
demand for this aromatic flavor is enormous. It is a fragrance widely
used in food, cleaning products, and perfumes. Its production has
been satisfied mainly by chemical synthesis based on fossil feedstocks
and chemical catalysts. Therefore, new biotechnological processes
for synthesizing this valuable compound are urgently needed.8−12 However, finding a suitable biocatalyst for any fulfilling bioprocess
criteria such as eco-friendliness, cost-effectiveness, and long-term
sustainability is still a challenging task. NOV1 from Novosphingobium
aromaticivorans DSM 12444 is a non-heme iron-dependent dioxygenase
that catalyzes the cleavage of double bonds of stilbene compounds
such as resveratrol, oxyresveratrol, and piceatannol, yielding small
modified benzaldehydes.13,14 NOV1 has activity as
compounds comprising a single aromatic ring, such as isoeugenol, which
is oxidatively cleaved at the C=C bond of the propenyl functional
group to produce vanillin, albeit at low efficiencies (Scheme 1).14 Coenzymes are not required in this reaction, which reduces the complexity
and cost of the bioprocess.13,15 The sequence of NOV1
is close to 40% identical to those of isoeugenol oxygenases, IE27
from Pseudomonas putida,16,17 and IEM from Pseudomonas nitroreducens.18−20 Isoeugenol can be obtained from the oxidation of 4-n-propylguaiacol, an intermediate of lignin depolymerization from
wood biorefineries,21 and thus, NOV1 and
similar enzymes offer the possibility of developing sustainable and
environmentally friendly routes for the production of vanillin through
an enzymatic bioprocess that employs lignin as a renewable feedstock
and notably broadening the biobased product portfolio.22

Proposed NOV1 Reaction Mechanism for Isoeugenol
Adapted from ref (14)

(A) Formation of the ternary
complex of Fe(III)-superoxo, and the isoeugenol substrate and contributions
of deprotonation of 4′-OH by Y101 and K134 in activation of
the substrate. (B) Intermediate formed before the formation of the
first C–O bond. (C) Intermediate formed after the formation
of the first C–O bond. (D) Cleavage of the O–O bond
and formation of the second C–O bond. (E) Cleavage of the C–C
bond and restoration of the Fe(II) enzyme. (F) Vanillin and acetaldehyde
are the reaction products.

In this work, 35
variants were designed on the basis of the structural
analysis of the NOV1 enzyme, in silico dockings,
comparative structural alignments, and Rosetta computation-based design,
constructed, and examined for activity toward the isoeugenol substrate.
The S283F variant emerged as the most active and stable variant and
a promising biocatalyst for vanillin production. Furthermore, a combination
of kinetics, stability measurements, X-ray diffraction, and molecular
dynamics allowed identification of the molecular basis behind the
improved properties of the S283F variant.

Materials and MethodsMutant
Design with Rosetta Coupled MovesIsoeugenol
was included in the active site of wild-type NOV1 using Autodock VINA.23 The vanillin present in the X-ray structure
[Protein Data Bank (PDB) entry 5J55] was used to define the center of the
simulation box, comprising 3 Å from the ligand, and then it was
manually removed. The best scoring binding mode of isoeugenol at the
active site was used as the starting point for Rosetta Coupled Moves
experiments.24 Three groups of noncatalytic
active site residues close to the isoeugenol substrate were selected
for mutagenesis (Figure 1C): (i) N120 and T121, (ii) F281, S283, and F307, and (iii) F354,
F473, and L475. For each group, a Monte Carlo algorithm explored changes
over one, two, or three positions simultaneously, resulting in a library
of single, double, and triple variants. Repacking was allowed for
all of the residues in contact with any modified position. A Boltzmann
constant of 0.6 and a ligand weight of 1.0 were used. Every individual
experiment consisted of 100 Coupled Moves runs of 1000 trials. All
variants were filtered by protein–ligand docking, retaining
the variants that attained precatalytic distances [the distances between
the two carbons forming the double bond of isoeugenol and the oxygen
molecule bound to Fe (d1) and the hydroxyl
group of the substrates and the catalytic residues Y101 and K134 (d2) are <4 Å]. The final list of variants
was determined by the TotalScore, LigandScore (from Rosetta), and
binding energy (from docking) values (Figure S1).Figure 1Structural basis for the rational design of NOV1. (A) NOV1 active
site in complex with vanillin (PDB entry 5J55) with surrounding residues highlighted.
(B) Chemical structures of resveratrol and isoeugenol. The regions
at which the different chemical groups of the ligands bind the active
site are indicated. (C) Comparison between the binding of isoeugenol
and resveratrol (PDB entry 5J54) to the NOV1 binding site. Regions A and B outline
the amino acids involved in binding the isoeugenol hydroxyl and propenyl
groups.Construction of VariantsSingle-, double-, or triple-amino
acid substitutions in the nov1 gene were constructed
using the Quick-Change site-directed mutagenesis protocol (Stratagene).
Plasmid pET-28a (+) containing the nov1 gene was
used as a template using the appropriate primers (Table S1), except triple variants F281M/S283I/F307H and F281M/S283T/F307H,
constructed using the DNA template of variants F281M/S283I and F281M/S283T,
respectively. Polymerization chain reactions (PCRs) were performed
in 50 μL reaction volumes containing 3 ng of DNA template, 2
μM primers, 200 μM dNTPs, NZYProof polymerase buffer,
and 1.25 units of NZYProof polymerase (NZYTech). After an initial
denaturation period of 5 min at 94 °C, the following steps were
repeated for 20 cycles in a thermal cycler (MyCycler thermocycler,
Bio-Rad): 1 min at 94 °C, 1 min at 55–58 °C, and
10 min at 72 °C, followed by a final 10 min period at 72 °C.
The amplified products were purified using GFX PCR DNA and the gel
band purification kit (GE Healthcare). The final PCR products were
digested with DpnI to eliminate the wild-type template
and were used to transform electrocompetent Escherichia coli strain DH5α (Novagen) cells. The presence of the desired mutation
in the resulting plasmid was confirmed by DNA sequencing.Activity Screenings
in 96-Well PlatesThe genes encoding
the wild-type and variant enzymes were introduced into the host strain E. coli BL21 star (DE3, Novagen) by electroporation. In E. coli BL21 star, the genes are controlled by the T7 promoter
and induced by isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside
(IPTG). Single colonies were picked from a fresh agar plate and placed
in 96-well microplates filled with 200 μL of Luria-Bertani medium
(LB) supplemented with 50 μg mL–1 kanamycin.
Cultures were cultivated at 37 °C and 750 rpm for 24 h. The following
day, 20 μL of these cultures was inoculated with 180 μL
of LB medium in 96-well microplates and cultivated for 4 h at 37 °C.
At this time, gene expression was induced with 0.1 mM IPTG; the medium
was supplemented with 0.5 mM FeSO4 and cultivated at room
temperature at 750 rpm. After 24 h, cells were harvested by centrifugation,
resuspended in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.6), disrupted by three cycles
of freezing in liquid nitrogen and thawing at room temperature for
5 min, and resuspended in lysozyme (0.5 mg mL–1).
After cell disruption, plates were centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 30
min at 4 °C, and supernatants (cell crude extracts) were used
for enzymatic activity measurements. The activity was assessed after
mixing 20 μL of crude extracts with 160 μL of 100 mM Tris-HCl
(pH 9.0) containing 1 mM isoeugenol. Reactions were monitored by following
vanillin production at 340 nm. The vanillin molar absorptivity at
340 nm (ε340= 15970 M–1 cm–1) was obtained using a calibration curve (Figure S2).Enzyme Production and PurificationThe recombinant E. coli strains containing plasmids
encoding wild-type and
S283F were grown in 1 L of LB medium supplemented with kanamycin in
a 5 L Erlenmeyer flask with 120 rpm shaking (Innova 44, New Brunswick
Scientific). The cells were grown at 37 °C until an optical density
of 0.6 at 600 nm was reached, after which 0.1 mM IPTG and 0.5 mM FeSO4 were added to the culture medium, and the temperature was
decreased to 25 °C. The incubation was continued for a further
16 h, after which the cells were harvested by centrifugation. The
cell pellets were suspended in 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer, 0.5
M NaCl, and 20 mM imidazole (pH 7.6) (buffer A) containing DNase I
(2 μg mL–1), MgCl2 (5 mM), and
a mixture of protease inhibitors (CompleteTM mini-EDTA-free protease
inhibitor mixture tablets; Roche, Basel, Switzerland). Cells were
disrupted in a French press cell (at 900 psi), followed by centrifugation
(18000g, 1 h, 4 °C). The resulting soluble extracts
were loaded onto an affinity chromatography HisTrap column (GE Healthcare)
equilibrated with buffer A. Elution was carried out with a linear
imidazole gradient (from 0 to 0.5 M in 20 min) in the same buffer.
All purification steps were performed at room temperature with an
Åkta purifier (GEHealthcare). The purity of eluted fractions
was analyzed by SDS–PAGE. The active fractions were pooled
and digested by SUMO-protease (1 unit for 5 μg of protein),
with removal of the SUMO and His tag overnight at 4 °C, concentrated
by ultrafiltration (cutoff of 30 kDa), and equilibrated to 20 mM Tris-HCl
and 0.2 M NaCl (pH 7.6).Apparent Steady-State Kinetic AnalysisThe effect of
pH on activity was studied in 100 mM Britton-Robinson buffer (pH 3–11),
and the optimal temperature was determined in the temperature range
of 10–40 °C. Reactions were performed with isoeugenol
(0.01–4 mM) in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 9) and monitored at 340
nm (see above). Reactions with resveratrol (0.01–0.32 mM) were
monitored following the decrease in absorbance at 306 nm (ε
= 31800 M–1 cm–1) in 100 mM Tris-HCl
(pH 9). Enzyme activity was also measured by monitoring the oxygen
consumption with an oxygen electrode (Oxygraph, Hansatech) at 25 °C.
Reactions were started by adding the enzyme to a nitrogen-purged mixture
containing 4 mM isoeugenol in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 9). Kinetic data
were fitted directly to the Michaelis–Menten equation using
Origin. All enzymatic assays were performed at least in triplicate.Bioconversions of Isoeugenol to VanillinConversion
of isoeugenol to vanillin was studied in a 50 mL Erlenmeyer flask
with a reaction volume of 10 mL containing 10, 25, 50, and 100 mM
isoeugenol in 0.1 M glycine-NaOH (pH 9) at room temperature and 150
rpm, after the addition of 1 unit mL–1 purified
wild-type and S283F variant (defined as the amount of enzyme that
produced 1 μmol of vanillin per minute) and whole cells of E. coli overproducing the variant S283F at a final OD600 of 2, which corresponds to 1.3 mg of cell dry weight mL–1. Reaction mixtures contained ≤3.5% ethanol
used to prepare the substrate’s stock solution (1–2
M isoeugenol in 70% ethanol). The progress of reactions was monitored
at 340 nm by quantifying vanillin production by absorbance (see above)
and high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). A Waters Alliance
2695 HPLC system with a Purospher STAR RP-18c column [125 mm ×
4 mm, 5 μm particle size (Merck KGaA)] was used for HPLC analysis.
The column was maintained at 40 °C; the flow rate was set to
1.0 mL min–1, and the volume injected was 25 μL.
A linear gradient was set starting from 70% 0.5% acetic acid (solvent
A) and 30% methanol with 0.5% acetic acid (solvent B), going from
0% to 80% solvent B in 25 min and maintaining for 10 min. Then, the
initial conditions were resumed in 2 min and maintained for 8 min.
The absorption was monitored between 200 and 500 nm by a Waters model
2996 photodiode array detector operated by Empower Pro, version 5
(Waters Chromatography).Thermodynamic StabilityProtein
unfolding was monitored
using a Cary Eclipse spectrofluorimeter with an excitation wavelength
of 296 nm and by recording the fluorescence emission of tryptophyl
residues at 340 nm. Guanidine hydrochloride (GdnHCl) concentrations
in the range of 0–3 M in 20 mM Tris-HCl and 0.2 M NaCl (pH
7.6) were used to induce protein unfolding after incubation at room
temperature for 5 min. The fraction of unfolded protein (fU) was plotted versus GdnHCl concentration and fitted
to the equation fU = exp(−ΔG°/RT)/[1 + exp(−ΔG°/RT)]. The chemical-induced unfolding
was analyzed using the equations previously described on the basis
of a two-state process.25 Thermal unfolding
was performed for the iron-depleted enzyme preparations (10 μM)
with EDTA for 12 h at room temperature. Before measurement, EDTA was
removed by ultrafiltration using Vivaspin. Enzyme preparations in
20 mM Tris-HCl and 0.2 M NaCl (pH 7.6) were placed onto a thermostatically
thermal block and heated at a rate of 1 °C/min to 100 °C.
Thermal unfolding was analyzed according to an N ⇌ U two-state
model.26 Static light scattering using
excitation and emission wavelengths of 500 nm in the spectrofluorimeter
was used to follow enzyme aggregation.Kinetic StabilityThermal inactivation was studied
by incubating enzyme preparations in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.6) at 25
°C. FeSO4 was added to the solution at a concentration
that was 100-fold higher than the enzyme molarity when required. At
appropriate time points, aliquots were withdrawn and examined for
activity. Inactivation constants (kin)
were obtained by linear regression of logarithm activity versus time.
Half-life t1/2 was calculated using the
equation t1/2 = ln 2/kin.Protein Crystallization, Data Collection,
and X-ray Structure
Determination and RefinementThe S283F enzyme was crystallized
according to the crystallization conditions reported in the literature
for wild-type NOV1 [sitting drop vapor diffusion, 0.16 M MgCl2, 0.08 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), 18% (w/v) PEG 4000, and 20% (v/v)
glycerol at 20 °C]. However, the shape of the crystals did not
correspond to the cubic geometry described,14 but clusters of large transparent crystal plates were obtained instead.
For data collection, crystals were flash-cooled in a stream of gaseous
nitrogen at 100 K. X-ray diffraction data were measured at beamlines
of the Swiss Light Source (SLS, Villigen, Switzerland). Data processing
and scaling were performed using XDS27 and
the CCP4 package28 (Table S2). The coordinates of the NOV1 bound to vanillin (PDB
entry 5J55)
deprived of all ligands and waters were used as the initial model
for structure determination. Coot29 was
used for electron density inspection and model building, whereas crystallographic
refinement was performed with REFMAC5.30Molecular Dynamics SimulationsThe 800 ns trajectories
(200 ns per four replicas) were run for four different systems: (1)
wild-type NOV1 in its Fe(II)-O2 substrate-free form, (2)
S283F variant in its Fe(II)-O2 substrate-free form, (3)
wild-type NOV1 in its apo form (no metal and no ligand), and 4) S283F
variant in its apo form. The NOV1 structures and the MD simulations
of apoproteins were prepared using Yasara (details in the Supporting Information).31 The protein and the water solvent were described on the basis of
the AMBER14 force field32 and the TIP3P
model,33 respectively. The resulting conformations
of the holoproteins were used for structural analysis (free volume
analysis and inter-residue interactions) and ensemble docking. Those
of the apoproteins were used for pKa studies
on the histidines composing the catalytic center to assess the effect
of the S283F mutation on their flexibility and orientation.Ensemble
Protein–Ligand DockingThe isoeugenol
and resveratrol substrates were systematically docked every 40 ps
along with the MD simulations of the ligand-free systems (20000 structures
for each system) using a simulation box of 8 Å from the oxygen
molecule. For each MD snapshot, 96 docking runs and a clustering cutoff
of 2 Å of the RMSD were established. The protein was kept rigid
while the rotors of the substrate were allowed to move. The distances
between the two carbons forming the double bond of the ligands and
the oxygen molecule bound to Fe (d1) and
the hydroxyl group of the substrates and catalytic residues Y101 and
K134 (d2) were measured. The dockings
were performed with AutoDock VINA23 using
the YAMBER force field,34 and the structural
analysis was done with the Yasara Python module. For all of the binding
modes identified as precatalytic structures (the distances d1 and d2 were <4
Å), the ΔGbinding (it estimates
the quality of ligand–protein interactions) and ΔEdihedral (it measures how strong the distortion
of the ligand is in comparison to that of its protein-free form) energies
were assessed.Inter-residue InteractionsThe Protein
Interactions
Calculator35 Web server was used to identify
the hydrophobic patches on the PDB structures of both wild-type NOV1
and S283F.Other MethodsThe concentration
of purified protein
preparations was estimated using the molar absorption coefficient
of NOV1 (ε280 = 81930 M–1 cm–1) calculated from the protein sequence using the ExPASy
Bioinformatics Resource Portal (http://web.expasy.org). The iron content of purified protein
samples was determined by a colorimetric assay resorting to the chelator
TPTZ [2,4,6-tris(2-pyridyl)-s-triazine]36 and by atomic emission spectroscopy at Laboratório
Central de Análises, Universidade de Aveiro (Aveiro, Portugal).

Materials and Methods

Mutant
Design with Rosetta Coupled MovesIsoeugenol
was included in the active site of wild-type NOV1 using Autodock VINA.23 The vanillin present in the X-ray structure
[Protein Data Bank (PDB) entry 5J55] was used to define the center of the
simulation box, comprising 3 Å from the ligand, and then it was
manually removed. The best scoring binding mode of isoeugenol at the
active site was used as the starting point for Rosetta Coupled Moves
experiments.24 Three groups of noncatalytic
active site residues close to the isoeugenol substrate were selected
for mutagenesis (Figure 1C): (i) N120 and T121, (ii) F281, S283, and F307, and (iii) F354,
F473, and L475. For each group, a Monte Carlo algorithm explored changes
over one, two, or three positions simultaneously, resulting in a library
of single, double, and triple variants. Repacking was allowed for
all of the residues in contact with any modified position. A Boltzmann
constant of 0.6 and a ligand weight of 1.0 were used. Every individual
experiment consisted of 100 Coupled Moves runs of 1000 trials. All
variants were filtered by protein–ligand docking, retaining
the variants that attained precatalytic distances [the distances between
the two carbons forming the double bond of isoeugenol and the oxygen
molecule bound to Fe (d1) and the hydroxyl
group of the substrates and the catalytic residues Y101 and K134 (d2) are <4 Å]. The final list of variants
was determined by the TotalScore, LigandScore (from Rosetta), and
binding energy (from docking) values (Figure S1).Figure 1Structural basis for the rational design of NOV1. (A) NOV1 active
site in complex with vanillin (PDB entry 5J55) with surrounding residues highlighted.
(B) Chemical structures of resveratrol and isoeugenol. The regions
at which the different chemical groups of the ligands bind the active
site are indicated. (C) Comparison between the binding of isoeugenol
and resveratrol (PDB entry 5J54) to the NOV1 binding site. Regions A and B outline
the amino acids involved in binding the isoeugenol hydroxyl and propenyl
groups.

Mutant
Design with Rosetta Coupled Moves

Isoeugenol
was included in the active site of wild-type NOV1 using Autodock VINA.23 The vanillin present in the X-ray structure
[Protein Data Bank (PDB) entry 5J55] was used to define the center of the
simulation box, comprising 3 Å from the ligand, and then it was
manually removed. The best scoring binding mode of isoeugenol at the
active site was used as the starting point for Rosetta Coupled Moves
experiments.24 Three groups of noncatalytic
active site residues close to the isoeugenol substrate were selected
for mutagenesis (Figure 1C): (i) N120 and T121, (ii) F281, S283, and F307, and (iii) F354,
F473, and L475. For each group, a Monte Carlo algorithm explored changes
over one, two, or three positions simultaneously, resulting in a library
of single, double, and triple variants. Repacking was allowed for
all of the residues in contact with any modified position. A Boltzmann
constant of 0.6 and a ligand weight of 1.0 were used. Every individual
experiment consisted of 100 Coupled Moves runs of 1000 trials. All
variants were filtered by protein–ligand docking, retaining
the variants that attained precatalytic distances [the distances between
the two carbons forming the double bond of isoeugenol and the oxygen
molecule bound to Fe (d1) and the hydroxyl
group of the substrates and the catalytic residues Y101 and K134 (d2) are <4 Å]. The final list of variants
was determined by the TotalScore, LigandScore (from Rosetta), and
binding energy (from docking) values (Figure S1).

Structural basis for the rational design of NOV1. (A) NOV1 active
site in complex with vanillin (PDB entry 5J55) with surrounding residues highlighted.
(B) Chemical structures of resveratrol and isoeugenol. The regions
at which the different chemical groups of the ligands bind the active
site are indicated. (C) Comparison between the binding of isoeugenol
and resveratrol (PDB entry 5J54) to the NOV1 binding site. Regions A and B outline
the amino acids involved in binding the isoeugenol hydroxyl and propenyl
groups.

Construction of VariantsSingle-, double-, or triple-amino
acid substitutions in the nov1 gene were constructed
using the Quick-Change site-directed mutagenesis protocol (Stratagene).
Plasmid pET-28a (+) containing the nov1 gene was
used as a template using the appropriate primers (Table S1), except triple variants F281M/S283I/F307H and F281M/S283T/F307H,
constructed using the DNA template of variants F281M/S283I and F281M/S283T,
respectively. Polymerization chain reactions (PCRs) were performed
in 50 μL reaction volumes containing 3 ng of DNA template, 2
μM primers, 200 μM dNTPs, NZYProof polymerase buffer,
and 1.25 units of NZYProof polymerase (NZYTech). After an initial
denaturation period of 5 min at 94 °C, the following steps were
repeated for 20 cycles in a thermal cycler (MyCycler thermocycler,
Bio-Rad): 1 min at 94 °C, 1 min at 55–58 °C, and
10 min at 72 °C, followed by a final 10 min period at 72 °C.
The amplified products were purified using GFX PCR DNA and the gel
band purification kit (GE Healthcare). The final PCR products were
digested with DpnI to eliminate the wild-type template
and were used to transform electrocompetent Escherichia coli strain DH5α (Novagen) cells. The presence of the desired mutation
in the resulting plasmid was confirmed by DNA sequencing.

Construction of Variants

Single-, double-, or triple-amino
acid substitutions in the nov1 gene were constructed
using the Quick-Change site-directed mutagenesis protocol (Stratagene).
Plasmid pET-28a (+) containing the nov1 gene was
used as a template using the appropriate primers (Table S1), except triple variants F281M/S283I/F307H and F281M/S283T/F307H,
constructed using the DNA template of variants F281M/S283I and F281M/S283T,
respectively. Polymerization chain reactions (PCRs) were performed
in 50 μL reaction volumes containing 3 ng of DNA template, 2
μM primers, 200 μM dNTPs, NZYProof polymerase buffer,
and 1.25 units of NZYProof polymerase (NZYTech). After an initial
denaturation period of 5 min at 94 °C, the following steps were
repeated for 20 cycles in a thermal cycler (MyCycler thermocycler,
Bio-Rad): 1 min at 94 °C, 1 min at 55–58 °C, and
10 min at 72 °C, followed by a final 10 min period at 72 °C.
The amplified products were purified using GFX PCR DNA and the gel
band purification kit (GE Healthcare). The final PCR products were
digested with DpnI to eliminate the wild-type template
and were used to transform electrocompetent Escherichia coli strain DH5α (Novagen) cells. The presence of the desired mutation
in the resulting plasmid was confirmed by DNA sequencing.

Activity Screenings
in 96-Well PlatesThe genes encoding
the wild-type and variant enzymes were introduced into the host strain E. coli BL21 star (DE3, Novagen) by electroporation. In E. coli BL21 star, the genes are controlled by the T7 promoter
and induced by isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside
(IPTG). Single colonies were picked from a fresh agar plate and placed
in 96-well microplates filled with 200 μL of Luria-Bertani medium
(LB) supplemented with 50 μg mL–1 kanamycin.
Cultures were cultivated at 37 °C and 750 rpm for 24 h. The following
day, 20 μL of these cultures was inoculated with 180 μL
of LB medium in 96-well microplates and cultivated for 4 h at 37 °C.
At this time, gene expression was induced with 0.1 mM IPTG; the medium
was supplemented with 0.5 mM FeSO4 and cultivated at room
temperature at 750 rpm. After 24 h, cells were harvested by centrifugation,
resuspended in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.6), disrupted by three cycles
of freezing in liquid nitrogen and thawing at room temperature for
5 min, and resuspended in lysozyme (0.5 mg mL–1).
After cell disruption, plates were centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 30
min at 4 °C, and supernatants (cell crude extracts) were used
for enzymatic activity measurements. The activity was assessed after
mixing 20 μL of crude extracts with 160 μL of 100 mM Tris-HCl
(pH 9.0) containing 1 mM isoeugenol. Reactions were monitored by following
vanillin production at 340 nm. The vanillin molar absorptivity at
340 nm (ε340= 15970 M–1 cm–1) was obtained using a calibration curve (Figure S2).

Activity Screenings
in 96-Well Plates

The genes encoding
the wild-type and variant enzymes were introduced into the host strain E. coli BL21 star (DE3, Novagen) by electroporation. In E. coli BL21 star, the genes are controlled by the T7 promoter
and induced by isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside
(IPTG). Single colonies were picked from a fresh agar plate and placed
in 96-well microplates filled with 200 μL of Luria-Bertani medium
(LB) supplemented with 50 μg mL–1 kanamycin.
Cultures were cultivated at 37 °C and 750 rpm for 24 h. The following
day, 20 μL of these cultures was inoculated with 180 μL
of LB medium in 96-well microplates and cultivated for 4 h at 37 °C.
At this time, gene expression was induced with 0.1 mM IPTG; the medium
was supplemented with 0.5 mM FeSO4 and cultivated at room
temperature at 750 rpm. After 24 h, cells were harvested by centrifugation,
resuspended in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.6), disrupted by three cycles
of freezing in liquid nitrogen and thawing at room temperature for
5 min, and resuspended in lysozyme (0.5 mg mL–1).
After cell disruption, plates were centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 30
min at 4 °C, and supernatants (cell crude extracts) were used
for enzymatic activity measurements. The activity was assessed after
mixing 20 μL of crude extracts with 160 μL of 100 mM Tris-HCl
(pH 9.0) containing 1 mM isoeugenol. Reactions were monitored by following
vanillin production at 340 nm. The vanillin molar absorptivity at
340 nm (ε340= 15970 M–1 cm–1) was obtained using a calibration curve (Figure S2).

Enzyme Production and PurificationThe recombinant E. coli strains containing plasmids
encoding wild-type and
S283F were grown in 1 L of LB medium supplemented with kanamycin in
a 5 L Erlenmeyer flask with 120 rpm shaking (Innova 44, New Brunswick
Scientific). The cells were grown at 37 °C until an optical density
of 0.6 at 600 nm was reached, after which 0.1 mM IPTG and 0.5 mM FeSO4 were added to the culture medium, and the temperature was
decreased to 25 °C. The incubation was continued for a further
16 h, after which the cells were harvested by centrifugation. The
cell pellets were suspended in 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer, 0.5
M NaCl, and 20 mM imidazole (pH 7.6) (buffer A) containing DNase I
(2 μg mL–1), MgCl2 (5 mM), and
a mixture of protease inhibitors (CompleteTM mini-EDTA-free protease
inhibitor mixture tablets; Roche, Basel, Switzerland). Cells were
disrupted in a French press cell (at 900 psi), followed by centrifugation
(18000g, 1 h, 4 °C). The resulting soluble extracts
were loaded onto an affinity chromatography HisTrap column (GE Healthcare)
equilibrated with buffer A. Elution was carried out with a linear
imidazole gradient (from 0 to 0.5 M in 20 min) in the same buffer.
All purification steps were performed at room temperature with an
Åkta purifier (GEHealthcare). The purity of eluted fractions
was analyzed by SDS–PAGE. The active fractions were pooled
and digested by SUMO-protease (1 unit for 5 μg of protein),
with removal of the SUMO and His tag overnight at 4 °C, concentrated
by ultrafiltration (cutoff of 30 kDa), and equilibrated to 20 mM Tris-HCl
and 0.2 M NaCl (pH 7.6).

Enzyme Production and Purification

The recombinant E. coli strains containing plasmids
encoding wild-type and
S283F were grown in 1 L of LB medium supplemented with kanamycin in
a 5 L Erlenmeyer flask with 120 rpm shaking (Innova 44, New Brunswick
Scientific). The cells were grown at 37 °C until an optical density
of 0.6 at 600 nm was reached, after which 0.1 mM IPTG and 0.5 mM FeSO4 were added to the culture medium, and the temperature was
decreased to 25 °C. The incubation was continued for a further
16 h, after which the cells were harvested by centrifugation. The
cell pellets were suspended in 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer, 0.5
M NaCl, and 20 mM imidazole (pH 7.6) (buffer A) containing DNase I
(2 μg mL–1), MgCl2 (5 mM), and
a mixture of protease inhibitors (CompleteTM mini-EDTA-free protease
inhibitor mixture tablets; Roche, Basel, Switzerland). Cells were
disrupted in a French press cell (at 900 psi), followed by centrifugation
(18000g, 1 h, 4 °C). The resulting soluble extracts
were loaded onto an affinity chromatography HisTrap column (GE Healthcare)
equilibrated with buffer A. Elution was carried out with a linear
imidazole gradient (from 0 to 0.5 M in 20 min) in the same buffer.
All purification steps were performed at room temperature with an
Åkta purifier (GEHealthcare). The purity of eluted fractions
was analyzed by SDS–PAGE. The active fractions were pooled
and digested by SUMO-protease (1 unit for 5 μg of protein),
with removal of the SUMO and His tag overnight at 4 °C, concentrated
by ultrafiltration (cutoff of 30 kDa), and equilibrated to 20 mM Tris-HCl
and 0.2 M NaCl (pH 7.6).

Apparent Steady-State Kinetic AnalysisThe effect of
pH on activity was studied in 100 mM Britton-Robinson buffer (pH 3–11),
and the optimal temperature was determined in the temperature range
of 10–40 °C. Reactions were performed with isoeugenol
(0.01–4 mM) in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 9) and monitored at 340
nm (see above). Reactions with resveratrol (0.01–0.32 mM) were
monitored following the decrease in absorbance at 306 nm (ε
= 31800 M–1 cm–1) in 100 mM Tris-HCl
(pH 9). Enzyme activity was also measured by monitoring the oxygen
consumption with an oxygen electrode (Oxygraph, Hansatech) at 25 °C.
Reactions were started by adding the enzyme to a nitrogen-purged mixture
containing 4 mM isoeugenol in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 9). Kinetic data
were fitted directly to the Michaelis–Menten equation using
Origin. All enzymatic assays were performed at least in triplicate.

Apparent Steady-State Kinetic Analysis

The effect of
pH on activity was studied in 100 mM Britton-Robinson buffer (pH 3–11),
and the optimal temperature was determined in the temperature range
of 10–40 °C. Reactions were performed with isoeugenol
(0.01–4 mM) in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 9) and monitored at 340
nm (see above). Reactions with resveratrol (0.01–0.32 mM) were
monitored following the decrease in absorbance at 306 nm (ε
= 31800 M–1 cm–1) in 100 mM Tris-HCl
(pH 9). Enzyme activity was also measured by monitoring the oxygen
consumption with an oxygen electrode (Oxygraph, Hansatech) at 25 °C.
Reactions were started by adding the enzyme to a nitrogen-purged mixture
containing 4 mM isoeugenol in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 9). Kinetic data
were fitted directly to the Michaelis–Menten equation using
Origin. All enzymatic assays were performed at least in triplicate.

Bioconversions of Isoeugenol to VanillinConversion
of isoeugenol to vanillin was studied in a 50 mL Erlenmeyer flask
with a reaction volume of 10 mL containing 10, 25, 50, and 100 mM
isoeugenol in 0.1 M glycine-NaOH (pH 9) at room temperature and 150
rpm, after the addition of 1 unit mL–1 purified
wild-type and S283F variant (defined as the amount of enzyme that
produced 1 μmol of vanillin per minute) and whole cells of E. coli overproducing the variant S283F at a final OD600 of 2, which corresponds to 1.3 mg of cell dry weight mL–1. Reaction mixtures contained ≤3.5% ethanol
used to prepare the substrate’s stock solution (1–2
M isoeugenol in 70% ethanol). The progress of reactions was monitored
at 340 nm by quantifying vanillin production by absorbance (see above)
and high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). A Waters Alliance
2695 HPLC system with a Purospher STAR RP-18c column [125 mm ×
4 mm, 5 μm particle size (Merck KGaA)] was used for HPLC analysis.
The column was maintained at 40 °C; the flow rate was set to
1.0 mL min–1, and the volume injected was 25 μL.
A linear gradient was set starting from 70% 0.5% acetic acid (solvent
A) and 30% methanol with 0.5% acetic acid (solvent B), going from
0% to 80% solvent B in 25 min and maintaining for 10 min. Then, the
initial conditions were resumed in 2 min and maintained for 8 min.
The absorption was monitored between 200 and 500 nm by a Waters model
2996 photodiode array detector operated by Empower Pro, version 5
(Waters Chromatography).

Bioconversions of Isoeugenol to Vanillin

Conversion
of isoeugenol to vanillin was studied in a 50 mL Erlenmeyer flask
with a reaction volume of 10 mL containing 10, 25, 50, and 100 mM
isoeugenol in 0.1 M glycine-NaOH (pH 9) at room temperature and 150
rpm, after the addition of 1 unit mL–1 purified
wild-type and S283F variant (defined as the amount of enzyme that
produced 1 μmol of vanillin per minute) and whole cells of E. coli overproducing the variant S283F at a final OD600 of 2, which corresponds to 1.3 mg of cell dry weight mL–1. Reaction mixtures contained ≤3.5% ethanol
used to prepare the substrate’s stock solution (1–2
M isoeugenol in 70% ethanol). The progress of reactions was monitored
at 340 nm by quantifying vanillin production by absorbance (see above)
and high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). A Waters Alliance
2695 HPLC system with a Purospher STAR RP-18c column [125 mm ×
4 mm, 5 μm particle size (Merck KGaA)] was used for HPLC analysis.
The column was maintained at 40 °C; the flow rate was set to
1.0 mL min–1, and the volume injected was 25 μL.
A linear gradient was set starting from 70% 0.5% acetic acid (solvent
A) and 30% methanol with 0.5% acetic acid (solvent B), going from
0% to 80% solvent B in 25 min and maintaining for 10 min. Then, the
initial conditions were resumed in 2 min and maintained for 8 min.
The absorption was monitored between 200 and 500 nm by a Waters model
2996 photodiode array detector operated by Empower Pro, version 5
(Waters Chromatography).

Thermodynamic StabilityProtein
unfolding was monitored
using a Cary Eclipse spectrofluorimeter with an excitation wavelength
of 296 nm and by recording the fluorescence emission of tryptophyl
residues at 340 nm. Guanidine hydrochloride (GdnHCl) concentrations
in the range of 0–3 M in 20 mM Tris-HCl and 0.2 M NaCl (pH
7.6) were used to induce protein unfolding after incubation at room
temperature for 5 min. The fraction of unfolded protein (fU) was plotted versus GdnHCl concentration and fitted
to the equation fU = exp(−ΔG°/RT)/[1 + exp(−ΔG°/RT)]. The chemical-induced unfolding
was analyzed using the equations previously described on the basis
of a two-state process.25 Thermal unfolding
was performed for the iron-depleted enzyme preparations (10 μM)
with EDTA for 12 h at room temperature. Before measurement, EDTA was
removed by ultrafiltration using Vivaspin. Enzyme preparations in
20 mM Tris-HCl and 0.2 M NaCl (pH 7.6) were placed onto a thermostatically
thermal block and heated at a rate of 1 °C/min to 100 °C.
Thermal unfolding was analyzed according to an N ⇌ U two-state
model.26 Static light scattering using
excitation and emission wavelengths of 500 nm in the spectrofluorimeter
was used to follow enzyme aggregation.

Thermodynamic Stability

Protein
unfolding was monitored
using a Cary Eclipse spectrofluorimeter with an excitation wavelength
of 296 nm and by recording the fluorescence emission of tryptophyl
residues at 340 nm. Guanidine hydrochloride (GdnHCl) concentrations
in the range of 0–3 M in 20 mM Tris-HCl and 0.2 M NaCl (pH
7.6) were used to induce protein unfolding after incubation at room
temperature for 5 min. The fraction of unfolded protein (fU) was plotted versus GdnHCl concentration and fitted
to the equation fU = exp(−ΔG°/RT)/[1 + exp(−ΔG°/RT)]. The chemical-induced unfolding
was analyzed using the equations previously described on the basis
of a two-state process.25 Thermal unfolding
was performed for the iron-depleted enzyme preparations (10 μM)
with EDTA for 12 h at room temperature. Before measurement, EDTA was
removed by ultrafiltration using Vivaspin. Enzyme preparations in
20 mM Tris-HCl and 0.2 M NaCl (pH 7.6) were placed onto a thermostatically
thermal block and heated at a rate of 1 °C/min to 100 °C.
Thermal unfolding was analyzed according to an N ⇌ U two-state
model.26 Static light scattering using
excitation and emission wavelengths of 500 nm in the spectrofluorimeter
was used to follow enzyme aggregation.

Kinetic StabilityThermal inactivation was studied
by incubating enzyme preparations in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.6) at 25
°C. FeSO4 was added to the solution at a concentration
that was 100-fold higher than the enzyme molarity when required. At
appropriate time points, aliquots were withdrawn and examined for
activity. Inactivation constants (kin)
were obtained by linear regression of logarithm activity versus time.
Half-life t1/2 was calculated using the
equation t1/2 = ln 2/kin.

Kinetic Stability

Thermal inactivation was studied
by incubating enzyme preparations in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.6) at 25
°C. FeSO4 was added to the solution at a concentration
that was 100-fold higher than the enzyme molarity when required. At
appropriate time points, aliquots were withdrawn and examined for
activity. Inactivation constants (kin)
were obtained by linear regression of logarithm activity versus time.
Half-life t1/2 was calculated using the
equation t1/2 = ln 2/kin.

Protein Crystallization, Data Collection,
and X-ray Structure
Determination and RefinementThe S283F enzyme was crystallized
according to the crystallization conditions reported in the literature
for wild-type NOV1 [sitting drop vapor diffusion, 0.16 M MgCl2, 0.08 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), 18% (w/v) PEG 4000, and 20% (v/v)
glycerol at 20 °C]. However, the shape of the crystals did not
correspond to the cubic geometry described,14 but clusters of large transparent crystal plates were obtained instead.
For data collection, crystals were flash-cooled in a stream of gaseous
nitrogen at 100 K. X-ray diffraction data were measured at beamlines
of the Swiss Light Source (SLS, Villigen, Switzerland). Data processing
and scaling were performed using XDS27 and
the CCP4 package28 (Table S2). The coordinates of the NOV1 bound to vanillin (PDB
entry 5J55)
deprived of all ligands and waters were used as the initial model
for structure determination. Coot29 was
used for electron density inspection and model building, whereas crystallographic
refinement was performed with REFMAC5.30

Protein Crystallization, Data Collection,
and X-ray Structure
Determination and Refinement

The S283F enzyme was crystallized
according to the crystallization conditions reported in the literature
for wild-type NOV1 [sitting drop vapor diffusion, 0.16 M MgCl2, 0.08 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), 18% (w/v) PEG 4000, and 20% (v/v)
glycerol at 20 °C]. However, the shape of the crystals did not
correspond to the cubic geometry described,14 but clusters of large transparent crystal plates were obtained instead.
For data collection, crystals were flash-cooled in a stream of gaseous
nitrogen at 100 K. X-ray diffraction data were measured at beamlines
of the Swiss Light Source (SLS, Villigen, Switzerland). Data processing
and scaling were performed using XDS27 and
the CCP4 package28 (Table S2). The coordinates of the NOV1 bound to vanillin (PDB
entry 5J55)
deprived of all ligands and waters were used as the initial model
for structure determination. Coot29 was
used for electron density inspection and model building, whereas crystallographic
refinement was performed with REFMAC5.30

Molecular Dynamics SimulationsThe 800 ns trajectories
(200 ns per four replicas) were run for four different systems: (1)
wild-type NOV1 in its Fe(II)-O2 substrate-free form, (2)
S283F variant in its Fe(II)-O2 substrate-free form, (3)
wild-type NOV1 in its apo form (no metal and no ligand), and 4) S283F
variant in its apo form. The NOV1 structures and the MD simulations
of apoproteins were prepared using Yasara (details in the Supporting Information).31 The protein and the water solvent were described on the basis of
the AMBER14 force field32 and the TIP3P
model,33 respectively. The resulting conformations
of the holoproteins were used for structural analysis (free volume
analysis and inter-residue interactions) and ensemble docking. Those
of the apoproteins were used for pKa studies
on the histidines composing the catalytic center to assess the effect
of the S283F mutation on their flexibility and orientation.

Molecular Dynamics Simulations

The 800 ns trajectories
(200 ns per four replicas) were run for four different systems: (1)
wild-type NOV1 in its Fe(II)-O2 substrate-free form, (2)
S283F variant in its Fe(II)-O2 substrate-free form, (3)
wild-type NOV1 in its apo form (no metal and no ligand), and 4) S283F
variant in its apo form. The NOV1 structures and the MD simulations
of apoproteins were prepared using Yasara (details in the Supporting Information).31 The protein and the water solvent were described on the basis of
the AMBER14 force field32 and the TIP3P
model,33 respectively. The resulting conformations
of the holoproteins were used for structural analysis (free volume
analysis and inter-residue interactions) and ensemble docking. Those
of the apoproteins were used for pKa studies
on the histidines composing the catalytic center to assess the effect
of the S283F mutation on their flexibility and orientation.

Ensemble
Protein–Ligand DockingThe isoeugenol
and resveratrol substrates were systematically docked every 40 ps
along with the MD simulations of the ligand-free systems (20000 structures
for each system) using a simulation box of 8 Å from the oxygen
molecule. For each MD snapshot, 96 docking runs and a clustering cutoff
of 2 Å of the RMSD were established. The protein was kept rigid
while the rotors of the substrate were allowed to move. The distances
between the two carbons forming the double bond of the ligands and
the oxygen molecule bound to Fe (d1) and
the hydroxyl group of the substrates and catalytic residues Y101 and
K134 (d2) were measured. The dockings
were performed with AutoDock VINA23 using
the YAMBER force field,34 and the structural
analysis was done with the Yasara Python module. For all of the binding
modes identified as precatalytic structures (the distances d1 and d2 were <4
Å), the ΔGbinding (it estimates
the quality of ligand–protein interactions) and ΔEdihedral (it measures how strong the distortion
of the ligand is in comparison to that of its protein-free form) energies
were assessed.

Ensemble
Protein–Ligand Docking

The isoeugenol
and resveratrol substrates were systematically docked every 40 ps
along with the MD simulations of the ligand-free systems (20000 structures
for each system) using a simulation box of 8 Å from the oxygen
molecule. For each MD snapshot, 96 docking runs and a clustering cutoff
of 2 Å of the RMSD were established. The protein was kept rigid
while the rotors of the substrate were allowed to move. The distances
between the two carbons forming the double bond of the ligands and
the oxygen molecule bound to Fe (d1) and
the hydroxyl group of the substrates and catalytic residues Y101 and
K134 (d2) were measured. The dockings
were performed with AutoDock VINA23 using
the YAMBER force field,34 and the structural
analysis was done with the Yasara Python module. For all of the binding
modes identified as precatalytic structures (the distances d1 and d2 were <4
Å), the ΔGbinding (it estimates
the quality of ligand–protein interactions) and ΔEdihedral (it measures how strong the distortion
of the ligand is in comparison to that of its protein-free form) energies
were assessed.

Inter-residue InteractionsThe Protein
Interactions
Calculator35 Web server was used to identify
the hydrophobic patches on the PDB structures of both wild-type NOV1
and S283F.

Inter-residue Interactions

The Protein
Interactions
Calculator35 Web server was used to identify
the hydrophobic patches on the PDB structures of both wild-type NOV1
and S283F.

Other MethodsThe concentration
of purified protein
preparations was estimated using the molar absorption coefficient
of NOV1 (ε280 = 81930 M–1 cm–1) calculated from the protein sequence using the ExPASy
Bioinformatics Resource Portal (http://web.expasy.org). The iron content of purified protein
samples was determined by a colorimetric assay resorting to the chelator
TPTZ [2,4,6-tris(2-pyridyl)-s-triazine]36 and by atomic emission spectroscopy at Laboratório
Central de Análises, Universidade de Aveiro (Aveiro, Portugal).

Other Methods

The concentration
of purified protein
preparations was estimated using the molar absorption coefficient
of NOV1 (ε280 = 81930 M–1 cm–1) calculated from the protein sequence using the ExPASy
Bioinformatics Resource Portal (http://web.expasy.org). The iron content of purified protein
samples was determined by a colorimetric assay resorting to the chelator
TPTZ [2,4,6-tris(2-pyridyl)-s-triazine]36 and by atomic emission spectroscopy at Laboratório
Central de Análises, Universidade de Aveiro (Aveiro, Portugal).

Results and DiscussionActive Site Design: Construction and Characterization
of VariantsThe analysis of the binding of vanillin and resveratrol
to NOV1
(PDB entries 5J55 and 5J54,
respectively) suggested that isoeugenol can be docked into the NOV1
active site with the hydroxyl group pointed toward Y101 and K134 residues
and the methoxy substituent pointed toward the pocket created by N120,
T121, and L475 (Figure 1A–C, region A). In this position, the isoeugenol aromatic
ring plane sits parallel to the side chain of F59. Moreover, the reactive
double bond of isoeugenol is located right above the iron center.
In contrast, the terminal methyl group is hosted in a large and hydrated
niche in the rear of the cavity close to F281, S283, F307, and F354
(Figure 1A–C,
region B). The alignment of NOV1 with P. nitroreducens isoeugenol monooxygenase shows a phenylalanine residue at position
S283 in this enzyme.16 Furthermore, analysis
of the X-ray crystal structure supported the reasoning that the S283F
replacement could improve isoeugenol catalysis by filling the free
space left in the active site upon binding the single-ring isoeugenol
substrate.Mutations N120L, F281W, S283Q, F307H, F307W, and
L475S were suggested by sequence comparisons and biochemical information
from the literature.14,16,18,19 Positions 120, 121, 281, 283, 307, 354,
473, and 475 were submitted to mutagenesis using Rosetta and filtered
by protein–ligand docking (see the computational methods section
for further details). Thirty-five variants based on the rational and
computational approaches were constructed using site-directed mutagenesis
and characterized (Tables S1 and S3). The
enzymatic activity of isoeugenol was tested in crude cell extracts
in 96-well microplates. The results showed that mutations at positions
120, 121, 473, and 475 impaired isoeugenol activity. Three double
variants, F281M/S283T, F281M/S283V, and F281C/S283I, showed specific
activities comparable to that of the wild type, and single variant
S283F stood out with almost 2-fold higher enzymatic activity compared
to that of the wild type.Biochemical and Kinetic CharacterizationThe wild type
and variant S283F were produced at an Erlenmeyer scale and purified.
Both enzymes showed an optimal pH of 9 and optimal temperatures of
∼28 °C for the wild-type enzyme and 32 °C for the
S283F variant (Figure 2A,B). Purified enzyme preparations displayed approximately 0.5 mol
of iron/mol of protein and were partially iron-depleted, similar to
those observed in isoeugenol oxygenases from P. putida IE2716 and P. nitroreducens IEM.18Figure 2pH and temperature profiles. (A) pH–activity
profile of
wild-type (●) and S283F (■) NOV1. Reactions were performed
using Britton Robinson buffer (in the pH range from 3 to 11) in the
presence of 1 mM isoeugenol at room temperature. (B) Temperature dependence
of enzymatic activity in reactions performed in 100 mM Tris-HCl buffer
(pH 9).The steady-state kinetic analysis
revealed that the S283F variant
features a kcat 2-fold higher than that
of the wild type, and a slightly higher Km value for isoeugenol, leading to a catalytic efficiency (kcat/Km) comparable
to that of the wild type (Table 1). The activity using resveratrol as a substrate was
also investigated; the S283F variant showed a 5-fold lower kcat and a 4-fold higher Km, resulting in a sharp 20-fold decrease in kcat/Km, compared to that of
the wild type. Notably, the kinetic analysis for O2 in
the presence of isoeugenol showed that the S283F variant displayed
enhanced binding to molecular oxygen, with an ∼2-fold lower Km and a 4-fold higher catalytic efficiency compared
to those of the wild type (Table 1 and Figure S3). This is
an important asset for overcoming the usually limiting levels of soluble
O2 in large-scale industrial processes; indeed, enhancing
O2 binding and catalysis has been a critical challenge
in the application of oxygenases.37,38 The results
obtained supported the prediction that the introduction of the bulky
and hydrophobic phenylalanine at position 283 impairs resveratrol
oxidation by shifting the specificity of NOV1 toward smaller substrates
such as isoeugenol and molecular oxygen.Table 1Apparent
Steady-State Kinetic Parameters
of Wild-Type and S283F NOV1 for Isoeugenol, Molecular Oxygen (in the
presence of isoeugenol), and Resveratrola  isoeugenolO2 (isoeugenol)resveratrolwild typekcat (s–1)7.3 ± 0.210.9 ± 0.80.38 ± 0.02Km (mM)0.6 ± 0.1(0.7 ± 0.1) × 10–20.06 ± 0.01kcat/Km (M–1 s–1)(12.2 ± 2) × 103(15.6 ± 4) × 105(6.3 ± 0.2) × 103S283Fkcat (s–1)14.5 ± 0.817.3 ± 0.60.078 ± 0.004Km (mM)0.8 ± 0.1(0.29 ± 0.04) × 10–20.227 ± 0.002kcat/Km (M–1 s–1)(18.1 ± 4) × 103(59.7 ± 10) × 105(0.34 ± 0.02) × 103aKinetic assays were performed
at room temperature in 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 9).Enzymatic Vanillin BioproductionBioconversion assays
confirmed that purified S283F converts isoeugenol to vanillin more
efficiently than does the wild type. A >99% conversion of 10 mM
isoeugenol
after reaction for 1.5 h was achieved, which favorably compares with
the 67% conversion obtained using the wild-type enzyme (Figure 3A). The reaction product was
confirmed to be vanillin by HPLC (Figure S4) in accordance with the previous identification.14 Further addition of isoeugenol (10 mM) resulted in 96%
and 74% conversion yields after 24 h for S283F and the wild type,
respectively. The total turnover numbers (TTNs), defined as the total
moles of vanillin produced per mole of enzyme over the entire length
of the reaction, are 5.1 and 2.2 for S283F and the wild type, respectively.
Remarkably, the kcat of the S283F variant
for isoeugenol is 2–10 times higher than the values previously
reported for isoeugenol oxygenases,16,18,19,39 further endorsing this
enzyme as a superior biocatalyst at nonlimiting substrate concentrations,
typical of industrial setups. We set up time-course bioconversion
assays using whole cells that overproduced the S283F variant to reduce
the costs associated with enzyme purification (Figure 3B,C).40,41 Our results revealed
that excellent molar conversion yields (>99%) were achievable within
24 h of reaction using ≤100 mM isoeugenol in the presence of
small amounts (3.5%) of ethanol, a biosolvent, in the whole cell catalysis
mixture.Figure 3Bioconversions of isoeugenol to vanillin. (A) Time course of vanillin
production using 1 unit mL–1 wild-type (blue) and
S283F NOV1 (red) purified enzymes; reactions started with 10 mM substrate,
and additional supplementation with 10 mM isoeugenol occurred after
reaction for 1.5 h (arrow). (B) Time course of vanillin production
using recombinant E. coli whole cells overproducing
the S283F NOV1 variant (final OD600 of 2) in reaction mixtures
containing initial concentrations of 10 (yellow), 25 (green), 50 (red),
and 100 (blue) mM isoeugenol. (C) Molar conversion yields after 24
h for reaction mixtures containing initial concentrations of 10 (yellow),
25 (green), 50 (red), and 100 (blue) mM isoeugenol. Reactions were
performed in glycine-NaOH buffer (pH 9) at room temperature and 150
rpm.Notably, the obtained conversion
yields were similar to those obtained
with Pseudomonas isoeugenol monooxygenases in the
presence of organic solvents or enzyme aggregates17,20 and higher than those obtained with oxygenases from Herbaspirillum
seopedicae and Rhodobacteraceae bacterium (Table S4).39 Furthermore, substrate concentrations of ≤100 mM were tolerated
by the NOV1 system in contrast to other enzymatic systems inhibited
by isoeugenol and force reactions to be performed at significantly
lower substrate concentrations.39,42NOV1 Stability and Iron
IncorporationThe kinetic or
operational stability is relevant for assessing the biocatalyst performance
under specific operating conditions, for example, at a given temperature,
and for studying pathways that lead to the formation of irreversibly
inactivated states of the enzyme.43 The
thermal inactivation assays revealed that the S283F amino acid replacement
drastically improves the enzyme kinetic stability. While wild-type
NOV1 displayed inferior stability with a half-life (t1/2) of ∼1 h at 25 °C, variant S283F exhibited
a half-life of ∼29 h (Figure 4). Notably, incubation of the wild type with iron increased
the half-life 10-fold but not that of the variant, indicating that
(i) binding of the iron cofactor seems to be the critical determinant
of thermostability of the NOV1 enzyme and (ii) the wild-type enzyme
loses iron more quickly than the S283F variant. The chemical unfolding
of the wild type and S283F was assessed by using the fluorescence
emission of tryptophan residues.Figure 4Kinetic stability. Stability of wild-type
(circles) and S283F (squares)
NOV1 at 25 °C in the absence (empty symbols) and presence of
100 equiv of FeSO4 (filled symbols). The inset shows the
linear regression of logarithm activity vs time. In the absence of
iron, the half-lives at 25 °C were 1.3 ± 0.2 and 29 ±
3.4 h for the wild type and S283F variant, respectively. The addition
of iron increased 10-fold the half-life (11.4 ± 0.7 h) of the
wild type, whereas the stability of S283F remained similar (30.4 ±
1.2 h).The folded and unfolded states
were the only states that accumulated
in significant amounts. A two-stage process accurately fit the unfolding
process (Figure 5A),
and both enzymes displayed similar stability. The guanidinium hydrochloride
midpoint concentration is ∼0.6 M (where 50% of molecules are
unfolded), and the native-state free energy is 3.5 kcal mol–1. In thermal unfolding experiments, the fluorescence emission from
tryptophan residues increased in the range of 30–40 °C
(Figure S5), indicating the iron cofactor’s
release, a known fluorescence quencher.44 Incubation of the wild type with 2000 molar equivalents of EDTA
abolished this effect (Figure S5A), in
contrast to S283F, which shows a persisting “iron quenching
effect” even after incubation with EDTA, suggesting a significantly
higher affinity for iron (Figure S5B),
in line with the longer half-lives of kinetic stability. The apparent
melting temperatures (Tm) are very similar
in both enzymes at 57–59 °C (Figure 5B); static light scattering at 500 nm revealed
a strong aggregation tendency with an onset of aggregation (Tagg) at 47 °C before enzyme unfolding (Figure S6). These results showed that both enzymes
share a relatively high thermal robustness of the enzymes’
native state. The higher kinetic thermostability observed in the S283F
variant compared to that of the wild type most likely results from
an enhanced stabilization of the iron cofactor inside the catalytic
cavity.Figure 5(A) Fraction of wild-type (●) and S283F (□) NOV1
unfolded by guanidinium chloride as measured by fluorescence emission
of tryptophyl residues at 340 nm. Measurements were performed by reading
the fluorescence at excitation wavelengths of 296 nm and emission
wavelengths of 340 nm. The solid line is the fit according to the
equation fU = exp(−ΔG°/RT)/[1 + exp(−ΔG°/RT)], which assumes the N ↔
U equilibrium.25 (B) Thermal unfolding
following fluorescence emission of tryptophan residues at 340 nm (Tm = 57–59 °C) for the wild type
(●) and S283F variant (□).Structural Characterization of the S283F VariantThe
crystal structure of NOV1-S283F was determined at 2.9 Å using
synchrotron radiation (Table S2), revealing
the recognizable electron density of a phenylalanine side chain at
position 283 (Figure 6A–C). The aromatic ring of F283 was found to occupy the active
site, cluttering the catalytic cavity. The Fe(II)-O2 complex,
required for activity, is coordinated by four histidine residues:
H167, H218, H284, and H476 (Figure 6B,C). F283 is predicted to reach out and interact with
isoeugenol through hydrophobic contacts (Figure 1C), whereas K134 and Y101 create the proper
hydrogen bonding environment with the 4-hydroxy group of the substrate
(Figure 6C,D).Figure 6(A) Crystals
of the S283F NOV1 variant. (B) Weighted 2Fo – Fc electron density
of the active site. The contour level is 1.2σ. The side chain
of F283 is quite recognizable with its aromatic ring close to the
His-coordinated iron. The difference Fourier Fo – Fc map [contoured at
the 3.0σ level (green)] showed a residual electron density interpreted
as bound oxygen. (C) Oxygen-bound active site structure of the final
model. (D) S283F NOV1 crystal structure with the reaction product
(vanillin, carbons colored purple) modeled in the cavity. The model
was generated using the structure of the complex between the wild-type
enzyme and vanillin as a reference (carbons colored green, PDB entry 5J55). F283 interacts
with the edge of the substrate ring, whereas F59 is involved in π–π
stacking with the aromatic ring of the substrate.Molecular Dynamics Simulations and Substrate DockingStarting
from the experimental wild-type (PDB entry 5J55) and S283F (this
work) structures, the computational analysis showed that a comparable
number of interactions is present in both wild-type and S283F enzymes
and the active site cavity along the MD trajectories (800 ns), which
remained in a relatively stable conformation with a constant volume
in both structures (Figure S7). However,
the S283F replacement resulted in local rearrangement of a sizable
hydrophobic core present in the wild type to create small hydrophobic
patches near the active site (Figure 7); the average cavity volume is expanded in S283F where,
additionally, longer distances were measured between molecular oxygen
and F59 (Figure S8A,B). Consequently, a
higher number of water molecules was identified inside the active
site of the mutant (Figure S8C). The more
expanded shape of the S283F active site could make the catalytic center
more accessible to the solvent and, by extension, other small molecules,
such as molecular oxygen and isoeugenol.Figure 7Inter-residue interaction
analysis performed with PIC (Protein
Interaction Calculator) using the X-ray structures of wild-type NOV1
(PDB entry 55j5) and the S283F variant (this work). The side chain–side chain
hydrophobic interactions that appear in the wild type but not in the
variant (left) or the variant but not in the wild type (right) are
shown as blue and orange spheres. The S283F mutation is highlighted
with green spheres. The gray spheres and sticks comprise interactions
shared by both systems.Furthermore, the presence
of the bulky phenylalanine at the active
site seems to distort the resveratrol conformation significantly when
approaching precatalytic states (Figure 8A,B and Table S5). In contrast, the distortion of the isoeugenol structure when approaching
precatalytic binding modes appeared only slightly higher in the variant
than in the wild type. These data support the experimental observation
that resveratrol is a poorer substrate for the variant than is the
wild type (4-fold higher Km and 5-fold
lower kcat). Furthermore, MD trajectories
of the ligand-, oxygen-, and iron-free systems of the wild type showed
that the four iron binding histidines are kept in a stable conformation
that is not compatible with iron coordination, particularly for H167
and H218 (Figure S9). This was different
from the case for S283F, where the presence of phenylalanine in the
iron neighborhood increased the fluctuation of the His residues, which
visited conformations compatible with iron binding (Figure S9), indicating a lower relative transition energy
barrier between iron-free and iron-bound forms in S283F. This increased
flexibility of the iron-coordinating histidines could be related to
alterations in the H-bond network of the active site, where three
conserved carboxylate residues (E135, E353, and E418) are responsible
for stabilizing H218, H284, and H476.14,45 In addition,
lower pKa values for all histidine side
chains, particularly H167 and H218, were found in the S283F variant
(Figure 8C), suggesting
that their dissociation equilibrium favors the unprotonated state
required to bind the iron metal. These electrostatic calculations
support a higher affinity of iron for the S283F variant with kinetic
stability and thermal unfolding/EDTA chelation, which showed that
the wild type loses iron more readily than does S283F (Figure 4 and Figure S5A,B).Figure 8(A) Dihedral (ΔE) and binding energies
(ΔG) estimated for ensemble docking of isoeugenol
and resveratrol
to wild-type NOV1 and the S283F variant. ΔEdihedral measures how strong the ligand distortion is
compared to its protein-free form, and ΔGbinding estimates the quality of ligand–protein interactions.
(B) Representation of resveratrol binding to wild-type NOV1 (gray)
and the S283F variant (blue). The substrate is represented as spheres,
and the residues are represented as sticks. (C) pKa values of iron-coordinating histidines 167, 218, 284,
and 476 were measured every 40 ps along the 800 ns MD trajectory for
the apo form of both the wild type (red) and the S283F mutant (blue).

Results and Discussion

Active Site Design: Construction and Characterization
of VariantsThe analysis of the binding of vanillin and resveratrol
to NOV1
(PDB entries 5J55 and 5J54,
respectively) suggested that isoeugenol can be docked into the NOV1
active site with the hydroxyl group pointed toward Y101 and K134 residues
and the methoxy substituent pointed toward the pocket created by N120,
T121, and L475 (Figure 1A–C, region A). In this position, the isoeugenol aromatic
ring plane sits parallel to the side chain of F59. Moreover, the reactive
double bond of isoeugenol is located right above the iron center.
In contrast, the terminal methyl group is hosted in a large and hydrated
niche in the rear of the cavity close to F281, S283, F307, and F354
(Figure 1A–C,
region B). The alignment of NOV1 with P. nitroreducens isoeugenol monooxygenase shows a phenylalanine residue at position
S283 in this enzyme.16 Furthermore, analysis
of the X-ray crystal structure supported the reasoning that the S283F
replacement could improve isoeugenol catalysis by filling the free
space left in the active site upon binding the single-ring isoeugenol
substrate.Mutations N120L, F281W, S283Q, F307H, F307W, and
L475S were suggested by sequence comparisons and biochemical information
from the literature.14,16,18,19 Positions 120, 121, 281, 283, 307, 354,
473, and 475 were submitted to mutagenesis using Rosetta and filtered
by protein–ligand docking (see the computational methods section
for further details). Thirty-five variants based on the rational and
computational approaches were constructed using site-directed mutagenesis
and characterized (Tables S1 and S3). The
enzymatic activity of isoeugenol was tested in crude cell extracts
in 96-well microplates. The results showed that mutations at positions
120, 121, 473, and 475 impaired isoeugenol activity. Three double
variants, F281M/S283T, F281M/S283V, and F281C/S283I, showed specific
activities comparable to that of the wild type, and single variant
S283F stood out with almost 2-fold higher enzymatic activity compared
to that of the wild type.

Active Site Design: Construction and Characterization
of Variants

The analysis of the binding of vanillin and resveratrol
to NOV1
(PDB entries 5J55 and 5J54,
respectively) suggested that isoeugenol can be docked into the NOV1
active site with the hydroxyl group pointed toward Y101 and K134 residues
and the methoxy substituent pointed toward the pocket created by N120,
T121, and L475 (Figure 1A–C, region A). In this position, the isoeugenol aromatic
ring plane sits parallel to the side chain of F59. Moreover, the reactive
double bond of isoeugenol is located right above the iron center.
In contrast, the terminal methyl group is hosted in a large and hydrated
niche in the rear of the cavity close to F281, S283, F307, and F354
(Figure 1A–C,
region B). The alignment of NOV1 with P. nitroreducens isoeugenol monooxygenase shows a phenylalanine residue at position
S283 in this enzyme.16 Furthermore, analysis
of the X-ray crystal structure supported the reasoning that the S283F
replacement could improve isoeugenol catalysis by filling the free
space left in the active site upon binding the single-ring isoeugenol
substrate.

Mutations N120L, F281W, S283Q, F307H, F307W, and
L475S were suggested by sequence comparisons and biochemical information
from the literature.14,16,18,19 Positions 120, 121, 281, 283, 307, 354,
473, and 475 were submitted to mutagenesis using Rosetta and filtered
by protein–ligand docking (see the computational methods section
for further details). Thirty-five variants based on the rational and
computational approaches were constructed using site-directed mutagenesis
and characterized (Tables S1 and S3). The
enzymatic activity of isoeugenol was tested in crude cell extracts
in 96-well microplates. The results showed that mutations at positions
120, 121, 473, and 475 impaired isoeugenol activity. Three double
variants, F281M/S283T, F281M/S283V, and F281C/S283I, showed specific
activities comparable to that of the wild type, and single variant
S283F stood out with almost 2-fold higher enzymatic activity compared
to that of the wild type.

Biochemical and Kinetic CharacterizationThe wild type
and variant S283F were produced at an Erlenmeyer scale and purified.
Both enzymes showed an optimal pH of 9 and optimal temperatures of
∼28 °C for the wild-type enzyme and 32 °C for the
S283F variant (Figure 2A,B). Purified enzyme preparations displayed approximately 0.5 mol
of iron/mol of protein and were partially iron-depleted, similar to
those observed in isoeugenol oxygenases from P. putida IE2716 and P. nitroreducens IEM.18Figure 2pH and temperature profiles. (A) pH–activity
profile of
wild-type (●) and S283F (■) NOV1. Reactions were performed
using Britton Robinson buffer (in the pH range from 3 to 11) in the
presence of 1 mM isoeugenol at room temperature. (B) Temperature dependence
of enzymatic activity in reactions performed in 100 mM Tris-HCl buffer
(pH 9).The steady-state kinetic analysis
revealed that the S283F variant
features a kcat 2-fold higher than that
of the wild type, and a slightly higher Km value for isoeugenol, leading to a catalytic efficiency (kcat/Km) comparable
to that of the wild type (Table 1). The activity using resveratrol as a substrate was
also investigated; the S283F variant showed a 5-fold lower kcat and a 4-fold higher Km, resulting in a sharp 20-fold decrease in kcat/Km, compared to that of
the wild type. Notably, the kinetic analysis for O2 in
the presence of isoeugenol showed that the S283F variant displayed
enhanced binding to molecular oxygen, with an ∼2-fold lower Km and a 4-fold higher catalytic efficiency compared
to those of the wild type (Table 1 and Figure S3). This is
an important asset for overcoming the usually limiting levels of soluble
O2 in large-scale industrial processes; indeed, enhancing
O2 binding and catalysis has been a critical challenge
in the application of oxygenases.37,38 The results
obtained supported the prediction that the introduction of the bulky
and hydrophobic phenylalanine at position 283 impairs resveratrol
oxidation by shifting the specificity of NOV1 toward smaller substrates
such as isoeugenol and molecular oxygen.Table 1Apparent
Steady-State Kinetic Parameters
of Wild-Type and S283F NOV1 for Isoeugenol, Molecular Oxygen (in the
presence of isoeugenol), and Resveratrola  isoeugenolO2 (isoeugenol)resveratrolwild typekcat (s–1)7.3 ± 0.210.9 ± 0.80.38 ± 0.02Km (mM)0.6 ± 0.1(0.7 ± 0.1) × 10–20.06 ± 0.01kcat/Km (M–1 s–1)(12.2 ± 2) × 103(15.6 ± 4) × 105(6.3 ± 0.2) × 103S283Fkcat (s–1)14.5 ± 0.817.3 ± 0.60.078 ± 0.004Km (mM)0.8 ± 0.1(0.29 ± 0.04) × 10–20.227 ± 0.002kcat/Km (M–1 s–1)(18.1 ± 4) × 103(59.7 ± 10) × 105(0.34 ± 0.02) × 103aKinetic assays were performed
at room temperature in 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 9).

Biochemical and Kinetic Characterization

The wild type
and variant S283F were produced at an Erlenmeyer scale and purified.
Both enzymes showed an optimal pH of 9 and optimal temperatures of
∼28 °C for the wild-type enzyme and 32 °C for the
S283F variant (Figure 2A,B). Purified enzyme preparations displayed approximately 0.5 mol
of iron/mol of protein and were partially iron-depleted, similar to
those observed in isoeugenol oxygenases from P. putida IE2716 and P. nitroreducens IEM.18

pH and temperature profiles. (A) pH–activity
profile of
wild-type (●) and S283F (■) NOV1. Reactions were performed
using Britton Robinson buffer (in the pH range from 3 to 11) in the
presence of 1 mM isoeugenol at room temperature. (B) Temperature dependence
of enzymatic activity in reactions performed in 100 mM Tris-HCl buffer
(pH 9).

The steady-state kinetic analysis
revealed that the S283F variant
features a kcat 2-fold higher than that
of the wild type, and a slightly higher Km value for isoeugenol, leading to a catalytic efficiency (kcat/Km) comparable
to that of the wild type (Table 1). The activity using resveratrol as a substrate was
also investigated; the S283F variant showed a 5-fold lower kcat and a 4-fold higher Km, resulting in a sharp 20-fold decrease in kcat/Km, compared to that of
the wild type. Notably, the kinetic analysis for O2 in
the presence of isoeugenol showed that the S283F variant displayed
enhanced binding to molecular oxygen, with an ∼2-fold lower Km and a 4-fold higher catalytic efficiency compared
to those of the wild type (Table 1 and Figure S3). This is
an important asset for overcoming the usually limiting levels of soluble
O2 in large-scale industrial processes; indeed, enhancing
O2 binding and catalysis has been a critical challenge
in the application of oxygenases.37,38 The results
obtained supported the prediction that the introduction of the bulky
and hydrophobic phenylalanine at position 283 impairs resveratrol
oxidation by shifting the specificity of NOV1 toward smaller substrates
such as isoeugenol and molecular oxygen.

Apparent
Steady-State Kinetic Parameters
of Wild-Type and S283F NOV1 for Isoeugenol, Molecular Oxygen (in the
presence of isoeugenol), and Resveratrola

Kinetic assays were performed
at room temperature in 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 9).

Enzymatic Vanillin BioproductionBioconversion assays
confirmed that purified S283F converts isoeugenol to vanillin more
efficiently than does the wild type. A >99% conversion of 10 mM
isoeugenol
after reaction for 1.5 h was achieved, which favorably compares with
the 67% conversion obtained using the wild-type enzyme (Figure 3A). The reaction product was
confirmed to be vanillin by HPLC (Figure S4) in accordance with the previous identification.14 Further addition of isoeugenol (10 mM) resulted in 96%
and 74% conversion yields after 24 h for S283F and the wild type,
respectively. The total turnover numbers (TTNs), defined as the total
moles of vanillin produced per mole of enzyme over the entire length
of the reaction, are 5.1 and 2.2 for S283F and the wild type, respectively.
Remarkably, the kcat of the S283F variant
for isoeugenol is 2–10 times higher than the values previously
reported for isoeugenol oxygenases,16,18,19,39 further endorsing this
enzyme as a superior biocatalyst at nonlimiting substrate concentrations,
typical of industrial setups. We set up time-course bioconversion
assays using whole cells that overproduced the S283F variant to reduce
the costs associated with enzyme purification (Figure 3B,C).40,41 Our results revealed
that excellent molar conversion yields (>99%) were achievable within
24 h of reaction using ≤100 mM isoeugenol in the presence of
small amounts (3.5%) of ethanol, a biosolvent, in the whole cell catalysis
mixture.Figure 3Bioconversions of isoeugenol to vanillin. (A) Time course of vanillin
production using 1 unit mL–1 wild-type (blue) and
S283F NOV1 (red) purified enzymes; reactions started with 10 mM substrate,
and additional supplementation with 10 mM isoeugenol occurred after
reaction for 1.5 h (arrow). (B) Time course of vanillin production
using recombinant E. coli whole cells overproducing
the S283F NOV1 variant (final OD600 of 2) in reaction mixtures
containing initial concentrations of 10 (yellow), 25 (green), 50 (red),
and 100 (blue) mM isoeugenol. (C) Molar conversion yields after 24
h for reaction mixtures containing initial concentrations of 10 (yellow),
25 (green), 50 (red), and 100 (blue) mM isoeugenol. Reactions were
performed in glycine-NaOH buffer (pH 9) at room temperature and 150
rpm.Notably, the obtained conversion
yields were similar to those obtained
with Pseudomonas isoeugenol monooxygenases in the
presence of organic solvents or enzyme aggregates17,20 and higher than those obtained with oxygenases from Herbaspirillum
seopedicae and Rhodobacteraceae bacterium (Table S4).39 Furthermore, substrate concentrations of ≤100 mM were tolerated
by the NOV1 system in contrast to other enzymatic systems inhibited
by isoeugenol and force reactions to be performed at significantly
lower substrate concentrations.39,42

Enzymatic Vanillin Bioproduction

Bioconversion assays
confirmed that purified S283F converts isoeugenol to vanillin more
efficiently than does the wild type. A >99% conversion of 10 mM
isoeugenol
after reaction for 1.5 h was achieved, which favorably compares with
the 67% conversion obtained using the wild-type enzyme (Figure 3A). The reaction product was
confirmed to be vanillin by HPLC (Figure S4) in accordance with the previous identification.14 Further addition of isoeugenol (10 mM) resulted in 96%
and 74% conversion yields after 24 h for S283F and the wild type,
respectively. The total turnover numbers (TTNs), defined as the total
moles of vanillin produced per mole of enzyme over the entire length
of the reaction, are 5.1 and 2.2 for S283F and the wild type, respectively.
Remarkably, the kcat of the S283F variant
for isoeugenol is 2–10 times higher than the values previously
reported for isoeugenol oxygenases,16,18,19,39 further endorsing this
enzyme as a superior biocatalyst at nonlimiting substrate concentrations,
typical of industrial setups. We set up time-course bioconversion
assays using whole cells that overproduced the S283F variant to reduce
the costs associated with enzyme purification (Figure 3B,C).40,41 Our results revealed
that excellent molar conversion yields (>99%) were achievable within
24 h of reaction using ≤100 mM isoeugenol in the presence of
small amounts (3.5%) of ethanol, a biosolvent, in the whole cell catalysis
mixture.

Bioconversions of isoeugenol to vanillin. (A) Time course of vanillin
production using 1 unit mL–1 wild-type (blue) and
S283F NOV1 (red) purified enzymes; reactions started with 10 mM substrate,
and additional supplementation with 10 mM isoeugenol occurred after
reaction for 1.5 h (arrow). (B) Time course of vanillin production
using recombinant E. coli whole cells overproducing
the S283F NOV1 variant (final OD600 of 2) in reaction mixtures
containing initial concentrations of 10 (yellow), 25 (green), 50 (red),
and 100 (blue) mM isoeugenol. (C) Molar conversion yields after 24
h for reaction mixtures containing initial concentrations of 10 (yellow),
25 (green), 50 (red), and 100 (blue) mM isoeugenol. Reactions were
performed in glycine-NaOH buffer (pH 9) at room temperature and 150
rpm.

Notably, the obtained conversion
yields were similar to those obtained
with Pseudomonas isoeugenol monooxygenases in the
presence of organic solvents or enzyme aggregates17,20 and higher than those obtained with oxygenases from Herbaspirillum
seopedicae and Rhodobacteraceae bacterium (Table S4).39 Furthermore, substrate concentrations of ≤100 mM were tolerated
by the NOV1 system in contrast to other enzymatic systems inhibited
by isoeugenol and force reactions to be performed at significantly
lower substrate concentrations.39,42

NOV1 Stability and Iron
IncorporationThe kinetic or
operational stability is relevant for assessing the biocatalyst performance
under specific operating conditions, for example, at a given temperature,
and for studying pathways that lead to the formation of irreversibly
inactivated states of the enzyme.43 The
thermal inactivation assays revealed that the S283F amino acid replacement
drastically improves the enzyme kinetic stability. While wild-type
NOV1 displayed inferior stability with a half-life (t1/2) of ∼1 h at 25 °C, variant S283F exhibited
a half-life of ∼29 h (Figure 4). Notably, incubation of the wild type with iron increased
the half-life 10-fold but not that of the variant, indicating that
(i) binding of the iron cofactor seems to be the critical determinant
of thermostability of the NOV1 enzyme and (ii) the wild-type enzyme
loses iron more quickly than the S283F variant. The chemical unfolding
of the wild type and S283F was assessed by using the fluorescence
emission of tryptophan residues.Figure 4Kinetic stability. Stability of wild-type
(circles) and S283F (squares)
NOV1 at 25 °C in the absence (empty symbols) and presence of
100 equiv of FeSO4 (filled symbols). The inset shows the
linear regression of logarithm activity vs time. In the absence of
iron, the half-lives at 25 °C were 1.3 ± 0.2 and 29 ±
3.4 h for the wild type and S283F variant, respectively. The addition
of iron increased 10-fold the half-life (11.4 ± 0.7 h) of the
wild type, whereas the stability of S283F remained similar (30.4 ±
1.2 h).The folded and unfolded states
were the only states that accumulated
in significant amounts. A two-stage process accurately fit the unfolding
process (Figure 5A),
and both enzymes displayed similar stability. The guanidinium hydrochloride
midpoint concentration is ∼0.6 M (where 50% of molecules are
unfolded), and the native-state free energy is 3.5 kcal mol–1. In thermal unfolding experiments, the fluorescence emission from
tryptophan residues increased in the range of 30–40 °C
(Figure S5), indicating the iron cofactor’s
release, a known fluorescence quencher.44 Incubation of the wild type with 2000 molar equivalents of EDTA
abolished this effect (Figure S5A), in
contrast to S283F, which shows a persisting “iron quenching
effect” even after incubation with EDTA, suggesting a significantly
higher affinity for iron (Figure S5B),
in line with the longer half-lives of kinetic stability. The apparent
melting temperatures (Tm) are very similar
in both enzymes at 57–59 °C (Figure 5B); static light scattering at 500 nm revealed
a strong aggregation tendency with an onset of aggregation (Tagg) at 47 °C before enzyme unfolding (Figure S6). These results showed that both enzymes
share a relatively high thermal robustness of the enzymes’
native state. The higher kinetic thermostability observed in the S283F
variant compared to that of the wild type most likely results from
an enhanced stabilization of the iron cofactor inside the catalytic
cavity.Figure 5(A) Fraction of wild-type (●) and S283F (□) NOV1
unfolded by guanidinium chloride as measured by fluorescence emission
of tryptophyl residues at 340 nm. Measurements were performed by reading
the fluorescence at excitation wavelengths of 296 nm and emission
wavelengths of 340 nm. The solid line is the fit according to the
equation fU = exp(−ΔG°/RT)/[1 + exp(−ΔG°/RT)], which assumes the N ↔
U equilibrium.25 (B) Thermal unfolding
following fluorescence emission of tryptophan residues at 340 nm (Tm = 57–59 °C) for the wild type
(●) and S283F variant (□).

NOV1 Stability and Iron
Incorporation

The kinetic or
operational stability is relevant for assessing the biocatalyst performance
under specific operating conditions, for example, at a given temperature,
and for studying pathways that lead to the formation of irreversibly
inactivated states of the enzyme.43 The
thermal inactivation assays revealed that the S283F amino acid replacement
drastically improves the enzyme kinetic stability. While wild-type
NOV1 displayed inferior stability with a half-life (t1/2) of ∼1 h at 25 °C, variant S283F exhibited
a half-life of ∼29 h (Figure 4). Notably, incubation of the wild type with iron increased
the half-life 10-fold but not that of the variant, indicating that
(i) binding of the iron cofactor seems to be the critical determinant
of thermostability of the NOV1 enzyme and (ii) the wild-type enzyme
loses iron more quickly than the S283F variant. The chemical unfolding
of the wild type and S283F was assessed by using the fluorescence
emission of tryptophan residues.

Kinetic stability. Stability of wild-type
(circles) and S283F (squares)
NOV1 at 25 °C in the absence (empty symbols) and presence of
100 equiv of FeSO4 (filled symbols). The inset shows the
linear regression of logarithm activity vs time. In the absence of
iron, the half-lives at 25 °C were 1.3 ± 0.2 and 29 ±
3.4 h for the wild type and S283F variant, respectively. The addition
of iron increased 10-fold the half-life (11.4 ± 0.7 h) of the
wild type, whereas the stability of S283F remained similar (30.4 ±
1.2 h).

The folded and unfolded states
were the only states that accumulated
in significant amounts. A two-stage process accurately fit the unfolding
process (Figure 5A),
and both enzymes displayed similar stability. The guanidinium hydrochloride
midpoint concentration is ∼0.6 M (where 50% of molecules are
unfolded), and the native-state free energy is 3.5 kcal mol–1. In thermal unfolding experiments, the fluorescence emission from
tryptophan residues increased in the range of 30–40 °C
(Figure S5), indicating the iron cofactor’s
release, a known fluorescence quencher.44 Incubation of the wild type with 2000 molar equivalents of EDTA
abolished this effect (Figure S5A), in
contrast to S283F, which shows a persisting “iron quenching
effect” even after incubation with EDTA, suggesting a significantly
higher affinity for iron (Figure S5B),
in line with the longer half-lives of kinetic stability. The apparent
melting temperatures (Tm) are very similar
in both enzymes at 57–59 °C (Figure 5B); static light scattering at 500 nm revealed
a strong aggregation tendency with an onset of aggregation (Tagg) at 47 °C before enzyme unfolding (Figure S6). These results showed that both enzymes
share a relatively high thermal robustness of the enzymes’
native state. The higher kinetic thermostability observed in the S283F
variant compared to that of the wild type most likely results from
an enhanced stabilization of the iron cofactor inside the catalytic
cavity.

(A) Fraction of wild-type (●) and S283F (□) NOV1
unfolded by guanidinium chloride as measured by fluorescence emission
of tryptophyl residues at 340 nm. Measurements were performed by reading
the fluorescence at excitation wavelengths of 296 nm and emission
wavelengths of 340 nm. The solid line is the fit according to the
equation fU = exp(−ΔG°/RT)/[1 + exp(−ΔG°/RT)], which assumes the N ↔
U equilibrium.25 (B) Thermal unfolding
following fluorescence emission of tryptophan residues at 340 nm (Tm = 57–59 °C) for the wild type
(●) and S283F variant (□).

Structural Characterization of the S283F VariantThe
crystal structure of NOV1-S283F was determined at 2.9 Å using
synchrotron radiation (Table S2), revealing
the recognizable electron density of a phenylalanine side chain at
position 283 (Figure 6A–C). The aromatic ring of F283 was found to occupy the active
site, cluttering the catalytic cavity. The Fe(II)-O2 complex,
required for activity, is coordinated by four histidine residues:
H167, H218, H284, and H476 (Figure 6B,C). F283 is predicted to reach out and interact with
isoeugenol through hydrophobic contacts (Figure 1C), whereas K134 and Y101 create the proper
hydrogen bonding environment with the 4-hydroxy group of the substrate
(Figure 6C,D).Figure 6(A) Crystals
of the S283F NOV1 variant. (B) Weighted 2Fo – Fc electron density
of the active site. The contour level is 1.2σ. The side chain
of F283 is quite recognizable with its aromatic ring close to the
His-coordinated iron. The difference Fourier Fo – Fc map [contoured at
the 3.0σ level (green)] showed a residual electron density interpreted
as bound oxygen. (C) Oxygen-bound active site structure of the final
model. (D) S283F NOV1 crystal structure with the reaction product
(vanillin, carbons colored purple) modeled in the cavity. The model
was generated using the structure of the complex between the wild-type
enzyme and vanillin as a reference (carbons colored green, PDB entry 5J55). F283 interacts
with the edge of the substrate ring, whereas F59 is involved in π–π
stacking with the aromatic ring of the substrate.

Structural Characterization of the S283F Variant

The
crystal structure of NOV1-S283F was determined at 2.9 Å using
synchrotron radiation (Table S2), revealing
the recognizable electron density of a phenylalanine side chain at
position 283 (Figure 6A–C). The aromatic ring of F283 was found to occupy the active
site, cluttering the catalytic cavity. The Fe(II)-O2 complex,
required for activity, is coordinated by four histidine residues:
H167, H218, H284, and H476 (Figure 6B,C). F283 is predicted to reach out and interact with
isoeugenol through hydrophobic contacts (Figure 1C), whereas K134 and Y101 create the proper
hydrogen bonding environment with the 4-hydroxy group of the substrate
(Figure 6C,D).

(A) Crystals
of the S283F NOV1 variant. (B) Weighted 2Fo – Fc electron density
of the active site. The contour level is 1.2σ. The side chain
of F283 is quite recognizable with its aromatic ring close to the
His-coordinated iron. The difference Fourier Fo – Fc map [contoured at
the 3.0σ level (green)] showed a residual electron density interpreted
as bound oxygen. (C) Oxygen-bound active site structure of the final
model. (D) S283F NOV1 crystal structure with the reaction product
(vanillin, carbons colored purple) modeled in the cavity. The model
was generated using the structure of the complex between the wild-type
enzyme and vanillin as a reference (carbons colored green, PDB entry 5J55). F283 interacts
with the edge of the substrate ring, whereas F59 is involved in π–π
stacking with the aromatic ring of the substrate.

Molecular Dynamics Simulations and Substrate DockingStarting
from the experimental wild-type (PDB entry 5J55) and S283F (this
work) structures, the computational analysis showed that a comparable
number of interactions is present in both wild-type and S283F enzymes
and the active site cavity along the MD trajectories (800 ns), which
remained in a relatively stable conformation with a constant volume
in both structures (Figure S7). However,
the S283F replacement resulted in local rearrangement of a sizable
hydrophobic core present in the wild type to create small hydrophobic
patches near the active site (Figure 7); the average cavity volume is expanded in S283F where,
additionally, longer distances were measured between molecular oxygen
and F59 (Figure S8A,B). Consequently, a
higher number of water molecules was identified inside the active
site of the mutant (Figure S8C). The more
expanded shape of the S283F active site could make the catalytic center
more accessible to the solvent and, by extension, other small molecules,
such as molecular oxygen and isoeugenol.Figure 7Inter-residue interaction
analysis performed with PIC (Protein
Interaction Calculator) using the X-ray structures of wild-type NOV1
(PDB entry 55j5) and the S283F variant (this work). The side chain–side chain
hydrophobic interactions that appear in the wild type but not in the
variant (left) or the variant but not in the wild type (right) are
shown as blue and orange spheres. The S283F mutation is highlighted
with green spheres. The gray spheres and sticks comprise interactions
shared by both systems.Furthermore, the presence
of the bulky phenylalanine at the active
site seems to distort the resveratrol conformation significantly when
approaching precatalytic states (Figure 8A,B and Table S5). In contrast, the distortion of the isoeugenol structure when approaching
precatalytic binding modes appeared only slightly higher in the variant
than in the wild type. These data support the experimental observation
that resveratrol is a poorer substrate for the variant than is the
wild type (4-fold higher Km and 5-fold
lower kcat). Furthermore, MD trajectories
of the ligand-, oxygen-, and iron-free systems of the wild type showed
that the four iron binding histidines are kept in a stable conformation
that is not compatible with iron coordination, particularly for H167
and H218 (Figure S9). This was different
from the case for S283F, where the presence of phenylalanine in the
iron neighborhood increased the fluctuation of the His residues, which
visited conformations compatible with iron binding (Figure S9), indicating a lower relative transition energy
barrier between iron-free and iron-bound forms in S283F. This increased
flexibility of the iron-coordinating histidines could be related to
alterations in the H-bond network of the active site, where three
conserved carboxylate residues (E135, E353, and E418) are responsible
for stabilizing H218, H284, and H476.14,45 In addition,
lower pKa values for all histidine side
chains, particularly H167 and H218, were found in the S283F variant
(Figure 8C), suggesting
that their dissociation equilibrium favors the unprotonated state
required to bind the iron metal. These electrostatic calculations
support a higher affinity of iron for the S283F variant with kinetic
stability and thermal unfolding/EDTA chelation, which showed that
the wild type loses iron more readily than does S283F (Figure 4 and Figure S5A,B).Figure 8(A) Dihedral (ΔE) and binding energies
(ΔG) estimated for ensemble docking of isoeugenol
and resveratrol
to wild-type NOV1 and the S283F variant. ΔEdihedral measures how strong the ligand distortion is
compared to its protein-free form, and ΔGbinding estimates the quality of ligand–protein interactions.
(B) Representation of resveratrol binding to wild-type NOV1 (gray)
and the S283F variant (blue). The substrate is represented as spheres,
and the residues are represented as sticks. (C) pKa values of iron-coordinating histidines 167, 218, 284,
and 476 were measured every 40 ps along the 800 ns MD trajectory for
the apo form of both the wild type (red) and the S283F mutant (blue).

Molecular Dynamics Simulations and Substrate Docking

Starting
from the experimental wild-type (PDB entry 5J55) and S283F (this
work) structures, the computational analysis showed that a comparable
number of interactions is present in both wild-type and S283F enzymes
and the active site cavity along the MD trajectories (800 ns), which
remained in a relatively stable conformation with a constant volume
in both structures (Figure S7). However,
the S283F replacement resulted in local rearrangement of a sizable
hydrophobic core present in the wild type to create small hydrophobic
patches near the active site (Figure 7); the average cavity volume is expanded in S283F where,
additionally, longer distances were measured between molecular oxygen
and F59 (Figure S8A,B). Consequently, a
higher number of water molecules was identified inside the active
site of the mutant (Figure S8C). The more
expanded shape of the S283F active site could make the catalytic center
more accessible to the solvent and, by extension, other small molecules,
such as molecular oxygen and isoeugenol.

Inter-residue interaction
analysis performed with PIC (Protein
Interaction Calculator) using the X-ray structures of wild-type NOV1
(PDB entry 55j5) and the S283F variant (this work). The side chain–side chain
hydrophobic interactions that appear in the wild type but not in the
variant (left) or the variant but not in the wild type (right) are
shown as blue and orange spheres. The S283F mutation is highlighted
with green spheres. The gray spheres and sticks comprise interactions
shared by both systems.

Furthermore, the presence
of the bulky phenylalanine at the active
site seems to distort the resveratrol conformation significantly when
approaching precatalytic states (Figure 8A,B and Table S5). In contrast, the distortion of the isoeugenol structure when approaching
precatalytic binding modes appeared only slightly higher in the variant
than in the wild type. These data support the experimental observation
that resveratrol is a poorer substrate for the variant than is the
wild type (4-fold higher Km and 5-fold
lower kcat). Furthermore, MD trajectories
of the ligand-, oxygen-, and iron-free systems of the wild type showed
that the four iron binding histidines are kept in a stable conformation
that is not compatible with iron coordination, particularly for H167
and H218 (Figure S9). This was different
from the case for S283F, where the presence of phenylalanine in the
iron neighborhood increased the fluctuation of the His residues, which
visited conformations compatible with iron binding (Figure S9), indicating a lower relative transition energy
barrier between iron-free and iron-bound forms in S283F. This increased
flexibility of the iron-coordinating histidines could be related to
alterations in the H-bond network of the active site, where three
conserved carboxylate residues (E135, E353, and E418) are responsible
for stabilizing H218, H284, and H476.14,45 In addition,
lower pKa values for all histidine side
chains, particularly H167 and H218, were found in the S283F variant
(Figure 8C), suggesting
that their dissociation equilibrium favors the unprotonated state
required to bind the iron metal. These electrostatic calculations
support a higher affinity of iron for the S283F variant with kinetic
stability and thermal unfolding/EDTA chelation, which showed that
the wild type loses iron more readily than does S283F (Figure 4 and Figure S5A,B).

(A) Dihedral (ΔE) and binding energies
(ΔG) estimated for ensemble docking of isoeugenol
and resveratrol
to wild-type NOV1 and the S283F variant. ΔEdihedral measures how strong the ligand distortion is
compared to its protein-free form, and ΔGbinding estimates the quality of ligand–protein interactions.
(B) Representation of resveratrol binding to wild-type NOV1 (gray)
and the S283F variant (blue). The substrate is represented as spheres,
and the residues are represented as sticks. (C) pKa values of iron-coordinating histidines 167, 218, 284,
and 476 were measured every 40 ps along the 800 ns MD trajectory for
the apo form of both the wild type (red) and the S283F mutant (blue).

Concluding RemarksIn this work,
35 variants were rationally designed, constructed,
and tested for activity. The S283F variant was selected for further
investigations on the basis of increased selectivity and catalytic
rates for isoeugenol compared to those of wild-type enzymes. This
variant also showed an enhanced kinetic (operational) thermostability
due to enhanced stabilization of the iron cofactor inside the catalytic
cavity. Incidentally, the primary molecular determinant of NOV1 kinetic
stability is suggested to be iron deletion of the active site. MD
analyses supported increased iron retention in the active site of
S283F and, therefore, enhanced kinetic stability. Biotransformation
of the plant-derived phenylpropanoid compound, isoeugenol, using whole
cells overproducing the improved variant showed remarkable levels
of conversion to vanillin at concentrations of ≤100 mM, at
room temperature, and in relatively short periods. The deactivation
and stability of the enzymes under harsh conditions are some of the
main limitations of the industrial application of biocatalysts. Therefore,
the S283F variant, which shows increased activity and stability, is
an exciting candidate for industrial bioprocesses targeted in valorizing
lignin-related phenolics for biovanillin production in the lignocellulosic
biorefinery realm.

Concluding Remarks

In this work,
35 variants were rationally designed, constructed,
and tested for activity. The S283F variant was selected for further
investigations on the basis of increased selectivity and catalytic
rates for isoeugenol compared to those of wild-type enzymes. This
variant also showed an enhanced kinetic (operational) thermostability
due to enhanced stabilization of the iron cofactor inside the catalytic
cavity. Incidentally, the primary molecular determinant of NOV1 kinetic
stability is suggested to be iron deletion of the active site. MD
analyses supported increased iron retention in the active site of
S283F and, therefore, enhanced kinetic stability. Biotransformation
of the plant-derived phenylpropanoid compound, isoeugenol, using whole
cells overproducing the improved variant showed remarkable levels
of conversion to vanillin at concentrations of ≤100 mM, at
room temperature, and in relatively short periods. The deactivation
and stability of the enzymes under harsh conditions are some of the
main limitations of the industrial application of biocatalysts. Therefore,
the S283F variant, which shows increased activity and stability, is
an exciting candidate for industrial bioprocesses targeted in valorizing
lignin-related phenolics for biovanillin production in the lignocellulosic
biorefinery realm.
