---
pmid: '27838364'
title: Biology of Hsp47 (Serpin H1), a collagen-specific molecular chaperone.
authors:
- Ito S
- Nagata K
journal: Semin Cell Dev Biol
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2016.11.005
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: REVIEW
---

# Biology of Hsp47 (Serpin H1), a collagen-specific molecular chaperone.
**Authors:** Ito S, Nagata K
**Journal:** Semin Cell Dev Biol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.semcdb.2016.11.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semcdb.2016.11.005)

## Abstract

1. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2017 Feb;62:142-151. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2016.11.005.
Epub 2016 Nov 9.

Biology of Hsp47 (Serpin H1), a collagen-specific molecular chaperone.

Ito S(1), Nagata K(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Faculty of Life Sciences, Kyoto Sangyo
University, Motoyama, Kamigamo, Kita-ku, Kyoto 603-8555, Japan; CREST, Japan
Science and Technology Agency, Kyoto Sangyo University, Kyoto 603-8555, Japan.
(2)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Faculty of Life Sciences, Kyoto Sangyo
University, Motoyama, Kamigamo, Kita-ku, Kyoto 603-8555, Japan; CREST, Japan
Science and Technology Agency, Kyoto Sangyo University, Kyoto 603-8555, Japan.
Electronic address: nagata@cc.kyoto-su.ac.jp.

Hsp47, a collagen-specific molecular chaperone that localizes in the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER), is indispensable for molecular maturation of collagen. Hsp47,
which is encoded by the SERPINH1 gene, belongs to the serpin family and has the
serpin fold; however, it has no serine protease inhibitory activity. Hsp47
transiently binds to procollagen in the ER, dissociates in the cis-Golgi or
ER-Golgi intermediate compartment (ERGIC) in a pH-dependent manner, and is then
transported back to the ER via its RDEL retention sequence. Hsp47 recognizes
collagenous (Gly-Xaa-Arg) repeats on triple-helical procollagen and can prevent
local unfolding and/or aggregate formation of procollagen. Gene disruption of
Hsp47 in mice causes embryonic lethality due to impairments in basement membrane
and collagen fibril formation. In Hsp47-knockout cells, the type I collagen
triple helix forms abnormally, resulting in thin and frequently branched
fibrils. Secretion of type I collagens is slow and plausible in making
aggregates of procollagens in the ER of hsp47-knocked out fibroblasts, which are
ultimately degraded by autophagy. Mutations in Hsp47 are causally associated
with osteogenesis imperfecta. Expression of Hsp47 is strongly correlated with
expression of collagens in multiple types of cells and tissues. Therefore, Hsp47
represents a promising target for treatment of collagen-related disorders,
including fibrosis of the liver, lung, and other organs.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2016.11.005
PMID: 27838364 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
