---
pmid: '14701807'
title: The molecular chaperone, Atp12p, from Homo sapiens. In vitro studies with purified
  wild type and mutant (E240K) proteins.
authors:
- Hinton A
- Gatti DL
- Ackerman SH
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M312631200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The molecular chaperone, Atp12p, from Homo sapiens. In vitro studies with purified wild type and mutant (E240K) proteins.
**Authors:** Hinton A, Gatti DL, Ackerman SH
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M312631200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M312631200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 5;279(10):9016-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M312631200. Epub
2003  Dec 29.

The molecular chaperone, Atp12p, from Homo sapiens. In vitro studies with 
purified wild type and mutant (E240K) proteins.

Hinton A(1), Gatti DL, Ackerman SH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, 
Michigan 48201, USA.

Work in Saccharomyces cerevisiae has shown that Atp12p binds to unassembled 
alpha subunits of F(1) and in so doing prevents the alpha subunit from 
associating with itself in non-productive complexes during assembly of the F(1) 
moiety of the mitochondrial ATP synthase. We have developed a method to prepare 
recombinant Atp12p after expression of its human cDNA in bacterial cells. The 
molecular chaperone activity of HuAtp12p was studied using citrate synthase as a 
model substrate. Wild type HuAtp12p suppresses the aggregation of thermally 
inactivated citrate synthase. In contrast, the mutant protein HuAtp12p(E240K), 
which harbors a lysine at the position of the highly conserved Glu-240, fails to 
prevent citrate synthase aggregation at 43 degrees C. No significant differences 
were observed between the wild type and the mutant proteins as judged by 
sedimentation analysis, cysteine titration, tryptophan emission spectra, or 
limited proteolysis, which suggests that the E240K mutation alters the activity 
of HuAtp12p with minimal effects on the physical integrity of the protein. An 
additional important finding of this work is that the equilibrium chemical 
denaturation curve of HuAtp12p shows two components, the first of which is 
associated with protein aggregation. This result is consistent with a model for 
Atp12p structure in which there is a hydrophobic chaperone domain that is buried 
within the protein interior.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M312631200
PMID: 14701807 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
