---
pmid: '19244314'
title: Cdo promotes neuronal differentiation via activation of the p38 mitogen-activated
  protein kinase pathway.
authors:
- Oh JE
- Bae GU
- Yang YJ
- Yi MJ
- Lee HJ
- Kim BG
- Krauss RS
- Kang JS
journal: FASEB J
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2704588
doi: 10.1096/fj.08-119255
---

# Cdo promotes neuronal differentiation via activation of the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway.
**Authors:** Oh JE, Bae GU, Yang YJ, Yi MJ, Lee HJ, Kim BG, Krauss RS, Kang JS
**Journal:** FASEB J (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1096/fj.08-119255](https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.08-119255)
**PMC:** [PMC2704588](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2704588/)

## Abstract

1. FASEB J. 2009 Jul;23(7):2088-99. doi: 10.1096/fj.08-119255. Epub 2009 Feb 25.

Cdo promotes neuronal differentiation via activation of the p38 
mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway.

Oh JE(1), Bae GU, Yang YJ, Yi MJ, Lee HJ, Kim BG, Krauss RS, Kang JS.

Author information:
(1)Samsung Biomedical Research Institute, Department of Molecular Cell Biology, 
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Suwon 440-746, South Korea.

Neural basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors (bHLHs) control many aspects 
of neurogenesis, such as proliferation, fate determination, and differentiation. 
We have previously shown that the promyogenic cell surface receptor Cdo 
modulates the Cdc42 and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways via 
a direct association with two scaffold-type proteins, JLP and Bnip-2, to 
regulate activities of myogenic bHLH factors and myogenic differentiation. We 
report here that Cdo uses similar regulatory mechanisms to promote neuronal 
differentiation. Expression of JLP, a scaffold protein for p38MAPK, and Bnip-2, 
a regulator of Cdc42, is increased during differentiation of C17.2 neural 
precursor cells and P19 embryonal carcinoma cells. These molecules regulate 
Cdc42 and p38MAPK activities, which increase in a Cdo-dependent manner during 
neuronal differentiation of C17.2 cells and retinoic acid-treated P19 cells. 
Furthermore, enhancement or reduction of Cdc42 and p38MAPK activities enhances 
or reduces, respectively, neuronal differentiation of these cell lines. Cdc42 
and p38MAPK activities also promote heterodimerization of neurogenin1 and E47, 
suggesting that one way they promote neurogenesis is via regulation of neural 
bHLH factor activities. These results imply that a conserved intracellular 
signaling mechanism initiated by Cdo regulates the activities of tissue-specific 
bHLH factors and therefore functions as a key regulator of differentiation of 
several different cell lineages.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.08-119255
PMCID: PMC2704588
PMID: 19244314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
