---
pmid: '25088257'
title: Ubiquitin-specific protease 19 regulates the stability of the E3 ubiquitin
  ligase MARCH6.
authors:
- Nakamura N
- Harada K
- Kato M
- Hirose S
journal: Exp Cell Res
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2014.07.025
---

# Ubiquitin-specific protease 19 regulates the stability of the E3 ubiquitin ligase MARCH6.
**Authors:** Nakamura N, Harada K, Kato M, Hirose S
**Journal:** Exp Cell Res (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yexcr.2014.07.025](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yexcr.2014.07.025)

## Abstract

1. Exp Cell Res. 2014 Oct 15;328(1):207-216. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2014.07.025.
Epub  2014 Aug 1.

Ubiquitin-specific protease 19 regulates the stability of the E3 ubiquitin 
ligase MARCH6.

Nakamura N(1), Harada K(2), Kato M(2), Hirose S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259-B13 
Nagatsuta-cho, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan. Electronic address: 
nnakamur@bio.titech.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259-B13 
Nagatsuta-cho, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan.

Ubiquitin-specific protease (USP)19 is a recently identified deubiquitinating 
enzyme (DUB) having multiple splice variants and cellular functions. One variant 
encodes an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-anchored DUB that rescues misfolded 
transmembrane proteins from ER-associated degradation (ERAD), but the underlying 
mechanism remains to be elucidated. Here, we show that USP19 interacts with the 
ERAD-associated E3 ubiquitin ligase MARCH6. Overexpression of USP19 delayed the 
degradation of MARCH6, leading to an increase in its protein level. In contrast, 
USP19 depletion resulted in decreased expression of MARCH6. We also show that 
USP19 overexpression reduced ubiquitination of MARCH6, while its knockdown had 
the opposite effect. In particular, USP19 was found to protect MARCH6 by 
deubiquitination from the p97-dependent proteasomal degradation. In addition, 
USP19 knockdown leads to increased expression of mutant ABCB11, an ERAD 
substrate of MARCH6. Moreover, USP19 is itself subjected to endoproteolytic 
processing by DUB activity, and the processing cleaves off an N-terminal 
cytoplasmic region of unknown function. However, elimination of this processing 
had no evident effect on MARCH6 stabilization. These results suggest that USP19 
is involved in the regulation of ERAD by controlling the stability of MARCH6 via 
deubiquitination.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2014.07.025
PMID: 25088257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
