---
pmid: '17702576'
title: Optineurin negatively regulates TNFalpha- induced NF-kappaB activation by competing
  with NEMO for ubiquitinated RIP.
authors:
- Zhu G
- Wu CJ
- Zhao Y
- Ashwell JD
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2007.07.041
---

# Optineurin negatively regulates TNFalpha- induced NF-kappaB activation by competing with NEMO for ubiquitinated RIP.
**Authors:** Zhu G, Wu CJ, Zhao Y, Ashwell JD
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cub.2007.07.041](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2007.07.041)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2007 Aug 21;17(16):1438-43. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2007.07.041.

Optineurin negatively regulates TNFalpha- induced NF-kappaB activation by 
competing with NEMO for ubiquitinated RIP.

Zhu G(1), Wu CJ, Zhao Y, Ashwell JD.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Immune Cell Biology, National Cancer Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

NF-kappaB essential modulator (NEMO), the regulatory subunit of the IkappaB 
kinase (IKK) that activates NF-kappaB, is essential for NF-kappaB activation. 
NEMO was recently found to contain a region that preferentially binds Lys 
(K)63-linked but not K48-linked polyubiquitin (polyUb) chains, and the ability 
of NEMO to bind to K63-linked polyUb RIP (receptor-interacting protein) is 
necessary for efficient tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha)-induced NF-kappaB 
activation. Optineurin is a homolog of NEMO, and mutations in the optineurin 
gene are found in a subset of patients with glaucoma, a neurodegenerative 
disease involving the loss of retinal ganglion cells. Although optineurin shares 
considerable homology with NEMO, in resting cells, it is not present in the 
high-molecular-weight complex containing IKKalpha and IKKbeta, and optineurin 
cannot substitute for NEMO in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced NF-kappaB 
activation. On the other hand, the overexpression of optineurin blocks the 
protective effect of E3-14.7K on cell death caused by the overexpression of 
TNFalpha receptor 1 (TNFR1). Here we show that optineurin has a K63-linked 
polyUb-binding region similar to that of NEMO, and like NEMO, it bound K63- but 
not K48-linked polyUb. Optineurin competitively antagonized NEMO's binding to 
polyUb RIP, and its overexpression inhibited TNFalpha-induced NF-kappaB 
activation. This competition occurs at physiologic protein levels because 
microRNA silencing of optineurin resulted in markedly enhanced TNFalpha-induced 
NF-kappaB activity. These results reveal a physiologic role for optineurin in 
dampening TNFalpha signaling, and this role might provide an explanation for its 
association with glaucoma.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2007.07.041
PMID: 17702576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
