---
pmid: '17692808'
title: BH3 profiling identifies three distinct classes of apoptotic blocks to predict
  response to ABT-737 and conventional chemotherapeutic agents.
authors:
- Deng J
- Carlson N
- Takeyama K
- Dal Cin P
- Shipp M
- Letai A
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2007.07.001
---

# BH3 profiling identifies three distinct classes of apoptotic blocks to predict response to ABT-737 and conventional chemotherapeutic agents.
**Authors:** Deng J, Carlson N, Takeyama K, Dal Cin P, Shipp M, Letai A
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccr.2007.07.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2007.07.001)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Cell. 2007 Aug;12(2):171-85. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2007.07.001.

BH3 profiling identifies three distinct classes of apoptotic blocks to predict 
response to ABT-737 and conventional chemotherapeutic agents.

Deng J(1), Carlson N, Takeyama K, Dal Cin P, Shipp M, Letai A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 
02115, USA.

Cancer cells exhibit many abnormal phenotypes that induce apoptotic signaling 
via the intrinsic, or mitochondrial, pathway. That cancer cells nonetheless 
survive implies that they select for blocks in apoptosis. Identifying 
cancer-specific apoptotic blocks is necessary to rationally target them. Using a 
panel of 18 lymphoma cell lines, we show that a strategy we have developed, BH3 
profiling, can identify apoptotic defects in cancer cells and separate them into 
three main classes based on position in the apoptotic pathway. BH3 profiling 
identifies cells that require BCL-2 for survival and predicts sensitivity to the 
BCL-2 antagonist ABT-737. BCL-2 dependence correlates with high levels of 
proapoptotic BIM sequestered by BCL-2. Strikingly, BH3 profiling can also 
predict sensitivity to conventional chemotherapeutic agents like etoposide, 
vincristine, and adriamycin.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccr.2007.07.001
PMID: 17692808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
