---
pmid: '20818335'
title: Neurotoxicity of Alzheimer's disease Aβ peptides is induced by small changes
  in the Aβ42 to Aβ40 ratio.
authors:
- Kuperstein I
- Broersen K
- Benilova I
- Rozenski J
- Jonckheere W
- Debulpaep M
- Vandersteen A
- Segers-Nolten I
- Van Der Werf K
- Subramaniam V
- Braeken D
- Callewaert G
- Bartic C
- D'Hooge R
- Martins IC
- Rousseau F
- Schymkowitz J
- De Strooper B
journal: EMBO J
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2957213
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.211
---

# Neurotoxicity of Alzheimer's disease Aβ peptides is induced by small changes in the Aβ42 to Aβ40 ratio.
**Authors:** Kuperstein I, Broersen K, Benilova I, Rozenski J, Jonckheere W, Debulpaep M, Vandersteen A, Segers-Nolten I, Van Der Werf K, Subramaniam V, Braeken D, Callewaert G, Bartic C, D'Hooge R, Martins IC, Rousseau F, Schymkowitz J, De Strooper B
**Journal:** EMBO J (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2010.211](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2010.211)
**PMC:** [PMC2957213](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2957213/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2010 Oct 6;29(19):3408-20. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.211. Epub 2010 Sep
3.

Neurotoxicity of Alzheimer's disease Aβ peptides is induced by small changes in 
the Aβ42 to Aβ40 ratio.

Kuperstein I(1), Broersen K, Benilova I, Rozenski J, Jonckheere W, Debulpaep M, 
Vandersteen A, Segers-Nolten I, Van Der Werf K, Subramaniam V, Braeken D, 
Callewaert G, Bartic C, D'Hooge R, Martins IC, Rousseau F, Schymkowitz J, De 
Strooper B.

Author information:
(1)Department for Molecular and Developmental Genetics, Flanders Institute for 
Biotechnology (VIB), Leuven, Belgium.

The amyloid peptides Aβ(40) and Aβ(42) of Alzheimer's disease are thought to 
contribute differentially to the disease process. Although Aβ(42) seems more 
pathogenic than Aβ(40), the reason for this is not well understood. We show here 
that small alterations in the Aβ(42):Aβ(40) ratio dramatically affect the 
biophysical and biological properties of the Aβ mixtures reflected in their 
aggregation kinetics, the morphology of the resulting amyloid fibrils and 
synaptic function tested in vitro and in vivo. A minor increase in the 
Aβ(42):Aβ(40) ratio stabilizes toxic oligomeric species with intermediate 
conformations. The initial toxic impact of these Aβ species is synaptic in 
nature, but this can spread into the cells leading to neuronal cell death. The 
fact that the relative ratio of Aβ peptides is more crucial than the absolute 
amounts of peptides for the induction of neurotoxic conformations has important 
implications for anti-amyloid therapy. Our work also suggests the dynamic nature 
of the equilibrium between toxic and non-toxic intermediates.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2010.211
PMCID: PMC2957213
PMID: 20818335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
