---
pmid: '12009895'
title: Plasma membrane phospholipid scramblase 1 is enriched in lipid rafts and interacts
  with the epidermal growth factor receptor.
authors:
- Sun J
- Nanjundan M
- Pike LJ
- Wiedmer T
- Sims PJ
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi025610l
---

# Plasma membrane phospholipid scramblase 1 is enriched in lipid rafts and interacts with the epidermal growth factor receptor.
**Authors:** Sun J, Nanjundan M, Pike LJ, Wiedmer T, Sims PJ
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi025610l](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi025610l)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2002 May 21;41(20):6338-45. doi: 10.1021/bi025610l.

Plasma membrane phospholipid scramblase 1 is enriched in lipid rafts and 
interacts with the epidermal growth factor receptor.

Sun J(1), Nanjundan M, Pike LJ, Wiedmer T, Sims PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular & Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Research 
Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

We have identified physical and functional interactions between the epidermal 
growth factor (EGF) receptor and phospholipid scramblase 1 (PLSCR1), an 
endofacial plasma membrane protein proposed to affect phospholipid organization. 
PLSCR1, a palmitoylated protein, was found to partition with the EGF receptor in 
membrane lipid rafts. Cell stimulation with EGF transiently elevated 
Tyr-phosphorylation of PLSCR1, peaking at 5 min. Although PLSCR1 is a known 
substrate of c-Abl [Sun, J., et al. (2001) J.Biol. Chem. 276, 28984-28990], the 
Abl inhibitor STI571 did not substantially affect its EGF-dependent 
phosphorylation, suggesting PLSCR1 is a substrate of the EGF receptor kinase, or 
another EGF-activated kinase. Coinciding with phosphorylation, there was a 
transient increase in physical association of PLSCR1 with both the EGF receptor 
and the adapter protein Shc, as determined by immunoprecipitation and Western 
blotting. Confocal immunofluorescence analysis revealed that EGF initiates rapid 
internalization of both the EGF receptor and PLSCR1, with trafficking into both 
distinct and common endosomal pools. These data also suggested that whereas the 
EGF receptor is ultimately degraded, much of the endocytosed PLSCR1 is recycled 
to the cell surface within 3 h after EGF treatment. Consistent with this 
interpretation, Western blotting revealed neither ubiquitination nor proteolysis 
of PLSCR1 under these conditions, whereas the ubiquitination and degradation of 
the EGF receptor were readily confirmed. Finally, stimulation with EGF was also 
found to markedly increase the total cellular expression of PLSCR1, suggesting 
that in addition to its initial interactions with activated EGF receptor, PLSCR1 
may also contribute to posttranscriptional effector pathway(s) mediating the 
cellular response to EGF.

DOI: 10.1021/bi025610l
PMID: 12009895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
