---
pmid: '34516797'
title: Nucleolar maturation of the human small subunit processome.
authors:
- Singh S
- Vanden Broeck A
- Miller L
- Chaker-Margot M
- Klinge S
journal: Science
year: '2021'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC8744464
doi: 10.1126/science.abj5338
---

# Nucleolar maturation of the human small subunit processome.
**Authors:** Singh S, Vanden Broeck A, Miller L, Chaker-Margot M, Klinge S
**Journal:** Science (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.abj5338](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abj5338)
**PMC:** [PMC8744464](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8744464/)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2021 Sep 10;373(6560):eabj5338. doi: 10.1126/science.abj5338. Epub
2021  Sep 10.

Nucleolar maturation of the human small subunit processome.

Singh S(#)(1), Vanden Broeck A(#)(1), Miller L(1)(2), Chaker-Margot M(1)(2), 
Klinge S(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Protein and Nucleic Acid Chemistry, The Rockefeller University, 
New York, NY 10065, USA.
(2)Tri-Institutional Training Program in Chemical Biology, The Rockefeller 
University, New York, NY 10065, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

The human small subunit processome mediates early maturation of the small 
ribosomal subunit by coupling RNA folding to subsequent RNA cleavage and 
processing steps. We report the high-resolution cryo–electron microscopy 
structures of maturing human small subunit (SSU) processomes at resolutions of 
2.7 to 3.9 angstroms. These structures reveal the molecular mechanisms that 
enable crucial progressions during SSU processome maturation. RNA folding states 
within these particles are communicated to and coordinated with key enzymes that 
drive irreversible steps such as targeted exosome-mediated RNA degradation, 
protein-guided site-specific endonucleolytic RNA cleavage, and tightly 
controlled RNA unwinding. These conserved mechanisms highlight the SSU 
processome’s impressive structural plasticity, which endows this 4.5-megadalton 
nucleolar assembly with the distinctive ability to mature the small ribosomal 
subunit from within.

DOI: 10.1126/science.abj5338
PMCID: PMC8744464
PMID: 34516797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
