---
pmid: '8097882'
title: A polypeptide bound by the chaperonin groEL is localized within a central cavity.
authors:
- Braig K
- Simon M
- Furuya F
- Hainfeld JF
- Horwich AL
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1993'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC46429
doi: 10.1073/pnas.90.9.3978
---

# A polypeptide bound by the chaperonin groEL is localized within a central cavity.
**Authors:** Braig K, Simon M, Furuya F, Hainfeld JF, Horwich AL
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.90.9.3978](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.90.9.3978)
**PMC:** [PMC46429](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC46429/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 May 1;90(9):3978-82. doi:
10.1073/pnas.90.9.3978.

A polypeptide bound by the chaperonin groEL is localized within a central 
cavity.

Braig K(1), Simon M, Furuya F, Hainfeld JF, Horwich AL.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, CT 06510.

Chaperonins are oligomeric protein complexes that play an essential role in the 
cell, mediating ATP-dependent polypeptide chain folding in a variety of cellular 
compartments. They appear to bind early folding intermediates, preventing their 
aggregation; in the presence of MgATP and a cochaperonin, bound polypeptides are 
released in a stepwise manner, associated with folding to the native state. 
Chaperonin complexes appear in the electron microscope as cylindrical 
structures, usually composed of two stacked rings, each containing, by negative 
staining, an electron dense central "hole" approximately 6.0 nm in diameter. We 
sought to identify the site on the Escherichia coli chaperonin groEL, where the 
"molten globule"-like intermediate of dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) becomes 
bound, by examining in the scanning transmission electron microscope complexes 
formed between groEL and DHFR molecules bearing covalently crosslinked 1.4-nm 
gold clusters. In top views of the groEL complexes, gold densities were observed 
in the central region; in side views, the densities were seen at the end 
portions of the cylinders, corresponding to positions within the individual 
rings. In some cases, two gold densities were observed in the same groEL 
complex. We conclude that folding intermediates are bound inside central 
cavities within individual chaperonin rings. In this potentially sequestered 
location, folding intermediates with a compact conformation can be bound at 
multiple sites by surrounding monomeric members of the ring; localization of 
folding within the cavity could also facilitate rebinding of structures that 
initially fail to incorporate properly into the folding protein.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.90.9.3978
PMCID: PMC46429
PMID: 8097882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
