---
pmid: '18427809'
title: 'Carnitine and carnitine acetyltransferases in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae:
  a role for carnitine in stress protection.'
authors:
- Franken J
- Kroppenstedt S
- Swiegers JH
- Bauer FF
journal: Curr Genet
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s00294-008-0191-0
---

# Carnitine and carnitine acetyltransferases in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae: a role for carnitine in stress protection.
**Authors:** Franken J, Kroppenstedt S, Swiegers JH, Bauer FF
**Journal:** Curr Genet (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00294-008-0191-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00294-008-0191-0)

## Abstract

1. Curr Genet. 2008 Jun;53(6):347-60. doi: 10.1007/s00294-008-0191-0. Epub 2008
Apr  22.

Carnitine and carnitine acetyltransferases in the yeast Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae: a role for carnitine in stress protection.

Franken J(1), Kroppenstedt S, Swiegers JH, Bauer FF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Viticulture and Oenology, Institute for Wine Biotechnology, 
University of Stellenbosch, Stellenbosch, ZA 7600, South Africa.

To date, the only reported metabolic and physiological roles for carnitine in 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae are related to the activity of the carnitine shuttle. 
In yeast, the shuttle transfers peroxisomal activated acetyl-residues to the 
mitochondria. However, acetyl-CoA can also be metabolised by the glyoxylate 
cycle to form succinate. The two pathways, therefore, provide a metabolic bypass 
for each other, and carnitine-dependent phenotypes have only been described in 
strains with non-functional peroxisomal citrate synthase, Cit2p. Here, we 
present evidence for a role of carnitine in stress protection that is 
independent of CIT2 and of the carnitine shuttle. Data show that carnitine 
improves growth during oxidative stress and in the presence of weak organic 
acids in wt and in CAT deletion strains. Our data also show that strains with 
single, double and triple deletions of the three CAT genes generally present 
identical phenotypes, but that the deletion of CAT2 decreases survival during 
oxidative stress in a carnitine-independent manner. Overexpression of single CAT 
genes does not lead to cross-complementation, suggesting a highly specific 
metabolic role for each enzyme. The data suggest that carnitine protects cells 
from oxidative and organic acid stress, while CAT2 contributes to the response 
to oxidative stress.

DOI: 10.1007/s00294-008-0191-0
PMID: 18427809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
