---
pmid: '23681898'
title: '[The PEG-dilemma - pleading for an ethically responsible medical treatment].'
authors:
- Löser C
journal: Z Gastroenterol
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1055/s-0033-1335189
---

# [The PEG-dilemma - pleading for an ethically responsible medical treatment].
**Authors:** Löser C
**Journal:** Z Gastroenterol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0033-1335189](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0033-1335189)

## Abstract

1. Z Gastroenterol. 2013 May;51(5):444-9. doi: 10.1055/s-0033-1335189. Epub 2013 
May 16.

[The PEG-dilemma - pleading for an ethically responsible medical treatment].

[Article in German]

Löser C(1).

Author information:
(1)Medizinische Klinik, Rotes Kreuz Krankenhaus Kassel, 34121 Kassel.

Within the 32 years of its existence our attitude towards artificial enteral 
nutrition via PEG-tubes has changed in a fundamental way: in our modern 
understanding nutrition via PEG is supportive, early, preventive, and in many 
cases temporary. PEG-feeding is not an alternative but a possible supplement to 
normal oral food intake and requires an individual medical indication as well as 
an ethical justification. This does not follow standardised algorithmic thinking 
but is decided on an individual base taking personal wishes, resources, and 
needs of the individual patient into account. Nutrition via PEG-tube is not a 
terminal basic or even symbolic treatment at the end of life. The present 
dilemma of the PEG is that the public discussion primarily focus one-sided on 
the problems of PEG-placement in multimorbid, elderly, and/or demented patients 
or patients in end-stage tumour diseases where indeed PEG-placement is neither 
medically nor ethically justified - we still place PEG-tubes to often in the 
wrong patients! On the other hand we still consider supportive and in many cases 
temporary nutrition via PEG too rare and even too late in those patients which 
clearly could benefit from an early, supportive, and preventive PEG-treatment on 
the base of our present evidence-based scientific knowledge - we still consider 
PEG-treatment not adequately and in most cases too late in the right patients! 
Placing a PEG-tube is not the second last step before death and physicians have 
to accept the ethically given limits of medical treatment by realizing our 
modern understanding of the benefits and limits of supportive artificial 
nutrition via PEG.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0033-1335189
PMID: 23681898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
