---
pmid: '7490082'
title: Cloning of the cDNA for the human ATP synthase OSCP subunit (ATP5O) by exon
  trapping and mapping to chromosome 21q22.1-q22.2.
authors:
- Chen H
- Morris MA
- Rossier C
- Blouin JL
- Antonarakis SE
journal: Genomics
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/geno.1995.1176
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Cloning of the cDNA for the human ATP synthase OSCP subunit (ATP5O) by exon trapping and mapping to chromosome 21q22.1-q22.2.
**Authors:** Chen H, Morris MA, Rossier C, Blouin JL, Antonarakis SE
**Journal:** Genomics (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1006/geno.1995.1176](https://doi.org/10.1006/geno.1995.1176)

## Abstract

1. Genomics. 1995 Aug 10;28(3):470-6. doi: 10.1006/geno.1995.1176.

Cloning of the cDNA for the human ATP synthase OSCP subunit (ATP5O) by exon 
trapping and mapping to chromosome 21q22.1-q22.2.

Chen H(1), Morris MA, Rossier C, Blouin JL, Antonarakis SE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Microbiology, Geneva University Medical School, 
Switzerland.

Exon trapping was used to clone portions of potential genes from human 
chromosome 21. One trapped sequence showed striking homology with the bovine and 
rat ATP synthase OSCP (oligomycin sensitivity conferring protein) subunit. We 
subsequently cloned the full-length human ATP synthase OSCP cDNA (GDB/HGMW 
approved name ATP50) from infant brain and muscle libraries and determined its 
nucleotide and deduced amino acid sequence (EMBL/GenBank Accession No. X83218). 
The encoded polypeptide contains 213 amino acids, with more than 80% identity to 
bovine and murine ATPase OSCP subunits and over 35% identity to Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae and sweet potato sequences. The human ATP5O gene is located at 
21q22.1-q22.2, just proximal to D21S17, in YACs 860G11 and 838C7 of the Chumakov 
et al. (Nature 359:380, 1992) YAC contig. The gene is expressed in all human 
tissues examined, most strongly in muscle and heart. This ATP5O subunit is a key 
structural component of the stalk of the mitochondrial respiratory chain 
F1F0-ATP synthase and as such may contribute in a gene dosage-dependent manner 
to the phenotype of Down syndrome (trisomy 21).

DOI: 10.1006/geno.1995.1176
PMID: 7490082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
