---
pmid: '20404519'
title: Phosphorylation of receptor-like cytoplasmic kinases by bacterial flagellin.
authors:
- Lu D
- Wu S
- He P
- Shan L
journal: Plant Signal Behav
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC3974576
doi: 10.4161/psb.11500
---

# Phosphorylation of receptor-like cytoplasmic kinases by bacterial flagellin.
**Authors:** Lu D, Wu S, He P, Shan L
**Journal:** Plant Signal Behav (2010)
**DOI:** [10.4161/psb.11500](https://doi.org/10.4161/psb.11500)
**PMC:** [PMC3974576](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3974576/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Signal Behav. 2010 May;5(5):598-600. doi: 10.4161/psb.11500. Epub 2010
Apr  20.

Phosphorylation of receptor-like cytoplasmic kinases by bacterial flagellin.

Lu D(1), Wu S(1), He P(1), Shan L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology (S.W. & L.S.), Department of 
Biochemistry and Biophysics (D.L & P.H.) and Institute for Plant Genomics and 
Biotechnology, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX USA.

Molecular mechanisms that distinguish self and non-self are fundamental in 
innate immunity to prevent infections in plants and animals. Recognition of the 
conserved microbial components triggers immune responses against a broad 
spectrum of potential pathogens. In Arabidopsis, bacterial flagellin was 
perceived by a leucine-rich repeat-receptor-like kinase (LRR-RLK) FLS2. Upon 
flagellin perception, FLS2 forms a complex with another LRR-RLK BAK1. The 
intracellular signaling events downstream of FLS2/BAK1 receptor complex are 
still poorly understood. We recently identified a receptor-like cytoplasmic 
kinase (RLCK) BIK1 that associates with flagellin receptor complex to initiate 
plant innate immunity. BIK1 is rapidly phosphorylated upon flagellin perception 
in an FLS2- and BAK1-dependent manner. BAK1 directly phosphorylates BIK1 with an 
in vitro kinase assay. Plants have evolved a large number of RLCK genes involved 
in a wide range of biological processes. We provided evidence here that 
additional RLCKs could also be phosphorylated by flagellin and may play 
redundant role with BIK1 in plant innate immunity.

DOI: 10.4161/psb.11500
PMCID: PMC3974576
PMID: 20404519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Molecular mechanisms that distinguish self and non-self are fundamental in innate immunity to prevent infections in plants and animals. Recognition of the conserved microbial components triggers immune responses against a broad spectrum of potential pathogens. In Arabidopsis , bacterial flagellin was perceived by a l eucine-rich repeat-receptor-like kinase (LRR-RLK) FLS2. Upon flagellin perception, FLS2 forms a complex with another LRR-RLK BAK1. The intracellular signaling events downstream of FLS2/BAK1 receptor complex are still poorly understood. We recently identified a receptor-like cytoplasmic kinase (RLCK) BIK1 that associates with flagellin receptor complex to initiate plant innate immunity. BIK1 is rapidly phosphorylated upon flagellin perception in an FLS2- and BAK1-dependent manner. BAK1 directly phosphorylates BIK1 with an in vitro kinase assay. Plants have evolved a large number of RLCK genes involved in a wide range of biological processes. We provided evidence here that additional RLCKs could also be phosphorylated by flagellin and may play redundant role with BIK1 in plant innate immunity.
