---
pmid: '31267705'
title: Regulation of MAGE-A3/6 by the CRL4-DCAF12 ubiquitin ligase and nutrient availability.
authors:
- Ravichandran R
- Kodali K
- Peng J
- Potts PR
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6607007
doi: 10.15252/embr.201847352
---

# Regulation of MAGE-A3/6 by the CRL4-DCAF12 ubiquitin ligase and nutrient availability.
**Authors:** Ravichandran R, Kodali K, Peng J, Potts PR
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2019)
**DOI:** [10.15252/embr.201847352](https://doi.org/10.15252/embr.201847352)
**PMC:** [PMC6607007](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6607007/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2019 Jul;20(7):e47352. doi: 10.15252/embr.201847352. Epub 2019 May
24.

Regulation of MAGE-A3/6 by the CRL4-DCAF12 ubiquitin ligase and nutrient 
availability.

Ravichandran R(1), Kodali K(2), Peng J(2), Potts PR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, St. Jude Children's Research 
Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA.
(2)Departments of Structural Biology and Developmental Neurobiology, Center for 
Proteomics and Metabolomics, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, 
USA.

Melanoma antigen genes (MAGEs) are emerging as important oncogenic drivers that 
are normally restricted to expression in male germ cells but are aberrantly 
expressed in cancers and promote tumorigenesis. Mechanistically, MAGEs function 
as substrate specifying subunits of E3 ubiquitin ligases. Thus, the activation 
of germline-specific genes in cancer can drive metabolic and signaling pathways 
through altered ubiquitination to promote tumorigenesis. However, the mechanisms 
regulating MAGE expression and activity are unclear. Here, we describe how the 
MAGE-A3/6 proteins that function as repressors of autophagy are downregulated in 
response to nutrient deprivation. Short-term cellular starvation promotes rapid 
MAGE-A3/6 degradation in a proteasome-dependent manner. Proteomic analysis 
reveals that degradation of MAGE-A3/6 is controlled by the CRL4-DCAF12 E3 
ubiquitin ligase. Importantly, the degradation of MAGE-A3/6 by CRL4-DCAF12 is 
required for starvation-induced autophagy. These findings suggest that oncogenic 
MAGEs can be dynamically controlled in response to stress to allow cellular 
adaptation, autophagy regulation, and tumor growth and that CRL4-DCAF12 activity 
is responsive to nutrient status.

© 2019 The Authors.

DOI: 10.15252/embr.201847352
PMCID: PMC6607007
PMID: 31267705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
