---
pmid: '7883709'
title: A short-filament mutant of Anabaena sp. strain PCC 7120 that fragments in nitrogen-deficient
  medium.
authors:
- Bauer CC
- Buikema WJ
- Black K
- Haselkorn R
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC176768
doi: 10.1128/jb.177.6.1520-1526.1995
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# A short-filament mutant of Anabaena sp. strain PCC 7120 that fragments in nitrogen-deficient medium.
**Authors:** Bauer CC, Buikema WJ, Black K, Haselkorn R
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1128/jb.177.6.1520-1526.1995](https://doi.org/10.1128/jb.177.6.1520-1526.1995)
**PMC:** [PMC176768](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC176768/)

## Abstract

1. J Bacteriol. 1995 Mar;177(6):1520-6. doi: 10.1128/jb.177.6.1520-1526.1995.

A short-filament mutant of Anabaena sp. strain PCC 7120 that fragments in 
nitrogen-deficient medium.

Bauer CC(1), Buikema WJ, Black K, Haselkorn R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, University of Chicago 
60637.

Strain 129 is a fragmentation mutant of the filamentous cyanobacterium Anabaena 
sp. strain PCC 7120. Growing with fixed nitrogen, this mutant forms filaments 
that are much shorter than wild-type filaments. Following starvation for fixed 
nitrogen, strain 129 becomes nearly unicellular and forms few heterocysts, 
although electron microscopy suggests that proheterocysts form while 
fragmentation occurs. Starvation for sulfate, phosphate, iron, and calcium does 
not cause this fragmentation. The affected gene in strain 129, fraC, was cloned 
by complementation and characterized. It encodes a unique 179-amino-acid protein 
rich in phenylalanine. Insertional inactivation of the chromosomal copy of fraC 
results in a phenotype identical to that of strain 129, while complementation 
using a truncated version of FraC results in only partial complementation of the 
original mutant. Heterocysts could be induced to form in N-replete cultures of 
strain 129, as in wild-type cells, by supplying extra copies of the hetR gene on 
a plasmid. Thus, FraC is required for the integrity of cell junctions in general 
but is apparently not directly involved in normal differentiation and nitrogen 
fixation.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.177.6.1520-1526.1995
PMCID: PMC176768
PMID: 7883709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Strain 129 is a fragmentation mutant of the filamentous cyanobacterium Anabaena sp. strain PCC 7120. Growing with fixed nitrogen, this mutant forms filaments that are much shorter than wild-type filaments. Following starvation for fixed nitrogen, strain 129 becomes nearly unicellular and forms few heterocysts, although electron microscopy suggests that proheterocysts form while fragmentation occurs. Starvation for sulfate, phosphate, iron, and calcium does not cause this fragmentation. The affected gene in strain 129, fraC, was cloned by complementation and characterized. It encodes a unique 179-amino-acid protein rich in phenylalanine. Insertional inactivation of the chromosomal copy of fraC results in a phenotype identical to that of strain 129, while complementation using a truncated version of FraC results in only partial complementation of the original mutant. Heterocysts could be induced to form in N-replete cultures of strain 129, as in wild-type cells, by supplying extra copies of the hetR gene on a plasmid. Thus, FraC is required for the integrity of cell junctions in general but is apparently not directly involved in normal differentiation and nitrogen fixation.
