---
pmid: '19109893'
title: Structural basis of UV DNA-damage recognition by the DDB1-DDB2 complex.
authors:
- Scrima A
- Konícková R
- Czyzewski BK
- Kawasaki Y
- Jeffrey PD
- Groisman R
- Nakatani Y
- Iwai S
- Pavletich NP
- Thomä NH
journal: Cell
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2676164
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.10.045
---

# Structural basis of UV DNA-damage recognition by the DDB1-DDB2 complex.
**Authors:** Scrima A, Konícková R, Czyzewski BK, Kawasaki Y, Jeffrey PD, Groisman R, Nakatani Y, Iwai S, Pavletich NP, Thomä NH
**Journal:** Cell (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2008.10.045](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2008.10.045)
**PMC:** [PMC2676164](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2676164/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2008 Dec 26;135(7):1213-23. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.10.045.

Structural basis of UV DNA-damage recognition by the DDB1-DDB2 complex.

Scrima A(1), Konícková R, Czyzewski BK, Kawasaki Y, Jeffrey PD, Groisman R, 
Nakatani Y, Iwai S, Pavletich NP, Thomä NH.

Author information:
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Maulbeerstrasse 66, CH 
4058 Basel, Switzerland.

Ultraviolet (UV) light-induced pyrimidine photodimers are repaired by the 
nucleotide excision repair pathway. Photolesions have biophysical parameters 
closely resembling undamaged DNA, impeding discovery through damage surveillance 
proteins. The DDB1-DDB2 complex serves in the initial detection of UV lesions in 
vivo. Here we present the structures of the DDB1-DDB2 complex alone and bound to 
DNA containing either a 6-4 pyrimidine-pyrimidone photodimer (6-4PP) lesion or 
an abasic site. The structure shows that the lesion is held exclusively by the 
WD40 domain of DDB2. A DDB2 hairpin inserts into the minor groove, extrudes the 
photodimer into a binding pocket, and kinks the duplex by approximately 40 
degrees. The tightly localized probing of the photolesions, combined with 
proofreading in the photodimer pocket, enables DDB2 to detect lesions refractory 
to detection by other damage surveillance proteins. The structure provides 
insights into damage recognition in chromatin and suggests a mechanism by which 
the DDB1-associated CUL4 ubiquitin ligase targets proteins surrounding the site 
of damage.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.10.045
PMCID: PMC2676164
PMID: 19109893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
