---
pmid: '21545838'
title: Cellular distribution and subcellular localization of spatacsin and spastizin,
  two proteins involved in hereditary spastic paraplegia.
authors:
- Murmu RP
- Martin E
- Rastetter A
- Esteves T
- Muriel MP
- El Hachimi KH
- Denora PS
- Dauphin A
- Fernandez JC
- Duyckaerts C
- Brice A
- Darios F
- Stevanin G
journal: Mol Cell Neurosci
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2011.04.004
---

# Cellular distribution and subcellular localization of spatacsin and spastizin, two proteins involved in hereditary spastic paraplegia.
**Authors:** Murmu RP, Martin E, Rastetter A, Esteves T, Muriel MP, El Hachimi KH, Denora PS, Dauphin A, Fernandez JC, Duyckaerts C, Brice A, Darios F, Stevanin G
**Journal:** Mol Cell Neurosci (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mcn.2011.04.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mcn.2011.04.004)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2011 Jul;47(3):191-202. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2011.04.004.
Epub  2011 Apr 27.

Cellular distribution and subcellular localization of spatacsin and spastizin, 
two proteins involved in hereditary spastic paraplegia.

Murmu RP(1), Martin E, Rastetter A, Esteves T, Muriel MP, El Hachimi KH, Denora 
PS, Dauphin A, Fernandez JC, Duyckaerts C, Brice A, Darios F, Stevanin G.

Author information:
(1)INSERM, U975, Université Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris 6, UMR_S975, Centre de 
Recherche de l'Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière (CR-icm), GHU 
Pitié-Salpêtrière, CNRS, Paris, France.

Truncating mutations in the SPG11 and SPG15 genes cause complicated spastic 
paraplegia, severe neurological conditions due to loss of the functions of 
spatacsin and spastizin, respectively. We developed specific polyclonal 
anti-spatacsin (SPG11) and anti-spastizin (SPG15) antisera, which we then used 
to explore the intracellular and tissue localizations of these proteins. We 
observed expression of both proteins in human and rat central nervous system, 
which was particularly strong in cortical and spinal motor neurons as well as in 
retina. Both proteins were also expressed ubiquitously and strongly in embryos. 
In cultured cells, these two proteins had similar diffuse punctate, cytoplasmic 
and sometimes nuclear (spastizin) distributions. They partially co-localized 
with multiple organelles, particularly with protein-trafficking vesicles, 
endoplasmic reticulum and microtubules. Spastizin was also found at the 
mitochondria surface. This first study of the endogenous expression of spatacsin 
and spastizin shows similarities in their expression patterns that could account 
for their overlapping clinical phenotypes and involvement in a common protein 
complex.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mcn.2011.04.004
PMID: 21545838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
