---
pmid: '12138178'
title: Identification of a nuclear Stat1 protein tyrosine phosphatase.
authors:
- ten Hoeve J
- de Jesus Ibarra-Sanchez M
- Fu Y
- Zhu W
- Tremblay M
- David M
- Shuai K
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC133976
doi: 10.1128/MCB.22.16.5662-5668.2002
---

# Identification of a nuclear Stat1 protein tyrosine phosphatase.
**Authors:** ten Hoeve J, de Jesus Ibarra-Sanchez M, Fu Y, Zhu W, Tremblay M, David M, Shuai K
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.22.16.5662-5668.2002](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.22.16.5662-5668.2002)
**PMC:** [PMC133976](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC133976/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Aug;22(16):5662-8. doi: 10.1128/MCB.22.16.5662-5668.2002.

Identification of a nuclear Stat1 protein tyrosine phosphatase.

ten Hoeve J(1), de Jesus Ibarra-Sanchez M, Fu Y, Zhu W, Tremblay M, David M, 
Shuai K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
California 90095, USA.

Upon interferon (IFN) stimulation, Stat1 becomes tyrosine phosphorylated and 
translocates into the nucleus, where it binds to DNA to activate transcription. 
The activity of Stat1 is dependent on tyrosine phosphorylation, and its 
inactivation in the nucleus is accomplished by a previously unknown protein 
tyrosine phosphatase (PTP). We have now purified a Stat1 PTP activity from HeLa 
cell nuclear extract and identified it as TC45, the nuclear isoform of the 
T-cell PTP (TC-PTP). TC45 can dephosphorylate Stat1 both in vitro and in vivo. 
Nuclear extracts lacking TC45 fail to dephosphorylate Stat1. Furthermore, the 
dephosphorylation of IFN-induced tyrosine-phosphorylated Stat1 is defective in 
TC-PTP-null mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) and primary thymocytes. 
Reconstitution of TC-PTP-null MEFs with TC45, but not the endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER)-associated isoform TC48, rescues the defect in Stat1 dephosphorylation. The 
dephosphorylation of Stat3, but not Stat5 or Stat6, is also affected in 
TC-PTP-null cells. Our results identify TC45 as a PTP responsible for the 
dephosphorylation of Stat1 in the nucleus.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.22.16.5662-5668.2002
PMCID: PMC133976
PMID: 12138178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
