---
pmid: '15286705'
title: Implication of BRG1 and cdk9 in the STAT3-mediated activation of the p21waf1
  gene.
authors:
- Giraud S
- Hurlstone A
- Avril S
- Coqueret O
journal: Oncogene
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1207972
---

# Implication of BRG1 and cdk9 in the STAT3-mediated activation of the p21waf1 gene.
**Authors:** Giraud S, Hurlstone A, Avril S, Coqueret O
**Journal:** Oncogene (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1207972](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1207972)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2004 Sep 23;23(44):7391-8. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1207972.

Implication of BRG1 and cdk9 in the STAT3-mediated activation of the p21waf1 
gene.

Giraud S(1), Hurlstone A, Avril S, Coqueret O.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U564, 4 rue Larrey, CHU Angers, 49033 Angers Cedex, France.

STAT transcription factors (signal transducers and activators of transcription) 
are cytoplasmic proteins that induce gene activation in response to cytokine 
receptor stimulation. Following tyrosine phosphorylation, STAT proteins 
translocate into the nucleus and activate specific target genes. We have 
previously reported that STAT3 activates the expression of the p21waf1 gene 
through its association with the NcoA/SRC1a and CBP coactivators. In this study, 
we explore the role of BRG1, a component of the SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling 
complex, and the role of cdk9, a component of the elongation factor P-TEFb, in 
the STAT3-mediated expression of p21waf1. We found using pull-down experiments 
and co-immunoprecipitation assays that both proteins associate with STAT3. 
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) experiments indicate that STAT3 DNA binding 
results in histone H3 acetylation and BRG1 recruitment. Using Southern blot 
analysis, we found that the loading of BRG1 is followed by an increased 
accessibility of the proximal p21waf1 promoter and by the association of RNA 
polymerase II. As a next step, STAT3 then recruits the cdk9 kinase to 
phosphorylate the carboxy-terminal domain of the RNA polymerase at serine 2. 
Accordingly, the elongating form of the polymerase can be detected by ChIP 
experiments on the coding region of the gene, probably initiating mRNA 
synthesis. Therefore, STAT3 not only promotes the initiation of transcription 
but also regulates chromatin remodeling and transcription elongation through its 
interaction with BRG1 and cdk9.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1207972
PMID: 15286705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
