---
pmid: '15642716'
title: Characterization of three homologous basic leucine zipper transcription factors
  (bZIP) of the ABI5 family during Arabidopsis thaliana embryo maturation.
authors:
- Bensmihen S
- Giraudat J
- Parcy F
journal: J Exp Bot
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/jxb/eri050
---

# Characterization of three homologous basic leucine zipper transcription factors (bZIP) of the ABI5 family during Arabidopsis thaliana embryo maturation.
**Authors:** Bensmihen S, Giraudat J, Parcy F
**Journal:** J Exp Bot (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jxb/eri050](https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/eri050)

## Abstract

1. J Exp Bot. 2005 Feb;56(412):597-603. doi: 10.1093/jxb/eri050. Epub 2005 Jan
10.

Characterization of three homologous basic leucine zipper transcription factors 
(bZIP) of the ABI5 family during Arabidopsis thaliana embryo maturation.

Bensmihen S(1), Giraudat J, Parcy F.

Author information:
(1)Institut des Sciences du Végétal, UPR 2355 CNRS, 1. avenue de la terrasse, 
91198 Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France. sandra.bensmihen@bbsrc.ac.uk

The Arabidopsis thaliana genome contains approximately 80 genes encoding basic 
leucine zipper transcription factors, divided into 11 groups. Abscisic 
Acid-Insensitive 5 (ABI5) is one of the 13 members of group A and is involved in 
ABA signalling during seed maturation, and germination. Seven other members of 
this group are expressed during seed maturation, but only one of them (Enhanced 
Em Level, EEL) has been functionally characterized during this developmental 
phase. Since EEL and two other group A genes, AtbZIP67 and AREB3 (ABA-Responsive 
Element Binding protein 3), display similar mRNA temporal expression in whole 
siliques, it is suspected that they might share some overlapping functions. To 
address this question, the proteins' tissular and subcellular localization in 
transgenic Arabidopsis were precisely characterized, using translational fusions 
with a green fluorescent protein (GFP) expressed under the corresponding bZIP 
promoter. It was found that the three fusion proteins were expressed with a 
largely overlapping pattern and constitutively localized in the nuclei. An RNA 
interference approach (RNAi) was then used to knock out the expression of all 
three genes simultaneously. Endogenous EEL, AREB3, and AtbZIP67 transcripts 
could be specifically reduced, but no visible defects could be observed during 
seed maturation.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/eri050
PMID: 15642716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
