---
pmid: '20697350'
title: The proximal signaling network of the BCR-ABL1 oncogene shows a modular organization.
authors:
- Titz B
- Low T
- Komisopoulou E
- Chen SS
- Rubbi L
- Graeber TG
journal: Oncogene
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5308218
doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.331
---

# The proximal signaling network of the BCR-ABL1 oncogene shows a modular organization.
**Authors:** Titz B, Low T, Komisopoulou E, Chen SS, Rubbi L, Graeber TG
**Journal:** Oncogene (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/onc.2010.331](https://doi.org/10.1038/onc.2010.331)
**PMC:** [PMC5308218](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5308218/)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2010 Nov 4;29(44):5895-910. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.331. Epub 2010 Aug
 9.

The proximal signaling network of the BCR-ABL1 oncogene shows a modular 
organization.

Titz B(1), Low T, Komisopoulou E, Chen SS, Rubbi L, Graeber TG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, Crump Institute for 
Molecular Imaging, Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of 
California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-7227, USA.

BCR-ABL1 is a fusion tyrosine kinase, which causes multiple types of leukemia. 
We used an integrated proteomic approach that includes label-free quantitative 
protein complex and phosphorylation profiling by mass spectrometry to 
systematically characterize the proximal signaling network of this oncogenic 
kinase. The proximal BCR-ABL1 signaling network shows a modular and layered 
organization with an inner core of three leukemia transformation-relevant 
adaptor protein complexes (Grb2/Gab2/Shc1 complex, CrkI complex and Dok1/Dok2 
complex). We introduced an 'interaction directionality' analysis, which 
annotates static protein networks with information on the directionality of 
phosphorylation-dependent interactions. In this analysis, the observed network 
structure was consistent with a step-wise phosphorylation-dependent assembly of 
the Grb2/Gab2/Shc1 and the Dok1/Dok2 complexes on the BCR-ABL1 core. The CrkI 
complex demonstrated a different directionality, which supports a candidate 
assembly on the Nedd9 (Hef1, CasL) scaffold. As adaptor protein family members 
can compensate for each other in leukemic transformation, we compared members of 
the Dok and Crk protein families and found both overlapping and differential 
binding patterns. We identified an additional level of regulation for the CrkII 
protein via binding to 14-3-3 proteins, which was independent from its 
inhibitory phosphorylation. We also identified novel components of the inner 
core complexes, including the kinases Pragmin (Sgk223) and Lrrk1 (Lrrk2 
paralog). Pragmin was found as a component of the CrkI complex and is a 
potential link between BCR-ABL1/CrkI and RhoA signaling. Lrrk1 is an unusual 
kinase with a GTPase domain. We detected Lrrk1 as a component of the 
Grb2/Gab2/Shc1 complex and found that it functionally interacts with the 
regulator of small GTPases Arap1 (Centd2) and possibly participates in the 
mitogen-activated protein kinase response to cellular stresses. This modular and 
phosphorylation-driven interaction network provides a framework for the 
integration of pleiotropic signaling effects of BCR-ABL1 toward leukemic 
transformation.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2010.331
PMCID: PMC5308218
PMID: 20697350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
