---
pmid: '730048'
title: Osmotic avoidance defective mutants of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans.
authors:
- Culotti JG
- Russell RL
journal: Genetics
year: '1978'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1213887
doi: 10.1093/genetics/90.2.243
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Osmotic avoidance defective mutants of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans.
**Authors:** Culotti JG, Russell RL
**Journal:** Genetics (1978)
**DOI:** [10.1093/genetics/90.2.243](https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/90.2.243)
**PMC:** [PMC1213887](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1213887/)

## Abstract

1. Genetics. 1978 Oct;90(2):243-56. doi: 10.1093/genetics/90.2.243.

Osmotic avoidance defective mutants of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans.

Culotti JG, Russell RL.

A wild-type strain of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans has been shown to 
avoid high concentrations of a number of sugars and salts. Individual and 
population assays for this response were developed and mutants were selected for 
their inability to avoid high concentrations of fructose or NaCl, Seven 
nonavoiding mutants representing six complementation groups were isolated and 
characterized. Genetic studies indicate that the mutants each carry a single 
recessive mutation responsible for the defective osmotic avoidance behavior. The 
map locations of the six complementation groups identified by these mutations 
have been determined. Mutants isolated for their inability to avoid fructose are 
also unable to avoid NaCl and vice versa. The mutants move normally, exhibit 
normal touch sensitivity, and, like wild type, follow isotherms in a radial 
thermal gradient. All of the mutants are at least partially defective in the 
attraction to sodium chloride exhibited by wild type. None of the mutants is 
temperature sensitive, and all exhibit defective osmotic avoidance behavior as 
young L1 larvae. Preliminary anatomical studies indicate selective sensory 
neuron changes in at least one mutant.

DOI: 10.1093/genetics/90.2.243
PMCID: PMC1213887
PMID: 730048 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
