---
pmid: '22759636'
title: Regeneration of Drosophila sensory neuron axons and dendrites is regulated
  by the Akt pathway involving Pten and microRNA bantam.
authors:
- Song Y
- Ori-McKenney KM
- Zheng Y
- Han C
- Jan LY
- Jan YN
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3404388
doi: 10.1101/gad.193243.112
---

# Regeneration of Drosophila sensory neuron axons and dendrites is regulated by the Akt pathway involving Pten and microRNA bantam.
**Authors:** Song Y, Ori-McKenney KM, Zheng Y, Han C, Jan LY, Jan YN
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.193243.112](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.193243.112)
**PMC:** [PMC3404388](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3404388/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2012 Jul 15;26(14):1612-25. doi: 10.1101/gad.193243.112. Epub 2012 
Jul 3.

Regeneration of Drosophila sensory neuron axons and dendrites is regulated by 
the Akt pathway involving Pten and microRNA bantam.

Song Y(1), Ori-McKenney KM, Zheng Y, Han C, Jan LY, Jan YN.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Physiology, Department of 
Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California at San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California 94158, USA.

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2012 Jul 15;26(14):1509-14. doi: 10.1101/gad.198150.112.

Both cell-intrinsic and extrinsic pathways govern axon regeneration, but only a 
limited number of factors have been identified and it is not clear to what 
extent axon regeneration is evolutionarily conserved. Whether dendrites also 
regenerate is unknown. Here we report that, like the axons of mammalian sensory 
neurons, the axons of certain Drosophila dendritic arborization (da) neurons are 
capable of substantial regeneration in the periphery but not in the CNS, and 
activating the Akt pathway enhances axon regeneration in the CNS. Moreover, 
those da neurons capable of axon regeneration also display dendrite 
regeneration, which is cell type-specific, developmentally regulated, and 
associated with microtubule polarity reversal. Dendrite regeneration is 
restrained via inhibition of the Akt pathway in da neurons by the epithelial 
cell-derived microRNA bantam but is facilitated by cell-autonomous activation of 
the Akt pathway. Our study begins to reveal mechanisms for dendrite 
regeneration, which depends on both extrinsic and intrinsic factors, including 
the PTEN-Akt pathway that is also important for axon regeneration. We thus 
established an important new model system--the fly da neuron regeneration model 
that resembles the mammalian injury model--with which to study and gain novel 
insights into the regeneration machinery.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.193243.112
PMCID: PMC3404388
PMID: 22759636 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
