---
pmid: '12519789'
title: Proteomic and biochemical analyses of human B cell-derived exosomes. Potential
  implications for their function and multivesicular body formation.
authors:
- Wubbolts R
- Leckie RS
- Veenhuizen PT
- Schwarzmann G
- Möbius W
- Hoernschemeyer J
- Slot JW
- Geuze HJ
- Stoorvogel W
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M207550200
---

# Proteomic and biochemical analyses of human B cell-derived exosomes. Potential implications for their function and multivesicular body formation.
**Authors:** Wubbolts R, Leckie RS, Veenhuizen PT, Schwarzmann G, Möbius W, Hoernschemeyer J, Slot JW, Geuze HJ, Stoorvogel W
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M207550200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M207550200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Mar 28;278(13):10963-72. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M207550200. Epub 
2003 Jan 7.

Proteomic and biochemical analyses of human B cell-derived exosomes. Potential 
implications for their function and multivesicular body formation.

Wubbolts R(1), Leckie RS, Veenhuizen PT, Schwarzmann G, Möbius W, Hoernschemeyer 
J, Slot JW, Geuze HJ, Stoorvogel W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Utrecht University Medical Centre and Institute 
of Biomembranes, Room G02.525, Heidelberglaan 100, 3585 CX Utrecht, The 
Netherlands.

Exosomes are 60-100-nm membrane vesicles that are secreted into the 
extracellular milieu as a consequence of multivesicular body fusion with the 
plasma membrane. Here we determined the protein and lipid compositions of highly 
purified human B cell-derived exosomes. Mass spectrometric analysis indicated 
the abundant presence of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I and 
class II, heat shock cognate 70, heat shock protein 90, integrin alpha 4, CD45, 
moesin, tubulin (alpha and beta), actin, G(i)alpha(2), and a multitude of other 
proteins. An alpha 4-integrin may direct B cell-derived exosomes to follicular 
dendritic cells, which were described previously as potential target cells. 
Clathrin, heat shock cognate 70, and heat shock protein 90 may be involved in 
protein sorting at multivesicular bodies. Exosomes were also enriched in 
cholesterol, sphingomyelin, and ganglioside GM3, lipids that are typically 
enriched in detergent-resistant membranes. Most exosome-associated proteins, 
including MHC class II and tetraspanins, were insoluble in 
3-[(3-cholamidopropyl)dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonic acid (CHAPS)-containing 
buffers. Multivesicular body-linked MHC class II was also resistant to CHAPS 
whereas plasma membrane-associated MHC class II was solubilized readily. 
Together, these data suggest that recruitment of membrane proteins from the 
limiting membranes into the internal vesicles of multivesicular bodies may 
involve their incorporation into tetraspanin-containing detergent-resistant 
membrane domains.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M207550200
PMID: 12519789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
