---
pmid: '11731480'
title: The silencing complex SAS-I links histone acetylation to the assembly of repressed
  chromatin by CAF-I and Asf1 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
authors:
- Meijsing SH
- Ehrenhofer-Murray AE
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC312838
doi: 10.1101/gad.929001
---

# The silencing complex SAS-I links histone acetylation to the assembly of repressed chromatin by CAF-I and Asf1 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Meijsing SH, Ehrenhofer-Murray AE
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.929001](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.929001)
**PMC:** [PMC312838](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC312838/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2001 Dec 1;15(23):3169-82. doi: 10.1101/gad.929001.

The silencing complex SAS-I links histone acetylation to the assembly of 
repressed chromatin by CAF-I and Asf1 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Meijsing SH(1), Ehrenhofer-Murray AE.

Author information:
(1)Otto-Warburg-Laboratorium, Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, 
D-14195 Berlin, Germany.

The acetylation state of histones plays a central role in determining gene 
expression in chromatin. The reestablishment of the acetylation state of 
nucleosomes after DNA replication and chromatin assembly requires both 
deacetylation and acetylation of specific lysine residues on newly incorporated 
histones. In this study, the MYST family acetyltransferase Sas2 was found to 
interact with Cac1, the largest subunit of Saccharomyces cerevisiae chromatin 
assembly factor-I (CAF-I), and with the nucleosome assembly factor Asf1. The 
deletions of CAC1 (cac1Delta), ASF1 (asf1Delta), and SAS2 (sas2Delta) had 
similar effects on gene silencing and were partially overlapping. Furthermore, 
Sas2 was found in a nuclear protein complex that included Sas4 and Sas5, a 
homolog of TAF(II)30. This complex, termed SAS-I, was also found to contribute 
to rDNA silencing. Furthermore, the observation that a mutation of H4 lysine 16 
to arginine displayed the identical silencing phenotypes as sas2Delta suggested 
that it was the in vivo target of Sas2 acetylation. In summary, our data present 
a novel model for the reestablishment of acetylation patterns after DNA 
replication, by which SAS-I is recruited to freshly replicated DNA by its 
association with chromatin assembly complexes to acetylate lysine 16 of H4.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.929001
PMCID: PMC312838
PMID: 11731480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
