---
pmid: '16405865'
title: Merlin inhibits growth hormone-regulated Raf-ERKs pathways by binding to Grb2
  protein.
authors:
- Lim JY
- Kim H
- Jeun SS
- Kang SG
- Lee KJ
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.12.122
---

# Merlin inhibits growth hormone-regulated Raf-ERKs pathways by binding to Grb2 protein.
**Authors:** Lim JY, Kim H, Jeun SS, Kang SG, Lee KJ
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.12.122](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.12.122)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Feb 24;340(4):1151-7. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.12.122. Epub 2005 Dec 28.

Merlin inhibits growth hormone-regulated Raf-ERKs pathways by binding to Grb2 
protein.

Lim JY(1), Kim H, Jeun SS, Kang SG, Lee KJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul 137-701, 
Republic of Korea, and Department of Oncology Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
MN 55905, USA.

Numerous studies have suggested that the NF2 protein merlin is involved in the 
regulation of abnormal cell growth and proliferation. In this study, to better 
understand the merlin's mechanisms that contribute to the inhibition of 
tumorigenesis, we examined the potential action of merlin on the cell 
proliferative signaling pathways in response to growth hormone (GH). Merlin 
effectively attenuated the GH-induced serum response element (SRE) and 
Elk-1-mediated transcriptional activation, as well as the endogenous 
SRE-regulated gene c-fos expression in NIH3T3 cells. In addition, merlin 
prevented the Raf-1 complex activation process, which resulted in the 
suppression of MAP kinase/ERK, extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERKs), and 
Elk-1 phosphorylation, which are the downstream signals of Raf-1. Moreover, it 
was shown that merlin interacted with endogenous growth factor receptor bound 2 
(Grb2) protein and inhibited its expression. These results suggest that merlin 
contributes, via its protein-to-protein interaction with Grb2 and consequent 
inhibition of the MAPK pathways, to the regulation of the abnormal cell 
proliferation, and this provides a further mechanism underlying the tumor 
suppressor function of merlin.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.12.122
PMID: 16405865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
