---
pmid: '20008835'
title: Quantitative proteomics analysis of chondrogenic differentiation of C3H10T1/2
  mesenchymal stem cells by iTRAQ labeling coupled with on-line two-dimensional LC/MS/MS.
authors:
- Ji YH
- Ji JL
- Sun FY
- Zeng YY
- He XH
- Zhao JX
- Yu Y
- Yu SH
- Wu W
journal: Mol Cell Proteomics
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2849707
doi: 10.1074/mcp.M900243-MCP200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Quantitative proteomics analysis of chondrogenic differentiation of C3H10T1/2 mesenchymal stem cells by iTRAQ labeling coupled with on-line two-dimensional LC/MS/MS.
**Authors:** Ji YH, Ji JL, Sun FY, Zeng YY, He XH, Zhao JX, Yu Y, Yu SH, Wu W
**Journal:** Mol Cell Proteomics (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1074/mcp.M900243-MCP200](https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M900243-MCP200)
**PMC:** [PMC2849707](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2849707/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2010 Mar;9(3):550-64. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M900243-MCP200.
Epub  2009 Dec 15.

Quantitative proteomics analysis of chondrogenic differentiation of C3H10T1/2 
mesenchymal stem cells by iTRAQ labeling coupled with on-line two-dimensional 
LC/MS/MS.

Ji YH(1), Ji JL, Sun FY, Zeng YY, He XH, Zhao JX, Yu Y, Yu SH, Wu W.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Tissue Transplantation and Immunology, Key Laboratory of 
Ministry of Education for Genetic Engineering, College of Life Science and 
Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China. 
tjiyuhua@office.jnu.edu.cn

The chondrogenic potential of multipotent mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) makes 
them a promising source for cell-based therapy of cartilage defects; however, 
the exact intracellular molecular mechanisms of chondrogenesis as well as 
self-renewal of MSCs remain largely unknown. To gain more insight into the 
underlying molecular mechanisms, we applied isobaric tag for relative and 
absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) labeling coupled with on-line two-dimensional 
LC/MS/MS technology to identify proteins differentially expressed in an in vitro 
model for chondrogenesis: chondrogenic differentiation of C3H10T1/2 cells, a 
murine embryonic mesenchymal cell line, was induced by micromass culture and 100 
ng/ml bone morphogenetic protein 2 treatment for 6 days. A total of 1756 
proteins were identified with an average false discovery rate <0.21%. Linear 
regression analysis of the quantitative data gave strong correlation 
coefficients: 0.948 and 0.923 for two replicate two-dimensional LC/MS/MS 
analyses and 0.881, 0.869, and 0.927 for three independent iTRAQ experiments, 
respectively (p < 0.0001). Among 1753 quantified proteins, 100 were 
significantly altered (95% confidence interval), and six of them were further 
validated by Western blotting. Functional categorization revealed that the 17 
up-regulated proteins mainly comprised hallmarks of mature chondrocytes and 
enzymes participating in cartilage extracellular matrix synthesis, whereas the 
83 down-regulated were predominantly involved in energy metabolism, chromatin 
organization, transcription, mRNA processing, signaling transduction, and 
cytoskeleton; except for a number of well documented proteins, the majority of 
these altered proteins were novel for chondrogenesis. Finally, the biological 
roles of BTF3l4 and fibulin-5, two novel chondrogenesis-related proteins 
identified in the present study, were verified in the context of chondrogenic 
differentiation. These data will provide valuable clues for our better 
understanding of the underlying mechanisms that modulate these complex 
biological processes and assist in the application of MSCs in cell-based therapy 
for cartilage regeneration.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M900243-MCP200
PMCID: PMC2849707
PMID: 20008835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
