---
pmid: '15781236'
title: Caveolin-2 regulation of the cell cycle in response to insulin in Hirc-B fibroblast
  cells.
authors:
- Kim S
- Pak Y
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.02.130
---

# Caveolin-2 regulation of the cell cycle in response to insulin in Hirc-B fibroblast cells.
**Authors:** Kim S, Pak Y
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.02.130](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.02.130)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Apr 29;330(1):88-96. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.02.130.

Caveolin-2 regulation of the cell cycle in response to insulin in Hirc-B 
fibroblast cells.

Kim S(1), Pak Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Division of Life Science, College of Natural 
Sciences, Graduate School of Applied Life Science, Gyeongsang National 
University, Jinju 660-701, Republic of Korea.

The regulatory function of caveolin-2 in cell cycle regulation by insulin was 
investigated in human insulin receptor-overexpressed rat 1 fibroblast (Hirc-B) 
cells. Insulin increased induction of the caveolin-2 gene in a time-dependent 
manner. Direct interaction between ERK and caveolin-2 was confirmed by 
immunoprecipitation and phosphorylated ERK increased the specific interaction in 
response to insulin. That insulin induced their nuclear co-localization over 
time was demonstrated by immunofluorescence microscopy. Insulin increased the S 
phase in the cell cycle by 6-fold. When recombinant caveolin-1 was transiently 
expressed, a decrease in the S phase was detected by flow-cytometry. The results 
indicate that the up-regulation of caveolin-2 in response to insulin activates 
the downstream signal cascades in the cell cycle, chiefly the increased 
phosphorylation of ERK, the nuclear translocation of phosphorylated ERK, and the 
subsequent activation of G0/G1 to S phase transition of the cell cycle. The 
results also suggest that DNA synthesis and the activation of the cell cycle by 
insulin are achieved concomitantly with an increase in the interaction between 
caveolin-2 and phosphorylated ERK, and the nuclear translocation of that 
complex. Taken together, we conclude that caveolin-2 positively regulates the 
insulin-induced cell cycle through activation of and direct interaction with ERK 
in Hirc-B cells.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.02.130
PMID: 15781236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
