---
pmid: '17666436'
title: Shroom2, a myosin-VIIa- and actin-binding protein, directly interacts with
  ZO-1 at tight junctions.
authors:
- Etournay R
- Zwaenepoel I
- Perfettini I
- Legrain P
- Petit C
- El-Amraoui A
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.002568
---

# Shroom2, a myosin-VIIa- and actin-binding protein, directly interacts with ZO-1 at tight junctions.
**Authors:** Etournay R, Zwaenepoel I, Perfettini I, Legrain P, Petit C, El-Amraoui A
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.002568](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.002568)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2007 Aug 15;120(Pt 16):2838-50. doi: 10.1242/jcs.002568. Epub 2007
 Jul 31.

Shroom2, a myosin-VIIa- and actin-binding protein, directly interacts with ZO-1 
at tight junctions.

Etournay R(1), Zwaenepoel I, Perfettini I, Legrain P, Petit C, El-Amraoui A.

Author information:
(1)INSERM UMRS 587, Unité de Génétique des Déficits Sensoriels, Institut 
Pasteur, 25 rue du Dr Roux, 75015 Paris, France.

Defects in myosin VIIa lead to developmental anomalies of the auditory and 
visual sensory cells. We sought proteins interacting with the myosin VIIa tail 
by using the yeast two-hybrid system. Here, we report on shroom2, a 
submembranous PDZ domain-containing protein that is associated with the tight 
junctions in multiple embryonic and adult epithelia. Shroom2 directly interacts 
with the C-terminal MyTH4-FERM domain of myosin VIIa and with F-actin. In 
addition, a shroom2 fragment containing the region of interaction with F-actin 
was able to protect actin filaments from cytochalasin-D-induced disruption in 
MDCK cells. Transfection experiments in MDCK and LE (L fibroblasts that express 
E-cadherin) cells led us to conclude that shroom2 is targeted to the cell-cell 
junctions in the presence of tight junctions only. In Ca(2+)-switch experiments 
on MDCK cells, ZO-1 (also known as TJP1) preceded GFP-tagged shroom2 at the 
differentiating tight junctions. ZO-1 directly interacts with the serine- and 
proline-rich region of shroom2 in vitro. Moreover, the two proteins colocalize 
in vivo at mature tight junctions, and could be coimmunoprecipitated from brain 
and cochlear extracts. We suggest that shroom2 and ZO-1 form a 
tight-junction-associated scaffolding complex, possibly linked to myosin VIIa, 
that bridges the junctional membrane to the underlying cytoskeleton, thereby 
contributing to the stabilization of these junctions.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.002568
PMID: 17666436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
