---
pmid: '10677481'
title: The subcellular localization of acetyl-CoA carboxylase 2.
authors:
- Abu-Elheiga L
- Brinkley WR
- Zhong L
- Chirala SS
- Woldegiorgis G
- Wakil SJ
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC26453
doi: 10.1073/pnas.97.4.1444
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The subcellular localization of acetyl-CoA carboxylase 2.
**Authors:** Abu-Elheiga L, Brinkley WR, Zhong L, Chirala SS, Woldegiorgis G, Wakil SJ
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.97.4.1444](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.97.4.1444)
**PMC:** [PMC26453](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC26453/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Feb 15;97(4):1444-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.97.4.1444.

The subcellular localization of acetyl-CoA carboxylase 2.

Abu-Elheiga L(1), Brinkley WR, Zhong L, Chirala SS, Woldegiorgis G, Wakil SJ.

Author information:
(1)Verna and Marrs McLean Department of Biochemistry, Baylor College of 
Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA. swakil@bcm.tmc.edu

Animals, including humans, express two isoforms of acetyl-CoA carboxylase (EC ), 
ACC1 (M(r) = 265 kDa) and ACC2 (M(r) = 280 kDa). The predicted amino acid 
sequence of ACC2 contains an additional 136 aa relative to ACC1, 114 of which 
constitute the unique N-terminal sequence of ACC2. The hydropathic profiles of 
the two ACC isoforms generally are comparable, except for the unique N-terminal 
sequence in ACC2. The sequence of amino acid residues 1-20 of ACC2 is highly 
hydrophobic, suggesting that it is a leader sequence that targets ACC2 for 
insertion into membranes. The subcellular localization of ACC2 in mammalian 
cells was determined by performing immunofluorescence microscopic analysis using 
affinity-purified anti-ACC2-specific antibodies and transient expression of the 
green fluorescent protein fused to the C terminus of the N-terminal sequences of 
ACC1 and ACC2. These analyses demonstrated that ACC1 is a cytosolic protein and 
that ACC2 was associated with the mitochondria, a finding that was confirmed 
further by the immunocolocalization of a known human mitochondria-specific 
protein and the carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1. Based on analyses of the 
fusion proteins of ACC-green fluorescent protein, we concluded that the 
N-terminal sequences of ACC2 are responsible for mitochondrial targeting of 
ACC2. The association of ACC2 with the mitochondria is consistent with the 
hypothesis that ACC2 is involved in the regulation of mitochondrial fatty acid 
oxidation through the inhibition of carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1 by its 
product malonyl-CoA.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.97.4.1444
PMCID: PMC26453
PMID: 10677481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
