---
pmid: '20472562'
title: Low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein-1 (LRP1) regulates thrombospondin-2
  (TSP2) enhancement of Notch3 signaling.
authors:
- Meng H
- Zhang X
- Lee SJ
- Strickland DK
- Lawrence DA
- Wang MM
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2010'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2906298
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.144634
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein-1 (LRP1) regulates thrombospondin-2 (TSP2) enhancement of Notch3 signaling.
**Authors:** Meng H, Zhang X, Lee SJ, Strickland DK, Lawrence DA, Wang MM
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110.144634](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.144634)
**PMC:** [PMC2906298](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2906298/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jul 23;285(30):23047-55. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.144634. Epub 
2010 May 14.

Low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein-1 (LRP1) regulates 
thrombospondin-2 (TSP2) enhancement of Notch3 signaling.

Meng H(1), Zhang X, Lee SJ, Strickland DK, Lawrence DA, Wang MM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 
48109-5622, USA.

Intracellular trafficking of Notch and Notch ligands modulates signaling, 
suggesting that choreography of ligand and receptor translocation is essential 
for optimal Notch activity. Indeed, a major model for Notch signaling posits 
that Notch trans-endocytosis into the ligand-expressing (signal sending) cell is 
a key driving force for Notch signal transduction. The extracellular protein 
thrombospondin-2 (TSP2) enhances Notch signaling and binds to both Jagged1 and 
Notch3 ectodomains, potentially bridging two essential extracellular components 
of Notch signaling. We investigated the role of low density lipoprotein 
receptor-related protein-1 (LRP1), a TSP2 receptor, in the regulation of Notch3 
signaling. TSP2 potentiation of Notch is blocked by the receptor-associated 
protein (an inhibitor of low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 
function) and requires LRP1 expression in the signal-sending cell. TSP2 
stimulates Notch3 endocytosis into wild type fibroblasts but not LRP1-deficient 
fibroblasts. Finally, recombinant Notch3 and Jagged1 interact with the LRP1 
85-kDa B-chain, a subunit that lacks known ligand binding function. Our data 
suggest that LRP1 and TSP2 stimulate Notch activity by driving trans-endocytosis 
of the Notch ectodomain into the signal-sending cell and demonstrate a novel, 
non-cell autonomous function of LRP1 in cell-cell signaling.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.144634
PMCID: PMC2906298
PMID: 20472562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Intracellular trafficking of Notch and Notch ligands modulates signaling, suggesting that choreography of ligand and receptor translocation is essential for optimal Notch activity. Indeed, a major model for Notch signaling posits that Notch trans-endocytosis into the ligand-expressing (signal sending) cell is a key driving force for Notch signal transduction. The extracellular protein thrombospondin-2 (TSP2) enhances Notch signaling and binds to both Jagged1 and Notch3 ectodomains, potentially bridging two essential extracellular components of Notch signaling. We investigated the role of low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein-1 (LRP1), a TSP2 receptor, in the regulation of Notch3 signaling. TSP2 potentiation of Notch is blocked by the receptor-associated protein (an inhibitor of low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein function) and requires LRP1 expression in the signal-sending cell. TSP2 stimulates Notch3 endocytosis into wild type fibroblasts but not LRP1-deficient fibroblasts. Finally, recombinant Notch3 and Jagged1 interact with the LRP1 85-kDa B-chain, a subunit that lacks known ligand binding function. Our data suggest that LRP1 and TSP2 stimulate Notch activity by driving trans-endocytosis of the Notch ectodomain into the signal-sending cell and demonstrate a novel, non-cell autonomous function of LRP1 in cell-cell signaling.

Introduction

Notch signaling is an evolutionarily conserved system that mediates direct, short range communication between adjacent cells. This pathway is required during development for cell type specification, which is essential for accurate cell patterning of almost all organs. Increasing evidence suggests that precise regulation of the quantity of Notch signaling is essential for homeostasis and development (dramatically demonstrated by Ref. 1 ). Thus, factors that modulate the efficacy of Notch signaling may be important in proper function of this important mediator of cell communication.

Unlike signaling systems that utilize soluble ligands, Notch signaling requires juxtaposition of membrane proteins expressed on two adjacent cells, commonly defined as the signal-sending and the signal-receiving cell. Mammalian Notch proteins are constitutively processed by furin, resulting in a noncovalently linked heterodimer ( 2 , 3 ). Canonical ligands (the DSL (Delta/Serrate/Lag-2) proteins Jagged1–2 and Delta1, -3, and -4) bind to Notch proteins, resulting in sequential processing by two additional proteolytic cleavages ( 4 , 5 ). Subsequently, the Notch intracellular domain migrates to the nucleus of the cells where it activates gene expression in the Notch signal-receiving cell.

The precise molecular mechanisms by which engagement of DSL ligands result in proteolytic Notch activation are under intense scrutiny. A large amount of work has been devoted to understanding the observation that endocytic function in the DSL-expressing cells is critical for Notch function in genetic studies ( 6 – 8 ). Two basic models have been proposed ( 9 – 11 ). One model proposes that endocytosis may modify DSL ligands, thereby activating them, but putative modifications that are hypothesized to occur after endocytic processing of DSL have not been identified.

An alternative model is that trans-endocytosis of Notch by the DSL ligand-expressing cells is critical for Notch activation. Specifically, a mechanical force provided by the endocytic machinery of the signal-sending cell may facilitate Notch dissociation and subsequent proteolytic cleavage. Indeed, cells expressing Drosophila ligand Delta, trans-endocytose Notch extracellular domain ( 12 – 14 ). Although earlier reports suggested that the uptake of Notch into DSL cells may reflect simple clearance of the protein, recent studies have suggested that trans-endocytosis occurs before regulated proteolysis and correlates with Notch activation ( 15 ). Recently, noncanonical Notch-interacting extracellular proteins MAGP were shown to activate signaling through heterodimer dissociation ( 16 ).

We recently demonstrated that the matricellular protein TSP2 binds to both Notch3 and Jagged1 and enhances Notch3 signaling ( 17 ). TSP2 increases the level of binding of Notch3 to Jagged1, suggesting that TSP2 amplifies Notch3 activity by enhancing the canonical Notch pathway. This study was initiated to identify mechanisms of TSP2 enhancement of Notch3 function. TSP2 acts on cells through multifaceted mechanisms. Multiple membrane receptors for TSP2 have been characterized, including CD36, CD47, HSPG, LRP1, and a variety of integrin subtypes (reviewed in Ref. 18 ). Each of these receptors binds to a defined region of TSP1 or TSP2 and mediates a variety of cell and context-specific cellular processes.

Among these receptors, LRP1 is of particular interest because it mediates endocytosis of TSP2-matrix metalloproteinase complexes and facilitates their cell-mediated elimination from the extracellular space through endocytosis and targeting to lysosomes ( 19 ). Evidence that Notch signaling requires trans-endocytosis of the Notch ectodomain into the signal-sending cell has led us to test the hypothesis that LRP1 mediates TSP2 activation of Notch and facilitates Notch trans-endocytosis.

DISCUSSION

Intracellular regulators of Notch and Notch ligand endocytosis are well known modulators of Notch signaling. In contrast, less is known about modulation of Notch proteins by extracellular proteins. Recent studies demonstrate that TSP2 is a novel extracellular Notch-binding protein that interacts with epidermal growth factor repeats of Notch3 and enhances its interaction with Jagged1 ( 17 ). In new experiments described herein, we test whether the TSP2 receptor LRP1 participates in Notch function and describe three novel findings as follows. 1) LRP1 is required for TSP2 potentiation of Notch3 signaling. 2) LRP1 participates in trans-endocytosis of Notch. 3) Both Notch3 and Jagged1 bind directly to the 85-kDa B-chain of LRP1.
