---
pmid: '19801630'
title: RNA-binding motif protein 4 translocates to cytoplasmic granules and suppresses
  translation via argonaute2 during muscle cell differentiation.
authors:
- Lin JC
- Tarn WY
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2787328
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.032946
---

# RNA-binding motif protein 4 translocates to cytoplasmic granules and suppresses translation via argonaute2 during muscle cell differentiation.
**Authors:** Lin JC, Tarn WY
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M109.032946](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.032946)
**PMC:** [PMC2787328](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2787328/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Dec 11;284(50):34658-65. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.032946. Epub 
2009 Sep 29.

RNA-binding motif protein 4 translocates to cytoplasmic granules and suppresses 
translation via argonaute2 during muscle cell differentiation.

Lin JC(1), Tarn WY.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan.

The RNA-binding motif protein 4 (RBM4) plays multiple roles in mRNA metabolism, 
including translation control. RBM4 suppresses cap-dependent translation but 
activates internal ribosome entry site-mediated translation. Because of its high 
expression level in muscle and heart, we investigated the function of RBM4 in 
myoblast cells. Here, we demonstrate that RBM4 is phosphorylated and 
translocates to the cytoplasm in mouse C2C12 cells upon cell differentiation. 
Notably, RBM4 is transiently deposited into cytoplasmic granules containing 
microtubule assembly factors as well as poly(A)(+) RNAs. Moreover, RBM4 
colocalizes with the components of micro-ribonucleoproteins, including the 
Argonaute2 (Ago2) protein, during muscle cell differentiation. RBM4 interacts 
directly with Ago2 and may recruit Ago2 to suppress translation of target mRNAs. 
Furthermore, RBM4 selectively associates with muscle cell-specific microRNAs and 
potentiates their translation repression activity by promoting 
micro-ribonucleoprotein association with target mRNAs. Altogether, our results 
suggest that RBM4 translocates to the cytoplasm and participates in translation 
suppression during muscle cell differentiation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.032946
PMCID: PMC2787328
PMID: 19801630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
