---
pmid: '21709243'
title: GIGANTEA directly activates Flowering Locus T in Arabidopsis thaliana.
authors:
- Sawa M
- Kay SA
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3136272
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1106771108
---

# GIGANTEA directly activates Flowering Locus T in Arabidopsis thaliana.
**Authors:** Sawa M, Kay SA
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1106771108](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1106771108)
**PMC:** [PMC3136272](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3136272/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Jul 12;108(28):11698-703. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1106771108. Epub 2011 Jun 27.

GIGANTEA directly activates Flowering Locus T in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Sawa M(1), Kay SA.

Author information:
(1)Section of Cell and Developmental Biology, Division of Biological Sciences, 
University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0130, USA.

Plants perceive environmental signals such as day length and temperature to 
determine optimal timing for the transition from vegetative to floral stages. 
Arabidopsis flowers under long-day conditions through the CONSTANS 
(CO)-FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT) regulatory module. It is thought that the 
environmental cues for photoperiodic control of flowering are initially 
perceived in the leaves. We have previously shown that GIGANTEA (GI) regulates 
the timing of CO expression, together with FLAVIN-BINDING, KELCH REPEAT, F BOX 
protein 1. Normally, CO and FT are expressed exclusively in vascular bundles, 
whereas GI is expressed in various tissues. To better elucidate the role of 
tissue-specific expression of GI in the flowering pathway, we established 
transgenic lines in which GI is expressed exclusively in mesophyll, vascular 
bundles, epidermis, shoot apical meristem, or root. We found that GI expressed 
in either mesophyll or vascular bundles rescues the late-flowering phenotype of 
the gi-2 loss-of-function mutant under both short-day and long-day conditions. 
Interestingly, GI expressed in mesophyll or vascular tissues increases FT 
expression without up-regulating CO expression under short-day conditions. 
Furthermore, we examined the interaction between GI and FT repressors in 
mesophyll. We found that GI can bind to three FT repressors: SHORT VEGETATIVE 
PHASE (SVP), TEMPRANILLO (TEM)1, and TEM2. Finally, our chromatin 
immunoprecipitation experiments showed that GI binds to FT promoter regions that 
are near the SVP binding sites. Taken together, our data further elucidate the 
multiple roles of GI in the regulation of flowering time.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1106771108
PMCID: PMC3136272
PMID: 21709243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
