---
pmid: '8805535'
title: The crystal structure of endoglucanase CelA, a family 8 glycosyl hydrolase
  from Clostridium thermocellum.
authors:
- Alzari PM
- Souchon H
- Dominguez R
journal: Structure
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0969-2126(96)00031-7
---

# The crystal structure of endoglucanase CelA, a family 8 glycosyl hydrolase from Clostridium thermocellum.
**Authors:** Alzari PM, Souchon H, Dominguez R
**Journal:** Structure (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0969-2126(96)00031-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0969-2126(96)00031-7)

## Abstract

1. Structure. 1996 Mar 15;4(3):265-75. doi: 10.1016/s0969-2126(96)00031-7.

The crystal structure of endoglucanase CelA, a family 8 glycosyl hydrolase from 
Clostridium thermocellum.

Alzari PM(1), Souchon H, Dominguez R.

Author information:
(1)Unité d'lmmunologie Structurale and URA 1961 CNRS, Institut Pasteur, Paris, 
France.

Erratum in
    Structure 1996 May 15;4(5):633.

BACKGROUND: Cellulases, which catalyze the hydrolysis of glycosidic bonds in 
cellulose, can be classified into several different protein families. 
Endoglucanase CelA is a member of glycosyl hydrolase family 8, a family for 
which no structural information was previously available.
RESULTS: The crystal structure of CelA was determined by multiple isomorphous 
replacement and refined to 1.65 A resolution. The protein folds into a regular 
(alpha/alpha)6 barrel formed by six inner and six outer alpha helices. 
Cello-oligosaccharides bind to an acidic cleft containing at least five 
D-glucosyl-binding subsites (A-E) such that the scissile glycosidic linkage lies 
between subsites C and D. The strictly conserved residue Glu95, which occupies 
the center of the substrate-binding cleft and is hydrogen bonded to the 
glycosidic oxygen, has been assigned the catalytic role of proton donor.
CONCLUSIONS: The present analysis provides a basis for modeling homologous 
family 8 cellulases. The architecture of the active-site cleft, presenting at 
least five glucosyl-binding subsites, explains why family 8 cellulases cleave 
cello-oligosaccharide polymers that are at least five D-glycosyl subunits long. 
Furthermore, the structure of CelA allows comparison with (alpha/alpha)6 barrel 
glycosidases that are not related in sequence, suggesting a possible, albeit 
distant, evolutionary relationship between different families of glycosyl 
hydrolases.

DOI: 10.1016/s0969-2126(96)00031-7
PMID: 8805535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
