---
reference_id: PMID:36744437
title: "LINE-1 retrotransposon expression in cancerous, epithelial and neuronal cells revealed by 5' single-cell RNA-Seq."
authors:
- McKerrow W
- Kagermazova L
- Doudican N
- Frazzette N
- Kaparos EI
- Evans SA
- Rocha A
- Sedivy JM
- Neretti N
- Carucci J
- Boeke JD
- Fenyö D
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkad049
content_type: abstract_only
---

# LINE-1 retrotransposon expression in cancerous, epithelial and neuronal cells revealed by 5' single-cell RNA-Seq.
**Authors:** McKerrow W, Kagermazova L, Doudican N, Frazzette N, Kaparos EI, Evans SA, Rocha A, Sedivy JM, Neretti N, Carucci J, Boeke JD, Fenyö D
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkad049](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkad049)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2023 Mar 21;51(5):2033-2045. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkad049.

LINE-1 retrotransposon expression in cancerous, epithelial and neuronal cells 
revealed by 5' single-cell RNA-Seq.

McKerrow W(1)(2), Kagermazova L(1)(2), Doudican N(3), Frazzette N(3), Kaparos 
EI(1)(2), Evans SA(4)(5), Rocha A(4)(5), Sedivy JM(5)(6), Neretti N(4)(5), 
Carucci J(3), Boeke JD(1)(2)(7), Fenyö D(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Systems Genetics, NYU Langone Health, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, NYU Langone Health, 
New York, NY, USA.
(3)Ronald O. Perelman Department of Dermatology, NYU Langone Health, New York, 
NY, USA.
(4)Center for Computational Molecular Biology, Brown University, Providence, RI, 
USA.
(5)Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology, and Biochemistry, Brown 
University, Providence, RI, USA.
(6)Center on the Biology of Aging, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA.
(7)Department of Biomedical Engineering, NYU Tandon School of Engineering, 
Brooklyn,NY11201, USA.

LINE-1 retrotransposons are sequences capable of copying themselves to new 
genomic loci via an RNA intermediate. New studies implicate LINE-1 in a range of 
diseases, especially in the context of aging, but without an accurate 
understanding of where and when LINE-1 is expressed, a full accounting of its 
role in health and disease is not possible. We therefore developed a method-5' 
scL1seq-that makes use of a widely available library preparation method (10x 
Genomics 5' single cell RNA-seq) to measure LINE-1 expression in tens of 
thousands of single cells. We recapitulated the known pattern of LINE-1 
expression in tumors-present in cancer cells, absent from immune cells-and 
identified hitherto undescribed LINE-1 expression in human epithelial cells and 
mouse hippocampal neurons. In both cases, we saw a modest increase with age, 
supporting recent research connecting LINE-1 to age related diseases.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkad049
PMCID: PMC10018344
PMID: 36744437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]