---
pmid: '9860297'
title: 'The nuclear-encoded human NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase NDUFA8 subunit: cDNA
  cloning, chromosomal localization, tissue distribution, and mutation detection in
  complex-I-deficient patients.'
authors:
- Triepels R
- van den Heuvel L
- Loeffen J
- Smeets R
- Trijbels F
- Smeitink J
journal: Hum Genet
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s004390050869
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The nuclear-encoded human NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase NDUFA8 subunit: cDNA cloning, chromosomal localization, tissue distribution, and mutation detection in complex-I-deficient patients.
**Authors:** Triepels R, van den Heuvel L, Loeffen J, Smeets R, Trijbels F, Smeitink J
**Journal:** Hum Genet (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s004390050869](https://doi.org/10.1007/s004390050869)

## Abstract

1. Hum Genet. 1998 Nov;103(5):557-63. doi: 10.1007/s004390050869.

The nuclear-encoded human NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase NDUFA8 subunit: cDNA 
cloning, chromosomal localization, tissue distribution, and mutation detection 
in complex-I-deficient patients.

Triepels R(1), van den Heuvel L, Loeffen J, Smeets R, Trijbels F, Smeitink J.

Author information:
(1)Nijmegen Center for Mitochondrial Disorders, University Children's Hospital, 
Department of Pediatrics, The Netherlands.

We report the cloning of the cDNA sequence of the nuclear-encoded NDUFA8 subunit 
of NADH: ubiquinone oxidoreductase, the first mitochondrial respiratory chain 
complex. The NDUFA8 open reading frame (ORF) includes 519 bp and encodes 172 
amino acids (Mr=20.1 kDa). The human cDNA sequence shows 86.2% identity with the 
bovine sequence, whereas the human NDUFA8 amino acid sequence is 87.8% similar 
to its bovine PGIV protein counterpart. Both human and bovine NDUFA8 contain a 
conserved cysteine motif. Polymerase chain reaction analysis of rodent/human 
somatic cell hybrids maps the human NDUFA8 gene to chromosome 9. A multiple 
tissue blot has revealed the highest NDUFA8 mRNA expression in human heart, 
skeletal muscle, and fetal heart. Mutation analysis of the NDUFA8 fibroblast 
cDNA in 20 patients with an isolated enzymatic complex I deficiency in cultured 
skin fibroblasts has revealed two polymorphisms, one within the ORF and the 
other in the 3' untranslated region of the NDUFA8 cDNA sequence. The allelic 
frequency of both polymorphisms was similar in controls and complex-I-deficient 
patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s004390050869
PMID: 9860297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
