---
pmid: '11495919'
title: Apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 controls the proapoptotic function of
  death-associated protein (Daxx) in the cytoplasm.
authors:
- Ko YG
- Kang YS
- Park H
- Seol W
- Kim J
- Kim T
- Park HS
- Choi EJ
- Kim S
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M105928200
---

# Apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 controls the proapoptotic function of death-associated protein (Daxx) in the cytoplasm.
**Authors:** Ko YG, Kang YS, Park H, Seol W, Kim J, Kim T, Park HS, Choi EJ, Kim S
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M105928200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M105928200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Oct 19;276(42):39103-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M105928200. Epub
2001  Aug 8.

Apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 controls the proapoptotic function of 
death-associated protein (Daxx) in the cytoplasm.

Ko YG(1), Kang YS, Park H, Seol W, Kim J, Kim T, Park HS, Choi EJ, Kim S.

Author information:
(1)National Creative Research Initiatives Center for ARS Network, College of 
Pharmacy, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea.

Although Daxx (death-associated protein) was first reported to mediate the 
apoptotic signal from Fas to JNK in the cytoplasm, other data suggested that 
Daxx is mainly located in the nucleus as a transcriptional regulator. Here, we 
demonstrated that cellular localization of Daxx could be determined by the 
relative concentration of a proapoptotic kinase, apoptosis signal-regulating 
kinase 1 (ASK1) by using immunofluorescence and transcriptional reporter assay. 
ASK1 sequestered Daxx in the cytoplasm and inhibited the repressive activity of 
Daxx in transcription. In addition, Daxx was bound to the activated Fas only in 
the presence of ASK1, accelerating the Fas-mediated apoptosis. These results 
suggest that Daxx requires ASK1 for its cytoplasmic localization and 
Fas-mediated signaling. Taken together, we could conclude that ASK1 controls the 
dual function of Daxx as a transcriptional repressor in the nucleus and as a 
proapoptotic signal mediator in the cytoplasm.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M105928200
PMID: 11495919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
