---
pmid: '20797633'
title: MMXD, a TFIIH-independent XPD-MMS19 protein complex involved in chromosome
  segregation.
authors:
- Ito S
- Tan LJ
- Andoh D
- Narita T
- Seki M
- Hirano Y
- Narita K
- Kuraoka I
- Hiraoka Y
- Tanaka K
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.07.029
---

# MMXD, a TFIIH-independent XPD-MMS19 protein complex involved in chromosome segregation.
**Authors:** Ito S, Tan LJ, Andoh D, Narita T, Seki M, Hirano Y, Narita K, Kuraoka I, Hiraoka Y, Tanaka K
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2010.07.029](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2010.07.029)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2010 Aug 27;39(4):632-40. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.07.029.

MMXD, a TFIIH-independent XPD-MMS19 protein complex involved in chromosome 
segregation.

Ito S(1), Tan LJ, Andoh D, Narita T, Seki M, Hirano Y, Narita K, Kuraoka I, 
Hiraoka Y, Tanaka K.

Author information:
(1)Human Cell Biology Group, Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences, Osaka 
University, 1-3 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Xeroderma pigmentosum group D (XPD) protein is one of the subunits of TFIIH that 
is required for nucleotide excision repair and transcription. We found a XPD 
protein complex containing MMS19 that was assumed to be a regulator of TFIIH. 
However, the MMS19-XPD complex did not contain any other subunits of TFIIH. 
Instead, it included FAM96B (now designated MIP18), Ciao1, and ANT2. MMS19, 
MIP18, and XPD localized to the mitotic spindle during mitosis. The 
siRNA-mediated knockdown of MMS19, MIP18, or XPD led to improper chromosome 
segregation and the accumulation of nuclei with abnormal shapes. In addition, 
the frequency of abnormal mitosis and nuclei was increased in XP-D and XP-D/CS 
patients' cells. These results indicate that the MMS19-XPD protein complex, now 
designated MMXD (MMS19-MIP18-XPD), is required for proper chromosome 
segregation, an abnormality of which could contribute to the pathogenesis in 
some cases of XP-D and XP-D/CS.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.07.029
PMID: 20797633 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
