---
pmid: '21448132'
title: Dissociation by Pelota, Hbs1 and ABCE1 of mammalian vacant 80S ribosomes and
  stalled elongation complexes.
authors:
- Pisareva VP
- Skabkin MA
- Hellen CU
- Pestova TV
- Pisarev AV
journal: EMBO J
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3101999
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.93
---

# Dissociation by Pelota, Hbs1 and ABCE1 of mammalian vacant 80S ribosomes and stalled elongation complexes.
**Authors:** Pisareva VP, Skabkin MA, Hellen CU, Pestova TV, Pisarev AV
**Journal:** EMBO J (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2011.93](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2011.93)
**PMC:** [PMC3101999](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3101999/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2011 May 4;30(9):1804-17. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.93. Epub 2011 Mar
29.

Dissociation by Pelota, Hbs1 and ABCE1 of mammalian vacant 80S ribosomes and 
stalled elongation complexes.

Pisareva VP(1), Skabkin MA, Hellen CU, Pestova TV, Pisarev AV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, SUNY Downstate Medical Center, Brooklyn, NY 
11203, USA.

No-go decay (NGD) and non-stop decay (NSD) are eukaryotic surveillance 
mechanisms that target mRNAs on which elongation complexes (ECs) are stalled by, 
for example, stable secondary structures (NGD) or due to the absence of a stop 
codon (NSD). Two interacting proteins Dom34(yeast)/Pelota(mammals) and Hbs1, 
which are paralogues of eRF1 and eRF3, are implicated in these processes. 
Dom34/Hbs1 were shown to promote dissociation of stalled ECs and release of 
intact peptidyl-tRNA. Using an in vitro reconstitution approach, we investigated 
the activities of mammalian Pelota/Hbs1 and report that Pelota/Hbs1 also induced 
dissociation of ECs and release of peptidyl-tRNA, but only in the presence of 
ABCE1. Whereas Pelota and ABCE1 were essential, Hbs1 had a stimulatory effect. 
Importantly, ABCE1/Pelota/Hbs1 dissociated ECs containing only a limited number 
of mRNA nucleotides downstream of the P-site, which suggests that 
ABCE1/Pelota/Hbs1 would disassemble NSD complexes stalled at the 3'-end, but not 
pre-cleavage NGD complexes stalled in the middle of mRNA. ABCE1/Pelota/Hbs1 also 
dissociated vacant 80S ribosomes, which stimulated 48S complex formation, 
suggesting that Pelota/Hbs1 have an additional role outside of NGD.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2011.93
PMCID: PMC3101999
PMID: 21448132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
