---
pmid: '1678319'
title: Identification of deletion mutations and three new genes at the familial polyposis
  locus.
authors:
- Joslyn G
- Carlson M
- Thliveris A
- Albertsen H
- Gelbert L
- Samowitz W
- Groden J
- Stevens J
- Spirio L
- Robertson M
journal: Cell
year: '1991'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(81)90022-2
---

# Identification of deletion mutations and three new genes at the familial polyposis locus.
**Authors:** Joslyn G, Carlson M, Thliveris A, Albertsen H, Gelbert L, Samowitz W, Groden J, Stevens J, Spirio L, Robertson M
**Journal:** Cell (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0092-8674(81)90022-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(81)90022-2)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 1991 Aug 9;66(3):601-13. doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(81)90022-2.

Identification of deletion mutations and three new genes at the familial 
polyposis locus.

Joslyn G(1), Carlson M, Thliveris A, Albertsen H, Gelbert L, Samowitz W, Groden 
J, Stevens J, Spirio L, Robertson M, et al.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah Health Sciences Center, Salt 
Lake City 84132.

Small (100-260 kb), nested deletions were characterized in DNA from two 
unrelated patients with familial adenomatous polyposis coli (APC). Three 
candidate genes located within the deleted region were ascertained and a 
previous candidate gene, MCC, was shown to be located outside the deleted 
region. One of the new genes contained sequence identical to SRP19, the gene 
coding for the 19 kd component of the ribosomal signal recognition particle. The 
second, provisionally designated DP1 (deleted in polyposis 1), was found to be 
transcribed in the same orientation as MCC. Two other cDNAs, DP2 and DP3, were 
found to overlap, forming a single gene, DP2.5, that is transcribed in the same 
orientation as SRP19.

DOI: 10.1016/0092-8674(81)90022-2
PMID: 1678319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
