---
reference_id: PMID:11573955
title: "The J domain of Tpr2 regulates its interaction with the proapoptotic and cell-cycle checkpoint protein, Rad9."
authors:
- Xiang SL
- Kumano T
- Iwasaki SI
- Sun X
- Yoshioka K
- Yamamoto KC
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1006/bbrc.2001.5685
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# The J domain of Tpr2 regulates its interaction with the proapoptotic and cell-cycle checkpoint protein, Rad9.
**Authors:** Xiang SL, Kumano T, Iwasaki SI, Sun X, Yoshioka K, Yamamoto KC
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1006/bbrc.2001.5685](https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.2001.5685)

## Content

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Oct 5;287(4):932-40. doi:
10.1006/bbrc.2001.5685.

The J domain of Tpr2 regulates its interaction with the proapoptotic and
cell-cycle checkpoint protein, Rad9.

Xiang SL(1), Kumano T, Iwasaki SI, Sun X, Yoshioka K, Yamamoto KC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Kanazawa University, 13-1 Takaramachi,
Kanazawa 920-0934, Japan.

Human Rad9 is a key cell-cycle checkpoint protein that is postulated to function
in the early phase of cell-cycle checkpoint control through complex formation
with Rad1 and Hus1. Rad9 is also thought to be involved in controlling apoptosis
through its interaction with Bcl-2. To explore the biochemical functions of Rad9
in these cellular control mechanisms, we performed two-hybrid screening and
identified Tetratricopeptide repeat protein 2 (Tpr2) as a novel Rad9-binding
protein. We found that Tpr2 binds not only to Rad9, but also to Rad1 and Hus1,
through its N-terminal tetratricopeptide repeat region, as assessed by in vivo
and in vitro binding assays. However, the in vivo and in vitro interactions of
Tpr2 with Rad9 were greatly enhanced by the deletion of its C-terminal J domain
or by a point mutation in the conserved HPD motif in the J domain, though the
binding of Tpr2 to Rad1 and Hus1 was not influenced by these J-domain mutations.
We further found: (1) Rad9 transiently dissociates from Tpr2 following
heat-shock or UV treatments, but the mutation of the J domain abrogates this
transient dissociation of the Tpr2/Rad9 complex; and (2) the J domain of Tpr2
modulates the cellular localization of both Tpr2 itself and Rad9. These results
indicate that the J domain of Tpr2 plays a critical role in the regulation of
both physical and functional interactions between Tpr2 and Rad9.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.2001.5685
PMID: 11573955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]