---
pmid: '16455755'
title: Spatial and temporal regulation of GLUT4 translocation by flotillin-1 and caveolin-3
  in skeletal muscle cells.
authors:
- Fecchi K
- Volonte D
- Hezel MP
- Schmeck K
- Galbiati F
journal: FASEB J
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4288748
doi: 10.1096/fj.05-4661fje
---

# Spatial and temporal regulation of GLUT4 translocation by flotillin-1 and caveolin-3 in skeletal muscle cells.
**Authors:** Fecchi K, Volonte D, Hezel MP, Schmeck K, Galbiati F
**Journal:** FASEB J (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1096/fj.05-4661fje](https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.05-4661fje)
**PMC:** [PMC4288748](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4288748/)

## Abstract

1. FASEB J. 2006 Apr;20(6):705-7. doi: 10.1096/fj.05-4661fje. Epub 2006 Feb 2.

Spatial and temporal regulation of GLUT4 translocation by flotillin-1 and 
caveolin-3 in skeletal muscle cells.

Fecchi K(1), Volonte D, Hezel MP, Schmeck K, Galbiati F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

Skeletal muscle tissue is one of the main sites where glucose uptake occurs in 
response to insulin. The glucose transporter type-4 (GLUT4) is primarily 
responsible for the insulin-stimulated increase in glucose uptake. Upon insulin 
stimulation, GLUT4 is recruited from intracellular reserves to the plasma 
membrane. The molecular mechanisms that regulate the translocation of GLUT4 to 
the sarcolemma remain to be fully identified. Here, we demonstrate that GLUT4 is 
localized to perinuclear stores that contain flotillin-1, a marker of lipid 
rafts, in skeletal muscle cells. Stimulation with insulin for 10 min results in 
the translocation of flotillin-1/GLUT4-containing domains to the plasma membrane 
in a PI3K- and PKCzeta-dependent manner. We also demonstrate that caveolin-3, a 
marker of caveolae, is required for the insulin receptor-mediated activation of 
the PI3K-dependent pathway, which occurs 2 min after insulin stimulation. In 
fact, we demonstrate that lack of caveolin-3 significantly reduces 
insulin-stimulated glucose uptake in caveolin-3 null myotubes by inhibiting both 
PI3K and Akt, as well as the movement of GLUT4 to the plasma membrane. 
Interestingly, caveolin-3 moves away from the plasma membrane toward the 
cytoplasm 5 min after insulin stimulation and temporarily interacts with 
flotillin-1/GLUT4-containing domains before they reach the sarcolemma, with the 
consequent movement of the insulin receptor from caveolin-3-containing domains 
to flotillin-1-containing domains. Such translocation temporally matches the 
insulin-stimulated movement of Cbl and CrkII in flotillin-1/GLUT4-containing 
domains, as well as the activation of the GDP-GTP exchange factor C3G. 
Disruption of flotillin-1-based domains prevents the activation of C3G, movement 
of GLUT4 to the sarcolemma, and glucose uptake in response to insulin. Thus, the 
activation of the Cbl/C3G/TC10-dependent pathway, which occurs before 
flotillin-1/GLUT4-containing domains reach the plasma membrane, is flotillin-1 
mediated and follows the activation of the PI3K-mediated signaling. Taken 
together, these results indicate that flotillin-1 and caveolin-3 may regulate 
muscle energy metabolism through the spatial and temporal segregation of key 
components of the insulin signaling.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.05-4661fje
PMCID: PMC4288748
PMID: 16455755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
