---
pmid: '10391222'
title: The gene mutated in thiamine-responsive anaemia with diabetes and deafness
  (TRMA) encodes a functional thiamine transporter.
authors:
- Fleming JC
- Tartaglini E
- Steinkamp MP
- Schorderet DF
- Cohen N
- Neufeld EJ
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/10379
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The gene mutated in thiamine-responsive anaemia with diabetes and deafness (TRMA) encodes a functional thiamine transporter.
**Authors:** Fleming JC, Tartaglini E, Steinkamp MP, Schorderet DF, Cohen N, Neufeld EJ
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1038/10379](https://doi.org/10.1038/10379)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 1999 Jul;22(3):305-8. doi: 10.1038/10379.

The gene mutated in thiamine-responsive anaemia with diabetes and deafness 
(TRMA) encodes a functional thiamine transporter.

Fleming JC(1), Tartaglini E, Steinkamp MP, Schorderet DF, Cohen N, Neufeld EJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology, Children's Hospital, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Thiamine-responsive megaloblastic anaemia with diabetes and deafness (TRMA; MIM 
249270) is an autosomal recessive disease thought to be due to a defect in 
thiamine (vitamin B1) transport. Pharmacological doses of thiamine correct the 
anaemia, and in some cases improve the diabetes, although progressive 
sensorineural deafness is irreversible. Previous studies localized the TRMA gene 
to a 4-cM region on chromosome 1q23.3 (ref. 5), and fine-mapping has recently 
narrowed that region further. We have previously demonstrated that fibroblasts 
from people with TRMA lack high-affinity thiamine transport. Expression of a 
gene encoding a known yeast thiamine transporter, THI10 (refs 8-10), in TRMA 
mutant cells prevents apoptotic cell death in thiamine-depleted medium. On the 
basis of these studies, we hypothesized that a defective thiamine transporter 
causes TRMA. We undertook a candidate gene approach to identify putative 
thiamine transporters in the 1q23.3 critical region. Here we present evidence 
that the gene SLC19A2 (for solute carrier family 19 (thiamine transporter), 
member 2) encodes the first known mammalian thiamine transporter, which we 
designate thiamine transporter-1 (THTR-1).

DOI: 10.1038/10379
PMID: 10391222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
