---
pmid: '11595183'
title: CED-12/ELMO, a novel member of the CrkII/Dock180/Rac pathway, is required for
  phagocytosis and cell migration.
authors:
- Gumienny TL
- Brugnera E
- Tosello-Trampont AC
- Kinchen JM
- Haney LB
- Nishiwaki K
- Walk SF
- Nemergut ME
- Macara IG
- Francis R
- Schedl T
- Qin Y
- Van Aelst L
- Hengartner MO
- Ravichandran KS
journal: Cell
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00520-7
---

# CED-12/ELMO, a novel member of the CrkII/Dock180/Rac pathway, is required for phagocytosis and cell migration.
**Authors:** Gumienny TL, Brugnera E, Tosello-Trampont AC, Kinchen JM, Haney LB, Nishiwaki K, Walk SF, Nemergut ME, Macara IG, Francis R, Schedl T, Qin Y, Van Aelst L, Hengartner MO, Ravichandran KS
**Journal:** Cell (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00520-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00520-7)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2001 Oct 5;107(1):27-41. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00520-7.

CED-12/ELMO, a novel member of the CrkII/Dock180/Rac pathway, is required for 
phagocytosis and cell migration.

Gumienny TL(1), Brugnera E, Tosello-Trampont AC, Kinchen JM, Haney LB, Nishiwaki 
K, Walk SF, Nemergut ME, Macara IG, Francis R, Schedl T, Qin Y, Van Aelst L, 
Hengartner MO, Ravichandran KS.

Author information:
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1 Bungtown Road, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11743, 
USA.

The C. elegans genes ced-2, ced-5, and ced-10, and their mammalian homologs 
crkII, dock180, and rac1, mediate cytoskeletal rearrangements during 
phagocytosis of apoptotic cells and cell motility. Here, we describe an 
additional member of this signaling pathway, ced-12, and its mammalian homologs, 
elmo1 and elmo2. In C. elegans, CED-12 is required for engulfment of dying cells 
and for cell migrations. In mammalian cells, ELMO1 functionally cooperates with 
CrkII and Dock180 to promote phagocytosis and cell shape changes. CED-12/ELMO-1 
binds directly to CED-5/Dock180; this evolutionarily conserved complex 
stimulates a Rac-GEF, leading to Rac1 activation and cytoskeletal 
rearrangements. These studies identify CED-12/ELMO as an upstream regulator of 
Rac1 that affects engulfment and cell migration from C. elegans to mammals.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00520-7
PMID: 11595183 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
