---
pmid: '16192304'
title: Beta-catenin is essential for pancreatic acinar but not islet development.
authors:
- Murtaugh LC
- Law AC
- Dor Y
- Melton DA
journal: Development
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/dev.02063
---

# Beta-catenin is essential for pancreatic acinar but not islet development.
**Authors:** Murtaugh LC, Law AC, Dor Y, Melton DA
**Journal:** Development (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.02063](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.02063)

## Abstract

1. Development. 2005 Nov;132(21):4663-74. doi: 10.1242/dev.02063. Epub 2005 Sep
28.

Beta-catenin is essential for pancreatic acinar but not islet development.

Murtaugh LC(1), Law AC, Dor Y, Melton DA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology and Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

Despite our increasingly sophisticated understanding of transcriptional 
regulation in pancreas development, we know relatively little about the 
extrinsic signaling pathways involved in this process. We show here that the 
early pancreatic epithelium exhibits a specific enrichment in unphosphorylated 
beta-catenin protein, a hallmark of activation of the canonical Wnt signaling 
pathway. To determine if this pathway is functionally required for normal 
pancreas development, we have specifically deleted the beta-catenin gene in 
these cells. Pancreata developing without beta-catenin are hypoplastic, although 
their early progenitors appear normal and exhibit no premature differentiation 
or death. Surprisingly, and in marked contrast to its role in the intestine, 
loss of beta-catenin does not significantly perturb islet endocrine cell mass or 
function. The major defect of the beta-catenin-deficient pancreas is an almost 
complete lack of acinar cells, which normally comprise the majority of the 
organ. beta-Catenin appears to be cell-autonomously required for the 
specification of acinar cells, rather than for their survival or maintenance, as 
deletion of beta-catenin specifically in differentiated acinar cells has no 
effect. Thus, our data are consistent with a crucial role for canonical Wnt 
signals in acinar lineage specification and differentiation.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.02063
PMID: 16192304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
