---
pmid: '15283700'
title: A novel member of the GCN5-related N-acetyltransferase superfamily from Caenorhabditis
  elegans preferentially catalyses the N-acetylation of thialysine [S-(2-aminoethyl)-L-cysteine].
authors:
- Abo-Dalo B
- Ndjonka D
- Pinnen F
- Liebau E
- Lüersen K
journal: Biochem J
year: '2004'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1134096
doi: 10.1042/BJ20040789
---

# A novel member of the GCN5-related N-acetyltransferase superfamily from Caenorhabditis elegans preferentially catalyses the N-acetylation of thialysine [S-(2-aminoethyl)-L-cysteine].
**Authors:** Abo-Dalo B, Ndjonka D, Pinnen F, Liebau E, Lüersen K
**Journal:** Biochem J (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BJ20040789](https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20040789)
**PMC:** [PMC1134096](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1134096/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2004 Nov 15;384(Pt 1):129-37. doi: 10.1042/BJ20040789.

A novel member of the GCN5-related N-acetyltransferase superfamily from 
Caenorhabditis elegans preferentially catalyses the N-acetylation of thialysine 
[S-(2-aminoethyl)-L-cysteine].

Abo-Dalo B(1), Ndjonka D, Pinnen F, Liebau E, Lüersen K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine, 
Bernhard-Nocht-Str. 74, D-20359 Hamburg, Germany.

The putative diamine N-acetyltransferase D2023.4 has been cloned from the model 
nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. The 483 bp open reading frame of the cDNA 
encodes a deduced polypeptide of 18.6 kDa. Accordingly, the recombinantly 
expressed His6-tagged protein forms an enzymically active homodimer with a 
molecular mass of approx. 44000 Da. The protein belongs to the GNAT 
(GCN5-related N-acetyltransferase) superfamily, and its amino acid sequence 
exhibits considerable similarity to mammalian 
spermidine/spermine-N1-acetyltransferases. However, neither the polyamines 
spermidine and spermine nor the diamines putrescine and cadaverine were 
efficiently acetylated by the protein. The smaller diamines diaminopropane and 
ethylenediamine, as well as L-lysine, represent better substrates, but, 
surprisingly, the enzyme most efficiently catalyses the N-acetylation of amino 
acids analogous with L-lysine. As determined by the k(cat)/K(m) values, the C. 
elegans N-acetyltransferase prefers thialysine [S-(2-aminoethyl)-L-cysteine], 
followed by O-(2-aminoethyl)-L-serine and S-(2-aminoethyl)-D,L-homocysteine. 
Reversed-phase HPLC and mass spectrometric analyses revealed that N-acetylation 
of L-lysine and L-thialysine occurs exclusively at the amino moiety of the side 
chain. Remarkably, heterologous expression of C. elegans N-acetyltransferase 
D2023.4 in Escherichia coli, which does not possess a homologous gene, results 
in a pronounced resistance against the anti-metabolite thialysine. Furthermore, 
C. elegans N-acetyltransferase D2023.4 exhibits the highest homology with a 
number of GNATs found in numerous genomes from bacteria to mammals that have not 
been biochemically characterized so far, suggesting a novel group of GNAT 
enzymes closely related to spermidine/spermine-N1-acetyltransferase, but with a 
distinct substrate specificity. Taken together, we propose to name the enzyme 
'thialysine N(epsilon)-acetyltransferase'.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20040789
PMCID: PMC1134096
PMID: 15283700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The putative diamine N -acetyltransferase D2023.4 has been cloned from the model nematode Caenorhabditis elegans . The 483 bp open reading frame of the cDNA encodes a deduced polypeptide of 18.6 kDa. Accordingly, the recombinantly expressed His 6 -tagged protein forms an enzymically active homodimer with a molecular mass of approx. 44000 Da. The protein belongs to the GNAT (GCN5-related N -acetyltransferase) superfamily, and its amino acid sequence exhibits considerable similarity to mammalian spermidine/spermine- N 1 -acetyltransferases. However, neither the polyamines spermidine and spermine nor the diamines putrescine and cadaverine were efficiently acetylated by the protein. The smaller diamines diaminopropane and ethylenediamine, as well as L -lysine, represent better substrates, but, surprisingly, the enzyme most efficiently catalyses the N -acetylation of amino acids analogous with L -lysine. As determined by the k cat / K m values, the C. elegans N -acetyltransferase prefers thialysine [ S -(2-aminoethyl)- L -cysteine], followed by O -(2-aminoethyl)- L -serine and S -(2-aminoethyl)- D , L -homocysteine. Reversed-phase HPLC and mass spectrometric analyses revealed that N -acetylation of L -lysine and L -thialysine occurs exclusively at the amino moiety of the side chain. Remarkably, heterologous expression of C. elegans N -acetyltransferase D2023.4 in Escherichia coli , which does not possess a homologous gene, results in a pronounced resistance against the anti-metabolite thialysine. Furthermore, C. elegans N -acetyltransferase D2023.4 exhibits the highest homology with a number of GNATs found in numerous genomes from bacteria to mammals that have not been biochemically characterized so far, suggesting a novel group of GNAT enzymes closely related to spermidine/spermine- N 1 -acetyltransferase, but with a distinct substrate specificity. Taken together, we propose to name the enzyme ‘thialysine N ε -acetyltransferase’.

INTRODUCTION

The GCN5-related N -acetyltransferase (GNAT) superfamily encompasses enzymes that catalyse the transfer of an acetyl group from acetyl-CoA to a primary amine of acceptor molecules. The members of the superfamily are characterized further by amino acid sequence similarity with generally four moderately conserved motifs termed C, D, A and B in N- to C-terminal order. All known crystal structures of GNAT proteins suggest that these homologous regions are involved in acetyl-CoA binding. Numerous functionally diverse GNATs have been reported that, for example, N -acetylate lysine residues of proteins, such as histones and transcription factors, or small molecules, like aminoglycosides, arylalkylamines or polyamines. Acetylation of the latter is catalysed by SSAT (spermidine/spermine- N 1 -acetyltransferase) [ 1 , 2 ].

The polyamines putrescine, spermidine and spermine are ubiquitous, and represent essential constituents of cells that are involved in developmental processes such as cell proliferation and cell differentiation [ 3 , 4 ]. The highly regulated SSAT1 catalyses the rate-limiting step of polyamine degradation, leading to N 1 -acetylspermidine and N 1 -acetylspermine respectively. The N -acetylated forms are either excreted out of cells or serve as substrates for the FAD-dependent PAO (polyamine oxidase) in the interconversion pathway. The PAO converts N 1 -acetylspermine into spermidine and N 1 -acetylspermidine into putrescine by respectively cleaving 3-acetaminopropanal [ 5 , 6 ]. Recently, a second SSAT has been reported of mammalian origin. However, the physiological function of SSAT2 was not clearly resolved, although an involvement in polyamine metabolism was proposed [ 7 ].

Here, we report on the N -acetyltransferase D2023.4 from the model nematode Caenorhabditis elegans , which was annotated as a putative diamine N -acetyltransferase, since its amino acid sequence exhibits considerable similarity to mammalian SSAT2 and SSAT1. Although nematodes possess a polyamine interconversion pathway, the presence of an SSAT was reported to be doubtful, at least for parasitic species, due to a PAO that accepts only non-acetylated polyamines [ 8 , 9 ]. Furthermore, diamine N -acetyltransferases have been purified from the parasitic nematodes Ascaris suum and Onchocerca volvulus . These enzymes accept only the diamines putrescine, cadaverine, diaminopropane and the biogenic amine histamine, but not spermidine and spermine [ 10 – 12 ]. Thus our goal was to elucidate whether the only SSAT homologue from C. elegans N -acetylates polyamines or diamines, or has another function. Polyamines were found to be poor substrates of the nematode enzyme. Biochemical characterization has revealed that N -acetylation of small diamines, as well as N ε -acetylation of L -lysine and especially of thialysine [ S -(2-aminoethyl)- L -cysteine] and O -(2-aminoethyl)- L -serine, is preferred instead. In addition, our data show that Escherichia coli cells that express the C. elegans enzyme are able to cope with much higher concentrations of the lysine analogue thialysine. On the basis of these data, we propose to name the enzyme thialysine N ε -acetyltransferase, a novel member of the GNAT superfamily.

DISCUSSION

A novel N -acetyltransferase of the GNAT superfamily has been cloned and characterized from C. elegans . Although its amino acid sequence exhibits considerable similarity with mammalian SSAT1, comparison of the substrate specificities revealed strong differences [ 23 ]. Most importantly, the naturally occurring polyamines spermidine and spermine represent poor substrates of C. elegans N -acetyltransferase D2023.4, with high K m values and low reaction rates. Regarding polyamines and diamines, C. elegans N -acetyltransferase D2023.4 exhibits a preference for the smallest diamines, diaminopropane and ethylenediamine. In contrast, SSAT1 shows the highest reaction rates with amines of the NH 2 (CH 2 ) 3 NHR type, preferring one primary and one secondary amino group, whereas diaminopropane is a relatively poor substrate of mammalian SSAT1 [ 23 ]. Diaminopropane is found in several organisms [ 27 ], but not in C. elegans (K. Lüersen and R. D. Walter, unpublished work), and the shortest diamine (ethylenediamine), which is the best substrate among the diamines, is not reported to be a natural product.

C. elegans N -acetyltransferase D2023.4 was found to preferentially catalyse the N ε -acetylation of the amino acid thialysine, a L -lysine analogue with the 4-methylene group substituted with a sulphur. Thialysine is generally regarded as an anti-metabolite of L -lysine. Owing to its structural similarity, thialysine was reported to compete with L -lysine for activation and transfer to tRNA Lys in prokaryotes and eukaryotes [ 28 ]. In this way, the lysine analogue can be incorporated into polypeptide chains resulting in the formation of inactive proteins. Thialysine is toxic against bacteria, as well as against eukaryotic cells [ 24 – 26 ]. The data presented here indicate that, at least in the prokaryote E. coli , cytotoxicity of thialysine is prevented by N ε -acetylation mediated by the introduced C. elegans N -acetyltransferase D2023.4. It is noteworthy that E. coli does not possess a homologue for C. elegans N -acetyltransferase D2023.4. In conclusion, C. elegans N -acetyltransferase D2023.4 has the capability to detoxify the lysine anti-metabolite thialysine.

Although thialysine functions as an anti-metabolite, several investigations have indicated a biological significance of this sulphur-containing amino acid, which has been reported to be present in human urine samples [ 29 ]. Furthermore, it has been demonstrated, at least in vitro , that thialysine can be synthesized enzymically from D -pantetheine and L -serine by the action of cystathionine β-synthase and pantetheinase [ 30 ], or by cystathionine β-synthase using cysteamine as substrate [ 31 ]. It was suggested that thialysine may be the precursor of the naturally occurring S -(2-aminoethyl)- L -cysteine ketimine and the corresponding decarboxylated dimer, the latter being reported to function as an antioxidant [ 32 , 33 ]. SSAT2 is the mammalian N -acetyltransferase with the highest similarity to the C. elegans N -acetyltransferase D2023.4. Expression of human SSAT2 after transient transfection of HEK-293 cells [ 7 ] or stable transfection of NIH-3T3 cells [ 34 ] did not affect polyamine content. These results and the in vitro determination of substrate specificity using purified recombinant human SSAT2 indicates that SSAT2 has negligible activity against polyamines, and greatly prefers thialysine as a substrate [ 34 ].

In previous studies, Tanaka, Soda and Yamamoto [ 35 , 36 ] purified a thialysine-inducible N -acetyltransferase from Klebsiella ( Aerobacter ) aerogenes that catalyses N ε -acetylation of L -lysine and, more efficiently, N ε -acetylation of its analogues thialysine and O -(2-aminoethyl)- L -serine. Therefore the enzyme was termed acetyl-CoA: S -(2-aminoethyl)- L -cysteine ω- N -acetyltransferase. To some extent these features resemble the results obtained with the C. elegans N -acetyltransferase D2023.4. However, in contrast with the C. elegans enzyme, the Klebsiella N -acetyltransferase exhibits no optical specificity and thus does not discriminate between D - and L -lysine. Furthermore, it also accepts L - and D -ornithine as substrates. The molecular mass of the Klebsiella protein was determined by gel filtration to be 100000 Da, which is more than twice the mass of the C. elegans protein.

The substrate spectrum of C. elegans N -acetyltransferase D2023.4 includes L -lysine. Several members of the GNAT superfamily, such as histone acetyltransferases or the p300/CBP (CREB-binding protein)-associating factor, modify their substrate proteins by N ε -acetylation of specific lysine residues [ 1 ]. However, a GNAT that catalyses the N ε -acetylation of the amino group of free lysine has not been reported. In the yeasts Yarrowia lipolytica and Saccharomyces cerevisiae , acetyl-CoA-dependent lysine- N ε -acetyltransferases have been characterized, which catalyse the first step of the L -lysine degradation pathway [ 18 , 37 ]. The amino acid sequence of the 43 kDa Yarrowia protein has no significant similarity to the C. elegans N -acetyltransferase D2023.4, and the protein does not belong to the GNAT superfamily. The acceptor specificity of Saccharomyces lysine- N ε -acetyltransferases includes thialysine, but the activity was only 24% compared with L -lysine as acceptor, and the K m for the lysine analogue was determined to be 100 mM compared with 5.8 mM for L -lysine [ 18 ]. In addition, a Ping Pong reaction mechanism has been determined for the Y. lipolytica enzyme [ 37 ], which can be excluded for the C. elegans N -acetyltransferase.

Generally, two distinct reaction mechanisms are possible for N -acetyltransferases: a Ping Pong mechanism or a direct acetyl transfer [ 1 ]. For the first type of reaction, a cysteine residue is required to form a covalently bound acetylated enzyme intermediate, as has been shown for arylamine N -acetyltransferases [ 38 , 39 ]. However, the C. elegans N -acetyltransferase D2023.4 does not possess any cysteine residue (Figure 3 ). Hence a Ping Pong mechanism can be excluded and a direct transfer of acetyl group on to the acceptor molecule via nucleophilic attack is very likely. A direct acetyl transfer has been suggested as the general mechanism for GNAT [ 1 ].

Members of the GNAT superfamily are characterized by four conserved regions termed A, B, C and D [ 1 , 2 ]. The crystal structures of different GNATs indicate that these four regions are involved in acetyl-CoA binding [ 1 ]. In particular, the pantothenic and the pyrophosphate moieties of CoA interact with the highly conserved motif (R/Q)XXGX(G/A) (where ‘X’ represents any amino acid), which is also present in the C. elegans N -acetyltransferase D2023.4 (amino acid residues 91–96). Mutagenic studies on human SSAT1 also confirmed the involvement of this motif in acetyl-CoA binding [ 40 , 41 ] and, accordingly, mutation of Ala 96 of C. elegans N -acetyltransferase D2023.4 to proline results in an inactive enzyme.

The crystal structures of serotonin N -acetyltransferase complexed with a bisubstrate analogue and of Tetrahymena GCN5 complexed with CoA and a peptide substrate analogue showed that the more divergent regions between these motifs and the C-terminus participate in acceptor binding [ 42 , 43 ]. In SSAT and in the C. elegans N -acetyltransferase D2023.4 modifying similar acceptor molecules (i.e. small molecules with terminal amino groups), these regions contain several conserved amino acid residues. For mammalian SSAT1 it has been demonstrated that charged amino acid residues within these regions are involved in polyamine binding [ 41 , 44 ].

Polyamines are only poor substrates of C. elegans N -acetyltransferase D2023.4 and no other SSAT homologue is present in the genome of C. elegans . Hence, the data presented here give evidence that the polyamine interconversion pathway of free-living nematodes (as previously proposed for parasitic nematodes [ 9 ]) does not include an N -acetylation step. Furthermore, a diamine N -acetyltransferase that has been reported from O. volvulus and A. suum catalysing the N -acetylation of the diamines putrescine and cadaverine, as well as of the biogenic amine histamine but not of spermidine and spermine [ 10 – 12 ], is either absent in C. elegans or is evolutionarily not closely related to mammalian SSAT1.

In conclusion, based on the kinetic data and the thialysine-detoxifying capacity of C. elegans N -acetyltransferase D2023.4, we propose to name the enzyme thialysine N ε -acetyltransferase. Putative orthologues of the C. elegans N -acetyltransferase D2023.4 are also present in the genomes of prokaryotes, invertebrates and mammals, and we have already determined a similar enzyme activity for the respective N -acetyltransferase from the human pathogen Leishmania major (K. Lüersen, unpublished work). Future studies will show whether more of these GNATs possess a comparable substrate specificity as the nematode enzyme and hence form a novel group of N -acetyltransferases within the GNAT superfamily.
