---
pmid: '1371509'
title: Biochemical and molecular genetic analyses on placental aromatase (P-450AROM)
  deficiency.
authors:
- Harada N
- Ogawa H
- Shozu M
- Yamada K
- Suhara K
- Nishida E
- Takagi Y
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1992'
full_text_available: false
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Biochemical and molecular genetic analyses on placental aromatase (P-450AROM) deficiency.
**Authors:** Harada N, Ogawa H, Shozu M, Yamada K, Suhara K, Nishida E, Takagi Y
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1992)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1992 Mar 5;267(7):4781-5.

Biochemical and molecular genetic analyses on placental aromatase (P-450AROM) 
deficiency.

Harada N(1), Ogawa H, Shozu M, Yamada K, Suhara K, Nishida E, Takagi Y.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, Fujita Health University, Aichi, Japan.

Biochemical and molecular genetic studies were made on a case of placental 
aromatase (P-450AROM) deficiency. Of the enzymes participating in the electron 
transport system of placental microsomes, only aromatase activity was decreased 
specifically in the patient, being less than 0.3% of the normal activity. 
Northern and Western blotting analyses showed that the transcription of the 
aromatase gene and the translation of its mRNA proceeded normally in the 
placenta of this patient. However, aromatase cDNA isolated from a placental cDNA 
library of the patient was found to have an insert of 87 base pairs, encoding 29 
amino acids in frame with no termination codon. The insert was located at the 
splicing point between exon 6 and intron 6 of the normal aromatase gene, and the 
extra DNA fragment was the first part of intron 6, except that its initial GT 
was altered to GC. These findings indicated that in this patient with aromatase 
deficiency, splicing between exon 6 and intron 6 did not occur at the normal 
position because of a point mutation in its consensus sequence and was forwarded 
to GT in the next cryptic consensus sequence 87 base pairs downstream according 
to the canonical GT/AG rule, resulting in translation of an abnormal protein 
molecule with 29 extra amino acids. During the transient expression in COS-7 
cells, the aromatase cDNA of the patient was found to produce a protein with a 
trace of activity. This is the first report of a genetic defect for aromatase 
deficiency.

PMID: 1371509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
