---
pmid: '22198199'
title: The cytosolic domain of human Tom22 modulates human Bax mitochondrial translocation
  and conformation in yeast.
authors:
- Renault TT
- Grandier-Vazeille X
- Arokium H
- Velours G
- Camougrand N
- Priault M
- Teijido O
- Dejean LM
- Manon S
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2011.12.003
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The cytosolic domain of human Tom22 modulates human Bax mitochondrial translocation and conformation in yeast.
**Authors:** Renault TT, Grandier-Vazeille X, Arokium H, Velours G, Camougrand N, Priault M, Teijido O, Dejean LM, Manon S
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2011.12.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2011.12.003)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2012 Jan 20;586(2):116-21. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2011.12.003. Epub
 2011 Dec 17.

The cytosolic domain of human Tom22 modulates human Bax mitochondrial 
translocation and conformation in yeast.

Renault TT(1), Grandier-Vazeille X, Arokium H, Velours G, Camougrand N, Priault 
M, Teijido O, Dejean LM, Manon S.

Author information:
(1)CNRS, IBGC, UMR5095, F-33000 Bordeaux, France.

The role of the mitochondrial protein receptor Tom22p in the interaction of 
pro-apoptotic protein Bax with yeast mitochondria was investigated. 
Co-immunoprecipitation assays showed that human Bax interacted with different 
TOM subunits, including Tom22p. Expression of the cytosolic receptor domain of 
human Tom22 increased Bax mitochondrial localization, but decreased the 
proportion of active Bax. BN-PAGE showed that the cytosolic domain of Tom22 
interfered with the oligomerization of Bax. These data suggest that the 
interaction with the cytosolic domain of Tom22 helps Bax to acquire a 
conformation able to interact with the outer mitochondrial membrane.

Copyright © 2011 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2011.12.003
PMID: 22198199 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
