---
reference_id: PMID:17064289
title: Enteropathogenic Escherichia coli effector EspF interacts with host protein Abcf2.
authors:
- Nougayrède JP
- Foster GH
- Donnenberg MS
journal: Cell Microbiol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2006.00820.x
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Enteropathogenic Escherichia coli effector EspF interacts with host protein Abcf2.
**Authors:** Nougayrède JP, Foster GH, Donnenberg MS
**Journal:** Cell Microbiol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1462-5822.2006.00820.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1462-5822.2006.00820.x)

## Content

1. Cell Microbiol. 2007 Mar;9(3):680-93. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2006.00820.x.
Epub 2006 Oct 25.

Enteropathogenic Escherichia coli effector EspF interacts with host protein
Abcf2.

Nougayrède JP(1), Foster GH, Donnenberg MS.

Author information:
(1)University of Maryland Baltimore, School of Medicine, Division of Infectious
Diseases, 20 Penn Street, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Enteropathogenic Escherichia coli (EPEC) is a major causative agent of infant
diarrhoea in developing countries. The EspF effector protein is injected from
EPEC into host cells via a type III secretion system and is involved in the
disruption of host intestinal barrier function. In addition, EspF is sorted to
mitochondria and has a role in initiating the mitochondrial death pathway. To
clarify the manner in which EspF affects host cells, we sought to identify
eukaryotic EspF-binding proteins using affinity purification. Abcf2, a protein
of unknown function and member of the ABC-transporter family, bound EspF in this
assay. An interaction between EspF and Abcf2 was confirmed in a yeast two-hybrid
system, by colocalization and by co-immunoprecipitation from EPEC-infected
cells. Levels of Abcf2 were decreased in cells infected with EPEC in an EspF
dose-dependent manner. Knock-down of Abcf2 expression by RNA interference
increased EspF-induced caspase 9 and caspase 3 cleavage. In addition,
Abcf2-knocked down cells showed increased caspase 3 cleavage upon treatment with
the apoptosis inducing agent staurosporine. These results indicate that EspF
induces or facilitates host cell death by targeting and interfering with the
putative protective function of Abcf2.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2006.00820.x
PMID: 17064289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]