---
pmid: '12177062'
title: CIN85 participates in Cbl-b-mediated down-regulation of receptor tyrosine kinases.
authors:
- Szymkiewicz I
- Kowanetz K
- Soubeyran P
- Dinarina A
- Lipkowitz S
- Dikic I
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M205535200
---

# CIN85 participates in Cbl-b-mediated down-regulation of receptor tyrosine kinases.
**Authors:** Szymkiewicz I, Kowanetz K, Soubeyran P, Dinarina A, Lipkowitz S, Dikic I
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M205535200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M205535200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Oct 18;277(42):39666-72. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M205535200. Epub 
2002 Aug 12.

CIN85 participates in Cbl-b-mediated down-regulation of receptor tyrosine 
kinases.

Szymkiewicz I(1), Kowanetz K, Soubeyran P, Dinarina A, Lipkowitz S, Dikic I.

Author information:
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Box 595, Husargatan 3, Uppsala, 
S-75124, Sweden.

The Cbl family of ubiquitin ligases in mammals contains three members, Cbl, 
Cbl-b, and Cbl-3, that are involved in down-regulation of receptor tyrosine 
kinases (RTKs) by mediating receptor ubiquitination and degradation. More 
recently, a novel pathway has been identified whereby Cbl promotes 
internalization of EGF receptor via a CIN85/endophilin pathway that is 
functionally separable from the ubiquitin ligase activity of Cbl (1). Here we 
show that Cbl-b, but not Cbl-3, utilize the same mechanism to down-regulate 
multiple RTKs. CIN85 was shown to bind to the minimal binding domain identified 
in the carboxyl terminus of Cbl-b. Ligand-induced phosphorylation of Cbl-b 
further increased their interactions and led to a rapid and sustained 
recruitment of CIN85 in the complex with EGF or PDGF receptors. Inhibition of 
binding between CIN85 and Cbl-b was sufficient to impair Cbl-b-mediated 
internalization of EGF receptors, while being dispensable for Cbl-b-directed 
polyubiquitination of EGF receptors. Moreover, CIN85 and Cbl/Cbl-b were 
constitutively associated with activated PDGF, EGF, or c-Kit receptors in 
several tumor cell lines. Our data reveal a common pathway utilized by Cbl and 
Cbl-b that may have an important and redundant function in negative regulation 
of ligand-activated as well as oncogenically activated RTKs in vivo.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M205535200
PMID: 12177062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
