---
pmid: '16354697'
title: Focal adhesion kinase is a substrate and downstream effector of SHP-2 complexed
  with Helicobacter pylori CagA.
authors:
- Tsutsumi R
- Takahashi A
- Azuma T
- Higashi H
- Hatakeyama M
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1317644
doi: 10.1128/MCB.26.1.261-276.2006
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Focal adhesion kinase is a substrate and downstream effector of SHP-2 complexed with Helicobacter pylori CagA.
**Authors:** Tsutsumi R, Takahashi A, Azuma T, Higashi H, Hatakeyama M
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.26.1.261-276.2006](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.26.1.261-276.2006)
**PMC:** [PMC1317644](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1317644/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Jan;26(1):261-76. doi: 10.1128/MCB.26.1.261-276.2006.

Focal adhesion kinase is a substrate and downstream effector of SHP-2 complexed 
with Helicobacter pylori CagA.

Tsutsumi R(1), Takahashi A, Azuma T, Higashi H, Hatakeyama M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Oncology, Institute for Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido 
University, Kita-15, Nishi-7, Sapporo 060-0815, Japan.

Infection with cagA-positive Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) is associated with 
atrophic gastritis, peptic ulcer, and gastric adenocarcinoma. The cagA gene 
product CagA is translocated from H. pylori into gastric epithelial cells and 
undergoes tyrosine phosphorylation by Src family kinases (SFKs). 
Tyrosine-phosphorylated CagA binds and activates SHP-2 phosphatase and the 
C-terminal Src kinase (Csk) while inducing an elongated cell shape termed the 
"hummingbird phenotype." Here we show that CagA reduces the level of focal 
adhesion kinase (FAK) tyrosine phosphorylation in gastric epithelial cells. The 
decrease in phosphorylated FAK is due to SHP-2-mediated dephosphorylation of FAK 
at the activating phosphorylation sites, not due to Csk-dependent inhibition of 
SFKs, which phosphorylate FAK. Coexpression of constitutively active FAK with 
CagA inhibits induction of the hummingbird phenotype, whereas expression of 
dominant-negative FAK elicits an elongated cell shape characteristic of the 
hummingbird phenotype. These results indicate that inhibition of FAK by SHP-2 
plays a crucial role in the morphogenetic activity of CagA. Impaired cell 
adhesion and increased motility by CagA may be involved in the development of 
gastric lesions associated with cagA-positive H. pylori infection.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.26.1.261-276.2006
PMCID: PMC1317644
PMID: 16354697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
