---
pmid: '21276203'
title: The Arabidopsis protein kinase Pto-interacting 1-4 is a common target of the
  oxidative signal-inducible 1 and mitogen-activated protein kinases.
authors:
- Forzani C
- Carreri A
- de la Fuente van Bentem S
- Lecourieux D
- Lecourieux F
- Hirt H
journal: FEBS J
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2011.08033.x
---

# The Arabidopsis protein kinase Pto-interacting 1-4 is a common target of the oxidative signal-inducible 1 and mitogen-activated protein kinases.
**Authors:** Forzani C, Carreri A, de la Fuente van Bentem S, Lecourieux D, Lecourieux F, Hirt H
**Journal:** FEBS J (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1742-4658.2011.08033.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1742-4658.2011.08033.x)

## Abstract

1. FEBS J. 2011 Apr;278(7):1126-36. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2011.08033.x. Epub 
2011 Feb 25.

The Arabidopsis protein kinase Pto-interacting 1-4 is a common target of the 
oxidative signal-inducible 1 and mitogen-activated protein kinases.

Forzani C(1), Carreri A, de la Fuente van Bentem S, Lecourieux D, Lecourieux F, 
Hirt H.

Author information:
(1)Max Perutz Laboratories, Vienna, Austria.

In Arabidopsis thaliana, the serine/threonine protein kinase oxidative 
signal-inducible 1 (OXI1), mediates oxidative stress signalling. Its activity is 
required for full activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), 
MPK3 and MPK6, in response to oxidative stress. In addition, the 
serine/threonine protein kinase Pto-interacting 1-2 (PTI1-2) has been positioned 
downstream from OXI1, but whether PTI1-2 signals through MAPK cascades is 
unclear. Using a yeast two-hybrid screen we show that OXI1 also interacts with 
PTI1-4. OXI1 and PTI1-4 are stress-responsive genes and are expressed in the 
same tissues. Therefore, studies were undertaken to determine whether PTI1-4 is 
positioned in the OXI1/MAPK signalling pathway. The interaction between OXI1 and 
PTI1-4 was confirmed by using in vivo co-immunoprecipitation experiments. OXI1 
and PTI1-4 were substrates of MPK3 and MPK6 in vitro. Although no direct 
interaction was detected between OXI1 and MPK3 or MPK6, in vitro binding studies 
showed interactions between MPK3 or MPK6 with PTI1-4. In addition, PTI1-4 and 
MPK6 were found in vivo in the same protein complex. These results demonstrate 
that PTI1-4 signals via OXI1 and MPK6 signalling cascades.

© 2011 The Authors Journal compilation © 2011 FEBS.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2011.08033.x
PMID: 21276203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
