---
pmid: '19536159'
title: The pluripotency factor Oct4 interacts with Ctcf and also controls X-chromosome
  pairing and counting.
authors:
- Donohoe ME
- Silva SS
- Pinter SF
- Xu N
- Lee JT
journal: Nature
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3057664
doi: 10.1038/nature08098
---

# The pluripotency factor Oct4 interacts with Ctcf and also controls X-chromosome pairing and counting.
**Authors:** Donohoe ME, Silva SS, Pinter SF, Xu N, Lee JT
**Journal:** Nature (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature08098](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature08098)
**PMC:** [PMC3057664](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3057664/)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2009 Jul 2;460(7251):128-32. doi: 10.1038/nature08098. Epub 2009 Jun
17.

The pluripotency factor Oct4 interacts with Ctcf and also controls X-chromosome 
pairing and counting.

Donohoe ME(1), Silva SS, Pinter SF, Xu N, Lee JT.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, USA.

Pluripotency of embryonic stem (ES) cells is controlled by defined transcription 
factors. During differentiation, mouse ES cells undergo global epigenetic 
reprogramming, as exemplified by X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) in which one 
female X chromosome is silenced to achieve gene dosage parity between the sexes. 
Somatic XCI is regulated by homologous X-chromosome pairing and counting, and by 
the random choice of future active and inactive X chromosomes. XCI and cell 
differentiation are tightly coupled, as blocking one process compromises the 
other and dedifferentiation of somatic cells to induced pluripotent stem cells 
is accompanied by X chromosome reactivation. Recent evidence suggests coupling 
of Xist expression to pluripotency factors occurs, but how the two are 
interconnected remains unknown. Here we show that Oct4 (also known as Pou5f1) 
lies at the top of the XCI hierarchy, and regulates XCI by triggering 
X-chromosome pairing and counting. Oct4 directly binds Tsix and Xite, two 
regulatory noncoding RNA genes of the X-inactivation centre, and also complexes 
with XCI trans-factors, Ctcf and Yy1 (ref. 17), through protein-protein 
interactions. Depletion of Oct4 blocks homologous X-chromosome pairing and 
results in the inactivation of both X chromosomes in female cells. Thus, we have 
identified the first trans-factor that regulates counting, and ascribed new 
functions to Oct4 during X-chromosome reprogramming.

DOI: 10.1038/nature08098
PMCID: PMC3057664
PMID: 19536159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
