---
pmid: '2870059'
title: 'Human F1-ATPase: molecular cloning of cDNA for the beta subunit.'
authors:
- Ohta S
- Kagawa Y
journal: J Biochem
year: '1986'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.jbchem.a135452
---

# Human F1-ATPase: molecular cloning of cDNA for the beta subunit.
**Authors:** Ohta S, Kagawa Y
**Journal:** J Biochem (1986)
**DOI:** [10.1093/oxfordjournals.jbchem.a135452](https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.jbchem.a135452)

## Abstract

1. J Biochem. 1986 Jan;99(1):135-41. doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.jbchem.a135452.

Human F1-ATPase: molecular cloning of cDNA for the beta subunit.

Ohta S, Kagawa Y.

F1-ATPase is the major enzyme for ATP synthesis, and its beta subunit is the 
catalytic site. To date, no full-length cDNA for the eukaryotic F1 gene has been 
reported. Human F1 was studied because of its importance in medicine and cell 
biology. Here we report molecular cloning of a full-length cDNA for the human F1 
beta subunit and purification of the human F1 beta subunit. The HeLa cell cDNA 
library constructed in an expression vector gamma gt11 was screened with 
antiserum against the yeast F1 beta subunit. One of the positive phage DNAs 
containing the human F1 beta gene and its flanking regions (1.8 kilobase pairs) 
was sequenced by the dideoxy chain termination method. The open reading frame 
started from a putative signal presequence, which was rich in both serine and 
arginine. There was a homologous segment in the signal presequence of human 
ornithine transcarbamoylase and that of F1 beta. The precursor of F1 beta was 
expressed in E. coli harboring a plasmid which had been constructed with T5 
promotor and the F1 beta cDNA. Both the precursor and mature form of F1 beta 
were detected in HeLa cells in a pulse-chase experiment. The amino acid sequence 
of 480 residues (51,568.3 daltons) following the presequence was highly 
homologous with that of mature beef heart F1 beta (97.5%) and E. coli F1 beta 
(71.7%), but the codon usage in the human gene was very different from those of 
reported genes coding for F1 beta of other species.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.jbchem.a135452
PMID: 2870059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
