---
pmid: '26504246'
title: Tether mutations that restore function and suppress pleiotropic phenotypes
  of the C. elegans isp-1(qm150) Rieske iron-sulfur protein.
authors:
- Jafari G
- Wasko BM
- Tonge A
- Schurman N
- Dong C
- Li Z
- Peters R
- Kayser EB
- Pitt JN
- Morgan PG
- Sedensky MM
- Crofts AR
- Kaeberlein M
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4653183
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1509416112
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Tether mutations that restore function and suppress pleiotropic phenotypes of the C. elegans isp-1(qm150) Rieske iron-sulfur protein.
**Authors:** Jafari G, Wasko BM, Tonge A, Schurman N, Dong C, Li Z, Peters R, Kayser EB, Pitt JN, Morgan PG, Sedensky MM, Crofts AR, Kaeberlein M
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1509416112](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1509416112)
**PMC:** [PMC4653183](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4653183/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Nov 10;112(45):E6148-57. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1509416112. Epub 2015 Oct 26.

Tether mutations that restore function and suppress pleiotropic phenotypes of 
the C. elegans isp-1(qm150) Rieske iron-sulfur protein.

Jafari G(1), Wasko BM(1), Tonge A(1), Schurman N(1), Dong C(1), Li Z(1), Peters 
R(1), Kayser EB(2), Pitt JN(1), Morgan PG(2), Sedensky MM(2), Crofts AR(3), 
Kaeberlein M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195;
(2)Center for Developmental Therapeutics, Seattle Children's Research Institute, 
Seattle, WA 98101;
(3)Department of Biochemistry, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 
Urbana, IL 61801.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195; 
kaeber@uw.edu.

Comment in
    Worm. 2016 Apr 11;5(2):e1174803. doi: 10.1080/21624054.2016.1174803.

Mitochondria play an important role in numerous diseases as well as normative 
aging. Severe reduction in mitochondrial function contributes to childhood 
disorders such as Leigh Syndrome, whereas mild disruption can extend the 
lifespan of model organisms. The Caenorhabditis elegans isp-1 gene encodes the 
Rieske iron-sulfur protein subunit of cytochrome c oxidoreductase (complex III 
of the electron transport chain). The partial loss of function allele, 
isp-1(qm150), leads to several pleiotropic phenotypes. To better understand the 
molecular mechanisms of ISP-1 function, we sought to identify genetic 
suppressors of the delayed development of isp-1(qm150) animals. Here we report a 
series of intragenic suppressors, all located within a highly conserved six 
amino acid tether region of ISP-1. These intragenic mutations suppress all of 
the evaluated isp-1(qm150) phenotypes, including developmental rate, pharyngeal 
pumping rate, brood size, body movement, activation of the mitochondrial 
unfolded protein response reporter, CO2 production, mitochondrial oxidative 
phosphorylation, and lifespan extension. Furthermore, analogous mutations show a 
similar effect when engineered into the budding yeast Rieske iron-sulfur protein 
Rip1, revealing remarkable conservation of the structure-function relationship 
of these residues across highly divergent species. The focus on a single subunit 
as causal both in generation and in suppression of diverse pleiotropic 
phenotypes points to a common underlying molecular mechanism, for which we 
propose a "spring-loaded" model. These observations provide insights into how 
gating and control processes influence the function of ISP-1 in mediating 
pleiotropic phenotypes including developmental rate, movement, sensitivity to 
stress, and longevity.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1509416112
PMCID: PMC4653183
PMID: 26504246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
