---
pmid: '27385586'
title: Parkinson Disease-linked Vps35 R524W Mutation Impairs the Endosomal Association
  of Retromer and Induces α-Synuclein Aggregation.
authors:
- Follett J
- Bugarcic A
- Yang Z
- Ariotti N
- Norwood SJ
- Collins BM
- Parton RG
- Teasdale RD
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5000076
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.703157
---

# Parkinson Disease-linked Vps35 R524W Mutation Impairs the Endosomal Association of Retromer and Induces α-Synuclein Aggregation.
**Authors:** Follett J, Bugarcic A, Yang Z, Ariotti N, Norwood SJ, Collins BM, Parton RG, Teasdale RD
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M115.703157](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M115.703157)
**PMC:** [PMC5000076](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5000076/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2016 Aug 26;291(35):18283-98. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.703157. Epub 
2016 Jul 6.

Parkinson Disease-linked Vps35 R524W Mutation Impairs the Endosomal Association 
of Retromer and Induces α-Synuclein Aggregation.

Follett J(1), Bugarcic A(1), Yang Z(1), Ariotti N(1), Norwood SJ(1), Collins 
BM(1), Parton RG(2), Teasdale RD(3).

Author information:
(1)From the Institute for Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, St. 
Lucia, Queensland 4072, Australia and.
(2)From the Institute for Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, St. 
Lucia, Queensland 4072, Australia and the Centre for Microscopy and 
Microanalysis, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland 4072, Australia.
(3)From the Institute for Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, St. 
Lucia, Queensland 4072, Australia and r.teasdale@uq.edu.au.

Endosomal sorting is a highly orchestrated cellular process. Retromer is a 
heterotrimeric complex that associates with endosomal membranes and facilitates 
the retrograde sorting of multiple receptors, including the cation-independent 
mannose 6-phosphate receptor for lysosomal enzymes. The cycling of retromer on 
and off the endosomal membrane is regulated by a network of retromer-interacting 
proteins. Here, we find that Parkinson disease-associated Vps35 variant, R524W, 
but not P316S, is a loss-of-function mutation as marked by a reduced association 
with this regulatory network and dysregulation of endosomal receptor sorting. 
Expression of Vps35 R524W-containing retromer results in the accumulation of 
intracellular α-synuclein-positive aggregates, a hallmark of Parkinson disease. 
Overall, the Vps35 R524W-containing retromer has a decreased endosomal 
association, which can be partially rescued by R55, a small molecule previously 
shown to stabilize the retromer complex, supporting the potential for future 
targeting of the retromer complex in the treatment of Parkinson disease.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M115.703157
PMCID: PMC5000076
PMID: 27385586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
