---
pmid: '2420472'
title: The epitopes of influenza nucleoprotein recognized by cytotoxic T lymphocytes
  can be defined with short synthetic peptides.
authors:
- Townsend AR
- Rothbard J
- Gotch FM
- Bahadur G
- Wraith D
- McMichael AJ
journal: Cell
year: '1986'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(86)90019-x
---

# The epitopes of influenza nucleoprotein recognized by cytotoxic T lymphocytes can be defined with short synthetic peptides.
**Authors:** Townsend AR, Rothbard J, Gotch FM, Bahadur G, Wraith D, McMichael AJ
**Journal:** Cell (1986)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0092-8674(86)90019-x](https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(86)90019-x)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 1986 Mar 28;44(6):959-68. doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(86)90019-x.

The epitopes of influenza nucleoprotein recognized by cytotoxic T lymphocytes 
can be defined with short synthetic peptides.

Townsend AR, Rothbard J, Gotch FM, Bahadur G, Wraith D, McMichael AJ.

A proportion of cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) responding to infection by 
influenza recognize target cells that express the viral nucleoprotein. Recent 
work showed that CTL can recognize short overlapping regions of large 
nucleoprotein fragments expressed in transfected L cells. This led to the 
suggestion that CTL recognize segmental epitopes of denatured or degraded 
proteins in a similar way to helper T cells. One corollary of this idea is that 
CTL should recognize appropriate short peptides on the target cell surface. We 
demonstrate that the epitopes of nucleoprotein recognized by CTL in association 
with class I molecules of the major histocompatibility complex in both mouse and 
man can be defined with short synthetic peptides derived from the nucleoprotein 
sequence.

DOI: 10.1016/0092-8674(86)90019-x
PMID: 2420472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
