---
pmid: '16190898'
title: Fyn kinase-mediated phosphorylation of NMDA receptor NR2B subunit at Tyr1472
  is essential for maintenance of neuropathic pain.
authors:
- Abe T
- Matsumura S
- Katano T
- Mabuchi T
- Takagi K
- Xu L
- Yamamoto A
- Hattori K
- Yagi T
- Watanabe M
- Nakazawa T
- Yamamoto T
- Mishina M
- Nakai Y
- Ito S
journal: Eur J Neurosci
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2005.04340.x
---

# Fyn kinase-mediated phosphorylation of NMDA receptor NR2B subunit at Tyr1472 is essential for maintenance of neuropathic pain.
**Authors:** Abe T, Matsumura S, Katano T, Mabuchi T, Takagi K, Xu L, Yamamoto A, Hattori K, Yagi T, Watanabe M, Nakazawa T, Yamamoto T, Mishina M, Nakai Y, Ito S
**Journal:** Eur J Neurosci (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1460-9568.2005.04340.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1460-9568.2005.04340.x)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Neurosci. 2005 Sep;22(6):1445-54. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2005.04340.x.

Fyn kinase-mediated phosphorylation of NMDA receptor NR2B subunit at Tyr1472 is 
essential for maintenance of neuropathic pain.

Abe T(1), Matsumura S, Katano T, Mabuchi T, Takagi K, Xu L, Yamamoto A, Hattori 
K, Yagi T, Watanabe M, Nakazawa T, Yamamoto T, Mishina M, Nakai Y, Ito S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Chemistry, Kansai Medical University, Moriguchi 
570-8506, Japan.

Despite abundant evidence implicating the importance of N-methyl-D-aspartate 
(NMDA) receptors in the spinal cord for pain transmission, the signal 
transduction coupled to NMDA receptor activation is largely unknown for the 
neuropathic pain state that lasts over periods of weeks. To address this, we 
prepared mice with neuropathic pain by transection of spinal nerve L5. 
Wild-type, NR2A-deficient, and NR2D-deficient mice developed neuropathic pain; 
in addition, phosphorylation of NR2B subunits of NMDA receptors at Tyr1472 was 
observed in the superficial dorsal horn of the spinal cord 1 week after nerve 
injury. Neuropathic pain and NR2B phosphorylation at Tyr1472 were attenuated by 
the NR2B-selective antagonist CP-101,606 and disappeared in mice lacking Fyn 
kinase, a Src-family tyrosine kinase. Concomitant with the NR2B phosphorylation, 
an increase in neuronal nitric oxide synthase activity was visualized in the 
superficial dorsal horn of neuropathic pain mice by NADPH diaphorase 
histochemistry. Electron microscopy showed that the phosphorylated NR2B was 
localized at the postsynaptic density in the spinal cord of mice with 
neuropathic pain. Indomethacin, an inhibitor of prostaglandin (PG) synthesis, 
and PGE receptor subtype EP1-selective antagonist reduced the NR2B 
phosphorylation in these mice. Conversely, EP1-selective agonist stimulated Fyn 
kinase-dependent nitric oxide formation in the spinal cord. The present study 
demonstrates that Tyr1472 phosphorylation of NR2B subunits by Fyn kinase may 
have dual roles in the retention of NMDA receptors in the postsynaptic density 
and in activation of nitric oxide synthase, and suggests that PGE2 is involved 
in the maintenance of neuropathic pain via the EP1 subtype.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2005.04340.x
PMID: 16190898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
