---
pmid: '8662673'
title: Isolation and characterization of the kininogen-binding protein p33 from endothelial
  cells. Identity with the gC1q receptor.
authors:
- Herwald H
- Dedio J
- Kellner R
- Loos M
- Müller-Esterl W
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.22.13040
---

# Isolation and characterization of the kininogen-binding protein p33 from endothelial cells. Identity with the gC1q receptor.
**Authors:** Herwald H, Dedio J, Kellner R, Loos M, Müller-Esterl W
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.271.22.13040](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.271.22.13040)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1996 May 31;271(22):13040-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.22.13040.

Isolation and characterization of the kininogen-binding protein p33 from 
endothelial cells. Identity with the gC1q receptor.

Herwald H(1), Dedio J, Kellner R, Loos M, Müller-Esterl W.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Physiological Chemistry and Pathobiochemistry, Johannes 
Gutenberg University at Mainz, D-55099 Mainz, Federal Republic of Germany.

Kininogens, the precursor proteins of the vasoactive kinins, bind specifically, 
reversibly, and saturably to platelets, neutrophils, and endothelial cells. Two 
domains of the kininogens expose major cell binding sites: domain D3 that is 
shared by H- and L-kininogen and domain D5H that is exclusively present in 
H-kininogen. Previously we have mapped the kininogen cell binding sites to 27 
residues of D3 ("LDC27") and 20 residues of D5H ("HKH20"", respectively 
(Herwald, H., Hasan, A. A. K., Godovac-Zimmermann, J., Schmaier, A. H., and 
Müller-Esterl, W. (1995) J. Biol. Chem. 270, 14634-14642; Hasan, A. A. K., 
Cines, D. B., Herwald, H., Schmaier, A. H., and Müller-Esterl, W. (1995) J. 
Biol. Chem. 270, 19256-19261). The corresponding kininogen acceptor site(s) 
exposed by the cell surfaces are still poorly defined. Using a non-ionic 
detergent, Nonidet P-40, we have been able to solubilize kininogen binding sites 
from an endothelial cell line, EA.hy926, in their functionally active form. 
Affinity chromatography of the solubilized kininogen binding sites on HKH20, a 
synthetic peptide representing the D5H cell binding site, allowed us to isolate 
a 33-kDa protein ("p33") that binds specifically and reversibly to H-kininogen 
with a KD (apparent dissociation constant) of 9 +/- 2 nM. Preparative SDS 
electrophoresis followed by NH2-terminal amino acid sequence analysis identified 
the kininogen-binding protein p33 as the gC1q receptor ("gC1qR"), an extrinsic 
membrane protein that interacts with the globular domains of the complement 
component C1q. The purified p33 binds C1q with moderate affinity, KD = 240 +/- 
10 nM. Recombinant expression of the corresponding cDNA in Escherichia coli 
demonstrated that p33 binds H-kininogen, but not L-kininogen. Peptide HKH20 but 
not peptide LDC27 inhibited binding of H-kininogen to the recombinant p33 in a 
concentration-dependent manner, indicating that H-kininogen binds to p33 via 
domain D5H. Recombinant p33 efficiently inhibited the binding of H-kininogen to 
EA.hy926 cells. Factor XII, but not prekallikrein, competed with H-kininogen 
binding to p33. These findings suggest that an endothelial binding protein 
mediates the assembly of critical components of the kinin-generating pathway on 
the surface of endothelial cells, thereby linking the early events of kinin 
formation and complement activation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.22.13040
PMID: 8662673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
