---
pmid: '40526720'
title: The oncogene SLC35F2 is a high-specificity transporter for the micronutrients
  queuine and queuosine.
authors:
- Burtnyak L
- Yuan Y
- Stojek E
- Pan X
- Gunaratne L
- Silveira d'Almeida G
- Fergus C
- Martinelli M
- J Reed C
- Fernandez J
- Patel BI
- Marquez I
- Ehrenhofer-Murray AE
- Swairjo MA
- Alfonzo JD
- Green BD
- Kelly VP
- de Crécy-Lagard V
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2025'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: xml
pmcid: PMC12207525
doi: 10.1073/pnas.2425364122
---

# The oncogene SLC35F2 is a high-specificity transporter for the micronutrients queuine and queuosine.
**Authors:** Burtnyak L, Yuan Y, Stojek E, Pan X, Gunaratne L, Silveira d'Almeida G, Fergus C, Martinelli M, J Reed C, Fernandez J, Patel BI, Marquez I, Ehrenhofer-Murray AE, Swairjo MA, Alfonzo JD, Green BD, Kelly VP, de Crécy-Lagard V
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.2425364122](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2425364122)
**PMC:** [PMC12207525](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC12207525/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2025 Jun 24;122(25):e2425364122. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2425364122. Epub 2025 Jun 17.

The oncogene SLC35F2 is a high-specificity transporter for the micronutrients 
queuine and queuosine.

Burtnyak L(1), Yuan Y(2), Stojek E(1), Pan X(3), Gunaratne L(4)(5), Silveira 
d'Almeida G(4), Fergus C(1), Martinelli M(2), J Reed C(2), Fernandez J(2), Patel 
BI(6), Marquez I(7), Ehrenhofer-Murray AE(6), Swairjo MA(7), Alfonzo JD(4), 
Green BD(3), Kelly VP(1), de Crécy-Lagard V(2)(8).

Author information:
(1)School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity Biomedical Sciences Institute, 
Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, D02 R590, Ireland.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Cell cience, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, FL 32611.
(3)School of Biological Sciences, Institute for Global Food Security, Queen's 
University, Belfast BT9 5DL, Northern Ireland, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology and Biochemistry and the Brown 
ribonucleic acid Center, Brown University, Providence, RI 02903.
(5)Ohio State Biochemistry Program, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 
43210.
(6)Institut für Biologie, Lebenswissenschaftliche Fakultät, Humboldt-Universität 
zu Berlin, Berlin 10115, Germany.
(7)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, San Diego State University, San 
Diego, CA 92182.
(8)Genetic Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611.

The nucleobase queuine (q) and its nucleoside queuosine (Q) are micronutrients 
derived from bacteria that are acquired from the gut microbiome and/or diet in 
humans. Following cellular uptake, Q is incorporated at the wobble base 
(position 34) of tRNAs that decode histidine, tyrosine, aspartate, and 
asparagine codons, which is important for efficient translation. Early studies 
suggested that cytosolic uptake of queuine is mediated by a selective 
transporter that is regulated by mitogenic signals, but the identity of this 
transporter has remained elusive. Here, through a cross-species bioinformatic 
search and genetic validation, we have identified the solute carrier family 
member SLC35F2 as a unique transporter for both queuine and queuosine in 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe and Trypanosoma brucei. Furthermore, gene disruption 
in human HeLa cells revealed that SLC35F2 is the sole transporter for queuosine 
(Km 174 nM) and a high-affinity transporter for the queuine nucleobase (Km 67 
nM), with the additional presence of second low-affinity queuine transporter (Km 
259 nM). Ectopic expression of labeled SLC35F2 reveals localization to the cell 
membrane and Golgi apparatus via immunofluorescence. Competition uptake studies 
show that SLC35F2 is not a general transporter for other canonical 
ribonucleobases or ribonucleosides but selectively imports q and Q. The 
identification of SLC35F2, an oncogene, as the transporter of both q and Q 
advances our understanding of how intracellular levels of queuine and queuosine 
are regulated and how their deficiency contributes to a variety of 
pathophysiological conditions, including neurological disorders and cancer.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2425364122
PMCID: PMC12207525
PMID: 40526720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests statement:The authors 
declare no competing interest.

## Full Text

Human health is deeply intertwined with the acquisition of sufficient daily nutrients. This encompasses not only adequate caloric intake but also a diverse array of essential vitamins, minerals, and other micronutrients necessary for optimal cellular function, disease prevention, and overall well-being (1). Queuine (q) and its nucleoside derivative queuosine (Q) are one such group of micronutrients that are synthesized exclusively by bacteria and salvaged by eukaryotic organisms including plants, Fungi, yeast, and metazoan species, with q undergoing subsequent incorporation into tRNAs decoding His, Tyr, Asp, and Asn codons and serving as a substrate for further glycosylation, turnover, and salvage (2) (Fig. 1). Currently, no transporters for intracellular uptake of Q or q have been identified in any eukaryote, and in metazoans, the mechanism of uptake from the gut and redistribution throughout the body is poorly understood.

Transport of q and Q into eukaryotes and subsequent intracellular utilization. The q/Q micronutrients are imported into the cell via (an) unidentified transporter(s). Q is phosphorylated by an unknown kinase to Q-5′MP and subsequently hydrolyzed by QNG1 to release the q nucleobase. Queuine serves as a substrate of the eukaryotic tRNA-guanine transglycosylase (TGT) heterodimer (QTRT1 and QTRT2) for incorporation into tRNA of the GUN anticodon, generating tRNAs modified with Q (Q34-tRNA) at position 34. The Q in tyrosyl- and aspartyl-tRNA can be modified further by galactosylation and mannosylation by the enzymes QTMAN and QTGAL, respectively (3). Q-5′MP is the biologically relevant substrate of QNG1, a queuosine-5′-monophosphate hydrolase (4).

In humans, the circulating levels of q are estimated to be in the range of 1 to 10 nM (5) with recent studies indicating a mean serum concentration of 8 nM in females and 6.8 nM in males (6). Early studies in fibroblasts and mammalian cell lines showed that a specific cellular uptake mechanism exists to transport q from the extracellular space to the cytosol. Using a tritiated q derivative (rQT3), it was shown that uptake in human foreskin fibroblasts can occur via two different transporters, a low Km transporter (30 nM) that reached saturation after 2 min (13.5 pmol/106 cells/h) and a slower, high Km mechanism (350 nM) that displayed a linear uptake after 3 to 4 h (2.3 pmol/106 cells/h). Moreover, competitive uptake experiments with a variety of purine and purine derivatives did not affect q transport, suggesting that the transporter is specific to q (7).

Earlier studies indicated that mitogenic signaling pathways could modulate q transport (8). In fibroblasts, low doses and short-term exposure to the Protein Kinase C (PKC) activator phorbol-12, 13-didecanoate (PDD) led to increased rQT3 uptake, whereas extended exposure durations inhibited uptake. In addition, the protein phosphatase inhibitors calyculin A and okadaic acid were found to increase rQT3 uptake, but avoidance of excess exposure time and concentrations was necessary (8). Later, other PKC activators, including phosphatidylserine, calcium ionophore, and diolein, were also found to increase rQT3 uptake (9). Furthermore, growth factors such as epidermal growth factor, fibroblast growth factor, and platelet-derived growth factor were also shown to increase q uptake, both alone and in combination with PKC activators (9). Notably, although a major portion of q transport appears to be regulated by PKC and mitogenic signaling, a substantial basal rate of q uptake exists, which operates independently of exogenous signaling. This implies the presence of two or more transporters for q uptake, one of which may be PKC- and mitogen-regulated.

Here, we show that SLC35F2 functions as the exclusive transporter for q and Q in Schizosaccharomyces pombe and the human parasite Trypanosoma brucei. In the human HeLa cell line, the transporter is localized to the membrane and Golgi. It serves as the primary high-affinity transporter for q and as the unique transporter for Q. Competitive uptake studies reveal that SLC35F2 does not recognize canonical nucleobases nor nucleosides, since they were unable to disrupt q/Q import into HeLa cells. Defining the role of the SLC35F2 transporter, an identified oncogene, as the q/Q transporter has significance for understanding the uptake, distribution, and function of this micronutrient in eukaryotes.

ResultsPrediction of a Candidate Q/q Transporter Family by Comparative Genomics.The Q modification of tRNA has been independently lost in several eukaryotic clades including the model organism Saccharomyces cerevisiae, while being present in most sequenced fungal genomes including S. pombe (10). The presence/absence of Q can be inferred by the presence/absence of the signature gene Qtrt1, which encodes tRNA guanine transglycosylase that exchanges G for Q at position 34 in tRNA. Previous phyletic profile searches to identify the missing q/Q transporter gene(s) by searching for protein families that codistribute with Qtrt1 were performed across three eukaryotic kingdoms (Fungi, Viridiplantae, and Metazoa) (10). However, these searches only returned candidate genes for the already characterized Qtrt1 and Qng1 genes, the latter being responsible for the release of q from the Q precursor queuosine 5′-monophosphate (Q-5′MP). As an alternate strategy, we analyzed protein families containing transmembrane domains separately in four different taxonomic clades (Sar, Viridiplantae, Metazoa, and Fungi), each including around 200 organisms encoding QTRT1 (QTRT+) and at least 10 organisms that are QTRT1 deficient (QTRT−) (SI Appendix, Fig. S1 Step I). The proteins in each of these taxonomic groups containing at least four transmembrane (TM) domains covering 25% or more of their length were clustered based on sequence similarity as described in the methods section (SI Appendix, Fig. S1 Step II). The choice of four TM domains was because 96.4% of all known electrochemical potential-driven transporters have at least four TM domains (11). Each cluster within a given group was given a probability score that would be 1 if all the proteins of the cluster were encoded by QTRT+ organisms and absent in QTRT− organisms as described in the methods section and in SI Appendix, Fig. S1 (Step III).The top candidate in the Fungi clade, which also scored highly in the other three analyzed taxonomic groups, was the IPR052221 annotated in InterPro database as the “SLC35F solute transporter family” (Dataset S1) but corresponds to the “solute carrier family 35 member F1/2” or the “SLC35F1/F2” KEGG orthology group (K15287) (12). This family of transporters contains 10 transmembrane helices (see UniProt entry Q8IXU6) and is a subgroup of the SLC35 superfamily (13). Most members of this family transport nucleoside diphosphate (NDP) sugars, but a few transport vitamins such as thiamin (14). To date, the substrate specificity of the SLC35F1/F2 subgroup is not known (15).SLC35F1/F2 proteins were present in 184 out of 189 QTRT+ Fungi and absent in all of 189 QTRT− Fungi. The gene encoding a SLC35F protein in S. pombe, SPCC320.08, is coexpressed with ribosome biogenesis genes; https://coxpresdb.jp/locus/?gene_id=2539011. Another published coexpression analysis along the S. pombe cell cycle (16) found that SPCC320.08 was the only transporter gene in a cluster of coexpressed genes highly enriched (21 out of 24, Dataset S2) in rRNA processing and translation-related proteins.We constructed a sequence similarity network (SSN) of the IPR052221 family proteins to dissect their functions (Fig. 2A). Each node in the network represents one or multiple IPR052221 proteins that share no less than 90% identity. An edge is drawn between two nodes when their similarity is over a specific Alignment Score Threshold (AST). The Chordata F1 and F2 paralogous subgroups could not be separated AST of 110 (Fig. 2A), but the divergence becomes evident with an AST of 125 (Fig. 2B), indicating similar functions. Members of this family separate mostly following taxonomic lineages except for the Viridiplantae SLC35F proteins, which are split in two groups: one that contains members from QTRT− organisms, such as Arabidopsis thaliana (Dataset S3), and one that lacks A. thaliana homologs but contains members only from QTRT+ organisms, such as Zea mays. Indeed, the Z. mays genome encodes the full Q salvage pathway (UniProt accession: QTRT1, A0A3L6E559; QTRT2, A0A8J8Y6E7 and Qng1, A0A3L6FZJ1) while A. thaliana is known to lack Q in tRNA, as this wobble base modification has been lost in cruciferous plants (10). The identification of distinct Viridiplantae paralogous groups, one with no A. thaliana member, suggested that the SLC35F family is not isofunctional and could also explain why this transporter family was not identified in previous phylogenetic distribution searches that were filtering for transporter families present in Zea mays and absent in A. thaliana (10). Analyses of the coexpression data available for the two human SLC35F genes link SLC35F2 to ribosome biogenesis and RNA processing, but associate SLC35F1 to neural and synaptic function (SI Appendix, Fig. S2). In addition, overexpression of SLC35F1 in HeLa cells recently showed that the transporter resides exclusively on recycling endosomes (17). This would suggest that SLC35F1 is likely not the plasma membrane transporter for q/Q. The combination of in silico derived evidence (presence/absence correlated with QTRT1, coexpression with RNA processing proteins, and membrane protein topology) led us to test the hypothesis that SLC35F2 is one of the missing human Q/q transporters.Fig. 2.The SLC35F transporter family is functionally diverse. (A) The SSN of SLC35F family proteins in Eukaryota. Each node in the network represents one SLC35F protein. An edge (represented as a line) is drawn between two nodes with a BLAST E-value cutoff of better than 10−110 (alignment score threshold of 110). The shape of nodes is based on the presence (circles) and absence (diamonds) of QTRT1 in the organism. The nodes of selected model organisms are highlighted in different colors. The borders of SLC35F1 and F2 annotated in Metazoa are highlighted in orange and pink, respectively. For better visualization, clusters with less than ten sequences are hidden. (B) The sub-SSN of the cluster of phylum Chordata. An edge (represented as a line) is drawn between two nodes with a BLAST E-value cutoff of better than 10 to 125 (alignment score threshold of 125). (C) The maximum likelihood tree of 34 SLC35F proteins. SLC35B1-4/HUT1 proteins were used as the outgroup. The branches are colored by taxonomic ranks and branches with a 0.7 or more bootstrap value are indicated by blue dots. The QTRT+ and QTRT− organisms are shown in black and red, respectively.The Human SLC35F2 Gene Encodes the Q/q Transporter.To investigate whether the SLC35F2 protein is required for q or Q transport in humans, a knockout approach was adopted. The SLC35F2 gene is located on the reverse strand of chromosome 11, comprising eight exons that encode a 374-amino acid protein. CRISPR-Cas9 was used to insert a promoter trap into exon two of the gene by homologous recombination—providing puromycin resistance under the control of the SLC35F2 promoter (SI Appendix, Fig. S3A). From the clones surviving puromycin selection, four were chosen and genotyped. All four clones were homozygous knockouts for SLC35F2, with either no PCR amplicon observed for the wild-type (WT) allele or a band of the incorrect size (SI Appendix, Fig. S3B). Strikingly, 3-AcrylamidoPhenylBoronic acid (APB) Northern blot analysis, which can separate Q modified from unmodified tRNAs (18), revealed that in the absence of SLC35F2, all four HeLa cell lines were devoid of detectable Q modification in tRNAHis after incubation with Q (25 nM), contrasting with WT cells, where approximately 50 percent of the tRNA was Q-modified (Fig. 3 A, Upper). In the case of q nucleobase, in WT cells, all the tRNA was found to be fully Q-modified with the addition of the micronutrient at a concentration of 25 nM, but a dramatic reduction in modification was observed in the SLC35F2 knockout clones (Fig. 3 A, Lower). To validate and extend this finding, Clone 1 was selected for further analysis by treating cells with increasing concentrations (from 25 to 250 nM) of either the q-base or Q-nucleoside (Fig. 3B). Notably, at all concentrations tested Q failed to modify the tRNA in the SLC35F2 knockout cells (upper panel), whereas in the case of q, almost a 10-fold higher concentration was required, relative to WT cells, to completely modify the tRNA (lower panel). These data show that SLC35F2 is a unique transporter for Q-nucleoside in human cells and the primary high-affinity transporter for the uptake of q base.Fig. 3.SLC35F2 is the transmembrane transporter responsible for Q/q uptake in humans, S. pombe, and T. brucei. (A) tRNAHis is Q-modified in WT HeLa cells, but not in four SLC35F2 knockout candidate clones (1-4), as determined by APB Northern blot. Cells were incubated with Q (25 nM) or q (25 nM) for 6 h. (B) SLC35F2 knock-out clone 1 was incubated with increasing concentrations of q and Q as indicated for 6 h, and the Q-modification status of tRNAHis was analyzed. (C) Immunofluorescence images of HeLa cells 6 h posttransfection with GFP-tagged SLC35F2 plasmid. Nuclei stained in blue (Hoechst), SLC35F2 in green (Alexa Fluor 488 anti-GFP), F-actin in purple (Alexa Fluro 647 phalloidin), and Golgi in red (Alexa Fluor 555 anti-GM130). Magnification = 40× (n = 3). (D) WT and a qtp1∆ S. pombe strain were cultured in the absence (−) or presence of q/Q at the indicated concentrations, tRNA extracted, and analyzed by APB Northern using a tRNAAsp probe. (E) APB Northern analysis of Q-modification status of tRNATyr in WT and Δqtp1 T. brucei strains that were cultured in media supplemented with either complete or dialyzed FBS supplemented when noted with 25 nM Q or q. tRNA extracted from a strain deleted for the gene encoding TGT2, one paralog of TGT in T. brucei (19). Q-tRNA percentages were quantified using ImageJ.The majority of members of the SLC35 family, whose substrates are known, transport nucleotide sugars and are localized to the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus (14). Therefore, it was of interest to determine the distribution of SLC35F2 (Fig. 3C). A green fluorescent protein (GFP) tagged version of the protein (C-terminus) was expressed in the HeLa cells knocked out for endogenous SLC35F2 protein. Cells were counterstained with phalloidin to distinguish F-actin (upper panels) and GM130 as a marker for the Golgi apparatus (lower panel). Localization to the plasma membrane was apparent, with closer inspection revealing a somewhat punctate distribution that may be indicative of coassociation with lipid rafts as has been described for some of the other solute carriers—albeit not SLC35 members—or interaction with endosomes that are trafficking to the trans-Golgi network as hinted at by an association with SNX2, a component of the retromer complex (20). In this regard, images also reveal a clear perinuclear signal for SLC35F2 which is indicative of the asymmetrical localization of the Golgi apparatus, as previously described (20) and confirmed by the overlapping signal (yellow) with the Golgi scaffolding protein marker GM130.With reference to the Human Protein Atlas (21), a comparatively high protein expression of SLC35F2 is evident in the salivary gland, endocrine tissue, lymphoid tissue, bone marrow, and throughout the length of the gastrointestinal tract—duodenum, small intestine, colon, and rectum—the latter being suggestive of a role in q/Q uptake from the gut; https://www.proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000110660-SLC35F2/tissue.SLC35F2 Homologs Are the Sole q/Q Transporters in S. pombe and T. brucei.Having shown that SLC35F2 was required for both q and Q transport in human cells, we investigated whether this was also the case in eukaryotes that encode only one SLC35F protein (Fig. 3 D and E). We focused on two single-cell eukaryotes where Q synthesis and function have been extensively studied: the fission yeast S. pombe (4, 10, 22–24) and the parasite T. brucei (19, 25, 26).The fission yeast S. pombe encodes an SLC35F1/F2 homolog SPCC320.08, (here renamed Qtp1 [Queuosine and queuine transporter 1]), which has no apparent homolog in S. cerevisiae [PomBase (27)]. To test whether Qtp1 transports q and/or Q in S. pombe, a qtp1∆ strain was constructed, and Q levels analyzed via APB Northerns in tRNAAsp extracted from cells grown in medium supplemented with either q or Q (Fig. 3D). In the presence of 10 nM q, WT cells showed partial Q modification of tRNAAsp, and 100 nM q resulted in full modification, as determined by APB Northern blotting. In contrast, in the qtp1∆ strain, tRNAAsp showed no Q modification of the tRNA even at the higher q concentration. Similarly, the qtp1∆ strain showed no Q modification of tRNAAsp when provided with the Q nucleoside, whereas the WT strain showed full modification.To study the function of the SLC35F2 homolog in T. brucei (ORF Tb927.4.320), here renamed Qtp1 as above for S. pombe, both alleles of the corresponding gene were deleted using the CRISPR/Cas9 system (SI Appendix, Fig. S4). We then extracted total RNA from WT and knockout cell lines and analyzed Q-content in tRNATyr (Fig. 3D), tRNAAsn and tRNAAsp (SI Appendix, Fig. S5) via APB Northern blotting. For this analysis, Q-content from cells grown in complete media (nondialyzed serum) was compared to cells grown in media containing dialyzed serum. No Q-tRNA was detected in cells grown with dialyzed serum, regardless of the presence or absence of Qtp1. This is expected given that serum is the only source of q/Q for T. brucei when grown in culture. Similar experiments were then performed by supplementing the dialyzed serum with q or Q (at 25 nM concentration, respectively). In this case, only WT cells showed detectable Q-tRNA, while Q-tRNA was undetectable in the qtp1 knockout cells even when the knockout cells were grown in complete media (Fig. 3E and SI Appendix, Fig. S5) or when the cultures were supplemented with 250 nM q (SI Appendix, Fig. S6).Taken together, these experiments show that in two organisms encoding only one member of the SLC35F2/Qtp1 family, this protein is the sole protein responsible for q and Q import.SLC35F2 Is Required for Normal Proliferation in HeLa Cells but Not in S. pombe and T. brucei.A number of recent studies have highlighted the contribution of SLC35F2 overexpression to the progression of a variety of cancers, including non–small cell lung cancer (28), papillary thyroid cancer (29), and bladder cancer (30). In the latter two cases, the authors demonstrate that SLC35F2 behaves as an oncogene wherein depletion of the protein can inhibit cellular proliferation and tumorigenic properties, whereas ectopic expression can enhance malignant phenotypes. Indeed, analysis across a number of cancers has shown that high expression of SLC35F2 is a highly unfavorable prognostic factor for patient survival in melanoma, lung, cervical, renal, and pancreatic cancer: www.proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000110660-SLC35F2/cancer.It was therefore of interest to determine how knockout of SLC25F2 in HeLa cells could affect the proliferation rate. To evaluate this, IncuCyte time-lapse microscopy was employed, and the confluence of the cells (surface area covered) was calculated over a 96-h period through the acquisition of real-time images (SI Appendix, Fig. S7 A–C). A clear reduction in growth of the SLC35F2 knockout cells was apparent relative to WT controls in both the DMEM-Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) (containing queuine) and serum-free culture media (deficient in queuine), suggesting that the reduction in proliferation is not due to the depletion of the q/Q micronutrient. To examine this further, HeLa cells were grown in OptiPro medium supplemented with 1 µM queuine base; a 40-fold excess over the concentrations required for full modification as shown earlier. However, proliferation of the SLC35F2 knockout cells was not restored to that of WT cells confirming that the underlying cause of slowed proliferation is not a principal effect of q/Q deficiency.Growth of the T. brucei or S. pombe Qtp1 deficient strains was not affected (SI Appendix, Fig. S7 D and E), in agreement with the fact that Q in tRNA is not essential for growth in these organisms (4, 10, 19, 22–26).Analysis of q/Q Uptake and SLC35F2 Kinetics in HeLa Cells.Recent studies to determine the circulating levels of q in humans indicate a range of 1 to 10 nM, with higher levels reported in females (6, 31) but a surprising absence of detectable Q (6). It therefore was of interest to determine the substrate affinity and specificity of SLC35F2, to provide an indication of its physiological activity. Of note, the SLC35F2 solute carrier has previously been identified as a unique, high-specificity transporter for the small molecule anticancer agent YM155 (sepantronium bromide), with retroviral disruption in KBM7 cells conferring drug resistance to this molecule (32). Structurally, YM155 contains a naphthoquinone–imidazolium core substituted with a pyrazinylmethyl group and a pyrazine ring side chain, that shows little similarity to queuine, which comprises a pyrazolo[4,3-d]pyrimidine scaffold and cyclopentenyl aminomethyl side chain (SI Appendix, Fig. S8).To negate the interference of multiple downstream steps, the uptake kinetics of SLC35F2 for Q was determined in HeLa cells that were knocked out for QNG1 and therefore are incapable of converting Q to q (Fig. 4 A, Upper). Intracellular Q and Q-5′MP were quantified by LC-MS/MS and their additive concentration was used to measure uptake kinetics, providing a Km of 174 nM and a Vmax of 0.87 pmol/min (lower panel). To examine q uptake, HeLa cells deficient in Qtrt1 were exploited (Fig. 4 B, Upper), providing a Km of 67 nM for q uptake through both the SLC35F2 transporter and the unidentified secondary mechanism (lower panel). To obtain further data on the uptake kinetics of the unidentified transporter, we took advantage of the fact that YM155 is a high-specificity substrate for SLC35F2 uptake and thus capable of competitively inhibiting the transporter (Fig. 4 C, Upper) (32). Saturating concentrations of YM155 were added to the Qtrt1 deficient HeLa cells to inhibit q uptake, revealing that the second transporter for q has a higher Km of 260 nM (lower panel), which agrees with previous literature wherein both a low-Km and high-Km transporter for the q nucleobase had been demonstrated (7). Together, the data indicate that the SLC35F2 transporter is uniquely tasked for Q uptake in humans with a Km that is comparatively high relative to that of q and which could indicate differential roles for the transporter in the uptake of each form of the micronutrient.Fig. 4.Analysis of q/Q uptake kinetics and specificity of SLC35F2 in human cells. (A) Uptake of Q was examined by adding increasing concentrations of Q (25, 50, 100, 250 nM) over four timepoints (15, 30, 45, and 60 min) to QNG1-knockout HeLa cells, followed by methanol:water extraction from cell pellets and LC-MS/MS analysis to quantify the intracellular Q and Q-5′MP concentrations. (B and C) Similar analysis was performed for q in Qtrt1-knockout HeLa cells that were untreated (B) or administered the known SLC35F2 inhibitor YM155 (C) at saturating concentrations, before methanol:water extraction and LC-MS/MS analysis. (D and E) Import of q and Q by SLC35F2 was inhibited by YM155, but not other nucleobases or nucleosides. To WT or SLC35F2 knockout HeLa cells, a fixed concentration of Q (25 nM) or q (25 nM) was added, as indicated, in the absence (−) or presence of saturating concentrations of nucleobases or nucleosides (25 µM) or YM155 (25 µM). Total RNA was extracted and the Q-modification status of tRNAHis analyzed by APB Northern blotting. Nucleobases—guanine (G), adenine (A), cytosine (C), thymine (T), uracil (U), hypoxanthine (H). Nucleosides - guanosine (Guo), adenosine (Ado), cytidine (Cyd), thymidine (Thy), uridine (Urd), inosine (Ino). Q-tRNA percentages were quantified using ImageJ.To determine how SLC35F2 activity contributes to q/Q transport and distribution, WT and SLC35F2 knockout HeLa cells were grown in OptiPrep serum-free medium and supplemented with increasing concentrations of either synthetic queuine or queuosine for 48 h before being analyzed by APB Northern blot and LC/MS (SI Appendix, Figs. S9 and S10). A concentration of 25 nM queuine was required for full modification of tRNA (SI Appendix, Fig. S9A). Notably, the intracellular concentration of queuine never rose above 10 pmol despite approximately 20-fold higher concentration of queuine being present in the medium (SI Appendix, Fig. S9 B, Upper). Both Q and queuosine 5′-monophosphate (Q5′-MP) were detectable in the cellular cytosolic fraction (SI Appendix, Fig. S9 B, Lower), which necessarily has arisen from tRNA breakdown following queuine incorporation into tRNA, and therefore, these metabolites are present at comparatively lower levels. Q export from the cytosol to the media is evident in the cells supplemented with the highest concentrations of queuine (100 and 250 nM). By contrast, in SLC35F2 knockout HeLa cells (SI Appendix, Fig. S9C), no Q was detectable in the media and the cytosolic levels of q are 10 times less than WT cells, indicating that the uptake of q has been attenuated as expected. This attenuation of q uptake is particularly evident at lower concentrations (1 to 50 nM), where q levels in the media of WT cells are depleted but remain in the media of SLC35F2 deficient cells.In the case of Q, the addition of 25 nM to WT cells is likewise sufficient for full modification of tRNA (SI Appendix, Fig. S10A). With increasing concentrations of Q added to the media, there is a linear increase in q being released to the medium (SI Appendix, Fig. S10 B, Upper) and a parallel increase in intracellular Q and Q-5′MP (SI Appendix, Fig. S10 B, Lower). The principal source for extracellular q is likely the result of intracellular phosphorylation of Q to Q-5′MP and subsequent hydrolysis by QNG1. Similar to the previous study, it is notable that the intracellular q levels in Q-supplemented cells do not increase beyond 10 pmol. Although small amounts of intracellular q/Q are detectable—considered to arise from contamination of the synthetic Q with small amounts of q—in the SLC35F2 knockout cells, no detectable q is released into the medium following Q addition, aligning with the inability to take up the nucleoside (SI Appendix, Fig. S10C).Together, the data show that the uptake of q and Q is greatly affected in the absence of SC35F2 and further suggest that a mechanism exists to eliminate excess q from the cell once tRNA is fully Q-modified.The SLC35F2 Transporter Is Highly Specific for q/Q Micronutrient Uptake.Earlier studies showed that transporters for q are specific and that uptake cannot be outcompeted by a variety of nucleobases or nucleotides (7). Using the level of Q-modified tRNA as an indirect indicator of the ability of cells to import Q or q, competitive uptake studies were performed using a range of nucleosides and nucleobases. In all cases in WT cells, none of the canonical nucleosides were capable of competing against Q-nucleoside uptake (Fig. 4D). Similarly, none of the tested nucleobases competed against q uptake (Fig. 4E) at saturating concentrations (25 µM versus 25 nM) except for the anticancer drug YM155, which effectively outcompeted Q/q import. This further validates SLC35F2 as the high-specificity transporter for both q and Q, both of which possess a cyclopentene-diol moiety not shared with canonical nucleobase or nucleoside molecules.Structural Insights into SLC35F2/Qtp1 Proteins.Human SLC35F2, T. brucei Qtp1 (ORF Tb927.4.320), and S. pombe Qtp1 (SPCC320.08) are all members of the SLC35F subfamily of the large solute carrier family 35 (SLC35). SLC35 proteins are highly conserved TM proteins typically composed of 10 α-helices (10-TM) arranged in two bundles of five helices each (14). These bundles are related by a pseudo-twofold symmetry axis running parallel to the membrane. Architecturally, they are part of the Drug/Metabolite Exporter (DME) structural superfamily (33) and operate using an alternating-access mechanism to facilitate solute exchange across the membrane. This process involves two gates, formed by specific helical pairs, that alternately open and close on the opposite sides of the DME fold, enabling the central solute-binding site to access solutes from either side of the membrane. To date, the SLC35 family comprises 32 members classified into seven subfamilies (SLC35A-G) based on sequence similarity and phylogenetic analyses, with members within a subfamily differentiated by the solutes they transport. For the majority of SLC35 proteins (21 of the 32 members), the substrates are unknown (orphan transporters) (28), while most of the functionally characterized members (mostly in subfamilies A-D) are Nucleotide Sugar Transporters (NSTs) located in the Golgi and endoplasmic reticulum membranes, where they transport specific nucleotide sugars into the lumens of these organelles to serve as substrates for glycosylation reactions (34–37). NSTs use an antiport mechanism and typically utilize the corresponding luminal nucleoside monophosphates as their antiport molecules (38). Additionally, members of the SLC35B subfamily include an ATP/ADP exchanger (39) and 3′-phosphoadenosine 5′-phosphosulfate (PAPS) transporters (40). In the SLC35F subfamily, which comprises six members, none have been reported to function as an NST, and only one has been functionally characterized and found to transport thiamine across the plasma membrane [SLC35F3 (41)].We built a structure-based multisequence alignment of human, S. pombe, and T. brucei SLC35F2/Qtp1 proteins based on the superposition of tertiary structures predicted by the AI-based tool AlphaFold (42) (SI Appendix, Fig. S11). Overall, the three proteins exhibit 14% sequence identity and 31% similarity. Their predicted structures share the common 10-TM transporter core and possess different, putatively extramembranous, N- and C-terminal regions that could not be modeled with confidence (SI Appendix, Fig. S11A). The 10-TM core is most similar to the crystal structure of the CMP-sialic acid transporter SLC35A1 (14, 43) [e.g., mouse CMP-sialic acid transporter, PDB ID 6OH3, r.m.s.d. 3.3 Å over 247 Cα atoms, 13% sequence identity (44)]. [e.g., mouse CMP-sialic acid transporter, PDB ID 6OH3, r.m.s.d. 3.3 Å over 247 Cα atoms, 13% sequence identity (44)] In terms of their topology and orientation in the membrane, SLC35 proteins are classified as type III integral membrane proteins, i.e., their N and C termini face the cytoplasm (14). Notably, the predicted structures of human, S. pombe, and T. brucei SLC35F2/Qtp1 proteins exhibit a biased distribution of positively charged amino acids (SI Appendix, Fig. S11B), consistent with the “positive-inside rule” for integral membrane proteins, whereby basic amino acids cluster at the cytoplasmic interface (45). Analysis of the topology of the core membrane-spanning domain using the online tool Deep TMHMM (46) suggests that the N and C termini are located on the cytoplasmic side (SI Appendix, Fig. S11A). These observations are consistent with the orientation of a type III integral membrane protein (SI Appendix, Fig. S11A).

Prediction of a Candidate Q/q Transporter Family by Comparative Genomics.The Q modification of tRNA has been independently lost in several eukaryotic clades including the model organism Saccharomyces cerevisiae, while being present in most sequenced fungal genomes including S. pombe (10). The presence/absence of Q can be inferred by the presence/absence of the signature gene Qtrt1, which encodes tRNA guanine transglycosylase that exchanges G for Q at position 34 in tRNA. Previous phyletic profile searches to identify the missing q/Q transporter gene(s) by searching for protein families that codistribute with Qtrt1 were performed across three eukaryotic kingdoms (Fungi, Viridiplantae, and Metazoa) (10). However, these searches only returned candidate genes for the already characterized Qtrt1 and Qng1 genes, the latter being responsible for the release of q from the Q precursor queuosine 5′-monophosphate (Q-5′MP). As an alternate strategy, we analyzed protein families containing transmembrane domains separately in four different taxonomic clades (Sar, Viridiplantae, Metazoa, and Fungi), each including around 200 organisms encoding QTRT1 (QTRT+) and at least 10 organisms that are QTRT1 deficient (QTRT−) (SI Appendix, Fig. S1 Step I). The proteins in each of these taxonomic groups containing at least four transmembrane (TM) domains covering 25% or more of their length were clustered based on sequence similarity as described in the methods section (SI Appendix, Fig. S1 Step II). The choice of four TM domains was because 96.4% of all known electrochemical potential-driven transporters have at least four TM domains (11). Each cluster within a given group was given a probability score that would be 1 if all the proteins of the cluster were encoded by QTRT+ organisms and absent in QTRT− organisms as described in the methods section and in SI Appendix, Fig. S1 (Step III).The top candidate in the Fungi clade, which also scored highly in the other three analyzed taxonomic groups, was the IPR052221 annotated in InterPro database as the “SLC35F solute transporter family” (Dataset S1) but corresponds to the “solute carrier family 35 member F1/2” or the “SLC35F1/F2” KEGG orthology group (K15287) (12). This family of transporters contains 10 transmembrane helices (see UniProt entry Q8IXU6) and is a subgroup of the SLC35 superfamily (13). Most members of this family transport nucleoside diphosphate (NDP) sugars, but a few transport vitamins such as thiamin (14). To date, the substrate specificity of the SLC35F1/F2 subgroup is not known (15).SLC35F1/F2 proteins were present in 184 out of 189 QTRT+ Fungi and absent in all of 189 QTRT− Fungi. The gene encoding a SLC35F protein in S. pombe, SPCC320.08, is coexpressed with ribosome biogenesis genes; https://coxpresdb.jp/locus/?gene_id=2539011. Another published coexpression analysis along the S. pombe cell cycle (16) found that SPCC320.08 was the only transporter gene in a cluster of coexpressed genes highly enriched (21 out of 24, Dataset S2) in rRNA processing and translation-related proteins.We constructed a sequence similarity network (SSN) of the IPR052221 family proteins to dissect their functions (Fig. 2A). Each node in the network represents one or multiple IPR052221 proteins that share no less than 90% identity. An edge is drawn between two nodes when their similarity is over a specific Alignment Score Threshold (AST). The Chordata F1 and F2 paralogous subgroups could not be separated AST of 110 (Fig. 2A), but the divergence becomes evident with an AST of 125 (Fig. 2B), indicating similar functions. Members of this family separate mostly following taxonomic lineages except for the Viridiplantae SLC35F proteins, which are split in two groups: one that contains members from QTRT− organisms, such as Arabidopsis thaliana (Dataset S3), and one that lacks A. thaliana homologs but contains members only from QTRT+ organisms, such as Zea mays. Indeed, the Z. mays genome encodes the full Q salvage pathway (UniProt accession: QTRT1, A0A3L6E559; QTRT2, A0A8J8Y6E7 and Qng1, A0A3L6FZJ1) while A. thaliana is known to lack Q in tRNA, as this wobble base modification has been lost in cruciferous plants (10). The identification of distinct Viridiplantae paralogous groups, one with no A. thaliana member, suggested that the SLC35F family is not isofunctional and could also explain why this transporter family was not identified in previous phylogenetic distribution searches that were filtering for transporter families present in Zea mays and absent in A. thaliana (10). Analyses of the coexpression data available for the two human SLC35F genes link SLC35F2 to ribosome biogenesis and RNA processing, but associate SLC35F1 to neural and synaptic function (SI Appendix, Fig. S2). In addition, overexpression of SLC35F1 in HeLa cells recently showed that the transporter resides exclusively on recycling endosomes (17). This would suggest that SLC35F1 is likely not the plasma membrane transporter for q/Q. The combination of in silico derived evidence (presence/absence correlated with QTRT1, coexpression with RNA processing proteins, and membrane protein topology) led us to test the hypothesis that SLC35F2 is one of the missing human Q/q transporters.Fig. 2.The SLC35F transporter family is functionally diverse. (A) The SSN of SLC35F family proteins in Eukaryota. Each node in the network represents one SLC35F protein. An edge (represented as a line) is drawn between two nodes with a BLAST E-value cutoff of better than 10−110 (alignment score threshold of 110). The shape of nodes is based on the presence (circles) and absence (diamonds) of QTRT1 in the organism. The nodes of selected model organisms are highlighted in different colors. The borders of SLC35F1 and F2 annotated in Metazoa are highlighted in orange and pink, respectively. For better visualization, clusters with less than ten sequences are hidden. (B) The sub-SSN of the cluster of phylum Chordata. An edge (represented as a line) is drawn between two nodes with a BLAST E-value cutoff of better than 10 to 125 (alignment score threshold of 125). (C) The maximum likelihood tree of 34 SLC35F proteins. SLC35B1-4/HUT1 proteins were used as the outgroup. The branches are colored by taxonomic ranks and branches with a 0.7 or more bootstrap value are indicated by blue dots. The QTRT+ and QTRT− organisms are shown in black and red, respectively.

Prediction of a Candidate Q/q Transporter Family by Comparative Genomics.

The Q modification of tRNA has been independently lost in several eukaryotic clades including the model organism Saccharomyces cerevisiae, while being present in most sequenced fungal genomes including S. pombe (10). The presence/absence of Q can be inferred by the presence/absence of the signature gene Qtrt1, which encodes tRNA guanine transglycosylase that exchanges G for Q at position 34 in tRNA. Previous phyletic profile searches to identify the missing q/Q transporter gene(s) by searching for protein families that codistribute with Qtrt1 were performed across three eukaryotic kingdoms (Fungi, Viridiplantae, and Metazoa) (10). However, these searches only returned candidate genes for the already characterized Qtrt1 and Qng1 genes, the latter being responsible for the release of q from the Q precursor queuosine 5′-monophosphate (Q-5′MP). As an alternate strategy, we analyzed protein families containing transmembrane domains separately in four different taxonomic clades (Sar, Viridiplantae, Metazoa, and Fungi), each including around 200 organisms encoding QTRT1 (QTRT+) and at least 10 organisms that are QTRT1 deficient (QTRT−) (SI Appendix, Fig. S1 Step I). The proteins in each of these taxonomic groups containing at least four transmembrane (TM) domains covering 25% or more of their length were clustered based on sequence similarity as described in the methods section (SI Appendix, Fig. S1 Step II). The choice of four TM domains was because 96.4% of all known electrochemical potential-driven transporters have at least four TM domains (11). Each cluster within a given group was given a probability score that would be 1 if all the proteins of the cluster were encoded by QTRT+ organisms and absent in QTRT− organisms as described in the methods section and in SI Appendix, Fig. S1 (Step III).

The top candidate in the Fungi clade, which also scored highly in the other three analyzed taxonomic groups, was the IPR052221 annotated in InterPro database as the “SLC35F solute transporter family” (Dataset S1) but corresponds to the “solute carrier family 35 member F1/2” or the “SLC35F1/F2” KEGG orthology group (K15287) (12). This family of transporters contains 10 transmembrane helices (see UniProt entry Q8IXU6) and is a subgroup of the SLC35 superfamily (13). Most members of this family transport nucleoside diphosphate (NDP) sugars, but a few transport vitamins such as thiamin (14). To date, the substrate specificity of the SLC35F1/F2 subgroup is not known (15).

SLC35F1/F2 proteins were present in 184 out of 189 QTRT+ Fungi and absent in all of 189 QTRT− Fungi. The gene encoding a SLC35F protein in S. pombe, SPCC320.08, is coexpressed with ribosome biogenesis genes; https://coxpresdb.jp/locus/?gene_id=2539011. Another published coexpression analysis along the S. pombe cell cycle (16) found that SPCC320.08 was the only transporter gene in a cluster of coexpressed genes highly enriched (21 out of 24, Dataset S2) in rRNA processing and translation-related proteins.

We constructed a sequence similarity network (SSN) of the IPR052221 family proteins to dissect their functions (Fig. 2A). Each node in the network represents one or multiple IPR052221 proteins that share no less than 90% identity. An edge is drawn between two nodes when their similarity is over a specific Alignment Score Threshold (AST). The Chordata F1 and F2 paralogous subgroups could not be separated AST of 110 (Fig. 2A), but the divergence becomes evident with an AST of 125 (Fig. 2B), indicating similar functions. Members of this family separate mostly following taxonomic lineages except for the Viridiplantae SLC35F proteins, which are split in two groups: one that contains members from QTRT− organisms, such as Arabidopsis thaliana (Dataset S3), and one that lacks A. thaliana homologs but contains members only from QTRT+ organisms, such as Zea mays. Indeed, the Z. mays genome encodes the full Q salvage pathway (UniProt accession: QTRT1, A0A3L6E559; QTRT2, A0A8J8Y6E7 and Qng1, A0A3L6FZJ1) while A. thaliana is known to lack Q in tRNA, as this wobble base modification has been lost in cruciferous plants (10). The identification of distinct Viridiplantae paralogous groups, one with no A. thaliana member, suggested that the SLC35F family is not isofunctional and could also explain why this transporter family was not identified in previous phylogenetic distribution searches that were filtering for transporter families present in Zea mays and absent in A. thaliana (10). Analyses of the coexpression data available for the two human SLC35F genes link SLC35F2 to ribosome biogenesis and RNA processing, but associate SLC35F1 to neural and synaptic function (SI Appendix, Fig. S2). In addition, overexpression of SLC35F1 in HeLa cells recently showed that the transporter resides exclusively on recycling endosomes (17). This would suggest that SLC35F1 is likely not the plasma membrane transporter for q/Q. The combination of in silico derived evidence (presence/absence correlated with QTRT1, coexpression with RNA processing proteins, and membrane protein topology) led us to test the hypothesis that SLC35F2 is one of the missing human Q/q transporters.

The SLC35F transporter family is functionally diverse. (A) The SSN of SLC35F family proteins in Eukaryota. Each node in the network represents one SLC35F protein. An edge (represented as a line) is drawn between two nodes with a BLAST E-value cutoff of better than 10−110 (alignment score threshold of 110). The shape of nodes is based on the presence (circles) and absence (diamonds) of QTRT1 in the organism. The nodes of selected model organisms are highlighted in different colors. The borders of SLC35F1 and F2 annotated in Metazoa are highlighted in orange and pink, respectively. For better visualization, clusters with less than ten sequences are hidden. (B) The sub-SSN of the cluster of phylum Chordata. An edge (represented as a line) is drawn between two nodes with a BLAST E-value cutoff of better than 10 to 125 (alignment score threshold of 125). (C) The maximum likelihood tree of 34 SLC35F proteins. SLC35B1-4/HUT1 proteins were used as the outgroup. The branches are colored by taxonomic ranks and branches with a 0.7 or more bootstrap value are indicated by blue dots. The QTRT+ and QTRT− organisms are shown in black and red, respectively.

The Human SLC35F2 Gene Encodes the Q/q Transporter.To investigate whether the SLC35F2 protein is required for q or Q transport in humans, a knockout approach was adopted. The SLC35F2 gene is located on the reverse strand of chromosome 11, comprising eight exons that encode a 374-amino acid protein. CRISPR-Cas9 was used to insert a promoter trap into exon two of the gene by homologous recombination—providing puromycin resistance under the control of the SLC35F2 promoter (SI Appendix, Fig. S3A). From the clones surviving puromycin selection, four were chosen and genotyped. All four clones were homozygous knockouts for SLC35F2, with either no PCR amplicon observed for the wild-type (WT) allele or a band of the incorrect size (SI Appendix, Fig. S3B). Strikingly, 3-AcrylamidoPhenylBoronic acid (APB) Northern blot analysis, which can separate Q modified from unmodified tRNAs (18), revealed that in the absence of SLC35F2, all four HeLa cell lines were devoid of detectable Q modification in tRNAHis after incubation with Q (25 nM), contrasting with WT cells, where approximately 50 percent of the tRNA was Q-modified (Fig. 3 A, Upper). In the case of q nucleobase, in WT cells, all the tRNA was found to be fully Q-modified with the addition of the micronutrient at a concentration of 25 nM, but a dramatic reduction in modification was observed in the SLC35F2 knockout clones (Fig. 3 A, Lower). To validate and extend this finding, Clone 1 was selected for further analysis by treating cells with increasing concentrations (from 25 to 250 nM) of either the q-base or Q-nucleoside (Fig. 3B). Notably, at all concentrations tested Q failed to modify the tRNA in the SLC35F2 knockout cells (upper panel), whereas in the case of q, almost a 10-fold higher concentration was required, relative to WT cells, to completely modify the tRNA (lower panel). These data show that SLC35F2 is a unique transporter for Q-nucleoside in human cells and the primary high-affinity transporter for the uptake of q base.Fig. 3.SLC35F2 is the transmembrane transporter responsible for Q/q uptake in humans, S. pombe, and T. brucei. (A) tRNAHis is Q-modified in WT HeLa cells, but not in four SLC35F2 knockout candidate clones (1-4), as determined by APB Northern blot. Cells were incubated with Q (25 nM) or q (25 nM) for 6 h. (B) SLC35F2 knock-out clone 1 was incubated with increasing concentrations of q and Q as indicated for 6 h, and the Q-modification status of tRNAHis was analyzed. (C) Immunofluorescence images of HeLa cells 6 h posttransfection with GFP-tagged SLC35F2 plasmid. Nuclei stained in blue (Hoechst), SLC35F2 in green (Alexa Fluor 488 anti-GFP), F-actin in purple (Alexa Fluro 647 phalloidin), and Golgi in red (Alexa Fluor 555 anti-GM130). Magnification = 40× (n = 3). (D) WT and a qtp1∆ S. pombe strain were cultured in the absence (−) or presence of q/Q at the indicated concentrations, tRNA extracted, and analyzed by APB Northern using a tRNAAsp probe. (E) APB Northern analysis of Q-modification status of tRNATyr in WT and Δqtp1 T. brucei strains that were cultured in media supplemented with either complete or dialyzed FBS supplemented when noted with 25 nM Q or q. tRNA extracted from a strain deleted for the gene encoding TGT2, one paralog of TGT in T. brucei (19). Q-tRNA percentages were quantified using ImageJ.The majority of members of the SLC35 family, whose substrates are known, transport nucleotide sugars and are localized to the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus (14). Therefore, it was of interest to determine the distribution of SLC35F2 (Fig. 3C). A green fluorescent protein (GFP) tagged version of the protein (C-terminus) was expressed in the HeLa cells knocked out for endogenous SLC35F2 protein. Cells were counterstained with phalloidin to distinguish F-actin (upper panels) and GM130 as a marker for the Golgi apparatus (lower panel). Localization to the plasma membrane was apparent, with closer inspection revealing a somewhat punctate distribution that may be indicative of coassociation with lipid rafts as has been described for some of the other solute carriers—albeit not SLC35 members—or interaction with endosomes that are trafficking to the trans-Golgi network as hinted at by an association with SNX2, a component of the retromer complex (20). In this regard, images also reveal a clear perinuclear signal for SLC35F2 which is indicative of the asymmetrical localization of the Golgi apparatus, as previously described (20) and confirmed by the overlapping signal (yellow) with the Golgi scaffolding protein marker GM130.With reference to the Human Protein Atlas (21), a comparatively high protein expression of SLC35F2 is evident in the salivary gland, endocrine tissue, lymphoid tissue, bone marrow, and throughout the length of the gastrointestinal tract—duodenum, small intestine, colon, and rectum—the latter being suggestive of a role in q/Q uptake from the gut; https://www.proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000110660-SLC35F2/tissue.

The Human SLC35F2 Gene Encodes the Q/q Transporter.

To investigate whether the SLC35F2 protein is required for q or Q transport in humans, a knockout approach was adopted. The SLC35F2 gene is located on the reverse strand of chromosome 11, comprising eight exons that encode a 374-amino acid protein. CRISPR-Cas9 was used to insert a promoter trap into exon two of the gene by homologous recombination—providing puromycin resistance under the control of the SLC35F2 promoter (SI Appendix, Fig. S3A). From the clones surviving puromycin selection, four were chosen and genotyped. All four clones were homozygous knockouts for SLC35F2, with either no PCR amplicon observed for the wild-type (WT) allele or a band of the incorrect size (SI Appendix, Fig. S3B). Strikingly, 3-AcrylamidoPhenylBoronic acid (APB) Northern blot analysis, which can separate Q modified from unmodified tRNAs (18), revealed that in the absence of SLC35F2, all four HeLa cell lines were devoid of detectable Q modification in tRNAHis after incubation with Q (25 nM), contrasting with WT cells, where approximately 50 percent of the tRNA was Q-modified (Fig. 3 A, Upper). In the case of q nucleobase, in WT cells, all the tRNA was found to be fully Q-modified with the addition of the micronutrient at a concentration of 25 nM, but a dramatic reduction in modification was observed in the SLC35F2 knockout clones (Fig. 3 A, Lower). To validate and extend this finding, Clone 1 was selected for further analysis by treating cells with increasing concentrations (from 25 to 250 nM) of either the q-base or Q-nucleoside (Fig. 3B). Notably, at all concentrations tested Q failed to modify the tRNA in the SLC35F2 knockout cells (upper panel), whereas in the case of q, almost a 10-fold higher concentration was required, relative to WT cells, to completely modify the tRNA (lower panel). These data show that SLC35F2 is a unique transporter for Q-nucleoside in human cells and the primary high-affinity transporter for the uptake of q base.

SLC35F2 is the transmembrane transporter responsible for Q/q uptake in humans, S. pombe, and T. brucei. (A) tRNAHis is Q-modified in WT HeLa cells, but not in four SLC35F2 knockout candidate clones (1-4), as determined by APB Northern blot. Cells were incubated with Q (25 nM) or q (25 nM) for 6 h. (B) SLC35F2 knock-out clone 1 was incubated with increasing concentrations of q and Q as indicated for 6 h, and the Q-modification status of tRNAHis was analyzed. (C) Immunofluorescence images of HeLa cells 6 h posttransfection with GFP-tagged SLC35F2 plasmid. Nuclei stained in blue (Hoechst), SLC35F2 in green (Alexa Fluor 488 anti-GFP), F-actin in purple (Alexa Fluro 647 phalloidin), and Golgi in red (Alexa Fluor 555 anti-GM130). Magnification = 40× (n = 3). (D) WT and a qtp1∆ S. pombe strain were cultured in the absence (−) or presence of q/Q at the indicated concentrations, tRNA extracted, and analyzed by APB Northern using a tRNAAsp probe. (E) APB Northern analysis of Q-modification status of tRNATyr in WT and Δqtp1 T. brucei strains that were cultured in media supplemented with either complete or dialyzed FBS supplemented when noted with 25 nM Q or q. tRNA extracted from a strain deleted for the gene encoding TGT2, one paralog of TGT in T. brucei (19). Q-tRNA percentages were quantified using ImageJ.

The majority of members of the SLC35 family, whose substrates are known, transport nucleotide sugars and are localized to the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus (14). Therefore, it was of interest to determine the distribution of SLC35F2 (Fig. 3C). A green fluorescent protein (GFP) tagged version of the protein (C-terminus) was expressed in the HeLa cells knocked out for endogenous SLC35F2 protein. Cells were counterstained with phalloidin to distinguish F-actin (upper panels) and GM130 as a marker for the Golgi apparatus (lower panel). Localization to the plasma membrane was apparent, with closer inspection revealing a somewhat punctate distribution that may be indicative of coassociation with lipid rafts as has been described for some of the other solute carriers—albeit not SLC35 members—or interaction with endosomes that are trafficking to the trans-Golgi network as hinted at by an association with SNX2, a component of the retromer complex (20). In this regard, images also reveal a clear perinuclear signal for SLC35F2 which is indicative of the asymmetrical localization of the Golgi apparatus, as previously described (20) and confirmed by the overlapping signal (yellow) with the Golgi scaffolding protein marker GM130.

With reference to the Human Protein Atlas (21), a comparatively high protein expression of SLC35F2 is evident in the salivary gland, endocrine tissue, lymphoid tissue, bone marrow, and throughout the length of the gastrointestinal tract—duodenum, small intestine, colon, and rectum—the latter being suggestive of a role in q/Q uptake from the gut; https://www.proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000110660-SLC35F2/tissue.

SLC35F2 Homologs Are the Sole q/Q Transporters in S. pombe and T. brucei.Having shown that SLC35F2 was required for both q and Q transport in human cells, we investigated whether this was also the case in eukaryotes that encode only one SLC35F protein (Fig. 3 D and E). We focused on two single-cell eukaryotes where Q synthesis and function have been extensively studied: the fission yeast S. pombe (4, 10, 22–24) and the parasite T. brucei (19, 25, 26).The fission yeast S. pombe encodes an SLC35F1/F2 homolog SPCC320.08, (here renamed Qtp1 [Queuosine and queuine transporter 1]), which has no apparent homolog in S. cerevisiae [PomBase (27)]. To test whether Qtp1 transports q and/or Q in S. pombe, a qtp1∆ strain was constructed, and Q levels analyzed via APB Northerns in tRNAAsp extracted from cells grown in medium supplemented with either q or Q (Fig. 3D). In the presence of 10 nM q, WT cells showed partial Q modification of tRNAAsp, and 100 nM q resulted in full modification, as determined by APB Northern blotting. In contrast, in the qtp1∆ strain, tRNAAsp showed no Q modification of the tRNA even at the higher q concentration. Similarly, the qtp1∆ strain showed no Q modification of tRNAAsp when provided with the Q nucleoside, whereas the WT strain showed full modification.To study the function of the SLC35F2 homolog in T. brucei (ORF Tb927.4.320), here renamed Qtp1 as above for S. pombe, both alleles of the corresponding gene were deleted using the CRISPR/Cas9 system (SI Appendix, Fig. S4). We then extracted total RNA from WT and knockout cell lines and analyzed Q-content in tRNATyr (Fig. 3D), tRNAAsn and tRNAAsp (SI Appendix, Fig. S5) via APB Northern blotting. For this analysis, Q-content from cells grown in complete media (nondialyzed serum) was compared to cells grown in media containing dialyzed serum. No Q-tRNA was detected in cells grown with dialyzed serum, regardless of the presence or absence of Qtp1. This is expected given that serum is the only source of q/Q for T. brucei when grown in culture. Similar experiments were then performed by supplementing the dialyzed serum with q or Q (at 25 nM concentration, respectively). In this case, only WT cells showed detectable Q-tRNA, while Q-tRNA was undetectable in the qtp1 knockout cells even when the knockout cells were grown in complete media (Fig. 3E and SI Appendix, Fig. S5) or when the cultures were supplemented with 250 nM q (SI Appendix, Fig. S6).Taken together, these experiments show that in two organisms encoding only one member of the SLC35F2/Qtp1 family, this protein is the sole protein responsible for q and Q import.

SLC35F2 Homologs Are the Sole q/Q Transporters in S. pombe and T. brucei.

Having shown that SLC35F2 was required for both q and Q transport in human cells, we investigated whether this was also the case in eukaryotes that encode only one SLC35F protein (Fig. 3 D and E). We focused on two single-cell eukaryotes where Q synthesis and function have been extensively studied: the fission yeast S. pombe (4, 10, 22–24) and the parasite T. brucei (19, 25, 26).

The fission yeast S. pombe encodes an SLC35F1/F2 homolog SPCC320.08, (here renamed Qtp1 [Queuosine and queuine transporter 1]), which has no apparent homolog in S. cerevisiae [PomBase (27)]. To test whether Qtp1 transports q and/or Q in S. pombe, a qtp1∆ strain was constructed, and Q levels analyzed via APB Northerns in tRNAAsp extracted from cells grown in medium supplemented with either q or Q (Fig. 3D). In the presence of 10 nM q, WT cells showed partial Q modification of tRNAAsp, and 100 nM q resulted in full modification, as determined by APB Northern blotting. In contrast, in the qtp1∆ strain, tRNAAsp showed no Q modification of the tRNA even at the higher q concentration. Similarly, the qtp1∆ strain showed no Q modification of tRNAAsp when provided with the Q nucleoside, whereas the WT strain showed full modification.

To study the function of the SLC35F2 homolog in T. brucei (ORF Tb927.4.320), here renamed Qtp1 as above for S. pombe, both alleles of the corresponding gene were deleted using the CRISPR/Cas9 system (SI Appendix, Fig. S4). We then extracted total RNA from WT and knockout cell lines and analyzed Q-content in tRNATyr (Fig. 3D), tRNAAsn and tRNAAsp (SI Appendix, Fig. S5) via APB Northern blotting. For this analysis, Q-content from cells grown in complete media (nondialyzed serum) was compared to cells grown in media containing dialyzed serum. No Q-tRNA was detected in cells grown with dialyzed serum, regardless of the presence or absence of Qtp1. This is expected given that serum is the only source of q/Q for T. brucei when grown in culture. Similar experiments were then performed by supplementing the dialyzed serum with q or Q (at 25 nM concentration, respectively). In this case, only WT cells showed detectable Q-tRNA, while Q-tRNA was undetectable in the qtp1 knockout cells even when the knockout cells were grown in complete media (Fig. 3E and SI Appendix, Fig. S5) or when the cultures were supplemented with 250 nM q (SI Appendix, Fig. S6).

Taken together, these experiments show that in two organisms encoding only one member of the SLC35F2/Qtp1 family, this protein is the sole protein responsible for q and Q import.

SLC35F2 Is Required for Normal Proliferation in HeLa Cells but Not in S. pombe and T. brucei.A number of recent studies have highlighted the contribution of SLC35F2 overexpression to the progression of a variety of cancers, including non–small cell lung cancer (28), papillary thyroid cancer (29), and bladder cancer (30). In the latter two cases, the authors demonstrate that SLC35F2 behaves as an oncogene wherein depletion of the protein can inhibit cellular proliferation and tumorigenic properties, whereas ectopic expression can enhance malignant phenotypes. Indeed, analysis across a number of cancers has shown that high expression of SLC35F2 is a highly unfavorable prognostic factor for patient survival in melanoma, lung, cervical, renal, and pancreatic cancer: www.proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000110660-SLC35F2/cancer.It was therefore of interest to determine how knockout of SLC25F2 in HeLa cells could affect the proliferation rate. To evaluate this, IncuCyte time-lapse microscopy was employed, and the confluence of the cells (surface area covered) was calculated over a 96-h period through the acquisition of real-time images (SI Appendix, Fig. S7 A–C). A clear reduction in growth of the SLC35F2 knockout cells was apparent relative to WT controls in both the DMEM-Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) (containing queuine) and serum-free culture media (deficient in queuine), suggesting that the reduction in proliferation is not due to the depletion of the q/Q micronutrient. To examine this further, HeLa cells were grown in OptiPro medium supplemented with 1 µM queuine base; a 40-fold excess over the concentrations required for full modification as shown earlier. However, proliferation of the SLC35F2 knockout cells was not restored to that of WT cells confirming that the underlying cause of slowed proliferation is not a principal effect of q/Q deficiency.Growth of the T. brucei or S. pombe Qtp1 deficient strains was not affected (SI Appendix, Fig. S7 D and E), in agreement with the fact that Q in tRNA is not essential for growth in these organisms (4, 10, 19, 22–26).

SLC35F2 Is Required for Normal Proliferation in HeLa Cells but Not in S. pombe and T. brucei.

A number of recent studies have highlighted the contribution of SLC35F2 overexpression to the progression of a variety of cancers, including non–small cell lung cancer (28), papillary thyroid cancer (29), and bladder cancer (30). In the latter two cases, the authors demonstrate that SLC35F2 behaves as an oncogene wherein depletion of the protein can inhibit cellular proliferation and tumorigenic properties, whereas ectopic expression can enhance malignant phenotypes. Indeed, analysis across a number of cancers has shown that high expression of SLC35F2 is a highly unfavorable prognostic factor for patient survival in melanoma, lung, cervical, renal, and pancreatic cancer: www.proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000110660-SLC35F2/cancer.

It was therefore of interest to determine how knockout of SLC25F2 in HeLa cells could affect the proliferation rate. To evaluate this, IncuCyte time-lapse microscopy was employed, and the confluence of the cells (surface area covered) was calculated over a 96-h period through the acquisition of real-time images (SI Appendix, Fig. S7 A–C). A clear reduction in growth of the SLC35F2 knockout cells was apparent relative to WT controls in both the DMEM-Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) (containing queuine) and serum-free culture media (deficient in queuine), suggesting that the reduction in proliferation is not due to the depletion of the q/Q micronutrient. To examine this further, HeLa cells were grown in OptiPro medium supplemented with 1 µM queuine base; a 40-fold excess over the concentrations required for full modification as shown earlier. However, proliferation of the SLC35F2 knockout cells was not restored to that of WT cells confirming that the underlying cause of slowed proliferation is not a principal effect of q/Q deficiency.

Growth of the T. brucei or S. pombe Qtp1 deficient strains was not affected (SI Appendix, Fig. S7 D and E), in agreement with the fact that Q in tRNA is not essential for growth in these organisms (4, 10, 19, 22–26).

Analysis of q/Q Uptake and SLC35F2 Kinetics in HeLa Cells.Recent studies to determine the circulating levels of q in humans indicate a range of 1 to 10 nM, with higher levels reported in females (6, 31) but a surprising absence of detectable Q (6). It therefore was of interest to determine the substrate affinity and specificity of SLC35F2, to provide an indication of its physiological activity. Of note, the SLC35F2 solute carrier has previously been identified as a unique, high-specificity transporter for the small molecule anticancer agent YM155 (sepantronium bromide), with retroviral disruption in KBM7 cells conferring drug resistance to this molecule (32). Structurally, YM155 contains a naphthoquinone–imidazolium core substituted with a pyrazinylmethyl group and a pyrazine ring side chain, that shows little similarity to queuine, which comprises a pyrazolo[4,3-d]pyrimidine scaffold and cyclopentenyl aminomethyl side chain (SI Appendix, Fig. S8).To negate the interference of multiple downstream steps, the uptake kinetics of SLC35F2 for Q was determined in HeLa cells that were knocked out for QNG1 and therefore are incapable of converting Q to q (Fig. 4 A, Upper). Intracellular Q and Q-5′MP were quantified by LC-MS/MS and their additive concentration was used to measure uptake kinetics, providing a Km of 174 nM and a Vmax of 0.87 pmol/min (lower panel). To examine q uptake, HeLa cells deficient in Qtrt1 were exploited (Fig. 4 B, Upper), providing a Km of 67 nM for q uptake through both the SLC35F2 transporter and the unidentified secondary mechanism (lower panel). To obtain further data on the uptake kinetics of the unidentified transporter, we took advantage of the fact that YM155 is a high-specificity substrate for SLC35F2 uptake and thus capable of competitively inhibiting the transporter (Fig. 4 C, Upper) (32). Saturating concentrations of YM155 were added to the Qtrt1 deficient HeLa cells to inhibit q uptake, revealing that the second transporter for q has a higher Km of 260 nM (lower panel), which agrees with previous literature wherein both a low-Km and high-Km transporter for the q nucleobase had been demonstrated (7). Together, the data indicate that the SLC35F2 transporter is uniquely tasked for Q uptake in humans with a Km that is comparatively high relative to that of q and which could indicate differential roles for the transporter in the uptake of each form of the micronutrient.Fig. 4.Analysis of q/Q uptake kinetics and specificity of SLC35F2 in human cells. (A) Uptake of Q was examined by adding increasing concentrations of Q (25, 50, 100, 250 nM) over four timepoints (15, 30, 45, and 60 min) to QNG1-knockout HeLa cells, followed by methanol:water extraction from cell pellets and LC-MS/MS analysis to quantify the intracellular Q and Q-5′MP concentrations. (B and C) Similar analysis was performed for q in Qtrt1-knockout HeLa cells that were untreated (B) or administered the known SLC35F2 inhibitor YM155 (C) at saturating concentrations, before methanol:water extraction and LC-MS/MS analysis. (D and E) Import of q and Q by SLC35F2 was inhibited by YM155, but not other nucleobases or nucleosides. To WT or SLC35F2 knockout HeLa cells, a fixed concentration of Q (25 nM) or q (25 nM) was added, as indicated, in the absence (−) or presence of saturating concentrations of nucleobases or nucleosides (25 µM) or YM155 (25 µM). Total RNA was extracted and the Q-modification status of tRNAHis analyzed by APB Northern blotting. Nucleobases—guanine (G), adenine (A), cytosine (C), thymine (T), uracil (U), hypoxanthine (H). Nucleosides - guanosine (Guo), adenosine (Ado), cytidine (Cyd), thymidine (Thy), uridine (Urd), inosine (Ino). Q-tRNA percentages were quantified using ImageJ.To determine how SLC35F2 activity contributes to q/Q transport and distribution, WT and SLC35F2 knockout HeLa cells were grown in OptiPrep serum-free medium and supplemented with increasing concentrations of either synthetic queuine or queuosine for 48 h before being analyzed by APB Northern blot and LC/MS (SI Appendix, Figs. S9 and S10). A concentration of 25 nM queuine was required for full modification of tRNA (SI Appendix, Fig. S9A). Notably, the intracellular concentration of queuine never rose above 10 pmol despite approximately 20-fold higher concentration of queuine being present in the medium (SI Appendix, Fig. S9 B, Upper). Both Q and queuosine 5′-monophosphate (Q5′-MP) were detectable in the cellular cytosolic fraction (SI Appendix, Fig. S9 B, Lower), which necessarily has arisen from tRNA breakdown following queuine incorporation into tRNA, and therefore, these metabolites are present at comparatively lower levels. Q export from the cytosol to the media is evident in the cells supplemented with the highest concentrations of queuine (100 and 250 nM). By contrast, in SLC35F2 knockout HeLa cells (SI Appendix, Fig. S9C), no Q was detectable in the media and the cytosolic levels of q are 10 times less than WT cells, indicating that the uptake of q has been attenuated as expected. This attenuation of q uptake is particularly evident at lower concentrations (1 to 50 nM), where q levels in the media of WT cells are depleted but remain in the media of SLC35F2 deficient cells.In the case of Q, the addition of 25 nM to WT cells is likewise sufficient for full modification of tRNA (SI Appendix, Fig. S10A). With increasing concentrations of Q added to the media, there is a linear increase in q being released to the medium (SI Appendix, Fig. S10 B, Upper) and a parallel increase in intracellular Q and Q-5′MP (SI Appendix, Fig. S10 B, Lower). The principal source for extracellular q is likely the result of intracellular phosphorylation of Q to Q-5′MP and subsequent hydrolysis by QNG1. Similar to the previous study, it is notable that the intracellular q levels in Q-supplemented cells do not increase beyond 10 pmol. Although small amounts of intracellular q/Q are detectable—considered to arise from contamination of the synthetic Q with small amounts of q—in the SLC35F2 knockout cells, no detectable q is released into the medium following Q addition, aligning with the inability to take up the nucleoside (SI Appendix, Fig. S10C).Together, the data show that the uptake of q and Q is greatly affected in the absence of SC35F2 and further suggest that a mechanism exists to eliminate excess q from the cell once tRNA is fully Q-modified.

Analysis of q/Q Uptake and SLC35F2 Kinetics in HeLa Cells.

Recent studies to determine the circulating levels of q in humans indicate a range of 1 to 10 nM, with higher levels reported in females (6, 31) but a surprising absence of detectable Q (6). It therefore was of interest to determine the substrate affinity and specificity of SLC35F2, to provide an indication of its physiological activity. Of note, the SLC35F2 solute carrier has previously been identified as a unique, high-specificity transporter for the small molecule anticancer agent YM155 (sepantronium bromide), with retroviral disruption in KBM7 cells conferring drug resistance to this molecule (32). Structurally, YM155 contains a naphthoquinone–imidazolium core substituted with a pyrazinylmethyl group and a pyrazine ring side chain, that shows little similarity to queuine, which comprises a pyrazolo[4,3-d]pyrimidine scaffold and cyclopentenyl aminomethyl side chain (SI Appendix, Fig. S8).

To negate the interference of multiple downstream steps, the uptake kinetics of SLC35F2 for Q was determined in HeLa cells that were knocked out for QNG1 and therefore are incapable of converting Q to q (Fig. 4 A, Upper). Intracellular Q and Q-5′MP were quantified by LC-MS/MS and their additive concentration was used to measure uptake kinetics, providing a Km of 174 nM and a Vmax of 0.87 pmol/min (lower panel). To examine q uptake, HeLa cells deficient in Qtrt1 were exploited (Fig. 4 B, Upper), providing a Km of 67 nM for q uptake through both the SLC35F2 transporter and the unidentified secondary mechanism (lower panel). To obtain further data on the uptake kinetics of the unidentified transporter, we took advantage of the fact that YM155 is a high-specificity substrate for SLC35F2 uptake and thus capable of competitively inhibiting the transporter (Fig. 4 C, Upper) (32). Saturating concentrations of YM155 were added to the Qtrt1 deficient HeLa cells to inhibit q uptake, revealing that the second transporter for q has a higher Km of 260 nM (lower panel), which agrees with previous literature wherein both a low-Km and high-Km transporter for the q nucleobase had been demonstrated (7). Together, the data indicate that the SLC35F2 transporter is uniquely tasked for Q uptake in humans with a Km that is comparatively high relative to that of q and which could indicate differential roles for the transporter in the uptake of each form of the micronutrient.

Analysis of q/Q uptake kinetics and specificity of SLC35F2 in human cells. (A) Uptake of Q was examined by adding increasing concentrations of Q (25, 50, 100, 250 nM) over four timepoints (15, 30, 45, and 60 min) to QNG1-knockout HeLa cells, followed by methanol:water extraction from cell pellets and LC-MS/MS analysis to quantify the intracellular Q and Q-5′MP concentrations. (B and C) Similar analysis was performed for q in Qtrt1-knockout HeLa cells that were untreated (B) or administered the known SLC35F2 inhibitor YM155 (C) at saturating concentrations, before methanol:water extraction and LC-MS/MS analysis. (D and E) Import of q and Q by SLC35F2 was inhibited by YM155, but not other nucleobases or nucleosides. To WT or SLC35F2 knockout HeLa cells, a fixed concentration of Q (25 nM) or q (25 nM) was added, as indicated, in the absence (−) or presence of saturating concentrations of nucleobases or nucleosides (25 µM) or YM155 (25 µM). Total RNA was extracted and the Q-modification status of tRNAHis analyzed by APB Northern blotting. Nucleobases—guanine (G), adenine (A), cytosine (C), thymine (T), uracil (U), hypoxanthine (H). Nucleosides - guanosine (Guo), adenosine (Ado), cytidine (Cyd), thymidine (Thy), uridine (Urd), inosine (Ino). Q-tRNA percentages were quantified using ImageJ.

To determine how SLC35F2 activity contributes to q/Q transport and distribution, WT and SLC35F2 knockout HeLa cells were grown in OptiPrep serum-free medium and supplemented with increasing concentrations of either synthetic queuine or queuosine for 48 h before being analyzed by APB Northern blot and LC/MS (SI Appendix, Figs. S9 and S10). A concentration of 25 nM queuine was required for full modification of tRNA (SI Appendix, Fig. S9A). Notably, the intracellular concentration of queuine never rose above 10 pmol despite approximately 20-fold higher concentration of queuine being present in the medium (SI Appendix, Fig. S9 B, Upper). Both Q and queuosine 5′-monophosphate (Q5′-MP) were detectable in the cellular cytosolic fraction (SI Appendix, Fig. S9 B, Lower), which necessarily has arisen from tRNA breakdown following queuine incorporation into tRNA, and therefore, these metabolites are present at comparatively lower levels. Q export from the cytosol to the media is evident in the cells supplemented with the highest concentrations of queuine (100 and 250 nM). By contrast, in SLC35F2 knockout HeLa cells (SI Appendix, Fig. S9C), no Q was detectable in the media and the cytosolic levels of q are 10 times less than WT cells, indicating that the uptake of q has been attenuated as expected. This attenuation of q uptake is particularly evident at lower concentrations (1 to 50 nM), where q levels in the media of WT cells are depleted but remain in the media of SLC35F2 deficient cells.

In the case of Q, the addition of 25 nM to WT cells is likewise sufficient for full modification of tRNA (SI Appendix, Fig. S10A). With increasing concentrations of Q added to the media, there is a linear increase in q being released to the medium (SI Appendix, Fig. S10 B, Upper) and a parallel increase in intracellular Q and Q-5′MP (SI Appendix, Fig. S10 B, Lower). The principal source for extracellular q is likely the result of intracellular phosphorylation of Q to Q-5′MP and subsequent hydrolysis by QNG1. Similar to the previous study, it is notable that the intracellular q levels in Q-supplemented cells do not increase beyond 10 pmol. Although small amounts of intracellular q/Q are detectable—considered to arise from contamination of the synthetic Q with small amounts of q—in the SLC35F2 knockout cells, no detectable q is released into the medium following Q addition, aligning with the inability to take up the nucleoside (SI Appendix, Fig. S10C).

Together, the data show that the uptake of q and Q is greatly affected in the absence of SC35F2 and further suggest that a mechanism exists to eliminate excess q from the cell once tRNA is fully Q-modified.

The SLC35F2 Transporter Is Highly Specific for q/Q Micronutrient Uptake.Earlier studies showed that transporters for q are specific and that uptake cannot be outcompeted by a variety of nucleobases or nucleotides (7). Using the level of Q-modified tRNA as an indirect indicator of the ability of cells to import Q or q, competitive uptake studies were performed using a range of nucleosides and nucleobases. In all cases in WT cells, none of the canonical nucleosides were capable of competing against Q-nucleoside uptake (Fig. 4D). Similarly, none of the tested nucleobases competed against q uptake (Fig. 4E) at saturating concentrations (25 µM versus 25 nM) except for the anticancer drug YM155, which effectively outcompeted Q/q import. This further validates SLC35F2 as the high-specificity transporter for both q and Q, both of which possess a cyclopentene-diol moiety not shared with canonical nucleobase or nucleoside molecules.

The SLC35F2 Transporter Is Highly Specific for q/Q Micronutrient Uptake.

Earlier studies showed that transporters for q are specific and that uptake cannot be outcompeted by a variety of nucleobases or nucleotides (7). Using the level of Q-modified tRNA as an indirect indicator of the ability of cells to import Q or q, competitive uptake studies were performed using a range of nucleosides and nucleobases. In all cases in WT cells, none of the canonical nucleosides were capable of competing against Q-nucleoside uptake (Fig. 4D). Similarly, none of the tested nucleobases competed against q uptake (Fig. 4E) at saturating concentrations (25 µM versus 25 nM) except for the anticancer drug YM155, which effectively outcompeted Q/q import. This further validates SLC35F2 as the high-specificity transporter for both q and Q, both of which possess a cyclopentene-diol moiety not shared with canonical nucleobase or nucleoside molecules.

Structural Insights into SLC35F2/Qtp1 Proteins.Human SLC35F2, T. brucei Qtp1 (ORF Tb927.4.320), and S. pombe Qtp1 (SPCC320.08) are all members of the SLC35F subfamily of the large solute carrier family 35 (SLC35). SLC35 proteins are highly conserved TM proteins typically composed of 10 α-helices (10-TM) arranged in two bundles of five helices each (14). These bundles are related by a pseudo-twofold symmetry axis running parallel to the membrane. Architecturally, they are part of the Drug/Metabolite Exporter (DME) structural superfamily (33) and operate using an alternating-access mechanism to facilitate solute exchange across the membrane. This process involves two gates, formed by specific helical pairs, that alternately open and close on the opposite sides of the DME fold, enabling the central solute-binding site to access solutes from either side of the membrane. To date, the SLC35 family comprises 32 members classified into seven subfamilies (SLC35A-G) based on sequence similarity and phylogenetic analyses, with members within a subfamily differentiated by the solutes they transport. For the majority of SLC35 proteins (21 of the 32 members), the substrates are unknown (orphan transporters) (28), while most of the functionally characterized members (mostly in subfamilies A-D) are Nucleotide Sugar Transporters (NSTs) located in the Golgi and endoplasmic reticulum membranes, where they transport specific nucleotide sugars into the lumens of these organelles to serve as substrates for glycosylation reactions (34–37). NSTs use an antiport mechanism and typically utilize the corresponding luminal nucleoside monophosphates as their antiport molecules (38). Additionally, members of the SLC35B subfamily include an ATP/ADP exchanger (39) and 3′-phosphoadenosine 5′-phosphosulfate (PAPS) transporters (40). In the SLC35F subfamily, which comprises six members, none have been reported to function as an NST, and only one has been functionally characterized and found to transport thiamine across the plasma membrane [SLC35F3 (41)].We built a structure-based multisequence alignment of human, S. pombe, and T. brucei SLC35F2/Qtp1 proteins based on the superposition of tertiary structures predicted by the AI-based tool AlphaFold (42) (SI Appendix, Fig. S11). Overall, the three proteins exhibit 14% sequence identity and 31% similarity. Their predicted structures share the common 10-TM transporter core and possess different, putatively extramembranous, N- and C-terminal regions that could not be modeled with confidence (SI Appendix, Fig. S11A). The 10-TM core is most similar to the crystal structure of the CMP-sialic acid transporter SLC35A1 (14, 43) [e.g., mouse CMP-sialic acid transporter, PDB ID 6OH3, r.m.s.d. 3.3 Å over 247 Cα atoms, 13% sequence identity (44)]. [e.g., mouse CMP-sialic acid transporter, PDB ID 6OH3, r.m.s.d. 3.3 Å over 247 Cα atoms, 13% sequence identity (44)] In terms of their topology and orientation in the membrane, SLC35 proteins are classified as type III integral membrane proteins, i.e., their N and C termini face the cytoplasm (14). Notably, the predicted structures of human, S. pombe, and T. brucei SLC35F2/Qtp1 proteins exhibit a biased distribution of positively charged amino acids (SI Appendix, Fig. S11B), consistent with the “positive-inside rule” for integral membrane proteins, whereby basic amino acids cluster at the cytoplasmic interface (45). Analysis of the topology of the core membrane-spanning domain using the online tool Deep TMHMM (46) suggests that the N and C termini are located on the cytoplasmic side (SI Appendix, Fig. S11A). These observations are consistent with the orientation of a type III integral membrane protein (SI Appendix, Fig. S11A).

Structural Insights into SLC35F2/Qtp1 Proteins.

Human SLC35F2, T. brucei Qtp1 (ORF Tb927.4.320), and S. pombe Qtp1 (SPCC320.08) are all members of the SLC35F subfamily of the large solute carrier family 35 (SLC35). SLC35 proteins are highly conserved TM proteins typically composed of 10 α-helices (10-TM) arranged in two bundles of five helices each (14). These bundles are related by a pseudo-twofold symmetry axis running parallel to the membrane. Architecturally, they are part of the Drug/Metabolite Exporter (DME) structural superfamily (33) and operate using an alternating-access mechanism to facilitate solute exchange across the membrane. This process involves two gates, formed by specific helical pairs, that alternately open and close on the opposite sides of the DME fold, enabling the central solute-binding site to access solutes from either side of the membrane. To date, the SLC35 family comprises 32 members classified into seven subfamilies (SLC35A-G) based on sequence similarity and phylogenetic analyses, with members within a subfamily differentiated by the solutes they transport. For the majority of SLC35 proteins (21 of the 32 members), the substrates are unknown (orphan transporters) (28), while most of the functionally characterized members (mostly in subfamilies A-D) are Nucleotide Sugar Transporters (NSTs) located in the Golgi and endoplasmic reticulum membranes, where they transport specific nucleotide sugars into the lumens of these organelles to serve as substrates for glycosylation reactions (34–37). NSTs use an antiport mechanism and typically utilize the corresponding luminal nucleoside monophosphates as their antiport molecules (38). Additionally, members of the SLC35B subfamily include an ATP/ADP exchanger (39) and 3′-phosphoadenosine 5′-phosphosulfate (PAPS) transporters (40). In the SLC35F subfamily, which comprises six members, none have been reported to function as an NST, and only one has been functionally characterized and found to transport thiamine across the plasma membrane [SLC35F3 (41)].

We built a structure-based multisequence alignment of human, S. pombe, and T. brucei SLC35F2/Qtp1 proteins based on the superposition of tertiary structures predicted by the AI-based tool AlphaFold (42) (SI Appendix, Fig. S11). Overall, the three proteins exhibit 14% sequence identity and 31% similarity. Their predicted structures share the common 10-TM transporter core and possess different, putatively extramembranous, N- and C-terminal regions that could not be modeled with confidence (SI Appendix, Fig. S11A). The 10-TM core is most similar to the crystal structure of the CMP-sialic acid transporter SLC35A1 (14, 43) [e.g., mouse CMP-sialic acid transporter, PDB ID 6OH3, r.m.s.d. 3.3 Å over 247 Cα atoms, 13% sequence identity (44)]. [e.g., mouse CMP-sialic acid transporter, PDB ID 6OH3, r.m.s.d. 3.3 Å over 247 Cα atoms, 13% sequence identity (44)] In terms of their topology and orientation in the membrane, SLC35 proteins are classified as type III integral membrane proteins, i.e., their N and C termini face the cytoplasm (14). Notably, the predicted structures of human, S. pombe, and T. brucei SLC35F2/Qtp1 proteins exhibit a biased distribution of positively charged amino acids (SI Appendix, Fig. S11B), consistent with the “positive-inside rule” for integral membrane proteins, whereby basic amino acids cluster at the cytoplasmic interface (45). Analysis of the topology of the core membrane-spanning domain using the online tool Deep TMHMM (46) suggests that the N and C termini are located on the cytoplasmic side (SI Appendix, Fig. S11A). These observations are consistent with the orientation of a type III integral membrane protein (SI Appendix, Fig. S11A).

DiscussionSLC35F2 belongs to the SLC35 solute superfamily and is a part of the F subfamily, which mostly consists of orphan transporters whose substrates and physiological function(s) are yet to be determined (36). Herein, we demonstrate by homozygous disruption in human HeLa cells that SLC35F2 functions as a key transporter for queuine and queuosine. We show that it is the sole high-affinity plasma membrane transporter for the Q nucleoside and the primary high-affinity transporter for the nucleobase q in human cells. Furthermore, it is the exclusive transporter of both q and Q in T. brucei and S. pombe and thus has been renamed Qtp1 in those two species.Previous literature has shown that q uptake can occur by two different transporters in human cells, a low Km (30 nM) component demonstrating rapid saturation and a high Km component (350 nM) showing a slower linear uptake, but their identity was not determined (7). Here, we demonstrate that SLC35F2 accounts for high-affinity Km q transporter activity (67 nM) and that there exists an independent lower affinity transporter for q (259 nM) that is evident from competitive inhibition of SLC35F2 with saturating concentrations of the anticancer compound YM155. Notably, the Km for q is higher than the maximum levels determined in human serum under normal conditions of ~25 nM (6, 31) and could therefore indicate that the levels of q in serum are capable of reaching higher levels, such as after a meal replete with q/Q. In the case of Q, its levels have not been detectable in human plasma (6). Therefore, the observed Km of 174 nM could suggest SLC35F2’s role in Q uptake is limited to environments that are rich in this micronutrient, such as the human gut, where Q is liberated from tRNA turnover either from the microbiome or from food. In this regard, an analysis of tissue-specific expression data [(47 and Dataset S4] finds that there is a heavy propensity for SLC35F2 to be expressed in the human alimentary canal, suggesting that SLC35F2 is responsible for the active transport of Q/q during the digestive process. In our previous work, we observed that the liver has distinctly higher levels of the Q salvage enzyme QNG1 (4). It could therefore be envisaged that Q is transported from the gut by SLC35F2 and delivered to the liver for cleavage by QNG1, which then serves to liberate the q base for subsequent release into the serum and wider distribution throughout the body. Whether the SLC35F2 transporter also functions in a reversible manner to release q to the extracellular space is an outstanding question.With relevance to the above, it is interesting to note that in our analysis of q/Q uptake, the intracellular levels of queuine base reached maximal steady-state levels (i.e., 10 pmol) when either excess queuine or queuosine nucleoside were added to cells, with a concomitant export of queuine to the growth medium. Ostensibly, intracellular queuine levels are maintained at a set level in the cell. The mechanism behind such control is unknown. However, it could be linked to the Q-modification status of the tRNA since queuine export occurred at the concentration where the tRNA becomes fully modified. A further possible control point could be the sensing of intracellular Q-5′MP that is generated directly from Q-nucleoside via an unidentified kinase or through tRNA turnover (4). The interrelationship between tRNA Q-modification, intracellular queuine levels, and the export of excess micronutrient is an outstanding question that has significance to the broader physiological question of how q/Q uptake and distribution is managed in the body.It is interesting that the blood-borne parasite T. brucei—being auxotrophic for q/Q, similar to other eukaryotes—exploits a homologous transporter to SLC35F2 for uptake, termed Qtp1 in this work. In this regard, tRNA from blood-stream trypanosomes shows a greater level of Q-modification relative to the procyclic form that resides in the midgut of the tsetse fly (25), a difference that could potentially be explained by differential expression of the Qtp1 transporter or differential control on micronutrient uptake.The SLC35F2 gene was first identified during the construction of a transcription map of the ATM gene locus located on chromosome region 11q23, which is associated with the genetic disorder ataxia–telangiectasia (48). Subsequently, an analysis of SLC35F2 mRNA expression by RT-PCR revealed that it is highest in human adult salivary glands (47). Previous studies on SLC35F2 have linked its expression to the progression of several forms of cancer (49). For example, high levels of SLC35F2 expression have been identified in non–small cell lung carcinoma tissue (under the name LSCC-3), suggesting its use as a prognostic biomarker (28). In HeLa cells, SLC35F2 has been shown to be a substrate for the mitotic-associated E3 ubiquitin ligase anaphase promoting complex/cyclosome-Cdh1 (APC/C-Cdh1) which promotes its degradation through the 26S proteosome (50). Silencing of APC/C-Cdh1 in HeLa cells promoted in vitro cell proliferation, colony formation, migration, and invasion (50). Moreover, elevated levels of SLC35F2 have been associated with papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC), and inhibiting SLC35F2 expression was shown to suppress the malignant phenotype of PTC (29). Also, SLC35F2 shows oncogenic behavior, promoting cell proliferation and metastasis in H1299 lung cancer cells (51). Furthermore, SLC35F2 is highly expressed in human pluripotent stem cells, which underlies the high cytotoxicity of YM155 in these cells (52). Given our identification of SLC35F2 as an import molecule for q and Q, one interpretation of its oncogenic activity is that its overexpression increases cellular levels of q/Q and thus promotes higher Q34 modification of tRNAs. This in turn may give malignant cells a selective advantage over normal cells. Our studies show that the loss of SLC35F2 results in a decreased rate of cellular proliferation of human HeLa cells—a cell line with poor tumorigenic potential. However, the addition of queuine at concentrations capable of leading to full tRNA modification through the secondary transporter (i.e., 1 µM) did not reverse the growth defect suggesting that q/Q supply is not the sole underpinning cause. It is possible that SLC35F2 has substrate specificities beyond the q/Q micronutrients that contribute to the growth defect since other SLC35 family members have been shown to have a variety of substrate specificities and redundance in their activities (14). In this regard, it is curious that the transporter is localized to the Golgi apparatus. Other family members have been shown to be essential for the translocation of nucleotide sugars across ER and Golgi membranes for glycan (14). Whether q/Q or another secondary substrate of SLC35F2 would have a role in this process is an outstanding question.Overall, our current findings, elucidating the role of SLC35F2 in q/Q import deepen our understanding of how these micronutrients are managed in eukaryotic organisms and provide fruitful opportunities to understand this transporter’s involvement in cancer progression.

SLC35F2 belongs to the SLC35 solute superfamily and is a part of the F subfamily, which mostly consists of orphan transporters whose substrates and physiological function(s) are yet to be determined (36). Herein, we demonstrate by homozygous disruption in human HeLa cells that SLC35F2 functions as a key transporter for queuine and queuosine. We show that it is the sole high-affinity plasma membrane transporter for the Q nucleoside and the primary high-affinity transporter for the nucleobase q in human cells. Furthermore, it is the exclusive transporter of both q and Q in T. brucei and S. pombe and thus has been renamed Qtp1 in those two species.

Previous literature has shown that q uptake can occur by two different transporters in human cells, a low Km (30 nM) component demonstrating rapid saturation and a high Km component (350 nM) showing a slower linear uptake, but their identity was not determined (7). Here, we demonstrate that SLC35F2 accounts for high-affinity Km q transporter activity (67 nM) and that there exists an independent lower affinity transporter for q (259 nM) that is evident from competitive inhibition of SLC35F2 with saturating concentrations of the anticancer compound YM155. Notably, the Km for q is higher than the maximum levels determined in human serum under normal conditions of ~25 nM (6, 31) and could therefore indicate that the levels of q in serum are capable of reaching higher levels, such as after a meal replete with q/Q. In the case of Q, its levels have not been detectable in human plasma (6). Therefore, the observed Km of 174 nM could suggest SLC35F2’s role in Q uptake is limited to environments that are rich in this micronutrient, such as the human gut, where Q is liberated from tRNA turnover either from the microbiome or from food. In this regard, an analysis of tissue-specific expression data [(47 and Dataset S4] finds that there is a heavy propensity for SLC35F2 to be expressed in the human alimentary canal, suggesting that SLC35F2 is responsible for the active transport of Q/q during the digestive process. In our previous work, we observed that the liver has distinctly higher levels of the Q salvage enzyme QNG1 (4). It could therefore be envisaged that Q is transported from the gut by SLC35F2 and delivered to the liver for cleavage by QNG1, which then serves to liberate the q base for subsequent release into the serum and wider distribution throughout the body. Whether the SLC35F2 transporter also functions in a reversible manner to release q to the extracellular space is an outstanding question.

With relevance to the above, it is interesting to note that in our analysis of q/Q uptake, the intracellular levels of queuine base reached maximal steady-state levels (i.e., 10 pmol) when either excess queuine or queuosine nucleoside were added to cells, with a concomitant export of queuine to the growth medium. Ostensibly, intracellular queuine levels are maintained at a set level in the cell. The mechanism behind such control is unknown. However, it could be linked to the Q-modification status of the tRNA since queuine export occurred at the concentration where the tRNA becomes fully modified. A further possible control point could be the sensing of intracellular Q-5′MP that is generated directly from Q-nucleoside via an unidentified kinase or through tRNA turnover (4). The interrelationship between tRNA Q-modification, intracellular queuine levels, and the export of excess micronutrient is an outstanding question that has significance to the broader physiological question of how q/Q uptake and distribution is managed in the body.

It is interesting that the blood-borne parasite T. brucei—being auxotrophic for q/Q, similar to other eukaryotes—exploits a homologous transporter to SLC35F2 for uptake, termed Qtp1 in this work. In this regard, tRNA from blood-stream trypanosomes shows a greater level of Q-modification relative to the procyclic form that resides in the midgut of the tsetse fly (25), a difference that could potentially be explained by differential expression of the Qtp1 transporter or differential control on micronutrient uptake.

The SLC35F2 gene was first identified during the construction of a transcription map of the ATM gene locus located on chromosome region 11q23, which is associated with the genetic disorder ataxia–telangiectasia (48). Subsequently, an analysis of SLC35F2 mRNA expression by RT-PCR revealed that it is highest in human adult salivary glands (47). Previous studies on SLC35F2 have linked its expression to the progression of several forms of cancer (49). For example, high levels of SLC35F2 expression have been identified in non–small cell lung carcinoma tissue (under the name LSCC-3), suggesting its use as a prognostic biomarker (28). In HeLa cells, SLC35F2 has been shown to be a substrate for the mitotic-associated E3 ubiquitin ligase anaphase promoting complex/cyclosome-Cdh1 (APC/C-Cdh1) which promotes its degradation through the 26S proteosome (50). Silencing of APC/C-Cdh1 in HeLa cells promoted in vitro cell proliferation, colony formation, migration, and invasion (50). Moreover, elevated levels of SLC35F2 have been associated with papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC), and inhibiting SLC35F2 expression was shown to suppress the malignant phenotype of PTC (29). Also, SLC35F2 shows oncogenic behavior, promoting cell proliferation and metastasis in H1299 lung cancer cells (51). Furthermore, SLC35F2 is highly expressed in human pluripotent stem cells, which underlies the high cytotoxicity of YM155 in these cells (52). Given our identification of SLC35F2 as an import molecule for q and Q, one interpretation of its oncogenic activity is that its overexpression increases cellular levels of q/Q and thus promotes higher Q34 modification of tRNAs. This in turn may give malignant cells a selective advantage over normal cells. Our studies show that the loss of SLC35F2 results in a decreased rate of cellular proliferation of human HeLa cells—a cell line with poor tumorigenic potential. However, the addition of queuine at concentrations capable of leading to full tRNA modification through the secondary transporter (i.e., 1 µM) did not reverse the growth defect suggesting that q/Q supply is not the sole underpinning cause. It is possible that SLC35F2 has substrate specificities beyond the q/Q micronutrients that contribute to the growth defect since other SLC35 family members have been shown to have a variety of substrate specificities and redundance in their activities (14). In this regard, it is curious that the transporter is localized to the Golgi apparatus. Other family members have been shown to be essential for the translocation of nucleotide sugars across ER and Golgi membranes for glycan (14). Whether q/Q or another secondary substrate of SLC35F2 would have a role in this process is an outstanding question.

Overall, our current findings, elucidating the role of SLC35F2 in q/Q import deepen our understanding of how these micronutrients are managed in eukaryotic organisms and provide fruitful opportunities to understand this transporter’s involvement in cancer progression.

Materials and MethodsThe in silico methods are given below. The growth conditions, mutant constructions, and analytical methods for Q/q detection and transport assays for HeLa, T. brucei, and S. pombe cells are given in the supplemental methods section.Bioinformatic Analyses.The workflow for searching for candidates of Q precursor transmembrane transporters comprised three steps. First, QTRT− and QTRT+ organisms were selected for comparative genomic analysis (SI Appendix, Fig. S1 Step I). To identify the QTRT− Eukaryotes, 245,896,766 protein sequences and metadata were retrieved from the UniProt database (www.uniprot.org/help/downloads). Homologs of the human QTRT1 (UniProt ID Q9BXR0) were searched from the proteomes of 10,768 taxa that contained at least 5,000 protein entries using DIAMOND v2.1.8 (53) with the setting “--very-sensitive --matrix BLOSUM45 --evalue 0.001 -k0.” Four taxa of the Eukaryota superkingdom (including Sar, Viridiplantae, Fungi, and Metazoa) that comprised at least ten QTRT− organisms (Dataset S5) were subjected to further analyses. To ensure that all Qtrt1 genes were called, Qtrt1 coding sequences were retrieved using tBLASTn (54) searching the NCBI nt and wgs databases (55) limited to genomes from these four taxa. Organisms without hits at an E-value of 0.001 and 20% minimum identity were retained as QTRT−. Organisms encoding QTRT1 proteins between 300 and 500 amino acids in length were identified as QTRT+. These organisms were then sorted in descending order based on the number of proteins in any given taxa with at least four transmembrane domains, and this information was used to select approx. 200 organisms in each rank with criteria in Dataset S6. The QTRT− and QTRT+ organisms are listed in Datasets S3 and S7–S9. Potential transporter families from both QTRT+ and QTRT− organisms were then clustered based on sequence similarity [using MMseqs2 (56) with --cov-mode 0; SI Appendix, Fig. S1 Step II]. Clustering criteria for minimum coverage and sequence identity were tested in increments from 5 to 50%. A 30% threshold for both criteria was chosen for separation between homologous families as the number of proteins in each cluster sharply decreased at this cut-off (Dataset S10). Finally, the potential transporter subfamilies clusters were given scores as follows: The presence of a family member in a given QTRT+ organism or its absence in a given QTRT− organism was scored by multiplying by 1, while the presence of a family member in a QTRT− organism or its absence in a QTRT+ organism was penalized by multiplying by −1 (SI Appendix, Fig. S1 Step III). The score of each family was normalized by the expected maximum score (present in all QTRT+ organisms and absent in QTRT− organisms) so it fell within the range of −1 to 1. The scores of the top 200 candidates for the four ranks are listed in Dataset S1. The scripts used in the workflow are available at https://github.com/vdclab/published_scripts/blob/main/workflow_identifying_Q_transporter_candidates.sh.SSNs.SSNs were generated using the Enzyme Function Initiative (EFI) analytic suite (57) and visualized using Cytoscape (3.10.1) (58). 5,782 sequences for the SLC35F1/F2 solute transporter family in Eukaryota were retrieved with the InterPro accession (59) of “IPR052221” through the “Family” option of EFI-EST (EFI Enzyme Similarity Tool) (57). The initial SSN was generated with an alignment score threshold (AST) set such that each connection (edge) represented a sequence identity above 40%. The obtained SSN was first colored by the presence and absence of QTRT in each organism. More stringent SSNs were then created by gradually increasing the AST in increments (usually by 10). This process was iterated until clusters containing nodes from QTRT− organisms were separated from those comprising nodes from QTRT+ organisms. Clusters with less than 10 sequences were hidden for better visualization. The UniProt IDs of IPR05221 family sequences in the SSN are listed in Dataset S11.Phylogenetic Analysis of SLC35F1/F2 Family Proteins.34 IPR05221 family sequences across different clades/kingdoms and three outgroup sequences, SLC35B1-4/HUT1 were aligned using MUSCLE v5.2 (60) and trimmed using BMGE v1.12 (61) with matrix BLOSUM30. The maximum likelihood tree was generated using FastTree v2.1.11 (62) with -lg -cat 20 -gamma model and bootstrap (1,000 replicates) and visualized by iTOL v6.9.1 (63) The QTRT− organisms are colored in red. The branches were colored by clades or kingdoms, and those with bootstrap support values higher than 0.7 were indicated by blue dots. The sequences used in the tree are listed in Dataset S12.Sequence and Structure Alignment.Structural models of SLC35F2 sequences from humans, S. pombe strain 972/ATCC 24843, and T. brucei strain 927/4 (UniProt IDs Q8IXU6, O59785, and Q57UU3, respectively) were generated using AlphaFold v4 (42) and aligned in PROMALS3D (64). The resulting structure-based multisequence alignment was visualized using ESPript server v3.0 (65).

Materials and Methods

The in silico methods are given below. The growth conditions, mutant constructions, and analytical methods for Q/q detection and transport assays for HeLa, T. brucei, and S. pombe cells are given in the supplemental methods section.

Bioinformatic Analyses.The workflow for searching for candidates of Q precursor transmembrane transporters comprised three steps. First, QTRT− and QTRT+ organisms were selected for comparative genomic analysis (SI Appendix, Fig. S1 Step I). To identify the QTRT− Eukaryotes, 245,896,766 protein sequences and metadata were retrieved from the UniProt database (www.uniprot.org/help/downloads). Homologs of the human QTRT1 (UniProt ID Q9BXR0) were searched from the proteomes of 10,768 taxa that contained at least 5,000 protein entries using DIAMOND v2.1.8 (53) with the setting “--very-sensitive --matrix BLOSUM45 --evalue 0.001 -k0.” Four taxa of the Eukaryota superkingdom (including Sar, Viridiplantae, Fungi, and Metazoa) that comprised at least ten QTRT− organisms (Dataset S5) were subjected to further analyses. To ensure that all Qtrt1 genes were called, Qtrt1 coding sequences were retrieved using tBLASTn (54) searching the NCBI nt and wgs databases (55) limited to genomes from these four taxa. Organisms without hits at an E-value of 0.001 and 20% minimum identity were retained as QTRT−. Organisms encoding QTRT1 proteins between 300 and 500 amino acids in length were identified as QTRT+. These organisms were then sorted in descending order based on the number of proteins in any given taxa with at least four transmembrane domains, and this information was used to select approx. 200 organisms in each rank with criteria in Dataset S6. The QTRT− and QTRT+ organisms are listed in Datasets S3 and S7–S9. Potential transporter families from both QTRT+ and QTRT− organisms were then clustered based on sequence similarity [using MMseqs2 (56) with --cov-mode 0; SI Appendix, Fig. S1 Step II]. Clustering criteria for minimum coverage and sequence identity were tested in increments from 5 to 50%. A 30% threshold for both criteria was chosen for separation between homologous families as the number of proteins in each cluster sharply decreased at this cut-off (Dataset S10). Finally, the potential transporter subfamilies clusters were given scores as follows: The presence of a family member in a given QTRT+ organism or its absence in a given QTRT− organism was scored by multiplying by 1, while the presence of a family member in a QTRT− organism or its absence in a QTRT+ organism was penalized by multiplying by −1 (SI Appendix, Fig. S1 Step III). The score of each family was normalized by the expected maximum score (present in all QTRT+ organisms and absent in QTRT− organisms) so it fell within the range of −1 to 1. The scores of the top 200 candidates for the four ranks are listed in Dataset S1. The scripts used in the workflow are available at https://github.com/vdclab/published_scripts/blob/main/workflow_identifying_Q_transporter_candidates.sh.

Bioinformatic Analyses.

The workflow for searching for candidates of Q precursor transmembrane transporters comprised three steps. First, QTRT− and QTRT+ organisms were selected for comparative genomic analysis (SI Appendix, Fig. S1 Step I). To identify the QTRT− Eukaryotes, 245,896,766 protein sequences and metadata were retrieved from the UniProt database (www.uniprot.org/help/downloads). Homologs of the human QTRT1 (UniProt ID Q9BXR0) were searched from the proteomes of 10,768 taxa that contained at least 5,000 protein entries using DIAMOND v2.1.8 (53) with the setting “--very-sensitive --matrix BLOSUM45 --evalue 0.001 -k0.” Four taxa of the Eukaryota superkingdom (including Sar, Viridiplantae, Fungi, and Metazoa) that comprised at least ten QTRT− organisms (Dataset S5) were subjected to further analyses. To ensure that all Qtrt1 genes were called, Qtrt1 coding sequences were retrieved using tBLASTn (54) searching the NCBI nt and wgs databases (55) limited to genomes from these four taxa. Organisms without hits at an E-value of 0.001 and 20% minimum identity were retained as QTRT−. Organisms encoding QTRT1 proteins between 300 and 500 amino acids in length were identified as QTRT+. These organisms were then sorted in descending order based on the number of proteins in any given taxa with at least four transmembrane domains, and this information was used to select approx. 200 organisms in each rank with criteria in Dataset S6. The QTRT− and QTRT+ organisms are listed in Datasets S3 and S7–S9. Potential transporter families from both QTRT+ and QTRT− organisms were then clustered based on sequence similarity [using MMseqs2 (56) with --cov-mode 0; SI Appendix, Fig. S1 Step II]. Clustering criteria for minimum coverage and sequence identity were tested in increments from 5 to 50%. A 30% threshold for both criteria was chosen for separation between homologous families as the number of proteins in each cluster sharply decreased at this cut-off (Dataset S10). Finally, the potential transporter subfamilies clusters were given scores as follows: The presence of a family member in a given QTRT+ organism or its absence in a given QTRT− organism was scored by multiplying by 1, while the presence of a family member in a QTRT− organism or its absence in a QTRT+ organism was penalized by multiplying by −1 (SI Appendix, Fig. S1 Step III). The score of each family was normalized by the expected maximum score (present in all QTRT+ organisms and absent in QTRT− organisms) so it fell within the range of −1 to 1. The scores of the top 200 candidates for the four ranks are listed in Dataset S1. The scripts used in the workflow are available at https://github.com/vdclab/published_scripts/blob/main/workflow_identifying_Q_transporter_candidates.sh.

SSNs.SSNs were generated using the Enzyme Function Initiative (EFI) analytic suite (57) and visualized using Cytoscape (3.10.1) (58). 5,782 sequences for the SLC35F1/F2 solute transporter family in Eukaryota were retrieved with the InterPro accession (59) of “IPR052221” through the “Family” option of EFI-EST (EFI Enzyme Similarity Tool) (57). The initial SSN was generated with an alignment score threshold (AST) set such that each connection (edge) represented a sequence identity above 40%. The obtained SSN was first colored by the presence and absence of QTRT in each organism. More stringent SSNs were then created by gradually increasing the AST in increments (usually by 10). This process was iterated until clusters containing nodes from QTRT− organisms were separated from those comprising nodes from QTRT+ organisms. Clusters with less than 10 sequences were hidden for better visualization. The UniProt IDs of IPR05221 family sequences in the SSN are listed in Dataset S11.

SSNs were generated using the Enzyme Function Initiative (EFI) analytic suite (57) and visualized using Cytoscape (3.10.1) (58). 5,782 sequences for the SLC35F1/F2 solute transporter family in Eukaryota were retrieved with the InterPro accession (59) of “IPR052221” through the “Family” option of EFI-EST (EFI Enzyme Similarity Tool) (57). The initial SSN was generated with an alignment score threshold (AST) set such that each connection (edge) represented a sequence identity above 40%. The obtained SSN was first colored by the presence and absence of QTRT in each organism. More stringent SSNs were then created by gradually increasing the AST in increments (usually by 10). This process was iterated until clusters containing nodes from QTRT− organisms were separated from those comprising nodes from QTRT+ organisms. Clusters with less than 10 sequences were hidden for better visualization. The UniProt IDs of IPR05221 family sequences in the SSN are listed in Dataset S11.

Phylogenetic Analysis of SLC35F1/F2 Family Proteins.34 IPR05221 family sequences across different clades/kingdoms and three outgroup sequences, SLC35B1-4/HUT1 were aligned using MUSCLE v5.2 (60) and trimmed using BMGE v1.12 (61) with matrix BLOSUM30. The maximum likelihood tree was generated using FastTree v2.1.11 (62) with -lg -cat 20 -gamma model and bootstrap (1,000 replicates) and visualized by iTOL v6.9.1 (63) The QTRT− organisms are colored in red. The branches were colored by clades or kingdoms, and those with bootstrap support values higher than 0.7 were indicated by blue dots. The sequences used in the tree are listed in Dataset S12.

Phylogenetic Analysis of SLC35F1/F2 Family Proteins.

34 IPR05221 family sequences across different clades/kingdoms and three outgroup sequences, SLC35B1-4/HUT1 were aligned using MUSCLE v5.2 (60) and trimmed using BMGE v1.12 (61) with matrix BLOSUM30. The maximum likelihood tree was generated using FastTree v2.1.11 (62) with -lg -cat 20 -gamma model and bootstrap (1,000 replicates) and visualized by iTOL v6.9.1 (63) The QTRT− organisms are colored in red. The branches were colored by clades or kingdoms, and those with bootstrap support values higher than 0.7 were indicated by blue dots. The sequences used in the tree are listed in Dataset S12.

Sequence and Structure Alignment.Structural models of SLC35F2 sequences from humans, S. pombe strain 972/ATCC 24843, and T. brucei strain 927/4 (UniProt IDs Q8IXU6, O59785, and Q57UU3, respectively) were generated using AlphaFold v4 (42) and aligned in PROMALS3D (64). The resulting structure-based multisequence alignment was visualized using ESPript server v3.0 (65).

Sequence and Structure Alignment.

Structural models of SLC35F2 sequences from humans, S. pombe strain 972/ATCC 24843, and T. brucei strain 927/4 (UniProt IDs Q8IXU6, O59785, and Q57UU3, respectively) were generated using AlphaFold v4 (42) and aligned in PROMALS3D (64). The resulting structure-based multisequence alignment was visualized using ESPript server v3.0 (65).

Supplementary MaterialAppendix 01 (PDF)Dataset S01 (XLSX)

Supplementary Material

Appendix 01 (PDF)

Dataset S01 (XLSX)
