---
pmid: '30630869'
title: Extracellular ATP Shapes a Defense-Related Transcriptome Both Independently
  and along with Other Defense Signaling Pathways.
authors:
- Jewell JB
- Sowders JM
- He R
- Willis MA
- Gang DR
- Tanaka K
journal: Plant Physiol
year: '2019'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC6393801
doi: 10.1104/pp.18.01301
---

# Extracellular ATP Shapes a Defense-Related Transcriptome Both Independently and along with Other Defense Signaling Pathways.
**Authors:** Jewell JB, Sowders JM, He R, Willis MA, Gang DR, Tanaka K
**Journal:** Plant Physiol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1104/pp.18.01301](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.18.01301)
**PMC:** [PMC6393801](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6393801/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Physiol. 2019 Mar;179(3):1144-1158. doi: 10.1104/pp.18.01301. Epub 2019 
Jan 10.

Extracellular ATP Shapes a Defense-Related Transcriptome Both Independently and 
along with Other Defense Signaling Pathways.

Jewell JB(1), Sowders JM(1)(2), He R(3), Willis MA(3), Gang DR(2)(3), Tanaka 
K(4)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, Washington State University, Pullman, 
Washington 99164.
(2)Molecular Plant Sciences Program, Washington State University, Pullman, 
Washington 99164.
(3)Institute of Biological Chemistry, Washington State University, Pullman, 
Washington 99164.
(4)Department of Plant Pathology, Washington State University, Pullman, 
Washington 99164 kiwamu.tanaka@wsu.edu.

ATP is not only an essential metabolite of cellular biochemistry but also acts 
as a signal in the extracellular milieu. In plants, extracellular ATP is 
monitored by the purinergic receptor P2K1. Recent studies have revealed that 
extracellular ATP acts as a damage-associated molecular pattern in plants, and 
its signaling through P2K1 is important for mounting an effective defense 
response against various pathogenic microorganisms. Biotrophic and necrotrophic 
pathogens attack plants using different strategies, to which plants respond 
accordingly with salicylate-based or jasmonate/ethylene-based defensive 
signaling, respectively. Interestingly, defense mediated by P2K1 is effective 
against pathogens of both lifestyles, raising the question of the level of 
interplay between extracellular ATP signaling and that of jasmonate, ethylene, 
and salicylate. To address this issue, we analyzed ATP-induced transcriptomes in 
wild-type Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) seedlings and mutant seedlings 
defective in essential components in the signaling pathways of jasmonate, 
ethylene, and salicylate (classic defense hormones) as well as a mutant and an 
overexpression line of the P2K1 receptor. We found that P2K1 function is crucial 
for faithful ATP-induced transcriptional changes and that a subset of genes is 
more responsive in the P2K1 overexpression line. We also found that more than 
half of the ATP-responsive genes required signaling by one or more of the 
pathways for the classical defense hormones, with the jasmonate-based signaling 
being more critical than others. By contrast, the other ATP-responsive genes 
were unaffected by deficiencies in signaling for any of the classical defense 
hormones. These ATP-responsive genes were highly enriched for defense-related 
Gene Ontology terms. We further tested the ATP-induced genes in knockout mutants 
of transcription factors, demonstrating that MYCs acting downstream of the 
jasmonate receptor complex and calmodulin-binding transcription activators are 
nuclear transducers of P2K1-mediated extracellular ATP signaling.

© 2019 American Society of Plant Biologists. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1104/pp.18.01301
PMCID: PMC6393801
PMID: 30630869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

ATP is not only an essential metabolite of cellular biochemistry but also acts as a signal in the extracellular milieu. In plants, extracellular ATP is monitored by the purinergic receptor P2K1. Recent studies have revealed that extracellular ATP acts as a damage-associated molecular pattern in plants, and its signaling through P2K1 is important for mounting an effective defense response against various pathogenic microorganisms. Biotrophic and necrotrophic pathogens attack plants using different strategies, to which plants respond accordingly with salicylate-based or jasmonate/ethylene-based defensive signaling, respectively. Interestingly, defense mediated by P2K1 is effective against pathogens of both lifestyles, raising the question of the level of interplay between extracellular ATP signaling and that of jasmonate, ethylene, and salicylate. To address this issue, we analyzed ATP-induced transcriptomes in wild-type Arabidopsis ( Arabidopsis thaliana ) seedlings and mutant seedlings defective in essential components in the signaling pathways of jasmonate, ethylene, and salicylate (classic defense hormones) as well as a mutant and an overexpression line of the P2K1 receptor. We found that P2K1 function is crucial for faithful ATP-induced transcriptional changes and that a subset of genes is more responsive in the P2K1 overexpression line. We also found that more than half of the ATP-responsive genes required signaling by one or more of the pathways for the classical defense hormones, with the jasmonate-based signaling being more critical than others. By contrast, the other ATP-responsive genes were unaffected by deficiencies in signaling for any of the classical defense hormones. These ATP-responsive genes were highly enriched for defense-related Gene Ontology terms. We further tested the ATP-induced genes in knockout mutants of transcription factors, demonstrating that MYCs acting downstream of the jasmonate receptor complex and calmodulin-binding transcription activators are nuclear transducers of P2K1-mediated extracellular ATP signaling.

DISCUSSION

ATP, a fundamental building block of life on Earth, is an extracellular signaling molecule in animals ( Verkhratsky and Burnstock, 2014 ) and is recently coming to be considered an extracellular signaling molecule in plants as well ( Tanaka et al., 2010a ). Although the physiological function and signal transduction downstream of plant extracellular ATP recognition remain poorly understood, our study provides several insights from mRNA-seq analysis, as discussed below, and demonstrates that extracellular ATP treatment causes transcriptional reprogramming of defense-related genes that fully depends on the functional P2K1 receptor.

CONCLUSION

In conclusion, we present a model ( Fig. 10 ) in which ATP binding to P2K1 results in defense gene activation, where more than half of ATP-responsive genes required signaling by one or more of the pathways through EIN2, NPR1, and COI1, but with a more substantial reliance on COI1. MYC transcription factors participate in some level of COI1-independent activation of ATP response. Cytosolic calcium transients induce some proportion of COI1/EIN2/NPR1-independent genes, likely with the participation of CAMTA transcription factors.
