---
pmid: '21951714'
title: 'Human FAD synthase (isoform 2): a component of the machinery that delivers
  FAD to apo-flavoproteins.'
authors:
- Torchetti EM
- Bonomi F
- Galluccio M
- Gianazza E
- Giancaspero TA
- Iametti S
- Indiveri C
- Barile M
journal: FEBS J
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2011.08368.x
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Human FAD synthase (isoform 2): a component of the machinery that delivers FAD to apo-flavoproteins.
**Authors:** Torchetti EM, Bonomi F, Galluccio M, Gianazza E, Giancaspero TA, Iametti S, Indiveri C, Barile M
**Journal:** FEBS J (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1742-4658.2011.08368.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1742-4658.2011.08368.x)

## Abstract

1. FEBS J. 2011 Nov;278(22):4434-49. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2011.08368.x. Epub 
2011 Oct 20.

Human FAD synthase (isoform 2): a component of the machinery that delivers FAD 
to apo-flavoproteins.

Torchetti EM(1), Bonomi F, Galluccio M, Gianazza E, Giancaspero TA, Iametti S, 
Indiveri C, Barile M.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica e Biologia Molecolare E. Quagliariello (DBBM), 
Università degli Studi di Bari, Bari, Italy.

A soluble form of human FAD synthase (isoform 2; hFADS2) was produced and 
purified to homogeneity as a recombinant His-tagged protein. The enzyme binds 1 
mole of the FAD product very tightly, although noncovalently. Complete release 
of FAD from the 'as isolated' protein requires extensive denaturation. A 75 : 25 
mixture of apo/holoprotein could be prepared by treatment with mild chaotropes, 
allowing estimatation of the contribution made by bound FAD to the protein 
stability and evaluatation of whether structural rearrangements may be required 
for FAD release. Under turnover conditions, the enzyme catalyzes FAD assembly 
from ATP and FMN and, at a much lower rate, the pyrophosphorolytic hydrolysis of 
FAD. Several mechanistic features of both reactions were investigated in detail, 
along with their dependence on environmental conditions (pH, temperature, 
dependence on metals). Our data indicate that FAD release may represent the 
rate-limiting step of the whole catalytic cycle and that the process leading to 
FAD synthesis, and delivery to client apoproteins may be tightly controlled.

Journal compilation © 2011 FEBS. No claim to original Italian government works.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2011.08368.x
PMID: 21951714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
