---
pmid: '9691087'
title: Mutations in the liver glycogen synthase gene in children with hypoglycemia
  due to glycogen storage disease type 0.
authors:
- Orho M
- Bosshard NU
- Buist NR
- Gitzelmann R
- Aynsley-Green A
- Blümel P
- Gannon MC
- Nuttall FQ
- Groop LC
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC508911
doi: 10.1172/JCI2890
pubmed_publication_types:
- Case Reports
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: CASE_REPORT
---

# Mutations in the liver glycogen synthase gene in children with hypoglycemia due to glycogen storage disease type 0.
**Authors:** Orho M, Bosshard NU, Buist NR, Gitzelmann R, Aynsley-Green A, Blümel P, Gannon MC, Nuttall FQ, Groop LC
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI2890](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI2890)
**PMC:** [PMC508911](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC508911/)

## Abstract

1. J Clin Invest. 1998 Aug 1;102(3):507-15. doi: 10.1172/JCI2890.

Mutations in the liver glycogen synthase gene in children with hypoglycemia due 
to glycogen storage disease type 0.

Orho M(1), Bosshard NU, Buist NR, Gitzelmann R, Aynsley-Green A, Blümel P, 
Gannon MC, Nuttall FQ, Groop LC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Wallenberg Laboratory, Malmö University 
Hospital, University of Lund, 20502 Malmö, Sweden.

Glycogen storage disease type 0 (GSD-0) is a rare form of fasting hypoglycemia 
presenting in infancy or early childhood and accompanied by high blood ketones 
and low alanine and lactate concentrations. Although feeding relieves symptoms, 
it often results in postprandial hyperglycemia and hyperlactatemia. The glycogen 
synthase (GS) activity has been low or immeasurable in liver biopsies, whereas 
the liver glycogen content has been only moderately decreased. To investigate 
whether mutations in the liver GS gene (GYS2) on chromosome 12p12.2 were 
involved in GSD-0, we determined the exon-intron structure of the GYS2 gene and 
examined nine affected children from five families for linkage of GSD-0 to the 
GYS2 gene. Mutation screening of the 16 GYS2 exons was done by single-strand 
conformational polymorphism (SSCP) and direct sequencing. Liver GS deficiency 
was diagnosed from liver biopsies (GS activity and glycogen content). GS 
activity in the liver of the affected children was extremely low or nil, 
resulting in subnormal glycogen content. After suggestive linkage to the GYS2 
gene had been established (LOD score = 2.9; P < 0.01), mutation screening 
revealed several different mutations in these families, including a premature 
stop codon in exon 5 (Arg246X), a 5'-donor splice site mutation in intron 6 
(G+1T--> CT), and missense mutations Asn39Ser, Ala339Pro, His446Asp, Pro479Gln, 
Ser483Pro, and Met491Arg. Seven of the affected children carried mutations on 
both alleles. The mutations could not be found in 200 healthy persons. 
Expression of the mutated enzymes in COS7 cells indicated severely impaired GS 
activity. In conclusion, the results demonstrate that GSD-0 is caused by 
different mutations in the GYS2 gene.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI2890
PMCID: PMC508911
PMID: 9691087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
