---
pmid: '10725230'
title: ARVCF localizes to the nucleus and adherens junction and is mutually exclusive
  with p120(ctn) in E-cadherin complexes.
authors:
- Mariner DJ
- Wang J
- Reynolds AB
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.113.8.1481
---

# ARVCF localizes to the nucleus and adherens junction and is mutually exclusive with p120(ctn) in E-cadherin complexes.
**Authors:** Mariner DJ, Wang J, Reynolds AB
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.113.8.1481](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.113.8.1481)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2000 Apr;113 ( Pt 8):1481-90. doi: 10.1242/jcs.113.8.1481.

ARVCF localizes to the nucleus and adherens junction and is mutually exclusive 
with p120(ctn) in E-cadherin complexes.

Mariner DJ(1), Wang J, Reynolds AB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, 
Nashville, Tennessee 37232-2175, USA. al.reynolds@mcmail.vanderbilt. edu

ARVCF is a novel Armadillo repeat domain protein that is closely related to the 
catenin p120(ctn). Using new ARVCF monoclonal antibodies, we have found that 
ARVCF associates with E-cadherin and competes with p120 for interaction with the 
E-cadherin juxtamembrane domain. ARVCF also localized to the nucleus in some 
cell types, however, and was significantly more nucleophilic than p120. 
Surprisingly, despite apparently ubiquitous expression, ARVCF was at least 
tenfold less abundant than p120 in a wide variety of cell types, and was 
difficult to detect by immunofluorescence unless overexpressed. Consequently, it 
is not likely to be abundant enough in adult tissues to functionally compete 
with p120. ARVCF also completely lacked the ability to induce the cell-branching 
phenotype associated with overexpression of p120. Expression of ARVCF/p120 
chimeras confirmed previous results indicating that the branching activity of 
p120 maps to its Armadillo repeat domain. Surprisingly, the preferential 
localization of ARVCF to the nucleus required sequences in the amino-terminal 
end of ARVCF, suggesting that the sequences directing nuclear translocation of 
ARVCF are distinct from the predicted bipartite nuclear localization signal 
located between repeats 6 and 7. The dual localization of ARVCF to junctions and 
to nuclei suggests activities in different cellular compartments, as is the case 
for several other Armadillo repeat proteins including beta-catenin, p120 and the 
plakophilins.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.113.8.1481
PMID: 10725230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
