---
pmid: '18358814'
title: Direct inhibition of the longevity-promoting factor SKN-1 by insulin-like signaling
  in C. elegans.
authors:
- Tullet JM
- Hertweck M
- An JH
- Baker J
- Hwang JY
- Liu S
- Oliveira RP
- Baumeister R
- Blackwell TK
journal: Cell
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2367249
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.01.030
---

# Direct inhibition of the longevity-promoting factor SKN-1 by insulin-like signaling in C. elegans.
**Authors:** Tullet JM, Hertweck M, An JH, Baker J, Hwang JY, Liu S, Oliveira RP, Baumeister R, Blackwell TK
**Journal:** Cell (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2008.01.030](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2008.01.030)
**PMC:** [PMC2367249](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2367249/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2008 Mar 21;132(6):1025-38. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.01.030.

Direct inhibition of the longevity-promoting factor SKN-1 by insulin-like 
signaling in C. elegans.

Tullet JM(1), Hertweck M, An JH, Baker J, Hwang JY, Liu S, Oliveira RP, 
Baumeister R, Blackwell TK.

Author information:
(1)Section on Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Joslin Diabetes Center; 
Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School; Harvard Stem Cell Institute, 1 
Joslin Place, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2008 Mar 21;132(6):915-6. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.03.002.

Insulin/IGF-1-like signaling (IIS) is central to growth and metabolism and has a 
conserved role in aging. In C. elegans, reductions in IIS increase stress 
resistance and longevity, effects that require the IIS-inhibited FOXO protein 
DAF-16. The C. elegans transcription factor SKN-1 also defends against oxidative 
stress by mobilizing the conserved phase 2 detoxification response. Here we show 
that IIS not only opposes DAF-16 but also directly inhibits SKN-1 in parallel. 
The IIS kinases AKT-1, -2, and SGK-1 phosphorylate SKN-1, and reduced IIS leads 
to constitutive SKN-1 nuclear accumulation in the intestine and SKN-1 target 
gene activation. SKN-1 contributes to the increased stress tolerance and 
longevity resulting from reduced IIS and delays aging when expressed 
transgenically. Furthermore, SKN-1 that is constitutively active increases life 
span independently of DAF-16. Our findings indicate that the transcription 
network regulated by SKN-1 promotes longevity and is an important direct target 
of IIS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.01.030
PMCID: PMC2367249
PMID: 18358814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
