---
pmid: '21118109'
title: The role of ESCRT proteins in fusion events involving lysosomes, endosomes
  and autophagosomes.
authors:
- Metcalf D
- Isaacs AM
journal: Biochem Soc Trans
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1042/BST0381469
---

# The role of ESCRT proteins in fusion events involving lysosomes, endosomes and autophagosomes.
**Authors:** Metcalf D, Isaacs AM
**Journal:** Biochem Soc Trans (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BST0381469](https://doi.org/10.1042/BST0381469)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Soc Trans. 2010 Dec;38(6):1469-73. doi: 10.1042/BST0381469.

The role of ESCRT proteins in fusion events involving lysosomes, endosomes and 
autophagosomes.

Metcalf D(1), Isaacs AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL Institute of Neurology, Queen 
Square, London WC1N 3BG, UK.

ESCRT (endosomal sorting complex required for transport) proteins were 
originally identified for their role in delivering endocytosed proteins to the 
intraluminal vesicles of late-endosomal structures termed multivesicular bodies. 
Multivesicular bodies then fuse with lysosomes, leading to degradation of the 
internalized proteins. Four ESCRT complexes interact to concentrate cargo on the 
endosomal membrane, induce membrane curvature to form an intraluminal bud and 
finally pinch off the bud through a membrane-scission event to produce the 
intraluminal vesicle. Recent work suggests that ESCRT proteins are also required 
downstream of these events to enable fusion of multivesicular bodies with 
lysosomes. Autophagy is a related pathway required for the degradation of 
organelles, long-lived proteins and protein aggregates which also converges on 
lysosomes. The proteins or organelle to be degraded are encapsulated by an 
autophagosome that fuses either directly with a lysosome or with an endosome to 
form an amphisome, which then fuses with a lysosome. A common machinery is 
beginning to emerge that regulates fusion events in the multivesicular body and 
autophagy pathways, and we focus in the present paper on the role of ESCRT 
proteins. These fusion events have been implicated in diseases including 
frontotemporal dementia, Alzheimer's disease, lysosomal storage disorders, 
myopathies and bacterial pathogen invasion, and therefore further examination of 
the mechanisms involved may lead to new insight into disease pathogenesis and 
treatments.

DOI: 10.1042/BST0381469
PMID: 21118109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
