---
pmid: '7905825'
title: Cloning of human acetyl-CoA carboxylase cDNA.
authors:
- Ha J
- Daniel S
- Kong IS
- Park CK
- Tae HJ
- Kim KH
journal: Eur J Biochem
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1994.tb19941.x
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Cloning of human acetyl-CoA carboxylase cDNA.
**Authors:** Ha J, Daniel S, Kong IS, Park CK, Tae HJ, Kim KH
**Journal:** Eur J Biochem (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1432-1033.1994.tb19941.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1432-1033.1994.tb19941.x)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Biochem. 1994 Jan 15;219(1-2):297-306. doi: 
10.1111/j.1432-1033.1994.tb19941.x.

Cloning of human acetyl-CoA carboxylase cDNA.

Ha J(1), Daniel S, Kong IS, Park CK, Tae HJ, Kim KH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907-1153.

Acetyl-CoA carboxylase is the rate-limiting enzyme in the biogenesis of 
long-chain fatty acids. In order to understand the mechanisms that regulate 
human acetyl-CoA carboxylase at the gene level, and the relationship between its 
structure and function, cDNA clones for human acetyl-CoA carboxylase have been 
isolated and sequenced. Human acetyl-CoA-carboxylase cDNA contains 7020 
nucleotides encoding a protein of 2340 amino acids with a calculated relative 
molecular mass of 264575. The human enzyme shows approximately 85% identity in 
nucleotide sequence with previously cloned rat acetyl-CoA carboxylase, and shows 
90% identity in the amino acid sequence. Two human acetyl-CoA-carboxylase mRNA 
species, which differ in the 5' untranslated region with the same coding 
sequence, have been identified. The sequence analysis reveals that type I and 
type II acetyl-CoA-carboxylase mRNA contain 313- and 173-base-long 5' 
untranslated regions, respectively. The first 240 nucleotides in the 5' 
untranslated region of type I acetyl-CoA-carboxylase mRNA replace the first 100 
nucleotides of the (G + C)-rich region of the 5' untranslated region of the type 
II mRNA. These two species of mRNAs are the only species of human ACC mRNA which 
have been detected compared to at least five species in rat tissues, and they 
are expressed in a tissue-specific manner.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1994.tb19941.x
PMID: 7905825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
