---
pmid: '28337824'
title: Phenotype-genotype correlations of PIGO deficiency with variable phenotypes
  from infantile lethality to mild learning difficulties.
authors:
- Tanigawa J
- Mimatsu H
- Mizuno S
- Okamoto N
- Fukushi D
- Tominaga K
- Kidokoro H
- Muramatsu Y
- Nishi E
- Nakamura S
- Motooka D
- Nomura N
- Hayasaka K
- Niihori T
- Aoki Y
- Nabatame S
- Hayakawa M
- Natsume J
- Ozono K
- Kinoshita T
- Wakamatsu N
- Murakami Y
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/humu.23219
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Phenotype-genotype correlations of PIGO deficiency with variable phenotypes from infantile lethality to mild learning difficulties.
**Authors:** Tanigawa J, Mimatsu H, Mizuno S, Okamoto N, Fukushi D, Tominaga K, Kidokoro H, Muramatsu Y, Nishi E, Nakamura S, Motooka D, Nomura N, Hayasaka K, Niihori T, Aoki Y, Nabatame S, Hayakawa M, Natsume J, Ozono K, Kinoshita T, Wakamatsu N, Murakami Y
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.23219](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.23219)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mutat. 2017 Jul;38(7):805-815. doi: 10.1002/humu.23219. Epub 2017 Apr 20.

Phenotype-genotype correlations of PIGO deficiency with variable phenotypes from 
infantile lethality to mild learning difficulties.

Tanigawa J(1), Mimatsu H(2), Mizuno S(3), Okamoto N(4), Fukushi D(5), Tominaga 
K(1)(6), Kidokoro H(7), Muramatsu Y(2), Nishi E(3), Nakamura S(8), Motooka D(8), 
Nomura N(5), Hayasaka K(9), Niihori T(10), Aoki Y(10), Nabatame S(1), Hayakawa 
M(2), Natsume J(11), Ozono K(1), Kinoshita T(12), Wakamatsu N(5), Murakami 
Y(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, 
Suita, Osaka, Japan.
(2)Division of Neonatology Center for Maternal-Neonatal Care, Nagoya University 
Hospital, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Central Hospital, Aichi Human Service Center, 
Kasugai, Aichi, Japan.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, Osaka Medical Center and Research Institute 
for Maternal and Child Health, Izumi, Osaka, Japan.
(5)Department of Genetics, Institute for Developmental Research, Aichi Human 
Service Center, Kasugai, Aichi, Japan.
(6)Department of Child Development, United Graduate School of Child Development, 
Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Nagoya University Hospital, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan.
(8)Department of Infection Metagenomics, Research Institute for Microbial 
Diseases, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Yamagata University School of Medicine, Yamagata, 
Yamagata, Japan.
(10)Department of Medical Genetics, Tohoku University School of Medicine, 
Sendai, Miyagi, Japan.
(11)Department of Developmental Disability Medicine and Department of 
Pediatrics, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan.
(12)Department of Immunoregulation, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases 
Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

Inherited GPI (glycosylphosphatidylinositol) deficiencies (IGDs), a recently 
defined group of diseases, show a broad spectrum of symptoms. Hyperphosphatasia 
mental retardation syndrome, also known as Mabry syndrome, is a type of IGDs. 
There are at least 26 genes involved in the biosynthesis and transport of 
GPI-anchored proteins; however, IGDs constitute a rare group of diseases, and 
correlations between the spectrum of symptoms and affected genes or the type of 
mutations have not been shown. Here, we report four newly identified and five 
previously described Japanese families with PIGO (phosphatidylinositol glycan 
anchor biosynthesis class O) deficiency. We show how the clinical severity of 
IGDs correlates with flow cytometric analysis of blood, functional analysis 
using a PIGO-deficient cell line, and the degree of hyperphosphatasia. The flow 
cytometric analysis and hyperphosphatasia are useful for IGD diagnosis, but the 
expression level of GPI-anchored proteins and the degree of hyperphosphatasia do 
not correlate, although functional studies do, with clinical severity. Compared 
with PIGA (phosphatidylinositol glycan anchor biosynthesis class A) deficiency, 
PIGO deficiency shows characteristic features, such as Hirschsprung disease, 
brachytelephalangy, and hyperphosphatasia. This report shows the precise 
spectrum of symptoms according to the severity of mutations and compares 
symptoms between different types of IGD.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.23219
PMID: 28337824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
