---
pmid: '25303530'
title: Enhancer activation requires trans-recruitment of a mega transcription factor
  complex.
authors:
- Liu Z
- Merkurjev D
- Yang F
- Li W
- Oh S
- Friedman MJ
- Song X
- Zhang F
- Ma Q
- Ohgi KA
- Krones A
- Rosenfeld MG
journal: Cell
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4465761
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.08.027
---

# Enhancer activation requires trans-recruitment of a mega transcription factor complex.
**Authors:** Liu Z, Merkurjev D, Yang F, Li W, Oh S, Friedman MJ, Song X, Zhang F, Ma Q, Ohgi KA, Krones A, Rosenfeld MG
**Journal:** Cell (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2014.08.027](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2014.08.027)
**PMC:** [PMC4465761](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4465761/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2014 Oct 9;159(2):358-73. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.08.027.

Enhancer activation requires trans-recruitment of a mega transcription factor 
complex.

Liu Z(1), Merkurjev D(2), Yang F(3), Li W(3), Oh S(4), Friedman MJ(3), Song 
X(5), Zhang F(3), Ma Q(2), Ohgi KA(3), Krones A(3), Rosenfeld MG(6).

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, 
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. Electronic 
address: z9liu@ucsd.edu.
(2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, 
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA; Graduate Program 
in Bioinformatics and System Biology, University of California, San Diego, La 
Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
(3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, 
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
(4)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, 
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA; Graduate Program 
in Biological Sciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, 
USA.
(5)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, 
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA; CAS Key Laboratory 
of Brain Function and Disease and School of Life Sciences, University of Science 
and Technology of China, Hefei 230027, China.
(6)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, 
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. Electronic 
address: mrosenfeld@ucsd.edu.

Enhancers provide critical information directing cell-type-specific 
transcriptional programs, regulated by binding of signal-dependent transcription 
factors and their associated cofactors. Here, we report that the most strongly 
activated estrogen (E2)-responsive enhancers are characterized by 
trans-recruitment and in situ assembly of a large 1-2 MDa complex of diverse 
DNA-binding transcription factors by ERα at ERE-containing enhancers. We refer 
to enhancers recruiting these factors as mega transcription factor-bound in 
trans (MegaTrans) enhancers. The MegaTrans complex is a signature of the most 
potent functional enhancers and is required for activation of enhancer RNA 
transcription and recruitment of coactivators, including p300 and Med1. The 
MegaTrans complex functions, in part, by recruiting specific enzymatic 
machinery, exemplified by DNA-dependent protein kinase. Thus, 
MegaTrans-containing enhancers represent a cohort of functional enhancers that 
mediate a broad and important transcriptional program and provide a molecular 
explanation for transcription factor clustering and hotspots noted in the 
genome.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.08.027
PMCID: PMC4465761
PMID: 25303530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
