---
pmid: '17216128'
title: Association of LKB1 with a WD-repeat protein WDR6 is implicated in cell growth
  arrest and p27(Kip1) induction.
authors:
- Xie X
- Wang Z
- Chen Y
journal: Mol Cell Biochem
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s11010-006-9402-5
---

# Association of LKB1 with a WD-repeat protein WDR6 is implicated in cell growth arrest and p27(Kip1) induction.
**Authors:** Xie X, Wang Z, Chen Y
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biochem (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11010-006-9402-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11010-006-9402-5)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biochem. 2007 Jul;301(1-2):115-22. doi: 10.1007/s11010-006-9402-5.
Epub  2007 Jan 10.

Association of LKB1 with a WD-repeat protein WDR6 is implicated in cell growth 
arrest and p27(Kip1) induction.

Xie X(1), Wang Z, Chen Y.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Nutritional Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological 
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Shanghai, China.

Germline mutations of the serine/threonine kinase LKB1 (also known as STK11) 
lead to Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) that is associated with increased incidence 
of malignant cancers. However, the tumor suppressor function of LKB1 has not 
been fully elucidated. We applied yeast two-hybrid screening and identified that 
a novel WD-repeat protein WDR6 was able to interact with LKB1. 
Immunofluorescence staining revealed that WDR6 was localized in cytoplasm, 
similar to the localization of LKB1. Expression of LKB1 was able to inhibit 
colony formation of Hela cells. Interestingly, coexpression of WDR6 with LKB1 
enhanced the inhibitory effect of LKB1 on Hela cell proliferation. Consistently, 
WDR6 was able to synergize with LKB1 in cell cycle G1 arrest in Hela cells. 
Coexpression of WDR6 and LKB1 was able to induce a cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) 
inhibitor p27(Kip1). Furthermore, the stimulatory effect of LKB1 on p27(Kip1) 
promoter activity was significantly elevated by coexpression with WDR6. 
Collectively, these results provided initial evidence that WDR6 is implicated in 
the cell growth inhibitory pathway of LKB1 via regulation of p27(Kip1).

DOI: 10.1007/s11010-006-9402-5
PMID: 17216128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
