---
pmid: '17611271'
title: FMRFamide-like neuropeptides and mechanosensory touch receptor neurons regulate
  male sexual turning behavior in Caenorhabditis elegans.
authors:
- Liu T
- Kim K
- Li C
- Barr MM
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC6794584
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1405-07.2007
---

# FMRFamide-like neuropeptides and mechanosensory touch receptor neurons regulate male sexual turning behavior in Caenorhabditis elegans.
**Authors:** Liu T, Kim K, Li C, Barr MM
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1405-07.2007](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1405-07.2007)
**PMC:** [PMC6794584](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6794584/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2007 Jul 4;27(27):7174-82. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1405-07.2007.

FMRFamide-like neuropeptides and mechanosensory touch receptor neurons regulate 
male sexual turning behavior in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Liu T(1), Kim K, Li C, Barr MM.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, Wisconsin 53705, USA.

Caenorhabditis elegans male mating provides a powerful model to study the 
relationship between the nervous system, genes, and innate sexual behaviors. 
Male mating is the most complex behavior exhibited by the nematode C. elegans 
and involves the steps of response, backing, turning, vulva location, spicule 
insertion, and sperm transfer. Because neuropeptides are important neural 
regulators of many complex animal behaviors, we explored the function of the 
FMRFamide-like neuropeptide (flp) gene family in regulating male copulation. We 
found that peptidergic signaling mediated by FMRF-amide like neuropeptides 
(FLPs) FLP-8, FLP-10, FLP-12, and FLP-20 is required for the sensory 
transduction involved in male turning behavior. flp-8, flp-10, flp-12, and 
flp-20 mutant males significantly increase repetition of substep(s) of turning 
behavior compared with wild-type males. Genes controlling neuropeptide 
processing and secretion in general, including egl-3, egl-21, ida-1, and unc-31, 
are also required for inhibiting repetitive turning behavior. Neuropeptidergic 
signaling adjusts the repetitiveness of turning independently of serotonergic 
modulation of the timing of turning. Surprisingly, the mechanosensitive touch 
receptor neurons are found to be part of the neural circuitry regulating male 
turning behavior, indicating the existence of functional dimorphisms in the 
nervous system with regard to sex-specific behaviors.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1405-07.2007
PMCID: PMC6794584
PMID: 17611271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Caenorhabditis elegans male mating provides a powerful model to study the relationship between the nervous system, genes, and innate sexual behaviors. Male mating is the most complex behavior exhibited by the nematode C. elegans and involves the steps of response, backing, turning, vulva location, spicule insertion, and sperm transfer. Because neuropeptides are important neural regulators of many complex animal behaviors, we explored the function of the FMRFamide-like neuropeptide ( flp ) gene family in regulating male copulation. We found that peptidergic signaling mediated by FMRF-amide like neuropeptides (FLPs) FLP-8, FLP-10, FLP-12, and FLP-20 is required for the sensory transduction involved in male turning behavior. flp-8 , flp-10 , flp-12 , and flp-20 mutant males significantly increase repetition of substep(s) of turning behavior compared with wild-type males. Genes controlling neuropeptide processing and secretion in general, including egl-3 , egl-21 , ida-1 , and unc-31 , are also required for inhibiting repetitive turning behavior. Neuropeptidergic signaling adjusts the repetitiveness of turning independently of serotonergic modulation of the timing of turning. Surprisingly, the mechanosensitive touch receptor neurons are found to be part of the neural circuitry regulating male turning behavior, indicating the existence of functional dimorphisms in the nervous system with regard to sex-specific behaviors.

Introduction

Sexual behavior is one of the most ancient and vital social behaviors exhibited among metazoans, yet remarkably little is known about its molecular basis. Caenorhabditis elegans copulation is comprised of an innate series of behavioral steps ( Liu and Sternberg, 1995 ), raising the question of how these behaviors are genetically controlled. C. elegans male mating is a powerful model to study the relationship between the nervous system, genes, and behavior.

The adult male possesses 381 neurons, of which 87 are sex-specific. With the exception of four neurons in the head, the male-specific neurons are located in the copulatory structures in the tail ( Sulston et al., 1980 ). Cell ablation experiments coupled with behavioral analysis have provided important insight into the neuronal basis of C. elegans mating behavior. In wild-type males, a stereotypic behavioral sequence includes response to hermaphrodite contact (requiring male-specific ray neurons), backing along the mate's body, turning at the mate's head or tail (requiring the three most posterior pairs of rays and the male-specific serotonergic CP neurons), location of vulva (requiring the male-specific hook neurons), spicule insertion (requiring male-specific cholinergic neurons of the spicules and postcloacal sensilla), and sperm transfer into the mate's uterus (requiring the male-specific SPV spicule neurons) ( Loer and Kenyon, 1993 ; Liu and Sternberg, 1995 ; Barr and Sternberg, 1999 ; Garcia et al., 2001 ). C. elegans male sexual behaviors are also regulated by components of the core nervous system: spicule protraction is modulated by the NSM neurosecretory head neurons, and sperm transfer requires input from the ventral nerve cord motor neurons ( Gruninger et al., 2006 ; Schindelman et al., 2006 ).

Neuropeptides modulate many complex animal behaviors, including feeding, nociception, circadian rhythm, reproduction, learning, and social behaviors ( Storm and Tecott, 2005 ; Borgland et al., 2006 ; Sabatier, 2006 ; Saper, 2006 ; Hill and Oliver, 2007 ). The C. elegans genome contains at least 30 FMRFamide-like neuropeptide ( flp ) genes that are predicted to encode over 70 biologically active FMRF-amide like neuropeptides (FLPs) ( Li, 2005 ) (S. Husson and L. Schoofs, personal communication). At least 50% of C. elegans neurons express one or more flp genes ( Kim and Li, 2004 ), indicating their potential roles in the nervous system. We explored flp gene function in regulating C. elegans male sexual behaviors and found that peptidergic signaling modulates the turning step. FLP-8, FLP-10, FLP-12, and FLP-20 are required to suppress the repetitive turning phenotype in C. elegans males. Genes controlling neuropeptide processing and secretion in general, like egl-3 , egl-21 , ida-1 , and unc-31 , are also required for inhibiting repetitive turning behavior. Moreover, peptidergic signaling regulates repetitive turning behavior independently of serotonergic and dopaminergic signaling. Interestingly, the cellular site of action for egl-3 and flp-20 in mediating male turning behavior is in the mechanosensitive touch receptor neurons (TRNs) found in both males and hermaphrodites, indicating that the shared nervous system has sexually dimorphic functions. Finally, we demonstrate that the MEC-4/MEC-10 channel complex is required for inhibition of repetitive turning, suggesting that a mechanosensory stimulus regulates the turning step of male mating behavior.

Results

We used two strategies to study the role of neuropeptides in C. elegans male mating behaviors. First, we analyzed the behavior of mutants defective in flp genes ( flp-3 , flp-4 , flp-6 , flp-8 , flp-10 , flp-12 , flp-19 , flp-20 , and flp-21 ), neuropeptide processing ( egl-3 and egl-21 ), or neuropeptide secretion ( ida-1 and unc-31 ). Second, we determined the cellular site of action of these neuropeptidergic components, which provided insight into the cellular and molecular basis of turning behavior.
