---
pmid: '11076031'
title: Analysis of the deubiquitinating enzymes of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
authors:
- Amerik AY
- Li SJ
- Hochstrasser M
journal: Biol Chem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1515/BC.2000.121
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Analysis of the deubiquitinating enzymes of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Amerik AY, Li SJ, Hochstrasser M
**Journal:** Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1515/BC.2000.121](https://doi.org/10.1515/BC.2000.121)

## Abstract

1. Biol Chem. 2000 Sep-Oct;381(9-10):981-92. doi: 10.1515/BC.2000.121.

Analysis of the deubiquitinating enzymes of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Amerik AY(1), Li SJ, Hochstrasser M.

Author information:
(1)Yale University, Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, New 
Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Attachment of proteins to ubiquitin is reversed by specialized proteases called 
deubiquitinating enzymes (Dubs), which are also essential for ubiquitin 
precursor processing. In the genome of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, 17 potential 
DUB genes can be discerned. We have now constructed strains deleted for each of 
these genes. Surprisingly, given the essential nature of the ubiquitin system, 
none of the mutants is lethal or strongly growth defective under standard 
conditions, although a number have detectable abnormalities. Including results 
from this study, 14 of the 17 Dubs have now been shown to have 
ubiquitin-cleaving activity. The most extensively characterized yeast Dub is 
Doa4, which is required for both ubiquitin homeostasis and proteasome-dependent 
proteolysis. To help determine what distinguishes Doa4 functionally from other 
Dubs, we have cloned a DOA4 ortholog from the yeast Kluyveromyces lactis. The K. 
lactis protein is 42% identical to Doa4, but unexpectedly the K. lactis gene is 
slightly closer in nucleotide sequence to UBP5, which cannot substitute for DOA4 
even in high dosage. The data suggest that the DOA4 locus underwent a 
duplication after the divergence of K. lactis and S. cerevisiae. This 
information will facilitate fine-structure analysis of the Doa4 protein to help 
delineate its key functional elements.

DOI: 10.1515/BC.2000.121
PMID: 11076031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
