---
pmid: '11972604'
title: Oxidant stress induces gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase and glutathione synthesis
  in human bronchial epithelial NCI-H292 cells.
authors:
- Ray S
- Watkins DN
- Misso NL
- Thompson PJ
journal: Clin Exp Allergy
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1046/j.0954-7894.2002.01294.x
---

# Oxidant stress induces gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase and glutathione synthesis in human bronchial epithelial NCI-H292 cells.
**Authors:** Ray S, Watkins DN, Misso NL, Thompson PJ
**Journal:** Clin Exp Allergy (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.0954-7894.2002.01294.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.0954-7894.2002.01294.x)

## Abstract

1. Clin Exp Allergy. 2002 Apr;32(4):571-7. doi: 10.1046/j.0954-7894.2002.01294.x.

Oxidant stress induces gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase and glutathione 
synthesis in human bronchial epithelial NCI-H292 cells.

Ray S(1), Watkins DN, Misso NL, Thompson PJ.

Author information:
(1)Asthma and Allergy Research Institute, and Department of Medicine, The 
University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia.

Comment in
    Clin Exp Allergy. 2002 Apr;32(4):486-8. doi: 
10.1046/j.0954-7894.2002.01368.x.

BACKGROUND: The bronchial epithelium is exposed to reactive oxygen species (ROS) 
derived from cigarette smoke, air pollutants and activated leucocytes. 
Glutathione (GSH) prevents ROS-mediated loss of cell function, tissue injury and 
inflammation, and its synthesis is regulated by gamma-glutamylcysteine 
synthetase (gamma-GCS). However, the capacity of bronchial epithelial cells to 
adapt to oxidative stress and the mechanisms involved are not known.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of oxidative stress on the regulation of 
GSH synthesis in human bronchial epithelial (NCI-H292) cells.
METHODS: NCI-H292 cells were exposed to menadione and intracellular GSH 
concentrations were measured by spectrophotometry. gamma-GCS activity was 
measured by HPLC assay and changes in gamma-GCS mRNA by Northern blotting.
RESULTS: Exposure to menadione (MQ, 10-200 microm, 30-120 min) decreased total 
cellular GSH content, measured immediately after exposure to MQ. However, GSH 
content measured 6-12 h after withdrawal of the oxidant stress (MQ, 50 microm, 
30 min), increased c. two fold over baseline levels (P < 0.001). gamma-GCS 
activity measured 6 h (21.7 +/- 3.4 nmol/min/mg, SD, n = 5, P < 0.01) or 12 h 
(23.2 +/- 4.6, P < 0.001) after MQ treatment was also significantly increased 
compared with untreated cells (12.8 +/- 1.0). Similarly, gamma-GCS mRNA 
expression increased 1.3-1.6-fold relative to GAPDH mRNA, 3-6 h after MQ 
treatment. The MQ-induced increase in gamma-GCS mRNA expression was completely 
inhibited by actinomycin D.
CONCLUSIONS: Bronchial epithelial (NCI-H292) cells respond rapidly and 
sensitively to oxidant stress, and this adaptive response is mediated by 
increased gamma-GCS mRNA transcription and enzyme activity.

DOI: 10.1046/j.0954-7894.2002.01294.x
PMID: 11972604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
