---
pmid: '9482734'
title: Axin, a negative regulator of the Wnt signaling pathway, forms a complex with
  GSK-3beta and beta-catenin and promotes GSK-3beta-dependent phosphorylation of beta-catenin.
authors:
- Ikeda S
- Kishida S
- Yamamoto H
- Murai H
- Koyama S
- Kikuchi A
journal: EMBO J
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1170485
doi: 10.1093/emboj/17.5.1371
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Axin, a negative regulator of the Wnt signaling pathway, forms a complex with GSK-3beta and beta-catenin and promotes GSK-3beta-dependent phosphorylation of beta-catenin.
**Authors:** Ikeda S, Kishida S, Yamamoto H, Murai H, Koyama S, Kikuchi A
**Journal:** EMBO J (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/17.5.1371](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/17.5.1371)
**PMC:** [PMC1170485](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1170485/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 1998 Mar 2;17(5):1371-84. doi: 10.1093/emboj/17.5.1371.

Axin, a negative regulator of the Wnt signaling pathway, forms a complex with 
GSK-3beta and beta-catenin and promotes GSK-3beta-dependent phosphorylation of 
beta-catenin.

Ikeda S(1), Kishida S, Yamamoto H, Murai H, Koyama S, Kikuchi A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hiroshima University School of Medicine, 1-2-3, 
Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan.

Glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3) mediates epidermal growth factor, insulin and 
Wnt signals to various downstream events such as glycogen metabolism, gene 
expression, proliferation and differentiation. We have isolated here a 
GSK-3beta-interacting protein from a rat brain cDNA library using a yeast 
two-hybrid method. This protein consists of 832 amino acids and possesses 
Regulators of G protein Signaling (RGS) and dishevelled (Dsh) homologous domains 
in its N- and C-terminal regions, respectively. The predicted amino acid 
sequence of this GSK-3beta-interacting protein shows 94% identity with mouse 
Axin, which recently has been identified as a negative regulator of the Wnt 
signaling pathway; therefore, we termed this protein rAxin (rat Axin). rAxin 
interacted directly with, and was phosphorylated by, GSK-3beta. rAxin also 
interacted directly with the armadillo repeats of beta-catenin. The binding site 
of rAxin for GSK-3beta was distinct from the beta-catenin-binding site, and 
these three proteins formed a ternary complex. Furthermore, rAxin promoted 
GSK-3beta-dependent phosphorylation of beta-catenin. These results suggest that 
rAxin negatively regulates the Wnt signaling pathway by interacting with 
GSK-3beta and beta-catenin and mediating the signal from GSK-3beta to 
beta-catenin.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/17.5.1371
PMCID: PMC1170485
PMID: 9482734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
