---
pmid: '20858707'
title: Selective transport of monoamine neurotransmitters by human plasma membrane
  monoamine transporter and organic cation transporter 3.
authors:
- Duan H
- Wang J
journal: J Pharmacol Exp Ther
year: '2010'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2993547
doi: 10.1124/jpet.110.170142
---

# Selective transport of monoamine neurotransmitters by human plasma membrane monoamine transporter and organic cation transporter 3.
**Authors:** Duan H, Wang J
**Journal:** J Pharmacol Exp Ther (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1124/jpet.110.170142](https://doi.org/10.1124/jpet.110.170142)
**PMC:** [PMC2993547](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2993547/)

## Abstract

1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2010 Dec;335(3):743-53. doi: 10.1124/jpet.110.170142.
Epub  2010 Sep 21.

Selective transport of monoamine neurotransmitters by human plasma membrane 
monoamine transporter and organic cation transporter 3.

Duan H(1), Wang J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics, University of Washington, H272J Health Science 
Bldg, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

The plasma membrane monoamine transporter (PMAT) and organic cation transporter 
3 (OCT3) are the two most prominent low-affinity, high-capacity (i.e., 
uptake(2)) transporters for endogenous biogenic amines. Using the Flp-in system, 
we expressed human PMAT (hPMAT) and human OCT3 (hOCT3) at similar levels in 
human embryonic kidney 293 cells. Parallel and detailed kinetics analysis 
revealed distinct and seemingly complementary patterns for the two transporters 
in transporting monoamine neurotransmitters. hPMAT is highly selective toward 
serotonin (5-HT) and dopamine, with the rank order of transport efficiency 
(V(max)/K(m)) being: dopamine, 5-HT ≫ histamine, norepinephrine, epinephrine. 
The substrate preference of hPMAT toward these amines is substantially driven by 
large (up to 15-fold) distinctions in its apparent binding affinities (K(m)). In 
contrast, hOCT3 is less selective than hPMAT toward the monoamines, and the 
V(max)/K(m) rank order for hOCT3 is: histamine > norepinephrine, epinephrine > 
dopamine >5-HT. It is noteworthy that hOCT3 demonstrated comparable (≤2-fold 
difference) K(m) toward all amines, and distinctions in V(max) played an 
important role in determining its differential transport efficiency toward the 
monoamines. Real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction revealed 
that hPMAT is expressed at much higher levels than hOCT3 in most human brain 
areas, whereas hOCT3 is selectively and highly expressed in adrenal gland and 
skeletal muscle. Our results suggest that hOCT3 represents a major uptake(2) 
transporter for histamine, epinephrine, and norepinephrine. hPMAT, on the other 
hand, is a major uptake(2) transporter for 5-HT and dopamine and may play a more 
important role in transporting these two neurotransmitters in the central 
nervous system.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.110.170142
PMCID: PMC2993547
PMID: 20858707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The plasma membrane monoamine transporter (PMAT) and organic cation transporter 3
               (OCT3) are the two most prominent low-affinity, high-capacity (i.e.,
               uptake 2 ) transporters for endogenous biogenic amines. Using the Flp-in
               system, we expressed human PMAT (hPMAT) and human OCT3 (hOCT3) at similar levels in
               human embryonic kidney 293 cells. Parallel and detailed kinetics analysis revealed
               distinct and seemingly complementary patterns for the two transporters in
               transporting monoamine neurotransmitters. hPMAT is highly selective toward serotonin
               (5-HT) and dopamine, with the rank order of transport efficiency
                  ( V max / K m ) being: dopamine,
               5-HT ≫ histamine, norepinephrine, epinephrine. The substrate preference
               of hPMAT toward these amines is substantially driven by large (up to 15-fold)
               distinctions in its apparent binding affinities ( K m ). In
               contrast, hOCT3 is less selective than hPMAT toward the monoamines, and the V max / K m rank order for
               hOCT3 is: histamine > norepinephrine, epinephrine > dopamine
               >5-HT. It is noteworthy that hOCT3 demonstrated comparable
               (≤2-fold difference) K m toward all amines,
               and distinctions in V max played an important role in
               determining its differential transport efficiency toward the monoamines. Real-time
               reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction revealed that hPMAT is expressed at
               much higher levels than hOCT3 in most human brain areas, whereas hOCT3 is selectively
               and highly expressed in adrenal gland and skeletal muscle. Our results suggest that
               hOCT3 represents a major uptake 2 transporter for histamine, epinephrine,
               and norepinephrine. hPMAT, on the other hand, is a major uptake 2 transporter for 5-HT and dopamine and may play a more important role in transporting
               these two neurotransmitters in the central nervous system.

Introduction

The monoamines, including the catecholamines (dopamine, epinephrine, norepinephrine),
            serotonin (5-HT), and histamine, are a group of important neurotransmitters and
            neurohormones. Monoamines regulate a wide array of physiological, behavioral, cognitive,
            and endocrine functions in central and peripheral nervous systems ( Carlsson, 1987 ; Greengard,
            2001 ). The actions of released monoamine neurotransmitters are terminated by
            plasma membrane transporters that actively remove the transmitters from the
            extracellular space. Two distinct transport systems, named uptake 1 and
               uptake 2 , are responsible for the clearance of monoamines ( Gründemann et al., 1998 ; Eisenhofer, 2001 ). Uptake 1 consists of
               Na + - and Cl − -dependent, high-affinity transporters
            in the solute carrier 6 family and includes the 5-HT transporter (SERT; SLC6A4), the
            dopamine transporter (DAT; SLC6A3), and the norepinephrine transporter (NET; SLC6A2)
               ( Blakely et al., 1994 ; Torres et al., 2003 ). Predominantly expressed on the nerve endings
            of monoaminergic neurons, uptake 1 transporters are the major mechanism for
            clearing released transmitters from the synaptic cleft. They are also the targets for
            numerous clinically significant agents such as antidepressants and drugs of abuse ( Amara and Kuhar, 1993 ; Torres et al., 2003 ).

The uptake 2 was originally characterized as a Na + - and
               Cl − -independent, low-affinity, high-capacity transport system
            in peripheral tissues such as heart and smooth muscle cells ( Iversen, 1971 ; Bönisch et
               al., 1985 ; Eisenhofer, 2001 ).
            Historically, uptake 2 has been associated with monoamine metabolism and was
            proposed to play a backup role in monoamine uptake ( Gründemann et al., 1998 ; Eisenhofer, 2001 ). However, emerging data suggest that these transporters may
            be actively involved in various monoamine signaling pathways and may represent promising
            targets for neuropsychiatric and neurodegenerative disorders ( Schildkraut and Mooney, 2004 ; Zhou
               et al., 2007 ; Cui et al., 2009 ; Daws, 2009 ).

The molecular identity of uptake 2 was unclear until recently. Molecular
            cloning work, including that from our laboratory, suggests that uptake 2 consists of multiple organic cation transporters with broad substrate selectivity ( Gründemann et al., 1998 ; Wu et al., 2000 ; Engel et al., 2004 ; Daws, 2009 ). In
            particular, the organic cation transporter 3 (OCT3; also termed extraneuronal monoamine
            transporter) and the plasma membrane monoamine transporter (PMAT) are the two most
            prominent uptake 2 transporters for endogenous monoamines ( Gründemann et al., 1998 ; Wu et al., 2000 ; Engel et al., 2004 ; Daws, 2009 ). OCT3
            (SLC22A3) and PMAT (SLC29A4) both transport a broad range of organic cations, including
            monoamine neurotransmitters and the prototypical organic cations
            1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP+) and tetraethylammonium (TEA) ( Gründemann et al., 1998 ; Kekuda et al., 1998 ; Engel et al.,
            2004 ; Engel and Wang, 2005 ). OCT3- and
            PMAT-mediated monoamine transport show classic uptake 2 characteristics, such
            as Na + and Cl − independency and low substrate affinity
            but high transport capacity ( Wu et al., 1998 ; Engel et al., 2004 ). Both transporters are
            highly sensitive to inhibition by the isocyanine compound, decynium 22 (D22) ( Hayer-Zillgen et al., 2002 ; Engel et al., 2004 ). However, OCT3 is highly sensitive to
            corticosterone, whereas PMAT is not ( Hayer-Zillgen et
               al., 2002 ; Engel et al., 2004 ). OCT3
            and PMAT have been reported to be expressed in the brain and a number of peripheral
            tissues ( Slitt et al., 2002 ; Engel et al., 2004 ). In rodent brains, in situ
            hybridization and immunolocalization work suggested that Oct3 and Pmat are expressed in
            neuronal cells in many brain regions ( Amphoux et al.,
               2006 ; Dahlin et al., 2007 ; Gasser et al., 2009 ). Oct3 is also reported to be
            expressed in astroglial cells ( Cui et al., 2009 ; Gasser et al., 2009 ).

The large overlaps in substrate specificity and tissue distribution of OCT3 and PMAT
            raise important questions regarding their specific contribution to monoamine clearance
            in vivo. Although both transporters have been characterized in several studies ( Gründemann et al., 1998 , 1999 ; Wu et al.,
               2000 ; Hayer-Zillgen et al., 2002 ; Engel et al., 2004 ; Engel and Wang, 2005 ), comprehensive and parallel analyses have not been
            performed to compare their substrate selectivity and transport kinetics for endogenous
            monoamines. Furthermore, although the expression patterns of Oct3 and Pmat have been
            studied in rat and mouse brains ( Amphoux et al.,
            2006 ; Dahlin et al., 2007 ; Vialou et al., 2007 ), little is known regarding
            their relative expression levels in various human brain areas. The current study is
            designed to compare the intrinsic transport efficiencies of human PMAT and human OCT3
            for endogenous monoamines. Using the Flp-in system, we stably expressed hPMAT and hOCT3
            at comparable levels in HEK293 cells and compared their transport kinetics toward
            monoamines. We then determined and compared the expression levels of the two
            transporters in various human brain regions and tissues. Finally, we evaluated the
            contribution of each transporter to 5-HT clearance through mouse brain synaptosome
            uptake studies.

Discussion

The removal of released monoamine neurotransmitters through transporters is a major
            mechanism to inactivate the chemical messengers. Studies suggest that, in addition to
            the high-affinity, low-capacity uptake 1 transporters, low-affinity,
            high-capacity uptake 2 transporters play a significant role in regulating
            monoamine neurotransmission ( Iversen, 1971 ; Eisenhofer, 2001 ). Uptake 2 transporters
            (e.g., PMAT and OCT3) may represent promising drug targets for neuropsychiatric
            disorders ( Schildkraut and Mooney, 2004 ; Zhou et al., 2007 ; Daws, 2009 ). However, before these transporters can be further explored as
            drug targets, it is crucial to know the relative contribution of PMAT and OCT3 in
            clearing specific monoamines in vivo, which is directly related to their intrinsic
            transport efficiencies and expression levels at the physiological sites of interest.

The transport activities of OCT3 or PMAT toward monoamines have been evaluated
            previously in several discrete studies ( Gründemann et al., 1998 , 1999 ; Engel et al., 2004 ; Engel and Wang, 2005 ; Amphoux et al., 2006 ). However, results from these studies are difficult to
            compare because transporter expression levels vary in different systems and kinetic data
            are not available for some monoamines. Furthermore, discrepancies exist in published
            data. For example, the reported K m of hOCT3 for
            norepinephrine varied more than 5-fold ( Gründemann et al., 1998 ; Amphoux
               et al., 2006 ; Koepsell et al., 2007 ),
            probably because of prolonged incubation time used in some studies. Therefore, in the
            current study, we aimed to comprehensively and rigorously analyze the transport kinetics
            of hOCT3 and hPMAT toward monoamines under well controlled conditions.

Using the Flp-in system, we isogenically expressed hPMAT and hOCT3 in HEK293 cell lines
            at comparable transcript levels ( Fig. 1 ). During
            the course of our study, the transport activities of both hPMAT and hOCT3 were stable as
            measured by MPP+ uptake (<20% variation; data not shown). All studies were
            done at a short incubation time within the linear range ( Fig. 3 ). Our analysis revealed complementary substrate preference of hPMAT
            and hOCT3 for the monoamine neurotransmitters. hPMAT exhibits strong preference for
            dopamine and 5-HT, whereas hOCT3 favors histamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine. The
            two transporters differ markedly in their magnitudes of selectivity. The V max / K m values of hPMAT for
            5-HT and DA are five to seven times greater than for other monoamines ( Table 2 ). In contrast, hOCT3 shows only 2- to
            4.6-fold difference in V max / K m for monoamines. The mechanisms underlying their selectivity are also different. For
            hPMAT, the substrate preference is readily observable in its K m , suggesting that initial substrate binding is an
            important step for hPMAT selectivity. In contrast, hOCT3 exhibits less than 2-fold
            variations in its K m values toward various monoamines.
            Distinction in V max contributes significantly to differences
            in V max / K m , suggesting that
            turnover rates are more important in the monoamine selectivity of hOCT3. MPP+ and TEA
            are two probe substrates for all organic cation transporters ( Koepsell et al., 2007 ). MPP+ is efficiently transported by hOCT3 and
            hPMAT with comparable K m . It is noteworthy that hPMAT
            transports dopamine and 5-HT almost as effectively as MPP+ ( Table 2 ). hOCT3, however, transports its most favored monoamine,
            histamine, only at 50% efficiency of MPP+. We also found that TEA is a poor substrate
            for both hOCT3 and hPMAT with transport efficiencies only 3% of that of MPP+.

The complementary kinetic profiles of hPMAT and hOCT3 suggest that the two transporters
            may have distinct functions in monoamine uptake in vivo. To further evaluate the roles
            of these transporters in vivo, we quantified the mRNA copy numbers in selected human
            tissues and brain regions by real-time RT-PCR ( Fig.
            5 ). In the CNS, hPMAT transcripts significantly outnumber hOCT3 in eight of the
            nine tested regions, suggesting that hPMAT is the major uptake 2 transporter
            in the CNS. Consistent with our previous findings in mouse brain ( Dahlin et al., 2007 ), hPMAT is highly expressed in brain areas
            innervated with serotonergic and dopaminergic fibers such as the cerebral cortex,
            hippocampus, substantia nigra, and cerebellum. However, contrary to our previous
            Northern blot data, which showed high hPMAT hybridization signal in skeletal muscle
               ( Engel et al., 2004 ), we detected only low
            expression of hPMAT in this tissue by real-time RT-PCR. The reason for this discrepancy
            could be interindividual variations in gene expression. In addition, our previous study
            may have overestimated the abundance of hPMAT in skeletal muscle because the mRNA
            loading control (β-actin) was overly saturated in that study. Similar to
            this study, we did not detect significant expression of Pmat in mouse skeletal muscle
               ( Dahlin et al., 2007 ). Our results showed that
            hOCT3 is selectively and highly expressed in the adrenal gland and skeletal muscle. The
            medulla of adrenal gland is the body's major source of circulating epinephrine and
            norepinephrine, which elicit the fight-or-flight response ( Ungar and Phillips, 1983 ). In the skeletal muscle, adrenergic
            signaling through α- and β-adrenoceptors controls important
            physiological functions, including muscle blood flow and metabolism ( Lynch and Ryall, 2008 ). The high expression of hOCT3
            in these organs may serve to take up excess circulating epinephrine/norepinephrine after
            their release.

The apparent affinities of hPMAT and hOCT3 toward the monoamine neurotransmitters are
            much lower than the uptake 1 transporters. The K m values of hPMAT and hOCT3 toward monoamines are in the micromolar to millimolar range
               ( Tables 1 and 2 ) whereas the K m values of uptake 1 transporters determined in heterologous expression systems are in the submicromolar
            range ( Daws, 2009 ). The in vivo concentrations of
            monoamine neurotransmitters fluctuate and vary significantly in different brain areas.
            The extracellular concentrations of the monoamine are highest at its site of release and
            plummet as the transmitter diffuses away ( Bunin and
               Wightman, 1999 ). For example, whereas the concentrations of extracellular 5-HT
            in mouse striatum and frontal cortex were determined to be in the low nanomolar range by
            microdialysis ( Mathews et al., 2004 ), its
            concentration at the synaptic cleft was estimated to be as high as 6 mM ( Bunin and Wightman, 1998 ), which far exceeds the K m of SERT (0.1–0.4 μM). Instead,
            5-HT is estimated to diffuse more than 20 μm away from the synaptic cleft,
            where its concentration falls into the nanomolar range and 5-HT is recycled by SERT
            localized in the perisynaptic area ( Bunin and Wightman,
               1998 , 1999 ). Although the precise
            localization of PMAT or OCT3 in neurons is unknown, it is possible that they participate
            in the clearance of monoamines at high concentration areas and/or after repeated
            stimulation of monoaminergic neurons. Clearance by uptake 2 transporters may
            also predominate when uptake 1 transporters are inactivated pharmacologically,
            such as under antidepressant treatment. It may not be unusual that the brain uses both
            high-affinity and low-affinity uptake systems to regulate a wide concentration range of
            certain endogenous molecules. A recent analysis of Slc gene expression
            in the mouse brain also demonstrated the coexpression of Na + -dependent,
            high-affinity transporters and Na + -independent, low-affinity transporters for
            other endogenous compounds such as choline, nucleosides, and glucose ( Dahlin et al., 2009 ).

As an exploratory study, we also tested the relative contribution of Pmat and Oct3 to
            monoamine clearance in mouse brain synaptosomes by using chemical inhibitors ( Fig. 7 ). Citalopram, GBR12909 , and desipramine reduced
            synaptosome 5-HT, dopamine, and norepinephrine uptake by approximately 45 to 60%,
            consistent with uptake 1 transporters playing a major role in brain monoamine
            clearance. Coinhibition of D22 with uptake 1 inhibitors suppressed monoamine
            uptake by approximately 60 to 85%, suggesting that uptake 2 activities may
            account for approximately 15 to 35% of total uptake. The much greater inhibitory effect
            of D22 alone for 5-HT and dopamine uptake suggests that this compound may also inhibit
            SERT and DAT to certain degrees. In contrast, the OCT3-specific inhibitor corticosterone
            had no inhibitory effect on synaptosome uptake of any of the monoamines. These data
            suggest that PMAT may play a more important role in mediating uptake 2 activities in the brain. However, we can not exclude the role of Oct3 in brain monoamine
            uptake because there are limitations in the synaptosome uptake studies. Synaptosome
            studies mainly detect uptake activities in neuronal cells. Oct3 is expressed in
            astroglial cells ( Cui et al., 2009 ) and could be
            important for monoamine uptake in these cells. In addition, our studies used
            synaptosomes prepared from whole brain homogenates and thus may not be able to detect
            Oct3 activities in specific brain areas or microstructures where its expression is high.

In summary, we examined side-by-side the transport kinetics of hPMAT and hOCT3 for
            endogenous monoamines in a well controlled expression system. Our data demonstrate
            complementary substrate preference and distinct tissue expression patterns for hOCT3 and
            hPMAT. Our results suggest that hPMAT is the major uptake 2 transporter for
            5-HT and DA in the CNS, whereas hOCT3 represent the major uptake 2 transporter
            for histamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine in peripheral organs. To explore
               uptake 2 transporters as potential drug targets, the distinct roles of
            these transporters in human physiology should be considered.
