---
pmid: '27559042'
title: Glycoproteomics Reveals Decorin Peptides With Anti-Myostatin Activity in Human
  Atrial Fibrillation.
authors:
- Barallobre-Barreiro J
- Gupta SK
- Zoccarato A
- Kitazume-Taneike R
- Fava M
- Yin X
- Werner T
- Hirt MN
- Zampetaki A
- Viviano A
- Chong M
- Bern M
- Kourliouros A
- Domenech N
- Willeit P
- Shah AM
- Jahangiri M
- Schaefer L
- Fischer JW
- Iozzo RV
- Viner R
- Thum T
- Heineke J
- Kichler A
- Otsu K
- Mayr M
journal: Circulation
year: '2016'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC5081096
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.115.016423
---

# Glycoproteomics Reveals Decorin Peptides With Anti-Myostatin Activity in Human Atrial Fibrillation.
**Authors:** Barallobre-Barreiro J, Gupta SK, Zoccarato A, Kitazume-Taneike R, Fava M, Yin X, Werner T, Hirt MN, Zampetaki A, Viviano A, Chong M, Bern M, Kourliouros A, Domenech N, Willeit P, Shah AM, Jahangiri M, Schaefer L, Fischer JW, Iozzo RV, Viner R, Thum T, Heineke J, Kichler A, Otsu K, Mayr M
**Journal:** Circulation (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.115.016423](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.115.016423)
**PMC:** [PMC5081096](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5081096/)

## Abstract

1. Circulation. 2016 Sep 13;134(11):817-32. doi:
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.115.016423.  Epub 2016 Aug 24.

Glycoproteomics Reveals Decorin Peptides With Anti-Myostatin Activity in Human 
Atrial Fibrillation.

Barallobre-Barreiro J(1), Gupta SK(1), Zoccarato A(1), Kitazume-Taneike R(1), 
Fava M(1), Yin X(1), Werner T(1), Hirt MN(1), Zampetaki A(1), Viviano A(1), 
Chong M(1), Bern M(1), Kourliouros A(1), Domenech N(1), Willeit P(1), Shah 
AM(1), Jahangiri M(1), Schaefer L(1), Fischer JW(1), Iozzo RV(1), Viner R(1), 
Thum T(1), Heineke J(1), Kichler A(1), Otsu K(1), Mayr M(2).

Author information:
(1)From King's British Heart Foundation Centre, King's College London, United 
Kingdom (J.B.-B., A. Zoccarato, R.K.-T., M.F., X.Y., A. Zampetaki, M.C., P.W., 
A.M.S., K.O., M.M.); Institute for Molecular and Translational Therapeutic 
Strategies, MH-Hannover, Germany (S.K.G., T.T.); St George's Hospital, NHS 
Trust, London, United Kingdom (M.F., A.V., A.K., M.J.); University Medical 
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany (T.W., M.N.H.); Protein Metrics, San Carlos, 
CA (M.B.); Biobanco A Coruña, INIBIC-Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de A 
Coruña, Spain (N.D.); Institut für Allgemeine Pharmakologie und Toxikologie, 
Klinikum der Goethe-Universität Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, Germany (L.S.); 
Institute for Pharmacology and Clinical Pharmacology, Heinrich-Heine-University, 
Düsseldorf, Germany (J.W.F.); Sidney Kimmel Medical College at Thomas Jefferson 
University, Philadelphia, PA (R.V.I.); Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA 
(R.V.); Experimental Cardiology, Department of Cardiology and Angiology, 
MH-Hannover, Germany (J.H.); and Laboratoire Vecteurs: Synthèse et Applications 
Thérapeutiques, UMR 7199 CNRS Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France (A.K.).
(2)From King's British Heart Foundation Centre, King's College London, United 
Kingdom (J.B.-B., A. Zoccarato, R.K.-T., M.F., X.Y., A. Zampetaki, M.C., P.W., 
A.M.S., K.O., M.M.); Institute for Molecular and Translational Therapeutic 
Strategies, MH-Hannover, Germany (S.K.G., T.T.); St George's Hospital, NHS 
Trust, London, United Kingdom (M.F., A.V., A.K., M.J.); University Medical 
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany (T.W., M.N.H.); Protein Metrics, San Carlos, 
CA (M.B.); Biobanco A Coruña, INIBIC-Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de A 
Coruña, Spain (N.D.); Institut für Allgemeine Pharmakologie und Toxikologie, 
Klinikum der Goethe-Universität Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, Germany (L.S.); 
Institute for Pharmacology and Clinical Pharmacology, Heinrich-Heine-University, 
Düsseldorf, Germany (J.W.F.); Sidney Kimmel Medical College at Thomas Jefferson 
University, Philadelphia, PA (R.V.I.); Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA 
(R.V.); Experimental Cardiology, Department of Cardiology and Angiology, 
MH-Hannover, Germany (J.H.); and Laboratoire Vecteurs: Synthèse et Applications 
Thérapeutiques, UMR 7199 CNRS Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France (A.K.). 
manuel.mayr@kcl.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Myocardial fibrosis is a feature of many cardiac diseases. We used 
proteomics to profile glycoproteins in the human cardiac extracellular matrix 
(ECM).
METHODS: Atrial specimens were analyzed by mass spectrometry after extraction of 
ECM proteins and enrichment for glycoproteins or glycopeptides.
RESULTS: ECM-related glycoproteins were identified in left and right atrial 
appendages from the same patients. Several known glycosylation sites were 
confirmed. In addition, putative and novel glycosylation sites were detected. On 
enrichment for glycoproteins, peptides of the small leucine-rich proteoglycan 
decorin were identified consistently in the flowthrough. Of all ECM proteins 
identified, decorin was found to be the most fragmented. Within its protein 
core, 18 different cleavage sites were identified. In contrast, less cleavage 
was observed for biglycan, the most closely related proteoglycan. Decorin 
processing differed between human ventricles and atria and was altered in 
disease. The C-terminus of decorin, important for the interaction with 
connective tissue growth factor, was detected predominantly in ventricles in 
comparison with atria. In contrast, atrial appendages from patients in 
persistent atrial fibrillation had greater levels of full-length decorin but 
also harbored a cleavage site that was not found in atrial appendages from 
patients in sinus rhythm. This cleavage site preceded the N-terminal domain of 
decorin that controls muscle growth by altering the binding capacity for 
myostatin. Myostatin expression was decreased in atrial appendages of patients 
with persistent atrial fibrillation and hearts of decorin null mice. A synthetic 
peptide corresponding to this decorin region dose-dependently inhibited the 
response to myostatin in cardiomyocytes and in perfused mouse hearts.
CONCLUSIONS: This proteomics study is the first to analyze the human cardiac 
ECM. Novel processed forms of decorin protein core, uncovered in human atrial 
appendages, can regulate the local bioavailability of antihypertrophic and 
profibrotic growth factors.

© 2016 American Heart Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.115.016423
PMCID: PMC5081096
PMID: 27559042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Methods

Atrial specimens were analyzed by mass spectrometry after extraction of ECM proteins and enrichment for glycoproteins or glycopeptides.

Results

ECM-related glycoproteins were identified in left and right atrial appendages from the same patients. Several known glycosylation sites were confirmed. In addition, putative and novel glycosylation sites were detected. Upon enrichment for glycoproteins, peptides of the small leucine-rich proteoglycan decorin were consistently identified in the flow through. Out of all ECM proteins identified, decorin was found to be most fragmented. Within its protein core, eighteen different cleavage sites were identified. In contrast, no cleavage was observed for biglycan, the most closely related proteoglycan. Decorin processing differed between human ventricles and atria and was altered in disease. The C-terminus of decorin, important for the interaction with connective tissue growth factor, was predominantly detected in ventricles compared to atria. In contrast, atrial appendages from patients in persistent atrial fibrillation had higher levels of full-length decorin but also harbored a cleavage site that was not found in atrial appendages from patients in sinus rhythm. This cleavage site preceded the N-terminal domain of decorin that controls muscle growth by altering the binding capacity for myostatin. Myostatin expression was decreased in atrial appendages of patients with persistent atrial fibrillation and hearts of decorin null mice. A synthetic peptide corresponding to this decorin region dose-dependently inhibited the response to myostatin in cardiomyocytes and in perfused mouse hearts.

Conclusions

This proteomics study is the first to analyse the human cardiac ECM. Novel processed forms of decorin protein core, uncovered in human atrial appendages can regulate the local bioavailability of anti-hypertrophic and pro-fibrotic growth factors.

Introduction

The importance of the ECM is increasingly being recognized, gradually overturning the concept that the cardiac ECM is inert. ECM proteins account for physiological properties of the cardiac tissue but also contribute to fibrosis and hypertrophy in disease. Fibrosis involves structural proteins but also matricellular proteins, predominantly glycoproteins. Due to the continuous need for dynamic adaptation in the heart, matricellular proteins are of particular importance. Previous studies have demonstrated that ECM deposition facilitates the development of ectopic pacemakers and late potentials as a result of inhomogeneous stimulus conduction, and can also lead to fluctuations in membrane potential. 1 Thus, atrial fibrotic remodeling has been implicated as a potential therapeutic target in atrial fibrillation (AF). 2

Proteomics offers the ability to quantify multiple proteins simultaneously without the constraints of antibodies. Most proteomics studies, including the ones on AF, investigated the cellular proteome. 3 , 4 We have previously developed a sequential extraction procedure to reduce cellular proteins before studying ECM remodelling in a porcine model of ischemia/reperfusion injury. 5 No proteomics study has been conducted on the human cardiac ECM.

Therefore, the aims of the present study were fourfold: i) to provide a comprehensive characterisation of ECM proteins in human atrial appendages; ii) to interrogate protein glycosylation of matricellular proteins; iii) to explore regional differences in the cardiac ECM composition; and iv) to interrogate ECM remodelling in the context of AF. We discovered extensive cleavage in the protein core of the proteoglycan decorin, a key constituent of the cardiac microenvironment. Decorin is a member of the small leucine-rich proteoglycan family (SLRPs) 6 , 7 and regulates collagen fibrillogenesis as well as a variety of other ECM molecules involved in cell signalling. 8 Processed forms of decorin detected in the human cardiac ECM had myostatin and connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) binding properties that might contribute to the pathophysiology of AF by regulating the bioavailability of growth factors.

An expanded Methods section is available in the online data supplement at http://circ.ahajournals.org .

Discussion

By applying a novel proteomics approach to human atria, fundamental insights were obtained about the composition and the proteolytic processing of the human cardiac ECM, which has not been analyzed by proteomics thus far. Using proteomics in combination with metabolomics, we have previously shown that discordant metabolic alterations are evident in individuals susceptible to postoperative AF. 4 We now identify endogenous decorin cleavage products in AF that may contribute to atrial remodelling and play a previously unrecognized role in the susceptibility or perpetuation of arrhythmias by altering the local bioavailability of growth factors, such as CTGF and myostatin.

The glycoproteomic analysis of atrial appendages allowed, for the first time, a detailed analysis of human cardiac ECM proteins. It examined differences in the ECM composition between RAA and LAA; confirmed putative and revealed new glycosylation sites in the cardiac ECM; and identified decorin-derived cleavage products that can act as local regulators of growth factor activity. Proteomic workflows, as outlined in this study, will be essential to explore the different aspects of ECM remodelling in cardiovascular disease, as exemplified by the observed changes in decorin processing during structural remodelling in persistent AF.
