---
pmid: '26006083'
title: The multidrug resistance pump ABCB1 is a substrate for the ubiquitin ligase
  NEDD4-1.
authors:
- Akkaya BG
- Zolnerciks JK
- Ritchie TK
- Bauer B
- Hartz AM
- Sullivan JA
- Linton KJ
journal: Mol Membr Biol
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4844833
doi: 10.3109/09687688.2015.1023378
---

# The multidrug resistance pump ABCB1 is a substrate for the ubiquitin ligase NEDD4-1.
**Authors:** Akkaya BG, Zolnerciks JK, Ritchie TK, Bauer B, Hartz AM, Sullivan JA, Linton KJ
**Journal:** Mol Membr Biol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.3109/09687688.2015.1023378](https://doi.org/10.3109/09687688.2015.1023378)
**PMC:** [PMC4844833](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4844833/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Membr Biol. 2015;32(2):39-45. doi: 10.3109/09687688.2015.1023378. Epub
2015  May 26.

The multidrug resistance pump ABCB1 is a substrate for the ubiquitin ligase 
NEDD4-1.

Akkaya BG(1), Zolnerciks JK, Ritchie TK, Bauer B, Hartz AM, Sullivan JA, Linton 
KJ.

Author information:
(1)Blizard Institute, Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, 
Queen Mary University of London , London , UK .

The ATP Binding Cassette transporter ABCB1 can export the neurotoxic peptide 
β-amyloid from endothelial cells that line the blood-brain barrier (BBB). This 
has the potential to lower cerebral levels of β-amyloid, but ABCB1 expression in 
the BBB appears to be progressively reduced in patients with Alzheimer's 
disease. The surface density of many membrane proteins is regulated by 
ubiquitination catalyzed by ubiquitin E3 ligases. In brain capillaries of mice 
challenged with β-amyloid ex vivo, we show that the level of the ubiquitin 
ligase Nedd4 increases concomitant with reduction in Abcb1. In vitro we show 
that human ABCB1 is a substrate for human NEDD4-1 ligase. Recombinant ABCB1 was 
purified from Sf21 insect cells and incubated with recombinant NEDD4-1 purified 
from Escherichia coli. The treated ABCB1 had reduced mobility on SDS-PAGE, and 
mass spectrometry identified eight lysine residues, K271, K272, K575, K685, 
K877, K885, K887 and K1062 that were ubiquitinated by NEDD4-1. Molecular 
modelling showed that all of the residues are exposed on the surface of the 
intracellular domains of ABCB1. K877, K885 and K887 in particular, are located 
in the intracellular loop of transmembrane helix 10 (TMH10) in close proximity, 
in the tertiary fold, to a putative NEDD4-1 binding site in the intracellular 
helix extending from TMH12 (PxY motif, residues 996-998). Transient expression 
of NEDD4-1 in HEK293 Flp-In cells stably expressing ABCB1 was shown to reduce 
the surface density of the transporter. Together, the data identify this 
ubiquitin ligase as a potential target for intervention in the pathophysiology 
of Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.3109/09687688.2015.1023378
PMCID: PMC4844833
PMID: 26006083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests: The authors declare no 
conflict of interests.
