---
pmid: '17360811'
title: PI3K activation is required for PMA-directed activation of cSrc by AFAP-110.
authors:
- Walker VG
- Ammer A
- Cao Z
- Clump AC
- Jiang BH
- Kelley LC
- Weed SA
- Zot H
- Flynn DC
journal: Am J Physiol Cell Physiol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.00525.2006
---

# PI3K activation is required for PMA-directed activation of cSrc by AFAP-110.
**Authors:** Walker VG, Ammer A, Cao Z, Clump AC, Jiang BH, Kelley LC, Weed SA, Zot H, Flynn DC
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Cell Physiol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpcell.00525.2006](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.00525.2006)

## Abstract

1. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2007 Jul;293(1):C119-32. doi: 
10.1152/ajpcell.00525.2006. Epub 2007 Mar 14.

PI3K activation is required for PMA-directed activation of cSrc by AFAP-110.

Walker VG(1), Ammer A, Cao Z, Clump AC, Jiang BH, Kelley LC, Weed SA, Zot H, 
Flynn DC.

Author information:
(1)The Mary Babb Randolph Cancer Center, Dept. of Microbiology, Immunology, and 
Cell Biology, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV 26506-9300, USA.

Activation of PKCalpha will induce the cSrc binding partner AFAP-110 to 
colocalize with and activate cSrc. The ability of AFAP-110 to colocalize with 
cSrc is contingent on the integrity of the amino-terminal pleckstrin homology 
(PH1) domain, while the ability to activate cSrc is dependent on the integrity 
of its SH3 binding motif, which engages the cSrc SH3 domain. The outcome of 
AFAP-110-directed cSrc activation is a change in actin filament integrity and 
the formation of podosomes. Here, we address what cellular signals promote 
AFAP-110 to colocalize with and activate cSrc, in response to PKCalpha 
activation or PMA treatment. Because PH domain integrity in AFAP-110 is required 
for colocalization, and PH domains are known to interact with both protein and 
lipid binding partners, we sought to determine whether phosphatidylinositol 
3-kinase (PI3K) activation played a role in PMA-induced colocalization between 
AFAP-110 and cSrc. We show that PMA treatment is able to direct activation of 
PI3K. Treatment of mouse embryo fibroblast with PI3K inhibitors blocked 
PMA-directed colocalization between AFAP-110 and cSrc and subsequent cSrc 
activation. PMA also was unable to induce colocalization or cSrc activation in 
cells that lacked the p85alpha and -beta regulatory subunits of PI3K. This 
signaling pathway was required for migration in a wound healing assay. Cells 
that were null for cSrc or the p85 regulatory subunits or expressed a 
dominant-negative AFAP-110 also displayed a reduction in migration. Thus PI3K 
activity is required for PMA-induced colocalization between AFAP-110 and cSrc 
and subsequent cSrc activation, and this signaling pathway promotes cell 
migration.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpcell.00525.2006
PMID: 17360811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
