---
pmid: '15916966'
title: HDAC6 regulates Hsp90 acetylation and chaperone-dependent activation of glucocorticoid
  receptor.
authors:
- Kovacs JJ
- Murphy PJ
- Gaillard S
- Zhao X
- Wu JT
- Nicchitta CV
- Yoshida M
- Toft DO
- Pratt WB
- Yao TP
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.04.021
---

# HDAC6 regulates Hsp90 acetylation and chaperone-dependent activation of glucocorticoid receptor.
**Authors:** Kovacs JJ, Murphy PJ, Gaillard S, Zhao X, Wu JT, Nicchitta CV, Yoshida M, Toft DO, Pratt WB, Yao TP
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2005.04.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2005.04.021)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2005 May 27;18(5):601-7. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.04.021.

HDAC6 regulates Hsp90 acetylation and chaperone-dependent activation of 
glucocorticoid receptor.

Kovacs JJ(1), Murphy PJ, Gaillard S, Zhao X, Wu JT, Nicchitta CV, Yoshida M, 
Toft DO, Pratt WB, Yao TP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University, Durham, North 
Carolina 27710, USA.

The molecular chaperone heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) and its accessory 
cochaperones function by facilitating the structural maturation and complex 
assembly of client proteins, including steroid hormone receptors and selected 
kinases. By promoting the activity and stability of these signaling proteins, 
Hsp90 has emerged as a critical modulator in cell signaling. Here, we present 
evidence that Hsp90 chaperone activity is regulated by reversible acetylation 
and controlled by the deacetylase HDAC6. We show that HDAC6 functions as an 
Hsp90 deacetylase. Inactivation of HDAC6 leads to Hsp90 hyperacetylation, its 
dissociation from an essential cochaperone, p23, and a loss of chaperone 
activity. In HDAC6-deficient cells, Hsp90-dependent maturation of the 
glucocorticoid receptor (GR) is compromised, resulting in GR defective in ligand 
binding, nuclear translocation, and transcriptional activation. Our results 
identify Hsp90 as a target of HDAC6 and suggest reversible acetylation as a 
unique mechanism that regulates Hsp90 chaperone complex activity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.04.021
PMID: 15916966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
