---
pmid: '21203938'
title: Specific interaction of hepatitis C virus glycoproteins with mannan binding
  lectin inhibits virus entry.
authors:
- Brown KS
- Keogh MJ
- Owsianka AM
- Adair R
- Patel AH
- Arnold JN
- Ball JK
- Sim RB
- Tarr AW
- Hickling TP
journal: Protein Cell
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC4875281
doi: 10.1007/s13238-010-0088-9
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Specific interaction of hepatitis C virus glycoproteins with mannan binding lectin inhibits virus entry.
**Authors:** Brown KS, Keogh MJ, Owsianka AM, Adair R, Patel AH, Arnold JN, Ball JK, Sim RB, Tarr AW, Hickling TP
**Journal:** Protein Cell (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13238-010-0088-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13238-010-0088-9)
**PMC:** [PMC4875281](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4875281/)

## Abstract

1. Protein Cell. 2010 Jul;1(7):664-74. doi: 10.1007/s13238-010-0088-9. Epub 2010 
Jul 29.

Specific interaction of hepatitis C virus glycoproteins with mannan binding 
lectin inhibits virus entry.

Brown KS(1), Keogh MJ, Owsianka AM, Adair R, Patel AH, Arnold JN, Ball JK, Sim 
RB, Tarr AW, Hickling TP.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, School of Molecular 
Medical Sciences, The University of Nottingham, Queen's Medical Centre, 
Nottingham, NG7 2UH, UK.

Mannan-binding lectin (MBL) is a soluble innate immune protein that binds to 
glycosylated targets. MBL acts as an opsonin and activates complement, 
contributing to the destruction and clearance of infecting microorganisms. 
Hepatitis C virus (HCV) encodes two envelope glycoproteins E1 and E2, expressed 
as non-covalent E1/E2 heterodimers in the viral envelope. E1 and E2 are 
potential ligands for MBL. Here we describe an analysis of the interaction 
between HCV and MBL using recombinant soluble E2 ectodomain fragment, the 
full-length E1/E2 heterodimer, expressed in vitro, and assess the effect of this 
interaction on virus entry. A binding assay using antibody capture of full 
length E1/E2 heterodimers was used to demonstrate calcium dependent, saturating 
binding of MBL to HCV glycoproteins. Competition with various saccharides 
further confirmed that the interaction was via the lectin domain of MBL. MBL 
binds to E1/E2 representing a broad range of virus genotypes. MBL was shown to 
neutralize the entry into Huh-7 cells of HCV pseudoparticles (HCVpp) bearing 
E1/E2 from a wide range of genotypes. HCVpp were neutralized to varying degrees. 
MBL was also shown to neutralize an authentic cell culture infectious virus, 
strain JFH-1 (HCVcc). Furthermore, binding of MBL to E1/E2 was able to activate 
the complement system via MBL-associated serine protease 2. In conclusion, MBL 
interacts directly with HCV glycoproteins, which are present on the surface of 
the virion, resulting in neutralization of HCV particles.

DOI: 10.1007/s13238-010-0088-9
PMCID: PMC4875281
PMID: 21203938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Mannan-binding lectin (MBL) is a soluble innate immune protein that binds to glycosylated targets. MBL acts as an opsonin and activates complement, contributing to the destruction and clearance of infecting microorganisms. Hepatitis C virus (HCV) encodes two envelope glycoproteins E1 and E2, expressed as non-covalent E1/E2 heterodimers in the viral envelope. E1 and E2 are potential ligands for MBL. Here we describe an analysis of the interaction between HCV and MBL using recombinant soluble E2 ectodomain fragment, the full-length E1/E2 heterodimer, expressed in vitro , and assess the effect of this interaction on virus entry. A binding assay using antibody capture of full length E1/E2 heterodimers was used to demonstrate calcium dependent, saturating binding of MBL to HCV glycoproteins. Competition with various saccharides further confirmed that the interaction was via the lectin domain of MBL. MBL binds to E1/E2 representing a broad range of virus genotypes. MBL was shown to neutralize the entry into Huh-7 cells of HCV pseudoparticles (HCVpp) bearing E1/E2 from a wide range of genotypes. HCVpp were neutralized to varying degrees. MBL was also shown to neutralize an authentic cell culture infectious virus, strain JFH-1 (HCVcc). Furthermore, binding of MBL to E1/E2 was able to activate the complement system via MBL-associated serine protease 2. In conclusion, MBL interacts directly with HCV glycoproteins, which are present on the surface of the virion, resulting in neutralization of HCV particles.
