---
pmid: '38670073'
title: Positive selection CRISPR screens reveal a druggable pocket in an oligosaccharyltransferase
  required for inflammatory signaling to NF-κB.
authors:
- Lampson BL
- Ramίrez AS
- Baro M
- He L
- Hegde M
- Koduri V
- Pfaff JL
- Hanna RE
- Kowal J
- Shirole NH
- He Y
- Doench JG
- Contessa JN
- Locher KP
- Kaelin WG Jr
journal: Cell
year: '2024'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC11149550
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2024.03.022
---

# Positive selection CRISPR screens reveal a druggable pocket in an oligosaccharyltransferase required for inflammatory signaling to NF-κB.
**Authors:** Lampson BL, Ramίrez AS, Baro M, He L, Hegde M, Koduri V, Pfaff JL, Hanna RE, Kowal J, Shirole NH, He Y, Doench JG, Contessa JN, Locher KP, Kaelin WG Jr
**Journal:** Cell (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2024.03.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2024.03.022)
**PMC:** [PMC11149550](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11149550/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2024 Apr 25;187(9):2209-2223.e16. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2024.03.022.

Positive selection CRISPR screens reveal a druggable pocket in an 
oligosaccharyltransferase required for inflammatory signaling to NF-κB.

Lampson BL(1), Ramίrez AS(2), Baro M(3), He L(1), Hegde M(4), Koduri V(5), Pfaff 
JL(1), Hanna RE(4), Kowal J(2), Shirole NH(1), He Y(1), Doench JG(4), Contessa 
JN(3), Locher KP(6), Kaelin WG Jr(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
(2)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, Eidgenössische Technische 
Hochschule (ETH), Zürich, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Therapeutic Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, CT 06510, USA.
(4)Genetic Perturbation Platform, Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(5)Division of Hematology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
(6)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, Eidgenössische Technische 
Hochschule (ETH), Zürich, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
locher@mol.biol.ethz.ch.
(7)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. Electronic address: 
william_kaelin@dfci.harvard.edu.

Nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) plays roles in various diseases. Many inflammatory 
signals, such as circulating lipopolysaccharides (LPSs), activate NF-κB via 
specific receptors. Using whole-genome CRISPR-Cas9 screens of LPS-treated cells 
that express an NF-κB-driven suicide gene, we discovered that the LPS receptor 
Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) is specifically dependent on the 
oligosaccharyltransferase complex OST-A for N-glycosylation and cell-surface 
localization. The tool compound NGI-1 inhibits OST complexes in vivo, but the 
underlying molecular mechanism remained unknown. We did a CRISPR base-editor 
screen for NGI-1-resistant variants of STT3A, the catalytic subunit of OST-A. 
These variants, in conjunction with cryoelectron microscopy studies, revealed 
that NGI-1 binds the catalytic site of STT3A, where it traps a molecule of the 
donor substrate dolichyl-PP-GlcNAc2-Man9-Glc3, suggesting an uncompetitive 
inhibition mechanism. Our results provide a rationale for and an initial step 
toward the development of STT3A-specific inhibitors and illustrate the power of 
contemporaneous base-editor and structural studies to define drug mechanism of 
action.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2024.03.022
PMCID: PMC11149550
PMID: 38670073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests B.L.L. is currently a 
paid employee of Blueprint Medicines. M.H. is currently a paid employee of 
Thermo Fisher Scientific. W.G.K. is a paid advisor to Casdin Capital, Circle 
Pharma, FibroGen, Nextech Invest, and Tango Therapeutics. W.G.K. receives 
compensation for serving as a board director for Eli Lilly and Company, IconOVir 
Bio, and LifeMine Therapeutics.
