---
pmid: '10921876'
title: APC(ste9/srw1) promotes degradation of mitotic cyclins in G(1) and is inhibited
  by cdc2 phosphorylation.
authors:
- Blanco MA
- Sánchez-Díaz A
- de Prada JM
- Moreno S
journal: EMBO J
year: '2000'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC306614
doi: 10.1093/emboj/19.15.3945
---

# APC(ste9/srw1) promotes degradation of mitotic cyclins in G(1) and is inhibited by cdc2 phosphorylation.
**Authors:** Blanco MA, Sánchez-Díaz A, de Prada JM, Moreno S
**Journal:** EMBO J (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/19.15.3945](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/19.15.3945)
**PMC:** [PMC306614](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC306614/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2000 Aug 1;19(15):3945-55. doi: 10.1093/emboj/19.15.3945.

APC(ste9/srw1) promotes degradation of mitotic cyclins in G(1) and is inhibited 
by cdc2 phosphorylation.

Blanco MA(1), Sánchez-Díaz A, de Prada JM, Moreno S.

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Microbiología Bioquímica, Departamento de Microbiología y 
Genética, CSIC/Universidad de Salamanca, Edificio Departamental, Campus Miguel 
de Unamuno, 37007 Salamanca, Spain.

Fission yeast ste9/srw1 is a WD-repeat protein highly homologous to budding 
yeast Hct1/Cdh1 and Drosophila Fizzy-related that are involved in activating 
APC/C (anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome). We show that APC(ste9/srw1) 
specifically promotes the degradation of mitotic cyclins cdc13 and cig1 but not 
the S-phase cyclin cig2. APC(ste9/srw1) is not necessary for the proteolysis of 
cdc13 and cig1 that occurs at the metaphase-anaphase transition but it is 
absolutely required for their degradation in G(1). Therefore, we propose that 
the main role of APC(ste9/srw1) is to promote degradation of mitotic cyclins 
when cells need to delay or arrest the cell cycle in G(1). We also show that 
ste9/srw1 is negatively regulated by cdc2-dependent protein phosphorylation. In 
G(1), when cdc2-cyclin kinase activity is low, unphosphorylated ste9/srw1 
interacts with APC/C. In the rest of the cell cycle, phosphorylation of 
ste9/srw1 by cdc2-cyclin complexes both triggers proteolysis of ste9/srw1 and 
causes its dissociation from the APC/C. This mechanism provides a molecular 
switch to prevent inactivation of cdc2 in G(2) and early mitosis and to allow 
its inactivation in G(1).

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/19.15.3945
PMCID: PMC306614
PMID: 10921876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Fission yeast ste9/srw1 is a WD-repeat protein highly homologous to budding yeast Hct1/Cdh1 and Drosophila Fizzy-related that are involved in activating APC/C (anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome). We show that APC ste9/srw1 specifically promotes the degradation of mitotic cyclins cdc13 and cig1 but not the S-phase cyclin cig2. APC ste9/srw1 is not necessary for the proteolysis of cdc13 and cig1 that occurs at the metaphase–anaphase transition but it is absolutely required for their degradation in G 1 . Therefore, we propose that the main role of APC ste9/srw1 is to promote degradation of mitotic cyclins when cells need to delay or arrest the cell cycle in G 1 . We also show that ste9/srw1 is negatively regulated by cdc2-dependent protein phosphorylation. In G 1 , when cdc2–cyclin kinase activity is low, unphosphorylated ste9/srw1 interacts with APC/C. In the rest of the cell cycle, phosphorylation of ste9/srw1 by cdc2–cyclin complexes both triggers proteolysis of ste9/srw1 and causes its dissociation from the APC/C. This mechanism provides a molecular switch to prevent inactivation of cdc2 in G 2 and early mitosis and to allow its inactivation in G 1 .

Introduction

Ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis plays an important role in the control of cell cycle progression. Targeted protein degradation is necessary for multiple processes in mitosis and at the G 1 –S transition (reviewed in Krek, 1998 ; Peters, 1998 ; Morgan, 1999 ; Zachariae and Nasmyth, 1999 ). Proteolysis of Cut2/Pds1, which triggers sister chromatid separation, is required for the metaphase–anaphase transition, and degradation of mitotic cyclins is essential to exit from mitosis ( Glotzer et al ., 1991 ; Holloway et al ., 1993 ; Irniger et al ., 1995 ; Cohen-Fix et al ., 1996 ; Funabiki et al ., 1996 ).

Ubiquitin is transferred to target substrates through several enzymatic reactions involving the E1, E2 and E3 enzymes. The ubiquitin ligase or E3 interacts with both the substrate and the E2 and determines the substrate specificity and the timing of degradation. Anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C) is the cell cycle-regulated ubiquitin ligase or E3 that mediates the degradation of Cut2/Pds1 and mitotic cyclins. APC/C is a multiprotein complex that it is activated at the metaphase–anaphase transition and remains active until late G 1 ( Amon et al., 1994 ; Brandeis and Hunt, 1996 ). APC/C activity and substrate specificity are regulated by its association with highly conserved regulatory activators that are part of the subfamilies of the WD40 repeat proteins, called Cdc20 and Hct1/Cdh1 in budding yeast ( Schwab et al., 1997 ; Visintin et al., 1997 ), slp1 and ste9/srw1 in fission yeast ( Yamaguchi et al., 1997 ; Kim et al., 1998 ; Kitamura et al., 1998 ), Fizzy and Fizzy-related in Drosophila and Xenopus ( Dawson et al., 1995 ; Sigrist et al., 1995 ; Sigrist and Lehner, 1997 ; Lorca et al., 1998 ) and p55 CDC /CDC20 and HCT1/CDH1 in humans ( Weinstein et al., 1994 ; Fang et al., 1998 ; Kramer et al., 1998 ). The APC Cdc20 (APC slp1 in fission yeast) complex promotes sister chromatid separation by ubiquitylating the anaphase inhibitor (or securin) Pds1 (cut2 in Schizosaccharomyces pombe ) and by liberating the separin Esp1 (cut1 in S.pombe ), which in turn causes either cleavage or modification of the cohesin subunit Scc1 (rad21 in S.pombe ) ( Michaelis et al., 1997 ; Ciosk et al., 1998 ; Uhlmann et al., 1999 ; see Yanagida, 2000 for a review). APC Hct1/Cdh1 (APC ste9/srw1 in S.pombe ) triggers mitotic exit by targeting mitotic cyclins for destruction ( Schwab et al., 1997 ; Sigrist and Lehner, 1997 ; Visintin et al., 1997 ; Yamaguchi et al, 1997 ; Kitamura et al., 1998 ; Kramer et al., 1998 ). Hct1 interaction with APC/C is negatively regulated by Cdk1–cyclin-dependent phosphorylation ( Zacchariae et al., 1998 ; Jaspersen et al., 1999 ; Kramer et al., 2000 ) and activated by Cdc14 protein phosphatase ( Visintin et al., 1998 , 1999 ; Jaspersen et al., 1999 ; Shou et al., 1999 ). APC Cdc20 activation controls not only Pds1 degradation but also that of Clb5 and Clb2 ( Shirayama et al., 1999 ; Baümer et al., 2000 ; Yeong et al., 2000 ). Recently it has been proposed that degradation of the mitotic cyclin Clb2 occurs in two steps. First, a fraction of Clb2 is degraded by APC Cdc20 at the metaphase–anaphase transition and later, in telophase, APC Hct1/Cdh1 degrades the rest of Clb2 ( Baümer et al., 2000 ; Yeong et al., 2000 ).

Fission yeast ste9/srw1 (ste9 from here on) has been proposed to be involved in the degradation of cdc13 B-type cyclin ( Yamaguchi et al ., 1997 ; Kitamura et al ., 1998 ). Here we show that the main role of APC ste9 is to target the mitotic cyclins cdc13 and cig1 for degradation in G 1 . ste9 interacts with APC/C only in G 1 . Cdk-dependent phosphorylation of ste9 in S-phase and G 2 has a dual effect: it triggers the proteolysis of ste9 and also causes its dissociation from APC/C.

Discussion

In this study, we provide biochemical evidence for a role for ste9 as a negative regulator of cell cycle progression in G 1 . ste9 is a member of a highly conserved family of proteins containing seven WD repeat domains of which the prototypes are Hct1/Cdh1 of budding yeast and Fizzy-related of higher eukaryotes ( Schwab et al., 1997 ; Sigrist and Lehner, 1997 ; Visintin et al., 1997 ; Kramer et al., 1998 ). These proteins function as activators of APC/C to promote polyubiquitylation and degradation of mitotic cyclins in mitosis and G 1 . Here we show that in fission yeast: (i) APC ste9 promotes degradation of the mitotic cyclins cdc13 and cig1 but not of the S-phase cyclin cig2. The fact that cig2 levels are high in cells overexpressing ste9 provides an explanation for the re-replication phenotype associated with these cells. (ii) APC ste9 is not necessary for the proteolysis of mitotic cyclins at the end of mitosis because in cells lacking ste9, degradation of cdc13 and cig1 still occurs. However, ste9 is absolutely required to degrade mitotic cyclins completely when cells need to delay or to stop the cell cycle in G 1 . This is important for small cells that had to lengthen the G 1 -phase until they reach the minimum cell size required to initiate DNA replication or to prevent entry into mitosis from G 1 . (iii) ste9 is phosphorylated by the cdc2 kinase in vivo at multiple sites. Cdk phosphorylation of ste9 in G 2 has two effects. First, to promote the degradation of ste9 and secondly, to prevent ste9 association with APC/C. APC/C–ste9 interaction occurs only in G 1 when ste9 is in its dephosphorylated form. In S-phase and G 2 , ste9 becomes phosphorylated and it does not interact with APC/C.

Fission yeast strains and methods

The S.pombe strains used in this study are listed in Table I . Growth conditions and strain manipulations were as described by Moreno et al. (1991) . The h + cut9::cut9-HA/Kan r strain was described by Berry et al. (1999) . The srw1/ste9Δ::ura4 + ura4d18 leu1-32 h – strain was described by Yamaguchi et al. (1997) , and involves deletion of the entire open reading frame. Since deletion of ste9 + causes sterility, all the crosses involving a deletion of ste9 + were done by transforming with pREP3X- ste9 + , so that ste9 + is expressed from a plasmid, and the double mutants were checked subsequently to ensure that the plasmid had been lost. Protoplast fusion and tetrad analysis was performed to construct double rum1Δ ste9Δ mutants, and the identity of these mutants was confirmed by Southern blotting. Yeast transformation was carried out using the lithium acetate transformation protocol ( Norbury and Moreno, 1997 ).

All experiments in liquid culture were carried out in essential minimal medium (EMM) containing the required supplements, starting with a cell density of 2–4 × 10 6 cells/ml, corresponding to mid-exponential phase growth. Temperature shift experiments were carried out using a water bath at 36.5°C.

To induce expression from the nmt1 promoter, cells were grown to mid-exponential phase in EMM containing 5 µg/ml thiamine, then spun down and washed four times with minimal medium lacking thiamine at a density calculated to produce 4 × 10 6 cells/ml at the time of peak expression from the nmt1 promoter.
