---
pmid: '2295468'
title: Isolation of tryptic fragment of antigen from mitochondrial inner membrane
  proteins reacting with antimitochondrial antibody in sera of patients with primary
  biliary cirrhosis.
authors:
- Muno D
- Kominami E
- Ishii H
- Usui K
- Saifuku K
- Sakakibara Y
- Namihisa T
journal: Hepatology
year: '1990'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/hep.1840110105
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Isolation of tryptic fragment of antigen from mitochondrial inner membrane proteins reacting with antimitochondrial antibody in sera of patients with primary biliary cirrhosis.
**Authors:** Muno D, Kominami E, Ishii H, Usui K, Saifuku K, Sakakibara Y, Namihisa T
**Journal:** Hepatology (1990)
**DOI:** [10.1002/hep.1840110105](https://doi.org/10.1002/hep.1840110105)

## Abstract

1. Hepatology. 1990 Jan;11(1):16-23. doi: 10.1002/hep.1840110105.

Isolation of tryptic fragment of antigen from mitochondrial inner membrane 
proteins reacting with antimitochondrial antibody in sera of patients with 
primary biliary cirrhosis.

Muno D(1), Kominami E, Ishii H, Usui K, Saifuku K, Sakakibara Y, Namihisa T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Juntendo University, School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.

Most of the sera from patients with primary biliary cirrhosis contains 
antimitochondrial antibodies, which react with four proteins of the 
mitochondrial inner membrane. We reported in a previous paper that when beef 
heart mitochondrial inner membrane proteins were digested by trypsin, a new 
reactive 36 kDa fragment with antimitochondrial antibody was obtained. This 36 
kDa fragment derives from original 70 kDa protein because the monoclonal 
antibody specific to 70 kDa protein reacts with the 36 kDa band equivalent to 70 
kDa band. The 36 kDa fragment was purified using an affinity column conjugated 
with an immunoglobulin-rich fraction of primary biliary cirrhosis serum 
containing antimitochondrial antibody, preparative electrophoresis and 
high-performance liquid chromatography using a reverse phase column. The final 
preparation showed a single band in sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel 
electrophoresis. Its amino acid composition is in good agreement with that of 
the subunit binding domain of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex E2 from bovine 
heart.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.1840110105
PMID: 2295468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
