---
pmid: '15563610'
title: ATP-2 interacts with the PLAT domain of LOV-1 and is involved in Caenorhabditis
  elegans polycystin signaling.
authors:
- Hu J
- Barr MM
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC545878
doi: 10.1091/mbc.e04-09-0851
---

# ATP-2 interacts with the PLAT domain of LOV-1 and is involved in Caenorhabditis elegans polycystin signaling.
**Authors:** Hu J, Barr MM
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.e04-09-0851](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.e04-09-0851)
**PMC:** [PMC545878](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC545878/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Cell. 2005 Feb;16(2):458-69. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e04-09-0851. Epub 2004 
Nov 24.

ATP-2 interacts with the PLAT domain of LOV-1 and is involved in Caenorhabditis 
elegans polycystin signaling.

Hu J(1), Barr MM.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53705, USA.

Caenorhabditis elegans is a powerful model to study the molecular basis of 
autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD). ADPKD is caused by 
mutations in the polycystic kidney disease (PKD)1 or PKD2 gene, encoding 
polycystin (PC)-1 or PC-2, respectively. The C. elegans polycystins LOV-1 and 
PKD-2 are required for male mating behaviors and are localized to sensory cilia. 
The function of the evolutionarily conserved polycystin/lipoxygenase/alpha-toxin 
(PLAT) domain found in all PC-1 family members remains an enigma. Here, we 
report that ATP-2, the beta subunit of the ATP synthase, physically associates 
with the LOV-1 PLAT domain and that this interaction is evolutionarily 
conserved. In addition to the expected mitochondria localization, ATP-2 and 
other ATP synthase components colocalize with LOV-1 and PKD-2 in cilia. 
Disrupting the function of the ATP synthase or overexpression of atp-2 results 
in a male mating behavior defect. We further show that atp-2, lov-1, and pkd-2 
act in the same molecular pathway. We propose that the ciliary localized ATP 
synthase may play a previously unsuspected role in polycystin signaling.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e04-09-0851
PMCID: PMC545878
PMID: 15563610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
