---
pmid: '21454521'
title: The developmental regulator protein Gon4l associates with protein YY1, co-repressor
  Sin3a, and histone deacetylase 1 and mediates transcriptional repression.
authors:
- Lu P
- Hankel IL
- Hostager BS
- Swartzendruber JA
- Friedman AD
- Brenton JL
- Rothman PB
- Colgan JD
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3093903
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.133603
---

# The developmental regulator protein Gon4l associates with protein YY1, co-repressor Sin3a, and histone deacetylase 1 and mediates transcriptional repression.
**Authors:** Lu P, Hankel IL, Hostager BS, Swartzendruber JA, Friedman AD, Brenton JL, Rothman PB, Colgan JD
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110.133603](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.133603)
**PMC:** [PMC3093903](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3093903/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2011 May 20;286(20):18311-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.133603. Epub 
2011 Mar 29.

The developmental regulator protein Gon4l associates with protein YY1, 
co-repressor Sin3a, and histone deacetylase 1 and mediates transcriptional 
repression.

Lu P(1), Hankel IL, Hostager BS, Swartzendruber JA, Friedman AD, Brenton JL, 
Rothman PB, Colgan JD.

Author information:
(1)Interdisciplinary Immunology Graduate Program, Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver 
College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Genetic studies involving zebrafish and mice have demonstrated that the protein 
Gon4l (Gon4-like) is essential for hematopoiesis. These studies also suggested 
that Gon4l regulates gene expression during hematopoietic development, yet the 
biochemical function of Gon4l has not been defined. Here, we describe the 
identification of factors that interact with Gon4l and may cooperate with this 
protein to regulate gene expression. As predicted by polypeptide sequence 
conservation, Gon4l interacted and co-localized with the DNA-binding protein YY1 
(Yin Yang 1). Density gradient sedimentation analysis of protein lysates from 
mouse M12 B cells showed that Gon4l and YY1 co-sediment with the transcriptional 
co-repressor Sin3a and its functional partner histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1. 
Consistent with these results, immunoprecipitation studies showed that Gon4l 
associates with Sin3a, HDAC1, and YY1 as a part of complexes that form in M12 
cells. Sequential immunoprecipitation studies demonstrated that Gon4l, YY1, 
Sin3a, and HDAC1 could all associate as components of a single complex and that 
a conserved domain spanning the central portion of Gon4l was required for 
formation of this complex. When targeted to DNA, Gon4l repressed the activity of 
a nearby promoter, which correlated with the ability to interact with Sin3a and 
HDAC1. Our data suggest that Sin3a, HDAC1, and YY1 are co-factors for Gon4l and 
that Gon4l may function as a platform for the assembly of complexes that 
regulate gene expression.

© 2011 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.133603
PMCID: PMC3093903
PMID: 21454521 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
