---
pmid: '17166838'
title: 14-3-3 protein interacts with Huntingtin-associated protein 1 and regulates
  its trafficking.
authors:
- Rong J
- Li S
- Sheng G
- Wu M
- Coblitz B
- Li M
- Fu H
- Li XJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M609057200
---

# 14-3-3 protein interacts with Huntingtin-associated protein 1 and regulates its trafficking.
**Authors:** Rong J, Li S, Sheng G, Wu M, Coblitz B, Li M, Fu H, Li XJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M609057200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M609057200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Feb 16;282(7):4748-4756. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M609057200. Epub 
2006 Dec 13.

14-3-3 protein interacts with Huntingtin-associated protein 1 and regulates its 
trafficking.

Rong J(1), Li S(1), Sheng G(1), Wu M(2), Coblitz B(2), Li M(2), Fu H(3), Li 
XJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics and the Emory University School of Medicine, 
Atlanta, Georgia 30322.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21205.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, 
Georgia 30322 and the.
(4)Department of Human Genetics and the Emory University School of Medicine, 
Atlanta, Georgia 30322. Electronic address: xiaoli@genetics.emory.edu.

HAP1 (Huntingtin-associated protein 1) consists of two alternately spliced 
isoforms (HAP1A and HAP1B, which have unique C-terminal sequences) and 
participates in intracellular trafficking. The C terminus of HAP1A is 
phosphorylated, and this phosphorylation was found to decrease the association 
of HAP1A with kinesin light chain, a protein involved in anterograde transport 
in cells. It remains unclear how this phosphorylation functions to regulate the 
association of HAP1 with trafficking proteins. Using the yeast two-hybrid 
system, we found that HAP1 also interacts with 14-3-3 proteins, which are 
involved in the assembly of protein complexes and the regulation of protein 
trafficking. The interaction of HAP1 with 14-3-3 is confirmed by their 
immunoprecipitation and colocalization in mouse brain. Moreover, this 
interaction is specific to HAP1A and is increased by the phosphorylation of the 
C terminus of HAP1A. We also found that expression of 14-3-3 decreases the 
association of HAP1A with kinesin light chain. As a result, there is less HAP1A 
distributed in neurite tips of PC12 cells that overexpress 14-3-3. Also, 
overexpression of 14-3-3 reduces the effect of HAP1A in promoting neurite 
outgrowth of PC12 cells. We propose that the phosphorylation-dependent 
interaction of HAP1A with 14-3-3 regulates HAP1 function by influencing its 
association with kinesin light chain and trafficking in neuronal processes.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M609057200
PMID: 17166838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
