---
pmid: '21296763'
title: 'Double loss-of-function mutation in EARLY FLOWERING 3 and CRYPTOCHROME 2 genes
  delays flowering under continuous light but accelerates it under long days and short
  days: an important role for Arabidopsis CRY2 to accelerate flowering time in continuous
  light.'
authors:
- Nefissi R
- Natsui Y
- Miyata K
- Oda A
- Hase Y
- Nakagawa M
- Ghorbel A
- Mizoguchi T
journal: J Exp Bot
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/jxb/erq450
---

# Double loss-of-function mutation in EARLY FLOWERING 3 and CRYPTOCHROME 2 genes delays flowering under continuous light but accelerates it under long days and short days: an important role for Arabidopsis CRY2 to accelerate flowering time in continuous light.
**Authors:** Nefissi R, Natsui Y, Miyata K, Oda A, Hase Y, Nakagawa M, Ghorbel A, Mizoguchi T
**Journal:** J Exp Bot (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jxb/erq450](https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erq450)

## Abstract

1. J Exp Bot. 2011 May;62(8):2731-44. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erq450. Epub 2011 Feb 4.

Double loss-of-function mutation in EARLY FLOWERING 3 and CRYPTOCHROME 2 genes 
delays flowering under continuous light but accelerates it under long days and 
short days: an important role for Arabidopsis CRY2 to accelerate flowering time 
in continuous light.

Nefissi R(1), Natsui Y, Miyata K, Oda A, Hase Y, Nakagawa M, Ghorbel A, 
Mizoguchi T.

Author information:
(1)Gene Research Center, University of Tsukuba, Tennodai 1-1-1, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 
305-8572, Japan.

The photoperiodic response is one of the adaptation mechanisms to seasonal 
changes of lengths of day and night. The circadian clock plays pivotal roles in 
this process. In Arabidopsis, LHY, CCA1, ELF3, and other clock proteins play 
major roles in maintaining circadian rhythms. lhy;cca1 double mutants with 
severe defects in circadian rhythms showed accelerated flowering under short 
days (SDs), but delayed flowering under continuous light (LL). The protein level 
of the floral repressor SVP increased in lhy;cca1 mutants under LL, and the 
late-flowering phenotype of lhy;cca1 mutants was partially suppressed by svp, 
flc, or elf3. ELF3 interacted with both CCA1 and SVP, and elf3 suppressed the 
SVP accumulation in lhy;cca1 under LL. These results suggest that the unique 
mechanism of the inversion of the flowering response of lhy;cca1 under LL may 
involve both the ELF3-SVP/FLC-dependent and -independent pathways. In this work, 
elf3-1 seeds were mutagenized with heavy-ion beams and used to identify 
mutation(s) that delayed flowering under LL but not long days (LDs) or SDs even 
without ELF3. In this screening, seven candidate lines named suppressor of elf3 
1 (self1), sel3, sel5, sel7, sel14, sel15, and sel20 were identified. Genetic 
analysis indicated that sel20 was a new deletion allele of a mutation in the 
blue light receptor, CRY2. A late-flowering phenotype and decrease of FT 
expression in the elf3;sel20 double mutant was obvious under LL but not under 
SDs or LDs. These results indicated that the late-flowering phenotype in the 
double mutant elf3;sel20 as well as in lhy;cca1 was affected by the presence of 
darkness. The results suggest that CRY2 may play more essential roles in the 
acceleration of flowering under LL than LDs or SDs.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/erq450
PMID: 21296763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
