---
pmid: '9737846'
title: Solution structure of methionine-oxidized amyloid beta-peptide (1-40). Does
  oxidation affect conformational switching?
authors:
- Watson AA
- Fairlie DP
- Craik DJ
journal: Biochemistry
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi9810757
---

# Solution structure of methionine-oxidized amyloid beta-peptide (1-40). Does oxidation affect conformational switching?
**Authors:** Watson AA, Fairlie DP, Craik DJ
**Journal:** Biochemistry (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi9810757](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi9810757)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 1998 Sep 15;37(37):12700-6. doi: 10.1021/bi9810757.

Solution structure of methionine-oxidized amyloid beta-peptide (1-40). Does 
oxidation affect conformational switching?

Watson AA(1), Fairlie DP, Craik DJ.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Drug Design and Development, The University of Queensland, 
Brisbane.

The solution structure of Abeta(1-40)Met(O), the methionine-oxidized form of 
amyloid beta-peptide Abeta(1-40), has been investigated by CD and NMR 
spectroscopy. Oxidation of Met35 may have implications in the aetiology of 
Alzheimer's disease. Circular dichroism experiments showed that whereas 
Abeta(1-40) and Abeta(1-40)Met(O) both adopt essentially random coil structures 
in water (pH 4) at micromolar concentrations, the former aggregates within 
several days while the latter is stable for at least 7 days under these 
conditions. This remarkable difference led us to determine the solution 
structure of Abeta(1-40)Met(O) using 1H NMR spectroscopy. In a water-SDS micelle 
medium needed to solubilize both peptides at the millimolar concentrations 
required to measure NMR spectra, chemical shift and NOE data for 
Abeta(1-40)Met(O) strongly suggest the presence of a helical region between 
residues 16 and 24. This is supported by slow H-D exchange of amide protons in 
this region and by structure calculations using simulated annealing with the 
program XPLOR. The remainder of the structure is relatively disordered. Our 
previously reported NMR data for Abeta(1-40) in the same solvent shows that 
helices are present over residues 15-24 (helix 1) and 28-36 (helix 2). Oxidation 
of Met35 thus causes a local and selective disruption of helix 2. In addition to 
this helix-coil rearrangement in aqueous micelles, the CD data show that 
oxidation inhibits a coil-to-beta-sheet transition in water. These significant 
structural rearrangements in the C-terminal region of Abeta may be important 
clues to the chemistry and biology of Abeta(1-40) and Abeta(1-42).

DOI: 10.1021/bi9810757
PMID: 9737846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
