---
pmid: '7961765'
title: The murine decorin. Complete cDNA cloning, genomic organization, chromosomal
  assignment, and expression during organogenesis and tissue differentiation.
authors:
- Scholzen T
- Solursh M
- Suzuki S
- Reiter R
- Morgan JL
- Buchberg AM
- Siracusa LD
- Iozzo RV
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
---

# The murine decorin. Complete cDNA cloning, genomic organization, chromosomal assignment, and expression during organogenesis and tissue differentiation.
**Authors:** Scholzen T, Solursh M, Suzuki S, Reiter R, Morgan JL, Buchberg AM, Siracusa LD, Iozzo RV
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1994)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1994 Nov 11;269(45):28270-81.

The murine decorin. Complete cDNA cloning, genomic organization, chromosomal 
assignment, and expression during organogenesis and tissue differentiation.

Scholzen T(1), Solursh M, Suzuki S, Reiter R, Morgan JL, Buchberg AM, Siracusa 
LD, Iozzo RV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Thomas Jefferson University, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107.

Decorin, a proteoglycan known to interact with collagen and growth factors, may 
play key roles during ontogenesis, tissue remodeling, and cancer. We have 
deciphered the complete protein sequence of the murine decorin by cDNA cloning, 
elucidated its gene structure and chromosomal location, and investigated its 
expression in the developing embryo. The decorin protein and the gene were 
highly conserved vis à vis the human counterpart; however, the murine gene 
lacked a leader exon, exon Ib, which was found only in the human. Using 
interspecific backcrossing, we assigned the gene to chromosome 10 just 
proximally to the Steel gene locus. In situ hybridization studies of developing 
mouse embryos showed a distinct pattern of expression with a progressive 
increase of decorin mRNA during ontogenesis. At early stages (day 11 
postconception), decorin was detectable only in the floor plate region. 
Subsequently (days 13-16 postconception), decorin expression was especially 
prominent in the meninges and mesothelial linings of pericardium, pleura, and 
coelomic cavity, as well as in the dermis and subepithelial layers of the 
intestine and urinary bladder. In contrast, the major parenchymal organs were 
only weakly positive for decorin mRNA. These findings suggest that decorin may 
play a role in epithelial/mesenchymal interactions during organ development and 
shaping.

PMID: 7961765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
