---
pmid: '18505759'
title: Domain II mutations in CRANE/IAA18 suppress lateral root formation and affect
  shoot development in Arabidopsis thaliana.
authors:
- Uehara T
- Okushima Y
- Mimura T
- Tasaka M
- Fukaki H
journal: Plant Cell Physiol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcn079
---

# Domain II mutations in CRANE/IAA18 suppress lateral root formation and affect shoot development in Arabidopsis thaliana.
**Authors:** Uehara T, Okushima Y, Mimura T, Tasaka M, Fukaki H
**Journal:** Plant Cell Physiol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1093/pcp/pcn079](https://doi.org/10.1093/pcp/pcn079)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell Physiol. 2008 Jul;49(7):1025-38. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcn079. Epub 2008
 May 27.

Domain II mutations in CRANE/IAA18 suppress lateral root formation and affect 
shoot development in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Uehara T(1), Okushima Y, Mimura T, Tasaka M, Fukaki H.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Science and Technology, Kobe University, 1-1 Rokkodai, 
Kobe, 657-8501 Japan.

Lateral root formation is an important developmental component of root systems 
in vascular plants. Several regulatory genes for lateral root formation have 
been identified from recent studies mainly using Arabidopsis thaliana. In this 
study, we isolated two dominant mutant alleles, crane-1 and crane-2, which are 
defective in lateral root formation in Arabidopsis. The crane mutants have 
dramatically reduced lateral root and auxin-induced lateral root formation, 
indicating that the crane mutations reduce auxin sensitivity. In addition, the 
crane mutants have pleiotropic phenotypes in the aerial shoots, including long 
hypocotyls when grown in the light, up-curled leaves and reduced fertility. The 
crane mutant phenotypes are caused by a gain-of-function mutation in domain II 
of IAA18, a member of the Aux/IAA transcriptional repressor family which is 
expressed in almost all organs. In roots, IAA18 promoter::GUS was expressed in 
the early stages of lateral root development. In the yeast two-hybrid system, 
IAA18 interacts with AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR 7 (ARF7) and ARF19, transcriptional 
activators that positively regulate lateral root formation. Taken together, our 
results indicate that CRANE/IAA18 is involved in lateral root formation in 
Arabidopsis, and suggest that it negatively regulates the activity of ARF7 and 
ARF19 for lateral root formation.

DOI: 10.1093/pcp/pcn079
PMID: 18505759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
