---
pmid: '23990462'
title: Endoplasmic reticulum protein quality control is determined by cooperative
  interactions between Hsp/c70 protein and the CHIP E3 ligase.
authors:
- Matsumura Y
- Sakai J
- Skach WR
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3829420
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.479345
---

# Endoplasmic reticulum protein quality control is determined by cooperative interactions between Hsp/c70 protein and the CHIP E3 ligase.
**Authors:** Matsumura Y, Sakai J, Skach WR
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M113.479345](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M113.479345)
**PMC:** [PMC3829420](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3829420/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Oct 25;288(43):31069-79. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.479345. Epub
2013 Aug 29.

Endoplasmic reticulum protein quality control is determined by cooperative
interactions between Hsp/c70 protein and the CHIP E3 ligase.

Matsumura Y(1), Sakai J, Skach WR.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health and
Science University, Portland, Oregon 97239 and.

The C terminus of Hsp70 interacting protein (CHIP) E3 ligase functions as a key
regulator of protein quality control by binding the C-terminal (M/I)EEVD peptide
motif of Hsp/c70(90) with its N-terminal tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) domain
and facilitating polyubiquitination of misfolded client proteins via its
C-terminal catalytic U-box. Using CFTR as a model client, we recently showed
that the duration of the Hsc70-client binding cycle is a primary determinant of
stability. However, molecular features that control CHIP recruitment to Hsp/c70,
and hence the fate of the Hsp/c70 client, remain unknown. To understand how CHIP
recognizes Hsp/c70, we utilized a dominant negative mutant in which loss of a
conserved proline in the U-box domain (P269A) eliminates E3 ligase activity. In
a cell-free reconstituted ER-associated degradation system, P269A CHIP inhibited
Hsc70-dependent CFTR ubiquitination and degradation in a dose-dependent manner.
Optimal inhibition required both the TPR and the U-box, indicating cooperativity
between the two domains. Neither the wild type nor the P269A mutant changed the
extent of Hsc70 association with CFTR nor the dissociation rate of the
Hsc70-CFTR complex. However, the U-box mutation stimulated CHIP binding to Hsc70
while promoting CHIP oligomerization. CHIP binding to Hsc70 binding was also
stimulated by the presence of an Hsc70 client with a preference for the
ADP-bound state. Thus, the Hsp/c70 (M/I)EEVD motif is not a simple anchor for
the TPR domain. Rather CHIP recruitment involves reciprocal allosteric
interactions between its TPR and U-box domains and the substrate-binding and
C-terminal domains of Hsp/c70.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.479345
PMCID: PMC3829420
PMID: 23990462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
