---
pmid: '12239582'
title: 'Role of endogenous regucalcin in bone metabolism: bone loss is induced in
  regucalcin transgenic rats.'
authors:
- Yamaguchi M
- Misawa H
- Uchiyama S
- Morooka Y
- Tsurusaki Y
journal: Int J Mol Med
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
---

# Role of endogenous regucalcin in bone metabolism: bone loss is induced in regucalcin transgenic rats.
**Authors:** Yamaguchi M, Misawa H, Uchiyama S, Morooka Y, Tsurusaki Y
**Journal:** Int J Mol Med (2002)

## Abstract

1. Int J Mol Med. 2002 Oct;10(4):377-83.

Role of endogenous regucalcin in bone metabolism: bone loss is induced in 
regucalcin transgenic rats.

Yamaguchi M(1), Misawa H, Uchiyama S, Morooka Y, Tsurusaki Y.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Endocrinology and Molecular Metabolism, Graduate School of 
Nutritional Sciences, University of Shizuoka, Japan. 
yamaguch@u-shizuoka-ken.ac.jp

The role of endogenous regucalcin in the regulation of bone metabolism was 
investigated by using regucalcin transgenic (TG) rats. The expression of 
regucalcin mRNA in the femoral-diaphyseal and -metaphyseal tissues of normal 
(wild-type) rats was shown by using reverse transcription-polymerase chain 
reaction (RT-PCR) with a specific primer of regucalcin cDNA. Regucalcin protein 
was detected in the femoral-diaphyseal and -metaphyseal tissues of normal 
(wild-type) rats using Western analysis. Regucalcin levels were significantly 
increased in the femoral-metaphyseal tissues of regucalcin TG male rats and in 
the diaphyseal and metaphyseal tissues of the TG female rats. The morphologic 
change in the femoral-diaphyseal and -metaphyseal tissues of regucalcin TG rats 
was demonstrated by using a peripheral quantitative computed tomography (pQCT); 
morphologic change was great in the femoral tissues of female rats as compared 
with that of male rats. Mineral content, mineral density and polar strength 
strain index in the femoral-diaphyseal and -metaphyseal tissues were markedly 
reduced in regucalcin TG female rats. A significant decrease in cortical 
thickness was seen in the femoral diaphysis of regucalcin TG female rats. 
Calcium content in the femoral-diaphyseal and -metaphyseal tissues was 
significantly decreased in regucalcin TG male and female rats; a remarkable 
decrease was seen in female rats. Femoral-metaphyseal alkaline phosphatase 
activity was significantly lowered in regucalcin TG female rats. The enzyme 
activity was not significantly changed in the femoral-diaphyseal tissues of the 
TG female rats. In the diaphyseal tissue of male rats, the enzyme activity was 
significantly decreased in the TG rats. A significant decrease in 
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) content was seen in the metaphyseal tissue of 
regucalcin TG male rats and in the diaphyseal and metaphyseal tissues of the TG 
female rats. This study demonstrates that bone loss is induced in the femoral 
tissue of regucalcin transgenic rats, and that a remarkable decrease in bone 
morphologic index and biochemical component was seen in the female rats. 
Regucalcin may be involved in the regulation of bone metabolism.

PMID: 12239582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
