---
pmid: '17696781'
title: Sumoylation of the zinc finger protein ZXDC enhances the function of its transcriptional
  activation domain.
authors:
- Jambunathan S
- Fontes JD
journal: Biol Chem
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1515/BC.2007.106
---

# Sumoylation of the zinc finger protein ZXDC enhances the function of its transcriptional activation domain.
**Authors:** Jambunathan S, Fontes JD
**Journal:** Biol Chem (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1515/BC.2007.106](https://doi.org/10.1515/BC.2007.106)

## Abstract

1. Biol Chem. 2007 Sep;388(9):965-72. doi: 10.1515/BC.2007.106.

Sumoylation of the zinc finger protein ZXDC enhances the function of its 
transcriptional activation domain.

Jambunathan S(1), Fontes JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological, Geological and Environmental Sciences, Cleveland 
State University, Cleveland, OH 44115, USA.

The transcription of major histocompatibility complex class II (MHC II) genes is 
dependent on the co-activator protein class II trans-activator (CIITA). We have 
recently identified a protein known as zinc finger X-linked duplicated family 
member C (ZXDC) that, along with its binding partner ZXDA, forms a complex that 
interacts with CIITA and regulates MHC II transcription. Western blot analysis 
with anti-ZXDC antibodies identified two species of the ZXDC protein, one 
migrating near its predicted molecular mass and one with slower electrophoretic 
mobility. We report here that the slower migrating form is the result of 
sumoylation at a single lysine residue within the transcriptional activation 
domain of ZXDC. Three SUMO proteins (SUMO-1, -2 and -3) can modify the ZXDC 
protein. Multiple SUMO E3 ligase enzymes and HDAC4 can facilitate ZXDC 
sumoylation, and one ligase, PIASy, interacts with a specific region of the ZXDC 
protein. We found that sumoylation does not appear to disrupt or modulate the 
interaction of ZXDC with its binding partners. Rather, sumoylation of ZXDC is 
required for full activity of the transcriptional activation domain. Our 
findings suggest that sumoylation is an important regulator of ZXDC.

DOI: 10.1515/BC.2007.106
PMID: 17696781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
