---
pmid: '9847238'
title: A BMP homolog acts as a dose-dependent regulator of body size and male tail
  patterning in Caenorhabditis elegans.
authors:
- Suzuki Y
- Yandell MD
- Roy PJ
- Krishna S
- Savage-Dunn C
- Ross RM
- Padgett RW
- Wood WB
journal: Development
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/dev.126.2.241
---

# A BMP homolog acts as a dose-dependent regulator of body size and male tail patterning in Caenorhabditis elegans.
**Authors:** Suzuki Y, Yandell MD, Roy PJ, Krishna S, Savage-Dunn C, Ross RM, Padgett RW, Wood WB
**Journal:** Development (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.126.2.241](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.126.2.241)

## Abstract

1. Development. 1999 Jan;126(2):241-50. doi: 10.1242/dev.126.2.241.

A BMP homolog acts as a dose-dependent regulator of body size and male tail 
patterning in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Suzuki Y(1), Yandell MD, Roy PJ, Krishna S, Savage-Dunn C, Ross RM, Padgett RW, 
Wood WB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of 
Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309-0347, USA. wood@stripe. colorado.edu

We cloned the dbl-1 gene, a C. elegans homolog of Drosophila decapentaplegic and 
vertebrate BMP genes. Loss-of-function mutations in dbl-1 cause markedly reduced 
body size and defective male copulatory structures. Conversely, dbl-1 
overexpression causes markedly increased body size and partly complementary male 
tail phenotypes, indicating that DBL-1 acts as a dose-dependent regulator of 
these processes. Evidence from genetic interactions indicates that these effects 
are mediated by a Smad signaling pathway, for which DBL-1 is a previously 
unidentified ligand. Our study of the dbl-1 expression pattern suggests a role 
for neuronal cells in global size regulation as well as male tail patterning.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.126.2.241
PMID: 9847238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
