---
pmid: '30614533'
title: Characterization of the epithelial membrane protein 3 interaction network reveals
  a potential functional link to mitogenic signal transduction regulation.
authors:
- Christians A
- Poisel E
- Hartmann C
- von Deimling A
- Pusch S
journal: Int J Cancer
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/ijc.32107
---

# Characterization of the epithelial membrane protein 3 interaction network reveals a potential functional link to mitogenic signal transduction regulation.
**Authors:** Christians A, Poisel E, Hartmann C, von Deimling A, Pusch S
**Journal:** Int J Cancer (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ijc.32107](https://doi.org/10.1002/ijc.32107)

## Abstract

1. Int J Cancer. 2019 Jul 15;145(2):461-473. doi: 10.1002/ijc.32107. Epub 2019
Jan  20.

Characterization of the epithelial membrane protein 3 interaction network 
reveals a potential functional link to mitogenic signal transduction regulation.

Christians A(1), Poisel E(2)(3), Hartmann C(1), von Deimling A(2)(3), Pusch 
S(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropathology, Institute of Pathology, Hannover Medical 
School, Hannover, Germany.
(2)Department of Neuropathology, Institute of Pathology, 
Ruprecht-Karls-University Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)German Consortium of Translational Cancer Research (DKTK), Clinical 
Cooperation Unit Neuropathology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 
Heidelberg, Germany.

Epithelial Membrane Protein 3 (EMP3), a 4-transmembrane glycoprotein, first 
gained attention as a putative tumor suppressor. Accumulating evidence, however, 
points to a more tumor promotive function of EMP3. The biological function of 
EMP3 remains largely unclear. To elucidate more of EMP3's interaction network, 
we performed a Yeast-Two-Hybrid (Y2H) screening, followed by validation of 
candidate interactors by Biomolecular Fluorescence Complementation (BiFC) and 
Proximity Ligation Assay (PLA). Furthermore, we generated stable EMP3 knockdown 
cell lines and measured cell proliferation, migration and sensitivity to 
apoptosis induction as well as the expression and activation levels of important 
signal pathway components. The Y2H screening yielded 10 novel interactions of 
EMP3, eight of which could also be detected by BiFC and PLA interaction assays. 
All newly discovered interaction partners are involved in signaling or 
trafficking regulation. Most notably, FLOT1 and HTATIP2 have well described 
roles in the regulation of EGFR signaling. In addition, knockdown of EMP3 
resulted in reduced levels of p-AKT, p-ERK and p-EGFR, attenuated cell 
proliferation and migration and sensitized cells to apoptosis induction by TRAIL 
and Staurosporine. Based on these observations we hypothesize that EMP3 might be 
involved in the regulation of receptor-tyrosine-kinase mediated mitogenic 
signaling.

© 2019 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.32107
PMID: 30614533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
