---
pmid: '10713104'
title: HS1 interacts with Lyn and is critical for erythropoietin-induced differentiation
  of erythroid cells.
authors:
- Ingley E
- Sarna MK
- Beaumont JG
- Tilbrook PA
- Tsai S
- Takemoto Y
- Williams JH
- Klinken SP
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.275.11.7887
---

# HS1 interacts with Lyn and is critical for erythropoietin-induced differentiation of erythroid cells.
**Authors:** Ingley E, Sarna MK, Beaumont JG, Tilbrook PA, Tsai S, Takemoto Y, Williams JH, Klinken SP
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.275.11.7887](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.275.11.7887)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Mar 17;275(11):7887-93. doi: 10.1074/jbc.275.11.7887.

HS1 interacts with Lyn and is critical for erythropoietin-induced 
differentiation of erythroid cells.

Ingley E(1), Sarna MK, Beaumont JG, Tilbrook PA, Tsai S, Takemoto Y, Williams 
JH, Klinken SP.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Cancer Medicine, Department of Biochemistry, the University of 
Western Australia and Royal Perth Hospital, WA 6001, Western Australia, 
Australia.

Erythroid cells terminally differentiate in response to erythropoietin binding 
its cognate receptor. Previously we have shown that the tyrosine kinase Lyn 
associates with the erythropoietin receptor and is essential for hemoglobin 
synthesis in three erythroleukemic cell lines. To understand Lyn signaling 
events in erythroid cells, the yeast two-hybrid system was used to analyze 
interactions with other proteins. Here we show that the hemopoietic-specific 
protein HS1 interacted directly with the SH3 domain of Lyn, via its proline-rich 
region. A truncated HS1, bearing the Lyn-binding domain, was introduced into J2E 
erythroleukemic cells to determine the impact upon responsiveness to 
erythropoietin. Truncated HS1 had a striking effect on the phenotype of the J2E 
line-the cells were smaller, more basophilic than the parental proerythoblastoid 
cells and had fewer surface erythropoietin receptors. Moreover, basal and 
erythropoietin-induced proliferation and differentiation were markedly 
suppressed. The inability of cells containing the truncated HS1 to differentiate 
may be a consequence of markedly reduced levels of Lyn and GATA-1. In addition, 
erythropoietin stimulation of these cells resulted in rapid, endosome-mediated 
degradation of endogenous HS1. The truncated HS1 also suppressed the development 
of erythroid colonies from fetal liver cells. These data show that disrupting 
HS1 has profoundly influenced the ability of erythroid cells to terminally 
differentiate.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.275.11.7887
PMID: 10713104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
