---
pmid: '9242632'
title: Dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase-binding protein of the human pyruvate dehydrogenase
  complex. DNA-derived amino acid sequence, expression, and reconstitution of the
  pyruvate dehydrogenase complex.
authors:
- Harris RA
- Bowker-Kinley MM
- Wu P
- Jeng J
- Popov KM
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.32.19746
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase-binding protein of the human pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. DNA-derived amino acid sequence, expression, and reconstitution of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex.
**Authors:** Harris RA, Bowker-Kinley MM, Wu P, Jeng J, Popov KM
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.272.32.19746](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.272.32.19746)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1997 Aug 8;272(32):19746-51. doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.32.19746.

Dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase-binding protein of the human pyruvate 
dehydrogenase complex. DNA-derived amino acid sequence, expression, and 
reconstitution of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex.

Harris RA(1), Bowker-Kinley MM, Wu P, Jeng J, Popov KM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School 
of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202-5122, USA.

Protein X, recently renamed dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase-binding protein 
(E3BP), is required for anchoring dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase (E3) to the 
dihydrolipoamide transacetylase (E2) core of the pyruvate dehydrogenase 
complexes of eukaryotes. DNA and deduced protein sequences for E3BP of the human 
pyruvate dehydrogenase complex are reported here. With the exception of only a 
single lipoyl domain, the protein has a segmented multi-domain structure 
analogous to that of the E2 component of the complex. The protein has 46% amino 
acid sequence identity in its amino-terminal region with the second lipoyl 
domain of E2, 38% identity in its central region with the putative peripheral 
subunit-binding domain of E2, and 50% identity in its carboxyl-terminal region 
with the catalytic inner core domain of E2. The similarity in the latter domain 
stands in contrast to E3BP of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which is quite different 
from its homologous transacetylase in this region. The putative catalytic site 
histidine residue present in the inner core domains of all dihydrolipoamide 
acyltransferases is replaced by a serine residue in human E3BP; thus, catalysis 
of coenzyme A acetylation by this protein is unlikely. Coexpression of cDNAs for 
E3BP and E2 resulted in the formation of an E2.E3BP subcomplex that 
spontaneously reconstituted the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex in the presence 
of native E3 and recombinant pyruvate decarboxylase (E1).

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.272.32.19746
PMID: 9242632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
