---
pmid: '36508461'
title: A role for brassinosteroid signalling in decision-making processes in the Arabidopsis
  seedling.
authors:
- Kalbfuß N
- Strohmayr A
- Kegel M
- Le L
- Grosse-Holz F
- Brunschweiger B
- Stöckl K
- Wiese C
- Franke C
- Schiestl C
- Prem S
- Sha S
- Franz-Oberdorf K
- Hafermann J
- Thiemé M
- Facher E
- Palubicki W
- Bolle C
- Assaad FF
journal: PLoS Genet
year: '2022'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC9779667
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1010541
---

# A role for brassinosteroid signalling in decision-making processes in the Arabidopsis seedling.
**Authors:** Kalbfuß N, Strohmayr A, Kegel M, Le L, Grosse-Holz F, Brunschweiger B, Stöckl K, Wiese C, Franke C, Schiestl C, Prem S, Sha S, Franz-Oberdorf K, Hafermann J, Thiemé M, Facher E, Palubicki W, Bolle C, Assaad FF
**Journal:** PLoS Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pgen.1010541](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1010541)
**PMC:** [PMC9779667](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9779667/)

## Abstract

1. PLoS Genet. 2022 Dec 12;18(12):e1010541. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1010541. 
eCollection 2022 Dec.

A role for brassinosteroid signalling in decision-making processes in the 
Arabidopsis seedling.

Kalbfuß N(1), Strohmayr A(1), Kegel M(1), Le L(1), Grosse-Holz F(1), 
Brunschweiger B(1), Stöckl K(1), Wiese C(1), Franke C(1), Schiestl C(1), Prem 
S(1), Sha S(1), Franz-Oberdorf K(1), Hafermann J(1), Thiemé M(1), Facher E(2), 
Palubicki W(3), Bolle C(4), Assaad FF(1).

Author information:
(1)Botany, School of Life Sciences, Technische Universität München, Freising, 
Germany.
(2)Systematic Botany and Mycology, Faculty of Biology, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany.
(3)Mathematics and Computer Science, Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznań, Polen.
(4)Plant Molecular Biology (Botany), Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, 
Martinsried, Germany.

Erratum in
    PLoS Genet. 2023 Sep 27;19(9):e1010970. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1010970.

Plants often adapt to adverse conditions via differential growth, whereby 
limited resources are discriminately allocated to optimize the growth of one 
organ at the expense of another. Little is known about the decision-making 
processes that underly differential growth. In this study, we developed a screen 
to identify decision making mutants by deploying two tools that have been used 
in decision theory: a well-defined yet limited budget, as well as 
conflict-of-interest scenarios. A forward genetic screen that combined light and 
water withdrawal was carried out. This identified BRASSINOSTEROID INSENSITIVE 2 
(BIN2) alleles as decision mutants with "confused" phenotypes. An assessment of 
organ and cell length suggested that hypocotyl elongation occurred predominantly 
via cellular elongation. In contrast, root growth appeared to be regulated by a 
combination of cell division and cell elongation or exit from the meristem. 
Gain- or loss- of function bin2 mutants were most severely impaired in their 
ability to adjust cell geometry in the hypocotyl or cell elongation as a 
function of distance from the quiescent centre in the root tips. This study 
describes a novel paradigm for root growth under limiting conditions, which 
depends not only on hypocotyl-versus-root trade-offs in the allocation of 
limited resources, but also on an ability to deploy different strategies for 
root growth in response to multiple stress conditions.

Copyright: © 2022 Kalbfuß et al. This is an open access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1010541
PMCID: PMC9779667
PMID: 36508461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
