---
pmid: '11076023'
title: Representing and analysing molecular and cellular function using the computer.
authors:
- van Helden J
- Naim A
- Mancuso R
- Eldridge M
- Wernisch L
- Gilbert D
- Wodak SJ
journal: Biol Chem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1515/BC.2000.113
---

# Representing and analysing molecular and cellular function using the computer.
**Authors:** van Helden J, Naim A, Mancuso R, Eldridge M, Wernisch L, Gilbert D, Wodak SJ
**Journal:** Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1515/BC.2000.113](https://doi.org/10.1515/BC.2000.113)

## Abstract

1. Biol Chem. 2000 Sep-Oct;381(9-10):921-35. doi: 10.1515/BC.2000.113.

Representing and analysing molecular and cellular function using the computer.

van Helden J(1), Naim A, Mancuso R, Eldridge M, Wernisch L, Gilbert D, Wodak SJ.

Author information:
(1)European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI), Hinxton, Cambridge, UK.

Determining the biological function of a myriad of genes, and understanding how 
they interact to yield a living cell, is the major challenge of the post 
genome-sequencing era. The complexity of biological systems is such that this 
cannot be envisaged without the help of powerful computer systems capable of 
representing and analysing the intricate networks of physical and functional 
interactions between the different cellular components. In this review we try to 
provide the reader with an appreciation of where we stand in this regard. We 
discuss some of the inherent problems in describing the different facets of 
biological function, give an overview of how information on function is 
currently represented in the major biological databases, and describe different 
systems for organising and categorising the functions of gene products. In a 
second part, we present a new general data model, currently under development, 
which describes information on molecular function and cellular processes in a 
rigorous manner. The model is capable of representing a large variety of 
biochemical processes, including metabolic pathways, regulation of gene 
expression and signal transduction. It also incorporates taxonomies for 
categorising molecular entities, interactions and processes, and it offers means 
of viewing the information at different levels of resolution, and dealing with 
incomplete knowledge. The data model has been implemented in the database on 
protein function and cellular processes 'aMAZE' 
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/research/pfbp/), which presently covers metabolic pathways 
and their regulation. Several tools for querying, displaying, and performing 
analyses on such pathways are briefly described in order to illustrate the 
practical applications enabled by the model.

DOI: 10.1515/BC.2000.113
PMID: 11076023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
