---
pmid: '7822273'
title: Cysteine 707 is involved in the dehydrogenase activity site of rat 10-formyltetrahydrofolate
  dehydrogenase.
authors:
- Krupenko SA
- Wagner C
- Cook RJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.2.519
---

# Cysteine 707 is involved in the dehydrogenase activity site of rat 10-formyltetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase.
**Authors:** Krupenko SA, Wagner C, Cook RJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.270.2.519](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.270.2.519)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1995 Jan 13;270(2):519-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.2.519.

Cysteine 707 is involved in the dehydrogenase activity site of rat 
10-formyltetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase.

Krupenko SA(1), Wagner C, Cook RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, 
Nashville, Tennessee.

The enzyme, 10-formyltetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase (10-FTHFDH) (EC 1.5.1.6) 
catalyzes both the NADP(+)-dependent oxidation of 10-formyltetrahydrofolate to 
tetrahydrofolate and CO2 and the NADP(+)-independent hydrolysis of 
10-formyltetrahydrofolate to tetrahydrofolate and formate. The COOH-terminal 
domain of the 10-FTHFDH (residues 417-902) shows a 46% identity with a series of 
NAD(+)-dependent aldehyde dehydrogenases (EC 1.2.1.3). All known members of the 
aldehyde dehydrogenase family and 10-FTHFDH have a strictly conserved cysteine 
(Cys-707 for 10-FTHFDH), which has been predicted to be at the active site of 
these enzymes. Rat liver 10-FTHFDH was expressed in a baculovirus system, and 
site-directed mutagenesis has been used to study the role of cysteine 707 in the 
activity of 10-FTHFDH. 10-FTHFDH with alanine substituted for cysteine at 
position 707 had no dehydrogenase activity, while hydrolase activity and binding 
of NADP+ were unchanged. Light scattering analysis revealed that wild type and 
mutant 10-FTHFDH exist as tetramers. We conclude that cysteine 707 is directly 
involved in the active site of 10-FTHFDH responsible for dehydrogenase activity, 
and there is a separate site for the hydrolase activity.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.270.2.519
PMID: 7822273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
