---
reference_id: PMID:31020005
title: Dominant LMAN2L mutation causes intellectual disability with remitting epilepsy.
authors:
- Alkhater RA
- Wang P
- Ruggieri A
- Israelian L
- Walker S
- Scherer SW
- Smith ML
- Minassian BA
journal: Ann Clin Transl Neurol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/acn3.727
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Dominant LMAN2L mutation causes intellectual disability with remitting epilepsy.
**Authors:** Alkhater RA, Wang P, Ruggieri A, Israelian L, Walker S, Scherer SW, Smith ML, Minassian BA
**Journal:** Ann Clin Transl Neurol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/acn3.727](https://doi.org/10.1002/acn3.727)

## Content

1. Ann Clin Transl Neurol. 2019 Mar 7;6(4):807-811. doi: 10.1002/acn3.727.
eCollection 2019 Apr.

Dominant LMAN2L mutation causes intellectual disability with remitting epilepsy.

Alkhater RA(1)(2), Wang P(1), Ruggieri A(3), Israelian L(1), Walker S(1),
Scherer SW(1), Smith ML(4)(5), Minassian BA(1)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Program in Genetics and Genome Biology The Hospital for Sick Children Toronto
Ontario Canada.
(2)Johns' Hopkins Aramco Healthcare Dhahran Saudi Arabia.
(3)Neuromuscular Diseases and Neuroimmunology Unit Fondazione IRCCS Istituto
Neurologico Carlo Besta Milan Italy.
(4)Department of Psychology University of Toronto Mississauga Mississauga
Ontario Canada.
(5)Neurosciences and Mental Health Program The Hospital for Sick Children
Toronto Ontario Canada.
(6)Institute of Medical Sciences University of Toronto 1 King's College Circle
Toronto Ontario Canada.
(7)Department of Pediatrics Division of Neurology and Program in Neurosciences
Children's Health University of Texas Southwestern Dallas Texas.

Mis-secreted glycoproteins (LGI1, reelin) are emerging causes of epilepsy.
LMAN2L belongs to a glycoprotein secretion chaperone family. One recessive
LMAN2L missense mutation predicted to impair the chaperone's interaction with
glycoproteins was reported in a family with intellectual disability (ID) and
remitting epilepsy. We describe four members of a family with autosomal dominant
inheritance of a similar phenotype. We show that they segregate a
NM_001142292.1:c.1073delT mutation that eliminates LMAN2L's endoplasmic
reticulum retention signal and mislocalizes the protein from that compartment to
the plasma membrane. LMAN2L mislocalization, like impaired glycoprotein
interaction, disturbs brain development, including generation of developmentally
restricted epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1002/acn3.727
PMCID: PMC6469342
PMID: 31020005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflict of interest.
Minassian holds patents for diagnostic testing of the following genes: EPM2A,
EPM2B, MECP2, and VMA21; has received research support from National Institutes
of Health (NIH); and has received license fee payments/royalty payments from
patents for diagnostic testing of the following genes: EPM2A, EPM2B, MECP2, and
VMA21.