---
pmid: '19118217'
title: EphA1 interacts with integrin-linked kinase and regulates cell morphology and
  motility.
authors:
- Yamazaki T
- Masuda J
- Omori T
- Usui R
- Akiyama H
- Maru Y
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.036467
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# EphA1 interacts with integrin-linked kinase and regulates cell morphology and motility.
**Authors:** Yamazaki T, Masuda J, Omori T, Usui R, Akiyama H, Maru Y
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.036467](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.036467)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2009 Jan 15;122(Pt 2):243-55. doi: 10.1242/jcs.036467.

EphA1 interacts with integrin-linked kinase and regulates cell morphology and 
motility.

Yamazaki T(1), Masuda J, Omori T, Usui R, Akiyama H, Maru Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Tokyo Women's Medical University, 8-1 Kawada-cho, 
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8666, Japan.

The Eph-ephrin receptor-ligand system is implicated in cell behavior and 
morphology. EphA1 is the founding member of the Eph receptors, but little is 
known about its function. Here, we show that activation of EphA1 kinase inhibits 
cell spreading and migration in a RhoA-ROCK-dependent manner. We also describe a 
novel interaction between EphA1 and integrin-linked kinase (ILK), a mediator of 
interactions between integrin and the actin cytoskeleton. The C-terminal sterile 
alpha motif (SAM) domain of EphA1 is required and the ankyrin region of ILK is 
sufficient for the interaction between EphA1 and ILK. The interaction is 
independent of EphA1 kinase activity but dependent on stimulation of the EphA1 
ligand ephrin-A1. Activation of EphA1 kinase resulted in a decrease of ILK 
activity. Finally, we demonstrated that expression of a kinase-active form of 
ILK (S343D) rescued the EphA1-mediated spreading defect, and attenuated RhoA 
activation. These results suggest that EphA1 regulates cell morphology and 
motility through the ILK-RhoA-ROCK pathway.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.036467
PMID: 19118217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
