---
pmid: '16141272'
title: Real-time imaging of Rab3a and Rab5a reveals differential roles in presynaptic
  function.
authors:
- Star EN
- Newton AJ
- Murthy VN
journal: J Physiol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1464220
doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2005.092528
---

# Real-time imaging of Rab3a and Rab5a reveals differential roles in presynaptic function.
**Authors:** Star EN, Newton AJ, Murthy VN
**Journal:** J Physiol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1113/jphysiol.2005.092528](https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2005.092528)
**PMC:** [PMC1464220](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1464220/)

## Abstract

1. J Physiol. 2005 Nov 15;569(Pt 1):103-17. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2005.092528.
Epub  2005 Sep 1.

Real-time imaging of Rab3a and Rab5a reveals differential roles in presynaptic 
function.

Star EN(1), Newton AJ, Murthy VN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, 
MA 02138, USA.

We investigated the roles of two Rab-family proteins, Rab3a and Rab5a, in 
hippocampal synaptic transmission using real-time fluorescence imaging. During 
synaptic activity, Rab3a dissociated from synaptic vesicles and dispersed into 
neighbouring axonal regions. Dispersion required calcium-dependent exocytosis 
and was complete before the entire vesicle pool turned over. In contrast, even 
prolonged synaptic activity produced limited dispersion of Rab5a. A 
GTPase-deficient mutant, Rab3a (Q81L), dispersed more slowly than wild-type 
Rab3a, and decreased the rate of exocytosis and the size of the recycling pool 
of vesicles. While overexpression of Rab3a did not affect vesicle recycling, 
overexpression of Rab5a reduced the recycling pool size by 50%. We propose that 
while Rab3a preferentially associates with recycling synaptic vesicles and 
modulates their trafficking, Rab5a is largely excluded from recycling vesicles.

DOI: 10.1113/jphysiol.2005.092528
PMCID: PMC1464220
PMID: 16141272 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
