---
pmid: '26752465'
title: Increased Expression of Interleukin-36, a Member of the Interleukin-1 Cytokine
  Family, in Inflammatory Bowel Disease.
authors:
- Nishida A
- Hidaka K
- Kanda T
- Imaeda H
- Shioya M
- Inatomi O
- Bamba S
- Kitoh K
- Sugimoto M
- Andoh A
journal: Inflamm Bowel Dis
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1097/MIB.0000000000000654
---

# Increased Expression of Interleukin-36, a Member of the Interleukin-1 Cytokine Family, in Inflammatory Bowel Disease.
**Authors:** Nishida A, Hidaka K, Kanda T, Imaeda H, Shioya M, Inatomi O, Bamba S, Kitoh K, Sugimoto M, Andoh A
**Journal:** Inflamm Bowel Dis (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MIB.0000000000000654](https://doi.org/10.1097/MIB.0000000000000654)

## Abstract

1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2016 Feb;22(2):303-14. doi: 10.1097/MIB.0000000000000654.

Increased Expression of Interleukin-36, a Member of the Interleukin-1 Cytokine 
Family, in Inflammatory Bowel Disease.

Nishida A(1), Hidaka K, Kanda T, Imaeda H, Shioya M, Inatomi O, Bamba S, Kitoh 
K, Sugimoto M, Andoh A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Shiga University of Medical Science, Seta Tsukinowa, 
Otsu, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Interleukin (IL)-36 (IL-36α, IL-36β, and IL-36γ) is a recently 
reported member of the IL-1 cytokine family. In this study, we investigated 
IL-36 expression in the inflamed mucosa of patients with inflammatory bowel 
disease and characterized the proinflammatory actions of IL-36 cytokines in 
human colonic epithelial cells.
METHODS: IL-36 mRNA expression was evaluated using real-time PCR. IL-36 protein 
expression was analyzed using immunoblotting and immunohistochemical technique. 
Intracellular signaling pathways were evaluated by immunoblotting and by 
specific siRNA-transfected cells.
RESULTS: The mRNA expression of IL-36α and IL-36γ, but not of IL-36β, was 
enhanced in the inflamed mucosa of patients with inflammatory bowel disease, in 
particular, in ulcerative colitis. Immunohistochemical analysis showed that T 
cells, monocytes, and plasma cells are the source of IL-36α and IL-36γ in 
colonic mucosa. DNA microarray analysis indicated that IL-36α induces the mRNA 
expression of CXC chemokines and acute phase proteins in intestinal epithelial 
cell line, HT-29 cells. IL-36α and IL-36γ dose-dependently and time-dependently 
induced the mRNA and protein expression of CXC chemokines (CXCL1, CXCL2, CXCL3 
etc.) in HT-29 and Widr cells. Stimulation with IL-36α and IL-36γ assembled 
MyD88 adaptor proteins (MyD88, TRAF6, IRAK1, and TAK1) into a complex and 
induced the activation of NF-κB and AP-1 and also the phosphorylation of MAPKs. 
MAPK inhibitors and siRNAs specific for NF-κB and c-Jun AP-1 significantly 
reduced IL-36-induced CXC chemokine expression.
CONCLUSIONS: IL-36α and IL-36γ may play a proinflammatory role in the 
pathophysiology of inflammatory bowel disease through induction of CXC 
chemokines and acute phase proteins.

DOI: 10.1097/MIB.0000000000000654
PMID: 26752465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
