---
pmid: '27650334'
title: Transcriptional Regulation of Arabidopsis Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 Coordinates
  Cell-Type Proliferation and Differentiation.
authors:
- de Lucas M
- Pu L
- Turco G
- Gaudinier A
- Morao AK
- Harashima H
- Kim D
- Ron M
- Sugimoto K
- Roudier F
- Brady SM
journal: Plant Cell
year: '2016'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC5134969
doi: 10.1105/tpc.15.00744
---

# Transcriptional Regulation of Arabidopsis Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 Coordinates Cell-Type Proliferation and Differentiation.
**Authors:** de Lucas M, Pu L, Turco G, Gaudinier A, Morao AK, Harashima H, Kim D, Ron M, Sugimoto K, Roudier F, Brady SM
**Journal:** Plant Cell (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1105/tpc.15.00744](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.15.00744)
**PMC:** [PMC5134969](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5134969/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell. 2016 Oct;28(10):2616-2631. doi: 10.1105/tpc.15.00744. Epub 2016
Sep  20.

Transcriptional Regulation of Arabidopsis Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 
Coordinates Cell-Type Proliferation and Differentiation.

de Lucas M(1), Pu L(1), Turco G(1), Gaudinier A(1), Morao AK(2), Harashima H(3), 
Kim D(1), Ron M(1), Sugimoto K(3), Roudier F(2), Brady SM(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Biology and Genome Center, University of California, 
Davis, California 95616.
(2)Institut de Biologie de l'Ecole Normale Supérieure, Centre National de la 
Recherche Scientifique, Unité Mixte de Recherche 8197, Institut National de la 
Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U1024 Paris, France.
(3)RIKEN Center for Sustainable Resource Science, Tsurumi, Yokohama 230-0045, 
Japan.
(4)Department of Plant Biology and Genome Center, University of California, 
Davis, California 95616 sbrady@ucdavis.edu.

Spatiotemporal regulation of transcription is fine-tuned at multiple levels, 
including chromatin compaction. Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) catalyzes 
the trimethylation of Histone 3 at lysine 27 (H3K27me3), which is the hallmark 
of a repressive chromatin state. Multiple PRC2 complexes have been reported in 
Arabidopsis thaliana to control the expression of genes involved in 
developmental transitions and maintenance of organ identity. Here, we show that 
PRC2 member genes display complex spatiotemporal gene expression patterns and 
function in root meristem and vascular cell proliferation and specification. 
Furthermore, PRC2 gene expression patterns correspond with vascular and 
nonvascular tissue-specific H3K27me3-marked genes. This tissue-specific 
repression via H3K27me3 regulates the balance between cell proliferation and 
differentiation. Using enhanced yeast one-hybrid analysis, upstream regulators 
of the PRC2 member genes are identified, and genetic analysis demonstrates that 
transcriptional regulation of some PRC2 genes plays an important role in 
determining PRC2 spatiotemporal activity within a developing organ.

© 2016 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.15.00744
PMCID: PMC5134969
PMID: 27650334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Spatiotemporal regulation of transcription is fine-tuned at multiple levels, including chromatin compaction. Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) catalyzes the trimethylation of Histone 3 at lysine 27 (H3K27me3), which is the hallmark of a repressive chromatin state. Multiple PRC2 complexes have been reported in Arabidopsis thaliana to control the expression of genes involved in developmental transitions and maintenance of organ identity. Here, we show that PRC2 member genes display complex spatiotemporal gene expression patterns and function in root meristem and vascular cell proliferation and specification. Furthermore, PRC2 gene expression patterns correspond with vascular and nonvascular tissue-specific H3K27me3-marked genes. This tissue-specific repression via H3K27me3 regulates the balance between cell proliferation and differentiation. Using enhanced yeast one-hybrid analysis, upstream regulators of the PRC2 member genes are identified, and genetic analysis demonstrates that transcriptional regulation of some PRC2 genes plays an important role in determining PRC2 spatiotemporal activity within a developing organ.

INTRODUCTION

The formation of new organs involves transcriptional reprogramming of pluripotent stem cells in order to give rise to different cell types. This temporal and spatial regulation of gene expression is regulated at multiple levels, including chromatin compaction via histone posttranslational modifications, a general mechanism by which promoter accessibility is regulated to enable interaction with transcription factors and RNA polymerase machinery. Despite the extensive chromatin modification data generated in recent years, few studies have evaluated the transcriptional regulation of chromatin modifiers themselves. Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) catalyzes the trimethylation of Histone 3 protein at the lysine 27 position (H3K27me3), the hallmark of a silent chromatin state that is correlated with gene repression and its maintenance across cell division.

PRC2 structure is highly conserved, with four core subunits conventionally named after their homologs in Drosophila melanogaster , including an Enhancer of zeste [E(z)] catalytic SET domain-containing protein, an Extra sex combs (Esc) protein, a nucleosome remodeling factor WD40-containing protein (Nurf55), and a Suppressor of zeste 12 zinc finger protein in a stoichiometric ratio of 1:1:1:1 ( Ciferri et al., 2012 ). However, the number of genes that encode each subunit varies between species ( Mozgová and Hennig, 2015 ). The Drosophila genome has been described as containing a single gene for each subunit, which consequently constitute a single complex. However, two copies of the Extra sex combs gene, ESC and ESCL , have been reported ( Ohno et al., 2008 ). In mouse and human, there are two copies of the E(z) gene, EZH1 and EZH2 ( Ciferri et al., 2012 ; Margueron et al., 2008 ). In addition, distinct isoforms of Esc have been reported in human ( Mozgová and Hennig, 2015 ; Kuzmichev et al., 2005 ). The Arabidopsis thaliana genome encodes three homologous genes for the E(z) methyltransferase subunit, MEDEA ( MEA ), CURLY LEAF ( CLF ), and SWINGER ( SWN ); one for Esc, FERTILIZATION INDEPENDENT ENDOSPERM ( FIE ); five WD40-containing protein genes, MULTICOPY SUPRESSOR OF IRA1-5 ( MSI1-5 ); and three Su(z)12, FERTILIZATION INDEPENDENT SEED2 ( FIS2 ), EMBRYONIC FLOWER2 ( EMF2 ), and VERNALIZATION2 ( VRN2 ). Together, these subunits have been reported to form three PRC2 complexes, with the methyltransferases acting partially redundantly ( Chanvivattana et al., 2004 ; Bemer and Grossniklaus, 2012 ). Several thousand genes are regulated by PRC2, and distinct complexes have been reported to regulate the expression of genes involved in developmental transitions ( Zhang et al., 2007a ; Bouyer et al., 2011 ). The FIS2 complex comprises FIS2, FIE, MEA, and MSI1 and functions in the female gametophyte and endosperm to repress PHERES ( Köhler et al., 2005 ). The expression of key regulators of the vegetative-to-reproductive transition, such as LEAFY and AGAMOUS , are regulated by the EMF2 complex (EMF2, FIE, CLF, or SWN and MSI1) ( Kinoshita et al., 2001 ). A third complex (VRN2), which comprises VRN2, FIE, CLF, or SWN and MSI1, represses FLOWERING LOCUS C to accelerate flowering in response to cold ( De Lucia et al., 2008 ).

The regulatory mechanisms that determine which of these complexes are able to act at these specific developmental transitions are unclear. Here, we describe spatiotemporal transcriptional regulation of PRC2 genes in the Arabidopsis root and characterize their function in cellular patterning, proliferation and differentiation. The Arabidopsis root has a simple structural and functional organization consisting of concentric cylinders of cell layers with radial symmetry. Briefly, root growth and development rely on the continuous activity of the apical meristem, where multipotent stem cells surround a small population of centrally located organizing cells, the quiescent center ( Scheres, 2007 ; Terpstra and Heidstra, 2009 ). Owing to a stereotypical division pattern, stem cells, depending on their position, give rise to different cell files in which the spatial relationship of cells in a file reflects their age and differentiation status ( Benfey and Scheres, 2000 ; Dolan et al., 1993 ). The epidermis is present on the outside and surrounds the cortex, endodermis, and pericycle layers. The internal vascular cylinder consists of xylem, phloem, and procambium tissues.

Here, we demonstrate that PRC2 controls root meristem development and regulates vascular cell proliferation in the maturation zone. Distinct suites of genes are marked by H3K27me3 in vascular and nonvascular cells to regulate the balance between cellular proliferation and differentiation. Dozens of transcription factors bind to the promoters of genes that encode PRC2 subunits and regulate their expression in Arabidopsis. Together, this multilayered regulatory network provides key insights into the varied means by which gene expression is regulated to ensure appropriate morphogenesis and functioning of a plant organ.
