---
pmid: '11894096'
title: The endophilin-CIN85-Cbl complex mediates ligand-dependent downregulation of
  c-Met.
authors:
- Petrelli A
- Gilestro GF
- Lanzardo S
- Comoglio PM
- Migone N
- Giordano S
journal: Nature
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/416187a
---

# The endophilin-CIN85-Cbl complex mediates ligand-dependent downregulation of c-Met.
**Authors:** Petrelli A, Gilestro GF, Lanzardo S, Comoglio PM, Migone N, Giordano S
**Journal:** Nature (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1038/416187a](https://doi.org/10.1038/416187a)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2002 Mar 14;416(6877):187-90. doi: 10.1038/416187a.

The endophilin-CIN85-Cbl complex mediates ligand-dependent downregulation of 
c-Met.

Petrelli A(1), Gilestro GF, Lanzardo S, Comoglio PM, Migone N, Giordano S.

Author information:
(1)CNR-CIOS and Department of Genetics, Biology and Biochemistry, University of 
Torino, 10126 Torino, Italy.

Comment in
    Nature. 2002 Mar 14;416(6877):133-6. doi: 10.1038/416133a.

Ligand-dependent downregulation of tyrosine kinase receptors is a critical step 
for modulating their activity. Upon ligand binding, hepatocyte growth factor 
(HGF) receptor (Met) is polyubiquitinated and degraded; however, the mechanisms 
underlying HGF receptor endocytosis are not yet known. Here we demonstrate that 
a complex involving endophilins, CIN85 and Cbl controls this process. 
Endophilins are regulatory components of clathrin-coated vesicle formation. 
Through their acyl-transferase activity they are thought to modify the membrane 
phospholipids and induce negative curvature and invagination of the plasma 
membrane during the early steps of endocytosis. Furthermore, by means of their 
Src-homology 3 domains, endophilins are able to bind CIN85, a recently 
identified protein that interacts with the Cbl proto-oncogene. Cbl, in turn, 
binds and ubiquitinates activated HGF receptor, and by recruiting the 
endophilin-CIN85 complex, it regulates receptor internalization. Inhibition of 
complex formation is sufficient to block HGF receptor internalization and to 
enhance HGF-induced signal transduction and biological responses. These data 
provide further evidence of a relationship between receptor-mediated signalling 
and endocytosis, and disclose a novel functional role for Cbl in HGF receptor 
signalling.

DOI: 10.1038/416187a
PMID: 11894096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
