---
pmid: '32694673'
title: Metformin-induced increases in GDF15 are important for suppressing appetite
  and promoting weight loss.
authors:
- Day EA
- Ford RJ
- Smith BK
- Mohammadi-Shemirani P
- Morrow MR
- Gutgesell RM
- Lu R
- Raphenya AR
- Kabiri M
- McArthur AG
- McInnes N
- Hess S
- Paré G
- Gerstein HC
- Steinberg GR
journal: Nat Metab
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/s42255-019-0146-4
---

# Metformin-induced increases in GDF15 are important for suppressing appetite and promoting weight loss.
**Authors:** Day EA, Ford RJ, Smith BK, Mohammadi-Shemirani P, Morrow MR, Gutgesell RM, Lu R, Raphenya AR, Kabiri M, McArthur AG, McInnes N, Hess S, Paré G, Gerstein HC, Steinberg GR
**Journal:** Nat Metab (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s42255-019-0146-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-019-0146-4)

## Abstract

1. Nat Metab. 2019 Dec;1(12):1202-1208. doi: 10.1038/s42255-019-0146-4. Epub 2019
 Dec 9.

Metformin-induced increases in GDF15 are important for suppressing appetite and 
promoting weight loss.

Day EA(#)(1)(2), Ford RJ(#)(1)(2), Smith BK(1)(2), Mohammadi-Shemirani P(3)(4), 
Morrow MR(1)(2), Gutgesell RM(1)(2), Lu R(1)(2), Raphenya AR(5), Kabiri M(6), 
McArthur AG(1)(5), McInnes N(1)(2)(3), Hess S(7), Paré G(1)(2)(3)(4)(8), 
Gerstein HC(1)(2)(3), Steinberg GR(9)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Metabolism, Obesity and Diabetes Research, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, McMaster 
University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Population Health Research Institute, Hamilton Health Sciences and McMaster 
University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Department of Pathology, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Sanofi Aventis Deutschland, Translational in vivo Models, Sanofi Research and 
Development, Frankfurt, Germany.
(7)Sanofi Aventis Deutschland GmbH, Research and Development Division, 
Translational Medicine and Early Development, Biomarkers and Clinical 
Bioanalyses, Frankfurt, Germany.
(8)Thrombosis and Atherosclerosis Research Institute, Hamilton Health Sciences 
and McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(9)Centre for Metabolism, Obesity and Diabetes Research, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. gsteinberg@mcmaster.ca.
(10)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, McMaster 
University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. gsteinberg@mcmaster.ca.
(11)Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. gsteinberg@mcmaster.ca.
(#)Contributed equally

Metformin is the most commonly prescribed medication for type 2 diabetes, owing 
to its glucose-lowering effects, which are mediated through the suppression of 
hepatic glucose production (reviewed in refs. 1-3). However, in addition to its 
effects on the liver, metformin reduces appetite and in preclinical models 
exerts beneficial effects on ageing and a number of diverse diseases (for 
example, cognitive disorders, cancer, cardiovascular disease) through mechanisms 
that are not fully understood1-3. Given the high concentration of metformin in 
the liver and its many beneficial effects beyond glycemic control, we reasoned 
that metformin may increase the secretion of a hepatocyte-derived endocrine 
factor that communicates with the central nervous system4. Here we show, using 
unbiased transcriptomics of mouse hepatocytes and analysis of proteins in human 
serum, that metformin induces expression and secretion of growth differentiating 
factor 15 (GDF15). In primary mouse hepatocytes, metformin stimulates the 
secretion of GDF15 by increasing the expression of activating transcription 
factor 4 (ATF4) and C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP; also known as DDIT3). In 
wild-type mice fed a high-fat diet, oral administration of metformin increases 
serum GDF15 and reduces food intake, body mass, fasting insulin and glucose 
intolerance; these effects are eliminated in GDF15 null mice. An increase in 
serum GDF15 is also associated with weight loss in patients with type 2 diabetes 
who take metformin. Although further studies will be required to determine the 
tissue source(s) of GDF15 produced in response to metformin in vivo, our data 
indicate that the therapeutic benefits of metformin on appetite, body mass and 
serum insulin depend on GDF15.

DOI: 10.1038/s42255-019-0146-4
PMID: 32694673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
