---
pmid: '17568773'
title: Foxh1 recruits Gsc to negatively regulate Mixl1 expression during early mouse
  development.
authors:
- Izzi L
- Silvestri C
- von Both I
- Labbé E
- Zakin L
- Wrana JL
- Attisano L
journal: EMBO J
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1914101
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601753
---

# Foxh1 recruits Gsc to negatively regulate Mixl1 expression during early mouse development.
**Authors:** Izzi L, Silvestri C, von Both I, Labbé E, Zakin L, Wrana JL, Attisano L
**Journal:** EMBO J (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7601753](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7601753)
**PMC:** [PMC1914101](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1914101/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2007 Jul 11;26(13):3132-43. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601753. Epub 2007
Jun  14.

Foxh1 recruits Gsc to negatively regulate Mixl1 expression during early mouse 
development.

Izzi L(1), Silvestri C, von Both I, Labbé E, Zakin L, Wrana JL, Attisano L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.

Mixl1 is a member of the Mix/Bix family of paired-like homeodomain proteins and 
is required for proper axial mesendoderm morphogenesis and endoderm formation 
during mouse development. Mix/Bix proteins are transcription factors that 
function in Nodal-like signaling pathways and are themselves regulated by Nodal. 
Here, we show that Foxh1 forms a DNA-binding complex with Smads to regulate 
transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta)/Nodal-dependent Mixl1 gene expression. 
Whereas Foxh1 is commonly described as a transcriptional activator, we observed 
that Foxh1-null embryos exhibit expanded and enhanced Mixl1 expression during 
gastrulation, indicating that Foxh1 negatively regulates expression of Mixl1 
during early mouse embryogenesis. We demonstrate that Foxh1 associates with the 
homeodomain-containing protein Goosecoid (Gsc), which in turn recruits histone 
deacetylases to repress Mixl1 gene expression. Ectopic expression of Gsc in 
embryoid bodies represses endogenous Mixl1 expression and this effect is 
dependent on Foxh1. As Gsc is itself induced in a Foxh1-dependent manner, we 
propose that Foxh1 initiates positive and negative transcriptional circuits to 
refine cell fate decisions during gastrulation.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601753
PMCID: PMC1914101
PMID: 17568773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
