---
reference_id: PMID:1569099
title: Molecular cloning and expression of a transformation-sensitive human protein containing the TPR motif and sharing identity to the stress-inducible yeast protein STI1.
authors:
- Honoré B
- Leffers H
- Madsen P
- Rasmussen HH
- Vandekerckhove J
- Celis JE
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1992'
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Molecular cloning and expression of a transformation-sensitive human protein containing the TPR motif and sharing identity to the stress-inducible yeast protein STI1.
**Authors:** Honoré B, Leffers H, Madsen P, Rasmussen HH, Vandekerckhove J, Celis JE
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1992)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 1992 Apr 25;267(12):8485-91.

Molecular cloning and expression of a transformation-sensitive human protein
containing the TPR motif and sharing identity to the stress-inducible yeast
protein STI1.

Honoré B(1), Leffers H, Madsen P, Rasmussen HH, Vandekerckhove J, Celis JE.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Biochemistry, Aarhus University, Denmark.

A transformation-sensitive human protein (IEF SSP 3521) that is 2-fold
up-regulated in SV40-transformed MRC-5 fibroblasts has been purified by
two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, microsequenced, and cDNA cloned using
oligodeoxyribonucleotides. The 2.1-kilobase cDNA encodes a 543-amino acid
protein with a calculated molecular mass of 62.6 kDa and a calculated pI of
6.77. Expression of the cDNA in AMA cells using the vaccinia virus expression
system followed by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis showed that the protein
comigrated with IEF SSP 3521. The protein contains the tetratricopeptide repeat
found in families of fungal proteins required for mitosis and RNA synthesis. In
particular, the protein has 42% amino acid sequence identity to STI1, a
stress-inducible mediator of the heat shock response in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Northern blot analysis indicated that the 3521 mRNA is up-regulated
in several transformed cells. Immunofluorescence studies using a polyclonal
antibody raised against the purified protein revealed that the antigen is
present mainly in the nucleus of SV40 transformed MRC-5 fibroblasts, while it
localizes to the Golgi apparatus and small vesicles in their normal
counterparts. The possible physiological role of IEF SSP 3521 is discussed in
the light of the structural relationship with STI1.

PMID: 1569099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]