---
pmid: '22859302'
title: Activation of the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC) by the alkaline protease
  from Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
authors:
- Butterworth MB
- Zhang L
- Heidrich EM
- Myerburg MM
- Thibodeau PH
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3463336
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.369520
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Activation of the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC) by the alkaline protease from Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
**Authors:** Butterworth MB, Zhang L, Heidrich EM, Myerburg MM, Thibodeau PH
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M112.369520](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M112.369520)
**PMC:** [PMC3463336](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3463336/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Sep 21;287(39):32556-65. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.369520. Epub 
2012 Aug 2.

Activation of the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC) by the alkaline protease from 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Butterworth MB(1), Zhang L, Heidrich EM, Myerburg MM, Thibodeau PH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15261, USA.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa is an opportunistic pathogen that significantly 
contributes to the mortality of patients with cystic fibrosis. Chronic infection 
by Pseudomonas induces sustained immune and inflammatory responses and damage to 
the airway. The ability of Pseudomonas to resist host defenses is aided, in 
part, by secreted proteases, which act as virulence factors in multiple modes of 
infection. Recent studies suggest that misregulation of protease activity in the 
cystic fibrosis lung may alter fluid secretion and pathogen clearance by 
proteolytic activation of the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC). To evaluate the 
possibility that proteolytic activation of ENaC may contribute to the virulence 
of Pseudomonas, primary human bronchial epithelial cells were exposed to P. 
aeruginosa and ENaC function was assessed by short circuit current measurements. 
Apical treatment with a strain known to express high levels of alkaline protease 
(AP) resulted in an increase in basal ENaC current and a loss of 
trypsin-inducible ENaC current, consistent with sustained activation of ENaC. To 
further characterize this AP-induced ENaC activation, AP was purified, and its 
folding, activity, and ability to activate ENaC were assessed. AP folding was 
efficient under pH and calcium conditions thought to exist in the airway surface 
liquid of normal and cystic fibrosis (CF) lungs. Short circuit measurements of 
ENaC in polarized monolayers indicated that AP activated ENaC in immortalized 
cell lines as well as post-transplant, primary human bronchial epithelial cells 
from both CF and non-CF patients. This activation was mapped to the γ-subunit of 
ENaC. Based on these data, patho-mechanisms associated with AP in the CF lung 
are proposed wherein secretion of AP leads to decreased airway surface liquid 
volume and a corresponding decrease in mucocilliary clearance of pulmonary 
pathogens.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.369520
PMCID: PMC3463336
PMID: 22859302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
