---
pmid: '2350182'
title: Glucocorticoid repression and basal regulation of the epoxide hydrolase promoter.
authors:
- Bell PA
- Falany CN
- McQuiddy P
- Kasper CB
journal: Arch Biochem Biophys
year: '1990'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0003-9861(90)90503-q
---

# Glucocorticoid repression and basal regulation of the epoxide hydrolase promoter.
**Authors:** Bell PA, Falany CN, McQuiddy P, Kasper CB
**Journal:** Arch Biochem Biophys (1990)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0003-9861(90)90503-q](https://doi.org/10.1016/0003-9861(90)90503-q)

## Abstract

1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1990 Jun;279(2):363-9. doi:
10.1016/0003-9861(90)90503-q.

Glucocorticoid repression and basal regulation of the epoxide hydrolase 
promoter.

Bell PA(1), Falany CN, McQuiddy P, Kasper CB.

Author information:
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, Madison, Wisconsin 53706.

Through a series of promoter deletions and gene transfer experiments we have 
examined the basal regulation and glucocorticoid-mediated repression of the rat 
epoxide hydrolase gene. Three regions of the 5' flanking sequence were found to 
influence the basal level of promoter function in H4IIE hepatoma cells. Region A 
(-891 to -355 bp) contains an apparent repressor of epoxide hydrolase 
expression, while regions B (-271 to -171 bp) and C (-141 to -85) were found to 
contain important sequences required for optimal promoter activity. Previous 
work has demonstrated that dexamethasone represses epoxide hydrolase 
transcription by approximately 50% in isolated rat liver nuclei, and, in this 
study, we have demonstrated that the ability of the epoxide hydrolase promoter 
to drive CAT expression is similarly repressed in H4IIE cells treated with 1 
microM dexamethasone. Furthermore, the level of endogenous epoxide hydrolase 
mRNA is decreased by 70-88% in nontransfected H4IIE cells treated with 
dexamethasone. Interestingly, promoter activity was not decreased by 
dexamethasone in COS cells, which lack glucocorticoid receptors. The current 
data show that sequences from -42 to +110 bp are sufficient to support the 
dexamethasone response, and, furthermore, they suggest that repression may not 
require direct interaction of the ligand-receptor complex with the promoter 
region.

DOI: 10.1016/0003-9861(90)90503-q
PMID: 2350182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
