---
pmid: '10478845'
title: Coactivators for the orphan nuclear receptor RORalpha.
authors:
- Atkins GB
- Hu X
- Guenther MG
- Rachez C
- Freedman LP
- Lazar MA
journal: Mol Endocrinol
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1210/mend.13.9.0343
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Coactivators for the orphan nuclear receptor RORalpha.
**Authors:** Atkins GB, Hu X, Guenther MG, Rachez C, Freedman LP, Lazar MA
**Journal:** Mol Endocrinol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1210/mend.13.9.0343](https://doi.org/10.1210/mend.13.9.0343)

## Abstract

1. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Sep;13(9):1550-7. doi: 10.1210/mend.13.9.0343.

Coactivators for the orphan nuclear receptor RORalpha.

Atkins GB(1), Hu X, Guenther MG, Rachez C, Freedman LP, Lazar MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, The Penn Diabetes Center, University of Pennsylvania 
School of Medicine, Philadelphia 19104-6149, USA.

A mutation in the nuclear orphan receptor RORalpha results in a severe 
impairment of cerebellar development by unknown mechanisms. We have shown 
previously that RORalpha contains a strong constitutive activation domain in its 
C terminus. We therefore searched for mammalian RORalpha coactivators using the 
minimal activation domain as bait in a two-hybrid screen. Several known and 
putative coactivators were isolated, including glucocorticoid 
receptor-interacting protein-1 (GRIP-1) and peroxisome proliferator-activated 
receptor (PPAR)-binding protein (PBP/TRAP220/DRIP205). These interactions were 
confirmed in vitro and require the intact activation domain of RORalpha although 
different requirements for interaction with GRIP-1 and PBP were detected. Even 
in the absence of exogenous ligand, RORalpha interacts with a complex or 
complexes of endogenous proteins, similar to those that bind to ligand-occupied 
thyroid hormone and vitamin D receptors. Both PBP and GRIP-1 were shown to be 
present in these complexes. Thus we have identified several potential RORalpha 
coactivators that, in contrast to the interactions with hormone receptors, 
interact with RORalpha in yeast, in bacterial extracts, and in mammalian cells 
in vivo and in vitro in the absence of exogenous ligand. GRIP-1 functioned as a 
coactivator for the RORalpha both in yeast and in mammalian cells. Thus, GRIP-1 
is the first proven coactivator for RORalpha.

DOI: 10.1210/mend.13.9.0343
PMID: 10478845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
