---
pmid: '15890648'
title: Nuclear localization and mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphorylation of
  the multifunctional protein CAD.
authors:
- Sigoillot FD
- Kotsis DH
- Serre V
- Sigoillot SM
- Evans DR
- Guy HI
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M504581200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Nuclear localization and mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphorylation of the multifunctional protein CAD.
**Authors:** Sigoillot FD, Kotsis DH, Serre V, Sigoillot SM, Evans DR, Guy HI
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M504581200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M504581200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jul 8;280(27):25611-20. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M504581200. Epub
2005  May 12.

Nuclear localization and mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphorylation of the 
multifunctional protein CAD.

Sigoillot FD(1), Kotsis DH, Serre V, Sigoillot SM, Evans DR, Guy HI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Wayne State University 
School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan 48201, USA.

CAD is a multifunctional protein that initiates and regulates mammalian de novo 
pyrimidine biosynthesis. The activation of the pathway required for cell 
proliferation is a consequence of the phosphorylation of CAD Thr-456 by 
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase. Although most of the CAD in the cell was 
cytosolic, cell fractionation and fluorescence microscopy showed that Thr(P)-456 
CAD was primarily localized within the nucleus in association with insoluble 
nuclear substructures, including the nuclear matrix. CAD in resting cells was 
cytosolic and unphosphorylated. Upon epidermal growth factor stimulation, CAD 
moved to the nucleus, and Thr-456 was found to be phosphorylated. Mutation of 
the CAD Thr-456 and inhibitor studies showed that nuclear import is not mediated 
by MAP kinase phosphorylation. Two fluorescent CAD constructs, NLS-CAD and 
NES-CAD, were prepared that incorporated strong nuclear import and export 
signals, respectively. NLS-CAD was exclusively nuclear and extensively 
phosphorylated. In contrast, NES-CAD was confined to the cytoplasm, and Thr-456 
remained unphosphorylated. Although alternative explanations can be envisioned, 
it is likely that phosphorylation occurs within the nucleus where much of the 
activated MAP kinase is localized. Trapping CAD in the nucleus had a minimal 
effect on pyrimidine metabolism. In contrast, when CAD was excluded from the 
nucleus, the rate of pyrimidine biosynthesis, the nucleotide pools, and the 
growth rate were reduced by 21, 36, and 60%, respectively. Thus, the nuclear 
import of CAD appears to promote optimal cell growth. UMP synthase, the 
bifunctional protein that catalyzes the last two steps in the pathway, was also 
found in both the cytoplasm and nucleus.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M504581200
PMID: 15890648 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
