---
pmid: '12970677'
title: c-Myc-deficient B lymphocytes are resistant to spontaneous and induced cell
  death.
authors:
- de Alborán IM
- Baena E
- Martinez-A C
journal: Cell Death Differ
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.cdd.4401319
---

# c-Myc-deficient B lymphocytes are resistant to spontaneous and induced cell death.
**Authors:** de Alborán IM, Baena E, Martinez-A C
**Journal:** Cell Death Differ (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.cdd.4401319](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.cdd.4401319)

## Abstract

1. Cell Death Differ. 2004 Jan;11(1):61-8. doi: 10.1038/sj.cdd.4401319.

c-Myc-deficient B lymphocytes are resistant to spontaneous and induced cell 
death.

de Alborán IM(1), Baena E, Martinez-A C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology and Oncology (DIO) (Pharmacia-CSIC), Centro Nacional 
de Biotecnología (CNB-CSIC), Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, Cantoblanco, Madrid 
28049, Spain. imoreno@cnb.uam.es

Erratum in
    Cell Death Differ. 2004 Jun;11(6):690.

C-myc gene is a member of the myc family of proto-oncogenes involved in 
proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. Overexpression of c-myc in 
fibroblasts causes apoptosis under low serum conditions in a process that 
requires the interaction of CD95 and CD95L on the surface. We have previously 
reported an in vivo conditional model to inactivate the c-myc gene in B 
lymphocytes. Here, we show that c-Myc-deficient primary B lymphocytes are 
resistant to different apoptotic stimuli. Nonactivated c-Myc-deficient B cells 
are resistant to spontaneous cell death. Upon activation, c-Myc-deficient B 
lymphocytes express normal surface levels of activation markers, and show 
resistance to staurosporine and CD95-induced cell death.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.cdd.4401319
PMID: 12970677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
