---
pmid: '17289582'
title: Identification of FAAP24, a Fanconi anemia core complex protein that interacts
  with FANCM.
authors:
- Ciccia A
- Ling C
- Coulthard R
- Yan Z
- Xue Y
- Meetei AR
- Laghmani el H
- Joenje H
- McDonald N
- de Winter JP
- Wang W
- West SC
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.01.003
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, N.I.H., Intramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Identification of FAAP24, a Fanconi anemia core complex protein that interacts with FANCM.
**Authors:** Ciccia A, Ling C, Coulthard R, Yan Z, Xue Y, Meetei AR, Laghmani el H, Joenje H, McDonald N, de Winter JP, Wang W, West SC
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2007.01.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2007.01.003)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2007 Feb 9;25(3):331-43. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.01.003.

Identification of FAAP24, a Fanconi anemia core complex protein that interacts 
with FANCM.

Ciccia A(1), Ling C, Coulthard R, Yan Z, Xue Y, Meetei AR, Laghmani el H, Joenje 
H, McDonald N, de Winter JP, Wang W, West SC.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research UK, London Research Institute, Clare Hall Laboratories, South 
Mimms, Herts, UK.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2007 Feb 23;25(4):487-90. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.02.002.

The Fanconi anemia (FA) core complex plays a crucial role in a DNA damage 
response network with BRCA1 and BRCA2. How this complex interacts with damaged 
DNA is unknown, as only the FA core protein FANCM (the homolog of an archaeal 
helicase/nuclease known as HEF) exhibits DNA binding activity. Here, we describe 
the identification of FAAP24, a protein that targets FANCM to structures that 
mimic intermediates formed during the replication/repair of damaged DNA. FAAP24 
shares homology with the XPF family of flap/fork endonucleases, associates with 
the C-terminal region of FANCM, and is a component of the FA core complex. 
FAAP24 is required for normal levels of FANCD2 monoubiquitylation following DNA 
damage. Depletion of FAAP24 by siRNA results in cellular hypersensitivity to DNA 
crosslinking agents and chromosomal instability. Our data indicate that the 
FANCM/FAAP24 complex may play a key role in recruitment of the FA core complex 
to damaged DNA.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.01.003
PMID: 17289582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
