---
pmid: '15944124'
title: Presenilin-dependent transcriptional control of the Abeta-degrading enzyme
  neprilysin by intracellular domains of betaAPP and APLP.
authors:
- Pardossi-Piquard R
- Petit A
- Kawarai T
- Sunyach C
- Alves da Costa C
- Vincent B
- Ring S
- D'Adamio L
- Shen J
- Müller U
- St George Hyslop P
- Checler F
journal: Neuron
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2005.04.008
---

# Presenilin-dependent transcriptional control of the Abeta-degrading enzyme neprilysin by intracellular domains of betaAPP and APLP.
**Authors:** Pardossi-Piquard R, Petit A, Kawarai T, Sunyach C, Alves da Costa C, Vincent B, Ring S, D'Adamio L, Shen J, Müller U, St George Hyslop P, Checler F
**Journal:** Neuron (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuron.2005.04.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2005.04.008)

## Abstract

1. Neuron. 2005 May 19;46(4):541-54. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2005.04.008.

Presenilin-dependent transcriptional control of the Abeta-degrading enzyme 
neprilysin by intracellular domains of betaAPP and APLP.

Pardossi-Piquard R(1), Petit A, Kawarai T, Sunyach C, Alves da Costa C, Vincent 
B, Ring S, D'Adamio L, Shen J, Müller U, St George Hyslop P, Checler F.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Centre National de la 
Recherche Scientifique, UMR6097 CNRS/UNSA, Valbonne 06560, France.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2007 Feb 15;53(4):479-83. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2007.01.023.
    Neuron. 2007 Feb 15;53(4):483-6. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2007.01.024.

Amyloid beta-peptide (Abeta), which plays a central role in Alzheimer's disease, 
is generated by presenilin-dependent gamma-secretase cleavage of beta-amyloid 
precursor protein (betaAPP). We report that the presenilins (PS1 and PS2) also 
regulate Abeta degradation. Presenilin-deficient cells fail to degrade Abeta and 
have drastic reductions in the transcription, expression, and activity of 
neprilysin, a key Abeta-degrading enzyme. Neprilysin activity and expression are 
also lowered by gamma-secretase inhibitors and by PS1/PS2 deficiency in mouse 
brain. Neprilysin activity is restored by transient expression of PS1 or PS2 and 
by expression of the amyloid intracellular domain (AICD), which is cogenerated 
with Abeta, during gamma-secretase cleavage of betaAPP. Neprilysin gene 
promoters are transactivated by AICDs from APP-like proteins (APP, APLP1, and 
APLP2), but not by Abeta or by the gamma-secretase cleavage products of Notch, 
N- or E- cadherins. The presenilin-dependent regulation of neprilysin, mediated 
by AICDs, provides a physiological means to modulate Abeta levels with varying 
levels of gamma-secretase activity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2005.04.008
PMID: 15944124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
