---
pmid: '16696853'
title: A yeast 2-hybrid analysis of human GTP cyclohydrolase I protein interactions.
authors:
- Swick L
- Kapatos G
journal: J Neurochem
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2239266
doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2006.03836.x
---

# A yeast 2-hybrid analysis of human GTP cyclohydrolase I protein interactions.
**Authors:** Swick L, Kapatos G
**Journal:** J Neurochem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1471-4159.2006.03836.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1471-4159.2006.03836.x)
**PMC:** [PMC2239266](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2239266/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurochem. 2006 Jun;97(5):1447-55. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2006.03836.x.

A yeast 2-hybrid analysis of human GTP cyclohydrolase I protein interactions.

Swick L(1), Kapatos G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, 
Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

The yeast 2-hybrid system was used to identify protein domains involved in the 
oligomerization of human guanosine 5'-triphosphate (GTP) Cyclohydrolase I (GCH1) 
and the interaction of GCH1 with its regulatory partner, GCH1 feedback 
regulatory protein (GFRP). When interpreted within the structural framework 
derived from crystallography, our results indicate that the GCH1 N-terminal 
alpha-helices are not the only domains involved in the formation of dimers from 
monomers and also suggest an important role for the C-terminal alpha-helix in 
the assembly of dimers to form decamers. Moreover, a previously unknown role of 
the extended N-terminal alpha-helix in the interaction of GCH1 and GFRP was 
revealed. To discover novel GCH1 protein binding partners, we used the yeast 
2-hybrid system to screen a human brain library with GCH1 N-terminal amino acids 
1-96 as prey. This protruding extension of GCH1 contains two canonical Type-I 
Src homology-3 (SH3) ligand domains located within amino acids 1-42. Our screen 
yielded seven unique clones that were subsequently shown to require amino acids 
1-42 for binding to GCH1. The interaction of one of these clones, Activator of 
Heat Shock 90 kDa Protein (Aha1), with GCH1 was validated by 
glutathione-s-transferase (GST) pull-down assay. Although the physiological 
relevance of the Aha1-GCH1 interaction requires further study, Aha1 may recruit 
GCH1 into the endothelial nitric oxide synthase/heat shock protein (eNOS/Hsp90) 
complex to support changes in endothelial nitric oxide production through the 
local synthesis of BH4.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2006.03836.x
PMCID: PMC2239266
PMID: 16696853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
