---
pmid: '15710408'
title: SorCS3 does not require propeptide cleavage to bind nerve growth factor.
authors:
- Westergaard UB
- Kirkegaard K
- Sørensen ES
- Jacobsen C
- Nielsen MS
- Petersen CM
- Madsen P
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2004.12.088
---

# SorCS3 does not require propeptide cleavage to bind nerve growth factor.
**Authors:** Westergaard UB, Kirkegaard K, Sørensen ES, Jacobsen C, Nielsen MS, Petersen CM, Madsen P
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2004.12.088](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2004.12.088)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2005 Feb 14;579(5):1172-6. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2004.12.088.

SorCS3 does not require propeptide cleavage to bind nerve growth factor.

Westergaard UB(1), Kirkegaard K, Sørensen ES, Jacobsen C, Nielsen MS, Petersen 
CM, Madsen P.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Biochemistry, Ole Worms Allé, bldg. 170, University of 
Aarhus, 8000 Aarhus C, Denmark.

The functional properties of the Vps10p-domain receptor SorCS3 are undescribed. 
Here, we examine its processing and sorting in cellular transfectants, and 
analyze the binding of potential ligands to the purified receptor. We show that 
SorCS3 is synthesized as a proprotein and converted to its mature form by 
N-terminal propeptide cleavage in distal Golgi compartments. The propeptide is 
not a requirement for normal processing of the receptor and does not prevent 
ligands from binding to the SorCS3 precursor form. Expression of wt and chimeric 
receptors further suggests that SorCS3 predominates on the plasma membrane, 
exhibits slow internalization and does not engage in intracellular trafficking. 
SorCS3 emerges as a new neurotrophin binding Vps10p-domain receptor functionally 
distinct from its relatives Sortilin and SorLA.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2004.12.088
PMID: 15710408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
