---
pmid: '12134162'
title: Myosin VI is required for E-cadherin-mediated border cell migration.
authors:
- Geisbrecht ER
- Montell DJ
journal: Nat Cell Biol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ncb830
---

# Myosin VI is required for E-cadherin-mediated border cell migration.
**Authors:** Geisbrecht ER, Montell DJ
**Journal:** Nat Cell Biol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncb830](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb830)

## Abstract

1. Nat Cell Biol. 2002 Aug;4(8):616-20. doi: 10.1038/ncb830.

Myosin VI is required for E-cadherin-mediated border cell migration.

Geisbrecht ER(1), Montell DJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, 725 
North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21205-2185, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2002 Sep;4(9):E211-2. doi: 10.1038/ncb0902-e211.

Myosin VI (MyoVI) is a pointed-end-directed, actin-based motor protein, and 
mutations in the gene result in disorganization of hair cell stereocilia and 
cause deafness in mice. MyoVI also localizes to the leading edges of 
growth-factor-stimulated fibroblast cells and has been suggested to be involved 
in cell motility. There has been no direct test of this hypothesis, however. 
Drosophila melanogaster MyoVI is expressed in a small group of migratory 
follicle cells, known as border cells. Here we show that depletion of MyoVI 
specifically from border cells severely inhibited their migration. Similar to 
MyoVI, E-cadherin is required for border cell migration. We found that 
E-cadherin and Armadillo (Arm, Drosophila beta-catenin) protein levels were 
specifically reduced in cells lacking MyoVI, whereas other proteins were not. In 
addition, MyoVI protein levels were reduced in cells lacking DE-cadherin or Arm. 
MyoVI and Arm co-immunoprecipitated from ovarian protein extracts. These data 
suggest that MyoVI is required for border cell migration where it stabilizes 
E-cadherin and Arm. Mutations in MyoVIIA, another unconventional myosin protein, 
also lead to deafness, and MyoVIIA interacts with E-cadherin through a membrane 
protein called vezatin. Multiple biochemical mechanisms may exist, therefore, 
for cadherins to associate with diverse unconventional myosins that are required 
for normal stereocilium formation or maintenance.

DOI: 10.1038/ncb830
PMID: 12134162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
