---
pmid: '27317676'
title: The Arabidopsis Malectin-Like/LRR-RLK IOS1 Is Critical for BAK1-Dependent and
  BAK1-Independent Pattern-Triggered Immunity.
authors:
- Yeh YH
- Panzeri D
- Kadota Y
- Huang YC
- Huang PY
- Tao CN
- Roux M
- Chien HC
- Chin TC
- Chu PW
- Zipfel C
- Zimmerli L
journal: Plant Cell
year: '2016'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC5077175
doi: 10.1105/tpc.16.00313
---

# The Arabidopsis Malectin-Like/LRR-RLK IOS1 Is Critical for BAK1-Dependent and BAK1-Independent Pattern-Triggered Immunity.
**Authors:** Yeh YH, Panzeri D, Kadota Y, Huang YC, Huang PY, Tao CN, Roux M, Chien HC, Chin TC, Chu PW, Zipfel C, Zimmerli L
**Journal:** Plant Cell (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1105/tpc.16.00313](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.16.00313)
**PMC:** [PMC5077175](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5077175/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell. 2016 Jul;28(7):1701-21. doi: 10.1105/tpc.16.00313. Epub 2016 Jun
17.

The Arabidopsis Malectin-Like/LRR-RLK IOS1 Is Critical for BAK1-Dependent and 
BAK1-Independent Pattern-Triggered Immunity.

Yeh YH(1), Panzeri D(1), Kadota Y(2), Huang YC(1), Huang PY(1), Tao CN(1), Roux 
M(2), Chien HC(1), Chin TC(1), Chu PW(1), Zipfel C(2), Zimmerli L(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science and Institute of Plant Biology, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei 106, Taiwan.
(2)The Sainsbury Laboratory, Norwich NR4 7UH, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Life Science and Institute of Plant Biology, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei 106, Taiwan lauzim2@ntu.edu.tw.

Plasma membrane-localized pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) such as FLAGELLIN 
SENSING2 (FLS2), EF-TU RECEPTOR (EFR), and CHITIN ELICITOR RECEPTOR KINASE1 
(CERK1) recognize microbe-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs) to activate 
pattern-triggered immunity (PTI). A reverse genetics approach on genes 
responsive to the priming agent β-aminobutyric acid (BABA) revealed IMPAIRED 
OOMYCETE SUSCEPTIBILITY1 (IOS1) as a critical PTI player. Arabidopsis thaliana 
ios1 mutants were hypersusceptible to Pseudomonas syringae bacteria. 
Accordingly, ios1 mutants showed defective PTI responses, notably delayed 
upregulation of the PTI marker gene FLG22-INDUCED RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE1, reduced 
callose deposition, and mitogen-activated protein kinase activation upon MAMP 
treatment. Moreover, Arabidopsis lines overexpressing IOS1 were more resistant 
to bacteria and showed a primed PTI response. In vitro pull-down, bimolecular 
fluorescence complementation, coimmunoprecipitation, and mass spectrometry 
analyses supported the existence of complexes between the membrane-localized 
IOS1 and BRASSINOSTEROID INSENSITIVE1-ASSOCIATED KINASE1 (BAK1)-dependent PRRs 
FLS2 and EFR, as well as with the BAK1-independent PRR CERK1. IOS1 also 
associated with BAK1 in a ligand-independent manner and positively regulated 
FLS2-BAK1 complex formation upon MAMP treatment. In addition, IOS1 was critical 
for chitin-mediated PTI. Finally, ios1 mutants were defective in BABA-induced 
resistance and priming. This work reveals IOS1 as a novel regulatory protein of 
FLS2-, EFR-, and CERK1-mediated signaling pathways that primes PTI activation.

© 2016 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.16.00313
PMCID: PMC5077175
PMID: 27317676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Plasma membrane-localized pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) such as FLAGELLIN
SENSING2 (FLS2), EF-TU RECEPTOR (EFR), and CHITIN ELICITOR RECEPTOR KINASE1 (CERK1)
recognize microbe-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs) to activate pattern-triggered
immunity ( PTI ). A reverse genetics approach
on genes responsive to the priming agent β-aminobutyric acid ( BABA ) revealed IMPAIRED OOMYCETE SUSCEPTIBILITY1
(IOS1) as a critical PTI player. Arabidopsis thaliana ios1 mutants were hypersusceptible to Pseudomonas syringae bacteria. Accordingly, ios1 mutants showed defective PTI responses,
notably delayed upregulation of the PTI marker gene FLG22-INDUCED
RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE1 , reduced callose deposition, and mitogen-activated
protein kinase activation upon MAMP treatment. Moreover, Arabidopsis lines overexpressing IOS1 were more
resistant to bacteria and showed a primed PTI response. In vitro pull-down,
bimolecular fluorescence complementation, coimmunoprecipitation, and mass
spectrometry analyses supported the existence of complexes between the
membrane-localized IOS1 and BRASSINOSTEROID INSENSITIVE1-ASSOCIATED KINASE1
(BAK1)-dependent PRRs FLS2 and EFR, as well as with the BAK1-independent PRR CERK1. IOS1 also associated with BAK1 in a
ligand-independent manner and positively regulated FLS2-BAK1 complex formation upon MAMP treatment. In addition, IOS1 was
critical for chitin-mediated PTI. Finally, ios1 mutants were
defective in BABA -induced resistance and
priming. This work reveals IOS1 as a novel regulatory protein of FLS2-, EFR-, and
CERK1-mediated signaling pathways that primes PTI activation.

INTRODUCTION

Plants possess multilayered recognition systems that detect pathogens at various stages
of infection and proliferation. Recognition of microbial invasion is essentially based
upon the host’s ability to distinguish between self and non-self components.
Early microbial pathogens detection is performed by cell surface-localized pattern
recognition receptors (PRRs) that sense pathogen- or microbe-associated molecular
patterns (PAMPs or MAMPs) ( Monaghan and Zipfel,
2012 ). Major examples of MAMPs are lipopolysaccharides present in the envelope
of Gram-negative bacteria, eubacterial flagellin, eubacterial elongation factor Tu
(EF-Tu), peptidoglycans from Gram-positive bacteria, methylated bacterial DNA fragments,
and fungal cell wall-derived chitins ( Girardin et al.,
2002 ; Cook et al., 2004 ; Boller and Felix, 2009 ). MAMP recognition promptly triggers the activation of
pattern-triggered immunity (PTI) ( Tsuda and Katagiri,
2010 ). Early PTI responses, such as calcium influx, production of reactive
oxygen species ( ROS ), and activation of
mitogen-activated protein ( MAP ) kinases, induce
transcriptional reprogramming mediated by plant WRKY transcription factors as well as
calmodulin binding proteins ( Boller and Felix,
2009 ; Tena et al., 2011 ). In
addition, Arabidopsis thaliana plants close stomata in a MAMP -dependent manner when in contact with bacteria
( Melotto et al., 2006 ; Singh et al., 2012 ). Callose deposition and PTI marker gene
upregulation are usually observed later ( Zipfel and
Robatzek, 2010 ). Activation of PTI leads to broad resistance to pathogens
( Nicaise et al., 2009 ; Tsuda and Katagiri, 2010 ; Zeng
et al., 2010 ; Desclos-Theveniau et al.,
2012 ). Virulent bacterial pathogens inject proteins, some of which suppress
PTI ( Deslandes and Rivas, 2012 ; Feng and Zhou, 2012 ). Often, recognition of
microbial effectors by plant intracellular nucleotide binding site and leucine-rich
repeat proteins activates effector-triggered immunity ( ETI ). ETI is a rapid and robust
response, usually associated with a hypersensitive reaction ( Maekawa et al., 2011 ; Gassmann
and Bhattacharjee, 2012 ).

In Arabidopsis, the most extensively studied PRRs are the leucine-rich repeat
receptor-like kinases (LRR-RLKs) FLAGELLIN SENSING2 (FLS2) and EF-Tu receptor (EFR).
FLS2 and EFR recognize bacterial flagellin (or the derived peptide flg22) and EF-Tu (or
the derived peptides elf18/elf26), respectively ( Gómez-Gómez and Boller, 2000 ; Zipfel et al., 2006 ). Upon ligand binding, FLS2 and EFR rapidly
associate with another LRR-RLK, BRI1-ASSOCIATED RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE/SOMATIC
EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE3 (BAK1/SERK3), forming a ligand-inducible complex
that triggers downstream PTI responses ( Chinchilla et al., 2007 ; Heese et al., 2007 ; Roux et al.,
2011 ). In addition to associating with FLS2, BAK1 recognizes the C terminus of
the FLS2-bound flg22, thus acting as a coreceptor ( Sun
et al., 2013 ). BAK1-LIKE1/SERK4 also cooperates with BAK1 to regulate PRR -mediated signaling ( Roux et al., 2011 ). Interestingly, the BAK1-INTERACTING RECEPTOR
KINASE2 (BIR2) prevents BAK1 interaction with FLS2 before elicitation. Importantly, BIR2
is released from BAK1 upon MAMP perception,
allowing FLS2-BAK1 association and PTI activation ( Halter et al., 2014 ). While BAK1
and other SERKs are the primary regulators downstream of FLS2 and EFR, the perception of
the fungal MAMP chitin and signaling through
CHITIN ELICITOR RECEPTOR KINASE1 (CERK1) does not require BAK1 ( Shan et al., 2008 ; Kemmerling et
al., 2011 ; Ranf et al., 2011 ).
Although CERK1 was considered as the major PRR for chitin ( Miya et al., 2007 ; Wan et al., 2008 , 2012 ), recent data suggest that the LYSIN MOTIF RECEPTOR KINASE5
(LYK5) is the primary receptor for chitin ( Cao et al.,
2014 ). Upon chitin elicitation, CERK1 and LYK5 form a complex to activate
plant innate immunity ( Cao et al., 2014 ). CERK1
is also involved in the recognition of peptidoglycans ( Willmann et al., 2011 ). Other proteins downstream of PRRs modulate the PTI response. Typically, the receptor-like
cytoplasmic kinase BOTRYTIS-INDUCED KINASE1 (BIK1) plays a critical role in mediating
early flagellin signaling from the FLS2/BAK1 receptor complex and regulates responses
induced by elf18, Pep1, and chitin and thus acts as a convergent point downstream of
multiple PRRs ( Lu et al., 2010a ; Zhang et al., 2010 ). Other receptor-like
cytoplasmic kinase, such as PTI COMPROMISED RECEPTOR-LIKE CYTOPLASMIC KINASE1 (PCRK1)
and PCRK2, function downstream of multiple PRRs ( Sreekanta et al., 2015 ; Kong et al.,
2016 ). In addition, BRASSINOSTEROID-SIGNALING KINASE1 (BSK1) associates with
unstimulated FLS2 ( Shi et al., 2013 ). The DENN
(Differentially Expressed in Normal and Neoplastic cells) domain protein STOMATAL
CYTOKINESIS-DEFECTIVE1 (SCD1) is also necessary for some FLS2- and EFR-mediated
responses and associates in a ligand-independent manner with FLS2 in vivo ( Korasick et al., 2010 ). Furthermore, lectin
receptor kinases (LecRKs) such as LecRK-VI.2 and LecRK-V.5 modulate early PTI signaling
( Desclos-Theveniau et al., 2012 ; Singh et al., 2012 ; Singh and Zimmerli, 2013 ; Huang
et al., 2014 ).

In addition to PTI and ETI , other resistance
responses, such as systemic acquired resistance and induced systemic resistance, are
activated after pathogen challenges ( Durrant and Dong,
2004 ; Van Wees et al., 2008 ). Organic
and inorganic compounds can also induce systemic resistance in plants. The non-protein
amino acid β-aminobutyric acid ( BABA ) is
a potent inducer of resistance against abiotic stress ( Jakab et al., 2005 ; Zimmerli et al.,
2008 ), nematodes ( Oka et al., 1999 ),
insects ( Hodge et al., 2005 ), and microbial
pathogens ( Jakab et al., 2001 ; Zimmerli et al., 2001 ; Cohen, 2002 ; Ton and Mauch-Mani,
2004 ; Po-Wen et al., 2013 ). BABA -induced resistance is associated with a faster
activation of defense mechanisms upon stress perception, a phenomenon known as priming
( Conrath et al., 2006 ; Návarová et al., 2012 ). Although accumulation of
defense signaling components before stress exposure ( Beckers et al., 2009 ; Singh et al.,
2012 ) and epigenetic modifications ( Jaskiewicz et al., 2011 ; Luna et al.,
2012 ; Rasmann et al., 2012 ; Slaughter et al., 2012 ; Po-Wen et al., 2013 ) are suggested to be critical for priming, the
identity of signaling components involved in priming is still largely unknown.

In an effort to identify novel critical players in Arabidopsis immunity and priming, we
used a reverse genetic approach by testing mutants of genes whose expression levels are
induced by the priming agent BABA ( Tsai et al., 2011 ). Three independent insertion
lines in the malectin-like/LRR-RLK IMPAIRED OOMYCETE SUSCEPTIBILITY1 ( IOS1 ) ( Hok et al., 2011 )
were found to be hypersusceptible to bacterial pathogens. IOS1 is known to contribute to
disease caused by filamentous (hemi)biotrophs and to attenuate abscisic acid ( ABA ) responses in Arabidopsis ( Hok et al., 2011 , 2014 ). Through loss- and gain-of-function analyses and biochemical
approaches, we show that IOS1 is an important modulator of Arabidopsis PTI that
associates with the LRR-RLKs FLS2, EFR, and BAK1 in a ligand-independent manner, notably
controlling the complex formation between FLS2 and BAK1. IOS1 also associates with the
LysM-domain RLK CERK1 and controls chitin-mediated PTI.

DISCUSSION

PRRs are critical to elicit PTI responses and to restrict pathogen ingress (Boller and
Felix, 2009; Nicaise et al., 2009 ; Zhang and Zhou, 2010 ; Huang and Zimmerli, 2014 ). To date, all known plant PRRs are
modular transmembrane proteins containing ligand binding ectodomains that function as
part of multiprotein complexes ( Böhm et al.,
2014 ; Zipfel, 2014 ). In this work,
we analyzed the role of the Arabidopsis malectin-like / LRR-RLK IOS1 in
innate immunity and priming with genetic and biochemical approaches. The results support
the following conclusions.
