---
pmid: '16810318'
title: Release of RASSF1C from the nucleus by Daxx degradation links DNA damage and
  SAPK/JNK activation.
authors:
- Kitagawa D
- Kajiho H
- Negishi T
- Ura S
- Watanabe T
- Wada T
- Ichijo H
- Katada T
- Nishina H
journal: EMBO J
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1523180
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601212
---

# Release of RASSF1C from the nucleus by Daxx degradation links DNA damage and SAPK/JNK activation.
**Authors:** Kitagawa D, Kajiho H, Negishi T, Ura S, Watanabe T, Wada T, Ichijo H, Katada T, Nishina H
**Journal:** EMBO J (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7601212](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7601212)
**PMC:** [PMC1523180](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1523180/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2006 Jul 26;25(14):3286-97. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601212. Epub 2006
Jun  29.

Release of RASSF1C from the nucleus by Daxx degradation links DNA damage and 
SAPK/JNK activation.

Kitagawa D(1), Kajiho H, Negishi T, Ura S, Watanabe T, Wada T, Ichijo H, Katada 
T, Nishina H.

Author information:
(1)The Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Medical Research 
Institute, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

Stress-activated protein kinase/c-Jun N-terminal kinase (SAPK/JNK) responds to a 
variety of stress stimuli and controls cell fates such as cell cycle entrance, 
apoptosis and senescence. Stimuli such as ultraviolet irradiation and chemical 
reagents that damage genomic DNA induce the activation of the SAPK/JNK signaling 
pathway. However, it is unclear how the signal arising in the nucleus owing to 
DNA damage is transmitted to SAPK/JNK in the cytoplasm. Here, we report that the 
nuclear components Daxx and Ras-association domain family 1C (RASSF1C) link DNA 
damage to SAPK/JNK activation in HeLa cells. In response to DNA damage, Daxx 
localized in promyelocytic leukaemia-nuclear bodies (PML-NBs) undergoes 
ubiquitination and degradation. RASSF1C, a tumor suppressor and newly identified 
binding partner of Daxx, is constitutively anchored by Daxx in PML-NBs but is 
released from the nucleus when Daxx is degraded. This released RASSF1C 
translocates to cytoplasmic microtubules and participates in the activation of 
SAPK/JNK. Our data define a novel mechanism by which the Daxx-RASSF1C complex in 
PML-NBs couples nuclear DNA damage to the cytoplasmic SAPK/JNK signaling 
pathway.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601212
PMCID: PMC1523180
PMID: 16810318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
