---
pmid: '15743821'
title: PC4 coactivates MyoD by relieving the histone deacetylase 4-mediated inhibition
  of myocyte enhancer factor 2C.
authors:
- Micheli L
- Leonardi L
- Conti F
- Buanne P
- Canu N
- Caruso M
- Tirone F
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1061592
doi: 10.1128/MCB.25.6.2242-2259.2005
---

# PC4 coactivates MyoD by relieving the histone deacetylase 4-mediated inhibition of myocyte enhancer factor 2C.
**Authors:** Micheli L, Leonardi L, Conti F, Buanne P, Canu N, Caruso M, Tirone F
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.25.6.2242-2259.2005](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.25.6.2242-2259.2005)
**PMC:** [PMC1061592](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1061592/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Mar;25(6):2242-59. doi: 10.1128/MCB.25.6.2242-2259.2005.

PC4 coactivates MyoD by relieving the histone deacetylase 4-mediated inhibition 
of myocyte enhancer factor 2C.

Micheli L(1), Leonardi L, Conti F, Buanne P, Canu N, Caruso M, Tirone F.

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Neurobiologia e Medicina Molecolare, Consiglio Nazionale delle 
Ricerche, Viale Marx 15, 00137, Rome, Italy.

Histone deacetylase 4 (HDAC4) negatively regulates skeletal myogenesis by 
associating with the myocyte enhancer factor 2 (MEF2) transcription factors. Our 
data indicate that the gene PC4 (interferon-related developmental regulator 1 
[IFRD1], Tis7), which we have previously shown to be required for myoblast 
differentiation, is both induced by MyoD and potentiates the transcriptional 
activity of MyoD, thus revealing a positive regulatory loop between these 
molecules. Enhancement by PC4 of MyoD-dependent activation of muscle gene 
promoters occurs selectively through MEF2 binding sites. Furthermore, PC4 
localizes in the nucleus of differentiating myoblasts, associates with MEF2C, 
and is able to counteract the HDAC4-mediated inhibition of MEF2C. This latter 
action can be explained by the observed ability of PC4 to dose dependently 
displace HDAC4 from MEF2C. Consistently, we have observed that (i) the region of 
PC4 that binds MEF2C is sufficient to counteract the inhibition by HDAC4; (ii) 
PC4, although able to bind HDAC4, does not inhibit the enzymatic activity of 
HDAC4; and (iii) PC4 overcomes the inhibition mediated by the amino-terminal 
domain of HDAC4, which associates with MEF2C but not with PC4. Together, our 
findings strongly suggest that PC4 acts as a coactivator of MyoD and MEF2C by 
removing the inhibitory effect of HDAC4, thus exerting a pivotal function during 
myogenesis.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.25.6.2242-2259.2005
PMCID: PMC1061592
PMID: 15743821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
