---
pmid: '12198165'
title: The chromatin remodeling complex NoRC targets HDAC1 to the ribosomal gene promoter
  and represses RNA polymerase I transcription.
authors:
- Zhou Y
- Santoro R
- Grummt I
journal: EMBO J
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC126197
doi: 10.1093/emboj/cdf460
---

# The chromatin remodeling complex NoRC targets HDAC1 to the ribosomal gene promoter and represses RNA polymerase I transcription.
**Authors:** Zhou Y, Santoro R, Grummt I
**Journal:** EMBO J (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/cdf460](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/cdf460)
**PMC:** [PMC126197](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC126197/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2002 Sep 2;21(17):4632-40. doi: 10.1093/emboj/cdf460.

The chromatin remodeling complex NoRC targets HDAC1 to the ribosomal gene 
promoter and represses RNA polymerase I transcription.

Zhou Y(1), Santoro R, Grummt I.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Biology of the Cell II, Deutsches 
Krebsforschungszentrum, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Mammalian chromatin remodeling complexes are involved in both activation and 
repression of transcription. Here, we show that NoRC, a SNF2h- containing 
nucleolar chromatin remodeling complex, represses ribosomal gene transcription. 
NoRC-mediated rDNA silencing was alleviated by trichostatin A, indicating that 
histone deacetylation is causally involved in silencing. Chromatin 
immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrate that overexpression of TIP5, the 
large subunit of NoRC, mediates deacetylation of nucleosomes in the vicinity of 
the rDNA promoter. Protein-protein interaction assays reveal association of TIP5 
with the histone deacetylase HDAC1 in vivo and in vitro. Deletion of the 
C-terminal PHD finger and bromodomain abolishes the interaction of TIP5 and 
HDAC1, and abrogates transcriptional repression. The results suggest that NoRC 
silences the rDNA locus by targeting the SIN3 corepressor complex to the rDNA 
promoter, thereby establishing a repressed chromatin structure.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/cdf460
PMCID: PMC126197
PMID: 12198165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
