---
pmid: '14665466'
title: Dictyostelium discoideum developmentally regulated genes whose expression is
  dependent on MADS box transcription factor SrfA.
authors:
- Escalante R
- Moreno N
- Sastre L
journal: Eukaryot Cell
year: '2003'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC326651
doi: 10.1128/EC.2.6.1327-1335.2003
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Dictyostelium discoideum developmentally regulated genes whose expression is dependent on MADS box transcription factor SrfA.
**Authors:** Escalante R, Moreno N, Sastre L
**Journal:** Eukaryot Cell (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1128/EC.2.6.1327-1335.2003](https://doi.org/10.1128/EC.2.6.1327-1335.2003)
**PMC:** [PMC326651](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC326651/)

## Abstract

1. Eukaryot Cell. 2003 Dec;2(6):1327-35. doi: 10.1128/EC.2.6.1327-1335.2003.

Dictyostelium discoideum developmentally regulated genes whose expression is 
dependent on MADS box transcription factor SrfA.

Escalante R(1), Moreno N, Sastre L.

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, CSIC/UAM, 28029 Madrid, Spain.

The MADS box transcription factor SrfA is required for spore differentiation in 
Dictyostelium discoideum. srfA null strains form rounded spores that do not 
resist adverse environmental conditions. Five genes whose expression is 
dependent on SrfA have been isolated by differential hybridization. One of these 
genes, sigC, is identical to phg1b, previously characterized in mutants with 
altered adhesive properties and found to encode a nine-transmembrane-domain 
protein. This gene is transcribed into two mRNAs as the result of alternative 
splicing of two internal exons. The slower-migrating mRNA codes for a shorter 
protein that lacks the first transmembrane fragment and is not expressed in srfA 
null strains. The other four genes (sigA, sigB, sigD, and 45D) are expressed 
only during late developmental stages. In situ hybridization experiments showed 
that expression of sigA, sigB, and sigD is restricted to the sorus of developing 
structures. sigA codes for a homologue of malate dehydrogenase that converts 
pyruvate to malate to replenish the tricarboxylic acid cycle. sigB encodes a 
protein with significant similarity to the GP63 metalloproteinase of Leishmania, 
leishmanolysin. The sequence of SigD is highly similar to that of several spore 
coat proteins of D. discoideum, and it may play a role in that structure. The 
gene 45D codes for an RNA-binding protein homologue whose expression is also 
dependent on the GATA transcription factor stalky (StkA). The expression of sigB 
is also dependent on both SrfA and StkA. The expression of 45D, but not of sigA, 
sigB, sigC, and sigD, can be induced in srfA null cells by constitutive protein 
kinase A activation. Strains in which either sigA, sigB, or sigD is disrupted 
were isolated and found to form spores that are not detectably different from 
those of wild-type strains.

DOI: 10.1128/EC.2.6.1327-1335.2003
PMCID: PMC326651
PMID: 14665466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The MADS box transcription factor SrfA is required for spore differentiation in Dictyostelium discoideum. srfA null strains form rounded spores that do not resist adverse environmental conditions. Five genes whose expression is dependent on SrfA have been isolated by differential hybridization. One of these genes, sigC , is identical to phg1b , previously characterized in mutants with altered adhesive properties and found to encode a nine-transmembrane-domain protein. This gene is transcribed into two mRNAs as the result of alternative splicing of two internal exons. The slower-migrating mRNA codes for a shorter protein that lacks the first transmembrane fragment and is not expressed in srfA null strains. The other four genes ( sigA , sigB , sigD , and 45D ) are expressed only during late developmental stages. In situ hybridization experiments showed that expression of sigA , sigB , and sigD is restricted to the sorus of developing structures. sigA codes for a homologue of malate dehydrogenase that converts pyruvate to malate to replenish the tricarboxylic acid cycle. sigB encodes a protein with significant similarity to the GP63 metalloproteinase of Leishmania , leishmanolysin. The sequence of SigD is highly similar to that of several spore coat proteins of D. discoideum , and it may play a role in that structure. The gene 45D codes for an RNA-binding protein homologue whose expression is also dependent on the GATA transcription factor stalky (StkA). The expression of sigB is also dependent on both SrfA and StkA. The expression of 45D , but not of sigA , sigB , sigC , and sigD , can be induced in srfA null cells by constitutive protein kinase A activation. Strains in which either sigA , sigB , or sigD is disrupted were isolated and found to form spores that are not detectably different from those of wild-type strains.

DISCUSSION

This report describes the isolation of five SrfA-dependent genes that are expressed in wild-type strains but not in srfA null strains. The expression of four of these genes ( sigA , sigB , sigD , and 45D ) is induced at late developmental stages (between 20 and 24 h). Three of these genes, sigB , sigD , and 45D , are expressed at detectable levels only at these late developmental stages. The gene coding for the malic enzyme homologue ( sigA ) is expressed in vegetative cells; its expression is repressed during aggregation and strongly induced again at 20 h of development. In situ hybridization experiments have shown that three of the genes that were studied ( sigA , sigB , and sigD ) are expressed at high levels in the sori of 24-h-old structures. The promoter regions of the genes sigA , sigB , sigD , and 45D have been cloned in LacZ reporter vectors. These constructs show specific LacZ expression in the sorus (data not shown), confirming the results obtained by in situ hybridization for the genes sigA , sigB , and sigD and suggesting a spore-specific expression for 45D . These data are in agreement with the hypothesis that SrfA induces the expression of a number of spore-specific genes at the final steps of spore differentiation.

The regulation of the expression of sig genes by SrfA could be through direct binding to their promoters, which activates their expression. Alternatively, SrfA could activate the expression of other transcription factors that would, in turn, activate the expression of sig genes. However, the strong induction of srfA expression in prespore cells at culmination, a short time before the induction of sig genes, suggests a direct regulation by SrfA. Animal SRF transcription factors bind to a conserved DNA element, the CArG box, whose consensus sequence is CC(A/T) 6 GG ( 27 ). This sequence is not present in the available promoter regions of sig genes. However, several amino acids involved in DNA binding have diverged in vertebrate and D. discoideum SRFs ( 13 , 26 ), which might have changed the DNA-binding specificity of SrfA with respect to animal SRF. A comparison of the nucleotide sequences of sig gene promoter regions did not allow the identification of conserved elements. Therefore, establishing the mechanisms of activation will require a detailed functional analysis of the promoter regions of these genes.

Surprisingly, the alternative splicing of phg1b ( sigC ) is also dependent on SrfA. phg1b codes for a protein with nine predicted transmembrane regions, homologous to the TM9 family of endoplasmic proteins. Mutation of this gene causes temperature-dependent defects in cell adhesion and phagocytosis ( 5 ). The SrfA-dependent alternatively spliced mRNA codes for an internally deleted protein that lacks part of the predicted first extracytoplasmic domain and the first transmembrane fragment. The absence of the first transmembrane fragment is predicted to reverse the orientation of the other transmembrane fragments, which could impair the functionality of the protein. It is not clear how SrfA can regulate mRNA splicing. One possibility is that SrfA induces the expression of proteins involved in the regulation of splicing. The 45D -encoded protein, homologous to RNA-binding proteins, may be a good candidate for this function. However, strains in which 45D has been interrupted still show wild-type alternative splicing of phg1b (data not shown). Alternatively, SrfA could activate phg1b slower-migrating mRNA transcription from a distal promoter region during culmination to originate a larger mRNA. Transcription from this promoter could be associated with the splicing of exons 2 and 3.

Two of the SrfA-dependent genes isolated, sigB and 45D , also depend on the GATA transcription factor stalky (StkA) for their expression ( 20 ). The expression of the spore-specific gene spiA is also dependent on both SrfA and StkA ( 13 , 20 ). The transcription factor StkA is specifically expressed in cells of the prespore region, and its mutation produces the conversion of prespore cells into prestalk cells ( 8 , 23 ). The existence of genes whose expression is dependent on both SrfA and StkA suggests the interaction of both transcription regulatory pathways in spore differentiation. Cooperation of the vertebrate SRF with GATA 4 and GATA 6 has been described previously ( 4 , 21 , 22 ). In D. discoideum , the two pathways are not completely overlapping, however, since there are genes whose expression is dependent on StkA but not on SrfA. The phenotypes derived from the alteration of both pathways are also very different, and StkA seems to be required at an earlier step of spore differentiation than is SrfA, since stkA mutants do not form spores while srfA mutants are able to accomplish the first stages of spore differentiation ( 8 , 13 , 23 ; unpublished results). Therefore, it is also possible that the SrfA pathway could not be activated in StkA mutants because prespore cells dedifferentiate before srfA induction.

The interaction of SrfA with other pathways regulating spore differentiation is also indicated by the consequences of PKA activation in srfA null strains. It is intriguing that the activation of PKA by 8-Br-cAMP induces the expression of two SrfA-dependent genes but not the others. The more likely interpretation for these results is that PKA is activating several transcription pathways. Previous results indicate that one of them involves SrfA, since PKA activation is required to induce srfA expression in prespore cells during midculmination ( 12 ). However, other pathways might also be activated, since 8-Br-cAMP induces the expression of some SrfA-dependent genes even in srfA null strains. These results might be explained if the expression of these genes simultaneously depends on both SrfA and PKA. High-level artificial activation of PKA by 8-Br-cAMP treatment might override the requirement for SrfA. The proposed PKA-dependent alternative pathway is not the StkA pathway, since some StkA-dependent genes, such as spiA or 45D , are induced by 8-Br-cAMP while another, sigB , is not induced. The possible relation between PKA and SrfA pathways is summarized in Fig. 6 .

The identification of SrfA-dependent genes is an important step towards the characterization of the biological processes regulated by this transcription factor. The similarities found between the SrfA-dependent genes and other genes of known function can provide some information in this respect. One of the more interesting genes is sigD , which demonstrates a very significant similarity to the family of D. discoideum spore coat proteins both in its sequence and in the predicted domain structure. However, this gene is expressed at a later developmental stage than the other described spore coat genes ( 16 ), and thus the secretory pathway used by the SigD protein may be different from the classical prespore vesicles ( 35 ). Knockout strains have been generated for this gene, but they did not present any obvious phenotype. The morphology of developing structures and spores, spore viability, and the stability at the sporocarp and after prolonged incubation in water and detergent treatment were similar to those of wild-type strains. These results may be the consequence of functional redundancy with other spore coat proteins, given their similarity.

Null strains were also generated for the malic enzyme homologue (SigA) and the homologue to the GP63 metalloproteinase from Leishmania (SigB), but again, they did not present any phenotype in either morphogenesis, spore differentiation, viability, or stability. Malic enzyme replenishes the tricarboxylic acid cycle when intermediates are used for biosynthesis and may be involved in the synthesis of the monosaccharides that are required for cellulose synthesis or in the generation of reduction potential (NADPH). The proteinase GP63 homologue might be required for several processes, including the degradation of the extracellular matrix, protein processing, or the degradation of the spore coat during germination. A null strain for the ribonucleoprotein homologue-encoding gene 45D has been described previously and also has no detectable phenotype ( 20 ). Biochemical redundancy in these processes may explain the lack of phenotype of the null strains. Besides, the phenotype of srfA − spores might be the consequence of the lack of expression of many target genes. So far, the absence of only one SrfA target gene, spiA , has shown defects in spore stability, and the severity of the phenotype is much lower than that of srfA − spores. There is the possibility that only the accumulative effect of the absence of several SrfA-dependent genes would give a distinct phenotype.

A knockout strain for phg1b ( sigC ) has also been studied ( 5 ). This strain presents a temperature-sensitive defect in adhesion and phagocytosis that probably corresponds to the absence of the protein isoform encoded by the faster-migrating mRNA that is expressed in vegetative cells and throughout development. The effect of the absence of the deleted protein, encoded by the slower-migrating mRNA, should be observed at the late developmental stages when this isoform is expressed. A defect in the morphology of the stalk has been observed in this strain (data not shown), although more experiments need to be done to unambiguously correlate the phenotype with the absence of the alternatively processed mRNA.

In summary, the results described in this article strongly suggest that SrfA participates in one of the transcriptional regulatory pathways that are required for spore differentiation. The determination of the mechanisms through which SrfA induces the expression of these genes and of the function of the encoded proteins will require further studies.
