---
pmid: '17290298'
title: 'PI3K delta and PI3K gamma: partners in crime in inflammation in rheumatoid
  arthritis and beyond?'
authors:
- Rommel C
- Camps M
- Ji H
journal: Nat Rev Immunol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nri2036
---

# PI3K delta and PI3K gamma: partners in crime in inflammation in rheumatoid arthritis and beyond?
**Authors:** Rommel C, Camps M, Ji H
**Journal:** Nat Rev Immunol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nri2036](https://doi.org/10.1038/nri2036)

## Abstract

1. Nat Rev Immunol. 2007 Mar;7(3):191-201. doi: 10.1038/nri2036. Epub 2007 Feb 9.

PI3K delta and PI3K gamma: partners in crime in inflammation in rheumatoid 
arthritis and beyond?

Rommel C(1), Camps M, Ji H.

Author information:
(1)Merck Serono International S.A., 9 Chemin des Mines, 1211 Geneva, 
Switzerland. christian.rommel@merckserono.net

Dysregulated signal transduction in innate and adaptive immune cells is known to 
be associated with the development of various autoimmune and inflammatory 
diseases. Consequently, targeting intracellular signalling of the 
pro-inflammatory cytokine network heralds hope for the next generation of 
anti-inflammatory drugs. Phosphoinositide 3-kinases (PI3Ks) generate lipid-based 
second messengers that control an array of intracellular signalling pathways 
that are known to have important roles in leukocytes. In light of the recent 
progress in the development of selective PI3K inhibitors, and the beneficial 
effects of these inhibitors in models of acute and chronic inflammatory 
disorders, we discuss the therapeutic potential of blocking PI3K isoforms for 
the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and other immune-mediated diseases.

DOI: 10.1038/nri2036
PMID: 17290298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
