---
pmid: '7706319'
title: The rad21 gene product of Schizosaccharomyces pombe is a nuclear, cell cycle-regulated
  phosphoprotein.
authors:
- Birkenbihl RP
- Subramani S
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.13.7703
---

# The rad21 gene product of Schizosaccharomyces pombe is a nuclear, cell cycle-regulated phosphoprotein.
**Authors:** Birkenbihl RP, Subramani S
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.270.13.7703](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.270.13.7703)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1995 Mar 31;270(13):7703-11. doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.13.7703.

The rad21 gene product of Schizosaccharomyces pombe is a nuclear, cell 
cycle-regulated phosphoprotein.

Birkenbihl RP(1), Subramani S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla 
92093-0322, USA.

The rad21 gene of Schizosaccharomyces pombe is involved in the repair of 
double-strand breaks in DNA and is essential for mitotic growth (Birkenbihl, R. 
P., and Subramani, S. (1992) Nucleic Acids Res. 20, 6605-6611). We show that the 
Rad21 protein migrates with an aberrantly slow mobility, has a thrombin cleavage 
site, and is multiply phosphorylated mainly at serine residues. The expression 
of the rad21 mRNA and the Rad21 protein is cell cycle-regulated, with the peak 
of mRNA and protein expression occurring near the G1 to S transition. Following 
translation of the protein, hypophosphorylated forms of the protein appear. 
However, the most phosphorylated form of Rad21 appears only later in the cell 
cycle (in S to G2). Analysis of the radiosensitive mutant rad21-45 revealed that 
the mutant protein is permanently hypophosphorylated. The Rad21 protein is 
nuclear during the cell cycle. The nuclear localization signal was identified in 
the C-terminal third of the protein. Upon repression of the Rad21 protein 
expressed from the repressible nmt1 promoter, the unphosphorylated and 
hypophosphorylated forms of Rad21 disappeared first. When the concentration of 
the most highly phosphorylated form of Rad21 sank under a critical level, the 
cells underwent aberrant mitoses. They exhibited loss of proper nuclear 
organization and abnormal septation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.270.13.7703
PMID: 7706319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
