---
pmid: '29237594'
title: Structure-function analysis of ferroportin defines the binding site and an
  alternative mechanism of action of hepcidin.
authors:
- Aschemeyer S
- Qiao B
- Stefanova D
- Valore EV
- Sek AC
- Ruwe TA
- Vieth KR
- Jung G
- Casu C
- Rivella S
- Jormakka M
- Mackenzie B
- Ganz T
- Nemeth E
journal: Blood
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5824336
doi: 10.1182/blood-2017-05-786590
---

# Structure-function analysis of ferroportin defines the binding site and an alternative mechanism of action of hepcidin.
**Authors:** Aschemeyer S, Qiao B, Stefanova D, Valore EV, Sek AC, Ruwe TA, Vieth KR, Jung G, Casu C, Rivella S, Jormakka M, Mackenzie B, Ganz T, Nemeth E
**Journal:** Blood (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2017-05-786590](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2017-05-786590)
**PMC:** [PMC5824336](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5824336/)

## Abstract

1. Blood. 2018 Feb 22;131(8):899-910. doi: 10.1182/blood-2017-05-786590. Epub
2017  Dec 13.

Structure-function analysis of ferroportin defines the binding site and an 
alternative mechanism of action of hepcidin.

Aschemeyer S(1)(2), Qiao B(2), Stefanova D(3), Valore EV(2), Sek AC(3), Ruwe 
TA(4), Vieth KR(4), Jung G(2), Casu C(5), Rivella S(5), Jormakka M(6)(7), 
Mackenzie B(4), Ganz T(1)(2)(8), Nemeth E(2).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biology Interdepartmental Doctoral Program.
(2)Department of Medicine, and.
(3)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Integrative Physiology, David Geffen 
School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA.
(4)Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, University of Cincinnati 
College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH.
(5)Division of Hematology, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA.
(6)Structural Biology Program, Centenary Institute, and.
(7)Faculty of Medicine, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia; and.
(8)Department of Pathology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2018 Feb 22;131(8):840-842. doi: 10.1182/blood-2018-01-824151.

Nonclassical ferroportin disease (FD) is a form of hereditary hemochromatosis 
caused by mutations in the iron transporter ferroportin (Fpn), resulting in 
parenchymal iron overload. Fpn is regulated by the hormone hepcidin, which 
induces Fpn endocytosis and cellular iron retention. We characterized 11 
clinically relevant and 5 nonclinical Fpn mutations using stably transfected, 
inducible isogenic cell lines. All clinical mutants were functionally resistant 
to hepcidin as a consequence of either impaired hepcidin binding or impaired 
hepcidin-dependent ubiquitination despite intact hepcidin binding. Mapping the 
residues onto 2 computational models of the human Fpn structure indicated that 
(1) mutations that caused ubiquitination-resistance were positioned at 
helix-helix interfaces, likely preventing the hepcidin-induced conformational 
change, (2) hepcidin binding occurred within the central cavity of Fpn, (3) 
hepcidin interacted with up to 4 helices, and (4) hepcidin binding should 
occlude Fpn and interfere with iron export independently of endocytosis. We 
experimentally confirmed hepcidin-mediated occlusion of Fpn in the absence of 
endocytosis in multiple cellular systems: HEK293 cells expressing an 
endocytosis-defective Fpn mutant (K8R), Xenopus oocytes expressing wild-type or 
K8R Fpn, and mature human red blood cells. We conclude that nonclassical FD is 
caused by Fpn mutations that decrease hepcidin binding or hinder conformational 
changes required for ubiquitination and endocytosis of Fpn. The newly documented 
ability of hepcidin and its agonists to occlude iron transport may facilitate 
the development of broadly effective treatments for hereditary iron overload 
disorders.

© 2018 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2017-05-786590
PMCID: PMC5824336
PMID: 29237594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: E.N. and T.G. 
are consultants and shareholders of Intrinsic LifeSciences and Silarus 
Therapeutics and consultants for La Jolla Pharmaceuticals. T.G. is a consultant 
for Keryx Pharmaceuticals. B.M. is a recipient of a Vifor Pharma grant. S.R. is 
a member of the scientific advisory board and the recipient of a grant from 
Ionis Pharmaceuticals. The remaining authors declare no competing financial 
interests.
