---
pmid: '25017465'
title: Oxidation of 7-dehydrocholesterol and desmosterol by human cytochrome P450
  46A1.
authors:
- Goyal S
- Xiao Y
- Porter NA
- Xu L
- Guengerich FP
journal: J Lipid Res
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4617353
doi: 10.1194/jlr.M051508
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Oxidation of 7-dehydrocholesterol and desmosterol by human cytochrome P450 46A1.
**Authors:** Goyal S, Xiao Y, Porter NA, Xu L, Guengerich FP
**Journal:** J Lipid Res (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1194/jlr.M051508](https://doi.org/10.1194/jlr.M051508)
**PMC:** [PMC4617353](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4617353/)

## Abstract

1. J Lipid Res. 2014 Sep;55(9):1933-43. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M051508. Epub 2014 Jul
13.

Oxidation of 7-dehydrocholesterol and desmosterol by human cytochrome P450 46A1.

Goyal S(1), Xiao Y(1), Porter NA(2), Xu L(2), Guengerich FP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Center in Molecular Toxicology, Vanderbilt 
University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Vanderbilt Institute of Chemical Biology, 
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235.

Erratum in
    J Lipid Res. 2015 Nov;56(11):2226. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M051508ERR.

Cytochrome P450 (P450 or CYP) 46A1 is expressed in brain and has been 
characterized by its ability to oxidize cholesterol to 24S-hydroxycholesterol. 
In addition, the same enzyme is known to further oxidize 24S-hydroxycholesterol 
to the 24,25- and 24,27-dihydroxy products, as well as to catalyze side-chain 
oxidations of 7α-hydroxycholesterol and cholestanol. As precursors in the 
biosynthesis of cholesterol, 7-dehydrocholesterol has not been found to be a 
substrate of P450 46A1 and desmosterol has not been previously tested. However, 
24-hydroxy-7-dehydrocholesterol was recently identified in brain tissues, which 
prompted us to reexamine this enzyme and its potential substrates. Here we 
report that P450 46A1 oxidizes 7-dehydrocholesterol to 
24-hydroxy-7-dehydrocholesterol and 25-hydroxy-7-dehydrocholesterol, as 
confirmed by LC-MS and GC-MS. Overall, the catalytic rates of formation 
increased in the order of 24-hydroxy-7-dehydrocholesterol < 
24-hydroxycholesterol < 25-hydroxy-7-dehydrocholesterol from their respective 
precursors, with a ratio of 1:2.5:5. In the case of desmosterol, epoxidation to 
24S,25-epoxycholesterol and 27-hydroxylation was observed, at roughly equal 
rates. The formation of these oxysterols in the brain may be of relevance in 
Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome, desmosterolosis, and other relevant diseases, as 
well as in signal transduction by lipids.

Copyright © 2014 by the American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 
Inc.

DOI: 10.1194/jlr.M051508
PMCID: PMC4617353
PMID: 25017465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
