---
pmid: '18257517'
title: Phosphoproteome analysis of fission yeast.
authors:
- Wilson-Grady JT
- Villén J
- Gygi SP
journal: J Proteome Res
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/pr7006335
---

# Phosphoproteome analysis of fission yeast.
**Authors:** Wilson-Grady JT, Villén J, Gygi SP
**Journal:** J Proteome Res (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1021/pr7006335](https://doi.org/10.1021/pr7006335)

## Abstract

1. J Proteome Res. 2008 Mar;7(3):1088-97. doi: 10.1021/pr7006335. Epub 2008 Feb
8.

Phosphoproteome analysis of fission yeast.

Wilson-Grady JT(1), Villén J, Gygi SP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 
02115, USA.

Phosphorylation is a key regulator of many events in eukaryotic cells. The 
acquisition of large-scale phosphorylation data sets from model organisms can 
pinpoint conserved regulatory inputs and reveal kinase-substrate relationships. 
Here, we provide the first large-scale phosphorylation analysis of the fission 
yeast, Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Protein from thiabendazole-treated cells was 
separated by preparative SDS-PAGE and digested with trypsin. The resulting 
peptides were subjected to either IMAC or TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment methods 
and then analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. In total, 
2887 distinct phosphorylation sites were identified from 1194 proteins with an 
estimated false-discovery rate of <0.5% at the peptide level. A comparison of 
the two different enrichment methods is presented, supporting the finding that 
they are complementary. Finally, phosphorylation sites were examined for 
phosphorylation-specific motifs and evolutionary conservation. These analyses 
revealed both motifs and specific phosphorylation events identified in S. pombe 
were conserved and predicted novel phosphorylation in mammals.

DOI: 10.1021/pr7006335
PMID: 18257517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
