---
pmid: '24667410'
title: Notch4 reveals a novel mechanism regulating Notch signal transduction.
authors:
- James AC
- Szot JO
- Iyer K
- Major JA
- Pursglove SE
- Chapman G
- Dunwoodie SL
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2014.03.015
---

# Notch4 reveals a novel mechanism regulating Notch signal transduction.
**Authors:** James AC, Szot JO, Iyer K, Major JA, Pursglove SE, Chapman G, Dunwoodie SL
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbamcr.2014.03.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbamcr.2014.03.015)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Jul;1843(7):1272-84. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2014.03.015. Epub 2014 Mar 22.

Notch4 reveals a novel mechanism regulating Notch signal transduction.

James AC(1), Szot JO(2), Iyer K(3), Major JA(4), Pursglove SE(5), Chapman G(6), 
Dunwoodie SL(7).

Author information:
(1)Developmental and Stem Cell Biology Division, Victor Chang Cardiac Research 
Institute, Sydney, Australia. Electronic address: a.james@victorchang.edu.au.
(2)Developmental and Stem Cell Biology Division, Victor Chang Cardiac Research 
Institute, Sydney, Australia; School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, 
Faculty of Science, UNSW, Sydney, Australia. Electronic address: 
j.szot@victorchang.edu.au.
(3)Developmental and Stem Cell Biology Division, Victor Chang Cardiac Research 
Institute, Sydney, Australia. Electronic address: k.iyer@victorchang.edu.au.
(4)Developmental and Stem Cell Biology Division, Victor Chang Cardiac Research 
Institute, Sydney, Australia. Electronic address: j.major@victorchang.edu.aua.
(5)Developmental and Stem Cell Biology Division, Victor Chang Cardiac Research 
Institute, Sydney, Australia. Electronic address: sharonchapman2201@gmail.com.
(6)Developmental and Stem Cell Biology Division, Victor Chang Cardiac Research 
Institute, Sydney, Australia; St Vincent's Clinical School, Faculty of Medicine, 
UNSW, Sydney, Australia. Electronic address: g.chapman@victorchang.edu.au.
(7)Developmental and Stem Cell Biology Division, Victor Chang Cardiac Research 
Institute, Sydney, Australia; St Vincent's Clinical School, Faculty of Medicine, 
UNSW, Sydney, Australia; School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, 
Faculty of Science, UNSW, Sydney, Australia. Electronic address: 
s.dunwoodie@victorchang.edu.au.

Notch4 is a divergent member of the Notch family of receptors that is primarily 
expressed in the vasculature. Its expression implies an important role for 
Notch4 in the vasculature; however, mice homozygous for the Notch4(d1) knockout 
allele are viable. Since little is known about the role of Notch4 in the 
vasculature and how it functions, we further investigated Notch4 in mice and in 
cultured cells. We found that the Notch4(d1) allele is not null as it expresses 
a truncated transcript encoding most of the NOTCH4 extracellular domain. In 
cultured cells, NOTCH4 did not signal in response to ligand. Moreover, NOTCH4 
inhibited signalling from the NOTCH1 receptor. This is the first report of 
cis-inhibition of signalling by another Notch receptor. The NOTCH4 extracellular 
domain also inhibits NOTCH1 signalling when expressed in cis, raising the 
possibility that reported Notch4 phenotypes may not be due to loss of NOTCH4 
function. To better address the role of NOTCH4 in vivo, we generated a Notch4 
null mouse in which the entire coding region was deleted. Notch4 null mice 
exhibited slightly delayed vessel growth in the retina, consistent with our 
novel finding that NOTCH4 protein is expressed in the newly formed vasculature. 
These findings indicate a role of NOTCH4 in fine-tuning the forming vascular 
plexus.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2014.03.015
PMID: 24667410 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
