---
pmid: '19474428'
title: Inactivating PAPSS2 mutations in a patient with premature pubarche.
authors:
- Noordam C
- Dhir V
- McNelis JC
- Schlereth F
- Hanley NA
- Krone N
- Smeitink JA
- Smeets R
- Sweep FC
- Claahsen-van der Grinten HL
- Arlt W
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0810489
pubmed_publication_types:
- Case Reports
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: CASE_REPORT
---

# Inactivating PAPSS2 mutations in a patient with premature pubarche.
**Authors:** Noordam C, Dhir V, McNelis JC, Schlereth F, Hanley NA, Krone N, Smeitink JA, Smeets R, Sweep FC, Claahsen-van der Grinten HL, Arlt W
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa0810489](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa0810489)

## Abstract

1. N Engl J Med. 2009 May 28;360(22):2310-8. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0810489.

Inactivating PAPSS2 mutations in a patient with premature pubarche.

Noordam C(1), Dhir V, McNelis JC, Schlereth F, Hanley NA, Krone N, Smeitink JA, 
Smeets R, Sweep FC, Claahsen-van der Grinten HL, Arlt W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics-Metabolic and Endocrine Disorders, Radboud 
University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Erratum in
    N Engl J Med. 2009 Jul 9;361(2):217.

Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) sulfotransferase, known as SULT2A1, converts the 
androgen precursor DHEA to its inactive sulfate ester, DHEAS [corrected], 
thereby preventing the conversion of DHEA to an active androgen. SULT2A1 
requires 3'-phosphoadenosine-5'-phosphosulfate (PAPS) for catalytic activity. We 
have identified compound heterozygous mutations in the gene encoding human PAPS 
synthase 2 (PAPSS2) in a girl with premature pubarche, hyperandrogenic 
anovulation, very low DHEAS levels, and increased androgen levels. In vitro 
coincubation of human SULT2A1 and wild-type or mutant PAPSS2 proteins confirmed 
the inactivating nature of the mutations. These observations indicate that 
PAPSS2 deficiency is a monogenic adrenocortical cause of androgen excess.

2009 Massachusetts Medical Society

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa0810489
PMID: 19474428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
