---
pmid: '6315706'
title: Epidermal growth factor-like transforming growth factor. II. Interaction with
  epidermal growth factor receptors in human placenta membranes and A431 cells.
authors:
- Massagué J
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1983'
full_text_available: false
---

# Epidermal growth factor-like transforming growth factor. II. Interaction with epidermal growth factor receptors in human placenta membranes and A431 cells.
**Authors:** Massagué J
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1983)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1983 Nov 25;258(22):13614-20.

Epidermal growth factor-like transforming growth factor. II. Interaction with 
epidermal growth factor receptors in human placenta membranes and A431 cells.

Massagué J.

A 125I-labeled derivative of rat epidermal growth factor-like transforming 
growth factor (125I-eTGF) that retains the chemical and biological properties of 
native eTGF has been prepared to characterize the interaction of eTGF with 
epidermal growth factor (EGF) membrane receptors. Binding of 125I-eTGF and 
125I-labeled mouse EGF (125I-EGF) to membrane preparations from human placenta 
and the A431 human epidermoid carcinoma cell line was competed for to the same 
extent and with the same potency by either unlabeled eTGF or EGF. Components of 
placenta membranes and A431 membranes (145-170 kDa) were the major species 
affinity-labeled by cross-linking with membrane-bound 125I-eTGF or 125I-EGF. 
Affinity labeling of these receptor species was fully inhibited by both native 
eTGF and native EGF when present in excess during incubation of membranes with 
125I-eTGF or 125I-EGF. The binding affinity and capacity of receptors in A431 
membranes and placenta membranes were strikingly similar for eTGF and EGF. 
However, binding of 125I-eTGF to membrane receptors was highly sensitive to pH, 
being optimal only within the pH 8.0-8.5 range whereas EGF binding was optimal 
at pH 7.0-9.0. eTGF binding and EGF binding were modified in parallel by 
exposure of placental membranes to phytohemagglutinin, concanavalin A, or wheat 
germ agglutinin. Prolonged exposure of A431 cells to eTGF or EGF induced the 
same extent of down-regulation of both eTGF binding and EGF binding. 
eTGF-induced down-regulation of receptors in A431 cells followed the same 
kinetics as EGF-induced receptor down-regulation. The data indicate that despite 
the limited sequence homology between eTGF and EGF, these two ligands exhibit a 
remarkably similar mode of interaction with a common eTGF/EGF membrane receptor 
type.

PMID: 6315706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
