---
pmid: '30072228'
title: 'Endosomal Retrieval of Cargo: Retromer Is Not Alone.'
authors:
- McNally KE
- Cullen PJ
journal: Trends Cell Biol
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.tcb.2018.06.005
---

# Endosomal Retrieval of Cargo: Retromer Is Not Alone.
**Authors:** McNally KE, Cullen PJ
**Journal:** Trends Cell Biol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tcb.2018.06.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcb.2018.06.005)

## Abstract

1. Trends Cell Biol. 2018 Oct;28(10):807-822. doi: 10.1016/j.tcb.2018.06.005.
Epub  2018 Jul 30.

Endosomal Retrieval of Cargo: Retromer Is Not Alone.

McNally KE(1), Cullen PJ(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Biochemistry, Biomedical Sciences Building, University of Bristol, 
Bristol BS8 1TD, UK.
(2)School of Biochemistry, Biomedical Sciences Building, University of Bristol, 
Bristol BS8 1TD, UK. Electronic address: pete.cullen@bristol.ac.uk.

Comment in
    Aging (Albany NY). 2018 Nov 27;10(12):3638-3640. doi: 10.18632/aging.101681.

Endosomes are major protein sorting stations in cells. Endosomally localised 
multi-protein complexes sort integral proteins, including signaling receptors, 
nutrient transporters, adhesion molecules, and lysosomal hydrolase receptors, 
for lysosomal degradation or conversely for retrieval and subsequent recycling 
to various membrane compartments. Correct endosomal sorting of these proteins is 
essential for maintaining cellular homeostasis, with defects in endosomal 
sorting implicated in various human pathologies including neurodegenerative 
disorders. Retromer, an ancient multi-protein complex, is essential for the 
retrieval and recycling of hundreds of transmembrane proteins. While retromer is 
a major player in endosomal retrieval and recycling, several studies have 
recently identified retrieval mechanisms that are independent of retromer. Here, 
we review endosomal retrieval complexes, with a focus on recently discovered 
retromer-independent mechanisms.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tcb.2018.06.005
PMID: 30072228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
