---
pmid: '10473630'
title: A novel Ras-interacting protein required for chemotaxis and cyclic adenosine
  monophosphate signal relay in Dictyostelium.
authors:
- Lee S
- Parent CA
- Insall R
- Firtel RA
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '1999'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC25521
doi: 10.1091/mbc.10.9.2829
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# A novel Ras-interacting protein required for chemotaxis and cyclic adenosine monophosphate signal relay in Dictyostelium.
**Authors:** Lee S, Parent CA, Insall R, Firtel RA
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.10.9.2829](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.10.9.2829)
**PMC:** [PMC25521](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC25521/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Cell. 1999 Sep;10(9):2829-45. doi: 10.1091/mbc.10.9.2829.

A novel Ras-interacting protein required for chemotaxis and cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate signal relay in Dictyostelium.

Lee S(1), Parent CA, Insall R, Firtel RA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Center for Molecular Genetics, University of 
California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093-0634, USA.

We have identified a novel Ras-interacting protein from Dictyostelium, RIP3, 
whose function is required for both chemotaxis and the synthesis and relay of 
the cyclic AMP (cAMP) chemoattractant signal. rip3 null cells are unable to 
aggregate and lack receptor activation of adenylyl cyclase but are able, in 
response to cAMP, to induce aggregation-stage, postaggregative, and 
cell-type-specific gene expression in suspension culture. In addition, rip3 null 
cells are unable to properly polarize in a cAMP gradient and chemotaxis is 
highly impaired. We demonstrate that cAMP stimulation of guanylyl cyclase, which 
is required for chemotaxis, is reduced approximately 60% in rip3 null cells. 
This reduced activation of guanylyl cyclase may account, in part, for the defect 
in chemotaxis. When cells are pulsed with cAMP for 5 h to mimic the endogenous 
cAMP oscillations that occur in wild-type strains, the cells will form 
aggregates, most of which, however, arrest at the mound stage. Unlike the 
response seen in wild-type strains, the rip3 null cell aggregates that form 
under these experimental conditions are very small, which is probably due to the 
rip3 null cell chemotaxis defect. Many of the phenotypes of the rip3 null cell, 
including the inability to activate adenylyl cyclase in response to cAMP and 
defects in chemotaxis, are very similar to those of strains carrying a 
disruption of the gene encoding the putative Ras exchange factor AleA. We 
demonstrate that aleA null cells also exhibit a defect in cAMP-mediated 
activation of guanylyl cyclase similar to that of rip3 null cells. A 
double-knockout mutant (rip3/aleA null cells) exhibits a further reduction in 
receptor activation of guanylyl cyclase, and these cells display almost no cell 
polarization or movement in cAMP gradients. As RIP3 preferentially interacts 
with an activated form of the Dictyostelium Ras protein RasG, which itself is 
important for cell movement, we propose that RIP3 and AleA are components of a 
Ras-regulated pathway involved in integrating chemotaxis and signal relay 
pathways that are essential for aggregation.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.10.9.2829
PMCID: PMC25521
PMID: 10473630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

We have identified a novel Ras-interacting protein from Dictyostelium , RIP3, whose function is required for both
 chemotaxis and the synthesis and relay of the cyclic AMP (cAMP)
 chemoattractant signal. rip3 null cells are unable to
 aggregate and lack receptor activation of adenylyl cyclase but are
 able, in response to cAMP, to induce aggregation-stage,
 postaggregative, and cell-type-specific gene expression in suspension
 culture. In addition, rip3 null cells are unable to
 properly polarize in a cAMP gradient and chemotaxis is highly impaired.
 We demonstrate that cAMP stimulation of guanylyl cyclase, which is
 required for chemotaxis, is reduced ∼60% in rip3 null
 cells. This reduced activation of guanylyl cyclase may account, in
 part, for the defect in chemotaxis. When cells are pulsed with cAMP for
 5 h to mimic the endogenous cAMP oscillations that occur in
 wild-type strains, the cells will form aggregates, most of which,
 however, arrest at the mound stage. Unlike the response seen in
 wild-type strains, the rip3 null cell aggregates that
 form under these experimental conditions are very small, which is
 probably due to the rip3 null cell chemotaxis defect.
 Many of the phenotypes of the rip3 null cell, including
 the inability to activate adenylyl cyclase in response to cAMP and
 defects in chemotaxis, are very similar to those of strains carrying a
 disruption of the gene encoding the putative Ras exchange factor AleA.
 We demonstrate that aleA null cells also exhibit a
 defect in cAMP-mediated activation of guanylyl cyclase similar to that
 of rip3 null cells. A double-knockout mutant
 ( rip3/aleA null cells) exhibits a further reduction in
 receptor activation of guanylyl cyclase, and these cells display almost
 no cell polarization or movement in cAMP gradients. As RIP3
 preferentially interacts with an activated form of the Dictyostelium Ras protein RasG, which itself is
 important for cell movement, we propose that RIP3 and AleA are
 components of a Ras-regulated pathway involved in integrating
 chemotaxis and signal relay pathways that are essential for
 aggregation.

INTRODUCTION

Dictyostelium is an excellent experimental system in
 which to examine the signaling pathways that control chemotaxis because
 of the availability of genetic and biochemical approaches as well as
 physiological assays to study mutant phenotypes ( Firtel, 1995 ; Van
 Haastert, 1995 ; Chen et al. , 1996 ; Parent and Devreotes,
 1996 ; Chung and Firtel, 1999 ). During the early phase of development,
 up to 10 5 cells chemotactically aggregate to form
 a multicellular organism in response to the chemoattractant cyclic AMP
 (cAMP) emitted from cells. This process requires the coordinated
 regulation of pathways that control the activation of adenylyl cyclase
 and the relay of the cAMP signal, chemotaxis toward cAMP, the
 activation of guanylyl cyclase and the Dictyostelium homologue of mammalian Akt/PKB required for chemotaxis, and the
 activation of the expression of genes required for this process
 (including the receptor, Gα subunit, and cell adhesion molecules)
 ( Firtel, 1995 ; Van Haastert, 1995 ; Chen et al. , 1996 ; Parent
 and Devreotes, 1996 ; Meili et al. , 1999 ). Activation of Dictyostelium Akt/PKB requires the function of the PI3
 kinases PI3K1 and PI3K2, which are related to mammalian p110α PI3K
 ( Zhou et al. , 1995 ; Meili et al. , 1999 ). All of
 these pathways are regulated through the cell surface serpentine cAMP
 receptor cAR1 and the coupled G protein containing the Gα2 subunit.
 Disruption of genes encoding the cAMP receptor, the sole Gβ subunit,
 or the Gα2 subunit results in complete abrogation of all four
 pathways ( Firtel, 1995 ; Van Haastert, 1995 ; Chen et al. ,
 1996 ; Parent and Devreotes, 1996 ; Meili et al. , 1999 ).

Activation of the cAMP receptor by extracellular cAMP results in
 stimulation of the activity of the adenylyl cyclase ACA, which has a
 molecular architecture similar to that of mammalian adenylyl cyclases
 ( Pitt et al. , 1992 ). The activation is mediated by the
 Gβγ subunit and requires cytosolic proteins including CRAC, a
 pleckstrin homology domain containing protein that translocates
 to the plasma membrane in response to receptor activation, and
 Pianissimo ( Lilly et al. , 1993 ; Insall et al. ,
 1994b ; Lilly and Devreotes, 1995 ; Chen et al. , 1997 ). In
 addition, activation of adenylyl cyclase and cAMP accumulation requires
 the function of the putative Ras exchange factor (GEF) Aimless (AleA)
 and the MAPK ERK2 ( Segall et al. , 1995 ; Insall et
 al. , 1996 ). The control of chemotaxis is even more complex; it
 requires the coordinated regulation of the actin cytoskeleton, the
 function of myosin II, and the unconventional myosins IB and IC
 ( Schleicher and Noegel, 1992 ; Peterson et al. , 1995 ; Chen et al. , 1996 ; Wessels et al. , 1996 ; Uyeda and
 Titus, 1997 ; Zigmond et al. , 1997 ). One of the second
 messengers required for chemotaxis is cyclic GMP (cGMP), which is
 thought to function, in part, through a cGMP-dependent protein kinase
 to activate myosin II kinase ( Dembinsky et al. , 1996 ; Van
 Haastert and Kuwayama, 1997 ). Guanylyl cyclase activity is very rapidly
 and transiently stimulated in response to chemoattractants and requires
 a MAPK pathway distinct from that containing the MAPK ERK2 ( Van
 Haastert and Van Lookeren Campagne, 1984 ; Ma et al. , 1997 ; Van Haastert and Kuwayama, 1997 ). MEK1, the cloned component of this
 pathway, is also required for the reorganization of the actin
 cytoskeleton, which may be dependent on MEK1’s role in regulating
 guanylyl cyclase activation (H. Ma and R.A. Firtel, unpublished data).
 Another signaling pathway needed for proper chemotaxis involves the Dictyostelium homologue of mammalian Akt/PKB that requires
 the function of the PI3 kinases PI3K1 and PI3K2, which are related to
 mammalian p110α PI3K ( Meili et al. , 1999 ).

In addition to its control of the activation of adenylyl cyclase, the
 putative Ras GEF AleA is required for proper chemotaxis ( Insall et al. , 1996 ). aleA null cells are unable to
 chemotax effectively or properly polarize in a chemoattractant
 gradient. The cells produce pseudopodia along the perimeter of the
 cell, in contrast to wild-type cells, in which a single, predominant
 pseudopod is extended at the leading edge in the direction of the
 chemoattractant signal. Dictyostelium has five known Ras
 proteins, two of which (RasD and RasG) are most closely related to
 their metazoan counterparts ( Reymond et al. , 1984 ; Pawson et al. , 1985 ; Esch et al. , 1993 ). RasG is
 preferentially expressed during early growth and development, whereas
 RasD is maximally expressed during the multicellular stages. Disruption
 of RasD does not exhibit growth or aggregation-stage defects
 (R. Insall, unpublished data). Cells expressing constitutively active
 RasD exhibit aberrant morphogenesis after the multicellular aggregate
 is formed and no abnormal phenotypes during aggregation ( Reymond et al. , 1986 ). rasG null cells, on the other
 hand, exhibit defects in cytokinesis and general cell movement
 ( Tuxworth et al. , 1997 ). In contrast to the cell movement
 defect of aleA null cells, which is observed only during
 chemotaxis, the rasG null cell movement defect is observed
 for randomly moving cells.

To identify proteins that may interact with different Dictyostelium Ras proteins, we undertook a two-hybrid screen
 using the activated form of mammalian Ha-Ras
 (Ha-Ras G12V ) as the bait. The logic was that
 using mammalian Ha-Ras rather than each individual Dictyostelium Ras protein might identify a broad spectrum of
 interacting proteins whose function may regulate pathways similar to
 those regulated by mammalian Ras proteins. The initial two-hybrid
 screen identified three Ha-Ras–interacting proteins, RIP1, RIP2, and
 RIP3 ( Lee et al. , 1997 ). RIP2 (RasGAP1) is related to
 mammalian IQGAPs and is required for proper cytokinesis during
 vegetative growth and for morphogenesis during multicellular
 development. This paper describes the analysis of RIP3, which we show
 preferentially interacts with the Dictyostelium RasG protein
 in a two-hybrid system. rip3 null cells have phenotypes very
 similar to those of aleA null cells; they are unable to
 activate adenylyl cyclase in response to a cAMP signal and have an
 impaired ability to chemotax. A rip3/aleA double-knockout
 strain exhibits a complete impairment in the ability to chemotax in a
 cAMP gradient, suggesting that both genes may regulate Ras-dependent
 pathways essential for chemotaxis. Our results suggest that RIP3 is a
 component of the Ras regulatory network that is required for signal
 relay and proper chemotaxis. Our findings suggest that RIP3 functions
 with AleA and possibly RasG in coordinating two essential functions
 during aggregation: chemotaxis and signal relay.

DISCUSSION

Chemotaxis requires coordinated changes in the actin and myosin
 cytoskeletons (see INTRODUCTION for references). In the case of Dictyostelium , these changes are mediated by
 chemoattractants such as cAMP and folic acid that function through
 discrete cell surface serpentine receptors coupled to heterotrimeric G
 proteins containing different Gα protein subunits. Aggregation in Dictyostelium requires the integrated regulation of pathways
 controlling chemotaxis, activation of adenylyl and guanylyl cyclases,
 and relay of cAMP. These processes are mediated through the cAMP
 receptor and downstream signal transduction pathways that require the
 heterotrimeric G protein containing the Gα2 subunit.

Our analysis demonstrates that rip3 null cells are impaired
 in the signal relay pathway and chemotaxis. rip3 null cells
 show only a minimal level of cAMP-mediated activation of adenylyl
 cyclase in cells lysed at various times after stimulation. When cells
 are lysed in the presence or absence of GTPγS to quantitate
 GTP-dependent stimulation of adenylyl cyclase activity, rip3 and aleA null cells exhibit very little adenylyl cyclase
 activity compared with wild-type cells, although
 MnSO 4 -stimulated activity is similar in all
 strains. The most simple genetic interpretation of these biochemical
 results suggests that RIP3 and AleA are required for Gβγ
 stimulation of adenylyl cyclase. One possible function of RIP3 is to
 control the function of other components of the pathway that are
 required for Gβγ-stimulated adenylyl cyclase activity. As the
 function of the pleckstrin homology domain-containing protein
 CRAC is essential for activation of adenylyl cyclase ( Insall et
 al. , 1994a ; Lilly and Devreotes, 1995 ; Parent et al. ,
 1998 ), one possible role of RIP3 is to potentiate one of these
 processes. Previous results and the results presented here indicate
 that aimless and rip3 null cells exhibit similar
 defects in adenylyl cyclase activation. Moreover, of the numerous genes
 that are required for proper aggregation ( Firtel, 1995 ; Chen et
 al. , 1996 ; Parent and Devreotes, 1996 ), only RIP3 and AleA are
 required for both chemotaxis and signal relay. It is possible that RIP3
 and AleA function in a similar pathway, especially considering that
 RIP3 interacts in vitro with RasG and AleA is a putative Ras GEF.

rip3 null cells do not express aggregation-stage or
 postaggregative and cell-type-specific genes when the cells are plated
 for development. These defects are probably due to the defect in the
 activation of cAMP and signal relay, as rip3 null cells
 induce all three classes of genes in response to exogenous cAMP. PKA
 activity is required for multiple developmental pathways, including
 aggregation ( Mann and Firtel, 1991 ; Reymond et al. , 1995 ; Schulkes and Schaap, 1995 ; Mann et al. , 1997 ). We
 demonstrate that constitutive expression of the PKA catalytic subunit
 does not complement the rip3 null phenotype, indicating that rip3 null cells have sufficient levels of endogenous PKA
 activity for these processes. This suggests that there is probably a
 low level of activation of adenylyl cyclase in vivo. Consistent with
 this possibility, we observe a low level of GTPγS-stimulated activity
 in vitro and the formation of rudimentary aggregation domains, which
 requires a low level of cAMP relay, when rip3 null cells are
 plated for development as visualized in the phase contrast time-lapse
 video imaging.

It is very striking that rip3 null cells have a defect in
 chemotaxis. The cells are less polarized than wild-type cells in a cAMP
 gradient, being unable to properly elongate. Instead, rip3 null cells extend pseudopodia laterally as well as in the direction of
 the cAMP signal. This defect is observed whether the micropipet is
 close to or farther away from cells, indicating that the defect occurs
 in response to different concentration gradients of cAMP. As with the
 regulation of adenylyl cyclase, aleA and rip3 null strains exhibit similar chemotaxis defects. We have shown that the
 activation of guanylyl cyclase is reduced in rip3 null
 cells. However, it is not clear that the reduced activation of guanylyl
 cyclase is sufficient to cause the chemotaxis defects we observe.
 Although we have no direct evidence, our view is that RIP3 controls
 other pathways that are also required for chemotaxis and that it is the
 defect in these pathways or a combined defect in multiple pathways that
 leads to the chemotaxis defects. Our analysis of the rip3/aleA double knockout indicates that these cells exhibit
 an even greater impairment in the ability to chemotax and do not
 respond to cAMP gradients produced by cAMP diffusing from a micropipet.
 The stronger phenotype of the double knockout has two interpretations.
 The first is that the proteins function in two direct, parallel
 pathways leading to chemotaxis and that the combined partial impairment
 of both pathways results in a sufficient loss of function to render the
 cells unable to chemotax. The second interpretation is that RIP3 and
 AleA function on the same pathway but both null phenotypes are leaky
 with respect to their requirement for the pathway. The double knockout
 would result in more efficient blocking of the pathway. As AleA is a
 putative Ras exchange factor (GEF) and RIP3 has specific interactions
 with RasG, which is known to be required for proper cell movement, it
 is reasonable to postulate that AleA and RIP3 control a common pathway
 by either regulating or being regulated by the Ras protein, presumably
 RasG. However, as the rasG null phenotype is not the same as
 that of rip3 null cells during aggregation, it is possible
 that RIP3 interacts genetically with another, not-yet-identified Ras
 protein or has a function that does not require interaction with RasG
 or another Ras protein. Although we expect Ras to be involved, we
 cannot distinguish between functions of AleA and RIP3 that do or do not
 require Ras and the phenotypes we observe.

One of our most striking observations is that this pathway that we
 expect involved Ras-mediated pathways is important for the activation
 of adenylyl cyclase and chemotaxis. It is not unexpected that such a
 coordination would be important to produce an integrated biological
 response. Although this coordination was expected to be mediated, at
 least partially, through chemoattractant activation of a common
 heterotrimeric G protein, the direct coupling of these pathways through
 pathways containing components that interact with Ras was unexpected.
 The phenotypes of AleA and RIP3 during chemotaxis are more severe than
 those of rasG null cells. We cannot exclude the possibility
 that another yet-to-be-identified Ras may be the key component of this
 pathway or that RIP3 may exert functions independent of possible
 interactions with RasG. It is possible that RIP3 could function as a
 scaffolding for various components of the chemotaxis and signal relay
 pathways and that RasG may coordinate or activate solely the chemotaxis
 component of the aggregation-stage pathways. RIP3 exhibits a restricted
 homology to a mammalian gene that was identified as a protein that
 represses the phenotype of activated Ras in yeast ( Colicelli et
 al. , 1991 ). Unfortunately, this restricted homology does not shed
 any light on the function of either the mammalian gene or RIP3. It is
 possible that this homology is more an indicator of a Ras-interacting
 or other regulatory domain than the biological function of either gene.
 Identification of interacting proteins or second-site suppressers
 should further elucidate the pathway that requires RIP3 function.
