---
pmid: '8458575'
title: The yeast SNF2/SWI2 protein has DNA-stimulated ATPase activity required for
  transcriptional activation.
authors:
- Laurent BC
- Treich I
- Carlson M
journal: Genes Dev
year: '1993'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1101/gad.7.4.583
---

# The yeast SNF2/SWI2 protein has DNA-stimulated ATPase activity required for transcriptional activation.
**Authors:** Laurent BC, Treich I, Carlson M
**Journal:** Genes Dev (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.7.4.583](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.7.4.583)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 1993 Apr;7(4):583-91. doi: 10.1101/gad.7.4.583.

The yeast SNF2/SWI2 protein has DNA-stimulated ATPase activity required for 
transcriptional activation.

Laurent BC(1), Treich I, Carlson M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University College of 
Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York 10032.

The yeast SNF2 (SWI2) protein functions with SNF5, SNF6, SWI1, and SWI3 in the 
transcriptional activation of many differently regulated genes. These proteins 
appear to facilitate activation by gene-specific regulatory proteins. SNF2 is 
highly conserved among eukaryotes and defines a family of proteins with 
similarity to helicases and nucleic acid-dependent NTPases. Here, we present 
genetic and biochemical evidence that SNF2 has DNA-stimulated ATPase activity. 
Mutations in the nucleoside triphosphate (NTP)-binding motif and other conserved 
motifs impair SNF2 function. Swapping experiments with another member of this 
family indicate that the helicase-related domains are functionally 
interchangeable. Finally, bacterially expressed SNF2 protein has ATPase activity 
that is stimulated by double-stranded DNA, and mutation of the NTP-binding site 
abolishes this activity. Deletion analysis shows that the helicase-like region 
of SNF2 is necessary, but not sufficient, for transcriptional activation.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.7.4.583
PMID: 8458575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
