---
pmid: '16167175'
title: Inhibition of mitochondrial neural cell death pathways by protein transduction
  of Bcl-2 family proteins.
authors:
- Soane L
- Fiskum G
journal: J Bioenerg Biomembr
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2570496
doi: 10.1007/s10863-005-6590-8
---

# Inhibition of mitochondrial neural cell death pathways by protein transduction of Bcl-2 family proteins.
**Authors:** Soane L, Fiskum G
**Journal:** J Bioenerg Biomembr (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10863-005-6590-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10863-005-6590-8)
**PMC:** [PMC2570496](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2570496/)

## Abstract

1. J Bioenerg Biomembr. 2005 Jun;37(3):179-90. doi: 10.1007/s10863-005-6590-8.

Inhibition of mitochondrial neural cell death pathways by protein transduction 
of Bcl-2 family proteins.

Soane L(1), Fiskum G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, School of Medicine, University of Maryland, 685 
W. Baltimore Street, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Bcl-2 and other closely related members of the Bcl-2 family of proteins inhibit 
the death of neurons and many other cells in response to a wide variety of 
pathogenic stimuli. Bcl-2 inhibition of apoptosis is mediated by its binding to 
pro-apoptotic proteins, e.g., Bax and tBid, inhibition of their oligomerization, 
and thus inhibition of mitochondrial outer membrane pore formation, through 
which other pro-apoptotic proteins, e.g., cytochrome c, are released to the 
cytosol. Bcl-2 also exhibits an indirect antioxidant activity caused by a 
sub-toxic elevation of mitochondrial production of reactive oxygen species and a 
compensatory increase in expression of antioxidant gene products. While classic 
approaches to cytoprotection based on Bcl-2 family gene delivery have 
significant limitations, cellular protein transduction represents a new and 
exciting approach utilizing peptides and proteins as drugs with intracellular 
targets. The mechanism by which proteins with transduction domains are taken up 
by cells and delivered to their targets is controversial but usually involves 
endocytosis. The effectiveness of transduced proteins may therefore be limited 
by their release from endosomes into the cytosol.

DOI: 10.1007/s10863-005-6590-8
PMCID: PMC2570496
PMID: 16167175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
