---
pmid: '8413235'
title: Molecular cloning of a human cDNA encoding a novel protein, DAD1, whose defect
  causes apoptotic cell death in hamster BHK21 cells.
authors:
- Nakashima T
- Sekiguchi T
- Kuraoka A
- Fukushima K
- Shibata Y
- Komiyama S
- Nishimoto T
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '1993'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC364695
doi: 10.1128/mcb.13.10.6367-6374.1993
---

# Molecular cloning of a human cDNA encoding a novel protein, DAD1, whose defect causes apoptotic cell death in hamster BHK21 cells.
**Authors:** Nakashima T, Sekiguchi T, Kuraoka A, Fukushima K, Shibata Y, Komiyama S, Nishimoto T
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1128/mcb.13.10.6367-6374.1993](https://doi.org/10.1128/mcb.13.10.6367-6374.1993)
**PMC:** [PMC364695](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC364695/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Oct;13(10):6367-74. doi: 10.1128/mcb.13.10.6367-6374.1993.

Molecular cloning of a human cDNA encoding a novel protein, DAD1, whose defect 
causes apoptotic cell death in hamster BHK21 cells.

Nakashima T(1), Sekiguchi T, Kuraoka A, Fukushima K, Shibata Y, Komiyama S, 
Nishimoto T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyushu 
University, Maidashi, Japan.

The tsBN7 cell line, one of the mutant lines temperature sensitive for growth 
which have been isolated from the BHK21 cell line, was found to die by apoptosis 
following a shift to the nonpermissive temperature. The induced apoptosis was 
inhibited by a protein synthesis inhibitor, cycloheximide, but not by the 
bcl-2-encoded protein. By DNA-mediated gene transfer, we cloned a cDNA that 
complements the tsBN7 mutation. It encodes a novel hydrophobic protein, 
designated DAD1, which is well conserved (100% identical amino acids between 
humans and hamsters). By comparing the base sequences of the parental BHK21 and 
tsBN7 DAD1 cDNAs, we found that the DAD1-encoding gene is mutated in tsBN7 
cells. The DAD1 protein disappeared in tsBN7 cells following a shift to the 
nonpermissive temperature, suggesting that loss of the DAD1 protein triggers 
apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.13.10.6367-6374.1993
PMCID: PMC364695
PMID: 8413235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
