---
pmid: '19366662'
title: Insulin receptor tyrosine kinase substrate links the E. coli O157:H7 actin
  assembly effectors Tir and EspF(U) during pedestal formation.
authors:
- Vingadassalom D
- Kazlauskas A
- Skehan B
- Cheng HC
- Magoun L
- Robbins D
- Rosen MK
- Saksela K
- Leong JM
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2672544
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0809131106
---

# Insulin receptor tyrosine kinase substrate links the E. coli O157:H7 actin assembly effectors Tir and EspF(U) during pedestal formation.
**Authors:** Vingadassalom D, Kazlauskas A, Skehan B, Cheng HC, Magoun L, Robbins D, Rosen MK, Saksela K, Leong JM
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0809131106](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0809131106)
**PMC:** [PMC2672544](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2672544/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Apr 21;106(16):6754-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0809131106. Epub 2009 Apr 6.

Insulin receptor tyrosine kinase substrate links the E. coli O157:H7 actin 
assembly effectors Tir and EspF(U) during pedestal formation.

Vingadassalom D(1), Kazlauskas A, Skehan B, Cheng HC, Magoun L, Robbins D, Rosen 
MK, Saksela K, Leong JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of 
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01655, USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Apr 21;106(16):6431-2. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0902773106.

Enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli O157:H7 translocates 2 effectors to trigger 
localized actin assembly in mammalian cells, resulting in filamentous actin 
"pedestals." One effector, the translocated intimin receptor (Tir), is localized 
in the plasma membrane and clustered upon binding the bacterial outer membrane 
protein intimin. The second, the proline-rich effector EspF(U) (aka TccP) 
activates the actin nucleation-promoting factor WASP/N-WASP, and is recruited to 
sites of bacterial attachment by a mechanism dependent on an Asn-Pro-Tyr 
(NPY(458)) sequence in the Tir C-terminal cytoplasmic domain. Tir, EspF(U), and 
N-WASP form a complex, but neither EspF(U) nor N-WASP bind Tir directly, 
suggesting involvement of another protein in complex formation. Screening of the 
mammalian SH3 proteome for the ability to bind EspF(U) identified the SH3 domain 
of insulin receptor tyrosine kinase substrate (IRTKS), a factor known to 
regulate the cytoskeleton. Derivatives of WASP, EspF(U), and the IRTKS SH3 
domain were capable of forming a ternary complex in vitro, and replacement of 
the C terminus of Tir with the IRTKS SH3 domain resulted in a fusion protein 
competent for actin assembly in vivo. A second domain of IRTKS, the IRSp53/MIM 
homology domain (IMD), bound to Tir in a manner dependent on the C-terminal 
NPY(458) sequence, thereby recruiting IRTKS to sites of bacterial attachment. 
Ectopic expression of either the IRTKS SH3 domain or the IMD, or genetic 
depletion of IRTKS, blocked pedestal formation. Thus, enterohemorrhagic E. coli 
translocates 2 effectors that bind to distinct domains of a common host factor 
to promote the formation of a complex that triggers robust actin assembly at the 
plasma membrane.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0809131106
PMCID: PMC2672544
PMID: 19366662 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
