---
pmid: '16343487'
title: Identification of novel phospholipid binding proteins in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
authors:
- Fernández-Murray JP
- McMaster CR
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2005.11.055
---

# Identification of novel phospholipid binding proteins in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Fernández-Murray JP, McMaster CR
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2005.11.055](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2005.11.055)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2006 Jan 9;580(1):82-6. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2005.11.055. Epub
2005  Dec 6.

Identification of novel phospholipid binding proteins in Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae.

Fernández-Murray JP(1), McMaster CR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Atlantic Research Centre, Dalhousie University, 
5849 University Avenue, Room C-302, Halifax, NS, Canada B3H 4H7.

A proteomics approach was used to search for novel phospholipid binding proteins 
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Phospholipids were immobilized on a solid support 
and the lipids were probed with soluble yeast protein extracts. From this, the 
phosphatidic acid binding proteins were eluted and identified by mass 
spectrometry. Thirteen proteins were identified and 11 of these were previously 
unknown lipid binding proteins. The protein-lipid interactions identified would 
not have been predicted using bioinformatics approaches as none possessed a 
known lipid binding motif. A subset of the identified proteins was purified to 
homogeneity and determined to directly bind phospholipids immobilized on a solid 
support or organized into liposomes. This simple approach could be 
systematically applied to perform an exhaustive screen for soluble lipid binding 
proteins in S. cerevisiae or other organisms.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2005.11.055
PMID: 16343487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
