---
pmid: '15782111'
title: G-protein-activated phospholipase C-beta, new partners for cell polarity proteins
  Par3 and Par6.
authors:
- Cai Y
- Stafford LJ
- Bryan BA
- Mitchell D
- Liu M
journal: Oncogene
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1208593
---

# G-protein-activated phospholipase C-beta, new partners for cell polarity proteins Par3 and Par6.
**Authors:** Cai Y, Stafford LJ, Bryan BA, Mitchell D, Liu M
**Journal:** Oncogene (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1208593](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1208593)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2005 Jun 16;24(26):4293-300. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1208593.

G-protein-activated phospholipase C-beta, new partners for cell polarity 
proteins Par3 and Par6.

Cai Y(1), Stafford LJ, Bryan BA, Mitchell D, Liu M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, Alkek Institute of 
Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M University System Health Science Center, 
2121 W Holcombe Blvd, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Cell polarity and asymmetric cell division are fundamental traits of all living 
cells and play an essential role in embryonic development, neuronal cell 
chirality formation, and maintenance of mammalian epithelial cell morphology. 
Heterotrimeric GTP-binding proteins (G proteins) are involved in directing cell 
polarity and asymmetric cell division in different organisms. However, the 
mechanism for G-protein-mediated cell polarity and asymmetric cell division is 
poorly understood. In this study, we have demonstrated that G-protein-activated 
phospholipase C-beta (PLC-beta) interacts with cell polarity proteins Par3 and 
Par6 (Par: partition-defective) to form protein complexes and to mediate 
downstream signal transduction. The interactions between PLC-beta and Par 
proteins are direct and require the extreme C-terminal-specific sequence motifs 
of PLC-beta and the PDZ (PSD95/Dlg/ZO-1) domains of Par proteins. Binding of Par 
proteins with PLC-beta stimulates PLC-beta enzymatic activity, leading to the 
hydrolysis of phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate, and the production of 
diacylglycerol and inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate, important mediators in cell 
polarity and cell asymmetric division processes. Furthermore, we have shown that 
coexpression of PLC-beta with Par proteins induces transcriptional activation 
coupled to intracellular Ca2+ and the Wnt signaling pathway. Therefore, our data 
suggest that the interaction of PLC-beta with cell polarity Par proteins may 
serve as a nexus to transduce extracellular signals to transcriptional 
regulation through G-protein-mediated signaling pathway in cell polarity and 
cell asymmetric division.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1208593
PMID: 15782111 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
