---
pmid: '17194762'
title: D1-D2 dopamine receptor heterooligomers with unique pharmacology are coupled
  to rapid activation of Gq/11 in the striatum.
authors:
- Rashid AJ
- So CH
- Kong MM
- Furtak T
- El-Ghundi M
- Cheng R
- O'Dowd BF
- George SR
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1766439
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0604049104
---

# D1-D2 dopamine receptor heterooligomers with unique pharmacology are coupled to rapid activation of Gq/11 in the striatum.
**Authors:** Rashid AJ, So CH, Kong MM, Furtak T, El-Ghundi M, Cheng R, O'Dowd BF, George SR
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0604049104](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0604049104)
**PMC:** [PMC1766439](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1766439/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jan 9;104(2):654-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0604049104.  Epub 2006 Dec 28.

D1-D2 dopamine receptor heterooligomers with unique pharmacology are coupled to 
rapid activation of Gq/11 in the striatum.

Rashid AJ(1), So CH, Kong MM, Furtak T, El-Ghundi M, Cheng R, O'Dowd BF, George 
SR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
M5S 1A8.

We demonstrate a heteromeric D1-D2 dopamine receptor signaling complex in brain 
that is coupled to Gq/11 and requires agonist binding to both receptors for G 
protein activation and intracellular calcium release. The D1 agonist SKF83959 
was identified as a specific agonist for the heteromer that activated Gq/11 by 
functioning as a full agonist for the D1 receptor and a high-affinity partial 
agonist for a pertussis toxin-resistant D2 receptor within the complex. We 
provide evidence that the D1-D2 signaling complex can be more readily detected 
in mice that are 8 months in age compared with animals that are 3 months old, 
suggesting that calcium signaling through the D1-D2 dopamine receptor complex is 
relevant for function in the postadolescent brain. Activation of Gq/11 through 
the heteromer increases levels of calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase 
IIalpha in the nucleus accumbens, unlike activation of Gs/olf-coupled D1 
receptors, indicating a mechanism by which D1-D2 dopamine receptor complexes may 
contribute to synaptic plasticity.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0604049104
PMCID: PMC1766439
PMID: 17194762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
