---
pmid: '36651746'
title: Identification of Cartilaginous Fish Endogenous Foamy Virus Rooting to Vertebrate
  Counterparts.
authors:
- Wang X
- Chen Y
- Cui J
journal: J Virol
year: '2023'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC9972966
doi: 10.1128/jvi.01816-22
---

# Identification of Cartilaginous Fish Endogenous Foamy Virus Rooting to Vertebrate Counterparts.
**Authors:** Wang X, Chen Y, Cui J
**Journal:** J Virol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1128/jvi.01816-22](https://doi.org/10.1128/jvi.01816-22)
**PMC:** [PMC9972966](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9972966/)

## Abstract

1. J Virol. 2023 Feb 28;97(2):e0181622. doi: 10.1128/jvi.01816-22. Epub 2023 Jan 
18.

Identification of Cartilaginous Fish Endogenous Foamy Virus Rooting to 
Vertebrate Counterparts.

Wang X(#)(1)(2), Chen Y(#)(1), Cui J(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology & Immunology, Institut Pasteur of 
Shanghai, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Laboratory for Marine Biology and Biotechnology, Pilot National Laboratory 
for Marine Science and Technology (Qingdao), Qingdao, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Foamy viruses (FVs) are ideal models for studying the long-term evolutionary 
history between viruses and their hosts. Currently, FVs have been documented in 
nearly all major taxa of vertebrates, but evidence is lacking for true FV 
infiltration in cartilaginous fish, the most basal living vertebrates with jaws. 
Here, we screened 11 available genomes and 10 transcriptome sequence assemblies 
of cartilaginous fish and revealed a novel endogenous foamy virus, termed 
cartilaginous fish endogenous foamy virus (CFEFV), in the genomes of sharks and 
rays. Genomic analysis of CFEFVs revealed feature motifs that were retained 
among canonical FVs. Phylogenetic analysis using polymerase sequences revealed 
the rooting nature of CFEFVs to vertebrate FVs, indicating their deep origin. 
Interestingly, three viral lineages were found in a shark (Scyliorhinus 
torazame), one of which was clustered with ray-finned fish foamy-like viruses, 
indicating that multiple episodes of viral infiltrations had occurred in this 
species. These findings fill a major gap in the Spumaretrovirinae taxon and 
reveal the aquatic origin of FVs found in terrestrial vertebrates. IMPORTANCE 
Although foamy viruses (FVs) have been found in major branches of vertebrates, 
the presence of these viruses in cartilaginous fish, the most basal living 
vertebrates with jaws, remains to be explored. This study revealed a collection 
of cartilaginous endogenous FVs in sharks and rays through in silico genomic 
mining. These viruses were rooted in the polymerase (POL) phylogeny, indicating 
the ancient aquatic origin of FVs. However, their envelope (ENV) protein grouped 
with those of amphibian FVs, suggesting different evolutionary histories of 
different FV genes. Overall, we provide the last missing gap for the taxonomic 
investigation of Spumaretrovirinae and provide concrete support for the aquatic 
origin of FVs.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.01816-22
PMCID: PMC9972966
PMID: 36651746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

ABSTRACT

Foamy viruses (FVs) are ideal models for studying the long-term evolutionary history between viruses and their hosts. Currently, FVs have been documented in nearly all major taxa of vertebrates, but evidence is lacking for true FV infiltration in cartilaginous fish, the most basal living vertebrates with jaws. Here, we screened 11 available genomes and 10 transcriptome sequence assemblies of cartilaginous fish and revealed a novel endogenous foamy virus, termed cartilaginous fish endogenous foamy virus (CFEFV), in the genomes of sharks and rays. Genomic analysis of CFEFVs revealed feature motifs that were retained among canonical FVs. Phylogenetic analysis using polymerase sequences revealed the rooting nature of CFEFVs to vertebrate FVs, indicating their deep origin. Interestingly, three viral lineages were found in a shark ( Scyliorhinus torazame ), one of which was clustered with ray-finned fish foamy-like viruses, indicating that multiple episodes of viral infiltrations had occurred in this species. These findings fill a major gap in the Spumaretrovirinae taxon and reveal the aquatic origin of FVs found in terrestrial vertebrates.

IMPORTANCE Although foamy viruses (FVs) have been found in major branches of vertebrates, the presence of these viruses in cartilaginous fish, the most basal living vertebrates with jaws, remains to be explored. This study revealed a collection of cartilaginous endogenous FVs in sharks and rays through in silico genomic mining. These viruses were rooted in the polymerase (POL) phylogeny, indicating the ancient aquatic origin of FVs. However, their envelope (ENV) protein grouped with those of amphibian FVs, suggesting different evolutionary histories of different FV genes. Overall, we provide the last missing gap for the taxonomic investigation of Spumaretrovirinae and provide concrete support for the aquatic origin of FVs.

INTRODUCTION

Foamy viruses (FVs), which belong to the Spumaretrovirinae subfamily in the Retroviridae family, are complex retroviruses prevalent in various animals and are considered nonpathogenic ( 1 – 8 ). Currently, FVs are classified into six genera ( Simiispumavirus , Prosimiispumavirus , Bovispumavirus , Felispumavirus , Equispumavirus , and Chispumavirus ) based on their host ( 9 ). Although FVs have mainly been discovered in mammals, their endogenous forms— endogenous foamy viruses (EFVs)—have been discovered in all 5 major classes of vertebrates, namely, mammals ( 10 , 11 ), birds ( 12 ), reptiles ( 13 , 14 ), amphibians ( 15 , 16 ) and lobe-finned fish ( 17 ). In light of the discovery of FVs, an extensive group of foamy-like viruses has been discovered in ray-finned fish ( 15 , 18 ) and cartilaginous fish ( 15 ) and has been proposed to be a separate taxon, Gigantospumavirus (GFV), in the Spumaretrovirinae subfamily, reflecting the group’s distant homology to FVs ( 17 ).

FVs are well-known models for studying viral macroevolution, as they exhibit a history of long-term codivergence with their vertebrate hosts ( 1 ). Cartilaginous fish are the most basal extant jawed vertebrates and can be divided into two subclusters, Elasmobranchii (sharks, rays, and skates) and Holocephali (chimaeras), which branched off from each other almost 400 million years ago ( 19 , 20 ). Only several partial pol elements of GFVs have been found in a chimaera ( Callorhinchus milii ) ( 15 ), while no bona fide intact FV has been discovered in cartilaginous fish. Here, by incorporating genomic/transcriptomic identification and phylogeny, a novel endogenous foamy virus, termed cartilaginous fish endogenous foamy virus (CFEFV), was identified in the genomes of sharks and rays, shedding light on the early evolution of complex retroviruses.

Conclusion.

In this study, we report the discovery of a novel endogenous foamy virus in cartilaginous fish, which enriches the current knowledge on the deep rooting of FVs in vertebrates. Phylogenetic analysis reveals the rooting nature of CFEFV and, thus, indicates the early existence of CFEFVs or their exogenous forms. In addition, both CFEFVs (with two lineages) and a GFV were identified in a shark ( S. torazame ), indicating that multiple episodes of spumavirus(-like) infiltration had occurred in this host. In summary, the newly identified CFEFV indicates a deep and most likely aquatic origin of terrestrial FVs.
