---
pmid: '21852791'
title: The mRNA export factor Npl3 mediates the nuclear export of large ribosomal
  subunits.
authors:
- Hackmann A
- Gross T
- Baierlein C
- Krebber H
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3185341
doi: 10.1038/embor.2011.155
---

# The mRNA export factor Npl3 mediates the nuclear export of large ribosomal subunits.
**Authors:** Hackmann A, Gross T, Baierlein C, Krebber H
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/embor.2011.155](https://doi.org/10.1038/embor.2011.155)
**PMC:** [PMC3185341](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3185341/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2011 Sep 30;12(10):1024-31. doi: 10.1038/embor.2011.155.

The mRNA export factor Npl3 mediates the nuclear export of large ribosomal 
subunits.

Hackmann A(1), Gross T, Baierlein C, Krebber H.

Author information:
(1)Abteilung für Molekulare Genetik, Institut für Mikrobiologie und Genetik, 
Göttinger Zentrum für Molekulare Biowissenschaften, Georg-August Universität 
Göttingen, Grisebachstrasse 8, Göttingen 37077, Germany.

The nuclear export of large ribonucleoparticles is complex and requires specific 
transport factors. Messenger RNAs are exported through the RNA-binding protein 
Npl3 and the interacting export receptor Mex67. Export of large ribosomal 
subunits also requires Mex67; however, in this case, Mex67 binds directly to the 
5S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) and does not require the Npl3 adaptor. Here, we have 
discovered a new function of Npl3 in mediating the export of pre-60S ribosomal 
subunit independently of Mex67. Npl3 interacts with the 25S rRNA, ribosomal and 
ribosome-associated proteins, as well as with the nuclear pore complex. 
Mutations in NPL3 lead to export defects of the large subunit and genetic 
interactions with other pre-60S export factors.

DOI: 10.1038/embor.2011.155
PMCID: PMC3185341
PMID: 21852791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
