---
pmid: '40246981'
title: Galectin-13 reduces membrane localization of SLC7A11 for ferroptosis propagation.
authors:
- Zhang HL
- Guo YQ
- Liu S
- Ye ZP
- Li LC
- Hu BX
- Li ZL
- Chen YH
- Feng GK
- Shen HQ
- Deng R
- Zhu XF
journal: Nat Chem Biol
year: '2025'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/s41589-025-01888-2
---

# Galectin-13 reduces membrane localization of SLC7A11 for ferroptosis propagation.
**Authors:** Zhang HL, Guo YQ, Liu S, Ye ZP, Li LC, Hu BX, Li ZL, Chen YH, Feng GK, Shen HQ, Deng R, Zhu XF
**Journal:** Nat Chem Biol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41589-025-01888-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41589-025-01888-2)

## Abstract

1. Nat Chem Biol. 2025 Oct;21(10):1531-1543. doi: 10.1038/s41589-025-01888-2.
Epub  2025 Apr 17.

Galectin-13 reduces membrane localization of SLC7A11 for ferroptosis 
propagation.

Zhang HL(#)(1), Guo YQ(#)(2), Liu S(#)(2)(3), Ye ZP(#)(2)(4), Li LC(2), Hu 
BX(2), Li ZL(2), Chen YH(2), Feng GK(2), Shen HQ(2), Deng R(5), Zhu XF(6).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Guangdong Provincial 
Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Guangdong Key Laboratory of Nasopharyngeal 
Carcinoma Diagnosis and Therapy, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, 
Guangzhou, China. zhanghl@sysucc.org.cn.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Guangdong Provincial 
Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Guangdong Key Laboratory of Nasopharyngeal 
Carcinoma Diagnosis and Therapy, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, 
Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, The Seventh Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Shenzhen, China.
(4)Hepatology Unit, Departments of Infectious Disease, Guangzhou Women and 
Children's Medical Center, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Guangdong Provincial 
Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Guangdong Key Laboratory of Nasopharyngeal 
Carcinoma Diagnosis and Therapy, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, 
Guangzhou, China. dengrong@sysucc.org.cn.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Guangdong Provincial 
Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Guangdong Key Laboratory of Nasopharyngeal 
Carcinoma Diagnosis and Therapy, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, 
Guangzhou, China. zhuxfeng@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

The mechanism of ferroptosis propagation is still unclear. Here our results 
indicate that the cells undergoing ferroptosis secrete Galectin-13, which binds 
to CD44 and inhibits the plasma membrane localization of SLC7A11 in neighboring 
cells, thereby accelerating neighboring cell death and promoting ferroptosis 
propagation. FOXK1 was phosphorylated by PKCβII and then facilitated the 
expression and secretion of Galectin-13 during ferroptotic cell death. 
Correlation analysis and functional analysis revealed that ferroptosis 
propagation ability was a previously unrecognized determinant of ferroptosis 
sensitivity in human cancer cells. A synthetic Galectin-13 mimetic peptide was 
shown to strongly enhance the sensitivity of tumors to the imidazole ketone 
erastin, radiotherapy and immunotherapy by boosting ferroptosis. In particular, 
cancer stem cells were vulnerable to the combination of Galectin-13 mimetic 
peptide and ferroptosis inducers. Our study provides new insights into 
ferroptosis propagation and highlights novel strategies for targeting 
ferroptosis to treat tumors.

© 2025. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature America, Inc.

DOI: 10.1038/s41589-025-01888-2
PMID: 40246981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no 
competing interests.
