---
pmid: '10778858'
title: Exit from G1 and S phase of the cell cycle is regulated by repressor complexes
  containing HDAC-Rb-hSWI/SNF and Rb-hSWI/SNF.
authors:
- Zhang HS
- Gavin M
- Dahiya A
- Postigo AA
- Ma D
- Luo RX
- Harbour JW
- Dean DC
journal: Cell
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80625-X
---

# Exit from G1 and S phase of the cell cycle is regulated by repressor complexes containing HDAC-Rb-hSWI/SNF and Rb-hSWI/SNF.
**Authors:** Zhang HS, Gavin M, Dahiya A, Postigo AA, Ma D, Luo RX, Harbour JW, Dean DC
**Journal:** Cell (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80625-X](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80625-X)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2000 Mar 31;101(1):79-89. doi: 10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80625-X.

Exit from G1 and S phase of the cell cycle is regulated by repressor complexes 
containing HDAC-Rb-hSWI/SNF and Rb-hSWI/SNF.

Zhang HS(1), Gavin M, Dahiya A, Postigo AA, Ma D, Luo RX, Harbour JW, Dean DC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
Missouri 63110, USA.

We present evidence that Rb forms a repressor containing histone deacetylase 
(HDAC) and the hSWI/SNF nucleosome remodeling complex, which inhibits 
transcription of genes for cyclins E and A and arrests cells in the G1 phase of 
the cell cycle. Phosphorylation of Rb by cyclin D/cdk4 disrupts association with 
HDAC, relieving repression of the cyclin E gene and G1 arrest. However, the 
Rb-hSWI/SNF complex persists and is sufficient to maintain repression of the 
cyclin A and cdc2 genes, inhibiting exit from S phase. HDAC-Rb-hSWI/SNF and 
Rb-hSWI/SNF then appear to maintain the order of cyclin E and A expression 
during the cell cycle, which in turn regulates exit from G1 and from S phase, 
respectively.

DOI: 10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80625-X
PMID: 10778858 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
