---
pmid: '11415431'
title: Intracellular distribution of glycogen synthase and glycogen in primary cultured
  rat hepatocytes.
authors:
- García-Rocha M
- Roca A
- De La Iglesia N
- Baba O
- Fernández-Novell JM
- Ferrer JC
- Guinovart JJ
journal: Biochem J
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1221923
doi: 10.1042/0264-6021:3570017
---

# Intracellular distribution of glycogen synthase and glycogen in primary cultured rat hepatocytes.
**Authors:** García-Rocha M, Roca A, De La Iglesia N, Baba O, Fernández-Novell JM, Ferrer JC, Guinovart JJ
**Journal:** Biochem J (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1042/0264-6021:3570017](https://doi.org/10.1042/0264-6021:3570017)
**PMC:** [PMC1221923](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1221923/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2001 Jul 1;357(Pt 1):17-24. doi: 10.1042/0264-6021:3570017.

Intracellular distribution of glycogen synthase and glycogen in primary cultured 
rat hepatocytes.

García-Rocha M(1), Roca A, De La Iglesia N, Baba O, Fernández-Novell JM, Ferrer 
JC, Guinovart JJ.

Author information:
(1)Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular, Universitat de Barcelona, 
Martí i Franquès 1, 7a planta, E-08028 Barcelona, Spain.

Changes in the intracellular distribution of liver glycogen synthase (GS) might 
constitute a new regulatory mechanism for the activity of this enzyme at 
cellular level. Our previous studies indicated that incubation of isolated 
hepatocytes with glucose activated GS and resulted in its translocation from a 
homogeneous cytosolic distribution to the cell periphery. These studies also 
suggested a relationship with insoluble elements of the cytoskeleton, in 
particular actin. Here we show the translocation of GS in a different 
experimental model that allows the analysis of this phenomenon in long-term 
studies. We describe the reversibility of translocation of GS and its effect on 
glycogen distribution. Incubation of cultured rat hepatocytes with glucose 
activated GS and triggered its translocation to the hepatocyte periphery. The 
relative amount of the enzyme concentrated near the plasma membrane increased 
with time up to 8 h of incubation with glucose, when the glycogen stores reached 
their maximal value. The lithium-induced covalent activation of GS was not 
sufficient to cause its translocation to the cell periphery. The intracellular 
distribution of GS closely resembled that of glycogen. Our results showed an 
interaction between GS and an insoluble element of the hepatocyte matrix. 
Although no co-localization between actin filaments and GS was observed in any 
condition, disruption of actin cytoskeleton resulted in a significantly lower 
percentage of cells in which the enzyme translocated to the cell periphery in 
response to glucose. This observation suggests that the microfilament network 
has a role in the translocation of GS.

DOI: 10.1042/0264-6021:3570017
PMCID: PMC1221923
PMID: 11415431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
