---
pmid: '19261746'
title: MERIT40 controls BRCA1-Rap80 complex integrity and recruitment to DNA double-strand
  breaks.
authors:
- Shao G
- Patterson-Fortin J
- Messick TE
- Feng D
- Shanbhag N
- Wang Y
- Greenberg RA
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2661612
doi: 10.1101/gad.1739609
---

# MERIT40 controls BRCA1-Rap80 complex integrity and recruitment to DNA double-strand breaks.
**Authors:** Shao G, Patterson-Fortin J, Messick TE, Feng D, Shanbhag N, Wang Y, Greenberg RA
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.1739609](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.1739609)
**PMC:** [PMC2661612](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2661612/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2009 Mar 15;23(6):740-54. doi: 10.1101/gad.1739609. Epub 2009 Mar
4.

MERIT40 controls BRCA1-Rap80 complex integrity and recruitment to DNA 
double-strand breaks.

Shao G(1), Patterson-Fortin J, Messick TE, Feng D, Shanbhag N, Wang Y, Greenberg 
RA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, 
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, 
USA.

Rap80 targets the breast cancer suppressor protein BRCA1 along with Abraxas and 
the BRCC36 deubiquitinating enzyme (DUB) to polyubiquitin structures at DNA 
double-strand breaks (DSBs). These DSB targeting events are essential for 
BRCA1-dependent DNA damage response-induced checkpoint and repair functions. 
Here, we identify MERIT40 (Mediator of Rap80 Interactions and Targeting 40 
kD)/(C19orf62) as a Rap80-associated protein that is essential for BRCA1-Rap80 
complex protein interactions, stability, and DSB targeting. Moreover, MERIT40 is 
required for Rap80-associated lysine(63)-ubiquitin DUB activity, a critical 
component of BRCA1-Rap80 G2 checkpoint and viability responses to ionizing 
radiation. Thus, MERIT40 represents a novel factor that links BRCA1-Rap80 
complex integrity, DSB recognition, and ubiquitin chain hydrolytic activities to 
the DNA damage response. These findings provide new molecular insights into how 
BRCA1 associates with independently assembled core protein complexes to maintain 
genome integrity.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.1739609
PMCID: PMC2661612
PMID: 19261746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
