---
pmid: '16267818'
title: A proteomics strategy for the enrichment of receptor-associated complexes.
authors:
- Cross M
- Nguyen T
- Bogdanoska V
- Reynolds E
- Hamilton JA
journal: Proteomics
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/pmic.200500058
---

# A proteomics strategy for the enrichment of receptor-associated complexes.
**Authors:** Cross M, Nguyen T, Bogdanoska V, Reynolds E, Hamilton JA
**Journal:** Proteomics (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pmic.200500058](https://doi.org/10.1002/pmic.200500058)

## Abstract

1. Proteomics. 2005 Dec;5(18):4754-63. doi: 10.1002/pmic.200500058.

A proteomics strategy for the enrichment of receptor-associated complexes.

Cross M(1), Nguyen T, Bogdanoska V, Reynolds E, Hamilton JA.

Author information:
(1)University of Melbourne, Department of Medicine, Royal Melbourne Hospital, 
Parkville, Victoria 3050, Australia.

Multimeric protein complexes are important for cell function and are being 
identified by proteomics approaches. Enrichment strategies, such as those 
employing affinity matrices, are required for the characterization of such 
complexes, for example, those containing growth factor receptors. The receptor 
for the macrophage lineage growth factor, macrophage-colony stimulating factor 
(M-CSF or CSF-1), is the tyrosine kinase, c-Fms. There is evidence that the 
CSF-1 receptor (CSF-1R) forms distinct multimeric complexes involving 
autophosphorylated tyrosines in its cytoplasmic region; however, these complexes 
are difficult to identify by immunoprecipitation, making enrichment necessary. 
We report here the use of a tyrosine-phosphorylated, GST-fusion construct of the 
entire CSF-1R cytoplasmic region to characterize proteins putatively associating 
with the activated CSF-1R. Besides signalling molecules known to associate with 
the receptor or be involved in CSF-1R-dependent signalling, mass spectrometry 
identified a number of other molecules binding to the construct. So far among 
these candidate proteins, dynein, claudin and silencer of death domains 
co-immunoprecipitated with the CSF-1R, suggesting association. This affinity 
matrix method, using an entire cytoplasmic region, may have relevance for other 
growth factor receptors.

DOI: 10.1002/pmic.200500058
PMID: 16267818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
