---
pmid: '7590244'
title: The 160-kD subunit of human cleavage-polyadenylation specificity factor coordinates
  pre-mRNA 3'-end formation.
authors:
- Murthy KG
- Manley JL
journal: Genes Dev
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1101/gad.9.21.2672
---

# The 160-kD subunit of human cleavage-polyadenylation specificity factor coordinates pre-mRNA 3'-end formation.
**Authors:** Murthy KG, Manley JL
**Journal:** Genes Dev (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.9.21.2672](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.9.21.2672)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 1995 Nov 1;9(21):2672-83. doi: 10.1101/gad.9.21.2672.

The 160-kD subunit of human cleavage-polyadenylation specificity factor 
coordinates pre-mRNA 3'-end formation.

Murthy KG(1), Manley JL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, New York 
10027, USA.

Cleavage-polyadenylation specificity factor (CPSF) is a multisubunit protein 
that plays a central role in 3' processing of mammalian pre-mRNAs. CPSF 
recognizes the AAUAAA signal in the pre-mRNA and interacts with other proteins 
to facilitate both RNA cleavage and poly(A) synthesis. Here we describe the 
isolation of cDNAs encoding the largest subunit of CPSF (160K) as well as 
characterization of the protein product. Antibodies raised against the 
recombinant protein inhibit polyadenylation in vitro, which can be restored by 
purified CPSF. Extending previous studies, which suggested that 160K contacts 
the pre-mRNA, we show that purified recombinant 160K can, by itself, bind 
preferentially to AAUAAA-containing RNAs. While the sequence of 160K reveals 
similarities to the RNP1 and RNP2 motifs found in many RNA-binding proteins, no 
clear match to a known RNA-binding domain was found, and RNA recognition is 
therefore likely mediated by a highly diverged or novel structure. We also show 
that 160K binds specifically to both the 77K (suppressor of forked) subunit of 
the cleavage factor CstF and to poly(A) polymerase (PAP). These results provide 
explanations for previously observed cooperative interactions between CPSF and 
CstF, which are responsible for poly(A) site specification, and between CPSF and 
PAP, which are necessary for synthesis of the poly(A) tail. Also supporting a 
direct role for 160K in these interactions is the fact that 160K by itself 
retains partial ability to cooperate with CstF in binding pre-mRNA and, 
unexpectedly, inhibits PAP activity in in vitro assays. We discuss the 
significance of these multiple functions and also a possible evolutionary link 
between yeast and mammalian polyadenylation suggested by the properties and 
sequence of 160K.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.9.21.2672
PMID: 7590244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
