---
pmid: '12873381'
title: Huntingtin and huntingtin-associated protein 1 influence neuronal calcium signaling
  mediated by inositol-(1,4,5) triphosphate receptor type 1.
authors:
- Tang TS
- Tu H
- Chan EY
- Maximov A
- Wang Z
- Wellington CL
- Hayden MR
- Bezprozvanny I
journal: Neuron
year: '2003'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3220623
doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(03)00366-0
---

# Huntingtin and huntingtin-associated protein 1 influence neuronal calcium signaling mediated by inositol-(1,4,5) triphosphate receptor type 1.
**Authors:** Tang TS, Tu H, Chan EY, Maximov A, Wang Z, Wellington CL, Hayden MR, Bezprozvanny I
**Journal:** Neuron (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0896-6273(03)00366-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0896-6273(03)00366-0)
**PMC:** [PMC3220623](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3220623/)

## Abstract

1. Neuron. 2003 Jul 17;39(2):227-39. doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(03)00366-0.

Huntingtin and huntingtin-associated protein 1 influence neuronal calcium 
signaling mediated by inositol-(1,4,5) triphosphate receptor type 1.

Tang TS(1), Tu H, Chan EY, Maximov A, Wang Z, Wellington CL, Hayden MR, 
Bezprozvanny I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at 
Dallas, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2003 Jul 17;39(2):195-7. doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(03)00425-2.

Huntington's disease (HD) is caused by polyglutamine expansion (exp) in 
huntingtin (Htt). The type 1 inositol (1,4,5)-triphosphate receptor (InsP3R1) is 
an intracellular calcium (Ca2+) release channel that plays an important role in 
neuronal function. In a yeast two-hybrid screen with the InsP3R1 carboxy 
terminus, we isolated Htt-associated protein-1A (HAP1A). We show that an 
InsP3R1-HAP1A-Htt ternary complex is formed in vitro and in vivo. In planar 
lipid bilayer reconstitution experiments, InsP3R1 activation by InsP3 is 
sensitized by Httexp, but not by normal Htt. Transfection of full-length Httexp 
or caspase-resistant Httexp, but not normal Htt, into medium spiny striatal 
neurons faciliates Ca2+ release in response to threshold concentrations of the 
selective mGluR1/5 agonist 3,5-DHPG. Our findings identify a novel molecular 
link between Htt and InsP3R1-mediated neuronal Ca2+ signaling and provide an 
explanation for the derangement of cytosolic Ca2+ signaling in HD patients and 
mouse models.

DOI: 10.1016/s0896-6273(03)00366-0
PMCID: PMC3220623
PMID: 12873381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Introduction

Huntington’s disease (HD) has onset usually between 35 and 50 years with chorea and psychiatric disturbances and gradual but inexorable intellectual decline to death after 15–20 years ( Vonsattel and DiFiglia, 1998 ). Neuropathological analysis reveals selective and progressive neuronal loss in the striatum ( Vonsattel et al., 1985 ), particularly affecting the GABAergic medium spiny striatal neurons (MSNs). At the molecular level, the cause of HD is a polyglutamine (polyQ) expansion (exp) in the amino terminus of huntingtin (Htt), a 350 kDa ubiquitously expressed cytoplasmic protein ( HDCRG, 1993 ; Nasir et al., 1996 ). A number of transgenic HD mouse models have been generated, which reproduce many HD-like features ( Menalled and Chesselet, 2002 ; Rubinsztein, 2002 ). Despite significant progress, cellular mechanisms that link the mutation with the disease remain controversial ( Tobin and Signer, 2000 ).

A number of Htt binding partners have been identified in yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) screens with an Htt amino-terminal fragment ( Gusella and MacDonald, 1998 ; Kalchman et al., 1997 ; Singaraja et al., 2002 ). Htt-associated protein-1 (HAP1) was the first identified Htt binding partner ( Li et al., 1995 ; Gutekunst et al, 1998 ; Page at al, 1998 ). Importantly, the HD-causing polyQ expansion of Htt (Htt exp ) promotes Htt-HAP1 association ( Li et al., 1995 , 1998b ). In rodents, two HAP1 protein isoforms differing in their carboxy termini are expressed via alternative splicing —HAP1A and HAP1B—both of which bind Htt ( Li et al., 1995 ; Nasir et al., 1998 ). Only one HAP1 isoform has been identified in humans, and this is most similar to rodent HAP1A ( Li et al., 1998b ). Association of HAP1 with hepatocyte growth factor-regulated tyrosine kinase substrate (Hrs) ( Li et al., 2002 ), the p150Glued subunit of dynactin ( Engelender et al., 1997 ; Li et al., 1998a ), and the Rac1 guanine nucleotide exchange factor Kalirin-7/Duo ( Colomer et al., 1997 ) has been discovered in Y2H screens. Targeted disruption of the HAP1 gene in mice results in postnatal death and depressed feeding behavior, suggesting an important role of HAP1 in hypothalamic function ( Chan et al., 2002 ). Despite all these data, the role of HAP1 in neuronal signaling and the pathogenesis of HD remain unclear ( Bertaux et al., 1998 ).

The inositol (1,4,5)-triphosphate receptor (InsP 3 R) is an intracellular calcium (Ca 2+ ) release channel that plays an important role in neuronal Ca 2+ signaling ( Berridge, 1998 ). Three isoforms of InsP 3 R have been identified ( Furuichi et al., 1994 ). The type 1 receptor (InsP 3 R1) is the predominant neuronal isoform. Mice lacking InsP 3 R1 display severe ataxic behavior ( Matsumoto et al., 1996 ), and mice with a spontaneous mutation in the InsP 3 R1 gene experience convulsions and ataxia ( Street et al., 1997 ), suggesting a major role of InsP 3 R1 in neuronal function. To identify novel InsP 3 R1 neuronal binding partners, we performed a Y2H screen of a rat brain cDNA library and isolated neuronal cytoskeleton 4.1N protein ( Maximov et al., 2003 ) and HAP1A. In the present manuscript, we describe biochemical and functional interactions of InsP 3 R1 with HAP1A and Htt. The discovered association of InsP 3 R1 with HAP1A and Htt provides additional insight into HAP1 function in the brain and to our knowledge for the first time links neuronal InsP 3 R1 function with Htt and HD.

Yeast Two-Hybrid Methods

The carboxy-terminal region of rat InsP 3 R1 ( Mignery et al., 1990 ) (amino acids D2590–A2749) was amplified by PCR and cloned into pLexN vector (IC bait). The yeast two-hybrid screen of a rat brain (P8-P9) cDNA library (kind gift of Dr. T. Südhof) with the IC bait and liquid yeast two-hybrid assays were performed as previously described ( Maximov et al., 2003 ).
