---
pmid: '24161952'
title: Structural analysis and optimization of the covalent association between SpyCatcher
  and a peptide Tag.
authors:
- Li L
- Fierer JO
- Rapoport TA
- Howarth M
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2014'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: xml
pmcid: PMC3959856
doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2013.10.021
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Structural analysis and optimization of the covalent association between SpyCatcher and a peptide Tag.
**Authors:** Li L, Fierer JO, Rapoport TA, Howarth M
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmb.2013.10.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2013.10.021)
**PMC:** [PMC3959856](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3959856/)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Biol. 2014 Jan 23;426(2):309-17. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2013.10.021. Epub
2013  Oct 23.

Structural analysis and optimization of the covalent association between 
SpyCatcher and a peptide Tag.

Li L(1), Fierer JO(2), Rapoport TA(3), Howarth M(4).

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Cell Biology, Harvard 
Medical School, 240 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford 
OX1 3QU, UK.
(3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Cell Biology, Harvard 
Medical School, 240 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address: 
tom_rapoport@hms.harvard.edu.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford 
OX1 3QU, UK. Electronic address: mark.howarth@bioch.ox.ac.uk.

Peptide tagging is a key strategy for observing and isolating proteins. However, 
the interactions of proteins with peptides are nearly all rapidly reversible. 
Proteins tagged with the peptide SpyTag form an irreversible covalent bond to 
the SpyCatcher protein via a spontaneous isopeptide linkage, thereby offering a 
genetically encoded way to create peptide interactions that resist force and 
harsh conditions. Here, we determined the crystal structure of the reconstituted 
covalent complex of SpyTag and SpyCatcher at 2.1Å resolution. The structure 
showed the expected reformation of the β-sandwich domain seen in the parental 
streptococcal adhesin, but flanking sequences at both N- and C-termini of 
SpyCatcher were disordered. In addition, only 10 out of 13 amino acids of the 
SpyTag peptide were observed to interact with SpyCatcher, pointing to specific 
contacts important for rapid split protein reconstitution. Based on these 
structural insights, we expressed a range of SpyCatcher variants and identified 
a minimized SpyCatcher, 32 residues shorter, that maintained rapid reaction with 
SpyTag. Together, these results give insight into split protein β-strand 
complementation and enhance a distinct approach to ultrastable molecular 
interaction.

© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2013.10.021
PMCID: PMC3959856
PMID: 24161952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Potential conflicts of interest: M.H. is an 
author on a patent application regarding peptides forming spontaneous isopeptide 
bonds (United Kingdom Patent Application No. 1002362.0).

## Full Text

IntroductionThe tagging of proteins with peptides is one of the most widely used methods in protein detection, purification and immobilization.1,2,3 In most cases, the peptide tag interacts reversibly, either with a protein, such as an antibody or a specific binding partner, or with a metal chelate. In contrast, the recently developed SpyTag/SpyCatcher tagging system involves the covalent attachment of a peptide tag to its cognate protein partner.4 The system is based on the immunoglobulin-like collagen adhesion domain of Streptococcus pyogenes (CnaB2). CnaB2 contains an internal isopeptide bond5 between amino acid residue Lys31 and residue Asp117.6,7,8 When CnaB2 is split into an N-terminal protein fragment containing Lys31 and a C-terminal peptide containing Asp117, the two fragments associate specifically and spontaneously form the isopeptide bond (Fig. 1a). A few modifications to the two binding partners made the reaction efficient both in vitro and in vivo. The modified peptide and protein fragment were named SpyTag and SpyCatcher, respectively.4The SpyTag/SpyCatcher system offers several advantages over other tagging approaches. SpyTag (13 amino acids) forms a high affinity initial non-covalent complex with its protein partner SpyCatcher (116 amino acids). The two partners then react rapidly, forming the isopeptide bond, with a half-time of 74 s for partners at 10 μM.4 The reaction can take place in diverse conditions and is relatively insensitive to pH and temperature changes. Due to the covalent nature of the isopeptide bond, the SpyTag-SpyCatcher complex forms irreversibly and is stable to boiling in SDS or to forces of thousands of picoNewtons.4 The SpyTag can be placed at N-terminal and C-terminal and internal positions of a protein,4 in contrast to covalent peptide labeling via split inteins9,10 or sortases.11 Thus, the SpyTag/SpyCatcher system is potentially versatile and general. However, a better understanding of the interaction between the two partners is required to optimize the system.Split proteins are an important and rapidly growing protein class, including split luciferase, fluorescent proteins, DNA polymerase and proteases. Split proteins give important insight into protein folding and are powerful tools for logical computation or for reporting on diverse cellular events.12 However, there are very few studies of how different split proteins reconstitute to form the original fold.13,14 Here, we have analyzed the binding of SpyTag and SpyCatcher using X-ray crystallography and biochemical methods. The crystal structure of the SpyTag and SpyCatcher complex indicates that the N-terminal and C-terminal segments of SpyCatcher are dispensable for the interaction. Our biochemical and structural studies confirm that both termini could be deleted without a major effect on the structure or reaction rate. In addition, the crystal structure explains the effect of previously engineered point mutations on the reaction efficiency. Together, these results lead to an optimized and robust SpyTag/SpyCatcher system.

Introduction

The tagging of proteins with peptides is one of the most widely used methods in protein detection, purification and immobilization.1,2,3 In most cases, the peptide tag interacts reversibly, either with a protein, such as an antibody or a specific binding partner, or with a metal chelate. In contrast, the recently developed SpyTag/SpyCatcher tagging system involves the covalent attachment of a peptide tag to its cognate protein partner.4 The system is based on the immunoglobulin-like collagen adhesion domain of Streptococcus pyogenes (CnaB2). CnaB2 contains an internal isopeptide bond5 between amino acid residue Lys31 and residue Asp117.6,7,8 When CnaB2 is split into an N-terminal protein fragment containing Lys31 and a C-terminal peptide containing Asp117, the two fragments associate specifically and spontaneously form the isopeptide bond (Fig. 1a). A few modifications to the two binding partners made the reaction efficient both in vitro and in vivo. The modified peptide and protein fragment were named SpyTag and SpyCatcher, respectively.4

The SpyTag/SpyCatcher system offers several advantages over other tagging approaches. SpyTag (13 amino acids) forms a high affinity initial non-covalent complex with its protein partner SpyCatcher (116 amino acids). The two partners then react rapidly, forming the isopeptide bond, with a half-time of 74 s for partners at 10 μM.4 The reaction can take place in diverse conditions and is relatively insensitive to pH and temperature changes. Due to the covalent nature of the isopeptide bond, the SpyTag-SpyCatcher complex forms irreversibly and is stable to boiling in SDS or to forces of thousands of picoNewtons.4 The SpyTag can be placed at N-terminal and C-terminal and internal positions of a protein,4 in contrast to covalent peptide labeling via split inteins9,10 or sortases.11 Thus, the SpyTag/SpyCatcher system is potentially versatile and general. However, a better understanding of the interaction between the two partners is required to optimize the system.

Split proteins are an important and rapidly growing protein class, including split luciferase, fluorescent proteins, DNA polymerase and proteases. Split proteins give important insight into protein folding and are powerful tools for logical computation or for reporting on diverse cellular events.12 However, there are very few studies of how different split proteins reconstitute to form the original fold.13,14 Here, we have analyzed the binding of SpyTag and SpyCatcher using X-ray crystallography and biochemical methods. The crystal structure of the SpyTag and SpyCatcher complex indicates that the N-terminal and C-terminal segments of SpyCatcher are dispensable for the interaction. Our biochemical and structural studies confirm that both termini could be deleted without a major effect on the structure or reaction rate. In addition, the crystal structure explains the effect of previously engineered point mutations on the reaction efficiency. Together, these results lead to an optimized and robust SpyTag/SpyCatcher system.

Results and DiscussionFormation of a stable SpyTag/SpyCatcher complexIn preparation for crystallization trials, we used a synthetic peptide to test whether the isolated SpyTag can form a complex with SpyCatcher, as was previously shown for SpyTag-fusion proteins.4 The SpyCatcher protein was purified as an N-terminal His-tagged protein by Ni-NTA chromatography after expression in E. coli.4 The His-tag was removed by overnight digestion with the Tobacco Etch Virus (TEV) protease. SpyCatcher protein was incubated with the SpyTag peptide at a 1:1 molar ratio at room temperature for 2 hours and the complex was further purified by anion exchange and size-exclusion chromatography. The complex ran as a homogeneous species in both chromatography steps. However, in SDS-gels no distinct bands were seen; rather the SpyTag/SpyCatcher complex smeared over a wide molecular weight range (Fig. 1b, lane 2), as was seen previously for the intact CnaB2 domain.7 In contrast, SpyCatcher alone migrated as a distinct band (lane 1). These data suggest that the complex of SpyTag peptide and SpyCatcher is tightly folded, resisting unfolding by SDS. Similar results were seen for an N-terminally truncated version of SpyCatcher (SpyCatcherΔN1, see below) (Fig 1b).Crystal structure of the SpyTag/SpyCatcher complexThe SpyTag/SpyCatcher complex was very soluble and could be concentrated to more than 110 mg/ml (~7 mM) in a Tris/NaCl pH 8 buffer. Initial trials with several commercially available screens gave no crystals. However, a cluster of thin plate crystals appeared in a semi-dried drop with an elevated concentration of PEG3350 after one month at 22 °C. These crystals were used for streak-seeding and resulted in optimization of the crystallization conditions. The crystals grew into layers of thin plates. These crystals diffracted to a maximum of 1.7 Å, but it became clear that the diffraction spots were generated from multiple crystals. Because it was difficult to pick individual crystals, we carefully examined the diffraction pattern and selected for data-processing the diffraction spots that belonged to a single crystal. The final structure was indexed to the P1 space group and was refined to a resolution of 2.1 Å (Table 1). Two molecules were located in the asymmetric unit, which were almost identical except for slight differences at the two termini of SpyCatcher. Coordinates and structure factors have been deposited in the Protein Data Bank (PDB 4MLI). One representative molecule (Chains A and B) is used for analysis in the following discussion.SpyCatcher and SpyTag together form a compact β-sandwich structure (Fig. 1c). The first 12 of the 13 amino acids of SpyTag are visible in the density map. The electron density map clearly confirms the isopeptide bond between Lys31 of SpyCatcher and Asp7 of SpyTag (Fig. 1c; 2a) (numbering of SpyCatcher and variants based on PDB 2X5P). The first 8 residues of SpyTag make interactions with the hydrophobic core of SpyCatcher (Fig. 2b): the side-chains of Ile3 and Met5 of SpyTag are inserted into a hydrophobic pocket formed by Phe29/75/92, Ile27/90, and Met44 residues of SpyCatcher. SpyTag makes extensive parallel hydrogen bonds with β-strand 1 of SpyCatcher (residues 25–32), like the last β-strand of CnaB2. However, SpyTag contains five additional residues at the C-terminus. The hydroxyl group of Tyr9 participates in a hydrogen bond network involving Asp35 of SpyCatcher, a water molecule, and possibly Lys37 (Fig. 2c). Lys10 of SpyTag electrostatically interacts with Glu85 of SpyCatcher. There is also a main-chain contact between Gly83 of SpyCatcher and Lys10 of SpyTag. The carboxylate group of Glu34 from SpyCatcher makes a hydrogen bond (distance ~2.7Å) with the backbone NH of Tyr9 of SpyTag (Fig. 2c), which may explain why mutating Glu34 in SpyCatcher from Ile34 in CnaB24 improved the efficiency of the reaction.The interactions we see between Tyr9 and Lys10 of SpyTag and SpyCatcher rationalize the substantial improvement of the efficiency of SpyCatcher reaction comparing SpyTag (AHIVMVDAYKPTK) with a peptide matching the original C-terminal sequence of CnaB2 (AHIVMVDA).4 However, our structures suggest that the three C-terminal amino acids of SpyTag peptide (PTK) may not have a direct role in stabilizing the initial non-covalent complex between SpyTag and SpyCatcher: Pro11 and Thr12 are visible, but these two amino acids interact with residues of the neighboring SpyCatcher molecule in the crystal (Supplemental Fig. 1), while Lys13 is disordered.Structural comparison of SpyCatcher/SpyTag and CnaB2A comparison of the structures of the SpyTag/SpyCatcher complex and CnaB2 shows that the largest differences are at the terminal regions of the proteins (Fig. 3a,b). The structures are overlaid in Supplemental Fig. 2. In CnaB2,6,7 the N-terminal 6 amino acids form a β-strand, whereas in the SpyTag/SpyCatcher complex these residues are disordered. In both cases, the subsequent residues (amino acids 5–21) cannot be seen in the electron density map. Thus, whereas in CnaB2 the β-strand of the SpyTag is sandwiched between β-strands 0 and 1, in the SpyTag/SpyCatcher complex the interaction with β-strand 0 is lost (Fig. 3b,c). Thus, N-terminal residues of SpyCatcher do not seem to contribute to the stability of the SpyTag/SpyCatcher complex. Complementation of a peptide into a groove surrounded on both sides by β-strands is sterically challenging. The SpyTag/SpyCatcher structure suggests that the binding site on SpyCatcher may be well exposed for docking of SpyTag, which may rationalize the much faster complementation of SpyTag/SpyCatcher compared to the related isopeptag/pilin-C spontaneous isopeptide bond-forming pair.15In the electron density map of the SpyTag/SpyCatcher complex, the backbone of SpyCatcher could be only traced to residue 103, leaving the C-terminal 10 residues of SpyCatcher disordered. In the CnaB2 structure, the first five residues of this segment form a short β-strand (strand 8) that is anti-parallel to β-strand 7, and the last three residues are part of a β-strand that interacts with β-strand 0 and 1 (Fig. 3a,b). These last three residues are identical to the first three amino acids of SpyTag, which explains why peptide binding causes displacement of these residues from β-strand 1 and makes them disordered. This displacement is reminiscent of the donor-strand exchange seen in Gram-negative bacterial pilus assembly.16 It is less clear why this difference would also cause the preceding β-strand of SpyCatcher to become disordered. In any case, our structure suggested that the C-terminal region of SpyCatcher might also be dispensable for interaction with SpyTag.Temperature factors of CnaB2 and SpyCatcher/SpyTag structures cannot be directly compared because of the different resolutions (PDB 2X5P solved at 1.6 Å). However, normalization by the mean temperature factor of the main-chain atoms does give closely similar values over the major part of the CnaB2 and SpyCatcher structures, except for increased values for the C-terminal residues 97–103 of SpyCatcher (Supplemental Fig. 3). This comparison suggests that increased flexibility may extend into SpyCatcher’s C-terminus even beyond the C-terminal residues that were not resolved at all.The N-terminal and C-terminal segments of SpyCatcher are not required for efficient reaction with SpyTagTo test the prediction from our structures that the terminal segments of SpyCatcher are dispensable for the reaction with SpyTag, we first made N-terminal truncation mutants of SpyCatcher that lacked either 23 or 9 N-terminal residues (following the His-tag and a TEV protease cleavage site, giving SpyCatcherΔN1 and SpyCatcherΔN2, respectively; Fig. 4a). We further generated a mutant from SpyCatcherΔN1 that lacked the TEV cleavage site (SpyCatcherΔN3). SpyCatcherΔN1-3 formed covalent complexes with SpyTag-MBP with similar efficiency to full-length SpyCatcher (~40% complex formation after 1 min and ~65% after 10 min; Fig. 4b).To explore the role of the N-terminus structurally, we further analyzed SpyCatcherΔN1. SpyCatcherΔN1 efficiently formed a complex with SpyTag, which resisted unfolding by SDS (Fig. 1b). The SpyCatcherΔN1/SpyTag complex crystallized under similar conditions as SpyCatcher/SpyTag. As expected, the crystal structure of the SpyTag/SpyCatcherΔN1 complex at 2.0 Å resolution was almost identical to that of the non-truncated complex with an r.m.s.d. of 0.88 Å for all atoms (PDB 4MLS, Table 1 and Supplemental Fig. 2). This result confirms that the N-terminus of SpyCatcher is dispensable for the interaction with SpyTag. There is always the possibility that a crystal structure captures one of many possible structural isoforms that exist in solution. Nevertheless, the close similarity between the structures of SpyTag with SpyCatcher and SpyCatcherΔN1 from different space groups adds to our confidence in the structural data.Next, we generated two C-terminal deletions of SpyCatcherΔN1, removing either 4 or 9 residues (SpyCatcherΔN1ΔC1 and SpyCatcherΔN1ΔC2 respectively; Fig. 4a). SpyCatcherΔN1ΔC1 and SpyCatcherΔN1ΔC2 were also able to react with comparable efficiency as the full-length SpyCatcher (Fig. 4b). Compared to WT SpyCatcher, the version with the largest deletion, SpyCatcher ΔN1ΔC2, had only a 0.2% decrease in reconstitution at 1 min (p=0.88, n=3, not significant) and a 10.4% decrease in reconstitution at 10 min (p<0.005, n=3) (Fig. 4b) (two-tailed unpaired t-test performed using GraphPad). Thus, the biochemical data confirm that the N-terminal 23 and C-terminal 9 amino acids can be removed from SpyCatcher without substantially affecting its reaction efficiency.Taken together, our structural and biochemical data indicate that a minimal SpyTag/SpyCatcher system consists of residues 21–104 of the original SpyCatcher. The minimization of SpyCatcher from 116 amino acids to a core 84 amino acid construct should enhance its applicability as a fusion tag for cellular expression, as well as taking its length firmly within the sequence range amenable to solid-phase peptide synthesis, so facilitating chemical or isotopic modification.17One of the few split proteins investigated structurally is Ribonuclease S, a functional enzyme generated by non-covalent interaction of a 20 amino acid S peptide with a 104 amino acid S protein. In contrast to SpyTag/SpyCatcher, S peptide forms an α-helix in the complex; also, apart from an 8 residue disordered stretch, Ribonuclease S has a crystal structure identical within error to the intact parental protein.14 The crystal structure of reassembled split Venus fluorescent protein did involve β-strand interactions, but the two fragments were both large and the difference to the intact protein was again small, with a main difference being two residues not forming a β-strand.13 Therefore our structures should contribute to the broad understanding of split protein complementation and the large number of residues that can have increased flexibility on reconstitution of certain complexes.The optimized SpyTag/SpyCatcher system should be widely applicable for biochemical and cellular studies. By comparison with other tagging systems, SpyTag/SpyCatcher allows for a covalent interaction between the tag and the interacting recognition molecule. While covalent bond formation often increases non-specific interactions, specificity is not compromised in the SpyTag/SpyCatcher system, as Lys and Asp have low intrinsic reactivity unless the residues are precisely aligned in the reactive triad. Because the interaction between SpyTag and SpyCatcher is irreversible, the linkage allows the purification of the tagged protein under stringent conditions. An interesting potential application of the SpyTag/SpyCatcher system is in the crystallization of membrane proteins. Our unpublished results show that the short SpyTag can be inserted into hydrophilic loops and following folding and expression of the fusion protein then SpyTag can react with recombinant SpyCatcher, to form a stable complex with increased hydrophilic surface for lattice-forming contacts. Such a system could have advantages over the insertion of large polypeptide domains into hydrophilic loops,18 which can affect the folding of membrane proteins.

Results and Discussion

Formation of a stable SpyTag/SpyCatcher complexIn preparation for crystallization trials, we used a synthetic peptide to test whether the isolated SpyTag can form a complex with SpyCatcher, as was previously shown for SpyTag-fusion proteins.4 The SpyCatcher protein was purified as an N-terminal His-tagged protein by Ni-NTA chromatography after expression in E. coli.4 The His-tag was removed by overnight digestion with the Tobacco Etch Virus (TEV) protease. SpyCatcher protein was incubated with the SpyTag peptide at a 1:1 molar ratio at room temperature for 2 hours and the complex was further purified by anion exchange and size-exclusion chromatography. The complex ran as a homogeneous species in both chromatography steps. However, in SDS-gels no distinct bands were seen; rather the SpyTag/SpyCatcher complex smeared over a wide molecular weight range (Fig. 1b, lane 2), as was seen previously for the intact CnaB2 domain.7 In contrast, SpyCatcher alone migrated as a distinct band (lane 1). These data suggest that the complex of SpyTag peptide and SpyCatcher is tightly folded, resisting unfolding by SDS. Similar results were seen for an N-terminally truncated version of SpyCatcher (SpyCatcherΔN1, see below) (Fig 1b).

Formation of a stable SpyTag/SpyCatcher complex

In preparation for crystallization trials, we used a synthetic peptide to test whether the isolated SpyTag can form a complex with SpyCatcher, as was previously shown for SpyTag-fusion proteins.4 The SpyCatcher protein was purified as an N-terminal His-tagged protein by Ni-NTA chromatography after expression in E. coli.4 The His-tag was removed by overnight digestion with the Tobacco Etch Virus (TEV) protease. SpyCatcher protein was incubated with the SpyTag peptide at a 1:1 molar ratio at room temperature for 2 hours and the complex was further purified by anion exchange and size-exclusion chromatography. The complex ran as a homogeneous species in both chromatography steps. However, in SDS-gels no distinct bands were seen; rather the SpyTag/SpyCatcher complex smeared over a wide molecular weight range (Fig. 1b, lane 2), as was seen previously for the intact CnaB2 domain.7 In contrast, SpyCatcher alone migrated as a distinct band (lane 1). These data suggest that the complex of SpyTag peptide and SpyCatcher is tightly folded, resisting unfolding by SDS. Similar results were seen for an N-terminally truncated version of SpyCatcher (SpyCatcherΔN1, see below) (Fig 1b).

Crystal structure of the SpyTag/SpyCatcher complexThe SpyTag/SpyCatcher complex was very soluble and could be concentrated to more than 110 mg/ml (~7 mM) in a Tris/NaCl pH 8 buffer. Initial trials with several commercially available screens gave no crystals. However, a cluster of thin plate crystals appeared in a semi-dried drop with an elevated concentration of PEG3350 after one month at 22 °C. These crystals were used for streak-seeding and resulted in optimization of the crystallization conditions. The crystals grew into layers of thin plates. These crystals diffracted to a maximum of 1.7 Å, but it became clear that the diffraction spots were generated from multiple crystals. Because it was difficult to pick individual crystals, we carefully examined the diffraction pattern and selected for data-processing the diffraction spots that belonged to a single crystal. The final structure was indexed to the P1 space group and was refined to a resolution of 2.1 Å (Table 1). Two molecules were located in the asymmetric unit, which were almost identical except for slight differences at the two termini of SpyCatcher. Coordinates and structure factors have been deposited in the Protein Data Bank (PDB 4MLI). One representative molecule (Chains A and B) is used for analysis in the following discussion.SpyCatcher and SpyTag together form a compact β-sandwich structure (Fig. 1c). The first 12 of the 13 amino acids of SpyTag are visible in the density map. The electron density map clearly confirms the isopeptide bond between Lys31 of SpyCatcher and Asp7 of SpyTag (Fig. 1c; 2a) (numbering of SpyCatcher and variants based on PDB 2X5P). The first 8 residues of SpyTag make interactions with the hydrophobic core of SpyCatcher (Fig. 2b): the side-chains of Ile3 and Met5 of SpyTag are inserted into a hydrophobic pocket formed by Phe29/75/92, Ile27/90, and Met44 residues of SpyCatcher. SpyTag makes extensive parallel hydrogen bonds with β-strand 1 of SpyCatcher (residues 25–32), like the last β-strand of CnaB2. However, SpyTag contains five additional residues at the C-terminus. The hydroxyl group of Tyr9 participates in a hydrogen bond network involving Asp35 of SpyCatcher, a water molecule, and possibly Lys37 (Fig. 2c). Lys10 of SpyTag electrostatically interacts with Glu85 of SpyCatcher. There is also a main-chain contact between Gly83 of SpyCatcher and Lys10 of SpyTag. The carboxylate group of Glu34 from SpyCatcher makes a hydrogen bond (distance ~2.7Å) with the backbone NH of Tyr9 of SpyTag (Fig. 2c), which may explain why mutating Glu34 in SpyCatcher from Ile34 in CnaB24 improved the efficiency of the reaction.The interactions we see between Tyr9 and Lys10 of SpyTag and SpyCatcher rationalize the substantial improvement of the efficiency of SpyCatcher reaction comparing SpyTag (AHIVMVDAYKPTK) with a peptide matching the original C-terminal sequence of CnaB2 (AHIVMVDA).4 However, our structures suggest that the three C-terminal amino acids of SpyTag peptide (PTK) may not have a direct role in stabilizing the initial non-covalent complex between SpyTag and SpyCatcher: Pro11 and Thr12 are visible, but these two amino acids interact with residues of the neighboring SpyCatcher molecule in the crystal (Supplemental Fig. 1), while Lys13 is disordered.

Crystal structure of the SpyTag/SpyCatcher complex

The SpyTag/SpyCatcher complex was very soluble and could be concentrated to more than 110 mg/ml (~7 mM) in a Tris/NaCl pH 8 buffer. Initial trials with several commercially available screens gave no crystals. However, a cluster of thin plate crystals appeared in a semi-dried drop with an elevated concentration of PEG3350 after one month at 22 °C. These crystals were used for streak-seeding and resulted in optimization of the crystallization conditions. The crystals grew into layers of thin plates. These crystals diffracted to a maximum of 1.7 Å, but it became clear that the diffraction spots were generated from multiple crystals. Because it was difficult to pick individual crystals, we carefully examined the diffraction pattern and selected for data-processing the diffraction spots that belonged to a single crystal. The final structure was indexed to the P1 space group and was refined to a resolution of 2.1 Å (Table 1). Two molecules were located in the asymmetric unit, which were almost identical except for slight differences at the two termini of SpyCatcher. Coordinates and structure factors have been deposited in the Protein Data Bank (PDB 4MLI). One representative molecule (Chains A and B) is used for analysis in the following discussion.

SpyCatcher and SpyTag together form a compact β-sandwich structure (Fig. 1c). The first 12 of the 13 amino acids of SpyTag are visible in the density map. The electron density map clearly confirms the isopeptide bond between Lys31 of SpyCatcher and Asp7 of SpyTag (Fig. 1c; 2a) (numbering of SpyCatcher and variants based on PDB 2X5P). The first 8 residues of SpyTag make interactions with the hydrophobic core of SpyCatcher (Fig. 2b): the side-chains of Ile3 and Met5 of SpyTag are inserted into a hydrophobic pocket formed by Phe29/75/92, Ile27/90, and Met44 residues of SpyCatcher. SpyTag makes extensive parallel hydrogen bonds with β-strand 1 of SpyCatcher (residues 25–32), like the last β-strand of CnaB2. However, SpyTag contains five additional residues at the C-terminus. The hydroxyl group of Tyr9 participates in a hydrogen bond network involving Asp35 of SpyCatcher, a water molecule, and possibly Lys37 (Fig. 2c). Lys10 of SpyTag electrostatically interacts with Glu85 of SpyCatcher. There is also a main-chain contact between Gly83 of SpyCatcher and Lys10 of SpyTag. The carboxylate group of Glu34 from SpyCatcher makes a hydrogen bond (distance ~2.7Å) with the backbone NH of Tyr9 of SpyTag (Fig. 2c), which may explain why mutating Glu34 in SpyCatcher from Ile34 in CnaB24 improved the efficiency of the reaction.

The interactions we see between Tyr9 and Lys10 of SpyTag and SpyCatcher rationalize the substantial improvement of the efficiency of SpyCatcher reaction comparing SpyTag (AHIVMVDAYKPTK) with a peptide matching the original C-terminal sequence of CnaB2 (AHIVMVDA).4 However, our structures suggest that the three C-terminal amino acids of SpyTag peptide (PTK) may not have a direct role in stabilizing the initial non-covalent complex between SpyTag and SpyCatcher: Pro11 and Thr12 are visible, but these two amino acids interact with residues of the neighboring SpyCatcher molecule in the crystal (Supplemental Fig. 1), while Lys13 is disordered.

Structural comparison of SpyCatcher/SpyTag and CnaB2A comparison of the structures of the SpyTag/SpyCatcher complex and CnaB2 shows that the largest differences are at the terminal regions of the proteins (Fig. 3a,b). The structures are overlaid in Supplemental Fig. 2. In CnaB2,6,7 the N-terminal 6 amino acids form a β-strand, whereas in the SpyTag/SpyCatcher complex these residues are disordered. In both cases, the subsequent residues (amino acids 5–21) cannot be seen in the electron density map. Thus, whereas in CnaB2 the β-strand of the SpyTag is sandwiched between β-strands 0 and 1, in the SpyTag/SpyCatcher complex the interaction with β-strand 0 is lost (Fig. 3b,c). Thus, N-terminal residues of SpyCatcher do not seem to contribute to the stability of the SpyTag/SpyCatcher complex. Complementation of a peptide into a groove surrounded on both sides by β-strands is sterically challenging. The SpyTag/SpyCatcher structure suggests that the binding site on SpyCatcher may be well exposed for docking of SpyTag, which may rationalize the much faster complementation of SpyTag/SpyCatcher compared to the related isopeptag/pilin-C spontaneous isopeptide bond-forming pair.15In the electron density map of the SpyTag/SpyCatcher complex, the backbone of SpyCatcher could be only traced to residue 103, leaving the C-terminal 10 residues of SpyCatcher disordered. In the CnaB2 structure, the first five residues of this segment form a short β-strand (strand 8) that is anti-parallel to β-strand 7, and the last three residues are part of a β-strand that interacts with β-strand 0 and 1 (Fig. 3a,b). These last three residues are identical to the first three amino acids of SpyTag, which explains why peptide binding causes displacement of these residues from β-strand 1 and makes them disordered. This displacement is reminiscent of the donor-strand exchange seen in Gram-negative bacterial pilus assembly.16 It is less clear why this difference would also cause the preceding β-strand of SpyCatcher to become disordered. In any case, our structure suggested that the C-terminal region of SpyCatcher might also be dispensable for interaction with SpyTag.Temperature factors of CnaB2 and SpyCatcher/SpyTag structures cannot be directly compared because of the different resolutions (PDB 2X5P solved at 1.6 Å). However, normalization by the mean temperature factor of the main-chain atoms does give closely similar values over the major part of the CnaB2 and SpyCatcher structures, except for increased values for the C-terminal residues 97–103 of SpyCatcher (Supplemental Fig. 3). This comparison suggests that increased flexibility may extend into SpyCatcher’s C-terminus even beyond the C-terminal residues that were not resolved at all.

Structural comparison of SpyCatcher/SpyTag and CnaB2

A comparison of the structures of the SpyTag/SpyCatcher complex and CnaB2 shows that the largest differences are at the terminal regions of the proteins (Fig. 3a,b). The structures are overlaid in Supplemental Fig. 2. In CnaB2,6,7 the N-terminal 6 amino acids form a β-strand, whereas in the SpyTag/SpyCatcher complex these residues are disordered. In both cases, the subsequent residues (amino acids 5–21) cannot be seen in the electron density map. Thus, whereas in CnaB2 the β-strand of the SpyTag is sandwiched between β-strands 0 and 1, in the SpyTag/SpyCatcher complex the interaction with β-strand 0 is lost (Fig. 3b,c). Thus, N-terminal residues of SpyCatcher do not seem to contribute to the stability of the SpyTag/SpyCatcher complex. Complementation of a peptide into a groove surrounded on both sides by β-strands is sterically challenging. The SpyTag/SpyCatcher structure suggests that the binding site on SpyCatcher may be well exposed for docking of SpyTag, which may rationalize the much faster complementation of SpyTag/SpyCatcher compared to the related isopeptag/pilin-C spontaneous isopeptide bond-forming pair.15

In the electron density map of the SpyTag/SpyCatcher complex, the backbone of SpyCatcher could be only traced to residue 103, leaving the C-terminal 10 residues of SpyCatcher disordered. In the CnaB2 structure, the first five residues of this segment form a short β-strand (strand 8) that is anti-parallel to β-strand 7, and the last three residues are part of a β-strand that interacts with β-strand 0 and 1 (Fig. 3a,b). These last three residues are identical to the first three amino acids of SpyTag, which explains why peptide binding causes displacement of these residues from β-strand 1 and makes them disordered. This displacement is reminiscent of the donor-strand exchange seen in Gram-negative bacterial pilus assembly.16 It is less clear why this difference would also cause the preceding β-strand of SpyCatcher to become disordered. In any case, our structure suggested that the C-terminal region of SpyCatcher might also be dispensable for interaction with SpyTag.

Temperature factors of CnaB2 and SpyCatcher/SpyTag structures cannot be directly compared because of the different resolutions (PDB 2X5P solved at 1.6 Å). However, normalization by the mean temperature factor of the main-chain atoms does give closely similar values over the major part of the CnaB2 and SpyCatcher structures, except for increased values for the C-terminal residues 97–103 of SpyCatcher (Supplemental Fig. 3). This comparison suggests that increased flexibility may extend into SpyCatcher’s C-terminus even beyond the C-terminal residues that were not resolved at all.

The N-terminal and C-terminal segments of SpyCatcher are not required for efficient reaction with SpyTagTo test the prediction from our structures that the terminal segments of SpyCatcher are dispensable for the reaction with SpyTag, we first made N-terminal truncation mutants of SpyCatcher that lacked either 23 or 9 N-terminal residues (following the His-tag and a TEV protease cleavage site, giving SpyCatcherΔN1 and SpyCatcherΔN2, respectively; Fig. 4a). We further generated a mutant from SpyCatcherΔN1 that lacked the TEV cleavage site (SpyCatcherΔN3). SpyCatcherΔN1-3 formed covalent complexes with SpyTag-MBP with similar efficiency to full-length SpyCatcher (~40% complex formation after 1 min and ~65% after 10 min; Fig. 4b).To explore the role of the N-terminus structurally, we further analyzed SpyCatcherΔN1. SpyCatcherΔN1 efficiently formed a complex with SpyTag, which resisted unfolding by SDS (Fig. 1b). The SpyCatcherΔN1/SpyTag complex crystallized under similar conditions as SpyCatcher/SpyTag. As expected, the crystal structure of the SpyTag/SpyCatcherΔN1 complex at 2.0 Å resolution was almost identical to that of the non-truncated complex with an r.m.s.d. of 0.88 Å for all atoms (PDB 4MLS, Table 1 and Supplemental Fig. 2). This result confirms that the N-terminus of SpyCatcher is dispensable for the interaction with SpyTag. There is always the possibility that a crystal structure captures one of many possible structural isoforms that exist in solution. Nevertheless, the close similarity between the structures of SpyTag with SpyCatcher and SpyCatcherΔN1 from different space groups adds to our confidence in the structural data.Next, we generated two C-terminal deletions of SpyCatcherΔN1, removing either 4 or 9 residues (SpyCatcherΔN1ΔC1 and SpyCatcherΔN1ΔC2 respectively; Fig. 4a). SpyCatcherΔN1ΔC1 and SpyCatcherΔN1ΔC2 were also able to react with comparable efficiency as the full-length SpyCatcher (Fig. 4b). Compared to WT SpyCatcher, the version with the largest deletion, SpyCatcher ΔN1ΔC2, had only a 0.2% decrease in reconstitution at 1 min (p=0.88, n=3, not significant) and a 10.4% decrease in reconstitution at 10 min (p<0.005, n=3) (Fig. 4b) (two-tailed unpaired t-test performed using GraphPad). Thus, the biochemical data confirm that the N-terminal 23 and C-terminal 9 amino acids can be removed from SpyCatcher without substantially affecting its reaction efficiency.Taken together, our structural and biochemical data indicate that a minimal SpyTag/SpyCatcher system consists of residues 21–104 of the original SpyCatcher. The minimization of SpyCatcher from 116 amino acids to a core 84 amino acid construct should enhance its applicability as a fusion tag for cellular expression, as well as taking its length firmly within the sequence range amenable to solid-phase peptide synthesis, so facilitating chemical or isotopic modification.17One of the few split proteins investigated structurally is Ribonuclease S, a functional enzyme generated by non-covalent interaction of a 20 amino acid S peptide with a 104 amino acid S protein. In contrast to SpyTag/SpyCatcher, S peptide forms an α-helix in the complex; also, apart from an 8 residue disordered stretch, Ribonuclease S has a crystal structure identical within error to the intact parental protein.14 The crystal structure of reassembled split Venus fluorescent protein did involve β-strand interactions, but the two fragments were both large and the difference to the intact protein was again small, with a main difference being two residues not forming a β-strand.13 Therefore our structures should contribute to the broad understanding of split protein complementation and the large number of residues that can have increased flexibility on reconstitution of certain complexes.The optimized SpyTag/SpyCatcher system should be widely applicable for biochemical and cellular studies. By comparison with other tagging systems, SpyTag/SpyCatcher allows for a covalent interaction between the tag and the interacting recognition molecule. While covalent bond formation often increases non-specific interactions, specificity is not compromised in the SpyTag/SpyCatcher system, as Lys and Asp have low intrinsic reactivity unless the residues are precisely aligned in the reactive triad. Because the interaction between SpyTag and SpyCatcher is irreversible, the linkage allows the purification of the tagged protein under stringent conditions. An interesting potential application of the SpyTag/SpyCatcher system is in the crystallization of membrane proteins. Our unpublished results show that the short SpyTag can be inserted into hydrophilic loops and following folding and expression of the fusion protein then SpyTag can react with recombinant SpyCatcher, to form a stable complex with increased hydrophilic surface for lattice-forming contacts. Such a system could have advantages over the insertion of large polypeptide domains into hydrophilic loops,18 which can affect the folding of membrane proteins.

The N-terminal and C-terminal segments of SpyCatcher are not required for efficient reaction with SpyTag

To test the prediction from our structures that the terminal segments of SpyCatcher are dispensable for the reaction with SpyTag, we first made N-terminal truncation mutants of SpyCatcher that lacked either 23 or 9 N-terminal residues (following the His-tag and a TEV protease cleavage site, giving SpyCatcherΔN1 and SpyCatcherΔN2, respectively; Fig. 4a). We further generated a mutant from SpyCatcherΔN1 that lacked the TEV cleavage site (SpyCatcherΔN3). SpyCatcherΔN1-3 formed covalent complexes with SpyTag-MBP with similar efficiency to full-length SpyCatcher (~40% complex formation after 1 min and ~65% after 10 min; Fig. 4b).

To explore the role of the N-terminus structurally, we further analyzed SpyCatcherΔN1. SpyCatcherΔN1 efficiently formed a complex with SpyTag, which resisted unfolding by SDS (Fig. 1b). The SpyCatcherΔN1/SpyTag complex crystallized under similar conditions as SpyCatcher/SpyTag. As expected, the crystal structure of the SpyTag/SpyCatcherΔN1 complex at 2.0 Å resolution was almost identical to that of the non-truncated complex with an r.m.s.d. of 0.88 Å for all atoms (PDB 4MLS, Table 1 and Supplemental Fig. 2). This result confirms that the N-terminus of SpyCatcher is dispensable for the interaction with SpyTag. There is always the possibility that a crystal structure captures one of many possible structural isoforms that exist in solution. Nevertheless, the close similarity between the structures of SpyTag with SpyCatcher and SpyCatcherΔN1 from different space groups adds to our confidence in the structural data.

Next, we generated two C-terminal deletions of SpyCatcherΔN1, removing either 4 or 9 residues (SpyCatcherΔN1ΔC1 and SpyCatcherΔN1ΔC2 respectively; Fig. 4a). SpyCatcherΔN1ΔC1 and SpyCatcherΔN1ΔC2 were also able to react with comparable efficiency as the full-length SpyCatcher (Fig. 4b). Compared to WT SpyCatcher, the version with the largest deletion, SpyCatcher ΔN1ΔC2, had only a 0.2% decrease in reconstitution at 1 min (p=0.88, n=3, not significant) and a 10.4% decrease in reconstitution at 10 min (p<0.005, n=3) (Fig. 4b) (two-tailed unpaired t-test performed using GraphPad). Thus, the biochemical data confirm that the N-terminal 23 and C-terminal 9 amino acids can be removed from SpyCatcher without substantially affecting its reaction efficiency.

Taken together, our structural and biochemical data indicate that a minimal SpyTag/SpyCatcher system consists of residues 21–104 of the original SpyCatcher. The minimization of SpyCatcher from 116 amino acids to a core 84 amino acid construct should enhance its applicability as a fusion tag for cellular expression, as well as taking its length firmly within the sequence range amenable to solid-phase peptide synthesis, so facilitating chemical or isotopic modification.17

One of the few split proteins investigated structurally is Ribonuclease S, a functional enzyme generated by non-covalent interaction of a 20 amino acid S peptide with a 104 amino acid S protein. In contrast to SpyTag/SpyCatcher, S peptide forms an α-helix in the complex; also, apart from an 8 residue disordered stretch, Ribonuclease S has a crystal structure identical within error to the intact parental protein.14 The crystal structure of reassembled split Venus fluorescent protein did involve β-strand interactions, but the two fragments were both large and the difference to the intact protein was again small, with a main difference being two residues not forming a β-strand.13 Therefore our structures should contribute to the broad understanding of split protein complementation and the large number of residues that can have increased flexibility on reconstitution of certain complexes.

The optimized SpyTag/SpyCatcher system should be widely applicable for biochemical and cellular studies. By comparison with other tagging systems, SpyTag/SpyCatcher allows for a covalent interaction between the tag and the interacting recognition molecule. While covalent bond formation often increases non-specific interactions, specificity is not compromised in the SpyTag/SpyCatcher system, as Lys and Asp have low intrinsic reactivity unless the residues are precisely aligned in the reactive triad. Because the interaction between SpyTag and SpyCatcher is irreversible, the linkage allows the purification of the tagged protein under stringent conditions. An interesting potential application of the SpyTag/SpyCatcher system is in the crystallization of membrane proteins. Our unpublished results show that the short SpyTag can be inserted into hydrophilic loops and following folding and expression of the fusion protein then SpyTag can react with recombinant SpyCatcher, to form a stable complex with increased hydrophilic surface for lattice-forming contacts. Such a system could have advantages over the insertion of large polypeptide domains into hydrophilic loops,18 which can affect the folding of membrane proteins.

Supplementary Material01

Supplementary Material
