---
pmid: '21536906'
title: The Arabidopsis thaliana Med25 mediator subunit integrates environmental cues
  to control plant development.
authors:
- Elfving N
- Davoine C
- Benlloch R
- Blomberg J
- Brännström K
- Müller D
- Nilsson A
- Ulfstedt M
- Ronne H
- Wingsle G
- Nilsson O
- Björklund S
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3100966
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1002981108
---

# The Arabidopsis thaliana Med25 mediator subunit integrates environmental cues to control plant development.
**Authors:** Elfving N, Davoine C, Benlloch R, Blomberg J, Brännström K, Müller D, Nilsson A, Ulfstedt M, Ronne H, Wingsle G, Nilsson O, Björklund S
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1002981108](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1002981108)
**PMC:** [PMC3100966](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3100966/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 May 17;108(20):8245-50. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1002981108. Epub 2011 May 2.

The Arabidopsis thaliana Med25 mediator subunit integrates environmental cues to 
control plant development.

Elfving N(1), Davoine C, Benlloch R, Blomberg J, Brännström K, Müller D, Nilsson 
A, Ulfstedt M, Ronne H, Wingsle G, Nilsson O, Björklund S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Umeå Plant Science Center, 
Umeå University, SE-901 87 Umeå, Sweden.

Development in plants is controlled by abiotic environmental cues such as day 
length, light quality, temperature, drought, and salinity. These signals are 
sensed by a variety of systems and transmitted by different signal transduction 
pathways. Ultimately, these pathways are integrated to control expression of 
specific target genes, which encode proteins that regulate development and 
differentiation. The molecular mechanisms for such integration have remained 
elusive. We here show that a linear 130-amino-acids-long sequence in the Med25 
subunit of the Arabidopsis thaliana Mediator is a common target for the drought 
response element binding protein 2A, zinc finger homeodomain 1, and Myb-like 
transcription factors which are involved in different stress response pathways. 
In addition, our results show that Med25 together with drought response element 
binding protein 2A also function in repression of PhyB-mediated light signaling 
and thus integrate signals from different regulatory pathways.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1002981108
PMCID: PMC3100966
PMID: 21536906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Development in plants is controlled by abiotic environmental cues such as day length, light quality, temperature, drought, and salinity. These signals are sensed by a variety of systems and transmitted by different signal transduction pathways. Ultimately, these pathways are integrated to control expression of specific target genes, which encode proteins that regulate development and differentiation. The molecular mechanisms for such integration have remained elusive. We here show that a linear 130-amino-acids-long sequence in the Med25 subunit of the Arabidopsis thaliana Mediator is a common target for the drought response element binding protein 2A, zinc finger homeodomain 1, and Myb-like transcription factors which are involved in different stress response pathways. In addition, our results show that Med25 together with drought response element binding protein 2A also function in repression of PhyB-mediated light signaling and thus integrate signals from different regulatory pathways.

Discussion

The results described here indicate that Med25 functions as a hub that integrates signals from different environmental cues to control development. We suggest that ZFHD1 and MYB-like function as transcriptional activators by interacting with Med25 to induce target genes that encode proteins required to respond to salt stress. These two transcription factors therefore seem to function in the expected way by interaction to a Mediator subunit via their TADs. However, our results also represent a conundrum. Because dreb2a is sensitive to drought, we expected that med25 also would be drought sensitive. Surprisingly, we found that med25 is drought resistant ( Fig. 4 ). A similar, unexpected result is the opposite effects of dreb2a and med25 on the hypocotyl-length response and flowering time (compare Fig. 5 and Fig. S5 ).

Our finding that the region is essential for interaction with the conserved Med25 551-680 region, combined with previous mappings of DREB2A functional domains, lead us to propose a model for how Med25 integrates different signal pathways to regulate both development and expression of stress-induced target genes ( Fig. 5 D ). DREB2A seems to function both as a transcriptional repressor and an activator depending on the circumstances. When the interaction between the RD of DREB2A and Mediator is disrupted, either by removal of the RD of DREB2A or by deletion of Med25, then DREB2A functions as an activator, both for induction of genes involved in drought ( Fig. 4 ) and in development ( 14 ) Fig. 5 ). We propose that Med25 mediates the repressing effect of DREB2A by placing its RD in the vicinity of another Mediator subunit. In this model, only the shorter (30 aa) RD requires interaction with Med25, whereas the longer (81 aa) TAD can bind another Mediator subunit and thus function independently of Med25. It is possible that the Mediator protein that interacts with the RD of DREB2A is Med8 because med8 shows a more pronounced defect than med25 , both in delay of flowering time and resistance to fungal pathogens ( 12 ). Moreover, DREB2A has been identified as a phosphoprotein ( 19 ) and the 30-aa-long RD in DREB2A contains no less than 11 serines and threonines, indicating that its activity might be regulated by phosphorylation.

Our finding that Physcomitrella med25 is salt sensitive is interesting because it suggests that the function of Med25 in salt stress was present already in a common ancestor of all land plants. In this context, we note that the phytohormone abscisic acid (ABA), which functions in drought and salt stress in vascular plants, has a similar function in mosses ( 20 ). We further note that a moss cDNA that was annotated as encoding a DREB2A homolog is induced by dehydration ( 21 ). The AP2 domain transcription factors, to which DREB2A belongs, is a large protein family, and it is not easy to identify direct orthologs in mosses and angiosperms ( 22 ). Nevertheless, the fact that the moss DREB2A-related protein is induced by drought stress suggests that it could have a function analogous to that of Arabidopsis DREB2A. It is further conceivable that both Med25 and DREB2A could function as downstream components in the ABA pathway. We note that ABI3 , encoding a key mediator of the ABA response ( 23 ), is among the genes that are induced by dehydration in Physcomitrella ( 22 ).

In conclusion, we suggest that previous models presented by us and others ( 6 , 11 ) for how Med25 functions downstream of the PhyB photoreceptor to activate FT now can be further elaborated ( Fig. 5 D ). Our finding that Med25 is a negative regulator of both flowering/development and drought resistance, and similar results reported by others for overexpression of DREB2A lacking its RD, suggest that DREB2A functions mainly as a repressor, and Med25 as a corepressor in these two pathways. FT cannot therefore be a direct target for repression by DREB2A acting through Med25 because disruption of the DREB2A–Med25 interaction would then cause an early flowering phenotype. Reports from other groups combined with our results presented here could be interpreted as if DREB2A and MED25 cooperate to cause down-regulation of a negative regulator of FT , such as, e.g., the FLC gene ( 24 , 25 ). However, based on the model proposed by Wollenberg et al., we rather suggest that Dreb2A acts as a repressor through Med25 to down-regulate the PhyB light signaling pathway ( 13 ).
