---
pmid: '24532666'
title: Analysis of the subunit organization of the eIF2B complex reveals new insights
  into its structure and regulation.
authors:
- Wortham NC
- Martinez M
- Gordiyenko Y
- Robinson CV
- Proud CG
journal: FASEB J
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1096/fj.13-243329
---

# Analysis of the subunit organization of the eIF2B complex reveals new insights into its structure and regulation.
**Authors:** Wortham NC, Martinez M, Gordiyenko Y, Robinson CV, Proud CG
**Journal:** FASEB J (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1096/fj.13-243329](https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.13-243329)

## Abstract

1. FASEB J. 2014 May;28(5):2225-37. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-243329. Epub 2014 Feb 14.

Analysis of the subunit organization of the eIF2B complex reveals new insights 
into its structure and regulation.

Wortham NC(1), Martinez M, Gordiyenko Y, Robinson CV, Proud CG.

Author information:
(1)1University of Southampton, Centre for Biological Sciences; Life Sciences 
Building 85, Highfield Campus, Southampton SO17 1BJ, UK. 
n.c.wortham@soton.ac.uk.

Eukaryotic initiation factor 2B (eIF2B) is the guanine nucleotide exchange 
factor for eIF2 and a critical regulator of protein synthesis, (e.g., as part of 
the integrated stress response). Certain mutations in the EIF2B genes cause 
leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter (VWM), an often serious 
neurological disorder. Comprising 5 subunits, α-ε (eIF2Bε being the catalytic 
one), eIF2B has always been considered an αβγδε heteropentamer. We have analyzed 
the subunit interactions within mammalian eIF2B by using a combination of mass 
spectrometry and in vivo studies of overexpressed complexes to gain further 
insight into the subunit arrangement of the complex. Our data reveal that eIF2B 
is actually decameric, a dimer of eIF2B(βγδε) tetramers stabilized by 2 copies 
of eIF2Bα. We also demonstrate a pivotal role for eIF2Bδ in the formation of 
eIF2B(βγδε) tetramers. eIF2B(αβγδε)2 decamers show greater binding to eIF2 than 
to eIF2B(βγδε) tetramers, which may underlie the increased activity of the 
former. We examined the levels of eIF2B subunits in a panel of different mouse 
tissues and identified different levels of eIF2B subunits, particularly eIF2Bα, 
which implies heterogeneity in the cellular proportions of eIF2B(αβγδε) and 
eIF2B(βγδε) complexes, with important implications for the regulation of 
translation in individual cell types.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.13-243329
PMID: 24532666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
