---
pmid: '17901876'
title: Autophagy is required for necrotic cell death in Caenorhabditis elegans.
authors:
- Samara C
- Syntichaki P
- Tavernarakis N
journal: Cell Death Differ
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.cdd.4402231
---

# Autophagy is required for necrotic cell death in Caenorhabditis elegans.
**Authors:** Samara C, Syntichaki P, Tavernarakis N
**Journal:** Cell Death Differ (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.cdd.4402231](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.cdd.4402231)

## Abstract

1. Cell Death Differ. 2008 Jan;15(1):105-12. doi: 10.1038/sj.cdd.4402231. Epub
2007  Sep 28.

Autophagy is required for necrotic cell death in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Samara C(1), Syntichaki P, Tavernarakis N.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and 
Technology, Heraklion, Crete, Greece.

Autophagy is the main process for bulk protein and organelle recycling in cells 
under extracellular or intracellular stress. Deregulation of autophagy has been 
associated with pathological conditions such as cancer, muscular disorders and 
neurodegeneration. Necrotic cell death underlies extensive neuronal loss in 
acute neurodegenerative episodes such as ischemic stroke. We find that excessive 
autophagosome formation is induced early during necrotic cell death in C. 
elegans. In addition, autophagy is required for necrotic cell death. Impairment 
of autophagy by genetic inactivation of autophagy genes or by pharmacological 
treatment suppresses necrosis. Autophagy synergizes with lysosomal catabolic 
mechanisms to facilitate cell death. Our findings demonstrate that autophagy 
contributes to cellular destruction during necrosis. Thus, interfering with the 
autophagic process may protect neurons against necrotic damage in humans.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.cdd.4402231
PMID: 17901876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
