---
pmid: '10557078'
title: Epsin binds to the EH domain of POB1 and regulates receptor-mediated endocytosis.
authors:
- Morinaka K
- Koyama S
- Nakashima S
- Hinoi T
- Okawa K
- Iwamatsu A
- Kikuchi A
journal: Oncogene
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1202974
---

# Epsin binds to the EH domain of POB1 and regulates receptor-mediated endocytosis.
**Authors:** Morinaka K, Koyama S, Nakashima S, Hinoi T, Okawa K, Iwamatsu A, Kikuchi A
**Journal:** Oncogene (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1202974](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1202974)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 1999 Oct 21;18(43):5915-22. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1202974.

Epsin binds to the EH domain of POB1 and regulates receptor-mediated 
endocytosis.

Morinaka K(1), Koyama S, Nakashima S, Hinoi T, Okawa K, Iwamatsu A, Kikuchi A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hiroshima University School of Medicine, 1-2-3 
Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan.

POB1 has been identified as a RalBP1-binding protein and has the Eps15 homology 
(EH) domain. The EH domain-containing proteins have been suggested to be 
involved in clathrin-dependent endocytosis. To clarify the function of POB1, we 
purified a protein which binds to the EH domain of POB1 from bovine brain 
cytosol and identified it as Epsin, which is known to bind to the EH domain of 
Eps15. Epsin has three Asn-Pro-Phe (NPF) motifs in the C-terminal region, which 
are known to form the core sequence for the binding to the EH domain. The EH 
domain of POB1 interacted directly with the region containing the NPF motifs of 
Epsin. Expression of Epsin in CHO-IR cells inhibited internalization of insulin 
although it affected neither insulin-binding nor autophosphorylation activities 
of the insulin receptor. Taken together with the observations that Epsin is 
involved in internalization of the receptors for epidermal growth factor and 
transferrin, these results suggest that Epsin is a binding partner of POB1 and 
their binding regulates receptor-mediated endocytosis.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1202974
PMID: 10557078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
