---
pmid: '16493035'
title: Recombinant Ig-like transcript 3-Fc modulates T cell responses via induction
  of Th anergy and differentiation of CD8+ T suppressor cells.
authors:
- Kim-Schulze S
- Scotto L
- Vlad G
- Piazza F
- Lin H
- Liu Z
- Cortesini R
- Suciu-Foca N
journal: J Immunol
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.176.5.2790
---

# Recombinant Ig-like transcript 3-Fc modulates T cell responses via induction of Th anergy and differentiation of CD8+ T suppressor cells.
**Authors:** Kim-Schulze S, Scotto L, Vlad G, Piazza F, Lin H, Liu Z, Cortesini R, Suciu-Foca N
**Journal:** J Immunol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.4049/jimmunol.176.5.2790](https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.176.5.2790)

## Abstract

1. J Immunol. 2006 Mar 1;176(5):2790-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.176.5.2790.

Recombinant Ig-like transcript 3-Fc modulates T cell responses via induction of 
Th anergy and differentiation of CD8+ T suppressor cells.

Kim-Schulze S(1), Scotto L, Vlad G, Piazza F, Lin H, Liu Z, Cortesini R, 
Suciu-Foca N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

The Ig-like transcript (ILT)3 is crucial to the tolerogenic activity acquired by 
dendritic cells exposed to allospecific T suppressor (Ts) cells. We have 
explored the immunomodulatory property of the extracellular region of ILT3 using 
a cytoplasmic deletion mutant of ILT3 (ILT3delta), expressed as membrane-bound 
ILT3 on KG1 cells, and a rILT3-Fc fusion protein. We found that both 
membrane-bound and soluble ILT3 inhibited T cell proliferation in primary and 
secondary MLC inducing anergy in CD4+ Th cells and suppressing the 
differentiation of IFN-gamma-producing CD8+ CTL. Furthermore, membrane-bound and 
soluble ILT3 induced the differentiation of CD8+ FOXP3+ Ts cells in primary 
7-day MLC. The suppressive activity of these CD8+ Ts cells is alloantigen 
specific and mediated by their capacity to induce the up-regulation of ILT3 and 
down-regulation of costimulatory molecules such as CD86 in APC from the 
stimulator used for priming, but not on control HLA-mismatched APC. Our finding 
that ILT3-Fc has potent immunosuppressive activity in vitro and that it acts on 
T cells only upon activation suggests the possibility that this agent may be of 
use for specific suppression of the immune response in autoimmunity or 
transplantation.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.176.5.2790
PMID: 16493035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
