---
pmid: '18239382'
title: Low-dose local kidney irradiation inhibits progression of experimental crescentic
  nephritis by promoting apoptosis.
authors:
- Liu D
- Nazneen A
- Taguchi T
- Razzaque MS
journal: Am J Nephrol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1159/000115290
---

# Low-dose local kidney irradiation inhibits progression of experimental crescentic nephritis by promoting apoptosis.
**Authors:** Liu D, Nazneen A, Taguchi T, Razzaque MS
**Journal:** Am J Nephrol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000115290](https://doi.org/10.1159/000115290)

## Abstract

1. Am J Nephrol. 2008;28(4):555-68. doi: 10.1159/000115290. Epub 2008 Feb 1.

Low-dose local kidney irradiation inhibits progression of experimental 
crescentic nephritis by promoting apoptosis.

Liu D(1), Nazneen A, Taguchi T, Razzaque MS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical 
Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Crescentic glomerulonephritis is a rapidly progressive form of 
nephritis and is usually resistant to therapeutic intervention. Apoptosis plays 
a role in the resolution of glomerulonephritis. We investigated the effects of 
local kidney irradiation on the progression of experimental crescentic 
glomerulonephritis.
METHODS: The following three experimental rat groups were generated: (1) Group 
I, sham-operated control (n = 12); (2) Group II, rats injected intravenously 
with rabbit anti-rat GBM antibody (nephrotoxic serum, NTS) (n = 23), and (3) 
Group III, a single low-dose irradiation of 0.5 Gy X-ray to both kidneys at days 
6, 13, 20, and 27 after NTS injection (n = 55). Renal function and blood 
leukocyte count were examined in different groups of rats at various time 
points. Kidneys obtained at various time points were analyzed to determine the 
effects of radiation in experimental nephritis.
RESULTS: Radiation of the kidneys reduced the levels of blood urea nitrogen and 
serum creatinine compared with Group II nephritic rats of similar age (p < 0.05 
or 0.001). No apparent changes in blood leukocyte counts were noted in various 
experimental groups. Glomerular hypercellularity, crescents, global sclerosis 
and tubulointerstitial damage developed gradually in Group II rats, but were 
decreased (p < 0.05 or 0.001) after radiation treatment. The extent of 
tubulointerstitial damage was also reduced, and radiation-associated 
histological improvements were accompanied by reduced infiltration of 
macrophages in the glomeruli and interstitium. The numbers of PCNA- and 
ED1-positive cells were reduced in the kidneys at 1 day post-irradiation, of 
rats irradiated at 6 and 13 days after NTS injection, compared with Group II at 
similar time intervals (p < 0.05). A larger numbers of TUNEL-positive cells were 
noted at 1 day post-irradiation in rats irradiated at 6 and 13 days after NTS 
injection, compared with Group II at similar time intervals (p < 0.05). 
Immunostaining for macrophages ED1 and TUNEL staining of serial sections of 
irradiated nephritic kidneys showed few ED1-positive macrophages stained for 
TUNEL. Overexpression of active caspases 3 and 7 was noted in irradiated 
kidneys, compared with the corresponding Group II rats at similar time 
intervals. Western blot analysis showed marked increase in active caspase 3 and 
active caspase 7 expression in irradiated kidneys compared with NTS injection 
only. A marked increase in the expression of p53 protein, which is closely 
related to radiation-induced apoptosis, was also observed in irradiated kidneys 
compared with NTS injection only.
CONCLUSION: Our study showed that renal radiation can alter acute glomerular 
inflammation by inducing apoptosis of intrinsic and infiltrating cells in the 
kidney in a rat model of crescentic glomerulonephritis. Low-dose kidney 
irradiation can inhibit the progression of experimental nephritis through 
inducing apoptosis.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 10.1159/000115290
PMID: 18239382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
