---
pmid: '10428808'
title: Isolation and characterization of ARA160 as the first androgen receptor N-terminal-associated
  coactivator in human prostate cells.
authors:
- Hsiao PW
- Chang C
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.32.22373
---

# Isolation and characterization of ARA160 as the first androgen receptor N-terminal-associated coactivator in human prostate cells.
**Authors:** Hsiao PW, Chang C
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.274.32.22373](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.32.22373)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Aug 6;274(32):22373-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.32.22373.

Isolation and characterization of ARA160 as the first androgen receptor 
N-terminal-associated coactivator in human prostate cells.

Hsiao PW(1), Chang C.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pathology, Urology, and Radiation Oncology, George Whipple 
Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Rochester, Rochester, New York 
14642, USA.

The androgen receptor (AR) is a member of the steroid receptor superfamily that 
may require coactivators for proper or maximal transactivation. Using a purified 
AR N-terminal peptide as a probe to screen the human testis expression library, 
we identified an androgen-enhanced AR N-terminal-associated protein ARA160, 
which consists of 1,093 amino acids with an apparent molecular mass of 160 kDa. 
Sequence comparison in GenBank(TM) reveals that ARA160 shares an identical 
sequence with a HIV-1 TATA element modulatory factor, TMF. The far-Western 
blotting and co-immunoprecipitation assays demonstrate that the AR can interact 
directly with ARA160/TMF. Affinity gel pull-down and mammalian two-hybrid assays 
further suggest androgen can enhance significantly the interaction between AR 
and ARA160. Transient transfection assays demonstrated that ARA160 might 
function as a coactivator for AR-mediated transactivation in human prostate 
cancer PC-3 cells. Our data further suggest that this AR N-terminal coactivator 
can function cooperatively with AR C-terminal coactivator, ARA70, in PC-3 cells. 
Together, our data demonstrate that ARA160 might represent the first identified 
androgen-enhanced N-terminal coactivator for the AR.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.32.22373
PMID: 10428808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
