---
pmid: '19426738'
title: The box H/ACA snoRNP assembly factor Shq1p is a chaperone protein homologous
  to Hsp90 cochaperones that binds to the Cbf5p enzyme.
authors:
- Godin KS
- Walbott H
- Leulliot N
- van Tilbeurgh H
- Varani G
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2744417
doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.04.076
---

# The box H/ACA snoRNP assembly factor Shq1p is a chaperone protein homologous to Hsp90 cochaperones that binds to the Cbf5p enzyme.
**Authors:** Godin KS, Walbott H, Leulliot N, van Tilbeurgh H, Varani G
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmb.2009.04.076](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2009.04.076)
**PMC:** [PMC2744417](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2744417/)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Biol. 2009 Jul 10;390(2):231-44. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.04.076. Epub
2009  May 6.

The box H/ACA snoRNP assembly factor Shq1p is a chaperone protein homologous to 
Hsp90 cochaperones that binds to the Cbf5p enzyme.

Godin KS(1), Walbott H, Leulliot N, van Tilbeurgh H, Varani G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, 98195, USA.

Box H/ACA small nucleolar (sno) ribonucleoproteins (RNPs) are responsible for 
the formation of pseudouridine in a variety of RNAs and are essential for 
ribosome biogenesis, modification of spliceosomal RNAs, and telomerase 
stability. A mature snoRNP has been reconstituted in vitro and is composed of a 
single RNA and four proteins. However, snoRNP biogenesis in vivo requires 
multiple factors to coordinate a complex and poorly understood assembly and 
maturation process. Among the factors required for snoRNP biogenesis in yeast is 
Shq1p, an essential protein necessary for stable expression of box H/ACA 
snoRNAs. We have found that Shq1p consists of two independent domains that 
contain casein kinase 1 phosphorylation sites. We also demonstrate that Shq1p 
binds the pseudourydilating enzyme Cbf5p through the C-terminal domain, in 
synergy with the N-terminal domain. The NMR solution structure of the N-terminal 
domain has striking homology to the 'Chord and Sgt1' domain of known Hsp90 
cochaperones, yet Shq1p does not interact with the yeast Hsp90 homologue in 
vitro. Surprisingly, Shq1p has stand-alone chaperone activity in vitro. This 
activity is harbored by the C-terminal domain, but it is increased by the 
presence of the N-terminal domain. These results provide the first evidence of a 
specific biochemical activity for Shq1p and a direct link to the H/ACA snoRNP.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.04.076
PMCID: PMC2744417
PMID: 19426738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
