---
pmid: '14717702'
title: GTP cyclohydrolase I utilizes metal-free GTP as its substrate.
authors:
- Suzuki T
- Kurita H
- Ichinose H
journal: Eur J Biochem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1046/j.1432-1033.2003.03933.x
---

# GTP cyclohydrolase I utilizes metal-free GTP as its substrate.
**Authors:** Suzuki T, Kurita H, Ichinose H
**Journal:** Eur J Biochem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1432-1033.2003.03933.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1432-1033.2003.03933.x)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Biochem. 2004 Jan;271(2):349-55. doi: 10.1046/j.1432-1033.2003.03933.x.

GTP cyclohydrolase I utilizes metal-free GTP as its substrate.

Suzuki T(1), Kurita H, Ichinose H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science, Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, 
Tokyo Institute of Technology, Yokohama, Japan.

GTP cyclohydrolase I (GCH) is the rate-limiting enzyme for the synthesis of 
tetrahydrobiopterin and its activity is important in the regulation of monoamine 
neurotransmitters such as dopamine, norepinephrine and serotonin. We have 
studied the action of divalent cations on the enzyme activity of purified 
recombinant human GCH expressed in Escherichia coli. First, we showed that the 
enzyme activity is dependent on the concentration of Mg-free GTP. Inhibition of 
the enzyme activity by Mg2+, as well as by Mn2+, Co2+ or Zn2+, was due to the 
reduction of the availability of metal-free GTP substrate for the enzyme, when a 
divalent cation was present at a relatively high concentration with respect to 
GTP. We next examined the requirement of Zn2+ for enzyme activity by the use of 
a protein refolding assay, because the recombinant enzyme contained 
approximately one zinc atom per subunit of the decameric protein. Only when Zn2+ 
was present was the activity of the denatured enzyme effectively recovered by 
incubation with a chaperone protein. These are the first data demonstrating that 
GCH recognizes Mg-free GTP and requires Zn2+ for its catalytic activity. We 
suggest that the cellular concentration of divalent cations can modulate GCH 
activity, and thus tetrahydrobiopterin biosynthesis as well.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1432-1033.2003.03933.x
PMID: 14717702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
