---
pmid: '14594798'
title: Interaction of human HSP22 (HSPB8) with other small heat shock proteins.
authors:
- Sun X
- Fontaine JM
- Rest JS
- Shelden EA
- Welsh MJ
- Benndorf R
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M311324200
---

# Interaction of human HSP22 (HSPB8) with other small heat shock proteins.
**Authors:** Sun X, Fontaine JM, Rest JS, Shelden EA, Welsh MJ, Benndorf R
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M311324200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M311324200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jan 23;279(4):2394-402. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M311324200. Epub
2003  Oct 31.

Interaction of human HSP22 (HSPB8) with other small heat shock proteins.

Sun X(1), Fontaine JM, Rest JS, Shelden EA, Welsh MJ, Benndorf R.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical 
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Mammalian small heat shock proteins (sHSP) are abundant in muscles and are 
implicated in both muscle function and myopathies. Recently a new sHSP, HSP22 
(HSPB8, H11), was identified in the human heart by its interaction with HSP27 
(HSPB1). Using phylogenetic analysis we show that HSP22 is a true member of the 
sHSP superfamily. sHSPs interact with each other and form homo- and 
hetero-oligomeric complexes. The function of these complexes is poorly 
understood. Using gel filtration HPLC, the yeast two-hybrid method, 
immunoprecipitation, cross-linking, and fluorescence resonance energy transfer 
microscopy, we report that (i). HSP22 forms high molecular mass complexes in the 
heart, (ii). HSP22 interacts with itself, cvHSP (HSPB7), MKBP (HSPB2) and HSP27, 
and (iii). HSP22 has two binding domains (N- and C-terminal) that are specific 
for different binding partners. HSP22 homo-dimers are formed through N-N and N-C 
interactions, and HSP22-cvHSP hetero-dimers through C-C interaction. HSP22-MKBP 
and HSP22-HSP27 hetero-dimers involve the N and C termini of HSP22 and HSP27, 
respectively, but appear to require full-length protein as a binding partner.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M311324200
PMID: 14594798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
