---
pmid: '9224714'
title: 'Yeast Gcn5 functions in two multisubunit complexes to acetylate nucleosomal
  histones: characterization of an Ada complex and the SAGA (Spt/Ada) complex.'
authors:
- Grant PA
- Duggan L
- Côté J
- Roberts SM
- Brownell JE
- Candau R
- Ohba R
- Owen-Hughes T
- Allis CD
- Winston F
- Berger SL
- Workman JL
journal: Genes Dev
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1101/gad.11.13.1640
---

# Yeast Gcn5 functions in two multisubunit complexes to acetylate nucleosomal histones: characterization of an Ada complex and the SAGA (Spt/Ada) complex.
**Authors:** Grant PA, Duggan L, Côté J, Roberts SM, Brownell JE, Candau R, Ohba R, Owen-Hughes T, Allis CD, Winston F, Berger SL, Workman JL
**Journal:** Genes Dev (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.11.13.1640](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.11.13.1640)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 1997 Jul 1;11(13):1640-50. doi: 10.1101/gad.11.13.1640.

Yeast Gcn5 functions in two multisubunit complexes to acetylate nucleosomal 
histones: characterization of an Ada complex and the SAGA (Spt/Ada) complex.

Grant PA(1), Duggan L, Côté J, Roberts SM, Brownell JE, Candau R, Ohba R, 
Owen-Hughes T, Allis CD, Winston F, Berger SL, Workman JL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and The Center for Gene 
Regulation, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park 16802-4500, USA.

The transcriptional adaptor protein Gcn5 has been identified as a nuclear 
histone acetyltransferase (HAT). Although recombinant yeast Gcn5 efficiently 
acetylates free histones, it fails to acetylate histones contained in 
nucleosomes, indicating that additional components are required for acetylation 
of chromosomal histones. We report here that Gcn5 functions as a catalytic 
subunit in two high-molecular-mass native HAT complexes, with apparent molecular 
masses of 0.8 and 1.8 megadalton (MD), respectively, which acetylate nucleosomal 
histones. Both the 0.8- and 1.8-MD Gcn5-containing complexes cofractionate with 
Ada2 and are lost in gcn5delta, ada2delta, or ada3delta yeast strains, 
illustrating that these HAT complexes are bona fide native Ada-transcriptional 
adaptor complexes. Importantly, the 1.8-MD adaptor/HAT complex also contains Spt 
gene products that are linked to TATA-binding protein (TBP) function. This 
complex is lost in spt20/ada5delta and spt7delta strains and Spt3, Spt7, 
Spt20/Ada5, Ada2, and Gcn5 all copurify with this nucleosomal HAT complex. 
Therefore, the 1.8-MD adaptor/HAT complex illustrates an interaction between Ada 
and Spt gene products and confirms the existence of a complex containing the TBP 
group of Spt proteins as demonstrated by genetic and biochemical studies. We 
have named this novel transcription regulatory complex SAGA 
(Spt-Ada-Gcn5-Acetyltransferase). The function of Gcn5 as a histone 
acetyltransferase within the Ada and SAGA adaptor complexes indicates the 
importance of histone acetylation during steps in transcription activation 
mediated by interactions with transcription activators and general transcription 
factors (i.e., TBP).

DOI: 10.1101/gad.11.13.1640
PMID: 9224714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
