---
pmid: '11290289'
title: The C. elegans homolog of the murine cystic kidney disease gene Tg737 functions
  in a ciliogenic pathway and is disrupted in osm-5 mutant worms.
authors:
- Haycraft CJ
- Swoboda P
- Taulman PD
- Thomas JH
- Yoder BK
journal: Development
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/dev.128.9.1493
---

# The C. elegans homolog of the murine cystic kidney disease gene Tg737 functions in a ciliogenic pathway and is disrupted in osm-5 mutant worms.
**Authors:** Haycraft CJ, Swoboda P, Taulman PD, Thomas JH, Yoder BK
**Journal:** Development (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.128.9.1493](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.128.9.1493)

## Abstract

1. Development. 2001 May;128(9):1493-505. doi: 10.1242/dev.128.9.1493.

The C. elegans homolog of the murine cystic kidney disease gene Tg737 functions 
in a ciliogenic pathway and is disrupted in osm-5 mutant worms.

Haycraft CJ(1), Swoboda P, Taulman PD, Thomas JH, Yoder BK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham Medical 
Center, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

Cilia and flagella are important organelles involved in diverse functions such 
as fluid and cell movement, sensory perception and embryonic patterning. They 
are devoid of protein synthesis, thus their formation and maintenance requires 
the movement of protein complexes from the cytoplasm into the cilium and 
flagellum axoneme by intraflagellar transport (IFT), a conserved process common 
to all ciliated or flagellated eukaryotic cells. We report that mutations in the 
Caenorhabditis elegans gene Y41g9a.1 are responsible for the ciliary defects in 
osm-5 mutant worms. This was confirmed by transgenic rescue of osm-5(p813) 
mutants using the wild-type Y41g9a.1 gene. osm-5 encodes a tetratricopeptide 
repeat (TPR)-containing protein that is the homolog of murine polaris (Tg737), a 
protein associated with cystic kidney disease and left-right axis patterning 
defects in the mouse. osm-5 is expressed in ciliated sensory neurons in C. 
elegans and its expression is regulated by DAF-19, an RFX-type transcription 
factor that governs the expression of other genes involved in cilia formation in 
the worm. Similar to murine polaris, the OSM-5 protein was found to concentrate 
at the cilium base and within the cilium axoneme as shown by an OSM-5::GFP 
translational fusion and immunofluorescence. Furthermore, time-lapse imaging of 
OSM-5::GFP fusion protein shows fluorescent particle migration within the cilia. 
Overall, the data support a crucial role for osm-5 in a conserved ciliogenic 
pathway, most likely as a component of the IFT process. 
http://www.biologists.com/Development/movies/dev3342.html

DOI: 10.1242/dev.128.9.1493
PMID: 11290289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
