---
pmid: '32601061'
title: Characterization of the nonheme iron center of cysteamine dioxygenase and its
  interaction with substrates.
authors:
- Wang Y
- Davis I
- Chan Y
- Naik SG
- Griffith WP
- Liu A
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2020'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC7450127
doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.013915
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Characterization of the nonheme iron center of cysteamine dioxygenase and its interaction with substrates.
**Authors:** Wang Y, Davis I, Chan Y, Naik SG, Griffith WP, Liu A
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.RA120.013915](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA120.013915)
**PMC:** [PMC7450127](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7450127/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2020 Aug 14;295(33):11789-11802. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.013915. 
Epub 2020 Jun 28.

Characterization of the nonheme iron center of cysteamine dioxygenase and its 
interaction with substrates.

Wang Y(1), Davis I(1)(2), Chan Y(2), Naik SG(1), Griffith WP(1), Liu A(3)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Texas at San Antonio, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of Texas at San Antonio, Texas, USA 
Feradical@utsa.edu.

Cysteamine dioxygenase (ADO) has been reported to exhibit two distinct 
biological functions with a nonheme iron center. It catalyzes oxidation of both 
cysteamine in sulfur metabolism and N-terminal cysteine-containing proteins or 
peptides, such as regulator of G protein signaling 5 (RGS5). It thereby 
preserves oxygen homeostasis in a variety of physiological processes. However, 
little is known about its catalytic center and how it interacts with these two 
types of primary substrates in addition to O2 Here, using electron paramagnetic 
resonance (EPR), Mössbauer, and UV-visible spectroscopies, we explored the 
binding mode of cysteamine and RGS5 to human and mouse ADO proteins in their 
physiologically relevant ferrous form. This characterization revealed that in 
the presence of nitric oxide as a spin probe and oxygen surrogate, both the 
small molecule and the peptide substrates coordinate the iron center with their 
free thiols in a monodentate binding mode, in sharp contrast to binding 
behaviors observed in other thiol dioxygenases. We observed a substrate-bound 
B-type dinitrosyl iron center complex in ADO, suggesting the possibility of 
dioxygen binding to the iron ion in a side-on mode. Moreover, we observed 
substrate-mediated reduction of the iron center from ferric to the ferrous 
oxidation state. Subsequent MS analysis indicated corresponding disulfide 
formation of the substrates, suggesting that the presence of the substrate could 
reactivate ADO to defend against oxidative stress. The findings of this work 
contribute to the understanding of the substrate interaction in ADO and fill a 
gap in our knowledge of the substrate specificity of thiol dioxygenases.

© 2020 Wang et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.013915
PMCID: PMC7450127
PMID: 32601061 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest—The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.

## Full Text

Abstract

Cysteamine dioxygenase (ADO) has been reported to exhibit two distinct biological functions with a nonheme iron center. It catalyzes oxidation of both cysteamine in sulfur metabolism and N-terminal cysteine-containing proteins or peptides, such as regulator of G protein signaling 5 (RGS5). It thereby preserves oxygen homeostasis in a variety of physiological processes. However, little is known about its catalytic center and how it interacts with these two types of primary substrates in addition to O 2 . Here, using electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR), Mössbauer, and UV-visible spectroscopies, we explored the binding mode of cysteamine and RGS5 to human and mouse ADO proteins in their physiologically relevant ferrous form. This characterization revealed that in the presence of nitric oxide as a spin probe and oxygen surrogate, both the small molecule and the peptide substrates coordinate the iron center with their free thiols in a monodentate binding mode, in sharp contrast to binding behaviors observed in other thiol dioxygenases. We observed a substrate-bound B-type dinitrosyl iron center complex in ADO, suggesting the possibility of dioxygen binding to the iron ion in a side-on mode. Moreover, we observed substrate-mediated reduction of the iron center from ferric to the ferrous oxidation state. Subsequent MS analysis indicated corresponding disulfide formation of the substrates, suggesting that the presence of the substrate could reactivate ADO to defend against oxidative stress. The findings of this work contribute to the understanding of the substrate interaction in ADO and fill a gap in our knowledge of the substrate specificity of thiol dioxygenases.

Discussion

Among the thiol dioxygenases, CDO has been unambiguously characterized to bind its substrate with bidentate coordination. Without an ES complex structure, the substrate-binding mode of 3MDO is controversial because of the inconsistency between spectroscopic data and a computational study ( 8 , 38 , 52 ), whereas the substrate binding of ADO and MSDO remains undefined. Studies on 3MDO and MSDO consistently suggest an arginine residue (Arg168 in 3MDO from Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Arg66 in MSDO from Variovorax paradoxus strain B4) plays a crucial role in their catalysis, likely interacting through a highly specific salt bridge to the carboxylate group of substrates, which correlates to the function of Arg60 in human CDO ( 9 , 52 , 53 ). Additionally, SbzM and OvoA are two nonheme iron enzymes related to cysteine oxidation but are not yet classified as thiol dioxygenases because of their atypical reactions and different metal ligands. SbzM catalyzes the two-step oxidation and decarboxylation of cysteine ( 54 ), whereas OvoA promotes either dioxygenation or dimerization of cysteine as modulated by histidine ( 55 ). The substrate binding of neither enzyme has been spectroscopically characterized. As the only thiol substrate without a carboxylate group among these native thiol substrates for this enzyme family ( Fig. 1 A ), lacking the assistance from such an arginine, cysteamine is likely to bind the enzyme in a different manner than the other thiol dioxygenases. Whether cysteamine binds in a bidentate fashion with both amine and thiol coordinated or as a monodentate ligand with either its thiol or amine was an open question before this study. Likewise, substrates of N-terminal cysteine-containing peptides such as RGS5 contain a free thiol and amine as well but lack a carboxylate group ( Fig. 1 B ). Determining the specific binding of these polypeptide substrates in the active site of ADO is of great importance to further understand this biologically significant enzyme.

Incubation with either cysteamine or the N terminus peptide of RGS5 with Fe III -ADO gave rise to respective EPR signals, which suggests the reduction is achieved through direct ligation between substrates and the enzyme. Similar EPR signals have been detected in Fe III -CDO with the incubation of cysteine, but no cysteine-mediated reduction was reported ( 56 ). Because the thiol groups of N-terminal cysteine and free cysteine have similar redox potentials and the iron centers of ADO and CDO have identical coordination (3-His motif), it is interesting that the substrate-mediated reduction was only found in the ADO system. A previous EPR study of CDO pointed out that the amine group of l -cysteine is likely to coordinate to the iron center prior to the thiol, and the thiol coordination is relatively transient in the absence of • NO or O 2 ( 47 ), which is also supported by X-ray absorption and crystallographic data ( 57 , 58 ). A plausible explanation is that the initial coordination of amine causes a strong d -orbital splitting of iron, resulting in a distinct coordination geometry that hinders further reduction by the thiol. This may explain that in the ADO case, thiol monodentate ligation enables a facile reduction of the metal center.

Mössbauer spectra show that ∼75% of the iron center remained as ferrous iron in as-isolated ADO in the concentrated samples. Although two major ferrous species were observed, Fe II A and Fe II B , only Fe II B is directly related to substrate binding and subsequent catalytic activity. However, there is an interconversion between these two species triggered by substrate addition. The mechanism for ADO preserving such an inhomogenous iron center is unclear, but it seems to be a common feature in some nonheme iron dioxygenases besides thiol dioxygenases ( 9 , 31 , 59 , 60 ).

Substrate incubation with oxidized ADO leads to the finding that the active site of ADO could be readily reduced by the substrate thiol group and, hence, reactivate the enzyme if it were to become oxidized. As a result, substrates form disulfide by-products, for example, cysteamine generates cystamine and RGS5 peptide produces either intra- or intermolecular disulfide cross-links. Other peptides whose dioxygenation may be catalyzed by ADO could have different disulfide products based on the location of cysteine, because the formation of a disulfide bond is a nonenzymatic outcome that occurs after the activated thiol is liberated from the active site. Importantly, the substrate-mediated reduction could have a profound impact on oxygen homeostasis. ADO regulates N-terminal cysteine-containing proteins with an extremely high K m for oxygen (>500 μ m ) ( 20 ), which implies that the activity of ADO keeps a linear relationship with the oxygen concentration within the physiological range. The reduction effect of the primary substrates keeps the enzyme ready in an active form to respond as an oxygen sensor, even when facing oxidative stress. Such a substrate-induced reactivation was also reported in a life-essential enzyme, tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase, that generates the tryptophan dimer and mono-oxygenated tryptophan as the by-products ( 61 ). The finding from ADO is another example of how metalloenzymes maintain their catalytic activity to defend against an oxidizing environment, such as that in cancer cells. We have previously shown that when the primary substrate and O 2 are both available, ADO autocatalytically generates a protein-bound Cys-Tyr cofactor by the iron center that functions as a catalytic amplifier to more rapidly reduce the level of the free-thiol-bearing substrate ( 27 ). Thus, the elevated level of the substrate can reactivate ADO and bring its catalysis up to speed to respond to the rise of thiol levels.

EPR results with nitrosyl complexes of ADO have striking differences from other nonheme iron-dependent enzymes that oxidize thiol-containing substrates, including CDO, 3MDO, and IPNS ( Table 2 ). In the absence of substrate cysteine, the CDO-nitrosyl complex exhibited an S = 3/2 and mononitrosyl {Fe(NO)} 7 EPR spectrum with features similar to those of the enzyme-nitrosyl complex of ADO. The substrate bidentate coordination of CDO promotes the generation of a broad S = 1/2, substrate-bound {Fe(NO)} 7 signal. A DNIC was also seen in CDO as a minor species (∼5% of the total iron), which was not a substrate-bound enzyme-nitrosyl complex ( 47 ). In the absence of a substrate, 3MDO was unable to bind • NO, and its substrate coordination mode is unclear. However, the substrate-bound nitrosyl complex gave rise to an S = 3/2, {Fe(NO)} 7 species. This high-spin species showed an EPR spectrum very similar to that of the substrate-free nitrosyl complexes of ADO and CDO, which implies a unique substrate binding mode for 3MDO that differs from both ADO and CDO. IPNS is a well-documented enzyme that catalyzes double-ring closure of a tripeptide substrate that monodentate binds to the iron center via a thiol group ( 62 ). Its nitrosyl complex in the absence of the substrate was reported to have EPR features similar to those of ADO and most nonheme iron-dependent proteins ( 39 ). In contrast to the low-spin ( S = 1/2), {Fe(NO) 2 } 9 species of ADO, the ES-nitrosyl complex of IPNS became more rhombic than substrate-free nitrosyl complex but remained as a high-spin ( S = 3/2), {Fe(NO)} 7 species. This difference may be because of a different set of first-sphere metal ligand (2-His-2-carboxylate motif in IPNS). In general, ADO exhibits a distinct DNIC among these thiol-oxidizing enzymes.

The unique phenomenon of DNIC in ADO involves the binding of its primary substrate, either cysteamine or N -cysteine-containing peptide. DNIC could be generated by mononuclear iron or the [2Fe-2S] or [4Fe-4S] cluster, whereas the mononuclear DNIC is generally more important in terms of biological events ( 63 ). As summarized in Table S1 , the EPR spectra of DNICs reported in the literature can be classified into A-type and B-type based on anisotropy of resonance, as first proposed by Chasteen and coworkers ( 42 ). The DNIC observed in ADO is a B-type mononuclear DNIC with thiol-containing ligands that is commonly described by the formula {Fe(NO) 2 } 9 , with two proposed models as [Fe 3+ (NO − ) 2 ] and [Fe + (NO) 2 ] ( 64 ). The former contains a high-spin ( S = 5/2) d 5 -configuration of the iron atom and two nitroxyl ligands each at triplet state ( S = 1), whereas the latter is a high-spin ( S = 3/2) d 7 -configuration of the iron atom bound to two neutral nitric oxide molecules ( S = 1/2). An alternative model for DNIC is [Fe + (NO + ) 2 ] with the formula {Fe(NO) 2 } 7 , which involves the transfer of electron density from sulfur atoms to iron and nitrosonium ligands ( 64 ). The third model is feasible where a soluble thiol-bound DNIC is concerned, especially if the DNIC could act as a • NO donor and trigger the S-nitrosation of the thiol. Further investigation is required to identify the model that best represents the structure and character of the DNIC present in ADO.

Presumably, the ES-nitrosyl complex mimics the ternary structure related to the catalytic reaction. The observation of a DNIC in ADO in the presence of primary substrate leads to the interpretation that both oxygen atoms of molecular oxygen could spontaneously bind to the iron center, forming an octahedral ternary complex after monodentate thiolate ligation. If so, our findings here add a new, side-on oxygen binding model to the thiol dioxygenase family, because previously binding modes were exclusively proposed as end-on ( 5 , 8 , 28 , 54 , 58 , 65 ). A new oxygen binding mode potentially represents a new oxygen activation mechanism during thiol oxidation and Cys-Tyr cross-link biogenesis in thiol dioxygenases. Our finding that cysteamine and N -cysteine peptide bind ADO through the thiol group in a monodentate fashion also supports the idea that the amine group does not participate in either catalysis or cofactor biogenesis. Moreover, a previous study showed that • NO affects the N-terminal cysteine oxidation and the stability of RGS proteins ( 66 ), a process that is regulated by ADO ( 20 ). The ADO-nitrosyl complexes presented here may provide a direction for investigating how the N -degron pathway acts as an • NO sensor. Hence, even if the ES-nitrosyl complex is not directly relevant to the catalytic mechanism, the DNIC formation in ADO certainly opens a new avenue for correlating ADO with • NO-related physiological study.
