---
pmid: '20427278'
title: The novel membrane protein TMEM59 modulates complex glycosylation, cell surface
  expression, and secretion of the amyloid precursor protein.
authors:
- Ullrich S
- Münch A
- Neumann S
- Kremmer E
- Tatzelt J
- Lichtenthaler SF
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2898310
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.055608
---

# The novel membrane protein TMEM59 modulates complex glycosylation, cell surface expression, and secretion of the amyloid precursor protein.
**Authors:** Ullrich S, Münch A, Neumann S, Kremmer E, Tatzelt J, Lichtenthaler SF
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M109.055608](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.055608)
**PMC:** [PMC2898310](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2898310/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jul 2;285(27):20664-74. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.055608. Epub 
2010 Apr 28.

The novel membrane protein TMEM59 modulates complex glycosylation, cell surface 
expression, and secretion of the amyloid precursor protein.

Ullrich S(1), Münch A, Neumann S, Kremmer E, Tatzelt J, Lichtenthaler SF.

Author information:
(1)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases Munich (DZNE) and Adolf 
Butenandt-Institute, Biochemistry, Ludwig-Maximilians University Munich, 80336 
Munich, Germany.

Ectodomain shedding of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) by the two proteases 
alpha- and beta-secretase is a key regulatory event in the generation of the 
Alzheimer disease amyloid beta peptide (Abeta). At present, little is known 
about the cellular mechanisms that control APP shedding and Abeta generation. 
Here, we identified a novel protein, transmembrane protein 59 (TMEM59), as a new 
modulator of APP shedding. TMEM59 was found to be a ubiquitously expressed, 
Golgi-localized protein. TMEM59 transfection inhibited complex N- and 
O-glycosylation of APP in cultured cells. Additionally, TMEM59 induced APP 
retention in the Golgi and inhibited Abeta generation as well as APP cleavage by 
alpha- and beta-secretase cleavage, which occur at the plasma membrane and in 
the endosomes, respectively. Moreover, TMEM59 inhibited the complex 
N-glycosylation of the prion protein, suggesting a more general modulation of 
Golgi glycosylation reactions. Importantly, TMEM59 did not affect the secretion 
of soluble proteins or the alpha-secretase like shedding of tumor necrosis 
factor alpha, demonstrating that TMEM59 did not disturb the general Golgi 
function. The phenotype of TMEM59 transfection on APP glycosylation and shedding 
was similar to the one observed in cells lacking conserved oligomeric Golgi 
(COG) proteins COG1 and COG2. Both proteins are required for normal localization 
and activity of Golgi glycosylation enzymes. In summary, this study shows that 
TMEM59 expression modulates complex N- and O-glycosylation and suggests that 
TMEM59 affects APP shedding by reducing access of APP to the cellular 
compartments, where it is normally cleaved by alpha- and beta-secretase.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.055608
PMCID: PMC2898310
PMID: 20427278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
