---
pmid: '8617933'
title: Cross-linking of the CD40 ligand on human CD4+ T lymphocytes generates a costimulatory
  signal that up-regulates IL-4 synthesis.
authors:
- Blotta MH
- Marshall JD
- DeKruyff RH
- Umetsu DT
journal: J Immunol
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
---

# Cross-linking of the CD40 ligand on human CD4+ T lymphocytes generates a costimulatory signal that up-regulates IL-4 synthesis.
**Authors:** Blotta MH, Marshall JD, DeKruyff RH, Umetsu DT
**Journal:** J Immunol (1996)

## Abstract

1. J Immunol. 1996 May 1;156(9):3133-40.

Cross-linking of the CD40 ligand on human CD4+ T lymphocytes generates a 
costimulatory signal that up-regulates IL-4 synthesis.

Blotta MH(1), Marshall JD, DeKruyff RH, Umetsu DT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University, CA 94305, USA.

Although there is good evidence that the induction of IL-4 synthesis in CD4+ T 
lymphocytes is favored by Ag presentation by B cells and not macrophages, the 
precise molecular signals provided by B cells to T cells that enhance IL-4 
synthesis are not clear. To examine this issue, we established an 
APC-independent system to activate highly purified T cells and induce cytokine 
synthesis, using immobilized mAbs against several T cell surface molecules, 
including CD3, CD28, and the CD40 ligand (CD40L). The counter-receptors for all 
three of these molecules are expressed on B cells, and include CD40, which is 
expressed primarily on B cells, but also on dendritic cells and thymic 
epithelium. We found that IL-4 synthesis was greatly enhanced by triggering of 
CD40L on the T cell surface in conjunction with ligation of CD3/TCR and CD28, 
whereas ligation of CD3/TCR and CD28 in the absence of CD40L triggering resulted 
in little or no IL-4 synthesis. CD40L costimulation greatly enhanced IL-4 
synthesis both in T cells from normal nonallergic adult subjects as well as in 
naive T cells from cord blood. Furthermore, we demonstrated that IL-4 synthesis 
was optimally enhanced when the strength of the CD3/TCR signal was limiting, 
while IL-4 synthesis was inhibited when CD3/TCR stimulation was maximal. These 
studies confirm that IL-4 synthesis can be induced in normal T lymphocytes in 
the absence of exogenous IL-4, and demonstrate that CD40L costimulation is of 
fundamental importance in regulation of IL-4 production. In addition, these 
findings provide a mechanism by which B cells preferentially enhance IL-4 
synthesis in T cells at low Ag concentrations.

PMID: 8617933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
