---
pmid: '2157630'
title: Novel use of a chimpanzee pseudogene for chromosomal mapping of human cytochrome
  c oxidase subunit IV.
authors:
- Lomax MI
- Welch MD
- Darras BT
- Francke U
- Grossman LI
journal: Gene
year: '1990'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0378-1119(90)90281-u
---

# Novel use of a chimpanzee pseudogene for chromosomal mapping of human cytochrome c oxidase subunit IV.
**Authors:** Lomax MI, Welch MD, Darras BT, Francke U, Grossman LI
**Journal:** Gene (1990)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0378-1119(90)90281-u](https://doi.org/10.1016/0378-1119(90)90281-u)

## Abstract

1. Gene. 1990 Feb 14;86(2):209-16. doi: 10.1016/0378-1119(90)90281-u.

Novel use of a chimpanzee pseudogene for chromosomal mapping of human cytochrome 
c oxidase subunit IV.

Lomax MI(1), Welch MD, Darras BT, Francke U, Grossman LI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical 
School, Ann Arbor 48109.

We have isolated a chimpanzee processed pseudogene for subunit IV of cytochrome 
c oxidase (COX; EC 1.9.3.1) by screening a chimpanzee genomic library in lambda 
Charon 32 with a bovine liver cDNA encoding COX subunit IV (COX IV), and 
localized it to a 1.9-kb HindIII fragment. Southern-blot analysis of genomic DNA 
from five primates showed that DNAs from human, gorilla, and chimpanzee each 
contained the 1.9-kb pseudogene fragment, whereas orangutan and pigtail macaque 
monkey DNA did not. This result clearly indicates that the pseudogene arose 
before the divergence of the chimpanzee and gorilla from the primate lineage. By 
screening Chinese hamster x human hybrid panels with the human COX4 cDNA, we 
have mapped COX4 genes to two human chromosomes, 14 and 16. The 1.9-kb HindIII 
fragment containing the pseudogene, COX4P1, can be assigned to chromosome 14, 
and by means of rearranged chromosomes in somatic cell hybrids, to 14q21-qter. 
Similarly, the functional gene, COX4, has been mapped to 16q22-qter.

DOI: 10.1016/0378-1119(90)90281-u
PMID: 2157630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
