---
pmid: '15485837'
title: 'NAK is recruited to the TNFR1 complex in a TNFalpha-dependent manner and mediates
  the production of RANTES: identification of endogenous TNFR-interacting proteins
  by a proteomic approach.'
authors:
- Kuai J
- Wooters J
- Hall JP
- Rao VR
- Nickbarg E
- Li B
- Chatterjee-Kishore M
- Qiu Y
- Lin LL
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M411037200
---

# NAK is recruited to the TNFR1 complex in a TNFalpha-dependent manner and mediates the production of RANTES: identification of endogenous TNFR-interacting proteins by a proteomic approach.
**Authors:** Kuai J, Wooters J, Hall JP, Rao VR, Nickbarg E, Li B, Chatterjee-Kishore M, Qiu Y, Lin LL
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M411037200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M411037200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Dec 17;279(51):53266-71. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M411037200. Epub 
2004 Oct 13.

NAK is recruited to the TNFR1 complex in a TNFalpha-dependent manner and 
mediates the production of RANTES: identification of endogenous TNFR-interacting 
proteins by a proteomic approach.

Kuai J(1), Wooters J, Hall JP, Rao VR, Nickbarg E, Li B, Chatterjee-Kishore M, 
Qiu Y, Lin LL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Inflammation, Wyeth Research, 200 Cambridge Park Dr., 
Cambridge, MA 02140, USA.

Tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) is a proinflammatory cytokine with 
pleiotropic immunological and biological activities. TNFalpha signaling is 
triggered by the engagement of soluble TNFalpha to two types of cell surface 
receptors, TNFR1 and TNFR2. This recruits cytosolic proteins to the 
intracellular domains of the receptors and initiates signaling to downstream 
effectors. In this study, we used a proteomic approach to identify these 
cytosolic proteins from affinity-purified, endogenous TNFalpha.TNFR complexes in 
human myelomonocytic U937 cells. Seven proteins were identified, including 
TRADD, TRAP2, and TRAF2, which are three proteins known to be recruited to 
TNFalpha receptors. NAK, RasGAP3, TRCP1, and TRCP2 were also identified. We 
further showed that NAK is recruited to TNFR1 in a temporally regulated and 
TNFalpha-dependent manner and that it mediates the TNFalpha-induced production 
of the chemokine RANTES (regulated on activation normal T cell expressed and 
secreted). These data demonstrate that NAK is a component of the TNFalpha.TNFR1 
signaling complex and confirm the physiological role of NAK in the 
TNFalpha-mediated response.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M411037200
PMID: 15485837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
