---
pmid: '23856522'
title: Jmjd3 controls mesodermal and cardiovascular differentiation of embryonic stem
  cells.
authors:
- Ohtani K
- Zhao C
- Dobreva G
- Manavski Y
- Kluge B
- Braun T
- Rieger MA
- Zeiher AM
- Dimmeler S
journal: Circ Res
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.113.302035
---

# Jmjd3 controls mesodermal and cardiovascular differentiation of embryonic stem cells.
**Authors:** Ohtani K, Zhao C, Dobreva G, Manavski Y, Kluge B, Braun T, Rieger MA, Zeiher AM, Dimmeler S
**Journal:** Circ Res (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.113.302035](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.113.302035)

## Abstract

1. Circ Res. 2013 Sep 13;113(7):856-62. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.113.302035. Epub 
2013 Jul 15.

Jmjd3 controls mesodermal and cardiovascular differentiation of embryonic stem 
cells.

Ohtani K(1), Zhao C, Dobreva G, Manavski Y, Kluge B, Braun T, Rieger MA, Zeiher 
AM, Dimmeler S.

Author information:
(1)From the Institute of Cardiovascular Regeneration, Centre for Molecular 
Medicine, University of Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2013 Sep 13;113(7):837-9. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.113.302202.

RATIONALE: The developmental role of the H3K27 demethylases Jmjd3, especially 
its epigenetic regulation at target genes in response to upstream developmental 
signaling, is unclear.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the role of Jmjd3 during mesoderm and cardiovascular 
lineage commitment.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Ablation of Jmjd3 in mouse embryonic stem cells does not 
affect the maintenance of pluripotency and self-renewal but compromised mesoderm 
and subsequent endothelial and cardiac differentiation. Jmjd3 reduces H3K27me3 
marks at the Brachyury promoter and facilitates the recruitment of β-catenin, 
which is critical for Wnt signal-induced mesoderm differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate that Jmjd3 is required for mesoderm 
differentiation and cardiovascular lineage commitment.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.113.302035
PMID: 23856522 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
