---
pmid: '11751414'
title: Suppression of membrane-type 1 matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-mediated MMP-2
  activation and tumor invasion by testican 3 and its splicing variant gene product,
  N-Tes.
authors:
- Nakada M
- Yamada A
- Takino T
- Miyamori H
- Takahashi T
- Yamashita J
- Sato H
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
---

# Suppression of membrane-type 1 matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-mediated MMP-2 activation and tumor invasion by testican 3 and its splicing variant gene product, N-Tes.
**Authors:** Nakada M, Yamada A, Takino T, Miyamori H, Takahashi T, Yamashita J, Sato H
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2001)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Res. 2001 Dec 15;61(24):8896-902.

Suppression of membrane-type 1 matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-mediated MMP-2 
activation and tumor invasion by testican 3 and its splicing variant gene 
product, N-Tes.

Nakada M(1), Yamada A, Takino T, Miyamori H, Takahashi T, Yamashita J, Sato H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medical 
Science, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa 920-0934, Japan.

Using expression cloning to screen a human fetal kidney cDNA library for 
regulator(s) of pro-matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 processing mediated by 
membrane-type (MT) 1 MMP, we isolated a cDNA whose product interfered with 
pro-MMP-2 activation. It encodes the NH(2)-terminal 313-amino acid region of a 
calcium-binding proteoglycan, testican 3, with a 3-amino acid substitution at 
the COOH terminus and thus was named N-Tes. N-Tes comprises a signal peptide, a 
unique domain, a follistatin-like domain, and a Ca(2+)-binding domain but lacks 
a COOH-terminal thyroglobulin domain and two putative glycosaminoglycan 
attachment sites of testican 3. Pro-MMP-2 activation by MT3-MMP was also 
inhibited by the coexpression of N-Tes. Immunoprecipitation analysis 
demonstrated direct interaction of N-Tes with either MT1-MMP or MT3-MMP. 
Expression of testican 1 or testican 3 but not testican 2 also inhibited 
pro-MMP-2 activation by either MT1-MMP or MT3-MMP. Deletion and substitution of 
amino acids residues in N-Tes revealed that the unique NH(2)-terminal domain of 
N-Tes is responsible for the inhibition of pro-MMP-2 activation by MT-MMPs. 
Expression of N-Tes and testican 3 was detected in normal brain but 
down-regulated in glioma tissues. Transfection of either the N-Tes or testican 3 
gene into U251 glioma cells or Madin-Darby canine kidney cells transformed by 
erbB2 suppressed their invasive growth in collagen gel. These results suggest 
that both N-Tes and testican 3 would interfere with tumor invasion by inhibiting 
MT-MMPs.

PMID: 11751414 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
