---
pmid: '27899487'
title: Glomerular Endothelial Mitochondrial Dysfunction Is Essential and Characteristic
  of Diabetic Kidney Disease Susceptibility.
authors:
- Qi H
- Casalena G
- Shi S
- Yu L
- Ebefors K
- Sun Y
- Zhang W
- D'Agati V
- Schlondorff D
- Haraldsson B
- Böttinger E
- Daehn I
journal: Diabetes
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5319717
doi: 10.2337/db16-0695
---

# Glomerular Endothelial Mitochondrial Dysfunction Is Essential and Characteristic of Diabetic Kidney Disease Susceptibility.
**Authors:** Qi H, Casalena G, Shi S, Yu L, Ebefors K, Sun Y, Zhang W, D'Agati V, Schlondorff D, Haraldsson B, Böttinger E, Daehn I
**Journal:** Diabetes (2017)
**DOI:** [10.2337/db16-0695](https://doi.org/10.2337/db16-0695)
**PMC:** [PMC5319717](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5319717/)

## Abstract

1. Diabetes. 2017 Mar;66(3):763-778. doi: 10.2337/db16-0695. Epub 2016 Nov 29.

Glomerular Endothelial Mitochondrial Dysfunction Is Essential and Characteristic 
of Diabetic Kidney Disease Susceptibility.

Qi H(1), Casalena G(1), Shi S(1), Yu L(1), Ebefors K(2), Sun Y(1), Zhang W(1), 
D'Agati V(3), Schlondorff D(1), Haraldsson B(2), Böttinger E(1)(4), Daehn 
I(5)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY.
(2)Department of Molecular and Clinical Medicine/Nephrology, Institute of 
Medicine, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(3)Department of Pathology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University, New York, NY.
(4)The Charles Bronfman Institute for Personalized Medicine, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY.
(5)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY ilse.daehn@mssm.edu.

The molecular signaling mechanisms between glomerular cell types during 
initiation/progression of diabetic kidney disease (DKD) remain poorly 
understood. We compared the early transcriptome profile between DKD-resistant 
C57BL/6J and DKD-susceptible DBA/2J (D2) glomeruli and demonstrated a 
significant downregulation of essential mitochondrial genes in glomeruli from 
diabetic D2 mice, but not in C57BL/6J, with comparable hyperglycemia. Diabetic 
D2 mice manifested increased mitochondrial DNA lesions (8-oxoguanine) 
exclusively localized to glomerular endothelial cells after 3 weeks of diabetes, 
and these accumulated over time in addition to increased urine secretion of 
8-oxo-deoxyguanosine. Detailed assessment of glomerular capillaries from 
diabetic D2 mice demonstrated early signs of endothelial injury and loss of 
fenestrae. Glomerular endothelial mitochondrial dysfunction was associated with 
increased glomerular endothelin-1 receptor type A (Ednra) expression and 
increased circulating endothelin-1 (Edn1). Selective Ednra blockade or 
mitochondrial-targeted reactive oxygen species scavenging prevented 
mitochondrial oxidative stress of endothelial cells and ameliorated 
diabetes-induced endothelial injury, podocyte loss, albuminuria, and 
glomerulosclerosis. In human DKD, increased urine 8-oxo-deoxyguanosine was 
associated with rapid DKD progression, and biopsies from patients with DKD 
showed increased mitochondrial DNA damage associated with glomerular endothelial 
EDNRA expression. Our studies show that DKD susceptibility was linked to 
mitochondrial dysfunction, mediated largely by Edn1-Ednra in glomerular 
endothelial cells representing an early event in DKD progression, and suggest 
that cross talk between glomerular endothelial injury and podocytes leads to 
defects and depletion, albuminuria, and glomerulosclerosis.

© 2017 by the American Diabetes Association.

DOI: 10.2337/db16-0695
PMCID: PMC5319717
PMID: 27899487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
