---
pmid: '18723220'
title: Measuring and modelling mixture toxicity of imidacloprid and thiacloprid on
  Caenorhabditis elegans and Eisenia fetida.
authors:
- Gomez-Eyles JL
- Svendsen C
- Lister L
- Martin H
- Hodson ME
- Spurgeon DJ
journal: Ecotoxicol Environ Saf
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2008.07.006
---

# Measuring and modelling mixture toxicity of imidacloprid and thiacloprid on Caenorhabditis elegans and Eisenia fetida.
**Authors:** Gomez-Eyles JL, Svendsen C, Lister L, Martin H, Hodson ME, Spurgeon DJ
**Journal:** Ecotoxicol Environ Saf (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ecoenv.2008.07.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2008.07.006)

## Abstract

1. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 2009 Jan;72(1):71-79. doi:
10.1016/j.ecoenv.2008.07.006.  Epub 2008 Aug 23.

Measuring and modelling mixture toxicity of imidacloprid and thiacloprid on 
Caenorhabditis elegans and Eisenia fetida.

Gomez-Eyles JL(1), Svendsen C(2), Lister L(3), Martin H(4), Hodson ME(1), 
Spurgeon DJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Soil Science, School of Human and Environmental Sciences, 
University of Reading, Reading RG6 6DW, Berkshire, UK.
(2)Centre for Ecology and Hydrology, Monks Wood, Abbots Ripton, Huntingdon PE28 
2LS, Cambridgeshire, UK. Electronic address: csv@ceh.ac.uk.
(3)Centre for Ecology and Hydrology, Monks Wood, Abbots Ripton, Huntingdon PE28 
2LS, Cambridgeshire, UK.
(4)School of Biosciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK.

While the standard models of concentration addition and independent action 
predict overall toxicity of multicomponent mixtures reasonably, interactions may 
limit the predictive capability when a few compounds dominate a mixture. This 
study was conducted to test if statistically significant systematic deviations 
from concentration addition (i.e. synergism/antagonism, dose ratio- or dose 
level-dependency) occur when two taxonomically unrelated species, the earthworm 
Eisenia fetida and the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans were exposed to a full 
range of mixtures of the similar acting neonicotinoid pesticides imidacloprid 
and thiacloprid. The effect of the mixtures on C. elegans was described 
significantly better (p<0.01) by a dose level-dependent deviation from the 
concentration addition model than by the reference model alone, while the 
reference model description of the effects on E. fetida could not be 
significantly improved. These results highlight that deviations from 
concentration addition are possible even with similar acting compounds, but that 
the nature of such deviations are species dependent. For improving ecological 
risk assessment of simple mixtures, this implies that the concentration addition 
model may need to be used in a probabilistic context, rather than in its 
traditional deterministic manner.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2008.07.006
PMID: 18723220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
