---
pmid: '15890657'
title: Characterization of four variant forms of human propionyl-CoA carboxylase expressed
  in Escherichia coli.
authors:
- Jiang H
- Rao KS
- Yee VC
- Kraus JP
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M413281200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Characterization of four variant forms of human propionyl-CoA carboxylase expressed in Escherichia coli.
**Authors:** Jiang H, Rao KS, Yee VC, Kraus JP
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M413281200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M413281200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jul 29;280(30):27719-27. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M413281200. Epub 
2005 May 12.

Characterization of four variant forms of human propionyl-CoA carboxylase 
expressed in Escherichia coli.

Jiang H(1), Rao KS, Yee VC, Kraus JP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, 
Colorado 80045, USA.

Propionyl-CoA carboxylase (PCC) is a biotin-dependent mitochondrial enzyme that 
catalyzes the conversion of propionyl-CoA to D-methylmalonyl-CoA. PCC consists 
of two heterologous subunits, alpha PCC and beta PCC, which are encoded by the 
nuclear PCCA and PCCB genes, respectively. Deficiency of PCC results in a 
metabolic disorder, propionic acidemia, which is sufficiently severe to cause 
neonatal death. We have purified three PCCs containing pathogenic mutations in 
the beta subunit (R165W, E168K, and R410W) and one PCCB polymorphism (A497V) to 
homogeneity to elucidate the potential structural and functional effects of 
these substitutions. We observed no significant difference in Km values for 
propionyl-CoA between wild-type and the variant enzymes, which indicated that 
these substitutions had no effect on the affinity of the enzyme for this 
substrate. Furthermore, the kinetic studies indicated that mutation R410W was 
not involved in propionyl-CoA binding in contrast to a previous report. The 
three mutant PCCs had half the catalytic efficiency of wild-type PCC as judged 
by the kcat/Km ratios. No significant differences have been observed in 
molecular mass or secondary structure among these enzymes. However, the variant 
PCCs were less thermostable than the wild-type. Following incubation at 47 
degrees C, blue native-PAGE revealed a lower oligomeric form (alpha2beta2) in 
the three mutants not detectable in wild-type and the polymorphism. 
Interestingly, the lower oligomeric form was also observed in the corresponding 
crude Escherichia coli extracts. Our biochemical data and the structural 
analysis using a beta PCC homology model indicate that the pathogenic nature of 
these mutations is more likely to be due to a lack of assembly rather than 
disruption of catalysis. The strong favorable effect of the co-expressed 
chaperone proteins on PCC folding, assembly, and activity suggest that propionic 
acidemia may be amenable to chaperone therapy.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M413281200
PMID: 15890657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
