---
pmid: '16272158'
title: Binding of PAI-1 to endothelial cells stimulated by thymosin beta4 and modulation
  of their fibrinolytic potential.
authors:
- Boncela J
- Smolarczyk K
- Wyroba E
- Cierniewski CS
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M506303200
---

# Binding of PAI-1 to endothelial cells stimulated by thymosin beta4 and modulation of their fibrinolytic potential.
**Authors:** Boncela J, Smolarczyk K, Wyroba E, Cierniewski CS
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M506303200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M506303200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jan 13;281(2):1066-72. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M506303200. Epub
2005  Nov 4.

Binding of PAI-1 to endothelial cells stimulated by thymosin beta4 and 
modulation of their fibrinolytic potential.

Boncela J(1), Smolarczyk K, Wyroba E, Cierniewski CS.

Author information:
(1)Center of Medical Biology, Polish Academy of Sciences, Lodz.

Our previous studies showed that thymosin beta4 (Tbeta4) induced the synthesis 
of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) in cultured human umbilical vein 
endothelial cells (HUVECs) via the AP-1 dependent mechanism and its enhanced 
secretion. In this work we provide evidence that the released PAI-1 is 
accumulated on the surface of HUVECs, exclusively in its active form, in a 
complex with alpha1-acid glycoprotein (AGP) that is also up-regulated and 
released from the cells. This mechanism is supported by several lines of 
experiments, in which expression of both proteins was analyzed by flow cytometry 
and their colocalization supported by confocal microscopy. PAI-1 did not bind to 
quiescent cells but only to the Tbeta4-activated endothelial cells. In contrast, 
significant amounts of AGP were found to be associated with the cells 
overexpressing enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP)-alpha1-acid 
glycoprotein (AGP) without Tbeta4 treatment. The AGP.PAI-1 complex was 
accumulated essentially at the basal surface of endothelial cells, and such 
cells showed (a) morphology characteristic for strongly adhered and spread cells 
and (b) significantly reduced plasmin formation. Taken together, these results 
provide the evidence supporting a novel mechanism by which active PAI-1 can be 
bound to the Tbeta4-activated endothelial cells, thus influencing their adhesive 
properties as well as their ability to generate plasmin.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M506303200
PMID: 16272158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
