---
pmid: '9866716'
title: 'The yeast mitochondrial intermembrane space: purification and analysis of
  two distinct fractions.'
authors:
- Martin H
- Eckerskorn C
- Gärtner F
- Rassow J
- Lottspeich F
- Pfanner N
journal: Anal Biochem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/abio.1998.2863
---

# The yeast mitochondrial intermembrane space: purification and analysis of two distinct fractions.
**Authors:** Martin H, Eckerskorn C, Gärtner F, Rassow J, Lottspeich F, Pfanner N
**Journal:** Anal Biochem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1006/abio.1998.2863](https://doi.org/10.1006/abio.1998.2863)

## Abstract

1. Anal Biochem. 1998 Dec 1;265(1):123-8. doi: 10.1006/abio.1998.2863.

The yeast mitochondrial intermembrane space: purification and analysis of two 
distinct fractions.

Martin H(1), Eckerskorn C, Gärtner F, Rassow J, Lottspeich F, Pfanner N.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Biochemie und Molekularbiologie, Universität Freiburg, Germany.

We have developed a protocol for the sequential release of the intermembrane 
space (IMS) content of Saccharomyces cerevisiae mitochondria. Two distinct 
fractions were obtained: a soluble IMS with cytochrome b2 as key marker and a 
salt-extractable IMS with cytochrome c as key marker. The identity of several 
proteins was determined by amino-terminal amino acid sequencing. The IMS 
fractions were devoid of contaminations from cytosol and mitochondrial outer and 
inner membranes. By subtraction analysis, the protein profiles of soluble and 
salt-extractable IMS fractions were depleted of contaminating bands derived from 
matrix proteins. The fractionation method will provide the basis for the further 
analysis of IMS proteins and characterization of their functions in 
bioenergetics, mitochondrial biogenesis, and regulatory processes.

DOI: 10.1006/abio.1998.2863
PMID: 9866716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
