---
pmid: '29423001'
title: Hypoxia increases amyloid-β level in exosomes by enhancing the interaction
  between CD147 and Hook1.
authors:
- Xie JC
- Ma XY
- Liu XH
- Yu J
- Zhao YC
- Tan Y
- Liu XY
- Zhao YX
journal: Am J Transl Res
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5801354
---

# Hypoxia increases amyloid-β level in exosomes by enhancing the interaction between CD147 and Hook1.
**Authors:** Xie JC, Ma XY, Liu XH, Yu J, Zhao YC, Tan Y, Liu XY, Zhao YX
**Journal:** Am J Transl Res (2018)
**PMC:** [PMC5801354](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5801354/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Transl Res. 2018 Jan 15;10(1):150-163. eCollection 2018.

Hypoxia increases amyloid-β level in exosomes by enhancing the interaction 
between CD147 and Hook1.

Xie JC(1), Ma XY(1), Liu XH(1), Yu J(1), Zhao YC(1), Tan Y(1), Liu XY(1), Zhao 
YX(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji University 
School of MedicineShanghai 200072, China.

Hypoxia promotes the accumulation of amyloid-β (Aβ), which is related to the 
pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). CD147 is considered as an additional 
subunit of γ-secretase regulated by hypoxia, and has been identified in 
exosomes. Aβ is also found in exosomes that participate in the intercellular 
communication and amyloids propagation. This study was to investigate the role 
of CD147 in hypoxia-induced accumulation of Aβ in exosomes. Our results showed 
that hypoxia increased the levels of Aβ40 and Aβ42 in exosomes and enhanced the 
interaction between CD147 and Hook1 in SH-SY5YAPP695 cells. Moreover, hypoxia 
increased the interaction between amyloid precursor protein (APP) and CD147 as 
well as the expression of CD147 in isolated membrane. After we interfered the 
interaction between CD147 and Hook1 by decreasing Rab22a expression, the hypoxia 
induced Aβ accumulation in exosomes was significantly suppressed. In addition, 
the increased interaction between CD147 and Hook1 was further confirmed in 
hypoxia exposed C57BL/6 mice. Our findings reveal that hypoxia may increase 
exosome Aβ level by enhancing the interaction between CD147 and Hook1.

PMCID: PMC5801354
PMID: 29423001

Conflict of interest statement: None.
