---
pmid: '22036843'
title: A catalytic defect in mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I due to a mutation
  in NDUFS2 in a patient with Leigh syndrome.
authors:
- Ngu LH
- Nijtmans LG
- Distelmaier F
- Venselaar H
- van Emst-de Vries SE
- van den Brand MA
- Stoltenborg BJ
- Wintjes LT
- Willems PH
- van den Heuvel LP
- Smeitink JA
- Rodenburg RJ
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2011.10.012
---

# A catalytic defect in mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I due to a mutation in NDUFS2 in a patient with Leigh syndrome.
**Authors:** Ngu LH, Nijtmans LG, Distelmaier F, Venselaar H, van Emst-de Vries SE, van den Brand MA, Stoltenborg BJ, Wintjes LT, Willems PH, van den Heuvel LP, Smeitink JA, Rodenburg RJ
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbadis.2011.10.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbadis.2011.10.012)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Feb;1822(2):168-75. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbadis.2011.10.012. Epub 2011 Oct 20.

A catalytic defect in mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I due to a 
mutation in NDUFS2 in a patient with Leigh syndrome.

Ngu LH(1), Nijtmans LG, Distelmaier F, Venselaar H, van Emst-de Vries SE, van 
den Brand MA, Stoltenborg BJ, Wintjes LT, Willems PH, van den Heuvel LP, 
Smeitink JA, Rodenburg RJ.

Author information:
(1)Nijmegen Center for Mitochondrial Disorders, Department of Pediatrics, 
Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

In this study, we investigated the pathogenicity of a homozygous Asp446Asn 
mutation in the NDUFS2 gene of a patient with a mitochondrial respiratory chain 
complex I deficiency. The clinical, biochemical, and genetic features of the 
NDUFS2 patient were compared with those of 4 patients with previously identified 
NDUFS2 mutations. All 5 patients presented with Leigh syndrome. In addition, 3 
out of 5 showed hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Complex I amounts in the patient 
carrying the Asp446Asn mutation were normal, while the complex I activity was 
strongly reduced, showing that the NDUFS2 mutation affects complex I enzymatic 
function. By contrast, the 4 other NDUFS2 patients showed both a reduced amount 
and activity of complex I. The enzymatic defect in fibroblasts of the patient 
carrying the Asp446Asn mutation was rescued by transduction of wild type NDUFS2. 
A 3-D model of the catalytic core of complex I showed that the mutated amino 
acid residue resides near the coenzyme Q binding pocket. However, the K(M) of 
complex I for coenzyme Q analogs of the Asp446Asn mutated complex I was similar 
to the K(M) observed in other complex I defects and in controls. We propose that 
the mutation interferes with the reduction of coenzyme Q or with the coupling of 
coenzyme Q reduction with the conformational changes involved in proton pumping 
of complex I.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2011.10.012
PMID: 22036843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
