---
pmid: '14665621'
title: Roles of Gab1 and SHP2 in paxillin tyrosine dephosphorylation and Src activation
  in response to epidermal growth factor.
authors:
- Ren Y
- Meng S
- Mei L
- Zhao ZJ
- Jove R
- Wu J
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M312575200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Roles of Gab1 and SHP2 in paxillin tyrosine dephosphorylation and Src activation in response to epidermal growth factor.
**Authors:** Ren Y, Meng S, Mei L, Zhao ZJ, Jove R, Wu J
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M312575200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M312575200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 27;279(9):8497-505. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M312575200. Epub
2003  Dec 8.

Roles of Gab1 and SHP2 in paxillin tyrosine dephosphorylation and Src activation 
in response to epidermal growth factor.

Ren Y(1), Meng S, Mei L, Zhao ZJ, Jove R, Wu J.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Oncology Program, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research 
Institute, Tampa, Florida 33612, USA.

Epidermal growth factor (EGF) induces paxillin tyrosine dephosphorylation and 
Src activation, but the signaling pathways that mediate these responses were 
largely undefined. We found that Gab1, a docking protein for the SHP2 
protein-tyrosine phosphatase in EGF-stimulated cells, was associated with 
paxillin. SHP2 dephosphorylated paxillin and caused dissociation of Csk, a 
negative regulator of Src, from paxillin but had no effect on paxillin-Src 
association. A lower level of Src Tyr-530 phosphorylation was detected in 
paxillin-associated Src in EGF-stimulated cells. Expression of an SHP2 binding 
defective mutant of Gab1 (Gab1FF) or a catalytically inactive mutant of SHP2 
(SHP2DN) prevented paxillin tyrosine dephosphorylation and Src activation 
induced by EGF. Importantly, Gab1FF blocked paxillin-SHP2 complex formation, Src 
Tyr-530 dephosphorylation, Erk activation, and cell migration induced by EGF. 
Inhibition of Src tyrosine kinase activity abrogated EGF-stimulated Erk 
activation and cell migration. Together, these results reveal that Gab1 recruits 
SHP2 to dephosphorylate paxillin, leading to dissociation of Csk from the 
paxillin-Src complex and Src activation and that Src is an SHP2 effector 
involved in EGF-stimulated Erk activation and cell migration.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M312575200
PMID: 14665621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
