---
pmid: '21515572'
title: 'Focusing forward genetics: a tripartite ENU screen for neurodevelopmental
  mutations in the mouse.'
authors:
- Stottmann RW
- Moran JL
- Turbe-Doan A
- Driver E
- Kelley M
- Beier DR
journal: Genetics
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3176541
doi: 10.1534/genetics.111.126862
---

# Focusing forward genetics: a tripartite ENU screen for neurodevelopmental mutations in the mouse.
**Authors:** Stottmann RW, Moran JL, Turbe-Doan A, Driver E, Kelley M, Beier DR
**Journal:** Genetics (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1534/genetics.111.126862](https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.111.126862)
**PMC:** [PMC3176541](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3176541/)

## Abstract

1. Genetics. 2011 Jul;188(3):615-24. doi: 10.1534/genetics.111.126862. Epub 2011 
Apr 21.

Focusing forward genetics: a tripartite ENU screen for neurodevelopmental 
mutations in the mouse.

Stottmann RW(1), Moran JL, Turbe-Doan A, Driver E, Kelley M, Beier DR.

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The control of growth, patterning, and differentiation of the mammalian 
forebrain has a large genetic component, and many human disease loci associated 
with cortical malformations have been identified. To further understand the 
genes involved in controlling neural development, we have performed a forward 
genetic screen in the mouse (Mus musculus) using ENU mutagenesis. We report the 
results from our ENU screen in which we biased our ascertainment toward 
mutations affecting neurodevelopment. Our screen had three components: a careful 
morphological and histological examination of forebrain structure, the inclusion 
of a retinoic acid response element-lacZ reporter transgene to highlight 
patterning of the brain, and the use of a genetically sensitizing locus, 
Lis1/Pafah1b1, to predispose animals to neurodevelopmental defects. We recovered 
and mapped eight monogenic mutations, seven of which affect neurodevelopment. We 
have evidence for a causal gene in four of the eight mutations. We describe in 
detail two of these: a mutation in the planar cell polarity gene scribbled 
homolog (Drosophila) (Scrib) and a mutation in caspase-3 (Casp3). We find that 
refining ENU mutagenesis in these ways is an efficient experimental approach and 
that investigation of the developing mammalian nervous system using forward 
genetic experiments is highly productive.

DOI: 10.1534/genetics.111.126862
PMCID: PMC3176541
PMID: 21515572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
