---
pmid: '26924529'
title: Mutations in Subunits of the Activating Signal Cointegrator 1 Complex Are Associated
  with Prenatal Spinal Muscular Atrophy and Congenital Bone Fractures.
authors:
- Knierim E
- Hirata H
- Wolf NI
- Morales-Gonzalez S
- Schottmann G
- Tanaka Y
- Rudnik-Schöneborn S
- Orgeur M
- Zerres K
- Vogt S
- van Riesen A
- Gill E
- Seifert F
- Zwirner A
- Kirschner J
- Goebel HH
- Hübner C
- Stricker S
- Meierhofer D
- Stenzel W
- Schuelke M
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4800037
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.01.006
---

# Mutations in Subunits of the Activating Signal Cointegrator 1 Complex Are Associated with Prenatal Spinal Muscular Atrophy and Congenital Bone Fractures.
**Authors:** Knierim E, Hirata H, Wolf NI, Morales-Gonzalez S, Schottmann G, Tanaka Y, Rudnik-Schöneborn S, Orgeur M, Zerres K, Vogt S, van Riesen A, Gill E, Seifert F, Zwirner A, Kirschner J, Goebel HH, Hübner C, Stricker S, Meierhofer D, Stenzel W, Schuelke M
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.01.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.01.006)
**PMC:** [PMC4800037](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4800037/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2016 Mar 3;98(3):473-489. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.01.006.
Epub  2016 Feb 25.

Mutations in Subunits of the Activating Signal Cointegrator 1 Complex Are 
Associated with Prenatal Spinal Muscular Atrophy and Congenital Bone Fractures.

Knierim E(1), Hirata H(2), Wolf NI(3), Morales-Gonzalez S(1), Schottmann G(1), 
Tanaka Y(4), Rudnik-Schöneborn S(5), Orgeur M(6), Zerres K(7), Vogt S(8), van 
Riesen A(9), Gill E(1), Seifert F(1), Zwirner A(1), Kirschner J(10), Goebel 
HH(11), Hübner C(9), Stricker S(6), Meierhofer D(12), Stenzel W(11), Schuelke 
M(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropediatrics, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 10117 
Berlin, Germany; NeuroCure Clinical Research Center, Charité Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, 10117 Berlin, Germany.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biological Science, College of Science and 
Engineering, Aoyama Gakuin University, Sagamihara 252-5258, Japan; Center for 
Frontier Research, National Institute of Genetics, Precursory Research for 
Embryonic Science and Technology, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Mishima 
411-8540, Japan. Electronic address: hihirata@chem.aoyama.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Child Neurology, Neuroscience Campus Amsterdam, VU University 
Medical Center, 1007 MB Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Chemistry and Biological Science, College of Science and 
Engineering, Aoyama Gakuin University, Sagamihara 252-5258, Japan.
(5)Institute of Human Genetics and University Hospital, 
Rheinisch-Westfälische Technische Hochschule Aachen University, 52074 Aachen, 
Germany; Division of Human Genetics, Medical University Innsbruck, 6020 
Innsbruck, Austria.
(6)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, 14195 Berlin, Germany; Free 
University Berlin, Institute for Chemistry and Biochemistry, 14195 Berlin, 
Germany.
(7)Institute of Human Genetics and University Hospital, 
Rheinisch-Westfälische Technische Hochschule Aachen University, 52074 Aachen, 
Germany.
(8)Medizinisches Versorgungszentrum Dr. Eberhard & Partner, 44137 Dortmund, 
Germany.
(9)Department of Neuropediatrics, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 10117 
Berlin, Germany.
(10)Department of Neuropediatrics and Muscle Disorders, University Medical 
Center Freiburg, 79106 Freiburg, Germany.
(11)Department of Neuropathology, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 10117 
Berlin, Germany.
(12)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, 14195 Berlin, Germany.
(13)Department of Neuropediatrics, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 10117 
Berlin, Germany; NeuroCure Clinical Research Center, Charité Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, 10117 Berlin, Germany. Electronic address: markus.schuelke@charite.de.

Transcriptional signal cointegrators associate with transcription factors or 
nuclear receptors and coregulate tissue-specific gene transcription. We report 
on recessive loss-of-function mutations in two genes (TRIP4 and ASCC1) that 
encode subunits of the nuclear activating signal cointegrator 1 (ASC-1) complex. 
We used autozygosity mapping and whole-exome sequencing to search for pathogenic 
mutations in four families. Affected individuals presented with prenatal-onset 
spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), multiple congenital contractures (arthrogryposis 
multiplex congenita), respiratory distress, and congenital bone fractures. We 
identified homozygous and compound-heterozygous nonsense and frameshift TRIP4 
and ASCC1 mutations that led to a truncation or the entire absence of the 
respective proteins and cosegregated with the disease phenotype. Trip4 and Ascc1 
have identical expression patterns in 17.5-day-old mouse embryos with high 
expression levels in the spinal cord, brain, paraspinal ganglia, thyroid, and 
submandibular glands. Antisense morpholino-mediated knockdown of either trip4 or 
ascc1 in zebrafish disrupted the highly patterned and coordinated process of 
α-motoneuron outgrowth and formation of myotomes and neuromuscular junctions and 
led to a swimming defect in the larvae. Immunoprecipitation of the ASC-1 complex 
consistently copurified cysteine and glycine rich protein 1 (CSRP1), a 
transcriptional cofactor, which is known to be involved in spinal cord 
regeneration upon injury in adult zebrafish. ASCC1 mutant fibroblasts 
downregulated genes associated with neurogenesis, neuronal migration, and 
pathfinding (SERPINF1, DAB1, SEMA3D, SEMA3A), as well as with bone development 
(TNFRSF11B, RASSF2, STC1). Our findings indicate that the dysfunction of a 
transcriptional coactivator complex can result in a clinical syndrome affecting 
the neuromuscular system.

Copyright © 2016 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.01.006
PMCID: PMC4800037
PMID: 26924529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
