---
pmid: '23569244'
title: Thymoproteasome subunit-β5T generates peptide-MHC complexes specialized for
  positive selection.
authors:
- Xing Y
- Jameson SC
- Hogquist KA
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3637736
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1222244110
---

# Thymoproteasome subunit-β5T generates peptide-MHC complexes specialized for positive selection.
**Authors:** Xing Y, Jameson SC, Hogquist KA
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1222244110](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1222244110)
**PMC:** [PMC3637736](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3637736/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Apr 23;110(17):6979-84. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1222244110. Epub 2013 Apr 8.

Thymoproteasome subunit-β5T generates peptide-MHC complexes specialized for 
positive selection.

Xing Y(1), Jameson SC, Hogquist KA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, MN 55414, USA.

Cortical thymic epithelial cells (cTECs) express a unique thymoproteasome 
subunit-β5T that plays an essential role in the development of CD8 T cells. In 
contrast, the immunoproteasome subunit-β5i is expressed in other thymic 
antigen-presenting cells (APCs). The thymoproteasome may generate peptides that 
are specialized for positive selection, or it may simply serve to generate 
peptides that are distinct from other APCs that cause negative selection, 
thereby promoting an overall larger number of surviving clones to mature and 
function in the immune system. To distinguish these models, we genetically 
engineered mice to express distinct peptide repertoires in cTECs vs. other APCs 
without expressing β5T, by generating β5t(5i) knockin mice, in which β5i 
replaced β5T in cTECs. When such animals were crossed to β5i(-/-) mice, β5i was 
exclusively expressed in cTECs, whereas β5 was expressed in other cells. 
However, this mouse did not support normal positive selection, suggesting that 
β5T generates peptides that are intrinsically better for positive selection 
(i.e., β5i could not replace β5T) and not merely because these peptides are 
distinct from peptides presented by other APCs. Finally, using an Nur77(GFP) 
reporter, we show that the T cells generated in the absence of β5T have higher 
reactivity to self, generating predominantly CD44(hi) memory phenotype 
peripheral CD8(+) T cells. Altogether, our results suggest that the 
thymoproteasome supports positive selection by generating peptides that are 
optimized for the selection of weakly self-reactive, naïve T-cell clones.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1222244110
PMCID: PMC3637736
PMID: 23569244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
