---
pmid: '8006019'
title: The high mobility group protein HMG1 can reversibly inhibit class II gene transcription
  by interaction with the TATA-binding protein.
authors:
- Ge H
- Roeder RG
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
---

# The high mobility group protein HMG1 can reversibly inhibit class II gene transcription by interaction with the TATA-binding protein.
**Authors:** Ge H, Roeder RG
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1994)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jun 24;269(25):17136-40.

The high mobility group protein HMG1 can reversibly inhibit class II gene 
transcription by interaction with the TATA-binding protein.

Ge H(1), Roeder RG.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Rockefeller University, New 
York, New York 10021.

Regulation of transcription by RNA polymerase II in eukaryotic cells requires 
both basal and accessory factors, which interact through specific protein-DNA or 
protein-protein interactions. The high mobility group 1 protein (HMG1) was 
previously demonstrated to be a nonhistone chromatin-associated protein, which 
selectively recognizes cruciform DNA rather than a specific primary sequence 
element. During our investigations of proteins that interact with TFIID, we 
found that purified mammalian HMG1, as well as recombinant human HMG1, can 
interact with TATA-binding protein (TBP) in the presence of a TATA 
box-containing oligonucleotide to form a specific HMG1.TBP.promoter complex. 
This complex prevents TFIIB binding to TBP and consequently blocks formation of 
the preinitiation complex. In contrast, TFIIA can compete with HMG1 for binding 
to TBP. In an in vitro transcription assay reconstituted with highly purified or 
recombinant general factors, HMG1 is able to inhibit transcription by RNA 
polymerase II over 30-fold. As expected, addition of TFIIA can partially reverse 
this repression in a concentration-dependent manner. These results demonstrate 
that HMG1, a chromatin-associated protein, has the potential to act as a 
TBP-dependent negative transcription factor and may provide an important link 
between chromatin structure and the modulation of class II gene transcription.

PMID: 8006019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
