---
pmid: '18163532'
title: Impaired placental trophoblast lineage differentiation in Alkbh1(-/-) mice.
authors:
- Pan Z
- Sikandar S
- Witherspoon M
- Dizon D
- Nguyen T
- Benirschke K
- Wiley C
- Vrana P
- Lipkin SM
journal: Dev Dyn
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21418
---

# Impaired placental trophoblast lineage differentiation in Alkbh1(-/-) mice.
**Authors:** Pan Z, Sikandar S, Witherspoon M, Dizon D, Nguyen T, Benirschke K, Wiley C, Vrana P, Lipkin SM
**Journal:** Dev Dyn (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1002/dvdy.21418](https://doi.org/10.1002/dvdy.21418)

## Abstract

1. Dev Dyn. 2008 Feb;237(2):316-27. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21418.

Impaired placental trophoblast lineage differentiation in Alkbh1(-/-) mice.

Pan Z(1), Sikandar S, Witherspoon M, Dizon D, Nguyen T, Benirschke K, Wiley C, 
Vrana P, Lipkin SM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, California 
92697, USA.

E. coli AlkB has been intensively studied since 1983, but the in vivo roles of 
its mammalian homologue Alkbh1 are unknown. We, therefore, created null mice for 
Alkbh1. Alkbh1 mRNA is expressed at highest levels in the trophoblast lineages 
of the developing placenta. Alkbh1(-/-) placentas have decreased expression of 
differentiated trophoblast markers including Tpbp, Gcm1, and Pl-1, and increased 
expression of the trophoblast stem cell marker Eomes. Alkbh1 localizes to 
nuclear euchromatin, and interacts strongly with Mrj, an essential placental 
gene that mediates gene repression by recruitment of class II histone 
deacetylases (HDACs). Competition experiments show Alkbh1 and HDAC4 binding to 
Mrj are mutually exclusive, which causes decreased HDAC activity and increased 
target gene expression. Our study demonstrates Alkbh1 performs important 
functions in placental trophoblast lineage differentiation and participates in 
mechanisms of transcriptional regulation.

DOI: 10.1002/dvdy.21418
PMID: 18163532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
