---
pmid: '26362788'
title: Proteomic mapping in live Drosophila tissues using an engineered ascorbate
  peroxidase.
authors:
- Chen CL
- Hu Y
- Udeshi ND
- Lau TY
- Wirtz-Peitz F
- He L
- Ting AY
- Carr SA
- Perrimon N
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2015'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4593093
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1515623112
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Proteomic mapping in live Drosophila tissues using an engineered ascorbate peroxidase.
**Authors:** Chen CL, Hu Y, Udeshi ND, Lau TY, Wirtz-Peitz F, He L, Ting AY, Carr SA, Perrimon N
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1515623112](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1515623112)
**PMC:** [PMC4593093](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4593093/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Sep 29;112(39):12093-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1515623112. Epub 2015 Sep 11.

Proteomic mapping in live Drosophila tissues using an engineered ascorbate 
peroxidase.

Chen CL(1), Hu Y(2), Udeshi ND(3), Lau TY(3), Wirtz-Peitz F(2), He L(2), Ting 
AY(4), Carr SA(3), Perrimon N(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115; 
clchen@genetics.med.harvard.edu perrimon@receptor.med.harvard.edu.
(2)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115;
(3)Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA 02142;
(4)Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA 02142; Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139;
(5)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115; Howard 
Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA 02115 clchen@genetics.med.harvard.edu 
perrimon@receptor.med.harvard.edu.

Characterization of the proteome of organelles and subcellular domains is 
essential for understanding cellular organization and identifying protein 
complexes as well as networks of protein interactions. We established a 
proteomic mapping platform in live Drosophila tissues using an engineered 
ascorbate peroxidase (APEX). Upon activation, the APEX enzyme catalyzes the 
biotinylation of neighboring endogenous proteins that can then be isolated and 
identified by mass spectrometry. We demonstrate that APEX labeling functions 
effectively in multiple fly tissues for different subcellular compartments and 
maps the mitochondrial matrix proteome of Drosophila muscle to demonstrate the 
power of APEX for characterizing subcellular proteomes in live cells. Further, 
we generate "MitoMax," a database that provides an inventory of Drosophila 
mitochondrial proteins with subcompartmental annotation. Altogether, APEX 
labeling in live Drosophila tissues provides an opportunity to characterize the 
organelle proteome of specific cell types in different physiological conditions.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1515623112
PMCID: PMC4593093
PMID: 26362788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Characterization of the proteome of organelles and subcellular domains is essential for understanding cellular organization and identifying protein complexes as well as networks of protein interactions. We established a proteomic mapping platform in live Drosophila tissues using an engineered ascorbate peroxidase (APEX). Upon activation, the APEX enzyme catalyzes the biotinylation of neighboring endogenous proteins that can then be isolated and identified by mass spectrometry. We demonstrate that APEX labeling functions effectively in multiple fly tissues for different subcellular compartments and maps the mitochondrial matrix proteome of Drosophila muscle to demonstrate the power of APEX for characterizing subcellular proteomes in live cells. Further, we generate “MitoMax,” a database that provides an inventory of Drosophila mitochondrial proteins with subcompartmental annotation. Altogether, APEX labeling in live Drosophila tissues provides an opportunity to characterize the organelle proteome of specific cell types in different physiological conditions.

Discussion

We have established a proteomic mapping platform in Drosophila tissues using APEX and show that APEX functions effectively in multiple fly tissues. In addition, we demonstrate that this approach can be used effectively in vivo to analyze the Drosophila mitochondrial matrix proteome to facilitate proteomic mapping of finer subcellular compartments (matrix vs. whole mitochondria). The APEX-based method provides an opportunity to achieve excellent specificity (83% compared with 49–57% for the isolation-based approach). The excellent specificity is greatly contributed by iTRAQ, which provides a method to subtract background or false positive cause during the APEX labeling process, even though the mechanism of iTRAQ leads to compression of ratios with relatively small numbers ( 11 ). Unfortunately, because the biotinylation catalyzed by APEX requires the exposure of electron-rich residues such as tyrosine on the surfaces of target proteins ( 1 ), proteins that lack tyrosine residues or that are obscured by membranes or macromolecular complexes may not be detected with APEX. Nevertheless, we have identified not only unannotated mitochondrial genes but also nonconserved genes that are unlikely to be identified by orthologous mapping. These fly-specific mitochondrial genes may provide insights into mitochondrial–nuclear coevolution ( 22 ). Altogether, our analysis of APEX labeling in live Drosophila tissues indicates that the application of APEX not only provides a means to avoid potential problems during purification of organelles but also provides an opportunity to characterize the proteome of specific cell types under different physiological conditions.

Note that in our experiments, we are unable to determine the labeling radius, because the mitochondrion is a membrane-bound organelle and we are using a signal peptide to target APEX to the mitochondrial matrix rather than fusing APEX to a specific mitochondrial protein. However, in previous studies, the reactive phenoxyl radicals have been considered to have a half-live shorter than 1 ms and a <20-nm labeling radius ( 23 – 26 ), and thus APEX should prove useful to label subcellular domains beyond organelles in vivo.

Furthermore, we have generated a high-quality inventory of Drosophila proteins with submitochondrial compartmental annotation by integrating our results with those of previous studies. The MitoMax database for Drosophila genes encoding mitochondrial localized proteins is publicly available ( genepath.med.harvard.edu/∼perrimon/MitoMax.html ). It provides a resource for systematic functional analysis of mitochondria, and in particular will facilitate investigation of mitochondrial diseases.
