---
pmid: '17500066'
title: Beta-arrestin-dependent regulation of the cofilin pathway downstream of protease-activated
  receptor-2.
authors:
- Zoudilova M
- Kumar P
- Ge L
- Wang P
- Bokoch GM
- DeFea KA
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M701391200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Beta-arrestin-dependent regulation of the cofilin pathway downstream of protease-activated receptor-2.
**Authors:** Zoudilova M, Kumar P, Ge L, Wang P, Bokoch GM, DeFea KA
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M701391200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M701391200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jul 13;282(28):20634-46. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M701391200. Epub 
2007 May 11.

Beta-arrestin-dependent regulation of the cofilin pathway downstream of 
protease-activated receptor-2.

Zoudilova M(1), Kumar P, Ge L, Wang P, Bokoch GM, DeFea KA.

Author information:
(1)Cell, Molecular, and Developmental Biology Program and Biomedical Sciences 
Division, University of California-Riverside, B605 Statistics Road, Riverside, 
CA 92521, USA.

Beta-arrestins are pleiotropic molecules that mediate signal desensitization, 
G-protein-independent signaling, scaffolding of signaling molecules, and 
chemotaxis. Protease-activated receptor-2 (PAR-2), a Galpha(q/11)-coupled 
receptor, which has been proposed as a therapeutic target for inflammation and 
cancer, requires the scaffolding function of beta-arrestins for chemotaxis. We 
hypothesized that PAR-2 can trigger specific responses by differential 
activation of two pathways, one through classic Galpha(q)/Ca(2+) signaling and 
one through beta-arrestins, and we proposed that the latter involves scaffolding 
of proteins involved in cell migration and actin assembly. Here we demonstrate 
the following. (a) PAR-2 promotes beta-arrestin-dependent dephosphorylation and 
activation of the actin filament-severing protein (cofilin) independently of 
Galpha(q)/Ca(2+) signaling. (b) PAR-2-evoked cofilin dephosphorylation requires 
both the activity of a recently identified cofilin-specific phosphatase 
(chronophin) and inhibition of LIM kinase (LIMK) activity. (c) Beta-arrestins 
can interact with cofilin, LIMK, and chronophin and colocalize with them in 
membrane protrusions, suggesting that beta-arrestins may spatially regulate 
their activities. These findings identify cofilin as a novel target of 
beta-arrestin-dependent scaffolding and suggest that many PAR-2-induced 
processes may be independent of Galpha(q/11) protein coupling.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M701391200
PMID: 17500066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
