---
pmid: '25670079'
title: 14-3-3ζ turns TGF-β's function from tumor suppressor to metastasis promoter
  in breast cancer by contextual changes of Smad partners from p53 to Gli2.
authors:
- Xu J
- Acharya S
- Sahin O
- Zhang Q
- Saito Y
- Yao J
- Wang H
- Li P
- Zhang L
- Lowery FJ
- Kuo WL
- Xiao Y
- Ensor J
- Sahin AA
- Zhang XH
- Hung MC
- Zhang JD
- Yu D
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2015'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4325275
doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2014.11.025
---

# 14-3-3ζ turns TGF-β's function from tumor suppressor to metastasis promoter in breast cancer by contextual changes of Smad partners from p53 to Gli2.
**Authors:** Xu J, Acharya S, Sahin O, Zhang Q, Saito Y, Yao J, Wang H, Li P, Zhang L, Lowery FJ, Kuo WL, Xiao Y, Ensor J, Sahin AA, Zhang XH, Hung MC, Zhang JD, Yu D
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccell.2014.11.025](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2014.11.025)
**PMC:** [PMC4325275](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4325275/)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Cell. 2015 Feb 9;27(2):177-92. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2014.11.025.

14-3-3ζ turns TGF-β's function from tumor suppressor to metastasis promoter in 
breast cancer by contextual changes of Smad partners from p53 to Gli2.

Xu J(1), Acharya S(2), Sahin O(1), Zhang Q(1), Saito Y(1), Yao J(1), Wang H(1), 
Li P(1), Zhang L(2), Lowery FJ(2), Kuo WL(1), Xiao Y(1), Ensor J(3), Sahin 
AA(4), Zhang XH(5), Hung MC(6), Zhang JD(7), Yu D(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA; The University of Texas Graduate 
School of Biomedical Sciences, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(5)Lester and Sue Smith Breast Center and Department of Molecular and Cellular 
Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(6)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA; The University of Texas Graduate 
School of Biomedical Sciences, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Center for Molecular 
Medicine and Graduate Institute of Cancer Biology, China Medical University, 
Taichung 404, Taiwan.
(7)Pharmaceutical Research and Early Development, F. Hoffmann-La Roche, Ltd., 
4070 Basel, Switzerland.
(8)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA; The University of Texas Graduate 
School of Biomedical Sciences, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic address: 
dyu@mdanderson.org.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2015 Feb 9;27(2):151-3. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2015.01.005.
    Breast Cancer Res. 2015 Jul 11;17:92. doi: 10.1186/s13058-015-0603-2.

Transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) functions as a tumor suppressor in 
premalignant cells but as a metastasis promoter in cancer cells. The dichotomous 
functions of TGF-β are proposed to be dictated by different partners of its 
downstream effector Smads. However, the mechanism for the contextual changes of 
Smad partners remained undefined. Here, we demonstrate that 14-3-3ζ destabilizes 
p53, a Smad partner in premalignant mammary epithelial cells, by downregulating 
14-3-3σ, thus turning off TGF-β's tumor suppression function. Conversely, 
14-3-3ζ stabilizes Gli2 in breast cancer cells, and Gli2 partners with Smads to 
activate PTHrP and promote TGF-β-induced bone metastasis. The 14-3-3ζ-driven 
contextual changes of Smad partners from p53 to Gli2 may serve as biomarkers and 
therapeutic targets of TGF-β-mediated cancer progression.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccell.2014.11.025
PMCID: PMC4325275
PMID: 25670079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.

## Full Text

Introduction

TGF-β manifests multifunctional and sometimes dichotomous roles in numerous biological processes, such as embryonic stem cell self-renewal and differentiation, homeostasis of differentiated mammalian cells, and different stages of cancer progression. In premalignant cells, TGF-β is primarily a tumor suppressor that inhibits cell proliferation or induces apoptosis ( Massague, 2008 ). In the later stages of cancer progression, however, TGF-β functions as a metastasis promoter by inducing epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), leading to increased invasion of cancer cells, and also by inducing genes that facilitate metastatic colonization of secondary organ sites ( Massague, 2008 ). Although the opposing functions of TGF-β in early- versus late-stage cancer have been known for decades, how and when TGF-β switches its functional roles are long-standing questions with no clear answer. TGF-β binds to its receptor-TGFβR1/2 on the cell membrane and induces a signaling cascade by phosphorylating Smad2/3. Phosphorylated Smad2/3 forms a complex with Smad4 and translocates from the cytoplasm to the nucleus to activate the transcription of downstream effectors. An emerging notion is that the unique cellular context (e.g., Smad binding partners and their modifiers) dictates the complicated and even converse biological responses to TGF-β ( Massague, 2012 ). However, which specific Smad partners determine TGF-β’s tumor suppressor versus metastasis promoter functions are unclear. More importantly, what factor(s) triggers the change of Smad partners in early- versus late-stage cancer is also unclear.

The critical role of TGF-β in cancer, especially in the process of metastasis, has spurred the development of antagonists that target TGF-β signaling as cancer therapeutics ( Akhurst and Hata, 2012 ). Disappointingly, many of the current TGF-β-targeting drugs showed limited clinical efficacy. Considering the opposing functions of TGF-β in cancer development ( Massague, 2008 ; Massague, 2012 ), it is not surprising that general inhibition of the TGF-β pathway may have deleterious consequence ( Bierie and Moses, 2009 ). Inhibiting TGF-β may accelerate the progression of pre-neoplastic lesions in which TGF-β still acts as a tumor suppressor. For example, conditional knockout of Tgfbr2 , which encodes the type II TGF-β receptor (TGFβR2), in the mammary gland of mice expressing the polyoma viral middle T antigen (PyVmT) at puberty before mammary tumors are established, resulted in shortened tumor latency and increased pulmonary metastases ( Forrester et al., 2005 ). In contrast, a short induction of TGF-β expression after mammary tumors were established in PyVmT mice accelerated metastatic progression ( Muraoka-Cook et al., 2004 ). Thus, it is essential to identify the disease stage at which patients will benefit from TGF-β antagonists, and to develop biomarkers to guide the selection of patients for TGF-β-targeting therapies and the evaluation of therapeutic efficacy.

Discussion

TGF-β’s complicated biological responses have been proposed to be governed by the different cellular contextual determinants of Smads ( Massague, 2012 ), including a wide-ranging complement of DNA-binding transcription factors, involving p53 and members of the bHLH, Forkhead box (e.g., Foxo3a), and Zinc finger protein families (e.g., Gli2) in different cells and various biological processes ( Cordenonsi et al., 2003 ; Feng and Derynck, 2005 ). However, the specific Smad partners determining TGF-β’s tumor suppressor versus metastasis promoter functions were elusive; and the factors triggering the contextual changes in Smad determinants are also not clear. Here, we unveiled that 1) p53 is the critical Smad partner for TGF-β-induced p21 expression and tumor suppression in pre-malignant HMECs, whereas Gli2 is the decisive Smad partner for TGF-β-induced PTHrP expression and metastasis promotion in breast cancer cells; 2) 14-3-3ζ switches TGF-β’s function by triggering the contextual change of Smad partners from p53 in pre-malignant HMECs to Gli2 in breast cancer. Mechanistically, 14-3-3ζ overexpression destabilizes p53 by cytoplasmic sequestration of YAP1, leading to reduced transcription of 14-3-3σ, a tumor suppressor that stabilizes p53 protein, while 14-3-3ζ stabilizes Gli2 by blocking Gli2’s binding with its E3 ligase β-TrCP ( Figure 7 ). Therefore, our study provided important answers to the long-standing questions of how and when TGF-β switches its functional roles from a tumor suppressor to a metastasis promoter. Moreover, TGF-β has multifunctional roles in numerous biological processes. Our study may facilitate more discoveries on cellular events that switch the contextual determinants of Smads, which will enable comprehensive understanding of TGF-β’s multifunctional and even opposing roles not only in cancer development, but also in TGF-β’s various general biological and pathological responses.

Previously, it was reported that 4-hours of TGF-β treatment induced Gli2 mRNA transcription in MDA-MB-231 cells, which subsequently transactivated PTHrP ( Dennler et al., 2007 ). Here, we found that TGF-β induced an immediate (in < 2 hours) increase of Gli2 protein via 14-3-3ζ-mediated Gli2 stabilization, indicating that TGF-β induces Gli2 expression at multiple levels. In addition, we found that TGF-β-activated Smads can directly bind to Gli2 protein to upregulate PTHrP transcription. Thus, TGF-β-activated Smads can induce PTHrP expression both indirectly via transactivating Gli2, which in turn induces PTHrP transcription, and directly by binding to Gli2 to turn on PTHrP transcription, which is empowered by 14-3-3ζ. Interestingly, 14-3-3ζ was reported to bind to and stabilize β-catenin in the cytoplasm in response to Wnt signaling ( Tian et al., 2004 ), suggesting that 14-3-3ζ may regulate multiple other signaling pathways by a similar mode of binding to and stabilizing downstream key regulators of these pathways.

The 14-3-3s are a family of evolutionarily conserved and ubiquitously expressed proteins in eukaryotes with seven mammalian isoforms β, γ, ɛ, η, σ, τ, and ζ These 29–31 kDa acidic proteins form hetero- or homo-dimers to bind to specific motifs on target proteins in a phosphorylation-dependent manner, subsequently altering their sub-cellular localization, stability, enzymatic activity, etc. As a result, 14-3-3 proteins are involved in many important cellular processes ( Reinhardt and Yaffe, 2013 ). Here, we found that 14-3-3ζ overexpression led to transcriptional repression of 14-3-3σ. Although in the same family, 14-3-3ζ and 14-3-3σ have opposite roles in several biological functions, including PI3K-Akt signaling, p53 stability, cell polarity, and invasion ( Danes et al., 2008 ; Ling et al., 2010 ; Lu et al., 2009 ; Neal et al., 2012 ). Among the 14-3-3 family members, 14-3-3σ is known as a tumor suppressor gene, which is lost in multiple types of cancer ( Akahira et al., 2004 ). The unique biology of 14-3-3σ may be explained by its different structure from the rest of 14-3-3 family members ( Reinhardt and Yaffe, 2013 ; Wilker et al., 2005 ). An imbalance between 14-3-3σ and other 14-3-3 family members may result in cancer or other disorders. However, the mechanism underlying the imbalance between 14-3-3σ and other 14-3-3 family members has always been unclear. Here, we revealed that 14-3-3ζ represses 14-3-3σ by sequestrating its transcription co-activator YAP1 outside of the nucleus, suggesting a critical role for YAP1 in maintaining the homeostasis of the 14-3-3 family in HMECs.

14-3-3σ and 14-3-3ζ have opposing functions on p53. 14-3-3σ can interact with and stabilize p53 by blocking Mdm2-mediated p53 ubiquitination and nuclear export ( Yang et al., 2003 ; Yang et al., 2007 ). We found that 14-3-3ζ can destabilize p53 protein partially through PI3K-Akt activation of Mdm2 ( Danes et al., 2008 ) and by downregualtion of 14-3-3σ. As restoration of 14-3-3σ fully recovered p53 expression in 10A.ζ cells, 14-3-3σ is likely a major regulator of p53 stability, while 14-3-3ζ destabilizes p53 primarily through downregulating 14-3-3σ.

The Hippo-YAP pathway plays very important roles in controlling organ size and tumorigenesis, and activation of the Hippo pathway leads to phosphorylation and inhibition of transcriptional co-activators, including YAP ( Harvey et al., 2013 ). There have been controversial reports on the role of YAP1 in cancer development ( Bertini et al., 2009 ; Luk and Guan, 2014 ; Zhao et al., 2011 ). Initially, the YAP1 gene was found to be amplified in human hepatocellular carcinomas and induce transformation ( Zender et al., 2006 ). Recently however, YAP1 was defined as an apoptosis-inducing tumor suppressor that is silenced in multiple types of cancer ( Bai et al., 2013 ; Barry et al., 2013 ; Cottini et al., 2014 ; Lapi et al., 2008 ; Yu et al., 2013 ). Moreover, mammary epithelia-specific hyperactivation of YAP1 in transgenic mice did not increase mammary cell proliferation or induce tumors ( Chen et al., 2014 ), indicating that YAP1 does not have an oncogenic function in mammary gland. Here, we found that nuclear YAP1 transactivates the 14-3-3σ tumor suppressor gene in HMECs. Thus, 14-3-3σ is a target gene of YAP1 and mediates YAP1 tumor suppressor function in HMECs. As a transcriptional co-activator, YAP1 has oncogenic functions when it binds to TEA domain family transcription factors ( Harvey et al., 2013 ), while it functions as a tumor suppressor when bound to p73 or p53BP2 ( Basu et al., 2003 ; Cottini et al., 2014 ; Fausti et al., 2013 ). In future studies, it will be interesting to identify the partner transcription factors of YAP1 for 14-3-3σ transactivation, and to test the functional role of cytosolic YAP1 retained by 14-3-3ζ in HMECs.

YAP1 nuclear localization was inhibited by 14-3-3ζ both in tissue samples and in cell models. Previously, it was found that YAP1 expression is downregulated in breast cancers compared to normal breast tissues ( Tufail et al., 2012 ; Yuan et al., 2008 ). Here, we also found that YAP1 protein levels in breast tissues were decreased as cancer progressed and 14-3-3ζ expression increased. However, YAP1 protein levels in 10A.ζ and 12A.ζ cells were similar to that in their control cells. This suggested that other 14-3-3ζ-independent mechanisms may regulate YAP1 protein stability ( Lapi et al., 2008 ) or YAP1 protein translation ( Yu et al., 2013 ) in human breast cancer in vivo that were not recapitulated by 14-3-3ζ overexpression cell models in vitro.

The crucial role of TGF-β in cancer and other diseases has motivated numerous efforts on developing therapeutics targeting the TGF-β pathway, some of which have been tested in the clinic ( Akhurst and Hata, 2012 ). In phase I and II trials for treating cancers that generally overexpress TGF-β, some patients with late-stage cancers received a marginal benefit from TGF-β inhibitors ( Bogdahn et al., 2011 ). A major obstacle for effective therapies targeting the TGF-β pathway has been the complex nature and opposing roles of TGF-β in different stages of cancer development. Thus, understanding the molecular mechanism by which TGF-β switches its role could guide more effective TGF-β-targeting strategies. In this regard, our findings ( Figure 7 ) suggest that the TGF-β functional switch by 14-3-3ζ and the contextual changes of Smad partners (p53 and Gli2) could be utilized as biomarkers to aid in selecting appropriate cancer patients who will benefit from TGF-β antagonists and determining optimal treatment timing when TGF-β-targeted therapy inhibits cancer.

Current therapies targeting the TGF-β pathway are mainly focused on targeting TGF-β ligands and/or receptors, e.g. TGF-β-neutralizing antibodies, TGF-β receptor kinase inhibitor, and TGF-β ligand trap ( Akhurst and Hata, 2012 ). These therapies down-modulate excessive levels of TGF-β ligands or block the entire TGF-β signaling cascade. However, a systemic application of anti-TGF-β therapies may bring significant side effects, such as widespread inflammation ( Shull et al., 1992 ), autoimmunity, or cardiovascular defects ( Larsson et al., 2001 ) because TGF-β plays important roles in various physiological functions. Thus, more specific drugs that selectively target the downstream signaling in cancer cells without compromising other systemic homeostatic functions of TGF-β would be superior. Our findings in this study suggest targeting TGF-β’s functional switch or the downstream cancer-specific Smad partners (e.g., Gli2) may be better alternatives to targeting TGF-β ligand and/or receptor for cancer treatment. This will inspire the development of drugs to selectively target the TGF-β signaling in cancer and metastasis without impeding TGF-β physiological functions in normal tissues. Taken together, our findings may steer biomarker-guided selection of patients who will most likely respond to second generation selective therapies to effectively target TGF-β signaling in the era of personalized medicine.
