---
pmid: '18474598'
title: Retinal pigment epithelium-retinal G protein receptor-opsin mediates light-dependent
  translocation of all-trans-retinyl esters for synthesis of visual chromophore in
  retinal pigment epithelial cells.
authors:
- Radu RA
- Hu J
- Peng J
- Bok D
- Mata NL
- Travis GH
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2443657
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M801288200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Retinal pigment epithelium-retinal G protein receptor-opsin mediates light-dependent translocation of all-trans-retinyl esters for synthesis of visual chromophore in retinal pigment epithelial cells.
**Authors:** Radu RA, Hu J, Peng J, Bok D, Mata NL, Travis GH
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M801288200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M801288200)
**PMC:** [PMC2443657](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2443657/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jul 11;283(28):19730-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M801288200. Epub
2008  May 12.

Retinal pigment epithelium-retinal G protein receptor-opsin mediates 
light-dependent translocation of all-trans-retinyl esters for synthesis of 
visual chromophore in retinal pigment epithelial cells.

Radu RA(1), Hu J, Peng J, Bok D, Mata NL, Travis GH.

Author information:
(1)Jules Stein Eye Institute, California, USA.

Visual perception begins with the absorption of a photon by an opsin pigment, 
inducing isomerization of its 11-cis-retinaldehyde chromophore. After a brief 
period of activation, the resulting all-trans-retinaldehyde dissociates from the 
opsin apoprotein rendering it insensitive to light. Restoring light sensitivity 
to apo-opsin requires thermal re-isomerization of all-trans-retinaldehyde to 
11-cis-retinaldehyde via an enzyme pathway called the visual cycle in retinal 
pigment epithelial (RPE) cells. Vertebrates can see over a 10(8)-fold range of 
background illumination. This implies that the visual cycle can regenerate a 
visual chromophore over a similarly broad range. However, nothing is known about 
how the visual cycle is regulated. Here we show that RPE cells, functionally or 
physically separated from photoreceptors, respond to light by mobilizing 
all-trans-retinyl esters. These retinyl esters are substrates for the retinoid 
isomerase and hence critical for regenerating visual chromophore. We show in 
knock-out mice and by RNA interference in human RPE cells that this mobilization 
is mediated by a protein called "RPE-retinal G protein receptor" (RGR) opsin. 
These data establish that RPE cells are intrinsically sensitive to light. 
Finally, we show that in the dark, RGR-opsin inhibits lecithin:retinol 
acyltransferase and all-trans-retinyl ester hydrolase in vitro and that this 
inhibition is released upon exposure to light. The results of this study suggest 
that RGR-opsin mediates light-dependent translocation of all-trans-retinyl 
esters from a storage pool in lipid droplets to an "isomerase pool" in membranes 
of the endoplasmic reticulum. This translocation permits insoluble 
all-trans-retinyl esters to be utilized as substrate for the synthesis of a new 
visual chromophore.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M801288200
PMCID: PMC2443657
PMID: 18474598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Visual perception begins with the absorption of a photon by an opsin
 pigment, inducing isomerization of its 11- cis -retinaldehyde
 chromophore. After a brief period of activation, the resulting
 all- trans- retinaldehyde dissociates from the opsin apoprotein
 rendering it insensitive to light. Restoring light sensitivity to apo-opsin
 requires thermal re-isomerization of all- trans- retinaldehyde to
 11- cis -retinaldehyde via an enzyme pathway called the visual cycle in
 retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells. Vertebrates can see over a
 10 8 -fold range of background illumination. This implies that the
 visual cycle can regenerate a visual chromophore over a similarly broad range.
 However, nothing is known about how the visual cycle is regulated. Here we
 show that RPE cells, functionally or physically separated from photoreceptors,
 respond to light by mobilizing all- trans- retinyl esters. These
 retinyl esters are substrates for the retinoid isomerase and hence critical
 for regenerating visual chromophore. We show in knock-out mice and by RNA
 interference in human RPE cells that this mobilization is mediated by a
 protein called “RPE-retinal G protein receptor” (RGR) opsin. These
 data establish that RPE cells are intrinsically sensitive to light. Finally,
 we show that in the dark, RGR-opsin inhibits lecithin:retinol acyltransferase
 and all- trans- retinyl ester hydrolase in vitro and that this
 inhibition is released upon exposure to light. The results of this study
 suggest that RGR-opsin mediates light-dependent translocation of
 all- trans- retinyl esters from a storage pool in lipid droplets to an
 “isomerase pool” in membranes of the endoplasmic reticulum. This
 translocation permits insoluble all- trans- retinyl esters to be
 utilized as substrate for the synthesis of a new visual chromophore.

RESULTS

Light-dependent Mobilization of Retinyl Esters in
 rpe65 - / - Mice —Mice with a knock-out mutation in the rpe65 gene
 massively accumulate all- trans- REs in the RPE and contain no
 detectable 11- cis -retinoids
 ( 21 , 22 ). Accordingly, these mice
 are virtually blind by electroretinographic analysis
 ( 21 ). In an exploratory
 experiment, we dark-adapted 2-month-old wild-type (strain 129) and rpe65 - / - mice
 overnight and then exposed one group of each strain to fluorescent light at
 500 lux for 2 h. We measured the content of visual retinoids in the eyes from
 these dark- and light-adapted mice. As reported previously
 ( 36 - 39 ),
 wild-type mice showed a light-dependent increase in levels of
 all- trans- REs ( Fig.
 2 A ). Unexpectedly, all- trans- REs were
 dramatically lower in the light- versus dark-adapted rpe65 - / - mice
 ( Fig. 2 C ).
 Representative chromatograms containing retinoid data from wild-type and rpe65 - / - mice are
 shown in Fig. 2, B and D . The magnitude of the light-dependent reduction in
 all- trans- REs was 300 pmol, almost two-thirds the total retinoid
 content of a wild-type mouse eye
 ( 37 ). Given the absence of
 rhodopsin and 11- cis- RAL in rpe65 - / - retinas,
 this mobilization of all- trans- REs is unlikely to be mediated by
 photoreceptors. Alternatively, RPE cells may be intrinsically sensitive to
 light and may respond to changes in illumination by regulating activities of
 the visual cycle.

Light-dependent Mobilization of Retinyl Esters in Cultured Human RPE
 Cells —To test this alternate possibility, we looked for changes in
 the retinoid content of primary cultured hRPE cells following light exposure.
 Cells in these monolayer cultures were shown to have normal RPE
 ultrastructure, to express all known proteins of the visual cycle, and to
 synthesize 11- cis -retinoids from exogenous all- trans- ROL
 ( 35 , 40 ). Photoreceptors are absent
 from these cultures. Without addition of all- trans- ROL to the medium,
 retinoids are undetectable in these cells (not shown). We added
 all- trans- ROL to the media of cultured hRPE cells grown in darkness.
 After incubating for an additional 6 h in the dark, we exposed one set of
 dishes to UV-filtered fluorescent light for 2 h, whereas the other set was
 kept in darkness. We then collected and homogenized the cells, extracted the
 retinoids, and analyzed by HPLC. The levels of all- trans- REs were
 1.9-fold lower in the light-exposed cells
 ( Fig. 3 A ). These data
 are consistent with the results from rpe65 - / - mice
 ( Fig. 2 C ) and suggest
 that RPE cells are intrinsically light-sensitive.

RGR-Opsin Mediates Light Sensitivity in RPE Cells —RGR is
 present in RPE cells and an excellent candidate protein to mediate the
 observed light-dependent mobilization of all- trans- REs. To test this
 possibility, we “knocked down” RGR expression in RPE cells by
 RNAi. We generated three synthetic, double-stranded siRNAs that correspond to
 the human RGR mRNA. We transfected these, plus a nonsilencing control
 double-stranded RNA, into cultured hRPE cells, and we then measured the levels
 of the RGR mRNA in total RNA extracted from these cells by qRT-PCR. RGR -siRNAs 1 and 2 reduced the RGR mRNA by ∼75%, whereas RGR -siRNA 3 only reduced expression by ∼30%
 ( Fig. 3 B ). To explore
 the role of RGR on light-dependent mobilization of all- trans- REs, we
 transfected hRPE cells with RGR -siRNA 2 or the nonsilencing control
 RNA. After 3 days of incubation in the dark, we added all- trans- ROL
 to the media, incubated for an additional 6 h, exposed one set of dishes to
 UV-filtered light, and then analyzed for retinoid content as described. Cells
 transfected with the control RNA showed significant mobilization of
 all- trans- REs after exposure to light
 ( Fig. 3 C ). In
 contrast, all- trans- REs were unchanged after light exposure in hRPE
 cells transfected with RGR -siRNA 2
 ( Fig. 3 D ). These data
 suggest that RGR-opsin mediates light-dependent mobilization of
 all- trans- REs by RPE cells. Levels of 11- cis- RAL were higher
 in light-exposed cells, suggesting partial conversion of
 all- trans- REs to 11- cis- RAL by Rpe65
 ( Fig. 3, C and D ). The higher all- trans- REs observed in
 untransfected ( Fig.
 3 A ) versus control RNA-transfected hRPE cells
 ( Fig. 3 C ) probably
 results from our use of RBP and IRBP as carrier proteins to deliver
 all- trans- ROL in the RNA transfection experiments, instead of BSA.
 The total retinoid content of the hRPE cells plus media were similar in dark-
 and light-adapted dishes.

Light-dependent Mobilization of Retinyl Esters Is Lost in Mice Lacking
 Rpe65 and RGR —If RGR is responsible for the light-stimulated
 depletion of all- trans- REs in rpe65 - / - mice, this
 effect should disappear in mice lacking both Rpe65 and RGR. To test this
 prediction, we generated mice homozygous for null mutations in rpe65 and rgr . We dark-adapted wild-type, rpe65 - / - , rgr - / - , and rpe65 - / - , rgr - / - double
 knock-out mice overnight, and we exposed one group to fluorescent light for 2
 h while the other group was kept in darkness, and we then quantitated visual
 retinoids in the eyes of mice from both groups. As before, light exposure
 caused modest accumulation of all- trans- REs in wild type and
 significant depletion of all- trans- REs from rpe65 - / - eyes
 ( Fig. 4, A and C ). Single knockout rgr - / - mice showed a
 larger fractional increase in all- trans- REs following light exposure
 than wild-type mice ( Fig. 4, A and B ). Importantly, the light-dependent depletion of
 all- trans- REs seen in rpe65 - / - mice was
 abolished in rpe65 - / - , rgr - / - mice
 ( Fig. 4 D ). These data
 corroborate the hypothesis that RGR-opsin is required for light-dependent
 mobilization of all- trans- REs. Wild-type mice exposed to light could
 maintain levels of 11- cis- ROL and 11- cis- RAL at nearly
 dark-adapted levels under these experimental conditions
 ( Fig. 4 A ). In
 contrast, 11- cis- ROL and 11- cis- RAL were significantly
 higher in dark-adapted versus light-exposed rgr - / - mice
 ( Fig. 4 B ). This effect
 was seen despite much higher levels of all- trans- REs in light-exposed rgr - / - versus wild-type mice ( Fig. 4, A and B ). These observations suggest lower
 isomerase activity in rgr - / - mice.

Effects of RGR-Opsin on Retinoid-processing Enzymes of the
 RPE —Light-dependent mobilization of retinyl esters in cultured hRPE
 cells and rpe65 - / - mice was only observed in the presence of RGR (Figs. 3 C and 4 C ). Retinyl ester
 levels are determined by the balance of synthase and hydrolase activities. The
 dominant all- trans- RE synthase in RPE is LRAT
 ( 41 - 43 )
 ( Fig. 1 ). Hydrolysis of
 all- trans- REs is carried out in the RPE by all- trans- retinyl
 ester hydrolase (all- trans- REH), which catalyzes the hydrolysis of an
 all- trans- RE to all- trans- ROL plus a free fatty acid. This
 enzyme has been characterized kinetically
 ( 44 - 46 )
 but not yet identified. Another enzyme that hydrolyzes all- trans- REs
 is Rpe65 isomerase, here yielding 11- cis- ROL plus a free fatty acid
 ( 18 - 20 , 47 ). Finally, it has been
 suggested that LRAT may possess “reverse synthase” or ester
 hydrolase activity ( 48 ). We
 measured the catalytic activities of these enzymes in vitro , to
 understand the role of RGR on light-dependent mobilization of retinyl
 esters.

First, we determined the activity of LRAT in RPE homogenates from dark- and
 light-adapted wild-type and rgr - / - mice. This
 experiment yielded three significant observations
 ( Fig. 5 A ). (i) LRAT
 activity was 5.6-fold higher in light- versus dark-adapted
 homogenates from wild-type mice. (ii) LRAT activity was only 1.5-fold higher
 in light- versus dark-adapted homogenates from rgr - / - mice. (iii)
 LRAT activity was 10.6-fold higher in rgr - / - versus wild-type homogenates from dark-adapted and 2.7-fold higher in
 homogenates from light-adapted mice. These results explain the higher retinyl
 esters in light-adapted rgr - / - ( Fig. 4 B ) versus wild-type ( Fig.
 4 A ) eyecups, as reported previously
 ( 49 ).

Next, we measured all- trans- REH activity in RPE homogenates from
 dark- and light-adapted mice of several genotypes. Hydrolase activity was
 2.2-fold higher in light- versus dark-adapted RPE homogenates from
 wild-type mice ( Fig.
 5 B ). Hydrolase activities in light- and dark-adapted rgr - / - homogenates
 were similar to the activity in light-adapted wild-type homogenates
 ( Fig. 5 B ). The
 hydrolase activities in homogenates from light- and dark-adapted rpe65 - / - mice were
 higher than the activities in the cognate homogenates from wild-type mice
 ( Fig. 5 B ).
 Nonetheless, rpe65 - / - homogenates
 retained the light-dependent stimulation of all- trans- REH activity.
 Similar to rgr - / - single knock-out mice, this light dependence was lost in homogenates from rgr - / - , rpe65 - / - double
 knock-out mice ( Fig.
 5 B ). These results suggest that the light-dependent
 mobilization of retinyl esters in RPE cells is mediated by the effects of RGR
 on all- trans- REH activity.

We assayed isomerase activity in RPE homogenates from wild-type and rgr - / - mice. Both
 showed modest (1.3-1.6-fold) light-dependent stimulation of isomerase activity
 ( Fig. 5 C ). Isomerase
 activity was ∼3-fold lower in the rgr - / - versus wild-type homogenates ( Fig.
 5 C ). This observation explains the light-independent
 slowing of rhodopsin regeneration previously reported in rgr - / - mice
 ( 23 ).

RGR-opsin was shown to co-precipitate with NADH-dependent
 11- cis- RDH in RPE cells
 ( 24 ). We measured
 11- cis- RDH activity in RPE homogenates from light- and dark-adapted
 wild-type and rgr - / - mice. We observed slightly higher 11- cis- RDH activity in the light- versus dark-adapted homogenates but no difference between wild-type
 and rgr - / - mice
 ( Fig. 5 D ). Thus,
 RGR-opsin does not appear to modulate the activity of 11- cis- RDH.

Increased LRAT and Reduced Isomerase Activities in
 rgr - / - Mice Are Not Caused
 by Changes in Protein Expression —A possible explanation for the
 increased LRAT and reduced Rpe65 activity in rgr - / - mice is
 altered expression of these proteins. We tested this possibility by immunoblot
 analysis using antisera against LRAT
 ( 33 ) and Rpe65
 ( 32 ). In repeated immunoblot
 assays, LRAT immunoreactivities were similar in dark- and light-adapted
 wild-type and rgr - / - eyecups (representative blot in Fig.
 6 A ). Rpe65 immunoreactivities were also similar in dark-
 and light-adapted wild-type versus
 rgr - / - eyecups
 (representative blot in Fig.
 6 B ). These data suggest that the 2.7-fold higher LRAT and
 2.6-fold lower isomerase activities in light-adapted wild-type versus
 rgr - / - mice
 ( Fig. 5, A and C ) are not caused by significant changes in levels of the
 LRAT or Rpe65 proteins.

DISCUSSION

A surprising result of this study is that RPE cells are intrinsically
 sensitive to light. This sensitivity was revealed in two experimental systems
 where RPE cells were functionally or physically separated from photoreceptors.
 The first was the rpe65 - / - mouse.
 These mice lack Rpe65 isomerase and cannot synthesize the 11- cis- RAL
 chromophore. RPE cells in rpe65 - / - mice
 greatly accumulate all- trans- REs. When rpe65 - / - mice were
 exposed to light, we observed large-scale mobilization of these
 all- trans- REs (Figs. 2 C and 4 C ). This effect was
 blocked in rpe65 - / - , rgr - / - mice lacking
 both Rpe65 and RGR ( Fig.
 4 D ). The second system was a primary culture of hRPE
 cells. These cells possess isomerase activity, evidenced by the synthesis of
 11- cis- ROL and 11- cis- RAL from all- trans- ROL added
 to the medium ( Fig. 3, C and D ). Despite the absence of photoreceptors, hRPE cells
 responded to light exposure by significant depletion of all- trans- REs
 and synthesis of 11- cis- RAL ( Fig.
 3 C ). Knockdown of RGR expression by RNAi resulted in the
 loss of this effect ( Fig.
 3 D ). These results suggest that the intrinsic light
 sensitivity of RPE cells is mediated by RGR-opsin to modulate the synthesis
 and/or degradation of retinyl esters.

Light exposure induces isomerization of 11- cis- RAL in rhodopsin,
 resulting in the eventual release of all- trans- ROL by photoreceptors
 ( Fig. 1 ). This
 all- trans- ROL is taken up by RPE cells and esterified by LRAT. In a
 normal retina, light exposure induces net synthesis of all- trans- REs
 in the RPE
 ( 37 - 39 ).
 This synthesis is driven by the availability of all- trans- ROL from
 bleached photoreceptors ( Fig.
 1 ). Formation of all- trans- REs in the light makes
 teleological sense because these are substrates for the isomerase and hence
 required for synthesis of the new visual chromophore. However, the results
 discussed above suggest that RGR-opsin stimulates light-dependent degradation
 of all- trans- REs. Why at a time of great need for chromophore
 synthesis should substrates for the isomerase be wastefully degraded? To
 answer this question we must consider the sites of all- trans- RE
 storage inside RPE cells.

One compartment for the storage of all- trans- REs is within the
 lipid bilayers of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Several retinoid-processing
 proteins are associated with the ER, including LRAT
 ( 50 ), 11- cis- RDH
 ( 51 ), RGR-opsin
 ( 13 ), and Rpe65
 ( 52 ). Another compartment in
 RPE cells for storage of all- trans- REs is lipid droplets
 ( 53 ). Lipid droplets are
 cytoplasmic structures containing a core of neutral lipids, including
 triglycerides, cholesterol and retinyl esters, surrounded by a phospholipid
 monolayer “skin”
 ( 54 , 55 ). Lipid droplets are
 expandable three-dimensional structures of potentially far greater capacity
 for retinyl esters than ER membranes. As an example, most of the excess
 all- trans- REs in rpe65 - / - mice are
 present within lipid droplets
 ( 21 , 39 ). Several proteins
 associate with lipid droplets, including the perilipins and caveolins.
 Importantly, Rpe65 does not co-localize with lipid droplets in RPE cells
 ( 39 ). Accordingly, lipid
 droplets may serve as a “spill-over” site for retinyl ester
 storage after ER membranes have been filled to capacity. Because of their
 water insolubility ( 56 ),
 all- trans- REs in lipid droplets must first be hydrolyzed by
 all- trans- REH, transported to the ER as all- trans- ROL, and
 secondarily re-esterified by LRAT into ER membranes before they can be used as
 substrate by the isomerase. We propose that the translocation of
 all- trans- REs from lipid droplets to ER membranes is regulated by
 light through the RGR-opsin, as depicted in Fig. 7 .

Consistent with this model, we observed light-dependent stimulation of LRAT
 and all- trans- REH activities in RPE homogenates from wild-type mice
 ( Fig. 5, A and B ). The activity of all- trans- REH was similar in
 homogenates from light-adapted wild-type and dark- and light-adapted rgr - / - mice
 ( Fig. 5, A and B ). This suggests that the dark-adapted form of RGR
 inhibits but the light-adapted form has no effect on all- trans- REH
 activity. LRAT activity was 5.6-fold higher in RPE homogenates from light- versus dark-adapted wild-type mice
 ( Fig. 5 A ). Under both
 light conditions, LRAT activity was significantly higher in homogenates from rgr - / - versus wild-type mice ( Fig.
 5 A ). In contrast to all- trans- REH activity,
 where light modulation was completely lost in rgr - / - mice
 ( Fig. 5 B ), LRAT
 retained partial light responsiveness ( Fig.
 5 A ). These results suggest that RGR inhibits LRAT in both
 darkness and light but more strongly in the dark. The 1.5-fold stimulation of
 LRAT seen in light- versus dark-adapted rgr - / - homogenates
 ( Fig. 5 A ) may result
 from the influence of another receptor in RPE cells.

The observed effects of RGR on all- trans- REH and LRAT-specific
 activities were not due to light-dependent changes in substrate availability,
 because these enzymes were assayed under saturating substrate concentrations.
 The specific activities of all- trans- REH were 30-70-fold higher than
 those of LRAT in the identical homogenates from light- or dark-adapted
 wild-type mice ( Fig. 5, A and B ). Accordingly, the inhibitory effect of RGR on the
 hydrolysis of all- trans- REs is probably greater than its effect on
 all- trans- RE-synthesis. This would explain the net mobilization of
 all- trans- REs mediated by RGR in rpe65 - / - eyecups
 (Figs. 2 C and 4 C ) and hRPE cells
 ( Fig. 3, A and C ). The unbalanced increase of LRAT with unchanged
 all- trans- REH activities in light-adapted rgr - / - mice explains
 the higher all- trans- REs in these animals
 ( Fig. 4, A and B ). The increased all- trans- REs following light
 exposure in wild-type RPE
 ( 37 - 39 )
 reflects the increased all- trans- ROL substrate for LRAT from bleached
 photoreceptors ( Fig. 1 ). This
 source of substrate is unavailable in rpe65 - / - eyes and
 cultured hRPE cells, which explains the net depletion following light exposure
 of all- trans- REs in these systems.

LRAT has also been shown to be active in the reverse direction, effectively
 functioning as a retinyl ester hydrolase
 ( 48 ). An alternative
 explanation for the results presented here is that RGR-opsin modulates this
 reverse activity of LRAT. Specifically, the dark-adapted form of RGR-opsin may
 inhibit both the synthase and hydrolase activities of LRAT. Light
 “activation” of RGR would release both activities of LRAT from
 inhibition and cause increased “churning” of
 all- trans- REs. Whether mediated by the reverse activity of LRAT, or a
 separate all- trans- REH as proposed above, release of inhibition by
 light-adapted RGR should cause a net flux of all- trans- REs from lipid
 droplets to ER membranes for subsequent isomerization
 ( Fig. 7 ).

Isomerase catalytic activity was ∼3-fold lower in RPE homogenates from rgr - / - versus wild-type mice ( Fig.
 5 C ). This reduced activity explains the slower
 regeneration of rhodopsin seen in rgr - / - versus wild-type mice
 ( 17 , 23 ). We observed modest
 (∼1.3-fold) light stimulation of isomerase activity, but the effect was
 present in both wild-type and rgr - / - homogenates
 ( Fig. 5 C ) suggesting
 that it is mediated by another receptor. The increased LRAT and reduced
 isomerase activities cannot be explained by changes in the levels of these
 proteins, because the immunoblot signal intensities of LRAT and Rpe65 were
 similar in wild-type and rgr - / - homogenates
 ( Fig. 6, A and B ).

The results presented above suggest that RGR-opsin regulates the activities
 of all- trans- REH and LRAT in a light-dependent fashion. The mechanism
 of this regulation is not clear. It may involve direct modulation of catalytic
 activities or changes in the stability of a protein complex through a second
 messenger system. The motifs “D(E)RY” and
 “NP XX Y” are critical for the interaction of a G
 protein-coupled receptor with a G protein α-subunit
 ( 57 ). RGR contains the variant
 motifs “GRY” and “NA XX Y.” RGR-opsin may
 interact with a G protein via these variant motifs or may modulate LRAT and
 all- trans- REH through another signaling mechanism. Several G proteins
 have been identified in human RPE cells, including G s α,
 G i-1 α, G i-2 α, G i-3 α, and
 G z α ( 58 ).
 Additional studies will be required to define the signaling pathway for
 RGR-opsin. Unlike the photoreceptor opsins, RGR does not require Rpe65 for
 synthesis of its chromophore because RGR functions as a photoisomerase
 ( 15 ).

In a previous study, 9- cis- retinaldehyde (9- cis- RAL) was
 administered to rpe65 - / - mice in a
 successful attempt to correct the visual phenotype
 ( 22 ). Similar to
 11- cis- RAL, 9- cis- RAL combines with apo-opsin to form a
 functional visual pigment (iso-rhodopsin). Unexpectedly, rpe65 - / - mice
 treated with 9- cis- RAL showed a dramatic reduction in the level of
 all- trans- REs. This observation was difficult to understand, because
 supplemental 9- cis- RAL does nothing to correct the inherited
 isomerase deficiency that induces all- trans- RE accumulation. The
 results presented here suggest a possible explanation for the reduced
 all- trans- REs after administration of 9- cis- RAL to rpe65 - / - mice.
 Purified RGR is sensitive to hydroxylamine and binds exogenous
 all- trans- RAL chromophore
 ( 30 , 59 ), indicating that RGR is
 available for chromophore exchange. In the above-described experiment with rpe65 - / - mice, the
 exogenous 9- cis- RAL may have replaced the bound
 all- trans- RAL, converting RGR to its light-adapted form. As we have
 shown ( Fig. 5 B ), light
 adaptation of RGR frees all- trans- REH from inhibition, causing
 mobilization of all- trans- REs. This effect is analogous to the
 all- trans- RE-mobilization seen in rpe65 - / - mice (Figs. 2 C and 4 C ) and hRPE cells
 ( Fig. 3, A and C ) following exposure to light.

In summary, we have identified a new mechanism for regulation of the visual
 cycle in RPE cells. This mechanism involves light-dependent redistribution of
 all- trans- REs, mediated by RGR-opsin. The likely purpose of this
 redistribution is to move all- trans- REs from the lipid droplet
 storage pool to the smaller ER “isomerase pool” where the
 all- trans- REs can be utilized for synthesis of visual chromophore.
 Biochemically, this regulatory mechanism involves inhibition of
 all- trans- REH and LRAT by RGR-opsin in the dark, with release of
 inhibition following photoisomerization of the RGR chromophore to
 11- cis- RAL. Further characterization of this regulatory mechanism
 will require identification of the all- trans- REH protein associated
 with lipid droplets.
