---
pmid: '29941559'
title: Degradation of unmethylated miRNA/miRNA*s by a DEDDy-type 3' to 5' exoribonuclease
  Atrimmer 2 in Arabidopsis.
authors:
- Wang X
- Wang Y
- Dou Y
- Chen L
- Wang J
- Jiang N
- Guo C
- Yao Q
- Wang C
- Liu L
- Yu B
- Zheng B
- Chekanova JA
- Ma J
- Ren G
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2018'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC6048527
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1721917115
---

# Degradation of unmethylated miRNA/miRNA*s by a DEDDy-type 3' to 5' exoribonuclease Atrimmer 2 in Arabidopsis.
**Authors:** Wang X, Wang Y, Dou Y, Chen L, Wang J, Jiang N, Guo C, Yao Q, Wang C, Liu L, Yu B, Zheng B, Chekanova JA, Ma J, Ren G
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1721917115](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1721917115)
**PMC:** [PMC6048527](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6048527/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2018 Jul 10;115(28):E6659-E6667. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1721917115. Epub 2018 Jun 25.

Degradation of unmethylated miRNA/miRNA*s by a DEDDy-type 3' to 5'
exoribonuclease Atrimmer 2 in Arabidopsis.

Wang X(1)(2)(3), Wang Y(1)(2), Dou Y(4)(5), Chen L(1)(2), Wang J(1)(2), Jiang
N(1)(2), Guo C(1)(2), Yao Q(1)(2), Wang C(1)(2), Liu L(3), Yu B(6), Zheng
B(1)(2), Chekanova JA(7), Ma J(1)(2), Ren G(8)(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Fudan
University, 200438 Shanghai, China.
(2)Institute of Plant Biology, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, 200438
Shanghai, China.
(3)Guangdong Province Key Laboratory for Plant Epigenetics, College of Life
Science and Oceanography, Shenzhen University, 518060 Shenzhen, China.
(4)Lester and Sue Smith Breast Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030.
(5)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030.
(6)Center for Plant Science Innovation and School of Biological Sciences,
University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE 68588-0660.
(7)School of Biological Sciences, University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas
City, MO 64110.
(8)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Fudan
University, 200438 Shanghai, China; gdren@fudan.edu.cn.

The 3' end methylation catalyzed by HUA Enhancer 1 (HEN1) is a crucial step of
small RNA stabilization in plants, yet how unmethylated small RNAs undergo
degradation remains largely unknown. Using a reverse genetic approach, we here
show that Atrimmer 2 (ATRM2), a DEDDy-type 3' to 5' exoribonuclease, acts in the
degradation of unmethylated miRNAs and miRNA*s in Arabidopsis Loss-of-function
mutations in ATRM2 partially suppress the morphological defects caused by HEN1
malfunction, with restored levels of a subset of miRNAs and receded expression
of corresponding miRNA targets. Dysfunction of ATRM2 has negligible effect on
miRNA trimming, and further increase the fertility of hen1 heso1 urt1, a mutant
with an almost complete abolishment of miRNA uridylation, indicating that ATRM2
may neither be involved in 3' to 5' trimming nor be the enzyme that specifically
degrades uridylated miRNAs. Notably, the fold changes of miRNAs and their
corresponding miRNA*s were significantly correlated in hen1 atrm2 versus hen1
Unexpectedly, we observed a marked increase of 3' to 5' trimming of several
miRNA*s but not miRNAs in ATRM2 compromised backgrounds. These data suggest an
action of ATRM2 on miRNA/miRNA* duplexes, and the existence of an unknown
exoribonuclease for specific trimming of miRNA*. This asymmetric effect on
miRNA/miRNA* is likely related to Argonaute (AGO) proteins, which can
distinguish miRNAs from miRNA*s. Finally, we show that ATRM2 colocalizes and
physically interacts with Argonaute 1 (AGO1). Taken together, our results
suggest that ATRM2 may be involved in the surveillance of unmethylated
miRNA/miRNA* duplexes during the initiation step of RNA-induced silencing
complex assembly.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1721917115
PMCID: PMC6048527
PMID: 29941559 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

The 3′ end methylation catalyzed by HUA Enhancer 1 (HEN1) is a crucial step of small RNA stabilization in plants, yet how unmethylated small RNAs undergo degradation remains largely unknown. Using a reverse genetic approach, we here show that Atrimmer 2 (ATRM2), a DEDDy-type 3′ to 5′ exoribonuclease, acts in the degradation of unmethylated miRNAs and miRNA*s in Arabidopsis . Loss-of-function mutations in ATRM2 partially suppress the morphological defects caused by HEN1 malfunction, with restored levels of a subset of miRNAs and receded expression of corresponding miRNA targets. Dysfunction of ATRM2 has negligible effect on miRNA trimming, and further increase the fertility of hen1 heso1 urt1 , a mutant with an almost complete abolishment of miRNA uridylation, indicating that ATRM2 may neither be involved in 3′ to 5′ trimming nor be the enzyme that specifically degrades uridylated miRNAs. Notably, the fold changes of miRNAs and their corresponding miRNA*s were significantly correlated in hen1 atrm2 versus hen1 . Unexpectedly, we observed a marked increase of 3′ to 5′ trimming of several miRNA*s but not miRNAs in ATRM2 compromised backgrounds. These data suggest an action of ATRM2 on miRNA/miRNA* duplexes, and the existence of an unknown exoribonuclease for specific trimming of miRNA*. This asymmetric effect on miRNA/miRNA* is likely related to Argonaute (AGO) proteins, which can distinguish miRNAs from miRNA*s. Finally, we show that ATRM2 colocalizes and physically interacts with Argonaute 1 (AGO1). Taken together, our results suggest that ATRM2 may be involved in the surveillance of unmethylated miRNA/miRNA* duplexes during the initiation step of RNA-induced silencing complex assembly.

Loss of ATRM2 inhen1Results in an Increased Level of a Subset of miRNAs with Trimming and Uridylation Largely Unaffected.

We next investigated whether loss of ATRM2 activity affected 3′ to 5′ trimming and/or overall amount of miRNAs. The miRNA expression patterns in Col-0 (WT), atrm2-1 , hen1-8 , hen1-8 atrm2-1 , hen1-8 heso1-1 , and hen1-8 heso1-1 atrm2-1 were compared by small RNA Northern blot ( Fig. 2 ). Consistent with our previous report, loss of function in HESO1 significantly shortened miRNA tailing in hen1 background ( 12 ). Strikingly, miRNA profiles in hen1-8 heso1-1 atrm2-1 resemble those in hen1-8 heso1-1 for all tested miRNAs ( Fig. 2 ). Similar results were also observed in a parallel set of mutants in the L er background ( SI Appendix , Fig. S5 A ). Notably, the overall abundance of miR156, miR158, miR172, and miR390, but not miR159/319, miR164, miR165/166, miR167, and miR173, were increased by the ATRM2 mutation, and tended to be more prominent when HESO1 is also compromised ( Fig. 2 and SI Appendix , Fig. S5 A ). The more accumulation of miR156 and miR390 is consistent with the restored phyllochron and adult-to-juvenile recovery of the first two pairs of true leaves in hen1-8 heso1-1 atrm2-1 ( 30 – 32 ) ( Fig. 1 B and SI Appendix , Fig. S3 B – D ). Moreover, the miRNA levels were largely unaffected by the ATRM2L mutation ( SI Appendix , Fig. S5 B ), further demonstrating that ATRM2, but not ATRM2L, is involved in miRNA degradation.

Discussion

Compared with relatively well-established pathways for small RNA biogenesis, much less is understood for their degradation. HEN1 mediated 3′ end 2′-O-methylation provides a key mechanism in protecting various small RNAs in plants and piRNAs in animals against degradation ( 9 ). Previously, we and colleagues found that HESO1 and URT1 cooperatively catalyze unmethylated miRNAs uridylation, which initiates their degradation ( 11 – 14 ). In this study, we identified ATRM2, a DEDDy type 3′ to 5′ exoribonuclease ( Fig. 1 B ), as another hen1 suppressor through a reverse genetic approach.

ATRM2 has a profound effect only when HEN1 function is compromised ( Figs. 1 B and 2 and SI Appendix , Fig. S5 A ), indicating that ATRM2 targets unmethylated small RNA species and acts downstream of HEN1. ATRM2 is likely not a trimmer because trimming of miRNAs was only marginally affected ( Figs. 2 and 3 D and SI Appendix , Fig. S9 ). In addition, ATRM2 is not specifically involved in the degradation of uridylated miRNAs, as atrm2 could rescue the phenotype of hen1-2 heso1-2 urt1-3 , a mutant with almost complete loss of U tailing ( Fig. 3 ) ( 11 ). In fact, atrm2 , but not heso1 , restored the phyllochron defects of hen1 ( Fig. 1 B ). Moreover, atrm2 appeared to have a more profound effect when uridylation was impaired ( Figs. 2 and 3 D ). One possible explanation for this observation is that accumulated unmethylated miRNAs caused by ATRM2 malfunction can further be degraded through the uridylation-mediated miRNA decay pathway.

Interestingly, we detected a significant coregulation of miRNAs and their corresponding miRNA*s by ATRM2 in the hen1 background ( Fig. 4 B and C ). This implies that ATRM2 may act on miRNA/miRNA* duplexes rather than single stranded miRNAs. Unfortunately, we were unable to detect any robust activities of ATRM2 on single strand miR156, miR156/miR156* duplex, or miRNAs from AGO1 imunoprecipitates. Considering the facts that ATRM2 itself does not contain any dsRBD domain and functions downstream of HEN1, we postulate that ATRM2 may function during RISC loading before duplex unwinding ( Fig. 7 ). Consistent with this model, we found that ATRM2 colocalized and physically interacted with AGO1 ( Fig. 6 C – F ). Because AGO distinguishes miRNAs from miRNA*s, this may also help explain why several miRNA*s, but not miRNAs, are trimmed in atrm2 mutant ( Fig. 5 and SI Appendix , Fig. S11 ).

Unlike HESO1, ATRM2 only regulates a limited number of miRNAs in vivo. There are two possible interpretations of this observation: ( i ) ATRM2 is a general factor, while multiple feedback mechanisms exist for the regulation of miRNA steady levels; and ( ii ) ATRM2 may recognize specific motifs or structures of miRNA/miRNA* duplex. Nevertheless, our attempts to find such cis-elements were not successful.

Strikingly, we found that miR390, but not all other tested miRNAs and miRNA*s including miR390*, were significantly more methylated in hen1-8 heso1-1 atrm2-1 than in hen1-8 heso1-1 ( SI Appendix , Fig. S6 ). The mechanism for miR390 remethylation is currently unknown. We guess this phenomenon may be related to the specific association of miR390 with AGO7. To provide specificity, at least part of HEN1-mediated methylation must occur at or very close to each AGO site, positionally different from the nascent small RNA duplex generating loci (e.g., d -body for most miRNA/miRNA*s) ( 41 ). Since plant HEN1 specifically recognizes miRNA/miRNA* duplex ( 4 , 42 ), it seems that increased miR390/miR390* by ATRM2 mutation is more likely at their unloaded status. We propose two possible mechanisms: ( i ) A specific connection between HEN1 and AGO7 marks this specificity; and ( ii ) HEN1 works nonspecifically at different AGOs. While many small RNAs compete for limited HEN1 activity at other AGO sites, it is reasonable that we did not see an obvious increase of methylation for individual miRNAs. A more accurate examination of methylation is required for testing this hypothesis.

Since a small proportion of miRNAs is unmethylated when HEN1 is fully competent, we envision that ATRM2 behaves the same in WT ( 11 ). Indeed, we found that miR158* was more trimmed in atrm2 compared with that in Col-0 ( Fig. 5 A and SI Appendix , Fig. S11 A ), resembling the observations in HEN1 compromised mutants ( Fig. 5 and SI Appendix , Fig. S11 ). This is consistent with our sequencing results ( SI Appendix , Fig. S9 B ) and previous report that miR158 is partially unmethylated in WT background ( 15 ). The biological significance of ATRM2 in WT is still unclear. We postulate that ATRM2 may regulate miRNA function in response to abiotic stresses since both ATRM2 and AGO1 were overaccumulated in stress granules after heat treatment. Moreover, ATRM2 may carry out additional function beyond miRNA regulation. In fact, it has been reported that ATRM2 is responsible for the shortening of a set of long siRNAs ( 28 ).
