---
pmid: '10188929'
title: Age-related cognitive deficits, impaired long-term potentiation and reduction
  in synaptic marker density in mice lacking the beta-amyloid precursor protein.
authors:
- Dawson GR
- Seabrook GR
- Zheng H
- Smith DW
- Graham S
- O'Dowd G
- Bowery BJ
- Boyce S
- Trumbauer ME
- Chen HY
- Van der Ploeg LH
- Sirinathsinghji DJ
journal: Neuroscience
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0306-4522(98)00410-2
---

# Age-related cognitive deficits, impaired long-term potentiation and reduction in synaptic marker density in mice lacking the beta-amyloid precursor protein.
**Authors:** Dawson GR, Seabrook GR, Zheng H, Smith DW, Graham S, O'Dowd G, Bowery BJ, Boyce S, Trumbauer ME, Chen HY, Van der Ploeg LH, Sirinathsinghji DJ
**Journal:** Neuroscience (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0306-4522(98)00410-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0306-4522(98)00410-2)

## Abstract

1. Neuroscience. 1999 Apr;90(1):1-13. doi: 10.1016/s0306-4522(98)00410-2.

Age-related cognitive deficits, impaired long-term potentiation and reduction in 
synaptic marker density in mice lacking the beta-amyloid precursor protein.

Dawson GR(1), Seabrook GR, Zheng H, Smith DW, Graham S, O'Dowd G, Bowery BJ, 
Boyce S, Trumbauer ME, Chen HY, Van der Ploeg LH, Sirinathsinghji DJ.

Author information:
(1)Merck Sharp and Dohme Research Laboratories, Neuroscience Research Centre, 
Harlow, Essex, UK.

Mutations in the beta-amyloid precursor protein are strongly associated with 
some cases of familial Alzheimer's disease. The normal physiological role of 
beta-amyloid precursor protein in the brain was evaluated in a cross-sectional 
analysis of mice deficient in beta-amyloid precursor protein. Compared with 
wild-type control mice the beta-amyloid precursor protein-null mice developed 
age-dependent deficits in cognitive function and also had impairments in 
long-term potentiation. In addition, the brains of the beta-amyloid precursor 
protein-null mice had marked reactive gliosis in many areas, especially in the 
cortex and hippocampus. A subpopulation of mice (n = 15) died prematurely 
(between three and 18 months of age). Analysis of another six mice from the same 
population that were showing weight loss and hypolocomotor activity exhibited a 
marked reactive gliosis as detected by immunoreactivity for glial fibrillary 
acidic protein and a profound loss of immunoreactivities for the presynaptic 
terminal vesicle marker proteins synaptophysin and synapsin and the dendritic 
marker microtubule-associated protein-2 in many brain areas, but most 
predominantly in the cortex and hippocampus. These results suggest that normal 
beta-amyloid precursor protein may serve an essential role in the maintenance of 
synaptic function during ageing. A compromise of this function of the 
beta-amyloid precursor protein may contribute to the progression of the memory 
decline and the neurodegenerative changes seen in Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.1016/s0306-4522(98)00410-2
PMID: 10188929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
