---
pmid: '22340593'
title: Aurora kinase-A inactivates DNA damage-induced apoptosis and spindle assembly
  checkpoint response functions of p73.
authors:
- Katayama H
- Wang J
- Treekitkarnmongkol W
- Kawai H
- Sasai K
- Zhang H
- Wang H
- Adams HP
- Jiang S
- Chakraborty SN
- Suzuki F
- Arlinghaus RB
- Liu J
- Mobley JA
- Grizzle WE
- Wang H
- Sen S
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2012'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3760020
doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2011.12.025
---

# Aurora kinase-A inactivates DNA damage-induced apoptosis and spindle assembly checkpoint response functions of p73.
**Authors:** Katayama H, Wang J, Treekitkarnmongkol W, Kawai H, Sasai K, Zhang H, Wang H, Adams HP, Jiang S, Chakraborty SN, Suzuki F, Arlinghaus RB, Liu J, Mobley JA, Grizzle WE, Wang H, Sen S
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccr.2011.12.025](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2011.12.025)
**PMC:** [PMC3760020](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3760020/)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Cell. 2012 Feb 14;21(2):196-211. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2011.12.025.

Aurora kinase-A inactivates DNA damage-induced apoptosis and spindle assembly 
checkpoint response functions of p73.

Katayama H(1), Wang J, Treekitkarnmongkol W, Kawai H, Sasai K, Zhang H, Wang H, 
Adams HP, Jiang S, Chakraborty SN, Suzuki F, Arlinghaus RB, Liu J, Mobley JA, 
Grizzle WE, Wang H, Sen S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77054, USA.

Elevated Aurora kinase-A expression is correlated with abrogation of DNA 
damage-induced apoptotic response and mitotic spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) 
override in human tumor cells. We report that Aurora-A phosphorylation of p73 at 
serine235 abrogates its transactivation function and causes cytoplasmic 
sequestration in a complex with the chaperon protein mortalin. Aurora-A 
phosphorylated p73 also facilitates inactivation of SAC through dissociation of 
the MAD2-CDC20 complex in cells undergoing mitosis. Cells expressing 
phosphor-mimetic mutant (S235D) of p73 manifest altered growth properties, 
resistance to cisplatin- induced apoptosis, as well as premature dissociation of 
the MAD2-CDC20 complex, and accelerated mitotic exit with SAC override in the 
presence of spindle damage. Elevated cytoplasmic p73 in Aurora-A overexpressing 
primary human tumors corroborates the experimental findings.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccr.2011.12.025
PMCID: PMC3760020
PMID: 22340593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Introduction

Aurora kinase-A (hereafter referred to as Aurora-A), a key regulator of the mitotic cell division cycle, is overexpressed in many human tumors and is associated with abrogation of DNA damage induced apoptotic response and spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) override in cancer cells. Aurora-A, a cancer susceptibility gene ( Ewart-Toland et al., 2003 ), plays essential roles in the commitment of proliferating cells to G2/M progression, centrosome maturation-separation, bipolar spindle formation, and spindle damage recovery ( Marumoto et al., 2005 , Katayama et al., 2008 , Macurek et al., 2008 , Seki et al., 2008 ). We and others have previously identified functional inactivation of p53 tumor suppressor protein after Aurora-A phosphorylation at serine 315 and serine 215 residues; the former facilitates Mdm2 mediated degradation, and the latter causes loss of DNA binding ability in human cells ( Katayama et al., 2004 , Liu et al., 2004 ). Aurora-A phosphorylation of BRCA1 at serine 308 is correlated with silencing of DNA damage induced G2/M checkpoint ( Ouchi et al., 2004 ). Furthermore, overexpression of Aurora-A makes HeLa cells resistant to taxol induced cell death due to mitotic SAC override ( Anand et al., 2003 ). A recent study found that treatment of p53-deficient cells with Aurora-A small molecule inhibitors activates p73 trans-activation function with up-regulation of its down-stream target genes during induction of cell death ( Dar et al., 2008 ). However, the molecular mechanism(s) underlying the observed effects have not been elucidated.

The role of p73 in tumorigenesis has been debated because loss of function mutations in the gene is rare. However, recently developed transactivation competent (TA) p73 specific gene-knockout mice have a high incidence of spontaneous and carcinogen induced tumors ( Tomasini et al., 2008 ). In addition, oocytes and cells lacking TAp73 exhibit abnormal spindle structure and mitotic slippage with spindle poisons, indicating participation of TAp73 in the SAC pathway ( Tomasini et al., 2009 ). More recent studies have demonstrated that TAp73 interacts with SAC proteins Bub1, Bub3, and BubR1. TAp73 deficient or knock down cells reveal mis-localization of Bub1 and BubR1 at the kinetochore and reduced BubR1 kinase activity, associated with aneuploidy and chromosome instability ( Tomasini et al., 2009 , Vernole et al., 2009 ). Together with pro-apoptotic function of TAp73 in response to genotoxic stress, these results suggest that p73 is directly involved in maintaining genomic stability and regulating SAC pathway.

In view of Aurora-A over expression reported to induce resistance to DNA damage mediated apoptosis response and SAC over ride, we investigated the possible role of Aurora-A functional interaction with p73 and the underlying molecular mechanisms involved in the development of these phenotypes.

Discussion

Aurora-A overexpression is detected in various tumor types and confers resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs and irradiation ( Zhou et al., 1998 , Marumoto et al., 2002 , Yang et al., 2006 ). We present evidence that the p73 tumor suppressor protein is a direct downstream target of Aurora-A, which influences cell fate after chemotherapeutic drug induced DNA and spindle damage in tumor cells. Aurora-A phosphorylation of p73 at serine 235 is critical in Aurora-A overexpression mediated abrogation of apoptotic response and mitotic checkpoint override.
