---
pmid: '7854423'
title: Interaction with RAP74 subunit of TFIIF is required for transcriptional activation
  by serum response factor.
authors:
- Joliot V
- Demma M
- Prywes R
journal: Nature
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/373632a0
---

# Interaction with RAP74 subunit of TFIIF is required for transcriptional activation by serum response factor.
**Authors:** Joliot V, Demma M, Prywes R
**Journal:** Nature (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1038/373632a0](https://doi.org/10.1038/373632a0)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 1995 Feb 16;373(6515):632-5. doi: 10.1038/373632a0.

Interaction with RAP74 subunit of TFIIF is required for transcriptional 
activation by serum response factor.

Joliot V(1), Demma M, Prywes R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, New York 
10027.

A few general transcription factors, in particular TFIID and TFIIB, have been 
found to bind transcriptional activators. Here we show that the general 
transcription factor TFIIF is also a target for a transcriptional activator, 
namely serum response factor (SRF), which binds to the c-fos promoter. Using a 
yeast interaction assay, we find that SRF binds the RAP74 subunit of TFIIF and 
that SRF's transcriptional activation domain is the region involved in this 
binding. Further, RAP74's central charged cluster domain is required for binding 
to SRF's activation domain. Deletion of this domain impairs RAP74's ability to 
support SRF-activated transcription in vitro but has little effect on the 
protein's basal transcription activity or its ability to support SP1-activated 
transcription. The correlation of SRF-RAP74 binding with transcriptional 
activation suggests that RAP74 is a critical target for SRF-activated 
transcription.

DOI: 10.1038/373632a0
PMID: 7854423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
