---
pmid: '9870947'
title: EAT-4, a homolog of a mammalian sodium-dependent inorganic phosphate cotransporter,
  is necessary for glutamatergic neurotransmission in caenorhabditis elegans.
authors:
- Lee RY
- Sawin ER
- Chalfie M
- Horvitz HR
- Avery L
journal: J Neurosci
year: '1999'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3759158
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.19-01-00159.1999
---

# EAT-4, a homolog of a mammalian sodium-dependent inorganic phosphate cotransporter, is necessary for glutamatergic neurotransmission in caenorhabditis elegans.
**Authors:** Lee RY, Sawin ER, Chalfie M, Horvitz HR, Avery L
**Journal:** J Neurosci (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.19-01-00159.1999](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.19-01-00159.1999)
**PMC:** [PMC3759158](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3759158/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 1999 Jan 1;19(1):159-67. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.19-01-00159.1999.

EAT-4, a homolog of a mammalian sodium-dependent inorganic phosphate 
cotransporter, is necessary for glutamatergic neurotransmission in 
caenorhabditis elegans.

Lee RY(1), Sawin ER, Chalfie M, Horvitz HR, Avery L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Oncology, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75235-9148, USA.

The Caenorhabditis elegans gene eat-4 affects multiple glutamatergic 
neurotransmission pathways. We find that eat-4 encodes a protein similar in 
sequence to a mammalian brain-specific sodium-dependent inorganic phosphate 
cotransporter I (BNPI). Like BNPI in the rat CNS, eat-4 is expressed 
predominantly in a specific subset of neurons, including several proposed to be 
glutamatergic. Loss-of-function mutations in eat-4 cause defective glutamatergic 
chemical transmission but appear to have little effect on other functions of 
neurons. Our data suggest that phosphate ions imported into glutamatergic 
neurons through transporters such as EAT-4 and BNPI are required specifically 
for glutamatergic neurotransmission.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.19-01-00159.1999
PMCID: PMC3759158
PMID: 9870947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The Caenorhabditis elegans gene eat-4 affects multiple glutamatergic neurotransmission pathways. We find that eat-4 encodes a protein similar in sequence to a mammalian brain-specific sodium-dependent inorganic phosphate cotransporter I (BNPI). Like BNPI in the rat CNS, eat-4 is expressed predominantly in a specific subset of neurons, including several proposed to be glutamatergic. Loss-of-function mutations in eat-4 cause defective glutamatergic chemical transmission but appear to have little effect on other functions of neurons. Our data suggest that phosphate ions imported into glutamatergic neurons through transporters such as EAT-4 and BNPI are required specifically for glutamatergic neurotransmission.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

General methods. Nematodes were grown on Escherichia coli strain HB101 on nematode growth medium (NGM) plates at 20°C. Wild-type animals were C. elegans strain N2. Electropharyngeograms (EPGs) were recorded as described by Raizen and Avery (1994) . Germline transformation methods were as described by Mello et al. (1992) . For general cloning methods we followed those described in Sambrook et al. (1989) . We used the Genetics Computer Group (GCG) Wisconsin Package for sequence management and comparisons.

Molecular cloning. The ability of cosmid ZK512 and the various DNA constructs derived from it to rescue eat-4 mutants was tested in transgenic animals. The DNA to be tested was coinjected into the gonads of eat-4 mutant animals with pRAK3 ( Davis et al., 1995 ), which contains a dominant rol-6 marker ( Mello et al., 1992 ). Independent lines of animals that transmitted the transgenes via the germline were established and scored for eat-4 phenotypes. We relied primarily on the pharyngeal phenotypes ( Avery, 1993a ), namely the extent of lumen opening of the anterior pharynx and M3 transmission, which was measured by EPG recordings ( Raizen and Avery, 1994 ). We found that the cosmid ZK512 rescued eat-4 ( ad572 ) in three of three transgenic lines. We then found that ZK512 digested with any of the restriction endonucleases Apa LI (two of two lines), Bsa HI (two of two lines), Nae I (two of two lines), and Xho I (two of three lines) was still able to rescue and that ZK512 restricted with either Hin dIII (one line) or Apa I (one line) was unable to rescue the mutant phenotype. Because the sequence of ZK512 had been determined ( Sulston et al., 1992 ), the exact sites of restriction by each of these endonucleases were known, and we were able to deduce that eat-4 rescuing activity was located in a 6.9 kb region (23,392–30,260 in the reported sequence). This conclusion then was verified with plasmid subclones of ZK512. pRE4-4, which contains a 6.5 kb fragment (22339–28863) of ZK512, was not able to rescue eat-4 ( ad819 ) (four lines); neither was pRE4-8, containing 25834–30259 of ZK512, able to rescue eat-4 ( ky5 ) (one line) when injected individually. When mixed together, however, they were able to rescue (three of six lines) eat-4 ( ky5 ). This result suggested that the recombined products of these two plasmids contained eat-4 rescuing activity.

A 2.2 kb cDNA clone, yk32h2, was isolated and mapped to the 6.9 kb region of ZK512 (Y. Kohara, personal communication). We determined and analyzed the sequence of yk32h2 and found that the largest open reading frame (ORF) within the 2.2 kb insert potentially encodes a polypeptide of 563 amino acids (see Fig. 2 A ). We tested the possibility that yk32h2 represents an eat-4 transcript by asking whether yk32h2 expressed in appropriate cells could rescue eat-4 mutants. We made a minigene (illustrated in Fig. 1 A ) construct by fusing a Sac I– Pst I (22339–24738) genomic DNA fragment from ZK512 to the corresponding Pst I site in yk32h2. By germline transformation experiments we found that the minigene was able to rescue eat-4 ( ky5 ) partially but significantly in seven of nine independent transgenic lines.

Because the dominant coinjection marker rol-6 we had used thus far caused transgenic animals to roll, we were unable to score the nose touch and foraging abnormal phenotype. To circumvent this problem, we did rescue experiments, using lin-15 as a coinjection marker ( Clark et al., 1994 ; Huang et al., 1994 ). We transformed eat-4 ( ky5 ); lin-15 ( n765ts ) mutant animals (which have a multivulva phenotype) with ZK512 along with DA#735 (which contains the wild-type lin-15 gene; Huang et al., 1994 ). Within each of six established lines there were transgenic animals that had apparently wild-type feeding and foraging behaviors, whereas the control transgenic animals (yk32h2 and DA#735 coinjection) did not show any rescue (five lines).

The eat-4 ( ad572 ) mutation reverts spontaneously at a low frequency (<1 in 6800 meiotic events) to an apparently wild-type phenotype (data not shown), suggesting the possibility that ad572 may be caused by a chromosomal rearrangement. We tested this possibility by Southern blot analysis, using ZK512 as a probe.

Analysis of expression patterns. We used eat-4:: lacZ ( nls ) and eat-4:: gfp fusion reporter constructs to identify the cells in which the presumptive eat-4 promoter is active ( Fire et al., 1990 ; Chalfie et al., 1994 ). The eat-4:: lacZ ( nls ) construct was made by fusing the 2.4 kb Sac I– Pst I fragment from ZK512 to the lacZ vector pPD22.11 ( Fire et al., 1990 ). The resulting construct (pRE4–lacZ) has the potential to express a fusion protein that contains the first 10 amino acids of EAT-4, a nuclear localization signal (NLS), and the E. coli β-galactosidase (β-gal). We used pRE4–lacZ to transform wild-type animals. We found strong expression of the transgene in many extrapharyngeal neurons in a pattern similar to the one we saw in eat-4:: gfp transgenic animals (see below and Fig. 3 B,C ). We also found consistent transgene expression in the nuclei of pharyngeal neurons M3 and neurosecretory motor neurons (NSM), although the signal was lower than in the extrapharyngeal cells. For clarity of presentation we selected a pharynx that had little staining in extrapharyngeal neurons for Figure 3 A . The failure of staining in the extrapharyngeal neurons in this animal probably was caused by genetic mosaicism, which is expected from extrachromosomal transgenes ( Mello et al., 1992 ).

The eat-4:: gfp fusion gene construct was made by inserting the 2.4 kb Sac I– Pst I ZK512 fragment into a green fluorescent protein (GFP) construct pPD95.77 (A. Fire, J. Ahnn, G. Seydoux, and S. Xu, personal communication). The construct (pRE4–sGFP) mixed with DA#735 was used to transform MT1642 ( lin-15 mutant) animals. Eleven transgenic lines were analyzed and all had similar expression patterns, although the levels of expression were quite variable. To circumvent the problem of mosaicism, we integrated the transgene in one selected line by γ-ray irradiation ( Mello and Fire, 1995 ). One integrated line was obtained. To see whether mutations in eat-4 have an effect on the expression of the transgene, we crossed the transgene, which was mapped to chromosome X , into an eat-4 ( ky5 ) mutant background. The expression patterns of the transgene were identical in eat-4 wild-type and mutant genetic backgrounds, except that the level of expression appeared slightly higher in the mutant than in the wild-type background. We did most of our cell identification analysis with an eat-4 ( ky5 ) mutant transgenic strain because of its higher level of GFP expression (see Fig. 3 B,C ). In ∼50% of the transgenic eat-4 ( ky5 ) mutant animals the pharyngeal interneuron I5 showed weak GFP staining (data not shown). Because of the interference by the GFP staining in extrapharyngeal neurons in the head, it was difficult to observe GFP expression in the pharynx in the integrated transgenic line. Therefore, pharyngeal reporter expression was analyzed in mosaic animals carrying the eat-4:: lacZ transgene as extrachromosomal arrays. In the pharynx of these animals we found consistent β-gal staining in the pharyngeal neurons M3 and NSM (see Fig. 3 A ).

The identification of the cells expressing β-gal or GFP was based on their stereotypic locations and the morphologies of the cell bodies and, when possible, the neuronal process morphologies ( Albertson and Thomson, 1976 ; Sulston et al., 1983 ; White et al., 1986 ).

Laser ablation of neurons. Neurons were killed by a laser microbeam as previously described ( Avery and Horvitz, 1989 ; Bargmann and Horvitz, 1991 ). PVC and NSM were killed in the first larval stage. All other neurons were killed in the second larval stage. Mock-treated animals were transferred to pads and anesthetized in parallel to the animals that underwent laser ablation.

Behavioral assays. The pharyngeal pumping rate was assayed for young adult animals as previously described ( Raizen et al., 1995 ). Anterior touch behavioral assays on young adult animals were performed 2 d after laser ablation. The anterior touch response was scored in young adult animals and was scored blind to the genotype and laser ablation treatment of the animal. Each animal was touched gently in the anterior body region with an eyelash attached to a Pasteur pipette. An animal that backed immediately in response to the touch was scored as touch-sensitive. An animal that backed only after a delay was scored as partially sensitive, and an animal that did not back within ∼2 sec was scored as touch-insensitive. The touch sensitivity trials were spaced by 45–60 min to prevent habituation to gentle touch.

DISCUSSION

eat-4 mutant animals are defective in behaviors known to be mediated by glutamatergic neurotransmission but normal in behaviors known to be mediated by other neurotransmitters such as GABA, ACh, and 5-HT ( Avery, 1993a ) (A. C. Hart and J. M. Kaplan, personal communication). Because of this correlation we hypothesized that in the nervous system eat-4 functions exclusively in glutamatergic pathways. The results of our present study are consistent with this hypothesis.
