---
pmid: '38554706'
title: The SPATA5-SPATA5L1 ATPase complex directs replisome proteostasis to ensure
  genome integrity.
authors:
- Krishnamoorthy V
- Foglizzo M
- Dilley RL
- Wu A
- Datta A
- Dutta P
- Campbell LJ
- Degtjarik O
- Musgrove LJ
- Calabrese AN
- Zeqiraj E
- Greenberg RA
journal: Cell
year: '2024'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC11055677
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2024.03.002
---

# The SPATA5-SPATA5L1 ATPase complex directs replisome proteostasis to ensure genome integrity.
**Authors:** Krishnamoorthy V, Foglizzo M, Dilley RL, Wu A, Datta A, Dutta P, Campbell LJ, Degtjarik O, Musgrove LJ, Calabrese AN, Zeqiraj E, Greenberg RA
**Journal:** Cell (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2024.03.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2024.03.002)
**PMC:** [PMC11055677](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11055677/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2024 Apr 25;187(9):2250-2268.e31. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2024.03.002. Epub 
2024 Mar 29.

The SPATA5-SPATA5L1 ATPase complex directs replisome proteostasis to ensure 
genome integrity.

Krishnamoorthy V(1), Foglizzo M(2), Dilley RL(3), Wu A(1), Datta A(1), Dutta 
P(1), Campbell LJ(2), Degtjarik O(2), Musgrove LJ(2), Calabrese AN(2), Zeqiraj 
E(4), Greenberg RA(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Penn Center for Genome Integrity, Basser Center 
for BRCA, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
PA 19104-6160, USA.
(2)Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, School of Molecular and 
Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 
9JT, UK.
(3)Department of Cancer Biology, Penn Center for Genome Integrity, Basser Center 
for BRCA, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
PA 19104-6160, USA. Electronic address: rdilley4@gmail.com.
(4)Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, School of Molecular and 
Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 
9JT, UK. Electronic address: e.zeqiraj@leeds.ac.uk.
(5)Department of Cancer Biology, Penn Center for Genome Integrity, Basser Center 
for BRCA, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
PA 19104-6160, USA. Electronic address: rogergr@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.

Ubiquitin-dependent unfolding of the CMG helicase by VCP/p97 is required to 
terminate DNA replication. Other replisome components are not processed in the 
same fashion, suggesting that additional mechanisms underlie replication protein 
turnover. Here, we identify replisome factor interactions with a protein complex 
composed of AAA+ ATPases SPATA5-SPATA5L1 together with heterodimeric partners 
C1orf109-CINP (55LCC). An integrative structural biology approach revealed a 
molecular architecture of SPATA5-SPATA5L1 N-terminal domains interacting with 
C1orf109-CINP to form a funnel-like structure above a cylindrically shaped 
ATPase motor. Deficiency in the 55LCC complex elicited ubiquitin-independent 
proteotoxicity, replication stress, and severe chromosome instability. 55LCC 
showed ATPase activity that was specifically enhanced by replication fork DNA 
and was coupled to cysteine protease-dependent cleavage of replisome substrates 
in response to replication fork damage. These findings define 55LCC-mediated 
proteostasis as critical for replication fork progression and genome stability 
and provide a rationale for pathogenic variants seen in associated human 
neurodevelopmental disorders.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2024.03.002
PMCID: PMC11055677
PMID: 38554706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests R.A.G. is a co-founder 
of RADD Pharmaceuticals. None of the work in this study relates to this company.

## Full Text

Abstract

Ubiquitin-dependent unfolding of the CMG helicase by VCP/p97 is required to terminate DNA replication. Other replisome components are not processed in the same fashion, suggesting that additional mechanisms underlie replication protein turnover. Here, we identify replisome factor interactions with a protein complex composed of AAA+ ATPases SPATA5-SPATA5L1 together with heterodimeric partners C1orf109-CINP (55LCC). An integrative structural biology approach revealed a molecular architecture of SPATA5-SPATA5L1 N-terminal domains interacting with C1orf109-CINP to form a funnel-like structure above a cylindrically-shaped ATPase motor. Deficiency in the 55LCC complex elicited ubiquitin-independent proteotoxicity, replication stress, and severe chromosome instability. 55LCC showed ATPase activity that was specifically enhanced by replication fork DNA and was coupled to cysteine protease-dependent cleavage of replisome substrates in response to replication fork damage. These findings define 55LCC-mediated proteostasis as critical for replication fork progression and genome stability and provide a rationale for pathogenic variants seen in associated human neurodevelopmental disorders.

Introduction

Cellular protein homeostasis is maintained by myriad enzymatic activities that include protein unfolding and proteolytic turnover 1 . How these processes are enacted to control DNA replication is of central importance to genome maintenance. Studies of replication termination provide key insights into replisome recycling. Upon completion of DNA synthesis, DNA replication is terminated by ubiquitylation of the replicative helicase CMG (CDC45, MCM2–7, GINS), which is then recognized and unfolded by the AAA+ ATPase p97/VCP in association with ubiquitin-interacting adaptor proteins 2 – 7 . Remarkably, ubiquitin-dependent unfolding and disassembly of the CMG helicase is not only required for DNA replication termination, but paradoxically, also for efficient DNA synthesis through S-phase due to a need for continuous replisome turnover and recycling for new origin firing 8 .

Lagging strand DNA synthesis is primarily executed by DNA polymerase δ (Pol δ). This four-subunit polymerase complex does not directly associate with the CMG but instead accesses replication forks by binding to the DNA clamp, PCNA (proliferating cell nuclear antigen) 9 , 10 . Interaction with PCNA and independence from the CMG allows Pol δ to participate in lagging strand DNA replication as well as homology-directed repair at replication forks and telomeres 11 , 12 . Additionally, POLD3 is a common subunit of the translesion synthesis polymerase, DNA polymerase ζ, further highlighting the expansive roles of Pol δ complex members in DNA synthesis reactions.

We posited that DNA Pol δ would be subjected to regulatory events during DNA replication, albeit distinct from those that affect the CMG. Here we identify the interaction of Pol δ and other replisome components with the AAA+ ATPases SPATA5 and SPATA5L1, which are mutated in the human neurodevelopmental syndromes EHLMRS (Epilepsy, Hearing Loss, and Mental Retardation Syndrome) and NEDHLS (Neurodevelopmental Disorder with Hearing Loss and Spasticity) 13 – 18 . We show that SPATA5 and SPATA5L1 associate in a DNA-binding heterohexameric complex together with heterodimeric alpha-helical proteins C1orf109 and CINP. This chromatin-associated complex, which we name 55LCC, uses ATPase activity to process replisome substrates in S-phase, facilitating their proteolytic turnover from chromatin to ensure DNA replication and mitotic fidelity. These findings define a mechanism of DNA replication proteostasis by a multi-subunit macromolecular motor that is necessary for genome stability.

Discussion

We identify the macromolecular AAA+ ATPase complex, 55LCC, that processes replisome substrates and regulates genome stability. SPATA5 and SPATA5L1 assemble into a DNA-binding stacked ring heterohexamer that constitutively interacts with the C1orf109-CINP heterodimer via the SPATA5 and SPATA5L1 N-termini. This four-membered complex associates with specific replisome proteins and mediates their ATPase-dependent processing in response to replication stress. We propose that 55LCC acts as an unfoldase, thereby remodeling protein complexes and facilitating their subsequent cleavage by cysteine proteases and removal from chromatin. Ubiquitin-independent 55LCC unfoldase-coupled proteolysis and turnover from chromatin represents an important mechanism of replication factor regulation that is critical for replication fork progression and genome integrity ( Figure 7E ).

SPATA5 and SPATA5L1, along with p97, belong to the classic clade of AAA+ ATPases involved in protein remodeling and degradation 20 , 57 , 58 . Interactions between p97 and its cofactors are largely mediated via the N-terminal domain of p97 26–28, 59 . Similarly, the SPATA5 and SPATA5L1 N-termini were required for binding to C1orf109-CINP and for association into a stable heterohexameric complex ( Figures 3A and S4G – I ). However, while p97 largely binds ubiquitylated substrates 60 – 64 , 55LCC likely recognizes substrate proteins in a ubiquitin-independent manner. Furthermore, 55LCC ATPase activity is specifically enhanced by DNA structures while p97-mediated ATP hydrolysis is unaffected by nucleic acids ( Figures 2E – H ). These observations differentiate 55LCC from p97 and suggest that the regulatory mechanisms for their enzymatic functions are likely different.

The 55LCC complex structure contains two copies of C1orf109-CINP that together with the SPATA5 and SPATA5L1 NTDs form a lid unit on the top of the SPATA5-SPATA5L1 ATPase motor ( Figure 3A ). As such, 55LCC is the only heterohexameric ATPase motor to date with a 4:2 stoichiometry. Conservation analysis of aromatic pore loop residues (required for substrate engagement and threading) 27 , 29 , 39 suggests differences between SPATA5 and SPATA5L1 ( Figure S2B ). SPATA5 has conserved aromatic pore loop residues in both ATPase 1 and 2 domains whereas only ATPase 2 pore loop residues are conserved in SPATA5L1 ( Figure S2B ). Variability in these residues has been linked to different substrate processing mechanisms of other AAA+ ATPases 65 – 68 and the combination and precise stoichiometry in 55LCC suggest a synergistic role between SPATA5 and SPATA5L1 activities. Consistent with this idea, the full 55LCC complex has higher ATPase activity than the SPATA5 homohexamer ( Figures 2E – H , top ).

55LCC members were present on replicating chromatin ( Figure 5A ), and 55LCC-dependent substrate cleavage was highest in S phase and enhanced by replication fork damage ( Figures 6D and S6A – C , Table S5 ). Additionally, 55LCC ATPase activity was only stimulated by replication fork DNA ( Figures 2E – H , top ). Replication stress and fork progression defects were the earliest observable phenotypes upon 55LCC loss, while cohesion loss and micronucleation arose in subsequent cell cycles ( Figures 5B – H ). We posit that this chromosomal instability emanates from replication defects, consistent with recent studies that indicate the importance of completing DNA replication in establishing sister chromatid cohesion 43 , 44 .

We identify extensive processing of replisome components on chromatin, including DNA polymerase δ, ɑ, and clamp loader RFC complexes ( Figures 6A , B , D , and S5B ). These substrates interact with 55LCC and require its putative unfoldase functionalities for processing ( Figures 1C , S1A , B , and 6A – C , Table S5 ). We propose that altered proteostasis of replisome components at replication fork impediments contributes to the increased replication stress and subsequent genome instability in 55LCC-deficient cells. Unfolded replisome substrates could be targeted for cleavage by an array of chromatin-localized proteases including cysteine proteases, such as calpains, and histone proteases, such as cathepsins 52 , 69 .

Germline mutations in SPATA5 and SPATA5L1 were identified in a spectrum of neurodevelopmental disorders characterized by microcephaly, intellectual disability, seizures, spasticity, hearing loss, and thrombocytopenia 13 – 18 . Similar phenotypes are observed in diverse human syndromes that arise from loss of function mutations in genes that ensure DNA replication fidelity 70 . Structural analyses coupled with cell-based reconstitution of SPATA5 and SPATA5L1 patient mutants demonstrates that these disease variants affect 55LCC stability, assembly, and enzymatic processing of the replisome ( Figures 4 , S6I and J , Table S4 , Movie S1 ). Given the position of C1orf109-CINP within the complex, we hypothesize that additional, and yet to be discovered, disease mutations will also affect C1orf109-CINP interactions with SPATA5-SPATA5L1 and contribute to complex destabilization. Alterations in 55LCC-dependent replisome processing and the resultant genome instability may contribute to a subset of phenotypes in these disorders. Supporting this idea, a recent study using EHLMRS patient-derived mutant fibroblasts implicated SPATA5L1 in DNA replication and mitosis 18 .

Our data suggest an expansive cellular role for 55LCC unfoldase activity outside of DNA replication and repair, as this complex interacts with key components of the ribosome and proteasome, among others ( Figure 1D ). The SPATA5 ortholog in yeast, Drg1, is involved in ribosome biogenesis by recycling the shuttling factor Rlp24 71 – 73 . A divergent N-terminus and the absence of the other 55LCC members in yeast suggest that this complex must have evolved diverse functionalities in higher organisms, although its role in ribosome biogenesis is conserved as reported recently 50 . Our data indicates that replisome functions of 55LCC are likely independent of its functions in ribosome biogenesis ( Figures 5F , S5D , and S6F – H ). Collectively, this raises the possibility that 55LCC, and perhaps other proteostasis control mechanisms, co-regulate DNA replication and protein synthesis in proliferating cells 74 – 76 .
