---
pmid: '28049740'
title: Resolvase OsGEN1 Mediates DNA Repair by Homologous Recombination.
authors:
- Wang C
- Higgins JD
- He Y
- Lu P
- Zhang D
- Liang W
journal: Plant Physiol
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC5291025
doi: 10.1104/pp.16.01726
---

# Resolvase OsGEN1 Mediates DNA Repair by Homologous Recombination.
**Authors:** Wang C, Higgins JD, He Y, Lu P, Zhang D, Liang W
**Journal:** Plant Physiol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1104/pp.16.01726](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.16.01726)
**PMC:** [PMC5291025](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5291025/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Physiol. 2017 Feb;173(2):1316-1329. doi: 10.1104/pp.16.01726. Epub 2017 
Jan 3.

Resolvase OsGEN1 Mediates DNA Repair by Homologous Recombination.

Wang C(1)(2)(3)(4), Higgins JD(1)(2)(3)(4), He Y(1)(2)(3)(4), Lu P(1)(2)(3)(4), 
Zhang D(1)(2)(3)(4), Liang W(5)(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Joint International Research Laboratory of Metabolic and Developmental 
Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University-University of Adelaide Joint Centre for 
Agriculture and Health, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao 
Tong University, Shanghai 20040, China (C.W., Y.H., D.Z., W.L.).
(2)Department of Genetics, University of Leicester, Leicester LE1 7RH, United 
Kingdom (J.D.H.).
(3)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering and Collaborative Innovation 
Center of Genetics and Development, Institute of Plant Biology, School of Life 
Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China (P.L.); and.
(4)School of Agriculture, Food and Wine, University of Adelaide, Urrbrae, South 
Australia 5064, Australia (D.Z.).
(5)Joint International Research Laboratory of Metabolic and Developmental 
Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University-University of Adelaide Joint Centre for 
Agriculture and Health, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao 
Tong University, Shanghai 20040, China (C.W., Y.H., D.Z., W.L.); 
wqliang@sjtu.edu.cn.
(6)Department of Genetics, University of Leicester, Leicester LE1 7RH, United 
Kingdom (J.D.H.); wqliang@sjtu.edu.cn.
(7)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering and Collaborative Innovation 
Center of Genetics and Development, Institute of Plant Biology, School of Life 
Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China (P.L.); and 
wqliang@sjtu.edu.cn.
(8)School of Agriculture, Food and Wine, University of Adelaide, Urrbrae, South 
Australia 5064, Australia (D.Z.) wqliang@sjtu.edu.cn.

Yen1/GEN1 are canonical Holliday junction resolvases that belong to the RAD2/XPG 
family. In eukaryotes, such as budding yeast, mice, worms, and humans, Yen1/GEN1 
work together with Mus81-Mms4/MUS81-EME1 and Slx1-Slx4/SLX1-SLX4 in DNA repair 
by homologous recombination to maintain genome stability. In plants, the 
biological function of Yen1/GEN1 remains largely unclear. In this study, we 
characterized the loss of function mutants of OsGEN1 and OsSEND1, a pair of 
paralogs of Yen1/GEN1 in rice (Oryza sativa). We first investigated the role of 
OsGEN1 during meiosis and found a reduction in chiasma frequency by ∼6% in 
osgen1 mutants, compared to the wild type, suggesting a possible involvement of 
OsGEN1 in the formation of crossovers. Postmeiosis, OsGEN1 foci were detected in 
wild-type microspore nuclei, but not in the osgen1 mutant concomitant with an 
increase in double-strand breaks. Persistent double-strand breaks led to 
programmed cell death of the male gametes and complete male sterility. In 
contrast, depletion of OsSEND1 had no effects on plant development and did not 
enhance osgen1 defects. Our results indicate that OsGEN1 is essential for 
homologous recombinational DNA repair at two stages of microsporogenesis in 
rice.

© 2017 American Society of Plant Biologists. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1104/pp.16.01726
PMCID: PMC5291025
PMID: 28049740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Yen1/GEN1 are canonical Holliday junction resolvases that belong to the RAD2/XPG family. In eukaryotes, such as budding yeast, mice, worms, and humans, Yen1/GEN1 work together with Mus81-Mms4/MUS81-EME1 and Slx1-Slx4/SLX1-SLX4 in DNA repair by homologous recombination to maintain genome stability. In plants, the biological function of Yen1/GEN1 remains largely unclear. In this study, we characterized the loss of function mutants of OsGEN1 and OsSEND1 , a pair of paralogs of Yen1/GEN1 in rice ( Oryza sativa ). We first investigated the role of OsGEN1 during meiosis and found a reduction in chiasma frequency by ∼6% in osgen1 mutants, compared to the wild type, suggesting a possible involvement of OsGEN1 in the formation of crossovers. Postmeiosis, OsGEN1 foci were detected in wild-type microspore nuclei, but not in the osgen1 mutant concomitant with an increase in double-strand breaks. Persistent double-strand breaks led to programmed cell death of the male gametes and complete male sterility. In contrast, depletion of OsSEND1 had no effects on plant development and did not enhance osgen1 defects. Our results indicate that OsGEN1 is essential for homologous recombinational DNA repair at two stages of microsporogenesis in rice.

CONCLUSION

In summary, we have determined that OsGEN1 has essential roles in processing recombination intermediates during male reproduction in rice. This is distinct from AtSEND1 and AtGEN1 that have essential overlapping roles with AtMUS81 in JM resolution in Arabidopsis, suggesting functional variations and divergence of the two Yen1/GEN1 paralogs in plant evolution. Further studies of mutants lacking a combination of osmus81/osgen1/ossend1 should provide additional insights into the mechanisms of recombination intermediate resolution during meiosis and mitosis in rice.
