---
pmid: '12150929'
title: BAK1, an Arabidopsis LRR receptor-like protein kinase, interacts with BRI1
  and modulates brassinosteroid signaling.
authors:
- Li J
- Wen J
- Lease KA
- Doke JT
- Tax FE
- Walker JC
journal: Cell
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(02)00812-7
---

# BAK1, an Arabidopsis LRR receptor-like protein kinase, interacts with BRI1 and modulates brassinosteroid signaling.
**Authors:** Li J, Wen J, Lease KA, Doke JT, Tax FE, Walker JC
**Journal:** Cell (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(02)00812-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(02)00812-7)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2002 Jul 26;110(2):213-22. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(02)00812-7.

BAK1, an Arabidopsis LRR receptor-like protein kinase, interacts with BRI1 and 
modulates brassinosteroid signaling.

Li J(1), Wen J, Lease KA, Doke JT, Tax FE, Walker JC.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, 
MO 65211, USA.

Brassinosteroids regulate plant growth and development through a protein complex 
that includes the leucine-rich repeat receptor-like protein kinase (LRR-RLK) 
brassinosteroid-insensitive 1 (BRI1). Activation tagging was used to identify a 
dominant genetic suppressor of bri1, bak1-1D (bri1-associated receptor kinase 
1-1Dominant), which encodes an LRR-RLK, distinct from BRI1. Overexpression of 
BAK1 results in elongated organ phenotypes, while a null allele of BAK1 displays 
a semidwarfed phenotype and has reduced sensitivity to brassinosteroids (BRs). 
BAK1 is a serine/threonine protein kinase, and BRI1 and BAK1 interact in vitro 
and in vivo. Expression of a dominant-negative mutant allele of BAK1 causes a 
severe dwarf phenotype, resembling the phenotype of null bri1 alleles. These 
results indicate BAK1 is a component of BR signaling.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(02)00812-7
PMID: 12150929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
