---
pmid: '29386126'
title: Unconventional Trafficking of Mammalian Phospholipase D3 to Lysosomes.
authors:
- Gonzalez AC
- Schweizer M
- Jagdmann S
- Bernreuther C
- Reinheckel T
- Saftig P
- Damme M
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2017.12.100
---

# Unconventional Trafficking of Mammalian Phospholipase D3 to Lysosomes.
**Authors:** Gonzalez AC, Schweizer M, Jagdmann S, Bernreuther C, Reinheckel T, Saftig P, Damme M
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2017.12.100](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2017.12.100)

## Abstract

1. Cell Rep. 2018 Jan 23;22(4):1040-1053. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2017.12.100. Epub
 2018 Jan 28.

Unconventional Trafficking of Mammalian Phospholipase D3 to Lysosomes.

Gonzalez AC(1), Schweizer M(2), Jagdmann S(1), Bernreuther C(3), Reinheckel 
T(4), Saftig P(1), Damme M(5).

Author information:
(1)Biochemical Institute, Christian-Albrechts-University of Kiel, Kiel 24118, 
Germany.
(2)Center of Molecular Neurobiology, University Medical Center 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg 20246, Germany.
(3)Institute of Neuropathology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, Germany.
(4)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, Medical Faculty, 
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(5)Biochemical Institute, Christian-Albrechts-University of Kiel, Kiel 24118, 
Germany. Electronic address: mdamme@biochem.uni-kiel.de.

Variants in the phospholipase D3 (PLD3) gene have genetically been linked to 
late-onset Alzheimer's disease. We present a detailed biochemical analysis 
of PLD3 and reveal its endogenous localization in endosomes and lysosomes. PLD3 
reaches lysosomes as a type II transmembrane protein via a (for mammalian cells) 
uncommon intracellular biosynthetic route that depends on the ESCRT (endosomal 
sorting complex required for transport) machinery. PLD3 is sorted 
into intraluminal vesicles of multivesicular endosomes, and ESCRT-dependent 
sorting correlates with ubiquitination. In multivesicular endosomes, PLD3 is 
subjected to proteolytic cleavage, yielding a stable glycosylated luminal 
polypeptide and a rapidly degraded N-terminal membrane-bound fragment. This 
pathway closely resembles the delivery route of carboxypeptidase S to the yeast 
vacuole. Our experiments reveal a biosynthetic route of PLD3 involving 
proteolytic processing and ESCRT-dependent sorting for its delivery to lysosomes 
in mammalian cells.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2017.12.100
PMID: 29386126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
