---
pmid: '9860955'
title: The biochemical properties of the ATPase activity of a 70-kDa heat shock protein
  (Hsp70) are governed by the C-terminal domains.
authors:
- Lopez-Buesa P
- Pfund C
- Craig EA
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC28029
doi: 10.1073/pnas.95.26.15253
---

# The biochemical properties of the ATPase activity of a 70-kDa heat shock protein (Hsp70) are governed by the C-terminal domains.
**Authors:** Lopez-Buesa P, Pfund C, Craig EA
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.95.26.15253](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.95.26.15253)
**PMC:** [PMC28029](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC28029/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Dec 22;95(26):15253-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.95.26.15253.

The biochemical properties of the ATPase activity of a 70-kDa heat shock protein 
(Hsp70) are governed by the C-terminal domains.

Lopez-Buesa P(1), Pfund C, Craig EA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, University of Wisconsin, 1300 
University Avenue, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

The cytosolic 70-kDa heat shock proteins (Hsp70s), Ssa and Ssb, of Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae are functionally distinct. Here we report that the ATPase activities 
of these two classes of Hsp70s exhibit different kinetic properties. The Ssa 
ATPase has properties similar to those of other Hsp70s studied, such as DnaK and 
Hsc70. Ssb, however, has an unusually low steady-state affinity for ATP but a 
higher maximal velocity. In addition, the ATPase activity of Hsp70s, like that 
of Ssa1, depends on the addition of K+ whereas Ssb activity does not. 
Suprisingly, the isolated 44-kDa ATPase domain of Ssb has a Km and Vmax for ATP 
hydrolysis similar to those of Ssa, rather than those of full length Ssb. 
Analysis of Ssa/Ssb fusion proteins demonstrates that the Ssb peptide-binding 
domain fused to the Ssa ATPase domain generates an ATPase of relatively high 
activity and low steady-state affinity for ATP similar to that of native Ssb. 
Therefore, at least some of the biochemical differences between the ATPases of 
these two classes of Hsp70s are not intrinsic to the ATPase domain itself. The 
differential influence of the peptide-binding domain on the ATPase domain may, 
in part, explain the functional uniqueness of these two classes of Hsp70s.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.95.26.15253
PMCID: PMC28029
PMID: 9860955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
