---
pmid: '19423573'
title: A protein interaction network for the large conductance Ca(2+)-activated K(+)
  channel in the mouse cochlea.
authors:
- Kathiresan T
- Harvey M
- Orchard S
- Sakai Y
- Sokolowski B
journal: Mol Cell Proteomics
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2722780
doi: 10.1074/mcp.M800495-MCP200
---

# A protein interaction network for the large conductance Ca(2+)-activated K(+) channel in the mouse cochlea.
**Authors:** Kathiresan T, Harvey M, Orchard S, Sakai Y, Sokolowski B
**Journal:** Mol Cell Proteomics (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1074/mcp.M800495-MCP200](https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M800495-MCP200)
**PMC:** [PMC2722780](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2722780/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2009 Aug;8(8):1972-87. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M800495-MCP200. 
Epub 2009 May 7.

A protein interaction network for the large conductance Ca(2+)-activated K(+) 
channel in the mouse cochlea.

Kathiresan T(1), Harvey M, Orchard S, Sakai Y, Sokolowski B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, University of South 
Florida, College of Medicine, Tampa, Florida 33612, USA.

The large conductance Ca(2+)-activated K(+) or BK channel has a role in 
sensory/neuronal excitation, intracellular signaling, and metabolism. In the 
non-mammalian cochlea, the onset of BK during development correlates with 
increased hearing sensitivity and underlies frequency tuning in non-mammals, 
whereas its role is less clear in mammalian hearing. To gain insights into BK 
function in mammals, coimmunoprecipitation and two-dimensional PAGE, combined 
with mass spectrometry, were used to reveal 174 putative BKAPs from cytoplasmic 
and membrane/cytoskeletal fractions of mouse cochlea. Eleven BKAPs were verified 
using reciprocal coimmunoprecipitation, including annexin, apolipoprotein, 
calmodulin, hippocalcin, and myelin P0, among others. These proteins were 
immunocolocalized with BK in sensory and neuronal cells. A bioinformatics 
approach was used to mine databases to reveal binary partners and the resultant 
protein network, as well as to determine previous ion channel affiliations, 
subcellular localization, and cellular processes. The search for binary partners 
using the IntAct molecular interaction database produced a putative global 
network of 160 nodes connected with 188 edges that contained 12 major hubs. 
Additional mining of databases revealed that more than 50% of primary BKAPs had 
prior affiliations with K(+) and Ca(2+) channels. Although a majority of BKAPs 
are found in either the cytoplasm or membrane and contribute to cellular 
processes that primarily involve metabolism (30.5%) and trafficking/scaffolding 
(23.6%), at least 20% are mitochondrial-related. Among the BKAPs are chaperonins 
such as calreticulin, GRP78, and HSP60 that, when reduced with siRNAs, alter 
BKalpha expression in CHO cells. Studies of BKalpha in mitochondria revealed 
compartmentalization in sensory cells, whereas heterologous expression of a 
BK-DEC splice variant cloned from cochlea revealed a BK mitochondrial candidate. 
The studies described herein provide insights into BK-related functions that 
include not only cell excitation, but also cell signaling and apoptosis, and 
involve proteins concerned with Ca(2+) regulation, structure, and hearing loss.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M800495-MCP200
PMCID: PMC2722780
PMID: 19423573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
