---
pmid: '30635284'
title: CDK5RAP3, a UFL1 substrate adaptor, is crucial for liver development.
authors:
- Yang R
- Wang H
- Kang B
- Chen B
- Shi Y
- Yang S
- Sun L
- Liu Y
- Xiao W
- Zhang T
- Yang J
- Zhang Y
- Zhu M
- Xu P
- Chang Y
- Jia Y
- Huang Y
journal: Development
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/dev.169235
---

# CDK5RAP3, a UFL1 substrate adaptor, is crucial for liver development.
**Authors:** Yang R, Wang H, Kang B, Chen B, Shi Y, Yang S, Sun L, Liu Y, Xiao W, Zhang T, Yang J, Zhang Y, Zhu M, Xu P, Chang Y, Jia Y, Huang Y
**Journal:** Development (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.169235](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.169235)

## Abstract

1. Development. 2019 Jan 25;146(2):dev169235. doi: 10.1242/dev.169235.

CDK5RAP3, a UFL1 substrate adaptor, is crucial for liver development.

Yang R(1)(2), Wang H(1)(2), Kang B(3), Chen B(1)(2), Shi Y(4), Yang S(1)(2), Sun 
L(5), Liu Y(1)(2), Xiao W(6), Zhang T(6), Yang J(1), Zhang Y(1)(7), Zhu M(4), Xu 
P(6), Chang Y(1)(7), Jia Y(8)(2), Huang Y(8)(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, 
Beijing 100005, China.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100005, 
China.
(3)School of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.
(4)Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100005, China.
(5)Center for Experimental Animal Research, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 
100005, China.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, 
National Center for Protein Sciences Beijing, Beijing Institute of Lifeomics, 
Beijing 102206, China.
(7)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, 
Beijing 100005, China.
(8)State Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, 
Beijing 100005, China huangyue@pumc.edu.cn jiayuyan@ibms.pumc.edu.cn.

Protein modification by ubiquitin and ubiquitin-like proteins (UBLs) regulates 
numerous biological functions. The UFM1 system, a novel UBL conjugation system, 
is implicated in mouse development and hematopoiesis. However, its broad 
biological functions and working mechanisms remain largely elusive. CDK5RAP3, a 
possible ufmylation substrate, is essential for epiboly and gastrulation in 
zebrafish. Herein, we report a crucial role of CDK5RAP3 in liver development and 
hepatic functions. Cdk5rap3 knockout mice displayed prenatal lethality with 
severe liver hypoplasia, as characterized by delayed proliferation and 
compromised differentiation. Hepatocyte-specific Cdk5rap3 knockout mice suffered 
post-weaning lethality, owing to serious hypoglycemia and impaired lipid 
metabolism. Depletion of CDK5RAP3 triggered endoplasmic reticulum stress and 
activated unfolded protein responses in hepatocytes. We detected the in vivo 
interaction of CDK5RAP3 with UFL1, the defined E3 ligase in ufmylation. Notably, 
loss of CDK5RAP3 altered the ufmylation profile in liver cells, suggesting that 
CDK5RAP3 serves as a novel substrate adaptor for this UBL modification. 
Collectively, our study identifies CDK5RAP3 as an important regulator of 
ufmylation and suggests the involvement of ufmylation in mammalian development.

© 2019. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.169235
PMID: 30635284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.
