---
pmid: '33981038'
title: DHODH-mediated ferroptosis defence is a targetable vulnerability in cancer.
authors:
- Mao C
- Liu X
- Zhang Y
- Lei G
- Yan Y
- Lee H
- Koppula P
- Wu S
- Zhuang L
- Fang B
- Poyurovsky MV
- Olszewski K
- Gan B
journal: Nature
year: '2021'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC8895686
doi: 10.1038/s41586-021-03539-7
---

# DHODH-mediated ferroptosis defence is a targetable vulnerability in cancer.
**Authors:** Mao C, Liu X, Zhang Y, Lei G, Yan Y, Lee H, Koppula P, Wu S, Zhuang L, Fang B, Poyurovsky MV, Olszewski K, Gan B
**Journal:** Nature (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41586-021-03539-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03539-7)
**PMC:** [PMC8895686](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8895686/)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2021 May;593(7860):586-590. doi: 10.1038/s41586-021-03539-7. Epub 2021
 May 12.

DHODH-mediated ferroptosis defence is a targetable vulnerability in cancer.

Mao C(1), Liu X(1), Zhang Y(1), Lei G(1), Yan Y(1), Lee H(1), Koppula P(1)(2), 
Wu S(1), Zhuang L(1), Fang B(3), Poyurovsky MV(4), Olszewski K(5), Gan B(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(2)The University of Texas MD Anderson UTHealth Graduate School of Biomedical 
Sciences, Houston, TX, USA.
(3)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Kadmon Corporation, LLC, New York, NY, USA.
(5)Kadmon Corporation, LLC, New York, NY, USA. kellen@kadmon.com.
(6)Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. bgan@mdanderson.org.
(7)The University of Texas MD Anderson UTHealth Graduate School of Biomedical 
Sciences, Houston, TX, USA. bgan@mdanderson.org.

Erratum in
    Nature. 2021 Aug;596(7873):E13. doi: 10.1038/s41586-021-03820-9.

Comment in
    Nature. 2021 May;593(7860):514-515. doi: 10.1038/d41586-021-01203-8.
    Nature. 2023 Jul;619(7968):E9-E18. doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06269-0.

Ferroptosis, a form of regulated cell death that is induced by excessive lipid 
peroxidation, is a key tumour suppression mechanism1-4. Glutathione peroxidase 4 
(GPX4)5,6 and ferroptosis suppressor protein 1 (FSP1)7,8 constitute two major 
ferroptosis defence systems. Here we show that treatment of cancer cells with 
GPX4 inhibitors results in acute depletion of N-carbamoyl-L-aspartate, a 
pyrimidine biosynthesis intermediate, with concomitant accumulation of uridine. 
Supplementation with dihydroorotate or orotate-the substrate and product of 
dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH)-attenuates or potentiates ferroptosis 
induced by inhibition of GPX4, respectively, and these effects are particularly 
pronounced in cancer cells with low expression of GPX4 (GPX4low). Inactivation 
of DHODH induces extensive mitochondrial lipid peroxidation and ferroptosis in 
GPX4low cancer cells, and synergizes with ferroptosis inducers to induce these 
effects in GPX4high cancer cells. Mechanistically, DHODH operates in parallel to 
mitochondrial GPX4 (but independently of cytosolic GPX4 or FSP1) to inhibit 
ferroptosis in the mitochondrial inner membrane by reducing ubiquinone to 
ubiquinol (a radical-trapping antioxidant with anti-ferroptosis activity). The 
DHODH inhibitor brequinar selectively suppresses GPX4low tumour growth by 
inducing ferroptosis, whereas combined treatment with brequinar and 
sulfasalazine, an FDA-approved drug with ferroptosis-inducing activity, 
synergistically induces ferroptosis and suppresses GPX4high tumour growth. Our 
results identify a DHODH-mediated ferroptosis defence mechanism in mitochondria 
and suggest a therapeutic strategy of targeting ferroptosis in cancer treatment.

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-021-03539-7
PMCID: PMC8895686
PMID: 33981038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests K.O. and M.V.P. are 
full-time employees of Kadmon Corporation, LLC. B.G, K.O., and M.C. have filed a 
patent application relating to the use of DHODH inhibitors to target ferroptosis 
in cancer therapy. Other authors declare no competing financial interests.
