---
pmid: '20533548'
title: Micro-RNA-21 regulates TGF-β-induced myofibroblast differentiation by targeting
  PDCD4 in tumor-stroma interaction.
authors:
- Yao Q
- Cao S
- Li C
- Mengesha A
- Kong B
- Wei M
journal: Int J Cancer
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/ijc.25506
---

# Micro-RNA-21 regulates TGF-β-induced myofibroblast differentiation by targeting PDCD4 in tumor-stroma interaction.
**Authors:** Yao Q, Cao S, Li C, Mengesha A, Kong B, Wei M
**Journal:** Int J Cancer (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ijc.25506](https://doi.org/10.1002/ijc.25506)

## Abstract

1. Int J Cancer. 2011 Apr 15;128(8):1783-92. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25506.

Micro-RNA-21 regulates TGF-β-induced myofibroblast differentiation by targeting 
PDCD4 in tumor-stroma interaction.

Yao Q(1), Cao S, Li C, Mengesha A, Kong B, Wei M.

Author information:
(1)Griffith Institute for Health and Medical Research, Griffith University, Gold 
Coast Campus, Southport, QLD, Australia.

Transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1) induces stromal 
fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transdifferentiation in the tumor-stroma interactive 
microenvironment via modulation of multiple phenotypic and functional genes, 
which plays a critical role in tumor progression. Up to now, the involvement of 
micro-RNAs (miRNAs) and their roles in TGF-β1-induced myofibroblast 
differentiation in tumor-stroma interaction are unclear. Using quantitative 
real-time RT-PCR, we demonstrated that the expression of micro-RNA-21 (miR-21) 
was upregulated in activated fibroblasts after treatment with TGF-β1 or 
conditioned medium from cancer cells. To determine the potential roles of miR-21 
in TGF-β1-mediated gene regulation during myofibroblast conversion, we showed 
that miR-21 expression was downregulated by miR-21 inhibitor and upregulated by 
miR-21 mimic. Interestingly, downregulation of miR-21 with the inhibitor 
effectively inhibited TGF-β1-induced myofibroblast differentiation while 
upregulation of miR-21 with a mimic significantly promoted myofibroblast 
differentiation. We further demonstrated that MiR-21 directly targeted and 
downregulated programmed cell death 4 (PDCD4) gene, which in turn acted as a 
negative regulator of several phenotypic and functional genes of myofibroblasts. 
Taken together, these results suggested that miR-21 participated in 
TGF-β1-induced myofibroblast transdifferentiation in cancer stroma by targeting 
PDCD4.

Copyright © 2010 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.25506
PMID: 20533548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
