---
pmid: '11698677'
title: Structural genomics of enzymes involved in sterol/isoprenoid biosynthesis.
authors:
- Bonanno JB
- Edo C
- Eswar N
- Pieper U
- Romanowski MJ
- Ilyin V
- Gerchman SE
- Kycia H
- Studier FW
- Sali A
- Burley SK
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2001'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC60796
doi: 10.1073/pnas.181466998
---

# Structural genomics of enzymes involved in sterol/isoprenoid biosynthesis.
**Authors:** Bonanno JB, Edo C, Eswar N, Pieper U, Romanowski MJ, Ilyin V, Gerchman SE, Kycia H, Studier FW, Sali A, Burley SK
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.181466998](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.181466998)
**PMC:** [PMC60796](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC60796/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Nov 6;98(23):12896-901. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.181466998.

Structural genomics of enzymes involved in sterol/isoprenoid biosynthesis.

Bonanno JB(1), Edo C, Eswar N, Pieper U, Romanowski MJ, Ilyin V, Gerchman SE, 
Kycia H, Studier FW, Sali A, Burley SK.

Author information:
(1)Laboratories of Molecular Biophysics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The 
Rockefeller University, 1230 York Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Nov 20;98(24):13488-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.261549098.

X-ray structures of two enzymes in the sterol/isoprenoid biosynthesis pathway 
have been determined in a structural genomics pilot study. 
Mevalonate-5-diphosphate decarboxylase (MDD) is a single-domain alpha/beta 
protein that catalyzes the last of three sequential ATP-dependent reactions 
which convert mevalonate to isopentenyl diphosphate. Isopentenyl disphosphate 
isomerase (IDI) is an alpha/beta metalloenzyme that catalyzes interconversion of 
isopentenyl diphosphate and dimethylallyl diphosphate, which condense in the 
next step toward synthesis of sterols and a host of natural products. Homology 
modeling of related proteins and comparisons of the MDD and IDI structures with 
two other experimentally determined structures have shown that MDD is a member 
of the GHMP superfamily of small-molecule kinases and IDI is similar to the 
nudix hydrolases, which act on nucleotide diphosphatecontaining substrates. 
Structural models were produced for 379 proteins, encompassing a substantial 
fraction of both protein superfamilies. All three enzymes responsible for 
synthesis of isopentenyl diphosphate from mevalonate (mevalonate kinase, 
phosphomevalonate kinase, and MDD) share the same fold, catalyze phosphorylation 
of chemically similar substrates (MDD decarboxylation involves phosphorylation 
of mevalonate diphosphate), and seem to have evolved from a common ancestor. 
These structures and the structural models derived from them provide a framework 
for interpreting biochemical function and evolutionary relationships.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.181466998
PMCID: PMC60796
PMID: 11698677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

X-ray structures of two enzymes in the sterol/isoprenoid biosynthesis pathway have been determined in a structural genomics pilot study. Mevalonate-5-diphosphate decarboxylase (MDD) is a single-domain α/β protein that catalyzes the last of three sequential ATP-dependent reactions which convert mevalonate to isopentenyl diphosphate. Isopentenyl disphosphate isomerase (IDI) is an α/β metalloenzyme that catalyzes interconversion of isopentenyl diphosphate and dimethylallyl diphosphate, which condense in the next step toward synthesis of sterols and a host of natural products. Homology modeling of related proteins and comparisons of the MDD and IDI structures with two other experimentally determined structures have shown that MDD is a member of the GHMP superfamily of small-molecule kinases and IDI is similar to the nudix hydrolases, which act on nucleotide diphosphatecontaining substrates. Structural models were produced for 379 proteins, encompassing a substantial fraction of both protein superfamilies. All three enzymes responsible for synthesis of isopentenyl diphosphate from mevalonate (mevalonate kinase, phosphomevalonate kinase, and MDD) share the same fold, catalyze phosphorylation of chemically similar substrates (MDD decarboxylation involves phosphorylation of mevalonate diphosphate), and seem to have evolved from a common ancestor. These structures and the structural models derived from them provide a framework for interpreting biochemical function and evolutionary relationships.

Discussion

One of the goals of the New York Structural Genomics Research Consortium is to generate experimentally determined structures with sufficient diversity to support homology modeling of large numbers of protein sequences. Recent analyses by Vitkup et al. ( 33 ) have suggested that determination of as few as 16,000 selected structures could enable production of “accurate” homology models for 90% of all proteins found in nature (see below).

Homology modeling can be distinguished from all other methods for analyzing relationships among protein sequences because it yields atomic coordinates suitable for direct comparisons with x-ray and solution NMR structures. Acceptable models can be divided into three accuracy classes, characterized with blind tests by using known structures ( 34 ). Models based on >50% sequence identity with the template are comparable in accuracy to 3 Å resolution x-ray structures or medium-resolution solution NMR structures (10 long-range restraints per residue). Models obtained with less similar templates (30–50% identity) typically have >85% of their α-carbons within 3.5 Å of the correct position. When sequence identities fall below 30%, models with acceptable model scores (>0.7) may contain significant errors arising from ambiguities in the sequence alignment of the modeling candidate with the template, but can nevertheless be used for protein fold identification.

Targets 100 (MDD) and 109 (IDI) were selected for experimental structure determination to provide modeling templates for two enzyme families in the sterol/isoprenoid biosynthesis pathway and, indeed, we obtained models for 21 MDDs and 36 IDIs. Greater modeling coverage was, however, possible because both MDD and IDI proved to be members of distinct protein superfamilies encompassing a range of different enzyme activities and proteins of unknown biochemical function. Even wider coverage was afforded by the availability of a second modeling template from each of these protein sequence/structure families. Of the 379 sequences modeled with one or more of the MDD, HSK, IDI, and MutT templates, 3 (<1%) fall into the highest accuracy range (>50% identity), 53 (14%) in the medium accuracy range (30–50% identity), and 323 (85%) in the lowest accuracy range (<30% identity). Virtually all of the 56 proteins with medium or highest accuracy models (≥30% identity) are thought to have the same enzymatic function as the template (with two possible exceptions in the nudix/IDI superfamily). In clustering the members of these two superfamilies into groups of the most closely related proteins (by means of sequence comparisons), proteins of unknown function were often grouped with proteins of known enzymatic activity, allowing tentative assignment of biochemical function (Tables 2–5). Isolated cases of patently incorrect functional annotation were also found (Tables 2–5).

The modeling coverage of the GHMP kinase superfamily provided some insights into the problem of target selection for structural genomics. The structure of S. cerevisiae MDD produced medium or high accuracy models for 80% of the modeled sequences thought to have MDD activity, but coverage of the HSK family provided by the M. jannaschii HSK template was not as broad (only 41% of HSK models are medium or high accuracy). Current GHMP kinase superfamily members can be clustered into 19 discrete subfamilies with at least 4 members, encompassing the MDDs, 3 clusters of GKs, 4 clusters of HSKs, 3 clusters of MKs, the PMKs, the d -glycero- d -manno-heptose 7-phosphate kinases, 3 clusters of diphosphocytidyl-2- C -methyl- d -erythritol kinases (CMKs), the archael shikimate kinases, and 2 distinct clusters of hypothetical proteins. We estimate that 17 additional experimentally determined structures will be required to produce medium to high accuracy models for most members (≥80%) of each detectable GHMP kinase subfamily. The nudix/IDI superfamily, on the other hand, seems to have much greater structural diversity, and achieving equivalent coverage by medium to high accuracy models may present a greater logistical challenge.

Structures of GHMP kinase superfamily members and resulting homology models may guide experimentation aimed at defining enzymatic function, cofactor requirements, and mechanism(s) of action, which should allow us to understand better how this family of structurally similar yet functionally diverse enzymes evolved from a common ancestor. The GHMP kinase models may be of some medical relevance in understanding the structural bases of a number of diseases caused by single-nucleotide polymorphisms in coding regions. Impairment of human GK function by missense mutations within the enzyme leads to galactosemia and cataract formation in newborns ( 35 ), which can be reversed by restricting dietary galactose. Mutations in the human gene encoding MK lead to either hyperIgD and periodic fever syndrome or mevalonic aciduria, a severe and frequently fatal malady ( 36 , 37 ). Finally, mutations in both MK and PMK have been implicated in the development of Zellweger syndrome, a genetic disorder characterized by defects in peroxisome biogenesis ( 38 ).
