---
pmid: '18562689'
title: Telomerase reverse transcriptase is required for the localization of telomerase
  RNA to cajal bodies and telomeres in human cancer cells.
authors:
- Tomlinson RL
- Abreu EB
- Ziegler T
- Ly H
- Counter CM
- Terns RM
- Terns MP
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2526684
doi: 10.1091/mbc.e08-02-0184
---

# Telomerase reverse transcriptase is required for the localization of telomerase RNA to cajal bodies and telomeres in human cancer cells.
**Authors:** Tomlinson RL, Abreu EB, Ziegler T, Ly H, Counter CM, Terns RM, Terns MP
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.e08-02-0184](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.e08-02-0184)
**PMC:** [PMC2526684](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2526684/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Cell. 2008 Sep;19(9):3793-800. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e08-02-0184. Epub
2008  Jun 18.

Telomerase reverse transcriptase is required for the localization of telomerase 
RNA to cajal bodies and telomeres in human cancer cells.

Tomlinson RL(1), Abreu EB, Ziegler T, Ly H, Counter CM, Terns RM, Terns MP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Georgia, 
Athens, GA 30602, USA.

Comment in
    Mol Biol Cell. 19:3615.

Telomere maintenance by telomerase is critical for the unlimited division 
potential of most human cancer cells. The two essential components of human 
telomerase, telomerase RNA (hTR) and telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT), 
are recruited from distinct subnuclear sites to telomeres during S phase. 
Throughout the remainder of the cell cycle hTR is found primarily in Cajal 
bodies. The localization of hTR to Cajal bodies and telomeres is specific to 
cancer cells where telomerase is active and is not observed in primary cells. 
Here we show that the trafficking of hTR to both telomeres and Cajal bodies 
depends on hTERT. RNA interference-mediated depletion of hTERT in cancer cells 
leads to loss of hTR from both Cajal bodies and telomeres without affecting hTR 
levels. In addition, expression of hTERT in telomerase-negative cells (including 
primary and ALT cancer cell lines) induces hTR to localize to both sites. 
Factors that did not stimulate hTR localization in our experiments include 
increased hTR RNA levels and Cajal body numbers, and expression of SV40 large T 
antigen and oncogenic Ras. Our findings suggest that the trafficking of 
telomerase to Cajal bodies and telomeres in cancer cells correlates with and 
depends on the assembly of the enzyme.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e08-02-0184
PMCID: PMC2526684
PMID: 18562689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
