---
pmid: '10593960'
title: Identification and characterization of cvHsp. A novel human small stress protein
  selectively expressed in cardiovascular and insulin-sensitive tissues.
authors:
- Krief S
- Faivre JF
- Robert P
- Le Douarin B
- Brument-Larignon N
- Lefrère I
- Bouzyk MM
- Anderson KM
- Greller LD
- Tobin FL
- Souchet M
- Bril A
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.51.36592
---

# Identification and characterization of cvHsp. A novel human small stress protein selectively expressed in cardiovascular and insulin-sensitive tissues.
**Authors:** Krief S, Faivre JF, Robert P, Le Douarin B, Brument-Larignon N, Lefrère I, Bouzyk MM, Anderson KM, Greller LD, Tobin FL, Souchet M, Bril A
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.274.51.36592](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.51.36592)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Dec 17;274(51):36592-600. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.51.36592.

Identification and characterization of cvHsp. A novel human small stress protein 
selectively expressed in cardiovascular and insulin-sensitive tissues.

Krief S(1), Faivre JF, Robert P, Le Douarin B, Brument-Larignon N, Lefrère I, 
Bouzyk MM, Anderson KM, Greller LD, Tobin FL, Souchet M, Bril A.

Author information:
(1)SmithKline Beecham Laboratoires Pharmaceutiques, 4 rue du Chesnay-Beauregard, 
BP 58, 35762 Saint-Grégoire, France. Stephane_Krief@sbphrd.com

Starting with computational tools that search for tissue-selective expression of 
assembled expressed sequenced tags, we have identified by focusing on heart 
libraries a novel small stress protein of 170 amino acids that we named cvHsp. 
cvHsp was found as being computationally selectively and highly (0.3% of the 
total RNA) expressed in human heart. The cvHsp gene mapped to 1p36.23-p34.3 
between markers D1S434 and D1S507. The expression of cvHsp was analyzed with RNA 
dot, Northern blots, or reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction: 
expression was high in heart, medium in skeletal muscle, and low in aorta or 
adipose tissues. In the heart of rat models of cardiac pathologies, cvHsp mRNA 
expression was either unchanged (spontaneous hypertension), up-regulated (right 
ventricular hypertrophy induced by monocrotaline treatment), or down-regulated 
(left ventricular hypertrophy following aortic banding). In obese Zucker rats, 
cvHsp mRNA was increased in skeletal muscle, brown, and white adipose tissues 
but remained unchanged in the heart. Western blot analysis using antipeptide 
polyclonal antibodies revealed two specific bands at 23 and 25 kDa for cvHsp in 
human heart. cvHsp interacted in both yeast two-hybrid and immunoprecipitation 
experiments with alpha-filamin or actin-binding protein 280. Within cvHsp, amino 
acid residues 56-119 were shown to be important for its specific interaction 
with the C-terminal tail of alpha-filamin.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.51.36592
PMID: 10593960 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
