---
pmid: '23913685'
title: Clathrin coat disassembly by the yeast Hsc70/Ssa1p and auxilin/Swa2p proteins
  observed by single-particle burst analysis spectroscopy.
authors:
- Krantz KC
- Puchalla J
- Thapa R
- Kobayashi C
- Bisher M
- Viehweg J
- Carr CM
- Rye HS
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3772218
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.491753
---

# Clathrin coat disassembly by the yeast Hsc70/Ssa1p and auxilin/Swa2p proteins observed by single-particle burst analysis spectroscopy.
**Authors:** Krantz KC, Puchalla J, Thapa R, Kobayashi C, Bisher M, Viehweg J, Carr CM, Rye HS
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M113.491753](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M113.491753)
**PMC:** [PMC3772218](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3772218/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Sep 13;288(37):26721-30. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.491753. Epub 
2013 Aug 2.

Clathrin coat disassembly by the yeast Hsc70/Ssa1p and auxilin/Swa2p proteins 
observed by single-particle burst analysis spectroscopy.

Krantz KC(1), Puchalla J, Thapa R, Kobayashi C, Bisher M, Viehweg J, Carr CM, 
Rye HS.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, 
New Jersey 08544.

The role of clathrin-coated vesicles in receptor-mediated endocytosis is 
conserved among eukaryotes, and many of the proteins required for clathrin coat 
assembly and disassembly have orthologs in yeast and mammals. In yeast, dozens 
of proteins have been identified as regulators of the multistep reaction 
required for endocytosis, including those that regulate disassembly of the 
clathrin coat. In mammalian systems, clathrin coat disassembly has been 
reconstituted using neuronal clathrin baskets mixed with the purified chaperone 
ATPase 70-kDa heat shock cognate (Hsc70), plus a clathrin-specific co-chaperone, 
such as the synaptic protein auxilin. Yet, despite previous characterization of 
the yeast Hsc70 ortholog, Ssa1p, and the auxilin-like ortholog, Swa2p, testing 
mechanistic models for disassembly of nonneuronal clathrin coats has been 
limited by the absence of a functional reconstitution assay. Here we use 
single-particle burst analysis spectroscopy, in combination with fluorescence 
correlation spectroscopy, to follow the population dynamics of fluorescently 
tagged yeast clathrin baskets in the presence of purified Ssa1p and Swa2p. An 
advantage of this combined approach for mechanistic studies is the ability to 
measure, as a function of time, changes in the number and size of objects from a 
starting population to the reaction products. Our results indicate that Ssa1p 
and Swa2p cooperatively disassemble yeast clathrin baskets into fragments larger 
than the individual triskelia, suggesting that disassembly of clathrin-coated 
vesicles may proceed through a partially uncoated intermediate.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.491753
PMCID: PMC3772218
PMID: 23913685 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
