---
pmid: '21150129'
title: A novel ER J-protein DNAJB12 accelerates ER-associated degradation of membrane
  proteins including CFTR.
authors:
- Yamamoto YH
- Kimura T
- Momohara S
- Takeuchi M
- Tani T
- Kimata Y
- Kadokura H
- Kohno K
journal: Cell Struct Funct
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1247/csf.10023
---

# A novel ER J-protein DNAJB12 accelerates ER-associated degradation of membrane proteins including CFTR.
**Authors:** Yamamoto YH, Kimura T, Momohara S, Takeuchi M, Tani T, Kimata Y, Kadokura H, Kohno K
**Journal:** Cell Struct Funct (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1247/csf.10023](https://doi.org/10.1247/csf.10023)

## Abstract

1. Cell Struct Funct. 2010;35(2):107-16. doi: 10.1247/csf.10023. Epub 2010 Dec 8.

A novel ER J-protein DNAJB12 accelerates ER-associated degradation of membrane 
proteins including CFTR.

Yamamoto YH(1), Kimura T, Momohara S, Takeuchi M, Tani T, Kimata Y, Kadokura H, 
Kohno K.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cell Genetics, Graduate School of Biological 
Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Ikoma, Nara, Japan.

Cytosolic Hsc70/Hsp70 are known to contribute to the endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER)-associated degradation of membrane proteins. However, at least in mammalian 
cells, its partner ER-localized J-protein for this cellular event has not been 
identified. Here we propose that this missing protein is DNAJB12. Protease 
protection assay and immunofluorescence study revealed that DNAJB12 is an 
ER-localized single membrane-spanning protein carrying a J-domain facing the 
cytosol. Using co-immunoprecipitation assay, we found that DNAJB12 is able to 
bind Hsc70 and thus can recruit Hsc70 to the ER membrane. Remarkably, cellular 
overexpression of DNAJB12 accelerated the degradation of misfolded membrane 
proteins including cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), 
but not a misfolded luminal protein. The DNAJB12-dependent degradation of CFTR 
was compromised by a proteasome inhibitor, lactacystin, suggesting that this 
process requires the ubiquitin-proteasome system. Conversely, knockdown of 
DNAJB12 expression attenuated the degradation of CFTR. Thus, DNAJB12 is a novel 
mammalian ER-localized J-protein that plays a vital role in the quality control 
of membrane proteins.

DOI: 10.1247/csf.10023
PMID: 21150129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
