---
pmid: '25244576'
title: Knockdown of Sec8 enhances the binding affinity of c-Jun N-terminal kinase
  (JNK)-interacting protein 4 for mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 4 (MKK4)
  and suppresses the phosphorylation of MKK4, p38, and JNK, thereby inhibiting apoptosis.
authors:
- Tanaka T
- Iino M
- Goto K
journal: FEBS J
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/febs.13063
---

# Knockdown of Sec8 enhances the binding affinity of c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK)-interacting protein 4 for mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 4 (MKK4) and suppresses the phosphorylation of MKK4, p38, and JNK, thereby inhibiting apoptosis.
**Authors:** Tanaka T, Iino M, Goto K
**Journal:** FEBS J (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1111/febs.13063](https://doi.org/10.1111/febs.13063)

## Abstract

1. FEBS J. 2014 Dec;281(23):5237-50. doi: 10.1111/febs.13063. Epub 2014 Oct 13.

Knockdown of Sec8 enhances the binding affinity of c-Jun N-terminal kinase 
(JNK)-interacting protein 4 for mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 4 (MKK4) 
and suppresses the phosphorylation of MKK4, p38, and JNK, thereby inhibiting 
apoptosis.

Tanaka T(1), Iino M, Goto K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Yamagata University School of 
Medicine, Japan; Department of Dentistry, Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, 
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Yamagata University School of Medicine, 
Japan.

The exocyst complex, also called the Sec6/8 complex, is important for targeting 
exocytic vesicles to specific docking sites on the plasma membrane in yeast and 
mammalian cells. In addition to these original findings, recent results of 
studies suggest that Sec8 is also involved in oncogenesis, although the 
functional implications of Sec8 in cancer cells are not well understood. c-Jun 
N-terminal kinase-interacting protein 4 (JIP4) is a scaffold protein that plays 
a crucial role in the regulation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) 
signaling cascades. The present study examined how Sec8 is involved in 
JIP4-mediated MAPK signaling under apoptotic conditions. It was found that Sec8 
binds to and regulates JIP4, and that knockdown of Sec8 enhances the binding of 
JIP4 to MAPK kinase 4, thereby decreasing the phosphorylation of MAPK kinase 4, 
JNK, and p38. These results raise the possibility that Sec8 serves as an 
important regulator of MAPK signaling cascades.

© 2014 FEBS.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.13063
PMID: 25244576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
