---
reference_id: PMID:3034602
title: Molecular cloning of the beta-subunit of human prolyl 4-hydroxylase. This subunit and protein disulphide isomerase are products of the same gene.
authors:
- Pihlajaniemi T
- Helaakoski T
- Tasanen K
- Myllylä R
- Huhtala ML
- Koivu J
- Kivirikko KI
journal: EMBO J
year: '1987'
doi: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1987.tb04803.x
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Molecular cloning of the beta-subunit of human prolyl 4-hydroxylase. This subunit and protein disulphide isomerase are products of the same gene.
**Authors:** Pihlajaniemi T, Helaakoski T, Tasanen K, Myllylä R, Huhtala ML, Koivu J, Kivirikko KI
**Journal:** EMBO J (1987)
**DOI:** [10.1002/j.1460-2075.1987.tb04803.x](https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1460-2075.1987.tb04803.x)

## Content

1. EMBO J. 1987 Mar;6(3):643-9. doi: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1987.tb04803.x.

Molecular cloning of the beta-subunit of human prolyl 4-hydroxylase. This
subunit and protein disulphide isomerase are products of the same gene.

Pihlajaniemi T, Helaakoski T, Tasanen K, Myllylä R, Huhtala ML, Koivu J,
Kivirikko KI.

Prolyl 4-hydroxylase (EC 1.14.11.2), an alpha 2 beta 2 tetramer, catalyses the
formation of 4-hydroxyproline in collagens by the hydroxylation of proline
residues in peptide linkages. We report here the isolation of cDNA clones coding
for the beta-subunit of prolyl 4-hydroxylase from a human hepatoma lambda gt11
library and a corresponding human placenta library. Five overlapping clones
covering all the coding sequences and almost all the non-coding sequences were
characterized. The size of the mRNA hybridizing with these clones in Northern
blotting is approximately 2.5 kb. The clones encode a polypeptide of 508 amino
acid residues, including a signal peptide of 17 amino acids. These human
sequences were found to be very similar to those recently reported for rat
protein disulphide isomerase (EC 5.3.4.1). The degree of homology between these
two proteins was 84% at the level of nucleotide sequences or 94% at the level of
amino acid sequences. Southern blot analyses of human genomic DNA with a cDNA
probe for the beta-subunit indicated the presence of only one gene containing
these sequences. The product of a single gene thus appears to possess two
different enzymatic functions depending on whether it is present in cells in
monomer form or in the prolyl 4-hydroxylase tetramer.

DOI: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1987.tb04803.x
PMCID: PMC553446
PMID: 3034602 [Indexed for MEDLINE]