---
pmid: '23211419'
title: Identification and selected reaction monitoring (SRM) quantification of endocytosis
  factors associated with Numb.
authors:
- Krieger JR
- Taylor P
- Gajadhar AS
- Guha A
- Moran MF
- McGlade CJ
journal: Mol Cell Proteomics
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3567869
doi: 10.1074/mcp.M112.020768
---

# Identification and selected reaction monitoring (SRM) quantification of endocytosis factors associated with Numb.
**Authors:** Krieger JR, Taylor P, Gajadhar AS, Guha A, Moran MF, McGlade CJ
**Journal:** Mol Cell Proteomics (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1074/mcp.M112.020768](https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M112.020768)
**PMC:** [PMC3567869](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3567869/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2013 Feb;12(2):499-514. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M112.020768.
Epub  2012 Dec 4.

Identification and selected reaction monitoring (SRM) quantification of 
endocytosis factors associated with Numb.

Krieger JR(1), Taylor P, Gajadhar AS, Guha A, Moran MF, McGlade CJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
M5G 2M9, Canada.

Numb is an endocytic adaptor protein that regulates the endocytosis and 
trafficking of transmembrane receptors including Notch, E-cadherin, and 
integrins. Vertebrate Numb is alternatively spliced at exons 3 and 9 to give 
rise to four protein isoforms. Expression of these isoforms varies at different 
developmental stages, and although the function of Numb isoforms containing exon 
3 has been studied, the role of exon 9 inclusion has not been shown. Here we use 
affinity purification and tandem mass spectrometry to identify Numb associated 
proteins, including novel interactions with REPS1, BMP2K, and BCR. In vitro 
binding measurements indicated exon 9-independent Numb interaction with REPS1 
and Eps15 EH domains. Selected reaction monitoring mass spectrometry was used to 
quantitatively compare the proteins associated with the p72 and p66 Numb 
isoforms, which differ by the exon 9 region. This showed that significantly more 
EPS15 and three AP-2 subunit proteins bound Numb isoforms containing exon 9. The 
EPS15 preference for exon 9-containing Numb was confirmed in intact cells by 
using a proximity ligation assay. Finally, we used multiplexed selected reaction 
monitoring mass spectrometry to assess the dynamic regulation of Numb 
association with endocytic proteins. Numb hyper-phosphorylation resulted in 
disassociation of Numb endocytic complexes, while inhibition of endocytosis did 
not alter Numb association with the AP-2 complex but altered recruitment of 
EPS15, REPS1, and BMP2K. Hence, quantitative mass spectrometric analysis of Numb 
protein-protein interactions has provided new insights into the assembly and 
regulation of protein complexes important in development and cancer.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M112.020768
PMCID: PMC3567869
PMID: 23211419 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
