---
pmid: '10805756'
title: Phosphorylation of SOX9 by cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase A enhances SOX9's
  ability to transactivate a Col2a1 chondrocyte-specific enhancer.
authors:
- Huang W
- Zhou X
- Lefebvre V
- de Crombrugghe B
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC85784
doi: 10.1128/MCB.20.11.4149-4158.2000
---

# Phosphorylation of SOX9 by cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase A enhances SOX9's ability to transactivate a Col2a1 chondrocyte-specific enhancer.
**Authors:** Huang W, Zhou X, Lefebvre V, de Crombrugghe B
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.20.11.4149-4158.2000](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.20.11.4149-4158.2000)
**PMC:** [PMC85784](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC85784/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jun;20(11):4149-58. doi: 10.1128/MCB.20.11.4149-4158.2000.

Phosphorylation of SOX9 by cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase A enhances SOX9's 
ability to transactivate a Col2a1 chondrocyte-specific enhancer.

Huang W(1), Zhou X, Lefebvre V, de Crombrugghe B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol 2000 Oct;20(20):7838.

Sox9 is a high-mobility-group domain-containing transcription factor required 
for chondrocyte differentiation and cartilage formation. We used a yeast 
two-hybrid method based on Son of Sevenless (SOS) recruitment to screen a 
chondrocyte cDNA library and found that the catalytic subunit of cyclic AMP 
(cAMP)-dependent protein kinase A (PKA-Calpha) interacted specifically with 
SOX9. Next we found that two consensus PKA phosphorylation sites within SOX9 
could be phosphorylated by PKA in vitro and that SOX9 could be phosphorylated by 
PKA-Calpha in vivo. In COS-7 cells cotransfected with PKA-Calpha and SOX9 
expression plasmids, PKA enhanced the phosphorylation of wild-type SOX9 but did 
not affect phosphorylation of a SOX9 protein in which the two PKA 
phosphorylation sites (S(64) and S(211)) were mutated. Using a phosphospecific 
antibody that specifically recognized SOX9 phosphorylated at serine 211, one of 
the two PKA phosphorylation sites, we demonstrated that addition of cAMP to 
chondrocytes strongly increased the phosphorylation of endogenous Sox9. In 
addition, immunohistochemistry of mouse embryo hind legs showed that Sox9 
phosphorylated at serine 211 was principally localized in the prehypertrophic 
zone of the growth plate, corresponding to the major site of expression of the 
parathyroid hormone-related peptide (PTHrP) receptor. Since cAMP has previously 
been shown to effectively increase the mRNA levels of Col2a1 and other specific 
markers of chondrocyte differentiation in culture, we then asked whether PKA 
phosphorylation could modulate the activity of SOX9. Addition of 8-bromo-cAMP to 
chondrocytes in culture increased the activity of a transiently transfected 
SOX9-dependent 48-bp Col2a1 chondrocyte-specific enhancer; similarly, 
cotransfection of PKA-Calpha increased the activity of this enhancer. Mutations 
of the two PKA phosphorylation consensus sites of SOX9 markedly decreased the 
PKA-Calpha activation of this enhancer by SOX9. PKA phosphorylation and the 
mutations in the consensus PKA phosphorylation sites of SOX9 did not alter its 
nuclear localization. In vitro phosphorylation of SOX9 by PKA resulted in more 
efficient DNA binding. We conclude that SOX9 is a target of cAMP signaling and 
that phosphorylation of SOX9 by PKA enhances its transcriptional and DNA-binding 
activity. Because PTHrP signaling is mediated by cAMP, our results support the 
hypothesis that Sox9 is a target of PTHrP signaling in the growth plate and that 
the increased activity of Sox9 might mediate the effect of PTHrP in maintaining 
the cells as nonhypertrophic chondrocytes.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.20.11.4149-4158.2000
PMCID: PMC85784
PMID: 10805756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
