---
pmid: '15255866'
title: TT2, TT8, and TTG1 synergistically specify the expression of BANYULS and proanthocyanidin
  biosynthesis in Arabidopsis thaliana.
authors:
- Baudry A
- Heim MA
- Dubreucq B
- Caboche M
- Weisshaar B
- Lepiniec L
journal: Plant J
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2004.02138.x
---

# TT2, TT8, and TTG1 synergistically specify the expression of BANYULS and proanthocyanidin biosynthesis in Arabidopsis thaliana.
**Authors:** Baudry A, Heim MA, Dubreucq B, Caboche M, Weisshaar B, Lepiniec L
**Journal:** Plant J (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-313X.2004.02138.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-313X.2004.02138.x)

## Abstract

1. Plant J. 2004 Aug;39(3):366-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2004.02138.x.

TT2, TT8, and TTG1 synergistically specify the expression of BANYULS and 
proanthocyanidin biosynthesis in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Baudry A(1), Heim MA, Dubreucq B, Caboche M, Weisshaar B, Lepiniec L.

Author information:
(1)Seed Biology Laboratory, UMR 204 INRA/INAPG, Jean-Pierre Bourgin Institute, 
Route de Saint-Cyr, 78026 Versailles Cedex, France.

Genetic analyses have demonstrated that together with TTG1, a WD-repeat (WDR) 
protein, TT2 (MYB), and TT8 (bHLH) are necessary for the correct expression of 
BANYULS (BAN). This gene codes for the core enzyme of proanthocyanidin 
biosynthesis in Arabidopsis thaliana seed coat. The interplays of TT2, TT8, and 
their closest MYB/bHLH relatives, with TTG1 and the BAN promoter have been 
investigated using a combination of genetic and molecular approaches, both in 
yeast and in planta. The results obtained using glucocorticoid receptor fusion 
proteins in planta strongly suggest that TT2, TT8, and TTG1 can directly 
activate BAN expression. Experiments using yeast two- and three-hybrid clearly 
demonstrated that TT2, TT8, and TTG1 can form a stable ternary complex. 
Furthermore, although TT2 and TT8 were able to bind to the BAN promoter when 
simultaneously expressed in yeast, the activity of the complex correlated with 
the level of TTG1 expression in A. thaliana protoplasts. In addition, transient 
expression experiments revealed that TTG1 acts mainly through the bHLH partner 
(i.e. TT8 or related proteins) and that TT2 cannot be replaced by any other 
related A. thaliana MYB proteins to activate BAN. Finally and consistent with 
these results, the ectopic expression of TT2 was sufficient to trigger BAN 
activation in vegetative parts, but only where TTG1 was expressed. Taken 
together, these results indicate that TT2, TT8, and TTG1 can form a ternary 
complex directly regulating BAN expression in planta.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2004.02138.x
PMID: 15255866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
