---
pmid: '1400330'
title: Fibulin binds to itself and to the carboxyl-terminal heparin-binding region
  of fibronectin.
authors:
- Balbona K
- Tran H
- Godyna S
- Ingham KC
- Strickland DK
- Argraves WS
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1992'
full_text_available: false
---

# Fibulin binds to itself and to the carboxyl-terminal heparin-binding region of fibronectin.
**Authors:** Balbona K, Tran H, Godyna S, Ingham KC, Strickland DK, Argraves WS
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1992)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1992 Oct 5;267(28):20120-5.

Fibulin binds to itself and to the carboxyl-terminal heparin-binding region of 
fibronectin.

Balbona K(1), Tran H, Godyna S, Ingham KC, Strickland DK, Argraves WS.

Author information:
(1)American Red Cross, Biochemistry Laboratory, Rockville, Maryland 20855.

Fibulin is a recently described extracellular matrix (ECM) and plasma 
glycoprotein (Argraves, W. S., Tran, H., Burgess, W. H., and Dickerson, K. 
(1990) J. Cell Biol. 111, 3155-3164). In this report, ligand affinity 
chromatography and solid-phase binding analyses were performed to determine 
which ECM protein(s) interact with fibulin. Fibulin-Sepharose bound two 
polypeptides of 240 and 100 kDa from the culture medium of metabolically 
radiolabeled fibroblasts. These two proteins were identified as fibronectin (FN) 
and fibulin, respectively, based on their electrophoretic behavior and 
reactivity with monoclonal antibodies. Consistent with the findings of affinity 
chromatography, fibulin bound to surfaces coated with FN (either plasma or 
cellular form) or fibulin but not with other ECM proteins, such as laminin, 
merosin, and types I and IV collagen. The binding of fibulin to solid-phase FN 
was estimated to have a Kd of 139 nM, whereas the Kd for self-interaction was 
322 nM. Evaluation of proteolytic fragments from all regions of FN allowed a 
fibulin-binding site to be localized within a 23-kDa heparin-binding fragment 
containing type III repeats 13-14. Heparin did not compete for the interaction 
between fibulin and FN, suggesting that the binding sites for fibulin and 
heparin are distinct.

PMID: 1400330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
