---
pmid: '16957052'
title: The Ca2+-binding protein ALG-2 is recruited to endoplasmic reticulum exit sites
  by Sec31A and stabilizes the localization of Sec31A.
authors:
- Yamasaki A
- Tani K
- Yamamoto A
- Kitamura N
- Komada M
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1635383
doi: 10.1091/mbc.e06-05-0444
---

# The Ca2+-binding protein ALG-2 is recruited to endoplasmic reticulum exit sites by Sec31A and stabilizes the localization of Sec31A.
**Authors:** Yamasaki A, Tani K, Yamamoto A, Kitamura N, Komada M
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.e06-05-0444](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.e06-05-0444)
**PMC:** [PMC1635383](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1635383/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Cell. 2006 Nov;17(11):4876-87. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e06-05-0444. Epub
2006  Sep 6.

The Ca2+-binding protein ALG-2 is recruited to endoplasmic reticulum exit sites 
by Sec31A and stabilizes the localization of Sec31A.

Yamasaki A(1), Tani K, Yamamoto A, Kitamura N, Komada M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Yokohama 
226-8501, Japan.

The formation of transport vesicles that bud from endoplasmic reticulum (ER) 
exit sites is dependent on the COPII coat made up of three components: the small 
GTPase Sar1, the Sec23/24 complex, and the Sec13/31 complex. Here, we provide 
evidence that apoptosis-linked gene 2 (ALG-2), a Ca(2+)-binding protein of 
unknown function, regulates the COPII function at ER exit sites in mammalian 
cells. ALG-2 bound to the Pro-rich region of Sec31A, a ubiquitously expressed 
mammalian orthologue of yeast Sec31, in a Ca(2+)-dependent manner and 
colocalized with Sec31A at ER exit sites. A Ca(2+) binding-deficient ALG-2 
mutant, which did not bind Sec31A, lost the ability to localize to ER exit 
sites. Overexpression of the Pro-rich region of Sec31A or RNA 
interference-mediated Sec31A depletion also abolished the ALG-2 localization at 
these sites. In contrast, depletion of ALG-2 substantially reduced the level of 
Sec31A associated with the membrane at ER exit sites. Finally, treatment with a 
cell-permeable Ca(2+) chelator caused the mislocalization of ALG-2, which was 
accompanied by a reduced level of Sec31A at ER exit sites. We conclude that 
ALG-2 is recruited to ER exit sites via Ca(2+)-dependent interaction with Sec31A 
and in turn stabilizes the localization of Sec31A at these sites.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e06-05-0444
PMCID: PMC1635383
PMID: 16957052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
