---
pmid: '19172738'
title: Phosphorylation-dependent binding of 14-3-3 terminates signalling by the Gab2
  docking protein.
authors:
- Brummer T
- Larance M
- Herrera Abreu MT
- Lyons RJ
- Timpson P
- Emmerich CH
- Fleuren ED
- Lehrbach GM
- Schramek D
- Guilhaus M
- James DE
- Daly RJ
journal: EMBO J
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2529372
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.159
---

# Phosphorylation-dependent binding of 14-3-3 terminates signalling by the Gab2 docking protein.
**Authors:** Brummer T, Larance M, Herrera Abreu MT, Lyons RJ, Timpson P, Emmerich CH, Fleuren ED, Lehrbach GM, Schramek D, Guilhaus M, James DE, Daly RJ
**Journal:** EMBO J (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2008.159](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2008.159)
**PMC:** [PMC2529372](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2529372/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2008 Sep 3;27(17):2305-16. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.159.

Phosphorylation-dependent binding of 14-3-3 terminates signalling by the Gab2 
docking protein.

Brummer T(1), Larance M, Herrera Abreu MT, Lyons RJ, Timpson P, Emmerich CH, 
Fleuren ED, Lehrbach GM, Schramek D, Guilhaus M, James DE, Daly RJ.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research Program, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, New 
South Wales, Australia.

Grb2-associated binder (Gab)2 functions downstream of a variety of receptor and 
cytoplasmic tyrosine kinases as a docking platform for specific signal 
transducers and performs important functions in both normal physiology and 
oncogenesis. Gab2 signalling is promoted by its association with specific 
receptors through the adaptor Grb2. However, the molecular mechanisms that 
attenuate Gab2 signals have remained unclear. We now demonstrate that growth 
factor-induced phosphorylation of Gab2 on two residues, S210 and T391, leads to 
recruitment of 14-3-3 proteins. Together, these events mediate negative-feedback 
regulation, as Gab2(S210A/T391A) exhibits sustained receptor association and 
signalling and promotes cell proliferation and transformation. Importantly, 
introduction of constitutive 14-3-3-binding sites into Gab2 renders it 
refractory to receptor activation, demonstrating that site-selective binding of 
14-3-3 proteins is sufficient to terminate Gab2 signalling. Furthermore, this is 
associated with reduced binding of Grb2. This leads to a model where signal 
attenuation occurs because 14-3-3 promotes dissociation of Gab2 from Grb2, and 
thereby uncouples Gab2 from the receptor complex. This represents a novel 
regulatory mechanism with implications for diverse tyrosine kinase signalling 
systems.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2008.159
PMCID: PMC2529372
PMID: 19172738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Grb2-associated binder (Gab)2 functions downstream of a variety of receptor and cytoplasmic tyrosine kinases as a docking platform for specific signal transducers and performs important functions in both normal physiology and oncogenesis. Gab2 signalling is promoted by its association with specific receptors through the adaptor Grb2. However, the molecular mechanisms that attenuate Gab2 signals have remained unclear. We now demonstrate that growth factor-induced phosphorylation of Gab2 on two residues, S210 and T391, leads to recruitment of 14-3-3 proteins. Together, these events mediate negative-feedback regulation, as Gab2 S210A/T391A exhibits sustained receptor association and signalling and promotes cell proliferation and transformation. Importantly, introduction of constitutive 14-3-3-binding sites into Gab2 renders it refractory to receptor activation, demonstrating that site-selective binding of 14-3-3 proteins is sufficient to terminate Gab2 signalling. Furthermore, this is associated with reduced binding of Grb2. This leads to a model where signal attenuation occurs because 14-3-3 promotes dissociation of Gab2 from Grb2, and thereby uncouples Gab2 from the receptor complex. This represents a novel regulatory mechanism with implications for diverse tyrosine kinase signalling systems.

Introduction

Docking proteins, which in mammals include the Grb2-associated binder (Gab) and insulin receptor substrate (IRS) families, represent key regulatory nodes in tyrosine kinase signalling networks ( Schlessinger, 2000 ; Gu and Neel, 2003 ; Araujo et al , 2007 ). Following tyrosine phosphorylation, they function as assembly platforms at the plasma membrane for specific SH2 domain-containing effectors, leading to activation or attenuation of particular downstream pathways. In addition, they may be subject to complex patterns of positive and negative feedback regulation that modulate the amplitude, kinetics and frequency of signal output and allow integration of different receptor signalling systems.

There are three Gab proteins in mammals, Gab1-3. These exhibit a conserved architecture, containing an N-terminal pleckstrin homology (PH) domain, one canonical and one atypical Grb2 SH3 domain-binding site and multiple tyrosine phosphorylation sites ( Gu and Neel, 2003 ). Following tyrosine phosphorylation, all Gab proteins recruit the protein tyrosine phosphatase Shp2 and the p85 subunit of phosphatidylinositol (PI)3-kinase, leading to potentiation of the Ras/Erk and PI3-kinase/Akt pathways ( Gu and Neel, 2003 ). Gab2 is tyrosine-phosphorylated upon activation of a variety of growth factor, hormone, cytokine, antigen and cell matrix receptors ( Gu and Neel, 2003 ) and performs important functions in normal physiology. It is required for haematopoiesis ( Zhang et al , 2007 ), allergic responses ( Gu et al , 2001 ), osteoclast differentiation ( Wada et al , 2005 ) and, in combination with Gab1, for cardiac function ( Nakaoka et al , 2007 ). In addition, Gab2 exhibits transforming activity when relieved of negative feedback control ( Lynch and Daly, 2002 ) and is strongly implicated in several human malignancies. For example, Gab2 is required for transformation of myeloid cells by the Bcr-Abl oncoprotein that drives chronic myelogenous leukaemia ( Sattler et al , 2002 ). In addition, Gab2 is overexpressed in breast cancer ( Daly et al , 2002 ) and promotes the growth and metastasis of erbB2-induced mouse mammary tumours ( Bentires-Alj et al , 2006 ; Ke et al , 2007 ).

The important functions of Gab2 in signalling systems that underpin both normal physiological responses and oncogenesis highlight the importance of defining its control mechanisms. Tyrosine phosphorylation of Gab proteins is promoted by their association with particular receptors. Whereas Gab1 can bind MET directly, other recruitment mechanisms are indirect and require Grb2, which binds the Gab protein through its C-terminal SH3 domain and specific tyrosine-phosphorylated targets through its SH2 domain ( Gu and Neel, 2003 ). In some cases, for example, binding of Gab2 to ErbB2 ( Bentires-Alj et al , 2006 ), the adaptor ‘bridge' consists of only Grb2. In others, the Grb2 SH2 domain binds an intermediary protein. For example, a Grb2/Shc complex mediates Gab2 binding to the ‘common β chain' (βc) of various cytokine receptors ( Gu et al , 2000 ). In addition, binding of the Gab PH domain to plasma membrane-localized PI3-kinase products also promotes receptor coupling ( Rodrigues et al , 2000 ), and this may be particularly important at low levels of receptor activation ( Sampaio et al , 2008 ). However, Gab proteins are also subject to negative regulation. For example, Akt and Erk attenuate Gab2 signalling by phosphorylation of S159 and S623, respectively ( Lynch and Daly, 2002 ; Arnaud et al , 2004 ), although the detailed molecular mechanisms are unclear.

In this study, we have addressed negative-feedback regulation of Gab2 using an integrated approach that combines a proteomics-based definition of the Gab2 phosphomap with bioinformatics, biochemistry and cell biology. This has identified a novel, 14-3-3-mediated mechanism for termination of Gab2 signalling that promotes dissociation of the Gab2/receptor complex.

Discussion

In this study, we have identified 14-3-3 proteins as novel interaction partners of Gab2 that limit its mitogenic signalling potential by binding to S210 and T391 in a phosphorylation-dependent manner. Of note, as the closely related Gab1 does not bind 14-3-3 proteins, and Gab3 lacks corresponding consensus sequences for 14-3-3 recruitment, this regulatory mechanism appears unique to Gab2. This may reflect a requirement for Gab2 signalling to be tightly regulated for it to execute its specific cellular and developmental functions.

A schematic representation of how 14-3-3 regulates Gab2 is presented in Figure 7 . A key aspect of this model is that binding of 14-3-3 proteins promotes disassembly of the Gab2/Grb2 complex. This is based on several lines of evidence. First, the signalosomes assembled by the 14-3-3-binding-deficient Gab2 mutants 2 × A and 2 × E contain increased amounts of not only Grb2 but also Shc and the EGFR, which are both recruited in a Grb2-dependent manner ( Brummer et al , 2006b ). Second, signalling complexes assembled by the constitutively 14-3-3-bound Gab2 2 × R18 mutant are devoid of Grb2, Shc and EGFR, whereas its 14-3-3-binding-deficient counterpart Gab2 2 × KK recruits these molecules to a similar extent as the Gab2 2 × A mutant. Finally, the Gab2 2 × R18 mutant phenocopies the weak and transient tyrosine phosphorylation of the Gab2 ΔGrb2 mutant ( Brummer et al , 2006b ), which is probably dependent on PH domain-mediated plasma membrane recruitment. Although we have characterized this mechanism in the context of EGFR signalling, Gab2 requires Grb2 for recruitment to other signal initiators, including the Met ( Lock et al , 2002 ), erbB2 ( Bentires-Alj et al , 2006 ), FGF ( Gu and Neel, 2003 ), SF-STK ( Teal et al , 2006 ) and Kit ( Yu et al , 2006b ) tyrosine kinase receptors, FcɛRI ( Yu et al , 2006a ), βc-containing cytokine receptors ( Gu et al , 2000 ) as well as the Bcr-Abl and Tel-Abl oncoproteins ( Sattler et al , 2002 ; Million et al , 2004 ). Consequently, 14-3-3 binding is likely to impact upon Gab2 signalling in a variety of settings and in both normal and pathological states. Of note, another example of negative-feedback regulation within the EGF signalling network that regulates Grb2 interactions is Erk-mediated phosphorylation of Sos ( Rozakis-Adcock et al , 1995 ; Porfiri and McCormick, 1996 ). However, in this case, Sos phosphorylation results in dissociation of Grb2 from its SH2 domain-binding partners Shc and the EGFR.

At present, it is not clear how binding of 14-3-3 proteins attenuate Grb2 binding to Gab2. One possibility is that they shield the Grb2 binding sites. Alternatively, 14-3-3 binding may induce a conformational change in Gab2 that restricts access to these sites. The latter mechanism is more likely if a 14-3-3 dimer bridges S210 and T391 as proposed in the ‘molecular anvil' model for 14-3-3 function ( Yaffe, 2002 ). However, if bridging of the two sites by 14-3-3 induces a conformational change, then mutation of a single site might be expected to be as effective in enhancing signalling as the double site mutation, and our analysis ( Supplementary Figure S5 ) indicates that this is not the case. Instead, the effects of the S210 and T391 substitutions on the assembly of Gab2 signalling complexes are largely additive. Also, there is a trend for the individual substitutions to enhance signalling approximately equally at 2.5 min, but for the S210A substitution to have a larger effect, relative to T391A, at 20 min ( Supplementary Figure S5 ). This reflects the kinetics of the corresponding phosphorylation events ( Figure 3 ). These data lead us to favour a model where 14-3-3 shields the Grb2-binding sites, and binding of 14-3-3 to one site is sufficient to partly inhibit signalling. When both sites are phosphorylated, the enhanced signal attenuation occurs either as a consequence of binding of separate 14-3-3 dimers to S210 or T391 or bridging of the two sites by a single dimer ( Figure 7 ). It is also possible that the stoichiometry of 14-3-3 binding changes over time, reflecting the relative phosphorylation of S210 and T391. Further resolution of this issue will require determination of the stoichiometry of the Gab2/14-3-3 complex.

The 14-3-3-mediated uncoupling of Gab2 from a receptor complex at the plasma membrane exemplifies a recurrent theme in 14-3-3/client protein interactions, where 14-3-3 proteins regulate subcellular localization of their target. Indeed, it is interesting to compare this mechanism with 14-3-3-mediated regulation of the Raf serine/threonine kinases, where 14-3-3 binding to the CR2 domain inhibits stable interaction with plasma membrane-localized Ras and Raf activation ( Dhillon et al , 2002a ; Light et al , 2002 ; Brummer et al , 2006a ; Rodriguez-Viciana et al , 2006 ). Furthermore, 14-3-3 proteins block the translocation of the KSR scaffold protein to the plasma membrane by preventing the interaction of the C1 domain with membrane phospholipids ( Ory et al , 2003 ). In both cases, growth factor stimulation leads to dephosphorylation of a specific 14-3-3-binding site, plasma membrane translocation and signal transmission. However, in the case of Gab2, 14-3-3 proteins associate following growth factor treatment and negatively regulate binding to an adaptor ‘bridge' that mediates recruitment to cell surface receptors, resulting in signal attenuation.

Maximal phosphorylation on both S210 and T391 requires PI3-kinase for two reasons: first, phosphorylation on both sites is partially dependent on the activation of Akt1/2; and second, it requires PH domain-mediated recruitment of Gab2 to the plasma membrane ( Figure 3 ). In the case of S210, it appears unlikely that this site is directly phosphorylated by Akt, implicating a downstream kinase. One possibility is IκB kinase α (IKKα), as this is activated by Akt ( Ozes et al , 1999 ), and the related kinase IKKβ negatively regulates the docking protein IRS-1 ( Herschkovitz et al , 2007 ). The additional kinases that phosphorylate S210 and T391 under both basal and EGF-stimulated conditions are currently under investigation. A further interesting question is how 14-3-3-bound Gab2 is recycled to an activation-competent state. Structural studies have revealed that the phosphate group of the 14-3-3-binding peptide is deeply buried in the 14-3-3-binding pocket and is consequently protected against phosphatases ( Yaffe et al , 1997 ). Consequently, 14-3-3 proteins need to be actively displaced before dephosphorylation can occur. For example, a recent study has revealed an intricate cooperation between M-Ras and the Shoc2/PP1c holophosphatase complex in the displacement of 14-3-3 from Raf-kinases ( Rodriguez-Viciana et al , 2006 ).

Given the important functions of Gab2 in normal physiology and oncogenesis, it will be important to determine whether the 14-3-3-dependent negative-feedback mechanism is subverted in human disease and can be exploited therapeutically. For example, the 14-3-3-binding motifs at S210 and T391 may be subject to germline or somatic mutation in developmental syndromes or cancer, respectively. Also, as phosphorylation of three critical regulatory sites on Gab2 (S159, S210 and T391) is PI3-kinase dependent, the effect of uncoupling Gab2 from negative-feedback control should be considered in the design of drug regimens that include PI3-kinase inhibitors. An example of how release of a feedback mechanism can impact upon drug sensitivity is provided by the amplification of IRS-1 signalling induced by treatment of cancer cells with the anti-mTOR drug rapamycin ( O'Reilly et al , 2006 ). Finally, as 14-3-3 represents an isoform-specific regulator of Gab2, a strategy aimed at stabilization of the Gab2/14-3-3 complex, or allosteric modulation of Gab2 in a manner that mimics 14-3-3 binding, could be utilized to downregulate Gab2 signalling, for example, in Gab2-dependent cancers ( Daly et al , 2002 ; Sattler et al , 2002 ; Bentires-Alj et al , 2006 ; Scherr et al , 2006 ) or inflammatory diseases ( Gu et al , 2001 ; Batliwalla et al , 2005 ).
