---
pmid: '11687631'
title: 'COMPASS: a complex of proteins associated with a trithorax-related SET domain
  protein.'
authors:
- Miller T
- Krogan NJ
- Dover J
- Erdjument-Bromage H
- Tempst P
- Johnston M
- Greenblatt JF
- Shilatifard A
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC60797
doi: 10.1073/pnas.231473398
---

# COMPASS: a complex of proteins associated with a trithorax-related SET domain protein.
**Authors:** Miller T, Krogan NJ, Dover J, Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P, Johnston M, Greenblatt JF, Shilatifard A
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.231473398](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.231473398)
**PMC:** [PMC60797](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC60797/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Nov 6;98(23):12902-7. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.231473398. Epub 2001 Oct 30.

COMPASS: a complex of proteins associated with a trithorax-related SET domain 
protein.

Miller T(1), Krogan NJ, Dover J, Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P, Johnston M, 
Greenblatt JF, Shilatifard A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Saint Louis University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, MO 63104, USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2001 Dec 18;98(26):15393-4.

The trithorax genes encode an evolutionarily conserved family of proteins that 
function to maintain specific patterns of gene expression throughout cellular 
development. Members of this protein family contain a highly conserved 130- to 
140-amino acid motif termed the SET domain. We report the purification and 
molecular identification of the subunits of a protein complex in the yeast 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae that includes the trithorax-related protein Set1. This 
protein complex, which we have named COMPASS (Complex Proteins Associated with 
Set1), consists of seven polypeptides ranging from 130 to 25 kDa. The same seven 
proteins were identified in COMPASS purified either by conventional biochemical 
chromatography or tandem-affinity tagging of the individual subunits of the 
complex. Null mutants missing any one of the six nonessential subunits of 
COMPASS grow more slowly than wild-type cells under normal conditions and 
demonstrate growth sensitivity to hydroxyurea. Furthermore, gene expression 
profiles of strains missing either of two nonessential subunits of COMPASS are 
altered in similar ways, suggesting these proteins have similar roles in gene 
expression in vivo. Molecular characterization of trithorax complexes will 
facilitate defining the role of this class of proteins in the regulation of gene 
expression and how their misregulation results in the development of human 
cancer.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.231473398
PMCID: PMC60797
PMID: 11687631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
