---
pmid: '17891140'
title: Bif-1 interacts with Beclin 1 through UVRAG and regulates autophagy and tumorigenesis.
authors:
- Takahashi Y
- Coppola D
- Matsushita N
- Cualing HD
- Sun M
- Sato Y
- Liang C
- Jung JU
- Cheng JQ
- Mulé JJ
- Pledger WJ
- Wang HG
journal: Nat Cell Biol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2254521
doi: 10.1038/ncb1634
---

# Bif-1 interacts with Beclin 1 through UVRAG and regulates autophagy and tumorigenesis.
**Authors:** Takahashi Y, Coppola D, Matsushita N, Cualing HD, Sun M, Sato Y, Liang C, Jung JU, Cheng JQ, Mulé JJ, Pledger WJ, Wang HG
**Journal:** Nat Cell Biol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncb1634](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb1634)
**PMC:** [PMC2254521](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2254521/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Cell Biol. 2007 Oct;9(10):1142-51. doi: 10.1038/ncb1634. Epub 2007 Sep 23.

Bif-1 interacts with Beclin 1 through UVRAG and regulates autophagy and 
tumorigenesis.

Takahashi Y(1), Coppola D, Matsushita N, Cualing HD, Sun M, Sato Y, Liang C, 
Jung JU, Cheng JQ, Mulé JJ, Pledger WJ, Wang HG.

Author information:
(1)H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, 12902 Magnolia Drive. 
Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2007 Oct;9(10):1125-7. doi: 10.1038/ncb1007-1125.

Autophagy is an evolutionarily conserved 'self-eating' process. Although the 
genes essential for autophagy (named Atg) have been identified in yeast, the 
molecular mechanism of how Atg proteins control autophagosome formation in 
mammalian cells remains to be elucidated. Here, we demonstrate that Bif-1 (also 
known as Endophilin B1) interacts with Beclin 1 through ultraviolet irradiation 
resistance-associated gene (UVRAG) and functions as a positive mediator of the 
class III PI(3) kinase (PI(3)KC3). In response to nutrient deprivation, Bif-1 
localizes to autophagosomes where it colocalizes with Atg5, as well as 
microtubule-associated protein light chain 3 (LC3). Furthermore, loss of Bif-1 
suppresses autophagosome formation. Although the SH3 domain of Bif-1 is 
sufficient for binding to UVRAG, both the BAR and SH3 domains are required for 
Bif-1 to activate PI(3)KC3 and induce autophagosome formation. We also observed 
that Bif-1 ablation prolongs cell survival under starvation conditions. 
Moreover, knockout of Bif-1 significantly enhances the development of 
spontaneous tumours in mice. These findings suggest that Bif-1 joins the 
UVRAG-Beclin 1 complex as a potential activator of autophagy and tumour 
suppressor.

DOI: 10.1038/ncb1634
PMCID: PMC2254521
PMID: 17891140 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
