---
pmid: '12177059'
title: Regulation of kinase activity of 3-phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase-1
  by binding to 14-3-3.
authors:
- Sato S
- Fujita N
- Tsuruo T
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M205141200
---

# Regulation of kinase activity of 3-phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase-1 by binding to 14-3-3.
**Authors:** Sato S, Fujita N, Tsuruo T
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M205141200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M205141200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Oct 18;277(42):39360-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M205141200. Epub
2002  Aug 12.

Regulation of kinase activity of 3-phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase-1 
by binding to 14-3-3.

Sato S(1), Fujita N, Tsuruo T.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, The University of Tokyo, 
Tokyo 113-0032, Japan.

3-Phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase-1 (PDK1) plays a central role in 
activating the protein kinase A, G, and C subfamily. In particular, PDK1 plays 
an important role in regulating the Akt survival pathway by phosphorylating Akt 
on Thr-308. PDK1 kinase activity was thought to be constitutively active; 
however, recent reports suggested that its activity is regulated by binding to 
other proteins, such as protein kinase C-related kinase-2 (PRK2), p90 ribosomal 
protein S6 kinase-2 (RSK2), and heat-shock protein 90 (Hsp90). Here we report 
that PDK1 binds to 14-3-3 proteins in vivo and in vitro through the sequence 
surrounding Ser-241, a residue that is phosphorylated by itself and is critical 
for its kinase activity. Mutation of PDK1 to increase its binding to 14-3-3 
decreased its kinase activity in vivo. By contrast, mutation of PDK1 to decrease 
its interaction with 14-3-3 resulted in increased PDK1 kinase activity. 
Moreover, incubation of wild-type PDK1 with recombinant 14-3-3 in vitro 
decreased its kinase activity. These data indicate that PDK1 kinase activity is 
negatively regulated by binding to 14-3-3 through the PDK1 autophosphorylation 
site Ser-241.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M205141200
PMID: 12177059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
