---
pmid: '11399750'
title: 'Interaction between aldolase and vacuolar H+-ATPase: evidence for direct coupling
  of glycolysis to the ATP-hydrolyzing proton pump.'
authors:
- Lu M
- Holliday LS
- Zhang L
- Dunn WA Jr
- Gluck SL
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M008768200
---

# Interaction between aldolase and vacuolar H+-ATPase: evidence for direct coupling of glycolysis to the ATP-hydrolyzing proton pump.
**Authors:** Lu M, Holliday LS, Zhang L, Dunn WA Jr, Gluck SL
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M008768200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M008768200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 10;276(32):30407-13. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M008768200. Epub 
2001 Jun 8.

Interaction between aldolase and vacuolar H+-ATPase: evidence for direct 
coupling of glycolysis to the ATP-hydrolyzing proton pump.

Lu M(1), Holliday LS, Zhang L, Dunn WA Jr, Gluck SL.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Medicine and Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Florida 
College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA. luming@medicine.ufl.edu

Vacuolar H(+)-ATPases (V-ATPases) are essential for acidification of 
intracellular compartments and for proton secretion from the plasma membrane in 
kidney epithelial cells and osteoclasts. The cellular proteins that regulate 
V-ATPases remain largely unknown. A screen for proteins that bind the V-ATPase E 
subunit using the yeast two-hybrid assay identified the cDNA clone coded for 
aldolase, an enzyme of the glycolytic pathway. The interaction between E subunit 
and aldolase was confirmed in vitro by precipitation assays using E 
subunit-glutathione S-transferase chimeric fusion proteins and metabolically 
labeled aldolase. Aldolase was isolated associated with intact V-ATPase from 
bovine kidney microsomes and osteoclast-containing mouse marrow cultures in 
co-immunoprecipitation studies performed using an anti-E subunit monoclonal 
antibody. The interaction was not affected by incubation with aldolase 
substrates or products. In immunocytochemical assays, aldolase was found to 
colocalize with V-ATPase in the renal proximal tubule. In osteoclasts, the 
aldolase-V-ATPase complex appeared to undergo a subcellular redistribution from 
perinuclear compartments to the ruffled membranes following activation of 
resorption. In yeast cells deficient in aldolase, the peripheral V(1) domain of 
V-ATPase was found to dissociate from the integral membrane V(0) domain, 
indicating direct coupling of glycolysis to the proton pump. The direct binding 
interaction between V-ATPase and aldolase may be a new mechanism for the 
regulation of the V-ATPase and may underlie the proximal tubule acidification 
defect in hereditary fructose intolerance.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M008768200
PMID: 11399750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
