---
pmid: '16855591'
title: TBC-domain GAPs for Rab GTPases accelerate GTP hydrolysis by a dual-finger
  mechanism.
authors:
- Pan X
- Eathiraj S
- Munson M
- Lambright DG
journal: Nature
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature04847
---

# TBC-domain GAPs for Rab GTPases accelerate GTP hydrolysis by a dual-finger mechanism.
**Authors:** Pan X, Eathiraj S, Munson M, Lambright DG
**Journal:** Nature (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature04847](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature04847)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2006 Jul 20;442(7100):303-6. doi: 10.1038/nature04847.

TBC-domain GAPs for Rab GTPases accelerate GTP hydrolysis by a dual-finger 
mechanism.

Pan X(1), Eathiraj S, Munson M, Lambright DG.

Author information:
(1)Program in Molecular Medicine & Department of Biochemistry and Molecular 
Pharmacology, UMASS Medical School, Two Biotech, 373 Plantation Street, 
Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA.

Rab GTPases regulate membrane trafficking by cycling between inactive 
(GDP-bound) and active (GTP-bound) conformations. The duration of the active 
state is limited by GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs), which accelerate the slow 
intrinsic rate of GTP hydrolysis. Proteins containing TBC (Tre-2, Bub2 and 
Cdc16) domains are broadly conserved in eukaryotic organisms and function as 
GAPs for Rab GTPases as well as GTPases that control cytokinesis. An exposed 
arginine residue is a critical determinant of GAP activity in vitro and in vivo. 
It has been expected that the catalytic mechanism of TBC domains would parallel 
that of Ras and Rho family GAPs. Here we report crystallographic, mutational and 
functional analyses of complexes between Rab GTPases and the TBC domain of 
Gyp1p. In the crystal structure of a TBC-domain-Rab-GTPase-aluminium fluoride 
complex, which approximates the transition-state intermediate for GTP 
hydrolysis, the TBC domain supplies two catalytic residues in trans, an arginine 
finger analogous to Ras/Rho family GAPs and a glutamine finger that substitutes 
for the glutamine in the DxxGQ motif of the GTPase. The glutamine from the Rab 
GTPase does not stabilize the transition state as expected but instead interacts 
with the TBC domain. Strong conservation of both catalytic fingers indicates 
that most TBC-domain GAPs may accelerate GTP hydrolysis by a similar dual-finger 
mechanism.

DOI: 10.1038/nature04847
PMID: 16855591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
