---
pmid: '23137377'
title: Quantitative targeted absolute proteomic analysis of transporters, receptors
  and junction proteins for validation of human cerebral microvascular endothelial
  cell line hCMEC/D3 as a human blood-brain barrier model.
authors:
- Ohtsuki S
- Ikeda C
- Uchida Y
- Sakamoto Y
- Miller F
- Glacial F
- Decleves X
- Scherrmann JM
- Couraud PO
- Kubo Y
- Tachikawa M
- Terasaki T
journal: Mol Pharm
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/mp3004308
---

# Quantitative targeted absolute proteomic analysis of transporters, receptors and junction proteins for validation of human cerebral microvascular endothelial cell line hCMEC/D3 as a human blood-brain barrier model.
**Authors:** Ohtsuki S, Ikeda C, Uchida Y, Sakamoto Y, Miller F, Glacial F, Decleves X, Scherrmann JM, Couraud PO, Kubo Y, Tachikawa M, Terasaki T
**Journal:** Mol Pharm (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1021/mp3004308](https://doi.org/10.1021/mp3004308)

## Abstract

1. Mol Pharm. 2013 Jan 7;10(1):289-96. doi: 10.1021/mp3004308. Epub 2012 Dec 11.

Quantitative targeted absolute proteomic analysis of transporters, receptors and 
junction proteins for validation of human cerebral microvascular endothelial 
cell line hCMEC/D3 as a human blood-brain barrier model.

Ohtsuki S(1), Ikeda C, Uchida Y, Sakamoto Y, Miller F, Glacial F, Decleves X, 
Scherrmann JM, Couraud PO, Kubo Y, Tachikawa M, Terasaki T.

Author information:
(1)Division of Membrane Transport and Drug Targeting, Graduate School of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

Human cerebral microvascular endothelial cell line hCMEC/D3 is an established 
model of the human blood-brain barrier (BBB). The purpose of the present study 
was to determine, by means of quantitative targeted absolute proteomics, the 
protein expression levels in hCMEC/D3 cells of multiple transporters, receptors 
and junction proteins for comparison with our previously reported findings in 
isolated human brain microvessels. Among 91 target molecules, 12 transporters, 2 
receptors, 1 junction protein and 1 membrane marker were present at quantifiable 
levels in plasma membrane fraction of hCMEC/D3 cells. ABCA2, MDR1, MRP4, BCRP, 
GLUT1, 4F2hc, MCT1, ENT1, transferrin and insulin receptors and claudin-5 were 
detected in both hCMEC/D3 cells and human brain microvessels. After 
normalization based on Na(+)/K(+) ATPase expression, the differences in protein 
expression levels between hCMEC/D3 cells and human brain microvessels were 
within 4-fold for these proteins, with the exceptions of ENT1, transferrin 
receptor and claudin-5. ABCA8, LAT1, LRP1 and γ-GTP were below the limit of 
quantification in the cells, but were found in human brain microvessels. ABCA3, 
ABCA6, MRP1 and ATA1 were found only in hCMEC/D3 cells. Furthermore, compared 
with human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) as reference nonbrain 
endothelial cells, MDR1 was found only in hCMEC/D3 cells, and GLUT1 expression 
was 15-fold higher in hCMEC/D3 cells than in HUVECs. In conclusion, this is the 
first study to examine the suitability and limitations of the hCMEC/D3 cell line 
as a BBB functional model in terms of quantitative expression levels of 
transporters, receptors and tight junction proteins.

DOI: 10.1021/mp3004308
PMID: 23137377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
