---
pmid: '11283339'
title: 'IAA17/AXR3: biochemical insight into an auxin mutant phenotype.'
authors:
- Ouellet F
- Overvoorde PJ
- Theologis A
journal: Plant Cell
year: '2001'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC135541
doi: 10.1105/tpc.13.4.829
---

# IAA17/AXR3: biochemical insight into an auxin mutant phenotype.
**Authors:** Ouellet F, Overvoorde PJ, Theologis A
**Journal:** Plant Cell (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1105/tpc.13.4.829](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.13.4.829)
**PMC:** [PMC135541](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC135541/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell. 2001 Apr;13(4):829-41. doi: 10.1105/tpc.13.4.829.

IAA17/AXR3: biochemical insight into an auxin mutant phenotype.

Ouellet F(1), Overvoorde PJ, Theologis A.

Author information:
(1)Plant Gene Expression Center, 800 Buchanan Street, Albany, California 94710, 
USA.

The Aux/IAA genes are rapidly and specifically induced by the plant hormone 
auxin. The proteins encoded by this gene family are short-lived nuclear proteins 
that are capable of homodimerizing and heterodimerizing. Molecular, biochemical, 
and genetic data suggest that these proteins are involved in auxin signaling. 
The pleiotropic morphological phenotype and altered auxin responses of the 
semidominant axr3-1 mutant of Arabidopsis result from a single amino acid change 
in the conserved domain II of the Aux/IAA protein IAA17. Here, we show that the 
biochemical effect of this gain-of-function mutation is to increase the 
half-life of the iaa17/axr3-1 protein by sevenfold. Intragenic mutations that 
suppress the iaa17/axr3-1 phenotype have been described. The iaa17/axr3-1R3 
revertant contains a second site mutation in domain I and the iaa17/axr3-1R2 
revertant contains a second site mutation in domain III. Transient expression 
assays show that the mutant forms of IAA17/AXR3 retain the ability to accumulate 
in the nucleus. Using the yeast two hybrid system, we show that the iaa17/axr3-1 
mutation does not affect homodimerization. However, the iaa17/axr3-1 revertants 
counteract the increased levels of iaa17/axr3-1 protein by decreasing the 
capacity of the mutant protein to homodimerize. Interestingly, 
heterodimerization of the revertant forms of IAA17/AXR3 with IAA3/SHY2, another 
Aux/IAA protein, and ARF1 or ARF5/MP proteins is affected only by changes in 
domain III. Collectively, the results provide biochemical evidence that the 
revertant mutations in the IAA17/AXR3 gene affect the capacity of the encoded 
protein to dimerize with itself, other members of the Aux/IAA protein family, 
and members of the ARF protein family. By extension, these findings may provide 
insight into the effects of analogous mutations in other members of the Aux/IAA 
gene family.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.13.4.829
PMCID: PMC135541
PMID: 11283339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The Aux/IAA genes are rapidly and specifically induced by the plant hormone auxin. The proteins encoded by this gene family are short-lived nuclear proteins that are capable of homodimerizing and heterodimerizing. Molecular, biochemical, and genetic data suggest that these proteins are involved in auxin signaling. The pleiotropic morphological phenotype and altered auxin responses of the semidominant axr3-1 mutant of Arabidopsis result from a single amino acid change in the conserved domain II of the Aux/IAA protein IAA17. Here, we show that the biochemical effect of this gain-of-function mutation is to increase the half-life of the iaa17/axr3-1 protein by sevenfold. Intragenic mutations that suppress the iaa17/axr3-1 phenotype have been described. The iaa17/axr3-1R3 revertant contains a second site mutation in domain I and the iaa17/axr3-1R2 revertant contains a second site mutation in domain III. Transient expression assays show that the mutant forms of IAA17/AXR3 retain the ability to accumulate in the nucleus. Using the yeast two hybrid system, we show that the iaa17/axr3-1 mutation does not affect homodimerization. However, the iaa17/axr3-1 revertants counteract the increased levels of iaa17/axr3-1 protein by decreasing the capacity of the mutant protein to homodimerize. Interestingly, heterodimerization of the revertant forms of IAA17/AXR3 with IAA3/SHY2, another Aux/IAA protein, and ARF1 or ARF5/MP proteins is affected only by changes in domain III. Collectively, the results provide biochemical evidence that the revertant mutations in the IAA17/AXR3 gene affect the capacity of the encoded protein to dimerize with itself, other members of the Aux/IAA protein family, and members of the ARF protein family. By extension, these findings may provide insight into the effects of analogous mutations in other members of the Aux/IAA gene family.

INTRODUCTION

The plant hormone auxin, typified by indoleacetic acid, regulates a broad range of cellular and physiological processes in response to abiotic and biotic stimuli ( Davies, 1995 ). Auxin transcriptionally activates a select set of immediate early genes that are thought to mediate processes ranging from embryo formation to tropic responses. Data gathered from several species have resulted in the classification of three groups of auxin early response genes: the Aux/IAA gene family, the GH3 gene family, and the SAUR gene family ( Abel and Theologis, 1996 ). Of these, the protein products of the Aux/IAA genes are the best characterized. Biochemical, molecular, and genetic studies suggest that the Aux/IAA proteins play a central role in auxin signaling and plant development.

The large family of Aux/IAA genes encode short-lived, nucleus-localized proteins that contain four highly conserved domains (I, II, III, and IV) ( Abel et al., 1994 , 1995 ; Abel and Theologis, 1995 ; Kim et al., 1997 ). Domain III of these proteins contains a predicted βαα protein fold that is found in the prokaryotic transcriptional repressors Arc and MetJ ( Abel and Theologis, 1995 ). In the prokaryotic proteins, this domain is involved in dimerization and DNA binding ( Raumann et al., 1994 ). Although specific DNA binding by the Aux/IAA proteins has not been demonstrated, domains III and IV mediate homodimerization and heterodimerization among members of this protein family ( Kim et al., 1997 ).

Most members of the auxin response factor (ARF) family of proteins also contain domains III and IV at their C termini ( Guilfoyle et al., 1998 ). The Aux/IAA proteins can heterodimerize with the ARF proteins through interactions mediated by these conserved domains ( Kim et al., 1997 ; Ulmasov et al., 1997b ; Guilfoyle et al., 1998 ). In addition, the ARFs are capable of binding synthetic and natural auxin responsive promoter elements through a VP1-B3 DNA binding domain located at their N termini ( Ulmasov et al., 1997a , 1997b , 1999 ).

Although the Aux/IAA proteins were initially identified by molecular and biochemical methods, three semidominant Arabidopsis mutants, axr3 , axr2 , and shy2 , have been shown to carry lesions in IAA17 , IAA7 , and IAA3 , respectively ( Rouse et al., 1998 ; Tian and Reed, 1999 ; Nagpal et al., 2000 ). The iaa17/axr3 , iaa7/axr2 , and iaa3/shy2 plants exhibit altered auxin responses and pleiotropic morphological phenotypes. The mutations in these three genes alter amino acids in the conserved qvVGWPPvrsyRkN motif found in domain II of all Aux/IAA proteins. In addition, intragenic mutations that suppress the mutant phenotypes to varying degrees have been described ( Rouse et al., 1998 ; Tian and Reed, 1999 ; Nagpal et al., 2000 ). Of the five intragenic revertant alleles of iaa17/axr3-1 ( Rouse et al., 1998 ), three contain a second site mutation that causes a single amino acid substitution. The iaa17/axr3-1R1 revertant leads to a P to S substitution in domain III, the iaa17/axr3-1R2 revertant causes a D to N substitution in domain III, and the iaa17/axr3-1R3 revertant leads to an L to F change in domain I. The other two revertants affect splice sites and result in either increased spacing between domains III and IV ( iaa17/axr3-1R5 ) or deletion of half of domain IV ( iaa17/axr3-1R4 ) ( Rouse et al., 1998 ).

The gain-of-function phenotype seen in the iaa17/axr3 , iaa7/axr2 , and iaa3/shy2 mutants suggests that changes in domain II are likely to be hypermorphic because they increase the stability of these proteins ( Leyser et al., 1996 ; Tian and Reed, 1999 ; Nagpal et al., 2000 ). Recent experiments have shown that domain II of the pea PS-IAA4/5 confers instability on the luciferase (LUC) reporter protein in transient assays, providing additional evidence that domain II may fulfill an important regulatory role in controlling the half-lives of Aux/IAA proteins ( Worley et al., 2000 ). Here, we examine the in vivo effects of mutations in iaa17/axr3 on IAA17/AXR3 protein function. Using the three assays that have been used to characterize the Aux/IAA proteins, we show that the iaa17/axr3-1 mutation has a dramatic effect on the stability of IAA17/AXR3 but does not abolish its accumulation in the nucleus or its ability to form protein–protein interactions. In contrast, the capacity of the revertant forms of iaa17/axr3 protein to homodimerize and heterodimerize is dramatically affected. These experiments show that the fine control of Aux/IAA protein levels and protein–protein interactions is critical for normal plant development and proper auxin responses.

DISCUSSION

In addition to sharing extensive amino acid similarity, the Aux/IAA proteins have been defined by three criteria: they are short-lived, they are localized in the nucleus, and they have the capacity to form homodimers and heterodimers ( Abel et al., 1994 ; Abel and Theologis, 1995 ; Oeller and Theologis, 1995 ; Kim et al., 1997 ). In this report, we have used these characteristics as functional assays to examine the effect of the iaa17/axr3-1 and intragenic revertant mutations on IAA17/AXR3 protein function.

Pulse–chase experiments show that the half-life of iaa17/axr3-1 is sevenfold longer than the wild-type IAA17/AXR3. The subsequent increase in IAA17/AXR3 protein levels is consistent with the semidominant, hypermorphic nature of the iaa17/axr3-1 mutation ( Leyser et al., 1996 ; Rouse et al., 1998 ). Semidominant mutations in IAA3/SHY2 ( shy2-2 and shy2-3 ) and in IAA7/AXR2 ( axr2-1 ) also alter invariant amino acids in domain II ( Tian and Reed, 1999 ; Nagpal et al., 2000 ), and it has been shown that the shy2-2 gain-of-function mutation increases the steady-state level of iaa3/shy2-2 protein ( Cólon-Carmona et al., 2000 ).

Further support for the hypothesis that domain II regulates the stability of Aux/IAA proteins comes from the work of Worley et al. (2000) . Using chimeric genes consisting of the PS-IAA4/5 or IAA1 open reading frame fused to the LUC reporter coding sequence, these authors show that the N-terminal region of the Aux/IAA proteins can serve as a transferable signal to decrease the half-life of LUC in transgenic plants or in transient assays. If LUC is fused to domain II of PS-IAA6 containing the iaa17/axr3-1 mutation, however, the LUC half-life is increased 50-fold. The differences in the degree of stabilization may be due to a number of differences in experimental design, including the use of a fusion protein, the use of protein domains, the stability of LUC alone, and the level of LUC expression. Nevertheless, these results suggest that domain II functions to mediate the short half-lives of the Aux/IAA proteins. How the mutations in domain II alter interaction with the machinery that targets the Aux/IAA proteins for rapid proteolysis is unknown.

The hypothesis that protein turnover may be critical for controlling auxin-induced gene expression is supported by several lines of direct and indirect evidence. First, early auxin-responsive genes are induced by blocking de novo protein synthesis with cycloheximide, suggesting the presence of a short-lived nuclear repressor(s) of auxin-inducible gene expression ( Ballas et al., 1993 , 1995 ; Koshiba et al., 1995 ). Second, the cloning of the auxin-resistant mutant axr1 suggested that this gene product is involved in the targeting of select proteins for ubiquitin-mediated degradation ( Leyser et al., 1993 ). Subsequent studies have shown that AXR1 forms a heterodimer with ECR1 and that this complex is capable of activating the ubiquitin-like RUB polypeptide ( del Pozo et al., 1998 ). Finally, cloning of the auxin transport inhibitor–resistant mutant tir1 further implicated protein turnover in auxin signaling ( Ruegger et al., 1998 ). TIR1 is the F-box component of an E3 ubiquitin–ligase complex known as Skp1•cdc53/cullin•F-box TIR1 (SCF TIR ). In yeast and Drosophila , proteins targeted for ubiquitination and subsequent degradation are first phosphorylated before being recruited by the SCF complexes ( Maniatis, 1999 ). There are several reports implicating kinase cascades in auxin-mediated responses ( Kovtun et al., 1998 , 2000 ; Christensen et al., 2000 ; Mockaitis and Howell, 2000 ). Although several lines of evidence have emerged concerning the function of ubiquitination in auxin response ( Gray and Estelle, 2000 ), a number of important questions remain to be answered: (1) Do the protein phosphorylation and protein degradation pathways converge on a common effector? (2) Are the activities of these distinct pathways influenced by auxin? (3) Are the Aux/IAA proteins targets of these pathways? (4) Are the ARF proteins targets of these pathways?

The identification of intragenic revertants of iaa17/axr3-1 suggests that the gain-of-function effects of the original mutation are negated by the biochemical properties of the revertant proteins. The Aux/IAA proteins share two highly conserved NLS elements that are necessary and sufficient to mediate nuclear localization ( Abel and Theologis, 1995 ). As expected, both IAA17/AXR3 and iaa17/axr3-1 accumulated in the nucleus ( Figure 3 ). Furthermore, proteins containing the amino acid substitutions that suppress the iaa17/axr3-1 phenotype accumulated in the nucleus. These results exclude the possibility that the iaa17/axr3-1 or revertant phenotypes are simply the result of altering the subcellular localization of the mutant proteins.

The Aux/IAA proteins have the capacity to form homodimers and heterodimers ( Kim et al., 1997 ). Furthermore, the Aux/IAA proteins interact with the ARFs, which are capable of binding the auxin response element found in the pro-moter of auxin-inducible genes ( Kim et al., 1997 ; Ulmasov et al., 1997a , 1999 ). Because there is no evidence to suggest that different Aux/IAA proteins have discrete affinities for select sets of Aux/IAAs or ARFs, it appears that the quantity of Aux/IAA protein present in the cell is critical for maintaining equilibrium. Even small changes in the level of a protein can have dramatic effects on the cell's state. For instance, in yeast, a 6-fold change in the intracellular concentration of GAL4 causes a 40-fold change in the expression of GAL1 , a gene required for galactose utilization ( Griggs and Johnston, 1991 ).

The gain-of-function phenotype of iaa17/axr3-1 plants might be explained by a dominant negative effect. Because the stabilized iaa17/axr3-1 protein retains its ability to homodimerize and heterodimerize, other Aux/IAA or ARF proteins could be titrated away from their normal partners. The disruption of this web of finely tuned and tightly regulated interactions could lead to the ectopic expression or repression of downstream genes. The altered patterns of gene expression would lead in turn to the pleiotropic phenotypes that are observed.

Mutations in domain III of IAA17/AXR3, which contains a predicted βαα motif, eliminate the capacity of IAA17/AXR3 proteins to homodimerize or heterodimerize. Circular dichroism spectroscopy of recombinant peptides corresponding to domain III has shown that this region contains substantial α-helical secondary structure ( Morgan et al., 1999 ). The location of the reverting amino acid change between the β and α1 segments supports the notion that this protein fold is a prerequisite for stable dimer formation.

The iaa17/axr3-1R3 mutant contains a second site change in domain I that affects the ability of the protein to homodimerize. This suggests that domain I may form an additional site of contact for homodimerization. Alternatively, the second site mutation might alter the secondary structure of the protein in such a way that the ability of the degradation machinery to target the protein is restored and the effects on homodimerization are a secondary consequence of this change.

In addition to auxin resistance, the iaa17/axr3-1 plants exhibit altered responses to other hormones. For instance, several of the iaa17/axr3-1 phenotypes, including ectopic expression from the SAUR-AC1 promoter, can be rescued by the application of exogenous cytokinin ( Leyser et al., 1996 ). This finding implies that the novel or misdirected interactions of a stabilized IAA17/AXR3 protein can be reversed by cytokinin-dependent signals. Furthermore, the iaa17/axr3-1 plants show a resistance to the ethylene precursor 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid, suggesting that improper interactions of IAA17/AXR3 also can affect the output of signaling through the well-characterized ethylene signal transduction pathway. Whether these effects represent the convergence of signaling networks or communication between signaling components remains to be determined.
