---
pmid: '19380113'
title: 'Antifungal innate immunity in C. elegans: PKCdelta links G protein signaling
  and a conserved p38 MAPK cascade.'
authors:
- Ziegler K
- Kurz CL
- Cypowyj S
- Couillault C
- Pophillat M
- Pujol N
- Ewbank JJ
journal: Cell Host Microbe
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2009.03.006
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Antifungal innate immunity in C. elegans: PKCdelta links G protein signaling and a conserved p38 MAPK cascade.
**Authors:** Ziegler K, Kurz CL, Cypowyj S, Couillault C, Pophillat M, Pujol N, Ewbank JJ
**Journal:** Cell Host Microbe (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.chom.2009.03.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2009.03.006)

## Abstract

1. Cell Host Microbe. 2009 Apr 23;5(4):341-52. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2009.03.006.

Antifungal innate immunity in C. elegans: PKCdelta links G protein signaling and 
a conserved p38 MAPK cascade.

Ziegler K(1), Kurz CL, Cypowyj S, Couillault C, Pophillat M, Pujol N, Ewbank JJ.

Author information:
(1)Centre d'Immunologie de Marseille-Luminy, Université de la Méditerranée, Case 
906, 13288 Marseille cedex 9, France.

Comment in
    Cell Host Microbe. 2009 Apr 23;5(4):313-5. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2009.04.002.

Like other multicellular organisms, the model nematode C. elegans responds to 
infection by inducing the expression of defense genes. Among the genes 
upregulated in response to a natural fungal pathogen is nlp-29, encoding an 
antimicrobial peptide. In a screen for mutants that fail to express nlp-29 
following fungal infection, we isolated alleles of tpa-1, homologous to the 
mammalian protein kinase C (PKC) delta. Through epistasis analyses, we 
demonstrate that C. elegans PKC acts through the p38 MAPK pathway to regulate 
nlp-29. This involves G protein signaling and specific C-type phospholipases 
acting upstream of PKCdelta. Unexpectedly and unlike in mammals, tpa-1 does not 
act via D-type protein kinases, but another C. elegans PKC gene, pkc-3, 
functions nonredundantly with tpa-1 to control nlp-29 expression. Finally, the 
tribbles-like kinase nipi-3 acts upstream of PKCdelta in this antifungal immune 
signaling cascade. These findings greatly expand our understanding of the 
pathways involved in C. elegans innate immunity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chom.2009.03.006
PMID: 19380113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
