---
pmid: '15109303'
title: 'Alternative reading frame protein (ARF)-independent function of CARF (collaborator
  of ARF) involves its interactions with p53: evidence for a novel p53-activation
  pathway and its negative feedback control.'
authors:
- Hasan MK
- Yaguchi T
- Minoda Y
- Hirano T
- Taira K
- Wadhwa R
- Kaul SC
journal: Biochem J
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1224239
doi: 10.1042/BJ20040337
---

# Alternative reading frame protein (ARF)-independent function of CARF (collaborator of ARF) involves its interactions with p53: evidence for a novel p53-activation pathway and its negative feedback control.
**Authors:** Hasan MK, Yaguchi T, Minoda Y, Hirano T, Taira K, Wadhwa R, Kaul SC
**Journal:** Biochem J (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BJ20040337](https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20040337)
**PMC:** [PMC1224239](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1224239/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2004 Jun 15;380(Pt 3):605-10. doi: 10.1042/BJ20040337.

Alternative reading frame protein (ARF)-independent function of CARF 
(collaborator of ARF) involves its interactions with p53: evidence for a novel 
p53-activation pathway and its negative feedback control.

Hasan MK(1), Yaguchi T, Minoda Y, Hirano T, Taira K, Wadhwa R, Kaul SC.

Author information:
(1)Gene Function Research Center, National Institute of Advanced Industrial 
Science & Technology (AIST), 1-1-1 Higashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8562, Japan.

CARF, a collaborator of ARF (alternative reading frame protein), was cloned as a 
novel ARF-binding protein from a yeast-interaction screen. It potentiated 
ARF-mediated p53 function, and also caused a moderate increase in p53 activity 
in the absence of ARF. We herein report the molecular mechanism of 
ARF-independent function of CARF. By employing a variety of approaches, 
including overexpression of CARF, its suppression by small interfering RNA and 
use of protease inhibitors, we demonstrate that: (i) CARF directly interacts 
with wild-type p53, causing its stabilization and functional activation; and 
(ii) CARF and p53 levels show an inverse relationship that is instigated by a 
negative-feedback control via a proteasome-mediated degradation pathway.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20040337
PMCID: PMC1224239
PMID: 15109303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
