---
pmid: '20217897'
title: RpS3 translation is repressed by interaction with its own mRNA.
authors:
- Kim HD
- Kim TS
- Joo YJ
- Shin HS
- Kim SH
- Jang CY
- Lee CE
- Kim J
journal: J Cell Biochem
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/jcb.22537
---

# RpS3 translation is repressed by interaction with its own mRNA.
**Authors:** Kim HD, Kim TS, Joo YJ, Shin HS, Kim SH, Jang CY, Lee CE, Kim J
**Journal:** J Cell Biochem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jcb.22537](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcb.22537)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Biochem. 2010 May 15;110(2):294-303. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22537.

RpS3 translation is repressed by interaction with its own mRNA.

Kim HD(1), Kim TS, Joo YJ, Shin HS, Kim SH, Jang CY, Lee CE, Kim J.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, and 
BioInstitute, Korea University, Seoul, South Korea.

Ribosomal protein S3 (RpS3) is a well-known multi-functional protein mainly 
involved in protein biosynthesis as a member of the small ribosomal subunit. It 
also plays a role in repairing various DNA damage acting as a repair UV 
endonuclease. Most of the rpS3 pool is located in the ribosome while the 
minority exists in free form in the cytoplasm. We here report an additional 
function of rpS3 in which it represses its own translation by binding to its 
cognate mRNA. Through RT-PCR of the RNAs co-immunoprecipitated with ectopically 
expressed rpS3, rpS3 protein was found to interact with various RNAs-endogenous 
rpS3, 18S rRNA. The S3-C terminal domain was shown to be the major mRNA binding 
domain of rpS3, independent of the KH domain. This interaction was shown to 
occur in cytoplasmic fractions rather than ribosomal fractions, and then is 
involved in its own mRNA translational inhibition by in vitro translation. 
Furthermore, when Flag-tagged rpS3 was transiently transfected into 293T cells, 
the level of endogenous rpS3 gradually decreased regardless of transcription. 
These results suggest that free rpS3 regulates its own translation via a 
feedback mechanism.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.22537
PMID: 20217897 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
