---
pmid: '11751572'
title: SEK-1 MAPKK mediates Ca2+ signaling to determine neuronal asymmetric development
  in Caenorhabditis elegans.
authors:
- Tanaka-Hino M
- Sagasti A
- Hisamoto N
- Kawasaki M
- Nakano S
- Ninomiya-Tsuji J
- Bargmann CI
- Matsumoto K
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1083920
doi: 10.1093/embo-reports/kvf001
---

# SEK-1 MAPKK mediates Ca2+ signaling to determine neuronal asymmetric development in Caenorhabditis elegans.
**Authors:** Tanaka-Hino M, Sagasti A, Hisamoto N, Kawasaki M, Nakano S, Ninomiya-Tsuji J, Bargmann CI, Matsumoto K
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1093/embo-reports/kvf001](https://doi.org/10.1093/embo-reports/kvf001)
**PMC:** [PMC1083920](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1083920/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2002 Jan;3(1):56-62. doi: 10.1093/embo-reports/kvf001. Epub 2001 Dec
 19.

SEK-1 MAPKK mediates Ca2+ signaling to determine neuronal asymmetric development 
in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Tanaka-Hino M(1), Sagasti A, Hisamoto N, Kawasaki M, Nakano S, Ninomiya-Tsuji J, 
Bargmann CI, Matsumoto K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Science, Nagoya 
University (and CREST, Japan Science and Technology Corporation), Chikusa-ku, 
Nagoya 464-8602, Japan.

The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway is a highly conserved 
signaling cascade that converts extracellular signals into various outputs. In 
Caenorhabditis elegans, asymmetric expression of the candidate odorant receptor 
STR-2 in either the left or the right of two bilaterally symmetrical olfactory 
AWC neurons is regulated by axon contact and Ca2+ signaling. We show that the 
MAPK kinase (MAPKK) SEK-1 is required for asymmetric expression in AWC neurons. 
Genetic and biochemical analyses reveal that SEK-1 functions in a pathway 
downstream of UNC-43 and NSY-1, Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II 
(CaMKII) and MAPK kinase kinase (MAPKKK), respectively. Thus, the 
NSY-1-SEK-1-MAPK cascade is activated by Ca2+ signaling through CaMKII and 
establishes asymmetric cell fate decision during neuronal development.

DOI: 10.1093/embo-reports/kvf001
PMCID: PMC1083920
PMID: 11751572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
