---
pmid: '18245293'
title: A set of activators and repressors control peripheral glucose pathways in Pseudomonas
  putida to yield a common central intermediate.
authors:
- del Castillo T
- Duque E
- Ramos JL
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2293218
doi: 10.1128/JB.01726-07
---

# A set of activators and repressors control peripheral glucose pathways in Pseudomonas putida to yield a common central intermediate.
**Authors:** del Castillo T, Duque E, Ramos JL
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JB.01726-07](https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.01726-07)
**PMC:** [PMC2293218](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2293218/)

## Abstract

1. J Bacteriol. 2008 Apr;190(7):2331-9. doi: 10.1128/JB.01726-07. Epub 2008 Feb
1.

A set of activators and repressors control peripheral glucose pathways in 
Pseudomonas putida to yield a common central intermediate.

del Castillo T(1), Duque E, Ramos JL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Protection, Estación del Zaidín, Consejo Superior 
de Investigaciones Cientificas, E-18008 Granada, Spain.

Pseudomonas putida KT2440 channels glucose to the central Entner-Doudoroff 
intermediate 6-phosphogluconate through three convergent pathways. The genes for 
these convergent pathways are clustered in three independent regions on the host 
chromosome. A number of monocistronic units and operons coexist within each of 
these clusters, favoring coexpression of catabolic enzymes and transport 
systems. Expression of the three pathways is mediated by three transcriptional 
repressors, HexR, GnuR, and PtxS, and by a positive transcriptional regulator, 
GltR-2. In this study, we generated mutants in each of the regulators and 
carried out transcriptional assays using microarrays and transcriptional 
fusions. These studies revealed that HexR controls the genes that encode 
glucokinase/glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase that yield 6-phosphogluconate; the 
genes for the Entner-Doudoroff enzymes that yield glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate and 
pyruvate; and gap-1, which encodes glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase. 
GltR-2 is the transcriptional regulator that controls specific porins for the 
entry of glucose into the periplasmic space, as well as the gtsABCD operon for 
glucose transport through the inner membrane. GnuR is the repressor of gluconate 
transport and gluconokinase responsible for the conversion of gluconate into 
6-phosphogluconate. PtxS, however, controls the enzymes for oxidation of 
gluconate to 2-ketogluconate, its transport and metabolism, and a set of genes 
unrelated to glucose metabolism.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01726-07
PMCID: PMC2293218
PMID: 18245293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
