---
pmid: '20089884'
title: Milk secretion and ejection are impaired in the mammary gland of mice harboring
  a Cx43 mutant while expression and localization of tight and adherens junction proteins
  remain unchanged.
authors:
- Plante I
- Wallis A
- Shao Q
- Laird DW
journal: Biol Reprod
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.109.081406
---

# Milk secretion and ejection are impaired in the mammary gland of mice harboring a Cx43 mutant while expression and localization of tight and adherens junction proteins remain unchanged.
**Authors:** Plante I, Wallis A, Shao Q, Laird DW
**Journal:** Biol Reprod (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1095/biolreprod.109.081406](https://doi.org/10.1095/biolreprod.109.081406)

## Abstract

1. Biol Reprod. 2010 May;82(5):837-47. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.109.081406. Epub 
2010 Jan 20.

Milk secretion and ejection are impaired in the mammary gland of mice harboring 
a Cx43 mutant while expression and localization of tight and adherens junction 
proteins remain unchanged.

Plante I(1), Wallis A, Shao Q, Laird DW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Western Ontario, 
London, Ontario, Canada.

During pregnancy, the integrity of the mammary gland epithelium must be 
maintained by the junctional nexus formed by gap, adherens, and tight junctions 
for proper alveologenesis. We have previously shown that mammary glands from 
Gja1(Jrt/+) mice, harboring a mutation in the Gja1 gene encoding connexin (Cx) 
43, have reduced Cx43 gap junction function and are unable to release milk to 
the pups. We hypothesized that low levels of Cx43 in the mammary gland may also 
affect other mammary gland connexins, tight and adherens junction proteins, and 
alveolar architecture, thus contributing to the lactation defect. Surprisingly, 
the levels and/or localization of Cx26 (Gjb2), Cx30 (Gjb6), Cx32 (Gjb1), 
E-cadherin, P-cadherin, beta-catenin, claudin-1, and occludin were all 
unaffected by the decreased levels of Cx43 at parturition, suggesting no 
cross-talk to other connexins or junctional proteins in mutant mice mammary 
glands. Consistently, in mammary gland myoepithelial primary cultures or in 
Normal Rat Kidney (NRK) cells, tight and adherens junction protein levels and 
localization were unaffected by the expression of Cx43 mutants. However, whereas 
the architecture of the alveolar and ductal structures appeared to be normal in 
mutant mice, the presence of milk and cytoplasmic lipid droplets were frequently 
observed within the epithelium itself, suggesting a defect in the secretory 
process. Overall, these results suggest that proteins associated with tight and 
adherens junctions are unaffected by greatly reduced Cx43 gap junctions in the 
mammary gland epithelium, and they further suggest that the mammary gland defect 
in Cx43 mutant mice may extend to impaired milk secretion.

DOI: 10.1095/biolreprod.109.081406
PMID: 20089884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
