---
pmid: '26113536'
title: Insufficient glucose supply is linked to hypothermia upon cold exposure in
  high-fat diet-fed mice lacking PEMT.
authors:
- Gao X
- van der Veen JN
- Fernandez-Patron C
- Vance JE
- Vance DE
- Jacobs RL
journal: J Lipid Res
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4548774
doi: 10.1194/jlr.M059287
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Insufficient glucose supply is linked to hypothermia upon cold exposure in high-fat diet-fed mice lacking PEMT.
**Authors:** Gao X, van der Veen JN, Fernandez-Patron C, Vance JE, Vance DE, Jacobs RL
**Journal:** J Lipid Res (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1194/jlr.M059287](https://doi.org/10.1194/jlr.M059287)
**PMC:** [PMC4548774](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4548774/)

## Abstract

1. J Lipid Res. 2015 Sep;56(9):1701-10. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M059287. Epub 2015 Jun
25.

Insufficient glucose supply is linked to hypothermia upon cold exposure in 
high-fat diet-fed mice lacking PEMT.

Gao X(1), van der Veen JN(1), Fernandez-Patron C(2), Vance JE(3), Vance DE(1), 
Jacobs RL(4).

Author information:
(1)Group on the Molecular and Cell Biology of Lipids University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Canada Departments of Biochemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, 
Canada.
(2)Departments of Biochemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.
(3)Group on the Molecular and Cell Biology of Lipids University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Canada Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.
(4)Group on the Molecular and Cell Biology of Lipids University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Canada Agricultural, Food, and Nutritional Science, University of 
Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.

Mice that lack phosphatidylethanolamine N-methyltransferase (Pemt(-/-) mice) are 
protected from high-fat (HF) diet-induced obesity. HF-fed Pemt(-/-) mice show 
higher oxygen consumption and heat production, indicating that more energy might 
be utilized for thermogenesis and might account for the resistance to 
diet-induced weight gain. To test this hypothesis, HF-fed Pemt(-/-) and 
Pemt(+/+) mice were challenged with acute cold exposure at 4°C. Unexpectedly, 
HF-fed Pemt(-/-) mice developed hypothermia within 3 h of cold exposure. In 
contrast, chow-fed Pemt(-/-) mice, possessing similar body mass, maintained body 
temperature. Lack of PEMT did not impair the capacity for thermogenesis in 
skeletal muscle or brown adipose tissue. Plasma catecholamines were not altered 
by Pemt genotype, and stimulation of lipolysis was intact in brown and white 
adipose tissue of Pemt(-/-) mice. HF-fed Pemt(-/-) mice also developed higher 
systolic blood pressure, accompanied by reduced cardiac output. Choline 
supplementation reversed the cold-induced hypothermia in HF-fed Pemt(-/-) mice 
with no effect on blood pressure. Plasma glucose levels were ∼50% lower in 
HF-fed Pemt(-/-) mice compared with Pemt(+/+) mice. Choline supplementation 
normalized plasma hypoglycemia and the expression of proteins involved in 
gluconeogenesis. We propose that cold-induced hypothermia in HF-fed Pemt(-/-) 
mice is linked to plasma hypoglycemia due to compromised hepatic glucose 
production.

Copyright © 2015 by the American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 
Inc.

DOI: 10.1194/jlr.M059287
PMCID: PMC4548774
PMID: 26113536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
