---
pmid: '30573682'
title: Structural basis and mechanism of the unfolding-induced activation of HdeA,
  a bacterial acid response chaperone.
authors:
- Yu XC
- Hu Y
- Ding J
- Li H
- Jin C
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6398119
doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.006398
---

# Structural basis and mechanism of the unfolding-induced activation of HdeA, a bacterial acid response chaperone.
**Authors:** Yu XC, Hu Y, Ding J, Li H, Jin C
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.RA118.006398](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA118.006398)
**PMC:** [PMC6398119](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6398119/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2019 Mar 1;294(9):3192-3206. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.006398. Epub 
2018 Dec 20.

Structural basis and mechanism of the unfolding-induced activation of HdeA, a 
bacterial acid response chaperone.

Yu XC(1)(2), Hu Y(3)(2), Ding J(2)(4), Li H(1)(2), Jin C(5)(2)(4)(6).

Author information:
(1)From the College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering.
(2)Beijing Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Center.
(3)From the College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, 
yunfei_hu@suda.edu.cn.
(4)College of Life Sciences.
(5)From the College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, changwen@pku.edu.cn.
(6)Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Peking University, 
Beijing 100871, China.

The role of protein structural disorder in biological functions has gained 
increasing attention in the past decade. The bacterial acid-resistant chaperone 
HdeA belongs to a group of "conditionally disordered" proteins, because it is 
inactive in its well-structured state and becomes activated via an 
order-to-disorder transition under acid stress. However, the mechanism for 
unfolding-induced activation remains unclear because of a lack of experimental 
information on the unfolded state conformation and the chaperone-client 
interactions. Herein, we used advanced solution NMR methods to characterize the 
activated-state conformation of HdeA under acidic conditions and identify its 
client-binding sites. We observed that the structure of activated HdeA becomes 
largely disordered and exposes two hydrophobic patches essential for client 
interactions. Furthermore, using the pH-dependent chemical exchange saturation 
transfer (CEST) NMR method, we identified three acid-sensitive regions that act 
as structural locks in regulating the exposure of the two client-binding sites 
during the activation process, revealing a multistep activation mechanism of 
HdeA's chaperone function at the atomic level. Our results highlight the role of 
intrinsic protein disorder in chaperone function and the self-inhibitory role of 
ordered structures under nonstress conditions, offering new insights for 
improving our understanding of protein structure-function paradigms.

© 2019 Yu et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.006398
PMCID: PMC6398119
PMID: 30573682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article
