---
pmid: '10671482'
title: Identification of Cox20p, a novel protein involved in the maturation and assembly
  of cytochrome oxidase subunit 2.
authors:
- Hell K
- Tzagoloff A
- Neupert W
- Stuart RA
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.275.7.4571
---

# Identification of Cox20p, a novel protein involved in the maturation and assembly of cytochrome oxidase subunit 2.
**Authors:** Hell K, Tzagoloff A, Neupert W, Stuart RA
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.275.7.4571](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.275.7.4571)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Feb 18;275(7):4571-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.275.7.4571.

Identification of Cox20p, a novel protein involved in the maturation and 
assembly of cytochrome oxidase subunit 2.

Hell K(1), Tzagoloff A, Neupert W, Stuart RA.

Author information:
(1)Institut f체r Physiologische Chemie der Universit채t M체nchen, Goethestrasse 33, 
80336 M체nchen, Germany.

We have identified Cox20p, a 23.8-kDa protein of the mitochondrial inner 
membrane that is involved in the biogenesis of the yeast cytochrome oxidase 
complex. Cytochrome oxidase subunit 2 (Cox2p) accumulates as a precursor in 
cox20 mutants, suggesting a defect in biogenesis of this mitochondrially encoded 
protein. The inability of cox20 mutants to process the subunit 2 precursor 
(pCox2p) is not due to impaired export of the protein across the inner membrane 
or to an inactive Imp1p/Imp2p peptidase. Rather, Cox20p specifically binds the 
newly synthesized pCox2p, a step required to present the exported pCox2p as a 
substrate to the Imp1p peptidase. All of the endogenous pCox2p accumulated in an 
Deltaimp1 mutant, and a small fraction of Cox2p in wild type yeast, is detected 
in a complex with Cox20p. Following maturation Cox2p remained associated with 
Cox20p, prior to assembling into the cytochrome oxidase complex. We propose that 
Cox20p acts as a membrane-bound chaperone necessary for cleavage of pCox2p and 
for interaction of the mature protein with other subunits of cytochrome oxidase 
in a later step of the assembly process.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.275.7.4571
PMID: 10671482 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
