---
pmid: '25819561'
title: Centrosome-Associated Degradation Limits β-Catenin Inheritance by Daughter
  Cells after Asymmetric Division.
authors:
- Vora S
- Phillips BT
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2015.02.020
---

# Centrosome-Associated Degradation Limits β-Catenin Inheritance by Daughter Cells after Asymmetric Division.
**Authors:** Vora S, Phillips BT
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cub.2015.02.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2015.02.020)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2015 Apr 20;25(8):1005-16. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2015.02.020. Epub
2015  Mar 26.

Centrosome-Associated Degradation Limits β-Catenin Inheritance by Daughter Cells 
after Asymmetric Division.

Vora S(1), Phillips BT(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA. 
Electronic address: bryan-phillips@uiowa.edu.

Caenorhabditis elegans embryos rapidly diversify cell fate using a modified 
Wnt/β-catenin signaling strategy to carry out serial asymmetric cell divisions 
(ACDs). Wnt-dependent ACDs rely on nuclear asymmetry of the transcriptional 
coactivator SYS-1/β-catenin between daughter cells to differentially activate 
Wnt-responsive target genes. Here, we investigate how dynamic localization of 
SYS-1 to mitotic centrosomes influences SYS-1 inheritance in daughter cells and 
cell-fate outcomes after ACD. Through yeast two-hybrid screening, we identify 
the centrosomal protein RSA-2 as a SYS-1 binding partner and show that 
localization of SYS-1 to mitotic centrosomes is dependent on RSA-2. Uncoupling 
SYS-1 from the centrosome by RSA-2 depletion increases SYS-1 inheritance after 
ACD and promotes Wnt-dependent cell fate. Photobleaching experiments reveal that 
centrosome-bound SYS-1 turns over rapidly. Interestingly, disruption of the 
proteasome leads to an increased accumulation of SYS-1 at the centrosome but 
disrupts its dynamic turnover. We conclude that centrosomal targeting of SYS-1 
promotes its degradation during asymmetric cell division. We propose a model 
whereby centrosome-associated SYS-1 degradation couples negative regulation with 
cell-division timing to facilitate SYS-1 clearance from the mother cell at the 
time of asymmetric division. Based on our observations of centrosomal SYS-1 
dynamics, we discuss the possibility that the centrosome may coordinate various 
cell-cycle-dependent processes by synchronizing mitosis and protein regulation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2015.02.020
PMID: 25819561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
