---
pmid: '21536684'
title: Survivin monomer plays an essential role in apoptosis regulation.
authors:
- Pavlyukov MS
- Antipova NV
- Balashova MV
- Vinogradova TV
- Kopantzev EP
- Shakhparonov MI
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3123095
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.237586
---

# Survivin monomer plays an essential role in apoptosis regulation.
**Authors:** Pavlyukov MS, Antipova NV, Balashova MV, Vinogradova TV, Kopantzev EP, Shakhparonov MI
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M111.237586](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M111.237586)
**PMC:** [PMC3123095](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3123095/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jul 1;286(26):23296-307. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.237586. Epub 
2011 May 2.

Survivin monomer plays an essential role in apoptosis regulation.

Pavlyukov MS(1), Antipova NV, Balashova MV, Vinogradova TV, Kopantzev EP, 
Shakhparonov MI.

Author information:
(1)Shemiakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Miklukho-Maklaya 
16/10, Moscow 117997, Russia.

Survivin was initially described as an inhibitor of apoptosis and attracted 
growing attention as one of the most tumor-specific genes in the human genome 
and a promising target for cancer therapy. Lately, it has been shown that 
survivin is a multifunctional protein that takes part in several crucial cell 
processes. At first, it was supposed that survivin functions only as a 
homodimer, but now data indicate that many processes require monomeric survivin. 
Moreover, recent studies reveal a special mechanism regulating the balance 
between monomeric and dimeric forms of the protein. In this paper we studied the 
mutant form of survivin that was unable to dimerize and investigated its role in 
apoptosis. We showed that survivin monomer interacts with Smac/DIABLO and 
X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP) both in vitro and in vivo. Due to 
this feature, it protects cells from caspase-dependent apoptosis even more 
efficiently than the wild-type survivin. We also identified that mutant 
monomeric survivin prevents apoptosis-inducing factor release from the 
mitochondrial intermembrane space, protecting human fibrosarcoma HT1080 cells 
from caspase-independent apoptosis. On the other hand, our results indicate that 
only wild-type survivin, but not the monomer mutant form, enhances tubulin 
stability in cells. These findings suggest that survivin partly performs its 
functions as a monomer and partly as a dimer. The mechanism of dimer-monomer 
balance regulation may also work as a "switcher" between survivin functions and 
thereby explain remarkable functional diversities of this protein.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.237586
PMCID: PMC3123095
PMID: 21536684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
