---
pmid: '11118322'
title: Structure of the VPATPD gene encoding subunit D of the human vacuolar proton
  ATPase.
authors:
- Agarwal AK
- White PC
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/bbrc.2000.4003
---

# Structure of the VPATPD gene encoding subunit D of the human vacuolar proton ATPase.
**Authors:** Agarwal AK, White PC
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1006/bbrc.2000.4003](https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.2000.4003)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Dec 20;279(2):543-7. doi: 
10.1006/bbrc.2000.4003.

Structure of the VPATPD gene encoding subunit D of the human vacuolar proton 
ATPase.

Agarwal AK(1), White PC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, Texas, 75390-9063, USA.

The HSD11B2 and VPATPD genes encoding the human kidney isozyme of 
11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (11-HSD2) and subunit D of the vacuolar 
proton ATPase, respectively, are located on chromosome 16q22. They are 
transcribed from complementary DNA strands and their 3' ends are only 0.5 
kilobase apart. Because polymorphisms in HSD11B2 have been associated with 
hypertension and salt sensitivity, we characterized the human VPATPD gene. It 
spans 19 kb and consists of 8 exons. The encoded protein is 99.5% identical to 
mouse subunit D at the amino acid level. An alternating purine-pyrimidine tract 
is located in the 3'-untranslated region of VPATPD. On genotyping 17 
hypertensive subjects, no length polymorphism was found. Although VPATPD and 
HSD11B2 are both expressed in kidney and placenta, they are regulated 
differently; forskolin upregulates HSD11B2 but not VPATPD in human 
choriocarcinoma JEG3 cells. The functional significance of the proximity of 
these two genes remains to be established.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.2000.4003
PMID: 11118322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
