---
pmid: '12214234'
title: The ELF4 gene controls circadian rhythms and flowering time in Arabidopsis
  thaliana.
authors:
- Doyle MR
- Davis SJ
- Bastow RM
- McWatters HG
- Kozma-Bognár L
- Nagy F
- Millar AJ
- Amasino RM
journal: Nature
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature00954
---

# The ELF4 gene controls circadian rhythms and flowering time in Arabidopsis thaliana.
**Authors:** Doyle MR, Davis SJ, Bastow RM, McWatters HG, Kozma-Bognár L, Nagy F, Millar AJ, Amasino RM
**Journal:** Nature (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature00954](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature00954)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2002 Sep 5;419(6902):74-7. doi: 10.1038/nature00954.

The ELF4 gene controls circadian rhythms and flowering time in Arabidopsis 
thaliana.

Doyle MR(1), Davis SJ, Bastow RM, McWatters HG, Kozma-Bognár L, Nagy F, Millar 
AJ, Amasino RM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology, 
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

Many plants use day length as an environmental cue to ensure proper timing of 
the switch from vegetative to reproductive growth. Day-length sensing involves 
an interaction between the relative length of day and night, and endogenous 
rhythms that are controlled by the plant circadian clock. Thus, plants with 
defects in circadian regulation cannot properly regulate the timing of the 
floral transition. Here we describe the gene EARLY FLOWERING 4 (ELF4), which is 
involved in photoperiod perception and circadian regulation. ELF4 promotes clock 
accuracy and is required for sustained rhythms in the absence of daily 
light/dark cycles. elf4 mutants show attenuated expression of CIRCADIAN CLOCK 
ASSOCIATED 1 (CCA1), a gene that is thought to function as a central oscillator 
component. In addition, elf4 plants transiently show output rhythms with highly 
variable period lengths before becoming arrhythmic. Mutations in elf4 result in 
early flowering in non-inductive photoperiods, which is probably caused by 
elevated amounts of CONSTANS (CO), a gene that promotes floral induction.

DOI: 10.1038/nature00954
PMID: 12214234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
