---
pmid: '16714284'
title: Autophagy is disrupted in a knock-in mouse model of juvenile neuronal ceroid
  lipofuscinosis.
authors:
- Cao Y
- Espinola JA
- Fossale E
- Massey AC
- Cuervo AM
- MacDonald ME
- Cotman SL
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M602180200
---

# Autophagy is disrupted in a knock-in mouse model of juvenile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis.
**Authors:** Cao Y, Espinola JA, Fossale E, Massey AC, Cuervo AM, MacDonald ME, Cotman SL
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M602180200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M602180200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jul 21;281(29):20483-93. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M602180200. Epub
2006 May 19.

Autophagy is disrupted in a knock-in mouse model of juvenile neuronal ceroid
lipofuscinosis.

Cao Y(1), Espinola JA, Fossale E, Massey AC, Cuervo AM, MacDonald ME, Cotman SL.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Neurogenetics Unit and Center for Human Genetic Research,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.

Juvenile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis is caused by mutation of a novel,
endosomal/lysosomal membrane protein encoded by CLN3. The observation that the
mitochondrial ATPase subunit c protein accumulates in this disease suggests that
autophagy, a pathway that regulates mitochondrial turnover, may be disrupted. To
test this hypothesis, we examined the autophagic pathway in Cln3(Deltaex7/8)
knock-in mice and CbCln3(Deltaex7/8) cerebellar cells, accurate genetic models
of juvenile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis. In homozygous knock-in mice, we
found that the autophagy marker LC3-II was increased, and mammalian target of
rapamycin was down-regulated. Moreover, isolated autophagic vacuoles and
lysosomes from homozygous knock-in mice were less mature in their
ultrastructural morphology than the wild-type organelles, and subunit c
accumulated in autophagic vacuoles. Intriguingly, we also observed subunit c
accumulation in autophagic vacuoles in normal aging mice. Upon further
investigation of the autophagic pathway in homozygous knock-in cerebellar cells,
we found that LC3-positive vesicles were altered and overlap of endocytic and
lysosomal dyes was reduced when autophagy was stimulated, compared with wildtype
cells. Surprisingly, however, stimulation of autophagy did not significantly
impact cell survival, but inhibition of autophagy led to cell death. Together
these observations suggest that autophagy is disrupted in juvenile neuronal
ceroid lipofuscinosis, likely at the level of autophagic vacuolar maturation,
and that activation of autophagy may be a prosurvival feedback response in the
disease process.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M602180200
PMID: 16714284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
