---
pmid: '1592257'
title: Disruption of the sporulation-specific gene spiA in Dictyostelium discoideum
  leads to spore instability.
authors:
- Richardson DL
- Loomis WF
journal: Genes Dev
year: '1992'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1101/gad.6.6.1058
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Disruption of the sporulation-specific gene spiA in Dictyostelium discoideum leads to spore instability.
**Authors:** Richardson DL, Loomis WF
**Journal:** Genes Dev (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.6.6.1058](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.6.6.1058)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 1992 Jun;6(6):1058-70. doi: 10.1101/gad.6.6.1058.

Disruption of the sporulation-specific gene spiA in Dictyostelium discoideum 
leads to spore instability.

Richardson DL(1), Loomis WF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla 
92093-0322.

The spiA gene of Dictyostelium is expressed specifically in prespore cells and 
spores during culmination, the final stage of development during which prespore 
and prestalk cells undergo terminal differentiation to form spores and stalk. We 
have used homologous recombination to delete this gene and have characterized 
the resulting phenotype. The spiA- strains develop normally and produce spores 
that are indistinguishable from those of wild-type strains by transmission and 
scanning electron microscopy. Mutant spores have normal viability when assayed 
soon after the completion of development, but, as the spiA- spores age, they 
lose viability more rapidly than those of the spiA+ parent. The drop in 
viability is more pronounced when spores are submerged in dilute buffer at a 
concentration that does not allow germination; after 11 days submerged, the 
viability of spiA- spores is 10(5)-fold reduced, whereas that of the parent is 
decreased only 10-fold. Reinserting an intact copy of the spiA gene into a spiA- 
strain restores the stability of its spores. The product of the spiA gene, Dd31, 
was identified on Western blots as a 30-kD protein using an antibody raised 
against a fusion protein containing a portion of the coding sequence. Dd31 is 
associated with the inner face of spore coat fragments in a detergent-resistant 
manner. This location is consistent with its observed role in maintaining 
stability of the spores.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.6.6.1058
PMID: 1592257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
