---
pmid: '22503972'
title: Stanniocalcin 2, forms a complex with heme oxygenase 1, binds hemin and is
  a heat shock protein.
authors:
- Jiang J
- Westberg JA
- Andersson LC
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.03.151
---

# Stanniocalcin 2, forms a complex with heme oxygenase 1, binds hemin and is a heat shock protein.
**Authors:** Jiang J, Westberg JA, Andersson LC
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.03.151](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.03.151)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 May 4;421(2):274-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.03.151. Epub 2012 Apr 6.

Stanniocalcin 2, forms a complex with heme oxygenase 1, binds hemin and is a 
heat shock protein.

Jiang J(1), Westberg JA, Andersson LC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki and 
HUSLAB, PO Box 21, Haartmaninkatu 3, FI-00014 Helsinki, Finland. 
ji.jiang@helsinki.fi

Stanniocalcin 2 (STC2) is a homolog of stanniocalcin 1, a 56kD glycoprotein 
hormone that originally was found to confer calcitonin-like activity in fish. 
Human STC2 is expressed in various tissues such as kidney, spleen, heart, and 
pancreas. STC2 has been demonstrated to be induced by different kinds of stress 
and display cytoprotective activity, but the molecular mechanism is poorly 
understood. Heme oxygenase 1 (HO1) degrades heme to biliverdin, carbon monoxide 
and free iron, and is a stress-responsive protein. Using yeast two-hybrid 
screening we identified HO1 as a binding partner of STC2. The interaction was 
validated by in vivo co-immunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence. The binding 
site for HO1 was located to amino acids 181-200 of STC2. We also found that STC2 
binds hemin via a consensus heme regulatory motif. Moreover, STC2 expression was 
induced by heat shock in HEK293 cells. Taken together, our findings point to 
three novel functions of STC2, and suggest that STC2 interacts with HO1 to form 
a eukaryotic 'stressosome' involved in the degradation of heme.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.03.151
PMID: 22503972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
