---
pmid: '23467411'
title: Quantitative structural insight into human variegate porphyria disease.
authors:
- Wang B
- Wen X
- Qin X
- Wang Z
- Tan Y
- Shen Y
- Xi Z
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2013'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3636862
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.459768
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Quantitative structural insight into human variegate porphyria disease.
**Authors:** Wang B, Wen X, Qin X, Wang Z, Tan Y, Shen Y, Xi Z
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M113.459768](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M113.459768)
**PMC:** [PMC3636862](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3636862/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Apr 26;288(17):11731-40. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.459768. Epub 
2013 Mar 6.

Quantitative structural insight into human variegate porphyria disease.

Wang B(1), Wen X, Qin X, Wang Z, Tan Y, Shen Y, Xi Z.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Elemento-Organic Chemistry, Department of Chemical 
Biology, College of Chemistry, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China.

Defects in the human protoporphyrinogen oxidase (hPPO) gene, resulting in ~50% 
decreased activity of hPPO, is responsible for the dominantly inherited disorder 
variegate porphyria (VP). To understand the molecular mechanism of VP, we 
employed the site-directed mutagenesis, biochemical assays, structural biology, 
and molecular dynamics simulation studies to investigate VP-causing hPPO 
mutants. We report here the crystal structures of R59Q and R59G mutants in 
complex with acifluorfen at a resolution of 2.6 and 2.8 Å. The r.m.s.d. of the 
Cα atoms of the active site structure of R59G and R59Q with respect to the 
wild-type was 0.20 and 0.15 Å, respectively. However, these highly similar 
static crystal structures of mutants with the wild-type could not quantitatively 
explain the observed large differences in their enzymatic activity. To 
understand how the hPPO mutations affect their catalytic activities, we combined 
molecular dynamics simulation and statistical analysis to quantitatively 
understand the molecular mechanism of VP-causing mutants. We have found that the 
probability of the privileged conformations of hPPO can be correlated very well 
with the k(cat)/K(m) of PPO (correlation coefficient, R(2) > 0.9), and the 
catalytic activity of 44 clinically reported VP-causing mutants can be 
accurately predicted. These results indicated that the VP-causing mutation 
affect the catalytic activity of hPPO by affecting the ability of hPPO to sample 
the privileged conformations. The current work, together with our previous 
crystal structure study on the wild-type hPPO, provided the quantitative 
structural insight into human variegate porphyria disease.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.459768
PMCID: PMC3636862
PMID: 23467411 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Defects in the human protoporphyrinogen oxidase (hPPO) gene, resulting in ∼50% decreased activity of hPPO, is responsible for the dominantly inherited disorder variegate porphyria (VP). To understand the molecular mechanism of VP, we employed the site-directed mutagenesis, biochemical assays, structural biology, and molecular dynamics simulation studies to investigate VP-causing hPPO mutants. We report here the crystal structures of R59Q and R59G mutants in complex with acifluorfen at a resolution of 2.6 and 2.8 Å. The r.m.s.d. of the Cα atoms of the active site structure of R59G and R59Q with respect to the wild-type was 0.20 and 0.15 Å, respectively. However, these highly similar static crystal structures of mutants with the wild-type could not quantitatively explain the observed large differences in their enzymatic activity. To understand how the hPPO mutations affect their catalytic activities, we combined molecular dynamics simulation and statistical analysis to quantitatively understand the molecular mechanism of VP-causing mutants. We have found that the probability of the privileged conformations of hPPO can be correlated very well with the k cat / K m of PPO (correlation coefficient, R 2 > 0.9), and the catalytic activity of 44 clinically reported VP-causing mutants can be accurately predicted. These results indicated that the VP-causing mutation affect the catalytic activity of hPPO by affecting the ability of hPPO to sample the privileged conformations. The current work, together with our previous crystal structure study on the wild-type hPPO, provided the quantitative structural insight into human variegate porphyria disease.

Introduction

Protoporphyrinogen oxidase (PPO) 3 (EC 1.3.3.4) is the penultimate enzyme in the heme biosynthetic pathway ( 1 ) and catalyzes the oxidation of protoporphyrinogen IX (protogen) to protoporphyrin IX (porphyrin) in the presence of cofactor FAD and molecular oxygen ( Fig. 1 ) ( 2 – 4 ). In humans, defects in the PPO gene, resulting in ∼50% decreased activity of PPO, is responsible for the dominantly inherited disorder variegate porphyria (VP) ( 5 – 8 ). VP is a type of acute hepaticporphyria ( 9 – 11 ), which is characterized by an abnormal pattern of porphyrin excretion. VP has been found worldwide ( 12 – 15 ) and is particularly prevalent in the white population of South Africa (∼3 in 1000), especially VP caused by the R59W founder mutation ( 16 , 17 ).

Inhibition of PPO in plants leads the accumulation of protogen, which exports to the cytoplasm and forms porphyrin through nonenzymatic oxidation. The photosensitizing porphyrin can lead to singlet oxygen, which can cause peroxidation of membrane lipids and cell death ( 18 , 19 ). In human, because the deficiency of PPO leads to the tissue accumulation and excessive excretion of porphyrin, it is hypothesized that the sensitivity of VP patients to light should be similar to the condition in plants ( 20 , 21 ).

Though the study of VP has been performed for more than half a century ( 8 , 17 , 21 , 22 ), the detailed molecular mechanism of VP is still unclear. To address this important issue, we have resolved the crystal structure of human PPO in a resolution of 1.9 Å and characterized 44 VP-causing mutations in vitro ( 22 ). Based on this high-resolution structure of hPPO and the kinetic data, we attempted to explain the defects of 44 missense mutants. The mapping of these 44 mutations on the hPPO crystal structure indicated these mutants distributed on all of the three structure domains of hPPO. However, our understanding of the molecular mechanism of VP-causing mutants was limited because our insights mostly depend on structural analysis and in silico docking ( 22 ); the detailed information of molecular motion on substrate binding was especially lacking. In this work, the site-directed mutagenesis, biochemical assays, structural biology, and molecular dynamics simulation studies have been carried out to understand molecular mechanism of VP-causing mutants. We report here the crystal structures of R59Q and R59G mutants in complex with acifluorfen at a resolution of 2.6 and 2.8 Å. However, these highly similar static crystal structures of mutants with the wild-type could not quantitatively explain the observed large differences in their enzymatic activity. We further combined molecular dynamics simulation and statistical analysis to quantitatively understand the molecular mechanism of VP-causing mutants. We have found that the VP-causing mutations affect the catalytic activity of hPPO by affecting the ability to sample privileged conformations. The effects of 44 clinically important mutations on the catalytic activity of hPPO have been accurately predicted with R 2 = 0.94 in this work.
