---
pmid: '12819136'
title: Comparative analysis of apoptosis and inflammation genes of mice and humans.
authors:
- Reed JC
- Doctor K
- Rojas A
- Zapata JM
- Stehlik C
- Fiorentino L
- Damiano J
- Roth W
- Matsuzawa S
- Newman R
- Takayama S
- Marusawa H
- Xu F
- Salvesen G
- Godzik A
- RIKEN GER Group
- GSL Members
journal: Genome Res
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC403667
doi: 10.1101/gr.1053803
---

# Comparative analysis of apoptosis and inflammation genes of mice and humans.
**Authors:** Reed JC, Doctor K, Rojas A, Zapata JM, Stehlik C, Fiorentino L, Damiano J, Roth W, Matsuzawa S, Newman R, Takayama S, Marusawa H, Xu F, Salvesen G, Godzik A, RIKEN GER Group, GSL Members
**Journal:** Genome Res (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gr.1053803](https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.1053803)
**PMC:** [PMC403667](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC403667/)

## Abstract

1. Genome Res. 2003 Jun;13(6B):1376-88. doi: 10.1101/gr.1053803.

Comparative analysis of apoptosis and inflammation genes of mice and humans.

Reed JC(1), Doctor K, Rojas A, Zapata JM, Stehlik C, Fiorentino L, Damiano J, 
Roth W, Matsuzawa S, Newman R, Takayama S, Marusawa H, Xu F, Salvesen G, Godzik 
A; RIKEN GER Group; GSL Members.

Author information:
(1)The Burnham Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA. jreed@burnham.org

Apoptosis (programmed cell death) plays important roles in many facets of normal 
mammalian physiology. Host-pathogen interactions have provided evolutionary 
pressure for apoptosis as a defense mechanism against viruses and microbes, 
sometimes linking apoptosis mechanisms with inflammatory responses through 
NFkappaB induction. Proteins involved in apoptosis and NFkappaB induction 
commonly contain evolutionarily conserved domains that can serve as signatures 
for identification by bioinformatics methods. Using a combination of public 
(NCBI) and private (RIKEN) databases, we compared the repertoire of apoptosis 
and NFkappaB-inducing genes in humans and mice from cDNA/EST/genomic data, 
focusing on the following domain families: (1) Caspase proteases; (2) Caspase 
recruitment domains (CARD); (3) Death Domains (DD); (4) Death Effector Domains 
(DED); (5) BIR domains of Inhibitor of Apoptosis Proteins (IAPs); (6) Bcl-2 
homology (BH) domains of Bcl-2 family proteins; (7) Tumor Necrosis Factor 
(TNF)-family ligands; (8) TNF receptors (TNFR); (9) TIR domains; (10) PAAD 
(PYRIN; PYD, DAPIN); (11) nucleotide-binding NACHT domains; (12) TRAFs; (13) 
Hsp70-binding BAG domains; (14) endonuclease-associated CIDE domains; and (15) 
miscellaneous additional proteins. After excluding redundancy due to alternative 
splice forms, sequencing errors, and other considerations, we identified cDNAs 
derived from a total of 227 human genes among these domain families. Orthologous 
murine genes were found for 219 (96%); in addition, several unique murine genes 
were found, which appear not to have human orthologs. This mismatch may be due 
to the still fragmentary information about the mouse genome or genuine 
differences between mouse and human repertoires of apoptotic genes. With this 
caveat, we discuss similarities and differences in human and murine genes from 
these domain families.

DOI: 10.1101/gr.1053803
PMCID: PMC403667
PMID: 12819136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
