---
pmid: '15998644'
title: JAK/STAT3 pathway is involved in survival of neurons in response to insulin-like
  growth factor and negatively regulated by suppressor of cytokine signaling-3.
authors:
- Yadav A
- Kalita A
- Dhillon S
- Banerjee K
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M501316200
---

# JAK/STAT3 pathway is involved in survival of neurons in response to insulin-like growth factor and negatively regulated by suppressor of cytokine signaling-3.
**Authors:** Yadav A, Kalita A, Dhillon S, Banerjee K
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M501316200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M501316200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Sep 9;280(36):31830-40. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M501316200. Epub
2005  Jul 5.

JAK/STAT3 pathway is involved in survival of neurons in response to insulin-like 
growth factor and negatively regulated by suppressor of cytokine signaling-3.

Yadav A(1), Kalita A, Dhillon S, Banerjee K.

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Immunology, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi-110067, 
India.

Janus kinases (JAK) and signal transducers and activator of transcription (STAT) 
proteins are activated in response to many cytokines and growth factors and are 
well studied in the immune system. This study was conducted to examine the role 
of the JAK/STAT pathway in neurons in response to tumor necrosis factor-alpha 
(TNFalpha) and insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), which play a major role 
during neurodegeneration, and to study their effect on expression of suppressors 
of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS-3), belonging to the novel family of feedback 
regulators of cytokine and growth factor activities. In this report, we showed 
that TNFalpha is inhibitory to the survival of primary cortical neurons at 
higher doses and that IGF-1 can rescue TNFalpha-stimulated cell death. We showed 
that the JAK/STAT pathway is involved in this rescue as tyrphostin AG490, a 
specific inhibitor of JAK/STAT, completely inhibits cell survival in response to 
IGF-1. STAT3 gets tyrosine-phosphorylated and translocated to the nucleus in 
response to IGF-1. Northern blot, semi-quantitative reverse transcription-PCR, 
and real time PCR experiments demonstrated that the JAK/STAT pathway also 
up-regulated SOCS-3 mainly in response to IGF-1. SOCS-3 associated with the IGF 
receptor and blocked further STAT3 activation. To our knowledge, this is the 
first report that demonstrated the importance of the JAK/STAT pathway and the 
role of SOCS-3 in the survival of neurons in response to IGF-1. We have 
subsequently shown that SOCS-3 overexpression, on one hand, leads to 
neuroblastoma cell death and on the other hand leads to primary cell 
differentiation, indicating the involvement of SOCS-3 in cell survival and 
differentiation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M501316200
PMID: 15998644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
