---
pmid: '24212999'
title: Inorganic arsenic induces apoptosis through downregulation of Ube2d genes and
  p53 accumulation in rat proximal tubular cells.
authors:
- Tokumoto M
- Lee JY
- Fujiwara Y
- Uchiyama M
- Satoh M
journal: J Toxicol Sci
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.2131/jts.38.815
---

# Inorganic arsenic induces apoptosis through downregulation of Ube2d genes and p53 accumulation in rat proximal tubular cells.
**Authors:** Tokumoto M, Lee JY, Fujiwara Y, Uchiyama M, Satoh M
**Journal:** J Toxicol Sci (2013)
**DOI:** [10.2131/jts.38.815](https://doi.org/10.2131/jts.38.815)

## Abstract

1. J Toxicol Sci. 2013;38(6):815-20. doi: 10.2131/jts.38.815.

Inorganic arsenic induces apoptosis through downregulation of Ube2d genes and 
p53 accumulation in rat proximal tubular cells.

Tokumoto M(1), Lee JY, Fujiwara Y, Uchiyama M, Satoh M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Toxicology and Environmental Health, Showa 
Pharmaceutical University.

Ube2d ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes promote p53 ubiquitination and proteasomal 
degradation. We previously showed that cadmium induced p53-dependent apoptosis 
through the suppression of expression of Ube2d family genes (Ube2d1, Ube2d2, 
Ube2d3 and Ube2d4) in normal rat proximal tubular cells. Here we examined the 
effects of inorganic arsenic and inorganic mercury, which induce apoptosis in 
proximal tubular cells, on cellular protein level of p53 and gene expression of 
Ube2d family. Inorganic arsenic induced apoptosis with p53 accumulation, and 
suppressed Ube2d1, Ube2d2 and Ube2d4 expression, but not Ube2d3. On the other 
hand, although apoptosis was induced in response to inorganic mercury in 
proximal tubular cells, protein level of p53 was not elevated by inorganic 
mercury. These results suggest that inorganic arsenic, but not inorganic 
mercury, may induce p53-dependent apoptotic pathways through downregulation of 
gene expression of Ube2d family in proximal tubular cells.

DOI: 10.2131/jts.38.815
PMID: 24212999 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
