---
pmid: '8399332'
title: Purification of a human cytochrome P-450 isozyme catalyzing lanosterol 14 alpha-demethylation.
authors:
- Sonoda Y
- Endo M
- Ishida K
- Sato Y
- Fukusen N
- Fukuhara M
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '1993'
full_text_available: false
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Purification of a human cytochrome P-450 isozyme catalyzing lanosterol 14 alpha-demethylation.
**Authors:** Sonoda Y, Endo M, Ishida K, Sato Y, Fukusen N, Fukuhara M
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (1993)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1993 Sep 29;1170(1):92-7.

Purification of a human cytochrome P-450 isozyme catalyzing lanosterol 14 
alpha-demethylation.

Sonoda Y(1), Endo M, Ishida K, Sato Y, Fukusen N, Fukuhara M.

Author information:
(1)Kyoritsu College of Pharmacy, Tokyo, Japan.

An isozyme of cytochrome P-450 catalyzing lanosterol 14 alpha-demethylation was 
purified from human liver using column chromatography, including immunoaffinity 
chromatography. The purified protein exhibited a single protein band (53 kDa) on 
sodium dodecylsulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. When reconstituted 
with NADPH-cytochrome P-450 reductase, the purified protein showed an activity 
of 14 alpha-demethylation of 24,25-dihydrolanosterol (3.20 nmol/min per mg 
protein). The apparent Km value for 24,25-dihydrolanosterol was found to be 27 
microM. This enzyme converted in the reconstituted system, the oxygenated 
intermediates of 24,25-dihydrolanosterol 14 alpha-demethylation, 
32-hydroxy-24,25-dihydrolanosterol and 32-oxo-24,25-dihydrolanosterol, to the 
32-nor compound, 4,4-dimethylcholesta-8,14-dien-3 beta-ol.

PMID: 8399332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
