---
pmid: '10339406'
title: Genetic and structural characterization of the human mitochondrial inner membrane
  translocase.
authors:
- Bauer MF
- Gempel K
- Reichert AS
- Rappold GA
- Lichtner P
- Gerbitz KD
- Neupert W
- Brunner M
- Hofmann S
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/jmbi.1999.2751
---

# Genetic and structural characterization of the human mitochondrial inner membrane translocase.
**Authors:** Bauer MF, Gempel K, Reichert AS, Rappold GA, Lichtner P, Gerbitz KD, Neupert W, Brunner M, Hofmann S
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1006/jmbi.1999.2751](https://doi.org/10.1006/jmbi.1999.2751)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Biol. 1999 May 28;289(1):69-82. doi: 10.1006/jmbi.1999.2751.

Genetic and structural characterization of the human mitochondrial inner 
membrane translocase.

Bauer MF(1), Gempel K, Reichert AS, Rappold GA, Lichtner P, Gerbitz KD, Neupert 
W, Brunner M, Hofmann S.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Klinische Chemie Molekularbiologische Diagnostik und 
Mitochondriale Genetik und Institut für Diabetesforschung, Akad, Krankenhaus 
München-Schwabing, Kölner Platz 1, München, D-80804, Germany. 
bauer@bio.med.uni-muenchen.de

Translocation of nuclear-encoded mitochondrial preproteins is mediated by 
translocases in the outer and inner membranes. In the yeast Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae, translocation of preproteins into the matrix requires the membrane 
proteins Tim23, Tim17 and Tim44, which drive translocation in cooperation with 
mtHsp70 and its co-chaperone Mge1p. We have cloned and functionally analyzed the 
human homologues of Tim17, Tim23 and Tim44. In contrast to yeast, two TIM17 
genes were found to be expressed in humans. TIM44, TIM23 and TIM17a genes were 
mapped to chromosomes 19p13.2-p13.3, 10q11. 21-q11.23 and 1q32. The TIM17b gene 
mapped to Xp11.23, near the fusion point where an autosomal region was proposed 
to have been added to the "ancient" part of the X chromosome about 80-130 MY 
ago. The primary sequences of the two proteins, hTim17a and hTim17b, are 
essentially identical, significant differences being restricted to their C 
termini. They are ubiquitously expressed in fetal and adult tissues, and both 
show expression levels comparable to that of hTim23. Biochemical 
characterization of the human Tim components revealed that hTim44 is localized 
in the matrix and, in contrast to yeast, only loosely associated with the inner 
membrane. hTim23 is organized into two distinct complexes in the inner membrane, 
one containing hTim17a and one containing hTim17b. Both TIM complexes display a 
native molecular mass of 110 kDa. We suggest that the structural organization of 
TIM23.17 preprotein translocases is conserved from low to high eukaryotes.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1999.2751
PMID: 10339406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
