---
pmid: '11418237'
title: Isolation of hNap1BP which interacts with human Nap1 (NCKAP1) whose expression
  is down-regulated in Alzheimer's disease.
authors:
- Yamamoto A
- Suzuki T
- Sakaki Y
journal: Gene
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0378-1119(01)00521-2
---

# Isolation of hNap1BP which interacts with human Nap1 (NCKAP1) whose expression is down-regulated in Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Yamamoto A, Suzuki T, Sakaki Y
**Journal:** Gene (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0378-1119(01)00521-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0378-1119(01)00521-2)

## Abstract

1. Gene. 2001 Jun 27;271(2):159-69. doi: 10.1016/s0378-1119(01)00521-2.

Isolation of hNap1BP which interacts with human Nap1 (NCKAP1) whose expression 
is down-regulated in Alzheimer's disease.

Yamamoto A(1), Suzuki T, Sakaki Y.

Author information:
(1)Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 
Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan. bun@mpipsykl.mpg.de

We previously reported the isolation of a novel apoptosis-related gene, human 
Nap1 (HGMW-approved symbol NCKAP1), the expression of which was strongly 
down-regulated in sporadic Alzheimer's disease (AD). Human Nap1 proved to be an 
orthologue of rat Nap1 which binds to the adaptor molecule Nck in signal 
transduction. In order to further elucidate the function of human Nap1, we 
performed yeast two-hybrid screening. As a result of screening, we discovered a 
protein designated hNap1BP (human Nap1 binding protein) which is a member of the 
tyrosine kinase-binding protein family. In addition, hNap1BP bound to the SH3 
domain of c-Abl and Nck. hNap1BP is expressed ubiquitously in various tissues 
like human Nap1, and intriguingly these genes are co-expressed in hippocampus 
and cerebral cortex in mouse brain where AD pathological features are strongly 
evident. Further functional analysis of hNap1BP may clarify its contribution to 
AD pathology.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-1119(01)00521-2
PMID: 11418237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
