---
pmid: '16498633'
title: Ataxin 10 induces neuritogenesis via interaction with G-protein beta2 subunit.
authors:
- Waragai M
- Nagamitsu S
- Xu W
- Li YJ
- Lin X
- Ashizawa T
journal: J Neurosci Res
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/jnr.20807
---

# Ataxin 10 induces neuritogenesis via interaction with G-protein beta2 subunit.
**Authors:** Waragai M, Nagamitsu S, Xu W, Li YJ, Lin X, Ashizawa T
**Journal:** J Neurosci Res (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jnr.20807](https://doi.org/10.1002/jnr.20807)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci Res. 2006 May 15;83(7):1170-8. doi: 10.1002/jnr.20807.

Ataxin 10 induces neuritogenesis via interaction with G-protein beta2 subunit.

Waragai M(1), Nagamitsu S, Xu W, Li YJ, Lin X, Ashizawa T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas 
77555-0539, USA.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 10 (SCA10) is a dominantly inherited disorder caused 
by an intronic ATTCT pentanucleotide repeat expansion. The ATXN10 gene encodes a 
novel protein, ataxin 10, known previously as E46L, which is widely expressed in 
the brain. Ataxin 10 deficiency has been shown recently to cause increased 
apoptosis in primary cerebellar cultures, thus implicated in SCA10 pathogenesis. 
The biologic functions of ataxin 10 remain largely unknown. By using 
yeast-two-hybrid screening of a human brain cDNA library, we identified the 
G-protein beta2 subunit (Gbeta2) as an ataxin 10 binding partner, and the 
interaction was confirmed by coimmunoprecipitation and colocalization in 
mammalian cells in culture. Overexpression of ataxin 10 in PC12 cells induced 
neurite extension and enhanced neuronal differentiation induced by nerve growth 
factor (NGF). Moreover, coexpression of ataxin 10 and Gbeta2 potently activated 
the Ras-MAP kinase-Elk-1 cascade. Dominant negative Ras or inhibitor of MEK-1/2 
(U0126) aborted this activation, and blocked morphologic changes, whereas 
inhibition of TrkA receptor by K252a had no effects. Our data suggest that the 
ataxin 10-Gbeta2 interaction represents a novel mechanism for inducing 
neuritogenesis in PC12 cells by activating the Ras-MAP kinase-Elk-1 cascade.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jnr.20807
PMID: 16498633 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
