---
pmid: '19289464'
title: Dynamic Organization of Aminoacyl-tRNA Synthetase Complexes in the Cytoplasm
  of Human Cells.
authors:
- Kaminska M
- Havrylenko S
- Decottignies P
- Le Maréchal P
- Negrutskii B
- Mirande M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2679476
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M900480200
---

# Dynamic Organization of Aminoacyl-tRNA Synthetase Complexes in the Cytoplasm of Human Cells.
**Authors:** Kaminska M, Havrylenko S, Decottignies P, Le Maréchal P, Negrutskii B, Mirande M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M900480200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M900480200)
**PMC:** [PMC2679476](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2679476/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2009 May 15;284(20):13746-13754. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M900480200.
Epub  2009 Mar 16.

Dynamic Organization of Aminoacyl-tRNA Synthetase Complexes in the Cytoplasm of 
Human Cells.

Kaminska M(1), Havrylenko S(2), Decottignies P(3), Le Maréchal P(3), Negrutskii 
B(4), Mirande M(5).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire d'Enzymologie et Biochimie Structurales, CNRS, 1 Avenue de la 
Terrasse, 91190 Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
(2)Laboratoire d'Enzymologie et Biochimie Structurales, CNRS, 1 Avenue de la 
Terrasse, 91190 Gif-sur-Yvette, France; Institute of Molecular Biology and 
Genetics, 150 Academy Zabolotnogo Street, 03143 Kiev, Ukraine.
(3)Institut de Biochimie et Biophysique Moléculaire et Cellulaire, UMR 8619 
CNRS, Université Paris-Sud, 91405 Orsay, France.
(4)Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics, 150 Academy Zabolotnogo Street, 
03143 Kiev, Ukraine.
(5)Laboratoire d'Enzymologie et Biochimie Structurales, CNRS, 1 Avenue de la 
Terrasse, 91190 Gif-sur-Yvette, France. Electronic address: 
Marc.Mirande@lebs.cnrs-gif.fr.

The localization in space and in time of proteins within the cytoplasm of 
eukaryotic cells is a central question of the cellular compartmentalization of 
metabolic pathways. The assembly of proteins within stable or transient 
complexes plays an essential role in this process. Here, we examined the 
subcellular localization of the multi-aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase complex in human 
cells. The sequestration of its components within the cytoplasm rests on the 
presence of the eukaryotic-specific polypeptide extensions that characterize the 
human enzymes, as compared with their prokaryotic counterparts. The cellular 
mobility of several synthetases, assessed by measuring fluorescence recovery 
after photobleaching, suggested that they are not freely diffusible within the 
cytoplasm. Several of these enzymes, isolated by tandem affinity purification, 
were copurified with ribosomal proteins and actin. The capacity of 
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases to interact with polyribosomes and with the actin 
cytoskeleton impacts their subcellular localization and mobility. Our 
observations have conceptual implications for understanding how translation 
machinery is organized in vivo.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M900480200
PMCID: PMC2679476
PMID: 19289464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
