---
pmid: '17823127'
title: 'Cytosolic accumulation of HSP60 during apoptosis with or without apparent
  mitochondrial release: evidence that its pro-apoptotic or pro-survival functions
  involve differential interactions with caspase-3.'
authors:
- Chandra D
- Choy G
- Tang DG
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M702777200
---

# Cytosolic accumulation of HSP60 during apoptosis with or without apparent mitochondrial release: evidence that its pro-apoptotic or pro-survival functions involve differential interactions with caspase-3.
**Authors:** Chandra D, Choy G, Tang DG
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M702777200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M702777200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Oct 26;282(43):31289-301. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M702777200. Epub 
2007 Sep 6.

Cytosolic accumulation of HSP60 during apoptosis with or without apparent 
mitochondrial release: evidence that its pro-apoptotic or pro-survival functions 
involve differential interactions with caspase-3.

Chandra D(1), Choy G, Tang DG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer 
Center, Science Park--Research Division, Smithville, Texas 78957, USA.

Most heat shock proteins (HSPs) have pro-survival functions. However, the role 
of HSP60, a mitochondrial matrix protein, is somewhat controversial with both 
pro-survival and pro-apoptotic functions reported. Here we show that in numerous 
apoptotic systems HSP60 protein accumulates in the cytosol. In BMD188-induced 
cell death, HSP60 accumulates in the cytosol with significant mitochondrial 
release. In contrast, in apoptosis induced by multiple other inducers, the 
cytosolic HSP60 accumulates without an apparent mitochondrial release. The short 
interfering RNA-mediated knockdown experiments revealed that in BMD188-induced 
apoptosis, HSP60 has a pro-death function and that the pro-death role of HSP60 
seems to involve caspase-3 maturation and activation in the cytosol. In 
contrast, HSP60 appears to play a pro-survival role in other apoptotic systems 
where there is no apparent mitochondrial release as its knockdown promotes cell 
death. In these latter apoptotic systems HSP60 does not associate with active 
caspase-3. In both cases, HSP60 does not appreciably interact with Bax. Taken 
together, our results suggest the following: 1) cytosolic accumulation of HSP60 
represents a common phenomenon during apoptosis induction; 2) cytosolic HSP60 
accumulation during apoptosis occurs either with or without apparent 
mitochondrial release; and 3) the cytosolically accumulated HSP60 possesses 
either pro-survival or pro-death functions, which involves differential 
interactions with caspase-3.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M702777200
PMID: 17823127 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
