---
pmid: '17357109'
title: '70-kDa heat shock proteins: specific interactions with HLA-DR molecules and
  their peptide fragments.'
authors:
- Haug M
- Schepp CP
- Kalbacher H
- Dannecker GE
- Holzer U
journal: Eur J Immunol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/eji.200636811
---

# 70-kDa heat shock proteins: specific interactions with HLA-DR molecules and their peptide fragments.
**Authors:** Haug M, Schepp CP, Kalbacher H, Dannecker GE, Holzer U
**Journal:** Eur J Immunol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1002/eji.200636811](https://doi.org/10.1002/eji.200636811)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Immunol. 2007 Apr;37(4):1053-63. doi: 10.1002/eji.200636811.

70-kDa heat shock proteins: specific interactions with HLA-DR molecules and 
their peptide fragments.

Haug M(1), Schepp CP, Kalbacher H, Dannecker GE, Holzer U.

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany.

Heat shock protein 70 (HSP70):peptide complexes are involved in MHC class I and 
class II-restricted antigen presentation enabling enhanced activation of 
antigen-specific T cells. Here, we investigated the potential of bacterial and 
mammalian HSP70 molecules to interact with peptide fragments from HLA-DR and the 
corresponding complete HLA-DR molecules. Peptide fragments were found to 
interact with DnaK, the HSP70 homologue from E. coli, but less with 
stress-inducible human Hsp70. Only a peptide sequence exclusively found in 
rheumatoid arthritis-protective HLA-DR molecules did not interact with DnaK. 
Subsequently, we investigated the interaction of complete HLA-DR molecules with 
HSP70 and detected a specific HSP70:HLA-DR interaction, with highest affinity 
for human stress-inducible Hsp70. In contrast to the peptide fragments, no 
allele-specific differences in Hsp70 affinity were detected with complete HLA-DR 
molecules. Interaction with HLA-DR molecules was increased at lowered pH values, 
whereas HSP70-chaperoned peptides were released at acidic pH, thus HSP70 could 
serve as scanner and carrier for antigenic peptides of self or foreign origin 
and transfer chaperoned peptides onto MHC class II molecules in acidic late 
endosomal compartments. Our findings indicate that direct interaction between 
mammalian HSP70 and HLA-DR molecules could be involved in the HSP70-mediated 
enhancement of MHC class II-restricted peptide presentation and CD4(+) T cell 
activation.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.200636811
PMID: 17357109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
