---
pmid: '11826099'
title: Process outgrowth of oligodendrocytes is promoted by interaction of fyn kinase
  with the cytoskeletal protein tau.
authors:
- Klein C
- Kramer EM
- Cardine AM
- Schraven B
- Brandt R
- Trotter J
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6758498
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-03-00698.2002
---

# Process outgrowth of oligodendrocytes is promoted by interaction of fyn kinase with the cytoskeletal protein tau.
**Authors:** Klein C, Kramer EM, Cardine AM, Schraven B, Brandt R, Trotter J
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-03-00698.2002](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-03-00698.2002)
**PMC:** [PMC6758498](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6758498/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2002 Feb 1;22(3):698-707. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-03-00698.2002.

Process outgrowth of oligodendrocytes is promoted by interaction of fyn kinase 
with the cytoskeletal protein tau.

Klein C(1), Kramer EM, Cardine AM, Schraven B, Brandt R, Trotter J.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Neurobiology and Immunology, University of Heidelberg, 69120 
Heidelberg, Germany.

Fyn kinase plays an important role during myelination and has been shown to 
promote morphological differentiation of cultured oligodendrocytes. We analyzed 
the downstream targets of Fyn kinase in oligodendrocytes. Because process 
outgrowth and wrapping of axons involve cytoskeletal rearrangement, we focused 
on cytoskeletal proteins linked to Fyn. Here we demonstrate that Fyn binds to 
the cytoskeletal proteins Tau and alpha-Tubulin in oligodendrocytes. Tau 
interacts with the Fyn SH3 domain whereas alpha-Tubulin binds to the Fyn SH2 and 
SH3 domains. To study the function of the Fyn-Tau interaction in 
oligodendrocytes, we designed a Tau deletion mutant that would compete with 
endogenous Tau-Fyn binding in transfected cells. The mutant Tau protein binds to 
the Fyn SH3 domain but lacks the microtubuli interaction domain and thus cannot 
bind to microtubuli. In the presence of the mutant Tau protein, a reduction of 
the process number and process length in oligodendroglial cells was observed. 
This effect is likely to be caused by interference with the Fyn-Tau-microtubuli 
cascade rather than inactivation of the kinase, because Fyn bound to the mutant 
Tau retains activity. A similar inhibition of process outgrowth was observed 
when oliogodendroglial cells were cultured in the presence of Fumonisin B1, an 
inhibitor of sphingolipid synthesis that prevents the formation of rafts. 
Because ligation of the cell adhesion molecule F3 on oligodendrocytes leads to 
activation of Fyn kinase localized in rafts, these findings suggest that 
recruitment of Tau and Tubulin to activated Fyn kinase in rafts is an important 
step in the initiation of myelination.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-03-00698.2002
PMCID: PMC6758498
PMID: 11826099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
