---
pmid: '11483494'
title: 'Structure of human cystathionine beta-synthase: a unique pyridoxal 5''-phosphate-dependent
  heme protein.'
authors:
- Meier M
- Janosik M
- Kery V
- Kraus JP
- Burkhard P
journal: EMBO J
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC149156
doi: 10.1093/emboj/20.15.3910
---

# Structure of human cystathionine beta-synthase: a unique pyridoxal 5'-phosphate-dependent heme protein.
**Authors:** Meier M, Janosik M, Kery V, Kraus JP, Burkhard P
**Journal:** EMBO J (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/20.15.3910](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/20.15.3910)
**PMC:** [PMC149156](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC149156/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2001 Aug 1;20(15):3910-6. doi: 10.1093/emboj/20.15.3910.

Structure of human cystathionine beta-synthase: a unique pyridoxal 
5'-phosphate-dependent heme protein.

Meier M(1), Janosik M, Kery V, Kraus JP, Burkhard P.

Author information:
(1)M.E.Müller Institute for Structural Biology, Biozentrum, University of Basel, 
Klingelbergstrasse 70, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland.

Cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS) is a unique heme- containing enzyme that 
catalyzes a pyridoxal 5'-phosphate (PLP)-dependent condensation of serine and 
homocysteine to give cystathionine. Deficiency of CBS leads to homocystinuria, 
an inherited disease of sulfur metabolism characterized by increased levels of 
the toxic metabolite homocysteine. Here we present the X-ray crystal structure 
of a truncated form of the enzyme. CBS shares the same fold with O-acetylserine 
sulfhydrylase but it contains an additional N-terminal heme binding site. This 
heme binding motif together with a spatially adjacent oxidoreductase active site 
motif could explain the regulation of its enzyme activity by redox changes.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/20.15.3910
PMCID: PMC149156
PMID: 11483494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
