---
pmid: '19549187'
title: Quenched hydrogen/deuterium exchange NMR characterization of amyloid-beta peptide
  aggregates formed in the presence of Cu2+ or Zn2+.
authors:
- Olofsson A
- Lindhagen-Persson M
- Vestling M
- Sauer-Eriksson AE
- Ohman A
journal: FEBS J
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07113.x
---

# Quenched hydrogen/deuterium exchange NMR characterization of amyloid-beta peptide aggregates formed in the presence of Cu2+ or Zn2+.
**Authors:** Olofsson A, Lindhagen-Persson M, Vestling M, Sauer-Eriksson AE, Ohman A
**Journal:** FEBS J (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07113.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07113.x)

## Abstract

1. FEBS J. 2009 Aug;276(15):4051-60. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07113.x. Epub 
2009 Jun 22.

Quenched hydrogen/deuterium exchange NMR characterization of amyloid-beta 
peptide aggregates formed in the presence of Cu2+ or Zn2+.

Olofsson A(1), Lindhagen-Persson M, Vestling M, Sauer-Eriksson AE, Ohman A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Umeå University, Sweden. 
anders.olofsson@medchem.umu.se

Alzheimer's disease, a neurodegenerative disorder causing synaptic impairment 
and neuronal cell death, is strongly correlated with aggregation of the 
amyloid-beta peptide (Abeta). Divalent metal ions such as Cu(2+) and Zn(2+) are 
known to significantly affect the rate of aggregation and morphology of Abeta 
assemblies in vitro and are also found at elevated levels within cerebral 
plaques in vivo. The present investigation characterized the architecture of the 
aggregated forms of Abeta(1-40) and Abeta(1-42) in the presence or absence of 
either Cu(2+) or Zn(2+) using quenched hydrogen/deuterium exchange combined with 
solution NMR spectroscopy. The NMR analyses provide a quantitative and 
residue-specific structural characterization of metal-induced Abeta aggregates, 
showing that both the peptide sequence and the type of metal ion exert an impact 
on the final architecture. Common features among the metal-complexed peptide 
aggregates are two solvent-protected regions with an intervening minimum 
centered at Asn27, and a solvent-accessible N-terminal region, Asp1-Lys16. Our 
results suggest that Abeta in complex with either Cu(2+) or Zn(2+) can attain an 
aggregation-prone beta-strand-turn-beta-strand motif, similar to the motif found 
in fibrils, but where the metal binding to the N-terminal region guides the 
peptide into an assembly distinctly different from the fibril form.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07113.x
PMID: 19549187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
