---
pmid: '23241949'
title: MEK1 inactivates Myt1 to regulate Golgi membrane fragmentation and mitotic
  entry in mammalian cells.
authors:
- Villeneuve J
- Scarpa M
- Ortega-Bellido M
- Malhotra V
journal: EMBO J
year: '2013'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3545310
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2012.329
---

# MEK1 inactivates Myt1 to regulate Golgi membrane fragmentation and mitotic entry in mammalian cells.
**Authors:** Villeneuve J, Scarpa M, Ortega-Bellido M, Malhotra V
**Journal:** EMBO J (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2012.329](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2012.329)
**PMC:** [PMC3545310](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3545310/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2013 Jan 9;32(1):72-85. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2012.329. Epub 2012 Dec 14.

MEK1 inactivates Myt1 to regulate Golgi membrane fragmentation and mitotic entry 
in mammalian cells.

Villeneuve J(1), Scarpa M, Ortega-Bellido M, Malhotra V.

Author information:
(1)Cell and Developmental Biology Programme, Centre for Genomic Regulation, 
Barcelona, Spain.

The pericentriolar stacks of Golgi cisternae are separated from each other in G2 
and fragmented extensively during mitosis. MEK1 is required for Golgi 
fragmentation in G2 and for the entry of cells into mitosis. We now report that 
Myt1 mediates MEK1's effects on the Golgi complex. Knockdown of Myt1 by siRNA 
increased the efficiency of Golgi complex fragmentation by mitotic cytosol in 
permeabilized and intact HeLa cells. Myt1 knockdown eliminated the requirement 
of MEK1 in Golgi fragmentation and alleviated the delay in mitotic entry due to 
MEK1 inhibition. The phosphorylation of Myt1 by MEK1 requires another kinase but 
is independent of RSK, Plk, and CDK1. Altogether our findings reveal that Myt1 
is inactivated by MEK1 mediated phosphorylation to fragment the Golgi complex in 
G2 and for the entry of cells into mitosis. It is known that Myt1 inactivation 
is required for CDK1 activation. Myt1 therefore is an important link by which 
MEK1 dependent fragmentation of the Golgi complex in G2 is connected to the CDK1 
mediated breakdown of Golgi into tubules and vesicles in mitosis.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2012.329
PMCID: PMC3545310
PMID: 23241949 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

The pericentriolar stacks of Golgi cisternae are separated from each other in G2 and fragmented extensively during mitosis. MEK1 is required for Golgi fragmentation in G2 and for the entry of cells into mitosis. We now report that Myt1 mediates MEK1’s effects on the Golgi complex. Knockdown of Myt1 by siRNA increased the efficiency of Golgi complex fragmentation by mitotic cytosol in permeabilized and intact HeLa cells. Myt1 knockdown eliminated the requirement of MEK1 in Golgi fragmentation and alleviated the delay in mitotic entry due to MEK1 inhibition. The phosphorylation of Myt1 by MEK1 requires another kinase but is independent of RSK, Plk, and CDK1. Altogether our findings reveal that Myt1 is inactivated by MEK1 mediated phosphorylation to fragment the Golgi complex in G2 and for the entry of cells into mitosis. It is known that Myt1 inactivation is required for CDK1 activation. Myt1 therefore is an important link by which MEK1 dependent fragmentation of the Golgi complex in G2 is connected to the CDK1 mediated breakdown of Golgi into tubules and vesicles in mitosis.

Introduction

The pericentriolar stacks of Golgi cisternae are separated from each other in G2 ( Shima et al, 1998 ). The Golgi stacks continue to fragment until metaphase and appear to be composed of small tubules and vesicles ( Jesch and Linstedt, 1998 ; Jokitalo et al, 2001 ; Axelsson and Warren, 2004 ; Pecot and Malhotra, 2004 ). In late anaphase/telophase, the fragmented Golgi membranes fuse and assemble into stacks of Golgi cisternae by a process that also involves membrane export from the ER, and finally the stacks are localized to the pericentriolar region of the cells after cytokinesis ( Lucocq et al, 1987 ; Lucocq and Warren, 1987 ; Colanzi et al, 2007 ; Persico et al, 2009 ). This process thus ensures the partitioning of Golgi membranes into daughter cells during cell division ( Shorter and Warren, 2002 ). Surprisingly, inhibiting fragmentation of the Golgi complex in G2 prevents or delays entry of cells into mitosis ( Sutterlin et al, 2002 ; Preisinger et al, 2005 ; Colanzi et al, 2007 ; Feinstein and Linstedt, 2007 ).

What is the role of the pericentriolar stacks of Golgi cisternae and why does inhibiting stack separation and dispersal arrest cells in G2? Incubation of isolated Golgi membranes or permeabilized cells, with mitotic cytosol and an ATP-regenerating system causes extensive Golgi membrane fragmentation, and these procedures have revealed the involvement of three different kinases: the mitogen activated kinase kinase (MEK1), polo like kinase (Plk), and cyclin dependent kinase CDK1 ( Misteli and Warren, 1994 ; Acharya et al, 1998 ; Lowe et al, 1998 ; Colanzi et al, 2000 , 2003 ; Sutterlin et al, 2001 ). MEK1 and polo like kinase (Plk) are required for the dispersal of the pericentriolar Golgi apparatus into smaller stacks and fragments, which then breakdown into small tubules and vesicles by a CDK1 dependent process ( Lowe et al, 1998 ; Kano et al, 2000 ; Sutterlin et al, 2001 ; Shorter and Warren, 2002 ). A protein called Golgi matrix protein 130 (GM130) localized on the cis side of the Golgi membranes is phosphorylated by CDK1 at Ser25 ( Lowe et al, 1998 ). However, new recent evidences suggest that phosphorylation of Ser25 in GM130 is not required for Golgi membrane fragmentation and mitotic progression ( Sundaramoorthy et al, 2010 ). Plk binds to the CDK1 phosphorylated Golgi membrane associated protein GRASP65; however the net effect of this reaction on the Golgi complex during mitosis is poorly understood ( Lin et al, 2000 ).

MEK1 phosphorylates the Golgi membrane protein GRASP55 ( Feinstein and Linstedt, 2008 ). Importantly, depletion of GRASP55 alleviates the requirement of MEK1 in the process of Golgi membrane fragmentation. The data suggests that GRASP55 is required for connecting Golgi stacks laterally; phosphorylation by MEK1/Extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) inactivates the function of GRASP55, which leads to the separation of Golgi stacks from each other in G2 and thus the entry of cell into mitosis ( Feinstein and Linstedt, 2008 ). However, the function of MEK1 in the Golgi membrane fragmentation is also reported to be independent of its well-characterized targets ERK1/ERK2 ( Acharya et al, 1998 ). For example, deletion of the N-terminal residues of MEK1 required for binding ERK1/ERK2 does not affect its ability to fragment Golgi membranes ( Colanzi et al, 2000 ). There are also reports of a specific spliced variant of ERK, ERK1c, as the target of MEK1 dependent Golgi membrane fragmentation ( Shaul and Seger, 2006 ). It is likely that MEK1 has additional targets on the Golgi membranes or that MEK1 does not directly phosphorylate GRASP55 to catalyse Golgi stacks separation.

As mentioned above, the overall breakdown of Golgi complex into tubules and vesicles is mediated sequentially by MEK1 and CDK1, respectively. How are these events connected? We have tested the hypothesis that these sequential events are connected by the ER-Golgi complex associated kinase called Myt1, which is expressed only in the metazoans ( Liu et al, 1997 ). Our assumption is based on the following facts. Myt1 phosphorylates CDK1 on Thr14 and Tyr15 ( Mueller et al, 1995 ) and the Myt1 phosphorylated CDK1 is inactive ( Booher et al, 1997 ). Inactivation of Myt1 is therefore necessary for the activation of CDK1 and entry into mitosis. MEK1 is known to phosphorylate Myt1 via p90RSK (90 kDa ribosomal S6 kinase) and this event is required for the entry of Xenopus oocytes into meiosis ( Palmer et al, 1998 ). We now report that MEK1 inactivates Myt1 in mammalian somatic cells. We show that this reaction is required for the process by which Stacks of Golgi cisternae are separated from each other -independent of CDK1- in G2 and promote entry of cells into mitosis. Surprisingly, the MEK1 dependent inactivation of Myt1 is RSK and CDK1 independent. The description of our findings on the involvement of Myt1 in Golgi membrane reorganization and mitotic entry follows.

Discussion

In the mammalian cells, the pericentriolar stacks of Golgi cisternae are separated from each other and dispersed in the cytoplasm. This change is evident in G2 and first reported by Warren and colleagues ( Shima et al, 1998 ). The cells then enter in mitosis and the stacks are broken into small tubules and vesicles. Understanding the mechanism and the reason for the G2 and mitosis specific changes in Golgi organization are of fundamental importance, and our new findings provide important insights into these two challenges as discussed below.

The first step (separation of Golgi stacks from each other and their dispersal from the pericentriolar region) is mediated by MEK1 and Plk. CDK1 is required for the second step by which the stacks are converted into small tubules and vesicles ( Kano et al, 2000 ). Our new findings reveal the involvement of Myt1 in the MEK1 dependent event, which occurs in G2. Loss of Myt1 promotes the fragmentation of the Golgi complex in G2 and the entry of cells into mitosis. Depletion of Myt1 alleviates the dependence on MEK1 for the purpose of Golgi fragmentation and it also abrogates the delay in mitotic entry produced by the knockdown or inactivation of MEK1. Myt1 therefore is a negative regulator of Golgi fragmentation in G2 and of the process by which the pericentriolar organization of the Golgi membranes controls entry of cell into mitosis.

It is important to note that the MEK1-Myt1 effects on the Golgi fragmentation are independent of CDK1 and the challenge now is to identify the target(s) of Myt1 on Golgi membranes. It is known that inactivation of Myt1 is required for the activation of CDK1. The identification of Myt1 in the MEK1 pathway is therefore important because it connects two sequential steps by which the pericentriolar Golgi stacks are first converted into small stacks by MEK1 in G2 and then into small tubules and vesicles by CDK1 in mitosis.
