---
pmid: '17998337'
title: p53 initiates apoptosis by transcriptionally targeting the antiapoptotic protein
  ARC.
authors:
- Li YZ
- Lu DY
- Tan WQ
- Wang JX
- Li PF
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2223427
doi: 10.1128/MCB.00738-07
---

# p53 initiates apoptosis by transcriptionally targeting the antiapoptotic protein ARC.
**Authors:** Li YZ, Lu DY, Tan WQ, Wang JX, Li PF
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.00738-07](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.00738-07)
**PMC:** [PMC2223427](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2223427/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Jan;28(2):564-74. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00738-07. Epub 2007 Nov
 12.

p53 initiates apoptosis by transcriptionally targeting the antiapoptotic protein 
ARC.

Li YZ(1), Lu DY, Tan WQ, Wang JX, Li PF.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Research, National Key Laboratory of Biomembrane 
and Membrane Biotechnology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Beijing 100080, China.

p53 plays an important role in regulating apoptosis. However, the molecular 
mechanism by which it initiates the apoptotic program still remains to be fully 
understood. Here, we report that p53 can transcriptionally target the 
antiapoptotic protein, apoptosis repressor with caspase recruitment domain 
(ARC). Our results show that reactive oxygen species and anoxia lead to the 
up-regulation of p53 expression. Concomitantly, ARC is down-regulated at both 
the protein and mRNA levels. Knockdown of p53 expression can attenuate the 
decreases in ARC protein and mRNA levels, indicating that ARC down-regulation is 
a consequence of p53 activation. Strikingly, p53-induced ARC repression occurs 
in a transcription-dependent manner. We further demonstrate that the p53 
up-regulated modulator of apoptosis (PUMA) and Bad are up-regulated in response 
to the stimulation with reactive oxygen species or anoxia, and p53 is 
responsible for their up-regulation. ARC can interact with PUMA or Bad via its N 
terminus. Such an interaction displaces the association of PUMA or Bad with 
Bcl-2. ARC repression by p53 leads to its failure to counteract the proapoptotic 
activity of PUMA and Bad. Thus, our data reveal a novel p53 apoptotic pathway in 
which it initiates apoptosis by transcriptionally repressing ARC.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00738-07
PMCID: PMC2223427
PMID: 17998337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
