---
pmid: '25686699'
title: LncRNA Dum interacts with Dnmts to regulate Dppa2 expression during myogenic
  differentiation and muscle regeneration.
authors:
- Wang L
- Zhao Y
- Bao X
- Zhu X
- Kwok YK
- Sun K
- Chen X
- Huang Y
- Jauch R
- Esteban MA
- Sun H
- Wang H
journal: Cell Res
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4349245
doi: 10.1038/cr.2015.21
---

# LncRNA Dum interacts with Dnmts to regulate Dppa2 expression during myogenic differentiation and muscle regeneration.
**Authors:** Wang L, Zhao Y, Bao X, Zhu X, Kwok YK, Sun K, Chen X, Huang Y, Jauch R, Esteban MA, Sun H, Wang H
**Journal:** Cell Res (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/cr.2015.21](https://doi.org/10.1038/cr.2015.21)
**PMC:** [PMC4349245](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4349245/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Res. 2015 Mar;25(3):335-50. doi: 10.1038/cr.2015.21. Epub 2015 Feb 17.

LncRNA Dum interacts with Dnmts to regulate Dppa2 expression during myogenic 
differentiation and muscle regeneration.

Wang L(1), Zhao Y(2), Bao X(3), Zhu X(3), Kwok YK(2), Sun K(4), Chen X(2), Huang 
Y(5), Jauch R(5), Esteban MA(3), Sun H(4), Wang H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, Li Ka Shing Institute of Health 
Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Li Ka Shing Institute of Health 
Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(3)Laboratory of Chromatin and Human Disease, Key Laboratory of Regenerative 
Biology, South China Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, 
Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Guangzhou, China.
(4)Department of Chemical Pathology, Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences, 
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(5)Genome Regulation Laboratory, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, China.

Emerging studies document the roles of long non-coding RNAs (LncRNAs) in 
regulating gene expression at chromatin level but relatively less is known how 
they regulate DNA methylation. Here we identify an lncRNA, Dum (developmental 
pluripotency-associated 2 (Dppa2) Upstream binding Muscle lncRNA) in skeletal 
myoblast cells. The expression of Dum is dynamically regulated during myogenesis 
in vitro and in vivo. It is also transcriptionally induced by MyoD binding upon 
myoblast differentiation. Functional analyses show that it promotes myoblast 
differentiation and damage-induced muscle regeneration. Mechanistically, Dum was 
found to silence its neighboring gene, Dppa2, in cis through recruiting Dnmt1, 
Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b. Furthermore, intrachromosomal looping between Dum locus and 
Dppa2 promoter is necessary for Dum/Dppa2 interaction. Collectively, we have 
identified a novel lncRNA that interacts with Dnmts to regulate myogenesis.

DOI: 10.1038/cr.2015.21
PMCID: PMC4349245
PMID: 25686699 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
