---
pmid: '19801555'
title: A human vitamin B12 trafficking protein uses glutathione transferase activity
  for processing alkylcobalamins.
authors:
- Kim J
- Hannibal L
- Gherasim C
- Jacobsen DW
- Banerjee R
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2785186
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.057877
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# A human vitamin B12 trafficking protein uses glutathione transferase activity for processing alkylcobalamins.
**Authors:** Kim J, Hannibal L, Gherasim C, Jacobsen DW, Banerjee R
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M109.057877](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.057877)
**PMC:** [PMC2785186](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2785186/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Nov 27;284(48):33418-24. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.057877. Epub 
2009 Oct 2.

A human vitamin B12 trafficking protein uses glutathione transferase activity 
for processing alkylcobalamins.

Kim J(1), Hannibal L, Gherasim C, Jacobsen DW, Banerjee R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical Center, 
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-5066, USA.

Pathways for tailoring and processing vitamins into active cofactor forms exist 
in mammals that are unable to synthesize these cofactors de novo. A prerequisite 
for intracellular tailoring of alkylcobalamins entering from the circulation is 
removal of the alkyl group to generate an intermediate that can subsequently be 
converted into the active cofactor forms. MMACHC, a cytosolic cobalamin 
trafficking chaperone, has been shown recently to catalyze a reductive 
decyanation reaction when it encounters cyanocobalamin. In this study, we 
demonstrate that this versatile protein catalyzes an entirely different chemical 
reaction with alkylcobalamins using the thiolate of glutathione for nucleophilic 
displacement to generate cob(I)alamin and the corresponding glutathione 
thioether. Biologically relevant thiols, e.g. cysteine and homocysteine, cannot 
substitute for glutathione. The catalytic turnover numbers for the dealkylation 
of methylcobalamin and 5'-deoxyadenosylcobalamin by MMACHC are 11.7 +/- 0.2 and 
0.174 +/- 0.006 h(-1) at 20 degrees C, respectively. This glutathione 
transferase activity of MMACHC is reminiscent of the methyltransferase chemistry 
catalyzed by the vitamin B(12)-dependent methionine synthase and is impaired in 
the cblC group of inborn errors of cobalamin disorders.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.057877
PMCID: PMC2785186
PMID: 19801555 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
