---
pmid: '16443932'
title: Apolipoprotein A-I activates Cdc42 signaling through the ABCA1 transporter.
authors:
- Nofer JR
- Remaley AT
- Feuerborn R
- Wolinnska I
- Engel T
- von Eckardstein A
- Assmann G
journal: J Lipid Res
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1194/jlr.M500502-JLR200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Apolipoprotein A-I activates Cdc42 signaling through the ABCA1 transporter.
**Authors:** Nofer JR, Remaley AT, Feuerborn R, Wolinnska I, Engel T, von Eckardstein A, Assmann G
**Journal:** J Lipid Res (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1194/jlr.M500502-JLR200](https://doi.org/10.1194/jlr.M500502-JLR200)

## Abstract

1. J Lipid Res. 2006 Apr;47(4):794-803. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M500502-JLR200. Epub
2006  Jan 28.

Apolipoprotein A-I activates Cdc42 signaling through the ABCA1 transporter.

Nofer JR(1), Remaley AT, Feuerborn R, Wolinnska I, Engel T, von Eckardstein A, 
Assmann G.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Klinische Chemie und Laboratoriumsmedizin, Westfälische 
Wilhelms-Universität, Münster, Germany. nofer@uni-muenster.de

It has been suggested that the signal transduction initiated by apolipoprotein 
A-I (apoA-I) activates key proteins involved in cholesterol efflux. ABCA1 serves 
as a binding partner for apoA-I, but its participation in apoA-I-induced 
signaling remains uncertain. We show that the exposure of human fibroblasts to 
ABCA1 ligands (apolipoproteins and amphipathic helical peptides) results in the 
generation of intracellular signals, including activation of the small G-protein 
Cdc42, protein kinases (PAK-1 and p54JNK), and actin polymerization. 
ApoA-I-induced signaling was abrogated by glyburide, an inhibitor of the ABC 
transporter family, and in fibroblasts from patients with Tangier disease, which 
do not express ABCA1. Conversely, induction of ABCA1 expression with the liver X 
receptor agonist, T0901317, and the retinoid X receptor agonist, R0264456, 
potentiated apoA-I-induced signaling. Similar effects were observed in HEK293 
cells overexpressing ABCA1-green fluorescent protein (GFP) fusion protein, but 
not ABCA1-GFP (K939M), which fails to hydrolyze ATP, or a nonfunctional 
ABCA1-GFP with a truncated C terminus. We further found that Cdc42 
coimmunoprecipitates with ABCA1 in ABCA1-GFP-expressing HEK293 cells exposed to 
apoA-I but not in cells expressing ABCA1 mutants. We conclude that ABCA1 
transduces signals from apoA-I by complexing and activating Cdc42 and downstream 
kinases and, therefore, acts as a full apoA-I receptor.

DOI: 10.1194/jlr.M500502-JLR200
PMID: 16443932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
