---
pmid: '9751710'
title: Transcriptional repression by AML1 and LEF-1 is mediated by the TLE/Groucho
  corepressors.
authors:
- Levanon D
- Goldstein RE
- Bernstein Y
- Tang H
- Goldenberg D
- Stifani S
- Paroush Z
- Groner Y
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC21685
doi: 10.1073/pnas.95.20.11590
---

# Transcriptional repression by AML1 and LEF-1 is mediated by the TLE/Groucho corepressors.
**Authors:** Levanon D, Goldstein RE, Bernstein Y, Tang H, Goldenberg D, Stifani S, Paroush Z, Groner Y
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.95.20.11590](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.95.20.11590)
**PMC:** [PMC21685](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC21685/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Sep 29;95(20):11590-5. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.95.20.11590.

Transcriptional repression by AML1 and LEF-1 is mediated by the TLE/Groucho 
corepressors.

Levanon D(1), Goldstein RE, Bernstein Y, Tang H, Goldenberg D, Stifani S, 
Paroush Z, Groner Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 
76100, Israel.

The mammalian AML/CBFalpha runt domain (RD) transcription factors regulate 
hematopoiesis and osteoblast differentiation. Like their Drosophila 
counterparts, most mammalian RD proteins terminate in a common pentapeptide, 
VWRPY, which serves to recruit the corepressor Groucho (Gro). Using a yeast 
two-hybrid assay, in vitro association and pull-down experiments, we demonstrate 
that Gro and its mammalian homolog TLE1 specifically interact with AML1 and 
AML2. In addition to the VWRPY motif, other C-terminal sequences are required 
for these interactions with Gro/TLE1. TLE1 inhibits AML1-dependent 
transactivation of the T cell receptor (TCR) enhancers alpha and beta, which 
contain functional AML binding sites, in transfected Jurkat T cells. LEF-1 is an 
additional transcription factor that mediates transactivation of TCR enhancers. 
LEF-1 and its Drosophila homolog Pangolin (Pan) are involved in the Wnt/Wg 
signaling pathway through interactions with the coactivator beta-catenin and its 
highly conserved fly homolog Armadillo (Arm). We show that TLE/Gro interacts 
with LEF-1 and Pan, and inhibits LEF-1:beta-catenin-dependent transcription. 
These data indicate that, in addition to their activity as transcriptional 
activators, AML1 and LEF-1 can act, through recruitment of the corepressor TLE1, 
as transcriptional repressors in TCR regulation and Wnt/Wg signaling.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.95.20.11590
PMCID: PMC21685
PMID: 9751710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
