---
pmid: '23580651'
title: HDAC6 regulates mutant SOD1 aggregation through two SMIR motifs and tubulin
  acetylation.
authors:
- Gal J
- Chen J
- Barnett KR
- Yang L
- Brumley E
- Zhu H
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3663524
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.431957
---

# HDAC6 regulates mutant SOD1 aggregation through two SMIR motifs and tubulin acetylation.
**Authors:** Gal J, Chen J, Barnett KR, Yang L, Brumley E, Zhu H
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M112.431957](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M112.431957)
**PMC:** [PMC3663524](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3663524/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2013 May 24;288(21):15035-45. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.431957. Epub 
2013 Apr 11.

HDAC6 regulates mutant SOD1 aggregation through two SMIR motifs and tubulin 
acetylation.

Gal J(1), Chen J, Barnett KR, Yang L, Brumley E, Zhu H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, College of Medicine, 
University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky 40536, USA.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is a tubulin deacetylase that regulates protein 
aggregation and turnover. Mutations in Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1) linked 
to familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) make the mutant protein prone to 
aggregation. However, the role of HDAC6 in mutant SOD1 aggregation and the ALS 
etiology is unclear. Here we report that HDAC6 knockdown increased mutant SOD1 
aggregation in cultured cells. Different from its known role in mediating the 
degradation of poly-ubiquitinated proteins, HDAC6 selectively interacted with 
mutant SOD1 via two motifs similar to the SOD1 mutant interaction region (SMIR) 
that we identified previously in p62/sequestosome 1. Expression of the 
aggregation-prone mutant SOD1 increased α-tubulin acetylation, and the 
acetylation-mimicking K40Q α-tubulin mutant promoted mutant SOD1 aggregation. 
Our results suggest that ALS-linked mutant SOD1 can modulate HDAC6 activity and 
increase tubulin acetylation, which, in turn, facilitates the microtubule- and 
retrograde transport-dependent mutant SOD1 aggregation. HDAC6 impairment might 
be a common feature in various subtypes of ALS.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.431957
PMCID: PMC3663524
PMID: 23580651 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
