---
pmid: '30877278'
title: 'DPH1 syndrome: two novel variants and structural and functional analyses of
  seven missense variants identified in syndromic patients.'
authors:
- Urreizti R
- Mayer K
- Evrony GD
- Said E
- Castilla-Vallmanya L
- Cody NAL
- Plasencia G
- Gelb BD
- Grinberg D
- Brinkmann U
- Webb BD
- Balcells S
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6906407
doi: 10.1038/s41431-019-0374-9
---

# DPH1 syndrome: two novel variants and structural and functional analyses of seven missense variants identified in syndromic patients.
**Authors:** Urreizti R, Mayer K, Evrony GD, Said E, Castilla-Vallmanya L, Cody NAL, Plasencia G, Gelb BD, Grinberg D, Brinkmann U, Webb BD, Balcells S
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41431-019-0374-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-019-0374-9)
**PMC:** [PMC6906407](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6906407/)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2020 Jan;28(1):64-75. doi: 10.1038/s41431-019-0374-9. Epub
2019  Mar 15.

DPH1 syndrome: two novel variants and structural and functional analyses of 
seven missense variants identified in syndromic patients.

Urreizti R(#)(1), Mayer K(#)(2), Evrony GD(#)(3), Said E(4)(5), 
Castilla-Vallmanya L(6), Cody NAL(7)(8), Plasencia G(9), Gelb BD(7)(10)(11), 
Grinberg D(6), Brinkmann U(#)(2), Webb BD(#)(7)(10)(11), Balcells S(#)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Microbiology and Statistics, Faculty of Biology, 
University of Barcelona, IBUB, IRSJD, CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain. 
roseruf@yahoo.es.
(2)Roche Pharma Research and Early Development. Large Molecule Research, Roche 
Innovation Center, Munich, Nonnenwald 2, 82377, Penzberg, Germany.
(3)Center for Human Genetics & Genomics, New York University Langone Health, New 
York, NY, USA.
(4)Section of Medical Genetics, Mater dei Hospital, Msida, Malta.
(5)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Malta, Msida, Malta.
(6)Department of Genetics, Microbiology and Statistics, Faculty of Biology, 
University of Barcelona, IBUB, IRSJD, CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(8)Sema4, Stamford, CT, USA.
(9)Lead Molecular Design, S.L, Sant Cugat del Vallés, Spain.
(10)Mindich Child Health and Development Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Eur J Hum Genet. 2020 Jan;28(1):138. doi: 10.1038/s41431-019-0394-5.

DPH1 variants have been associated with an ultra-rare and severe 
neurodevelopmental disorder, mainly characterized by variable developmental 
delay, short stature, dysmorphic features, and sparse hair. We have identified 
four new patients (from two different families) carrying novel variants in DPH1, 
enriching the clinical delineation of the DPH1 syndrome. Using a diphtheria 
toxin ADP-ribosylation assay, we have analyzed the activity of seven identified 
variants and demonstrated compromised function for five of them [p.(Leu234Pro); 
p.(Ala411Argfs*91); p.(Leu164Pro); p.(Leu125Pro); and p.(Tyr112Cys)]. We have 
built a homology model of the human DPH1-DPH2 heterodimer and have performed 
molecular dynamics simulations to study the effect of these variants on the 
catalytic sites as well as on the interactions between subunits of the 
heterodimer. The results show correlation between loss of activity, reduced size 
of the opening to the catalytic site, and changes in the size of the catalytic 
site with clinical severity. This is the first report of functional tests of 
DPH1 variants associated with the DPH1 syndrome. We demonstrate that the in 
vitro assay for DPH1 protein activity, together with structural modeling, are 
useful tools for assessing the effect of the variants on DPH1 function and may 
be used for predicting patient outcomes and prognoses.

DOI: 10.1038/s41431-019-0374-9
PMCID: PMC6906407
PMID: 30877278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: RU, GDE, ES, LCV, BDG, DG, BDW, and SB declare 
no conflict of interest. KM and UB are employees of Roche. Roche is interested 
in identifying novel targets and approaches for disease diagnosis and therapy. 
NC is an employee of Sema4, a for-profit genetic testing laboratory. GP is 
employed by Lead Molecular Design, SL, a company that develops software and 
offers modeling services for pharmaceutical industries, but has no competing 
interests on the results of this article.
