---
pmid: '11410650'
title: The yeast POP2 gene encodes a nuclease involved in mRNA deadenylation.
authors:
- Daugeron MC
- Mauxion F
- Séraphin B
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC55743
doi: 10.1093/nar/29.12.2448
---

# The yeast POP2 gene encodes a nuclease involved in mRNA deadenylation.
**Authors:** Daugeron MC, Mauxion F, Séraphin B
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/29.12.2448](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/29.12.2448)
**PMC:** [PMC55743](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC55743/)

## Abstract

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001 Jun 15;29(12):2448-55. doi: 10.1093/nar/29.12.2448.

The yeast POP2 gene encodes a nuclease involved in mRNA deadenylation.

Daugeron MC(1), Mauxion F, Séraphin B.

Author information:
(1)Centre de Génétique Moléculaire, CNRS, Avenue de la Terrasse, F-91198 Gif sur 
Yvette, France.

The major mRNA degradation pathway involves deadenylation of the target molecule 
followed by decapping and, finally, 5'-->3' exonuclease digestion of the mRNA 
body. While yeast factors involved in the decapping and exonuclease degradation 
steps have been identified, the nature of the factor(s) involved in the 
deadenylation step remained elusive. Database searches for yeast proteins 
related to the mammalian deadenylase PARN identified the Pop2 protein (Pop2p) as 
a potential deadenylase. While Pop2p was previously identified as a factor 
affecting transcription, we identified a non-canonical RNase D sequence 
signature in its sequence. Analysis of the fate of a reporter mRNA in a pop2 
mutant demonstrates that Pop2p is required for efficient mRNA degradation in 
vivo. Characterisation of mRNA degradation intermediates accumulating in this 
mutant supports the involvement of Pop2p in mRNA deadenylation in vivo. Similar 
phenotypes are observed in yeast strains lacking the Ccr4 protein, which is 
known to be associated with Pop2p. A recombinant Pop2p fragment encompassing the 
putative catalytic domain degrades poly(A) in vitro demonstrating that Pop2p is 
a nuclease. We also demonstrate that poly(A) is a better competitor than poly(G) 
or poly(C) of the Pop2p nuclease activity. Altogether, our study indicates that 
Pop2p is a nuclease subunit of the yeast deadenylase and suggests that Pop2p 
homologues in other species may have similar functions.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/29.12.2448
PMCID: PMC55743
PMID: 11410650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
