---
pmid: '9226443'
title: 'cudA: a Dictyostelium gene with pleiotropic effects on cellular differentiation
  and slug behaviour.'
authors:
- Fukuzawa M
- Hopper N
- Williams J
journal: Development
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/dev.124.14.2719
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# cudA: a Dictyostelium gene with pleiotropic effects on cellular differentiation and slug behaviour.
**Authors:** Fukuzawa M, Hopper N, Williams J
**Journal:** Development (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.124.14.2719](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.124.14.2719)

## Abstract

1. Development. 1997 Jul;124(14):2719-28. doi: 10.1242/dev.124.14.2719.

cudA: a Dictyostelium gene with pleiotropic effects on cellular differentiation 
and slug behaviour.

Fukuzawa M(1), Hopper N, Williams J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University College London, UK.

The Dictyostelium cudA gene encodes a nucleoplasmic protein that is essential 
for normal culmination. There are no functionally characterised homologues in 
other organisms but there is a related gene of unknown function in Entamoeba 
histolytica. The cudA gene is expressed by the prestalk cells that constitute 
the slug tip (the pstA cells), it is not detectably expressed in the band of 
prestalk cells that lies behind the tip (the pstO cells) but it is expressed in 
the prespore cells. This unusual pattern of expression suggests a role on both 
the stalk and spore pathways of differentiation and cudA- mutant cells are 
indeed defective in both stalk and spore formation. Furthermore, the slugs 
formed by cudA- cells continue to migrate under environmental conditions where 
normal slugs culminate immediately. This aspect of their behaviour can be 
reversed when the cudA gene is selectively expressed in the pstA cells. This 
shows that processes occurring in the pstA cells regulate entry into 
culmination.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.124.14.2719
PMID: 9226443 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
