---
pmid: '23560844'
title: Metal-dependent protein phosphatase 1A functions as an extracellular signal-regulated
  kinase phosphatase.
authors:
- Li R
- Gong Z
- Pan C
- Xie DD
- Tang JY
- Cui M
- Xu YF
- Yao W
- Pang Q
- Xu ZG
- Li MY
- Yu X
- Sun JP
journal: FEBS J
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/febs.12275
---

# Metal-dependent protein phosphatase 1A functions as an extracellular signal-regulated kinase phosphatase.
**Authors:** Li R, Gong Z, Pan C, Xie DD, Tang JY, Cui M, Xu YF, Yao W, Pang Q, Xu ZG, Li MY, Yu X, Sun JP
**Journal:** FEBS J (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/febs.12275](https://doi.org/10.1111/febs.12275)

## Abstract

1. FEBS J. 2013 Jun;280(11):2700-11. doi: 10.1111/febs.12275. Epub 2013 May 3.

Metal-dependent protein phosphatase 1A functions as an extracellular 
signal-regulated kinase phosphatase.

Li R(1), Gong Z, Pan C, Xie DD, Tang JY, Cui M, Xu YF, Yao W, Pang Q, Xu ZG, Li 
MY, Yu X, Sun JP.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Experimental Teratology of the Ministry of Education, 
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Shandong 
University, Jinan 250012, China.

Protein phosphorylation is an important post-translational modification that 
regulates almost every aspect of signal transduction in cells. Activation of the 
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) family kinase extracellular 
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) is a point of convergence for many cellular 
activities in response to external stimulation. With stimuli, ERK activity is 
significantly increased by the phosphorylation of Thr202 and Tyr204 at its 
activation loop. Downregulation of ERK phosphorylation at these two sites by 
several phosphatases, such as protein phosphatase 2A, HePTP and MAPK phosphatase 
3, is essential for maintaining appropriate ERK function in different cellular 
processes. However, it is unknown whether metal-dependent protein phosphatase 
(PPM) family phosphatases directly dephosphorylate ERK. In this study, we found 
that PPM1A negatively regulated ERK by directly dephosphorylating its pThr202 
position early in EGF stimulation. Additional kinetic studies revealed that key 
residues participated in phospho-ERK recognition by PPM1A. Importantly, PPM1A 
preferred the phospho-ERK peptide sequence over a panel of other phosphopeptides 
through the interactions of basic residues in the active site of PPM1A with the 
pThr-Glu-pTyr motif of ERK. Whereas Lys165 and Arg33 were required for efficient 
catalysis or phosphosubstrate binding of PPM1A, Gln185 and Arg186 were 
determinants of PPM1A substrate specificity. The interaction between Arg186 of 
PPM1A and Glu203 and pTyr204 of phospho-ERK was identified as a hot-spot for 
phospho-ERK-PPM1A interaction.

© 2013 The Authors Journal compilation © 2013 FEBS.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.12275
PMID: 23560844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
