---
pmid: '8692888'
title: Expression of galectin-3 modulates T-cell growth and apoptosis.
authors:
- Yang RY
- Hsu DK
- Liu FT
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC39096
doi: 10.1073/pnas.93.13.6737
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Expression of galectin-3 modulates T-cell growth and apoptosis.
**Authors:** Yang RY, Hsu DK, Liu FT
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.93.13.6737](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.93.13.6737)
**PMC:** [PMC39096](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC39096/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Jun 25;93(13):6737-42. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.93.13.6737.

Expression of galectin-3 modulates T-cell growth and apoptosis.

Yang RY(1), Hsu DK, Liu FT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, Scripps Research 
Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Galectin-3 is a member (if a large family of beta-galactoside-binding animal 
lectins. It has been shown that the expression of galectin-3 is upregulated in 
proliferating cells, suggesting a possible role for this lectin in regulation of 
cell growth. Previously, we have shown that T cells infected with human T-cell 
leukemia virus type I express high levels of galectin-3, in contrast to 
uninfected cells, which do not express detectable amounts of this protein. In 
this study, we examined growth properties of human leukemia T cells transfected 
with galectin-3 cDNA, and thus constitutively overexpressing this lectin. 
Transfectants expressing galectin-3 displayed higher growth rates than control 
transfectants, which do not express this lectin. Furthermore, galectin-3 
expression in these cells confers resistance to apoptosis induced by anti-Fas 
antibody and staurosporine. Galectin-3 was found to have significant sequence 
similarity with Bcl-2, a well-characterized suppressor of apoptosis. In 
particular, the lectin contains the NWGR motif that is highly conserved among 
members of the Bcl-2 family and shown to be critical for the 
apoptosis-suppressing activity. We further demonstrated that galectin-3 
interacts with Bc1-2 in a lactose-inhibitable manner. We conclude that 
galectin-3 is a regulator of cell growth and apoptosis and it may function 
through a cell death inhibition pathway that involves Bcl-2.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.93.13.6737
PMCID: PMC39096
PMID: 8692888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Galectin-3 is a member (if a large family of beta-galactoside-binding animal lectins. It has been shown that the expression of galectin-3 is upregulated in proliferating cells, suggesting a possible role for this lectin in regulation of cell growth. Previously, we have shown that T cells infected with human T-cell leukemia virus type I express high levels of galectin-3, in contrast to uninfected cells, which do not express detectable amounts of this protein. In this study, we examined growth properties of human leukemia T cells transfected with galectin-3 cDNA, and thus constitutively overexpressing this lectin. Transfectants expressing galectin-3 displayed higher growth rates than control transfectants, which do not express this lectin. Furthermore, galectin-3 expression in these cells confers resistance to apoptosis induced by anti-Fas antibody and staurosporine. Galectin-3 was found to have significant sequence similarity with Bcl-2, a well-characterized suppressor of apoptosis. In particular, the lectin contains the NWGR motif that is highly conserved among members of the Bcl-2 family and shown to be critical for the apoptosis-suppressing activity. We further demonstrated that galectin-3 interacts with Bc1-2 in a lactose-inhibitable manner. We conclude that galectin-3 is a regulator of cell growth and apoptosis and it may function through a cell death inhibition pathway that involves Bcl-2.
