---
pmid: '15254550'
title: Sirtuin activators mimic caloric restriction and delay ageing in metazoans.
authors:
- Wood JG
- Rogina B
- Lavu S
- Howitz K
- Helfand SL
- Tatar M
- Sinclair D
journal: Nature
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature02789
---

# Sirtuin activators mimic caloric restriction and delay ageing in metazoans.
**Authors:** Wood JG, Rogina B, Lavu S, Howitz K, Helfand SL, Tatar M, Sinclair D
**Journal:** Nature (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature02789](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature02789)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2004 Aug 5;430(7000):686-9. doi: 10.1038/nature02789. Epub 2004 Jul
14.

Sirtuin activators mimic caloric restriction and delay ageing in metazoans.

Wood JG(1), Rogina B, Lavu S, Howitz K, Helfand SL, Tatar M, Sinclair D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, 77 Ave. Louis Pasteur, 
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Erratum in
    Nature. 2004 Sep 2;431(7004):107.

Caloric restriction extends lifespan in numerous species. In the budding yeast 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae this effect requires Sir2 (ref. 1), a member of the 
sirtuin family of NAD+-dependent deacetylases. Sirtuin activating compounds 
(STACs) can promote the survival of human cells and extend the replicative 
lifespan of yeast. Here we show that resveratrol and other STACs activate 
sirtuins from Caenorhabditis elegans and Drosophila melanogaster, and extend the 
lifespan of these animals without reducing fecundity. Lifespan extension is 
dependent on functional Sir2, and is not observed when nutrients are restricted. 
Together these data indicate that STACs slow metazoan ageing by mechanisms that 
may be related to caloric restriction.

DOI: 10.1038/nature02789
PMID: 15254550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
