---
pmid: '20208530'
title: PtdIns(3)P controls cytokinesis through KIF13A-mediated recruitment of FYVE-CENT
  to the midbody.
authors:
- Sagona AP
- Nezis IP
- Pedersen NM
- Liestøl K
- Poulton J
- Rusten TE
- Skotheim RI
- Raiborg C
- Stenmark H
journal: Nat Cell Biol
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ncb2036
---

# PtdIns(3)P controls cytokinesis through KIF13A-mediated recruitment of FYVE-CENT to the midbody.
**Authors:** Sagona AP, Nezis IP, Pedersen NM, Liestøl K, Poulton J, Rusten TE, Skotheim RI, Raiborg C, Stenmark H
**Journal:** Nat Cell Biol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncb2036](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb2036)

## Abstract

1. Nat Cell Biol. 2010 Apr;12(4):362-71. doi: 10.1038/ncb2036. Epub 2010 Mar 7.

PtdIns(3)P controls cytokinesis through KIF13A-mediated recruitment of FYVE-CENT 
to the midbody.

Sagona AP(1), Nezis IP, Pedersen NM, Liestøl K, Poulton J, Rusten TE, Skotheim 
RI, Raiborg C, Stenmark H.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Cancer Biomedicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, 
Montebello, N-0310 Oslo, Norway.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2010 Apr;12(4):308-10. doi: 10.1038/ncb0410-308.

Several subunits of the class III phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase (PI(3)K-III) 
complex are known as tumour suppressors. Here we uncover a function for this 
complex and its catalytic product phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate (PtdIns(3)P) 
in cytokinesis. We show that PtdIns(3)P localizes to the midbody during 
cytokinesis and recruits a centrosomal protein, FYVE-CENT (ZFYVE26), and its 
binding partner TTC19, which in turn interacts with CHMP4B, an endosomal sorting 
complex required for transport (ESCRT)-III subunit implicated in the abscission 
step of cytokinesis. Translocation of FYVE-CENT and TTC19 from the centrosome to 
the midbody requires another FYVE-CENT-interacting protein, the microtubule 
motor KIF13A. Depletion of the VPS34 or Beclin 1 subunits of PI(3)K-III causes 
cytokinesis arrest and an increased number of binucleate and multinucleate 
cells, in a similar manner to the depletion of FYVE-CENT, KIF13A or TTC19. These 
results provide a mechanism for the translocation and docking of a cytokinesis 
regulatory machinery at the midbody.

DOI: 10.1038/ncb2036
PMID: 20208530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
