---
pmid: '9326641'
title: MIC-1, a novel macrophage inhibitory cytokine, is a divergent member of the
  TGF-beta superfamily.
authors:
- Bootcov MR
- Bauskin AR
- Valenzuela SM
- Moore AG
- Bansal M
- He XY
- Zhang HP
- Donnellan M
- Mahler S
- Pryor K
- Walsh BJ
- Nicholson RC
- Fairlie WD
- Por SB
- Robbins JM
- Breit SN
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC23523
doi: 10.1073/pnas.94.21.11514
---

# MIC-1, a novel macrophage inhibitory cytokine, is a divergent member of the TGF-beta superfamily.
**Authors:** Bootcov MR, Bauskin AR, Valenzuela SM, Moore AG, Bansal M, He XY, Zhang HP, Donnellan M, Mahler S, Pryor K, Walsh BJ, Nicholson RC, Fairlie WD, Por SB, Robbins JM, Breit SN
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.94.21.11514](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.94.21.11514)
**PMC:** [PMC23523](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC23523/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Oct 14;94(21):11514-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.94.21.11514.

MIC-1, a novel macrophage inhibitory cytokine, is a divergent member of the 
TGF-beta superfamily.

Bootcov MR(1), Bauskin AR, Valenzuela SM, Moore AG, Bansal M, He XY, Zhang HP, 
Donnellan M, Mahler S, Pryor K, Walsh BJ, Nicholson RC, Fairlie WD, Por SB, 
Robbins JM, Breit SN.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Immunology, St. Vincent's Hospital, and University of New South 
Wales, Sydney, 2010, Australia.

Macrophages play a key role in both normal and pathological processes involving 
immune and inflammatory responses, to a large extent through their capacity to 
secrete a wide range of biologically active molecules. To identify some of these 
as yet not characterized molecules, we have used a subtraction cloning approach 
designed to identify genes expressed in association with macrophage activation. 
One of these genes, designated macrophage inhibitory cytokine 1 (MIC-1), encodes 
a protein that bears the structural characteristics of a transforming growth 
factor beta (TGF-beta) superfamily cytokine. Although it belongs to this 
superfamily, it has no strong homology to existing families, indicating that it 
is a divergent member that may represent the first of a new family within this 
grouping. Expression of MIC-1 mRNA in monocytoid cells is up-regulated by a 
variety of stimuli associated with activation, including interleukin 1beta, 
tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha), interleukin 2, and macrophage 
colony-stimulating factor but not interferon gamma, or lipopolysaccharide (LPS). 
Its expression is also increased by TGF-beta. Expression of MIC-1 in CHO cells 
results in the proteolytic cleavage of the propeptide and secretion of a 
cysteine-rich dimeric protein of Mr 25 kDa. Purified recombinant MIC-1 is able 
to inhibit lipopolysaccharide -induced macrophage TNF-alpha production, 
suggesting that MIC-1 acts in macrophages as an autocrine regulatory molecule. 
Its production in response to secreted proinflammatory cytokines and TGF-beta 
may serve to limit the later phases of macrophage activation.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.94.21.11514
PMCID: PMC23523
PMID: 9326641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
