---
pmid: '17410207'
title: A novel role for histone chaperones CAF-1 and Rtt106p in heterochromatin silencing.
authors:
- Huang S
- Zhou H
- Tarara J
- Zhang Z
journal: EMBO J
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1864969
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601670
---

# A novel role for histone chaperones CAF-1 and Rtt106p in heterochromatin silencing.
**Authors:** Huang S, Zhou H, Tarara J, Zhang Z
**Journal:** EMBO J (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7601670](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7601670)
**PMC:** [PMC1864969](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1864969/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2007 May 2;26(9):2274-83. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601670. Epub 2007 Apr
 5.

A novel role for histone chaperones CAF-1 and Rtt106p in heterochromatin 
silencing.

Huang S(1), Zhou H, Tarara J, Zhang Z.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of 
Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

The histone chaperones CAF-1 and Rtt106p are required for heterochromatin 
silencing in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Although it has been suggested 
that CAF-1 is involved in the maintenance of heterochromatin silencing, their 
exact functions during this process are not well understood. Here, we show that 
CAF-1 and Rtt106p are involved in the early stages of heterochromatin formation. 
The binding of Sir proteins to telomeric heterochromatin is significantly 
reduced and, additionally, Sir proteins are mislocalized in cells lacking CAF-1 
and Rtt106p. At the HMR locus, CAF-1 and Rtt106p are required for the initial 
recruitment of Sir2p and Sir3p, but not Sir4p, to the HMR-E silencer, where 
silencing initiates, as well as the efficient spreading of all of these Sir 
proteins to the distal a1 gene. Moreover, silencing at the HMR locus is 
dramatically reduced in cells lacking CAF-1, Rtt106p, and Sir1p. Thus, these 
studies reveal a novel role for CAF-1 and Rtt106p in epigenetic silencing and 
indicate that the spreading of heterochromatin, a poorly understood process, 
requires histone chaperones.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601670
PMCID: PMC1864969
PMID: 17410207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
