---
pmid: '1508186'
title: Isolation of a gene required for programmed initiation of development by Aspergillus
  nidulans.
authors:
- Adams TH
- Hide WA
- Yager LN
- Lee BN
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '1992'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC360252
doi: 10.1128/mcb.12.9.3827-3833.1992
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Isolation of a gene required for programmed initiation of development by Aspergillus nidulans.
**Authors:** Adams TH, Hide WA, Yager LN, Lee BN
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1128/mcb.12.9.3827-3833.1992](https://doi.org/10.1128/mcb.12.9.3827-3833.1992)
**PMC:** [PMC360252](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC360252/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Sep;12(9):3827-33. doi: 10.1128/mcb.12.9.3827-3833.1992.

Isolation of a gene required for programmed initiation of development by 
Aspergillus nidulans.

Adams TH(1), Hide WA, Yager LN, Lee BN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Texas A&M University, College Station 77843.

In contrast to many other cases in microbial development, Aspergillus nidulans 
conidiophore production initiates primarily as a programmed part of the life 
cycle rather than as a response to nutrient deprivation. Mutations in the acoD 
locus result in "fluffy" colonies that appear to grow faster than the wild type 
and proliferate as undifferentiated masses of vegetative cells. We show that 
unlike wild-type strains, acoD deletion mutants are unable to make conidiophores 
under optimal growth conditions but can be induced to conidiate when growth is 
nutritionally limited. The requirement for acoD in conidiophore development 
occurs prior to activation of brlA, a primary regulator of development. The acoD 
transcript is present both in vegetative hyphae prior to developmental induction 
and in developing cultures. However, the effects of acoD mutations are 
detectable only after developmental induction. We propose that acoD activity is 
primarily controlled at the posttranscriptional level and that it is required to 
direct developmentally specific changes that bring about growth inhibition and 
activation of brlA expression to result in conidiophore development.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.12.9.3827-3833.1992
PMCID: PMC360252
PMID: 1508186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

In contrast to many other cases in microbial development, Aspergillus nidulans conidiophore production initiates primarily as a programmed part of the life cycle rather than as a response to nutrient deprivation. Mutations in the acoD locus result in "fluffy" colonies that appear to grow faster than the wild type and proliferate as undifferentiated masses of vegetative cells. We show that unlike wild-type strains, acoD deletion mutants are unable to make conidiophores under optimal growth conditions but can be induced to conidiate when growth is nutritionally limited. The requirement for acoD in conidiophore development occurs prior to activation of brlA, a primary regulator of development. The acoD transcript is present both in vegetative hyphae prior to developmental induction and in developing cultures. However, the effects of acoD mutations are detectable only after developmental induction. We propose that acoD activity is primarily controlled at the posttranscriptional level and that it is required to direct developmentally specific changes that bring about growth inhibition and activation of brlA expression to result in conidiophore development.
