---
pmid: '32084341'
title: A Metabolic Pathway for Activation of Dietary Glucosinolates by a Human Gut
  Symbiont.
authors:
- Liou CS
- Sirk SJ
- Diaz CAC
- Klein AP
- Fischer CR
- Higginbottom SK
- Erez A
- Donia MS
- Sonnenburg JL
- Sattely ES
journal: Cell
year: '2020'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC7515767
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.01.023
---

# A Metabolic Pathway for Activation of Dietary Glucosinolates by a Human Gut Symbiont.
**Authors:** Liou CS, Sirk SJ, Diaz CAC, Klein AP, Fischer CR, Higginbottom SK, Erez A, Donia MS, Sonnenburg JL, Sattely ES
**Journal:** Cell (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2020.01.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.01.023)
**PMC:** [PMC7515767](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7515767/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2020 Feb 20;180(4):717-728.e19. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.01.023.

A Metabolic Pathway for Activation of Dietary Glucosinolates by a Human Gut 
Symbiont.

Liou CS(1), Sirk SJ(1), Diaz CAC(1), Klein AP(1), Fischer CR(2), Higginbottom 
SK(3), Erez A(4), Donia MS(4), Sonnenburg JL(3), Sattely ES(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, 
USA.
(2)Chemistry, Engineering, and Medicine for Human Health, Stanford University, 
Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, 
USA.
(5)Department of Chemical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, 
USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, 
USA. Electronic address: sattely@stanford.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2020 Apr;17(4):195. doi: 
10.1038/s41575-020-0287-7.

Consumption of glucosinolates, pro-drug-like metabolites abundant in Brassica 
vegetables, has been associated with decreased risk of certain cancers. Gut 
microbiota have the ability to metabolize glucosinolates, generating 
chemopreventive isothiocyanates. Here, we identify a genetic and biochemical 
basis for activation of glucosinolates to isothiocyanates by Bacteroides 
thetaiotaomicron, a prominent gut commensal species. Using a genome-wide 
transposon insertion screen, we identified an operon required for glucosinolate 
metabolism in B. thetaiotaomicron. Expression of BT2159-BT2156 in a 
non-metabolizing relative, Bacteroides fragilis, resulted in gain of 
glucosinolate metabolism. We show that isothiocyanate formation requires the 
action of BT2158 and either BT2156 or BT2157 in vitro. Monocolonization of mice 
with mutant BtΔ2157 showed reduced isothiocyanate production in the 
gastrointestinal tract. These data provide insight into the mechanisms by which 
a common gut bacterium processes an important dietary nutrient.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.01.023
PMCID: PMC7515767
PMID: 32084341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.

## Full Text

Abstract

Consumption of glucosinolates, pro-drug like metabolites abundant in brassica vegetables, has been associated with decreased risk of certain cancers. Gut microbiota have the ability to metabolize glucosinolates, generating chemopreventive isothiocyanates. Here, we identify a genetic and biochemical basis for the activation of glucosinolates to isothiocyanates by Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron , a prominent gut commensal species. Using a genome-wide transposon insertion screen, we identified an operon required for glucosinolate metabolism in B. thetaiotaomicron . Expression of BT2159 - BT2156 in a non-metabolizing relative, Bacteroides fragilis , resulted in gain of glucosinolate metabolism. We show that isothiocyanate formation requires the action of BT2158 and either BT2156 or BT2157 in vitro . Monocolonization of mice with mutant Bt Δ 2157 showed reduced isothiocyanate production in the gastrointestinal tract. These data provide insight into the mechanisms by which a common gut bacterium processes an important dietary nutrient.

INTRODUCTION

Diet is the largest source of plant-derived metabolites that influence human health. In addition to contributing fiber and micronutrients, dietary plants, including commonly consumed fruits and vegetables, contain secondary metabolites capable of eliciting pharmacological effects ( Holst and Williamson, 2008 ; Martin et al., 2013 ). The diversity of these compounds has exceeded our understanding of their metabolic fates following consumption and resulting effect, limiting our ability to assess their impact on health. Commensal microbes in the gut have been implicated in the processing of many of these bioactive molecules, altering their reactivity, biochemical function, and propensity to be absorbed through the intestinal epithelium. However, these activities are often attributed to taxonomic groups and are rarely understood at the genetic or biochemical level ( Bode et al., 2013 ; Clavel et al., 2006 ). A mechanistic understanding of how gut microbial metabolism impacts host biology will yield insight into how, from a common dietary input, the microbiome can drive divergent physiological outcomes based on which nutrient processing pathways dominate.

An example of diet-derived small molecules that influence the host involves edible vegetables such as broccoli, cabbage, and other plants in the family Brassicaceae. Epidemiological studies have linked diets rich in cruciferous vegetables to a decreased risk of gastrointestinal cancer, with isothiocyanates (ITCs) thought to be involved in the observed chemopreventive effects ( Herr and Büchler, 2010 ). ITCs do not typically accumulate in crucifers; instead, they are hydrolysis products of biologically inert glucosinolates (GSs), thioglucosides with a sulfonated oxime moiety and an amino-derived side chain that are abundant in the plant tissue ( Figure 1A ). Efforts to take advantage of these protective effects have included the commercialization of Beneforte broccoli, a line bred to accumulate enhanced levels of the GS glucoraphanin ( Mithen, 2013 ).

ITCs are reactive electrophiles that have been studied in the context of a broad range of pharmacological effects using cell-based assays and in vivo models. For instance, the ITC sulforaphane (SFN), derived from hydrolysis of glucoraphanin, is an inducer of nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2 (Nrf2). Nrf2 activation by SFN upregulates xenobiotic-metabolizing and antioxidant-responsive phase II enzymes like quinone oxidoreductases and glutathione S-transferases ( Traka and Mithen, 2009 ). Beyond xenobiotic metabolism, Nrf2 is a repressor of genes involved in hepatic lipid synthesis ( Vomhof-DeKrey and Picklo, 2012 ), consistent with data from human intervention studies showing that consumption of Beneforte broccoli reduces plasma LDL-cholesterol to a greater extent than conventional broccoli ( Armah et al., 2015 ). In addition to modulating plasma metabolite profiles and contributing to chemoprotection, SFN has been studied in the context of diabetes, with SFN treatment reducing fasting blood glucose levels in human patients with Type 2 diabetes and decreasing glucose production in rat hepatoma cell lines, mediated in part by Nrf2 regulation of gluconeogenesis ( Axelsson et al., 2017 ). Beyond Nrf2 induction, ITCs have also been shown to interact with sensory and inflammatory pathways. Allyl ITC, derived from the GS sinigrin, is an agonist of the transient receptor potential ion channel TRPA1, which is involved in inflammatory pain signaling ( Bellono et al., 2017 ), while SFN has been shown to modify lipopolysaccharide-activated Toll-like receptor 4, resulting in the reduced secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells ( Folkard et al., 2014 ).

Plant and gut bacterial metabolism are two different routes for the conversion of GSs into biologically active ITCs. GSs in crucifers are involved in chemical defense in planta ( Halkier and Gershenzon, 2006 ), and are stored in the plant tissue in an inert state before conversion into an active state by myrosinases, thio-specific glucoside hydrolases ( Figure 1A ). GSs are sequestered in vacuoles, while myrosinases are expressed in specialized myrosin cells ( Kissen et al., 2009 ). Upon disruption of the plant tissue, myrosinases mediate the hydrolysis of GSs into a variety of possible products, including ITCs, nitriles, and epithionitriles, determined by environmental pH and the presence of specifier proteins ( Halkier and Gershenzon, 2006 ).

In addition to being activated by plant enzymes, GSs can also be hydrolyzed to ITCs by the intestinal microbiota ( Rabot et al., 1993 ). This route of GS activation plays an important role in a dietary context, since plant myrosinases are often denatured during cooking. Consumption of cooked broccoli by human volunteers following a regimen to reduce intestinal colonization resulted in diminished quantities of excreted ITC-derived metabolites compared to those who did not follow a microflora-reducing regimen ( Shapiro et al., 1998 ). A consequence of the role that the gut microbiota plays in activating these prodrug-like molecules is variation in the level of bioactive ITCs produced following a meal of cooked crucifers between individuals ( Navarro et al., 2014 ; Shapiro et al., 2001 ). The observed variability has been shown to be associated in part with the diverse metabolic capabilities represented in the intestinal microbiota, with ex vivo fecal bacterial cultures from high ITC-excreting individuals turning over more GSs than those from low ITC-excreting individuals ( Li et al., 2011 ). Several gut bacteria are known to metabolize GSs, including Lactobacillus , Bifidobacterium , and Bacteroides strains ( Cheng et al., 2004 ; Elfoul et al., 2001 ; Palop et al., 1995 ). As is the case with many interactions between dietary plant metabolites and the gut microflora, however, the bacterial genes encoding this conversion have not been identified.

Here, we investigate the genetic and biochemical basis behind the activation of dietary GSs by Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron ( Bt ), a prominent member of the human gut microbiota ( Xu et al., 2003 ). Using insertional mutagenesis, we identified a previously uncharacterized operon, BT2160-BT2156 , required for GS conversion to ITCs by Bt . While microbial genetics showed that BT2157 and BT2158 are required for activity in Bt , biochemical analyses revealed that the coordinated action of BT2158 with either BT2156 or BT2157 can promote GS transformation in vitro . Furthermore, mice monocolonized with mutant Bt lacking the complete operon ( Bt Δ 2157 ) showed decreased ITC production when fed GSs. Collectively, these results increase our resolution of gut microbial processing of plant metabolites, a first step towards quantifying the impacts that these dietary plant molecules have on disease prevention.

Expression ofBT2159-BT2156 in an inactiveBacteroidesstrain results in gain of activity

We sought to determine if BT2157 and BT2158 represent the minimal unit required for GS hydrolysis in Bacteroides fragilis ( Bf ), which we determined is unable to metabolize GS in culture media ( Figure 1C ). BLAST analysis also confirmed the absence of close homologs of BT2160-BT2156 in the Bf genome. Using a plasmid-based expression system ( Smith et al., 1992 ), we expressed subsets of the BT2159-BT2156 operon in Bf , cultured these strains in rich medium supplemented with BGS, and assayed for BITC-cys in spent media using LC-MS/MS. Growth of these Bf strains was also monitored to ensure that the constitutive expression of these genes did not result in growth defects relative to a strain expressing RFP ( Figure S2D ). We found that simultaneous expression of BT2157 and BT2158 was not sufficient for gain of GS metabolizing activity ( Figure 2C ). In contrast, expression of either BT2156 or BT2159 in addition to BT2157 and BT2158 resulted in measurable production of ITCs. Furthermore, expression of all four enzymes results in gain of GS metabolizing function in Bf .

DISCUSSION

Despite the impact of dietary plant metabolites on human health and the role of the gut microbiome in modulating their activity, few microbial genes required for conversion of these molecules have been described. Our understanding of this metabolism has often been limited to identification of the involved strains ( Clavel et al., 2006 ; Tsuchihashi et al., 2008 ). One of the few studies that report specific bacterial genes and mechanisms acting on bioactive plant molecules identified a cytochrome-encoding operon responsible for inactivation of the plant-derived cardiac drug digoxin by the gut bacterium Eggerthella lenta ( Haiser et al., 2013 ). The lack of knowledge regarding the genetic basis for production of reactive ITCs by gut microbiota limits our ability to understand inter-individual differences in GS hydrolysis and use quantitative approaches to connect GS exposure to their effects on the host.

Our efforts to identify a genetic basis for GS conversion to ITCs by gut microbiota have led to the identification of an operon in Bt that is necessary and sufficient for GS activation and is also able to metabolize selected disaccharides. An interesting implication that arises from the identification of this pathway is its potential involvement in mediating microbe-microbe interactions in the gut. Certain bacterial strains are more susceptible to growth inhibition by ITC ( Dufour et al., 2015 ). In this study, we examined growth inhibition of Bt and E. coli , as well as of the pathogen Salmonella typhimurium ( Figure S1D ), in the presence of ITCs generated by Bt . While growth of E. coli and S. typhimurium was inhibited by ITCs in spent Bt media, Bt growth in the presence of GSs was uninhibited. Though the mechanisms underlying susceptibility and resistance to ITC are not well understood, these data suggest that ITC production mediated by this metabolic pathway has the potential to influence relative species abundances in the microbiome. The extent to which this gene cluster may affect community profiles in the gut, however, is yet to be determined.

While this operon plays an important role in mediating ITC production by a specific gut commensal, there are other mechanisms through which GS activation may occur in the host. Beyond Bacteroides strains, other human isolates have been associated with GS metabolism, including Lactobacillus agilis R16 ( Palop et al., 1995 ) and E. coli VL8 ( Luang-In et al., 2016 ). Because they lack homologs to BT2160-BT2156 , these strains likely perform this metabolism through different mechanisms. Based on the prevalence of this gene cluster in public stool data sets, however, the pathway for GS activation encoded by BT2160-BT2156 is both widely represented and expressed ( Figure 2B ). These distinct pathways for GS activation, differences in metabolic rate, conditional expression of the involved genes ( Figure 5 ), and the relative abundance of metabolizing strains may contribute to the inter-individual variability in ITC production observed in human feeding studies ( Li et al., 2011 ). With the genetic and biochemical basis responsible for one method of gut microbe-mediated GS activation now identified, we can begin to distinguish between the relative contributions of these mechanisms towards host exposure to ITC.

To date, identified bacterial glycosidases capable of cleaving the thio-linked sugar of GS include a glycoside hydrolase family 3 β-O-glucosidase in the soil-isolate Citrobacter WyE1( Albaser et al., 2016 ); after confirmation of GS degradation by cell-free protein extract, activity-guided purification was used to isolate the active protein. A 6-phospho-β-glucosidase was also found to be associated with GS metabolism in the pathogenic E. coli strain 0157:H7, identified through homology to plant myrosinases ( Cordeiro et al., 2015 ); however, deletion of the identified genes did not abolish the ability of the bacteria to hydrolyze the aliphatic GS sinigrin. While, to our knowledge, there have not been any reports of gut bacterial myrosinase-encoding genes that are both necessary and sufficient for GS hydrolysis, the sax operon in certain pathovars of the plant pathogen Pseudomonas syringae has been identified as being necessary and sufficient for overcoming ITC toxicity ( Fan et al., 2011 ). Putative myrosinase activity by the 6-phospho-β-glucosidase from E. coli 0157:H7, in conjunction with GS-induced activation of a glucose phosphotransferase system in E. coli VL8, has led to the proposal that phosphorylation of the glucose moiety may be prerequisite for GS hydrolysis in these strains ( Narbad and Rossiter, 2018 ). While the annotation of BT2156 as a sugar phosphate epimerase may suggest that BT2159-BT2156 act on a phosphorylated substrate, our time course in vitro reactions were performed in phosphate-free buffers and in the absence of externally supplied ATP ( Figures 3B and C ). In addition, features with masses corresponding to phosphorylated GS or phosphorylated hexose were not detected in either reactions with purified proteins or in the spent media of Bt strains. An alternative mechanistic hypothesis involves a two-step transformation for GS hydrolysis; initial oxidation of the GS sugar using NAD + is followed by hydrolysis and concomitant reduction of the sugar back to glucose using the generated NADH ( Taberman et al., 2016 ). We searched extensively for modified forms of GS, including GS bearing an oxidized sugar, in our assays, but did not observe putative intermediates. The lack of observable intermediates, however, does not necessarily preclude a redox mechanism for GS hydrolysis; these intermediates may be immediately processed by an enzyme complex and therefore not accumulate.

While Bacteroidetes are well known metabolizers of plant glycans, the question remains whether the BT2160-BT2156 operon was evolved to specifically process GS. Bacteroides spp. have been found to metabolize a variety of plant molecules, including the lignan secoisolariciresinol diglucoside (SDG) ( Clavel et al., 2006 ) and the flavonoid glycoside rutin ( Bokkenheuser et al., 1987 ). The β-glucosidase involved in SDG hydrolysis in Bacteroides uniformis ZL1 was also found to exhibit activity on other plant glycosides, including astragalin, rutin, and isoquercetin ( Tao et al., 2014 ). Similarly, an α-L-rhamnosidase from Bacteroides JY-6 was isolated for its activity on different rhamnoglucosides, including rutin and hesperidin ( Jang and Kim, 1996 ). BT2159-BT2156 exhibit similarly broad activity towards cellobiose and maltose in vitro , which suggests that these proteins may have evolved to process other glycosides in addition to GSs. The native substrate of these proteins, however, is yet to be determined.

Of the 88 polysaccharide utilizing loci (PUL) in Bt , the starch utilization system (Sus) is the most well-characterized and is comprised of eight proteins that work in a concerted manner to bind and degrade starch ( Martens et al., 2009 ). Sus is regulated by the membrane protein SusR, which is activated upon binding with maltose or higher oligomers. Efforts to identify similarly regulated loci have revealed four SusR paralogs in Bt , including BT2160 ( Ravcheev et al., 2013 ). Though BT2160 is annotated as SusR-like, there are a few differences between Sus and BT2160-BT2156. BT2160-BT2156 is not classified as a PUL because it lacks homologs to SusC or SusD, involved in substrate binding and transport ( Foley et al., 2016 ). Our in vitro studies suggest that coordinated action by the periplasmic BT2158 with either BT2156 or BT2157 is required for hydrolytic activity. In contrast, SusA and SusB are involved in hydrolytic activity in the periplasm, but do not require coordinated activity with another enzyme. In addition, single deletions of susA or susB were not deleterious to growth on starch ( D’Elia and Salyers, 1996 ), whereas single deletions of BT2157 and BT2158 both resulted in a loss of GS conversion. SusG is annotated as an outer membrane-bound glycosyl hydrolase and was found to be necessary but by itself insufficient for growth on starch, similarly to BT2157 ( Shipman et al., 1999 ). In Sus, outer membrane proteins SusC-G form a complex that is required for starch binding and transport. SusC and SusD individually are insufficient for starch binding, but together are capable of binding 60% of the starch bound by WT Bt , with the addition of SusE and SusF providing the remaining affinity ( Shipman et al., 2000 ). Though BT2157 and BT2158 together are sufficient for GS hydrolysis in vitro , presence of this pair in the inactive Bf did not result in gain of activity. Additional expression of BT2156 or BT2159 increased activity to 3% and 14%, respectively, of the activity of the Bf strain expressing the full operon, suggestive that these proteins may similarly require formation of a complex for GS hydrolysis. Interestingly, the in vitro hydrolysis of cellobiose and maltose require different combinations of proteins. While the mechanism behind GS and disaccharide hydrolysis by these proteins is yet to be determined, the combinations of proteins required for different substrates may provide insight into the catalytic roles that each of the proteins play.

In this study, we have identified a genetic and biochemical basis for the activation of a class of dietary plant metabolite, GSs, by a widely conserved bacterial species in the human gut microbiota. GSs have been extensively studied for the role of the activated product, ITCs, on human health. Despite their importance, genes in the gut microbiota that contribute to activation have remained elusive. Using a genome-wide screen, we identified the operon BT2159-BT2156 as a key player in GS conversion to ITCs by Bt . Discovery of the microbial pathways that produce bioactive compounds such as ITCs, in conjunction with recent developments in genetic tools for cellular therapeutics ( Mimee et al., 2015 ; Whitaker et al., 2017 ) can contribute to engineering gut commensals for therapeutic benefit. On a more fundamental level, this work provides a critical advance in our understanding of the many interrelated mechanisms through which the gut microbiota and plant-derived metabolites in our diet interact to influence health and disease.
