---
pmid: '10212200'
title: Purification and cloning of a brefeldin A-inhibited guanine nucleotide-exchange
  protein for ADP-ribosylation factors.
authors:
- Togawa A
- Morinaga N
- Ogasawara M
- Moss J
- Vaughan M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.18.12308
---

# Purification and cloning of a brefeldin A-inhibited guanine nucleotide-exchange protein for ADP-ribosylation factors.
**Authors:** Togawa A, Morinaga N, Ogasawara M, Moss J, Vaughan M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.274.18.12308](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.18.12308)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Apr 30;274(18):12308-15. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.18.12308.

Purification and cloning of a brefeldin A-inhibited guanine nucleotide-exchange 
protein for ADP-ribosylation factors.

Togawa A(1), Morinaga N, Ogasawara M, Moss J, Vaughan M.

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary-Critical Care Medicine Branch, NHLBI, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. togawaa@gwgate.nhlbi.nih.gov

Activation of ADP-ribosylation factors (ARFs), approximately 20-kDa guanine 
nucleotide-binding proteins that play an important role in intracellular 
vesicular trafficking, depends on guanine nucleotide-exchange proteins (GEPs), 
which accelerate replacement of bound GDP with GTP. Two major families of ARF 
GEPs are known: approximately 200-kDa molecules that are inhibited by brefeldin 
A (BFA), a fungal metabolite that blocks protein secretion and causes apparent 
disintegration of Golgi structure, and approximately 50-kDa GEPs that are 
insensitive to BFA. We describe here two human brain cDNAs that encode 
BFA-inhibited GEPs. One is a approximately 209-kDa protein 99.5% identical in 
deduced amino acid sequence (1, 849 residues) to a BFA-inhibited ARF GEP (p200) 
from bovine brain. The other smaller protein, which is approximately 74% 
identical (1, 785 amino acids), represents a previously unknown gene. We propose 
that the former, p200, be named BIG1 for (brefeldin A-inhibited GEP1) and the 
second, which encodes a approximately 202-kDa protein, BIG2. A protein 
containing sequences found in BIG2 had been purified earlier from bovine brain. 
Human tissues contained a 7.5-kilobase BIG1 mRNA and a 9.4-kilobase BIG2 
transcript. The BIG1 and BIG2 genes were localized, respectively, to chromosomes 
8 and 20. BIG2, synthesized as a His6 fusion protein in Sf9 cells, accelerated 
guanosine 5'-3-O-(thio)triphosphate binding by recombinant ARF1, ARF5, and ARF6. 
It activated native ARF (mixture of ARF1 and ARF3) more effectively than it did 
any of the nonmyristoylated recombinant ARFs. BIG2 activity was inhibited by BFA 
in a concentration-dependent manner but not by B17, a structural analog without 
effects on Golgi function. Although several clones for approximately 50-kDa 
BFA-insensitive ARF GEPs are known, these new clones for the approximately 
200-kDa BIG1 and BIG2 should facilitate characterization of this rather 
different family of proteins as well as the elucidation of mechanisms of 
regulation of BFA-sensitive ARF function in Golgi transport.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.18.12308
PMID: 10212200 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
