---
pmid: '15537665'
title: Digenic inheritance of deafness caused by mutations in genes encoding cadherin
  23 and protocadherin 15 in mice and humans.
authors:
- Zheng QY
- Yan D
- Ouyang XM
- Du LL
- Yu H
- Chang B
- Johnson KR
- Liu XZ
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2858222
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddi010
---

# Digenic inheritance of deafness caused by mutations in genes encoding cadherin 23 and protocadherin 15 in mice and humans.
**Authors:** Zheng QY, Yan D, Ouyang XM, Du LL, Yu H, Chang B, Johnson KR, Liu XZ
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddi010](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddi010)
**PMC:** [PMC2858222](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2858222/)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Jan 1;14(1):103-11. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddi010. Epub 2004 Nov
 10.

Digenic inheritance of deafness caused by mutations in genes encoding cadherin 
23 and protocadherin 15 in mice and humans.

Zheng QY(1), Yan D, Ouyang XM, Du LL, Yu H, Chang B, Johnson KR, Liu XZ.

Author information:
(1)Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME 04609, USA.

Mutations in genes coding for cadherin 23 and protocadherin 15 cause deafness in 
both mice and humans. Here, we provide evidence that mutations at these two 
cadherin loci can interact to cause hearing loss in digenic heterozygotes of 
both species. Using a classical genetic approach, we generated mice that were 
heterozygous for both Cdh23 and Pcdh15 mutations on a uniform C57BL/6J 
background. Significant levels of hearing loss were detected in these mice when 
compared to age-matched single heterozygous animals or normal controls. 
Cytoarchitectural defects in the cochlea of digenic heterozygotes, including 
degeneration of the stereocilia and a base-apex loss of hair cells and spiral 
ganglion cells, were consistent with the observed age-related hearing loss of 
these mice beginning with the high frequencies. In humans, we also have obtained 
evidence for a digenic inheritance of a USH1 phenotype in three unrelated 
families with mutations in CDH23 and PCDH15. Altogether, our data indicate that 
CDH23 and PCDH15 play an essential long-term role in maintaining the normal 
organization of the stereocilia bundle.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddi010
PMCID: PMC2858222
PMID: 15537665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
