---
pmid: '17891150'
title: A conserved motif in Argonaute-interacting proteins mediates functional interactions
  through the Argonaute PIWI domain.
authors:
- Till S
- Lejeune E
- Thermann R
- Bortfeld M
- Hothorn M
- Enderle D
- Heinrich C
- Hentze MW
- Ladurner AG
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nsmb1302
---

# A conserved motif in Argonaute-interacting proteins mediates functional interactions through the Argonaute PIWI domain.
**Authors:** Till S, Lejeune E, Thermann R, Bortfeld M, Hothorn M, Enderle D, Heinrich C, Hentze MW, Ladurner AG
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nsmb1302](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb1302)

## Abstract

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2007 Oct;14(10):897-903. doi: 10.1038/nsmb1302. Epub 2007
 Sep 23.

A conserved motif in Argonaute-interacting proteins mediates functional 
interactions through the Argonaute PIWI domain.

Till S(1), Lejeune E, Thermann R, Bortfeld M, Hothorn M, Enderle D, Heinrich C, 
Hentze MW, Ladurner AG.

Author information:
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Meyerhofstrasse 1, 69117 Heidelberg, 
Germany.

Argonaute (Ago) proteins mediate silencing of nucleic acid targets by small 
RNAs. In fission yeast, Ago1, Tas3 and Chp1 assemble into a RITS complex, which 
silences transcription near centromeres. Here we describe a repetitive motif 
within Tas3, termed the 'Argonaute hook', that is conserved from yeast to humans 
and binds Ago proteins through their PIWI domains in vitro and in vivo. 
Site-directed mutation of key residues in the motif disrupts Ago binding and 
heterochromatic silencing in vivo. Unexpectedly, a PIWI domain pocket that binds 
the 5' end of the short interfering RNA guide strand is required for direct 
binding of the Ago hook. Moreover, wild-type but not mutant Ago hook peptides 
derepress microRNA-mediated translational silencing of a target messenger RNA. 
Proteins containing the conserved Ago hook may thus be important regulatory 
components of effector complexes in RNA interference.

DOI: 10.1038/nsmb1302
PMID: 17891150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
