---
pmid: '12871976'
title: 'Induction of Grp78/BiP by translational block: activation of the Grp78 promoter
  by ATF4 through and upstream ATF/CRE site independent of the endoplasmic reticulum
  stress elements.'
authors:
- Luo S
- Baumeister P
- Yang S
- Abcouwer SF
- Lee AS
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M303619200
---

# Induction of Grp78/BiP by translational block: activation of the Grp78 promoter by ATF4 through and upstream ATF/CRE site independent of the endoplasmic reticulum stress elements.
**Authors:** Luo S, Baumeister P, Yang S, Abcouwer SF, Lee AS
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M303619200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M303619200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Sep 26;278(39):37375-85. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M303619200. Epub 
2003 Jul 18.

Induction of Grp78/BiP by translational block: activation of the Grp78 promoter 
by ATF4 through and upstream ATF/CRE site independent of the endoplasmic 
reticulum stress elements.

Luo S(1), Baumeister P, Yang S, Abcouwer SF, Lee AS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern 
California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90089-9176, USA.

Mammalian cells respond to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress by attenuation of 
protein translation mediated through the PERK-eIF2alpha pathway and 
transcriptional activation of genes such as Grp78/BiP encoding ER chaperone 
proteins. The disruption of PERK function or the blocking of eIF2alpha Ser51 
phosphorylation fails to attenuate translation after ER stress and also results 
in substantial impairment of Grp78/BiP induction by ER stress. While the 
activation of the Grp78 promoter by the ATF6 pathway through the endoplasmic 
reticulum stress elements (ERSEs) is well documented, the molecular mechanism 
linking PERK activation to Grp78 stress induction is unknown. We report here 
that ATF4, a transcription factor whose translation is up-regulated by the 
PERK-eIF2alpha pathway, can activate the Grp78 promoter independent of the ERSE. 
The ATF4-activating site is localized to an ATF/CRE sequence upstream of the 
ERSEs and is distinct from the C/EBP-ATF composite site previously identified as 
the ATF4 binding site in the ER stress-inducible chop promoter. In vitro 
translated ATF4 binding to the ATF/CRE site requires other nuclear co-factors 
from non-stressed cells, forming a complex that exhibits identical 
electrophoretic mobility as a thapsigargin-stress induced complex. Here we have 
identified the closely related ATF1 and CREB1 as nuclear co-factors that form in 
vivo complexes with endogenous ATF4. ER stress induces CREB1 phosphorylation and 
ATF1/CREB1 binding to the Grp78 promoter. Through the use of adenoviral vector 
expression systems, we provide evidence that when ATF4 function is suppressed 
and its binding partners are not able to compensate for its function, Grp78 
induction by Tg and Tu is partially inhibited. Our studies resolve a mechanism 
responsible for inhibition of Grp78 mRNA induction by ER stress in cells that 
are functionally null for PERK or devoid of eIF2alpha phosphorylation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M303619200
PMID: 12871976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
