---
pmid: '20660729'
title: Polybromo-associated BRG1-associated factor components BRD7 and BAF180 are
  critical regulators of p53 required for induction of replicative senescence.
authors:
- Burrows AE
- Smogorzewska A
- Elledge SJ
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC2922604
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1009559107
---

# Polybromo-associated BRG1-associated factor components BRD7 and BAF180 are critical regulators of p53 required for induction of replicative senescence.
**Authors:** Burrows AE, Smogorzewska A, Elledge SJ
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1009559107](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1009559107)
**PMC:** [PMC2922604](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2922604/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Aug 10;107(32):14280-5. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1009559107. Epub 2010 Jul 26.

Polybromo-associated BRG1-associated factor components BRD7 and BAF180 are 
critical regulators of p53 required for induction of replicative senescence.

Burrows AE(1), Smogorzewska A, Elledge SJ.

Author information:
(1)The Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Genetics, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

A variety of tumor-suppressor mechanisms exist to promote genome integrity and 
organismal survival. One such mechanism is cellular senescence. In response to 
replicative aging, DNA damage, and oncogenic stimuli, the p53 and Rb pathways 
are activated to prevent the proliferation of damaged cells by inducing 
senescence or apoptosis. We have performed a loss-of-function genetic screen in 
primary human cells to identify components of the senescence machinery. Here we 
describe BRD7 and BAF180 as unique regulators of replicative senescence in human 
cells. Both regulate p53 transcriptional activity toward a subset of its target 
genes required for replicative and oncogenic stress senescence induction, and 
BRD7 physically interacts with p53. BRD7 is a deletion target in human cancer, 
suggesting that loss of BRD7 may provide an additional mechanism to antagonize 
p53 function in cancer cells.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1009559107
PMCID: PMC2922604
PMID: 20660729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

A variety of tumor-suppressor mechanisms exist to promote genome integrity and organismal survival. One such mechanism is cellular senescence. In response to replicative aging, DNA damage, and oncogenic stimuli, the p53 and Rb pathways are activated to prevent the proliferation of damaged cells by inducing senescence or apoptosis. We have performed a loss-of-function genetic screen in primary human cells to identify components of the senescence machinery. Here we describe BRD7 and BAF180 as unique regulators of replicative senescence in human cells. Both regulate p53 transcriptional activity toward a subset of its target genes required for replicative and oncogenic stress senescence induction, and BRD7 physically interacts with p53. BRD7 is a deletion target in human cancer, suggesting that loss of BRD7 may provide an additional mechanism to antagonize p53 function in cancer cells.
