---
pmid: '11874905'
title: HEN1 functions pleiotropically in Arabidopsis development and acts in C function
  in the flower.
authors:
- Chen X
- Liu J
- Cheng Y
- Jia D
journal: Development
year: '2002'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC5137379
doi: 10.1242/dev.129.5.1085
---

# HEN1 functions pleiotropically in Arabidopsis development and acts in C function in the flower.
**Authors:** Chen X, Liu J, Cheng Y, Jia D
**Journal:** Development (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.129.5.1085](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.129.5.1085)
**PMC:** [PMC5137379](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5137379/)

## Abstract

1. Development. 2002 Mar;129(5):1085-94. doi: 10.1242/dev.129.5.1085.

HEN1 functions pleiotropically in Arabidopsis development and acts in C function
in the flower.

Chen X(1), Liu J, Cheng Y, Jia D.

Author information:
(1)Waksman Institute, Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey, 190
Frelinghuysen Road, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA. xuemei@waksman.rutgers.edu

Four classes of floral homeotic MADS domain proteins specify the identities of
the four organ types in an Arabidopsis flower. While the activities of the MADS
domain proteins are essentially confined to the flower or to the inflorescence,
several genes, such as APETALA2, HUA1 and HUA2, also act outside the flower in
addition to their organ identity functions inside the flower. We identified a
new gene, HUA ENHANCER 1 (HEN1) from a sensitized genetic screen in the hua1-1
hua2-1 background that is compromised in floral homeotic C function. We showed
that HEN1, like the C function gene AGAMOUS, acts to specify reproductive organ
identities and to repress A function. HEN1 also shares AG's non-homeotic
function in controlling floral determinacy. HEN1 may achieve these functions by
regulating the expression of AG. hen1 single mutants exhibit pleiotropic
phenotypes such as reduced organ size, altered rosette leaf shape and increased
number of coflorescences, during most stages of development. Therefore, HEN1,
like the A function gene AP2, plays multiple roles in plant development as well
as acting in organ identity specification in the flower. HEN1 codes for a novel
protein and is expressed throughout the plant.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.129.5.1085
PMCID: PMC5137379
PMID: 11874905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

INTRODUCTION

Three classes of floral homeotic genes, known as the A, B and C genes, act in overlapping domains in the floral meristem to specify the identities of the four floral organ types ( Coen and Meyerowitz, 1991 ; Meyerowitz et al., 1991 ). While the A, B and C genes each act in two adjacent whorls, the SEPALLATA ( SEP ) 1, 2 and 3 genes (also referred to as the class E genes) act in whorls 2, 3 and 4 to specify petal, stamen and carpel identities together with the A, B and C genes ( Pelaz et al., 2000 ; Theißen and Saedler, 2001 ).

With the exception of the A function gene APETALA2 ( AP2 ), the A, B, C and E genes code for MADS domain DNA-binding proteins ( Yanofsky et al., 1990 ; Ma et al., 1991 ; Jack et al., 1992 ; Mandel et al., 1992 ; Shiraishi et al., 1993 ; Huang et al., 1993 ; Goto and Meyerowitz, 1994 ; Jofuku et al., 1994 ; Riechmann et al., 1996 ; Mandrel and Yanofsky, 1998 ) that likely act as transcription factors in multimeric complexes ( Gutierrez-Cortines and Davies, 2000 ; Honma and Goto, 2001 ). The expression of the floral homeotic MADS box genes is largely restricted to the flower and to the specific floral whorls where they function ( Yanofsky et al., 1990 ; Drews et al., 1991 ; Ma et al., 1991 ; Jack et al., 1992 ; Mandrel et al., 1992 ; Goto and Meyerowitz, 1994 ; Mandrel and Yanofsky, 1998 ). In fact, ectopic expression of the floral homeotic MADS box genes in leaves can convert leaves to floral organs ( Honma and Goto, 2001 ; Pelaz et al., 2001 ), suggesting that the A, B, C and E MADS box genes constitute most, if not all, of the flower-specific regulators of floral organ identities. However, genes that play pleiotropic roles in the development of the plant may also serve as regulators of floral organ identities. One such example is the A function gene AP2 ( Jofuku et al., 1994 ; Okamuro et al., 1997 ).

AG is essential for stamen and carpel identities and floral determinacy. AG also antagonizes A function by restricting the activities of AP2 and the expression of APETALA1 ( AP1 ) to the outer two floral whorls ( Bowman et al., 1991b ; Gustafson-Brown et al., 1994 ). AG controls floral determinacy by repressing the expression of WUSCHEL , a gene that specifies stem cell fates, in the center of the flower ( Schoof et al., 2000 ; Lenhard et al., 2001 ; Lohmann et al., 2001 ). How AG specifies stamen and carpel identities at the molecular level is less well understood. Since AG likely functions in complexes involving the B and E proteins, the B, C and E MADS domain proteins probably act at the same developmental hierarchy in the floral homeotic pathways.

Several other genes that act in the specification of carpel and/or stamen identities have been identified. CRABS CLAW ( CRC ), encoding a protein with zinc finger and helix-loop-helix domains, and SPATULA ( SPT ), encoding a basic helix-loop-helix protein, control aspects of gynoecium development ( Alvarez and Smyth, 1999 ; Bowman and Smyth, 1999 ; Heisler et al., 2001 ). Either crc-1 or spt-2 reduces the carpelloidy present in the first whorl organs of ap2-2 ag-1 flowers, suggesting that the two genes also function in carpel identity specification ( Alvarez and Smyth, 1999 ). Two other genes, HUA1 and HUA2 , were found to control stamen and carpel identities, antagonize A function, and specify floral determinacy ( Chen and Meyerowitz, 1999 ). These functions of HUA1 and HUA2 were only recognized in genetic backgrounds in which AG activities are compromised, such as in the weak ag-4 allele ( Sieburth et al., 1995 ) and in the ag-1/+ background. HUA2 codes for a novel protein ( Chen and Meyerowitz, 1999 ) that has transcription activation activity (unpublished results), and HUA1 codes for a nuclear RNA-binding protein with CCCH zinc fingers ( Li et al., 2001 ). The molecular relationship among HUA1, HUA2 and AG has yet to be determined.

In order to identify additional players that specify reproductive organ identities and/or control floral determinacy, we performed a genetic screen in the hua1-1 hua2-1 double mutant background. Two recessive mutations in the HUA ENHANCER 1 ( HEN1 ) locus strongly enhance the hua1-1 hua2-1 homeotic phenotypes in the inner two whorls. The hen1 mutations also convert the determinate hua1-1 hua2-1 floral meristems to indeterminate meristems, suggesting that HEN1 also controls floral determinacy. The hen1 mutant plants have shorter stems and smaller leaves that differ in shape from those of wild type. Therefore, HEN1 is a gene that plays multiple roles in plant development.
