---
pmid: '9266688'
title: Substrate binding and catalysis by L-arginine:glycine amidinotransferase--a
  mutagenesis and crystallographic study.
authors:
- Fritsche E
- Humm A
- Huber R
journal: Eur J Biochem
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1997.00483.x
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Substrate binding and catalysis by L-arginine:glycine amidinotransferase--a mutagenesis and crystallographic study.
**Authors:** Fritsche E, Humm A, Huber R
**Journal:** Eur J Biochem (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1432-1033.1997.00483.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1432-1033.1997.00483.x)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Biochem. 1997 Jul 15;247(2):483-90. doi:
10.1111/j.1432-1033.1997.00483.x.

Substrate binding and catalysis by L-arginine:glycine amidinotransferase--a 
mutagenesis and crystallographic study.

Fritsche E(1), Humm A, Huber R.

Author information:
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Biochemie, Martinsried, Germany.

L-Arginine:glycine amidinotransferase catalyzes the committed step in the 
biosynthesis of creatine. Eight active-site mutants, D170N, D254N, H303V, D305A, 
R322E, S355A, C407S, and C410A of recombinant human L-arginine:glycine 
amidinotransferase were prepared by site-directed mutagenesis and enzymatically 
characterized. The crystal structures of the three mutants D170N, D254N, and 
C407S have been determined at 0.28-nm, 0.29-nm and 0.236-nm resolution, 
respectively. The mutation of active-site residues which are involved in 
substrate-binding yielded inactive mutants. Substitution of Asp254, which is not 
directly involved in substrate binding but is thought to transfer protons in 
concert with the His303 imidazole group, results in a strongly (2000-fold) 
reduced activity. However, the substitution of Cys410, a residue near the active 
site but not involved in catalysis or substrate binding, by Ala does not change 
the kinetic properties with respect to the wild-type enzyme. The loss of 
enzymatic activity of the D170N, D254N, C407S and likely all other mutants is 
solely due to the inserted point mutations, affecting substrate binding or 
transition-state stabilization, and not due to major conformational 
rearrangements of the protein. These results show that a His-Asp pair on one 
side of the substrate and a Cys on the other side are key residues for activity 
and are part of a disjoint triad. The imidazole ring of the His is proposed to 
act as a general acid/general base during catalysis whereas the Cys acts as a 
nucleophile analogous to Cys25 of papain-like cysteine proteinases.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1997.00483.x
PMID: 9266688 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
