---
pmid: '21460856'
title: ATM-mediated phosphorylation activates the tumor-suppressive function of B56γ-PP2A.
authors:
- Shouse GP
- Nobumori Y
- Panowicz MJ
- Liu X
journal: Oncogene
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.95
---

# ATM-mediated phosphorylation activates the tumor-suppressive function of B56γ-PP2A.
**Authors:** Shouse GP, Nobumori Y, Panowicz MJ, Liu X
**Journal:** Oncogene (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/onc.2011.95](https://doi.org/10.1038/onc.2011.95)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2011 Sep 1;30(35):3755-65. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.95. Epub 2011 Apr
4.

ATM-mediated phosphorylation activates the tumor-suppressive function of 
B56γ-PP2A.

Shouse GP(1), Nobumori Y, Panowicz MJ, Liu X.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of California, Riverside, USA.

Protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) is a family of heterotrimeric protein phosphatases 
that has a multitude of functions inside the cell, acting through various 
substrate targets in cell-signaling pathways. Recent evidence suggests that a 
subset of PP2A holoenzymes function as tumor suppressors and one particular 
family of B subunits, B56, are implicated in this function. However, the 
regulatory mechanisms that govern activation of B56-PP2A tumor-suppressive 
function have not been elucidated. In the present study, we demonstrate that 
ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) directly phosphorylates and specifically 
regulates B56γ3, B56γ2 and B56δ, after DNA damage. We further show that 
phosphorylation of B56γ3 at Ser510 leads to an increase in B56γ3-PP2A complexes, 
and direction of PP2A phosphatase activity toward the substrate p53, activating 
its tumor-suppressive functions. In addition, we found that under cell growth 
conditions B56γ3 is kept at low levels through the actions of the E3 ubiquitin 
ligase MDM2, and, importantly, phosphorylation of B56γ3 by ATM leads to 
upregulation of the protein by blocking MDM2-mediated B56γ3 ubiquitination. 
Finally, we show that Ser510 phosphorylation significantly enhances the ability 
of B56γ3 to inhibit cell proliferation and anchorage-independent growth. These 
results provide mechanistic insight into the regulation of PP2A 
tumor-suppressive function, and suggest a model for parallel regulation of p53 
and B56γ3.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2011.95
PMID: 21460856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
