---
pmid: '10790327'
title: CHE-3, a cytosolic dynein heavy chain, is required for sensory cilia structure
  and function in Caenorhabditis elegans.
authors:
- Wicks SR
- de Vries CJ
- van Luenen HG
- Plasterk RH
journal: Dev Biol
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/dbio.2000.9686
---

# CHE-3, a cytosolic dynein heavy chain, is required for sensory cilia structure and function in Caenorhabditis elegans.
**Authors:** Wicks SR, de Vries CJ, van Luenen HG, Plasterk RH
**Journal:** Dev Biol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1006/dbio.2000.9686](https://doi.org/10.1006/dbio.2000.9686)

## Abstract

1. Dev Biol. 2000 May 15;221(2):295-307. doi: 10.1006/dbio.2000.9686.

CHE-3, a cytosolic dynein heavy chain, is required for sensory cilia structure 
and function in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Wicks SR(1), de Vries CJ, van Luenen HG, Plasterk RH.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, Center for Biomedical Genetics, The 
Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, Amsterdam, 1066 CX, The 
Netherlands.

Forward genetic screens using novel assays of nematode chemotaxis to soluble 
compounds identified three independent transposon-insertion mutations in the 
gene encoding the Caenorhabditis elegans dynein heavy chain (DHC) 1b isoform. 
These disruptions were mapped and cloned using a newly developed PCR-based 
transposon display. The mutations were demonstrated to be allelic to the che-3 
genetic locus. This isoform of dynein shows temporally and spatially restricted 
expression in ciliated sensory neurons, and mutants show progressive 
developmental defects of the chemosensory cilia. These results are consistent 
with a role for this motor protein in the process of intraflagellar transport; 
DHC 1b acts in concert with a number of other proteins to establish and maintain 
the structural integrity of the ciliated sensory endings in C. elegans.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/dbio.2000.9686
PMID: 10790327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
