---
pmid: '9150138'
title: Redistribution of silencing proteins from telomeres to the nucleolus is associated
  with extension of life span in S. cerevisiae.
authors:
- Kennedy BK
- Gotta M
- Sinclair DA
- Mills K
- McNabb DS
- Murthy M
- Pak SM
- Laroche T
- Gasser SM
- Guarente L
journal: Cell
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80219-6
---

# Redistribution of silencing proteins from telomeres to the nucleolus is associated with extension of life span in S. cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Kennedy BK, Gotta M, Sinclair DA, Mills K, McNabb DS, Murthy M, Pak SM, Laroche T, Gasser SM, Guarente L
**Journal:** Cell (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80219-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80219-6)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 1997 May 2;89(3):381-91. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80219-6.

Redistribution of silencing proteins from telomeres to the nucleolus is 
associated with extension of life span in S. cerevisiae.

Kennedy BK(1), Gotta M, Sinclair DA, Mills K, McNabb DS, Murthy M, Pak SM, 
Laroche T, Gasser SM, Guarente L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge 
02139, USA.

A prior genetic study indicated that activity of Sir silencing proteins at a 
hypothetical AGE locus is essential for long life span. In this model, the 
SIR4-42 mutation would direct the Sir protein complex to the AGE locus, giving 
rise to a long life span. We show by indirect immunofluorescence that Sir3p and 
Sir4p are redirected to the nucleolus in the SIR4-42 mutant. Furthermore, this 
relocalization is dependent on both UTH4 a novel yeast gene that extends life 
span, and its homologue YGL023. Strikingly, the Sir complex is relocalized from 
telomeres to the nucleolus in old wild-type cells. We propose that the rDNA is 
the AGE locus and that nucleolar function is compromised in old yeast cells in a 
way that may be mitigated by targeting of Sir proteins to the nucleolus.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80219-6
PMID: 9150138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
