---
pmid: '7478510'
title: Direct interaction of Gadd45 with PCNA and evidence for competitive interaction
  of Gadd45 and p21Waf1/Cip1 with PCNA.
authors:
- Chen IT
- Smith ML
- O'Connor PM
- Fornace AJ Jr
journal: Oncogene
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
---

# Direct interaction of Gadd45 with PCNA and evidence for competitive interaction of Gadd45 and p21Waf1/Cip1 with PCNA.
**Authors:** Chen IT, Smith ML, O'Connor PM, Fornace AJ Jr
**Journal:** Oncogene (1995)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 1995 Nov 16;11(10):1931-7.

Direct interaction of Gadd45 with PCNA and evidence for competitive interaction 
of Gadd45 and p21Waf1/Cip1 with PCNA.

Chen IT(1), Smith ML, O'Connor PM, Fornace AJ Jr.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, National Cancer Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

We have previously shown (Smith et al., 1994) that antibodies raised against the 
growth arrest and DNA damage inducible protein Gadd45 co-precipitate 
proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), a protein involved in DNA replication 
and repair. Here we demonstrate that Gadd45 can directly bind to PCNA using a 
Far-western blotting approach. In this assay, a Gadd45 bacterial expression 
vector was modified to allow synthesis of purified 32P-labeled Gadd45 fusion 
protein. This protein was used to detect filter bound PCNA protein, while filter 
bound Gadd45 protein could also be detected by free PCNA molecules. Using 
recombinant proteins in conjunction with immunoprecipitation and immunoblotting, 
we show that Gadd45 competes with p21 for binding to PCNA and conversely, p21 
blocks the ability of Gadd45 to bind PCNA. In addition, p21 appears to disrupt 
PCNA trimers whereas Gadd45 has a lesser effect. PCNA trimer disruption was also 
observed in UV-irradiated cells but not in repair-defective xeroderma 
pigmentosum group A (XP-A) cells.

PMID: 7478510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
