---
pmid: '16368433'
title: Deficient E-cadherin adhesion in C57BL/6J-Min/+ mice is associated with increased
  tyrosine kinase activity and RhoA-dependent actomyosin contractility.
authors:
- Carothers AM
- Javid SH
- Moran AE
- Hunt DH
- Redston M
- Bertagnolli MM
journal: Exp Cell Res
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2005.11.019
---

# Deficient E-cadherin adhesion in C57BL/6J-Min/+ mice is associated with increased tyrosine kinase activity and RhoA-dependent actomyosin contractility.
**Authors:** Carothers AM, Javid SH, Moran AE, Hunt DH, Redston M, Bertagnolli MM
**Journal:** Exp Cell Res (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yexcr.2005.11.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yexcr.2005.11.019)

## Abstract

1. Exp Cell Res. 2006 Feb 15;312(4):387-400. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2005.11.019.

Deficient E-cadherin adhesion in C57BL/6J-Min/+ mice is associated with 
increased tyrosine kinase activity and RhoA-dependent actomyosin contractility.

Carothers AM(1), Javid SH, Moran AE, Hunt DH, Redston M, Bertagnolli MM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Carrie Hall, Room 116, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
75 Francis Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA. acarothers@partners.org

The Min/+ mouse is a model for APC-dependent colorectal cancer (CRC). We showed 
that tumorigenesis in this animal was associated with decreased E-cadherin 
adhesion and increased epidermal growth factor receptor (Egfr) activity in the 
non-tumor intestinal mucosa. Here, we tested whether these abnormalities 
correlated with changes in the actin cytoskeleton due to increased Rho-ROCK 
signaling. We treated Apc+/+ (WT) littermate small intestine with EGTA, an 
inhibitor of E-cadherin, and with LPA, an RhoA activator; both induced effects 
on adhesion and kinase activity that mimicked the Min/+ phenotype. GTP-bound Rho 
was increased in Min/+ enterocytes relative to WT. Since RhoA activity is 
associated with actomyosin contractility, markers of this signaling cascade were 
assessed including phosphorylated myosin light chain (MLC), cofilin, Pyk2, Src, 
and MAPK kinases. The increased actomyosin contractility characterizing Min/+ 
intestinal tissue was suppressed by the ROCK inhibitor, Y27632, but was 
inducible in the WT by EGTA or LPA. Finally, ultrastructural imaging revealed 
changes consistent with actomyosin contractility in Min/+ enterocytes. Thus, the 
positive regulation of E-cadherin adhesion provided by Apc+ in vivo allows 
proper negative regulation of Egfr, Src, Pyk2, and MAPK, as well as RhoA 
activities.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2005.11.019
PMID: 16368433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
