---
pmid: '8706663'
title: Acceptor substrate specificity of a cloned GD3 synthase that catalyzes the
  biosynthesis of both GD3 and GD1c/GT1a/GQ1b.
authors:
- Nara K
- Watanabe Y
- Kawashima I
- Tai T
- Nagai Y
- Sanai Y
journal: Eur J Biochem
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1996.0647w.x
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Acceptor substrate specificity of a cloned GD3 synthase that catalyzes the biosynthesis of both GD3 and GD1c/GT1a/GQ1b.
**Authors:** Nara K, Watanabe Y, Kawashima I, Tai T, Nagai Y, Sanai Y
**Journal:** Eur J Biochem (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1432-1033.1996.0647w.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1432-1033.1996.0647w.x)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Biochem. 1996 Jun 15;238(3):647-52. doi:
10.1111/j.1432-1033.1996.0647w.x.

Acceptor substrate specificity of a cloned GD3 synthase that catalyzes the 
biosynthesis of both GD3 and GD1c/GT1a/GQ1b.

Nara K(1), Watanabe Y, Kawashima I, Tai T, Nagai Y, Sanai Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemical Cell Research, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of 
Medical Science, Tokyo, Japan.

To address the role of alpha2,8-sialyltransferase (GD3 synthase) in the 
biosynthesis of gangliosides, we examined the substrate specificity of the 
enzyme. In the ganglioside synthesis pathway, it has been generally accepted 
that sialyltransferase II (SAT II) catalyzes the production of GD3 from GM3, and 
sialyltransferase V (SAT V) catalyzes the production of GD1c/GT1a/GQ1b from 
GM1h/GD1a/GT1b. However, acceptor specificity of the clones GD3 synthase that 
was isolated from human melanoma cells [Nara, K., Watanabe, Y., Maruyama, K., 
Kasahara, K., Nagai. Y. & Sanai, Y. (1994) Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 91, 
7952-7956] has revealed that this enzyme utilized the gangliosides containing 
the terminal Sia(alpha2-3)Gas structure of the carbohydrate moiety, which 
includes GM3, GM1b, GD1a and GT1B as exogenous substrates. Kinetic data also 
showed that the enzyme was able to utilize both GM3 and GM1b/GD1a/GT1b as 
acceptor substrates. These data indicate that the enzyme catalyzes the formation 
of not only GD3 but also GD1c, GT1a, and GQ1B in vitro. Furthermore, by 
transfection of the cloned human alpha2,8-sialyltransferase cDNA, transient and 
stable expression of GT1a and GQ1b wa also observed in COS-7 cells and Swiss 3T3 
cells that originally lacked SAT II and SAT V activities. These observations 
indicate that the enzyme has both SAT II and SAT V activities in vivo.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1996.0647w.x
PMID: 8706663 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
