---
pmid: '17240342'
title: Glypican LON-2 is a conserved negative regulator of BMP-like signaling in Caenorhabditis
  elegans.
authors:
- Gumienny TL
- MacNeil LT
- Wang H
- de Bono M
- Wrana JL
- Padgett RW
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2006.11.065
---

# Glypican LON-2 is a conserved negative regulator of BMP-like signaling in Caenorhabditis elegans.
**Authors:** Gumienny TL, MacNeil LT, Wang H, de Bono M, Wrana JL, Padgett RW
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cub.2006.11.065](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2006.11.065)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2007 Jan 23;17(2):159-64. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2006.11.065.

Glypican LON-2 is a conserved negative regulator of BMP-like signaling in 
Caenorhabditis elegans.

Gumienny TL(1), MacNeil LT, Wang H, de Bono M, Wrana JL, Padgett RW.

Author information:
(1)Waksman Institute, Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Cancer 
Institute of New Jersey, Rutgers University, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA.

Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) pathways are required for a wide variety of 
developmental and homeostatic decisions, and mutations in signaling components 
are associated with several diseases. An important aspect of BMP control is the 
extracellular regulation of these pathways. We show that LON-2 negatively 
regulates a BMP-like signaling pathway that controls body length in C. elegans. 
lon-2 acts genetically upstream of the BMP-like gene dbl-1, and loss of lon-2 
function results in animals that are longer than normal. LON-2 is a conserved 
member of the glypican family of heparan sulfate proteoglycans, a family with 
several members known to regulate growth-factor signaling in many organisms. 
LON-2 is functionally conserved because the Drosophila glypican gene dally 
rescues the lon-2(lf) body-size defect. We show that the LON-2 protein binds 
BMP2 in vitro, and a mutant variation of LON-2 found in lon-2(e2140) animals 
diminishes this interaction. We propose that LON-2 binding to DBL-1 negatively 
regulates this pathway in C. elegans by attenuating ligand-receptor 
interactions. This is the first report of a glypican directly interacting with a 
growth-factor pathway in C. elegans and provides a mechanistic model for 
glypican regulation of growth-factor pathways.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2006.11.065
PMID: 17240342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
