---
pmid: '2152124'
title: abaA controls phialide differentiation in Aspergillus nidulans.
authors:
- Sewall TC
- Mims CW
- Timberlake WE
journal: Plant Cell
year: '1990'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC159926
doi: 10.1105/tpc.2.8.731
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# abaA controls phialide differentiation in Aspergillus nidulans.
**Authors:** Sewall TC, Mims CW, Timberlake WE
**Journal:** Plant Cell (1990)
**DOI:** [10.1105/tpc.2.8.731](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.2.8.731)
**PMC:** [PMC159926](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC159926/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell. 1990 Aug;2(8):731-9. doi: 10.1105/tpc.2.8.731.

abaA controls phialide differentiation in Aspergillus nidulans.

Sewall TC(1), Mims CW, Timberlake WE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, University of Georgia, Athens 30602.

Aspergillus nidulans is an ascomycetous fungus that reproduces asexually by 
forming multicellular conidiophores and uninucleate spores called conidia. Loss 
of function mutations in the abacus A (abaA) regulatory locus result in 
formation of aberrant conidiophores that fail to produce conidia. Wild-type 
conidiophores form two tiers of sterigmata. The first tier, metulae, divide to 
produce the second tier, phialides. Phialides are sporogenous cells that produce 
conidia through a specialized apical budding process. We have examined 
conidiophore development in an abaA- strain at the ultrastructural level. The 
results showed that in the mutant metulae produce supernumerary tiers of cells 
with metula-like, rather than phialide-like, properties. Temperature shift 
experiments with an abaA14ts strain demonstrated that abaA+ function induced 
phialide formation by the aberrant abacus cells and was continuously required 
for maintenance of phialide function. In the absence of abaA+ activity, metulae 
simply proliferated and later developmental steps never occurred. We conclude 
that abaA+ directs the differentiation of phialides and is continuously required 
for maintenance of their function.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.2.8.731
PMCID: PMC159926
PMID: 2152124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
