---
pmid: '21062745'
title: The RUN domain of rubicon is important for hVps34 binding, lipid kinase inhibition,
  and autophagy suppression.
authors:
- Sun Q
- Zhang J
- Fan W
- Wong KN
- Ding X
- Chen S
- Zhong Q
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3012973
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.126425
---

# The RUN domain of rubicon is important for hVps34 binding, lipid kinase inhibition, and autophagy suppression.
**Authors:** Sun Q, Zhang J, Fan W, Wong KN, Ding X, Chen S, Zhong Q
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110.126425](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.126425)
**PMC:** [PMC3012973](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3012973/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 7;286(1):185-91. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.126425. Epub 2010
 Nov 9.

The RUN domain of rubicon is important for hVps34 binding, lipid kinase 
inhibition, and autophagy suppression.

Sun Q(1), Zhang J, Fan W, Wong KN, Ding X, Chen S, Zhong Q.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Department of Molecular and 
Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720, USA.

The class III phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3KC3) plays a central role in 
autophagy. Rubicon, a RUN domain-containing protein, is newly identified as a 
PI3KC3 subunit through its association with Beclin 1. Rubicon serves as a 
negative regulator of PI3KC3 and autophagosome maturation. The molecular 
mechanism underlying the PI3KC3 and autophagy inhibition by Rubicon is largely 
unknown. Here, we demonstrate that Rubicon interacts with the PI3KC3 catalytic 
subunit hVps34 via its RUN domain. The RUN domain contributes to the efficient 
inhibition of PI3KC3 lipid kinase activity by Rubicon. Furthermore, a Rubicon 
RUN domain deletion mutant fails to complement the autophagy deficiency in 
Rubicon-depleted cells. Hence, these results reveal a critical role of the 
Rubicon RUN domain in PI3KC3 and autophagy regulation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.126425
PMCID: PMC3012973
PMID: 21062745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
