---
pmid: '17589504'
title: Ambra1 regulates autophagy and development of the nervous system.
authors:
- Fimia GM
- Stoykova A
- Romagnoli A
- Giunta L
- Di Bartolomeo S
- Nardacci R
- Corazzari M
- Fuoco C
- Ucar A
- Schwartz P
- Gruss P
- Piacentini M
- Chowdhury K
- Cecconi F
journal: Nature
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature05925
---

# Ambra1 regulates autophagy and development of the nervous system.
**Authors:** Fimia GM, Stoykova A, Romagnoli A, Giunta L, Di Bartolomeo S, Nardacci R, Corazzari M, Fuoco C, Ucar A, Schwartz P, Gruss P, Piacentini M, Chowdhury K, Cecconi F
**Journal:** Nature (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature05925](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature05925)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2007 Jun 28;447(7148):1121-5. doi: 10.1038/nature05925. Epub 2007 Jun 
24.

Ambra1 regulates autophagy and development of the nervous system.

Fimia GM(1), Stoykova A, Romagnoli A, Giunta L, Di Bartolomeo S, Nardacci R, 
Corazzari M, Fuoco C, Ucar A, Schwartz P, Gruss P, Piacentini M, Chowdhury K, 
Cecconi F.

Author information:
(1)National Institute for Infectious Diseases, IRCCS L. Spallanzani, 00149 Rome, 
Italy.

Autophagy is a self-degradative process involved both in basal turnover of 
cellular components and in response to nutrient starvation or organelle damage 
in a wide range of eukaryotes. During autophagy, portions of the cytoplasm are 
sequestered by double-membraned vesicles called autophagosomes, and are degraded 
after fusion with lysosomes for subsequent recycling. In vertebrates, this 
process acts as a pro-survival or pro-death mechanism in different physiological 
and pathological conditions, such as neurodegeneration and cancer; however, the 
roles of autophagy during embryonic development are still largely 
uncharacterized. Beclin1 (Becn1; coiled-coil, myosin-like BCL2-interacting 
protein) is a principal regulator in autophagosome formation, and its deficiency 
results in early embryonic lethality. Here we show that Ambra1 (activating 
molecule in Beclin1-regulated autophagy), a large, previously unknown protein 
bearing a WD40 domain at its amino terminus, regulates autophagy and has a 
crucial role in embryogenesis. We found that Ambra1 is a positive regulator of 
the Becn1-dependent programme of autophagy, as revealed by its overexpression 
and by RNA interference experiments in vitro. Notably, Ambra1 functional 
deficiency in mouse embryos leads to severe neural tube defects associated with 
autophagy impairment, accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins, unbalanced cell 
proliferation and excessive apoptotic cell death. In addition to identifying a 
new and essential element regulating the autophagy programme, our results 
provide in vivo evidence supporting the existence of a complex interplay between 
autophagy, cell growth and cell death required for neural development in 
mammals.

DOI: 10.1038/nature05925
PMID: 17589504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
