---
pmid: '7829473'
title: Disassembly of Son-of-sevenless proteins from Grb2 during p21ras desensitization
  by insulin.
authors:
- Cherniack AD
- Klarlund JK
- Conway BR
- Czech MP
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
---

# Disassembly of Son-of-sevenless proteins from Grb2 during p21ras desensitization by insulin.
**Authors:** Cherniack AD, Klarlund JK, Conway BR, Czech MP
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1995)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1995 Jan 27;270(4):1485-8.

Disassembly of Son-of-sevenless proteins from Grb2 during p21ras desensitization 
by insulin.

Cherniack AD(1), Klarlund JK, Conway BR, Czech MP.

Author information:
(1)Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical Center, 
Worcester 01605.

Insulin receptor signaling acutely stimulates GTP loading of p21ras, apparently 
by mobilizing complexes of Grb2 and the guanine nucleotide exchangers 
Son-of-sevenless (Sos) 1 and 2 to associate with tyrosine-phosphorylated 
proteins in the plasma membrane. Here we show that in 32P-labeled 3T3-L1 
adipocytes the elevated cellular concentrations of [32P]GTP-bound p21ras in 
response to insulin return to near basal levels after 20-30 min of hormone 
stimulation, while insulin receptors remain activated. Lysates of such 
desensitized cells were quantitatively immunoprecipitated with an antiserum 
recognizing both Sos1 and Sos2 proteins or a specific anti-Sos2 antiserum. 
Immunoblot analysis of these precipitates revealed that insulin causes a marked 
hyperphosphorylation of Sos1 and a 50% decrease in Grb2 associated with Sos 
proteins under these conditions. Similarly, anti-Grb2 immunoprecipitates of such 
lysates revealed the presence of decreased Sos1 protein due to insulin action. 
The disassembly of Grb2 from Sos proteins slightly precedes the time course of 
p21ras deactivation in response to insulin. These data are consistent with the 
hypothesis that the dissociation of Grb2 from Sos proteins caused by insulin in 
3T3-L1 cells mediates p21ras deactivation and desensitization.

PMID: 7829473 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
