---
pmid: '16118219'
title: SphK1 and SphK2, sphingosine kinase isoenzymes with opposing functions in sphingolipid
  metabolism.
authors:
- Maceyka M
- Sankala H
- Hait NC
- Le Stunff H
- Liu H
- Toman R
- Collier C
- Zhang M
- Satin LS
- Merrill AH Jr
- Milstien S
- Spiegel S
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M502207200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# SphK1 and SphK2, sphingosine kinase isoenzymes with opposing functions in sphingolipid metabolism.
**Authors:** Maceyka M, Sankala H, Hait NC, Le Stunff H, Liu H, Toman R, Collier C, Zhang M, Satin LS, Merrill AH Jr, Milstien S, Spiegel S
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M502207200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M502207200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Nov 4;280(44):37118-29. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M502207200. Epub
2005  Aug 23.

SphK1 and SphK2, sphingosine kinase isoenzymes with opposing functions in 
sphingolipid metabolism.

Maceyka M(1), Sankala H, Hait NC, Le Stunff H, Liu H, Toman R, Collier C, Zhang 
M, Satin LS, Merrill AH Jr, Milstien S, Spiegel S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Virginia Commonwealth University School of 
Medicine, Richmond, Virginia 23298, USA.

The potent sphingolipid metabolite sphingosine 1-phosphate is produced by 
phosphorylation of sphingosine catalyzed by sphingosine kinase (SphK) types 1 
and 2. In contrast to pro-survival SphK1, the putative BH3-only protein SphK2 
inhibits cell growth and enhances apoptosis. Here we show that SphK2 catalytic 
activity also contributes to its ability to induce apoptosis. Overexpressed 
SphK2 also increased cytosolic free calcium induced by serum starvation. 
Transfer of calcium to mitochondria was required for SphK2-induced apoptosis, as 
cell death and cytochrome c release was abrogated by inhibition of the 
mitochondrial Ca(2+) transporter. Serum starvation increased the proportion of 
SphK2 in the endoplasmic reticulum and targeting SphK1 to the endoplasmic 
reticulum converted it from anti-apoptotic to pro-apoptotic. Overexpression of 
SphK2 increased incorporation of [(3)H]palmitate, a substrate for both serine 
palmitoyltransferase and ceramide synthase, into C16-ceramide, whereas SphK1 
decreased it. Electrospray ionizationmass spectrometry/mass spectrometry also 
revealed an opposite effect on ceramide mass levels. Importantly, specific 
down-regulation of SphK2 reduced conversion of sphingosine to ceramide in the 
recycling pathway and conversely, down-regulation of SphK1 increased it. Our 
results demonstrate that SphK1 and SphK2 have opposing roles in the regulation 
of ceramide biosynthesis and suggest that the location of sphingosine 
1-phosphate production dictates its functions.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M502207200
PMID: 16118219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
