---
pmid: '16234850'
title: Erythroid-specific 5-aminolevulinate synthase protein is stabilized by low
  oxygen and proteasomal inhibition.
authors:
- Abu-Farha M
- Niles J
- Willmore WG
journal: Biochem Cell Biol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1139/o05-045
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Erythroid-specific 5-aminolevulinate synthase protein is stabilized by low oxygen and proteasomal inhibition.
**Authors:** Abu-Farha M, Niles J, Willmore WG
**Journal:** Biochem Cell Biol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1139/o05-045](https://doi.org/10.1139/o05-045)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Cell Biol. 2005 Oct;83(5):620-30. doi: 10.1139/o05-045.

Erythroid-specific 5-aminolevulinate synthase protein is stabilized by low 
oxygen and proteasomal inhibition.

Abu-Farha M(1), Niles J, Willmore WG.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada.

5-Aminolevulinate synthase (ALAS; E.C. 2.3.1.37) catalyzes the first and 
rate-limiting step of heme synthesis within the mitochondria. Two isozymes of 
ALAS, encoded by separate genes, exist. ALAS1 is ubiquitously expressed and 
provides heme for cytochromes and other hemoproteins. ALAS2 is expressed 
exclusively in erythroid cells and synthesizes heme specifically for 
haemoglobin. A database search for proteins potentially regulated by oxygen 
tension revealed that ALAS2 contained a sequence of amino acids (LXXLAP where L 
is leucine, X is any amino acid, A is alanine, and P is proline) not occurring 
in ALAS1, which may be hydroxylated under normoxic conditions (21% O2) and 
target the enzyme for ubiquitination and degradation by the proteasome. We 
examined protein turnover of ALAS2 in the presence of cycloheximide in K562 
cells. Normoxic ALAS2 had a turnover time of approximately 36 h. Hypoxia (1% O2) 
and inhibition of the proteasome increased both the stability and the specific 
activity of ALAS2 (greater than 2- and 7-fold, respectively, over 72 h of 
treatment). Mutation of a key proline within the LXXLAP sequence of ALAS2 also 
stabilized the protein beyond 36 h under normoxic conditions. The von 
Hippel-Lindau (vHL) protein was immunoprecipitated with FLAG epitope-tagged 
ALAS2 produced in normoxic cells but not in hypoxic cells, suggesting that the 
ALAS2 is hydroxylated under normoxic conditions and targeted for ubiquitination 
by the E3 ubiquitin ligase system. ALAS2 could also be ubiquitinated under 
normoxia using an in vitro ubiquitination assay. The present study provides 
evidence that ALAS2 is broken down under normoxic conditions by the proteasome 
and that the prolyl-4-hydroxylase/vHL E3 ubiquitin ligase pathway may be 
involved.

DOI: 10.1139/o05-045
PMID: 16234850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
