---
pmid: '20159018'
title: Identification and characterization of the novel protein CCDC106 that interacts
  with p53 and promotes its degradation.
authors:
- Zhou J
- Qiao X
- Xiao L
- Sun W
- Wang L
- Li H
- Wu Y
- Ding X
- Hu X
- Zhou C
- Zhang J
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2010.02.031
---

# Identification and characterization of the novel protein CCDC106 that interacts with p53 and promotes its degradation.
**Authors:** Zhou J, Qiao X, Xiao L, Sun W, Wang L, Li H, Wu Y, Ding X, Hu X, Zhou C, Zhang J
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2010.02.031](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2010.02.031)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2010 Mar 19;584(6):1085-90. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2010.02.031.
Epub  2010 Feb 14.

Identification and characterization of the novel protein CCDC106 that interacts 
with p53 and promotes its degradation.

Zhou J(1), Qiao X, Xiao L, Sun W, Wang L, Li H, Wu Y, Ding X, Hu X, Zhou C, 
Zhang J.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Protein Chemistry and Developmental Biology of Education 
Ministry of China, College of Life Science, Hunan Normal University, Changsha, 
Hunan, China.

The putative CCDC106 protein was previously identified as a p53-interacting 
partner by automated yeast two-hybrid screening, but its sequence and function 
have not been validated experimentally. Here, we identified three variant 
transcripts of the CCDC106 gene; these transcripts differ in their second exons 
due to the use of different splice acceptor site, but encode an identical 
protein of 280 residues. A bipartite nuclear localisation signal at residues 
151-164 mediates the nuclear localisation of CCDC106. Double immunofluorescence 
staining revealed the colocalisation of endogenous CCDC106 and p53 protein in 
nuclei. The in vivo interaction between CCDC106 and p53 was confirmed by a 
co-immunoprecipitation assay. Furthermore, we demonstrated that CCDC106 promotes 
the degradation of p53 protein and inhibits its transactivity.

Copyright 2010 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2010.02.031
PMID: 20159018 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
