---
pmid: '17097643'
title: The inner nuclear membrane protein Lem2 is critical for normal nuclear envelope
  morphology.
authors:
- Ulbert S
- Antonin W
- Platani M
- Mattaj IW
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2006.10.060
---

# The inner nuclear membrane protein Lem2 is critical for normal nuclear envelope morphology.
**Authors:** Ulbert S, Antonin W, Platani M, Mattaj IW
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2006.10.060](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2006.10.060)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2006 Nov 27;580(27):6435-41. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2006.10.060.
Epub  2006 Nov 3.

The inner nuclear membrane protein Lem2 is critical for normal nuclear envelope 
morphology.

Ulbert S(1), Antonin W, Platani M, Mattaj IW.

Author information:
(1)EMBL, Meyerhofstr. 1, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany.

The inner nuclear membrane (INM) of eukaryotic cells is characterized by a 
unique set of transmembrane proteins which interact with chromatin and/or the 
nuclear lamina. The number of identified INM proteins is steadily increasing, 
mainly as a result of proteomic and computational approaches. However, despite a 
link between mutation of several of these proteins and disease, the function of 
most transmembrane proteins of the INM remains unknown and depletion of many of 
these proteins from a variety of systems did not produce an obvious phenotype in 
the affected cells. Here, we report that depletion of the conserved INM protein 
Lem2 from human cell lines leads to abnormally shaped nuclei and severely 
reduces cell survival. We suggest that interactions of Lem2 with lamins or 
chromatin are critical for maintaining the integrity of the nuclear envelope.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2006.10.060
PMID: 17097643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
