---
pmid: '15466419'
title: Swi5 acts in meiotic DNA joint molecule formation in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
authors:
- Ellermeier C
- Schmidt H
- Smith GR
journal: Genetics
year: '2004'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1448720
doi: 10.1534/genetics.104.034280
---

# Swi5 acts in meiotic DNA joint molecule formation in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
**Authors:** Ellermeier C, Schmidt H, Smith GR
**Journal:** Genetics (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1534/genetics.104.034280](https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.104.034280)
**PMC:** [PMC1448720](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1448720/)

## Abstract

1. Genetics. 2004 Dec;168(4):1891-8. doi: 10.1534/genetics.104.034280. Epub 2004 
Sep 30.

Swi5 acts in meiotic DNA joint molecule formation in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.

Ellermeier C(1), Schmidt H, Smith GR.

Author information:
(1)Fred Hutchinson Research Cancer Center, Seattle, Washington 98109, USA.

Previously isolated Schizosaccharomyces pombe swi5 mutants are defective in 
mitotic mating-type switching and in repair of meiotic recombination-related DNA 
double-strand breaks. Here, we identify the swi5 gene, which encodes an 
85-amino-acid polypeptide, similar to Sae3 of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, with an 
N-terminal predicted coiled-coil domain. A swi5 complete deletion mutant had 
normal mitotic growth rate but was hypersensitive to DNA-damaging agents and 
defective in mating-type switching. In meiosis, recombinant frequencies were 
reduced by a factor of approximately 10. The swi5 deletion strongly reduced the 
viable spore yields of mutants lacking Rhp55 or Rhp57, proteins thought to aid 
joint molecule formation. Furthermore, the swi5 deletion strongly suppressed the 
low viable spore yield of mutants lacking Mus81*Eme1, which resolves joint 
molecules such as Holliday junctions. These and previous results indicate that 
the small Swi5 polypeptide acts in a branched pathway of joint molecule 
formation to repair meiotic DNA breaks.

DOI: 10.1534/genetics.104.034280
PMCID: PMC1448720
PMID: 15466419 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Previously isolated Schizosaccharomyces pombe swi5 mutants are defective in mitotic mating-type switching and in repair of meiotic recombination-related DNA double-strand breaks. Here, we identify the swi5 gene, which encodes an 85-amino-acid polypeptide, similar to Sae3 of Saccharomyces cerevisiae , with an N-terminal predicted coiled-coil domain. A swi5 complete deletion mutant had normal mitotic growth rate but was hypersensitive to DNA-damaging agents and defective in mating-type switching. In meiosis, recombinant frequencies were reduced by a factor of ∼10. The swi5 deletion strongly reduced the viable spore yields of mutants lacking Rhp55 or Rhp57, proteins thought to aid joint molecule formation. Furthermore, the swi5 deletion strongly suppressed the low viable spore yield of mutants lacking Mus81•Eme1, which resolves joint molecules such as Holliday junctions. These and previous results indicate that the small Swi5 polypeptide acts in a branched pathway of joint molecule formation to repair meiotic DNA breaks.

DISCUSSION

Swi5 is a remarkably small protein—85 amino acids—that appears, from the evidence discussed below, to act with other proteins to form joint DNA molecules. This activity is important in the repair of single- and double-strand DNA breaks during both mitotic growth and meiosis.

Swi5 is related to the small Sae3 protein of S. cerevisiae ( Figure 1 ). sae3 mutants were identified among sporulation-deficient mutants that are rescued by a spo11 mutation, a phenotype consistent with Sae3 acting after DNA break formation by Spo11 ( M c K ee and K leckner 1997 ). SAE3 was thought to encode a 50-amino-acid polypeptide from a single exon ( M c K ee and K leckner 1997 ), but further analysis suggests an additional exon and a protein of 91 amino acids (A. S hinohara , personal communication). This longer version has 14 amino acids identical to those of Swi5 scattered throughout the proteins ( Figure 1 ). Physical analyses show that Sae3 and Swi5 are required for the repair of meiotic DNA double-strand breaks ( M c K ee and K leckner 1997 ; Y oung et al. 2004 ) and appear to act in concert with RecA-like strand exchange proteins. S. cerevisiae sae3 mutants have a phenotype indistinguishable from that of dmc1 mutants: both are meiosis specific, accumulate broken DNA hyperresected at the ends, and form less recombinant DNA than wild type does; the sae3 dmc1 double mutant has the same phenotype as the single mutants ( M c K ee and K leckner 1997 ). These results suggest that Sae3 and Dmc1, a meiosis-specific DNA strand-exchange protein ( B ishop et al. 1992 ; S ehorn et al. 2004 ), act in the same step in DNA repair, the formation of joint molecules.

There are differences in the roles of Swi5 and Sae3, however. Although Sae3 is meiosis specific, Swi5 is required during mitotic growth for repair of DNA damage ( S chmidt et al. 1989 ; A kamatsu et al. 2003 ; data not shown) and for mating-type switching ( E gel et al. 1984 ). In addition, although the phenotypes of S. cerevisiae sae3 and dmc1 mutants are indistinguishable, the phenotypes of S. pombe swi5 and dmc1 mutants differ: during meiosis broken DNA accumulates in swi5 mutants but not in dmc1 mutants ( Y oung et al. 2004 ), spore viabilities are lower in swi5 mutants than in dmc1 mutants ( G rishchuk and K ohli 2003 ; Y oung et al. 2004 ; Table 5 ), and intragenic recombinant frequencies are lower in swi5 mutants than in dmc1 mutants ( S chmidt et al. 1987 ; D e V eaux et al. 1992 ; S chmidt 1993 ; F ukushima et al. 2000 ; G rishchuk and K ohli 2003 ; Table 5 ). Thus, S. pombe Swi5 and Dmc1 are not functionally identical, although S. cerevisiae Sae3 and Dmc1 appear to be. Below, we discuss the roles of these and related proteins in meiotic and mitotic DNA break repair.
