---
pmid: '23496207'
title: BSKs are partially redundant positive regulators of brassinosteroid signaling
  in Arabidopsis.
authors:
- Sreeramulu S
- Mostizky Y
- Sunitha S
- Shani E
- Nahum H
- Salomon D
- Hayun LB
- Gruetter C
- Rauh D
- Ori N
- Sessa G
journal: Plant J
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/tpj.12175
---

# BSKs are partially redundant positive regulators of brassinosteroid signaling in Arabidopsis.
**Authors:** Sreeramulu S, Mostizky Y, Sunitha S, Shani E, Nahum H, Salomon D, Hayun LB, Gruetter C, Rauh D, Ori N, Sessa G
**Journal:** Plant J (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/tpj.12175](https://doi.org/10.1111/tpj.12175)

## Abstract

1. Plant J. 2013 Jun;74(6):905-19. doi: 10.1111/tpj.12175. Epub 2013 Apr 15.

BSKs are partially redundant positive regulators of brassinosteroid signaling in 
Arabidopsis.

Sreeramulu S(1), Mostizky Y, Sunitha S, Shani E, Nahum H, Salomon D, Hayun LB, 
Gruetter C, Rauh D, Ori N, Sessa G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Ecology of Plants, Tel-Aviv University, 
Tel-Aviv, 69978, Israel.

Arabidopsis thaliana brassinosteroid signaling kinases (BSKs) constitute a 
receptor-like cytoplasmic kinase sub-family (RLCK-XII) with 12 members. Previous 
analysis demonstrated a positive role for BSK1 and BSK3 in the initial steps of 
brassinosteroid (BR) signal transduction. To investigate the function of BSKs in 
plant growth and BR signaling, we characterized T-DNA insertion lines for eight 
BSK genes (BSK1-BSK8) and multiple mutant combinations. Simultaneous elimination 
of three BSK genes caused alterations in growth and the BR response, and the 
most severe phenotypes were observed in the bsk3,4,7,8 quadruple and 
bsk3,4,6,7,8 pentuple mutants, which displayed reduced rosette size, leaf 
curling and enhanced leaf inclination. In addition, upon treatment with 
24-epibrassinolide, these mutants showed reduced hypocotyl elongation, enhanced 
root growth and alteration in the expression of BR-responsive genes. Some mutant 
combinations also showed antagonistic interactions. In support of a redundant 
function in BR signaling, multiple BSKs interacted in vivo with the BR receptor 
BRI1, and served as its phosphorylation substrates in vitro. The BIN2 and BIL2 
GSK3-like kinases, which are negative regulators of BR signaling, interacted in 
vivo with BSKs and phosphorylated them in vitro, probably at different sites to 
BRI1. This study demonstrates redundant biological functions for BSKs, and 
suggests the existence of a regulatory link between BSKs and GSK3-like kinases.

© 2013 The Authors The Plant Journal © 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/tpj.12175
PMID: 23496207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
