---
pmid: '21297582'
title: A TACC3/ch-TOG/clathrin complex stabilises kinetochore fibres by inter-microtubule
  bridging.
authors:
- Booth DG
- Hood FE
- Prior IA
- Royle SJ
journal: EMBO J
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3049211
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.15
---

# A TACC3/ch-TOG/clathrin complex stabilises kinetochore fibres by inter-microtubule bridging.
**Authors:** Booth DG, Hood FE, Prior IA, Royle SJ
**Journal:** EMBO J (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2011.15](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2011.15)
**PMC:** [PMC3049211](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3049211/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2011 Mar 2;30(5):906-19. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.15. Epub 2011 Feb 4.

A TACC3/ch-TOG/clathrin complex stabilises kinetochore fibres by 
inter-microtubule bridging.

Booth DG(1), Hood FE, Prior IA, Royle SJ.

Author information:
(1)Physiological Laboratory, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.

Kinetochore fibres (K-fibres) of the spindle apparatus move chromosomes during 
mitosis. These fibres are discrete bundles of parallel microtubules (MTs) that 
are crosslinked by inter-MT 'bridges' that are thought to improve fibre 
stability during chromosomal movement. The identity of these bridges is unknown. 
Clathrin is a multimeric protein that has been shown to stabilise K-fibres 
during early mitosis by a mechanism independent of its role in membrane 
trafficking. In this study, we show that clathrin at the mitotic spindle is in a 
transforming acidic colied-coil protein 3 (TACC3)/colonic, hepatic tumour 
overexpressed gene (ch-TOG)/clathrin complex. The complex is anchored to the 
spindle by TACC3 and ch-TOG. Ultrastructural analysis of clathrin-depleted 
K-fibres revealed a selective loss of a population of short inter-MT bridges and 
a general loss of MTs. A similar loss of short inter-MT bridges was observed in 
TACC3-depleted K-fibres. Finally, immunogold labelling confirmed that inter-MT 
bridges in K-fibres contain clathrin. Our results suggest that the 
TACC3/ch-TOG/clathrin complex is an inter-MT bridge that stabilises K-fibres by 
physical crosslinking and by reducing rates of MT catastrophe.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2011.15
PMCID: PMC3049211
PMID: 21297582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
