---
pmid: '28484017'
title: Structural basis for cancer immunotherapy by the first-in-class checkpoint
  inhibitor ipilimumab.
authors:
- Ramagopal UA
- Liu W
- Garrett-Thomson SC
- Bonanno JB
- Yan Q
- Srinivasan M
- Wong SC
- Bell A
- Mankikar S
- Rangan VS
- Deshpande S
- Korman AJ
- Almo SC
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5448203
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1617941114
---

# Structural basis for cancer immunotherapy by the first-in-class checkpoint inhibitor ipilimumab.
**Authors:** Ramagopal UA, Liu W, Garrett-Thomson SC, Bonanno JB, Yan Q, Srinivasan M, Wong SC, Bell A, Mankikar S, Rangan VS, Deshpande S, Korman AJ, Almo SC
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1617941114](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1617941114)
**PMC:** [PMC5448203](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5448203/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017 May 23;114(21):E4223-E4232. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1617941114. Epub 2017 May 8.

Structural basis for cancer immunotherapy by the first-in-class checkpoint 
inhibitor ipilimumab.

Ramagopal UA(1), Liu W(1)(2), Garrett-Thomson SC(1), Bonanno JB(1), Yan Q(2), 
Srinivasan M(3), Wong SC(3), Bell A(3), Mankikar S(3), Rangan VS(3), Deshpande 
S(3), Korman AJ(4), Almo SC(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 
10461.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461.
(3)Biologics Discovery California, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Redwood City, CA 94063.
(4)Biologics Discovery California, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Redwood City, CA 94063 
steve.almo@einstein.yu.edu alan.korman@bms.com.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 
10461; steve.almo@einstein.yu.edu alan.korman@bms.com.

Rational modulation of the immune response with biologics represents one of the 
most promising and active areas for the realization of new therapeutic 
strategies. In particular, the use of function blocking monoclonal antibodies 
targeting checkpoint inhibitors such as CTLA-4 and PD-1 have proven to be highly 
effective for the systemic activation of the human immune system to treat a wide 
range of cancers. Ipilimumab is a fully human antibody targeting CTLA-4 that 
received FDA approval for the treatment of metastatic melanoma in 2011. 
Ipilimumab is the first-in-class immunotherapeutic for blockade of CTLA-4 and 
significantly benefits overall survival of patients with metastatic melanoma. 
Understanding the chemical and physical determinants recognized by these mAbs 
provides direct insight into the mechanisms of pathway blockade, the 
organization of the antigen-antibody complexes at the cell surface, and 
opportunities to further engineer affinity and selectivity. Here, we report the 
3.0 Å resolution X-ray crystal structure of the complex formed by ipilimumab 
with its human CTLA-4 target. This structure reveals that ipilimumab contacts 
the front β-sheet of CTLA-4 and intersects with the CTLA-4:Β7 recognition 
surface, indicating that direct steric overlap between ipilimumab and the B7 
ligands is a major mechanistic contributor to ipilimumab function. The 
crystallographically observed binding interface was confirmed by a comprehensive 
cell-based binding assay against a library of CTLA-4 mutants and by direct 
biochemical approaches. This structure also highlights determinants responsible 
for the selectivity exhibited by ipilimumab toward CTLA-4 relative to the 
homologous and functionally related CD28.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1617941114
PMCID: PMC5448203
PMID: 28484017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: S.C.A., 
S.C.G.-T., U.A.R., W.L., and Q.Y. declare no competing financial interests. A.B. 
is a former employee of Bristol–Myers & Squibb. A.J.K., M.S., S.C.W., S.M., 
V.S.R., and S.D. are employees and stockholders of Bristol–Myers & Squibb.
