---
pmid: '23042607'
title: DVC1 (C1orf124) recruits the p97 protein segregase to sites of DNA damage.
authors:
- Davis EJ
- Lachaud C
- Appleton P
- Macartney TJ
- Näthke I
- Rouse J
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2394
---

# DVC1 (C1orf124) recruits the p97 protein segregase to sites of DNA damage.
**Authors:** Davis EJ, Lachaud C, Appleton P, Macartney TJ, Näthke I, Rouse J
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nsmb.2394](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb.2394)

## Abstract

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2012 Nov;19(11):1093-100. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2394. Epub
2012  Oct 7.

DVC1 (C1orf124) recruits the p97 protein segregase to sites of DNA damage.

Davis EJ(1), Lachaud C, Appleton P, Macartney TJ, Näthke I, Rouse J.

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council Protein Phosphorylation Unit, Sir James Black 
Centre, University of Dundee, Dundee, Scotland, UK.

Ubiquitin-binding domains (UBDs) are crucial for recruiting many proteins to 
sites of DNA damage. Here we characterize C1orf124 (Spartan; referred to as 
DVC1), which has an UBZ4-type UBD found predominantly in DNA repair proteins. 
DVC1 associates with DNA replication factories and localizes to sites of DNA 
damage in human cells, in a manner that requires the ability of the DVC1 UBZ 
domain to bind to ubiquitin polymers in vitro and a conserved PCNA-interacting 
motif. DVC1 interacts with the p97 protein 'segregase'. We show that DVC1 
recruits p97 to sites of DNA damage, where we propose that p97 facilitates the 
extraction of the translesion synthesis (TLS) polymerase (Pol) η during DNA 
repair to prevent excessive TLS and limit the incidence of mutations induced by 
DNA damage. We introduce DVC1 as a regulator of cellular responses to DNA damage 
that prevents mutations when DNA damage occurs.

DOI: 10.1038/nsmb.2394
PMID: 23042607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
