---
pmid: '12242300'
title: Calreticulin interacts with C/EBPalpha and C/EBPbeta mRNAs and represses translation
  of C/EBP proteins.
authors:
- Timchenko LT
- Iakova P
- Welm AL
- Cai ZJ
- Timchenko NA
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC139801
doi: 10.1128/MCB.22.20.7242-7257.2002
---

# Calreticulin interacts with C/EBPalpha and C/EBPbeta mRNAs and represses translation of C/EBP proteins.
**Authors:** Timchenko LT, Iakova P, Welm AL, Cai ZJ, Timchenko NA
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.22.20.7242-7257.2002](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.22.20.7242-7257.2002)
**PMC:** [PMC139801](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC139801/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Oct;22(20):7242-57. doi: 10.1128/MCB.22.20.7242-7257.2002.

Calreticulin interacts with C/EBPalpha and C/EBPbeta mRNAs and represses 
translation of C/EBP proteins.

Timchenko LT(1), Iakova P, Welm AL, Cai ZJ, Timchenko NA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Huffington Center on Aging. Departments of 
Medicine and Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas 77030,USA.

We previously identified an RNA binding protein, CUGBP1, which binds to GCN 
repeats located within the 5' region of C/EBPbeta mRNAs and regulates 
translation of C/EBPbeta isoforms. To further investigate the role of RNA 
binding proteins in the posttranscriptional control of C/EBP proteins, we 
purified additional RNA binding proteins that interact with GC-rich RNAs and 
that may regulate RNA processing. In HeLa cells, the majority of GC-rich RNA 
binding proteins are associated with endogenous RNA transcripts. The separation 
of these proteins from endogenous RNA identified several proteins in addition to 
CUGBP1 that specifically interact with the GC-rich 5' region of C/EBPbeta mRNA. 
One of these proteins was purified to homogeneity and was identified as 
calreticulin (CRT). CRT is a multifunctional protein involved in several 
biological processes, including interaction with and regulation of rubella virus 
RNA processing. Our data demonstrate that both CUGBP1 and CRT interact with GCU 
repeats within myotonin protein kinase and with GCN repeats within C/EBPalpha 
and C/EBPbeta mRNAs. GCN repeats within these mRNAs form stable SL structures. 
The interaction of CRT with SL structures of C/EBPbeta and C/EBPalpha mRNAs 
leads to inhibition of translation of C/EBP proteins in vitro and in vivo. 
Deletions or mutations abolishing the formation of SL structures within 
C/EBPalpha and C/EBPbeta mRNAs lead to a failure of CRT to inhibit translation 
of C/EBP proteins. CRT-dependent inhibition of C/EBPalpha is sufficient to block 
the growth-inhibitory activity of C/EBPalpha. This finding further defines the 
molecular mechanism for posttranscriptional regulation of the C/EBPalpha and 
C/EBPbeta proteins.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.22.20.7242-7257.2002
PMCID: PMC139801
PMID: 12242300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

We previously identified an RNA binding protein, CUGBP1, which binds to GCN repeats located within the 5′ region of C/EBPβ mRNAs and regulates translation of C/EBPβ isoforms. To further investigate the role of RNA binding proteins in the posttranscriptional control of C/EBP proteins, we purified additional RNA binding proteins that interact with GC-rich RNAs and that may regulate RNA processing. In HeLa cells, the majority of GC-rich RNA binding proteins are associated with endogenous RNA transcripts. The separation of these proteins from endogenous RNA identified several proteins in addition to CUGBP1 that specifically interact with the GC-rich 5′ region of C/EBPβ mRNA. One of these proteins was purified to homogeneity and was identified as calreticulin (CRT). CRT is a multifunctional protein involved in several biological processes, including interaction with and regulation of rubella virus RNA processing. Our data demonstrate that both CUGBP1 and CRT interact with GCU repeats within myotonin protein kinase and with GCN repeats within C/EBPα and C/EBPβ mRNAs. GCN repeats within these mRNAs form stable SL structures. The interaction of CRT with SL structures of C/EBPβ and C/EBPα mRNAs leads to inhibition of translation of C/EBP proteins in vitro and in vivo. Deletions or mutations abolishing the formation of SL structures within C/EBPα and C/EBPβ mRNAs lead to a failure of CRT to inhibit translation of C/EBP proteins. CRT-dependent inhibition of C/EBPα is sufficient to block the growth-inhibitory activity of C/EBPα. This finding further defines the molecular mechanism for posttranscriptional regulation of the C/EBPα and C/EBPβ proteins.

DISCUSSION

C/EBPα and C/EBPβ are involved in the regulation of a variety of biological processes, such as cell growth and differentiation and the acute-phase response ( 9 , 13 , 23 , 34 ). Although the transcriptional control of C/EBPα and C/EBPβ expression is an important level of regulation, a number of recent observations revealed several additional pathways by which expression of these proteins is controlled. Given the GC-rich content of both the C/EBPα and C/EBPβ mRNAs, we performed purification and analysis of RNA binding proteins that preferentially bind to GC-rich sequences within these mRNAs and potentially regulate translation of C/EBP proteins. It was previously found that CUGBP1 binds to the 5′ region of C/EBPβ mRNA and that there are several additional RNA binding proteins interacting with C/EBPβ mRNA ( 33 , 36 ). HPLC-based size exclusion chromatography of HeLa proteins showed that the majority of these GC-rich RNA binding proteins are observed in high-molecular-mass fractions containing endogenous RNA transcripts. Although putative protein-protein interactions of RNA binding proteins may also contribute to their presence in high-molecular-mass fractions, the digestion of endogenous transcripts with RNase A shifts a significant portion of these proteins to low-molecular-mass fractions and demonstrates that GCN binding proteins, including CUGBP1, are associated with endogenous RNA.

Further experiments showed that the activities of the majority of RNA binding proteins that interact with GC-rich sequences are very weak or not detectable within total protein extracts, while they are readily detectable after separation from endogenous RNA by ion-exchange chromatography. Experiments with RNA-free CUGBP1 showed that binding of CUGBP1 to RNA transcripts increases proportionally with the number of GCU repeats. Another family of GCU RNA binding proteins, EXP, was recently identified ( 18 ). Based on its preferential binding to long GCU repeats, EXP42 was suggested to be affected in DM1 patients by virtue of its association with GCU repeats, which are expanded within DMPK mRNA ( 18 ). Surprisingly, in our studies under several conditions, we were not able to detect interaction of EXP42 with RNA transcripts containing long or short GCU repeats in either total HeLa extracts or RNA-free DEAE fractions. The lack of interaction of EXP42 with GCU repeats is not due to loss of total activity in the DEAE fractions, because CUGBP1 from the same fractions interacts with RNA proportionally to the number of GCU repeats.

The RNA binding activities of two additional proteins, p60 and p150, were not detectable within total protein extracts but were identified after separation from endogenous RNA by ion-exchange chromatography (Fig. 3B ). Further purification and sequence analysis identified p60 as CRT. Although the majority of CRT is located in the endoplasmic reticulum, where it performs chaperone functions and regulates Ca + homeostasis ( 16 ), CRT is also detected in the cytoplasm, where it interacts with rubella virus RNA and controls its processing ( 3 , 7 , 8 , 27 ). Detailed analysis of the interaction of CRT with wild-type and mutant rubella virus RNA revealed that CRT recognizes an SL structure containing a GC-rich sequence within the stem ( 24 , 27 ). The finding that CRT interacts with GC-rich putative SL sequences of C/EBPα and C/EBPβ mRNAs prompted us to examine the result of this interaction. In vitro experiments revealed that binding of CRT to C/EBPα and C/EBPβ mRNAs inhibits translation of these proteins. We also observed CRT-dependent inhibition of C/EBPα and C/EBPβ translation when CRT was overexpressed in cultured cells. This inhibition is abolished if the CRT binding sites (GC-rich sequences) are mutated or deleted. The failure of CRT to affect the mutant RNAs suggests that the CRT-dependent inhibition of translation occurs via direct interaction with RNAs rather than through an interaction with protein components of translation machinery. Although CRT interacts in vitro with the 5′ region and with the internal stem of C/EBPα mRNA, we reproducibly observed that both GST-CRT purified from bacteria and p60/CRT isolated from liver cells preferentially bind to the internal SL structure of C/EBPα mRNA. In agreement with the preferential binding to the internal SL structure, the deletion of the internal SL abolishes the CRT-dependent repression of C/EBPα, while the C/EBPα mRNA lacking the 5′SL structure is still inhibited by CRT. Our data with HT1 cells demonstrate that when CRT is overexpressed, it is able to block the ability of C/EBPα to inhibit cell proliferation (Fig. 9 ). Perrotti et al. have recently shown the role of RNA binding proteins in the regulation of translation of C/EBPα mRNA ( 21 ). Similar to our results with CRT, the authors show that another RNA binding protein, poly(rC)-binding protein hnRNP E2, interacts with C/EBPα mRNA through a different binding site in the 5′ end and inhibits translation of the C/EBPα protein. This inhibition blocks C/EBPα-dependent regulation of downstream targets and leads to the development of leukemia ( 21 ).

In conclusion, we have discovered that CRT interacts with the GC-rich regions of the C/EBPα and C/EBPβ mRNAs and inhibits translation of full-length C/EBP proteins. Although CRT is known to bind and regulate translation of rubella virus RNA, our data identify the first endogenous mRNAs to which CRT binds to regulate translation. Interestingly, deletion of the CRT gene in mice leads to embryonic lethality ( 15 ), while overexpression of CRT leads to complete heart block and death ( 19 ). Since both C/EBPα and C/EBPβ are involved in cell growth and differentiation, our data suggest that the novel role of CRT in the posttranscriptional processing of certain GC-rich mRNAs may be involved in these processes via regulation of C/EBP protein expression.
