---
pmid: '9560217'
title: Bax directly induces release of cytochrome c from isolated mitochondria.
authors:
- Jürgensmeier JM
- Xie Z
- Deveraux Q
- Ellerby L
- Bredesen D
- Reed JC
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC20202
doi: 10.1073/pnas.95.9.4997
---

# Bax directly induces release of cytochrome c from isolated mitochondria.
**Authors:** Jürgensmeier JM, Xie Z, Deveraux Q, Ellerby L, Bredesen D, Reed JC
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.95.9.4997](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.95.9.4997)
**PMC:** [PMC20202](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC20202/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Apr 28;95(9):4997-5002. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.95.9.4997.

Bax directly induces release of cytochrome c from isolated mitochondria.

Jürgensmeier JM(1), Xie Z, Deveraux Q, Ellerby L, Bredesen D, Reed JC.

Author information:
(1)Program on Apoptosis and Cell Death Research, The Burnham Institute, 10901 
North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Bax is a pro-apoptotic member of the Bcl-2 protein family that resides in the 
outer mitochondrial membrane. It is controversial whether Bax promotes cell 
death directly through its putative function as a channel protein versus 
indirectly by inhibiting cellular regulators of the cell death proteases 
(caspases). We show here that addition of submicromolar amounts of recombinant 
Bax protein to isolated mitochondria can induce cytochrome c (Cyt c) release, 
whereas a peptide representing the Bax BH3 domain was inactive. When placed into 
purified cytosol, neither mitochondria nor Bax individually induced proteolytic 
processing and activation of caspases. In contrast, the combination of Bax and 
mitochondria triggered release of Cyt c from mitochondria and induced caspase 
activation in cytosols. Supernatants from Bax-treated mitochondria also induced 
caspase processing and activation. Recombinant Bcl-XL protein abrogated 
Bax-induced release of Cyt c from isolated mitochondria and prevented caspase 
activation. In contrast, the broad-specificity caspase inhibitor 
benzyloxycarbonyl-valinyl-alaninyl-aspartyl-(0-methyl)- fluoromethylketone 
(zVAD-fmk) and the caspase-inhibiting protein X-IAP had no effect on Bax-induced 
release of Cyt c from mitochondria in vitro but prevented the subsequent 
activation of caspases in cytosolic extracts. Unlike Ca2+, a classical inducer 
of mitochondrial permeability transition, Bax did not induce swelling of 
mitochondria in vitro. Because the organellar swelling caused by permeability 
transition causes outer membrane rupture, the findings, therefore, dissociate 
these two events, implying that Bax uses an alternative mechanism for triggering 
release of Cyt c from mitochondria.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.95.9.4997
PMCID: PMC20202
PMID: 9560217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
