---
pmid: '31862704'
title: Deletion in the Cobalamin Synthetase W Domain-Containing Protein 1 Gene Is
  associated with Congenital Anomalies of the Kidney and Urinary Tract.
authors:
- Kanda S
- Ohmuraya M
- Akagawa H
- Horita S
- Yoshida Y
- Kaneko N
- Sugawara N
- Ishizuka K
- Miura K
- Harita Y
- Yamamoto T
- Oka A
- Araki K
- Furukawa T
- Hattori M
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6934996
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2019040398
---

# Deletion in the Cobalamin Synthetase W Domain-Containing Protein 1 Gene Is associated with Congenital Anomalies of the Kidney and Urinary Tract.
**Authors:** Kanda S, Ohmuraya M, Akagawa H, Horita S, Yoshida Y, Kaneko N, Sugawara N, Ishizuka K, Miura K, Harita Y, Yamamoto T, Oka A, Araki K, Furukawa T, Hattori M
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.2019040398](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2019040398)
**PMC:** [PMC6934996](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6934996/)

## Abstract

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2020 Jan;31(1):139-147. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2019040398. Epub
2019  Dec 20.

Deletion in the Cobalamin Synthetase W Domain-Containing Protein 1 Gene Is 
associated with Congenital Anomalies of the Kidney and Urinary Tract.

Kanda S(1)(2), Ohmuraya M(3), Akagawa H(4), Horita S(5), Yoshida Y(6), Kaneko 
N(2), Sugawara N(2), Ishizuka K(2), Miura K(2), Harita Y(6), Yamamoto T(4)(7), 
Oka A(6), Araki K(8), Furukawa T(4)(9), Hattori M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan; 
skanda-tky@umin.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Pediatric Nephrology.
(3)Department of Genetics, Hyogo College of Medicine, Hyogo, Japan.
(4)Tokyo Women's Medical University Institute for Integrated Medical Sciences, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Pathology, Kidney Center, School of Medicine, and.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Institute of Medical Genetics, Tokyo Women's Medical University, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(8)Division of Developmental Genetics, Institute of Resource Development and 
Analysis, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan; and.
(9)Department of Investigative Pathology, Tohoku University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Sendai, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Researchers have identified about 40 genes with mutations that 
result in the most common cause of CKD in children, congenital anomalies of the 
kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT), but approximately 85% of patients with CAKUT 
lack mutations in these genes. The anomalies that comprise CAKUT are clinically 
heterogenous, and thought to be caused by disturbances at different points in 
kidney development. However, identification of novel CAKUT-causing genes remains 
difficult because of their variable expressivity, incomplete penetrance, and 
heterogeneity.
METHODS: We investigated two generations of a family that included two siblings 
with CAKUT. Although the parents and another child were healthy, the two 
affected siblings presented the same manifestations, unilateral renal agenesis 
and contralateral renal hypoplasia. To search for a novel causative gene of 
CAKUT, we performed whole-exome and whole-genome sequencing of DNA from the 
family members. We also generated two lines of genetically modified mice with a 
gene deletion present only in the affected siblings, and performed 
immunohistochemical and phenotypic analyses of these mice.
RESULTS: We found that the affected siblings, but not healthy family members, 
had a homozygous deletion in the Cobalamin Synthetase W Domain-Containing 
Protein 1 (CBWD1) gene. Whole-genome sequencing uncovered genomic breakpoints, 
which involved exon 1 of CBWD1, harboring the initiating codon. 
Immunohistochemical analysis revealed high expression of Cbwd1 in the nuclei of 
the ureteric bud cells in the developing kidneys. Cbwd1-deficient mice showed 
CAKUT phenotypes, including hydronephrosis, hydroureters, and duplicated 
ureters.
CONCLUSIONS: The identification of a deletion in CBWD1 gene in two siblings with 
CAKUT implies a role for CBWD1 in the etiology of some cases of CAKUT.

Copyright © 2020 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2019040398
PMCID: PMC6934996
PMID: 31862704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
