---
pmid: '17267293'
title: Methylation of histone H3 lysine-79 by Dot1p plays multiple roles in the response
  to UV damage in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
authors:
- Bostelman LJ
- Keller AM
- Albrecht AM
- Arat A
- Thompson JS
journal: DNA Repair (Amst)
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2006.12.010
---

# Methylation of histone H3 lysine-79 by Dot1p plays multiple roles in the response to UV damage in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Bostelman LJ, Keller AM, Albrecht AM, Arat A, Thompson JS
**Journal:** DNA Repair (Amst) (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.dnarep.2006.12.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dnarep.2006.12.010)

## Abstract

1. DNA Repair (Amst). 2007 Mar 1;6(3):383-95. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2006.12.010. 
Epub 2007 Jan 30.

Methylation of histone H3 lysine-79 by Dot1p plays multiple roles in the 
response to UV damage in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Bostelman LJ(1), Keller AM, Albrecht AM, Arat A, Thompson JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Denison University, 213 Talbot Hall, Granville, Ohio 
43023, USA.

Various proteins have been found to play roles in both the repair of UV damaged 
DNA and heterochromatin-mediated silencing in the yeast Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae. In particular, factors that are involved in the methylation of 
lysine-79 of histone H3 by Dot1p have been implicated in both processes, 
suggesting a bipartite function for this modification. We find that a dot1 null 
mutation and a histone H3 point mutation at lysine-79 cause increased 
sensitivity to UV radiation, suggesting that lysine-79 methylation is important 
for efficient repair of UV damage. Epistasis analysis between dot1 and various 
UV repair genes indicates that lysine-79 methylation plays overlapping roles 
within the nucleotide excision, post-replication and recombination repair 
pathways, as well as RAD9-mediated checkpoint function. In contrast, epistasis 
analysis with the H3 lysine-79 point mutation indicates that the 
lysine-to-glutamic acid substitution exerts specific effects within the 
nucleotide excision repair and post-replication repair pathways, suggesting that 
this allele only disrupts a subset of the functions of lysine-79 methylation. 
The overall results indicate the existence of distinct and separable roles of 
histone H3 lysine-79 methylation in the response to UV damage, potentially 
serving to coordinate the various repair processes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2006.12.010
PMID: 17267293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
