---
pmid: '16251355'
title: The thioredoxin system protects ribosomes against stress-induced aggregation.
authors:
- Rand JD
- Grant CM
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1345676
doi: 10.1091/mbc.e05-06-0520
---

# The thioredoxin system protects ribosomes against stress-induced aggregation.
**Authors:** Rand JD, Grant CM
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.e05-06-0520](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.e05-06-0520)
**PMC:** [PMC1345676](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1345676/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Cell. 2006 Jan;17(1):387-401. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e05-06-0520. Epub 2005
 Oct 26.

The thioredoxin system protects ribosomes against stress-induced aggregation.

Rand JD(1), Grant CM.

Author information:
(1)The University of Manchester, Faculty of Life Sciences, Manchester M13 9PT, 
United Kingdom.

We previously showed that thioredoxins are required for dithiothreitol (DTT) 
tolerance, suggesting they maintain redox homeostasis in response to both 
oxidative and reductive stress conditions. In this present study, we screened 
the complete set of viable deletion strains in Saccharomyces cerevisiae for 
sensitivity to DTT to identify cell functions involved in resistance to 
reductive stress. We identified 195 mutants, whose gene products are localized 
throughout the cell. DTT-sensitive mutants were distributed among most major 
biological processes, but they particularly affected gene expression, 
metabolism, and the secretory pathway. Strikingly, a mutant lacking TSA1, 
encoding a peroxiredoxin, showed a similar sensitivity to DTT as a thioredoxin 
mutant. Epistasis analysis indicated that thioredoxins function upstream of Tsa1 
in providing tolerance to DTT. Our data show that the chaperone function of 
Tsa1, rather than its peroxidase function, is required for this activity. Cells 
lacking TSA1 were found to accumulate aggregated proteins, and this was 
exacerbated by exposure to DTT. Analysis of the protein aggregates revealed that 
they are predominantly composed of ribosomal proteins. Furthermore, aggregation 
was found to correlate with an inhibition of translation initiation. We propose 
that Tsa1 normally functions to chaperone misassembled ribosomal proteins, 
preventing the toxicity that arises from their aggregation.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e05-06-0520
PMCID: PMC1345676
PMID: 16251355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
