---
pmid: '15292193'
title: Identification of nine sucrose nonfermenting 1-related protein kinases 2 activated
  by hyperosmotic and saline stresses in Arabidopsis thaliana.
authors:
- Boudsocq M
- Barbier-Brygoo H
- Laurière C
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M405259200
---

# Identification of nine sucrose nonfermenting 1-related protein kinases 2 activated by hyperosmotic and saline stresses in Arabidopsis thaliana.
**Authors:** Boudsocq M, Barbier-Brygoo H, Laurière C
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M405259200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M405259200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Oct 1;279(40):41758-66. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M405259200. Epub
2004  Jul 29.

Identification of nine sucrose nonfermenting 1-related protein kinases 2 
activated by hyperosmotic and saline stresses in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Boudsocq M(1), Barbier-Brygoo H, Laurière C.

Author information:
(1)Institut des Sciences du Végétal, UPR 2355, CNRS, 1 Ave de la Terrasse, 91198 
Gif/Yvette Cedex, France.

Several calcium-independent protein kinases were activated by hyperosmotic and 
saline stresses in Arabidopsis cell suspension. Similar activation profiles were 
also observed in seedlings exposed to hyperosmotic stress. One of them was 
identified to AtMPK6 but the others remained to be identified. They were assumed 
to belong to the SNF1 (sucrose nonfermenting 1)-related protein kinase 2 (SnRK2) 
family, which constitutes a plant-specific kinase group. The 10 Arabidopsis 
SnRK2 were expressed both in cells and seedlings, making the whole SnRK2 family 
a suitable candidate. Using a family-specific antibody raised against the 10 
SnRK2, we demonstrated that these non-MAPK protein kinases activated by 
hyperosmolarity in cell suspension were SnRK2 proteins. Then, the molecular 
identification of the involved SnRK2 was investigated by transient expression 
assays. Nine of the 10 SnRK2 were activated by hyperosmolarity induced by 
mannitol, as well as NaCl, indicating an important role of the SnRK2 family in 
osmotic signaling. In contrast, none of the SnRK2 were activated by cold 
treatment, whereas abscisic acid only activated five of the nine SnRK2. The 
probable involvement of the different Arabidopsis SnRK2 in several abiotic 
transduction pathways is discussed.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M405259200
PMID: 15292193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
