---
pmid: '12777757'
title: High-resolution structure of human phosphoserine phosphatase in open conformation.
authors:
- Peeraer Y
- Rabijns A
- Verboven C
- Collet JF
- Van Schaftingen E
- De Ranter C
journal: Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1107/s0907444903005407
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# High-resolution structure of human phosphoserine phosphatase in open conformation.
**Authors:** Peeraer Y, Rabijns A, Verboven C, Collet JF, Van Schaftingen E, De Ranter C
**Journal:** Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1107/s0907444903005407](https://doi.org/10.1107/s0907444903005407)

## Abstract

1. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2003 Jun;59(Pt 6):971-7. doi: 
10.1107/s0907444903005407. Epub 2003 May 23.

High-resolution structure of human phosphoserine phosphatase in open 
conformation.

Peeraer Y(1), Rabijns A, Verboven C, Collet JF, Van Schaftingen E, De Ranter C.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Analytical Chemistry and Medicinal Physicochemistry, Faculty 
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, K.U. Leuven, E. Van Evenstraat 4, B-3000 Leuven, 
Belgium.

The crystal structure of human phosphoserine phosphatase (HPSP) in the open 
conformation has been determined at a resolution of 1.53 A. The crystals are 
orthorhombic, belonging to space group C222(1), with unit-cell parameters a = 
49.03, b = 130.25, c = 157.29 A. The asymmetric unit contains two molecules. 
Phase information was derived from a multiwavelength anomalous dispersion (MAD) 
experiment conducted at three wavelengths using a selenomethionine-derivative 
crystal of HPSP. The structure was refined using CNS to a final crystallographic 
R value of 21.6% (R(free) = 23.4%). HPSP is a dimeric enzyme responsible for the 
third and final step of the l-serine biosynthesis pathway. It catalyses the 
Mg2+-dependent hydrolysis of l-phosphoserine. Recently, the structure of HPSP in 
complex with an inhibitor bound to the active site has been reported to be the 
open conformation of the enzyme. Here, the structure of HPSP is reported in the 
absence of substrate in the active site. Evidence is presented that HPSP in an 
uncomplexed form is in an even more open conformation than in the inhibitor 
complex. In this state, the enzyme is partially unfolded to allow the substrate 
to enter the active site. Binding of the substrate causes HPSP to shift to the 
closed conformation by stabilizing the partially unfolded region. In the present 
structure a Ca2+ ion is bound to the active site and an explanation is given why 
HPSP is not active when in the active site Mg2+ is replaced by a Ca2+ ion.

DOI: 10.1107/s0907444903005407
PMID: 12777757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
