---
pmid: '1322908'
title: Molecular cloning of human macrophage capping protein cDNA. A unique member
  of the gelsolin/villin family expressed primarily in macrophages.
authors:
- Dabiri GA
- Young CL
- Rosenbloom J
- Southwick FS
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1992'
full_text_available: false
---

# Molecular cloning of human macrophage capping protein cDNA. A unique member of the gelsolin/villin family expressed primarily in macrophages.
**Authors:** Dabiri GA, Young CL, Rosenbloom J, Southwick FS
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1992)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1992 Aug 15;267(23):16545-52.

Molecular cloning of human macrophage capping protein cDNA. A unique member of 
the gelsolin/villin family expressed primarily in macrophages.

Dabiri GA(1), Young CL, Rosenbloom J, Southwick FS.

Author information:
(1)Graduate Group in Cell Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.

Macrophage capping protein (MCP) is a Ca(2+)-sensitive protein which reversibly 
blocks the barbed ends of actin filaments but does not sever preformed actin 
filaments. The human cDNA for MCP has been cloned and sequenced. The derived 
amino acid sequence predicts a polypeptide of 38.4 kDa. Human MCP expressed in 
Escherichia coli using a pET12a vector was functionally identical to the native 
protein purified from rabbit alveolar macrophages with respect to Ca2+ 
sensitivity and ability to block monomer exchange at the barbed end of actin 
filaments. Sequence comparison with other actin-binding protein sequences 
indicates that MCP is a member of the gelsolin/villin family of barbed end 
blocking proteins. Unlike gelsolin, this protein has a limited tissue 
distribution being detected primarily in macrophages where it was abundant, 
representing 0.9-1% of the total cytoplasmic protein. Northern blot analysis of 
U937 and HL60 cells differentiated to macrophage-like cells demonstrated that 
MCP message increases to 2.6 and greater than 7 times initial levels, 
respectively. Human MCP displays a 93% amino acid sequence identity with two 
recently described mouse proteins, gCap39 and Mbh1. Its abundance in macrophages 
and the corresponding increases in mRNA levels upon promyelocyte and monocyte 
development into macrophages indicate that MCP may play an important role in 
macrophage function.

PMID: 1322908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
