---
pmid: '30948508'
title: Dephosphorylation of the transcriptional cofactor NACA by the PP1A phosphatase
  enhances cJUN transcriptional activity and osteoblast differentiation.
authors:
- Addison WN
- Pellicelli M
- St-Arnaud R
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6527172
doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.006920
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Dephosphorylation of the transcriptional cofactor NACA by the PP1A phosphatase enhances cJUN transcriptional activity and osteoblast differentiation.
**Authors:** Addison WN, Pellicelli M, St-Arnaud R
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.RA118.006920](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA118.006920)
**PMC:** [PMC6527172](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6527172/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2019 May 17;294(20):8184-8196. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.006920.
Epub  2019 Apr 4.

Dephosphorylation of the transcriptional cofactor NACA by the PP1A phosphatase 
enhances cJUN transcriptional activity and osteoblast differentiation.

Addison WN(1), Pellicelli M(1), St-Arnaud R(2).

Author information:
(1)Shriners Hospitals for Children-Canada, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(2)Shriners Hospitals for Children-Canada, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Department 
of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Department of 
Surgery, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Department of Medicine, 
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Research Institute of the McGill 
University Health Centre, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. 
Electronic address: rst-arnaud@shriners.mcgill.ca.

The transcriptional cofactor nascent polypeptide-associated complex and 
co-regulator α (NACA) regulates osteoblast maturation and activity. NACA 
functions, at least in part, by binding to Jun proto-oncogene, AP-1 
transcription factor subunit (cJUN) and potentiating the transactivation of AP-1 
targets such as osteocalcin (Bglap) and matrix metallopeptidase 9 (Mmp9). NACA 
activity is modulated by phosphorylation carried out by several kinases, but a 
phosphatase regulating NACA's activity remains to be identified. Here, we used 
affinity purification with MS in HEK293T cells to isolate NACA complexes and 
identified protein phosphatase 1 catalytic subunit α (PP1A) as a NACA-associated 
Ser/Thr phosphatase. NACA interacted with multiple components of the PP1A 
holoenzyme complex: the PPP1CA catalytic subunit and the regulatory subunits 
PPP1R9B, PPP1R12A and PPP1R18. MS analysis revealed that NACA co-expression with 
PPP1CA causes dephosphorylation of NACA at Thr-89, Ser-151, and Thr-174. NACA 
Ser/Thr-to-alanine variants displayed increased nuclear localization, and NACA 
dephosphorylation was associated with specific recruitment of novel NACA 
interactants, such as basic transcription factor 3 (BTF3) and its homolog 
BTF3L4. NACA and PP1A cooperatively potentiated cJUN transcriptional activity of 
the AP-1-responsive MMP9-luciferase reporter, which was abolished when Thr-89, 
Ser-151, or Thr-174 were substituted with phosphomimetic aspartate residues. We 
confirmed the NACA-PP1A interaction in MC3T3-E1 osteoblastic cells and observed 
that NACA phosphorylation status at PP1A-sensitive sites is important for the 
regulation of AP-1 pathway genes and for osteogenic differentiation and matrix 
mineralization. These results suggest that PP1A dephosphorylates NACA at 
specific residues, impacting cJUN transcriptional activity and osteoblast 
differentiation and function.

© 2019 Addison et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.006920
PMCID: PMC6527172
PMID: 30948508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article
