---
pmid: '11331580'
title: The tripartite motif family identifies cell compartments.
authors:
- Reymond A
- Meroni G
- Fantozzi A
- Merla G
- Cairo S
- Luzi L
- Riganelli D
- Zanaria E
- Messali S
- Cainarca S
- Guffanti A
- Minucci S
- Pelicci PG
- Ballabio A
journal: EMBO J
year: '2001'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC125245
doi: 10.1093/emboj/20.9.2140
---

# The tripartite motif family identifies cell compartments.
**Authors:** Reymond A, Meroni G, Fantozzi A, Merla G, Cairo S, Luzi L, Riganelli D, Zanaria E, Messali S, Cainarca S, Guffanti A, Minucci S, Pelicci PG, Ballabio A
**Journal:** EMBO J (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/20.9.2140](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/20.9.2140)
**PMC:** [PMC125245](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC125245/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2001 May 1;20(9):2140-51. doi: 10.1093/emboj/20.9.2140.

The tripartite motif family identifies cell compartments.

Reymond A(1), Meroni G, Fantozzi A, Merla G, Cairo S, Luzi L, Riganelli D, 
Zanaria E, Messali S, Cainarca S, Guffanti A, Minucci S, Pelicci PG, Ballabio A.

Author information:
(1)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), San Raffaele Biomedical 
Science Park, Milan, Italy.

A functional genomic approach, based on systematic data gathering, was used to 
characterize a family of proteins containing a tripartite motif (TRIM). A total 
of 37 TRIM genes/proteins were studied, 21 of which were novel. The results 
demonstrate that TRIM proteins share a common function: by means of 
homo-multimerization they identify specific cell compartments.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/20.9.2140
PMCID: PMC125245
PMID: 11331580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

A functional genomic approach, based on systematic data gathering, was used to characterize a family of proteins containing a tri partite m otif (TRIM). A total of 37 TRIM genes/proteins were studied, 21 of which were novel. The results demonstrate that TRIM proteins share a common function: by means of homo-multimerization they identify specific cell compartments.

Introduction

The complete or partial sequence information on the genomes of several organisms is now available ( Goffeau et al ., 1996 ; Blattner et al ., 1997 ; The C. elegans Sequencing Consortium, 1998 ; Dunham et al ., 1999 ; Adams et al ., 2000 ; The Chromosome 21 Mapping and Sequencing Consortium, 2000 ). This information allows the study of molecular mechanisms at the level of large numbers of genes, thus modifying the way biological questions are addressed. Large-scale surveys of protein contents, protein subcellular localization and of potential interacting partners have, indeed, provided relevant functional information ( Shevchenko et al ., 1996 ; Martzen et al ., 1999 ; Ross-Macdonald et al ., 1999 ; Brent, 2000 ; Uetz et al ., 2000 ; Walhout et al ., 2000 ). Such systematic data gathering on a protein family may provide further information towards the assignment of function to homologous protein sequences.

We tested this postulate on the emerging tri partite m otif (TRIM) protein family (also known as the RBCC family) ( Reddy et al ., 1992 ; Borden, 1998 ). The TRIM is composed of three zinc-binding domains, a RING (R), a B-box type 1 (B1) and a B-box type 2 (B2), followed by a coiled-coil (CC) region ( Reddy et al ., 1992 ; Borden, 1998 ). Genes belonging to this family are implicated in a variety of processes, such as development and cell growth, and are involved in several human diseases. PYRIN/MARENOSTRIN, MID1 and MUL are mutated in familial Mediterranean fever, X-linked Opitz/GBBB syndrome and mulibrey nanism, respectively ( Quaderi et al ., 1997 ; The French FMF Consortium, 1997 ; The International FMF Consortium 1997 ; Avela et al ., 2000 ), whereas PML, RFP and Tif1 acquire oncogenic activity when fused to RARα, RET or B-raf, respectively ( Takahashi et al ., 1988 ; Grignani et al ., 1994 ; Le Douarin et al ., 1995 ).

Very little is known about the biological and molecular mechanisms mediated by the TRIM genes ( Friedman et al ., 1996 ; Kim et al ., 1996 ; Le Douarin et al ., 1996 ; Moosmann et al ., 1996 ; Quignon et al ., 1998 ; Wang et al ., 1998 ; Nielsen et al ., 1999 ; Pearson et al ., 2000 ; Zhong et al ., 2000b ). To tackle this issue, we devised a strategy based on a bioinformatic approach combined with systematic functional data gathering (Figure 1 ). The collected data are summarized in Table I and are accessible through our web page (www.tigem.it/TRIM). The pertinence of this approach is demonstrated by the identification of a common molecular property shared by TRIM proteins.

Discussion

Nature often uses the same structures to perform functions that are similar at the biochemical level, but might be very different in a physiological context. This effective and ‘economical’ way of handling functions is achieved by duplicating structures, hence generating gene families. The analysis of the entire human genome is expanding both the number and size of such families, creating the need to develop new approaches to identify the functional properties of their members. Towards this goal, we implemented a combinatorial strategy. After definition of a protein family with in silico and classical molecular biology approaches, we systematically investigated the function of all family members. Our scheme allowed us to show that a given structural motif, the TRIM, defines a family of proteins and a cellular function (compartmentalization), thereby allowing the assignment of a common function to homologous proteins.

Cells set apart specific functions even without the help of membranes, thus rendering the process dynamic and flexible to physiological changes. These functional compartments are defined by specific proteins and are found both in the nucleus and in the cytoplasm. Our data indicate that the TRIM-containing proteins may serve a fundamental role in defining such subcompartments. TRIM proteins present the expected features that one can hypothesize as being necessary to fulfill this task; triggered by homodimerization, they form high molecular weight complexes that identify subcellular niches. Consistently, PML (TRIM19), but not other proteins localizing within the PML nuclear bodies, is necessary for the correct constitution of this compartment ( Ishov et al ., 1999 ; Zhong et al ., 1999b ).

Formation of distinct cellular compartments by TRIM proteins is strictly dependent on the integrity of the TRIM. The CC domain is necessary and sufficient for homo-multimerization, an essential step towards compartmentalization. Nevertheless, the other TRIM domains are also involved. Independent deletions of the R or BB regions result in the formation of different subcellular compartments. We hypothesize that TRIM domains, besides the CC region, provide the protein–protein interfaces for the recruitment of other proteins, to specify cellular compartments. Consistently, these domains were shown to contribute specific interaction moieties ( Li et al ., 1994 ; Bellini et al ., 1995 ; Friedman et al ., 1996 ; Hasegawa et al ., 1996 ; Kim et al ., 1996 ; Le Douarin et al ., 1996 ; Moosmann et al ., 1996 ; Nielsen et al ., 1999 ; Pearson et al ., 2000 ; Zhong et al ., 2000a ). Notably, the TRIM proteins, despite sequence and structural similarity, have no or little propensity to heterodimerize, have distinct patterns of expression and are not functionally interchangeable ( Peng et al ., 2000 ; this work), suggesting that they are single functional entities. Further studies are needed to clarify the role of TRIM proteins in compartmentalization and to identify other factors involved in this process.
