---
pmid: '24422557'
title: Dph3 is an electron donor for Dph1-Dph2 in the first step of eukaryotic diphthamide
  biosynthesis.
authors:
- Dong M
- Su X
- Dzikovski B
- Dando EE
- Zhu X
- Du J
- Freed JH
- Lin H
journal: J Am Chem Soc
year: '2014'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: xml
pmcid: PMC3985478
doi: 10.1021/ja4118957
---

# Dph3 is an electron donor for Dph1-Dph2 in the first step of eukaryotic diphthamide biosynthesis.
**Authors:** Dong M, Su X, Dzikovski B, Dando EE, Zhu X, Du J, Freed JH, Lin H
**Journal:** J Am Chem Soc (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1021/ja4118957](https://doi.org/10.1021/ja4118957)
**PMC:** [PMC3985478](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3985478/)

## Abstract

1. J Am Chem Soc. 2014 Feb 5;136(5):1754-7. doi: 10.1021/ja4118957. Epub 2014 Jan
 22.

Dph3 is an electron donor for Dph1-Dph2 in the first step of eukaryotic 
diphthamide biosynthesis.

Dong M(1), Su X, Dzikovski B, Dando EE, Zhu X, Du J, Freed JH, Lin H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Cornell University , Ithaca, 
New York 14853, United States.

Diphthamide, the target of diphtheria toxin, is a unique posttranslational 
modification on translation elongation factor 2 (EF2) in archaea and eukaryotes. 
The biosynthesis of diphthamide was proposed to involve three steps. The first 
step is the transfer of the 3-amino-3-carboxypropyl group from 
S-adenosyl-l-methionine (SAM) to the histidine residue of EF2, forming a C-C 
bond. Previous genetic studies showed this step requires four proteins in 
eukaryotes, Dph1-Dph4. However, the exact molecular functions for the four 
proteins are unknown. Previous study showed that Pyrococcus horikoshii Dph2 
(PhDph2), a novel iron-sulfur cluster-containing enzyme, forms a homodimer and 
is sufficient for the first step of diphthamide biosynthesis in vitro. Here we 
demonstrate by in vitro reconstitution that yeast Dph1 and Dph2 form a complex 
(Dph1-Dph2) that is equivalent to the homodimer of PhDph2 and is sufficient to 
catalyze the first step in vitro in the presence of dithionite as the reductant. 
We further demonstrate that yeast Dph3 (also known as KTI11), a CSL-type zinc 
finger protein, can bind iron and in the reduced state can serve as an electron 
donor to reduce the Fe-S cluster in Dph1-Dph2. Our study thus firmly establishes 
the functions for three of the proteins involved in eukaryotic diphthamide 
biosynthesis. For most radical SAM enzymes in bacteria, flavodoxins and 
flavodoxin reductases are believed to serve as electron donors for the Fe-S 
clusters. The finding that Dph3 is an electron donor for the Fe-S clusters in 
Dph1-Dph2 is thus interesting and opens up new avenues of research on electron 
transfer to Fe-S proteins in eukaryotic cells.

DOI: 10.1021/ja4118957
PMCID: PMC3985478
PMID: 24422557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Diphthamide is a unique posttranslationally
modified histidine residue in archaeal and eukaryotic translation
elongation factor 2 (EF2), a protein required for ribosomal protein
synthesis.1−4 Diphthamide is the target of Diphtheria toxin (DT) and Pseudomonas
exotoxin A, which ADP-ribosylate diphthamide and inhibit ribosomal
protein synthesis.5 Diphthamide modification
is conserved in all eukaryotes and archaea. Several reports suggested
that diphthamide helps to maintain the translation fidelity in yeast6 and mouse7 by preventing
−1 frameshift. Previous studies have led to a three-step biosynthetic
pathway for diphthamide (Scheme 1).8−11 The first step is the transfer of a 3-amino-3-carboxypropyl (ACP)
group from S-adenosyl methionine (SAM) to the C2
carbon of the imidazole ring of the histidine residue in EF2 (Scheme 1). This step requires four proteins in eukaryotes,
Dph1–Dph4. This is then followed by a trimethylation step (catalyzed
by Dph5) and an amidation step (catalyzed by Dph612,13 and Dph714) to give diphthamide.

Diphthamide Biosynthesis Pathway

The first step of diphthamide biosynthesis is particularly
interesting
as the enzymatic reaction mechanism and the molecular function of
each of the four proteins are still not well understood. We previously
showed that Pyrococcus horikoshii Dph2
(PhDph2) is sufficient for the first step of diphthamide biosynthesis in vitro.15 PhDph2 is homologous
to eukaryotic Dph1 and Dph2 (Dph1 and Dph2 share about 20% sequence
identity), but no Dph3 or Dph4 homologues can be found in archaea
by BLAST search. PhDph2 is a novel [4Fe-4S] cluster-containing radical
SAM enzyme. Different from traditional radical SAM enzymes, existing
evidence suggests that it cleaves a Cγ,Met–S bond in SAM and generates a 3-amino-3-carboxypropyl (ACP)
radical.15 PhDph2 is a homodimer, and each
monomer contains a [4Fe-4S] cluster. Previous report suggests that
only one [4Fe-4S] cluster in this homodimer is needed for the activity in vitro.16

The studies
on PhDph2 have begun to shed light on the molecular
functions of eukaryotic Dph1–4. Specifically, we proposed that
Dph1 and Dph2 form a heterodimer (Dph1-Dph2), which is equivalent
to the PhDph2 homodimer and is the catalyst required for the C–C
bond formation reaction. Dph3 and Dph4 may serve to assemble the Fe-S
cluster on Dph1-Dph2 or to keep the Fe-S cluster in Dph1-Dph2 in a
reduced state. Here we report the in vitro reconstitution
of the first step of yeast diphthamide biosynthesis using purified
recombinant Dph1 and Dph2. This reconstituted system provides the
first direct experimental evidence supporting that the Dph1-Dph2 complex
is the enzyme for the first step of diphthamide biosynthesis. This
reconstituted system also allows us to directly test whether Dph3
or Dph4 can serve as an electron donor to reduce the Fe-S cluster
in Dph1-Dph2. Our evidence suggests that Dph3, but not Dph4, is the
electron carrier for Dph1-Dph2.

Attempts to overexpress yeast
Dph1 and Dph2 separately in Escherichia coli were unsuccessful, yielding insoluble
proteins. However, we readily obtained soluble Dph1 and Dph2 when
we co-expressed them in E. coli, suggesting
that they form a complex. To increase the Fe-S cluster loading, Dph1-Dph2
was coexpressed with the ISC (iron sulfur cluster) proteins, which
are a set of bacterial proteins that assemble Fe-S clusters and transfer
them to client proteins.17 Similar to PhDph2,
anaerobically purified yeast Dph1-Dph2 complex displayed a dark-brown
color and showed a broad absorption band at 410 nm, typical for a
[4Fe-4S]2+ cluster. The 410 nm absorption decreased upon
reduction with dithionite (Figure 1A). Quantification
based on the 410 nm absorption suggested the presence of 0.6 [4Fe-4S]2+ clusters per Dph1-Dph2 complex. The EPR spectrum of the
reduced Dph1-Dph2 complex showed g values of 2.04
and 1.93, consistent with a [4Fe-4S]+ cluster (Figure 1B). Size exclusion chromatography-multiangle light
scattering (SEC-MALS) experiment of the Dph1-Dph2 complex showed that
the molecular weight is ∼110 kDa (Figure
S1), suggesting that Dph1 and Dph2 form a heterodimer.

Spectroscopic
characterization of the [4Fe-4S] cluster in Dph1-Dph2
heterodimer. (A) UV–vis absorption spectra of anaerobically
isolated (purple) and dithionite-reduced (red) Dph1-Dph2. (B) X-band
EPR spectra of dithionite reduced Dph1-Dph2 at 12 K.

We next tested whether Dph1-Dph2 heterodimer is
sufficient to catalyze
the first step of diphthamide biosynthesis in vitro with dithionite as the reductant. We first tested whether Dph1-Dph2
could cleave SAM to generate 5′-deoxy-5′-methylthioadenosine
(MTA) using high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). In the
reaction containing Dph1-Dph2, SAM, dithionite, with or without EF2,
SAM was cleaved and MTA was produced (Figure 2A). In control reactions without Dph1-Dph2 or dithionite, only background
level of MTA was detected. This result showed that the Dph1-Dph2 complex
was active and could cleave SAM, similar to PhDph2.15 To reconstitute the full reaction of the first step, we
used carboxy-14C-labeled SAM (14C-SAM) to examine
whether EF2 can be labeled by 14C. Indeed, EF2 was labeled
in the reaction containing Dph1-Dph2, 14C-SAM, and dithionite
(Figure 2B lane 2). As a negative control,
EF2 could not be labeled in the reaction without dithionite (Figure 2B lane 3). These results suggested that Dph1-Dph2
complex is sufficient for the first step of diphthamide biosynthesis in vitro with dithionite as the reductant.

Reconstitution of Dph1-Dph2
activity with dithionite as the reductant.
(A)HPLC analysis showing that reduced Dph1-Dph2 was sufficient in
the SAM cleavage reaction, generating MTA with or without EF2. SAM
was not cleaved without Dph1-Dph2 or dithionite. (B) Activity assay
using carboxy 14C-SAM. Left panel, Coomassie blue-stained
gel; right panel, the autoradiography. Lane 1: protein standard; Lane
2: reaction containing Dph1-Dph2, SAM, and dithionite; Lane 3: negative
control containing Dph1-Dph2 and SAM but without dithionite.

With this fully active Dph1-Dph2,
we next tested whether Dph3 or
Dph4 could serve as an electron carrier to reduce Dph1-Dph2. Eukaryotic
Dph3 and Dph4 belong to the protein family PF05207, which share a
conserved region encoding a CSL-type zinc finger. The CSL zinc finger
was thought to use four conserved Cys residues to coordinate Zn2+,18 and the last Cys residue is
followed by a Ser and a Leu residue (hence the name CSL zinc finger).
Dph3 is a small protein (82 aa) that essentially just contains the
CSL zinc finger, while Dph4 contains a DnaJ domain in addition to
the zinc finger domain.

In the CSL zinc finger family, Dph3
is relativily well studied.
It was first identified as the Kluyveromyces lactis killer toxin zymocin insensitive 11 (Kti11) gene from Saccharomyces cerevisiae.19 Later the Kti11 gene was found to be identical to Dph3. Further
studies showed Dph3/Kti11 is involved in multiple biological processes
and interacts with different proteins,20 such as Elongator subunits (Elp1–Elp3, Elp5),20,21 EF2, Dph1, and Dph2.21 Multiple data
suggested that Dph1–Dph3 may form a multimeric complex.11,20,22 The solution structure of yeast
Dph3, purified from E. coli grown on
minimal medium M9 supplemented with ZnSO4, was solved by
NMR.18 A single Zn2+ ion is
bound by four conserved cysteine residues of Dph3. Yakunin and co-workers
demonstrated that yeast Dph3 binds both zinc and iron when prepared
from E. coli cells grown on rich medium.23 Mutagenasis and deletion studies showed that
the Cys25, Cys27, Cys47, and Cys50 are responsible for metal coordination.

We expressed and purified yeast Dph3 in E. coli. Dph3 purified from E. coli in LB
medium was purple, suggesting that it binds iron, consistent with
previous report.23 The UV–vis spectrum
showed two major peaks at 350 and 490 nm, with a shoulder at 570 nm
(Figure 3A). When reduced by dithionite, the
three peaks disappeared. After exposing the sample to air for 10 min,
the three peaks came back. These results showed that Dph3 is redox
active. In contrast, purified Dph4 (Figure S2) was colorless, even when we supplemented the growth medium with
200 μM FeCl3. These observations made us believe
that Dph3, but not Dph4, is the electron carrier for Dph1-Dph2. Therefore,
in later studies, we focused on testing Dph3.

Dph3 binds iron and is
redox active. (A) UV–vis absorption
spectrum of Dph3; Dph3 reduced by dithionite and reoxidized by air.
(B) Dph3 can be reduced by NorW and NADH (monitored at 488 nm).

It was reported that Dph3 can
be reduced by E. coli rubredoxin reductase
NorW in the presence of NADH and is redox active
to cytochrome C from horse heart.23 We
expressed and purified NorW (Figure S2),
a bright yellow flavoprotein. Consistent with the previous report,
NorW could reduce Dph3 (Figure 3B, monitored
at 488 nm). The reduced Dph3 was slowly oxidized in air but was reduced
when additional NADH was added. Therefore, NADH and NorW are a suitable
reduction system that can be used to generate reduced Dph3.

With the system to generate the reduced form of Dph3, we then tested
whether Dph3 could serve as an electron donor to reduce Dph1-Dph2
and enable Dph1-Dph2 to catalyze the first step of diphthamide biosynthesis
in the absence of dithionite. Using 14C-SAM, EF2 was successfully
labeled in the reaction containing Dph1-Dph2, Dph3/NorW/NADH (Figure 4, lane 4). The result was similar with the positive
control when dithionite was used as the reductant (lane 2). NorW and
NADH were both required for the reduction of Dph3, and EF2 was not
labeled when any one of them was omitted in the reaction (Figure 4, lanes 5 and 6). It was reported that Dph3 can
also be isolated in a Zn2+-bound form when expressed in
M9 minimal medium supplemented with Zn2+. We also obtained
the colorless Zn2+-bound Dph3 and found that it cannot
serve as the electron donor for Dph1-Dph2 (Figure 4, lane 7). Our results thus demonstrated that the iron-bound
form of Dph3 can serve as an electron carrier for Dph1-Dph2. To investigate
the specificity of Dph3, we similarly tested the electron carrier
activity of Dph3 on PhDph2 using 14C-SAM (Figure S3). PhDph2 could be reduced and PhEF2 could be labeled
with dithionite as the reductant, but not with Dph3/NorW/NADH as the
reductant.

In vitro reconstitution of Dph1–Dph3 activity
using carboxy-14C-SAM. The top panel shows the Coomassie-blue-stained
gel; the bottom panel shows the autoradiography. All the reactions
in lanes 2–7 contained EF2 and Dph1-Dph2. The presence of other
reagents is indicated below each lane.

In summary, our data demonstrate that Dph1-Dph2 complex is
the
enzyme that catalyzes the first step of diphthamide biosynthesis in
eukaryotic cells. Dph3 is an electron donor that reduces the [4Fe-4S]
cluster in Dph1-Dph2. Although previous work suggested that Dph4 could
behave similarly to Dph3,24 our studies
suggest that Dph4 does not readily bind iron and thus is unlikely
to be an electron donor for Dph1-Dph2. Thus the exact molecular function
of Dph4 awaits further studies.

The discovery that Dph3 is an
electron donor in diphthamide biosynthesis
is the first time that the physiological role of a member from the
CSL zinc finger family is convincingly demonstrated, paving the road
for understanding the function of this protein family. In the Pfam
database, the CSL type zinc finger family (PF05207) is listed with
560 sequences from 303 species, but no definite function has been
assigned to CSL zinc fingers. In the 560 sequences, 307 sequences
have only the CSL zinc finger domain like Dph3. Among the 303 species
that contain CSL zinc finger proteins, there are 296 eukaryotes and
7 bacteria. As diphthamide modification only exits in archaea and
eukaryotes, proteins in this family must have functions other than
diphthamide biosynthesis. Knowing the electron-donor activity of Dph3
will help to understand the functions of other CSL zinc finger proteins.

Radical SAM enzymes require electron donors to keep the [4Fe-4S]
clusters in the active and reduced state. In vitro, almost all radical SAM enzyme reactions were reconstituted using
artificial electron donors, such as dithionite or illuminated deazaflavin.
In E. coli, the flavodoxin/flavodoxin
reductase/NADPH25 reducing system is shown
to be the electron donor for radical SAM enzymes, which is also used in vitro for reduction of [4Fe-4S] in radical SAM enzymes
such as lysine 2,3-aminomutase,26 DesII27 and LipA.28 However,
very little is known about electron carriers for Fe-S cluster-containing
enzymes in eukaryotes. The identification of Dph3 as an electron carrier
thus will likely enable other studies in this direction. Interestingly,
Dph3 is also required for tRNA modifications at the wobble position
that involves another radical SAM enzyme, Elp3.29 Dph3 may also pass electrons to reduce Elp3. In our resonstitution
experiment, an E. coli rubredoxin reductase
NorW was used to reduce Dph3. The identity of the endogenous reductase
for Dph3 is unknown. The discovery of Dph3′s activity will
facilitate the discovery of the reductase and thus provide further
understanding about the electron-transfer pathways for Fe-S enzymes
in eukaryotes.
