---
pmid: '21095585'
title: Ubiquitin binding to A20 ZnF4 is required for modulation of NF-κB signaling.
authors:
- Bosanac I
- Wertz IE
- Pan B
- Yu C
- Kusam S
- Lam C
- Phu L
- Phung Q
- Maurer B
- Arnott D
- Kirkpatrick DS
- Dixit VM
- Hymowitz SG
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.10.009
---

# Ubiquitin binding to A20 ZnF4 is required for modulation of NF-κB signaling.
**Authors:** Bosanac I, Wertz IE, Pan B, Yu C, Kusam S, Lam C, Phu L, Phung Q, Maurer B, Arnott D, Kirkpatrick DS, Dixit VM, Hymowitz SG
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2010.10.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2010.10.009)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2010 Nov 24;40(4):548-57. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.10.009.

Ubiquitin binding to A20 ZnF4 is required for modulation of NF-κB signaling.

Bosanac I(1), Wertz IE, Pan B, Yu C, Kusam S, Lam C, Phu L, Phung Q, Maurer B, 
Arnott D, Kirkpatrick DS, Dixit VM, Hymowitz SG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Structural Biology, Genentech, Inc, 1 DNA Way, South San 
Francisco, CA 94080, USA.

Inactivating mutations in the ubiquitin (Ub) editing protein A20 promote 
persistent nuclear factor (NF)-κB signaling and are genetically linked to 
inflammatory diseases and hematologic cancers. A20 tightly regulates NF-κB 
signaling by acting as an Ub editor, removing K63-linked Ub chains and mediating 
addition of Ub chains that target substrates for degradation. However, a precise 
molecular understanding of how A20 modulates this pathway remains elusive. Here, 
using structural analysis, domain mapping, and functional assays, we show that 
A20 zinc finger 4 (ZnF4) does not directly interact with E2 enzymes but instead 
can bind mono-Ub and K63-linked poly-Ub. Mutations to the A20 ZnF4 Ub-binding 
surface result in decreased A20-mediated ubiquitination and impaired regulation 
of NF-κB signaling. Collectively, our studies illuminate the mechanistically 
distinct but biologically interdependent activities of the A20 ZnF and ovarian 
tumor (OTU) domains that are inherent to the Ub editing process and, ultimately, 
to regulation of NF-κB signaling.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.10.009
PMID: 21095585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
