---
pmid: '17965588'
title: Epigenetic control of a transcription factor at the cross section of two antagonistic
  pathways.
authors:
- Alvarez-Venegas R
- Abdallat AA
- Guo M
- Alfano JR
- Avramova Z
journal: Epigenetics
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.4161/epi.2.2.4404
---

# Epigenetic control of a transcription factor at the cross section of two antagonistic pathways.
**Authors:** Alvarez-Venegas R, Abdallat AA, Guo M, Alfano JR, Avramova Z
**Journal:** Epigenetics (2007)
**DOI:** [10.4161/epi.2.2.4404](https://doi.org/10.4161/epi.2.2.4404)

## Abstract

1. Epigenetics. 2007 Apr-Jun;2(2):106-13. doi: 10.4161/epi.2.2.4404. Epub 2007
May  8.

Epigenetic control of a transcription factor at the cross section of two 
antagonistic pathways.

Alvarez-Venegas R(1), Abdallat AA, Guo M, Alfano JR, Avramova Z.

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebraska 
68588-0660 , USA.

The expression of the Arabidopsis gene WRKY70 is known to be antagonistically 
regulated by the salicylic acid (SA) and jasmonic acid (JA) signaling pathways. 
The gene encodes a transcription factor functioning at the crossroad of the two 
pathways. Here we show that the Arabidopsis homolog of Trithorax, ATX1, 
activates the expression of the WRKY70 gene and is involved in establishing the 
trimethylation pattern of histone H3 tail lysine 4 (H3K4me3) residues of its 
nucleosomes. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analyses with antiATX1 
specific antibodies demonstrated that WRKY70 is a primary target for the ATX1 
histone methylase activity, while the SA-responsive gene, PR1, and the 
JA-responsive gene, THI2.1, are secondary targets. The unexpected finding that 
PR1 and THI2.1 nucleosomes carryH3K4me3-marks unrelated to their transcription 
states suggests that the defense-response genes PR1 and THI2.1 keep their 
nucleosomes in 'actively' modified state, perhaps, in preparation for 
quick-changes of transcription when needed by the cell. Based on the 
experimental data, we propose a model that could explain the ability of a single 
epigenetic factor to orchestrate expression of a large number of genes, 
particularly in cases involving response reactions.

DOI: 10.4161/epi.2.2.4404
PMID: 17965588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
