---
reference_id: PMID:38755661
title: RICTOR/mTORC2 downregulation in BRAF(V600E) melanoma cells promotes resistance to BRAF/MEK inhibition.
authors:
- Ponzone L
- Audrito V
- Landi C
- Moiso E
- Levra Levron C
- Ferrua S
- Savino A
- Vitale N
- Gasparrini M
- Avalle L
- Vantaggiato L
- Shaba E
- Tassone B
- Saoncella S
- Orso F
- Viavattene D
- Marina E
- Fiorilla I
- Burrone G
- Abili Y
- Altruda F
- Bini L
- Deaglio S
- Defilippi P
- Menga A
- Poli V
- Porporato PE
- Provero P
- Raffaelli N
- Riganti C
- Taverna D
- Cavallo F
- Calautti E
journal: Mol Cancer
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12943-024-02010-1
content_type: full_text_pdf
full_text_attempted: true
full_text_provider: openalex
full_text_url: "https://molecular-cancer.biomedcentral.com/counter/pdf/10.1186/s12943-024-02010-1"
oa_status: gold
license: cc-by
local_pdf_path: files/PMID_38755661.pdf
---

# RICTOR/mTORC2 downregulation in BRAF(V600E) melanoma cells promotes resistance to BRAF/MEK inhibition.
**Authors:** Ponzone L, Audrito V, Landi C, Moiso E, Levra Levron C, Ferrua S, Savino A, Vitale N, Gasparrini M, Avalle L, Vantaggiato L, Shaba E, Tassone B, Saoncella S, Orso F, Viavattene D, Marina E, Fiorilla I, Burrone G, Abili Y, Altruda F, Bini L, Deaglio S, Defilippi P, Menga A, Poli V, Porporato PE, Provero P, Raffaelli N, Riganti C, Taverna D, Cavallo F, Calautti E
**Journal:** Mol Cancer (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12943-024-02010-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12943-024-02010-1)

## Content

1. Mol Cancer. 2024 May 16;23(1):105. doi: 10.1186/s12943-024-02010-1.

RICTOR/mTORC2 downregulation in BRAF(V600E) melanoma cells promotes resistance
to BRAF/MEK inhibition.

Ponzone L(1)(2), Audrito V(3), Landi C(4), Moiso E(5), Levra Levron C(1)(6),
Ferrua S(1)(2), Savino A(1)(2), Vitale N(1)(2), Gasparrini M(7), Avalle
L(1)(2)(3), Vantaggiato L(4), Shaba E(4), Tassone B(1)(2)(8), Saoncella S(1)(2),
Orso F(1)(2), Viavattene D(1)(2), Marina E(1)(2), Fiorilla I(3), Burrone
G(1)(2)(9), Abili Y(1)(2)(10), Altruda F(1)(2), Bini L(4), Deaglio S(1)(11),
Defilippi P(1)(2), Menga A(1)(2), Poli V(1)(2), Porporato PE(1)(2), Provero
P(12), Raffaelli N(7), Riganti C(1)(13), Taverna D(1)(2), Cavallo F(1)(2),
Calautti E(14)(15).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biotechnology Center "Guido Tarone", University of Turin, Turin,
10126, Italy.
(2)Department of Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences, University of
Turin, Turin, 10126, Italy.
(3)Department of Science and Technological Innovation, University of Piemonte
Orientale, Alessandria, 15121, Italy.
(4)Functional Proteomic Section, Department of Life Sciences, University of
Siena, Siena, 53100, Italy.
(5)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
USA.
(6)Department of Life Sciences and Systems Biology, University of Turin, Turin,
10126, Italy.
(7)Department of Agriculture, Food and Environmental Sciences, Polytechnic
University of Marche, Ancona, 60131, Italy.
(8)Department of Personal Care, dsm-firmenich, Kaiseraugst, 4303, Switzerland.
(9)Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences, University of Turin, Turin,
10124, Italy.
(10)GenomeUp, Rome, 00144, Italy.
(11)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, 10124, Italy.
(12)Neuroscience Department "Rita Levi Montalcini", University of Turin, Turin,
10126, Italy.
(13)Department of Oncology, University of Turin, Turin, 10124, Italy.
(14)Molecular Biotechnology Center "Guido Tarone", University of Turin, Turin,
10126, Italy. vincenzo.calautti@unito.it.
(15)Department of Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences, University of
Turin, Turin, 10126, Italy. vincenzo.calautti@unito.it.

BACKGROUND: The main drawback of BRAF/MEK inhibitors (BRAF/MEKi)-based targeted
therapy in the management of BRAF-mutated cutaneous metastatic melanoma (MM) is
the development of therapeutic resistance. We aimed to assess in this context
the role of mTORC2, a signaling complex defined by the presence of the essential
RICTOR subunit, regarded as an oncogenic driver in several tumor types,
including MM.
METHODS: After analyzing The Cancer Genome Atlas MM patients' database to
explore both overall survival and molecular signatures as a function of
intra-tumor RICTOR levels, we investigated the effects of RICTOR downregulation
in BRAFV600E MM cell lines on their response to BRAF/MEKi. We performed
proteomic screening to identify proteins modulated by changes in RICTOR
expression, and Seahorse analysis to evaluate the effects of RICTOR depletion on
mitochondrial respiration. The combination of BRAFi with drugs targeting
proteins and processes emerged in the proteomic screening was carried out on
RICTOR-deficient cells in vitro and in a xenograft setting in vivo.
RESULTS: Low RICTOR levels in BRAF-mutated MM correlate with a worse clinical
outcome. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis of low-RICTOR tumors display gene
signatures suggestive of activation of the mitochondrial Electron Transport
Chain (ETC) energy production. RICTOR-deficient BRAFV600E cells are
intrinsically tolerant to BRAF/MEKi and anticipate the onset of resistance to
BRAFi upon prolonged drug exposure. Moreover, in drug-naïve cells we observed a
decline in RICTOR expression shortly after BRAFi exposure. In RICTOR-depleted
cells, both mitochondrial respiration and expression of nicotinamide
phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT) are enhanced, and their pharmacological
inhibition restores sensitivity to BRAFi.
CONCLUSIONS: Our work unveils an unforeseen tumor-suppressing role for mTORC2 in
the early adaptation phase of BRAFV600E melanoma cells to targeted therapy and
identifies the NAMPT-ETC axis as a potential therapeutic vulnerability of low
RICTOR tumors. Importantly, our findings indicate that the evaluation of
intra-tumor RICTOR levels has a prognostic value in metastatic melanoma and may
help to guide therapeutic strategies in a personalized manner.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12943-024-02010-1
PMCID: PMC11097536
PMID: 38755661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict
of interest.

RESEARCH Open Access
© The Author(s) 2024. Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, 
sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and 
the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included 
in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. The 
Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available 
in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data.
Ponzone et al. Molecular Cancer          (2024) 23:105 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12943-024-02010-1
Molecular Cancer
*Correspondence:
Enzo Calautti
vincenzo.calautti@unito.it
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
Abstract
Background The main drawback of BRAF/MEK inhibitors (BRAF/MEKi)-based targeted therapy in the management 
of BRAF-mutated cutaneous metastatic melanoma (MM) is the development of therapeutic resistance. We aimed 
to assess in this context the role of mTORC2, a signaling complex defined by the presence of the essential RICTOR 
subunit, regarded as an oncogenic driver in several tumor types, including MM.
Methods After analyzing The Cancer Genome Atlas MM patients’ database to explore both overall survival and 
molecular signatures as a function of intra-tumor RICTOR levels, we investigated the effects of RICTOR downregulation 
in BRAFV600E MM cell lines on their response to BRAF/MEKi. We performed proteomic screening to identify proteins 
modulated by changes in RICTOR expression, and Seahorse analysis to evaluate the effects of RICTOR depletion on 
mitochondrial respiration. The combination of BRAFi with drugs targeting proteins and processes emerged in the 
proteomic screening was carried out on RICTOR-deficient cells in vitro and in a xenograft setting in vivo.
Results Low RICTOR levels in BRAF-mutated MM correlate with a worse clinical outcome. Gene Set Enrichment 
Analysis of low-RICTOR tumors display gene signatures suggestive of activation of the mitochondrial Electron 
Transport Chain (ETC) energy production. RICTOR-deficient BRAFV600E cells are intrinsically tolerant to BRAF/MEKi and 
anticipate the onset of resistance to BRAFi upon prolonged drug exposure. Moreover, in drug-naïve cells we observed 
a decline in RICTOR expression shortly after BRAFi exposure. In RICTOR-depleted cells, both mitochondrial respiration 
and expression of nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT) are enhanced, and their pharmacological 
inhibition restores sensitivity to BRAFi.
Conclusions Our work unveils an unforeseen tumor-suppressing role for mTORC2 in the early adaptation phase 
of BRAFV600E melanoma cells to targeted therapy and identifies the NAMPT-ETC axis as a potential therapeutic 
RICTOR/mTORC2 downregulation in BRAFV600E 
melanoma cells promotes resistance to BRAF/
MEK inhibition
Luca Ponzone1,2, Valentina Audrito3, Claudia Landi4, Enrico Moiso5, Chiara Levra Levron1,6, Sara Ferrua1,2, 
Aurora Savino1,2, Nicoletta Vitale1,2, Massimiliano Gasparrini7, Lidia Avalle1,2,3, Lorenza Vantaggiato4, Enxhi Shaba4, 
Beatrice Tassone1,2,8, Stefania Saoncella1,2, Francesca Orso1,2, Daniele Viavattene1,2, Eleonora Marina1,2, Irene Fiorilla3, 
Giulia Burrone1,2,9, Youssef Abili1,2,10, Fiorella Altruda1,2, Luca Bini4, Silvia Deaglio1,11, Paola Defilippi1,2, 
Alessio Menga1,2, Valeria Poli1,2, Paolo Ettore Porporato1,2, Paolo Provero12, Nadia Raffaelli7, Chiara Riganti1,13, 
Daniela Taverna1,2, Federica Cavallo1,2 and Enzo Calautti1,2*

Page 2 of 17
Ponzone et al. Molecular Cancer          (2024) 23:105 
Background
Malignant melanoma is the deadliest form of skin can -
cer, and about 50% of tumors carry activating muta -
tions (V600E/K) of the BRAF oncogene. In the clinics, 
BRAFV600E tumors can be selectively targeted by BRAF-
inhibitors (BRAFi) administered in combination with 
MEK inhibitors (MEKi) [ 1], with remarkable clinical 
efficacy in the short term. However, BRAF/MEKi tar -
geted therapy is characterized by the nearly inevitable 
and rapid development of therapeutic resistance [ 2, 3]. 
The mechanisms underlying resistance to BRAF/MEKi 
include genetic and epigenetic alterations, aberrant acti -
vation of signaling pathways, phenotype plasticity, and 
metabolic rewiring [ 3–6].The latter typically relies on 
a switch from a glycolytic based- to an Oxidative Phos -
phorylation (OXPHOS)-based energetic metabolism 
triggered by BRAF pharmacological inhibition [ 3, 4], 
which is often coupled with the upregulation of NAD + 
biosynthesis [ 7]. In the clinics, resistance to targeted 
therapy may depend on the drug-resistant phenotype of 
preexisting tumor cell subpopulations (intrinsic resis -
tance) or occur via de novo mutations that render cancer 
cells permanently refractory to BRAF/MEKi treatment 
(acquired resistance) [3, 5]. In both cases, the therapeutic 
pressure causes the “Darwinian” selection of drug-resis -
tant tumor cell populations that are at the bases of the 
patients’ relapse. Recently, it became evident that non-
genetic, reversible adaptation mechanisms occurring in 
tumor cells subjected to BRAF/MEKi treatment foster 
the maintenance of clinically elusive populations of drug-
tolerant persister cells [8]. While persister cells can revert 
to a drug-sensitive phenotype upon discontinuation of 
therapeutic regimens, they can act as founders for the 
subsequent development of acquired genetic resistance 
upon continuous drug exposure. Several lines of evidence 
indicate that the capacity of melanoma persister cells to 
tolerate BRAF/MEK inhibition relies in large part on the 
reprogramming of the cell biosynthetic processes, includ-
ing mRNA translation and/or mitochondrial energy pro -
duction [8].
mTOR belongs to PI3K-related (PIKK) family of protein 
kinases and is a master regulator of the balance between 
cell biosynthetic and catabolic functions [9]. mTOR oper-
ates as the catalytic subunit of two distinct multi-protein 
signaling complexes, mTORC1 and mTORC2, both com-
posed by shared (mLST8, DEPTOR) and specific com -
ponents. While mTORC1 is defined by the presence of 
RAPTOR and PRAS40 and is activated by growth factors 
and amino acids, RICTOR, SIN1 and PROTOR1/2 repre-
sent the mTORC2-specific components. Both mTORC2 
integrity and signaling activity depend on the essential 
RICTOR subunit. mTORC2 activity is typically engaged 
downstream of growth factors/PI3K signaling axis [ 9], 
although it can also function in a growth-factor-inde -
pendent manner in specific subcellular districts [ 10, 11]. 
Through its kinase activity, mTORC2 regulates cell prolif-
eration, survival, cytoskeleton organization, glucose and 
lipid metabolism by participating in the activation and/or 
stabilization of protein kinases such as AKT, SGK1 and 
PKCα [9, 12].
mTORC2 signaling is mostly regarded as an oncogenic 
driver in several cancer types including melanoma, via 
both AKT-dependent and -independent mechanisms [13, 
14]. However, mTORC2 signaling can also play tumor-
suppressive roles in a context-dependent manner [ 15, 
16], and mTORC2 deficiency can protect against some 
forms of cellular stress. For instance, we previously found 
that RICTOR deficiency causes a rewiring of the ener -
getic metabolism in murine keratinocytes that enhances 
the tolerance of cells towards anthracyclines and X-ray 
radiation [17].
Notably, the metabolic phenotype found in RICTOR-
knockout keratinocytes, consisting of a switch from a 
glycolytic- to an OXPHOS-based energetic metabolism 
fueled by glutamine consumption, is reminiscent of that 
of targeted therapy-resistant melanoma cells. Consis -
tently, RICTOR deficiency was previously associated 
with the induction of genes and/or cellular processes 
that favor mitochondrial ATP synthesis [ 18–21]. Based 
on these notions, we have hypothesized that RICTOR/
mTORC2 deficiency in BRAF V600E melanoma cells may 
favor BRAF/MEKi resistance.
This hypothesis prompted us to investigate this issue 
in the clinically relevant Skin Cutaneous Melanoma 
(SKCM) dataset from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) 
database. Our analysis revealed a correlation between 
low RICTOR expression in BRAF V600E tumors and poor 
survival, accompanied by gene signatures associated with 
mitochondrial ATP production. Here we show that RIC -
TOR downregulation enhances the intrinsic tolerance of 
drug-naïve cells to BRAF/MEK inhibition and promotes 
a BRAFi-resistant phenotype both in vitro and in vivo. 
Mechanistically, this drug resistance depends in large 
part on a gain in the activity of the rate-limiting enzyme 
vulnerability of low RICTOR tumors. Importantly, our findings indicate that the evaluation of intra-tumor RICTOR 
levels has a prognostic value in metastatic melanoma and may help to guide therapeutic strategies in a personalized 
manner.
Keywords mTORC2, RICTOR, NAMPT, Drug resistance, Targeted therapy, BRAFV600E melanoma, Mitochondrial 
metabolism

Page 3 of 17
Ponzone et al. Molecular Cancer          (2024) 23:105 
of the NAD + salvage pathway Nicotinamide Phosphori -
bosyl Transferase (NAMPT) that fuels mitochondrial 
OXPHOS, and that was previously identified as a driver 
of melanoma targeted therapy resistance [ 22, 23], but 
never shown to be negatively regulated by mTORC2. 
Indeed, pharmacological inhibition of either NAMPT 
or the mitochondrial Electron Transport Chain (ETC), 
administered in combination with BRAFi, restores the 
responsiveness of RICTOR-deficient-cells to the drug, 
suggesting that the NAMPT/ETC axis likely represents 
a specific therapeutic vulnerability of mTORC2-deficient 
melanomas. Our data support a model in which RIC -
TOR/mTORC2 downregulation promotes early adapta -
tion of BRAF V600E cells to targeted therapy, accelerating 
the acquisition of therapeutic resistance.
Methods
A complete list of the Methods can be found in Supple-
mentary Materials and Methods section.
Cell culture
A375, M14 (MDA-MB-435 S) and SK-MEL-28 cells were 
obtained from the American Type Culture Collection 
(ATCC) and maintained in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s 
medium (DMEM, Gibco 10566016) supplemented with 
10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco 10270106), 1% 
MEM Vitamin Solution (Gibco, 11120037), 1% MEM 
Non-Essential Amino Acids Solution (Gibco, 11140035), 
10 mM HEPES Buffer Solution (Gibco, 15630056) and 1% 
Penicillin-Streptomycin (Gibco, 15140122). Cells were 
maintained in these culture conditions for all experi -
ments except where specifically indicated. All cell lines 
were authenticated by PCR-single-locus-technology by 
Eurofins Genomics (Ebersberg, DE) and were routinely 
tested for Mycoplasma contamination.
Colony forming efficiency (CFE) assay
Cells were seeded at 500 cells/well in 6-well plates and 
treated with the indicated drugs the following day. Media 
with the drugs was refreshed every 72  h and cells were 
cultured for 12 days. At the endpoint cells were fixed with 
4% paraformaldehyde for 15  min, rinsed with PBS and 
stained with 0.1% crystal violet. Staining intensity was 
quantified by dissolving crystal violet with 1  ml of 10% 
acetic acid for 15 min, then 100 µl were moved in 96-well 
plate and optical density (OD) was measured by 560 nm 
absorbance using Promega GloMax Explorer GM3500.
For CFE assay of siRNA-transfected cells, cells were 
seeded at 2000 cells/well 24  h after transfection and 
treated with the indicated drugs the following day. Media 
with the drugs was refreshed every 72  h and cells were 
cultured for 7 days. Staining and intensity quantification 
were performed as described above.
BRAFi resistance acquisition assay
Parental BRAFi-sensitive cells were seeded in 60  mm 
cell culture dishes (1.5 × 105 cells/dish) and after 24  h 
treated with 0.2 µM Vemurafenib, then maintained 
in the presence of the same drug concentration with 
media refresh every 72  h. When cells reached conflu -
ency, they were collected and re-plated in new 60 mm 
dishes (1.5 × 105 cells/dish). Cells were then treated 
with a higher dose of Vemurafenib and the same pro -
cess was repeated when they reached confluency in the 
presence of the new Vemurafenib dose. Vemurafenib 
doses used for this experiment are indicated in Fig.  2B 
(0.2–0.4–0.8–1.2–1.6 µM) and cells were considered 
fully resistant when they could grow in the presence of 
1.6 µM Vemurafenib.
In vivo experiments
6–8 weeks-old NOD/SCID/IL2Rγ null  (NSG) mice were 
purchased from Charles River Laboratories Interna -
tional (Wilmington, MA, USA) and were maintained 
in a specific-pathogen-free (SPF) facility at the Molecu -
lar Biotechnology Center (MBC, Univerisity of Turin, 
Italy). 5 × 106 M14 cells were resuspended in Matrigel® 
(Corning) and subcutaneously injected in the flank of 
mice, when tumors became palpable mice were treated 
with FK866 administered intraperitoneally (50  µl/twice 
daily/14 days at 20 mg/kg) and/or Vemurafenib adminis -
tered by gavage (200  µl/daily/14 days at 60  mg/kg). The 
control group was treated in the same way administering 
a solution without the drug. The tumor size was mea -
sured weekly using calipers in two dimensions to gen -
erate a tumor volume using the following formula: 0.5 
× (length × width 2). After 14 days from the start of the 
treatment mice were euthanized and tumors were col -
lected and weighed. Procedures were conducted in con -
formity with national and international laws and policies 
as approved by the Faculty Ethical Committee and the 
Italian Ministry of Health.
Statistical analysis
For statistical analyses, significance was tested with 
one-way ANOVA and two-way ANOVA, with Dun -
nett’s, Sidak’s or Tukey’s post hoc tests. Statistical analysis 
was performed using the GraphPad Prism v8 software. 
p < 0.05 was considered significant. The definition of cen -
ter and of dispersion and precision measures (e.g., mean 
and SD), as well as the number of technical or biological 
replicates of the experiments described and the specific 
statistical test used, are reported in the corresponding 
figure legends.

Page 4 of 17
Ponzone et al. Molecular Cancer          (2024) 23:105 
Results
Low levels of RICTOR in metastatic melanoma correlate 
with a poor patients’ prognosis
To investigate the relationships between RICTOR 
expression and melanoma patients’ survival, we inter -
rogated the entire Skin Cutaneous Melanoma (SKCM) 
cohort of patients from the publicly available The Cancer 
Genome Atlas (TCGA) database with respect to over -
all survival (OS). We found that high RICTOR mRNA 
levels in metastatic tumors (367 out of 448 total sam -
ples) positively correlate with patients’ survival, as indi -
cated by a Kaplan-Meier curve obtained from patients 
falling in the first ( n = 87) and fourth ( n = 91) quartile of 
RICTOR expression (Fig.  1A). This was also indicated 
by Cox regression analysis ( p = 0.007, median Hazard 
ratio = 0.68), using RICTOR expression as a continuous 
independent variable without imposing arbitrary thresh -
olds (Fig S1A). In this analysis, however no significant 
Fig. 1 Analysis of Melanoma patients’ data from the TCGA database. ( A-F) Kaplan-Meier survival analysis of the metastatic Skin Cutaneous Melanoma 
(SKCM) dataset obtained from TCGA patients’ database. A-D curves were obtained from analysis of the whole TCGA database irrespective of BRAF muta-
tional status (All); E-F curves include only patients with reported BRAF Hotspot Mutations (BRAF-Mut); A, B, E curves were obtained from gene expres -
sion database (RNA); C, D, F were obtained from Reverse Phase Protein Array (RPPA) data. Patients were stratified into High and Low RICTOR-expressing 
groups based on average RNA/Protein expression levels. High-RICTOR/RAPTOR = fourth quartile; Low-RICTOR/RAPTOR = first quartile. Number of patients 
for each group and p-value calculated by Log-rank test are indicated in individual graphs. (G-H) Dotplots indicate the top 10 most significantly enriched 
Gene Ontology (GO) categories anticorrelated with RICTOR expression, in the (G) whole dataset (All; n = 367) or (H) after filtering for BRAF Hotspot Muta-
tions (BRAF-Mut; n = 118). NES = Normalized Enrichment Score
 

Page 5 of 17
Ponzone et al. Molecular Cancer          (2024) 23:105 
association with RICTOR mRNA expression and distinct 
genetic subtypes (BRAF-Mut, NF1-Mut, RAS-Mut, Tri -
ple WT) emerged (Fig S1A). By contrast, analysis of the 
same cohort of patients stratified according to RAPTOR 
expression (first quartile n = 89; fourth quartile n = 90), 
indicated that elevated levels of this essential mTORC1 
component correlate with a shorter OS (Fig. 1B), whereas 
no correlation was found between MTOR levels and 
patients’ survival (Fig S1B). Also for RAPTOR expres -
sion, Cox analysis confirms its negative association with 
patients’ survival without indicating association to spe -
cific genetic subtypes (Fig S1C). Thus, based on RIC -
TOR and RAPTOR mRNA levels, these data suggest 
that mTORC2 and mTORC1 may play opposite roles in 
melanoma progression and/or therapeutic responses. 
Importantly, the positive correlation between RICTOR 
expression and patients’ OS was also indicated by both 
Kaplan-Meyer (Fig.  1C) and Cox analyses ( p = 0.003, 
median Hazard ratio = 0.54) based on the TCGA pro -
tein dataset (Fig S1D), while no significant association 
with survival was found with the levels of RAPTOR and 
MTOR (Fig.  1D, S1E). Kaplan-Meier analysis performed 
on BRAF-mutated (BRAF-Mut) tumors did not evidence 
significant correlations between survival and RICTOR 
mRNA levels. However, both Kaplan-Meier and Cox 
analyses based on the TCGA protein expression data -
set indicated significantly reduced survival in patients 
bearing BRAF-Mut tumors with low RICTOR expres -
sion (Fig.  1E, S1D). No significant difference in RIC -
TOR mRNA or protein expression was detected between 
BRAF-WT (n = 99) and -Mut (n = 93) tumors, and further 
analysis indicated that RICTOR mRNA is only moder -
ately correlated (Pearson correlation = 0.384 and 0.335 
respectively) with protein levels, and thus may not reli -
ably reflect the corresponding protein levels (Fig S1F, G).
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) revealed a sig -
nificant anticorrelation between RICTOR expression 
levels and signatures relative to mitochondrial processes 
(e.g. Respiratory Electron transport chain; ATP Synthe -
sis Coupled Proton Transport), coupled with stress pro -
tective and cell detoxifying pathways (Supplementary 
Table S1), both in the entire melanoma dataset as well 
as in the BRAF-Mut tumor subgroup (Fig.  2G, H). Thus, 
low expression of RICTOR in metastatic melanoma is 
associated with a poor clinical outcome, and the gene 
expression signature of low RICTOR tumors indicates 
the activation of processes that are frequently associated 
with BRAF/MEKi resistance [6, 24, 25].
Downregulation of RICTOR in BRAFV600E melanoma cell 
lines promotes resistance to BRAF/MEKi
To establish whether RICTOR/mTORC2 downregulation 
affects the responses of melanoma cells to BRAFi-based 
targeted therapy, we stably silenced RICTOR in three 
BRAF-mutated human melanoma cell lines (M14, A375 
and SK-MEL-28) via lentiviral delivery of two separate 
RICTOR-targeted shRNAs (shR1, shR2), and compared 
their effects with those of a scramble control shRNA 
(shC). Both RICTOR protein and mRNA (Fig.  2A, S2A) 
levels were reduced, as well as the expression level of the 
other essential mTORC2 protein component SIN1 [ 26]. 
As readout of mTORC2 signaling activity, we monitored 
the phosphorylation levels of the downstream targets 
AKT and NDRG1 both under serum-deprived and -stim-
ulated conditions (Fig.  1A). This analysis indicates that 
all the RICTOR-silenced cell lines display disruption of 
mTORC2 integrity and attenuation of downstream sig -
naling, with no significant effects on proliferation rates 
under basal culture conditions (Fig S2B). Therefore, we 
used these cell lines as experimental models to investi -
gate the effects of RICTOR/mTORC2 depletion in the 
response of BRAF-mutated melanoma cells to BRAF/
MEKi.
Culture of BRAF-mutated melanoma cells in the 
presence of increasing concentrations of BRAFi can 
be used to generate BRAFi-resistant cell line variants 
from BRAFi-sensitive parental cells [ 5, 22]. We applied 
this procedure to evaluate the kinetics of acquisition of 
BRAFi-resistance in RICTOR-silenced and control cells 
of A375, M14 and SK-MEL-28 background over the 
course of ~ 8–9 weeks. We have arbitrarily set the experi-
mental endpoint as the capacity of cells to expand in the 
presence of 1.6 µM Vemurafenib. Analysis of growth pro-
files of cell cultures in the presence of increasing drug 
concentrations showed that in all cellular backgrounds 
RICTOR-depleted cells anticipate by several weeks the 
reach of the experimental endpoint (Fig.  1B). Interest -
ingly, A375 shR1 acquired the resistance status earlier 
than shR2 variants, suggesting that within the same cellu-
lar background RICTOR levels correlate with the timing 
of resistance acquisition.
To evaluate whether this anticipated acquisition of 
BRAFi resistance relies on an intrinsically higher toler -
ance to BRAFi of RICTOR-depleted cells, we have carried 
out Colony Formation Efficiency (CFE) survival assays 
by exposing M14 and A375 cells to fixed doses of BRAFi 
(Vemurafenib) and/or MEKi (UO126) over the course of 
12 days (Fig.  2C). While RICTOR downregulation did 
not affect the basal clonogenicity of cells, the results indi-
cated that RICTOR-depleted cells are intrinsically more 
tolerant than RICTOR-proficient counterparts to BRAFi 
and their combination with MEKi, as also confirmed by 
its acute siRNA-mediated downregulation (Fig. 2D, E).

Page 6 of 17
Ponzone et al. Molecular Cancer          (2024) 23:105 
RICTOR protein downregulation occurs in drug-naïve 
BRAFV600E melanoma cells as a consequence of MAPK 
pathway inhibition
Because RICTOR levels affect the kinetics of acquisition 
of BRAFi resistance, it was important to determine 
whether the endogenous levels of the protein could be 
modulated in response to BRAF inhibition. Indeed, in 
drug-naïve M14, A375 and SK-MEL-28 cells the levels 
Fig. 2 Downregulation of RICTOR in BRAF V600E melanoma cell lines promotes resistance to BRAF/MEKi. ( A) Western blot analysis of indicated cell lines 
transduced with RICTOR-targeting shRNAs (shR1, shR2) or scramble control (shC) lentiviruses. Cells were analyzed after 24 h of serum starvation (-) or 24 h 
of serum starvation followed by 15 min of refeeding (+). (B) Resistance acquisition kinetics analysis of RICTOR-silenced (shR1, shR2) or control (shC) M14/
A375/SK-MEL-28 cells exposed to increasing doses of BRAFi (Vemurafenib, from 0.2 to 1.6 µM). The number of days required to reach resistance to 1.6 
µM Vemurafenib is indicated on top of each curve. (C) Colony Formation Efficiency (CFE) assay of indicated cell lines cultured for 12 days in presence of 
vehicle control (DMSO), 0.5 µM Vemurafenib (Vem), 0.5 µM UO126 (UO126) or the combination of 0.5 µM Vemurafenib + 0.5 µM UO126 (Vem + UO126). 
Bar graphs represent the mean values of independent experiments ± SEM (n = 4 for M14 cells; n = 5 for A375 cells). ns = not significant, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, 
***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001, one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test. (D) Western blot analysis of indicated cell lines transfected 
with a RICTOR-targeting (siR) or Non-targeting control (siC) siRNAs at 72 h after transfection. (E) CFE assay of indicated cell lines cultured for 7 days in pres-
ence of DMSO, Vem, UO126 or the combination of Vem + UO126 as in ( C). Bar graphs represent the mean values of 4 independent experiments ± SEM. 
ns = not significant, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, unpaired t test
 

Page 7 of 17
Ponzone et al. Molecular Cancer          (2024) 23:105 
of RICTOR were significantly reduced by Vemurafenib 
treatment, paralleled by attenuated phosphorylation 
of the mTORC2 downstream target NDRG1 (Fig.  3A). 
Vemurafenib-induced decrease in RICTOR protein levels 
were not matched by a parallel decrease in mRNA, sug -
gesting a post-transcriptional mechanism of regulation 
(Fig. 3B). Accordingly, concomitant treatment with pro -
teasome inhibitor Bortezomib prevented BRAFi-induced 
RICTOR downregulation (Fig.  3C). In M14 and SK-
MEL-28 cells AKT phosphorylation at Ser473 decreased 
in parallel with RICTOR, whereas in A375 cells Vemu -
rafenib exposure increased AKT phosphorylation. This 
uncoupling between RICTOR and phospho-AKT lev -
els is consistent with previous evidence of alternative, 
mTORC2-independent mechanisms of AKT Hydropho -
bic motif phosphorylation [27, 28], reported also to occur 
in BRAF-mutated melanoma cells, including A375 [27].
As RICTOR-silenced cells display an advantage in clo -
nogenic growth upon BRAF inhibition, we investigated 
how survival/proliferation pathways are modulated 
under these conditions as a function of RICTOR expres -
sion and BRAF inhibition. Visual inspection of cultures 
kept in presence of BRAFi over the course of 12 days 
confirmed that colonies that survive treatment were pro -
gressively expanding, as also evidenced by similar levels 
of phospho-RB proliferation marker between treated and 
untreated colonies (Fig. 3D).
Consistent with previous data, in drug naïve RICTOR-
proficient cells the endogenous levels of RICTOR protein 
were significantly reduced in the presence of Vemu -
rafenib. Although the colonies generated by RICTOR-
deficient cells were more abundant (Fig.  2C) and larger 
than those generated by control counterparts, we did 
not detect significant differences in the levels of ERK, 
AKT or RB phosphorylation that could account for their 
drug-tolerant phenotype (Fig.  3D). These data suggest 
that RICTOR downregulation occurs during the initial 
response and early adaptation phase to BRAFi, that nor -
mally precede the development of further mechanisms 
typical of acquired drug resistance.
To understand the role of RICTOR in later stages of 
BRAFi-resistance acquisition we applied the same meth -
odology shown in Fig.  2B to derive BRAFi-resistant (BiR) 
cells from parental, drug-naïve cell lines (S). BiR cells 
present features of acquired resistance, such as mainte -
nance of the resistant phenotype after drug withdrawal 
(Fig S3A) and reduced inhibition of ERK and RB phos -
phorylation upon Vemurafenib exposure, as compared 
to S counterparts (Fig.  3E, S3B). Moreover, BiR cells also 
showed a lineage-specific pattern of AKT phosphoryla -
tion under basal and treated conditions while in all BiR 
lineages RICTOR and p-NDRG1 levels were no longer 
reduced by Vemurafenib exposure (Fig. 3E, S3C). Overall, 
these data indicate that RICTOR expression is positively 
regulated by MAPK signaling both in sensitive and resis -
tant cells.
We then attempted to define the effects of RICTOR 
knockdown after the acquisition of BRAFi resistance. 
In all three BiR lineages, shRNA-mediated RICTOR 
silencing significantly impaired mTORC2 downstream 
signaling (Fig S3D) and the clonogenic growth of cells 
(Fig S3E). However, in M14 and SK-MEL-28 lineages, 
RICTOR knockdown led to a relative increase in clo -
nogenic growth after treatment with BRAFi, MEKi and 
their combination, compared to untreated conditions. 
Conversely, A375 RICTOR-deficient BiR cells displayed 
an overall reduction in the resistance to all treatments. 
This underscores a context-dependent role of RICTOR 
after development of acquired resistance, while RICTOR 
knockdown in drug-naïve cells consistently promotes 
a faster progression towards resistance in our cellular 
models.
To shed light on the mechanisms in which RICTOR 
downregulation plays a role in the early adaptation of 
cells to BRAFi, we analyzed pathways previously impli -
cated in BRAF/MEKi resistance in multiple melanoma 
cell lines. These include receptor tyrosine kinase AXL 
[29], transcriptional regulators (MITF, SOX10 [ 30–32]) 
and BRAF downstream effectors (ERK, MEK, p-p90-
RSK, RB) as readout of MAPK signaling activation 
(Fig. 3F, S3F).
Our analysis revealed that changes in RICTOR expres -
sion levels, either Vemurafenib- or shRNA-induced, did 
not correlate with modulation of MAPK signaling out -
puts nor with univocal changes in expression of the other 
resistance determinants we analyzed (Fig.  3F, S3F). These 
data did not provide sufficient evidence of the involve -
ment of such mechanisms in the BRAFi tolerance of RIC-
TOR-deficient cells.
Increased mitochondrial respiration underlies the BRAFi 
resistance of RICTOR-deficient melanoma cells
To identify mTORC2-regulated molecules potentially 
implicated in the response of melanoma cells to targeted 
therapy, we have undertaken an unbiased proteomic 
approach to compare differentially expressed proteins 
between RICTOR-proficient and -deficient M14 and 
A375 cells under basal conditions. To this aim, protein 
extracts were separated by 2D-Gel Electrophoresis and 
spots were visualized by silver staining. Differentially 
expressed protein species were then identified by MALDI 
Mass Spectrometry (MS) and proteins contained in dif -
ferent spots displaying a fold change equal or higher than 
1.5 are shown in Tables 1 and 2.
Gene Ontology (GO) analysis of differentially expressed 
protein species revealed that in both lineages, RICTOR 
depletion was associated with GO Cellular Components 
categories such as “vesicle lumen” , “ficolin rich granule 

Page 8 of 17
Ponzone et al. Molecular Cancer          (2024) 23:105 
Fig. 3 RICTOR protein downregulation occurs in drug-naïve BRAFV600E melanoma cells as a consequence of MAPK pathway inhibition. ( A) Western blot 
analysis of indicated cell lines treated with (-) DMSO or (+) with 1.6 µM Vemurafenib (Vem) for 72 h. Images are representative of 3 independent experi -
ments. See right panel for quantification. (B) Quantitative reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) analysis of RICTOR gene expression in the indicated cell lines 
treated for 72 h either with DMSO or 1.6 µM Vemurafenib (Vem). Bar graphs represent the mean values of 3 independent experiments ± SEM. ns = not 
significant, one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test. ( C) Upper panel: western blot analysis of indicated cell lines treated for 
48 h with 1.6 µM Vem ± 10 nM Bortezomib (BTZ). Lower panel: bar graphs show the mean values of densitometric analysis of RICTOR from 5 independent 
experiments ± SEM. **p < 0.01, one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test. ( D) Western blot analysis of indicated cell lines. Cells 
were cultured for 12 days in presence of either DMSO or 0.5 µM Vem. (E) Western blot analysis of Vemurafenib-sensitive (S) and -resistant (BiR) BRAFV600E 
melanoma cell lines treated for 72 h with (-) DMSO vehicle or (+) 1.6 µM Vemurafenib (Vem) (F) Western blot analysis of indicated cell lines treated for 72 h 
either with DMSO or 0.5 µM Vem
 

Page 9 of 17
Ponzone et al. Molecular Cancer          (2024) 23:105 
lumen” , and “mitochondrial matrix” (Fig.  4A). Among 
upregulated moieties, we found proteins related to oxi -
dative stress protection (SOD2, PRDX5 [M14]), mito -
chondrial functions (NDUFS1, PDHA1, HSD17B10, 
GATD3 and TUFM [M14]; ACADM, SUCLA2, OAT, 
ALDH1B1 and TUFM [A375]) and NAD + metabolism 
(NAMPT, NAPRT [M14]; IDH1 [A375]). A complete list 
of enriched GO categories is shown in Supplementary 
Table S4.
Table 1 Differentially abundant proteins identified in RICTOR-deficient M14 cells by proteomic analysis. Column 1 reports 
the spot numbers corresponding to those indicated in the representative image of Figure S6. Protein names of the identified spots 
by MALDI-ToF MS, corresponding UniProt gene names, fold change expressed as the ratio between M14 shR1 and shC (means of the 
Volumes of single spots/Volume of total spots quantified by densitometric analysis), and the p-value determined by one-way ANOVA 
Test (n = 5) are indicated
Spot n° Protein name Gene name Fold change (shR/shC) p-value
1 Syntenin-1 SDCBP 1.64 0.0010
2 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase type-2 HSD17B10 1.97 0.0011
3 Nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase NAMPT 1.54 0.0014
4 Peroxiredoxin-5, mitochondrial PRDX5 1.59 0.0025
5 Nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase NAMPT 1.87 0.0027
6 Glutamine amidotransferase-like class 1 domain-containing protein 3, mitochondrial GATD3 1.55 0.0028
7 Histone H2A type 1-H H2AC12 1.67 0.0031
8 Triosephosphate isomerase TPI1 1.80 0.0040
9 Pyruvate dehydrogenase E1 component subunit alpha, somatic form, mitochondrial PDHA1 2.58 0.0044
10 UBX domain-containing protein 1 C-term fragment UBXN6 2.69 0.0049
11 Transgelin-2 TAGLN2 1.83 0.0052
12 High mobility group protein B1 HMGB1 1.52 0.0070
13 Poly(rC)-binding protein 1 PCBP1 2.66 0.0072
14 Pirin PIR 1.50 0.0097
15 Small ribosomal subunit protein eS12 RPS12 1.59 0.0104
16 Polyubiquitin-B [free Ubiquitin] UBB 1.67 0.0104
17 Phosphoserine phosphatase PSPH 2.77 0.0110
18 Triosephosphate isomerase TPI1 1.77 0.0124
19 Superoxide dismutase [Mn], mitochondrial SOD2 1.73 0.0124
20 Nicotinate phosphoribosyltransferase NAPRT 1.56 0.0125
21 Prelamin-A/C LMNA -1.73 0.0132
22 F-box only protein 22 FBXO22 2.90 0.0158
23 Cofilin-1 CFL1 1.51 0.0173
24 Cold shock domain-containing protein E1 CSDE1 -1.56 0.0174
25 Aldo-keto reductase family 1 member A1 AKR1A1 1.53 0.0182
26 Annexin A11 ANXA11 2.48 0.0188
27 Sialic acid synthase NANS 1.70 0.0204
28 Far upstream element-binding protein 1 FUBP1 -2.81 0.0216
29 Translation initiation factor eIF-2B subunit alpha EIF2B1 1.54 0.0243
30 Proteasome subunit alpha type-2 PSMA2 1.58 0.0250
31 Endoplasmic reticulum resident protein 44 ERP44 1.60 0.0258
32 NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase 75 kDa subunit, mitochondrial NDUFS1 4.17 0.0260
33 Tubulin alpha-1C chain TUBA1C 1.51 0.0272
Peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase FKBP4 FKBP4
34 CCHC-type zinc finger nucleic acid binding protein CNBP 2.09 0.0314
35 Scinderin SCIN 1.54 0.0344
36 Protein S100-A4 S100A4 -3.33 0.0366
37 Alpha-centractin ACTR1A 1.62 0.0391
Elongation factor Tu, mitochondrial TUFM
38 Inosine-5'-monophosphate dehydrogenase 2 IMPDH2 1.56 0.0393
Adenylyl cyclase-associated protein 1 CAP1
39 Galectin-3 LGALS3 1.60 0.0451
40 MYG1 exonuclease MYG1 2.31 0.0494

Page 10 of 17
Ponzone et al. Molecular Cancer          (2024) 23:105 
Spot n° Protein name Gene Name Fold change (shR/shC) p-value
1 Peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase A PPIA -2.29 0.0101
2 Histone H2B type 1-B H2BC3 -2.25 0.0253
3 Hippocalcin-like protein 1 HPCAL1 -3.97 0.0342
4 GTP-binding nuclear protein Ran RAN 2.69 0.0032
5 Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 6 EIF6 -2.84 0.0138
6 Proteasome subunit alpha type-3 PSMA3 -3.35 0.0034
7 6-phosphogluconolactonase PGLS -2.42 0.0062
8 Proteasome activator complex subunit 3 PSME3 -2.24 0.0217
9 Serine/arginine-rich splicing factor 1 SRSF1 -2.67 0.0120
10 Tubulin beta chain TUBB 3.66 0.0055
11 Cathepsin Z CTSZ -3.50 0.0001
12 Serine-threonine kinase receptor-associated protein STRAP 12.03 0.0215
13 Twinfilin-2 TWF2 -2.89 0.0029
14 Actin, cytoplasmic 1 ACTB -2.63 0.0223
15 Ubiquilin-1 UBQLN1 -2.34 0.0016
16 Glycine–tRNA ligase GARS1 -2.14 0.0370
17 Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4B EIF4B -2.61 0.0062
18 Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4B EIF4B -2.43 0.0008
19 Far upstream element-binding protein 2 KHSRP 3.81 0.0021
20 Elongation factor 2 EEF2 2.61 0.0222
21 Glycogen phosphorylase, brain form PYGB 2.09 0.0336
Elongation factor 2 EEF2
22 Vinculin VCL 2.14 0.0061
23 Vinculin VCL 2.55 0.0013
24 Protein S100-A10 S100A10 -1.66 0.0106
25 Peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase A PPIA 1.55 0.0281
26 Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5A-1 EIF5A -1.61 0.0022
27 Chromobox protein homolog 3 CBX3 -1.58 0.0222
28 Prohibitin 1 PHB1 -1.58 0.0094
29 Calpain small subunit 1 CAPNS1 -1.61 0.0368
30 Isopentenyl-diphosphate Delta-isomerase 1 IDI1 1.63 0.0053
31 26S proteasome non-ATPase regulatory subunit 14 PSMD14 1.46 0.0236
32 Large ribosomal subunit protein uL10 RPLP0 1.47 0.0107
33 Crk-like protein CRKL -1.64 0.0381
34 Elongation factor Tu, mitochondrial TUFM 1.53 0.0332
35 Anamorsin CIAPIN1 -1.56 0.0375
36 26S proteasome non-ATPase regulatory subunit 13 PSMD13 -1.98 0.0006
37 Leukocyte elastase inhibitor SERPINB1 -1.80 0.0015
38 Medium-chain specific acyl-CoA dehydrogenase, mitochondrial ACADM 1.73 0.0049
39 Elongation factor Tu, mitochondrial TUFM 1.56 0.0008
Isocitrate dehydrogenase [NADP] cytoplasmic IDH1
40 Succinate–CoA ligase [ADP-forming] subunit beta, mitochondrial SUCLA2 1.50 0.0117
41 Ornithine aminotransferase, mitochondrial OAT 1.63 0.0068
42 Fascin FSCN1 -1.90 0.0422
43 S-adenosylmethionine synthase isoform type-2 MAT2A -2.00 0.0145
44 Aldehyde dehydrogenase X, mitochondrial ALDH1B1 1.51 0.0007
45 Ras GTPase-activating protein-binding protein 1 G3BP1 1.51 0.0009
46 Prelamin-A/C LMNA -1.86 0.0025
47 Sorting nexin-9 SNX9 1.70 0.0143
Table 2 Differentially abundant proteins identified in RICTOR-deficient A375 cells by proteomic analysis. Protein names of the 
identified spots by MALDI-ToF MS, corresponding UniProt gene names, fold change expressed as the ratio between A375 shR1 and 
shC (means of the Volumes of single spots/Volume of total spots quantified by densitometric analysis), and the p-value determined by 
one-way ANOVA Test (n = 5) are indicated

Page 11 of 17
Ponzone et al. Molecular Cancer          (2024) 23:105 
Because enhanced mitochondrial respiration is typi -
cal of BRAF/MEKi-resistance [ 6, 24, 25, 33, 34], and 
in light of the mitochondrial OXPHOS gene signa -
ture identified in BRAF-mutated low RICTOR tumors 
(Fig. 2G, H), we found of particular interest the changes 
in proteins involved in metabolic pathways that fuel 
mitochondrial oxidative metabolism such as glutamine 
metabolism (OAT), mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxi -
dation (ADACM; HSD17B10), tricarboxylic acid cycle 
(SUCLA2, IDH2) and ETC (NDUFS1). Accordingly, 
through Seahorse analysis we found an overall increase 
in maximal respiration rates in all cellular backgrounds 
upon RICTOR knockdown, though some cell line-spe -
cific differences were identified for other parameters 
(Fig. 4B). Interestingly, spots identified in both M14 and 
A375 RICTOR-deficient cells contained TUFM, a key 
regulator of mitochondrial protein translation and oxi -
dative phosphorylation [ 35], processes previously impli -
cated in adaptive resistance to BRAFi in BRAF V600E 
melanoma cells [6, 36]. The NDUFS1 protein identified in 
M14 cells is the core subunit of the ETC Complex I that 
transfers electrons from NADH to the respiratory chain, 
and its overexpression enhances mitochondrial func -
tions [37]. Although we did not find significant changes 
in TUFM protein and NDUFS1 protein/mRNA levels 
between RICTOR-proficient and -deficient cells (Fig.  4C, 
S4A, B), the 2D-immunoblotting analysis revealed differ -
ent migratory patterns of TUFM and NDUFS1 moieties 
in shR1 cells in both M14 and A375 cell lines (Fig.  4D, E, 
S4C, D). Moreover, in A375 shR1 cells, the NDUFS1 anti-
body detected high molecular weight protein species that 
were absent in shC cells (Fig. 4D).
These results indicate that the increase in TUFM and 
NDUFS1 expression detected by MS in RICTOR-defi -
cient cells likely reflects the increase in proteoforms 
sensitive to RICTOR depletion, which may connect 
mTORC2 to ETC regulation. To functionally investi -
gate the involvement of mitochondrial respiration in the 
BRAFi-resistant phenotype of shR1 cells, we carried out 
CFE survival assays in the presence of Vemurafenib and/
or the ETC Complex I inhibitor Phenformin, a deriva -
tive of the anti-diabetic drug Metformin. Whereas treat -
ment with Phenformin alone similarly reduced of ∼ 40% 
the clonogenic ability of both RICTOR-deficient and –
proficient cells under basal conditions, when combined 
with Vemurafenib it selectively diminished the CFE of 
RICTOR-deficient cells to levels comparable to those of 
BRAFi-sensitive control cells (Fig.  4F). These data indi -
cate that ETC Complex I inhibition induces a substantial 
rescue of the BRAFi-tolerant phenotype of shR1 cells, 
further indicating that mitochondrial respiration plays 
an important role in protecting these cells from BRAF 
inhibition.
Increased NAMPT activity in RICTOR-depleted cells is 
crucial for their BRAFi resistance
Our proteomic analysis also identified in RICTOR-
depleted cells an increase in the expression of pro -
teins involved in NAD + metabolism and biosynthesis 
(NAMPT, NAPRT, IDH1). Specifically, NAMPT is the 
rate-limiting enzyme of the NAD + salvage pathway in 
mammals and increases in its expression/activity play 
key roles in melanoma therapeutic resistance to BRAF/
MEKi [ 7, 23]. Albeit M14 and A375 cell lines differ in 
their absolute levels of NAMPT protein expression, 
with the former having > 5 fold higher protein amount 
than the latter under basal conditions, in both lineages, 
RICTOR knockdown induced a significant increase in 
NAMPT levels relative to control conditions (Fig.  5A). 
RICTOR-depleted M14 cells also displayed increased 
NAMPT mRNA levels, while RICTOR-proficient and –
deficient A375 cells possessed similar level of NAMPT 
transcript (Fig.  5B). Measurements of NAMPT catalytic 
activity revealed an increase in M14 shR1 cells, both 
under basal conditions and upon Vemurafenib treatment 
(Fig. 5C). In A375 shC cells NAMPT activity was found 
below the threshold of detection of our enzymatic assay 
(< 0.10 pmol/h/µg), which is likely due to their intrinsi -
cally lower NAMPT levels compared to the M14 cell lin -
eage (Fig. 5A). Nevertheless, in shR1 A375 cells, NAMPT 
activity was measurable both under basal conditions and 
upon Vemurafenib treatment (0.183 pmol/h/µg and 0.123 
pmol/h/µg, respectively), indicating that also in this cell 
lineage the catalytic activity of the enzyme is increased by 
RICTOR depletion. Total NAD+ content in M14 cells was 
not affected by RICTOR silencing or Vemurafenib treat -
ment (Fig S5A), although we cannot rule out the occur -
rence of a localized accumulation of NAD + in specific 
cellular compartments or a faster NAD + consumption in 
RICTOR-silenced cells by NAD+-consuming enzymes.
Spot n° Protein name Gene Name Fold change (shR/shC) p-value
48 Glycogen phosphorylase, brain form PYGB 1.87 0.0101
Elongation factor 2 EEF2
Cytoplasmic aconitate hydratase ACO1
49 Nucleolin NCL -1.54 0.0019
50 Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein U-like protein 2 HNRNPUL2 -1.97 0.0092
51 Talin-1 TLN1 1.65 0.0253
Table 2 (continued) 

Page 12 of 17
Ponzone et al. Molecular Cancer          (2024) 23:105 
Fig. 4 RICTOR depletion in BRAFV600E melanoma cells induces alterations in mitochondrial functions and protein profiles. (A) Significantly enriched gene 
ontology (GO) categories of differentially expressed protein species identified by MALDI-ToF MS in shR1 M14 and A375 cells. Blue bars indicate GO terms 
in common between the two lineages. Redundant enriched terms relative to identical subsets of proteins have been omitted. (B) Oxygen consumption 
rate (OCR) measurement performed on indicated cell lines using Seahorse XFp analyzer. Bar graphs represent indicated functional parameters calculated 
from the same measurements ( n = 4). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 one-way ANOVA followed by Sidak’s multiple comparisons test ( C) Western blot 
analysis performed on indicated cell lines under basal conditions. ( D, E) Western blot analysis of NDUFS1 (D) and TUFM (E) proteins in the indicated cell 
lines performed after 2D-Gel electrophoresis (2D-GE) under basal conditions. Arrows indicate NDFUS1 proteoforms with different molecular weights. See 
Fig S4B-D for quantification of western blots shown in C-E. (F) CFE assay of indicated cell lines cultured for 12 days in presence of DMSO, 0.5 µM Vemu -
rafenib (Vem), 200 µM Phenformin (Phen) or the combination of 0.5 µM Vemurafenib + 200 µM Phenformin (Vem + Phen). Bar graphs represent the mean 
values of 3 independent experiments ± SEM. **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test
 

Page 13 of 17
Ponzone et al. Molecular Cancer          (2024) 23:105 
Fig. 5 RICTOR silencing in BRAFV600E melanoma cell lines leads to increased NAMPT activity which can be pharmacologically inhibited to restore sensitiv-
ity to BRAFi. (A) WB analysis performed on indicated cell lines under basal conditions. Densitometric quantification of NAMPT band intensity is indicated 
below each band. Right panel: densitometric quantification of WB, each value was normalized on shC cells of the same lineage. Bar graphs represent the 
mean values of 5 independent experiments ± SEM. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test. 
(B) qRT-PCR analysis of NAMPT gene expression in the indicated cell lines under basal conditions. Bar graphs represent mean values of 4 independent 
experiments ± SEM. *p < 0.05, one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test. ( C) NAMPT enzymatic activity of M14 cells treated for 
24 h with 5 µM Vemurafenib (Vem) or vehicle control (DMSO), normalized on untreated shC cells. Bar graphs represent mean values of 3 independent 
experiments ± SEM. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. (D) WB analysis of NAMPT protein 
in the indicated cell lines performed after 2D-GE under basal conditions. Arrows indicate NDFUS1 proteoforms with different molecular weights. See Fig 
S5B for quantification. (E) CFE assay of indicated cell lines cultured for 12 days in presence of DMSO, 0.5 µM Vem, 2.5 nM FK866 or the combination of 0.5 
µM Vem + 2.5 nM FK866 (Vem + FK866). Bar graphs represent the mean values of independent experiments ± SEM (n = 3 for M14 cells; n = 4 for A375 cells). 
*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001, one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test. (F) CFE assay of M14 cells cultured for 
12 days in presence of DMSO, 0.5 µM Vem, 1.2 nM OT-82 or the combination of 0.5 µM Vem + 1.2 nM OT-82 (Vem + OT-82). Bar graphs represent the mean 
values of 3 independent experiments ± SEM. *p < 0.05, one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test. ( G) Tumor weights of tumor 
xenografts of shC or shR1 M14 cells in NSG mice ( n = 8 mice/group), treated for 14 days with the indicated drugs. ** p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001, 
two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. (H) Growth curves of M14 shC or shR1 xenografts used for tumor weight measurement, 
each graph refers to the treatment indicated at the top. * p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test performed 
at the experimental endpoint
 

Page 14 of 17
Ponzone et al. Molecular Cancer          (2024) 23:105 
Immunoblotting analysis aimed to detect differences in 
NAMPT moieties after 2D electrophoresis between RIC -
TOR-deficient and -proficient cells also revealed changes 
not only in levels but also in the migratory pattern of 
some NAMPT proteoforms in both M14 and A375 back -
grounds (Fig. 5D, S5B). Overall, our analysis revealed that 
RICTOR deficiency is coupled to an increased NAMPT 
protein expression and/or activity in BRAF V600E mela -
noma cells, and that both transcriptional and post-tran -
scriptional mechanisms can account for this effect in a 
cell lineage-specific manner.
To verify whether in shR1 cells the overall increase 
in NAMPT activity plays a role in their BRAFi resis -
tance, we compared the survival of mTORC2-deficient 
and –proficient cells by CFE assays carried out in the 
presence of Vemurafenib and/or two structurally unre -
lated NAMPT inhibitors (NAMPTi), FK866 and OT-82 
(Fig.  5E, F). Similar to Phenformin treatment, exposure 
of cells to low nanomolar concentrations of both FK866 
and OT-82 caused a comparable reduction of CFE in 
both genotypes. In the A375 cellular background, FK866 
alone caused a more pronounced drop in cell clonogenic-
ity in all genotypes as compared to the M14 lineage. In 
the latter, the combination of Vemurafenib + FK866 or 
OT-82 caused a drop in the clonogenicity of RICTOR–
deficient cells equivalent to that observed in control cells. 
Thus, the inhibition of NAMPT enhances the response of 
RICTOR-deficient cells to Vemurafenib, indicating that 
the increased activity of the enzyme in these cells is criti -
cal for their BRAFi resistance.
To verify if the NAMPT-dependent BRAFi-resistant 
phenotype induced by RICTOR depletion holds true also 
in vivo, we injected M14 RICTOR-deficient and -profi -
cient cells subcutaneously in NOD scid gamma (NSG) 
mice, and when tumors became palpable, mice were 
treated with Vemurafenib and/or FK866. Tumor growth 
was progressively monitored, and after 14 days of treat -
ment the animals were sacrificed and tumors were mea -
sured and weighted. As shown in Fig.  5G, H and S5C, 
whereas tumors generated by RICTOR-proficient cells 
displayed a decrease in weight of about 50% in response 
to Vemurafenib, weight and the volume of RICTOR-
deficient tumors at the experimental endpoint were com-
parable to those of vehicle-treated control tumors. The 
combination of Vemurafenib and FK866 induced instead 
in RICTOR-deficient tumors a growth inhibition similar 
to that of Vemurafenib-treated control tumors. The sen -
sitivity of RICTOR-deficient and -proficient xenografts 
to the treatment with NAMPTi alone differed between 
the two genotypes, as shR1 tumors resulted overall less 
responsive to the individual FK866 treatment. Never -
theless, even in this in vivo setting, NAMPT inhibi -
tion combined to Vemurafenib treatment significantly 
enhanced the responses of RICTOR-deficient xenografts 
to Vemurafenib, confirming that NAMPT activity is key 
for counteracting the response of these tumors to BRAFi.
Discussion
Our research uncovers an unforeseen role for RICTOR/
mTORC2 downregulation in promoting the development 
of resistance to BRAFi-based therapies in BRAF V600E 
melanoma cells. This discovery seems at odds with the 
well-established role of mTORC2 signaling in promoting 
cell growth and survival across various pathophysiologi -
cal contexts [ 14, 38–40], including melanoma progres -
sion [38, 39]. However, our findings align with emerging 
evidence indicating tumor suppressive functions for 
mTORC2 in different settings [15, 16, 41].
In fact, we demonstrate that downregulation of RIC -
TOR in drug-naïve cells accelerates the acquisition of 
resistance to Vemurafenib, indicating a role for mTORC2 
downregulation during the early adaptation to BRAFi. 
Indeed, RICTOR-depleted melanoma cells exhibit intrin-
sic tolerance to BRAFi, either alone or in combination 
with MEKi. This adaptive role is further supported by 
the observation of endogenous RICTOR decline during 
the initial phase of response of drug-naïve cells to BRAF 
inhibition. Of note, we described this decrease also in 
cellular colonies surviving sustained Vemurafenib treat -
ment, which likely represent the precursors of future 
BRAFi-resistant cell populations.
Our data suggest that a decrease in MAPK signal -
ing is the primary trigger for this phenomenon, which 
occurs through processes leading to the reduction of 
RICTOR protein levels. Although the specific molecu -
lar mechanism remains unidentified, we propose that 
BRAFi-induced RICTOR downregulation relies on the 
modulation of its protein stability, as it is sensitive to pro-
teasomal inhibition and unrelated to changes in mRNA 
levels. These data are consistent with recent findings that 
highlight the importance of post-translational mecha -
nisms on the overall regulation of RICTOR/mTORC2 
in different models [ 42–45]. However, it remains pos -
sible that other unidentified factors (like microRNAs or 
changes in mRNA translation [ 8, 46, 47]) may also con -
tribute to regulate RICTOR protein levels at different 
stages of melanoma progression.
In many cases, mTORC2 functions have been 
approached as a prospective target in tumor cells display-
ing advanced stages of therapeutic resistance. These cells 
are also typically characterized by upregulation in growth 
factor receptor signaling [ 3], for which mTORC2 acts as 
amplifier of mitogenic stimuli [ 9]. Consistently, we also 
found a generalized decrease in basal clonogenicity after 
inducing RICTOR depletion in irreversibly resistant cells. 
However, our study shows that the specific response of 
RICTOR-deficient BiR cells to BRAF/MEKi in this con -
text ranges from an increased sensitivity (in A375 BiR 

Page 15 of 17
Ponzone et al. Molecular Cancer          (2024) 23:105 
cells) to a stimulation of clonogenicity to BRAF/MEKi (in 
M14 and SK-MEL-28 cells). The described behaviour of 
BiR A375 cells is in agreement with the finding of Jebali 
et al. [ 38], that showed enhanced responses of BRAFi-
resistant A375 cells to mTOR(C2) inhibition.
Thus, although the effects of RICTOR depletion in 
the responses of cells to targeted therapy may vary in 
BiR cells, RICTOR knockdown in drug-naïve cells con -
sistently promotes a faster progression towards BRAFi 
resistance.
Proteomic analysis of RICTOR-deficient cells revealed 
significant alterations in proteins related to NAD + bio -
synthesis and mitochondrial processes. We observed that 
RICTOR knockdown correlates with increased NAMPT 
expression/activity, with multi-layered and cell lineage-
specific mechanisms leading to NAMPT upregulation. 
RICTOR deficiency alters post-translational modifica -
tions in NAMPT likely affecting its activation and/or sta -
bility, which is suggestive of a complex interplay between 
mTORC2 signaling and NAD+ biosynthesis in melanoma. 
2D proteomic analysis also identified a differential repre -
sentation of NDUFS1 (core component of ETC Complex 
I) and TUFM (mitochondrial translation regulator) pro -
teoforms, suggesting mTORC2 regulation on mitochon -
drial dynamics in melanoma. This is further supported by 
GSEA analysis of melanoma TCGA data, which indicates 
upregulation of mitochondrial gene signatures in low 
RICTOR tumors. The connection between increase in 
mitochondrial functions and resistance to BRAFi is sup -
ported by our experimental evidence, as both NAMPT 
and ETC inhibition reverses the BRAFi tolerance of 
RICTOR-depleted cells. Our findings are supported by 
previous works that show NDUFS1 modulation by post-
translational modifications, and by poorly-characterized 
associations between RICTOR downregulation and gain 
of mitochondrial functions [18, 19, 48].
The clinical significance of our findings is supported 
by analysis of the cutaneous melanoma subset in the 
TCGA database, which reveals a positive correlation 
between lower RICTOR protein and poorer outcomes in 
patients with BRAF V600E mutations. Conversely, higher 
levels of RAPTOR mRNA correlate with worse progno -
sis, consistent with the pro-tumorigenic role of mTORC1 
in melanoma [ 13]. These results suggest that the use of 
pan-mTOR inhibitors, often proposed in the context of 
melanoma treatment [ 40, 49], could potentially repre -
sent a double-edged sword, with mTORC1 inhibition 
potentially counteracting therapeutic resistance while 
mTORC2 inhibition exacerbating it.
This highlights the importance of assessing RICTOR 
protein levels for diagnostic and prognostic purposes, 
given the poor correlation between RICTOR mRNA 
and protein levels in melanoma patients. Accordingly, 
patients with low RICTOR tumors may benefit from 
NAMPTi therapy in combination with targeted therapy, 
with low RICTOR levels serving as a predictive bio -
marker for NAMPTi response, thus improving the appli -
cations of NAMPT inhibitors in the clinics.
An outstanding question is whether Immune Check -
point Inhibitors would represent a valuable alternative 
for the treatment of BRAF-mutated low RICTOR tumors. 
This is especially relevant in light of recent evidence that 
connect tumor immunogenicity with metabolic altera -
tions reminiscent of those we observed in RICTOR-defi -
cient cells [50, 51].
In conclusion, our study reveals an important role for 
RICTOR/mTORC2 in modulating response to BRAFi 
therapy, highlighting potential therapeutic avenues. In 
particular, RICTOR protein may serve as a suitable bio -
marker for guiding therapeutic strategies, rather than as 
an actionable target per se, as often proposed. These find-
ings strongly emphasize the need for personalized treat -
ment strategies based on tumor molecular profiles.
Abbreviations
AKT  V-Akt Murine Thymoma Viral Oncogene Homolog
ACADM  acyl-CoA dehydrogenase medium chain
ALDH1B1  Aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 family member B1
AXL  AXL receptor tyrosine kinase
BRAF  v-Raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B
DEPTOR  DEP domain-containing mTOR-interacting protein
ERK1/2  Extracellular signal-regulated kinase1/2
ETC  Electron Transport Chain
GAPDH  Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase
GATD3  Glutamine Amidotransferase Class 1 Domain Containing 3
GSEA  Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
HSD17B10  Hydroxysteroid 17-beta dehydrogenase 10
IDH1  Socitrate dehydrogenase (NADP(+)) 1
MAPK  Mitogen-activated protein kinase
MEK1/2  Mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase1/2
MEM  Minimum Essential Media
MITF  Melanocyte inducing transcription factor
mLST8  Mammalian lethal with Sect. 13 protein 8
mTOR  mammalian target of rapamycin
NAD  Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
NAMPT  Nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase
NAPRT  Nicotinate phosphoribosyltransferase
NDRG1  N-myc downstream regulated gene 1
NDUFS1  NADH: Ubiquinone Oxidoreductase Core Subunit S1
NSG  NOD/SCID/IL2γr null
OAT  ornithine aminotransferase
OXPHOS  oxidative phosphorylation
PDHA1  pyruvate dehydrogenase E1 subunit alpha 1
PI3K  Phosphoinositide 3-kinase
PKCα  Protein kinase C-α
PRAS40  proline-rich Akt substrate of 40 kDa
PRDX5  Peroxiredoxin 5
PROTOR1/2  Protein observed with Rictor-1/2
P90RSK  Ribosomal protein S6 kinase A1
RB  RB transcriptional corepressor 1
RICTOR  Rapamycin-insensitive companion of mammalian target of 
rapamycin
SGK1  Serum and glucocorticoid-regulated kinase 1
SIN1  Stress-activated protein kinase-interacting protein
SOD2  Superoxide dismutase
SOX10  SRY-box transcription factor 10
SUCLA2  Succinate-CoA ligase ADP-forming subunit beta
TCGA  The cancer genome atlas
TUFM  Tu translation elongation factor, mitochondrial

Page 16 of 17
Ponzone et al. Molecular Cancer          (2024) 23:105 
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at https://doi.
org/10.1186/s12943-024-02010-1.
Supplementary Material 1
Supplementary Material 2
Supplementary Material 3
Supplementary Material 4
Supplementary Material 5
Supplementary Material 6
Supplementary Material 7
Supplementary Material 8
Supplementary Material 9
Supplementary Material 10
Supplementary Material 11
Supplementary Material 12
Supplementary Material 13
Supplementary Material 14
Supplementary Material 15
Supplementary Material 16
Acknowledgements
We thank Chiara Ambrogio, Emilio Hirsch, Sabrina Rizzolio, Stefano Gustincich, 
Massimiliano Mazzone, Francesco Neri, Salvatore Oliviero and Pier Paolo 
Pandolfi for critical discussion and suggestions.
Author contributions
EC and LP designed the study and wrote the manuscript. LP , VA, CLL, LA, SF, 
BT, SS, EM, GB, DV, IF, and FO performed the experiments. LP , NV, VA and FO 
performed animal experiments. AS, EM, YA performed bioinformatics analysis. 
PP supervised the bioinformatics analyses. LV, ES performed proteomic 
experiments under the supervision of CL and LB. MG and VA performed 
biochemical analysis. NR and CR supervised the biochemical analyses. EC, FC, 
VA, PD, CL, VP and DT provided funding. EC, LP , VA, SF, BT, SS, FC, FA, SD, CL, PD, 
AM, VP , PEP , PP , NR, CR and DT were involved in data analysis and manuscript 
editing. EC supervised the study.
Funding
EC was supported by a liberal donation from the Bank of Italy (Banca d’Italia). 
VA was supported by the Italian Association for Cancer Research (AIRC) under 
the MFAG-2021 – ID. 26004 project – P .I. VA. PD was supported by AIRC under 
the IG 2022–27353, by a grant from Unione Europea-NextGenerationEU 
PNRR M4C2-Investimento 1.4-CN00000041 and by Ministero della Salute 
(RF-2021-12371961). FC was supported by a grant from Fondazione Ricerca 
Molinette Onlus Torino, Italy (8893/5; F.C.). VP was supported by AIRC under 
the IG 2021 – ID. 24851. DT was supported by AIRC under the IG 2022– ID. 
27054 project – P .I. DT, by a grant from National Center for Gene Therapy and 
Drugs based on RNA Technology, Spoke2, PNRR M4C2-Investimento 1.4- 
CN00000041-DT and by Ex-POST 21 SanPaolo/UNITO-DT. CL was supported 
by a grant from Università di Siena, PIANO DI SOSTEGNO ALLA RICERCA (PSR) 
2022-Curiosity-driven (F-CUR). LP was supported by Fondazione Onlus per la 
Ricerca Biomedica (FORB) and currently by a fellowship from the Department 
of Molecular Biotechnology, University of Turin, Italy.
Data availability
Full and uncropped western blots were uploaded as Supplementary Material. 
The datasets generated during and/or analyzed during the current study are 
available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. The mass 
spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange 
Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/) 
with the dataset identifiers PXD045346 and PXD050614.
Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate
All mice were treated in accordance with the European guidelines, Directive 
2010/63, and with the approval of the Animal Care and Use Committee of the 
University of Turin, Italy, and of the Italian Ministry of Health (authorization N° 
194/2017-PR).
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
Author details
1Molecular Biotechnology Center “Guido Tarone” , University of Turin,  
Turin 10126, Italy
2Department of Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences, University 
of Turin, Turin 10126, Italy
3Department of Science and Technological Innovation, University of 
Piemonte Orientale, Alessandria 15121, Italy
4Functional Proteomic Section, Department of Life Sciences, University of 
Siena, Siena 53100, Italy
5Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New 
York, USA
6Department of Life Sciences and Systems Biology, University of Turin, 
Turin 10126, Italy
7Department of Agriculture, Food and Environmental Sciences, 
Polytechnic University of Marche, Ancona 60131, Italy
8Department of Personal Care, dsm-firmenich, Kaiseraugst  
4303, Switzerland
9Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences, University of Turin,  
Turin 10124, Italy
10GenomeUp, Rome 00144, Italy
11Department of Medical Sciences, University of Turin, Turin 10124, Italy
12Neuroscience Department “Rita Levi Montalcini” , University of Turin, 
Turin 10126, Italy
13Department of Oncology, University of Turin, Turin 10124, Italy
Received: 30 September 2023 / Accepted: 26 April 2024
References
1. Jenkins RW, Fisher DE. Treatment of Advanced Melanoma in 2020 and 
Beyond. Journal of Investigative Dermatology. Volume 141. Elsevier B.V.; 2021. 
pp. 23–31.
2. Moriceau G, Hugo W, Hong A, Shi H, Kong X, Yu CC, et al. Tunable-combi-
natorial mechanisms of Acquired Resistance Limit the Efficacy of BRAF/
MEK cotargeting but result in Melanoma Drug Addiction. Cancer Cell. 
2015;27(2):240–56.
3. Tangella LP , Clark ME, Gray ES. Resistance mechanisms to targeted therapy 
in BRAF-mutant melanoma - A mini review. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta - 
General Subjects. Volume 1865. Elsevier B.V.; 2021.
4. Indini A, Fiorilla I, Ponzone L, Calautti E, Audrito V. NAD/NAMPT and mTOR 
pathways in Melanoma: drivers of Drug Resistance and prospective thera-
peutic targets. International Journal of Molecular Sciences. Volume 23. MDPI; 
2022.
5. Luebker SA, Koepsell SA. Diverse mechanisms of BRAF inhibitor resistance in 
melanoma identified in clinical and preclinical studies. Frontiers in Oncology. 
Volume 9. Frontiers Media S.A.; 2019.
6. Zhang G, Frederick DT, Wu L, Wei Z, Krepler C, Srinivasan S, et al. Targeting 
mitochondrial biogenesis to overcome drug resistance to MAPK inhibitors. J 
Clin Invest. 2016;126(5):1834–56.
7. Audrito V, Managò A, Gaudino F, Deaglio S. Targeting metabolic reprogram-
ming in metastatic melanoma: The key role of nicotinamide phosphoribosyl-
transferase (NAMPT). Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2020;98(March):192–201.
8. Shen S, Vagner S, Robert C. Persistent Cancer cells: the Deadly survivors. 
Volume 183. Cell. Cell; 2020. pp. 860–74.
9. Liu GY, Sabatini DM. mTOR at the nexus of nutrition, growth, ageing and 
disease. Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology. Volume 21. Nature Research; 
2020. pp. 183–203.
10. Ebner M, Sinkovics B, Szczygieł M, Ribeiro DW, Yudushkin I. Localization of 
mTORC2 activity inside cells. J Cell Biol. 2017;216(2):343–53.

Page 17 of 17
Ponzone et al. Molecular Cancer          (2024) 23:105 
11. Knudsen JR, Fritzen AM, James DE, Jensen TE, Kleinert M, Richter EA. Growth 
factor-dependent and -independent activation of mTORC2. Vol. 31, trends in 
Endocrinology and Metabolism. Elsevier Inc.; 2020. pp. 13–24.
12. Saxton RA, Sabatini DM. mTOR Signaling in Growth, Metabolism, and Disease. 
Volume 168. Cell. Cell; 2017. pp. 960–76.
13. Damsky W, Micevic G, Meeth K, Muthusamy V, Curley DP , Santhanakrishnan 
M, et al. mTORC1 activation blocks brafV600E-induced growth arrest but is 
insufficient for melanoma formation. Cancer Cell. 2015;27(1):41–56.
14. Guertin DA, Stevens DM, Saitoh M, Kinkel S, Crosby K, Sheen JH, et al. mTOR 
complex 2 is required for the development of prostate Cancer Induced by 
Pten loss in mice. Cancer Cell. 2009;15(2):148–59.
15. Akgül S, Li Y, Zheng S, Kool M, Treisman DM, Li C, et al. Opposing tumor-
promoting and -suppressive functions of Rictor/mTORC2 Signaling in Adult 
Glioma and Pediatric SHH Medulloblastoma. Cell Rep. 2018;24(2):463–e4785.
16. Gu Y, Albuquerque CP , Braas D, Zhang W, Villa GR, Bi J et al. mTORC2 Regulates 
Amino Acid Metabolism in Cancer by Phosphorylation of the Cystine-Gluta-
mate Antiporter xCT. Mol Cell. 2017;67(1):128–138.e7.
17. Tassone B, Saoncella S, Neri F, Ala U, Brusa D, Magnuson MA et al. Rictor / 
mTORC2 deficiency enhances keratinocyte stress tolerance via mitohormesis. 
2017;731–46.
18. Entwisle SW, Calejman CM, Valente AS, Lawrence RT, Hung CM, Guertin DA, 
et al. Proteome and phosphoproteome analysis of brown adipocytes reveals 
that RICTOR loss dampens global insulin/AKT signaling. Mol Cell Proteomics. 
2020;19(7):1104–19.
19. Hung CM, Calejman CM, Sanchez-Gurmaches J, Li H, Clish CB, Hettmer S, et 
al. Rictor/mTORC2 loss in the Myf5 lineage reprograms brown fat metabo-
lism and protects mice against obesity and metabolic disease. Cell Rep. 
2014;8(1):256–71.
20. Martinez-Lopez N, Mattar P , Toledo M, Bains H, Kalyani M, Aoun ML et al. 
mTORC2–NDRG1–CDC42 axis couples fasting to mitochondrial fission. Nat 
Cell Biol. 2023.
21. Lamming DW, Demirkan G, Boylan JM, Mihaylova MM, Peng T, Ferreira J, 
et al. Hepatic signaling by the mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 2 
(mTORC2). FASEB J. 2014;28(1):300–15.
22. Audrito V, Managò A, La Vecchia S, Zamporlini F, Vitale N, Baroni G, et al. 
Nicotinamide Phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT) as a therapeutic target in 
BRAF-Mutated metastatic melanoma. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2018;110(3):290–303.
23. Ohanna M, Cerezo M, Nottet N, Bille K, Didier R, Beranger G, et al. Pivotal role 
of NAMPT in the switch of melanoma cells toward an invasive and drug-
resistant phenotype. Genes Dev. 2018;32(5–6):448–61.
24. Baenke F, Chaneton B, Smith M, Van Den Broek N, Hogan K, Tang H, et al. 
Resistance to BRAF inhibitors induces glutamine dependency in melanoma 
cells. Mol Oncol. 2016;10(1):73–84.
25. Pendleton KE, Wang K, Echeverria GV. Rewiring of mitochondrial metabolism 
in therapy-resistant cancers: permanent and plastic adaptations. Frontiers in 
Cell and Developmental Biology. Volume 11. Frontiers Media SA; 2023.
26. Yang Q, Inoki K, Ikenoue T, Guan KL. Identification of Sin1 as an essential 
TORC2 component required for complex formation and kinase activity. 
Genes Dev. 2006;20(20):2820–32.
27. Yoon SO, Shin S, Karreth FA, Roux PP , Dephoure N, Blenis J et al. Focal Adhe-
sion- and IGF1R-Dependent Survival and Migratory Pathways Mediate Tumor 
Resistance to Focal Adhesion- and IGF1R-Dependent Survival and Migratory 
Pathways Mediate Tumor Resistance to mTORC1 / 2 Inhibition. Mol Cell. 
2017;67(3):512–527.e4.
28. Mahajan K, Mahajan NP . PI3K-independent AKT activation in cancers: a trea-
sure trove for novel therapeutics. J Cell Physiol. 2012;227:3178–84.
29. Müller J, Krijgsman O, Tsoi J, Robert L, Hugo W, Song C et al. Low MITF/AXL 
ratio predicts early resistance to multiple targeted drugs in melanoma. Nat 
Commun. 2014;5.
30. Capparelli C, Purwin TJ, Glasheen MK, Caksa S, Tiago M, Wilski N et al. Target-
ing SOX10-deficient cells to reduce the dormant-invasive phenotype state in 
melanoma. Nat Commun. 2022;13(1).
31. Sun C, Wang L, Huang S, Heynen GJJE, Prahallad A, Robert C, et al. Reversible 
and adaptive resistance to BRAF(V600E) inhibition in melanoma. Nature. 
2014;508(1):118–22.
32. Carotenuto P , Romano A, Barbato A, Quadrano P , Brillante S, Volpe M et al. 
Targeting the MITF/APAF-1 axis as salvage therapy for MAPK inhibitors in 
resistant melanoma. Cell Rep. 2022;41(6).
33. Haq R, Shoag J, Andreu-Perez P , Yokoyama S, Edelman H, Rowe GC, et al. 
Oncogenic BRAF regulates oxidative metabolism via PGC1α and MITF. Cancer 
Cell. 2013;23(3):302–15.
34. Feng J, Lian Z, Xia X, Lu Y, Hu K, Zhang Y, et al. Targeting metabolic vulnerabil-
ity in mitochondria conquers MEK inhibitor resistance in KRAS-mutant lung 
cancer. Acta Pharm Sin B. 2023;13(3):1145–63.
35. Wang F, Zhang D, Zhang D, Li P , Gao Y. Mitochondrial protein translation: 
emerging roles and clinical significance in Disease. Frontiers in Cell and 
Developmental Biology. Volume 9. Frontiers Media S.A.; 2021.
36. Smith LK, Parmenter T, Kleinschmidt M, Kusnadi EP , Kang J, Martin CA et al. 
Adaptive translational reprogramming of metabolism limits the response to 
targeted therapy in BRAFV600 melanoma. Nat Commun. 2022;13(1).
37. Qi B, Song L, Hu L, Guo D, Ren G, Peng T, et al. Cardiac-specific overexpres-
sion of Ndufs1 ameliorates cardiac dysfunction after myocardial infarction 
by alleviating mitochondrial dysfunction and apoptosis. Exp Mol Med. 
2022;54(7):946–60.
38. Jebali A, Battistella M, Lebbé C, Dumaz N. Rictor affects melanoma tumori-
genesis and its resistance to targeted therapy. Biomedicines. 2021;9(10).
39. Schmidt KM, Dietrich P , Hackl C, Guenzle J, Bronsert P , Wagner C, et al. Inhibi-
tion of mTORC2/RICTOR Impairs Melanoma Hepatic Metastasis. Neoplasia 
(United States). 2018;20(12):1198–208.
40. Kim LC, Cook RS, Chen J. MTORC1 and mTORC2 in cancer and the tumor 
microenvironment. Volume 36. Oncogene. Nature Publishing Group; 2017. 
pp. 2191–201.
41. Sun Y, Li R, Nong B, Songyang Z, Wang X, Ma W, et al. A Comprehensive Pan-
cancer Analysis of the potential Biological functions and Prognosis values of 
RICTOR. Genes (Basel). 2023;14(6):1280.
42. Luciano AK, Korobkina ED, Lyons SP , Haley JA, Fluharty SM, Jung SM et al. 
Proximity labeling of endogenous RICTOR identifies mTOR complex 2 regula-
tion by ADP ribosylation factor ARF1. J Biol Chem. 2022;298(10).
43. Koo J, Wu X, Mao Z, Khuri FR, Sun SY. Rictor undergoes glycogen synthase 
kinase 3 (GSK3)-dependent, FBXW7-mediated ubiquitination and protea-
somal degradation. J Biol Chem. 2015;290(22):14120–9.
44. Sane S, Srinivasan R, Potts RA, Eikanger M, Zagirova D, Freeling J, et al. 
UBXN2A suppresses the Rictor-mTORC2 signaling pathway, an estab-
lished tumorigenic pathway in human colorectal cancer. Oncogene. 
2023;42(21):1763–76.
45. Pergolizzi B, Panuzzo C, Shahzad Ali M, Iacono M, Lo, Levron CL, Ponzone L et 
al. Two conserved glycine residues in mammalian and Dictyostelium Rictor 
are required for mTORC2 activity and integrity. J Cell Sci. 2019;132(22).
46. Ghafouri-Fard S, Gholipour M, Taheri M. MicroRNA signature in Melanoma: 
biomarkers and therapeutic targets. Frontiers in Oncology. Volume 11. Fron-
tiers Media S.A.; 2021.
47. Micevic G, Muthusamy V, Damsky W, Theodosakis N, Liu X, Meeth K, et al. 
DNMT3b modulates Melanoma Growth by Controlling levels of mTORC2 
component RICTOR. Cell Rep. 2016;14(9):2180–92.
48. Gowthami N, Sunitha B, Kumar M, Keshava Prasad TS, Gayathri N, Padmanab-
han B, et al. Mapping the protein phosphorylation sites in human mitochon-
drial complex I (NADH: Ubiquinone oxidoreductase): a bioinformatics study 
with implications for brain aging and neurodegeneration. J Chem Neuroanat. 
2019;95:13–28.
49. Greger JG, Eastman SD, Zhang V, Bleam MR, Hughes AM, Smitheman KN, et 
al. Combinations of BRAF, MEK, and PI3K/mTOR inhibitors overcome acquired 
resistance to the BRAF inhibitor GSK2118436 dabrafenib, mediated by NRAS 
or MEK mutations. Mol Cancer Ther. 2012;11(4):909–20.
50. Lv H, Lv G, Chen C, Zong Q, Jiang G, Ye D, et al. NAD + metabolism maintains 
inducible PD-L1 expression to Drive Tumor Immune Evasion. Cell Metab. 
2021;33(1):110–e1275.
51. Mangalhara KC, Varanasi SK, Johnson MA, Burns MJ, Rojas GR, Esparza Moltó 
PB et al. Manipulating mitochondrial electron flow enhances tumor immuno-
genicity. Science (New York, N.Y.), 381(6664), 1316–1323.
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations. 