---
pmid: '16730026'
title: Crystal structure of human pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase.
authors:
- Meng Z
- Lou Z
- Liu Z
- Li M
- Zhao X
- Bartlam M
- Rao Z
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2006.04.053
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Crystal structure of human pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase.
**Authors:** Meng Z, Lou Z, Liu Z, Li M, Zhao X, Bartlam M, Rao Z
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmb.2006.04.053](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2006.04.053)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Biol. 2006 Jun 23;359(5):1364-77. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2006.04.053. Epub 
2006 May 11.

Crystal structure of human pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase.

Meng Z(1), Lou Z, Liu Z, Li M, Zhao X, Bartlam M, Rao Z.

Author information:
(1)Tsinghua-IBP Joint Research Group for Structural Biology, Tsinghua 
University, Beijing, China.

Pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase (P5CR) is a universal housekeeping enzyme that 
catalyzes the reduction of Delta(1)-pyrroline-5-carboxylate (P5C) to proline 
using NAD(P)H as the cofactor. The enzymatic cycle between P5C and proline is 
very important for the regulation of amino acid metabolism, intracellular redox 
potential, and apoptosis. Here, we present the 2.8 Angstroms resolution 
structure of the P5CR apo enzyme, its 3.1 Angstroms resolution ternary complex 
with NAD(P)H and substrate-analog. The refined structures demonstrate a 
decameric architecture with five homodimer subunits and ten catalytic sites 
arranged around a peripheral circular groove. Mutagenesis and kinetic studies 
reveal the pivotal roles of the dinucleotide-binding Rossmann motif and residue 
Glu221 in the human enzyme. Human P5CR is thermostable and the crystals were 
grown at 37 degrees C. The enzyme is implicated in oxidation of the anti-tumor 
drug thioproline.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2006.04.053
PMID: 16730026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
