---
pmid: '27113755'
title: UBQLN4 recognizes mislocalized transmembrane domain proteins and targets these
  to proteasomal degradation.
authors:
- Suzuki R
- Kawahara H
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2016'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC5278606
doi: 10.15252/embr.201541402
---

# UBQLN4 recognizes mislocalized transmembrane domain proteins and targets these to proteasomal degradation.
**Authors:** Suzuki R, Kawahara H
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2016)
**DOI:** [10.15252/embr.201541402](https://doi.org/10.15252/embr.201541402)
**PMC:** [PMC5278606](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5278606/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2016 Jun;17(6):842-57. doi: 10.15252/embr.201541402. Epub 2016 Apr
22.

UBQLN4 recognizes mislocalized transmembrane domain proteins and targets these 
to proteasomal degradation.

Suzuki R(1), Kawahara H(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Department of Biological 
Sciences, Tokyo Metropolitan University, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Department of Biological 
Sciences, Tokyo Metropolitan University, Tokyo, Japan hkawa@tmu.ac.jp.

The majority of transmembrane proteins are integrated into the endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER) by virtue of a signal sequence-mediated co-translational process. 
However, a substantial portion of transmembrane proteins fails to reach the ER, 
leading to mislocalized cytosolic polypeptides. Their appropriate recognition 
and removal are of the utmost importance to avoid proteotoxic stress. Here, we 
identified UBQLN4 as a BAG6-binding factor that eliminates newly synthesized 
defective polypeptides. Using a truncated transmembrane domain protein whose 
degradation occurs during a pre-ER incorporation process as a model, we show 
that UBQLN4 recognizes misassembled proteins in the cytoplasm and targets these 
to the proteasome. We suggest that the exposed transmembrane segment of the 
defective polypeptides is essential for the UBQLN4-mediated substrate 
discrimination. Importantly, UBQLN4 recognizes not only the defective model 
substrate but also a pool of endogenous defective proteins that were induced by 
the depletion of the SRP54 subunit of the signal recognition particle. This 
study identifies a novel quality control mechanism for newly synthesized and 
defective transmembrane domain polypeptides that fail to reach their correct 
destination at the ER membrane.

© 2016 The Authors.

DOI: 10.15252/embr.201541402
PMCID: PMC5278606
PMID: 27113755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The majority of transmembrane proteins are integrated into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) by virtue of a signal sequence‐mediated co‐translational process. However, a substantial portion of transmembrane proteins fails to reach the ER, leading to mislocalized cytosolic polypeptides. Their appropriate recognition and removal are of the utmost importance to avoid proteotoxic stress. Here, we identified UBQLN4 as a BAG6‐binding factor that eliminates newly synthesized defective polypeptides. Using a truncated transmembrane domain protein whose degradation occurs during a pre‐ER incorporation process as a model, we show that UBQLN4 recognizes misassembled proteins in the cytoplasm and targets these to the proteasome. We suggest that the exposed transmembrane segment of the defective polypeptides is essential for the UBQLN4‐mediated substrate discrimination. Importantly, UBQLN4 recognizes not only the defective model substrate but also a pool of endogenous defective proteins that were induced by the depletion of the SRP54 subunit of the signal recognition particle. This study identifies a novel quality control mechanism for newly synthesized and defective transmembrane domain polypeptides that fail to reach their correct destination at the ER membrane.

Introduction

Recent progress in genome analysis revealed that more than one‐fifth of proteins encoded in the mammalian genome are putative transmembrane (TM) proteins 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 . Since TM proteins contain an almost 20‐residue long bulky hydrophobic stretch called the transmembrane domain (TMD), their biogenesis in the aqueous cytosol requires specialized machinery dedicated to TM protein assembly 5 . Indeed, many TM proteins possess a characteristic signal sequence (SS) at the N‐terminus of the nascent polypeptide for endoplasmic reticulum (ER) targeting 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 . The timely and accurate capture of the SS in the ribosome–nascent chain complex is essential for the proper initiation of membrane protein assembly in the ER 10 . At the initial stage of translation on cytosolic ribosomes, the SS of nascent chain polypeptides is recognized by a signal recognition particle (SRP), a novel class of GTPase whose activity is regulated by nucleotide‐dependent dimerization cycles 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 . Subsequently, the SRP‐ribosome complex is recruited to the surface of the rough ER, where newly synthesized polypeptides are assembled in the ER membrane through SRP receptor and translocon complexes 6 , 9 , 10 , 16 .

The fidelity of SS recognition by the SRP, however, is challenged by the kinetic difficulties of targeting nascent chain polypeptides elongating from the ribosome 10 , 17 , 18 . Indeed, the SRP must identify the targeted substrates within several seconds in the cytosol; a nascent polypeptide reportedly loses its competence to be targeted by the SRP when it exceeds a critical length of 140 residues 10 , 19 . Furthermore, the concentration of the SRP is estimated to be more than 100‐fold lower than that of the translating ribosomes 10 . Thus, difficulties of SRP recognition within a limited time window in the crowded cytosol might result in the probable production of defective SRP substrates with an orphan TMD 20 , 21 . Similar consequences might occur when SRP subunits are compromised or when the ratio of the SRP to its client substrates is overwhelmed 18 , 22 .

In accordance with these studies, it was reported that some classes of TM proteins fail frequently to access the ER membrane 21 , 23 . Indeed, a surprisingly low efficiency of ER targeting (as low as 60% success for some newly synthesized ER proteins) was reported, resulting in the production of defective (and mislocalized) proteins 21 , 24 , 25 . Their appropriate recognition and removal before they reach the lumen of the ER are of real significance for the maintenance of cellular homeostasis 26 , 27 . Defects in SS machinery can lead to various human diseases such as prion disease, amyloid precursor protein‐derived neurodegeneration, and autosomal dominant late‐onset diabetes 28 , 29 , 30 , 31 . Nevertheless, the molecular mechanism of the elimination pathway that targets newly synthesized and mistargeted TMD protein is not well understood.

A hydrophobic TMD that is normally buried in the lipid bilayer tends to be exposed in the aqueous cytoplasm by mistargeting of TM proteins during the course of their biogenesis. BAG6, a major histocompatibility complex (MHC)‐encoded gene product, was identified as an essential factor in the metabolism of newly synthesized defective and/or mistargeted TM proteins 25 , 32 , 33 , 34 , 35 , 36 . The BAG6 complex recognizes the exposed hydrophobicity of TM proteins just after their ribosomal release and leads to the ER insertion of these newly synthesized polypeptides in the case of tail‐anchored (TA) proteins 37 , 38 , 39 , 40 , 41 , 42 , while it enhances the targeted degradation of the remainder (including mislocalized proteins) by the ubiquitin/proteasome‐mediated degradation pathway 25 , 32 , 33 . Thus, the BAG6 complex provides an essential quality control system for TMD substrates and newly synthesized defective polypeptides with exposed hydrophobic stretches 43 , 44 , 45 , 46 , 47 . However, how BAG6 and its associated proteins determine the fate of client membrane proteins has not been elucidated adequately.

In this study, we explored the potential function of BAG6‐associated proteins and thus identified UBQLN4 as an essential factor for the elimination of newly synthesized polyubiquitinated proteins. Using a model TMD protein whose degradation occurs at a pre‐ER incorporation process, we show that UBQLN4 specifically associates with misassembled TM protein in the cytoplasm for targeted degradation via the ubiquitin pathway. Importantly, UBQLN4 recognized not only this model defective substrate but also a pool of endogenous defective proteins that were induced by compromising the SRP. We suggest that UBQLN4 acts as a substrate‐discriminating ubiquitin receptor for newly synthesized and defective TM polypeptides before their ER entry.

Discussion

The majority of nascent TMD proteins are integrated into the ER membrane by virtue of an SS‐ and SRP‐mediated co‐translational process 6 , 8 , 9 , 12 , 14 . In accordance with this notion, we showed that SS truncation or SRP suppression resulted in the production of a defective form of IL‐2Rα. With such a defective protein model, we identified the UBL‐UBA ubiquitin receptor UBQLN4 as a binding protein whose function is closely linked with the metabolism of newly synthesized and misassembled TMD polypeptides in the cytoplasm.

Accumulating evidence suggests that the substrates of both the co‐ and post‐translational ER targeting pathways are polyubiquitinated in the aqueous cytosol in a BAG6‐dependent manner when targeting fails 25 , 43 , 44 , 47 , 68 . Mammalian PrP also showed preferential stabilization as a non‐glycosylated precursor species when BAG6 was knocked down 25 . In the present study, we found that UBQLN4 is included in the BAG6 complex, while other UBQLN paralog family proteins were found to have a much weaker cellular interaction with BAG6 (Fig EV1 A). This observation suggests that BAG6 collaborates preferentially with UBQLN4 and their function might be closely related. Indeed, both BAG6 25 and UBQLN4 (this study) were shown to be essential for targeting improperly assembled TM proteins for proteasomal degradation. However, the function of UBQLN4 is not identical to that of BAG6, because the knockdown phenotype of UBQLN4 with polyubiquitinated protein accumulation was the opposite of that of BAG6 . Indeed, UBQLN4 knockdown stimulated the cellular accumulation of polyubiquitinated IL‐2Rα ΔSS, while BAG6 knockdown reduced it (Fig 4 C). Thus, they might play partly distinct roles in their complex.

How UBQLN4 recognizes client substrates is an important issue to understand the quality control mechanism of newly synthesized TM proteins. UBQLN4 possesses two tandem repeats of the STI1 motif in its central region 49 , 73 , 74 . STI‐I motifs and their upstream region in the N‐terminal half of UBQLN4 are involved in SS recognition of various ER luminal proteins 51 as well as in the interaction with LC3, an autophagic regulator 74 , while the functions of the STI‐II region in UBQLN4 remain completely elusive to date. In this study, we found that the STI‐II region of UBQLN4 is necessary, but not sufficient, for the recruitment of mislocalized TMD proteins (Fig 7 B). We also showed that the STI‐II region of UBQLN4 is critical for co‐precipitation with newly synthesized polyubiquitinated proteins (Fig 7 D). While all UBQLN family proteins possess an STI‐II motif, UBQLN1 associates with neither IL‐2Rα ΔSS (Fig 6 B, E and F) nor BAG6 (Fig EV1 A), in contrast to UBQLN4. These observations suggest that the STI‐II region of UBQLN4 is a distinct domain, as suggested by disorder/order prediction analysis (Fig 6 C), which plays a key role in the discrimination of unassembled TM proteins.

Groettrup et al 23 reported that an MHC class I‐restricted peptide, mainly derived from the degradation products of newly synthesized defective polypeptides 66 , 75 , 76 , 77 , 78 , contains the cleavage site of the ER signal peptidase 23 . As signal peptides for ER targeting are cleaved off immediately after their co‐translational insertion into the lumen of the ER 8 , this uncleaved antigenic peptide did not originate from its retro‐translocation from the ER 23 and thus could not be derived from ER‐associated protein degradation (ERAD), a major TM protein quality control machinery in eukaryotic cells 77 , 79 , 80 , 81 , 82 , 83 , 84 , 85 . Instead, this endogenous antigenic protein could be degraded by cytoplasmic proteasomes before it reaches the lumen of the ER 23 . In accordance with this idea, ablating the SS of a type I membrane protein reportedly results in its default delivery to the cytosol and accelerated turnover for MHC‐mediated antigen presentation, in contrast to the substantially delayed presentation from the ERAD‐derived counterpart pathway 69 , 86 . Although we do not exclude the possibility that a portion of IL‐2Rα ΔSS is an ERAD substrate, this seems largely unlikely since the typical ERAD pathway is effective only after proteins are incorporated into the ER membrane. It should be noted that UBQLN4 also recognizes the non‐glycosylated (and thus mislocalized) form of wild‐type IL‐2Rα that possesses a non‐processed SS (with a T7‐tag) at its N‐terminus in the cytoplasm (Fig EV5 ). These observations also support our hypothesis that UBQLN4 eliminates MLP via a non‐ERAD pathway. It was reported that the cytosolic face of the ER membrane serves as a “platform” for the rapid degradation of cytosolic substrates that exposed hydrophobic 87 , and ERAD‐C components are responsible for such “non‐ERAD” protein degradation 87 , 88 . We speculate that the ERAD‐C machinery might also be utilized for defective IL‐2Rα degradation on the cytosolic surface of the ER. An interesting challenge for the future will be to determine how the UBQLN4 ubiquitin receptor collaborates with chaperones/E3 ligases/BAG6/ERAD‐C machineries. Clarification of the linkage between defects in the UBQLN4‐BAG6 complex and various human diseases such as immune disorders, neurodegeneration, and diabetes should also be a relevant prospect for future extensive investigations, since the quality control system for MLP is intimately linked with these diseases. Our findings in this study will provide important clues to reveal these critical points.
