---
pmid: '10747892'
title: The GADD45 inhibition of Cdc2 kinase correlates with GADD45-mediated growth
  suppression.
authors:
- Jin S
- Antinore MJ
- Lung FD
- Dong X
- Zhao H
- Fan F
- Colchagie AB
- Blanck P
- Roller PP
- Fornace AJ Jr
- Zhan Q
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M000284200
---

# The GADD45 inhibition of Cdc2 kinase correlates with GADD45-mediated growth suppression.
**Authors:** Jin S, Antinore MJ, Lung FD, Dong X, Zhao H, Fan F, Colchagie AB, Blanck P, Roller PP, Fornace AJ Jr, Zhan Q
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M000284200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M000284200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jun 2;275(22):16602-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M000284200.

The GADD45 inhibition of Cdc2 kinase correlates with GADD45-mediated growth 
suppression.

Jin S(1), Antinore MJ, Lung FD, Dong X, Zhao H, Fan F, Colchagie AB, Blanck P, 
Roller PP, Fornace AJ Jr, Zhan Q.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, University of 
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

Cell cycle growth arrest is an important cellular response to genotoxic stress. 
Gadd45, a p53-regulated stress protein, plays an important role in the cell 
cycle G(2)-M checkpoint following exposure to certain types of DNA-damaging 
agents such as UV radiation and methylmethane sulfonate. Recent findings 
indicate that Gadd45 interacts with Cdc2 protein and inhibits Cdc2 kinase 
activity. In the present study, a series of Myc-tagged Gadd45 deletion mutants 
and a Gadd45 overlapping peptide library were used to define the Gadd45 domains 
that are involved in the interaction of Gadd45 with Cdc2. Both in vitro and in 
vivo studies indicate that the interaction of Gadd45 with Cdc2 involves a 
central region of the Gadd45 protein (amino acids 65-84). The Cdc2-binding 
domain of Gadd45 is also required for Gadd45 inhibition of Cdc2 kinase activity. 
Sequence analysis of the central Gadd45 region reveals no homology to inhibitory 
motifs of known cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors, indicating that the 
Cdc2-binding and -inhibitory domains on Gadd45 are a novel motif. The peptide 
containing the Cdc2-binding domain (amino acids 65-84) disrupted the Cdc2-cyclin 
B1 protein complex, suggesting that dissociation of this complex results from a 
direct interaction between the Gadd45 and Cdc2 proteins. GADD45-induced cell 
cycle G(2)-M arrest was abolished when its Cdc2 binding motif was disrupted. 
Importantly, a short term survival assay demonstrated that GADD45-induced cell 
cycle G(2)-M arrest correlates with GADD45-mediated growth suppression. These 
findings indicate that the cell cycle G(2)-M growth arrest mediated by GADD45 is 
one of the major mechanisms by which GADD45 suppresses cell growth.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M000284200
PMID: 10747892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
