---
pmid: '18242179'
title: 14-3-3 Proteins directly regulate Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase
  kinase alpha through phosphorylation-dependent multisite binding.
authors:
- Ichimura T
- Taoka M
- Hozumi Y
- Goto K
- Tokumitsu H
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2008.01.037
---

# 14-3-3 Proteins directly regulate Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinase alpha through phosphorylation-dependent multisite binding.
**Authors:** Ichimura T, Taoka M, Hozumi Y, Goto K, Tokumitsu H
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2008.01.037](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2008.01.037)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2008 Mar 5;582(5):661-5. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2008.01.037. Epub 
2008 Jan 31.

14-3-3 Proteins directly regulate Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase 
kinase alpha through phosphorylation-dependent multisite binding.

Ichimura T(1), Taoka M, Hozumi Y, Goto K, Tokumitsu H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tokyo Metropolitan 
University, Tokyo, Japan. ichimura@nda.ac.jp

Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinase alpha (CaMKKalpha) plays 
critical roles in the modulation of neuronal cell survival as well as many other 
cellular activities. Here we show that 14-3-3 proteins directly regulate 
CaMKKalpha when the enzyme is phosphorylated by protein kinase A on either Ser74 
or Ser475. Mutational analysis revealed that these two serines are both 
functional: the CaMKKalpha mutant with a mutation at either of these residues, 
but not the double mutant, was inhibited significantly by 14-3-3. The mode of 
regulation described herein differs the recently described mode of 14-3-3 
regulation of CaMKKalpha.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2008.01.037
PMID: 18242179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
