---
pmid: '27753622'
title: VCP/p97 cooperates with YOD1, UBXD1 and PLAA to drive clearance of ruptured
  lysosomes by autophagy.
authors:
- Papadopoulos C
- Kirchner P
- Bug M
- Grum D
- Koerver L
- Schulze N
- Poehler R
- Dressler A
- Fengler S
- Arhzaouy K
- Lux V
- Ehrmann M
- Weihl CC
- Meyer H
journal: EMBO J
year: '2017'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC5242375
doi: 10.15252/embj.201695148
---

# VCP/p97 cooperates with YOD1, UBXD1 and PLAA to drive clearance of ruptured lysosomes by autophagy.
**Authors:** Papadopoulos C, Kirchner P, Bug M, Grum D, Koerver L, Schulze N, Poehler R, Dressler A, Fengler S, Arhzaouy K, Lux V, Ehrmann M, Weihl CC, Meyer H
**Journal:** EMBO J (2017)
**DOI:** [10.15252/embj.201695148](https://doi.org/10.15252/embj.201695148)
**PMC:** [PMC5242375](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5242375/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2017 Jan 17;36(2):135-150. doi: 10.15252/embj.201695148. Epub 2016 Oct
 17.

VCP/p97 cooperates with YOD1, UBXD1 and PLAA to drive clearance of ruptured 
lysosomes by autophagy.

Papadopoulos C(1), Kirchner P(1), Bug M(1), Grum D(1), Koerver L(1), Schulze 
N(2), Poehler R(1), Dressler A(1), Fengler S(1), Arhzaouy K(3), Lux V(4), 
Ehrmann M(4), Weihl CC(3), Meyer H(5).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biology I, Faculty of Biology, Centre for Medical Biotechnology, 
University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.
(2)Imaging Center Campus Essen, Faculty of Biology, Centre for Medical 
Biotechnology, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.
(3)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint 
Louis, MO, USA.
(4)Microbiology, Faculty of Biology, Centre for Medical Biotechnology, 
University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.
(5)Molecular Biology I, Faculty of Biology, Centre for Medical Biotechnology, 
University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany hemmo.meyer@uni-due.de.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2017 Jan 17;36(2):129-131. doi: 10.15252/embj.201695950.

Rupture of endosomes and lysosomes is a major cellular stress condition leading 
to cell death and degeneration. Here, we identified an essential role for the 
ubiquitin-directed AAA-ATPase, p97, in the clearance of damaged lysosomes by 
autophagy. Upon damage, p97 translocates to lysosomes and there cooperates with 
a distinct set of cofactors including UBXD1, PLAA, and the deubiquitinating 
enzyme YOD1, which we term ELDR components for Endo-Lysosomal Damage Response. 
Together, they act downstream of K63-linked ubiquitination and p62 recruitment, 
and selectively remove K48-linked ubiquitin conjugates from a subpopulation of 
damaged lysosomes to promote autophagosome formation. Lysosomal clearance is 
also compromised in MEFs harboring a p97 mutation that causes inclusion body 
myopathy and neurodegeneration, and damaged lysosomes accumulate in affected 
patient tissue carrying the mutation. Moreover, we show that p97 helps clear 
late endosomes/lysosomes ruptured by endocytosed tau fibrils. Thus, our data 
reveal an important mechanism of how p97 maintains lysosomal homeostasis, and 
implicate the pathway as a modulator of degenerative diseases.

© 2016 The Authors.

DOI: 10.15252/embj.201695148
PMCID: PMC5242375
PMID: 27753622 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Rupture of endosomes and lysosomes is a major cellular stress condition leading to cell death and degeneration. Here, we identified an essential role for the ubiquitin‐directed AAA‐ATPase, p97, in the clearance of damaged lysosomes by autophagy. Upon damage, p97 translocates to lysosomes and there cooperates with a distinct set of cofactors including UBXD1, PLAA, and the deubiquitinating enzyme YOD1, which we term ELDR components for Endo‐Lysosomal Damage Response. Together, they act downstream of K63‐linked ubiquitination and p62 recruitment, and selectively remove K48‐linked ubiquitin conjugates from a subpopulation of damaged lysosomes to promote autophagosome formation. Lysosomal clearance is also compromised in MEFs harboring a p97 mutation that causes inclusion body myopathy and neurodegeneration, and damaged lysosomes accumulate in affected patient tissue carrying the mutation. Moreover, we show that p97 helps clear late endosomes/lysosomes ruptured by endocytosed tau fibrils. Thus, our data reveal an important mechanism of how p97 maintains lysosomal homeostasis, and implicate the pathway as a modulator of degenerative diseases.

Introduction

The endolysosomal pathway is particularly vulnerable to membrane rupture and lysosomal membrane permeabilization (LMP). LMP is a detrimental consequence of host cell invasion from the endosome to cytosol by virions and bacteria. Moreover, incorporated chemical compounds and mineral crystals can rupture the organelles causing medical conditions such as kidney damage or alveolar inflammation (Salminen et al , 2012 ). In addition, endogenous factors, such as reactive oxygen species (ROS) or neurotoxic protein aggregates, can induce lysosomal damage. This imposes a severe stress condition that affects cellular homeostasis, and releases cathepsins that in turn can trigger cell death with relevance for neurodegeneration (Boya & Kroemer, 2008 ; Nixon, 2013 ; Repnik et al , 2013 ).

Damaged lysosomes were recently shown to be cleared by selective macroautophagy (called autophagy from here on), which mediates the engulfment of the injured organelles within isolation membranes and ultimately the fusion of the resulting autophagosomes with intact lysosomes for degradation (Dupont et al , 2009 ; Hung et al , 2013 ; Maejima et al , 2013 ). Autophagy of lysosomes (also called lysophagy) involves the established autophagic enzyme machinery that mediates the conversion of the ubiquitin‐like protein LC3 into its lipidated form to decorate the autophagosomal membrane (Mizushima & Levine, 2010 ; Suzuki & Ohsumi, 2010 ; Maejima et al , 2013 ; Klionsky & Schulman, 2014 ). The association of autophagosomal membranes with the damaged organelle is thought to be largely mediated by extensive ubiquitination of multiple components of the damaged organelle, which recruits the autophagy machinery and LC3‐adapter proteins such as p62/SQSTM1 (Fujita et al , 2013 ; Shaid et al , 2013 ; Rogov et al , 2014 ). Different types of ubiquitin chains have been detected on damaged lysosomes including those with lysine 63 (K63) and lysine 48 (K48) linkages (Fujita et al , 2013 ). However, the significance of individual chain types for LC3 recruitment and how they are regulated has remained largely elusive (Fujita et al , 2013 ; Shaid et al , 2013 ).

Various reports from different organisms have linked the hexameric, ubiquitin‐directed AAA+‐type ATPase p97 (also called VCP or Cdc48) and individual p97 cofactor proteins to the endolysosomal system or autophagy (Ren et al , 2008 ; Krick et al , 2010 ; Ossareh‐Nazari et al , 2010 ; Tanaka et al , 2010 ; Ramanathan & Ye, 2011 ; Ritz et al , 2011 ; Buchan et al , 2013 ; Johnson et al , 2015 ). Of note, defective autophagy and compromised lysosome integrity is a prominent cytopathic feature in tissues affected by a VCP/p97‐associated multisystem proteinopathy (MSP) that includes a myopathy and the neurodegenerative components frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) (Ju et al , 2009 ; Tresse et al , 2010 ; Meyer & Weihl, 2014 ; Johnson et al , 2015 ). Commonly, p97 is considered a protein “segregase” that targets ubiquitinated proteins and often facilitates their degradation in the proteasome. To do so, it cooperates with different sets of ubiquitin adapters and additional cofactors. The best‐studied complex is with the heterodimeric Ufd1‐Npl4 ubiquitin adapter that extracts ubiquitinated proteins from cellular structures in a large variety of processes including ER‐associated degradation (Stolz et al , 2011 ; Meyer et al , 2012 ; Franz et al , 2014 ). However, the apparent role of p97 in autophagy and lysosomal homeostasis, and the identity of the relevant p97‐cofactors that explain its molecular mechanism have remained enigmatic.

In this study, we show that p97 translocates to lysosomes and is essential for cell survival after lysosomal damage. We identified three cofactors including a deubiquitinating enzyme (DUB) that interact and cooperate with p97 on the damaged lysosomes. Intriguingly, p97 and its cofactors act downstream of K63 ubiquitination and p62 recruitment. Rather, they specifically remove K48‐linked ubiquitin conjugates to promote autophagosome formation and efficient clearance of the damaged organelles. We further show that disease‐associated mutation of p97 attenuates lysosomal clearance and that damaged lysosomes accumulate in pathological tissue. Moreover, autophagy and the p97 endolysosomal damage complex respond to late endosomes/lysosomes that are damaged by endocytosed tau fibrils, thus implicating the pathway in neurodegenerative disease.

Discussion

The data presented here reveal an essential function of p97 in the autophagic clearance of damaged lysosomes. p97 cooperates with a distinct set of cofactors, including UBXD1, PLAA, and the DUB, YOD1, which we term ELDR components (for Endo‐Lysosomal Damage Response) to distinguish this activity from other cellular roles of p97 such as ER‐ or chromatin‐associated degradation. Moreover, we demonstrate that the pathway specifically targets and turns over K48‐linked ubiquitin conjugates on damaged lysosomes to promote autophagosome formation. Thus, our findings shed light on the role of p97 in the cellular stress response, autophagy, and disease. In addition, they reveal an important functional distinction of different ubiquitin chain types during autophagic clearance of lysosomes.

Our data are consistent with K63 chains initiating the autophagic response and mediating p62 recruitment (Tan et al , 2008 ; Matsumoto et al , 2011 ; van Wijk et al , 2012 ), because K63 chains and p62 coincide temporally and spatially early during lysophagy, and are not regulated by the ELDR components. In contrast, the K48 conjugates occur later during the process and only on a subpopulation of K63‐decorated damaged lysosomes. Importantly, our data suggest that, in contrast to K63 chains, K48 conjugates need to be turned over by p97 with help of the ELDR factors to allow formation of autophagosomes. We find that YOD1 specifically cleaves K48 chains, which is in line with previous biochemical studies (Ernst et al , 2009 ; Mevissen et al , 2013 ), and that overexpression of YOD1‐CS inhibits removal of K48 conjugates on damaged lysosomes and suppresses association of LC3‐positive membranes. Consistently, depletion of any of the ELDR components leads to persistence of K48‐decorated lysosomes that then fail to associate with LC3. This is supported by our finding that YOD1 recruitment and dissociation precedes LC3 association in live cell microscopy.

Because p97 is generally thought to extract ubiquitinated proteins from cellular structures, an obvious explanation for our observations is that K48‐linked ubiquitination and the ELDR‐mediated removal of one or more factors that interfere with autophagosome formation. A similar model has also been proposed for the role of p97 in mitophagy, where p97‐mediated extraction of factors on the outer membrane, such as mitofusins, is thought to facilitate the clearance of damaged mitochondria or mitophagy (Tanaka et al , 2010 ; Chan et al , 2011 ). Of note, extraction of mitofusins involves the Ufd1‐Npl4 cofactor (Kim et al , 2013 ; Wu et al , 2016 ), whereas we identified a distinct set of cofactors in lysophagy including the DUB, YOD1. DUBs such as YOD1 were also shown to contribute to extraction of proteins from the ER membrane during ER‐associated degradation (Ernst et al , 2009 ; Liu & Ye, 2012 ; Stein et al , 2014 ). It is therefore likely that YOD1 assists protein extraction from lysosomes. On lysosomes, a whole range of membrane proteins is ubiquitinated upon damage (Fujita et al , 2013 ). Removal of the K48 conjugates may therefore facilitate access of LC3‐decorated autophagic membranes to K63‐p62 assemblies on damaged lysosomes. Extraction may be followed by degradation, but this would not be essential for the process, because proteasome inhibitors do not affect lysophagy. Identification of the relevant ubiquitin ligase(s) in lysophagy will help clarify these questions.

Intriguingly, we find that only a subpopulation of damaged lysosomes is conjugated with K48 chains and that some autophagosomes form early without involvement of K48 chains and independently of the EDLR components. One possible explanation is that K48‐labeled lysosomes represent a particular type of late endosomes or lysosomes and therefore require an additional layer of regulation. Alternatively, the populations may be distinct with respect to the type or degree of damage. Consistent with this notion, diverse bacteria that damage endolysosomal membranes in different ways also induce distinct autophagic responses (Gomes & Dikic, 2014 ).

The p97‐governed response involves a distinct set of cofactors that assist p97 during lysophagy. Even though these cofactors bind at the same time to p97 only transiently, it is likely that they tightly cooperate during lysophagy because they all colocalize on damaged lysosomes and are essential for their clearance. Among the three p97 cofactors, UBXD1 appears to be the defining component because it binds p97 in a mutually exclusive manner with other major cofactors such as p47 or Ufd1‐Npl4, and has been associated with endolysosomes and trafficking before (Ritz et al , 2011 ; Stolz et al , 2011 ; Haines et al , 2012 ). YOD1 harbors the essential catalytic DUB activity, but can also function as a ubiquitin sensor by means of its S2 ubiquitin‐binding site. We find that ubiquitin binding by YOD1 appears to stimulate interaction of YOD1 with p97 along with UBXD1 and PLAA and, in turn, p97 activates ubiquitin binding of YOD1. However, targeting of p97 is likely more complex because YOD1 depletion does not impair p97 recruitment to damaged lysosomes (data not shown), whereas it clearly affects p97‐mediated lysophagy. So far, the role of PLAA remains unclear. It appears to be a versatile factor because it also teams up with diverse p97 complexes in other processes at least in yeast (Richly et al , 2005 ; Balakirev et al , 2015 ; Wu et al , 2016 ). It has ubiquitin‐binding domains (Mullally et al , 2006 ; Pashkova et al , 2010 ) but binds only transiently to p97 depending on the nucleotide state, suggesting that it may coordinate ATP hydrolysis within the process of lysophagy.

Disease mutations in p97 cause a late onset myodegenerative and neurodegenerative disease termed MSP. MEFs expressing a disease‐associated p97 allele fail to clear damaged lysosomes and MSP patient tissue accumulates damaged lysosomes. This raises the possibility that compromised clearance of damaged lysosomes contributes to the pathogenesis of p97‐associated disease. One intriguing aspect of p97‐associated MSP is the variable penetrance of muscle or CNS pathology even within the same family. This phenotypic heterogeneity has led to speculation that either secondary genetic or environmental factors dictate disease penetrance. The emerging role for p97 in mediating “damage responses”—whether it is DNA damage repair, mitochondrial clearance, or lysosomal homeostasis—suggests that environmental stressors that occur with age play a key role in p97‐associated diseases (Meyer & Weihl, 2014 ; Johnson et al , 2015 ).

Our findings also have implications for the relevance of p97 in other diseases where lysosomal membrane permeabilization is an element, such as lysosomal storage diseases and neurodegenerative disorders (Boya & Kroemer, 2008 ; Nixon, 2013 ; Repnik et al , 2013 ). Intriguingly, tau fibrils, which occur and can be released from cells in a number of pathologies, can damage lysosomes when endocytosed. Tau‐induced damage could further decrease lysosomal fitness and thereby affect the capacity of cells to maintain protein homeostasis. The fact that p97 clears damaged lysosomes and also responds to the tau‐induced lysosomal damage adds an unanticipated aspect to the emerging picture of p97 as a critical modulator of neurodegeneration (Rubinsztein, 2006 ; Ling et al , 2013 ).
