---
pmid: '26942675'
title: Mitochondria-Translocated PGK1 Functions as a Protein Kinase to Coordinate
  Glycolysis and the TCA Cycle in Tumorigenesis.
authors:
- Li X
- Jiang Y
- Meisenhelder J
- Yang W
- Hawke DH
- Zheng Y
- Xia Y
- Aldape K
- He J
- Hunter T
- Wang L
- Lu Z
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2016'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4888784
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2016.02.009
---

# Mitochondria-Translocated PGK1 Functions as a Protein Kinase to Coordinate Glycolysis and the TCA Cycle in Tumorigenesis.
**Authors:** Li X, Jiang Y, Meisenhelder J, Yang W, Hawke DH, Zheng Y, Xia Y, Aldape K, He J, Hunter T, Wang L, Lu Z
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2016.02.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2016.02.009)
**PMC:** [PMC4888784](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4888784/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2016 Mar 3;61(5):705-719. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2016.02.009.

Mitochondria-Translocated PGK1 Functions as a Protein Kinase to Coordinate 
Glycolysis and the TCA Cycle in Tumorigenesis.

Li X(1), Jiang Y(2), Meisenhelder J(3), Yang W(1), Hawke DH(4), Zheng Y(1), Xia 
Y(2), Aldape K(4), He J(5), Hunter T(3), Wang L(6), Lu Z(7).

Author information:
(1)Brain Tumor Center and Department of Neuro-Oncology, The University of Texas 
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(2)Brain Tumor Center and Department of Neuro-Oncology, The University of Texas 
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA; The Institute of Cell 
Metabolism and Disease, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Pancreatic Disease, Shanghai 
General Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai 
200080, China.
(3)Molecular and Cell Biology Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 
La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(5)Laboratory of Thoracic Surgery, Cancer Institute and Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 10002, China.
(6)The Institute of Cell Metabolism and Disease, Shanghai Key Laboratory of 
Pancreatic Disease, Shanghai General Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai 
Jiaotong University, Shanghai 200080, China.
(7)Brain Tumor Center and Department of Neuro-Oncology, The University of Texas 
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Department of Molecular and 
Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, 
TX 77030, USA; Cancer Biology Program, The University of Texas Graduate School 
of Biomedical Sciences at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic address: 
zhiminlu@mdanderson.org.

It is unclear how the Warburg effect that exemplifies enhanced glycolysis in the 
cytosol is coordinated with suppressed mitochondrial pyruvate metabolism. We 
demonstrate here that hypoxia, EGFR activation, and expression of K-Ras G12V and 
B-Raf V600E induce mitochondrial translocation of phosphoglycerate kinase 1 
(PGK1); this is mediated by ERK-dependent PGK1 S203 phosphorylation and 
subsequent PIN1-mediated cis-trans isomerization. Mitochondrial PGK1 acts as a 
protein kinase to phosphorylate pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 1 (PDHK1) at T338, 
which activates PDHK1 to phosphorylate and inhibit the pyruvate dehydrogenase 
(PDH) complex. This reduces mitochondrial pyruvate utilization, suppresses 
reactive oxygen species production, increases lactate production, and promotes 
brain tumorigenesis. Furthermore, PGK1 S203 and PDHK1 T338 phosphorylation 
levels correlate with PDH S293 inactivating phosphorylation levels and poor 
prognosis in glioblastoma patients. This work highlights that PGK1 acts as a 
protein kinase in coordinating glycolysis and the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) 
cycle, which is instrumental in cancer metabolism and tumorigenesis.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2016.02.009
PMCID: PMC4888784
PMID: 26942675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

INTRODUCTION

Most cancer cells even in the presence of ample oxygen predominantly produce energy by a high rate of glycolysis followed by lactic acid fermentation in the cytosol, rather than by oxidation of pyruvate in mitochondria as in most normal cells. This tumor-specific Warburg effect promotes tumor progression ( Yang and Lu, 2013 , 2015 ). Mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation is regulated by the availability of oxygen and pyruvate, which are the terminal electron acceptor and the primary carbon source, respectively ( Kim et al., 2006 ). Mitochondrial pyruvate metabolism is regulated by pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase (PDHK or PDK), which has 4 isoforms (PDHK1–4), and pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) ( Roche and Hiromasa, 2007 ). PDHK1, whose expression is upregulated by hypoxia-inducible factor 1α (HIF1α), phosphorylates S293 of the PDH E1α subunit and inactivates the PDH complex that normally converts pyruvate to acetyl-coA and CO 2 ; this results in an inhibition of pyruvate metabolism and tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle–coupled electron transport and thus attenuation of mitochondrial respiration and ROS production ( Kim et al., 2006 ; Papandreou et al., 2006 ). By excluding pyruvate from mitochondrial consumption, PDHK1 induction may promote glycolysis and increase the rate of conversion of pyruvate to lactate.

Phosphoglycerate kinase 1 (PGK1), the first ATP-generating enzyme in the glycolytic pathway, catalyzes the transfer of the high-energy phosphate from the 1-position of 1,3-diphosphoglycerate (1,3-BPG) to ADP, which leads to the generation of 3-phosphoglycerate (3-PG) and ATP ( Bernstein and Hol, 1998 ). PGK1 expression is upregulated in human breast cancer ( Zhang et al., 2005 ), pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma ( Hwang et al., 2006 ), radioresistant astrocytomas ( Yan et al., 2012 ), and multidrug-resistant ovarian cancer cells ( Duan et al., 2002 ) as well as in metastatic gastric cancer, colon cancer, and hepatocellular carcinoma cells ( Ahmad et al., 2013 ; Ai et al., 2011 ; Zieker et al., 2010 ). In spite of its overexpression in many types of human cancer, the mechanisms underlying PGK1-promoted tumor development remain largely unclear.

In this report, we demonstrate that hypoxia, activation of EGFR, and expression of K-Ras G12V and B-Raf V600E induces ERK1/2 phosphorylation-dependent and PIN1 cis–trans isomerization-regulated mitochondrial translocation of PGK1. Mitochondrial PGK1, acting as a protein kinase, phosphorylates and activates PDHK1. This phosphorylation inhibits mitochondrial pyruvate metabolism and ROS production and enhances lactate production, thereby promoting tumor development.

DISCUSSION

A tumor cell mass, developing initially in a vascular environment, can become severely hypoxic as a result of massive expansion distant from the vasculature ( Guise et al., 2014 ). To survive this hypoxic stress and support growth, the tumor cells upregulate glycolysis and suppress pyruvate metabolism and oxidative phosphorylation in mitochondria so that pyruvate is converted to lactate in the cytoplasm and exported ( Gatenby and Gillies, 2004 ). In normoxic conditions, activation of receptor tyrosine kinases or the presence of prevalent K-Ras and B-Raf mutations promotes the Warburg effect ( Tani et al., 1985 ; Yaffe et al., 1997 ; Yang et al., 2012b ). We reveal here an important mechanism underlying the coordinated regulation of glycolysis and the TCA cycle by subcellular compartment-specific regulation of the glycolytic enzyme PGK1: hypoxic stress, EGFR activation, or expression of K-Ras G12V or B-Raf V600E results in ERK1/2-dependent phosphorylation of PGK1 at S203, leading to PIN1-dependent PGK1 cis–trans isomerization, binding of PGK1 to the TOM complex, and subsequently mitochondrial translocation of PGK1. In mitochondria, PGK1 directly interacts with and phosphorylates PDHK1 at T338. This phosphorylation enhances PDHK1 activity and PDHK1-mediated PDH phosphorylation, which results in the suppression of PDH-dependent pyruvate utilization and ROS production in mitochondria and increased cytosolic production of pyruvate and lactate. This metabolic alteration promotes cell proliferation and tumorigenesis ( Figure 7E ). The demonstration that PGK1 functions as a protein kinase highlights its dual roles as a glycolytic enzyme and protein kinase in integrated regulation of glycolysis and mitochondrial metabolism.

In the glycolytic pathway, PGK1 and puruvate kinase are the only two ATP-generating enzymes. PKM2 was reported as a protein kinase and utilizes the phosphate group from phosphoenolpyruvate but not ATP to phosphorylate histone H3 and STAT3, thereby regulating gene expression ( Gao et al., 2012 ; Yang et al., 2012a ). PKM2 was also shown to phosphorylate Bub3 and myosin light chain 2 to promote mitosis and cytokinesis, respectively ( Jiang et al., 2014a ; Jiang et al., 2014b ). In addition, succinyl-5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-ribose-5'-phosphate (SAICAR) binds to and enhances the protein kinase activity of PKM2 for phosphorylation of more than 100 proteins ( Keller et al., 2014 ). Of note, these findings from multiple groups were debated by a recent report, which shows that protein phosphorylation spectrum PKM2-null lysates was not altered by recombinant PKM2 and suggests that previously observed PKM2 protein kinase activity might result from PKM2-associated protein kinases rather than PKM2 itself. However, PKM2, as one out of more than 500 protein kinases in mammalian cells, might not be able to alter autoradiography-generated phosphorylation spectrums of thousands of proteins in gels. Importantly, PKM2 protein kinase activity was demonstrated and validated by a more recent publication ( Li et al., 2015 ), which showed that the yeast PKM2 homolog can directly phosphorylate histone H3 at T11 in vivo and in vitro. The current study shows that highly purified PGK1 with no obvious protein kinase contamination phosphorylated highly purified PDHK1 supporting that glycolytic enzymes can possess dual enzymatic activities, functioning both as metabolic enzymes and protein kinases.

Hypoxic cells increase glycolysis with suppressed cellular respiration. The suppressed cellular respiration was thought to result from the paucity of oxygen required for accepting electrons from the mitochondrial respiratory chain and from the inhibition of mitochondrial pyruvate metabolism and respiration, which can be regulated by several mechanisms, including HIF1α-upregulated PDHK1 expression ( Kim et al., 2006 ). In our study, a deficiency in mitochondrial translocation of PGK1 induced by expression of PGK1 S203A, which had no effect on hypoxia-enhanced PGK1 and PDHK1 expression, largely reduced hypoxia-induced PDH phosphorylation. These results indicated that overexpression of PGK1 and PDHK1 by itself is not sufficient to maximize its cellular activity in mitochondria and that PGK1-mediated phosphorylation of PDHK1 and hypoxia-enhanced PDHK1 expression have a synergistic effect on regulating PDHK1 activity.

Although tumor cells can regulate glycolysis and mitochondria simultaneously via HIF-regulated expression of glycolytic genes and mitochondrial enzymes under hypoxic conditions, this regulation, which does not occur in normoxic conditions, is a chronic response and requires regulation of gene transcription. We found that activation of EGFR, K-Ras, and B-Raf under normoxic conditions or hypoxia stimulation induced an immediate or acute response in tumor cells by rapid mitochondrial translocation of PGK1, which led to inhibition of mitochondrial pyruvate metabolism and increased cytosolic glycolysis. Thus, our findings provide an instrumental concept of integrated regulation of glycolysis and the TCA cycle and provide a critical insight into the Warburg effect induced by prevalent oncogenes, such as EGFR, K-Ras, and B-Raf. Given that PGK1 expression is upregulated in human cancer and is associated with tumor metastasis and drug resistance ( Ahmad et al., 2013 ; Duan et al., 2002 ), our findings—demonstrating that PGK1-dependent PDHK1 T338 phosphorylation promotes tumor cell proliferation and tumorigenesis and that the phosphorylation levels of PGK1 S203 and PDHK1 T338 correlate with glioblastoma prognosis—may provide a molecular basis for improved diagnosis and treatment of human cancer.
