---
pmid: '11790773'
title: Protein binding and functional characterization of plakophilin 2. Evidence
  for its diverse roles in desmosomes and beta -catenin signaling.
authors:
- Chen X
- Bonne S
- Hatzfeld M
- van Roy F
- Green KJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M108765200
---

# Protein binding and functional characterization of plakophilin 2. Evidence for its diverse roles in desmosomes and beta -catenin signaling.
**Authors:** Chen X, Bonne S, Hatzfeld M, van Roy F, Green KJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M108765200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M108765200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 22;277(12):10512-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M108765200. Epub 
2002 Jan 14.

Protein binding and functional characterization of plakophilin 2. Evidence for 
its diverse roles in desmosomes and beta -catenin signaling.

Chen X(1), Bonne S, Hatzfeld M, van Roy F, Green KJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago, 
Illinois 60611, USA.

Plakophilins are a subfamily of p120-related arm-repeat proteins that can be 
found in both desmosomes and the nucleus. Among the three known plakophilin 
members, plakophilin 1 has been linked to a genetic skin disorder and shown to 
play important roles in desmosome assembly and organization. However, little is 
known about the binding partners and functions of the most widely expressed 
member, plakophilin 2. To better understand the cellular functions of 
plakophilin 2, we have examined its protein interactions with other junctional 
molecules using co-immunoprecipitation and yeast two-hybrid assays. Here we show 
that plakophilin 2 can interact directly with several desmosomal components, 
including desmoplakin, plakoglobin, desmoglein 1 and 2, and desmocollin 1a and 
2a. The head domain of plakophilin 2 is critical for most of these interactions 
and is sufficient to direct plakophilin 2 to cell borders. In addition, 
plakophilin 2 is less efficient than plakophilin 1 in localizing to the nucleus 
and enhancing the recruitment of excess desmoplakin to cell borders in 
transiently transfected COS cells. Furthermore, plakophilin 2 is able to 
associate with beta-catenin through its head domain, and the expression of 
plakophilin 2 in SW480 cells up-regulates the endogenous beta-catenin/T cell 
factor-signaling activity. This up-regulation by plakophilin 2 is abolished by 
ectopic expression of E-cadherin, suggesting that these proteins compete for the 
same pool of signaling active beta-catenin. Our results demonstrate that 
plakophilin 2 interacts with a broader repertoire of desmosomal components than 
plakophilin 1 and provide new insight into the possible roles of plakophilin 2 
in regulating the signaling activity of beta-catenin.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M108765200
PMID: 11790773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
