---
pmid: '10863092'
title: 'Human sphingosine kinase: molecular cloning, functional characterization and
  tissue distribution.'
authors:
- Melendez AJ
- Carlos-Dias E
- Gosink M
- Allen JM
- Takacs L
journal: Gene
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0378-1119(00)00205-5
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Human sphingosine kinase: molecular cloning, functional characterization and tissue distribution.
**Authors:** Melendez AJ, Carlos-Dias E, Gosink M, Allen JM, Takacs L
**Journal:** Gene (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0378-1119(00)00205-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0378-1119(00)00205-5)

## Abstract

1. Gene. 2000 Jun 13;251(1):19-26. doi: 10.1016/s0378-1119(00)00205-5.

Human sphingosine kinase: molecular cloning, functional characterization and 
tissue distribution.

Melendez AJ(1), Carlos-Dias E, Gosink M, Allen JM, Takacs L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Institut de Recherche 
Jouveinal/Parke-Davis, Fresnes, France. alirio.melendez@wl.com

Sphingosine-1-phosphate (SPP), the product of sphingosine kinase, is an 
important signaling molecule with intra- and extracellular functions. The cDNA 
for the mouse sphingosine kinase has recently been reported. In this paper we 
describe the cloning, expression and characterization of the human sphingosine 
kinase (huSPHK1). Sequence analysis comparison revealed that this kinase is 
evolutionarily very conserved, having a high degree of homology with the murine 
enzyme, and presenting several conserved regions with bacteria, yeast, plant, 
and mammalian proteins. Expressed huSPHK1 cDNA specifically phosphorylates 
D-erythro-sphingosine and, to a lesser extent, D, L-erythro-dihydrosphingosine, 
and not at all the 'threo' isoforms of dihydrosphingosine; hydroxy-ceramide or 
non-hydroxy-ceramide; diacylglycerol (DAG); phosphatidylinositol (PI); 
phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate (PIP); or phosphatidylinositol-4, 
5-bisphosphate (PIP(2)). huSPHK1 shows typical Michaelis-Menten kinetics 
(V(max)=56microM and K(m)=5microM). The kinase is inhibited by 
D,L-threo-dihydrosphingosine (K(i)=3microM), and by N, N-dimethyl-sphingosine 
(K(i)=5microM). Northern blots indicate highest expression in adult lung and 
spleen, followed by peripheral blood leukocyte, thymus and kidney, respectively. 
It is also expressed in brain and heart. In addition, database searches with the 
stSG2854 sequence indicate that huSPHK1 is also expressed in endothelial cells, 
retinal pigment epithelium, and senescent fibroblasts.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-1119(00)00205-5
PMID: 10863092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
