---
pmid: '9989599'
title: 'Human thymidine kinase 2: molecular cloning and characterisation of the enzyme
  activity with antiviral and cytostatic nucleoside substrates.'
authors:
- Wang L
- Munch-Petersen B
- Herrström Sjöberg A
- Hellman U
- Bergman T
- Jörnvall H
- Eriksson S
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(98)01711-6
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Human thymidine kinase 2: molecular cloning and characterisation of the enzyme activity with antiviral and cytostatic nucleoside substrates.
**Authors:** Wang L, Munch-Petersen B, Herrström Sjöberg A, Hellman U, Bergman T, Jörnvall H, Eriksson S
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0014-5793(98)01711-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0014-5793(98)01711-6)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 1999 Jan 25;443(2):170-4. doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(98)01711-6.

Human thymidine kinase 2: molecular cloning and characterisation of the enzyme 
activity with antiviral and cytostatic nucleoside substrates.

Wang L(1), Munch-Petersen B, Herrström Sjöberg A, Hellman U, Bergman T, Jörnvall 
H, Eriksson S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Medical Chemistry, Swedish University of 
Agricultural Sciences, Biomedical Center, Uppsala.

Based on amino acid sequence information from purified mitochondrial thymidine 
kinase (TK2), a cDNA of 1930 bp was cloned, containing an open reading frame 
encoding 232 amino acid residues starting with the N-terminal sequence 
determined from the native human protein preparation. Northern blot analysis 
with the cDNA coding region demonstrated several TK2 mRNAs, with 2 and 4 kb 
forms present in many tissues. We also characterised N-terminally truncated 
(starting at position 18) human TK2 with pharmacologically important antiviral 
and cytostatic nucleoside analogues. Results were highly similar to those with 
the native TK2 preparation. The anti-leukaemic drug arabinosyl cytosine is 
phosphorylated. The antitumour drug difluorodeoxycytidine and its metabolite 
difluorodeoxyuridine are good substrates, with K(m) values of 66 and 29 microM, 
respectively, and a relative Vmax of 0.6 compared to that of thymidine. Negative 
cooperativity was found with thymidine and the anti-HIV drug 3'-azidothymidine, 
but the reaction followed Michaelis-Menten kinetics with deoxycytidine, 
arabinosyl cytosine, and arabinosyl thymine. The results demonstrate a broad 
substrate specificity and complex kinetics, and suggest a role for TK2 in the 
activation of chemotherapeutic nucleoside analogues.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(98)01711-6
PMID: 9989599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
