---
pmid: '9463366'
title: The first step of glycosylphosphatidylinositol biosynthesis is mediated by
  a complex of PIG-A, PIG-H, PIG-C and GPI1.
authors:
- Watanabe R
- Inoue N
- Westfall B
- Taron CH
- Orlean P
- Takeda J
- Kinoshita T
journal: EMBO J
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC1170437
doi: 10.1093/emboj/17.4.877
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The first step of glycosylphosphatidylinositol biosynthesis is mediated by a complex of PIG-A, PIG-H, PIG-C and GPI1.
**Authors:** Watanabe R, Inoue N, Westfall B, Taron CH, Orlean P, Takeda J, Kinoshita T
**Journal:** EMBO J (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/17.4.877](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/17.4.877)
**PMC:** [PMC1170437](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1170437/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 1998 Feb 16;17(4):877-85. doi: 10.1093/emboj/17.4.877.

The first step of glycosylphosphatidylinositol biosynthesis is mediated by a 
complex of PIG-A, PIG-H, PIG-C and GPI1.

Watanabe R(1), Inoue N, Westfall B, Taron CH, Orlean P, Takeda J, Kinoshita T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunoregulation, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, 
Osaka University, Japan.

Biosynthesis of glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) is initiated by transfer of 
N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) from UDP-GlcNAc to phosphatidylinositol (PI). This 
chemically simple step is genetically complex because three genes are required 
in both mammals and yeast. Mammalian PIG-A and PIG-C are homologous to yeast 
GPI3 and GPI2, respectively; however, mammalian PIG-H is not homologous to yeast 
GPI1. Here, we report cloning of a human homolog of GPI1 (hGPI1) and demonstrate 
that four mammalian gene products form a protein complex in the endoplasmic 
reticulum membrane. PIG-L, which is involved in the second step in GPI 
synthesis, GlcNAc-PI de-N-acetylation, did not associate with the isolated 
complex. The protein complex had GPI-GlcNAc transferase (GPI-GnT) activity in 
vitro, but did not mediate the second reaction. Bovine PI was utilized 
approximately 100-fold more efficiently than soybean PI as a substrate, and lyso 
PI was a very inefficient substrate. These results suggest that GPI-GnT 
recognizes the fatty acyl chains of PI. The unusually complex organization of 
GPI-GnT may be relevant to selective usage of PI and/or regulation.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/17.4.877
PMCID: PMC1170437
PMID: 9463366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Biosynthesis of glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) is initiated by transfer of N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) from UDP-GlcNAc to phosphatidylinositol (PI). This chemically simple step is genetically complex because three genes are required in both mammals and yeast. Mammalian PIG-A and PIG-C are homologous to yeast GPI3 and GPI2, respectively; however, mammalian PIG-H is not homologous to yeast GPI1. Here, we report cloning of a human homolog of GPI1 (hGPI1) and demonstrate that four mammalian gene products form a protein complex in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane. PIG-L, which is involved in the second step in GPI synthesis, GlcNAc-PI de-N-acetylation, did not associate with the isolated complex. The protein complex had GPI-GlcNAc transferase (GPI-GnT) activity in vitro, but did not mediate the second reaction. Bovine PI was utilized approximately 100-fold more efficiently than soybean PI as a substrate, and lyso PI was a very inefficient substrate. These results suggest that GPI-GnT recognizes the fatty acyl chains of PI. The unusually complex organization of GPI-GnT may be relevant to selective usage of PI and/or regulation.
