---
pmid: '16361107'
title: Dystonia-causing mutant torsinA inhibits cell adhesion and neurite extension
  through interference with cytoskeletal dynamics.
authors:
- Hewett JW
- Zeng J
- Niland BP
- Bragg DC
- Breakefield XO
journal: Neurobiol Dis
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2005.10.012
---

# Dystonia-causing mutant torsinA inhibits cell adhesion and neurite extension through interference with cytoskeletal dynamics.
**Authors:** Hewett JW, Zeng J, Niland BP, Bragg DC, Breakefield XO
**Journal:** Neurobiol Dis (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nbd.2005.10.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2005.10.012)

## Abstract

1. Neurobiol Dis. 2006 Apr;22(1):98-111. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2005.10.012. Epub
2005  Dec 19.

Dystonia-causing mutant torsinA inhibits cell adhesion and neurite extension 
through interference with cytoskeletal dynamics.

Hewett JW(1), Zeng J, Niland BP, Bragg DC, Breakefield XO.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Neurogenetics Unit, Departments of Neurology and Radiology, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, and Program in Neuroscience, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

Early onset torsion dystonia is a movement disorder inherited as an autosomal 
dominant syndrome with reduced penetrance. Symptoms appear to result from 
altered neuronal circuitry within the brain with no evidence of neuronal loss. 
Most cases are caused by loss of a glutamic acid residue in the AAA+ chaperone 
protein, torsinA, encoded in the DYT1 gene. In this study, torsinA was found to 
move in conjunction with vimentin in three cell culture paradigms-recovery from 
microtubule depolymerization, expression of a dominant-negative form of kinesin 
light chain and respreading after trypsinization. Co-immune precipitation 
studies revealed association between vimentin and torsinA in a complex including 
other cytoskeletal elements, actin and tubulin, as well as two proteins 
previously shown to interact with torsinA-the motor protein, kinesin light chain 
1, and the nuclear envelope protein, LAP1. Morphologic and functional 
differences related to vimentin were noted in primary fibroblasts from patients 
carrying this DYT1 mutation as compared with controls, including an increased 
perinuclear concentration of vimentin and a delayed rate of adhesion to the 
substratum. Overexpression of mutant torsinA inhibited neurite extension in 
human neuroblastoma cells, with torsinA and vimentin immunoreactivity enriched 
in the perinuclear region and in cytoplasmic inclusions. Collectively, these 
studies suggest that mutant torsinA interferes with cytoskeletal events 
involving vimentin, possibly by restricting movement of these 
particles/filaments, and hence may affect development of neuronal pathways in 
the brain.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2005.10.012
PMID: 16361107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
