---
pmid: '17309111'
title: Comparison of SDS- and methanol-assisted protein solubilization and digestion
  methods for Escherichia coli membrane proteome analysis by 2-D LC-MS/MS.
authors:
- Zhang N
- Chen R
- Young N
- Wishart D
- Winter P
- Weiner JH
- Li L
journal: Proteomics
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/pmic.200600518
---

# Comparison of SDS- and methanol-assisted protein solubilization and digestion methods for Escherichia coli membrane proteome analysis by 2-D LC-MS/MS.
**Authors:** Zhang N, Chen R, Young N, Wishart D, Winter P, Weiner JH, Li L
**Journal:** Proteomics (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pmic.200600518](https://doi.org/10.1002/pmic.200600518)

## Abstract

1. Proteomics. 2007 Feb;7(4):484-493. doi: 10.1002/pmic.200600518.

Comparison of SDS- and methanol-assisted protein solubilization and digestion 
methods for Escherichia coli membrane proteome analysis by 2-D LC-MS/MS.

Zhang N(1), Chen R(1), Young N(2), Wishart D(2), Winter P(3), Weiner JH(3)(4), 
Li L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences and Computing Science, University of 
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(3)Institute for Biomolecular Design, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, 
Canada.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

Both organic solvent and surfactant have been used for dissolving membrane 
proteins for shotgun proteomics. In this work, two methods of protein 
solubilization, namely using 60% methanol or 1% SDS, to dissolve and analyze the 
inner membrane fraction of an Escherichia coli K12 cell lysate were compared. A 
total of 358 proteins (1417 unique peptides) from the methanol-solubilized 
protein mixture and 299 proteins (892 peptides) from the SDS-solubilized 
sample-were identified by using trypsin digestion and 2-D LC-ESI MS/MS. It was 
found that the methanol method detected more hydrophobic peptides, resulting in 
a greater number of proteins identified, than the SDS method. We found that 159 
out of 358 proteins (44%) and 120 out of 299 proteins (40%) detected from the 
methanol- and SDS-solubilized samples, respectively, are integral membrane 
proteins. Among the 190 integral membrane proteins 70 were identified 
exclusively in the methanol-solubilized sample, 89 were identified by both 
methods, and only 31 proteins were exclusively identified by the SDS method. It 
is shown that the integral membrane proteins reflected the theoretical proteome 
for number of transmembrane helices, length, functional class, and topology, 
indicating there was no bias in the proteins identified.

DOI: 10.1002/pmic.200600518
PMID: 17309111 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
