---
pmid: '17542813'
title: 'Adrenoleukodystrophy: subcellular localization and degradation of adrenoleukodystrophy
  protein (ALDP/ABCD1) with naturally occurring missense mutations.'
authors:
- Takahashi N
- Morita M
- Maeda T
- Harayama Y
- Shimozawa N
- Suzuki Y
- Furuya H
- Sato R
- Kashiwayama Y
- Imanaka T
journal: J Neurochem
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2007.04457.x
---

# Adrenoleukodystrophy: subcellular localization and degradation of adrenoleukodystrophy protein (ALDP/ABCD1) with naturally occurring missense mutations.
**Authors:** Takahashi N, Morita M, Maeda T, Harayama Y, Shimozawa N, Suzuki Y, Furuya H, Sato R, Kashiwayama Y, Imanaka T
**Journal:** J Neurochem (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1471-4159.2007.04457.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1471-4159.2007.04457.x)

## Abstract

1. J Neurochem. 2007 Jun;101(6):1632-43. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2007.04457.x.

Adrenoleukodystrophy: subcellular localization and degradation of 
adrenoleukodystrophy protein (ALDP/ABCD1) with naturally occurring missense 
mutations.

Takahashi N(1), Morita M, Maeda T, Harayama Y, Shimozawa N, Suzuki Y, Furuya H, 
Sato R, Kashiwayama Y, Imanaka T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Medicine and 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toyama, Toyama, Japan.

Mutation in the X-chromosomal adrenoleukodystrophy gene (ALD; ABCD1) leads to 
X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD), a severe neurodegenerative disorder. The 
encoded adrenoleukodystrophy protein (ALDP/ABCD1) is a half-size peroxisomal 
ATP-binding cassette protein of 745 amino acids in humans. In this study, we 
chose nine arbitrary mutant human ALDP forms (R104C, G116R, Y174C, S342P, Q544R, 
S606P, S606L, R617H, and H667D) with naturally occurring missense mutations and 
examined the intracellular behavior. When expressed in X-ALD fibroblasts lacking 
ALDP, the expression level of mutant His-ALDPs (S606L, R617H, and H667D) was 
lower than that of wild type and other mutant ALDPs. Furthermore, mutant 
ALDP-green fluorescence proteins (S606L and H667D) stably expressed in CHO cells 
were not detected due to rapid degradation. Interestingly, the wild type ALDP 
co-expressed in these cells also disappeared. In the case of X-ALD fibroblasts 
from an ALD patient (R617H), the mutant ALDP was not detected in the cells, but 
appeared upon incubation with a proteasome inhibitor. When CHO cells expressing 
mutant ALDP-green fluorescence protein (H667D) were cultured in the presence of 
a proteasome inhibitor, both the mutant and wild type ALDP reappeared. In 
addition, mutant His-ALDP (Y174C), which has a mutation between transmembrane 
domain 2 and 3, did not exhibit peroxisomal localization by immunofluorescense 
study. These results suggest that mutant ALDPs, which have a mutation in the 
COOH-terminal half of ALDP, including S606L, R617H, and H667D, were degraded by 
proteasomes after dimerization. Further, the region between transmembrane domain 
2 and 3 is important for the targeting of ALDP to the peroxisome.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2007.04457.x
PMID: 17542813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
