---
pmid: '20696378'
title: Huntingtin is required for mitotic spindle orientation and mammalian neurogenesis.
authors:
- Godin JD
- Colombo K
- Molina-Calavita M
- Keryer G
- Zala D
- Charrin BC
- Dietrich P
- Volvert ML
- Guillemot F
- Dragatsis I
- Bellaiche Y
- Saudou F
- Nguyen L
- Humbert S
journal: Neuron
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.06.027
---

# Huntingtin is required for mitotic spindle orientation and mammalian neurogenesis.
**Authors:** Godin JD, Colombo K, Molina-Calavita M, Keryer G, Zala D, Charrin BC, Dietrich P, Volvert ML, Guillemot F, Dragatsis I, Bellaiche Y, Saudou F, Nguyen L, Humbert S
**Journal:** Neuron (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuron.2010.06.027](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2010.06.027)

## Abstract

1. Neuron. 2010 Aug 12;67(3):392-406. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.06.027.

Huntingtin is required for mitotic spindle orientation and mammalian 
neurogenesis.

Godin JD(1), Colombo K, Molina-Calavita M, Keryer G, Zala D, Charrin BC, 
Dietrich P, Volvert ML, Guillemot F, Dragatsis I, Bellaiche Y, Saudou F, Nguyen 
L, Humbert S.

Author information:
(1)Institut Curie, Orsay F-91405, France.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2010 Aug 17;19(2):192-3. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2010.08.002.

Huntingtin is the protein mutated in Huntington's disease, a devastating 
neurodegenerative disorder. We demonstrate here that huntingtin is essential to 
control mitosis. Huntingtin is localized at spindle poles during mitosis. 
RNAi-mediated silencing of huntingtin in cells disrupts spindle orientation by 
mislocalizing the p150(Glued) subunit of dynactin, dynein, and the large nuclear 
mitotic apparatus NuMA protein. This leads to increased apoptosis following 
mitosis of adherent cells in vitro. In vivo inactivation of huntingtin by RNAi 
or by ablation of the Hdh gene affects spindle orientation and cell fate of 
cortical progenitors of the ventricular zone in mouse embryos. This function is 
conserved in Drosophila, the specific disruption of Drosophila huntingtin in 
neuroblast precursors leading to spindle misorientation. Moreover, Drosophila 
huntingtin restores spindle misorientation in mammalian cells. These findings 
reveal an unexpected role for huntingtin in dividing cells, with potential 
important implications in health and disease.

(c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.06.027
PMID: 20696378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
