---
pmid: '9851978'
title: A novel class of evolutionarily conserved genes defined by piwi are essential
  for stem cell self-renewal.
authors:
- Cox DN
- Chao A
- Baker J
- Chang L
- Qiao D
- Lin H
journal: Genes Dev
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC317255
doi: 10.1101/gad.12.23.3715
---

# A novel class of evolutionarily conserved genes defined by piwi are essential for stem cell self-renewal.
**Authors:** Cox DN, Chao A, Baker J, Chang L, Qiao D, Lin H
**Journal:** Genes Dev (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.12.23.3715](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.12.23.3715)
**PMC:** [PMC317255](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC317255/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 1998 Dec 1;12(23):3715-27. doi: 10.1101/gad.12.23.3715.

A novel class of evolutionarily conserved genes defined by piwi are essential 
for stem cell self-renewal.

Cox DN(1), Chao A, Baker J, Chang L, Qiao D, Lin H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North 
Carolina 27710 USA.

Germ-line stem cells (GSCs) serve as the source for gametogenesis in diverse 
organisms. We cloned and characterized the Drosophila piwi gene and showed that 
it is required for the asymmetric division of GSCs to produce and maintain a 
daughter GSC but is not essential for the further differentiation of the 
committed daughter cell. Genetic mosaic and RNA in situ analyses suggest that 
piwi expression in adjacent somatic cells regulates GSC division. piwi encodes a 
highly basic novel protein, well conserved during evolution. We isolated piwi 
homologs in Caenorhabditis elegans and humans and also identified Arabidopsis 
piwi-like genes known to be required for meristem cell maintenance. Decreasing 
C. elegans piwi expression reduces the proliferation of GSC-equivalent cells. 
Thus, piwi represents a novel class of genes required for GSC division in 
diverse organisms.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.12.23.3715
PMCID: PMC317255
PMID: 9851978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
