---
pmid: '33058883'
title: Protein Phosphatase-1 Complex Disassembly by p97 is Initiated through Multivalent
  Recognition of Catalytic and Regulatory Subunits by the p97 SEP-domain Adapters.
authors:
- Kracht M
- van den Boom J
- Seiler J
- Kröning A
- Kaschani F
- Kaiser M
- Meyer H
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2020.10.001
---

# Protein Phosphatase-1 Complex Disassembly by p97 is Initiated through Multivalent Recognition of Catalytic and Regulatory Subunits by the p97 SEP-domain Adapters.
**Authors:** Kracht M, van den Boom J, Seiler J, Kröning A, Kaschani F, Kaiser M, Meyer H
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmb.2020.10.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2020.10.001)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Biol. 2020 Nov 20;432(23):6061-6074. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2020.10.001.
Epub  2020 Oct 12.

Protein Phosphatase-1 Complex Disassembly by p97 is Initiated through 
Multivalent Recognition of Catalytic and Regulatory Subunits by the p97 
SEP-domain Adapters.

Kracht M(1), van den Boom J(1), Seiler J(1), Kröning A(1), Kaschani F(2), Kaiser 
M(2), Meyer H(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Medical Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology, University of 
Duisburg-Essen, 45117 Essen, Germany.
(2)Chemical Biology and Analytics Core Facility, Centre for Medical 
Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology, University of Duisburg-Essen, 45117 Essen, 
Germany.
(3)Centre for Medical Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology, University of 
Duisburg-Essen, 45117 Essen, Germany. Electronic address: 
hemmo.meyer@uni-due.de.

The AAA-ATPase VCP/p97 cooperates with the SEP-domain adapters p37, UBXN2A and 
p47 in stripping inhibitor-3 (I3) from protein phosphatase-1 (PP1) for 
activation. In contrast to p97-mediated degradative processes, PP1 complex 
disassembly is ubiquitin-independent. It is therefore unclear how selective 
targeting is achieved. Using biochemical reconstitution and crosslink mass 
spectrometry, we show here that SEP-domain adapters use a multivalent substrate 
recognition strategy. An N-terminal sequence element predicted to form a helix, 
together with the SEP-domain, binds and engages the direct target I3 in the 
central pore of p97 for unfolding, while its partner PP1 is held by a linker 
between SHP box and UBX domain locked onto the peripheral N-domain of p97. 
Although the I3-binding element is functional in p47, p47 in vitro requires a 
transplant of the PP1-binding linker from p37 for activity stressing that both 
sites are essential to control specificity. Of note, unfolding is then governed 
by an inhibitory segment in the N-terminal region of p47, suggesting a 
regulatory function. Together, this study reveals how p97 adapters engage a 
protein complex for ubiquitin-independent disassembly while ensuring selectivity 
for one subunit.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2020.10.001
PMID: 33058883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported here.
