---
pmid: '11453994'
title: Dichloromethane mediated in vivo selection and functional characterization
  of rat glutathione S-transferase theta 1-1 variants.
authors:
- Gisi D
- Maillard J
- Flanagan JU
- Rossjohn J
- Chelvanayagam G
- Board PG
- Parker MW
- Leisinger T
- Vuilleumier S
journal: Eur J Biochem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1046/j.1432-1327.2001.02314.x
---

# Dichloromethane mediated in vivo selection and functional characterization of rat glutathione S-transferase theta 1-1 variants.
**Authors:** Gisi D, Maillard J, Flanagan JU, Rossjohn J, Chelvanayagam G, Board PG, Parker MW, Leisinger T, Vuilleumier S
**Journal:** Eur J Biochem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1432-1327.2001.02314.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1432-1327.2001.02314.x)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Biochem. 2001 Jul;268(14):4001-10. doi:
10.1046/j.1432-1327.2001.02314.x.

Dichloromethane mediated in vivo selection and functional characterization of 
rat glutathione S-transferase theta 1-1 variants.

Gisi D(1), Maillard J, Flanagan JU, Rossjohn J, Chelvanayagam G, Board PG, 
Parker MW, Leisinger T, Vuilleumier S.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Mikrobiologie, Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule Zürich, 
Switzerland.

Methylobacterium dichloromethanicum DM4 is able to grow with dichloromethane as 
the sole carbon and energy source by using a dichloromethane 
dehalogenase/glutathione S-transferase (GST) for the conversion of 
dichloromethane to formaldehyde. Mammalian homologs of this bacterial enzyme are 
also known to catalyze this reaction. However, the dehalogenation of 
dichloromethane by GST T1-1 from rat was highly mutagenic and toxic to 
methylotrophic bacteria. Plasmid-driven expression of rat GST T1-1 in strain 
DM4-2cr, a mutant of strain DM4 lacking dichloromethane dehalogenase, reduced 
cell viability 10(5)-fold in the presence of dichloromethane. This effect was 
exploited to select dichloromethane-resistant transconjugants of strain DM4-2cr 
carrying a plasmid-encoded rGSTT1 gene. Transconjugants that still expressed the 
GST T1 protein after dichloromethane treatment included rGSTT1 mutants encoding 
protein variants with sequence changes from the wild-type ranging from single 
residue exchanges to large insertions and deletions. A structural model of rat 
GST T1-1 suggested that sequence variation was clustered around the glutathione 
activation site and at the protein C-terminus believed to cap the active site. 
The enzymatic activity of purified His-tagged GST T1-1 variants expressed in 
Escherichia coli was markedly reduced with both dichloromethane and the 
alternative substrate 1,2-epoxy-3-(4'-nitrophenoxy)propane. These results 
provide the first experimental evidence for the involvement of Gln102 and Arg107 
in catalysis, and illustrate the potential of in vivo approaches to identify 
catalytic residues in GSTs whose activity leads to toxic effects.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1432-1327.2001.02314.x
PMID: 11453994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
