---
pmid: '22751931'
title: A novel 4EHP-GIGYF2 translational repressor complex is essential for mammalian
  development.
authors:
- Morita M
- Ler LW
- Fabian MR
- Siddiqui N
- Mullin M
- Henderson VC
- Alain T
- Fonseca BD
- Karashchuk G
- Bennett CF
- Kabuta T
- Higashi S
- Larsson O
- Topisirovic I
- Smith RJ
- Gingras AC
- Sonenberg N
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3422012
doi: 10.1128/MCB.00455-12
---

# A novel 4EHP-GIGYF2 translational repressor complex is essential for mammalian development.
**Authors:** Morita M, Ler LW, Fabian MR, Siddiqui N, Mullin M, Henderson VC, Alain T, Fonseca BD, Karashchuk G, Bennett CF, Kabuta T, Higashi S, Larsson O, Topisirovic I, Smith RJ, Gingras AC, Sonenberg N
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.00455-12](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.00455-12)
**PMC:** [PMC3422012](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3422012/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Sep;32(17):3585-93. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00455-12. Epub 2012
Jul  2.

A novel 4EHP-GIGYF2 translational repressor complex is essential for mammalian 
development.

Morita M(1), Ler LW, Fabian MR, Siddiqui N, Mullin M, Henderson VC, Alain T, 
Fonseca BD, Karashchuk G, Bennett CF, Kabuta T, Higashi S, Larsson O, 
Topisirovic I, Smith RJ, Gingras AC, Sonenberg N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Goodman Cancer Research Centre, McGill 
University, Montréal, Quebec, Canada.

The binding of the eukaryotic initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) to the mRNA 5' cap 
structure is a rate-limiting step in mRNA translation initiation. eIF4E promotes 
ribosome recruitment to the mRNA. In Drosophila, the eIF4E homologous protein 
(d4EHP) forms a complex with binding partners to suppress the translation of 
distinct mRNAs by competing with eIF4E for binding the 5' cap structure. This 
repression mechanism is essential for the asymmetric distribution of proteins 
and normal embryonic development in Drosophila. In contrast, the physiological 
role of the mammalian 4EHP (m4EHP) was not known. In this study, we have 
identified the Grb10-interacting GYF protein 2 (GIGYF2) and the zinc finger 
protein 598 (ZNF598) as components of the m4EHP complex. GIGYF2 directly 
interacts with m4EHP, and this interaction is required for stabilization of both 
proteins. Disruption of the m4EHP-GIGYF2 complex leads to increased translation 
and perinatal lethality in mice. We propose a model by which the m4EHP-GIGYF2 
complex represses translation of a subset of mRNAs during embryonic development, 
as was previously reported for d4EHP.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00455-12
PMCID: PMC3422012
PMID: 22751931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
