---
pmid: '23584453'
title: Interaction with Shc prevents aberrant Erk activation in the absence of extracellular
  stimuli.
authors:
- Suen KM
- Lin CC
- George R
- Melo FA
- Biggs ER
- Ahmed Z
- Drake MN
- Arur S
- Arold ST
- Ladbury JE
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2013'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4059177
doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2557
---

# Interaction with Shc prevents aberrant Erk activation in the absence of extracellular stimuli.
**Authors:** Suen KM, Lin CC, George R, Melo FA, Biggs ER, Ahmed Z, Drake MN, Arur S, Arold ST, Ladbury JE
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nsmb.2557](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb.2557)
**PMC:** [PMC4059177](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4059177/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2013 May;20(5):620-7. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2557. Epub 2013
Apr  14.

Interaction with Shc prevents aberrant Erk activation in the absence of 
extracellular stimuli.

Suen KM(1), Lin CC, George R, Melo FA, Biggs ER, Ahmed Z, Drake MN, Arur S, 
Arold ST, Ladbury JE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2013 May;14(5):266. doi: 10.1038/nrm3571.

Control mechanisms that prevent aberrant signaling are necessary to maintain 
cellular homeostasis. We describe a new mechanism by which the adaptor protein 
Shc directly binds the MAP kinase Erk, thus preventing its activation in the 
absence of extracellular stimuli. The Shc-Erk complex restricts Erk nuclear 
translocation, restraining Erk-dependent transcription of genes, including those 
responsible for oncogenic growth. The complex forms through unique binding sites 
on both the Shc PTB domain and the N-terminal lobe of Erk. Upon receptor 
tyrosine kinase stimulation, a conformational change within Shc-induced through 
interaction with the phosphorylated receptor-releases Erk, allowing it to 
fulfill its role in signaling. Thus, in addition to its established role in 
promoting MAP kinase signaling in stimulated cells, Shc negatively regulates Erk 
activation in the absence of growth factors and thus could be considered a tumor 
suppressor in human cells.

DOI: 10.1038/nsmb.2557
PMCID: PMC4059177
PMID: 23584453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing financial interests The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.

## Full Text

Abstract

Control mechanisms that prevent aberrant signaling are necessary to maintain cellular homeostasis. We describe a novel mechanism by which the adaptor protein Shc binds directly to the MAP-kinase Erk, preventing its activation in the absence of extracellular stimulus. The Shc–Erk complex restricts Erk nuclear translocation, restraining Erk-dependent transcription of genes, including those responsible for oncogenic growth. The complex is formed through unique binding sites on both the Shc PTB domain and N-terminal lobe of Erk. Upon receptor tyrosine kinase stimulation, a conformational change within Shc—induced through interaction with the phosphorylated receptor—releases Erk allowing it to fulfill its role in signaling. Thus, in addition to its established role in promoting MAP-kinase signaling in stimulated cells, Shc negatively regulates Erk activation in the absence of growth factors and thus could be considered as a tumor suppressor in human cells.

DISCUSSION

Significant basal kinase activity prevails in cells in the absence of extracellular stimulation 38 . This requires that control mechanisms be in place to prevent improper cellular responses to this activity. This work focused on the role of the adaptor protein Shc in preventing aberrant signal transduction by Erk in non-stimulated cells. We uncovered a control mechanism in which Shc binds to, and inhibits the recruitment of Erk to the MAPK pathway. This interaction occurs between a non-canonical binding interface on the ShcPTB and the N-terminal lobe of Erk. As a consequence, Shc suppresses Erk phosphorylation and, potentially, undesirable cellular outcomes such as oncogenic cell proliferation. The function of Shc as a negative regulator of Erk phosphorylation was confirmed in vivo in an animal model. Deletion of shc-1 in C. elegans resulted in the elevation of pErk in the germ line which could be rescued by the expression of hShc. Upon growth factor stimulation, Shc binds to an appropriate RTK which induces a conformational change in the ShcPTB and results in the release of Erk from Shc. Both Shc and Erk have numerous known intracellular binding partners, and the distinct domains of Shc provide docking sites for a diverse array of signaling molecules 39 – 41 . Erk also has several cognate sites for binding partners 33 , 42 . However, the ShcPTB–Erk interaction maps to sites unique on the surfaces of both Shc and Erk, suggesting a specialized function. The previously reported site closest to the one we identified for the ShcPTB–Erk interaction involves the yeast scaffold protein Ste5 binding to a site on the N-terminal lobe of the Fus3—an Erk homologue 43 . However the corresponding site on the N-terminal lobe of human Erk is occluded by Erk’s own N-terminus and hence prevents ligand binding. Alignment of Shc sequences from vertebrates and invertebrates indicate that the binding site for Erk is conserved 40 . The fact that there are—to date—no reported competing interactions for this site suggest that the maintenance of the Shc–Erk complex is important for cellular homeostasis and likely disrupted only in the context of signaling. Thus control of Erk by Shc is preserved in the presence of other potential functional interactions of these proteins.

The role of Shc as an adaptor protein in stimulated cells by forming a docking platform for enzymes involved in receptor-mediated signaling is well established. The involvement of Shc in signal transduction in response to growth factor stimulation is contrasted by its function in the absence of cellular stimulation. One notable interaction in this context is the binding of Shc to protein phosphatase 2 (PP2) under basal conditions 44 . Similarly to Erk, PP2 is released upon stimulation by EGF or insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1). Furthermore, the Shc–PP2 complex is believed to negatively regulate growth factor signaling. This is because the presence of PP2 prevents phosphorylation of Shc and the subsequent recruitment of Grb2. Thus, although the result of the dissociation of the Shc–PP2 complex is similar to that of the Shc–Erk complex, the mechanism of regulating MAPK signaling is entirely different.

Erk activity has also been shown to be regulated by cellular proteins other than Shc. For example, the p hosphoprotein e nriched in a strocytes 15 (Pea-15) protein has been demonstrated to regulate the subcellular localization of Erk and control the outcomes of MAPK signaling 45 , 46 . Pea-15 binds to Erk regardless of its phosphorylation status and as a result cells depleted of Pea-15 show increased levels of Erk in the nucleus. In addition, the s imilar e xpression to F GF (Sef) protein also regulates Erk cellular localization. This is achieved through Sef binding to the activated forms of Mek and preventing the dissociation of Erk from Mek 47 . Again, knock down of Sef results in nuclear accumulation of Erk in stimulated cells. Importantly, although Pea-15 and Sef exert control over the spatial distribution of Erk (the latter in stimulated cells only), neither are involved in induction of MAPK signaling as shown here for Shc. Thus Shc is unique in exerting a dual influence on Erk activation and its downstream response.

ShcPTB binds to a distinct set of activated growth factor receptors including TrkA, EGFR, ErbB2, and ErbB3. The resulting tyrosine phosphorylation of Shc promotes signal transduction through the MAPK pathway 15 . However, this work highlights that the recruitment to an appropriate RTK also results in the release of Erk from Shc, increasing the cellular concentrations of free Erk able to increase MAPK signaling and downstream gene transcription. Shc therefore plays a central role in modulating MAPK signaling through two distinct mechanisms, and could be fundamental in controlling Erk activation-sensitive cellular outcomes of MAPK-mediated signal transduction 25 . In the context of oncogenic activating mutations of receptors, there will be increased recruitment of Shc to pY-containing binding sites and hence elevated levels of free Erk. This will have an effect on amplification of MAPK signal transduction and hence increased proliferative potential.

Erk plays multiple roles in the acquisition of complex malignant phenotypes, hence down-regulation of Erk activity is expected to produce anti-proliferative, anti-metastatic and/or anti-angiogenic effects in tumor cells. It has already been demonstrated that reducing the cellular concentration of Erk by RNA interference leads to the suppression of tumor cell proliferation in ovarian cancer cells 19 . Small molecule inhibition of Shc–RTK interaction that preserve Shc–Erk binding could have a similar effect by maintaining the engagement of the Shc-Erk complex.
