---
pmid: '9214382'
title: A novel class of RanGTP binding proteins.
authors:
- Görlich D
- Dabrowski M
- Bischoff FR
- Kutay U
- Bork P
- Hartmann E
- Prehn S
- Izaurralde E
journal: J Cell Biol
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2139951
doi: 10.1083/jcb.138.1.65
---

# A novel class of RanGTP binding proteins.
**Authors:** Görlich D, Dabrowski M, Bischoff FR, Kutay U, Bork P, Hartmann E, Prehn S, Izaurralde E
**Journal:** J Cell Biol (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1083/jcb.138.1.65](https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.138.1.65)
**PMC:** [PMC2139951](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2139951/)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Biol. 1997 Jul 14;138(1):65-80. doi: 10.1083/jcb.138.1.65.

A novel class of RanGTP binding proteins.

Görlich D(1), Dabrowski M, Bischoff FR, Kutay U, Bork P, Hartmann E, Prehn S, 
Izaurralde E.

Author information:
(1)Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie der Universität Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, 
Germany. dg@mail.zmbh.uni-heidelberg.de

The importin-alpha/beta complex and the GTPase Ran mediate nuclear import of 
proteins with a classical nuclear localization signal. Although Ran has been 
implicated also in a variety of other processes, such as cell cycle progression, 
a direct function of Ran has so far only been demonstrated for importin-mediated 
nuclear import. We have now identified an entire class of approximately 20 
potential Ran targets that share a sequence motif related to the Ran-binding 
site of importin-beta. We have confirmed specific RanGTP binding for some of 
them, namely for two novel factors, RanBP7 and RanBP8, for CAS, Pse1p, and 
Msn5p, and for the cell cycle regulator Cse1p from Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We 
have studied RanBP7 in more detail. Similar to importin-beta, it prevents the 
activation of Ran's GTPase by RanGAP1 and inhibits nucleotide exchange on 
RanGTP. RanBP7 binds directly to nuclear pore complexes where it competes for 
binding sites with importin-beta, transportin, and apparently also with the 
mediators of mRNA and U snRNA export. Furthermore, we provide evidence for a 
Ran-dependent transport cycle of RanBP7 and demonstrate that RanBP7 can cross 
the nuclear envelope rapidly and in both directions. On the basis of these 
results, we propose that RanBP7 might represent a nuclear transport factor that 
carries an as yet unknown cargo, which could apply as well for this entire class 
of related RanGTP-binding proteins.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.138.1.65
PMCID: PMC2139951
PMID: 9214382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
