---
pmid: '22308366'
title: Self-assembly of functional, amphipathic amyloid monolayers by the fungal hydrophobin
  EAS.
authors:
- Macindoe I
- Kwan AH
- Ren Q
- Morris VK
- Yang W
- Mackay JP
- Sunde M
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2012'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3325668
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1114052109
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Self-assembly of functional, amphipathic amyloid monolayers by the fungal hydrophobin EAS.
**Authors:** Macindoe I, Kwan AH, Ren Q, Morris VK, Yang W, Mackay JP, Sunde M
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1114052109](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1114052109)
**PMC:** [PMC3325668](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3325668/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Apr 3;109(14):E804-11. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1114052109. Epub 2012 Jan 23.

Self-assembly of functional, amphipathic amyloid monolayers by the fungal 
hydrophobin EAS.

Macindoe I(1), Kwan AH, Ren Q, Morris VK, Yang W, Mackay JP, Sunde M.

Author information:
(1)School of Molecular Bioscience, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales 
2006, Australia.

The hydrophobin EAS from the fungus Neurospora crassa forms functional amyloid 
fibrils called rodlets that facilitate spore formation and dispersal. 
Self-assembly of EAS into fibrillar rodlets occurs spontaneously at 
hydrophobic:hydrophilic interfaces and the rodlets further associate laterally 
to form amphipathic monolayers. We have used site-directed mutagenesis and 
peptide experiments to identify the region of EAS that drives intermolecular 
association and formation of the cross-β rodlet structure. Transplanting this 
region into a nonamyloidogenic hydrophobin enables it to form rodlets. We have 
also determined the structure and dynamics of an EAS variant with reduced 
rodlet-forming ability. Taken together, these data allow us to pinpoint the 
conformational changes that take place when hydrophobins self-assemble at an 
interface and to propose a model for the amphipathic EAS rodlet structure.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1114052109
PMCID: PMC3325668
PMID: 22308366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

The hydrophobin EAS from the fungus Neurospora crassa forms functional amyloid fibrils called rodlets that facilitate spore formation and dispersal. Self-assembly of EAS into fibrillar rodlets occurs spontaneously at hydrophobic:hydrophilic interfaces and the rodlets further associate laterally to form amphipathic monolayers. We have used site-directed mutagenesis and peptide experiments to identify the region of EAS that drives intermolecular association and formation of the cross-β rodlet structure. Transplanting this region into a nonamyloidogenic hydrophobin enables it to form rodlets. We have also determined the structure and dynamics of an EAS variant with reduced rodlet-forming ability. Taken together, these data allow us to pinpoint the conformational changes that take place when hydrophobins self-assemble at an interface and to propose a model for the amphipathic EAS rodlet structure.

Discussion

While the amyloid characteristics of rodlets give a starting point for understanding the formation of fungal hydrophobin amyloid, there is much to learn about the triggers for the conformational change involved in rodlet formation, the sequence segments that are critical for assembly and the molecular structure of the functional monolayers.

Our mutagenesis studies indicate that glycine substitutions only within the F72–N76 segment of EAS and not elsewhere in the protein have a significant effect on rodlet assembly, identifying this region as the critical amyloidogenic segment. Our results demonstrate that the F72–I75 region directly forms the core of the cross-β structure in EAS hydrophobin functional amyloid rodlets. Not only can a peptide encompassing the sequence of this region form amyloid fibrils on its own, but when this sequence is transplanted into a class II hydrophobin, it confers rodlet-forming ability. Significantly, inclusion of pep70–76 in EAS assembly assays reduces the extent of EAS rodlet assembly and disrupts the fibrillar morphology and packing within the monolayer. This finding provides a starting point for the design of inhibitors that can reduce rodlet polymerization, which is an important step in fungal pathogenesis.

We previously proposed that EAS rodlet assembly might involve the monomeric β-barrels stacked head-to-tail at the interface, with or without involvement of the Cys3–Cys4 loop ( 15 ). However, we have subsequently demonstrated that the Cys3–Cys4 loop is not required for assembly ( 22 ). In addition, although several different amyloid prediction algorithms identified two regions of high fibril-forming potential in EAS, our results demonstrate that in the context of the intact protein and surface-driven functional amyloid assembly, only the region F72–I75 within the Cys7–Cys8 loop is central to EAS rodlet formation.

Goldschmidt et al. highlight the importance of conformational freedom for the amyloidogenic segment to interact with other molecules ( 20 ). In the solution structure of EAS, the Cys7–Cys8 bond tethers this loop at its base and the L73–I75 region (a short two-residue β-strand) links it to the edge of the β-barrel by two hydrogen bonds. Therefore, the only way in which the F72–I75 sequence can form the β-spine of an amyloid-structured rodlet is for a conformational change to take place. This does not happen spontaneously in solution, even at the high protein concentrations used for NMR structure determination, but requires association with a hydrophobic:hydrophilic interface. Surface tension is critical for triggering this conformational change, which may be analogous to the phenomenon of surface-induced denaturation of proteins ( 33 ) but is a functional requirement for Class I hydrophobins ( 34 ).

The structures of EAS, EAS Δ15 and EAS Δ15 -F72G monomers all suggest that residues T66–S71, in the N-terminal half of the Cys7–Cys8 loop, are highly mobile in solution on the nanosecond time scale ( 15 , 16 ). Therefore, it is likely that a conformational change involving a larger proportion of the Cys7–Cys8 loop can take place upon contact with a suitable interface. In the crystal structures of the class II hydrophobins HFBI and HFBII solved in the presence of detergent, the Cys7–Cys8 loop in some of the monomers is observed in an extended conformation ( 35 , 36 ). While these class II hydrophobins do not form rodlets and the sequence of this corresponding region in the class II hydrophobins is not predicted to be amyloidogenic, the observation does indicate that this region of the protein is inherently mobile in response to a hydrophobic environment. In contrast, the region V46–I50 in the EAS protein, while predicted by four algorithms to be amyloidogenic, is flanked by Cys4 and Cys5, which form disulfide bonds with Cys3 and Cys2, respectively. The network of disulfide bonds imposes tight structural constraints on this segment. In addition, we did not find that the peptide corresponding to this region formed fibrils in vitro when dissolved in water, in spite of its predicted amyloid-forming potential.

Substitution of residues in the amyloidogenic F72–I75 region by glycines dramatically increases the lag phase for rodlet assembly. Studies on other proteins and polypeptides have indicated that amyloid formation generally follows a nucleation-dependent polymerization mechanism, with the length of the lag phase dependent on the characteristics of the association equilibria that lead to formation of the nucleus ( 37 , 38 ). Our data indicate that this is also true for EAS rodlet formation. Glycine residues can sample a much wider range of ϕ and ψ angles than other residues, allowing increased local dynamics, and this is indeed observed around the mutation site in EAS Δ15 -F72G. In the glycine mutants with an extended lag phase, the formation of a stable nucleus is slowed but not prevented and, when rodlets do form, they are indistinguishable from wild-type rodlets in terms of morphology and stability.

While most amyloid structures determined to date have demonstrated a parallel arrangement of monomers ( 39 – 41 ), important characteristics of these functional hydrophobin rodlets support the antiparallel arrangement presented in this model. Critically, the antiparallel arrangement of monomers maintains the dimensions and amphipathic nature of the rodlet monolayer that is characteristic of these fungal assemblies and fundamental to their biological functions. A model with a parallel arrangement of the Cys7–Cys8 loop was generated, but the barrel of the protein could not be accommodated without severe steric clashes from overlapping adjacent monomers, and the docked structures were not consistent with the observed straight rodlet morphology ( Fig. S2 C ). Antiparallel arrangements have been predicted to form amyloid zipper structures ( 39 ) but to be rare because of sequence constraints ( 42 ). An antiparallel arrangement has been seen in fibrils formed by the Iowa mutant of Aβ1–40 under certain conditions ( 43 ), and recent models for RNase A, cystatin, and β 2 -microglobulin amyloid fibrils that involve domain swapping suggest that in the more complex situation of amyloid formation by segments within a mostly folded protein, antiparallel sheets may form steric zippers ( 44 – 46 ). The model we present for EAS rodlets is similar to the antiparallel, face-to-face steric zipper, as proposed by Sawaya and colleagues ( 39 ), but the sheets are composed of different sequences.

Furthermore, this model is compatible with the effects we observed in vortexed EAS:pep70-76 mixtures—namely, reduction in fibril length and disturbance of lateral packing compared with EAS rodlets alone. Lateral packing of the rodlets is required to form a monolayer, and the model predicts that the lateral assembly of rodlets involves interactions between the remaining bulk of the protein, contacts that the peptide cannot provide. This model would also explain the observation that rodlets composed of EAS Δ15 are narrower than those composed of wild-type EAS, given the positioning of the Cys3–Cys4 loop at the outer edges ( 22 ) ( Fig. 7 C ).

While it has long been postulated that a conformational change is associated with hydrophobin assembly from solution to rodlet states ( 11 , 26 ), the critical rodlet assembly region has not been pinpointed before. As proposed for other amyloid-forming proteins ( 20 , 47 ), a conformational change in the protein monomer is thought to expose a previously buried segment that is prone to cross-β stacking, leaving the bulk of the native fold of the protein largely unchanged. These conformational change models were designed to describe the behavior of proteins that “switch” to an amyloidogenic state due to a localized conformational change under appropriate conditions. The parallels with the functional amyloid formed by hydrophobins are apparent: Hydrophobins also have a nonamyloidogenic state (i.e., the monomeric solution conformation) and an amyloidogenic state (i.e., the conformation adopted at hydrophobic–hydrophilic interfaces).

Materials and Methods

All reagents and chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, Astral Scientific, Amyl Media, or Ajax Finechem apart from chromatography grade methanol, which was purchased from Burdick & Jackson. Peptides were synthesized by standard FMOC chemistry using a PS3 Peptide Synthesizer (Protein Technologies) in the School of Chemistry, University of Sydney (pep70–76) or purchased from Genscript (pep46–52, pep10–16, and SC3–pep).
