---
reference_id: PMID:2304215
title: Problems identified by secondary review of accepted manuscripts.
authors:
- Garfunkel JM
- Ulshen MH
- Hamrick HJ
- Lawson EE
journal: JAMA
year: '1990'
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Problems identified by secondary review of accepted manuscripts.
**Authors:** Garfunkel JM, Ulshen MH, Hamrick HJ, Lawson EE
**Journal:** JAMA (1990)

## Content

1. JAMA. 1990 Mar 9;263(10):1369-71.

Problems identified by secondary review of accepted manuscripts.

Garfunkel JM(1), Ulshen MH, Hamrick HJ, Lawson EE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of North Carolina School of Medicine,
Chapel Hill 27599-7230.

To test the hypothesis that no important deficits would be identified on further
review of accepted manuscripts, and that such manuscripts would be recommended
for publication on rereview, we sent manuscripts that had been accepted for
publication, after review and revision, for rereview by new referees who were
unaware of the status of the manuscripts. Each review was evaluated
independently by two assistant editors to determine whether substantive
criticisms were identified by the new reviewers. The majority of manuscripts
were thought by the new reviewers to have defects that warranted further
revision, but the problems noted were often dissimilar. However, 80% of the
manuscripts were recommended for publication and others were judged suitable for
publication, although not at a high priority. The assistant editors frequently
differed in their judgments whether a given criticism of a reviewer warranted
further revision; nevertheless, there was infrequent disagreement regarding the
basic decision for acceptance or rejection.

PMID: 2304215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]