---
pmid: '10347213'
title: A nuclear export signal prevents Saccharomyces cerevisiae Hsp70 Ssb1p from
  stimulating nuclear localization signal-directed nuclear transport.
authors:
- Shulga N
- James P
- Craig EA
- Goldfarb DS
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.23.16501
---

# A nuclear export signal prevents Saccharomyces cerevisiae Hsp70 Ssb1p from stimulating nuclear localization signal-directed nuclear transport.
**Authors:** Shulga N, James P, Craig EA, Goldfarb DS
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.274.23.16501](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.23.16501)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jun 4;274(23):16501-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.23.16501.

A nuclear export signal prevents Saccharomyces cerevisiae Hsp70 Ssb1p from 
stimulating nuclear localization signal-directed nuclear transport.

Shulga N(1), James P, Craig EA, Goldfarb DS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Rochester, Rochester, New York 14627, 
USA.

Hsp70 has been implicated in nuclear localization signal (NLS)-directed nuclear 
transport. Saccharomyces cerevisiae contains distinct SSA and SSB gene families 
of cytosolic Hsp70s. The nucleocytoplasmic localization of Ssa1p and Ssb1p was 
investigated using green fluorescent protein (GFP) fusions. Whereas GFP-Ssa1p 
localized both to the nucleus and cytoplasm, GFP-Ssb1p appeared only in the 
cytosol. The C-terminal domain of Ssb1p contains a leucine-rich nuclear export 
signal (NES) that is necessary and sufficient to direct nuclear export. The 
accumulation of GFP-Ssb1p in the nuclei of xpo1-1 cells suggests that Ssb1p 
shuttles across the nuclear envelope. Elevated levels of SSA1 but not SSB1 
suppressed the NLS-GFP nuclear localization defects of nup188-Delta cells. 
Studies with Ssa1p/Ssb1p chimeras revealed that the Ssb1p NES is sufficient and 
necessary to inhibit the function of Ssa- or Ssb-type Hsp70s in nuclear 
transport. Thus, NES-less Ssb1p stimulates nuclear transport in nup188-Delta 
cells and NES-containing Ssa1p does not. We conclude that the differential 
function of Ssa1p and Ssb1p in nuclear transport is due to the NES-directed 
export of the Ssb1p and not to functional differences in their ATPase or peptide 
binding domains.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.23.16501
PMID: 10347213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
