---
pmid: '2646638'
title: Angiogenin stimulates endothelial cell prostacyclin secretion by activation
  of phospholipase A2.
authors:
- Bicknell R
- Vallee BL
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1989'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC286740
doi: 10.1073/pnas.86.5.1573
---

# Angiogenin stimulates endothelial cell prostacyclin secretion by activation of phospholipase A2.
**Authors:** Bicknell R, Vallee BL
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.86.5.1573](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.86.5.1573)
**PMC:** [PMC286740](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC286740/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1989 Mar;86(5):1573-7. doi: 10.1073/pnas.86.5.1573.

Angiogenin stimulates endothelial cell prostacyclin secretion by activation of 
phospholipase A2.

Bicknell R(1), Vallee BL.

Author information:
(1)Center for Biochemical and Biophysical Sciences and Medicine, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02115.

Angiogenin stimulates capillary and umbilical vein endothelial cell prostacyclin 
secretion but not that of prostaglandins of the E series. The response was 
quantitated by radioimmunoassay and by [3H]arachidonate labeling followed by 
analysis of the secreted prostaglandins. The stimulated secretion lasts for 
several minutes and is optimal at 2-4 min. The dose-response (peak at 1-10 
ng/ml) is similar to that previously observed for activation of endothelial cell 
phospholipase C. Stimulated secretion was blocked by pretreatment with the 
inhibitors of prostacyclin synthesis, indomethacin and tranylcypromine, and also 
the specific inhibitor of phospholipase A2, quinacrine, as well as pertussis 
toxin and the diglyceryl and monoglyceryl lipase inhibitor RHC 80267. Stimulated 
secretion was also abolished in cells that were either pretreated for 48 hr with 
phorbol ester to down-regulate protein kinase C or incubated with the protein 
kinase inhibitor H7. Hydrolysis of phosphatidylinositol by phospholipase A2 
appears to be the source of angiogenin-mobilized arachidonate; 
angiogenin-induced hydrolysis of phosphatidylcholine was not detected. 
Activation of phospholipase A2 occurs in the absence of an angiogenin-induced 
calcium flux. The results are discussed in terms of mechanisms of 
agonist-induced intracellular arachidonate mobilization and relevance to 
angiogenesis.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.86.5.1573
PMCID: PMC286740
PMID: 2646638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
