---
pmid: '20875085'
title: Functional analysis of a murine monoclonal antibody against the repetitive
  region of the fibronectin-binding adhesins fibronectin-binding protein A and fibronectin-binding
  protein B from Staphylococcus aureus.
authors:
- Provenza G
- Provenzano M
- Visai L
- Burke FM
- Geoghegan JA
- Stravalaci M
- Gobbi M
- Mazzini G
- Arciola CR
- Foster TJ
- Speziale P
journal: FEBS J
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07835.x
---

# Functional analysis of a murine monoclonal antibody against the repetitive region of the fibronectin-binding adhesins fibronectin-binding protein A and fibronectin-binding protein B from Staphylococcus aureus.
**Authors:** Provenza G, Provenzano M, Visai L, Burke FM, Geoghegan JA, Stravalaci M, Gobbi M, Mazzini G, Arciola CR, Foster TJ, Speziale P
**Journal:** FEBS J (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07835.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07835.x)

## Abstract

1. FEBS J. 2010 Nov;277(21):4490-505. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07835.x. Epub
 2010 Sep 28.

Functional analysis of a murine monoclonal antibody against the repetitive 
region of the fibronectin-binding adhesins fibronectin-binding protein A and 
fibronectin-binding protein B from Staphylococcus aureus.

Provenza G(1), Provenzano M, Visai L, Burke FM, Geoghegan JA, Stravalaci M, 
Gobbi M, Mazzini G, Arciola CR, Foster TJ, Speziale P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.

Fibronectin-binding proteins A and B are multifunctional LPXTG staphylococcal 
adhesins, comprising an N-terminal region that binds fibrinogen and elastin, and 
a C-terminal domain that interacts with fibronectin. The C-terminal domain of 
fibronectin-binding protein A is organized into 11 tandem repeats, six of which 
bind the ligand with high affinity; other sites bind more weakly. 
Fibronectin-binding protein B has been postulated to harbor 10 rather than 11 
repeats, but it contains the same number of high-affinity fibronectin-binding 
sites as fibronectin-binding protein A. In this study, we confirm this 
prediction and show that six of 10 sites bind with dissociation constants in the 
nanomolar range. We also found that the full-length repetitive region of 
fibronectin-binding protein B stimulated the production of a mAb (15E11) that 
binds with high affinity to an epitope shared by repeats 9 and 10 from both 
adhesins. With the use of truncated fragments of repeat 9 of fibronectin-binding 
protein A, we mapped the antibody epitope to the N-terminal segment and the 
fibronectin-binding site to the C-terminal segment of the repeat. The distinct 
localization of the 15E11 epitope and the fibronectin-binding site suggests that 
the interfering effect of the antibody might result from steric hindrance or a 
conformational change in the structure that reduces the accessibility of 
fibronectin to its binding determinant. The epitope is well exposed on the 
surface of staphylococcal cells, as determined by genetic analyses, fluorescence 
microscopy, and flow cytometry. When incubated with cells of Staphylococcus 
aureus strains, 15E11 inhibits attachment of bacteria to surface-coated 
fibronectin by almost 70%.

© 2010 The Authors Journal compilation © 2010 FEBS.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07835.x
PMID: 20875085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
