---
pmid: '16943770'
title: Targeted inhibition of p57 and p15 blocks transforming growth factor beta-inhibited
  proliferation of primary cultured human limbal epithelial cells.
authors:
- Chen Z
- Li DQ
- Tong L
- Stewart P
- Chu C
- Pflugfelder SC
journal: Mol Vis
year: '2006'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2906388
---

# Targeted inhibition of p57 and p15 blocks transforming growth factor beta-inhibited proliferation of primary cultured human limbal epithelial cells.
**Authors:** Chen Z, Li DQ, Tong L, Stewart P, Chu C, Pflugfelder SC
**Journal:** Mol Vis (2006)
**PMC:** [PMC2906388](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2906388/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Vis. 2006 Aug 23;12:983-94.

Targeted inhibition of p57 and p15 blocks transforming growth factor 
beta-inhibited proliferation of primary cultured human limbal epithelial cells.

Chen Z(1), Li DQ, Tong L, Stewart P, Chu C, Pflugfelder SC.

Author information:
(1)The Ocular Surface Center, Cullen Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the role of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors p57 and p15 
in transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta1 or TGF-beta2 inhibited proliferation 
of primary cultured human limbal epithelial cells using short interfering RNA 
(siRNA).
METHODS: Primary cultured human limbal epithelial cells were treated with 
TGF-beta1 or TGF-beta2 for 6 and 24 h, and total RNA extracted for RT-PCR and 
real-time PCR using primers for p21, p27, and p57 (CipP/Kip family) and p15 and 
p19 (INK4 family). Proteins were extracted for western blot analysis of p57 and 
p15. For RNA interference, primary cultured human limbal epithelial cells were 
transfected with annealed double-stranded siRNA (67 nM) specific for p57, p15, 
or siRNA-Fluorescein (siRNA-F; as a negative control) followed by treatment with 
TGF-beta1 or TGF-beta2 at 1 ng/ml. P57 and p15 were quantitatively detected by 
real-time PCR and western blot; and immunolocalized by immunofluorescent 
staining. The effects of TGF-beta1 or TGF-beta2 on cell proliferation were 
evaluated by BrdU incorporation and MTT assay.
RESULTS: TGF-beta1 or TGF-beta2 significantly inhibited primary cultured human 
limbal epithelial cell proliferation measured by BrdU incorporation and MTT 
assay. TGF-beta1 or TGF-beta2 upregulated the expression of p57 and p15 mRNA and 
protein, but did not effect the expression of p19, p21, or p27. The siRNA 
transfection efficiency of these cells was 75% and no cellular toxicity was 
observed by 24 h. The TGF-beta1 or TGF-beta2 stimulated expression of p57 and 
p15 mRNA were markedly blocked by siRNA-p57 or siRNA-p15, respectively, but not 
by siRNA-F. The TGF-beta1 or TGF-beta2 suppression of epithelial proliferation 
measured by BrdU incorporation and MTT generation was increased to near normal 
levels by siRNA-p57 or siRNA-p15. Western blot and immunofluorescent staining 
showed that levels of p57 and p15 proteins were equally reduced in the cytoplasm 
and nucleus.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings demonstrate that TGF-beta1 and/or TGF-beta2 inhibit 
proliferation of primary cultured human limbal epithelial cells and that p57 and 
p15 play roles in this process.

PMCID: PMC2906388
PMID: 16943770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Methods

Primary cultured human limbal epithelial cells were treated with TGF-β1 or TGF-β2 for 6 and 24 h, and total RNA extracted for RT-PCR and real-time PCR using primers for p21, p27, and p57 (CipP/Kip family) and p15 and p19 (INK4 family). Proteins were extracted for western blot analysis of p57 and p15. For RNA interference, primary cultured human limbal epithelial cells were transfected with annealed double-stranded siRNA (67 nM) specific for p57, p15, or siRNA-Fluorescein (siRNA-F; as a negative control) followed by treatment with TGF-β1 or TGF-β2 at 1 ng/ml. P57 and p15 were quantitatively detected by real-time PCR and western blot; and immunolocalized by immunofluorescent staining. The effects of TGF-β1 or TGF-β2 on cell proliferation were evaluated by BrdU incorporation and MTT assay.

Results

TGF-β1 or TGF-β2 significantly inhibited primary cultured human limbal epithelial cell proliferation measured by BrdU incorporation and MTT assay. TGF-β1 or TGF-β2 upregulated the expression of p57 and p15 mRNA and protein, but did not effect the expression of p19, p21, or p27. The siRNA transfection efficiency of these cells was 75% and no cellular toxicity was observed by 24 h. The TGF-β1 or TGF-β2 stimulated expression of p57 and p15 mRNA were markedly blocked by siRNA-p57 or siRNA-p15, respectively, but not by siRNA-F. The TGF-β1 or TGF-β2 suppression of epithelial proliferation measured by BrdU incorporation and MTT generation was increased to near normal levels by siRNA-p57 or siRNA-p15. Western blot and immunofluorescent staining showed that levels of p57 and p15 proteins were equally reduced in the cytoplasm and nucleus.

Conclusions

These findings demonstrate that TGF-β1 and/or TGF-β2 inhibit proliferation of primary cultured human limbal epithelial cells and that p57 and p15 play roles in this process.

DISCUSSION

In this study we found that TGF-β1 or TGF-β2 treatments of primary cultured human limbal epithelial cells stimulated production of the CDKIs p57 and p15 and inhibited proliferation of these cells. These findings suggest that TGF-βs play a role in cell cycle regulation in vivo, especially TGF-β2. p57 and p15 play different role in response to TGF-βstimulation.

TGF-β is a 25 kDa protein that is secreted by nucleated cells. Three isoforms of TGF-β (TGF-β1, TGF-β2, and TGF-β3) have been identified in mammalian cells and they produce similar biological effects. Among them, TGF-β2 has been found to be strongly expressed in corneal cells, including epithelia, keratocytes, and endothelia, while latent TGF-β1 is the predominant isoform detected in human tears. In contrast, TGF-β3 is detected only faintly in corneal cells [ 7 , 35 , 36 ]. Both TGF-β1 and TGF-β2 inhibited corneal epithelial cell proliferation promoted by KGF and HGF in a dose-dependent fashion [ 3 ]. The inhibitory effect of TGF-β2 is greater than TGF-β1 [ 3 ]. Therefore, in this study we have only evaluated the effect of TGF-β1 or TGF-β2 on primary cultured human limbal epithelial cells.

Previous studies have shown that TGF-β can upregulate p15, p21 and p27 CDKIs in epithelial cells [ 12 , 37 ], inhibit the activities of both cyclin D-CDK4/6 and cyclin E/CDK2 complexes resulting in hypophosphorylation of pRbs and decreased transcriptional activity by E2Fs in lung epithelial cells [ 38 , 39 ] and human corneal epithelial cells [ 15 – 18 ]. It has been shown that active transcriptional repression by the Rb-E2F complex mediates G 1 arrest by TGF-β [ 40 , 41 ]. However, there is not much evidence on weather TGF-βs regulate other CDKI besides p15 in epithelial cells [ 12 ]. Due to its pleiotropic nature, the mechanisms of TGFβ-mediated growth inhibition varies between cell types and they have not been fully studied in corneal epithelial cells. To the best of our knowledge, there has been no thorough investigation of CDKI expression and location in human corneal epithelial cells, nor have the effects of TGF-βs on regulation of CDKIs besides p15 in these cells been evaluated.

In this study, we found that mRNA of 3 members of the Cip/Kip family, p21, p27, and p57, and 2 members of INK4 family, p15 and p19, were detected by semi-quantitative RT-PCR in primary cultured human limbal epithelial cells. Among them, only mRNA from p57 and p15 increased following TGF-β1 and TGF-β2 treatments for 6 and 24 h. Semi-quantitative and relative quantitative real-time RT-PCR, western blot, and immunofluorescent staining showed that TGF-β1 or TGF-β2 stimulated the expression of CDKI p57 and p15 at the mRNA and protein levels in a dose-dependent manner in primary cultured human limbal epithelial cells, and inhibited cell proliferation measured by BrdU incorporation and an MTT assay. The strong TGF-β mediated upregulation of p57 observed in primary cultured human limbal epithelial cells has not been reported in other epithelial cells types [ 42 ].

Generally, INK4 proteins function as proliferation suppressor by phosphorylation of Rb protein which is found in the cytoplasm. Cip/Kip proteins are mainly related to DNA and programmed cell death such as apoptosis which happens in the nucleus, they also participate in Rb phosphorylation in the cytoplasm [ 43 ]. In this work, we found that INK protein p15 primarily locates in the cytoplasm, and Cip/Kip protein p57 locates in the nucleus, and slightly expresses in the cytoplasm of human cultured limbal epithelial cells. These finding suggest that although p57 and p15 are both CDKIs, their roles in response to TGF-βstimulation in the human limbal epithelial cells are different. p15 is a major CDKI for Rb phospholylation and p57 is related to cell DNA damage.

RNA silences gene expression through specific degradation of mRNAs. Using siRNA duplexes <30 bp long circumvents both the induction of dsRNA induced cell death and nonspecific gene silencing initially observed with longer sequences [ 22 ]. Lee and colleagues [ 44 ] have reported a study employing siRNA transfection in primary cultured human limbal epithelial cells using Ambion transfection reagent, but the transfection efficiency was not reported in that study. siRNA experiments in mammalian cells have used siRNAs at varying concentrations, typically ranging from 20 nM [ 45 ] to 200 nM [ 46 ]. Most published RNA interference studies report using siRNAs at 100 nM or less, which is a concentration where nonspecific effects may occur [ 47 ]. In our study, we used this technology to specifically knock down expression of endogenous p57 and p15 in these cells with 67 nM. Using siRNA-F as a reporter we show that siRNA can be successfully transfected into approximately 75% of primary cultured human limbal epithelial cells, and we have optimized the Qiagen protocol on primary cultured human limbal epithelial cells to minimize toxicity and maximize transfection efficiency, confirmed by siCONTROL TOX.

In our study, silencing of p57 and p15 is associated with marked phenotypic changes in the nucleus and cytoplasm in response to TGF-βs, indicating that p57 and p15 are critical downstream mediators of TGF-βs in primary cultured human limbal epithelial cells. Transfection of siRNA-p57 and siRNA-p15 resulted in reduced levels of p57 and p15 mRNA and protein 24 h post-transfection. LSCM and deconvolution microscopy data show that siRNA-57 and siRNA-p15 decrease the p57 and p15 protein levels equally in the nucleus and cytoplasm.

These data presented in this paper support the contention that 5 CDKI members are produced by human corneal epithelial cells, and besides p15, p57 is a key CDKI in TGF-β1 and TGF-β2 growth inhibition proliferation of these cells. TGF-β1 or TGF-β2 induced cell cycle arrest in human corneal epithelial cells depend upon upregulation of the CDKIs p57 and p15. Our study confirms that a TGF-β induced inhibition of human corneal epithelial cell proliferation can be reversed by knock down of p57 and p15. It is likely that other cell signaling pathways affected by TGF-βs such as Smad, MAPK, RhoA, PP2A, and the TAK/MEKK pathways also play a role in this process. To dissect the biological response to TGF-βs at the molecular level, future investigations are needed. Our results also underscore the potential utility of siRNA in regulating of human corneal epithelial cell proliferation in ocular surface diseases and corneal wound healing.
