---
pmid: '15790566'
title: Cdk5 activator-binding protein C53 regulates apoptosis induced by genotoxic
  stress via modulating the G2/M DNA damage checkpoint.
authors:
- Jiang H
- Luo S
- Li H
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M413431200
---

# Cdk5 activator-binding protein C53 regulates apoptosis induced by genotoxic stress via modulating the G2/M DNA damage checkpoint.
**Authors:** Jiang H, Luo S, Li H
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M413431200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M413431200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 27;280(21):20651-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M413431200. Epub
2005  Mar 24.

Cdk5 activator-binding protein C53 regulates apoptosis induced by genotoxic 
stress via modulating the G2/M DNA damage checkpoint.

Jiang H(1), Luo S, Li H.

Author information:
(1)Children's Memorial Research Center, The Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, The Feinberg School of Medicine and IGP Graduate Program, Northwestern 
University, Chicago, Illinois 60614, USA.

In response to DNA damage, the cellular decision of life versus death involves 
an intricate network of multiple factors that play critical roles in regulation 
of DNA repair, cell cycle, and cell death. DNA damage checkpoint proteins are 
crucial for maintaining DNA integrity and normal cellular functions, but they 
may also reduce the effectiveness of cancer treatment. Here we report the 
involvement of Cdk5 activator p35-binding protein C53 in regulation of apoptosis 
induced by genotoxic stress through modulating Cdk1-cyclin B1 function. C53 was 
originally identified as a Cdk5 activator p35-binding protein and a caspase 
substrate. Importantly, our results demonstrated that C53 deficiency conferred 
partial resistance to genotoxic agents such as etoposide and x-ray irradiation, 
whereas ectopic expression of C53 rendered cells susceptible to multiple 
genotoxins that usually trigger G(2)/M arrest. Furthermore, we found that Cdk1 
activity was required for etoposide-induced apoptosis of HeLa cells. 
Overexpression of C53 promoted Cdk1 activity and nuclear accumulation of cyclin 
B1, whereas C53 deficiency led to more cytoplasmic retention of cyclin B1, 
suggesting that C53 acts as a pivotal player in modulating the G(2)/M DNA damage 
checkpoint. Finally, C53 and cyclin B1 co-localize and associate in vivo, 
indicating a direct role of C53 in regulating the Cdk1-cyclin B1 complex. Taken 
together, our results strongly indicate that in response to genotoxic stress, 
C53 serves as an important regulatory component of the G(2)/M DNA damage 
checkpoint. By overriding the G(2)/M checkpoint-mediated inhibition of 
Cdk1-cyclin B1 function, ectopic expression of C53 may represent a novel 
approach for chemo- and radio-sensitization of cancer cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M413431200
PMID: 15790566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
