---
pmid: '8090221'
title: p35 is a neural-specific regulatory subunit of cyclin-dependent kinase 5.
authors:
- Tsai LH
- Delalle I
- Caviness VS Jr
- Chae T
- Harlow E
journal: Nature
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/371419a0
---

# p35 is a neural-specific regulatory subunit of cyclin-dependent kinase 5.
**Authors:** Tsai LH, Delalle I, Caviness VS Jr, Chae T, Harlow E
**Journal:** Nature (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1038/371419a0](https://doi.org/10.1038/371419a0)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 1994 Sep 29;371(6496):419-23. doi: 10.1038/371419a0.

p35 is a neural-specific regulatory subunit of cyclin-dependent kinase 5.

Tsai LH(1), Delalle I, Caviness VS Jr, Chae T, Harlow E.

Author information:
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Charlestown 02129.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (Cdk5) was originally isolated through its structural 
homology to human Cdc2, a key regulator of cell-cycle progression. In tissue 
samples from adult mice, Cdk5 protein is found at the highest level in brain, at 
an intermediate level in testis, and at low or undetectable levels in all other 
tissues, but brain is the only tissue that shows Cdk5 histone H1 kinase 
activity. No equivalent kinase activity has been found in tissue culture cell 
lines despite high levels of Cdk5. This raised the possibility that a Cdk5 
regulatory subunit was responsible for the activation of Cdk5 in brain. Here we 
describe the cloning and characterization of a regulatory subunit for Cdk5 known 
as p35. p35 displays a neuronal cell-specific pattern of expression, it 
associates physically with Cdk5 in vivo and activates the Cdk5 kinase. p35 
differs from the mammalian cyclins and thus represents a new type of regulatory 
subunit for cyclin-dependent kinase activity.

DOI: 10.1038/371419a0
PMID: 8090221 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
