---
pmid: '17159907'
title: Palmitoylation of CD95 facilitates formation of SDS-stable receptor aggregates
  that initiate apoptosis signaling.
authors:
- Feig C
- Tchikov V
- Schütze S
- Peter ME
journal: EMBO J
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1782382
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601460
---

# Palmitoylation of CD95 facilitates formation of SDS-stable receptor aggregates that initiate apoptosis signaling.
**Authors:** Feig C, Tchikov V, Schütze S, Peter ME
**Journal:** EMBO J (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7601460](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7601460)
**PMC:** [PMC1782382](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1782382/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2007 Jan 10;26(1):221-31. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601460. Epub 2006 Dec
 7.

Palmitoylation of CD95 facilitates formation of SDS-stable receptor aggregates 
that initiate apoptosis signaling.

Feig C(1), Tchikov V, Schütze S, Peter ME.

Author information:
(1)The Ben May Institute for Cancer Research, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 
60637, USA.

Apoptosis signaling through CD95 (Fas/APO-1) involves aggregation and clustering 
of the receptor followed by its actin-dependent internalization. Internalization 
is required for efficient formation of the death-inducing signaling complex 
(DISC) with maximal recruitment of FADD, caspase-8/10 and c-FLIP occurring when 
the receptor has reached an endosomal compartment. The first detectable event 
during CD95 signaling is the formation of SDS-stable aggregates likely 
reflecting intense oligomerization of the receptor. We now demonstrate that 
these SDS-stable forms of CD95 correspond to very high molecular weight DISC 
complexes (hiDISC) and are the sites of caspase-8 activation. hiDISCs are found 
both inside and outside of detergent-resistant membranes. The formation of 
SDS-stable CD95 aggregates involves palmitoylation of the membrane proximal 
cysteine 199 in CD95. Cysteine 199 mutants no longer form SDS-stable aggregates, 
and inhibition of palmitoylation reduces internalization of CD95 and activation 
of caspase-8. Our data demonstrate that SDS-stable forms of CD95 are the sites 
of apoptosis initiation and represent an important early step in apoptosis 
signaling through CD95 before activation of caspases.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601460
PMCID: PMC1782382
PMID: 17159907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
