---
reference_id: PMID:36459117
title: Signal sequences encode information for protein folding in the endoplasmic reticulum.
authors:
- Sun S
- Li X
- Mariappan M
journal: J Cell Biol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1083/jcb.202203070
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Signal sequences encode information for protein folding in the endoplasmic reticulum.
**Authors:** Sun S, Li X, Mariappan M
**Journal:** J Cell Biol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1083/jcb.202203070](https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.202203070)

## Content

1. J Cell Biol. 2023 Jan 2;222(1):e202203070. doi: 10.1083/jcb.202203070. Epub
2022  Dec 2.

Signal sequences encode information for protein folding in the endoplasmic
reticulum.

Sun S(1), Li X(1), Mariappan M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Nanobiology Institute, Yale School of Medicine,
Yale West Campus, West Haven, CT.

One-third of newly synthesized proteins in mammals are translocated into the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) through the Sec61 translocon. How protein
translocation coordinates with chaperone availability in the ER to promote
protein folding remains unclear. We find that marginally hydrophobic signal
sequences and transmembrane domains cause transient retention at the Sec61
translocon and require the luminal BiP chaperone for efficient protein
translocation. Using a substrate-trapping proteomic approach, we identify that
nascent proteins bearing marginally hydrophobic signal sequences accumulate on
the cytosolic side of the Sec61 translocon. Sec63 is co-translationally
recruited to the translocation site and mediates BiP binding to incoming
polypeptides. BiP binding not only releases translocationally paused nascent
chains but also ensures protein folding in the ER. Increasing hydrophobicity of
signal sequences bypasses Sec63/BiP-dependent translocation, but translocated
proteins are prone to misfold and aggregate in the ER under limited BiP
availability. Thus, the signal sequence-guided protein folding may explain why
signal sequences are diverse and use multiple protein translocation pathways.

© 2022 Sun et al.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.202203070
PMCID: PMC9723807
PMID: 36459117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]