---
pmid: '10713105'
title: A novel member of the BTB/POZ family, PATZ, associates with the RNF4 RING finger
  protein and acts as a transcriptional repressor.
authors:
- Fedele M
- Benvenuto G
- Pero R
- Majello B
- Battista S
- Lembo F
- Vollono E
- Day PM
- Santoro M
- Lania L
- Bruni CB
- Fusco A
- Chiariotti L
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.275.11.7894
---

# A novel member of the BTB/POZ family, PATZ, associates with the RNF4 RING finger protein and acts as a transcriptional repressor.
**Authors:** Fedele M, Benvenuto G, Pero R, Majello B, Battista S, Lembo F, Vollono E, Day PM, Santoro M, Lania L, Bruni CB, Fusco A, Chiariotti L
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.275.11.7894](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.275.11.7894)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Mar 17;275(11):7894-901. doi: 10.1074/jbc.275.11.7894.

A novel member of the BTB/POZ family, PATZ, associates with the RNF4 RING finger 
protein and acts as a transcriptional repressor.

Fedele M(1), Benvenuto G, Pero R, Majello B, Battista S, Lembo F, Vollono E, Day 
PM, Santoro M, Lania L, Bruni CB, Fusco A, Chiariotti L.

Author information:
(1)Centro di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR "G. Salvatore" 
Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare "L. Califano" 
Università degli Studi di Napoli "Federico II" via S. Pansini, 5, 80131 Napoli, 
Italy.

We have identified a novel human gene encoding a 59-kDa POZ-AT hook-zinc finger 
protein (PATZ) that interacts with RNF4, a mediator of androgen receptor 
activity, and acts as a transcriptional repressor. PATZ cDNA was isolated 
through a two-hybrid interaction screening using the RING finger protein RNF4 as 
a bait. In vitro and in vivo interaction between RNF4 and PATZ was demonstrated 
by protein-protein affinity chromatography and coimmunoprecipitation 
experiments. Such interaction occurred through a small region of PATZ containing 
an AT-hook DNA binding domain. Immunofluorescence staining and confocal 
microscopy showed that PATZ localizes in distinct punctate nuclear regions and 
colocalizes with RNF4. Functional analysis was performed by cotransfection 
assays: PATZ acted as a transcriptional repressor, whereas its partner RNF4 
behaved as a transcriptional activator. When both proteins were overexpressed a 
strong repression of the basal transcription was observed, indicating that the 
association of PATZ with RNF4 switches activation to repression. In addition, 
RNF4 was also found to associate with HMGI(Y), a chromatin-modeling factor 
containing AT-hook domains.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.275.11.7894
PMID: 10713105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
