---
pmid: '8764295'
title: Impaired ventilatory responses to hypoxia and hypercapnia in mutant mice deficient
  in endothelin-1.
authors:
- Kuwaki T
- Cao WH
- Kurihara Y
- Kurihara H
- Ling GY
- Onodera M
- Ju KH
- Yazaki Y
- Kumada M
journal: Am J Physiol
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1152/ajpregu.1996.270.6.R1279
---

# Impaired ventilatory responses to hypoxia and hypercapnia in mutant mice deficient in endothelin-1.
**Authors:** Kuwaki T, Cao WH, Kurihara Y, Kurihara H, Ling GY, Onodera M, Ju KH, Yazaki Y, Kumada M
**Journal:** Am J Physiol (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpregu.1996.270.6.R1279](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpregu.1996.270.6.R1279)

## Abstract

1. Am J Physiol. 1996 Jun;270(6 Pt 2):R1279-86. doi: 
10.1152/ajpregu.1996.270.6.R1279.

Impaired ventilatory responses to hypoxia and hypercapnia in mutant mice 
deficient in endothelin-1.

Kuwaki T(1), Cao WH, Kurihara Y, Kurihara H, Ling GY, Onodera M, Ju KH, Yazaki 
Y, Kumada M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Japan.

We studied respiratory functions in mutant mice deficient in endothelin-1 (ET-1) 
generated by gene targeting. In conscious adult mice heterozygous for ET-1 gene 
mutation (ET+/- heterozygous mice), arterial PO2 was significantly lower, PCO2 
tended to be higher, and pH tended to be lower than in wild-type littermates. 
When these conscious mice breathed room air, respiratory minute volume and rate, 
determined by body plethysmography, were not significantly different between the 
two groups. However, when ET+/- heterozygous mice were subjected to systemic 
hypoxia (1:1 air-N2) or hypercapnia (5% CO2-95% O2), increases in respiratory 
minute volume were significantly attenuated. In conscious newborn ET-/- 
homozygous mice delivered by cesarean section and tracheotomized, ventilatory 
responses to systemic hypoxia and hypercapnia, regularly observed in newborn 
wild-type mice, were almost totally absent. In urethan-anesthetized adult ET+/- 
heterozygous mice, increases in phrenic nerve discharges in response to hypoxia 
and hypercapnia were significantly attenuated. Our results demonstrate that 
ventilatory responses to hypoxia and hypercapnia are impaired in ET-1-deficient 
mice and suggest that endogenous ET-1 participates in the physiological control 
of ventilation.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpregu.1996.270.6.R1279
PMID: 8764295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
