---
pmid: '10620514'
title: Molecular cloning, sequencing and expression studies of the human breast cancer
  cell glutaminase.
authors:
- Gómez-Fabre PM
- Aledo JC
- Del Castillo-Olivares A
- Alonso FJ
- Núñez De Castro I
- Campos JA
- Márquez J
journal: Biochem J
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1220766
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Molecular cloning, sequencing and expression studies of the human breast cancer cell glutaminase.
**Authors:** Gómez-Fabre PM, Aledo JC, Del Castillo-Olivares A, Alonso FJ, Núñez De Castro I, Campos JA, Márquez J
**Journal:** Biochem J (2000)
**PMC:** [PMC1220766](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1220766/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2000 Jan 15;345 Pt 2(Pt 2):365-75.

Molecular cloning, sequencing and expression studies of the human breast cancer 
cell glutaminase.

Gómez-Fabre PM(1), Aledo JC, Del Castillo-Olivares A, Alonso FJ, Núñez De Castro 
I, Campos JA, Márquez J.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Biología Molecular y Bioquímica, Laboratorio de Química de 
Proteínas, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Málaga, Campus de Teatinos, 
29071 Málaga, Spain.

Phosphate-activated glutaminase (GA) is overexpressed in certain types of tumour 
but its exact role in tumour cell growth and proliferation is unknown. Here we 
describe the isolation of a full-length cDNA clone of human breast cancer ZR75 
cells, by a combination of lambdagt10 cDNA library screening and the rapid 
amplification of cDNA ends ('RACE') technique. The cDNA of human GA is 2408 nt 
with a 1806-base open reading frame encoding a 602-residue protein with a 
predicted molecular mass of 66309 Da. The deduced amino acid sequence contains a 
putative mitochondrial import presequence of 14 residues at the N-terminal end. 
Heterologous expression and purification in Escherichia coli yielded a product 
of the expected molecular size that was recognized by using antibodies against 
the recombinant human GA. Sequence analyses showed that human GA was highly 
similar to the rat liver enzyme. Northern gel analysis revealed that the gene is 
present in human liver, brain and pancreas, in which a major transcript of 2.4 
kb was demonstrated, but not in kidney, heart, skeletal muscle, lung or 
placenta. These results strongly suggest that the first human GA cloned, the GA 
from ZR-75 breast cancer cells, and presumably those from human liver and brain, 
are liver-type isoenzymes, in sharp contrast with the present view that 
considers the kidney type as the isoform expressed in all tissues with GA 
activity, with the exception of postnatal liver.

PMCID: PMC1220766
PMID: 10620514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
