---
pmid: '22703880'
title: Spinal muscular atrophy associated with progressive myoclonic epilepsy is caused
  by mutations in ASAH1.
authors:
- Zhou J
- Tawk M
- Tiziano FD
- Veillet J
- Bayes M
- Nolent F
- Garcia V
- Servidei S
- Bertini E
- Castro-Giner F
- Renda Y
- Carpentier S
- Andrieu-Abadie N
- Gut I
- Levade T
- Topaloglu H
- Melki J
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3397266
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.05.001
pubmed_publication_types:
- Case Reports
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: CASE_REPORT
---

# Spinal muscular atrophy associated with progressive myoclonic epilepsy is caused by mutations in ASAH1.
**Authors:** Zhou J, Tawk M, Tiziano FD, Veillet J, Bayes M, Nolent F, Garcia V, Servidei S, Bertini E, Castro-Giner F, Renda Y, Carpentier S, Andrieu-Abadie N, Gut I, Levade T, Topaloglu H, Melki J
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.05.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.05.001)
**PMC:** [PMC3397266](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3397266/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Jul 13;91(1):5-14. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.05.001. Epub 
2012 Jun 14.

Spinal muscular atrophy associated with progressive myoclonic epilepsy is caused 
by mutations in ASAH1.

Zhou J(1), Tawk M, Tiziano FD, Veillet J, Bayes M, Nolent F, Garcia V, Servidei 
S, Bertini E, Castro-Giner F, Renda Y, Carpentier S, Andrieu-Abadie N, Gut I, 
Levade T, Topaloglu H, Melki J.

Author information:
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale UMR, University of 
Paris, Biomedical Institute of Bicetre, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France. 
judith.melki@inserm.fr

Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous 
disease characterized by the degeneration of lower motor neurons. The most 
frequent form is linked to mutations in SMN1. Childhood SMA associated with 
progressive myoclonic epilepsy (SMA-PME) has been reported as a rare 
autosomal-recessive condition unlinked to mutations in SMN1. Through linkage 
analysis, homozygosity mapping, and exome sequencing in three unrelated 
SMA-PME-affected families, we identified a homozygous missense mutation 
(c.125C>T [p.Thr42Met]) in exon 2 of ASAH1 in the affected children of two 
families and the same mutation associated with a deletion of the whole gene in 
the third family. Expression studies of the c.125C>T mutant cDNA in Farber 
fibroblasts showed that acid-ceramidase activity was only 32% of that generated 
by normal cDNA. This reduced activity was able to normalize the ceramide level 
in Farber cells, raising the question of the pathogenic mechanism underlying the 
CNS involvement in deficient cells. Morpholino knockdown of the ASAH1 ortholog 
in zebrafish led to a marked loss of motor-neuron axonal branching, a loss that 
is associated with increased apoptosis in the spinal cord. Our results reveal a 
wide phenotypic spectrum associated with ASAH1 mutations. An acid-ceramidase 
activity below 10% results in Farber disease, an early-onset disease starting 
with subcutaneous lipogranulomata, joint pain, and hoarseness of the voice, 
whereas a higher residual activity might be responsible for SMA-PME, a 
later-onset phenotype restricted to the CNS and starting with lower-motor-neuron 
disease.

Copyright © 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.05.001
PMCID: PMC3397266
PMID: 22703880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
