---
pmid: '15010863'
title: IL2-dependent phosphorylation of 40S ribosomal protein S6 is controlled by
  PI-3K/mTOR signalling in CTLL2 cells.
authors:
- Tuhácková Z
- Sloncová E
- Vojtechová M
- Sovová V
journal: Int J Mol Med
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
---

# IL2-dependent phosphorylation of 40S ribosomal protein S6 is controlled by PI-3K/mTOR signalling in CTLL2 cells.
**Authors:** Tuhácková Z, Sloncová E, Vojtechová M, Sovová V
**Journal:** Int J Mol Med (2004)

## Abstract

1. Int J Mol Med. 2004 Apr;13(4):601-5.

IL2-dependent phosphorylation of 40S ribosomal protein S6 is controlled by
PI-3K/mTOR signalling in CTLL2 cells.

Tuhácková Z(1), Sloncová E, Vojtechová M, Sovová V.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic,
166 37 Prague 6, Czech Republic. tuhack@img.cas.cz

Growth factors and hormones activate global and selective protein translation by
phosphorylation and therefore activation of p70 S6 kinase through a
wortmannin-sensitive phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI-3K) antiapoptotic pathway and
a rapamycin-sensitive signalling pathway of mTOR. Here we demonstrate that the
phosphorylation of 40S ribosomal protein S6, a physiological substrate p70 S6
kinase, was highly increased by growth-stimulation of the cytolytic T cells
(CTLL2) with interleukin 2 (IL2), which was accompanied with the increased
phosphorylation of p70 S6K. The activity of p70 S6K and phosphorylation of the
S6 protein was completely blocked by rapamycin and significantly decreased upon
treatment of the cells with wortmannin, indicating an involvement of the PI-3K
pathway in concert with the signalling pathway of mTOR in IL2-dependent
phos-phorylation of ribosomal protein S6. The phosphorylation and activity of
PKB/Akt in IL2-stimulated CTLL2 cells were rapamycin-insensitive and reduced
upon wortmannin treatment of the cells, confirming a requirement for PI-3K for
Akt activity. The data support the hypothesis that Akt may act downstream to
PI-3K and upstream to mTOR in an IL2-mediated signal transduction pathway that
controls phosphorylation of the regulatory protein S6 in CTLL2 cells.

PMID: 15010863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
