---
pmid: '11953314'
title: A presenilin-1/gamma-secretase cleavage releases the E-cadherin intracellular
  domain and regulates disassembly of adherens junctions.
authors:
- Marambaud P
- Shioi J
- Serban G
- Georgakopoulos A
- Sarner S
- Nagy V
- Baki L
- Wen P
- Efthimiopoulos S
- Shao Z
- Wisniewski T
- Robakis NK
journal: EMBO J
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: pdf_partial
pmcid: PMC125968
doi: 10.1093/emboj/21.8.1948
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# A presenilin-1/gamma-secretase cleavage releases the E-cadherin intracellular domain and regulates disassembly of adherens junctions.
**Authors:** Marambaud P, Shioi J, Serban G, Georgakopoulos A, Sarner S, Nagy V, Baki L, Wen P, Efthimiopoulos S, Shao Z, Wisniewski T, Robakis NK
**Journal:** EMBO J (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/21.8.1948](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/21.8.1948)
**PMC:** [PMC125968](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC125968/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2002 Apr 15;21(8):1948-56. doi: 10.1093/emboj/21.8.1948.

A presenilin-1/gamma-secretase cleavage releases the E-cadherin intracellular 
domain and regulates disassembly of adherens junctions.

Marambaud P(1), Shioi J, Serban G, Georgakopoulos A, Sarner S, Nagy V, Baki L, 
Wen P, Efthimiopoulos S, Shao Z, Wisniewski T, Robakis NK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Fishberg Research Center for Neurobiology, Mount 
Sinai School of Medicine, New York University, New York, NY 10029, USA.

E-cadherin controls a wide array of cellular behaviors including cell-cell 
adhesion, differentiation and tissue development. Here we show that presenilin-1 
(PS1), a protein involved in Alzheimer's disease, controls a 
gamma-secretase-like cleavage of E-cadherin. This cleavage is stimulated by 
apoptosis or calcium influx and occurs between human E-cadherin residues Leu731 
and Arg732 at the membrane-cytoplasm interface. The PS1/gamma-secretase system 
cleaves both the full-length E-cadherin and a transmembrane C-terminal fragment, 
derived from a metalloproteinase cleavage after the E-cadherin ectodomain 
residue Pro700. The PS1/gamma-secretase cleavage dissociates E-cadherins, 
beta-catenin and alpha-catenin from the cytoskeleton, thus promoting disassembly 
of the E-cadherin-catenin adhesion complex. Furthermore, this cleavage releases 
the cytoplasmic E-cadherin to the cytosol and increases the levels of soluble 
beta- and alpha-catenins. Thus, the PS1/gamma-secretase system stimulates 
disassembly of the E-cadherin- catenin complex and increases the cytosolic pool 
of beta-catenin, a key regulator of the Wnt signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/21.8.1948
PMCID: PMC125968
PMID: 11953314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Preparing to download ... HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
