---
pmid: '1599432'
title: Human homologues of the bacterial heat-shock protein DnaJ are preferentially
  expressed in neurons.
authors:
- Cheetham ME
- Brion JP
- Anderton BH
journal: Biochem J
year: '1992'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1132662
doi: 10.1042/bj2840469
---

# Human homologues of the bacterial heat-shock protein DnaJ are preferentially expressed in neurons.
**Authors:** Cheetham ME, Brion JP, Anderton BH
**Journal:** Biochem J (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1042/bj2840469](https://doi.org/10.1042/bj2840469)
**PMC:** [PMC1132662](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1132662/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 1992 Jun 1;284 ( Pt 2)(Pt 2):469-76. doi: 10.1042/bj2840469.

Human homologues of the bacterial heat-shock protein DnaJ are preferentially 
expressed in neurons.

Cheetham ME(1), Brion JP, Anderton BH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Institute of Psychiatry, Denmark Hill, London, 
U.K.

The bacterial heat-shock protein DnaJ has been implicated in protein folding and 
protein complex dissociation. The DnaJ protein interacts with the prokaryotic 
analogue of Hsp70, DnaK, and accelerates the rate of ATP hydrolysis by DnaK. 
Several yeast homologues of DnaJ, with different proposed subcellular 
localizations and functions, have recently been isolated and are the only 
eukaryotic forms of DnaJ so far described. We have isolated cDNAs corresponding 
to two alternatively spliced transcripts of a novel human gene, HSJ1, which show 
sequence similarity to the bacterial DnaJ protein and the yeast homologues. The 
cDNA clones were isolated from a human brain-frontal-cortex expression library 
screened with a polyclonal antiserum raised to paired-helical-filament (PHF) 
proteins isolated from extracts of the brains of patients suffering from 
Alzheimer's disease. The similarity between the predicted human protein 
sequences and the bacterial and yeast proteins is highest at the N-termini, this 
region also shows a limited similarity to viral T-antigens and is a possible 
common motif involved in the interaction with DnaK/Hsp70. Northern-blot analysis 
has shown that human brain contains higher levels of mRNA for the DnaJ homologue 
than other tissues examined, and hybridization studies with riboprobes in situ 
show a restricted pattern of expression of the mRNA within the brain, with 
neuronal layers giving the strongest signal. These findings suggest that the 
DnaJ-DnaK (Hsp70) interaction is general to eukaryotes and, indeed, to higher 
organisms.

DOI: 10.1042/bj2840469
PMCID: PMC1132662
PMID: 1599432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
