---
pmid: '36797247'
title: Mechanisms of the RNA helicases DDX42 and DDX46 in human U2 snRNP assembly.
authors:
- Yang F
- Bian T
- Zhan X
- Chen Z
- Xing Z
- Larsen NA
- Zhang X
- Shi Y
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2023'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC9935549
doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-36489-x
---

# Mechanisms of the RNA helicases DDX42 and DDX46 in human U2 snRNP assembly.
**Authors:** Yang F, Bian T, Zhan X, Chen Z, Xing Z, Larsen NA, Zhang X, Shi Y
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-023-36489-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-36489-x)
**PMC:** [PMC9935549](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9935549/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Commun. 2023 Feb 17;14(1):897. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-36489-x.

Mechanisms of the RNA helicases DDX42 and DDX46 in human U2 snRNP assembly.

Yang F(#)(1)(2)(3), Bian T(#)(1)(2)(3), Zhan X(#)(2)(3), Chen Z(4), Xing 
Z(2)(3), Larsen NA(5), Zhang X(6)(7), Shi Y(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)College of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200433, China.
(2)Research Center for Industries of the Future, Key Laboratory of Structural 
Biology of Zhejiang Province, School of Life Sciences, Westlake University; 
Institute of Biology, Westlake Institute for Advanced Study, 18 Shilongshan 
Road, Hangzhou, 310024, Zhejiang Province, China.
(3)Westlake Laboratory of Life Sciences and Biomedicine, 18 Shilongshan Road, 
Hangzhou, 310024, Zhejiang Province, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Pathogenesis, Prevention and Treatment of High 
Incidence Diseases in Central Asia, Xinjiang Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology 
for Endemic Diseases, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School 
of Basic Medical Sciences, Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi, 830017, 
Xinjiang, China.
(5)Foghorn Therapeutics, 500 Technology Square, Suite 700, Cambridge, MA, 02139, 
USA.
(6)Research Center for Industries of the Future, Key Laboratory of Structural 
Biology of Zhejiang Province, School of Life Sciences, Westlake University; 
Institute of Biology, Westlake Institute for Advanced Study, 18 Shilongshan 
Road, Hangzhou, 310024, Zhejiang Province, China. xiaofengzhang@ustc.edu.cn.
(7)Westlake Laboratory of Life Sciences and Biomedicine, 18 Shilongshan Road, 
Hangzhou, 310024, Zhejiang Province, China. xiaofengzhang@ustc.edu.cn.
(8)Research Center for Industries of the Future, Key Laboratory of Structural 
Biology of Zhejiang Province, School of Life Sciences, Westlake University; 
Institute of Biology, Westlake Institute for Advanced Study, 18 Shilongshan 
Road, Hangzhou, 310024, Zhejiang Province, China. syg@westlake.edu.cn.
(9)Westlake Laboratory of Life Sciences and Biomedicine, 18 Shilongshan Road, 
Hangzhou, 310024, Zhejiang Province, China. syg@westlake.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Three RNA helicases - DDX42, DDX46 and DHX15 - are found to be associated with 
human U2 snRNP, but their roles and mechanisms in U2 snRNP and spliceosome 
assembly are insufficiently understood. Here we report the cryo-electron 
microscopy (cryo-EM) structures of the DDX42-SF3b complex and a putative 
assembly precursor of 17S U2 snRNP that contains DDX42 (DDX42-U2 complex). DDX42 
is anchored on SF3B1 through N-terminal sequences, with its N-plug occupying the 
RNA path of SF3B1. The binding mode of DDX42 to SF3B1 is in striking analogy to 
that of DDX46. In the DDX42-U2 complex, the N-terminus of DDX42 remains anchored 
on SF3B1, but the helicase domain has been displaced by U2 snRNA and TAT-SF1. 
Through in vitro assays, we show DDX42 and DDX46 are mutually exclusive in terms 
of binding to SF3b. Cancer-driving mutations of SF3B1 target the residues in the 
RNA path that directly interact with DDX42 and DDX46. These findings reveal the 
distinct roles of DDX42 and DDX46 in assembly of 17S U2 snRNP and provide 
insights into the mechanisms of SF3B1 cancer mutations.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-023-36489-x
PMCID: PMC9935549
PMID: 36797247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: N.A.L. is an employee of Foghorn Therapeutics, 
Inc. The remaining authors declare no competing interests.
