---
pmid: '19816956'
title: MiR-21 regulates adipogenic differentiation through the modulation of TGF-beta
  signaling in mesenchymal stem cells derived from human adipose tissue.
authors:
- Kim YJ
- Hwang SJ
- Bae YC
- Jung JS
journal: Stem Cells
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/stem.235
---

# MiR-21 regulates adipogenic differentiation through the modulation of TGF-beta signaling in mesenchymal stem cells derived from human adipose tissue.
**Authors:** Kim YJ, Hwang SJ, Bae YC, Jung JS
**Journal:** Stem Cells (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1002/stem.235](https://doi.org/10.1002/stem.235)

## Abstract

1. Stem Cells. 2009 Dec;27(12):3093-102. doi: 10.1002/stem.235.

MiR-21 regulates adipogenic differentiation through the modulation of TGF-beta 
signaling in mesenchymal stem cells derived from human adipose tissue.

Kim YJ(1), Hwang SJ, Bae YC, Jung JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Pusan National University, 
Yangsan, Gyeongnam 626-870, Korea.

A better understanding of the molecular mechanisms that govern human adipose 
tissue-derived mesenchymal stem cells (hASCs) differentiation could improve 
hASCs-based cell therapy and provide new insights into a number of diseases, 
including obesity. In this study, we examined the roles of microRNA-21 (miR-21) 
in adipogenic differentiation of hASCs. We found that miR-21 expression was 
transiently increased after induction of adipogenic differentiation, peaked at 3 
days, and returned to the baseline level 8 days. Lentiviral overexpression of 
miR-21 enhanced adipogenic differentiation. Overexpression of miR-21 decreased 
both protein and mRNA levels of TGFBR2. The expression of TGFBR2 was decreased 
during adipogenic differentiation of hASCs in concordance with an increase in 
the level of miR-21. In contrast, inhibiting miR-21 with 2'-O-methyl-antisense 
microRNA increased TGFBR2 protein levels in hASCs, accompanied by decreased 
adipogenic differentiation. The activity of a luciferase construct containing 
the miR-21 target site from the TGFBR2 3'UTR was lower in LV-miR21-infected 
hASCs than in LV-miLacZ infected cells. TGF-beta-induced inhibition of 
adipogenic differentiation was significantly decreased in miR-21 overexpressing 
cells compared with control lentivirus-transduced cells. RNA 
interference-mediated downregulation of SMAD3, but not of SMAD2, increased 
adipogenic differentiation. Overexpression and inhibition of miR-21 altered 
SMAD3 phosphorylation without affecting total levels of SMAD3 protein. Our data 
are the first to demonstrate that the role of miR-21 in the adipogenic 
differentiation of hASCs is mediated through the modulation of TGF-beta 
signaling. This study improves our knowledge of the molecular mechanisms 
governing hASCs differentiation, which may underlie the development of obesity 
or other metabolic diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/stem.235
PMID: 19816956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
