---
pmid: '27913623'
title: ChaC2, an Enzyme for Slow Turnover of Cytosolic Glutathione.
authors:
- Kaur A
- Gautam R
- Srivastava R
- Chandel A
- Kumar A
- Karthikeyan S
- Bachhawat AK
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5241738
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.727479
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# ChaC2, an Enzyme for Slow Turnover of Cytosolic Glutathione.
**Authors:** Kaur A, Gautam R, Srivastava R, Chandel A, Kumar A, Karthikeyan S, Bachhawat AK
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M116.727479](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M116.727479)
**PMC:** [PMC5241738](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5241738/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2017 Jan 13;292(2):638-651. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.727479. Epub
2016  Dec 2.

ChaC2, an Enzyme for Slow Turnover of Cytosolic Glutathione.

Kaur A(1), Gautam R(2), Srivastava R(2), Chandel A(1), Kumar A(1), Karthikeyan 
S(3), Bachhawat AK(4).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Biological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science 
Education and Research, Mohali, S.A.S. Nagar, Punjab 140306, India and.
(2)the CSIR-Institute of Microbial Technology, Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research (CSIR), Sector 39A, Chandigarh 160036, India.
(3)the CSIR-Institute of Microbial Technology, Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research (CSIR), Sector 39A, Chandigarh 160036, India 
skarthik@imtech.res.in.
(4)From the Department of Biological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science 
Education and Research, Mohali, S.A.S. Nagar, Punjab 140306, India and 
anand@iisermohali.ac.in.

Glutathione degradation plays an important role in glutathione and redox 
homeostasis, and thus it is imperative to understand the enzymes and the 
mechanisms involved in glutathione degradation in detail. We describe here 
ChaC2, a member of the ChaC family of γ-glutamylcyclotransferases, as an enzyme 
that degrades glutathione in the cytosol of mammalian cells. ChaC2 is distinct 
from the previously described ChaC1, to which ChaC2 shows ∼50% sequence 
identity. Human and mouse ChaC2 proteins purified in vitro show 10-20-fold lower 
catalytic efficiency than ChaC1, although they showed comparable Km values (Km 
of 3.7 ± 0.4 mm and kcat of 15.9 ± 1.0 min-1 toward glutathione for human ChaC2; 
Km of 2.2 ± 0.4 mm and kcat of 225.2 ± 15 min-1 toward glutathione for human 
ChaC1). The ChaC1 and ChaC2 proteins also shared the same specificity for 
reduced glutathione, with no activity against either γ-glutamyl amino acids or 
oxidized glutathione. The ChaC2 proteins were found to be expressed 
constitutively in cells, unlike the tightly regulated ChaC1. Moreover, lower 
eukaryotes have a single member of the ChaC family that appears to be 
orthologous to ChaC2. In addition, we determined the crystal structure of yeast 
ChaC2 homologue, GCG1, at 1.34 Å resolution, which represents the first 
structure of the ChaC family of proteins. The catalytic site is defined by a 
fortuitous benzoic acid molecule bound to the crystal structure. The mechanism 
for binding and catalytic activity of this new enzyme of glutathione 
degradation, which is involved in continuous but basal turnover of cytosolic 
glutathione, is proposed.

© 2017 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M116.727479
PMCID: PMC5241738
PMID: 27913623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
