---
pmid: '27193680'
title: Structure of the T4 baseplate and its function in triggering sheath contraction.
authors:
- Taylor NM
- Prokhorov NS
- Guerrero-Ferreira RC
- Shneider MM
- Browning C
- Goldie KN
- Stahlberg H
- Leiman PG
journal: Nature
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature17971
---

# Structure of the T4 baseplate and its function in triggering sheath contraction.
**Authors:** Taylor NM, Prokhorov NS, Guerrero-Ferreira RC, Shneider MM, Browning C, Goldie KN, Stahlberg H, Leiman PG
**Journal:** Nature (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature17971](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature17971)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2016 May 19;533(7603):346-52. doi: 10.1038/nature17971.

Structure of the T4 baseplate and its function in triggering sheath contraction.

Taylor NM(1), Prokhorov NS(1)(2), Guerrero-Ferreira RC(1), Shneider MM(1)(3), 
Browning C(1), Goldie KN(4), Stahlberg H(4), Leiman PG(1).

Author information:
(1)École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), BSP-415, 1015 Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(2)Winogradsky Institute of Microbiology, Research Center of Biotechnology of 
the Russian Academy of Sciences, pr. 60-letiya Oktyabrya, 7 build. 2, 117312, 
Moscow, Russia.
(3)Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Laboratory of 
Molecular Bioengineering, 16/10 Miklukho-Maklaya St., 117997 Moscow, Russia.
(4)Center for Cellular Imaging and NanoAnalytics (C-CINA), Biozentrum, 
University of Basel, Mattenstrasse 26, 4058 Basel, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Nat Microbiol. 2016 Jun 24;1(7):16104. doi: 10.1038/nmicrobiol.2016.104.

Several systems, including contractile tail bacteriophages, the type VI 
secretion system and R-type pyocins, use a multiprotein tubular apparatus to 
attach to and penetrate host cell membranes. This macromolecular machine 
resembles a stretched, coiled spring (or sheath) wound around a rigid tube with 
a spike-shaped protein at its tip. A baseplate structure, which is arguably the 
most complex part of this assembly, relays the contraction signal to the sheath. 
Here we present the atomic structure of the approximately 6-megadalton 
bacteriophage T4 baseplate in its pre- and post-host attachment states and 
explain the events that lead to sheath contraction in atomic detail. We 
establish the identity and function of a minimal set of components that is 
conserved in all contractile injection systems and show that the triggering 
mechanism is universally conserved.

DOI: 10.1038/nature17971
PMID: 27193680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
