---
pmid: '25743205'
title: Chromokinesin Kid and kinetochore kinesin CENP-E differentially support chromosome
  congression without end-on attachment to microtubules.
authors:
- Iemura K
- Tanaka K
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ncomms7447
---

# Chromokinesin Kid and kinetochore kinesin CENP-E differentially support chromosome congression without end-on attachment to microtubules.
**Authors:** Iemura K, Tanaka K
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncomms7447](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms7447)

## Abstract

1. Nat Commun. 2015 Mar 6;6:6447. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7447.

Chromokinesin Kid and kinetochore kinesin CENP-E differentially support 
chromosome congression without end-on attachment to microtubules.

Iemura K(1), Tanaka K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Institute of Development, Aging and Cancer, 
Tohoku University, 4-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Miyagi 980-8575, Japan.

Chromosome congression is the alignment of chromosomes at the spindle equator, 
and is a prerequisite for faithful chromosome segregation. Recent data suggest 
that before kinetochores attach to the end of microtubules (end-on attachment), 
chromosomes can move along microtubules towards the spindle equator through 
attachment of kinetochores to the lateral surface of microtubules (lateral 
attachment). Here we address this mechanism, focusing on the contribution of two 
mitotic motors, Kid and CENP-E. In cells depleted of Hec1, which is essential 
for end-on attachment, chromosomes show partial and transient congression. This 
transient congression is further perturbed by co-depletion of Kid, suggesting 
its role in chromosome congression. In comparison, CENP-E suppresses chromosome 
congression, probably by tethering kinetochores to short, unstable microtubules, 
and works in congression only when microtubules are stabilized. Our results may 
reflect the differential contributions of Kid and CENP-E in chromosome 
congression in physiological conditions where stabilized microtubules are 
becoming increased.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7447
PMID: 25743205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
