---
pmid: '22388820'
title: Structural basis of ultraviolet-B perception by UVR8.
authors:
- Wu D
- Hu Q
- Yan Z
- Chen W
- Yan C
- Huang X
- Zhang J
- Yang P
- Deng H
- Wang J
- Deng X
- Shi Y
journal: Nature
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature10931
---

# Structural basis of ultraviolet-B perception by UVR8.
**Authors:** Wu D, Hu Q, Yan Z, Chen W, Yan C, Huang X, Zhang J, Yang P, Deng H, Wang J, Deng X, Shi Y
**Journal:** Nature (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature10931](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature10931)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2012 Feb 29;484(7393):214-9. doi: 10.1038/nature10931.

Structural basis of ultraviolet-B perception by UVR8.

Wu D(1), Hu Q, Yan Z, Chen W, Yan C, Huang X, Zhang J, Yang P, Deng H, Wang J, 
Deng X, Shi Y.

Author information:
(1)Tsinghua-Peking Center for Life Sciences, Center for Structural Biology, 
School of Life Sciences and School of Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing 
100084, China.

The Arabidopsis thaliana protein UVR8 is a photoreceptor for ultraviolet-B. Upon 
ultraviolet-B irradiation, UVR8 undergoes an immediate switch from homodimer to 
monomer, which triggers a signalling pathway for ultraviolet protection. The 
mechanism by which UVR8 senses ultraviolet-B remains largely unknown. Here we 
report the crystal structure of UVR8 at 1.8 Å resolution, revealing a symmetric 
homodimer of seven-bladed β-propeller that is devoid of any external cofactor as 
the chromophore. Arginine residues that stabilize the homodimeric interface, 
principally Arg 286 and Arg 338, make elaborate intramolecular cation-π 
interactions with surrounding tryptophan amino acids. Two of these tryptophans, 
Trp 285 and Trp 233, collectively serve as the ultraviolet-B chromophore. Our 
structural and biochemical analyses identify the molecular mechanism for 
UVR8-mediated ultraviolet-B perception, in which ultraviolet-B radiation results 
in destabilization of the intramolecular cation-π interactions, causing 
disruption of the critical intermolecular hydrogen bonds mediated by Arg 286 and 
Arg 338 and subsequent dissociation of the UVR8 homodimer.

DOI: 10.1038/nature10931
PMID: 22388820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
