---
pmid: '10063806'
title: A putative blue-light receptor from Drosophila melanogaster.
authors:
- Okano S
- Kanno S
- Takao M
- Eker AP
- Isono K
- Tsukahara Y
- Yasui A
journal: Photochem Photobiol
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1562/0031-8655(1999)069<0108:apblrf>2.3.co;2
---

# A putative blue-light receptor from Drosophila melanogaster.
**Authors:** Okano S, Kanno S, Takao M, Eker AP, Isono K, Tsukahara Y, Yasui A
**Journal:** Photochem Photobiol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1562/0031-8655(1999)069<0108:apblrf>2.3.co;2](https://doi.org/10.1562/0031-8655(1999)069<0108:apblrf>2.3.co;2)

## Abstract

1. Photochem Photobiol. 1999 Jan;69(1):108-13. doi: 
10.1562/0031-8655(1999)069<0108:apblrf>2.3.co;2.

A putative blue-light receptor from Drosophila melanogaster.

Okano S(1), Kanno S, Takao M, Eker AP, Isono K, Tsukahara Y, Yasui A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

A gene encoding a 62.5 kDa homolog of Drosophila melanogaster photolyase was 
isolated. Purified recombinant protein contained a flavin adenine dinucleotide 
chromophore. The recombinant protein did not show photolyase activity for either 
cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers or 6-4 photoproducts in vitro as well as in vivo 
in Escherichia coli host cells, suggesting that the protein is not a DNA repair 
enzyme but a blue-light photoreceptor. Reverse transcription polymerase chain 
reaction analysis showed that the gene is more expressed in head than in body 
and that it is more expressed in antennae than in legs, wings and mouth 
appendages. In a phylogenetic tree of the photolyase family, the Drosophila 
photolyase homolog is located in a cluster containing 6-4 photolyases and 
mammalian photolyase homologs, which is only distantly related to the clade of 
higher plant blue-light photoreceptors. The mammalian photolyase homologs are 
more closely related to Drosophila 6-4 photolyase than to the Drosophila 
photolyase homolog, suggesting different roles of the photolyase homologs.

DOI: 10.1562/0031-8655(1999)069<0108:apblrf>2.3.co;2
PMID: 10063806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
