---
pmid: '19829063'
title: Identification and characterization of CAC1 as a novel CDK2-associated cullin.
authors:
- Kong Y
- Nan K
- Yin Y
journal: Cell Cycle
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.4161/cc.8.21.9955
---

# Identification and characterization of CAC1 as a novel CDK2-associated cullin.
**Authors:** Kong Y, Nan K, Yin Y
**Journal:** Cell Cycle (2009)
**DOI:** [10.4161/cc.8.21.9955](https://doi.org/10.4161/cc.8.21.9955)

## Abstract

1. Cell Cycle. 2009 Nov 1;8(21):3552-61. doi: 10.4161/cc.8.21.9955. Epub 2009 Dec
 1.

Identification and characterization of CAC1 as a novel CDK2-associated cullin.

Kong Y(1), Nan K, Yin Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, First-Affiliated Hospital, Xian JiaoTong University 
School of Medicine, Xian, China.

Cell cycle progression is tightly controlled by cyclins and cyclin-dependent 
kinases (CDKs). CDK2 plays a crucial role in regulating cell cycle progression, 
but how CDK2 is regulated is still incompletely understood. In this study, we 
report the identification and characterization of a novel gene CAC1 that 
regulates CDK2 activity. The open reading frame sequence of this gene encodes a 
protein of 369 amino acids which contains a Cullin domain, and this protein is 
physically associated with CDK2. As such, we have designated it Cdk-Associated 
Cullin1, or CAC1. CAC1 is highly expressed in cancer tissues and cancer cell 
lines. Interestingly, CAC1 is expressed in a cell cycle-dependent manner and its 
expression is high in late G(1) to S phase. Knockdown of CAC1 by RNAi inhibits 
cell proliferation and induces G(1)/S arrest. Since CAC1 interacts with CDK2 and 
promotes the kinase activity of CDK2 protein, we propose that CAC1 is a novel 
cell cycle associated protein capable of promoting cell proliferation. Our data 
provide insight into the mechanism by which CDK2 is regulated and the molecular 
basis of cell cycle progression in cancer.

DOI: 10.4161/cc.8.21.9955
PMID: 19829063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
