---
pmid: '29079699'
title: Substrate analog interaction with MCR-1 offers insight into the rising threat
  of the plasmid-mediated transferable colistin resistance.
authors:
- Wei P
- Song G
- Shi M
- Zhou Y
- Liu Y
- Lei J
- Chen P
- Yin L
journal: FASEB J
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1096/fj.201700705R
---

# Substrate analog interaction with MCR-1 offers insight into the rising threat of the plasmid-mediated transferable colistin resistance.
**Authors:** Wei P, Song G, Shi M, Zhou Y, Liu Y, Lei J, Chen P, Yin L
**Journal:** FASEB J (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1096/fj.201700705R](https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.201700705R)

## Abstract

1. FASEB J. 2018 Feb;32(2):1085-1098. doi: 10.1096/fj.201700705R. Epub 2018 Jan
3.

Substrate analog interaction with MCR-1 offers insight into the rising threat of 
the plasmid-mediated transferable colistin resistance.

Wei P(1), Song G(1), Shi M(1), Zhou Y(1), Liu Y(1), Lei J(1), Chen P(1), Yin 
L(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Hubei Key Laboratory of Cell Homeostasis, 
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Life Sciences, 
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.

Colistin is considered a last-resort antibiotic against most gram-negative 
bacteria. Recent discoveries of a plasmid-mediated, transferable mobilized 
colistin-resistance gene ( mcr-1) on all continents have heralded the imminent 
emergence of pan-drug-resistant superbacteria. The inner-membrane protein MCR-1 
can catalyze the transfer of phosphoethanolamine (PEA) to lipid A, resulting in 
colistin resistance. However, little is known about the mechanism, and few drugs 
exist to address this issue. We present crystal structures revealing the MCR-1 
catalytic domain (cMCR-1) as a monozinc metalloprotein with ethanolamine (ETA) 
and d-glucose, respectively, thus highlighting 2 possible substrate-binding 
pockets in the MCR-1-catalyzed PEA transfer reaction. Mutation of the residues 
involved in ETA and d-glucose binding impairs colistin resistance in recombinant 
Escherichia coli containing full-length MCR-1. Partial analogs of the substrate 
are used for cocrystallization with cMCR-1, providing valuable information about 
the family of PEA transferases. One of the analogs, ETA, causes clear inhibition 
of polymyxin B resistance, highlighting its potential for drug development. 
These data demonstrate the crucial role of the PEA- and lipid A-binding pockets 
and provide novel insights into the structure-based mechanisms, important 
drug-target hot spots, and a drug template for further drug development to 
combat the urgent, rising threat of MCR-1-mediated antibiotic resistance.-Wei, 
P., Song, G., Shi, M., Zhou, Y., Liu, Y., Lei, J., Chen, P., Yin, L. Substrate 
analog interaction with MCR-1 offers insight into the rising threat of the 
plasmid-mediated transferable colistin resistance.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.201700705R
PMID: 29079699 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
