---
pmid: '11918817'
title: 'Microarray analysis of the Bacillus subtilis K-state: genome-wide expression
  changes dependent on ComK.'
authors:
- Berka RM
- Hahn J
- Albano M
- Draskovic I
- Persuh M
- Cui X
- Sloma A
- Widner W
- Dubnau D
journal: Mol Microbiol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2002.02833.x
---

# Microarray analysis of the Bacillus subtilis K-state: genome-wide expression changes dependent on ComK.
**Authors:** Berka RM, Hahn J, Albano M, Draskovic I, Persuh M, Cui X, Sloma A, Widner W, Dubnau D
**Journal:** Mol Microbiol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1365-2958.2002.02833.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2958.2002.02833.x)

## Abstract

1. Mol Microbiol. 2002 Mar;43(5):1331-45. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2002.02833.x.

Microarray analysis of the Bacillus subtilis K-state: genome-wide expression 
changes dependent on ComK.

Berka RM(1), Hahn J, Albano M, Draskovic I, Persuh M, Cui X, Sloma A, Widner W, 
Dubnau D.

Author information:
(1)Novozymes Biotech, Inc., Davis, CA 95616, USA.

In Bacillus subtilis, the competence transcription factor ComK activates its own 
transcription as well as the transcription of genes that encode DNA transport 
proteins. ComK is expressed in about 10% of the cells in a culture grown to 
competence. Using DNA microarrays representing approximately 95% of the 
protein-coding open reading frames in B. subtilis, we compared the expression 
profiles of wild-type and comK strains, as well as of a mecA mutant (which 
produces active ComK in all the cells of the population) and a comK mecA double 
mutant. In these comparisons, we identified at least 165 genes that are 
upregulated by ComK and relatively few that are downregulated. The use of 
reporter fusions has confirmed these results for several genes. Many of the 
ComK-regulated genes are organized in clusters or operons, and 23 of these 
clusters are preceded by apparent ComK-box promoter motifs. In addition to those 
required for DNA uptake, other genes that are upregulated in the presence of 
ComK are probably involved in DNA repair and in the uptake and utilization of 
nutritional sources. From this and previous work, we conclude that the ComK 
regulon defines a growth-arrested state, distinct from sporulation, of which 
competence for genetic transformation is but one notable feature. We suggest 
that this is a unique adaptation to stress and that it be termed the 'K-state'.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2002.02833.x
PMID: 11918817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
