---
pmid: '8691146'
title: Phosphotyrosines in the killer cell inhibitory receptor motif of NKB1 are required
  for negative signaling and for association with protein tyrosine phosphatase 1C.
authors:
- Fry AM
- Lanier LL
- Weiss A
journal: J Exp Med
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: xml_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC2192670
doi: 10.1084/jem.184.1.295
---

# Phosphotyrosines in the killer cell inhibitory receptor motif of NKB1 are required for negative signaling and for association with protein tyrosine phosphatase 1C.
**Authors:** Fry AM, Lanier LL, Weiss A
**Journal:** J Exp Med (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1084/jem.184.1.295](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.184.1.295)
**PMC:** [PMC2192670](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2192670/)

## Abstract

1. J Exp Med. 1996 Jul 1;184(1):295-300. doi: 10.1084/jem.184.1.295.

Phosphotyrosines in the killer cell inhibitory receptor motif of NKB1 are 
required for negative signaling and for association with protein tyrosine 
phosphatase 1C.

Fry AM(1), Lanier LL, Weiss A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute 
University of California, San Francisco 94143, USA.

NKB1 is one member of a growing family of killer cell inhibitory receptors 
(KIR). It is expressed on natural killer (NK) cells and T cells, and has been 
shown to inhibit cytolytic functions of these cells upon interacting with its 
ligand, HLA-B (Bw4). We demonstrate here that the cytoplasmic region of NKB1 is 
capable of inhibiting T cell activation in Jurkat cells. The tyrosine 
phosphorylation of the NKB1 KIR consensus motif, YxxL(x)26 YxxL, induces an 
association with the protein tyrosine phosphatase 1C (PTP1C). Importantly, 
mutation of both tyrosines in the motif abolished the inhibitory functions of 
NKB1 and abrogated PTP1C association. Mutational analysis of the individual 
tyrosines suggest that the membrane proximal tyrosine may play a crucial role in 
mediating the inhibitory signal. These results demonstrate that KIR can not only 
inhibit cytolytic activity, but can also negatively regulate T cell receptor 
activation events that lead to downstream gene activation, and further supports 
a model that implicates PTP1C as a mediator in the KIR inhibitory signal.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.184.1.295
PMCID: PMC2192670
PMID: 8691146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

NKB1 is one member of a growing family of killer cell inhibitory receptors (KIR). It is expressed on natural killer (NK) cells and T cells, and has been shown to inhibit cytolytic functions of these cells upon interacting with its ligand, HLA-B (Bw4). We demonstrate here that the cytoplasmic region of NKB1 is capable of inhibiting T cell activation in Jurkat cells. The tyrosine phosphorylation of the NKB1 KIR consensus motif, YxxL(x)26 YxxL, induces an association with the protein tyrosine phosphatase 1C (PTP1C). Importantly, mutation of both tyrosines in the motif abolished the inhibitory functions of NKB1 and abrogated PTP1C association. Mutational analysis of the individual tyrosines suggest that the membrane proximal tyrosine may play a crucial role in mediating the inhibitory signal. These results demonstrate that KIR can not only inhibit cytolytic activity, but can also negatively regulate T cell receptor activation events that lead to downstream gene activation, and further supports a model that implicates PTP1C as a mediator in the KIR inhibitory signal.
