---
pmid: '8610150'
title: Mammalian ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme Ubc9 interacts with Rad51 recombination
  protein and localizes in synaptonemal complexes.
authors:
- Kovalenko OV
- Plug AW
- Haaf T
- Gonda DK
- Ashley T
- Ward DC
- Radding CM
- Golub EI
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC39742
doi: 10.1073/pnas.93.7.2958
---

# Mammalian ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme Ubc9 interacts with Rad51 recombination protein and localizes in synaptonemal complexes.
**Authors:** Kovalenko OV, Plug AW, Haaf T, Gonda DK, Ashley T, Ward DC, Radding CM, Golub EI
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.93.7.2958](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.93.7.2958)
**PMC:** [PMC39742](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC39742/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Apr 2;93(7):2958-63. doi:
10.1073/pnas.93.7.2958.

Mammalian ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme Ubc9 interacts with Rad51 recombination 
protein and localizes in synaptonemal complexes.

Kovalenko OV(1), Plug AW, Haaf T, Gonda DK, Ashley T, Ward DC, Radding CM, Golub 
EI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven CT 
06510, USA.

Hsubc9, a human gene encoding a ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme, has been cloned. 
The 18-kDa HsUbc9 protein is homologous to the ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes 
Hus5 of Schizosaccharomyces pombe and Ubc9 of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The 
Hsubc9 gene complements a ubc9 mutation of S. cerevisiae. It has been mapped to 
chromosome 16p13.3 and is expressed in many human tissues, with the highest 
levels in testis and thymus. According to the Ga14 two-hybrid system analysis, 
HsUbc9 protein interacts with human recombination protein Rad51. A mouse 
homolog, Mmubc9, encodes an amino acid sequence that is identical to the human 
protein. In mouse spermatocytes, MmUbc9 protein, like Rad51 protein, localizes 
in synaptonemal complexes, which suggests that Ubc9 protein plays a regulatory 
role in meiosis.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.93.7.2958
PMCID: PMC39742
PMID: 8610150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Hsubc9, a human gene encoding a ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme, has been cloned. The 18-kDa HsUbc9 protein is homologous to the ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes Hus5 of Schizosaccharomyces pombe and Ubc9 of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The Hsubc9 gene complements a ubc9 mutation of S. cerevisiae. It has been mapped to chromosome 16p13.3 and is expressed in many human tissues, with the highest levels in testis and thymus. According to the Ga14 two-hybrid system analysis, HsUbc9 protein interacts with human recombination protein Rad51. A mouse homolog, Mmubc9, encodes an amino acid sequence that is identical to the human protein. In mouse spermatocytes, MmUbc9 protein, like Rad51 protein, localizes in synaptonemal complexes, which suggests that Ubc9 protein plays a regulatory role in meiosis.
