---
pmid: '15681342'
title: BZR1 is a transcriptional repressor with dual roles in brassinosteroid homeostasis
  and growth responses.
authors:
- He JX
- Gendron JM
- Sun Y
- Gampala SS
- Gendron N
- Sun CQ
- Wang ZY
journal: Science
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC2925132
doi: 10.1126/science.1107580
---

# BZR1 is a transcriptional repressor with dual roles in brassinosteroid homeostasis and growth responses.
**Authors:** He JX, Gendron JM, Sun Y, Gampala SS, Gendron N, Sun CQ, Wang ZY
**Journal:** Science (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1107580](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1107580)
**PMC:** [PMC2925132](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2925132/)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2005 Mar 11;307(5715):1634-8. doi: 10.1126/science.1107580. Epub 2005
 Jan 27.

BZR1 is a transcriptional repressor with dual roles in brassinosteroid 
homeostasis and growth responses.

He JX(1), Gendron JM, Sun Y, Gampala SS, Gendron N, Sun CQ, Wang ZY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Biology, Carnegie Institution, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Erratum in
    Science. 2005 Jun 17;308(5729):1743.

Comment in
    Science. 2005 Mar 11;307(5715):1569-70. doi: 10.1126/science.1110534.

Brassinosteroid (BR) homeostasis and signaling are crucial for normal growth and 
development of plants. BR signaling through cell-surface receptor kinases and 
intracellular components leads to dephosphorylation and accumulation of the 
nuclear protein BZR1. How BR signaling regulates gene expression, however, 
remains unknown. Here we show that BZR1 is a transcriptional repressor that has 
a previously unknown DNA binding domain and binds directly to the promoters of 
feedback-regulated BR biosynthetic genes. Microarray analyses identified 
additional potential targets of BZR1 and illustrated, together with 
physiological studies, that BZR1 coordinates BR homeostasis and signaling by 
playing dual roles in regulating BR biosynthesis and downstream growth 
responses.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1107580
PMCID: PMC2925132
PMID: 15681342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Brassinosteroid (BR) homeostasis and signaling are crucial for normal growth and development of plants. BR signaling through cell-surface receptor kinases and intracellular components leads to dephosphorylation and accumulation of the nuclear protein BZR1. How BR signaling regulates gene expression, however, remains unknown. Here we show that BZR1 is a transcriptional repressor that has a previously unknown DNA binding domain and binds directly to the promoters of feedback-regulated BR biosynthetic genes. Microarray analyses identified additional potential targets of BZR1 and illustrated, together with physiological studies, that BZR1 coordinates BR homeostasis and signaling by playing dual roles in regulating BR biosynthesis and downstream growth responses.
