---
pmid: '12954646'
title: Sphingosine kinase 2 is a nuclear protein and inhibits DNA synthesis.
authors:
- Igarashi N
- Okada T
- Hayashi S
- Fujita T
- Jahangeer S
- Nakamura S
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M306577200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Sphingosine kinase 2 is a nuclear protein and inhibits DNA synthesis.
**Authors:** Igarashi N, Okada T, Hayashi S, Fujita T, Jahangeer S, Nakamura S
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M306577200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M306577200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 21;278(47):46832-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M306577200. Epub
2003  Sep 2.

Sphingosine kinase 2 is a nuclear protein and inhibits DNA synthesis.

Igarashi N(1), Okada T, Hayashi S, Fujita T, Jahangeer S, Nakamura S.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biochemistry, Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Kobe 
University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe 650-0017, Japan.

Sphingosine kinase-1 (SPHK1) is a key enzyme catalyzing the formation of an 
important bioactive lipid messenger, sphingosine 1-phosphate, and is implicated 
in the regulation of cell proliferation and antiapoptotic processes. Biological 
features of another isozyme SPHK2, however, remain unclear. The present studies 
were undertaken to characterize SPHK2 by comparison with SPHK1. When SPHK2 was 
transiently expressed in various cell lines, it was localized in the nuclei as 
well as in the cytosol, whereas SPHK1 was distributed in the cytosol but not in 
the nucleus. We have mapped a functional nuclear localization signal (NLS) to 
the N-terminal region of SPHK2. We have observed that the expression of SPHK2 in 
various cell types causes inhibition of DNA synthesis, resulting in the cell 
cycle arrest at G1/S phase. We have also demonstrated that an NLS mutant of 
SPHK2, SPHK2R93E/R94E, failed to enter the nucleus and to inhibit DNA synthesis. 
Moreover, a fusion protein, NLS-SPHK1, where SPHK1 was fused to the NLS sequence 
of SPHK2 acquired the ability to enter nuclei and inhibited DNA synthesis. These 
results indicate that SPHK2 localizes in the nuclei and causes inhibition of DNA 
synthesis, and this may affect subsequent cellular events.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M306577200
PMID: 12954646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
