---
pmid: '16582881'
title: Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein is involved in alphaIIb beta3-mediated cell
  adhesion.
authors:
- Tsuboi S
- Nonoyama S
- Ochs HD
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1479562
doi: 10.1038/sj.embor.7400665
---

# Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein is involved in alphaIIb beta3-mediated cell adhesion.
**Authors:** Tsuboi S, Nonoyama S, Ochs HD
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.embor.7400665](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.embor.7400665)
**PMC:** [PMC1479562](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1479562/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2006 May;7(5):506-11. doi: 10.1038/sj.embor.7400665. Epub 2006 Mar
31.

Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein is involved in alphaIIb beta3-mediated cell 
adhesion.

Tsuboi S(1), Nonoyama S, Ochs HD.

Author information:
(1)Infectious and Inflammatory Disease Research Center, Burnham Institute for 
Biomedical Research, 10901 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, 
USA.

The Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) is an X-chromosome-linked immunodeficiency 
disorder. The most common symptom seen in WAS patients is bleeding. One of the 
main causes of bleeding is defective platelet aggregation. The causative gene of 
WAS encodes WAS protein (WASP). Here, we show that WASP binds to the calcium- 
and integrin-binding protein (CIB) in platelets. CIB was originally identified 
as a protein binding to the alphaIIb cytoplasmic tail of platelet integrin 
alphaIIb beta3, which has a primary role in platelet aggregation. We also show 
that the WASP-CIB complex is important in alphaIIb beta3-mediated cell adhesion, 
and that in patients mutant forms of WASP are expressed at reduced levels or 
show lower affinities for CIB than wild-type WASP. Our results indicate that 
impaired complex formation between mutant WASPs and CIB reduces alphaIIb 
beta3-mediated cell adhesion and causes defective platelet aggregation, 
resulting in bleeding.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.embor.7400665
PMCID: PMC1479562
PMID: 16582881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
