---
pmid: '19965387'
title: Phosphorylation of H2A by Bub1 prevents chromosomal instability through localizing
  shugoshin.
authors:
- Kawashima SA
- Yamagishi Y
- Honda T
- Ishiguro K
- Watanabe Y
journal: Science
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.1180189
---

# Phosphorylation of H2A by Bub1 prevents chromosomal instability through localizing shugoshin.
**Authors:** Kawashima SA, Yamagishi Y, Honda T, Ishiguro K, Watanabe Y
**Journal:** Science (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1180189](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1180189)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2010 Jan 8;327(5962):172-7. doi: 10.1126/science.1180189. Epub 2009
Nov  19.

Phosphorylation of H2A by Bub1 prevents chromosomal instability through 
localizing shugoshin.

Kawashima SA(1), Yamagishi Y, Honda T, Ishiguro K, Watanabe Y.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Chromosome Dynamics, Institute of Molecular and Cellular 
Biosciences, University of Tokyo, Yayoi, Tokyo 113-0032, Japan.

Comment in
    Science. 2010 Jan 8;327(5962):150-1. doi: 10.1126/science.1184770.

Bub1 is a multi-task protein kinase required for proper chromosome segregation 
in eukaryotes. Impairment of Bub1 in humans may lead to chromosomal instability 
(CIN) or tumorigenesis. Yet, the primary cellular substrate of Bub1 has remained 
elusive. Here, we show that Bub1 phosphorylates the conserved serine 121 of 
histone H2A in fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe. The h2a-SA mutant, in 
which all cellular H2A-S121 is replaced by alanine, phenocopies the bub1 
kinase-dead mutant (bub1-KD) in losing the centromeric localization of shugoshin 
proteins. Artificial tethering of shugoshin to centromeres largely restores the 
h2a-SA or bub1-KD-related CIN defects, a function that is evolutionally 
conserved. Thus, Bub1 kinase creates a mark for shugoshin localization and the 
correct partitioning of chromosomes.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1180189
PMID: 19965387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
