---
pmid: '12775688'
title: The Pseudomonas fluorescens AlgG protein, but not its mannuronan C-5-epimerase
  activity, is needed for alginate polymer formation.
authors:
- Gimmestad M
- Sletta H
- Ertesvåg H
- Bakkevig K
- Jain S
- Suh SJ
- Skjåk-Braek G
- Ellingsen TE
- Ohman DE
- Valla S
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC156231
doi: 10.1128/JB.185.12.3515-3523.2003
---

# The Pseudomonas fluorescens AlgG protein, but not its mannuronan C-5-epimerase activity, is needed for alginate polymer formation.
**Authors:** Gimmestad M, Sletta H, Ertesvåg H, Bakkevig K, Jain S, Suh SJ, Skjåk-Braek G, Ellingsen TE, Ohman DE, Valla S
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JB.185.12.3515-3523.2003](https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.185.12.3515-3523.2003)
**PMC:** [PMC156231](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC156231/)

## Abstract

1. J Bacteriol. 2003 Jun;185(12):3515-23. doi: 10.1128/JB.185.12.3515-3523.2003.

The Pseudomonas fluorescens AlgG protein, but not its mannuronan C-5-epimerase 
activity, is needed for alginate polymer formation.

Gimmestad M(1), Sletta H, Ertesvåg H, Bakkevig K, Jain S, Suh SJ, Skjåk-Braek G, 
Ellingsen TE, Ohman DE, Valla S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 
Trondheim, Norway.

Bacterial alginates are produced as 1-4-linked beta-D-mannuronan, followed by 
epimerization of some of the mannuronic acid residues to alpha-L-guluronic acid. 
Here we report the isolation of four different epimerization-defective point 
mutants of the periplasmic Pseudomonas fluorescens mannuronan C-5-epimerase 
AlgG. All mutations affected amino acids conserved among AlgG-epimerases and 
were clustered in a part of the enzyme also sharing some sequence similarity to 
a group of secreted epimerases previously reported in Azotobacter vinelandii. An 
algG-deletion mutant was constructed and found to produce predominantly a dimer 
containing a 4-deoxy-L-erythro-hex-4-enepyranosyluronate residue at the 
nonreducing end and a mannuronic acid residue at the reducing end. The 
production of this dimer is the result of the activity of an alginate lyase, 
AlgL, whose in vivo activity is much more limited in the presence of AlgG. A 
strain expressing both an epimerase-defective (point mutation) and a wild-type 
epimerase was constructed and shown to produce two types of alginate molecules: 
one class being pure mannuronan and the other having the wild-type content of 
guluronic acid residues. This formation of two distinct classes of polymers in a 
genetically pure cell line can be explained by assuming that AlgG is part of a 
periplasmic protein complex.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.185.12.3515-3523.2003
PMCID: PMC156231
PMID: 12775688 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
