---
pmid: '15939020'
title: The Gemin6-Gemin7 heterodimer from the survival of motor neurons complex has
  an Sm protein-like structure.
authors:
- Ma Y
- Dostie J
- Dreyfuss G
- Van Duyne GD
journal: Structure
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.str.2005.03.014
---

# The Gemin6-Gemin7 heterodimer from the survival of motor neurons complex has an Sm protein-like structure.
**Authors:** Ma Y, Dostie J, Dreyfuss G, Van Duyne GD
**Journal:** Structure (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.str.2005.03.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2005.03.014)

## Abstract

1. Structure. 2005 Jun;13(6):883-92. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2005.03.014.

The Gemin6-Gemin7 heterodimer from the survival of motor neurons complex has an 
Sm protein-like structure.

Ma Y(1), Dostie J, Dreyfuss G, Van Duyne GD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, 
USA.

Comment in
    Structure. 2005 Jun;13(6):833-4. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2005.05.002.

The survival of motor neurons (SMN) protein, product of the disease gene of the 
common neurodegenerative disease spinal muscular atrophy, is part of the large 
multiprotein "SMN complex." The SMN complex functions as an assembly machine for 
small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs)-the major components of the 
spliceosome. Here, we report the crystal structure of two components of the 
human SMN complex, Gemin6 and Gemin7. Although Gemin6 and Gemin7 have no 
significant sequence similarity with Sm proteins, both adopt canonical Sm folds. 
Moreover, Gemin6 and Gemin7 exist as a heterodimer, and interact with each other 
via an interface similar to that which mediates interactions among the Sm 
proteins. Together with binding experiments that show that the Gemin6/Gemin7 
complex binds to Sm proteins, these findings provide a framework for considering 
how the SMN complex, with Gemin6 and Gemin7 as tools, might organize Sm proteins 
for formation of Sm rings on snRNA targets.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2005.03.014
PMID: 15939020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
