---
pmid: '7991565'
title: Rab geranylgeranyl transferase catalyzes the geranylgeranylation of adjacent
  cysteines in the small GTPases Rab1A, Rab3A, and Rab5A.
authors:
- Farnsworth CC
- Seabra MC
- Ericsson LH
- Gelb MH
- Glomset JA
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC45356
doi: 10.1073/pnas.91.25.11963
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Rab geranylgeranyl transferase catalyzes the geranylgeranylation of adjacent cysteines in the small GTPases Rab1A, Rab3A, and Rab5A.
**Authors:** Farnsworth CC, Seabra MC, Ericsson LH, Gelb MH, Glomset JA
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.91.25.11963](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.91.25.11963)
**PMC:** [PMC45356](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC45356/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Dec 6;91(25):11963-7. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.91.25.11963.

Rab geranylgeranyl transferase catalyzes the geranylgeranylation of adjacent 
cysteines in the small GTPases Rab1A, Rab3A, and Rab5A.

Farnsworth CC(1), Seabra MC, Ericsson LH, Gelb MH, Glomset JA.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Washington, Seattle 98195.

Rab proteins are Ras-related small GTPases that are geranylgeranylated on 
cysteine residues located at or near their C termini. They differ from other 
geranylgeranylated small GTPases in several important respects. (i) Most Rab 
proteins contain two adjacent cysteine residues within one of the following 
C-terminal sequence motifs: -XXCC, -XCXC, or -CCXX; (ii) a Rab protein that ends 
in a -XCXC motif has been shown to be geranylgeranylated on both adjacent 
cysteine residues; and (iii) Rab proteins are substrates of a unique 
Rab-specific geranylgeranyltransferase. Whether this enzyme catalyzes the 
geranylgeranylation of both cysteines is unknown. We addressed this question by 
direct structural analysis of in vitro prenylated proteins. We incubated 
recombinant Rab geranylgeranyltransferase, Rab escort protein, and 
[1-3H]geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate with recombinant wild-type Rab1A (-XXCC), 
Rab3A (-XCXC), or Rab5A (-CCXX) and treated each labeled protein with trypsin. 
We then analyzed the resulting peptides by HPLC and electrospray mass 
spectrometry and found that for each protein both C-terminal adjacent cysteines 
were geranylgeranylated. These results indicate that Rab 
geranylgeranyltransferase/Rab escort protein catalyzes the geranylgeranylation 
of both cysteines in Rab proteins with three distinct C-terminal motifs and 
suggest that other Rab proteins with these motifs may be similarly modified.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.91.25.11963
PMCID: PMC45356
PMID: 7991565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
