---
pmid: '17428789'
title: Phosphatidylethanolamine, a limiting factor of autophagy in yeast strains bearing
  a defect in the carboxypeptidase Y pathway of vacuolar targeting.
authors:
- Nebauer R
- Rosenberger S
- Daum G
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M611345200
---

# Phosphatidylethanolamine, a limiting factor of autophagy in yeast strains bearing a defect in the carboxypeptidase Y pathway of vacuolar targeting.
**Authors:** Nebauer R, Rosenberger S, Daum G
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M611345200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M611345200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jun 8;282(23):16736-43. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M611345200. Epub
2007  Apr 11.

Phosphatidylethanolamine, a limiting factor of autophagy in yeast strains 
bearing a defect in the carboxypeptidase Y pathway of vacuolar targeting.

Nebauer R(1), Rosenberger S, Daum G.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Graz University of Technology, Petersgasse 12/2, 
A-8010 Graz, Austria.

Vps4p and Vps36p of Saccharomyces cerevisiae are involved in the transport of 
proteins to the vacuole via the carboxypeptidase Y pathway. We found that 
deletion of VPS4 and VPS36 caused impaired maturation of the vacuolar 
proaminopeptidase I (pAPI) via autophagy or the cytosol to vacuole targeting 
pathway. Supplementation with ethanolamine rescued this defect, leading to an 
increase of the cellular amount of phosphatidylethanolamine (PtdEtn), an 
enhanced level of the PtdEtn-binding autophagy protein Atg8p and a balanced rate 
of autophagy. We also discovered that maturation of pAPI was generally affected 
by PtdEtn depletion in a psd1Delta psd2Delta mutant due to reduced recruitment 
of Atg8p to the preautophagosomal structure. Ethanolamine supplementation 
provided the necessary amounts of PtdEtn for complete maturation of pAPI. Since 
the expression level of Atg8p was not compromised in the psd1Delta psd2Delta 
strain, we concluded that the amount of available PtdEtn was limiting. Thus, 
PtdEtn appears to be a limiting factor for the balance of the carboxypeptidase Y 
pathway and autophagy/the cytosol to vacuole targeting pathway in the yeast.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M611345200
PMID: 17428789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
