---
pmid: '24525231'
title: The PRKCI and SOX2 oncogenes are coamplified and cooperate to activate Hedgehog
  signaling in lung squamous cell carcinoma.
authors:
- Justilien V
- Walsh MP
- Ali SA
- Thompson EA
- Murray NR
- Fields AP
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3949484
doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2014.01.008
---

# The PRKCI and SOX2 oncogenes are coamplified and cooperate to activate Hedgehog signaling in lung squamous cell carcinoma.
**Authors:** Justilien V, Walsh MP, Ali SA, Thompson EA, Murray NR, Fields AP
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccr.2014.01.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2014.01.008)
**PMC:** [PMC3949484](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3949484/)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Cell. 2014 Feb 10;25(2):139-51. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2014.01.008.

The PRKCI and SOX2 oncogenes are coamplified and cooperate to activate Hedgehog 
signaling in lung squamous cell carcinoma.

Justilien V(1), Walsh MP(1), Ali SA(1), Thompson EA(1), Murray NR(1), Fields 
AP(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic Cancer Center, Jacksonville, FL 
32224, USA.
(2)Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic Cancer Center, Jacksonville, FL 
32224, USA. Electronic address: fields.alan@mayo.edu.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2014 Feb 10;25(2):133-4. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2014.01.027.

We report that two oncogenes coamplified on chromosome 3q26, PRKCI and SOX2, 
cooperate to drive a stem-like phenotype in lung squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC). 
Protein kinase Cι (PKCι) phosphorylates SOX2, a master transcriptional regulator 
of stemness, and recruits it to the promoter of Hedgehog (Hh) acyltransferase 
(HHAT) that catalyzes the rate-limiting step in Hh ligand production. 
PKCι-mediated SOX2 phosphorylation is required for HHAT promoter occupancy, HHAT 
expression, and maintenance of a stem-like phenotype. Primary LSCC tumors 
coordinately overexpress PKCι, SOX2, and HHAT and require PKCι-SOX2-HHAT 
signaling to maintain a stem-like phenotype. Thus, PKCι and SOX2 are 
genetically, biochemically, and functionally linked in LSCC, and together they 
drive tumorigenesis by establishing a cell-autonomous Hh signaling axis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccr.2014.01.008
PMCID: PMC3949484
PMID: 24525231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
