---
pmid: '12080090'
title: Lysine methylation within the globular domain of histone H3 by Dot1 is important
  for telomeric silencing and Sir protein association.
authors:
- Ng HH
- Feng Q
- Wang H
- Erdjument-Bromage H
- Tempst P
- Zhang Y
- Struhl K
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC186335
doi: 10.1101/gad.1001502
---

# Lysine methylation within the globular domain of histone H3 by Dot1 is important for telomeric silencing and Sir protein association.
**Authors:** Ng HH, Feng Q, Wang H, Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P, Zhang Y, Struhl K
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.1001502](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.1001502)
**PMC:** [PMC186335](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC186335/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2002 Jun 15;16(12):1518-27. doi: 10.1101/gad.1001502.

Lysine methylation within the globular domain of histone H3 by Dot1 is important 
for telomeric silencing and Sir protein association.

Ng HH(1), Feng Q, Wang H, Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P, Zhang Y, Struhl K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The amino-terminal histone tails are subject to covalent post-translational 
modifications such as acetylation, methylation, and phosphorylation. In the 
histone code hypothesis, these exposed and unstructured histone tails are 
accessible to a repertoire of regulatory factors that specifically recognize the 
various modified histones, thereby generating altered chromatin structures that 
mediate specific biological responses. Here, we report that lysine (Lys) 79 of 
histone H3, which resides in the globular domain, is methylated in eukaryotic 
organisms. In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Lys 79 of histone H3 is 
methylated by Dot1, a protein shown previously to play a role in telomeric 
silencing. Mutations of Lys 79 of histone H3 and mutations that abolish the 
catalytic activity of Dot1 impair telomeric silencing, suggesting that Dot1 
mediates telomeric silencing largely through methylation of Lys 79. This defect 
in telomeric silencing might reflect an interaction between Sir proteins and Lys 
79, because dot1 and Lys 79 mutations weaken the interaction of Sir2 and Sir3 
with the telomeric region in vivo. Our results indicate that histone 
modifications in the core globular domain have important biological functions.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.1001502
PMCID: PMC186335
PMID: 12080090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
