---
pmid: '17933903'
title: The Arabidopsis mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase MKK3 is upstream of
  group C mitogen-activated protein kinases and participates in pathogen signaling.
authors:
- Dóczi R
- Brader G
- Pettkó-Szandtner A
- Rajh I
- Djamei A
- Pitzschke A
- Teige M
- Hirt H
journal: Plant Cell
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2174707
doi: 10.1105/tpc.106.050039
---

# The Arabidopsis mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase MKK3 is upstream of group C mitogen-activated protein kinases and participates in pathogen signaling.
**Authors:** Dóczi R, Brader G, Pettkó-Szandtner A, Rajh I, Djamei A, Pitzschke A, Teige M, Hirt H
**Journal:** Plant Cell (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1105/tpc.106.050039](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.106.050039)
**PMC:** [PMC2174707](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2174707/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell. 2007 Oct;19(10):3266-79. doi: 10.1105/tpc.106.050039. Epub 2007
Oct  12.

The Arabidopsis mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase MKK3 is upstream of 
group C mitogen-activated protein kinases and participates in pathogen 
signaling.

Dóczi R(1), Brader G, Pettkó-Szandtner A, Rajh I, Djamei A, Pitzschke A, Teige 
M, Hirt H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Molecular Biology, Max F. Perutz Laboratories, University 
of Viena, A-1030 Viena, Austria.

Although the Arabidopsis thaliana genome contains genes encoding 20 
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) and 10 MAPK kinases (MAPKKs), most of 
them are still functionally uncharacterized. In this work, we analyzed the 
function of the group B MAPK kinase, MKK3. Transgenic ProMKK3:GUS lines showed 
basal expression in vascular tissues that was strongly induced by Pseudomonas 
syringae pv tomato strain DC3000 (Pst DC3000) infection but not by abiotic 
stresses. The growth of virulent Pst DC3000 was increased in mkk3 knockout 
plants and decreased in MKK3-overexpressing plants. Moreover, MKK3 
overexpression lines showed increased expression of several PR genes. By yeast 
two-hybrid analysis, coimmunoprecipitation, and protein kinase assays, MKK3 was 
revealed to be an upstream activator of the group C MAPKs MPK1, MPK2, MPK7, and 
MPK14. Flagellin-derived flg22 peptide strongly activated MPK6 but resulted in 
poor activation of MPK7. By contrast, MPK6 and MPK7 were both activated by 
H(2)O(2), but only MPK7 activation was enhanced by MKK3. In agreement with the 
notion that MKK3 regulates the expression of PR genes, ProPR1:GUS expression was 
strongly enhanced by coexpression of MKK3-MPK7. Our results reveal that the MKK3 
pathway plays a role in pathogen defense and further underscore the importance 
and complexity of MAPK signaling in plant stress responses.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.106.050039
PMCID: PMC2174707
PMID: 17933903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Although the Arabidopsis thaliana genome contains genes encoding 20 mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) and 10 MAPK kinases (MAPKKs), most of them are still functionally uncharacterized. In this work, we analyzed the function of the group B MAPK kinase, MKK3. Transgenic ProMKK3:GUS lines showed basal expression in vascular tissues that was strongly induced by Pseudomonas syringae pv tomato strain DC3000 ( Pst DC3000) infection but not by abiotic stresses. The growth of virulent Pst DC3000 was increased in mkk3 knockout plants and decreased in MKK3 -overexpressing plants. Moreover, MKK3 overexpression lines showed increased expression of several PR genes. By yeast two-hybrid analysis, coimmunoprecipitation, and protein kinase assays, MKK3 was revealed to be an upstream activator of the group C MAPKs MPK1, MPK2, MPK7, and MPK14. Flagellin-derived flg22 peptide strongly activated MPK6 but resulted in poor activation of MPK7. By contrast, MPK6 and MPK7 were both activated by H 2 O 2 , but only MPK7 activation was enhanced by MKK3. In agreement with the notion that MKK3 regulates the expression of PR genes, ProPR1:GUS expression was strongly enhanced by coexpression of MKK3-MPK7. Our results reveal that the MKK3 pathway plays a role in pathogen defense and further underscore the importance and complexity of MAPK signaling in plant stress responses.

INTRODUCTION

Due to their sessile life cycle, plants have developed sophisticated mechanisms to rapidly sense a changing environment and protect themselves from environmental biotic and abiotic stresses. Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK or MPK) cascades are common mechanisms to translate external stimuli into cellular responses in all eukaryotes, including higher plants. These protein kinase cascades consist of three subsequently acting protein kinases, a MAPK kinase kinase (MAPKKK), a MAPK kinase (MAPKK or MKK), and finally the MAPK. Different MAPK pathways respond to a variety of external stimuli and have been characterized in yeast, animals, and plants ( Davis, 2000 ; Chang and Karin, 2001 ; Hohmann, 2002 ; Jonak et al., 2002 ).

The genome of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae encodes six different MAPKs, and cellular functions for five of these MAPKs have been established ( Herskowitz, 1995 ; Gustin et al., 1998 ; Hohmann, 2002 ; O'Rourke et al., 2002 ). By contrast, plants have ∼20 MAPKs, but relatively little is known about the function and composition of the different pathways ( Tena et al., 2001 ; Zhang and Klessig, 2001 ; MAP Kinase Group, 2002 ; Jonak et al., 2002 ). The MAPKs investigated to date were mainly involved in stress responses ( Jonak et al., 2002 ). In the genetic model plant Arabidopsis thaliana , MPK3, MPK4, and MPK6 are activated by a diverse set of stresses, including pathogens, osmotic, cold, and oxidative stresses ( Ichimura et al., 2000 ; Kovtun et al., 2000 ; Nühse et al., 2000 ; Petersen et al., 2000 ; Desikan et al., 2001 ; Asai et al., 2002 ; Droillard et al., 2002 ).

Compared with our current knowledge of the 20 plant MAPKs, much less is known of the functions of the 10 MAPKKs or of the >60 putative MAPKKKs ( MAP Kinase Group, 2002 ). The 20 MAPKs can be divided into four groups. Best studied are MPK3 and MPK6 of group A and MPK4 of group B, whereas to date there is no functional information on groups C and D. Based on sequence alignment, plant MAPKKs can also be divided into four groups. MKK1 and MKK2 of group A and MKK4 and MKK5 of group C MAPKKs mainly appear to be involved in stress responses. By contrast, little is known about the function of group B and D MAPKKs. A recent article by Takahashi et al. (2007) provides evidence that MKK3, the only member of group B MAPKKs, plays a role in jasmonate (JA)-mediated developmental signaling. With the exception of MKK7, which was recently shown to be an inhibitor of polar auxin transport ( Dai et al., 2006 ), there is no information on the function of group D MAPKKs.

A broad range of pathogens are recognized by plants through pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), which are highly conserved molecular structures of pathogenic microbes ( Nürnberger et al., 2004 ). PAMP perception systems in plants and animals are mechanistically comparable, and PAMP recognition by receptors triggers nitric oxide, reactive oxygen species (ROS), and MAPK cascades that induce innate immune responses ( Nürnberger et al., 2004 ). In particular, plants possess a specific recognition system for a conserved, 22–amino acid motif (flg22) of the bacterial flagellin ( Felix et al., 1999 ). Recognition of flg22 in Arabidopsis occurs via a host protein complex that contains the FLS2 Leu-rich repeat receptor kinase ( Gomez-Gomez et al., 2001 ). Recognition of flg22 by FLS2 leads to the production of ROS, medium alkalinization, and induction of pathogen-responsive genes ( Felix et al., 1999 ; Gomez-Gomez et al., 1999 ; Nühse et al., 2000 ). flg22 activates multiple MAPKs, and Asai et al. (2002) identified a MAPK cascade that consists of the MEKK1-MKK4/MKK5-MPK3/MPK6 module and functions in innate immunity by the combination of transient expression analyses with biochemical and genetic approaches. MPK4 is also activated by flg22, and recent genetic evidence suggests that MEKK1 is upstream of MKK1 and MPK4 in flagellin and ROS signaling ( Ichimura et al., 2006 ; Mészáros et al., 2006 ; Nakagami et al., 2006 ; Su et al., 2007 ; Suarez-Rodriguez et al., 2007 ). Recently, it was shown that both flg22 and another bacterial PAMP, called elf18 ( Zipfel et al., 2006 ), result in activation of the MPK3/6 pathway, indicating that different elicitor-derived signals converge to activate the same MAPK cascade. Activation of MPK3/6 results in the induction of WRKY transcription factor genes ( Asai et al., 2002 ), and MPK6 -silenced Arabidopsis plants are compromised in resistance to different pathogens ( Menke et al., 2004 ).

A unique group of plant MAPKKs is group B, which contains only one gene, MKK3 , in all three sequenced plant genomes. Interestingly, all currently known MKK3 orthologs contain a C-terminal extension encoding a nuclear transfer factor domain ( Hamel et al., 2006 ). Nuclear Transport Factor2 (NTF2) is a small protein that mediates the nuclear import of RAN-GDP and binds to both RAN-GDP and FxFG repeat–containing nucleoporins ( Quimby et al., 2000 ). Interestingly, the only MKK encoded in the Chlamydomonas genome also belongs to the MKK3 structural class, including the C-terminal NTF2-like domain, indicating that this chimeric arrangement has had a long and successful evolutionary history in the lineage of photosynthetic eukaryotes ( Hamel et al., 2006 ). The combination of a MAPKK and an NTF2-like domain in plants appears to be unique among eukaryotic taxa. However, there are other examples for modular architecture of proteins with NTF2-like domains, such as TAP, a vertebrate nuclear mRNA export factor, or Ras-GAP SH3 domain binding protein ( Suyama et al., 2000 ).

Recently, it was found that Arabidopsis root growth inhibition by JA is negatively regulated by MKK3 ( Takahashi et al., 2007 ). Accordingly, a JA marker gene ( VEGETATIVE STORAGE PROTEIN2 [ VSP2 ]) is also negatively regulated by the pathway. On the other hand, PLANT DEFENSIN1.2 ( PDF1.2 ), a JA-regulated pathogen marker gene, along with some other JA-responsive genes (e.g., LIPOXYGENASE2 [ LOX2 ] and VSP1 ) are positively regulated by MKK3. Here, we provide evidence that Arabidopsis MKK3 is part of a novel pathogen-signaling MAPK pathway. We show that MKK3 is an activator of group C MPKs and acts as a positive regulator of PR gene expression.

DISCUSSION

The Arabidopsis genome encodes 20 MAPKs and 10 MAPK kinases, most of which are still functionally unknown. We set out to functionally analyze MKK3, the only member of group B MAPK kinases. We demonstrate that the susceptibility of Arabidopsis plants to infection by virulent Pst DC3000 growth correlates with MKK3 expression and activity levels. While MKK3 itself is transcriptionally induced upon Pst DC3000 infection, MKK3 is also a positive regulator of PR gene expression. In addition, MKK3 interacts with and activates MPK1, MPK2, MPK7, and MPK14, which are the four members of group C MAPKs, for which no functional information has been available to date.

In order to explore the potential role of MKK3 , its expression was studied using Arabidopsis lines transformed with a ProMKK3:GUS fusion construct. Whereas basal expression was observed mainly in vascular tissues, widespread expression of MKK3 was strongly induced by Pst DC3000 infection but not by different abiotic stimuli. This suggested that MKK3 could have a role in pathogen signaling. Since constitutively active MKK3 results in MAPK activation of group C MPKs ( Figure 4A ), this pathway is probably regulated at both the posttranslational and transcriptional levels, the latter of which might be part of a positive feedback loop for amplifying the signal. The involvement of feedback loops appears to be a relatively common theme in plant pathogen-signaling networks for fine-tuning defense responses ( Shah, 2003 ). Microarray data ( Zimmermann et al., 2004 ) show that besides induction by Pseudomonas infection, MKK3 is also induced upon senescence. We confirmed this observation in our ProMKK3:GUS lines (data not shown). Furthermore, microarray data show the identified downstream MAPK MPK7 to be regulated in a very similar fashion. Like MKK3 , MPK7 is induced during senescence and by Pseudomonas infection.

Besides its own transcriptional induction by Pst DC3000, we also found MKK3 to be a signaling component regulating PR gene expression. Our genetic studies support this notion, as bacterial growth assays showed that Pst DC3000 growth is effectively retarded in plant lines overexpressing MKK3-EE , whereas mkk3-1 knockout plants were more susceptible to bacterial invasion. These findings strongly suggest that MKK3 plays a role in Arabidopsis defense signaling. Complementation of mkk3-1 by MKK3-WT expression in this background resulted in a reduction of bacterial growth, although not completely to wild-type values (see Supplemental Figure 1 online). The remaining difference in resistance might be explained by the lack of the observed positive feedback loop mechanism in this system.

In a prototypical MAPK cascade, MAPK kinases act through phosphorylating and thereby activating downstream MAPKs. To identify potential MPK partners of MKK3, a directed pair-wise yeast two-hybrid analysis was performed, revealing that MKK3 selectively interacts with MPK1, MPK2, and MPK7 and to some extent with MPK14 in yeast. These MAPKs belong to the group C MAPKs. In protoplasts, an active version of MKK3 could activate MPK1/2/7 and MPK14, all four members of the group C MAPKs. Because MKK3 and MPK7 are transcriptionally coregulated by Pst DC3000, we focused our further analyses on the MKK3–MPK7 interaction. We found that MPK7 is stabilized by MKK3 at the protein level. Interestingly, this accumulation of MPK7 did not lead to an increase of MPK7 activity, which, however, could be achieved either by H 2 O 2 treatment or by coexpressing constitutively active MKK3. These data suggest that complex formation with MKK3 might protect MPK7 from degradation. Indeed, by coimmunoprecipitation experiments, we could show that MKK3 and MPK7 form a complex with each other in planta.

Protein degradation also plays a role in MKK3 regulation. Bands of lower molecular mass than full-length MKK3 were detected both in seedlings ( Figure 1D ) and in protoplasts ( Figure 5 ), and we also observed that the lower bands disappeared upon treatment with the proteasome inhibitor MG115. In fact, H 2 O 2 treatment had the same effect, suggesting that protein stabilization plays a role in MKK3 and MPK7 signaling. The role of protein stabilization, however, must be indirect, since the proteasome completely destroys target proteins; here, however, we observed distinct bands of MKK3. In the absence of H 2 O 2 , constitutively active MKK3-EE was also detected as multiple bands, indicating that this effect is separable from activation. Nonetheless, MAPK kinase rearrangement by H 2 O 2 may be a more general phenomenon, as a very pronounced accumulation of full-length MKK4 protein was also observed following H 2 O 2 treatment.

MPK7 is activated by H 2 O 2 , and this activation is clearly enhanced by coexpression with MKK3 ( Figure 5A ). Furthermore, PR1 promoter–dependent GUS expression was strongly induced by coexpression of MPK7 with MKK3 ( Figure 6A ). These data indicate that MKK3 and MPK7 are part of a pathogen-signaling MAPK pathway that regulates PR1 gene expression. Using the ProPR1:GUS construct, we could narrow down the transcriptional activation of the pathway to an 833-bp promoter region of PR1 . Functional analysis of this promoter sequence revealed five regulatory motifs ( Lebel, 1998 ). Of these five regulatory elements, three are perfectly conserved within the MKK3 promoter and are binding sites for GCN4 (TGACTG: −695 to −690) and WRKY (TTGACT: −1491 to −1486, −1106 to −1101, −223 to −218, and −35 to −30) transcription factors. Moreover, an 8-bp site similar to the nuclear factor κB binding site is also conserved in both promoters (GGACTTTTC: −138 to −130 in ProMKK3 ). The GCN4 and WRKY sites also occur in the MPK7 promoter (−1548 to −1553 and −1058 to −1053, respectively), although the GCN4 site is inverted. We also analyzed a 2000-bp sequence upstream of MKK4 , another Arabidopsis MAPK kinase that is involved in innate immunity responses ( Asai et al., 2002 ), but none of the PR1 promoter elements was found within this region of the MKK4 promoter. Considering this fact, the conservation of such elements in PR1 and MKK3 promoters is highly remarkable.

Pathogens in higher eukaryotes are recognized by multiple receptors that recognize PAMPs ( Nürnberger et al., 2004 ). The production of ROS is an important early component of the innate immune system in animals and plants ( Nürnberger and Scheel, 2001 ). The recognition of flg22 in Arabidopsis occurs via the FLS2 receptor ( Gomez-Gomez et al., 2001 ) and leads to the production of ROS, medium alkalinization, the activation of MPK3/6 via MKK4/5 or MPK4 via MKK1, and the induction of pathogen-responsive genes ( Felix et al., 1999 ; Gomez-Gomez et al., 1999 ; Nühse et al., 2000 ; Asai et al., 2002 ; Mészáros et al., 2006 ). Surprisingly, flg22 was not an activator of the MKK3-MPK7 module, although a minor increase in MPK7 activity could be observed following flg22 treatment. This low degree of activation could be a consequence of some ROS accumulation after flg22 recognition. Therefore, we assume that the MKK3-MPK7 pathway might be activated by a recognition system other than that of flagellin that may use ROS as a secondary signal or, alternatively, the applied H 2 O 2 in our experiments causes a physiological change that initiates the signaling.

A recent article by Takahashi et al. (2007) demonstrates that Arabidopsis root growth inhibition by JA is negatively regulated by MKK3. Accordingly, a JA marker gene ( VSP2 ) is also negatively regulated by the pathway. JA is not only a key regulator of development in plants but also of biotic and abiotic stress responses (reviewed in Browse, 2005 ). According to Takahashi et al. (2007) , some JA-responsive genes (e.g., LOX2 and VSP1 ) along with PDF1.2 , a JA-regulated pathogen marker gene, are positively regulated by MKK3. As we found MKK3 to be a positive regulator of pathogen response, it is reasonable to speculate that MKK3-mediated pathogen signaling is also part of the JA signaling network. Interestingly, JA signaling is also linked to ROS. For example, JA induces the accumulation of antioxidant pathways, and in a JA-deficient Arabidopsis mutant ( opr3 ) the induction of these pathways upon ozone exposure is abolished ( Sasaki-Sekimoto et al., 2005 ), and oji1 , a JA-insensitive mutant, is hypersensitive to O 3 treatments ( Kanna et al., 2003 ). On the other hand, JA generates H 2 O 2 , an agent we found to activate MPK7, as a secondary signal for the activation of defense genes ( Orozco-Cardenas and Ryan, 1999 ; Orozco-Cardenas et al., 2001 ).

Takahashi et al. (2007) place MPK6 downstream of MKK3 in JA signaling, whereas we did not observe an activation of MPK6 by MKK3. This apparent contradiction probably can be assigned to differences in biochemical approaches. Yeast two-hybrid assays in both laboratories showed no interaction between MKK3 and MPK6 (cited as data not shown in Takahashi et al., 2007 ). Takahashi et al. (2007) used GST-purified recombinant kinases to show both phosphorylation and activation of MPK6 by MKK3 in vitro. To this end, we used kinases immunoprecipitated from protoplasts; thus, activation of MAPKs took place in living cells. The use of high concentrations of purified kinases in vitro might result in unspecific activities; in addition, removal of the kinase from the cell often results in a loss of its physiological regulatory mechanisms (reviewed in Manning and Cantley, 2002 ). Nevertheless, a weak activation of MPK1 and MPK2 by MKK3 was also observed in this setup, and MPK7 was not tested with active MKK3.

A strong activation of MPK6 upon constitutively active MKK3DD induction is shown by Takahashi et al. (2007) , supporting the idea that MPK6 is downstream of MKK3 in planta. As no physical interaction was shown between MKK3 and MPK6, an indirect effect cannot be completely ruled out. As at least four distinct MAPK kinases activate MPK6 in cascades regulating different biological responses, scaffold proteins may play a key role in each pathway, and their absence in yeast can explain the failure to detect MKK3–MPK6 interaction by the two-hybrid system.

As indicated by a number of biochemical studies, the presence of only 10 MAPKKs is compatible with the notion that these kinases serve as entry routes to many upstream signals as well as bifurcation points for the activation of multiple downstream MAPKs ( Cardinale et al., 2002 ; Jin et al., 2003 ). In Arabidopsis , MKK4 and MKK5 can activate both MPK3 and MPK6 ( Asai et al., 2002 ), whereas MPK4 can be activated by MKK1 and MKK2 ( Mizoguchi et al., 1998 ; Huang et al., 2000 ; Matsuoka et al., 2002 ). Moreover, MKK2 can target MPK4 and MPK6 ( Teige et al., 2004 ). In agreement with this concept, our data show that MKK3 is an activator of all four group C MAPKs.

The common docking (CD) domain of the consensus sequence [LH][LHY]Dxx[DE]xx[DE]EPxC in MAPKs functions as a docking site for MAPKKs, phosphatases, and protein substrates ( Tanoue et al., 2000 ). Arabidopsis MPKs belonging to groups A and B possess an evolutionarily conserved CD domain in their C-terminal extension ( MAP Kinase Group, 2002 ). Interestingly, the corresponding CD domains in group C MPKs appear to be modified in the hydrophobic residues (VP[IV][SD]L[DE][IV]DE[ND][ML]xx[DE]) and might explain their (at least in yeast) specific interaction with MKK3. Interestingly, MPK14 is a very weak interactor of MKK3. MPK7 and MPK14 are highly homologous proteins, and perhaps MPK14 is only able to fully interact with MKK3 in planta in the presence of a third component and/or under certain conditions, in order to avoid promiscuous interactions. Deletion of the C-terminal NTF2-like domain of MKK3 significantly reduces its capability to interact with MAPKs, suggesting that a proper structure is important for proper binding.

On the basis of these results, we suggest a role for MKK3 function in pathogen signaling. Accordingly, plants can detect the presence of Pst DC3000 by PAMPs, which are recognized by an array of specific receptors on the plant cells. As a consequence, secondary signals, such as ROS, are triggered. JA can also trigger ROS production. ROS can activate the MKK3-MPK7 module that induces target genes such as PR1 , thereby activating defense responses. In this pathway, transcriptional feedback loops are also at work, as MKK3 and MPK7 gene expression is induced upon Pst DC3000 infection. On the other hand, JA can activate MPK6 in an MKK3-dependent manner, leading to root growth arrest via the AtMYC2 transcription factor, and the expression of defense genes (e.g., PDF1.2 ).

An interesting question that remains open is the role of the other three group C MAPKs, which should be clarified by further investigations in the future. It was recently shown that members of the C1 subgroup, MPK1 and MPK2, are activated by diverse stress signals, such as wounding, JA, abscisic acid, and H 2 O 2 ( Ortiz-Masia et al., 2007 ). Therefore, it is very likely that this group of MPKs have redundant functions in stress signaling. In addition, a remarkable coregulation of these genes is shown in microarray data in different organs (see Supplemental Figure 4 online). With the exception of MPK2 , all four MPK s appear to be expressed at a relatively low basal level in all organs and tissues. Interestingly, all four group C MPKs are highly expressed in xylem and cork tissues. Coinciding with this expression pattern, MKK3 also has a strong basal expression in vascular tissues, suggesting that MKK3 and its downstream MAPK targets in these cell types may have a role other than stress signaling.
