---
pmid: '18596123'
title: KIBRA modulates directional migration of podocytes.
authors:
- Duning K
- Schurek EM
- Schlüter M
- Bayer M
- Reinhardt HC
- Schwab A
- Schaefer L
- Benzing T
- Schermer B
- Saleem MA
- Huber TB
- Bachmann S
- Kremerskothen J
- Weide T
- Pavenstädt H
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2551571
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2007080916
---

# KIBRA modulates directional migration of podocytes.
**Authors:** Duning K, Schurek EM, Schlüter M, Bayer M, Reinhardt HC, Schwab A, Schaefer L, Benzing T, Schermer B, Saleem MA, Huber TB, Bachmann S, Kremerskothen J, Weide T, Pavenstädt H
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.2007080916](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2007080916)
**PMC:** [PMC2551571](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2551571/)

## Abstract

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2008 Oct;19(10):1891-903. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2007080916. Epub 
2008 Jul 2.

KIBRA modulates directional migration of podocytes.

Duning K(1), Schurek EM, Schlüter M, Bayer M, Reinhardt HC, Schwab A, Schaefer 
L, Benzing T, Schermer B, Saleem MA, Huber TB, Bachmann S, Kremerskothen J, 
Weide T, Pavenstädt H.

Author information:
(1)Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik D, Universitätsklinikum Münster, Münster, 
Germany.

Asymmetric delivery and distribution of macromolecules are essential for cell 
polarity and for cellular functions such as differentiation, division, and 
signaling. Injury of podocytes, which are polarized epithelial cells, changes 
the dynamics of the actin meshwork, resulting in foot process retraction and 
proteinuria. Although the spatiotemporal control of specific protein-protein 
interactions is crucial for the establishment of cell polarity, the mechanisms 
controlling polarity-dependent differentiation and division are incompletely 
understood. In this study, yeast two-hybrid screens were performed using a 
podocyte cDNA library and the polarity protein PATJ as bait. The protein KIBRA 
was identified as an interaction partner of PATJ and was localized to podocytes, 
tubular structures, and collecting ducts. The last four amino acids of KIBRA 
mediated binding to the eighth PDZ domain of PATJ. In addition, KIBRA directly 
bound to synaptopodin, an essential organizer of the podocyte cytoskeleton. 
Stable knockdown of KIBRA in immortalized podocytes impaired directed cell 
migration, suggesting that KIBRA modulates the motility of podocytes by linking 
polarity proteins and cytoskeleton-associated protein complexes.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2007080916
PMCID: PMC2551571
PMID: 18596123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
