---
pmid: '10681527'
title: Identification and characterization of a PDZ protein that interacts with activin
  type II receptors.
authors:
- Shoji H
- Tsuchida K
- Kishi H
- Yamakawa N
- Matsuzaki T
- Liu Z
- Nakamura T
- Sugino H
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.275.8.5485
---

# Identification and characterization of a PDZ protein that interacts with activin type II receptors.
**Authors:** Shoji H, Tsuchida K, Kishi H, Yamakawa N, Matsuzaki T, Liu Z, Nakamura T, Sugino H
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.275.8.5485](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.275.8.5485)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Feb 25;275(8):5485-92. doi: 10.1074/jbc.275.8.5485.

Identification and characterization of a PDZ protein that interacts with activin 
type II receptors.

Shoji H(1), Tsuchida K, Kishi H, Yamakawa N, Matsuzaki T, Liu Z, Nakamura T, 
Sugino H.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Enzyme Research, University of Tokushima, 3-18-15 Kuramoto, 
Tokushima 770-8503, Japan.

We have identified a mouse PDZ protein that interacts with the activin type IIA 
receptor (ActRIIA), which we named activin receptor-interacting protein 1 
(ARIP1). By using yeast two-hybrid screening, we isolated a cDNA clone of ARIP1 
from a mouse brain cDNA library. We detected two forms of ARIP1, ARIP1-long and 
ARIP1-short, which may be produced by alternative splicing. ARIP1-long had one 
guanylate kinase domain in the NH(2)-terminal region, followed by two WW domains 
and five PDZ domains (PDZ1-5). ARIP1-short had a deletion in the NH(2)-terminal 
region and lacked the guanylate kinase domain. Both forms interacted with 
ActRIIA through PDZ5. The COOH-terminal residues of ActRIIA (ESSL) agree with a 
PDZ-binding consensus motif, and ARIP1 recognized the consensus sequence. ARIP1 
interacts specifically with ActRIIA among the receptors for the transforming 
growth factor beta family. Interestingly, ARIP1 also interacted with Smad3, 
which is an activin/transforming growth factor beta intracellular signaling 
molecule. The mRNA of ARIP1 was more abundant in the brain than in other 
tissues. Overexpression of ARIP1 controls activin-induced and Smad3-induced 
transcription in activin-responsive cell lines. These findings suggest that 
ARIP1 has a significant role in assembling activin signaling molecules at 
specific subcellular sites and in regulating signal transduction in neuronal 
cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.275.8.5485
PMID: 10681527 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
