---
pmid: '14570870'
title: Sphingosine-phosphate lyase enhances stress-induced ceramide generation and
  apoptosis.
authors:
- Reiss U
- Oskouian B
- Zhou J
- Gupta V
- Sooriyakumaran P
- Kelly S
- Wang E
- Merrill AH Jr
- Saba JD
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M309646200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Sphingosine-phosphate lyase enhances stress-induced ceramide generation and apoptosis.
**Authors:** Reiss U, Oskouian B, Zhou J, Gupta V, Sooriyakumaran P, Kelly S, Wang E, Merrill AH Jr, Saba JD
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M309646200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M309646200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jan 9;279(2):1281-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M309646200. Epub 2003
 Oct 21.

Sphingosine-phosphate lyase enhances stress-induced ceramide generation and 
apoptosis.

Reiss U(1), Oskouian B, Zhou J, Gupta V, Sooriyakumaran P, Kelly S, Wang E, 
Merrill AH Jr, Saba JD.

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital Oakland Research Institute, Oakland, California 
94609-1673, USA.

Sphingosine-1-phosphate lyase is a widely expressed enzyme that catalyzes the 
essentially irreversible cleavage of the signaling molecule sphingosine 
1-phosphate. To investigate whether sphingosine-1-phosphate lyase influences 
mammalian cell fate decisions, a recombinant human sphingosine-1-phosphate lyase 
fused to green fluorescent protein was expressed in HEK293 cells. The 
recombinant enzyme was active, localized to the endoplasmic reticulum, and 
reduced baseline sphingosine and sphingosine 1-phosphate levels. Stable 
overexpression led to diminished viability under stress, which was attributed to 
an increase in apoptosis and was reversible in a dose-dependent manner by 
exogenous sphingosine 1-phosphate. In contrast to sphingosine 1-phosphate, the 
products of the lyase reaction had no effect on apoptosis. Lyase enzymatic 
activity was required to potentiate apoptosis, because cells expressing a 
catalytically inactive enzyme behaved like controls. Stress increased the 
amounts of long- and very long-chain ceramides in HEK293 cells, and this was 
enhanced in cells overexpressing wild type but not catalytically inactive lyase. 
The ceramide increases appeared to be required for apoptosis, because inhibition 
of ceramide synthase with fumonisin B1 decreased apoptosis in 
lyase-overexpressing cells. Thus, sphingosine-1-phosphate lyase overexpression 
in HEK293 cells decreases sphingosine and sphingosine 1-phosphate amounts but 
elevates stress-induced ceramide generation and apoptosis. This identifies 
sphingosine-1-phosphate lyase as a dual modulator of sphingosine 1-phosphate and 
ceramide metabolism as well as a regulator of cell fate decisions and, hence, a 
potential target for diseases with an imbalance in these biomodulators, such as 
cancer.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M309646200
PMID: 14570870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
