---
pmid: '10521483'
title: Identification of Tek/Tie2 binding partners. Binding to a multifunctional docking
  site mediates cell survival and migration.
authors:
- Jones N
- Master Z
- Jones J
- Bouchard D
- Gunji Y
- Sasaki H
- Daly R
- Alitalo K
- Dumont DJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.43.30896
---

# Identification of Tek/Tie2 binding partners. Binding to a multifunctional docking site mediates cell survival and migration.
**Authors:** Jones N, Master Z, Jones J, Bouchard D, Gunji Y, Sasaki H, Daly R, Alitalo K, Dumont DJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.274.43.30896](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.43.30896)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Oct 22;274(43):30896-905. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.43.30896.

Identification of Tek/Tie2 binding partners. Binding to a multifunctional 
docking site mediates cell survival and migration.

Jones N(1), Master Z, Jones J, Bouchard D, Gunji Y, Sasaki H, Daly R, Alitalo K, 
Dumont DJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cancer Biology Research, Sunnybrook and Women's College Health 
Sciences Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M4N 3M5.

The Tek/Tie2 receptor tyrosine kinase plays a pivotal role in vascular and 
hematopoietic development. To study the signal transduction pathways that are 
mediated by this receptor, we have used the yeast two-hybrid system to identify 
signaling molecules that associate with the phosphorylated Tek receptor. Using 
this approach, we demonstrate that five molecules, Grb2, Grb7, Grb14, Shp2, and 
the p85 subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase can interact with Tek in a 
phosphotyrosine-dependent manner through their SH2 domains. Mapping of the 
binding sites of these molecules on Tek reveals the presence of a multisubstrate 
docking site in the carboxyl tail of Tek (Tyr(1100)). Mutation of this site 
abrogates binding of Grb2 and Grb7 to Tek in vivo, and this site is required for 
tyrosine phosphorylation of Grb7 and p85 in vivo. Furthermore, stimulation of 
Tek-expressing cells with Angiopoietin-1 results in phosphorylation of both Tek 
and p85 and in activation of endothelial cell migration and survival pathways 
that are dependent in part on phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. Taken together, 
these results demonstrate that Angiopoietin-1-induced signaling from the Tek 
receptor is mediated by a multifunctional docking site that is responsible for 
activation of both cell migration and cell survival pathways.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.43.30896
PMID: 10521483 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
