---
pmid: '25684354'
title: Mechanical tension drives cell membrane fusion.
authors:
- Kim JH
- Ren Y
- Ng WP
- Li S
- Son S
- Kee YS
- Zhang S
- Zhang G
- Fletcher DA
- Robinson DN
- Chen EH
journal: Dev Cell
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4357538
doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2015.01.005
---

# Mechanical tension drives cell membrane fusion.
**Authors:** Kim JH, Ren Y, Ng WP, Li S, Son S, Kee YS, Zhang S, Zhang G, Fletcher DA, Robinson DN, Chen EH
**Journal:** Dev Cell (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.devcel.2015.01.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2015.01.005)
**PMC:** [PMC4357538](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4357538/)

## Abstract

1. Dev Cell. 2015 Mar 9;32(5):561-73. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2015.01.005. Epub
2015  Feb 12.

Mechanical tension drives cell membrane fusion.

Kim JH(1), Ren Y(2), Ng WP(3), Li S(1), Son S(3), Kee YS(2), Zhang S(1), Zhang 
G(4), Fletcher DA(3), Robinson DN(2), Chen EH(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Johns Hopkins University School 
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
(3)Department of Bioengineering, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, 
CA 94720, USA.
(4)Laboratory of Bioengineering and Physical Science, National Institute of 
Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(5)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Johns Hopkins University School 
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. Electronic address: echen@jhmi.edu.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2015 Mar 9;32(5):529-30. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2015.02.018.

Membrane fusion is an energy-consuming process that requires tight juxtaposition 
of two lipid bilayers. Little is known about how cells overcome energy barriers 
to bring their membranes together for fusion. Previously, we have shown that 
cell-cell fusion is an asymmetric process in which an "attacking" cell drills 
finger-like protrusions into the "receiving" cell to promote cell fusion. Here, 
we show that the receiving cell mounts a Myosin II (MyoII)-mediated 
mechanosensory response to its invasive fusion partner. MyoII acts as a 
mechanosensor, which directs its force-induced recruitment to the fusion site, 
and the mechanosensory response of MyoII is amplified by chemical signaling 
initiated by cell adhesion molecules. The accumulated MyoII, in turn, increases 
cortical tension and promotes fusion pore formation. We propose that the 
protrusive and resisting forces from fusion partners put the fusogenic synapse 
under high mechanical tension, which helps to overcome energy barriers for 
membrane apposition and drives cell membrane fusion.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2015.01.005
PMCID: PMC4357538
PMID: 25684354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
