---
pmid: '17919905'
title: The discovery of 2-anilinothiazolones as 11beta-HSD1 inhibitors.
authors:
- Yuan C
- St Jean DJ Jr
- Liu Q
- Cai L
- Li A
- Han N
- Moniz G
- Askew B
- Hungate RW
- Johansson L
- Tedenborg L
- Pyring D
- Williams M
- Hale C
- Chen M
- Cupples R
- Zhang J
- Jordan S
- Bartberger MD
- Sun Y
- Emery M
- Wang M
- Fotsch C
journal: Bioorg Med Chem Lett
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2007.09.070
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The discovery of 2-anilinothiazolones as 11beta-HSD1 inhibitors.
**Authors:** Yuan C, St Jean DJ Jr, Liu Q, Cai L, Li A, Han N, Moniz G, Askew B, Hungate RW, Johansson L, Tedenborg L, Pyring D, Williams M, Hale C, Chen M, Cupples R, Zhang J, Jordan S, Bartberger MD, Sun Y, Emery M, Wang M, Fotsch C
**Journal:** Bioorg Med Chem Lett (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bmcl.2007.09.070](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bmcl.2007.09.070)

## Abstract

1. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2007 Nov 15;17(22):6056-61. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2007.09.070. Epub 2007 Sep 25.

The discovery of 2-anilinothiazolones as 11beta-HSD1 inhibitors.

Yuan C(1), St Jean DJ Jr, Liu Q, Cai L, Li A, Han N, Moniz G, Askew B, Hungate 
RW, Johansson L, Tedenborg L, Pyring D, Williams M, Hale C, Chen M, Cupples R, 
Zhang J, Jordan S, Bartberger MD, Sun Y, Emery M, Wang M, Fotsch C.

Author information:
(1)Amgen Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA 91320, USA.

A series of 2-anilinothiazolones were prepared as inhibitors of 
11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 (11beta-HSD1). The most potent 
compounds contained a 2-chloro or 2-fluoro group on the aniline ring with an 
isopropyl substituent on the 5-position of the thiazolone ring (compounds 2 and 
3, respectively). The binding mode was determined through the X-ray co-crystal 
structure of the enzyme with compound 3. This compound was also approximately 
70-fold selective over 11beta-HSD2 and was orally bioavailable in rat 
pharmacokinetic studies. However, compound 3 was >580-fold less active in the 
11beta-HSD1 cell assay when tested in the presence of 3% human serum albumin.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2007.09.070
PMID: 17919905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
