---
pmid: '9618255'
title: cDNA sequence, transport function, and genomic organization of human OCTN2,
  a new member of the organic cation transporter family.
authors:
- Wu X
- Prasad PD
- Leibach FH
- Ganapathy V
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/bbrc.1998.8669
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# cDNA sequence, transport function, and genomic organization of human OCTN2, a new member of the organic cation transporter family.
**Authors:** Wu X, Prasad PD, Leibach FH, Ganapathy V
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1006/bbrc.1998.8669](https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.1998.8669)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 May 29;246(3):589-95. doi: 
10.1006/bbrc.1998.8669.

cDNA sequence, transport function, and genomic organization of human OCTN2, a 
new member of the organic cation transporter family.

Wu X(1), Prasad PD, Leibach FH, Ganapathy V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical College of Georgia, 
Augusta 30912, USA.

We have cloned OCTN2, a new member of the organic cation transporter family, 
from a human placental trophoblast cell line. The hOCTN2 cDNA codes for a 
protein of 557 amino acids with twelve putative transmembrane domains. The octn2 
gene, located on human chromosome 5q31, consists of ten exons. The 
OCTN2-specific transcript, 3.5 kb in size, is expressed widely in human tissues 
and in cell lines of human origin. At the level of amino acid sequence, OCTN2 is 
more closely related to OCTN1 than to OCT1, OCT2 and OCT3. When expressed 
heterologously in HeLa cells, OCTN2 mediates the transport of 
tetraethylammonium, a prototypical organic cation, in a pH-dependent manner. 
Several organic cations, including the neurotoxins 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium, 
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine, and methamphetamine, compete for 
the OCTN2-mediated transport process.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.1998.8669
PMID: 9618255 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
