---
pmid: '10512862'
title: Requirement of sequences outside the conserved kinase domain of fission yeast
  Rad3p for checkpoint control.
authors:
- Chapman CR
- Evans ST
- Carr AM
- Enoch T
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '1999'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC25583
doi: 10.1091/mbc.10.10.3223
---

# Requirement of sequences outside the conserved kinase domain of fission yeast Rad3p for checkpoint control.
**Authors:** Chapman CR, Evans ST, Carr AM, Enoch T
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.10.10.3223](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.10.10.3223)
**PMC:** [PMC25583](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC25583/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Cell. 1999 Oct;10(10):3223-38. doi: 10.1091/mbc.10.10.3223.

Requirement of sequences outside the conserved kinase domain of fission yeast 
Rad3p for checkpoint control.

Chapman CR(1), Evans ST, Carr AM, Enoch T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, 
USA.

The fission yeast Rad3p checkpoint protein is a member of the 
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-related family of protein kinases, which includes 
human ATMp. Mutation of the ATM gene is responsible for the disease 
ataxia-telangiectasia. The kinase domain of Rad3p has previously been shown to 
be essential for function. Here, we show that although this domain is necessary, 
it is not sufficient, because the isolated kinase domain does not have kinase 
activity in vitro and cannot complement a rad3 deletion strain. Using dominant 
negative alleles of rad3, we have identified two sites N-terminal to the 
conserved kinase domain that are essential for Rad3p function. One of these 
sites is the putative leucine zipper, which is conserved in other 
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-related family members. The other is a novel 
motif, which may also mediate Rad3p protein-protein interactions.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.10.10.3223
PMCID: PMC25583
PMID: 10512862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The fission yeast Rad3p checkpoint protein is a member of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-related family of protein kinases, which includes human ATMp. Mutation of the ATM gene is responsible for the disease ataxia-telangiectasia. The kinase domain of Rad3p has previously been shown to be essential for function. Here, we show that although this domain is necessary, it is not sufficient, because the isolated kinase domain does not have kinase activity in vitro and cannot complement a rad3 deletion strain. Using dominant negative alleles of rad3, we have identified two sites N-terminal to the conserved kinase domain that are essential for Rad3p function. One of these sites is the putative leucine zipper, which is conserved in other phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-related family members. The other is a novel motif, which may also mediate Rad3p protein–protein interactions.

INTRODUCTION

Checkpoint pathways ensure the correct temporal order of the cell cycle ( Hartwell and Weinert, 1989 ) and are an evolutionarily conserved feature of eukaryotic cells. The Schizosaccharomyces pombe checkpoint kinase Rad3p (unrelated to the Saccharomyces cerevisiae DNA helicase Rad3p) acts to delay cell cycle events in response to DNA damage or incomplete DNA replication ( Jimenez et al. , 1992 ; Seaton et al. , 1992 ; Bentley et al. , 1996 ). Unlike wild-type cells, rad3Δ cells do not arrest the cell cycle in response to DNA damage or blocked DNA replication and lose viability rapidly under these conditions ( Al-Khodairy and Carr, 1992 ). Two human proteins with similarities to fission yeast Rad3p, ATRp ( Bentley et al. , 1996 ; Cimprich et al. , 1996 ) and ATMp ( Savitsky et al. , 1995a , b ), also function in checkpoint control ( Painter and Young, 1980 ; Beamish and Lavin, 1994 ; Cliby et al. , 1998 ). In humans, mutation of the ATM gene causes the autosomal recessive disease ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), in which patients suffer from a variety of symptoms, including a predisposition to cancer ( Harnden, 1994 ). In mice, deletion of the ATM gene greatly increases the frequency of thymic lymphomas ( Barlow et al. , 1996 ; Xu et al. , 1996 ). Thus, normal checkpoints appear to be required to prevent cancer in mammalian cells. Fission yeast provides the opportunity to study these checkpoint kinases in a simple, genetically tractable model system.

Fission yeast Rad3p and human ATMp and ATRp are members of a large family of structurally and functionally similar proteins from diverse organisms ( Savitsky et al. , 1995a ; Bentley et al. , 1996 , Cimprich et al. , 1996 ). Other members of the family include human DNA-PKcs, the catalytic subunit of DNA-dependent protein kinase ( Hartley et al. , 1995 ), and FKBP12–rapamycin-associated protein ( Brown et al. , 1994 ; Chiu et al. , 1994 ; Sabatini et al. , 1994 ); S. cerevisiae Mec1p ( Weinert, 1992 ; Kato and Ogawa, 1994 ), Tel1p ( Greenwell et al. , 1995 ; Morrow et al. , 1995 ), Tor1p, and Tor2p ( Heitman et al. , 1991 ; Kunz et al. , 1993 ); and Drosophila Mei-41p ( Hari et al. , 1995 ). S. pombe Tel1p has also recently been identified ( Naito et al. , 1998 ). At their C termini, these large proteins (>200 kDa) all contain a kinase domain related to phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases (PI3Ks). Despite this similarity, none of the PI3-kinase-related (PI3KR) proteins have been shown to phosphorylate lipids. ATMp, ATRp, DNA-PK, and Rad3p are all capable of autophosphorylation ( Bentley et al. , 1996 ; Chan and Lees-Miller, 1996 ; Cliby et al. , 1998 ; Scott et al. , 1998 ), and are also known to directly phosphorylate other protein substrates as well ( Lees-Miller et al. , 1992 ; Banin et al. , 1998 ; Canman et al. , 1998 , Martinho et al. , 1998 ). In addition to the kinase domain, many PI3KR proteins contain a putative leucine zipper motif, which may mediate homo- or heterodimerization.

The PI3KR family can be subdivided on the basis of sequence similarity ( Keith and Schreiber, 1995 ; Bentley et al. , 1996 ). In such a phylogenetic tree, S. pombe Rad3p, human ATRp, Drosophila Mei-41p, and S. cerevisiae Mec1p form one subgroup (the ATR group), whereas human ATMp, S. cerevisiae Tel1p, and S. pombe Tel1p are in another distinct but closely related cluster (the ATM group). In yeast and in higher eukaryotes, ATR and ATM-like proteins appear to have overlapping molecular functions in cell cycle control and telomere regulation. For example, S. cerevisiae mec1 tel1 and S. pombe rad3 tel1 double mutants have more severe defects than either single mutant ( Morrow et al. , 1995 ; Naito et al. , 1998 ). Moreover, overexpression of S. cerevisiae tel1 + partially complements the radiation sensitivity of mec1 mutants ( Morrow et al. , 1995 ), and human ATR overexpression can suppress A-T cell defects ( Cliby et al. , 1998 ). In contrast, the remaining family members are more distantly related and have not been shown to overlap functionally with the ATM and ATR subgroups. S. cerevisiae Tor1p and Tor2p and human FKBP12–rapamycin-associated protein regulate G1 progression, whereas DNA-PKcs is involved in V(D)J recombination and repair of double-stranded DNA breaks.

Although not directly involved in checkpoint control, DNA-PKcs serves as a paradigm for understanding the regulation of other kinases in the family because the biochemistry of its regulation is relatively well understood ( Jeggo et al. , 1995 ). In vitro, DNA-PKcs is activated by binding double-stranded DNA ends in the presence of a heterodimer, composed of Ku70 and Ku86 subunits ( Lieber et al. , 1997 ). In this way, the activity of this kinase is dependent both on specific DNA structures and on regulatory cofactors.

Analogously, the ATR and ATM-like PI3KR kinases may also require regulatory cofactors and may be activated by DNA structures. Although the activating structures and regulatory cofactors for these kinases have not been identified, it is known that ionizing radiation enhances the ATM-dependent phosphorylation of p53 in mammalian cells ( Banin et al. , 1998 ; Canman et al. , 1998 ). Similarly, a number of fission yeast proteins, including Hus1p, Chk1p, and Cds1p, are phosphorylated in response to DNA damage in a Rad3p-dependent manner ( Walworth and Bernards, 1996 ; Kostrub et al. , 1998 ; Lindsay et al. , 1998 ), suggesting that Rad3p activity could also be activated by DNA damage. The phosphorylation of these proteins is also dependent on other fission yeast checkpoint proteins, which do not contain recognizable kinase domains, such as Rad1p, Rad9p, Rad17p, and Rad26p ( Sunnerhagen et al. , 1990 ; Enoch et al. , 1992 ; Rowley et al. , 1992 ; Al-Khodairy et al. , 1994 ). These proteins, as well as others known to be involved in checkpoint control ( McFarlane et al. , 1997 ; Saka et al. , 1997 ; Willson et al. , 1997 ), are candidate cofactors or regulators of Rad3p. For example, they may stimulate Rad3p kinase activity by directing the localization of Rad3p to activating DNA structures such as sites of DNA damage, just as the Ku proteins regulate DNA-PKcs.

The Rad3p kinase domain, which comprises <15% of the protein, is essential for Rad3p function in cell cycle checkpoint control ( Bentley et al. , 1996 ). Little is known about the function of Rad3p sequences outside the kinase domain. In this study we demonstrate the importance of sequences outside the kinase domain of Rad3p using a combination of genetic and biochemical methods. We find that they are required for full complementation of the checkpoint defects of rad3Δ cells and are also required for the catalytic activity of Rad3p. Using a genetic assay we have shown that the Rad3p N terminus contains at least two important sites, the leucine zipper and another novel site. Our results differ strikingly from previous studies of ATMp, which indicated that the isolated ATMp kinase domain is sufficient for complementation of A-T cell defects and for kinase activity ( Baskaran et al. , 1997 ; Morgan et al. , 1997 ). Thus, there may be important differences in the regulation of the different classes of proteins within the PI3KR family.

DISCUSSION

Relatively little is known about the function of sequences outside the kinase domain in the PI3KR family of kinases. In this study, we have identified sites important for the normal cellular functions of S. pombe Rad3p, a member of this family. Our data indicate that sequences outside the kinase domain have at least two important functions. First, these sequences are required for catalytic activity. Second, we have identified two sites in the N terminus of Rad3p that may mediate interactions with regulators or substrates but are not required for catalytic activity.
