---
pmid: '15377783'
title: Crystal structure of the clathrin adaptor protein 1 core.
authors:
- Heldwein EE
- Macia E
- Wang J
- Yin HL
- Kirchhausen T
- Harrison SC
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC521094
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0406102101
---

# Crystal structure of the clathrin adaptor protein 1 core.
**Authors:** Heldwein EE, Macia E, Wang J, Yin HL, Kirchhausen T, Harrison SC
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0406102101](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0406102101)
**PMC:** [PMC521094](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC521094/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Sep 28;101(39):14108-13. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0406102101. Epub 2004 Sep 17.

Crystal structure of the clathrin adaptor protein 1 core.

Heldwein EE(1), Macia E, Wang J, Yin HL, Kirchhausen T, Harrison SC.

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Cell 
Biology, and CBR Institute for Biomedical Research, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The heterotetrameric adaptor proteins (AP complexes) link the outer lattice of 
clathrin-coated vesicles with membrane-anchored cargo molecules. We report the 
crystal structure of the core of the AP-1 complex, which functions in the 
trans-Golgi network (TGN). Packing of complexes in the crystal generates an 
exceptionally long (1,135-A) unit-cell axis, but the 6-fold noncrystallographic 
redundancy yields an excellent map at 4-A resolution. The AP-1 core comprises 
N-terminal fragments of the two large chains, beta1 and gamma, and the intact 
medium and small chains, micro1 and sigma1. Its molecular architecture closely 
resembles that of the core of AP-2, the plasma-membrane-specific adaptor, for 
which a structure has been determined. Both structures represent an "inactive" 
conformation with respect to binding of cargo with a tyrosine-based sorting 
signal. TGN localization of AP-1 depends on the small GTPase, Arf1, and the 
phosphoinositide, PI-4-P. We show that directed mutations of residues at a 
particular corner of the gamma chain prevent recruitment to the TGN in cells and 
diminish PI-4-P-dependent, but not Arf1-dependent, liposome binding in vitro.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0406102101
PMCID: PMC521094
PMID: 15377783 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
