---
pmid: '11701881'
title: The Arabidopsis BELL1 and KNOX TALE homeodomain proteins interact through a
  domain conserved between plants and animals.
authors:
- Bellaoui M
- Pidkowich MS
- Samach A
- Kushalappa K
- Kohalmi SE
- Modrusan Z
- Crosby WL
- Haughn GW
journal: Plant Cell
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC139464
doi: 10.1105/tpc.010161
---

# The Arabidopsis BELL1 and KNOX TALE homeodomain proteins interact through a domain conserved between plants and animals.
**Authors:** Bellaoui M, Pidkowich MS, Samach A, Kushalappa K, Kohalmi SE, Modrusan Z, Crosby WL, Haughn GW
**Journal:** Plant Cell (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1105/tpc.010161](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.010161)
**PMC:** [PMC139464](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC139464/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell. 2001 Nov;13(11):2455-70. doi: 10.1105/tpc.010161.

The Arabidopsis BELL1 and KNOX TALE homeodomain proteins interact through a 
domain conserved between plants and animals.

Bellaoui M(1), Pidkowich MS, Samach A, Kushalappa K, Kohalmi SE, Modrusan Z, 
Crosby WL, Haughn GW.

Author information:
(1)Botany Department and Biotechnology Laboratory, 6270 University Boulevard, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia V6T 1Z4, Canada.

Interactions between TALE (three-amino acid loop extension) homeodomain proteins 
play important roles in the development of both fungi and animals. Although in 
plants, two different subclasses of TALE proteins include important 
developmental regulators, the existence of interactions between plant TALE 
proteins has remained unexplored. We have used the yeast two-hybrid system to 
demonstrate that the Arabidopsis BELL1 (BEL1) homeodomain protein can 
selectively heterodimerize with specific KNAT homeodomain proteins. Interaction 
is mediated by BEL1 sequences N terminal to the homeodomain and KNAT sequences 
including the MEINOX domain. These findings validate the hypothesis that the 
MEINOX domain has been conserved between plants and animals as an interaction 
domain for developmental regulators. In yeast, BEL1 and KNAT proteins can 
activate transcription only as a heterodimeric complex, suggesting a role for 
such complexes in planta. Finally, overlapping patterns of BEL1 and SHOOT 
MERISTEMLESS (STM) expression within the inflorescence meristem suggest a role 
for the BEL1-STM complex in maintaining the indeterminacy of the inflorescence 
meristem.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.010161
PMCID: PMC139464
PMID: 11701881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
