---
pmid: '10842192'
title: Increased oxidative stress with gene alteration in urinary bladder urothelium
  after the Chernobyl accident.
authors:
- Romanenko A
- Morimura K
- Wanibuchi H
- Salim EI
- Kinoshita A
- Kaneko M
- Vozianov A
- Fukushima S
journal: Int J Cancer
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/(sici)1097-0215(20000615)86:6<790::aid-ijc6>3.0.co;2-q
---

# Increased oxidative stress with gene alteration in urinary bladder urothelium after the Chernobyl accident.
**Authors:** Romanenko A, Morimura K, Wanibuchi H, Salim EI, Kinoshita A, Kaneko M, Vozianov A, Fukushima S
**Journal:** Int J Cancer (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1002/(sici)1097-0215(20000615)86:6<790::aid-ijc6>3.0.co;2-q](https://doi.org/10.1002/(sici)1097-0215(20000615)86:6<790::aid-ijc6>3.0.co;2-q)

## Abstract

1. Int J Cancer. 2000 Jun 15;86(6):790-8. doi: 
10.1002/(sici)1097-0215(20000615)86:6<790::aid-ijc6>3.0.co;2-q.

Increased oxidative stress with gene alteration in urinary bladder urothelium 
after the Chernobyl accident.

Romanenko A(1), Morimura K, Wanibuchi H, Salim EI, Kinoshita A, Kaneko M, 
Vozianov A, Fukushima S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Institute of Urology and Nephrology, Academy of 
Medical Science of Ukraine, Kiev, Ukraine.

We have previously shown that bladder urothelium of people living in the 
cesium-137 ((137)Cs)-contaminated areas of Ukraine demonstrates accumulation of 
stable p53 and p53 mutational inactivation, preferentially through G:C to A:T 
transition mutations at CpG dinucleotides, with a codon 245 hot spot. In the 
present study, we analyzed immuno-histochemically the relationship between 
oxidative stress markers and over-expression of p53 and H-ras in urinary bladder 
urothelium from 42 men with benign prostatic hyperplasia. Bladder mapping 
biopsies were obtained from 15 patients from a highly radiocontaminated area 
(group I), 14 patients from the less contaminated city of Kiev (group II) and 13 
patients as a control group from "clean" (without radiocontamination) areas of 
Ukraine (group III). Irradiation cystitis with multiple foci of severe dysplasia 
and carcinoma in situ were observed in 15 of 15 (100%, group I) and 9 of 14 
(64%, group II) cases, with 4 small transitional-cell carcinomas incidentally 
detected in groups I and II. Markedly elevated levels of inducible nitric oxide 
synthase (iNOS), cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) and 8-hydroxy-2;-deoxyguanosine 
(8-OHdG) were noted in these bladder urothelial lesions from groups I and II, 
accompanied by strong over-expression of p53 and less H-ras expression. These 
findings support the hypothesis that iNOS, COX-2 and 8-OHdG in bladder 
urothelium are induced by long-term exposure to low-dose radiation with a close 
relationship to p53 over-expression that could predispose to bladder 
carcinogenesis.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/(sici)1097-0215(20000615)86:6<790::aid-ijc6>3.0.co;2-q
PMID: 10842192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
