---
pmid: '17038317'
title: Ack1 mediates Cdc42-dependent cell migration and signaling to p130Cas.
authors:
- Modzelewska K
- Newman LP
- Desai R
- Keely PJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M604342200
---

# Ack1 mediates Cdc42-dependent cell migration and signaling to p130Cas.
**Authors:** Modzelewska K, Newman LP, Desai R, Keely PJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M604342200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M604342200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Dec 8;281(49):37527-35. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M604342200. Epub
2006  Oct 12.

Ack1 mediates Cdc42-dependent cell migration and signaling to p130Cas.

Modzelewska K(1), Newman LP, Desai R, Keely PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology Program, 
University of Wisconsin Medical School, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

We previously showed that activation of the small GTPase Cdc42 promotes breast 
cell migration on a collagen matrix. Here we further define the signaling 
pathways that drive this response and show that Cdc42-mediated migration relies 
on the adaptor molecule p130(Cas). Activated Cdc42 enhanced p130(Cas) 
phosphorylation and its binding to Crk. Cdc42-driven migration and p130(Cas) 
phosphorylation were dependent on the Cdc42 effector Ack1 (activated 
Cdc42-associated kinase). Ack1 formed a signaling complex that also included 
Cdc42, p130(Cas), and Crk, formation of which was regulated by collagen 
stimulation. The interaction between Ack1 and p130(Cas) occurred through their 
respective SH3 domains, while the substrate domain of p130(Cas) was the major 
site of Ack1-dependent phosphorylation. Signaling through this complex is 
functionally relevant, because treatment with either p130(Cas) or Ack1 siRNA 
blocked Cdc42-induced migration. These results suggest that Cdc42 exerts its 
effects on cell migration in part through its effector Ack1, which regulates 
p130(Cas) signaling.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M604342200
PMID: 17038317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
