---
pmid: '15608638'
title: Loss of silent-chromatin looping and impaired imprinting of DLX5 in Rett syndrome.
authors:
- Horike S
- Cai S
- Miyano M
- Cheng JF
- Kohwi-Shigematsu T
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ng1491
---

# Loss of silent-chromatin looping and impaired imprinting of DLX5 in Rett syndrome.
**Authors:** Horike S, Cai S, Miyano M, Cheng JF, Kohwi-Shigematsu T
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1491](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1491)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 2005 Jan;37(1):31-40. doi: 10.1038/ng1491. Epub 2004 Dec 19.

Loss of silent-chromatin looping and impaired imprinting of DLX5 in Rett 
syndrome.

Horike S(1), Cai S, Miyano M, Cheng JF, Kohwi-Shigematsu T.

Author information:
(1)Life Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron 
Road, Mail Stop 84-171, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720, 
USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2005 Jan;37(1):10-1. doi: 10.1038/ng0105-10.

Mutations in MECP2 are associated with Rett syndrome, an X-linked 
neurodevelopmental disorder. To identify genes targeted by Mecp2, we sequenced 
100 in vivo Mecp2-binding sites in mouse brain. Several sequences mapped to an 
imprinted gene cluster on chromosome 6, including Dlx5 and Dlx6, whose 
transcription was roughly two times greater in brains of Mecp2-null mice 
compared with those of wild-type mice. The maternally expressed gene DLX5 showed 
a loss of imprinting in lymphoblastoid cells from individuals with Rett 
syndrome. Because Dlx5 regulates production of enzymes that synthesize 
gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), loss of imprinting of Dlx5 may alter GABAergic 
neuron activity in individuals with Rett syndrome. In mouse brain, Dlx5 
imprinting was relaxed, yet Mecp2-mediated silent-chromatin structure existed at 
the Dlx5-Dlx6 locus in brains of wild-type, but not Mecp2-null, mice. Mecp2 
targeted histone deacetylase 1 to a sharply defined, approximately 1-kb region 
at the Dlx5-Dlx6 locus and promoted repressive histone methylation at Lys9 at 
this site. Chromatin immunoprecipitation-combined loop assays showed that Mecp2 
mediated the silent chromatin-derived 11-kb chromatin loop at the Dlx5-Dlx6 
locus. This loop was absent in chromatin of brains of Mecp2-null mice, and 
Dlx5-Dlx6 interacted with far distant sequences, forming distinct active 
chromatin-associated loops. These results show that formation of a 
silent-chromatin loop is a new mechanism underlying gene regulation by Mecp2.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1491
PMID: 15608638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
