---
pmid: '2476436'
title: Analysis of inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor and a novel trypsin inhibitor, pre-alpha-trypsin
  inhibitor, from human plasma. Polypeptide chain stoichiometry and assembly by glycan.
authors:
- Enghild JJ
- Thøgersen IB
- Pizzo SV
- Salvesen G
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1989'
full_text_available: false
---

# Analysis of inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor and a novel trypsin inhibitor, pre-alpha-trypsin inhibitor, from human plasma. Polypeptide chain stoichiometry and assembly by glycan.
**Authors:** Enghild JJ, Thøgersen IB, Pizzo SV, Salvesen G
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1989)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1989 Sep 25;264(27):15975-81.

Analysis of inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor and a novel trypsin inhibitor, 
pre-alpha-trypsin inhibitor, from human plasma. Polypeptide chain stoichiometry 
and assembly by glycan.

Enghild JJ(1), Thøgersen IB, Pizzo SV, Salvesen G.

Author information:
(1)Pathology Department, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 
27710.

The polypeptide chain composition of protein material referred to in the 
literature as "inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor" was investigated. The material was 
found to consist of distinct proteins of 125,000 and 225,000 Da, each of which 
contained more than one polypeptide chain. The links that assemble each protein 
were found to be stable to various strong denaturants, but susceptible to 
treatment with trifluoromethanesulfonic acid or hyaluronidase, indicating a 
glycan nature. The 225,000-Da protein migrated with inter-alpha mobility on 
agarose gel electrophoresis and is designated inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor, 
whereas the 125,000-Da protein migrated with pre-alpha mobility, and we 
designate it pre-alpha-trypsin inhibitor. Analysis of the proteins, the 
separated chains, and proteolytic derivatives thereof revealed that each protein 
contained a single, identical, trypsin-inhibitory chain of 30,000 Da. 
Inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor contains noninhibitory heavy chains of 65,000 and 
70,000 Da, whereas pre-alpha-trypsin inhibitor contains a heavy chain of 90,000 
Da. Our data allow identification of several recently reported cDNA clones and 
clarify the confusion surrounding the composition of plasma proteins referred to 
as inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor.

PMID: 2476436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
