---
reference_id: PMID:12941630
title: The muscle integrin binding protein (MIBP) interacts with alpha7beta1 integrin and regulates cell adhesion and laminin matrix deposition.
authors:
- Li J
- Rao H
- Burkin D
- Kaufman SJ
- Wu C
journal: Dev Biol
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1016/s0012-1606(03)00304-x
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Binding Sites/genetics
- Carrier Proteins/metabolism
- Cell Adhesion/physiology
- Cell Differentiation
- Cell Line
- "Cytoskeletal Proteins/chemistry, metabolism"
- Extracellular Matrix/metabolism
- Fibronectins/metabolism
- Integrin alpha5beta1/metabolism
- "Integrins/genetics, metabolism"
- Laminin/metabolism
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Muscle Proteins/metabolism
- "Myoblasts/cytology, metabolism"
- Paxillin
- "Phosphoproteins/chemistry, metabolism"
- Phosphorylation
- Protein Binding
- Signal Transduction
- Tyrosine/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# The muscle integrin binding protein (MIBP) interacts with alpha7beta1 integrin and regulates cell adhesion and laminin matrix deposition.
**Authors:** Li J, Rao H, Burkin D, Kaufman SJ, Wu C
**Journal:** Dev Biol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0012-1606(03)00304-x](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0012-1606(03)00304-x)

## Content

1. Dev Biol. 2003 Sep 1;261(1):209-19. doi: 10.1016/s0012-1606(03)00304-x.

The muscle integrin binding protein (MIBP) interacts with alpha7beta1 integrin 
and regulates cell adhesion and laminin matrix deposition.

Li J(1), Rao H, Burkin D, Kaufman SJ, Wu C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

Integrins are alphabeta transmembrane receptors that function in key cellular 
processes, including cell adhesion, differentiation, and extracellular matrix 
deposition through interactions with extracellular, membrane, and cytoplasmic 
proteins. We previously identified and cloned a muscle beta1 integrin 
cytoplasmic binding protein termed MIBP and found that the expression level of 
MIBP is critical in the decision-making process of terminal myogenic 
differentiation. We report here that MIBP interacts with the alpha7beta1 
integrin but not the alpha5beta1 integrin in C2C12 myoblasts, suggesting an 
important role of integrin alpha chains in the regulation of the beta1-MIBP 
interaction. Furthermore, consistent with its selective binding activity toward 
the alpha7beta1 laminin receptor, we have found that overexpression of MIBP in 
C2C12 myoblasts resulted in a significant reduction of cell adhesion to laminin 
and inhibition of laminin matrix deposition. By contrast, neither cell adhesion 
to fibronectin nor fibronectin matrix deposition was significantly altered in 
cells overexpressing MIBP. Finally, we show that both the protein level and 
tyrosine phosphorylation of paxillin, a key signaling molecule involved in the 
cellular control of myogenic differentiation, are increased by MIBP. These 
results suggest that MIBP functions in the control of myogenic differentiation 
by regulating alpha7beta1 integrin-mediated cell interactions with laminin 
matrix and intracellular signaling through paxillin.

DOI: 10.1016/s0012-1606(03)00304-x
PMID: 12941630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]