---
pmid: '35914352'
title: NBR1 mediates autophagic degradation of IRF3 to negatively regulate type I
  interferon production.
authors:
- Cai Y
- Zhu Y
- Zheng J
- Zhang Y
- Chen W
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2022'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2022.07.043
---

# NBR1 mediates autophagic degradation of IRF3 to negatively regulate type I interferon production.
**Authors:** Cai Y, Zhu Y, Zheng J, Zhang Y, Chen W
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2022.07.043](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2022.07.043)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2022 Oct 1;623:140-147. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2022.07.043. Epub 2022 Jul 14.

NBR1 mediates autophagic degradation of IRF3 to negatively regulate type I 
interferon production.

Cai Y(1), Zhu Y(1), Zheng J(1), Zhang Y(1), Chen W(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Immunology, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, 
310058, People's Republic of China.
(2)Institute of Immunology, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, 
310058, People's Republic of China. Electronic address: chenwei566@zju.edu.cn.

In the setting of virus infection, autophagy regulates the synthesis of type I 
interferon (IFN) via multiple mechanisms to prevent adverse overreaction. 
Interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 3, the dominant transcriptional factor of 
type I IFN, can be degraded via autophagy-lysosomal pathway. However, the exact 
regulatory mechanism is not yet well elucidated. IRF3 was targeted into 
autophagosome by interacting with cargo receptors including p62, NDP52 and NBR1. 
The recent studies have reported the mechanism of p62 and NDP52 sequestrating 
IRF3. This work aims to investigate the role of NBR1 in the process of IRF3 
degradation. We found that blocking autophagy via ATG3/ATG7 knockout and 
chemical inhibitors both resulted in the accumulation of IRF3 protein and 
increased synthesis of type I IFN, while enhancing autophagy activity led to 
more obvious clearance of IRF3 in HEK293T cells infected with Sendai virus 
(SeV). Our data suggested that NBR1 bound both unphosphorylated and 
phosphorylated IRF3 through its ubiquitin-associated domain. Meanwhile, viral 
infection elevated the expression of NBR1, which sequentially formed a negative 
feedback loop to promote IRF3 degradation and hence optimized the type I IFN 
signaling. This study expands the knowledge of molecular mechanisms regulating 
the IRF3 stability and function during viral infection.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2022.07.043
PMID: 35914352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
