---
pmid: '20133804'
title: A role for FKBP52 in Tau protein function.
authors:
- Chambraud B
- Sardin E
- Giustiniani J
- Dounane O
- Schumacher M
- Goedert M
- Baulieu EE
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2010'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2823896
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0914957107
---

# A role for FKBP52 in Tau protein function.
**Authors:** Chambraud B, Sardin E, Giustiniani J, Dounane O, Schumacher M, Goedert M, Baulieu EE
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0914957107](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0914957107)
**PMC:** [PMC2823896](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2823896/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Feb 9;107(6):2658-63. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0914957107. Epub 2010 Jan 25.

A role for FKBP52 in Tau protein function.

Chambraud B(1), Sardin E, Giustiniani J, Dounane O, Schumacher M, Goedert M, 
Baulieu EE.

Author information:
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale Unité Mixte de 
Recherche 788, Université Paris XI, Kremlin Bicêtre 94276, France.

Tau is a microtubule-associated protein, which is widely expressed in the 
central nervous system, predominantly in neurons, where it regulates microtubule 
dynamics, axonal transport, and neurite outgrowth. The aberrant assembly of Tau 
is the hallmark of several human neurodegenerative diseases, collectively known 
as tauopathies. They include Alzheimer's disease, Pick's disease, progressive 
supranuclear palsy, and frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to 
chromosome 17. Several abnormalities in Tau, such as hyperphosphorylation and 
aggregation, alter its function and are central to the pathogenic process. Here, 
we describe biochemical and functional interactions between FKBP52 and Tau. 
FKBP52 is a member of the FKBP (FK506-binding protein) family that comprises 
intracellular protein effectors of immunosuppressive drugs (such as FK506 and 
rapamycin). We found that FKBP52, which is abundant in brain, binds directly and 
specifically to Tau, especially in its hyperphosphorylated form. The relevance 
of this observation was confirmed by the colocalization of both proteins in the 
distal part of the axons of cortical neurons and by the antagonistic effect of 
FKBP52 on the ability of Tau to promote microtubule assembly. Overexpression of 
FKBP52 in differentiated PC12 cells prevented the accumulation of Tau and 
resulted in reduced neurite length. Taken together, these findings indicate a 
role for FKBP52 in Tau function and may help to decipher and modulate the events 
involved in Tau-induced neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0914957107
PMCID: PMC2823896
PMID: 20133804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Tau is a microtubule-associated protein, which is widely expressed in the central nervous system, predominantly in neurons, where it regulates microtubule dynamics, axonal transport, and neurite outgrowth. The aberrant assembly of Tau is the hallmark of several human neurodegenerative diseases, collectively known as tauopathies. They include Alzheimer’s disease, Pick’s disease, progressive supranuclear palsy, and frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17. Several abnormalities in Tau, such as hyperphosphorylation and aggregation, alter its function and are central to the pathogenic process. Here, we describe biochemical and functional interactions between FKBP52 and Tau. FKBP52 is a member of the FKBP (FK506-binding protein) family that comprises intracellular protein effectors of immunosuppressive drugs (such as FK506 and rapamycin). We found that FKBP52, which is abundant in brain, binds directly and specifically to Tau, especially in its hyperphosphorylated form. The relevance of this observation was confirmed by the colocalization of both proteins in the distal part of the axons of cortical neurons and by the antagonistic effect of FKBP52 on the ability of Tau to promote microtubule assembly. Overexpression of FKBP52 in differentiated PC12 cells prevented the accumulation of Tau and resulted in reduced neurite length. Taken together, these findings indicate a role for FKBP52 in Tau function and may help to decipher and modulate the events involved in Tau-induced neurodegeneration.

Discussion

This newly discovered “anti-Tau” activity of FKBP52 leads us to re-examine the functions of this protein, which was originally identified and cloned as a modulator of hormone steroid receptors ( 8 , 23 ). FKPB52 is a multimodular protein, which includes a peptidyl prolyl isomerase (“rotamase”) segment, the function of which is blocked by FK506 ( 24 ); rapamycin; and some related nonimmunosuppressive derivatives. There is a noteworthy structural similarity between FKBP52 and Pin1: both proteins have peptidyl–prolyl isomerase (PPIase) activity and a specific protein–protein interaction domain ( 7 ). Because the Pin1 PPIase activity restores the function of phosphorylated Tau protein in a model of Alzheimer’s disease ( 7 ), the interaction observed between Tau and FKBP52 may have implications for the pathogenesis of the tauopathies, including Alzheimer’s disease. It must be remembered that, unlike FKBP12 ( 25 ), FKBP52 does not bind calcineurin ( 26 ), and thus FKBP52 does not mediate the immunosuppressant capacity of FK506. Therefore, the pharmacological modulation of the rotamase activity of FKBP52 by nonimmunosuppressive FK506/rapamycin derivatives may offer a unique approach for preventing/reducing the pathogenic effects of misfolded Tau.

In addition to its peptidyl–prolyl isomerase activity, FKBP52 serves as a molecular chaperone. This activity depends on its tetratricopeptide repeat domain ( 27 ) to which the molecular chaperone HSP90 and other proteins bind. It has already been noted that chaperone–cochaperone protein complexes play a critical role in neurodegenerative diseases characterized by Tau accumulation ( 28 ). We now report that FKBP52 could decrease the function/accumulation of Tau and therefore suggest its possible involvement in these described cochaperone systems ( 28 ).

Our results establish a role of FKBP52 in Tau function. The interaction described in this report deserves to be studied further rapidly because effective pharmacological targeting of FKBP52 is likely to become a reality in the near future.
