---
pmid: '31981475'
title: The G3BP1-Family-USP10 Deubiquitinase Complex Rescues Ubiquitinated 40S Subunits
  of Ribosomes Stalled in Translation from Lysosomal Degradation.
authors:
- Meyer C
- Garzia A
- Morozov P
- Molina H
- Tuschl T
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2019.12.024
---

# The G3BP1-Family-USP10 Deubiquitinase Complex Rescues Ubiquitinated 40S Subunits of Ribosomes Stalled in Translation from Lysosomal Degradation.
**Authors:** Meyer C, Garzia A, Morozov P, Molina H, Tuschl T
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2019.12.024](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2019.12.024)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2020 Mar 19;77(6):1193-1205.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2019.12.024. 
Epub 2020 Jan 24.

The G3BP1-Family-USP10 Deubiquitinase Complex Rescues Ubiquitinated 40S Subunits 
of Ribosomes Stalled in Translation from Lysosomal Degradation.

Meyer C(1), Garzia A(1), Morozov P(1), Molina H(2), Tuschl T(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for RNA Molecular Biology, The Rockefeller University, 1230 York 
Ave, Box 186, New York, NY 10065, USA.
(2)Proteomics Resource Center, The Rockefeller University, 1230 York Ave, Box 
105, New York, NY 10065, USA.
(3)Laboratory for RNA Molecular Biology, The Rockefeller University, 1230 York 
Ave, Box 186, New York, NY 10065, USA. Electronic address: 
ttuschl@rockefeller.edu.

Ribosome-associated quality control (RQC) purges aberrant mRNAs and nascent 
polypeptides in a multi-step molecular process initiated by the E3 ligase ZNF598 
through sensing of ribosomes collided at aberrant mRNAs and monoubiquitination 
of distinct small ribosomal subunit proteins. We show that G3BP1-family-USP10 
complexes are required for deubiquitination of RPS2, RPS3, and RPS10 to rescue 
modified 40S subunits from programmed degradation. Knockout of USP10 or G3BP1 
family proteins increased lysosomal ribosomal degradation and perturbed 
ribosomal subunit stoichiometry, both of which were rescued by a single K214R 
substitution of RPS3. While the majority of RPS2 and RPS3 monoubiquitination 
resulted from ZNF598-dependent sensing of ribosome collisions initiating RQC, 
another minor pathway contributed to their monoubiquitination. G3BP1 family 
proteins have long been considered RNA-binding proteins, however, our results 
identified 40S subunits and associated mRNAs as their predominant targets, a 
feature shared by stress granules to which G3BP1 family proteins localize under 
stress.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2019.12.024
PMID: 31981475 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.
