---
pmid: '11567617'
title: The bHLH transcription factor Olig2 promotes oligodendrocyte differentiation
  in collaboration with Nkx2.2.
authors:
- Zhou Q
- Choi G
- Anderson DJ
journal: Neuron
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(01)00414-7
---

# The bHLH transcription factor Olig2 promotes oligodendrocyte differentiation in collaboration with Nkx2.2.
**Authors:** Zhou Q, Choi G, Anderson DJ
**Journal:** Neuron (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0896-6273(01)00414-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0896-6273(01)00414-7)

## Abstract

1. Neuron. 2001 Sep 13;31(5):791-807. doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(01)00414-7.

The bHLH transcription factor Olig2 promotes oligodendrocyte differentiation in 
collaboration with Nkx2.2.

Zhou Q(1), Choi G, Anderson DJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biology 216-76, California Institute of Technology, 1201 E. 
California Boulevard, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA.

Olig2, a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor, is expressed in a 
restricted domain of the spinal cord ventricular zone that sequentially 
generates motoneurons and oligodendrocytes. Just prior to oligo-dendrocyte 
precursor formation, the domains of Olig2 and Nkx2.2 expression switch from 
being mutually exclusive to overlapping, and Neurogenins1 and 2 are extinguished 
within this region. Coexpression of Olig2 with Nkx2.2 in the spinal cord 
promotes ectopic and precocious oligodendrocyte differentiation. Both proteins 
function as transcriptional repressors in this assay. This effect is blocked by 
forced expression of Neurogenin1. By contrast, misexpression of Olig2 alone 
derepresses Neurogenins and promotes motoneuron differentiation. Olig2 therefore 
functions sequentially in motoneuron and oligodendrocyte fate specification. 
This dual action is enabled by spatio-temporal changes in the expression domains 
of other transcription factors with which Olig2 functionally interacts.

DOI: 10.1016/s0896-6273(01)00414-7
PMID: 11567617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
