---
pmid: '10919675'
title: Dnmt1N/+ reduces the net growth rate and multiplicity of intestinal adenomas
  in C57BL/6-multiple intestinal neoplasia (Min)/+ mice independently of p53 but demonstrates
  strong synergy with the modifier of Min 1(AKR) resistance allele.
authors:
- Cormier RT
- Dove WF
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
---

# Dnmt1N/+ reduces the net growth rate and multiplicity of intestinal adenomas in C57BL/6-multiple intestinal neoplasia (Min)/+ mice independently of p53 but demonstrates strong synergy with the modifier of Min 1(AKR) resistance allele.
**Authors:** Cormier RT, Dove WF
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2000)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Res. 2000 Jul 15;60(14):3965-70.

Dnmt1N/+ reduces the net growth rate and multiplicity of intestinal adenomas in 
C57BL/6-multiple intestinal neoplasia (Min)/+ mice independently of p53 but 
demonstrates strong synergy with the modifier of Min 1(AKR) resistance allele.

Cormier RT(1), Dove WF.

Author information:
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin, Madison 
53706, USA.

Altered patterns of the 5-cytosine methylation of genomic DNA are associated 
with the development of a wide range of human cancers. We have studied the 
mechanisms and genetic pathways by which a targeted heterozygous deficiency in 
the murine 5-cytosine DNA methyltransferase gene (Dnmt1(N/+)) diminishes 
intestinal tumorigenesis in C57BL/6-multiple intestinal neoplasia (Min)/+ mice. 
We found that Dnmt1(N/+) retards the net growth rate of intestinal adenomas and 
reduces tumor multiplicity by approximately 50%. This tumor resistance affects 
the entire intestinal tract and is independent of the status of modifier of Min 
1 and p53, two loci that have been found to confer strong resistance to 
Min-induced neoplasia Interestingly, Dnmt/(N/+) and modifier of Min 1 resistance 
interact synergistically, together virtually eliminating tumor incidence. This 
finding may provide an insight into potential combinatorial therapeutic 
approaches for treating human colon cancer.

PMID: 10919675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
