---
pmid: '25014355'
title: 'Identification and characterization of membrane androgen receptors in the
  ZIP9 zinc transporter subfamily: II. Role of human ZIP9 in testosterone-induced
  prostate and breast cancer cell apoptosis.'
authors:
- Thomas P
- Pang Y
- Dong J
- Berg AH
journal: Endocrinology
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4197988
doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1201
---

# Identification and characterization of membrane androgen receptors in the ZIP9 zinc transporter subfamily: II. Role of human ZIP9 in testosterone-induced prostate and breast cancer cell apoptosis.
**Authors:** Thomas P, Pang Y, Dong J, Berg AH
**Journal:** Endocrinology (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1210/en.2014-1201](https://doi.org/10.1210/en.2014-1201)
**PMC:** [PMC4197988](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4197988/)

## Abstract

1. Endocrinology. 2014 Nov;155(11):4250-65. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1201. Epub 2014 
Jul 11.

Identification and characterization of membrane androgen receptors in the ZIP9 
zinc transporter subfamily: II. Role of human ZIP9 in testosterone-induced 
prostate and breast cancer cell apoptosis.

Thomas P(1), Pang Y, Dong J, Berg AH.

Author information:
(1)Marine Science Institute (P.T., Y.P., J.D., A.H.B.), The University of Texas 
at Austin, Port Aransas, Texas 78373; and Department of Science and Technology 
(A.H.B.), Örebro University, Örebro, Sweden SE-70182.

Comment in
    Endocrinology. 2014 Nov;155(11):4120-3. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1749.
    J Urol. 2015 Jun;193(6):2147. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2015.03.006.

Recently, we discovered a cDNA in teleost ovarian follicle cells belonging to 
the zinc transporter ZIP9 subfamily (SLC39A9) encoding a protein with 
characteristics of a membrane androgen receptor (mAR). Here, we demonstrate that 
human ZIP9 expressed in MDA-MB-468 breast cancer cells and stably overexpressed 
in human prostate cancer PC-3 cells (PC-3-ZIP9) also displays the ligand binding 
and signaling characteristics of a specific, high-affinity mAR. Testosterone 
treatment of MDA-MB-468 and PC-3-ZIP9 cells caused activation of G proteins and 
second messenger pathways as well as increases in intracellular free zinc 
concentrations that were accompanied by induction of apoptosis. 
[1,2,6,7-(3)H]-testosterone binding and these responses were abrogated in 
MDA-MB-468 cells after ZIP9 small interfering RNA (siRNA) treatment and absent 
in PC-3 cells transfected with empty vector, confirming that ZIP9 functions as 
an mAR. Testosterone treatment caused up-regulation of proapoptotic genes Bax 
(Bcl-2-associated X protein), p53 (tumor protein p53), and JNK (c-Jun N-terminal 
kinases) in both cell lines and increased expression of Bax, Caspase 3, and 
cytochrome C proteins. Treatment with a zinc chelator or a MAPK inhibitor 
blocked testosterone-induced increases in Bax, p53, and JNK mRNA expression. The 
results suggest that both androgen signaling and zinc transporter functions of 
ZIP9 mediate testosterone promotion of apoptosis. ZIP9 is widely expressed in 
human tissues and up-regulated in malignant breast and prostate tissues, 
suggesting that it is a potential therapeutic target for treating breast and 
prostate cancers. These results provide the first evidence for a mechanism 
mediated by a single protein through which steroid and zinc signaling pathways 
interact to regulate physiological functions in mammalian cells.

DOI: 10.1210/en.2014-1201
PMCID: PMC4197988
PMID: 25014355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
