---
pmid: '10825192'
title: Mechanism of caffeine-induced checkpoint override in fission yeast.
authors:
- Moser BA
- Brondello JM
- Baber-Furnari B
- Russell P
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2000'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC85796
doi: 10.1128/MCB.20.12.4288-4294.2000
---

# Mechanism of caffeine-induced checkpoint override in fission yeast.
**Authors:** Moser BA, Brondello JM, Baber-Furnari B, Russell P
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.20.12.4288-4294.2000](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.20.12.4288-4294.2000)
**PMC:** [PMC85796](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC85796/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jun;20(12):4288-94. doi: 10.1128/MCB.20.12.4288-4294.2000.

Mechanism of caffeine-induced checkpoint override in fission yeast.

Moser BA(1), Brondello JM, Baber-Furnari B, Russell P.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, The Scripps Research 
Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Mitotic checkpoints restrain the onset of mitosis (M) when DNA is incompletely 
replicated or damaged. These checkpoints are conserved between the fission yeast 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe and mammals. In both types of organisms, the 
methylxanthine caffeine overrides the synthesis (S)-M checkpoint that couples 
mitosis to completion of DNA S phase. The molecular target of caffeine was 
sought in fission yeast. Caffeine prevented activation of Cds1 and 
phosphorylation of Chk1, two protein kinases that enforce the S-M checkpoint 
triggered by hydroxyurea. Caffeine did not inhibit these kinases in vitro but 
did inhibit Rad3, a kinase that regulates Cds1 and Chk1. In accordance with this 
finding, caffeine also overrode the G(2)-M DNA damage checkpoint that requires 
Rad3 function. Rad3 coprecipitated with Cds1 expressed at endogenous amounts, a 
finding that supports the hypothesis that Rad3 is involved in direct activation 
of Cds1.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.20.12.4288-4294.2000
PMCID: PMC85796
PMID: 10825192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Mitotic checkpoints restrain the onset of mitosis (M) when DNA is incompletely replicated or damaged. These checkpoints are conserved between the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe and mammals. In both types of organisms, the methylxanthine caffeine overrides the synthesis (S)-M checkpoint that couples mitosis to completion of DNA S phase. The molecular target of caffeine was sought in fission yeast. Caffeine prevented activation of Cds1 and phosphorylation of Chk1, two protein kinases that enforce the S-M checkpoint triggered by hydroxyurea. Caffeine did not inhibit these kinases in vitro but did inhibit Rad3, a kinase that regulates Cds1 and Chk1. In accordance with this finding, caffeine also overrode the G 2 -M DNA damage checkpoint that requires Rad3 function. Rad3 coprecipitated with Cds1 expressed at endogenous amounts, a finding that supports the hypothesis that Rad3 is involved in direct activation of Cds1.

DISCUSSION

Compounds that override checkpoints have significant experimental utility and potential therapeutic applications. Caffeine was the first drug reported to override checkpoints; in fact, the use of caffeine to induce mitosis with unreplicated DNA predates the formal genetic definition of DNA structure checkpoints ( 33 ). More recently, caffeine was used to investigate checkpoints in the Xenopus oocyte system and to potentiate the radiation sensitivity of p53-deficient cells ( 10 , 16 , 41 ). These studies demonstrate the continued experimental usefulness of caffeine. Therefore, it is important to understand how caffeine overrides checkpoints. In this report, we have applied the genetic advantages of fission yeast in an attempt to define the molecular target of caffeine that is relevant to checkpoints. Our studies provide strong evidence that caffeine targets Rad3.

Caffeine overrides both S-M DNA replication and G 2 -M DNA damage checkpoints in S. pombe . Our studies demonstrated that caffeine overrides the S-M checkpoint that is normally enforced by Cds1 and the G 2 -M DNA damage checkpoint enforced by Chk1. Two general mechanisms of checkpoint override can be envisioned. One mechanism does not interfere with checkpoint signaling. Instead, it causes mitotic initiation in the presence of a checkpoint signal. For example, a compound that inhibited Wee1 and Mik1 would cause mitotic initiation despite an intact S-M replication checkpoint signal ( 27 ). The alternative mechanism is to abrogate the checkpoint signal by blocking the activity of a checkpoint protein. Cds1 activation is the S-M checkpoint signal most proximal to the mitotic control proteins. We observed that Cds1 activity is lost very rapidly upon addition of caffeine to HU-treated cells. Likewise, we found that caffeine rapidly induced the disappearance of the phosphorylated form of Chk1 observed in cds1 cells treated with HU. These finding demonstrated that caffeine specifically abrogates checkpoint signal as opposed to modulating the activity of Cdc2 or the proteins that control Cdc2 activity.
