---
reference_id: PMID:16844119
title: Hepatitis C virus non-structural protein NS5A interacts with FKBP38 and inhibits apoptosis in Huh7 hepatoma cells.
authors:
- Wang J
- Tong W
- Zhang X
- Chen L
- Yi Z
- Pan T
- Hu Y
- Xiang L
- Yuan Z
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2006.07.002
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Hepatitis C virus non-structural protein NS5A interacts with FKBP38 and inhibits apoptosis in Huh7 hepatoma cells.
**Authors:** Wang J, Tong W, Zhang X, Chen L, Yi Z, Pan T, Hu Y, Xiang L, Yuan Z
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2006.07.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2006.07.002)

## Content

1. FEBS Lett. 2006 Aug 7;580(18):4392-400. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2006.07.002.
Epub  2006 Jul 17.

Hepatitis C virus non-structural protein NS5A interacts with FKBP38 and inhibits
apoptosis in Huh7 hepatoma cells.

Wang J(1), Tong W, Zhang X, Chen L, Yi Z, Pan T, Hu Y, Xiang L, Yuan Z.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology, Shanghai Medical College,
Institutes of Medical Microbiology and Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University,
P.O. Box 228, 138 Yi Xue Yuan Road, Shanghai 200032, PR China.

Hepatitis C virus non-structural protein NS5A plays an important role in viral
replication and various cellular events. To gain further insight into the
function of NS5A, we screened a human fetal liver cDNA library for its
interacting proteins using the yeast two-hybrid system. FKBP38, a 38 kDa
immunosuppressant FK506-binding protein, was identified and its interaction with
NS5A was confirmed by both in vitro and in vivo. The interaction was mapped to
the amino acids 148-236 of NS5A containing a BH domain (Bcl-2 homology domain).
Besides, both NS5A and FKBP38 were found to localize in mitochondria and
endoplasmic reticulum. Moreover, NS5A stably expressing Huh7 hepatoma cells
showed more resistance to apoptosis and such inhibition of apoptosis could
specifically be abrogated by depletion of FKBP38 using RNA interference. These
results indicate that HCV NS5A inhibits apoptosis through interaction with
FKBP38.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2006.07.002
PMID: 16844119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]