---
pmid: '12403464'
title: Two proteins that form a complex are required for 7-methylguanosine modification
  of yeast tRNA.
authors:
- Alexandrov A
- Martzen MR
- Phizicky EM
journal: RNA
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1370335
doi: 10.1017/s1355838202024019
---

# Two proteins that form a complex are required for 7-methylguanosine modification of yeast tRNA.
**Authors:** Alexandrov A, Martzen MR, Phizicky EM
**Journal:** RNA (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1017/s1355838202024019](https://doi.org/10.1017/s1355838202024019)
**PMC:** [PMC1370335](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1370335/)

## Abstract

1. RNA. 2002 Oct;8(10):1253-66. doi: 10.1017/s1355838202024019.

Two proteins that form a complex are required for 7-methylguanosine modification 
of yeast tRNA.

Alexandrov A(1), Martzen MR, Phizicky EM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Rochester School of 
Medicine, New York 14642, USA.

7-methylguanosine (m7G) modification of tRNA occurs widely in eukaryotes and 
bacteria, is nearly always found at position 46, and is one of the few 
modifications that confers a positive charge to the base. Screening of a 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae genomic library of purified GST-ORF fusion proteins 
reveals two previously uncharacterized proteins that copurify with m7G 
methyltransferase activity on pre-tRNA(Phe). ORF YDL201w encodes Trm8, a protein 
that is highly conserved in prokaryotes and eukaryotes and that contains an 
S-adenosylmethionine binding domain. ORF YDR165w encodes Trm82, a less highly 
conserved protein containing putative WD40 repeats, which are often implicated 
in macromolecular interactions. Neither protein has significant sequence 
similarity to yeast Abd1, which catalyzes m7G modification of the 5' cap of 
mRNA, other than the methyltransferase motif shared by Trm8 and Abd1. Several 
lines of evidence indicate that both Trm8 and Trm82 proteins are required for 
tRNA m7G-methyltransferase activity: Extracts derived from strains lacking 
either gene have undetectable m7G methyltransferase activity, RNA from strains 
lacking either gene have much reduced m7G, and coexpression of both proteins is 
required to overproduce activity. Aniline cleavage mapping shows that Trm8/Trm82 
proteins modify pre-tRNAPhe at G46, the site that is modified in vivo. Trm8 and 
Trm82 proteins form a complex, as affinity purification of Trm8 protein causes 
copurification of Trm82 protein in approximate equimolar yield. This functional 
two-protein family appears to be retained in eukaryotes, as expression of both 
corresponding human proteins, METTL1 and WDR4, is required for 
m7G-methyltransferase activity.

DOI: 10.1017/s1355838202024019
PMCID: PMC1370335
PMID: 12403464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
