---
pmid: '2324105'
title: Separate nuclear genes encode sarcomere-specific and ubiquitous human mitochondrial
  creatine kinase isoenzymes.
authors:
- Haas RC
- Strauss AW
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1990'
full_text_available: false
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Separate nuclear genes encode sarcomere-specific and ubiquitous human mitochondrial creatine kinase isoenzymes.
**Authors:** Haas RC, Strauss AW
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1990)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1990 Apr 25;265(12):6921-7.

Separate nuclear genes encode sarcomere-specific and ubiquitous human 
mitochondrial creatine kinase isoenzymes.

Haas RC(1), Strauss AW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
Missouri 63110.

Creatine kinase (EC 2.7.3.2) isoenzymes play a central role in energy 
transduction. Nuclear genes encode creatine kinase subunits from muscle, brain, 
and mitochondria (MtCK). We have recently isolated a cDNA clone encoding MtCK 
from a human placental library which is expressed in many human tissues (Haas, 
R. C., Korenfeld, C., Zhang, Z., Perryman, B., Roman, D., and Strauss, A. W. 
(1989) J. Biol. Chem. 264, 2890-2897). With nontranslated and coding region 
probes, we demonstrated by RNA blot analysis that the MtCK mRNA in sarcomeric 
muscle is distinct from this placenta-derived, ubiquitous MtCK cDNA. To compare 
these different mRNAs, a MtCK cDNA clone was isolated from a human heart library 
and characterized by complete nucleotide sequence analysis. The chemically 
determined NH2-terminal 26 residues of purified human heart MtCK protein are 
identical to those predicted from this sarcomeric MtCK cDNA. The human 
sarcomeric and ubiquitous cDNAs share 73% nucleotide and 80% predicted amino 
acid sequence identities, but have less than 66% identity with the cytosolic 
creatine kinases. The sarcomeric MtCK cDNA encodes a 419-amino acid protein 
which contains a 39-residue transit peptide essential for mitochondrial import. 
Primer extension analysis predicts a 348-base pair 5'-nontranslated region. RNA 
blot analysis demonstrates that heart-derived MtCK is sarcomere-specific, but 
the ubiquitous MtCK mRNA is expressed in most tissues. Thus, separate nuclear 
genes encode two closely related, tissue-specific isoenzymes of MtCK. Our 
finding that multiple genes encode different mitochondrial protein isoenzymes is 
rare.

PMID: 2324105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
