---
pmid: '10849448'
title: Transformation of myeloid leukemia cells to cytokine independence by Bcr-Abl
  is suppressed by kinase-defective Hck.
authors:
- Lionberger JM
- Wilson MB
- Smithgall TE
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.C000126200
---

# Transformation of myeloid leukemia cells to cytokine independence by Bcr-Abl is suppressed by kinase-defective Hck.
**Authors:** Lionberger JM, Wilson MB, Smithgall TE
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.C000126200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.C000126200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jun 16;275(24):18581-5. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C000126200.

Transformation of myeloid leukemia cells to cytokine independence by Bcr-Abl is 
suppressed by kinase-defective Hck.

Lionberger JM(1), Wilson MB, Smithgall TE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Pittsburgh School of 
Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15261, USA.

Bcr-Abl is the constitutively active protein-tyrosine kinase expressed as a 
result of the Philadelphia translocation in chronic myelogenous leukemia. 
Bcr-Abl is coupled to many of the same signaling pathways normally regulated by 
hematopoietic cytokines. Recent work shows that Hck, a member of the Src 
tyrosine kinase family with myeloid-restricted expression, associates with and 
is activated by Bcr-Abl. Here we investigated the mechanism of Hck interaction 
with Bcr-Abl and the requirement for Hck activation in Bcr-Abl transformation 
signaling. Binding studies demonstrated that the Hck SH3 and SH2 domains are 
sufficient for interaction with Bcr-Abl in vitro. Hck binding localizes to the 
Abl SH2, SH3, and kinase domains as well as the distal portion of the C-terminal 
tail. To address the requirement for endogenous Src family kinase activation in 
Bcr-Abl signaling, a kinase-defective mutant of Hck was stably expressed in the 
cytokine-dependent myeloid leukemia cell line DAGM. Kinase-defective Hck 
dramatically suppressed Bcr-Abl-induced outgrowth of these cells in the absence 
of cytokine compared with a control cell line expressing beta-galactosidase. In 
contrast, kinase-defective Hck did not affect cell proliferation in response to 
interleukin-3, suggesting that the effect is specific for Bcr-Abl. These data 
show that Hck interacts with Bcr-Abl through a complex mechanism involving 
kinase-dependent and -independent components and that interaction with Hck or 
other Src family members is essential for transformation signaling by Bcr-Abl.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.C000126200
PMID: 10849448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
