---
pmid: '19897600'
title: Role of insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 5 (IGFBP5) in organismal
  and pancreatic beta-cell growth.
authors:
- Gleason CE
- Ning Y
- Cominski TP
- Gupta R
- Kaestner KH
- Pintar JE
- Birnbaum MJ
journal: Mol Endocrinol
year: '2010'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2802899
doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0167
---

# Role of insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 5 (IGFBP5) in organismal and pancreatic beta-cell growth.
**Authors:** Gleason CE, Ning Y, Cominski TP, Gupta R, Kaestner KH, Pintar JE, Birnbaum MJ
**Journal:** Mol Endocrinol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1210/me.2009-0167](https://doi.org/10.1210/me.2009-0167)
**PMC:** [PMC2802899](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2802899/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Jan;24(1):178-92. doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0167. Epub 2009
Nov  6.

Role of insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 5 (IGFBP5) in organismal and
pancreatic beta-cell growth.

Gleason CE(1), Ning Y, Cominski TP, Gupta R, Kaestner KH, Pintar JE, Birnbaum
MJ.

Author information:
(1)University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Department of Medicine,
Institute for Diabetes, Obesity, and Metabolism, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104, USA.

A family of IGF-binding proteins (IGFBP) exerts biological actions both
dependent on and independent of IGF-I. A major effector of the insulin/IGF-I
signaling pathway, the serine/threonine protein kinase Akt, mediates cellular
processes such as glucose uptake, protein synthesis, cell survival, and growth.
IGF-I is required for normal organismal growth, and in the pancreatic beta-cell,
the insulin/IGF-I signaling pathway is critical for normal and adaptive
maintenance of beta-cell mass. Expression of myrAkt1, an activated form of Akt,
in the endocrine pancreas drives beta-cell expansion through dramatic increases
in both islet and beta-cell size and number. Herein we present a comparative
expression profiling of myrAkt1 transgenic islets that demonstrates the
increased abundance of transcripts encoding proteins associated with growth,
suppression of apoptosis, RNA processing, and metabolism. Although IGFBP5 is
identified as a gene induced by Akt1 activation in the beta-cell, Igfbp5
expression is not necessary for myrAkt1 to augment beta-cell size or mass in
vivo. However, in the absence of Igfbp5, mice demonstrate an increase in size
and mild glucose intolerance. This is accentuated during diet-induced obesity,
when Igfbp5-deficient mice have increased adiposity compared with wild-type mice
on the same diet. These studies reveal a novel role for Igfbp5 in the control of
growth and metabolism.

DOI: 10.1210/me.2009-0167
PMCID: PMC2802899
PMID: 19897600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

A family of IGF-binding proteins (IGFBP) exerts biological actions both dependent on and independent of IGF-I. A major effector of the insulin/IGF-I signaling pathway, the serine/threonine protein kinase Akt, mediates cellular processes such as glucose uptake, protein synthesis, cell survival, and growth. IGF-I is required for normal organismal growth, and in the pancreatic β-cell, the insulin/IGF-I signaling pathway is critical for normal and adaptive maintenance of β-cell mass. Expression of myrAkt1, an activated form of Akt, in the endocrine pancreas drives β-cell expansion through dramatic increases in both islet and β-cell size and number. Herein we present a comparative expression profiling of myrAkt1 transgenic islets that demonstrates the increased abundance of transcripts encoding proteins associated with growth, suppression of apoptosis, RNA processing, and metabolism. Although IGFBP5 is identified as a gene induced by Akt1 activation in the β-cell, Igfbp5 expression is not necessary for myrAkt1 to augment β-cell size or mass in vivo . However, in the absence of Igfbp5, mice demonstrate an increase in size and mild glucose intolerance. This is accentuated during diet-induced obesity, when Igfbp5-deficient mice have increased adiposity compared with wild-type mice on the same diet. These studies reveal a novel role for Igfbp5 in the control of growth and metabolism.

Discussion

Regulation of glucose homeostasis throughout life requires dynamic fluctuations in pancreatic β-cell mass. The endocrine organ achieves this plasticity through a careful balance of β-cell renewal and β-cell loss. The serine/threonine kinase Akt has been implicated as a critical factor linking diverse nutrient, growth factor, and incretin stimuli with processes related to β-cell mass expansion such as proliferation, hypertrophy, and cell survival. Importantly, the factors downstream of Akt1 that mediate these growth-related effects have not been defined completely. In this study, by assessing the gene expression profile of RIP-myrAkt1 TG islets, we identify potential targets and/or gene networks that might contribute to the effect of Akt1 activation on enhancing β-cell mass and/or function. We demonstrate that Akt1 activation induces gene networks with functions related to cell growth, inhibition of apoptosis, RNA processing, and metabolism. From this analysis, we also identify the IGFBP5 as a gene induced by Akt1 in the β-cell. We find that Igfbp5 deficiency does not prevent the effect of myrAkt1 on expansion of β-cell mass in vivo . However, IGFBP5 is important for regulation of postnatal growth and possibly glucose homeostasis.

Gene expression analysis identified genes with interesting functions that might contribute to the myrAkt1 TG phenotype. We decided to focus our efforts on IGFBP5, based on its induction in the array analyses and its purported effects on growth. IGFBP5 is a member of a family of six IGFBPs that bind to and modulate the activity of IGF-I and IGF-II ( 19 ). Both IGF-I and IGF-II are potent stimuli for pancreatic β-cell growth ( 25 ). In β-cell tissue culture lines, IGF-I potentiates the mitogenic effect of glucose ( 26 ). Overexpression of IGF-I in the β-cell protects them from streptozotocin-induced β-cell death ( 27 ). Furthermore, IGF-I mRNA increases rapidly in the area of the regenerating pancreas after 90% pancreatectomy ( 28 ). Lastly, Devedjian et al. ( 29 ) demonstrated that overexpression of IGF-II in the β-cell leads to a 3-fold increase in β-cell mass. Together, these data indicate that IGF-I can positively influence β-cell growth and development under various conditions. The IGFBPs have been postulated to modulate IGF activity by various mechanisms, including protecting IGFs from proteolytic degradation, targeting IGFs in serum to specific tissues, and regulating local IGF availability to receptors by sequestration in extracellular storage pools ( 19 ). There has been limited investigation into the effects of IGFBP on β-cell growth and/or function.

Many studies have demonstrated a role for IGFBP5 in promoting aspects of growth such as differentiation and proliferation in non-β-cell lines and tissues. For example, Yin et al. ( 30 ) report that endogenous IGFBP5 is important for maintaining bone cell survival and differentiation in human osteoblastic cells. Igfbp5 has also been identified by serial analysis of gene expression (SAGE) as an abundant transcript during cardiac development ( 31 ). The ability of IGFBP5 to regulate growth has been divided into both IGF-dependent and -independent effects. IGFBP5 stimulates proliferation of murine calvarial cells, a primary osteoblast cell line, independently of IGF-I ( 32 ). IGFBP5 expression is also up-regulated in various tumor sections, and cell lines such as pancreatic islet adenocarcinomas, thyroid carcinoma, and prostate and breast cancers ( 33 , 34 , 35 , 36 ).

IGF-I induces IGFBP5 expression in aortic and vascular smooth muscle cells. This induction is blocked by both LY294002 and rapamycin, suggesting that the PI3K/mTOR signaling pathway is involved in stimulation of IGFBP5 expression ( 20 , 21 , 37 ). IGFBP5 has also been identified as a gene induced by TG overexpression of myrAkt1 in the heart, a model of cardiac hypertrophy ( 38 , 39 ). Furthermore, acute overexpression of myrAkt1 by adenovirus infection induces IGFBP5 expression in neonatal rat ventricular cardiomyocytes ( 38 ). However, the role of IGFBP5 in regulating cardiac hypertrophy in these models has not been assessed.

Igfbp5 mRNA and protein are expressed in islets and ductal cells in the developing and adult mouse pancreas ( 40 ). Interestingly, Igfbp5 is recognized as a transcript enriched in the developing pancreatic endoderm ( 41 ). However, the role of IGFBP5 in β-cell growth and/or function has not been examined previously. In this study, we present data that IGFBP5 is induced by overexpression of myrAkt1 in the β-cell and during pregnancy, both conditions of augmented β-cell mass. However, even in mice deficient for IGFBP5, myrAkt1 overexpression still augmented β-cell mass. The lack of IGFBP5 does not compromise β-cell function because the Igfbp5 −/− ;myrAkt TG mice exhibit fasting hyperinsulinemia and improved glucose tolerance. These experiments demonstrate that Igfbp5 is not necessary for the effect of myrAkt1 on expansion of β-cell mass in vivo . However, it is possible that other members of the Igfbp family could have compensated for the absence of Igfbp5 , because IGFBPs 1–5 are expressed in the β-cell and surrounding islet cell types ( 40 ).

Ubiquitous overexpression of IGFBP5 inhibits growth and development in vivo , suggesting that IGFBP5 might function primarily as an inhibitor of IGF action ( 42 ). A requirement for IGFBP5 in normal growth was not detected in several previous studies ( 24 , 43 ). The most likely explanation for the different findings reported herein are the additional crosses of Igfbp5 −/− alleles onto a C57BL/6 genetic background. In this study, we have demonstrated that Igfbp5 is required for normal growth only during the postnatal period. Of note, overexpression of IGFBP5 results in decreased prenatal growth and maximal growth retardation that occurred by about 2–3 wk after birth, suggesting that IGFBP5 regulates growth before the onset of GH-stimulated IGF synthesis ( 42 ). From this analysis, the authors surmised that the effect of IGFBP5 on growth was either through regulation of IGF-II action or through IGF-independent means. However, our results show that in the absence of IGFBP5, enhanced growth does not develop until after GH-stimulated IGF synthesis has begun. In contrast to the IGFBP5 overexpression study, the Igfbp5 −/− phenotype presents the antithesis of Igf1-null mice, which exhibit progressively increased growth retardation after about 3 wk postnatal development ( 44 ). Thus, although artificially high levels of IGFBP5 lead to IGF-I-independent inhibition of the early stages of growth, we suggest that IGFBP5 influences growth during postweaning development most likely through IGF-I.

Interestingly, during this study, we observed that IGFBP5-deficient mice exhibit impaired glucose tolerance. Given this, it was surprising that the euglycemic hyperinsulinemic clamp showed no abnormalities. Perhaps this simply reflects the subtlety of the defect; alternatively, the resistance might have been related to a change in a circulating factor, for example glucose, that is held constant in the clamp but not the glucose tolerance test. In any case, the insulin-resistance phenotype was greatly enhanced when the mice were placed on a high-fat diet. In addition to its well-known anabolic effects, IGF-I also influences carbohydrate metabolism. For example, mice with either liver- or skeletal muscle-specific deletion of IGF-I exhibited impaired glucose intolerance and insulin action ( 45 , 46 ). Intraperitoneal injection of IGF-I induces a pronounced decrease in blood glucose level in IR-deficient mice ( 47 ). IGFBP proteins influence glucose homeostasis as well. For instance, hyperglycemia and glucose intolerance occur as a result of global overexpression of either IGFBP1 or IGFBP3 ( 48 , 49 ). Our findings demonstrate that in addition to effects on growth, IGFBP5 is also important for normal glucose homeostasis.
