---
pmid: '34298062'
title: Dynamic and Reversible Aggregation of the Human CAP Superfamily Member GAPR-1
  in Protein Inclusions in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
authors:
- Sirati N
- Popova B
- Molenaar MR
- Verhoek IC
- Braus GH
- Kaloyanova DV
- Helms JB
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2021'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2021.167162
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Dynamic and Reversible Aggregation of the Human CAP Superfamily Member GAPR-1 in Protein Inclusions in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Sirati N, Popova B, Molenaar MR, Verhoek IC, Braus GH, Kaloyanova DV, Helms JB
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmb.2021.167162](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2021.167162)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Biol. 2021 Sep 17;433(19):167162. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2021.167162. Epub 
2021 Jul 21.

Dynamic and Reversible Aggregation of the Human CAP Superfamily Member GAPR-1 in 
Protein Inclusions in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Sirati N(1), Popova B(2), Molenaar MR(3), Verhoek IC(3), Braus GH(2), Kaloyanova 
DV(3), Helms JB(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cell Biology, Metabolism and Cancer, Faculty of Veterinary 
Medicine, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands. Electronic address: 
N.SiratiRoodbaraki@uu.nl.
(2)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Genetics and Göttingen Center for 
Molecular Biosciences (GZMB), Institute for Microbiology and Genetics, 
Universität Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.
(3)Division of Cell Biology, Metabolism and Cancer, Faculty of Veterinary 
Medicine, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(4)Division of Cell Biology, Metabolism and Cancer, Faculty of Veterinary 
Medicine, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands. Electronic address: 
J.B.Helms@uu.nl.

Many proteins that can assemble into higher order structures termed amyloids can 
also concentrate into cytoplasmic inclusions via liquid-liquid phase separation. 
Here, we study the assembly of human Golgi-Associated plant Pathogenesis Related 
protein 1 (GAPR-1), an amyloidogenic protein of the Cysteine-rich secretory 
proteins, Antigen 5, and Pathogenesis-related 1 proteins (CAP) protein 
superfamily, into cytosolic inclusions in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. 
Overexpression of GAPR-1-GFP results in the formation GAPR-1 oligomers and 
fluorescent inclusions in yeast cytosol. These cytosolic inclusions are dynamic 
and reversible organelles that gradually increase during time of overexpression 
and decrease after promoter shut-off. Inclusion formation is, however, a 
regulated process that is influenced by factors other than protein expression 
levels. We identified N-myristoylation of GAPR-1 as an important determinant at 
early stages of inclusion formation. In addition, mutations in the conserved 
metal-binding site (His54 and His103) enhanced inclusion formation, suggesting 
that these residues prevent uncontrolled protein sequestration. In agreement 
with this, we find that addition of Zn2+ metal ions enhances inclusion 
formation. Furthermore, Zn2+ reduces GAPR-1 protein degradation, which indicates 
stabilization of GAPR-1 in inclusions. We propose that the properties underlying 
both the amyloidogenic properties and the reversible sequestration of GAPR-1 
into inclusions play a role in the biological function of GAPR-1 and other CAP 
family members.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2021.167162
PMID: 34298062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.
