---
pmid: '18334219'
title: De novo backbone trace of GroEL from single particle electron cryomicroscopy.
authors:
- Ludtke SJ
- Baker ML
- Chen DH
- Song JL
- Chuang DT
- Chiu W
journal: Structure
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.str.2008.02.007
---

# De novo backbone trace of GroEL from single particle electron cryomicroscopy.
**Authors:** Ludtke SJ, Baker ML, Chen DH, Song JL, Chuang DT, Chiu W
**Journal:** Structure (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.str.2008.02.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2008.02.007)

## Abstract

1. Structure. 2008 Mar;16(3):441-8. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2008.02.007.

De novo backbone trace of GroEL from single particle electron cryomicroscopy.

Ludtke SJ(1), Baker ML, Chen DH, Song JL, Chuang DT, Chiu W.

Author information:
(1)National Center for Macromolecular Imaging, Verna and Marrs McLean Department 
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor 
Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

In this work, we employ single-particle electron cryo-microscopy (cryo-EM) to 
reconstruct GroEL to approximately 4 A resolution with both D7 and C7 symmetry. 
Using a newly developed skeletonization algorithm and secondary structure 
element identification in combination with sequence-based secondary structure 
prediction, we demonstrate that it is possible to achieve a de novo Calpha trace 
directly from a cryo-EM reconstruction. The topology of our backbone trace is 
completely accurate, though subtle alterations illustrate significant 
differences from existing crystal structures. In the map with C7 symmetry, the 
seven monomers in each ring are identical; however, the subunits have a subtly 
different structure in each ring, particularly in the equatorial domain. These 
differences include an asymmetric salt bridge, density in the nucleotide-binding 
pocket of only one ring, and small shifts in alpha helix positions. This 
asymmetric conformation is different from previous asymmetric structures, 
including GroES-bound GroEL, and may represent a "primed state" in the 
chaperonin pathway.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2008.02.007
PMID: 18334219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
