---
pmid: '21173027'
title: The role of Arabidopsis Rubisco activase in jasmonate-induced leaf senescence.
authors:
- Shan X
- Wang J
- Chua L
- Jiang D
- Peng W
- Xie D
journal: Plant Physiol
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC3032464
doi: 10.1104/pp.110.166595
---

# The role of Arabidopsis Rubisco activase in jasmonate-induced leaf senescence.
**Authors:** Shan X, Wang J, Chua L, Jiang D, Peng W, Xie D
**Journal:** Plant Physiol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1104/pp.110.166595](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.110.166595)
**PMC:** [PMC3032464](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3032464/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Physiol. 2011 Feb;155(2):751-64. doi: 10.1104/pp.110.166595. Epub 2010
Dec  20.

The role of Arabidopsis Rubisco activase in jasmonate-induced leaf senescence.

Shan X(1), Wang J, Chua L, Jiang D, Peng W, Xie D.

Author information:
(1)MOE Key Laboratory of Protein Science, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua 
University, Beijing 100084, China.

Leaf senescence, as the last stage of leaf development, is regulated by diverse 
developmental and environmental factors. Jasmonates (JAs) have been shown to 
induce leaf senescence in several plant species; however, the molecular 
mechanism for JA-induced leaf senescence remains unknown. In this study, 
proteomic, genetic, and physiological approaches were used to reveal the 
molecular basis of JA-induced leaf senescence in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis 
thaliana). We identified 35 coronatine-insensitive 1 (COI1)-dependent 
JA-regulated proteins using two-dimensional difference gel electrophoresis in 
Arabidopsis. Among these 35 proteins, Rubisco activase (RCA) was a 
COI1-dependent JA-repressed protein. We found that RCA was down-regulated at the 
levels of transcript and protein abundance by JA in a COI1-dependent manner. We 
further found that loss of RCA led to typical senescence-associated features and 
that the COI1-dependent JA repression of RCA played an important role in 
JA-induced leaf senescence.

DOI: 10.1104/pp.110.166595
PMCID: PMC3032464
PMID: 21173027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Leaf senescence, as the last stage of leaf development, is regulated by diverse developmental and environmental factors. Jasmonates (JAs) have been shown to induce leaf senescence in several plant species; however, the molecular mechanism for JA-induced leaf senescence remains unknown. In this study, proteomic, genetic, and physiological approaches were used to reveal the molecular basis of JA-induced leaf senescence in Arabidopsis ( Arabidopsis thaliana ). We identified 35 coronatine-insensitive 1 (COI1)-dependent JA-regulated proteins using two-dimensional difference gel electrophoresis in Arabidopsis. Among these 35 proteins, Rubisco activase (RCA) was a COI1-dependent JA-repressed protein. We found that RCA was down-regulated at the levels of transcript and protein abundance by JA in a COI1-dependent manner. We further found that loss of RCA led to typical senescence-associated features and that the COI1-dependent JA repression of RCA played an important role in JA-induced leaf senescence.

DISCUSSION

Leaf senescence is a developmental program that is regulated by intrinsic factors such as hormones and developmental age and environmental factors such as temperature, light, nutrients, and pathogens ( Schippers et al., 2007 ; Balazadeh et al., 2008 ). The JA-induced leaf senescence has been known for a long time ( Ueda and Kato, 1980 ). In this study, we specially investigated the molecular mechanism underlying JA induction of leaf senescence. We identified RCA as a COI1-dependent JA-repressed protein using 2-D DIGE coupled with MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. We found that RCA was down-regulated in response to JA treatment at levels of transcript and protein abundance in a COI1-dependent manner. Further genetic and physiological analyses showed that the COI1-dependent JA repression of RCA correlated with JA-induced senescence and that loss of RCA led to typical senescence-associated features. Our results suggest that the COI1-dependent JA repression of RCA plays an important role in JA-induced leaf senescence. In addition, we showed that dark-induced senescence correlated with the reduction of RCA protein, indicating that down-regulation of RCA protein is also involved in dark-induced senescence.
