---
pmid: '16461383'
title: A role for auxin response factor 19 in auxin and ethylene signaling in Arabidopsis.
authors:
- Li J
- Dai X
- Zhao Y
journal: Plant Physiol
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1400570
doi: 10.1104/pp.105.070987
---

# A role for auxin response factor 19 in auxin and ethylene signaling in Arabidopsis.
**Authors:** Li J, Dai X, Zhao Y
**Journal:** Plant Physiol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1104/pp.105.070987](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.105.070987)
**PMC:** [PMC1400570](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1400570/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Physiol. 2006 Mar;140(3):899-908. doi: 10.1104/pp.105.070987. Epub 2006 
Feb 3.

A role for auxin response factor 19 in auxin and ethylene signaling in 
Arabidopsis.

Li J(1), Dai X, Zhao Y.

Author information:
(1)Section of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of California San 
Diego, La Jolla, 92093-0116, USA.

Although auxin response factors (ARFs) are the first well-characterized proteins 
that bind to the auxin response elements, elucidation of the roles of each ARF 
gene in auxin responses and plant development has been challenging. Here we show 
that ARF19 and ARF7 not only participate in auxin signaling, but also play a 
critical role in ethylene responses in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) roots, 
indicating that the ARFs serve as a cross talk point between the two hormones. 
Both arf19 and arf7 mutants isolated from our forward genetic screens are auxin 
resistant and the arf19arf7 double mutant had stronger auxin resistance than the 
single mutants and displayed phenotypes not seen in the single mutants. 
Furthermore, we show that a genomic fragment of ARF19 not only complements 
arf19, but also rescues arf7. We conclude that ARF19 complements ARF7 at the 
protein level and that the ARF7 target sequences are also recognized by ARF19. 
Therefore, it is the differences in expression level/pattern and not the 
differences in protein sequences between the two ARFs that determines the 
relative contribution of the two ARFs in auxin signaling and plant development. 
In addition to being auxin resistant, arf19 has also ethylene-insensitive roots 
and ARF19 expression is induced by ethylene treatment. This work provides a 
sensitive genetic screen for uncovering auxin-resistant mutants including the 
described arf mutants. This study also provides a likely mechanism for 
coordination and integration of hormonal signals to regulate plant growth and 
development.

DOI: 10.1104/pp.105.070987
PMCID: PMC1400570
PMID: 16461383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
