---
pmid: '26777405'
title: ATPase-Modulated Stress Granules Contain a Diverse Proteome and Substructure.
authors:
- Jain S
- Wheeler JR
- Walters RW
- Agrawal A
- Barsic A
- Parker R
journal: Cell
year: '2016'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4733397
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.12.038
---

# ATPase-Modulated Stress Granules Contain a Diverse Proteome and Substructure.
**Authors:** Jain S, Wheeler JR, Walters RW, Agrawal A, Barsic A, Parker R
**Journal:** Cell (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2015.12.038](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2015.12.038)
**PMC:** [PMC4733397](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4733397/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2016 Jan 28;164(3):487-98. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.12.038. Epub 2016
Jan  14.

ATPase-Modulated Stress Granules Contain a Diverse Proteome and Substructure.

Jain S(1), Wheeler JR(1), Walters RW(1), Agrawal A(2), Barsic A(2), Parker R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado Boulder, 
Boulder, CO 80303, USA.
(2)Double Helix LLC, Boulder, CO 80309, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado Boulder, 
Boulder, CO 80303, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Colorado 
Boulder, Boulder, CO 80303, USA. Electronic address: roy.parker@colorado.edu.

Stress granules are mRNA-protein granules that form when translation initiation 
is limited, and they are related to pathological granules in various 
neurodegenerative diseases. Super-resolution microscopy reveals stable 
substructures, referred to as cores, within stress granules that can be 
purified. Proteomic analysis of stress granule cores reveals a dense network of 
protein-protein interactions and links between stress granules and human 
diseases and identifies ATP-dependent helicases and protein remodelers as 
conserved stress granule components. ATP is required for stress granule assembly 
and dynamics. Moreover, multiple ATP-driven machines affect stress granules 
differently, with the CCT complex inhibiting stress granule assembly, while the 
MCM and RVB complexes promote stress granule persistence. Our observations 
suggest that stress granules contain a stable core structure surrounded by a 
dynamic shell with assembly, disassembly, and transitions between the core and 
shell modulated by numerous protein and RNA remodeling complexes.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.12.038
PMCID: PMC4733397
PMID: 26777405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

INTRODUCTION

Eukaryotic cells contain non-membrane bound organelles consisting of mRNA and protein, referred to as mRNP granules. mRNP granules can affect mRNA function and localization ( Buchan et al., 2014 ). Stress granules are mRNP granules that form when translation initiation is limiting ( Buchan and Parker, 2009 ). Stress granules, or related assemblies, have been proposed to play a role in neurodegenerative diseases since mutations that cause disease can increase stress granule formation or persistence ( Li et al., 2013 ; Ramaswami et al., 2013 ). However, the composition and physical properties of stress granules are largely unknown.

Several observations suggest that intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) on RNA binding proteins play a role in stress granule assembly. First, IDRs of TIA and FUS have been shown to affect targeting of TIA and FUS to stress granules ( Gilks et al., 2004 ; Kato et al., 2012 ). Second, the assembly of yeast P bodies is promoted by IDRs on several proteins ( Decker et al., 2007 ; Reijns et al., 2008 ). Since IDRs can also be predicted to have a high probability of forming β-amyloid fibers and such domains on RNA binding proteins self-assemble into fibers in vitro ( Eisenberg and Jucker, 2012 ; Guo et al., 2011 ; Kato et al., 2012 ), this has led to a model whereby stress granule assembly is driven by homo- and/or heterotypic interactions between IDRs and/or prion-related domains on RNA binding proteins ( Buchan, 2014 ).

One hypothesis is that RNP granules are liquid-liquid phase separations, where high concentrations of assembly components reach a critical threshold and then spontaneously assemble into RNP granules through weak multivalent interactions ( Brangwynne et al., 2011 ; Weber and Brangwynne, 2012 ). This is suggested by RNP granules being dynamic by FRAP (reviewed in Buchan and Parker, 2009 ), which is explained in the phase separation model by intrinsic weak interactions and surface exchange. In addition, RNP granules are observed to display liquid-like behavior of fission and fusion, and they flow like liquids under mechanical pressure ( Brangwynne et al., 2009 ; Weber and Brangwynne, 2012 ). Moreover, at high concentrations, IDRs on RNA binding proteins can promote phase separations in vitro ( Elbaum-Garfinkle et al., 2015 ; Nott et al., 2015 ; Lin et al., 2015 ; Molliex et al., 2015 ).

We provide evidence that stress granules contain a dynamic shell-like structure surrounding stable cores. Mass spectroscopy of purified yeast and mammalian stress granule cores identified new components of stress granules, including numerous ATP-dependent helicases and protein remodelers. ATP is required for stress granule assembly and dynamics with the Chaperonin-Containing T complex (CCT complex), a well known protein chaperone complex ( Leitner et al., 2012 ) inhibiting stress granule assembly, while the MCM and RVB helicase complexes, which are known to remodel DNA and/or RNA-protein complexes ( Labib et al., 2000 ; Shen et al., 2000 ; Shin and Kelman, 2006 ), promote stress granule persistence. Our observations suggest that stress granules contain a stable core structure and a more dynamic shell with assembly, disassembly and transitions between the core and shell modulated by numerous protein and RNA remodeling complexes. Perturbation of specific steps in these stress granule dynamics could lead to aberrant granules and thereby contribute to degenerative disease.
