---
pmid: '23791884'
title: 'Long non-coding RNAs: a new frontier in the study of human diseases.'
authors:
- Shi X
- Sun M
- Liu H
- Yao Y
- Song Y
journal: Cancer Lett
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.06.013
---

# Long non-coding RNAs: a new frontier in the study of human diseases.
**Authors:** Shi X, Sun M, Liu H, Yao Y, Song Y
**Journal:** Cancer Lett (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.canlet.2013.06.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.canlet.2013.06.013)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Lett. 2013 Oct 10;339(2):159-66. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.06.013.
Epub  2013 Jun 18.

Long non-coding RNAs: a new frontier in the study of human diseases.

Shi X(1), Sun M, Liu H, Yao Y, Song Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Jinling Hospital, Nanjing University 
School of Medicine, Nanjing, China. Electronic address: shixuefei1223@yahoo.cn.

With the development of whole genome and transcriptome sequencing technologies, 
long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) have received increased attention. Multiple 
studies indicate that lncRNAs act not only as the intermediary between DNA and 
protein but also as important protagonists of cellular functions. LncRNAs can 
regulate gene expression in many ways, including chromosome remodeling, 
transcription and post-transcriptional processing. Moreover, the dysregulation 
of lncRNAs has increasingly been linked to many human diseases, especially in 
cancers. Here, we reviewed the rapidly advancing field of lncRNAs and described 
the relationship between the dysregulation of lncRNAs and human diseases, 
highlighting the specific roles of lncRNAs in human diseases.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.06.013
PMID: 23791884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
