---
reference_id: PMID:17229891
title: DYRK1A autophosphorylation on serine residue 520 modulates its kinase activity via 14-3-3 binding.
authors:
- Alvarez M
- Altafaj X
- Aranda S
- de la Luna S
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1091/mbc.e06-08-0668
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DYRK1A autophosphorylation on serine residue 520 modulates its kinase activity via 14-3-3 binding.
**Authors:** Alvarez M, Altafaj X, Aranda S, de la Luna S
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.e06-08-0668](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.e06-08-0668)

## Content

1. Mol Biol Cell. 2007 Apr;18(4):1167-78. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e06-08-0668. Epub 2007
 Jan 17.

DYRK1A autophosphorylation on serine residue 520 modulates its kinase activity
via 14-3-3 binding.

Alvarez M(1), Altafaj X, Aranda S, de la Luna S.

Author information:
(1)Genes and Disease Program, Centre de Regulació Genómica, Parc de Recerca
Biomèdica de Barcelona, 08003 Barcelona, Spain.

Dual-specificity tyrosine-phosphorylated and regulated kinase (DYRK) proteins
are an evolutionarily conserved family of protein kinases, with members
identified from yeast to humans, that participate in a variety of cellular
processes. DYRKs are serine/threonine protein kinases that are activated by
autophosphorylation on a tyrosine residue in the activation loop. The family
member DYRK1A has been shown to phosphorylate several cytosolic proteins and a
number of splicing and transcription factors, including members of the nuclear
factor of activated T cells family. In the present study, we show that DYRK1A
autophosphorylates, via an intramolecular mechanism, on Ser-520, in the PEST
domain of the protein. We also show that phosphorylation of this residue, which
we show is subjected to dynamic changes in vivo, mediates the interaction of
DYRK1A with 14-3-3beta. A second 14-3-3 binding site is present within the
N-terminal of the protein. In the context of the DYRK1A molecule, neither site
can act independently of the other. Bacterially produced DYRK1A and the mutant
DYRK1A/S520A have similar kinase activities, suggesting that Ser-520
phosphorylation does not affect the intrinsic kinase activity on its own.
Instead, we demonstrate that this phosphorylation allows the binding of
14-3-3beta, which in turn stimulates the catalytic activity of DYRK1A. These
findings provide evidence for a novel mechanism for the regulation of DYRK1A
kinase activity.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e06-08-0668
PMCID: PMC1838983
PMID: 17229891 [Indexed for MEDLINE]