---
pmid: '7536752'
title: IFI 16 gene encodes a nuclear protein whose expression is induced by interferons
  in human myeloid leukaemia cell lines.
authors:
- Dawson MJ
- Trapani JA
journal: J Cell Biochem
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/jcb.240570106
---

# IFI 16 gene encodes a nuclear protein whose expression is induced by interferons in human myeloid leukaemia cell lines.
**Authors:** Dawson MJ, Trapani JA
**Journal:** J Cell Biochem (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jcb.240570106](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcb.240570106)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Biochem. 1995 Jan;57(1):39-51. doi: 10.1002/jcb.240570106.

IFI 16 gene encodes a nuclear protein whose expression is induced by interferons 
in human myeloid leukaemia cell lines.

Dawson MJ(1), Trapani JA.

Author information:
(1)Cellular Cytotoxicity Laboratory, Austin Research Institute, Austin Hospital, 
Heidelberg, Australia.

We have characterized the induction of mRNA and protein products of the human 
IFI 16 gene in response to IFN-gamma, IFN-alpha, and IFN-beta 2 (IL-6). We 
demonstrate that the IFI 16 gene product is a novel nucleoprotein expressed in 
association with the differentiation of myeloid precursor cell lines. In 
Northern blots, IFI 16 mRNA was increased approximately 25-fold above barely 
detectable levels in unstimulated promyelocytic HL-60 cells, in response to 
IFN-gamma. Other myeloid cell lines, U937 and K562, also demonstrated a marked 
IFN-gamma-inducibility of IFI 16 mRNA. However, all three cell lines were far 
less responsive to IFN-alpha, and there was no response to IL-6. By comparison, 
a panel of T and B cell lines demonstrated high constitutive expression of IFI 
16 mRNA that was not regulated by these cytokines. Culture of HL-60 cells in 
medium containing dimethylsulfoxide, retinoic acid, and 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin 
D3, agents that stimulate the differentiation of HL-60 along myeloid pathways, 
also caused the induction of IFI 16 mRNA. To characterize the protein product of 
IFI 16, a monoclonal antibody was raised against a recombinant bacterial protein 
comprising the amino terminal 159 amino acids of IFI 16 fused to glutathione 
S-transferase. The antibody, designated 1G7, was used in Western blotting to 
demonstrate the strong induction of a cluster of proteins of 85-95 kDa in the 
nuclear extracts of IFN-gamma-treated HL-60. The nuclear localization of IFI 16 
antigen was confirmed by immunohistochemical staining of HL-60 cells treated 
with IFN-gamma, dimethylsulfoxide, and retinoic acid. IFI 16 was also detected 
in the nuclei of monocytes, neutrophils, and lymphocytes in normal peripheral 
blood. Database comparisons of the IFI 16 amino acid sequence revealed 51% 
identity with the recently cloned myeloid cell nuclear differentiation antigen 
(MNDA), and extensive similarity to protein products of the Gene 200 cluster of 
IFN-inducible genes, Ifi 202 and Ifi 204. The amino terminal domain of IFI 16 
encodes a putative nuclear localization signal, 124PGAQKRKK, which is strongly 
conserved in MNDA and 204. Nuclear IFI 16 was able to bind double-stranded DNA 
in vitro and exhibited a similar elution profile from DNA-cellulose as 
previously observed for MNDA and 204. Therefore, IFI 16 and MNDA are members of 
a novel family of human DNA-binding proteins whose expression is associated with 
myeloid cell differentiation induced by cytokines and chemical agents.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.240570106
PMID: 7536752 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
