---
pmid: '21075214'
title: A critical role for the protein phosphatase 2A B'α regulatory subunit in dephosphorylation
  of sphingosine kinase 1.
authors:
- Pitman MR
- Barr RK
- Gliddon BL
- Magarey AM
- Moretti PA
- Pitson SM
journal: Int J Biochem Cell Biol
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2010.11.001
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# A critical role for the protein phosphatase 2A B'α regulatory subunit in dephosphorylation of sphingosine kinase 1.
**Authors:** Pitman MR, Barr RK, Gliddon BL, Magarey AM, Moretti PA, Pitson SM
**Journal:** Int J Biochem Cell Biol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.biocel.2010.11.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocel.2010.11.001)

## Abstract

1. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2011 Mar;43(3):342-7. doi: 
10.1016/j.biocel.2010.11.001. Epub 2010 Nov 11.

A critical role for the protein phosphatase 2A B'α regulatory subunit in 
dephosphorylation of sphingosine kinase 1.

Pitman MR(1), Barr RK, Gliddon BL, Magarey AM, Moretti PA, Pitson SM.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Signalling Laboratory, Centre for Cancer Biology, SA Pathology, 
Frome Road, Adelaide, South Australia 5000, Australia.

Sphingosine kinase 1 (SK1) is an important regulator of cellular signalling that 
has gained recent attention as a potential target for anti-cancer therapies. SK1 
activity, subcellular localization and oncogenic function are regulated by 
phosphorylation and dephosphorylation at Ser225. ERK1/2 have been identified as 
the protein kinases responsible for phosphorylation and activation of SK1. 
Conversely, dephosphorylation and deactivation of SK1 occurs by protein 
phosphatase 2A (PP2A). Active PP2A, however, is a heterotrimer, composed of 
tightly associated catalytic and structural subunits that can interact with an 
array of regulatory subunits, which are critical for determining holoenzyme 
substrate specificity and subcellular localization. Thus, PP2A represents a 
large family of holoenzyme complexes with different activities and diverse 
substrate specificities. To date the regulatory subunit essential for targeting 
PP2A to SK1 has remained undefined. Here, we demonstrate a critical role for the 
B'α (B56α/PR61α/PPP2R5A) regulatory subunit of PP2A in SK1 dephosphorylation. 
B'α was found to interact with the c-terminus of SK1, and reduce SK1 
phosphorylation when overexpressed, while having no effect on upstream ERK1/2 
activation. siRNA-mediated knockdown of B'α increased SK1 phosphorylation, 
activity and membrane localization of endogenous SK1. Furthermore, 
overexpression of B'α blocked agonist-induced translocation of SK1 to the plasma 
membrane and abrogated SK1-induced neoplastic transformation of NIH3T3 
fibroblasts. Thus, the PP2A-B'α holoenzyme appears to function as an important 
endogenous regulator of SK1.

Crown Copyright © 2010. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biocel.2010.11.001
PMID: 21075214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
