---
pmid: '19102630'
title: The SH3 domain of alphaII spectrin is a target for the Fanconi anemia protein,
  FANCG.
authors:
- Lefferts JA
- Wang C
- Sridharan D
- Baralt M
- Lambert MW
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi801483u
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The SH3 domain of alphaII spectrin is a target for the Fanconi anemia protein, FANCG.
**Authors:** Lefferts JA, Wang C, Sridharan D, Baralt M, Lambert MW
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi801483u](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi801483u)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2009 Jan 20;48(2):254-63. doi: 10.1021/bi801483u.

The SH3 domain of alphaII spectrin is a target for the Fanconi anemia protein, 
FANCG.

Lefferts JA(1), Wang C, Sridharan D, Baralt M, Lambert MW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, UMDNJNew Jersey Medical 
School and Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Newark, New Jersey 07103, 
USA.

The structural protein nonerythroid alpha spectrin (alphaIISp) plays a role in 
the repair of DNA interstrand cross-links and is deficient in cells from 
patients with Fanconi anemia (FA), in which there is a defect in ability to 
repair such cross-links. We have proposed a model in which alphaIISp, whose 
stability is dependent on FA proteins, acts as a scaffold to aid in recruitment 
of repair proteins to sites of damage. In order to get a clearer understanding 
of the proposed role of FA proteins in maintaining stability of alphaIISp, yeast 
two-hybrid analysis was carried out to determine whether FA proteins directly 
interact with alphaIISp and, if so, to map the sites of interaction. Four 
overlapping regions of alphaIISp were constructed. FANCG interacted with one of 
these regions and specifically with the SH3 domain in this region of alphaIISp. 
The site of interaction in FANCG was mapped to a motif that binds to SH3 domains 
and contains a consensus sequence with preference for the SH3 domain of 
alphaIISp. This site of interaction was confirmed using site-directed 
mutagenesis. Two FA proteins that did not contain motifs that bind to SH3 
domains, FANCC and FANCF, did not interact with the SH3 domain of alphaIISp. 
These results demonstrate that one of the FA proteins, FANCG, contains a motif 
that interacts directly with the SH3 domain of alphaIISp. We propose that this 
binding of FANCG to alphaIISp may be important for the stability of alphaIISp in 
cells and the role alphaIISp plays in the DNA repair process.

DOI: 10.1021/bi801483u
PMID: 19102630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
