---
pmid: '11401427'
title: 'Human biotin-containing subunit of 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase gene (MCCA):
  cDNA sequence, genomic organization, localization to chromosomal band 3q27, and
  expression.'
authors:
- Obata K
- Fukuda T
- Morishita R
- Abe S
- Asakawa S
- Yamaguchi S
- Yoshino M
- Ihara K
- Murayama K
- Shigemoto K
- Shimizu N
- Kondo I
journal: Genomics
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/geno.2000.6366
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Human biotin-containing subunit of 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase gene (MCCA): cDNA sequence, genomic organization, localization to chromosomal band 3q27, and expression.
**Authors:** Obata K, Fukuda T, Morishita R, Abe S, Asakawa S, Yamaguchi S, Yoshino M, Ihara K, Murayama K, Shigemoto K, Shimizu N, Kondo I
**Journal:** Genomics (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1006/geno.2000.6366](https://doi.org/10.1006/geno.2000.6366)

## Abstract

1. Genomics. 2001 Mar 1;72(2):145-52. doi: 10.1006/geno.2000.6366.

Human biotin-containing subunit of 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase gene (MCCA): 
cDNA sequence, genomic organization, localization to chromosomal band 3q27, and 
expression.

Obata K(1), Fukuda T, Morishita R, Abe S, Asakawa S, Yamaguchi S, Yoshino M, 
Ihara K, Murayama K, Shigemoto K, Shimizu N, Kondo I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hygiene, Ehime University School of Medicine, Onsen-gun, Ehime, 
791-0295, Japan.

3-Methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase (MCCase; EC 6.4.1.4) is a mitochondrial biotin 
enzyme and plays an essential role in the catabolism of leucine and isovalerate 
in animals, bacterial species, and plants. MCCase consists of two subunits, 
those that are biotin-containing and non-biotin-containing. The genes 
responsible for these subunits have been isolated in soybean, Arabidopsis 
thaliana, and tomatoes, but not in mammals. In humans, MCCase deficiency has 
been thought to be a rare metabolic disease, but the number of patients with 
MCCase deficiency appears to be increasing with a wide range of clinical 
presentations, some that result in a lethal condition and others that are 
asymptomatic. In this report, we have isolated and carried out chromosomal 
mapping of the gene for the biotin-containing subunit (A subunit) of the human 
MCCase gene, MCCA. The cDNA predicts an open reading frame coding for a 
725-amino-acid protein with mitochondrial signal peptide, biotin carboxylase, 
and biotin-carrier domains. The gene is composed of at least 19 exons and covers 
more than 70 kb of sequence on band q27 of chromosome 3. MCCA was abundantly 
expressed in mitochondria-rich organs, such as the heart, skeletal muscles, 
kidney, and liver. In exon 13, we observed a His/Pro polymorphism at codon 464 
(an A to C transition at nucleotide position 1391 in the cDNA sequence). Then, 
we determined the DNA sequences of the 5' untranslated region and entire coding 
regions in two patients with MCCase deficiency, but no sequence substitution was 
detected, suggesting that the gene mutations might be in the 
non-biotin-containing subunit (B subunit) gene, MCCB, in these patients.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/geno.2000.6366
PMID: 11401427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
