---
pmid: '15269005'
title: Signals regulating trafficking of Menkes (MNK; ATP7A) copper-translocating
  P-type ATPase in polarized MDCK cells.
authors:
- Greenough M
- Pase L
- Voskoboinik I
- Petris MJ
- O'Brien AW
- Camakaris J
journal: Am J Physiol Cell Physiol
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.00179.2004
---

# Signals regulating trafficking of Menkes (MNK; ATP7A) copper-translocating P-type ATPase in polarized MDCK cells.
**Authors:** Greenough M, Pase L, Voskoboinik I, Petris MJ, O'Brien AW, Camakaris J
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Cell Physiol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpcell.00179.2004](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.00179.2004)

## Abstract

1. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2004 Nov;287(5):C1463-71. doi: 
10.1152/ajpcell.00179.2004. Epub 2004 Jul 21.

Signals regulating trafficking of Menkes (MNK; ATP7A) copper-translocating 
P-type ATPase in polarized MDCK cells.

Greenough M(1), Pase L, Voskoboinik I, Petris MJ, O'Brien AW, Camakaris J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, 
Australia.

The Menkes protein (MNK; ATP7A) functions as a transmembrane 
copper-translocating P-type ATPase and plays a vital role in systemic copper 
absorption in the gut and copper reabsorption in the kidney. Polarized 
epithelial cells such as Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells are a 
physiologically relevant model for systemic copper absorption and reabsorption 
in vivo. In this study, cultured MDCK cells were used to characterize MNK 
trafficking and enabled the identification of signaling motifs required to 
target the protein to specific membranes. Using confocal laser scanning 
microscopy and surface biotinylation we demonstrate that MNK relocalizes from 
the Golgi to the basolateral (BL) membrane under elevated copper conditions. As 
previously shown in nonpolarized cells, the metal binding sites in the 
NH2-terminal domain of MNK were found to be required for copper-regulated 
trafficking from the Golgi to the plasma membrane. These data provide molecular 
evidence that is consistent with the presumed role of this protein in systemic 
copper absorption in the gut and reabsorption in the kidney. Using site-directed 
mutagenesis, we identified a dileucine motif proximal to the COOH terminus of 
MNK that was critical for correctly targeting the protein to the BL membrane and 
a putative PDZ target motif that was required for localization at the BL 
membrane in elevated copper.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpcell.00179.2004
PMID: 15269005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
