---
pmid: '29061364'
title: Inflammatory microglia are glycolytic and iron retentive and typify the microglia
  in APP/PS1 mice.
authors:
- Holland R
- McIntosh AL
- Finucane OM
- Mela V
- Rubio-Araiz A
- Timmons G
- McCarthy SA
- Gun'ko YK
- Lynch MA
journal: Brain Behav Immun
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2017.10.017
---

# Inflammatory microglia are glycolytic and iron retentive and typify the microglia in APP/PS1 mice.
**Authors:** Holland R, McIntosh AL, Finucane OM, Mela V, Rubio-Araiz A, Timmons G, McCarthy SA, Gun'ko YK, Lynch MA
**Journal:** Brain Behav Immun (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbi.2017.10.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbi.2017.10.017)

## Abstract

1. Brain Behav Immun. 2018 Feb;68:183-196. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2017.10.017. Epub 
2017 Oct 20.

Inflammatory microglia are glycolytic and iron retentive and typify the 
microglia in APP/PS1 mice.

Holland R(1), McIntosh AL(1), Finucane OM(1), Mela V(1), Rubio-Araiz A(1), 
Timmons G(1), McCarthy SA(2), Gun'ko YK(2), Lynch MA(3).

Author information:
(1)Trinity College Institute for Neuroscience, Trinity College, Dublin 2, 
Ireland.
(2)School of Chemistry and CRANN, Trinity College, Dublin 2, Ireland.
(3)Trinity College Institute for Neuroscience, Trinity College, Dublin 2, 
Ireland. Electronic address: lynchma@tcd.ie.

Microglia, like macrophages, can adopt inflammatory and anti-inflammatory 
phenotypes depending on the stimulus. In macrophages, the evidence indicates 
that these phenotypes have different metabolic profiles with lipopolysaccharide 
(LPS)- or interferon-γ (IFNγ)-stimulated inflammatory cells switching to 
glycolysis as their main source of ATP and interleukin-4 (IL-4)-stimulated cells 
utilizing oxidative phosphorylation. There is a paucity of information regarding 
the metabolic signatures of inflammatory and anti-inflammatory microglia. Here, 
we polarized primary microglia with IFNγ and show that the characteristic 
increases in tumor necrosis factor-α (TNFα) and nitric oxide synthase 2 (NOS2) 
were accompanied by increased glycolysis and an increase in the expression of 
6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-biphosphatase (PFKFB)3, an enzyme that 
plays a significant role in driving glycolysis. These changes were associated 
with increased expression of ferritin and retention of iron in microglia. 
Significantly, retention of iron in microglia increased TNFα expression and also 
increased glycolysis suggesting that increased intracellular iron concentration 
may drive the metabolic and/or inflammatory changes. Analysis of microglia 
prepared from wildtype mice and from transgenic mice that overexpress amyloid 
precursor protein (APP) and presenilin 1 (PS1; APP/PS1) revealed 
genotype-related increases in glycolysis, accompanied by increased PFKFB3, and 
an increase in the expression of ferritin. The data indicate a distinct 
metabolic signature of inflammatory microglia from APP/PS1 mice that are also 
distinguishable by their iron handling profiles.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbi.2017.10.017
PMID: 29061364 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
