---
pmid: '17934462'
title: DAF-16/FOXO targets genes that regulate tumor growth in Caenorhabditis elegans.
authors:
- Pinkston-Gosse J
- Kenyon C
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ng.2007.1
---

# DAF-16/FOXO targets genes that regulate tumor growth in Caenorhabditis elegans.
**Authors:** Pinkston-Gosse J, Kenyon C
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.2007.1](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.2007.1)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 2007 Nov;39(11):1403-9. doi: 10.1038/ng.2007.1. Epub 2007 Oct 14.

DAF-16/FOXO targets genes that regulate tumor growth in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Pinkston-Gosse J(1), Kenyon C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California San 
Francisco, San Francisco, California 94158, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2007 Nov;39(11):1306-7. doi: 10.1038/ng1107-1306.

Cancer is an age-related disease, and inhibiting insulin/insulin-like growth 
factor 1 (IGF-1) signaling extends lifespan and increases tumor resistance in C. 
elegans and mammals. To investigate how the insulin/IGF-1 pathway couples these 
two processes, we analyzed putative transcriptional targets of the C. elegans 
FOXO transcription factor DAF-16, which promotes both longevity and tumor 
resistance. Twenty-nine of 734 genes tested influenced germline-tumor cell 
proliferation or p53-dependent apoptosis. About half of these genes also 
affected normal aging, thereby linking these two processes mechanistically. Many 
of these 29 genes are orthologs of known human tumor suppressors or oncogenes, 
suggesting that others may be as well. Our findings implicate nuclear-pore 
modification in p53-dependent cell death, because inhibiting nuclear-pore genes 
that are upregulated by DAF-16 blocks p53-dependent cell death in the tumor, but 
not normal, p53-independent, germline cell death.

DOI: 10.1038/ng.2007.1
PMID: 17934462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
