---
pmid: '19726575'
title: Dual roles of reactive oxygen species and NADPH oxidase RBOHD in an Arabidopsis-Alternaria
  pathosystem.
authors:
- Pogány M
- von Rad U
- Grün S
- Dongó A
- Pintye A
- Simoneau P
- Bahnweg G
- Kiss L
- Barna B
- Durner J
journal: Plant Physiol
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2773049
doi: 10.1104/pp.109.141994
---

# Dual roles of reactive oxygen species and NADPH oxidase RBOHD in an Arabidopsis-Alternaria pathosystem.
**Authors:** Pogány M, von Rad U, Grün S, Dongó A, Pintye A, Simoneau P, Bahnweg G, Kiss L, Barna B, Durner J
**Journal:** Plant Physiol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1104/pp.109.141994](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.109.141994)
**PMC:** [PMC2773049](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2773049/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Physiol. 2009 Nov;151(3):1459-75. doi: 10.1104/pp.109.141994. Epub 2009 
Sep 2.

Dual roles of reactive oxygen species and NADPH oxidase RBOHD in an 
Arabidopsis-Alternaria pathosystem.

Pogány M(1), von Rad U, Grün S, Dongó A, Pintye A, Simoneau P, Bahnweg G, Kiss 
L, Barna B, Durner J.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biochemical Plant Pathology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German 
Research Center for Environmental Health, 85764 Munich/Neuherberg, Germany.

Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) NADPH oxidases have been reported to suppress 
the spread of pathogen- and salicylic acid-induced cell death. Here, we present 
dual roles of RBOHD (for respiratory burst oxidase homolog D) in an 
Arabidopsis-Alternaria pathosystem, suggesting either initiation or prevention 
of cell death dependent on the distance from pathogen attack. Our data 
demonstrate that a rbohD knockout mutant exhibits increased spread of cell death 
at the macroscopic level upon inoculation with the fungus Alternaria 
brassicicola. However, the cellular patterns of reactive oxygen species 
accumulation and cell death are fundamentally different in the AtrbohD mutant 
compared with the wild type. Functional RBOHD causes marked extracellular 
hydrogen peroxide accumulation as well as cell death in distinct, single cells 
of A. brassicicola-infected wild-type plants. This single cell response is 
missing in the AtrbohD mutant, where infection triggers spreading-type necrosis 
preceded by less distinct chloroplastic hydrogen peroxide accumulation in large 
clusters of cells. While the salicylic acid analog benzothiadiazole induces the 
action of RBOHD and the development of cell death in infected tissues, the 
ethylene inhibitor aminoethoxyvinylglycine inhibits cell death, indicating that 
both salicylic acid and ethylene positively regulate RBOHD and cell death. 
Moreover, A. brassicicola-infected AtrbohD plants hyperaccumulate ethylene and 
free salicylic acid compared with the wild type, suggesting negative feedback 
regulation of salicylic acid and ethylene by RBOHD. We propose that functional 
RBOHD triggers death in cells that are damaged by fungal infection but 
simultaneously inhibits death in neighboring cells through the suppression of 
free salicylic acid and ethylene levels.

DOI: 10.1104/pp.109.141994
PMCID: PMC2773049
PMID: 19726575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Arabidopsis ( Arabidopsis thaliana ) NADPH oxidases have been reported to suppress the spread of pathogen- and salicylic acid-induced cell death. Here, we present dual roles of RBOHD (for respiratory burst oxidase homolog D) in an Arabidopsis- Alternaria pathosystem, suggesting either initiation or prevention of cell death dependent on the distance from pathogen attack. Our data demonstrate that a rbohD knockout mutant exhibits increased spread of cell death at the macroscopic level upon inoculation with the fungus Alternaria brassicicola . However, the cellular patterns of reactive oxygen species accumulation and cell death are fundamentally different in the AtrbohD mutant compared with the wild type. Functional RBOHD causes marked extracellular hydrogen peroxide accumulation as well as cell death in distinct, single cells of A. brassicicola -infected wild-type plants. This single cell response is missing in the AtrbohD mutant, where infection triggers spreading-type necrosis preceded by less distinct chloroplastic hydrogen peroxide accumulation in large clusters of cells. While the salicylic acid analog benzothiadiazole induces the action of RBOHD and the development of cell death in infected tissues, the ethylene inhibitor aminoethoxyvinylglycine inhibits cell death, indicating that both salicylic acid and ethylene positively regulate RBOHD and cell death. Moreover, A. brassicicola -infected AtrbohD plants hyperaccumulate ethylene and free salicylic acid compared with the wild type, suggesting negative feedback regulation of salicylic acid and ethylene by RBOHD. We propose that functional RBOHD triggers death in cells that are damaged by fungal infection but simultaneously inhibits death in neighboring cells through the suppression of free salicylic acid and ethylene levels.

Staining Methods and Microscopy

Cellular and extracellular H 2 O 2 accumulation was visualized by H 2 DCFDA and DAB staining methods. A 10 m m stock solution of H 2 DCFDA (Molecular Probes, Invitrogen) was prepared by dissolving H 2 DCFDA in anhydrous dimethyl sulfoxide, and after a subsequent dilution step with distilled water, a 10 μ m working concentration was set. Infected leaves were detached before staining, incubated in the working solution for 5 min, and washed with distilled water. Cells exhibiting green fluorescence on the adaxial side of leaves were examined and photographed.

Whole Arabidopsis plants (without the root system) were vacuum infiltrated with DAB, decolorized, and mounted in 50% glycerol solution as described before ( Pogány et al., 2004 ). For the detection of cell death, lactophenol-trypan blue staining was performed. A trypan blue stock solution was prepared by mixing 10 g of phenol, 10 mL of glycerol, 10 mL of lactic acid, 10 mL of distilled water, and 0.02 g of trypan blue (Sigma). This stock solution was further diluted with ethanol (96%; 1:2, v/v) to obtain trypan blue working solution. Arabidopsis leaves soaking in trypan blue working solution were boiled in a water bath for 1 min, incubated in the working solution for 1 d, and cleared with saturated chloral hydrate solution (1 kg of chloral hydrate dissolved in 400 mL of distilled water). Fifteen decolorized leaves per treatment were scanned, and cell death was quantified by the histogram tool of Adobe Photoshop measuring the pixel number of trypan blue-stained areas and the number of pixels covering the total leaf surface. The level of cell death was presented as a ratio between the two pixel number values.

Simultaneous detection of H 2 O 2 accumulation and cell death in one Arabidopsis leaf specimen was accomplished by a combination of DAB and Evans blue staining methods. DAB-infiltrated leaves were incubated in light for 2 h and vacuum infiltrated for a second time with 1.3 m m Evans blue (Fluka) solution (0.125 g of Evans blue dissolved in 100 mL of distilled water). After 15 min of incubation in the dark, leaves were transferred to DAB clearing solution and handled as DAB-stained tissues.

The A. brassicicola -infected and stained Arabidopsis leaf samples were examined and photographed with a Zeiss Axioskop microscope and digital camera.
