---
pmid: '15165244'
title: Activation of the redox sensor Pap1 by hydrogen peroxide requires modulation
  of the intracellular oxidant concentration.
authors:
- Vivancos AP
- Castillo EA
- Jones N
- Ayté J
- Hidalgo E
journal: Mol Microbiol
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2004.04065.x
---

# Activation of the redox sensor Pap1 by hydrogen peroxide requires modulation of the intracellular oxidant concentration.
**Authors:** Vivancos AP, Castillo EA, Jones N, Ayté J, Hidalgo E
**Journal:** Mol Microbiol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2958.2004.04065.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2958.2004.04065.x)

## Abstract

1. Mol Microbiol. 2004 Jun;52(5):1427-35. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2004.04065.x.

Activation of the redox sensor Pap1 by hydrogen peroxide requires modulation of 
the intracellular oxidant concentration.

Vivancos AP(1), Castillo EA, Jones N, Ayté J, Hidalgo E.

Author information:
(1)Cell Signalling Unit, Departament de Ciències Experimentals i de la Salut, 
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, C/Dr Aiguader 80, E-08003 Barcelona, Spain.

The transcription factor Pap1 and the MAP kinase Sty1 are key regulators of 
hydrogen peroxide-induced responses in Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Pap1 can be 
activated quickly at low, but not high, hydrogen peroxide concentrations. The 
MAP kinase Sty1 has been reported to participate in Pap1 activation by the 
oxidant. Here, we provide biochemical and genetic evidence for the in vivo 
formation of a hydrogen peroxide-induced disulphide bond in Pap1, which precedes 
the rapid and reversible nuclear accumulation of the transcription factor. We 
show that activation of the Sty1 cascade before the oxidative insult, or 
overexpression of the Sty1-regulated genes ctt1 (encoding catalase) or gpx1 
(encoding glutathione peroxidase), can accelerate Pap1 entry even at high doses 
of hydrogen peroxide. In fact, the lack of Sty1 impedes Pap1 nuclear 
localization, but only at high doses of the oxidant. We propose that, whereas 
low doses of hydrogen peroxide lead directly to Pap1 oxidation-activation, high 
concentrations of the oxidant initially activate the Sty1 pathway, with the 
consequent increase in scavenging enzymes, which in turn helps to decompose the 
excess of hydrogen peroxide and achieve an appropriate concentration for the 
subsequent activation of Pap1. Our results also suggest that activation of Sty1 
at high doses of hydrogen peroxide may also be required to trigger other 
antioxidant activities such as those reverting the overoxidation of cysteine 
residues at the Pap1 pathway.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2004.04065.x
PMID: 15165244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
