---
pmid: '8581736'
title: Cloning, sequencing and expression of a novel cDNA encoding human vacuolar
  ATPase (14-kDa subunit).
authors:
- Fujiwara T
- Kawai A
- Shimizu F
- Hirano H
- Okuno S
- Takeda S
- Ozaki K
- Shimada Y
- Nagata M
- Watanabe T
journal: DNA Res
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/dnares/2.3.107
---

# Cloning, sequencing and expression of a novel cDNA encoding human vacuolar ATPase (14-kDa subunit).
**Authors:** Fujiwara T, Kawai A, Shimizu F, Hirano H, Okuno S, Takeda S, Ozaki K, Shimada Y, Nagata M, Watanabe T
**Journal:** DNA Res (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1093/dnares/2.3.107](https://doi.org/10.1093/dnares/2.3.107)

## Abstract

1. DNA Res. 1995 Jun 30;2(3):107-11. doi: 10.1093/dnares/2.3.107.

Cloning, sequencing and expression of a novel cDNA encoding human vacuolar 
ATPase (14-kDa subunit).

Fujiwara T(1), Kawai A, Shimizu F, Hirano H, Okuno S, Takeda S, Ozaki K, Shimada 
Y, Nagata M, Watanabe T, et al.

Author information:
(1)Otsuka GEN Research Institute, Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Tokushima, 
Japan.

A cDNA encoding the 14-kDa subunit of vacuolar ATPase was cloned from human 
fetal brain. The sequence was composed of 680 nucleotides containing an open 
reading frame of 357 nucleotides. The deduced peptide sequence consisted of 119 
amino acid residues with a calculated molecular weight of 13,369 Da and a pI of 
5.19. Overall, this amino-acid sequence was respectively 69% and 70% identical 
to those of Manduca sexta and Drosophila melanogaster 14-kDa subunits, although 
the two representatives of Class Insecta were remarkably similar to one another 
(91% identity). Three regions in particular (the N-terminal, amino acids 5-36; 
the middle, residues 58-68; and the C-terminal, residues 88-118) were highly 
conserved. Hence, we think that the 14-kDa subunits have evolved from the same 
ancestral gene, and that the three conserved regions are important for the 
structure and function of vacuolar ATPase. A single 0.8-kb band was detected in 
various human tissues by Northern blot analysis. Since the human 14-kDa subunit 
is expressed ubiquitously, it might be a housekeeping protein. A separate 
transcript found in the cDNA library lacked a 6-bp segment in the 5' non-coding 
region (nucleotides -40 to -35) and also carried a 23C to T (8Thr to Ile) point 
mutation in the coding region; these minor differences likely reflected normal 
polymorphism.

DOI: 10.1093/dnares/2.3.107
PMID: 8581736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
