---
pmid: '2451510'
title: Enzymes of the pathway of purine synthesis in the rat mammary gland. Changes
  in the lactation cycle and the effects of diabetes.
authors:
- Beardsley S
- Kunjara S
- Greenbaum AL
journal: Biochem J
year: '1988'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1148869
doi: 10.1042/bj2500395
---

# Enzymes of the pathway of purine synthesis in the rat mammary gland. Changes in the lactation cycle and the effects of diabetes.
**Authors:** Beardsley S, Kunjara S, Greenbaum AL
**Journal:** Biochem J (1988)
**DOI:** [10.1042/bj2500395](https://doi.org/10.1042/bj2500395)
**PMC:** [PMC1148869](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1148869/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 1988 Mar 1;250(2):395-9. doi: 10.1042/bj2500395.

Enzymes of the pathway of purine synthesis in the rat mammary gland. Changes in 
the lactation cycle and the effects of diabetes.

Beardsley S(1), Kunjara S, Greenbaum AL.

Author information:
(1)Courtauld Institute of Biochemistry, Middlesex Hospital Medical School, 
London, U.K.

Measurements were made of the activities of the enzymes of the 'de novo' and 
salvage pathways of purine synthesis [phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate 
amidotransferase (EC 2.4.2.14), adenine phosphoribosyltransferase (EC 2.4.2.7) 
and hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltranferase (EC 2.4.2.8)] at different stages of 
the lactation cycle, and the effects of diabetes on the activity of these 
enzymes in lactation were studied. A distinctive pattern of enzyme change was 
observed, in which the 'de novo' pathway enzyme phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate 
amidotransferase increased sharply between days 10 and 14 of pregnancy, and then 
remained sensibly constant until the height of lactation, whereas the enzymes of 
the salvage pathway increased later in pregnancy and continued to rise during 
lactation. Diabetes severely depressed the activity of the enzymes of the 
salvage pathway, but appeared to be without effect on the 'de novo' pathway 
enzyme. These results are discussed in relation to the provision of purine 
precursors from tissues outside the mammary gland.

DOI: 10.1042/bj2500395
PMCID: PMC1148869
PMID: 2451510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
