---
pmid: '8660965'
title: Structure and organization of the human metaxin gene (MTX) and pseudogene.
authors:
- Long GL
- Winfield S
- Adolph KW
- Ginns EI
- Bornstein P
journal: Genomics
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/geno.1996.0181
---

# Structure and organization of the human metaxin gene (MTX) and pseudogene.
**Authors:** Long GL, Winfield S, Adolph KW, Ginns EI, Bornstein P
**Journal:** Genomics (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1006/geno.1996.0181](https://doi.org/10.1006/geno.1996.0181)

## Abstract

1. Genomics. 1996 Apr 15;33(2):177-84. doi: 10.1006/geno.1996.0181.

Structure and organization of the human metaxin gene (MTX) and pseudogene.

Long GL(1), Winfield S, Adolph KW, Ginns EI, Bornstein P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle 98195, USA.

Metaxin encodes a mitochondrial protein and is an essential nuclear gene in 
mice. The cDNA sequence and genomic organization of the human metaxin gene (MTX) 
have now been determined. MTX is 6 kb and consists of eight protein-encoding 
exons. The gene is contiguous to thrombospondin 3 (THBS3) and to the pseudogene 
for glucocerebrosidase (psGBA), but it transcribed in a direction opposite to 
the latter two genes. Thus, MTX and THBS3 share a common promoter region and are 
transcribed convergently, whereas MTX and psGBA are transcribed convergently and 
have closed apposed polyadenylation sites. Human metaxin contains 317 amino 
acids and is 91.5% identical to mouse metaxin. Metaxin is rich in leucine 
(14.2%) and in basic (12.9%) and acidic (12.0%) amino acids. The predicted 
protein lacks an amino-terminal signal sequence and N-glycosylation sites, but 
contains a putative transmembrane domain near its carboxy terminus. A DNA 
duplication has led to a direct repeat and the evolution of a pseudogene for 
GBA. A pseudogene for metaxin (psMTX) is also located within the 16 kb of DNA 
separating GBA from psGBA. The psMTX sequence is nearly identical to the 3' part 
of exon 2 through exon 8 of MTX, and both the intronic and the 3'-flanking 
sequences are highly conserved. Thus, there is a 278 amino acid open reading 
frame that is 97.8% identical to metaxin. However, psMTX lacks the first intron 
and promoter present in MTX, and at least in liver, the pseudogene is not 
expressed.

DOI: 10.1006/geno.1996.0181
PMID: 8660965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
