---
pmid: '11731265'
title: Expression of Tcf/Lef and sFrp and localization of beta-catenin in the developing
  mouse lung.
authors:
- Tebar M
- Destrée O
- de Vree WJ
- Ten Have-Opbroek AA
journal: Mech Dev
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0925-4773(01)00556-1
---

# Expression of Tcf/Lef and sFrp and localization of beta-catenin in the developing mouse lung.
**Authors:** Tebar M, Destrée O, de Vree WJ, Ten Have-Opbroek AA
**Journal:** Mech Dev (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0925-4773(01)00556-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0925-4773(01)00556-1)

## Abstract

1. Mech Dev. 2001 Dec;109(2):437-40. doi: 10.1016/s0925-4773(01)00556-1.

Expression of Tcf/Lef and sFrp and localization of beta-catenin in the 
developing mouse lung.

Tebar M(1), Destrée O, de Vree WJ, Ten Have-Opbroek AA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonology, Leiden University Medical Center, NL-2300 RC, 
Leiden, The Netherlands.

Recent evidence that Wnts and other genes in the Wnt signaling pathway are 
expressed in embryonic and adult mouse lung suggests that this pathway is 
important for cell fate decisions and differentiation of lung cell types. We 
therefore examined the expression and protein distribution of several Wnt 
pathway components during prenatal mouse lung development using whole-mount in 
situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry. Between embryonic days 10.5 and 
17.5 (E10.5-E17.5), beta-catenin was localized in the cytoplasm, and often also 
the nucleus, of the undifferentiated primordial epithelium (PE), differentiating 
alveolar epithelium (AE; present from E14.5 onward), and adjacent mesenchyme. 
Tcf1, Lef1, Tcf3, Tcf4, sFrp1, sFrp2 and sFrp4 were also expressed in the PE, 
AE, and adjacent mesenchyme in specific spatio-temporal patterns.

DOI: 10.1016/s0925-4773(01)00556-1
PMID: 11731265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
