---
pmid: '15657136'
title: Abelson-interactor-1 promotes WAVE2 membrane translocation and Abelson-mediated
  tyrosine phosphorylation required for WAVE2 activation.
authors:
- Leng Y
- Zhang J
- Badour K
- Arpaia E
- Freeman S
- Cheung P
- Siu M
- Siminovitch K
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC545868
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0409120102
---

# Abelson-interactor-1 promotes WAVE2 membrane translocation and Abelson-mediated tyrosine phosphorylation required for WAVE2 activation.
**Authors:** Leng Y, Zhang J, Badour K, Arpaia E, Freeman S, Cheung P, Siu M, Siminovitch K
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0409120102](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0409120102)
**PMC:** [PMC545868](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC545868/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Jan 25;102(4):1098-103. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0409120102. Epub 2005 Jan 18.

Abelson-interactor-1 promotes WAVE2 membrane translocation and Abelson-mediated 
tyrosine phosphorylation required for WAVE2 activation.

Leng Y(1), Zhang J, Badour K, Arpaia E, Freeman S, Cheung P, Siu M, Siminovitch 
K.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Medicine, Immunology, Medical Genetics, and Microbiology, 
University of Toronto and The Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai 
Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada M5G 1X5.

WAVE2 is a member of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein family of cytoskeletal 
regulatory proteins shown to link Rac activation to actin remodeling via 
induction of Arp 2/3 activity. WAVE2 is thought to be regulated by its 
positioning in a macromolecular complex also containing the Abelson-(Abl) 
interactor-1 (Abi-1) adaptor, but the molecular basis and biologic relevance of 
WAVE2 inclusion in this complex are ill defined. Here we show that Abi-1 binding 
to WAVE2 is mediated by discrete motifs in the Abi-1 coiled-coil and WAVE2 
WAVE-homology domains and increases markedly in conjunction with Abi-1-WAVE2 
translocation and colocalization at the leading edge in B16F1 cells after 
fibronectin stimulation. Abi-1 also couples WAVE2 to Abl after cell stimulation, 
an interaction that triggers Abl membrane translocation with WAVE2, Abi-1, and 
activated Rac, as well as Abl-mediated tyrosine phosphorylation and WAVE2 
activation. By contrast, mutation of tyrosine residue Y150, identified here as 
the major site of Abl-mediated WAVE2 tyrosine phosphorylation, as well as 
disruption of WAVE2-Abi-1 binding, impairs induction of WAVE2-driven actin 
polymerization and its membrane translocation in association with activated Rac. 
Similarly, WAVE2 tyrosine phosphorylation and induction of membrane actin 
rearrangement are abrogated in fibroblasts lacking the Abl family kinase. 
Together, these data reveal that Abi-1-mediated coupling of Abl to WAVE2 
promotes Abl-evoked WAVE2 tyrosine phosphorylation required to link WAVE2 with 
activated Rac and with actin polymerization and remodeling at the cell 
periphery.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0409120102
PMCID: PMC545868
PMID: 15657136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
