---
pmid: '21879336'
title: Multistep regulation of protein kinase A in its localization, phosphorylation
  and binding with a regulatory subunit in fission yeast.
authors:
- Gupta DR
- Paul SK
- Oowatari Y
- Matsuo Y
- Kawamukai M
journal: Curr Genet
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s00294-011-0354-2
---

# Multistep regulation of protein kinase A in its localization, phosphorylation and binding with a regulatory subunit in fission yeast.
**Authors:** Gupta DR, Paul SK, Oowatari Y, Matsuo Y, Kawamukai M
**Journal:** Curr Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00294-011-0354-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00294-011-0354-2)

## Abstract

1. Curr Genet. 2011 Oct;57(5):353-65. doi: 10.1007/s00294-011-0354-2. Epub 2011
Aug  31.

Multistep regulation of protein kinase A in its localization, phosphorylation 
and binding with a regulatory subunit in fission yeast.

Gupta DR(1), Paul SK, Oowatari Y, Matsuo Y, Kawamukai M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science and Biotechnology, Faculty of Life and 
Environmental Science, Shimane University, 1060 Nishikawatsu, Matsue 690-8504, 
Japan.

The cAMP-PKA is the major glucose-sensing pathway that controls sexual 
differentiation in Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Sequencing from the pka1 locus of 
recessive sam mutants, in which cells are highly inclined to sexual 
differentiation, led to the identification of mutations in the pka1 locus in 
sam5 (pka1-G441E) and sam7 (pka1-G441R). Rst2 and Ste11 proteins were induced 
and localized to the nucleus of sam5 and sam7 mutants even under rich glucose 
conditions, indicating that the function of Pka1 was completely abolished by 
mutations. Pka1-G441E and Pka1-G441R mutant proteins reside in the cytoplasm, 
even under glucose-rich conditions, while wild-type Pka1 resides in the nucleus, 
indicating that the functionality of Pka1 is important for its nuclear 
localization. This is supported by the observation that the Pka1-T356A mutant, 
which partially lacks Pka1 function, was localized to both the cytoplasm and the 
nucleus, but an active phosphomimetic Pka1-T356D mutant prtotein was localized 
to the nucleus under glucose-rich conditions. In addition to the basal 
phosphorylation of Pka1 at T356, hyperphosphorylation of Pka1 was observed under 
glucose-starved conditions, and such hyperphosphorylation was not observed in 
pka1-G441E, pka1-G441R, pka1-T356A or pka1-T356D mutants. As these mutant 
proteins failed to interact with a regulatory subunit Cgs1, hyperphosphorylation 
of Pka1 mutant proteins was considered to be dependent on Cgs1 interaction. 
Consistent with a role for Cgs1 in Pka1 phosphorylation, we detected the 
formation of a Cgs1-Pka1 complex prior to Pka1 hyperphosphorylation. Together, 
these results indicate that nuclear localization of Pka1 depends on its activity 
and hyperphosphorylation of Pka1 depends on Cgs1 interaction.

DOI: 10.1007/s00294-011-0354-2
PMID: 21879336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
