---
pmid: '20212154'
title: p38 MAPK/MK2-mediated induction of miR-34c following DNA damage prevents Myc-dependent
  DNA replication.
authors:
- Cannell IG
- Kong YW
- Johnston SJ
- Chen ML
- Collins HM
- Dobbyn HC
- Elia A
- Kress TR
- Dickens M
- Clemens MJ
- Heery DM
- Gaestel M
- Eilers M
- Willis AE
- Bushell M
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2851793
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0910015107
---

# p38 MAPK/MK2-mediated induction of miR-34c following DNA damage prevents Myc-dependent DNA replication.
**Authors:** Cannell IG, Kong YW, Johnston SJ, Chen ML, Collins HM, Dobbyn HC, Elia A, Kress TR, Dickens M, Clemens MJ, Heery DM, Gaestel M, Eilers M, Willis AE, Bushell M
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0910015107](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0910015107)
**PMC:** [PMC2851793](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2851793/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Mar 23;107(12):5375-80. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0910015107. Epub 2010 Mar 8.

p38 MAPK/MK2-mediated induction of miR-34c following DNA damage prevents 
Myc-dependent DNA replication.

Cannell IG(1), Kong YW, Johnston SJ, Chen ML, Collins HM, Dobbyn HC, Elia A, 
Kress TR, Dickens M, Clemens MJ, Heery DM, Gaestel M, Eilers M, Willis AE, 
Bushell M.

Author information:
(1)Center for Biomolecular Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of 
Nottingham, University Park, Nottingham, NG7 2RD, UK.

The DNA damage response activates several pathways that stall the cell cycle and 
allow DNA repair. These consist of the well-characterized ATR (Ataxia 
telangiectasia and Rad-3 related)/CHK1 and ATM (Ataxia telangiectasia 
mutated)/CHK2 pathways in addition to a newly identified ATM/ATR/p38MAPK/MK2 
checkpoint. Crucial to maintaining the integrity of the genome is the S-phase 
checkpoint that functions to prevent DNA replication until damaged DNA is 
repaired. Inappropriate expression of the proto-oncogene c-Myc is known to cause 
DNA damage. One mechanism by which c-Myc induces DNA damage is through binding 
directly to components of the prereplicative complex thereby promoting DNA 
synthesis, resulting in replication-associated DNA damage and checkpoint 
activation due to inappropriate origin firing. Here we show that following 
etoposide-induced DNA damage translation of c-Myc is repressed by miR-34c via a 
highly conserved target-site within the 3(') UTR. While miR-34c is induced by 
p53 following DNA damage, we show that in cells lacking p53 this is achieved by 
an alternative pathway which involves p38 MAPK signalling to MK2. The data 
presented here suggest that a major physiological target of miR-34c is c-Myc. 
Inhibition of miR-34c activity prevents S-phase arrest in response to DNA damage 
leading to increased DNA synthesis, DNA damage, and checkpoint activation in 
addition to that induced by etoposide alone, which are all reversed by 
subsequent c-Myc depletion. These data demonstrate that miR-34c is a critical 
regulator of the c-Myc expression following DNA damage acting downstream of p38 
MAPK/MK2 and suggest that miR-34c serves to remove c-Myc to prevent 
inappropriate replication which may otherwise lead to genomic instability.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0910015107
PMCID: PMC2851793
PMID: 20212154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
