---
pmid: '22252131'
title: Structure of a novel phosphotyrosine-binding domain in Hakai that targets E-cadherin.
authors:
- Mukherjee M
- Chow SY
- Yusoff P
- Seetharaman J
- Ng C
- Sinniah S
- Koh XW
- Asgar NF
- Li D
- Yim D
- Jackson RA
- Yew J
- Qian J
- Iyu A
- Lim YP
- Zhou X
- Sze SK
- Guy GR
- Sivaraman J
journal: EMBO J
year: '2012'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3298002
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.496
---

# Structure of a novel phosphotyrosine-binding domain in Hakai that targets E-cadherin.
**Authors:** Mukherjee M, Chow SY, Yusoff P, Seetharaman J, Ng C, Sinniah S, Koh XW, Asgar NF, Li D, Yim D, Jackson RA, Yew J, Qian J, Iyu A, Lim YP, Zhou X, Sze SK, Guy GR, Sivaraman J
**Journal:** EMBO J (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2011.496](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2011.496)
**PMC:** [PMC3298002](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3298002/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2012 Mar 7;31(5):1308-19. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.496. Epub 2012 Jan
17.

Structure of a novel phosphotyrosine-binding domain in Hakai that targets 
E-cadherin.

Mukherjee M(1), Chow SY, Yusoff P, Seetharaman J, Ng C, Sinniah S, Koh XW, Asgar 
NF, Li D, Yim D, Jackson RA, Yew J, Qian J, Iyu A, Lim YP, Zhou X, Sze SK, Guy 
GR, Sivaraman J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, 
Singapore.

Phosphotyrosine-binding domains, typified by the SH2 (Src homology 2) and PTB 
domains, are critical upstream components of signal transduction pathways. The 
E3 ubiquitin ligase Hakai targets tyrosine-phosphorylated E-cadherin via an 
uncharacterized domain. In this study, the crystal structure of Hakai (amino 
acids 106-206) revealed that it forms an atypical, zinc-coordinated homodimer by 
utilizing residues from the phosphotyrosine-binding domain of two Hakai 
monomers. Hakai dimerization allows the formation of a phosphotyrosine-binding 
pocket that recognizes specific phosphorylated tyrosines and flanking acidic 
amino acids of Src substrates, such as E-cadherin, cortactin and DOK1. NMR and 
mutational analysis identified the Hakai residues required for target binding 
within the binding pocket, now named the HYB domain. ZNF645 also possesses a HYB 
domain but demonstrates different target specificities. The HYB domain is 
structurally different from other phosphotyrosine-binding domains and is a 
potential drug target due to its novel structural features.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2011.496
PMCID: PMC3298002
PMID: 22252131 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Phosphotyrosine-binding domains, typified by the SH2 ( S rc h omology 2) and PTB domains, are critical upstream components of signal transduction pathways. The E3 ubiquitin ligase Hakai targets tyrosine-phosphorylated E-cadherin via an uncharacterized domain. In this study, the crystal structure of Hakai (amino acids 106–206) revealed that it forms an atypical, zinc-coordinated homodimer by utilizing residues from the phosphotyrosine-binding domain of two Hakai monomers. Hakai dimerization allows the formation of a phosphotyrosine-binding pocket that recognizes specific phosphorylated tyrosines and flanking acidic amino acids of Src substrates, such as E-cadherin, cortactin and DOK1. NMR and mutational analysis identified the Hakai residues required for target binding within the binding pocket, now named the HYB domain. ZNF645 also possesses a HYB domain but demonstrates different target specificities. The HYB domain is structurally different from other phosphotyrosine-binding domains and is a potential drug target due to its novel structural features.

Introduction

In eukaryotic cells, phosphorylation events regulate cell signalling by providing docking sites for protein domains, such as the S rc h omology 2 (SH2) and p hospho t yrosine- b inding (PTB) domains ( Forman-Kay and Pawson, 1999 ; Yaffe, 2002 ; Pawson and Nash, 2003 ). The SH2 was the first signalling domain to be identified and has been extensively characterized ( Songyang et al, 1993 ; Forman-Kay and Pawson, 1999 ; Yaffe, 2002 ; Pawson and Nash, 2003 ; Liu et al, 2006 ; Filippakopoulos et al, 2009 ). The SH2 is a dedicated phosphotyrosine-binding domain and plays a critical role in signal transduction, hence making it a target for drug development ( Pawson and Nash, 2003 ; Machida and Mayer, 2005 ; Taylor et al, 2008 ; Kasembeli et al, 2009 ). Binding specificity of SH2 domains is generally conferred by the sequences flanking the C-terminus of the phosphotyrosine (pTyr), and motif recognition is usually relatively inflexible. The other major class of pTyr-binding domain is the PTB domain. The specificity of binding to the PTB domain is conferred typically by residues on the target that are N-terminal to the pTyr. However, the PTB domain also recognizes non-pTyr motifs ( Forman-Kay and Pawson, 1999 ; Yaffe, 2002 ; Pawson and Nash, 2003 ; Farooq and Zhou, 2004 ; Smith et al, 2006 ). Atypical phosphotyrosine-binding domains have also been detected in PKCδ and the human M2 pyruvate kinase (PKM2) ( Benes et al, 2005 ; Christofk et al, 2008 ).

In 2002, Fujita et al (2002) discovered a novel ubiquitin E3 ligase protein that targeted pTyr sites on E-cadherin. The E3 ligase, Hakai, possesses three domains: a RING domain, a short pTyr recognition sequence and a proline-rich domain ( Fujita et al, 2002 ). Hakai is involved in the regulation of cell adhesion, cell migration and embryogenesis ( Figueroa et al, 2009 ; Kaido et al, 2009 ; Gong et al, 2010 ). Among the reported protein interactions of Hakai, its association with and ubiquitination of E-cadherin upon Src activation is the best characterized ( Fujita et al, 2002 ).

Based on molecular modelling, Fujita et al (2002) assumed the pTyr-binding domain of Hakai to be a derivative SH2 domain. Our previous experience analysing the SH2 domain of a similar E3 ubiquitin ligase, c-Cbl ( Ng et al, 2008 ) led us to examine the nature of the Hakai pTyr-binding domain to provide structural insights into its interaction with E-cadherin. In this study, we report that the Hakai pTyr-binding (HYB) domain consists of a homodimer formed at a structurally novel interface. Each monomer consists of two zinc-finger domains: a RING domain and a minimum pTyr-binding domain that incorporates a novel, atypical zinc coordination motif. Both domains play key roles in dimerization. The HYB domain is therefore composed of four zinc-binding domains cooperating to bind pTyr residues surrounded by acidic amino acids. Whereas the RING domain appears in other proteins, the atypical zinc-binding domain component is a novel protein fold that incorporates an intertwined configuration. In order to obtain its consensus target sequence, we have characterized the recognition motif of the HYB domain and identified several Src substrates that are also targeted. In addition, the HYB domain can also be found in a testis-specific ubiquitin E3 ligase, ZNF645, and possibly Ligand-of-Numb protein X1 and 2 (LNX1 and LNX2).

Discussion

ZnFs consist of a diverse group of protein domains that are able to bind to zinc ions. Initially thought to bind only nucleic acids, ZnFs were later shown to mediate protein–protein interactions ( Gamsjaeger et al, 2007 ; Klug, 2010 ). The common structural feature in the different ZnF classes, where determined, is that the zinc-coordinating cysteine and histidine residues are all situated on the same monomer. The evidence in this study has shown that Hakai, in addition to having a typical RING domain, possesses an atypical ZnF with a novel structural fold. In contrast to previously reported structures, the formation of this atypical ZnF requires amino-acid residues from two intertwining Hakai monomers. Three of the four residues are contributed by one monomer, whereas one cysteine residue comes from another monomer, implying that the formation of this ZnF is accompanied by dimerization. Although this particular ZnF is novel by itself, it is made more intriguing by the fact that this domain lies within a pTyr-binding region. The results from our study demonstrate that in conjunction with the RING domain of Hakai, dimerization of Hakai through the formation of the atypical ZnF creates a novel pTyr-binding domain, called the HYB domain. Originally postulated to recognize multiple consecutive pTyrs, it was instead found that the HYB domain recognizes a single pTyr residue flanked by acidic amino acids. Interestingly, this may indicate a bias towards Src substrates because Src kinase has a preferred, but not strict, recognition sequence of Y(p)-E-E-I/V ( Yeatman, 2004 ).

The zinc-coordinating residues of each Hakai monomer consist of a conserved series of nine cysteine and three histidine residues that facilitate Hakai dimerization. Based on sequence analysis, LNX1 and LNX2 also harbour such a sequence motif, although the last conserved histidine is replaced by cysteine. While the full structures of the LNX proteins are currently unknown, it is possible that, based on sequence homology, they also contain the HYB domain. As the HYB domain contains a RING domain, its occurrence would be predominantly in E3 ubiquitin ligases, which has implications in the way these proteins recognize their targets and effect downstream signalling.

Although the zinc-coordinating residues within the ZnFs of the HYB domain are critical, the protein folding of the primary sequences surrounding the cysteine and histidine residues are also important in defining its characteristics. This chelation-derived folding provides the necessary three-dimensional structure while specific amino acids within the sequences between the zinc-coordinating residues are instrumental in recognizing and binding phosphorylated tyrosines of target proteins. In the case of Hakai, four residues were identified through NMR studies to bind to E-cadherin, H127, Y176, H185 and R189. It is noteworthy that there is strict conservation of these residues between Hakai and ZNF645. On the other hand, the differences in their binding targets are most likely dictated by amino acids that are not common to both proteins, although this aspect requires further study. It would also be interesting to observe if LNX1 or LNX2 binds phosphorylated tyrosine residues. Based on sequence homology, both LNX1 and LNX2 harbour most of the zinc-coordinating residues of the HYB domain. However, only LNX2 has the equivalent of R189 of Hakai. Neither of the LNX proteins has the equivalent of Y176. It is possible that these two proteins bind a different set of tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins by utilizing different residues within their sequences. Thus, while the basic sequence required to provide a unique pTyr-binding structure is apparent within the four proteins, a number of questions regarding the exact pTyr-binding requirements of these proteins remain unanswered.

In conclusion, we have identified a novel HYB domain, made up of two structurally atypical ZnF domains, which recognize a previously unidentified pTyr motif. Our structural data indicate that the HYB domain forms a positively charged pocket, implying that it represents a highly suitable drug target. As dysfunctional E3 ubiquitin ligases are often associated with diseases ( Burger et al, 2006 ; Lohr et al, 2010 ), the presence of the HYB domain in these proteins offers a specific target for directed therapies.
