---
pmid: '25342469'
title: Regulation of neuronal survival and morphology by the E3 ubiquitin ligase RNF157.
authors:
- Matz A
- Lee SJ
- Schwedhelm-Domeyer N
- Zanini D
- Holubowska A
- Kannan M
- Farnworth M
- Jahn O
- Göpfert MC
- Stegmüller J
journal: Cell Death Differ
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4356340
doi: 10.1038/cdd.2014.163
---

# Regulation of neuronal survival and morphology by the E3 ubiquitin ligase RNF157.
**Authors:** Matz A, Lee SJ, Schwedhelm-Domeyer N, Zanini D, Holubowska A, Kannan M, Farnworth M, Jahn O, Göpfert MC, Stegmüller J
**Journal:** Cell Death Differ (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/cdd.2014.163](https://doi.org/10.1038/cdd.2014.163)
**PMC:** [PMC4356340](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4356340/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Death Differ. 2015 Apr;22(4):626-42. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2014.163. Epub 2014
 Oct 24.

Regulation of neuronal survival and morphology by the E3 ubiquitin ligase 
RNF157.

Matz A(1), Lee SJ(1), Schwedhelm-Domeyer N(1), Zanini D(2), Holubowska A(3), 
Kannan M(1), Farnworth M(1), Jahn O(4), Göpfert MC(2), Stegmüller J(3).

Author information:
(1)Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology Group, Max Planck Institute of 
Experimental Medicine, Göttingen, Germany.
(2)Department of Cellular Neurobiology, Schwann-Schleiden Center, Julia 
Lermontowa Weg 3, University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.
(3)1] Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology Group, Max Planck Institute of 
Experimental Medicine, Göttingen, Germany [2] Center for Nanoscale Microscopy 
and Molecular Physiology of the Brain (CNMPB), Göttingen, Germany.
(4)1] Center for Nanoscale Microscopy and Molecular Physiology of the Brain 
(CNMPB), Göttingen, Germany [2] Proteomics Group, Max Planck Institute of 
Experimental Medicine, Göttingen, Germany.

Neuronal health is essential for the long-term integrity of the brain. In this 
study, we characterized the novel E3 ubiquitin ligase ring finger protein 157 
(RNF157), which displays a brain-dominant expression in mouse. RNF157 is a 
homolog of the E3 ligase mahogunin ring finger-1, which has been previously 
implicated in spongiform neurodegeneration. We identified RNF157 as a regulator 
of survival in cultured neurons and established that the ligase activity of 
RNF157 is crucial for this process. We also uncovered that independently of its 
ligase activity, RNF157 regulates dendrite growth and maintenance. We further 
identified the adaptor protein APBB1 (amyloid beta precursor protein-binding, 
family B, member 1 or Fe65) as an interactor and proteolytic substrate of RNF157 
in the control of neuronal survival. Here, the nuclear localization of Fe65 
together with its interaction partner RNA-binding protein SART3 (squamous cell 
carcinoma antigen recognized by T cells 3 or Tip110) is crucial to trigger 
apoptosis. In summary, we described that the E3 ligase RNF157 regulates 
important aspects of neuronal development.

DOI: 10.1038/cdd.2014.163
PMCID: PMC4356340
PMID: 25342469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
