---
pmid: '10918569'
title: 'PTEN expression is reduced in a subset of sporadic thyroid carcinomas: evidence
  that PTEN-growth suppressing activity in thyroid cancer cells mediated by p27kip1.'
authors:
- Bruni P
- Boccia A
- Baldassarre G
- Trapasso F
- Santoro M
- Chiappetta G
- Fusco A
- Viglietto G
journal: Oncogene
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1203633
---

# PTEN expression is reduced in a subset of sporadic thyroid carcinomas: evidence that PTEN-growth suppressing activity in thyroid cancer cells mediated by p27kip1.
**Authors:** Bruni P, Boccia A, Baldassarre G, Trapasso F, Santoro M, Chiappetta G, Fusco A, Viglietto G
**Journal:** Oncogene (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1203633](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1203633)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2000 Jun 29;19(28):3146-55. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1203633.

PTEN expression is reduced in a subset of sporadic thyroid carcinomas: evidence 
that PTEN-growth suppressing activity in thyroid cancer cells mediated by 
p27kip1.

Bruni P(1), Boccia A, Baldassarre G, Trapasso F, Santoro M, Chiappetta G, Fusco 
A, Viglietto G.

Author information:
(1)Servizio Oncologia Sperimentale E, Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Napoli, Italy.

The dual-specificity phosphatase PTEN/MMAC1/TEP1 has recently been identified as 
the tumor suppressor gene most frequently mutated and/or deleted in human 
tumors. Germline mutations of PTEN give rise to Cowden Disease (CD), an 
autosomal dominantly-inherited cancer syndrome which predisposes to increased 
risk of developing breast and thyroid tumors. However, PTEN mutations have 
rarely been detected in sporadic thyroid carcinomas. In this study, we confirm 
that PTEN mutations in sporadic thyroid cancer are infrequent as we found one 
point mutation and one heterozygous deletion of PTEN gene in 26 tumors and eight 
cell lines screened. However, we report that PTEN expression is reduced both at 
the mRNA and at the protein level - in five out of eight tumor-derived cell 
lines and in 24 out of 61 primary tumors. In most cases, decreased PTEN 
expression is correlated with increased phosphorylation of the PTEN-regulated 
protein kinase Akt/PKB. Moreover, we demonstrate that PTEN may act as a 
suppressor of thyroid cancerogenesis as the constitutive re-expression of PTEN 
into two different thyroid tumor cell lines markedly inhibits cell growth. 
PTEN-dependent inhibition of BrdU incorporation is accompanied by enhanced 
expression of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27kip1 and can be overcome 
by simultaneous co-transfection of an excess p27kip1 antisense plasmid. 
Accordingly, in a subset of thyroid primary carcinomas and tumor-derived cell 
lines, a striking correlation between PTEN expression and the level of p27kip1 
protein was observed. In conclusion, our findings demonstrate that inactivation 
of PTEN may play a role in the development of sporadic thyroid carcinomas and 
that one key target of PTEN suppressor activity is represented by the 
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27kip1.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1203633
PMID: 10918569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
