---
pmid: '20133945'
title: A conserved PMK-1/p38 MAPK is required in caenorhabditis elegans tissue-specific
  immune response to Yersinia pestis infection.
authors:
- Bolz DD
- Tenor JL
- Aballay A
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2856289
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.091629
---

# A conserved PMK-1/p38 MAPK is required in caenorhabditis elegans tissue-specific immune response to Yersinia pestis infection.
**Authors:** Bolz DD, Tenor JL, Aballay A
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M109.091629](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.091629)
**PMC:** [PMC2856289](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2856289/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 2;285(14):10832-40. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.091629. Epub 
2010 Feb 4.

A conserved PMK-1/p38 MAPK is required in caenorhabditis elegans tissue-specific 
immune response to Yersinia pestis infection.

Bolz DD(1), Tenor JL, Aballay A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical 
Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

Yersinia pestis has acquired a variety of complex strategies that enable the 
bacterium to overcome defenses in different hosts and ensure its survival and 
successful transmission. A full-genome microarray analysis on Caenorhabditis 
elegans infected with Y. pestis shows enrichment in genes that are markers of 
innate immune responses and regulated by a conserved PMK-1/p38 MAPK. Consistent 
with a role in regulating expression of immune effectors, inhibition of 
PMK-1/p38 by mutation or RNA interference enhances susceptibility to Y. pestis. 
Further studies of mosaic animals where PMK-1/p38 is exclusively inhibited or 
overexpressed in a tissue-specific manner indicate that PMK-1/p38 controls 
expression of a CUB-like family of immune genes at the cell-autonomous level. 
Given the conserved nature of PMK-1/p38 MAPK-mediated signaling and innate 
immune responses, PMK-1/p38 MAPK may play a role in the immune response against 
Y. pestis in natural hosts.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.091629
PMCID: PMC2856289
PMID: 20133945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
