---
pmid: '15930132'
title: Spindle checkpoint signaling requires the mis6 kinetochore subcomplex, which
  interacts with mad2 and mitotic spindles.
authors:
- Saitoh S
- Ishii K
- Kobayashi Y
- Takahashi K
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '2005'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1182306
doi: 10.1091/mbc.e05-01-0014
---

# Spindle checkpoint signaling requires the mis6 kinetochore subcomplex, which interacts with mad2 and mitotic spindles.
**Authors:** Saitoh S, Ishii K, Kobayashi Y, Takahashi K
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.e05-01-0014](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.e05-01-0014)
**PMC:** [PMC1182306](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1182306/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Cell. 2005 Aug;16(8):3666-77. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e05-01-0014. Epub 2005
 Jun 1.

Spindle checkpoint signaling requires the mis6 kinetochore subcomplex, which 
interacts with mad2 and mitotic spindles.

Saitoh S(1), Ishii K, Kobayashi Y, Takahashi K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cell Biology, Institute of Life Science, Kurume University, 
Fukuoka 839-0864, Japan.

The spindle checkpoint coordinates cell cycle progression and chromosome 
segregation by inhibiting anaphase promoting complex/cyclosome until all 
kinetochores interact with the spindle properly. During early mitosis, the 
spindle checkpoint proteins, such as Mad2 and Bub1, accumulate at kinetochores 
that do not associate with the spindle. Here, we assess the requirement of 
various kinetochore components for the accumulation of Mad2 and Bub1 on the 
kinetochore in fission yeast and show that the necessity of the Mis6-complex and 
the Nuf2-complex is an evolutionarily conserved feature in the loading of Mad2 
onto the kinetochore. Furthermore, we demonstrated that Nuf2 is required for 
maintaining the Mis6-complex on the kinetochore during mitosis. The Mis6-complex 
physically interacts with Mad2 under the condition that the Mad2-dependent 
checkpoint is activated. Ectopically expressed N-terminal fragments of Mis6 
localize along the mitotic spindle, highlighting the potential binding ability 
of Mis6 not only to the centromeric chromatin but also to the spindle 
microtubules. We propose that the Mis6-complex, in collaboration with the 
Nuf2-complex, monitors the spindle-kinetochore attachment state and acts as a 
platform for Mad2 to accumulate at unattached kinetochores.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e05-01-0014
PMCID: PMC1182306
PMID: 15930132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The spindle checkpoint coordinates cell cycle progression and chromosome segregation by inhibiting anaphase promoting complex/cyclosome until all kinetochores interact with the spindle properly. During early mitosis, the spindle checkpoint proteins, such as Mad2 and Bub1, accumulate at kinetochores that do not associate with the spindle. Here, we assess the requirement of various kinetochore components for the accumulation of Mad2 and Bub1 on the kinetochore in fission yeast and show that the necessity of the Mis6-complex and the Nuf2-complex is an evolutionarily conserved feature in the loading of Mad2 onto the kinetochore. Furthermore, we demonstrated that Nuf2 is required for maintaining the Mis6-complex on the kinetochore during mitosis. The Mis6-complex physically interacts with Mad2 under the condition that the Mad2-dependent checkpoint is activated. Ectopically expressed N-terminal fragments of Mis6 localize along the mitotic spindle, highlighting the potential binding ability of Mis6 not only to the centromeric chromatin but also to the spindle microtubules. We propose that the Mis6-complex, in collaboration with the Nuf2-complex, monitors the spindle–kinetochore attachment state and acts as a platform for Mad2 to accumulate at unattached kinetochores.

INTRODUCTION

The kinetochore is a multiprotein complex that is formed on centromeric DNA and serves as an interface connecting the spindle and the chromosome during mitosis. From prometaphase to metaphase, the kineotochore acts as a sensor of spindle microtubule (MT) association and regulates the onset of anaphase via the mitotic checkpoint. The mitotic checkpoint detects aberrations in the kinetochore–spindle interaction during early mitosis, transmits inhibitory signals to anaphase promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C), and thus prevents the metaphase–anaphase transition until all chromosomes have established a bipolar attachment with the spindle ( Cleveland et al ., 2003 ). Genes involved in the mitotic checkpoint are evolutionarily conserved, and many of them are implicated in tumorigenesis ( Cahill et al ., 1998 ). At the early stage of mitosis, the key components of the mitotic checkpoint, such as Mad2, Bub1, and BubR1, accumulate on kinetochores that are not properly connected with the spindle ( Chen et al ., 1996 ; Li and Benezra, 1996 ; Taylor and McKeon, 1997 ; Taylor et al ., 1998 ). It has been proposed that Mad2, along with its binding partner Mad1, recognizes and localizes to unattached kinetochores that are not captured by the spindle, whereas Bub1 and BubR1 attach to tension-less kinetochores that are not pulled by the spindle in both directions ( Waters et al ., 1998 ; Skoufias et al ., 2001 ). In vertebrate cells, kinetochore components Mis6/CENP-I protein and the Nuf2-complex have been reported to be required for kinetochore accumulation of Mad2 ( Martin-Lluesma et al ., 2002 ; DeLuca et al ., 2003 ; Hori et al ., 2003 ; Liu et al ., 2003 ). However, the molecular basis of this accumulation is still largely unknown; particularly, the kinetochore components that accept the checkpoint proteins remain to be identified.

Comprehensive studies in budding yeast revealed that the kinetochore can be dissected into discrete subcomplexes (Cheeseman et al ., 2002a , b ; De Wulf et al ., 2003 ; Westermann et al ., 2003 ). Based on studies in human and the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe , at least four well-characterized kinetochore subcomplexes are evolutionarily conserved: the CENP-A–containing nucleosomes, the Mis6-complex, the Mis12-complex, and the Nuf2-complex ( Takahashi et al ., 2000 ; Nabetani et al ., 2001 ; Wigge and Kilmartin, 2001 ; Hayashi et al ., 2004 ; Obuse et al ., 2004 ). CENP-A is a centromere-specific histone H3 variant. Kinetochore localization of SpCENP-A (gene name is cnp1 + ) requires the Mis6-complex in fission yeast ( Takahashi et al ., 2000 ; Hayashi et al ., 2004 ). Fission yeast Mis6, which is homologous to Mis6/LRPR1/CENP-I in vertebrates ( Saitoh et al ., 1997 ; Nishihashi et al ., 2002 ; Liu et al ., 2003 ), forms a complex with Mis15, Mis17, and Sim4 ( Pidoux et al ., 2003 ; Hayashi et al ., 2004 ). Sim4 seems to be a homologue of vertebrate CENP-H ( Pidoux et al ., 2003 ). Another conserved kinetochore protein, Mis12, which is dispensable for CENP-A loading ( Takahashi et al ., 2000 ; Goshima et al ., 2003 ), forms a complex with Mis13 and Mis14 ( Hayashi et al ., 2004 ; Obuse et al ., 2004 ), but not with Mis6 ( Goshima et al ., 1999 ). The Mis6-complex, the Mis12-complex and the CENP-A–containing nucleosomes constitutively localize on the kinetochore.

Nuf2 was originally identified in budding yeast as a component of the spindle pole body (SPB) ( Osborne et al ., 1994 ; Wigge et al ., 1998 ), which is equivalent to the centorosome in higher eukaryotes. In addition, Nuf2 was found to be a component of the kinetochore ( Wigge and Kilmartin, 2001 ). Nuf2 forms a protein complex containing Ndc80/Hec1 ( Janke et al ., 2001 ; Wigge and Kilmartin, 2001 ), whose expression is elevated in cancer cell lines ( Chen et al ., 1997 ). Unlike three constitutive kinetochore subcomplexes mentioned above, the vertebrate Nuf2-complex localizes on the kinetochore in a cell cycle-dependent manner ( Howe et al ., 2001 ; Nabetani et al ., 2001 ); it localizes at the kinetochore during mitosis, and localizes at the centrosome during G 1 and S phase ( Hori et al ., 2003 ). Fission yeast Nuf2 is required for clustering of the centromeres near the SPB during interphase ( Appelgren et al ., 2003 ) and for proper chromosome segregation in mitosis ( Nabetani et al ., 2001 ; Appelgren et al ., 2003 ). The Nuf2-complex thus seems to be a mitosis-specific component of the kinetochore. Incorporation of such mitosis-specific components may be essential for the kinetochore to gain its mitotic functions, such as the association with the spindle MTs, and monitoring the MT attachment state.

Interestingly, in the fission yeast mutant cells with defects in any of these four kinetochore complexes, the mitotic phases seem to proceed normally, and fatal unequal chromosome segregation consequently occurs; it implies that the checkpoint does not function properly in these mutant cells ( Saitoh et al ., 1997 ; Goshima et al ., 1999 ; Takahashi et al ., 2000 ; Nabetani et al ., 2001 ; Pidoux et al ., 2003 ). Here, we thus investigate the involvement of these kinetochore complexes in the mitotic checkpoint signaling pathway and find that the Mad2-dependant checkpoint pathway is specifically impaired in mis6-302 mutant. We also find that both the Mis6-complex and the Nuf2-complex are vital for the Mad2 accumulation at the kinetochore in fission yeast, suggesting that the mechanism for the kinetochore loading of Mad2 seems to be conserved among fission yeast and vertebrates. We demonstrate that the Mis6 complex physically associates with Mad2 under the condition that the checkpoint is activated, whereas the incorporation of the Nuf2-complex stabilizes the kinetochore association of the Mis6-complex during mitosis. Furthermore, we present evidence to suggest that Mis6 possesses the potential to interact with the spindle MTs. Therefore, the Mis6-complex may act as an acceptor for Mad2 at unattached kinetochores and coordinate Mad2 accumulation and the spindle attachment state.

DISCUSSION

The kinetochore is a huge multiprotein complex consisting of a number of distinct subcomplexes that are formed on the CENP-A–containing nucleosomes (CENP-A-H4-H2A-H2B) ( Cleveland et al ., 2003 ). In fission yeast, the Mis6-complex (Mis6-Sim4-Mis15-Mis17), the Mis12-complex (Mis12-Mis13-Mis14), and the Nuf2-complex (Nuf2-Hec1-Spc24-Spc25) have been proposed to represent different kinetochore subcomplexes ( Wigge and Kilmartin, 2001 ; Appelgren et al ., 2003 ; Hayashi et al ., 2004 ; Obuse et al ., 2004 ). In this report, we showed that inactivation of the component in either the Mis6-complex or the Nuf2-complex impairs the kinetochore accumulation of the mitotic checkpoint protein Mad2 but not Bub1 in fission yeast. In contrast, mutations in either Mis12 or SpCENP-A did not severely affect the Mad2 or the Bub1 localization. The present study is consistent with previous reports that Mis6/CENP-I and Nuf2-Hec1 are required for the kinetochore accumulation of Mad2 in higher eukaryotes ( Martin-Lluesma et al ., 2002 ; DeLuca et al ., 2003 ; Hori et al ., 2003 ; Liu et al ., 2003 ). Therefore, the importance of both Mis6/CENP-I and Nuf2-Hec1 in a mechanism of the Mad2 accumulation on the kinetochore seemed to be evolutionarily conserved. To adjust the MT-driven dynamic behavior of chromosomes with the progression of mitosis, at least two aspects of kinetochore states, i.e., the interkinetochore tension and the outer-kinetochore attachment to MTs are thought to be monitored by the BubR1-Bub1–dependent and the Mad2-Mad1–dependent checkpoint pathways, respectively ( Waters et al ., 1998 ; Skoufias et al ., 2001 ). The mis6 mutation causes a synthetic defect in cell growth with elevated chromosome missegregation when combined with Δ bub1 but not with Δ mad2 (our unpublished data), suggesting that the Mad2-dependent spindle attachment checkpoint response is specifically impaired in cells defective in the Mis6-complex. Noteworthy, in CENP-I–depleted HeLa cells, the treatment with MT-depolymerizing drug delayed mitotic progression in Mad2-dependent manner despite the mislocalization of Mad2 ( Liu et al ., 2003 ), whereas fission yeast mis6-302 mutation substantially impaired the checkpoint response to the drug treatment. The kinetochore targeting of Mad2 seems to be crucial for the checkpoint activation in fission yeast; additional checkpoint components existing only in higher eukaryotes might alleviate the requirement of Mad2 targeting.

Our findings not only confirm the results of previous vertebrate studies but also provide further insight into the molecular mechanism of the Mad2 accumulation on the kinetochore. We demonstrated that Mis6 physically interacts with Mad2 under the condition that the Mad2-dependent checkpoint is activated. This suggests that the Mis6-complex acts as a platform for the Mad2 accumulation at the kinetochore. Recently, fission yeast Mad2 was reported to bind to the central core domain of the centromere ( cnt and imr ), but not to the franking heterochromatic region ( otr ) ( Vanoosthuyse et al ., 2004 ). This is consistent with the present study, because Mis6 binds specifically to the central core region ( Saitoh et al ., 1997 ). We showed that the Nuf2-complex also was required for the kinetochore accumulation of Mad2. Although it remains to be clarified whether fission yeast Nuf2-complex localizes on the kinetochore in a cell-cycle dependent manner, it is likely that fission yeast Nuf2 is incorporated to the kinetochore specifically during mitosis based on the results of the homologues in other organism ( Howe et al ., 2001 ; Nabetani et al ., 2001 ; Hori et al ., 2003 ). Given that the fission yeast Nuf2-complex is a mitosis-specific kinetochore component, it would be explained why Mad2 accumulates at unattached kinetochores only during mitosis, but not in interphase; incorporation of the Nuf2-complex may cause the structural change in the kinetochore that allows the Mis6-complex to associate with Mad2. We found that Sim4 delocalized from the kinetochore during passage of mitosis in nuf2-1 mutant cells, indicating that Nuf2 is essential for the stable association of the Mis6-complex on the kinetochore during mitosis. Fission yeast Mis6 has been shown to be required for the loading of SpCENP-A to the centromeric chromatin ( Takahashi et al ., 2000 ) and thus has been assumed to function near the chromatin and not at the kinetochore surface that the spindle MTs attach to. In contrast, it has been suggested that Nuf2 localizes at the kinetochore periphery, the outer plate, close to the spindle MTs ( Wigge and Kilmartin, 2001 ; Deluca et al ., 2005 ). Therefore, Nuf2-complex may bring the Mis6-complex to the kinetochore periphery where it can physically interact with Mad2 during early mitosis. Alternatively, Mad2 may simultaneously interact with both the Mis6- and the Nuf2-complex. Mad2 was shown to form a complex with Mad1, which plays an important role in Mad2 localization (Chen et al ., 1998 , 1999 ; Jin et al ., 1998 ; Ikui et al ., 2002 ). Two-hybrid assay revealed that Mad1 can physically bind to human Hec1 ( Martin-Lluesma et al ., 2002 ), which forms a complex with Nuf2. Thus, ternary subcomplex interaction among Mis6-Sim4, Nuf2-Hec1, and Mad1-Mad2 may be established upon entry into mitosis, because Mad1-Mad2 forms a link between the other two complexes; this inter-subcomplex interaction might be crucial for Mad2 to recognize the kinetochore that has not properly attached to the spindle MTs. Consistently, it was recently shown that CENP-H, a putative homologue of Sim4, was coimmunoprecipitated with both the Nuf2-complex and Mad2 in a chicken cell ( Mikami et al ., 2005 ). The Mis6-complex and the Nuf2-complex may be involved in different aspects of Mad2 accumulation, such as “recruitment” and “retention,” onto the kinetochore.

An important question with regard to the regulation of the Mad2 localization is the absence of Mad2 accumulation on kinetochores that attached to the spindle. At present, this question remains to be answered. However, we demonstrated that ectopically expressed Mis6 N-terminal fragments localize along the mitotic spindle, but not along the interphase MTs, highlighting the potential binding ability of Mis6 not only to the centromeric chromatin but also to a subset of the spindle MTs, presumably MTs attaching to kinetochores. In addition, Mis6 also interacts with Mad2. We currently speculate that Mis6 might interact with the spindle MTs that attach onto kinetochores and that this Mis6–MT interaction might prevent further association of Mad2 in a competitive manner. Therefore, Mis6 may be a sensor of the spindle attachment for the Mad2-related checkpoint. Consistent with this hypothesis, mis6-302 mutant cells were shown to override the Mad2-dependent checkpoint response to MT depolymerization.

In fission yeast, compromising Mad2 function does not cause fetal chromosome missegregation. This suggests that the Mis6-complex acts not solely as a component of the mitotic checkpoint. Localization of SpCENP-A also is impaired in any of the mis6, mis15, mis17 and sim4 mutant ( Takahashi et al ., 2000 ; Pidoux et al ., 2003 ; Hayashi et al ., 2004 ), indicating that the Mis6-complex plays dual roles in both SpCENP-A incorporation into the centromere nucleosomes and the Mad2 accumulation on the surface of unattached kinetochores. It has been proposed that CENP-A may be correctly incorporated at mitosis only when proper kinetochore-spindle attachments produce tension at functional kinetochores ( Mellone and Allshire, 2003 ; Pidoux et al ., 2003 ). The Mis6-complex could be a good candidate for a molecular interface that potentially transmits the positional information regarding the spindle attachment site to the SpCENP-A loading pathway.
