---
pmid: '17705025'
title: High frequency of missense mutations in glycogen storage disease type VI.
authors:
- Beauchamp NJ
- Taybert J
- Champion MP
- Layet V
- Heinz-Erian P
- Dalton A
- Tanner MS
- Pronicka E
- Sharrard MJ
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s10545-007-0499-9
pubmed_publication_types:
- Case Reports
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: CASE_REPORT
---

# High frequency of missense mutations in glycogen storage disease type VI.
**Authors:** Beauchamp NJ, Taybert J, Champion MP, Layet V, Heinz-Erian P, Dalton A, Tanner MS, Pronicka E, Sharrard MJ
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-007-0499-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-007-0499-9)

## Abstract

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2007 Oct;30(5):722-34. doi: 10.1007/s10545-007-0499-9.
Epub  2007 Aug 21.

High frequency of missense mutations in glycogen storage disease type VI.

Beauchamp NJ(1), Taybert J, Champion MP, Layet V, Heinz-Erian P, Dalton A, 
Tanner MS, Pronicka E, Sharrard MJ.

Author information:
(1)Academic Unit of Child Health, University of Sheffield, Stephenson Wing, 
Sheffield Children's NHS Trust, Western Bank, Sheffield, S10 2TH, UK. 
n.j.beauchamp@sheffield.ac.uk

Deficiency of liver glycogen phosphorylase in glycogen storage disease (GSD) 
type VI results in a reduced ability to mobilize glucose from glycogen. Six 
mutations of the PYGL gene, which encodes the liver isoform of the enzyme, have 
been identified in the literature. We have characterized eight patients from 
seven families with GSD type VI and identified 11 novel PYGL gene defects. The 
majority of the mutations were missense, resulting in the substitution of highly 
conserved residues. These could be grouped into those that were predicted to 
affect substrate binding (p.V456M, p.E673K, p.S675L, p.S675T), pyridoxal 
phosphate binding (p.R491C, p.K681T), or activation of glycogen phosphorylase 
(p.Q13P) or that had an unknown effect (p.N632I and p.D634H). Two mutations were 
predicted to result in null alleles, p.R399X and 
[c.1964_1969inv6;c.1969+1_+4delGTAC]. Only 7 of the 23 (30%) reported PYGL 
alleles carry nonsense, splice site or frameshift mutations compared to 68-80% 
of affected alleles of the highly homologous muscle glycogen phosphorylase gene, 
PYGM, that underlie McArdle disease. There was heterogeneity in the clinical 
symptoms observed in affected individuals. These varied from hepatomegaly and 
subclinical hypoglycaemia, to severe hepatomegaly with recurrent severe 
hypoglycaemia and postprandial lactic acidosis. We conclude that deficiency of 
liver glycogen phosphorylase is predominantly the result of missense mutations 
affecting enzyme activity. There are no common mutations and the severity of 
clinical symptoms varies significantly.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-007-0499-9
PMID: 17705025 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
