---
pmid: '12747833'
title: 'Arabidopsis HEN1: a genetic link between endogenous miRNA controlling development
  and siRNA controlling transgene silencing and virus resistance.'
authors:
- Boutet S
- Vazquez F
- Liu J
- Béclin C
- Fagard M
- Gratias A
- Morel JB
- Crété P
- Chen X
- Vaucheret H
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5137371
doi: 10.1016/s0960-9822(03)00293-8
---

# Arabidopsis HEN1: a genetic link between endogenous miRNA controlling development and siRNA controlling transgene silencing and virus resistance.
**Authors:** Boutet S, Vazquez F, Liu J, Béclin C, Fagard M, Gratias A, Morel JB, Crété P, Chen X, Vaucheret H
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0960-9822(03)00293-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0960-9822(03)00293-8)
**PMC:** [PMC5137371](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5137371/)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2003 May 13;13(10):843-8. doi: 10.1016/s0960-9822(03)00293-8.

Arabidopsis HEN1: a genetic link between endogenous miRNA controlling
development and siRNA controlling transgene silencing and virus resistance.

Boutet S(1), Vazquez F, Liu J, Béclin C, Fagard M, Gratias A, Morel JB, Crété P,
Chen X, Vaucheret H.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Cellulaire, INRA, 78026 Versailles Cedex, France.

In animals, double-stranded short interfering RNA (siRNA) and single-stranded
microRNA (miRNA) regulate gene expression by targeting homologous mRNA for
cleavage or by interfering with their translation, respectively. siRNAs are
processed from injected or transgene-derived, long, perfect double-stranded RNA
(dsRNA), while miRNAs are processed from short, imperfect dsRNA precursors
transcribed from endogenous intergenic regions. In plants, both siRNAs and
miRNAs activate cleavage of homologous RNA targets, but little is known about
the genes controlling their production or action. The SGS2/SDE1 protein
contributes to produce transgene siRNA, while DCL1 and HEN1 contribute to
endogenous miRNA accumulation. Here, we show that: i) SGS2, SGS3, AGO1, and HEN1
contribute to produce transgene siRNA involved in sense posttranscriptional gene
silencing (S-PTGS); ii) HEN1, but not SGS2, SGS3, or AGO1, contributes to the
accumulation of the endogenous miR171 miRNA and to the cleavage of Scarecrow
target mRNA by miR171; iii) SGS2, SGS3, AGO1, and HEN1 contribute to resistance
against cucumber mosaic virus, but not to siRNA and IR-PTGS triggered by hairpin
transgenes directly producing perfect dsRNA; and iv) the actions of HEN1 in
miRNA/development and siRNA/S-PTGS can be uncoupled by single-point mutations at
different positions in the protein.

DOI: 10.1016/s0960-9822(03)00293-8
PMCID: PMC5137371
PMID: 12747833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
