---
pmid: '20015955'
title: Interaction between Sdo1p and Btn1p in the Saccharomyces cerevisiae model for
  Batten disease.
authors:
- Vitiello SP
- Benedict JW
- Padilla-Lopez S
- Pearce DA
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2816617
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp560
---

# Interaction between Sdo1p and Btn1p in the Saccharomyces cerevisiae model for Batten disease.
**Authors:** Vitiello SP, Benedict JW, Padilla-Lopez S, Pearce DA
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddp560](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddp560)
**PMC:** [PMC2816617](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2816617/)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Mar 1;19(5):931-42. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp560. Epub 2009 Dec
 16.

Interaction between Sdo1p and Btn1p in the Saccharomyces cerevisiae model for 
Batten disease.

Vitiello SP(1), Benedict JW, Padilla-Lopez S, Pearce DA.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neural Development and Disease, Aab Institute of Biomedical 
Sciences, University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, 
NY 14642, USA.

Juvenile Batten disease is an autosomal recessive pediatric neurodegenerative 
disorder caused by mutations in the CLN3 gene. The CLN3 protein primarily 
resides in the lysosomal membrane, but its function is unknown. We demonstrate 
that CLN3 interacts with SBDS, the protein mutated in Shwachman-Bodian-Diamond 
syndrome patients. We demonstrate that this protein-protein interaction is 
conserved between Btn1p and Sdo1p, the respective yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
orthologs of CLN3 and SBDS. It was previously shown that deletion of BTN1 
results in alterations in vacuolar pH and vacuolar (H(+))-ATPase 
(V-ATPase)-dependent H(+) transport and ATP hydrolysis. Here, we report that an 
SDO1 deletion strain has decreased vacuolar pH and V-ATPase-dependent H(+) 
transport and ATP hydrolysis. These alterations result from decreased V-ATPase 
subunit expression. Overexpression of BTN1 or the presence of ionophore carbonyl 
cyanide m-chlorophenil hydrazone (CCCP) causes decreased growth in yeast lacking 
SDO1. In fact, in normal cells, overexpression of BTN1 mirrors the effect of 
CCCP, with both resulting in increased vacuolar pH due to alterations in the 
coupling of V-ATPase-dependent H(+) transport and ATP hydrolysis. Thus, we 
propose that Sdo1p and SBDS work to regulate Btn1p and CLN3, respectively. This 
report highlights a novel mechanism for controlling vacuole/lysosome homeostasis 
by the ribosome maturation pathway that may contribute to the cellular 
abnormalities associated with juvenile Batten disease and 
Shwachman-Bodian-Diamond syndrome.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddp560
PMCID: PMC2816617
PMID: 20015955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
