---
pmid: '29500230'
title: EPT1 (selenoprotein I) is critical for the neural development and maintenance
  of plasmalogen in humans.
authors:
- Horibata Y
- Elpeleg O
- Eran A
- Hirabayashi Y
- Savitzki D
- Tal G
- Mandel H
- Sugimoto H
journal: J Lipid Res
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5983406
doi: 10.1194/jlr.P081620
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# EPT1 (selenoprotein I) is critical for the neural development and maintenance of plasmalogen in humans.
**Authors:** Horibata Y, Elpeleg O, Eran A, Hirabayashi Y, Savitzki D, Tal G, Mandel H, Sugimoto H
**Journal:** J Lipid Res (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1194/jlr.P081620](https://doi.org/10.1194/jlr.P081620)
**PMC:** [PMC5983406](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5983406/)

## Abstract

1. J Lipid Res. 2018 Jun;59(6):1015-1026. doi: 10.1194/jlr.P081620. Epub 2018 Mar
 2.

EPT1 (selenoprotein I) is critical for the neural development and maintenance of 
plasmalogen in humans.

Horibata Y(1), Elpeleg O(2), Eran A(3), Hirabayashi Y(4), Savitzki D(5), Tal 
G(6), Mandel H(7), Sugimoto H(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Dokkyo Medical University School of Medicine, 
Mibu, Tochigi, Japan.
(2)Monique and Jacques Roboh Department of Genetic Research, Hadassah-Hebrew 
University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
(3)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel.
(4)Molecular Membrane Neuroscience, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Wako, 
Saitama, Japan.
(5)Pediatric Neurology Unit, Galilee Medical Center, Nahariya, Israel.
(6)Metabolic Unit, Rambam Health Care Campus, Rappaport School of Medicine, 
Haifa, Israel.
(7)Metabolic Unit, Rambam Health Care Campus, Rappaport School of Medicine, 
Haifa, Israel. Electronic address: h_mandel@rambam.health.gov.il.
(8)Department of Biochemistry, Dokkyo Medical University School of Medicine, 
Mibu, Tochigi, Japan. Electronic address: h-sugi@dokkyomed.ac.jp.

Ethanolamine phosphotransferase (EPT)1, also known as selenoprotein 1 (SELENOI), 
is an enzyme that transfers phosphoethanolamine from cytidine 
diphosphate-ethanolamine to lipid acceptors to produce ethanolamine 
glycerophospholipids, such as diacyl-linked phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) and 
ether-linked plasmalogen [1-alkenyl-2-acyl-glycerophosphoethanolamine 
(plasmenyl-PE)]. However, to date there has been no analysis of the metabolomic 
consequences of the mutation of EPT1 on the concentration of ethanolamine 
glycerophospholipids in mammalian cells. We studied a patient with severe 
complicated hereditary spastic paraplegia, sensorineural-deafness, blindness, 
and seizures. Neuroimaging revealed hypomyelination, followed by brain atrophy 
mainly in the cerebellum and brainstem. Using whole exome sequencing, we 
identified a novel EPT1 mutation (exon skipping). In vitro EPT activity, as well 
as the rate of biosynthesis of ethanolamine glycerophospholipids, was markedly 
reduced in cultures of the patient's skin fibroblasts. Quantification of 
phospholipids by LC-MS/MS demonstrated reduced levels of several PE species with 
polyunsaturated fatty acids, such as 38:6, 38:4, 40:6, 40:5, and 40:4. Notably, 
most plasmenyl-PE species were significantly decreased in the patient's cells, 
whereas most plasmanylcholine [1-alkyl-2-acyl-glycerophosphocholine 
(plasmanyl-PC)] species were increased. Similar findings regarding decreased 
plasmenyl-PE and increased plasmanyl-PC were obtained using EPT1-KO HeLa cells. 
Our data demonstrate for the first time the indispensable role of EPT1 in the 
myelination process and neurodevelopment, and in the maintenance of normal 
homeostasis of ether-linked phospholipids in humans.

Copyright © 2018 by the American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 
Inc.

DOI: 10.1194/jlr.P081620
PMCID: PMC5983406
PMID: 29500230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.
