---
pmid: '12297050'
title: Crystal structure of the complex of human epidermal growth factor and receptor
  extracellular domains.
authors:
- Ogiso H
- Ishitani R
- Nureki O
- Fukai S
- Yamanaka M
- Kim JH
- Saito K
- Sakamoto A
- Inoue M
- Shirouzu M
- Yokoyama S
journal: Cell
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(02)00963-7
---

# Crystal structure of the complex of human epidermal growth factor and receptor extracellular domains.
**Authors:** Ogiso H, Ishitani R, Nureki O, Fukai S, Yamanaka M, Kim JH, Saito K, Sakamoto A, Inoue M, Shirouzu M, Yokoyama S
**Journal:** Cell (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(02)00963-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(02)00963-7)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2002 Sep 20;110(6):775-87. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(02)00963-7.

Crystal structure of the complex of human epidermal growth factor and receptor 
extracellular domains.

Ogiso H(1), Ishitani R, Nureki O, Fukai S, Yamanaka M, Kim JH, Saito K, Sakamoto 
A, Inoue M, Shirouzu M, Yokoyama S.

Author information:
(1)RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi, 230-0045, 
Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.

Epidermal growth factor (EGF) regulates cell proliferation and differentiation 
by binding to the EGF receptor (EGFR) extracellular region, comprising domains 
I-IV, with the resultant dimerization of the receptor tyrosine kinase. In this 
study, the crystal structure of a 2:2 complex of human EGF and the EGFR 
extracellular region has been determined at 3.3 A resolution. EGFR domains I-III 
are arranged in a C shape, and EGF is docked between domains I and III. The 1:1 
EGF*EGFR complex dimerizes through a direct receptor*receptor interaction, in 
which a protruding beta-hairpin arm of each domain II holds the body of the 
other. The unique "receptor-mediated dimerization" was verified by EGFR 
mutagenesis.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(02)00963-7
PMID: 12297050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
