---
pmid: '15805470'
title: Histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3) activity is regulated by interaction with protein
  serine/threonine phosphatase 4.
authors:
- Zhang X
- Ozawa Y
- Lee H
- Wen YD
- Tan TH
- Wadzinski BE
- Seto E
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1074320
doi: 10.1101/gad.1286005
---

# Histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3) activity is regulated by interaction with protein serine/threonine phosphatase 4.
**Authors:** Zhang X, Ozawa Y, Lee H, Wen YD, Tan TH, Wadzinski BE, Seto E
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.1286005](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.1286005)
**PMC:** [PMC1074320](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1074320/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2005 Apr 1;19(7):827-39. doi: 10.1101/gad.1286005.

Histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3) activity is regulated by interaction with protein 
serine/threonine phosphatase 4.

Zhang X(1), Ozawa Y, Lee H, Wen YD, Tan TH, Wadzinski BE, Seto E.

Author information:
(1)H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa, Florida 33612, 
USA.

Histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3) is one of four members of the human class I HDACs 
that regulates gene expression by deacetylation of histones and nonhistone 
proteins. Early studies have suggested that HDAC3 activity is regulated by 
association with the corepressors N-CoR and SMRT. Here we demonstrate that, in 
addition to protein-protein interactions with NCoR/SMRT, the activity of HDAC3 
is regulated by both phosphorylation and dephosphorylation. A protein kinase CK2 
phosphoacceptor site in the HDAC3 protein was identified at position Ser424, 
which is a nonconserved residue among the class I HDACs. Mutation of this 
residue was found to reduce deacetylase activity. Interestingly, unlike other 
class I HDACs, HDAC3 uniquely copurifies with the catalytic and regulatory 
subunits of the protein serine/threonine phosphatase 4 complex (PP4c/PP4R1). 
Furthermore, HDAC3 complexes displayed protein phosphatase activity and a series 
of subsequent mutational analyses revealed that the N terminus of HDAC3 
(residues 1-122) was both necessary and sufficient for HDAC3-PP4c interactions. 
Significantly, both overexpression and siRNA knock-down approaches, and analysis 
of cells devoid of PP4c, unequivocally show that HDAC3 activity is inversely 
proportional to the cellular abundance of PP4(c). These findings therefore 
further highlight the importance of protein-protein interactions and extend the 
significance of dephosphorylation in the regulation of HDAC activity, as well as 
present a novel alternative pathway by which HDAC3 activity is regulated.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.1286005
PMCID: PMC1074320
PMID: 15805470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
