---
pmid: '17430889'
title: Human OLA1 defines an ATPase subfamily in the Obg family of GTP-binding proteins.
authors:
- Koller-Eichhorn R
- Marquardt T
- Gail R
- Wittinghofer A
- Kostrewa D
- Kutay U
- Kambach C
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M700541200
---

# Human OLA1 defines an ATPase subfamily in the Obg family of GTP-binding proteins.
**Authors:** Koller-Eichhorn R, Marquardt T, Gail R, Wittinghofer A, Kostrewa D, Kutay U, Kambach C
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M700541200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M700541200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jul 6;282(27):19928-37. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M700541200. Epub
2007  Apr 12.

Human OLA1 defines an ATPase subfamily in the Obg family of GTP-binding 
proteins.

Koller-Eichhorn R(1), Marquardt T, Gail R, Wittinghofer A, Kostrewa D, Kutay U, 
Kambach C.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland.

Purine nucleotide-binding proteins build the large family of P-loop GTPases and 
related ATPases, which perform essential functions in all kingdoms of life. The 
Obg family comprises a group of ancient GTPases belonging to the TRAFAC (for 
translation factors) class and can be subdivided into several distinct protein 
subfamilies. The founding member of one of these subfamilies is the bacterial 
P-loop NTPase YchF, which had so far been assumed to act as GTPase. We have 
biochemically characterized the human homologue of YchF and found that it binds 
and hydrolyzes ATP more efficiently than GTP. For this reason, we have termed 
the protein hOLA1, for human Obg-like ATPase 1. Further biochemical 
characterization of YchF proteins from different species revealed that ATPase 
activity is a general but previously missed feature of the YchF subfamily of 
Obg-like GTPases. To explain ATP specificity of hOLA1, we have solved the x-ray 
structure of hOLA1 bound to the nonhydrolyzable ATP analogue AMPPCP. Our 
structural data help to explain the altered nucleotide specificity of YchF 
homologues and identify the Ola1/YchF subfamily of the Obg-related NTPases as an 
exceptional example of a single protein subfamily, which has evolved altered 
nucleotide specificity within a distinct protein family of GTPases.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M700541200
PMID: 17430889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
