---
pmid: '25246594'
title: FBH1 affects warm temperature responses in the Arabidopsis circadian clock.
authors:
- Nagel DH
- Pruneda-Paz JL
- Kay SA
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2014'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4210019
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1416666111
---

# FBH1 affects warm temperature responses in the Arabidopsis circadian clock.
**Authors:** Nagel DH, Pruneda-Paz JL, Kay SA
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1416666111](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1416666111)
**PMC:** [PMC4210019](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4210019/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Oct 7;111(40):14595-600. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1416666111. Epub 2014 Sep 22.

FBH1 affects warm temperature responses in the Arabidopsis circadian clock.

Nagel DH(1), Pruneda-Paz JL(2), Kay SA(3).

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Computational Biology Section, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, CA 90089; and.
(2)Section of Cell and Developmental Biology, Division of Biological Sciences, 
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093.
(3)Molecular and Computational Biology Section, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, CA 90089; and stevekay@usc.edu.

In Arabidopsis, the circadian clock allows the plant to coordinate daily 
external signals with internal processes, conferring enhanced fitness and growth 
vigor. Although external cues such as temperature can entrain the clock, an 
important feature of the clock is the ability to maintain a relatively constant 
period over a range of physiological temperatures; this ability is referred to 
as "temperature compensation." However, how temperature actually is perceived 
and integrated into the clock molecular circuitry remains largely unknown. In an 
effort to identify additional regulators of the circadian clock, including 
putative components that could modulate the clock response to changes in 
environmental signals, we identified in a previous large-scale screen a 
transcription factor that interacts with and regulates the promoter activity of 
a core clock gene. In this report, we characterized this transcription factor, 
flowering basic helix-loop-helix 1 (FBH1) that binds in vivo to the promoter of 
the key clock gene circadian clock-associated 1 (CCA1) and regulates its 
expression. We found that upon temperature changes, overexpression of FBH1 
alters the pace of CCA1 expression by causing a period shortening and thus 
preventing the clock from buffering against this change in temperature. 
Furthermore, as is consistent with the current mechanistic model of feedback 
loops observed in the clock regulatory network, we also determined that CCA1 
binds in vivo to the FBH1 promoter and regulates its expression. Together these 
results establish a role for FBH1 as a transcriptional modulator of warm 
temperature signals and clock responses in Arabidopsis.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1416666111
PMCID: PMC4210019
PMID: 25246594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

In Arabidopsis , the circadian clock allows the plant to coordinate daily external signals with internal processes, conferring enhanced fitness and growth vigor. Although external cues such as temperature can entrain the clock, an important feature of the clock is the ability to maintain a relatively constant period over a range of physiological temperatures; this ability is referred to as “temperature compensation.” However, how temperature actually is perceived and integrated into the clock molecular circuitry remains largely unknown. In an effort to identify additional regulators of the circadian clock, including putative components that could modulate the clock response to changes in environmental signals, we identified in a previous large-scale screen a transcription factor that interacts with and regulates the promoter activity of a core clock gene. In this report, we characterized this transcription factor, FLOWERING BASIC HELIX-LOOP-HELIX 1 ( FBH1 ) that binds in vivo to the promoter of the key clock gene CIRCADIAN CLOCK-ASSOCIATED 1 ( CCA1 ) and regulates its expression. We found that upon temperature changes, overexpression of FBH1 alters the pace of CCA1 expression by causing a period shortening and thus preventing the clock from buffering against this change in temperature. Furthermore, as is consistent with the current mechanistic model of feedback loops observed in the clock regulatory network, we also determined that CCA1 binds in vivo to the FBH1 promoter and regulates its expression. Together these results establish a role for FBH1 as a transcriptional modulator of warm temperature signals and clock responses in Arabidopsis .

Discussion

In Arabidopsis , the bHLH transcription factor family consists of several subfamilies with either overlapping or distinct functions ( 28 , 29 ). In a recent study, FBH1 was shown to function as a positive regulator of CONSTANS ( CO ) and FLOWERING LOCUS T ( FT ) ( 27 ). In our studies, we found that FBH1 negatively regulates CCA1 ( Fig. 1 ) ( 26 ). Opposing transcriptional roles are common for transcription factors, because cis -element specificity in target promoters can determine the transcriptional polarity ( 37 , 38 ). Although FBH1 positively regulates CO and FT , the binding site is a canonical Ebox element, unlike the FBH1 target site found in the CCA1 promoter ( 27 ). In our studies, however, we determined that FBH1 binds to a noncanonical Ebox-like element in the CCA1 promoter and not to the canonical Ebox element 8 bp upstream in the same promoter region. This finding suggests that FBH1 might have a dual function and that cis -element specificity is indeed important for determining its transcriptional polarity. In our previous screen, we identified ∼60 high-confidence interactors, and more than half of these were shown to have biological relevance ( 26 ). bHLH transcription factors are known often to homodimerize, heterodimerize, and even interact with members of other transcription factor families to regulate target genes ( 28 , 29 , 39 ). This interaction might explain, in part, why we did not detect a significant reduction in CCA1 mRNA levels in lines overexpressing FBH1 and suggests that, at least at the mRNA level, the effects of FBH1 overexpression might be masked by the functional balance between the other CCA1 interactors and/or posttranscriptional regulation ( Fig. S8 ). A yeast two-hybrid assay of FBH1 with all other interactors could reveal which are involved in protein–protein interactions and modulate FBH1 transcriptional polarity.

An intrinsic feature of the clock is the ability to be insensitive to fluctuations in ambient temperatures and thus sustain a period of ∼24 h. We showed that, at elevated temperature, overexpression of FBH1 affects the ability of CCA1 to maintain a periodicity similar to that in WT plants. We observed that although the period of CCA1 remains relatively constant between WT and misexpressed FBH1 at 22 °C, the period length shortens significantly at 28 °C when FBH1 is overexpressed, suggesting that CCA1 no longer is able to compensate effectively for the temperature change ( Fig. 2 ). We also observed a modest shortening of the clock period from 16 °C to 28 °C in WT lines, as was previously reported ( 13 , 40 ). The two morning components CCA1 and LHY have been implicated previously in temperature compensation and also in modulating the prr7prr9 overcompensation phenotype at high temperature ( 22 ). Furthermore, a loss of CCA1 and/or LHY results in a shorter-period phenotype at 27 °C than at with 17 °C ( 22 ). Interestingly, these reports partially complement our observations for the short-period phenotype of CCA1 in lines overexpressing FBH1 at 28 °C, because FBH1 is considered a negative regulator of CCA1 expression. The precise mechanism of temperature compensation is poorly understood, and it is likely that several temperature sensors responsible for integrating these temperature signals are yet to be discovered. We propose that FBH1 could function as a candidate temperature-response gene modulating CCA1 response to warm temperatures ( Figs. 2 and 3 ).

Recently, FBH1 has been shown to promote flowering by activating CO and FT expression ( 27 ). Another bHLH subfamily, PHYTOCHROME INTERACTING FACTORS 4 and 5 (PIF4 and PIF5), is involved in enhancing flowering at warm temperatures (28 °C) by stimulating the expression of FT ( 41 ). Furthermore, it has been proposed that temperature signals feed into the clock through the Evening Complex (EC) to regulate the expression of several clock components and also of PIF4 ( 42 ). Together, these studies suggest a dual role for FBH1 in modulating the clock response to warm temperatures and the regulation of flowering. It is tempting to speculate that FBH1 also could interact with members of the EC or PIF4 and PIF5 to modulate this dual function.

Reciprocal regulation between clock components is another remarkable clock feature conserved across species. In this study we show that CCA1 binds in vivo to the promoter of FBH1 and regulates its expression, adding another regulatory feedback loop ( Fig. 4 ). Presently, most of the clock components in Arabidopsis function primarily as transcriptional repressors, and their functional connections are insufficient to explain the underlying regulatory network. Using similar large-scale approaches against the existing clock promoters can be a powerful tool for identifying additional regulators of the clock and may provide new mechanistic connections. Furthermore, because FBH1 modulates the CCA1 response to temperature change, it is possible that characterization of other such interactors could provide the molecular connections by which the clock senses and responds to environmental changes and stimulus.
