---
pmid: '23377180'
title: Quantitative variation in maize kernel row number is controlled by the FASCIATED
  EAR2 locus.
authors:
- Bommert P
- Nagasawa NS
- Jackson D
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ng.2534
---

# Quantitative variation in maize kernel row number is controlled by the FASCIATED EAR2 locus.
**Authors:** Bommert P, Nagasawa NS, Jackson D
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.2534](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.2534)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 2013 Mar;45(3):334-7. doi: 10.1038/ng.2534. Epub 2013 Feb 3.

Quantitative variation in maize kernel row number is controlled by the FASCIATED 
EAR2 locus.

Bommert P(1), Nagasawa NS, Jackson D.

Author information:
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York, USA.

Domestication of cereal crops, such as maize, wheat and rice, had a profound 
influence on agriculture and the establishment of human civilizations. One major 
improvement was an increase in seed number per inflorescence, which enhanced 
yield and simplified harvesting and storage. The ancestor of maize, teosinte, 
makes 2 rows of kernels, and modern varieties make ∼8-20 rows. Kernel rows are 
initiated by the inflorescence shoot meristem, and shoot meristem size is 
controlled by a feedback loop involving the CLAVATA signaling proteins and the 
WUSCHEL transcription factor. We present a hypothesis that variation in 
inflorescence meristem size affects kernel row number (KRN), with the potential 
to increase yield. We also show that variation in the CLAVATA receptor-like 
protein FASCIATED EAR2 leads to increased inflorescence meristem size and KRN. 
These findings indicate that modulation of fundamental stem cell proliferation 
control pathways has the potential to enhance crop yields.

DOI: 10.1038/ng.2534
PMID: 23377180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
