---
reference_id: PMID:39477683
title: Atractylenolide I inhibits angiogenesis and reverses sunitinib resistance in clear cell renal cell carcinoma through ATP6V0D2-mediated autophagic degradation of EPAS1/HIF2α.
authors:
- Li Q
- Zeng K
- Chen Q
- Han C
- Wang X
- Li B
- Miao J
- Zheng B
- Liu J
- Yuan X
- Liu B
journal: Autophagy
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1080/15548627.2024.2421699
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atractylenolide I inhibits angiogenesis and reverses sunitinib resistance in clear cell renal cell carcinoma through ATP6V0D2-mediated autophagic degradation of EPAS1/HIF2α.
**Authors:** Li Q, Zeng K, Chen Q, Han C, Wang X, Li B, Miao J, Zheng B, Liu J, Yuan X, Liu B
**Journal:** Autophagy (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15548627.2024.2421699](https://doi.org/10.1080/15548627.2024.2421699)

## Content

1. Autophagy. 2025 Mar;21(3):619-638. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2024.2421699. Epub
2024  Nov 4.

Atractylenolide I inhibits angiogenesis and reverses sunitinib resistance in 
clear cell renal cell carcinoma through ATP6V0D2-mediated autophagic degradation 
of EPAS1/HIF2α.

Li Q(1), Zeng K(1)(2), Chen Q(3)(4), Han C(1), Wang X(5), Li B(1), Miao J(6), 
Zheng B(7), Liu J(1), Yuan X(5), Liu B(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China.
(2)Department of Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Shihezi University, 
Shihezi, Xinjiang, China.
(3)Hepatic Surgery Center, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China.
(4)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Shihezi 
University, Shihezi, Xinjiang, China.
(5)Department of Oncology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China.
(6)Department of Geriatrics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China.
(7)School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and 
Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China.

Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is tightly associated with VHL (von 
Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor) mutation and dysregulated angiogenesis. 
Accumulating evidence indicates that antiangiogenic treatment abolishing tumor 
angiogenesis can achieve longer disease-free survival in patients with ccRCC. 
Atractylenolide I (ATL-I) is one of the main active compounds in Atractylodes 
macrocephala root extract and exhibits various pharmacological effects, 
including anti-inflammatory and antitumor effects. In this study, we revealed 
the potent antitumor activity of ATL-I in ccRCC. ATL-I exhibited robust 
antiangiogenic capacity by inhibiting EPAS1/HIF2α-mediated VEGFA production in 
VHL-deficient ccRCC, and it promoted autophagic degradation of EPAS1 by 
upregulating the ATPase subunit ATP6V0D2 (ATPase H+ transporting V0 subunit d2) 
to increase lysosomal function and facilitated fusion between autophagosomes and 
lysosomes. Mechanistically, ATP6V0D2 directly bound to RAB7 and VPS41 and 
promoted the RAB7-HOPS interaction, facilitating SNARE complex assembly and 
autophagosome-lysosome fusion. Moreover, ATP6V0D2 promoted autolysosome 
degradation by increasing the acidification and activity of lysosomes during the 
later stages of macroautophagy/autophagy. Additionally, we found that ATL-I 
could decrease the level of EPAS1, which was upregulated in sunitinib-resistant 
cells, thus reversing sunitinib resistance. Collectively, our findings 
demonstrate that ATL-I is a robust antiangiogenic and antitumor lead compound 
with potential clinical application for ccRCC therapy.Abbreviations: ATL-I: 
atractylenolide I; ATP6V0D2: ATPase H+ transporting V0 subunit d2; CAM: chick 
chorioallantoic membrane; ccRCC: clear cell renal cell carcinoma; CTSB: 
cathepsin B; CTSD: cathepsin D; GO: Gene Ontology; HIF-1: HIF1A-ARNT 
heterodimer; HOPS: homotypic fusion and protein sorting; KDR/VEGFR: kinase 
insert domain receptor; KEGG: Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes; RCC: 
renal cell carcinoma; SNARE: soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor 
attachment protein receptor; TCGA: The Cancer Genome Atlas; TEM: transmission 
electron microscopy; TKI: tyrosine kinase inhibitor; V-ATPase: vacuolar-type 
H±translocating ATPase; VEGF: vascular endothelial growth factor; VHL: von 
Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor.

DOI: 10.1080/15548627.2024.2421699
PMCID: PMC11849937
PMID: 39477683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).