---
pmid: '23948589'
title: Structural elucidation of full-length nidogen and the laminin-nidogen complex
  in solution.
authors:
- Patel TR
- Bernards C
- Meier M
- McEleney K
- Winzor DJ
- Koch M
- Stetefeld J
journal: Matrix Biol
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2013.07.009
---

# Structural elucidation of full-length nidogen and the laminin-nidogen complex in solution.
**Authors:** Patel TR, Bernards C, Meier M, McEleney K, Winzor DJ, Koch M, Stetefeld J
**Journal:** Matrix Biol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.matbio.2013.07.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matbio.2013.07.009)

## Abstract

1. Matrix Biol. 2014 Jan;33:60-7. doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2013.07.009. Epub 2013
Aug  12.

Structural elucidation of full-length nidogen and the laminin-nidogen complex in 
solution.

Patel TR(1), Bernards C(2), Meier M(1), McEleney K(1), Winzor DJ(3), Koch M(2), 
Stetefeld J(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Manitoba, 144 Dysart Road, Winnipeg, 
Manitoba RT3 2N2, Canada.
(2)Institute for Dental Research and Oral Musculoskeletal Biology, Center for 
Molecular Medicine Cologne, Center for Biochemistry, Medical Faculty, University 
of Cologne, D-50931 Cologne, Germany.
(3)School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, University of Queensland, 
Brisbane, Queensland, 4072, Australia.
(4)Department of Chemistry, University of Manitoba, 144 Dysart Road, Winnipeg, 
Manitoba RT3 2N2, Canada; Microbiology, University of Manitoba, 144 Dysart Road, 
Winnipeg, Manitoba RT3 2N2, Canada; Biochemistry and Medical Genetics, 
University of Manitoba, 144 Dysart Road, Winnipeg, Manitoba RT3 2N2, Canada. 
Electronic address: jorg.stetefeld@ad.manitoba.ca.

Nidogen-1 is a key basement membrane protein that is required for many 
biological activities. It is one of the central elements in organizing basal 
laminae including those in the skin, muscle, and the nervous system. The 
self-assembling extracellular matrix that also incorporates fibulins, 
fibronectin and integrins is clamped together by networks formed between 
nidogen, perlecan, laminin and collagen IV. To date, the full-length version of 
nidogen-1 has not been studied in detail in terms of its solution conformation 
and shape because of its susceptibility to proteolysis. In the current study, we 
have expressed and purified full-length nidogen-1 and have investigated its 
solution behavior using size-exclusion chromatography (SEC), dynamic light 
scattering (DLS) and small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS). The ab initio shape 
reconstruction of the complex between nidogen-1 and the laminin γ-1 short arm 
confirms that the interaction is mediated solely by the C-terminal domains: the 
rest of the domains of both proteins do not participate in complex formation.

© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.matbio.2013.07.009
PMID: 23948589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
