---
pmid: '16916640'
title: 'Engineered hybrid dimers: tracking the activation pathway of caspase-7.'
authors:
- Denault JB
- Békés M
- Scott FL
- Sexton KM
- Bogyo M
- Salvesen GS
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2006.06.020
---

# Engineered hybrid dimers: tracking the activation pathway of caspase-7.
**Authors:** Denault JB, Békés M, Scott FL, Sexton KM, Bogyo M, Salvesen GS
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2006.06.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2006.06.020)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2006 Aug;23(4):523-33. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2006.06.020.

Engineered hybrid dimers: tracking the activation pathway of caspase-7.

Denault JB(1), Békés M, Scott FL, Sexton KM, Bogyo M, Salvesen GS.

Author information:
(1)The Burnham Institute for Medical Research, 10901 North Torrey Pines Road, La 
Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Caspase-7 is an obligate dimer of catalytic domains, with generation of activity 
requiring limited proteolysis within a region that separates the large and small 
chains of each domain. Using hybrid dimers we distinguish the relative 
contribution of each domain to catalysis by the whole molecule. We demonstrate 
that the zymogen arises from direct dimerization and not domain swapping. In 
contrast to previous conclusions, we show that only one of the catalytic domains 
must be proteolyzed to enable activation. The processed domain of this singly 
cleaved zymogen has the same catalytic activity as a domain of fully active 
caspase-7. A transient intermediate of singly cleaved dimeric caspase-7 can be 
found in a cell-free model of apoptosis induction. However, we see no evidence 
for an analogous intermediate of the related executioner caspase-3. Our study 
demonstrates the efficiency by which the executioner caspases are activated in 
vivo.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2006.06.020
PMID: 16916640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
