---
pmid: '8524402'
title: Crystal structures of human calcineurin and the human FKBP12-FK506-calcineurin
  complex.
authors:
- Kissinger CR
- Parge HE
- Knighton DR
- Lewis CT
- Pelletier LA
- Tempczyk A
- Kalish VJ
- Tucker KD
- Showalter RE
- Moomaw EW
journal: Nature
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/378641a0
---

# Crystal structures of human calcineurin and the human FKBP12-FK506-calcineurin complex.
**Authors:** Kissinger CR, Parge HE, Knighton DR, Lewis CT, Pelletier LA, Tempczyk A, Kalish VJ, Tucker KD, Showalter RE, Moomaw EW
**Journal:** Nature (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1038/378641a0](https://doi.org/10.1038/378641a0)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 1995 Dec 7;378(6557):641-4. doi: 10.1038/378641a0.

Crystal structures of human calcineurin and the human FKBP12-FK506-calcineurin 
complex.

Kissinger CR(1), Parge HE, Knighton DR, Lewis CT, Pelletier LA, Tempczyk A, 
Kalish VJ, Tucker KD, Showalter RE, Moomaw EW, et al.

Author information:
(1)Agouron Pharmaceuticals Inc., San Diego, California 92121-1121, USA.

Calcineurin (CaN) is a calcium- and calmodulin-dependent protein 
serine/threonine phosphate which is critical for several important cellular 
processes, including T-cell activation. CaN is the target of the 
immunosuppressive drugs cyclosporin A and FK506, which inhibit CaN after forming 
complexes with cytoplasmic binding proteins (cyclophilin and FKBP12, 
respectively). We report here the crystal structures of full-length human CaN at 
2.1 A resolution and of the complex of human CaN with FKBP12-FK506 at 3.5 A 
resolution. In the native CaN structure, an auto-inhibitory element binds at the 
Zn/Fe-containing active site. The metal-site geometry and active-site water 
structure suggest a catalytic mechanism involving nucleophilic attack on the 
substrate phosphate by a metal-activated water molecule. In the FKBP12-FK506-CaN 
complex, the auto-inhibitory element is displaced from the active site. The site 
of binding of FKBP12-FK506 appears to be shared by other non-competitive 
inhibitors of calcineurin, including a natural anchoring protein.

DOI: 10.1038/378641a0
PMID: 8524402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
