---
pmid: '10485849'
title: 'Fission yeast condensin complex: essential roles of non-SMC subunits for condensation
  and Cdc2 phosphorylation of Cut3/SMC4.'
authors:
- Sutani T
- Yuasa T
- Tomonaga T
- Dohmae N
- Takio K
- Yanagida M
journal: Genes Dev
year: '1999'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC316991
doi: 10.1101/gad.13.17.2271
---

# Fission yeast condensin complex: essential roles of non-SMC subunits for condensation and Cdc2 phosphorylation of Cut3/SMC4.
**Authors:** Sutani T, Yuasa T, Tomonaga T, Dohmae N, Takio K, Yanagida M
**Journal:** Genes Dev (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.13.17.2271](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.13.17.2271)
**PMC:** [PMC316991](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC316991/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 1999 Sep 1;13(17):2271-83. doi: 10.1101/gad.13.17.2271.

Fission yeast condensin complex: essential roles of non-SMC subunits for 
condensation and Cdc2 phosphorylation of Cut3/SMC4.

Sutani T(1), Yuasa T, Tomonaga T, Dohmae N, Takio K, Yanagida M.

Author information:
(1)Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology (CREST) Research 
Project, Department of Gene Mechanisms, Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto 
University, Kitashirakawa-Oiwakecho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan.

The condensin complex in frog extracts, containing two SMC (structural 
maintenance of chromosomes) and three non-SMC subunits, promotes mitotic 
chromosome condensation, and its supercoiling activity increases during mitosis 
by Cdc2 phosphorylation. Here, we report that fission yeast has the same 
five-member condensin complex, each of which is essential for mitotic 
condensation. The condensin complex was purified and the subunits were 
identified by microsequencing. Cnd1, Cnd2, and Cnd3, three non-SMC subunits 
showing a high degree of sequence conservation to frog subunits, are essential 
for viability, and their gene disruption leads to a phenotype indistinguishable 
from that observed in cut3-477 and cut14-208, known mutations in SMC4 and 
SMC2-like subunits. Condensin subunits tagged with GFP were observed to alter 
dramatically their localization during the cell cycle, enriched in the nucleus 
during mitosis, but cytoplasmic during other stages. This stage-specific 
alteration in localization requires mitosis-specific phosphorylation of the T19 
Cdc2 site in Cut3. The T19 site is phosphorylated in vitro by Cdc2 kinase and 
shows the maximal phosphorylation in metaphase in vivo. Its alanine substitution 
mutant fails to suppress the temperature-sensitive phenotype of cut3-477, and 
shows deficiency in condensation, probably because Cut3 T19A remains 
cytoplasmic. Therefore, direct Cdc2 phosphorylation of fission yeast condensin 
may facilitate its nuclear accumulation during mitosis.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.13.17.2271
PMCID: PMC316991
PMID: 10485849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The condensin complex in frog extracts, containing two SMC ( s tructural m aintenance of c hromosomes) and three non-SMC subunits, promotes mitotic chromosome condensation, and its supercoiling activity increases during mitosis by Cdc2 phosphorylation. Here, we report that fission yeast has the same five-member condensin complex, each of which is essential for mitotic condensation. The condensin complex was purified and the subunits were identified by microsequencing. Cnd1, Cnd2, and Cnd3, three non-SMC subunits showing a high degree of sequence conservation to frog subunits, are essential for viability, and their gene disruption leads to a phenotype indistinguishable from that observed in cut3-477 and cut14-208 , known mutations in SMC4 and SMC2-like subunits. Condensin subunits tagged with GFP were observed to alter dramatically their localization during the cell cycle, enriched in the nucleus during mitosis, but cytoplasmic during other stages. This stage-specific alteration in localization requires mitosis-specific phosphorylation of the T19 Cdc2 site in Cut3. The T19 site is phosphorylated in vitro by Cdc2 kinase and shows the maximal phosphorylation in metaphase in vivo. Its alanine substitution mutant fails to suppress the temperature-sensitive phenotype of cut3-477 , and shows deficiency in condensation, probably because Cut3 T19A remains cytoplasmic. Therefore, direct Cdc2 phosphorylation of fission yeast condensin may facilitate its nuclear accumulation during mitosis.

Discussion

This study shows that the five-member condensin complex, first identified in frog ( Hirano et al. 1997 ), is present in S. pombe , a eukaryotic microbe in which mitotic chromosome condensation takes place, albeit to a lesser extent than in higher eukaryotes ( Umesono et al. 1983 ; Saka et al. 1994 ). The S. pombe condensin complex was isolated by immunoprecipitation and analyzed by microsequencing. It contains, in addition to the two known SMC subunits Cut3 and Cut14, three more subunits—Cnd1, Cnd2, and Cnd3. The calculated total molecular mass of the fission yeast condensin subunits (without the tag) was 600 kD. Sucrose gradient centrifugation indicated that the majority of the condensin subunits detected by anti-Cut3 and anti-Cut14 antibodies sedimented at ∼13S ( Sutani and Yanagida 1997 ), identical to the value reported for the frog condensin ( Hirano et al. 1997 ); this demonstrated that a greater part of SMC subunits are in the form of the complex. A spherical protein complex of 600 kD should sediment around 17S–18S, suggesting that the fission yeast condensin has an asymmetrical shape, perhaps reflecting the coiled–coil structure of SMC proteins ( Melby et al. 1998 ). The Cut3–Cut14 complex (calculated molecular mass, 290 kD) formed by overproduction of the two proteins peaked around the 8S position ( Sutani and Yanagida 1997 ).

Cnd1, Cnd2, and Cnd3 are similar to frog XCAP-D2, XCAP-H, and XCAP-G, respectively ( Hirano et al. 1997 ; Kimura et al. 1998 ; GenBank accession no. AF111423 ). In this study we showed for the first time that these non-SMC subunits of condensin are essential for cell viability and also for mitotic chromosome condensation in vivo. These results are important in understanding condensation mechanisms, because the role of condensin in condensation has been explained often in relation to the shape and motifs of the SMC subunits. The Barren-like Cnd2 attracts attention because Drosophila Barren is reported to interact with topo II ( Bhat et al. 1996 ). The relaxing activity of topo II is enhanced by the addition of Barren. The frog condensin isolated from mitotic cells demonstrates ATP-dependent activity for positive supercoiling of DNA ( Kimura and Hirano 1997 ). It remains to be determined whether S. pombe condensin shows the same in vitro activity; currently we are trying to purify condensin by overproducing the five gene products within the same cells. Therefore the in vitro DNA renaturation activity reported for the Cut3–Cut14 complex should represent only a part of the whole activity of condensin, and the positive supercoiling activity, which was not detected in the Cut3–Cut14 complex, might require non-SMC subunits.

One common property of the non-SMC subunits of fission yeast and other organisms is that they are acidic (pI < 5.5). They may interact with basic components in chromatin such as histones or high mobility group proteins. Interestingly, only Cut14 is basic (pI = 8.1) among the five subunits, and Cut14 appears to be directly bound to DNA in vitro (T. Sutani and M. Yanagida, unpubl.). The essential role of non-SMC Cnd1 and Cnd3 is still not well understood. PSI–BLAST search ( Altschul et al. 1997 ) revealed a weak homology between Cnd1 or Cnd3 and the β subunit of the AP3 complex (Fig. 8 A). The adapter protein (AP) complex is required for vesicle transport and is involved in the assembly of clathrin ( Schmid 1997 ; Odorizzi et al. 1998 ). Homology exists between the AP3–β subunit and Cnd1 and Cnd3 in the different regions spanning ∼200 amino acids. Note that clathrin consists of two rod-like regions linked by a hinge-like region called knee ( Schmid 1997 ), and the role of AP3–β is presumed to assist in the assembly of rod-like clathrin molecules. Similarly, Cnd1 and Cnd3 might serve for the correct assembly of the rod-like Cut3 and Cut14 subunits (and possibly also Cnd2) into a higher-order structure (a cartoon is shown in Fig. 8 B). When purified Cut3 was mixed with Cut14 in vitro, they formed a stable complex but at a rather low efficiency ( Sutani and Yanagida 1997 ). Cnd1 and Cnd3 might have a role in linking the subunits together into the functional condensin architecture. The Drosophila Barren-like Cnd2 might have a specific role in interacting with chromosomal DNA.

All five subunits tagged with GFP were found to dramatically alter their localization during the cell cycle, the patterns of which were very similar to each other, probably reflecting the behavior of a complex rather than free subunits. Because these genes, except for cnd3 + , were integrated into the chromosome and could thus substitute for the wild-type genes, their behavior should reflect the actual localization changes of the functional condensin complex in vivo. The S. pombe condensin accumulates in the nucleus at an early stage of mitosis and reduces its nuclear level at the end of mitosis. The role for condensation is consistent with nuclear localization in early to mid-mitosis of S. pombe , as fungal mitosis occurs within the closed nucleus. Condensin might be needed for chromosome decondensation, which occurs in late anaphase and telophase, although such a concept has no experimental support yet. It would be difficult to discern such a role in mutant cells, as condensation defects would appear first.

What is the possible physiological significance for shuttling of condensin subunits between the cytoplasm and the nucleus? In frog- and chicken-cultured cells, the majority of condensin SMC subunits are localized in nuclei even in interphase ( Hirano and Mitchison 1994 ; Saitoh et al. 1994 ) so that the S. pombe localization behavior is not universal. A possible explanation is that the S. pombe condensin complex might be active throughout the cell cycle so that its nuclear localization has to be regulated and occurs only in mitosis. In frog, however, it has been established that XCAP-D2 and XCAP-H subunits have to be phosphorylated to activate the in vitro condensin activity ( Kimura et al. 1998 ). Consistent with this, XCAP-D2 has multiple Cdc2 sites that Cnd1 does not have. Alternatively, the S. pombe condensin may change its localization if its association in the interphase chromosome interferes with other chromatin proteins such that it would inhibit certain DNA metabolisms during the S and G 2 phases. Another possibility is that the S. pombe condensin activity is regulated, as in the frog, and its shuttling between the nucleus and the cytoplasm may represent dispensable behavior. Regulation of Cnd2 may occur by phosphorylation because the amino terminal Cdc2 site is present as in the frog homolog.

We showed that the T19 site of Cut3 is actually phosphorylated in mitosis, perhaps by Cdc2 kinase, peaking at metaphase, and that the T19 phosphorylation is essential for mitotic accumulation of condensin components in the nucleus. The T19A substitution mutant protein remains in the cytoplasm throughout the cell cycle and fails to rescue the temperature-sensitive phenotype of the cut3 mutant. However, the mechanism by which phosphorylation of T19 leads to nuclear accumulation of Cut3 is still unclear. T19-phosphorylated Cut3 might acquire the ability to interact with other proteins, which ensures nuclear accumulation. Our results suggest that the short amino-terminal sequence of Cut3 contains the nuclear export signal (e.g., Fukuda et al., 1997 ), but it remains to be determined whether the signal controls localization of the condensin complex. After Cdc2 kinase is inactivated in anaphase, the S. pombe condensin complex is still briefly retained until septation. An additional unknown mechanism might be needed to retain condensin in the postanaphase nucleus.

In summary, this study demonstrates that all of the non-SMC subunits of condensin are absolutely required for mitotic condensation and that Cdc2 kinase promotes chromosome condensation through phosphorylation of the Cut3/SMC4 subunit, which ensures proper cellular positioning during the cell cycle in fission yeast. Whether the regulated activation of condensin by phosphorylation occurs in this organism during mitosis remains to be determined.

Immunochemical methods

Anti-T19Ph Cut3 antibodies were obtained by injecting phosphopeptide PSIVDV T(PO 3 H 2 ) PDRGER (Peptide Institute, Inc., Osaka, Japan) conjugated with keyhole limpet cyanin (KLH) to a rabbit. Antibodies were affinity purified by using phosphopeptide coupled to FMP-activated cellulofine (Seikagaku) and used for immunoblotting. CIP treatment of immunoprecipitants was performed as described ( Pereia et al. 1998 ). As phosphatase inhibitors, 60 m m β-glycerophosphate and 15 m m p -nitrophenylphosphate were used. Antibodies against the carboxy-terminal phosphorylated sequence T316Ph Dis2 and Anti-Cut3 antibodies were described previously ( Saka et al. 1994 ; Ishii et al. 1996 ). PSTAIR was the gift of Drs. M. Yamashita (Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan) and Y. Nagahama (National Institute for Basic Biology, Okazaki, Japan).
