---
pmid: '16173922'
title: A novel ARF-binding protein (LZAP) alters ARF regulation of HDM2.
authors:
- Wang J
- He X
- Luo Y
- Yarbrough WG
journal: Biochem J
year: '2006'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1360699
doi: 10.1042/BJ20050960
---

# A novel ARF-binding protein (LZAP) alters ARF regulation of HDM2.
**Authors:** Wang J, He X, Luo Y, Yarbrough WG
**Journal:** Biochem J (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BJ20050960](https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20050960)
**PMC:** [PMC1360699](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1360699/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2006 Jan 15;393(Pt 2):489-501. doi: 10.1042/BJ20050960.

A novel ARF-binding protein (LZAP) alters ARF regulation of HDM2.

Wang J(1), He X, Luo Y, Yarbrough WG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

The tumour suppressor ARF (alternative reading frame) is encoded by the INK4a 
(inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinase 4)/ARF locus, which is frequently altered 
in human tumours. ARF binds MDM2 (murine double minute 2) and releases p53 from 
inhibition by MDM2, resulting in stabilization, accumulation and activation of 
p53. Recently, ARF has been found to associate with other proteins, but, to 
date, little is known about ARF-associated proteins that are implicated in 
post-translational regulation of ARF activity. Using a yeast two-hybrid screen, 
we have identified a novel protein, LZAP (LXXLL/leucine-zipper-containing 
ARF-binding protein), that interacts with endogenous ARF in mammalian cells. In 
the present study, we show that LZAP reversed the ability of ARF to inhibit 
HDM2's ubiquitin ligase activity towards p53, but simultaneously co-operated 
with ARF, maintaining p53 stability and increasing p53 transcriptional activity. 
Expression of LZAP, in addition to ARF, increased the percentage of cells in the 
G1 phase of the cell cycle. Expression of LZAP also caused activation of p53 and 
a p53-dependent G1 cell-cycle arrest in the absence of ARF. Taken together, our 
data suggest that LZAP can regulate ARF biochemical and biological activity. 
Additionally, LZAP has p53-dependent cell-cycle effects that are independent of 
ARF.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20050960
PMCID: PMC1360699
PMID: 16173922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The tumour suppressor ARF (alternative reading frame) is encoded by the INK4a (inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinase 4)/ ARF locus, which is frequently altered in human tumours. ARF binds MDM2 (murine double minute 2) and releases p53 from inhibition by MDM2, resulting in stabilization, accumulation and activation of p53. Recently, ARF has been found to associate with other proteins, but, to date, little is known about ARF-associated proteins that are implicated in post-translational regulation of ARF activity. Using a yeast two-hybrid screen, we have identified a novel protein, LZAP (LXXLL/leucine-zipper-containing ARF-binding protein), that interacts with endogenous ARF in mammalian cells. In the present study, we show that LZAP reversed the ability of ARF to inhibit HDM2's ubiquitin ligase activity towards p53, but simultaneously co-operated with ARF, maintaining p53 stability and increasing p53 transcriptional activity. Expression of LZAP, in addition to ARF, increased the percentage of cells in the G 1 phase of the cell cycle. Expression of LZAP also caused activation of p53 and a p53-dependent G 1 cell-cycle arrest in the absence of ARF. Taken together, our data suggest that LZAP can regulate ARF biochemical and biological activity. Additionally, LZAP has p53-dependent cell-cycle effects that are independent of ARF.

INTRODUCTION

The tumour suppressor ARF (alternative reading frame) is a product of the INK4a [inhibitor of CDK (cyclin-dependent kinase) 4]/ ARF locus, which encodes two unrelated cell-cycle inhibitors, p16 INK4a and p14 ARF (p19 ARF in mice) [ 1 ]. These two proteins share nucleotide sequences in exons 2 and 3, but are specified by distinct first exons and are translated in different reading frames. The biochemical activities of the CDK inhibitor p16 INK4a are well described. It binds cyclin-D-associated CDKs to prevent phosphorylation of the pRb (retinoblastoma protein), thereby maintaining pRb in its growth-suppressive state [ 2 ]. In contrast, ARF activates p53 through direct interaction with MDM2 (murine double minute 2) or HDM2 (human homologue of MDM2) in humans, the major negative regulator of p53 [ 3 – 5 ]. Activity of p53 is repressed by MDM2 through direct inhibition of p53 transcriptional activity [ 6 ] and through p53 degradation following HDM2-directed ubiquitination [ 7 ] and nuclear export [ 8 ]. ARF has been shown to antagonize all of these functions of MDM2 [ 9 , 10 ].

Acting as a sensor of hyperproliferative signals, ARF is induced by multiple oncogenes, including Myc [ 11 ], Ras [ 12 ], E1A [ 13 ], Abl [ 14 ] and E2F1 [ 15 ] (reviewed in [ 16 ]). Following oncogenic stimulation, increased levels of ARF induce nuclear accumulation and activation of p53, resulting in cell-cycle arrest and/or apoptosis [ 16 ]. ARF has also been reported to respond to other signals, such as DNA damage, microtubule disruption, morphological changes and short-lived perturbations in the cell cycle and in nucleolar function [ 17 , 18 ]. Furthermore, it has been reported that, in several human haemopoietic tumour cell lines that express abundant amounts of ARF mRNA, ARF protein cannot be detected, indicating that post-transcriptional regulation of ARF may play a role in certain tumour types [ 19 ]. A recent report also suggests that binding of Tat-binding protein 1 regulates ARF protein stability [ 20 ]. ARF stability has been found to be regulated by proteasomal degradation after N-terminal ubiquitination [ 21 , 22 ]. Although the transcriptional regulation of ARF by oncogenes and transcriptional factors has been demonstrated, little is known about the post-transcriptional regulation of ARF activity.

Several proteins, other than MDM2, have been reported to interact with ARF, including E2F1 [ 23 , 24 ], neurabin II [ 25 ], HIF-1α (hypoxia-inducible factor 1α) [ 26 ], Pex19P [ 27 ], CARF (collaborator of ARF) [ 28 ] and B23/nucleophosmin [ 29 – 32 ]. Some of these proteins alter ARF localization or ARF-dependent activation of p53 [ 25 , 27 , 28 ]. To identify ARF-interacting proteins that may regulate ARF activity, we screened for ARF-binding proteins using a yeast two-hybrid system. A novel human protein that bound ARF was identified in yeast and confirmed in mammalian cells. This protein is highly similar to a rat protein, C53, which has been identified previously using a yeast two-hybrid assay as interacting with p35, the precursor of CDK5 activator [ 33 ]. We show here that this LZAP (LXXLL/leucine-zipper-containing ARF-binding protein) directly and specifically binds to the N-terminal region of human ARF. Our data suggest that, upon direct binding to ARF, LZAP reverses ARF inhibition of HDM2's p53 ubiquitination activity. Remarkably, despite its ability to restore HDM2 ubiquitination of p53 in the presence of ARF, expression of LZAP did not lead to p53 degradation or decreased p53 transcriptional activity. Additionally, ectopic expression of LZAP resulted in a G 1 cell-cycle arrest that was dependent on p53, but independent of ARF.

DISCUSSION

p53 activity within the cell is tightly controlled, primarily through regulation of p53 stability. In embryonic development, stabilization of p53 as a result of homozygous loss of MDM2 results in embryonic lethality that can be rescued by simultaneous loss of p53, suggesting that, at least in development, MDM2/HDM2 is the major controller of p53 [ 42 , 43 ]. Because of its central role in regulation of p53, HDM2 activity is also regulated at multiple levels. ARF binds HDM2 and inhibits its E3 ubiquitin ligase activity towards p53, while simultaneously reversing HDM2's inhibition of p53 transactivation [ 36 ]. ARF expression is induced by multiple different oncogenic stimuli resulting in p53-dependent cell-cycle arrest and/or apoptosis [ 16 , 44 ]. In this capacity, ARF seems to direct a major cellular defence, protecting the organism from cells with excessive proliferative signalling and, as such, many human tumour types frequently lack expression of ARF. In this study, we identified and characterized a novel protein, LZAP, which regulates ARF activity towards HDM2. Our data suggest that LZAP also has ARF-independent cell-cycle regulatory activities that depend on p53.

At least two mechanistic models of ARF regulation of HDM2 exist: (i) ARF dissociates HDM2 from p53 and sequesters MDM2 in the nucleolus [ 9 , 45 ], and (ii) ARF binds to HDM2–p53 in the nucleus, forms a ternary complex and within the complex inhibits HDM2's ubiquitination and transcriptional inhibition of p53 [ 10 , 36 ]. The nucleolar sequestration model suggests that ARF must dissociate p53 from MDM2 and that sequestration of HDM2 in the nucleolus is vital for ARF activity. Direct experimental evidence has shown that ARF mutants excluded from nucleoli are capable of stabilizing and activating p53 equally as well as wild-type ARF [ 37 ], and recent data suggest that nucleolar ARF may be inactive towards p53 and that B23/nucleophosmin may play a role in antagonizing ARF activity by sequestering ARF in the nucleolus [ 32 ]. The role of nucleolar ARF in the regulation of p53 remains controversial.

Our data favours the ternary p53–HDM2–ARF complex model. In addition to the binding data ( Figure 3 ) which suggest that HDM2, ARF and LZAP are capable of forming a complex, ubiquitination and p53 stability data support the existence of quaternary p53–HDM2–ARF–LZAP complexes. ARF complexes precipitated from in vitro ubiquitination assays ( Figure 4 B, lanes 6 and 7) not only contained p53 protein, but also contained p53 ubiquitination activity that was increased in the presence of LZAP. Had LZAP disrupted the p53–HDM2–ARF complex by competing for ARF, then ARF immunoprecipitates would contain LZAP, but no p53 and no HDM2 ubiquitin ligase activity towards p53. Likewise, if LZAP competed with HDM2 for ARF, the addition of LZAP to p53–HDM2–ARF complexes should decrease p53 stability and increase nuclear cytoplasmic shuttling. Since we observed no decrease in p53 stability and no nuclear cytoplasmic shuttling of p53 following the addition of LZAP in the presence of HDM2 and ARF ( Figures 5 and 7 ), our data suggest that LZAP alters ARF activity within a complex containing p53–HDM2–ARF.

ARF inhibits HDM2-mediated p53 degradation while simultaneously inhibiting HDM2 ubiquitination of p53; however, p53 ubiquitination and degradation activities of HDM2 can be separated, since mutants of MDM2 have been described that can ubiquitinate p53, but that cannot direct p53 degradation [ 46 ]. Also, ARF inhibition of HDM2 ubiquitin ligase activity is not absolute since HDM2 bound to ARF still has ligase activity, just not towards p53 [ 47 ]. The fate of ubiquitinated p53, and the sequence and subcellular localization of p53 ubiquitination has been the subject of intense investigation and debate. Some studies suggest that p53 degradation requires nuclear export [ 8 , 48 , 49 ]. Other studies suggest that nuclear ubiquitinated p53 can be degraded without export [ 50 , 51 ]. Our data suggest that LZAP reverses ARF inhibition of HDM2 and allows p53 ubiquitination in the nucleus. Although ubiquitinated p53 exists in the presence of HDM2, ARF and LZAP, it is not exported from the nucleus ( Figure 7 ). Assuming that both nuclear and cytoplasmic degradation of ubiquitinated p53 contribute to its degradation, inhibition of nuclear export may partially explain LZAP restoration of HDM2-directed p53 ubiquitination without subsequent destabilization. Our data does not exclude the possibilities that LZAP in the presence of ARF may restore HDM2 mono-ubiquitination, but not polyubiquitination of p53, that LZAP may allow only low levels of p53 ubiquitination that would require nuclear export for degradation, or that LZAP may inhibit targeting of ubiquitinated p53 to nuclear proteasomes as additional mechanisms of stabilizing ubiquitinated p53.

Our data suggest that LZAP allows nuclear accumulation of ubiquitinated and transcriptionally active p53 in the presence of ARF and HDM2. Given that p53 is tightly regulated by HDM2 and ARF, why would additional regulation of ARF be necessary? Mechanisms that ensure a rapid increase in p53 activity, such as post-translational modification, are necessary to prevent growth of damaged cells, but perhaps as important, mechanisms to ensure rapid inhibition of p53 activity must be in place to allow cellular survival and division under appropriate conditions. Ubiquitinated, but active, p53 in the nucleus may be very susceptible to rapid nuclear export and degradation following loss or inhibition of ARF. Although regulators that increase ARF expression are characterized, and loss of ARF in tumour cells is very common through deletion or transcriptional silencing of the ARF gene, mechanisms of ARF inactivation under normal cellular growth conditions are not well characterized.

We report identification of an ARF-binding protein that abrogates ARF inhibition of HDM2 ubiquitin ligase activity. Despite increasing ubiquitination of p53 in the presence of HDM2 and ARF, LZAP expression did not result in loss of stabilization of p53 protein and enhanced p53 transcriptional activity further. These characteristics, as well as induction of endogenous ARF–LZAP interaction following E2F1 oncogene stimulation, imply a possible role of LZAP in ARF-mediated tumorigenesis surveillance. Regulators of LZAP are presently unknown, but, given its biochemical activity, LZAP could serve as a means of prolonging ARF-directed p53 responses that would otherwise be dampened by increased HDM2 expression as part of a p53-directed negative-feedback loop. Since our data suggest that LZAP allows ubiquitination of p53 with maintenance of p53 activity, ARF down-regulation under these circumstances may result in a rapid decrease in p53 protein levels and p53 activity. Our data also suggest that LZAP can activate p53 transcription and cause a p53-dependent cell-cycle arrest in the absence of ARF. Further studies are needed to determine the mechanism of ARF-independent p53 activation by LZAP.
