---
pmid: '17646382'
title: Sorting by the cytoplasmic domain of the amyloid precursor protein binding
  receptor SorLA.
authors:
- Nielsen MS
- Gustafsen C
- Madsen P
- Nyengaard JR
- Hermey G
- Bakke O
- Mari M
- Schu P
- Pohlmann R
- Dennes A
- Petersen CM
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2099242
doi: 10.1128/MCB.00815-07
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Sorting by the cytoplasmic domain of the amyloid precursor protein binding receptor SorLA.
**Authors:** Nielsen MS, Gustafsen C, Madsen P, Nyengaard JR, Hermey G, Bakke O, Mari M, Schu P, Pohlmann R, Dennes A, Petersen CM
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.00815-07](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.00815-07)
**PMC:** [PMC2099242](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2099242/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Oct;27(19):6842-51. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00815-07. Epub 2007
Jul  23.

Sorting by the cytoplasmic domain of the amyloid precursor protein binding 
receptor SorLA.

Nielsen MS(1), Gustafsen C, Madsen P, Nyengaard JR, Hermey G, Bakke O, Mari M, 
Schu P, Pohlmann R, Dennes A, Petersen CM.

Author information:
(1)The MIND-Center, Department of Medical Biochemistry, Ole Worms Allé, Bldg 
1170, University of Aarhus, 8000, Aarhus, Denmark.

SorLA/LR11 (250 kDa) is the largest and most composite member of the 
Vps10p-domain receptors, a family of type 1 proteins preferentially expressed in 
neuronal tissue. SorLA binds several ligands, including neurotensin, 
platelet-derived growth factor-bb, and lipoprotein lipase, and via 
complex-formation with the amyloid precursor protein it downregulates generation 
of Alzheimer's disease-associated Abeta-peptide. The receptor is mainly located 
in vesicles, suggesting a function in protein sorting and transport. Here we 
examined SorLA's trafficking using full-length and chimeric receptors and find 
that its cytoplasmic tail mediates efficient Golgi body-endosome transport, as 
well as AP-2 complex-dependent endocytosis. Functional sorting sites were mapped 
to an acidic cluster-dileucine-like motif and to a GGA binding site in the C 
terminus. Experiments in permanently or transiently AP-1 mu1-chain-deficient 
cells established that the AP-1 adaptor complex is essential to SorLA's 
transport between Golgi membranes and endosomes. Our results further implicate 
the GGA proteins in SorLA trafficking and provide evidence that SNX1 and Vps35, 
as parts of the retromer complex or possibly in a separate context, are engaged 
in retraction of the receptor from endosomes.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00815-07
PMCID: PMC2099242
PMID: 17646382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

SorLA/LR11 (250 kDa) is the largest and most composite member of the Vps10p-domain receptors, a family of type 1 proteins preferentially expressed in neuronal tissue. SorLA binds several ligands, including neurotensin, platelet-derived growth factor-bb, and lipoprotein lipase, and via complex-formation with the amyloid precursor protein it downregulates generation of Alzheimer's disease-associated Aβ-peptide. The receptor is mainly located in vesicles, suggesting a function in protein sorting and transport. Here we examined SorLA's trafficking using full-length and chimeric receptors and find that its cytoplasmic tail mediates efficient Golgi body-endosome transport, as well as AP-2 complex-dependent endocytosis. Functional sorting sites were mapped to an acidic cluster-dileucine-like motif and to a GGA binding site in the C terminus. Experiments in permanently or transiently AP-1 μ1-chain-deficient cells established that the AP-1 adaptor complex is essential to SorLA's transport between Golgi membranes and endosomes. Our results further implicate the GGA proteins in SorLA trafficking and provide evidence that SNX1 and Vps35, as parts of the retromer complex or possibly in a separate context, are engaged in retraction of the receptor from endosomes.

RESULTS

SorLA shows structural similarities to Sortilin, as well as to LRP. The three receptors share a number of ligands and are all capable of endocytosis, but in terms of subcellular localization they clearly differ. LRP has a much higher expression at the plasma membrane than the two Vps10p-D receptors, and although SorLA and Sortilin both predominate intracellularly, colocalization is only partial. In double transfectants expressing Sortilin and SorLA, SorLA displays a more dispersed vesicular expression pattern than Sortilin, which concentrates mainly in perinuclear compartments (Fig. 1A ). In accordance with this observation, subcellular fractionation shows a clear difference in the overall localization of the two wt receptors in HEK293 double transfectants (Fig. 1B ). As is apparent from Fig. 1B (lower panels), this difference becomes particularly distinct when TGN46 containing fractions obtained in velocity gradients are subjected to additional separation on an equilibrium gradient. A similar discrepancy was observed in relation to endogenous LRP (Fig. 1B ).

For further analysis of SorLA trafficking, we constructed two types of chimeric receptors (Fig. 2 ) combining the SorLA-cd with the luminal and transmembrane domains of either the IL-2R or of the MPR300. Both chimeras (IL-2R/SorLA and MPR300/SorLA) were generated as a series of receptors containing either the wt SorLA-cd, various truncated cd's, or mutant cd's comprising amino acid substitutions in candidate sorting motifs (Fig. 2B ).

DISCUSSION

Only a small group of receptors, which includes the Vps10p-D receptor Sortilin and the two MPRs, are known to run a regular service between the TGN and the early and late endosomes. The present report adds SorLA to the chosen few. Our findings demonstrate that although SorLA is expressed on the plasma membrane, the vast majority of receptors are intracellular and engage in Golgi body-endosome transport. Thus, the expression of MPR300/SorLA prevents the secretion of hydrolases in mpr −/− cultures, restores lysosomal morphology and promotes the conversion of hydrolases from their proform to active mature enzymes. The finding that secretion of RAP is downregulated upon coexpression with SorLA further demonstrates that the wt receptor has the capacity to target newly synthesized soluble ligands for sorting in the biosynthetic pathway. In agreement, we find that SorLA sorting depends on cytosolic interactors that have previously been shown to facilitate Golgi body-endosome shuttling. Still, one must keep in mind that our results are based mainly on chimeric receptors carrying the SorLA-cd. It can therefore not be excluded that trafficking of the full-length wt receptor is influenced by additional factors not reflected by the present study.

Like Sortilin and the MPRs, SorLA predominates intracellularly, and only ca. 5 to 10% of the receptors are present on the plasma membrane at any given time ( 15 ). Accordingly, SorLA is endocytic and has been shown to mediate internalization of several ligands ( 10 , 15 , 34 ). Our present findings show that endocytosis relies on the C-terminal half of the cytoplasmic tail and identifies the AC (D 30 -D 38 ) as the major functional motif. Alanine substitutions in the AC impaired endocytosis, and exchange of the entire cluster seriously slowed the process. A truncation immediately after the AC also affected internalization, but selective mutations in this segment did not. It is therefore likely that the latter truncation inhibits endocytosis by hampering the AC and not because it harbors additional functional motifs. Thus, an AC but none of the classical motifs (YXXΦ, dileucines, or NPXY) for endocytosis via coated pits seem active in the SorLA-cd. Acidic clusters are targeted by PACS-1, which partakes in the endocytosis and retrograde sorting of furin ( 8 ). PACS-1 may in fact bind SorLA, but receptor internalization was virtually unchanged at <10% of normal PACS-1 levels. In contrast, endocytosis was clearly affected by changes in the AP-2 complex. SorLA binds to the AP-2 complex, and inactivation of AP-2 complex by μ-chain knockdown almost completely blocks internalization. It follows that AP-2 is essential to endocytosis of the receptor, whereas SorLA, similar to Sortilin, does not depend on PACS-1 for this function.

After internalization, SorLA accumulates in early endosomes and, within 30 min, relocation to TGN46 positive and, to a minor degree, Lamp-1-positive vesicles is visible. The internalized receptors do not return to the plasma membrane but appear to incur cycling between intracellular compartments. In agreement, our findings in mpr −/− cells show that SorLA is engaged in Golgi body-endosome transport. The MPR300/SorLA retained hydrolase precursors in the cells and promoted their processing to mature enzymes by delivering them to the lysosomes. We have previously reported similar results for Sortilin ( 22 ); however, the overall localization of Sortilin and SorLA differs, suggesting alternative routes of trafficking. Like Sortilin, SorLA depends on at least two sites in its cd for TGN-endosome sorting. One of the two is situated at the extreme C terminus of the cd and implicates the GGA-binding motif D 48 XXM 51 . Exchange of D or M for alanine or removal of M by truncation (ΔMVIA) disrupts the motif and prevents binding of all three GGAs to SorLA ( 17 ). Here we find that sorting of β-glucuronidase is impaired in mpr −/− cells if the MPR300/SorLA carries a dysfunctional GGA-binding motif. This and the fact that the M 51 VIA 54 truncation alters the subcellular localization of the wt receptor strongly indicate the involvement of GGAs in the TGN-endosome trafficking of SorLA.

The other involved site maps to the AC-dileucine-like motif. This type of motif is a well-known candidate for interaction with the tetrameric adaptor protein complexes, notably AP-1 which, along with the GGAs, is implicated in sorting of MPRs at the TGN ( 6 ). The present findings clearly demonstrate that AP-1 is similarly important to SorLA sorting. Fluorescence microscopy, as well as subcellular fractionation, presented a significant difference between localization of wt SorLA in μ-chain-deficient mouse fibroblasts and their wt counterparts, and μ-chain knockdown seriously impaired hydrolase transport in MPR300/SorLA mpr −/− cells.

Recent findings provide evidence that GGA3 and PACS-1 in complex with casein kinase may act in concert to promote transport of the MPR300 from TGN and their return from endosomes ( 29 ). As shown here, GGAs engage in SorLA sorting. We therefore challenged PACS-1 function by RNAi, but found no detectable effect on hydrolase-sorting in mpr −/− transfectants. Evidently, PACS-1 is either not involved or its function is subject to redundancy.

We finally probed for the participation of SNX1 in SorLA sorting. SNX1 is part of the retromer, a multisubunit that mediates retrograde transport of MPRs between endosomes and the TGN ( 3 ). The mammalian retromer comprises the subunits SNX1, SNX2, Vps26, Vps29, and Vps35 ( 11 ). The functional organization of the complex is not entirely clear, but it appears that SNX1 and SNX2 mediate binding to phosphoinositides in highly curved endosomal membranes ( 7 ), whereas Vps35 may account for capture of cargo receptors ( 3 , 31 ). Current evidence suggests that Sortilin is a target for retromer sorting, and a recent finding has established that SNX1 knockdown in HepG2 cells is accompanied by a significant decrease in cellular Sortilin resulting from a reduction in receptor half-life (M. Mari, unpublished results). We confirm this finding and show that SorLA is subject to a similar downregulation and reduction of half-life in response to deficiency of SNX1. In all probability the findings reflect that SNX1 is needed (at least in HepG2 cells) for the retraction of Sortilin and SorLA from the endosomes and enables them to escape degradation in the lysosomes. It is less clear whether this also implicates the retromer complex. The fact that deficiency in Vps35 was accompanied by a significant reduction in SorLA does suggest that sorting of this receptor involves the retromer. In contrast, Sortilin expression was (surprisingly) unchanged under the same conditions. This underscores in the first place a difference in the trafficking of the two receptors and, second, provides evidence that SNX1 function is not limited to the context of the retromer complex. The apparent lack of interaction between the SorLA-cd and Vps35 furthermore indicates that the retromer may target receptors via alternative subunits.

The results obtained with RAP show that wt SorLA may target soluble ligands in the TGN for transport, e.g., lipoprotein lipase, and thereby regulate their release. However, SorLA also binds and sorts the transmembrane protein APP ( 1 ), which produces the Alzheimer's disease-associated Aβ-peptide when processed by β-secretase activity. After complex formation, SorLA protects APP from β-secretase activity and inhibits the generation of Aβ-peptide in cells ( 1 , 24 , 33 ). Accordingly, SorLA seems to be downregulated in brains of individuals with AD. In the light of our present findings it is therefore highly interesting that a similar decrease in Vps35 and other elements of the retromer complex has also been associated with AD and the generation of Aβ-peptide ( 32 ). As demonstrated, Vps35 and (in particular) SNX1 deficiency may downregulate SorLA in cells. Thus, a functional connection between low levels of SorLA and the two proteins in AD seems conceivable, and it could be speculated that defects or deficiency in SNX1 and/or Vps35 (as parts of the retromer or in a different context) might form a basis for accelerated Αβ-peptide production.
