---
pmid: '17130244'
title: Murine Pif1 interacts with telomerase and is dispensable for telomere function
  in vivo.
authors:
- Snow BE
- Mateyak M
- Paderova J
- Wakeham A
- Iorio C
- Zakian V
- Squire J
- Harrington L
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1800700
doi: 10.1128/MCB.01866-06
---

# Murine Pif1 interacts with telomerase and is dispensable for telomere function in vivo.
**Authors:** Snow BE, Mateyak M, Paderova J, Wakeham A, Iorio C, Zakian V, Squire J, Harrington L
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.01866-06](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.01866-06)
**PMC:** [PMC1800700](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1800700/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Feb;27(3):1017-26. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01866-06. Epub 2006
Nov  27.

Murine Pif1 interacts with telomerase and is dispensable for telomere function 
in vivo.

Snow BE(1), Mateyak M, Paderova J, Wakeham A, Iorio C, Zakian V, Squire J, 
Harrington L.

Author information:
(1)Ontario Cancer Institute, Campbell Family Institute for Breast Cancer 
Research, 620 University Avenue, Room 706, Toronto M5G 2C1, Canada.

Pif1 is a 5'-to-3' DNA helicase critical to DNA replication and telomere length 
maintenance in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. ScPif1 is a negative 
regulator of telomeric repeat synthesis by telomerase, and recombinant ScPif1 
promotes the dissociation of the telomerase RNA template from telomeric DNA in 
vitro. In order to dissect the role of mPif1 in mammals, we cloned and disrupted 
the mPif1 gene. In wild-type animals, mPif1 expression was detected only in 
embryonic and hematopoietic lineages. mPif1(-/-) mice were viable at expected 
frequencies, displayed no visible abnormalities, and showed no reproducible 
alteration in telomere length in two different null backgrounds, even after 
several generations. Spectral karyotyping of mPif1(-/-) fibroblasts and 
splenocytes revealed no significant change in chromosomal rearrangements. 
Furthermore, induction of apoptosis or DNA damage revealed no differences in 
cell viability compared to what was found for wild-type fibroblasts and 
splenocytes. Despite a novel association of mPif1 with telomerase, mPif1 did not 
affect the elongation activity of telomerase in vitro. Thus, in contrast to what 
occurs with ScPif1, murine telomere homeostasis or genetic stability does not 
depend on mPif1, perhaps due to fundamental differences in the regulation of 
telomerase and/or telomere length between mice and yeast or due to genetic 
redundancy with other DNA helicases.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.01866-06
PMCID: PMC1800700
PMID: 17130244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
