---
pmid: '11969205'
title: Cholesterol, hydroxycholesterols, and bile acids.
authors:
- Javitt NB
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/bbrc.2001.2013
---

# Cholesterol, hydroxycholesterols, and bile acids.
**Authors:** Javitt NB
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1006/bbrc.2001.2013](https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.2001.2013)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Apr 19;292(5):1147-53. doi: 
10.1006/bbrc.2001.2013.

Cholesterol, hydroxycholesterols, and bile acids.

Javitt NB(1).

Author information:
(1)New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA. 
Norman.Javitt@med.nyu.edu

Although a variety of oxidation products of cholesterol occur in vitro, 
enzyme-catalyzed oxidations can occur at only 5 sites on the cholesterol 
molecule: C7alpha, C22R, C24S, C25, and C27. The genes coding for the synthesis 
of these enzymes were cloned, the tissue expressions of the mRNAs were 
identified, and the enzymes were characterized. The biologic properties of the 
hydroxycholesterol molecules that are initially generated and their metabolites 
are under study. Downregulation of cholesterol synthesis via the SREBP/SCAP 
regulatory pathway is common to the initial hydroxycholesterols, but more 
variations exist with respect to these intermediates functioning as ligands for 
the nuclear receptor LXRalpha. Because this receptor regulates the expression of 
cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase and ABC transporter proteins, hydroxycholesterols 
and their intermediate steroid metabolites modulate a number of biologic 
processes. Metabolism of 22S-hydroxycholesterol to steroid hormones differs from 
that of the other hydroxycholesterols which form mostly steroid acidic products, 
otherwise known as bile acids. In vivo estimates of their production rates in 
intact humans indicate that 24S and 25-hydroxycholesterol account for no more 
than 7% of total bile acid production per day. Current evidence indicates that 
cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxycholesterol generated in the liver is the major source 
of bile acids in older adults. It is also known that the cholesterol 
27-hydroxylation pathway is the only one expressed in fetal and neonatal life. 
Precisely when the proportions contributed by these two metabolic pathways to 
bile acid synthesis begin to shift and the role of the cholesterol 
27-hydroxylase pathway in reverse cholesterol transport mandate further study.

(c) 2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.2001.2013
PMID: 11969205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
