---
pmid: '17525370'
title: Dominant negative suppression of Rad leads to QT prolongation and causes ventricular
  arrhythmias via modulation of L-type Ca2+ channels in the heart.
authors:
- Yada H
- Murata M
- Shimoda K
- Yuasa S
- Kawaguchi H
- Ieda M
- Adachi T
- Murata M
- Ogawa S
- Fukuda K
journal: Circ Res
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.106.146399
---

# Dominant negative suppression of Rad leads to QT prolongation and causes ventricular arrhythmias via modulation of L-type Ca2+ channels in the heart.
**Authors:** Yada H, Murata M, Shimoda K, Yuasa S, Kawaguchi H, Ieda M, Adachi T, Murata M, Ogawa S, Fukuda K
**Journal:** Circ Res (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.106.146399](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.106.146399)

## Abstract

1. Circ Res. 2007 Jul 6;101(1):69-77. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.106.146399. Epub
2007  May 24.

Dominant negative suppression of Rad leads to QT prolongation and causes 
ventricular arrhythmias via modulation of L-type Ca2+ channels in the heart.

Yada H(1), Murata M, Shimoda K, Yuasa S, Kawaguchi H, Ieda M, Adachi T, Murata 
M, Ogawa S, Fukuda K.

Author information:
(1)Cardiopulmonary Division, Keio University, 35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, 
Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

Disorders of L-type Ca2+ channels can cause severe cardiac arrhythmias. A 
subclass of small GTP-binding proteins, the RGK family, regulates L-type Ca2+ 
current (I(Ca,L)) in heterologous expression systems. Among these proteins, Rad 
(Ras associated with diabetes) is highly expressed in the heart, although its 
role in the heart remains unknown. Here we show that overexpression of dominant 
negative mutant Rad (S105N) led to an increase in I(Ca,L) and action potential 
prolongation via upregulation of L-type Ca2+ channel expression in the plasma 
membrane of guinea pig ventricular cardiomyocytes. To verify the in vivo 
physiological role of Rad in the heart, a mouse model of cardiac-specific Rad 
suppression was created by overexpressing S105N Rad, using the alpha-myosin 
heavy chain promoter. Microelectrode studies revealed that action potential 
duration was significantly prolonged with visible identification of a small 
plateau phase in S105N Rad transgenic mice, when compared with wild-type 
littermate mice. Telemetric electrocardiograms on unrestrained mice revealed 
that S105N Rad transgenic mice had significant QT prolongation and diverse 
arrhythmias such as sinus node dysfunction, atrioventricular block, and 
ventricular extrasystoles, whereas no arrhythmias were observed in wild-type 
mice. Furthermore, administration of epinephrine induced frequent ventricular 
extrasystoles and ventricular tachycardia in S105N Rad transgenic mice. This 
study provides novel evidence that the suppression of Rad activity in the heart 
can induce ventricular tachycardia, suggesting that the Rad-associated signaling 
pathway may play a role in arrhythmogenesis in diverse cardiac diseases.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.106.146399
PMID: 17525370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
