---
pmid: '22941656'
title: PALB2 self-interaction controls homologous recombination.
authors:
- Buisson R
- Masson JY
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3488246
doi: 10.1093/nar/gks807
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# PALB2 self-interaction controls homologous recombination.
**Authors:** Buisson R, Masson JY
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gks807](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gks807)
**PMC:** [PMC3488246](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3488246/)

## Abstract

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Nov 1;40(20):10312-23. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks807. Epub 
2012 Aug 31.

PALB2 self-interaction controls homologous recombination.

Buisson R(1), Masson JY.

Author information:
(1)Genome Stability Laboratory, Laval University Cancer Research Center, 
Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, Québec city (Québec), G1R 2J6, Canada.

PALB2 is essential for BRCA2 anchorage to nuclear structures and for homologous 
recombinational repair of DNA double-strand breaks. Here, we report that the 
N-terminal coiled-coil motif of PALB2 regulates its self-association and 
homologous recombination. Monomeric PALB2 shows higher efficiency to bind DNA 
and promotes RAD51 filament formation with or without the inhibitory effect of 
Replication Protein A. Moreover, overexpression of the PALB2 coiled-coil domain 
severely affects RAD51 loading to DNA damage sites suggesting a competition 
between PALB2 self-interaction and PALB2-BRCA1 interaction. In the presence of 
DNA damage, the switch between PALB2-PALB2 and PALB2-BRCA1 interactions allows 
the activation of HR. Controlling HR via PALB2 self-interactions could be 
important to prevent aberrant recombination in normal conditions and activate 
DNA repair when required.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gks807
PMCID: PMC3488246
PMID: 22941656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
