---
pmid: '15255861'
title: Functional identification of rice syn-copalyl diphosphate synthase and its
  role in initiating biosynthesis of diterpenoid phytoalexin/allelopathic natural
  products.
authors:
- Xu M
- Hillwig ML
- Prisic S
- Coates RM
- Peters RJ
journal: Plant J
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2004.02137.x
---

# Functional identification of rice syn-copalyl diphosphate synthase and its role in initiating biosynthesis of diterpenoid phytoalexin/allelopathic natural products.
**Authors:** Xu M, Hillwig ML, Prisic S, Coates RM, Peters RJ
**Journal:** Plant J (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-313X.2004.02137.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-313X.2004.02137.x)

## Abstract

1. Plant J. 2004 Aug;39(3):309-18. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2004.02137.x.

Functional identification of rice syn-copalyl diphosphate synthase and its role 
in initiating biosynthesis of diterpenoid phytoalexin/allelopathic natural 
products.

Xu M(1), Hillwig ML, Prisic S, Coates RM, Peters RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Biophysics, and Molecular Biology, Iowa State 
University, Ames, IA 50011, USA.

Rice produces a number of phytoalexins, and at least one allelopathic agent, 
from syn-copalyl diphosphate (CPP), representing the only known metabolic fate 
for this compound. Thus, the class II terpene synthase that converts the 
universal diterpenoid precursor geranylgeranyl diphosphate to syn-CPP catalyzes 
the committed step in biosynthesis of these natural products. Here the extensive 
sequence information available for rice was coupled to recombinant expression 
and functional analysis to identify syn-copalyl diphosphate synthase (OsCPSsyn). 
In addition, OsCPSsyn mRNA was found to be specifically induced in leaves by 
conditions that stimulate phytoalexin biosynthesis. Therefore, transcription of 
OsCPSsyn seems to be an important regulatory point for controlling the 
production of these defensive compounds. Finally, alignments carried out with 
OsCPSsyn revealed that class II terpene synthases exhibit a sequence 
conservation pattern substantially different from that of the prototypical class 
I enzymes. One particularly notable feature is the specific conservation of the 
functionally cryptic 'insertional' sequence element in class II terpene 
synthases, indicating that this region is important for the corresponding 
cyclization reaction.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2004.02137.x
PMID: 15255861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
