---
pmid: '2180753'
title: Conidium differentiation in Aspergillus nidulans wild-type and wet-white (wetA)
  mutant strains.
authors:
- Sewall TC
- Mims CW
- Timberlake WE
journal: Dev Biol
year: '1990'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0012-1606(90)90215-5
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Conidium differentiation in Aspergillus nidulans wild-type and wet-white (wetA) mutant strains.
**Authors:** Sewall TC, Mims CW, Timberlake WE
**Journal:** Dev Biol (1990)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0012-1606(90)90215-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/0012-1606(90)90215-5)

## Abstract

1. Dev Biol. 1990 Apr;138(2):499-508. doi: 10.1016/0012-1606(90)90215-5.

Conidium differentiation in Aspergillus nidulans wild-type and wet-white (wetA) 
mutant strains.

Sewall TC(1), Mims CW, Timberlake WE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, University of Georgia, Athens 30602.

Conidium (asexual spore) differentiation in wild-type and the wet-white (wetA) 
mutant of Aspergillus nidulans was compared in intact chains of successively 
older conidia. Carbohydrate cytochemistry helped define three stages (Stages I, 
II, and III) of wild-type conidium maturation on the basis of changes in the 
ultrastructure and composition of the conidium wall. Conidia of the wetA6 mutant 
strain formed normally but failed to mature during Stages II and III. 
Specifically, the inner wall layer of wetA6 conidia did not condense during 
Stage II and two wall layers that stained for carbohydrates did not form during 
the transition to Stage III. Concomitantly, wetA6 conidia formed large 
cytoplasmic vacuoles and underwent lysis. The wetA gene appears to have a 
conidium-specific function for the modification of the conidium wall during 
Stages II and III. These modifications of the conidium wall are essential for 
the stability of mature, dormant conidia.

DOI: 10.1016/0012-1606(90)90215-5
PMID: 2180753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
