---
pmid: '9528774'
title: The carboxy-terminal domain of Hsc70 provides binding sites for a distinct
  set of chaperone cofactors.
authors:
- Demand J
- Lüders J
- Höhfeld J
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC121432
doi: 10.1128/MCB.18.4.2023
---

# The carboxy-terminal domain of Hsc70 provides binding sites for a distinct set of chaperone cofactors.
**Authors:** Demand J, Lüders J, Höhfeld J
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.18.4.2023](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.18.4.2023)
**PMC:** [PMC121432](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC121432/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Apr;18(4):2023-8. doi: 10.1128/MCB.18.4.2023.

The carboxy-terminal domain of Hsc70 provides binding sites for a distinct set 
of chaperone cofactors.

Demand J(1), Lüders J, Höhfeld J.

Author information:
(1)ZMBH, Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie, Universität Heidelberg, Germany.

The modulation of the chaperone activity of the heat shock cognate Hsc70 protein 
in mammalian cells involves cooperation with chaperone cofactors, such as Hsp40; 
BAG-1; the Hsc70-interacting protein, Hip; and the Hsc70-Hsp90-organizing 
protein, Hop. By employing the yeast two-hybrid system and in vitro interaction 
assays, we have provided insight into the structural basis that underlies 
Hsc70's cooperation with different cofactors. The carboxy-terminal domain of 
Hsc70, previously shown to form a lid over the peptide binding pocket of the 
chaperone protein, mediates the interaction of Hsc70 with Hsp40 and Hop. 
Remarkably, the two cofactors bind to the carboxy terminus of Hsc70 in a 
noncompetitive manner, revealing the existence of distinct binding sites for 
Hsp40 and Hop within this domain. In contrast, Hip interacts exclusively with 
the amino-terminal ATPase domain of Hsc70. Hence, Hsc70 possesses separate 
nonoverlapping binding sites for Hsp40, Hip, and Hop. This appears to enable the 
chaperone protein to cooperate simultaneously with multiple cofactors. On the 
other hand, BAG-1 and Hip have recently been shown to compete in binding to the 
ATPase domain. Our data thus establish the existence of a network of cooperating 
and competing cofactors regulating the chaperone activity of Hsc70 in the 
mammalian cell.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.18.4.2023
PMCID: PMC121432
PMID: 9528774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
