---
pmid: '11967989'
title: Interleukin-4 regulates connective tissue growth factor expression in human
  lung fibroblasts.
authors:
- Rishikof DC
- Ricupero DA
- Kuang PP
- Liu H
- Goldstein RH
journal: J Cell Biochem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/jcb.10144
---

# Interleukin-4 regulates connective tissue growth factor expression in human lung fibroblasts.
**Authors:** Rishikof DC, Ricupero DA, Kuang PP, Liu H, Goldstein RH
**Journal:** J Cell Biochem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jcb.10144](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcb.10144)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Biochem. 2002;85(3):496-504. doi: 10.1002/jcb.10144.

Interleukin-4 regulates connective tissue growth factor expression in human lung 
fibroblasts.

Rishikof DC(1), Ricupero DA, Kuang PP, Liu H, Goldstein RH.

Author information:
(1)The Pulmonary Center, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02118, USA. drishikof@lung.bumc.bu.edu

Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) and interleukin-4 (IL-4) have 
fibrogenic properties and induce extracellular matrix production in a variety of 
lung diseases. Connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) is a matrix signaling 
molecule stimulated by TGF-beta that in part mediates alpha1(I) collagen mRNA 
expression. In these studies, the regulation of CTGF expression by IL-4 in human 
lung fibroblasts was examined. Following 6 h of stimulation with IL-4, basal 
CTGF mRNA levels were unchanged as assessed by Northern blot analysis. However, 
IL-4 attenuated the TGF-beta-stimulated induction of CTGF mRNA expression by 
50%. This effect was selective because IL-4 did not affect fibronectin or 
alpha1(I) collagen mRNA expression induced by TGF-beta. Experiments employing 
the transcriptional inhibitor actinomycin D suggest that IL-4 did not affect the 
stability of the CTGF mRNA. Transient transfection assays with 3TP-Lux, a 
luciferase gene controlled by a TGF-beta inducible promoter, and with a CTGF 
promoter construct indicate that IL-4 interfered with the TGF-beta-induced 
transcriptional activation of the CTGF gene.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.10144
PMID: 11967989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
