---
pmid: '17222790'
title: Blocking neuropilin-1 function has an additive effect with anti-VEGF to inhibit
  tumor growth.
authors:
- Pan Q
- Chanthery Y
- Liang WC
- Stawicki S
- Mak J
- Rathore N
- Tong RK
- Kowalski J
- Yee SF
- Pacheco G
- Ross S
- Cheng Z
- Le Couter J
- Plowman G
- Peale F
- Koch AW
- Wu Y
- Bagri A
- Tessier-Lavigne M
- Watts RJ
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2006.10.018
---

# Blocking neuropilin-1 function has an additive effect with anti-VEGF to inhibit tumor growth.
**Authors:** Pan Q, Chanthery Y, Liang WC, Stawicki S, Mak J, Rathore N, Tong RK, Kowalski J, Yee SF, Pacheco G, Ross S, Cheng Z, Le Couter J, Plowman G, Peale F, Koch AW, Wu Y, Bagri A, Tessier-Lavigne M, Watts RJ
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccr.2006.10.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2006.10.018)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Cell. 2007 Jan;11(1):53-67. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2006.10.018.

Blocking neuropilin-1 function has an additive effect with anti-VEGF to inhibit 
tumor growth.

Pan Q(1), Chanthery Y, Liang WC, Stawicki S, Mak J, Rathore N, Tong RK, Kowalski 
J, Yee SF, Pacheco G, Ross S, Cheng Z, Le Couter J, Plowman G, Peale F, Koch AW, 
Wu Y, Bagri A, Tessier-Lavigne M, Watts RJ.

Author information:
(1)Tumor Biology and Angiogenesis, Genentech, Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San 
Francisco, CA 94080, USA.

Neuropilin-1 (NRP1) guides the development of the nervous and vascular systems. 
Binding to either semaphorins or VEGF, NRP1 acts with plexins to regulate 
neuronal guidance, or with VEGFR2 to mediate vascular development. We have 
generated two monoclonal antibodies that bind to the Sema- and VEGF-binding 
domains of NRP1, respectively. Both antibodies reduce angiogenesis and vascular 
remodeling, while having little effect on other VEGFR2-mediated events. 
Importantly, anti-NRP1 antibodies have an additive effect with anti-VEGF therapy 
in reducing tumor growth. Vessels from tumors treated with anti-VEGF show a 
close association with pericytes, while tumors treated with both anti-NRP1 and 
anti-VEGF lack this organization. We propose that blocking NRP1 function 
inhibits vascular remodeling, rendering vessels more susceptible to anti-VEGF 
therapy.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccr.2006.10.018
PMID: 17222790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
