---
pmid: '16103110'
title: Involvement of N-terminal-extended form of sphingosine kinase 2 in serum-dependent
  regulation of cell proliferation and apoptosis.
authors:
- Okada T
- Ding G
- Sonoda H
- Kajimoto T
- Haga Y
- Khosrowbeygi A
- Gao S
- Miwa N
- Jahangeer S
- Nakamura S
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M504507200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Involvement of N-terminal-extended form of sphingosine kinase 2 in serum-dependent regulation of cell proliferation and apoptosis.
**Authors:** Okada T, Ding G, Sonoda H, Kajimoto T, Haga Y, Khosrowbeygi A, Gao S, Miwa N, Jahangeer S, Nakamura S
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M504507200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M504507200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Oct 28;280(43):36318-25. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M504507200. Epub 
2005 Aug 15.

Involvement of N-terminal-extended form of sphingosine kinase 2 in 
serum-dependent regulation of cell proliferation and apoptosis.

Okada T(1), Ding G, Sonoda H, Kajimoto T, Haga Y, Khosrowbeygi A, Gao S, Miwa N, 
Jahangeer S, Nakamura S.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biochemistry, Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Kobe 
University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe 650-0017, Japan.

Sphingosine kinase (SPHK) 1 is implicated in the regulation of cell 
proliferation and anti-apoptotic processes by catalyzing the formation of an 
important bioactive messenger, sphingosine 1-phosphate. Unlike the proliferative 
action of SPHK1, another isozyme, SPHK2, has been shown to possess 
anti-proliferative or pro-apoptotic action. Molecular mechanisms of SPHK2 
action, however, are largely unknown. The present studies were undertaken to 
characterize the N-terminal-extended form of SPHK2 (SPHK2-L) by comparing it 
with the originally reported form, SPHK2-S. Real-time quantitative PCR analysis 
revealed that SPHK2-L mRNA is the major form in several human cell lines and 
tissues. From sequence analyses it was concluded that SPHK2-L is a 
species-specific isoform that is expressed in human but not in mouse. At the 
protein level it has been demonstrated by immunoprecipitation studies that 
SPHK2-L is the major isoform in human hepatoma HepG2 cells. SPHK2-L, when 
expressed in human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293 cells, did not show any inhibition 
of DNA synthesis in the presence of serum, whereas it showed marked inhibition 
in the absence of serum. Moreover, serum deprivation resulted in the 
translocation of SPHK2-L into the nuclei. In addition, serum deprivation induced 
SPHK2-L expression in HEK293 cells. Furthermore, suppression of SPHK2 by small 
interfering RNA treatment prevented serum deprivation- or drug-induced apoptosis 
in HEK293 cells. Taken together, these results indicate that a major form of 
SPHK2 splice variant, SPHK2-L, in human cells does not inhibit DNA synthesis 
under normal conditions and that SPHK2-L accumulation in the nucleus induced by 
serum deprivation may be involved in the cessation of cell proliferation or 
apoptosis depending on the cell type.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M504507200
PMID: 16103110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
