---
pmid: '20816395'
title: Endocytosis and intracellular trafficking of Notch and its ligands.
authors:
- Yamamoto S
- Charng WL
- Bellen HJ
journal: Curr Top Dev Biol
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6233319
doi: 10.1016/S0070-2153(10)92005-X
---

# Endocytosis and intracellular trafficking of Notch and its ligands.
**Authors:** Yamamoto S, Charng WL, Bellen HJ
**Journal:** Curr Top Dev Biol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0070-2153(10)92005-X](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0070-2153(10)92005-X)
**PMC:** [PMC6233319](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6233319/)

## Abstract

1. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2010;92:165-200. doi: 10.1016/S0070-2153(10)92005-X.

Endocytosis and intracellular trafficking of Notch and its ligands.

Yamamoto S(1), Charng WL, Bellen HJ.

Author information:
(1)Program in Developmental Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 
USA.

Notch signaling occurs through direct interaction between Notch, the receptor, 
and its ligands, presented on the surface of neighboring cells. Endocytosis has 
been shown to be essential for Notch signal activation in both signal-sending 
and signal-receiving cells, and numerous genes involved in vesicle trafficking 
have recently been shown to act as key regulators of the pathway. Defects in 
vesicle trafficking can lead to gain- or loss-of-function defects in a 
context-dependent manner. Here, we discuss how endocytosis and vesicle 
trafficking regulate Notch signaling in both signal-sending and signal-receiving 
cells. We will introduce the key players in different trafficking steps, and 
further illustrate how they impact the signal outcome. Some of these players act 
as general factors and modulate Notch signaling in all contexts, whereas others 
modulate signaling in a context-specific fashion. We also discuss Notch 
signaling during mechanosensory organ development in the fly to exemplify how 
endocytosis and vesicle trafficking are effectively used to determine correct 
cell fates. In summary, endocytosis plays an essential role in Notch signaling, 
whereas intracellular vesicle trafficking often plays a context-dependent or 
regulatory role, leading to divergent outcomes in different developmental 
contexts.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0070-2153(10)92005-X
PMCID: PMC6233319
PMID: 20816395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
