---
pmid: '15385965'
title: Cortical dysplasia resembling human type 2 lissencephaly in mice lacking all
  three APP family members.
authors:
- Herms J
- Anliker B
- Heber S
- Ring S
- Fuhrmann M
- Kretzschmar H
- Sisodia S
- Müller U
journal: EMBO J
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC524337
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600390
---

# Cortical dysplasia resembling human type 2 lissencephaly in mice lacking all three APP family members.
**Authors:** Herms J, Anliker B, Heber S, Ring S, Fuhrmann M, Kretzschmar H, Sisodia S, Müller U
**Journal:** EMBO J (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7600390](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7600390)
**PMC:** [PMC524337](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC524337/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2004 Oct 13;23(20):4106-15. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600390. Epub 2004
Sep  23.

Cortical dysplasia resembling human type 2 lissencephaly in mice lacking all 
three APP family members.

Herms J(1), Anliker B, Heber S, Ring S, Fuhrmann M, Kretzschmar H, Sisodia S, 
Müller U.

Author information:
(1)Zentrum für Neuropathologie und Prionforschung, Universität München, München, 
Germany.

The Alzheimer's disease beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP) is a member of a 
larger gene family that includes the amyloid precursor-like proteins, termed 
APLP1 and APLP2. We previously documented that APLP2-/-APLP1-/- and 
APLP2-/-APP-/- mice die postnatally, while APLP1-/-APP-/- mice and single 
mutants were viable. We now report that mice lacking all three APP/APLP family 
members survive through embryonic development, and die shortly after birth. In 
contrast to double-mutant animals with perinatal lethality, 81% of triple 
mutants showed cranial abnormalities. In 68% of triple mutants, we observed 
cortical dysplasias characterized by focal ectopic neuroblasts that had migrated 
through the basal lamina and pial membrane, a phenotype that resembles human 
type II lissencephaly. Moreover, at E18.5 triple mutants showed a partial loss 
of cortical Cajal Retzius (CR) cells, suggesting that APP/APLPs play a crucial 
role in the survival of CR cells and neuronal adhesion. Collectively, our data 
reveal an essential role for APP family members in normal brain development and 
early postnatal survival.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600390
PMCID: PMC524337
PMID: 15385965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
