---
pmid: '10645425'
title: 'The role of ABI1 in abscisic acid signal transduction: from gene to cell.'
authors:
- Leung J
- Merlot S
- Gosti F
- Bertauche N
- Blatt MR
- Giraudat J
journal: Symp Soc Exp Biol
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
---

# The role of ABI1 in abscisic acid signal transduction: from gene to cell.
**Authors:** Leung J, Merlot S, Gosti F, Bertauche N, Blatt MR, Giraudat J
**Journal:** Symp Soc Exp Biol (1998)

## Abstract

1. Symp Soc Exp Biol. 1998;51:65-71.

The role of ABI1 in abscisic acid signal transduction: from gene to cell.

Leung J(1), Merlot S, Gosti F, Bertauche N, Blatt MR, Giraudat J.

Author information:
(1)Institut des Sciences Végétales, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 
UPR 40, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

The semi-dominant abi1-1 mutation of Arabidopsis interferes with multiple 
aspects of abscisic acid signal transduction resulting in reduced seed dormancy 
and sensitivity of root growth in ABA. Furthermore, the mutant transpires 
excessively as a result of abnormal stomatal regulation leading to a wilty 
phenotype. The ABI1 gene has been cloned. The carboxyl-terminal domain of the 
predicted ABI1 protein is related to the 2C class of serine-threonine 
phosphatases while no overt homology was found in the extended amino terminus. A 
combination of in vitro assays and yeast mutant complementation studies 
confirmed that ABI1 is a functional protein phosphatase 2C. The abi1-1 mutation 
converts the amino acid glycine180 to aspartic acid, and in the above test 
systems, causes a partial loss of the phosphatase activity. In transgenic 
Nicotiana benthamiana guard cells, the abi1-1 gene causes a reduction in the 
background current of the outward-rectifying potassium channels, and also in the 
abscisic acid-sensitivity of both the outward- and the inward-rectifying 
potassium channels in the plasma membrane. However, normal sensitivity of both 
potassium channels to, and stomatal closure in, abscisic acid was recovered in 
the presence of H7 and staurosporine, both broad-range protein kinase 
antagonists. These results suggest the aberrant potassium channel behavior as a 
major consequence of abi1-1 action and implicate ABI1 as part of a 
phosphatase/kinase pathway that modulates the sensitivity of guard-cell 
potassium channels to abscisic acid-evoked signal cascades.

PMID: 10645425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
