---
pmid: '9763511'
title: Tau interacts with src-family non-receptor tyrosine kinases.
authors:
- Lee G
- Newman ST
- Gard DL
- Band H
- Panchamoorthy G
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.111.21.3167
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Tau interacts with src-family non-receptor tyrosine kinases.
**Authors:** Lee G, Newman ST, Gard DL, Band H, Panchamoorthy G
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.111.21.3167](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.111.21.3167)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 1998 Nov;111 ( Pt 21):3167-77. doi: 10.1242/jcs.111.21.3167.

Tau interacts with src-family non-receptor tyrosine kinases.

Lee G(1), Newman ST, Gard DL, Band H, Panchamoorthy G.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. gloria-lee@uiowa.edu

Tau and other microtubule-associated proteins promote the assembly and 
stabilization of neuronal microtubules. While each microtubule-associated 
protein has distinct properties, their in vivo roles remain largely unknown. Tau 
is important in neurite outgrowth and axonal development. Recently, we showed 
that the amino-terminal region of tau, which is not involved in microtubule 
interactions, is important in NGF induced neurite outgrowth in PC12 cells. Here 
we report that a proline rich sequence in the amino terminus of tau interacts 
with the SH3 domains of fyn and src non-receptor tyrosine kinases. Tau and fyn 
were co-immunoprecipitated from human neuroblastoma cells and co-localization of 
tau and fyn was visualized in co-transfected NIH3T3 cells. Co-transfection of 
tau and fyn also resulted in an alteration in NIH3T3 cell morphology, consistent 
with an in vivo interaction. Fyn-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation of tau 
occurred in transfected cells and tyrosine phosphorylated tau was identified in 
human neuroblastoma cells as well. Our data suggest that tau is involved in 
signal transduction pathways. An interaction between tau and fyn may serve as a 
mechanism by which extracellular signals influence the spatial distribution of 
microtubules. The tyrosine phosphorylation of tau by fyn may also have a role in 
neuropathogenesis, as fyn is upregulated in Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.111.21.3167
PMID: 9763511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
