---
pmid: '24696293'
title: Ecl1 is activated by the transcription factor Atf1 in response to H2O2 stress
  in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
authors:
- Shimasaki T
- Ohtsuka H
- Naito C
- Murakami H
- Aiba H
journal: Mol Genet Genomics
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s00438-014-0845-1
---

# Ecl1 is activated by the transcription factor Atf1 in response to H2O2 stress in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
**Authors:** Shimasaki T, Ohtsuka H, Naito C, Murakami H, Aiba H
**Journal:** Mol Genet Genomics (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00438-014-0845-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00438-014-0845-1)

## Abstract

1. Mol Genet Genomics. 2014 Aug;289(4):685-93. doi: 10.1007/s00438-014-0845-1.
Epub  2014 Apr 3.

Ecl1 is activated by the transcription factor Atf1 in response to H2O2 stress in 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe.

Shimasaki T(1), Ohtsuka H, Naito C, Murakami H, Aiba H.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology, Department of Basic Medicinal Sciences, 
Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Nagoya University, Chikusa-ku, 
Nagoya, 464-8601, Japan.

The Ecl1 family genes extend the lifespan of fission yeast when overexpressed. 
They also cause resistance against H(2)O(2) stress. In this study, we found that 
the bZip transcription factor Atf1 is a direct activator of the induction of 
extender of chronological lifespan (ecl1 (+)) by H(2)O(2) stress. Based on ChIP 
analysis, we identified that Atf1 binds to the upstream DNA region of ecl1(+). 
Previously, we reported that overexpression of ecl1(+) increased the expression 
of the catalase-encoding ctt1(+). This ecl1(+)-dependent increase of ctt1(+) 
expression occurred in ∆atf1 mutant. On the other hand, the activation of ctt1 
(+) caused by the ∆pyp1 mutation, which enhances Sty1-Atf1 activity, could occur 
in ∆ecl1 mutant. Based on these results, we propose that Atf1 can regulate 
ctt1(+) in both an Ecl1-dependent and an Ecl1-independent manner.

DOI: 10.1007/s00438-014-0845-1
PMID: 24696293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
