---
pmid: '3894330'
title: 'Cell shape and division in Escherichia coli: experiments with shape and division
  mutants.'
authors:
- Begg KJ
- Donachie WD
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '1985'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC219166
doi: 10.1128/jb.163.2.615-622.1985
---

# Cell shape and division in Escherichia coli: experiments with shape and division mutants.
**Authors:** Begg KJ, Donachie WD
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (1985)
**DOI:** [10.1128/jb.163.2.615-622.1985](https://doi.org/10.1128/jb.163.2.615-622.1985)
**PMC:** [PMC219166](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC219166/)

## Abstract

1. J Bacteriol. 1985 Aug;163(2):615-22. doi: 10.1128/jb.163.2.615-622.1985.

Cell shape and division in Escherichia coli: experiments with shape and division 
mutants.

Begg KJ, Donachie WD.

Double mutants which carry mutations in genes (rodA, pbpA) required for cell 
elongation (i.e., maintenance of rod shape) in combination with mutations in 
genes (ftsA, ftsI, ftsQ, or ftsZ) required for septation were constructed. Such 
mutants were able to grow for about two mass doublings at a normal rate at the 
restrictive temperature (42 degrees C). The morphology of the cells formed under 
these conditions was interpreted by assuming the existence of a generalized 
system for peptidoglycan growth together with two additional systems which 
modify the shape of the growing peptidoglycan layer. The results also showed 
that different fts genes probably control different stages in septation. ftsZ 
(sulB or sfiB) appears to be required for the earliest step in septation, ftsQ 
and ftsI (pbpB or sep) are required for a later step or steps, and ftsA is 
required only for the latest stages in septation.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.163.2.615-622.1985
PMCID: PMC219166
PMID: 3894330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
