---
pmid: '22879593'
title: Large protein assemblies formed by multivalent interactions between cadherin23
  and harmonin suggest a stable anchorage structure at the tip link of stereocilia.
authors:
- Wu L
- Pan L
- Zhang C
- Zhang M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3460447
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.378505
---

# Large protein assemblies formed by multivalent interactions between cadherin23 and harmonin suggest a stable anchorage structure at the tip link of stereocilia.
**Authors:** Wu L, Pan L, Zhang C, Zhang M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M112.378505](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M112.378505)
**PMC:** [PMC3460447](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3460447/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Sep 28;287(40):33460-71. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.378505. Epub 
2012 Aug 8.

Large protein assemblies formed by multivalent interactions between cadherin23 
and harmonin suggest a stable anchorage structure at the tip link of 
stereocilia.

Wu L(1), Pan L, Zhang C, Zhang M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Life Science, State Key Laboratory of Molecular Neuroscience, 
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong 
Kong.

Stereocilia tip links of inner ear hair cells are subjected to constant 
stretching during hair-bundle deflection, and accordingly are well designed to 
prevent from being broken by mechanical tensions. The roots of tip links, which 
couple tip links with the cytoskeleton, supposedly play important roles in 
withstanding large forces under stimulated conditions. The upper root of the tip 
link is mainly formed by the cytoplasmic tail of cadherin23 and its 
actin-anchoring protein harmonin. However, the detailed organization mode of the 
two proteins that gives rise to a strong upper root remains unclear. Here we 
show that the exon68-encoded peptide of cadherin23 can either interact with the 
N-terminal domain (NTD) of harmonin or form a homodimer. We demonstrate that the 
three harmonin binding sites of cadherin23, namely the NTD-binding motif, the 
exon68 peptide, and the C-terminal PDZ binding motif, do not synergize with each 
other in binding to harmonin, instead they facilitate formation of polymeric 
cadherin23/harmonin complexes. The exon68 peptide can promote the 
cadherin23/harmonin polymer formation via either binding to harmonin NTD or 
self-dimerization. We propose that the polymeric cadherin23/harmonin complex 
formed beneath the upper tip link membranes may serve as part of the stable 
rootlet structure for anchoring the tip links of stereocilia.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.378505
PMCID: PMC3460447
PMID: 22879593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
