---
pmid: '27060871'
title: Suppression of innate inflammation and immunity by interleukin-37.
authors:
- Dinarello CA
- Nold-Petry C
- Nold M
- Fujita M
- Li S
- Kim S
- Bufler P
journal: Eur J Immunol
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5003108
doi: 10.1002/eji.201545828
---

# Suppression of innate inflammation and immunity by interleukin-37.
**Authors:** Dinarello CA, Nold-Petry C, Nold M, Fujita M, Li S, Kim S, Bufler P
**Journal:** Eur J Immunol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/eji.201545828](https://doi.org/10.1002/eji.201545828)
**PMC:** [PMC5003108](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5003108/)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Immunol. 2016 May;46(5):1067-81. doi: 10.1002/eji.201545828.

Suppression of innate inflammation and immunity by interleukin-37.

Dinarello CA(1)(2), Nold-Petry C(3), Nold M(3), Fujita M(1), Li S(1), Kim 
S(1)(4), Bufler P(5).

Author information:
(1)University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO, USA.
(2)Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(3)Monash University, Melbourne, Australia.
(4)Konkuk University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(5)Ludwig-Maximilian-University, Munich, Germany.

IL-37 is unique in the IL-1 family in that unlike other members of the family, 
IL-37 broadly suppresses innate immunity. IL-37 can be elevated in humans with 
inflammatory and autoimmune diseases where it likely functions to limit 
inflammation. Transgenic mice expressing human IL-37 (IL37-tg) exhibit less 
severe inflammation in models of endotoxin shock, colitis, myocardial 
infarction, lung, and spinal cord injury. IL37-tg mice have reduced 
antigen-specific responses and dendritic cells (DCs) from these mice exhibit 
characteristics of tolerogenic DCs. Compared to aging wild-type (WT) mice, aging 
IL37-tg mice are protected against B-cell leukemogenesis and heart failure. 
Treatment of WT mice with recombinant human IL-37 has been shown to be 
protective in several models of inflammation and injury. IL-37 binds to the 
IL-18 receptor but then recruits the orphan IL-1R8 (formerly TIR8 or SIGIRR) in 
order to function as an inhibitor. Here, we review the discovery of IL-37, its 
production, release, and mechanisms by which IL-37 reduces inflammation and 
suppresses immune responses. The data reviewed here suggest a therapeutic 
potential for IL-37.

© 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201545828
PMCID: PMC5003108
PMID: 27060871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest. The authors declare no 
financial or commercial conflict of interest.
