---
pmid: '14749388'
title: Human CNK1 acts as a scaffold protein, linking Rho and Ras signal transduction
  pathways.
authors:
- Jaffe AB
- Aspenström P
- Hall A
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC344169
doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.4.1736-1746.2004
---

# Human CNK1 acts as a scaffold protein, linking Rho and Ras signal transduction pathways.
**Authors:** Jaffe AB, Aspenström P, Hall A
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.24.4.1736-1746.2004](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.24.4.1736-1746.2004)
**PMC:** [PMC344169](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC344169/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Feb;24(4):1736-46. doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.4.1736-1746.2004.

Human CNK1 acts as a scaffold protein, linking Rho and Ras signal transduction 
pathways.

Jaffe AB(1), Aspenström P, Hall A.

Author information:
(1)MRC Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology and Cell Biology Unit, Cancer 
Research UK Oncogene and Signal Transduction Group, and Department of 
Biochemistry, University College London, London WC1E 6BT, United Kingdom.

Rho family GTPases act as molecular switches to control a variety of cellular 
responses, including cytoskeletal rearrangements, changes in gene expression, 
and cell transformation. In the active, GTP-bound state, Rho interacts with an 
ever-growing number of effector molecules, which promote distinct biochemical 
pathways. Here, we describe the isolation of hCNK1, the human homologue of 
Drosophila connector enhancer of ksr, as an effector for Rho. hCNK1 contains 
several protein-protein interaction domains, and Rho interacts with one of 
these, the PH domain, in a GTP-dependent manner. A mutant hCNK1, which is unable 
to bind to Rho, or depletion of endogenous hCNK1 by using RNA interference 
inhibits Rho-induced gene expression via serum response factor but has no 
apparent effect on Rho-induced stress fiber formation, suggesting that it acts 
as a specific effector for transcriptional, but not cytoskeletal, activation 
pathways. Finally, hCNK1 associates with Rhophilin and RalGDS, Rho and Ras 
effector molecules, respectively, suggesting that it acts as a scaffold protein 
to mediate cross talk between the two pathways.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.24.4.1736-1746.2004
PMCID: PMC344169
PMID: 14749388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
