---
pmid: '24162852'
title: Structure of LIMP-2 provides functional insights with implications for SR-BI
  and CD36.
authors:
- Neculai D
- Schwake M
- Ravichandran M
- Zunke F
- Collins RF
- Peters J
- Neculai M
- Plumb J
- Loppnau P
- Pizarro JC
- Seitova A
- Trimble WS
- Saftig P
- Grinstein S
- Dhe-Paganon S
journal: Nature
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature12684
---

# Structure of LIMP-2 provides functional insights with implications for SR-BI and CD36.
**Authors:** Neculai D, Schwake M, Ravichandran M, Zunke F, Collins RF, Peters J, Neculai M, Plumb J, Loppnau P, Pizarro JC, Seitova A, Trimble WS, Saftig P, Grinstein S, Dhe-Paganon S
**Journal:** Nature (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature12684](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature12684)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2013 Dec 5;504(7478):172-6. doi: 10.1038/nature12684. Epub 2013 Oct
27.

Structure of LIMP-2 provides functional insights with implications for SR-BI and 
CD36.

Neculai D(1), Schwake M, Ravichandran M, Zunke F, Collins RF, Peters J, Neculai 
M, Plumb J, Loppnau P, Pizarro JC, Seitova A, Trimble WS, Saftig P, Grinstein S, 
Dhe-Paganon S.

Author information:
(1)Cell Biology Program, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto M5G 1X8, 
Canada.

Members of the CD36 superfamily of scavenger receptor proteins are important 
regulators of lipid metabolism and innate immunity. They recognize normal and 
modified lipoproteins, as well as pathogen-associated molecular patterns. The 
family consists of three members: SR-BI (which delivers cholesterol to the liver 
and steroidogenic organs and is a co-receptor for hepatitis C virus), 
LIMP-2/LGP85 (which mediates lysosomal delivery of β-glucocerebrosidase and 
serves as a receptor for enterovirus 71 and coxsackieviruses) and CD36 (a 
fatty-acid transporter and receptor for phagocytosis of effete cells and 
Plasmodium-infected erythrocytes). Notably, CD36 is also a receptor for modified 
lipoproteins and β-amyloid, and has been implicated in the pathogenesis of 
atherosclerosis and of Alzheimer's disease. Despite their prominent roles in 
health and disease, understanding the function and abnormalities of the CD36 
family members has been hampered by the paucity of information about their 
structure. Here we determine the crystal structure of LIMP-2 and infer, by 
homology modelling, the structure of SR-BI and CD36. LIMP-2 shows a helical 
bundle where β-glucocerebrosidase binds, and where ligands are most likely to 
bind to SR-BI and CD36. Remarkably, the crystal structure also shows the 
existence of a large cavity that traverses the entire length of the molecule. 
Mutagenesis of SR-BI indicates that the cavity serves as a tunnel through which 
cholesterol(esters) are delivered from the bound lipoprotein to the outer 
leaflet of the plasma membrane. We provide evidence supporting a model whereby 
lipidic constituents of the ligands attached to the receptor surface are handed 
off to the membrane through the tunnel, accounting for the selective lipid 
transfer characteristic of SR-BI and CD36.

DOI: 10.1038/nature12684
PMID: 24162852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
