---
pmid: '11988738'
title: E2F-dependent accumulation of hEmi1 regulates S phase entry by inhibiting APC(Cdh1).
authors:
- Hsu JY
- Reimann JD
- Sørensen CS
- Lukas J
- Jackson PK
journal: Nat Cell Biol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ncb785
---

# E2F-dependent accumulation of hEmi1 regulates S phase entry by inhibiting APC(Cdh1).
**Authors:** Hsu JY, Reimann JD, Sørensen CS, Lukas J, Jackson PK
**Journal:** Nat Cell Biol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncb785](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb785)

## Abstract

1. Nat Cell Biol. 2002 May;4(5):358-66. doi: 10.1038/ncb785.

E2F-dependent accumulation of hEmi1 regulates S phase entry by inhibiting 
APC(Cdh1).

Hsu JY(1), Reimann JD, Sørensen CS, Lukas J, Jackson PK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Program in Biophysics, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, CA 94305, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2002 May;4(5):E119-20. doi: 10.1038/ncb0502-e119.

Emi1 promotes mitotic entry in Xenopus laevis embryos by inhibiting the 
APC(Cdc20) ubiquitination complex to allow accumulation of cyclin B. We show 
here that human Emi1 (hEmi1) functions to promote cyclin A accumulation and S 
phase entry in somatic cells by inhibiting the APC(Cdh1) complex. At the G1-S 
transition, hEmi1 is transcriptionally induced by the E2F transcription factor, 
much like cyclin A. hEmi1 overexpression accelerates S phase entry and can 
override a G1 block caused by overexpression of Cdh1 or the E2F-inhibitor p105 
retinoblastoma protein (pRb). Depleting cells of hEmi1 through RNA interference 
prevents accumulation of cyclin A and inhibits S phase entry. These data suggest 
that E2F can activate both transcription of cyclin A and the hEmi1-dependent 
stabilization of APC(Cdh1) targets, such as cyclin A, to promote S phase entry.

DOI: 10.1038/ncb785
PMID: 11988738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
