---
pmid: '17268548'
title: Monoubiquitylation promotes mitochondrial p53 translocation.
authors:
- Marchenko ND
- Wolff S
- Erster S
- Becker K
- Moll UM
journal: EMBO J
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1852828
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601560
---

# Monoubiquitylation promotes mitochondrial p53 translocation.
**Authors:** Marchenko ND, Wolff S, Erster S, Becker K, Moll UM
**Journal:** EMBO J (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7601560](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7601560)
**PMC:** [PMC1852828](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1852828/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2007 Feb 21;26(4):923-34. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601560. Epub 2007 Feb
 1.

Monoubiquitylation promotes mitochondrial p53 translocation.

Marchenko ND(1), Wolff S, Erster S, Becker K, Moll UM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York, NY 
11794-869, USA.

A major function of the p53 tumor suppressor is the induction of a pleiotropic 
apoptotic program in response to stress through transcription-dependent and 
-independent mechanisms. In particular, this includes a direct apoptotic role of 
p53 at the mitochondria. Stress-induced p53 translocation to the mitochondria 
with subsequent outer membrane permeabilization is a common early component in 
p53-mediated apoptosis in normal and transformed cells. However, the mechanism 
of p53 delivery to the mitochondria remains unknown. Here, we show that the 
cytoplasm contains a separate and distinct p53 pool that is the major source for 
p53 translocation to the mitochondria upon its stress-induced stabilization. 
Using various manipulations that enhance or diminish p53 ubiquitylation, our 
data provide evidence that Mdm2-mediated monoubiquitylation of p53 greatly 
promotes its mitochondrial translocation and thus its direct mitochondrial 
apoptosis. On the other hand, p53 does not require Mdm2 as a shuttler. Upon 
arrival at the mitochondria, our data suggest that p53 undergoes rapid 
deubiquitylation by mitochondrial HAUSP via a stress-induced mitochondrial 
p53-HAUSP complex. This generates the apoptotically active non-ubiquitylated 
p53. Taken together, we propose a novel model for mitochondrial p53 targeting, 
whereby a distinct cytoplasmic pool of stabilized monoubiquitylated p53, 
generated in resting cells by basal levels of Mdm2-type ligases, is subject to a 
binary switch from a fate of inactivation via subsequent polyubiquitylation and 
degradation in unstressed cells, to a fate of activation via mitochondrial 
trafficking.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601560
PMCID: PMC1852828
PMID: 17268548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

A major function of the p53 tumor suppressor is the induction of a pleiotropic apoptotic program in response to stress through transcription-dependent and -independent mechanisms. In particular, this includes a direct apoptotic role of p53 at the mitochondria. Stress-induced p53 translocation to the mitochondria with subsequent outer membrane permeabilization is a common early component in p53-mediated apoptosis in normal and transformed cells. However, the mechanism of p53 delivery to the mitochondria remains unknown. Here, we show that the cytoplasm contains a separate and distinct p53 pool that is the major source for p53 translocation to the mitochondria upon its stress-induced stabilization. Using various manipulations that enhance or diminish p53 ubiquitylation, our data provide evidence that Mdm2-mediated monoubiquitylation of p53 greatly promotes its mitochondrial translocation and thus its direct mitochondrial apoptosis. On the other hand, p53 does not require Mdm2 as a shuttler. Upon arrival at the mitochondria, our data suggest that p53 undergoes rapid deubiquitylation by mitochondrial HAUSP via a stress-induced mitochondrial p53–HAUSP complex. This generates the apoptotically active non-ubiquitylated p53. Taken together, we propose a novel model for mitochondrial p53 targeting, whereby a distinct cytoplasmic pool of stabilized monoubiquitylated p53, generated in resting cells by basal levels of Mdm2-type ligases, is subject to a binary switch from a fate of inactivation via subsequent polyubiquitylation and degradation in unstressed cells, to a fate of activation via mitochondrial trafficking.

Introduction

The p53 tumor suppressor exerts its potent antineoplastic function mainly by inducing a pleiotropic apoptotic program after cell damage via transcription-dependent and -independent mechanisms. Recent studies revealed a direct apoptotic role of the p53 protein at the mitochondria in primary and transformed cells and in normal tissues upon genotoxic and hypoxic stress in vivo ( Marchenko et al , 2000 ; Sansome et al , 2001 ; Dumont et al , 2003 ; Gilman et al , 2003 ; Mihara et al , 2003 ; Bonini et al , 2004 ; Dagher, 2004 ; Erster et al , 2004 ; Leu et al , 2004 ; Nemajerova et al , 2005b ; Endo et al , 2006 ; Strom et al , 2006 ). Upon exposure to a broad spectrum of apoptotic stimuli, total cellular p53 levels quickly stabilize and a fraction accumulates at the mitochondria, where it controls a direct apoptotic program. Induced p53 rapidly translocates to the outer membrane of mitochondria, where it engages in inhibitory and activating complexes with the anti- and proapoptotic members of the Bcl family of mitochondrial permeability regulators (BclXL/Bcl2 and BAK, respectively). In sum, this induces outer membrane permeabilization and the release of apoptotic activators ( Marchenko et al , 2000 ; Sansome et al , 2001 ; Mihara et al , 2003 ; Nemajerova et al , 2005b ).

In unstressed cells, rapid p53 turnover via polyubiquitylation and proteasomal degradation that cause very low levels of p53 is largely owing to basal levels of Mdm2, a p53 ubiquitin E3/E4 ligase and p53's pivotal negative regulator ( Kubbutat MH, 1998 ; Grossman SR, 2003 ). Mitochondrially-targeted p53 proteins are sufficient to launch apoptosis in all tested p53-null cells in culture ( Marchenko et al , 2000 ; Mihara et al , 2003 ) and also has tumor suppressor activities in vivo against primary lymphomas that are either p53- or ARF-deficient or harbor high levels of endogenous mutant p53 ( Talos et al , 2005 ). Further support for a direct mitochondrial role of p53 in apoptosis came from an analysis of two common polymorphic variants of human p53, Arg72 and Pro72, that differed greatly in their apoptotic ability. Whereas all the other properties examined failed to explain the difference, the better killer (Arg72) localized better to the mitochondria ( Dumont et al , 2003 ). However, the origin and mechanism of mitochondrial p53 translocation remained unclear. A translocation motif was not found and phosphorylation/acetylation modifications of p53 are not the determining factors for the mitochondrial targeting of p53 ( Nemajerova et al , 2005a ). Previous work on conditional temperature-sensitive Arg/Pro72 p53 mutants had proposed that polyubiquitylated p53 traffics from the nucleus to the mitochondria in an Mdm2/CRM1-dependent manner ( Dumont et al , 2003 ). However, it is a generally accepted paradigm that Lys48 (and possibly Lys29-linked) polyubiquitylated proteins are destined for proteasomal destruction. Conversely, (multi-lysine)-monoubiquitylation of many cellular proteins determines a fate other than degradation and has been widely implicated as a signal for intracellular trafficking among compartments and organelles (for reviews, see Di Fiore et al , 2003 ; Sigismund et al , 2004 ). Importantly, (multi)-monoubiquitylated proteins are stable, as efficient proteasomal degradation minimally requires an at least four-subunit-long multiubiquitin chain per individual lysine residue ( Thrower et al , 2000 ). Of note, ubiquitination was earlier shown to regulate the delivery of specific proteins and phospholipids, such as monoamine oxidase B and phosphatidylserine, to the mitochondria ( Zhaung and McCauley, 1989 ; Schumacher et al , 2002 ). Moreover, Li et al (2003) have shown that monoubiquitylation of p53 is a trafficking signal for the nuclear–cytoplasmic redistribution of p53. Here, we propose a novel regulation of a p53 function in the cytoplasm in response to stress: an E3 ligase-mediated binary switch from polyubiquitylation to monoubiquitylation of p53 provides a trafficking signal and rapidly redirects the now stress-stabilized pool of cytoplasmic p53 from a fate of polyubiquitylation and degradation in unstressed cells to mitochondrial translocation and activation upon stress.

Discussion

In this report, we show that a stress-stabilized cytoplasmic pool of p53 is the major source for mitochondrially translocated p53. We further provide evidence that in contrast to polyubiquitylation, monoubiquitylation of p53 provides a trafficking signal that redirects it from a fate of degradation and inactivation in unstressed cells to mitochondrial translocation and activation early during the stress response. Mdm2 appears to not act as a p53 shuttler but promotes mitochondrial p53 translocation by virtue of its enzymatic E3 ligase activity.

Using classical biochemical fractionation as well as competitive and non-competitive export blockade, we found that p53 nuclear export is not required for mitochondrial translocation upon DNA damage. Instead, distinct nuclear and cytoplasmic p53 pools become simultaneously and rapidly stabilized after genotoxic stress ( Figure 1B ). This is consistent with previous observations that cells can undergo p53-dependent apoptosis in the presence of wheat germ agglutinin, a specific inhibitor of nuclear import ( Chipuk et al , 2004 ). Similarly, we find that an exclusively cytoplasmic version of p53 (NLS-deficient mutant) was as efficient as wtp53 in colony suppression of p53-null cells ( Figure 1E ). This indicates that mitochondrially translocated p53 arises from a distinct cytoplasmic pool. Our result is further supported by the kinetics of the event, as mitochondrial p53 translocation physiologically coincides with p53 nuclear export block in cells. In unstressed cells, both p53 and Mdm2 constantly shuttle between nucleus and cytoplasm via intrinsic NES and NLS signals ( Roth et al , 1998 ). In contrast, upon stress p53 export is rapidly blocked by tetramerization-dependent masking of its C-terminal NES, and by phosphorylation-mediated inhibition of its N-terminal NES, resulting in rapid nuclear p53 accumulation ( Stommel et al , 1999 ; Zhang and Xiong, 2001 ). In agreement with that, Crm1–p53 complexes were detectable only in unstressed but not in stressed cells ( Figure 1C ). Moreover, nuclear p53 export is a slow process requiring 3–8 h ( Stommel and Wahl, 2004 ). In contrast, stress-induced mitochondrial p53 translocation is a fast process detectable within 30 min and peaking at 2 h in, for example, irradiated thymus and spleen and in Camp-treated ML1 and RKO cells ( Marchenko et al , 2000 ; Erster et al , 2004 ). Together, this indicates the presence of two largely independent pools of preexisting p53 in unstressed cells, cytoplasmic and nuclear, which simultaneously respond to genotoxic stress.

We showed earlier that p53 forcibly targeted to the mitochondria is sufficient to induce p53-dependent apoptosis in cultured cells and mice ( Mihara et al , 2003 ; Talos et al , 2005 ; Palacios G, 2006 ). Moreover, Dumont et al (2003) invoked Mdm2 in the proapoptotic mitochondrial activity of p53. Indeed, using various approaches that either enhance or prevent p53 ubiquitylation, we find that Mdm2-mediated p53 monoubiquitylation greatly promotes p53 translocation and direct mitochondrial apoptosis ( Figure 3 ). However, based on the observations that: (i) mitochondria from DNA-damaged or proteasome-inhibited cells are devoid of Mdm2 and of Mdm2–p53 complexes ( Figure 2 ); (ii) that stress-induced mitochondrial translocation of p53 coincides temporally with dissociation of Mdm2–p53 complexes ( Appella and Anderson, 2001 ) and (iii) that a catalytically inactive Mdm2 mutant fails to promote translocation of p53, we conclude that the enzymatic E3 ligase activity, rather than the Mdm2 molecule as a shuttler, is important for trafficking p53 to mitochondrial p53. Notably, monoubiquitylation was previously found to regulate delivery of specific proteins and phospholipids, such as monoamine oxidase B and phosphatidylserine (the latter for use in mitochondrial membrane biogenesis), to the mitochondria ( Zhaung and McCauley, 1989 ; Schumacher et al , 2002 ). Moreover, monoubiquitylation has previously been shown to act as a trafficking signal for p53 in its nuclear–cytoplasmic redistribution in cells ( Li et al , 2003 ). Importantly, (multi)-monoubiquitylated proteins are stable, as efficient proteasomal degradation minimally requires an at least four-subunits-long multiubiquitin chain per single lysine residue ( Thrower et al , 2000 ). In agreement with this, we show here that monoubiquiytylated p53 is stable, in contrast to polyubiquitylated p53 that is very unstable and subject to immediate proteosomal degradation ( Figure 3C ). Notably, unstressed cytoplasm contains a mixture of unstable polyubiquitylated and stable monoubiquitylated p53. Importantly though, upon stress, a portion of endogenous monoubiquitylated p53 remains in the cytoplasm and serves as the source for p53 translocation to the mitochondria. ( Figure 4C ). Furthermore, Dumont et al (2003) found that the better killer Arg72p53, despite higher affinity to Mdm2 than Pro72 p53, is not degraded (which would reduce its apoptotic potential), but exhibits enhanced mitochondrial translocation.

Together, these data led us to propose a novel regulation for mitochondrial translocation of p53, as need arises in the early stages of a cellular stress response ( Figure 6 ). In unstressed conditions, a two-step regulation of p53 enables the creation of a rapid-action binary switch. The product of the first step—monoubiquitylated p53, generated by basal levels of Mdm2-type E3 ligases—can undergo two diametrically opposed fates: (i) either degradation and inactivation by subsequent polyubiquitylation via Mdm2 or E4-type ligases, if no stress occurs. (ii) Alternatively, if stress does occur, this monoubiquiylated intermediate p53 product is rapidly stabilized by stress-induced disruption of the p53–Mdm2 complex and diverted to the mitochondria, hence becoming apoptoticically active. A stress-mediated decrease in Mdm2 levels ( Supplementary Figure 1E ) ( Stommel and Wahl, 2004 ) might further contribute to the conversion of polyubiquitylated to monoubiquitylated p53. In this way, the pre-existing and now stabilized pool of monoubiquitylated p53 mediates its first apoptotic response wave. Moreover, this first response arises from the cytoplasm, avoiding the extensive investment of time and energy required for nuclear export. This is entirely consistent with the previously published observation that p53 ubiquitylation can occur in two distinct compartments, the nucleus and the cytoplasm, and does not require nuclear import or export ( Yu et al , 2000 ). This model also explains our earlier observation that p53 translocation to the mitochondria precedes the transactivation of p53 target genes. Later in the stress response, stabilization of nuclear p53 reaches a threshold sufficient to activate p53 targets in a second wave, which amplifies the response to a full apoptotic program.

Our data further suggest that upon arrival at the mitochondria, p53 undergoes deubiquitylation by mitochondrial HAUSP. This suggestion is based on: (i) the higher p53 deubiquitylating activity at the mitochondria, compared with other cellular compartments; (ii) the constitutive presence of HAUSP at the mitochondria; (iii) a stress-inducible HAUSP–p53 complex at the mitochondria, in contrast to total cell lysates, which exhibit a constitutive p53–HAUSP complex; (iv) the mitochondrial p53 moieties that are actively engaged in effector complexes with BCL X/L are deubiquitylated. The notion that effector-competent mitochondrial p53 has undergone deubiquitylation after its delivery is supported by structural, mutational and modeling data of inhibitory p53-BclX/L and p53–Bcl2 complexes and activating p53–Bak complexes that are formed at the OMM and involve the central DNA-binding domain of p53 ( Mihara et al , 2003 ; Leu et al , 2004 ; Petros et al , 2004 ; Tomita et al , 2006 ). Moreover, we and others had detected only non-ubiquitylated p53 in endogenous complexes with the Bcl family members and with mitochondrial proteins mtHsp70/60 ( Marchenko et al , 2000 ; Mihara et al , 2003 ; Chipuk et al , 2004 ; Leu et al , 2004 ). Also, non-ubiquitylated recombinant bacterial p53 is robustly capable of all mitochondrial activities in vitro , including BclX/L complex formation, Bak oligomerization and OMM permeabilization ( Mihara et al , 2003 ). Similarly, monoubiquitylation and subsequent HAUSP-mediated deubiquitylation has been shown to be critical for subcellular trafficking and activity of transcription factor FOXO4, while it did not influence the half-life of FOXO4 protein ( van der Horst et al , 2006 ). Interestingly, Ubp16, which shares 30% similarity/identity with human HAUSP, is the only member of the 16 yeast protein deubiquitinases that is exclusively localized to the mitochondria, where it is anchored to the OMM in a N in –C out orientation ( Kinner and Kolling, 2003 ). The putative mitochondrial leader sequence of Ubp16 shares 70% homology with a central region of HAUSP. Unfortunately, our extensive attempts at manipulating HAUSP levels by either RNAi-mediated downregulation (almost complete elimination) or ectopic overexpression in stable cell lines in order to further assess the role of HAUSP in mitochondrial p53 function were not informative. This is because HAUSP manipulation simultaneously also affects the total cellular levels of the other two important parameters in the system, that is, Mdm2 and p53 (data not shown). For this reason, HAUSP-null cells ( Cummins et al , 2004 ) will not be useful either. While such a complex and dynamic interplay was already previously reported by others ( Li et al , 2004 ; Meulmeester et al , 2005 ), it precluded experimental evaluation of p53 deubiquitylation by HAUSP at the mitochondria. Thus, the physiological significance of p53 deubiquitylation by HAUSP at the mitochondria, as well as other cellular compartments during stress requires further evaluation.

In sum, we propose a 2-step regulation of cytoplasmic p53 function involving a binary switch that acts on a monoubiquitylated p53 intermediate in response to stress. This direct pathway of OMM permeabilization might co-transcriptional stages of a p53 stress response, a plethora of additional apoptotic target genes then amplify this p53-initiated apoptosis in a feed-forward loop. Future studies need to address the detailed nature of this ubiquitylation switch and clarify whether alternate E3 ligases also play a role in its regulation.
