---
pmid: '12714610'
title: Expression and localization of tenomodulin, a transmembrane type chondromodulin-I-related
  angiogenesis inhibitor, in mouse eyes.
authors:
- Oshima Y
- Shukunami C
- Honda J
- Nishida K
- Tashiro F
- Miyazaki J
- Hiraki Y
- Tano Y
journal: Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1167/iovs.02-0664
---

# Expression and localization of tenomodulin, a transmembrane type chondromodulin-I-related angiogenesis inhibitor, in mouse eyes.
**Authors:** Oshima Y, Shukunami C, Honda J, Nishida K, Tashiro F, Miyazaki J, Hiraki Y, Tano Y
**Journal:** Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1167/iovs.02-0664](https://doi.org/10.1167/iovs.02-0664)

## Abstract

1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2003 May;44(5):1814-23. doi: 10.1167/iovs.02-0664.

Expression and localization of tenomodulin, a transmembrane type 
chondromodulin-I-related angiogenesis inhibitor, in mouse eyes.

Oshima Y(1), Shukunami C, Honda J, Nishida K, Tashiro F, Miyazaki J, Hiraki Y, 
Tano Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, Osaka University Medical 
School, Osaka, Japan. oshima@ophthal.med.osaka-u.ac.jp

PURPOSE: To explore the role in the eye of tenomodulin (TeM), a chondromodulin 
(ChM)-I-related glycoprotein, the expression, localization, and antiangiogenic 
potential of TeM were investigated.
METHODS: Gene expression and protein localization of TeM in mouse eyes were 
examined by Northern blot analysis, in situ hybridization, and 
immunohistochemical analysis. Antiangiogenic function included in the C terminus 
of TeM and ChM-I was examined in vascular endothelial cells through adenoviral 
gene transduction.
RESULTS: TeM expression was detectable from day 15 of the embryonic stage and 
was clearly present in the eye and skin. In situ hybridization of the eye 
tissues revealed TeM mRNA in the tendon of the extraocular muscle, the 
sclerocornea, the lens fiber cells, and the ganglion cell layer, inner nuclear 
layer cells, and pigment epithelium of the retina. Corresponding 
immunoreactivity of TeM was present in most of these cells. Western blot 
detected 40- and 45-kDa immunoreactive bands of TeM in the eye as differently 
glycosylated forms of the transmembrane protein. Production of a secreted form 
of TeM and ChM-I through adenoviral gene transfer caused effective autocrine 
suppression of cell proliferation and capillary-like morphogenesis of retina 
vascular endothelial cells. The condition media from soluble TeM- and 
ChM-I-overexpressing cells also showed a marked inhibitory effect on in vitro 
angiogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate a potential role for TeM in prevention of 
vascular invasion in the mouse eye and the possibility of both TeM and ChM-I as 
candidates for use in gene therapy approaches to treatment of ocular 
angiogenesis.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.02-0664
PMID: 12714610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
