---
pmid: '17057715'
title: Solution structures of the adhesion molecule DdCAD-1 reveal new insights into
  Ca(2+)-dependent cell-cell adhesion.
authors:
- Lin Z
- Sriskanthadevan S
- Huang H
- Siu CH
- Yang D
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nsmb1162
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Solution structures of the adhesion molecule DdCAD-1 reveal new insights into Ca(2+)-dependent cell-cell adhesion.
**Authors:** Lin Z, Sriskanthadevan S, Huang H, Siu CH, Yang D
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nsmb1162](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb1162)

## Abstract

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2006 Nov;13(11):1016-22. doi: 10.1038/nsmb1162. Epub 2006
 Oct 22.

Solution structures of the adhesion molecule DdCAD-1 reveal new insights into 
Ca(2+)-dependent cell-cell adhesion.

Lin Z(1), Sriskanthadevan S, Huang H, Siu CH, Yang D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, 14 
Science Drive 4, Singapore 117543.

DdCAD-1 is a novel Ca(2+)-dependent cell adhesion molecule that lacks a 
hydrophobic signal peptide and a transmembrane domain. DdCAD-1 is expressed by 
the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum at the onset of development. It is 
synthesized as a soluble protein and then transported to the plasma membrane by 
contractile vacuoles. Here we describe the novel features of the solution 
structures of Ca(2+)-free and Ca(2+)-bound monomeric DdCAD-1. DdCAD-1 contains 
two beta-sandwich domains, belonging to the betagamma-crystallin and 
immunoglobulin fold classes, respectively. Whereas the N-terminal domain has a 
major role in homophilic binding, the C-terminal domain tethers the protein to 
the cell membrane. From structural and mutational analyses, we propose a model 
for the Ca(2+)-bound DdCAD-1 dimer as a basis for understanding DdCAD-1-mediated 
cell-cell adhesion at the molecular level. Our results provide new insights into 
Ca(2+)-dependent mechanisms for cell-cell adhesion.

DOI: 10.1038/nsmb1162
PMID: 17057715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
