---
pmid: '25267638'
title: Crystal structure of Mycobacterium tuberculosis ClpP1P2 suggests a model for
  peptidase activation by AAA+ partner binding and substrate delivery.
authors:
- Schmitz KR
- Carney DW
- Sello JK
- Sauer RT
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4217457
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1417120111
---

# Crystal structure of Mycobacterium tuberculosis ClpP1P2 suggests a model for peptidase activation by AAA+ partner binding and substrate delivery.
**Authors:** Schmitz KR, Carney DW, Sello JK, Sauer RT
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1417120111](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1417120111)
**PMC:** [PMC4217457](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4217457/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Oct 28;111(43):E4587-95. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1417120111. Epub 2014 Sep 29.

Crystal structure of Mycobacterium tuberculosis ClpP1P2 suggests a model for 
peptidase activation by AAA+ partner binding and substrate delivery.

Schmitz KR(1), Carney DW(2), Sello JK(2), Sauer RT(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 
02139; and.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912.
(3)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 
02139; and bobsauer@mit.edu.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Oct 28;111(43):15289-90. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1417991111.

Caseinolytic peptidase P (ClpP), a double-ring peptidase with 14 subunits, 
collaborates with ATPases associated with diverse activities (AAA+) partners to 
execute ATP-dependent protein degradation. Although many ClpP enzymes 
self-assemble into catalytically active homo-tetradecamers able to cleave small 
peptides, the Mycobacterium tuberculosis enzyme consists of discrete ClpP1 and 
ClpP2 heptamers that require a AAA+ partner and protein-substrate delivery or a 
peptide agonist to stabilize assembly of the active tetradecamer. Here, we show 
that cyclic acyldepsipeptides (ADEPs) and agonist peptides synergistically 
activate ClpP1P2 by mimicking AAA+ partners and substrates, respectively, and 
determine the structure of the activated complex. Our studies establish the 
basis of heteromeric ClpP1P2 assembly and function, reveal tight coupling 
between the conformations of each ring, show that ADEPs bind only to one ring 
but appear to open the axial pores of both rings, provide a foundation for 
rational drug development, and suggest strategies for studying the roles of 
individual ClpP1 and ClpP2 rings in Clp-family proteolysis.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1417120111
PMCID: PMC4217457
PMID: 25267638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
