---
pmid: '11456758'
title: Crystallographic and FTIR spectroscopic evidence of changes in Fe coordination
  upon reduction of the active site of the Fe-only hydrogenase from Desulfovibrio
  desulfuricans.
authors:
- Nicolet Y
- de Lacey AL
- Vernède X
- Fernandez VM
- Hatchikian EC
- Fontecilla-Camps JC
journal: J Am Chem Soc
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/ja0020963
---

# Crystallographic and FTIR spectroscopic evidence of changes in Fe coordination upon reduction of the active site of the Fe-only hydrogenase from Desulfovibrio desulfuricans.
**Authors:** Nicolet Y, de Lacey AL, Vernède X, Fernandez VM, Hatchikian EC, Fontecilla-Camps JC
**Journal:** J Am Chem Soc (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1021/ja0020963](https://doi.org/10.1021/ja0020963)

## Abstract

1. J Am Chem Soc. 2001 Feb 28;123(8):1596-601. doi: 10.1021/ja0020963.

Crystallographic and FTIR spectroscopic evidence of changes in Fe coordination 
upon reduction of the active site of the Fe-only hydrogenase from Desulfovibrio 
desulfuricans.

Nicolet Y(1), de Lacey AL, Vernède X, Fernandez VM, Hatchikian EC, 
Fontecilla-Camps JC.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Cristallographie et Cristallogenèse des Protéines, Institut de 
Biologie Structurale, J.-P. Ebel CEA-CNRS, 41, rue Jules Horowitz, 38027 
Grenoble, Cedex 1, France.

Fe-only hydrogenases, as well as their NiFe counterparts, display unusual 
intrinsic high-frequency IR bands that have been assigned to CO and CN(-) 
ligation to iron in their active sites. FTIR experiments performed on the 
Fe-only hydrogenase from Desulfovibrio desulfuricans indicate that upon 
reduction of the active oxidized form, there is a major shift of one of these 
bands that is provoked, most likely, by the change of a CO ligand from a 
bridging position to a terminal one. Indeed, the crystal structure of the 
reduced active site of this enzyme shows that the previously bridging CO is now 
terminally bound to the iron ion that most likely corresponds to the primary 
hydrogen binding site (Fe2). The CO binding change may result from changes in 
the coordination sphere of Fe2 or its reduction. Superposition of this reduced 
active site with the equivalent region of a NiFe hydrogenase shows a remarkable 
coincidence between the coordination of Fe2 and that of the Fe ion in the NiFe 
cluster. Both stereochemical and mechanistic considerations suggest that the 
small organic molecule found at the Fe-only hydrogenase active site and 
previously modeled as 1,3-propanedithiolate may, in fact, be 
di-(thiomethyl)-amine.

DOI: 10.1021/ja0020963
PMID: 11456758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
