---
pmid: '27666369'
title: TBCE Mutations Cause Early-Onset Progressive Encephalopathy with Distal Spinal
  Muscular Atrophy.
authors:
- Sferra A
- Baillat G
- Rizza T
- Barresi S
- Flex E
- Tasca G
- D'Amico A
- Bellacchio E
- Ciolfi A
- Caputo V
- Cecchetti S
- Torella A
- Zanni G
- Diodato D
- Piermarini E
- Niceta M
- Coppola A
- Tedeschi E
- Martinelli D
- Dionisi-Vici C
- Nigro V
- Dallapiccola B
- Compagnucci C
- Tartaglia M
- Haase G
- Bertini E
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC5065657
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.08.006
---

# TBCE Mutations Cause Early-Onset Progressive Encephalopathy with Distal Spinal Muscular Atrophy.
**Authors:** Sferra A, Baillat G, Rizza T, Barresi S, Flex E, Tasca G, D'Amico A, Bellacchio E, Ciolfi A, Caputo V, Cecchetti S, Torella A, Zanni G, Diodato D, Piermarini E, Niceta M, Coppola A, Tedeschi E, Martinelli D, Dionisi-Vici C, Nigro V, Dallapiccola B, Compagnucci C, Tartaglia M, Haase G, Bertini E
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.08.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.08.006)
**PMC:** [PMC5065657](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5065657/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2016 Oct 6;99(4):974-983. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.08.006.
Epub  2016 Sep 22.

TBCE Mutations Cause Early-Onset Progressive Encephalopathy with Distal Spinal 
Muscular Atrophy.

Sferra A(1), Baillat G(2), Rizza T(1), Barresi S(1), Flex E(3), Tasca G(1), 
D'Amico A(1), Bellacchio E(1), Ciolfi A(4), Caputo V(5), Cecchetti S(6), Torella 
A(7), Zanni G(1), Diodato D(1), Piermarini E(1), Niceta M(1), Coppola A(8), 
Tedeschi E(9), Martinelli D(1), Dionisi-Vici C(1), Nigro V(7), Dallapiccola 
B(1), Compagnucci C(1), Tartaglia M(10), Haase G(2), Bertini E(11).

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino 
Gesù, 00146 Rome, Italy.
(2)Institut de Neurosciences de la Timone, UMR 7289 CNRS Aix-Marseille 
University, 13005 Marseille, France.
(3)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore 
di Sanità, 00161 Rome, Italy.
(4)Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino 
Gesù, 00146 Rome, Italy; Centro di Ricerca per gli alimenti e la nutrizione, 
CREA, 00178 Rome, Italy.
(5)Department of Experimental Medicine, Università La Sapienza, 00161 Rome, 
Italy.
(6)Department of Cell Biology and Neurosciences, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, 
00161 Rome, Italy.
(7)Department of Biochemistry, Biophysics and General Pathology, Seconda 
Università degli Studi di Napoli, 80138 Naples, Italy; Telethon Institute of 
Genetics and Medicine, 80078 Pozzuoli, Italy.
(8)Department of Neuroscience, Reproductive and Odontostomatological Sciences, 
Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, 80131 Naples, Italy.
(9)Department of Advanced Biomedical Sciences, Università degli Studi di Napoli 
Federico II, 80131 Naples, Italy.
(10)Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino 
Gesù, 00146 Rome, Italy. Electronic address: marco.tartaglia@opbg.net.
(11)Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino 
Gesù, 00146 Rome, Italy. Electronic address: bertini@opbg.net.

Tubulinopathies constitute a family of neurodevelopmental/neurodegenerative 
disorders caused by mutations in several genes encoding tubulin isoforms. 
Loss-of-function mutations in TBCE, encoding one of the five tubulin-specific 
chaperones involved in tubulin folding and polymerization, cause two rare 
neurodevelopmental syndromes, hypoparathyroidism-retardation-dysmorphism and 
Kenny-Caffey syndrome. Although a missense mutation in Tbce has been associated 
with progressive distal motor neuronopathy in the pmn/pmn mice, no similar 
degenerative phenotype has been recognized in humans. We report on the 
identification of an early-onset and progressive neurodegenerative 
encephalopathy with distal spinal muscular atrophy resembling the phenotype of 
pmn/pmn mice and caused by biallelic TBCE mutations, with the c.464T>A 
(p.Ile155Asn) change occurring at the heterozygous/homozygous state in six 
affected subjects from four unrelated families originated from the same 
geographical area in Southern Italy. Western blot analysis of patient 
fibroblasts documented a reduced amount of TBCE, suggestive of rapid degradation 
of the mutant protein, similarly to what was observed in pmn/pmn fibroblasts. 
The impact of TBCE mutations on microtubule polymerization was determined using 
biochemical fractionation and analyzing the nucleation and growth of 
microtubules at the centrosome and extracentrosomal sites after treatment with 
nocodazole. Primary fibroblasts obtained from affected subjects displayed a 
reduced level of polymerized α-tubulin, similarly to tail fibroblasts of pmn/pmn 
mice. Moreover, markedly delayed microtubule re-polymerization and abnormal 
mitotic spindles with disorganized microtubule arrangement were also documented. 
Although loss of function of TBCE has been documented to impact multiple 
developmental processes, the present findings provide evidence that hypomorphic 
TBCE mutations primarily drive neurodegeneration.

Copyright © 2016 American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.08.006
PMCID: PMC5065657
PMID: 27666369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Tubulinopathies constitute a family of neurodevelopmental/neurodegenerative disorders caused by mutations in several genes encoding tubulin isoforms. Loss-of-function mutations in TBCE , encoding one of the five tubulin-specific chaperones involved in tubulin folding and polymerization, cause two rare neurodevelopmental syndromes, hypoparathyroidism-retardation-dysmorphism and Kenny-Caffey syndrome. Although a missense mutation in Tbce has been associated with progressive distal motor neuronopathy in the pmn / pmn mice, no similar degenerative phenotype has been recognized in humans. We report on the identification of an early-onset and progressive neurodegenerative encephalopathy with distal spinal muscular atrophy resembling the phenotype of pmn/pmn mice and caused by biallelic TBCE mutations, with the c.464T>A (p.Ile155Asn) change occurring at the heterozygous/homozygous state in six affected subjects from four unrelated families originated from the same geographical area in Southern Italy. Western blot analysis of patient fibroblasts documented a reduced amount of TBCE, suggestive of rapid degradation of the mutant protein, similarly to what was observed in pmn/pmn fibroblasts. The impact of TBCE mutations on microtubule polymerization was determined using biochemical fractionation and analyzing the nucleation and growth of microtubules at the centrosome and extracentrosomal sites after treatment with nocodazole. Primary fibroblasts obtained from affected subjects displayed a reduced level of polymerized α-tubulin, similarly to tail fibroblasts of pmn / pmn mice. Moreover, markedly delayed microtubule re-polymerization and abnormal mitotic spindles with disorganized microtubule arrangement were also documented. Although loss of function of TBCE has been documented to impact multiple developmental processes, the present findings provide evidence that hypomorphic TBCE mutations primarily drive neurodegeneration.
