---
pmid: '16648645'
title: The molecular identities of the Caenorhabditis elegans intraflagellar transport
  genes dyf-6, daf-10 and osm-1.
authors:
- Bell LR
- Stone S
- Yochem J
- Shaw JE
- Herman RK
journal: Genetics
year: '2006'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1526656
doi: 10.1534/genetics.106.056721
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The molecular identities of the Caenorhabditis elegans intraflagellar transport genes dyf-6, daf-10 and osm-1.
**Authors:** Bell LR, Stone S, Yochem J, Shaw JE, Herman RK
**Journal:** Genetics (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1534/genetics.106.056721](https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.106.056721)
**PMC:** [PMC1526656](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1526656/)

## Abstract

1. Genetics. 2006 Jul;173(3):1275-86. doi: 10.1534/genetics.106.056721. Epub 2006
 Apr 30.

The molecular identities of the Caenorhabditis elegans intraflagellar transport 
genes dyf-6, daf-10 and osm-1.

Bell LR(1), Stone S, Yochem J, Shaw JE, Herman RK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, and Development, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA. bellx035@umn.edu

The Caenorhabditis elegans genes dyf-6, daf-10, and osm-1 are among the set of 
genes that affect chemotaxis and the ability of certain sensory neurons to take 
up fluorescent dyes from the environment. Some genes in this category are known 
to be required for intraflagellar transport (IFT), which is the bidirectional 
movement of raft-like particles along the axonemes of cilia and flagella. The 
cloning of dyf-6, daf-10, and osm-1 are described here. The daf-10 and osm-1 
gene products resemble each other and contain WD and WAA repeats. DYF-6, the 
product of a complex locus, lacks known motifs, but orthologs are present in 
flies and mammals. Phenotypic analysis of dyf-6 mutants expressing an OSM-6::GFP 
reporter indicates that the cilia of the amphid and phasmid dendritic endings 
are foreshortened. Consistent with genetic mosaic analysis, which indicates that 
dyf-6 functions in neurons of the amphid sensilla, DYF-6::GFP is expressed in 
amphid and phasmid neurons. Movement of DYF-6::GFP within the ciliated endings 
of the neurons indicates that DYF-6 is involved in IFT. In addition, IFT can be 
observed in dauer larvae.

DOI: 10.1534/genetics.106.056721
PMCID: PMC1526656
PMID: 16648645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The Caenorhabditis elegans genes dyf-6 , daf-10 , and osm-1 are among the set of genes that affect chemotaxis and the ability of certain sensory neurons to take up fluorescent dyes from the environment. Some genes in this category are known to be required for intraflagellar transport (IFT), which is the bidirectional movement of raft-like particles along the axonemes of cilia and flagella. The cloning of dyf-6 , daf-10 , and osm-1 are described here. The daf-10 and osm-1 gene products resemble each other and contain WD and WAA repeats. DYF-6, the product of a complex locus, lacks known motifs, but orthologs are present in flies and mammals. Phenotypic analysis of dyf-6 mutants expressing an OSM-6∷GFP reporter indicates that the cilia of the amphid and phasmid dendritic endings are foreshortened. Consistent with genetic mosaic analysis, which indicates that dyf-6 functions in neurons of the amphid sensilla, DYF-6∷GFP is expressed in amphid and phasmid neurons. Movement of DYF-6∷GFP within the ciliated endings of the neurons indicates that DYF-6 is involved in IFT. In addition, IFT can be observed in dauer larvae.

DISCUSSION

Although daf-10 contains another gene within its first intron, daf-10 and osm-1 are for the most part simple loci. In addition to having tandem WD repeats, the products of both genes have tandem WAA repeats ( P edersen et al. 2005 ), which have previously been termed “degenerate repeats” ( C ole 2003 ). Only five genes in the C. elegans genome appear to encode proteins containing WAA repeats (J. E. S haw , unpublished observations). These include CHE-11, the ortholog of Chlamydomonas IFT140 ( Q in et al ., 2001 ); ZK520.1; and G54G7.4, a WD-containing protein that is present in the flagellar and basal body proteome and whose gene is preceded by an X-box. It is possible that the WAA repeat is present exclusively within components of IFT particles.

dyf-6 is part of a complex locus: in addition to two smaller, nearly identical mRNAs, a larger mRNA is also produced that contains the dyf-6 open reading frame fused to the open reading frame of the adjacent gene upstream (F46F6.3). This work has concentrated on the shorter region of the dyf-6 locus, because products of the short region confer full rescue of dye filling and because a fusion of it with GFP exhibits IFT. The smaller gene products also closely correspond in size with sequence-related proteins in other organisms; for example, the human ortholog is conserved throughout and begins at the same methionine. The ortholog in Drosophila, CG15161, is expressed in sensory cilia ( A vidor -R eiss et al. 2004 ) and shares sequence similarity only with the short forms. Moreover, the sequence specific to the F46F6.3 gene product appears to be confined to nematodes. The function, if any, of the larger dyf-6 gene product remains unknown. The m175 mutation should affect not only the short forms but also the long form; however, we are unaware of defects caused by the mutation other than those associated with the amphid or phasmid sensilla.

With the exception of the hypodermis, the DYF-6∷GFP construct was expressed only in a limited number of neurons. Those in the region of the inner labial neurons may correspond to the IL2 neurons, which, like the phasmid and dye-filling amphid neurons, are ciliated and are exposed to the environment ( W ard et al. 1975 ; W are et al. 1975 ). The pattern of expression of DYF-6∷GFP appears to be a subset of that seen with OSM-6∷GFP, which is expressed in nearly all (56 of 60) of the ciliated neurons of C. elegans ( C ollet et al. 1998 ). The expression pattern of DYF-3∷GFP is also a subset of that seen with OSM-6∷GFP ( M urayama et al. 2005 ).

Although reporter constructs may not reliably indicate gene expression, movement of DYF-6∷GFP along the cilia of the amphid and phasmid neurons provided compelling evidence that DYF-6 undergoes IFT. Anterograde movement appeared more apparent than retrograde movement. It is likewise easier to perceive anterograde movement of OSM-6∷GFP, although retrograde movement can also be observed ( S ignor et al. 1999 ). It is not clear why it is more difficult to see retrograde movement. The intensity of the GFP does not increase at the tip of the cilia, which may indicate that much of the GFP is being degraded at the tip and therefore is less abundant in the retrograde direction. Alternatively, the GFP might be more diffuse during retrograde movement, as could be the case if those IFT particles contain less densely packed GFP. In addition to exchanging molecular motors, it is known that Chlamydomonas IFT particles undergo a change in structure at the tip, during which they become smaller ( P iperno et al. 1998 ; S loboda 2005 ).

On the basis of the expression pattern of OSM-6∷GFP, dyf-6 may encode a component of complex B IFT particles. As has been previously noted ( C ollet et al. 1998 ), the expression of OSM-6∷GFP in the dendritic endings of amphid and phasmid neurons is reduced by mutation in osm-1 , che-2 , che-13 , or osm-5 , all of which encode complex B IFT components ( C ole 2003 ); such a pattern is consistent with the foreshortened cilia seen in electron micrographs of these mutants ( L ewis and H odgkin 1977 ; P erkins et al. 1986 ). The expression of OSM-6∷GFP in dyf-6 mutants is similarly reduced in the dendritic endings. In contrast, mutation in daf-10 or che-11 , which encode complex A components, leads to thicker-than-wild-type patches of OSM-6∷GFP expression in the endings of these neurons, which is not seen in dyf-6 mutants. The pattern of OSM-6∷GFP in dyf-6 mutants therefore more closely resembles that of a complex B IFT component.

Consistent with the observation that DYF-6∷GFP and OSM-6∷GFP undergo IFT in the dendritic endings of the amphid neurons, genetic mosaic analyses of osm-6 ( C ollet et al. 1998 ) and of dyf-6 indicate that both genes are required only in the amphid neurons for the uptake of fluorescent dyes by these neurons. The dyf-6 mosaics were, however, unusual in that the gene did not behave precisely cell autonomously. The dyf-6 gene appears instead to be autonomous at the level of the amphid dendritic bundle: it appeared as though dyf-6(+) in four neurons was able to correct the dye-filling defect of two dyf-6(−) neurons in the same sensillum. In contrast, the osm-6 gene, although there was one exceptional mosaic, behaved cell autonomously ( C ollet et al. 1998 ). An explanation for the discrepancy between the two analyses might be that DiD was used for the analysis of dyf-6 but DiO for osm-6 . Perhaps only some of the dendritic endings, those that are dyf-6(+) , need to be exposed to the environment for initial uptake of DiD. Once they have taken up the dye it is transferred to the dyf-6(−) dendrites or cell bodies farther posterior. This is a reasonable hypothesis, because it is known that dendritic endings of an amphid neuron need not penetrate the body cuticle for uptake of certain dyes: the left and right AWB neurons take up DiO ( S tarich et al. 1995 ) and DiD, but their endings are completely embedded in the amphid sheath and are therefore not directly exposed to the environment ( P erkins et al. 1986 ). Thus, there must be transfer of the dye from the membrane of a neuron that is exposed to the environment to the membrane of the AWB dendrites.

The maintenance of IFT in amphid neurons of dauer larvae is perhaps to be expected. Although dauer larvae do not exhibit chemotaxis toward food, they can detect the presence of food, which stimulates an exit from the dauer state ( A lbert and R iddle 1983 ). Certain amphid neurons affect the entry into or exit from the dauer state ( B argmann and H orvitz 1991 ), and it is therefore reasonable to expect that proper cilia in these amphid neurons might be important for their function even in dauer larvae. In Chlamydomonas, cessation of IFT results in foreshortening of the flagellum (for review, see R osenbaum and W itman 2002 ). It is not clear if a similar foreshortening of cilia would occur in C. elegans if IFT were stopped postembryonically, because the cilia are not in free structures. They are embedded in a supporting structure in a channel that penetrates the body wall. The dendritic endings of the left and right ASG and ASI neurons have been reported to be slightly retracted in the amphid channels of dauer larvae ( A lbert and R iddle 1983 ). It is interesting in this regard that there appeared to be fewer GFP particles undergoing IFT in the amphid channels of dauer larvae relative to non-dauer animals. Perhaps this impression reflects a reduction of IFT in ASG and ASI, which results in their retraction, but this notion is highly speculative at this stage.

IFT is maintained constantly throughout development and the life cycle (for review, see R osenbaum and W itman 2002 ). Genetic analyses in Chlamydomonas and C. elegans strongly indicate that IFT is required for the assembly and maintenance of the flagellar and ciliary axoneme. It has been argued also that IFT is a means of transporting other cytoplasmic components, including those needed for reception of extracellular signals, within these structures. We suggest another possibility—that IFT plays a general role as a circulatory system for the cilia and flagella. The constancy of IFT may reflect the necessity of providing ATP and other essential components to a long cylinder of narrow diameter at the termini of dendrites, which are themselves long and narrow. In any case, the defective, foreshortened dendritic endings present in dyf-6 mutants, as visualized with OSM-6∷GFP, further strengthen the correlation between functional IFT and proper structure of cilia.
