---
pmid: '21167176'
title: Solution NMR structure of Apo-calmodulin in complex with the IQ motif of human
  cardiac sodium channel NaV1.5.
authors:
- Chagot B
- Chazin WJ
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3030672
doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.11.046
---

# Solution NMR structure of Apo-calmodulin in complex with the IQ motif of human cardiac sodium channel NaV1.5.
**Authors:** Chagot B, Chazin WJ
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmb.2010.11.046](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2010.11.046)
**PMC:** [PMC3030672](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3030672/)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Biol. 2011 Feb 11;406(1):106-19. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.11.046. Epub
2010  Dec 15.

Solution NMR structure of Apo-calmodulin in complex with the IQ motif of human 
cardiac sodium channel NaV1.5.

Chagot B(1), Chazin WJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

The function of the human voltage-gated sodium channel Na(V)1.5 is regulated in 
part by intracellular calcium signals. The ubiquitous calcium sensor protein 
calmodulin (CaM) is an important part of the complex calcium-sensing apparatus 
in Na(V)1.5. CaM interacts with an IQ (isoleucine-glutamine) motif in the large 
intracellular C-terminal domain of the channel. Using co-expression and 
co-purification, we have been able to isolate a CaM-IQ motif complex and to 
determine its high-resolution structure in absence of calcium using 
multi-dimensional solution NMR. Under these conditions, the Na(V)1.5 IQ motif 
interacts with the C-terminal domain (C-lobe) of CaM, with the N-terminal domain 
remaining free in solution. The structure reveals that the C-lobe adopts a 
semi-open conformation with the IQ motif bound in a narrow hydrophobic groove. 
Sequence similarities between voltage-gated sodium channels and voltage-gated 
calcium channels suggest that the structure of the CaM-Na(V)1.5 IQ motif complex 
can serve as a general model for the interaction between CaM and ion channel IQ 
motifs under low-calcium conditions. The structure also provides insight into 
the biochemical basis for disease-associated mutations that map to the IQ motif 
in Na(V)1.5.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.11.046
PMCID: PMC3030672
PMID: 21167176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The function of the human voltage-gated sodium channel Na V 1.5 is regulated in part by intracellular calcium signals. The ubiquitous calcium sensor protein calmodulin (CaM) is an important part of the complex calcium-sensing apparatus in Na V 1.5. CaM interacts with an IQ motif in the large intracellular C-terminal domain of the channel. Using co-expression and co-purification, we have been able to isolate a CaM-IQ motif complex and to determine its high-resolution structure in absence of calcium using multi-dimensional solution NMR. Under these conditions, the Na V 1.5 IQ motif interacts with the C-terminal domain (C-lobe) of CaM, with the N-terminal domain remaining free in solution. The structure reveals that the C-lobe adopts a semi-open conformation with the IQ motif bound in a narrow hydrophobic groove. Sequence similarities between voltage-gated sodium channels and voltage-gated calcium channels suggest that the structure of the CaM-Na V 1.5 IQ motif complex can serve as a general model for the interaction between CaM and ion channels IQ motifs under conditions of low calcium. The structure also provides insight into the biochemical basis for disease-associated mutations that map to the IQ motif in Na V 1.5.

Introduction

The cardiac voltage-gated sodium channel Na V 1.5 is an essential element of regulation of the beating of the heart, as it is involved in the initial phase of the action potential. Upon activation, Na V 1.5 opens and allows sodium ions to pass through the cell membrane according to their electrochemical gradient. Nav1.5 will then close and stop sodium ion flow. This channel is mainly activated by change in membrane potential, but recent studies showed that intracellular calcium also plays an important role in its gating mechanism. The structure of Na V 1.5 is composed of one alpha chain divided in four homologous domains (D I , D II , D III , D IV ) with distinct N and C-termini. The domains, each containing six trans-membrane helices, are linked by intracellular loops. The loop between domains D III and D IV has a very important role in the channel function as it is involved in the phenomenon of fast-inactivation of the channel. 1 The N- and C-terminal domains are also intracellular. Several mutations located in these domains are associated with diseases such as long QT syndrome, Brugada syndrome and atrial or ventricular fibrillations. 2 - 7

Although membrane potential variations are the primary stimulus for Na V 1.5 activation, calcium ions are also able to modulate channel gating. Recent studies from our lab and others 8 - 13 have shown that calcium sensitivity involves three domains of Na V 1.5: the D III -D IV linker and two regions in the C-terminal domain- an IQ motif and an EF-hand domain (CTD-EF). The IQ motif is a key element in the calcium sensing apparatus of Na V 1.5 as it serves as a molecular switch that couples the actions of the Ca 2+ sensing modules calmodulin (CaM) and CTD-EF. 8 , 12

IQ motifs are well-characterized CaM binding motifs that are associated with localization of CaM to sites of action in the cell. CaM, a member of the EF-hand family of calcium-binding proteins, is a ubiquitous protein that serves as a primary calcium signal transducer, and it is involved in a multitude of biological processes. CaM is composed of two homologous structural domains (commonly referred to as lobes). The N-lobe (residues 1-76) and C-lobe (residues 80-148) are tethered together by a short linker, and each contains a pair of helix-loop-helix EF-hands (Ca 2+ binding motifs). CaM has been shown to interact with the Na V 1.5 IQ motif in the absence and presence of calcium, 8 , 10 and it serves as an extrinsic calcium sensor for Na V 1.5 that complements the intrinsic CTD-EF calcium sensor.

In this manuscript we present the NMR solution structure of human calmodulin in complex with IQ motif of human Na V 1.5 in the absence of calcium. While several structures of calmodulin in complex with ion channel IQ motifs exist in the presence of calcium, to our knowledge this is the first structure of such a complex in the apo-state.

DISCUSSION

Evidence has accumulated showing that intracellular calcium modulates inactivation gating of ion channels including Na v 1.5. 40 The molecular basis for this regulation is complex and involves the Na V 1.5 D III -D IV linker, C-terminal domain EF-hand (CTD-EF), and the downstream IQ motif as well as calmodulin. 8 , 9 , 41 , 42 Knowledge of the mechanism for Ca 2+ -dependent modulation of Na V 1.5 is of high importance because it will provide insight into the origin of certain Brugada syndrome and Long QT syndrome diseases. The structure reported here represents an extension of our effort to define the action of the Ca 2+ sensing apparatus of Na V 1.5, following upon the determination of the structure of the unique CTD-EF. 12
