---
pmid: '15351965'
title: 'VEGF: once regarded as a specific angiogenic factor, now implicated in neuroprotection.'
authors:
- Storkebaum E
- Lambrechts D
- Carmeliet P
journal: Bioessays
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/bies.20092
---

# VEGF: once regarded as a specific angiogenic factor, now implicated in neuroprotection.
**Authors:** Storkebaum E, Lambrechts D, Carmeliet P
**Journal:** Bioessays (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1002/bies.20092](https://doi.org/10.1002/bies.20092)

## Abstract

1. Bioessays. 2004 Sep;26(9):943-54. doi: 10.1002/bies.20092.

VEGF: once regarded as a specific angiogenic factor, now implicated in 
neuroprotection.

Storkebaum E(1), Lambrechts D, Carmeliet P.

Author information:
(1)Center for Transgene Technology and Gene Therapy, Flanders Interuniversity 
Institute for Biotechnology, University of Leuven, Belgium.

Both blood vessels and nerves are guided to their target. Vascular endothelial 
growth factor (VEGF)A is a key signal in the induction of vessel growth (a 
process termed angiogenesis). Though initial studies, now a decade ago, 
indicated that VEGF is an endothelial cell-specific factor, more recent findings 
revealed that VEGF also has direct effects on neural cells. Genetic studies 
showed that mice with reduced VEGF levels develop adult-onset motor neuron 
degeneration, reminiscent of the human neurodegenerative disorder amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis (ALS). Additional genetic studies confirmed that VEGF is a 
modifier of motor neuron degeneration in humans and in SOD1(G93A) mice--a model 
of ALS. Reduced VEGF levels may promote motor neuron degeneration by limiting 
neural tissue perfusion and VEGF-dependent neuroprotection. VEGF also affects 
neuron death after acute spinal cord or cerebral ischemia, and has also been 
implicated in other neurological disorders such as diabetic and ischemic 
neuropathy, nerve regeneration, Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease and 
multiple sclerosis. These findings have raised growing interest in assessing the 
therapeutic potential of VEGF for neurodegenerative disorders.

DOI: 10.1002/bies.20092
PMID: 15351965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
