---
pmid: '8597541'
title: Product inhibition of the recombinant CelS, an exoglucanase component of the
  Clostridium thermocellum cellulosome.
authors:
- Kruus K
- Andreacchi A
- Wang WK
- Wu JH
journal: Appl Microbiol Biotechnol
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/BF00169935
---

# Product inhibition of the recombinant CelS, an exoglucanase component of the Clostridium thermocellum cellulosome.
**Authors:** Kruus K, Andreacchi A, Wang WK, Wu JH
**Journal:** Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF00169935](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00169935)

## Abstract

1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 1995 Dec;44(3-4):399-404. doi: 10.1007/BF00169935.

Product inhibition of the recombinant CelS, an exoglucanase component of the 
Clostridium thermocellum cellulosome.

Kruus K(1), Andreacchi A, Wang WK, Wu JH.

Author information:
(1)University of Rochester, Department of Chemical Engineering, NY 14627-0166, 
USA.

CelS is the most abundant subunit and an exoglucanase component of the 
Clostridium thermocellum cellulosome, multicomponent cellulase complex. The 
product inhibition pattern of CelS was examined using purified recombinant CelS 
(rCelS) produced in Escherichia coli. The rCelS activity on cellopentaose was 
strongly inhibited by cellobiose. The rCelS activity was also inhibited by 
lactose. Glucose was only marginally inhibitory. Cellobiose appeared to inhibit 
the rCelS activity through a competitive mechanism. The inhibition was relieved 
when beta-glucosidase was added, presumably because of the conversion of 
cellobiose into glucose. These hydrolysis product inhibition patterns are 
consistent with those of the crude enzyme (cellulosome), suggesting that CelS is 
a rate-limiting factor in the activity of the cellulosome.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00169935
PMID: 8597541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
