---
pmid: '34857990'
title: Upregulation of ENDOU in cytotrophoblasts from placenta complicated with preeclampsia
  and fetal growth restriction.
authors:
- Nomoto M
- Kotani T
- Miki R
- Ushida T
- Imai K
- Iitani Y
- Tano S
- Wang J
- Moriyama Y
- Kobayashi T
- Mimura N
- Iriyama T
- Kikkawa F
- Kajiyama H
journal: J Clin Biochem Nutr
year: '2021'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC8611368
doi: 10.3164/jcbn.21-37
---

# Upregulation of ENDOU in cytotrophoblasts from placenta complicated with preeclampsia and fetal growth restriction.
**Authors:** Nomoto M, Kotani T, Miki R, Ushida T, Imai K, Iitani Y, Tano S, Wang J, Moriyama Y, Kobayashi T, Mimura N, Iriyama T, Kikkawa F, Kajiyama H
**Journal:** J Clin Biochem Nutr (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3164/jcbn.21-37](https://doi.org/10.3164/jcbn.21-37)
**PMC:** [PMC8611368](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8611368/)

## Abstract

1. J Clin Biochem Nutr. 2021 Nov;69(3):280-285. doi: 10.3164/jcbn.21-37. Epub
2021  Jul 13.

Upregulation of ENDOU in cytotrophoblasts from placenta complicated with 
preeclampsia and fetal growth restriction.

Nomoto M(1)(2), Kotani T(1)(3), Miki R(4), Ushida T(1)(3), Imai K(1), Iitani 
Y(1), Tano S(1), Wang J(4), Moriyama Y(5), Kobayashi T(1), Mimura N(6), Iriyama 
T(6), Kikkawa F(1), Kajiyama H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nagoya University Graduate School of 
Medicine, 65 Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya, Aichi 466-8550, Japan.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Handa City Hospital, 2-29 Toyo-cho, 
Handa City, Aichi 475-8599, Japan.
(3)Center for Maternal-Neonatal Care, Nagoya University Hospital, 65 
Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya, Aichi 466-8560, Japan.
(4)Laboratory of Bell Research Center‑Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology 
Collaborative Research, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, 65 
Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya, Aichi 466-8550, Japan.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Fujita Health University, School of 
Medicine, 1-98 Dengakugakubo, Kutsukake-cho, Toyoake, Aichi 470-1192, Japan.
(6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, The University 
of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-655, Japan.

Placental hypoplasia is associated with the pathophysiology of fetal growth 
restriction and preeclampsia. The placenta consists of differentiated 
trophoblasts, including cytotrophoblasts, syncytiotrophoblasts, and extravillous 
trophoblasts. Cytotrophoblasts are thought to have stem-like characteristics and 
the ability to differentiate into syncytiotrophoblasts and extravillous 
trophoblasts. However, it is poorly understood whether isolated cytotrophoblasts 
derived from hypoplastic placentas have specific features compared with those in 
normal placentas. This study aimed to determine the features of cytotrophoblasts 
in hypoplastic placentas. Differentially expressed proteins between isolated 
cytotrophoblasts from hypoplastic placenta with fetal growth restriction and 
those from the normal placenta were determined by liquid chromatography-tandem 
mass spectrometry. Among 6,802 proteins, 1,253 and 2,129 proteins were more than 
2-fold upregulated and downregulated, respectively. Among them, ENDOU 
(endonuclease, poly(U) specific), which has high homology with the coronavirus 
endoribonuclease nonstructural protein 15 (Nsp15), showed a significantly 
increased expression in cytotrophoblasts from the placenta with fetal growth 
restriction related to preeclampsia compared with those in normal control 
placenta. These results provide insight into the pathological mechanisms of 
placental hypoplasia and additional information on preeclamptic symptoms in 
cases of SARS-CoV-2 infected placenta, although further investigation is needed.

Copyright © 2021 JCBN.

DOI: 10.3164/jcbn.21-37
PMCID: PMC8611368
PMID: 34857990

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflicts of interest were 
disclosed.
