---
pmid: '16730941'
title: 'A systematic analysis of human CHMP protein interactions: additional MIT domain-containing
  proteins bind to multiple components of the human ESCRT III complex.'
authors:
- Tsang HT
- Connell JW
- Brown SE
- Thompson A
- Reid E
- Sanderson CM
journal: Genomics
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2006.04.003
---

# A systematic analysis of human CHMP protein interactions: additional MIT domain-containing proteins bind to multiple components of the human ESCRT III complex.
**Authors:** Tsang HT, Connell JW, Brown SE, Thompson A, Reid E, Sanderson CM
**Journal:** Genomics (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ygeno.2006.04.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ygeno.2006.04.003)

## Abstract

1. Genomics. 2006 Sep;88(3):333-46. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2006.04.003. Epub 2006
May  30.

A systematic analysis of human CHMP protein interactions: additional MIT 
domain-containing proteins bind to multiple components of the human ESCRT III 
complex.

Tsang HT(1), Connell JW, Brown SE, Thompson A, Reid E, Sanderson CM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics and Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 2XY, UK.

In Saccharomyces cerevisiae 6 closely related proteins (Did2p, Vps2p, Vps24p, 
Vps32p, Vps60p, Vps20p) form part of the extended ESCRT III complex. This 
complex is required for the formation of multivesicular bodies and the 
degradation of internalized transmembrane receptor proteins. In contrast the 
human genome encodes 10 homologous proteins (CHMP1A (approved gene symbol 
PCOLN3), 1B, 2A, 2B, 3 (approved gene symbol VPS24), 4A, 4B, 4C, 5, and 6). In 
this study we have performed a series of protein interaction experiments to 
generate a more comprehensive picture of the human CHMP protein-interaction 
network. Our results describe novel interactions between known components of the 
human ESCRT III complex and identify a range of putative binding partners, which 
may indicate new ways in which the function of human CHMP proteins may be 
regulated. In particular, we show that two further MIT domain-containing 
proteins (AMSH/STAMBP and LOC129531) interact with multiple components of the 
human ESCRT III complex.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2006.04.003
PMID: 16730941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
