---
pmid: '18541721'
title: Tetraspanin family member CD9 inhibits Aggrus/podoplanin-induced platelet aggregation
  and suppresses pulmonary metastasis.
authors:
- Nakazawa Y
- Sato S
- Naito M
- Kato Y
- Mishima K
- Arai H
- Tsuruo T
- Fujita N
journal: Blood
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-11-124693
---

# Tetraspanin family member CD9 inhibits Aggrus/podoplanin-induced platelet aggregation and suppresses pulmonary metastasis.
**Authors:** Nakazawa Y, Sato S, Naito M, Kato Y, Mishima K, Arai H, Tsuruo T, Fujita N
**Journal:** Blood (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2007-11-124693](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2007-11-124693)

## Abstract

1. Blood. 2008 Sep 1;112(5):1730-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-11-124693. Epub 2008 
Jun 9.

Tetraspanin family member CD9 inhibits Aggrus/podoplanin-induced platelet 
aggregation and suppresses pulmonary metastasis.

Nakazawa Y(1), Sato S, Naito M, Kato Y, Mishima K, Arai H, Tsuruo T, Fujita N.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Chemotherapy Center, Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, Tokyo.

CD9 has been reported to play a role in tumor metastasis suppression. However, 
it is not fully understood how CD9 affects the hematogenous spread of tumor 
cells. To clarify a new mechanism (or mechanisms), we generated HT1080 cells 
that had been transfected with a CD9-expressing plasmid. Ectopic expression of 
CD9 in HT1080 cells actually reduced their metastatic ability. CD9 expression 
reduced lung retention and platelet aggregation activity of the transfectants. 
Because HT1080 cells express the metastasis-promoting, platelet 
aggregation-inducing factor Aggrus/podoplanin on their surface, we examined the 
relationship between CD9 and Aggrus. We discovered that CD9 formed a complex 
with Aggrus via transmembrane domains 1 and 2 (TM1 and TM2) of CD9. 
Investigation of the interaction revealed that each CD9 and Aggrus interacted 
homophilically, and that they colocalized in low-density membrane fractions. 
Deleting TM1 and TM2 attenuated the ability of CD9 to interact homophilically or 
to localize in low-density membrane fractions. The expression of CD9-wild-type 
(WT), but not CD9 lacking TM1 and TM2, attenuated the platelet aggregation and 
metastasis induced by forced expression of Aggrus in CHO cells. Therefore, CD9 
may act as a metastasis suppressor, at least in part, by neutralizing 
Aggrus-mediated platelet aggregation.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2007-11-124693
PMID: 18541721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
