---
pmid: '24191030'
title: Structural basis of ATG3 recognition by the autophagic ubiquitin-like protein
  ATG12.
authors:
- Metlagel Z
- Otomo C
- Takaesu G
- Otomo T
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3839761
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1314755110
---

# Structural basis of ATG3 recognition by the autophagic ubiquitin-like protein ATG12.
**Authors:** Metlagel Z, Otomo C, Takaesu G, Otomo T
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1314755110](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1314755110)
**PMC:** [PMC3839761](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3839761/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Nov 19;110(47):18844-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1314755110. Epub 2013 Nov 4.

Structural basis of ATG3 recognition by the autophagic ubiquitin-like protein 
ATG12.

Metlagel Z(1), Otomo C, Takaesu G, Otomo T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Structural and Computational Biology, The Scripps 
Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037.

The autophagic ubiquitin-like protein (ublp) autophagy-related (ATG)12 is a 
component of the ATG12∼ATG5-ATG16L1 E3 complex that promotes lipid conjugation 
of members of the LC3 ublp family. A role of ATG12 in the E3 complex is to 
recruit the E2 enzyme ATG3. Here we report the identification of the ATG12 
binding sequence in the flexible region of human ATG3 and the crystal structure 
of the minimal E3 complexed with the identified binding fragment of ATG3. The 
structure shows that 13 residues of the ATG3 fragment form a short β-strand 
followed by an α-helix on a surface area that is exclusive to ATG12. Mutational 
analyses of ATG3 confirm that four residues whose side chains make contacts with 
ATG12 are important for E3 interaction as well as LC3 lipidation. Conservation 
of these four critical residues is high in metazoan organisms and plants but 
lower in fungi. A structural comparison reveals that the ATG3 binding surface on 
ATG12 contains a hydrophobic pocket corresponding to the binding pocket of LC3 
that accommodates the leucine of the LC3-interacting region motif. These 
findings establish the mechanism of ATG3 recruitment by ATG12 in higher 
eukaryotes and place ATG12 among the members of signaling ublps that bind liner 
sequences.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1314755110
PMCID: PMC3839761
PMID: 24191030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
