---
pmid: '24334245'
title: 'Human fertilization: epididymal hCRISP1 mediates sperm-zona pellucida binding
  through its interaction with ZP3.'
authors:
- Maldera JA
- Weigel Muñoz M
- Chirinos M
- Busso D
- G E Raffo F
- Battistone MA
- Blaquier JA
- Larrea F
- Cuasnicu PS
journal: Mol Hum Reprod
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/molehr/gat092
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Human fertilization: epididymal hCRISP1 mediates sperm-zona pellucida binding through its interaction with ZP3.
**Authors:** Maldera JA, Weigel Muñoz M, Chirinos M, Busso D, G E Raffo F, Battistone MA, Blaquier JA, Larrea F, Cuasnicu PS
**Journal:** Mol Hum Reprod (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/molehr/gat092](https://doi.org/10.1093/molehr/gat092)

## Abstract

1. Mol Hum Reprod. 2014 Apr;20(4):341-9. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gat092. Epub 2013
Dec  12.

Human fertilization: epididymal hCRISP1 mediates sperm-zona pellucida binding 
through its interaction with ZP3.

Maldera JA(1), Weigel Muñoz M, Chirinos M, Busso D, G E Raffo F, Battistone MA, 
Blaquier JA, Larrea F, Cuasnicu PS.

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Biología y Medicina Experimental (IBYME-CONICET), Buenos Aires 
1428, Argentina.

Human epididymal CRISP1 (hCRISP1) associates with sperm during maturation and 
participates in gamete fusion through egg complementary sites. Its homology with 
both rodent epididymal CRISP1 and CRISP4 reported to participate in the previous 
stage of sperm binding to the zona pellucida (ZP), led us to further investigate 
the functional role of hCRISP1 by studying its involvement in human sperm-ZP 
interaction. Human hemizona (HZ) were inseminated with human capacitated sperm 
in the presence of either anti-hCRISP1 polyclonal antibody to inhibit sperm 
hCRISP1, or bacterially-expressed hCRISP1 (rec-hCRISP1) to block putative 
hCRISP1 binding sites in the ZP. Results revealed that both anti-hCRISP1 and 
rec-hCRISP1 produced a significant inhibition in the number of sperm bound per 
HZ compared with the corresponding controls. The finding that neither 
anti-hCRISP1 nor rec-hCRISP1 affected capacitation-associated events (i.e. sperm 
motility, protein tyrosine phosphorylation or acrosome reaction) supports a 
specific inhibition at the sperm-egg interaction level. Moreover, 
immunofluorescence experiments using human ZP-intact eggs revealed the presence 
of complementary sites for hCRISP1 in the ZP. To identify the ligand of hCRISP1 
in the ZP, human recombinant proteins ZP2, ZP3 and ZP4 expressed in insect cells 
were co-incubated with hCRISP1 and protein-protein interaction was analyzed by 
ELISA. Results revealed that rec-hCRISP1 mainly interacted with ZP3 in a 
dose-dependent and saturable manner, supporting the specificity of this 
interaction. Altogether, these results indicate that hCRISP1 is a 
multifunctional protein involved not only in sperm-egg fusion but also in the 
previous stage of sperm-ZP binding through its specific interaction with human 
ZP3.

DOI: 10.1093/molehr/gat092
PMID: 24334245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
