---
pmid: '16227588'
title: Loss of Bif-1 suppresses Bax/Bak conformational change and mitochondrial apoptosis.
authors:
- Takahashi Y
- Karbowski M
- Yamaguchi H
- Kazi A
- Wu J
- Sebti SM
- Youle RJ
- Wang HG
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1265816
doi: 10.1128/MCB.25.21.9369-9382.2005
---

# Loss of Bif-1 suppresses Bax/Bak conformational change and mitochondrial apoptosis.
**Authors:** Takahashi Y, Karbowski M, Yamaguchi H, Kazi A, Wu J, Sebti SM, Youle RJ, Wang HG
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.25.21.9369-9382.2005](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.25.21.9369-9382.2005)
**PMC:** [PMC1265816](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1265816/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Nov;25(21):9369-82. doi: 10.1128/MCB.25.21.9369-9382.2005.

Loss of Bif-1 suppresses Bax/Bak conformational change and mitochondrial 
apoptosis.

Takahashi Y(1), Karbowski M, Yamaguchi H, Kazi A, Wu J, Sebti SM, Youle RJ, Wang 
HG.

Author information:
(1)Drug Discovery Program, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, 
12902 Magnolia Drive, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

Bif-1, a member of the endophilin B protein family, interacts with Bax and 
promotes interleukin-3 withdrawal-induced Bax conformational change and 
apoptosis when overexpressed in FL5.12 cells. Here, we provide evidence that 
Bif-1 plays a regulatory role in apoptotic activation of not only Bax but also 
Bak and appears to be involved in suppression of tumorigenesis. Inhibition of 
endogenous Bif-1 expression in HeLa cells by RNA interference abrogated the 
conformational change of Bax and Bak, cytochrome c release, and caspase 3 
activation induced by various intrinsic death signals. Similar results were 
obtained in Bif-1 knockout mouse embryonic fibroblasts. While Bif-1 did not 
directly interact with Bak, it heterodimerized with Bax on mitochondria in 
intact cells, and this interaction was enhanced by apoptosis induction and 
preceded the Bax conformational change. Moreover, suppression of Bif-1 
expression was associated with an enhanced ability of HeLa cells to form 
colonies in soft agar and tumors in nude mice. Taken together, these findings 
support the notion that Bif-1 is an important component of the mitochondrial 
pathway for apoptosis as a novel Bax/Bak activator, and loss of this 
proapoptotic molecule may contribute to tumorigenesis.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.25.21.9369-9382.2005
PMCID: PMC1265816
PMID: 16227588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Bif-1, a member of the endophilin B protein family, interacts with Bax and promotes interleukin-3 withdrawal-induced Bax conformational change and apoptosis when overexpressed in FL5.12 cells. Here, we provide evidence that Bif-1 plays a regulatory role in apoptotic activation of not only Bax but also Bak and appears to be involved in suppression of tumorigenesis. Inhibition of endogenous Bif-1 expression in HeLa cells by RNA interference abrogated the conformational change of Bax and Bak, cytochrome c release, and caspase 3 activation induced by various intrinsic death signals. Similar results were obtained in Bif-1 knockout mouse embryonic fibroblasts. While Bif-1 did not directly interact with Bak, it heterodimerized with Bax on mitochondria in intact cells, and this interaction was enhanced by apoptosis induction and preceded the Bax conformational change. Moreover, suppression of Bif-1 expression was associated with an enhanced ability of HeLa cells to form colonies in soft agar and tumors in nude mice. Taken together, these findings support the notion that Bif-1 is an important component of the mitochondrial pathway for apoptosis as a novel Bax/Bak activator, and loss of this proapoptotic molecule may contribute to tumorigenesis.

DISCUSSION

The findings reported here suggest a regulatory role for Bif-1 in apoptosis as a new type of Bax/Bak activator. Despite the results showing that Bif-1 does not appear to be absolutely required for apoptosis, loss of Bif-1 significantly delays the activation of Bax and Bak, cytochrome c release, caspase 3 activation, and cell death, suggesting that Bif-1 plays an important regulatory role in apoptosis through the activation of Bax/Bak in concert with other types of proapoptotic molecules, such as BH3-only proteins. Indeed, knockdown of Bif-1 suppresses the death-inducing activity of wild-type, but not a conformationally active, Bax in HeLa cells (Fig. 7A and B ), although ectopic overexpression of Bif-1 in HeLa and 293 cells reportedly has a minor effect on cell death ( 44 ), probably due to the relatively high levels of endogenous Bif-1 protein in these cells (not shown). Nevertheless, inhibition of Bif-1 expression enhances the anchorage-independent growth and tumorigenicity of HeLa cells without a significant effect on cell proliferation. Collectively, these findings suggest that Bif-1 is an important component of the mitochondrial pathway for apoptosis as a novel Bax/Bak activator that may contribute to suppression of tumorigenesis. Indeed, the downregulation of Bif-1 mRNA was reported in lung adenocarcinomas ( 2 ).

The Bif-1 protein contains an N-terminal BAR domain, which is commonly found in proteins implicated in vesicle generation and membrane remodeling ( 43 ). Bif-1 forms a homodimer through its coiled-coil domain located within the BAR domain ( 44 ), and the N-terminal part (1 to 27 amino acids), but not the C-terminal SH3 domain, is required for Bif-1 binding to Bax ( 6 , 44 ). Crystallographic studies show that the dimer of the Drosophila amphiphysin BAR domain forms a banana-shaped structure, which binds to negatively charged membranes and induces membrane curvature ( 43 ). The N-BAR domains possess an amino-terminal amphipathic α helix that enhances their ability to bind lipids and to induce membranes to form tubes ( 43 ). Consistently, the N-BAR-containing protein Bif-1 binds lipid, exhibits lysophosphatidic acid acyl transferase activity, and deforms liposomes into tubules ( 10 , 37 ). Moreover, it has been shown that Bax-mediated liposome permeabilization occurs through a mechanism sensitive to intrinsic membrane curvature ( 1 ). Therefore, it is possible that Bif-1-mediated OMM deformations facilitate and/or stabilize Bax/Bak oligomerization and integration into OMM during apoptosis.

Although the N-BAR domain is important, the C-terminal SH3 domain of Bif-1 may also play a role in membrane dynamics of mitochondria through its interactions with proline-rich molecules involved in membrane remodeling. Changes in mitochondrial morphology, such as mitochondrial fragmentation and crista remodeling, have been described in connection with many modes of apoptosis ( 11 , 24 , 48 ). Interestingly, tBid-treated mitochondria showed an increase in intracrista connectivity and formation of a more highly interconnected crista network ( 48 ), whereas overexpression of a dominant-negative mutant (K38A) of Drp1 inhibited apoptotic fragmentation of mitochondria and cytochrome c release ( 11 ). This pathway seems to be evolutionarily conserved, because inhibition of Drp1-mediated mitochondrial fragmentation prevents apoptosis in Caenorhabditis elegans as well ( 22 ). Drp1 is a mediator of mitochondrial fission that contains the PXXP motif, a potential SH3 domain-binding site, suggesting a possible interaction between the SH3 domain of Bif-1 and the PXXP region of Drp1 for the regulation of mitochondrial fragmentation during apoptosis. In fact, Bif-1 and Drp1 control the same pathway for the regulation of the morphological dynamics of mitochondria, and expression of the N-terminal deletion mutant Bif-1 (60-362ΔN) induces a dominant-negative inhibition of endogenous Bif-1, indicating that the SH3-containing C-terminal region of Bif-1 plays a regulatory role in the maintenance of mitochondrial morphology ( 23 ).

Interestingly, we showed that the association of Bif-1 with Bax is dramatically increased in intact cells after induction of apoptosis. This suggests a possibility that the ability of Bif-1 to induce Bax conformational change is regulated by posttranslational modifications, such as phosphorylation. Moreover, a number of retention factors such as Ku70 ( 47 ), 14-3-3 ( 40 ), and humanin ( 15 ), have been reported to bind and keep Bax in an inactive conformation in viable cells. Apoptotic stimuli induce the dissociation of these retention factors, resulting in Bax conformational change, oligomerization, and insertion into OMM ( 15 , 40 , 47 ). Therefore, it will be interesting to see if these suppressors prevent Bif-1 binding and activation of Bax in the cell under conditions in which Bax should be kept inactive.

Numerous studies indicate that evasion of apoptosis is a hallmark of most and perhaps all types of cancer ( 17 ). The BH1-3 prodeath proteins Bax and Bak are essential gatekeepers to the mitochondrial apoptosis machinery ( 57 ). We showed that silencing of these proapoptotic proteins by siRNAs results in the inhibition of PARP cleavage, and these effects are enhanced by cotransfection with siBif-1. Considering the existence of Bif-1 in Bax/Bak double-knockout cells, which are resistant to intrinsic death signals, Bif-1 must act upstream of Bax/Bak to regulate apoptosis. Indeed, Bif-1 silencing results in the inhibition of Bak conformational change as well as Bax, indicating that Bif-1 is involved in not only Bax but also Bak activation. Since Bif-1 specifically interacts with Bax but not Bak ( 44 ; data not shown), the activation of Bak by Bif-1 might occur indirectly through Bax or other mitochondrial proteins. It has been suggested that Bak activation requires Bax ( 36 ). The loss of Bax and Bak in transformed BMK cells facilitates tumor formation in nude mice ( 39 ). Our results showing that loss of Bif-1 prevents both Bax and Bak activation and apoptosis suggest a potential role for Bif-1 in suppression of tumorigenesis. Indeed, suppression of endogenous Bif-1 expression enhanced the tumorigenicity of HeLa cells, as demonstrated by anchorage-independent growth in soft agar and tumor formation in nude mice. Surprisingly, Bif-1-deficient mouse embryos developed normally and were born at the expected Mendelian frequency with no obvious abnormalities, at least at the time of birth, which is different from the phenotypes reported in Bax/Bak double-knockout mice ( 31 ). However, loss of one of the Bax/Bak activators may not be enough to completely inactivate these gatekeepers of the mitochondrial death machinery. Similarly, knockout of Bid, a well-characterized Bax/Bak activator, produced no apparent developmental defects or tissue abnormalities in mice ( 64 ). The precise physiological roles of Bif-1 in mammalian development, tissue homeostasis, and tumorigenesis remain to be explored by the analysis of Bif-1-deficient mice.
