---
pmid: '30083810'
title: Xyloglucan O-acetyltransferases from Arabidopsis thaliana and Populus trichocarpa
  catalyze acetylation of fucosylated galactose residues on xyloglucan side chains.
authors:
- Zhong R
- Cui D
- Ye ZH
journal: Planta
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s00425-018-2972-0
---

# Xyloglucan O-acetyltransferases from Arabidopsis thaliana and Populus trichocarpa catalyze acetylation of fucosylated galactose residues on xyloglucan side chains.
**Authors:** Zhong R, Cui D, Ye ZH
**Journal:** Planta (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00425-018-2972-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00425-018-2972-0)

## Abstract

1. Planta. 2018 Nov;248(5):1159-1171. doi: 10.1007/s00425-018-2972-0. Epub 2018
Aug  6.

Xyloglucan O-acetyltransferases from Arabidopsis thaliana and Populus 
trichocarpa catalyze acetylation of fucosylated galactose residues on xyloglucan 
side chains.

Zhong R(1), Cui D(2), Ye ZH(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Biology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, 30602, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, 30602, USA.
(3)Department of Plant Biology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, 30602, USA. 
yh@uga.edu.

AXY4/XGOAT1, AXY4L/XGOAT2 and PtrXGOATs are O-acetyltransferases acetylating 
fucosylated galactose residues on xyloglucan and AXY9 does not directly catalyze 
O-acetylation of xyloglucan but exhibits weak acetylesterase activity. 
Xyloglucan is a major hemicellulose that cross-links cellulose in the primary 
walls of dicot plants and the galactose (Gal) residues on its side chains can be 
mono- and di-O-acetylated. In Arabidopsis thaliana, mutations of three AXY 
(altered xyloglucan) genes, AXY4, AXY4L and AXY9, have previously been shown to 
cause a reduction in xyloglucan acetylation, but their biochemical functions 
remain to be investigated. In this report, we demonstrated that recombinant 
proteins of AXY4/XGOAT1 (xyloglucan O-acetyltransferase1), AXY4L/XGOAT2 and 
their close homologs from Populus trichocarpa, PtrXGOATs, displayed 
O-acetyltransferase activities transferring acetyl groups from acetyl CoA onto 
xyloglucan oligomers. Structural analysis of XGOAT-catalyzed reaction products 
revealed that XGOATs mediated predominantly 6-O-monoacetylation and a much 
lesser degree of 3-O and 4-O-monoacetylation and 4,6-di-O-acetylation of Gal 
residues on xyloglucan side chains. XGOATs appeared to preferentially acetylate 
fucosylated Gal residues with little activity toward non-fucosylated Gal 
residues. Mutations of the conserved amino acid residues in the GDS and DXXH 
motifs in AXY4/XGOAT1 resulted in a drastic reduction in its ability to transfer 
acetyl groups onto xyloglucan oligomers. In addition, although recombinant AXY9 
was unable to transfer acetyl groups from acetyl CoA onto xyloglucan oligomers, 
it was catalytically active as demonstrated by its weak acetylesterase activity 
that was also exhibited by AXY4/XGOAT1 and AXY4L/XGOAT2. Furthermore, we showed 
that the AXY8 fucosidase was able to hydrolyze fucosyl residues from both 
non-acetylated and acetylated xyloglucan oligomers. These findings provide 
biochemical evidence that AXY4/XGOAT1, AXY4L/XGOAT2 and PtrXGOATs are xyloglucan 
O-acetyltransferases catalyzing acetyl transfer onto fucosylated Gal residues on 
xyloglucan side chains and the defucosylation of these acetylated side chains by 
apoplastic AXY8 generates side chains with acetylated, non-fucosylated Gal 
residues.

DOI: 10.1007/s00425-018-2972-0
PMID: 30083810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
