---
pmid: '8289818'
title: Cloning and characterization of the cDNA encoding a novel human pre-B-cell
  colony-enhancing factor.
authors:
- Samal B
- Sun Y
- Stearns G
- Xie C
- Suggs S
- McNiece I
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC358498
doi: 10.1128/mcb.14.2.1431-1437.1994
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Cloning and characterization of the cDNA encoding a novel human pre-B-cell colony-enhancing factor.
**Authors:** Samal B, Sun Y, Stearns G, Xie C, Suggs S, McNiece I
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1128/mcb.14.2.1431-1437.1994](https://doi.org/10.1128/mcb.14.2.1431-1437.1994)
**PMC:** [PMC358498](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC358498/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Feb;14(2):1431-7. doi: 10.1128/mcb.14.2.1431-1437.1994.

Cloning and characterization of the cDNA encoding a novel human pre-B-cell 
colony-enhancing factor.

Samal B(1), Sun Y, Stearns G, Xie C, Suggs S, McNiece I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Amgen Inc., Amgen Center, Thousand Oaks, 
California 91320.

A novel gene coding for the pre-B-cell colony-enhancing factor (PBEF) has been 
isolated from a human peripheral blood lymphocyte cDNA library. The expression 
of this gene is induced by pokeweed mitogen and superinduced by cycloheximide. 
It is also induced in the T-lymphoblastoid cell line HUT 78 after phorbol ester 
(phorbol myristate acetate) treatment. The predominant mRNA for PBEF is 
approximately 2.4 kb long and codes for a 52-kDa secreted protein. The 3' 
untranslated region of the mRNA has multiple TATT motifs, usually found in 
cytokine and oncogene messages. The PBEF gene is mainly transcribed in human 
bone marrow, liver tissue, and muscle. We have expressed PBEF in COS 7 and PA317 
cells and have tested the biological activities of the conditioned medium as 
well as the antibody-purified protein in different in vitro assays. PBEF itself 
had no activity but synergized the pre-B-cell colony formation activity of stem 
cell factor and interleukin 7. In the presence of PBEF, the number of pre-B-cell 
colonies was increased by at least 70% above the amount stimulated by stem cell 
factor plus interleukin 7. No effect of PBEF was found with cells of myeloid or 
erythroid lineages. These data define PBEF as a novel cytokine which acts on 
early B-lineage precursor cells.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.14.2.1431-1437.1994
PMCID: PMC358498
PMID: 8289818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
