---
pmid: '15604276'
title: Adenoviral E1A targets Mdm4 to stabilize tumor suppressor p53.
authors:
- Li Z
- Day CP
- Yang JY
- Tsai WB
- Lozano G
- Shih HM
- Hung MC
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-2419
---

# Adenoviral E1A targets Mdm4 to stabilize tumor suppressor p53.
**Authors:** Li Z, Day CP, Yang JY, Tsai WB, Lozano G, Shih HM, Hung MC
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-2419](https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-2419)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Res. 2004 Dec 15;64(24):9080-5. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-2419.

Adenoviral E1A targets Mdm4 to stabilize tumor suppressor p53.

Li Z(1), Day CP, Yang JY, Tsai WB, Lozano G, Shih HM, Hung MC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, Texas, USA.

The adenoviral protein E1A associates with multiple anticancer activities, 
including stabilization of p53 tumor suppressor, and has been tested through 
gene therapy approaches in clinical trials. To identify potential E1A-binding 
proteins involved in E1A's anticancer activities, we screened a yeast two-hybrid 
library and identified Mdm4, an Mdm2-related p53-binding protein, as a novel 
E1A-binding protein. The NH(2)-terminal region of Mdm4 and the CR1 domain of E1A 
were required for the interaction between E1A and Mdm4. E1A preferentially bound 
to Mdm4 rather than Mdm2 and formed a complex with p53 in the presence of Mdm4, 
resulting in the stabilization of p53 in a p14(ARF)-independent manner. E1A 
failed to stabilize p53 in the absence of Mdm4, showing that Mdm4 was required 
for p53 stabilization by E1A. Moreover, E1A-mediated stabilization of p53 
occurred in nucleus. Although it had no effect on the p53-Mdm2 interaction, E1A 
facilitated Mdm4 binding to p53 and inhibited Mdm2 binding to Mdm4, resulting in 
decreased nuclear exportation of p53. Thus, our findings highlighted a novel 
mechanism, whereby E1A stabilized the p53 tumor suppressor through Mdm4.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-2419
PMID: 15604276 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
