---
pmid: '17947393'
title: 'ITIM-dependent endocytosis of CD33-related Siglecs: role of intracellular
  domain, tyrosine phosphorylation, and the tyrosine phosphatases, Shp1 and Shp2.'
authors:
- Walter RB
- Raden BW
- Zeng R
- Häusermann P
- Bernstein ID
- Cooper JA
journal: J Leukoc Biol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1189/jlb.0607388
---

# ITIM-dependent endocytosis of CD33-related Siglecs: role of intracellular domain, tyrosine phosphorylation, and the tyrosine phosphatases, Shp1 and Shp2.
**Authors:** Walter RB, Raden BW, Zeng R, Häusermann P, Bernstein ID, Cooper JA
**Journal:** J Leukoc Biol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1189/jlb.0607388](https://doi.org/10.1189/jlb.0607388)

## Abstract

1. J Leukoc Biol. 2008 Jan;83(1):200-11. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0607388. Epub 2007 Oct 
18.

ITIM-dependent endocytosis of CD33-related Siglecs: role of intracellular 
domain, tyrosine phosphorylation, and the tyrosine phosphatases, Shp1 and Shp2.

Walter RB(1), Raden BW, Zeng R, Häusermann P, Bernstein ID, Cooper JA.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 1100 
Fairview Ave. N., D2-373, Seattle, WA 98109-1024, USA. rwalter@fhcrc.org

The leukocyte CD33-related sialic acid-binding Ig-like lectins (Siglecs) are 
implicated in glycan recognition and host defense against and pathogenicity of 
sialylated pathogens. Recent studies have shown endocytosis by CD33-related 
Siglecs, which is implicated in clearance of sialylated antigens and antigen 
presentation and makes targeted immunotherapy possible. Using CD33 as a 
paradigm, we have now investigated the reasons underlying the comparatively slow 
rate of endocytosis of these receptors. We show that endocytosis is largely 
limited and determined by the intracellular domain while the extracellular and 
transmembrane domains play a minor role. Tyrosine phosphorylation, most likely 
through Src family kinases, increases uptake of CD33 depending on the integrity 
of the two cytoplasmic immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motifs (ITIMs). 
Simultaneous depletion of the protein tyrosine phosphatases, Src 
homology-2-containing tyrosine phosphatase 1 (Shp1) and Shp2, which bind to 
phosphorylated CD33, increases internalization of CD33 slightly in some cell 
lines, whereas depletion of spleen tyrosine kinase (Syk) has no effect, implying 
that Shp1 and Shp2 can dephosphorylate the ITIMs or mask binding of the 
phosphorylated ITIMs to an endocytic adaptor. Our studies show that restraint of 
CD33 internalization through the intracellular domain is relieved partly when 
the ITIMs are phosphorylated and show that Shp1 and Shp2 can modulate this 
process.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.0607388
PMID: 17947393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
