---
pmid: '15654892'
title: 2-Hydroxyisocaproyl-CoA dehydratase and its activator from Clostridium difficile.
authors:
- Kim J
- Darley D
- Buckel W
journal: FEBS J
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2004.04498.x
---

# 2-Hydroxyisocaproyl-CoA dehydratase and its activator from Clostridium difficile.
**Authors:** Kim J, Darley D, Buckel W
**Journal:** FEBS J (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1742-4658.2004.04498.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1742-4658.2004.04498.x)

## Abstract

1. FEBS J. 2005 Jan;272(2):550-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2004.04498.x.

2-Hydroxyisocaproyl-CoA dehydratase and its activator from Clostridium 
difficile.

Kim J(1), Darley D, Buckel W.

Author information:
(1)Laboratorium für Mikrobiologie, Fachbereich Biologie, Philipps-Universität, 
35032 Marburg, Germany.

The hadBC and hadI genes from Clostridium difficile were functionally expressed 
in Escherichia coli and shown to encode the novel 2-hydroxyisocaproyl-CoA 
dehydratase HadBC and its activator HadI. The activated enzyme catalyses the 
dehydration of (R)-2-hydroxyisocaproyl-CoA to isocaprenoyl-CoA in the pathway of 
leucine fermentation. The extremely oxygen-sensitive homodimeric activator as 
well as the heterodimeric dehydratase, contain iron and inorganic sulfur; 
besides varying amounts of zinc, other metal ions, particularly molybdenum, were 
not detected in the dehydratase. The reduced activator transfers one electron to 
the dehydratase concomitant with hydrolysis of ATP, a process similar to that 
observed with the unrelated nitrogenase. The thus activated dehydratase was 
separated from the activator and ATP; it catalyzed about 10(4) dehydration 
turnovers until the enzyme became inactive. Adding activator, ATP, MgCl(2), 
dithionite and dithioerythritol reactivated the enzyme. This is the first 
demonstration with a 2-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydratase that the catalytic electron 
is recycled after each turnover. In agreement with this observation, only 
substoichiometric amounts of activator (dehydratase/activator = 10 mol/mol) were 
required to generate full activity.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2004.04498.x
PMID: 15654892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
