---
pmid: '30042492'
title: STAT3 localizes to the ER, acting as a gatekeeper for ER-mitochondrion Ca(2+)
  fluxes and apoptotic responses.
authors:
- Avalle L
- Camporeale A
- Morciano G
- Caroccia N
- Ghetti E
- Orecchia V
- Viavattene D
- Giorgi C
- Pinton P
- Poli V
journal: Cell Death Differ
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6214529
doi: 10.1038/s41418-018-0171-y
---

# STAT3 localizes to the ER, acting as a gatekeeper for ER-mitochondrion Ca(2+) fluxes and apoptotic responses.
**Authors:** Avalle L, Camporeale A, Morciano G, Caroccia N, Ghetti E, Orecchia V, Viavattene D, Giorgi C, Pinton P, Poli V
**Journal:** Cell Death Differ (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41418-018-0171-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41418-018-0171-y)
**PMC:** [PMC6214529](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6214529/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Death Differ. 2019 May;26(5):932-942. doi: 10.1038/s41418-018-0171-y.
Epub  2018 Jul 24.

STAT3 localizes to the ER, acting as a gatekeeper for ER-mitochondrion Ca(2+) 
fluxes and apoptotic responses.

Avalle L(1), Camporeale A(1), Morciano G(2)(3)(4), Caroccia N(2), Ghetti E(1), 
Orecchia V(1), Viavattene D(1), Giorgi C(2), Pinton P(5)(6), Poli V(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences, University of 
Torino, 10126, Torino, Italy.
(2)Department of Morphology, Surgery and Experimental Medicine, University of 
Ferrara, 44121, Ferrara, Italy.
(3)Cecilia Hospital, GVM Care & Research, 48033, Cotignola, Ravenna, Italy.
(4)Maria Pia Hospital, GVM Care & Research, 10132, Torino, Italy.
(5)Department of Morphology, Surgery and Experimental Medicine, University of 
Ferrara, 44121, Ferrara, Italy. paolo.pinton@unife.it.
(6)Cecilia Hospital, GVM Care & Research, 48033, Cotignola, Ravenna, Italy. 
paolo.pinton@unife.it.
(7)Department of Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences, University of 
Torino, 10126, Torino, Italy. valeria.poli@unito.it.

Comment in
    Cell Calcium. 2018 Dec;76:137-139. doi: 10.1016/j.ceca.2018.10.002.

STAT3 is an oncogenic transcription factor exerting its functions both as a 
canonical transcriptional activator and as a non-canonical regulator of energy 
metabolism and mitochondrial functions. While both activities are required for 
cell transformation downstream of different oncogenic stimuli, they rely on 
different post-translational activating events, namely phosphorylation on either 
Y705 (nuclear activities) or S727 (mitochondrial functions). Here, we report the 
discovery of the unexpected STAT3 localization to the endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER), from where it modulates ER-mitochondria Ca2+ release by interacting with 
the Ca2+ channel IP3R3 and facilitating its degradation. The release of Ca2+ is 
of paramount importance for life/death cell decisions, as excessive Ca2+ causes 
mitochondrial Ca2+ overload, the opening of the mitochondrial permeability 
transition pore, and the initiation of the intrinsic apoptotic program. Indeed, 
STAT3 silencing enhances ER Ca2+ release and sensitivity to apoptosis following 
oxidative stress in STAT3-dependent mammary tumor cells, correlating with 
increased IP3R3 levels. Accordingly, basal-like mammary tumors, which frequently 
display constitutively active STAT3, show an inverse correlation between IP3R3 
and STAT3 protein levels. These results suggest that STAT3-mediated IP3R3 
downregulation in the ER crucially contributes to its anti-apoptotic functions 
via modulation of Ca2+ fluxes.

DOI: 10.1038/s41418-018-0171-y
PMCID: PMC6214529
PMID: 30042492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
