---
pmid: '2185659'
title: Increased de novo purine synthesis by insulin through selective enzyme induction
  in primary cultured rat hepatocytes.
authors:
- Tsuchiya M
- Yoshikawa H
- Itakura M
- Yamashita K
journal: Am J Physiol
year: '1990'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.1990.258.5.C841
---

# Increased de novo purine synthesis by insulin through selective enzyme induction in primary cultured rat hepatocytes.
**Authors:** Tsuchiya M, Yoshikawa H, Itakura M, Yamashita K
**Journal:** Am J Physiol (1990)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpcell.1990.258.5.C841](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.1990.258.5.C841)

## Abstract

1. Am J Physiol. 1990 May;258(5 Pt 1):C841-8. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.1990.258.5.C841.

Increased de novo purine synthesis by insulin through selective enzyme induction 
in primary cultured rat hepatocytes.

Tsuchiya M(1), Yoshikawa H, Itakura M, Yamashita K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 
Japan.

The proliferative effect of insulin on de novo purine synthesis and on the 
expression of various enzymes of purine metabolism were studied in primary 
cultured rat hepatocytes. Insulin greater than 1.5 x 10(-8) M increased DNA and 
de novo purine synthesis to 260-390 and 270-420%, respectively, 24 and 8 h after 
the administration. Insulin at 1.5 x 10(-7) M increased the specific activity of 
amidophosphoribosyltransferase (ATase) to 154-180%, hypoxanthine-guanine 
phosphoribosyltransferase to 129%, and adenine phosphoribosyltransferase (APRT) 
to 205%, in contrast to unchanged xanthine dehydrogenase at 80%. Enzyme 
induction was supported by the results of kinetic analysis and the inhibition of 
the insulin-induced increase in enzyme activities by protein synthesis 
inhibitors. Insulin increased ATP to 127% and decreased AMP, ADP, 5'-guanylic 
acid (GMP), and guanosine 5'-diphosphate (GDP), respectively, to 73, 69, 73, and 
69%. Insulin increased adenylate energy charge from 0.83 to 0.90 without 
changing total feedback inhibitory potential on ATase. No obvious increase of 
5-phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate supply was suggested, although its apparent 
availability for purine ribonucleotide synthesis was increased to 208-245%, 
reflecting mainly induced APRT activity to 205%. It is concluded that hepatocyte 
proliferation by insulin, as evidenced by purine metabolism, is mediated by the 
selective gene activation of anabolic enzymes and increased ATP as the basis to 
activate multiple metabolic pathways without remarkable changes of substrate 
availability or feedback inhibition.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpcell.1990.258.5.C841
PMID: 2185659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
