---
pmid: '15057752'
title: Beta-catenin is temporally regulated during normal liver development.
authors:
- Micsenyi A
- Tan X
- Sneddon T
- Luo JH
- Michalopoulos GK
- Monga SP
journal: Gastroenterology
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2003.12.047
---

# Beta-catenin is temporally regulated during normal liver development.
**Authors:** Micsenyi A, Tan X, Sneddon T, Luo JH, Michalopoulos GK, Monga SP
**Journal:** Gastroenterology (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.gastro.2003.12.047](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2003.12.047)

## Abstract

1. Gastroenterology. 2004 Apr;126(4):1134-46. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2003.12.047.

Beta-catenin is temporally regulated during normal liver development.

Micsenyi A(1), Tan X, Sneddon T, Luo JH, Michalopoulos GK, Monga SP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh, School of Medicine, PA 
15261, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: beta-Catenin, a key component of the Wnt pathway, plays an 
important role in unregulated liver growth in liver tumors, in regulated growth 
during liver regeneration, and in ex vivo embryonic liver cultures.
METHODS: We used developing livers from several stages of gestational 
development to examine beta-catenin expression, protein-protein interactions, 
localization, and regulation in prenatal and postnatal livers.
RESULTS: Microarray, Northern, and protein analyses showed peak expression of 
beta-catenin during early liver development at Embryonic day 10 (E10)-E12, 
followed by a decrease and a complete loss of normal beta-catenin (97-kilodalton 
species) after E16 through the remaining prenatal period. At the early stages, 
beta-catenin localized to the cytoplasm and nuclei of resident cells in addition 
to its normal membranous localization, which was seen at all later stages and in 
adult liver. Decreases in beta-catenin levels at E14 onward coincided with its 
decreased gene expression and increased degradation, as seen by an increase in 
serine 45/threonine 41-phosphorylated beta-catenin and its other negative 
regulators, such as axin, adenomatous polyposis coli gene product (APC), and 
glycogen synthase kinase-3 beta. Finally, we showed an intact association of 
E-cadherin and beta-catenin despite the loss of beta-catenin at E16-E18, owing 
to the presence of membrane-associated smaller-molecular-weight beta-catenin 
species.
CONCLUSIONS: We also identified a stage-specific expression and regulation of 
beta-catenin during liver development that might be crucial for physiological 
liver development. Nuclear and cytoplasmic beta-catenin corresponded to cell 
proliferation in liver development. Finally, a smaller-molecular-weight species 
of beta-catenin might be maintaining normal interactions at the membrane.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2003.12.047
PMID: 15057752 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
