---
pmid: '14733938'
title: Protein-protein interactions among human 20S proteasome subunits and proteassemblin.
authors:
- Jayarapu K
- Griffin TA
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2003.12.119
---

# Protein-protein interactions among human 20S proteasome subunits and proteassemblin.
**Authors:** Jayarapu K, Griffin TA
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2003.12.119](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2003.12.119)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Feb 6;314(2):523-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2003.12.119.

Protein-protein interactions among human 20S proteasome subunits and 
proteassemblin.

Jayarapu K(1), Griffin TA.

Author information:
(1)William S. Rowe Division of Rheumatology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital 
Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Immunoproteasomes and standard proteasomes assemble by alternative pathways that 
bias against the formation of certain "mixed" proteasomes. Differences between 
beta subunit propeptides contribute to assembly specificity and an assembly 
chaperone, proteassemblin, may be involved via differential propeptide 
interactions. We investigated possible mechanisms of biased proteasome assembly 
and the role of proteassemblin by identifying protein-protein interactions among 
human 20S proteasome subunits and proteassemblin using a yeast two-hybrid 
interaction assay. Forty-one interactions were detected, including five 
involving proteassemblin and contiguous beta subunits, which suggests that 
proteassemblin binds to preproteasomes via a beta subunit surface. Interaction 
between proteassemblin and beta5, but not beta5i, suggests that proteassemblin 
may be involved in the propeptide-dependent differential incorporation of these 
subunits. Interactions between proteassemblin and beta1, beta1i, and beta7 
suggest that proteassemblin may regulate preproteasome dimerization via 
interactions with the C-termini of these subunits, which in the mature 20S 
structure extend to contact opposing beta subunit rings.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2003.12.119
PMID: 14733938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
