---
pmid: '14525946'
title: Coordinated functions of Akt/PKB and ETS1 in tubule formation.
authors:
- Lavenburg KR
- Ivey J
- Hsu T
- Muise-Helmericks RC
journal: FASEB J
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2276577
doi: 10.1096/fj.03-0040fje
---

# Coordinated functions of Akt/PKB and ETS1 in tubule formation.
**Authors:** Lavenburg KR, Ivey J, Hsu T, Muise-Helmericks RC
**Journal:** FASEB J (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1096/fj.03-0040fje](https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.03-0040fje)
**PMC:** [PMC2276577](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2276577/)

## Abstract

1. FASEB J. 2003 Dec;17(15):2278-80. doi: 10.1096/fj.03-0040fje. Epub 2003 Oct 2.

Coordinated functions of Akt/PKB and ETS1 in tubule formation.

Lavenburg KR(1), Ivey J, Hsu T, Muise-Helmericks RC.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Genomics, Hollings Cancer Center, and Department of Cell 
Biology and Anatomy, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston 29425, 
USA.

We investigated the inter-relationship between two downstream effectors of 
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), the serine threonine kinase Akt (also 
known as protein kinase B) and the transcription factor ETS1, during 
tubulogenesis. Human endothelial cell culture and the in vivo Drosophila 
tracheal systems are employed in comparative analysis. We show that VEGF 
stimulates the expression of ETS1 through a phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase 
(PI3K)/Akt-dependent pathway in primary endothelial cells. Activation of Akt 
results in vessel formation in vitro, a process that is blocked by expression of 
antisense ETS1. The functional relationship between ETS and Akt was then tested 
in the homologous tubular system in Drosophila. Contrary to expectation, ETS1 
and Akt did not form a linear positive regulatory pathway in vivo. Instead, 
genetic analyses suggest that the Drosophila ETS1 homologue Pointed is required 
for cell motility per se while Drosophila Akt (Dakt1) is responsible for 
organized and restricted cell movement that is essential for tubule formation. 
Taken together, our results show that ETS1 and Akt control different aspects of 
cell motility that are integrated in the precise regulation of vascular tubule 
formation.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.03-0040fje
PMCID: PMC2276577
PMID: 14525946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
