---
pmid: '8811196'
title: Structure and functions of the 20S and 26S proteasomes.
authors:
- Coux O
- Tanaka K
- Goldberg AL
journal: Annu Rev Biochem
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1146/annurev.bi.65.070196.004101
---

# Structure and functions of the 20S and 26S proteasomes.
**Authors:** Coux O, Tanaka K, Goldberg AL
**Journal:** Annu Rev Biochem (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev.bi.65.070196.004101](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.bi.65.070196.004101)

## Abstract

1. Annu Rev Biochem. 1996;65:801-47. doi: 10.1146/annurev.bi.65.070196.004101.

Structure and functions of the 20S and 26S proteasomes.

Coux O(1), Tanaka K, Goldberg AL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 
02115, USA.

The proteasome is an essential component of the ATP-dependent proteolytic 
pathway in eukaryotic cells and is responsible for the degradation of most 
cellular proteins. The 20S (700-kDa) proteasome contains multiple peptidase 
activities that function through a new type of proteolytic mechanism involving a 
threonine active site. The 26S (2000-kDa) complex, which degrades ubiquitinated 
proteins, contains in addition to the 20S proteasome a 19S regulatory complex 
composed of multiple ATPases and components necessary for binding protein 
substrates. The proteasome has been highly conserved during eukaryotic 
evolution, and simpler forms are even found in archaebacteria and eubacteria. 
Major advances have been achieved recently in our knowledge about the molecular 
organization of the 20S and 19S particles, their subunits, the proteasome's role 
in MHC-class 1 antigen presentation, and regulators of its activities. This 
article focuses on recent progress concerning the biochemical mechanisms and 
intracellular functions of the 20S and 26S proteasomes.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev.bi.65.070196.004101
PMID: 8811196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
