---
pmid: '10029540'
title: Role of cysteine-82 in the catalytic mechanism of human S-adenosylmethionine
  decarboxylase.
authors:
- Xiong H
- Stanley BA
- Pegg AE
journal: Biochemistry
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi9825201
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Role of cysteine-82 in the catalytic mechanism of human S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase.
**Authors:** Xiong H, Stanley BA, Pegg AE
**Journal:** Biochemistry (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi9825201](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi9825201)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 1999 Feb 23;38(8):2462-70. doi: 10.1021/bi9825201.

Role of cysteine-82 in the catalytic mechanism of human S-adenosylmethionine 
decarboxylase.

Xiong H(1), Stanley BA, Pegg AE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, The Milton S. Hershey 
Medical Center, Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, Hershey 
17033, USA.

S-Adenosylmethionine decarboxylase is a pyruvate-dependent enzyme. The enzyme 
forms a Schiff base with substrate, S-adenosylmethionine, through the pyruvoyl 
moiety. This facilitates the release of CO2 from the substrate, which must then 
be protonated on the alpha carbon in order to permit hydrolysis of the Schiff 
base to release the product. The catalytic mechanism of human 
S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase was investigated via mutagenic and kinetic 
approaches. The results of enzyme kinetic studies indicated that Cys-82 is a 
crucial residue for activity and this residue has a basic pKa. Iodoacetic acid 
inhibited wild-type enzyme activity in a time- and pH-dependent manner but did 
not affect the already reduced activity of mutant C82A. Reaction of this mutant 
with iodoacetic acid led to approximately one less mole of reagent being 
incorporated per mole of enzyme alphabeta dimer than with wild-type 
S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase. Both wild-type and C82A mutant 
S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylases were inactivated by substrate-mediated 
transamination, but this reaction occurred much more frequently with C82A than 
with wild-type enzyme. A major proportion of the recombinant C82A mutant protein 
was in the transaminated form in which the pyruvoyl cofactor is converted into 
alanine. This suggests that incorrect protonation of the pyruvate, rather than 
the substrate, occurs much more readily when Cys-82 is altered. On the basis of 
these results, it was postulated that residue Cys-82 may be the proton donor of 
the decarboxylation reaction catalyzed by S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase.

DOI: 10.1021/bi9825201
PMID: 10029540 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
