---
pmid: '12042308'
title: Interaction of two actin-binding proteins, synaptopodin and alpha-actinin-4,
  with the tight junction protein MAGI-1.
authors:
- Patrie KM
- Drescher AJ
- Welihinda A
- Mundel P
- Margolis B
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M203072200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Interaction of two actin-binding proteins, synaptopodin and alpha-actinin-4, with the tight junction protein MAGI-1.
**Authors:** Patrie KM, Drescher AJ, Welihinda A, Mundel P, Margolis B
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M203072200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M203072200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 16;277(33):30183-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M203072200. Epub 
2002 May 31.

Interaction of two actin-binding proteins, synaptopodin and alpha-actinin-4, 
with the tight junction protein MAGI-1.

Patrie KM(1), Drescher AJ, Welihinda A, Mundel P, Margolis B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 
48109-0650, USA.

In an attempt to find podocyte-expressed proteins that may interact with the 
tight junction protein MAGI-1, we screened a glomerulus-enriched cDNA library 
with a probe consisting of both WW domains of MAGI-1. One of the isolated clones 
contained two WW domain-binding motifs and was identified as a portion of the 
actin-bundling protein synaptopodin. In vitro binding assays confirmed this 
interaction between MAGI-1 and synaptopodin and identified the second WW domain 
of MAGI-1 to be responsible for the interaction. MAGI-1 and synaptopodin can 
also interact in vivo, as they can be immunoprecipitated together from HEK293 
cell lysates. Another actin-bundling protein that is found in glomerular 
podocytes and shown to be mutated in an inheritable form of glomerulosclerosis 
is alpha-actinin-4. We show that alpha-actinin-4 is also capable of binding to 
MAGI-1 in in vitro binding assays and that this interaction is mediated by the 
fifth PDZ domain of MAGI-1 binding to the C terminus of alpha-actinin-4. 
Exogenously expressed synaptopodin and alpha-actinin-4 were found to colocalize 
along with endogenous MAGI-1 at the tight junction of Madin-Darby canine kidney 
cells. The interaction and colocalization of MAGI-1 with two actin-bundling 
proteins suggest that MAGI-1 may play a role in actin cytoskeleton dynamics 
within polarized epithelial cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M203072200
PMID: 12042308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
