---
pmid: '12845332'
title: Phospholipase Cgamma activates Ras on the Golgi apparatus by means of RasGRP1.
authors:
- Bivona TG
- Pérez De Castro I
- Ahearn IM
- Grana TM
- Chiu VK
- Lockyer PJ
- Cullen PJ
- Pellicer A
- Cox AD
- Philips MR
journal: Nature
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature01806
---

# Phospholipase Cgamma activates Ras on the Golgi apparatus by means of RasGRP1.
**Authors:** Bivona TG, Pérez De Castro I, Ahearn IM, Grana TM, Chiu VK, Lockyer PJ, Cullen PJ, Pellicer A, Cox AD, Philips MR
**Journal:** Nature (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature01806](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature01806)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2003 Aug 7;424(6949):694-8. doi: 10.1038/nature01806. Epub 2003 Jun
29.

Phospholipase Cgamma activates Ras on the Golgi apparatus by means of RasGRP1.

Bivona TG(1), Pérez De Castro I, Ahearn IM, Grana TM, Chiu VK, Lockyer PJ, 
Cullen PJ, Pellicer A, Cox AD, Philips MR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, 550 First 
Avenue, New York, New York 10016, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2003 Aug 7;424(6949):624-5. doi: 10.1038/424624a.

Ras proteins regulate cellular growth and differentiation, and are mutated in 
30% of cancers. We have shown recently that Ras is activated on and transmits 
signals from the Golgi apparatus as well as the plasma membrane but the 
mechanism of compartmentalized signalling was not determined. Here we show that, 
in response to Src-dependent activation of phospholipase Cgamma1, the Ras 
guanine nucleotide exchange factor RasGRP1 translocated to the Golgi where it 
activated Ras. Whereas Ca(2+) positively regulated Ras on the Golgi apparatus 
through RasGRP1, the same second messenger negatively regulated Ras on the 
plasma membrane by means of the Ras GTPase-activating protein CAPRI. Ras 
activation after T-cell receptor stimulation in Jurkat cells, rich in RasGRP1, 
was limited to the Golgi apparatus through the action of CAPRI, demonstrating 
unambiguously a physiological role for Ras on Golgi. Activation of Ras on Golgi 
also induced differentiation of PC12 cells, transformed fibroblasts and mediated 
radioresistance. Thus, activation of Ras on Golgi has important biological 
consequences and proceeds through a pathway distinct from the one that activates 
Ras on the plasma membrane.

DOI: 10.1038/nature01806
PMID: 12845332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
