---
pmid: '10395741'
title: Interactions of nuclear receptor coactivator/corepressor proteins with the
  aryl hydrocarbon receptor complex.
authors:
- Nguyen TA
- Hoivik D
- Lee JE
- Safe S
journal: Arch Biochem Biophys
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/abbi.1999.1282
---

# Interactions of nuclear receptor coactivator/corepressor proteins with the aryl hydrocarbon receptor complex.
**Authors:** Nguyen TA, Hoivik D, Lee JE, Safe S
**Journal:** Arch Biochem Biophys (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1006/abbi.1999.1282](https://doi.org/10.1006/abbi.1999.1282)

## Abstract

1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1999 Jul 15;367(2):250-7. doi: 10.1006/abbi.1999.1282.

Interactions of nuclear receptor coactivator/corepressor proteins with the aryl 
hydrocarbon receptor complex.

Nguyen TA(1), Hoivik D, Lee JE, Safe S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University, 
College Station, Texas, 77843-4466, USA.

MCF-7 human breast cancer cells express the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), and 
treatment with AhR agonists such as 2,3,7, 8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) 
inhibits estrogen receptor (ER)-mediated responses. This study investigates 
physical and functional interactions of the AhR complex with a prototypical 
coactivator (estrogen receptor associating protein 140, ERAP 140) and 
corepressor (silencing mediator for retinoic acid and thyroid hormone receptor, 
SMRT) for ER and other members of the nuclear receptor superfamily. The AhR, AhR 
nuclear translocator (Arnt), and AhR/Arnt proteins were coimmunoprecipitated 
with 35S-ERAP 140 and 35S-SMRT and, in gel mobility shift assays, AhR/Arnt 
binding to 32P-dioxin response element (DRE) was enhanced by ERAP-140 and 
inhibited by SMRT; supershifted bands were not observed. In transactivation 
assays, coactivator and corepressor proteins enhanced or inhibited AhR-mediated 
gene expression; however, these responses varied with the amount of 
coactivator/corepressor expression. These results confirmed functional and 
physical interactions of AhR/Arnt with ERAP 140 and SMRT in breast cancer cells.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/abbi.1999.1282
PMID: 10395741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
