---
pmid: '9988274'
title: Interaction between Set1p and checkpoint protein Mec3p in DNA repair and telomere
  functions.
authors:
- Corda Y
- Schramke V
- Longhese MP
- Smokvina T
- Paciotti V
- Brevet V
- Gilson E
- Géli V
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/5991
---

# Interaction between Set1p and checkpoint protein Mec3p in DNA repair and telomere functions.
**Authors:** Corda Y, Schramke V, Longhese MP, Smokvina T, Paciotti V, Brevet V, Gilson E, Géli V
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1038/5991](https://doi.org/10.1038/5991)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 1999 Feb;21(2):204-8. doi: 10.1038/5991.

Interaction between Set1p and checkpoint protein Mec3p in DNA repair and 
telomere functions.

Corda Y(1), Schramke V, Longhese MP, Smokvina T, Paciotti V, Brevet V, Gilson E, 
Géli V.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire d'Ingénierie et de Dynamique des Systèmes Macromoléculaires, 
CNRS, Marseille, France.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 1999 Feb;21(2):151-2. doi: 10.1038/5930.

The yeast protein Set1p, inactivation of which alleviates telomeric position 
effect (TPE), contains a conserved SET domain present in chromosomal proteins 
involved in epigenetic control of transcription. Mec3p is required for efficient 
DNA-damage-dependent checkpoints at G1/S, intra-S and G2/M (refs 3-7). We show 
here that the SET domain of Set1p interacts with Mec3p. Deletion of SET1 
increases the viability of mec3delta mutants after DNA damage (in a process that 
is mostly independent of Rad53p kinase, which has a central role in checkpoint 
control) but does not significantly affect cell-cycle progression. Deletion of 
MEC3 enhances TPE and attenuates the Set1delta-induced silencing defect. 
Furthermore, restoration of TPE in a Set1delta mutant by overexpression of the 
isolated SET domain requires Mec3p. Finally, deletion of MEC3 results in 
telomere elongation, whereas cells with deletions of both SET1 and MEC3 do not 
have elongated telomeres. Our findings indicate that interactions between SET1 
and MEC3 have a role in DNA repair and telomere function.

DOI: 10.1038/5991
PMID: 9988274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
