---
reference_id: PMID:8522528
title: "Role of the ferric uptake regulator of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in the regulation of siderophores and exotoxin A expression: purification and activity on iron-regulated promoters."
authors:
- Ochsner UA
- Vasil AI
- Vasil ML
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1128/jb.177.24.7194-7201.1995
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of the ferric uptake regulator of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in the regulation of siderophores and exotoxin A expression: purification and activity on iron-regulated promoters.
**Authors:** Ochsner UA, Vasil AI, Vasil ML
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1128/jb.177.24.7194-7201.1995](https://doi.org/10.1128/jb.177.24.7194-7201.1995)

## Content

1. J Bacteriol. 1995 Dec;177(24):7194-201. doi: 10.1128/jb.177.24.7194-7201.1995.

Role of the ferric uptake regulator of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in the regulation 
of siderophores and exotoxin A expression: purification and activity on 
iron-regulated promoters.

Ochsner UA(1), Vasil AI, Vasil ML.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, 
Denver 80262, USA.

The cloned Pseudomonas aeruginosa fur (ferric uptake regulator) gene was 
overexpressed in P. aeruginosa by using a T7 expression system, and the Fur 
protein (PA-Fur) was purified by using a combination of ion-exchange 
chromatography and metal affinity chromatography. The DNA binding activity of 
the PA-Fur protein was confirmed by gel mobility shift assays and DNase I 
footprints of the synthetic DNA fragment GATAAT GATAATCATTATC, representing a 
perfect "Fur box". In addition, it was shown that PA-Fur is capable of binding 
to promoter and operator determinants of the tightly iron-regulated Escherichia 
coli fepA-fes enterobactin gene system. The activity of PA-Fur on the promoters 
of iron-regulated genes involved in the production of two siderophores, 
pyochelin and pyoverdin, and in the expression of exotoxin A was investigated. 
Data indicating that the promoters of the pchR gene, encoding a transcriptional 
activator for pyochelin synthesis, and of the pvdS gene, encoding a positive 
regulator for pyoverdin production, are specifically recognized by Fur-Fe(II) 
are presented, suggesting that PA-Fur represses expression of pchR and pvdS 
during growth in an iron-replete environment. However, neither the promoter 
region of the gene encoding exotoxin A (toxA) nor the promoters of the regAB 
operon, required for toxA expression, interacted with high concentrations of 
purified PA-Fur. These data indicate that iron regulation of exotoxin A 
production involves additional factors which may ultimately be under the control 
of PA-Fur.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.177.24.7194-7201.1995
PMCID: PMC177600
PMID: 8522528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]