---
pmid: '32513959'
title: Structure and dynamics of the ASB9 CUL-RING E3 Ligase.
authors:
- Lumpkin RJ
- Baker RW
- Leschziner AE
- Komives EA
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC7280518
doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-16499-9
---

# Structure and dynamics of the ASB9 CUL-RING E3 Ligase.
**Authors:** Lumpkin RJ, Baker RW, Leschziner AE, Komives EA
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-020-16499-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-16499-9)
**PMC:** [PMC7280518](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7280518/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Commun. 2020 Jun 8;11(1):2866. doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-16499-9.

Structure and dynamics of the ASB9 CUL-RING E3 Ligase.

Lumpkin RJ(#)(1), Baker RW(#)(2)(3)(4), Leschziner AE(2)(5), Komives EA(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, San 
Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA, 92092-0378, USA.
(2)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, School of Medicine, University 
of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 92093, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, School of Medicine, University of 
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(4)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel 
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(5)Section of Molecular Biology, Division of Biological Sciences, University of 
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 92093, USA.
(6)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, San 
Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA, 92092-0378, USA. ekomives@ucsd.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Nat Commun. 2023 Nov 17;14(1):7463. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-43056-x.

The Cullin 5 (CUL5) Ring E3 ligase uses adaptors Elongins B and C (ELOB/C) to 
bind different SOCS-box-containing substrate receptors, determining the 
substrate specificity of the ligase. The 18-member ankyrin and SOCS box (ASB) 
family is the largest substrate receptor family. Here we report cryo-EM data for 
the substrate, creatine kinase (CKB) bound to ASB9-ELOB/C, and for full-length 
CUL5 bound to the RING protein, RBX2, which binds various E2s. To date, no full 
structures are available either for a substrate-bound ASB nor for CUL5. 
Hydrogen-deuterium exchange (HDX-MS) mapped onto a full structural model of the 
ligase revealed long-range allostery extending from the substrate through CUL5. 
We propose a revised allosteric mechanism for how CUL-E3 ligases function. ASB9 
and CUL5 behave as rigid rods, connected through a hinge provided by ELOB/C 
transmitting long-range allosteric crosstalk from the substrate through CUL5 to 
the RBX2 flexible linker.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-020-16499-9
PMCID: PMC7280518
PMID: 32513959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
