---
pmid: '28006656'
title: Disruption of Serinc1, which facilitates serine-derived lipid synthesis, fails
  to alter macrophage function, lymphocyte proliferation or autoimmune disease susceptibility.
authors:
- Chu EP
- Elso CM
- Pollock AH
- Alsayb MA
- Mackin L
- Thomas HE
- Kay TW
- Silveira PA
- Mansell AS
- Gaus K
- Brodnicki TC
journal: Mol Immunol
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2016.12.007
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Disruption of Serinc1, which facilitates serine-derived lipid synthesis, fails to alter macrophage function, lymphocyte proliferation or autoimmune disease susceptibility.
**Authors:** Chu EP, Elso CM, Pollock AH, Alsayb MA, Mackin L, Thomas HE, Kay TW, Silveira PA, Mansell AS, Gaus K, Brodnicki TC
**Journal:** Mol Immunol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molimm.2016.12.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molimm.2016.12.007)

## Abstract

1. Mol Immunol. 2017 Feb;82:19-33. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2016.12.007. Epub 2016
Dec  19.

Disruption of Serinc1, which facilitates serine-derived lipid synthesis, fails 
to alter macrophage function, lymphocyte proliferation or autoimmune disease 
susceptibility.

Chu EP(1), Elso CM(2), Pollock AH(3), Alsayb MA(1), Mackin L(2), Thomas HE(1), 
Kay TW(1), Silveira PA(4), Mansell AS(5), Gaus K(3), Brodnicki TC(6).

Author information:
(1)St Vincent's Institute, Fitzroy, Victoria 3065, Australia; Department of 
Medicine, St Vincent's Hospital, University of Melbourne, Fitzroy, Victoria 
3065, Australia.
(2)St Vincent's Institute, Fitzroy, Victoria 3065, Australia.
(3)European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL) Australia Node in Single 
Molecule Science, School of Medical Sciences, University of New South Wales, 
Sydney, New South Wales 2052, Australia; Australian Research Council Centre of 
Excellence in Advanced Molecular Imaging, University of New South Wales, Sydney, 
New South Wales 2052, Australia.
(4)ANZAC Research Institute, Sydney, New South Wales 2139, Australia; Sydney 
Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales 2006, Australia.
(5)Hudson Institute of Medical Research, Clayton, Victoria 3168, Australia; 
Department of Molecular and Translational Science, Monash University, Melbourne, 
Victoria 3168, Australia.
(6)St Vincent's Institute, Fitzroy, Victoria 3065, Australia; Department of 
Medicine, St Vincent's Hospital, University of Melbourne, Fitzroy, Victoria 
3065, Australia. Electronic address: tbrodnicki@svi.edu.au.

During immune cell activation, serine-derived lipids such as phosphatidylserine 
and sphingolipids contribute to the formation of protein signaling complexes 
within the plasma membrane. Altering lipid composition in the cell membrane can 
subsequently affect immune cell function and the development of autoimmune 
disease. Serine incorporator 1 (SERINC1) is a putative carrier protein that 
facilitates synthesis of serine-derived lipids. To determine if SERINC1 has a 
role in immune cell function and the development of autoimmunity, we 
characterized a mouse strain in which a retroviral insertion abolishes 
expression of the Serinc1 transcript. Expression analyses indicated that the 
Serinc1 transcript is readily detectable and expressed at relatively high levels 
in wildtype macrophages and lymphocytes. The ablation of Serinc1 expression in 
these immune cells, however, did not significantly alter serine-derived lipid 
composition or affect macrophage function and lymphocyte proliferation. Analyses 
of Serinc1-deficient mice also indicated that systemic ablation of Serinc1 
expression did not affect viability, fertility or autoimmune disease 
susceptibility. These results suggest that Serinc1 is dispensable for certain 
immune cell functions and does not contribute to previously reported links 
between lipid composition in immune cells and autoimmunity.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2016.12.007
PMID: 28006656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
