---
pmid: '19524539'
title: LysRS serves as a key signaling molecule in the immune response by regulating
  gene expression.
authors:
- Yannay-Cohen N
- Carmi-Levy I
- Kay G
- Yang CM
- Han JM
- Kemeny DM
- Kim S
- Nechushtan H
- Razin E
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.05.019
---

# LysRS serves as a key signaling molecule in the immune response by regulating gene expression.
**Authors:** Yannay-Cohen N, Carmi-Levy I, Kay G, Yang CM, Han JM, Kemeny DM, Kim S, Nechushtan H, Razin E
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2009.05.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2009.05.019)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2009 Jun 12;34(5):603-11. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.05.019.

LysRS serves as a key signaling molecule in the immune response by regulating 
gene expression.

Yannay-Cohen N(1), Carmi-Levy I, Kay G, Yang CM, Han JM, Kemeny DM, Kim S, 
Nechushtan H, Razin E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The Institute for Medical Research Israel-Canada, 
The Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

Lysyl-tRNA synthetase (LysRS) was found to produce diadenosine tetraphosphate 
(Ap(4)A) in vitro more than two decades ago. Here, we used LysRS silencing in 
mast cells in combination with transfected normal and mutated LysRS to 
demonstrate in vivo the critical role played by LysRS in the production of 
Ap(4)A in response to immunological challenge. Upon such challenge, LysRS was 
phosphorylated on serine 207 in a MAPK-dependent manner, released from the 
multisynthetase complex, and translocated into the nucleus. We previously 
demonstrated that LysRS forms a complex with MITF and its repressor Hint-1, 
which is released from the complex by its binding to Ap(4)A, enabling MITF to 
transcribe its target genes. Here, silencing LysRS led to reduced Ap(4)A 
production in immunologically activated cells, which resulted in a lower level 
of MITF inducible genes. Our data demonstrate that specific LysRS serine 207 
phosphorylation regulates Ap(4)A production in immunologically stimulated mast 
cells, thus implying that LysRS is a key mediator in gene regulation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.05.019
PMID: 19524539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
