---
pmid: '23707606'
title: Human endothelial dihydrofolate reductase low activity limits vascular tetrahydrobiopterin
  recycling.
authors:
- Whitsett J
- Rangel Filho A
- Sethumadhavan S
- Celinska J
- Widlansky M
- Vasquez-Vivar J
journal: Free Radic Biol Med
year: '2013'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3748942
doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2013.04.035
---

# Human endothelial dihydrofolate reductase low activity limits vascular tetrahydrobiopterin recycling.
**Authors:** Whitsett J, Rangel Filho A, Sethumadhavan S, Celinska J, Widlansky M, Vasquez-Vivar J
**Journal:** Free Radic Biol Med (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2013.04.035](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2013.04.035)
**PMC:** [PMC3748942](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3748942/)

## Abstract

1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2013 Oct;63:143-50. doi: 
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2013.04.035. Epub 2013 May 23.

Human endothelial dihydrofolate reductase low activity limits vascular 
tetrahydrobiopterin recycling.

Whitsett J(1), Rangel Filho A, Sethumadhavan S, Celinska J, Widlansky M, 
Vasquez-Vivar J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biophysics, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, 
USA.

Tetrahydrobiopterin (BH₄) is required for NO synthesis and inhibition of 
superoxide release from endothelial NO synthase. Clinical trials using BH₄ to 
treat endothelial dysfunction have produced mixed results. Poor outcomes may be 
explained by the rapid systemic and cellular oxidation of BH₄. One of the 
oxidation products of BH₄, 7,8-dihydrobiopterin (7,8-BH₂), is recycled back to 
BH₄ by dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR). This enzyme is ubiquitously distributed 
and shows a wide range of activity depending on species-specific factors and 
cell type. Information about the kinetics and efficiency of BH4 recycling in 
human endothelial cells receiving BH₄ treatment is lacking. To characterize this 
reaction, we applied a novel multielectrode coulometric HPLC method that enabled 
the direct quantification of 7,8-BH₂ and BH₄, which is not possible with 
fluorescence-based methodologies. We found that basal untreated BH₄ and 7,8-BH₂ 
concentrations in human endothelial cells (ECs) are lower than in bovine and 
murine endothelioma cells. Treatment of human ECs with BH₄ transiently increased 
intracellular BH₄ while accumulating the more stable 7,8-BH₂. This was different 
from bovine or murine ECs, which resulted in preferential BH₄ increase. Using 
BH₄ diastereomers, 6S-BH₄ and 6R-BH₄, the narrow contribution of enzymatic DHFR 
recycling to total intracellular BH₄ was demonstrated. Reduction of 7,8-BH₂ to 
BH₄ occurs at very slow rates in cells and needs supraphysiological levels of 
7,8-BH₂, indicating this reaction is kinetically limited. Activity assays 
verified that human DHFR has very low affinity for 7,8-BH₂ (DHF<Km>7,8-BH₂) and 
folic acid inhibits 7,8-BH₂ recycling. We conclude that low activity of 
endothelial DHFR is an important factor limiting the benefits of BH4 therapies, 
which may be further aggravated by folate supplements.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2013.04.035
PMCID: PMC3748942
PMID: 23707606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Tetrahydrobiopterin (BH 4 ) is required for NO synthesis and inhibition of superoxide release from eNOS. Clinical trials using BH 4 to treat endothelial dysfunction have produced mixed results. Poor outcomes may be explained by the rapid systemic and cellular oxidation of BH 4 . One of the oxidation products of BH 4 , 7,8-dihydrobiopterin (7,8-BH 2 ), is recycled back to BH 4 by dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR). This enzyme is ubiquitously distributed and shows a wide range of activity depending on species-specific factors and cell type. Information about the kinetics and efficiency of BH 4 recycling in human endothelial cells receiving BH 4 treatment is lacking. To characterize this reaction, we applied a novel multi-electrode coulometric HPLC method that enabled the direct quantification of 7,8-BH 2 and BH 4 which is not possible with fluorescent-based methodologies. We found that basal untreated BH 4 and 7,8-BH 2 concentrations in human ECs is lower than bovine and murine endothelioma cells. Treatment of human ECs with BH 4 transiently increased intracellular BH 4 while accumulating the more stable 7,8-BH 2 . This was different from bovine or murine ECs that resulted in preferential BH 4 increase. Using BH 4 diastereomers, 6S-BH 4 and 6R-BH 4 , the narrow contribution of enzymatic DHFR recycling to total intracellular BH 4 was demonstrated. Reduction of 7,8-BH 2 to BH 4 occurs at very slow rates in cells and needs supra-physiological levels of 7,8-BH 2 , indicating this reaction is kinetically limited. Activity assays verified that hDHFR has very low affinity for 7,8-BH 2 (DHF< K M >7,8-BH 2 ) and folic acid inhibits 7,8-BH 2 recycling. We conclude that low activity of endothelial DHFR is an important factor limiting the benefits of BH 4 therapies which may be further aggravated by folate supplements.

DISCUSSION

The main finding of this work is that recycling of BH 4 via DHFR pathway in human endothelial cells is exceedingly slow indicating that this pathway has a minor role in the maintenance of endothelial BH 4 levels. This fact may significantly impact the success of BH 4 treatments where systemic and cellular 7,8-BH 2 can increase several fold.

Our observation that BH 4 concentrations in human endothelial and umbilical vein cells and freshly isolated arterioles are very low is in agreement with previous reports using human umbilical cells, aortic endothelial cells and the established umbilical-derived cell line, EAhy926 ( 24 – 27 ). This finding may be explained by the slow rate of biosynthesis or recycling of BH 4 in human cells. Since inhibition of BH 4 biosynthesis rapidly causes a state of BH 4 deficiency in isolated blood vessels ( 35 ), it has been concluded that BH 4 is rapidly lost in normal conditions and that constant biosynthesis is necessary to satisfy cellular cofactor needs. Also implicit in this conclusion is the possibility that 7,8-BH 2 recycling is not a good source of BH 4 in endothelial cells. The oxidative metabolism of BH 4 generates quininoid-BH 2 (qBH 2 ), 7,8-BH 2 , pterin-radical intermediates, isoxanthopterin and biopterin ( 36 , 37 ). Until now, the specific endothelial biochemical mechanisms controlling the formation and fate of these products are not well defined. A well-known reaction of BH 4 is with iron and iron-containing proteins such as cytochrome c ( 38 ). Since iron-proteins are abundant, it is possible that in a cellular context, BH 4 is constantly oxidized as a consequence of its interactions with iron-containing centers. The product of this reaction is a radical species that undergoes a number of reactions including dismutation to generate 7,8-BH 2 and BH 4 or reacts with oxygen to generate hydrogen peroxide and qBH 2 . Therefore 7,8-BH 2 is unlikely the only and specific product of BH 4 oxidation and is yet to be proven 7,8-BH2 is a good marker of BH 4 degradation as discussed in the literature. The importance of 7,8-BH 2 as an oxidation product may lie in the fact that it can be recycled back to BH 4 via DHFR. The characteristics of this reaction are, however, highly dependent on the cell type in human tissues.

We found that 7,8-BH 2 in endothelial cells and freshly isolated human arterioles is present in higher concentrations than BH 4 . The high proportion of 7,8-BH 2 is intriguing because it is believed that in endothelial cells 7,8-BH 2 is rapidly recycled to BH 4 via DHFR ( 12 , 14 ). Also, the relatively high 7,8-BH 2 levels in HAEC are in direct contrast to findings in BAEC or sEnd.1 where a higher BH 4 :7,8-BH 2 ratio is typical under basal conditions ( 11 – 14 , 25 ). Thus understanding species-specific features of BH 4 metabolism in human cells is even more important. We found that in HAEC treated with BH 4 doses comparable to those of therapeutic regimens (5–20 mg BH 4 /kg weight) ( 17 – 19 ), 7,8-BH 2 is the predominant species. Only in the treatments with high doses and for very short times was BH 4 increased. Using diasteromers, 6R-BH 4 and 6S-BH 4 , we demonstrated that the direct uptake of BH 4 better explains the acute increase in intracellular BH 4 and that DHFR-recycling of 7,8-BH 2 is marginal. This unexpected result was better characterized by using 7,8-BH 2 that showed a slow conversion to BH 4 .

Pharmacokinetic studies have shown that oral administration of 20 mg/kg BH 4 in healthy adult subjects rapidly increased total plasma biopterin (i.e. the sum of biopterin, BH 2 and BH 4 concentrations) reaching C max of 0.4 μM within ~2.5h with an estimated bioavailability of (AUC 0–10h ) of 3.6 μM representing ~3.5% of the total initial total dose of 1800 mg for an individual weighting 90 kg. ( 39 ). Total plasma biopterin in coronary artery disease patients supplemented with 400–700 mg of BH 4 reached <0.07μM and even lower levels of 7,8-BH 2 ~0.03μM ( 40 ). Although it is not known whether these values represent C max , they illustrate that 7,8-BH 2 represents only a small fraction of the initial treatment dose which is unlikely to significantly stimulate DHFR-mediated conversion to BH 4 . The physiological significance of these changes is yet to be established. Previously we showed that 7,8-BH 2 competes for BH 4 -binding site on eNOS and inhibits NO formation to increase superoxide release by encouraging futile NADPH-oxidation cycle ( 41 ). The NO-forming activity is, however, more sensitive to inhibition by 7,8-BH 2 than uncoupled-superoxide formation ( 41 ). Thus the relatively high 7,8-BH 2 to BH 4 accumulated in endothelial cells upon supplementation predicts that supplementation may decrease eNOS activity. By following NO forming activity (DAF assay), 100 BH 4 μM stimulated less NO production than 10 μM BH 4 despite the fact that intracellular 7,8-BH 2 was higher than BH 4 . This indicates that regulation of eNOS by intracellular BH 4 and BH 2 in endothelial cells is influenced by cofactor concentrations and perhaps by the accessibility of 7,8-BH 2 to the eNOS binding site.

Dihydrofolate reductase can accept alternative substrates such as folic acid and 7,8-BH 2 in addition to its natural substrate dihydrofolate. However, the rate of reduction of 7,8-BH 2 is slower as verified by measuring both NADPH-oxidation, tetrahydrofolate and BH 4 , respectively ( 29 , 42 ). Similarly we found that 7,8-BH 2 is a better substrate for DHFR than folic acid but a poor substrate compared to DHF. These differences may be relevant when considering potential competitive reactions in the cellular milieu. Folic acid therapy is common, and high doses can be found in vitamin supplements and fortified foods. Here, we showed that folic acid at concentrations 1/100 and lower of that found in vitamin supplements inhibited DHF and 7,8-BH 2 reduction by human DHFR in vitro , and it reduced the conversion of 7,8-BH 2 to BH 4 in HAEC. This effect appears to be a general phenomenon since addition of folic acid also inhibited DHFR activity in sEnd.1 murine endothelioma cells which compares with a 27% inhibition caused by MTX under similar experimental conditions. This information may be important in the design of therapeutic use of BH 4 in cardiovascular conditions since most patients generally receive vitamin supplements.

Regulation of BH 4 metabolism in human endothelial cells is complex and not well understood. It remains unclear why human endothelial cells maintain low BH 4 despite the presence of enzymes able to generate BH 4 via de novo and salvage pathways and its critical regulatory role on eNOS activity. In several cell types DHFR assumes an active role in regulating BH 4 . Here we showed that enzyme activity of DHFR in human endothelial cells is low which may be a factor explaining low basal BH 4 in human cells under physiological conditions. Importantly, the low DHFR activity in endothelial cells appears to be a limitation in the use of BH 4 for the treatment of endothelial dysfunction associated with several cardiovascular conditions.
