---
pmid: '10748169'
title: Presenilin 2 interacts with sorcin, a modulator of the ryanodine receptor.
authors:
- Pack-Chung E
- Meyers MB
- Pettingell WP
- Moir RD
- Brownawell AM
- Cheng I
- Tanzi RE
- Kim TW
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.m909882199
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Presenilin 2 interacts with sorcin, a modulator of the ryanodine receptor.
**Authors:** Pack-Chung E, Meyers MB, Pettingell WP, Moir RD, Brownawell AM, Cheng I, Tanzi RE, Kim TW
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.m909882199](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.m909882199)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2000 May 12;275(19):14440-5. doi: 10.1074/jbc.m909882199.

Presenilin 2 interacts with sorcin, a modulator of the ryanodine receptor.

Pack-Chung E(1), Meyers MB, Pettingell WP, Moir RD, Brownawell AM, Cheng I, 
Tanzi RE, Kim TW.

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Aging Research Unit, Department of Neurology, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129, USA.

Perturbed Ca(2+) homeostasis is a common molecular consequence of familial 
Alzheimer's disease-linked presenilin mutations. We report here the molecular 
interaction of the large hydrophilic loop region of presenilin 2 (PS2) with 
sorcin, a penta-EF-hand Ca(2+)-binding protein that serves as a modulator of the 
ryanodine receptor intracellular Ca(2+) channel. The association of endogenous 
sorcin and PS2 was demonstrated in cultured cells and human brain tissues. 
Membrane-associated sorcin and a subset of the functional PS2 complexes were 
co-localized to a novel subcellular fraction that is distinctively positive for 
calcineurin B. Sorcin was found to interact with PS2 endoproteolytic fragments 
but not full-length PS2, and the sorcin/PS2 interaction was greatly enhanced by 
treatment with the Ca(2+) ionophore A23187. Our findings reveal a molecular link 
between PS2 and intracellular Ca(2+) channels (i.e. ryanodine receptor) and 
substantiate normal and/or pathological roles of PS2 in intracellular Ca(2+) 
homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.m909882199
PMID: 10748169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
