---
pmid: '30280653'
title: 'Blood-Brain Barrier: From Physiology to Disease and Back.'
authors:
- Sweeney MD
- Zhao Z
- Montagne A
- Nelson AR
- Zlokovic BV
journal: Physiol Rev
year: '2019'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC6335099
doi: 10.1152/physrev.00050.2017
---

# Blood-Brain Barrier: From Physiology to Disease and Back.
**Authors:** Sweeney MD, Zhao Z, Montagne A, Nelson AR, Zlokovic BV
**Journal:** Physiol Rev (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1152/physrev.00050.2017](https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.00050.2017)
**PMC:** [PMC6335099](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6335099/)

## Abstract

1. Physiol Rev. 2019 Jan 1;99(1):21-78. doi: 10.1152/physrev.00050.2017.

Blood-Brain Barrier: From Physiology to Disease and Back.

Sweeney MD(1), Zhao Z(1), Montagne A(1), Nelson AR(1), Zlokovic BV(1).

Author information:
(1)Zilkha Neurogenetic Institute, Keck School of Medicine, University of 
Southern California , Los Angeles, California ; and Department of Physiology and 
Neuroscience, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California , Los 
Angeles, California.

Comment in
    Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2019 Jul 1;317(1):R14. doi: 
10.1152/ajpregu.00073.2019.

The blood-brain barrier (BBB) prevents neurotoxic plasma components, blood 
cells, and pathogens from entering the brain. At the same time, the BBB 
regulates transport of molecules into and out of the central nervous system 
(CNS), which maintains tightly controlled chemical composition of the neuronal 
milieu that is required for proper neuronal functioning. In this review, we 
first examine molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying the establishment of 
the BBB. Then, we focus on BBB transport physiology, endothelial and pericyte 
transporters, and perivascular and paravascular transport. Next, we discuss rare 
human monogenic neurological disorders with the primary genetic defect in 
BBB-associated cells demonstrating the link between BBB breakdown and 
neurodegeneration. Then, we review the effects of genes underlying inheritance 
and/or increased susceptibility for Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's 
disease (PD), Huntington's disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) on 
BBB in relation to other pathologies and neurological deficits. We next examine 
how BBB dysfunction relates to neurological deficits and other pathologies in 
the majority of sporadic AD, PD, and ALS cases, multiple sclerosis, other 
neurodegenerative disorders, and acute CNS disorders such as stroke, traumatic 
brain injury, spinal cord injury, and epilepsy. Lastly, we discuss BBB-based 
therapeutic opportunities. We conclude with lessons learned and future 
directions, with emphasis on technological advances to investigate the BBB 
functions in the living human brain, and at the molecular and cellular level, 
and address key unanswered questions.

DOI: 10.1152/physrev.00050.2017
PMCID: PMC6335099
PMID: 30280653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The blood-brain barrier (BBB) prevents neurotoxic plasma components, blood cells, and pathogens from entering the brain. At the same time, the BBB regulates transport of molecules into and out of the central nervous system (CNS), which maintains tightly controlled chemical composition of the neuronal milieu that is required for proper neuronal functioning. In this review, we first examine molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying the establishment of the BBB. Then, we focus on BBB transport physiology, endothelial and pericyte transporters, and perivascular and paravascular transport. Next, we discuss rare human monogenic neurological disorders with the primary genetic defect in BBB-associated cells demonstrating the link between BBB breakdown and neurodegeneration. Then, we review the effects of genes underlying inheritance and/or increased susceptibility for Alzheimer’s disease (AD), Parkinson’s disease (PD), Huntington’s disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) on BBB in relation to other pathologies and neurological deficits. We next examine how BBB dysfunction relates to neurological deficits and other pathologies in the majority of sporadic AD, PD, and ALS cases, multiple sclerosis, other neurodegenerative disorders, and acute CNS disorders such as stroke, traumatic brain injury, spinal cord injury, and epilepsy. Lastly, we discuss BBB-based therapeutic opportunities. We conclude with lessons learned and future directions, with emphasis on technological advances to investigate the BBB functions in the living human brain, and at the molecular and cellular level, and address key unanswered questions.

I. INTRODUCTION

The blood-brain barrier (BBB) prevents neurotoxic plasma components, blood cells, and pathogens from entering the brain ( 420 ). At the same time, the BBB regulates transport of molecules into and out of the central nervous system (CNS), which maintains tightly controlled chemical composition of the neuronal milieu that is required for proper neuronal functioning ( 682 , 693 ). In disease states, BBB breakdown and dysfunction leads to leakages of harmful blood components into the CNS, cellular infiltration, and aberrant transport and clearance of molecules ( 420 , 682 , 693 ), which is associated with cerebral blood flow (CBF) reductions and dysregulation ( 269 – 271 , 318 ), contributing to neurological deficits.

The pattern of cerebral blood vessels follows the major brain circuits tasked with sensation, memory, and motion suggesting that the cerebrovascular system plays an important role in normal CNS functioning ( 271 , 318 , 682 ). Under physiological conditions, the human brain receives 20% of the cardiac output and uses 20% of the body’s oxygen and glucose ( 270 ). Energy substrates are consumed by the brain “on the fly” from blood via transport across the BBB, as the brain lacks a reservoir to store fuel for use when needed ( 271 ). In the mammalian brain, cerebral arteries, arterioles, and capillaries supply CNS circuits with blood in response to neuronal stimuli by increasing the rate of CBF and oxygen delivery, a mechanism known as neurovascular coupling ( 271 , 319 ). Different cell types of the neurovascular unit (NVU) including vascular cells [e.g., endothelium and mural cells including pericytes and smooth muscle cells (SMCs)], glia (e.g., astrocytes, microglia), and neurons contribute to regulation of BBB permeability, neurovascular coupling, cell-matrix interactions, neurotransmitter turnover, and angiogenesis and neurogenesis ( 270 , 271 , 692 , 693 ) ( FIGURE 1 ).

The BBB is centrally positioned within the NVU and is formed by a monolayer of tightly-sealed endothelial cells along the vascular tree expressing low paracellular and transcellular permeability ( 682 , 693 ). In the human brain, total length of cerebral blood vessels is ~400 miles with capillaries contributing to 85% of the vessel length and providing ~12 m 2 of the endothelial surface area available for transport exchanges ( 2 , 460 , 693 ). At the capillary level, BBB integrity is maintained by pericytes ( 28 , 59 , 130 , 570 ). Pericytes, SMCs, and endothelial cells express thousands of transcripts encoding different transporters, receptors, active efflux pumps, ion channels, and regulatory molecules ( 28 , 72 , 86 , 129 , 242 , 358 , 359 , 610 , 675 , 678 ), whose expression pattern varies by zonation along the arterio-capillary-venous axis and cell type ( 610 ).

Here, we first examine molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying the establishment of the BBB. Then, we focus on BBB transport physiology including the BBB molecular junctions, endothelial and pericyte transporters, and perivascular and paravascular transport. Next, we discuss rare human monogenic neurological disorders with the primary genetic defect in vascular cells of the BBB, and the link to neurodegeneration. Then, we review the effects of genes underlying inheritance and/or increased susceptibility for Alzheimer’s disease (AD), Parkinson’s disease (PD), Huntington’s disease (HD), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) on BBB in relation to other pathologies and neurological deficits. We next examine how BBB breakdown and dysfunction relates to neurological deficits and other pathologies in the majority of sporadic AD, PD, and ALS cases with no clear etiology or genetic inheritance, multiple sclerosis (MS), other neurodegenerative disorders, and acute CNS disorders such as stroke, traumatic brain injury, spinal cord injury, and epilepsy. Lastly, we discuss BBB-based therapeutic opportunities and targets. We conclude with lessons learned and future directions, with emphasis on technological advances to investigate the BBB functions in the living human brain, to provide molecular definitions of different vascular cell types, and address key unanswered questions.
