---
pmid: '14742432'
title: Subcellular localization and targeting of N-acetylglucosaminyl phosphatidylinositol
  de-N-acetylase, the second enzyme in the glycosylphosphatidylinositol biosynthetic
  pathway.
authors:
- Pottekat A
- Menon AK
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M313537200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Subcellular localization and targeting of N-acetylglucosaminyl phosphatidylinositol de-N-acetylase, the second enzyme in the glycosylphosphatidylinositol biosynthetic pathway.
**Authors:** Pottekat A, Menon AK
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M313537200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M313537200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 16;279(16):15743-51. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M313537200. Epub 
2004 Jan 23.

Subcellular localization and targeting of N-acetylglucosaminyl 
phosphatidylinositol de-N-acetylase, the second enzyme in the 
glycosylphosphatidylinositol biosynthetic pathway.

Pottekat A(1), Menon AK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 
53706, USA.

The second step in glycosylphosphatidylinositol biosynthesis is the 
de-N-acetylation of N-acetylglucosaminylphosphatidylinositol (GlcNAc-PI) 
catalyzed by N-acetylglucosaminylphosphatidylinositol deacetylase (PIG-L). 
Previous studies of mouse thymoma cells showed that GlcNAc-PI de-N-acetylase 
activity is localized to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) but enriched in a 
mitochondria-associated ER membrane (MAM) domain. Because PIG-L has no readily 
identifiable ER sorting determinants, we were interested in learning how PIG-L 
is localized to the ER and possibly enriched in MAM. We used HeLa cells 
transiently or stably expressing epitope-tagged PIG-L variants or chimeric 
constructs composed of elements of PIG-L fused to Tac antigen, a cell surface 
protein. We first analyzed the subcellular distribution of PIG-L and 
Glc-NAc-PI-de-N-acetylase activity and then studied the localization of 
Tac-PIG-L chimeras to identify sequence elements in PIG-L responsible for its 
subcellular localization. We show that human PIG-L is a type I membrane protein 
with a large cytoplasmic domain and that, unlike the result with mouse thymoma 
cells, both PIG-L and GlcNAc-PI-de-N-acetylase activity are uniformly 
distributed between ER and MAM in HeLa cells. Analyses of a series of Tac-PIG-L 
chimeras indicated that PIG-L contains two ER localization signals, an 
independent retention signal located between residues 60 and 88 of its 
cytoplasmic domain and another weak signal in the luminal and transmembrane 
domains that functions autonomously in the presence of membrane proximal 
residues of the cytoplasmic domain that themselves lack any retention 
information. We conclude that PIG-L, like a number of other ER membrane 
proteins, is retained in the ER through a multi-component localization signal 
rather than a discrete sorting motif.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M313537200
PMID: 14742432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
