---
pmid: '10970852'
title: Scar/WAVE-1, a Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein, assembles an actin-associated
  multi-kinase scaffold.
authors:
- Westphal RS
- Soderling SH
- Alto NM
- Langeberg LK
- Scott JD
journal: EMBO J
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC302050
doi: 10.1093/emboj/19.17.4589
---

# Scar/WAVE-1, a Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein, assembles an actin-associated multi-kinase scaffold.
**Authors:** Westphal RS, Soderling SH, Alto NM, Langeberg LK, Scott JD
**Journal:** EMBO J (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/19.17.4589](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/19.17.4589)
**PMC:** [PMC302050](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC302050/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2000 Sep 1;19(17):4589-600. doi: 10.1093/emboj/19.17.4589.

Scar/WAVE-1, a Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein, assembles an actin-associated 
multi-kinase scaffold.

Westphal RS(1), Soderling SH, Alto NM, Langeberg LK, Scott JD.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Vollum Institute, Portland, OR, USA.

WAVE proteins are members of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP) family 
of scaffolding proteins that coordinate actin reorganization by coupling 
Rho-related small molecular weight GTPases to the mobilization of the Arp2/3 
complex. We identified WAVE-1 in a screen for rat brain A kinase-anchoring 
proteins (AKAPs), which bind to the SH3 domain of the Abelson tyrosine kinase 
(Abl). Recombinant WAVE-1 interacts with cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) and 
Abl kinases when expressed in HEK-293 cells, and both enzymes co-purify with 
endogenous WAVE from brain extracts. Mapping studies have defined binding sites 
for each kinase. Competition experiments suggest that the PKA-WAVE-1 interaction 
may be regulated by actin as the kinase binds to a site overlapping a verprolin 
homology region, which has been shown to interact with actin. Immunocytochemical 
analyses in Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts suggest that the WAVE-1 kinase scaffold is 
assembled dynamically as WAVE, PKA and Abl translocate to sites of actin 
reorganization in response to platelet-derived growth factor treatment. Thus, we 
propose a previously unrecognized function for WAVE-1 as an actin-associated 
scaffolding protein that recruits PKA and Abl.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/19.17.4589
PMCID: PMC302050
PMID: 10970852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
