---
pmid: '19955572'
title: The hypoxia-controlled FBXL14 ubiquitin ligase targets SNAIL1 for proteasome
  degradation.
authors:
- Viñas-Castells R
- Beltran M
- Valls G
- Gómez I
- García JM
- Montserrat-Sentís B
- Baulida J
- Bonilla F
- de Herreros AG
- Díaz VM
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2823521
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.065995
---

# The hypoxia-controlled FBXL14 ubiquitin ligase targets SNAIL1 for proteasome degradation.
**Authors:** Viñas-Castells R, Beltran M, Valls G, Gómez I, García JM, Montserrat-Sentís B, Baulida J, Bonilla F, de Herreros AG, Díaz VM
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M109.065995](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.065995)
**PMC:** [PMC2823521](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2823521/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Feb 5;285(6):3794-3805. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.065995. Epub 
2009 Dec 2.

The hypoxia-controlled FBXL14 ubiquitin ligase targets SNAIL1 for proteasome 
degradation.

Viñas-Castells R(1), Beltran M(1), Valls G(1), Gómez I(2), García JM(2), 
Montserrat-Sentís B(1), Baulida J(1), Bonilla F(2), de Herreros AG(3), Díaz 
VM(4).

Author information:
(1)From the Programa de Recerca en Càncer, Institut Municipal d'Investigació 
Mèdica, Hospital del Mar, Parc de Recerca Biomèdica de Barcelona, Doctor 
Aiguader 88, E-08003 Barcelona, Spain.
(2)the Servicio de Oncologia Médica, Hospital Universitario Puerta de Hierro, 
E-28222 Majadahonda, Spain, and.
(3)From the Programa de Recerca en Càncer, Institut Municipal d'Investigació 
Mèdica, Hospital del Mar, Parc de Recerca Biomèdica de Barcelona, Doctor 
Aiguader 88, E-08003 Barcelona, Spain; the Departament de Ciències Experimentals 
i de la Salut, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, E-08003 Barcelona, Spain. Electronic 
address: agarcia@imim.es.
(4)From the Programa de Recerca en Càncer, Institut Municipal d'Investigació 
Mèdica, Hospital del Mar, Parc de Recerca Biomèdica de Barcelona, Doctor 
Aiguader 88, E-08003 Barcelona, Spain; the Departament de Ciències Experimentals 
i de la Salut, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, E-08003 Barcelona, Spain. Electronic 
address: vdiaz@imim.es.

The transcription factor SNAIL1 is a master regulator of epithelial to 
mesenchymal transition. SNAIL1 is a very unstable protein, and its levels are 
regulated by the E3 ubiquitin ligase beta-TrCP1 that interacts with SNAIL1 upon 
its phosphorylation by GSK-3beta. Here we show that SNAIL1 polyubiquitylation 
and degradation may occur in conditions precluding SNAIL1 phosphorylation by 
GSK-3beta, suggesting that additional E3 ligases participate in the control of 
SNAIL1 protein stability. In particular, we demonstrate that the F-box E3 
ubiquitin ligase FBXl14 interacts with SNAIL1 and promotes its ubiquitylation 
and proteasome degradation independently of phosphorylation by GSK-3beta. In 
vivo, inhibition of FBXl14 using short hairpin RNA stabilizes both ectopically 
expressed and endogenous SNAIL1. Moreover, the expression of FBXl14 is potently 
down-regulated during hypoxia, a condition that increases the levels of SNAIL1 
protein but not SNAIL1 mRNA. FBXL14 mRNA is decreased in tumors with a high 
expression of two proteins up-regulated in hypoxia, carbonic anhydrase 9 and 
TWIST1. In addition, Twist1 small interfering RNA prevents hypoxia-induced 
Fbxl14 down-regulation and SNAIL1 stabilization in NMuMG cells. Altogether, 
these results demonstrate the existence of an alternative mechanism controlling 
SNAIL1 protein levels relevant for the induction of SNAIL1 during hypoxia.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.065995
PMCID: PMC2823521
PMID: 19955572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
