---
pmid: '17968012'
title: Analysis of sigma32 mutants defective in chaperone-mediated feedback control
  reveals unexpected complexity of the heat shock response.
authors:
- Yura T
- Guisbert E
- Poritz M
- Lu CZ
- Campbell E
- Gross CA
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2077055
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0708819104
---

# Analysis of sigma32 mutants defective in chaperone-mediated feedback control reveals unexpected complexity of the heat shock response.
**Authors:** Yura T, Guisbert E, Poritz M, Lu CZ, Campbell E, Gross CA
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0708819104](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0708819104)
**PMC:** [PMC2077055](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2077055/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Nov 6;104(45):17638-43. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0708819104. Epub 2007 Oct 29.

Analysis of sigma32 mutants defective in chaperone-mediated feedback control 
reveals unexpected complexity of the heat shock response.

Yura T(1), Guisbert E, Poritz M, Lu CZ, Campbell E, Gross CA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San 
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Protein quality control is accomplished by inducing chaperones and proteases in 
response to an altered cellular folding state. In Escherichia coli, expression 
of chaperones and proteases is positively regulated by sigma32. 
Chaperone-mediated negative feedback control of sigma32 activity allows this 
transcription factor to sense the cellular folding state. We identified point 
mutations in sigma32 altered in feedback control. Surprisingly, such mutants are 
resistant to inhibition by both the DnaK/J and GroEL/S chaperones in vivo and 
also show dramatically increased stability. Further characterization of the most 
defective mutant revealed that it has almost normal binding to chaperones and 
RNA polymerase and is competent for chaperone-mediated inactivation in vitro. We 
suggest that the mutants identify a regulatory step downstream of chaperone 
binding that is required for both inactivation and degradation of sigma32.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0708819104
PMCID: PMC2077055
PMID: 17968012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
