---
pmid: '15520368'
title: Hematopoietic gene expression profile in zebrafish kidney marrow.
authors:
- Song HD
- Sun XJ
- Deng M
- Zhang GW
- Zhou Y
- Wu XY
- Sheng Y
- Chen Y
- Ruan Z
- Jiang CL
- Fan HY
- Zon LI
- Kanki JP
- Liu TX
- Look AT
- Chen Z
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC528959
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0407241101
---

# Hematopoietic gene expression profile in zebrafish kidney marrow.
**Authors:** Song HD, Sun XJ, Deng M, Zhang GW, Zhou Y, Wu XY, Sheng Y, Chen Y, Ruan Z, Jiang CL, Fan HY, Zon LI, Kanki JP, Liu TX, Look AT, Chen Z
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0407241101](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0407241101)
**PMC:** [PMC528959](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC528959/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Nov 16;101(46):16240-5. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0407241101. Epub 2004 Nov 1.

Hematopoietic gene expression profile in zebrafish kidney marrow.

Song HD(1), Sun XJ, Deng M, Zhang GW, Zhou Y, Wu XY, Sheng Y, Chen Y, Ruan Z, 
Jiang CL, Fan HY, Zon LI, Kanki JP, Liu TX, Look AT, Chen Z.

Author information:
(1)State Key Lab for Medical Genomics, Shanghai Institute of Hematology, Ruijin 
Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Second Medical University, Shanghai 200025, 
China.

The zebrafish kidney marrow is considered to be the organ of definitive 
hematopoiesis, analogous to the mammalian bone marrow. We have sequenced 26,143 
ESTs and isolated 304 cDNAs with putative full-length ORF from a zebrafish 
kidney marrow cDNA library. The ESTs formed 7,742 assemblies, representing both 
previously identified zebrafish ESTs (56%) and recently discovered zebrafish 
ESTs (44%). About 30% of these EST assemblies have orthologues in humans, 
including 1,282 disease-associated genes in the Online Mendelian Inheritance in 
Man (OMIM) database. Comparison of the effective and regulatory molecules 
related to erythroid functions across species suggests a good conservation from 
zebrafish to human. Interestingly, both embryonic and adult zebrafish globin 
genes showed higher homology to the human embryonic globin genes than to the 
human fetal/adult ones, consistent with evo-devo correlation hypothesis. In 
addition, conservation of a whole set of transcription factors involved in 
globin gene switch suggests the regulatory network for such remodeling mechanism 
existed before the divergence of the teleost and the ancestor of mammals. We 
also carried out whole-mount mRNA in situ hybridization assays for 493 cDNAs and 
identified 80 genes (16%) with tissue-specific expression during the first five 
days of zebrafish development. Twenty-six of these genes were specifically 
expressed in hematopoietic or vascular tissues, including three previously 
unidentified zebrafish genes: coro1a, nephrosin, and dab2. Our results indicate 
that conserved genetic programs regulate vertebrate hematopoiesis and 
vasculogenesis, and support the role of the zebrafish as an important animal 
model for studying both normal development and the molecular pathogenesis of 
human blood diseases.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0407241101
PMCID: PMC528959
PMID: 15520368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
