---
pmid: '28634302'
title: Structure of human Fe-S assembly subcomplex reveals unexpected cysteine desulfurase
  architecture and acyl-ACP-ISD11 interactions.
authors:
- Cory SA
- Van Vranken JG
- Brignole EJ
- Patra S
- Winge DR
- Drennan CL
- Rutter J
- Barondeau DP
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5502623
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1702849114
---

# Structure of human Fe-S assembly subcomplex reveals unexpected cysteine desulfurase architecture and acyl-ACP-ISD11 interactions.
**Authors:** Cory SA, Van Vranken JG, Brignole EJ, Patra S, Winge DR, Drennan CL, Rutter J, Barondeau DP
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1702849114](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1702849114)
**PMC:** [PMC5502623](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5502623/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017 Jul 3;114(27):E5325-E5334. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1702849114. Epub 2017 Jun 20.

Structure of human Fe-S assembly subcomplex reveals unexpected cysteine 
desulfurase architecture and acyl-ACP-ISD11 interactions.

Cory SA(1), Van Vranken JG(2), Brignole EJ(3)(4), Patra S(1), Winge DR(2)(5), 
Drennan CL(3)(4)(6), Rutter J(2)(7), Barondeau DP(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77842.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake 
City, UT 84112.
(3)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 
02139.
(4)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA 02139.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake 
City, UT 84132.
(6)Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 
02139.
(7)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt 
Lake City, UT 84132.
(8)Department of Chemistry, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77842; 
barondeau@tamu.edu.

In eukaryotes, sulfur is mobilized for incorporation into multiple biosynthetic 
pathways by a cysteine desulfurase complex that consists of a catalytic subunit 
(NFS1), LYR protein (ISD11), and acyl carrier protein (ACP). This NFS1-ISD11-ACP 
(SDA) complex forms the core of the iron-sulfur (Fe-S) assembly complex and 
associates with assembly proteins ISCU2, frataxin (FXN), and ferredoxin to 
synthesize Fe-S clusters. Here we present crystallographic and electron 
microscopic structures of the SDA complex coupled to enzyme kinetic and 
cell-based studies to provide structure-function properties of a mitochondrial 
cysteine desulfurase. Unlike prokaryotic cysteine desulfurases, the SDA 
structure adopts an unexpected architecture in which a pair of ISD11 subunits 
form the dimeric core of the SDA complex, which clarifies the critical role of 
ISD11 in eukaryotic assemblies. The different quaternary structure results in an 
incompletely formed substrate channel and solvent-exposed pyridoxal 5'-phosphate 
cofactor and provides a rationale for the allosteric activator function of FXN 
in eukaryotic systems. The structure also reveals the 
4'-phosphopantetheine-conjugated acyl-group of ACP occupies the hydrophobic core 
of ISD11, explaining the basis of ACP stabilization. The unexpected architecture 
for the SDA complex provides a framework for understanding interactions with 
acceptor proteins for sulfur-containing biosynthetic pathways, elucidating 
mechanistic details of eukaryotic Fe-S cluster biosynthesis, and clarifying how 
defects in Fe-S cluster assembly lead to diseases such as Friedreich's ataxia. 
Moreover, our results support a lock-and-key model in which LYR proteins 
associate with acyl-ACP as a mechanism for fatty acid biosynthesis to coordinate 
the expression, Fe-S cofactor maturation, and activity of the respiratory 
complexes.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1702849114
PMCID: PMC5502623
PMID: 28634302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
