---
pmid: '23583373'
title: Early VEGFR2 activation in response to flow is VEGF-dependent and mediated
  by MMP activity.
authors:
- dela Paz NG
- Melchior B
- Frangos JA
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4074593
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.03.134
---

# Early VEGFR2 activation in response to flow is VEGF-dependent and mediated by MMP activity.
**Authors:** dela Paz NG, Melchior B, Frangos JA
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.03.134](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.03.134)
**PMC:** [PMC4074593](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4074593/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 May 10;434(3):641-6. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.03.134. Epub 2013 Apr 10.

Early VEGFR2 activation in response to flow is VEGF-dependent and mediated by 
MMP activity.

dela Paz NG(1), Melchior B, Frangos JA.

Author information:
(1)La Jolla Bioengineering Institute, 3535 General Atomics Court, Suite 210, San 
Diego, CA 92121, USA. ndelapaz@ljbi.org

Although several potential mechanosensors/mechanotransducers have been proposed, 
the precise mechanisms by which ECs sense and respond to mechanical forces and 
translate them into biochemical signals remains unclear. Here, we report that 
two major ligand-dependent tyrosine autophosphorylation sites of VEGFR2, Y1175 
and Y1214, are rapidly activated by shear stress in human coronary artery 
endothelial cells (HCAECs). Neutralizing antibody against VEGFR2 not only 
abrogates flow-induced phosphorylation of these tyrosine residues, but also has 
a marked inhibitory effect on downstream eNOS activation. In situ proximity 
ligation assay revealed that VEGF and VEGFR2 are closely associated in HCAECs, 
and more importantly, this association is increased with flow. Finally, we show 
that flow-induced VEGFR2 activation is attenuated in the presence of the broad 
spectrum matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) inhibitor, GM6001. Taken together, our 
results suggest that a ligand-dependent mechanism involving the activity of MMPs 
plays a key role in the early, shear stress-induced activation of VEGFR2.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.03.134
PMCID: PMC4074593
PMID: 23583373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
