---
pmid: '28923481'
title: ADAM17 is the main sheddase for the generation of human triggering receptor
  expressed in myeloid cells (hTREM2) ectodomain and cleaves TREM2 after Histidine
  157.
authors:
- Feuerbach D
- Schindler P
- Barske C
- Joller S
- Beng-Louka E
- Worringer KA
- Kommineni S
- Kaykas A
- Ho DJ
- Ye C
- Welzenbach K
- Elain G
- Klein L
- Brzak I
- Mir AK
- Farady CJ
- Aichholz R
- Popp S
- George N
- Neumann U
journal: Neurosci Lett
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2017.09.034
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# ADAM17 is the main sheddase for the generation of human triggering receptor expressed in myeloid cells (hTREM2) ectodomain and cleaves TREM2 after Histidine 157.
**Authors:** Feuerbach D, Schindler P, Barske C, Joller S, Beng-Louka E, Worringer KA, Kommineni S, Kaykas A, Ho DJ, Ye C, Welzenbach K, Elain G, Klein L, Brzak I, Mir AK, Farady CJ, Aichholz R, Popp S, George N, Neumann U
**Journal:** Neurosci Lett (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neulet.2017.09.034](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2017.09.034)

## Abstract

1. Neurosci Lett. 2017 Nov 1;660:109-114. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2017.09.034. Epub
 2017 Sep 18.

ADAM17 is the main sheddase for the generation of human triggering receptor 
expressed in myeloid cells (hTREM2) ectodomain and cleaves TREM2 after Histidine 
157.

Feuerbach D(1), Schindler P(2), Barske C(3), Joller S(3), Beng-Louka E(2), 
Worringer KA(4), Kommineni S(4), Kaykas A(4), Ho DJ(4), Ye C(4), Welzenbach 
K(5), Elain G(5), Klein L(5), Brzak I(3), Mir AK(5), Farady CJ(5), Aichholz 
R(6), Popp S(2), George N(2), Neumann U(3).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Research, Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Basel, 
Switzerland. Electronic address: dominik.feuerbach@novartis.com.
(2)Biologics Center, Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Basel, 
Switzerland.
(3)Neuroscience Research, Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Basel, 
Switzerland.
(4)Neuroscience Research, Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.
(5)Autoimmunity, Transplantation & Inflammation, Novartis Institutes for 
Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland.
(6)PK Sciences Department, Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Basel, 
Switzerland.

Triggering receptor expressed in myeloid cells (TREM2) is a member of the 
immunoglobulin superfamily and is expressed in macrophages, dendritic cells, 
microglia, and osteoclasts. TREM2 plays a role in phagocytosis, regulates 
release of cytokine, contributes to microglia maintenance, and its ectodomain is 
shed from the cell surface. Here, the question was addressed at which position 
sheddases cleave TREM2 and what are the proteases involved in this process. 
Using both pharmacological and genetic approaches we report that the main 
protease contributing to the release of TREM2 ectodomain is ADAM17, (a 
disintegrin and metalloproteinase domain containing protein, also called TACE, 
TNFα converting enzyme) while ADAM10 plays a minor role. Complementary 
biochemical experiments reveal that cleavage occurs between histidine 157 and 
serine 158. Shedding is not altered for the R47H-mutated TREM2 protein that 
confers an increased risk for the development of Alzheimers disease. These 
findings reveal a link between shedding of TREM2 and its regulation during 
inflammatory conditions or chronic neurodegenerative disease like AD in which 
activity or expression of sheddases might be altered.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2017.09.034
PMID: 28923481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
