---
pmid: '19059439'
title: PKCdelta-dependent functional switch of rpS3 between translation and DNA repair.
authors:
- Kim TS
- Kim HD
- Kim J
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2008.10.017
---

# PKCdelta-dependent functional switch of rpS3 between translation and DNA repair.
**Authors:** Kim TS, Kim HD, Kim J
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbamcr.2008.10.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbamcr.2008.10.017)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Feb;1793(2):395-405. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2008.10.017. Epub 2008 Nov 19.

PKCdelta-dependent functional switch of rpS3 between translation and DNA repair.

Kim TS(1), Kim HD, Kim J.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, and 
BioInstitute, Korea University, Seoul 136-701, Republic of Korea.

Ribosomal protein S3 (rpS3) is critically involved in translation as a component 
of the 40S ribosomal subunit and participates in the processing of DNA damage, 
functioning as a damage DNA endonuclease. However, it is not yet known how the 
function of rpS3 switches between translation and DNA repair. Here we show that 
PKCdelta phosphorylates rpS3 resulting in its mobilization in the nucleus to 
repair damaged DNA. Phosphorylated rpS3 was only detected in non-ribosomal rpS3 
and the repair endonuclease activity of rpS3 was increased by its 
phosphorylation. In addition, rpS3 knock-down cells showed more sensitivity to 
genotoxic stress than control cells, and this sensitivity was corrected by 
overexpressed wild-type rpS3 but not by phosphorylation defective rpS3. In 
conclusion, we propose that the destiny of rpS3 molecules between translation 
and DNA repair is regulated by PKCdelta-dependent phosphorylation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2008.10.017
PMID: 19059439 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
