---
pmid: '9718352'
title: 'Dihydropyrimidinase deficiency: structural organization, chromosomal localization,
  and mutation analysis of the human dihydropyrimidinase gene.'
authors:
- Hamajima N
- Kouwaki M
- Vreken P
- Matsuda K
- Sumi S
- Imaeda M
- Ohba S
- Kidouchi K
- Nonaka M
- Sasaki M
- Tamaki N
- Endo Y
- De Abreu R
- Rotteveel J
- van Kuilenburg A
- van Gennip A
- Togari H
- Wada Y
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1377410
doi: 10.1086/302022
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Dihydropyrimidinase deficiency: structural organization, chromosomal localization, and mutation analysis of the human dihydropyrimidinase gene.
**Authors:** Hamajima N, Kouwaki M, Vreken P, Matsuda K, Sumi S, Imaeda M, Ohba S, Kidouchi K, Nonaka M, Sasaki M, Tamaki N, Endo Y, De Abreu R, Rotteveel J, van Kuilenburg A, van Gennip A, Togari H, Wada Y
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1086/302022](https://doi.org/10.1086/302022)
**PMC:** [PMC1377410](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1377410/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Hum Genet. 1998 Sep;63(3):717-26. doi: 10.1086/302022.

Dihydropyrimidinase deficiency: structural organization, chromosomal 
localization, and mutation analysis of the human dihydropyrimidinase gene.

Hamajima N(1), Kouwaki M, Vreken P, Matsuda K, Sumi S, Imaeda M, Ohba S, 
Kidouchi K, Nonaka M, Sasaki M, Tamaki N, Endo Y, De Abreu R, Rotteveel J, van 
Kuilenburg A, van Gennip A, Togari H, Wada Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Nagoya City University Medical School, Nagoya City 
Higashi General Hospital, Nagoya, Japan. hamajima@med.nagoya-cu.ac.jp

Dihydropyrimidinase (DHP) deficiency (MIM 222748) is characterized by 
dihydropyrimidinuria and is associated with a variable clinical phenotype. This 
disease might be associated with a risk of 5-fluorouracil toxicity, although no 
cases have been reported. We present here both the molecular characterization of 
the human DHP gene and, for the first time, the mutations causing DHP 
deficiency. The human DHP gene spans >80 kb and consists of 10 exons. It has 
been assigned to 8q22, by FISH. We performed mutation analysis of genomic DNA in 
one symptomatic and five asymptomatic individuals presenting with 
dihydropyrimidinuria. We identified one frameshift mutation and five missense 
mutations. Two related Japanese adult subjects were homozygous for the Q334R 
substitution, whereas two other, unrelated Japanese infant subjects were 
heterozygous for the same mutation, but this mutation is not common in the 
Japanese population. A Caucasian pediatric patient exhibiting epileptic attacks, 
dysmorphic features, and severe developmental delay was homozygous for W360R. 
Using a eukaryotic expression system, we showed that all mutations reduced 
enzyme activity significantly, indicating that these are crucial DHP 
deficiency-causing mutations. There was no significant difference, in residual 
activity, between mutations observed in the symptomatic and those observed in 
the asymptomatic individuals.

DOI: 10.1086/302022
PMCID: PMC1377410
PMID: 9718352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
