---
pmid: '8336730'
title: The protein encoded by a growth arrest-specific gene (gas6) is a new member
  of the vitamin K-dependent proteins related to protein S, a negative coregulator
  in the blood coagulation cascade.
authors:
- Manfioletti G
- Brancolini C
- Avanzi G
- Schneider C
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '1993'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC360142
doi: 10.1128/mcb.13.8.4976-4985.1993
---

# The protein encoded by a growth arrest-specific gene (gas6) is a new member of the vitamin K-dependent proteins related to protein S, a negative coregulator in the blood coagulation cascade.
**Authors:** Manfioletti G, Brancolini C, Avanzi G, Schneider C
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1128/mcb.13.8.4976-4985.1993](https://doi.org/10.1128/mcb.13.8.4976-4985.1993)
**PMC:** [PMC360142](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC360142/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Aug;13(8):4976-85. doi: 10.1128/mcb.13.8.4976-4985.1993.

The protein encoded by a growth arrest-specific gene (gas6) is a new member of 
the vitamin K-dependent proteins related to protein S, a negative coregulator in 
the blood coagulation cascade.

Manfioletti G(1), Brancolini C, Avanzi G, Schneider C.

Author information:
(1)International Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Trieste, 
Italy.

A set of growth arrest-specific genes (gas) whose expression is negatively 
regulated after serum induction has previously been described (C. Schneider, R. 
M. King, and L. Philipson, Cell 54:787-793, 1988). The detailed analysis of one 
of them, gas6, is reported here, gas6 mRNA (2.6 kb) is abundantly expressed in 
serum-starved (48 h in 0.5% fetal calf serum) NIH 3T3 cells but decreases 
dramatically after fetal calf serum or basic fibroblast growth factor 
stimulation. The human homolog of gas6 was also cloned and sequenced, revealing 
a high degree of homology and a similar pattern of expression in IMR90 human 
fibroblasts. Computer analysis of the protein encoded by murine and human gas6 
cDNAs showed significant homology (43 and 44% amino acid identity, respectively) 
to human protein S, a negative coregulator in the blood coagulation pathway. By 
using an anti-human Gas6 monospecific affinity-purified antibody, we show that 
the biosynthetic level of human Gas6 fully reflects mRNA expression in IMR90 
human fibroblasts. This finding thus defines a new member of vitamin K-dependent 
proteins that is expressed in many human and mouse tissues and may be involved 
in the regulation of a protease cascade relevant in growth regulation.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.13.8.4976-4985.1993
PMCID: PMC360142
PMID: 8336730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
