---
pmid: '11083918'
title: X11 alpha and x11 beta interact with presenilin-1 via their PDZ domains.
authors:
- Lau KF
- McLoughlin DM
- Standen C
- Miller CC
journal: Mol Cell Neurosci
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/mcne.2000.0898
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# X11 alpha and x11 beta interact with presenilin-1 via their PDZ domains.
**Authors:** Lau KF, McLoughlin DM, Standen C, Miller CC
**Journal:** Mol Cell Neurosci (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1006/mcne.2000.0898](https://doi.org/10.1006/mcne.2000.0898)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2000 Nov;16(5):557-65. doi: 10.1006/mcne.2000.0898.

X11 alpha and x11 beta interact with presenilin-1 via their PDZ domains.

Lau KF(1), McLoughlin DM, Standen C, Miller CC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Institute of Psychiatry, Denmark Hill, London SE5 
8AF, United Kingdom.

X11 alpha and X11 beta are two neuronal adaptor proteins that interact with the 
Alzheimer's disease amyloid precursor protein (APP). X11 alpha and X11 beta 
stabilise APP and inhibit production of proteolytic APP fragments including the 
A beta peptide that is deposited in the brains of Alzheimer's disease patients. 
The mechanisms by which X11 alpha and X11 beta modulate APP processing are not 
clear but one possibility is that they influence the activity of the secretases 
that cleave APP to give rise to A beta. Presenilin-1 is required for 
gamma-secretase activity and here we demonstrate that both X11 alpha and X11 
beta interact with presenilin-1. X11/presenilin-1 binding is via two X11 PDZ 
domains and sequences within the carboxy-terminus of presenilin-1. We also 
demonstrate that both X11 alpha and X11 beta mediate the formation of complexes 
between APP and presenilin-1. These results suggest that the X11 regulation of 
APP processing is controlled, at least in part, via their interactions with APP 
and presenilin-1.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/mcne.2000.0898
PMID: 11083918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
