---
pmid: '23106816'
title: Insulin solubility transitions by pH-dependent interactions with proinsulin
  C-peptide.
authors:
- Landreh M
- Alvelius G
- Willander H
- Stukenborg JB
- Söder O
- Johansson J
- Jörnvall H
journal: FEBS J
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/febs.12045
---

# Insulin solubility transitions by pH-dependent interactions with proinsulin C-peptide.
**Authors:** Landreh M, Alvelius G, Willander H, Stukenborg JB, Söder O, Johansson J, Jörnvall H
**Journal:** FEBS J (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1111/febs.12045](https://doi.org/10.1111/febs.12045)

## Abstract

1. FEBS J. 2012 Dec;279(24):4589-97. doi: 10.1111/febs.12045. Epub 2012 Nov 21.

Insulin solubility transitions by pH-dependent interactions with proinsulin 
C-peptide.

Landreh M(1), Alvelius G, Willander H, Stukenborg JB, Söder O, Johansson J, 
Jörnvall H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, 
S-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

Proinsulin processing into insulin and C-peptide in the secretory granules of 
the pancreatic β-cells occurs under mildly acidic conditions and at high peptide 
concentrations (> 10 mm). Mature insulin has reduced solubility and a propensity 
to adopt an amyloid-like structure, but is physiologically released as a mixture 
of a zinc-containing core and a zinc-free, C-peptide-rich fluid phase. C-peptide 
is known to function in the insulin secretion, but its exact mode of interaction 
is not established. We now demonstrate that C-peptide in sub-stoichiometric 
amount versus insulin coprecipitates with insulin at the pH found in secretory 
vesicles. Precipitation is reversible and the precipitate is dissolved by 
elevation of the pH. This effect was found to be dependent on relatively 
conserved glutamate residues in the otherwise poorly conserved C-peptide. 
Together, the data show that C-peptide has the ability to influence insulin 
solubility. The physiological pH changes between insulin processing and release 
sites may therefore affect the quaternary structure of insulin, as well as the 
phase transitions during insulin sorting and secretion.
STRUCTURED DIGITAL ABSTRACT: Insulin and C-peptide bind by molecular 
sieving (View Interaction: 1, 2) C-peptide and Insulin bind by dynamic light 
scattering (View Interaction: 1, 2) C-peptide and Insulin bind by fluorescence 
technology (View Interaction: 1, 2, 3, 4).

© 2012 The Authors Journal compilation © 2012 FEBS.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.12045
PMID: 23106816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
