---
pmid: '19380743'
title: Charting the molecular network of the drug target Bcr-Abl.
authors:
- Brehme M
- Hantschel O
- Colinge J
- Kaupe I
- Planyavsky M
- Köcher T
- Mechtler K
- Bennett KL
- Superti-Furga G
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2670881
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0900653106
---

# Charting the molecular network of the drug target Bcr-Abl.
**Authors:** Brehme M, Hantschel O, Colinge J, Kaupe I, Planyavsky M, Köcher T, Mechtler K, Bennett KL, Superti-Furga G
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0900653106](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0900653106)
**PMC:** [PMC2670881](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2670881/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 May 5;106(18):7414-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0900653106. Epub 2009 Apr 20.

Charting the molecular network of the drug target Bcr-Abl.

Brehme M(1), Hantschel O, Colinge J, Kaupe I, Planyavsky M, Köcher T, Mechtler 
K, Bennett KL, Superti-Furga G.

Author information:
(1)Research Center for Molecular Medicine, Austrian Academy of Sciences, 
Lazarettgasse 19, 1090 Vienna, Austria.

The tyrosine kinase Bcr-Abl causes chronic myeloid leukemia and is the cognate 
target of tyrosine kinase inhibitors like imatinib. We have charted the 
protein-protein interaction network of Bcr-Abl by a 2-pronged approach. Using a 
monoclonal antibody we have first purified endogenous Bcr-Abl protein complexes 
from the CML K562 cell line and characterized the set of most tightly-associated 
interactors by MS. Nine interactors were subsequently subjected to tandem 
affinity purifications/MS analysis to obtain a molecular interaction network of 
some hundred cellular proteins. The resulting network revealed a high degree of 
interconnection of 7 "core" components around Bcr-Abl (Grb2, Shc1, Crk-I, c-Cbl, 
p85, Sts-1, and SHIP-2), and their links to different signaling pathways. 
Quantitative proteomics analysis showed that tyrosine kinase inhibitors lead to 
a disruption of this network. Certain components still appear to interact with 
Bcr-Abl in a phosphotyrosine-independent manner. We propose that Bcr-Abl and 
other drug targets, rather than being considered as single polypeptides, can be 
considered as complex protein assemblies that remodel upon drug action.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0900653106
PMCID: PMC2670881
PMID: 19380743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
