---
pmid: '16246721'
title: The nucleation and maintenance of heterochromatin by a histone deacetylase
  in fission yeast.
authors:
- Yamada T
- Fischle W
- Sugiyama T
- Allis CD
- Grewal SI
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.10.002
---

# The nucleation and maintenance of heterochromatin by a histone deacetylase in fission yeast.
**Authors:** Yamada T, Fischle W, Sugiyama T, Allis CD, Grewal SI
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2005.10.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2005.10.002)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2005 Oct 28;20(2):173-85. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.10.002.

The nucleation and maintenance of heterochromatin by a histone deacetylase in 
fission yeast.

Yamada T(1), Fischle W, Sugiyama T, Allis CD, Grewal SI.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, National Cancer Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Posttranslational modifications of histones play an essential role in 
heterochromatin assembly. Whereas the role of Clr4/Suv39h-mediated methylation 
of histone H3 at lysine 9 (H3K9) in heterochromatin assembly is well studied, 
the exact function of histone deacetylases (HDACs) in this process is unclear. 
We show that Clr3, a fission yeast homolog of mammalian class II HDACs, acts in 
a distinct pathway parallel to RNAi-directed heterochromatin nucleation to 
recruit Clr4 and mediate H3K9 methylation at the silent mating-type region and 
centromeres. At the mat locus, Clr3 is recruited at a specific site through a 
mechanism involving ATF/CREB family proteins. Once recruited, Clr3 spreads 
across the 20 kb silenced domain that requires its own HDAC activity and 
heterochromatin proteins including Swi6/HP1. We also demonstrate that Clr3 
contributes to heterochromatin maintenance by stabilizing H3K9 trimethylation 
and by preventing histone modifications associated with active transcription, 
and that it limits RNA polymerase II accessibility to naturally silenced repeats 
at heterochromatin domains.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.10.002
PMID: 16246721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
