---
pmid: '8874966'
title: Dictyostelium cell shape generation requires myosin II.
authors:
- Shelden E
- Knecht DA
journal: Cell Motil Cytoskeleton
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1097-0169(1996)35:1<59::AID-CM5>3.0.CO;2-D
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Dictyostelium cell shape generation requires myosin II.
**Authors:** Shelden E, Knecht DA
**Journal:** Cell Motil Cytoskeleton (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1002/(SICI)1097-0169(1996)35:1<59::AID-CM5>3.0.CO;2-D](https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0169(1996)35:1<59::AID-CM5>3.0.CO;2-D)

## Abstract

1. Cell Motil Cytoskeleton. 1996;35(1):59-67. doi: 
10.1002/(SICI)1097-0169(1996)35:1<59::AID-CM5>3.0.CO;2-D.

Dictyostelium cell shape generation requires myosin II.

Shelden E(1), Knecht DA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Connecticut, Storrs 
06269, USA.

Myosin II function has been implicated in non-muscle cell behaviors including 
movement, cytokinesis, and multicellular morphogenesis. Surprisingly, 
two-dimensional morphology and behavior of Dictyostelium amoebae lacking myosin 
II (mhcA-) is not dramatically altered when cells are examined using 
conventional imaging techniques. We have observed amoebae from the side 
(side-view microscopy or SVM) and find that wild-type but not mhcA- cells 
undergo extensive three-dimensional (3D) shape changes. These shape changes 
often occur above the plane of the substrate and are morphologically distinct 
from pseudopods. For example, unlike pseudopods, vertically extended cell 
regions are not enriched in F-actin and do not exclude organelles. In contrast, 
mhcA- cells generate F-actin-filled pseudopods and spread laterally but do not 
undergo vertical extension. When wild-type cells are removed from the substrate 
and shaken in suspension, they retain their irregular three-dimensional shape. 
Suspended mhcA- cells, however, rapidly become spherical. Thus, cells lacking 
myosin appear to be incapable of generating or maintaining 3D shape independent 
of a substrate. When a substrate is available, these cells can attach and spread 
on the surface in a myosin-independent manner. These previously undescribed 
defects of mhcA- cells reveal that 3D cell shape generation requires myosin II 
and is mechanistically distinct from pseudopod formation.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1097-0169(1996)35:1<59::AID-CM5>3.0.CO;2-D
PMID: 8874966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
