---
pmid: '16794082'
title: JETLAG resets the Drosophila circadian clock by promoting light-induced degradation
  of TIMELESS.
authors:
- Koh K
- Zheng X
- Sehgal A
journal: Science
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2767177
doi: 10.1126/science.1124951
---

# JETLAG resets the Drosophila circadian clock by promoting light-induced degradation of TIMELESS.
**Authors:** Koh K, Zheng X, Sehgal A
**Journal:** Science (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1124951](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1124951)
**PMC:** [PMC2767177](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2767177/)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2006 Jun 23;312(5781):1809-12. doi: 10.1126/science.1124951.

JETLAG resets the Drosophila circadian clock by promoting light-induced 
degradation of TIMELESS.

Koh K(1), Zheng X, Sehgal A.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Neuroscience, University of 
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Organisms ranging from bacteria to humans synchronize their internal clocks to 
daily cycles of light and dark. Photic entrainment of the Drosophila clock is 
mediated by proteasomal degradation of the clock protein TIMELESS (TIM). We have 
identified mutations in jetlag-a gene coding for an F-box protein with 
leucine-rich repeats-that result in reduced light sensitivity of the circadian 
clock. Mutant flies show rhythmic behavior in constant light, reduced phase 
shifts in response to light pulses, and reduced light-dependent degradation of 
TIM. Expression of JET along with the circadian photoreceptor cryptochrome (CRY) 
in cultured S2R cells confers light-dependent degradation onto TIM, thereby 
reconstituting the acute response + of the circadian clock to light in a cell 
culture system. Our results suggest that JET is essential for resetting the 
clock by transmitting light signals from CRY to TIM.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1124951
PMCID: PMC2767177
PMID: 16794082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
