---
pmid: '8875995'
title: Human neural tissues express a truncated Ror1 receptor tyrosine kinase, lacking
  both extracellular and transmembrane domains.
authors:
- Reddy UR
- Phatak S
- Pleasure D
journal: Oncogene
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Human neural tissues express a truncated Ror1 receptor tyrosine kinase, lacking both extracellular and transmembrane domains.
**Authors:** Reddy UR, Phatak S, Pleasure D
**Journal:** Oncogene (1996)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 1996 Oct 3;13(7):1555-9.

Human neural tissues express a truncated Ror1 receptor tyrosine kinase, lacking 
both extracellular and transmembrane domains.

Reddy UR(1), Phatak S, Pleasure D.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology Research, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Human heart, lung and kidney express a 6 kb mRNA encoding Ror1, a member of the 
receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) family with as yet unknown ligand specificity. We 
used a Ror1 cDNA probe to screen a cDNA library prepared from the human 
neuronogenic teratocarcinoma line, NTera2, and cloned a 2373 nucleotide 
transcript. This transcript contains an open reading frame that encodes a 388 
amino acid protein identical with the cytosolic, C-terminal region of ror1 but 
lacking the ror1 transmembrane and entire extracellular domains. Northern blots 
demonstrate that mRNA encoding this truncated Ror1 ('t-Rorl') is abundantly 
expressed in fetal and adult human CNS, in human leukemia, lymphoma cell lines, 
and in a variety of human cancers derived from neuroectoderm. While previous 
studies have documented alternative splicing patterns within 5' and 3' regions 
of mRNAs encoding various RTKs altering their ligand binding specificity or 
their intracellular signaling, the present report is the first to demonstrate 
tissue-specific alternative mRNA splicing causing loss of the entire 
extracellular and transmembrane regions of an RTK.

PMID: 8875995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
