---
pmid: '12860994'
title: The ALG-2-interacting protein Alix associates with CHMP4b, a human homologue
  of yeast Snf7 that is involved in multivesicular body sorting.
authors:
- Katoh K
- Shibata H
- Suzuki H
- Nara A
- Ishidoh K
- Kominami E
- Yoshimori T
- Maki M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M301604200
---

# The ALG-2-interacting protein Alix associates with CHMP4b, a human homologue of yeast Snf7 that is involved in multivesicular body sorting.
**Authors:** Katoh K, Shibata H, Suzuki H, Nara A, Ishidoh K, Kominami E, Yoshimori T, Maki M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M301604200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M301604200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 3;278(40):39104-13. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M301604200. Epub
2003  Jul 14.

The ALG-2-interacting protein Alix associates with CHMP4b, a human homologue of 
yeast Snf7 that is involved in multivesicular body sorting.

Katoh K(1), Shibata H, Suzuki H, Nara A, Ishidoh K, Kominami E, Yoshimori T, 
Maki M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Molecular Biosciences, Graduate School of 
Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 
464-8601, Japan.

Alix (ALG-2-interacting protein X) is a 95-kDa protein that interacts with an 
EF-hand type Ca(2+)-binding protein, ALG-2 (apoptosis-linked gene 2), through 
its C-terminal proline-rich region. In this study, we searched for proteins that 
interact with human AlixDeltaC (a truncated form not containing the C-terminal 
region) by using a yeast two-hybrid screen, and we identified two similar human 
proteins, CHMP4a and CHMP4b (chromatin-modifying protein; charged multivesicular 
body protein), as novel binding partners of Alix. The interaction of Alix with 
CHMP4b was confirmed by a glutathione S-transferase pull-down assay and by 
co-immunoprecipitation experiments. Fluorescence microscopic analysis revealed 
that CHMP4b transiently expressed in HeLa cells mainly exhibited a punctate 
distribution in the perinuclear area and co-localized with co-expressed Alix. 
The distribution of CHMP4b partly overlapped the distributions of early and late 
endosomal marker proteins, EEA1 (early endosome antigen 1) and Lamp-1 (lysosomal 
membrane protein-1), respectively. Transient overexpression of CHMP4b induced 
the accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins as punctate patterns that were partly 
overlapped with the distribution of CHMP4b and inhibited the disappearance of 
endocytosed epidermal growth factor. In contrast, stably expressed CHMP4b in 
HEK293 cells was observed diffusely in the cytoplasm. Transient overexpression 
of AlixDeltaC in stably CHMP4b-expressing cells, however, induced formation of 
vesicle-like structures in which CHMP4b and AlixDeltaC were co-localized. 
SKD1(E235Q), a dominant negative form of the AAA type ATPase SKD1 that plays 
critical roles in the endocytic pathway, was co-immunoprecipitated with CHMP4b. 
Furthermore, CHMP4b co-localized with SKD1(E235Q) as punctate patterns in the 
perinuclear area, and Alix was induced to exhibit dot-like distributions 
overlapped with SKD1(E235Q) in HeLa cells. These results suggest that CHMP4b and 
Alix participate in formation of multivesicular bodies by cooperating with SKD1.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M301604200
PMID: 12860994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
