---
pmid: '26038239'
title: Transformation of tetracycline by TetX and its subsequent degradation in a
  heterologous host.
authors:
- Ghosh S
- LaPara TM
- Sadowsky MJ
journal: FEMS Microbiol Ecol
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/femsec/fiv059
---

# Transformation of tetracycline by TetX and its subsequent degradation in a heterologous host.
**Authors:** Ghosh S, LaPara TM, Sadowsky MJ
**Journal:** FEMS Microbiol Ecol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/femsec/fiv059](https://doi.org/10.1093/femsec/fiv059)

## Abstract

1. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2015 Jun;91(6):fiv059. doi: 10.1093/femsec/fiv059. Epub 
2015 Jun 1.

Transformation of tetracycline by TetX and its subsequent degradation in a 
heterologous host.

Ghosh S(1), LaPara TM(2), Sadowsky MJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Biotechnology Institute, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, MN 55108, USA.
(2)Biotechnology Institute, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, MN 55108, USA 
Department of Civil, Environmental and Geo- Engineering, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.
(3)Biotechnology Institute, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, MN 55108, USA 
Department of Soil, Water and Climate, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, MN 
55108, USA sadowsky@umn.edu.

TetX is a flavin-dependent monooxygenase. It has been reported to inactivate all 
tested tetracyclines. In this study, Escherichia coli overexpressing TetX was 
added to soil bacterial enrichment cultures along with varying levels of 
tetracycline and was found to affect community-wide tetracycline resistance 
levels. Soil microbial communities developed lower levels of tetracycline 
resistance upon exposure to 25 μg/mL of tetracycline when an E. coli expressing 
TetX was present (6% of cultivable bacteria were resistant to 40 μg/mL 
tetracycline). In contrast, in the absence of TetX activity, a similar 
tetracycline exposure selected for greater levels of resistant bacteria in the 
soil microbial community (90% of cultivable bacteria were resistant to 40 μg/mL 
tetracycline). We also describe new metabolites formed after tetracycline 
transformation by TetX and report the transient generation of redox-active 
metabolite(s). The results presented here are particularly pertinent in the 
light of the recent emergence of tet(X) in different bacterial species, 
including clinical isolates.

© FEMS 2015. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/femsec/fiv059
PMID: 26038239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
