---
pmid: '28819009'
title: The AAA+ ATPase p97, a cellular multitool.
authors:
- Stach L
- Freemont PS
journal: Biochem J
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5559722
doi: 10.1042/BCJ20160783
---

# The AAA+ ATPase p97, a cellular multitool.
**Authors:** Stach L, Freemont PS
**Journal:** Biochem J (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BCJ20160783](https://doi.org/10.1042/BCJ20160783)
**PMC:** [PMC5559722](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5559722/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2017 Aug 17;474(17):2953-2976. doi: 10.1042/BCJ20160783.

The AAA+ ATPase p97, a cellular multitool.

Stach L(1), Freemont PS(2).

Author information:
(1)Section of Structural Biology, Department of Medicine, Imperial College 
London, London, U.K.
(2)Section of Structural Biology, Department of Medicine, Imperial College 
London, London, U.K. p.freemont@imperial.ac.uk.

The AAA+ (ATPases associated with diverse cellular activities) ATPase p97 is 
essential to a wide range of cellular functions, including endoplasmic 
reticulum-associated degradation, membrane fusion, NF-κB (nuclear factor 
kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells) activation and 
chromatin-associated processes, which are regulated by ubiquitination. p97 acts 
downstream from ubiquitin signaling events and utilizes the energy from ATP 
hydrolysis to extract its substrate proteins from cellular structures or 
multiprotein complexes. A multitude of p97 cofactors have evolved which are 
essential to p97 function. Ubiquitin-interacting domains and p97-binding domains 
combine to form bi-functional cofactors, whose complexes with p97 enable the 
enzyme to interact with a wide range of ubiquitinated substrates. A set of 
mutations in p97 have been shown to cause the multisystem proteinopathy 
inclusion body myopathy associated with Paget's disease of bone and 
frontotemporal dementia. In addition, p97 inhibition has been identified as a 
promising approach to provoke proteotoxic stress in tumors. In this review, we 
will describe the cellular processes governed by p97, how the cofactors interact 
with both p97 and its ubiquitinated substrates, p97 enzymology and the current 
status in developing p97 inhibitors for cancer therapy.

© 2017 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1042/BCJ20160783
PMCID: PMC5559722
PMID: 28819009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The Authors declare that there are no competing 
interests associated with the manuscript.
