---
pmid: '9988268'
title: Human homologue of the Drosophila melanogaster lats tumour suppressor modulates
  CDC2 activity.
authors:
- Tao W
- Zhang S
- Turenchalk GS
- Stewart RA
- St John MA
- Chen W
- Xu T
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/5960
---

# Human homologue of the Drosophila melanogaster lats tumour suppressor modulates CDC2 activity.
**Authors:** Tao W, Zhang S, Turenchalk GS, Stewart RA, St John MA, Chen W, Xu T
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1038/5960](https://doi.org/10.1038/5960)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 1999 Feb;21(2):177-81. doi: 10.1038/5960.

Human homologue of the Drosophila melanogaster lats tumour suppressor modulates 
CDC2 activity.

Tao W(1), Zhang S, Turenchalk GS, Stewart RA, St John MA, Chen W, Xu T.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Genetics, Yale University 
School of Medicine, Boyer Center for Molecular Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
06536-0812, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 1999 Feb;21(2):147-8. doi: 10.1038/5922.

We have previously used mosaic flies to screen for tumour suppressors or 
negative regulators of cell proliferation. The cellular composition of these 
flies resembles that of cancer patients who are chimaeric individuals carrying a 
small number of mutated somatic cells. One of the genes we identified is the 
large tumour suppressor gene, lats (also known as wts), which encodes a putative 
serine/threonine kinase. Somatic cells mutant for lats undergo extensive 
proliferation and form large tumours in many tissues in mosaic adults. 
Homozygous mutants for various lats alleles display a range of developmental 
defects including embryonic lethality. Although many tumour suppressors have 
been identified in Drosophila melanogaster, it is not clear whether these fly 
genes are directly relevant to tumorigenesis in mammals. Here, we have isolated 
mammalian homologues of Drosophila lats. Human LATS1 suppresses tumour growth 
and rescues all developmental defects, including embryonic lethality in flies. 
In mammalian cells, LATS1 is phosphorylated in a cell-cycle-dependent manner and 
complexes with CDC2 in early mitosis. LATS1-associated CDC2 has no mitotic 
cyclin partner and no kinase activity for histone H1. Furthermore, lats mutant 
cells in Drosophila abnormally accumulate cyclin A. These biochemical 
observations indicate that LATS is a novel negative regulator of CDC2/cyclin A, 
a finding supported by genetic data in Drosophila demonstrating that lats 
specifically interacts with cdc2 and cyclin A.

DOI: 10.1038/5960
PMID: 9988268 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
