---
pmid: '8026862'
title: Cloning and sequence analysis of candidate human natural killer-enhancing factor
  genes.
authors:
- Shau H
- Butterfield LH
- Chiu R
- Kim A
journal: Immunogenetics
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/BF00188176
---

# Cloning and sequence analysis of candidate human natural killer-enhancing factor genes.
**Authors:** Shau H, Butterfield LH, Chiu R, Kim A
**Journal:** Immunogenetics (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF00188176](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00188176)

## Abstract

1. Immunogenetics. 1994;40(2):129-34. doi: 10.1007/BF00188176.

Cloning and sequence analysis of candidate human natural killer-enhancing factor 
genes.

Shau H(1), Butterfield LH, Chiu R, Kim A.

Author information:
(1)Division of Surgical Oncology, UCLA School of Medicine 90024-1782.

A cytosol factor from human red blood cells enhances natural killer (NK) 
activity. This factor, termed NK-enhancing factor (NKEF), is a protein of 44,000 
M(r) consisting of two subunits of equal size linked by disulfide bonds. NKEF is 
expressed in the NK-sensitive erythroleukemic cell line K562. Using an antibody 
specific for NKEF as a probe for immunoblot screening, we isolated several 
clones from a lambda gt11 cDNA library of K562. Additional subcloning and 
sequencing revealed that the candidate NKEF cDNAs fell into one of two 
catagories of closely related but non-identical genes, referred to as NKEF A and 
B. They are 88% identical in amino acid sequence and 71% identical in nucleotide 
sequence. Southern blot analysis suggests that there are two to three NKEF 
family members in the genome. Analysis of predicted amino acid sequences 
indicates that both NKEF A and B are cytosol proteins with several 
phosphorylation sites each, but that they have no glycosylation sites. They are 
significantly homologous to several other proteins from a wide variety of 
organisms ranging from prokaryotes to mammals, especially with regard to several 
well-conserved motifs within the amino acid sequences. The biological functions 
of these proteins in other species are mostly unknown, but some of them were 
reported to be induced by oxidative stress. Therefore, as well as for 
immunoregulation of NK activity, NKEF may be important for cells in coping with 
oxidative insults.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00188176
PMID: 8026862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
