---
pmid: '23524970'
title: Desmoglein-1/Erbin interaction suppresses ERK activation to support epidermal
  differentiation.
authors:
- Harmon RM
- Simpson CL
- Johnson JL
- Koetsier JL
- Dubash AD
- Najor NA
- Sarig O
- Sprecher E
- Green KJ
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3613912
doi: 10.1172/JCI65220
---

# Desmoglein-1/Erbin interaction suppresses ERK activation to support epidermal differentiation.
**Authors:** Harmon RM, Simpson CL, Johnson JL, Koetsier JL, Dubash AD, Najor NA, Sarig O, Sprecher E, Green KJ
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI65220](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI65220)
**PMC:** [PMC3613912](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3613912/)

## Abstract

1. J Clin Invest. 2013 Apr;123(4):1556-70. doi: 10.1172/JCI65220. Epub 2013 Mar
25.

Desmoglein-1/Erbin interaction suppresses ERK activation to support epidermal 
differentiation.

Harmon RM(1), Simpson CL, Johnson JL, Koetsier JL, Dubash AD, Najor NA, Sarig O, 
Sprecher E, Green KJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2013 Apr;123(4):1419-22. doi: 10.1172/JCI69071.

Genetic disorders of the Ras/MAPK pathway, termed RASopathies, produce numerous 
abnormalities, including cutaneous keratodermas. The desmosomal cadherin, 
desmoglein-1 (DSG1), promotes keratinocyte differentiation by attenuating 
MAPK/ERK signaling and is linked to striate palmoplantar keratoderma (SPPK). 
This raises the possibility that cutaneous defects associated with SPPK and 
RASopathies share certain molecular faults. To identify intermediates 
responsible for executing the inhibition of ERK by DSG1, we conducted a yeast 
2-hybrid screen. The screen revealed that Erbin (also known as ERBB2IP), a known 
ERK regulator, binds DSG1. Erbin silencing disrupted keratinocyte 
differentiation in culture, mimicking aspects of DSG1 deficiency. Furthermore, 
ERK inhibition and the induction of differentiation markers by DSG1 required 
both Erbin and DSG1 domains that participate in binding Erbin. Erbin blocks ERK 
signaling by interacting with and disrupting Ras-Raf scaffolds mediated by 
SHOC2, a protein genetically linked to the RASopathy, Noonan-like syndrome with 
loose anagen hair (NS/LAH). DSG1 overexpression enhanced this inhibitory 
function, increasing Erbin-SHOC2 interactions and decreasing Ras-SHOC2 
interactions. Conversely, analysis of epidermis from DSG1-deficient patients 
with SPPK demonstrated increased Ras-SHOC2 colocalization and decreased 
Erbin-SHOC2 colocalization, offering a possible explanation for the observed 
epidermal defects. These findings suggest a mechanism by which DSG1 and Erbin 
cooperate to repress MAPK signaling and promote keratinocyte differentiation.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI65220
PMCID: PMC3613912
PMID: 23524970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
