---
pmid: '15796781'
title: Identification and characterization of Iporin as a novel interaction partner
  for rab1.
authors:
- Bayer M
- Fischer J
- Kremerskothen J
- Ossendorf E
- Matanis T
- Konczal M
- Weide T
- Barnekow A
journal: BMC Cell Biol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1079803
doi: 10.1186/1471-2121-6-15
---

# Identification and characterization of Iporin as a novel interaction partner for rab1.
**Authors:** Bayer M, Fischer J, Kremerskothen J, Ossendorf E, Matanis T, Konczal M, Weide T, Barnekow A
**Journal:** BMC Cell Biol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1471-2121-6-15](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2121-6-15)
**PMC:** [PMC1079803](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1079803/)

## Abstract

1. BMC Cell Biol. 2005 Mar 29;6(1):15. doi: 10.1186/1471-2121-6-15.

Identification and characterization of Iporin as a novel interaction partner for 
rab1.

Bayer M(1), Fischer J, Kremerskothen J, Ossendorf E, Matanis T, Konczal M, Weide 
T, Barnekow A.

Author information:
(1)UKM Muenster, Albert-Schweitzer-Str. 33, D-48149 Muenster, Germany. 
bayerm@uni-muenster.de

BACKGROUND: The small GTPase rab1a and its isoform rab1b are essential 
regulating components in the vesicle transport between the ER and the Golgi 
apparatus. Rab1 is thought to act as a molecular switch and can change between 
an active GTP-bound and an inactive GDP-bound conformation. To elucidate the 
function of rab1, several approaches have been established to isolate effector 
proteins, which interact with the activated conformation of rab1. To date p115, 
GM130, golgin-84 and MICAL have been identified as direct interacting partners. 
Together with rab1, these molecules are components of a protein complex, which 
mediates and regulates intracellular vesicle transport.
RESULTS: Here, we report the characterization of Iporin, which is similar to 
KIAA0375 as a novel rab1-interacting protein. It was initially identified by 
yeast two-hybrid screening experiments with the active mutant of rab1b (rab1b 
Q67R) as bait. Iporin contains a SH3 domain and two polyproline stretches, which 
are known to play a role in protein/protein interactions. In addition, Iporin 
encloses a RUN domain, which seems to be a major part of the rab1binding domain 
(R1BD). Iporin is ubiquitously expressed and immunofluorescence staining 
displays a cytosolic punctual distribution. Interestingly, we also show that 
Iporin interacts with another rab1 interacting partner, the GM130 protein.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate that Iporin is a potential new interacting 
partner of rab1. Iporin is different from already identified rab1 interacting 
proteins concerning protein structure and cellular localization. We conclude 
that Iporin might function as a link between the targeting of ER derived 
vesicles, triggered by the rab1 GTPase and a signaling pathway regulated by 
molecules containing SH3 and/or poly-proline regions. The characterization of 
this novel intermolecular relation could help to elucidate how vesicles find 
their way from ER to the Golgi apparatus.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2121-6-15
PMCID: PMC1079803
PMID: 15796781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
