---
pmid: '7989337'
title: Cloning and functional expression of a urea transporter from human bone marrow
  cells.
authors:
- Olives B
- Neau P
- Bailly P
- Hediger MA
- Rousselet G
- Cartron JP
- Ripoche P
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
---

# Cloning and functional expression of a urea transporter from human bone marrow cells.
**Authors:** Olives B, Neau P, Bailly P, Hediger MA, Rousselet G, Cartron JP, Ripoche P
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1994)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1994 Dec 16;269(50):31649-52.

Cloning and functional expression of a urea transporter from human bone marrow 
cells.

Olives B(1), Neau P, Bailly P, Hediger MA, Rousselet G, Cartron JP, Ripoche P.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U76, Institut National de la Transfusion Sanguine, Paris, France.

A rapid passive urea transport has been previously described in the mammalian 
renal inner medullary collecting duct epithelial cells and in mammalian 
erythrocytes. Recently, a vasopressin-regulated urea transporter (UT2) has been 
cloned from a rabbit kidney medullary cDNA library (You, G., Smith, C. P., 
Kanai, Y., Lee, W. S., Stelzner, M., and Hediger, M. A. (1993) Nature 365, 
844-847). We now report the cloning and characterization of a complementary DNA 
(HUT11) encoding an urea transporter isolated from a human bone marrow library. 
It encodes a 43,000-Da polypeptide of 391 amino acids that exhibited 63% 
sequence identity with the rabbit urea transporter and a similar membrane 
topology. HUT11 carries 2 putative glycosylation sites and 10 cysteines, of 
which only 7 are conserved at an equivalent position in UT2. HUT11 transcripts 
have been identified in human erythroid and renal tissues. Expression studies in 
Xenopus oocytes demonstrated that HUT11 mediates a facilitated urea transport 
that was inhibited, as described in mammalian erythrocytes, by very low 
concentrations of phloretin, p-chloromercuribenzene sulfonate, and urea 
analogues. No unidirectional movements of charged molecules, glycerol, or water 
were associated with HUT11 expression in oocytes. These findings suggest that 
HUT11 is most likely responsible for the facilitated urea transport in human red 
blood cells.

PMID: 7989337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
