---
pmid: '28689657'
title: Wnt-Dependent Inactivation of the Groucho/TLE Co-repressor by the HECT E3 Ubiquitin
  Ligase Hyd/UBR5.
authors:
- Flack JE
- Mieszczanek J
- Novcic N
- Bienz M
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5592244
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2017.06.009
---

# Wnt-Dependent Inactivation of the Groucho/TLE Co-repressor by the HECT E3 Ubiquitin Ligase Hyd/UBR5.
**Authors:** Flack JE, Mieszczanek J, Novcic N, Bienz M
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2017.06.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2017.06.009)
**PMC:** [PMC5592244](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5592244/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2017 Jul 20;67(2):181-193.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2017.06.009.
Epub  2017 Jul 6.

Wnt-Dependent Inactivation of the Groucho/TLE Co-repressor by the HECT 
E3 Ubiquitin Ligase Hyd/UBR5.

Flack JE(1), Mieszczanek J(1), Novcic N(1), Bienz M(2).

Author information:
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Francis 
Crick Avenue, Cambridge, CB2 0QH, UK.
(2)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Francis 
Crick Avenue, Cambridge, CB2 0QH, UK. Electronic address: mb2@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk.

Extracellular signals are transduced to the cell nucleus by effectors that bind 
to enhancer complexes to operate transcriptional switches. For example, the Wnt 
enhanceosome is a multiprotein complex associated with Wnt-responsive enhancers 
through T cell factors (TCF) and kept silent by Groucho/TLE co-repressors. 
Wnt-activated β-catenin binds to TCF to overcome this repression, but how it 
achieves this is unknown. Here, we discover that this process depends on the 
HECT E3 ubiquitin ligase Hyd/UBR5, which is required for Wnt signal responses in 
Drosophila and human cell lines downstream of activated Armadillo/β-catenin. We 
identify Groucho/TLE as a functionally relevant substrate, whose ubiquitylation 
by UBR5 is induced by Wnt signaling and conferred by β-catenin. Inactivation of 
TLE by UBR5-dependent ubiquitylation also involves VCP/p97, an AAA ATPase 
regulating the folding of various cellular substrates including ubiquitylated 
chromatin proteins. Thus, Groucho/TLE ubiquitylation by Hyd/UBR5 is a key 
prerequisite that enables Armadillo/β-catenin to activate transcription.

Copyright © 2017 MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2017.06.009
PMCID: PMC5592244
PMID: 28689657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
