---
pmid: '23453667'
title: Mutations in B3GALNT2 cause congenital muscular dystrophy and hypoglycosylation
  of α-dystroglycan.
authors:
- Stevens E
- Carss KJ
- Cirak S
- Foley AR
- Torelli S
- Willer T
- Tambunan DE
- Yau S
- Brodd L
- Sewry CA
- Feng L
- Haliloglu G
- Orhan D
- Dobyns WB
- Enns GM
- Manning M
- Krause A
- Salih MA
- Walsh CA
- Hurles M
- Campbell KP
- Manzini MC
- UK10K Consortium
- Stemple D
- Lin YY
- Muntoni F
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2013'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3591840
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.01.016
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Mutations in B3GALNT2 cause congenital muscular dystrophy and hypoglycosylation of α-dystroglycan.
**Authors:** Stevens E, Carss KJ, Cirak S, Foley AR, Torelli S, Willer T, Tambunan DE, Yau S, Brodd L, Sewry CA, Feng L, Haliloglu G, Orhan D, Dobyns WB, Enns GM, Manning M, Krause A, Salih MA, Walsh CA, Hurles M, Campbell KP, Manzini MC, UK10K Consortium, Stemple D, Lin YY, Muntoni F
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.01.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.01.016)
**PMC:** [PMC3591840](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3591840/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Mar 7;92(3):354-65. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.01.016. Epub
 2013 Feb 28.

Mutations in B3GALNT2 cause congenital muscular dystrophy and hypoglycosylation 
of α-dystroglycan.

Stevens E(1), Carss KJ, Cirak S, Foley AR, Torelli S, Willer T, Tambunan DE, Yau 
S, Brodd L, Sewry CA, Feng L, Haliloglu G, Orhan D, Dobyns WB, Enns GM, Manning 
M, Krause A, Salih MA, Walsh CA, Hurles M, Campbell KP, Manzini MC; UK10K 
Consortium; Stemple D, Lin YY, Muntoni F.

Author information:
(1)Dubowitz Neuromuscular Centre, UCL Institute of Child Health, London, UK.

Mutations in several known or putative glycosyltransferases cause glycosylation 
defects in α-dystroglycan (α-DG), an integral component of the dystrophin 
glycoprotein complex. The hypoglycosylation reduces the ability of α-DG to bind 
laminin and other extracellular matrix ligands and is responsible for the 
pathogenesis of an inherited subset of muscular dystrophies known as the 
dystroglycanopathies. By exome and Sanger sequencing we identified two 
individuals affected by a dystroglycanopathy with mutations in 
β-1,3-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase 2 (B3GALNT2). B3GALNT2 transfers 
N-acetyl galactosamine (GalNAc) in a β-1,3 linkage to N-acetyl glucosamine 
(GlcNAc). A subsequent study of a separate cohort of individuals identified 
recessive mutations in four additional cases that were all affected by 
dystroglycanopathy with structural brain involvement. We show that functional 
dystroglycan glycosylation was reduced in the fibroblasts and muscle (when 
available) of these individuals via flow cytometry, immunoblotting, and 
immunocytochemistry. B3GALNT2 localized to the endoplasmic reticulum, and this 
localization was perturbed by some of the missense mutations identified. 
Moreover, knockdown of b3galnt2 in zebrafish recapitulated the human congenital 
muscular dystrophy phenotype with reduced motility, brain abnormalities, and 
disordered muscle fibers with evidence of damage to both the myosepta and the 
sarcolemma. Functional dystroglycan glycosylation was also reduced in the 
b3galnt2 knockdown zebrafish embryos. Together these results demonstrate a role 
for B3GALNT2 in the glycosylation of α-DG and show that B3GALNT2 mutations can 
cause dystroglycanopathy with muscle and brain involvement.

Copyright © 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.01.016
PMCID: PMC3591840
PMID: 23453667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Mutations in several known or putative glycosyltransferases cause glycosylation defects in α-dystroglycan (α-DG), an integral component of the dystrophin glycoprotein complex. The hypoglycosylation reduces the ability of α-DG to bind laminin and other extracellular matrix ligands and is responsible for the pathogenesis of an inherited subset of muscular dystrophies known as the dystroglycanopathies. By exome and Sanger sequencing we identified two individuals affected by a dystroglycanopathy with mutations in β-1,3-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase 2 ( B3GALNT2 ). B3GALNT2 transfers N-acetyl galactosamine (GalNAc) in a β-1,3 linkage to N-acetyl glucosamine (GlcNAc). A subsequent study of a separate cohort of individuals identified recessive mutations in four additional cases that were all affected by dystroglycanopathy with structural brain involvement. We show that functional dystroglycan glycosylation was reduced in the fibroblasts and muscle (when available) of these individuals via flow cytometry, immunoblotting, and immunocytochemistry. B3GALNT2 localized to the endoplasmic reticulum, and this localization was perturbed by some of the missense mutations identified. Moreover, knockdown of b3galnt2 in zebrafish recapitulated the human congenital muscular dystrophy phenotype with reduced motility, brain abnormalities, and disordered muscle fibers with evidence of damage to both the myosepta and the sarcolemma. Functional dystroglycan glycosylation was also reduced in the b3galnt2 knockdown zebrafish embryos. Together these results demonstrate a role for B3GALNT2 in the glycosylation of α-DG and show that B3GALNT2 mutations can cause dystroglycanopathy with muscle and brain involvement.

Introduction

Congenital muscular dystrophies (CMDs) are a heterogeneous group of inherited diseases characterized by the onset of muscle weakness at birth or within 2 years of life and variable degrees of dystrophic changes on muscle biopsy. A common subgroup within the CMDs are the dystroglycanopathies, characterized by reduced functional glycosylation of α-dystroglycan (α-DG). The dystroglycan gene DAG1 (MIM 128239 ) encodes for a protein that is posttranslationally glycosylated and cleaved into two noncovalently associated proteins, α-DG and β-dystroglycan (β-DG). 1–3 α-DG is a peripheral membrane protein that binds to several extracellular matrix components, including laminin-α2 and other laminin-G domain containing ligands, 2,4 and the transmembrane protein β-DG is anchored to the cytoskeleton by the dystrophin complex. 1 This connection helps to maintain structural integrity and force transmission between the cytoskeleton and the extracellular matrix but also allows for efficient signal transduction. The correct glycosylation of α-DG is essential for its function as an extracellular matrix receptor. 1 Dystroglycan is not restricted to skeletal muscle and is also present with varying degrees of glycosylation in many tissues such as the brain, peripheral nerve, and epithelia. 5,6 In these tissues, dystroglycan has a multitude of functions including morphogenesis, early development, synaptogenesis, and signaling. 7

Dystroglycanopathies have been linked to mutations in 12 genes: Protein O-mannosyltransferase 1 8 ( POMT1 [MIM 607423 ]), Protein O-mannosyltransferase 2 9 ( POMT2 [MIM 607439 ]), Protein O-mannose β-1, 2-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase 10 ( POMGNT1 [MIM 606822 ]), Fukutin 11 ( FKTN [MIM 607440 ]), Fukutin-related protein 12 ( FKRP [MIM 606596 ]), like-acetylglucosaminyltransferase 13 ( LARGE [MIM 603590 ]), Dolichyl-phosphate mannosyltransferase 2 14 ( DPM2 [MIM 603564 ]), Dolichyl-phosphate mannosyltransferase 3 15 ( DPM3 [MIM 605951 ]), Dolichol Kinase 16 ( DOLK [MIM 610746 ]), Isoprenoid Synthase Domain Containing 17–19 ( ISPD [MIM 614631 ]), Glycosyltransferase-like domain containing 2 20 ( GTDC2 [MIM 147730 ]), and Transmembrane protein 5 21 ( TMEM5 [MIM 605862 ]). In these disorders, the reduced α-DG glycosylation 1 results in lower-affinity binding to the extracellular matrix partners. Clinical severity in individuals with dystroglycanopathy varies markedly 22–24 and is broadly related to the level of α-DG hypoglycosylation caused especially by mutations in some genes such as POMT1, POMT2, and POMGNT1 22 but less so with FKTN and FKRP , 22 as assessed with antibodies that specifically recognize glycosylated epitopes on α-DG. Individuals at the severe end of the clinical spectrum have muscular dystrophy with brain and eye anomalies and the resulting clinical conditions known as Walker-Warburg syndrome (WWS [MIM 236670 ]), muscle-eye-brain disease (MEB [MIM 236670 ]), and Fukuyama congenital muscular dystrophy (FCMD [MIM 253800 ]).These conditions are often associated with a short life expectancy. Milder conditions often exclusively affect striated muscle and can have onset in childhood or later, as for example in limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2I (LGMD2I [MIM 607155 ]) and congenital muscular dystrophy type 1C with no mental retardation (MDC1C [MIM 606612 ]). Almost 50% of individuals with features of a dystroglycanopathy remain genetically uncharacterized. 17,25,26

In this report we describe the identification of mutations in β1,3-N-acetylgalactosaminyl transferase ( B3GALNT2 [MIM 610194 ]) in individuals with dystroglycanopathy. The clinical severity ranges from severe WWS to milder dystroglycanopathy variants, invariably associated with brain involvement. Further analysis suggests that B3GALNT2 is involved in the functional glycosylation of α-DG.

Discussion

In this study we describe the use of exome and Sanger sequencing for the identification of mutations in B3GALNT2 in six dystroglycanopathy-affected families characterized by the invariable presence of structural brain involvement and, in some severe cases, ocular involvement. The spectrum of severity in individuals with B3GALNT2 mutations ranged from severe WWS to mild MEB-like or FCMD-like conditions 45 ( Tables 1 and 2 ). In terms of correlation between genotype and phenotype, biallelic loss-of-function mutations were associated with the most severe phenotype, as demonstrated in P3 and P7, affected by severe WWS. P1, with compound heterozygosity for two missense mutations in exons 6 and 8 of B3GALNT2 , had a milder CMD phenotype, associated with less severe structural brain involvement and better motor and cognitive achievements. Surprisingly, P2, with a biallelic duplication in exon 1, also presented with a milder CMD phenotype with brain involvement.

In order to assess the pathogenicity of the missense mutations found in P1 (c.740G>A [p.Gly247Glu], c.875G>C [p.Arg292Pro]) and P6 (c.802G>A [p.Val268Met]), which do not affect a known functional domain ( Figure 6 ), we transfected mutated V5-tagged constructs into C2C12 cells and observed that two of them (c.740G>A [p.Gly247Glu] and c.802G>A [p.Val268Met]) altered the ER localization, potentially preventing normal enzymatic function ( Figure 4 ). The missense mutation (c.875G>C [p.Arg292Pro]) showed no obvious changes in localization compared to wild-type ( Figure 4 ), but this amino acid is highly conserved in vertebrates ( Figure 6 ), so it is likely to be of functional importance. To determine whether mutations in B3GALNT2 led to a reduction in the level of functional α-DG glycosylation, we assessed the muscle and fibroblasts of P1 and P2 by muscle immunohistochemistry ( Figure 2 ), flow cytometry, and immunoblotting ( Figures 3 and S2 ). Although each technique revealed some degree of hypoglycosylation, the fact that flow cytometry and immunoblotting of the fibroblasts indicated a more severe depletion compared to the immunoblot of muscle protein lysate may be related to tissue-specific glycosylation of α-DG. 5,6,46

Knockdown of zebrafish b3galnt2 recapitulated aspects of the human phenotype including dystrophic muscle, hydrocephalus, and reduced functional α-DG glycosylation. The myotomal lesions revealed by EBD ( Figure 5 ) are very similar to the phenotype caused by knockdown of other known dystroglycanopathy genes including FKTN and FKRP . 43

α-DG is heavily O -mannosylated in its mucin-like domain. 1 These mannose residues can themselves be modified. For example, a β1,2 linked N-acetyl glucosamine (GlcNAc) group can be added by POMGNT1 38 or a β1,4 linked GlcNAc group can be added by an unknown GlcNAc transferase. 38 We speculate that after the addition of β1,4 linked GlcNAc, B3GALNT2 completes the trisaccharide GalNAc-b1,3-GlcNAc-b1,4-Man. 38,39 This trisaccharide is believed to contain a LARGE-dependent 6- O -phosphoryl modification on the mannose residue 38 and is required for ligand binding glycan of α-DG. 37 There may be other protein targets of B3GALNT2, which are currently unknown. 37 We propose that the phosphorylated trisaccharide is produced in the endoplasmic reticulum, as suggested by the subcellular localization of B3GALNT2. Although O -mannosylation occurs in the ER and O -GalNAcylation in the Golgi, it has been recently suggested that certain GalNAc glycosyltransferases can be located in the ER, 47 which appears to be the case for B3GALNT2.

Although further study is needed to establish the precise role of B3GALNT2 in the glycosylation of α-DG, our data show that mutations in B3GALNT2 can cause dystroglycanopathy. Furthermore, this study provides insight into the complexity of α-DG glycoslyation and illustrates the utility of whole-exome sequencing with functional analysis for the identification of mutations that cause dystroglycanopathies. Additional genetic discoveries will help to complete the understanding of α-DG glycosylation as well as elucidate the pathological mechanisms underlying the muscle and brain phenotypes associated with these diseases.
