---
pmid: '20959514'
title: Sphingosine-1-phosphate produced by sphingosine kinase 2 in mitochondria interacts
  with prohibitin 2 to regulate complex IV assembly and respiration.
authors:
- Strub GM
- Paillard M
- Liang J
- Gomez L
- Allegood JC
- Hait NC
- Maceyka M
- Price MM
- Chen Q
- Simpson DC
- Kordula T
- Milstien S
- Lesnefsky EJ
- Spiegel S
journal: FASEB J
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3023391
doi: 10.1096/fj.10-167502
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Sphingosine-1-phosphate produced by sphingosine kinase 2 in mitochondria interacts with prohibitin 2 to regulate complex IV assembly and respiration.
**Authors:** Strub GM, Paillard M, Liang J, Gomez L, Allegood JC, Hait NC, Maceyka M, Price MM, Chen Q, Simpson DC, Kordula T, Milstien S, Lesnefsky EJ, Spiegel S
**Journal:** FASEB J (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1096/fj.10-167502](https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.10-167502)
**PMC:** [PMC3023391](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3023391/)

## Abstract

1. FASEB J. 2011 Feb;25(2):600-12. doi: 10.1096/fj.10-167502. Epub 2010 Oct 19.

Sphingosine-1-phosphate produced by sphingosine kinase 2 in mitochondria 
interacts with prohibitin 2 to regulate complex IV assembly and respiration.

Strub GM(1), Paillard M, Liang J, Gomez L, Allegood JC, Hait NC, Maceyka M, 
Price MM, Chen Q, Simpson DC, Kordula T, Milstien S, Lesnefsky EJ, Spiegel S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Virginia Commonwealth 
University School of Medicine, Richmond, VA 23298-0614, USA.

The potent lipid mediator sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) regulates diverse 
physiological processes by binding to 5 specific GPCRs, although it also has 
intracellular targets. Here, we demonstrate that S1P, produced in the 
mitochondria mainly by sphingosine kinase 2 (SphK2), binds with high affinity 
and specificity to prohibitin 2 (PHB2), a highly conserved protein that 
regulates mitochondrial assembly and function. In contrast, S1P did not bind to 
the closely related protein PHB1, which forms large, multimeric complexes with 
PHB2. In mitochondria from SphK2-null mice, a new aberrant band of cytochrome-c 
oxidase was detected by blue native PAGE, and interaction between subunit IV of 
cytochrome-c oxidase and PHB2 was greatly reduced. Moreover, depletion of SphK2 
or PHB2 led to a dysfunction in mitochondrial respiration through cytochrome-c 
oxidase. Our data point to a new action of S1P in mitochondria and suggest that 
interaction of S1P with homomeric PHB2 is important for cytochrome-c oxidase 
assembly and mitochondrial respiration.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.10-167502
PMCID: PMC3023391
PMID: 20959514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
