---
pmid: '24613385'
title: Hsp70 and Hsp90 oppositely regulate TGF-β signaling through CHIP/Stub1.
authors:
- Shang Y
- Xu X
- Duan X
- Guo J
- Wang Y
- Ren F
- He D
- Chang Z
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.02.124
---

# Hsp70 and Hsp90 oppositely regulate TGF-β signaling through CHIP/Stub1.
**Authors:** Shang Y, Xu X, Duan X, Guo J, Wang Y, Ren F, He D, Chang Z
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.02.124](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.02.124)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Mar 28;446(1):387-92. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.02.124. Epub 2014 Mar 5.

Hsp70 and Hsp90 oppositely regulate TGF-β signaling through CHIP/Stub1.

Shang Y(1), Xu X(2), Duan X(3), Guo J(2), Wang Y(2), Ren F(2), He D(4), Chang 
Z(5).

Author information:
(1)The Key Laboratory for Cell Proliferation and Regulation Biology of Ministry 
of Education, College of Life Sciences, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 
100875, China; State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, 
School of Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, School of 
Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.
(3)The Second People's Hospital of Zhuhai, Guangdong 519000, China.
(4)The Key Laboratory for Cell Proliferation and Regulation Biology of Ministry 
of Education, College of Life Sciences, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 
100875, China.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, School of 
Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. Electronic address: 
zhijiec@tsinghua.edu.cn.

Transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) signaling plays an important role in 
regulation of a wide variety of cellular processes. Canonical TGF-β signaling is 
mediated by Smads which were further regulated by several factors. We previously 
reported that E3 ubiquitin ligase CHIP (carboxyl terminus of Hsc70-interacting 
protein, also named Stub1) controlled the sensitivity of TGF-β signaling by 
modulating the basal level of Smad3 through ubiquitin-mediated degradation. 
Here, we present evidence that Hsp70 and Hsp90 regulate the complex formation of 
Smad3/CHIP. Furthermore, we observed that over-expressed Hsp70 or inhibition of 
Hsp90 by geldanamycin (GA) leads to facilitated CHIP-induced ubiquitination and 
degradation of Smad3, which finally enhances TGF-β signaling. In contrast, 
over-expressed Hsp90 antagonizes CHIP mediated Smad3 ubiquitination and 
degradation and desensitizes cells in response to TGF-β signaling. Taken 
together, our data reveal an opposite role of Hsp70 and Hsp90 in regulating 
TGF-β signaling by implicating CHIP-mediated Smad3 ubiquitination and 
degradation. This study provides a new insight into understanding the regulation 
of the TGF-β signaling by chaperones.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.02.124
PMID: 24613385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
