---
pmid: '18354498'
title: The initiation factor eIF3-f is a major target for atrogin1/MAFbx function
  in skeletal muscle atrophy.
authors:
- Lagirand-Cantaloube J
- Offner N
- Csibi A
- Leibovitch MP
- Batonnet-Pichon S
- Tintignac LA
- Segura CT
- Leibovitch SA
journal: EMBO J
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2367397
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.52
---

# The initiation factor eIF3-f is a major target for atrogin1/MAFbx function in skeletal muscle atrophy.
**Authors:** Lagirand-Cantaloube J, Offner N, Csibi A, Leibovitch MP, Batonnet-Pichon S, Tintignac LA, Segura CT, Leibovitch SA
**Journal:** EMBO J (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2008.52](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2008.52)
**PMC:** [PMC2367397](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2367397/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2008 Apr 23;27(8):1266-76. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.52. Epub 2008 Mar
20.

The initiation factor eIF3-f is a major target for atrogin1/MAFbx function in 
skeletal muscle atrophy.

Lagirand-Cantaloube J(1), Offner N, Csibi A, Leibovitch MP, Batonnet-Pichon S, 
Tintignac LA, Segura CT, Leibovitch SA.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Génomique Fonctionnelle et Myogenèse, UMR866 Différenciation 
Cellulaire et Croissance, INRA UM II, Campus INRA/SUPAGRO, Montpellier, France.

In response to cancer, AIDS, sepsis and other systemic diseases inducing muscle 
atrophy, the E3 ubiquitin ligase Atrogin1/MAFbx (MAFbx) is dramatically 
upregulated and this response is necessary for rapid atrophy. However, the 
precise function of MAFbx in muscle wasting has been questioned. Here, we 
present evidence that during muscle atrophy MAFbx targets the eukaryotic 
initiation factor 3 subunit 5 (eIF3-f) for ubiquitination and degradation by the 
proteasome. Ectopic expression of MAFbx in myotubes induces atrophy and 
degradation of eIF3-f. Conversely, blockade of MAFbx expression by small hairpin 
RNA interference prevents eIF3-f degradation in myotubes undergoing atrophy. 
Furthermore, genetic activation of eIF3-f is sufficient to cause hypertrophy and 
to block atrophy in myotubes, whereas genetic blockade of eIF3-f expression 
induces atrophy in myotubes. Finally, eIF3-f induces increasing expression of 
muscle structural proteins and hypertrophy in both myotubes and mouse skeletal 
muscle. We conclude that eIF3-f is a key target that accounts for MAFbx function 
during muscle atrophy and has a major role in skeletal muscle hypertrophy. Thus, 
eIF3-f seems to be an attractive therapeutic target.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2008.52
PMCID: PMC2367397
PMID: 18354498 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
