---
pmid: '15502821'
title: A conserved Mis12 centromere complex is linked to heterochromatic HP1 and outer
  kinetochore protein Zwint-1.
authors:
- Obuse C
- Iwasaki O
- Kiyomitsu T
- Goshima G
- Toyoda Y
- Yanagida M
journal: Nat Cell Biol
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ncb1187
---

# A conserved Mis12 centromere complex is linked to heterochromatic HP1 and outer kinetochore protein Zwint-1.
**Authors:** Obuse C, Iwasaki O, Kiyomitsu T, Goshima G, Toyoda Y, Yanagida M
**Journal:** Nat Cell Biol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncb1187](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb1187)

## Abstract

1. Nat Cell Biol. 2004 Nov;6(11):1135-41. doi: 10.1038/ncb1187. Epub 2004 Oct 24.

A conserved Mis12 centromere complex is linked to heterochromatic HP1 and outer 
kinetochore protein Zwint-1.

Obuse C(1), Iwasaki O, Kiyomitsu T, Goshima G, Toyoda Y, Yanagida M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gene Mechanisms, Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto 
University, Yoshida-Honmachi, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

Defects in kinetochore proteins often lead to aneuploidy and cancer. Mis12-Mtw1 
is a conserved, essential kinetochore protein family. Here, we show that a Mis12 
core complex exists in Schizosaccharomyces pombe and human cells. Nine 
polypeptides bind to human hMis12; two of these, HEC1 and Zwint-1, are authentic 
kinetochore proteins. Four other human proteins of unknown function (c20orf172, 
DC8, PMF1 and KIAA1570) correspond to yeast Mis12-Mtw1 complex components and 
are shown to be required for chromosome segregation in HeLa cells using RNA 
interference (RNAi). Surprisingly, hMis12 also forms a stable complex with the 
centromeric heterochromatin components HP1alpha and HP1gamma. Double HP1 RNAi 
abolishes kinetochore localization of hMis12 and DC8. Therefore, centromeric HP1 
may be the base to anchor the hMis12 core complex that is enriched with coiled 
coils and extends to outer Zwint-1 during mitosis.

DOI: 10.1038/ncb1187
PMID: 15502821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
