---
pmid: '31144305'
title: Hyperactive TORC1 sensitizes yeast cells to endoplasmic reticulum stress by
  compromising cell wall integrity.
authors:
- Ahmed K
- Carter DE
- Lajoie P
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/1873-3468.13463
---

# Hyperactive TORC1 sensitizes yeast cells to endoplasmic reticulum stress by compromising cell wall integrity.
**Authors:** Ahmed K, Carter DE, Lajoie P
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/1873-3468.13463](https://doi.org/10.1002/1873-3468.13463)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2019 Aug;593(15):1957-1973. doi: 10.1002/1873-3468.13463. Epub 2019
 Jun 12.

Hyperactive TORC1 sensitizes yeast cells to endoplasmic reticulum stress by 
compromising cell wall integrity.

Ahmed K(1), Carter DE(2), Lajoie P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, The University of Western Ontario, 
London, Canada.
(2)Robarts Research Institute, The University of Western Ontario, London, 
Canada.

Accumulation of misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) activates 
the unfolded protein response (UPR). Here, we investigated how the target of 
rapamycin complex 1 (TORC1) signaling cascade acts in parallel with the UPR to 
regulate ER stress sensitivity. Using Saccharomyces cerevisiae, we found that 
TORC1 signaling is attenuated during ER stress and constitutive activation of 
TORC1 increases sensitivity to ER stressors independently of the UPR. 
Transcriptome analysis revealed that TORC1 hyperactivation results in cell wall 
remodelling. Conversely, hyperactive TORC1 sensitizes cells to cell wall 
stressors, including the antifungal caspofungin. Elucidating the crosstalk 
between the UPR, cell wall integrity, and TORC1 signaling may uncover new 
paradigms through which the response to protein misfolding is regulated.

© 2019 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1002/1873-3468.13463
PMID: 31144305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
