---
pmid: '16895791'
title: Tumor necrosis factor-alpha down-regulates human Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase
  1 promoter via JNK/AP-1 signaling pathway.
authors:
- Afonso V
- Santos G
- Collin P
- Khatib AM
- Mitrovic DR
- Lomri N
- Leitman DC
- Lomri A
journal: Free Radic Biol Med
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2006.05.014
---

# Tumor necrosis factor-alpha down-regulates human Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase 1 promoter via JNK/AP-1 signaling pathway.
**Authors:** Afonso V, Santos G, Collin P, Khatib AM, Mitrovic DR, Lomri N, Leitman DC, Lomri A
**Journal:** Free Radic Biol Med (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2006.05.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2006.05.014)

## Abstract

1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2006 Sep 1;41(5):709-21. doi: 
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2006.05.014. Epub 2006 May 20.

Tumor necrosis factor-alpha down-regulates human Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase 1 
promoter via JNK/AP-1 signaling pathway.

Afonso V(1), Santos G, Collin P, Khatib AM, Mitrovic DR, Lomri N, Leitman DC, 
Lomri A.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U606, Lariboisiere Hospital, Paris, France.

Overexpression of Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) in monocytes blocks 
reactive oxygen species-induced inhibition of cell growth and apoptosis and 
renders cells resistant to the toxic effect of tumor necrosis factor 
(TNF)-alpha, suggesting that TNF-alpha represses the SOD1 gene in these cells. 
We herein show that TNF-alpha decreases SOD1 mRNA, protein, and promoter 
activity in U937 cells. Electrophoretic mobility-shift assays (EMSA) show that 
TNF-alpha decreased binding of three different complexes. Ectopic Sp1 
overexpression markedly increased SOD1-basal promoter activity and partially 
antagonized the TNF-alpha inhibitory effect. In contrast, ectopic c-Jun 
overexpression mimics TNF-alpha inhibitory effects and antagonizes Sp1 
stimulatory effects. In agreement with these findings, EMSA shows a 
TNF-alpha-induced increase in AP-1 and a decrease in Sp1 DNA binding. Disruption 
of the C/EBP site decreases, whereas mutation in the Sp1/Egr-1 site completely 
abolishes DNA-binding and promoter activity. A JNK inhibitor antagonized the 
negative effects of TNF-alpha on SOD1 promoter activity, suggesting that JNK 
signaling through c-Jun protein activation is critical for the 
TNF-alpha-dependent SOD1 repression. A greater understanding of the mechanisms 
of TNF-alpha-induced SOD1 repression could facilitate the design and development 
of novel therapeutic drugs for inflammatory conditions.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2006.05.014
PMID: 16895791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
