---
pmid: '26277395'
title: Human FAD synthase is a bi-functional enzyme with a FAD hydrolase activity
  in the molybdopterin binding domain.
authors:
- Giancaspero TA
- Galluccio M
- Miccolis A
- Leone P
- Eberini I
- Iametti S
- Indiveri C
- Barile M
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.08.035
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Human FAD synthase is a bi-functional enzyme with a FAD hydrolase activity in the molybdopterin binding domain.
**Authors:** Giancaspero TA, Galluccio M, Miccolis A, Leone P, Eberini I, Iametti S, Indiveri C, Barile M
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.08.035](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.08.035)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Sep 25;465(3):443-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.08.035. Epub 2015 Aug 12.

Human FAD synthase is a bi-functional enzyme with a FAD hydrolase activity in 
the molybdopterin binding domain.

Giancaspero TA(1), Galluccio M(2), Miccolis A(3), Leone P(4), Eberini I(5), 
Iametti S(6), Indiveri C(7), Barile M(8).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Bioscienze, Biotecnologie e Biofarmaceutica, Università degli 
Studi di Bari "A. Moro", via Orabona 4, I-70126, Bari, Italy. Electronic 
address: teresaanna.giancaspero@uniba.it.
(2)Dipartimento DiBEST, Biologia, Ecologia, Scienze della Terra, Unità di 
Biochimica e Biotecnologie Molecolari, Università della Calabria, via Bucci 4c, 
I-87036, Arcavacata di Rende, Italy. Electronic address: mgalluccio@unical.it.
(3)Dipartimento di Bioscienze, Biotecnologie e Biofarmaceutica, Università degli 
Studi di Bari "A. Moro", via Orabona 4, I-70126, Bari, Italy. Electronic 
address: miccolis.angelica@libero.it.
(4)Dipartimento di Bioscienze, Biotecnologie e Biofarmaceutica, Università degli 
Studi di Bari "A. Moro", via Orabona 4, I-70126, Bari, Italy. Electronic 
address: pieroleone87@gmail.com.
(5)Dipartimento di Scienze Farmacologiche e Biomolecolari, Università degli 
Studi di Milano, via Balzaretti 9, I-20133, Milano, Italy. Electronic address: 
ivano.eberini@unimi.it.
(6)Dipartimento di Scienze per gli Alimenti, la Nutrizione e l'Ambiente, 
Università degli Studi di Milano, via Celoria 2, I-20133, Milano, Italy. 
Electronic address: stefania.iametti@unimi.it.
(7)Dipartimento DiBEST, Biologia, Ecologia, Scienze della Terra, Unità di 
Biochimica e Biotecnologie Molecolari, Università della Calabria, via Bucci 4c, 
I-87036, Arcavacata di Rende, Italy. Electronic address: 
cesare.indiveri@unical.it.
(8)Dipartimento di Bioscienze, Biotecnologie e Biofarmaceutica, Università degli 
Studi di Bari "A. Moro", via Orabona 4, I-70126, Bari, Italy. Electronic 
address: maria.barile@uniba.it.

FAD synthase (FMN:ATP adenylyl transferase, FMNAT or FADS, EC 2.7.7.2) is 
involved in the biochemical pathway for converting riboflavin into FAD. Human 
FADS exists in different isoforms. Two of these have been characterized and are 
localized in different subcellular compartments. hFADS2 containing 490 amino 
acids shows a two domain organization: the 3'-phosphoadenosine-5'-phosphosulfate 
(PAPS) reductase domain, that is the FAD-forming catalytic domain, and a 
resembling molybdopterin-binding (MPTb) domain. By a multialignment of hFADS2 
with other MPTb containing proteins of various organisms from bacteria to 
plants, the critical residues for hydrolytic function were identified. A 
homology model of the MPTb domain of hFADS2 was built, using as template the 
solved structure of a T. acidophilum enzyme. The capacity of hFADS2 to catalyse 
FAD hydrolysis was revealed. The recombinant hFADS2 was able to hydrolyse added 
FAD in a Co(2+) and mersalyl dependent reaction. The recombinant PAPS reductase 
domain is not able to perform the same function. The mutant C440A catalyses the 
same hydrolytic function of WT with no essential requirement for mersalyl, thus 
indicating the involvement of C440 in the control of hydrolysis switch. The 
enzyme C440A is also able to catalyse hydrolysis of FAD bound to the PAPS 
reductase domain, which is quantitatively converted into FMN.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.08.035
PMID: 26277395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
