---
pmid: '9677371'
title: Identification of amino acid residues critical for the Src-homology 2 domain-dependent
  docking of Stat2 to the interferon alpha receptor.
authors:
- Krishnan K
- Singh B
- Krolewski JJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.31.19495
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Identification of amino acid residues critical for the Src-homology 2 domain-dependent docking of Stat2 to the interferon alpha receptor.
**Authors:** Krishnan K, Singh B, Krolewski JJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.273.31.19495](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.31.19495)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jul 31;273(31):19495-501. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.31.19495.

Identification of amino acid residues critical for the Src-homology 2 
domain-dependent docking of Stat2 to the interferon alpha receptor.

Krishnan K(1), Singh B, Krolewski JJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Irving Cancer Center, Columbia University, 
College of Physicians & Surgeons, New York, New York 10032, USA.

The interaction between Src-homology 2 domains (SH2) domains and phosphorylated 
tyrosine residues serves a critical role in intracellular signaling. In addition 
to the phosphotyrosine, adjacent residues are critical mediators of the 
specificity of this interaction. Upon treatment of cells with interferon alpha 
(IFNalpha), the IFNaR1 subunit of the IFNalpha receptor becomes tyrosine 
phosphorylated at position 466. The region surrounding phosphorylated tyrosine 
466 subsequently acts as a docking site for the SH2 domain of Stat2, 
facilitating phosphorylation of the latter and, thus, the transduction of the 
IFNalpha signal. In this report site-specific mutagenesis was employed to 
analyze the nature of the interaction between the SH2 domain of Stat2 and the 
region surrounding tyrosine 466 on IFNaR1. Mutation of the valine at the +1 
position carboxyl-terminal to tyrosine 466 or of the serine at the +5 position 
inhibits the association of Stat2 with phosphorylated IFNaR1. Moreover, 
receptors mutated at either of these two positions act in a dominant manner to 
decrease IFNalpha signaling, as assayed by both Stat2 phosphorylation and 
expression of an IFNalpha-responsive reporter. The demonstration that these two 
residues are critical in mediating the interaction between Stat2 and IFNaR1 
suggests that STAT proteins might utilize a structurally distinct subset of SH2 
domains to mediate signal transduction from the cell surface to the nucleus.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.31.19495
PMID: 9677371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
