---
pmid: '15713455'
title: The dyf-3 gene encodes a novel protein required for sensory cilium formation
  in Caenorhabditis elegans.
authors:
- Murayama T
- Toh Y
- Ohshima Y
- Koga M
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2004.12.005
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The dyf-3 gene encodes a novel protein required for sensory cilium formation in Caenorhabditis elegans.
**Authors:** Murayama T, Toh Y, Ohshima Y, Koga M
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmb.2004.12.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2004.12.005)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Biol. 2005 Feb 25;346(3):677-87. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2004.12.005. Epub
2004  Dec 24.

The dyf-3 gene encodes a novel protein required for sensory cilium formation in 
Caenorhabditis elegans.

Murayama T(1), Toh Y, Ohshima Y, Koga M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, Kyushu University Graduate 
School, 6-10-1, Hakozaki, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8581, Japan.

Ciliated neurons in animals are important for the reception of environmental 
stimuli. To understand the mechanism of cilium morphogenesis in Caenorhabditis 
elegans, we analyzed dyf-3 mutants that are defective in uptake of a fluorescent 
dye and abnormal in sensory cilium structure. Expression of green fluorescent 
protein in sensory neurons of a dyf-3 mutant revealed that the mutant has 
stunted cilia and abnormal posterior projections in some sensory neurons. The 
dyf-3 gene encodes three proteins with different N-terminals. The largest DYF-3 
protein has 404 amino acid residues that are 38% identical with those of a 
predicted human protein of unknown function. Expression of a functional 
dyf-3Colon, two colonsgfp fusion gene is detected in 26 chemosensory neurons, 
including six IL2 neurons, eight pairs of amphid neurons (ASE, ADF, ASG, ASH, 
ASI, ASJ, ASK and ADL) and two pairs of phasmid neurons (PHA and PHB). 
Expression of a dyf-3 cDNA in specific neurons of dyf-3 animals indicated that 
dyf-3 acts cell-autonomously for fluorescent dye uptake. Reduction of 
dyf-3Colon, two colonsgfp expression in a daf-19 mutant suggests that dyf-3 
expression is regulated by DAF-19 transcription factor, and DYF-3 may be 
involved in the intraflagellar transport system.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2004.12.005
PMID: 15713455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
