---
pmid: '15145828'
title: Nuclear surveillance and degradation of hypomodified initiator tRNAMet in S.
  cerevisiae.
authors:
- Kadaba S
- Krueger A
- Trice T
- Krecic AM
- Hinnebusch AG
- Anderson J
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC420349
doi: 10.1101/gad.1183804
---

# Nuclear surveillance and degradation of hypomodified initiator tRNAMet in S. cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Kadaba S, Krueger A, Trice T, Krecic AM, Hinnebusch AG, Anderson J
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.1183804](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.1183804)
**PMC:** [PMC420349](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC420349/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2004 Jun 1;18(11):1227-40. doi: 10.1101/gad.1183804. Epub 2004 May 
14.

Nuclear surveillance and degradation of hypomodified initiator tRNAMet in S. 
cerevisiae.

Kadaba S(1), Krueger A, Trice T, Krecic AM, Hinnebusch AG, Anderson J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Marquette University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 
53201, USA.

The tRNA m(1)A58 methyltransferase is composed of two subunits encoded by the 
essential genes TRM6 and TRM61 (formerly GCD10 and GCD14). The trm6-504 mutation 
results in a defective m(1)A methyltransferase (Mtase) and a 
temperature-sensitive growth phenotype that is attributable to the absence of 
m(1)A58 and consequential tRNA(i)(Met) instability. We used a genetic approach 
to identify the genes responsible for tRNA(i)(Met) degradation in trm6 cells. 
Three recessive extragenic mutations that suppress trm6-504 mutant phenotypes 
and restore hypomodified tRNA(i)(Met) to near normal levels were identified. The 
wild-type allele of one suppressor, DIS3/RRP44, encodes a 3'-5' exoribonuclease 
and a member of the multisubunit exosome complex. We provide evidence that a 
functional nuclear exosome is required for the degradation of tRNA(i)(Met) 
lacking m(1)A58. A second suppressor gene encodes Trf4p, a DNA polymerase (pol 
sigma) with poly(A) polymerase activity. Whereas deletion of TRF4 leads to 
stabilization of tRNA(i)(Met), overexpression of Trf4p destabilizes the 
hypomodified tRNA(i)(Met) in trm6 cells. The hypomodified, but not wild-type, 
pre-tRNA(i)(Met) accumulates as a polyadenylated species, whose abundance and 
length distribution both increase upon Trf4p overexpression. These data indicate 
that a tRNA surveillance pathway exists in yeast that requires Trf4p and the 
exosome for polyadenylation and degradation of hypomodified pre-tRNA(i)(Met).

DOI: 10.1101/gad.1183804
PMCID: PMC420349
PMID: 15145828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
