---
pmid: '17483213'
title: 'Convergent peripheral pathways catalyze initial glucose catabolism in Pseudomonas
  putida: genomic and flux analysis.'
authors:
- del Castillo T
- Ramos JL
- Rodríguez-Herva JJ
- Fuhrer T
- Sauer U
- Duque E
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1951859
doi: 10.1128/JB.00203-07
---

# Convergent peripheral pathways catalyze initial glucose catabolism in Pseudomonas putida: genomic and flux analysis.
**Authors:** del Castillo T, Ramos JL, Rodríguez-Herva JJ, Fuhrer T, Sauer U, Duque E
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JB.00203-07](https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.00203-07)
**PMC:** [PMC1951859](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1951859/)

## Abstract

1. J Bacteriol. 2007 Jul;189(14):5142-52. doi: 10.1128/JB.00203-07. Epub 2007 May
 4.

Convergent peripheral pathways catalyze initial glucose catabolism in 
Pseudomonas putida: genomic and flux analysis.

del Castillo T(1), Ramos JL, Rodríguez-Herva JJ, Fuhrer T, Sauer U, Duque E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Protection, Estación Experimental del Zaidín, 
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, C/ Prof. Albareda, 1, E-18008 
Granada, Spain.

In this study, we show that glucose catabolism in Pseudomonas putida occurs 
through the simultaneous operation of three pathways that converge at the level 
of 6-phosphogluconate, which is metabolized by the Edd and Eda Entner/Doudoroff 
enzymes to central metabolites. When glucose enters the periplasmic space 
through specific OprB porins, it can either be internalized into the cytoplasm 
or be oxidized to gluconate. Glucose is transported to the cytoplasm in a 
process mediated by an ABC uptake system encoded by open reading frames PP1015 
to PP1018 and is then phosphorylated by glucokinase (encoded by the glk gene) 
and converted by glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (encoded by the zwf genes) to 
6-phosphogluconate. Gluconate in the periplasm can be transported into the 
cytoplasm and subsequently phosphorylated by gluconokinase to 6-phosphogluconate 
or oxidized to 2-ketogluconate, which is transported to the cytoplasm, and 
subsequently phosphorylated and reduced to 6-phosphogluconate. In the wild-type 
strain, glucose was consumed at a rate of around 6 mmol g(-1) h(-1), which 
allowed a growth rate of 0.58 h(-1) and a biomass yield of 0.44 g/g carbon used. 
Flux analysis of (13)C-labeled glucose revealed that, in the Krebs cycle, most 
of the oxalacetate fraction was produced by the pyruvate shunt rather than by 
the direct oxidation of malate by malate dehydrogenase. Enzymatic and microarray 
assays revealed that the enzymes, regulators, and transport systems of the three 
peripheral glucose pathways were induced in response to glucose in the outer 
medium. We generated a series of isogenic mutants in one or more of the steps of 
all three pathways and found that, although all three functioned simultaneously, 
the glucokinase pathway and the 2-ketogluconate loop were quantitatively more 
important than the direct phosphorylation of gluconate. In physical terms, 
glucose catabolism genes were organized in a series of clusters scattered along 
the chromosome. Within each of the clusters, genes encoding porins, 
transporters, enzymes, and regulators formed operons, suggesting that genes in 
each cluster coevolved. The glk gene encoding glucokinase was located in an 
operon with the edd gene, whereas the zwf-1 gene, encoding glucose-6-phosphate 
dehydrogenase, formed an operon with the eda gene. Therefore, the enzymes of the 
glucokinase pathway and those of the Entner-Doudoroff pathway are physically 
linked and induced simultaneously. It can therefore be concluded that the 
glucokinase pathway is a sine qua non condition for P. putida to grow with 
glucose.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00203-07
PMCID: PMC1951859
PMID: 17483213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
