---
pmid: '19798103'
title: Efficient protection and isolation of ubiquitylated proteins using tandem ubiquitin-binding
  entities.
authors:
- Hjerpe R
- Aillet F
- Lopitz-Otsoa F
- Lang V
- England P
- Rodriguez MS
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2775171
doi: 10.1038/embor.2009.192
---

# Efficient protection and isolation of ubiquitylated proteins using tandem ubiquitin-binding entities.
**Authors:** Hjerpe R, Aillet F, Lopitz-Otsoa F, Lang V, England P, Rodriguez MS
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/embor.2009.192](https://doi.org/10.1038/embor.2009.192)
**PMC:** [PMC2775171](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2775171/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2009 Nov;10(11):1250-8. doi: 10.1038/embor.2009.192. Epub 2009 Oct
2.

Efficient protection and isolation of ubiquitylated proteins using tandem 
ubiquitin-binding entities.

Hjerpe R(1), Aillet F, Lopitz-Otsoa F, Lang V, England P, Rodriguez MS.

Author information:
(1)Proteomics Unit, CIC bioGUNE, CIBERehd, Bizkaia Technology Park, Building 
801A, Derio 48160, Spain.

Post-translational modification with ubiquitin is one of the most important 
mechanisms in the regulation of protein stability and function. However, the 
high reversibility of this modification is the main obstacle for the isolation 
and characterization of ubiquitylated proteins. To overcome this problem, we 
have developed tandem-repeated ubiquitin-binding entities (TUBEs) based on 
ubiquitin-associated (UBA) domains. TUBEs recognize tetra-ubiquitin with a 
markedly higher affinity than single UBA domains, allowing poly-ubiquitylated 
proteins to be efficiently purified from cell extracts in native conditions. 
More significant is the fact that TUBEs protect poly-ubiquitin-conjugated 
proteins, such as p53 and IkappaBalpha, both from proteasomal degradation and 
de-ubiquitylating activity present in cell extracts, as well as from existing 
proteasome and cysteine protease inhibitors. Therefore, these new 'molecular 
traps' should become valuable tools for purifying endogenous poly-ubiquitylated 
proteins, thus contributing to a better characterization of many essential 
functions regulated by these post-translational modifications.

DOI: 10.1038/embor.2009.192
PMCID: PMC2775171
PMID: 19798103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Post-translational modification with ubiquitin is one of the most important mechanisms in the regulation of protein stability and function. However, the high reversibility of this modification is the main obstacle for the isolation and characterization of ubiquitylated proteins. To overcome this problem, we have developed tandem-repeated ubiquitin-binding entities (TUBEs) based on ubiquitin-associated (UBA) domains. TUBEs recognize tetra-ubiquitin with a markedly higher affinity than single UBA domains, allowing poly-ubiquitylated proteins to be efficiently purified from cell extracts in native conditions. More significant is the fact that TUBEs protect poly-ubiquitin-conjugated proteins, such as p53 and IκBα, both from proteasomal degradation and de-ubiquitylating activity present in cell extracts, as well as from existing proteasome and cysteine protease inhibitors. Therefore, these new ‘molecular traps' should become valuable tools for purifying endogenous poly-ubiquitylated proteins, thus contributing to a better characterization of many essential functions regulated by these post-translational modifications.

Introduction

Post-translational modification offers immense possibilities for proteins to modulate their properties. In addition to a variety of modifications involving small chemical moieties, such as phosphorylation, proteins can also be modified by conjugation to other proteins. The first described protein modifier was the 8.5 kDa ubiquitin, which is ligated to lysines in target proteins through an ATP-dependent thio-ester cascade. This process is termed ‘ubiquitylation', and involves three families of enzymes: E1 (ubiquitin-activating enzyme), E2 (ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme) and E3 (ubiquitin ligase).

Substrate proteins might be modified by a single ubiquitin at one acceptor site (mono-ubiquitylation), by several ubiquitins at different acceptor sites (multiple mono-ubiquitylation) or by poly-ubiquitin chains resulting from the modification of ubiquitin on any of its seven lysines. In general, chains linked through lysine 48 (Lys 48) are considered to mediate proteasomal degradation, whereas those coupled through lysine 63 (Lys 63) are involved in diverse processes such as signal transduction and DNA repair ( Ikeda & Dikic, 2008 ). Further complexity arises from the existence of forked ubiquitin chains ( Tagwerker et al , 2006 ) and heterogeneous chains incorporating ubiquitin-like (Ubl) molecules ( Tatham et al , 2008 ). Similarly to phosphorylation, ubiquitylation is a reversible process, as de-ubiquitylating enzymes (DUBs) continuously de-conjugate ubiquitylated substrates by different catalytic mechanisms ( Nijman et al , 2005 ). However, most known DUBs are cysteine proteases.

Various strategies have been used to analyse the ubiquitylated proteome—or ‘ubiquitome' ( Hjerpe & Rodriguez, 2008b ). However, both in studies spanning the entire ubiquitome and in those focusing on a single protein, reliable detection or characterization of protein ubiquitylation is hampered by the de-conjugation mediated by DUBs. A well-known solution to this is to purify His 6 -tagged ubiquitylated conjugates under denaturing conditions. The reliability of this method is questionable as His 6 modification of ubiquitin and its overexpression and competition with endogenous ubiquitin could result in artefactual ubiquitylation patterns.

Ubiquitin-binding domains are a category of at least 20 protein module families that bind to ubiquitin and poly-ubiquitin chains with varying affinities ( Raasi et al , 2005 ). The ubiquitin-associated (UBA) domain and ubiquitin-interacting motif have previously been used to enrich cell extracts in proteins modified by endogenous ubiquitin ( Hjerpe & Rodriguez, 2008b ). To preserve the native ubiquitylation, cysteine protease inhibitors, such as iodoacetamide (IAA) and N -ethylmaleimide (NEM), are often required. However, the use of IAA was recently reported to lead to the formation of protein adducts with the same mass signature as that of a double glycine ( Nielsen et al , 2008 ), potentially leading to misinterpretation of mass spectrometry data. On the basis of the evidence that dual ubiquitin-binding domains can bind cooperatively to poly-ubiquitin ( Raasi & Pickart, 2003 ; Raasi et al , 2004 ), we report here the design and development of tandem-repeated ubiquitin-binding entities (TUBEs) based on UBA domains. We show that, in native conditions, TUBEs efficiently bind to and thereby protect poly-ubiquitylated proteins such as IκBα and p53, thus opening up new ways in which to study these post-translational modifications.

Methods

Cloning, protein expression and purification. Single and tandem UBA domains were cloned in pGEX-6P1 (GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Chalfont St Giles, UK) and were modified to code for His 6 - and simian virus 5 tags 5′ and 3′ of the multiple cloning site, respectively. Tandem repeats were constructed using Bgl II and Bam HI restriction sites, allowing consecutive cloning of the UBA domains of HR23A and ubiquilin 1 with a poly-glycine linker between every two domains (see supplementary information online). All proteins were inducibly expressed in Escherichia coli C41(DE3) for 4 h at 30°C. Cells were lysed by sonication in buffered saline phosphate supplemented with 2 mM benzamidine, and the lysates were clarified by 1 h centrifugation at 10,000 r.p.m., before being subjected to standard glutathione agarose affinity purification (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. TUBEs will be available from Life-Sensors, Inc (Malvern, PA, USA).

Surface plasmon resonance experiments. Surface plasmon resonance experiments were carried out on a Biacore 3000 system, equilibrated at 25°C in HBS–EP buffer (0.01 M HEPES pH 7.4, 0.15 M NaCl, 3 mM EDTA, 0.005% surfactant P20; GE Healthcare, Chalfont St Giles, UK), using a CM5 sensor chip with a density of about 9,000 resonance units (RU≈pg/mm 2 ) of covalently immobilized GST antibody (GE Healthcare). Single and tandem GST-fused UBA domains were captured on the sensor chip at low (30–55 RU) and high (130–220 RU) densities. Mono-ubiquitin (Sigma-Aldrich) or the Ubl molecules SUMO-1, -2, -3 (produced as previously described; Rodriguez et al , 1999 ) and NEDD8 (Boston Biochem, Cambridge, MA, USA) were then injected for 30 s at a flow rate of 30 μl/min, and tetra-ubiquitin (Boston Biochem) for 1,500 s at 10 μl/min. All injections were carried out as randomized duplicates, and each experiment was repeated in triplicate (mono-ubiquitin experiments) or duplicate (tetra-ubiquitin experiments). Values of K D and n are reported as the means of independent experiments with corresponding standard deviations.

Cell culture, transfections, cell lysis and immunodetection. Cells were grown in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and antibiotics. For IκBα experiments, human embryonic kidney 293 cells were pre-treated for 3 h with 20 μM MG132, and then stimulated with 10 ng/ml TNF-α. At 3 h after TNF-α stimulation, cells were lysed and processed. For p53 experiments, p53 wt MCF-7 cells were pulsed for 1 h with 1 μM doxorubicin, and then lysed at the indicated time points. H1299 cells were transfected with 300 ng pcDNA3 plasmids encoding OD1, OD2 or wt p53, 2 μg His 6 -ubiquitin in the absence or presence of 5 μg MDM2. The pcDNA3 His 6 -ubiquitin knockout plasmid encodes a molecule without lysine residues available for conjugation (lysine to arginine mutations). After 24 h of expression, cells were collected and purified by TUBEs or nickel chromatography under denaturing conditions ( Rodriguez et al , 1999 ). MCF-7 cells were transfected using lipofectamine (Invitrogen) with 6 μg of pcDNA3-His 6 -ubiquitin plasmid and maintained in culture for 24 h before the experiment. His 6 -ubiquitylated proteins were purified using denaturing conditions and nickel chromatography. Immunoprecipitations with the ubiquitin monoclonal antibody FK2 (BIOMOL, Plymouth Meeting, PA, USA) or the mouse monoclonal HA antibody (Serotec, Kidlington, Oxford, UK) were carried out using 40 μg of antibody. In all cases, cells were lysed for 15 min on ice in TUBEs lysis buffer (50 mM sodium fluoride, 5 mM tetra-sodium pyrophosphate, 10 mM β-glyceropyrophosphate, 1% Igepal CA-630, 2 mM EDTA, 20 mM Na 2 HPO 4 , 20 mM NaH 2 PO 4 , 1 mM Pefablock and 1.2 mg/ml complete protease inhibitor cocktail; Roche, Basel, Switzerland). This buffer was supplemented with the indicated concentrations of TUBEs or 10 mM IAA/NEM. Lysates were isolated by cold centrifugation at 13,000 r.p.m. for 10 min, and added to 50 μl of glutathione agarose beads (Sigma-Aldrich), either empty or pre-bound to GST-fusion proteins. For two-step purification using TUBEs and immunoprecipitation, the captured ubiquitylated material was first eluted with 10 mM of glutathione in 50 mM Tris pH 9. The eluted material was dialysed for 2 h at 25°C using the Slide-A-Lyzer-7 kDa system (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) against cold dialysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8.5, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA and 0.1% NP40) before immunoprecipitation with 4 μg of DO.1 antibody.

Immunodetections were carried out using the following primary antibodies: TUBEs—mouse monoclonal SV5 (Serotec); p53—mouse monoclonal DO.1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA); MDM2—mouse monoclonal Ab5 (Calbiochem, San Diego, CA, USA); poly-ubiquitin—P4D1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology); IκBα—rabbit polyclonal (Santa Cruz Biotechnology); and Sam68—rabbit polyclonal (Santa Cruz Biotechnology). The secondary antibodies used were rabbit anti-mouse polyclonal and goat anti-rabbit polyclonal (Jackson Immunoresearch, Suffolk, USA).

Supplementary information is available at EMBO reports online ( http://www.emboreports.org ).
