---
pmid: '16200078'
title: Cloning and functional characterization of a new Ski homolog, Fussel-18, specifically
  expressed in neuronal tissues.
authors:
- Arndt S
- Poser I
- Schubert T
- Moser M
- Bosserhoff AK
journal: Lab Invest
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/labinvest.3700344
---

# Cloning and functional characterization of a new Ski homolog, Fussel-18, specifically expressed in neuronal tissues.
**Authors:** Arndt S, Poser I, Schubert T, Moser M, Bosserhoff AK
**Journal:** Lab Invest (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1038/labinvest.3700344](https://doi.org/10.1038/labinvest.3700344)

## Abstract

1. Lab Invest. 2005 Nov;85(11):1330-41. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.3700344.

Cloning and functional characterization of a new Ski homolog, Fussel-18, 
specifically expressed in neuronal tissues.

Arndt S(1), Poser I, Schubert T, Moser M, Bosserhoff AK.

Author information:
(1)University of Regensburg Medical School, Regensburg, Germany.

The Sloan Kettering Virus (Ski) family of nuclear oncoproteins represses 
transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) signaling through inhibition of 
transcriptional activity of Smad proteins. Here, we report the discovery of a 
new functional Smad suppressing element on chromosome 18 (Fussel-18). Fussel-18 
encodes for a protein of 297 amino acids sharing characteristic structural 
features, significant homology and similar genomic organization with the homolog 
Ski family members, Ski and Ski-related novel sequence (Sno). In contrast to Ski 
and Sno, which are ubiquitously expressed in human tissues, in situ 
hybridization, RT-PCR, Western blot and immunohistochemistry revealed a highly 
specific expression pattern for Fussel-18 in neuronal tissues, especially in the 
cerebellum, the spinal cord and dorsal root ganglia, during both embryogenesis 
and adult stage. Functionally, we determined interaction of Fussel-18 with Smad 
2 and Smad 3 together with an inhibitory activity on TGF-beta signaling. 
Fussel-18 is the first example of a Smad-binding protein with a highly 
restricted expression pattern within the nervous system.

DOI: 10.1038/labinvest.3700344
PMID: 16200078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
