---
pmid: '1645445'
title: Molecular cloning and expression of the type 1 and type 2 murine receptors
  for tumor necrosis factor.
authors:
- Goodwin RG
- Anderson D
- Jerzy R
- Davis T
- Brannan CI
- Copeland NG
- Jenkins NA
- Smith CA
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '1991'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC360136
doi: 10.1128/mcb.11.6.3020-3026.1991
---

# Molecular cloning and expression of the type 1 and type 2 murine receptors for tumor necrosis factor.
**Authors:** Goodwin RG, Anderson D, Jerzy R, Davis T, Brannan CI, Copeland NG, Jenkins NA, Smith CA
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1128/mcb.11.6.3020-3026.1991](https://doi.org/10.1128/mcb.11.6.3020-3026.1991)
**PMC:** [PMC360136](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC360136/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 Jun;11(6):3020-6. doi: 10.1128/mcb.11.6.3020-3026.1991.

Molecular cloning and expression of the type 1 and type 2 murine receptors for 
tumor necrosis factor.

Goodwin RG(1), Anderson D, Jerzy R, Davis T, Brannan CI, Copeland NG, Jenkins 
NA, Smith CA.

Author information:
(1)Immunex Corporation, Seattle, Washington 98101.

Clones encoding the type 1 (p80) and type 2 (p60) forms of the murine receptors 
for tumor necrosis factor (TNF) were isolated by cross-hybridization using 
probes derived from the cloned human TNF receptors. Each of the murine receptors 
shows strong sequence homology to the corresponding human receptor 
(approximately 65% amino acid identity) throughout the molecule but only modest 
homology, limited to ligand-binding domains, between themselves. The 
ligand-binding characteristics of the recombinant murine receptors mirror those 
of the human homologs: both receptor types bind TNF-alpha and -beta with 
multiple affinity classes, and the ligands cross-compete. Analysis of the murine 
transcripts encoding these receptors revealed the presence of RNAs for one or 
both forms of the receptors in all cells examined. It was also demonstrated that 
for both types of human TNF receptor, variably sized transcripts are observed in 
different cells. The murine cDNAs were further used to determine the chromosomal 
locations of the TNF receptor genes. They are not linked, in contrast to the 
ligands, and map to chromosomes 4 (type 1) and 6 (type 2).

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.11.6.3020-3026.1991
PMCID: PMC360136
PMID: 1645445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
