---
pmid: '15465828'
title: Phosphorylation of serine 468 by GSK-3beta negatively regulates basal p65 NF-kappaB
  activity.
authors:
- Buss H
- Dörrie A
- Schmitz ML
- Frank R
- Livingstone M
- Resch K
- Kracht M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.C400442200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Phosphorylation of serine 468 by GSK-3beta negatively regulates basal p65 NF-kappaB activity.
**Authors:** Buss H, Dörrie A, Schmitz ML, Frank R, Livingstone M, Resch K, Kracht M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.C400442200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.C400442200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Nov 26;279(48):49571-4. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C400442200. Epub
2004  Oct 1.

Phosphorylation of serine 468 by GSK-3beta negatively regulates basal p65 
NF-kappaB activity.

Buss H(1), Dörrie A, Schmitz ML, Frank R, Livingstone M, Resch K, Kracht M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, Medical School Hannover, Carl-Neuberg Strasse 1, 
D-30625 Hannover, Germany.

The activity of NF-kappaB is controlled at several levels including the 
phosphorylation of the strongly transactivating p65 (RelA) subunit. However, the 
overall number of phosphorylation sites, the signaling pathways and protein 
kinases that target p65 NF-kappaB and the functional role of these 
phosphorylations are still being uncovered. Using a combination of peptide 
arrays with in vitro kinase assays we identify serine 468 as a novel 
phosphorylation site of p65 NF-kappaB. Serine 468 lies within a GSK-3beta 
consensus site, and recombinant GSK-3beta specifically phosphorylates a 
GST-p65-(354-551) fusion protein at Ser(468) in vitro. In intact cells, 
phosphorylation of endogenous Ser(468) of p65 is induced by the PP1/PP2A 
phosphatase inhibitor calyculin A and this effect is inhibited by the GSK-3beta 
inhibitor LiCl. Reconstitution of p65-deficient cells with a p65 protein where 
serine 468 was mutated to alanine revealed a negative regulatory role of serine 
468 for NF-kappaB activation. Collectively our results suggest that a 
GSK-3beta-PP1-dependent mechanism regulates phosphorylation of p65 NF-kappaB at 
Ser(468) in unstimulated cells and thereby controls the basal activity of 
NF-kappaB.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.C400442200
PMID: 15465828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
