---
pmid: '17296735'
title: Histone deacetylases RPD3 and HOS2 regulate the transcriptional activation
  of DNA damage-inducible genes.
authors:
- Sharma VM
- Tomar RS
- Dempsey AE
- Reese JC
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1899941
doi: 10.1128/MCB.02311-06
---

# Histone deacetylases RPD3 and HOS2 regulate the transcriptional activation of DNA damage-inducible genes.
**Authors:** Sharma VM, Tomar RS, Dempsey AE, Reese JC
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.02311-06](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.02311-06)
**PMC:** [PMC1899941](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1899941/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Apr;27(8):3199-210. doi: 10.1128/MCB.02311-06. Epub 2007
Feb  12.

Histone deacetylases RPD3 and HOS2 regulate the transcriptional activation of 
DNA damage-inducible genes.

Sharma VM(1), Tomar RS, Dempsey AE, Reese JC.

Author information:
(1)Penn State University, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 203 
Althouse Lab, University Park, PA 16802, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Feb;28(4):1427.

DNA microarray and genetic studies of Saccharomyces cerevisiae have demonstrated 
that histone deacetylases (HDACs) are required for transcriptional activation 
and repression, but the mechanism by which they activate transcription remains 
poorly understood. We show that two HDACs, RPD3 and HOS2, are required for the 
activation of DNA damage-inducible genes RNR3 and HUG1. Using mutants specific 
for the Rpd3L complex, we show that the complex is responsible for regulating 
RNR3. Furthermore, unlike what was described for the GAL genes, Rpd3L regulates 
the activation of RNR3 by deacetylating nucleosomes at the promoter, not at the 
open reading frame. Rpd3 is recruited to the upstream repression sequence of 
RNR3, which surprisingly does not require Tup1 or Crt1. Chromatin remodeling and 
TFIID recruitment are largely unaffected in the Deltarpd3/Deltahos2 mutant, but 
the recruitment of RNA polymerase II is strongly reduced, arguing that Rpd3 and 
Hos2 regulate later stages in the assembly of the preinitiation complex or 
facilitate multiple rounds of polymerase recruitment. Furthermore, the histone 
H4 acetyltransferase Esa1 is required for the activation of RNR3 and HUG1. Thus, 
reduced or unregulated constitutive histone H4 acetylation is detrimental to 
promoter activity, suggesting that HDAC-dependent mechanisms are in place to 
reset promoters to allow high levels of transcription.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.02311-06
PMCID: PMC1899941
PMID: 17296735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
