---
pmid: '12620186'
title: Cortactin interacts with WIP in regulating Arp2/3 activation and membrane protrusion.
authors:
- Kinley AW
- Weed SA
- Weaver AM
- Karginov AV
- Bissonette E
- Cooper JA
- Parsons JT
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0960-9822(03)00107-6
---

# Cortactin interacts with WIP in regulating Arp2/3 activation and membrane protrusion.
**Authors:** Kinley AW, Weed SA, Weaver AM, Karginov AV, Bissonette E, Cooper JA, Parsons JT
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0960-9822(03)00107-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0960-9822(03)00107-6)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2003 Mar 4;13(5):384-93. doi: 10.1016/s0960-9822(03)00107-6.

Cortactin interacts with WIP in regulating Arp2/3 activation and membrane 
protrusion.

Kinley AW(1), Weed SA, Weaver AM, Karginov AV, Bissonette E, Cooper JA, Parsons 
JT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Health Sciences Center, University of Virginia, 
Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

BACKGROUND: Modulation of actin cytoskeleton assembly is an integral step in 
many cellular events. A key regulator of actin polymerization is Arp2/3 complex. 
Cortactin, an F-actin binding protein that localizes to membrane ruffles, is an 
activator of Arp2/3 complex.
RESULTS: A yeast two-hybrid screen revealed the interaction of the cortactin Src 
homology 3 (SH3) domain with a peptide fragment derived from a cDNA encoding a 
region of WASp-Interacting Protein (WIP). GST-cortactin interacted with WIP in 
an SH3-dependent manner. The subcellular localization of cortactin and WIP 
coincided at the cell periphery. WIP increased the efficiency of 
cortactin-mediated Arp2/3 complex activation of actin polymerization in a 
concentration-dependent manner. Lastly, coexpression of cortactin and WIP 
stimulated membrane protrusions.
CONCLUSIONS: WIP, a protein involved in filopodia formation, binds to both actin 
monomers and cortactin. Thus, recruitment of actin monomers to a 
cortactin-activated Arp2/3 complex likely leads to the observed increase in 
cortactin activation of Arp2/3 complex by WIP. These data suggest that a 
cortactin-WIP complex functions in regulating actin-based structures at the cell 
periphery.

DOI: 10.1016/s0960-9822(03)00107-6
PMID: 12620186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
