---
pmid: '40440427'
title: ASB7 is a negative regulator of H3K9me3 homeostasis.
authors:
- Zhou L
- Chen Z
- Zou Y
- Zhang X
- Wang Z
- Zhu H
- Lin J
- Huang Z
- Zheng L
- Chen J
- Xie M
- Zhang M
- Zhang R
- Zhu M
- Wang Z
- Zhou H
- Gao S
- Yin Y
- Wu Y
- Kang T
journal: Science
year: '2025'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.adq7408
---

# ASB7 is a negative regulator of H3K9me3 homeostasis.
**Authors:** Zhou L, Chen Z, Zou Y, Zhang X, Wang Z, Zhu H, Lin J, Huang Z, Zheng L, Chen J, Xie M, Zhang M, Zhang R, Zhu M, Wang Z, Zhou H, Gao S, Yin Y, Wu Y, Kang T
**Journal:** Science (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.adq7408](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.adq7408)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2025 Jul 17;389(6757):309-316. doi: 10.1126/science.adq7408. Epub
2025  May 29.

ASB7 is a negative regulator of H3K9me3 homeostasis.

Zhou L(#)(1), Chen Z(#)(1), Zou Y(#)(2), Zhang X(1), Wang Z(1), Zhu H(3), Lin 
J(1), Huang Z(1), Zheng L(1), Chen J(1), Xie M(4), Zhang M(1), Zhang R(1), Zhu 
M(5), Wang Z(1), Zhou H(3), Gao S(1), Yin Y(5), Wu Y(1), Kang T(1).

Author information:
(1)Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in 
South China, Guangdong Provincial Clinical Research Center for Cancer, 
Guangzhou, China.
(2)School of Medicine, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-Sen University, Shenzhen, 
China.
(3)Department of Analytical Chemistry, State Key Laboratory of Drug Research, 
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, 
China.
(4)Department of Hematology, Guangzhou First People's Hospital, South China 
University of Technology, Guangzhou, China.
(5)Department of Pathology, Institute of Systems Biomedicine, School of Basic 
Medical Sciences, Beijing Key Laboratory of Tumor Systems Biology, Peking 
University Health Science Center, Beijing, China.
(#)Contributed equally

The maintenance of histone H3 lysine 9 trimethylation (H3K9me3) involves the 
recognition of preexisting modifications by heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1), 
which recruits the methyltransferase suppressor of variegation 3-9 homolog 1 
(SUV39H1) to methylate the adjacent newly incorporated histones, establishing a 
positive feedback loop. However, how this positive feedback is restricted to 
maintain H3K9me3 homeostasis remains largely unknown. We performed an unbiased 
genome-scale CRISPR-Cas9 screen and identified CUL5ASB7 E3 ubiquitin ligase as a 
negative regulator of H3K9me3. ASB7 is recruited to heterochromatin by HP1 and 
promotes SUV39H1 degradation. During mitosis, cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1) 
phosphorylates ASB7, preventing its interaction with SUV39H1, leading to SUV39H1 
stabilization and H3K9me3 restoration. Our findings reveal a dynamic circuit 
involving HP1, SUV39H1, and ASB7 that governs H3K9me3 homeostasis, ensuring 
faithful epigenetic inheritance and preventing excessive heterochromatin 
formation.

DOI: 10.1126/science.adq7408
PMID: 40440427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
