---
pmid: '12124778'
title: GADD45b and GADD45g are cdc2/cyclinB1 kinase inhibitors with a role in S and
  G2/M cell cycle checkpoints induced by genotoxic stress.
authors:
- Vairapandi M
- Balliet AG
- Hoffman B
- Liebermann DA
journal: J Cell Physiol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/jcp.10140
---

# GADD45b and GADD45g are cdc2/cyclinB1 kinase inhibitors with a role in S and G2/M cell cycle checkpoints induced by genotoxic stress.
**Authors:** Vairapandi M, Balliet AG, Hoffman B, Liebermann DA
**Journal:** J Cell Physiol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jcp.10140](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcp.10140)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Physiol. 2002 Sep;192(3):327-38. doi: 10.1002/jcp.10140.

GADD45b and GADD45g are cdc2/cyclinB1 kinase inhibitors with a role in S and 
G2/M cell cycle checkpoints induced by genotoxic stress.

Vairapandi M(1), Balliet AG, Hoffman B, Liebermann DA.

Author information:
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Temple University 
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19140, USA.

Gadd45a (Gadd45), Gadd45b (MyD118), and Gadd45g (CR6) constitute a family of 
evolutionarily conserved, small, acidic, nuclear proteins, which have been 
implicated in terminal differentiation, growth suppression, and apoptosis. How 
Gadd45 proteins function in negative growth control is not fully understood. 
Recent evidence has implicated Gadd45a in inhibition of cdc2/cyclinB1 kinase and 
in G2/M cell cycle arrest. Yet, whether Gadd45b and/or Gadd45g function as 
inhibitors of cdc2/cyclinB1 kinase and/or play a role in G2/M cell cycle arrest 
has not been fully established. In this work, we show that Gadd45b and Gadd45g 
specifically interact with the Cdk1/CyclinB1 complex, but not with other 
Cdk/Cyclin complexes, in vitro and in vivo. Data also has been obtained that 
Gadd45b and Gadd45g, as well as GADD45a, interact with both Cdk1 and cyclinB1, 
resulting in inhibition of the kinase activity of the Cdk1/cyclinB1 complex. 
Inhibition of Cdk1/cyclinB1 kinase activity by Gadd45b and Gadd45a was found to 
involve disruption of the complex, whereas Gadd45g did not disrupt the complex. 
Moreover, using RKO lung carcinoma cell lines, which express antisense Gadd45 
RNA, data has been obtained, which indicates that all three Gadd45 proteins are 
likely to cooperate in activation of S and G2/M checkpoints following exposure 
of cells to UV irradiation.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.10140
PMID: 12124778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
