---
pmid: '27057418'
title: Role of the epithelial cell-specific clathrin adaptor complex AP-1B in cell
  polarity.
authors:
- Fölsch H
journal: Cell Logist
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4820817
doi: 10.1080/21592799.2015.1074331
---

# Role of the epithelial cell-specific clathrin adaptor complex AP-1B in cell polarity.
**Authors:** Fölsch H
**Journal:** Cell Logist (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1080/21592799.2015.1074331](https://doi.org/10.1080/21592799.2015.1074331)
**PMC:** [PMC4820817](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4820817/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Logist. 2015 Jul 30;5(2):e1074331. doi: 10.1080/21592799.2015.1074331. 
eCollection 2015 Apr-Jun.

Role of the epithelial cell-specific clathrin adaptor complex AP-1B in cell 
polarity.

Fölsch H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology; Northwestern University; Feinberg 
School of Medicine ; Chicago, IL USA.

Epithelial cells are important for organ development and function. To this end, 
they polarize their plasma membrane into biochemically and physically distinct 
membrane domains. The apical membrane faces the luminal site of an organ and the 
basolateral domain is in contact with the basement membrane and neighboring 
cells. To establish and maintain this polarity it is important that newly 
synthesized and endocytic cargos are correctly sorted according to their final 
destinations at either membrane. Sorting takes place at one of 2 major sorting 
stations in the cells, the trans-Golgi network (TGN) and recycling endosomes 
(REs). Polarized sorting may involve epithelial cell-specific sorting adaptors 
like the AP-1B clathrin adaptor complex. AP-1B facilitates basolateral sorting 
from REs. This review will discuss various aspects of basolateral sorting in 
epithelial cells with a special emphasis on AP-1B.

DOI: 10.1080/21592799.2015.1074331
PMCID: PMC4820817
PMID: 27057418
