---
pmid: '12972431'
title: Novel cadherin-related membrane proteins, Alcadeins, enhance the X11-like protein-mediated
  stabilization of amyloid beta-protein precursor metabolism.
authors:
- Araki Y
- Tomita S
- Yamaguchi H
- Miyagi N
- Sumioka A
- Kirino Y
- Suzuki T
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M306024200
---

# Novel cadherin-related membrane proteins, Alcadeins, enhance the X11-like protein-mediated stabilization of amyloid beta-protein precursor metabolism.
**Authors:** Araki Y, Tomita S, Yamaguchi H, Miyagi N, Sumioka A, Kirino Y, Suzuki T
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M306024200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M306024200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Dec 5;278(49):49448-58. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M306024200. Epub
2003  Sep 12.

Novel cadherin-related membrane proteins, Alcadeins, enhance the X11-like 
protein-mediated stabilization of amyloid beta-protein precursor metabolism.

Araki Y(1), Tomita S, Yamaguchi H, Miyagi N, Sumioka A, Kirino Y, Suzuki T.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neuroscience, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Hokkaido University, Kita-ku Kita-12 Nishi-6, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.

Previously we found that X11-like protein (X11L) associates with amyloid 
beta-protein precursor (APP). X11L stabilizes APP metabolism and suppresses the 
secretion of the amyloid beta-protein (Abeta) that are the pathogenic agents of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). Here we found that Alcadein (Alc), a novel membrane 
protein family that contains cadherin motifs and originally reported as 
calsyntenins, also interacted with X11L. Alc was abundant in the brain and 
occurred in the same areas of the brain as X11L. X11L could simultaneously 
associate with APP and Alc, resulting in the formation of a tripartite complex 
in brain. The tripartite complex stabilized intracellular APP metabolism and 
enhanced the X11L-mediated suppression of Abeta secretion that is due to the 
retardation of intracellular APP maturation. X11L and Alc also formed another 
complex with C99, a carboxyl-terminal fragment of APP cleaved at the beta-site 
(CTFbeta). The formation of the Alc.X11L.C99 complex inhibited the interaction 
of C99 with presenilin, which strongly suppressed the gamma-cleavage of C99. In 
AD patient brains, Alc and APP were particularly colocalized in dystrophic 
neurites in senile plaques. Deficiencies in the X11L-mediated interaction 
between Alc and APP and/or CTFbeta enhanced the production of Abeta, which may 
be related to the development or progression of AD.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M306024200
PMID: 12972431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
