---
pmid: '17529984'
title: Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 governs learning and synaptic plasticity via control
  of NMDAR degradation.
authors:
- Hawasli AH
- Benavides DR
- Nguyen C
- Kansy JW
- Hayashi K
- Chambon P
- Greengard P
- Powell CM
- Cooper DC
- Bibb JA
journal: Nat Neurosci
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3910113
doi: 10.1038/nn1914
---

# Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 governs learning and synaptic plasticity via control of NMDAR degradation.
**Authors:** Hawasli AH, Benavides DR, Nguyen C, Kansy JW, Hayashi K, Chambon P, Greengard P, Powell CM, Cooper DC, Bibb JA
**Journal:** Nat Neurosci (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nn1914](https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1914)
**PMC:** [PMC3910113](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3910113/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Neurosci. 2007 Jul;10(7):880-886. doi: 10.1038/nn1914. Epub 2007 May 27.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 governs learning and synaptic plasticity via control 
of NMDAR degradation.

Hawasli AH(#)(1), Benavides DR(#)(1), Nguyen C(1), Kansy JW(1), Hayashi K(1), 
Chambon P(2), Greengard P(3), Powell CM(1)(4), Cooper DC(1), Bibb JA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
5323 Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.
(2)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, 67404 
Illkirch Cedex, Centre Universitaire de Strasbourg, France.
(3)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience, The Rockefeller 
University, 1230 York Avenue, New York, New York 10021, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
5323 Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Learning is accompanied by modulation of postsynaptic signal transduction 
pathways in neurons. Although the neuronal protein kinase cyclin-dependent 
kinase 5 (Cdk5) has been implicated in cognitive disorders, its role in learning 
has been obscured by the perinatal lethality of constitutive knockout mice. Here 
we report that conditional knockout of Cdk5 in the adult mouse brain improved 
performance in spatial learning tasks and enhanced hippocampal long-term 
potentiation and NMDA receptor (NMDAR)-mediated excitatory postsynaptic 
currents. Enhanced synaptic plasticity in Cdk5 knockout mice was attributed to 
reduced NR2B degradation, which caused elevations in total, surface and synaptic 
NR2B subunit levels and current through NR2B-containing NMDARs. Cdk5 facilitated 
the degradation of NR2B by directly interacting with both it and its protease, 
calpain. These findings reveal a previously unknown mechanism by which Cdk5 
facilitates calpain-mediated proteolysis of NR2B and may control synaptic 
plasticity and learning.

DOI: 10.1038/nn1914
PMCID: PMC3910113
PMID: 17529984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
