---
pmid: '15120593'
title: Altered Bad localization and interaction between Bad and Bcl-xL in the hippocampus
  after transient global ischemia.
authors:
- Abe T
- Takagi N
- Nakano M
- Furuya M
- Takeo S
journal: Brain Res
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2004.03.003
---

# Altered Bad localization and interaction between Bad and Bcl-xL in the hippocampus after transient global ischemia.
**Authors:** Abe T, Takagi N, Nakano M, Furuya M, Takeo S
**Journal:** Brain Res (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.brainres.2004.03.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2004.03.003)

## Abstract

1. Brain Res. 2004 May 29;1009(1-2):159-68. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2004.03.003.

Altered Bad localization and interaction between Bad and Bcl-xL in the 
hippocampus after transient global ischemia.

Abe T(1), Takagi N, Nakano M, Furuya M, Takeo S.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Department of Pharmacology, Tokyo 
University of Pharmacy and Life Science, 1432-1 Horinouchi, Hachioji, Tokyo 
192-0392, Japan.

Accumulating evidence indicates that the mitochondrial cell-death pathway, which 
involves the release of cytochrome c from mitochondria, participates in neuronal 
cell death after transient cerebral ischemia. However, the upstream events, that 
induce cytochrome c release after transient global ischemia are not fully 
understood. Bad is a pro-apoptotic member of the bcl-2 gene family that promotes 
apoptosis by binding to and inhibiting functions of anti-apoptotic proteins 
Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL. We investigated the effects of transient (15 min) global 
ischemia on the intracellular localization of Bad and the interaction of Bad 
with calcineurin, Akt or Bcl-xL in the vulnerable CA1 and resistant CA3/dentate 
gyrus of the hippocampus. Immunoblotting analysis revealed that the amount of 
Bad in mitochondria significantly increased after ischemia. 
Co-immunoprecipitation studies showed decreased interactions of Bad with Akt and 
calcineurin in the cytosol and increased binding with Bcl-xL in the 
mitochondrial fraction of hippocampal CA1, but not in the CA3/dentate gyrus 
region. Further, we examined the effect of recombinant Bad on the cytochrome c 
release from isolated mitochondria. Treatment with both recombinant Bad and 
calcium, but not with recombinant Bad alone, induced cytochrome c release. These 
results suggest that changes in localization and complex formation by Bad are, 
at least in part, involved in the vulnerability of cells after transient global 
ischemia.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2004.03.003
PMID: 15120593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
