---
pmid: '23159739'
title: Structural switch of lysyl-tRNA synthetase between translation and transcription.
authors:
- Ofir-Birin Y
- Fang P
- Bennett SP
- Zhang HM
- Wang J
- Rachmin I
- Shapiro R
- Song J
- Dagan A
- Pozo J
- Kim S
- Marshall AG
- Schimmel P
- Yang XL
- Nechushtan H
- Razin E
- Guo M
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3766370
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.10.010
---

# Structural switch of lysyl-tRNA synthetase between translation and transcription.
**Authors:** Ofir-Birin Y, Fang P, Bennett SP, Zhang HM, Wang J, Rachmin I, Shapiro R, Song J, Dagan A, Pozo J, Kim S, Marshall AG, Schimmel P, Yang XL, Nechushtan H, Razin E, Guo M
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2012.10.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2012.10.010)
**PMC:** [PMC3766370](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3766370/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2013 Jan 10;49(1):30-42. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.10.010. Epub
2012  Nov 15.

Structural switch of lysyl-tRNA synthetase between translation and 
transcription.

Ofir-Birin Y(1), Fang P, Bennett SP, Zhang HM, Wang J, Rachmin I, Shapiro R, 
Song J, Dagan A, Pozo J, Kim S, Marshall AG, Schimmel P, Yang XL, Nechushtan H, 
Razin E, Guo M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Institute for Medical 
Research Israel-Canada, The Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem 
91120, Israel.

Lysyl-tRNA synthetase (LysRS), a component of the translation apparatus, is 
released from the cytoplasmic multi-tRNA synthetase complex (MSC) to activate 
the transcription factor MITF in stimulated mast cells through undefined 
mechanisms. Here we show that Ser207 phosphorylation provokes a new conformer of 
LysRS that inactivates its translational function but activates its 
transcriptional function. The crystal structure of an MSC subcomplex established 
that LysRS is held in the MSC by binding to the N terminus of the scaffold 
protein p38/AIMP2. Phosphorylation-created steric clashes at the LysRS domain 
interface disrupt its binding grooves for p38/AIMP2, releasing LysRS and 
provoking its nuclear translocation. This alteration also exposes the C-terminal 
domain of LysRS to bind to MITF and triggers LysRS-directed production of the 
second messenger Ap(4)A that activates MITF. Thus our results establish that a 
single conformational change triggered by phosphorylation leads to multiple 
effects driving an exclusive switch of LysRS function from translation to 
transcription.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.10.010
PMCID: PMC3766370
PMID: 23159739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.
