---
pmid: '18775313'
title: UBXD7 binds multiple ubiquitin ligases and implicates p97 in HIF1alpha turnover.
authors:
- Alexandru G
- Graumann J
- Smith GT
- Kolawa NJ
- Fang R
- Deshaies RJ
journal: Cell
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2614663
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.06.048
---

# UBXD7 binds multiple ubiquitin ligases and implicates p97 in HIF1alpha turnover.
**Authors:** Alexandru G, Graumann J, Smith GT, Kolawa NJ, Fang R, Deshaies RJ
**Journal:** Cell (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2008.06.048](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2008.06.048)
**PMC:** [PMC2614663](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2614663/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2008 Sep 5;134(5):804-16. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.06.048.

UBXD7 binds multiple ubiquitin ligases and implicates p97 in HIF1alpha turnover.

Alexandru G(1), Graumann J, Smith GT, Kolawa NJ, Fang R, Deshaies RJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, 1200 East California 
Boulevard, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA.

p97 is an ATP-dependent chaperone that plays an important role in endoplasmic 
reticulum-associated degradation but whose connections to turnover of soluble 
proteins remain sparse. Binding of p97 to substrates is mediated by cofactors 
that contain ubiquitin-binding domains. We employed "network proteomics" to show 
that p97 assembles with all of the 13 mammalian UBX-domain proteins. The UBX 
proteins that bind ubiquitin conjugates also interact with dozens of E3 
ubiquitin ligases, only one of which had been previously linked to p97. In 
particular, UBXD7 links p97 to the ubiquitin ligase CUL2/VHL and its substrate 
hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha (HIF1alpha). Depletion of p97 leads to 
accumulation of endogenous HIF1alpha and increased expression of a HIF1alpha 
target gene. The large number of ubiquitin ligases found associated with UBX 
proteins suggests that p97 plays a far broader role than previously anticipated 
in the global regulation of protein turnover.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.06.048
PMCID: PMC2614663
PMID: 18775313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
