---
pmid: '11831390'
title: The apical localization of SGLT1 glucose transporter is determined by the short
  amino acid sequence in its N-terminal domain.
authors:
- Suzuki T
- Fujikura K
- Koyama H
- Matsuzaki T
- Takahashi Y
- Takata K
journal: Eur J Cell Biol
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1078/0171-9335-00204
---

# The apical localization of SGLT1 glucose transporter is determined by the short amino acid sequence in its N-terminal domain.
**Authors:** Suzuki T, Fujikura K, Koyama H, Matsuzaki T, Takahashi Y, Takata K
**Journal:** Eur J Cell Biol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1078/0171-9335-00204](https://doi.org/10.1078/0171-9335-00204)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Cell Biol. 2001 Dec;80(12):765-74. doi: 10.1078/0171-9335-00204.

The apical localization of SGLT1 glucose transporter is determined by the short 
amino acid sequence in its N-terminal domain.

Suzuki T(1), Fujikura K, Koyama H, Matsuzaki T, Takahashi Y, Takata K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Institute for Molecular and Cellular Regulation, 
Gunma University, Maebashi, Japan. suzutake@showa.gunma-u.ac.jp

SGLT1, an isoform of Na+-dependent glucose cotransporters, is localized at the 
apical plasma membrane in the epithelial cells of the small intestine and the 
kidney, where it plays a pivotal role in the absorption and reabsorption of 
sugars, respectively. To search the domain responsible for the apical 
localization of SGLT1, we constructed an N-terminal deletion clone series of rat 
SGLT1 and analyzed the localization of the respective products in Madin-Darby 
canine kidney (MDCK) cells. The products of N-terminal deletion clones up to the 
19th amino acid were localized at the apical plasma membrane, whereas the 
products of N-terminal 20- and 23-amino-acid deletion clones were localized 
along the entire plasma membrane. Since single-amino-acid mutations of either 
D28N or D28G in the N-terminal domain give rise to glucose/galactose 
malabsorption disease, we examined the localization of these mutants. The 
products of D28N and D28G clones were localized in the cytoplasm, showing that 
the aspartic acid-28 may be essential for the delivery of SGLT1 to the plasma 
membrane. These results suggest that a short amino acid sequence of the 
N-terminal domain of SGLT1 plays important roles in plasma membrane targeting 
and specific apical localization of the protein.

DOI: 10.1078/0171-9335-00204
PMID: 11831390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
