---
pmid: '20176123'
title: 'Chaperone-mediated autophagy: molecular mechanisms and physiological relevance.'
authors:
- Orenstein SJ
- Cuervo AM
journal: Semin Cell Dev Biol
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2914824
doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2010.02.005
---

# Chaperone-mediated autophagy: molecular mechanisms and physiological relevance.
**Authors:** Orenstein SJ, Cuervo AM
**Journal:** Semin Cell Dev Biol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.semcdb.2010.02.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semcdb.2010.02.005)
**PMC:** [PMC2914824](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2914824/)

## Abstract

1. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2010 Sep;21(7):719-26. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2010.02.005.
 Epub 2010 Feb 20.

Chaperone-mediated autophagy: molecular mechanisms and physiological relevance.

Orenstein SJ(1), Cuervo AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Marion Bessin Liver 
Research Center, Institute for Aging Research, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA) is a selective lysosomal pathway for the 
degradation of cytosolic proteins. We review in this work some of the recent 
findings on this pathway regarding the molecular mechanisms that contribute to 
substrate targeting, binding and translocation across the lysosomal membrane. We 
have placed particular emphasis on the critical role that changes in the lipid 
composition of the lysosomal membrane play in the regulation of CMA, as well as 
the modulatory effect of other novel CMA components. In the second part of this 
review, we describe the physiological relevance of CMA and its role as one of 
the cellular mechanisms involved in the response to stress. Changes with age in 
CMA activity and the contribution of failure of CMA to the phenotype of aging 
and to the pathogenesis of several age-related pathologies are also described.

(c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2010.02.005
PMCID: PMC2914824
PMID: 20176123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
