---
pmid: '11809970'
title: Role of the myosin assembly protein UNC-45 as a molecular chaperone for myosin.
authors:
- Barral JM
- Hutagalung AH
- Brinker A
- Hartl FU
- Epstein HF
journal: Science
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.1066648
---

# Role of the myosin assembly protein UNC-45 as a molecular chaperone for myosin.
**Authors:** Barral JM, Hutagalung AH, Brinker A, Hartl FU, Epstein HF
**Journal:** Science (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1066648](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1066648)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2002 Jan 25;295(5555):669-71. doi: 10.1126/science.1066648.

Role of the myosin assembly protein UNC-45 as a molecular chaperone for myosin.

Barral JM(1), Hutagalung AH, Brinker A, Hartl FU, Epstein HF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The organization of myosin into motile cellular structures requires precise 
temporal and spatial regulation. Proteins containing a UCS (UNC-45/CRO1/She4p) 
domain are necessary for the incorporation of myosin into the contractile ring 
during cytokinesis and into thick filaments during muscle development. We report 
that the carboxyl-terminal regions of UNC-45 bound and exerted chaperone 
activity on the myosin head. The amino-terminal tetratricopeptide repeat domain 
of UNC-45 bound the molecular chaperone Hsp90. Thus, UNC-45 functions both as a 
molecular chaperone and as an Hsp90 co-chaperone for myosin, which can explain 
previous findings of altered assembly and decreased accumulation of myosin in 
UNC-45 mutants of Caenorhabditis elegans.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1066648
PMID: 11809970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
