---
pmid: '11604410'
title: HtrA2 promotes cell death through its serine protease activity and its ability
  to antagonize inhibitor of apoptosis proteins.
authors:
- Verhagen AM
- Silke J
- Ekert PG
- Pakusch M
- Kaufmann H
- Connolly LM
- Day CL
- Tikoo A
- Burke R
- Wrobel C
- Moritz RL
- Simpson RJ
- Vaux DL
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109891200
---

# HtrA2 promotes cell death through its serine protease activity and its ability to antagonize inhibitor of apoptosis proteins.
**Authors:** Verhagen AM, Silke J, Ekert PG, Pakusch M, Kaufmann H, Connolly LM, Day CL, Tikoo A, Burke R, Wrobel C, Moritz RL, Simpson RJ, Vaux DL
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M109891200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109891200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jan 4;277(1):445-54. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109891200. Epub 2001 
Oct 16.

HtrA2 promotes cell death through its serine protease activity and its ability 
to antagonize inhibitor of apoptosis proteins.

Verhagen AM(1), Silke J, Ekert PG, Pakusch M, Kaufmann H, Connolly LM, Day CL, 
Tikoo A, Burke R, Wrobel C, Moritz RL, Simpson RJ, Vaux DL.

Author information:
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Post Office Royal 
Melbourne Hospital, Victoria 3050, Australia. verhagen@wehi.edu.au

Inhibitor of apoptosis (IAP) proteins inhibit caspases, a function counteracted 
by IAP antagonists, insect Grim, HID, and Reaper and mammalian DIABLO/Smac. We 
now demonstrate that HtrA2, a mammalian homologue of the Escherichia coli heat 
shock-inducible protein HtrA, can bind to MIHA/XIAP, MIHB, and baculoviral OpIAP 
but not survivin. Although produced as a 50-kDa protein, HtrA2 is processed to 
yield an active serine protease with an N terminus similar to that of Grim, 
Reaper, HID, and DIABLO/Smac that mediates its interaction with XIAP. HtrA2 is 
largely membrane-associated in healthy cells, with a significant proportion 
observed within the mitochondria, but in response to UV irradiation, HtrA2 
shifts into the cytosol, where it can interact with IAPs. HtrA2 can, like 
DIABLO/Smac, prevent XIAP inhibition of active caspase 3 in vitro and is able to 
counteract XIAP protection of mammalian NT2 cells against UV-induced cell death. 
The proapoptotic activity of HtrA2 in vivo involves both IAP binding and serine 
protease activity. Mutations of either the N-terminal alanine of mature HtrA2 
essential for IAP interaction or the catalytic serine residue reduces the 
ability of HtrA2 to promote cell death, whereas a complete loss in proapoptotic 
activity is observed when both sites are mutated.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109891200
PMID: 11604410 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
