---
pmid: '20562830'
title: The ATAC acetyl transferase complex controls mitotic progression by targeting
  non-histone substrates.
authors:
- Orpinell M
- Fournier M
- Riss A
- Nagy Z
- Krebs AR
- Frontini M
- Tora L
journal: EMBO J
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2910275
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.125
---

# The ATAC acetyl transferase complex controls mitotic progression by targeting non-histone substrates.
**Authors:** Orpinell M, Fournier M, Riss A, Nagy Z, Krebs AR, Frontini M, Tora L
**Journal:** EMBO J (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2010.125](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2010.125)
**PMC:** [PMC2910275](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2910275/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2010 Jul 21;29(14):2381-94. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.125. Epub 2010 Jun
 18.

The ATAC acetyl transferase complex controls mitotic progression by targeting 
non-histone substrates.

Orpinell M(1), Fournier M, Riss A, Nagy Z, Krebs AR, Frontini M, Tora L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Functional Genomics, Institut de Génétique et de Biologie 
Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS UMR 7104, INSERM U964, Université de Strasbourg, 
Illkirch Cedex, France.

All DNA-related processes rely on the degree of chromatin compaction. The 
highest level of chromatin condensation accompanies transition to mitosis, 
central for cell cycle progression. Covalent modifications of histones, mainly 
deacetylation, have been implicated in this transition, which also involves 
transcriptional repression. Here, we show that the Gcn5-containing histone 
acetyl transferase complex, Ada Two A containing (ATAC), controls mitotic 
progression through the regulation of the activity of non-histone targets. RNAi 
for the ATAC subunits Ada2a/Ada3 results in delayed M/G1 transition and 
pronounced cell division defects such as centrosome multiplication, defective 
spindle and midbody formation, generation of binucleated cells and 
hyperacetylation of histone H4K16 and alpha-tubulin. We show that ATAC localizes 
to the mitotic spindle and controls cell cycle progression through direct 
acetylation of Cyclin A/Cdk2. Our data describes a new pathway in which the ATAC 
complex controls Cyclin A/Cdk2 mitotic function: ATAC/Gcn5-mediated acetylation 
targets Cyclin A for degradation, which in turn regulates the SIRT2 deacetylase 
activity. Thus, we have uncovered an essential function for ATAC in regulating 
Cyclin A activity and consequent mitotic progression.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2010.125
PMCID: PMC2910275
PMID: 20562830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
