---
pmid: '15389586'
title: Spreading of embryologically distinct urothelial cells is inhibited by SPARC.
authors:
- Hudson AE
- Feng WC
- Delostrinos CF
- Carmean N
- Bassuk JA
journal: J Cell Physiol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/jcp.20140
---

# Spreading of embryologically distinct urothelial cells is inhibited by SPARC.
**Authors:** Hudson AE, Feng WC, Delostrinos CF, Carmean N, Bassuk JA
**Journal:** J Cell Physiol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jcp.20140](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcp.20140)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Physiol. 2005 Feb;202(2):453-63. doi: 10.1002/jcp.20140.

Spreading of embryologically distinct urothelial cells is inhibited by SPARC.

Hudson AE(1), Feng WC, Delostrinos CF, Carmean N, Bassuk JA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Urology, Children's Hospital and Regional Medical 
Center, Seattle, Washington 98105-0371, USA.

The AON epitope of secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine (SPARC) is a 
conserved motif expressed by human SPARC in a variety of human cell types. 
Through the use of a monoclonal antibody that recognizes this epitope, 
transitional epithelium was found to restrict expression of SPARC to the 
suprabasal and intermediate layer. Such intracellular expression was defined by 
immunoreactive signals that localized to the apical plasma membranes of 
suprabasal and intermediate cells. Polarization of SPARC to apical plasma 
membranes of suprabasal cells was retained in vitro by a subpopulation of cells 
that exhibited characteristics of suprabasal cells--cell-cycle quiescence, large 
cell volumes, and multiple nuclei. In contrast, the basal layer of transitional 
epithelium in vivo and cycling cells in vitro did not exhibit this apical 
staining pattern, but instead sequestered the SPARC polypeptide within 
urothelial cytoplasm and/or nuclei, as revealed by immunohistochemical analysis. 
Elution of soluble proteins and DNA from urothelial cells revealed the presence 
of SPARC within the nuclear matrix--and that SPARC colocalized with the nuclear 
matrix Ki-67 antigen. rSPARC activity was demonstrated and quantified with a 
rounding assay whereby the spreading of freshly plated cells was inhibited by 
recombinant SPARC in a concentration- and time-dependent manner. Inhibition of 
spreading was observed in urothelial cells derived from endoderm (bladder) and 
mesoderm (ureter) germ layers. Statistically significant differences were seen 
between urothelial cells from these two layers. Mesodermal cells recovered more 
slowly from the inhibitory effects of rSPARC, such that at hour 6 endodermal 
cells underwent significantly more spreading, as shown by a rounding index (RI). 
These experiments provide new insights about the matricellular trafficking of 
SPARC and suggest that intra- and extra-cellular localization patterns influence 
the development, homeostasis, and differentiation of transitional epithelium.

2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.20140
PMID: 15389586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
