---
pmid: '16314870'
title: 'Serine racemase binds to PICK1: potential relevance to schizophrenia.'
authors:
- Fujii K
- Maeda K
- Hikida T
- Mustafa AK
- Balkissoon R
- Xia J
- Yamada T
- Ozeki Y
- Kawahara R
- Okawa M
- Huganir RL
- Ujike H
- Snyder SH
- Sawa A
journal: Mol Psychiatry
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.mp.4001776
---

# Serine racemase binds to PICK1: potential relevance to schizophrenia.
**Authors:** Fujii K, Maeda K, Hikida T, Mustafa AK, Balkissoon R, Xia J, Yamada T, Ozeki Y, Kawahara R, Okawa M, Huganir RL, Ujike H, Snyder SH, Sawa A
**Journal:** Mol Psychiatry (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.mp.4001776](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.mp.4001776)

## Abstract

1. Mol Psychiatry. 2006 Feb;11(2):150-7. doi: 10.1038/sj.mp.4001776.

Serine racemase binds to PICK1: potential relevance to schizophrenia.

Fujii K(1), Maeda K, Hikida T, Mustafa AK, Balkissoon R, Xia J, Yamada T, Ozeki 
Y, Kawahara R, Okawa M, Huganir RL, Ujike H, Snyder SH, Sawa A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.

Accumulating evidence from both genetic and clinico-pharmacological studies 
suggests that D-serine, an endogenous coagonist to the NMDA subtype glutamate 
receptor, may be implicated in schizophrenia (SZ). Although an association of 
genes for D-serine degradation, such as D-amino acid oxidase and G72, has been 
reported, a role for D-serine in SZ has been unclear. In this study, we identify 
and characterize protein interacting with C-kinase (PICK1) as a protein 
interactor of the D-serine synthesizing enzyme, serine racemase (SR). The 
binding of endogenous PICK1 and SR requires the PDZ domain of PICK1. The gene 
coding for PICK1 is located at chromosome 22q13, a region frequently linked to 
SZ. In a case-control association study using well-characterized Japanese 
subjects, we observe an association of the PICK1 gene with SZ, which is more 
prominent in disorganized SZ. Our findings implicating PICK1 as a susceptibility 
gene for SZ are consistent with a role for D-serine in the disease.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.mp.4001776
PMID: 16314870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
