---
pmid: '19909339'
title: Olfactory receptor signaling is regulated by the post-synaptic density 95,
  Drosophila discs large, zona-occludens 1 (PDZ) scaffold multi-PDZ domain protein
  1.
authors:
- Dooley R
- Baumgart S
- Rasche S
- Hatt H
- Neuhaus EM
journal: FEBS J
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07435.x
---

# Olfactory receptor signaling is regulated by the post-synaptic density 95, Drosophila discs large, zona-occludens 1 (PDZ) scaffold multi-PDZ domain protein 1.
**Authors:** Dooley R, Baumgart S, Rasche S, Hatt H, Neuhaus EM
**Journal:** FEBS J (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07435.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07435.x)

## Abstract

1. FEBS J. 2009 Dec;276(24):7279-90. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07435.x.

Olfactory receptor signaling is regulated by the post-synaptic density 95, 
Drosophila discs large, zona-occludens 1 (PDZ) scaffold multi-PDZ domain protein 
1.

Dooley R(1), Baumgart S, Rasche S, Hatt H, Neuhaus EM.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Medicine Lab RCSI, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Republic of Ireland.

The unique ability of mammals to detect and discriminate between thousands of 
different odorant molecules is governed by the diverse array of olfactory 
receptors expressed by olfactory sensory neurons in the nasal epithelium. 
Olfactory receptors consist of seven transmembrane domain G protein-coupled 
receptors and comprise the largest gene superfamily in the mammalian genome. We 
found that approximately 30% of olfactory receptors possess a classical 
post-synaptic density 95, Drosophila discs large, zona-occludens 1 (PDZ) domain 
binding motif in their C-termini. PDZ domains have been established as sites for 
protein-protein interaction and play a central role in organizing diverse cell 
signaling assemblies. In the present study, we show that multi-PDZ domain 
protein 1 (MUPP1) is expressed in the apical compartment of olfactory sensory 
neurons. Furthermore, on heterologous co-expression with olfactory sensory 
neurons, MUPP1 was shown to translocate to the plasma membrane. We found direct 
interaction of PDZ domains 1 + 2 of MUPP1 with the C-terminus of olfactory 
receptors in vitro. Moreover, the odorant-elicited calcium response of OR2AG1 
showed a prolonged decay in MUPP1 small interfering RNA-treated cells. We have 
therefore elucidated the first building blocks of the putative 'olfactosome', 
brought together by the scaffolding protein MUPP1, a possible central nucleator 
of the olfactory response.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07435.x
PMID: 19909339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
