---
pmid: '12799359'
title: 'Synergistic activation of endothelial nitric-oxide synthase (eNOS) by HSP90
  and Akt: calcium-independent eNOS activation involves formation of an HSP90-Akt-CaM-bound
  eNOS complex.'
authors:
- Takahashi S
- Mendelsohn ME
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M304471200
---

# Synergistic activation of endothelial nitric-oxide synthase (eNOS) by HSP90 and Akt: calcium-independent eNOS activation involves formation of an HSP90-Akt-CaM-bound eNOS complex.
**Authors:** Takahashi S, Mendelsohn ME
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M304471200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M304471200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 15;278(33):30821-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M304471200. Epub
2003  Jun 10.

Synergistic activation of endothelial nitric-oxide synthase (eNOS) by HSP90 and 
Akt: calcium-independent eNOS activation involves formation of an 
HSP90-Akt-CaM-bound eNOS complex.

Takahashi S(1), Mendelsohn ME.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Division of Cardiology, Molecular Cardiology 
Research Institute New England Medical Center Hospitals and Tufts University 
School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02111, USA.

Endothelial nitric-oxide synthase (eNOS), which generates the endogenous 
vasodilator, nitric oxide (NO), is highly regulated by post-translational 
modifications and protein interactions. We recently used purified proteins to 
characterize the mechanisms by which heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) increases 
eNOS activity at low and high Ca2+ levels (Takahashi, S. and Mendelsohn, M. E. 
(2003) J. Biol. Chem. 278, 9339-9344). Here we extend these studies to explore 
interactions between HSP90, Akt, and eNOS. In studies with purified proteins, 
HSP90 increased the initial rate and maximal extent of Akt-mediated eNOS 
phosphorylation and activation at low Ca2+ levels. Akt was not observed in the 
eNOS complex in the absence of HSP90, but both active and inactive Akt 
associated with eNOS in the presence of HSP90. Direct binding of Akt to HSP90 
was observed even in the absence of eNOS. HSP90 also facilitated CaM binding to 
eNOS irrespective of Akt presence. Geldanamycin (GA) disrupted HSP90-eNOS 
binding, reduced HSP90-stimulated CaM binding, and blocked both recruitment of 
Akt to the eNOS complex and phosphorylation of eNOS at Ser-1179. Akt 
phosphorylated only CaM-bound eNOS, in an HSP90-independent manner. HSP90 and 
active Akt together increased eNOS activity synergistically, which was reversed 
by GA. In bovine aortic endothelial cells (BAECs), the effects of vascular 
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and insulin on eNOS-HSP90-Akt complex formation 
and eNOS activation were compared. BAPTA-AM inhibited VEGF- but not 
insulin-induced eNOS-HSP90-Akt complex formation and eNOS phosphorylation. 
Insulin caused rapid, transient increase in eNOS activity correlated temporally 
with the formation of eNOS-HSP90-Akt complex. GA prevented insulin-induced 
association of HSP90, Akt and CaM with eNOS and inhibited eNOS activation in 
BAECs. Both platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and insulin induced activation 
of Akt in BAECs, but only insulin caused HSP90-Akt-eNOS association and eNOS 
phosphorylation. These results demonstrate that HSP90 and Akt synergistically 
activate eNOS and suggest that this synergy contributes to Ca2+-independent eNOS 
activation in response to insulin.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M304471200
PMID: 12799359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
