---
pmid: '32553967'
title: Implications of the mutation S164A on Bacillus subtilis levansucrase product
  specificity and insights into protein interactions acting upon levan synthesis.
authors:
- Ortiz-Soto ME
- Porras-Domínguez JR
- Rodríguez-Alegría ME
- Morales-Moreno LA
- Díaz-Vilchis A
- Rudiño-Piñera E
- Beltrán-Hernandez NE
- Rivera HM
- Seibel J
- López Munguía A
journal: Int J Biol Macromol
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.06.114
---

# Implications of the mutation S164A on Bacillus subtilis levansucrase product specificity and insights into protein interactions acting upon levan synthesis.
**Authors:** Ortiz-Soto ME, Porras-Domínguez JR, Rodríguez-Alegría ME, Morales-Moreno LA, Díaz-Vilchis A, Rudiño-Piñera E, Beltrán-Hernandez NE, Rivera HM, Seibel J, López Munguía A
**Journal:** Int J Biol Macromol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.06.114](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.06.114)

## Abstract

1. Int J Biol Macromol. 2020 Oct 15;161:898-908. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.06.114. Epub 2020 Jun 15.

Implications of the mutation S164A on Bacillus subtilis levansucrase product 
specificity and insights into protein interactions acting upon levan synthesis.

Ortiz-Soto ME(1), Porras-Domínguez JR(2), Rodríguez-Alegría ME(2), 
Morales-Moreno LA(2), Díaz-Vilchis A(2), Rudiño-Piñera E(2), Beltrán-Hernandez 
NE(3), Rivera HM(3), Seibel J(1), López Munguía A(4).

Author information:
(1)Institut für Organische Chemie, Julius-Maximilians-Universität, Am Hubland, 
97074 Würzburg, Germany.
(2)Instituto de Biotecnología, UNAM, Chamilpa, Cuernavaca, Morelos 62240, 
Mexico.
(3)Facultad de Nutrición, UAEM, Calle Iztaccíhuatl #100, Los Volcanes, C.P. 
62350 Cuernavaca, Morelos, Mexico.
(4)Instituto de Biotecnología, UNAM, Chamilpa, Cuernavaca, Morelos 62240, 
Mexico. Electronic address: agustin@ibt.unam.mx.

Mutation S164A largely affects the transfructosylation properties of Bacillus 
subtilis levansucrase (SacB). The variant uses acceptors such as glucose and 
short levans with an average molecular weight of 7.6 kDa more efficiently than 
SacB, leading to the enhanced synthesis of medium and high molecular weight 
polymer and a blasto-oligosaccharide series with a polymerization degree of 
2-10. A 3-fold increase in blasto-oligosaccharides yield is provoked by the 
modified interplay between the variant and glucose. Despite its modified product 
specificity, protein-carbohydrate and protein-protein interactions are still a 
major factor affecting size and distribution of levan molecular weight. This 
study highlights the importance of critical factors such as protein 
concentration in the analysis of wild-type and mutagenized levansucrases. 
Docking experiments with the crystal structures of SacB and variant S164A - the 
latter obtained at a 2.6 Å resolution - identified unreported potential binding 
subsites for fructosyl moieties on the surface of both enzymes.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.06.114
PMID: 32553967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
