---
reference_id: PMID:14585989
title: The FACT complex travels with elongating RNA polymerase II and is important for the fidelity of transcriptional initiation in vivo.
authors:
- Mason PB
- Struhl K
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1128/MCB.23.22.8323-8333.2003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The FACT complex travels with elongating RNA polymerase II and is important for the fidelity of transcriptional initiation in vivo.
**Authors:** Mason PB, Struhl K
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.23.22.8323-8333.2003](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.23.22.8323-8333.2003)

## Content

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Nov;23(22):8323-33. doi: 10.1128/MCB.23.22.8323-8333.2003.

The FACT complex travels with elongating RNA polymerase II and is important for 
the fidelity of transcriptional initiation in vivo.

Mason PB(1), Struhl K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jul;24(14):6536.

The FACT complex facilitates transcription on chromatin templates in vitro, and 
it has been functionally linked to nucleosomes and putative RNA polymerase II 
(Pol II) elongation factors. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells, FACT 
specifically associates with active Pol II genes in a TFIIH-dependent manner and 
travels across the gene with elongating Pol II. Conditional inactivation of the 
FACT subunit Spt16 results in increased Pol II density, transcription, and 
TATA-binding protein (TBP) occupancy in the 3' portion of certain coding 
regions, indicating that FACT suppresses inappropriate initiation from cryptic 
promoters within coding regions. Conversely, loss of Spt16 activity reduces the 
association of TBP, TFIIB, and Pol II with normal promoters. Thus, FACT is 
required for wild-type cells to restrict initiation to normal promoters, thereby 
ensuring that only appropriate mRNAs are synthesized. We suggest that FACT 
contributes to the fidelity of Pol II transcription by linking the processes of 
initiation and elongation.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.23.22.8323-8333.2003
PMCID: PMC262413
PMID: 14585989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]