---
pmid: '10571240'
title: Reelin is a ligand for lipoprotein receptors.
authors:
- D'Arcangelo G
- Homayouni R
- Keshvara L
- Rice DS
- Sheldon M
- Curran T
journal: Neuron
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(00)80860-0
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Reelin is a ligand for lipoprotein receptors.
**Authors:** D'Arcangelo G, Homayouni R, Keshvara L, Rice DS, Sheldon M, Curran T
**Journal:** Neuron (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0896-6273(00)80860-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0896-6273(00)80860-0)

## Abstract

1. Neuron. 1999 Oct;24(2):471-9. doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(00)80860-0.

Reelin is a ligand for lipoprotein receptors.

D'Arcangelo G(1), Homayouni R, Keshvara L, Rice DS, Sheldon M, Curran T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St Jude Children's Research 
Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

A signaling pathway involving the extracellular protein Reelin and the 
intracellular adaptor protein Disabled-1 (Dab1) controls cell positioning during 
mammalian brain development. Here, we demonstrate that Reelin binds directly to 
lipoprotein receptors, preferably the very low-density lipoprotein receptor 
(VLDLR) and apolipoprotein E receptor 2 (ApoER2). Binding requires calcium, and 
it is inhibited in the presence of apoE. Furthermore, the CR-50 monoclonal 
antibody, which inhibits Reelin function, blocks the association of Reelin with 
VLDLR. After binding to VLDLR on the cell surface, Reelin is internalized into 
vesicles. In dissociated neurons, apoE reduces the level of Reelin-induced 
tyrosine phosphorylation of Dab1. These data suggest that Reelin directs 
neuronal migration by binding to VLDLR and ApoER2.

DOI: 10.1016/s0896-6273(00)80860-0
PMID: 10571240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
