---
pmid: '15152091'
title: 'Heterodimers of wild-type and subunit interface mutant enzymes of glutathione
  S-transferase A1-1: interactive or independent active sites?'
authors:
- Vargo MA
- Colman RF
journal: Protein Sci
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2279973
doi: 10.1110/ps.04694004
---

# Heterodimers of wild-type and subunit interface mutant enzymes of glutathione S-transferase A1-1: interactive or independent active sites?
**Authors:** Vargo MA, Colman RF
**Journal:** Protein Sci (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1110/ps.04694004](https://doi.org/10.1110/ps.04694004)
**PMC:** [PMC2279973](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2279973/)

## Abstract

1. Protein Sci. 2004 Jun;13(6):1586-93. doi: 10.1110/ps.04694004.

Heterodimers of wild-type and subunit interface mutant enzymes of glutathione 
S-transferase A1-1: interactive or independent active sites?

Vargo MA(1), Colman RF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Delaware, Newark, DE 
19716, USA.

Heterodimers of rat glutathione S-transferase A1-1 were formed using one 
wild-type subunit and one subunit with a mutation at the interface to evaluate 
whether the subunits are interactive or independent. Within the subunit 
interface, we are considering two regions of interactions: one region consists 
of a "hydrophobic ball and socket" with Phe 52 from one subunit as the ball and 
Phe 136 from the second subunit as one of the socket residues. The second region 
of interaction consists of Arg 69 and Glu 97 from both subunits. The 
heterodimers were formed after incubation in 1,6-hexanediol. Because one subunit 
in each pair had a His-tag, the heterodimers were purified using a 
nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid column. The specific activities of the heterodimer 
were compared with those of the two homodimers to determine whether the less 
active, mutant subunit communicates with the other subunit. Two of the 
heterodimers, wild type/R69E-His and wild type/E97Q-His, displayed specific 
activities much lower than that expected for independent active sites; in these 
cases, there are new close repulsive interactions and the low activity of one 
subunit is communicated to the neighboring subunit. In contrast, the other two 
heterodimers, wild type/R69Q-His and F136A/wild type-His, exhibited specific 
activities similar to those expected for independent active sites; in these 
heterodimers, the closest interaction is not repulsive or occurs over a much 
longer distance and the subunits act independently. We conclude that whether the 
subunits interact or are independent depends on the nature of the interactions 
at the subunit interface.

DOI: 10.1110/ps.04694004
PMCID: PMC2279973
PMID: 15152091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
