---
pmid: '31133753'
title: N4BP1 restricts HIV-1 and its inactivation by MALT1 promotes viral reactivation.
authors:
- Yamasoba D
- Sato K
- Ichinose T
- Imamura T
- Koepke L
- Joas S
- Reith E
- Hotter D
- Misawa N
- Akaki K
- Uehata T
- Mino T
- Miyamoto S
- Noda T
- Yamashita A
- Standley DM
- Kirchhoff F
- Sauter D
- Koyanagi Y
- Takeuchi O
journal: Nat Microbiol
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/s41564-019-0460-3
---

# N4BP1 restricts HIV-1 and its inactivation by MALT1 promotes viral reactivation.
**Authors:** Yamasoba D, Sato K, Ichinose T, Imamura T, Koepke L, Joas S, Reith E, Hotter D, Misawa N, Akaki K, Uehata T, Mino T, Miyamoto S, Noda T, Yamashita A, Standley DM, Kirchhoff F, Sauter D, Koyanagi Y, Takeuchi O
**Journal:** Nat Microbiol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41564-019-0460-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-019-0460-3)

## Abstract

1. Nat Microbiol. 2019 Sep;4(9):1532-1544. doi: 10.1038/s41564-019-0460-3. Epub 
2019 May 27.

N4BP1 restricts HIV-1 and its inactivation by MALT1 promotes viral reactivation.

Yamasoba D(1)(2)(3), Sato K(4)(5)(6), Ichinose T(1)(2)(3), Imamura T(2), Koepke 
L(7), Joas S(7), Reith E(7), Hotter D(7), Misawa N(4), Akaki K(1)(2)(3), Uehata 
T(1)(2), Mino T(1)(2), Miyamoto S(8), Noda T(8), Yamashita A(9), Standley 
DM(10), Kirchhoff F(7), Sauter D(7), Koyanagi Y(4), Takeuchi O(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Chemistry, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto 
University, Kyoto, Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Infection and Prevention, Institute for Frontier Life and 
Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(4)Laboratory of Systems Virology, Institute for Frontier Life and Medical 
Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(5)CREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Saitama, Japan.
(6)Department of Systems Virology, Institute for Medical Science, University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Institute of Molecular Virology, Ulm University Medical Center, Ulm, Germany.
(8)Laboratory of Ultrastructural Virology, Institute for Frontier Life and 
Medical Sciences, Kyoto, Japan.
(9)Department of Molecular Biology, Yokohama City University School of Medicine, 
Kanagawa, Japan.
(10)Department of Genome Informatics, Genome Information Research Center, 
Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.
(11)Department of Medical Chemistry, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto 
University, Kyoto, Japan. otake@mfour.med.kyoto-u.ac.jp.
(12)Laboratory of Infection and Prevention, Institute for Frontier Life and 
Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. otake@mfour.med.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

RNA-modulating factors not only regulate multiple steps of cellular RNA 
metabolism, but also emerge as key effectors of the immune response against 
invading viral pathogens including human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1). 
However, the cellular RNA-binding proteins involved in the establishment and 
maintenance of latent HIV-1 reservoirs have not been extensively studied. Here, 
we screened a panel of 62 cellular RNA-binding proteins and identified 
NEDD4-binding protein 1 (N4BP1) as a potent interferon-inducible inhibitor of 
HIV-1 in primary T cells and macrophages. N4BP1 harbours a prototypical PilT N 
terminus-like RNase domain and inhibits HIV-1 replication by interacting with 
and degrading viral mRNA species. Following activation of CD4+ T cells, however, 
N4BP1 undergoes rapid cleavage at Arg 509 by the paracaspase named 
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma translocation 1 (MALT1). Mutational 
analyses and knockout studies revealed that MALT1-mediated inactivation of N4BP1 
facilitates the reactivation of latent HIV-1 proviruses. Taken together, our 
findings demonstrate that the RNase N4BP1 is an efficient restriction factor of 
HIV-1 and suggest that inactivation of N4BP1 by induction of MALT1 activation 
might facilitate elimination of latent HIV-1 reservoirs.

DOI: 10.1038/s41564-019-0460-3
PMID: 31133753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
