---
pmid: '17581632'
title: Reconstitution reveals the functional core of mammalian eIF3.
authors:
- Masutani M
- Sonenberg N
- Yokoyama S
- Imataka H
journal: EMBO J
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1933396
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601765
---

# Reconstitution reveals the functional core of mammalian eIF3.
**Authors:** Masutani M, Sonenberg N, Yokoyama S, Imataka H
**Journal:** EMBO J (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7601765](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7601765)
**PMC:** [PMC1933396](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1933396/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2007 Jul 25;26(14):3373-83. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601765. Epub 2007
Jun  21.

Reconstitution reveals the functional core of mammalian eIF3.

Masutani M(1), Sonenberg N, Yokoyama S, Imataka H.

Author information:
(1)RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Japan.

Eukaryotic translation initiation factor (eIF)3 is the largest eIF ( 
approximately 650 kDa), consisting of 10-13 different polypeptide subunits in 
mammalian cells. To understand the role of each subunit, we successfully 
reconstituted a human eIF3 complex consisting of 11 subunits that promoted the 
recruitment of the 40S ribosomal subunit to mRNA. Strikingly, the eIF3g and 
eIF3i subunits, which are evolutionarily conserved between human and the yeast 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae are dispensable for active mammalian eIF3 complex 
formation. Extensive deletion analyses suggest that three evolutionarily 
conserved subunits (eIF3a, eIF3b, and eIF3c) and three non-conserved subunits 
(eIF3e, eIF3f, and eIF3h) comprise the functional core of mammalian eIF3.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601765
PMCID: PMC1933396
PMID: 17581632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Eukaryotic translation initiation factor (eIF)3 is the largest eIF (∼650 kDa), consisting of 10–13 different polypeptide subunits in mammalian cells. To understand the role of each subunit, we successfully reconstituted a human eIF3 complex consisting of 11 subunits that promoted the recruitment of the 40S ribosomal subunit to mRNA. Strikingly, the eIF3g and eIF3i subunits, which are evolutionarily conserved between human and the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae are dispensable for active mammalian eIF3 complex formation. Extensive deletion analyses suggest that three evolutionarily conserved subunits (eIF3a, eIF3b, and eIF3c) and three non-conserved subunits (eIF3e, eIF3f, and eIF3h) comprise the functional core of mammalian eIF3.

Introduction

Eukaryotic protein synthesis requires the participation of translation initiation factors that mediate mRNA binding to the 40S ribosomal subunit. Ribosome binding is facilitated by the cap structure (m7GpppN, where N is any nucleotide) at the 5′ end of all cellular mRNAs (except organellar mRNAs). The mRNA cap structure initially binds to eukaryotic initiation factor (eIF) 4F, which consists of the cap binding protein eIF4E, an RNA helicase eIF4A, and a modular scaffold protein eIF4G. eIF4F, in conjunction with eIF4B, disrupts mRNA secondary structure in its 5′-untranslated region and promotes ribosome binding. The 40S ribosomal subunit, in a complex with eIF3, eIF1, eIF1A, and eIF2-GTP-Met-tRNAi Met , binds at or near the cap structure and scans the 5′-untranslated region in search of the initiator AUG codon ( Gingras et al , 1999 ; Hinnebusch, 2000 ; Raught et al , 2000 ). eIF3 is the largest translation initiation factor (∼650 kDa) ( Behlke et al , 1986 ), and consists of 10–13 different polypeptide subunits in mammalian cells ( Hershey and Merrick, 2000 ; Unbehaun et al , 2004 ).

eIF3 is a moderately abundant translation initiation factor, with 0.5–1 molecules/ribosome in HeLa cells and rabbit reticulocyte lysate ( Meyer et al , 1982 ; Mengod and Trachsel, 1985 ). eIF3 plays many functions in initiation complex formation. It interacts with eIF1, eIF5, eIF4B and eIF4G, and the direct interaction between eIF3 and eIF4G may serve as a bridge between the 40S ribosomal subunit and eIF4F-bound mRNA ( Hershey and Merrick, 2000 ). eIF3 stabilizes the binding of the eIF2-GTP-Met-tRNAi Met ternary complex to the 40S subunit ( Chaudhuri et al , 1999 ), and, reciprocally, binding of the ternary complex to the 40S subunit enhances eIF3 binding to the ribosome ( Kolupaeva et al , 2005 ). Even in the absence of the ternary complex, the presence of RNA can promote the binding of eIF3 to the 40S subunit ( Kolupaeva et al , 2005 ). Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is proposed to take advantage of this property of eIF3 to correctly position the viral internal ribosome entry site (IRES) on the 40S ribosome ( Siridechadilok et al , 2005 ). Association of eIF3 with the ribosome is stabilized by a loosely bound eIF3 subunit, eIF3j ( Fraser et al , 2004 ). eIF3j is not associated with the eIF3 complex in quiescent T lymphocytes, but upon mitogenic stimulation joins the other eIF3 subunits, promoting eIF3 binding to 40S ribosomes. This may contribute to increased translation rates during T-lymphocyte activation ( Miyamoto et al , 2005 ). Protein kinases such as mTOR and S6K1 also regulate translation initiation by associating with eIF3 in response to nutrients, energy sufficiency, hormones, and mitogenic agents ( Holz et al , 2005 ; Harris et al , 2006 ). The 20S proteasome specifically cleaves eIF3a, the largest subunit of eIF3, and differentially affects translation of different mRNAs ( Baugh and Pilipenko, 2004 ). Taken together, these findings clearly establish that eIF3 is a pivotal player in translational control ( Hinnebusch, 2006 ).

The function of each subunit of eIF3 has been investigated in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . In budding yeast, eIF3 comprises only five subunits, TIF32 (eIF3a), PRT1 (eIF3b), NIP1 (eIF3c), TIF35 (eIF3g), and TIF34 (eIF3i) ( Asano et al , 1998 ; Phan et al , 1998 ), all of which are conserved in mammalian eIF3. Deletion or mutation of eIF3a ( Valasek et al , 1998 ; Vornlocher et al , 1999 ), eIF3b ( Danaie et al , 1995 ; Phan et al , 1998 ), eIF3c ( Greenberg et al , 1998 ), eIF3g ( Hanachi et al , 1999 ), or eIF3i ( Naranda et al , 1997 ; Verlhac et al , 1997 ) in yeast leads to a vast reduction in protein synthesis, suggesting that each of these five subunits is required for eIF3 integrity. However, a biochemical study using yeast extract suggested that a subcomplex comprising the large three subunits eIF3a, eIF3b, and eIF3c supported translation initiation, and that the small two subunits, eIF3g and eIF3i were dispensable for translation at least in vitro ( Phan et al , 2001 ).

Analysis of mammalian eIF3 has been difficult due to the complexity of eIF3 and to a lack of genetic tools. Because the non-conserved subunits of mammalian eIF3 are not only binding partners but are integral components of the eIF3 complex ( Hershey et al , 1996 ; Unbehaun et al , 2004 ), the structure of the mammalian eIF3 is likely to be considerably different from the yeast eIF3.

As a major step toward elucidating the structure of this multisubunit translation initiation factor and the molecular mechanisms of the mammalian eIF3-mediated translational controls, we reconstituted the human eIF3 by coexpressing 11 human subunit proteins. Remarkably, deletion studies showed that a recombinant eIF3 complex lacking two evolutionarily conserved subunits and three non-conserved subunits is able to support translation initiation and thus constitutes the core of mammalian eIF3.

Discussion

We have successfully reconstituted a functional human eIF3 by coexpressing 11 subunits. This recombinant eIF3 was functional in a 40S ribosome-binding assay using β-globin mRNA. By reconstituting recombinant eIF3 complexes that lacked different individual subunits, we identified the subunits that are dispensable for assembly of an active eIF3 complex. It was striking that two evolutionarily conserved subunits, eIF3g and eIF3i, were not essential for eIF3 activity.

Our findings are in agreement with the structural model of eIF3 proposed for budding yeast in which eIF3g and eIF3i bind to a C-terminal part of eIF3b, but do not play a critical role in the basal activity of eIF3 ( Valasek et al , 2001 , 2002 ). These two subunits seem to work in concert. When the eIF3g subunit is deleted, the eIF3i subunit is also absent from the recombinant eIF3 complex, and vice versa ( Figure 5D and E ). Knockdown of the eIF3g subunit in HeLa cells is accompanied by a reduction in the level of the eIF3i subunit ( Figure 6 ); similarly, a reduction in eIF3g expression leads to depletion of eIF3i in yeast ( Hanachi et al , 1999 ). The physical association of eIF3g and eIF3i has also been observed in budding yeast ( Verlhac et al , 1997 ; Asano et al , 1998 ).

What, then, is the function of the eIF3g and eIF3i subunits? We demonstrated that binding of the 40S ribosome-initiation factor complex at the AUG codon of mRNA does not require the presence of eIF3g and eIF3i ( Figure 5F ). Furthermore, the rate of overall protein synthesis does not change by knockdown of the eIF3g subunit in HeLa cells ( Figure 6B ). Thus, these two subunits might be involved in translational control of specific mRNAs or in particular cellular conditions.

We also found that three evolutionarily non-conserved subunits, eIF3d, eIF3l, and eIF3k, are dispensable for the assembly of active human eIF3. We repeatedly attempted to reconstitute r-eIF3 lacking any one of the other non-conserved subunits (eIF3e, eIF3f, and eIF3h), but obtained only small amounts of complexes that were insufficient for assaying the activity (data not shown). These results imply that eIF3e, eIF3f, and eIF3h are important for efficient formation of a functional eIF3 complex. We also demonstrated the importance of eIF3c for eIF3 activity by showing that r-eIF3(del-c) was not very active in the toeprint analysis ( Figure 5C ), and that transfection of HeLa cells with an siRNA against eIF3c resulted in severely decreased cell viability (data not shown). eIF3c may coordinate the functions of eIF1 and eIF5 by binding these two initiation factors and the 40S ribosome ( Valasek et al , 2003 , 2004 ). The use of r-eIF3(del-c) in various assay systems such as a completely reconstituted translation system ( Alkalaeva et al , 2006 ) with or without eIF1 or eIF5 may provide insight into the role of eIF3c in translation.

In pioneering work using a budding yeast system, Hinnebusch's group demonstrated that a subcomplex consisting of eIF3a, eIF3b, and eIF3c could carry out most eIF3 functions. In this system, the eIF3a subunit was thought to bridge the eIF3b and eIF3c subunits ( Phan et al , 2001 ). Physical interaction of eIF3a and eIF3b has been clearly shown both for budding yeast ( Asano et al , 1998 ; Valasek et al , 2001 ) and mammals ( Methot et al , 1997 ). Although binding of eIF3c to eIF3a was also evident in budding yeast ( Asano et al , 1998 ; Phan et al , 2001 ), such an interaction has not been previously shown for mammals. Fraser et al (2004) expressed five mammalian homologues of budding yeast eIF3 (eIF3a, eIF3b, eIF3c, eIF3g, and eIF3i subunits where the eIF3b subunit was FLAG-tagged) in insect cells, and purified a protein complex by anti-FLAG chromatography. The purified complex consisted of eIF3a, eIF3b, eIF3g, and eIF3i, but not eIF3c, suggesting that evolutionarily non-conserved subunits might be required to stably incorporate eIF3c into the four-subunit complex. In the present study, we coexpressed six non-conserved and five conserved eIF3 subunits, and successfully purified an active eIF3 complex. The purified complex contained eIF3c, as eIF3c was FLAG-tagged and the last step of the purification strategy was anti-FLAG-chromatography. The eIF3c molecule was contained in the purified eIF3 complex such that the association of eIF3c with the eIF3 complex was resistant to high ionic conditions during the Ni-NTA and gel-filtration chromatography purification steps. If the important functions of eIF3 are carried out by the largest three subunits, as suggested by the yeast study ( Phan et al , 2001 ), the role of eIF3e, eIF3f, and eIF3h might be to tightly bind eIF3c to an eIF3a-eIF3b-associated complex rather than to directly participate in translation initiation. In support of this, when only the evolutionarily conserved subunits (eIF3a, eIF3b, eIF3c-FLAG, eIF3g, and eIF3i) were expressed, far less amounts of eIF3a and eIF3b were copurified with eIF3c-FLAG even under physiological ionic conditions than when all the subunits were expressed ( Supplementary Figure S1 ). Of note, the eIF3e subunit was shown to bind to the eIF3c subunit in mammals ( Morris-Desbois et al , 1999 ) and in Arabidopsis ( Yahalom et al , 2001 ). eIF3e and eIF3c each possess a PCI (proteosome-COP9-initiation factor) domain, and eIF3f and eIF3h have a MPN (Mpr1-Pad1-N-terminal) domain. The PCI and MPN domains mediate protein–protein interactions and are also found in some subunits of the 26S proteasome and in the COP9 signalosome ( Chang and Schwechheimer, 2004 ).

Are eIF3e, eIF3f, and eIF3h subunits essential in vivo ? In fission yeast, deletion of the eIF3e subunit is not lethal and leads to only a moderate decrease in protein synthesis ( Bandyopadhyay et al , 2000 ; Akiyoshi et al , 2001 ). However, the presence of the eIF3e was required for formation of a stable eIF3 complex ( Bandyopadhyay et al , 2002 ). In contrast, in fission yeast, eIF3f is essential for growth ( Zhou et al , 2005 ). In Arabidopsis , disruption of eIF3h is not lethal, and has no effect on global protein synthesis ( Kim et al , 2004 ). However, gel filtration of protein extracts from the eIF3h subunit-disrupted plants showed that eIF3 as detected by the presence of eIF3b, eluted in lower molecular weight fractions than did eIF3 from control plants ( Kim et al , 2004 ). Thus, as noted above, the eIF3h subunit could affect the integrity of the eIF3 complex. Presumably, the eIF3e, eIF3f, and eIF3h subunits serve to stabilize the eIF3 complex. These subunits may also be involved in translational regulation. Mammalian eIF3e and eIF3f are proposed to bind to eIF4G ( LeFebvre et al , 2006 ) and mTOR ( Harris et al , 2006 ), respectively. In human cells, the eIF3e subunit mediates translational repression by p56, an interferon-inducible protein ( Guo et al , 2000 ). Plant eIF3h is implicated in translation of specific mRNAs ( Kim et al , 2004 ).

What are the functions of the eIF3d, eIF3l, and eIF3k subunits? These subunits were dispensable for the formation of active mammalian eIF3 in the present study. However, deletion of eIF3d, which did not result in lethality, rendered the eIF3 complex physically unstable in fission yeast ( Bandyopadhyay et al , 2002 ). eIF3d binds to eIF3e in fission yeast ( Yen and Chang, 2000 ; Bandyopadhyay et al , 2002 ), while interactions of mammalian eIF3l with eIF3e ( Morris-Desbois et al , 2001 ) and of mammalian eIF3k with the eIF3c, eIF3g, and eIF3j subunits ( Mayeur et al , 2003 ) have been reported. These intersubunit connections probably increase the physical stability of eIF3.

A pertinent question about the coexpression system used in this study is whether endogenous eIF3 subunits derived from insect cells were incorporated into the recombinant mammalian eIF3 complex. It is unlikely that significant incorporation took place due to the much greater abundance of the recombinant subunits: the recombinant subunits in cell extracts expressed by the baculovirus system are detectable by CBB staining on SDS–PAGE, while those of insect eIF3 are apparently undetectable (data not shown).

Finally, in the present study, we assayed r-eIF3 in toeprint analysis using β-globin mRNA. However, β-globin mRNA is translated in a cap-dependent manner. It will be important to examine whether different combinations of eIF3 subunits would suffice for translation initiation on IRES-containing mRNA such as EMCV ( Pestova et al , 1996 ) or HCV ( Pestova et al , 1998 ). The toeprint analysis in the present study monitors only the formation of the 48S ribosomal complex, but not of the 80S complex, leaving the possibility that different subunits of eIF3 are required at different stages of translation initiation. In addition, eIF3 probably participates not only in initiation but also in termination followed by reinitiation of translation as well ( Nielsen et al , 2004 ; Kolupaeva et al , 2005 ). Thus, it is important to test recombinant eIF3 deletion mutants in a completely reconstituted translation system ( Alkalaeva et al , 2006 ) to examine whether different subunits take part in different phases of translation.
