---
pmid: '25253613'
title: Fis overexpression enhances Pseudomonas putida biofilm formation by regulating
  the ratio of LapA and LapF.
authors:
- Moor H
- Teppo A
- Lahesaare A
- Kivisaar M
- Teras R
journal: Microbiology (Reading)
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1099/mic.0.082503-0
---

# Fis overexpression enhances Pseudomonas putida biofilm formation by regulating the ratio of LapA and LapF.
**Authors:** Moor H, Teppo A, Lahesaare A, Kivisaar M, Teras R
**Journal:** Microbiology (Reading) (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1099/mic.0.082503-0](https://doi.org/10.1099/mic.0.082503-0)

## Abstract

1. Microbiology (Reading). 2014 Dec;160(Pt 12):2681-2693. doi: 
10.1099/mic.0.082503-0. Epub 2014 Sep 24.

Fis overexpression enhances Pseudomonas putida biofilm formation by regulating 
the ratio of LapA and LapF.

Moor H(1), Teppo A(1), Lahesaare A(1), Kivisaar M(1), Teras R(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Riia 23, 51010 
Tartu, Estonia.

Bacteria form biofilm as a response to a number of environmental signals that 
are mediated by global transcription regulators and alarmones. Here we report 
the involvement of the global transcription regulator Fis in Pseudomonas putida 
biofilm formation through regulation of lapA and lapF genes. The major component 
of P. putida biofilm is proteinaceous and two large adhesive proteins, LapA and 
LapF, are known to play a key role in its formation. We have previously shown 
that Fis overexpression enhances P. putida biofilm formation. In this study, we 
used mini-Tn5 transposon mutagenesis to select potential Fis-regulated genes 
involved in biofilm formation. A total of 90 % of the studied transposon mutants 
carried insertions in the lap genes. Since our experiments showed that 
Fis-enhanced biofilm is mostly proteinaceous, the amounts of LapA and LapF from 
P. putida cells lysates were quantified using SDS-PAGE. Fis overexpression 
increases the quantity of LapA 1.6 times and decreases the amount of LapF at 
least 4 times compared to the wild-type cells. The increased LapA expression 
caused by Fis overexpression was confirmed by FACS analysis measuring the amount 
of LapA-GFP fusion protein. Our results suggest that the profusion of LapA in 
the Fis-overexpressed cells causes enhanced biofilm formation in mature stages 
of P. putida biofilm and LapF has a minor role in P. putida biofilm formation.

© 2014 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.082503-0
PMID: 25253613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
