---
pmid: '15809373'
title: Essential role of endothelial Notch1 in angiogenesis.
authors:
- Limbourg FP
- Takeshita K
- Radtke F
- Bronson RT
- Chin MT
- Liao JK
journal: Circulation
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2633594
doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000160870.93058.DD
---

# Essential role of endothelial Notch1 in angiogenesis.
**Authors:** Limbourg FP, Takeshita K, Radtke F, Bronson RT, Chin MT, Liao JK
**Journal:** Circulation (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1161/01.CIR.0000160870.93058.DD](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.CIR.0000160870.93058.DD)
**PMC:** [PMC2633594](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2633594/)

## Abstract

1. Circulation. 2005 Apr 12;111(14):1826-32. doi: 
10.1161/01.CIR.0000160870.93058.DD. Epub 2005 Apr 4.

Essential role of endothelial Notch1 in angiogenesis.

Limbourg FP(1), Takeshita K, Radtke F, Bronson RT, Chin MT, Liao JK.

Author information:
(1)Vascular Medicine Research Unit, Brigham & Women's Hospital, and Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Mass, USA.

BACKGROUND: Notch signaling influences binary cell fate decisions in a variety 
of tissues. The Notch1 receptor is widely expressed during embryogenesis and is 
essential for embryonic development. Loss of global Notch1 function results in 
early embryonic lethality, but the cell type responsible for this defect is not 
known. Here, we identify the endothelium as the primary target tissue affected 
by Notch1 signaling.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We generated an endothelium-specific deletion of Notch1 
using Tie2Cre and conditional Notch1(flox/flox) mice. Mutant embryos lacking 
endothelial Notch1 died at approximately embryonic day 10.5 with profound 
vascular defects in placenta, yolk sac, and embryo proper, whereas heterozygous 
deletion had no effect. In yolk sacs of mutant embryos, endothelial cells formed 
a primary vascular plexus indicative of intact vasculogenesis but failed to 
induce the secondary vascular remodeling required to form a mature network of 
well-organized large and small blood vessels, which demonstrates a defect in 
angiogenesis. These vascular defects were also evident in the placenta, where 
blood vessels failed to invade the placental labyrinth, and in the embryo 
proper, where defective blood vessel maturation led to pericardial and 
intersomitic hemorrhage. Enhanced activation of caspase-3 was detected in 
endothelial and neural cells of mutant mice, which resulted in enhanced 
apoptotic degeneration of somites and the neural tube.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings recapitulate the vascular phenotype of global 
Notch1-/- mutants and indicate an essential cell-autonomous role of Notch1 
signaling in the endothelium during vascular development. These results may have 
important clinical implications with regard to Notch1 signaling in adult 
angiogenesis.

DOI: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000160870.93058.DD
PMCID: PMC2633594
PMID: 15809373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
