---
pmid: '10358038'
title: Calreticulin is expressed on the cell surface of activated human peripheral
  blood T lymphocytes in association with major histocompatibility complex class I
  molecules.
authors:
- Arosa FA
- de Jesus O
- Porto G
- Carmo AM
- de Sousa M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.24.16917
---

# Calreticulin is expressed on the cell surface of activated human peripheral blood T lymphocytes in association with major histocompatibility complex class I molecules.
**Authors:** Arosa FA, de Jesus O, Porto G, Carmo AM, de Sousa M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.274.24.16917](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.24.16917)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jun 11;274(24):16917-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.24.16917.

Calreticulin is expressed on the cell surface of activated human peripheral 
blood T lymphocytes in association with major histocompatibility complex class I 
molecules.

Arosa FA(1), de Jesus O, Porto G, Carmo AM, de Sousa M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology, 
University of Porto, 4150 Porto, Portugal. farosa@ibmc.up.pt

Calreticulin is an endoplasmic reticulum resident molecule known to be involved 
in the folding and assembly of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I 
molecules. In the present study, expression of calreticulin was analyzed in 
human peripheral blood T lymphocytes. Pulse-chase experiments in 
[35S]methionine-labeled T cell blasts showed that calreticulin was associated 
with several proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum and suggested that it was 
expressed at the cell surface. Indeed, the 60-kDa calreticulin was labeled by 
cell surface biotinylation and precipitated from the surface of activated T 
cells together with a protein with an apparent molecular mass of 46 kDa. Cell 
surface expression of calreticulin by activated T lymphocytes was further 
confirmed by immunofluorescence and flow cytometry, studies that showed that 
both CD8+ and CD4+ T cells expressed calreticulin in the plasma membrane. Low 
amounts of cell surface calreticulin were detected in resting T lymphocytes. By 
sequential immunoprecipitation using the conformation independent monoclonal 
antibody HC-10, we provided evidence that the cell surface 46-kDa protein 
co-precipitated with calreticulin is unfolded MHC I. These results show for the 
first time that after T cell activation, significant amounts of calreticulin are 
expressed on the T cell surface, where they are found in physical association 
with a pool of beta2-free MHC class I molecules.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.24.16917
PMID: 10358038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
