---
pmid: '15246877'
title: S-nitrosation of thioredoxin in the nitrogen monoxide/superoxide system activates
  apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1.
authors:
- Yasinska IM
- Kozhukhar AV
- Sumbayev VV
journal: Arch Biochem Biophys
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2004.06.004
---

# S-nitrosation of thioredoxin in the nitrogen monoxide/superoxide system activates apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1.
**Authors:** Yasinska IM, Kozhukhar AV, Sumbayev VV
**Journal:** Arch Biochem Biophys (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.abb.2004.06.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.abb.2004.06.004)

## Abstract

1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2004 Aug 15;428(2):198-203. doi: 
10.1016/j.abb.2004.06.004.

S-nitrosation of thioredoxin in the nitrogen monoxide/superoxide system 
activates apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1.

Yasinska IM(1), Kozhukhar AV, Sumbayev VV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Mechnikov Odessa National University, Per. 
Shampansky 2, Odessa 65058, Ukraine.

In the present study, we have investigated S-nitrosation of reactive thioredoxin 
(Trx) thiol groups in nitric oxide/superoxide system. We have found that Trx 
thiol groups are the targets for S-nitrosation by N2O3-like species generated in 
the system containing xanthine/xanthine oxidase (superoxide producing system) 
and DEA/NO-the *NO donating compound, however, they have shown low sensitivity 
to the *NO derived from DEA/NO. N2O3-dependent S-nitrosation of Trx at 
approximately 2-fold of NO excess compared to the superoxide amount resulted in 
dissociation and activation of apoptosis signal regulating kinase 1 (ASK1). 
However, approximately 4-fold of NO excess compared to a superoxide production 
preserved the level of dissociated ASK1 but decreased its activity due to the 
enzyme S-nitrosation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.abb.2004.06.004
PMID: 15246877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
