---
pmid: '17297443'
title: GRIM-19 associates with the serine protease HtrA2 for promoting cell death.
authors:
- Ma X
- Kalakonda S
- Srinivasula SM
- Reddy SP
- Platanias LC
- Kalvakolanu DV
journal: Oncogene
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1210287
---

# GRIM-19 associates with the serine protease HtrA2 for promoting cell death.
**Authors:** Ma X, Kalakonda S, Srinivasula SM, Reddy SP, Platanias LC, Kalvakolanu DV
**Journal:** Oncogene (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1210287](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1210287)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2007 Jul 19;26(33):4842-9. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1210287. Epub 2007
Feb  12.

GRIM-19 associates with the serine protease HtrA2 for promoting cell death.

Ma X(1), Kalakonda S, Srinivasula SM, Reddy SP, Platanias LC, Kalvakolanu DV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Greenebaum Cancer Center, 
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

We have isolated a novel interferon (IFN)-retinoid regulated cell death 
regulatory protein genes associated with retinoid-IFN-induced mortality 
(GRIM)-19 earlier. To understand its mechanism of action, we have employed a 
yeast-two-hybrid screen and identified serine protease HtrA2 as its binding 
partner. GRIM-19 physically interacts with HtrA2 and augments cell death in an 
IFN/all-trans retinoic acid (RA)-dependent manner. In the presence of GRIM-19, 
the HtrA2-driven destruction of the antiapoptotic protein X-linked inhibitor of 
apoptosis (XIAP) is augmented. These interactions were disrupted by an human 
herpes virus-8 (HHV-8)-coded oncoprotein, vIRF1, and conferred resistance to 
IFN/RA-induced cell death. These data show a critical role of HtrA2 in a 
cytokine-induced cell death response for the first time and its inhibition by a 
viral protein.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1210287
PMID: 17297443 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
