---
pmid: '19118186'
title: Spatial learning impairment, enhanced CDK5/p35 activity, and downregulation
  of NMDA receptor expression in transgenic mice expressing tau-tubulin kinase 1.
authors:
- Sato S
- Xu J
- Okuyama S
- Martinez LB
- Walsh SM
- Jacobsen MT
- Swan RJ
- Schlautman JD
- Ciborowski P
- Ikezu T
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6671237
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3417-08.2008
---

# Spatial learning impairment, enhanced CDK5/p35 activity, and downregulation of NMDA receptor expression in transgenic mice expressing tau-tubulin kinase 1.
**Authors:** Sato S, Xu J, Okuyama S, Martinez LB, Walsh SM, Jacobsen MT, Swan RJ, Schlautman JD, Ciborowski P, Ikezu T
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3417-08.2008](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3417-08.2008)
**PMC:** [PMC6671237](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6671237/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2008 Dec 31;28(53):14511-21. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3417-08.2008.

Spatial learning impairment, enhanced CDK5/p35 activity, and downregulation of 
NMDA receptor expression in transgenic mice expressing tau-tubulin kinase 1.

Sato S(1), Xu J, Okuyama S, Martinez LB, Walsh SM, Jacobsen MT, Swan RJ, 
Schlautman JD, Ciborowski P, Ikezu T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience and Center for 
Neurovirology and Neurodegenerative Disorders, University of Nebraska Medical 
Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68198-5880, USA.

Tau-tubulin kinase-1 (TTBK1) is involved in phosphorylation of tau protein at 
specific Serine/Threonine residues found in paired helical filaments, suggesting 
its role in tauopathy pathogenesis. We found that TTBK1 levels were upregulated 
in brains of human Alzheimer' disease (AD) patients compared with age-matched 
non-AD controls. To understand the effects of TTBK1 activation in vivo, we 
developed transgenic mice harboring human full-length TTBK1 genomic DNA 
(TTBK1-Tg). Transgenic TTBK1 is highly expressed in subiculum and cortical 
pyramidal layers, and induces phosphorylated neurofilament aggregation. TTBK1-Tg 
mice show significant age-dependent memory impairment as determined by radial 
arm water maze test, which is associated with enhancement of tau and 
neurofilament phosphorylation, increased levels of p25 and p35, both activators 
of cyclin-dependent protein kinase 5 (CDK5), enhanced calpain I activity, and 
reduced levels of hippocampal NMDA receptor types 2B (NR2B) and D. Enhanced 
CDK5/p35 complex formation is strongly correlated with dissociation of F-actin 
from p35, suggesting the inhibitory mechanism of CDK5/p35 complex formation by 
F-actin. Expression of recombinant TTBK1 in primary mouse cortical neurons 
significantly downregulated NR2B in a CDK5- and calpain-dependent manner. These 
data suggest that TTBK1 in AD brain may be one of the underlying mechanisms 
inducing CDK5 and calpain activation, NR2B downregulation, and subsequent memory 
dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3417-08.2008
PMCID: PMC6671237
PMID: 19118186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
