---
pmid: '11553781'
title: Serine-345 is required for Rad3-dependent phosphorylation and function of checkpoint
  kinase Chk1 in fission yeast.
authors:
- Lopez-Girona A
- Tanaka K
- Chen XB
- Baber BA
- McGowan CH
- Russell P
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2001'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC58722
doi: 10.1073/pnas.191557598
---

# Serine-345 is required for Rad3-dependent phosphorylation and function of checkpoint kinase Chk1 in fission yeast.
**Authors:** Lopez-Girona A, Tanaka K, Chen XB, Baber BA, McGowan CH, Russell P
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.191557598](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.191557598)
**PMC:** [PMC58722](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC58722/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Sep 25;98(20):11289-94. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.191557598. Epub 2001 Sep 11.

Serine-345 is required for Rad3-dependent phosphorylation and function of 
checkpoint kinase Chk1 in fission yeast.

Lopez-Girona A(1), Tanaka K, Chen XB, Baber BA, McGowan CH, Russell P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, MB3, The Scripps Research 
Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Genome integrity is monitored by a checkpoint that delays mitosis in response to 
DNA damage. This checkpoint is enforced by Chk1, a protein kinase that inhibits 
the mitotic inducer Cdc25. In fission yeast, Chk1 is regulated by a group of 
proteins that includes Rad3, a protein kinase related to human ATM and ATR. 
These kinases phosphorylate serine or threonine followed by glutamine (SQ/TQ). 
Fission yeast and human Chk1 proteins share two conserved SQ motifs at 
serine-345 and serine-367. Serine-345 of human Chk1 is phosphorylated in 
response to DNA damage. Here we report that Rad3 and ATM phosphorylate 
serine-345 of fission yeast Chk1. Mutation of serine-345 (chk1-S345A) abrogates 
Rad3-dependent phosphorylation of Chk1 in vivo. The chk1-S345A cells are 
sensitive to DNA damage and are checkpoint defective. In contrast, mutations of 
serine-367 and other SQ/TQ sites do not substantially impair the checkpoint or 
cause damage sensitivity. These findings attest to the importance of serine-345 
phosphorylation for Chk1 function and strengthen evidence that transduction of 
the DNA damage checkpoint signal requires direct phosphorylation of Chk1 by 
Rad3.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.191557598
PMCID: PMC58722
PMID: 11553781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Genome integrity is monitored by a checkpoint that delays mitosis
 in response to DNA damage. This checkpoint is enforced by Chk1, a
 protein kinase that inhibits the mitotic inducer Cdc25. In fission
 yeast, Chk1 is regulated by a group of proteins that includes Rad3, a
 protein kinase related to human ATM and ATR. These kinases
 phosphorylate serine or threonine followed by glutamine (SQ/TQ).
 Fission yeast and human Chk1 proteins share two conserved SQ motifs at
 serine-345 and serine-367. Serine-345 of human Chk1 is phosphorylated
 in response to DNA damage. Here we report that Rad3 and ATM
 phosphorylate serine-345 of fission yeast Chk1. Mutation of serine-345
 ( chk1-S345A ) abrogates Rad3-dependent phosphorylation of
 Chk1 in vivo . The chk1-S345A cells are
 sensitive to DNA damage and are checkpoint defective. In contrast,
 mutations of serine-367 and other SQ/TQ sites do not substantially
 impair the checkpoint or cause damage sensitivity. These findings
 attest to the importance of serine-345 phosphorylation for Chk1
 function and strengthen evidence that transduction of the DNA damage
 checkpoint signal requires direct phosphorylation of Chk1 by Rad3.

Discussion

A central aim of checkpoint studies in fission yeast is to
 understand how the DNA damage signal is transmitted from the point of
 damage, through Rad3 and other checkpoint proteins, to the checkpoint
 effector kinase Chk1. Evidence has been building that Chk1
 phosphorylation is regulated by Rad3 in fission yeast and ATR in
 metazoan organisms ( 14 , 15 , 22 , 23 ), but the physiological importance
 of this phosphorylation was uncertain. In this article, we have shown
 that serine-345 of fission yeast Chk1, which is phosphorylated in
 vitro by Rad3, is required for Chk1 phosphorylation, DNA damage
 survival, and checkpoint enforcement in vivo . These data
 provide persuasive evidence that phosphorylation of Chk1 at serine-345
 is required to engage the G 2 -M DNA damage
 checkpoint.

These findings confirm and extend several recent investigations that
 have linked Chk1 regulation to ATR in metazoan species. Studies with
 human tissue culture cells showed that serine-345 of Chk1 is
 phosphorylated in response to DNA damage ( 22 ). Serine-345
 phosphorylation was modulated by high expression of ATR. This work
 established a link between ATR and serine-345 phosphorylation. A
 separate study showed that ATR controls Chk1 phosphorylation in Xenopus egg extracts ( 23 ). Xenopus ATR
 phosphorylated Chk1 at multiple SQ/TQ sites in vitro . One
 of these sites, serine-344, appears to align with serine-345 in human
 and fission yeast Chk1 (Fig. 1 a ). Mutant Chk1 that lacked
 serine-345 and three additional SQ/TQ sites was unable to restore a
 mitotic checkpoint when added to Chk1-depleted Xenopus egg
 extracts that were supplemented with sperm nuclei and a replication
 inhibitor ( 23 ). More recently, another study with human tissue culture
 cells showed that ATR controls phosphorylation of serine-317 and
 serine-345 of human Chk1 ( 24 ). A mutant form of Chk1 that had alanine
 substitutions at these two positions exhibited impaired activation.
 These studies showed that one or possibly a combination of SQ/TQ
 sites is important for Chk1 function in these assay systems.

This work extends the understanding of DNA damage checkpoints in
 several ways. Most importantly, by finding that chk1-S345A cells are highly sensitive to killing by UV radiation, at a level
 equivalent to that of chk1 Δ cells, we have established the
 physiological importance of a conserved phosphorylation site in Chk1.
 DNA damage checkpoints serve to enhance genome stability and survival
 of DNA damage; thus it is important to demonstrate that elimination of
 conserved phosphorylation site in Chk1 diminishes the ability of cells
 to survive exposure to a DNA-damaging agent. Furthermore, we have
 refined the analysis of individual SQ/TQ sites in Chk1 by showing
 that serine-345 of Chk1 is essential for the DNA damage checkpoint
 arrest and important for UV survival in vivo . Previous work
 left unresolved whether any of the individual SQ/TQ sites in the
 C-terminal domain of Chk1 were important for checkpoint arrest ( 22 , 23 ). We further demonstrated the physiological importance of serine-345
 by showing that the UV survival profile of the chk1-S345A mutant was equivalent to a chk1 Δ mutant. These studies
 establish the functional relevance of a conserved phosphorylation site
 in Chk1 in the context of a living organism.

In contrast to the chk1-S345A mutation, none of the other
 mutations of SQ/TQ motifs enhanced sensitivity to DNA damage.
 Furthermore, all of the mutant strains (except chk1-S345A )
 arrested division in response to DNA damage. These findings argue that
 serine-345 is the crucially important site of phosphorylation on Chk1,
 and that if phosphorylation occurs at other SQ/TQ motifs, these
 phosphorylations have little measurable effect on Chk1 function. In
 carefully performed studies with synchronous cultures, we noticed that chk1-S345A cells exhibit a very abbreviated checkpoint delay
 in response to bleomycin treatment (Fig. 4 b ). Therefore, it
 is formally possible that Chk1 is very weakly regulated by
 phosphorylation at another position. In fact, we have noted that chk1-T323A cells slowly resume division after arresting for
 3 h in bleomcyin, whereas wild-type cells and other SQ/TQ
 mutants remain arrested for at least 4 h (unpublished data). These
 findings suggest that minor regulation of Chk1 might be mediated
 through phosphorylation of threonine-323, although ablation of
 threonine-323 has no measurable effect on survival of ionizing
 radiation, UV, or bleomycin when these agents are applied as a pulse of
 DNA damage.

These studies also provide some hints as to how Chk1 might be regulated
 by phosphorylation of serine-345. The simplest possibility was that
 serine-345 phosphorylation was required for the kinase activity of
 Chk1. We found that wild-type GST-Chk1 and mutant
 GST-Chk1 S345A were equally potent in their
 ability to arrest division when overexpressed in fission yeast. In
 contrast, a kinase-inactive form of Chk1 was unable to arrest division
 when overexpressed. These findings strongly suggest that
 Chk1 S345A is active as a protein kinase and argue
 against the possibility that the chk1-S345A mutation
 severely disrupts Chk1 structure. Thus, it appears that Chk1 is active
 without serine-345 phosphorylation, but serine-345 phosphorylation must
 in some way further enhance Chk1 activity in vivo . We have
 been unable to measure an increase in the kinase activity of
 immunoprecipitated Chk1 in response to irradiation (Beth Baber-Furnari
 and P.R., unpublished data). However, recent studies measured an
 increase in kinase activity of hyperphosphorylated Chk1 isolated from
 checkpoint-activated Xenopus egg extracts treated with a
 phosphatase inhibitor and from checkpoint-arrested human tissue culture
 cells ( 24 , 32 ). Thus far, there have been no reports of direct in
 vitro activation of Chk1 with an ATM-related kinase. It is
 possible that other proteins are required for effective phosphorylation
 of Chk1 by Rad3. One such protein might be Crb2/Rhp9, a protein that
 is required for Chk1 phosphorylation and associates with Chk1 in a
 yeast two-hybrid assay ( 33 , 34 ). In this regard it is notable that Chk1
 phosphorylation in Xenopus oocyte extracts correlates with a
 physical association with Claspin, a novel checkpoint protein ( 32 ). It
 is possible that Crb2 and Claspin perform similar functions in their
 respective organisms. Interestingly, certain deletions or point
 mutations in the C terminus of Chk1 activate Chk1 when assayed with in vitro kinase assays or the Xenopus extract
 mitotic induction system ( 35 – 37 ). These findings suggest that the C
 terminus of Chk1 might inhibit Chk1 activity.

One limitation of our studies is that they do not provide direct
 evidence that serine-345 is phosphorylated in vivo .
 Metabolic labeling experiments of Chk1 with radioactive phosphate have
 been unsuccessful, and phosphospecific antisera for serine-345 are not
 yet available. Serine-345 is required for mobility shift of Chk1 that
 is caused by Rad3-dependent phosphorylation, but it is formally
 possible that serine-345 is not an actual site of phosphorylation.
 However, the simplest interpretation of the data is that serine-345 is
 phosphorylated by Rad3 in vivo . This explanation is
 consistent with studies of mammalian cells demonstrating that
 serine-345 is phosphorylated in vivo ( 22 ).

Our findings provide evidence that Rad3 controls Chk1 by direct
 phosphorylation. This phosphorylation is required for Chk1 function
 and, as a consequence, the G 2 -M DNA damage
 checkpoint. Chk1 phosphorylation also requires Rad1, Rad9, Rad17,
 Rad26, Hus1 ( 14 ), Rfc3 (and presumably other small subunits of RFC)
 ( 38 ), and Crb2/Rhp9 ( 33 ). It appears that Rad3 activation is
 independent of all of these proteins, with the exception of Rad26 ( 11 ).
 The requirement for Rad26 is readily understandable, as Rad3 associates
 with Rad26 in vivo , and it is likely that the two proteins
 function as a complex. It is yet to be understood why so many proteins
 are required for Rad3 to phosphorylate Chk1 in vivo .
