---
pmid: '16446437'
title: Abeta and tau form soluble complexes that may promote self aggregation of both
  into the insoluble forms observed in Alzheimer's disease.
authors:
- Guo JP
- Arai T
- Miklossy J
- McGeer PL
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1413647
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0509386103
---

# Abeta and tau form soluble complexes that may promote self aggregation of both into the insoluble forms observed in Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Guo JP, Arai T, Miklossy J, McGeer PL
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0509386103](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0509386103)
**PMC:** [PMC1413647](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1413647/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Feb 7;103(6):1953-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0509386103. Epub 2006 Jan 30.

Abeta and tau form soluble complexes that may promote self aggregation of both 
into the insoluble forms observed in Alzheimer's disease.

Guo JP(1), Arai T, Miklossy J, McGeer PL.

Author information:
(1)Kinsmen Laboratory of Neurological Research, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, BC, Canada V6T 1Z3.

To date, there is no reasonable explanation as to why plaques and tangles 
simultaneously accumulate in Alzheimer's disease (AD). We demonstrate here by 
Western blotting and ELISA that a stable complex can form between tau and 
amyloid-beta protein (Abeta). This complex enhances tau phosphorylation by 
GSK3beta, but the phosphorylation then promotes dissociation of the complex. We 
have localized the sites of this interaction by using peptide membrane arrays. 
Abeta binds to multiple tau peptides, especially those in exons 7 and 9. This 
binding is sharply reduced or abolished by phosphorylation of specific serine 
and threonine residues. Conversely, tau binds to multiple Abeta peptides in the 
mid to C-terminal regions of Abeta. This binding is also significantly decreased 
by GSK3beta phosphorylation of tau. We used surface plasmon resonance to 
determine the binding affinity of Abeta for tau and found it to be in the low 
nanomolar range and almost 1,000-fold higher than tau for itself. In soluble 
extracts from AD and control brain tissue, we detected Abeta bound to tau in 
ELISAs. We also found by double immunostaining of AD brain tissue that 
phosphorylated tau and Abeta form separate insoluble complexes within the same 
neurons and their processes. We hypothesize that in AD, an initial step in the 
pathogenesis may be the intracellular binding of soluble Abeta to soluble 
nonphosphorylated tau, thus promoting tau phosphorylation and Abeta nucleation. 
Blocking the sites where Abeta initially binds to tau might arrest the 
simultaneous formation of plaques and tangles in AD.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0509386103
PMCID: PMC1413647
PMID: 16446437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts 
declared.
