---
pmid: '18430416'
title: Involvement of HMG-12 and CAR-1 in the cdc-48.1 expression of Caenorhabditis
  elegans.
authors:
- Yamauchi S
- Higashitani N
- Otani M
- Higashitani A
- Ogura T
- Yamanaka K
journal: Dev Biol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.02.057
---

# Involvement of HMG-12 and CAR-1 in the cdc-48.1 expression of Caenorhabditis elegans.
**Authors:** Yamauchi S, Higashitani N, Otani M, Higashitani A, Ogura T, Yamanaka K
**Journal:** Dev Biol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.02.057](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.02.057)

## Abstract

1. Dev Biol. 2008 Jun 15;318(2):348-59. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.02.057. Epub
2008  Mar 13.

Involvement of HMG-12 and CAR-1 in the cdc-48.1 expression of Caenorhabditis 
elegans.

Yamauchi S(1), Higashitani N, Otani M, Higashitani A, Ogura T, Yamanaka K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Molecular Embryology and 
Genetics, Kumamoto University, 2-2-1 Honjo, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.

Caenorhabditis elegans possesses two p97/VCP/Cdc48p homologues, named CDC-48.1 
(C06A1.1) and CDC-48.2 (C41C4.8), and their expression patterns and levels are 
differently regulated. To clarify the regulatory mechanisms of differential 
expression of two p97 proteins of C. elegans, we performed detailed deletion 
analysis of their promoter regions. We found that the promoter of cdc-48.1 
contains two regions necessary for embryonic and for post-embryonic expression, 
while the promoter of cdc-48.2 contains the single region necessary for 
embryonic expression. In particular, two elements (Element A and Element B) and 
three conserved boxes (Box a, Box b and Box c) were essential for cdc-48.1 
expression in embryos and at post-embryonic stages, respectively. By using 
South-Western blotting and MALDI-TOF MS analysis, we identified HMG-12 and CAR-1 
as proteins that bind to Element A and Element B, respectively, from the 
embryonic nuclear extract. Importantly, we found the decreased expression of p97 
in embryos prepared from hmg-12(RNAi) or car-1(RNAi) worms. These results 
indicate that both HMG-12 and CAR-1 play important roles in embryonic expression 
of cdc-48.1.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.02.057
PMID: 18430416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
