---
pmid: '24881874'
title: Transcriptional regulation by Pho23 modulates the frequency of autophagosome
  formation.
authors:
- Jin M
- He D
- Backues SK
- Freeberg MA
- Liu X
- Kim JK
- Klionsky DJ
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4169046
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2014.04.048
---

# Transcriptional regulation by Pho23 modulates the frequency of autophagosome formation.
**Authors:** Jin M, He D, Backues SK, Freeberg MA, Liu X, Kim JK, Klionsky DJ
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cub.2014.04.048](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2014.04.048)
**PMC:** [PMC4169046](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4169046/)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2014 Jun 16;24(12):1314-1322. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2014.04.048. Epub 
2014 May 29.

Transcriptional regulation by Pho23 modulates the frequency of autophagosome 
formation.

Jin M(1), He D(1), Backues SK(1), Freeberg MA(2), Liu X(1), Kim JK(3), Klionsky 
DJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Life Sciences Institute and Department of Molecular, Cellular and 
Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
(2)Life Sciences Institute and Department of Computational Medicine and 
Bioinformatics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
(3)Life Sciences Institute and Department of Human Genetics, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
(4)Life Sciences Institute and Department of Molecular, Cellular and 
Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. 
Electronic address: klionsky@umich.edu.

BACKGROUND: Autophagy as a conserved lysosomal/vacuolar degradation and 
recycling pathway is important in normal development and physiology, and defects 
in this process are linked to many kinds of disease. Because too much or too 
little autophagy can be detrimental, the process must be tightly regulated both 
temporally and in magnitude. Two parameters that affect this regulation are the 
size and the number of autophagosomes; however, although we know that the amount 
of Atg8 affects the size of autophagosomes, the mechanism for regulating their 
number has not been elucidated. The transcriptional induction and repression of 
the autophagy-related (ATG) genes is one crucial aspect of autophagy regulation, 
but the transcriptional regulators that modulate autophagy are not well 
characterized.
RESULTS: We detected increased expression levels of ATG genes, and elevated 
autophagy activity, in cells lacking the transcriptional regulator Pho23. Using 
transmission electron microscopy, we found that PHO23 null mutant cells contain 
significantly more autophagosomes than the wild-type. By RNA sequencing 
transcriptome profiling, we identified ATG9 as one of the key targets of Pho23, 
and our studies with strains expressing modulated levels of Atg9 show that the 
amount of this protein directly correlates with the frequency of autophagosome 
formation and the level of autophagy activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results identified Pho23 as a master transcriptional repressor 
for autophagy that regulates the frequency of autophagosome formation through 
its negative regulation of ATG9.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2014.04.048
PMCID: PMC4169046
PMID: 24881874 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
