---
pmid: '32327536'
title: STRESS INDUCED FACTOR 2 Regulates Arabidopsis Stomatal Immunity through Phosphorylation
  of the Anion Channel SLAC1.
authors:
- Chan C
- Panzeri D
- Okuma E
- Tõldsepp K
- Wang YY
- Louh GY
- Chin TC
- Yeh YH
- Yeh HL
- Yekondi S
- Huang YH
- Huang TY
- Chiou TJ
- Murata Y
- Kollist H
- Zimmerli L
journal: Plant Cell
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC7346559
doi: 10.1105/tpc.19.00578
---

# STRESS INDUCED FACTOR 2 Regulates Arabidopsis Stomatal Immunity through Phosphorylation of the Anion Channel SLAC1.
**Authors:** Chan C, Panzeri D, Okuma E, Tõldsepp K, Wang YY, Louh GY, Chin TC, Yeh YH, Yeh HL, Yekondi S, Huang YH, Huang TY, Chiou TJ, Murata Y, Kollist H, Zimmerli L
**Journal:** Plant Cell (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1105/tpc.19.00578](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.19.00578)
**PMC:** [PMC7346559](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7346559/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell. 2020 Jul;32(7):2216-2236. doi: 10.1105/tpc.19.00578. Epub 2020 Apr
 23.

STRESS INDUCED FACTOR 2 Regulates Arabidopsis Stomatal Immunity through 
Phosphorylation of the Anion Channel SLAC1.

Chan C(1)(2), Panzeri D(1), Okuma E(3), Tõldsepp K(4), Wang YY(1), Louh GY(1), 
Chin TC(1), Yeh YH(1), Yeh HL(2), Yekondi S(1), Huang YH(1), Huang TY(1), Chiou 
TJ(2), Murata Y(3), Kollist H(4), Zimmerli L(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science and Institute of Plant Biology, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei 106, Taiwan.
(2)Agricultural Biotechnology Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, 
Taiwan.
(3)Graduate School of Environmental and Life Science, Okayama University, 
Okayama 700-8530, Japan.
(4)University of Tartu, Tartu 50411, Estonia.
(5)Department of Life Science and Institute of Plant Biology, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei 106, Taiwan lozim4@gmail.com.

Comment in
    Plant Cell. 2020 Jul;32(7):2069-2070. doi: 10.1105/tpc.20.00404.

Upon recognition of microbes, pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) activate 
pattern-triggered immunity. FLAGELLIN SENSING2 (FLS2) and BRASSINOSTEROID 
INSENSITIVE1-ASSOCIATED KINASE1 (BAK1) form a typical PRR complex that senses 
bacteria. Here, we report that the kinase activity of the malectin-like 
receptor-like kinase STRESS INDUCED FACTOR 2 (SIF2) is critical for Arabidopsis 
(Arabidopsis thaliana) resistance to bacteria by regulating stomatal immunity. 
SIF2 physically associates with the FLS2-BAK1 PRR complex and interacts with and 
phosphorylates the guard cell SLOW ANION CHANNEL1 (SLAC1), which is necessary 
for abscisic acid (ABA)-mediated stomatal closure. SIF2 is also required for the 
activation of ABA-induced S-type anion currents in Arabidopsis protoplasts, and 
SIF2 is sufficient to activate SLAC1 anion channels in Xenopus oocytes. 
SIF2-mediated activation of SLAC1 depends on specific phosphorylation of Ser 65. 
This work reveals that SIF2 functions between the FLS2-BAK1 initial immunity 
receptor complex and the final actuator SLAC1 in stomatal immunity.

© 2020 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.19.00578
PMCID: PMC7346559
PMID: 32327536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
