---
pmid: '11115394'
title: Msx3 protein recruits histone deacetylase to down-regulate the Msx1 promoter.
authors:
- Mehra-Chaudhary R
- Matsui H
- Raghow R
journal: Biochem J
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1221538
---

# Msx3 protein recruits histone deacetylase to down-regulate the Msx1 promoter.
**Authors:** Mehra-Chaudhary R, Matsui H, Raghow R
**Journal:** Biochem J (2001)
**PMC:** [PMC1221538](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1221538/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2001 Jan 1;353(Pt 1):13-22.

Msx3 protein recruits histone deacetylase to down-regulate the Msx1 promoter.

Mehra-Chaudhary R(1), Matsui H, Raghow R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Research Service (151), 1030 
Jefferson Avenue, Memphis, TN 38104, USA.

Msx1 promoter is known to be repressed by Msx1 protein [Shetty, Takahashi, 
Matsui, Iyengar and Raghow (1999) Biochem. J. 339, 751-758]. We show that in the 
transiently transfected C(2)C(12) myoblasts, co-expression of Msx3 also causes 
potent repression of Msx1 promoter that can be relieved by exogenous expression 
of cAMP-response-element-binding protein-binding protein (CBP) and p300 in a 
dose-dependent manner. Co-immunoprecipitation and Western blot analyses revealed 
that Msx3 interacts with CBP and p300 and this interaction significantly 
decreases the histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activity of both proteins. We also 
discovered that Msx3-mediated repression of Msx1 promoter is synergized by the 
exogenous co-expression of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). Furthermore, the 
repression of Msx1 promoter by Msx3 could be relieved by treating transfected 
cells with trichostatin A, an inhibitor of HDAC(s). Finally, we show that Msx3 
and HDAC1 can be co-immunoprecipitated in a complex that does not contain CBP 
and that Msx3 and HDAC1 proteins are co-localized in the nucleus. Taken 
together, our results strongly suggest that two distinct multiprotein complexes 
are present within the nuclei of C(2)C(12) cells: one containing Msx3 and 
HDAC(s) and another containing Msx3 and CBP and/or p300. On the basis of these 
results, we propose a dual mechanism of repression by Msx3 protein that involves 
the squelching of the HAT activity of co-activators, CBP and p300, and 
recruitment of HDAC(s).

PMCID: PMC1221538
PMID: 11115394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
