---
pmid: '9339377'
title: Genomic organization and molecular characterization of a gene encoding HsPXF,
  a human peroxisomal farnesylated protein.
authors:
- Kammerer S
- Arnold N
- Gutensohn W
- Mewes HW
- Kunau WH
- Höfler G
- Roscher AA
- Braun A
journal: Genomics
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/geno.1997.4914
---

# Genomic organization and molecular characterization of a gene encoding HsPXF, a human peroxisomal farnesylated protein.
**Authors:** Kammerer S, Arnold N, Gutensohn W, Mewes HW, Kunau WH, Höfler G, Roscher AA, Braun A
**Journal:** Genomics (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1006/geno.1997.4914](https://doi.org/10.1006/geno.1997.4914)

## Abstract

1. Genomics. 1997 Oct 1;45(1):200-10. doi: 10.1006/geno.1997.4914.

Genomic organization and molecular characterization of a gene encoding HsPXF, a 
human peroxisomal farnesylated protein.

Kammerer S(1), Arnold N, Gutensohn W, Mewes HW, Kunau WH, Höfler G, Roscher AA, 
Braun A.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Anthropology and Human Genetics, University of Munich, Germany.

A protein modification essential for the cellular sorting of many biologically 
relevant proteins is the covalent attachment of prenyl lipids by specific 
transferases. Isoprenylation is known to render protein domains hydrophobic, 
thereby facilitating the interaction with lipid bilayers and/or membrane 
proteins. The target for the modification with farnesyl groups is the 
COOH-terminal sequence CaaX. Among the variety of farnesylated proteins the only 
one reported so far to be located to peroxisomes is the 37-kDa peroxisomal 
farnesylated hamster protein PxF. Recently we published data on the cDNA of the 
human gene HK33 (A. Braun et al., 1994, Gene 146: 291-295), which was revealed 
to be the human ortholog of PxF and was consequently renamed HsPXF. The genomic 
structure, molecular characterization, and evolutionary conservation of HsPXF 
are described herein. The exact location of the gene was defined as chromosome 
1q22. The gene spans a region of approximately 9 kb, containing eight exons and 
seven introns. The 5' upstream region showed two potential Sp1-binding sites and 
an Alu repetitive sequence. Luciferase reporter activating capacity confirmed 
the presumed promoter activity of this region. On the transcriptional level, we 
detected four splice variants originating either from exon skipping or from 
alternative splicing events. For the HsPXF protein, a carboxyterminal 
farnesylation at cysteine residues was demonstrated. Through the use of 
HsPXF-specific antibodies, the protein was shown to be attached to the outer 
surface of peroxisomes. This localization together with the similarity to a 
peroxisomal assembly protein from Saccharomyces cerevisiae suggests HsPXF is 
involved in the process of peroxisomal biogenesis or assembly.

DOI: 10.1006/geno.1997.4914
PMID: 9339377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
