---
pmid: '22720776'
title: PHF6 interacts with the nucleosome remodeling and deacetylation (NuRD) complex.
authors:
- Todd MA
- Picketts DJ
journal: J Proteome Res
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/pr3004369
---

# PHF6 interacts with the nucleosome remodeling and deacetylation (NuRD) complex.
**Authors:** Todd MA, Picketts DJ
**Journal:** J Proteome Res (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1021/pr3004369](https://doi.org/10.1021/pr3004369)

## Abstract

1. J Proteome Res. 2012 Aug 3;11(8):4326-37. doi: 10.1021/pr3004369. Epub 2012
Jul  3.

PHF6 interacts with the nucleosome remodeling and deacetylation (NuRD) complex.

Todd MA(1), Picketts DJ.

Author information:
(1)Regenerative Medicine Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Department 
of Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University 
of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1H 8L6.

Mutations in PHF6 are the cause of Börjeson-Forssman-Lehman syndrome (BFLS), an 
X-linked intellectual disability (XLID) disorder, and both T-cell acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML). The PHF6 gene 
encodes a protein with two plant homeodomain (PHD)-like zinc finger domains. As 
many PHD-like domains function to target chromatin remodelers to 
post-translationally modified histones, this suggests a role for PHF6 in 
chromatin regulation. However, PHD domains are usually found in association with 
a catalytic domain, a feature that is lacking in PHF6. This distinct domain 
structure and the minimal information on its cellular function prompted us to 
perform a proteomic screen to identify PHF6 binding partners. We expressed 
recombinant Flag-tagged PHF6 in HEK 293T cells for coimmunoprecipitation, and 
analyzed the purified products by mass spectrometry. We identified proteins 
involved in ribosome biogenesis, RNA splicing, and chromatin regulation, 
consistent with PHF6 localization to both the nucleoplasm and nucleolus. 
Notably, PHF6 copurified with multiple constituents of the nucleosome remodeling 
and deacetylation (NuRD) complex, including CHD4, HDAC1, and RBBP4. We 
demonstrate that this PHF6-NuRD complex is not present in the nucleolus but is 
restricted to the nucleoplasm. The association with NuRD represents the first 
known interaction for PHF6 and implicates it in chromatin regulation.

DOI: 10.1021/pr3004369
PMID: 22720776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
