---
pmid: '9733776'
title: The sequence, bacterial expression, and functional reconstitution of the rat
  mitochondrial dicarboxylate transporter cloned via distant homologs in yeast and
  Caenorhabditis elegans.
authors:
- Fiermonte G
- Palmieri L
- Dolce V
- Lasorsa FM
- Palmieri F
- Runswick MJ
- Walker JE
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.38.24754
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The sequence, bacterial expression, and functional reconstitution of the rat mitochondrial dicarboxylate transporter cloned via distant homologs in yeast and Caenorhabditis elegans.
**Authors:** Fiermonte G, Palmieri L, Dolce V, Lasorsa FM, Palmieri F, Runswick MJ, Walker JE
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.273.38.24754](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.38.24754)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Sep 18;273(38):24754-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.38.24754.

The sequence, bacterial expression, and functional reconstitution of the rat 
mitochondrial dicarboxylate transporter cloned via distant homologs in yeast and 
Caenorhabditis elegans.

Fiermonte G(1), Palmieri L, Dolce V, Lasorsa FM, Palmieri F, Runswick MJ, Walker 
JE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaco-Biology, Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biology, University of Bari, Via Orabona 4, 70125 Bari, Italy.

The dicarboxylate carrier (DIC) belongs to a family of transport proteins found 
in the inner mitochondrial membranes. The biochemical properties of the 
mammalian protein have been characterized, but the protein is not abundant. It 
is difficult to purify and had not been sequenced. We have used the sequence of 
the distantly related yeast DIC to identify a related protein encoded in the 
genome of Caenorhabditis elegans. Then, related murine expressed sequence tags 
were identified with the worm sequence, and the murine sequence was used to 
isolate the cDNA for the rat homolog. The sequences of the worm and rat proteins 
have features characteristic of the family of mitochondrial transport proteins. 
Both proteins were expressed in bacteria and reconstituted into phospholipid 
vesicles where their transport characteristics closely resembled those of whole 
rat mitochondria and of the rat DIC reconstituted into vesicles. As expected 
from the role of the DIC in gluconeogenesis and ureogenesis, its transcripts 
were detected in rat liver and kidney, but unexpectedly, they were also detected 
in rat heart and brain tissues where the protein may fulfill other roles, 
possibly in supplying substrates to the Krebs cycle.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.38.24754
PMID: 9733776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
