---
pmid: '11500361'
title: The Dictyostelium homologue of mammalian soluble adenylyl cyclase encodes a
  guanylyl cyclase.
authors:
- Roelofs J
- Meima M
- Schaap P
- Van Haastert PJ
journal: EMBO J
year: '2001'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC125260
doi: 10.1093/emboj/20.16.4341
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The Dictyostelium homologue of mammalian soluble adenylyl cyclase encodes a guanylyl cyclase.
**Authors:** Roelofs J, Meima M, Schaap P, Van Haastert PJ
**Journal:** EMBO J (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/20.16.4341](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/20.16.4341)
**PMC:** [PMC125260](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC125260/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2001 Aug 15;20(16):4341-8. doi: 10.1093/emboj/20.16.4341.

The Dictyostelium homologue of mammalian soluble adenylyl cyclase encodes a 
guanylyl cyclase.

Roelofs J(1), Meima M, Schaap P, Van Haastert PJ.

Author information:
(1)GBB, Department of Biochemistry, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 4, 9747 
AG Groningen, The Netherlands.

A new Dictyostelium discoideum cyclase gene was identified that encodes a 
protein (sGC) with 35% similarity to mammalian soluble adenylyl cyclase (sAC). 
Gene disruption of sGC has no effect on adenylyl cyclase activity and results in 
a >10-fold reduction in guanylyl cyclase activity. The scg- null mutants show 
reduced chemotactic sensitivity and aggregate poorly under stringent conditions. 
With Mn(2+)/GTP as substrate, most of the sGC activity is soluble, but with the 
more physiological Mg(2+)/GTP the activity is detected in membranes and 
stimulated by GTPgammaS. Unexpectedly, orthologues of sGC and sAC are present in 
bacteria and vertebrates, but absent from Drosophila melanogaster, 
Caenorhabditis elegans, Arabidopsis thaliana and Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/20.16.4341
PMCID: PMC125260
PMID: 11500361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

A new Dictyostelium discoideum cyclase gene was identified that encodes a protein (sGC) with 35% similarity to mammalian soluble adenylyl cyclase (sAC). Gene disruption of sGC has no effect on adenylyl cyclase activity and results in a >10-fold reduction in guanylyl cyclase activity. The scg– null mutants show reduced chemotactic sensitivity and aggregate poorly under stringent conditions. With Mn 2+ /GTP as substrate, most of the sGC activity is soluble, but with the more physiological Mg 2+ /GTP the activity is de tected in membranes and stimulated by GTPγS. Unexpectedly, orthologues of sGC and sAC are present in bacteria and vertebrates, but absent from Drosophila melanogaster , Caenorhabditis elegans , Arabidopsis thaliana and Saccharomyces cerevisiae .

Introduction

cAMP and cGMP are important signalling molecules in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. In prokaryotes, cAMP regulates gene expression. cGMP is only found in cyanobacteria in relatively high amounts, but its function as an intracellular signalling molecule is not well understood ( Ochoa De Alda et al ., 2000 ). In eukaryotes, cAMP and cGMP regulate enzyme activities, channel activities and gene expression, mainly via cAMP- and cGMP-dependent protein kinases ( Houslay and Milligan, 1997 ; Lohmann et al ., 1997 ). A large and complex family of adenylyl cyclases (ACs) and guanylyl cyclases (GCs) is responsible for the synthesis of cAMP and cGMP. At present, five phylogenetically separated classes have been recognized ( Danchin, 1993 ), which are the ACs in enterobacteria (class I), the calmodulin-dependent toxin ACs (class II), the universal group of ACs and GCs (class III) and two recently recognized genetically unrelated ACs in hyperthermophilic archeabacteria (class IV; Sismeiro et al ., 1998 ) and ruminal anaerobic bacteria (class V; Cotta et al ., 1998 ). All five classes of enzymes are present in bacteria, while eukaryotes seem to contain only class III enzymes, which are the subject of this study.

The general topology of class III enzymes is deduced from the three-dimensional structure of mammalian AC ( Tesmer et al ., 1997 ; Zhang et al ., 1997 ). Two cyclase domains are associated in an antiparallel manner. This dimer can be formed by two identical cyclase domains or two different domains. In the latter case, these domains can derive from one polypeptide or from two different polypeptides. Additional domains may control the localization and regulation of the cyclases. In higher eukaryotes, four subgroups are recognized ( Hurley, 1998 ): (i) the 12-transmembrane ACs, which are composed of two different cyclase domains and are regulated by G-proteins; (ii) the single-transmembrane GCs, which contain one cyclase domain and dimerize to form a homodimer; these enzymes are stimulated by extracellular peptides, which bind to a receptor domain; (iii) the nitric oxide-sensitive soluble GC, which is a heterodimer of two different proteins with one cyclase domain each; and (iv) the recently discovered mammalian soluble adenylyl cyclase (sAC), which harbours two cyclase domains and shares the highest degree of identity with bacterial ACs ( Buck et al ., 1999 ). sAC is regulated by bicarbonate and involved in sperm maturation ( Chen et al ., 2000 ).

In the social amoeba Dictyostelium, cGMP is implicated as a second messenger for chemotaxis ( Van Haastert and Kuwayama, 1997 ), while cAMP can act as both first and second messenger ( Parent and Devreotes, 1996 ; Meima and Schaap, 1999b ). As first messenger, cAMP induces chemotaxis, cAMP signal relay and gene expression. As second messenger, it controls terminal spore and stalk cell differentiation and spore germination. Three AC genes were identified in Dictyostelium . ACA is similar to mammalian 12-transmembrane ACs and controls cAMP signalling during cell aggregation. ACG has the topology of the single transmembrane cyclases, with one cyclase domain ( Pitt et al., 1992 ); the enzyme produces cAMP, which regulates spore germination. A third adenylyl cyclase activity (ACB) is detectable mainly in the multicellular stage ( Meima and Schaap, 1999a ). This activity is encoded by the acrA gene, which is most similar to cyanobacterial ACs and controls spore maturation ( Soderbom et al., 1999 ). Not all known effects of cAMP can as yet be attributed to the known ACs, which may suggest the presence of a fourth AC gene. Recently, we identified a Dictyostelium GC gene, gcaA ( Roelofs et al., 2001 ), which encodes a protein with the topology of 12-transmembrane ACs. The two catalytic domains of GCA appear to be interchanged; thus, the second cyclase domain of mammalian AC, which provides most catalytic interactions with ATP, is similar to the first domain of GCA, interacting with GTP. GC enzymes with this topology have also been found in Paramecium and Plasmodium ( Linder et al., 1999 ; Carucci et al., 2000 ) but, unlike GCA, these proteins have a P-type ATPase at their N-terminus. Cells with an inactivated gcaA gene still possess substantial GC activity, indicating the presence of a second GC in Dictyostelium .

During the last 3 years, a large portion of the Dictyostelium genome has been sequenced; presently, the probability of finding an open reading frame (ORF) of 300 amino acids is ∼80–90%. Using this database, we recognized gene fragments whose deduced amino acid sequence predicts two catalytic domains and a more C-terminal sequence that are similar to mammalian sAC ( Buck et al., 1999 ). The complete amino acid sequence was deduced from genomic and cDNA sequence data. We have inactivated the gene and demonstrate that it encodes a guanylyl cyclase (sGC). Interestingly, databases of several completed genomes suggest that orthologues of Dictyostelium sGC are present in bacteria and mammals, but not in Drosophila , Caenorhabditis elegans , Arabidopsis and Saccharomyces cerevisiae .

Discussion

The Dictyostelium genome sequencing project has provided a wealth of information on genes that potentially are involved in signal transduction. We identified the Dictyostelium homologue of mammalian sAC. Sequence alignment with both AC and GC domains and functional analysis of the Dictyostelium gene showed that it encodes a guanylyl cyclase (sGC). Similarly to mammalian sAC, sGC shows high activity in the soluble cell fraction with Mn 2+ /GTP as a substrate. Lower activity can be detected in the particulate fraction. sGC does not contain hydrophobic segments that could result in membrane localization, suggesting that it may form a complex with a membrane-bound protein. In Dictyostelium , Mn 2+ is most probably not the physiological bivalent cation of sGC, because the intracellular concentration of Mn 2+ (∼10 µM) is too low to support activity, while at the prevailing Mg 2+ concentration (∼3.5 mM) significant activity is observed ( Padh and Brenner, 1984 ). The same conclusion was drawn for sAC in mammalian cells ( Chen et al., 2000 ). In the presence of Mg 2+ , sGC activity was detected mainly in the particulate fraction.

Regulation of ACs and GCs by their natural effectors such as G-proteins or Ca 2+ generally is detectable only with Mg 2+ , while Mn 2+ uncovers all intrinsic activity ( Tesmer et al., 1999 ). In agreement with this general observation, Mg 2+ -dependent sGC activity is stimulated by GTPγS and inhibited by Ca 2+ ions, whereas these regulators do not affect Mn 2+ -dependent sGC activity. The in vitro activation of membrane-associated sGC by GTPγS could represent the activation mechanism in living cells. The large pool of inactive sGC allows for two additional activation mechanisms: A G-protein-mediated signal may modify the soluble enzyme (e.g. covalent modification or the association with other proteins) such that soluble sGC becomes Mg 2+ sensitive. Alternatively, a G-protein-mediated signal may result in the translocation of soluble sGC to the membrane, which could result in an Mg 2+ -sensitive sGC activity.

Inactivation of the sgcA gene demonstrates that the cAMP-induced cGMP response is mediated predominantly by sGC. The sgc– cells show ∼20-fold reduced chemotactic sensitivity towards cAMP and a reduced capacity to aggregate under stringent conditions, which is consistent with the proposed role of cGMP during chemotaxis and cell aggregation. The small ∼10% residual cGMP response in sgc– cells to cAMP is most probably derived from GCA at the aggregation stage. Northern blot analysis reveals that the expression of the sGC gene and of the GCA gene complement each other, with high expression of GCA during growth and late development and highest expression of sGC during aggregation. These expression patterns are also reflected by the enzyme activities. sGC shows an ∼4-fold higher activity during aggregation than during growth, while GCA is 5-fold more active during growth than during aggregation (Figure 7 ).

The two GCs in Dictyostelium have a very different topology suggesting different modes of regulation. GCA is a 12-transmembrane enzyme, similar to G-protein-coupled ACs, whereas sGC is homologous to bicarbonate-stimulated sAC. Nevertheless, both GCA and sGC are activated in membranes by GTPγS and inhibited by Ca 2+ ions. Detailed biochemical characterization and regulation of GCA and sGC can be performed in sgc– and gca– cells, respectively. This may also uncover the mechanism by which GCA is Mn 2+ insensitive and sGC is associated with the membrane.

The identification of the two GCs in Dictyostelium , GCA and sGC, which are both homologous to ACs, uncovers unexpected evolutionary traits. From a biochemical point of view, this may not be very surprising, considering the relative ease with which an AC can be converted by site-directed mutagenesis into a GC. No close phylogenetic relationship can be found with mammalian GC, suggesting that GCA and sGC developed independently into a GC. Phylogenetic analysis of hundreds of ACs and GCs suggests that mammalian GC, GCA and sGC developed independently. This analysis also indicates that an AC to GC transition became fixed only a few times during evolution: at the formation of the vertebrate GCs; at the formation of GCA-like GCs in lower eukaryotes such as Dictyostelium , Paramecium and Plasmodium ; and at the formation of sGC in Dictyo stelium . Furthermore, it is surprising that Dictyostelium does not have a member of the metazoan GCs, suggesting that in Dictyostelium cGMP synthesis has an independent origin. This might mean that other components of the cGMP pathway, such as phosphodiesterases and cGMP targets, have unique characteristics as well, which may explain the difficulties in identifying these proteins in Dictyostelium .

It is quite fascinating that orthologues of sGC can be detected in mammals and bacteria, but are absent from the completed genome sequences of the invertebrates C.elegans and Drosophila , the yeast S.cerevisiae and the flowering plant Arabidopsis . The eukaryote phylogeny strongly supports an animal/fungi supergroup, with the mycetozoa, such as Dictyostelium , as the immediate sister group ( Baldauf et al., 2000 ). It seems unlikely that all lower animals and fungi have lost the gene, but even more unlikely that in the absence of gene loss, sGC and sAC represent two sequential cases of lateral transfer of an originally bacterial gene. It will be of great interest to trace the evolutionary roots of these enzymes when more complete genome sequences of lower unicellular eukaryotes and lower animals become available.
