---
pmid: '38986731'
title: Trafficking of adhesion and aggregation-modulating proteins during the early
  stages of Dictyostelium development.
authors:
- Huber RJ
- Kim WD
journal: Cell Signal
year: '2024'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2024.111292
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Trafficking of adhesion and aggregation-modulating proteins during the early stages of Dictyostelium development.
**Authors:** Huber RJ, Kim WD
**Journal:** Cell Signal (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cellsig.2024.111292](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cellsig.2024.111292)

## Abstract

1. Cell Signal. 2024 Sep;121:111292. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2024.111292. Epub
2024  Jul 8.

Trafficking of adhesion and aggregation-modulating proteins during the early 
stages of Dictyostelium development.

Huber RJ(1), Kim WD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Trent University, Peterborough, Ontario, Canada. 
Electronic address: roberthuber@trentu.ca.
(2)Environmental and Life Sciences Graduate Program, Trent University, 
Peterborough, Ontario, Canada.

The social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum has been studied for close to a 
century to better understand conserved cellular and developmental processes. The 
life cycle of this model eukaryote is composed of a unicellular growth phase and 
a multicellular developmental phase that is induced by starvation. When starved, 
individual cells undergo chemotactic aggregation to form multicellular mounds 
that develop into slugs. Terminal differentiation of cells within slugs forms 
fruiting bodies, each composed of a stalk that supports a mass of viable spores 
that germinate and restart the life cycle when nutrients become available. 
Calcium-dependent cell adhesion protein A (CadA) and countin (CtnA) are two 
proteins that regulate adhesion and aggregation, respectively, during the early 
stages of D. discoideum development. While the functions of these proteins have 
been well-studied, the mechanisms regulating their trafficking are not fully 
understood. In this study, we reveal pathways and cellular components that 
regulate the intracellular and extracellular amounts of CadA and CtnA during 
aggregation. During growth and starvation, CtnA localizes to cytoplasmic 
vesicles and punctae. We show that CtnA is glycosylated and this 
post-translational modification is required for its secretion. Upon autophagy 
induction, a signal peptide for secretion facilitates the release of CtnA from 
cells via a pathway involving the μ subunit of the AP3 complex (Apm3) and the 
WASP and SCAR homolog, WshA. Additionally, CtnA secretion is negatively 
regulated by the D. discoideum orthologs of the human non-selective cation 
channel mucolipin-1 (Mcln) and sorting receptor sortilin (Sort1). As for CadA, 
it localizes to the cell periphery in growth-phase and starved cells. The 
intracellular and extracellular amounts of CadA are modulated by autophagy genes 
(atg1, atg9), Apm3, WshA, and Mcln. We integrate these data with previously 
published findings to generate a comprehensive model summarizing the trafficking 
of CadA and CtnA in D. discoideum. Overall, this study enhances our 
understanding of protein trafficking during D. discoideum aggregation, and more 
broadly, provides insight into the multiple pathways that regulate protein 
trafficking and secretion in all eukaryotes.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2024.111292
PMID: 38986731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
have no interests to declare.
