---
pmid: '9016340'
title: 'D1-like dopaminergic activation of phosphoinositide hydrolysis is independent
  of D1A dopamine receptors: evidence from D1A knockout mice.'
authors:
- Friedman E
- Jin LQ
- Cai GP
- Hollon TR
- Drago J
- Sibley DR
- Wang HY
journal: Mol Pharmacol
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1124/mol.51.1.6
---

# D1-like dopaminergic activation of phosphoinositide hydrolysis is independent of D1A dopamine receptors: evidence from D1A knockout mice.
**Authors:** Friedman E, Jin LQ, Cai GP, Hollon TR, Drago J, Sibley DR, Wang HY
**Journal:** Mol Pharmacol (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1124/mol.51.1.6](https://doi.org/10.1124/mol.51.1.6)

## Abstract

1. Mol Pharmacol. 1997 Jan;51(1):6-11. doi: 10.1124/mol.51.1.6.

D1-like dopaminergic activation of phosphoinositide hydrolysis is independent of 
D1A dopamine receptors: evidence from D1A knockout mice.

Friedman E(1), Jin LQ, Cai GP, Hollon TR, Drago J, Sibley DR, Wang HY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, MCP-Hahnemann School of Medicine, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania 19129, USA. friedmane@allegheny.edu

Accumulated evidence suggests that dopamine and dopamine D1 agonists can 
activate phospholipase C in both brain and peripheral tissue. The receptor that 
mediates the hydrolysis of phosphoinositides has not been identified. The cloned 
dopamine D1A receptor that is generally thought to be linked to adenylyl 
cyclase, has also been proposed to couple to phospholipase C. However, a number 
of studies have suggested that this signaling pathway is mediated via a distinct 
D1-like dopamine receptor. We tested whether the D1A site plays a role in 
stimulating phosphoinositide hydrolysis by using the dopamine D1A-deficient 
mutant mice as a test model. Results show that although D1 dopamine 
receptor-mediated product on of cAMP is completely absent in membranes of 
D1A-deficient mice, D1 receptor-mediated accumulation of inositol phosphate is 
identical in tissues of mutant and wild-type animals. Furthermore, the coupling 
of [3H]SCH23390 binding sites in striatal or frontal cortex membranes to G alpha 
s is markedly reduced, although coupling of [3H]SCH23390 binding sites to G 
alpha q was unaltered in tissue taken from D1A mutant mice compared with control 
animals. These results clearly demonstrate that dopaminergic stimulation of 
inositol phosphate formation is mediated by a D1 dopamine receptor subtype that 
is distinct from the D1A receptor that activates adenylyl cyclase.

DOI: 10.1124/mol.51.1.6
PMID: 9016340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
