---
pmid: '27059175'
title: SAMM50 Affects Mitochondrial Morphology through the Association of Drp1 in
  Mammalian Cells.
authors:
- Liu S
- Gao Y
- Zhang C
- Li H
- Pan S
- Wang X
- Du S
- Deng Z
- Wang L
- Song Z
- Chen S
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/1873-3468.12170
---

# SAMM50 Affects Mitochondrial Morphology through the Association of Drp1 in Mammalian Cells.
**Authors:** Liu S, Gao Y, Zhang C, Li H, Pan S, Wang X, Du S, Deng Z, Wang L, Song Z, Chen S
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/1873-3468.12170](https://doi.org/10.1002/1873-3468.12170)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2016 May;590(9):1313-23. doi: 10.1002/1873-3468.12170. Epub 2016
Apr  15.

SAMM50 Affects Mitochondrial Morphology through the Association of Drp1 in 
Mammalian Cells.

Liu S(1), Gao Y(1)(2), Zhang C(1), Li H(1), Pan S(1)(2), Wang X(1), Du S(2), 
Deng Z(1), Wang L(1), Song Z(3), Chen S(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Combinatorial Biosynthesis and Drug Discovery, Ministry of 
Education, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Medical Research Institute, Wuhan 
University, Hubei, China.
(2)Taihe Hospital, Hubei University of Medicine, Shiyan, Hubei, China.
(3)College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Hubei, China.

Mitochondrial fission and fusion activities are important for cell survival and 
function. Drp1 is a GTPase protein responsible for mitochondrial division, and 
SAMM50 is responsible for protein sorting and assembly. We demonstrated that 
SAMM50 overexpression results in Drp1-dependent mitochondrial fragmentation in 
HeLa cells. However, the mitochondrial fragmentation induced by SAMM50 
overexpression could be reversed through co-expression with MFN2. Furthermore, 
SAMM50 interacts with Drp1 both in vivo and in vitro. The mitochondria in SAMM50 
knockdown HeLa cells displayed a swollen phenotype, and the levels of the SAM 
complex and OPA1, along with the mitochondrial Drp1 levels, significantly 
decreased. In addition, mitochondrial inheritance was impaired in SAMM50 
silenced cells. These results suggest that SAMM50 affects the Drp1-dependent 
mitochondrial morphology.

© 2016 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1002/1873-3468.12170
PMID: 27059175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
