---
pmid: '20215406'
title: Ciz1 cooperates with cyclin-A-CDK2 to activate mammalian DNA replication in
  vitro.
authors:
- Copeland NA
- Sercombe HE
- Ainscough JF
- Coverley D
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2844319
doi: 10.1242/jcs.059345
---

# Ciz1 cooperates with cyclin-A-CDK2 to activate mammalian DNA replication in vitro.
**Authors:** Copeland NA, Sercombe HE, Ainscough JF, Coverley D
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.059345](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.059345)
**PMC:** [PMC2844319](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2844319/)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2010 Apr 1;123(Pt 7):1108-15. doi: 10.1242/jcs.059345. Epub 2010
Mar  9.

Ciz1 cooperates with cyclin-A-CDK2 to activate mammalian DNA replication in 
vitro.

Copeland NA(1), Sercombe HE, Ainscough JF, Coverley D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of York, Heslington, York YO10 5YW, UK.

Initiation of mammalian DNA replication can be reconstituted from isolated 
G1-phase nuclei and cell extracts, supplemented with cyclin-dependent protein 
kinases (CDKs). Under these conditions, cyclin E supports pre-replication 
complex assembly, whereas cyclin-A-associated kinase acts later to terminate 
assembly and activate DNA replication. The mechanism by which these events are 
coordinated is unknown. Here, we show that the replication factor Ciz1 interacts 
with cyclins E and A sequentially through distinct cyclin-binding motifs. Cyclin 
A displaces cyclin E from Ciz1 in a manner that is dependent on functional 
domains that are essential for its role in DNA replication. Furthermore, in 
cell-free assays, recombinant cyclin-A-CDK2 complexes and recombinant Ciz1 
cooperate to promote initiation of DNA replication in late G1-phase nuclei. In 
addition, Ciz1 supports immobilization of cyclin A in isolated nuclei and 
depletion of Ciz1 by RNAi impairs immobilization, suggesting that Ciz1 promotes 
initiation by helping to target the kinase to a specific subnuclear compartment. 
We propose that Ciz1 acts to coordinate the functions of cyclins E and A in the 
nucleus, by delivering cyclin-A-associated kinase to sites that are specified by 
cyclin E, helping to ensure that they execute their functions in the same place 
and in the correct order.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.059345
PMCID: PMC2844319
PMID: 20215406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
