---
pmid: '22637583'
title: Apolipoprotein E4 effects in Alzheimer's disease are mediated by synaptotoxic
  oligomeric amyloid-β.
authors:
- Koffie RM
- Hashimoto T
- Tai HC
- Kay KR
- Serrano-Pozo A
- Joyner D
- Hou S
- Kopeikina KJ
- Frosch MP
- Lee VM
- Holtzman DM
- Hyman BT
- Spires-Jones TL
journal: Brain
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3381721
doi: 10.1093/brain/aws127
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Apolipoprotein E4 effects in Alzheimer's disease are mediated by synaptotoxic oligomeric amyloid-β.
**Authors:** Koffie RM, Hashimoto T, Tai HC, Kay KR, Serrano-Pozo A, Joyner D, Hou S, Kopeikina KJ, Frosch MP, Lee VM, Holtzman DM, Hyman BT, Spires-Jones TL
**Journal:** Brain (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/aws127](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/aws127)
**PMC:** [PMC3381721](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3381721/)

## Abstract

1. Brain. 2012 Jul;135(Pt 7):2155-68. doi: 10.1093/brain/aws127. Epub 2012 May
26.

Apolipoprotein E4 effects in Alzheimer's disease are mediated by synaptotoxic 
oligomeric amyloid-β.

Koffie RM(1), Hashimoto T, Tai HC, Kay KR, Serrano-Pozo A, Joyner D, Hou S, 
Kopeikina KJ, Frosch MP, Lee VM, Holtzman DM, Hyman BT, Spires-Jones TL.

Author information:
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 114 16th Street, 
Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2012 Jun 19;8(7):357. doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2012.121.

The apolipoprotein E ε4 gene is the most important genetic risk factor for 
sporadic Alzheimer's disease, but the link between this gene and 
neurodegeneration remains unclear. Using array tomography, we analysed >50000 
synapses in brains of 11 patients with Alzheimer's disease and five non-demented 
control subjects and found that synapse loss around senile plaques in 
Alzheimer's disease correlates with the burden of oligomeric amyloid-β in the 
neuropil and that this synaptotoxic oligomerized peptide is present at a subset 
of synapses. Further analysis reveals apolipoprotein E ε4 patients with 
Alzheimer's disease have significantly higher oligomeric amyloid-β burden and 
exacerbated synapse loss around plaques compared with apolipoprotein E ε3 
patients. Apolipoprotein E4 protein colocalizes with oligomeric amyloid-β and 
enhances synaptic localization of oligomeric amyloid-β by >5-fold. Biochemical 
characterization shows that the amyloid-β enriched at synapses by apolipoprotein 
E4 includes sodium dodecyl sulphate-stable dimers and trimers. In mouse primary 
neuronal culture, lipidated apolipoprotein E4 enhances oligomeric amyloid-β 
association with synapses via a mechanism involving apolipoprotein E receptors. 
Together, these data suggest that apolipoprotein E4 is a co-factor that enhances 
the toxicity of oligomeric amyloid-β both by increasing its levels and directing 
it to synapses, providing a link between apolipoprotein E ε4 genotype and 
synapse loss, a major correlate of cognitive decline in Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/aws127
PMCID: PMC3381721
PMID: 22637583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
