---
pmid: '20164180'
title: A novel LZAP-binding protein, NLBP, inhibits cell invasion.
authors:
- Kwon J
- Cho HJ
- Han SH
- No JG
- Kwon JY
- Kim H
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2010'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2852962
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.065920
---

# A novel LZAP-binding protein, NLBP, inhibits cell invasion.
**Authors:** Kwon J, Cho HJ, Han SH, No JG, Kwon JY, Kim H
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M109.065920](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.065920)
**PMC:** [PMC2852962](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2852962/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 16;285(16):12232-40. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.065920. Epub 
2010 Feb 17.

A novel LZAP-binding protein, NLBP, inhibits cell invasion.

Kwon J(1), Cho HJ, Han SH, No JG, Kwon JY, Kim H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Science, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746, 
Republic of Korea.

LXXLL/leucine zipper-containing alternative reading frame (ARF)-binding protein 
(LZAP) was recently shown to function as a tumor suppressor through inhibition 
of the NF-kappaB signaling pathway. LZAP is also known as a negative regulator 
of cell invasion, and its expression was demonstrated to be reduced in several 
tumor tissues. However, the molecular mechanism of the negative effect of LZAP 
on cell invasion is unclear. In this study, we identify NLBP as a novel 
LZAP-binding protein using tandem affinity purification. We demonstrate the 
negative effects of NLBP on cell invasion and the NF-kappaB signaling pathway. 
NLBP expression was not detected in hepatocellular carcinoma cells with strong 
invasive activity, whereas its expression was detected in a hepatocellular 
carcinoma cell line with no invasive activity. We also demonstrate that these 
two proteins mutually affect the stability of each other by inhibiting 
ubiquitination of the other protein. Based on these results, we suggest that 
NLBP may act as a novel tumor suppressor by inhibiting cell invasion, blocking 
NF-kappaB signaling, and increasing stability of the LZAP protein.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.065920
PMCID: PMC2852962
PMID: 20164180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

L XX LL/leucine zipper-containing alternative reading frame (ARF)-binding protein (LZAP) was recently shown to function as a tumor suppressor through inhibition of the NF-κB signaling pathway. LZAP is also known as a negative regulator of cell invasion, and its expression was demonstrated to be reduced in several tumor tissues. However, the molecular mechanism of the negative effect of LZAP on cell invasion is unclear. In this study, we identify NLBP as a novel LZAP-binding protein using tandem affinity purification. We demonstrate the negative effects of NLBP on cell invasion and the NF-κB signaling pathway. NLBP expression was not detected in hepatocellular carcinoma cells with strong invasive activity, whereas its expression was detected in a hepatocellular carcinoma cell line with no invasive activity. We also demonstrate that these two proteins mutually affect the stability of each other by inhibiting ubiquitination of the other protein. Based on these results, we suggest that NLBP may act as a novel tumor suppressor by inhibiting cell invasion, blocking NF-κB signaling, and increasing stability of the LZAP protein.

Introduction

Multistep progressions are involved in tumor formation. Many proteins, including tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes, affect the tumorigenesis of normal cells ( 1 ). One of the most important factors for tumor formation is mutations in tumor suppressors or oncogenes, which affect expression levels and/or protein activity ( 2 ). Therefore, maintaining oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes in a wild type state is crucial to blocking tumorigenesis.

LZAP 3 (also known as Cdk5rap3 or C53 protein) was originally identified as an ARF-binding protein and was found to have numerous functions as a tumor suppressor. These include activation of p53, induction of apoptosis mediated by genotoxic agents leading to inhibition of tumor cell growth, and negative regulation of the checkpoint response by antagonizing checkpoint kinases to promote cyclin-dependent kinase 1 activation ( 3 – 6 ). Recently, it was shown that upon depletion of LZAP expression, NF-κB-dependent MMP-9 expression, and cellular invasion were increased ( 7 ). In addition, LZAP protein was reduced in ∼30% of human head and neck squamous cell carcinomas ( 7 ).

Although LZAP has been functionally shown to be a tumor suppressor, the molecular mechanism of how LZAP blocks tumorigenesis is not yet clear. To gain further insight into the molecular mechanism of LZAP functions on tumorigenesis, we performed biochemical tandem repeat affinity purification and identified KIAA0776 as a n ovel L ZAP- b inding p rotein (NLBP). NLBP encodes an uncharacterized protein of 794 amino acids and does not contain any conserved domains. In this study, we show that NLBP is a novel LZAP-binding protein that may function as a tumor suppressor by inhibiting cell invasion, blocking NF-κB signaling, and increasing the stability of the LZAP protein.

DISCUSSION

In this study, we identified NLBP as a novel LZAP-binding protein using the tandem repeat affinity purification method. We confirmed the physical association between NLBP and LZAP by overexpression in 293T cells and also at endogenous levels. Similar to LZAP, knockdown of NLBP expression increased MMP-9 expression and cell invasion but did not affect cell migration. NLBP was found to function as a negative regulator of NF-κB-mediated transcription, also similar to LZAP. In addition, NLBP and LZAP expression was reduced in certain hepatocellular carcinomas that have highly invasive activity. These data strongly suggest that NLBP may function as a tumor suppressor together with LZAP through inhibition of cell invasion and NF-κB-mediated transcription.

Several studies have shown that LZAP localized to different subcellular compartments, including the nucleus, nucleolus, or cytoplasm ( 3 , 4 , 6 , 7 ). However, our data show that NLBP protein colocalizes with LZAP in the cytoplasm. These data suggest that the cytoplasm may be the compartment where the NLBP and LZAP proteins function together.

Here, we show that NLBP or LZAP expression inhibits cell invasion and NF-κB activation in Hep3B cells, which have high invasive activity and low expression levels of both the NLBP and the LZAP proteins. The inhibition of cell invasion and NF-κB activation seen upon overexpression of NLBP or LZAP was restored upon LZAP or NLBP siRNA treatment, respectively. Furthermore, deletion mutants of LZAP or NLBP, which lack the region binding to the other protein, could not inhibit cell-invasive activity or NF-κB activation in Hep3B cells. Taken together, these findings indicate that the interaction between LZAP and NLBP is required for tumor suppression through inhibition of cell invasion and NF-κB activation. We speculate that the effects of NLBP and LZAP on cell invasion and MMP-9 expression may be mediated by effects on the NF-κB signaling pathway. The Matrigel chamber model that we used to quantify invasive activity reflects an early step of metastasis where tumor cells invade basement membranes. Data from our Matrigel assays and the reduced expression levels of NLBP and LZAP observed in non-invasive tumor cell lines lead us to conclude that the NLBP-LZAP complex is a potent regulator that inhibits local invasion of cells in the early steps of metastasis.

The expression levels of the NLBP and LZAP proteins increased after treatment with the proteasome inhibitor MG132 ( Fig. 6 A ), and the half-life of each protein increased in the presence of the other protein ( Fig. 6 , B and C ). In addition, the levels of the ubiquitinated forms of these proteins were reduced when both protein expression plasmids were cotransfected, whereas binding region deletion mutants did not reduce the levels of the ubiquitinated form of the other protein ( Fig. 6 , D and F ). These results suggest that binding between these two proteins is required for mutual stabilization. Because these two proteins are ubiquitinated in vivo ( Fig. 6 , D and F ), we reason that one or more ubiquitin E3 ligase proteins may ubiquitinate these proteins and may have a major role in the interplay between LZAP and NLBP. The identification of the E3 ligase(s) and the molecular mechanisms underlying the interplay between LZAP and NLBP remain to be determined.

LZAP was previously shown to have reduced expression in head and neck squamous cell carcinomas ( 7 ), and many reports show that the 6q16.1 locus, where the NLBP gene is located, was deleted in several tumor tissues ( 14 – 17 ). These data provide additional conviction that NLBP may be a bona fide new tumor suppressor protein and may also imply that the loss of the NLBP gene is initiating events leading to the loss of LZAP.

Because overexpression of NLBP can efficiently block cell invasion, the activation or supply of NLBP may be a useful mode of therapy to inhibit the cell invasion of tumors with non-functional NLBP. In conclusion, the identification of NLBP, a new LZAP-binding protein, provides new implications for the interplay between signaling pathways and protein networks in tumor development.
