---
pmid: '26021844'
title: Regulatory role of BOTRYTIS INDUCED KINASE1 in ETHYLENE INSENSITIVE3-dependent
  gene expression in Arabidopsis.
authors:
- Kang GH
- Son S
- Cho YH
- Yoo SD
journal: Plant Cell Rep
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s00299-015-1812-y
---

# Regulatory role of BOTRYTIS INDUCED KINASE1 in ETHYLENE INSENSITIVE3-dependent gene expression in Arabidopsis.
**Authors:** Kang GH, Son S, Cho YH, Yoo SD
**Journal:** Plant Cell Rep (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00299-015-1812-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00299-015-1812-y)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell Rep. 2015 Sep;34(9):1605-14. doi: 10.1007/s00299-015-1812-y. Epub 
2015 May 29.

Regulatory role of BOTRYTIS INDUCED KINASE1 in ETHYLENE INSENSITIVE3-dependent 
gene expression in Arabidopsis.

Kang GH(1), Son S, Cho YH, Yoo SD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Korea University, 145 Anamro, Sungbuk-gu, Seoul, 
136-701, Republic of Korea.

Arabidopsis BIK1 negatively regulates EIN3-depedent gene expression as an 
immediate cellular response. BIK1 localizes to the plasma membrane and its 
autophosphorylation and kinase activity involves in EIN3 repression. BOTRYTIS 
INDUCED KINASE1 (BIK1) is a multifunctional receptor-like kinase that involves 
in ethylene-mediated plant defense signaling. The loss of function BIK1 becomes 
insensitive to ethylene, but it still accumulates a higher level of ETHYLENE 
INSENSITIVE3 (EIN3) that serves as the key transcription activator in ethylene 
signaling. To unequivocally elucidate BIK1 function on EIN3 regulation in 
ethylene signaling, we took a combined approach of transient expression assay 
and stable expression analysis of BIK1. In our cell-based functional assay BIK1 
destabilized EIN3 and down-regulated EIN3-dependent transcription. Membrane 
localization and autophosphorylation of BIK1 were required for full repression 
of EIN3 function, but its kinase activity potential compromised such regulatory 
action. Consistently, the analysis of transgenic plants verified BIK1 function 
on EIN3 repression. Our findings have clarified that autophosphorylated BIK1 in 
the plasma membrane negatively regulates EIN3-dependent gene expression. Thus, 
ethylene insensitivity in bik1 appears to be an indirect or a feedback long-term 
response.

DOI: 10.1007/s00299-015-1812-y
PMID: 26021844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
