---
pmid: '18591255'
title: A survivin-ran complex regulates spindle formation in tumor cells.
authors:
- Xia F
- Canovas PM
- Guadagno TM
- Altieri DC
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2519733
doi: 10.1128/MCB.02039-07
---

# A survivin-ran complex regulates spindle formation in tumor cells.
**Authors:** Xia F, Canovas PM, Guadagno TM, Altieri DC
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.02039-07](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.02039-07)
**PMC:** [PMC2519733](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2519733/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Sep;28(17):5299-311. doi: 10.1128/MCB.02039-07. Epub 2008 
Jun 30.

A survivin-ran complex regulates spindle formation in tumor cells.

Xia F(1), Canovas PM, Guadagno TM, Altieri DC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, LRB428, University of Massachusetts Medical 
School, 364 Plantation Street, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

Aberrant cell division is a hallmark of cancer, but the molecular circuitries of 
this process in tumor cells are not well understood. Here, we used a 
high-throughput proteomics screening to identify novel molecular partners of 
survivin, an essential regulator of mitosis overexpressed in cancer. We found 
that survivin associates with the small GTPase Ran in an evolutionarily 
conserved recognition in mammalian cells and Xenopus laevis extracts. This 
interaction is regulated during the cell cycle, involves Ran-GTP, requires a 
discrete binding interface centered on Glu65 in survivin, and is independent of 
the Ran effector Crm1. Disruption of a survivin-Ran complex does not affect the 
assembly of survivin within the chromosomal passenger complex or its cytosolic 
accumulation, but it inhibits the delivery of the Ran effector molecule TPX2 to 
microtubules. In turn, this results in aberrant mitotic spindle formation and 
chromosome missegregation in tumor, but not normal, cells. Therefore, survivin 
is a novel effector of Ran signaling, and this pathway may be preferentially 
exploited for spindle assembly in tumor cells.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.02039-07
PMCID: PMC2519733
PMID: 18591255 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
