---
pmid: '16672320'
title: Suppression of ureteric bud apoptosis rescues nephron endowment and adult renal
  function in Pax2 mutant mice.
authors:
- Dziarmaga A
- Eccles M
- Goodyer P
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2005101074
---

# Suppression of ureteric bud apoptosis rescues nephron endowment and adult renal function in Pax2 mutant mice.
**Authors:** Dziarmaga A, Eccles M, Goodyer P
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.2005101074](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2005101074)

## Abstract

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2006 Jun;17(6):1568-75. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2005101074. Epub
2006  May 3.

Suppression of ureteric bud apoptosis rescues nephron endowment and adult renal 
function in Pax2 mutant mice.

Dziarmaga A(1), Eccles M, Goodyer P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Montreal Children's Hospital Research 
Institute, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, H3Z 2Z3 Canada.

The molecular mechanisms that set congenital nephron number are unknown. 
However, humans with modest suboptimal nephron number may be at increased risk 
for essential hypertension, and those with more severe nephron deficits at birth 
may develop progressive renal insufficiency. A model of branching morphogenesis 
during fetal kidney development in which the extent of ureteric bud arborization 
is dependent on suppression of programmed cell death has been proposed. This 
study shows that the increased apoptosis and reduced ureteric bud branching of 
heterozygous Pax2 mutant mice is associated with 40% decrease in nephron number 
at birth. This leads to postnatal glomerular hypertrophy and long-term renal 
insufficiency in the absence of glomerulosclerosis. To determine whether 
restoration of antiapoptotic factors alone is sufficient to rescue the nephron 
deficit in these mice, a BCL2 transgene that is under the control of the PAX2 
promoter was targeted to the ureteric bud. The transgene suppressed programmed 
cell death in the ureteric bud lineage, increased nephron number to 90% of that 
of wild-type littermates at birth, and normalized renal function at 1 yr. These 
observations lend strong support to the hypothesis that factors that control 
ureteric bud apoptosis are powerful determinants of congenital nephron 
endowment.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2005101074
PMID: 16672320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
