---
pmid: '14622975'
title: Functional characterization of Narc 1, a novel proteinase related to proteinase
  K.
authors:
- Naureckiene S
- Ma L
- Sreekumar K
- Purandare U
- Lo CF
- Huang Y
- Chiang LW
- Grenier JM
- Ozenberger BA
- Jacobsen JS
- Kennedy JD
- DiStefano PS
- Wood A
- Bingham B
journal: Arch Biochem Biophys
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2003.09.011
---

# Functional characterization of Narc 1, a novel proteinase related to proteinase K.
**Authors:** Naureckiene S, Ma L, Sreekumar K, Purandare U, Lo CF, Huang Y, Chiang LW, Grenier JM, Ozenberger BA, Jacobsen JS, Kennedy JD, DiStefano PS, Wood A, Bingham B
**Journal:** Arch Biochem Biophys (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.abb.2003.09.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.abb.2003.09.011)

## Abstract

1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2003 Dec 1;420(1):55-67. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2003.09.011.

Functional characterization of Narc 1, a novel proteinase related to proteinase 
K.

Naureckiene S(1), Ma L, Sreekumar K, Purandare U, Lo CF, Huang Y, Chiang LW, 
Grenier JM, Ozenberger BA, Jacobsen JS, Kennedy JD, DiStefano PS, Wood A, 
Bingham B.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Discovery Research, Wyeth Research, CN 8000, Princeton, NJ 
08543-8000, USA.

The NARC 1 gene encodes a novel proteinase K family proteinase. The domain 
structure of rat Narc 1 resembles that of the subtilisin-like proprotein 
convertases (SPCs), except that rNarc 1 lacks the canonical P-domain of SPCs, 
retaining only the RGD motif as part of what might be a cryptically functioning 
P-domain. Narc 1 undergoes autocatalytic intramolecular processing at the site 
LVFAQ/, resulting in the cleavage of its prosegment and the generation of an 
active proteinase with a broad alkaline pH optimum and no apparent calcium 
requirement for activity. Both primary and secondary structural determinants 
influence Narc 1 substrate recognition. Our functional characterization of Narc 
1 reinforces the inference drawn from the analysis of its predicted structure 
that this enzyme is most closely related to representatives of the proteinase K 
family, but that it is also sufficiently different to warrant its possible 
classification in a separate sub-family.

DOI: 10.1016/j.abb.2003.09.011
PMID: 14622975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
