---
pmid: '25368151'
title: Stable expression and function of the inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptor
  requires palmitoylation by a DHHC6/selenoprotein K complex.
authors:
- Fredericks GJ
- Hoffmann FW
- Rose AH
- Osterheld HJ
- Hess FM
- Mercier F
- Hoffmann PR
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4246275
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1417176111
---

# Stable expression and function of the inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptor requires palmitoylation by a DHHC6/selenoprotein K complex.
**Authors:** Fredericks GJ, Hoffmann FW, Rose AH, Osterheld HJ, Hess FM, Mercier F, Hoffmann PR
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1417176111](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1417176111)
**PMC:** [PMC4246275](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4246275/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Nov 18;111(46):16478-83. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1417176111. Epub 2014 Nov 3.

Stable expression and function of the inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptor 
requires palmitoylation by a DHHC6/selenoprotein K complex.

Fredericks GJ(1), Hoffmann FW(1), Rose AH(1), Osterheld HJ(2), Hess FM(3), 
Mercier F(4), Hoffmann PR(5).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Cell and Molecular Biology.
(2)Biotechnology Department, University of Applied Sciences Mannheim, 68163 
Mannheim, Germany.
(3)Medicine, and.
(4)Tropical Medicine, Medical Microbiology and Pharmacology, John A. Burns 
School of Medicine, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 96813; and.
(5)Departments of Cell and Molecular Biology, peterrh@hawaii.edu.

Calcium (Ca(2+)) is a secondary messenger in cells and Ca(2+) flux initiated 
from endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stores via inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP3) 
binding to the IP3 receptor (IP3R) is particularly important for the activation 
and function of immune cells. Previous studies demonstrated that genetic 
deletion of selenoprotein K (Selk) led to decreased Ca(2+) flux in a variety of 
immune cells and impaired immunity, but the mechanism was unclear. Here we show 
that Selk deficiency does not affect receptor-induced IP3 production, but Selk 
deficiency through genetic deletion or low selenium in culture media leads to 
low expression of the IP3R due to a defect in IP3R palmitoylation. Bioinformatic 
analysis of the DHHC (letters represent the amino acids aspartic acid, 
histidine, histidine, and cysteine in the catalytic domain) family of enzymes 
that catalyze protein palmitoylation revealed that one member, DHHC6, contains a 
predicted Src-homology 3 (SH3) domain and DHHC6 is localized to the ER membrane. 
Because Selk is also an ER membrane protein and contains an SH3 binding domain, 
immunofluorescence and coimmunoprecipitation experiments were conducted and 
revealed DHHC6/Selk interactions in the ER membrane that depended on SH3/SH3 
binding domain interactions. DHHC6 knockdown using shRNA in stably transfected 
cell lines led to decreased expression of the IP3R and impaired IP3R-dependent 
Ca(2+) flux. Mass spectrophotometric and bioinformatic analyses of the IP3R 
protein identified two palmitoylated cysteine residues and another potentially 
palmitoylated cysteine, and mutation of these three cysteines to alanines 
resulted in decreased IP3R palmitoylation and function. These findings reveal 
IP3R palmitoylation as a critical regulator of Ca(2+) flux in immune cells and 
define a previously unidentified DHHC/Selk complex responsible for this process.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1417176111
PMCID: PMC4246275
PMID: 25368151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
