---
pmid: '12154125'
title: Smad3 allostery links TGF-beta receptor kinase activation to transcriptional
  control.
authors:
- Qin BY
- Lam SS
- Correia JJ
- Lin K
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC186427
doi: 10.1101/gad.1002002
---

# Smad3 allostery links TGF-beta receptor kinase activation to transcriptional control.
**Authors:** Qin BY, Lam SS, Correia JJ, Lin K
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.1002002](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.1002002)
**PMC:** [PMC186427](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC186427/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2002 Aug 1;16(15):1950-63. doi: 10.1101/gad.1002002.

Smad3 allostery links TGF-beta receptor kinase activation to transcriptional 
control.

Qin BY(1), Lam SS, Correia JJ, Lin K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of 
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01655, USA.

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2002 Aug 1;16(15):1867-71. doi: 10.1101/gad.1016802.

Smad3 transduces the signals of TGF-betas, coupling transmembrane receptor 
kinase activation to transcriptional control. The membrane-associated molecule 
SARA (Smad Anchor for Receptor Activation) recruits Smad3 for phosphorylation by 
the receptor kinase. Upon phosphorylation, Smad3 dissociates from SARA and 
enters the nucleus, in which its transcriptional activity can be repressed by 
Ski. Here, we show that SARA and Ski recognize specifically the monomeric and 
trimeric forms of Smad3, respectively. Thus, trimerization of Smad3, induced by 
phosphorylation, simultaneously activates the TGF-beta signal by driving Smad3 
dissociation from SARA and sets up the negative feedback mechanism by Ski. 
Structural models of the Smad3/SARA/receptor kinase complex and Smad3/Ski 
complex provide insights into the molecular basis of regulation.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.1002002
PMCID: PMC186427
PMID: 12154125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
