---
pmid: '23396260'
title: Yes-associated protein homolog, YAP-1, is involved in the thermotolerance and
  aging in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans.
authors:
- Iwasa H
- Maimaiti S
- Kuroyanagi H
- Kawano S
- Inami K
- Timalsina S
- Ikeda M
- Nakagawa K
- Hata Y
journal: Exp Cell Res
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2013.01.020
---

# Yes-associated protein homolog, YAP-1, is involved in the thermotolerance and aging in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans.
**Authors:** Iwasa H, Maimaiti S, Kuroyanagi H, Kawano S, Inami K, Timalsina S, Ikeda M, Nakagawa K, Hata Y
**Journal:** Exp Cell Res (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yexcr.2013.01.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yexcr.2013.01.020)

## Abstract

1. Exp Cell Res. 2013 Apr 15;319(7):931-45. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2013.01.020.
Epub  2013 Feb 7.

Yes-associated protein homolog, YAP-1, is involved in the thermotolerance and 
aging in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans.

Iwasa H(1), Maimaiti S, Kuroyanagi H, Kawano S, Inami K, Timalsina S, Ikeda M, 
Nakagawa K, Hata Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo 
Medical and Dental University, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan.

The mammalian Hippo pathway comprises mammalian Ste20-like kinases (MST1/2) and 
large tumor suppressor kinases (LATS1/2). LATS1/2, which are activated by 
MST1/2, phosphorylate a transcriptional co-activator, yes-associated protein 
(YAP), and induce the recruitment of YAP by 14-3-3 to cytoplasm, so that the 
TEAD-dependent gene transcriptions are turned off. Although the core components 
of the Hippo pathway are well conserved in metazoans, it has been discussed that 
Caenorhabditis elegans lacks YAP ortholog, we found that F13E6.4 gene encodes a 
protein that shows sequence similarities to YAP in the N-terminal TEAD-binding 
domain and in the WW domain. We designated this gene as yap-1. YAP-1 is widely 
expressed in various cells such as epithelial cells, muscles, hypodermal cells, 
gonadal sheath cells, spermatheca, and hypodermal cells. YAP-1 is distributed in 
cytoplasm and nuclei. wts-1 (LATS ortholog) and ftt-2 (14-3-3 ortholog) 
knockdowns cause nuclear accumulation of YAP-1, supporting that the subcellular 
localization of YAP-1 is regulated in a similar way as that of YAP. Heat shock 
also causes the nuclear accumulation of YAP-1 but after heat shock, YAP-1 
translocates to cytoplasm. Knockdowns of DAF-21 (HSP90 ortholog) and HSF-1block 
the nuclear export of YAP-1 during this recovery. YAP-1 overexpression is 
beneficial for thermotolerance, whereas YAP-1 hyperactivity induced by wts-1 and 
ftt-2 knockdowns is deleterious on thermal response and yap-1 deficiency 
promotes health aging. In short, YAP-1 partially shares basal characters with 
mammalian YAP and plays a role in thermal stress response and healthy aging.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2013.01.020
PMID: 23396260 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
