---
pmid: '25402950'
title: The chaperone activity of clusterin is dependent on glycosylation and redox
  environment.
authors:
- Rohne P
- Prochnow H
- Wolf S
- Renner B
- Koch-Brandt C
journal: Cell Physiol Biochem
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1159/000366365
---

# The chaperone activity of clusterin is dependent on glycosylation and redox environment.
**Authors:** Rohne P, Prochnow H, Wolf S, Renner B, Koch-Brandt C
**Journal:** Cell Physiol Biochem (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000366365](https://doi.org/10.1159/000366365)

## Abstract

1. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2014;34(5):1626-39. doi: 10.1159/000366365. Epub 2014
Nov  3.

The chaperone activity of clusterin is dependent on glycosylation and redox 
environment.

Rohne P(1), Prochnow H, Wolf S, Renner B, Koch-Brandt C.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmacy and Biochemistry, Therapeutical Life Sciences, Johannes 
Gutenberg -University Mainz, Mainz, Germany.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Clusterin (CLU), also known as Apolipoprotein J (ApoJ) is a 
highly glycosylated extracellular chaperone. In humans it is expressed from a 
broad spectrum of tissues and related to a plethora of physiological and 
pathophysiological processes, such as Alzheimer's disease, atherosclerosis and 
cancer. In its dominant form it is expressed as a secretory protein (secreted 
CLU, sCLU). During its maturation, the sCLU-precursor is N-glycosylated and 
cleaved into an α- and a β-chain, which are connected by five symmetrical 
disulfide bonds. Recently, it has been demonstrated that besides the predominant 
sCLU, rare intracellular CLU forms are expressed in stressed cells. Since these 
forms do not enter or complete the secretory pathway, they are not 
proteolytically modified and show either no or only core glycosylation. Due to 
their sparsity, these intracellular forms are functionally poorly characterized. 
To evaluate the function(s) of these stress-related intracellular forms, we 
investigate for the first time the impact of proteolytic cleavage, differential 
glycosylation and the influence of the redox environment on the chaperone 
activity of CLU.
METHODS: Non-cleavable sCLU was generated by expression from a mutant construct 
of sCLU, in which the furin-like proprotein convertase (PC) recognition site was 
modified. After purification of recombinant uncleaved sCLU from the medium of 
over-expressing cells, we performed chaperone activity assays to compare the 
activities of wild-type (cleaved) and uncleaved mutant sCLU. Additionally, this 
approach enabled us to investigate the role of carbohydrates, the proteolytic 
maturation and reducing conditions on CLU chaperone activity. Further, we 
characterized the differentially treated CLU forms by using MALDI-TOF, 
CD-spectroscopy and Western blotting in addition to the functional assay.
RESULTS: We show that the PC-cleavage is dispensable for sCLU chaperone 
activity. Moreover, our data demonstrate that while fully deglycosylated sCLU 
lacks chaperone activity, partially deglycosylated sCLU is still capable of 
solubilizing target proteins. Most importantly, we here demonstrate for the 
first time that uncleaved sCLU is highly sensitive towards reducing conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides evidence that unglycosylated intracellular CLU 
forms cannot exhibit a chaperone activity compared to sCLU. Additionally, we 
support recent postulates that glycosylated intracellular CLU forms may act as a 
redox sensor under oxidative stress conditions. Furthermore, we conclude that 
the proteolytic cleavage of sCLU is important to maintain full chaperone 
activity, i.e. in the presence of necrosis.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000366365
PMID: 25402950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
