---
pmid: '19893578'
title: The human homologue of Dictyostelium discoideum phg1A is expressed by human
  metastatic melanoma cells.
authors:
- Lozupone F
- Perdicchio M
- Brambilla D
- Borghi M
- Meschini S
- Barca S
- Marino ML
- Logozzi M
- Federici C
- Iessi E
- de Milito A
- Fais S
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2799214
doi: 10.1038/embor.2009.236
---

# The human homologue of Dictyostelium discoideum phg1A is expressed by human metastatic melanoma cells.
**Authors:** Lozupone F, Perdicchio M, Brambilla D, Borghi M, Meschini S, Barca S, Marino ML, Logozzi M, Federici C, Iessi E, de Milito A, Fais S
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/embor.2009.236](https://doi.org/10.1038/embor.2009.236)
**PMC:** [PMC2799214](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2799214/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2009 Dec;10(12):1348-54. doi: 10.1038/embor.2009.236. Epub 2009 Nov
6.

The human homologue of Dictyostelium discoideum phg1A is expressed by human 
metastatic melanoma cells.

Lozupone F(1), Perdicchio M, Brambilla D, Borghi M, Meschini S, Barca S, Marino 
ML, Logozzi M, Federici C, Iessi E, de Milito A, Fais S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Therapeutic Research and Medicine Evaluation, Istituto 
Superiore di Sanità, Viale Regina Elena 299, Rome 00161, Italy. 
francesco.lozupone@iss.it

Tumour cannibalism is a characteristic of malignancy and metastatic behaviour. 
This atypical phagocytic activity is a crucial survival option for tumours in 
conditions of low nutrient supply, and has some similarities to the phagocytic 
activity of unicellular microorganisms. In fact, Dictyostelium discoideum has 
been used widely as a model to study phagocytosis. Recently, phg1A has been 
described as a protein that is primarily involved in the phagocytic process of 
this microorganism. The closest human homologue to phg1A is transmembrane 9 
superfamily protein member 4 (TM9SF4). Here, we report that TM9SF4 is highly 
expressed in human malignant melanoma cells deriving from metastatic lesions, 
whereas it is undetectable in healthy human tissues and cells. TM9SF4 is 
predominantly expressed in acidic vesicles of melanoma cells, in which it 
co-localizes with the early endosome antigens Rab5 and early endosome antigen 1. 
TM9SF4 silencing induced marked inhibition of cannibal activity, which is 
consistent with a derangement of intracellular pH gradients, with alkalinization 
of acidic vesicles and acidification of the cell cytosol. We propose TM9SF4 as a 
new marker of malignancy, representing a potential new target for anti-tumour 
strategies with a specific role in tumour cannibalism and in the establishment 
of a metastatic phenotype.

DOI: 10.1038/embor.2009.236
PMCID: PMC2799214
PMID: 19893578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
