---
pmid: '20080953'
title: Cooperative interaction between retinoic acid receptor-alpha and estrogen receptor
  in breast cancer.
authors:
- Ross-Innes CS
- Stark R
- Holmes KA
- Schmidt D
- Spyrou C
- Russell R
- Massie CE
- Vowler SL
- Eldridge M
- Carroll JS
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2807352
doi: 10.1101/gad.552910
---

# Cooperative interaction between retinoic acid receptor-alpha and estrogen receptor in breast cancer.
**Authors:** Ross-Innes CS, Stark R, Holmes KA, Schmidt D, Spyrou C, Russell R, Massie CE, Vowler SL, Eldridge M, Carroll JS
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.552910](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.552910)
**PMC:** [PMC2807352](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2807352/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2010 Jan 15;24(2):171-82. doi: 10.1101/gad.552910.

Cooperative interaction between retinoic acid receptor-alpha and estrogen 
receptor in breast cancer.

Ross-Innes CS(1), Stark R, Holmes KA, Schmidt D, Spyrou C, Russell R, Massie CE, 
Vowler SL, Eldridge M, Carroll JS.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research UK, Cambridge Research Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, 
Cambridge CB2 0RE, United Kingdom.

Retinoic acid receptor-alpha (RAR alpha) is a known estrogen target gene in 
breast cancer cells. The consequence of RAR alpha induction by estrogen was 
previously unknown. We now show that RAR alpha is required for efficient 
estrogen receptor-alpha (ER)-mediated transcription and cell proliferation. RAR 
alpha can interact with ER-binding sites, but this occurs in an ER-dependent 
manner, providing a novel role for RAR alpha that is independent of its classic 
role. We show, on a genome-wide scale, that RAR alpha and ER can co-occupy 
regulatory regions together within the chromatin. This transcriptionally active 
co-occupancy and dependency occurs when exposed to the predominant breast cancer 
hormone, estrogen--an interaction that is promoted by the estrogen-ER induction 
of RAR alpha. These findings implicate RAR alpha as an essential component of 
the ER complex, potentially by maintaining ER-cofactor interactions, and suggest 
that different nuclear receptors can cooperate for effective transcriptional 
activity in breast cancer cells.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.552910
PMCID: PMC2807352
PMID: 20080953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
