---
pmid: '16193057'
title: A non-haem iron centre in the transcription factor NorR senses nitric oxide.
authors:
- D'Autréaux B
- Tucker NP
- Dixon R
- Spiro S
journal: Nature
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature03953
---

# A non-haem iron centre in the transcription factor NorR senses nitric oxide.
**Authors:** D'Autréaux B, Tucker NP, Dixon R, Spiro S
**Journal:** Nature (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature03953](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature03953)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2005 Sep 29;437(7059):769-72. doi: 10.1038/nature03953.

A non-haem iron centre in the transcription factor NorR senses nitric oxide.

D'Autréaux B(1), Tucker NP, Dixon R, Spiro S.

Author information:
(1)John Innes Centre, Colney, Norwich NR4 7UH, UK.

Nitric oxide (NO), synthesized in eukaryotes by the NO synthases, has multiple 
roles in signalling pathways and in protection against pathogens. Pathogenic 
microorganisms have apparently evolved defence mechanisms that counteract the 
effects of NO and related reactive nitrogen species. Regulatory proteins that 
sense NO mediate the primary response to NO and nitrosative stress. The only 
regulatory protein in enteric bacteria known to serve exclusively as an 
NO-responsive transcription factor is the enhancer binding protein NorR (refs 9, 
10-11). In Escherichia coli, NorR activates the transcription of the norVW genes 
encoding a flavorubredoxin (FlRd) and an associated flavoprotein, respectively, 
which together have NADH-dependent NO reductase activity. The NO-responsive 
activity of NorR raises important questions concerning the mechanism of NO 
sensing. Here we show that the regulatory domain of NorR contains a mononuclear 
non-haem iron centre, which reversibly binds NO. Binding of NO stimulates the 
ATPase activity of NorR, enabling the activation of transcription by RNA 
polymerase. The mechanism of NorR reveals an unprecedented biological role for a 
non-haem mononitrosyl-iron complex in NO sensing.

DOI: 10.1038/nature03953
PMID: 16193057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
