---
pmid: '9765203'
title: Premature senescence involving p53 and p16 is activated in response to constitutive
  MEK/MAPK mitogenic signaling.
authors:
- Lin AW
- Barradas M
- Stone JC
- van Aelst L
- Serrano M
- Lowe SW
journal: Genes Dev
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC317198
doi: 10.1101/gad.12.19.3008
---

# Premature senescence involving p53 and p16 is activated in response to constitutive MEK/MAPK mitogenic signaling.
**Authors:** Lin AW, Barradas M, Stone JC, van Aelst L, Serrano M, Lowe SW
**Journal:** Genes Dev (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.12.19.3008](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.12.19.3008)
**PMC:** [PMC317198](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC317198/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 1998 Oct 1;12(19):3008-19. doi: 10.1101/gad.12.19.3008.

Premature senescence involving p53 and p16 is activated in response to 
constitutive MEK/MAPK mitogenic signaling.

Lin AW(1), Barradas M, Stone JC, van Aelst L, Serrano M, Lowe SW.

Author information:
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York 11724, USA.

Oncogenic Ras transforms immortal rodent cells to a tumorigenic state, in part, 
by constitutively transmitting mitogenic signals through the mitogen-activated 
protein kinase (MAPK) cascade. In primary cells, Ras is initially mitogenic but 
eventually induces premature senescence involving the p53 and p16(INK4a) tumor 
suppressors. Constitutive activation of MEK (a component of the MAPK cascade) 
induces both p53 and p16, and is required for Ras-induced senescence of normal 
human fibroblasts. Furthermore, activated MEK permanently arrests primary murine 
fibroblasts but forces uncontrolled mitogenesis and transformation in cells 
lacking either p53 or INK4a. The precisely opposite response of normal and 
immortalized cells to constitutive activation of the MAPK cascade implies that 
premature senescence acts as a fail-safe mechanism to limit the transforming 
potential of excessive Ras mitogenic signaling. Consequently, constitutive MAPK 
signaling activates p53 and p16 as tumor suppressors.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.12.19.3008
PMCID: PMC317198
PMID: 9765203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
