---
pmid: '8195709'
title: Isolation, cDNA cloning, and overexpression of a 33-kD cell surface glycoprotein
  that binds to the globular "heads" of C1q.
authors:
- Ghebrehiwet B
- Lim BL
- Peerschke EI
- Willis AC
- Reid KB
journal: J Exp Med
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: xml_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC2191527
doi: 10.1084/jem.179.6.1809
---

# Isolation, cDNA cloning, and overexpression of a 33-kD cell surface glycoprotein that binds to the globular "heads" of C1q.
**Authors:** Ghebrehiwet B, Lim BL, Peerschke EI, Willis AC, Reid KB
**Journal:** J Exp Med (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1084/jem.179.6.1809](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.179.6.1809)
**PMC:** [PMC2191527](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2191527/)

## Abstract

1. J Exp Med. 1994 Jun 1;179(6):1809-21. doi: 10.1084/jem.179.6.1809.

Isolation, cDNA cloning, and overexpression of a 33-kD cell surface glycoprotein 
that binds to the globular "heads" of C1q.

Ghebrehiwet B(1), Lim BL, Peerschke EI, Willis AC, Reid KB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, State University of New York, Stony Brook 11794-8161.

This work describes the functional characterization, cDNA cloning, and 
expression of a novel cell surface protein. This protein designated gC1q-R, was 
first isolated from Raji cells and was found to bind to the globular "heads" of 
C1q molecules, at physiological ionic strength, and also to inhibit 
complement-mediated lysis of sheep erythrocytes by human serum. The NH2-terminal 
amino acid sequence of the first 24 residues of the C1q-binding protein was 
determined and this information allowed the synthesis of two degenerate 
polymerase chain reaction primers for use in the preparation of a probe in the 
screening of a B cell cDNA library. The cDNA isolated, using this probe, was 
found to encode a pre-pro protein of 282 residues. The NH2 terminus of the 
protein isolated from Raji cells started at residue 74 of the predicted pre-pro 
sequence. The cDNA sequence shows that the purified protein has three potential 
N-glycosylation residues and is a highly charged, acidic molecule. Hence, its 
binding to C1q may be primarily but not exclusively due to ionic interactions. 
The "mature" protein, corresponding to amino acid residues 74-282 of the 
predicted pre-pro sequence, was overexpressed in Escherichia coli and was 
purified to homogeneity. This recombinant protein was also able to inhibit the 
complement-mediated lysis of sheep erythrocytes by human serum and was shown to 
be a tetramer by gel filtration in nondissociating conditions. Northern blot and 
RT-PCR studies showed that the C1q-binding protein is expressed at high levels 
in Raji and Daudi cell lines, at moderate levels in U937, Molt-4, and HepG2 cell 
lines, and at a very low level in the HL60 cell line. However, it is not 
expressed in the K562 cell line. Comparison of gC1q-R NH2-terminal sequence with 
that of the receptor for the collagen-like domain of C1q (cC1q-R) showed no 
similarity. Furthermore, antibodies to gC1q-R or an 18-amino acid residue-long 
NH2-terminal synthetic gC1q-R peptide did not cross-react with antibodies to 
cC1q-R. Anti-gC1q-R immunoblotted a 33-kD Raji cell membrane protein, whereas 
anti cC1q-R recognized a molecule of approximately 60 kD. The NH2-terminal 
sequence of gC1g-R appears to be displayed extracellularly since anti-gC1g-R 
peptide reacted with surface molecules on lymphocytes, polymorphonuclear 
leukocytes, and platelets, as assessed by flow cytometric and confocal laser 
scanning microscopic analyses.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1084/jem.179.6.1809
PMCID: PMC2191527
PMID: 8195709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

This work describes the functional characterization, cDNA cloning, and expression of a novel cell surface protein. This protein designated gC1q-R, was first isolated from Raji cells and was found to bind to the globular "heads" of C1q molecules, at physiological ionic strength, and also to inhibit complement-mediated lysis of sheep erythrocytes by human serum. The NH2-terminal amino acid sequence of the first 24 residues of the C1q-binding protein was determined and this information allowed the synthesis of two degenerate polymerase chain reaction primers for use in the preparation of a probe in the screening of a B cell cDNA library. The cDNA isolated, using this probe, was found to encode a pre-pro protein of 282 residues. The NH2 terminus of the protein isolated from Raji cells started at residue 74 of the predicted pre-pro sequence. The cDNA sequence shows that the purified protein has three potential N-glycosylation residues and is a highly charged, acidic molecule. Hence, its binding to C1q may be primarily but not exclusively due to ionic interactions. The "mature" protein, corresponding to amino acid residues 74-282 of the predicted pre-pro sequence, was overexpressed in Escherichia coli and was purified to homogeneity. This recombinant protein was also able to inhibit the complement-mediated lysis of sheep erythrocytes by human serum and was shown to be a tetramer by gel filtration in nondissociating conditions. Northern blot and RT-PCR studies showed that the C1q-binding protein is expressed at high levels in Raji and Daudi cell lines, at moderate levels in U937, Molt-4, and HepG2 cell lines, and at a very low level in the HL60 cell line. However, it is not expressed in the K562 cell line. Comparison of gC1q-R NH2-terminal sequence with that of the receptor for the collagen-like domain of C1q (cC1q-R) showed no similarity. Furthermore, antibodies to gC1q-R or an 18-amino acid residue-long NH2-terminal synthetic gC1q-R peptide did not cross-react with antibodies to cC1q-R. Anti-gC1q-R immunoblotted a 33-kD Raji cell membrane protein, whereas anti cC1q-R recognized a molecule of approximately 60 kD. The NH2-terminal sequence of gC1g-R appears to be displayed extracellularly since anti-gC1g-R peptide reacted with surface molecules on lymphocytes, polymorphonuclear leukocytes, and platelets, as assessed by flow cytometric and confocal laser scanning microscopic analyses.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)
