---
pmid: '23676497'
title: Endocytosis of synaptic ADAM10 in neuronal plasticity and Alzheimer's disease.
authors:
- Marcello E
- Saraceno C
- Musardo S
- Vara H
- de la Fuente AG
- Pelucchi S
- Di Marino D
- Borroni B
- Tramontano A
- Pérez-Otaño I
- Padovani A
- Giustetto M
- Gardoni F
- Di Luca M
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3668814
doi: 10.1172/JCI65401
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Endocytosis of synaptic ADAM10 in neuronal plasticity and Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Marcello E, Saraceno C, Musardo S, Vara H, de la Fuente AG, Pelucchi S, Di Marino D, Borroni B, Tramontano A, Pérez-Otaño I, Padovani A, Giustetto M, Gardoni F, Di Luca M
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI65401](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI65401)
**PMC:** [PMC3668814](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3668814/)

## Abstract

1. J Clin Invest. 2013 Jun;123(6):2523-38. doi: 10.1172/JCI65401. Epub 2013 May
8.

Endocytosis of synaptic ADAM10 in neuronal plasticity and Alzheimer's disease.

Marcello E(1), Saraceno C, Musardo S, Vara H, de la Fuente AG, Pelucchi S, Di 
Marino D, Borroni B, Tramontano A, Pérez-Otaño I, Padovani A, Giustetto M, 
Gardoni F, Di Luca M.

Author information:
(1)Università degli Studi di Milano, Dipartimento di Scienze Farmacologiche e 
Biomolecolari and Centre of Excellence on Neurodegenerative Diseases, Milan, 
Italy.

A disintegrin and metalloproteinase 10 (ADAM10), a disintegrin and 
metalloproteinase that resides in the postsynaptic densities (PSDs) of 
excitatory synapses, has previously been shown to limit β-amyloid peptide (Aβ) 
formation in Alzheimer's disease (AD). ADAM10 also plays a critical role in 
regulating functional membrane proteins at the synapse. Using human hippocampal 
homogenates, we found that ADAM10 removal from the plasma membrane was mediated 
by clathrin-dependent endocytosis. Additionally, we identified the clathrin 
adaptor AP2 as an interacting partner of a previously uncharacterized atypical 
binding motif in the ADAM10 C-terminal domain. This domain was required for 
ADAM10 endocytosis and modulation of its plasma membrane levels. We found that 
the ADAM10/AP2 association was increased in the hippocampi of AD patients 
compared with healthy controls. Long-term potentiation (LTP) in hippocampal 
neuronal cultures induced ADAM10 endocytosis through AP2 association and 
decreased surface ADAM10 levels and activity. Conversely, long-term depression 
(LTD) promoted ADAM10 synaptic membrane insertion and stimulated its activity. 
ADAM10 interaction with the synapse-associated protein-97 (SAP97) was necessary 
for LTD-induced ADAM10 trafficking and required for LTD maintenance and 
LTD-induced changes in spine morphogenesis. These data identify and characterize 
a mechanism controlling ADAM10 localization and activity at excitatory synapses 
that is relevant to AD pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI65401
PMCID: PMC3668814
PMID: 23676497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
