---
pmid: '21906946'
title: Autophagy and lipid metabolism coordinately modulate life span in germline-less
  C. elegans.
authors:
- Lapierre LR
- Gelino S
- Meléndez A
- Hansen M
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3191188
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2011.07.042
---

# Autophagy and lipid metabolism coordinately modulate life span in germline-less C. elegans.
**Authors:** Lapierre LR, Gelino S, Meléndez A, Hansen M
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cub.2011.07.042](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2011.07.042)
**PMC:** [PMC3191188](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3191188/)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2011 Sep 27;21(18):1507-14. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2011.07.042. Epub
2011  Sep 8.

Autophagy and lipid metabolism coordinately modulate life span in germline-less 
C. elegans.

Lapierre LR(1), Gelino S, Meléndez A, Hansen M.

Author information:
(1)Program of Development and Aging, Del E. Webb Neuroscience, Aging and Stem 
Cell Research Center, USA.

BACKGROUND: The cellular recycling process of autophagy is emerging as a key 
player in several longevity pathways in Caenorhabditis elegans. Here, we 
identify a role for autophagy in long-lived animals lacking a germline and show 
that autophagy and lipid metabolism work interdependently to modulate aging in 
this longevity model.
RESULTS: Germline removal extends life span in C. elegans via genes such as the 
lipase LIPL-4; however, less is known of the cellular basis for this life-span 
extension. Here, we show that germline loss induces autophagy gene expression 
via the forkhead box A (FOXA) transcription factor PHA-4 and that autophagy is 
required to extend longevity. We identify a novel link between autophagy and 
LIPL-4, because autophagy is required to maintain high lipase activity in 
germline-deficient animals. Reciprocally, lipl-4 is required for autophagy 
induction. Coordination between autophagy and lipolysis is further supported by 
the finding that inhibition of TOR (target of rapamycin), a major negative 
regulator of autophagy, induces lipl-4 expression, and TOR levels are reduced in 
germline-less animals. TOR may therefore function as a common upstream regulator 
of both autophagy and lipl-4 expression in germline-less animals. Importantly, 
we find that the link between autophagy and LIPL-4 is relevant to longevity, 
because autophagy is induced in animals overexpressing LIPL-4 and autophagy is 
required for their long life span, recapitulating observations in germline-less 
animals.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, our data offer a novel mechanism by which autophagy 
and the lipase LIPL-4 interdependently modulate aging in germline-deficient 
C. elegans by maintaining lipid homeostasis to prolong life span.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2011.07.042
PMCID: PMC3191188
PMID: 21906946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
