---
pmid: '14651934'
title: A cell-adhesion pathway regulates intercellular communication during Dictyostelium
  development.
authors:
- Kibler K
- Svetz J
- Nguyen TL
- Shaw C
- Shaulsky G
journal: Dev Biol
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2003.08.025
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# A cell-adhesion pathway regulates intercellular communication during Dictyostelium development.
**Authors:** Kibler K, Svetz J, Nguyen TL, Shaw C, Shaulsky G
**Journal:** Dev Biol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ydbio.2003.08.025](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2003.08.025)

## Abstract

1. Dev Biol. 2003 Dec 15;264(2):506-21. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2003.08.025.

A cell-adhesion pathway regulates intercellular communication during 
Dictyostelium development.

Kibler K(1), Svetz J, Nguyen TL, Shaw C, Shaulsky G.

Author information:
(1)Graduate Program in Developmental Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, One 
Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Cell adhesion molecules play an important physical role in shaping the structure 
of multicellular organisms. Recent studies show that they also play a role in 
intracellular and intercellular signaling. We describe a cell adhesion pathway 
that is mediated by the intercellular communication genes comC, lagC, and lagD 
during Dictyostelium development. Disruptions of these genes result in strains 
that are unable to generate spores when developed in a pure population but are 
capable of sporulation when developed in chimerae with wild-type cells. In 
contrast, any pair-wise chimera of the three mutants fails to form spores. We 
postulate that the wild-type cells supply the mutant cells with a signal that 
partially rescues their sporulation. We also propose that the three mutants are 
deficient in the production of that signal, suggesting that the three genes 
function in one signaling pathway. In support of that notion, the mutant cells 
share common non-cell-autonomous prespore and prestalk-specific defects and a 
common pattern of developmental progression and regression. We provide 
transcriptional and functional evidence for a network in which comC inhibits 
lagC and activates lagD expression, lagC and lagD are mutually inductive, and 
the cell adhesion gene lagC is the terminal node in this signaling network.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2003.08.025
PMID: 14651934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
