---
pmid: '19955415'
title: CRM1 mediates nuclear-cytoplasmic shuttling of mature microRNAs.
authors:
- Castanotto D
- Lingeman R
- Riggs AD
- Rossi JJ
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2787469
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0912384106
---

# CRM1 mediates nuclear-cytoplasmic shuttling of mature microRNAs.
**Authors:** Castanotto D, Lingeman R, Riggs AD, Rossi JJ
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0912384106](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0912384106)
**PMC:** [PMC2787469](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2787469/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Dec 22;106(51):21655-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0912384106. Epub 2009 Dec 2.

CRM1 mediates nuclear-cytoplasmic shuttling of mature microRNAs.

Castanotto D(1), Lingeman R, Riggs AD, Rossi JJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Beckman Research Institute of 
the City of Hope, 1450 East Duarte Road, Duarte, CA 91010, USA.

Drosha-processed microRNAs (miRNAs) have been shown to be exported from the 
nucleus to the cytoplasm by Exportin 5, where they are processed a second time 
to generate mature miRNAs. In this work we show that miRNAs also use CRM1 for 
nuclear-cytoplasmic shuttling. Inhibition of CRM1 by Leptomycin B results in 
nuclear accumulation of miRNA guide sequences. Nuclear to cytoplasmic transport 
can be actively competed by synthetic small interfering RNAs, indicating that 
this pathway is shared by different classes of processed small RNAs. We also 
find that CRM1 coimmunoprecipitates with Ago-1, Ago-2, Topo2alpha, EzH2, and 
Mta, consistent with a role of Argonautes and small RNAs in chromatin 
remodeling.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0912384106
PMCID: PMC2787469
PMID: 19955415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
