---
pmid: '23333317'
title: Removal of centrosomal PP1 by NIMA kinase unlocks the MPF feedback loop to
  promote mitotic commitment in S. pombe.
authors:
- Grallert A
- Chan KY
- Alonso-Nuñez ML
- Madrid M
- Biswas A
- Alvarez-Tabarés I
- Connolly Y
- Tanaka K
- Robertson A
- Ortiz JM
- Smith DL
- Hagan IM
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2012.12.039
---

# Removal of centrosomal PP1 by NIMA kinase unlocks the MPF feedback loop to promote mitotic commitment in S. pombe.
**Authors:** Grallert A, Chan KY, Alonso-Nuñez ML, Madrid M, Biswas A, Alvarez-Tabarés I, Connolly Y, Tanaka K, Robertson A, Ortiz JM, Smith DL, Hagan IM
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cub.2012.12.039](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2012.12.039)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2013 Feb 4;23(3):213-22. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2012.12.039. Epub 2013 
Jan 17.

Removal of centrosomal PP1 by NIMA kinase unlocks the MPF feedback loop to 
promote mitotic commitment in S. pombe.

Grallert A(1), Chan KY, Alonso-Nuñez ML, Madrid M, Biswas A, Alvarez-Tabarés I, 
Connolly Y, Tanaka K, Robertson A, Ortiz JM, Smith DL, Hagan IM.

Author information:
(1)CRUK Cell Division Group, Paterson Institute for Cancer Research, University 
of Manchester, Wilmslow Road, Manchester M20 4BX, UK.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2013 Feb 4;23(3):R120-2. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2012.12.020.

BACKGROUND: Activation of the Cdk1/cyclin B complex, also known as 
mitosis-promoting factor (MPF), drives commitment to mitosis. Interphase MPF is 
inhibited through phosphorylation of Cdk1 by Wee1-related kinases. Because Cdc25 
phosphatases remove this phosphate, Cdc25 activity is an essential part of the 
switch that drives cells into mitosis. The generation of a critical "trigger" of 
active MPF promotes a positive feedback loop that employs Polo kinase to boost 
Cdc25 activity and inhibit Wee1, thereby ensuring that mitotic commitment is a 
bistable switch. Mutations in the spindle pole body (SPB) component Cut12 
suppress otherwise lethal deficiencies in Cdc25.
RESULTS: Cut12 harbors a bipartite protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) docking domain. 
Mutation of either element alone suppressed the temperature-dependent lethality 
of cdc25.22, whereas simultaneous ablation of both allowed cells to divide in 
the complete absence of Cdc25. Late G2 phase phosphorylation between the two 
elements by MPF and the NIMA kinase Fin1 blocked PP1(Dis2) recruitment, thereby 
promoting recruitment of Polo to Cut12 and the SPB and elevating global Polo 
kinase activity throughout the cell.
CONCLUSIONS: PP1 recruitment to Cut12 sets a threshold for Polo's feedback-loop 
activity that locks the cell in interphase until Cdc25 pushes MPF activity 
through this barrier to initiate mitosis. We propose that events on the SPB 
(and, by inference, the centrosome) integrate inputs from diverse signaling 
networks to generate a coherent decision to divide that is appropriate for the 
particular environmental context of each cell. PP1 recruitment sets one or more 
critical thresholds for single or multiple local events within this switch.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2012.12.039
PMID: 23333317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
