---
pmid: '19576176'
title: 'Lrrk2 phosphorylates alpha synuclein at serine 129: Parkinson disease implications.'
authors:
- Qing H
- Wong W
- McGeer EG
- McGeer PL
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.06.142
---

# Lrrk2 phosphorylates alpha synuclein at serine 129: Parkinson disease implications.
**Authors:** Qing H, Wong W, McGeer EG, McGeer PL
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.06.142](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.06.142)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Sep 11;387(1):149-52. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.06.142. Epub 2009 Jul 1.

Lrrk2 phosphorylates alpha synuclein at serine 129: Parkinson disease 
implications.

Qing H(1), Wong W, McGeer EG, McGeer PL.

Author information:
(1)Kinsmen Laboratory of Neurological Research, University of British Columbia, 
2255 Wesbrook Mall, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Mutations in the alpha synuclein gene (SNCA) are the most potent cause of 
autosomal dominant Parkinson disease (PD) while mutations in the leucine-rich 
repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene are the most common cause. We hypothesized that a 
direct interaction may exist between their protein products. Here we show that 
full-length Lrrk2 or fragments containing its kinase domain have a significant 
capacity to phosphorylate recombinant alpha synuclein (Asyn) at serine 129. Such 
phosphorylated Asyn is the major component of pathological deposits in PD. We 
further show that the G2019S mutation in Lrrk2, which is the most common genetic 
determinant of PD, has a significantly greater capacity than wild-type Lrrk2 to 
phosphorylate Asyn. This suggests that the G2019S mutant protein may cause PD by 
generating pathological levels of phosphorylated Asyn. Controlling Lrrk2 Asyn 
phosphokinase activity may be an approach to disease modifying therapy for PD 
and other synucleinopathies.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.06.142
PMID: 19576176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
