---
pmid: '19196961'
title: CHIP regulates leucine-rich repeat kinase-2 ubiquitination, degradation, and
  toxicity.
authors:
- Ko HS
- Bailey R
- Smith WW
- Liu Z
- Shin JH
- Lee YI
- Zhang YJ
- Jiang H
- Ross CA
- Moore DJ
- Patterson C
- Petrucelli L
- Dawson TM
- Dawson VL
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2650345
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0810123106
---

# CHIP regulates leucine-rich repeat kinase-2 ubiquitination, degradation, and toxicity.
**Authors:** Ko HS, Bailey R, Smith WW, Liu Z, Shin JH, Lee YI, Zhang YJ, Jiang H, Ross CA, Moore DJ, Patterson C, Petrucelli L, Dawson TM, Dawson VL
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0810123106](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0810123106)
**PMC:** [PMC2650345](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2650345/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Feb 24;106(8):2897-902. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0810123106. Epub 2009 Feb 5.

CHIP regulates leucine-rich repeat kinase-2 ubiquitination, degradation, and 
toxicity.

Ko HS(1), Bailey R, Smith WW, Liu Z, Shin JH, Lee YI, Zhang YJ, Jiang H, Ross 
CA, Moore DJ, Patterson C, Petrucelli L, Dawson TM, Dawson VL.

Author information:
(1)Neuroregeneration and Stem Cell Programs, Institute for Cell Engineering, 
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Mutation in leucine-rich repeat kinase-2 (LRRK2) is the most common cause of 
late-onset Parkinson's disease (PD). Although most cases of PD are sporadic, 
some are inherited, including those caused by LRRK2 mutations. Because these 
mutations may be associated with a toxic gain of function, controlling the 
expression of LRRK2 may decrease its cytotoxicity. Here we show that the 
carboxyl terminus of HSP70-interacting protein (CHIP) binds, ubiquitinates, and 
promotes the ubiquitin proteasomal degradation of LRRK2. Overexpression of CHIP 
protects against and knockdown of CHIP exacerbates toxicity mediated by mutant 
LRRK2. Moreover, HSP90 forms a complex with LRRK2, and inhibition of HSP90 
chaperone activity by 17AAG leads to proteasomal degradation of LRRK2, resulting 
in increased cell viability. Thus, increasing CHIP E3 ligase activity and 
blocking HSP90 chaperone activity can prevent the deleterious effects of LRRK2. 
These findings point to potential treatment options for LRRK2-associated PD.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0810123106
PMCID: PMC2650345
PMID: 19196961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
