---
pmid: '34762484'
title: Structural basis of Integrator-mediated transcription regulation.
authors:
- Fianu I
- Chen Y
- Dienemann C
- Dybkov O
- Linden A
- Urlaub H
- Cramer P
journal: Science
year: '2021'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.abk0154
---

# Structural basis of Integrator-mediated transcription regulation.
**Authors:** Fianu I, Chen Y, Dienemann C, Dybkov O, Linden A, Urlaub H, Cramer P
**Journal:** Science (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.abk0154](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abk0154)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2021 Nov 12;374(6569):883-887. doi: 10.1126/science.abk0154. Epub
2021  Nov 11.

Structural basis of Integrator-mediated transcription regulation.

Fianu I(1), Chen Y(1), Dienemann C(1), Dybkov O(2), Linden A(3)(4), Urlaub 
H(3)(4), Cramer P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical 
Chemistry, 37077 Göttingen, Germany.
(2)Department of Cellular Biochemistry, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical 
Chemistry, 37077 Göttingen, Germany.
(3)Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical 
Chemistry, 37077 Göttingen, Germany.
(4)Institute of Clinical Chemistry, Bioanalytics Group, University Medical 
Center Göttingen, 37075 Göttingen, Germany.

Integrator and protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) form a complex that 
dephosphorylates paused RNA polymerase II (Pol II), cleaves the nascent RNA, and 
terminates transcription. We report the structure of the pretermination complex 
containing the human Integrator-PP2A complex bound to paused Pol II. Integrator 
binds Pol II and the pausing factors DSIF and NELF to exclude binding of the 
elongation factors SPT6 and PAF1 complex. Integrator also binds the C-terminal 
domain of Pol II and positions PP2A to counteract Pol II phosphorylation and 
elongation. The Integrator endonuclease docks to the RNA exit site and opens to 
cleave nascent RNA about 20 nucleotides from the Pol II active site. Integrator 
does not bind the DNA clamps formed by Pol II and DSIF, enabling release of DNA 
and transcription termination.

DOI: 10.1126/science.abk0154
PMID: 34762484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
