---
pmid: '14660601'
title: A conserved proline in the last transmembrane segment of Gaa1 is required for
  glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) recognition by GPI transamidase.
authors:
- Vainauskas S
- Menon AK
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M312191200
---

# A conserved proline in the last transmembrane segment of Gaa1 is required for glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) recognition by GPI transamidase.
**Authors:** Vainauskas S, Menon AK
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M312191200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M312191200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 20;279(8):6540-5. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M312191200. Epub 2003
 Dec 1.

A conserved proline in the last transmembrane segment of Gaa1 is required for 
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) recognition by GPI transamidase.

Vainauskas S(1), Menon AK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 
53706-1544, USA. saulius@biochem.wisc.edu

Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored proteins are synthesized as 
precursor proteins that are processed in the endoplasmic reticulum by GPI 
transamidase (GPIT). Human GPIT is a multisubunit membrane-bound protein complex 
consisting of Gaa1, Gpi8, phosphatidylinositol glycan (PIG)-S, PIG-T, and PIG-U. 
The enzyme recognizes a C-terminal signal sequence in the proprotein and 
replaces it with a preformed GPI lipid. The nature of the functional interaction 
of the GPIT subunits with each other and with the proprotein and GPI substrates 
is largely unknown. We recently analyzed the GPIT subunit Gaa1, a polytopic 
protein with seven transmembrane (TM) spans, to identify sequence determinants 
in the protein that are required for its interaction with other subunits and for 
function (Vainauskas, S., Maeda, Y., Kurniawan, H., Kinoshita, T., and Menon, A. 
K. (2002) J. Biol. Chem. 277, 30535-30542). We showed that elimination of the 
C-terminal TM segment of Gaa1 allows the protein to interact with Gpi8, PIG-S, 
and PIG-T but renders the resulting GPIT complex nonfunctional. We now show that 
GPIT complexes containing C-terminally truncated Gaa1 possess a full complement 
of subunits and are able to interact with a proprotein substrate but cannot 
co-immunoprecipitate GPI. We go on to show that mutation of a conserved proline 
residue centrally located within the C-terminal TM span of Gaa1 is sufficient to 
abrogate the ability of the resulting GPIT complex to co-immunoprecipitate GPI. 
We suggest that the putative dynamic hinge created by the proline residue 
provides a structural basis for the interaction of GPI with GPIT.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M312191200
PMID: 14660601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
