---
pmid: '9601094'
title: Mph1, a member of the Mps1-like family of dual specificity protein kinases,
  is required for the spindle checkpoint in S. pombe.
authors:
- He X
- Jones MH
- Winey M
- Sazer S
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.111.12.1635
---

# Mph1, a member of the Mps1-like family of dual specificity protein kinases, is required for the spindle checkpoint in S. pombe.
**Authors:** He X, Jones MH, Winey M, Sazer S
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.111.12.1635](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.111.12.1635)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 1998 Jun;111 ( Pt 12):1635-47. doi: 10.1242/jcs.111.12.1635.

Mph1, a member of the Mps1-like family of dual specificity protein kinases, is 
required for the spindle checkpoint in S. pombe.

He X(1), Jones MH, Winey M, Sazer S.

Author information:
(1)Verna and Marrs McLean Department of Biochemistry, Baylor College of 
Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The spindle assembly checkpoint pathway is not essential for normal mitosis but 
ensures accurate nuclear division by blocking the metaphase to anaphase 
transition in response to a defective spindle. Here, we report the isolation of 
a new spindle checkpoint gene, mph1 (Mps1p-like pombe homolog), in the fission 
yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe, that is required for checkpoint activation in 
response to spindle defects. mph1 functions upstream of mad2, a previously 
characterized component of the spindle checkpoint. Overexpression of mph1, like 
overexpression of mad2, mimics activation of the checkpoint and imposes a 
metaphase arrest. mph1 protein shares sequence similarity with Mps1p, a dual 
specificity kinase that functions in the spindle checkpoint of the budding yeast 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Complementation analysis demonstrates that mph1 and 
Mps1p are functionally related. They differ in that Mps1p, but not mph1, has an 
additional essential role in spindle pole body duplication. We propose that mph1 
is the MPS1 equivalent in the spindle checkpoint pathway but not in the SPB 
duplication pathway. Overexpression of mad2 does not require mph1 to impose a 
metaphase arrest, which indicates a mechanism of spindle checkpoint activation 
other than mph1/Mps1p kinase-dependent phosphorylation. In the same screen which 
led to the isolation of mad2 and mph1, we also isolated dph1, a cDNA that 
encodes a protein 46% identical to an S. cerevisiae SPB duplication protein, 
Dsk2p. Our initial characterization indicates that S.p. dph1 and S.c. DSK2 are 
functionally similar. Together these results suggest that the budding and 
fission yeasts share common elements for SPB duplication, despite differences in 
SPB structure and the timing of SPB duplication relative to mitotic entry.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.111.12.1635
PMID: 9601094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
