---
pmid: '14724282'
title: A novel human beta1,3-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase that synthesizes a
  unique carbohydrate structure, GalNAcbeta1-3GlcNAc.
authors:
- Hiruma T
- Togayachi A
- Okamura K
- Sato T
- Kikuchi N
- Kwon YD
- Nakamura A
- Fujimura K
- Gotoh M
- Tachibana K
- Ishizuka Y
- Noce T
- Nakanishi H
- Narimatsu H
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M310614200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# A novel human beta1,3-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase that synthesizes a unique carbohydrate structure, GalNAcbeta1-3GlcNAc.
**Authors:** Hiruma T, Togayachi A, Okamura K, Sato T, Kikuchi N, Kwon YD, Nakamura A, Fujimura K, Gotoh M, Tachibana K, Ishizuka Y, Noce T, Nakanishi H, Narimatsu H
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M310614200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M310614200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 2;279(14):14087-95. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M310614200. Epub
2004  Jan 14.

A novel human beta1,3-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase that synthesizes a 
unique carbohydrate structure, GalNAcbeta1-3GlcNAc.

Hiruma T(1), Togayachi A, Okamura K, Sato T, Kikuchi N, Kwon YD, Nakamura A, 
Fujimura K, Gotoh M, Tachibana K, Ishizuka Y, Noce T, Nakanishi H, Narimatsu H.

Author information:
(1)Research Center for Glycoscience (RCG), National Institute of Advanced 
Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Open Space Laboratory Central-2, 1-1-1 
Umezono, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8568, Japan.

We found, using a BLAST search, a novel human gene (GenBank trade mark accession 
number BC029564) that possesses beta3-glycosyltransferase motifs. The 
full-length open reading frame consists of 500 amino acids and encodes a typical 
type II membrane protein. This enzyme has a domain containing 
beta1,3-glycosyltransferase motifs, which are widely conserved in the 
beta1,3-galactosyltransferase and beta1,3-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase 
families. The putative catalytic domain was expressed in human embryonic kidney 
293T cells as a soluble protein. Its N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase activity 
was observed when N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) beta1-O-benzyl was used as an 
acceptor substrate. The enzyme product was determined to have a beta1,3-linkage 
by NMR spectroscopic analysis, and was therefore named 
beta1,3-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase-II (beta3GalNAc-T2). The acceptor 
substrate specificity of beta3GalNAc-T2 was examined using various 
oligosaccharide substrates. 
Galbeta1-3(GlcNAcbeta1-6)GalNAcalpha1-O-para-nitrophenyl (core 2-pNP) was the 
best acceptor substrate for beta3GalNAc-T2, followed by 
GlcNAcbeta1-4GlcNAcbeta1-O-benzyl, and 
GlcNAcbeta1-6GalNAcalpha1-O-para-nitrophenyl (core 6-pNP), among the tested 
oligosaccharide substrates. Quantitative real time PCR analysis revealed that 
the beta3Gal-NAc-T2 transcripts was restricted in its distribution mainly to the 
testis, adipose tissue, skeletal muscle, and ovary. Its putative orthologous 
gene, mbeta3GalNAc-T2, was also found in a data base of mouse expressed sequence 
tags. In situ hybridization analysis with mouse testis showed that the 
transcripts are expressed in germ line cells. beta3GalNAc-T2 efficiently 
transferred GalNAc to N-glycans of fetal calf fetuin, which was treated with 
neuraminidase and beta-galactosidase. However, it showed no activity toward any 
glycolipid examined. Although the GalNAcbeta1-3GlcNAcbeta1-R structure has not 
been reported in humans or other mammals, we have discovered a novel human 
glycosyltransferase producing this structure on N- and O-glycans.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M310614200
PMID: 14724282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
