---
pmid: '22094058'
title: Alternative splicing directs dual localization of Candida albicans 6-phosphogluconate
  dehydrogenase to cytosol and peroxisomes.
authors:
- Strijbis K
- van den Burg J
- Visser WF
- van den Berg M
- Distel B
journal: FEMS Yeast Res
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1567-1364.2011.00761.x
---

# Alternative splicing directs dual localization of Candida albicans 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase to cytosol and peroxisomes.
**Authors:** Strijbis K, van den Burg J, Visser WF, van den Berg M, Distel B
**Journal:** FEMS Yeast Res (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1567-1364.2011.00761.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1567-1364.2011.00761.x)

## Abstract

1. FEMS Yeast Res. 2012 Feb;12(1):61-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1567-1364.2011.00761.x.
Epub  2011 Dec 2.

Alternative splicing directs dual localization of Candida albicans 
6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase to cytosol and peroxisomes.

Strijbis K(1), van den Burg J, Visser WF, van den Berg M, Distel B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Academic Medical Center, University of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) is the main source of NADPH in the cell and 
therefore essential for the maintenance of the redox balance and anabolic 
reactions. NADPH is produced by the two dehydrogenases in the oxidative branch 
of the PPP: glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (Zwf1) and 6-phosphogluconate 
dehydrogenase (Gnd1). We observed that in the commensal fungus Candida albicans 
these two enzymes contain putative peroxisomal targeting signals (PTSs): Zwf1 
has a putative PTS1, while the annotated intron of GND1 encodes a PTS2. By 
subcellular fractionation and fluorescence microscopy, we show that both enzymes 
have a dual localization in which the majority is cytosolic, but a small 
fraction is peroxisome associated. Analysis of GND1 transcripts revealed that 
dual targeting of Gnd1 is directed by alternative splicing resulting in two Gnd1 
isoforms, one without targeting signals localized to the cytosol and one with an 
N-terminal PTS2 targeted to peroxisomes. To our knowledge, Gnd1 is the first 
example of dual targeting of a protein by alternative splicing in C. albicans. 
In silico analysis suggests that PTS-mediated peroxisomal targeting of Zwf1 and 
Gnd1 is conserved across closely related Candida species. We discuss putative 
functions of the peroxisomal oxidative PPP in these organisms.

© 2011 Federation of European Microbiological Societies. Published by Blackwell 
Publishing Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1567-1364.2011.00761.x
PMID: 22094058 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
