---
pmid: '7523381'
title: The ubiquitously expressed Syp phosphatase interacts with c-kit and Grb2 in
  hematopoietic cells.
authors:
- Tauchi T
- Feng GS
- Marshall MS
- Shen R
- Mantel C
- Pawson T
- Broxmeyer HE
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The ubiquitously expressed Syp phosphatase interacts with c-kit and Grb2 in hematopoietic cells.
**Authors:** Tauchi T, Feng GS, Marshall MS, Shen R, Mantel C, Pawson T, Broxmeyer HE
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1994)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1994 Oct 7;269(40):25206-11.

The ubiquitously expressed Syp phosphatase interacts with c-kit and Grb2 in 
hematopoietic cells.

Tauchi T(1), Feng GS, Marshall MS, Shen R, Mantel C, Pawson T, Broxmeyer HE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine (Hematology/Oncology), Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis 46202.

The c-kit proto-oncogene encodes a transmembrane tyrosine kinase receptor, which 
is important for the normal development of hematopoietic cells, melanoblasts, 
and germ cells. Autophosphorylation of c-kit receptor on tyrosine creates 
binding sites for cellular src homology 2 (SH2)-containing signaling molecules. 
The discovery of phosphotyrosine phosphatases that contain SH2 domains suggests 
roles for these molecules in growth factor signaling pathways. We found that 
Syp, a phosphotyrosine phosphatase widely expressed in all the tissues in 
mammals, associates with c-kit receptor after activation with its ligand, steel 
factor, in the factor-dependent cell line, M07e. Both NH2-terminal and 
COOH-terminal SH2 domains of Syp, made as glutathione S-transferase fusion 
proteins, were able to bind to the activated c-kit receptor in vitro. 
Furthermore, Syp became marginally phosphorylated on tyrosine upon c-kit 
receptor activation, and tyrosine-phosphorylated Syp was found to be complexed 
with Grb2 in steel factor-stimulated M07e cells. Direct binding between Syp and 
Grb2 was also observed in vitro. Last, Ras and Raf interacts in vitro as a 
result of steel factor-stimulated Ras activation. These results suggest that Syp 
may be an important signaling component downstream of the c-kit receptor and 
involved in activation of the Ras signaling pathway in hematopoietic cells.

PMID: 7523381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
