---
pmid: '18614528'
title: Structural and functional analysis of the human HDAC4 catalytic domain reveals
  a regulatory structural zinc-binding domain.
authors:
- Bottomley MJ
- Lo Surdo P
- Di Giovine P
- Cirillo A
- Scarpelli R
- Ferrigno F
- Jones P
- Neddermann P
- De Francesco R
- Steinkühler C
- Gallinari P
- Carfí A
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3258910
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M803514200
---

# Structural and functional analysis of the human HDAC4 catalytic domain reveals a regulatory structural zinc-binding domain.
**Authors:** Bottomley MJ, Lo Surdo P, Di Giovine P, Cirillo A, Scarpelli R, Ferrigno F, Jones P, Neddermann P, De Francesco R, Steinkühler C, Gallinari P, Carfí A
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M803514200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M803514200)
**PMC:** [PMC3258910](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3258910/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Sep 26;283(39):26694-704. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M803514200. Epub 
2008 Jul 8.

Structural and functional analysis of the human HDAC4 catalytic domain reveals a 
regulatory structural zinc-binding domain.

Bottomley MJ(1), Lo Surdo P, Di Giovine P, Cirillo A, Scarpelli R, Ferrigno F, 
Jones P, Neddermann P, De Francesco R, Steinkühler C, Gallinari P, Carfí A.

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Ricerche di Biologia Molecolare P. Angeletti, Merck Research 
Laboratories, Via Pontina Km 30.600, 00040 Pomezia (Roma), Italy.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) regulate chromatin status and gene expression, and 
their inhibition is of significant therapeutic interest. To date, no biological 
substrate for class IIa HDACs has been identified, and only low activity on 
acetylated lysines has been demonstrated. Here, we describe inhibitor-bound and 
inhibitor-free structures of the histone deacetylase-4 catalytic domain 
(HDAC4cd) and of an HDAC4cd active site mutant with enhanced enzymatic activity 
toward acetylated lysines. The structures presented, coupled with activity data, 
provide the molecular basis for the intrinsically low enzymatic activity of 
class IIa HDACs toward acetylated lysines and reveal active site features that 
may guide the design of class-specific inhibitors. In addition, these structures 
reveal a conformationally flexible structural zinc-binding domain conserved in 
all class IIa enzymes. Importantly, either the mutation of residues coordinating 
the structural zinc ion or the binding of a class IIa selective inhibitor 
prevented the association of HDAC4 with the N-CoR.HDAC3 repressor complex. 
Together, these data suggest a key role of the structural zinc-binding domain in 
the regulation of class IIa HDAC functions.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M803514200
PMCID: PMC3258910
PMID: 18614528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
