---
pmid: '10480941'
title: A novel motif mediates the targeting of the Arabidopsis COP1 protein to subnuclear
  foci.
authors:
- Stacey MG
- von Arnim AG
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.38.27231
---

# A novel motif mediates the targeting of the Arabidopsis COP1 protein to subnuclear foci.
**Authors:** Stacey MG, von Arnim AG
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.274.38.27231](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.38.27231)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Sep 17;274(38):27231-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.38.27231.

A novel motif mediates the targeting of the Arabidopsis COP1 protein to 
subnuclear foci.

Stacey MG(1), von Arnim AG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany, The University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee 
37996-1100, USA.

The constitutive photomorphogenesis 1 (COP1) protein of Arabidopsis thaliana 
accumulates in discrete subnuclear foci. To better understand the role of 
subnuclear architecture in COP1-mediated gene expression, we investigated the 
structural motifs of COP1 that mediate its localization to subnuclear foci using 
mutational analysis with green fluorescent protein as a reporter. In a transient 
expression assay, a subnuclear localization signal consisting of 58 residues 
between amino acids 120 and 177 of COP1 was able to confer speckled localization 
onto the heterologous nuclear NIa protein from tobacco etch virus. The 
subnuclear localization signal overlaps two previously characterized motifs, a 
cytoplasmic localization signal and a putative alpha-helical coiled-coil domain 
that has been implicated in COP1 dimerization. Moreover, phenotypically lethal 
mutations in the carboxyl-terminal WD-40 repeats inhibited localization to 
subnuclear foci, consistent with a functional role for the accumulation of COP1 
at subnuclear sites.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.38.27231
PMID: 10480941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
