---
pmid: '15480788'
title: The ire1 and ptc2 genes involved in the unfolded protein response pathway in
  the filamentous fungus Trichoderma reesei.
authors:
- Valkonen M
- Penttilä M
- Saloheimo M
journal: Mol Genet Genomics
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s00438-004-1070-0
---

# The ire1 and ptc2 genes involved in the unfolded protein response pathway in the filamentous fungus Trichoderma reesei.
**Authors:** Valkonen M, Penttilä M, Saloheimo M
**Journal:** Mol Genet Genomics (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00438-004-1070-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00438-004-1070-0)

## Abstract

1. Mol Genet Genomics. 2004 Nov;272(4):443-51. doi: 10.1007/s00438-004-1070-0.
Epub  2004 Oct 8.

The ire1 and ptc2 genes involved in the unfolded protein response pathway in the 
filamentous fungus Trichoderma reesei.

Valkonen M(1), Penttilä M, Saloheimo M.

Author information:
(1)VTT Biotechnology, PO Box 1500, 02044 VTT, Finland. mari.valkonen@vtt.fi

A signal transduction pathway called the unfolded protein response is activated 
when increased levels of misfolded proteins or incorrectly assembled subunits 
accumulate in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The expression of several genes 
for ER-resident foldases and chaperones, as well as genes encoding proteins that 
are involved in functions associated with the secretory process, are induced by 
this pathway. This paper describes the cloning and characterisation of genes for 
two components of the pathway, ire1 and ptc2, from the filamentous fungus 
Trichoderma reesei (Hypocrea jecorina). The data presented demonstrates that the 
T. reesei genes can complement Saccharomyces cerevisiae mutants that are 
deficient in the corresponding homologues. The T. reesei IREI protein has 
intrinsic kinase activity, as revealed by an in vitro autophosphorylation assay. 
Overexpression of ire1 in a T. reesei strain that expresses a foreign protein 
(laccase 1 from Phlebia radiata), results in up-regulation of the UPR pathway, 
as indicated by the increased expression levels of the known UPR target genes 
bip1 and pdi1. Splicing of the mRNA encoding the transcription factor HAC1 is 
also observed. Other genes encoding proteins from different parts of the 
secretory pathway also respond to ire1 overexpression.

DOI: 10.1007/s00438-004-1070-0
PMID: 15480788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
