---
pmid: '21453443'
title: Organization and assembly of the TRAPPII complex.
authors:
- Choi C
- Davey M
- Schluter C
- Pandher P
- Fang Y
- Foster LJ
- Conibear E
journal: Traffic
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2011.01181.x
---

# Organization and assembly of the TRAPPII complex.
**Authors:** Choi C, Davey M, Schluter C, Pandher P, Fang Y, Foster LJ, Conibear E
**Journal:** Traffic (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1600-0854.2011.01181.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0854.2011.01181.x)

## Abstract

1. Traffic. 2011 Jun;12(6):715-25. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2011.01181.x. Epub
2011  Apr 1.

Organization and assembly of the TRAPPII complex.

Choi C(1), Davey M, Schluter C, Pandher P, Fang Y, Foster LJ, Conibear E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Centre for Molecular Medicine and 
Therapeutics, Child and Family Research Institute, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, V5Z 4H4 Canada.

Current models suggest that TRAPP tethering complexes exist in two forms. 
Whereas the seven-subunit TRAPPI complex mediates ER-to-Golgi transport, TRAPPII 
contains three additional subunits (Trs65, Trs120 and Trs130) and is required 
for distinct tethering events at Golgi membranes. It is not clear how TRAPPII 
assembly is regulated. Here, we show that Tca17 is a fourth TRAPPII-specific 
component, and that Trs65 and Tca17 interact with distinct domains of Trs130 and 
make different contributions to complex assembly. Whereas Tca17 promotes the 
stable association of TRAPPII-specific subunits with the core complex, Trs65 
stabilizes TRAPPII in an oligomeric form. We show that Trs85, which was 
previously reported to be a subunit of both TRAPPI and TRAPPII, is not 
associated with the TRAPPII complex in yeast. However, we find that proteins 
related to Trs85, Trs65 and Tca17 are part of the same TRAPP complex in 
mammalian cells. These findings have implications for models of TRAPP complex 
formation and suggest that TRAPP complexes may be organized differently in yeast 
and mammals.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2011.01181.x
PMID: 21453443 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
