---
pmid: '20855601'
title: INO80 chromatin remodeling complex promotes the removal of UV lesions by the
  nucleotide excision repair pathway.
authors:
- Jiang Y
- Wang X
- Bao S
- Guo R
- Johnson DG
- Shen X
- Li L
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2951448
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1008388107
---

# INO80 chromatin remodeling complex promotes the removal of UV lesions by the nucleotide excision repair pathway.
**Authors:** Jiang Y, Wang X, Bao S, Guo R, Johnson DG, Shen X, Li L
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1008388107](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1008388107)
**PMC:** [PMC2951448](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2951448/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Oct 5;107(40):17274-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1008388107. Epub 2010 Sep 20.

INO80 chromatin remodeling complex promotes the removal of UV lesions by the 
nucleotide excision repair pathway.

Jiang Y(1), Wang X, Bao S, Guo R, Johnson DG, Shen X, Li L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The creation of accessible DNA in the context of chromatin is a key step in many 
DNA functions. To reveal how ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling activities 
impact DNA repair, we constructed mammalian genetic models for the INO80 
chromatin remodeling complex and investigated the impact of loss of INO80 
function on the repair of UV-induced photo lesions. We showed that deletion of 
two core components of the INO80 complex, INO80 and ARP5, significantly hampered 
cellular removal of UV-induced photo lesions but had no significant impact on 
the transcription of nucleotide excision repair (NER) factors. Loss of INO80 
abolished the assembly of NER factors, suggesting that prior chromatin 
relaxation is important for the NER incision process. Ino80 and Arp5 are 
enriched to UV-damaged DNA in an NER-incision-independent fashion, suggesting 
that recruitment of the remodeling activity likely takes place during the 
initial stage of damage recognition. These results demonstrate a critical role 
of INO80 in creating DNA accessibility for the NER pathway and provide direct 
evidence that repair of UV lesions and perhaps most bulky adduct lesions 
requires chromatin reconfiguration.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1008388107
PMCID: PMC2951448
PMID: 20855601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
