---
pmid: '9211985'
title: Association of human, rat, and rabbit apolipoprotein E with beta-amyloid.
authors:
- LaDu MJ
- Lukens JR
- Reardon CA
- Getz GS
journal: J Neurosci Res
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
---

# Association of human, rat, and rabbit apolipoprotein E with beta-amyloid.
**Authors:** LaDu MJ, Lukens JR, Reardon CA, Getz GS
**Journal:** J Neurosci Res (1997)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci Res. 1997 Jul 1;49(1):9-18.

Association of human, rat, and rabbit apolipoprotein E with beta-amyloid.

LaDu MJ(1), Lukens JR, Reardon CA, Getz GS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA. 
mladu@midway.uchicago.edu

In humans, apolipoprotein E (apoE) has three major isoforms, E2 (Cys112, 
Cys158), E3 (Cys112, Arg158), and E4 (Arg112, Arg158). While epsilon4 is a 
genetic risk factor for Alzheimer's disease (AD), epsilon2 may protect against 
late-onset AD. Using native preparations of apoE from conditioned tissue culture 
media or plasma lipoproteins, we have previously shown that when equivalent 
amounts of apoE3 or E4 were incubated with beta-amyloid (A beta), apoE3 formed 
20 times as much SDS-stable complex with the peptide as apoE4. This preferential 
binding of A beta to apoE3 was abolished when apoE was purified by a process 
which includes delipidation and denaturation. Here we expand these observations 
to include A beta binding to lipoprotein-associated and purified apoE2. 
Lipoproteins isolated from the plasma of individuals homozygous for either 
epsilon2 or epsilon3 were incubated with A beta(1-40). SDS-stable complex 
formation was analyzed by a non-reducing gel shift assay, followed by 
immunoblotting with either A beta or apoE antibodies. ApoE2:A beta complex 
formation was comparable to apoE3:A beta in both native and purified 
preparations of apoE. In addition, lipoprotein-associated rat apoE (Arg112, 
Arg158), like human apoE4, did not form complex with A beta, while 
lipoprotein-associated rabbit apoE (Cys112, Arg158) did bind the peptide. These 
binding studies provide one possible explanation for protective effects of both 
apoE2 and E3 against the development of Alzheimer's disease.

PMID: 9211985 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
