---
pmid: '31582561'
title: Angiogenin generates specific stress-induced tRNA halves and is not involved
  in tRF-3-mediated gene silencing.
authors:
- Su Z
- Kuscu C
- Malik A
- Shibata E
- Dutta A
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6851321
doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.009272
---

# Angiogenin generates specific stress-induced tRNA halves and is not involved in tRF-3-mediated gene silencing.
**Authors:** Su Z, Kuscu C, Malik A, Shibata E, Dutta A
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.RA119.009272](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA119.009272)
**PMC:** [PMC6851321](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6851321/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2019 Nov 8;294(45):16930-16941. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.009272.
Epub  2019 Oct 3.

Angiogenin generates specific stress-induced tRNA halves and is not involved in 
tRF-3-mediated gene silencing.

Su Z(1), Kuscu C(1), Malik A(1), Shibata E(1), Dutta A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Virginia, 
Charlottesville, Virginia 22901.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Virginia, 
Charlottesville, Virginia 22901 ad8q@virginia.edu.

tRNA fragments (tRFs) and tRNA halves have been implicated in various cellular 
processes, including gene silencing, translation, stress granule assembly, cell 
differentiation, retrotransposon activity, symbiosis, apoptosis, and more. 
Overexpressed angiogenin (ANG) cleaves tRNA anticodons and produces tRNA halves 
similar to those produced in response to stress. However, it is not clear 
whether endogenous ANG is essential for producing the stress-induced tRNA 
halves. It is also not clear whether smaller tRFs are generated from the tRNA 
halves. Here, using global short RNA-Seq approach, we found that ANG 
overexpression selectively cleaves a subset of tRNAs, including tRNAGlu, 
tRNAGly, tRNALys, tRNAVal, tRNAHis, tRNAAsp, and tRNASeC to produce tRNA halves 
and tRF-5s that are 26-30 bases long. Surprisingly, ANG knockout revealed that 
the majority of stress-induced tRNA halves, except for the 5' half from 
tRNAHisGTG and the 3' half from tRNAAspGTC, are ANG independent, suggesting 
there are other RNases that produce tRNA halves. We also found that the 17-25 
bases-long tRF-3s and tRF-5s that could enter into Argonaute complexes are not 
induced by ANG overexpression, suggesting that they are generated independently 
from tRNA halves. Consistent with this, ANG knockout did not decrease tRF-3 
levels or gene-silencing activity. We conclude that ANG cleaves specific tRNAs 
and is not the only RNase that creates tRNA halves and that the shorter tRFs are 
not generated from the tRNA halves or from independent tRNA cleavage by ANG.

© 2019 Su et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.009272
PMCID: PMC6851321
PMID: 31582561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article
