---
pmid: '9507004'
title: Role of clathrin-mediated endocytosis in agonist-induced down-regulation of
  the beta2-adrenergic receptor.
authors:
- Gagnon AW
- Kallal L
- Benovic JL
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.12.6976
---

# Role of clathrin-mediated endocytosis in agonist-induced down-regulation of the beta2-adrenergic receptor.
**Authors:** Gagnon AW, Kallal L, Benovic JL
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.273.12.6976](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.12.6976)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Mar 20;273(12):6976-81. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.12.6976.

Role of clathrin-mediated endocytosis in agonist-induced down-regulation of the 
beta2-adrenergic receptor.

Gagnon AW(1), Kallal L, Benovic JL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Kimmel Cancer Institute, Thomas 
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

Previous studies have demonstrated that non-visual arrestins function as 
adaptors in clathrin-mediated endocytosis to promote agonist-induced 
internalization of the beta2-adrenergic receptor (beta2AR). Here, we 
characterized the effects of arrestins and other modulators of clathrin-mediated 
endocytosis on down-regulation of the beta2AR. In COS-1 and HeLa cells, 
non-visual arrestins promote agonist-induced internalization and down-regulation 
of the beta2AR, whereas dynamin-K44A, a dominant-negative mutant of dynamin that 
inhibits clathrin-mediated endocytosis, attenuates beta2AR internalization and 
down-regulation. In HEK293 cells, dynamin-K44A profoundly inhibits 
agonist-induced internalization and down-regulation of the beta2AR, suggesting 
that receptor internalization is critical for down-regulation in these cells. 
Moreover, a dominant-negative mutant of beta-arrestin, beta-arrestin-(319-418), 
also inhibits both agonist-induced receptor internalization and down-regulation. 
Immunofluorescence microscopy analysis reveals that the beta2AR is trafficked to 
lysosomes in HEK293 cells, where presumably degradation of the receptor occurs. 
These studies demonstrate that down-regulation of the beta2AR is in part due to 
trafficking of the beta2AR via the clathrin-coated pit endosomal pathway to 
lysosomes.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.12.6976
PMID: 9507004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
