---
pmid: '7957230'
title: Characterization of a rat C6 glioma-secreted follistatin-related protein (FRP).
  Cloning and sequence of the human homologue.
authors:
- Zwijsen A
- Blockx H
- Van Arnhem W
- Willems J
- Fransen L
- Devos K
- Raymackers J
- Van de Voorde A
- Slegers H
journal: Eur J Biochem
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1994.0937b.x
---

# Characterization of a rat C6 glioma-secreted follistatin-related protein (FRP). Cloning and sequence of the human homologue.
**Authors:** Zwijsen A, Blockx H, Van Arnhem W, Willems J, Fransen L, Devos K, Raymackers J, Van de Voorde A, Slegers H
**Journal:** Eur J Biochem (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1432-1033.1994.0937b.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1432-1033.1994.0937b.x)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Biochem. 1994 Nov 1;225(3):937-46. doi:
10.1111/j.1432-1033.1994.0937b.x.

Characterization of a rat C6 glioma-secreted follistatin-related protein (FRP). 
Cloning and sequence of the human homologue.

Zwijsen A(1), Blockx H, Van Arnhem W, Willems J, Fransen L, Devos K, Raymackers 
J, Van de Voorde A, Slegers H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Antwerp, Belgium.

A protein was isolated from rat C6 glioma-conditioned medium and was 
biochemically characterized. The heparin-binding protein has a native molecular 
mass of 55-75,000 Da, a molecular mass of 40-48,000 Da under denaturing 
conditions, and a pI of 5.0-6.0. Based on the determined partial amino acid 
sequences, the full lenght cDNA encoding the rat and human proteins were cloned. 
The cDNA sequences identified the isolated rat and human protein as the 
homologue of a recently reported mouse 
osteoblast-transforming-growth-factor-beta 1-inducible protein, encoded by the 
TSC-36 gene [Shibanuma, M., Mashimo, J., Mita, A., Kuroki, T. & Nose, K. (1993) 
Eur. J. Biochem. 217, 13-19]. Analysis of the human, rat and mouse amino acid 
sequences indicates that these proteins are highly conserved (> 92% sequence 
identity). Sequence similarities with follistatin and the follistatin-like 
domain of agrin are revealed. The relationship with follistatin and agrin points 
to possible common functions for the cloned follistatin-related proteins (FRP). 
The protein has no effect on the inhibitory action of transforming growth 
factor-beta 1, on CCl-64 cell growth.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1994.0937b.x
PMID: 7957230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
