---
pmid: '12354787'
title: The disintegrin/metalloprotease ADAM 10 is essential for Notch signalling but
  not for alpha-secretase activity in fibroblasts.
authors:
- Hartmann D
- de Strooper B
- Serneels L
- Craessaerts K
- Herreman A
- Annaert W
- Umans L
- Lübke T
- Lena Illert A
- von Figura K
- Saftig P
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/11.21.2615
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The disintegrin/metalloprotease ADAM 10 is essential for Notch signalling but not for alpha-secretase activity in fibroblasts.
**Authors:** Hartmann D, de Strooper B, Serneels L, Craessaerts K, Herreman A, Annaert W, Umans L, Lübke T, Lena Illert A, von Figura K, Saftig P
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/11.21.2615](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/11.21.2615)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2002 Oct 1;11(21):2615-24. doi: 10.1093/hmg/11.21.2615.

The disintegrin/metalloprotease ADAM 10 is essential for Notch signalling but 
not for alpha-secretase activity in fibroblasts.

Hartmann D(1), de Strooper B, Serneels L, Craessaerts K, Herreman A, Annaert W, 
Umans L, Lübke T, Lena Illert A, von Figura K, Saftig P.

Author information:
(1)Center for Human Genetics KU Leuven and Flanders Interuniversity Institute 
for Biotechnology, VIB 4 KU Leuven, VIB 7 (Celgen), Herestraat 49, 3000 Leuven, 
Belgium.

The metalloprotease ADAM 10 is an important APP alpha-secretase candidate, but 
in vivo proof of this is lacking. Furthermore, invertebrate models point towards 
a key role of the ADAM 10 orthologues Kuzbanian and sup-17 in Notch signalling. 
In the mouse, this function is, however, currently attributed to ADAM 17/TACE, 
while the role of ADAM 10 remains unknown. We have created ADAM 10-deficient 
mice. They die at day 9.5 of embryogenesis with multiple defects of the 
developing central nervous system, somites, and cardiovascular system. In situ 
hybridization revealed a reduced expression of the Notch target gene hes-5 in 
the neural tube and an increased expression of the Notch ligand dll-1, 
supporting an important role for ADAM 10 in Notch signalling in the vertebrates 
as well. Since the early lethality precluded the establishment of primary 
neuronal cultures, APPs alpha generation was analyzed in embryonic fibroblasts 
and found to be preserved in 15 out of 17 independently generated ADAM 
10-deficient fibroblast cell lines, albeit at a quantitatively more variable 
level than in controls, whereas a severe reduction was found in only two cases. 
The variability was not due to differences in genetic background or to variable 
expression of the alternative alpha-secretase candidates ADAM 9 and ADAM 17. 
These results indicate, therefore, either a regulation between ADAMs on the 
post-translational level or that other, not yet known, proteases are able to 
compensate for ADAM 10 deficiency. Thus, the observed variability, together with 
recent reports on tissue-specific expression patterns of ADAMs 9, 10 and 17, 
points to the existence of tissue-specific 'teams' of different proteases 
exerting alpha-secretase activity.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/11.21.2615
PMID: 12354787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
