---
pmid: '15286722'
title: An antibiotic factory caught in action.
authors:
- Keatinge-Clay AT
- Maltby DA
- Medzihradszky KF
- Khosla C
- Stroud RM
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nsmb808
---

# An antibiotic factory caught in action.
**Authors:** Keatinge-Clay AT, Maltby DA, Medzihradszky KF, Khosla C, Stroud RM
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nsmb808](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb808)

## Abstract

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2004 Sep;11(9):888-93. doi: 10.1038/nsmb808. Epub 2004
Aug  1.

An antibiotic factory caught in action.

Keatinge-Clay AT(1), Maltby DA, Medzihradszky KF, Khosla C, Stroud RM.

Author information:
(1)Graduate Group in Biophysics, University of California San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California 94107-2240, USA.

The synthesis of aromatic polyketides, such as actinorhodin, tetracycline and 
doxorubicin, begins with the formation of a polyketide chain. In type II 
polyketide synthases (PKSs), chains are polymerized by the heterodimeric 
ketosynthase-chain length factor (KS-CLF). Here we present the 2.0-A structure 
of the actinorhodin KS-CLF, which shows polyketides being elongated inside an 
amphipathic tunnel approximately 17 A in length at the heterodimer interface. 
The structure resolves many of the questions about the roles of KS and CLF. 
Although CLF regulates chain length, it does not have an active site; KS must 
catalyze both chain initiation and elongation. We provide evidence that the 
first cyclization of the polyketide occurs within the KS-CLF tunnel. The 
mechanistic details of this central PKS polymerase could guide biosynthetic 
chemists in designing new pharmaceuticals and polymers.

DOI: 10.1038/nsmb808
PMID: 15286722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
