---
pmid: '8955159'
title: Molecular cloning and characterization of a full-length complementary DNA encoding
  human acid ceramidase. Identification Of the first molecular lesion causing Farber
  disease.
authors:
- Koch J
- Gärtner S
- Li CM
- Quintern LE
- Bernardo K
- Levran O
- Schnabel D
- Desnick RJ
- Schuchman EH
- Sandhoff K
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.51.33110
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Molecular cloning and characterization of a full-length complementary DNA encoding human acid ceramidase. Identification Of the first molecular lesion causing Farber disease.
**Authors:** Koch J, Gärtner S, Li CM, Quintern LE, Bernardo K, Levran O, Schnabel D, Desnick RJ, Schuchman EH, Sandhoff K
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.271.51.33110](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.271.51.33110)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1996 Dec 20;271(51):33110-5. doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.51.33110.

Molecular cloning and characterization of a full-length complementary DNA 
encoding human acid ceramidase. Identification Of the first molecular lesion 
causing Farber disease.

Koch J(1), Gärtner S, Li CM, Quintern LE, Bernardo K, Levran O, Schnabel D, 
Desnick RJ, Schuchman EH, Sandhoff K.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Organische Chemie und Biochemie, D-53121 Bonn, Federal Republic 
of Germany.

Human acid ceramidase ((AC) N-acylsphingosine amidohydrolase, EC 3.5. 1.23) 
hydrolyzes the sphingolipid ceramide into sphingosine and free fatty acid. 
Ceramide is an essential component of all sphingolipids and an important 
cell-signaling molecule. Moreover, an inherited deficiency of AC activity leads 
to the lysosomal storage disorder known as Farber disease. Human AC was purified 
from urine, and 117 amino acid residues were determined by microsequencing. 
Degenerative oligonucleotide probes were then constructed and used to screen for 
human fibroblast and pituitary cDNA libraries. Several partial cDNA clones were 
obtained, and two of these were combined to construct a full-length cDNA 
containing a 17-base pair (bp) 5'-untranslated sequence, a 1185-bp open reading 
frame encoding 395 amino acids, a 1110-bp 3'-untranslated sequence, and an 18-bp 
poly(A) tail. Transient expression of the full-length cDNA in COS-1 cells led to 
a 10-fold increase in AC activity. In addition, biosynthetic studies carried out 
in the transfected cells demonstrated that 13-kDa (alpha) and 40-kDa (beta) AC 
subunits were derived from a common 55-kDa precursor encoded by the full-length 
cDNA. This protein pattern was identical to that seen in normal human skin 
fibroblasts. A homoallelic point mutation (T222K) was also identified in the AC 
gene of a patient suffering from Farber disease, further confirming the 
authenticity of the full-length cDNA.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.51.33110
PMID: 8955159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
