---
pmid: '24694894'
title: Experimental determination of refractive index of condensed reflectin in squid
  iridocytes.
authors:
- Ghoshal A
- DeMartini DG
- Eck E
- Morse DE
journal: J R Soc Interface
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4006249
doi: 10.1098/rsif.2014.0106
---

# Experimental determination of refractive index of condensed reflectin in squid iridocytes.
**Authors:** Ghoshal A, DeMartini DG, Eck E, Morse DE
**Journal:** J R Soc Interface (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1098/rsif.2014.0106](https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2014.0106)
**PMC:** [PMC4006249](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4006249/)

## Abstract

1. J R Soc Interface. 2014 Apr 2;11(95):20140106. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2014.0106. 
Print 2014 Jun 6.

Experimental determination of refractive index of condensed reflectin in squid 
iridocytes.

Ghoshal A(1), DeMartini DG, Eck E, Morse DE.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Collaborative Biotechnologies, University of California, , 
Santa Barbara, CA 93106-5100, USA.

Loliginid squid dynamically tune the structural iridescence of cells in their 
skin for active camouflage and communication. Bragg reflectors in these cells 
consist of membrane-bound lamellae periodically alternating with low refractive 
index extracellular spaces; neuronal signalling induces condensation of the 
reflectin proteins that fill the lamellae, consequently triggering the expulsion 
of water. This causes an increase in refractive index within the lamellae, 
activating reflectance, with the change in lamellar thickness and spacing 
progressively shifting the wavelength of reflected light. We used 
micro-spectrophotometry to measure the functionally relevant refractive index of 
the high-index lamellae of the Bragg reflectors containing the condensed 
reflectins in chemically fixed dermal iridocytes of the squid, Doryteuthis 
opalescens. Our high-magnification imaging spectrometer allowed us to obtain 
normalized spectra of optically distinct sections of the individual, 
subcellular, multi-layer Bragg stacks. Replacement of the extracellular fluid 
with liquids of increasing refractive index allowed us to measure the 
reflectivity of the Bragg stacks as it decreased progressively to 0 when the 
refractive index of the extracellular medium exactly matched that of the 
reflectin-filled lamellae, thus allowing us to directly measure the refractive 
index of the reflectin-filled lamellae as ncondensed lamellae ≈ 1.44. The 
measured value of the physiologically relevant ncondensed lamellae from these 
bright iridocytes falls within the range of values that we recently determined 
by an independent optical method and is significantly lower than values 
previously reported for dehydrated and air-dried reflectin films. We propose 
that this directly measured value for the refractive index of the squid's Bragg 
lamellae containing the condensed reflectins is most appropriate for 
calculations of reflectivity in similar reflectin-based high-index layers in 
other molluscs.

DOI: 10.1098/rsif.2014.0106
PMCID: PMC4006249
PMID: 24694894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
