---
pmid: '9624182'
title: The vesicle transport protein Vps33p is an ATP-binding protein that localizes
  to the cytosol in an energy-dependent manner.
authors:
- Gerhardt B
- Kordas TJ
- Thompson CM
- Patel P
- Vida T
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.25.15818
---

# The vesicle transport protein Vps33p is an ATP-binding protein that localizes to the cytosol in an energy-dependent manner.
**Authors:** Gerhardt B, Kordas TJ, Thompson CM, Patel P, Vida T
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.273.25.15818](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.25.15818)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jun 19;273(25):15818-29. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.25.15818.

The vesicle transport protein Vps33p is an ATP-binding protein that localizes to 
the cytosol in an energy-dependent manner.

Gerhardt B(1), Kordas TJ, Thompson CM, Patel P, Vida T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, Pharmacology, and Physiology, University 
of Texas Medical School, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Molecular mechanisms of vesicle transport between the prevacuolar compartment 
and the vacuole in yeast or the lysosome in mammalian cells are poorly 
understood. To learn more about the specificity of this intercompartmental step, 
we have examined the subcellular localization of a SEC1 homologue, Vps33p, a 
protein implicated to function in transport between the prevacuolar compartment 
and the vacuole. Following short pulses, 80-90% of newly synthesized Vps33p 
cofractionated with a cytosolic enzyme marker after making permeabilized yeast 
cells. However, during a chase, 20-40% of Vps33p fractionated with permeabilized 
cell membranes in a time-dependent fashion with a half-time of approximately 40 
min. Depletion of cellular ATP increased the association rate to a half-time of 
approximately 4 min and caused 80-90% of newly synthesized Vps33p to be 
associated with permeabilized cell membranes. The association of Vps33p with 
permeabilized cell membranes was reversible after restoring cells with glucose 
before permeabilization. The N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive fusion protein 
homologue, Sec18p, a protein with known ATP binding and hydrolysis activity, 
displayed the same reversible energy-dependent sedimentation characteristics as 
Vps33p. We determined that the photosensitive analog, 8-azido-[alpha-32P]ATP, 
could bind directly to Vps33p with low affinity. Interestingly, excess unlabeled 
ATP could enhance photoaffinity labeling of 8-azido-[alpha-32P]ATP to Vps33p, 
suggesting cooperative binding, which was not observed with excess GTP. 
Importantly, we did not detect significant photolabeling after deleting amino 
acid regions in Vps33p that show similarity to ATP interaction motifs. We 
visualized these events in living yeast cells after fusing the jellyfish green 
fluorescent protein (GFP) to the C terminus of full-length Vps33p. In 
metabolically active cells, the fully functional Vps33p-GFP fusion protein 
appeared to stain throughout the cytoplasm with one or two very bright 
fluorescent spots near the vacuole. After depleting cellular ATP, Vps33p-GFP 
appeared to localize with a punctate morphology, which was also reversible upon 
restoring cells with glucose. Overall, these data support a model where Vps33p 
cycles between soluble and particulate forms in an ATP-dependent manner, which 
may facilitate the specificity of transport vesicle docking or targeting to the 
yeast lysosome/vacuole.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.25.15818
PMID: 9624182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
