---
pmid: '9770488'
title: GIPC, a PDZ domain containing protein, interacts specifically with the C terminus
  of RGS-GAIP.
authors:
- De Vries L
- Lou X
- Zhao G
- Zheng B
- Farquhar MG
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC22833
doi: 10.1073/pnas.95.21.12340
---

# GIPC, a PDZ domain containing protein, interacts specifically with the C terminus of RGS-GAIP.
**Authors:** De Vries L, Lou X, Zhao G, Zheng B, Farquhar MG
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.95.21.12340](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.95.21.12340)
**PMC:** [PMC22833](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC22833/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Oct 13;95(21):12340-5. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.95.21.12340.

GIPC, a PDZ domain containing protein, interacts specifically with the C 
terminus of RGS-GAIP.

De Vries L(1), Lou X, Zhao G, Zheng B, Farquhar MG.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cellular and Molecular Medicine and Department of Pathology, 
University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0651, USA.

We have identified a mammalian protein called GIPC (for GAIP interacting 
protein, C terminus), which has a central PDZ domain and a C-terminal acyl 
carrier protein (ACP) domain. The PDZ domain of GIPC specifically interacts with 
RGS-GAIP, a GTPase-activating protein (GAP) for Galphai subunits recently 
localized on clathrin-coated vesicles. Analysis of deletion mutants indicated 
that the PDZ domain of GIPC specifically interacts with the C terminus of GAIP 
(11 amino acids) in the yeast two-hybrid system and glutathione S-transferase 
(GST)-GIPC pull-down assays, but GIPC does not interact with other members of 
the RGS (regulators of G protein signaling) family tested. This finding is in 
keeping with the fact that the C terminus of GAIP is unique and possesses a 
modified C-terminal PDZ-binding motif (SEA). By immunoblotting of membrane 
fractions prepared from HeLa cells, we found that there are two pools of GIPC-a 
soluble or cytosolic pool (70%) and a membrane-associated pool (30%). By 
immunofluorescence, endogenous and GFP-tagged GIPC show both a diffuse and 
punctate cytoplasmic distribution in HeLa cells reflecting, respectively, the 
existence of soluble and membrane-associated pools. By immunoelectron microscopy 
the membrane pool of GIPC is associated with clusters of vesicles located near 
the plasma membrane. These data provide direct evidence that the C terminus of a 
RGS protein is involved in interactions specific for a given RGS protein and 
implicates GAIP in regulation of additional functions besides its GAP activity. 
The location of GIPC together with its binding to GAIP suggest that GAIP and 
GIPC may be components of a G protein-coupled signaling complex involved in the 
regulation of vesicular trafficking. The presence of an ACP domain suggests a 
putative function for GIPC in the acylation of vesicle-bound proteins.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.95.21.12340
PMCID: PMC22833
PMID: 9770488 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
