---
pmid: '9660962'
title: XRCC2 and XRCC3, new human Rad51-family members, promote chromosome stability
  and protect against DNA cross-links and other damages.
authors:
- Liu N
- Lamerdin JE
- Tebbs RS
- Schild D
- Tucker JD
- Shen MR
- Brookman KW
- Siciliano MJ
- Walter CA
- Fan W
- Narayana LS
- Zhou ZQ
- Adamson AW
- Sorensen KJ
- Chen DJ
- Jones NJ
- Thompson LH
journal: Mol Cell
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s1097-2765(00)80078-7
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# XRCC2 and XRCC3, new human Rad51-family members, promote chromosome stability and protect against DNA cross-links and other damages.
**Authors:** Liu N, Lamerdin JE, Tebbs RS, Schild D, Tucker JD, Shen MR, Brookman KW, Siciliano MJ, Walter CA, Fan W, Narayana LS, Zhou ZQ, Adamson AW, Sorensen KJ, Chen DJ, Jones NJ, Thompson LH
**Journal:** Mol Cell (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1097-2765(00)80078-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1097-2765(00)80078-7)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 1998 May;1(6):783-93. doi: 10.1016/s1097-2765(00)80078-7.

XRCC2 and XRCC3, new human Rad51-family members, promote chromosome stability 
and protect against DNA cross-links and other damages.

Liu N(1), Lamerdin JE, Tebbs RS, Schild D, Tucker JD, Shen MR, Brookman KW, 
Siciliano MJ, Walter CA, Fan W, Narayana LS, Zhou ZQ, Adamson AW, Sorensen KJ, 
Chen DJ, Jones NJ, Thompson LH.

Author information:
(1)Biology and Biotechnology Research Program, Lawrence Livermore National 
Laboratory, Livermore, California 94551, USA.

The phenotypically similar hamster mutants irs1 and irs1SF exhibit high 
spontaneous chromosome instability and broad-spectrum mutagen sensitivity, 
including extreme sensitivity to DNA cross-linking agents. The human XRCC2 and 
XRCC3 genes, which functionally complement irs1 and irs1SF, respectively, were 
previously mapped in somatic cell hybrids. Characterization of these genes and 
sequence alignments reveal that XRCC2 and XRCC3 are members of an emerging 
family of Rad51-related proteins that likely participate in homologous 
recombination to maintain chromosome stability and repair DNA damage. XRCC3 is 
shown to interact directly with HsRad51, and like Rad55 and Rad57 in yeast, may 
cooperate with HsRad51 during recombinational repair. Analysis of the XRCC2 
mutation in irs1 implies that XRCC2's function is not essential for viability in 
cultured hamster cells.

DOI: 10.1016/s1097-2765(00)80078-7
PMID: 9660962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
