---
pmid: '19688755'
title: LC-MS/MS as an alternative for SDS-PAGE in blue native analysis of protein
  complexes.
authors:
- Wessels HJ
- Vogel RO
- van den Heuvel L
- Smeitink JA
- Rodenburg RJ
- Nijtmans LG
- Farhoud MH
journal: Proteomics
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/pmic.200900157
---

# LC-MS/MS as an alternative for SDS-PAGE in blue native analysis of protein complexes.
**Authors:** Wessels HJ, Vogel RO, van den Heuvel L, Smeitink JA, Rodenburg RJ, Nijtmans LG, Farhoud MH
**Journal:** Proteomics (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pmic.200900157](https://doi.org/10.1002/pmic.200900157)

## Abstract

1. Proteomics. 2009 Sep;9(17):4221-8. doi: 10.1002/pmic.200900157.

LC-MS/MS as an alternative for SDS-PAGE in blue native analysis of protein 
complexes.

Wessels HJ(1), Vogel RO, van den Heuvel L, Smeitink JA, Rodenburg RJ, Nijtmans 
LG, Farhoud MH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Nijmegen Center for Mitochondrial Disorders, 
Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Two-dimensional blue native/SDS-PAGE is widely applied to investigate native 
protein-protein interactions, particularly those within membrane multi-protein 
complexes. MS has enabled the application of this approach at the proteome 
scale, typically by analysis of picked protein spots. Here, we investigated the 
potential of using LC-MS/MS as an alternative for SDS-PAGE in blue native (BN) 
analysis of protein complexes. By subjecting equal slices from BN gel lanes to 
label-free semi-quantitative LC-MS/MS, we determined an abundance profile for 
each protein across the BN gel, and used these profiles to identify potentially 
interacting proteins by protein correlation profiling. We demonstrate the 
feasibility of this approach by considering the oxidative phosphorylation 
complexes I-V in the native human embryonic kidney 293 mitochondrial fraction, 
showing that the method is capable of detecting both the fully assembled 
complexes as well as assembly/turnover intermediates of complex I 
(NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase). Using protein correlation profiling with a 
profile for subunits NDUFS2, 3, 7 and 8 we identified multiple proteins possibly 
involved in the biogenesis of complex I, including the recently implicated 
chaperone C6ORF66 and a novel candidate, C3ORF60.

DOI: 10.1002/pmic.200900157
PMID: 19688755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
