---
pmid: '15024079'
title: Brn-2 expression controls melanoma proliferation and is directly regulated
  by beta-catenin.
authors:
- Goodall J
- Martinozzi S
- Dexter TJ
- Champeval D
- Carreira S
- Larue L
- Goding CR
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2004'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC371132
doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.7.2915-2922.2004
---

# Brn-2 expression controls melanoma proliferation and is directly regulated by beta-catenin.
**Authors:** Goodall J, Martinozzi S, Dexter TJ, Champeval D, Carreira S, Larue L, Goding CR
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.24.7.2915-2922.2004](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.24.7.2915-2922.2004)
**PMC:** [PMC371132](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC371132/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Apr;24(7):2915-22. doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.7.2915-2922.2004.

Brn-2 expression controls melanoma proliferation and is directly regulated by 
beta-catenin.

Goodall J(1), Martinozzi S, Dexter TJ, Champeval D, Carreira S, Larue L, Goding 
CR.

Author information:
(1)Signaling and Development Laboratory, Marie Curie Research Institute, The 
Chart, Oxted, Surrey RH8 0TL, United Kingdom.

Constitutive activation of the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway is a notable 
feature of a large minority of cases of malignant melanoma, an aggressive and 
increasingly common cancer. The identification of target genes downstream from 
this pathway is therefore crucial to our understanding of the disease. The POU 
domain transcription factor Brn-2 has been implicated in control of 
proliferation and melanoma survival, and its expression is strongly upregulated 
in melanoma. We show here that in vivo Brn-2 is expressed in melanocytes but not 
in embryonic day 11.5 melanoblasts and that its expression is directly 
controlled by the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway in melanoma cell lines and 
in transgenic mice. Moreover, silent interfering RNA-mediated inhibition of 
Brn-2 expression in melanoma cells overexpressing beta-catenin results in 
significantly decreased proliferation. These results, together with the 
observation that BRAF signaling also induces Brn-2 expression, reveal that Brn-2 
is a focus for the convergence of two key melanoma-associated signaling pathways 
that are linked to cell proliferation.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.24.7.2915-2922.2004
PMCID: PMC371132
PMID: 15024079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Constitutive activation of the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway is a notable feature of a large minority of cases of malignant melanoma, an aggressive and increasingly common cancer. The identification of target genes downstream from this pathway is therefore crucial to our understanding of the disease. The POU domain transcription factor Brn-2 has been implicated in control of proliferation and melanoma survival, and its expression is strongly upregulated in melanoma. We show here that in vivo Brn-2 is expressed in melanocytes but not in embryonic day 11.5 melanoblasts and that its expression is directly controlled by the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway in melanoma cell lines and in transgenic mice. Moreover, silent interfering RNA-mediated inhibition of Brn-2 expression in melanoma cells overexpressing β-catenin results in significantly decreased proliferation. These results, together with the observation that BRAF signaling also induces Brn-2 expression, reveal that Brn-2 is a focus for the convergence of two key melanoma-associated signaling pathways that are linked to cell proliferation.

DISCUSSION

In this paper we provide several lines of evidence to suggest that Wnt/β-catenin signaling controls Brn-2 expression. The Brn-2 promoter contains a functional Lef1 binding site, is responsive to Wnt/β-catenin signaling, and, importantly, is recognized by Lef1 and β-catenin in vivo, as determined with a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, while siRNA-mediated downregulation of β-catenin in melanoma cells also results in decreased Brn-2 expression. Moreover, Brn-2 expression is upregulated in mice expressing activated β-catenin in melanocytes. The ability of β-catenin to upregulate Brn-2 expression will no doubt contribute to the elevated levels of Brn-2 observed in many melanomas and may also contribute to the highly specific pattern of Brn-2 expression observed during development ( 31 , 37 ).

Strikingly, expression of Brn-2 is not only upregulated by β-catenin but is also elevated in response to mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling downstream from reporter tyrosine kinases (RTKs) and in particular downstream from BRAF ( 18 ), which is known to be activated by mutation in about 70% of melanomas and nevi ( 8 , 32 ). Thus, the overexpression of Brn-2 is a feature of melanoma irrespective of which pathway, β-catenin or mitogen-activated protein kinase, is constitutively activated. Moreover, we demonstrate here that siRNA-mediated downregulation of Brn-2 expression dramatically reduced the S-phase population of the 501 mel cells, strongly pointing to a role for Brn-2 in proliferation. Consistent with this, we have also shown that overexpression of Brn-2 in melanocytes leads to increased proliferation, while siRNA-mediated inhibition of Brn-2 expression in melanoma cell lines expressing a constitutively activated BRAF leads to decreased [ 3 H]thymidine incorporation ( 18 ). Previous work has also linked expression of Brn-2 in melanoma cell lines tumorigenicity and proliferation ( 45 ). Indeed, we have found that of 16 melanoma cell lines for which we have information on the status of Brn-2 expression as well as BRAF and β-catenin mutations, only three, which are apparently wild type for both BRAF and β-catenin, do not express Brn-2. Of the remaining cell lines. only one exhibits both an activating mutation on BRAF and a mutated form of β-catenin.

There is now a substantial body of evidence indicating that Brn-2 plays a key role in controlling the proliferation of many melanoma cell lines. Moreover, since Brn-2 expression lies downstream of the two genetically defined signaling pathways that are constitutively activated in melanoma, it is possible that overexpression of Brn-2 may be a necessary step in the formation of many melanomas and will confer a strong selective growth advantage. Consistent with this, expression of β-catenin in B16 melanoma cells results in increased proliferation, while expression of a dominant-negative Tcf slows melanoma cell growth ( 49 ). In this respect it is notable that in other systems, β-catenin signaling is implicated in growth control. For example, in colorectal cancer cells, expression of a dominant-negative Tcf4 leads to a G 1 arrest via the induction of the p21 cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor ( 46 ), and siRNA-mediated downregulation of β-catenin in colon cancer cells also inhibited proliferation ( 47 ). Similarly, in the pituitary, expression of the PitX1 transcription factor is induced by Wnt/β-catenin signaling and is required for proliferation ( 25 ). The fact that β-catenin can induce the expression of Brn-2 in melanoma appears to indicate that the control of proliferation by the Wnt//β-catenin signaling pathway may be a general theme.

In the melanocyte lineage, Wnt/β-catenin signaling is required to turn on expression of the Mitf transcription factor ( 10 , 43 ), which plays a crucial role in melanoblast survival and is most likely a key factor in determining the identity of a melanoblast ( 17 ). Intriguingly, we found no evidence for Brn-2 expression in the neural crest in melanoblasts at E11.5, a time when these cells are both proliferating and migrating. It is possible that at this stage in development, the chromatin across the Brn-2 promoter is in a conformation that is incompatible with activation by Wnt/β-catenin signaling or that Wnt/β-catenin signaling in the melanocyte lineage operates only early in development, turns on Mitf expression, and then is no longer required. Alternatively, the levels of β-catenin expressed in melanoblasts at E11.5, while capable of activating Mitf expression, may be insufficient for activation of the Brn-2 promoter, which would only respond to the increased β-catenin expression occurring when the migrating melanoblast population arrives in the epidermis. A further possibility is that melanoblasts have the potential to express Brn-2 but that its expression can only be induced by the cooperative effect of multiple signal transduction pathways that are not simultaneously active in melanoblasts. Currently we know little about the timing of activation of signal transduction pathways in melanocyte development.

Despite the fact that Brn-2 does not appear to be expressed in melanoblasts at E11.5, it is nevertheless present in melanocytes in postnatal hair follicles, where evidently the signals required to induce Brn-2 expression are active. In these cells Brn-2 expression can be further induced by the elevated levels of β-catenin expressed in the transgenic animals, confirming the results indicating that Brn-2 expression is activated by β-catenin that were obtained by using cell lines. However, although Brn-2 may be expressed in hair follicle melanocytes, whether it plays a role in the proliferation of these cells is likely to depend on several factors, including the absolute level of Brn-2 protein expressed, which will in turn depend on the activity of the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway downstream of RTKs and BRAF as well as the β-catenin signaling pathway. In addition, the DNA-binding activity of the Brn-2 protein in regulating gene expression will, like that of other POU domain proteins ( 4 , 41 ), be controlled by phosphorylation, and it is likely that the ability of Brn-2 to cooperate or interact with other DNA-binding proteins such as Sox11, as has been seen in other cell types ( 50 ), will also be regulated. An additional level of control of Brn-2 activity may also be provided by the regulation of its ability to interact with specific transcriptional cofactors ( 42 ). Dissecting the signal transduction pathways that regulate Brn-2 and its ability to control transcription and proliferation as well as its oncogenic potential will lead to a better understanding of how mitogen-activated protein kinase and β-catenin signaling are integrated with cell cycle control.
