---
pmid: '34089617'
title: Blockade of checkpoint ILT3/LILRB4/gp49B binding to fibronectin ameliorates
  autoimmune disease in BXSB/Yaa mice.
authors:
- Su MT
- Inui M
- Wong YL
- Takahashi M
- Sugahara-Tobinai A
- Ono K
- Miyamoto S
- Murakami K
- Itoh-Nakadai A
- Kezuka D
- Itoi S
- Endo S
- Hirayasu K
- Arase H
- Takai T
journal: Int Immunol
year: '2021'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxab028
---

# Blockade of checkpoint ILT3/LILRB4/gp49B binding to fibronectin ameliorates autoimmune disease in BXSB/Yaa mice.
**Authors:** Su MT, Inui M, Wong YL, Takahashi M, Sugahara-Tobinai A, Ono K, Miyamoto S, Murakami K, Itoh-Nakadai A, Kezuka D, Itoi S, Endo S, Hirayasu K, Arase H, Takai T
**Journal:** Int Immunol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/intimm/dxab028](https://doi.org/10.1093/intimm/dxab028)

## Abstract

1. Int Immunol. 2021 Jul 23;33(8):447-458. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxab028.

Blockade of checkpoint ILT3/LILRB4/gp49B binding to fibronectin ameliorates 
autoimmune disease in BXSB/Yaa mice.

Su MT(1), Inui M(1), Wong YL(1), Takahashi M(1), Sugahara-Tobinai A(1), Ono 
K(1), Miyamoto S(1), Murakami K(1), Itoh-Nakadai A(1), Kezuka D(1), Itoi S(1), 
Endo S(1), Hirayasu K(2)(3)(4), Arase H(3)(4), Takai T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Immunology, Institute of Development, Aging and 
Cancer, Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.
(2)Advanced Preventive Medical Sciences Research Center, Kanazawa University, 
Kanazawa 920-8640, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Immunochemistry, WPI Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka 
University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.
(4)Department of Immunochemistry, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, 
Osaka University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

The extracellular matrix (ECM) is the basis for virtually all cellular processes 
and is also related to tumor metastasis. Fibronectin (FN), a major ECM 
macromolecule expressed by different cell types and also present in plasma, 
consists of multiple functional modules that bind to ECM-associated, plasma, and 
cell-surface proteins such as integrins and FN itself, thus ensuring its 
cell-adhesive and modulatory role. Here we show that FN constitutes an immune 
checkpoint. Thus, FN was identified as a physiological ligand for a 
tumor/leukemia/lymphoma- as well as autoimmune-associated checkpoint, 
ILT3/LILRB4 (B4, CD85k). Human B4 and the murine ortholog, gp49B, bound FN with 
sub-micromolar affinities as assessed by bio-layer interferometry. The major 
B4-binding site in FN was located at the N-terminal 30-kDa module (FN30), which 
is apart from the major integrin-binding site present at the middle of the 
molecule. Blockade of B4-FN binding such as with B4 antibodies or a recombinant 
FN30-Fc fusion protein paradoxically ameliorated autoimmune disease in 
lupus-prone BXSB/Yaa mice. The unexpected nature of the B4-FN checkpoint in 
autoimmunity is discussed, referring to its potential role in tumor immunity.

© The Japanese Society for Immunology. 2021. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/dxab028
PMID: 34089617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
