---
pmid: '16387659'
title: Crystal structure of the mitochondrial chaperone TIM9.10 reveals a six-bladed
  alpha-propeller.
authors:
- Webb CT
- Gorman MA
- Lazarou M
- Ryan MT
- Gulbis JM
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.11.010
---

# Crystal structure of the mitochondrial chaperone TIM9.10 reveals a six-bladed alpha-propeller.
**Authors:** Webb CT, Gorman MA, Lazarou M, Ryan MT, Gulbis JM
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2005.11.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2005.11.010)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2006 Jan 6;21(1):123-33. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.11.010.

Crystal structure of the mitochondrial chaperone TIM9.10 reveals a six-bladed 
alpha-propeller.

Webb CT(1), Gorman MA, Lazarou M, Ryan MT, Gulbis JM.

Author information:
(1)Structural Biology Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical 
Research, 1G Royal Parade, Parkville, Victoria 3050, Australia.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2006 Jan 20;21(2):145-8. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2006.01.001.

Import of proteins into mitochondria occurs by coordinated actions of preprotein 
translocases in the outer and inner membranes. Tim9 and Tim10 are translocase 
components of the intermembrane space, related to deafness-dystonia peptide 1 
(DDP1). They coassemble into a hexamer, TIM9.10, which captures and chaperones 
precursors of inner membrane metabolite carriers as they exit the TOM channel in 
the outer membrane. The crystal structure of TIM9.10 reveals a previously 
undescribed alpha-propeller topology in which helical "blades" radiate from a 
narrow central pore lined with polar residues. The propeller blades are 
reminiscent of "tentacles" in chaperones Skp and prefoldin. In each TIM9.10 
subunit, a signature "twin CX3C" motif forms two intramolecular disulfides. 
There is no obvious binding pocket for precursors, which we suggest employ the 
chaperone-like tentacles of TIM9.10 as surrogate lipid contacts. The first 
reported crystal structure of a mitochondrial translocase assembly provides 
insights into selectivity and regulation of precursor import.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.11.010
PMID: 16387659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
