---
pmid: '15314180'
title: Stabilization of the E3 ubiquitin ligase Nrdp1 by the deubiquitinating enzyme
  USP8.
authors:
- Wu X
- Yen L
- Irwin L
- Sweeney C
- Carraway KL 3rd
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2004'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC506982
doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.17.7748-7757.2004
---

# Stabilization of the E3 ubiquitin ligase Nrdp1 by the deubiquitinating enzyme USP8.
**Authors:** Wu X, Yen L, Irwin L, Sweeney C, Carraway KL 3rd
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.24.17.7748-7757.2004](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.24.17.7748-7757.2004)
**PMC:** [PMC506982](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC506982/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Sep;24(17):7748-57. doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.17.7748-7757.2004.

Stabilization of the E3 ubiquitin ligase Nrdp1 by the deubiquitinating enzyme 
USP8.

Wu X(1), Yen L, Irwin L, Sweeney C, Carraway KL 3rd.

Author information:
(1)UC Davis Cancer Center, Research Building III, Room 1400, 4645 2nd Ave., 
Sacramento, CA 95817, USA.

Nrdp1 is a RING finger-containing E3 ubiquitin ligase that physically interacts 
with and regulates steady-state cellular levels of the ErbB3 and ErbB4 receptor 
tyrosine kinases and has been implicated in the degradation of the 
inhibitor-of-apoptosis protein BRUCE. Here we demonstrate that the Nrdp1 protein 
undergoes efficient proteasome-dependent degradation and that mutations in its 
RING finger domain that disrupt ubiquitin ligase activity enhance stability. 
These observations suggest that Nrdp1 self-ubiquitination and stability could 
play an important role in regulating the activity of this protein. Using 
affinity chromatography, we identified the deubiquitinating enzyme USP8 (also 
called Ubpy) as a protein that physically interacts with Nrdp1. Nrdp1 and USP8 
could be coimmunoprecipitated, and in transfected cells USP8 specifically bound 
to Nrdp1 but not cbl, a RING finger E3 ligase involved in ligand-stimulated 
epidermal growth factor receptor down-regulation. The USP8 rhodanese and 
catalytic domains mediated Nrdp1 binding. USP8 markedly enhanced the stability 
of Nrdp1, and a point mutant that disrupts USP8 catalytic activity destabilized 
endogenous Nrdp1. Our results indicate that Nrdp1 is a specific target for the 
USP8 deubiquitinating enzyme and are consistent with a model where USP8 augments 
Nrdp1 activity by mediating its stabilization.

Copyright 2004 American Society for Microbiology

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.24.17.7748-7757.2004
PMCID: PMC506982
PMID: 15314180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Nrdp1 is a RING finger-containing E3 ubiquitin ligase that physically interacts with and regulates steady-state cellular levels of the ErbB3 and ErbB4 receptor tyrosine kinases and has been implicated in the degradation of the inhibitor-of-apoptosis protein BRUCE. Here we demonstrate that the Nrdp1 protein undergoes efficient proteasome-dependent degradation and that mutations in its RING finger domain that disrupt ubiquitin ligase activity enhance stability. These observations suggest that Nrdp1 self-ubiquitination and stability could play an important role in regulating the activity of this protein. Using affinity chromatography, we identified the deubiquitinating enzyme USP8 (also called Ubpy) as a protein that physically interacts with Nrdp1. Nrdp1 and USP8 could be coimmunoprecipitated, and in transfected cells USP8 specifically bound to Nrdp1 but not cbl, a RING finger E3 ligase involved in ligand-stimulated epidermal growth factor receptor down-regulation. The USP8 rhodanese and catalytic domains mediated Nrdp1 binding. USP8 markedly enhanced the stability of Nrdp1, and a point mutant that disrupts USP8 catalytic activity destabilized endogenous Nrdp1. Our results indicate that Nrdp1 is a specific target for the USP8 deubiquitinating enzyme and are consistent with a model where USP8 augments Nrdp1 activity by mediating its stabilization.

DISCUSSION

Previous studies have implicated Nrdp1 as a E3 ubiquitin ligase involved in the ligand-independent maintenance of steady-state levels of the neuregulin receptor tyrosine kinases ErbB3 and ErbB4 ( 15 , 46 ) and in the maintenance of cellular levels of the antiapoptotic protein BRUCE ( 47 ). Here we demonstrate that the Nrdp1 protein is highly labile and that point mutations in Nrdp1 that eliminate its ubiquitin ligase activity also significantly stabilize the protein. This is consistent with previous observations that autoubiquitination of E3 ligases, for example, Mdm2 ( 59 ), influences their intrinsic stability in cells. Moreover, we demonstrate that the multidomain UBP deubiquitinating enzyme USP8 specifically interacts with and stabilizes Nrdp1. The simplest explanation for these observations is as follows. At low levels of USP8 binding or activity, constitutive Nrdp1 autoubiquitination efficiently targets the protein for degradation by proteasomes, resulting in low levels of the Nrdp1 protein. High levels of functional USP8 mediate Nrdp1 deubiquitination and stabilization.

Interestingly, Nrdp1 may also ubiquitinate USP8 to mediate its destruction, an activity unmasked with the USP8 catalytic cysteine point mutants. Hence, Nrdp1 may be capable of mediating the destruction of itself and USP8 through its ubiquitin ligase activity, and USP8 could be capable of preserving itself and Nrdp1 through its deubiquitinating activity. When coupled with the coimmunoprecipitation data and our unpublished observations that Nrdp1 mediates the subcellular relocalization of USP8, these results underscore the notion that the functional form of the two proteins is a complex.

While our model emphasizes the role of USP8 in determining Nrdp1 levels, the mechanism by which the formation or activity of the Nrdp1/USP8 complex is regulated in cells remains an important question. One mode of regulation of the complex could be at the level of USP8 expression, through transcriptional regulation or through regulation of its half-life or localization. Alternatively, the binding of USP8 to Nrdp1 may be a regulated step that is influenced by posttranslational events such as phosphorylation, ubiquitination, or binding to other cellular factors. Finally, it is possible that the catalytic activity of USP8 is regulated.

The catalytic and rhodanese domains of USP8 mediate its interaction with Nrdp1. As catalytic domains in UBPs exhibit marked divergence that may confer substrate specificity ( 58 ), this domain of USP8 probably contributes to Nrdp1 recognition as a target for deubiquitination. The USP8 rhodanese domain is sufficient to specifically recognize Nrdp1 and may be responsible for maintaining a stable complex between the two proteins. Rhodanese domains are ubiquitous structural modules conserved from bacteria to humans whose functions at present are unclear. A subset of rhodanese domains possesses sulfurtransferase activity, while noncatalytic versions are found in proteins of various functions including eukaryotic deubiquitinating enzymes and mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase phosphatases ( 7 ). Our observations suggest that noncatalytic rhodanese domains mediate specific protein-protein interactions. This conclusion is consistent with previous observations indicating that the amino-terminal region of the MAP kinase phosphatase MKP-3 encompassing its rhodanese domain is responsible for binding to MAP kinases Erk1 and Erk2 ( 39 ). Fine mapping of the rhodanese binding site on Nrdp1 could shed light on sequence motifs selected by rhodanese domains.

Although the large number and divergence of mammalian UBPs strongly suggest that these enzymes have specific substrates and distinct biological activities, substrates for only a few have been described ( 58 ). HAUSP (USP7) mediates the deubiquitination and stabilization of p53 ( 33 ), reversing the action of the Mdm2 E3 ubiquitin ligase and enhancing p53 tumor suppressor function. CYLD is a deubiquitinating en-zyme that is mutated in familial cylindromatosis syndrome, where patients are predisposed to tumors of skin appendages ( 6 ). CYLD interacts with the Nemo regulatory component of the Iκ kinase complex and negatively regulates activation of the transcription factor NF-κB in response to specific tumor necrosis factor receptors by suppressing the K63 polyubiquitination and activation of TRAF2 and TRAF6 ( 8 , 31 , 55 ).

fam (USP9), the mouse homolog of the D. melanogaster fat facets gene, colocalizes and interacts with AF-6 ( 52 ) and β-catenin ( 53 ) at sites of cell-cell contact in cultured epithelial cells. Together with data indicating that AF-6 and β-catenin protein levels are suppressed by fam loss in developing embryos ( 41 ), these observations suggest that fam-mediated deubiquitination may contribute to the stability of a subset of proteins at cell adhesion sites. Analogous to its function in Drosophila ( 26 ), fam also mediates the deubiquitination of epsin 1 ( 9 ), a protein involved in membrane trafficking. Hence, it appears that a single UBP is capable of mediating the deubiquitination of distinct sets of proteins.

The interaction of deubiquitinating enzymes with E3 ubiquitin ligases has been reported previously, but the functional consequences are unclear. The deubiquitinating enzyme UnpEL was isolated in a screen for proteins that interact with SSA/Ro ( 16 ), a putative E3 ubiquitin ligase of unknown function with an overall domain structure similar to that of Nrdp1. Analogous to Nrdp1, SSA/Ro coexpression in cells mediates the redistribution of UnpEL; however, this study made no attempt to assess UnpEL impact on SSA/Ro stabilization. Association of the deubiquitinating enzyme BAP1 with the RING finger domain of the E3 ubiquitin ligase BRCA1 has been demonstrated to enhance the tumor suppressor activity of the BRCA1/BARD1 complex in cells ( 27 ). Although autopolyubiquitination enhances the E3 ligase activity of the complex in vitro, BAP1 may not function in the deubiquitination of the complex ( 37 ) but target other substrates.

Previous studies have implicated a role for USP8 in cellular growth regulation. USP8 message accumulates upon growth stimulation of serum-starved human fibroblasts, and its levels decrease in response to growth arrest induced by cell-cell contact. Moreover, antisense oligonucleotides prevented fibroblasts from entering S phase, suggesting that USP8 expression is necessary for normal cell cycling ( 40 ). Similar to our observations, USP8 has been shown to interact with and stabilize the RING finger E3 ubiquitin ligase GRAIL to mediate T-cell anergy ( 49 ). GRAIL is localized to the transferring recycling endocytic pathway ( 4 ), suggesting a function for USP8 in membrane protein trafficking. Mouse USP8 has been previously demonstrated to interact with the brain-specific ras guanine nucleotide exchange factor cdc25mm and coexpression of USP8-mediated cdc25mm deubiquitination and stabilization ( 19 ). Interestingly, USP8 has been also been demonstrated to interact with the Hrs binding protein Hbp/STAM2A ( 28 ), a member of the EAST/STAM/hbp family of adapter proteins. Hbp/STAM2A plays roles in receptor endo- and exocytosis and probably also in the regulation of actin cytoskeleton ( 36 ). Hence, while the overall function of USP8 is unclear, several lines of evidence point to its involvement in disparate cellular pathways that contribute to cellular growth regulation.

Finally, the overall domain structure of USP8 is similar to that of a rhodanese domain-containing subfamily of Saccharomyces cerevisiae deubiquitinating enzymes that includes yeast Ubp4/Doa4, Ubp5, and Ubp7. Of these only Ubp4/Doa4 has been characterized in any detail. Ubp4/Doa4 associates with proteasomes, is required for efficient proteasome activity, and promotes proteolysis through the removal of ubiquitin from proteolytic intermediates upon substrate breakdown ( 42 , 43 ). Hence, Ubp4/Doa4 may play a role in ubiquitin homeostasis by recycling ubiquitin for reuse ( 50 ). Evidence has also accumulated that Ubp4/Doa4 plays a necessary role in the deubiquitination of plasma membrane proteins prior to their degradation in yeast vacuoles ( 3 , 18 ). Taken together, these observations indicate that Ubp4/Doa4 plays a central role in cytosolic and membrane protein degradation by mediating the deubiquitination of target proteins prior to full degradation. It should be noted, however, that yeast Ubp5 cannot substitute for Ubp4/Doa4, suggesting that the rhodanese domain-containing deubiquitinating enzymes in yeast harbor distinct functions. Therefore, USP8, the only rhodanese domain-containing deubiquitinating enzyme encoded by the human genome, may be functionally distinct from Ubp4/Doa4.
