---
pmid: '12384423'
title: Protection against thrombosis in mice lacking PAR3.
authors:
- Weiss EJ
- Hamilton JR
- Lease KE
- Coughlin SR
journal: Blood
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1182/blood-2002-05-1470
---

# Protection against thrombosis in mice lacking PAR3.
**Authors:** Weiss EJ, Hamilton JR, Lease KE, Coughlin SR
**Journal:** Blood (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2002-05-1470](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2002-05-1470)

## Abstract

1. Blood. 2002 Nov 1;100(9):3240-4. doi: 10.1182/blood-2002-05-1470.

Protection against thrombosis in mice lacking PAR3.

Weiss EJ(1), Hamilton JR, Lease KE, Coughlin SR.

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, Department of Medicine, University of 
California-San Francisco, 513 Parnassus Avenue, San Francisco, CA 94143-0130, 
USA.

The recent observation that knock-out of protease-activated receptor-4 (PAR4) 
ablates thrombin signaling in mouse platelets and protects against ferric 
chloride-induced thrombosis of mouse mesenteric arterioles suggests that 
thrombin's actions on platelets can play an important role in thrombosis. 
Complete ablation of thrombin signaling would be difficult to achieve in human 
beings because human platelets have 2 thrombin receptors that are each capable 
of mediating transmembrane signaling. However, it is possible that complete 
ablation of thrombin signaling in platelets is not necessary for an 
antithrombotic effect. In mouse platelets, PAR3 functions as a cofactor that 
binds thrombin and promotes productive cleavage of PAR4, and thrombin responses 
are decreased but not absent in Par3(-/-) platelets. We now report that 
Par3(-/-) mice were protected against ferric chloride-induced thrombosis of 
mesenteric arterioles and against thromboplastin-induced pulmonary embolism. 
Surprisingly, Par3(-/-) and Par4(-/-) mice showed similar degrees of protection 
in these models and similar prolongation of tail bleeding times. Thus, even a 
partial decrease in mouse platelet responsiveness to thrombin protected against 
thrombosis and impaired hemostasis in some settings. These results demonstrate 
the importance of PAR3's unusual cofactor function and underscore the relative 
importance of thrombin's actions on platelets in vivo. They also suggest that 
PAR inhibition might be explored for the prevention or treatment of thrombosis 
in human beings.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2002-05-1470
PMID: 12384423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
