---
pmid: '15003516'
title: Caspase 3 activation is controlled by a sequence located in the N-terminus
  of its large subunit.
authors:
- Pelletier M
- Cartron PF
- Delaval F
- Meflah K
- Vallette FM
- Oliver L
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2004.02.021
---

# Caspase 3 activation is controlled by a sequence located in the N-terminus of its large subunit.
**Authors:** Pelletier M, Cartron PF, Delaval F, Meflah K, Vallette FM, Oliver L
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2004.02.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2004.02.021)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Mar 26;316(1):93-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2004.02.021.

Caspase 3 activation is controlled by a sequence located in the N-terminus of 
its large subunit.

Pelletier M(1), Cartron PF, Delaval F, Meflah K, Vallette FM, Oliver L.

Author information:
(1)IFR 26, INSERM U601, 9 quai Moncousu, 44035 Nantes Cedex 01, France.

We report that the induction and completion of the apoptotic program is delayed 
in a doxorubicin-resistant cell line (HL60/ADR). This hindrance to cell death 
occurred downstream of the multidrug-resistant protein (mrp), a transmembrane 
transporter. In vitro studies showed that these cells were incapable of 
correctly activating procaspase 3 (pC3), the main executioner of apoptosis. 
Sequencing of HL60/ADR pC3 revealed point mutations in a sequence located in the 
N-terminal region of the large subunit of caspase 3 (C3, amino acids 31-37; 
i.e., immediately after the propeptide). We called this particular form of C3, 
the C3 N-terminal modified (C3-NTM), and show that it is partially active when 
transfected into MCF-7 cells shown to have little or no endogenous pC3. As a 
deletion of the amino acids 31-37 in wild-type C3 leads to the same phenotype, 
we conclude that this sequence is involved in C3 activation during apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2004.02.021
PMID: 15003516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
