---
pmid: '30542810'
title: Post-translational and transcriptional regulation of phenylpropanoid biosynthesis
  pathway by Kelch repeat F-box protein SAGL1.
authors:
- Yu SI
- Kim H
- Yun DJ
- Suh MC
- Lee BH
journal: Plant Mol Biol
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s11103-018-0808-8
---

# Post-translational and transcriptional regulation of phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathway by Kelch repeat F-box protein SAGL1.
**Authors:** Yu SI, Kim H, Yun DJ, Suh MC, Lee BH
**Journal:** Plant Mol Biol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11103-018-0808-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11103-018-0808-8)

## Abstract

1. Plant Mol Biol. 2019 Jan;99(1-2):135-148. doi: 10.1007/s11103-018-0808-8. Epub
 2018 Dec 12.

Post-translational and transcriptional regulation of phenylpropanoid 
biosynthesis pathway by Kelch repeat F-box protein SAGL1.

Yu SI(1), Kim H(1), Yun DJ(2), Suh MC(1), Lee BH(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science, Sogang University, Seoul, 04107, Republic of 
Korea.
(2)Department of Biomedical Science and Engineering, Konkuk University, Seoul, 
05029, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Life Science, Sogang University, Seoul, 04107, Republic of 
Korea. byeongha@sogang.ac.kr.

A Kelch repeat F-box containing protein, SMALL AND GLOSSY LEAVES1 (SAGL1) 
regulates phenylpropanoid biosynthesis as a post-translational regulator for 
PAL1 (phenylalanine ammonia-lyase) and an indirect transcriptional regulator for 
ANTHOCYANIDIN SYNTHASE. Phenylpropanoid biosynthesis in plants produces diverse 
aromatic metabolites with important biological functions. Phenylalanine 
ammonia-lyase (PAL) catalyzes the first step in phenylpropanoid biosynthesis by 
converting L-phenylalanine to trans-cinnamic acid. Here, we report that SMALL 
AND GLOSSY LEAVES1 (SAGL1), a Kelch repeat F-box protein, interacts with PAL1 
protein for proteasome-mediated degradation to regulate phenylpropanoid 
biosynthesis in Arabidopsis. Mutations in SAGL1 caused high accumulation of 
anthocyanins and lignin derived from the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathway. 
We found that PAL enzyme activity increased in SAGL1-defective mutants, sagl1, 
but decreased in SAGL1-overexpressing Arabidopsis (SAGL1OE) without changes in 
the transcript levels of PAL genes, suggesting protein-level regulation by 
SAGL1. Indeed, the levels of PAL1-GFP fusion protein were reduced when both 
SAGL1 and PAL1-GFP were transiently co-expressed in leaves of Nicotiana 
benthamiana. In addition, bimolecular fluorescence complementation analysis 
suggested an interaction between SAGL1 and PAL1. We also found that the 
transcript levels of ANTHOCYANIDIN SYNTHASE (ANS) increased in the sagl1 mutants 
but decreased in SAGL1OE. Our results suggest that SAGL1 regulates 
phenylpropanoid biosynthesis post-translationally at PAL1 and transcriptionally 
at ANS.

DOI: 10.1007/s11103-018-0808-8
PMID: 30542810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
