---
pmid: '7740503'
title: Purification and partial characterization of draculin, the anticoagulant factor
  present in the saliva of vampire bats (Desmodus rotundus).
authors:
- Apitz-Castro R
- Béguin S
- Tablante A
- Bartoli F
- Holt JC
- Hemker HC
journal: Thromb Haemost
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
---

# Purification and partial characterization of draculin, the anticoagulant factor present in the saliva of vampire bats (Desmodus rotundus).
**Authors:** Apitz-Castro R, Béguin S, Tablante A, Bartoli F, Holt JC, Hemker HC
**Journal:** Thromb Haemost (1995)

## Abstract

1. Thromb Haemost. 1995 Jan;73(1):94-100.

Purification and partial characterization of draculin, the anticoagulant factor 
present in the saliva of vampire bats (Desmodus rotundus).

Apitz-Castro R(1), Béguin S, Tablante A, Bartoli F, Holt JC, Hemker HC.

Author information:
(1)Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones Cientificas (IVIC), Caracas.

From the saliva of the vampire bat Desmodus rotundus, we isolated an unknown 
anticoagulant protein which we have named draculin. Its molecular mass as 
determined by non-reduced SDS-PAGE is about 83 kDa. The reduced polypeptide 
shows a slower migration. HPLC in a molecular sieve matrix yields a single, 
symmetrical peak corresponding to 88.5 kDa. Isoelectric focusing shows an acidic 
protein with pI = 4.1-4.2. Aminoacid analysis is compatible with a single chain 
polypeptide of about 80 kDa. Cyanogen bromide cleavage yields a single 
16-aminoacid peptide, corresponding to the amino-terminus of the native 
molecule. Draculin inhibits the activated form of coagulation factors IX and X. 
It does not act on thrombin, trypsin, chymotrypsin and does not express 
fibrinolytic activity. The inhibition is immediate and not readily reversible, 
with a stoichiometry of about two molecules of draculin per molecule of factor 
IXa or Xa. Surprisingly, the inhibitory activity against either factor is not 
affected by the presence of the other. Draculin binds quantitatively to either 
immobilised factor Xa or factor IXa. Our preliminary interpretation is that 
there are two forms of draculin that hardly differ in structure. Both bind to 
factor Xa and to factor IXa but one form inhibits factor Xa and the other 
inhibits factor IXa. When added to plasma, draculin increases the lag phase as 
well as the height of the peak of thrombin generation.

PMID: 7740503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
