---
pmid: '12819209'
title: Threonine 391 phosphorylation of the human prolactin receptor mediates a novel
  interaction with 14-3-3 proteins.
authors:
- Olayioye MA
- Guthridge MA
- Stomski FC
- Lopez AF
- Visvader JE
- Lindeman GJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M302910200
---

# Threonine 391 phosphorylation of the human prolactin receptor mediates a novel interaction with 14-3-3 proteins.
**Authors:** Olayioye MA, Guthridge MA, Stomski FC, Lopez AF, Visvader JE, Lindeman GJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M302910200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M302910200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 29;278(35):32929-35. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M302910200. Epub 
2003 Jun 20.

Threonine 391 phosphorylation of the human prolactin receptor mediates a novel 
interaction with 14-3-3 proteins.

Olayioye MA(1), Guthridge MA, Stomski FC, Lopez AF, Visvader JE, Lindeman GJ.

Author information:
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research and Bone Marrow Research 
Laboratories, 1G Royal Parade, Victoria 3050, Australia.

The prolactin receptor (PrlR) is a member of the cytokine receptor superfamily 
that lacks an intrinsic kinase domain and relies on the cytoplasmic Jak tyrosine 
kinases to transduce signals. Prolactin-induced Jak2 activation and consequent 
tyrosine phosphorylation of the receptor and downstream signaling molecules have 
been studied, but phosphorylation of the PrlR on serine or threonine residues 
has not been reported. Here we describe a novel interaction between the PrlR and 
the phosphoserine/phosphothreonine-binding 14-3-3 proteins. This association is 
mediated by the KCST391WP motif, which occurs in the major functional isoform of 
the human receptor and is conserved among a wide variety of species. Mutagenesis 
of threonine 391 to alanine significantly impaired 14-3-3 binding to the PrlR in 
both glutathione S-transferase pulldown and coimmunoprecipitation assays. In 
breast carcinoma and mouse mammary epithelial cell lines, the endogenous 
receptor was found to associate with glutathione S-transferase-14-3-3 proteins 
independent of prolactin stimulation. A phospho-specific peptide antibody was 
generated and used to demonstrate phosphorylation of Thr391 in vivo. 
Phosphorylation of this site was found to be sensitive to okadaic acid, a 
specific inhibitor of serine/threonine protein phosphatases. Interestingly, the 
T391A PrlR mutant exhibited increased basal and prolactin-induced tyrosine 
phosphorylation compared with the wild-type receptor. This was accompanied by a 
ligand-induced increase in protein kinase B and Erk activation but not that of 
Stat5a. Phosphorylation of the receptor on Thr391 may therefore provide a new 
mechanism by which prolactin signaling is attenuated.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M302910200
PMID: 12819209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
