---
pmid: '18486321'
title: Acetylation and deacetylation regulate CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta
  at K39 in mediating gene transcription.
authors:
- Ceseña TI
- Cui TX
- Subramanian L
- Fulton CT
- Iñiguez-Lluhí JA
- Kwok RP
- Schwartz J
journal: Mol Cell Endocrinol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2008.03.009
---

# Acetylation and deacetylation regulate CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta at K39 in mediating gene transcription.
**Authors:** Ceseña TI, Cui TX, Subramanian L, Fulton CT, Iñiguez-Lluhí JA, Kwok RP, Schwartz J
**Journal:** Mol Cell Endocrinol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mce.2008.03.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mce.2008.03.009)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2008 Jul 16;289(1-2):94-101. doi: 
10.1016/j.mce.2008.03.009. Epub 2008 Mar 27.

Acetylation and deacetylation regulate CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta at 
K39 in mediating gene transcription.

Ceseña TI(1), Cui TX, Subramanian L, Fulton CT, Iñiguez-Lluhí JA, Kwok RP, 
Schwartz J.

Author information:
(1)Cellular & Molecular Biology Program, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 
48109-5622, United States.

The transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta (C/EBPbeta) 
contains multiple acetylation sites, including lysine (K) 39. Mutation of 
C/EBPbeta at K39, an acetylation site in the transcriptional activation domain, 
impairs transcription of C/EBPbeta target genes in a dominant-negative fashion. 
Further, K39 of C/EBPbeta can be deacetylated by HDAC1, and HDAC1 may decrease 
C/EBPbeta-mediated transcription, suggesting that acetylation of C/EBPbeta at 
K39 is dynamically regulated in mediating gene transcription. Acetylation of 
endogenous C/EBPbeta at K39 is detected in adipose tissue, and also occurs in 
3T3-L1 cells undergoing adipocyte conversion. In addition, mutation of K39 in 
C/EBPbeta impairs activation of its target genes encoding C/EBPalpha and 
PPARgamma, essential mediators of adipogenesis, as well as adipocyte genes for 
leptin and Glut4. These findings suggest that acetylation of C/EBPbeta at K39 is 
an important and dynamic regulatory event that contributes to its ability to 
transactivate target genes, including those associated with adipogenesis and 
adipocyte function.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mce.2008.03.009
PMID: 18486321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
