---
pmid: '2467293'
title: Characterization of the interleukin 2 receptor beta chain using three distinct
  monoclonal antibodies.
authors:
- Tsudo M
- Kitamura F
- Miyasaka M
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1989'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC286829
doi: 10.1073/pnas.86.6.1982
---

# Characterization of the interleukin 2 receptor beta chain using three distinct monoclonal antibodies.
**Authors:** Tsudo M, Kitamura F, Miyasaka M
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.86.6.1982](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.86.6.1982)
**PMC:** [PMC286829](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC286829/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1989 Mar;86(6):1982-6. doi: 10.1073/pnas.86.6.1982.

Characterization of the interleukin 2 receptor beta chain using three distinct 
monoclonal antibodies.

Tsudo M(1), Kitamura F, Miyasaka M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, 
Japan.

The human high-affinity receptor for interleukin 2 (IL-2) has been proposed as 
being a membrane complex composed of at least two distinct polypeptide chains: 
p55 (alpha chain), recognized by the anti-Tac monoclonal antibody (mAb), and p75 
(beta chain), both of which are capable of binding IL-2. Whereas the alpha chain 
itself has been shown to be nonfunctional, the beta chain appears to be pivotal 
in the IL-2 signal transduction, although the beta chain is otherwise poorly 
characterized. Three beta chain-specific mAbs, designated Mik-beta 1, -beta 2, 
and -beta 3, were developed. Mik-beta 1 and -beta 2 completely inhibited the 
IL-2 binding to the beta chain, whereas Mik-beta 3 immunoprecipitated the beta 
chain crosslinked with 125I-labeled IL-2. The beta chain immunoprecipitated by 
these mAbs was revealed to have a Mr of 68,000-72,000. High-affinity IL-2 
binding was completely abolished by Mik-beta 1. Although IL-2-dependent T-cell 
growth at high IL-2 concentrations was not inhibited by the anti-Tac, it was 
almost completely inhibited by Mik-beta 1 in the presence of the anti-Tac. These 
results clearly indicate that the beta chain is an indispensable component to 
the high-affinity IL-2 receptor and is responsible for the IL-2 signal 
transduction. The beta chain was found to be constitutively expressed without 
the alpha chain on the surface of peripheral blood Leu-19+ natural killer cells.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.86.6.1982
PMCID: PMC286829
PMID: 2467293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
