---
pmid: '16669699'
title: Dynamic interaction of TTDA with TFIIH is stabilized by nucleotide excision
  repair in living cells.
authors:
- Giglia-Mari G
- Miquel C
- Theil AF
- Mari PO
- Hoogstraten D
- Ng JM
- Dinant C
- Hoeijmakers JH
- Vermeulen W
journal: PLoS Biol
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1457016
doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0040156
---

# Dynamic interaction of TTDA with TFIIH is stabilized by nucleotide excision repair in living cells.
**Authors:** Giglia-Mari G, Miquel C, Theil AF, Mari PO, Hoogstraten D, Ng JM, Dinant C, Hoeijmakers JH, Vermeulen W
**Journal:** PLoS Biol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pbio.0040156](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.0040156)
**PMC:** [PMC1457016](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1457016/)

## Abstract

1. PLoS Biol. 2006 Jun;4(6):e156. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0040156. Epub 2006
May  9.

Dynamic interaction of TTDA with TFIIH is stabilized by nucleotide excision 
repair in living cells.

Giglia-Mari G(1), Miquel C, Theil AF, Mari PO, Hoogstraten D, Ng JM, Dinant C, 
Hoeijmakers JH, Vermeulen W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Medical Genetics Center, Erasmus 
Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 2006 Jun;4(6):e184. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0040184.

Transcription/repair factor IIH (TFIIH) is essential for RNA polymerase II 
transcription and nucleotide excision repair (NER). This multi-subunit complex 
consists of ten polypeptides, including the recently identified small 8-kDa 
trichothiodystrophy group A (TTDA)/ hTFB5 protein. Patients belonging to the 
rare neurodevelopmental repair syndrome TTD-A carry inactivating mutations in 
the TTDA/hTFB5 gene. One of these mutations completely inactivates the protein, 
whereas other TFIIH genes only tolerate point mutations that do not compromise 
the essential role in transcription. Nevertheless, the severe NER-deficiency in 
TTD-A suggests that the TTDA protein is critical for repair. Using a 
fluorescently tagged and biologically active version of TTDA, we have 
investigated the involvement of TTDA in repair and transcription in living 
cells. Under non-challenging conditions, TTDA is present in two distinct kinetic 
pools: one bound to TFIIH, and a free fraction that shuttles between the 
cytoplasm and nucleus. After induction of NER-specific DNA lesions, the 
equilibrium between these two pools dramatically shifts towards a more stable 
association of TTDA to TFIIH. Modulating transcriptional activity in cells did 
not induce a similar shift in this equilibrium. Surprisingly, DNA conformations 
that only provoke an abortive-type of NER reaction do not result into a more 
stable incorporation of TTDA into TFIIH. These findings identify TTDA as the 
first TFIIH subunit with a primarily NER-dedicated role in vivo and indicate 
that its interaction with TFIIH reflects productive NER.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0040156
PMCID: PMC1457016
PMID: 16669699 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
