---
pmid: '12408816'
title: Two TOR complexes, only one of which is rapamycin sensitive, have distinct
  roles in cell growth control.
authors:
- Loewith R
- Jacinto E
- Wullschleger S
- Lorberg A
- Crespo JL
- Bonenfant D
- Oppliger W
- Jenoe P
- Hall MN
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s1097-2765(02)00636-6
---

# Two TOR complexes, only one of which is rapamycin sensitive, have distinct roles in cell growth control.
**Authors:** Loewith R, Jacinto E, Wullschleger S, Lorberg A, Crespo JL, Bonenfant D, Oppliger W, Jenoe P, Hall MN
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1097-2765(02)00636-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1097-2765(02)00636-6)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2002 Sep;10(3):457-68. doi: 10.1016/s1097-2765(02)00636-6.

Two TOR complexes, only one of which is rapamycin sensitive, have distinct roles 
in cell growth control.

Loewith R(1), Jacinto E, Wullschleger S, Lorberg A, Crespo JL, Bonenfant D, 
Oppliger W, Jenoe P, Hall MN.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biochemistry, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Klingelbergstrasse 
70, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland.

The target of rapamycin (TOR) proteins in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, TOR1 and 
TOR2, redundantly regulate growth in a rapamycin-sensitive manner. TOR2 
additionally regulates polarization of the actin cytoskeleton in a 
rapamycin-insensitive manner. We describe two functionally distinct TOR 
complexes. TOR Complex 1 (TORC1) contains TOR1 or TOR2, KOG1 (YHR186c), and 
LST8. TORC2 contains TOR2, AVO1 (YOL078w), AVO2 (YMR068w), AVO3 (YER093c), and 
LST8. FKBP-rapamycin binds TORC1, and TORC1 disruption mimics rapamycin 
treatment, suggesting that TORC1 mediates the rapamycin-sensitive, TOR-shared 
pathway. FKBP-rapamycin fails to bind TORC2, and TORC2 disruption causes an 
actin defect, suggesting that TORC2 mediates the rapamycin-insensitive, 
TOR2-unique pathway. Thus, the distinct TOR complexes account for the diversity, 
specificity, and selective rapamycin inhibition of TOR signaling. TORC1 and 
possibly TORC2 are conserved from yeast to man.

DOI: 10.1016/s1097-2765(02)00636-6
PMID: 12408816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
