---
pmid: '14746899'
title: A human granin-like neuroendocrine peptide precursor (proSAAS) immunoreactivity
  in tau inclusions of Alzheimer's disease and parkinsonism-dementia complex on Guam.
authors:
- Wada M
- Ren CH
- Koyama S
- Arawaka S
- Kawakatsu S
- Kimura H
- Nagasawa H
- Kawanami T
- Kurita K
- Daimon M
- Hirano A
- Kato T
journal: Neurosci Lett
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2003.11.028
---

# A human granin-like neuroendocrine peptide precursor (proSAAS) immunoreactivity in tau inclusions of Alzheimer's disease and parkinsonism-dementia complex on Guam.
**Authors:** Wada M, Ren CH, Koyama S, Arawaka S, Kawakatsu S, Kimura H, Nagasawa H, Kawanami T, Kurita K, Daimon M, Hirano A, Kato T
**Journal:** Neurosci Lett (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neulet.2003.11.028](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2003.11.028)

## Abstract

1. Neurosci Lett. 2004 Feb 6;356(1):49-52. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2003.11.028.

A human granin-like neuroendocrine peptide precursor (proSAAS) immunoreactivity 
in tau inclusions of Alzheimer's disease and parkinsonism-dementia complex on 
Guam.

Wada M(1), Ren CH, Koyama S, Arawaka S, Kawakatsu S, Kimura H, Nagasawa H, 
Kawanami T, Kurita K, Daimon M, Hirano A, Kato T.

Author information:
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Yamagata University School of 
Medicine, Yamagata 990-9585, Japan. mwada@yacht.ocn.ne.jp

The deposition of tau inclusions is one of the neuropathological hallmarks in 
neurodegenerative disorders with dementia. We have reported that the N-terminal 
fragment of a human granin-like neuroendocrine peptide precursor (N-proSAAS) is 
accumulated in Pick bodies. However, it is unknown whether N-proSAAS is widely 
accumulated in tau inclusions in other tauopathies. Here, we performed an 
immunohistochemical examination using antibodies against both the N- and 
C-terminal sequence of proSAAS in the brains of patients with Alzheimer's 
disease and parkinsonism-dementia complex on Guam. The antibody against 
N-proSAAS immunostained neurofibrillary tangles and neuritic plaques in both 
diseases, whereas the antibody against the C-terminal sequence of proSAAS did 
not. The results of the present study suggest that N-proSAAS or proSAAS-like 
molecules were trapped within the tau fibrils and accumulated in tau inclusions.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2003.11.028
PMID: 14746899 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
