---
pmid: '2465147'
title: Human plasma inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor is encoded by four genes on three
  chromosomes.
authors:
- Diarra-Mehrpour M
- Bourguignon J
- Sesboüé R
- Matteï MG
- Passage E
- Salier JP
- Martin JP
journal: Eur J Biochem
year: '1989'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1989.tb14532.x
---

# Human plasma inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor is encoded by four genes on three chromosomes.
**Authors:** Diarra-Mehrpour M, Bourguignon J, Sesboüé R, Matteï MG, Passage E, Salier JP, Martin JP
**Journal:** Eur J Biochem (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1432-1033.1989.tb14532.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1432-1033.1989.tb14532.x)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Biochem. 1989 Jan 15;179(1):147-54. doi: 
10.1111/j.1432-1033.1989.tb14532.x.

Human plasma inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor is encoded by four genes on three 
chromosomes.

Diarra-Mehrpour M(1), Bourguignon J, Sesboüé R, Matteï MG, Passage E, Salier JP, 
Martin JP.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Physiopathologie et Génétique Rénale et Pulmonaire, Institute 
National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale Unité 295, Faculté de Médecine 
de Rouen, Saint Etienne-du-Rouvray, France.

Human inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor is a plasma protein of Mr 180,000 which has 
long been described as a single polypeptide chain. However, we have previously 
demonstrated that it is synthesized in liver by two different mRNA populations 
coding for heavy or light polypeptide chains [Bourguignon, J. et al. (1983) FEBS 
Lett. 162, 379-383] and cDNA clones for the heavy or light chains have recently 
been isolated and characterized [Bourguignon, J. et. al. (1985) Biochem. 
Biophys. Res. Commun. 131, 1146-1153; Salier, J.P. et al. (1987) Proc. Natl 
Acad. Sci. USA 84, 8272-8276]. In the present study, we show that human 
poly(A)-rich RNAs hybrid-selected with various heavy-chain-encoding cDNA clones 
translate three different heavy chains, designated H1 (Mr 92,000), H2 (Mr 
98,000) and H3 (Mr 107,000). We previously characterized two heavy-chain cDNA 
clones. We now report that they correspond to H1 and H2 chains. We have also 
determined the sequence of an additional cDNA clone which codes for H3 chain. 
Its insert size is 1.79 kb with a single open reading frame and a poly(A) tail. 
The deduced amino acid sequence of the H3 chain is highly similar to those of 
the H1 (54%) and H2 (44%) chains. Northern analysis of human liver poly(A)-rich 
RNAs with the three heavy-chain cDNAs as probes clearly identified a single 
major mRNA population of 3.3 +/- 0.1 kb. Chromosomal localization by in situ 
hybridization shows that inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor genes are located on 
three different human chromosomes. The H1 and H3 genes are located in the 
p211-p212 region of chromosome 3, whereas the H2 gene resides in the p15 band of 
chromosome 10. The light-chain gene is located in the q32-q33 region of 
chromosome 9. These results indicate that heavy and light chains of 
inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor are encoded by at least four functional genes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1989.tb14532.x
PMID: 2465147 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
