---
pmid: '17055435'
title: Structure of protein phosphatase 2A core enzyme bound to tumor-inducing toxins.
authors:
- Xing Y
- Xu Y
- Chen Y
- Jeffrey PD
- Chao Y
- Lin Z
- Li Z
- Strack S
- Stock JB
- Shi Y
journal: Cell
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.09.025
---

# Structure of protein phosphatase 2A core enzyme bound to tumor-inducing toxins.
**Authors:** Xing Y, Xu Y, Chen Y, Jeffrey PD, Chao Y, Lin Z, Li Z, Strack S, Stock JB, Shi Y
**Journal:** Cell (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2006.09.025](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2006.09.025)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2006 Oct 20;127(2):341-53. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.09.025.

Structure of protein phosphatase 2A core enzyme bound to tumor-inducing toxins.

Xing Y(1), Xu Y, Chen Y, Jeffrey PD, Chao Y, Lin Z, Li Z, Strack S, Stock JB, 
Shi Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Lewis Thomas Laboratory, Princeton 
University, NJ 08544, USA.

The serine/threonine phosphatase protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) plays an 
essential role in many aspects of cellular functions and has been shown to be an 
important tumor suppressor. The core enzyme of PP2A comprises a 65 kDa 
scaffolding subunit and a 36 kDa catalytic subunit. Here we report the crystal 
structures of the PP2A core enzyme bound to two of its inhibitors, the 
tumor-inducing agents okadaic acid and microcystin-LR, at 2.6 and 2.8 A 
resolution, respectively. The catalytic subunit recognizes one end of the 
elongated scaffolding subunit by interacting with the conserved ridges of HEAT 
repeats 11-15. Formation of the core enzyme forces the scaffolding subunit to 
undergo pronounced structural rearrangement. The scaffolding subunit exhibits 
considerable conformational flexibility, which is proposed to play an essential 
role in PP2A function. These structures, together with biochemical analyses, 
reveal significant insights into PP2A function and serve as a framework for 
deciphering the diverse roles of PP2A in cellular physiology.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.09.025
PMID: 17055435 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
