---
pmid: '27872189'
title: Biophysical Evidence for Intrinsic Disorder in the C-terminal Tails of the
  Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) and HER3 Receptor Tyrosine Kinases.
authors:
- Keppel TR
- Sarpong K
- Murray EM
- Monsey J
- Zhu J
- Bose R
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2017'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC5241735
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.747485
---

# Biophysical Evidence for Intrinsic Disorder in the C-terminal Tails of the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) and HER3 Receptor Tyrosine Kinases.
**Authors:** Keppel TR, Sarpong K, Murray EM, Monsey J, Zhu J, Bose R
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M116.747485](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M116.747485)
**PMC:** [PMC5241735](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5241735/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2017 Jan 13;292(2):597-610. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.747485. Epub
2016  Nov 21.

Biophysical Evidence for Intrinsic Disorder in the C-terminal Tails of the 
Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) and HER3 Receptor Tyrosine Kinases.

Keppel TR(1), Sarpong K(1), Murray EM(1), Monsey J(1), Zhu J(2), Bose R(3).

Author information:
(1)From the Divisions of Oncology and.
(2)Hematology, Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, 
St. Louis, Missouri 63110.
(3)From the Divisions of Oncology and rbose@wustl.edu.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)/ErbB family of receptor tyrosine 
kinases includes oncogenes important in the progression of breast and other 
cancers, and they are targets for many drug development strategies. Each member 
of the ErbB family possesses a unique, structurally uncharacterized C-terminal 
tail that plays an important role in autophosphorylation and signal propagation. 
To determine whether these C-terminal tails are intrinsically disordered 
regions, we conducted a battery of biophysical experiments on the EGFR and HER3 
tails. Using hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry, we measured the 
conformational dynamics of intracellular half constructs and compared the tails 
with the ordered kinase domains. The C-terminal tails demonstrate more rapid 
deuterium exchange behavior when compared with the kinase domains. Next, we 
expressed and purified EGFR and HER3 tail-only constructs. Results from circular 
dichroism spectroscopy, size exclusion chromatography with multiangle light 
scattering, dynamic light scattering, analytical ultracentrifugation, and small 
angle X-ray scattering each provide evidence that the EGFR and HER3 C-terminal 
tails are intrinsically disordered with extended, non-globular structure in 
solution. The intrinsic disorder and extended conformation of these tails may be 
important for their function by increasing the capture radius and reducing the 
thermodynamic barriers for binding of downstream signaling proteins.

© 2017 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M116.747485
PMCID: PMC5241735
PMID: 27872189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)/ErbB family of receptor tyrosine kinases includes oncogenes important in the progression of breast and other cancers, and they are targets for many drug development strategies. Each member of the ErbB family possesses a unique, structurally uncharacterized C-terminal tail that plays an important role in autophosphorylation and signal propagation. To determine whether these C-terminal tails are intrinsically disordered regions, we conducted a battery of biophysical experiments on the EGFR and HER3 tails. Using hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry, we measured the conformational dynamics of intracellular half constructs and compared the tails with the ordered kinase domains. The C-terminal tails demonstrate more rapid deuterium exchange behavior when compared with the kinase domains. Next, we expressed and purified EGFR and HER3 tail-only constructs. Results from circular dichroism spectroscopy, size exclusion chromatography with multiangle light scattering, dynamic light scattering, analytical ultracentrifugation, and small angle X-ray scattering each provide evidence that the EGFR and HER3 C-terminal tails are intrinsically disordered with extended, non-globular structure in solution. The intrinsic disorder and extended conformation of these tails may be important for their function by increasing the capture radius and reducing the thermodynamic barriers for binding of downstream signaling proteins.

Introduction

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) 3 /ErbB family of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) contains four member proteins: EGFR/ErbB1, HER2/ErbB2/neu, HER3/ErbB3, and HER4/ErbB4. These RTKs carry out important signaling functions via the sequential process of ligand binding by the extracellular domain, homo- or heterodimerization, activation of their intracellular kinase domain, and recruitment of downstream signaling proteins. These RTKs are also important oncogenic drivers in many breast, lung, and other human cancers ( 1 ). Several structural biology studies on the ErbB family have been published, and this has helped advance drug development for HER2-positive breast cancer ( 2 ). Protein crystallography studies published in 2004 showed the structure of pertuzumab bound to the extracellular domain of HER2 and lapatinib bound to the kinase domain of EGFR ( 3 , 4 ). Since that time, growing structural biology-based understanding of how EGFR, HER2, and HER3 function at the atomic level has dramatically reshaped our understanding of RTKs ( 1 , 2 ). Despite these advances, there is a domain in each EGFR/ErbB family protein for which little structural biology information is available; this domain is the C-terminal tail (CTT) domain. The CTTs contain numerous autophosphorylation sites that are essential for recruiting downstream signaling proteins and initiating intracellular signaling ( 5 , 6 ). The CTT can also contribute to autoinhibition of the kinase domain of RTK ( 7 ). The lack of available crystallographic information on the CTT region of EGFR/ErbB family RTKs led us to examine whether these proteins lack a stable secondary and/or tertiary structure.

Intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) represent an emerging area of interest in medicine. IDRs are regions within proteins that exhibit high flexibility and may lack a secondary or tertiary structure but are still able to carry out important biological functions ( 8 – 15 ). Algorithm prediction methods indicate that around 25–30% of eukaryotic proteins can be categorized as having disordered regions ( 16 ). These disordered regions provide certain advantages in protein-protein interactions, including a larger hydrodynamic radius ( 17 , 18 ), faster on- and off-rates of binding ( 19 ), high binding specificity ( 20 ), and the ability to adopt different conformations depending on the binding partner ( 9 , 21 ). Correlation studies have revealed a high propensity for disordered regions to undergo post-translational modification, particularly phosphorylation ( 22 ). Because traditional methods, such as NMR and X-ray crystallography, were developed to study stable protein structures, IDRs have been more difficult to analyze because of difficulties in obtaining high concentrations or representative protein crystals ( 11 , 23 ). Correlation studies suggest a strong association between IDRs and human cancer-associated proteins ( 24 ); therefore, identifying and analyzing IDRs in cancer-related proteins is vital in understanding how they function.

Protein kinases demonstrate a high degree of specificity in facilitating phosphorylation; however, many are able to perform such interactions with multiple substrate partners ( 25 ). An analysis of the human kinome shows that as many as 83% of kinase genes contain IDRs, which could facilitate these multiple interactions. RTKs are involved in more protein-protein interactions than any other kinase group, thus potentially pointing to the involvement of IDRs in their recognition mechanisms ( 26 ). Multisequence alignment ( 27 ) of EGFR/ErbB family RTKs shows that the kinase domain sequences are highly conserved between all four family members. However, the CTT regions are highly divergent between each EGFR/ErbB family member. One previous study using circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy indicated that the EGFR CTT is rich in α-helical and β-sheet content ( 6 ), but a later study used coarse grained modeling to show many possible conformations of the EGFR CTT based on the assumption that it is naturally disordered ( 28 ). A high degree of flexibility in the CTT would provide distinct advantages to EGFR interaction with downstream Src homology 2 (SH2) and phosphotyrosine-binding domains during signaling functions ( 6 ).

In this work, we examine the biophysical properties of the CTT of EGFR and HER3. The motivation of this study is to gather structural information on the CTT region to determine whether the tails are highly dynamic, disordered regions. First, we measured the conformational dynamics of intracellular half (ICH) constructs of EGFR/ErbB family members using amide hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS). This information is used to compare the CTTs with the kinase domains. We also expressed and purified EGFR and HER3 CTT-only constructs and demonstrated that they are functional because they are recognized and phosphorylated by EGFR family kinases and once phosphorylated can be bound by the Grb2 SH2 domain. Using these CTT constructs, we performed multiple biophysical analyses, including CD spectroscopy, size exclusion chromatography with multiangle light scattering (SEC-MALS), dynamic light scattering (DLS), analytical ultracentrifugation (AUC), and small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS). The results of these methods support the hypothesis that the EGFR and HER3 CTTs are IDRs with extended, non-globular structure in solution.

Discussion

We have shown that the CTT domains in EGFR family proteins are intrinsically disordered regions that have an extended, highly dynamic conformational state. HDX-MS demonstrates that the CTT domains have a highly dynamic and exchange-competent conformation. CD spectroscopy shows that they have high unordered character as expected for IDRs. SEC and DLS demonstrate that hydrodynamic size of the CTT is larger than protein standards of comparable molecular weight, which is another property of IDRs. AUC and the Kratky plot from SAXS demonstrate that the CTTs are IDRs, and R g and D max measurements from SAXS demonstrate that the CTTs have an extended conformation. The R g and D max measurements of the EGFR kinase domain were estimated from crystal structure (Protein Data Bank code 1XKK), and we observed that the EGFR CTT had R g and D max values that were ∼2.4 times larger than those of the EGFR kinase domain.

A striking finding on the EGFR and HER3 CTTs is that despite their low primary sequence homology (22% sequence identity) the structural features of the CTTs are strongly conserved. This implies that the intrinsic disorder of these tails is important for their function, and the multiple conformers that a disordered region can adopt could reduce the thermodynamic barriers for protein binding and thereby increase both the on- and off-rates for binding of SH2 domain-containing proteins. Furthermore, the extended conformation of the CTT could increase the capture radius for recruitment of these signaling proteins ( 53 , 54 ). Both of these mechanisms would facilitate signal propagation by these receptor tyrosine kinases.

The intrinsically disordered properties of these CTTs also explain why these regions are mostly absent from crystallographic studies on EGFR ( 7 , 55 ). Portions of the EGFR tail located close to the kinase domain have been shown to be responsible for EGFR autoinhibition ( 56 ). The deletion of residues 982–1054 in the EGFR vIVb mutant is of particular importance in downstream signaling and kinase activation and has been shown to promote tumor formation. This region has been characterized via crystallography as containing an AP2-helix and other secondary structure elements, which appear to interact with the kinase domain in a manner that inhibits activation ( 4 , 55 , 56 ). In a study by Kovacs et al. ( 55 ), serial deletions of tail regions revealed specific regions important for autoinhibition as they relate to the oncogenic vIVb mutation. We observe increased protection from deuterium exchange for the EGFR 982–1054 region in the HDX-MS heat map ( Fig. 3 ) relative to the rest of the C-terminal tail. The application of HDX-MS allows us to locally characterize conformational properties for protein regions that may not be easily analyzable with crystallography. In conclusion, these methods demonstrate that the EGFR and HER3 CTTs are IDRs with extended, non-globular structure in solution, and this finding may have important implications for the recruitment of downstream signaling proteins and signal propagation from these RTKs.
