---
pmid: '31685550'
title: Function of the MYND Domain and C-Terminal Region in Regulating the Subcellular
  Localization and Catalytic Activity of the SMYD Family Lysine Methyltransferase
  Set5.
authors:
- Jaiswal D
- Turniansky R
- Moresco JJ
- Ikram S
- Ramaprasad G
- Akinwole A
- Wolf J
- Yates JR 3rd
- Green EM
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6944473
doi: 10.1128/MCB.00341-19
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Function of the MYND Domain and C-Terminal Region in Regulating the Subcellular Localization and Catalytic Activity of the SMYD Family Lysine Methyltransferase Set5.
**Authors:** Jaiswal D, Turniansky R, Moresco JJ, Ikram S, Ramaprasad G, Akinwole A, Wolf J, Yates JR 3rd, Green EM
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.00341-19](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.00341-19)
**PMC:** [PMC6944473](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6944473/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2020 Jan 3;40(2):e00341-19. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00341-19. Print
2020  Jan 3.

Function of the MYND Domain and C-Terminal Region in Regulating the Subcellular 
Localization and Catalytic Activity of the SMYD Family Lysine Methyltransferase 
Set5.

Jaiswal D(1), Turniansky R(1), Moresco JJ(2), Ikram S(1), Ramaprasad G(1), 
Akinwole A(1), Wolf J(1), Yates JR 3rd(2), Green EM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Maryland Baltimore County, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, 
California, USA.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Maryland Baltimore County, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA egreen@umbc.edu.

SMYD lysine methyltransferases target histones and nonhistone proteins for 
methylation and are critical regulators of muscle development and implicated in 
neoplastic transformation. They are characterized by a split catalytic SET 
domain and an intervening MYND zinc finger domain, as well as an extended 
C-terminal domain. Saccharomyces cerevisiae contains two SMYD proteins, Set5 and 
Set6, which share structural elements with the mammalian SMYD enzymes. Set5 is a 
histone H4 lysine 5, 8, and 12 methyltransferase, implicated in the regulation 
of stress responses and genome stability. While the SMYD proteins have diverse 
roles in cells, there are many gaps in our understanding of how these enzymes 
are regulated. Here, we performed mutational analysis of Set5, combined with 
phosphoproteomics, to identify regulatory mechanisms for its enzymatic activity 
and subcellular localization. Our results indicate that the MYND domain promotes 
Set5 chromatin association in cells and is required for its role in repressing 
subtelomeric genes. Phosphoproteomics revealed extensive phosphorylation of 
Set5, and phosphomimetic mutations enhance Set5 catalytic activity but diminish 
its ability to interact with chromatin in cells. These studies uncover multiple 
regions within Set5 that regulate its localization and activity and highlight 
potential avenues for understanding mechanisms controlling the diverse roles of 
SMYD enzymes.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00341-19
PMCID: PMC6944473
PMID: 31685550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
