---
pmid: '42260140'
title: GPATCH11 ortholog Sap34 regulates pre-mRNA splicing by interacting with early
  spliceosomal complexes in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
authors:
- Cipakova I
- Karika LO
- Hronska L
- Selicky T
- Iaparov B
- Karhanek M
- Kohutova L
- Barath P
- Cipak L
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2026'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/s41598-026-57150-9
---

# GPATCH11 ortholog Sap34 regulates pre-mRNA splicing by interacting with early spliceosomal complexes in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
**Authors:** Cipakova I, Karika LO, Hronska L, Selicky T, Iaparov B, Karhanek M, Kohutova L, Barath P, Cipak L
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-026-57150-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-026-57150-9)

## Abstract

1. Sci Rep. 2026 Jun 8. doi: 10.1038/s41598-026-57150-9. Online ahead of print.

GPATCH11 ortholog Sap34 regulates pre-mRNA splicing by interacting with early 
spliceosomal complexes in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.

Cipakova I(#)(1), Karika LO(#)(1), Hronska L(#)(1), Selicky T(1)(2), Iaparov 
B(3), Karhanek M(3), Kohutova L(4), Barath P(4), Cipak L(5).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Biomedical Research Center, Slovak Academy of 
Sciences, Dubravska cesta 9, Bratislava, 845 05, Slovakia.
(2)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Umeå University, 901 87, 
Umeå, Sweden.
(3)Laboratory of Bioinformatics, Biomedical Research Center, Slovak Academy of 
Sciences, Dubravska cesta 9, Bratislava, 845 05, Slovakia.
(4)Institute of Chemistry, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Dubravska cesta 9, 
Bratislava, 845 38, Slovakia.
(5)Cancer Research Institute, Biomedical Research Center, Slovak Academy of 
Sciences, Dubravska cesta 9, Bratislava, 845 05, Slovakia. lubos.cipak@savba.sk.
(#)Contributed equally

Pre-mRNA splicing is an essential step in gene expression regulation. It is 
mediated by the spliceosome, a large ribonucleoprotein complex that undergoes 
dynamic structural and compositional rearrangements during each splicing cycle. 
Although the mechanisms of splicing and the roles of main spliceosomal 
components are well defined, the identities and functions of transiently 
associated spliceosomal proteins remain incompletely understood. Here, we 
investigated the molecular function of the poorly characterized G-patch 
domain-containing protein SPAC6F6.19 (herein Sap34, for spliceosome-associated 
protein of 34 kDa) in Schizosaccharomyces pombe, an ortholog of human GPATCH11. 
Using affinity purification and a yeast two-hybrid assay, we analyzed its 
interactome and identified its interaction partners. In addition, long-read 
sequencing was employed to assess Sap34-dependent changes in splicing 
efficiency. We found that Sap34 forms a complex with components of the U2 small 
nuclear ribonucleoprotein (snRNP) and the U4/U6 × U5 tri-snRNP, which are 
required for early spliceosome assembly and activation. Furthermore, we defined 
the interaction specificity of Sap34 with splicing proteins, demonstrating the 
importance of its C-terminal region for binding to Sap61 and Ini1, and of its 
G-patch domain for interaction with ATP-dependent RNA helicase Prp43, suggesting 
that G-patch domain of Sap34 may contribute to the regulation of Prp43 activity 
in early spliceosomes. Notably, we showed that deletion of sap34 leads to a 
global reduction in splicing efficiency, predominantly associated with increased 
intron retention. Together, these findings identify Sap34 as a previously 
unrecognized and important G-patch domain-containing protein regulating the 
early steps of pre-mRNA splicing in fission yeast.

© 2026. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-026-57150-9
PMID: 42260140

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing interests: The authors 
declare no competing interests.
