---
reference_id: PMID:1441745
title: The telomere-associated MAL3 locus of Saccharomyces is a tandem array of repeated genes.
authors:
- Michels CA
- Read E
- Nat K
- Charron MJ
journal: Yeast
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1002/yea.320080809
keywords:
- Alleles
- "Genes, Fungal/physiology"
- Multigene Family
- "Repetitive Sequences, Nucleic Acid"
- Saccharomyces/genetics
- "Telomere/chemistry, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# The telomere-associated MAL3 locus of Saccharomyces is a tandem array of repeated genes.
**Authors:** Michels CA, Read E, Nat K, Charron MJ
**Journal:** Yeast (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1002/yea.320080809](https://doi.org/10.1002/yea.320080809)

## Content

1. Yeast. 1992 Aug;8(8):655-65. doi: 10.1002/yea.320080809.

The telomere-associated MAL3 locus of Saccharomyces is a tandem array of 
repeated genes.

Michels CA(1), Read E, Nat K, Charron MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Queens College, Flushing, New York.

Saccharomyces strains capable of fermenting maltose contain any one of five 
telomere-associated MAL loci. Each MAL locus is a complex of three genes 
encoding the three functions required to ferment maltose: maltose permease (GENE 
1), maltase (GENE 2) and the MAL trans-activator (GENE 3). All five loci have 
been cloned and all are highly sequence homologous over at least a 9.0 kbp 
region containing these GENEs (Charron et al., Genetics 122, 307-331, 1989). Our 
initial studies of strains carrying the MAL3 locus indicated the presence of 
linked, repeated MAL-homologous sequences (Michels and Needleman, Mol. Gen. 
Genet. 191, 225-230, 1983). Here we report our analysis of the 
centromere-proximal MAL3-linked sequences and show that the complete MAL3 locus 
spans approximately 40 kbp and consists of tandemly arrayed, partial repeats of 
the three GENE sequences described above. In addition, the structure of the MAL3 
locus is compared to that of three partially functional alleles of MAL3. These 
alleles were shown to contain only MAL31 and MAL32 and their structure suggests 
that they resulted from MAL3 deletions removing the sequences 
centromere-proximal to MAL31. The amplification and rearrangement of the 
telomere-linked MAL3 sequences are discussed in the context of studies on other 
telemere-associated sequences from yeast and other species.

DOI: 10.1002/yea.320080809
PMID: 1441745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]