---
pmid: '16043710'
title: Human POT1 disrupts telomeric G-quadruplexes allowing telomerase extension
  in vitro.
authors:
- Zaug AJ
- Podell ER
- Cech TR
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1180509
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0504744102
---

# Human POT1 disrupts telomeric G-quadruplexes allowing telomerase extension in vitro.
**Authors:** Zaug AJ, Podell ER, Cech TR
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0504744102](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0504744102)
**PMC:** [PMC1180509](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1180509/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Aug 2;102(31):10864-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0504744102. Epub 2005 Jul 25.

Human POT1 disrupts telomeric G-quadruplexes allowing telomerase extension in 
vitro.

Zaug AJ(1), Podell ER, Cech TR.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, 
University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309-0215, USA.

The POT1 (protection of telomeres 1) protein binds the ssDNA overhangs at the 
ends of chromosomes in diverse eukaryotes. POT1 is essential for chromosome 
end-protection, as best demonstrated in fission yeast. In human cells, hPOT1 is 
also involved in telomere-length regulation. We now show that telomeric 
oligonucleotides, such as d[GGG(TTAGGG)(3)], which form intramolecular 
G-quadruplexes through Hoogsteen base-pairing, serve as only marginal primers 
for extension by recombinant human telomerase; telomerase stalls after every 
nucleotide addition. Addition of hPOT1 to the reaction restores the normal 
processive elongation pattern seen with primers that cannot form G-quadruplexes. 
hPOT1 does not act catalytically but, instead, forms a stoichiometric complex 
with the DNA, freeing its 3' tail. An antisense oligonucleotide, which 
base-pairs near the 5' end of the telomeric sequence, leaving a 
telomerase-extendable 3' tail, duplicates the effect of hPOT1 on activation of 
G-quadruplex primers. Thus, hPOT1 may function simply by trapping the unfolded 
forms of these telomeric primers in an equilibrium population. We propose an 
additional role for hPOT1 in telomere maintenance: disrupting G-quadruplex 
structures in telomeric DNA, thereby allowing proper elongation by telomerase.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0504744102
PMCID: PMC1180509
PMID: 16043710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
