---
pmid: '14749334'
title: Bacillus subtilis CheC and FliY are members of a novel class of CheY-P-hydrolyzing
  proteins in the chemotactic signal transduction cascade.
authors:
- Szurmant H
- Muff TJ
- Ordal GW
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M311497200
---

# Bacillus subtilis CheC and FliY are members of a novel class of CheY-P-hydrolyzing proteins in the chemotactic signal transduction cascade.
**Authors:** Szurmant H, Muff TJ, Ordal GW
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M311497200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M311497200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 May 21;279(21):21787-92. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M311497200. Epub 
2004 Jan 27.

Bacillus subtilis CheC and FliY are members of a novel class of 
CheY-P-hydrolyzing proteins in the chemotactic signal transduction cascade.

Szurmant H(1), Muff TJ, Ordal GW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Colleges of Medicine and Liberal Arts and 
Sciences, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA.

Rapid restoration of prestimulus levels of the chemotactic response regulator, 
CheY-P, is important for preparing bacteria and archaea to respond sensitively 
to new stimuli. In an extension of previous work (Szurmant, H., Bunn, M. W., 
Cannistraro, V. J., and Ordal, G. W. (2003) J. Biol. Chem. 278, 48611-48616), we 
describe a new family of CheY-P phosphatases, the CYX family, that is widespread 
among the bacteria and archaea. These proteins provide another pathway, in 
addition to the ones involving CheZ of the gamma- and beta-proteobacteria (e.g. 
Escherichia coli) or the alternative CheY that serves as a "phosphate sink" 
among the alpha-proteobacteria (e.g. Sinorhizobium meliloti), for 
dephosphorylating CheY-P. In particular, we identify CheC, known previously to 
be involved in adaptation to stimuli in Bacillus subtilis, as a CheY-P 
phosphatase. Using an in vitro assay used previously to demonstrate that the 
switch protein FliY is a CheY-P phosphatase, we have shown that increasing 
amounts of CheC accelerate the hydrolysis of CheY-P. In vivo, a double mutant 
lacking cheC and the region of fliY that encodes the CheY-P binding domain is 
almost completely smooth swimming, implying that these cells contain very high 
levels of CheY-P. CheC appears to be primarily involved in restoring normal 
CheY-P levels following the addition of attractant, whereas FliY seems to act on 
CheY-P constitutively. The activity of CheC is relatively low compared to that 
of FliY, but we have shown that the chemotaxis protein CheD enhances the 
activity of CheC 5-fold. We suggest a model for how FliY, CheC, and CheD work 
together to regulate CheY-P levels in the bacterium.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M311497200
PMID: 14749334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
