---
pmid: '41337830'
title: An electrochemical perspective on human sulfite oxidase as a potential nitrite
  reductase.
authors:
- Giang PD
- Zapiter J
- Zhou J
- Kaczmarek AT
- Schwarz G
- Bernhardt PV
journal: J Inorg Biochem
year: '2026'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2025.113159
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# An electrochemical perspective on human sulfite oxidase as a potential nitrite reductase.
**Authors:** Giang PD, Zapiter J, Zhou J, Kaczmarek AT, Schwarz G, Bernhardt PV
**Journal:** J Inorg Biochem (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2025.113159](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2025.113159)

## Abstract

1. J Inorg Biochem. 2026 Mar;276:113159. doi: 10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2025.113159.
Epub  2025 Nov 26.

An electrochemical perspective on human sulfite oxidase as a potential nitrite 
reductase.

Giang PD(1), Zapiter J(1), Zhou J(1), Kaczmarek AT(2), Schwarz G(2), Bernhardt 
PV(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, University of Queensland, 
Brisbane 4072, Australia.
(2)Institute of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry & Center for Molecular 
Medicine Cologne University, 50674 Köln, Germany.
(3)School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, University of Queensland, 
Brisbane 4072, Australia. Electronic address: p.bernhardt@uq.edu.au.

The Mo-dependent enzyme human sulfite oxidase (HSO) oxidises highly neurotoxic 
sulfite to benign sulfate in the final step of cysteine catabolism. Although 
sulfite is its only known physiological substrate, HSO has been suggested to 
play a role in the generation of nitric oxide (NO) from nitrite under ischemic 
conditions. In this work we have investigated the electrochemically driven 
nitrite reductase activity of HSO mediated by the benzyl viologen radical 
cation. We show that HSO can act as an effective nitrite reductase with a KM 
value of 3.5 mM at pH 7. A heme-free variant of HSO behaves similarly. We also 
demonstrate electrochemically driven tandem sulfite oxidation and nitrite 
reduction with HSO using a known FeIII coordination compound as mediator. 
Significant pH-dependence of catalytic activity is found.

Copyright © 2025. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2025.113159
PMID: 41337830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
have no conflicts of interest in this submission.
