---
pmid: '19019919'
title: PDGF receptor-{beta} modulates metanephric mesenchyme chemotaxis induced by
  PDGF AA.
authors:
- Ricono JM
- Wagner B
- Gorin Y
- Arar M
- Kazlauskas A
- Choudhury GG
- Abboud HE
journal: Am J Physiol Renal Physiol
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2643859
doi: 10.1152/ajprenal.90368.2008
---

# PDGF receptor-{beta} modulates metanephric mesenchyme chemotaxis induced by PDGF AA.
**Authors:** Ricono JM, Wagner B, Gorin Y, Arar M, Kazlauskas A, Choudhury GG, Abboud HE
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Renal Physiol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajprenal.90368.2008](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajprenal.90368.2008)
**PMC:** [PMC2643859](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2643859/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2009 Feb;296(2):F406-17. doi: 
10.1152/ajprenal.90368.2008. Epub 2008 Nov 19.

PDGF receptor-{beta} modulates metanephric mesenchyme chemotaxis induced by PDGF 
AA.

Ricono JM(1), Wagner B, Gorin Y, Arar M, Kazlauskas A, Choudhury GG, Abboud HE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Biotechnology, Univ. of Texas 
Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78229-3900, USA.

PDGF B chain or PDGF receptor (PDGFR)-beta-deficient (-/-) mice lack mesangial 
cells. To study responses of alpha- and beta-receptor activation to PDGF 
ligands, metanephric mesenchymal cells (MMCs) were established from embryonic 
day E11.5 wild-type (+/+) and -/- mouse embryos. PDGF BB stimulated cell 
migration in +/+ cells, whereas PDGF AA did not. Conversely, PDGF AA was 
chemotactic for -/- MMCs. The mechanism by which PDGFR-beta inhibited AA-induced 
migration was investigated. PDGF BB, but not PDGF AA, increased intracellular 
Ca(2+) and the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in +/+ cells. 
Transfection of -/- MMCs with the wild-type beta-receptor restored cell 
migration and ROS generation in response to PDGF BB and inhibited AA-induced 
migration. Inhibition of Ca(2+) signaling facilitated PDGF AA-induced chemotaxis 
in the wild-type cells. The antioxidant N-acetyl-l-cysteine (NAC) or the NADPH 
oxidase inhibitor diphenyleneiodonium (DPI) abolished the BB-induced increase in 
intracellular Ca(2+) concentration, suggesting that ROS act as upstream 
mediators of Ca(2+) in suppressing PDGF AA-induced migration. These data 
indicate that ROS and Ca(2+) generated by active PDGFR-beta play an essential 
role in suppressing PDGF AA-induced migration in +/+ MMCs. During kidney 
development, PDGFR beta-mediated ROS generation and Ca(2+) influx suppress PDGF 
AA-induced chemotaxis in metanephric mesenchyme.

DOI: 10.1152/ajprenal.90368.2008
PMCID: PMC2643859
PMID: 19019919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
