---
pmid: '15155581'
title: Chk1 activation requires Rad9 S/TQ-site phosphorylation to promote association
  with C-terminal BRCT domains of Rad4TOPBP1.
authors:
- Furuya K
- Poitelea M
- Guo L
- Caspari T
- Carr AM
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2004'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC415640
doi: 10.1101/gad.291104
---

# Chk1 activation requires Rad9 S/TQ-site phosphorylation to promote association with C-terminal BRCT domains of Rad4TOPBP1.
**Authors:** Furuya K, Poitelea M, Guo L, Caspari T, Carr AM
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.291104](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.291104)
**PMC:** [PMC415640](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC415640/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2004 May 15;18(10):1154-64. doi: 10.1101/gad.291104.

Chk1 activation requires Rad9 S/TQ-site phosphorylation to promote association 
with C-terminal BRCT domains of Rad4TOPBP1.

Furuya K(1), Poitelea M, Guo L, Caspari T, Carr AM.

Author information:
(1)Genome Damage and Stability Centre, University of Sussex, Brighton, BN1 9RQ, 
UK.

To gain insight into the function and organization of proteins assembled on the 
DNA in response to genotoxic insult we investigated the phosphorylation of the 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe PCNA-like checkpoint protein Rad9. C-terminal 
T412/S423 phosphorylation of Rad9 by Rad3(ATR) occurs in S phase without 
replication stress. Rad3(ATR) and Tel1(ATM) phosphorylate these same residues, 
plus additional ones, in response to DNA damage. In S phase and after damage, 
only Rad9 phosphorylated on T412/S423, but not unphosphorylated Rad9, associates 
with a two-BRCT-domain region of the essential Rad4(TOPBP1) protein. 
Rad9-Rad4(TOPBP1) interaction is required to activate the Chk1 damage checkpoint 
but not the Cds1 replication checkpoint. When the Rad9-T412/S423 are 
phosphorylated, Rad4(TOPBP1) coprecipitates with Rad3(ATR), suggesting that 
phosphorylation coordinates formation of an active checkpoint complex.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.291104
PMCID: PMC415640
PMID: 15155581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

To gain insight into the function and organization of proteins assembled on the DNA in response to genotoxic insult we investigated the phosphorylation of the Schizosaccharomyces pombe PCNA-like checkpoint protein Rad9. C-terminal T412/S423 phosphorylation of Rad9 by Rad3 ATR occurs in S phase without replication stress. Rad3 ATR and Tel1 ATM phosphorylate these same residues, plus additional ones, in response to DNA damage. In S phase and after damage, only Rad9 phosphorylated on T412/S423, but not unphosphorylated Rad9, associates with a two-BRCT-domain region of the essential Rad4 TOPBP1 protein. Rad9–Rad4 TOPBP1 interaction is required to activate the Chk1 damage checkpoint but not the Cds1 replication checkpoint. When the Rad9-T412/S423 are phosphorylated, Rad4 TOPBP1 coprecipitates with Rad3 ATR , suggesting that phosphorylation coordinates formation of an active checkpoint complex.

Results

Rad9, in common with many checkpoint proteins, is phosphorylated in response to DNA damage in a rad3 ATR -dependent manner ( Caspari et al. 2000b ). Rad3 is a member of the PI3 kinase-like protein kinase family (PIKK) and these unusual protein kinases favor the phosphorylation at TQ and SQ motifs ( Kim et al. 1999 ). S. pombe Rad9 contains five T/SQ sites ( Fig. 1A ).

Discussion

It has previously been reported that ATR–ATRIP complexes in human and yeast cells associate with DNA damage sites in a manner independent of the 9–1–1 complex and that the 9–1–1 complex similarly associates with sites of DNA damage independently of ATR–ATRIP ( Melo et al. 2001 ; Zou et al. 2003 ). A recent report in fission yeast further suggests that the mediator protein Crb2 (potentially an analog of P53BP1 and BRCA1) can also associate with sites of DNA damage, and that this is independent of both Rad3 ATR and of the 9–1–1 complex ( Du et al. 2003 ). Thus, several distinct protein complexes may be able to independently bind to damaged chromatin. Previously, we and others have demonstrated that successful transmission of the checkpoint signal to Chk1 requires the presence of all three of these protein complexes ( Caspari and Carr 1999 ). From studies of the individual phosphorylation events, it is also known that Rad3 ATR can phosphorylate its partner Rad26 ATRIP independently of other checkpoint components ( Edwards et al. 1999 ) and that the Rad3 ATR –Rad26 ATRIP complex can phosphorylate 9–1–1 components, but not Crb2 or Chk1, in the absence of Rad4 TOPBP1 function ( Harris et al. 2003 ). These data suggested a hierarchical organization of the checkpoint.

Conclusion

Most of the proteins involved in the DNA damage and DNA replication checkpoint have been identified, and the majority are highly conserved through evolution. Many features of the checkpoint pathways remain unexplained, including their apparent complexity and the fact that many of the same proteins participate in both the DNA damage and DNA replication responses. The data presented here begin to uncover the molecular organization of the checkpoint proteins following their recruitment to sites of DNA damage or collapsed DNA replication forks. We suggest that one of the reasons for the apparent complexity of the system is because it allows cells to distinguish between similar biochemical consequences of DNA damage (such as ssDNA-RPA complexes) that occurs in distinct circumstances (such as induced damage in G2 and collapsed replication forks). It is important to make these distinctions because different signaling responses to the cell cycle and the DNA repair apparatus will be appropriate in each case. Our data suggest that the Rad3 ATR -dependent phosphorylation of Rad9 promotes association between Rad9 and Rad4 TOPBP1 through phospho-specific BRCT-domain interactions during unperturbed S phase, and that this helps cells distinguish collapsed forks from DNA damage in G2 cells. It is intriguing that a phospho-specific BRCT-mediated interaction between BRCA1 and BACH1 in human cells ( Yu et al. 2003 ) is promoted by cyclin-dependent kinase activity against BACH1 in G2 and also by the G2 checkpoint. Together, these observations suggest that a combination of phosphorylation events can orchestrate the organization of the checkpoint apparatus before it is activated and that, upon activation, the consequent phospho-specific protein interactions dictate the downstream consequences of this activation.
