---
pmid: '21965549'
title: Homozygosity mapping and exome sequencing reveal GATAD1 mutation in autosomal
  recessive dilated cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Theis JL
- Sharpe KM
- Matsumoto ME
- Chai HS
- Nair AA
- Theis JD
- de Andrade M
- Wieben ED
- Michels VV
- Olson TM
journal: Circ Cardiovasc Genet
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3248690
doi: 10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.111.961052
---

# Homozygosity mapping and exome sequencing reveal GATAD1 mutation in autosomal recessive dilated cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Theis JL, Sharpe KM, Matsumoto ME, Chai HS, Nair AA, Theis JD, de Andrade M, Wieben ED, Michels VV, Olson TM
**Journal:** Circ Cardiovasc Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.111.961052](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.111.961052)
**PMC:** [PMC3248690](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3248690/)

## Abstract

1. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2011 Dec;4(6):585-94. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.111.961052. Epub 2011 Sep 30.

Homozygosity mapping and exome sequencing reveal GATAD1 mutation in autosomal 
recessive dilated cardiomyopathy.

Theis JL(1), Sharpe KM, Matsumoto ME, Chai HS, Nair AA, Theis JD, de Andrade M, 
Wieben ED, Michels VV, Olson TM.

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Genetics Research Laboratory, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 
55905, USA.

BACKGROUND: Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a heritable, genetically 
heterogeneous disorder that typically exhibits autosomal dominant inheritance. 
Genomic strategies enable discovery of novel, unsuspected molecular 
underpinnings of familial DCM. We performed genome-wide mapping and exome 
sequencing in a unique family wherein DCM segregated as an autosomal recessive 
(AR) trait.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Echocardiography in 17 adult descendants of first cousins 
revealed DCM in 2 female siblings and idiopathic left ventricular enlargement in 
their brother. Genotyping and linkage analysis mapped an AR DCM locus to 
chromosome arm 7q21, which was validated and refined by high-density 
homozygosity mapping. Exome sequencing of the affected sisters was then used as 
a complementary strategy for mutation discovery. An iterative bioinformatics 
process was used to filter >40,000 genetic variants, revealing a single shared 
homozygous missense mutation localized to the 7q21 critical region. The 
mutation, absent in HapMap, 1000 Genomes, and 474 ethnically matched controls, 
altered a conserved residue of GATAD1, encoding GATA zinc finger 
domain-containing protein 1. Thirteen relatives were heterozygous mutation 
carriers with no evidence of myocardial disease, even at advanced ages. 
Immunohistochemistry demonstrated nuclear localization of GATAD1 in left 
ventricular myocytes, yet subcellular expression and nuclear morphology were 
aberrant in the proband.
CONCLUSIONS: Linkage analysis and exome sequencing were used as synergistic 
genomic strategies to identify GATAD1 as a gene for AR DCM. GATAD1 binds to a 
histone modification site that regulates gene expression. Consistent with murine 
DCM caused by genetic disruption of histone deacetylases, the data implicate an 
inherited basis for epigenetic dysregulation in human heart failure.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.111.961052
PMCID: PMC3248690
PMID: 21965549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None
