---
pmid: '2687270'
title: Site of pyruvate formation and processing of mammalian S-adenosylmethionine
  decarboxylase proenzyme.
authors:
- Stanley BA
- Pegg AE
- Holm I
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1989'
full_text_available: false
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Site of pyruvate formation and processing of mammalian S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase proenzyme.
**Authors:** Stanley BA, Pegg AE, Holm I
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1989)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1989 Dec 15;264(35):21073-9.

Site of pyruvate formation and processing of mammalian S-adenosylmethionine 
decarboxylase proenzyme.

Stanley BA(1), Pegg AE, Holm I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Milton S. Hershey Medical 
Center, Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, Hershey 17033.

Mammalian S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase was expressed at a high level in an 
Escherichia coli mutant deficient in this enzyme. The proenzyme form of this 
enzyme was cleaved and processed to the mature decarboxylase which contains two 
pairs of nonidentical subunits, the larger of which contains a pyruvate 
prosthetic group. In order to determine the site of formation of the pyruvate, 
two approaches were used. First, the mammalian S-adenosylmethionine 
decarboxylase produced in E. coli was purified to homogeneity and the pyruvate 
converted to alanine by a reductive amination. The large subunit was then 
isolated by reversed phase high pressure liquid chromatography and the 
amino-terminal sequence determined and compared with the sequence of the 
proenzyme derived from its cDNA. These results indicated that the bond between 
glutamic acid 67 and serine 68 was the site of cleavage. Second, each of the 
serine residues in portion of the proenzyme likely to contain the cleavage site 
were altered by site-directed mutagenesis and the RNA produced from plasmids 
containing these mutations was translated in a reticulocyte lysate. The 
translation products were tested for processing and for S-adenosylmethionine 
decarboxylase activity. Altering the serine residues at positions 50, 66, and 69 
to alanines had little effect but changing serine at position 68 to alanine 
completely prevented both processing and activity. These results indicate that 
the serine residue at position 68 of the proenzyme which is in the underlined 
position in the sequence -Leu-Ser-Glu-Ser-Ser-Met- is the residue which is 
converted to the pyruvate prosthetic group in human S-adenosylmethionine 
decarboxylase.

PMID: 2687270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
