---
pmid: '22516433'
title: Proteomic analysis of microvesicles from plasma of healthy donors reveals high
  individual variability.
authors:
- Bastos-Amador P
- Royo F
- Gonzalez E
- Conde-Vancells J
- Palomo-Diez L
- Borras FE
- Falcon-Perez JM
journal: J Proteomics
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2012.03.054
---

# Proteomic analysis of microvesicles from plasma of healthy donors reveals high individual variability.
**Authors:** Bastos-Amador P, Royo F, Gonzalez E, Conde-Vancells J, Palomo-Diez L, Borras FE, Falcon-Perez JM
**Journal:** J Proteomics (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jprot.2012.03.054](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jprot.2012.03.054)

## Abstract

1. J Proteomics. 2012 Jun 27;75(12):3574-84. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2012.03.054.
Epub  2012 Apr 10.

Proteomic analysis of microvesicles from plasma of healthy donors reveals high 
individual variability.

Bastos-Amador P(1), Royo F, Gonzalez E, Conde-Vancells J, Palomo-Diez L, Borras 
FE, Falcon-Perez JM.

Author information:
(1)LIRAD-BST, Institut d'Investigació en Ciències de la Salut Germans Trias i 
Pujol, Barcelona, Badalona, Spain.

Healthy blood plasma is required for several therapeutic procedures. To maximize 
successful therapeutic outcomes it is critical to control the quality of blood 
plasma. Clearly initiatives to improve the safety of blood transfusions will 
have a high economical and social impact. A detailed knowledge of the 
composition of healthy blood plasma is essential to facilitate such 
improvements. Apart from free proteins, lipids and metabolites, blood plasma 
also contains cell-derived microvesicles, including exosomes and microparticles 
from several different cellular origins. In this study, we have purified 
microvesicles smaller than 220nm from plasma of healthy donors and performed 
proteomic, ultra-structural, biochemical and functional analyses. We have 
detected 161 microvesicle-associated proteins, including many associated with 
the complement and coagulation signal-transduction cascades. Several proteases 
and protease inhibitors associated with acute phase responses were present, 
indicating that these microvesicles may be involved in these processes. There 
was a remarkably high variability in the protein content of plasma from 
different donors. In addition, we report that this variability could be relevant 
for their interaction with cellular systems. This work provides valuable 
information on plasma microvesicles and a foundation to understand microvesicle 
biology and clinical implications.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jprot.2012.03.054
PMID: 22516433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
