---
pmid: '17943721'
title: HCCRBP-1 directly interacting with HCCR-1 induces tumorigenesis through P53
  stabilization.
authors:
- Ha SA
- Shin SM
- Lee YJ
- Kim S
- Kim HK
- Namkoong H
- Lee H
- Lee YS
- Cho YS
- Park YG
- Jeon HM
- Oh C
- Kim JW
journal: Int J Cancer
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/ijc.23146
---

# HCCRBP-1 directly interacting with HCCR-1 induces tumorigenesis through P53 stabilization.
**Authors:** Ha SA, Shin SM, Lee YJ, Kim S, Kim HK, Namkoong H, Lee H, Lee YS, Cho YS, Park YG, Jeon HM, Oh C, Kim JW
**Journal:** Int J Cancer (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ijc.23146](https://doi.org/10.1002/ijc.23146)

## Abstract

1. Int J Cancer. 2008 Feb 1;122(3):501-8. doi: 10.1002/ijc.23146.

HCCRBP-1 directly interacting with HCCR-1 induces tumorigenesis through P53 
stabilization.

Ha SA(1), Shin SM, Lee YJ, Kim S, Kim HK, Namkoong H, Lee H, Lee YS, Cho YS, 
Park YG, Jeon HM, Oh C, Kim JW.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Genetic Laboratory, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of 
Korea, Seoul 137-040, Korea.

Oncogene HCCR-1 functions as a negative regulator of the p53 and contributes to 
tumorigenesis of various human tissues. HCCR transgenic mice developed breast 
cancers but it is unknown how HCCR-1 contributes to human tumorigenesis. This 
study identified a HCCR-1-binding protein 1 (HCCRBP-1) as an HCCR binding 
partner by performing yeast two hybrid screening. Their endogenous interaction 
was further confirmed by coimmunoprecipitation experiments. These two proteins 
colocalized in the mitochondria. HCCRBP-1 was overexpressed in various human 
tumors. In addition, HCCRBP-1 alone converted NIH/3T3 cells into tumor cells in 
combination with no other oncogenes. HCCRBP-1 induced tumorigenesis by markedly 
activating PKC activities but decreasing the pro-apoptotic PKC alpha and PKC 
delta isoform levels. We observed that p53 stabilization also occurred with 
functional impairment in HCCRBP-1-transfected 293 cells, as indicated by 
defective induction of p21, MDM2 and bax. Indeed, HCCRBP-1 decreased p21 
promoter activity probably via p53 stabilization leading to the defective 
function. These results indicate that HCCRBP-1 oncogene induces p53 
stabilization and thereby contributes to tumorigenesis.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.23146
PMID: 17943721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
