---
pmid: '18976916'
title: PAR-1 kinase regulates epithelial detachment and directional protrusion of
  migrating border cells.
authors:
- McDonald JA
- Khodyakova A
- Aranjuez G
- Dudley C
- Montell DJ
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2593744
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2008.09.041
---

# PAR-1 kinase regulates epithelial detachment and directional protrusion of migrating border cells.
**Authors:** McDonald JA, Khodyakova A, Aranjuez G, Dudley C, Montell DJ
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cub.2008.09.041](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2008.09.041)
**PMC:** [PMC2593744](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2593744/)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2008 Nov 11;18(21):1659-67. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2008.09.041. Epub
2008  Oct 30.

PAR-1 kinase regulates epithelial detachment and directional protrusion of 
migrating border cells.

McDonald JA(1), Khodyakova A, Aranjuez G, Dudley C, Montell DJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland 
Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. mcdonaj@ccf.org

BACKGROUND: Many cells that migrate during normal embryonic development or in 
metastatic cancer first detach from an epithelium. However, this step is often 
difficult to observe directly in vivo, and the mechanisms controlling the 
ability of cells to leave the epithelium are poorly understood. In addition, 
once cells detach, they must assume a migratory phenotype, involving changes in 
cytoskeletal and signaling dynamics. Drosophila border cells provide a model 
system in which a combination of forward genetics and live-cell imaging can 
allow researchers to investigate the cellular and molecular mechanisms of 
epithelial cell detachment and migration in vivo.
RESULTS: We identified the Drosophila homolog of the serine/threonine kinase 
PAR-1 (MARK/Kin1) in a screen for mutations that disrupt border cell migration. 
Previous studies identified two proteins, Apontic and Notch, that indirectly 
affect border cell detachment by regulating transcription of downstream targets. 
In contrast, PAR-1 directly modulates apical-basal polarity between border cells 
and epithelial cells to promote detachment. Furthermore, PAR-1, but not the 
apical polarity complex protein PAR-3, promotes the directionality of transient 
cell protrusions, which border cells require for sensing the chemoattractant 
gradient.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that PAR-1-dependent apical-basal polarity is required 
for proper detachment of migratory border cells from neighboring epithelial 
cells. Moreover, polarity controlled by PAR-1 influences the ability of 
migratory cells to sense direction, a critical feature of migration. Thus, this 
work reveals new insights into two distinct, but essential, steps of epithelial 
cell migration.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2008.09.041
PMCID: PMC2593744
PMID: 18976916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
