---
pmid: '21068390'
title: Bifunctional apoptosis regulator (BAR), an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated
  E3 ubiquitin ligase, modulates BI-1 protein stability and function in ER Stress.
authors:
- Rong J
- Chen L
- Toth JI
- Tcherpakov M
- Petroski MD
- Reed JC
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3020754
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.175232
---

# Bifunctional apoptosis regulator (BAR), an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated E3 ubiquitin ligase, modulates BI-1 protein stability and function in ER Stress.
**Authors:** Rong J, Chen L, Toth JI, Tcherpakov M, Petroski MD, Reed JC
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110.175232](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.175232)
**PMC:** [PMC3020754](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3020754/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 14;286(2):1453-63. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.175232. Epub
2010  Nov 10.

Bifunctional apoptosis regulator (BAR), an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated 
E3 ubiquitin ligase, modulates BI-1 protein stability and function in ER Stress.

Rong J(1), Chen L, Toth JI, Tcherpakov M, Petroski MD, Reed JC.

Author information:
(1)Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Accumulation of misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) causes ER 
stress and activates inositol-requiring protein-1 (IRE1), among other 
ER-associated signaling proteins of the unfolded protein response (UPR) in 
mammalian cells. IRE1 signaling becomes attenuated under prolonged ER stress. 
The mechanisms by which this occurs are not well understood. An ER resident 
protein, Bax inhibitor-1 (BI-1), interacts with IRE1 and directly inhibits IRE1 
activity. However, little is known about regulation of the BI-1 protein. We show 
here that bifunctional apoptosis regulator (BAR) functions as an ER-associated 
RING-type E3 ligase, interacts with BI-1, and promotes proteasomal degradation 
of BI-1. Overexpression of BAR reduced BI-1 protein levels in a RING-dependent 
manner. Conversely, knockdown of endogenous BAR increased BI-1 protein levels 
and enhanced inhibition of IRE1 signaling during ER stress. We also found that 
the levels of endogenous BAR were reduced under prolonged ER stress. Our 
findings suggest that post-translational regulation of the BI-1 protein by E3 
ligase BAR contributes to the dynamic control of IRE1 signaling during ER 
stress.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.175232
PMCID: PMC3020754
PMID: 21068390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Accumulation of misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) causes ER stress and activates inositol-requiring protein-1 (IRE1), among other ER-associated signaling proteins of the unfolded protein response (UPR) in mammalian cells. IRE1 signaling becomes attenuated under prolonged ER stress. The mechanisms by which this occurs are not well understood. An ER resident protein, Bax inhibitor-1 (BI-1), interacts with IRE1 and directly inhibits IRE1 activity. However, little is known about regulation of the BI-1 protein. We show here that bifunctional apoptosis regulator (BAR) functions as an ER-associated RING-type E3 ligase, interacts with BI-1, and promotes proteasomal degradation of BI-1. Overexpression of BAR reduced BI-1 protein levels in a RING-dependent manner. Conversely, knockdown of endogenous BAR increased BI-1 protein levels and enhanced inhibition of IRE1 signaling during ER stress. We also found that the levels of endogenous BAR were reduced under prolonged ER stress. Our findings suggest that post-translational regulation of the BI-1 protein by E3 ligase BAR contributes to the dynamic control of IRE1 signaling during ER stress.

Introduction

The lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) 2 possesses various molecular chaperones and enzymes that ensure proper folding of newly synthesized proteins destined for secretion or expression as membrane-bound proteins. Factors that compromise the folding capacity of the ER result in accumulation of unfolded/misfolded proteins, causing the phenomenon of ER stress ( 1 ). ER stress is triggered by multiple cellular disturbances, including glucose deprivation, alterations of Ca 2+ concentrations in the ER, perturbations of the redox state of the ER lumen (caused by hypoxia, oxidative insults, or reactive chemicals), viral infection, accumulation of mutant proteins, and other stimuli. ER stress has been associated with a variety of diseases, including ischemia, neurodegenerative diseases, cancer, diabetes, viral infections, inflammatory bowel disease, and a variety of genetic disorders that result in mutant proteins that fail to fold properly, among other causes ( 2 ). At least three types of ER stress transducers have been identified in ER membranes in mammalian cells: IRE1, protein kinase RNA-like ER kinase (PERK), and activating transcription factor-6 (ATF6). Each initiates a distinct signaling pathway, collectively named the unfolded protein response (UPR).

Among these three known ER stress transducers, only IRE1 is highly conserved from yeast to mammals. IRE1 contains a kinase domain and a kinase-extension nuclease domain with endoribonuclease activity. During ER stress, dimerization/oligomerization and trans-autophosphorylation of IRE1 are coupled with endoribonuclease activation ( 3 ), which cleaves mRNA encoding transcriptional factor XBP1 (known as HAC1 mRNA in yeast). In parallel, IRE1 also interacts with tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 2 (TRAF2) in mammals, which initiates phosphorylation cascades that include apoptotic signaling kinase-1 (ASK1) and downstream stress kinases, c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNKs) and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinases (p38 MAPKs) ( 4 ). The role of UPR is to promote cellular adaptation to ER stress by increasing the folding capacity of the ER, reducing the unfolded protein load, and enhancing ER-associated protein degradation (ERAD). However, components of the UPR can also trigger cell death if protein homeostasis is not restored ( 1 , 5 ). Although it remains poorly understood how stressed cells make decisions regarding survival versus death, a recent study provides some insights by revealing that the duration of individual UPR signal transduction events can be differentially regulated. For example, during persistent ER stress, PERK activation (which inhibits mRNA translation by phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor 2α (eIF2α)) can be sustained, whereas IRE1 activation becomes attenuated ( 6 ). In this case, IRE1-mediated XBP1 mRNA splicing was shown to promote cell survival. The mechanism by which IRE1 signaling is selectively suppressed during prolonged ER stress is unknown.

BI-1, an evolutionarily conserved ER membrane protein, was recently found to negatively inhibit IRE1 activity ( 7 ). Indeed, BI-1 knock-out mice showed enhanced XBP1 mRNA splicing and JNK phosphorylation in vivo ( 8 , 9 ). The inhibitory effect of BI-1 on IRE1 signaling is specific, in that eIF2α phosphorylation downstream of PERK activation is not altered in BI-1 knock-out mice ( 8 ). BI-1 forms protein complexes with IRE1 ( 7 , 9 ), and the endoribonuclease activity of IRE1 was reported to be directly suppressed in vitro by BI-1 protein ( 7 ). Importantly, in contrast to time-dependent decline of IRE1 activation after prolonged ER stress, IRE1 activation and downstream XBP1 mRNA splicing were sustained in BI-1 knock-out cells ( 7 ), suggesting BI-1 plays a crucial role in the dynamic control of IRE1 activation during ER stress. However, little is known about the mechanisms by which BI-1 is regulated.

Here we studied the post-translational regulation of the BI-1 protein by BAR. We discovered that BI-1 interacts with BAR, a RING-type E3 ligase on the ER membrane ( 10 ). BAR induces BI-1 ubiquitination and promotes BI-1 proteasomal degradation, as well as catalyzing its own ubiquitination in a RING-dependent manner. BAR thus opposes BI-1, removing an inhibitory influence on IRE1 signaling. We also observed that levels of endogenous BAR protein are reduced by sustained ER stress. Taken together, our findings suggest that post-translational regulation of BI-1 by ER-associated E3 ligase BAR contributes to regulation of IRE1 signaling during ER stress.

DISCUSSION

BI-1 is an evolutionarily conserved ER resident protein that functions to modulate the UPR in plants and animals ( 7 , 25 – 27 ). Three parallel ER stress transducers in mammals have been characterized, namely IRE1, PERK, and ATF6. It has been reported that IRE1 signaling can become selectively attenuated under prolonged ER stress relative to other UPR signaling components such as PERK, suggesting that specific modulators of IRE1 exist ( 6 ). Recently, BI-1 was found to directly interact with IRE1 and negatively regulate IRE1/XBP1 signaling ( 7 ), making BI-1 a candidate regulator of IRE1 signaling. Little is known about how BI-1 is regulated. Numerous efforts to generate BI-1 antibodies have been unsuccessful making tracking of the endogenous BI-1 protein a challenge, and leaving only mRNA studies to provide guidance. The levels of BI-1 mRNA vary among normal tissues, and have been reported to be modulated by hypoxia and ER stress ( 8 , 9 , 27 , 28 ). Our findings indicate that BAR is an E3 ligase of the ER that plays a role in regulating BI-1 protein levels. The rapid decline of BAR protein levels during ER stress suggests that post-translational regulation of the BI-1 protein is dynamic and could contribute to the selective control of IRE1 signaling in cells undergoing prolonged ER stress. Indeed, we observed increased BI-1 expression in cells lacking endogenous BAR expression and selective inhibition of IRE1 signaling with intact PERK activation when cells with siRNA-mediated reductions in BAR were treated with ER stress inducers.

Although we focused on IRE1 signaling as an end point for inferring cellular activity of BI-1, the mechanisms by which BI-1 modulates ER stress responses appear to be multifaceted. Although BI-1 directly interacts with IRE1 and inhibits IRE1 activation ( 7 ), BI-1 also inhibits cell death induced by pro-apoptotic protein Bax ( 11 , 25 , 29 , 30 ), which regulates mitochondrial outer membrane permeability ( 31 ), but also binds and activates IRE1 ( 32 ). In addition, BI-1 interacts with anti-apoptotic proteins Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL in ER membranes and regulates ER Ca 2+ homeostasis, which is essential for normal ER function ( 33 , 34 ). Finally, BI-1 is reported to activate redox-sensitive transcription factor Nrf-2 and protect cells from oxidative stress ( 26 ). It remains to be determined how BI-1 coordinates multiple regulatory responses when confronted with ER stress-associated disturbances.

Regulation of BI-1 signaling could occur at multiple levels. Here, we studied post-translational regulation of BI-1 protein stability and found that BAR has E3 ligase activity toward BI-1. Rapid changes of BAR protein levels in cells undergoing ER stress suggest that this level of regulation is dynamic and relevant to ER stress signaling. Regulation of BI-1 could occur at other levels, including transcription, translation, and post-translational modification. Transcriptional regulation of BI-1 has been studied previously ( 7 , 8 , 27 , 28 ). Whereas one study found no change of BI-1 mRNA levels in cells treated with the ER stress inducer tunicamycin ( 7 ), other studies reported induction of BI-1 mRNA when confronted with ER stress stimuli ( 8 , 27 , 28 ). The results have implied that different types of cells might tailor BI-1 levels, depending on the duration and severity of ER stress. Moreover, BI-1 expression at the mRNA level becomes altered with disease, as shown by decreased expression in the liver of obese mice ( 9 ) and increased BI-1 mRNA expression in human cancers ( 35 – 37 ). The unavailability of antibodies recognizing BI-1 has hampered studies of BI-1 protein regulation.

E3 ligases may interact with different E2s and catalyze distinct types of ubiquitin chain polymerization ( 38 ). K48-linked poly-Ub chains typically target proteins for degradation by the 26 S proteasome, whereas K63-linked poly-Ub chains act as a scaffolds for assembling signaling complexes involved in inflammation, DNA repair, and protein trafficking ( 15 ), as well as possibly serving as a tag for lysosomal destruction ( 20 ). We show here that BAR-mediated K48-linked poly-Ub chain formation on BI-1 and induced proteasomal degradation of BI-1 protein. On the other hand, we also found that BAR was able to collaborate with the K63-specific E2 complex Ubc13-Uev1A in vitro ( supplemental Fig. S12 ), which specifically forms K63-linked poly-Ub chains ( 15 ). Furthermore, by using both a K63-specific ubiquitin antibody and by overexpressing K63-only mutant ubiquitin protein, we detected evidence of K63-linked poly-Ub chains on BAR ( supplemental Fig. S2 and Fig. 2 D ), suggesting that BAR may also serve as an E3 ligase for catalyzing K63-linked poly-Ub chains. The ability of some E3 ligases to catalyze both K48- and K63-linked ubiquitin chains has been reported previously ( 38 ). In agreement with previous reports ( 39 , 40 ), we detected an increase in the K63-linked poly-Ub signal after MG132 treatment ( supplemental Fig. S2 ), which may be an indication of mixed K48/K63 chains whereby the K48 poly-Ub component mediates proteasomal degradation. BAR also probably mediates formation of non-K48/non-K63-linked poly-Ub chains, given the strong ubiquitination of BAR observed in cells expressing mutant ubiquitin (K48R). Recently, K11 has been identified as an abundant site of ubiquitin conjugation in vivo ( 16 ).

The finding that BAR is an ER-associated RING-type E3 ligase involved in the degradation of ER membrane proteins ( e.g. BI-1) raised the possibility that BAR is a novel ERAD component that targets the degradation of a subset of misfolded proteins in the ER. To this end, we studied by immunoprecipitation experiments the interaction of BAR with MmUbc6 and MmUbc7, mammalian homologs of yeast ER-associated E2s, Ubc6 and Ubc7, respectively, which are implicated in ERAD ( 41 ). We found MmUbc7 associated with BAR in a RING-dependent manner ( supplemental Fig. S13 ). However, when we further assessed the role of BAR in degradation of two bona fide ERAD substrates, TCR-α and CD3-δ ( 41 , 42 ), overexpression of BAR did not affect the steady-state levels of either TCR-α or CD3-δ ( supplemental Fig. S14 ). Thus, either BAR is not involved in ERAD or it plays a role distinct from other RING-type of E3 ligases that have been previously implicated in ERAD ( 43 ).

Analogous to BI-1, the BAR protein may have several functions in ER membranes besides the BI-1-directed E3 ligase activity documented here. In this regard, both BI-1 and BAR were originally discovered using a functional genomics method in which human cDNA libraries were screened in yeast for suppressors of cell death induced by ectopic expression of mammalian Bax ( 10 , 11 ). Thus, BI-1 and BAR appear to share some unknown function by which they oppose the cytotoxic activity of Bax in yeast, despite the role of BAR as an antagonist of BI-1 with respect to regulation of protein degradation. Like BI-1, BAR reportedly associates with Bcl-2 and Bcl-X L (but not Bax) in ER membranes and inhibits apoptosis ( 10 ). In addition to at least one (possibly as many as three) transmembrane domain, the BAR protein also possesses a coiled-coil domain sharing sequence similarity with protein interaction domains found in the ER membrane protein Bap31, the Huntingtin-interacting protein (Hip), and the Hip protein interactor (Hippi) ( 21 , 44 ). BAR also reportedly binds to these proteins ( e.g. Bap31, Hip, and Hippi), which have all been reported to regulate apoptosis ( 21 ). Of these, Bap31 has been claimed to regulate ER Ca 2+ homeostasis ( 45 ), reminiscent of BI-1 ( 33 , 34 ). Thus, several intriguing connections intertwine BAR with BI-1 and other ER proteins implicated in regulation of cell life and death, serving as a foundation for future investigations of the mechanisms of these proteins in the context of ER stress.
