---
pmid: '12072413'
title: 1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) and 24R,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) modulate growth
  plate chondrocyte physiology via protein kinase C-dependent phosphorylation of extracellular
  signal-regulated kinase 1/2 mitogen-activated protein kinase.
authors:
- Schwartz Z
- Ehland H
- Sylvia VL
- Larsson D
- Hardin RR
- Bingham V
- Lopez D
- Dean DD
- Boyan BD
journal: Endocrinology
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1210/endo.143.7.8889
---

# 1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) and 24R,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) modulate growth plate chondrocyte physiology via protein kinase C-dependent phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 mitogen-activated protein kinase.
**Authors:** Schwartz Z, Ehland H, Sylvia VL, Larsson D, Hardin RR, Bingham V, Lopez D, Dean DD, Boyan BD
**Journal:** Endocrinology (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1210/endo.143.7.8889](https://doi.org/10.1210/endo.143.7.8889)

## Abstract

1. Endocrinology. 2002 Jul;143(7):2775-86. doi: 10.1210/endo.143.7.8889.

1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) and 24R,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) modulate growth 
plate chondrocyte physiology via protein kinase C-dependent phosphorylation of 
extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 mitogen-activated protein kinase.

Schwartz Z(1), Ehland H, Sylvia VL, Larsson D, Hardin RR, Bingham V, Lopez D, 
Dean DD, Boyan BD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedics, University of Texas Health Science Center, San 
Antonio 78229, USA.

Membrane-mediated increases in protein kinase C (PKC) activity and PKC-dependent 
physiological responses of growth plate chondrocytes to vitamin D metabolites 
depend on the state of endochondral maturation; 1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) 
[1alpha,25-(OH)(2)D(3)] regulates growth zone (GC) cells, whereas 
24R,25-(OH)(2)D(3) regulates resting zone (RC) cells. Different mechanisms, 
including protein kinase A signaling, mediate the effects of 
1alpha,25-(OH)(2)D(3) and 24R,25-(OH)(2)D(3) on PKC, suggesting that different 
mechanisms may also regulate any MAPK involvement in the physiological 
responses. This study used confluent cultures of rat costochondral chondrocytes 
as a model. 1alpha,25-(OH)(2)D(3) stimulated MAPK specific activity in GC in a 
time- and dose-dependent manner, evident within 9 min. 24R,25-(OH)(2)D(3) 
stimulated MAPK in RC; increases were dose dependent, occurred after 9 min, and 
were greatest at 90 min. In both cells the effect was due to ERK1/2 activation 
(p42 > p44 in GC; p42 = p44 in RC). MAPK activation was dependent on PKC, but 
not protein kinase A. The effect of 1alpha,25-(OH)(2)D(3) required phospholipase 
C, and the effect of 24R,25-(OH)(2)D(3) required phospholipase D. Inhibition of 
cyclooxygenase activity reduced the effect of 1alpha,25-(OH)(2)D(3) on MAPK in 
GC and enhanced the effect of 24R,25-(OH)(2)D(3) in RC. Based on MAPK inhibition 
with PD98059, ERK1/2 MAPK mediated the effect of 24R,25-(OH)(2)D(3) on 
[(3)H]thymidine incorporation and [(35)S]sulfate incorporation by RC, but only 
partially mediated the effect of 1alpha,25-(OH)(2)D(3) on GC. ERK1/2 was not 
involved in the regulation of alkaline phosphatase specific activity by either 
metabolite. This paper supports the hypothesis that 1alpha,25-(OH)(2)D(3) 
regulates the physiology of GC via rapid membrane-mediated signaling pathways, 
and some, but not all, of the response to 1alpha,25-(OH)(2)D(3) is via the ERK 
family of MAPKs. In contrast, 24R,25-(OH)(2)D(3) exerts its effects on RC via 
PKC-dependent MAPK. Whereas 1alpha,25-(OH)(2)D(3) increases MAPK activity via 
phospholipase C and increased prostaglandin production, 24R,25-(OH)(2)D(3) 
increases MAPK via phospholipase D and decreased prostaglandin production. The 
cell specificity, metabolite stereospecificity, and the dependence on PKC argue 
for the participation of membrane receptors for 1alpha,25-(OH)(2)D(3) and 
24R,25-(OH)(2)D(3) in the regulation of ERK1/2 in the growth plate.

DOI: 10.1210/endo.143.7.8889
PMID: 12072413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
