---
pmid: '1309608'
title: 'Determination of ligand-binding specificity by alternative splicing: two distinct
  growth factor receptors encoded by a single gene.'
authors:
- Miki T
- Bottaro DP
- Fleming TP
- Smith CL
- Burgess WH
- Chan AM
- Aaronson SA
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1992'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC48213
doi: 10.1073/pnas.89.1.246
---

# Determination of ligand-binding specificity by alternative splicing: two distinct growth factor receptors encoded by a single gene.
**Authors:** Miki T, Bottaro DP, Fleming TP, Smith CL, Burgess WH, Chan AM, Aaronson SA
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.89.1.246](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.89.1.246)
**PMC:** [PMC48213](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC48213/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 Jan 1;89(1):246-50. doi: 10.1073/pnas.89.1.246.

Determination of ligand-binding specificity by alternative splicing: two 
distinct growth factor receptors encoded by a single gene.

Miki T(1), Bottaro DP, Fleming TP, Smith CL, Burgess WH, Chan AM, Aaronson SA.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Biology, National Cancer Institute, 
Bethesda, MD 20892.

Expression cDNA cloning and structural analysis of the human keratinocyte growth 
factor receptor (KGFR) revealed identity with one of the fibroblast growth 
factor (FGF) receptors encoded by the bek gene (FGFR-2), except for a divergent 
stretch of 49 amino acids in their extracellular domains. Binding assays 
demonstrated that the KGFR was a high-affinity receptor for both KGF and acidic 
FGF, while FGFR-2 showed high affinity for basic and acidic FGF but no 
detectable binding by KGF. Genomic analysis of the bek gene revealed two 
alternative exons responsible for the region of divergence between the two 
receptors. The KGFR transcript was specific to epithelial cells, and it appeared 
to be differentially regulated with respect to the alternative FGFR-2 
transcript. Thus, two growth factor receptors with different ligand-binding 
specificities and expression patterns are encoded by alternative transcripts of 
the same gene.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.89.1.246
PMCID: PMC48213
PMID: 1309608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
