---
pmid: '18401410'
title: Endothelins are vascular-derived axonal guidance cues for developing sympathetic
  neurons.
authors:
- Makita T
- Sucov HM
- Gariepy CE
- Yanagisawa M
- Ginty DD
journal: Nature
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2713667
doi: 10.1038/nature06859
---

# Endothelins are vascular-derived axonal guidance cues for developing sympathetic neurons.
**Authors:** Makita T, Sucov HM, Gariepy CE, Yanagisawa M, Ginty DD
**Journal:** Nature (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature06859](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature06859)
**PMC:** [PMC2713667](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2713667/)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2008 Apr 10;452(7188):759-63. doi: 10.1038/nature06859.

Endothelins are vascular-derived axonal guidance cues for developing sympathetic 
neurons.

Makita T(1), Sucov HM, Gariepy CE, Yanagisawa M, Ginty DD.

Author information:
(1)The Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience, Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 
21205, USA.

During development, sympathetic neurons extend axons along a myriad of distinct 
trajectories, often consisting of arteries, to innervate one of a large variety 
of distinct final target tissues. Whether or not subsets of neurons within 
complex sympathetic ganglia are predetermined to innervate select end-organs is 
unknown. Here we demonstrate in mouse embryos that the endothelin family member 
Edn3 (ref. 1), acting through the endothelin receptor EdnrA (refs 2, 3), directs 
extension of axons of a subset of sympathetic neurons from the superior cervical 
ganglion to a preferred intermediate target, the external carotid artery, which 
serves as the gateway to select targets, including the salivary glands. These 
findings establish a previously unknown mechanism of axonal pathfinding 
involving vascular-derived endothelins, and have broad implications for 
endothelins as general mediators of axonal growth and guidance in the developing 
nervous system. Moreover, they suggest a model in which newborn sympathetic 
neurons distinguish and choose between distinct vascular trajectories to 
innervate their appropriate end organs.

DOI: 10.1038/nature06859
PMCID: PMC2713667
PMID: 18401410 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
