---
pmid: '10908344'
title: The human RAD18 gene product interacts with HHR6A and HHR6B.
authors:
- Xin H
- Lin W
- Sumanasekera W
- Zhang Y
- Wu X
- Wang Z
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC102657
doi: 10.1093/nar/28.14.2847
---

# The human RAD18 gene product interacts with HHR6A and HHR6B.
**Authors:** Xin H, Lin W, Sumanasekera W, Zhang Y, Wu X, Wang Z
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/28.14.2847](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/28.14.2847)
**PMC:** [PMC102657](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC102657/)

## Abstract

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Jul 15;28(14):2847-54. doi: 10.1093/nar/28.14.2847.

The human RAD18 gene product interacts with HHR6A and HHR6B.

Xin H(1), Lin W, Sumanasekera W, Zhang Y, Wu X, Wang Z.

Author information:
(1)306 Health Sciences Research Building, Graduate Center for Toxicology, 
University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536, USA.

During DNA replication, lesion bypass is an important cellular response to 
unrepaired damage in the genome. In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Rad6 and 
Rad18 are required for both the error-free and error-prone lesion bypass 
mechanisms. Furthermore, Rad6-Rad18 interaction is thought to be critical at an 
early step during lesion bypass in yeast. Two closely related human homologs of 
yeast Rad6 have been identified as HHR6A and HHR6B. Here, we report a 
full-length cDNA coding for the human homolog of yeast Rad18. The human RAD18 
gene codes for a protein of 484 amino acid residues with a calculated molecular 
weight of 54 804 Da, and the gene is localized to chromosome 3 between reference 
intervals D3S3591 and D3S1283. Human RAD18 protein (hRAD18) was found to 
interact with HHR6A and HHR6B. When co-expressed in yeast cells, stable 
hRAD18-HHR6A and hRAD18-HHR6B protein complexes were identified and purified to 
near homogeneity. Thus, through interaction and complex formation with HHR6A and 
HHR6B, RAD18 protein may play an important role in lesion bypass mechanisms in 
humans. Consistent with its role as a fundamental lesion bypass protein, the 
RAD18 gene is ubiquitously expressed in various human tissues.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/28.14.2847
PMCID: PMC102657
PMID: 10908344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
