---
pmid: '2038319'
title: Identification of a GTPase-activating protein homolog in Schizosaccharomyces
  pombe.
authors:
- Imai Y
- Miyake S
- Hughes DA
- Yamamoto M
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '1991'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC360150
doi: 10.1128/mcb.11.6.3088-3094.1991
---

# Identification of a GTPase-activating protein homolog in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
**Authors:** Imai Y, Miyake S, Hughes DA, Yamamoto M
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1128/mcb.11.6.3088-3094.1991](https://doi.org/10.1128/mcb.11.6.3088-3094.1991)
**PMC:** [PMC360150](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC360150/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 Jun;11(6):3088-94. doi: 10.1128/mcb.11.6.3088-3094.1991.

Identification of a GTPase-activating protein homolog in Schizosaccharomyces 
pombe.

Imai Y(1), Miyake S, Hughes DA, Yamamoto M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, University of 
Tokyo, Japan.

Loss of function of the Schizosaccharomyces pombe gap1 gene results in the same 
phenotypes as those caused by an activated ras1 mutation, i.e., hypersensitivity 
to the mating factor and inability to perform efficient mating. Sequence 
analysis of gap1 indicates that it encodes a homolog of the mammalian Ras 
GTPase-activating protein (GAP). The predicted gap1 gene product has 766 amino 
acids with relatively short N- and C-terminal regions flanking the conserved 
core sequence of GAP. Genetic analysis suggests that S. pombe Gap1 functions 
primarily as a negative regulator of Ras1, like S. cerevisiae GAP homologs 
encoded by IRA1 and IRA2, but is unlikely to be a downstream effector of the Ras 
protein, a role proposed for mammalian GAP. Thus, Gap1 and Ste6, a putative 
GDP-GTP-exchanging protein for Ras1 previously identified, appear to play 
antagonistic roles in the Ras-GTPase cycle in S. pombe. Furthermore, we suggest 
that this Ras-GTPase cycle involves the ra12 gene product, another positive 
regulator of Ras1 whose homologs have not been identified in other organisms, 
which could function either as a second GDP-GTP-exchanging protein or as a 
factor that negatively regulates Gap1 activity.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.11.6.3088-3094.1991
PMCID: PMC360150
PMID: 2038319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
