---
pmid: '11448776'
title: CAPRI regulates Ca(2+)-dependent inactivation of the Ras-MAPK pathway.
authors:
- Lockyer PJ
- Kupzig S
- Cullen PJ
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0960-9822(01)00261-5
---

# CAPRI regulates Ca(2+)-dependent inactivation of the Ras-MAPK pathway.
**Authors:** Lockyer PJ, Kupzig S, Cullen PJ
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0960-9822(01)00261-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0960-9822(01)00261-5)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2001 Jun 26;11(12):981-6. doi: 10.1016/s0960-9822(01)00261-5.

CAPRI regulates Ca(2+)-dependent inactivation of the Ras-MAPK pathway.

Lockyer PJ(1), Kupzig S, Cullen PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medical Sciences, University of 
Bristol, BS8 1TD, Bristol, United Kingdom. P.J.Lockyer@bristol.ac.uk

Ca(2+) is a universal second messenger that is critical for cell growth and is 
intimately associated with many Ras-dependent cellular processes such as 
proliferation and differentiation. Ras is a small GTP binding protein that 
operates as a molecular switch regulating the control of gene expression, cell 
growth, and differentiation through a pathway from receptors to 
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs). A role for intracellular Ca(2+) in 
the activation of Ras has been previously demonstrated, e.g., via the 
nonreceptor tyrosine kinase PYK2 and by Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent guanine 
nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs) such as Ras-GRF; however, there is no 
Ca(2+)-dependent mechanism for direct inactivation. An important advance toward 
greater understanding of the complex coordination within the Ras-signaling 
network is the spatio-temporal analysis of signaling events in vivo. Here, we 
describe the identification of CAPRI (Ca(2+)-promoted Ras inactivator), a 
Ca(2+)-dependent Ras GTPase-activating protein (GAP) that switches off the 
Ras-MAPK pathway following a stimulus that elevates intracellular Ca(2+). 
Analysis of the spatio-temporal dynamics of CAPRI indicates that Ca(2+) 
regulates the GAP by a fast C2 domain-dependent translocation mechanism.

DOI: 10.1016/s0960-9822(01)00261-5
PMID: 11448776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
