---
pmid: '12944386'
title: In vivo recruitment of XPC to UV-induced cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers by the
  DDB2 gene product.
authors:
- Fitch ME
- Nakajima S
- Yasui A
- Ford JM
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M307254200
---

# In vivo recruitment of XPC to UV-induced cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers by the DDB2 gene product.
**Authors:** Fitch ME, Nakajima S, Yasui A, Ford JM
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M307254200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M307254200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 21;278(47):46906-10. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M307254200. Epub 
2003 Aug 27.

In vivo recruitment of XPC to UV-induced cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers by the 
DDB2 gene product.

Fitch ME(1), Nakajima S, Yasui A, Ford JM.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Medicine and Genetics, Division of Oncology, Stanford 
University School of Medicine, 269 Campus Drive, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

The initial step in mammalian nucleotide excision repair (NER) of the major 
UV-induced photoproducts, cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPDs) and 6-4 
photoproducts (6-4PPs), requires lesion recognition. It is believed that the 
heterodimeric proteins XPC/hHR23B and UV-DDB (UV-damaged DNA binding factor, 
composed of the p48 and p127 subunits) perform this function in genomic DNA, but 
their requirement and lesion specificity in vivo remains unknown. Using 
repair-deficient xeroderma pigmentosum (XP)-A cells that stably express 
photoproduct-specific photolyases, we determined the binding characteristics of 
p48 and XPC to either CPDs or 6-4PPs in vivo. p48 localized to UV-irradiated 
sites that contained either CPDs or 6-4PPs. However, XPC localized only to 
UV-irradiated sites that contained 6-4PPs, suggesting that XPC does not 
efficiently recognize CPDs in vivo. XPC did localize to CPDs when p48 was 
overexpressed in the same cell, signifying that p48 activates the recruitment of 
XPC to CPDs and may be the initial recognition factor in the NER pathway.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M307254200
PMID: 12944386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
