---
pmid: '16139212'
title: Arabidopsis KNOXI proteins activate cytokinin biosynthesis.
authors:
- Yanai O
- Shani E
- Dolezal K
- Tarkowski P
- Sablowski R
- Sandberg G
- Samach A
- Ori N
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2005.07.060
---

# Arabidopsis KNOXI proteins activate cytokinin biosynthesis.
**Authors:** Yanai O, Shani E, Dolezal K, Tarkowski P, Sablowski R, Sandberg G, Samach A, Ori N
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cub.2005.07.060](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2005.07.060)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2005 Sep 6;15(17):1566-71. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2005.07.060.

Arabidopsis KNOXI proteins activate cytokinin biosynthesis.

Yanai O(1), Shani E, Dolezal K, Tarkowski P, Sablowski R, Sandberg G, Samach A, 
Ori N.

Author information:
(1)The Robert H. Smith Institute of Plant Sciences and Genetics in Agriculture, 
Faculty of Agricultural, Food, and Environmental Quality Sciences, The Hebrew 
University of Jerusalem, P.O. Box 12, Rehovot 76100, Israel.

Plant architecture is shaped through the continuous formation of organs by 
meristems. Class I KNOTTED1-like homeobox (KNOXI) genes are expressed in the 
shoot apical meristem (SAM) and are required for SAM maintenance. KNOXI proteins 
and cytokinin, a plant hormone intimately associated with the regulation of cell 
division, share overlapping roles, such as meristem maintenance and repression 
of senescence, but their mechanistic and hierarchical relationship have yet to 
be defined. Here, we show that activation of three different KNOXI proteins 
using an inducible system resulted in a rapid increase in mRNA levels of the 
cytokinin biosynthesis gene isopentenyl transferase 7 (AtIPT7) and in the 
activation of ARR5, a cytokinin response factor. We further demonstrate a rapid 
and dramatic increase in cytokinin levels following activation of the KNOXI 
protein SHOOT MERISTEMLESS (STM). Application of exogenous cytokinin or 
expression of a cytokinin biosynthesis gene through the STM promoter partially 
rescued the stm mutant. We conclude that activation of cytokinin biosynthesis 
mediates KNOXI function in meristem maintenance. KNOXI proteins emerge as 
central regulators of hormone levels in plant meristems.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2005.07.060
PMID: 16139212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
