---
pmid: '16816426'
title: The conserved ATPase Get3/Arr4 modulates the activity of membrane-associated
  proteins in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
authors:
- Auld KL
- Hitchcock AL
- Doherty HK
- Frietze S
- Huang LS
- Silver PA
journal: Genetics
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1569774
doi: 10.1534/genetics.106.058362
---

# The conserved ATPase Get3/Arr4 modulates the activity of membrane-associated proteins in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Auld KL, Hitchcock AL, Doherty HK, Frietze S, Huang LS, Silver PA
**Journal:** Genetics (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1534/genetics.106.058362](https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.106.058362)
**PMC:** [PMC1569774](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1569774/)

## Abstract

1. Genetics. 2006 Sep;174(1):215-27. doi: 10.1534/genetics.106.058362. Epub 2006 
Jul 2.

The conserved ATPase Get3/Arr4 modulates the activity of membrane-associated 
proteins in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Auld KL(1), Hitchcock AL, Doherty HK, Frietze S, Huang LS, Silver PA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 
02115, USA.

The regulation of cellular membrane dynamics is crucial for maintaining proper 
cell growth and division. The Cdc48-Npl4-Ufd1 complex is required for several 
regulated membrane-associated processes as part of the ubiquitin-proteasome 
system, including ER-associated degradation and the control of lipid composition 
in yeast. In this study we report the results of a genetic screen in 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae for extragenic suppressors of a temperature-sensitive 
npl4 allele and the subsequent analysis of one suppressor, GET3/ARR4. The GET3 
gene encodes an ATPase with homology to the regulatory component of the 
bacterial arsenic pump. Mutants of GET3 rescue several phenotypes of the npl4 
mutant and transcription of GET3 is coregulated with the proteasome, 
illustrating a functional relationship between GET3 and NPL4 in the 
ubiquitin-proteasome system. We have further found that Get3 biochemically 
interacts with the trans-membrane domain proteins Get1/Mdm39 and Get2/Rmd7 and 
that Deltaget3 is able to suppress phenotypes of get1 and get2 mutants, 
including sporulation defects. In combination, our characterization of GET3 
genetic and biochemical interactions with NPL4, GET1, and GET2 implicates Get3 
in multiple membrane-dependent pathways.

DOI: 10.1534/genetics.106.058362
PMCID: PMC1569774
PMID: 16816426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
