---
reference_id: PMID:27092003
title: Elongation factor 4 remodels the A-site tRNA on the ribosome.
authors:
- Gagnon MG
- Lin J
- Steitz TA
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1522932113
keywords:
- Binding Sites
- Computer Simulation
- "Escherichia coli Proteins/chemistry, ultrastructure"
- Molecular Docking Simulation
- Nucleic Acid Conformation
- "Peptide Initiation Factors/chemistry, ultrastructure"
- Protein Binding
- Protein Conformation
- "RNA, Bacterial/chemistry, ultrastructure"
- "RNA, Transfer/chemistry, ultrastructure"
- RNA-Binding Motifs
- "RNA-Binding Proteins/chemistry, ultrastructure"
- Ribosomes
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Elongation factor 4 remodels the A-site tRNA on the ribosome.
**Authors:** Gagnon MG, Lin J, Steitz TA
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1522932113](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1522932113)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 May 3;113(18):4994-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1522932113. Epub 2016 Apr 18.

Elongation factor 4 remodels the A-site tRNA on the ribosome.

Gagnon MG(1), Lin J(1), Steitz TA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, New 
Haven, CT 06520-8114; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale University, New 
Haven, CT 06520-8114;
(2)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, New 
Haven, CT 06520-8114; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale University, New 
Haven, CT 06520-8114; Department of Chemistry, Yale University, New Haven, CT 
06520-8107 thomas.steitz@yale.edu.

During translation, a plethora of protein factors bind to the ribosome and 
regulate protein synthesis. Many of those factors are guanosine triphosphatases 
(GTPases), proteins that catalyze the hydrolysis of guanosine 5'-triphosphate 
(GTP) to promote conformational changes. Despite numerous studies, the function 
of elongation factor 4 (EF-4/LepA), a highly conserved translational GTPase, has 
remained elusive. Here, we present the crystal structure at 2.6-Å resolution of 
the Thermus thermophilus 70S ribosome bound to EF-4 with a nonhydrolyzable GTP 
analog and A-, P-, and E-site tRNAs. The structure reveals the interactions of 
EF-4 with the A-site tRNA, including contacts between the C-terminal domain 
(CTD) of EF-4 and the acceptor helical stem of the tRNA. Remarkably, EF-4 
induces a distortion of the A-site tRNA, allowing it to interact simultaneously 
with EF-4 and the decoding center of the ribosome. The structure provides 
insights into the tRNA-remodeling function of EF-4 on the ribosome and suggests 
that the displacement of the CCA-end of the A-site tRNA away from the peptidyl 
transferase center (PTC) is functionally significant.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1522932113
PMCID: PMC4983839
PMID: 27092003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.