---
pmid: '19631309'
title: Identification of an agrin mutation that causes congenital myasthenia and affects
  synapse function.
authors:
- Huzé C
- Bauché S
- Richard P
- Chevessier F
- Goillot E
- Gaudon K
- Ben Ammar A
- Chaboud A
- Grosjean I
- Lecuyer HA
- Bernard V
- Rouche A
- Alexandri N
- Kuntzer T
- Fardeau M
- Fournier E
- Brancaccio A
- Rüegg MA
- Koenig J
- Eymard B
- Schaeffer L
- Hantaï D
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2725239
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.06.015
---

# Identification of an agrin mutation that causes congenital myasthenia and affects synapse function.
**Authors:** Huzé C, Bauché S, Richard P, Chevessier F, Goillot E, Gaudon K, Ben Ammar A, Chaboud A, Grosjean I, Lecuyer HA, Bernard V, Rouche A, Alexandri N, Kuntzer T, Fardeau M, Fournier E, Brancaccio A, Rüegg MA, Koenig J, Eymard B, Schaeffer L, Hantaï D
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.06.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.06.015)
**PMC:** [PMC2725239](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2725239/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2009 Aug;85(2):155-67. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.06.015. Epub 
2009 Jul 23.

Identification of an agrin mutation that causes congenital myasthenia and 
affects synapse function.

Huzé C(1), Bauché S, Richard P, Chevessier F, Goillot E, Gaudon K, Ben Ammar A, 
Chaboud A, Grosjean I, Lecuyer HA, Bernard V, Rouche A, Alexandri N, Kuntzer T, 
Fardeau M, Fournier E, Brancaccio A, Rüegg MA, Koenig J, Eymard B, Schaeffer L, 
Hantaï D.

Author information:
(1)Equipe Différenciation Neuromusculaire, UMR 5239, Ecole Normale Supérieure 
Lyon, CNRS, Université Lyon 1, Lyon, France.

Erratum in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2009 Oct;85(4):536.

We report the case of a congenital myasthenic syndrome due to a mutation in 
AGRN, the gene encoding agrin, an extracellular matrix molecule released by the 
nerve and critical for formation of the neuromuscular junction. Gene analysis 
identified a homozygous missense mutation, c.5125G>C, leading to the 
p.Gly1709Arg variant. The muscle-biopsy specimen showed a major disorganization 
of the neuromuscular junction, including changes in the nerve-terminal 
cytoskeleton and fragmentation of the synaptic gutters. Experiments performed in 
nonmuscle cells or in cultured C2C12 myotubes and using recombinant mini-agrin 
for the mutated and the wild-type forms showed that the mutated form did not 
impair the activation of MuSK or change the total number of induced 
acetylcholine receptor aggregates. A solid-phase assay using the dystrophin 
glycoprotein complex showed that the mutation did not affect the binding of 
agrin to alpha-dystroglycan. Injection of wild-type or mutated agrin into rat 
soleus muscle induced the formation of nonsynaptic acetylcholine receptor 
clusters, but the mutant protein specifically destabilized the endogenous 
neuromuscular junctions. Importantly, the changes observed in rat muscle 
injected with mutant agrin recapitulated the pre- and post-synaptic 
modifications observed in the patient. These results indicate that the mutation 
does not interfere with the ability of agrin to induce postsynaptic structures 
but that it dramatically perturbs the maintenance of the neuromuscular junction.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.06.015
PMCID: PMC2725239
PMID: 19631309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
