---
pmid: '12427827'
title: SynGAP regulates ERK/MAPK signaling, synaptic plasticity, and learning in the
  complex with postsynaptic density 95 and NMDA receptor.
authors:
- Komiyama NH
- Watabe AM
- Carlisle HJ
- Porter K
- Charlesworth P
- Monti J
- Strathdee DJ
- O'Carroll CM
- Martin SJ
- Morris RG
- O'Dell TJ
- Grant SG
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6757832
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-22-09721.2002
---

# SynGAP regulates ERK/MAPK signaling, synaptic plasticity, and learning in the complex with postsynaptic density 95 and NMDA receptor.
**Authors:** Komiyama NH, Watabe AM, Carlisle HJ, Porter K, Charlesworth P, Monti J, Strathdee DJ, O'Carroll CM, Martin SJ, Morris RG, O'Dell TJ, Grant SG
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-22-09721.2002](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-22-09721.2002)
**PMC:** [PMC6757832](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6757832/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2002 Nov 15;22(22):9721-32. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-22-09721.2002.

SynGAP regulates ERK/MAPK signaling, synaptic plasticity, and learning in the 
complex with postsynaptic density 95 and NMDA receptor.

Komiyama NH(1), Watabe AM, Carlisle HJ, Porter K, Charlesworth P, Monti J, 
Strathdee DJ, O'Carroll CM, Martin SJ, Morris RG, O'Dell TJ, Grant SG.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neuroscience, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH8-9JZ, United 
Kingdom.

At excitatory synapses, the postsynaptic scaffolding protein postsynaptic 
density 95 (PSD-95) couples NMDA receptors (NMDARs) to the Ras GTPase-activating 
protein SynGAP. The close association of SynGAP and NMDARs suggests that SynGAP 
may have an important role in NMDAR-dependent activation of Ras signaling 
pathways, such as the MAP kinase pathway, and in synaptic plasticity. To explore 
this issue, we examined long-term potentiation (LTP), p42 MAPK (ERK2) signaling, 
and spatial learning in mice with a heterozygous null mutation of the SynGAP 
gene (SynGAP(-/+)). In SynGAP(-/+) mutant mice, the induction of LTP in the 
hippocampal CA1 region was strongly reduced in the absence of any detectable 
alteration in basal synaptic transmission and NMDAR-mediated synaptic currents. 
Although basal levels of activated ERK2 were elevated in hippocampal extracts 
from SynGAP(-/+) mice, NMDAR stimulation still induced a robust increase in ERK 
activation in slices from SynGAP(-/+) mice. Thus, although SynGAP may regulate 
the ERK pathway, its role in LTP most likely involves additional downstream 
targets. Consistent with this, the amount of potentiation induced by stimulation 
protocols that induce an ERK-independent form of LTP were also significantly 
reduced in slices from SynGAP(-/+) mice. An elevation of basal phospho-ERK2 
levels and LTP deficits were also observed in SynGAP(-/+)/H-Ras(-)/- double 
mutants, suggesting that SynGAP may normally regulate Ras isoforms other than 
H-Ras. A comparison of SynGAP and PSD-95 mutants suggests that PSD-95 couples 
NMDARs to multiple downstream signaling pathways with very different roles in 
LTP and learning.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-22-09721.2002
PMCID: PMC6757832
PMID: 12427827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
