---
pmid: '15200957'
title: Dual role of BRUCE as an antiapoptotic IAP and a chimeric E2/E3 ubiquitin ligase.
authors:
- Bartke T
- Pohl C
- Pyrowolakis G
- Jentsch S
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2004.05.018
---

# Dual role of BRUCE as an antiapoptotic IAP and a chimeric E2/E3 ubiquitin ligase.
**Authors:** Bartke T, Pohl C, Pyrowolakis G, Jentsch S
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2004.05.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2004.05.018)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2004 Jun 18;14(6):801-11. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2004.05.018.

Dual role of BRUCE as an antiapoptotic IAP and a chimeric E2/E3 ubiquitin 
ligase.

Bartke T(1), Pohl C, Pyrowolakis G, Jentsch S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, 
Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany.

Apoptotic cell death and survival is controlled by pro- and antiapoptotic 
proteins. Because these proteins act on each other, cell fate is dictated by the 
relative activity of pro- versus antiapoptotic proteins. Here we report that 
BRUCE, a conserved 528 kDa peripheral membrane protein of the trans-Golgi 
network, protects cells against apoptosis and functions as an inhibitor of 
apoptosis (IAP). By using wild-type and mutant forms we show that BRUCE inhibits 
caspase activity and apoptosis depending on its BIR domain. Upon apoptosis 
induction, BRUCE is antagonized by three mechanisms: first, through binding to 
Smac; second, by the protease HtrA2; and third, by caspase-mediated cleavage. In 
addition to its IAP activity BRUCE has the distinctive property of functioning 
as a chimeric E2/E3 ubiquitin ligase with Smac being a substrate. Our work 
suggests that, owing to its two activities and its localization, BRUCE may 
function as a specialized regulator of cell death pathways.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2004.05.018
PMID: 15200957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
