---
pmid: '3220103'
title: 'Human Ig superfamily CTLA-4 gene: chromosomal localization and identity of
  protein sequence between murine and human CTLA-4 cytoplasmic domains.'
authors:
- Dariavach P
- Mattéi MG
- Golstein P
- Lefranc MP
journal: Eur J Immunol
year: '1988'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/eji.1830181206
---

# Human Ig superfamily CTLA-4 gene: chromosomal localization and identity of protein sequence between murine and human CTLA-4 cytoplasmic domains.
**Authors:** Dariavach P, Mattéi MG, Golstein P, Lefranc MP
**Journal:** Eur J Immunol (1988)
**DOI:** [10.1002/eji.1830181206](https://doi.org/10.1002/eji.1830181206)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Immunol. 1988 Dec;18(12):1901-5. doi: 10.1002/eji.1830181206.

Human Ig superfamily CTLA-4 gene: chromosomal localization and identity of 
protein sequence between murine and human CTLA-4 cytoplasmic domains.

Dariavach P(1), Mattéi MG, Golstein P, Lefranc MP.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire d'Immunogénétique, UA CNRS 1191, Université des Sciences et 
Techniques du Languedoc, Montpellier, France.

The mouse CTLA-4 gene has been shown to code for an activated 
lymphocyte-associated sequence belonging to the Ig gene superfamily. We now 
report on the molecular cloning and study of the human corresponding gene 
isolated from a genomic library and designated Hu-CTLA-4. The Hu-CTLA-4 gene 
exists as a single copy per human haploid genome and maps to band q33 of 
chromosome 2. It comprises 3 exons notwithstanding the leader sequence. The 
first exon encodes a V-like domain of 116 amino acids, the second one a 
hydrophobic putative transmembrane region of 37 amino acids and the third one a 
34 amino acid putative cytoplasmic domain. Whereas the overall homology between 
the human and murine CTLA-4 proteins is 76%, there is, remarkably, a complete 
identity of their cytoplasmic domains. This complete interspecies conservation 
comes in support of an important role for this domain in CTLA-4 function.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.1830181206
PMID: 3220103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
