---
pmid: '17974563'
title: A poised initiation complex is activated by SNF1.
authors:
- Tachibana C
- Biddick R
- Law GL
- Young ET
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M707363200
---

# A poised initiation complex is activated by SNF1.
**Authors:** Tachibana C, Biddick R, Law GL, Young ET
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M707363200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M707363200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Dec 28;282(52):37308-15. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M707363200. Epub 
2007 Oct 31.

A poised initiation complex is activated by SNF1.

Tachibana C(1), Biddick R, Law GL, Young ET.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

Snf1, the yeast AMP kinase homolog, is essential for derepression of 
glucose-repressed genes that are activated by Adr1. Although required for Adr1 
DNA binding, the precise role of Snf1 is unknown. Deletion of histone 
deacetylase genes allowed constitutive promoter binding of Adr1 and Cat8, 
another activator of glucose-repressed genes. In repressed conditions, at the 
Adr1-and Cat8-dependent ADH2 promoter, partial chromatin remodeling had 
occurred, and the activators recruited a partial preinitiation complex that 
included RNA polymerase II. Transcription did not occur, however, unless Snf1 
was activated, suggesting a Snf1-dependent event that occurs after RNA 
polymerase II recruitment. Glucose regulation persisted because shifting to low 
glucose increased expression. Glucose repression could be completely relieved by 
combining the three elements of 1) chromatin perturbation by mutation of histone 
deacetylases, 2) activation of Snf1, and 3) the addition of an Adr1 mutant that 
by itself confers only weak constitutive activity.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M707363200
PMID: 17974563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
