---
pmid: '15525536'
title: The S. pombe Cdc14-like phosphatase Clp1p regulates chromosome biorientation
  and interacts with Aurora kinase.
authors:
- Trautmann S
- Rajagopalan S
- McCollum D
journal: Dev Cell
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2004.10.006
---

# The S. pombe Cdc14-like phosphatase Clp1p regulates chromosome biorientation and interacts with Aurora kinase.
**Authors:** Trautmann S, Rajagopalan S, McCollum D
**Journal:** Dev Cell (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.devcel.2004.10.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2004.10.006)

## Abstract

1. Dev Cell. 2004 Nov;7(5):755-62. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2004.10.006.

The S. pombe Cdc14-like phosphatase Clp1p regulates chromosome biorientation and 
interacts with Aurora kinase.

Trautmann S(1), Rajagopalan S, McCollum D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of 
Massachusetts Medical Center, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

The S. pombe Cdc14-related phosphatase Clp1p/Flp1p regulates G2/M transition by 
antagonizing CDK activity and is essential for coordinating the nuclear division 
cycle with cytokinesis through the cytokinesis checkpoint. At the G2/M 
transition, Clp1p/Flp1p is released from the nucleolus and SPB and distributes 
throughout the nucleus to the spindle and the contractile ring. This early 
relocalization is analogous to vertebrate Cdc14 homologs and stands in contrast 
to S. cerevisiae Cdc14p, which is not released from the nucleolus until 
metaphase/anaphase transition. Here, we report that Clp1p/Flp1p localizes to 
kinetochores in prometaphase and functions in chromosome segregation, since 
deletion of clp1/flp1 causes cosegregation of sister chromatids, when sister 
kinetochores are prone to mono-orientation. Genetic, cytological, and 
biochemical experiments suggest that Clp1p/Flp1p functions together with Aurora 
kinase at kinetochores. Together, these results suggest that Clp1p/Flp1p has a 
role in repairing mono-orientation of sister kinetochores.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2004.10.006
PMID: 15525536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
