---
pmid: '11001060'
title: CAP defines a second signalling pathway required for insulin-stimulated glucose
  transport.
authors:
- Baumann CA
- Ribon V
- Kanzaki M
- Thurmond DC
- Mora S
- Shigematsu S
- Bickel PE
- Pessin JE
- Saltiel AR
journal: Nature
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/35025089
---

# CAP defines a second signalling pathway required for insulin-stimulated glucose transport.
**Authors:** Baumann CA, Ribon V, Kanzaki M, Thurmond DC, Mora S, Shigematsu S, Bickel PE, Pessin JE, Saltiel AR
**Journal:** Nature (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1038/35025089](https://doi.org/10.1038/35025089)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2000 Sep 14;407(6801):202-7. doi: 10.1038/35025089.

CAP defines a second signalling pathway required for insulin-stimulated glucose 
transport.

Baumann CA(1), Ribon V, Kanzaki M, Thurmond DC, Mora S, Shigematsu S, Bickel PE, 
Pessin JE, Saltiel AR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Michigan School of Medicine, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2000 Sep 14;407(6801):147-8. doi: 10.1038/35025183.

Insulin stimulates the transport of glucose into fat and muscle cells. Although 
the precise molecular mechanisms involved in this process remain uncertain, 
insulin initiates its actions by binding to its tyrosine kinase receptor, 
leading to the phosphorylation of intracellular substrates. One such substrate 
is the Cbl proto-oncogene product. Cbl is recruited to the insulin receptor by 
interaction with the adapter protein CAP, through one of three adjacent SH3 
domains in the carboxy terminus of CAP. Upon phosphorylation of Cbl, the CAP-Cbl 
complex dissociates from the insulin receptor and moves to a caveolin-enriched, 
triton-insoluble membrane fraction. Here, to identify a molecular mechanism 
underlying this subcellular redistribution, we screened a yeast two-hybrid 
library using the amino-terminal region of CAP and identified the caveolar 
protein flotillin. Flotillin forms a ternary complex with CAP and Cbl, directing 
the localization of the CAP-Cbl complex to a lipid raft subdomain of the plasma 
membrane. Expression of the N-terminal domain of CAP in 3T3-L1 adipocytes blocks 
the stimulation of glucose transport by insulin, without affecting signalling 
events that depend on phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase. Thus, localization of 
the Cbl-CAP complex to lipid rafts generates a pathway that is crucial in the 
regulation of glucose uptake.

DOI: 10.1038/35025089
PMID: 11001060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
