---
pmid: '12650946'
title: Identification of three novel Smad binding proteins involved in cell polarity.
authors:
- Warner DR
- Pisano MM
- Roberts EA
- Greene RM
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(03)00155-8
---

# Identification of three novel Smad binding proteins involved in cell polarity.
**Authors:** Warner DR, Pisano MM, Roberts EA, Greene RM
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0014-5793(03)00155-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0014-5793(03)00155-8)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2003 Mar 27;539(1-3):167-73. doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(03)00155-8.

Identification of three novel Smad binding proteins involved in cell polarity.

Warner DR(1), Pisano MM, Roberts EA, Greene RM.

Author information:
(1)University of Louisville Birth Defects Center, Department of Molecular, 
Cellular, and Craniofacial Biology, University of Louisville School of 
Dentistry, 501 South Preston Street, Suite 301, Louisville, KY 40292, USA. 
drwarn01@gwise.louisville.edu

A yeast two-hybrid screen was utilized to identify novel Smad 3 binding proteins 
expressed in developing mouse orofacial tissue. Three proteins (Erbin, Par-3, 
and Dishevelled) were identified that share several similar structural and 
functional characteristics. Each contains at least one PDZ domain and all have 
been demonstrated to play a role in the establishment and maintenance of cell 
polarity. In GST (glutathione S-transferase) pull-down assays, Erbin, Par-3, and 
Dishevelled bound strongly to the isolated MH2 domain of Smad 3, with weaker 
binding to a full-length Smad 3 protein. Failure of Erbin, Par-3, and 
Dishevelled to bind to a Smad 3 mutant protein that was missing the MH2 domain 
confirms that the binding site resides within the MH2 domain. Erbin, Par-3, and 
Dishevelled also interacted with the MH2 domains of other Smads, suggesting 
broad Smad binding specificity. Dishevelled and Erbin mutant proteins, in which 
the PDZ domain was removed, still retained their ability to bind Smad 3, albeit 
with lower affinity. While transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta) has been 
suggested to alter cell polarity through a Smad-independent mechanism involving 
activation of members of the RhoA family of GTP binding proteins, the 
observation that Smads can directly interact with proteins involved in cell 
polarity, as shown in the present report, suggests an additional means by which 
TGFbeta could alter cell polarity via a Smad-dependent signaling mechanism.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(03)00155-8
PMID: 12650946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
