---
pmid: '23682772'
title: 'Human GGT2 does not autocleave into a functional enzyme: A cautionary tale
  for interpretation of microarray data on redox signaling.'
authors:
- West MB
- Wickham S
- Parks EE
- Sherry DM
- Hanigan MH
journal: Antioxid Redox Signal
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3852618
doi: 10.1089/ars.2012.4997
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Human GGT2 does not autocleave into a functional enzyme: A cautionary tale for interpretation of microarray data on redox signaling.
**Authors:** West MB, Wickham S, Parks EE, Sherry DM, Hanigan MH
**Journal:** Antioxid Redox Signal (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1089/ars.2012.4997](https://doi.org/10.1089/ars.2012.4997)
**PMC:** [PMC3852618](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3852618/)

## Abstract

1. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2013 Dec 1;19(16):1877-88. doi: 10.1089/ars.2012.4997. 
Epub 2013 Jun 28.

Human GGT2 does not autocleave into a functional enzyme: A cautionary tale for 
interpretation of microarray data on redox signaling.

West MB(1), Wickham S, Parks EE, Sherry DM, Hanigan MH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center , 
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.

AIMS: Human γ-glutamyltranspeptidase 1 (hGGT1) is a cell-surface enzyme that is 
a regulator of redox adaptation and drug resistance due to its glutathionase 
activity. The human GGT2 gene encodes a protein that is 94% identical to the 
amino-acid sequence of hGGT1. Transcriptional profiling analyses in a series of 
recent publications have implicated the hGGT2 enzyme as a modulator of disease 
processes. However, hGGT2 has never been shown to encode a protein with 
enzymatic activity. The aim of this study was to express the protein encoded by 
hGGT2 and each of its known variants and to assess their stability, cellular 
localization, and enzymatic activity.
RESULTS: We discovered that the proteins encoded by hGGT2 and its variants are 
inactive propeptides. We show that hGGT2 cDNAs are transcribed with a similar 
efficiency to hGGT1, and the expressed propeptides are N-glycosylated. However, 
they do not autocleave into heterodimers, fail to localize to the plasma 
membrane, and do not metabolize γ-glutamyl substrates. Substituting the coding 
sequence of hGGT1 to conform to alterations in a CX3C motif encoded by hGGT2 
mRNAs disrupted autocleavage of the hGGT1 propeptide into a heterodimer, 
resulting in loss of plasma membrane localization and catalytic activity.
INNOVATION AND CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study to evaluate hGGT2 protein. 
The data show that hGGT2 does not encode a functional enzyme. Microarray data 
which have reported induction of hGGT2 mRNA should not be interpreted as 
induction of a protein that has a role in the metabolism of extracellular 
glutathione and in maintaining the redox status of the cell.

DOI: 10.1089/ars.2012.4997
PMCID: PMC3852618
PMID: 23682772 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
