---
pmid: '12097513'
title: Mice lacking dopamine D2 and D3 receptors have spatial working memory deficits.
authors:
- Glickstein SB
- Hof PR
- Schmauss C
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6758242
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-13-05619.2002
---

# Mice lacking dopamine D2 and D3 receptors have spatial working memory deficits.
**Authors:** Glickstein SB, Hof PR, Schmauss C
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-13-05619.2002](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-13-05619.2002)
**PMC:** [PMC6758242](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6758242/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2002 Jul 1;22(13):5619-29. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-13-05619.2002.

Mice lacking dopamine D2 and D3 receptors have spatial working memory deficits.

Glickstein SB(1), Hof PR, Schmauss C.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Psychiatry and Neuroscience, Columbia University and New York 
State Psychiatric Institute, New York, New York 10032, USA.

Mice deficient for dopamine D(2) and D(3) receptors exhibit blunted c-fos 
responses to D(1) agonist stimulation. Stereologic cell counting revealed 
decreased numbers of medial prefrontal cortex neurons that express Fos 
immunoreactivity in all layers, particularly in the prelimbic and anterior 
cingulate subregions. Pretreatment of these mutants with a single, low dose of 
methamphetamine (METH) led to a sustained increase in the number of neurons that 
express Fos immunoreactivity in response to a D(1) agonist challenge, which was 
most significant in prelimbic and anterior cingulate subregions. The increased 
c-fos responses reached wild-type-like levels in METH-pretreated D(2) mutants 
but remained submaximal in METH-pretreated D(3) mutants. Additional studies 
tested the performance of wild type and mutants in a delayed alternation test, a 
cognitive task critically dependent on optimal activation of prefrontal cortical 
D(1) receptors by synaptically released dopamine. Both D(2) and D(3) mutants 
exhibited deficits in their spatial working memory, with increasing impairments 
at increasing delays. Whereas METH pretreatment rescued the spatial working 
memory of D(2) mutants, it had no effect on D(3) mutants. These data suggest 
that the sustained improvement of spatial working memory in METH-pretreated D(2) 
mutants is attributable to D(1) receptor-mediated mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-13-05619.2002
PMCID: PMC6758242
PMID: 12097513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
