---
pmid: '24415753'
title: Protein disulfide isomerase directly interacts with β-actin Cys374 and regulates
  cytoskeleton reorganization.
authors:
- Sobierajska K
- Skurzynski S
- Stasiak M
- Kryczka J
- Cierniewski CS
- Swiatkowska M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2014'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3937648
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.479477
---

# Protein disulfide isomerase directly interacts with β-actin Cys374 and regulates cytoskeleton reorganization.
**Authors:** Sobierajska K, Skurzynski S, Stasiak M, Kryczka J, Cierniewski CS, Swiatkowska M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M113.479477](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M113.479477)
**PMC:** [PMC3937648](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3937648/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Feb 28;289(9):5758-73. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.479477. Epub
2014  Jan 10.

Protein disulfide isomerase directly interacts with β-actin Cys374 and regulates 
cytoskeleton reorganization.

Sobierajska K(1), Skurzynski S, Stasiak M, Kryczka J, Cierniewski CS, 
Swiatkowska M.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Molecular and Medical Biophysics, Medical University 
of Lodz, 92-215 Lodz, Poland and.

Recent studies support the role of cysteine oxidation in actin cytoskeleton 
reorganization during cell adhesion. The aim of this study was to explain 
whether protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) is responsible for the thiol-disulfide 
rearrangement in the β-actin molecule of adhering cells. First, we showed that 
PDI forms a disulfide-bonded complex with β-actin with a molecular mass of 110 
kDa. Specific interaction of both proteins was demonstrated by a solid phase 
binding assay, surface plasmon resonance analysis, and immunoprecipitation 
experiments. Second, using confocal microscopy, we found that both proteins 
colocalized when spreading MEG-01 cells on fibronectin. Colocalization of PDI 
and β-actin could be abolished by the membrane-permeable sulfhydryl blocker, 
N-ethylmaleimide, by the RGD peptide, and by anti-αIIbβ3 antibodies. 
Consequently, down-regulation of PDI expression by antisense oligonucleotides 
impaired the spreading of cells and initiated reorganization of the 
cytoskeleton. Third, because of transfection experiments followed by 
immunoprecipitation and confocal analysis, we provided evidence that PDI binds 
to the β-actin Cys(374) thiol. Formation of the β-actin-PDI complex was mediated 
by integrin-dependent signaling in response to the adhesion of cells to the 
extracellular matrix. Our data suggest that PDI is released from subcellular 
compartments to the cytosol and translocated toward the periphery of the cell, 
where it forms a disulfide bond with β-actin when MEG-01 cells adhere via the 
αIIbβ3 integrin to fibronectin. Thus, PDI appears to regulate cytoskeletal 
reorganization by the thiol-disulfide exchange in β-actin via a redox-dependent 
mechanism.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.479477
PMCID: PMC3937648
PMID: 24415753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Recent studies support the role of cysteine oxidation in actin cytoskeleton reorganization during cell adhesion. The aim of this study was to explain whether protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) is responsible for the thiol-disulfide rearrangement in the β-actin molecule of adhering cells. First, we showed that PDI forms a disulfide-bonded complex with β-actin with a molecular mass of 110 kDa. Specific interaction of both proteins was demonstrated by a solid phase binding assay, surface plasmon resonance analysis, and immunoprecipitation experiments. Second, using confocal microscopy, we found that both proteins colocalized when spreading MEG-01 cells on fibronectin. Colocalization of PDI and β-actin could be abolished by the membrane-permeable sulfhydryl blocker, N -ethylmaleimide, by the RGD peptide, and by anti-αIIbβ3 antibodies. Consequently, down-regulation of PDI expression by antisense oligonucleotides impaired the spreading of cells and initiated reorganization of the cytoskeleton. Third, because of transfection experiments followed by immunoprecipitation and confocal analysis, we provided evidence that PDI binds to the β-actin Cys 374 thiol. Formation of the β-actin-PDI complex was mediated by integrin-dependent signaling in response to the adhesion of cells to the extracellular matrix. Our data suggest that PDI is released from subcellular compartments to the cytosol and translocated toward the periphery of the cell, where it forms a disulfide bond with β-actin when MEG-01 cells adhere via the αIIbβ3 integrin to fibronectin. Thus, PDI appears to regulate cytoskeletal reorganization by the thiol-disulfide exchange in β-actin via a redox-dependent mechanism.

Introduction

Actin, a major component of the cytoskeleton, is involved in multiple cellular functions such as proliferation, adhesion, motility, growth, and cytokinesis. It belongs to the most important targets of integrin-mediated signaling ( 1 ). Recent studies showed that its intracellular activity is directly regulated by reactive oxygen species ( 2 ). The β-actin molecule contains six conserved cysteine residues, but only one of them, located at position 374, is exposed on the surface of the molecule ( 3 , 4 ). This cysteine residue takes part in actin polymerization as well as in filament formation ( 5 ). Both processes are preceded by the intracellular oxidation of β-actin, which results in the formation of the disulfide bond between the sulfhydryl group Cys 374 and glutathione ( 4 ). The oxidative modifications of β-actin play a key role in the GSH disulfide formation upon integrin engagement and cell spreading. The glutathionylation of β-actin that occurs during cell adhesion leads to the disassembly of actomyosin filaments ( 2 ). On the other hand, oxidation of β-actin creates intermolecular disulfide bonds between Cys 374 residues of neighboring β-actin molecules and thus prevents β-actin polymerization ( 6 ). In consequence, it leads to a cytoskeleton rearrangement ( 7 , 8 ).

The activity of redox-sensitive proteins is usually regulated by enzymes belonging to the glutaredoxin and thioredoxin systems, which convert disulfide bond cross-linked proteins back to their forms containing free sulfhydryl groups ( 9 , 10 ). In this report, we attempted to evaluate the role of PDI 3 in the regulation of cellular β-actin activity. PDI, a member of the thiol-disulfide oxidoreductase family, displays thiol isomerase, oxidase, and reductase activity. The canonical function of PDI is a disulfide bond formation in the nascent protein and protein folding in the endoplasmic reticulum ( 11 ). PDI has multiple biological functions and interacts with numerous proteins ( 12 ). Extracellular PDI is known to mediate platelet aggregation and thrombus formation ( 13 , 14 ). After activation of the platelets and endothelial cells, it can be found both inside and outside of the cells, in association with F-actin microfilaments or with cellular membranes, respectively ( 14 – 18 ).

In this report, we show that PDI, through binding to β-actin-CYA, affects the thiol exchange mechanism during the adhesion of cells to fibronectin. Our data provide evidence that PDI catalyzes the thiol-disulfide exchange reaction in β-actin-CYA during cell adhesion and that it is a major enzyme responsible for redox regulation of the cytoskeleton rearrangement.

DISCUSSION

Cell adhesion and motility play key roles in a variety of biological processes, including angiogenesis, inflammation, and wound healing. Both adhesion and motility involve the expansion of the plasma membrane, which takes place through the formation of either thin actin-rich protrusions called lamellipodia or finger-like projections known as filopodia. Variations in the rate of expansion may have striking effects on the course of numerous phenomena. The formation of both lamellipodia and filopodia engages the polymerization of actin filaments.

The data presented here demonstrate that PDI interacts exclusively with β-actin-CYA during integrin-mediated cell adhesion to fibronectin and that it promotes cytoskeleton reorganization. Specifically, we provided evidence that: ( a ) both proteins can directly interact in a purified system, as is documented by solid phase binding assay and surface plasmon resonance analysis; ( b ) PDI preferentially binds to G-actin; ( c ) intracellularly PDI and β-actin form a complex with a molecular mass of 110 kDa that can be immunoprecipitated with specific antibodies either to PDI or β-actin; the complex dissociates upon reduction; β-actin Cys 374 is involved in the creation of a disulfide bond with PDI and is responsible for integrity of the β-actin-PDI complex; mutation of the Cys 374 residue abolishes the ability of β-actin to interact with PDI; ( d ) PDI colocalizes with β-actin in adhering MEG-01 cells and predominantly in areas close to the membrane in the lamellipodial protrusions; ( e ) down-regulation of PDI expression with antisense oligonucleotide abolishes adhesion of the MEG-01 cells to fibronectin and appreciably delays their spreading; and ( f ) the binding of PDI to β-actin in the adhering cells requires the functionally active αIIbβ3 integrin. Treatment of the cells with the RGD peptide or anti-αΙΙbβ3 antibodies prevents colocalization of PDI with β-actin.

By using specific monoclonal antibody, we showed that PDI directly interact only with β-actin isoform but not with γ-actin during adhesion. These two isoforms of actin display distinct distribution and different functional roles and participate differently in organization of cell morphology, polarity, and motility. β-Actin is preferentially localized in stress fiber, in circular bundles, and at cell-cell contacts, suggesting its role in cell attachment. The crucial role for γ-actin is control of cell motility ( 23 ). Our previous work showed that PDI is able to interact with integrin ( 16 ). It is possible that PDI is recruited to the adhesion area by active form of integrin αIIbβ3, therefore interacting with β-actin in these compartments during cell adhesion and spreading. However, this supposition requires further investigations.

Recent observations indicate that reactive oxygen species that are produced during processes occurring in the ECM, for example, by adhering cells, modify the structure of cytoskeletal proteins, cause cytoskeleton reorganization, and weaken cell spreading ( 2 ). Oxidation of cysteine residues resulting from integrin-dependent transmembrane signaling seems to be a key mechanism in the regulation of the β-actin function. During cell adhesion, β-actin Cys 374 was described to be directly modified by the formation of a disulfide bond with reduced glutathione ( 2 ). S -Glutathionylation of this residue is induced by oxidative stress ( 24 ). Interestingly, β-actin undergoes reversible S -glutathionylation in response to stimulation by the epidermal growth factor. Deglutathionylation of G-actin leads to an ∼6-fold increase in the rate of polymerization and the F-actin content. F-actin was found in the cell periphery, which suggests that actin polymerization is regulated by a mechanism of reversible glutathionylation ( 25 ). S -Glutathionylation is reversible in either an enzyme-dependent or -independent manner. The principle enzyme that removes glutathione from the mixed sulfides is glutaredoxin, although thioredoxin or protein disulfide isomerase can also catalyze this reaction ( 26 , 27 ). In other systems, PDI showed lower deglutathionylation activity when compared with glutaredoxin; however, in contrast to glutaredoxin, only PDI could create the mixed disulfide intermediate ( 28 ). Furthermore, PDI is able to form native disulfide bonds in fully glutathionylated protein substrates ( 29 , 30 ).

Our data showed that β-actin Cys 374 constitutes the binding site for PDI in cells adhering to ECM after its translocation from endoplasmic reticulum compartments toward the cytosol in response to integrin engagement. Such translocation of PDI to the cytosol was observed after activation of human neutrophils by phorbol ester ( 31 ). The disulfide-bonded complex between PDI and β-actin may provide a mechanism that protects cells against irreversible cytoskeleton reorganization. It was reported that oxidation of β-actin Cys 374 destabilizes intermonomer interactions of β-actin ( 6 ). On the other hand, reactive oxygen species are known to interfere with the organization of actin microfilaments and motility of many eukaryotic cells ( 32 ). Therefore, oxidation of Cys 374 could be critical for the disassembly of filaments, when the environment is more oxidative because of a shifted GSH/GSSH equilibrium ( 6 ).

The formation of disulfide bonds between β-actin monomers may be fundamental during cellular redox responses to growth factors or integrin stimulation. Then the resulting β-actin dimmers can be incorporated into F-actin during polymerization and can affect the cross-linking of F-actin and its elasticity ( 33 ). Our study suggests that PDI can be responsible for the disulfide-thiol exchange by providing the mechanism for the regulation of β-actin cytoskeleton rearrangement during cell adhesion.

To sum up, our data show that PDI can be an element of the mechanism leading toward cytoskeleton reorganization. It mediates the intramolecular disulfide-thiol rearrangement of β-actin in response to integrin engagement and forms a complex with β-actin Cys 374 , which is localized in the focal adhesion plate mediating adhesion and cell spreading.
