---
pmid: '25168382'
title: A novel bile acid biosynthesis defect due to a deficiency of peroxisomal ABCD3.
authors:
- Ferdinandusse S
- Jimenez-Sanchez G
- Koster J
- Denis S
- Van Roermund CW
- Silva-Zolezzi I
- Moser AB
- Visser WF
- Gulluoglu M
- Durmaz O
- Demirkol M
- Waterham HR
- Gökcay G
- Wanders RJ
- Valle D
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu448
---

# A novel bile acid biosynthesis defect due to a deficiency of peroxisomal ABCD3.
**Authors:** Ferdinandusse S, Jimenez-Sanchez G, Koster J, Denis S, Van Roermund CW, Silva-Zolezzi I, Moser AB, Visser WF, Gulluoglu M, Durmaz O, Demirkol M, Waterham HR, Gökcay G, Wanders RJ, Valle D
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddu448](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddu448)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Jan 15;24(2):361-70. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu448. Epub 2014
Aug  28.

A novel bile acid biosynthesis defect due to a deficiency of peroxisomal ABCD3.

Ferdinandusse S(1), Jimenez-Sanchez G(2), Koster J(3), Denis S(3), Van Roermund 
CW(3), Silva-Zolezzi I(4), Moser AB(5), Visser WF(3), Gulluoglu M(6), Durmaz 
O(7), Demirkol M(8), Waterham HR(3), Gökcay G(8), Wanders RJ(3), Valle D(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Department of Pediatrics and Clinical 
Chemistry, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands s.ferdinandusse@amc.nl.
(2)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Department of Pediatrics and Clinical 
Chemistry, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(4)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD, USA Programa de Posgrado en Biomedicina Molecular. Cinvestav-IPN, 
Av. IPN 2508, Col. Zacatenco, CP 07360, México, D.F., Mexico.
(5)Kennedy Krieger Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology and.
(7)Department of Pediatric Gastrohepatology.
(8)Department of Pediatric Nutrition and Metabolism, Istanbul Faculty of 
Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey and.

ABCD3 is one of three ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters present in the 
peroxisomal membrane catalyzing ATP-dependent transport of substrates for 
metabolic pathways localized in peroxisomes. So far, the precise function of 
ABCD3 is not known. Here, we report the identification of the first patient with 
a defect of ABCD3. The patient presented with hepatosplenomegaly and severe 
liver disease and showed a striking accumulation of peroxisomal C27-bile acid 
intermediates in plasma. Investigation of peroxisomal parameters in skin 
fibroblasts revealed a reduced number of enlarged import-competent peroxisomes. 
Peroxisomal beta-oxidation of C26:0 was normal, but beta-oxidation of pristanic 
acid was reduced. Genetic analysis revealed a homozygous deletion at the DNA 
level of 1758bp, predicted to result in a truncated ABCD3 protein lacking the 
C-terminal 24 amino acids (p.Y635NfsX1). Liver disease progressed and the 
patient required liver transplantation at 4 years of age but expired shortly 
after transplantation. To corroborate our findings in the patient, we studied a 
previously generated Abcd3 knockout mouse model. Abcd3-/- mice accumulated the 
branched chain fatty acid phytanic acid after phytol loading. In addition, 
analysis of bile acids revealed a reduction of C24 bile acids, whereas C27-bile 
acid intermediates were significantly increased in liver, bile and intestine of 
Abcd3-/- mice. Thus, both in the patient and in Abcd3-/- mice, there was 
evidence of a bile acid biosynthesis defect. In conclusion, our studies show 
that ABCD3 is involved in transport of branched-chain fatty acids and C27 bile 
acids into the peroxisome and that this is a crucial step in bile acid 
biosynthesis.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddu448
PMID: 25168382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
