---
pmid: '12763797'
title: Functional properties of the human copper-transporting ATPase ATP7B (the Wilson's
  disease protein) and regulation by metallochaperone Atox1.
authors:
- Lutsenko S
- Tsivkovskii R
- Walker JM
journal: Ann N Y Acad Sci
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2003.tb07161.x
---

# Functional properties of the human copper-transporting ATPase ATP7B (the Wilson's disease protein) and regulation by metallochaperone Atox1.
**Authors:** Lutsenko S, Tsivkovskii R, Walker JM
**Journal:** Ann N Y Acad Sci (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1749-6632.2003.tb07161.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-6632.2003.tb07161.x)

## Abstract

1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2003 Apr;986:204-11. doi:
10.1111/j.1749-6632.2003.tb07161.x.

Functional properties of the human copper-transporting ATPase ATP7B (the 
Wilson's disease protein) and regulation by metallochaperone Atox1.

Lutsenko S(1), Tsivkovskii R, Walker JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health Science 
University, Portland 97239, USA. lutsenko@ohsu.edu

Wilson's disease protein (WNDP) is a copper-transporting P(1)-type ATPase which 
plays a key role in normal distribution of copper in a number of tissues, 
particularly in the liver and the brain. Copper has numerous effects on WNDP, 
altering its structure, activity, and intracellular localization. To better 
understand the function of this copper-transporting ATPase and its regulation by 
copper, we have recently developed the functional expression systems for WNDP 
and for Atox1, a cytosolic protein that serves as an intracellular donor of 
copper for WNDP. Here we summarize the results of our experiments on 
characterization of the enzymatic properties of WNDP and the effects of Atox1 on 
the WNDP activity.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2003.tb07161.x
PMID: 12763797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
