---
pmid: '17139257'
title: hRpn13/ADRM1/GP110 is a novel proteasome subunit that binds the deubiquitinating
  enzyme, UCH37.
authors:
- Qiu XB
- Ouyang SY
- Li CJ
- Miao S
- Wang L
- Goldberg AL
journal: EMBO J
year: '2006'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1698896
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601450
---

# hRpn13/ADRM1/GP110 is a novel proteasome subunit that binds the deubiquitinating enzyme, UCH37.
**Authors:** Qiu XB, Ouyang SY, Li CJ, Miao S, Wang L, Goldberg AL
**Journal:** EMBO J (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7601450](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7601450)
**PMC:** [PMC1698896](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1698896/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2006 Dec 13;25(24):5742-53. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601450. Epub 2006
Nov  30.

hRpn13/ADRM1/GP110 is a novel proteasome subunit that binds the deubiquitinating 
enzyme, UCH37.

Qiu XB(1), Ouyang SY, Li CJ, Miao S, Wang L, Goldberg AL.

Author information:
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, 
Tsinghua University, 5 Dongdan Santiao, Beijing, China. xbqiu@yahoo.com

The 26S proteasome catalyzes the degradation of most proteins in mammalian 
cells. To better define its composition and associated regulatory proteins, we 
developed affinity methods to rapidly purify 26S proteasomes from mammalian 
cells. By this approach, we discovered a novel 46-kDa (407 residues) subunit of 
its 19S regulatory complex (previously termed ADRM1 or GP110). As its N-terminal 
half can be incorporated into the 26S proteasome and is homologous to Rpn13, a 
156-residue subunit of the 19S complex in budding yeast, we renamed it human 
Rpn13 (hRpn13). The C-terminal half of hRpn13 binds directly to the 
proteasome-associated deubiquitinating enzyme, UCH37, and enhances its 
isopeptidase activity. Knockdown of hRpn13 in 293T cells increases the cellular 
levels of ubiquitin conjugates and decreases the degradation of short-lived 
proteins. Surprisingly, an overproduction of hRpn13 also reduced their 
degradation. Furthermore, transfection of the C-terminal half of hRpn13 slows 
proteolysis and induces cell death, probably by acting as a dominant-negative 
form. Thus in human 26S proteasomes, hRpn13 appears to be important for the 
binding of UCH37 to the 19S complex and for efficient proteolysis.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601450
PMCID: PMC1698896
PMID: 17139257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The 26S proteasome catalyzes the degradation of most proteins in mammalian cells. To better define its composition and associated regulatory proteins, we developed affinity methods to rapidly purify 26S proteasomes from mammalian cells. By this approach, we discovered a novel 46-kDa (407 residues) subunit of its 19S regulatory complex (previously termed ADRM1 or GP110). As its N-terminal half can be incorporated into the 26S proteasome and is homologous to Rpn13, a 156-residue subunit of the 19S complex in budding yeast, we renamed it human Rpn13 (hRpn13). The C-terminal half of hRpn13 binds directly to the proteasome-associated deubiquitinating enzyme, UCH37, and enhances its isopeptidase activity. Knockdown of hRpn13 in 293T cells increases the cellular levels of ubiquitin conjugates and decreases the degradation of short-lived proteins. Surprisingly, an overproduction of hRpn13 also reduced their degradation. Furthermore, transfection of the C-terminal half of hRpn13 slows proteolysis and induces cell death, probably by acting as a dominant-negative form. Thus in human 26S proteasomes, hRpn13 appears to be important for the binding of UCH37 to the 19S complex and for efficient proteolysis.

Introduction

Degradation of proteins by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway is critical in regulating the levels of most cellular proteins and in the rapid elimination of misfolded proteins ( Hershko and Ciechanover, 1998 ; Glickman and Ciechanover, 2002 ; Goldberg, 2003 ). The conjugation of a polyubiquitin chain to a protein substrate leads to its rapid binding and ATP-dependent hydrolysis by the 26S proteasome. This 2.4-MDa particle consists of two subcomplexes, the 20S core particle, within which proteolysis takes place, and the 19S regulatory particle, which binds the ubiquitinated substrate ( Voges et al, 1999 ). The 20S proteasome is composed of two outer α-rings and two inner β-rings, each containing seven different, but homologous, subunits. The 19S complex, which binds to one or both ends of the 20S particle, is composed of a base and a lid ( Glickman et al, 1998 ; Leggett et al, 2002 ). The base contains a ring of six homologous ATPases, which mediate the unfolding and translocation of substrates into the 20S ( Smith et al, 2005 ). The lid contains at least eight subunits, including multiple isopeptidases that catalyze the rapid disassembly of the ubiquitin (Ub) chain ( Glickman and Ciechanover, 2002 ).

Our current knowledge about the composition of the mammalian 26S proteasome has emerged primarily from studies in which this particle was purified by multiple chromatographic steps ( Voges et al, 1999 ). These studies have led to the identification of a set of subunits, whose presence resists relatively stringent purification steps (e.g., high salt concentrations). Recent studies using affinity purification methods in yeast indicate that a number of additional proteins are loosely or transiently bound to these particles and can be dissociated by high salt concentration or upon ATP hydrolysis ( Verma et al, 2000 ; Leggett et al, 2002 ; Sone et al, 2004 ; Leggett et al, 2005 ; Guerrero et al, 2006 ). One aim of the present study was to develop similar gentle techniques for rapid isolation of 26S proteasomes from mammalian tissues. Such an approach could help identify critical cofactors and regulators of protein degradation, or even novel subunits.

Although proteasome structure and properties are highly conserved in eukaryotes ( Smith et al, 2005 ), a number of differences exist between proteasomes of higher and lower eukaryotes, and several specializations in mammalian proteasomes have been identified, such as the immunoproteasomes that are important in antigen presentation ( Rock et al, 2002 ). Also, the 26S particles in lower eukaryotes seem to contain unique subunits, such as Daq1/Rpn13, a 156 amino-acid subunit of the 19S in budding yeast that appears to be important in the degradation of certain model substrates ( Verma et al, 2000 ). No similar subunit has been reported in mammalian proteasomes, although interestingly, Rpn13 is highly homologous to the N-terminal half of Xoom, a 404 amino-acid protein required for the embryonic development of frogs ( Hasegawa et al, 2001 ).

In the present study, we describe an affinity method for purifying mammalian 26S proteasomes, which is based upon the approach of Leggett et al (2005) for isolating yeast proteasomes. Using this approach, we have discovered a novel human 19S subunit, a 407-residue protein that corresponds to gene products previously termed ADRM1 or ARM1 for ‘adhesion regulating molecule 1' ( Simins et al, 1999 ) or GP110 ( Shimada et al, 1991 ) for a putative surface glycoprotein. However, as we show, this protein is primarily a subunit of the 26S proteasome, and as this paper was submitted, three other groups ( Hamazaki et al, 2006 ; Jorgensen et al, 2006 ; Yao et al, 2006 ) have also demonstrated, by other approaches, its presence within the 26S proteasome. As its N-terminal region shares 28% identity with yeast Daq1/Rpn13, we renamed it human Rpn13 (hRpn13). We also show here that it associates with the deubiquitinating enzyme UCH37 and anchors this enzyme to the proteasome. Disassembly of the polyubiquitin chain is an essential step in protein degradation by the 26S particle ( Glickman and Ciechanover, 2002 ). Among the 60 putative isopeptidases in the human genome, three are associated with the 19S complex, POH1/Rpn11, UCH2/UCH37, and Ubp6/Usp14 ( Holzl et al, 2000 ; Leggett et al, 2002 ; Verma et al, 2002 ). Interestingly, the isopeptidase UCH37 that binds to hRpn13 is not found in budding yeast ( Guterman and Glickman, 2004 ). When the C-terminal half of hRpn13 that binds to UCH37 is expressed, it can reduce proteolysis and induce cell death, probably by acting as a dominant-negative form of hRpn13. Thus, this novel subunit and its interaction with UCH37 appear to play an important role in proteasomal function.

Purification of proteasomes from rabbit skeletal muscle by conventional methods

Purification of 20S and 26S proteasomes was carried out as described by Kisselev et al (2002) with a few modifications. Briefly, the 100 000 g supernatant from homogenized rabbit muscle (100 g) was incubated with DE52 DEAE cellulose (100 ml). The resin was then washed on a glass filter with buffer A (20 mM Tris–HCl, pH7.5, 10% glycerol, 5 mM MgCl 2 , 0.5 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, and 2 mM ATP) containing 50 mM NaCl, and then packed in a column. Proteasomes were eluted with 250 ml of buffer A with a 50–300 mM NaCl gradient. The pooled fractions with proteasome peptidase activity were loaded on a Uno Q column (6 ml, Bio-Rad), and then eluted with 25 ml of buffer A, with a 100–350 mM NaCl gradient. 20S and 26S proteasomes were separated into two pools. The 20S pool was further dialyzed against buffer B (20 mM Na-HEPES, pH 7.5, 0.5 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, and 10% glycerol), loaded on a Heparin HiTrap column (5 ml, Amersham/Pharmacia), and eluted with 50 ml of buffer B containing a 0–250 mM NaCl gradient. The 26S proteasome pool from the Uno Q step was finally purified by ultracentrifugation (100 000 g for 24 h) on a 20–40% glycerol gradient.
