---
pmid: '10671565'
title: Alternative splicing of GAD67 results in the synthesis of a third form of glutamic-acid
  decarboxylase in human islets and other non-neural tissues.
authors:
- Chessler SD
- Lernmark A
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.275.7.5188
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Alternative splicing of GAD67 results in the synthesis of a third form of glutamic-acid decarboxylase in human islets and other non-neural tissues.
**Authors:** Chessler SD, Lernmark A
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.275.7.5188](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.275.7.5188)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Feb 18;275(7):5188-92. doi: 10.1074/jbc.275.7.5188.

Alternative splicing of GAD67 results in the synthesis of a third form of 
glutamic-acid decarboxylase in human islets and other non-neural tissues.

Chessler SD(1), Lernmark A.

Author information:
(1)Robert H. Williams Laboratory, Department of Medicine, University of 
Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195-7710, USA. chessler@u.washington.edu

Two forms of glutamic-acid decarboxylase (GAD) have been identified in mammalian 
tissues: a 65-kDa form (GAD65) and a 67-kDa form (GAD67). Alternate splicing 
produces one or two smaller variants of GAD67 in the brain of embryonic mice and 
rats. Additionally, a short, heretofore unidentified transcript homologous to 
GAD67 has been detected in human testis RNA. Because GAD, the enzyme responsible 
for gamma-aminobutyric acid production and a key autoantigen in type I diabetes, 
has unclear function in non-neural tissue, it is important to understand its 
pattern of expression. Unlike GAD65, GAD67 is not produced in human pancreatic 
islets. Here, we describe a novel splice variant of GAD67 that is produced in 
human islets, testis, adrenal cortex, and perhaps other endocrine tissues, but 
not in brain. This transcript directs the synthesis of a protein without GAD 
enzymatic activity: GAD25. A unique peptide sequence at the carboxyl terminus of 
GAD25 is highly conserved between mice, rats, and humans. We conclude that 
humans produce a third form of GAD in non-neural tissues and that human islets, 
although they do not synthesize full-length GAD67, do express this shortened 
variant.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.275.7.5188
PMID: 10671565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
