---
pmid: '20618438'
title: N-glycosylation is important for the correct intracellular localization of
  HFE and its ability to decrease cell surface transferrin binding.
authors:
- Bhatt L
- Murphy C
- O'Driscoll LS
- Carmo-Fonseca M
- McCaffrey MW
- Fleming JV
journal: FEBS J
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07727.x
---

# N-glycosylation is important for the correct intracellular localization of HFE and its ability to decrease cell surface transferrin binding.
**Authors:** Bhatt L, Murphy C, O'Driscoll LS, Carmo-Fonseca M, McCaffrey MW, Fleming JV
**Journal:** FEBS J (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07727.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07727.x)

## Abstract

1. FEBS J. 2010 Aug;277(15):3219-34. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07727.x. Epub 
2010 Jul 5.

N-glycosylation is important for the correct intracellular localization of HFE 
and its ability to decrease cell surface transferrin binding.

Bhatt L(1), Murphy C, O'Driscoll LS, Carmo-Fonseca M, McCaffrey MW, Fleming JV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Biosciences Institute, University College Cork, 
Ireland.

HFE is a type 1 transmembrane protein that becomes N-glycosylated during 
transport to the cell membrane. It influences cellular iron concentrations 
through multiple mechanisms, including regulation of transferrin binding to 
transferrin receptors. The importance of glycosylation in HFE localization and 
function has not yet been studied. Here we employed bioinformatics to identify 
putative N-glycosylation sites at residues N110, N130 and N234 of the human HFE 
protein, and used site-directed mutagenesis to create combinations of single, 
double or triple mutants. Compared with the wild-type protein, which 
co-localizes with the type 1 transferrin receptor in the endosomal recycling 
compartment and on distributed punctae, the triple mutant co-localized with BiP 
in the endoplasmic reticulum. This was similar to the localization pattern 
described previously for the misfolding HFE-C282Y mutant that causes type 1 
hereditary haemachromatosis. We also observed that the triple mutant was 
functionally deficient in beta2-microglobulin interactions and incapable of 
regulating transferrin binding, once again, reminiscent of the HFE-C282Y 
variant. Single and double mutants that undergo limited glycosylation appeared 
to have a mixed phenotype, with characteristics primarily of the wild-type, but 
also some from the glycosylation-deficient protein. Therefore, although they 
displayed an endosomal recycling compartment/punctate localization like the 
wild-type protein, many cells simultaneously displayed additional reticular 
localization. Furthermore, although the majority of cells expressing these 
single and double mutants showed decreased surface binding of transferrin, a 
number appeared to have lost this ability. We conclude that glycosylation is 
important for the normal intracellular trafficking and functional activity of 
HFE.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07727.x
PMID: 20618438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
