---
pmid: '14970196'
title: The early onset dystonia protein torsinA interacts with kinesin light chain
  1.
authors:
- Kamm C
- Boston H
- Hewett J
- Wilbur J
- Corey DP
- Hanson PI
- Ramesh V
- Breakefield XO
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M401332200
---

# The early onset dystonia protein torsinA interacts with kinesin light chain 1.
**Authors:** Kamm C, Boston H, Hewett J, Wilbur J, Corey DP, Hanson PI, Ramesh V, Breakefield XO
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M401332200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M401332200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 May 7;279(19):19882-92. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M401332200. Epub
2004  Feb 17.

The early onset dystonia protein torsinA interacts with kinesin light chain 1.

Kamm C(1), Boston H, Hewett J, Wilbur J, Corey DP, Hanson PI, Ramesh V, 
Breakefield XO.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Neurogenetics Unit, Departments of Neurology and Radiology, 
Massachusetts General Hospital and Neuroscience Program, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02114, USA.

Early onset dystonia is a movement disorder caused by loss of a glutamic acid 
residue (Glu(302/303)) in the carboxyl-terminal portion of the AAA+ protein, 
torsinA. We identified the light chain subunit (KLC1) of kinesin-I as an 
interacting partner for torsinA, with binding occurring between the 
tetratricopeptide repeat domain of KLC1 and the carboxyl-terminal region of 
torsinA. Coimmunoprecipitation analysis demonstrated that wild-type torsinA and 
kinesin-I form a complex in vivo. In cultured cortical neurons, both proteins 
co-localized along processes with enrichment at growth cones. Wild-type torsinA 
expressed in CAD cells co-localized with endogenous KLC1 at the distal end of 
processes, whereas mutant torsinA remained confined to the cell body. 
Subcellular fractionation of adult rat brain revealed torsinA and KLC associated 
with cofractionating membranes, and both proteins were co-immunoprecipitated 
after cross-linking cytoplasmically oriented proteins on isolated rat brain 
membranes. These studies suggest that wild-type torsinA undergoes anterograde 
transport along microtubules mediated by kinesin and may act as a molecular 
chaperone regulating kinesin activity and/or cargo binding.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M401332200
PMID: 14970196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
