---
pmid: '11991638'
title: Purification and characterization of native spliceosomes suitable for three-dimensional
  structural analysis.
authors:
- Jurica MS
- Licklider LJ
- Gygi SR
- Grigorieff N
- Moore MJ
journal: RNA
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1370266
doi: 10.1017/s1355838202021088
---

# Purification and characterization of native spliceosomes suitable for three-dimensional structural analysis.
**Authors:** Jurica MS, Licklider LJ, Gygi SR, Grigorieff N, Moore MJ
**Journal:** RNA (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1017/s1355838202021088](https://doi.org/10.1017/s1355838202021088)
**PMC:** [PMC1370266](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1370266/)

## Abstract

1. RNA. 2002 Apr;8(4):426-39. doi: 10.1017/s1355838202021088.

Purification and characterization of native spliceosomes suitable for 
three-dimensional structural analysis.

Jurica MS(1), Licklider LJ, Gygi SR, Grigorieff N, Moore MJ.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry, Brandeis 
University, Waltham, Massachusetts 02454, USA.

We describe characterization of spliceosomes affinity purified under native 
conditions. These spliceosomes consist largely of C complex containing splicing 
intermediates. After C complex assembly on an MS2 affinity-tagged pre-mRNA 
substrate containing a 3' splice site mutation, followed by RNase H digestion of 
earlier complexes, spliceosomes were purified by size exclusion and affinity 
selection. This protocol yielded 40S C complexes in sufficient quantities to 
visualize in negative stain by electron microscopy. Complexes purified in this 
way contain U2, U5, and U6 snRNAs, but very little U1 or U4 snRNA. Analysis by 
tandem mass spectrometry confirmed the presence of core snRNP proteins (SM and 
LSM), U2 and U5 snRNP-specific proteins, and the second step factors Prp16, 
Prp17, Slu7, and Prp22. In contrast, proteins specific to earlier splicing 
complexes, such as U2AF and U1 snRNP components, were not detected in C complex, 
but were present in similarly purified H complex. Images of these spliceosomes 
revealed single particles with dimensions of approximately 270 x 240 A that 
assort into well-defined classes. These images represent an important first step 
toward attaining a comprehensive three-dimensional understanding of pre-mRNA 
splicing.

DOI: 10.1017/s1355838202021088
PMCID: PMC1370266
PMID: 11991638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
