---
pmid: '9143333'
title: The effect of fasting/refeeding and insulin treatment on the expression of
  the regulatory genes of ketogenesis in intestine and liver of suckling rats.
authors:
- Arias G
- Asins G
- Hegardt FG
- Serra D
journal: Arch Biochem Biophys
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/abbi.1997.9911
---

# The effect of fasting/refeeding and insulin treatment on the expression of the regulatory genes of ketogenesis in intestine and liver of suckling rats.
**Authors:** Arias G, Asins G, Hegardt FG, Serra D
**Journal:** Arch Biochem Biophys (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1006/abbi.1997.9911](https://doi.org/10.1006/abbi.1997.9911)

## Abstract

1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1997 Apr 15;340(2):287-98. doi: 10.1006/abbi.1997.9911.

The effect of fasting/refeeding and insulin treatment on the expression of the 
regulatory genes of ketogenesis in intestine and liver of suckling rats.

Arias G(1), Asins G, Hegardt FG, Serra D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Pharmacy, University of Barcelona, 
Spain.

The influence of fasting/refeeding and insulin treatment on ketogenesis in 
12-day-old suckling rats was studied in intestine and liver by determining mRNA 
levels and enzyme activity of the two genes responsible for regulation of 
ketogenesis: carnitine palmitoyl transferase I (CPT I) and mitochondrial HMG-CoA 
synthase. Fasting produced hardly any change in mRNA or activity of CPT 1 in 
intestine, but led to a decrease in mitochondrial (mit.) HMG-CoA synthase. In 
liver, while mRNA levels and activity for CPT I increased, neither parameter was 
changed in HMG-CoA synthase. The comparison of these values with the ketogenic 
rate of both tissues under the fasting/refeeding treatment shows that HMG-CoA 
synthase could be the main gene responsible for regulation of ketogenesis in 
suckling rats. The small changes produced in serum ketone bodies in 
fasting/refeeding, with a profile similar to the ketogenic rate of the liver, 
indicate that liver contributes most to ketone body synthesis in suckling rats 
under these experimental conditions. Short-term insulin treatment produced 
increases in mRNA levels and activity in CPT I in intestine, but it also 
decreased both parameters in mit. HMG-CoA synthase. In liver, graphs of mRNA and 
activity were nearly identical in both genes. There was a marked decrease in 
mRNA levels and activity, resembling those values observed in adult rats. As in 
fasting/refeeding, the ketogenic rate correlated better to mit. HMG-CoA synthase 
than CPT I, and liver was the main organ regulating ketogenesis after insulin 
treatment. Serum ketone body concentrations were decreased by insulin but 
recovered after the second hour. Long-term insulin treatment had little effect 
on the mRNA levels for CPT I or mit. HMG-CoA synthase, but both the expressed 
and total activities of mit. HMG-CoA synthase were reduced by half in both 
intestine and liver. The ketogenic rate of both organs was decreased to 40% by 
long-term insulin treatment. The different effects of refeeding and insulin 
treatment on the expression of both genes, on the ketogenic rate, and on ketone 
body concentrations are discussed.

DOI: 10.1006/abbi.1997.9911
PMID: 9143333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
