---
pmid: '16236705'
title: h2-Calponin is regulated by mechanical tension and modifies the function of
  actin cytoskeleton.
authors:
- Hossain MM
- Crish JF
- Eckert RL
- Lin JJ
- Jin JP
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1405912
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M509952200
---

# h2-Calponin is regulated by mechanical tension and modifies the function of actin cytoskeleton.
**Authors:** Hossain MM, Crish JF, Eckert RL, Lin JJ, Jin JP
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M509952200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M509952200)
**PMC:** [PMC1405912](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1405912/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Dec 23;280(51):42442-53. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M509952200. Epub 
2005 Oct 18.

h2-Calponin is regulated by mechanical tension and modifies the function of 
actin cytoskeleton.

Hossain MM(1), Crish JF, Eckert RL, Lin JJ, Jin JP.

Author information:
(1)Section of Molecular Cardiology, Evanston Northwestern Healthcare and 
Northwestern University Fienberg School of Medicine, Evanston, Illinois 60201, 
USA.

Calponin is an extensively studied actin-binding protein, but its function is 
not well understood. Among three isoforms of calponin, h2-calponin is found in 
both smooth muscle and non-muscle cells. The present study demonstrates that 
epidermal keratinocytes and fibroblast cells express significant amounts of 
h2-calponin. The expression of h2-calponin is cell anchorage-dependent. The 
levels of h2-calponin decrease when cells are rounded up and remain low when 
cells are prevented from adherence to a culture dish. h2-calponin expression 
resumes after the floating cells are allowed to form a monolayer in plastic 
dish. Cell cultures on polyacrylamide gels of different stiffness demonstrated 
that h2-calponin expression is affected by the mechanical properties of the 
culture matrix. When cells are cultured on soft gel that applies less traction 
force to the cell and, therefore, lower mechanical tension in the cytoskeleton, 
the level of h2-calponin is significantly lower than that in cells cultured on 
hard gel or rigid plastic dish. Force-expression of h2-calponin enhanced the 
resistance of the actin filaments to cytochalasin B treatment. Keratinocyte 
differentiation is accompanied by a mechanical tension-related up-regulation of 
h2-calponin. Lowering the tension of actin cytoskeleton by inhibiting non-muscle 
myosin II ATPase decreased h2-calponin expression. In contrast to the mechanical 
tension regulation of endogenous h2-calponin, the expression of h2-calponin 
using a cytomegalovirus promotor was independent of the stiffness of culture 
matrix. The results suggest that h2-calponin represents a novel manifestation of 
mechanical tension responsive gene regulation that may modify cytoskeleton 
function.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M509952200
PMCID: PMC1405912
PMID: 16236705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
