---
pmid: '15355975'
title: Regulation of PTEN phosphorylation and stability by a tumor suppressor candidate
  protein.
authors:
- Okahara F
- Ikawa H
- Kanaho Y
- Maehama T
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.C400377200
---

# Regulation of PTEN phosphorylation and stability by a tumor suppressor candidate protein.
**Authors:** Okahara F, Ikawa H, Kanaho Y, Maehama T
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.C400377200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.C400377200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Oct 29;279(44):45300-3. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C400377200. Epub
2004  Sep 7.

Regulation of PTEN phosphorylation and stability by a tumor suppressor candidate 
protein.

Okahara F(1), Ikawa H, Kanaho Y, Maehama T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, 
3-18-22 Honkomagome, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8613, Japan.

The tumor suppressor PTEN plays an essential role in regulating signaling 
pathways involved in cell growth and apoptosis and is inactivated in a wide 
variety of tumors. In this study, we have identified a protein, referred to as 
PICT-1 (protein interacting with carboxyl terminus 1), that binds to the C 
terminus of PTEN and regulates its phosphorylation and turnover. Down-regulation 
of PICT-1 in MCF7 cells by RNA interference enhances the degradation of PTEN 
with a concomitant decrease in its phosphorylation. PTEN C-terminal 
tumor-associated mutants, which are highly susceptible to protein degradation, 
have lost the ability to bind to PICT-1 along with their reduced 
phosphorylation, suggesting that their rapid turnover results from impaired 
binding to PICT-1. Our results identify PICT-1 as a PTEN-interacting protein 
that promotes the phosphorylation and stability of PTEN. These findings suggest 
a novel molecular mechanism underlying the turnover of PTEN, which also provides 
an explanation for the loss of PTEN function due to C-terminal mutations.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.C400377200
PMID: 15355975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
