---
pmid: '19834901'
title: Benchmarking yeast two-hybrid systems using the interactions of bacterial motility
  proteins.
authors:
- Rajagopala SV
- Hughes KT
- Uetz P
journal: Proteomics
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2818629
doi: 10.1002/pmic.200900282
---

# Benchmarking yeast two-hybrid systems using the interactions of bacterial motility proteins.
**Authors:** Rajagopala SV, Hughes KT, Uetz P
**Journal:** Proteomics (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pmic.200900282](https://doi.org/10.1002/pmic.200900282)
**PMC:** [PMC2818629](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2818629/)

## Abstract

1. Proteomics. 2009 Dec;9(23):5296-302. doi: 10.1002/pmic.200900282.

Benchmarking yeast two-hybrid systems using the interactions of bacterial 
motility proteins.

Rajagopala SV(1), Hughes KT, Uetz P.

Author information:
(1)J Craig Venter Institute, Rockville, MD 20850, USA.

Yeast two-hybrid screens often produce vastly non-overlapping interaction data 
when the screens are conducted in different laboratories, or use different 
vectors, strains, or reporter genes. Here we investigate the underlying reasons 
for such inconsistencies and compare the effect of seven different vectors and 
their yeast two-hybrid interactions. Genome-wide array screens with 49 
motility-related baits from Treponema pallidum yielded 77 and 165 interactions 
with bait vectors pLP-GBKT7 and pAS1-LP, respectively, including 21 overlapping 
interactions. In addition, 90 motility-related proteins from Escherichia coli 
were tested in all pairwise combinations and yielded 140 interactions when 
tested with pGBKT7g/pGADT7g vectors but only 47 when tested with 
pDEST32/pDEST22. We discuss the factors that determine these effects, including 
copy number, the nature of the fusion protein, and species-specific differences 
that explain non-conserved interactions among species. The pDEST22/pDEST32 
vectors produce a higher fraction of interactions that are conserved and that 
are biologically relevant when compared with the pGBKT7/pGADT7-related vectors, 
but the latter appear to be more sensitive and thus detect more interactions 
overall.

DOI: 10.1002/pmic.200900282
PMCID: PMC2818629
PMID: 19834901 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors do not declare any conflicts of 
interest.
