---
pmid: '17182860'
title: Activated Cdc42-associated kinase 1 is a component of EGF receptor signaling
  complex and regulates EGF receptor degradation.
authors:
- Shen F
- Lin Q
- Gu Y
- Childress C
- Yang W
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1805115
doi: 10.1091/mbc.e06-02-0142
---

# Activated Cdc42-associated kinase 1 is a component of EGF receptor signaling complex and regulates EGF receptor degradation.
**Authors:** Shen F, Lin Q, Gu Y, Childress C, Yang W
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.e06-02-0142](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.e06-02-0142)
**PMC:** [PMC1805115](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1805115/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Cell. 2007 Mar;18(3):732-42. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e06-02-0142. Epub 2006 
Dec 20.

Activated Cdc42-associated kinase 1 is a component of EGF receptor signaling 
complex and regulates EGF receptor degradation.

Shen F(1), Lin Q, Gu Y, Childress C, Yang W.

Author information:
(1)Weis Center for Research, Geisinger Clinic, Danville, PA 17822, USA.

Cdc42-associated tyrosine kinase 1 (ACK1) is a specific down-stream effector of 
Cdc42, a Rho family small G-protein. Previous studies have shown that ACK1 
interacts with clathrin heavy chain and is involved in clathrin-coated vesicle 
endocytosis. Here we report that ACK1 interacted with epidermal growth factor 
receptor (EGFR) upon EGF stimulation via a region at carboxy terminus that is 
highly homologous to Gene-33/Mig-6/RALT. The interaction of ACK1 with EGFR was 
dependent on the kinase activity or tyrosine phosphorylation of EGFR. 
Immunofluorescent staining using anti-EGFR and GFP-ACK1 indicates that ACK1 was 
colocalized with EGFR on EEA-1 positive vesicles upon EGF stimulation. 
Suppression of the expression of ACK1 by ACK-RNAi inhibited ligand-induced 
degradation of EGFR upon EGF stimulation, suggesting that ACK1 plays an 
important role in regulation of EGFR degradation in cells. Furthermore, we 
identified ACK1 as an ubiquitin-binding protein. Through an 
ubiquitin-association (Uba) domain at the carboxy terminus, ACK1 binds to both 
poly- and mono-ubiquitin. Overexpression of the Uba domain-deletion mutant of 
ACK1 blocked the ligand-dependent degradation of EGFR, suggesting that ACK1 
regulates EGFR degradation via its Uba domain. Taken together, our studies 
suggest that ACK1 senses signal of EGF and regulates ligand-induced degradation 
of EGFR.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e06-02-0142
PMCID: PMC1805115
PMID: 17182860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Cdc42-associated tyrosine kinase 1 (ACK1) is a specific down-stream effector of Cdc42, a Rho family small G-protein. Previous studies have shown that ACK1 interacts with clathrin heavy chain and is involved in clathrin-coated vesicle endocytosis. Here we report that ACK1 interacted with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) upon EGF stimulation via a region at carboxy terminus that is highly homologous to Gene-33/Mig-6/RALT. The interaction of ACK1 with EGFR was dependent on the kinase activity or tyrosine phosphorylation of EGFR. Immunofluorescent staining using anti-EGFR and GFP-ACK1 indicates that ACK1 was colocalized with EGFR on EEA-1 positive vesicles upon EGF stimulation. Suppression of the expression of ACK1 by ACK-RNAi inhibited ligand-induced degradation of EGFR upon EGF stimulation, suggesting that ACK1 plays an important role in regulation of EGFR degradation in cells. Furthermore, we identified ACK1 as an ubiquitin-binding protein. Through an ubiquitin-association (Uba) domain at the carboxy terminus, ACK1 binds to both poly- and mono-ubiquitin. Overexpression of the Uba domain-deletion mutant of ACK1 blocked the ligand-dependent degradation of EGFR, suggesting that ACK1 regulates EGFR degradation via its Uba domain. Taken together, our studies suggest that ACK1 senses signal of EGF and regulates ligand-induced degradation of EGFR.

INTRODUCTION

The Cdc42-associated tyrosine kinase (ACK) family contains five members: ACK1, ACK2, Tnk1, Kos1, and Gene33 (also Mig-6 or RALT). Among the members, Gene33 is the only protein that does not have tyrosine kinase domain. ACK1, ACK2, and Gene33 are specific effectors of Rho family small GTPase Cdc42 ( Manser et al. , 1993 , Yang and Cerione, 1997 ; Makkinje et al. , 2000 ). ACK, including both ACK1 and ACK2, is activated by signaling of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), M3 muscarinic receptor, and cell adhesion mediated by integrin and proteoglycan ( Satoh et al. , 1996 ; Yang and Cerione, 1997 ; Eisenmann et al. , 1999 ; Yang et al. , 1999 ; Linseman et al. , 2001 ). In Drosophila , DACK mediates function of Cdc42 in dorsal closure during the embryo development ( Sem et al. , 2002 ). An ACK homolog, Ark-1, in Caenorhabditis elegans negatively regulates EGF signaling ( Hopper et al. , 2000 ).

The members of the ACK family function in regulation of cell growth. Ark-1 has shown to inhibit EGFR signals and suppress cell division in embryo development ( Hopper et al. , 2000 ). Overexpression of ACK2 in NIH3T3 cells severely impairs cell growth ( Yang et al. , 2001a ). Kos-1, the homologue to the N-terminus portion of Tnk1 and ACK, suppresses Ras-mediated cellular transformation ( Hoare et al. , 2003 ). Gene33, the homologue to the carboxy terminus of ACK that includes Cdc42-binding and proline-rich domains, inhibits tyrosine phosphorylation and signaling of EGFR and ErbB2, thus blocking the mitogenic effect of EGFR and ErbB2 ( Fiorentino et al. , 2000 ; Xu et al. , 2005 ). However, studies on the effect of ACK1 on Ras-GRF activity found that ACK1 activates Ras and is required for Ras-mediated cellular transformation in NIH3T3 cells ( Nur-E-Kamal et al. , 2005 ). Recent studies have shown that ACK1 enhances tumor metastasis by mediating integrin signaling ( van der Horst et al. , 2005 ) and promotes tumorigenesis by inhibiting tumor-suppression activity of WWOX ( Mahajan et al. , 2005 ). The variety of these studies suggests a complexity of the effects of members of ACK family on cell growth and tumorigenesis.

Both ACK1 and ACK2 possess a highly conserved clathrin-binding motif and interact with clathrin ( Teo et al. , 2001 ; Yang et al. , 2001b ). Overexpression of ACK2 severely impairs transferrin receptor endocytosis, causes aberrant localization of AP-2, and induces changes in clathrin assembly. Furthermore, ACK2 interacts with SH3PX1, a member of sorting nexin family, via its proline-rich domain 1 and phosphorylates SH3PX1 to facilitate the degradation of EGF receptors ( Lin et al. , 2002 ). In C. elegans , Ark-1 genetically interacts with UNC101, the homologue of mammalian clathrin-associated protein AP47, and SLI-1, the homologue of mammalian Cbl that is an E3 ubiquitin ligase for ubiquitination of EGFR, and negatively regulates EGFR signaling ( Hopper et al. , 2000 ). These data suggest a role of ACK in EGFR degradation.

Here we show that ACK1 is an ubiquitin-binding protein and interacts with EGFR through a conserved EGFR-binding domain (EBD) at the carboxy terminus. The interaction of ACK1 with EGFR is dependent on EGF stimulation and kinase activity of EGFR. ACK1 colocalizes with EGFR during the internalization of EGFR. We have demonstrated that ACK1 plays a role in EGFR degradation by using ACK-RNA interference (RNAi) knockdown of endogenous ACK1 and overexpression of the ubiquitin-binding defective mutant. Our studies suggest that ACK1 is a component of EGFR signaling and regulates ligand-induced EGFR degradation.

DISCUSSION

ACK is a specific downstream effector of Cdc42, a member of Rho family small G-proteins. While Cdc42 functions in cytoskeletal organization, membrane trafficking and mitogenesis, the signal transduction pathway of ACK has not been defined. Previous studies have shown that tyrosine phosphorylation of ACK1 is enhanced in response to the EGF signal ( Satoh et al. , 1996 ), and ACK1 possesses a clathrin-binding motif, interacts with clathrin, and participates in clathrin-mediated endocytosis ( Teo et al. , 2001 ). Here we report that ACK1 is an ubiquitin-binding protein and interacts with EGFR upon EGF stimulation. Knockdown of ACK1 by ACK1-RNAi or overexpression of the Uba domain-deletion mutant of ACK1 inhibits ligand-induced degradation of EGFR. Our data point to a function for ACK1 to be a regulator in ligand-induced degradation of EGFR.

The interaction of ACK1 with EGFR is in a way that is very similar to that of Gene-33/Mig-6/RALT, a protein homologous to the carboxyl portion of ACK1, with ErbB2 ( Fiorentino et al. , 2000 ; Xu et al. , 2005 ). For example, Gene-33 interacts only with activated ErbB2 and the ErbB2-interactive domain of Gene-33 is the conserved EBD domain ( Fiorentino et al. , 2000 ). Gene-33 also interacts with EGFR through the EBD domain, however, independent of stimulation of EGF ( Xu et al. , 2005 ). It is not clear why Gene-33 binds to ErbB2 dependent on tyrosine phosphorylation of the receptor, whereas to EGFR independent on tyrosine phosphorylation of the receptor. Because those binding assays were performed with transfection of exogenous EGFR and Gene-33, the overexpression level of the receptor and Gene-33 in the assays may be a cause for diversified receptor-binding properties of Gene-33. Nevertheless, it seems that Gene-33 and ACK1 share a conserved EGFR/ErbB2-interactive mechanism. It has been shown that overexpression of Gene-33 inhibited tyrosine phosphorylation of EGFR and ErbB2-initiated cell proliferation and Erk activation ( Fiorentino et al. , 2000 ; Xu et al. , 2005 ), suggesting that Gene-33 is a negative regulator of EGFR or ErbB2 signaling. There is a research report showing that ACK1 is required for Ras-mediated cellular transformation ( Nur-E-Kamal et al. , 2005 ). However, genetic analysis of ACK function in C. elegans has indicated a negative role of ACK in EGFR signaling ( Hopper et al. , 2000 ). Further investigation of the role of ACK1 in EGFR-mediated cell proliferation is necessary to define the role of ACK1 in cellular mitogenesis.

We observed a striking difference in interaction with EGFR between endogenous ACK1 and exogenous overexpressed ACK1 ( Figures 2 – 4 ): interaction of exogenous ACK1 with EGFR occurred as quickly as 1 min after EGF stimulation ( Figure 2 B), and consistent with this the interaction took place on plasma membrane ( Figure 4 ), whereas interaction of endogenous ACK1 with EGFR occurred relatively slowly (maximal binding at 1 h after EGF stimulation; Figures 2 A and 3 ), and consistent with this the interaction did not take place on plasma membrane ( Figure 4 ). These data suggest a possibility that endogenous ACK1 is restrained in cells. The interaction of endogenous ACK1 with EGFR may require transport of EGFR to an ACK1-containing intracellular compartment (EEA1 positive endosomes?) or release of ACK1 from the restrained sites by EGF signaling. Overexpression eliminates the restraint of ACK1 and yields free ACK1 that is capable of binding to active EGFR. Because endogenous ACK1 interacts with EGFR at late stage of ligand-induced EGFR activation, ACK1 is likely to function at late phase of EGFR endocytosis on EEA1-positive endosomes.

Cbl, the E3 ubiquitin ligase for the ubiquitination of EGFR, the HGF-regulated tyrosine phosphorylation substrate (Hrs), and the tumor-suppressor gene 101 (Tsg101) have been reported as the key regulators in ubiquitination-mediated EGFR degradation ( Levkowitz et al. , 1999 ; Yarden, 2001 ; Bishop et al. , 2002 ; Lu et al. , 2003 ). Cbl directly interacts with EGFR phosphotyrosine residue (tyrosine 1045) via its SH2 domain upon the activation of EGFR and subsequently catalyzes the ubiquitination. Hrs recognizes the mono-ubiqitinated EGFR and brings EGFR-loaded CCVs to multivesicular bodies (MVBs) by interaction with Tsg101 in the endosomal sorting complex required for transport I (ESCRT-I). The EGFR in MVBs eventually transports to lysosomes for degradation. In C. elegans , the ACK homologue, Ark-1, is in the same pathway as that of Cbl for regulation of EGFR signaling ( Hopper et al. , 2000 ). However, we did not observe an interaction between ACK1 and Cbl with coimmunoprecipitation assays in COS7 cells (data not shown). The results in Figures 2 A, 3 A, and 5 B also suggest that ACK1 and c-Cbl interact with EGFR at different steps during ligand-induced endocytosis and degradation of EGFR. To dissect the signaling events of ACK1 in regulation of EGFR degradation, we need to determine the exact timing and location of the interaction of ACK1 with EGFR in future studies. Furthermore, we will address the biological consequence of ACK1-regulated EGFR degradation in future investigations. Because EGFR has a pivotal role in regulation of cell growth and overexpression of EGFR has been found in many types of solid tumors, the function of ACK1 in tumorigenesis related to EGFR degradation should be another interesting area to explore.
