---
pmid: '35188580'
title: The intrinsically disordered TSSC4 protein acts as a helicase inhibitor, placeholder
  and multi-interaction coordinator during snRNP assembly and recycling.
authors:
- Bergfort A
- Hilal T
- Kuropka B
- Ilik İA
- Weber G
- Aktaş T
- Freund C
- Wahl MC
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2022'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC8934646
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkac087
---

# The intrinsically disordered TSSC4 protein acts as a helicase inhibitor, placeholder and multi-interaction coordinator during snRNP assembly and recycling.
**Authors:** Bergfort A, Hilal T, Kuropka B, Ilik İA, Weber G, Aktaş T, Freund C, Wahl MC
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkac087](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkac087)
**PMC:** [PMC8934646](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8934646/)

## Abstract

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2022 Mar 21;50(5):2938-2958. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkac087.

The intrinsically disordered TSSC4 protein acts as a helicase inhibitor, 
placeholder and multi-interaction coordinator during snRNP assembly and 
recycling.

Bergfort A(1), Hilal T(1)(2), Kuropka B(3)(4), Ilik İA(5), Weber G(6), Aktaş 
T(5), Freund C(3), Wahl MC(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Freie Universität Berlin, Institute of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Laboratory 
of Structural Biochemistry, Takustr. 6, D-14195 Berlin, Germany.
(2)Freie Universität Berlin, Institute of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Research 
Center of Electron Microscopy, Fabeckstr. 36a, 14195 Berlin, Germany.
(3)Freie Universität Berlin, Institute of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Laboratory 
of Protein Biochemistry, Thielallee 63, D-14195, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Freie Universität Berlin, Institute of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Core 
Facility BioSupraMol, Thielallee 63, D-14195, Berlin, Germany.
(5)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Ihnestr. 63, D-14195 Berlin, 
Germany.
(6)Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie, Macromolecular 
Crystallography, Albert-Einstein-Str. 15, D-12489 Berlin, Germany.

Biogenesis of spliceosomal small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs) and their 
recycling after splicing require numerous assembly/recycling factors whose modes 
of action are often poorly understood. The intrinsically disordered TSSC4 
protein has been identified as a nuclear-localized U5 snRNP and U4/U6-U5 
tri-snRNP assembly/recycling factor, but how TSSC4's intrinsic disorder supports 
TSSC4 functions remains unknown. Using diverse interaction assays and cryogenic 
electron microscopy-based structural analysis, we show that TSSC4 employs four 
conserved, non-contiguous regions to bind the PRPF8 Jab1/MPN domain and the 
SNRNP200 helicase at functionally important sites. It thereby inhibits SNRNP200 
helicase activity, spatially aligns the proteins, coordinates formation of a U5 
sub-module and transiently blocks premature interaction of SNRNP200 with at 
least three other spliceosomal factors. Guided by the structure, we designed a 
TSSC4 variant that lacks stable binding to the PRPF8 Jab1/MPN domain or SNRNP200 
in vitro. Comparative immunoprecipitation/mass spectrometry from HEK293 nuclear 
extract revealed distinct interaction profiles of wild type TSSC4 and the 
variant deficient in PRPF8/SNRNP200 binding with snRNP proteins, other 
spliceosomal proteins as well as snRNP assembly/recycling factors and 
chaperones. Our findings elucidate molecular strategies employed by an 
intrinsically disordered protein to promote snRNP assembly, and suggest multiple 
TSSC4-dependent stages during snRNP assembly/recycling.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkac087
PMCID: PMC8934646
PMID: 35188580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
