---
pmid: '11162499'
title: The sugar-insensitive1 (sis1) mutant of Arabidopsis is allelic to ctr1.
authors:
- Gibson SI
- Laby RJ
- Kim D
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/bbrc.2000.4062
---

# The sugar-insensitive1 (sis1) mutant of Arabidopsis is allelic to ctr1.
**Authors:** Gibson SI, Laby RJ, Kim D
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1006/bbrc.2000.4062](https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.2000.4062)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Jan 12;280(1):196-203. doi:
10.1006/bbrc.2000.4062.

The sugar-insensitive1 (sis1) mutant of Arabidopsis is allelic to ctr1.

Gibson SI(1), Laby RJ, Kim D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, MS140, Rice University, 6100
Main Street, Houston, Texas 77005-1892, USA. sig@bioc.rice.edu

Soluble sugar levels affect a diverse array of plant developmental processes.
For example, exposure to high levels of glucose or sucrose inhibits early
seedling development of Arabidopsis thaliana (L.) Heynh. Media-shift experiments
indicate that Arabidopsis seedlings lose their sensitivity to the inhibitory
effects of high sugar levels on early development within approximately two days
after the start of imbibition. The sugar-insensitive1 (sis1) mutant of
Arabidopsis was isolated by screening for plants that are insensitive to the
inhibitory effects of high concentrations of sucrose on early seedling
development. The sis1 mutant also displays glucose and mannose resistant
phenotypes and has an osmo-tolerant phenotype during early seedling development.
The sis1 mutant is resistant to the negative effects of paclobutrazol, an
inhibitor of gibberellin biosynthesis, on seed germination. Characterization of
the sis1 mutant revealed that it is allelic to ctr1, a previously identified
mutant with a constitutive response to ethylene.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.2000.4062
PMID: 11162499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
