---
pmid: '27257257'
title: ADP-ribose-derived nuclear ATP synthesis by NUDIX5 is required for chromatin
  remodeling.
authors:
- Wright RH
- Lioutas A
- Le Dily F
- Soronellas D
- Pohl A
- Bonet J
- Nacht AS
- Samino S
- Font-Mateu J
- Vicent GP
- Wierer M
- Trabado MA
- Schelhorn C
- Carolis C
- Macias MJ
- Yanes O
- Oliva B
- Beato M
journal: Science
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.aad9335
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# ADP-ribose-derived nuclear ATP synthesis by NUDIX5 is required for chromatin remodeling.
**Authors:** Wright RH, Lioutas A, Le Dily F, Soronellas D, Pohl A, Bonet J, Nacht AS, Samino S, Font-Mateu J, Vicent GP, Wierer M, Trabado MA, Schelhorn C, Carolis C, Macias MJ, Yanes O, Oliva B, Beato M
**Journal:** Science (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.aad9335](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aad9335)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2016 Jun 3;352(6290):1221-5. doi: 10.1126/science.aad9335.

ADP-ribose-derived nuclear ATP synthesis by NUDIX5 is required for chromatin 
remodeling.

Wright RH(1), Lioutas A(1), Le Dily F(1), Soronellas D(1), Pohl A(1), Bonet 
J(2), Nacht AS(1), Samino S(3), Font-Mateu J(1), Vicent GP(1), Wierer M(1), 
Trabado MA(4), Schelhorn C(5), Carolis C(4), Macias MJ(6), Yanes O(3), Oliva 
B(2), Beato M(7).

Author information:
(1)Centre de Regulació Genòmica (CRG), Barcelona Institute for Science and 
Technology, Barcelona E-09003, Spain. Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona 
E-08003, Spain.
(2)Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona E-08003, Spain. Structural Bioinformatics 
Laboratory, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona E-08003, Spain.
(3)Metabolomics Platform, Spanish Biomedical Research Centre in Diabetes and 
Associated Metabolic Disorders (CIBERDEM), 28029 Madrid, Spain. Center for Omic 
Sciences and Department of Electronic Engineering, Rovira i Virgili University, 
43007 Tarragona, Spain.
(4)Biomolecular Screening and Protein Technologies Unit, Centre de Regulació 
Genòmica, Barcelona E-08003, Spain.
(5)Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), Barcelona Institute of 
Science and Technology, Barcelona 08028, Spain.
(6)Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), Barcelona Institute of 
Science and Technology, Barcelona 08028, Spain. Catalan Institution for Research 
and Advanced Studies (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Centre de Regulació Genòmica (CRG), Barcelona Institute for Science and 
Technology, Barcelona E-09003, Spain. Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona 
E-08003, Spain. miguel.beato@crg.eu.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2016 Aug 4;63(3):349-51. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2016.07.018.
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2019 Sep;20(9):512. doi: 10.1038/s41580-019-0145-z.

Key nuclear processes in eukaryotes, including DNA replication, repair, and gene 
regulation, require extensive chromatin remodeling catalyzed by energy-consuming 
enzymes. It remains unclear how the ATP demands of such processes are met in 
response to rapid stimuli. We analyzed this question in the context of the 
massive gene regulation changes induced by progestins in breast cancer cells and 
found that ATP is generated in the cell nucleus via the hydrolysis of 
poly(ADP-ribose) to ADP-ribose. In the presence of pyrophosphate, ADP-ribose is 
used by the pyrophosphatase NUDIX5 to generate nuclear ATP. The nuclear source 
of ATP is essential for hormone-induced chromatin remodeling, transcriptional 
regulation, and cell proliferation.

Copyright © 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/science.aad9335
PMID: 27257257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
