---
pmid: '9659934'
title: The GATA-factor elt-2 is essential for formation of the Caenorhabditis elegans
  intestine.
authors:
- Fukushige T
- Hawkins MG
- McGhee JD
journal: Dev Biol
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
---

# The GATA-factor elt-2 is essential for formation of the Caenorhabditis elegans intestine.
**Authors:** Fukushige T, Hawkins MG, McGhee JD
**Journal:** Dev Biol (1998)

## Abstract

1. Dev Biol. 1998 Jun 15;198(2):286-302.

The GATA-factor elt-2 is essential for formation of the Caenorhabditis elegans 
intestine.

Fukushige T(1), Hawkins MG, McGhee JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary, 
Alberta, Canada.

The Caenorhabditis elegans elt-2 gene encodes a single-finger GATA factor, 
previously cloned by virtue of its binding to a tandem pair of GATA sites that 
control the gut-specific ges-1 esterase gene. In the present paper, we show that 
elt-2 expression is completely gut specific, beginning when the embryonic gut 
has only two cells (one cell cycle prior to ges-1 expression) and continuing in 
every cell of the gut throughout the life of the worm. When elt-2 is expressed 
ectopically using a transgenic heat-shock construct, the endogenous ges-1 gene 
is now expressed in most if not all cells of the embryo; several other gut 
markers (including a transgenic elt-2-promoter::lacZ reporter construct designed 
to test for elt-2 autoregulation) are also expressed ectopically in the same 
experiment. These effects are specific in that two other C. elegans GATA factors 
(elt-1 and elt-3) do not cause ectopic gut gene expression. An imprecise 
transposon excision was identified that removes the entire elt-2 coding region. 
Homozygous elt-2 null mutants die at the L1 larval stage with an apparent 
malformation or degeneration of gut cells. Although the loss of elt-2 function 
has major consequences for later gut morphogenesis and function, mutant embryos 
still express ges-1. We suggest that elt-2 is part of a redundant network of 
genes that controls embryonic gut development; other factors may be able to 
compensate for elt-2 loss in the earlier stages of gut development but not in 
later stages. We discuss whether elements of this regulatory network may be 
conserved in all metazoa.

PMID: 9659934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
