---
reference_id: PMID:29295865
title: Trans-binding of UFM1 to UBA5 stimulates UBA5 homodimerization and ATP binding.
authors:
- Mashahreh B
- Hassouna F
- Soudah N
- Cohen-Kfir E
- Strulovich R
- Haitin Y
- Wiener R
journal: FASEB J
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1096/fj.201701057R
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Trans-binding of UFM1 to UBA5 stimulates UBA5 homodimerization and ATP binding.
**Authors:** Mashahreh B, Hassouna F, Soudah N, Cohen-Kfir E, Strulovich R, Haitin Y, Wiener R
**Journal:** FASEB J (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1096/fj.201701057R](https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.201701057R)

## Content

1. FASEB J. 2018 May;32(5):2794-2802. doi: 10.1096/fj.201701057R. Epub 2018 Jan
8.

Trans-binding of UFM1 to UBA5 stimulates UBA5 homodimerization and ATP binding.

Mashahreh B(1), Hassouna F(1), Soudah N(1), Cohen-Kfir E(1), Strulovich R(2),
Haitin Y(2), Wiener R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute for Medical
Research Israel-Canada, Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem,
Israel.
(2)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv
University, Tel-Aviv, Israel.

All ubiquitin-like proteins (UBLs) undergo an activation process before their
conjugation to target proteins. Although the steps required for the activation
of UBLs are conserved and common to all UBLs, we have previously shown that the
activation of the UBL, ubiquitin fold modifier 1 (UFM1) by the E1, Ufm1
modifier-activating enzyme 5 (UBA5) is executed in a trans-binding mechanism,
not observed in any other E1. In this study, we explored the necessity of that
mechanism for UFM1 activation and found that it is needed not only for UFM1
binding to UBA5 but also for stabilizing the UBA5 homodimer. Although UBA5
functions as a dimer, in solution it behaves as a weak dimer. Dimerization of
UBA5 is required for ATP binding; therefore, stabilization of the dimer by UFM1
enhances ATP binding. Our results make a connection between the binding of UFM1
to UBA5 and the latter's affinity to ATP, so we propose a novel mechanism for
the regulation of ATP's binding to E1.-Mashahreh, B., Hassouna, F., Soudah, N.,
Cohen-Kfir, E., Strulovich, R., Haitin, Y., Wiener, R. Trans-binding of UFM1 to
UBA5 stimulates UBA5 homodimerization and ATP binding.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.201701057R
PMID: 29295865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]