---
pmid: '18573880'
title: Phosphorylation of profilin by ROCK1 regulates polyglutamine aggregation.
authors:
- Shao J
- Welch WJ
- Diprospero NA
- Diamond MI
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC2519718
doi: 10.1128/MCB.00079-08
---

# Phosphorylation of profilin by ROCK1 regulates polyglutamine aggregation.
**Authors:** Shao J, Welch WJ, Diprospero NA, Diamond MI
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.00079-08](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.00079-08)
**PMC:** [PMC2519718](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2519718/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Sep;28(17):5196-208. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00079-08. Epub 2008 
Jun 23.

Phosphorylation of profilin by ROCK1 regulates polyglutamine aggregation.

Shao J(1), Welch WJ, Diprospero NA, Diamond MI.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Neurology and Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, UCSF, San 
Francisco, California 94143, USA.

Y-27632, an inhibitor of the Rho-associated kinase ROCK, is a therapeutic lead 
for Huntington disease (HD). The downstream targets that mediate its inhibitory 
effects on huntingtin (Htt) aggregation and toxicity are unknown. We have 
identified profilin, a small actin-binding factor that also interacts with Htt, 
as being a direct target of the ROCK1 isoform. The overexpression of profilin 
reduces the aggregation of polyglutamine-expanded Htt and androgen receptor (AR) 
peptides. This requires profilin's G-actin binding activity and its direct 
interaction with Htt, which are both inhibited by the ROCK1-mediated 
phosphorylation of profilin at Ser-137. Y-27632 blocks the phosphorylation of 
profilin in HEK293 cells and primary neurons, which maintains profilin in an 
active state. The knockdown of profilin blocks the inhibitory effect of Y-27632 
on both AR and Htt aggregation. A signaling pathway from ROCK1 to profilin thus 
controls polyglutamine protein aggregation and is targeted by a promising 
therapeutic lead for HD.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00079-08
PMCID: PMC2519718
PMID: 18573880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Y-27632, an inhibitor of the Rho-associated kinase ROCK, is a therapeutic lead for Huntington disease (HD). The downstream targets that mediate its inhibitory effects on huntingtin (Htt) aggregation and toxicity are unknown. We have identified profilin, a small actin-binding factor that also interacts with Htt, as being a direct target of the ROCK1 isoform. The overexpression of profilin reduces the aggregation of polyglutamine-expanded Htt and androgen receptor (AR) peptides. This requires profilin's G-actin binding activity and its direct interaction with Htt, which are both inhibited by the ROCK1-mediated phosphorylation of profilin at Ser-137. Y-27632 blocks the phosphorylation of profilin in HEK293 cells and primary neurons, which maintains profilin in an active state. The knockdown of profilin blocks the inhibitory effect of Y-27632 on both AR and Htt aggregation. A signaling pathway from ROCK1 to profilin thus controls polyglutamine protein aggregation and is targeted by a promising therapeutic lead for HD.

DISCUSSION

Y-27632 is a therapeutic lead for HD and SBMA. It diminishes AR and Htt aggregation in cultured cells and reduces Htt exon 1 toxicity in vivo ( 36 ). In this work, we have elucidated a signaling pathway that mediates these effects in neural and nonneural cells. We find that ROCK1, under the control of Rho-GTPase, phosphorylates the actin regulatory factor profilin at Ser-137, and this inactivates profilin as an aggregation inhibitor. Phosphorylation at Ser-137 modestly interferes with profilin's binding to actin, which is required for the maximal inhibition of both AR and Htt aggregation. Phosphorylation at Ser-137 also blocks profilin's interaction with Htt, which is necessary for profilin's maximal inhibition of Htt aggregation. The knockdown of profilin strongly reduces the inhibitory effect of Y-27632 on AR and Htt aggregation. Taken together, these data suggest that profilin is directly downstream of ROCK1, and the Rho/ROCK/profilin signaling pathway constitutes an important therapeutic target. More effective inhibitors of ROCK and other enzymes that modulate profilin phosphorylation at Ser-137 may prove to be effective HD therapies.

In contrast to profilin, cofilin, an actin-severing and -depolymerizing factor, increases AR and Htt aggregation. These data, combined with the known activities of ROCK as an actin-remodeling factor, suggest that the actin cytoskeleton might somehow play a role in regulating the aggregation process. This is supported by recent observations that the inhibition of actin polymerization pharmacologically or by the depletion of Arp2 promotes intracellular Htt aggregation ( 29 ). The precise mechanism by which the actin cytoskeleton influences polyglutamine aggregation awaits further study.
