---
pmid: '23995642'
title: Amino acid racemization in Pseudomonas putida KT2440.
authors:
- Radkov AD
- Moe LA
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3811597
doi: 10.1128/JB.00761-13
---

# Amino acid racemization in Pseudomonas putida KT2440.
**Authors:** Radkov AD, Moe LA
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JB.00761-13](https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.00761-13)
**PMC:** [PMC3811597](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3811597/)

## Abstract

1. J Bacteriol. 2013 Nov;195(22):5016-24. doi: 10.1128/JB.00761-13. Epub 2013 Aug
 30.

Amino acid racemization in Pseudomonas putida KT2440.

Radkov AD(1), Moe LA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant and Soil Sciences, College of Agriculture, University of 
Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, USA.

D-Amino acids have been shown to play an increasingly diverse role in bacterial 
physiology, yet much remains to be learned about their synthesis and catabolism. 
Here we used the model soil- and rhizosphere-dwelling organism Pseudomonas 
putida KT2440 to elaborate on the genomics and enzymology of d-amino acid 
metabolism. P. putida KT2440 catabolized the d-stereoisomers of lysine, 
phenylalanine, arginine, alanine, and hydroxyproline as the sole carbon and 
nitrogen sources. With the exception of phenylalanine, each of these amino acids 
was racemized by P. putida KT2440 enzymes. Three amino acid racemases were 
identified from a genomic screen, and the enzymes were further characterized in 
vitro. The putative biosynthetic alanine racemase Alr showed broad substrate 
specificity, exhibiting measurable racemase activity with 9 of the 19 chiral 
amino acids. Among these amino acids, activity was the highest with lysine, and 
the k(cat)/K(m) values with l- and d-lysine were 3 orders of magnitude greater 
than the k(cat)/K(m) values with l- and d-alanine. Conversely, the putative 
catabolic alanine racemase DadX showed narrow substrate specificity, clearly 
preferring only the alanine stereoisomers as the substrates. However, DadX did 
show 6- and 9-fold higher k(cat)/K(m) values than Alr with l- and d-alanine, 
respectively. The annotated proline racemase ProR of P. putida KT2440 showed 
negligible activity with either stereoisomer of the 19 chiral amino acids but 
exhibited strong epimerization activity with hydroxyproline as the substrate. 
Comparative genomic analysis revealed differences among pseudomonads with 
respect to alanine racemase genes that may point to different roles for these 
genes among closely related species.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00761-13
PMCID: PMC3811597
PMID: 23995642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
