---
pmid: '10960098'
title: Identification of Escherichia coli ubiB, a gene required for the first monooxygenase
  step in ubiquinone biosynthesis.
authors:
- Poon WW
- Davis DE
- Ha HT
- Jonassen T
- Rather PN
- Clarke CF
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC94662
doi: 10.1128/JB.182.18.5139-5146.2000
---

# Identification of Escherichia coli ubiB, a gene required for the first monooxygenase step in ubiquinone biosynthesis.
**Authors:** Poon WW, Davis DE, Ha HT, Jonassen T, Rather PN, Clarke CF
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JB.182.18.5139-5146.2000](https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.182.18.5139-5146.2000)
**PMC:** [PMC94662](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC94662/)

## Abstract

1. J Bacteriol. 2000 Sep;182(18):5139-46. doi: 10.1128/JB.182.18.5139-5146.2000.

Identification of Escherichia coli ubiB, a gene required for the first 
monooxygenase step in ubiquinone biosynthesis.

Poon WW(1), Davis DE, Ha HT, Jonassen T, Rather PN, Clarke CF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry and the Molecular Biology Institute, 
University of California, Los Angeles 90095, USA.

It was recently discovered that the aarF gene in Providencia stuartii is 
required for coenzyme Q (CoQ) biosynthesis. Here we report that yigR, the 
Escherichia coli homologue of aarF, is ubiB, a gene required for the first 
monooxygenase step in CoQ biosynthesis. Both the P. stuartii aarF and E. coli 
ubiB (yigR) disruption mutant strains lack CoQ and accumulate octaprenylphenol. 
Octaprenylphenol is the CoQ biosynthetic intermediate found to accumulate in the 
E. coli strain AN59, which contains the ubiB409 mutant allele. Analysis of the 
mutation in the E. coli strain AN59 reveals no mutations within the ubiB gene, 
but instead shows the presence of an IS1 element at position +516 of the ubiE 
gene. The ubiE gene encodes a C-methyltransferase required for the synthesis of 
both CoQ and menaquinone, and it is the 5' gene in an operon containing ubiE, 
yigP, and ubiB. The data indicate that octaprenylphenol accumulates in AN59 as a 
result of a polar effect of the ubiE::IS1 mutation on the downstream ubiB gene. 
AN59 is complemented by a DNA segment containing the contiguous ubiE, yigP, and 
ubiB genes. Although transformation of AN59 with a DNA segment containing the 
ubiB coding region fails to restore CoQ biosynthesis, transformation with the 
ubiE coding region results in a low-frequency but significant rescue attributed 
to homologous recombination. In addition, the fre gene, previously considered to 
correspond to ubiB, was found not to be involved in CoQ biosynthesis. The ubiB 
gene is a member of a predicted protein kinase family of which the Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae ABC1 gene is the prototypic member. The possible protein kinase 
function of UbiB and Abc1 and the role these polypeptides may play in CoQ 
biosynthesis are discussed.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.182.18.5139-5146.2000
PMCID: PMC94662
PMID: 10960098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
