---
pmid: '20040599'
title: Regulation of E2F1-induced apoptosis by the nucleolar protein RRP1B.
authors:
- Paik JC
- Wang B
- Liu K
- Lue JK
- Lin WC
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2825430
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.072074
---

# Regulation of E2F1-induced apoptosis by the nucleolar protein RRP1B.
**Authors:** Paik JC, Wang B, Liu K, Lue JK, Lin WC
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M109.072074](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.072074)
**PMC:** [PMC2825430](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2825430/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Feb 26;285(9):6348-63. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.072074. Epub
2009  Dec 29.

Regulation of E2F1-induced apoptosis by the nucleolar protein RRP1B.

Paik JC(1), Wang B, Liu K, Lue JK, Lin WC.

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of 
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama 35294, USA.

Regulation of the E2F family of transcription factors is important in control of 
cellular proliferation; dysregulation of the E2Fs is a hallmark of many cancers. 
One member of the E2F family, E2F1, also has the paradoxical ability to induce 
apoptosis; however, the mechanisms underlying this selectivity are not fully 
understood. We now identify a nucleolar protein, RRP1B, as an E2F1-specific 
transcriptional target. We characterize the RRP1B promoter and demonstrate its 
selective response to E2F1. Consistent with the activation of E2F1 activity upon 
DNA damage, RRP1B is induced by several DNA-damaging agents. Importantly, RRP1B 
is required for the expression of certain E2F1 proapoptotic target genes and the 
induction of apoptosis by DNA-damaging agents. This activity is mediated in part 
by complex formation between RRP1B and E2F1 on selective E2F1 target gene 
promoters. Interaction between RRP1B and E2F1 can be found inside the nucleolus 
and diffuse nucleoplasmic punctates. Thus, E2F1 makes use of its transcriptional 
target RRP1B to activate other genes directly involved in apoptosis. Our data 
also suggest an underappreciated role for nucleolar proteins in transcriptional 
regulation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.072074
PMCID: PMC2825430
PMID: 20040599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
