---
reference_id: PMID:40285646
title: m(6)A-Mediated TMCO3 Promotes Hepatocellular Carcinoma Progression by Facilitating the Membrane Translocation and Activation of AKT.
authors:
- Li X
- Han M
- Zhu H
- Pan Y
- Su C
- Liu Y
- Liao Z
- Zhang B
- Chen X
journal: Adv Sci (Weinh)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/advs.202504187
content_type: abstract_only
---

# m(6)A-Mediated TMCO3 Promotes Hepatocellular Carcinoma Progression by Facilitating the Membrane Translocation and Activation of AKT.
**Authors:** Li X, Han M, Zhu H, Pan Y, Su C, Liu Y, Liao Z, Zhang B, Chen X
**Journal:** Adv Sci (Weinh) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/advs.202504187](https://doi.org/10.1002/advs.202504187)

## Content

1. Adv Sci (Weinh). 2025 Jul;12(27):e2504187. doi: 10.1002/advs.202504187. Epub
2025 Apr 26.

m(6)A-Mediated TMCO3 Promotes Hepatocellular Carcinoma Progression by
Facilitating the Membrane Translocation and Activation of AKT.

Li X(1)(2), Han M(3), Zhu H(1)(2), Pan Y(1)(2), Su C(1)(2), Liu Y(1)(2), Liao
Z(1)(2), Zhang B(1)(2)(4), Chen X(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Hepatic Surgery Center, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, 430030, China.
(2)Hubei Key Laboratory of Hepato-Pancreato-Biliary Diseases, Wuhan, Hubei,
430030, China.
(3)Department of General Surgery, Ezhou Central Hospital, Ezhou, Hubei, 436099,
China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Organ Transplantation, Ministry of Education, Wuhan, Hubei,
430030, China.

The transmembrane and coiled-coil domains 3 (TMCO3) are highly expressed in many
tumors. However, the underlying mechanisms governing the way in which TMCO3
affects the progression of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) remain unclear. This
study screens out the molecule TMCO3 with high N6-methyladenosine (m6A)
modification level in tumor samples compared to the adjacent non-cancerous
tissues of three pairs of HCC patients through Methylated RNA
Immunoprecipitation Sequencing (MeRIP-seq) and RNA sequencing (RNA-seq).
Subsequently, the oncogenic effect of TMCO3 in HCC is verified through in vivo
and in vitro experiments. AlkB Homolog 5 (ALKBH5), an m6A demethylase of TMCO3
is then screened out. The following experiments demonstrate that TMCO3 can
activate AKT directly through the Phosphatidylinositol-3-Kinase (PI3K) pathway,
thus promoting the progression of HCC. Meanwhile, the phosphorylation site on
TMCO3: the 85th amino acid-serine, and mutation of this site can directly impair
the activity and membrane translocation of AKT is found. Finally, the
carcinogenic effect of TMCO3 is further elucidated in HCC through the orthotopic
treatment model and the hydrodynamic tail vein injection treatment model. The
findings can provide a potential target for targeted AKT treatment in patients
with HCC and verify a possible prognostic marker in HCC.

© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley‐VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/advs.202504187
PMCID: PMC12279241
PMID: 40285646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.