---
pmid: '19371722'
title: 14-3-3zeta/tau heterodimers regulate Slingshot activity in migrating keratinocytes.
authors:
- Kligys K
- Yao J
- Yu D
- Jones JC
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2727353
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.04.031
---

# 14-3-3zeta/tau heterodimers regulate Slingshot activity in migrating keratinocytes.
**Authors:** Kligys K, Yao J, Yu D, Jones JC
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.04.031](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.04.031)
**PMC:** [PMC2727353](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2727353/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Jun 12;383(4):450-4. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.04.031. Epub 2009 Apr 14.

14-3-3zeta/tau heterodimers regulate Slingshot activity in migrating 
keratinocytes.

Kligys K(1), Yao J, Yu D, Jones JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Northwestern University, Tarry 8-716, 303 E. Chicago Avenue, Chicago, IL 60611, 
USA.

Defining the pathways required for keratinocyte cell migration is important for 
understanding mechanisms of wound healing and tumor cell metastasis. We have 
recently identified an alpha6beta4 integrin-Rac1 signaling pathway via which the 
phosphatase Slingshot (SSH) activates/dephosphorylates cofilin, thereby 
determining keratinocyte migration behavior. Here, we assayed the role of 14-3-3 
isoforms in regulating the activity of SSH1. Using amino or carboxy terminal 
domains of 14-3-3zeta, we demonstrate that in keratinocytes 14-3-3zeta/tau 
heterodimers bind SSH1, in the absence of Rac1 signaling. This interaction leads 
to an inhibition of SSH1 activity, as measured by an increase in phosphorylated 
cofilin levels. Overexpression of the carboxy terminal domain of 14-3-3zeta acts 
as a dominant negative and inhibits the interaction between 14-3-3tau and SSH1. 
These results implicate 14-3-3zeta/tau heterodimers as key regulators of SSH1 
activity in keratinocytes and suggest they play a role in cytoskeleton 
remodeling during cell migration.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.04.031
PMCID: PMC2727353
PMID: 19371722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
