---
pmid: '8985185'
title: SurA, a periplasmic protein with peptidyl-prolyl isomerase activity, participates
  in the assembly of outer membrane porins.
authors:
- Rouvière PE
- Gross CA
journal: Genes Dev
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1101/gad.10.24.3170
---

# SurA, a periplasmic protein with peptidyl-prolyl isomerase activity, participates in the assembly of outer membrane porins.
**Authors:** Rouvière PE, Gross CA
**Journal:** Genes Dev (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.10.24.3170](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.10.24.3170)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 1996 Dec 15;10(24):3170-82. doi: 10.1101/gad.10.24.3170.

SurA, a periplasmic protein with peptidyl-prolyl isomerase activity, 
participates in the assembly of outer membrane porins.

Rouvière PE(1), Gross CA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Stomatology, University of California, San Francisco 
94143-0512, USA.

Little is known about either the process of periplasmic protein folding or how 
information concerning the folding state in this compartment is communicated. We 
present evidence that SurA, a periplasmic protein with peptidyl-prolyl isomerase 
activity, is involved in the maturation and assembly of LamB. LamB is a trimeric 
outer membrane porin for maltodextrins as well as the bacteriophage lambda 
receptor in Escherichia coli. We demonstrate that SurA is involved in the 
conversion of unfolded monomers into a newly identified intermediate in LamB 
assembly, which behaves as a folded monomer. The absence of SurA blocks the 
assembly pathway and leads to accumulation of species prior to the folded 
monomer. These species also accumulate when the stress sigma factor sigmaE is 
induced by LamB overexpression. We suggest that accumulation of species prior to 
the generation of folded monomer is a stress signal sensed by sigmaE.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.10.24.3170
PMID: 8985185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
