---
pmid: '17032941'
title: Stanniocalcin-1 regulates endothelial gene expression and modulates transendothelial
  migration of leukocytes.
authors:
- Chakraborty A
- Brooks H
- Zhang P
- Smith W
- McReynolds MR
- Hoying JB
- Bick R
- Truong L
- Poindexter B
- Lan H
- Elbjeirami W
- Sheikh-Hamad D
journal: Am J Physiol Renal Physiol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1152/ajprenal.00219.2006
---

# Stanniocalcin-1 regulates endothelial gene expression and modulates transendothelial migration of leukocytes.
**Authors:** Chakraborty A, Brooks H, Zhang P, Smith W, McReynolds MR, Hoying JB, Bick R, Truong L, Poindexter B, Lan H, Elbjeirami W, Sheikh-Hamad D
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Renal Physiol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajprenal.00219.2006](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajprenal.00219.2006)

## Abstract

1. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2007 Feb;292(2):F895-904. doi: 
10.1152/ajprenal.00219.2006. Epub 2006 Oct 10.

Stanniocalcin-1 regulates endothelial gene expression and modulates 
transendothelial migration of leukocytes.

Chakraborty A(1), Brooks H, Zhang P, Smith W, McReynolds MR, Hoying JB, Bick R, 
Truong L, Poindexter B, Lan H, Elbjeirami W, Sheikh-Hamad D.

Author information:
(1)Renal Section, Dept. of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 
USA.

The mammalian counterpart of the fish calcium-regulating hormone stanniocalcin-1 
(STC1) inhibits monocyte chemotactic protein-1- and stromal-derived 
factor-1alpha (SDF-1alpha)-mediated chemotaxis and diminishes chemokinesis in 
macrophage-like RAW264.7 and U937 cells in a manner that may involve attenuation 
of the intracellular calcium signal. STC1 is strongly induced in the kidney 
following obstructive injury. We hypothesized that STC1 may serve to attenuate 
the influx of inflammatory cells to the site of tissue injury. In this study, we 
examined the effect of STC1 on the migration of freshly isolated human 
macrophages, neutrophils, and T and B lymphocytes through quiescent or 
IL-1beta-treated human umbilical vein endothelial cell (HUVEC) monolayers. STC1 
inhibited transmigration of macrophages and T lymphocytes through quiescent or 
IL-1beta-activated HUVECs but did not attenuate the transmigration of 
neutrophils and B lymphocytes. STC1 regulates gene expression in cultured 
endothelial cells and is detected on the apical surface of endothelial cells in 
vivo. The data suggest that STC1 plays a critical role in transendothelial 
migration of inflammatory cells and is involved in the regulation of numerous 
aspects of endothelial function.

DOI: 10.1152/ajprenal.00219.2006
PMID: 17032941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
