---
pmid: '10557075'
title: wt p53 dependent expression of a membrane-associated isoform of adenylate kinase.
authors:
- Collavin L
- Lazarevic D
- Utrera R
- Marzinotto S
- Monte M
- Schneider C
journal: Oncogene
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1202970
---

# wt p53 dependent expression of a membrane-associated isoform of adenylate kinase.
**Authors:** Collavin L, Lazarevic D, Utrera R, Marzinotto S, Monte M, Schneider C
**Journal:** Oncogene (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1202970](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1202970)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 1999 Oct 21;18(43):5879-88. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1202970.

wt p53 dependent expression of a membrane-associated isoform of adenylate 
kinase.

Collavin L(1), Lazarevic D, Utrera R, Marzinotto S, Monte M, Schneider C.

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio Nazionale Consorzio Interuniversitario Biotecnologie, AREA 
Science Park, Padriciano 99, 34012 Trieste, Italy.

Six novel p53-inducible transcripts were recently cloned from Val5, a murine 
cell line stably expressing a temperature-sensitive p53 allele. One of the 
isolated clones represented a novel isoform of cytosolic adenylate kinase (AK1), 
a highly conserved monomeric enzyme involved in cellular homeostasis of adenine 
nucleotides. The corresponding protein, which we named AK1beta, was specifically 
induced upon activation of wt p53 in Val5 cells. The AK1beta protein differs 
from cytoplasmic AK1 by having 18 extra amino acids at the N-terminus. The extra 
residues in AK1beta provide a consensus signal for N-terminal myristoylation; as 
expected, AK1beta was shown to localize to the plasma membrane. The human AK1 
gene contains several consensus p53 binding sites and we report that 
p53-dependent induction of the alternative AK1beta transcript also occurs in 
human cells. By using antisense ablation experiments in Val5 fibroblasts we show 
that AK1beta plays a relevant role in the establishment of reversible cell-cycle 
arrest as induced by p53 in these cells. These findings suggest that within a 
p53-dependent genetic program, a specific isoform of adenylate kinase has a 
previously undescribed growth-regulatory function, which might not necessarily 
require its best characterized biochemical activity.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1202970
PMID: 10557075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
