---
pmid: '26482249'
title: Osteopontin promotes aromatase expression and estradiol production in human
  adipocytes.
authors:
- Leitner L
- Jürets A
- Itariu BK
- Keck M
- Prager G
- Langer F
- Grablowitz V
- Zeyda M
- Stulnig TM
journal: Breast Cancer Res Treat
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s10549-015-3603-0
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Osteopontin promotes aromatase expression and estradiol production in human adipocytes.
**Authors:** Leitner L, Jürets A, Itariu BK, Keck M, Prager G, Langer F, Grablowitz V, Zeyda M, Stulnig TM
**Journal:** Breast Cancer Res Treat (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10549-015-3603-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10549-015-3603-0)

## Abstract

1. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2015 Nov;154(1):63-9. doi: 10.1007/s10549-015-3603-0.
 Epub 2015 Oct 20.

Osteopontin promotes aromatase expression and estradiol production in human 
adipocytes.

Leitner L(1), Jürets A(1), Itariu BK(1), Keck M(2), Prager G(2), Langer F(2), 
Grablowitz V(3), Zeyda M(1), Stulnig TM(4).

Author information:
(1)Christian Doppler Laboratory for Cardio-Metabolic Immunotherapy and Clinical 
Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine III, Medical 
University of Vienna, Währinger Gürtel 18-20, 1090, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Department of Surgery, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(3)Department of Surgery, Hospital Göttlicher Heiland, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Christian Doppler Laboratory for Cardio-Metabolic Immunotherapy and Clinical 
Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine III, Medical 
University of Vienna, Währinger Gürtel 18-20, 1090, Vienna, Austria. 
thomas.stulnig@meduniwien.ac.at.

Breast and endometrial cancer are often estrogen dependent, and their incidence 
and mortality are increased by obesity in postmenopausal women. Osteopontin 
(OPN) is a cytokine strongly upregulated in adipose tissue (AT) in obesity. OPN 
function is potentiated by cleavage by matrix metalloproteinases (MMP). OPN and 
MMPs play a role in cancer development and are prognostic markers in breast 
cancer progression. While induction of the estrogen-synthesizing enzyme 
aromatase by TNFa and IL1 has been shown in preadipocytes, an impact of OPN on 
aromatase expression in AT has not been investigated yet. Gene expression was 
determined in AT samples of 21 morbidly obese and matched non-obese subjects. 
Primary human adipocytes were treated with full-length OPN or MMP-cleaved OPN 
(cOPN). Protein and mRNA expressions were analyzed from cell lysates, or cells 
were subsequently supplied with testosterone to determine estradiol production 
and for indirect co-culture with the estrogen-dependent MCF-7 cell line. 
Aromatase expression strongly correlated with gene expression of OPN and various 
MMPs in visceral and MMPs in subcutaneous AT, but not with TNFα expression in 
both tissues. In vitro, cOPN more effectively than full-length OPN upregulated 
aromatase mRNA in adipocytes and significantly increased aromatase protein level 
and estradiol production, leading to increased MCF-7 growth in indirect 
co-culture. OPN and MMPs are upregulated in AT in obesity, and MMP-cleaved OPN 
is particularly effective in inducing aromatase activity in human adipocytes. 
Thereby, obesity-induced OPN expression in AT may contribute to estradiol 
production and thus to the association of obesity with estrogen-dependent 
cancers.

DOI: 10.1007/s10549-015-3603-0
PMID: 26482249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
