---
pmid: '9312087'
title: Characterization of phosphotyrosine binding motifs in the cytoplasmic domain
  of platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 (PECAM-1) that are required for
  the cellular association and activation of the protein-tyrosine phosphatase, SHP-2.
authors:
- Jackson DE
- Kupcho KR
- Newman PJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.40.24868
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Characterization of phosphotyrosine binding motifs in the cytoplasmic domain of platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 (PECAM-1) that are required for the cellular association and activation of the protein-tyrosine phosphatase, SHP-2.
**Authors:** Jackson DE, Kupcho KR, Newman PJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.272.40.24868](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.272.40.24868)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1997 Oct 3;272(40):24868-75. doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.40.24868.

Characterization of phosphotyrosine binding motifs in the cytoplasmic domain of 
platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 (PECAM-1) that are required for 
the cellular association and activation of the protein-tyrosine phosphatase, 
SHP-2.

Jackson DE(1), Kupcho KR, Newman PJ.

Author information:
(1)Blood Research Institute, The Blood Center of Southeastern Wisconsin, 
Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53233, USA.

Recent studies have shown that the Src homology-2 (SH2) domain-containing 
protein-tyrosine phosphatase, SHP-2, associates with the cytoplasmic domain of 
PECAM-1 as it becomes tyrosine-phosphorylated during platelet aggregation: a 
process that can be mimicked in part by small synthetic phosphopeptides 
corresponding to the cytoplasmic domain of PECAM-1 encompassing tyrosine 
residues Tyr-663 or Tyr-686. To further examine the molecular requirements for 
PECAM-1/SHP-2 interactions, we generated human embryonic kidney (HEK)-293 cell 
lines that stably expressed mutant forms of PECAM-1 harboring tyrosine to 
phenylalanine (Tyr --> Phe) mutations in the cytoplasmic domain. Y663F and Y686F 
forms of PECAM-1 were tyrosine-phosphorylated to a somewhat lesser extent than 
wild-type PECAM-1, and a doubly substituted Y663,686F form of PECAM-1 failed to 
become tyrosine-phosphorylated, suggesting that the PECAM-1 cytoplasmic domain 
tyrosine residues 596, 636 and 701 do not serve as substrates for cellular 
kinases. Interestingly, SHP-2 binding was lost when either Tyr-663 or Tyr-686 
were changed to phenylalanine, indicating that both residues are required for 
SHP-2/PECAM-1 association. Although PECAM-1 phosphopeptides NSDVQpY663TEVQV and 
DTETVpY686SEVRK stimulated the catalytic activity of the phosphatase to a 
similar extent, surface plasmon resonance studies revealed that the 
Tyr-663-containing peptide had approximately 10-fold higher affinity for SHP-2 
than did the Tyr-686 peptide. Finally, peptido-precipitation analysis showed 
that the NH2-terminal SH2 domain of SHP-2 reacted preferentially with the 
Tyr-663 PECAM-1 phosphopeptide, while the Tyr-686 phosphopeptide associated only 
with the COOH-terminal SH2 domain of the phosphatase. Together, these data 
provide a molecular model for PECAM-1/SHP-2 interactions that may shed light on 
the downstream events that follow PECAM-1-mediated interactions of vascular 
cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.272.40.24868
PMID: 9312087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
