---
pmid: '16204409'
title: Rat renal glucose transporter SGLT1 exhibits zonal distribution and androgen-dependent
  gender differences.
authors:
- Sabolić I
- Skarica M
- Gorboulev V
- Ljubojević M
- Balen D
- Herak-Kramberger CM
- Koepsell H
journal: Am J Physiol Renal Physiol
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1152/ajprenal.00270.2005
---

# Rat renal glucose transporter SGLT1 exhibits zonal distribution and androgen-dependent gender differences.
**Authors:** Sabolić I, Skarica M, Gorboulev V, Ljubojević M, Balen D, Herak-Kramberger CM, Koepsell H
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Renal Physiol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajprenal.00270.2005](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajprenal.00270.2005)

## Abstract

1. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2006 Apr;290(4):F913-26. doi: 
10.1152/ajprenal.00270.2005. Epub 2005 Oct 4.

Rat renal glucose transporter SGLT1 exhibits zonal distribution and 
androgen-dependent gender differences.

Sabolić I(1), Skarica M, Gorboulev V, Ljubojević M, Balen D, Herak-Kramberger 
CM, Koepsell H.

Author information:
(1)Unit of Molecular Toxicology, Institute for Medical Research and Occupational 
Health, Ksaverska cesta 2, 10001 Zagreb, Croatia. sabolic@imi.hr

SGLT1 (SLC5A1) mediates a part of glucose and galactose reabsorption in the 
mammalian proximal tubule (PT), but the detailed localization of the transporter 
along the tubule is still disputable. Here, we used several methods to localize 
rat SGLT1 (rSGLT1) in the kidneys of intact and variously treated male (M) and 
female (F) rats. In immunoblots of isolated cortical (C) and outer stripe (OS) 
brush-border membranes (BBM), a peptide-specific polyclonal antibody for rSGLT1 
labeled a sharp inzone-, and gender-dependent approximately 40-kDa protein and a 
broad approximately 75-kDa band that exhibited strong zonal (OS > C) and gender 
differences (F > M). In tissue cryosections, the antibody strongly stained BBM 
of the S3 PT segments in the OS and medullary rays (F > M) and smooth muscles of 
the blood vessels and renal capsule (F approximately M) and weakly stained the 
apical domain of other PT segments in the C (F approximately M). The 
phlorizin-sensitive uptake of d-[(3)H]galactose in BBM vesicles, as well as the 
tissue abundance of rSGLT1-specific mRNA, matched the immunoblotting data 
related to the 75-kDa protein and the immunostaining in S3, proving zonal and 
gender differences in the functional transporter. Ovariectomy had no effect, 
castration upregulated, whereas treatment of castrated rats with testosterone, 
but not with estradiol or progesterone, downregulated the 75-kDa protein and the 
immunostaining in S3. We conclude that in the rat kidney, the expression of 
SGLT1 is represented by a 75-kDa protein localized largely in the PT S3 
segments, where it exhibits gender differences (F > M) at both the protein and 
mRNA levels that are caused by androgen inhibition.

DOI: 10.1152/ajprenal.00270.2005
PMID: 16204409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
