---
pmid: '18761674'
title: Fission yeast chromatin assembly factor 1 assists in the replication-coupled
  maintenance of heterochromatin.
authors:
- Dohke K
- Miyazaki S
- Tanaka K
- Urano T
- Grewal SI
- Murakami Y
journal: Genes Cells
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2008.01225.x
---

# Fission yeast chromatin assembly factor 1 assists in the replication-coupled maintenance of heterochromatin.
**Authors:** Dohke K, Miyazaki S, Tanaka K, Urano T, Grewal SI, Murakami Y
**Journal:** Genes Cells (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2443.2008.01225.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2443.2008.01225.x)

## Abstract

1. Genes Cells. 2008 Oct;13(10):1027-43. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2008.01225.x. 
Epub 2008 Aug 29.

Fission yeast chromatin assembly factor 1 assists in the replication-coupled 
maintenance of heterochromatin.

Dohke K(1), Miyazaki S, Tanaka K, Urano T, Grewal SI, Murakami Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, 
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507 Japan.

Chromatin assembly factor-1 (CAF1) is a well-conserved histone chaperone that 
loads the histone H3-H4 complex onto newly synthesized DNA in vitro through 
interaction with the replication factor PCNA. CAF1 is considered to be involved 
in heterochromatin maintenance in several organisms, but the evidence is 
circumstantial and functional details have not been established. We identified 
fission yeast CAF-1 (spCAF1), which interacts with PCNA in S phase. Depletion of 
spCAF1 caused defects in silencing at centromeric and mating locus 
heterochromatin, accompanied with a decrease in Swi6, the fission yeast HP1 
homologue. Loss of spCAF1 destabilized both the silent and active states of 
chromatin at the meta-stable heterochromatic region, with a more pronounced 
effect on the silent state, indicating that spCAF1 is involved in the 
maintenance of heterochromatin. Swi6 dissociated from heterochromatin during 
G1/S phase appears to associate with spCAF1. In early S phase, spCAF1 localized 
to replicating heterochromatin as well as euchromatin and remained associated 
with Swi6, and Swi6 then bound to heterochromatin. Taken together, we propose 
that spCAF1 functions in heterochromatin maintenance by recruiting dislocated 
Swi6 during replication to replicated heterochromatin at the replication fork.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2008.01225.x
PMID: 18761674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
