---
pmid: '1532796'
title: Characterization of ATP11 and detection of the encoded protein in mitochondria
  of Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
authors:
- Ackerman SH
- Martin J
- Tzagoloff A
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1992'
full_text_available: false
---

# Characterization of ATP11 and detection of the encoded protein in mitochondria of Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Ackerman SH, Martin J, Tzagoloff A
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1992)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1992 Apr 15;267(11):7386-94.

Characterization of ATP11 and detection of the encoded protein in mitochondria 
of Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Ackerman SH(1), Martin J, Tzagoloff A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, New York 
10027.

In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, expression of functional F1-ATPase requires two 
proteins encoded by the ATP11 and ATP12 genes. Mutations in either gene block 
some crucial late step in assembly of F1, causing the alpha and beta subunits to 
accumulate in mitochondria as inactive aggregates (Ackerman, S. H., and 
Tzagoloff, A. (1991) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 87, 4986-4990). In the 
present study we have cloned and determined the sequence of ATP11. The encoded 
product is protein of 37 kDa with no obvious homology to any known protein. In 
vitro import assays of ATP11 precursor and immunochemical evidence indicate that 
the protein is located in mitochondria. A fusion was made between ATP11 and a 
short sequence coding for 78 amino acids with the biotination signal of 
bacterial transcarboxylase. The protein expressed from this construct 
complements atp11 mutants, indicating that the addition of the extra 78 amino 
acids at the carboxyl terminus of the ATP11 protein does not compromise its 
function. The hybrid protein is detected in mitochondria with antibodies and 
with peroxidase-conjugated avidin. Biotinated ATP11 protein can be partially 
purified by affinity chromatography on monomeric or tetrameric avidin coupled to 
Sepharose. A fraction eluted from the avidin column and enriched for the 
biotinated ATP11 protein also contains the alpha and beta subunits of F1-ATPase.

PMID: 1532796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
