---
pmid: '19864458'
title: MICAL-L1 links EHD1 to tubular recycling endosomes and regulates receptor recycling.
authors:
- Sharma M
- Giridharan SS
- Rahajeng J
- Naslavsky N
- Caplan S
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2793294
doi: 10.1091/mbc.e09-06-0535
---

# MICAL-L1 links EHD1 to tubular recycling endosomes and regulates receptor recycling.
**Authors:** Sharma M, Giridharan SS, Rahajeng J, Naslavsky N, Caplan S
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.e09-06-0535](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.e09-06-0535)
**PMC:** [PMC2793294](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2793294/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Cell. 2009 Dec;20(24):5181-94. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e09-06-0535.

MICAL-L1 links EHD1 to tubular recycling endosomes and regulates receptor 
recycling.

Sharma M(1), Giridharan SS, Rahajeng J, Naslavsky N, Caplan S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Eppley Cancer Center, 
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-5870, USA.

Endocytic recycling of receptors and lipids occurs via a complex network of 
tubular and vesicular membranes. EHD1 is a key regulator of endocytosis and 
associates with tubular membranes to facilitate recycling. Although EHD proteins 
tubulate membranes in vitro, EHD1 primarily associates with preexisting tubules 
in vivo. How EHD1 is recruited to these tubular endosomes remains unclear. We 
have determined that the Rab8-interacting protein, MICAL-L1, associates with 
EHD1, with both proteins colocalizing to long tubular membranes, in vitro and in 
live cells. MICAL-L1 is a largely uncharacterized member of the MICAL-family of 
proteins that uniquely contains two asparagine-proline-phenylalanine motifs, 
sequences that typically interact with EH-domains. Our data show that the 
MICAL-L1 C-terminal coiled-coil region is necessary and sufficient for its 
localization to tubular membranes. Moreover, we provide unexpected evidence that 
endogenous MICAL-L1 can link both EHD1 and Rab8a to these structures, as its 
depletion leads to loss of the EHD1-Rab8a interaction and the absence of both of 
these proteins from the membrane tubules. Finally, we demonstrate that MICAL-L1 
is essential for efficient endocytic recycling. These data implicate MICAL-L1 as 
an unusual type of Rab effector that regulates endocytic recycling by recruiting 
and linking EHD1 and Rab8a on membrane tubules.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e09-06-0535
PMCID: PMC2793294
PMID: 19864458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
