---
pmid: '19559006'
title: A major mutation of KIF21A associated with congenital fibrosis of the extraocular
  muscles type 1 (CFEOM1) enhances translocation of Kank1 to the membrane.
authors:
- Kakinuma N
- Kiyama R
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.06.109
---

# A major mutation of KIF21A associated with congenital fibrosis of the extraocular muscles type 1 (CFEOM1) enhances translocation of Kank1 to the membrane.
**Authors:** Kakinuma N, Kiyama R
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.06.109](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.06.109)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Sep 4;386(4):639-44. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.06.109. Epub 2009 Jun 24.

A major mutation of KIF21A associated with congenital fibrosis of the 
extraocular muscles type 1 (CFEOM1) enhances translocation of Kank1 to the 
membrane.

Kakinuma N(1), Kiyama R.

Author information:
(1)Signaling Molecules Research Group, Neuroscience Research Institute, National 
Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, 1-1-1 Higashi, Tsukuba, 
Ibaraki 305-8566, Japan.

Congenital fibrosis of the extraocular muscles type 1 (CFEOM1) is associated 
with heterozygous mutations in the KIF21A gene, including a major (R954W) and a 
minor (M947T) mutation. Kank1, which regulates actin polymerization, cell 
migration and neurite outgrowth, interacted with the third and fourth 
coiled-coil domains of KIF21A protein at its ankyrin-repeat domain. While both 
KIF21A(R954W) and KIF21A(M947T) enhanced the formation of a heterodimer with the 
wild type, KIF21A(WT), these mutants also enhanced the interaction with Kank1. 
Knockdown of KIF21A resulted in Kank1 predominantly occurring in the cytosolic 
fraction, while KIF21A(WT) slightly enhanced the translocation of Kank1 to the 
membrane fraction. Moreover, KIF21A(R954W) significantly enhanced the 
translocation of Kank1 to the membrane fraction. These results suggest that 
KIF21A regulates the distribution of Kank1 and that KIF21A mutations associated 
with CFEOM1 enhanced the accumulation of Kank1 in the membrane fraction. This 
might cause an abrogation of neuronal development in cases of CFEOM1 through 
over-regulation of actin polymerization by Kank1.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.06.109
PMID: 19559006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
