---
pmid: '10961446'
title: The Cdc42p GTPase is targeted to the site of cell division in the fission yeast
  Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
authors:
- Merla A
- Johnson DI
journal: Eur J Cell Biol
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1078/0171-9335-00073
---

# The Cdc42p GTPase is targeted to the site of cell division in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
**Authors:** Merla A, Johnson DI
**Journal:** Eur J Cell Biol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1078/0171-9335-00073](https://doi.org/10.1078/0171-9335-00073)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Cell Biol. 2000 Jul;79(7):469-77. doi: 10.1078/0171-9335-00073.

The Cdc42p GTPase is targeted to the site of cell division in the fission yeast 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe.

Merla A(1), Johnson DI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics and the Markey Center for 
Molecular Genetics, University of Vermont, Burlington 05405, USA.

The Rho-family GTPase Cdc42p regulates many aspects of cell polarity and growth 
in eukaryotic cells, including the organization of the actin cytoskeleton. To 
further examine Cdc42p function in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe, 
a functional green fluorescent protein (GFP)-Cdc42p fusion protein was 
generated. GFP-Cdc42p was observed at the medial region of the cell at the 
cell-division site early in cytokinesis and remained there through cell 
separation, and was also localized to the periphery of the cell and to internal 
membranes. Unexpectedly, treatment with the actin-depolymerizing drug 
latrunculin-A disrupted the medial region targeting pattern, and cells deficient 
in the actin-binding proteins tropomyosin and profilin also did not exhibit 
medial GFP-Cdc42p staining. In addition, medial GFP-Cdc42p localization was 
eliminated in a number of cytokinesis mutants, including strains defective in 
assembling the medial actinomyosin ring, medial ring contraction, and septum 
assembly. GFP-Cdc42p targeting was less affected in mutants that formed 
misplaced or multiple septa. These results suggest that the localization of 
Cdc42p at the cell-division site was dependent upon the actin cytoskeleton and 
that Cdc42p may function in the interdependent processes of cytokinesis and 
septation.

DOI: 10.1078/0171-9335-00073
PMID: 10961446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
