---
pmid: '15123695'
title: Hetero-oligomerization between beta2- and beta3-adrenergic receptors generates
  a beta-adrenergic signaling unit with distinct functional properties.
authors:
- Breit A
- Lagacé M
- Bouvier M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M313310200
---

# Hetero-oligomerization between beta2- and beta3-adrenergic receptors generates a beta-adrenergic signaling unit with distinct functional properties.
**Authors:** Breit A, Lagacé M, Bouvier M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M313310200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M313310200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 2;279(27):28756-65. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M313310200. Epub
2004  Apr 27.

Hetero-oligomerization between beta2- and beta3-adrenergic receptors generates a 
beta-adrenergic signaling unit with distinct functional properties.

Breit A(1), Lagacé M, Bouvier M.

Author information:
(1)Département de Biochimie et Groupe de Recherche sur le Système Nerveux 
Autonome, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec H3C 3J7, Canada.

The ability of the closely related beta(2)- and beta(3)-adrenergic receptors 
(AR) to form hetero-oligomers was assessed by bioluminescence resonance energy 
transfer. Quantitative bioluminescence resonance energy transfer titration 
curves revealed that the beta(2)AR has identical propensity to 
hetero-oligomerize with the beta(3)AR than to form homo-oligomers. To determine 
the influence of heterooligomerization, a HEK293 cell line stably expressing an 
excess of beta(3)AR over beta(2)AR was generated so that all beta(2)AR are 
engaged in hetero-oligomerization with beta(3)AR, providing a tool to study the 
effect of hetero-oligomerization on beta(2)AR function in the absence of any 
beta(2)AR homooligomer. The hetero-oligomerization had no effect on the ligand 
binding properties of various beta(2)AR ligands and did not affect the potency 
of isoproterenol to stimulate adenylyl cyclase. Despite the unaltered ligand 
binding properties of the beta(2/3)AR hetero-oligomer, the stable association of 
the beta(2)AR with the beta(3)AR completely blocked agonist-stimulated 
internalization of the beta(2)AR. Given that the beta(3)AR is resistant to 
agonist-promoted endocytosis, the results indicate that the beta(3)AR acted as a 
dominant negative of the beta(2)AR endocytosis process. Consistent with this 
notion, the beta(2/3)AR hetero-oligomer displayed a lower propensity to recruit 
beta-arrestin-2 than the beta(2)AR. The hetero-oligomerization also led to a 
change in G protein coupling selectivity. Indeed, in contrast to beta(2)AR and 
beta(3)AR, which regulate adenylyl cyclase and extracellular signal-regulated 
kinase activity through a coupling to G(s) and G(i/o), no G(i/o) coupling was 
observed for the beta(2/3)AR hetero-oligomer. Together, these results 
demonstrate that hetero-oligomerization between beta(2)AR and beta(3)AR forms a 
beta-adrenergic signaling unit that possesses unique functional properties.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M313310200
PMID: 15123695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
