---
pmid: '7920653'
title: Tumour predisposition in mice heterozygous for a targeted mutation in Nf1.
authors:
- Jacks T
- Shih TS
- Schmitt EM
- Bronson RT
- Bernards A
- Weinberg RA
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ng0794-353
---

# Tumour predisposition in mice heterozygous for a targeted mutation in Nf1.
**Authors:** Jacks T, Shih TS, Schmitt EM, Bronson RT, Bernards A, Weinberg RA
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng0794-353](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng0794-353)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 1994 Jul;7(3):353-61. doi: 10.1038/ng0794-353.

Tumour predisposition in mice heterozygous for a targeted mutation in Nf1.

Jacks T(1), Shih TS, Schmitt EM, Bronson RT, Bernards A, Weinberg RA.

Author information:
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge 
02139.

Human neurofibromatosis type 1 is a dominant disease caused by the inheritance 
of a mutant allele of the NF1 gene. In order to study NF1 function, we have 
constructed a mouse strain carrying a germline mutation in the murine homologue. 
Heterozygous animals do not exhibit the classical symptoms of the human disease, 
but are highly predisposed to the formation of various tumour types, notably 
phaeochomocytoma, a tumour of the neural crest-derived adrenal medulla, and 
myeloid leukaemia, both of which occur with increased frequency in human NF1 
patients. The wild-type Nf1 allele is lost in approximately half of the tumours 
from heterozygous animals. In addition, homozygosity for the Nf1 mutation leads 
to abnormal cardiac development and mid-gestational embryonic lethality.

DOI: 10.1038/ng0794-353
PMID: 7920653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
