---
pmid: '23697806'
title: A genome-wide resource of cell cycle and cell shape genes of fission yeast.
authors:
- Hayles J
- Wood V
- Jeffery L
- Hoe KL
- Kim DU
- Park HO
- Salas-Pino S
- Heichinger C
- Nurse P
journal: Open Biol
year: '2013'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: xml
pmcid: PMC3866870
doi: 10.1098/rsob.130053
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# A genome-wide resource of cell cycle and cell shape genes of fission yeast.
**Authors:** Hayles J, Wood V, Jeffery L, Hoe KL, Kim DU, Park HO, Salas-Pino S, Heichinger C, Nurse P
**Journal:** Open Biol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1098/rsob.130053](https://doi.org/10.1098/rsob.130053)
**PMC:** [PMC3866870](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3866870/)

## Abstract

1. Open Biol. 2013 May 22;3(5):130053. doi: 10.1098/rsob.130053.

A genome-wide resource of cell cycle and cell shape genes of fission yeast.

Hayles J(1), Wood V, Jeffery L, Hoe KL, Kim DU, Park HO, Salas-Pino S, 
Heichinger C, Nurse P.

Author information:
(1)Cell Cycle Laboratory, Cancer Research UK, London Research Institute, 44 
Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A 3LY, UK.

To identify near complete sets of genes required for the cell cycle and cell 
shape, we have visually screened a genome-wide gene deletion library of 4843 
fission yeast deletion mutants (95.7% of total protein encoding genes) for their 
effects on these processes. A total of 513 genes have been identified as being 
required for cell cycle progression, 276 of which have not been previously 
described as cell cycle genes. Deletions of a further 333 genes lead to specific 
alterations in cell shape and another 524 genes result in generally misshapen 
cells. Here, we provide the first eukaryotic resource of gene deletions, which 
describes a near genome-wide set of genes required for the cell cycle and cell 
shape.

DOI: 10.1098/rsob.130053
PMCID: PMC3866870
PMID: 23697806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

2.IntroductionUnderstanding how cells reproduce and how they generate their shape are two major goals in
eukaryotic cell biology. These two processes are related because, during the cell cycle, cells
duplicate cellular components and reproduce their cell structure in space to generate two daughter
cells. A key function of the cell cycle is to ensure accurate replication and segregation of the
genome, because errors in genetic transmission can cause mutations and chromosomal rearrangements
that may lead to cell death or disease. Failure to accurately reproduce and maintain cell shape can
disrupt tissue architecture or influence cell motility and may also lead to cell death or disease.
Given the importance of these two processes for cell biology, we have generated a genome-wide
resource, cataloguing the genes that when deleted disrupt the cell cycle or cell shape in the
fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe. This is the first such resource that
qualitatively describes a near complete set of genes required for these processes in a eukaryotic
organism.Fission yeast is very amenable for investigating the cell cycle and cell shape [1–3] and has been used extensively for cell cycle studies for many years [4]. It is a rod-shaped, unicellular eukaryote that grows
by apical extension and divides by medial fission and septation. This regular cell shape has made
fission yeast a very useful organism to identify genes involved in the cell cycle and the generation
and maintenance of cell shape. Mutants can easily be identified by visually screening for cells that
divide at a longer or shorter length compared with wild-type (WT) (cell cycle defect), or that do
not have a rod-shape (cell shape defect). A long cell phenotype is generated if cells are blocked or
delayed in cell cycle progression because they continue to grow but fail to divide and thus become
elongated. However, not all genes required for the cell cycle show a long cell phenotype when
deleted. For example, genes encoding checkpoint proteins that are not required during a normal cell
cycle may have a WT deletion phenotype and genes required for mitosis often arrest with a more
irregular, non-elongated cell shape [5]. The long
cell phenotype is easily identified by visual screening and is definitive for cells blocked or
delayed in cell cycle progression through the G1, S, G2 and cytokinesis phases of the cell cycle
[6]. We have therefore focused on identifying all
genes with this phenotype when deleted, to determine the majority of genes required for progression
through interphase or cytokinesis in fission yeast.Genes important for the generation of cell shape are also easily identified, because mutants
deleted for these genes lose the normal rod-shape. These cells exhibit a range of phenotypes,
including rounded or stubby, curved, branched, skittle-shaped or more generally misshapen [2,3]. The
penetrance of these mutant phenotypes can be quite variable; in some cases, the majority of cells
have the same altered cell shape, whereas in others the phenotype is of lower penetrance with fewer
of the cells exhibiting the phenotype.Fission yeast currently has 5059 annotated protein coding genes, and a genome-wide deletion
collection has been constructed with 4836 genes deleted [7]. In this study, we have systematically visually screened the deletion collection to
identify genes required during interphase of the cell cycle, cytokinesis and for cell shape. This
resource complements and extends earlier studies using gene deletions in budding yeast [8,9] and
RNAi-based gene knockdowns in metazoa [10–15]. Although the budding yeast
gene deletion collection has been extensively investigated, it has not been subjected to a
systematic screen for cell cycle genes such as that carried out here, while metazoan RNAi cell cycle
studies have shown only limited reproducibility [12]. Given that 3397 (67.14%) of the fission yeast protein coding genes have
identifiable orthologues in metazoa (http://www.pombase.org), the genome-wide resource provided here will help to identify cell
cycle and cell shape genes in other eukaryotes, including humans.

Introduction

Understanding how cells reproduce and how they generate their shape are two major goals in
eukaryotic cell biology. These two processes are related because, during the cell cycle, cells
duplicate cellular components and reproduce their cell structure in space to generate two daughter
cells. A key function of the cell cycle is to ensure accurate replication and segregation of the
genome, because errors in genetic transmission can cause mutations and chromosomal rearrangements
that may lead to cell death or disease. Failure to accurately reproduce and maintain cell shape can
disrupt tissue architecture or influence cell motility and may also lead to cell death or disease.
Given the importance of these two processes for cell biology, we have generated a genome-wide
resource, cataloguing the genes that when deleted disrupt the cell cycle or cell shape in the
fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe. This is the first such resource that
qualitatively describes a near complete set of genes required for these processes in a eukaryotic
organism.

Fission yeast is very amenable for investigating the cell cycle and cell shape [1–3] and has been used extensively for cell cycle studies for many years [4]. It is a rod-shaped, unicellular eukaryote that grows
by apical extension and divides by medial fission and septation. This regular cell shape has made
fission yeast a very useful organism to identify genes involved in the cell cycle and the generation
and maintenance of cell shape. Mutants can easily be identified by visually screening for cells that
divide at a longer or shorter length compared with wild-type (WT) (cell cycle defect), or that do
not have a rod-shape (cell shape defect). A long cell phenotype is generated if cells are blocked or
delayed in cell cycle progression because they continue to grow but fail to divide and thus become
elongated. However, not all genes required for the cell cycle show a long cell phenotype when
deleted. For example, genes encoding checkpoint proteins that are not required during a normal cell
cycle may have a WT deletion phenotype and genes required for mitosis often arrest with a more
irregular, non-elongated cell shape [5]. The long
cell phenotype is easily identified by visual screening and is definitive for cells blocked or
delayed in cell cycle progression through the G1, S, G2 and cytokinesis phases of the cell cycle
[6]. We have therefore focused on identifying all
genes with this phenotype when deleted, to determine the majority of genes required for progression
through interphase or cytokinesis in fission yeast.

Genes important for the generation of cell shape are also easily identified, because mutants
deleted for these genes lose the normal rod-shape. These cells exhibit a range of phenotypes,
including rounded or stubby, curved, branched, skittle-shaped or more generally misshapen [2,3]. The
penetrance of these mutant phenotypes can be quite variable; in some cases, the majority of cells
have the same altered cell shape, whereas in others the phenotype is of lower penetrance with fewer
of the cells exhibiting the phenotype.

Fission yeast currently has 5059 annotated protein coding genes, and a genome-wide deletion
collection has been constructed with 4836 genes deleted [7]. In this study, we have systematically visually screened the deletion collection to
identify genes required during interphase of the cell cycle, cytokinesis and for cell shape. This
resource complements and extends earlier studies using gene deletions in budding yeast [8,9] and
RNAi-based gene knockdowns in metazoa [10–15]. Although the budding yeast
gene deletion collection has been extensively investigated, it has not been subjected to a
systematic screen for cell cycle genes such as that carried out here, while metazoan RNAi cell cycle
studies have shown only limited reproducibility [12]. Given that 3397 (67.14%) of the fission yeast protein coding genes have
identifiable orthologues in metazoa (http://www.pombase.org), the genome-wide resource provided here will help to identify cell
cycle and cell shape genes in other eukaryotes, including humans.

3.Results3.1.Screening of the haploid deletion mutantsWe have microscopically examined and described the deletion phenotypes of 4843 haploid gene
deletion mutants of both essential and non-essential genes, after sporulating diploid heterozygous
deletion mutants and germinating haploid spores on rich medium plates (see §5.1 for details
of the screen and electronic supplementary material 1, tables S1 (column G)–S3). Mutants were
classified to one of 11 cell shape phenotypes together with three additional categories, namely:
WT; arrested as normal spores (spores); or arrested as normal
germinated spores (germination) (figures 1 and 2a
and table 1; electronic supplementary material 1,
table S1, column H), making 14 phenotype categories in total (see §5.1). These phenotypes
were mapped to terms in the Fission Yeast Phenotype Ontology (http://www.obofoundry.org/cgi-bin/detail.cgi?id=fypo) (see the electronic supplementary
material 1, table S4), and the gene list for each category can be found in the electronic
supplementary material 1, table S5a–n. All 4843 deletions were assigned to
only one of these 14 categories for analysis. The variation in the phenotype for mutants in a
particular category can be found in the phenotype description in the electronic supplementary
material 1, table S1, column G. For example, some long mutants may be slightly curved, and T-shaped
cells were observed in a subset of curved cells. Table 1.Summary of phenotype categories. Fourteen broad phenotype categories were used for analysis, and
the number and dispensability of genes in the different categories is shown. Each gene is classified
by a single phenotype category based on the most penetrant or strongest deletion phenotype. Cells
were only described as wild-type (WT) when no other phenotype was observed. The classifier for each
gene can be found in the electronic supplementary material, table S1, column H and gene
dispensability in table S1, column I. All genes are included only once and cell phenotype terms from
the electronic supplementary material 1, table S4 that are not included as separate phenotypes are
subsets of one of these categories, for example, a T-shaped mutant is included in the
curved category as curved is the most penetrant phenotype for this type of cell
shape mutant.phenotype categories for analysistotal genesessential genesnon-essential genesWT304103041spores1841840germination2232230misshapen essential3023020misshapen viable31031misshapen weak viable1910191long high penetrance346215131long low penetrance13610630long branched312011rounded895534stubby52844curved501139small251411skittle14212913total genes analysed484312673576
Figure 1.Cell shape categories. Examples of the 11 major cell shape phenotype categories described in this
study. For each deletion, mutant cells are shown as observed during the screen. Definitions of each
phenotype can be found in the electronic supplementary material 1, table S4. Scale bar (shown in WT)
= 10 µm.
Figure 2.Distribution of cell shape genes. (a) Distribution of 1395 genes with a cell
shape deletion phenotype among the 11 cell shape categories. (b) Overlap of
long gene set identified in this study (513 genes, green circle) with a set of
previously published genes with a long deletion phenotype (158 genes, red circle). For further
details see the electronic supplementary material 1, table S8. (c) Overlap between
(i) 521 fission yeast orthologues of human genes with an RNAi cell cycle phenotype (blue circle),
(ii) 614 genes with a mitotic cell cycle annotation in fission yeast (pink circle) and 276 new cell
cycle genes from this study (orange circle). For further details see the electronic supplementary
material 1, tables S8 and S11.Gene Ontology (GO) term enrichment of biological processes and cellular components for these 14
phenotype categories is shown in tables 2–4
(see the electronic supplementary material 1, table S6a–n and table
S7a–n for the complete results). There are 643/4843 genes with no GO process
annotation. Of these 643 ‘unknowns’, 574 (89.2%) have a WT deletion phenotype.
This means that most genes showing one or more of the 13 other deletion phenotypes are assigned a
biological process either by inference from other organisms or because they have been partially
characterized in fission yeast. However, their cellular shape is often not part of that
characterization. Table 2.GO cellular processes for all phenotype categories. A summary of the GO analysis to identify
genes annotated to cellular processes enriched within particular phenotype categories. The
enrichment results were mapped to ‘GO slim’ (high level) terms covering most
biological processes observed in fission yeast to give a broad view of the ontology content of the
genome-wide gene deletion dataset. For details see §5.5.2 and the electronic supplementary
material 1, table S6a–n and table S14. The total dataset is 4843 genes.
Footnotes are denoted by a–n. Red colour denotes enriched p ≤ 0.001;
orange denotes moderately enriched p ≤ 0.01; light orange denotes weakly
enriched p ≤ 0.1: light blue denotes no enrichment p
≤ 1; blank denotes number of genes is 0.aIncludes 15/29 genes annotated to glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor
biosynthesis, a descendent of lipid metabolism (p = 1.75 ×
10−8).bIncludes 10/41 genes annotated to attachment of spindle to microtubules, a descendent
of chromosome segregation (p = 0.001).cIncludes 11/26 genes annotated to histone deacetylation, a descendent of
transcription (p = 0.00054).dIncludes 53/118 genes annotated to nuclear mRNA splicing, via spliceosome, a
descendent of mRNA metabolism (p = 3.7 ×
10−27).eIncludes 5/6 subunits of the elongator complex involved in tRNA wobble uridine
modification.fIncludes 11/25 genes annotated to the septation initiation signalling cascade
(p = 0.00013), and 5/15 genes annotated to the stress activated protein.
Kinase signalling cascade, 4/19 genes annotated to TOR signalling and 3/17 genes annotated to
cAMP-mediated signalling (none enriched), all descendents of signalling.gIncludes 27/79 genes annotated to regulation of interphase, a descendent of
regulation of the mitotic cell cycle (p = 1.23 ×
10−9).hIncludes 18/67 genes annotated to regulation of mitosis (p =
4.88 × 10−11) and 6/27 genes annotated to attachment of spindle
microtubules to kinetochore (p = 0.0351), descendents of regulation of the
mitotic cell cycle.iIncludes 13/115 genes annotated to microtubule cytoskeleton, a descendent of
cytoskeleton organization (p = 0.00706).jIncludes 4/9 genes annotated to Cdc42 signal transduction, a descendent of signalling
(p = 0.006).kIncludes 7/52 genes annotated to actin cytoskeleton organization, a descendent of
cytoskeleton organization (p = 8.09 × 10−5).lIncludes 13/115 genes annotated to microtubule cytoskeleton organization, a
descendent of cytoskeleton organization (p = 2.12 ×
10−8) and 5/5 genes annotated to gamma tubulin complex localization, a descendent
of microtubule cytoskeleton organization (p = 3.11 ×
10−8).mIncludes 3/11 genes annotated to carbon catabolite repression of transcription, a
descendent of signalling (p = 0.00484).nAll 19 genes involved in mitochondrial tRNA metabolism.
Table 3.GO cellular components and complexes for all phenotype categories. Summary of the GO analysis for
cellular components enriched within particular phenotype categories. For details see §5.5.2
and electronic supplementary material 1, tables S7a–n and S14. For further
details, see table 2 legend. Footnotes are denoted
by a–u. Red colour denotes enriched p ≤ 0.001; orange denotes
moderately enriched p ≤ 0.01; light orange denotes weakly enriched
p ≤ 0.1; light blue denotes no enrichment p ≤ 1;
blank denotes number of genes is 0.aIncludes164/193 genes annotated to plasma membrane (p = 1.74
× 10−9) and 661/914 genes annotated to intrinsic to membrane
(p = 5.45 × 10−9), both descendents of
membrane.bIncludes 7/8 subunits of chaperonin containing T-complex (p =
1. 29 × 10−7) and 4/5 subunits of eukaryotic translation initiation factor
2B complex (p = 0.001).cIncludes 5/8 subunits of COP I coated vesicle membrane (p =
0.001).dIncludes 8/14 subunits of vacuolar proton-transporting V-type ATPase complex
(p = 7.26 × 10−6).eSee table 4 for breakdown of nuclear complexes.fIncludes 5/8 subunits of Arp2/3 protein complex (p =
0.00922).gIncludes 5/7 subunits of oligosaccharyltransferase complex (p
= 0.003), 3/3 subunits of
glycosylphosphatidylinositol-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (GPI-GnT)
(p = 0.05068), 6/11 subunits of TRAPP complex (p =
0.00417) and 4/4 subunits GARP complex (p = 0.00313).hIncludes 2/4 subunits of AP-1 adaptor complex (p =
0.02077).iIncludes 12/81 genes annotated to cytosolic large ribosomal subunit
(p = 0.00936), a descendent of ribosome.jIncludes 5/6 subunits of elongator holoenzyme complex (p =
0.002) and 5/5 subunits of RNA cap binding complex (p = 0.0004).kIncludes 32/211 genes annotated to spindle pole body (p =
0.006), a descendent of microtubule cytoskeleton.lIncludes 20/211 genes annotated to spindle pole body (p =
0.00014), a descendent of microtubule cytoskeleton.mIncludes 2/4 subunits of mitochondrial sorting and assembly machinery complex
(p = 0.22496).nIncludes 2/2 subunits of eRF1 methyltransferase complex (p =
0.03840).oIncludes 4/8 subunits of mannosyltransferase complex (p =
0.00081).pIncludes 8/194 genes annotated to ER membrane (p = 0.15), a
descendent of Golgi/ER.qIncludes 4/10 genes annotated to equatorial MTOC (p =
0.00015) and 8/51 genes annotated to spindle pole body (p = 0.1),
descendents of microtubule cytoskeleton.rIncludes 2/2 subunits of tea1 cell end complex (p =
0.008).sIncludes 4/211 genes annotated to spindle pole body (p = 1),
a descendent of microtubule cytoskeleton.tAll 61 genes encode subunits of mitochondrial ribosome (61/70 subunits
p = 3.98 × 10−88).uIncludes 20/173 genes annotated to mitochondrial membrane (p
= 6.38 × 10−6), a descendent of membrane.
Table 4.A summary of the GO analysis for nuclear complexes enriched within the 3 long
phenotype categories. For details, see §5.5.2 and electronic supplementary material 1, table
S14. For further details, see table 2 legend.
Footnotes are denoted by a–d. Red colour denotes enriched p ≤ 0.001;
orange denotes moderately enriched p ≤0.01; light orange denotes weakly
enriched p ≤0.1; light blue is no enrichment p ≤ 1;
blank denotes number of genes is 0.aIncludes 13/26 subunits of U4/U6 × U5 tri-snRNP complex (p
= 9.18 × 10−7), 6/7subunits of U6 SnRNP (p =
0.00017) and 6/6 subunits U2 snRNP (p = 0.0747).bIncludes 4/4 subunits of GINS complex (p = 7.14 ×
10−5).cIncludes 4/15 subunits of U1 snRNP (p = 0.07660), 3/6
subunits of t-UTP complex (p = 0.04886) and 6/7 subunits of U6 SnRNP
(p = 0.00017).dAll five genes encode subunits of holo TFIIH complex (5/10 subunits
p = 1.08 × 10−7).To identify genes required for the cell cycle and cell shape, we focused on the 11 cell shape
categories. These phenotypes and their relevance for the cell cycle and cell shape are described in
the following sections. To demonstrate the use of this resource, we describe a more detailed
cytological analysis of a subset of mutants altered in cell shape. In addition, we screened the
library of haploid viable deletion mutants for hydroxyurea (HU) sensitivity and identified new genes
implicated in the DNA checkpoint preventing entry into mitosis when DNA replication is incomplete or
DNA is damaged.3.2.Gene deletion mutants with an elongated cell phenotypeA long cell phenotype identifies cells blocked in progression through interphase of the cell
cycle or cytokinesis (see §2). Gene deletion mutants with this phenotype were assigned to
three categories, long high penetrance (long HP; 346/4843), long low penetrance
(long LP; 136/4843) and long branched (long Br; 31/4843) (figure 1 and table 1 and electronic supplementary material 1, tables S4 and
S5g–i). These three categories totalled 513 genes required for cell cycle
progression, and we conclude that 10 per cent of fission yeast genes are required directly or
indirectly for progression through interphase or cytokinesis (513/4843). Four hundred and
sixty-seven genes had a strong elongated deletion phenotype and a further 46 genes were included
that were only weakly elongated when deleted (see §5.1). Of the 513 genes in the
long categories, 66.5 per cent (341 genes) were essential for viability compared
with 26.2 per cent for all genes, and 85.57 per cent (439 genes) were conserved in human. This
indicates that many of the genes identified in this study are likely to be important for
understanding the cell cycle in other more complex eukaryotes.All three long categories were enriched for nuclear localization (table 3). The long Br set was enriched
for cytokinesis and transcription and included genes encoding subunits of the RNA polymerase II
holoenzyme, mediator and SAGA complexes (tables 2
and 4). As expected the long HP
and long LP sets were both overrepresented for genes involved in DNA metabolism and
the regulation of mitotic cell cycle (table 2).
The long HP set was also enriched for processes and complexes involved in mRNA
metabolism (particularly splicing), RNA biogenesis, transcription and DNA replication initiation,
and 6/6 genes encoding subunits of the MCM complex (see table 4 and legend for details). By contrast, the long LP set was enriched
for chromosome segregation and for genes encoding subunits of kinetochore complexes, including
Mis6-SIM4 (8/14 subunits), Ndc-Mis-Spc (6/10 subunits), condensin (4/5 subunits) and APC (8/13
subunits) (tables 2 and 4). These differences in enrichment indicate that long
HP is a good classifier for genes involved in progress through interphase, whereas
long LP is more specific for genes associated with progress through mitosis (table 2 footnotes g,h). Mutants that block in mitosis
usually display an irregular less defined cell shape but are not elongated, whereas an elongated
phenotype is characteristic of an interphase block, so one possibility is that the long
LP gene set is enriched for a subset of mitotic genes that are also required for interphase
progression, with some cells arresting in mitosis and other cells in interphase. Together, these
three long phenotype categories (long HP, long LP
and long Br) define gene sets important for progression through interphase or
cytokinesis. The long LP gene set is in addition enriched for a set of mitotic
genes, which may also be required during interphase.3.3.Cell cycle mutants without a long phenotypeNot all genes previously known to be required during interphase have an elongated phenotype when
deleted. We found that DNA replication genes cdc23, ssb1, pol1, cdc18, cdt1, rad4
and four genes encoding core subunits of the RFC (rfc2, rfc3, rfc4 and
rfc5) were all annotated to the misshapen essential set (miss E;
table 1 and electronic supplementary material 1,
table S5d). Some of these genes are known to be required for both DNA replication
and the DNA checkpoint, and mutant strains enter mitosis with incompletely replicated DNA [16–20]. The miss E category also contains genes required for mitosis, for
example, the kinetochore protein Nnf1 and pericentrin Pcp1. In total, 57 genes were annotated to one
or more cell cycle process (table 2 and electronic
supplementary material 1, table S6d). We conclude that the miss E
phenotypic class will be a good starting point to screen for further genes required for both DNA
replication and the DNA checkpoint as well as for genes required during mitosis.Another group of previously known cell cycle genes exhibit a wee phenotype, with viable cells
dividing at a shorter length and a smaller cell volume than WT cells. A partial gene deletion
library of viable haploid mutants has already been screened, and 18 wee mutants identified [21]. In this study, we identified by visual examination
25 genes with a small cell deletion phenotype; this small set consisted of 11
non-essential genes and 14 essential genes (see the electronic supplementary material 1, table
S5m). The 11 non-essential genes included nine of the 18 previously identified wee
genes and were mainly those with a stronger wee deletion phenotype [21]. The two additional genes encode a predicted 26S proteasome
non-ATPase regulatory subunit (SPCC18.17c), which has been found (F. Navarro and P. Nurse 2012,
personal communication) to be shorter but also wider and so divided at a WT cell volume, and a
mitochondrial inheritance GTPase (dml1), which is potentially a new wee gene. The
14 essential genes were enriched for tRNA metabolism (see table 2 for summary and the electronic supplementary material 1, tables S6m
and S7m for details), including genes encoding subunits of the RNase P and
mitochondrial RNase P, which have roles in RNA processing [22], tRNA 2’-O-ribose methyltransferase, tRNA-specific adenosine
deaminase (2/2 subunits) and the tRNA-specific splicing endonuclease (2/4 subunits). It is possible
that these non-viable small mutants, like other similar small size viable mutants identified in
budding yeast that affect growth [23], may only
indirectly affect cell cycle progression.3.4.New cell cycle genesOur genome-wide screen has identified 513 genes with a long cell deletion phenotype and thus
required for the cell cycle in fission yeast. Previously, 158 fission yeast genes that generate
elongated cells when deleted have been reported and annotated in PomBase (http://www.pombase.org/) [24]. To validate this qualitative visual approach to identify new cell
cycle genes, we compared these 158 genes (see the electronic supplementary material 1, table
S8a) with the 513 fission yeast cell cycle genes from this screen (see the
electronic supplementary material 1, table S5g–i) and found that 147 of the
158 genes were also identified in our screen (see figure
2b and electronic supplementary material 1, table S9). The 366 genes not
previously reported as elongated when deleted included 90 genes with an existing cell cycle GO
annotation and 276 genes with no previously known cell cycle role (see the electronic supplementary
material 1, tables S8b and S8c). The majority of these 276 genes
(230/276) are annotated to GO processes which have previously been linked to the cell cycle,
suggesting that the 276 genes are true positives and identify new cell cycle genes. The 230 new
genes involved in cell-cycle-related processes included genes required for ribosome biogenesis,
splicing and nucleotide metabolism (table 5). For
example, seven genes (dfr1, adk1, hpt1, dea2, dut1, dcd1, tmp1) are concerned with
various nucleotide metabolism pathways. Two previously identified cell cycle genes, budding yeast
CDC8 (tmp1 orthologue) [25], and
the fission yeast cdc22 (ribonucleotide reductase) [26] are also required for nucleotide metabolism. Given the cell cycle
role of these two genes, the other genes identified here may also be important for maintaining the
nucleotide levels needed for cell cycle progression. Table 5.GO process annotations for 276 novel cell cycle genes. These 276 genes were not previously known
to be involved in the cell cycle in fission yeast. Two hundred and thirty genes are annotated to
other GO processes that have accepted links to the cell cycle in fission yeast and 29 genes had a GO
process annotation not related to the cell cycle. Only 17 genes were of completely unknown
function.process in fission yeastno. genesGO processes cell-cycle-related230 nucleocytoplasmic transport13 mRNA metabolic process and splicing73 ribosome biogenesis and cytoplasmic translation37 Transcription78 DNA repair, recombination, telomere maintenance14 vesicle-mediated transport5 modification by small molecule conjugation3 nucleotide metabolism7GO processes not cell-cycle-related29 small molecule metabolic pathways13 miscellaneous16unknown process17 fission-yeast-specific4 fungal-specific4 conserved to humans9The remaining 46 genes include 17 genes unstudied in any organism (nine of which are conserved in
humans), and 29 genes that have existing GO annotations to processes or pathways not previously
linked to the cell cycle. Of these, 13 genes are involved in a number of different metabolic
pathways, including amino acid, carbohydrate and phospholipid metabolism. We investigated whether
any of these genes had genetic or physical interactions with genes implicated in the cell cycle
using the BioGRID Interaction database [27].
Several genes showed such interactions (see the electronic supplementary material 1, table S10). For
example, a predicted pyruvate decarboxylase SPAC1F8.07c interacts with a wee gene
zfs1 [21,28]. It is possible that these 13 metabolic cell cycle genes may act as
regulatory links between small molecule biosynthesis pathways and the cell cycle.3.5.Comparison with a human cell cycle gene setTo examine the overlap between cell cycle genes in fission yeast and human, we identified a set
of 521 human genes proposed to be involved in the cell cycle [12], and which have a fission yeast orthologue (see the electronic
supplementary material 1, table S11a and §5.5.3). The 521 fission yeast
orthologues of these human genes were compared with 614 fission yeast genes with an existing mitotic
cell cycle annotation, including all genes so far annotated to the mitotic cell cycle either by
inference or experiment (see the electronic supplementary material 1, table S11b
and §5.5.1; http://www.pombase.org/). There
were 113 genes common to both gene sets (see figure
2c and electronic supplementary material 1, table S11c). We
also compared the 521 gene set with the 276 new cell cycle genes from this study and identified a
further 43 genes in common (see figure
2c and electronic supplementary material 1, table S11d).
Therefore, in total, 156 of the 521 conserved genes were involved in the cell cycle in both
organisms (29.9%), a similar level to other inter-species comparisons, human/worm at 36 per
cent and human/fly at 38 per cent [12,14,29,30]. Possible reasons why these
inter-species comparisons in a variety of studies show such a low overlap are considered in
§4.3.6.Cell cycle checkpoint genesTo identify new DNA checkpoint genes, we screened 2983 viable gene deletion mutants for those
that failed to block the cell cycle in the presence of the ribonucleotide reductase inhibitor HU
[31–33]. We further screened these HU-sensitive mutants for those with a cut
phenotype [34], where cells fail to block cell
cycle progress and enter mitosis generating chromosome segregation defects. We identified 132
mutants sensitive to at least 5 mM HU (see §5.2 and electronic supplementary material 1,
table S12). In the presence of HU, deletion mutants of eight genes had greater than 60 per cent
 cells with a cut phenotype (see the electronic supplementary material 1, table S12, column
O). Of these, deletion mutants of hus1, rad1, rad3, rad26, rad17 and
rad9, which have been previously been shown to be required for establishment of the
DNA checkpoint, did not elongate prior to entering mitosis [33]. Deletion mutants of the remaining two genes (ddb1,
lem2) initially became elongated but eventually entered mitosis and displayed a cut
phenotype (figure 3a). Ddb1 is
necessary for stabilizing DNA replication forks and is involved in regulating the replication
checkpoint kinase Cds1 [35], and a
lem2 mutant has previously been shown to be sensitive to HU [36]. Mutants of a further 24 genes showed a lower level of cut cells
(between 20 and 60%) after 10 h in HU (see the electronic supplementary material 1, table
S12, column P). Of these, nine genes (nup132, nup40, did4, spc34, vps24, ubr1,
mde4, utp16 and ers1) are newly identified as
HU-sensitive genes with a cut phenotype. Figure 3.New HU-sensitive cut genes. (a) lem2 deletion mutant cells
stained with DAPI after growing for 8–10 h in the presence of HU. Examples of anucleated
cells can be seen (white arrow) and cells with unequally segregated chromatin (red arrow).
(b) New checkpoint genes identified in this study.In this study, we have identified one new S phase checkpoint gene, lem2, which
has a strong cut deletion phenotype, and nine genes with a lower penetrance cut deletion phenotype,
which may influence maintenance of the S phase checkpoint (figure 3b).3.7.Cell shape mutantsCell shape mutants other than those with a long cell phenotype have been used to identify genes
important for generating the normal rod-shape of a fission yeast cell. Previous studies in fission
yeast have identified orb mutants that are spherical because cells fail to grow in a polarized
manner, ban (banana) mutants that have a curved or bent cell phenotype because cells no longer
orientate the growth zones at 180° along the long axis of the cell, and tea (tip elongation
aberrant) mutants, which form a new growth zone in the wrong place often at 90° to the long
axis of the cell [2,3]. Other cell shape mutants included bottle- or skittle-shaped cells and
more generally misshapen cells [37]. We screened
the deletion mutants for shape defects using the following seven categories to describe the mutant
phenotypes (see figure 1 and electronic supplementary
material 1, table S5d–f,j–l,n for
gene lists). (i) rounded, which includes the typical orb mutants and also mutants
that are more rounded than WT but not completely spherical. (ii) stubby, which look
shorter and wider than WT but are mainly rod-shaped. These two categories showed a degree of
overlap, with some mutants showing both phenotypes. (iii) curved, which includes
the ban mutants and the tea mutants. During vegetative growth, tea mutants have only a low level of
T-shaped cells with most cells having a curved phenotype. (iv) skittle: one end of
cell the is wider than the other end. A total of 333 genes (6.9% of total genes) showed these
specific alterations in cell shape when deleted and are thus important for the generation of normal
cell shape. A further less well-defined group called misshapen showed an
ill-defined potato-like shape or a mixture of other shapes. These fell into three further subgroups:
(v) viable misshapen mutants (miss V), (vi) viable misshapen mutants, which have a
weak phenotype (miss weak V) and (vii) essential misshapen mutants (miss
E). There were 524 genes with these more general misshapen deletion phenotypes. In total,
857/4843 genes (17.7%) showed altered cell shape when deleted (table 1) and 668 of these are conserved in humans (77.9%). No
additional cell shape phenotypes were identified compared with earlier work, suggesting that there
may only be a restricted number of shapes that a fission yeast cell can adopt.The rounded, stubby and curved sets are all enriched for genes
implicated in cell polarity and for localization at the cell tip (tables 2 and 3),
rounded and stubby sets for cell wall organization, and the
stubby set for cytokinesis and actin cytoskeleton organization (table 2, footnote k). All 14 genes in the
curved set annotated to the cytoskeleton organization category are involved in
microtubule cytoskeleton organization (see table
2, footnote l) and are also enriched at the cell tip (table 3). Therefore, we predict that unknown genes with a curved deletion
phenotype when deleted are likely to be involved in microtubule-related processes. Similarly, the
stubby phenotype is likely to be associated with genes that affect actin processes. Genes which
generate a skittle phenotype when deleted were enriched for mitochondrial organization; nearly, 50
per cent (118/241) of the total genes annotated to mitochondrion organization were in the
skittle category. We found that 19 genes were required for mitochondrial tRNA
metabolism (table 2) and 61 genes for the
mitochondrial ribosome, suggesting that mitochondrial translation underlies the skittle phenotype.
The miss E category was enriched for genes required for lipid metabolism (35
genes), 15 of which are involved in glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor biosynthesis (table 2, footnote a; electronic supplementary material
1, table S6d). GPI anchor proteins affect cell wall integrity, and loss of these
proteins can result in a misshapen cell phenotype [38]. In higher eukaryotes, GPI anchor proteins have been implicated in the sorting of
membrane proteins important for cell polarization [39], and so, in fission yeast, GPI anchor proteins could also be implicated in cell
polarization.To investigate whether gene deletions that cause cell shape changes also have defects in the
cytoskeleton, bipolar growth pattern or the cell wall, we analysed 54 previously uncharacterized
viable cell shape mutants. These were a subset of 352 non-essential genes in the miss
V, miss weak V, rounded, stubby, curved and skittle
categories (table 1). We found that a total of 35
strains had defects in the cytoskeleton and/or the cell wall, bipolar growth or cell separation
defects and included 26 mutants with actin or microtubule defects (see figure 4 and electronic supplementary material 1, table S13 and electronic
supplementary material 2 for details). These results indicate that further screening of viable
deletion mutants, even those with a weak phenotype, will be a useful approach to identify and
characterize genes involved in the cytoskeleton. Figure 4.Cytological analysis of novel cell shape mutants. Examples of viable mutants from four cell shape
phenotype categories analysed for defects in the cytoskeleton, growth pattern or cell wall.
(a) Wild-type. (b) meu29Δ.
(c) yaf9Δ. (d)
spc2Δ. (e) tlg2Δ. DIC, differential
interference contrast; CF, calcofluor used to stain the cell wall and septum. For details, see the
electronic supplementary material 2 and electronic supplementary material 1, table S13.

3.1.Screening of the haploid deletion mutantsWe have microscopically examined and described the deletion phenotypes of 4843 haploid gene
deletion mutants of both essential and non-essential genes, after sporulating diploid heterozygous
deletion mutants and germinating haploid spores on rich medium plates (see §5.1 for details
of the screen and electronic supplementary material 1, tables S1 (column G)–S3). Mutants were
classified to one of 11 cell shape phenotypes together with three additional categories, namely:
WT; arrested as normal spores (spores); or arrested as normal
germinated spores (germination) (figures 1 and 2a
and table 1; electronic supplementary material 1,
table S1, column H), making 14 phenotype categories in total (see §5.1). These phenotypes
were mapped to terms in the Fission Yeast Phenotype Ontology (http://www.obofoundry.org/cgi-bin/detail.cgi?id=fypo) (see the electronic supplementary
material 1, table S4), and the gene list for each category can be found in the electronic
supplementary material 1, table S5a–n. All 4843 deletions were assigned to
only one of these 14 categories for analysis. The variation in the phenotype for mutants in a
particular category can be found in the phenotype description in the electronic supplementary
material 1, table S1, column G. For example, some long mutants may be slightly curved, and T-shaped
cells were observed in a subset of curved cells. Table 1.Summary of phenotype categories. Fourteen broad phenotype categories were used for analysis, and
the number and dispensability of genes in the different categories is shown. Each gene is classified
by a single phenotype category based on the most penetrant or strongest deletion phenotype. Cells
were only described as wild-type (WT) when no other phenotype was observed. The classifier for each
gene can be found in the electronic supplementary material, table S1, column H and gene
dispensability in table S1, column I. All genes are included only once and cell phenotype terms from
the electronic supplementary material 1, table S4 that are not included as separate phenotypes are
subsets of one of these categories, for example, a T-shaped mutant is included in the
curved category as curved is the most penetrant phenotype for this type of cell
shape mutant.phenotype categories for analysistotal genesessential genesnon-essential genesWT304103041spores1841840germination2232230misshapen essential3023020misshapen viable31031misshapen weak viable1910191long high penetrance346215131long low penetrance13610630long branched312011rounded895534stubby52844curved501139small251411skittle14212913total genes analysed484312673576
Figure 1.Cell shape categories. Examples of the 11 major cell shape phenotype categories described in this
study. For each deletion, mutant cells are shown as observed during the screen. Definitions of each
phenotype can be found in the electronic supplementary material 1, table S4. Scale bar (shown in WT)
= 10 µm.
Figure 2.Distribution of cell shape genes. (a) Distribution of 1395 genes with a cell
shape deletion phenotype among the 11 cell shape categories. (b) Overlap of
long gene set identified in this study (513 genes, green circle) with a set of
previously published genes with a long deletion phenotype (158 genes, red circle). For further
details see the electronic supplementary material 1, table S8. (c) Overlap between
(i) 521 fission yeast orthologues of human genes with an RNAi cell cycle phenotype (blue circle),
(ii) 614 genes with a mitotic cell cycle annotation in fission yeast (pink circle) and 276 new cell
cycle genes from this study (orange circle). For further details see the electronic supplementary
material 1, tables S8 and S11.Gene Ontology (GO) term enrichment of biological processes and cellular components for these 14
phenotype categories is shown in tables 2–4
(see the electronic supplementary material 1, table S6a–n and table
S7a–n for the complete results). There are 643/4843 genes with no GO process
annotation. Of these 643 ‘unknowns’, 574 (89.2%) have a WT deletion phenotype.
This means that most genes showing one or more of the 13 other deletion phenotypes are assigned a
biological process either by inference from other organisms or because they have been partially
characterized in fission yeast. However, their cellular shape is often not part of that
characterization. Table 2.GO cellular processes for all phenotype categories. A summary of the GO analysis to identify
genes annotated to cellular processes enriched within particular phenotype categories. The
enrichment results were mapped to ‘GO slim’ (high level) terms covering most
biological processes observed in fission yeast to give a broad view of the ontology content of the
genome-wide gene deletion dataset. For details see §5.5.2 and the electronic supplementary
material 1, table S6a–n and table S14. The total dataset is 4843 genes.
Footnotes are denoted by a–n. Red colour denotes enriched p ≤ 0.001;
orange denotes moderately enriched p ≤ 0.01; light orange denotes weakly
enriched p ≤ 0.1: light blue denotes no enrichment p
≤ 1; blank denotes number of genes is 0.aIncludes 15/29 genes annotated to glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor
biosynthesis, a descendent of lipid metabolism (p = 1.75 ×
10−8).bIncludes 10/41 genes annotated to attachment of spindle to microtubules, a descendent
of chromosome segregation (p = 0.001).cIncludes 11/26 genes annotated to histone deacetylation, a descendent of
transcription (p = 0.00054).dIncludes 53/118 genes annotated to nuclear mRNA splicing, via spliceosome, a
descendent of mRNA metabolism (p = 3.7 ×
10−27).eIncludes 5/6 subunits of the elongator complex involved in tRNA wobble uridine
modification.fIncludes 11/25 genes annotated to the septation initiation signalling cascade
(p = 0.00013), and 5/15 genes annotated to the stress activated protein.
Kinase signalling cascade, 4/19 genes annotated to TOR signalling and 3/17 genes annotated to
cAMP-mediated signalling (none enriched), all descendents of signalling.gIncludes 27/79 genes annotated to regulation of interphase, a descendent of
regulation of the mitotic cell cycle (p = 1.23 ×
10−9).hIncludes 18/67 genes annotated to regulation of mitosis (p =
4.88 × 10−11) and 6/27 genes annotated to attachment of spindle
microtubules to kinetochore (p = 0.0351), descendents of regulation of the
mitotic cell cycle.iIncludes 13/115 genes annotated to microtubule cytoskeleton, a descendent of
cytoskeleton organization (p = 0.00706).jIncludes 4/9 genes annotated to Cdc42 signal transduction, a descendent of signalling
(p = 0.006).kIncludes 7/52 genes annotated to actin cytoskeleton organization, a descendent of
cytoskeleton organization (p = 8.09 × 10−5).lIncludes 13/115 genes annotated to microtubule cytoskeleton organization, a
descendent of cytoskeleton organization (p = 2.12 ×
10−8) and 5/5 genes annotated to gamma tubulin complex localization, a descendent
of microtubule cytoskeleton organization (p = 3.11 ×
10−8).mIncludes 3/11 genes annotated to carbon catabolite repression of transcription, a
descendent of signalling (p = 0.00484).nAll 19 genes involved in mitochondrial tRNA metabolism.
Table 3.GO cellular components and complexes for all phenotype categories. Summary of the GO analysis for
cellular components enriched within particular phenotype categories. For details see §5.5.2
and electronic supplementary material 1, tables S7a–n and S14. For further
details, see table 2 legend. Footnotes are denoted
by a–u. Red colour denotes enriched p ≤ 0.001; orange denotes
moderately enriched p ≤ 0.01; light orange denotes weakly enriched
p ≤ 0.1; light blue denotes no enrichment p ≤ 1;
blank denotes number of genes is 0.aIncludes164/193 genes annotated to plasma membrane (p = 1.74
× 10−9) and 661/914 genes annotated to intrinsic to membrane
(p = 5.45 × 10−9), both descendents of
membrane.bIncludes 7/8 subunits of chaperonin containing T-complex (p =
1. 29 × 10−7) and 4/5 subunits of eukaryotic translation initiation factor
2B complex (p = 0.001).cIncludes 5/8 subunits of COP I coated vesicle membrane (p =
0.001).dIncludes 8/14 subunits of vacuolar proton-transporting V-type ATPase complex
(p = 7.26 × 10−6).eSee table 4 for breakdown of nuclear complexes.fIncludes 5/8 subunits of Arp2/3 protein complex (p =
0.00922).gIncludes 5/7 subunits of oligosaccharyltransferase complex (p
= 0.003), 3/3 subunits of
glycosylphosphatidylinositol-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (GPI-GnT)
(p = 0.05068), 6/11 subunits of TRAPP complex (p =
0.00417) and 4/4 subunits GARP complex (p = 0.00313).hIncludes 2/4 subunits of AP-1 adaptor complex (p =
0.02077).iIncludes 12/81 genes annotated to cytosolic large ribosomal subunit
(p = 0.00936), a descendent of ribosome.jIncludes 5/6 subunits of elongator holoenzyme complex (p =
0.002) and 5/5 subunits of RNA cap binding complex (p = 0.0004).kIncludes 32/211 genes annotated to spindle pole body (p =
0.006), a descendent of microtubule cytoskeleton.lIncludes 20/211 genes annotated to spindle pole body (p =
0.00014), a descendent of microtubule cytoskeleton.mIncludes 2/4 subunits of mitochondrial sorting and assembly machinery complex
(p = 0.22496).nIncludes 2/2 subunits of eRF1 methyltransferase complex (p =
0.03840).oIncludes 4/8 subunits of mannosyltransferase complex (p =
0.00081).pIncludes 8/194 genes annotated to ER membrane (p = 0.15), a
descendent of Golgi/ER.qIncludes 4/10 genes annotated to equatorial MTOC (p =
0.00015) and 8/51 genes annotated to spindle pole body (p = 0.1),
descendents of microtubule cytoskeleton.rIncludes 2/2 subunits of tea1 cell end complex (p =
0.008).sIncludes 4/211 genes annotated to spindle pole body (p = 1),
a descendent of microtubule cytoskeleton.tAll 61 genes encode subunits of mitochondrial ribosome (61/70 subunits
p = 3.98 × 10−88).uIncludes 20/173 genes annotated to mitochondrial membrane (p
= 6.38 × 10−6), a descendent of membrane.
Table 4.A summary of the GO analysis for nuclear complexes enriched within the 3 long
phenotype categories. For details, see §5.5.2 and electronic supplementary material 1, table
S14. For further details, see table 2 legend.
Footnotes are denoted by a–d. Red colour denotes enriched p ≤ 0.001;
orange denotes moderately enriched p ≤0.01; light orange denotes weakly
enriched p ≤0.1; light blue is no enrichment p ≤ 1;
blank denotes number of genes is 0.aIncludes 13/26 subunits of U4/U6 × U5 tri-snRNP complex (p
= 9.18 × 10−7), 6/7subunits of U6 SnRNP (p =
0.00017) and 6/6 subunits U2 snRNP (p = 0.0747).bIncludes 4/4 subunits of GINS complex (p = 7.14 ×
10−5).cIncludes 4/15 subunits of U1 snRNP (p = 0.07660), 3/6
subunits of t-UTP complex (p = 0.04886) and 6/7 subunits of U6 SnRNP
(p = 0.00017).dAll five genes encode subunits of holo TFIIH complex (5/10 subunits
p = 1.08 × 10−7).To identify genes required for the cell cycle and cell shape, we focused on the 11 cell shape
categories. These phenotypes and their relevance for the cell cycle and cell shape are described in
the following sections. To demonstrate the use of this resource, we describe a more detailed
cytological analysis of a subset of mutants altered in cell shape. In addition, we screened the
library of haploid viable deletion mutants for hydroxyurea (HU) sensitivity and identified new genes
implicated in the DNA checkpoint preventing entry into mitosis when DNA replication is incomplete or
DNA is damaged.

Screening of the haploid deletion mutants

We have microscopically examined and described the deletion phenotypes of 4843 haploid gene
deletion mutants of both essential and non-essential genes, after sporulating diploid heterozygous
deletion mutants and germinating haploid spores on rich medium plates (see §5.1 for details
of the screen and electronic supplementary material 1, tables S1 (column G)–S3). Mutants were
classified to one of 11 cell shape phenotypes together with three additional categories, namely:
WT; arrested as normal spores (spores); or arrested as normal
germinated spores (germination) (figures 1 and 2a
and table 1; electronic supplementary material 1,
table S1, column H), making 14 phenotype categories in total (see §5.1). These phenotypes
were mapped to terms in the Fission Yeast Phenotype Ontology (http://www.obofoundry.org/cgi-bin/detail.cgi?id=fypo) (see the electronic supplementary
material 1, table S4), and the gene list for each category can be found in the electronic
supplementary material 1, table S5a–n. All 4843 deletions were assigned to
only one of these 14 categories for analysis. The variation in the phenotype for mutants in a
particular category can be found in the phenotype description in the electronic supplementary
material 1, table S1, column G. For example, some long mutants may be slightly curved, and T-shaped
cells were observed in a subset of curved cells. Table 1.Summary of phenotype categories. Fourteen broad phenotype categories were used for analysis, and
the number and dispensability of genes in the different categories is shown. Each gene is classified
by a single phenotype category based on the most penetrant or strongest deletion phenotype. Cells
were only described as wild-type (WT) when no other phenotype was observed. The classifier for each
gene can be found in the electronic supplementary material, table S1, column H and gene
dispensability in table S1, column I. All genes are included only once and cell phenotype terms from
the electronic supplementary material 1, table S4 that are not included as separate phenotypes are
subsets of one of these categories, for example, a T-shaped mutant is included in the
curved category as curved is the most penetrant phenotype for this type of cell
shape mutant.phenotype categories for analysistotal genesessential genesnon-essential genesWT304103041spores1841840germination2232230misshapen essential3023020misshapen viable31031misshapen weak viable1910191long high penetrance346215131long low penetrance13610630long branched312011rounded895534stubby52844curved501139small251411skittle14212913total genes analysed484312673576
Figure 1.Cell shape categories. Examples of the 11 major cell shape phenotype categories described in this
study. For each deletion, mutant cells are shown as observed during the screen. Definitions of each
phenotype can be found in the electronic supplementary material 1, table S4. Scale bar (shown in WT)
= 10 µm.
Figure 2.Distribution of cell shape genes. (a) Distribution of 1395 genes with a cell
shape deletion phenotype among the 11 cell shape categories. (b) Overlap of
long gene set identified in this study (513 genes, green circle) with a set of
previously published genes with a long deletion phenotype (158 genes, red circle). For further
details see the electronic supplementary material 1, table S8. (c) Overlap between
(i) 521 fission yeast orthologues of human genes with an RNAi cell cycle phenotype (blue circle),
(ii) 614 genes with a mitotic cell cycle annotation in fission yeast (pink circle) and 276 new cell
cycle genes from this study (orange circle). For further details see the electronic supplementary
material 1, tables S8 and S11.

Summary of phenotype categories. Fourteen broad phenotype categories were used for analysis, and
the number and dispensability of genes in the different categories is shown. Each gene is classified
by a single phenotype category based on the most penetrant or strongest deletion phenotype. Cells
were only described as wild-type (WT) when no other phenotype was observed. The classifier for each
gene can be found in the electronic supplementary material, table S1, column H and gene
dispensability in table S1, column I. All genes are included only once and cell phenotype terms from
the electronic supplementary material 1, table S4 that are not included as separate phenotypes are
subsets of one of these categories, for example, a T-shaped mutant is included in the
curved category as curved is the most penetrant phenotype for this type of cell
shape mutant.

Cell shape categories. Examples of the 11 major cell shape phenotype categories described in this
study. For each deletion, mutant cells are shown as observed during the screen. Definitions of each
phenotype can be found in the electronic supplementary material 1, table S4. Scale bar (shown in WT)
= 10 µm.

Distribution of cell shape genes. (a) Distribution of 1395 genes with a cell
shape deletion phenotype among the 11 cell shape categories. (b) Overlap of
long gene set identified in this study (513 genes, green circle) with a set of
previously published genes with a long deletion phenotype (158 genes, red circle). For further
details see the electronic supplementary material 1, table S8. (c) Overlap between
(i) 521 fission yeast orthologues of human genes with an RNAi cell cycle phenotype (blue circle),
(ii) 614 genes with a mitotic cell cycle annotation in fission yeast (pink circle) and 276 new cell
cycle genes from this study (orange circle). For further details see the electronic supplementary
material 1, tables S8 and S11.

Gene Ontology (GO) term enrichment of biological processes and cellular components for these 14
phenotype categories is shown in tables 2–4
(see the electronic supplementary material 1, table S6a–n and table
S7a–n for the complete results). There are 643/4843 genes with no GO process
annotation. Of these 643 ‘unknowns’, 574 (89.2%) have a WT deletion phenotype.
This means that most genes showing one or more of the 13 other deletion phenotypes are assigned a
biological process either by inference from other organisms or because they have been partially
characterized in fission yeast. However, their cellular shape is often not part of that
characterization. Table 2.GO cellular processes for all phenotype categories. A summary of the GO analysis to identify
genes annotated to cellular processes enriched within particular phenotype categories. The
enrichment results were mapped to ‘GO slim’ (high level) terms covering most
biological processes observed in fission yeast to give a broad view of the ontology content of the
genome-wide gene deletion dataset. For details see §5.5.2 and the electronic supplementary
material 1, table S6a–n and table S14. The total dataset is 4843 genes.
Footnotes are denoted by a–n. Red colour denotes enriched p ≤ 0.001;
orange denotes moderately enriched p ≤ 0.01; light orange denotes weakly
enriched p ≤ 0.1: light blue denotes no enrichment p
≤ 1; blank denotes number of genes is 0.aIncludes 15/29 genes annotated to glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor
biosynthesis, a descendent of lipid metabolism (p = 1.75 ×
10−8).bIncludes 10/41 genes annotated to attachment of spindle to microtubules, a descendent
of chromosome segregation (p = 0.001).cIncludes 11/26 genes annotated to histone deacetylation, a descendent of
transcription (p = 0.00054).dIncludes 53/118 genes annotated to nuclear mRNA splicing, via spliceosome, a
descendent of mRNA metabolism (p = 3.7 ×
10−27).eIncludes 5/6 subunits of the elongator complex involved in tRNA wobble uridine
modification.fIncludes 11/25 genes annotated to the septation initiation signalling cascade
(p = 0.00013), and 5/15 genes annotated to the stress activated protein.
Kinase signalling cascade, 4/19 genes annotated to TOR signalling and 3/17 genes annotated to
cAMP-mediated signalling (none enriched), all descendents of signalling.gIncludes 27/79 genes annotated to regulation of interphase, a descendent of
regulation of the mitotic cell cycle (p = 1.23 ×
10−9).hIncludes 18/67 genes annotated to regulation of mitosis (p =
4.88 × 10−11) and 6/27 genes annotated to attachment of spindle
microtubules to kinetochore (p = 0.0351), descendents of regulation of the
mitotic cell cycle.iIncludes 13/115 genes annotated to microtubule cytoskeleton, a descendent of
cytoskeleton organization (p = 0.00706).jIncludes 4/9 genes annotated to Cdc42 signal transduction, a descendent of signalling
(p = 0.006).kIncludes 7/52 genes annotated to actin cytoskeleton organization, a descendent of
cytoskeleton organization (p = 8.09 × 10−5).lIncludes 13/115 genes annotated to microtubule cytoskeleton organization, a
descendent of cytoskeleton organization (p = 2.12 ×
10−8) and 5/5 genes annotated to gamma tubulin complex localization, a descendent
of microtubule cytoskeleton organization (p = 3.11 ×
10−8).mIncludes 3/11 genes annotated to carbon catabolite repression of transcription, a
descendent of signalling (p = 0.00484).nAll 19 genes involved in mitochondrial tRNA metabolism.
Table 3.GO cellular components and complexes for all phenotype categories. Summary of the GO analysis for
cellular components enriched within particular phenotype categories. For details see §5.5.2
and electronic supplementary material 1, tables S7a–n and S14. For further
details, see table 2 legend. Footnotes are denoted
by a–u. Red colour denotes enriched p ≤ 0.001; orange denotes
moderately enriched p ≤ 0.01; light orange denotes weakly enriched
p ≤ 0.1; light blue denotes no enrichment p ≤ 1;
blank denotes number of genes is 0.aIncludes164/193 genes annotated to plasma membrane (p = 1.74
× 10−9) and 661/914 genes annotated to intrinsic to membrane
(p = 5.45 × 10−9), both descendents of
membrane.bIncludes 7/8 subunits of chaperonin containing T-complex (p =
1. 29 × 10−7) and 4/5 subunits of eukaryotic translation initiation factor
2B complex (p = 0.001).cIncludes 5/8 subunits of COP I coated vesicle membrane (p =
0.001).dIncludes 8/14 subunits of vacuolar proton-transporting V-type ATPase complex
(p = 7.26 × 10−6).eSee table 4 for breakdown of nuclear complexes.fIncludes 5/8 subunits of Arp2/3 protein complex (p =
0.00922).gIncludes 5/7 subunits of oligosaccharyltransferase complex (p
= 0.003), 3/3 subunits of
glycosylphosphatidylinositol-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (GPI-GnT)
(p = 0.05068), 6/11 subunits of TRAPP complex (p =
0.00417) and 4/4 subunits GARP complex (p = 0.00313).hIncludes 2/4 subunits of AP-1 adaptor complex (p =
0.02077).iIncludes 12/81 genes annotated to cytosolic large ribosomal subunit
(p = 0.00936), a descendent of ribosome.jIncludes 5/6 subunits of elongator holoenzyme complex (p =
0.002) and 5/5 subunits of RNA cap binding complex (p = 0.0004).kIncludes 32/211 genes annotated to spindle pole body (p =
0.006), a descendent of microtubule cytoskeleton.lIncludes 20/211 genes annotated to spindle pole body (p =
0.00014), a descendent of microtubule cytoskeleton.mIncludes 2/4 subunits of mitochondrial sorting and assembly machinery complex
(p = 0.22496).nIncludes 2/2 subunits of eRF1 methyltransferase complex (p =
0.03840).oIncludes 4/8 subunits of mannosyltransferase complex (p =
0.00081).pIncludes 8/194 genes annotated to ER membrane (p = 0.15), a
descendent of Golgi/ER.qIncludes 4/10 genes annotated to equatorial MTOC (p =
0.00015) and 8/51 genes annotated to spindle pole body (p = 0.1),
descendents of microtubule cytoskeleton.rIncludes 2/2 subunits of tea1 cell end complex (p =
0.008).sIncludes 4/211 genes annotated to spindle pole body (p = 1),
a descendent of microtubule cytoskeleton.tAll 61 genes encode subunits of mitochondrial ribosome (61/70 subunits
p = 3.98 × 10−88).uIncludes 20/173 genes annotated to mitochondrial membrane (p
= 6.38 × 10−6), a descendent of membrane.
Table 4.A summary of the GO analysis for nuclear complexes enriched within the 3 long
phenotype categories. For details, see §5.5.2 and electronic supplementary material 1, table
S14. For further details, see table 2 legend.
Footnotes are denoted by a–d. Red colour denotes enriched p ≤ 0.001;
orange denotes moderately enriched p ≤0.01; light orange denotes weakly
enriched p ≤0.1; light blue is no enrichment p ≤ 1;
blank denotes number of genes is 0.aIncludes 13/26 subunits of U4/U6 × U5 tri-snRNP complex (p
= 9.18 × 10−7), 6/7subunits of U6 SnRNP (p =
0.00017) and 6/6 subunits U2 snRNP (p = 0.0747).bIncludes 4/4 subunits of GINS complex (p = 7.14 ×
10−5).cIncludes 4/15 subunits of U1 snRNP (p = 0.07660), 3/6
subunits of t-UTP complex (p = 0.04886) and 6/7 subunits of U6 SnRNP
(p = 0.00017).dAll five genes encode subunits of holo TFIIH complex (5/10 subunits
p = 1.08 × 10−7).

GO cellular processes for all phenotype categories. A summary of the GO analysis to identify
genes annotated to cellular processes enriched within particular phenotype categories. The
enrichment results were mapped to ‘GO slim’ (high level) terms covering most
biological processes observed in fission yeast to give a broad view of the ontology content of the
genome-wide gene deletion dataset. For details see §5.5.2 and the electronic supplementary
material 1, table S6a–n and table S14. The total dataset is 4843 genes.
Footnotes are denoted by a–n. Red colour denotes enriched p ≤ 0.001;
orange denotes moderately enriched p ≤ 0.01; light orange denotes weakly
enriched p ≤ 0.1: light blue denotes no enrichment p
≤ 1; blank denotes number of genes is 0.

aIncludes 15/29 genes annotated to glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor
biosynthesis, a descendent of lipid metabolism (p = 1.75 ×
10−8).

bIncludes 10/41 genes annotated to attachment of spindle to microtubules, a descendent
of chromosome segregation (p = 0.001).

cIncludes 11/26 genes annotated to histone deacetylation, a descendent of
transcription (p = 0.00054).

dIncludes 53/118 genes annotated to nuclear mRNA splicing, via spliceosome, a
descendent of mRNA metabolism (p = 3.7 ×
10−27).

eIncludes 5/6 subunits of the elongator complex involved in tRNA wobble uridine
modification.

fIncludes 11/25 genes annotated to the septation initiation signalling cascade
(p = 0.00013), and 5/15 genes annotated to the stress activated protein.
Kinase signalling cascade, 4/19 genes annotated to TOR signalling and 3/17 genes annotated to
cAMP-mediated signalling (none enriched), all descendents of signalling.

gIncludes 27/79 genes annotated to regulation of interphase, a descendent of
regulation of the mitotic cell cycle (p = 1.23 ×
10−9).

hIncludes 18/67 genes annotated to regulation of mitosis (p =
4.88 × 10−11) and 6/27 genes annotated to attachment of spindle
microtubules to kinetochore (p = 0.0351), descendents of regulation of the
mitotic cell cycle.

iIncludes 13/115 genes annotated to microtubule cytoskeleton, a descendent of
cytoskeleton organization (p = 0.00706).

jIncludes 4/9 genes annotated to Cdc42 signal transduction, a descendent of signalling
(p = 0.006).

kIncludes 7/52 genes annotated to actin cytoskeleton organization, a descendent of
cytoskeleton organization (p = 8.09 × 10−5).

lIncludes 13/115 genes annotated to microtubule cytoskeleton organization, a
descendent of cytoskeleton organization (p = 2.12 ×
10−8) and 5/5 genes annotated to gamma tubulin complex localization, a descendent
of microtubule cytoskeleton organization (p = 3.11 ×
10−8).

mIncludes 3/11 genes annotated to carbon catabolite repression of transcription, a
descendent of signalling (p = 0.00484).

nAll 19 genes involved in mitochondrial tRNA metabolism.

GO cellular components and complexes for all phenotype categories. Summary of the GO analysis for
cellular components enriched within particular phenotype categories. For details see §5.5.2
and electronic supplementary material 1, tables S7a–n and S14. For further
details, see table 2 legend. Footnotes are denoted
by a–u. Red colour denotes enriched p ≤ 0.001; orange denotes
moderately enriched p ≤ 0.01; light orange denotes weakly enriched
p ≤ 0.1; light blue denotes no enrichment p ≤ 1;
blank denotes number of genes is 0.

aIncludes164/193 genes annotated to plasma membrane (p = 1.74
× 10−9) and 661/914 genes annotated to intrinsic to membrane
(p = 5.45 × 10−9), both descendents of
membrane.

bIncludes 7/8 subunits of chaperonin containing T-complex (p =
1. 29 × 10−7) and 4/5 subunits of eukaryotic translation initiation factor
2B complex (p = 0.001).

cIncludes 5/8 subunits of COP I coated vesicle membrane (p =
0.001).

dIncludes 8/14 subunits of vacuolar proton-transporting V-type ATPase complex
(p = 7.26 × 10−6).

eSee table 4 for breakdown of nuclear complexes.

fIncludes 5/8 subunits of Arp2/3 protein complex (p =
0.00922).

gIncludes 5/7 subunits of oligosaccharyltransferase complex (p
= 0.003), 3/3 subunits of
glycosylphosphatidylinositol-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (GPI-GnT)
(p = 0.05068), 6/11 subunits of TRAPP complex (p =
0.00417) and 4/4 subunits GARP complex (p = 0.00313).

hIncludes 2/4 subunits of AP-1 adaptor complex (p =
0.02077).

iIncludes 12/81 genes annotated to cytosolic large ribosomal subunit
(p = 0.00936), a descendent of ribosome.

jIncludes 5/6 subunits of elongator holoenzyme complex (p =
0.002) and 5/5 subunits of RNA cap binding complex (p = 0.0004).

kIncludes 32/211 genes annotated to spindle pole body (p =
0.006), a descendent of microtubule cytoskeleton.

lIncludes 20/211 genes annotated to spindle pole body (p =
0.00014), a descendent of microtubule cytoskeleton.

mIncludes 2/4 subunits of mitochondrial sorting and assembly machinery complex
(p = 0.22496).

nIncludes 2/2 subunits of eRF1 methyltransferase complex (p =
0.03840).

oIncludes 4/8 subunits of mannosyltransferase complex (p =
0.00081).

pIncludes 8/194 genes annotated to ER membrane (p = 0.15), a
descendent of Golgi/ER.

qIncludes 4/10 genes annotated to equatorial MTOC (p =
0.00015) and 8/51 genes annotated to spindle pole body (p = 0.1),
descendents of microtubule cytoskeleton.

rIncludes 2/2 subunits of tea1 cell end complex (p =
0.008).

sIncludes 4/211 genes annotated to spindle pole body (p = 1),
a descendent of microtubule cytoskeleton.

tAll 61 genes encode subunits of mitochondrial ribosome (61/70 subunits
p = 3.98 × 10−88).

uIncludes 20/173 genes annotated to mitochondrial membrane (p
= 6.38 × 10−6), a descendent of membrane.

A summary of the GO analysis for nuclear complexes enriched within the 3 long
phenotype categories. For details, see §5.5.2 and electronic supplementary material 1, table
S14. For further details, see table 2 legend.
Footnotes are denoted by a–d. Red colour denotes enriched p ≤ 0.001;
orange denotes moderately enriched p ≤0.01; light orange denotes weakly
enriched p ≤0.1; light blue is no enrichment p ≤ 1;
blank denotes number of genes is 0.

aIncludes 13/26 subunits of U4/U6 × U5 tri-snRNP complex (p
= 9.18 × 10−7), 6/7subunits of U6 SnRNP (p =
0.00017) and 6/6 subunits U2 snRNP (p = 0.0747).

bIncludes 4/4 subunits of GINS complex (p = 7.14 ×
10−5).

cIncludes 4/15 subunits of U1 snRNP (p = 0.07660), 3/6
subunits of t-UTP complex (p = 0.04886) and 6/7 subunits of U6 SnRNP
(p = 0.00017).

dAll five genes encode subunits of holo TFIIH complex (5/10 subunits
p = 1.08 × 10−7).

To identify genes required for the cell cycle and cell shape, we focused on the 11 cell shape
categories. These phenotypes and their relevance for the cell cycle and cell shape are described in
the following sections. To demonstrate the use of this resource, we describe a more detailed
cytological analysis of a subset of mutants altered in cell shape. In addition, we screened the
library of haploid viable deletion mutants for hydroxyurea (HU) sensitivity and identified new genes
implicated in the DNA checkpoint preventing entry into mitosis when DNA replication is incomplete or
DNA is damaged.

3.2.Gene deletion mutants with an elongated cell phenotypeA long cell phenotype identifies cells blocked in progression through interphase of the cell
cycle or cytokinesis (see §2). Gene deletion mutants with this phenotype were assigned to
three categories, long high penetrance (long HP; 346/4843), long low penetrance
(long LP; 136/4843) and long branched (long Br; 31/4843) (figure 1 and table 1 and electronic supplementary material 1, tables S4 and
S5g–i). These three categories totalled 513 genes required for cell cycle
progression, and we conclude that 10 per cent of fission yeast genes are required directly or
indirectly for progression through interphase or cytokinesis (513/4843). Four hundred and
sixty-seven genes had a strong elongated deletion phenotype and a further 46 genes were included
that were only weakly elongated when deleted (see §5.1). Of the 513 genes in the
long categories, 66.5 per cent (341 genes) were essential for viability compared
with 26.2 per cent for all genes, and 85.57 per cent (439 genes) were conserved in human. This
indicates that many of the genes identified in this study are likely to be important for
understanding the cell cycle in other more complex eukaryotes.All three long categories were enriched for nuclear localization (table 3). The long Br set was enriched
for cytokinesis and transcription and included genes encoding subunits of the RNA polymerase II
holoenzyme, mediator and SAGA complexes (tables 2
and 4). As expected the long HP
and long LP sets were both overrepresented for genes involved in DNA metabolism and
the regulation of mitotic cell cycle (table 2).
The long HP set was also enriched for processes and complexes involved in mRNA
metabolism (particularly splicing), RNA biogenesis, transcription and DNA replication initiation,
and 6/6 genes encoding subunits of the MCM complex (see table 4 and legend for details). By contrast, the long LP set was enriched
for chromosome segregation and for genes encoding subunits of kinetochore complexes, including
Mis6-SIM4 (8/14 subunits), Ndc-Mis-Spc (6/10 subunits), condensin (4/5 subunits) and APC (8/13
subunits) (tables 2 and 4). These differences in enrichment indicate that long
HP is a good classifier for genes involved in progress through interphase, whereas
long LP is more specific for genes associated with progress through mitosis (table 2 footnotes g,h). Mutants that block in mitosis
usually display an irregular less defined cell shape but are not elongated, whereas an elongated
phenotype is characteristic of an interphase block, so one possibility is that the long
LP gene set is enriched for a subset of mitotic genes that are also required for interphase
progression, with some cells arresting in mitosis and other cells in interphase. Together, these
three long phenotype categories (long HP, long LP
and long Br) define gene sets important for progression through interphase or
cytokinesis. The long LP gene set is in addition enriched for a set of mitotic
genes, which may also be required during interphase.

Gene deletion mutants with an elongated cell phenotype

A long cell phenotype identifies cells blocked in progression through interphase of the cell
cycle or cytokinesis (see §2). Gene deletion mutants with this phenotype were assigned to
three categories, long high penetrance (long HP; 346/4843), long low penetrance
(long LP; 136/4843) and long branched (long Br; 31/4843) (figure 1 and table 1 and electronic supplementary material 1, tables S4 and
S5g–i). These three categories totalled 513 genes required for cell cycle
progression, and we conclude that 10 per cent of fission yeast genes are required directly or
indirectly for progression through interphase or cytokinesis (513/4843). Four hundred and
sixty-seven genes had a strong elongated deletion phenotype and a further 46 genes were included
that were only weakly elongated when deleted (see §5.1). Of the 513 genes in the
long categories, 66.5 per cent (341 genes) were essential for viability compared
with 26.2 per cent for all genes, and 85.57 per cent (439 genes) were conserved in human. This
indicates that many of the genes identified in this study are likely to be important for
understanding the cell cycle in other more complex eukaryotes.

All three long categories were enriched for nuclear localization (table 3). The long Br set was enriched
for cytokinesis and transcription and included genes encoding subunits of the RNA polymerase II
holoenzyme, mediator and SAGA complexes (tables 2
and 4). As expected the long HP
and long LP sets were both overrepresented for genes involved in DNA metabolism and
the regulation of mitotic cell cycle (table 2).
The long HP set was also enriched for processes and complexes involved in mRNA
metabolism (particularly splicing), RNA biogenesis, transcription and DNA replication initiation,
and 6/6 genes encoding subunits of the MCM complex (see table 4 and legend for details). By contrast, the long LP set was enriched
for chromosome segregation and for genes encoding subunits of kinetochore complexes, including
Mis6-SIM4 (8/14 subunits), Ndc-Mis-Spc (6/10 subunits), condensin (4/5 subunits) and APC (8/13
subunits) (tables 2 and 4). These differences in enrichment indicate that long
HP is a good classifier for genes involved in progress through interphase, whereas
long LP is more specific for genes associated with progress through mitosis (table 2 footnotes g,h). Mutants that block in mitosis
usually display an irregular less defined cell shape but are not elongated, whereas an elongated
phenotype is characteristic of an interphase block, so one possibility is that the long
LP gene set is enriched for a subset of mitotic genes that are also required for interphase
progression, with some cells arresting in mitosis and other cells in interphase. Together, these
three long phenotype categories (long HP, long LP
and long Br) define gene sets important for progression through interphase or
cytokinesis. The long LP gene set is in addition enriched for a set of mitotic
genes, which may also be required during interphase.

3.3.Cell cycle mutants without a long phenotypeNot all genes previously known to be required during interphase have an elongated phenotype when
deleted. We found that DNA replication genes cdc23, ssb1, pol1, cdc18, cdt1, rad4
and four genes encoding core subunits of the RFC (rfc2, rfc3, rfc4 and
rfc5) were all annotated to the misshapen essential set (miss E;
table 1 and electronic supplementary material 1,
table S5d). Some of these genes are known to be required for both DNA replication
and the DNA checkpoint, and mutant strains enter mitosis with incompletely replicated DNA [16–20]. The miss E category also contains genes required for mitosis, for
example, the kinetochore protein Nnf1 and pericentrin Pcp1. In total, 57 genes were annotated to one
or more cell cycle process (table 2 and electronic
supplementary material 1, table S6d). We conclude that the miss E
phenotypic class will be a good starting point to screen for further genes required for both DNA
replication and the DNA checkpoint as well as for genes required during mitosis.Another group of previously known cell cycle genes exhibit a wee phenotype, with viable cells
dividing at a shorter length and a smaller cell volume than WT cells. A partial gene deletion
library of viable haploid mutants has already been screened, and 18 wee mutants identified [21]. In this study, we identified by visual examination
25 genes with a small cell deletion phenotype; this small set consisted of 11
non-essential genes and 14 essential genes (see the electronic supplementary material 1, table
S5m). The 11 non-essential genes included nine of the 18 previously identified wee
genes and were mainly those with a stronger wee deletion phenotype [21]. The two additional genes encode a predicted 26S proteasome
non-ATPase regulatory subunit (SPCC18.17c), which has been found (F. Navarro and P. Nurse 2012,
personal communication) to be shorter but also wider and so divided at a WT cell volume, and a
mitochondrial inheritance GTPase (dml1), which is potentially a new wee gene. The
14 essential genes were enriched for tRNA metabolism (see table 2 for summary and the electronic supplementary material 1, tables S6m
and S7m for details), including genes encoding subunits of the RNase P and
mitochondrial RNase P, which have roles in RNA processing [22], tRNA 2’-O-ribose methyltransferase, tRNA-specific adenosine
deaminase (2/2 subunits) and the tRNA-specific splicing endonuclease (2/4 subunits). It is possible
that these non-viable small mutants, like other similar small size viable mutants identified in
budding yeast that affect growth [23], may only
indirectly affect cell cycle progression.

Cell cycle mutants without a long phenotype

Not all genes previously known to be required during interphase have an elongated phenotype when
deleted. We found that DNA replication genes cdc23, ssb1, pol1, cdc18, cdt1, rad4
and four genes encoding core subunits of the RFC (rfc2, rfc3, rfc4 and
rfc5) were all annotated to the misshapen essential set (miss E;
table 1 and electronic supplementary material 1,
table S5d). Some of these genes are known to be required for both DNA replication
and the DNA checkpoint, and mutant strains enter mitosis with incompletely replicated DNA [16–20]. The miss E category also contains genes required for mitosis, for
example, the kinetochore protein Nnf1 and pericentrin Pcp1. In total, 57 genes were annotated to one
or more cell cycle process (table 2 and electronic
supplementary material 1, table S6d). We conclude that the miss E
phenotypic class will be a good starting point to screen for further genes required for both DNA
replication and the DNA checkpoint as well as for genes required during mitosis.

Another group of previously known cell cycle genes exhibit a wee phenotype, with viable cells
dividing at a shorter length and a smaller cell volume than WT cells. A partial gene deletion
library of viable haploid mutants has already been screened, and 18 wee mutants identified [21]. In this study, we identified by visual examination
25 genes with a small cell deletion phenotype; this small set consisted of 11
non-essential genes and 14 essential genes (see the electronic supplementary material 1, table
S5m). The 11 non-essential genes included nine of the 18 previously identified wee
genes and were mainly those with a stronger wee deletion phenotype [21]. The two additional genes encode a predicted 26S proteasome
non-ATPase regulatory subunit (SPCC18.17c), which has been found (F. Navarro and P. Nurse 2012,
personal communication) to be shorter but also wider and so divided at a WT cell volume, and a
mitochondrial inheritance GTPase (dml1), which is potentially a new wee gene. The
14 essential genes were enriched for tRNA metabolism (see table 2 for summary and the electronic supplementary material 1, tables S6m
and S7m for details), including genes encoding subunits of the RNase P and
mitochondrial RNase P, which have roles in RNA processing [22], tRNA 2’-O-ribose methyltransferase, tRNA-specific adenosine
deaminase (2/2 subunits) and the tRNA-specific splicing endonuclease (2/4 subunits). It is possible
that these non-viable small mutants, like other similar small size viable mutants identified in
budding yeast that affect growth [23], may only
indirectly affect cell cycle progression.

3.4.New cell cycle genesOur genome-wide screen has identified 513 genes with a long cell deletion phenotype and thus
required for the cell cycle in fission yeast. Previously, 158 fission yeast genes that generate
elongated cells when deleted have been reported and annotated in PomBase (http://www.pombase.org/) [24]. To validate this qualitative visual approach to identify new cell
cycle genes, we compared these 158 genes (see the electronic supplementary material 1, table
S8a) with the 513 fission yeast cell cycle genes from this screen (see the
electronic supplementary material 1, table S5g–i) and found that 147 of the
158 genes were also identified in our screen (see figure
2b and electronic supplementary material 1, table S9). The 366 genes not
previously reported as elongated when deleted included 90 genes with an existing cell cycle GO
annotation and 276 genes with no previously known cell cycle role (see the electronic supplementary
material 1, tables S8b and S8c). The majority of these 276 genes
(230/276) are annotated to GO processes which have previously been linked to the cell cycle,
suggesting that the 276 genes are true positives and identify new cell cycle genes. The 230 new
genes involved in cell-cycle-related processes included genes required for ribosome biogenesis,
splicing and nucleotide metabolism (table 5). For
example, seven genes (dfr1, adk1, hpt1, dea2, dut1, dcd1, tmp1) are concerned with
various nucleotide metabolism pathways. Two previously identified cell cycle genes, budding yeast
CDC8 (tmp1 orthologue) [25], and
the fission yeast cdc22 (ribonucleotide reductase) [26] are also required for nucleotide metabolism. Given the cell cycle
role of these two genes, the other genes identified here may also be important for maintaining the
nucleotide levels needed for cell cycle progression. Table 5.GO process annotations for 276 novel cell cycle genes. These 276 genes were not previously known
to be involved in the cell cycle in fission yeast. Two hundred and thirty genes are annotated to
other GO processes that have accepted links to the cell cycle in fission yeast and 29 genes had a GO
process annotation not related to the cell cycle. Only 17 genes were of completely unknown
function.process in fission yeastno. genesGO processes cell-cycle-related230 nucleocytoplasmic transport13 mRNA metabolic process and splicing73 ribosome biogenesis and cytoplasmic translation37 Transcription78 DNA repair, recombination, telomere maintenance14 vesicle-mediated transport5 modification by small molecule conjugation3 nucleotide metabolism7GO processes not cell-cycle-related29 small molecule metabolic pathways13 miscellaneous16unknown process17 fission-yeast-specific4 fungal-specific4 conserved to humans9The remaining 46 genes include 17 genes unstudied in any organism (nine of which are conserved in
humans), and 29 genes that have existing GO annotations to processes or pathways not previously
linked to the cell cycle. Of these, 13 genes are involved in a number of different metabolic
pathways, including amino acid, carbohydrate and phospholipid metabolism. We investigated whether
any of these genes had genetic or physical interactions with genes implicated in the cell cycle
using the BioGRID Interaction database [27].
Several genes showed such interactions (see the electronic supplementary material 1, table S10). For
example, a predicted pyruvate decarboxylase SPAC1F8.07c interacts with a wee gene
zfs1 [21,28]. It is possible that these 13 metabolic cell cycle genes may act as
regulatory links between small molecule biosynthesis pathways and the cell cycle.

New cell cycle genes

Our genome-wide screen has identified 513 genes with a long cell deletion phenotype and thus
required for the cell cycle in fission yeast. Previously, 158 fission yeast genes that generate
elongated cells when deleted have been reported and annotated in PomBase (http://www.pombase.org/) [24]. To validate this qualitative visual approach to identify new cell
cycle genes, we compared these 158 genes (see the electronic supplementary material 1, table
S8a) with the 513 fission yeast cell cycle genes from this screen (see the
electronic supplementary material 1, table S5g–i) and found that 147 of the
158 genes were also identified in our screen (see figure
2b and electronic supplementary material 1, table S9). The 366 genes not
previously reported as elongated when deleted included 90 genes with an existing cell cycle GO
annotation and 276 genes with no previously known cell cycle role (see the electronic supplementary
material 1, tables S8b and S8c). The majority of these 276 genes
(230/276) are annotated to GO processes which have previously been linked to the cell cycle,
suggesting that the 276 genes are true positives and identify new cell cycle genes. The 230 new
genes involved in cell-cycle-related processes included genes required for ribosome biogenesis,
splicing and nucleotide metabolism (table 5). For
example, seven genes (dfr1, adk1, hpt1, dea2, dut1, dcd1, tmp1) are concerned with
various nucleotide metabolism pathways. Two previously identified cell cycle genes, budding yeast
CDC8 (tmp1 orthologue) [25], and
the fission yeast cdc22 (ribonucleotide reductase) [26] are also required for nucleotide metabolism. Given the cell cycle
role of these two genes, the other genes identified here may also be important for maintaining the
nucleotide levels needed for cell cycle progression. Table 5.GO process annotations for 276 novel cell cycle genes. These 276 genes were not previously known
to be involved in the cell cycle in fission yeast. Two hundred and thirty genes are annotated to
other GO processes that have accepted links to the cell cycle in fission yeast and 29 genes had a GO
process annotation not related to the cell cycle. Only 17 genes were of completely unknown
function.process in fission yeastno. genesGO processes cell-cycle-related230 nucleocytoplasmic transport13 mRNA metabolic process and splicing73 ribosome biogenesis and cytoplasmic translation37 Transcription78 DNA repair, recombination, telomere maintenance14 vesicle-mediated transport5 modification by small molecule conjugation3 nucleotide metabolism7GO processes not cell-cycle-related29 small molecule metabolic pathways13 miscellaneous16unknown process17 fission-yeast-specific4 fungal-specific4 conserved to humans9

GO process annotations for 276 novel cell cycle genes. These 276 genes were not previously known
to be involved in the cell cycle in fission yeast. Two hundred and thirty genes are annotated to
other GO processes that have accepted links to the cell cycle in fission yeast and 29 genes had a GO
process annotation not related to the cell cycle. Only 17 genes were of completely unknown
function.

The remaining 46 genes include 17 genes unstudied in any organism (nine of which are conserved in
humans), and 29 genes that have existing GO annotations to processes or pathways not previously
linked to the cell cycle. Of these, 13 genes are involved in a number of different metabolic
pathways, including amino acid, carbohydrate and phospholipid metabolism. We investigated whether
any of these genes had genetic or physical interactions with genes implicated in the cell cycle
using the BioGRID Interaction database [27].
Several genes showed such interactions (see the electronic supplementary material 1, table S10). For
example, a predicted pyruvate decarboxylase SPAC1F8.07c interacts with a wee gene
zfs1 [21,28]. It is possible that these 13 metabolic cell cycle genes may act as
regulatory links between small molecule biosynthesis pathways and the cell cycle.

3.5.Comparison with a human cell cycle gene setTo examine the overlap between cell cycle genes in fission yeast and human, we identified a set
of 521 human genes proposed to be involved in the cell cycle [12], and which have a fission yeast orthologue (see the electronic
supplementary material 1, table S11a and §5.5.3). The 521 fission yeast
orthologues of these human genes were compared with 614 fission yeast genes with an existing mitotic
cell cycle annotation, including all genes so far annotated to the mitotic cell cycle either by
inference or experiment (see the electronic supplementary material 1, table S11b
and §5.5.1; http://www.pombase.org/). There
were 113 genes common to both gene sets (see figure
2c and electronic supplementary material 1, table S11c). We
also compared the 521 gene set with the 276 new cell cycle genes from this study and identified a
further 43 genes in common (see figure
2c and electronic supplementary material 1, table S11d).
Therefore, in total, 156 of the 521 conserved genes were involved in the cell cycle in both
organisms (29.9%), a similar level to other inter-species comparisons, human/worm at 36 per
cent and human/fly at 38 per cent [12,14,29,30]. Possible reasons why these
inter-species comparisons in a variety of studies show such a low overlap are considered in
§4.

Comparison with a human cell cycle gene set

To examine the overlap between cell cycle genes in fission yeast and human, we identified a set
of 521 human genes proposed to be involved in the cell cycle [12], and which have a fission yeast orthologue (see the electronic
supplementary material 1, table S11a and §5.5.3). The 521 fission yeast
orthologues of these human genes were compared with 614 fission yeast genes with an existing mitotic
cell cycle annotation, including all genes so far annotated to the mitotic cell cycle either by
inference or experiment (see the electronic supplementary material 1, table S11b
and §5.5.1; http://www.pombase.org/). There
were 113 genes common to both gene sets (see figure
2c and electronic supplementary material 1, table S11c). We
also compared the 521 gene set with the 276 new cell cycle genes from this study and identified a
further 43 genes in common (see figure
2c and electronic supplementary material 1, table S11d).
Therefore, in total, 156 of the 521 conserved genes were involved in the cell cycle in both
organisms (29.9%), a similar level to other inter-species comparisons, human/worm at 36 per
cent and human/fly at 38 per cent [12,14,29,30]. Possible reasons why these
inter-species comparisons in a variety of studies show such a low overlap are considered in
§4.

3.6.Cell cycle checkpoint genesTo identify new DNA checkpoint genes, we screened 2983 viable gene deletion mutants for those
that failed to block the cell cycle in the presence of the ribonucleotide reductase inhibitor HU
[31–33]. We further screened these HU-sensitive mutants for those with a cut
phenotype [34], where cells fail to block cell
cycle progress and enter mitosis generating chromosome segregation defects. We identified 132
mutants sensitive to at least 5 mM HU (see §5.2 and electronic supplementary material 1,
table S12). In the presence of HU, deletion mutants of eight genes had greater than 60 per cent
 cells with a cut phenotype (see the electronic supplementary material 1, table S12, column
O). Of these, deletion mutants of hus1, rad1, rad3, rad26, rad17 and
rad9, which have been previously been shown to be required for establishment of the
DNA checkpoint, did not elongate prior to entering mitosis [33]. Deletion mutants of the remaining two genes (ddb1,
lem2) initially became elongated but eventually entered mitosis and displayed a cut
phenotype (figure 3a). Ddb1 is
necessary for stabilizing DNA replication forks and is involved in regulating the replication
checkpoint kinase Cds1 [35], and a
lem2 mutant has previously been shown to be sensitive to HU [36]. Mutants of a further 24 genes showed a lower level of cut cells
(between 20 and 60%) after 10 h in HU (see the electronic supplementary material 1, table
S12, column P). Of these, nine genes (nup132, nup40, did4, spc34, vps24, ubr1,
mde4, utp16 and ers1) are newly identified as
HU-sensitive genes with a cut phenotype. Figure 3.New HU-sensitive cut genes. (a) lem2 deletion mutant cells
stained with DAPI after growing for 8–10 h in the presence of HU. Examples of anucleated
cells can be seen (white arrow) and cells with unequally segregated chromatin (red arrow).
(b) New checkpoint genes identified in this study.In this study, we have identified one new S phase checkpoint gene, lem2, which
has a strong cut deletion phenotype, and nine genes with a lower penetrance cut deletion phenotype,
which may influence maintenance of the S phase checkpoint (figure 3b).

Cell cycle checkpoint genes

To identify new DNA checkpoint genes, we screened 2983 viable gene deletion mutants for those
that failed to block the cell cycle in the presence of the ribonucleotide reductase inhibitor HU
[31–33]. We further screened these HU-sensitive mutants for those with a cut
phenotype [34], where cells fail to block cell
cycle progress and enter mitosis generating chromosome segregation defects. We identified 132
mutants sensitive to at least 5 mM HU (see §5.2 and electronic supplementary material 1,
table S12). In the presence of HU, deletion mutants of eight genes had greater than 60 per cent
 cells with a cut phenotype (see the electronic supplementary material 1, table S12, column
O). Of these, deletion mutants of hus1, rad1, rad3, rad26, rad17 and
rad9, which have been previously been shown to be required for establishment of the
DNA checkpoint, did not elongate prior to entering mitosis [33]. Deletion mutants of the remaining two genes (ddb1,
lem2) initially became elongated but eventually entered mitosis and displayed a cut
phenotype (figure 3a). Ddb1 is
necessary for stabilizing DNA replication forks and is involved in regulating the replication
checkpoint kinase Cds1 [35], and a
lem2 mutant has previously been shown to be sensitive to HU [36]. Mutants of a further 24 genes showed a lower level of cut cells
(between 20 and 60%) after 10 h in HU (see the electronic supplementary material 1, table
S12, column P). Of these, nine genes (nup132, nup40, did4, spc34, vps24, ubr1,
mde4, utp16 and ers1) are newly identified as
HU-sensitive genes with a cut phenotype. Figure 3.New HU-sensitive cut genes. (a) lem2 deletion mutant cells
stained with DAPI after growing for 8–10 h in the presence of HU. Examples of anucleated
cells can be seen (white arrow) and cells with unequally segregated chromatin (red arrow).
(b) New checkpoint genes identified in this study.

New HU-sensitive cut genes. (a) lem2 deletion mutant cells
stained with DAPI after growing for 8–10 h in the presence of HU. Examples of anucleated
cells can be seen (white arrow) and cells with unequally segregated chromatin (red arrow).
(b) New checkpoint genes identified in this study.

In this study, we have identified one new S phase checkpoint gene, lem2, which
has a strong cut deletion phenotype, and nine genes with a lower penetrance cut deletion phenotype,
which may influence maintenance of the S phase checkpoint (figure 3b).

3.7.Cell shape mutantsCell shape mutants other than those with a long cell phenotype have been used to identify genes
important for generating the normal rod-shape of a fission yeast cell. Previous studies in fission
yeast have identified orb mutants that are spherical because cells fail to grow in a polarized
manner, ban (banana) mutants that have a curved or bent cell phenotype because cells no longer
orientate the growth zones at 180° along the long axis of the cell, and tea (tip elongation
aberrant) mutants, which form a new growth zone in the wrong place often at 90° to the long
axis of the cell [2,3]. Other cell shape mutants included bottle- or skittle-shaped cells and
more generally misshapen cells [37]. We screened
the deletion mutants for shape defects using the following seven categories to describe the mutant
phenotypes (see figure 1 and electronic supplementary
material 1, table S5d–f,j–l,n for
gene lists). (i) rounded, which includes the typical orb mutants and also mutants
that are more rounded than WT but not completely spherical. (ii) stubby, which look
shorter and wider than WT but are mainly rod-shaped. These two categories showed a degree of
overlap, with some mutants showing both phenotypes. (iii) curved, which includes
the ban mutants and the tea mutants. During vegetative growth, tea mutants have only a low level of
T-shaped cells with most cells having a curved phenotype. (iv) skittle: one end of
cell the is wider than the other end. A total of 333 genes (6.9% of total genes) showed these
specific alterations in cell shape when deleted and are thus important for the generation of normal
cell shape. A further less well-defined group called misshapen showed an
ill-defined potato-like shape or a mixture of other shapes. These fell into three further subgroups:
(v) viable misshapen mutants (miss V), (vi) viable misshapen mutants, which have a
weak phenotype (miss weak V) and (vii) essential misshapen mutants (miss
E). There were 524 genes with these more general misshapen deletion phenotypes. In total,
857/4843 genes (17.7%) showed altered cell shape when deleted (table 1) and 668 of these are conserved in humans (77.9%). No
additional cell shape phenotypes were identified compared with earlier work, suggesting that there
may only be a restricted number of shapes that a fission yeast cell can adopt.The rounded, stubby and curved sets are all enriched for genes
implicated in cell polarity and for localization at the cell tip (tables 2 and 3),
rounded and stubby sets for cell wall organization, and the
stubby set for cytokinesis and actin cytoskeleton organization (table 2, footnote k). All 14 genes in the
curved set annotated to the cytoskeleton organization category are involved in
microtubule cytoskeleton organization (see table
2, footnote l) and are also enriched at the cell tip (table 3). Therefore, we predict that unknown genes with a curved deletion
phenotype when deleted are likely to be involved in microtubule-related processes. Similarly, the
stubby phenotype is likely to be associated with genes that affect actin processes. Genes which
generate a skittle phenotype when deleted were enriched for mitochondrial organization; nearly, 50
per cent (118/241) of the total genes annotated to mitochondrion organization were in the
skittle category. We found that 19 genes were required for mitochondrial tRNA
metabolism (table 2) and 61 genes for the
mitochondrial ribosome, suggesting that mitochondrial translation underlies the skittle phenotype.
The miss E category was enriched for genes required for lipid metabolism (35
genes), 15 of which are involved in glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor biosynthesis (table 2, footnote a; electronic supplementary material
1, table S6d). GPI anchor proteins affect cell wall integrity, and loss of these
proteins can result in a misshapen cell phenotype [38]. In higher eukaryotes, GPI anchor proteins have been implicated in the sorting of
membrane proteins important for cell polarization [39], and so, in fission yeast, GPI anchor proteins could also be implicated in cell
polarization.To investigate whether gene deletions that cause cell shape changes also have defects in the
cytoskeleton, bipolar growth pattern or the cell wall, we analysed 54 previously uncharacterized
viable cell shape mutants. These were a subset of 352 non-essential genes in the miss
V, miss weak V, rounded, stubby, curved and skittle
categories (table 1). We found that a total of 35
strains had defects in the cytoskeleton and/or the cell wall, bipolar growth or cell separation
defects and included 26 mutants with actin or microtubule defects (see figure 4 and electronic supplementary material 1, table S13 and electronic
supplementary material 2 for details). These results indicate that further screening of viable
deletion mutants, even those with a weak phenotype, will be a useful approach to identify and
characterize genes involved in the cytoskeleton. Figure 4.Cytological analysis of novel cell shape mutants. Examples of viable mutants from four cell shape
phenotype categories analysed for defects in the cytoskeleton, growth pattern or cell wall.
(a) Wild-type. (b) meu29Δ.
(c) yaf9Δ. (d)
spc2Δ. (e) tlg2Δ. DIC, differential
interference contrast; CF, calcofluor used to stain the cell wall and septum. For details, see the
electronic supplementary material 2 and electronic supplementary material 1, table S13.

Cell shape mutants

Cell shape mutants other than those with a long cell phenotype have been used to identify genes
important for generating the normal rod-shape of a fission yeast cell. Previous studies in fission
yeast have identified orb mutants that are spherical because cells fail to grow in a polarized
manner, ban (banana) mutants that have a curved or bent cell phenotype because cells no longer
orientate the growth zones at 180° along the long axis of the cell, and tea (tip elongation
aberrant) mutants, which form a new growth zone in the wrong place often at 90° to the long
axis of the cell [2,3]. Other cell shape mutants included bottle- or skittle-shaped cells and
more generally misshapen cells [37]. We screened
the deletion mutants for shape defects using the following seven categories to describe the mutant
phenotypes (see figure 1 and electronic supplementary
material 1, table S5d–f,j–l,n for
gene lists). (i) rounded, which includes the typical orb mutants and also mutants
that are more rounded than WT but not completely spherical. (ii) stubby, which look
shorter and wider than WT but are mainly rod-shaped. These two categories showed a degree of
overlap, with some mutants showing both phenotypes. (iii) curved, which includes
the ban mutants and the tea mutants. During vegetative growth, tea mutants have only a low level of
T-shaped cells with most cells having a curved phenotype. (iv) skittle: one end of
cell the is wider than the other end. A total of 333 genes (6.9% of total genes) showed these
specific alterations in cell shape when deleted and are thus important for the generation of normal
cell shape. A further less well-defined group called misshapen showed an
ill-defined potato-like shape or a mixture of other shapes. These fell into three further subgroups:
(v) viable misshapen mutants (miss V), (vi) viable misshapen mutants, which have a
weak phenotype (miss weak V) and (vii) essential misshapen mutants (miss
E). There were 524 genes with these more general misshapen deletion phenotypes. In total,
857/4843 genes (17.7%) showed altered cell shape when deleted (table 1) and 668 of these are conserved in humans (77.9%). No
additional cell shape phenotypes were identified compared with earlier work, suggesting that there
may only be a restricted number of shapes that a fission yeast cell can adopt.

The rounded, stubby and curved sets are all enriched for genes
implicated in cell polarity and for localization at the cell tip (tables 2 and 3),
rounded and stubby sets for cell wall organization, and the
stubby set for cytokinesis and actin cytoskeleton organization (table 2, footnote k). All 14 genes in the
curved set annotated to the cytoskeleton organization category are involved in
microtubule cytoskeleton organization (see table
2, footnote l) and are also enriched at the cell tip (table 3). Therefore, we predict that unknown genes with a curved deletion
phenotype when deleted are likely to be involved in microtubule-related processes. Similarly, the
stubby phenotype is likely to be associated with genes that affect actin processes. Genes which
generate a skittle phenotype when deleted were enriched for mitochondrial organization; nearly, 50
per cent (118/241) of the total genes annotated to mitochondrion organization were in the
skittle category. We found that 19 genes were required for mitochondrial tRNA
metabolism (table 2) and 61 genes for the
mitochondrial ribosome, suggesting that mitochondrial translation underlies the skittle phenotype.
The miss E category was enriched for genes required for lipid metabolism (35
genes), 15 of which are involved in glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor biosynthesis (table 2, footnote a; electronic supplementary material
1, table S6d). GPI anchor proteins affect cell wall integrity, and loss of these
proteins can result in a misshapen cell phenotype [38]. In higher eukaryotes, GPI anchor proteins have been implicated in the sorting of
membrane proteins important for cell polarization [39], and so, in fission yeast, GPI anchor proteins could also be implicated in cell
polarization.

To investigate whether gene deletions that cause cell shape changes also have defects in the
cytoskeleton, bipolar growth pattern or the cell wall, we analysed 54 previously uncharacterized
viable cell shape mutants. These were a subset of 352 non-essential genes in the miss
V, miss weak V, rounded, stubby, curved and skittle
categories (table 1). We found that a total of 35
strains had defects in the cytoskeleton and/or the cell wall, bipolar growth or cell separation
defects and included 26 mutants with actin or microtubule defects (see figure 4 and electronic supplementary material 1, table S13 and electronic
supplementary material 2 for details). These results indicate that further screening of viable
deletion mutants, even those with a weak phenotype, will be a useful approach to identify and
characterize genes involved in the cytoskeleton. Figure 4.Cytological analysis of novel cell shape mutants. Examples of viable mutants from four cell shape
phenotype categories analysed for defects in the cytoskeleton, growth pattern or cell wall.
(a) Wild-type. (b) meu29Δ.
(c) yaf9Δ. (d)
spc2Δ. (e) tlg2Δ. DIC, differential
interference contrast; CF, calcofluor used to stain the cell wall and septum. For details, see the
electronic supplementary material 2 and electronic supplementary material 1, table S13.

Cytological analysis of novel cell shape mutants. Examples of viable mutants from four cell shape
phenotype categories analysed for defects in the cytoskeleton, growth pattern or cell wall.
(a) Wild-type. (b) meu29Δ.
(c) yaf9Δ. (d)
spc2Δ. (e) tlg2Δ. DIC, differential
interference contrast; CF, calcofluor used to stain the cell wall and septum. For details, see the
electronic supplementary material 2 and electronic supplementary material 1, table S13.

4.DiscussionWe have visually screened 4843 gene deletion mutants in fission yeast, 95.7 per cent of all
protein coding genes, and have identified near genome-wide sets of the genes required for the cell
cycle and cell shape, the first systematic description for a eukaryote. The long cell phenotype in
fission yeast defines cells blocked in cell cycle progression during interphase or cytokinesis and
so is an effective way to identify genes required for these stages of the cell cycle. GO enrichment
analysis has shown that the long HP and long Br categories were
enriched for genes previously identified as being required during interphase or cytokinesis
respectively. The long LP set included genes previously known to be required during
mitosis and we suggest that these genes may represent a subgroup of mitotic genes that have
additional roles during interphase. Several genes required for the cell cycle were found in the
miss E gene set suggesting that further analysis of this set may also identify new
genes required during interphase or mitosis.We identified 513 cell cycle genes in total, 276 of which were not previously known to have a
role in the cell cycle. Of these new genes, 230 were annotated to GO processes previously implicated
in the cell cycle, thus identifying new links between the cell cycle and these processes. These
included genes required for nucleocytoplasmic transport, mRNA metabolic process (specifically
splicing), ribosome biogenesis and nucleotide metabolism (table 5). There were 46 new cell cycle genes not annotated to a process previously
associated with the cell cycle, 13 of which are involved in small molecule metabolism. Frequently,
only one or two genes were identified for a specific metabolic pathway. For example
ect1 is predicted to encode ethanolamine-phosphate cytidylyltransferase, which is
rate-limiting for synthesis of CDP-ethanolamine, an important step in phospholipid biosynthesis
[40]. We speculate that these genes may encode
proteins linking different aspects of metabolism, such as metabolite levels or flux, to the cell
cycle.Studies using RNAi in metazoan organisms have identified sets of genes required for cell cycle
progression. However, these overlap only to a limited extent between various intra- and
inter-species comparisons in a range from 10 to 38 per cent [12]. Our analysis comparing cell cycle genes in fission yeast and human
identified 156/521 orthologous gene pairs (29.9%) involved in the cell cycle in both
organisms, a similar percentage overlap to that found in other inter-species studies. A possible
reason for the rather limited overlap of cell cycle genes in a wide range of studies may be because
gene knockdowns using RNAi can result in varying levels of gene product and thus more variation in
cellular phenotype. Our analysis is based on gene deletions that generally eliminate the entire gene
function, thus reducing phenotypic variability. Inter-species comparisons may also be limited
because different phenotypes may be used in different organisms to infer a specific cell cycle
defect, and these are not always directly comparable. A cell cycle defect during interphase in
fission yeast produces an easily identifiable highly consistent long cell phenotype, which can be
used to reliably identify interphase cell cycle genes. Many of the cell cycle genes identified in
fission yeast have a conserved cell cycle role in other eukaryotes and, so the long
cell cycle gene set identified in this study is likely to be useful to uncover additional cell cycle
genes conserved across species.To catalogue genes required to generate and maintain the correct cell shape, we identified
categories of deletion mutants with specific cell shape defects. GO analysis showed that genes
within these groups could be used to identify genes implicated in the actin cytoskeleton
(stubby), the microtubule cytoskeleton (curved) and mitochondrial
function (skittle). The skittle category suggests that there is an
uncharacterized mechanism influencing cell shape, which is affected by defects in mitochondrial
organization and translation. The distribution of mitochondria in a cell is dependent on
microtubules [41], and binding of mitochondria to
microtubules can moderate microtubule dynamics [42], raising the possibility that defective mitochondria may affect microtubules thus
leading to cell shape changes. In humans, a number of diseases including deafness and muscle
pathologies are linked to defects in mitochondrial protein synthesis [43]. The link we have identified in this study between mitochondria and
cell shape suggests that cell shape changes could be an underlying cause of some of these
pathologies in humans. We also showed that some genes from the miss weak V set,
although only exhibiting a mild shape change when deleted, have cytoskeletal defects. This suggests
that genes with this deletion phenotype will be a good source of new genes affecting the actin and
microtubule cytoskeleton.A limited range of defined cell shapes were identified in the genome-wide gene deletion screen.
It appears that only a restricted range of cell shapes is possible for the fission yeast cell,
perhaps reflecting topological constraints in cellular organization, related to the cell wall or the
cytoskeleton, for example. Future comparisons with other organisms that have been screened for cell
shape defects [10,11,13] will help
identify the genes and processes required to generate or maintain eukaryotic cell shape.Our work provides the first near genome-wide sets of gene deletions that influence the eukaryotic
cell cycle and cell shape. This qualitative classification of genes according to cell shape
phenotypes, based on deletion mutants, provides a resource that will be a good starting point for
further studies in fission yeast and for the identification of equivalent gene functions in other
eukaryotic organisms.

We have visually screened 4843 gene deletion mutants in fission yeast, 95.7 per cent of all
protein coding genes, and have identified near genome-wide sets of the genes required for the cell
cycle and cell shape, the first systematic description for a eukaryote. The long cell phenotype in
fission yeast defines cells blocked in cell cycle progression during interphase or cytokinesis and
so is an effective way to identify genes required for these stages of the cell cycle. GO enrichment
analysis has shown that the long HP and long Br categories were
enriched for genes previously identified as being required during interphase or cytokinesis
respectively. The long LP set included genes previously known to be required during
mitosis and we suggest that these genes may represent a subgroup of mitotic genes that have
additional roles during interphase. Several genes required for the cell cycle were found in the
miss E gene set suggesting that further analysis of this set may also identify new
genes required during interphase or mitosis.

We identified 513 cell cycle genes in total, 276 of which were not previously known to have a
role in the cell cycle. Of these new genes, 230 were annotated to GO processes previously implicated
in the cell cycle, thus identifying new links between the cell cycle and these processes. These
included genes required for nucleocytoplasmic transport, mRNA metabolic process (specifically
splicing), ribosome biogenesis and nucleotide metabolism (table 5). There were 46 new cell cycle genes not annotated to a process previously
associated with the cell cycle, 13 of which are involved in small molecule metabolism. Frequently,
only one or two genes were identified for a specific metabolic pathway. For example
ect1 is predicted to encode ethanolamine-phosphate cytidylyltransferase, which is
rate-limiting for synthesis of CDP-ethanolamine, an important step in phospholipid biosynthesis
[40]. We speculate that these genes may encode
proteins linking different aspects of metabolism, such as metabolite levels or flux, to the cell
cycle.

Studies using RNAi in metazoan organisms have identified sets of genes required for cell cycle
progression. However, these overlap only to a limited extent between various intra- and
inter-species comparisons in a range from 10 to 38 per cent [12]. Our analysis comparing cell cycle genes in fission yeast and human
identified 156/521 orthologous gene pairs (29.9%) involved in the cell cycle in both
organisms, a similar percentage overlap to that found in other inter-species studies. A possible
reason for the rather limited overlap of cell cycle genes in a wide range of studies may be because
gene knockdowns using RNAi can result in varying levels of gene product and thus more variation in
cellular phenotype. Our analysis is based on gene deletions that generally eliminate the entire gene
function, thus reducing phenotypic variability. Inter-species comparisons may also be limited
because different phenotypes may be used in different organisms to infer a specific cell cycle
defect, and these are not always directly comparable. A cell cycle defect during interphase in
fission yeast produces an easily identifiable highly consistent long cell phenotype, which can be
used to reliably identify interphase cell cycle genes. Many of the cell cycle genes identified in
fission yeast have a conserved cell cycle role in other eukaryotes and, so the long
cell cycle gene set identified in this study is likely to be useful to uncover additional cell cycle
genes conserved across species.

To catalogue genes required to generate and maintain the correct cell shape, we identified
categories of deletion mutants with specific cell shape defects. GO analysis showed that genes
within these groups could be used to identify genes implicated in the actin cytoskeleton
(stubby), the microtubule cytoskeleton (curved) and mitochondrial
function (skittle). The skittle category suggests that there is an
uncharacterized mechanism influencing cell shape, which is affected by defects in mitochondrial
organization and translation. The distribution of mitochondria in a cell is dependent on
microtubules [41], and binding of mitochondria to
microtubules can moderate microtubule dynamics [42], raising the possibility that defective mitochondria may affect microtubules thus
leading to cell shape changes. In humans, a number of diseases including deafness and muscle
pathologies are linked to defects in mitochondrial protein synthesis [43]. The link we have identified in this study between mitochondria and
cell shape suggests that cell shape changes could be an underlying cause of some of these
pathologies in humans. We also showed that some genes from the miss weak V set,
although only exhibiting a mild shape change when deleted, have cytoskeletal defects. This suggests
that genes with this deletion phenotype will be a good source of new genes affecting the actin and
microtubule cytoskeleton.

A limited range of defined cell shapes were identified in the genome-wide gene deletion screen.
It appears that only a restricted range of cell shapes is possible for the fission yeast cell,
perhaps reflecting topological constraints in cellular organization, related to the cell wall or the
cytoskeleton, for example. Future comparisons with other organisms that have been screened for cell
shape defects [10,11,13] will help
identify the genes and processes required to generate or maintain eukaryotic cell shape.

Our work provides the first near genome-wide sets of gene deletions that influence the eukaryotic
cell cycle and cell shape. This qualitative classification of genes according to cell shape
phenotypes, based on deletion mutants, provides a resource that will be a good starting point for
further studies in fission yeast and for the identification of equivalent gene functions in other
eukaryotic organisms.

5.Material and methods5.1.Phenotype analysis of the genome-wide set of gene deletionsThe 4843 deletion strain collection used for this analysis consists of 4825 strains described by
Kim et al. [7] plus 18 additional
gene deletion mutants as shown in the electronic supplementary material 1, table S2. Changes in gene
dispensability from Kim et al. [7]
for nine reconstructed strains and 12 re-analysed strains are shown in the electronic supplementary
materia 1, table S3. All growth conditions and media were used as described by Moreno et
al. [44], unless otherwise stated. Spores
were generated as described for gene dispensability analysis [7]. All strains were coded, and a blind analysis was conducted. Between
two and four isolates for each heterozygous diploid deletion mutant were independently sporulated. A
visual examination of the phenotypes of both deletion G418-resistant spores and WT G418-sensitive
spores following free spore analysis was carried out after 1 and 2 days following plating on
non-selective YES plates at 25°C and 32°C. The presence of both G418-sensitive and
-resistant spores allowed a comparison of the deletion mutant with WT. Any phenotypic differences
from WT that could be detected by eye were described as the putative deletion phenotype. After 2
days, colonies were replica plated onto YES plates containing G418 (Sigma) at 25°C and
32°C to confirm the gene deletion phenotype by linkage to the G418-resistant phenotype.The final deletion phenotype categories for a genome-wide set of genes were generated as follows,
a GO analysis of the long group was compared with a GO analysis of the subdivisions
long HP, long LP and long Br. These subdivisions formed
biologically significant subgroups of the long group and so these three categories
were used for further analysis. The same type of GO analysis was used for the
rounded and stubby groups as these formed biologically distinct
categories, although there is also overlap between the phenotypes of these two categories. The
misshapen group was divided into essential and non-essential genes, because viable
mutants may be more useful for identifying genes required for cell shape where as the misshapen
phenotype observed in the essential group may be less specific for a cell shape defect given that
the cells are dying or dead. The remaining categories WT, spores, germination, skittle,
curved and small could not be usefully further subdivided by their
phenotype.To estimate the minimal cell length increase detectable, we measured the cell length of 34 viable
gene deletion mutants described as long after visual screening on plates and which had not
previously been implicated in the cell cycle (see the electronic supplementary material 1, table S1
column J). We could detect cells at least 10 per cent or longer compared with WT (approx. 15.6
µm) and, so a 10 per cent or greater increase in cell length was used as the criteria for a
long phenotype. The cut-off between high penetrance and low penetrance was 30 per cent long cells.
This was estimated using inviable mutants that formed microcolonies showing a mixture of long and
WT/short cells. For these mutants, 30 per cent  or less of the cells had a long
phenotype.To validate this approach, we compared the 513 genes from the three long
categories with 158 cell cycle genes reported in PomBase as long. We identified 147/158 (93%)
of these genes, suggesting that the remainder of the genes in our long category are
also likely to be involved in the cell cycle. Furthermore, only 46/513 were not annotated to a GO
category previously linked to the cell cycle.Cells showing different cell shape defects were photographed using a Zeiss Axioskop microscope
with a CF plan X50/0.55 objective and a Panasonic DMC-LX2 camera. Spores from representative strains
were plated on to YES solid medium and allowed to germinate or form small colonies before being
photographed.5.2.Screen for new DNA checkpoint genesThe growth of 2983 viable deletion mutants from Bioneer version 1 were screened on YES agar
plates for 24–48 h either in the presence of 2.75 or 5.5 mM HU or without HU and scored on a
scale of strong (+++), medium (++), weak (+) or no
sensitivity, depending on their ability to grow on different HU concentrations compared with no HU
(see the electronic supplementary material 1, table S12). To check whether the 132 HU-sensitive
mutants were also involved in the DNA checkpoint preventing mitosis, cells were grown in liquid
cultures with 11 mM HU and screened for a cut phenotype using
 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) to visualize the nucleus.5.3.Cell length measurementsCells were grown to mid-exponential growth (2 × 106 to 1 ×
107 cells ml−1) in YES liquid medium at 32°C (or 25°C
where appropriate) and photographed using a Zeiss Axioplan microscope with 100× objective and
a COHU CCD camera. Cell lengths of 30 septated cells were measured using ImageJ.5.4.Phenotypic analysis and cytoskeleton analysis of viable shape mutantsFor the initial characterization, cells were grown at 18°C, 25.5°C, 29°C and
34°C on minimal and YES medium plates, and cell morphology analysed by differential
interference contrast (DIC) microscopy. For further characterization, strains showing morphological
defects were grown in liquid rich medium at 25°C to mid-log phase or in the conditions at
which each strain showed the strongest phenotype by DIC microscopy. Septa and pattern of cell growth
was visualized with 35 µg ml−1 calcofluor staining (fluorescent brightener;
Sigma). For WT cells, the septation index was 15 per cent (n = 500 cells)
and 30.1 per cent of cells showed monopolar growth (n = 300 cells). Nuclei
were visualized with 0.2 µg ml−1 DAPI (Sigma) or 100 µm
ml−1 IP (Sigma) staining. Actin staining was as described by Pelham & Chang
[45] using AlexaFluor 488-phalloidin (Molecular
Probes). For anti-tubulin immunofluorescence, cells were fixed in methanol at −80°C
and further processed as described by Hagan & Hyams [46]. Primary antibodies were anti-tubulin ((TAT-1; 1 : 80 dilution)
followed by Alexa 488 goat anti-mouse secondary antibody (Molecular Probes). Microscopy was
performed at 23–25°C, either with an Axioplan 2 microscope (Carl Zeiss, Inc.) equipped
with a CoolsnapHQ camera (Roper Scientific) or with a Leica TCS SL confocal microscope. Data were
acquired using the 100× objective taking seven z-sections with 0.5 μm
spacing.5.5.Bioinformatics analysis5.5.1.Identification of genes already implicated in mitotic cell cycle processesTo identify genes involved in the mitotic cell cycle in fission yeast, we used fission yeast GO
data from 26 September 2011 (http://www.pombase.org/), and selected the set of protein coding genes annotated to:GO:0000278 mitotic cell cycle,GO:0000910 cytokinesis,GO:0006261 DNA-dependent DNA replication, andGO:0000075 cell cycle checkpoint.Minor adjustments were made to this dataset to remove three known false positives (SPAC343.17c,
SPBC19F8.02, SPAC5D6.08c) and add three known false negatives (SPAC23H4.11c, SPAC26A3.03c
SPAC23H4.18c). The complete list is provided in the electronic supplementary material 1, table
S11b.5.5.2.Gene Ontology enrichment analysisGO enrichments were performed using GO term finder (http://go.princeton.edu/cgi-bin/GOTermFinder with ontology and annotations from 26 September
2011). Threshold p-values of 0.001, 0.01 and 0.1 were used to identify specific
enrichments. Bonferroni correction was used.GO slim categories presented in tables 2, 3 and 4 refer to the GO IDs in the electronic supplementary material 1, table S14. All GO terms
and p-values for each phenotype set are provided in the electronic supplementary
material 1, tables S6 and S7. Genes where number of annotations = 1 were obtained using GO
term Mapper (http://go.princeton.edu/cgi-bin/GOTermMapper).The background set was the 4843 gene set used this study.5.5.3.Comparison with human cell cycle genesA list of 1351 human cell cycle genes was extracted from a study by Kittler et
al. [12] and mapped to current Ensembl IDs
(79 of the human identifiers had been retired and were no longer linked to extant genes). The
remainder were mapped to 521 fission yeast orthologues using Ensembl Compara 10/11/2011 (http://genome.cshlp.org/content/19/2/327.long).

Material and methods

5.1.Phenotype analysis of the genome-wide set of gene deletionsThe 4843 deletion strain collection used for this analysis consists of 4825 strains described by
Kim et al. [7] plus 18 additional
gene deletion mutants as shown in the electronic supplementary material 1, table S2. Changes in gene
dispensability from Kim et al. [7]
for nine reconstructed strains and 12 re-analysed strains are shown in the electronic supplementary
materia 1, table S3. All growth conditions and media were used as described by Moreno et
al. [44], unless otherwise stated. Spores
were generated as described for gene dispensability analysis [7]. All strains were coded, and a blind analysis was conducted. Between
two and four isolates for each heterozygous diploid deletion mutant were independently sporulated. A
visual examination of the phenotypes of both deletion G418-resistant spores and WT G418-sensitive
spores following free spore analysis was carried out after 1 and 2 days following plating on
non-selective YES plates at 25°C and 32°C. The presence of both G418-sensitive and
-resistant spores allowed a comparison of the deletion mutant with WT. Any phenotypic differences
from WT that could be detected by eye were described as the putative deletion phenotype. After 2
days, colonies were replica plated onto YES plates containing G418 (Sigma) at 25°C and
32°C to confirm the gene deletion phenotype by linkage to the G418-resistant phenotype.The final deletion phenotype categories for a genome-wide set of genes were generated as follows,
a GO analysis of the long group was compared with a GO analysis of the subdivisions
long HP, long LP and long Br. These subdivisions formed
biologically significant subgroups of the long group and so these three categories
were used for further analysis. The same type of GO analysis was used for the
rounded and stubby groups as these formed biologically distinct
categories, although there is also overlap between the phenotypes of these two categories. The
misshapen group was divided into essential and non-essential genes, because viable
mutants may be more useful for identifying genes required for cell shape where as the misshapen
phenotype observed in the essential group may be less specific for a cell shape defect given that
the cells are dying or dead. The remaining categories WT, spores, germination, skittle,
curved and small could not be usefully further subdivided by their
phenotype.To estimate the minimal cell length increase detectable, we measured the cell length of 34 viable
gene deletion mutants described as long after visual screening on plates and which had not
previously been implicated in the cell cycle (see the electronic supplementary material 1, table S1
column J). We could detect cells at least 10 per cent or longer compared with WT (approx. 15.6
µm) and, so a 10 per cent or greater increase in cell length was used as the criteria for a
long phenotype. The cut-off between high penetrance and low penetrance was 30 per cent long cells.
This was estimated using inviable mutants that formed microcolonies showing a mixture of long and
WT/short cells. For these mutants, 30 per cent  or less of the cells had a long
phenotype.To validate this approach, we compared the 513 genes from the three long
categories with 158 cell cycle genes reported in PomBase as long. We identified 147/158 (93%)
of these genes, suggesting that the remainder of the genes in our long category are
also likely to be involved in the cell cycle. Furthermore, only 46/513 were not annotated to a GO
category previously linked to the cell cycle.Cells showing different cell shape defects were photographed using a Zeiss Axioskop microscope
with a CF plan X50/0.55 objective and a Panasonic DMC-LX2 camera. Spores from representative strains
were plated on to YES solid medium and allowed to germinate or form small colonies before being
photographed.

Phenotype analysis of the genome-wide set of gene deletions

The 4843 deletion strain collection used for this analysis consists of 4825 strains described by
Kim et al. [7] plus 18 additional
gene deletion mutants as shown in the electronic supplementary material 1, table S2. Changes in gene
dispensability from Kim et al. [7]
for nine reconstructed strains and 12 re-analysed strains are shown in the electronic supplementary
materia 1, table S3. All growth conditions and media were used as described by Moreno et
al. [44], unless otherwise stated. Spores
were generated as described for gene dispensability analysis [7]. All strains were coded, and a blind analysis was conducted. Between
two and four isolates for each heterozygous diploid deletion mutant were independently sporulated. A
visual examination of the phenotypes of both deletion G418-resistant spores and WT G418-sensitive
spores following free spore analysis was carried out after 1 and 2 days following plating on
non-selective YES plates at 25°C and 32°C. The presence of both G418-sensitive and
-resistant spores allowed a comparison of the deletion mutant with WT. Any phenotypic differences
from WT that could be detected by eye were described as the putative deletion phenotype. After 2
days, colonies were replica plated onto YES plates containing G418 (Sigma) at 25°C and
32°C to confirm the gene deletion phenotype by linkage to the G418-resistant phenotype.

The final deletion phenotype categories for a genome-wide set of genes were generated as follows,
a GO analysis of the long group was compared with a GO analysis of the subdivisions
long HP, long LP and long Br. These subdivisions formed
biologically significant subgroups of the long group and so these three categories
were used for further analysis. The same type of GO analysis was used for the
rounded and stubby groups as these formed biologically distinct
categories, although there is also overlap between the phenotypes of these two categories. The
misshapen group was divided into essential and non-essential genes, because viable
mutants may be more useful for identifying genes required for cell shape where as the misshapen
phenotype observed in the essential group may be less specific for a cell shape defect given that
the cells are dying or dead. The remaining categories WT, spores, germination, skittle,
curved and small could not be usefully further subdivided by their
phenotype.

To estimate the minimal cell length increase detectable, we measured the cell length of 34 viable
gene deletion mutants described as long after visual screening on plates and which had not
previously been implicated in the cell cycle (see the electronic supplementary material 1, table S1
column J). We could detect cells at least 10 per cent or longer compared with WT (approx. 15.6
µm) and, so a 10 per cent or greater increase in cell length was used as the criteria for a
long phenotype. The cut-off between high penetrance and low penetrance was 30 per cent long cells.
This was estimated using inviable mutants that formed microcolonies showing a mixture of long and
WT/short cells. For these mutants, 30 per cent  or less of the cells had a long
phenotype.

To validate this approach, we compared the 513 genes from the three long
categories with 158 cell cycle genes reported in PomBase as long. We identified 147/158 (93%)
of these genes, suggesting that the remainder of the genes in our long category are
also likely to be involved in the cell cycle. Furthermore, only 46/513 were not annotated to a GO
category previously linked to the cell cycle.

Cells showing different cell shape defects were photographed using a Zeiss Axioskop microscope
with a CF plan X50/0.55 objective and a Panasonic DMC-LX2 camera. Spores from representative strains
were plated on to YES solid medium and allowed to germinate or form small colonies before being
photographed.

5.2.Screen for new DNA checkpoint genesThe growth of 2983 viable deletion mutants from Bioneer version 1 were screened on YES agar
plates for 24–48 h either in the presence of 2.75 or 5.5 mM HU or without HU and scored on a
scale of strong (+++), medium (++), weak (+) or no
sensitivity, depending on their ability to grow on different HU concentrations compared with no HU
(see the electronic supplementary material 1, table S12). To check whether the 132 HU-sensitive
mutants were also involved in the DNA checkpoint preventing mitosis, cells were grown in liquid
cultures with 11 mM HU and screened for a cut phenotype using
 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) to visualize the nucleus.

Screen for new DNA checkpoint genes

The growth of 2983 viable deletion mutants from Bioneer version 1 were screened on YES agar
plates for 24–48 h either in the presence of 2.75 or 5.5 mM HU or without HU and scored on a
scale of strong (+++), medium (++), weak (+) or no
sensitivity, depending on their ability to grow on different HU concentrations compared with no HU
(see the electronic supplementary material 1, table S12). To check whether the 132 HU-sensitive
mutants were also involved in the DNA checkpoint preventing mitosis, cells were grown in liquid
cultures with 11 mM HU and screened for a cut phenotype using
 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) to visualize the nucleus.

5.3.Cell length measurementsCells were grown to mid-exponential growth (2 × 106 to 1 ×
107 cells ml−1) in YES liquid medium at 32°C (or 25°C
where appropriate) and photographed using a Zeiss Axioplan microscope with 100× objective and
a COHU CCD camera. Cell lengths of 30 septated cells were measured using ImageJ.

Cell length measurements

Cells were grown to mid-exponential growth (2 × 106 to 1 ×
107 cells ml−1) in YES liquid medium at 32°C (or 25°C
where appropriate) and photographed using a Zeiss Axioplan microscope with 100× objective and
a COHU CCD camera. Cell lengths of 30 septated cells were measured using ImageJ.

5.4.Phenotypic analysis and cytoskeleton analysis of viable shape mutantsFor the initial characterization, cells were grown at 18°C, 25.5°C, 29°C and
34°C on minimal and YES medium plates, and cell morphology analysed by differential
interference contrast (DIC) microscopy. For further characterization, strains showing morphological
defects were grown in liquid rich medium at 25°C to mid-log phase or in the conditions at
which each strain showed the strongest phenotype by DIC microscopy. Septa and pattern of cell growth
was visualized with 35 µg ml−1 calcofluor staining (fluorescent brightener;
Sigma). For WT cells, the septation index was 15 per cent (n = 500 cells)
and 30.1 per cent of cells showed monopolar growth (n = 300 cells). Nuclei
were visualized with 0.2 µg ml−1 DAPI (Sigma) or 100 µm
ml−1 IP (Sigma) staining. Actin staining was as described by Pelham & Chang
[45] using AlexaFluor 488-phalloidin (Molecular
Probes). For anti-tubulin immunofluorescence, cells were fixed in methanol at −80°C
and further processed as described by Hagan & Hyams [46]. Primary antibodies were anti-tubulin ((TAT-1; 1 : 80 dilution)
followed by Alexa 488 goat anti-mouse secondary antibody (Molecular Probes). Microscopy was
performed at 23–25°C, either with an Axioplan 2 microscope (Carl Zeiss, Inc.) equipped
with a CoolsnapHQ camera (Roper Scientific) or with a Leica TCS SL confocal microscope. Data were
acquired using the 100× objective taking seven z-sections with 0.5 μm
spacing.

Phenotypic analysis and cytoskeleton analysis of viable shape mutants

For the initial characterization, cells were grown at 18°C, 25.5°C, 29°C and
34°C on minimal and YES medium plates, and cell morphology analysed by differential
interference contrast (DIC) microscopy. For further characterization, strains showing morphological
defects were grown in liquid rich medium at 25°C to mid-log phase or in the conditions at
which each strain showed the strongest phenotype by DIC microscopy. Septa and pattern of cell growth
was visualized with 35 µg ml−1 calcofluor staining (fluorescent brightener;
Sigma). For WT cells, the septation index was 15 per cent (n = 500 cells)
and 30.1 per cent of cells showed monopolar growth (n = 300 cells). Nuclei
were visualized with 0.2 µg ml−1 DAPI (Sigma) or 100 µm
ml−1 IP (Sigma) staining. Actin staining was as described by Pelham & Chang
[45] using AlexaFluor 488-phalloidin (Molecular
Probes). For anti-tubulin immunofluorescence, cells were fixed in methanol at −80°C
and further processed as described by Hagan & Hyams [46]. Primary antibodies were anti-tubulin ((TAT-1; 1 : 80 dilution)
followed by Alexa 488 goat anti-mouse secondary antibody (Molecular Probes). Microscopy was
performed at 23–25°C, either with an Axioplan 2 microscope (Carl Zeiss, Inc.) equipped
with a CoolsnapHQ camera (Roper Scientific) or with a Leica TCS SL confocal microscope. Data were
acquired using the 100× objective taking seven z-sections with 0.5 μm
spacing.

5.5.Bioinformatics analysis5.5.1.Identification of genes already implicated in mitotic cell cycle processesTo identify genes involved in the mitotic cell cycle in fission yeast, we used fission yeast GO
data from 26 September 2011 (http://www.pombase.org/), and selected the set of protein coding genes annotated to:GO:0000278 mitotic cell cycle,GO:0000910 cytokinesis,GO:0006261 DNA-dependent DNA replication, andGO:0000075 cell cycle checkpoint.Minor adjustments were made to this dataset to remove three known false positives (SPAC343.17c,
SPBC19F8.02, SPAC5D6.08c) and add three known false negatives (SPAC23H4.11c, SPAC26A3.03c
SPAC23H4.18c). The complete list is provided in the electronic supplementary material 1, table
S11b.5.5.2.Gene Ontology enrichment analysisGO enrichments were performed using GO term finder (http://go.princeton.edu/cgi-bin/GOTermFinder with ontology and annotations from 26 September
2011). Threshold p-values of 0.001, 0.01 and 0.1 were used to identify specific
enrichments. Bonferroni correction was used.GO slim categories presented in tables 2, 3 and 4 refer to the GO IDs in the electronic supplementary material 1, table S14. All GO terms
and p-values for each phenotype set are provided in the electronic supplementary
material 1, tables S6 and S7. Genes where number of annotations = 1 were obtained using GO
term Mapper (http://go.princeton.edu/cgi-bin/GOTermMapper).The background set was the 4843 gene set used this study.5.5.3.Comparison with human cell cycle genesA list of 1351 human cell cycle genes was extracted from a study by Kittler et
al. [12] and mapped to current Ensembl IDs
(79 of the human identifiers had been retired and were no longer linked to extant genes). The
remainder were mapped to 521 fission yeast orthologues using Ensembl Compara 10/11/2011 (http://genome.cshlp.org/content/19/2/327.long).

Bioinformatics analysis

5.5.1.Identification of genes already implicated in mitotic cell cycle processesTo identify genes involved in the mitotic cell cycle in fission yeast, we used fission yeast GO
data from 26 September 2011 (http://www.pombase.org/), and selected the set of protein coding genes annotated to:GO:0000278 mitotic cell cycle,GO:0000910 cytokinesis,GO:0006261 DNA-dependent DNA replication, andGO:0000075 cell cycle checkpoint.Minor adjustments were made to this dataset to remove three known false positives (SPAC343.17c,
SPBC19F8.02, SPAC5D6.08c) and add three known false negatives (SPAC23H4.11c, SPAC26A3.03c
SPAC23H4.18c). The complete list is provided in the electronic supplementary material 1, table
S11b.

Identification of genes already implicated in mitotic cell cycle processes

To identify genes involved in the mitotic cell cycle in fission yeast, we used fission yeast GO
data from 26 September 2011 (http://www.pombase.org/), and selected the set of protein coding genes annotated to:

GO:0000278 mitotic cell cycle,

GO:0000910 cytokinesis,

GO:0006261 DNA-dependent DNA replication, and

GO:0000075 cell cycle checkpoint.

Minor adjustments were made to this dataset to remove three known false positives (SPAC343.17c,
SPBC19F8.02, SPAC5D6.08c) and add three known false negatives (SPAC23H4.11c, SPAC26A3.03c
SPAC23H4.18c). The complete list is provided in the electronic supplementary material 1, table
S11b.

5.5.2.Gene Ontology enrichment analysisGO enrichments were performed using GO term finder (http://go.princeton.edu/cgi-bin/GOTermFinder with ontology and annotations from 26 September
2011). Threshold p-values of 0.001, 0.01 and 0.1 were used to identify specific
enrichments. Bonferroni correction was used.GO slim categories presented in tables 2, 3 and 4 refer to the GO IDs in the electronic supplementary material 1, table S14. All GO terms
and p-values for each phenotype set are provided in the electronic supplementary
material 1, tables S6 and S7. Genes where number of annotations = 1 were obtained using GO
term Mapper (http://go.princeton.edu/cgi-bin/GOTermMapper).The background set was the 4843 gene set used this study.

Gene Ontology enrichment analysis

GO enrichments were performed using GO term finder (http://go.princeton.edu/cgi-bin/GOTermFinder with ontology and annotations from 26 September
2011). Threshold p-values of 0.001, 0.01 and 0.1 were used to identify specific
enrichments. Bonferroni correction was used.

GO slim categories presented in tables 2, 3 and 4 refer to the GO IDs in the electronic supplementary material 1, table S14. All GO terms
and p-values for each phenotype set are provided in the electronic supplementary
material 1, tables S6 and S7. Genes where number of annotations = 1 were obtained using GO
term Mapper (http://go.princeton.edu/cgi-bin/GOTermMapper).

The background set was the 4843 gene set used this study.

5.5.3.Comparison with human cell cycle genesA list of 1351 human cell cycle genes was extracted from a study by Kittler et
al. [12] and mapped to current Ensembl IDs
(79 of the human identifiers had been retired and were no longer linked to extant genes). The
remainder were mapped to 521 fission yeast orthologues using Ensembl Compara 10/11/2011 (http://genome.cshlp.org/content/19/2/327.long).

Comparison with human cell cycle genes

A list of 1351 human cell cycle genes was extracted from a study by Kittler et
al. [12] and mapped to current Ensembl IDs
(79 of the human identifiers had been retired and were no longer linked to extant genes). The
remainder were mapped to 521 fission yeast orthologues using Ensembl Compara 10/11/2011 (http://genome.cshlp.org/content/19/2/327.long).

6.AcknowledgementsThis work was supported by Cancer Research UK, the Wellcome Trust, Breast Cancer Research
Foundation, KRIBB, NRF grants (nos. 2012M3A9D1054666 and 2011-0016688) from the Korea Ministry of
Science, ICT & Future Planning (MSIP). We are very grateful to Midori Harris, Mark McDowall,
Kim Rutherford and Juan-Juan Li for providing help with the analysis. We are also indebted to all
members of the Cell Cycle Laboratory, particularly Francisco Navarro, for reading of the manuscript
and helpful suggestions. There are no conflicts of interest resulting from this work.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by Cancer Research UK, the Wellcome Trust, Breast Cancer Research
Foundation, KRIBB, NRF grants (nos. 2012M3A9D1054666 and 2011-0016688) from the Korea Ministry of
Science, ICT & Future Planning (MSIP). We are very grateful to Midori Harris, Mark McDowall,
Kim Rutherford and Juan-Juan Li for providing help with the analysis. We are also indebted to all
members of the Cell Cycle Laboratory, particularly Francisco Navarro, for reading of the manuscript
and helpful suggestions. There are no conflicts of interest resulting from this work.

Supplementary MaterialHayles et al Supplementary Material RSOB-13-0053

Supplementary Material

Hayles et al Supplementary Material RSOB-13-0053

Supplementary MaterialTable S1

Supplementary Material

Supplementary MaterialTable S5

Supplementary Material

Supplementary MaterialTable S6

Supplementary Material

Supplementary MaterialTable S7

Supplementary Material

Supplementary MaterialTable S8

Supplementary Material

Supplementary MaterialTable S10

Supplementary Material

Supplementary MaterialTable S11

Supplementary Material

Supplementary MaterialTable S12

Supplementary Material

Supplementary MaterialTable S13

Supplementary Material

Supplementary MaterialTable S14

Supplementary Material
