---
pmid: '21285529'
title: Autophagy and apoptosis are redundantly required for C. elegans embryogenesis.
authors:
- Borsos E
- Erdélyi P
- Vellai T
journal: Autophagy
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.4161/auto.7.5.14685
---

# Autophagy and apoptosis are redundantly required for C. elegans embryogenesis.
**Authors:** Borsos E, Erdélyi P, Vellai T
**Journal:** Autophagy (2011)
**DOI:** [10.4161/auto.7.5.14685](https://doi.org/10.4161/auto.7.5.14685)

## Abstract

1. Autophagy. 2011 May;7(5):557-9. doi: 10.4161/auto.7.5.14685. Epub 2011 May 1.

Autophagy and apoptosis are redundantly required for C. elegans embryogenesis.

Borsos E(1), Erdélyi P, Vellai T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest, Hungary.

Apoptosis, the main form of regulated (or programmed) cell death, allows the 
organism to tightly control cell numbers and tissue size, and to protect itself 
from potentially damaging cells. This type of cellular self-killing has long 
been assumed to be essential for early development. In the nematode 
Caenorhabditis elegans, however, the core apoptotic cell death pathway appears 
to be dispensable for embryogenesis when most developmental cell deaths take 
place: mutant nematodes defective for apoptosis develop into adulthood, with 
superficially normal morphology and behavior. Accumulating evidence indicates a 
similar situation in mammalian systems as well. For example, apoptosis-deficient 
mice can grow as healthy, fertile adults. These observations raise the 
possibility that alternative cell death mechanisms may compensate for the lack 
of apoptotic machinery in developing embryos. Interestingly, C. elegans 
embryogenesis can also occur without autophagy, an alternative form of cellular 
self-destruction (also called autophagic cell death). In an upcoming paper we 
report that simultaneous inactivation of the autophagic and apoptotic gene 
cascades in C. elegans arrests development at early stages, and the affected 
embryos exhibit severe morphological defects. Double-mutant nematode embryos 
deficient in both autophagy and apoptosis are unable to undergo body elongation 
or to arrange several tissues correctly. This novel function of autophagy genes 
in morphogenesis indicates a more fundamental role for cellular self-digestion 
in tissue patterning than previously thought.

DOI: 10.4161/auto.7.5.14685
PMID: 21285529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
