---
pmid: '22193716'
title: Redox signalling directly regulates TDP-43 via cysteine oxidation and disulphide
  cross-linking.
authors:
- Cohen TJ
- Hwang AW
- Unger T
- Trojanowski JQ
- Lee VM
journal: EMBO J
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3297986
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.471
---

# Redox signalling directly regulates TDP-43 via cysteine oxidation and disulphide cross-linking.
**Authors:** Cohen TJ, Hwang AW, Unger T, Trojanowski JQ, Lee VM
**Journal:** EMBO J (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2011.471](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2011.471)
**PMC:** [PMC3297986](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3297986/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2012 Mar 7;31(5):1241-52. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.471. Epub 2011 Dec
23.

Redox signalling directly regulates TDP-43 via cysteine oxidation and disulphide 
cross-linking.

Cohen TJ(1), Hwang AW, Unger T, Trojanowski JQ, Lee VM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Institute on Aging and 
Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, University of Pennsylvania School 
of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104-4283, USA.

TDP-43 is the major disease protein in ubiquitin-positive inclusions of 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) 
characterized by TDP-43 pathology (FTLD-TDP). Accumulation of insoluble TDP-43 
aggregates could impair normal TDP-43 functions and initiate disease 
progression. Thus, it is critical to define the signalling mechanisms regulating 
TDP-43 since this could open up new avenues for therapeutic interventions. Here, 
we have identified a redox-mediated signalling mechanism directly regulating 
TDP-43. Using in vitro and cell-based studies, we demonstrate that oxidative 
stress promotes TDP-43 cross-linking via cysteine oxidation and disulphide bond 
formation leading to decreased TDP-43 solubility. Biochemical analysis 
identified several cysteine residues located within and adjacent to the second 
RNA-recognition motif that contribute to both intra- and inter-molecular 
interactions, supporting TDP-43 as a target of redox signalling. Moreover, 
increased levels of cross-linked TDP-43 species are found in FTLD-TDP brains, 
indicating that aberrant TDP-43 cross-linking is a prominent pathological 
feature of this disease. Thus, TDP-43 is dynamically regulated by a redox 
regulatory switch that links oxidative stress to the modulation of TDP-43 and 
its downstream targets.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2011.471
PMCID: PMC3297986
PMID: 22193716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
