---
pmid: '14570917'
title: 'pH regulates vascular endothelial growth factor binding to fibronectin: a
  mechanism for control of extracellular matrix storage and release.'
authors:
- Goerges AL
- Nugent MA
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M308482200
---

# pH regulates vascular endothelial growth factor binding to fibronectin: a mechanism for control of extracellular matrix storage and release.
**Authors:** Goerges AL, Nugent MA
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M308482200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M308482200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jan 16;279(3):2307-15. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M308482200. Epub
2003  Oct 21.

pH regulates vascular endothelial growth factor binding to fibronectin: a 
mechanism for control of extracellular matrix storage and release.

Goerges AL(1), Nugent MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 
02118, USA.

Hypoxia is one of the major signals that induces angiogenesis. Hypoxic 
conditions lead to reduced extracellular pH. Vascular endothelial growth factor 
(VEGF) binding to endothelial cells and the extracellular matrix (ECM) increases 
at acidic pH (7.0-5.5). These interactions are dependent on heparan sulfate 
proteoglycans, but do not depend on the presence of VEGF receptors. Here we 
report that VEGF(165) and VEGF(121) binding to fibronectin also increased at 
acidic pH, and that these interactions are further enhanced by the addition of 
heparin. These results reveal that the accepted non-heparin-binding isoform of 
VEGF (VEGF(121)) is converted into a heparin-binding growth factor under acidic 
conditions. Interestingly, we did not observe increased binding of VEGF to 
collagen type I at acidic pH in the presence or absence of heparin, indicating 
that this effect is not a general property of all heparin-binding ECM proteins. 
The high level of VEGF binding at acidic pH was also rapidly reversed as 
demonstrated by increased rates of VEGF dissociation from fibronectin and 
fibronectin-heparin matrices as the pH was raised. The VEGF released from 
fibronectin retained its ability to stimulate the activation of 
extracellular-regulated kinase 1/2 in endothelial cells. These results suggest 
that VEGF may be stored in the extracellular matrix via interactions with 
fibronectin and heparan sulfate in tissues that are in need of vascularization 
so that it can aid in directing the dynamic process of growth and migration of 
new blood vessels.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M308482200
PMID: 14570917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
