---
pmid: '10518500'
title: A novel WD40 protein, CHE-2, acts cell-autonomously in the formation of C.
  elegans sensory cilia.
authors:
- Fujiwara M
- Ishihara T
- Katsura I
journal: Development
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/dev.126.21.4839
---

# A novel WD40 protein, CHE-2, acts cell-autonomously in the formation of C. elegans sensory cilia.
**Authors:** Fujiwara M, Ishihara T, Katsura I
**Journal:** Development (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.126.21.4839](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.126.21.4839)

## Abstract

1. Development. 1999 Nov;126(21):4839-48. doi: 10.1242/dev.126.21.4839.

A novel WD40 protein, CHE-2, acts cell-autonomously in the formation of C. 
elegans sensory cilia.

Fujiwara M(1), Ishihara T, Katsura I.

Author information:
(1)Structural Biology Center, National Institute of Genetics, Mishima 411-8540, 
Japan and Department of Genetics, School of Life Science, Graduate University 
for Advanced Studies, Mishima 411-8540, Japan. ikatsura@lab.nig.ac.jp.

To elucidate the mechanism of sensory cilium formation, we analyzed mutants in 
the Caenorhabditis elegans che-2 gene. These mutants have extremely short cilia 
with an abnormal posterior projection, and show defects in behaviors that are 
mediated by ciliated sensory neurons. The che-2 gene encodes a new member of the 
WD40 protein family, suggesting that it acts in protein-protein interaction. 
Analysis of mutation sites showed that both the amino-terminal WD40 repeats and 
the carboxyl-terminal non-WD40 domain are necessary for the CHE-2 function. 
CHE-2-tagged green fluorescent protein is localized at the cilia of almost all 
the ciliated sensory neurons. Expression of che-2 in a subset of sensory neurons 
of a che-2 mutant by using a heterologous promoter resulted in restoration of 
the functions and cilium morphology of only the che-2-expressing neurons. Thus, 
che-2 acts cell-autonomously. This technique can be used in the future for 
determining the function of each type of che-2-expressing sensory neuron. Using 
green fluorescent protein, we found that the extension of cilia in wild-type 
animals took place at the late embryonic stage, whereas the cilia of che-2 
mutant animals remained always short during development. Hence, the abnormal 
posterior projection is due to the inability of cilia to extend, rather than 
degeneration of cilia once correctly formed. Expression of che-2 in a che-2 
mutant under a heat shock promoter showed that the extension of cilia, 
surprisingly, can occur even at the adult stage, and that such cilia can 
function apparently normally in behavior.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.126.21.4839
PMID: 10518500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
