---
pmid: '18317410'
title: Inhibition of p53 by pifithrin-alpha reduces myocyte apoptosis and leukocyte
  transmigration in aged rat hearts following 24 hours of reperfusion.
authors:
- Liu P
- Xu B
- Cavalieri TA
- Hock CE
journal: Shock
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1097/SHK.0b013e31816a192d
---

# Inhibition of p53 by pifithrin-alpha reduces myocyte apoptosis and leukocyte transmigration in aged rat hearts following 24 hours of reperfusion.
**Authors:** Liu P, Xu B, Cavalieri TA, Hock CE
**Journal:** Shock (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1097/SHK.0b013e31816a192d](https://doi.org/10.1097/SHK.0b013e31816a192d)

## Abstract

1. Shock. 2008 Nov;30(5):545-51. doi: 10.1097/SHK.0b013e31816a192d.

Inhibition of p53 by pifithrin-alpha reduces myocyte apoptosis and leukocyte 
transmigration in aged rat hearts following 24 hours of reperfusion.

Liu P(1), Xu B, Cavalieri TA, Hock CE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and New Jersey Institute of Successful Aging, 
University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, School of Osteopathic 
Medicine, Stratford, New Jersey, USA. liupe@umdnj.edu

Ischemic heart disease is a common age-related disease. Apoptotic cell death and 
inflammation are the major contributors to I/R injury. The mechanisms that 
trigger myocyte apoptosis and inflammation during myocardial I/R (MI/R) remain 
to be elucidated. Published data from our laboratory demonstrated that 
pretreatment of MI/R rats with pifithrin-alpha (PFT), a specific p53 inhibitor, 
reduced myocyte apoptosis and improved cardiac function compared with MI/R rats 
pretreated with saline at 4 h of reperfusion. In the present study, we 
investigated the effects of PFT on the occurrence of myocyte apoptosis and 
leukocyte transmigration in the later period of reperfusion. Aged (20-month-old) 
male F344 rats were subjected to 30 min of myocardial ischemia via ligature of 
the LCA, followed by 24 h of reperfusion. Pifithrin-alpha (2.2 mg/kg, 
intraperitoneally) or saline was administered to rats before ischemia. The 
results indicate that pretreatment of MI/R rats with PFT significantly decreased 
the percentage of infarct area to ischemic area (33 +/- 8 vs. 54 +/- 9, P < 
0.05) and improved cardiac output (79 +/- 11 vs. 38 +/- 9 mL/min per 100 g body 
weight, P < 0.05) when compared with rats pretreated with saline at 24 h of 
reperfusion. The protective effects of PFT may involve the p53/Bax-mediated 
apoptosis because treatment of MI/R rats with PFT attenuated the ratio of Bax to 
Bcl2 (0.97 +/- 0.1 vs. 2.1 +/- 0.2, P < 0.05) and reduced myocyte apoptosis. 
Interestingly, inhibition of p53 transcriptional function by PFT alleviated 
leukocyte infiltration into the ischemic area of the heart (339 +/- 37 vs. 498 
+/- 75 cells/10 high-power fields, P < 0.05). These data suggest that inhibition 
of p53 transcriptional function by PFT attenuates myocyte apoptosis and 
alleviates leukocyte transmigration at 24 h of reperfusion. The mechanisms by 
which p53 modulates leukocyte transmigration require further investigation.

DOI: 10.1097/SHK.0b013e31816a192d
PMID: 18317410 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
