---
reference_id: PMID:18068114
title: Nuclear localized protein-1 (Nulp1) increases cell death of human osteosarcoma cells and binds the X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein.
authors:
- Steen H
- Lindholm D
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2007.11.146
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Nuclear localized protein-1 (Nulp1) increases cell death of human osteosarcoma cells and binds the X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein.
**Authors:** Steen H, Lindholm D
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2007.11.146](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2007.11.146)

## Content

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Feb 8;366(2):432-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2007.11.146. Epub 2007 Dec 7.

Nuclear localized protein-1 (Nulp1) increases cell death of human osteosarcoma
cells and binds the X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein.

Steen H(1), Lindholm D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Uppsala University, Biomedical Centre, Box 587,
Husargatan 3, SE-75123 Uppsala, Sweden.

Nuclear localized protein-1 (Nulp1) is a recently identified gene expressed in
mouse and human tissues particularly during embryonic development. Nulp1 belongs
to the family of basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins that are important in
development. The precise function of Nulp1 in cells is however not known. We
observed that overexpression of Nulp1 induces a large increase in cell death of
human osteosarcoma Saos2 cells with DNA fragmentation. In mouse N2A
neuroblastoma cells Nulp1 affected cell proliferation and sensitized cells
towards death induced by staurosporine. Staining using a novel antibody
localized Nulp1 mainly to the cell nucleus and to some extent to the cytoplasm.
Nulp1 binds the X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP) and this
interaction was increased during cell death. These results indicate that Nulp1
plays a role in cell death control and may influence tumor growth.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2007.11.146
PMID: 18068114 [Indexed for MEDLINE]