---
pmid: '11279521'
title: Learning deficits, but normal development and tumor predisposition, in mice
  lacking exon 23a of Nf1.
authors:
- Costa RM
- Yang T
- Huynh DP
- Pulst SM
- Viskochil DH
- Silva AJ
- Brannan CI
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/86898
---

# Learning deficits, but normal development and tumor predisposition, in mice lacking exon 23a of Nf1.
**Authors:** Costa RM, Yang T, Huynh DP, Pulst SM, Viskochil DH, Silva AJ, Brannan CI
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1038/86898](https://doi.org/10.1038/86898)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 2001 Apr;27(4):399-405. doi: 10.1038/86898.

Learning deficits, but normal development and tumor predisposition, in mice 
lacking exon 23a of Nf1.

Costa RM(1), Yang T, Huynh DP, Pulst SM, Viskochil DH, Silva AJ, Brannan CI.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Neurobiology, Psychiatry and Psychology, BRI, UCLA, Los 
Angeles, California, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2001 Apr;27(4):354-5. doi: 10.1038/86835.

Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a commonly inherited autosomal dominant 
disorder. Previous studies indicated that mice homozygous for a null mutation in 
Nf1 exhibit mid-gestation lethality, whereas heterozygous mice have an increased 
predisposition to tumors and learning impairments. Here we show that mice 
lacking the alternatively spliced exon 23a, which modifies the GTPase-activating 
protein (GAP) domain of Nf1, are viable and physically normal, and do not have 
an increased tumor predisposition, but show specific learning impairments. Our 
findings have implications for the development of a treatment for the learning 
disabilities associated with NF1 and indicate that the GAP domain of NF1 
modulates learning and memory.

DOI: 10.1038/86898
PMID: 11279521 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
