---
pmid: '17237713'
title: 'Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis: a common pathway?'
authors:
- Persaud-Sawin DA
- Mousallem T
- Wang C
- Zucker A
- Kominami E
- Boustany RM
journal: Pediatr Res
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1203/pdr.0b013e31802d8a4a
---

# Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis: a common pathway?
**Authors:** Persaud-Sawin DA, Mousallem T, Wang C, Zucker A, Kominami E, Boustany RM
**Journal:** Pediatr Res (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1203/pdr.0b013e31802d8a4a](https://doi.org/10.1203/pdr.0b013e31802d8a4a)

## Abstract

1. Pediatr Res. 2007 Feb;61(2):146-52. doi: 10.1203/pdr.0b013e31802d8a4a.

Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis: a common pathway?

Persaud-Sawin DA(1), Mousallem T, Wang C, Zucker A, Kominami E, Boustany RM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North 
Carolina 27710, USA.

The neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses are pediatric neurodegenerative diseases with 
common clinical features. Of the nine clinical variants (CLN1-CLN9), six have 
been genetically identified. Most variants manifest cell death and dysregulated 
sphingolipid metabolism, suggesting the proteins defective in these disorders 
may interact along one pathway. NCL patient-derived cell lines exhibit cell 
growth and apoptotic defects that reverse following transfection with the 
wild-type gene. The membrane-bound proteins CLN3, CLN6, and CLN8 complement each 
other, as do CLN1 and CLN2 proteins, with respect to growth and apoptosis. The 
CLN2 protein also corrects growth and apoptosis in CLN3-, CLN6-, and 
CLN8-deficient cell lines. Neither CLN1-deficient nor CLN2-deficient growth 
defects are corrected by CLN3, CLN6, and CLN8 proteins. CLN2, CLN3, CLN6, and 
CLN8 proteins co-immunoprecipitate and co-localize to early and/or recycling 
endosomes and lipid rafts. Additionally, CLN2p and CLN1p co-immunoprecipitate. 
The work presented supports interactions between NCL proteins occurring at 
multiple points along one pathway.

DOI: 10.1203/pdr.0b013e31802d8a4a
PMID: 17237713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
