---
reference_id: PMID:11102472
title: A conserved clathrin assembly motif essential for synaptic vesicle endocytosis.
authors:
- Morgan JR
- Prasad K
- Hao W
- Augustine GJ
- Lafer EM
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.20-23-08667.2000
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A conserved clathrin assembly motif essential for synaptic vesicle endocytosis.
**Authors:** Morgan JR, Prasad K, Hao W, Augustine GJ, Lafer EM
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.20-23-08667.2000](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.20-23-08667.2000)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 2000 Dec 1;20(23):8667-76. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.20-23-08667.2000.

A conserved clathrin assembly motif essential for synaptic vesicle endocytosis.

Morgan JR(1), Prasad K, Hao W, Augustine GJ, Lafer EM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North 
Carolina 27710, USA.

Although clathrin assembly by adaptor proteins (APs) plays a major role in the 
recycling of synaptic vesicles, the molecular mechanism that allows APs to 
assemble clathrin is poorly understood. Here we demonstrate that AP180, like 
AP-2 and AP-3, binds to the N-terminal domain of clathrin. Sequence analysis 
reveals a motif, containing the sequence DLL, that exists in multiple copies in 
many clathrin APs. Progressive deletion of these motifs caused a gradual 
reduction in the ability of AP180 to assemble clathrin in vitro. Peptides from 
AP180 or AP-2 containing this motif also competitively inhibited clathrin 
assembly by either protein. Microinjection of these peptides into squid giant 
presynaptic terminals reversibly blocked synaptic transmission and inhibited 
synaptic vesicle endocytosis by preventing coated pit formation at the plasma 
membrane. These results indicate that the DLL motif confers clathrin assembly 
properties to AP180 and AP-2 and, perhaps, to other APs. We propose that APs 
promote clathrin assembly by cross-linking clathrin triskelia via multivalent 
interactions between repeated DLL motifs in the APs and complementary binding 
sites on the N-terminal domain of clathrin. These results reveal the structural 
basis for clathrin assembly and provide novel insights into the molecular 
mechanism of clathrin-mediated synaptic vesicle endocytosis.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.20-23-08667.2000
PMCID: PMC6773056
PMID: 11102472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]