---
pmid: '8294396'
title: Rh-related antigen CD47 is the signal-transducer integrin-associated protein.
authors:
- Lindberg FP
- Lublin DM
- Telen MJ
- Veile RA
- Miller YE
- Donis-Keller H
- Brown EJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
---

# Rh-related antigen CD47 is the signal-transducer integrin-associated protein.
**Authors:** Lindberg FP, Lublin DM, Telen MJ, Veile RA, Miller YE, Donis-Keller H, Brown EJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1994)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jan 21;269(3):1567-70.

Rh-related antigen CD47 is the signal-transducer integrin-associated protein.

Lindberg FP(1), Lublin DM, Telen MJ, Veile RA, Miller YE, Donis-Keller H, Brown 
EJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 
63110.

Integrin-associated protein (IAP) is a 50-kDa membrane protein with an 
amino-terminal immunoglobulin domain and a carboxyl-terminal multiply 
membrane-spanning region. It is physically and functionally associated with the 
integrin alpha v beta 3 vitronectin receptor and is involved in the increase in 
intracellular calcium concentration, which occurs upon cell adhesion to 
extracellular matrix. Oxidative burst in neutrophils can be induced or inhibited 
via IAP. Surprisingly, IAP is also expressed on erythrocytes, which have no 
known integrins. IAP has been shown to be identical to OA3, an ovarian carcinoma 
antigen. We now show that IAP expression is reduced on Rhnull erythrocytes. The 
IAP structural gene is mapped to q13.1-2 on human chromosome 3, within a region 
known to contain a gene encoding the Rh-associated 1D8 antigen. By expression 
studies on human erythrocytes and IAP transfectants, IAP is shown to be 
identical to the 1D8 antigen and to CD47, a cell surface protein with broad 
tissue distribution, reduced in expression on Rhnull erythrocytes. Two CD47 
antibodies recognize the immunoglobulin domain of IAP, as does antibody 1D8. 
These studies suggest the possibility that IAP and the Rh polypeptides may share 
a pathway for membrane expression on erythrocytes. Furthermore, decreased 
expression of IAP on Rhnull cells may contribute to the these cells' abnormal 
cation permeabilities. These studies demonstrate an unexpected link between 
integrin signal transduction and erythrocyte membrane structure.

PMID: 8294396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
