---
pmid: '12093795'
title: The catalytic center of glucose-6-phosphatase. HIS176 is the nucleophile forming
  the phosphohistidine-enzyme intermediate during catalysis.
authors:
- Ghosh A
- Shieh JJ
- Pan CJ
- Sun MS
- Chou JY
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M201853200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The catalytic center of glucose-6-phosphatase. HIS176 is the nucleophile forming the phosphohistidine-enzyme intermediate during catalysis.
**Authors:** Ghosh A, Shieh JJ, Pan CJ, Sun MS, Chou JY
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M201853200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M201853200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 6;277(36):32837-42. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M201853200. Epub
2002  Jul 1.

The catalytic center of glucose-6-phosphatase. HIS176 is the nucleophile forming 
the phosphohistidine-enzyme intermediate during catalysis.

Ghosh A(1), Shieh JJ, Pan CJ, Sun MS, Chou JY.

Author information:
(1)Section on Cellular Differentiation, Heritable Disorders Branch, NICHD, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase), a key enzyme in glucose homeostasis, is anchored 
to the endoplasmic reticulum by nine transmembrane helices. The amino acids 
comprising the catalytic center of G6Pase include Lys(76), Arg(83), His(119), 
Arg(170), and His(176). During catalysis, a His residue in G6Pase becomes 
phosphorylated generating an enzyme-phosphate intermediate. It was predicted 
that His(176) would be the amino acid that acts as a nucleophile forming a 
phosphohistidine-enzyme intermediate, and His(119) would be the amino acid that 
provides the proton needed to liberate the glucose moiety. However, the 
phosphate acceptor in G6Pase has eluded molecular characterization. To identify 
the His residue that covalently bound the phosphate moiety, we generated 
recombinant adenoviruses carrying G6Pase wild type and active site mutants. A 
40-kDa [(32)P]phosphate-G6Pase intermediate was identified after incubating 
[(32)P]glucose 6-phosphate with microsomes expressing wild type but not with 
microsomes expressing either H119A or H176A mutant G6Pase. Human G6Pase contains 
five methionine residues at positions 1, 5, 121, 130, and 279. After cyanogen 
bromide cleavage, His(119) is predicted to be within a 116-amino acid peptide of 
13.5 kDa with an isoelectric point of 5.3 (residues 6-121), and His(176) is 
predicted to be within a 149-amino acid peptide of 16.8 kDa with an isoelectric 
point of 9.3 (residues 131-279). We show that after digestion of a 
non-glycosylated [(32)P]phosphate-G6Pase intermediate by cyanogen bromide, the 
[(32)P]phosphate remains bound to a peptide of 17 kDa with an isoelectric point 
above 9, demonstrating that His(176) is the phosphate acceptor in G6Pase.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M201853200
PMID: 12093795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
