---
pmid: '18550839'
title: Dual roles of the nuclear cap-binding complex and SERRATE in pre-mRNA splicing
  and microRNA processing in Arabidopsis thaliana.
authors:
- Laubinger S
- Sachsenberg T
- Zeller G
- Busch W
- Lohmann JU
- Rätsch G
- Weigel D
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2426964
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0802493105
---

# Dual roles of the nuclear cap-binding complex and SERRATE in pre-mRNA splicing and microRNA processing in Arabidopsis thaliana.
**Authors:** Laubinger S, Sachsenberg T, Zeller G, Busch W, Lohmann JU, Rätsch G, Weigel D
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0802493105](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0802493105)
**PMC:** [PMC2426964](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2426964/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Jun 24;105(25):8795-800. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0802493105. Epub 2008 Jun 12.

Dual roles of the nuclear cap-binding complex and SERRATE in pre-mRNA splicing 
and microRNA processing in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Laubinger S(1), Sachsenberg T, Zeller G, Busch W, Lohmann JU, Rätsch G, Weigel 
D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Max Planck Institute for Developmental 
Biology, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Jun 24;105(25):8489-90. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0804356105.

The processing of Arabidopsis thaliana microRNAs (miRNAs) from longer primary 
transcripts (pri-miRNAs) requires the activity of several proteins, including 
DICER-LIKE1 (DCL1), the double-stranded RNA-binding protein HYPONASTIC LEAVES1 
(HYL1), and the zinc finger protein SERRATE (SE). It has been noted before that 
the morphological appearance of weak se mutants is reminiscent of plants with 
mutations in ABH1/CBP80 and CBP20, which encode the two subunits of the nuclear 
cap-binding complex. We report that, like SE, the cap-binding complex is 
necessary for proper processing of pri-miRNAs. Inactivation of either ABH1/CBP80 
or CBP20 results in decreased levels of mature miRNAs accompanied by apparent 
stabilization of pri-miRNAs. Whole-genome tiling array analyses reveal that se, 
abh1/cbp80, and cbp20 mutants also share similar splicing defects, leading to 
the accumulation of many partially spliced transcripts. This is unlikely to be 
an indirect consequence of improper miRNA processing or other mRNA turnover 
pathways, because introns retained in se, abh1/cbp80, and cbp20 mutants are not 
affected by mutations in other genes required for miRNA processing or for 
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. Taken together, our results uncover dual roles in 
splicing and miRNA processing that distinguish SE and the cap-binding complex 
from specialized miRNA processing factors such as DCL1 and HYL1.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0802493105
PMCID: PMC2426964
PMID: 18550839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
