---
pmid: '24136289'
title: Identification and comparative analysis of hepatitis C virus-host cell protein
  interactions.
authors:
- Dolan PT
- Zhang C
- Khadka S
- Arumugaswami V
- Vangeloff AD
- Heaton NS
- Sahasrabudhe S
- Randall G
- Sun R
- LaCount DJ
journal: Mol Biosyst
year: '2013'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4171131
doi: 10.1039/c3mb70343f
---

# Identification and comparative analysis of hepatitis C virus-host cell protein interactions.
**Authors:** Dolan PT, Zhang C, Khadka S, Arumugaswami V, Vangeloff AD, Heaton NS, Sahasrabudhe S, Randall G, Sun R, LaCount DJ
**Journal:** Mol Biosyst (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1039/c3mb70343f](https://doi.org/10.1039/c3mb70343f)
**PMC:** [PMC4171131](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4171131/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biosyst. 2013 Dec;9(12):3199-209. doi: 10.1039/c3mb70343f. Epub 2013 Oct
18.

Identification and comparative analysis of hepatitis C virus-host cell protein 
interactions.

Dolan PT(1), Zhang C, Khadka S, Arumugaswami V, Vangeloff AD, Heaton NS, 
Sahasrabudhe S, Randall G, Sun R, LaCount DJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Purdue 
University, RHPH 514, 575 Stadium Mall Drive, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA. 
dlacount@purdue.edu.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) alters the global behavior of the host cell to create an 
environment conducive to its own replication, but much remains unknown about how 
HCV proteins elicit these changes. Thus, a better understanding of the interface 
between the virus and host cell is required. Here we report the results of a 
large-scale yeast two-hybrid screen to identify protein-protein interactions 
between HCV genotype 2a (strain JFH1) and cellular factors. Our study identified 
112 unique interactions between 7 HCV and 94 human proteins, over 40% of which 
have been linked to HCV infection by other studies. These interactions develop a 
more complete picture of HCV infection, providing insight into HCV manipulation 
of pathways, such as lipid and cholesterol metabolism, that were previously 
linked to HCV infection and implicating novel targets within 
microtubule-organizing centers, the complement system and cell cycle regulatory 
machinery. In an effort to understand the relationship between HCV and related 
viruses, we compared the HCV 2a interactome to those of other HCV genotypes and 
to the related dengue virus. Greater overlap was observed between HCV and dengue 
virus targets than between HCV genotypes, demonstrating the value of parallel 
screening approaches when comparing virus-host cell interactomes. Using siRNAs 
to inhibit expression of cellular proteins, we found that five of the ten shared 
targets tested (CUL7, PCM1, RILPL2, RNASET2, and TCF7L2) were required for 
replication of both HCV and dengue virus. These shared interactions provide 
insight into common features of the viral life cycles of the family 
Flaviviridae.

DOI: 10.1039/c3mb70343f
PMCID: PMC4171131
PMID: 24136289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) alters the global behavior of the host cell to create an environment conducive to its own replication, but much remains unknown about how HCV proteins elicit these changes. Thus, a better understanding of the interface between the virus and host cell is required. Here we report the results of a large-scale yeast two-hybrid screen to identify protein-protein interactions between HCV genotype 2a (strain JFH1) and cellular factors. Our study identified 112 unique interactions between 7 HCV and 94 human proteins, over 40% of which have been linked to HCV infection by other studies. These interactions develop a more complete picture of HCV infection, providing insight into HCV manipulation of pathways, such as lipid and cholesterol metabolism, that were previously linked to HCV infection and implicating novel targets within microtubule-organizing centers, the complement system and cell cycle regulatory machinery. In an effort to understand the relationship between HCV and related viruses, we compared the HCV 2a interactome to those of other HCV genotypes and to the related dengue virus. Greater overlap was observed between HCV and dengue virus targets than between HCV genotypes, demonstrating the value of parallel screening approaches when comparing virus-host cell interactomes. Using siRNAs to inhibit expression of cellular proteins, we found that five of the ten shared targets tested (CUL7, PCM1, RILPL2, RNASET2, and TCF7L2) were required for replication of both HCV and dengue virus. These shared interactions provide insight into common features of the viral life cycles of the family Flaviviridae .

Introduction

Hepatitis C Virus (HCV), like all viruses, relies on the host cell to provide functions not encoded within its own genome. During infection, the virus must interface with cellular pathways to create an environment conducive to viral replication. These changes in the infected cell are often mediated by direct physical interactions between viral and host proteins. Similarly, the host cell has evolved mechanisms to impede viral replication through direct interaction with viral factors. Identification of the interactions between virus and cellular proteins is, therefore, essential to understanding the complex interplay between HCV and its host. Likewise, comparing the virus-host cell interactions can reveal relationships between the viruses and provide insights into potentially important similarities and differences in virus biology. Previous studies have compared the cellular targets 1 - 5 and intraviral interactions 6 , 7 of orthologous viral proteins across viral species. However, comparison of interactomes across more divergent viral species remains problematic due to difficulties in distinguishing orthology relationships between viral proteins.

HCV is a major burden on global health, with an estimated 170 million people infected worldwide. 8 Chronic HCV infection is associated with progression of several diseases, including liver cirrhosis, steatosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. 9 HCV pathology, persistence, and response to treatment are influenced by the genotype (GT) of the infecting virus. 10 - 12 These differences in biology suggest differences in the host cell interactions for the various GTs. However, systematic screens for interactions with host proteins have been performed only for HCV GT 1a and 1b proteins. 13 , 14 The HCVPro database currently lists 104 and 359 cellular targets for GTs 1a and 1b, respectively, but only 9 cellular targets for GT 2a. 15 As a commonly studied laboratory strain, identification of host factors involved in the replication of HCV 2a will better inform future experiments with HCV culture systems.

HCV belongs to the family Flaviviridae and is the prototypical member of the genus Hepacivirus . Its positive-sense RNA genome encodes a polyprotein of approximately 3000 amino acids that is co-translationally processed into 11 mature peptides including three structural proteins: core, E1 and E2; 6 non-structural (NS) proteins: NS2, NS3, NS4A, NS4B, NS5A, NS5B; a putative viroporin, p7; and frameshift protein, F. 10 This small collection of gene products elicits the complex network of concerted changes in metabolic and regulatory processes that transform the phenotype of the host cell. Although the genomic organization is generally conserved among the Flaviviridae , HCV differs from most other family members in its mode of transmission and its capacity to establish persistent infection. While most of the members are transmitted via arthropod vectors, HCV is primarily transmitted through blood-blood contact. 8 Similarly, whereas Flaviviridae such as dengue virus (DENV) can establish acute hepatotropic infections that lead to hepatitis in some infected patients 16 , HCV establishes chronic liver infections in about 70-80% of infected individuals 8 . Comparisons of the cellular proteins targeted by the Flaviviridae are likely to provide insight into the differences in their replication and pathology.

Here we report the results of a large-scale yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) screen to identify virus-host cell protein interactions for the HCV 2a strain, JFH-1. The interactions identified augment the current understanding of HCV-host interactions and offer insight into HCV biology. We use the genome-wide collection of HCV 2a – host interactions identified in this study as the basis to compare interactomes of other HCV genotypes and other Flaviviridae . 17 Our results indicate that these comparisons are heavily influenced by experimental conditions and therefore, meaningful comparison of genome-wide interactomes requires parallel screening to reduce confounding inter-experimental variation. Comparing the HCV and DENV interactomes that were generated from parallel screens demonstrated that genome-wide comparisons can capture important biological similarities and differences between the two viruses. By probing a subset of the shared targets of HCV and DENV through siRNA knockdown, we identified host factors that were required for infection of both viruses, which may prove to be promising therapeutic targets.

Discussion

Here we report the first genome-wide screen for HCV GT 2a-human protein interactions. Our study identified 112 interactions between 7 HCV 2a proteins and 94 human proteins, which expands the list of host targets of HCV 2a by a factor of ten. Several observations indicate that the interactions are relevant to HCV infection and associated disease progression. First, a high percentage of the Y2H interactions can be confirmed by alternative approaches. Second, we observed extensive overlap with orthogonal studies of HCV-host cell interactions. Third, the host factors identified in this study were enriched in functions and cellular localizations consistent with the known biology of HCV, such as intracellular trafficking, lipid and cholesterol metabolism, cell survival and innate immunity. Finally, using siRNA experiments to inhibit expression of cellular proteins that interacted with HCV 2a, we found that 60% of the proteins tested were required for HCV replication.

Conclusion

This study is the first systematic analysis of the cellular proteins targeted the HCV GT 2a strain JFH1. Since JFH1 and its derivatives are commonly used laboratory strains, the interactions reported here will facilitate future studies on HCV-host cell interactions. These interactions highlighted key features of the HCV 2a – host interactome, such as lipid and cholesterol trafficking and metabolism, but also identified many novel cellular targets, including components of the microtubule-organizing center and key regulators of cellular proliferation. This study also comprised the first demonstration of comparative interactomics that employs genome-wide interaction networks resulting from parallel Y2H screening as a basis for characterizing differences in viral life cycles and pathogenesis between HCV and DENV. This approach provided a greater overlap between identified partners than comparisons of datasets resulting from disparate screening procedures. Interrogation of cellular proteins that interacted with HCV and DENV implicated components of the centrosome/microtubule-organizing center, ubiquitinylation, RNA processing and lysosomal trafficking machinery of the host cell in the life cycles of both viruses. Taken together, these results suggest new avenues of study for HCV and demonstrate promising new comparative approaches to virus-host interactions that may lead to the development of broadly acting antivirals directed at shared host targets.

Methods

Additional experimental details can be found in Supplementary information .
