---
pmid: '8725894'
title: Glycogen synthase kinase 3 alpha and 3 beta do not colocalize with neurofibrillary
  tangles.
authors:
- Harr SD
- Hollister RD
- Hyman BT
journal: Neurobiol Aging
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0197-4580(96)00025-5
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Glycogen synthase kinase 3 alpha and 3 beta do not colocalize with neurofibrillary tangles.
**Authors:** Harr SD, Hollister RD, Hyman BT
**Journal:** Neurobiol Aging (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0197-4580(96)00025-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/0197-4580(96)00025-5)

## Abstract

1. Neurobiol Aging. 1996 May-Jun;17(3):343-8. doi: 10.1016/0197-4580(96)00025-5.

Glycogen synthase kinase 3 alpha and 3 beta do not colocalize with 
neurofibrillary tangles.

Harr SD(1), Hollister RD, Hyman BT.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Service, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, USA.

Glycogen synthase kinase (GSK) 3 alpha and 3 beta are two proline-directed 
serine/ threonine kinases that have been shown in vitro to hyperphosphorylate 
tau, and therefore, may contribute to neurofibillary tangle (NFT) formation in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). We report here that, in the human hippocampal 
formation of both control and AD individuals, GSK 3 alpha and 3 beta are 
immunohistochemically localized to neurons within the presubiculum > CA1, CA3, 
and CA4 subfields of the hippocampus, layers III > II > IV, V, VI of entorhinal 
cortex, and occasional neurons in layers III, V, and VI of temporal neocortex. 
By contrast, NFTs occur primarily in CA1. subiculum, layers II and IV of 
entorhinal cortex, and layers II, III, and V of temporal neocortex. The 
presubiculum and other subfields are frequently spared. Thus, localization of 
GSK 3 alpha and GSK 3 beta does not correspond to the expected pattern of 
neuronal vulnerability to NFT formation in AD. Interpreted within the 
limitations of immunohistochemical detection, these results argue against a 
major role of GSK 3 alpha or GSK 3 beta in NFT formation in AD.

DOI: 10.1016/0197-4580(96)00025-5
PMID: 8725894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
