---
pmid: '8806613'
title: PIG-C, one of the three human genes involved in the first step of glycosylphosphatidylinositol
  biosynthesis is a homologue of Saccharomyces cerevisiae GPI2.
authors:
- Inoue N
- Watanabe R
- Takeda J
- Kinoshita T
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/bbrc.1996.1332
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# PIG-C, one of the three human genes involved in the first step of glycosylphosphatidylinositol biosynthesis is a homologue of Saccharomyces cerevisiae GPI2.
**Authors:** Inoue N, Watanabe R, Takeda J, Kinoshita T
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1006/bbrc.1996.1332](https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.1996.1332)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1996 Sep 4;226(1):193-9. doi: 
10.1006/bbrc.1996.1332.

PIG-C, one of the three human genes involved in the first step of 
glycosylphosphatidylinositol biosynthesis is a homologue of Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae GPI2.

Inoue N(1), Watanabe R, Takeda J, Kinoshita T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunoregulation, Osaka University, Japan.

Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) protein anchors are ubiquitous in eukaryotic 
cells. GPI anchors are synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum by actions of 
ten or more gene products. The first step of the biosynthesis, the transfer of 
N-acetylglucosamine from UDP-N-acetylglucosamine to phosphatidylinositol, is 
mediated by at least three genes in mammalian cells (PIG-A, PIG-H and PIG-C) and 
in yeast (GPI1, GPI2 and GPI3/SPT14/CWH6). PIG-A is homologous to 
GPI3/SPTI4/CWH6. However, PIG-H has no homology with GPI1 or GPI2. Here we 
cloned a human homologue of GPI2 and showed that it is PIG-C. PIG-C protein is a 
297 amino-acid membrane protein in the endoplasmic reticulum that has 20% amino 
acid identity with GPI2. Since there are several human EST sequences that have 
homology to GPI1, our results suggest that four genes are involved in the first 
step of GPI anchor synthesis in mammalian cells.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.1996.1332
PMID: 8806613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
