---
pmid: '19826086'
title: Fibronectin forms the most extensible biological fibers displaying switchable
  force-exposed cryptic binding sites.
authors:
- Klotzsch E
- Smith ML
- Kubow KE
- Muntwyler S
- Little WC
- Beyeler F
- Gourdon D
- Nelson BJ
- Vogel V
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2761242
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0907518106
---

# Fibronectin forms the most extensible biological fibers displaying switchable force-exposed cryptic binding sites.
**Authors:** Klotzsch E, Smith ML, Kubow KE, Muntwyler S, Little WC, Beyeler F, Gourdon D, Nelson BJ, Vogel V
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0907518106](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0907518106)
**PMC:** [PMC2761242](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2761242/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Oct 27;106(43):18267-72. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0907518106. Epub 2009 Oct 13.

Fibronectin forms the most extensible biological fibers displaying switchable 
force-exposed cryptic binding sites.

Klotzsch E(1), Smith ML, Kubow KE, Muntwyler S, Little WC, Beyeler F, Gourdon D, 
Nelson BJ, Vogel V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Materials, Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule Zurich, CH-8093 
Zürich, Switzerland.

Rather than maximizing toughness, as needed for silk and muscle titin fibers to 
withstand external impact, the much softer extracellular matrix fibers made from 
fibronectin (Fn) can be stretched by cell generated forces and display 
extraordinary extensibility. We show that Fn fibers can be extended more than 
8-fold (>700% strain) before 50% of the fibers break. The Young's modulus of 
single fibers, given by the highly nonlinear slope of the stress-strain curve, 
changes orders of magnitude, up to MPa. Although many other materials 
plastically deform before they rupture, evidence is provided that the reversible 
breakage of force-bearing backbone hydrogen bonds enables the large strain. When 
tension is released, the nano-sized Fn domains first contract in the crowded 
environment of fibers within seconds into random coil conformations (molten 
globule states), before the force-bearing hydrogen bond networks that stabilize 
the domain's secondary structures are reestablished within minutes (double 
exponential). The exposure of cryptic binding sites on Fn type III modules 
increases steeply upon stretching. Thus fiber extension steadily up-regulates 
fiber rigidity and cryptic epitope exposure, both of which are known to 
differentially alter cell behavior. Finally, since stress-strain relationships 
cannot directly be measured in native extracellular matrix (ECM), the 
stress-strain curves were correlated with stretch-induced alterations of 
intramolecular fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) obtained from trace 
amounts of Fn probes (mechanical strain sensors) that can be incorporated into 
native ECM. Physiological implications of the extraordinary extensibility of Fn 
fibers and contraction kinetics are discussed.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0907518106
PMCID: PMC2761242
PMID: 19826086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Rather than maximizing toughness, as needed for silk and muscle titin fibers to withstand external impact, the much softer extracellular matrix fibers made from fibronectin (Fn) can be stretched by cell generated forces and display extraordinary extensibility. We show that Fn fibers can be extended more than 8-fold (>700% strain) before 50% of the fibers break. The Young's modulus of single fibers, given by the highly nonlinear slope of the stress-strain curve, changes orders of magnitude, up to MPa. Although many other materials plastically deform before they rupture, evidence is provided that the reversible breakage of force-bearing backbone hydrogen bonds enables the large strain. When tension is released, the nano-sized Fn domains first contract in the crowded environment of fibers within seconds into random coil conformations (molten globule states), before the force-bearing hydrogen bond networks that stabilize the domain's secondary structures are reestablished within minutes (double exponential). The exposure of cryptic binding sites on Fn type III modules increases steeply upon stretching. Thus fiber extension steadily up-regulates fiber rigidity and cryptic epitope exposure, both of which are known to differentially alter cell behavior. Finally, since stress-strain relationships cannot directly be measured in native extracellular matrix (ECM), the stress-strain curves were correlated with stretch-induced alterations of intramolecular fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) obtained from trace amounts of Fn probes (mechanical strain sensors) that can be incorporated into native ECM. Physiological implications of the extraordinary extensibility of Fn fibers and contraction kinetics are discussed.

Discussion and Conclusions

A combination of microfabricated surfaces, spectroscopic imaging of labeled protein, and a MEMS capacitive force sensor was used to characterize the mechanical and structural properties of individual, freely suspended Fn fibers. With more than 8-fold extension (700% strain) with respect to the resting length before 50% of the fibers are broken, the Fn fibers are one of the most extensible macromolecular fibers described so far ( Fig. 2 ). The extraordinary fiber extensibility requires the mechanical unfolding of secondary structure ( Fig. 2 E ), and remarkably, release of mechanical stress permits recovery of the fiber's original mechanical properties ( Fig. 3 ). Given the diameter of the fibers at resting length, this corresponds to more than a million Fn molecules that have to refold synchronously in the crowed environment of a fiber because a module can only refold if the lateral neighbor refolds as well. Upon the release of tensile force, the fibers rapidly contract within seconds ( Fig. 3 ). The fast kinetic contribution of fiber contraction, τ 1 , is driven by the contraction of unfolded Fn modules into random coil conformations that initially act as entropic springs, whereby the terminal ends are pulled inwards ( Figs. 3 and 4 ). With a slower time constant (i.e., over minutes), the force-bearing backbone hydrogen bond networks are reestablished (τ 2 in Fig. 3 E equaling τ′ and τ″ in Fig. 4 D ), as reflected by the recovery of the original mechanical strength ( Fig. 4 ). Finally, we demonstrate that fiber stretching exposes cryptic binding sites and that the number of exposed cryptic sites increases first slightly and then steeply once the strain exceeds 100% ( Fig. 2 F ). Cryptic molecular recognition sites can thus be switched on by force as demonstrated here for the exposure of cryptic cysteines on FnIII 7 and FnIII 15 .
