---
pmid: '12403614'
title: Reconstitution and characterization of the human DNA polymerase delta four-subunit
  holoenzyme.
authors:
- Xie B
- Mazloum N
- Liu L
- Rahmeh A
- Li H
- Lee MY
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi0262707
---

# Reconstitution and characterization of the human DNA polymerase delta four-subunit holoenzyme.
**Authors:** Xie B, Mazloum N, Liu L, Rahmeh A, Li H, Lee MY
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi0262707](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi0262707)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2002 Nov 5;41(44):13133-42. doi: 10.1021/bi0262707.

Reconstitution and characterization of the human DNA polymerase delta 
four-subunit holoenzyme.

Xie B(1), Mazloum N, Liu L, Rahmeh A, Li H, Lee MY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, New York Medical College, 
Valhalla, New York 10595, USA.

Mammalian DNA polymerase delta was originally characterized as a tightly 
associated heterodimer consisting of the catalytic subunit, p125, and the p50 
subunit. Recently, two additional subunits, the third (p68) and fourth subunits 
(p12), have been identified. The heterotetrameric human pol delta complex was 
reconstituted by overexpression of the four subunits in Sf9 cells, followed by 
purification to near-homogeneity using FPLC chromatography. The properties of 
the four-subunit enzyme were shown to be functionally indistinguishable from 
those of pol delta isolated from calf thymus. The physicochemical properties of 
both the reconstituted heterotetramer and the heterodimer of the p125 and p50 
subunits were examined by gel filtration and glycerol gradient 
ultracentrifugation. These studies show quite clearly that the heterodimer and 
heterotetramer complexes do not behave in solution as dimeric structures. This 
issue is of significance because several studies of the yeast pol delta 
complexes have indicated that the third subunit is able to bring about the 
dimerization of the pol delta complex. The heterodimer is only weakly stimulated 
by PCNA, whereas the heterotetramer is strongly stimulated to a level with a 
specific activity comparable to that of the calf thymus enzyme. These results 
resolve earlier, conflicting reports on the response of the heterodimer to PCNA. 
Nevertheless, the heterodimer does have some ability to interact functionally 
with PCNA, consistent with evidence that the p125 subunit itself has an ability 
to interact with PCNA. The functional interaction of PCNA with the pol delta 
complex may likely involve multiple contacts.

DOI: 10.1021/bi0262707
PMID: 12403614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
