---
pmid: '10734121'
title: Identification and characterization of a Na(+)-independent neutral amino acid
  transporter that associates with the 4F2 heavy chain and exhibits substrate selectivity
  for small neutral D- and L-amino acids.
authors:
- Fukasawa Y
- Segawa H
- Kim JY
- Chairoungdua A
- Kim DK
- Matsuo H
- Cha SH
- Endou H
- Kanai Y
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.275.13.9690
---

# Identification and characterization of a Na(+)-independent neutral amino acid transporter that associates with the 4F2 heavy chain and exhibits substrate selectivity for small neutral D- and L-amino acids.
**Authors:** Fukasawa Y, Segawa H, Kim JY, Chairoungdua A, Kim DK, Matsuo H, Cha SH, Endou H, Kanai Y
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.275.13.9690](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.275.13.9690)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Mar 31;275(13):9690-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.275.13.9690.

Identification and characterization of a Na(+)-independent neutral amino acid 
transporter that associates with the 4F2 heavy chain and exhibits substrate 
selectivity for small neutral D- and L-amino acids.

Fukasawa Y(1), Segawa H, Kim JY, Chairoungdua A, Kim DK, Matsuo H, Cha SH, Endou 
H, Kanai Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Kyorin University School of 
Medicine, 6-20-2 Shinkawa, Mitaka, Tokyo 181-8611, Japan.

A cDNA was isolated from the mouse brain that encodes a novel Na(+)-independent 
neutral amino acid transporter. The encoded protein, designated as Asc-1 
(asc-type amino acid transporter 1), was found to be structurally related to 
recently identified mammalian amino acid transporters for the transport systems 
L, y(+)L, x(C)(-), and b(0,+), which are linked, via a disulfide bond, to the 
type II membrane glycoproteins, 4F2 heavy chain (4F2hc), or rBAT (related to 
b(0,+) amino acid transporter). Asc-1 required 4F2hc for its functional 
expression. In Western blot analysis in the nonreducing condition, a 118-kDa 
band, which seems to correspond to the heterodimeric complex of Asc-1 and 4F2hc, 
was detected in the mouse brain. The band shifted to 33 kDa in the reducing 
condition, confirming that Asc-1 and 4F2hc are linked via a disulfide bond. 
Asc-1-mediated transport was not dependent on the presence of Na(+) or Cl(-). 
Although Asc-1 showed a high sequence homology (66% identity at the amino acid 
level) to the Na(+)-independent broad scope neutral amino acid transporter LAT2 
(Segawa, H., Fukasawa, Y., Miyamoto, K., Takeda, E., Endou, H., and Kanai, Y. 
(1999) J. Biol. Chem. 274, 19745-19751), Asc-1 also exhibited distinctive 
substrate selectivity and transport properties. Asc-1 preferred small neutral 
amino acids such as Gly, L-Ala, L-Ser, L-Thr, and L-Cys, and 
alpha-aminoisobutyric acid as substrates. Asc-1 also transported D-isomers of 
the small neutral amino acids, in particular D-Ser, a putative endogenous 
modulator of N-methyl-D-aspartate-type glutamate receptors, with high affinity. 
Asc-1 operated preferentially, although not exclusively, in an exchange mode. 
Asc-1 mRNA was detected in the brain, lung, small intestine, and placenta. The 
functional properties of Asc-1 seem to be consistent with those of a transporter 
subserving the Na(+)-independent small neutral amino acid transport system asc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.275.13.9690
PMID: 10734121 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
