---
pmid: '19458197'
title: Scribble interacts with beta-catenin to localize synaptic vesicles to synapses.
authors:
- Sun Y
- Aiga M
- Yoshida E
- Humbert PO
- Bamji SX
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2710836
doi: 10.1091/mbc.e08-12-1172
---

# Scribble interacts with beta-catenin to localize synaptic vesicles to synapses.
**Authors:** Sun Y, Aiga M, Yoshida E, Humbert PO, Bamji SX
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.e08-12-1172](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.e08-12-1172)
**PMC:** [PMC2710836](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2710836/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Cell. 2009 Jul;20(14):3390-400. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e08-12-1172. Epub
2009  May 20.

Scribble interacts with beta-catenin to localize synaptic vesicles to synapses.

Sun Y(1), Aiga M, Yoshida E, Humbert PO, Bamji SX.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Physiological Sciences and the Brain Research 
Centre, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, V6T-1Z3, Canada.

An understanding of how synaptic vesicles are recruited to and maintained at 
presynaptic compartments is required to discern the molecular mechanisms 
underlying presynaptic assembly and plasticity. We have previously demonstrated 
that cadherin-beta-catenin complexes cluster synaptic vesicles at presynaptic 
sites. Here we show that scribble interacts with the cadherin-beta-catenin 
complex to coordinate vesicle localization. Scribble and beta-catenin are 
colocalized at synapses and can be coimmunoprecipitated from neuronal lysates, 
indicating an interaction between scribble and beta-catenin at the synapse. 
Using an RNA interference approach, we demonstrate that scribble is important 
for the clustering of synaptic vesicles at synapses. Indeed, in scribble 
knockdown cells, there is a diffuse distribution of synaptic vesicles along the 
axon, and a deficit in vesicle recycling. Despite this, synapse number and the 
distribution of the presynaptic active zone protein, bassoon, remain unchanged. 
These effects largely phenocopy those observed after ablation of beta-catenin. 
In addition, we show that loss of beta-catenin disrupts scribble localization in 
primary neurons but that the localization of beta-catenin is not dependent on 
scribble. Our data supports a model by which scribble functions downstream of 
beta-catenin to cluster synaptic vesicles at developing synapses.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e08-12-1172
PMCID: PMC2710836
PMID: 19458197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

An understanding of how synaptic vesicles are recruited to and maintained at presynaptic compartments is required to discern the molecular mechanisms underlying presynaptic assembly and plasticity. We have previously demonstrated that cadherin–β-catenin complexes cluster synaptic vesicles at presynaptic sites. Here we show that scribble interacts with the cadherin–β-catenin complex to coordinate vesicle localization. Scribble and β-catenin are colocalized at synapses and can be coimmunoprecipitated from neuronal lysates, indicating an interaction between scribble and β-catenin at the synapse. Using an RNA interference approach, we demonstrate that scribble is important for the clustering of synaptic vesicles at synapses. Indeed, in scribble knockdown cells, there is a diffuse distribution of synaptic vesicles along the axon, and a deficit in vesicle recycling. Despite this, synapse number and the distribution of the presynaptic active zone protein, bassoon, remain unchanged. These effects largely phenocopy those observed after ablation of β -catenin . In addition, we show that loss of β-catenin disrupts scribble localization in primary neurons but that the localization of β-catenin is not dependent on scribble. Our data supports a model by which scribble functions downstream of β-catenin to cluster synaptic vesicles at developing synapses.

INTRODUCTION

Synapse formation begins with the recognition of appropriate targets and formation of incipient contacts and is followed by the recruitment of pre- and postsynaptic proteins to points of cell–cell contact ( Ziv and Garner, 2004 ). The formation of presynaptic active zones, sites of neurotransmitter release, is believed to occur by the insertion of large dense-core vesicles containing multiple active zone components in a preassembled form ( Ahmari et al. , 2000 ; Zhai et al. , 2001 ). Similarly, clusters of pleiomorphic vesicles associated with synaptic vesicle (SV) proteins are recruited and localized to regions underlying active zones ( Ziv and Garner, 2004 ). These elements were previously thought to be relatively stable in mature synapses; however, emerging evidence from time-lapse imaging suggests that there is constant movement of SVs and other synaptic proteins into and out of individual synapses ( Krueger et al. , 2003 ; Bamji et al. , 2006 ; Kalla et al. , 2006 ; Tsuriel et al. , 2006 ). Indeed, a high degree of sharing of SVs between synapses has been reported ( Darcy et al. , 2006a , b ) and may be important for regulating synapse maintenance, efficacy, and plasticity ( Staras, 2007 ). Elucidating the molecular mechanisms underlying SV recruitment and localization will therefore not only shed light on presynaptic assembly, but will also be informative with respect to mechanisms underlying presynaptic plasticity.

The cadherin–β-catenin adhesion complex has been shown to play a crucial role in the recruitment of SVs to synapses ( Iwai et al. , 2002 ; Togashi et al. , 2002 ; Bamji et al. , 2003 ; Jungling et al. , 2006 ). We have previously demonstrated that some of the effects of cadherin on SV localization are attributed to the function of its intracellular binding partner, β-catenin ( Bamji et al. , 2003 , 2006 ). Indeed, in the absence of β-catenin, SVs do not cluster at synapses, resulting in an impaired response to prolonged repetitive stimulation. Domain analyses reveal that the armadillo domain of β-catenin (which binds cadherin), as well as its C-terminal PDZ-binding motif, are essential for proper SV localization, indicating that β-catenin mediates this effect by acting as a scaffold to tether PDZ protein(s) to cadherin clusters ( Bamji et al. , 2003 ). Moreover, transient disruptions of cadherin–β-catenin interaction enhances the overall mobility of SVs and more specifically, enhances the efflux of SVs from established synapses ( Bamji et al. , 2006 ). As regulation of SV localization is thought to be involved in presynaptic plasticity during development, these data suggest that the cadherin–β-catenin adhesion complex may play a role in this process. However, thus far, it is unclear how cadherin–β-catenin complexes regulate SV localization.

Scribble, a member of the LAP (leucine-rich repeats and PDZ domains) protein family ( Yamanaka and Ohno, 2008 ), has been shown to localize to Drosophila neuromuscular junctions (NMJ; Mathew et al. , 2002 ), where it plays a role in regulating SV localization ( Roche et al. , 2002 ). Loss-of-function mutations in scribble result in an accumulation of SVs at the NMJ and a decreased number of presynaptic active zones ( Roche et al. , 2002 ). Moreover, several forms of plasticity are drastically altered in scribble mutants, accompanied by impaired vesicle dynamics ( Roche et al. , 2002 ). These results suggest that scribble is an essential regulator of SV turnover. A relationship between scribble and the cadherin–β-catenin complex has been demonstrated in various cell types and tissues ( Navarro et al. , 2005 ; Nguyen et al. , 2005 ; Kamei et al. , 2007 ). For instance, scribble has recently been shown to exist in a complex with β-catenin and adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) in the mouse brain ( Takizawa et al. , 2006 ). Our results suggest that scribble is recruited by β-catenin to presynaptic compartments, where it recruits SVs to developing synapses.

DISCUSSION

Increasing evidence suggests that there is a strong correlation between the number of SVs localized at presynaptic compartments and synaptic efficacy ( Murthy et al. , 2001 ; Cabin et al. , 2002 ; Taschenberger et al. , 2002 ; Bamji et al. , 2003 ; Thiagarajan et al. , 2005 ). As synapses mature, vesicle pool size and exocytotic efficiency (amount of exocytosis per Ca 2+ influx) increases, resulting in more effective transmission after bursts of neuronal activity ( Taschenberger et al. , 2002 ). Evidence suggests that altering neuronal activity can impact the number of SVs localized to the presynaptic zone of mature synapses. For example, when hippocampal synapses in culture are pharmacologically silenced for several days, synaptic strength increases. Among changes in other synaptic components, this corresponds to an increase in the total number of docked vesicles and the total number of vesicles per synapse ( Murthy et al. , 2001 ), as well as an increase in the rate of vesicle turnover ( Thiagarajan et al. , 2005 ). Changes in the number of SVs per synapse can also alter synaptic efficacy. Indeed, in both α-synuclein ( Cabin et al. , 2002 ) and β-catenin ( Bamji et al. , 2003 ) knockout mice, there is a decrease number of total SVs per synapse, and a concomitant impairment in the synaptic response to prolonged repetitive stimulation. Understanding the mechanism of SV localization to synapses is therefore essential to our understanding of synapse development and function.

Recent studies demonstrate that the cadherin–β-catenin adhesion complex plays a central role in recruiting and retaining SVs to synapses ( Iwai et al. , 2002 ; Togashi et al. , 2002 ; Bamji et al. , 2003 , 2006 ; Bamji et al. , 2006 ). β-Catenin was shown to act downstream of cadherin to mediate SV localization ( Bamji et al. , 2003 ). Because both the internal armadillo repeats that bind cadherin and the PDZ-binding motif of β-catenin are important for vesicle localization, β-catenin is believed to mediate SV clustering by acting as a scaffold ( Bamji et al. , 2003 ). In this study, we identify the PDZ protein downstream of β-catenin that localizes SVs to synapses. We demonstrate that β-catenin recruits scribble to synapses and forms a complex with scribble through its C-terminal PDZ-binding motif. Scribble, in turn, regulates the recruitment and localization of SVs.
