---
pmid: '26310625'
title: F-box protein 7 mutations promote protein aggregation in mitochondria and inhibit
  mitophagy.
authors:
- Zhou ZD
- Xie SP
- Sathiyamoorthy S
- Saw WT
- Sing TY
- Ng SH
- Chua HP
- Tang AM
- Shaffra F
- Li Z
- Wang H
- Ho PG
- Lai MK
- Angeles DC
- Lim TM
- Tan EK
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv340
---

# F-box protein 7 mutations promote protein aggregation in mitochondria and inhibit mitophagy.
**Authors:** Zhou ZD, Xie SP, Sathiyamoorthy S, Saw WT, Sing TY, Ng SH, Chua HP, Tang AM, Shaffra F, Li Z, Wang H, Ho PG, Lai MK, Angeles DC, Lim TM, Tan EK
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddv340](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddv340)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Nov 15;24(22):6314-30. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv340. Epub 2015 
Aug 26.

F-box protein 7 mutations promote protein aggregation in mitochondria and 
inhibit mitophagy.

Zhou ZD(1), Xie SP(2), Sathiyamoorthy S(2), Saw WT(2), Sing TY(2), Ng SH(2), 
Chua HP(2), Tang AM(2), Shaffra F(2), Li Z(2), Wang H(3), Ho PG(2), Lai MK(4), 
Angeles DC(5), Lim TM(6), Tan EK(7).

Author information:
(1)National Neuroscience Institute of Singapore, 11 Jalan Tan Tock Seng, 
Singapore, Singapore, Signature Research Program in Neuroscience and Behavioral 
Disorders, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School Singapore, 8 College Road, 
Singapore, Singapore.
(2)National Neuroscience Institute of Singapore, 11 Jalan Tan Tock Seng, 
Singapore, Singapore.
(3)Signature Research Program in Neuroscience and Behavioral Disorders, Duke-NUS 
Graduate Medical School Singapore, 8 College Road, Singapore, Singapore.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National 
University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(5)Department of Neurology, Singapore General Hospital, Outram Road, Singapore, 
Singapore and.
(6)Department of Biological Science, National University of Singapore, 14 
Science Drive 4, Singapore, Singapore.
(7)National Neuroscience Institute of Singapore, 11 Jalan Tan Tock Seng, 
Singapore, Singapore, Signature Research Program in Neuroscience and Behavioral 
Disorders, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School Singapore, 8 College Road, 
Singapore, Singapore, Department of Neurology, Singapore General Hospital, 
Outram Road, Singapore, Singapore and gnrtek@sgh.com.sg.

The mutations of F-box protein 7 (FBXO7) gene (T22M, R378G and R498X) are 
associated with a severe form of autosomal recessive juvenile-onset Parkinson's 
disease (PD) (PARK 15). Here we demonstrated that wild-type (WT) FBXO7 is a 
stress response protein and it can play both cytoprotective and neurotoxic 
roles. The WT FBXO7 protein is vital to cell mitophagy and can facilitate 
mitophagy to protect cells, whereas mutant FBXO7 inhibits mitophagy. Upon 
stress, the endogenous WT FBXO7 gets up-regulated, concentrates into 
mitochondria and forms FBXO7 aggregates in mitochondria. However, FBXO7 
mutations aggravate deleterious FBXO7 aggregation in mitochondria. The FBXO7 
aggregation and toxicity can be alleviated by Proline, glutathione (GSH) and 
coenzyme Q10, whereas deleterious FBXO7 aggregation in mitochondria can be 
aggravated by prohibitin 1 (PHB1), a mitochondrial protease inhibitor. The 
overexpression of WT FBXO7 could lead to FBXO7 protein aggregation and dopamine 
neuron degeneration in transgenic Drosophila heads. The elevated FBXO7 
expression and aggregation were identified in human fibroblast cells from PD 
patients. FBXO7 can also form aggregates in brains of PD and Alzheimer's 
disease. Our study provides novel pathophysiologic insights and suggests that 
FBXO7 may be a potential therapeutic target in FBXO7-linked neuron degeneration 
in PD.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddv340
PMID: 26310625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
