---
pmid: '18445495'
title: LRRK2 regulates synaptic vesicle endocytosis.
authors:
- Shin N
- Jeong H
- Kwon J
- Heo HY
- Kwon JJ
- Yun HJ
- Kim CH
- Han BS
- Tong Y
- Shen J
- Hatano T
- Hattori N
- Kim KS
- Chang S
- Seol W
journal: Exp Cell Res
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2008.02.015
---

# LRRK2 regulates synaptic vesicle endocytosis.
**Authors:** Shin N, Jeong H, Kwon J, Heo HY, Kwon JJ, Yun HJ, Kim CH, Han BS, Tong Y, Shen J, Hatano T, Hattori N, Kim KS, Chang S, Seol W
**Journal:** Exp Cell Res (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yexcr.2008.02.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yexcr.2008.02.015)

## Abstract

1. Exp Cell Res. 2008 Jun 10;314(10):2055-65. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2008.02.015. 
Epub 2008 Mar 5.

LRRK2 regulates synaptic vesicle endocytosis.

Shin N(1), Jeong H, Kwon J, Heo HY, Kwon JJ, Yun HJ, Kim CH, Han BS, Tong Y, 
Shen J, Hatano T, Hattori N, Kim KS, Chang S, Seol W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science, GIST, Buk-gu, Gwangju, South Korea.

The leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) has been identified as the defective 
gene at the PARK8 locus causing the autosomal dominant form of Parkinson's 
disease (PD). Although several LRRK2 mutations were found in familial as well as 
sporadic PD patients, its physiological functions are not clearly defined. In 
this study, using yeast two-hybrid screening, we report the identification of 
Rab5b as an LRRK2-interacting protein. Indeed, our GST pull down and 
co-immunoprecipitation assays showed that it specifically interacts with LRRK2. 
In addition, subcellular fractionation and immunocytochemical analyses confirmed 
that a fraction of both proteins co-localize in synaptic vesicles. 
Interestingly, we found that alteration of LRRK2 expression by either 
overexpression or knockdown of endogenous LRRK2 in primary neuronal cells 
significantly impairs synaptic vesicle endocytosis. Furthermore, this 
endocytosis defect was rescued by co-expression of functional Rab5b protein, but 
not by its inactive form. Taken together, we propose that LRRK2, in conjunction 
with its interaction with Rab5b, plays an important role in synaptic function by 
modulating the endocytosis of synaptic vesicles.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2008.02.015
PMID: 18445495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
