---
pmid: '23684459'
title: Phosphorylation of EZH2 activates STAT3 signaling via STAT3 methylation and
  promotes tumorigenicity of glioblastoma stem-like cells.
authors:
- Kim E
- Kim M
- Woo DH
- Shin Y
- Shin J
- Chang N
- Oh YT
- Kim H
- Rheey J
- Nakano I
- Lee C
- Joo KM
- Rich JN
- Nam DH
- Lee J
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4109796
doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2013.04.008
---

# Phosphorylation of EZH2 activates STAT3 signaling via STAT3 methylation and promotes tumorigenicity of glioblastoma stem-like cells.
**Authors:** Kim E, Kim M, Woo DH, Shin Y, Shin J, Chang N, Oh YT, Kim H, Rheey J, Nakano I, Lee C, Joo KM, Rich JN, Nam DH, Lee J
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccr.2013.04.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2013.04.008)
**PMC:** [PMC4109796](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4109796/)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Cell. 2013 Jun 10;23(6):839-52. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2013.04.008. Epub
2013  May 16.

Phosphorylation of EZH2 activates STAT3 signaling via STAT3 methylation and 
promotes tumorigenicity of glioblastoma stem-like cells.

Kim E(1), Kim M, Woo DH, Shin Y, Shin J, Chang N, Oh YT, Kim H, Rheey J, Nakano 
I, Lee C, Joo KM, Rich JN, Nam DH, Lee J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Lerner Research 
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2013 Jun 10;23(6):711-3. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2013.05.016.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) displays cellular hierarchies harboring a 
subpopulation of stem-like cells (GSCs). Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2 (EZH2), the 
lysine methyltransferase of Polycomb repressive complex 2, mediates 
transcriptional repression of prodifferentiation genes in both normal and 
neoplastic stem cells. An oncogenic role of EZH2 as a transcriptional silencer 
is well established; however, additional functions of EZH2 are incompletely 
understood. Here, we show that EZH2 binds to and methylates STAT3, leading to 
enhanced STAT3 activity by increased tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT3. The 
EZH2-STAT3 interaction preferentially occurs in GSCs relative to non-stem bulk 
tumor cells, and it requires a specific phosphorylation of EZH2. Inhibition of 
EZH2 reverses the silencing of Polycomb target genes and diminishes STAT3 
activity, suggesting therapeutic strategies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccr.2013.04.008
PMCID: PMC4109796
PMID: 23684459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
