---
pmid: '17449468'
title: RBCK1 negatively regulates tumor necrosis factor- and interleukin-1-triggered
  NF-kappaB activation by targeting TAB2/3 for degradation.
authors:
- Tian Y
- Zhang Y
- Zhong B
- Wang YY
- Diao FC
- Wang RP
- Zhang M
- Chen DY
- Zhai ZH
- Shu HB
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M701913200
---

# RBCK1 negatively regulates tumor necrosis factor- and interleukin-1-triggered NF-kappaB activation by targeting TAB2/3 for degradation.
**Authors:** Tian Y, Zhang Y, Zhong B, Wang YY, Diao FC, Wang RP, Zhang M, Chen DY, Zhai ZH, Shu HB
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M701913200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M701913200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jun 8;282(23):16776-82. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M701913200. Epub
2007  Apr 20.

RBCK1 negatively regulates tumor necrosis factor- and interleukin-1-triggered 
NF-kappaB activation by targeting TAB2/3 for degradation.

Tian Y(1), Zhang Y, Zhong B, Wang YY, Diao FC, Wang RP, Zhang M, Chen DY, Zhai 
ZH, Shu HB.

Author information:
(1)College of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

Inflammation is a homeostatic mechanism that limits the effects of infectious 
agents. Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and interleukin (IL)-1 are two cytokines 
that induce inflammation through activation of the transcription factor 
NF-kappaB. Various studies have suggested that two homologous and structurally 
related adapter proteins TAB2 and TAB3 play redundant roles in TNF- and 
IL-1-mediated NF-kappaB activation pathways. Both TAB2 and TAB3 contain CUE, 
coiled-coil, and nuclear protein localization 4 zinc finger (NZF) domains. The 
NZF domains of TAB2/3 are critical for TAB2/3 to bind to Lys(63)-linked 
polyubiquitin chains of other adaptor proteins, such as receptor-interacting 
protein and TRAF6, which are two signaling proteins essential for TNF- and 
IL-1-induced NF-kappaB activation, respectively. In a search for proteins 
containing NZF domains conserved with those of TAB2/3, we identified RBCK1, 
which has been shown to act as an E3 ubiquitin ligase in iron metabolism. 
Overexpression of RBCK1 negatively regulates TAB2/3-mediated and TNF- and 
IL-1-induced NF-kappaB activation, whereas knockdown of RBCK1 by RNA 
interference potentiates TNF- and IL-1-induced NF-kappaB activation. RBCK1 
physically interacts with TAB2/3 and facilitates degradation of TAB2/3 through a 
proteasome-dependent process. Taken together, our findings suggest that RBCK1 is 
involved in negative regulation of inflammatory signaling triggered by TNF and 
IL-1 through targeting TAB2/3 for degradation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M701913200
PMID: 17449468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
