---
pmid: '21097510'
title: DJ-1 enhances cell survival through the binding of Cezanne, a negative regulator
  of NF-kappaB.
authors:
- McNally RS
- Davis BK
- Clements CM
- Accavitti-Loper MA
- Mak TW
- Ting JP
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3039338
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.147371
---

# DJ-1 enhances cell survival through the binding of Cezanne, a negative regulator of NF-kappaB.
**Authors:** McNally RS, Davis BK, Clements CM, Accavitti-Loper MA, Mak TW, Ting JP
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110.147371](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.147371)
**PMC:** [PMC3039338](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3039338/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Feb 11;286(6):4098-106. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.147371. Epub 
2010 Nov 19.

DJ-1 enhances cell survival through the binding of Cezanne, a negative regulator 
of NF-kappaB.

McNally RS(1), Davis BK, Clements CM, Accavitti-Loper MA, Mak TW, Ting JP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599-7295, 
USA.

Heightened DJ-1 (Park7) expression is associated with a reduction in 
chemotherapeutic-induced cell death and poor prognosis in several cancers, 
whereas the loss of DJ-1 function is found in a subgroup of Parkinson disease 
associated with neuronal death. This study describes a novel pathway by which 
DJ-1 modulates cell survival. Mass spectrometry shows that DJ-1 interacts with 
BBS1, CLCF1, MTREF, and Cezanne/OTUD7B/Za20d1. Among these, Cezanne is a known 
deubiquitination enzyme that inhibits NF-κB activity. DJ-1/Cezanne interaction 
is confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation of overexpressed and endogenous proteins, 
maps to the amino-terminal 70 residues of DJ-1, and leads to the inhibition of 
the deubiquitinating activity of Cezanne. Microarray profiling of 
shRNA-transduced cells shows that DJ-1 and Cezanne regulate IL-8 and ICAM-1 
expression in opposing directions. Similarly, DJ-1 enhances NF-κB nuclear 
translocation and cell survival, whereas Cezanne reduces these outcomes. 
Analysis of mouse Park7(-/-) primary cells confirms the regulation of ICAM-1 by 
DJ-1 and Cezanne. As NF-κB is important in cellular survival and transformation, 
IL-8 functions as an angiogenic factor and pro-survival signal, and ICAM-1 has 
been implicated in tumor progression, invasion, and metastasis; these data 
provide an additional modality by which DJ-1 controls cell survival and possibly 
tumor progression via interaction with Cezanne.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.147371
PMCID: PMC3039338
PMID: 21097510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Heightened DJ-1 (Park7) expression is associated with a reduction in chemotherapeutic-induced cell death and poor prognosis in several cancers, whereas the loss of DJ-1 function is found in a subgroup of Parkinson disease associated with neuronal death. This study describes a novel pathway by which DJ-1 modulates cell survival. Mass spectrometry shows that DJ-1 interacts with BBS1, CLCF1, MTREF, and Cezanne/OTUD7B/Za20d1. Among these, Cezanne is a known deubiquitination enzyme that inhibits NF-κB activity. DJ-1/Cezanne interaction is confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation of overexpressed and endogenous proteins, maps to the amino-terminal 70 residues of DJ-1, and leads to the inhibition of the deubiquitinating activity of Cezanne. Microarray profiling of shRNA-transduced cells shows that DJ-1 and Cezanne regulate IL-8 and ICAM-1 expression in opposing directions. Similarly, DJ-1 enhances NF-κB nuclear translocation and cell survival, whereas Cezanne reduces these outcomes. Analysis of mouse Park7 −/− primary cells confirms the regulation of ICAM-1 by DJ-1 and Cezanne. As NF-κB is important in cellular survival and transformation, IL-8 functions as an angiogenic factor and pro-survival signal, and ICAM-1 has been implicated in tumor progression, invasion, and metastasis; these data provide an additional modality by which DJ-1 controls cell survival and possibly tumor progression via interaction with Cezanne.

Introduction

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related mortality in the world. It is estimated that over 215,000 new cases were diagnosed in the United States in 2008 alone ( 1 ). Of the two major types of lung cancer, 85% are non-small cell lung carcinomas (NSCLC) 2 ( 2 ). With NSCLC, the best chance for a long term cure is surgery. Unfortunately, 70% of NSCLC patients are initially contraindicated for surgery due to locally invasive or metastatic disease ( 3 ). For these patients, the current treatment options are a combination of chemotherapy and radiation. With treatment, NSCLC patients have a 5-year survival rate of 15%. It is therefore imperative to investigate new pathways to target in NSCLC. Our work in the H157 NSCLC squamous cell line has focused on the role of DJ-1.

DJ-1 is associated with a spectrum of human disease. Loss of DJ-1 activity, due to inactivation by mutation or genetic deletion, causes early onset Parkinson disease with high penetrance ( 4 ). Due to the protective effects of DJ-1 against toxic insults, this association is hypothesized to be due to a protective role of DJ-1 in dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra ( 5 – 7 ). As loss of DJ-1 activity leads to neuronal cell death, increased DJ-1 activity can promote cell survival, leading to its association with human malignancies. Initial research on the role of DJ-1 in cancer showed that although DJ-1 can weakly transform cells alone, it can act synergistically in combination with Ras ( 8 ). DJ-1 is highly expressed in a number of cancer types including acute leukemia, breast, prostate, ovarian, and thyroid cancer, and NSCLC and is associated with tumor progression in esophageal and cervical cancer ( 9 – 15 ). Our laboratory and others have shown that increased DJ-1 expression confers protection against toxic insults including oxidative and endoplasmic reticulum stress, proteasome inhibition, and chemotherapeutic agents ( 16 – 18 ). This protection is partially mediated by the ability of DJ-1 to inhibit p53 and Phosphatase and Tensin homolog (PTEN), an inhibitor of the PI3K cell survival pathway, and to positively regulate the Nrf2 detoxification pathway ( 15 , 19 , 20 ). Here we examine a novel pathway in which DJ-1 binds to and inhibits Cezanne, a negative regulator of the cell survival-associated transcription factor NF-κB.

Cezanne is a member of the A20 family of deubiquitination enzymes ( 21 ). Similar to A20, Cezanne has been shown to inhibit NF-κB through modulation of the ubiquitination state of two of its positive regulators, RIP-1 and TRAF6 ( 21 , 22 ). Cezanne is implicated in cancer biology as a 93-kb sequence containing Cezanne was shown to be duplicated in acute lymphoblastic leukemia and Burkitt lymphoma ( 23 ). Although the precise role of Cezanne in cancer is unknown, its inhibition of NF-κB would suggest that Cezanne may act as a tumor suppressor.

Although typically associated with regulating the inflammatory response to infection or injury, NF-κB subunits are constitutively activated in a number of human carcinomas ( 24 – 26 ). This family of transcription factors plays a role in cancer cell survival, angiogenesis, invasion, progression, and metastasis. Two important targets of NF-κB-mediated transcription in relation to cancer are interleukin 8 ( IL-8 ) and intercellular adhesion molecule 1 ( ICAM-1 ). These two proteins are involved in the homing and extravasation of neutrophils from the blood into inflamed tissues but have additional functions in cancer biology. IL-8 expression has been associated with cancer progression, invasion, angiogenesis, and metastasis ( 27 – 33 ). It is also secreted by certain NSCLC cell lines, including H157 cells, in response to Paclitaxel treatment, activating a pro-survival-positive feedback loop via signaling through the CXCR1 receptor ( 34 , 35 ). Blockade of IL-8 binding to its receptor causes a decrease in tumor size, angiogenesis, tumor growth, and metastasis while promoting cancer cell apoptosis ( 36 ). ICAM-1 is highly expressed in multiple human cancers as well ( 37 – 39 ). Although it has not been associated with effects on cancer cell survival, ICAM-1 has been linked to both tumor progression and metastasis through its ability to mediate cell adhesion and extravagation ( 33 , 40 , 41 ).

In this study, we identify Cezanne as a binding partner of DJ-1. This interaction can be mediated by the amino terminus of DJ-1 and leads to the inhibition of the deubiquitinating activity of Cezanne in vitro . Microarray analysis on H157 cells shows that DJ-1 and Cezanne shRNAs regulate IL-8 and ICAM-1 gene expression, albeit in opposing directions. DJ-1 and Cezanne shRNA treatments also result in reciprocal phenotypes in chemotherapeutic-induced cell death and NF-κB nuclear localization in vitro . Finally, we analyzed ICAM-1 expression in Park7 −/− mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) to verify that this pathway is intact in a primary cell line. These findings identify a novel pathway through which DJ-1 modulates a number of critical aspects of cancer cell biology as well as uncovering a potential role of DJ-1 in leukocyte migration and inflammation. This work emphasizes the importance of future research on pharmacologic inhibitors of the DJ-1/Cezanne pathway and the role of DJ-1 in cancer biology in vivo .

DISCUSSION

Due to the prominent link between DJ-1 genetic inactivation and early onset Parkinson disease in humans, a large portion of the DJ-1 literature has focused on the role of DJ-1 in neuronal cell death ( 48 , 49 ). That work uncovered a broader role of DJ-1 in cell survival outside of the nervous system. DJ-1 has been shown to be a central molecule in cell survival by positively regulating Nrf2-dependent detoxification pathways ( 19 ), inhibiting p53-mediated cell cycle checkpoints ( 20 ) possibly via caspase-6 ( 51 ), and inducing Akt activity through the inhibition of Phosphatase and Tensin homolog (PTEN) ( 15 ). Likely due to its effects on cell survival, DJ-1 has been found to be dysregulated in several human cancers ( 8 , 11 , 12 , 16 ). Increased expression of DJ-1 has been shown in a number of human carcinomas and is associated with negative survival outcomes and resistance to chemotherapeutics.

In this study, we identify a novel pathway by which DJ-1 modulates IL-8 and ICAM-1 levels through the regulation of Cezanne activity and NF-κB nuclear localization. Using a proteomic approach, we identify four binding partners of DJ-1. One of these DJ-1 binding partners, Cezanne, is a member of the A20 family of immunoregulatory deubiquitinating enzymes. Similar to A20, Cezanne is known to inhibit NF-κB through modulation of the ubiquitination status of RIP-1 and TRAF6 ( 21 , 22 ). NF-κB, a cell survival-associated transcription factor, is known to be dysregulated in a variety of cancer types including NSCLC ( 24 – 26 , 50 ). After confirming endogenous interaction of DJ-1 and Cezanne, we showed that the DJ-1/Cezanne interaction is enhanced by oxidation of the Cys-106 residue of DJ-1 and that the amino terminus of DJ-1 is sufficient to mediate this interaction. The interaction also leads to the inhibition of the deubiquitinating activity of Cezanne in vitro . We used microarray analysis to identify the transcriptional targets and thus the pathways regulated by the DJ-1/Cezanne interaction. DJ-1 and Cezanne shRNA were found to reciprocally regulate ICAM-1 and IL-8 . As ICAM-1 and IL-8 are targets of NF-κB, this datum suggests a role of DJ-1 and Cezanne in NF-κB-mediated transcription, whereas no role of Cezanne was seen in Nrf2-mediated transcription as downstream targets of Nrf2 were unchanged in the presence of Cezanne shRNA. This link between DJ-1 and NF-κB was confirmed as nuclear p65 was found to be decreased in the presence of DJ-1 shRNA, making this work the first to identify DJ-1 as a positive regulator of NF-κB.

IL-8 is released by a subset of NSCLC cell lines in response to chemotherapy treatment ( 34 ). As IL-8 is a pro-survival signal, this IL-8 release can inhibit chemotherapeutic efficacy ( 32 ). Acting in an autocrine or paracrine fashion to activate NF-κB through stimulation of the CXCR1 receptor, IL-8 causes its continued release, completing a pro-survival-positive feedback loop ( 34 , 35 ). Through inhibition of DJ-1 or activation of Cezanne, we can disrupt this IL-8-controlled pro-survival loop, thus increasing the sensitivity of IL-8 secreting tumors to chemotherapeutics ( 36 ). Aside from its effects on cell survival, IL-8 has been shown to promote angiogenesis, cancer progression, invasion, and metastasis ( 27 , 29 – 33 ). Concordant with IL-8, ICAM-1 dysregulation has been associated with tumor progress, invasion, and metastasis ( 33 , 40 , 41 ). Through regulation of IL-8 and ICAM-1, DJ-1 and Cezanne may impact angiogenesis and tumor progression, leading to changes in tumor growth and survival in in vivo cancer models separate from their effects on cell survival and drug efficacy seen in vitro .

As a whole, we identify DJ-1 as a positive regulator of cancer cell survival via a cell type-specific pathway that controls IL-8 and ICAM-1 expression. The pro-cancer activities of these molecules are well documented. However, IL-8 is also a potent chemotactic molecule for infiltrating inflammatory cells such as neutrophils. Therefore IL-8 has manifold roles during carcinogenesis. In an autocrine role, it contributes to cell, survival but in a cancer cell-autonomous role, it facilitates the recruitment of infiltrating inflammatory cells such as neutrophils. Future studies will need to be conducted to confirm that this pathway is mediated through the deubiquitination of RIP-1 and TRAF6 by Cezanne as well as identify other NF-κB targets regulated by DJ-1 under cell stimulation. Finally, mouse tumor models will be necessary to examine the effects of DJ-1 and Cezanne expression on tumor growth and inflammation in vivo .

Due to the central role of DJ-1 in transcriptional regulation, identification of DJ-1 inhibitors may lead to novel treatment regimens that modulate cancer hallmarks including cancer cell growth, survival, angiogenesis, progression, invasion, and metastasis as well as boosting the efficacy of current chemotherapeutics.
