---
pmid: '15644318'
title: BIG1 is a binding partner of myosin IXb and regulates its Rho-GTPase activating
  protein activity.
authors:
- Saeki N
- Tokuo H
- Ikebe M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M413415200
---

# BIG1 is a binding partner of myosin IXb and regulates its Rho-GTPase activating protein activity.
**Authors:** Saeki N, Tokuo H, Ikebe M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M413415200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M413415200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Mar 18;280(11):10128-34. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M413415200. Epub 
2005 Jan 11.

BIG1 is a binding partner of myosin IXb and regulates its Rho-GTPase activating 
protein activity.

Saeki N(1), Tokuo H, Ikebe M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 55 Lake 
Ave., Worcester, Massachusetts 01655, USA.

Myosin IXb, a member of the myosin superfamily, is a molecular motor that 
possesses a GTPase activating protein (GAP) for Rho. Through the yeast 
two-hybrid screening using the tail domain of myosin IXb as bait we found BIG1, 
a guanine nucleotide exchange factor for ADP-ribosylation factor (Arf1), as a 
potential binding partner for myosin IXb. The interaction between myosin IXb and 
BIG1 was demonstrated by co-immunoprecipitation of endogenous myosin IXb and 
BIG1 with anti-BIG1 antibodies in normal rat kidney cells. Using the isolated 
proteins, it was demonstrated that myosin IXb and BIG1 directly bind to each 
other. Various truncation mutants of the myosin IXb tail domain were produced, 
and it was revealed that the binding region of myosin IXb to BIG1 is the zinc 
finger/GAP domain. Interestingly, the GAP activity of myosin IXb was 
significantly inhibited by the addition of BIG1 with IC(50) of 0.06 microm. The 
RhoA binding to myosin IXb was inhibited by the addition of BIG1 with the 
concentration similar to the inhibition of the GAP activity. Likewise, RhoA 
inhibited the BIG1 binding of myosin IXb. These results suggest that BIG1 and 
RhoA compete with each other for the binding to myosin IXb, thus resulting in 
the inhibition of the GAP activity by BIG1. The present study identified BIG1, 
the Arf guanine nucleotide exchange factor, as a new binding partner for myosin 
IXb, which inhibited the GAP activity of myosin IXb. The findings raise a 
concept that the myosin transports the signaling molecule as a cargo that 
functions as a regulator for the myosin molecule.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M413415200
PMID: 15644318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
