---
pmid: '28602820'
title: Structural Basis for Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor-Mediated Gene Activation.
authors:
- Schulte KW
- Green E
- Wilz A
- Platten M
- Daumke O
journal: Structure
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.str.2017.05.008
---

# Structural Basis for Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor-Mediated Gene Activation.
**Authors:** Schulte KW, Green E, Wilz A, Platten M, Daumke O
**Journal:** Structure (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.str.2017.05.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2017.05.008)

## Abstract

1. Structure. 2017 Jul 5;25(7):1025-1033.e3. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2017.05.008. Epub
 2017 Jun 9.

Structural Basis for Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor-Mediated Gene Activation.

Schulte KW(1), Green E(2), Wilz A(3), Platten M(4), Daumke O(5).

Author information:
(1)Crystallography Department, Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, 
Robert-Rössle-Strasse 10, 13125 Berlin, Germany; Institute of Chemistry and 
Biochemistry, Freie Universität Berlin, Takustrasse 6, 14195 Berlin, Germany.
(2)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Heidelberg and National Center 
for Tumor Diseases, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany; Clinical Cooperation Unit 
Neuroimmunology and Brain Tumor Immunology, German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), 
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Clinical Cooperation Unit Neuroimmunology and Brain Tumor Immunology, German 
Cancer Consortium (DKTK), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 69120 
Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Heidelberg and National Center 
for Tumor Diseases, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany; Clinical Cooperation Unit 
Neuroimmunology and Brain Tumor Immunology, German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), 
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 69120 Heidelberg, Germany; Department of 
Neurology, Universitätsmedizin Mannheim, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg 
University, 68167 Mannheim, Germany. Electronic address: m.platten@dkfz.de.
(5)Crystallography Department, Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, 
Robert-Rössle-Strasse 10, 13125 Berlin, Germany; Institute of Chemistry and 
Biochemistry, Freie Universität Berlin, Takustrasse 6, 14195 Berlin, Germany. 
Electronic address: oliver.daumke@mdc-berlin.de.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and the AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT) 
constitute a heterodimeric basic helix-loop-helix-Per-ARNT-Sim (bHLH-PAS) domain 
containing transcription factor with central functions in development and 
cellular homeostasis. AHR is activated by xenobiotics, notably dioxin, as well 
as by exogenous and endogenous metabolites. Modulation of AHR activity holds 
promise for the treatment of diseases featuring altered cellular homeostasis, 
such as cancer or autoimmune disorders. Here, we present the crystal structure 
of a heterodimeric AHR:ARNT complex containing the PAS A and bHLH domain bound 
to its target DNA. The structure provides insights into the DNA binding mode of 
AHR and elucidates how stable dimerization of AHR:ARNT is achieved through 
sophisticated domain interplay via three specific interfaces. Using mutational 
analyses, we prove the relevance of the observed interfaces for AHR-mediated 
gene activation. Thus, our work establishes the structural basis of AHR assembly 
and DNA interaction and provides a template for targeted drug design.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2017.05.008
PMID: 28602820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
