---
pmid: '9256426'
title: Significance of chaperonin 10-mediated inhibition of ATP hydrolysis by chaperonin
  60.
authors:
- Dubaquié Y
- Looser R
- Rospert S
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC23004
doi: 10.1073/pnas.94.17.9011
---

# Significance of chaperonin 10-mediated inhibition of ATP hydrolysis by chaperonin 60.
**Authors:** Dubaquié Y, Looser R, Rospert S
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.94.17.9011](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.94.17.9011)
**PMC:** [PMC23004](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC23004/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Aug 19;94(17):9011-6. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.94.17.9011.

Significance of chaperonin 10-mediated inhibition of ATP hydrolysis by 
chaperonin 60.

Dubaquié Y(1), Looser R, Rospert S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Biozentrum der Universität Basel, 
Klingelbergstrasse 70, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland.

Chaperonins are essential for the folding of proteins in bacteria, mitochondria, 
and chloroplasts. We have functionally characterized the yeast mitochondrial 
chaperonins hsp60 and hsp10. In the presence of ADP, one molecule of hsp10 binds 
to hsp60 with an apparent Kd of 0.9 nM and a second molecule of hsp10 binds with 
a Kd of 24 nM. In the presence of ATP, the purified yeast chaperonins mediate 
the refolding of mitochondrial malate dehydrogenase. Hsp10 inhibits the ATPase 
activity of hsp60 by about 40%. Hsp10(P36H) is a point mutant of hsp10 that 
confers temperature-sensitive growth to yeast. Consistent with the in vivo 
phenotype, refolding of mitochondrial malate dehydrogenase in the presence of 
purified hsp10(P36H) and hsp60 is reduced at 25 degrees C and abolished at 30 
degrees C. The affinity of hsp10(P36H) to hsp60 as well as to Escherichia coli 
GroEL is reduced. However, this decrease in affinity does not correlate with the 
functional defect, because hsp10(P36H) fully assists the GroEL-mediated 
refolding of malate dehydrogenase at 30 degrees C. Refolding activity, rather, 
correlates with the ability of hsp10(P36H) to inhibit the ATPase of GroEL but 
not that of hsp60. Based on our findings, we propose that the inhibition of ATP 
hydrolysis is mechanistically coupled to chaperonin-mediated protein folding.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.94.17.9011
PMCID: PMC23004
PMID: 9256426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
