---
pmid: '11557028'
title: 'Human L-type amino acid transporter 1 (LAT1): characterization of function
  and expression in tumor cell lines.'
authors:
- Yanagida O
- Kanai Y
- Chairoungdua A
- Kim DK
- Segawa H
- Nii T
- Cha SH
- Matsuo H
- Fukushima J
- Fukasawa Y
- Tani Y
- Taketani Y
- Uchino H
- Kim JY
- Inatomi J
- Okayasu I
- Miyamoto K
- Takeda E
- Goya T
- Endou H
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0005-2736(01)00384-4
---

# Human L-type amino acid transporter 1 (LAT1): characterization of function and expression in tumor cell lines.
**Authors:** Yanagida O, Kanai Y, Chairoungdua A, Kim DK, Segawa H, Nii T, Cha SH, Matsuo H, Fukushima J, Fukasawa Y, Tani Y, Taketani Y, Uchino H, Kim JY, Inatomi J, Okayasu I, Miyamoto K, Takeda E, Goya T, Endou H
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0005-2736(01)00384-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0005-2736(01)00384-4)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2001 Oct 1;1514(2):291-302. doi: 
10.1016/s0005-2736(01)00384-4.

Human L-type amino acid transporter 1 (LAT1): characterization of function and 
expression in tumor cell lines.

Yanagida O(1), Kanai Y, Chairoungdua A, Kim DK, Segawa H, Nii T, Cha SH, Matsuo 
H, Fukushima J, Fukasawa Y, Tani Y, Taketani Y, Uchino H, Kim JY, Inatomi J, 
Okayasu I, Miyamoto K, Takeda E, Goya T, Endou H.

Author information:
(1)Second Department of Surgery, Kyorin University School of Medicine, Mitaka, 
Tokyo, Japan.

System L is a major nutrient transport system responsible for the transport of 
large neutral amino acids including several essential amino acids. We previously 
identified a transporter (L-type amino acid transporter 1: LAT1) subserving 
system L in C6 rat glioma cells and demonstrated that LAT1 requires 4F2 heavy 
chain (4F2hc) for its functional expression. Since its oncofetal expression was 
suggested in the rat liver, it has been proposed that LAT1 plays a critical role 
in cell growth and proliferation. In the present study, we have examined the 
function of human LAT1 (hLAT1) and its expression in human tissues and tumor 
cell lines. When expressed in Xenopus oocytes with human 4F2hc (h4F2hc), hLAT1 
transports large neutral amino acids with high affinity (K(m)= approximately 15- 
approximately 50 microM) and L-glutamine and L-asparagine with low affinity 
(K(m)= approximately 1.5- approximately 2 mM). hLAT1 also transports D-amino 
acids such as D-leucine and D-phenylalanine. In addition, we show that hLAT1 
accepts an amino acid-related anti-cancer agent melphalan. When loaded 
intracellularly, L-leucine and L-glutamine but not L-alanine are effluxed by 
extracellular substrates, confirming that hLAT1 mediates an amino acid exchange. 
hLAT1 mRNA is highly expressed in the human fetal liver, bone marrow, placenta, 
testis and brain. We have found that, while all the tumor cell lines examined 
express hLAT1 messages, the expression of h4F2hc is varied particularly in 
leukemia cell lines. In Western blot analysis, hLAT1 and h4F2hc have been 
confirmed to be linked to each other via a disulfide bond in T24 human bladder 
carcinoma cells. Finally, in in vitro translation, we show that hLAT1 is not a 
glycosylated protein even though an N-glycosylation site has been predicted in 
its extracellular loop, consistent with the property of the classical 4F2 light 
chain. The properties of the hLAT1/h4F2hc complex would support the roles of 
this transporter in providing cells with essential amino acids for cell growth 
and cellular responses, and in distributing amino acid-related compounds.

DOI: 10.1016/s0005-2736(01)00384-4
PMID: 11557028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
