---
pmid: '29196474'
title: Inflammasome activation and assembly at a glance.
authors:
- Malik A
- Kanneganti TD
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2017'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC5769591
doi: 10.1242/jcs.207365
---

# Inflammasome activation and assembly at a glance.
**Authors:** Malik A, Kanneganti TD
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.207365](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.207365)
**PMC:** [PMC5769591](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5769591/)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2017 Dec 1;130(23):3955-3963. doi: 10.1242/jcs.207365.

Inflammasome activation and assembly at a glance.

Malik A(1), Kanneganti TD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 
38105, USA.
(2)Department of Immunology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 
38105, USA thirumala-devi.kanneganti@stjude.org.

Inflammasomes are multimeric protein complexes that typically comprise a sensor, 
an adaptor and the zymogen procaspase-1. An inflammasome assembles in response 
to a diverse range of pathogen-associated or danger-associated molecular 
patterns (PAMPs or DAMPs). The inflammasome platform leads to activation of 
caspase-1 through proximity-induced self-cleavage, which further induces 
maturation of interleukins 1β and 18 (IL-1β and IL-18) through proteolytic 
cleavage of pro-IL-1β and pro-IL-18. Activated caspase-1 also cleaves gasdermin 
D, which leads to a particular form of cell death called pyroptosis. Mutations 
in genes that encode inflammasome components are associated with many 
inflammatory disorders, and studies in the past decade have highlighted the 
importance of appropriate activation of the inflammasome in homeostasis and 
disease pathogenesis. Therefore, much attention is being paid to uncover the 
modulators and regulators of inflammasome assembly and pyroptosis. This Cell 
Science at a Glance article and accompanying poster outlines the concepts in the 
activation of inflammasome sensors and assembly of the inflammasome platform. We 
also discuss recent insights into the mechanisms of regulation of inflammasome 
activity and the induction of cell death by pyroptosis.

© 2017. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.207365
PMCID: PMC5769591
PMID: 29196474 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

ABSTRACT

Inflammasomes are multimeric protein complexes that typically comprise a sensor, an adaptor and the zymogen procaspase-1. An inflammasome assembles in response to a diverse range of pathogen-associated or danger-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs or DAMPs). The inflammasome platform leads to activation of caspase-1 through proximity-induced self-cleavage, which further induces maturation of interleukins 1β and 18 (IL-1β and IL-18) through proteolytic cleavage of pro-IL-1β and pro-IL-18. Activated caspase-1 also cleaves gasdermin D, which leads to a particular form of cell death called pyroptosis. Mutations in genes that encode inflammasome components are associated with many inflammatory disorders, and studies in the past decade have highlighted the importance of appropriate activation of the inflammasome in homeostasis and disease pathogenesis. Therefore, much attention is being paid to uncover the modulators and regulators of inflammasome assembly and pyroptosis. This Cell Science at a Glance article and accompanying poster outlines the concepts in the activation of inflammasome sensors and assembly of the inflammasome platform. We also discuss recent insights into the mechanisms of regulation of inflammasome activity and the induction of cell death by pyroptosis.

Introduction

Sensors of PAMPs and DAMPs in the cytoplasm include nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain (NOD)- and leucine-rich repeat (LRR)-containing receptors (NLRs), the absent in melanoma-2 (AIM2)-like receptors (ALRs) and proteins that contain a tripartite motif (TRIM), including pyrin. Among these sensors, members of the evolutionary conserved NLRs, together with AIM2 and pyrin, can assemble into a multimeric protein complex that is called the inflammasome (see poster). Inflammasomes are typically composed of a sensor, the adaptor molecule ASC [apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a caspase-activation and recruitment domain (CARD); also known as PYCARD] and the cysteine protease procaspase-1. Upon detection of specific stimuli, the sensor, which includes NLRs, AIM2 or pyrin, recruits ASC to form a multimeric complex that is referred to as ‘speck’. Oligomerized or ‘nucleated’ ASC recruits procaspase-1 into the complex, which then is converted into bioactive caspase-1 by proximity-induced self-cleavage. Following this, the active caspase-1 subunits p20 and p10 cleave pro-IL-1β and pro-IL-18 to yield bioactive cytokines and activate pore-forming gasdermin D (GSDMD) to induce a form of cell death called ‘pyroptosis’ (see poster and Box 1 ). Inflammasome activation serves critical functions in pathogen defense; it helps to remove damaged and transformed host cells and stimulates an adaptive immune response. Conversely, aberrant inflammasome activation is linked to many inflammatory disorders, infectious diseases and cancer. Therefore, inflammasome activation is a tightly regulated event that encompasses many molecular and cellular signals. Here, we summarize the mechanisms that regulate the activation of the inflammasome sensors and the assembly of the inflammasome platform. We also discuss recent insights on the induction of pyroptosis and open questions in inflammasome biology.

Conclusion and future directions

Inflammasomes play a critical role in health and disease. They are required for maturation and release of IL-1β, IL-18 and other cellular contents, removal of malignant or damaged cells and host defense from infectious agents. Inflammasome activation intersects with many critical cellular processes that include inflammatory signaling, metabolism, cell division and cell death pathways. Given their high inflammatory potential, many cellular processes are also devoted to the regulation of inflammasome activation. In spite of recent progress in elucidating these mechanisms, many fundamental questions still remain. For example, the exact ligand and mechanisms that activate NLRP3- and pyrin-mediated inflammasomes are not entirely known. Furthermore, the mechanisms that regulate sensing of DAMPs and/or PAMPs present within membrane vesicles by sensors that are localized in the cytoplasm are still unclear. Investigating these and other fundamental questions highlighted in this article will help to significantly improve our understanding of the inflammasome biology, and likely yield novel therapeutic options for the associated diseases and conditions.
