---
pmid: '22453920'
title: Dual role of the molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis protein MOCS3 in tRNA thiolation
  and molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis in humans.
authors:
- Chowdhury MM
- Dosche C
- Löhmannsröben HG
- Leimkühler S
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3366815
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.351429
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Dual role of the molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis protein MOCS3 in tRNA thiolation and molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis in humans.
**Authors:** Chowdhury MM, Dosche C, Löhmannsröben HG, Leimkühler S
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M112.351429](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M112.351429)
**PMC:** [PMC3366815](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3366815/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2012 May 18;287(21):17297-17307. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.351429.
Epub  2012 Mar 27.

Dual role of the molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis protein MOCS3 in tRNA 
thiolation and molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis in humans.

Chowdhury MM(1), Dosche C(2), Löhmannsröben HG(2), Leimkühler S(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Biology, Department of Molecular Enzymology, 
University of Potsdam, Potsdam 14476, Germany.
(2)Institute of Chemistry, Department of Physical Chemistry, University of 
Potsdam, Potsdam 14476, Germany.
(3)Institute of Biochemistry and Biology, Department of Molecular Enzymology, 
University of Potsdam, Potsdam 14476, Germany. Electronic address: 
sleim@uni-potsdam.de.

We studied two pathways that involve the transfer of persulfide sulfur in 
humans, molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis and tRNA thiolation. Investigations 
using human cells showed that the two-domain protein MOCS3 is shared between 
both pathways. MOCS3 has an N-terminal adenylation domain and a C-terminal 
rhodanese-like domain. We showed that MOCS3 activates both MOCS2A and URM1 by 
adenylation and a subsequent sulfur transfer step for the formation of the 
thiocarboxylate group at the C terminus of each protein. MOCS2A and URM1 are 
β-grasp fold proteins that contain a highly conserved C-terminal double glycine 
motif. The role of the terminal glycine of MOCS2A and URM1 was examined for the 
interaction and the cellular localization with MOCS3. Deletion of the C-terminal 
glycine of either MOCS2A or URM1 resulted in a loss of interaction with MOCS3. 
Enhanced cyan fluorescent protein and enhanced yellow fluorescent protein 
fusions of the proteins were constructed, and the fluorescence resonance energy 
transfer efficiency was determined by the decrease in the donor lifetime. The 
cellular localization results showed that extension of the C terminus with an 
additional glycine of MOCS2A and URM1 altered the localization of MOCS3 from the 
cytosol to the nucleus.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.351429
PMCID: PMC3366815
PMID: 22453920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
