---
pmid: '10807909'
title: Phorbol esters and cytokines regulate the expression of the NEMO-related protein,
  a molecule involved in a NF-kappa B-independent pathway.
authors:
- Schwamborn K
- Weil R
- Courtois G
- Whiteside ST
- Israël A
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M001500200
---

# Phorbol esters and cytokines regulate the expression of the NEMO-related protein, a molecule involved in a NF-kappa B-independent pathway.
**Authors:** Schwamborn K, Weil R, Courtois G, Whiteside ST, Israël A
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M001500200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M001500200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jul 28;275(30):22780-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M001500200.

Phorbol esters and cytokines regulate the expression of the NEMO-related 
protein, a molecule involved in a NF-kappa B-independent pathway.

Schwamborn K(1), Weil R, Courtois G, Whiteside ST, Israël A.

Author information:
(1)Unité de Biologie Moléculaire de l'Expression Génique, URA 1773 Centre 
National de la Recherche Scientifique, Institut Pasteur, 25 Rue du Dr. Roux, 
75724 Paris Cedex 15, France.

The NF-kappaB signaling pathway plays a crucial role in the immune, 
inflammatory, and apoptotic responses. Recently, we identified the NF-kappaB 
Essential Modulator (NEMO) as an essential component of this pathway. NEMO is a 
structural and regulatory subunit of the high molecular kinase complex (IKK) 
responsible for the phosphorylation of NF-kappaB inhibitors. Data base searching 
led to the isolation of a cDNA encoding a protein we called NRP (NEMO-related 
protein), which shows a strong homology to NEMO. Here we show that NRP is 
present in a novel high molecular weight complex, that contains none of the 
known members of the IKK complex. Consistently, we could not observe any effect 
of NRP on NF-kappaB signaling. Nonetheless, we could demonstrate that treatment 
with phorbol esters induces NRP phosphorylation and decreases its half-life. 
This phosphorylation event could only be inhibited by K-252a and stauroporin. We 
also show that de novo expression of NRP can be induced by interferon and tumor 
necrosis factor alpha and that these two stimuli have a synergistic effect on 
NRP expression. In addition, we observed that endogenous NRP is associated with 
the Golgi apparatus. Analogous to NEMO, we find that NRP is associated in a 
complex with two kinases, suggesting that NRP could play a similar role in 
another signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M001500200
PMID: 10807909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
