---
pmid: '15475159'
title: Identification and phylogenetic analyses of the protein arginine methyltransferase
  gene family in fish and ascidians.
authors:
- Hung CM
- Li C
journal: Gene
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2004.07.039
---

# Identification and phylogenetic analyses of the protein arginine methyltransferase gene family in fish and ascidians.
**Authors:** Hung CM, Li C
**Journal:** Gene (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gene.2004.07.039](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gene.2004.07.039)

## Abstract

1. Gene. 2004 Oct 13;340(2):179-87. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2004.07.039.

Identification and phylogenetic analyses of the protein arginine 
methyltransferase gene family in fish and ascidians.

Hung CM(1), Li C.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, 110 Sec. 1, Chein-Kuo 
North Road, Taichung, Taiwan, ROC.

Protein arginine methyltransferases (PRMT) involved in the regulations of signal 
transduction, protein subcellular localization, and transcription have been 
mostly studied in mammals and yeast. In this study orthologues of eight human 
PRMT genes (PRMT1-7 and HRMT1L3) were identified in both puffer fish Fugu 
rubripes and zebrafish Danio rerio. The fish PRMT genes appear to be conserved 
with their mammalian orthologues at the levels of amino acid sequences as well 
as genomic structures. All vertebrate PRMT genes contain 10-16 coding exons 
except PRMT6 that contains only one coding exon. Western blot analyses of 
zebrafish tissue extracts confirmed the expression of some PRMT proteins in 
zebra fish. We further identified six PRMT members (PRMT1, 3-7) in an 
invertebrate chordate Ciona intestinalis. Genomic structures of the PRMT 
orthologues are no more conserved in the ascidians, as PRMT3 and PRMT5 contain 
only one coding exon while PRMT6 contains six exons. PRMT2 and HRMT1L3 that are 
missing in Ciona appear to be vertebrate-specific. HRMT1L3 is a PRMT1 paralogue 
with highly conserved sequences and exact exon junctions, whereas the PRMT2 
orthologues are very diverged. Different PRMT orthologues are likely to evolve 
at different rates and the PRMT1 orthologues appear to be most conserved through 
evolution. Furthermore, phylogenetic analyses using the core regions of various 
PRMT genes show that PRMT5 with the type II PRMT activity is separated in one 
branch. All other PRMT genes including PRMT1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7 and HRMT1L3 
clustered in the other branch, probably represent the genes for the type I 
activity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2004.07.039
PMID: 15475159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
