---
pmid: '15107969'
title: Molecular mechanism investigation of phenobarbital-induced serum cholesterol
  elevation in rat livers by microarray analysis.
authors:
- Kiyosawa N
- Tanaka K
- Hirao J
- Ito K
- Niino N
- Sakuma K
- Kanbori M
- Yamoto T
- Manabe S
- Matsunuma N
journal: Arch Toxicol
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s00204-004-0565-0
---

# Molecular mechanism investigation of phenobarbital-induced serum cholesterol elevation in rat livers by microarray analysis.
**Authors:** Kiyosawa N, Tanaka K, Hirao J, Ito K, Niino N, Sakuma K, Kanbori M, Yamoto T, Manabe S, Matsunuma N
**Journal:** Arch Toxicol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00204-004-0565-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00204-004-0565-0)

## Abstract

1. Arch Toxicol. 2004 Aug;78(8):435-42. doi: 10.1007/s00204-004-0565-0. Epub 2004
 Apr 24.

Molecular mechanism investigation of phenobarbital-induced serum cholesterol 
elevation in rat livers by microarray analysis.

Kiyosawa N(1), Tanaka K, Hirao J, Ito K, Niino N, Sakuma K, Kanbori M, Yamoto T, 
Manabe S, Matsunuma N.

Author information:
(1)Medicinal Safety Research Labs., Sankyo Co. Ltd., 717 Horikoshi, Fukuroi, 
437-0065 Shizuoka, Japan. kiyosawa@fuku.sankyo.co.jp

Phenobarbital (PB) increases serum total cholesterol levels in rodents and 
humans. To investigate the underlying molecular mechanisms, we performed a 
microarray analysis on liver of rats treated repeatedly with 100 mg/kg PB, and 
examined the serum blood chemistry. The serum concentration of non-esterified 
fatty acids was decreased from day 1 to day 14 except for day 7, and that of 
cholesterol was increased from day 4 to day 14. The serum concentration of total 
ketone bodies was increased on day 7, and that of triglycerides was decreased on 
day 14. Transcript content of glycolytic genes was decreased by PB treatments, 
while that of lipoprotein lipase was continuously increased, suggesting a notion 
that repetitive PB treatments impaired glycolysis and stimulated lipolysis in 
the liver. The hypothesis was examined by using a previously reported 
flux-balance model. The increase in mRNA content of malic enzyme after the PB 
treatment agreed well with the flux-balance model result, suggesting the 
validity of our hypothesis. The findings also suggested that there was an 
abundance of acetyl-CoA and shortage of glycolytic products after the repeated 
PB treatments. Although ketogenesis would normally occur under such cellular 
conditions, it was only weakly observed after the repeated PB treatments, 
presumably owing to a decrease in HMG-CoA synthase mRNA content. On the other 
hand, the mRNA content of several cholesterogenic genes was slightly induced by 
PB treatments. Thus, serum chemistry and microarray results suggested that 
repeated PB treatments induced cholesterogenesis in rat livers, which may have 
contributed to the elevation of the serum total cholesterol concentration.

DOI: 10.1007/s00204-004-0565-0
PMID: 15107969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
