---
pmid: '21454554'
title: Positive cooperativity of the p97 AAA ATPase is critical for essential functions.
authors:
- Nishikori S
- Esaki M
- Yamanaka K
- Sugimoto S
- Ogura T
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3091191
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.201400
---

# Positive cooperativity of the p97 AAA ATPase is critical for essential functions.
**Authors:** Nishikori S, Esaki M, Yamanaka K, Sugimoto S, Ogura T
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110.201400](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.201400)
**PMC:** [PMC3091191](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3091191/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2011 May 6;286(18):15815-20. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.201400. Epub 
2011 Mar 18.

Positive cooperativity of the p97 AAA ATPase is critical for essential 
functions.

Nishikori S(1), Esaki M, Yamanaka K, Sugimoto S, Ogura T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Molecular Embryology and 
Genetics, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.

p97 is composed of two conserved AAA (ATPases associated with diverse cellular 
activities) domains, which form a tandem hexameric ring. We characterized the 
ATP hydrolysis mechanism of CDC-48.1, a p97 homolog of Caenorhabditis elegans. 
The ATPase activity of the N-terminal AAA domain was very low at physiological 
temperature, whereas the C-terminal AAA domain showed high ATPase activity in a 
coordinated fashion with positive cooperativity. The cooperativity and 
coordination are generated by different mechanisms because a noncooperative 
mutant still showed the coordination. Interestingly, the growth speed of yeast 
cells strongly related to the positive cooperativity rather than the ATPase 
activity itself, suggesting that the positive cooperativity is critical for the 
essential functions of p97.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.201400
PMCID: PMC3091191
PMID: 21454554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
