---
pmid: '10661513'
title: Behavioral responses to cocaine and amphetamine administration in mice lacking
  the dopamine D1 receptor.
authors:
- Xu M
- Guo Y
- Vorhees CV
- Zhang J
journal: Brain Res
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0006-8993(99)02258-1
---

# Behavioral responses to cocaine and amphetamine administration in mice lacking the dopamine D1 receptor.
**Authors:** Xu M, Guo Y, Vorhees CV, Zhang J
**Journal:** Brain Res (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0006-8993(99)02258-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0006-8993(99)02258-1)

## Abstract

1. Brain Res. 2000 Jan 3;852(1):198-207. doi: 10.1016/s0006-8993(99)02258-1.

Behavioral responses to cocaine and amphetamine administration in mice lacking 
the dopamine D1 receptor.

Xu M(1), Guo Y, Vorhees CV, Zhang J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of 
Cincinnati College of Medicine, OH 45267-0521, USA. ming.xu@uc.edu

Cocaine and amphetamine can induce both short-term and long-term behavioral 
changes in rodents. The major target for these psychostimulants is thought to be 
the brain dopamine system. To determine whether the dopamine D1 receptor plays a 
crucial role in the behavioral effects of psychostimulants, we tested both the 
locomotor and stereotyped behaviors in D1 receptor mutant and wild-type control 
mice after cocaine and amphetamine treatments. We found that the overall 
locomotor responses of D1 receptor mutant mice to repeated cocaine 
administration were significantly reduced compared to those of the wild-type 
mice and the responses of the D1 receptor mutant mice to cocaine injections were 
never significantly higher than their responses to saline injections. D1 
receptor mutant mice were less sensitive than the wild-type mice to acute 
amphetamine stimulation over a dose range even though they exhibited apparently 
similar behavioral responses as those of the wild-type mice after repeated 
amphetamine administration at the 5 mg/kg dose. Immunostaining experiments 
indicated that there was no detectable neurotoxicity in the nucleus accumbens in 
both D1 receptor mutant and wild-type mice after repeated amphetamine 
administration. The data suggest that the D1 receptor plays an essential role in 
mediating cocaine-induced behavioral changes in mice. Moreover, the D1 receptor 
also participates in behavioral responses induced by amphetamine administration.

DOI: 10.1016/s0006-8993(99)02258-1
PMID: 10661513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
