---
pmid: '27519411'
title: Architecture of the Human Mitochondrial Iron-Sulfur Cluster Assembly Machinery.
authors:
- Gakh O
- Ranatunga W
- Smith DY 4th
- Ahlgren EC
- Al-Karadaghi S
- Thompson JR
- Isaya G
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5076535
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.738542
---

# Architecture of the Human Mitochondrial Iron-Sulfur Cluster Assembly Machinery.
**Authors:** Gakh O, Ranatunga W, Smith DY 4th, Ahlgren EC, Al-Karadaghi S, Thompson JR, Isaya G
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M116.738542](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M116.738542)
**PMC:** [PMC5076535](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5076535/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2016 Sep 30;291(40):21296-21321. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.738542.
Epub  2016 Aug 12.

Architecture of the Human Mitochondrial Iron-Sulfur Cluster Assembly Machinery.

Gakh O(1), Ranatunga W(1), Smith DY 4th(1), Ahlgren EC(2), Al-Karadaghi S(2), 
Thompson JR(3), Isaya G(4).

Author information:
(1)From the Departments of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine and Biochemistry 
Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic Children's Research Center, and.
(2)the Center for Molecular Protein Science, Institute for Chemistry and 
Chemical Engineering, Lund University, P. O. Box 124, SE-221 00 Lund, Sweden.
(3)Department of Physiology and Biomedical Engineering, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota 55905 and.
(4)From the Departments of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine and Biochemistry 
Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic Children's Research Center, and isaya@mayo.edu.

Fe-S clusters, essential cofactors needed for the activity of many different 
enzymes, are assembled by conserved protein machineries inside bacteria and 
mitochondria. As the architecture of the human machinery remains undefined, we 
co-expressed in Escherichia coli the following four proteins involved in the 
initial step of Fe-S cluster synthesis: FXN42-210 (iron donor); [NFS1]·[ISD11] 
(sulfur donor); and ISCU (scaffold upon which new clusters are assembled). We 
purified a stable, active complex consisting of all four proteins with 1:1:1:1 
stoichiometry. Using negative staining transmission EM and single particle 
analysis, we obtained a three-dimensional model of the complex with ∼14 Å 
resolution. Molecular dynamics flexible fitting of protein structures docked 
into the EM map of the model revealed a 
[FXN42-210]24·[NFS1]24·[ISD11]24·[ISCU]24 complex, consistent with the measured 
1:1:1:1 stoichiometry of its four components. The complex structure fulfills 
distance constraints obtained from chemical cross-linking of the complex at 
multiple recurring interfaces, involving hydrogen bonds, salt bridges, or 
hydrophobic interactions between conserved residues. The complex consists of a 
central roughly cubic [FXN42-210]24·[ISCU]24 sub-complex with one symmetric ISCU 
trimer bound on top of one symmetric FXN42-210 trimer at each of its eight 
vertices. Binding of 12 [NFS1]2·[ISD11]2 sub-complexes to the surface results in 
a globular macromolecule with a diameter of ∼15 nm and creates 24 Fe-S cluster 
assembly centers. The organization of each center recapitulates a previously 
proposed conserved mechanism for sulfur donation from NFS1 to ISCU and reveals, 
for the first time, a path for iron donation from FXN42-210 to ISCU.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M116.738542
PMCID: PMC5076535
PMID: 27519411 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
