---
pmid: '16455797'
title: Structures of wild-type and mutant human spermidine/spermine N1-acetyltransferase,
  a potential therapeutic drug target.
authors:
- Bewley MC
- Graziano V
- Jiang J
- Matz E
- Studier FW
- Pegg AE
- Coleman CS
- Flanagan JM
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1360125
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0511008103
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Structures of wild-type and mutant human spermidine/spermine N1-acetyltransferase, a potential therapeutic drug target.
**Authors:** Bewley MC, Graziano V, Jiang J, Matz E, Studier FW, Pegg AE, Coleman CS, Flanagan JM
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0511008103](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0511008103)
**PMC:** [PMC1360125](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1360125/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Feb 14;103(7):2063-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0511008103. Epub 2006 Feb 2.

Structures of wild-type and mutant human spermidine/spermine 
N1-acetyltransferase, a potential therapeutic drug target.

Bewley MC(1), Graziano V, Jiang J, Matz E, Studier FW, Pegg AE, Coleman CS, 
Flanagan JM.

Author information:
(1)Biology Department, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY 11973, USA.

Spermidine/spermine N1-acetyltransferase (SSAT) is a key enzyme in the control 
of polyamine levels in human cells, as acetylation of spermidine and spermine 
triggers export or degradation. Increased intracellular polyamine levels 
accompany several types of cancers as well as other human diseases, and 
compounds that affect the expression, activity, or stability of SSAT are being 
explored as potential therapeutic drugs. We have expressed human SSAT from the 
cloned cDNA in Escherichia coli and have determined high-resolution structures 
of wild-type and mutant SSAT, as the free dimer and in binary and ternary 
complexes with CoA, acetyl-CoA (AcCoA), spermine, and the inhibitor 
N1,N11bis-(ethyl)-norspermine (BE-3-3-3). These structures show details of 
binding sites for cofactor, substrates, and inhibitor and provide a framework to 
understand enzymatic activity, mutations, and the action of potential drugs. Two 
dimer conformations were observed: a symmetric form with two open surface 
channels capable of binding substrate or cofactor, and an asymmetric form in 
which only one of the surface channels appears capable of binding and 
acetylating polyamines. SSAT was found to self-acetylate lysine-26 in the 
presence of AcCoA and absence of substrate, a reaction apparently catalzyed by 
AcCoA bound in the second channel of the asymmetric dimer. These unexpected and 
intriguing complexities seem likely to have some as yet undefined role in 
regulating SSAT activity or stability as a part of polyamine homeostasis. 
Sequence signatures group SSAT with proteins that appear to have thialysine 
Nepsilon-acetyltransferase activity.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0511008103
PMCID: PMC1360125
PMID: 16455797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts 
declared.
