---
pmid: '7715703'
title: Targeted disruption of the tyrosine hydroxylase gene reveals that catecholamines
  are required for mouse fetal development.
authors:
- Zhou QY
- Quaife CJ
- Palmiter RD
journal: Nature
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/374640a0
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Targeted disruption of the tyrosine hydroxylase gene reveals that catecholamines are required for mouse fetal development.
**Authors:** Zhou QY, Quaife CJ, Palmiter RD
**Journal:** Nature (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1038/374640a0](https://doi.org/10.1038/374640a0)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 1995 Apr 13;374(6523):640-3. doi: 10.1038/374640a0.

Targeted disruption of the tyrosine hydroxylase gene reveals that catecholamines 
are required for mouse fetal development.

Zhou QY(1), Quaife CJ, Palmiter RD.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Washington, Seattle 98195, 
USA.

Tyrosine hydroxylase catalyses the initial, rate-limiting step in the 
catecholamine biosynthetic pathway. Catecholamines, which include dopamine, 
noradrenaline, and adrenaline, are important neurotransmitters and hormones that 
regulate visceral functions, motor coordination and arousal in adults. The gene 
encoding tyrosine hydroxylase becomes transcriptionally active in developing 
neuroblasts during mid-gestation of rodent embryos, before the onset of 
neurotransmission. Here we show that inactivation of both tyrosine hydroxylase 
alleles results in mid-gestational lethality: about 90% of mutant embryos die 
between embryonic days 11.5 and 15.5, apparently of cardiovascular failure. 
Administration of L-DOPA (dihydroxyphenylalanine), the product of the tyrosine 
hydroxylase reaction, to pregnant females results in complete rescue of mutant 
mice in utero. Without further treatment, however, they die before weaning. We 
conclude that catecholamines are essential for mouse fetal development and 
postnatal survival.

DOI: 10.1038/374640a0
PMID: 7715703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
