---
pmid: '21778237'
title: COMMD1 (copper metabolism MURR1 domain-containing protein 1) regulates Cullin
  RING ligases by preventing CAND1 (Cullin-associated Nedd8-dissociated protein 1)
  binding.
authors:
- Mao X
- Gluck N
- Chen B
- Starokadomskyy P
- Li H
- Maine GN
- Burstein E
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3173175
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.278408
---

# COMMD1 (copper metabolism MURR1 domain-containing protein 1) regulates Cullin RING ligases by preventing CAND1 (Cullin-associated Nedd8-dissociated protein 1) binding.
**Authors:** Mao X, Gluck N, Chen B, Starokadomskyy P, Li H, Maine GN, Burstein E
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M111.278408](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M111.278408)
**PMC:** [PMC3173175](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3173175/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Sep 16;286(37):32355-65. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.278408. Epub 
2011 Jul 21.

COMMD1 (copper metabolism MURR1 domain-containing protein 1) regulates Cullin 
RING ligases by preventing CAND1 (Cullin-associated Nedd8-dissociated protein 1) 
binding.

Mao X(1), Gluck N, Chen B, Starokadomskyy P, Li H, Maine GN, Burstein E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

Cullin RING ligases (CRLs), the most prolific class of ubiquitin ligase enzymes, 
are multimeric complexes that regulate a wide range of cellular processes. CRL 
activity is regulated by CAND1 (Cullin-associated Nedd8-dissociated protein 1), 
an inhibitor that promotes the dissociation of substrate receptor components 
from the CRL. We demonstrate here that COMMD1 (copper metabolism MURR1 
domain-containing 1), a factor previously found to promote ubiquitination of 
various substrates, regulates CRL activation by antagonizing CAND1 binding. We 
show that COMMD1 interacts with multiple Cullins, that the COMMD1-Cul2 complex 
cannot bind CAND1, and that, conversely, COMMD1 can actively displace CAND1 from 
CRLs. These findings highlight a novel mechanism of CRL activation and suggest 
that CRL regulation may underlie the pleiotropic activities of COMMD1.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.278408
PMCID: PMC3173175
PMID: 21778237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
