---
pmid: '20467437'
title: Direct interaction between hnRNP-M and CDC5L/PLRG1 proteins affects alternative
  splice site choice.
authors:
- Llères D
- Denegri M
- Biggiogera M
- Ajuh P
- Lamond AI
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2892320
doi: 10.1038/embor.2010.64
---

# Direct interaction between hnRNP-M and CDC5L/PLRG1 proteins affects alternative splice site choice.
**Authors:** Llères D, Denegri M, Biggiogera M, Ajuh P, Lamond AI
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/embor.2010.64](https://doi.org/10.1038/embor.2010.64)
**PMC:** [PMC2892320](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2892320/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2010 Jun;11(6):445-51. doi: 10.1038/embor.2010.64. Epub 2010 May 14.

Direct interaction between hnRNP-M and CDC5L/PLRG1 proteins affects alternative 
splice site choice.

Llères D(1), Denegri M, Biggiogera M, Ajuh P, Lamond AI.

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Gene Regulation & Expression, College of Life 
Sciences, University of Dundee, MSI/WTB/JBC Complex, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, 
UK.

Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein-M (hnRNP-M) is an abundant nuclear 
protein that binds to pre-mRNA and is a component of the spliceosome complex. A 
direct interaction was detected in vivo between hnRNP-M and the human 
spliceosome proteins cell division cycle 5-like (CDC5L) and pleiotropic 
regulator 1 (PLRG1) that was inhibited during the heat-shock stress response. A 
central region in hnRNP-M is required for interaction with CDC5L/PLRG1. hnRNP-M 
affects both 5' and 3' alternative splice site choices, and an hnRNP-M mutant 
lacking the CDC5L/PLRG1 interaction domain is unable to modulate alternative 
splicing of an adeno-E1A mini-gene substrate.

DOI: 10.1038/embor.2010.64
PMCID: PMC2892320
PMID: 20467437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
