---
pmid: '16709193'
title: TT8 controls its own expression in a feedback regulation involving TTG1 and
  homologous MYB and bHLH factors, allowing a strong and cell-specific accumulation
  of flavonoids in Arabidopsis thaliana.
authors:
- Baudry A
- Caboche M
- Lepiniec L
journal: Plant J
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2006.02733.x
---

# TT8 controls its own expression in a feedback regulation involving TTG1 and homologous MYB and bHLH factors, allowing a strong and cell-specific accumulation of flavonoids in Arabidopsis thaliana.
**Authors:** Baudry A, Caboche M, Lepiniec L
**Journal:** Plant J (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-313X.2006.02733.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-313X.2006.02733.x)

## Abstract

1. Plant J. 2006 Jun;46(5):768-79. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2006.02733.x.

TT8 controls its own expression in a feedback regulation involving TTG1 and 
homologous MYB and bHLH factors, allowing a strong and cell-specific 
accumulation of flavonoids in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Baudry A(1), Caboche M, Lepiniec L.

Author information:
(1)Seed Biology Laboratory, UMR 204 INRA/INAPG, Jean-Pierre Bourgin Institute, 
Route de Saint-Cyr, 78026 Versailles Cedex, France.

The control of TT8 expression was investigated in this study, and it was 
demonstrated that it constitutes a major regulatory step in the specific 
activation of the expression of flavonoid structural genes. First, the GUS 
activity generated in planta from a TT8::uidA construct revealed cell-specific 
activation of the TT8 promoter consistent with the known involvement of the TT8 
bHLH factor in proanthocyanidin, anthocyanin and mucilage biosynthesis. 
Moreover, the activity of this reporter construct was strongly affected in ttg1, 
TT2 overexpressers (OE), and PAP1-OE, suggesting interplay between TT2, PAP1, 
TTG1 and the activation of the TT8 promoter in planta. To further investigate 
the mechanisms involved, we used 35S::TT2-GR and 35S::TTG1-GR transgenic plants 
(expressing fusion proteins with the glucocorticoid receptor), as well as 
one-hybrid experiments, to determine the direct effect of these factors on TT8 
expression. Interestingly, in vivo binding of TT2 and PAP1 to the TT8 promoter 
was dependent on the simultaneous expression of TT8 or the homologous bHLH 
factors GL3 and EGL3. Consistent with these results, the activity of the 
TT8::uidA reporter was strongly affected in the seed endothelium of a tt8 
mutant. Similarly, a strong decrease in the level of TT8 mRNA was detected in 
the siliques of a gl3 x egl3 mutant and in plants that express a dominant 
negative form of the PAP1 protein, suggesting that TT8 expression is controlled 
by different combinations of MYB and bHLH factors in planta. The importance of 
this positive feedback mechanism in the strong and specific induction of 
proanthocyanidin biosynthesis in the seed coat of Arabidopsis thaliana is 
discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2006.02733.x
PMID: 16709193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
