---
pmid: '20697359'
title: 'Regulation of MDM4 (MDMX) function by p76(MDM2): a new facet in the control
  of p53 activity.'
authors:
- Giglio S
- Mancini F
- Pellegrino M
- Di Conza G
- Puxeddu E
- Sacchi A
- Pontecorvi A
- Moretti F
journal: Oncogene
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.324
---

# Regulation of MDM4 (MDMX) function by p76(MDM2): a new facet in the control of p53 activity.
**Authors:** Giglio S, Mancini F, Pellegrino M, Di Conza G, Puxeddu E, Sacchi A, Pontecorvi A, Moretti F
**Journal:** Oncogene (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/onc.2010.324](https://doi.org/10.1038/onc.2010.324)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2010 Nov 4;29(44):5935-45. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.324. Epub 2010 Aug
9.

Regulation of MDM4 (MDMX) function by p76(MDM2): a new facet in the control of 
p53 activity.

Giglio S(1), Mancini F, Pellegrino M, Di Conza G, Puxeddu E, Sacchi A, 
Pontecorvi A, Moretti F.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neurobiology and Molecular Medicine, CNR/Fondazione Santa Lucia, 
Roma, Italy.

Under basal growth conditions, p53 function is tightly controlled by the members 
of MDM family, MDM2 and MDM4. The Mdm2 gene codes, in addition to the 
full-length p90(MDM2), for a short protein, p76(MDM2) that lacks the p53-binding 
domain. Despite this property and at variance with p90(MDM2), this protein acts 
positively toward p53, although the molecular mechanism remains elusive. Here, 
we report that p76(MDM2) antagonizes MDM4 inhibitory function. We show that 
p76(MDM2) possesses intrinsic ubiquitinating and degrading activity, and through 
these activities controls MDM4 levels. Furthermore, the presence of p76(MDM2) 
decreases the association of MDM4 with p53 and p90(MDM2), and antagonizes p53 
degradation by the heterodimer MDM4/p90(MDM2). The p76(MDM2)-mediated regulation 
of MDM4 occurs in the cytoplasm, under basal growth conditions. Conversely, upon 
DNA damage, phosphorylation of MDM4Ser403 dissociates p76(MDM2) and prevents 
MDM4 degradation. The overall negative control of MDM4 by p76(MDM2) reflects on 
p53 function as p76(MDM2) impairs MDM4-mediated inhibition of p53 activity. In 
agreement with the positive role of p76(MDM2) toward p53, the 
p76(MDM2)/p90(MDM2) ratio significantly decreases in a group of thyroid tumor 
samples compared with normal counterparts. Overall, these findings reveal a new 
mechanism in the control of p53 basal activity that may account for the distinct 
sensitivity of tissues to stress signals depending on the balance among MDM 
proteins. Moreover, these data suggest an oncosuppressive function for a product 
of the Mdm2 gene.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2010.324
PMID: 20697359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
