---
pmid: '31983428'
title: Interaction between IDH1 WT and calmodulin and its implications for glioblastoma
  cell growth and migration.
authors:
- Kang S
- Kwon HN
- Kang S
- Park S
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.01.073
---

# Interaction between IDH1 WT and calmodulin and its implications for glioblastoma cell growth and migration.
**Authors:** Kang S, Kwon HN, Kang S, Park S
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.01.073](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.01.073)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2020 Mar 26;524(1):224-230. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.01.073. Epub 2020 Jan 23.

Interaction between IDH1 WT and calmodulin and its implications for glioblastoma 
cell growth and migration.

Kang S(1), Kwon HN(2), Kang S(3), Park S(4).

Author information:
(1)Natural Product Research Institute, College of Pharmacy, Seoul National 
University, 1 Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu, Seoul, 08826, South Korea. Electronic 
address: lovesmart@snu.ac.kr.
(2)Natural Product Research Institute, College of Pharmacy, Seoul National 
University, 1 Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu, Seoul, 08826, South Korea; Stem Cells and 
Metabolism Research Program, Faculty of Medicine / Helsinki Institute of Life 
Science, University of Helsinki, Finland.
(3)Natural Product Research Institute, College of Pharmacy, Seoul National 
University, 1 Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu, Seoul, 08826, South Korea; Department of 
Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, College of Medicine, University of Illinois 
at Chicago, Chicago, IL, 60607, USA.
(4)Natural Product Research Institute, College of Pharmacy, Seoul National 
University, 1 Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu, Seoul, 08826, South Korea. Electronic 
address: psh@snu.ac.kr.

Isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) mutations are found in low-grade gliomas, and the 
product of the IDH mutant (MT), 2-hydroxyglutarate (2-HG), is the first known 
oncometabolite. However, the roles of the IDH wild type (WT) in high-grade 
glioblastoma, which rarely has the IDH mutation, are still unknown. To 
investigate possible pathways related to IDH WT in gliomas, we carried out 
bioinformatics analysis, and found that IDH1 has several putative calmodulin 
(CaM) binding sites. Pull-down and quantitative dissociation constant (Kd) 
measurements using recombinant proteins showed that IDH1 WT indeed binds to CaM 
with a higher affinity than IDH1 R132H MT. This biochemical interaction was 
demonstrated also in the cellular environment by immunoprecipitation with 
glioblastoma cell extracts. A synthetic peptide for the suggested binding region 
interfered with the interaction between CaM and IDH1, confirming the specificity 
of the binding. Direct binding between the synthetic peptide and CaM was 
observed in an NMR binding experiment, which additionally revealed that the 
peptide initially binds to the C-lobe of CaM. The physiological meaning of the 
CaM-IDH1 WT binding was shown with trifluoperazine (TFP), a CaM antagonist, 
which disrupted the binding and inhibited survival and migration of glioblastoma 
cells with IDH1 WT. As CaM signaling is activated in glioblastoma, our results 
suggest that IDH1 WT may be involved in the CaM-signaling pathway in the 
tumorigenesis of high-grade gliomas.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.01.073
PMID: 31983428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interests The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.
