---
pmid: '30139873'
title: An intrinsic S/G(2) checkpoint enforced by ATR.
authors:
- Saldivar JC
- Hamperl S
- Bocek MJ
- Chung M
- Bass TE
- Cisneros-Soberanis F
- Samejima K
- Xie L
- Paulson JR
- Earnshaw WC
- Cortez D
- Meyer T
- Cimprich KA
journal: Science
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6365305
doi: 10.1126/science.aap9346
---

# An intrinsic S/G(2) checkpoint enforced by ATR.
**Authors:** Saldivar JC, Hamperl S, Bocek MJ, Chung M, Bass TE, Cisneros-Soberanis F, Samejima K, Xie L, Paulson JR, Earnshaw WC, Cortez D, Meyer T, Cimprich KA
**Journal:** Science (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.aap9346](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aap9346)
**PMC:** [PMC6365305](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6365305/)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2018 Aug 24;361(6404):806-810. doi: 10.1126/science.aap9346.

An intrinsic S/G(2) checkpoint enforced by ATR.

Saldivar JC(1), Hamperl S(1), Bocek MJ(1), Chung M(1), Bass TE(2), 
Cisneros-Soberanis F(3)(4), Samejima K(3), Xie L(5), Paulson JR(5), Earnshaw 
WC(3), Cortez D(2), Meyer T(1), Cimprich KA(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical and Systems Biology, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, 318 Campus Drive, Stanford, CA 94305-5441, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, 2215 
Garland Avenue, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.
(3)Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, King's Buildings, 
Max Born Crescent, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, Scotland, UK.
(4)Unidad de Investigación Biomédica en Cáncer, Instituto de Investigaciones 
Biomédicas-Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México; Insituto Nacional de 
Cancerología, México City 14080, Mexico.
(5)Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh, 800 Algoma 
Boulevard, Oshkosh, WI 54901, USA.
(6)Department of Chemical and Systems Biology, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, 318 Campus Drive, Stanford, CA 94305-5441, USA. cimprich@stanford.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2018 Nov;19(11):676-677. doi: 
10.1038/s41580-018-0064-4.

The cell cycle is strictly ordered to ensure faithful genome duplication and 
chromosome segregation. Control mechanisms establish this order by dictating 
when a cell transitions from one phase to the next. Much is known about the 
control of the G1/S, G2/M, and metaphase/anaphase transitions, but thus far, no 
control mechanism has been identified for the S/G2 transition. Here we show that 
cells transactivate the mitotic gene network as they exit the S phase through a 
CDK1 (cyclin-dependent kinase 1)-directed FOXM1 phosphorylation switch. During 
normal DNA replication, the checkpoint kinase ATR (ataxia-telangiectasia and 
Rad3-related) is activated by ETAA1 to block this switch until the S phase ends. 
ATR inhibition prematurely activates FOXM1, deregulating the S/G2 transition and 
leading to early mitosis, underreplicated DNA, and DNA damage. Thus, ATR couples 
DNA replication with mitosis and preserves genome integrity by enforcing an S/G2 
checkpoint.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works.

DOI: 10.1126/science.aap9346
PMCID: PMC6365305
PMID: 30139873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
