---
pmid: '15169888'
title: ABIN-2 forms a ternary complex with TPL-2 and NF-kappa B1 p105 and is essential
  for TPL-2 protein stability.
authors:
- Lang V
- Symons A
- Watton SJ
- Janzen J
- Soneji Y
- Beinke S
- Howell S
- Ley SC
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC419892
doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.12.5235-5248.2004
---

# ABIN-2 forms a ternary complex with TPL-2 and NF-kappa B1 p105 and is essential for TPL-2 protein stability.
**Authors:** Lang V, Symons A, Watton SJ, Janzen J, Soneji Y, Beinke S, Howell S, Ley SC
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.24.12.5235-5248.2004](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.24.12.5235-5248.2004)
**PMC:** [PMC419892](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC419892/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jun;24(12):5235-48. doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.12.5235-5248.2004.

ABIN-2 forms a ternary complex with TPL-2 and NF-kappa B1 p105 and is essential 
for TPL-2 protein stability.

Lang V(1), Symons A, Watton SJ, Janzen J, Soneji Y, Beinke S, Howell S, Ley SC.

Author information:
(1)Division of Immune Cell Biology, National Institute for Medical Research, 
Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, United Kingdom.

NF-kappa B1 p105 forms a high-affinity, stoichiometric interaction with TPL-2, a 
MEK kinase essential for TLR4 activation of the ERK mitogen-activated protein 
kinase cascade in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated macrophages. Interaction 
with p105 is required to maintain TPL-2 metabolic stability and also negatively 
regulates TPL-2 MEK kinase activity. Here, affinity purification identified 
A20-binding inhibitor of NF-kappa B 2 (ABIN-2) as a novel p105-associated 
protein. Cotransfection experiments demonstrated that ABIN-2 could interact with 
TPL-2 in addition to p105 but preferentially formed a ternary complex with both 
proteins. Consistently, in unstimulated bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs), 
a substantial fraction of endogenous ABIN-2 was associated with both p105 and 
TPL-2. Although the majority of TPL-2 in these cells was complexed with ABIN-2, 
the pool of TPL-2 which could activate MEK after LPS stimulation was not, and 
LPS activation of TPL-2 was found to correlate with its release from ABIN-2. 
Depletion of ABIN-2 by RNA interference dramatically reduced steady-state levels 
of TPL-2 protein without affecting levels of TPL-2 mRNA or p105 protein. In 
addition, ABIN-2 increased the half-life of cotransfected TPL-2. Thus, optimal 
TPL-2 stability in vivo requires interaction with ABIN-2 as well as p105. 
Together, these data raise the possibility that ABIN-2 functions in the TLR4 
signaling pathway which regulates TPL-2 activation.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.24.12.5235-5248.2004
PMCID: PMC419892
PMID: 15169888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
