---
pmid: '7015340'
title: Identification of a second Escherichia coli groE gene whose product is necessary
  for bacteriophage morphogenesis.
authors:
- Tilly K
- Murialdo H
- Georgopoulos C
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1981'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC319185
doi: 10.1073/pnas.78.3.1629
---

# Identification of a second Escherichia coli groE gene whose product is necessary for bacteriophage morphogenesis.
**Authors:** Tilly K, Murialdo H, Georgopoulos C
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1981)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.78.3.1629](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.78.3.1629)
**PMC:** [PMC319185](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC319185/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1981 Mar;78(3):1629-33. doi: 10.1073/pnas.78.3.1629.

Identification of a second Escherichia coli groE gene whose product is necessary 
for bacteriophage morphogenesis.

Tilly K, Murialdo H, Georgopoulos C.

Previous work has uncovered the existence of an Escherichia coli locus, groE, 
that is essential for bacterial growth, lambda phage and T4 phage head 
morphogenesis, and T5 phage tail assembly. Our genetic and biochemical analyses 
of lambda groE+ transducing phages and their deletion and point mutant 
derivatives show that the groE locus consists of two closely linked genes. One 
groE gene, groEL, has been shown to encode the synthesis of a 65,000 Mr 
polypeptide, whereas the second, groES, codes for the synthesis of a 15,000 Mr 
polypeptide. About half of the groE- bacterial isolates fall into the groES 
complementation group. GroE mutations in either gene cause similar phenotypes, 
with respect to lambda phage head morphogenesis and bacterial growth at 
nonpermissive temperatures.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.78.3.1629
PMCID: PMC319185
PMID: 7015340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
