---
pmid: '12620231'
title: The human Sir2 ortholog, SIRT2, is an NAD+-dependent tubulin deacetylase.
authors:
- North BJ
- Marshall BL
- Borra MT
- Denu JM
- Verdin E
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s1097-2765(03)00038-8
---

# The human Sir2 ortholog, SIRT2, is an NAD+-dependent tubulin deacetylase.
**Authors:** North BJ, Marshall BL, Borra MT, Denu JM, Verdin E
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1097-2765(03)00038-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1097-2765(03)00038-8)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2003 Feb;11(2):437-44. doi: 10.1016/s1097-2765(03)00038-8.

The human Sir2 ortholog, SIRT2, is an NAD+-dependent tubulin deacetylase.

North BJ(1), Marshall BL, Borra MT, Denu JM, Verdin E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, University of California, San Francisco, 94141, San 
Francisco, CA, USA

The silent information regulator 2 protein (Sir2p) of Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
is an NAD-dependent histone deacetylase that plays a critical role in 
transcriptional silencing. Here, we report that a human ortholog of Sir2p, 
sirtuin type 2 (SIRT2), is a predominantly cytoplasmic protein that colocalizes 
with microtubules. SIRT2 deacetylates lysine-40 of alpha-tubulin both in vitro 
and in vivo. Knockdown of SIRT2 via siRNA results in tubulin hyperacetylation. 
SIRT2 colocalizes and interacts in vivo with HDAC6, another tubulin deacetylase. 
Enzymatic analysis of recombinant SIRT2 in comparison to a yeast homolog of Sir2 
protein (Hst2p) shows a striking preference of SIRT2 for acetylated tubulin 
peptide as a substrate relative to acetylated histone H3 peptide. These 
observations establish SIRT2 as a bona fide tubulin deacetylase.

DOI: 10.1016/s1097-2765(03)00038-8
PMID: 12620231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
