---
pmid: '34445249'
title: The SCF Complex Is Essential to Maintain Genome and Chromosome Stability.
authors:
- Thompson LL
- Rutherford KA
- Lepage CC
- McManus KJ
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2021'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC8395177
doi: 10.3390/ijms22168544
---

# The SCF Complex Is Essential to Maintain Genome and Chromosome Stability.
**Authors:** Thompson LL, Rutherford KA, Lepage CC, McManus KJ
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms22168544](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22168544)
**PMC:** [PMC8395177](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8395177/)

## Abstract

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Aug 9;22(16):8544. doi: 10.3390/ijms22168544.

The SCF Complex Is Essential to Maintain Genome and Chromosome Stability.

Thompson LL(1)(2), Rutherford KA(1)(2), Lepage CC(1)(2), McManus KJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)CancerCare Manitoba Research Institute, CancerCare Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB R3E 
0V9, Canada.
(2)Department of Biochemistry & Medical Genetics, University of Manitoba, 
Winnipeg, MB R3E 0J9, Canada.

The SKP1, CUL1, F-box protein (SCF) complex encompasses a group of 69 SCF E3 
ubiquitin ligase complexes that primarily modify protein substrates with 
poly-ubiquitin chains to target them for proteasomal degradation. These SCF 
complexes are distinguishable by variable F-box proteins, which determine 
substrate specificity. Although the function(s) of each individual SCF complex 
remain largely unknown, those that have been characterized regulate a wide array 
of cellular processes, including gene transcription and the cell cycle. In this 
regard, the SCF complex regulates transcription factors that modulate cell 
signaling and ensures timely degradation of primary cell cycle regulators for 
accurate replication and segregation of genetic material. SCF complex members 
are aberrantly expressed in a myriad of cancer types, with altered expression or 
function of the invariable core SCF components expected to have a greater impact 
on cancer pathogenesis than that of the F-box proteins. Accordingly, this review 
describes the normal roles that various SCF complexes have in maintaining genome 
stability before discussing the impact that aberrant SCF complex expression 
and/or function have on cancer pathogenesis. Further characterization of the SCF 
complex functions is essential to identify and develop therapeutic approaches to 
exploit aberrant SCF complex expression and function.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22168544
PMCID: PMC8395177
PMID: 34445249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.
