---
pmid: '22388736'
title: The structure of the ASAP core complex reveals the existence of a Pinin-containing
  PSAP complex.
authors:
- Murachelli AG
- Ebert J
- Basquin C
- Le Hir H
- Conti E
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2242
---

# The structure of the ASAP core complex reveals the existence of a Pinin-containing PSAP complex.
**Authors:** Murachelli AG, Ebert J, Basquin C, Le Hir H, Conti E
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nsmb.2242](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb.2242)

## Abstract

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2012 Mar 4;19(4):378-86. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2242.

The structure of the ASAP core complex reveals the existence of a 
Pinin-containing PSAP complex.

Murachelli AG(1), Ebert J, Basquin C, Le Hir H, Conti E.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Department of Structural Cell Biology, 
Martinsried, Germany.

The ASAP complex interacts with the exon-junction complex (EJC), a messenger 
ribonucleoprotein complex involved in post-transcriptional regulation. The three 
ASAP subunits (Acinus, RNPS1 and SAP18) have been individually implicated in 
transcriptional regulation, pre-mRNA splicing and mRNA quality control. To shed 
light on the basis for and consequences of ASAP's interaction with the EJC, we 
have determined the 1.9-Å resolution structure of a eukaryotic ASAP core 
complex. The RNA-recognition motif of RNPS1 binds to a conserved motif of Acinus 
with a recognition mode similar to that observed in splicing U2AF proteins. The 
Acinus-RNPS1 platform recruits the ubiquitin-like domain of SAP18, forming a 
ternary complex that has both RNA- and protein-binding properties. Unexpectedly, 
our structural analysis identified an Acinus-like motif in Pinin, another 
EJC-associated splicing factor. We show that Pinin physically interacts with 
RNPS1 and SAP18, forming an alternative ternary complex, PSAP.

DOI: 10.1038/nsmb.2242
PMID: 22388736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
