---
pmid: '16901894'
title: A point mutation in the SH1 helix alters elasticity and thermal stability of
  myosin II.
authors:
- Iwai S
- Hanamoto D
- Chaen S
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M605365200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# A point mutation in the SH1 helix alters elasticity and thermal stability of myosin II.
**Authors:** Iwai S, Hanamoto D, Chaen S
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M605365200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M605365200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Oct 13;281(41):30736-44. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M605365200. Epub 
2006 Aug 9.

A point mutation in the SH1 helix alters elasticity and thermal stability of 
myosin II.

Iwai S(1), Hanamoto D, Chaen S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrated Sciences in Physics and Biology, College of 
Humanities and Sciences, Nihon University, 3-25-40 Sakurajousui, Setagaya-ku, 
Tokyo 156-8550, Japan.

Movement generated by the myosin motor is generally thought to be driven by 
distortion of an elastic element within the myosin molecule and subsequent 
release of the resulting strain. However, the location of this elastic element 
in myosin remains unclear. The myosin motor domain consists of four major 
subdomains connected by flexible joints. The SH1 helix is the joint that 
connects the converter subdomain to the other domains, and is thought to play an 
important role in arrangements of the converter relative to the motor. To 
investigate the involvement of the SH1 helix in elastic distortion in myosin, we 
have introduced a point mutation into the SH1 helix of Dictyostelium myosin II 
(R689H), which in human nonmuscle myosin IIA causes nonsyndromic hereditary 
deafness, DFNA17. The mutation resulted in a significant impairment in motile 
activities, whereas actin-activated ATPase activity was only slightly affected. 
Single molecule mechanical measurements using optical trap showed that the step 
size was not shortened by the mutation, suggesting that the slower motility is 
caused by altered kinetics. The single molecule measurements demonstrated that 
the mutation significantly reduced cross-bridge stiffness. Motile activities 
produced by mixtures of wild-type and mutant myosins also suggested that the 
mutation affected the elasticity of myosin. These results suggest that the SH1 
helix is involved in modulation of myosin elasticity, presumably by modulating 
the converter flexibility. Consistent with this, the mutation was also shown to 
reduce thermal stability and induce thermal aggregation of the protein, which 
might be implicated in the disease process.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M605365200
PMID: 16901894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
