---
pmid: '16025100'
title: Mutations in NOTCH1 cause aortic valve disease.
authors:
- Garg V
- Muth AN
- Ransom JF
- Schluterman MK
- Barnes R
- King IN
- Grossfeld PD
- Srivastava D
journal: Nature
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature03940
---

# Mutations in NOTCH1 cause aortic valve disease.
**Authors:** Garg V, Muth AN, Ransom JF, Schluterman MK, Barnes R, King IN, Grossfeld PD, Srivastava D
**Journal:** Nature (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature03940](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature03940)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2005 Sep 8;437(7056):270-4. doi: 10.1038/nature03940. Epub 2005 Jul
17.

Mutations in NOTCH1 cause aortic valve disease.

Garg V(1), Muth AN, Ransom JF, Schluterman MK, Barnes R, King IN, Grossfeld PD, 
Srivastava D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, Texas 75390-9148, USA. vidu.garg@utsouthwestern.edu

Calcification of the aortic valve is the third leading cause of heart disease in 
adults. The incidence increases with age, and it is often associated with a 
bicuspid aortic valve present in 1-2% of the population. Despite the frequency, 
neither the mechanisms of valve calcification nor the developmental origin of a 
two, rather than three, leaflet aortic valve is known. Here, we show that 
mutations in the signalling and transcriptional regulator NOTCH1 cause a 
spectrum of developmental aortic valve anomalies and severe valve calcification 
in non-syndromic autosomal-dominant human pedigrees. Consistent with the valve 
calcification phenotype, Notch1 transcripts were most abundant in the developing 
aortic valve of mice, and Notch1 repressed the activity of Runx2, a central 
transcriptional regulator of osteoblast cell fate. The hairy-related family of 
transcriptional repressors (Hrt), which are activated by Notch1 signalling, 
physically interacted with Runx2 and repressed Runx2 transcriptional activity 
independent of histone deacetylase activity. These results suggest that NOTCH1 
mutations cause an early developmental defect in the aortic valve and a later 
de-repression of calcium deposition that causes progressive aortic valve 
disease.

DOI: 10.1038/nature03940
PMID: 16025100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
