---
pmid: '26172538'
title: Retromer Ensures the Degradation of Autophagic Cargo by Maintaining Lysosome
  Function in Drosophila.
authors:
- Maruzs T
- Lőrincz P
- Szatmári Z
- Széplaki S
- Sándor Z
- Lakatos Z
- Puska G
- Juhász G
- Sass M
journal: Traffic
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/tra.12309
---

# Retromer Ensures the Degradation of Autophagic Cargo by Maintaining Lysosome Function in Drosophila.
**Authors:** Maruzs T, Lőrincz P, Szatmári Z, Széplaki S, Sándor Z, Lakatos Z, Puska G, Juhász G, Sass M
**Journal:** Traffic (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1111/tra.12309](https://doi.org/10.1111/tra.12309)

## Abstract

1. Traffic. 2015 Oct;16(10):1088-107. doi: 10.1111/tra.12309. Epub 2015 Aug 14.

Retromer Ensures the Degradation of Autophagic Cargo by Maintaining Lysosome 
Function in Drosophila.

Maruzs T(1)(2), Lőrincz P(1), Szatmári Z(1), Széplaki S(1), Sándor Z(1), Lakatos 
Z(1), Puska G(1), Juhász G(1)(2), Sass M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, Cell and Developmental Biology, Eötvös Loránd 
University, Pázmány Péter sétány 1./C, Budapest, H-1117, Hungary.
(2)Momentum Drosophila Autophagy Research Group, Institute of Genetics, 
Biological Research Centre, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Temesvári krt. 62, 
Szeged, H-6726, Hungary.

The retromer is an evolutionarily conserved coat complex that consists of Vps26, 
Vps29, Vps35 and a heterodimer of sorting nexin (Snx) proteins in yeast. 
Retromer mediates the recycling of transmembrane proteins from endosomes to the 
trans-Golgi network, including receptors that are essential for the delivery of 
hydrolytic enzymes to lysosomes. Besides its function in lysosomal enzyme 
receptor recycling, involvement of retromer has also been proposed in a variety 
of vesicular trafficking events, including early steps of autophagy and 
endocytosis. Here we show that the late stages of autophagy and endocytosis are 
impaired in Vps26 and Vps35 deficient Drosophila larval fat body cells, but 
formation of autophagosomes and endosomes is not compromised. Accumulation of 
aberrant autolysosomes and amphisomes in the absence of retromer function 
appears to be the consequence of decreased degradative capacity, as they contain 
undigested cytoplasmic material. Accordingly, we show that retromer is required 
for proper cathepsin L trafficking mainly independent of LERP, the Drosophila 
homolog of the cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor. Finally, we find 
that Snx3 and Snx6 are also required for proper autolysosomal degradation in 
Drosophila larval fat body cells.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/tra.12309
PMID: 26172538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
