---
pmid: '21507178'
title: Influence of putative exopolysaccharide genes on Pseudomonas putida KT2440
  biofilm stability.
authors:
- Nilsson M
- Chiang WC
- Fazli M
- Gjermansen M
- Givskov M
- Tolker-Nielsen T
journal: Environ Microbiol
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2011.02447.x
---

# Influence of putative exopolysaccharide genes on Pseudomonas putida KT2440 biofilm stability.
**Authors:** Nilsson M, Chiang WC, Fazli M, Gjermansen M, Givskov M, Tolker-Nielsen T
**Journal:** Environ Microbiol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1462-2920.2011.02447.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1462-2920.2011.02447.x)

## Abstract

1. Environ Microbiol. 2011 May;13(5):1357-69. doi: 
10.1111/j.1462-2920.2011.02447.x. Epub 2011 Mar 9.

Influence of putative exopolysaccharide genes on Pseudomonas putida KT2440 
biofilm stability.

Nilsson M(1), Chiang WC, Fazli M, Gjermansen M, Givskov M, Tolker-Nielsen T.

Author information:
(1)Department of International Health, Immunology and Microbiology, Faculty of 
Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

We report a study of the role of putative exopolysaccharide gene clusters in the 
formation and stability of Pseudomonas putida KT2440 biofilm. Two novel putative 
exopolysaccharide gene clusters, pea and peb, were identified, and evidence is 
provided that they encode products that stabilize P. putida KT2440 biofilm. The 
gene clusters alg and bcs, which code for proteins mediating alginate and 
cellulose biosynthesis, were found to play minor roles in P. putida KT2440 
biofilm formation and stability under the conditions tested. A P. putida KT2440 
derivative devoid of any identifiable exopolysaccharide genes was found to form 
biofilm with a structure similar to wild-type biofilm, but with a stability 
lower than that of wild-type biofilm. Based on our data, we suggest that the 
formation of structured P. putida KT2440 biofilm can occur in the absence of 
exopolysaccharides; however, exopolysaccharides play a role as structural 
stabilizers.

© 2011 Society for Applied Microbiology and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2011.02447.x
PMID: 21507178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
