---
pmid: '16365312'
title: On the mechanism of sensing unfolded protein in the endoplasmic reticulum.
authors:
- Credle JJ
- Finer-Moore JS
- Papa FR
- Stroud RM
- Walter P
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1316886
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0509487102
---

# On the mechanism of sensing unfolded protein in the endoplasmic reticulum.
**Authors:** Credle JJ, Finer-Moore JS, Papa FR, Stroud RM, Walter P
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0509487102](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0509487102)
**PMC:** [PMC1316886](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1316886/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Dec 27;102(52):18773-84. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0509487102. Epub 2005 Dec 19.

On the mechanism of sensing unfolded protein in the endoplasmic reticulum.

Credle JJ(1), Finer-Moore JS, Papa FR, Stroud RM, Walter P.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Departments of Biochemistry and Biophysics 
and Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143-2200, USA.

Unfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) activate the ER 
transmembrane sensor Ire1 to trigger the unfolded protein response (UPR), a 
homeostatic signaling pathway that adjusts ER protein folding capacity according 
to need. Ire1 is a bifunctional enzyme, containing cytoplasmic kinase and RNase 
domains whose roles in signal transduction downstream of Ire1 are understood in 
some detail. By contrast, the question of how its ER-luminal domain (LD) senses 
unfolded proteins has remained an enigma. The 3.0-A crystal structure and 
consequent structure-guided functional analyses of the conserved core region of 
the LD (cLD) leads us to a proposal for the mechanism of response. cLD exhibits 
a unique protein fold and is sufficient to control Ire1 activation by unfolded 
proteins. Dimerization of cLD monomers across a large interface creates a shared 
central groove formed by alpha-helices that are situated on a beta-sheet floor. 
This groove is reminiscent of the peptide binding domains of major 
histocompatibility complexes (MHCs) in its gross architecture. Conserved amino 
acid side chains in Ire1 that face into the groove are shown to be important for 
UPR activation in that their mutation reduces the response. Mutational analyses 
suggest that further interaction between cLD dimers is required to form 
higher-order oligomers necessary for UPR activation. We propose that cLD 
directly binds unfolded proteins, which changes the quaternary association of 
the monomers in the membrane plane. The changes in the ER lumen in turn position 
Ire1 kinase domains in the cytoplasm optimally for autophosphorylation to 
initiate the UPR.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0509487102
PMCID: PMC1316886
PMID: 16365312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
