---
pmid: '21561987'
title: The cell adhesion molecule DdCAD-1 regulates morphogenesis through differential
  spatiotemporal expression in Dictyostelium discoideum.
authors:
- Sriskanthadevan S
- Zhu Y
- Manoharan K
- Yang C
- Siu CH
journal: Development
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/dev.060129
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The cell adhesion molecule DdCAD-1 regulates morphogenesis through differential spatiotemporal expression in Dictyostelium discoideum.
**Authors:** Sriskanthadevan S, Zhu Y, Manoharan K, Yang C, Siu CH
**Journal:** Development (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.060129](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.060129)

## Abstract

1. Development. 2011 Jun;138(12):2487-97. doi: 10.1242/dev.060129. Epub 2011 May 
11.

The cell adhesion molecule DdCAD-1 regulates morphogenesis through differential 
spatiotemporal expression in Dictyostelium discoideum.

Sriskanthadevan S(1), Zhu Y, Manoharan K, Yang C, Siu CH.

Author information:
(1)The Banting and Best Department of Medical Research, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, Canada.

During development of Dictyostelium, multiple cell types are formed and undergo 
a coordinated series of morphogenetic movements guided by their adhesive 
properties and other cellular factors. DdCAD-1 is a unique homophilic cell 
adhesion molecule encoded by the cadA gene. It is synthesized in the cytoplasm 
and transported to the plasma membrane by contractile vacuoles. In chimeras 
developed on soil plates, DdCAD-1-expressing cells showed greater propensity to 
develop into spores than did cadA-null cells. When development was performed on 
non-nutrient agar, wild-type cells sorted from the cadA-null cells and moved to 
the anterior zone. They differentiated mostly into stalk cells and eventually 
died, whereas the cadA-null cells survived as spores. To assess the role of 
DdCAD-1 in this novel behavior of wild-type and mutant cells, cadA-null cells 
were rescued by the ectopic expression of DdCAD-1-GFP. Morphological studies 
have revealed major spatiotemporal changes in the subcellular distribution of 
DdCAD-1 during development. Whereas DdCAD-1 became internalized in most cells in 
the post-aggregation stages, it was prominent in the contact regions of anterior 
cells. Cell sorting was also restored in cadA(-) slugs by exogenous recombinant 
DdCAD-1. Remarkably, DdCAD-1 remained on the surface of anterior cells, whereas 
it was internalized in the posterior cells. Additionally, DdCAD-1-expressing 
cells migrated slower than cadA(-) cells and sorted to the anterior region of 
chimeric slugs. These results show that DdCAD-1 influences the sorting behavior 
of cells in slugs by its differential distribution on the prestalk and prespore 
cells.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.060129
PMID: 21561987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
