---
pmid: '19154346'
title: Structural framework of the GABARAP-calreticulin interface--implications for
  substrate binding to endoplasmic reticulum chaperones.
authors:
- Thielmann Y
- Weiergräber OH
- Mohrlüder J
- Willbold D
journal: FEBS J
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2008.06857.x
---

# Structural framework of the GABARAP-calreticulin interface--implications for substrate binding to endoplasmic reticulum chaperones.
**Authors:** Thielmann Y, Weiergräber OH, Mohrlüder J, Willbold D
**Journal:** FEBS J (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1742-4658.2008.06857.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1742-4658.2008.06857.x)

## Abstract

1. FEBS J. 2009 Feb;276(4):1140-52. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2008.06857.x. Epub 
2009 Jan 16.

Structural framework of the GABARAP-calreticulin interface--implications for 
substrate binding to endoplasmic reticulum chaperones.

Thielmann Y(1), Weiergräber OH, Mohrlüder J, Willbold D.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Neurowissenschaften und Biophysik, Molekulare Biophysik, 
Forschungszentrum Jülich, Germany.

The 4-aminobutyrate type A receptor-associated protein (GABARAP) is a versatile 
adaptor protein that plays an important role in intracellular vesicle 
trafficking, particularly in neuronal cells. We have investigated the structural 
determinants underlying the interaction of GABARAP with calreticulin using 
spectroscopic and crystallographic techniques. Specifically, we present the 
crystal structure of GABARAP in complex with its major binding epitope on the 
chaperone. Molecular modeling of a complex containing full-length calreticulin 
suggests a novel mode of substrate interaction, which may have functional 
implications for the calreticulin/calnexin family in general.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2008.06857.x
PMID: 19154346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
