---
pmid: '19308289'
title: PDCD5 interacts with Tip60 and functions as a cooperator in acetyltransferase
  activity and DNA damage-induced apoptosis.
authors:
- Xu L
- Chen Y
- Song Q
- Xu D
- Wang Y
- Ma D
journal: Neoplasia
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2657881
doi: 10.1593/neo.81524
---

# PDCD5 interacts with Tip60 and functions as a cooperator in acetyltransferase activity and DNA damage-induced apoptosis.
**Authors:** Xu L, Chen Y, Song Q, Xu D, Wang Y, Ma D
**Journal:** Neoplasia (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1593/neo.81524](https://doi.org/10.1593/neo.81524)
**PMC:** [PMC2657881](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2657881/)

## Abstract

1. Neoplasia. 2009 Apr;11(4):345-54. doi: 10.1593/neo.81524.

PDCD5 interacts with Tip60 and functions as a cooperator in acetyltransferase 
activity and DNA damage-induced apoptosis.

Xu L(1), Chen Y, Song Q, Xu D, Wang Y, Ma D.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Medical Immunology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking 
University Health Science Center, 38 Xueyuan Road, Beijing, 100191, China.

Tip60 is a histone acetyltransferase (HAT) involved in the acetyltransferase 
activity and the cellular response to DNA damage. Here, we show that programmed 
cell death 5 (PDCD5), a human apoptosis-related protein, binds to Tip60 and 
enhances the stability of Tip60 protein in unstressed conditions. The binding 
amount of PDCD5 and Tip60 is significantly increased after UV irradiation. 
Further, PDCD5 enhances HAT activity of Tip60 and Tip60-dependent histone 
acetylation in both basal and UV-induced levels. We also find that PDCD5 
increases Tip60-dependent K120 acetylation of p53 and participates in the 
p53-dependent expression of apoptosis-related genes, such as Bax. Moreover, we 
demonstrate the biological significance of the PDCD5-Tip60 interaction; that is, 
they function in cooperation to accelerate DNA damage-induced apoptosis and 
knockdown of PDCD5 or Tip60 impairs their apoptosis-accelerating activity, 
mutually. Consistent with this, PDCD5 levels increase significantly on DNA 
damage in U2OS cells, as does Tip60. Together, our findings indicate that PDCD5 
may play a dual role in the Tip60 pathway. Specifically, under normal growth 
conditions, PDCD5 contributes to maintaining a basal pool of Tip60 and its HAT 
activity. After DNA damage, PDCD5 functions as a Tip60 coactivator to promote 
apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1593/neo.81524
PMCID: PMC2657881
PMID: 19308289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
