---
pmid: '11676469'
title: Syk expression and novel function in a wide variety of tissues.
authors:
- Yanagi S
- Inatome R
- Takano T
- Yamamura H
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/bbrc.2001.5788
---

# Syk expression and novel function in a wide variety of tissues.
**Authors:** Yanagi S, Inatome R, Takano T, Yamamura H
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1006/bbrc.2001.5788](https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.2001.5788)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Nov 2;288(3):495-8. doi: 
10.1006/bbrc.2001.5788.

Syk expression and novel function in a wide variety of tissues.

Yanagi S(1), Inatome R, Takano T, Yamamura H.

Author information:
(1)Division of Proteomics, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Chuo-ku, 
Kobe, 650-0017, Japan.

Syk protein-tyrosine kinase has been implicated in a variety of hematopoietic 
cell responses, in particular immunoreceptor signaling events that mediate 
diverse cellular responses including proliferation, differentiation, and 
phagocytosis. On the other hand, Syk exhibits a more widespread expression 
pattern in nonhematopoietic cells like fibroblasts, epithelial cells, breast 
tissue, hepatocytes, neuronal cells, and vascular endothelial cells and has been 
shown to be functionally important on these cell types. Thus, Syk appears to 
play a general physiological function in a wide variety of cells. In this 
article, we briefly review the current literature regarding the expression and 
novel function of Syk in various cells and tissues.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.2001.5788
PMID: 11676469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
