---
pmid: '25066423'
title: Structural and functional analyses of human tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase.
authors:
- Meng B
- Wu D
- Gu J
- Ouyang S
- Ding W
- Liu ZJ
journal: Proteins
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/prot.24653
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Structural and functional analyses of human tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase.
**Authors:** Meng B, Wu D, Gu J, Ouyang S, Ding W, Liu ZJ
**Journal:** Proteins (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1002/prot.24653](https://doi.org/10.1002/prot.24653)

## Abstract

1. Proteins. 2014 Nov;82(11):3210-6. doi: 10.1002/prot.24653. Epub 2014 Aug 30.

Structural and functional analyses of human tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase.

Meng B(1), Wu D, Gu J, Ouyang S, Ding W, Liu ZJ.

Author information:
(1)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100101, China; University of Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.

Tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase (TDO), one of the two key enzymes in the kynurenine 
pathway, catalyzes the indole ring cleavage at the C2-C3 bond of L-tryptophan. 
This is a rate-limiting step in the regulation of tryptophan concentration in 
vivo, and is thus important in drug discovery for cancer and immune diseases. 
Here, we report the crystal structure of human TDO (hTDO) without the heme 
cofactor to 2.90 Å resolution. The overall fold and the tertiary assembly of 
hTDO into a tetramer, as well as the active site architecture, are well 
conserved and similar to the structures of known orthologues. Kinetic and 
mutational studies confirmed that eight residues play critical roles in 
L-tryptophan oxidation.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.24653
PMID: 25066423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
