---
pmid: '16464856'
title: Cytokines promote Wnt signaling and inflammation and impair the normal differentiation
  and lipid accumulation in 3T3-L1 preadipocytes.
authors:
- Gustafson B
- Smith U
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M512077200
---

# Cytokines promote Wnt signaling and inflammation and impair the normal differentiation and lipid accumulation in 3T3-L1 preadipocytes.
**Authors:** Gustafson B, Smith U
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M512077200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M512077200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Apr 7;281(14):9507-16. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M512077200. Epub
2006  Feb 7.

Cytokines promote Wnt signaling and inflammation and impair the normal 
differentiation and lipid accumulation in 3T3-L1 preadipocytes.

Gustafson B(1), Smith U.

Author information:
(1)Lundberg Laboratory for Diabetes Research, Department of Internal Medicine, 
The Sahlgrenska Academy at Göteborg University, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 
Göteborg SE-413 45, Sweden.

Obesity with enlarged fat cells is associated with high local concentrations of 
interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) in the adipose 
tissue. We examined the effects of this inflammatory state on 3T3-L1 
preadipocyte development and differentiation to mature adipose cells. Both IL-6 
and TNFalpha impaired the normal differentiation pattern and lipid accumulation. 
However, IL-6 allowed a normal early induction of differentiation with 
inhibition of Wnt10b and Pref-1, whereas expression of CCAAT/enhancer-binding 
protein alpha, in contrast to peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma, 
was markedly reduced. TNFalpha also allowed a normal early induction of 
differentiation, whereas the terminal differentiation to adipose cells was 
completely prevented. However, both cytokines induced an inflammatory phenotype 
of the cells but with different profiles. Remarkably, both IL-6 and TNFalpha 
maintained and augmented the canonical Wnt signaling associated with low axin 
and high low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRD), Dishevelled, 
and beta-catenin levels. TNFalpha, but not IL-6, activated Wnt10b expression, 
whereas IL-6 increased the apparent phosphorylation of Dishevelled. Thus, both 
IL-6 and TNFalpha prevent the normal development of preadipocytes to fully 
differentiated adipose cells and, instead, promote an inflammatory phenotype of 
the adipocytes. These results provide an explanation as to why obesity and 
diabetes are associated with both local and systemic inflammation, insulin 
resistance, and ectopic lipid accumulation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M512077200
PMID: 16464856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
