---
pmid: '15632413'
title: 'Combinatorial control of the bradykinin B2 receptor promoter by p53, CREB,
  KLF-4, and CBP: implications for terminal nephron differentiation.'
authors:
- Saifudeen Z
- Dipp S
- Fan H
- El-Dahr SS
journal: Am J Physiol Renal Physiol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1152/ajprenal.00370.2004
---

# Combinatorial control of the bradykinin B2 receptor promoter by p53, CREB, KLF-4, and CBP: implications for terminal nephron differentiation.
**Authors:** Saifudeen Z, Dipp S, Fan H, El-Dahr SS
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Renal Physiol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajprenal.00370.2004](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajprenal.00370.2004)

## Abstract

1. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2005 May;288(5):F899-909. doi: 
10.1152/ajprenal.00370.2004. Epub 2005 Jan 4.

Combinatorial control of the bradykinin B2 receptor promoter by p53, CREB, 
KLF-4, and CBP: implications for terminal nephron differentiation.

Saifudeen Z(1), Dipp S, Fan H, El-Dahr SS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tulane University Health Sciences Center, 1430 
Tulane Ave., New Orleans, Louisiana 70112, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2005 May;288(5):F897-8. doi: 
10.1152/ajprenal.00031.2005.

Despite a wealth of knowledge regarding the early steps of epithelial 
differentiation, little is known about the mechanisms responsible for terminal 
nephron differentiation. The bradykinin B2 receptor (B2R) regulates renal 
function and integrity, and its expression is induced during terminal nephron 
differentiation. This study investigates the transcriptional regulation of the 
B2R during kidney development. The rat B2R 5'-flanking region has a highly 
conserved cis-acting enhancer in the proximal promoter consisting of contiguous 
binding sites for the transcription factors cAMP response element binding 
protein (CREB), p53, and Kruppel-like factor (KLF-4). The B2R enhancer drives 
reporter gene expression in inner medullary collecting duct-3 cells but is 
considerably weaker in other cell types. Site-directed mutagenesis and 
expression of dominant negative mutants demonstrated the requirement of CREB DNA 
binding and Ser-133 phosphorylation for optimal enhancer function. Moreover, 
helical phasing experiments showed that disruption of the spatial organization 
of the enhancer inhibits B2R promoter activity. Several lines of evidence 
indicate that cooperative interactions among the three transcription factors 
occur in vivo during terminal nephron differentiation: 1) CREB, p53, and KLF-4 
are coexpressed in B2R-positive differentiating cells; 2) the maturational 
expression of B2R correlates with CREB/p53/KLF-4 DNA-binding activity; 3) 
assembly of CREB, p53, and KLF-4 on chromatin at the endogenous B2R promoter is 
developmentally regulated and is accompanied by CBP recruitment and histone 
hyperacetylation; and 4) CREB and p53 occupancy of the B2R enhancer is 
cooperative. These results demonstrate that combinatorial interactions among the 
transcription factors, CREB, p53, and KLF-4, and the coactivator CBP, may be 
critical for the regulation of B2R gene expression during terminal nephron 
differentiation.

DOI: 10.1152/ajprenal.00370.2004
PMID: 15632413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
