---
pmid: '25281560'
title: Proximity biotinylation and affinity purification are complementary approaches
  for the interactome mapping of chromatin-associated protein complexes.
authors:
- Lambert JP
- Tucholska M
- Go C
- Knight JD
- Gingras AC
journal: J Proteomics
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4383713
doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2014.09.011
---

# Proximity biotinylation and affinity purification are complementary approaches for the interactome mapping of chromatin-associated protein complexes.
**Authors:** Lambert JP, Tucholska M, Go C, Knight JD, Gingras AC
**Journal:** J Proteomics (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jprot.2014.09.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jprot.2014.09.011)
**PMC:** [PMC4383713](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4383713/)

## Abstract

1. J Proteomics. 2015 Apr 6;118:81-94. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2014.09.011. Epub
2014  Oct 2.

Proximity biotinylation and affinity purification are complementary approaches 
for the interactome mapping of chromatin-associated protein complexes.

Lambert JP(1), Tucholska M(1), Go C(2), Knight JD(1), Gingras AC(3).

Author information:
(1)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital 600 University 
Avenue, Toronto, M5G 1X5, Canada.
(2)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital 600 University 
Avenue, Toronto, M5G 1X5, Canada; Department of Molecular Genetics, University 
of Toronto, Toronto M5S 1A8, Canada.
(3)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital 600 University 
Avenue, Toronto, M5G 1X5, Canada; Department of Molecular Genetics, University 
of Toronto, Toronto M5S 1A8, Canada. Electronic address: gingras@lunenfeld.ca.

Mapping protein-protein interactions for chromatin-associated proteins remains 
challenging. Here we explore the use of BioID, a proximity biotinylation 
approach in which a mutated biotin ligase (BirA*) is fused to a bait of 
interest, allowing for the local activation of biotin and subsequent 
biotinylation of proteins in the bait vicinity. BioID allowed for successful 
interactome mapping of core histones and members of the mediator complex. We 
explored the background signal produced by the BioID approach and found that 
using distinct types of controls increased the stringency of our statistical 
analysis with SAINTexpress. A direct comparison of BioID with our AP-MS protocol 
optimized for chromatin-associated protein complexes revealed that the 
approaches identified few shared interaction partners and enriched for distinct 
biological processes; yet, both approaches permitted the recovery of 
biologically meaningful interactions. While no clear bias could be observed for 
either technique toward protein complexes of particular functions, BioID allowed 
for the purification of proteins of lower cellular abundance. Finally, we were 
able to identify a strong association of MED4 with the centrosome by BioID and 
validated this finding by immunofluorescence. In summary, BioID complements 
AP-MS for the study of chromatin-associated protein complexes.
BIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE: This manuscript describes the application of BioID, a 
proximity biotinylation approach, to chromatin-associated proteins, namely core 
histones and members of the mediator complex. We observed that BioID was 
successful at identifying known interaction partners for the baits tested, but 
also allowed novel putative interaction partners to be identified. By performing 
a detailed comparison of BioID versus a standard method for interactome mapping 
(affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry, AP-MS), we show that the 
approaches were complementary, allowing for purification of different 
interaction partners. These interaction partners were different in the 
biological processes they are associated with, but also in their abundance. 
BioID represents a significant technical development in the field of chromatin 
research by expanding the search space for interactome mapping beyond what is 
possible with AP-MS. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Protein 
dynamics in health and disease. Guest Editors: Pierre Thibault and Anne-Claude 
Gingras.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jprot.2014.09.011
PMCID: PMC4383713
PMID: 25281560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
