---
pmid: '20553223'
title: 'Effect of zinc and paraquat co-exposure on neurodegeneration: Modulation of
  oxidative stress and expression of metallothioneins, toxicant responsive and transporter
  genes in rats.'
authors:
- Kumar A
- Ahmad I
- Shukla S
- Singh BK
- Patel DK
- Pandey HP
- Singh C
journal: Free Radic Res
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.3109/10715762.2010.492832
---

# Effect of zinc and paraquat co-exposure on neurodegeneration: Modulation of oxidative stress and expression of metallothioneins, toxicant responsive and transporter genes in rats.
**Authors:** Kumar A, Ahmad I, Shukla S, Singh BK, Patel DK, Pandey HP, Singh C
**Journal:** Free Radic Res (2010)
**DOI:** [10.3109/10715762.2010.492832](https://doi.org/10.3109/10715762.2010.492832)

## Abstract

1. Free Radic Res. 2010 Aug;44(8):950-65. doi: 10.3109/10715762.2010.492832.

Effect of zinc and paraquat co-exposure on neurodegeneration: Modulation of 
oxidative stress and expression of metallothioneins, toxicant responsive and 
transporter genes in rats.

Kumar A(1), Ahmad I, Shukla S, Singh BK, Patel DK, Pandey HP, Singh C.

Author information:
(1)Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 226 001, India.

Oxidative stress is implicated in Parkinson's disease (PD). Metallothioneins 
(MT), cytochrome P450 IIE1 (CYP2E1) and glutathione S-transferases alpha4-4 
(GSTA4-4) are involved in oxidative stress-mediated damage. Altered dopamine 
transporter (DAT) and vesicular monoamine transporter-2 (VMAT-2) are also 
documented in PD. The present study was undertaken to investigate the effect of 
Zn and PQ co-exposure on neurodegeneration in rats. A significant reduction was 
observed in spontaneous locomotor activity (SLA), striatal dopamine (DA) levels, 
tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) immunoreactivity, glutathione reductase (GR) and 
catalase activity along with increased lipid peroxidation (LPO) and glutathione 
peroxidase (GPx) activity after Zn and/or PQ exposure. Zn and/or PQ exposure 
increased gene expression of DAT, CYP2E1, GSTA4-4, MT-I and MT-II, but reduced 
the expression of VMAT-2. Protein expression analysis of TH, VMAT-2 and DAT 
showed results similar to those obtained with gene expression study. Zn and PQ 
co-exposure caused a more pronounced effect than that of individual exposure. 
The results obtained in this study suggest that, similar to PQ, Zn induced 
neurodegeneration via alterations in oxidative stress and expression of the 
above-mentioned genes. However, the effect of Zn+PQ was only slightly higher 
than that of alone, indicating that probably Zn and PQ follow some different 
molecular events leading to neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.3109/10715762.2010.492832
PMID: 20553223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
