---
pmid: '19264780'
title: Involvement of creatine kinase B in hepatitis C virus genome replication through
  interaction with the viral NS4A protein.
authors:
- Hara H
- Aizaki H
- Matsuda M
- Shinkai-Ouchi F
- Inoue Y
- Murakami K
- Shoji I
- Kawakami H
- Matsuura Y
- Lai MM
- Miyamura T
- Wakita T
- Suzuki T
journal: J Virol
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2682066
doi: 10.1128/JVI.02179-08
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Involvement of creatine kinase B in hepatitis C virus genome replication through interaction with the viral NS4A protein.
**Authors:** Hara H, Aizaki H, Matsuda M, Shinkai-Ouchi F, Inoue Y, Murakami K, Shoji I, Kawakami H, Matsuura Y, Lai MM, Miyamura T, Wakita T, Suzuki T
**Journal:** J Virol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.02179-08](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.02179-08)
**PMC:** [PMC2682066](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2682066/)

## Abstract

1. J Virol. 2009 May;83(10):5137-47. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02179-08. Epub 2009 Mar 4.

Involvement of creatine kinase B in hepatitis C virus genome replication through 
interaction with the viral NS4A protein.

Hara H(1), Aizaki H, Matsuda M, Shinkai-Ouchi F, Inoue Y, Murakami K, Shoji I, 
Kawakami H, Matsuura Y, Lai MM, Miyamura T, Wakita T, Suzuki T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Virology II, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, 1-23-1 
Toyama, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8640, Japan.

Persistent infection with hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a major cause of chronic 
liver diseases. The aim of this study was to identify host cell factor(s) 
participating in the HCV replication complex (RC) and to clarify the regulatory 
mechanisms of viral genome replication dependent on the host-derived factor(s) 
identified. By comparative proteome analysis of RC-rich membrane fractions and 
subsequent gene silencing mediated by RNA interference, we identified several 
candidates for RC components involved in HCV replication. We found that one of 
these candidates, creatine kinase B (CKB), a key ATP-generating enzyme that 
regulates ATP in subcellular compartments of nonmuscle cells, is important for 
efficient replication of the HCV genome and propagation of infectious virus. CKB 
interacts with HCV NS4A protein and forms a complex with NS3-4A, which possesses 
multiple enzyme activities. CKB upregulates both NS3-4A-mediated unwinding of 
RNA and DNA in vitro and replicase activity in permeabilized HCV replicating 
cells. Our results support a model in which recruitment of CKB to the HCV RC 
compartment, which has high and fluctuating energy demands, through its 
interaction with NS4A is important for efficient replication of the viral 
genome. The CKB-NS4A association is a potential target for the development of a 
new type of antiviral therapeutic strategy.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02179-08
PMCID: PMC2682066
PMID: 19264780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
