---
pmid: '15923622'
title: The HRPT2 tumor suppressor gene product parafibromin associates with human
  PAF1 and RNA polymerase II.
authors:
- Yart A
- Gstaiger M
- Wirbelauer C
- Pecnik M
- Anastasiou D
- Hess D
- Krek W
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1140601
doi: 10.1128/MCB.25.12.5052-5060.2005
---

# The HRPT2 tumor suppressor gene product parafibromin associates with human PAF1 and RNA polymerase II.
**Authors:** Yart A, Gstaiger M, Wirbelauer C, Pecnik M, Anastasiou D, Hess D, Krek W
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.25.12.5052-5060.2005](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.25.12.5052-5060.2005)
**PMC:** [PMC1140601](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1140601/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Jun;25(12):5052-60. doi: 10.1128/MCB.25.12.5052-5060.2005.

The HRPT2 tumor suppressor gene product parafibromin associates with human PAF1 
and RNA polymerase II.

Yart A(1), Gstaiger M, Wirbelauer C, Pecnik M, Anastasiou D, Hess D, Krek W.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, ETH Hönggerberg, CH-8093 Zurich, Switzerland.

Inactivation of the HRPT2 tumor suppressor gene is associated with the 
pathogenesis of the hereditary hyperparathyroidism-jaw tumor syndrome and 
malignancy in sporadic parathyroid tumors. The cellular function of the HPRT2 
gene product, parafibromin, has not been defined yet. Here we show that 
parafibromin physically interacts with human orthologs of yeast Paf1 complex 
components, including PAF1, LEO1, and CTR9, that are involved in transcription 
elongation and 3' end processing. It also associates with modified forms of the 
large subunit of RNA polymerase II, in particular those phosphorylated on serine 
5 or 2 within the carboxy-terminal domain, that are important for the coordinate 
recruitment of transcription elongation and RNA processing machineries during 
the transcription cycle. These interactions depend on a C-terminal domain of 
parafibromin, which is deleted in ca. 80% of clinically relevant mutations. 
Finally, RNAi-induced downregulation of parafibromin promotes entry into S 
phase, implying a role for parafibromin as an inhibitor of cell cycle 
progression. Taken together, these findings link the tumor suppressor 
parafibromin to the transcription elongation and RNA processing pathway as a 
PAF1 complex- and RNA polymerase II-bound protein. Dysfunction of this pathway 
may be a general phenomenon in the majority of cases of hereditary parathyroid 
cancer.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.25.12.5052-5060.2005
PMCID: PMC1140601
PMID: 15923622 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
