---
pmid: '21148485'
title: FAM129B/MINERVA, a novel adherens junction-associated protein, suppresses apoptosis
  in HeLa cells.
authors:
- Chen S
- Evans HG
- Evans DR
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3060473
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.175273
---

# FAM129B/MINERVA, a novel adherens junction-associated protein, suppresses apoptosis in HeLa cells.
**Authors:** Chen S, Evans HG, Evans DR
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110.175273](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.175273)
**PMC:** [PMC3060473](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3060473/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Mar 25;286(12):10201-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.175273. Epub 
2010 Dec 9.

FAM129B/MINERVA, a novel adherens junction-associated protein, suppresses 
apoptosis in HeLa cells.

Chen S(1), Evans HG, Evans DR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Wayne State University 
School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan 48201, USA.

A recent proteomics study identified FAM129B or MINERVA as a target of the MAP 
kinase (Erk1/2) signaling cascade in human melanoma cells. Phosphorylation of 
the protein was found to promote cell invasion and the dissociation of the 
protein from the cell-cell junctions. Suppression of apoptosis during metastasis 
is a prerequisite for the survival and spread of cancer cells. During apoptosis, 
the adherens junctions are disassembled as the dying cell retracts, and new 
contacts are formed between normal neighboring cells. In this study, we show 
that FAM129B was cytosolic in exponentially growing HeLa cells but was 
translocated to the adherens junctions where it colocalized with β-catenin 
whenever contact between two or more cells was established. Silencing the 
FAM129B gene expression by specific siRNAs did not induce apoptosis or inhibit 
the growth of HeLa cells. However, when apoptosis was induced by exposure to 
TNFα/cycloheximide or other apoptotic signaling molecules, the onset of 
apoptosis was accelerated 3-4-fold when FAM129B was depleted. Annexin V binding, 
the inactivation of the DNA repair enzyme, poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase, and the 
activation of the caspases occurred more rapidly in the cells lacking FAM129B. 
The rapid induction of apoptosis in FAM129B knockdown cells was reversed by 
co-transfection with recombinant FAM129B, indicating that its effect on 
apoptosis was specific. As apoptosis proceeded, FAM129B was degraded and 
disappeared from the plasma membrane. Thus, one crucial facet of the mechanism 
by which FAM129B promotes cancer cell invasion is likely to be the suppression 
of apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.175273
PMCID: PMC3060473
PMID: 21148485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
