---
pmid: '28607088'
title: Skin-specific regulation of SREBP processing and lipid biosynthesis by glycerol
  kinase 5.
authors:
- Zhang D
- Tomisato W
- Su L
- Sun L
- Choi JH
- Zhang Z
- Wang KW
- Zhan X
- Choi M
- Li X
- Tang M
- Castro-Perez JM
- Hildebrand S
- Murray AR
- Moresco EMY
- Beutler B
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5495269
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1705312114
---

# Skin-specific regulation of SREBP processing and lipid biosynthesis by glycerol kinase 5.
**Authors:** Zhang D, Tomisato W, Su L, Sun L, Choi JH, Zhang Z, Wang KW, Zhan X, Choi M, Li X, Tang M, Castro-Perez JM, Hildebrand S, Murray AR, Moresco EMY, Beutler B
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1705312114](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1705312114)
**PMC:** [PMC5495269](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5495269/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017 Jun 27;114(26):E5197-E5206. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1705312114. Epub 2017 Jun 12.

Skin-specific regulation of SREBP processing and lipid biosynthesis by glycerol 
kinase 5.

Zhang D(1), Tomisato W(1), Su L(1), Sun L(1), Choi JH(1), Zhang Z(1), Wang 
KW(1), Zhan X(1), Choi M(1), Li X(1), Tang M(1), Castro-Perez JM(2), Hildebrand 
S(1), Murray AR(1), Moresco EMY(1), Beutler B(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for the Genetics of Host Defense, University of Texas Southwestern 
Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-8505.
(2)Merck & Co., Inc., Kenilworth, NJ 07033.
(3)Center for the Genetics of Host Defense, University of Texas Southwestern 
Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-8505; bruce.beutler@UTSouthwestern.edu.

The recessive N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea-induced phenotype toku is characterized by 
delayed hair growth, progressive hair loss, and excessive accumulation of dermal 
cholesterol, triglycerides, and ceramides. The toku phenotype was attributed to 
a null allele of Gk5, encoding glycerol kinase 5 (GK5), a skin-specific kinase 
expressed predominantly in sebaceous glands. GK5 formed a complex with the 
sterol regulatory element-binding proteins (SREBPs) through their C-terminal 
regulatory domains, inhibiting SREBP processing and activation. In Gk5toku/toku 
mice, transcriptionally active SREBPs accumulated in the skin, but not in the 
liver; they were localized to the nucleus and led to elevated lipid synthesis 
and subsequent hair growth defects. Similar defective hair growth was observed 
in kinase-inactive GK5 mutant mice. Hair growth defects of homozygous toku mice 
were partially rescued by treatment with the HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor 
simvastatin. GK5 exists as part of a skin-specific regulatory mechanism for 
cholesterol biosynthesis, independent of cholesterol regulation elsewhere in the 
body.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1705312114
PMCID: PMC5495269
PMID: 28607088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
