---
pmid: '15935758'
title: RNA degradation by the exosome is promoted by a nuclear polyadenylation complex.
authors:
- LaCava J
- Houseley J
- Saveanu C
- Petfalski E
- Thompson E
- Jacquier A
- Tollervey D
journal: Cell
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.04.029
---

# RNA degradation by the exosome is promoted by a nuclear polyadenylation complex.
**Authors:** LaCava J, Houseley J, Saveanu C, Petfalski E, Thompson E, Jacquier A, Tollervey D
**Journal:** Cell (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2005.04.029](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2005.04.029)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2005 Jun 3;121(5):713-24. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.04.029.

RNA degradation by the exosome is promoted by a nuclear polyadenylation complex.

LaCava J(1), Houseley J, Saveanu C, Petfalski E, Thompson E, Jacquier A, 
Tollervey D.

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh 
EH9 3JR, UK.

Comment in
    Cell. 2005 Jun 3;121(5):660-2. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.05.018.

The exosome complex of 3'-5' exonucleases participates in RNA maturation and 
quality control and can rapidly degrade RNA-protein complexes in vivo. However, 
the purified exosome showed weak in vitro activity, indicating that rapid RNA 
degradation requires activating cofactors. This work identifies a nuclear 
polyadenylation complex containing a known exosome cofactor, the RNA helicase 
Mtr4p; a poly(A) polymerase, Trf4p; and a zinc knuckle protein, Air2p. In vitro, 
the Trf4p/Air2p/Mtr4p polyadenylation complex (TRAMP) showed distributive RNA 
polyadenylation activity. The presence of the exosome suppressed poly(A) tail 
addition, while TRAMP stimulated exosome degradation through structured RNA 
substrates. In vivo analyses showed that TRAMP is required for polyadenylation 
and degradation of rRNA and snoRNA precursors that are characterized exosome 
substrates. Poly(A) tails stimulate RNA degradation in bacteria, suggesting that 
this is their ancestral function. We speculate that this function was maintained 
in eukaryotic nuclei, while cytoplasmic mRNA poly(A) tails acquired different 
roles in translation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.04.029
PMID: 15935758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
