---
pmid: '8521818'
title: In vitro assembly of a functional human CDK7-cyclin H complex requires MAT1,
  a novel 36 kDa RING finger protein.
authors:
- Tassan JP
- Jaquenoud M
- Fry AM
- Frutiger S
- Hughes GJ
- Nigg EA
journal: EMBO J
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC394676
doi: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1995.tb00248.x
---

# In vitro assembly of a functional human CDK7-cyclin H complex requires MAT1, a novel 36 kDa RING finger protein.
**Authors:** Tassan JP, Jaquenoud M, Fry AM, Frutiger S, Hughes GJ, Nigg EA
**Journal:** EMBO J (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1002/j.1460-2075.1995.tb00248.x](https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1460-2075.1995.tb00248.x)
**PMC:** [PMC394676](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC394676/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 1995 Nov 15;14(22):5608-17. doi: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1995.tb00248.x.

In vitro assembly of a functional human CDK7-cyclin H complex requires MAT1, a 
novel 36 kDa RING finger protein.

Tassan JP(1), Jaquenoud M, Fry AM, Frutiger S, Hughes GJ, Nigg EA.

Author information:
(1)Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC), Epalinges, 
Switzerland.

It is proposed that the CDK7-cyclin H complex functions in cell cycle 
progression, basal transcription and DNA repair. Here we report that in vitro 
reconstitution of an active CDK7-cyclin H complex requires stoichiometric 
amounts of a novel 36 kDa assembly factor termed MAT1 (ménage à trois 1). 
Sequencing of MAT1 reveals a putative zinc binding motif (a C3HC4 RING finger) 
in the N-terminus; however, this domain is not required for ternary complex 
formation with CDK7-cyclin H. MAT1 is associated with nuclear CDK7-cyclin H at 
all stages of the cell cycle in vivo. Ternary complexes of CDK7, cyclin H and 
MAT1 display kinase activity towards substrates mimicking both the T-loop in 
CDKs and the C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II, regardless of whether they 
are immunoprecipitated from HeLa cells or reconstituted in a reticulocyte 
lysate. MAT1 constitutes the first example of an assembly factor that appears to 
be essential for the formation of an active CDK-cyclin complex.

DOI: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1995.tb00248.x
PMCID: PMC394676
PMID: 8521818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
