---
pmid: '1347713'
title: Antifolding activity of hsp60 couples protein import into the mitochondrial
  matrix with export to the intermembrane space.
authors:
- Koll H
- Guiard B
- Rassow J
- Ostermann J
- Horwich AL
- Neupert W
- Hartl FU
journal: Cell
year: '1992'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(92)90086-r
---

# Antifolding activity of hsp60 couples protein import into the mitochondrial matrix with export to the intermembrane space.
**Authors:** Koll H, Guiard B, Rassow J, Ostermann J, Horwich AL, Neupert W, Hartl FU
**Journal:** Cell (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0092-8674(92)90086-r](https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(92)90086-r)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 1992 Mar 20;68(6):1163-75. doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(92)90086-r.

Antifolding activity of hsp60 couples protein import into the mitochondrial 
matrix with export to the intermembrane space.

Koll H(1), Guiard B, Rassow J, Ostermann J, Horwich AL, Neupert W, Hartl FU.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Physiologische Chemie, München, Germany.

Cytochrome b2 reaches the intermembrane space of mitochondria by transport into 
the matrix followed by export across the inner membrane. While in the matrix, 
the protein interacts with hsp60, which arrests its folding prior to export. The 
bacterial-type export sequence in pre-cytochrome b2 functions by inhibiting the 
ATP-dependent release of the protein from hsp60. Release for export apparently 
requires, in addition to ATP, the interaction of the signal sequence with a 
component of the export machinery in the inner membrane. Export can occur before 
import is complete provided that a critical length of the polypeptide chain has 
been translocated into the matrix. Thus, hsp60 combines two activities: 
catalysis of folding of proteins destined for the matrix, and maintaining 
proteins in an unfolded state to facilitate their channeling between the 
machineries for import and export across the inner membrane. Anti-folding 
signals such as the hydrophobic export sequence in cytochrome b2 may act as 
switches between these two activities.

DOI: 10.1016/0092-8674(92)90086-r
PMID: 1347713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
