---
pmid: '7542744'
title: The phosphotyrosine interaction domain of Shc binds an LXNPXY motif on the
  epidermal growth factor receptor.
authors:
- Batzer AG
- Blaikie P
- Nelson K
- Schlessinger J
- Margolis B
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC230680
doi: 10.1128/MCB.15.8.4403
---

# The phosphotyrosine interaction domain of Shc binds an LXNPXY motif on the epidermal growth factor receptor.
**Authors:** Batzer AG, Blaikie P, Nelson K, Schlessinger J, Margolis B
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.15.8.4403](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.15.8.4403)
**PMC:** [PMC230680](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC230680/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Aug;15(8):4403-9. doi: 10.1128/MCB.15.8.4403.

The phosphotyrosine interaction domain of Shc binds an LXNPXY motif on the 
epidermal growth factor receptor.

Batzer AG(1), Blaikie P, Nelson K, Schlessinger J, Margolis B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, New York University Medical Center, New York, 
USA.

Shc is an SH2 domain protein that is tyrosine phosphorylated in cells stimulated 
with a variety of growth factors and cytokines. Once phosphorylated, Shc binds 
the Grb2-Sos complex, leading to Ras activation. Shc can interact with 
tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins by binding to phosphotyrosine in the context of 
an NPXpY motif, where pY is a phosphotyrosine. This is an unusual binding site 
for an SH2 domain protein whose binding specificity is usually controlled by 
residues carboxy terminal, not amino terminal, to the phosphotyrosine. Recently 
we identified a second region in Shc, named the phosphotyrosine interaction (PI) 
domain, and we have found it to be present in a variety of other cellular 
proteins. In this study we used a dephosphorylation protection assay, 
competition analysis with phosphotyrosine-containing synthetic peptides, and 
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutants to determine the binding sites 
of the PI domain of Shc on the EGFR. We demonstrate that the PI domain of Shc 
binds the LXNPXpY motif that encompasses Y-1148 of the activated EGFR. We 
conclude that the PI domain imparts to Shc its ability to bind the NPXpY motif.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.15.8.4403
PMCID: PMC230680
PMID: 7542744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Shc is an SH2 domain protein that is tyrosine phosphorylated in cells stimulated with a variety of growth factors and cytokines. Once phosphorylated, Shc binds the Grb2-Sos complex, leading to Ras activation. Shc can interact with tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins by binding to phosphotyrosine in the context of an NPXpY motif, where pY is a phosphotyrosine. This is an unusual binding site for an SH2 domain protein whose binding specificity is usually controlled by residues carboxy terminal, not amino terminal, to the phosphotyrosine. Recently we identified a second region in Shc, named the phosphotyrosine interaction (PI) domain, and we have found it to be present in a variety of other cellular proteins. In this study we used a dephosphorylation protection assay, competition analysis with phosphotyrosine-containing synthetic peptides, and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutants to determine the binding sites of the PI domain of Shc on the EGFR. We demonstrate that the PI domain of Shc binds the LXNPXpY motif that encompasses Y-1148 of the activated EGFR. We conclude that the PI domain imparts to Shc its ability to bind the NPXpY motif.
