---
pmid: '8550562'
title: Integrin-associated protein is a receptor for the C-terminal domain of thrombospondin.
authors:
- Gao AG
- Lindberg FP
- Finn MB
- Blystone SD
- Brown EJ
- Frazier WA
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.1.21
---

# Integrin-associated protein is a receptor for the C-terminal domain of thrombospondin.
**Authors:** Gao AG, Lindberg FP, Finn MB, Blystone SD, Brown EJ, Frazier WA
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.271.1.21](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.271.1.21)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jan 5;271(1):21-4. doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.1.21.

Integrin-associated protein is a receptor for the C-terminal domain of 
thrombospondin.

Gao AG(1), Lindberg FP, Finn MB, Blystone SD, Brown EJ, Frazier WA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

The C-terminal "cell-binding domain" (CBD) of thrombospondin-1 (TS1) is a 
binding site for many cell types. Cell-binding peptides based on the sequence 
RFYVVM from the CBD of TS1 affinity label a 52-kDa cell surface glycoprotein, 
which we show is integrin-associated protein (IAP or CD47). IAP associates with 
alpha v beta 3 and thereby modulates the activity of several integrins. Cells 
that express IAP bind strongly to TS1, the CBD, and its active cell-binding 
peptides while IAP negative cells do not. The 52-kDa protein is affinity labeled 
on IAP-positive but not IAP-negative cells, and monoclonal antibodies against 
IAP specifically immunoprecipitate the affinity-labeled 52-kDa protein from 
lysates of IAP-positive cells. Consistent with the association of IAP with alpha 
v beta 3 integrin, the labeled 52-kDa protein is immunoprecipitated by an 
anti-alpha v beta 3 antibody. Endothelial cells exhibit chemotaxis toward TS1 
(at concentrations above 10 nM) and RFYVVM peptides. Chemotaxis to both agents 
is specifically inhibited by a function blocking anti-IAP monoclonal antibody. 
These data establish IAP (CD47) as a receptor for the CBD of TS1 and suggest a 
mechanism for the well established effects of the CBD on cell motility.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.1.21
PMID: 8550562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
