---
pmid: '28414460'
title: Analysis of Novel Interactions between Components of the Selenocysteine Biosynthesis
  Pathway, SEPHS1, SEPHS2, SEPSECS, and SECp43.
authors:
- Oudouhou F
- Casu B
- Dopgwa Puemi AS
- Sygusch J
- Baron C
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.6b01116
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Analysis of Novel Interactions between Components of the Selenocysteine Biosynthesis Pathway, SEPHS1, SEPHS2, SEPSECS, and SECp43.
**Authors:** Oudouhou F, Casu B, Dopgwa Puemi AS, Sygusch J, Baron C
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1021/acs.biochem.6b01116](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.biochem.6b01116)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2017 May 2;56(17):2261-2270. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.6b01116. 
Epub 2017 Apr 20.

Analysis of Novel Interactions between Components of the Selenocysteine 
Biosynthesis Pathway, SEPHS1, SEPHS2, SEPSECS, and SECp43.

Oudouhou F(1), Casu B(1), Dopgwa Puemi AS(1), Sygusch J(1), Baron C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
Université de Montréal , Montréal, QC, Canada.

In mammalian cells, the incorporation of the 21st amino acid, selenocysteine, 
into proteins is guided by the Sec machinery. The function of this protein 
complex requires several protein-protein and protein-RNA interactions, leading 
to the incorporation of selenocysteine at UGA codons. It is guided by stem-loop 
structures localized in the 3' untranslated regions of the 
selenoprotein-encoding genes. Here, we conducted a global analysis of 
interactions between the Sec biosynthesis and incorporation components using a 
bioluminescence resonance energy transfer assay in mammalian cells that showed 
that selenocysteine synthase (SEPSECS), SECp43, and selenophosphate synthetases 
SEPHS1 and SEPHS2 form oligomers in eukaryotic cells. We also showed that SEPHS2 
interacts with SEPSECS and SEPHS1; these interactions were confirmed by 
co-immunoprecipitation. To further analyze the interactions of SECp43, the 
protein was expressed in Escherichia coli, and small-angle X-ray scattering 
analysis revealed that it is a globular protein comprising two RNA-binding 
domains. Using phage display, we identified potential interaction sites and 
highlighted two residues (K166 and P167) required for its dimerization. The 
SECp43 structural model presented here constitutes the basis of future 
exploration of the protein-protein interactions among early components of the 
selenocysteine biosynthesis and incorporation pathway.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.6b01116
PMID: 28414460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
