---
pmid: '8631859'
title: The Fyn tyrosine kinase binds Irs-1 and forms a distinct signaling complex
  during insulin stimulation.
authors:
- Sun XJ
- Pons S
- Asano T
- Myers MG Jr
- Glasheen E
- White MF
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.18.10583
---

# The Fyn tyrosine kinase binds Irs-1 and forms a distinct signaling complex during insulin stimulation.
**Authors:** Sun XJ, Pons S, Asano T, Myers MG Jr, Glasheen E, White MF
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.271.18.10583](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.271.18.10583)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1996 May 3;271(18):10583-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.18.10583.

The Fyn tyrosine kinase binds Irs-1 and forms a distinct signaling complex 
during insulin stimulation.

Sun XJ(1), Pons S, Asano T, Myers MG Jr, Glasheen E, White MF.

Author information:
(1)Research Division, Joslin Diabetes Center, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Irs-proteins link the receptors for insulin/IGF-1, growth hormones, and several 
interleukins and interferons to signaling proteins that contain Src homology-2 
(SH2). To identify new Irs-1-binding proteins, we screened a mouse embryo 
expression library with recombinant [32P]Irs-1, which revealed a specific 
association between p59fyn and Irs-1. The SH2 domain in p59fyn bound to 
phosphorylated Tyr895 and Tyr1172, which are located in YXX(L/I) motifs. 
Mutation of p59fyn at the COOH-terminal tyrosine phosphorylation site (Tyr531) 
enhanced its binding to Irs-1 during insulin stimulation. Binding experiments 
with various SH2 protein revealed that Grb-2 was largely excluded from Irs-1 
complexes containing p59fyn, whereas Grb-2 and p85 occurred in the same Irs-1 
complex. By comparison with the insulin receptor, p59fyn kinase phosphorylated a 
unique cohort of tyrosine residues in Irs-1. These results outline a role for 
p59fyn or other related Src-kinases during insulin and cytokine signaling.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.18.10583
PMID: 8631859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
