---
pmid: '15093541'
title: 'Thymidylate synthase as an oncogene: a novel role for an essential DNA synthesis
  enzyme.'
authors:
- Rahman L
- Voeller D
- Rahman M
- Lipkowitz S
- Allegra C
- Barrett JC
- Kaye FJ
- Zajac-Kaye M
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s1535-6108(04)00080-7
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Thymidylate synthase as an oncogene: a novel role for an essential DNA synthesis enzyme.
**Authors:** Rahman L, Voeller D, Rahman M, Lipkowitz S, Allegra C, Barrett JC, Kaye FJ, Zajac-Kaye M
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1535-6108(04)00080-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1535-6108(04)00080-7)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Cell. 2004 Apr;5(4):341-51. doi: 10.1016/s1535-6108(04)00080-7.

Thymidylate synthase as an oncogene: a novel role for an essential DNA synthesis 
enzyme.

Rahman L(1), Voeller D, Rahman M, Lipkowitz S, Allegra C, Barrett JC, Kaye FJ, 
Zajac-Kaye M.

Author information:
(1)Basic Research Laboratory and Molecular Therapeutic Program, National 
Institute of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2004 Apr;5(4):301-2. doi: 10.1016/s1535-6108(04)00086-8.

Thymidylate synthase (TS) is an E2F1-regulated enzyme that is essential for DNA 
synthesis and repair. TS protein and mRNA levels are elevated in many human 
cancers, and high TS levels have been correlated with poor prognosis in patients 
with colorectal, breast, cervical, bladder, kidney, and non-small cell lung 
cancers. In this study, we show that ectopic expression of catalytically active 
TS is sufficient to induce a transformed phenotype in mammalian cells as 
manifested by foci formation, anchorage independent growth, and tumor formation 
in nude mice. In contrast, comparable levels of two TS mutants carrying single 
point mutations within the catalytic domain had no transforming activity. In 
addition, we show that overexpression of TS results in apoptotic cell death 
following serum removal. These data demonstrate that TS exhibits oncogene-like 
activity and suggest a link between TS-regulated DNA synthesis and the induction 
of a neoplastic phenotype.

DOI: 10.1016/s1535-6108(04)00080-7
PMID: 15093541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
