---
reference_id: PMID:17189203
title: The human cytochrome c oxidase assembly factors SCO1 and SCO2 have regulatory roles in the maintenance of cellular copper homeostasis.
authors:
- Leary SC
- Cobine PA
- Kaufman BA
- Guercin GH
- Mattman A
- Palaty J
- Lockitch G
- Winge DR
- Rustin P
- Horvath R
- Shoubridge EA
journal: Cell Metab
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2006.12.001
keywords:
- Alleles
- "Carrier Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Cation Transport Proteins/metabolism
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Copper/deficiency, metabolism"
- Copper Transporter 1
- Electron Transport Complex IV/metabolism
- Fibroblasts
- Homeostasis
- Humans
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- "Mitochondrial Encephalomyopathies/genetics, metabolism"
- "Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Molecular Chaperones
- Mutation
- Organ Specificity
- Phenotype
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# The human cytochrome c oxidase assembly factors SCO1 and SCO2 have regulatory roles in the maintenance of cellular copper homeostasis.
**Authors:** Leary SC, Cobine PA, Kaufman BA, Guercin GH, Mattman A, Palaty J, Lockitch G, Winge DR, Rustin P, Horvath R, Shoubridge EA
**Journal:** Cell Metab (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cmet.2006.12.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2006.12.001)

## Content

1. Cell Metab. 2007 Jan;5(1):9-20. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2006.12.001.

The human cytochrome c oxidase assembly factors SCO1 and SCO2 have regulatory 
roles in the maintenance of cellular copper homeostasis.

Leary SC(1), Cobine PA, Kaufman BA, Guercin GH, Mattman A, Palaty J, Lockitch G, 
Winge DR, Rustin P, Horvath R, Shoubridge EA.

Author information:
(1)Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 2B4, 
Canada; Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 2B4, 
Canada.

Erratum in
    Cell Metab. 2007 May;5(5):403.

Human SCO1 and SCO2 are metallochaperones that are essential for the assembly of 
the catalytic core of cytochrome c oxidase (COX). Here we show that they have 
additional, unexpected roles in cellular copper homeostasis. Mutations in either 
SCO result in a cellular copper deficiency that is both tissue and allele 
specific. This phenotype can be dissociated from the defects in COX assembly and 
is suppressed by overexpression of SCO2, but not SCO1. Overexpression of a SCO1 
mutant in control cells in which wild-type SCO1 levels were reduced by shRNA 
recapitulates the copper-deficiency phenotype in SCO1 patient cells. The 
copper-deficiency phenotype reflects not a change in high-affinity copper uptake 
but rather a proportional increase in copper efflux. These results suggest a 
mitochondrial pathway for the regulation of cellular copper content that 
involves signaling through SCO1 and SCO2, perhaps by their thiol redox or 
metal-binding state.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmet.2006.12.001
PMID: 17189203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]