---
pmid: '10542110'
title: Simultaneous assay of Src SH3 and SH2 domain binding using different wavelength
  fluorescence polarization probes.
authors:
- Lynch BA
- Minor C
- Loiacono KA
- van Schravendijk MR
- Ram MK
- Sundaramoorthi R
- Adams SE
- Phillips T
- Holt D
- Rickles RJ
- MacNeil IA
journal: Anal Biochem
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/abio.1999.4305
---

# Simultaneous assay of Src SH3 and SH2 domain binding using different wavelength fluorescence polarization probes.
**Authors:** Lynch BA, Minor C, Loiacono KA, van Schravendijk MR, Ram MK, Sundaramoorthi R, Adams SE, Phillips T, Holt D, Rickles RJ, MacNeil IA
**Journal:** Anal Biochem (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1006/abio.1999.4305](https://doi.org/10.1006/abio.1999.4305)

## Abstract

1. Anal Biochem. 1999 Nov 1;275(1):62-73. doi: 10.1006/abio.1999.4305.

Simultaneous assay of Src SH3 and SH2 domain binding using different wavelength 
fluorescence polarization probes.

Lynch BA(1), Minor C, Loiacono KA, van Schravendijk MR, Ram MK, Sundaramoorthi 
R, Adams SE, Phillips T, Holt D, Rickles RJ, MacNeil IA.

Author information:
(1)ARIAD Pharmaceuticals Inc., 26 Landsdowne Street, Cambridge, Massachusetts 
02139, USA. berkley.lynch@ucb-group.com

pp60(c-src) is a prototypical nonreceptor tyrosine kinase and may play a role in 
diseases as diverse as cancer and osteoporosis. In Src, the SH3 domain (Src 
homology 3) binds proteins at specific, proline-rich sequences, while the SH2 
domain (Src homology 2) binds phosphotyrosine-containing sequences. Inhibition 
of Src SH3 and SH2 domain function is of potential therapeutic value because of 
their importance in signaling pathways involved in disease states. We have 
developed dual-wavelength fluorescent peptide probes for both the Src SH3 and 
the Src SH2 domains, which allow the simultaneous measurement of compounds 
binding to each domain in assays based on the technique of fluorescence 
polarization. We demonstrate the utility of these probes in a dual-binding assay 
(suitable for high-throughput screening) to study the interactions of various 
peptides with these domains, including a sequence from the rat protein p130(CAS) 
which has been reported to bind simultaneously to both Src SH3 and SH2 domains. 
Utilizing this dual-binding assay, we confirm that sequences from p130(CAS) can 
simultaneously bind Src via both its SH3 and its SH2 domains. We also use the 
dual-binding assay as an internal control to identify substances which inhibit 
SH3 and SH2 binding via nonspecific mechanisms.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/abio.1999.4305
PMID: 10542110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
