---
pmid: '1565642'
title: Primary sequence analysis of Clostridium cellulovorans cellulose binding protein
  A.
authors:
- Shoseyov O
- Takagi M
- Goldstein MA
- Doi RH
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1992'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC48892
doi: 10.1073/pnas.89.8.3483
---

# Primary sequence analysis of Clostridium cellulovorans cellulose binding protein A.
**Authors:** Shoseyov O, Takagi M, Goldstein MA, Doi RH
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.89.8.3483](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.89.8.3483)
**PMC:** [PMC48892](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC48892/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 Apr 15;89(8):3483-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.89.8.3483.

Primary sequence analysis of Clostridium cellulovorans cellulose binding protein 
A.

Shoseyov O(1), Takagi M, Goldstein MA, Doi RH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California, Davis 
95616.

The cbpA gene for the Clostridium cellulovorans cellulose binding protein 
(CbpA), which is part of the multisubunit cellulase complex, has been cloned and 
sequenced. When cbpA was expressed in Escherichia coli, proteins capable of 
binding to crystalline cellulose and of interacting with anti-CbpA were 
observed. The cbpA gene consists of 5544 base pairs and encodes a protein 
containing 1848 amino acids with a molecular mass of 189,036 Da. The open 
reading frame is preceded by a Gram-positive-type ribosome binding site. A 
signal peptide sequence of 28 amino acids is present at its N terminus. The 
encoded protein is highly hydrophobic with extremely high levels of threonine 
and valine residues. There are two types of putative cellulose binding domains 
of approximately 100 amino acids that are slightly hydrophilic and eight 
conserved, highly hydrophobic beta-sheet regions of approximately 140 amino 
acids. These latter hydrophobic regions may be the CbpA domains that interact 
with the different enzymatic subunits of the cellulase complex.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.89.8.3483
PMCID: PMC48892
PMID: 1565642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
