---
pmid: '3402455'
title: Complex formation of human thrombospondin with osteonectin.
authors:
- Clezardin P
- Malaval L
- Ehrensperger AS
- Delmas PD
- Dechavanne M
- McGregor JL
journal: Eur J Biochem
year: '1988'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1988.tb14194.x
---

# Complex formation of human thrombospondin with osteonectin.
**Authors:** Clezardin P, Malaval L, Ehrensperger AS, Delmas PD, Dechavanne M, McGregor JL
**Journal:** Eur J Biochem (1988)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1432-1033.1988.tb14194.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1432-1033.1988.tb14194.x)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Biochem. 1988 Aug 1;175(2):275-84. doi: 
10.1111/j.1432-1033.1988.tb14194.x.

Complex formation of human thrombospondin with osteonectin.

Clezardin P(1), Malaval L, Ehrensperger AS, Delmas PD, Dechavanne M, McGregor 
JL.

Author information:
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Faculté de 
Médecine Alexis-Carrel, Lyon, France.

Human thrombospondin, a 450-kDa glycoprotein isolated from platelets and 
endothelial cells, specifically interacts with osteonectin, a protein of 30 kDa 
isolated from bovine bones and human platelets. Using ELISA, purified 
osteonectin binds to solid-phase-adsorbed thrombospondin with a dissociation 
constant (Kd) of 0.7 nM. Binding of thrombospondin to solid-phase-adsorbed 
osteonectin was also observed (Kd = 0.86 nM). The interaction of thrombospondin 
with solid-phase-adsorbed osteonectin was significantly decreased (81% 
inhibition) when using an excess of fluid-phase osteonectin. 
Thrombospondin-osteonectin complex formation was calcium-dependent as shown by a 
50-80% inhibition in the presence of EDTA. None of the proteins known to 
interact with thrombospondin (fibrinogen, fibronectin, collagen, plasminogen) 
had a significant inhibitory effect on thrombospondin-osteonectin complex 
formation. This selective interaction was confirmed by affinity chromatography. 
Iodinated osteonectin, previously incubated with purified thrombospondin, 
specifically bound to an anti-thrombospondin monoclonal antibody (P10) linked to 
protein-A--Sepharose 4B. Elution of the anti-thrombospondin antibody from 
protein A allowed the recovery of the thrombospondin-osteonectin complex in the 
eluate, as judged by SDS/polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and autoradiography. 
Blotting of purified thrombospondin to osteonectin adsorbed onto nitrocellulose 
further confirmed complex formation. In addition, when released from 
thrombin-stimulated platelets, thrombospondin and osteonectin bound to 
anti-thrombospondin IgG-coated plates indicating that osteonectin was complexed 
to thrombospondin once the platelet-release reaction has occurred.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1988.tb14194.x
PMID: 3402455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
