---
pmid: '23431171'
title: MOZ increases p53 acetylation and premature senescence through its complex
  formation with PML.
authors:
- Rokudai S
- Laptenko O
- Arnal SM
- Taya Y
- Kitabayashi I
- Prives C
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2013'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3593914
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1300490110
---

# MOZ increases p53 acetylation and premature senescence through its complex formation with PML.
**Authors:** Rokudai S, Laptenko O, Arnal SM, Taya Y, Kitabayashi I, Prives C
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1300490110](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1300490110)
**PMC:** [PMC3593914](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3593914/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Mar 5;110(10):3895-900. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1300490110. Epub 2013 Feb 19.

MOZ increases p53 acetylation and premature senescence through its complex 
formation with PML.

Rokudai S(1), Laptenko O, Arnal SM, Taya Y, Kitabayashi I, Prives C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, 
USA.

Monocytic leukemia zinc finger (MOZ)/KAT6A is a MOZ, Ybf2/Sas3, Sas2, Tip60 
(MYST)-type histone acetyltransferase that functions as a coactivator for acute 
myeloid leukemia 1 protein (AML1)- and Ets family transcription factor 
PU.1-dependent transcription. We previously reported that MOZ directly interacts 
with p53 and is essential for p53-dependent selective regulation of p21 
expression. We show here that MOZ is an acetyltransferase of p53 at K120 and 
K382 and colocalizes with p53 in promyelocytic leukemia (PML) nuclear bodies 
following cellular stress. The MOZ-PML-p53 interaction enhances MOZ-mediated 
acetylation of p53, and this ternary complex enhances p53-dependent p21 
expression. Moreover, we identified an Akt/protein kinase B recognition sequence 
in the PML-binding domain of MOZ protein. Akt-mediated phosphorylation of MOZ at 
T369 has a negative effect on complex formation between PML and MOZ. As a result 
of PML-mediated suppression of Akt, the increased PML-MOZ interaction enhances 
p21 expression and induces p53-dependent premature senescence upon forced PML 
expression. Our research demonstrates that MOZ controls p53 acetylation and 
transcriptional activity via association with PML.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1300490110
PMCID: PMC3593914
PMID: 23431171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Monocytic leukemia zinc finger (MOZ)/KAT6A is a MOZ, Ybf2/Sas3, Sas2, Tip60 (MYST)-type histone acetyltransferase that functions as a coactivator for acute myeloid leukemia 1 protein (AML1)- and Ets family transcription factor PU.1-dependent transcription. We previously reported that MOZ directly interacts with p53 and is essential for p53-dependent selective regulation of p21 expression. We show here that MOZ is an acetyltransferase of p53 at K120 and K382 and colocalizes with p53 in promyelocytic leukemia (PML) nuclear bodies following cellular stress. The MOZ–PML–p53 interaction enhances MOZ-mediated acetylation of p53, and this ternary complex enhances p53-dependent p21 expression. Moreover, we identified an Akt/protein kinase B recognition sequence in the PML-binding domain of MOZ protein. Akt-mediated phosphorylation of MOZ at T369 has a negative effect on complex formation between PML and MOZ. As a result of PML-mediated suppression of Akt, the increased PML–MOZ interaction enhances p21 expression and induces p53-dependent premature senescence upon forced PML expression. Our research demonstrates that MOZ controls p53 acetylation and transcriptional activity via association with PML.

Discussion

Several factors, such as Tip60, hematopoietic zinc finger (Hzf), and human cellular apoptosis susceptibility protein (hCAS/CSE1L) are involved in the selection of p53 target genes ( 35 , 40 , 41 ). However, the molecular mechanisms by which p53 “chooses” cell-cycle arrest or apoptosis are not fully understood. Here we discovered that the MYST-type HAT MOZ interacts with PML and is recruited into PML-NBs. Significantly, we confirmed that the PML–MOZ interaction promotes the MOZ-mediated acetylation of p53 at K120 and K382, which makes MOZ distinct from other KATs that can target only one of these residues and p53-mediated expression of p21 ( Fig. S9 ).

It has been reported that p53 can be acetylated at K373, K382, K164 (catalyzed by p300/CBP), K320 (PCAF/KAT2B), and K120 (Tip60) ( 42 , 43 ). Although p53 mice engineered to lack acetylatable lysines within their C termini are viable and phenotypically normal, p53-mediated transcriptional activation upon DNA damage is partially impaired in the ES cells and thymocytes of these mice ( 44 ). In addition, the p53 7KR mutation, where the seven C-terminal lysines were changed to arginine, significantly contributes to hematopoietic stem cell homeostasis and mouse radiosensitivity ( 45 ). Thus, it is possible that other cofactors or additional acetylation sites of p53 may compensate for the loss of p53 acetylation at the C terminus. In this report, we found that MOZ is an acetylation regulator of p53. In contrast to normal MOZ and CBP, the leukemia-associated MOZ-CBP fusion protein inhibited p53-mediated transcription ( Fig. S5 ). These results suggest that inhibition of MOZ-p53–mediated transcription might be involved in pathogenesis of tumors and leukemia.

Our previous study revealed that MOZ-deficient MEFs exhibit impaired p21 expression and fail to arrest in G1 phase in response to DNA damage ( 27 ). Evidence of the significance of lysine modifications in the functions of the DNA-binding region comes from studies showing that Tip60/KAT5 and hMOF/KAT8, members of the MYST family of acetyltransferases, acetylate K120 of p53 followed by its accumulation on Puma and Bax promoters ( 35 ) and that K120/K164R double-mutant mice display reduced induction of p21 and puma ( 43 ). In addition, K120 acetylation of p53 exhibited specific DNA binding and discriminated among response elements at effective physiological salt concentration ( 46 ). The ability of MOZ to simultaneously acetylate both K120 and K382 might be responsible for the difference of target genes from previous reports. It might be also possible that MOZ acetylation of p53 occurs in a different subcellular compartment, such as PML-NBs, from that of Tip60/hMOF. Thus, the DNA-binding domain acetylation by MOZ appears to play a role in selective gene regulation.

Akt kinase activity is frequently elevated in several high-grade, late-stage cancers ( 47 ), and a somatic constitutively active Akt mutant has been identified in human breast, colorectal, and ovarian cancers ( 48 ). In fact, the role of Akt in the p53-mediated response was shown to involve Akt suppression of p21 expression through phosphorylation and activation of MDM2 and subsequent MDM2-mediated ubiquitination of p53 ( 23 , 24 , 49 ). Here we demonstrate that Akt works by a second process in which Akt phosphorylation of MOZ at T369 within its PML interaction region blocks its complex formation with PML ( Fig. 3 A ). A mutant MOZ (T369A) displays enhanced acetylation of p53 at K120 and K382 with ensuing increased expression of p21, indicating that phosphorylation at T369 of MOZ is important for the acetylation of p53, but not for its acetylation activity per se ( Fig. 4 A and C ). Suppressing Akt-mediated phosphorylation of MOZ at T369 is likely very important for the recruitment of MOZ into PML-NBs and the subsequent acetylation of p53.

In this report, we demonstrate that forced PML expression in MOZ −/− primary MEFs somewhat suppresses either G1 arrest or senescence ( Fig. 5 B ). PML expression in MOZ −/− MEFs only slightly alters BrdU incorporation ( Fig. 5 C and D ), but the frequency of SA β-gal–positive senescent cells is markedly lower ( Fig. 5 E and Fig. S7 ). These results indicate that loss of MOZ contributes to resistance to PML-induced G1 arrest and premature senescence. In contrast, MOZ −/− primary MEFs exhibit a high proportion of cells in S phase but lower BrdU incorporation after forced PML expression. This is also true for serially passaged MEFs after DNA damage, suggesting that MOZ might be involved in DNA replication. These results are consistent with a report that depletion of inhibitor of growth family, member 5 (ING5), which comprises a subunit of the ING5-MOZ stoichiometric HAT complex, renders cells unable to complete S phase, allowing only a few cells to proceed to the G2/M phase. Together, these results suggest that ING5–MOZ complexes are essential for DNA replication, not only for initiation but also for replication fork movement ( 50 ). Recently, it has been reported that Pten-loss–induced cellular senescence, where the activation of the PI3K-Akt pathway is the key mechanism triggering a p53-dependent senescence, represents a senescence response that is distinct from oncogene-induced senescence ( 51 ). Further studies are required to investigate whether the sequential phenomenon—down-regulation of Akt activity and MOZ acetylation of p53—occurs in the PML-NB subcellular compartment.

Materials and Methods

Plasmids expressing FLAG-tagged and HA-tagged human MOZ, CBP, MOZ-CBP, and p300 were cloned into the pLNCX vector (Clontech). Human cDNA encoding FLAG- and HA-tagged PML isoform IV and HA-tagged V12 Ras were cloned into pLPCX retrovirus vectors. Myristoylated active, FLAG-tagged, wild-type, or dominant negative Akt1 were described previously ( 52 ). Details of other methods used in this article, including cell culture, antisense oligonucleotides, baculovirus protein expression and purification, flow cytometry, SA β-gal assay, immunofluorescence, immunoprecipitation, immunoblotting, Far-Western blotting, real-time PCR, luciferase assay, in vitro acetylation assay, and in vitro kinase assay are described in SI Materials and Methods .
