---
pmid: '23382196'
title: H3K4 methyltransferase Set1 is involved in maintenance of ergosterol homeostasis
  and resistance to Brefeldin A.
authors:
- South PF
- Harmeyer KM
- Serratore ND
- Briggs SD
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3600464
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1215768110
---

# H3K4 methyltransferase Set1 is involved in maintenance of ergosterol homeostasis and resistance to Brefeldin A.
**Authors:** South PF, Harmeyer KM, Serratore ND, Briggs SD
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1215768110](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1215768110)
**PMC:** [PMC3600464](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3600464/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Mar 12;110(11):E1016-25. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1215768110. Epub 2013 Feb 4.

H3K4 methyltransferase Set1 is involved in maintenance of ergosterol homeostasis 
and resistance to Brefeldin A.

South PF(1), Harmeyer KM, Serratore ND, Briggs SD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Purdue Center for Cancer Research, Purdue 
University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA.

Set1 is a conserved histone H3 lysine 4 (H3K4) methyltransferase that exists as 
a multisubunit complex. Although H3K4 methylation is located on many actively 
transcribed genes, few studies have established a direct connection showing that 
loss of Set1 and H3K4 methylation results in a phenotype caused by disruption of 
gene expression. In this study, we determined that cells lacking Set1 or Set1 
complex members that disrupt H3K4 methylation have a growth defect when grown in 
the presence of the antifungal drug Brefeldin A (BFA), indicating that H3K4 
methylation is needed for BFA resistance. To determine the role of Set1 in BFA 
resistance, we discovered that Set1 is important for the expression of genes in 
the ergosterol biosynthetic pathway, including the rate-limiting enzyme HMG-CoA 
reductase. Consequently, deletion of SET1 leads to a reduction in HMG-CoA 
reductase protein and total cellular ergosterol. In addition, the lack of Set1 
results in an increase in the expression of DAN1 and PDR11, two genes involved 
in ergosterol uptake. The increase in expression of uptake genes in set1Δ cells 
allows sterols such as cholesterol and ergosterol to be actively taken up under 
aerobic conditions. Interestingly, when grown in the presence of ergosterol 
set1Δ cells become resistant to BFA, indicating that proper ergosterol levels 
are needed for antifungal drug resistance. These data show that H3K4 methylation 
impacts gene expression and output of a biologically and medically relevant 
pathway and determines why cells lacking H3K4 methylation have antifungal drug 
sensitivity.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1215768110
PMCID: PMC3600464
PMID: 23382196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
