---
pmid: '9765219'
title: A 17-amino acid insert changes UDP-N-acetylhexosamine pyrophosphorylase specificity
  from UDP-GalNAc to UDP-GlcNAc.
authors:
- Wang-Gillam A
- Pastuszak I
- Elbein AD
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.42.27055
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# A 17-amino acid insert changes UDP-N-acetylhexosamine pyrophosphorylase specificity from UDP-GalNAc to UDP-GlcNAc.
**Authors:** Wang-Gillam A, Pastuszak I, Elbein AD
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.273.42.27055](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.42.27055)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Oct 16;273(42):27055-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.42.27055.

A 17-amino acid insert changes UDP-N-acetylhexosamine pyrophosphorylase 
specificity from UDP-GalNAc to UDP-GlcNAc.

Wang-Gillam A(1), Pastuszak I, Elbein AD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas for 
Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas 72205, USA.

We previously reported the purification of a UDP-N-acetylhexosamine (UDP-HexNAc) 
pyrophosphorylase from pig liver that catalyzed the synthesis of both UDP-GlcNAc 
and UDP-GalNAc from UTP and the appropriate HexNAc-1-P (Szumilo, T., Zeng, Y., 
Pastuszak, I., Drake, R., Szumilo, H., and Elbein, A. D. (1996) J. Biol. Chem. 
271, 13147-13154). Both sugar nucleotides were synthesized at nearly the same 
rate, although the Km for GalNAc-1-P was about 3 times higher than for 
GlcNAc-1-P. Based on native gels and SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, the 
enzyme appeared to be a dimer of 120 kDa composed of two subunits of about 57 
and 64 kDa. Three peptides sequenced from the 64-kDa protein and two from the 
57-kDa protein showed 100% identity to AGX1, a 57-kDa protein of unknown 
function from human sperm. An isoform called AGX2 is identical in sequence to 
AGX1 except that it has a 17-amino acid insert near the carboxyl terminus. We 
expressed the AGX1 and AGX2 genes in Escherichia coli. The protein isolated from 
the AGX1 clone comigrated on SDS gels with the liver 57-kDa pyrophosphorylase 
subunit and was 2-3 times more active with GalNAc-1-P than with GlcNAc-1-P. On 
the other hand, the protein from the AGX2 clone migrated with the liver 64-kDa 
pyrophosphorylase subunit and had 8-fold better activity with GlcNAc-1-P than 
with GalNAc-1-P. These results indicate that insertion of the 17-amino acid 
peptide modifies the specificity of the pyrophosphorylase from synthesis of 
UDP-GalNAc to synthesis of UDP-GlcNAc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.42.27055
PMID: 9765219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
