---
pmid: '18264092'
title: OS-9 and GRP94 deliver mutant alpha1-antitrypsin to the Hrd1-SEL1L ubiquitin
  ligase complex for ERAD.
authors:
- Christianson JC
- Shaler TA
- Tyler RE
- Kopito RR
journal: Nat Cell Biol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2757077
doi: 10.1038/ncb1689
---

# OS-9 and GRP94 deliver mutant alpha1-antitrypsin to the Hrd1-SEL1L ubiquitin ligase complex for ERAD.
**Authors:** Christianson JC, Shaler TA, Tyler RE, Kopito RR
**Journal:** Nat Cell Biol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncb1689](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb1689)
**PMC:** [PMC2757077](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2757077/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Cell Biol. 2008 Mar;10(3):272-82. doi: 10.1038/ncb1689. Epub 2008 Feb 10.

OS-9 and GRP94 deliver mutant alpha1-antitrypsin to the Hrd1-SEL1L ubiquitin 
ligase complex for ERAD.

Christianson JC(1), Shaler TA, Tyler RE, Kopito RR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences & Bio-X Program, Stanford University, Lorry 
Lokey Bldg, 337 Campus Drive, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2008 Mar;10(3):251-3. doi: 10.1038/ncb0308-251.

Terminally misfolded or unassembled proteins in the early secretory pathway are 
degraded by a ubiquitin- and proteasome-dependent process known as ER-associated 
degradation (ERAD). How substrates of this pathway are recognized within the ER 
and delivered to the cytoplasmic ubiquitin-conjugating machinery is unknown. We 
report here that OS-9 and XTP3-B/Erlectin are ER-resident glycoproteins that 
bind to ERAD substrates and, through the SEL1L adaptor, to the 
ER-membrane-embedded ubiquitin ligase Hrd1. Both proteins contain conserved 
mannose 6-phosphate receptor homology (MRH) domains, which are required for 
interaction with SEL1L, but not with substrate. OS-9 associates with the ER 
chaperone GRP94 which, together with Hrd1 and SEL1L, is required for the 
degradation of an ERAD substrate, mutant alpha(1)-antitrypsin. These data 
suggest that XTP3-B and OS-9 are components of distinct, partially redundant, 
quality control surveillance pathways that coordinate protein folding with 
membrane dislocation and ubiquitin conjugation in mammalian cells.

DOI: 10.1038/ncb1689
PMCID: PMC2757077
PMID: 18264092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
