---
pmid: '9819422'
title: Cns1 is an essential protein associated with the hsp90 chaperone complex in
  Saccharomyces cerevisiae that can restore cyclophilin 40-dependent functions in
  cpr7Delta cells.
authors:
- Marsh JA
- Kalton HM
- Gaber RF
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC109317
doi: 10.1128/MCB.18.12.7353
---

# Cns1 is an essential protein associated with the hsp90 chaperone complex in Saccharomyces cerevisiae that can restore cyclophilin 40-dependent functions in cpr7Delta cells.
**Authors:** Marsh JA, Kalton HM, Gaber RF
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.18.12.7353](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.18.12.7353)
**PMC:** [PMC109317](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC109317/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Dec;18(12):7353-9. doi: 10.1128/MCB.18.12.7353.

Cns1 is an essential protein associated with the hsp90 chaperone complex in 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae that can restore cyclophilin 40-dependent functions in 
cpr7Delta cells.

Marsh JA(1), Kalton HM, Gaber RF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Northwestern 
University, Evanston, Illinois 60208, USA.

Saccharomyces cerevisiae harbors two cyclophilin 40-type enzymes, Cpr6 and Cpr7, 
which are components of the Hsp90 molecular chaperone machinery. Cpr7 is 
required for normal growth and is required for maximal activity of heterologous 
Hsp90-dependent substrates, including glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and the 
oncogenic tyrosine kinase pp60(v-src). In addition, it has recently been shown 
that Cpr7 plays a major role in negative regulation of the S. cerevisiae heat 
shock transcription factor (HSF). To better understand functions associated with 
Cpr7, a search was undertaken for multicopy suppressors of the cpr7Delta 
slow-growth phenotype. The screen identified a single gene, designated CNS1 (for 
cyclophilin seven suppressor), capable of suppressing the cpr7Delta growth 
defect. Overexpression of CNS1 in cpr7Delta cells also largely restored GR 
activity and negative regulation of HSF. In vitro protein retention experiments 
in which Hsp90 heterocomplexes were precipitated resulted in coprecipitation of 
Cns1. Interaction between Cns1 and the carboxy terminus of Hsp90 was also shown 
by two-hybrid analysis. The functional consequences of CNS1 overexpression and 
its physical association with the Hsp90 machinery indicate that Cns1 is a 
previously unidentified component of molecular chaperone complexes. Thus far, 
Cns1 is the only tetratricopeptide repeat-containing component of Hsp90 
heterocomplexes found to be essential for cell viability under all conditions 
tested.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.18.12.7353
PMCID: PMC109317
PMID: 9819422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
