---
pmid: '7962052'
title: LDLC encodes a brefeldin A-sensitive, peripheral Golgi protein required for
  normal Golgi function.
authors:
- Podos SD
- Reddy P
- Ashkenas J
- Krieger M
journal: J Cell Biol
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: xml_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC2120235
doi: 10.1083/jcb.127.3.679
---

# LDLC encodes a brefeldin A-sensitive, peripheral Golgi protein required for normal Golgi function.
**Authors:** Podos SD, Reddy P, Ashkenas J, Krieger M
**Journal:** J Cell Biol (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1083/jcb.127.3.679](https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.127.3.679)
**PMC:** [PMC2120235](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2120235/)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Biol. 1994 Nov;127(3):679-91. doi: 10.1083/jcb.127.3.679.

LDLC encodes a brefeldin A-sensitive, peripheral Golgi protein required for 
normal Golgi function.

Podos SD(1), Reddy P, Ashkenas J, Krieger M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge 
02139.

Two genetically distinct classes of low density lipoprotein (LDL) 
receptor-deficient Chinese hamster ovary cell mutants, ldlB and ldlC, exhibit 
nearly identical pleiotropic defects in multiple medial and trans 
Golgi-associated processes (Kingsley, D., K. F. Kozarsky, M. Segal, and M. 
Krieger. 1986. J. Cell Biol. 102:1576-1585). In these mutants, the synthesis of 
virtually all N- and O-linked glycoproteins and of the major lipid-linked 
oligosaccharides is abnormal. The abnormal glycosylation of LDL receptors in 
ldlB and ldlC cells results in their dramatically reduced stability and thus 
very low LDL receptor activity. We have cloned and sequenced a human cDNA (LDLC) 
which corrects the mutant phenotypes of ldlC, but not ldlB, cells. Unlike 
wild-type CHO or ldlB cells, ldlC cells had virtually no detectable endogenous 
LDLC mRNA, indicating that LDLC is likely to be the normal human homologue of 
the defective gene in ldlC cells. The predicted sequence of the human LDLC 
protein (ldlCp, approximately 83 kD) is not similar to that of any known 
proteins, and contains no major common structural motifs such as transmembrane 
domains or an ER translocation signal sequence. We have also determined the 
sequence of the Caenorhabditis elegans ldlCp by cDNA cloning and sequencing. Its 
similarity to that of human ldlCp suggests that ldlCp mediates a well-conserved 
cellular function. Immunofluorescence studies with anti-ldlCp antibodies in 
mammalian cells established that ldlCp is a peripheral Golgi protein whose 
association with the Golgi is brefeldin A sensitive. In ldlB cells, ldlCp was 
expressed at normal levels; however, it was not associated with the Golgi. Thus, 
a combination of somatic cell and molecular genetics has identified a previously 
unrecognized protein, ldlCp, which is required for multiple Golgi functions and 
whose peripheral association with the Golgi is both LDLB dependent and brefeldin 
A sensitive.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.127.3.679
PMCID: PMC2120235
PMID: 7962052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Two genetically distinct classes of low density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor-deficient Chinese hamster ovary cell mutants, ldlB and ldlC, exhibit nearly identical pleiotropic defects in multiple medial and trans Golgi-associated processes (Kingsley, D., K. F. Kozarsky, M. Segal, and M. Krieger. 1986. J. Cell Biol. 102:1576-1585). In these mutants, the synthesis of virtually all N- and O-linked glycoproteins and of the major lipid-linked oligosaccharides is abnormal. The abnormal glycosylation of LDL receptors in ldlB and ldlC cells results in their dramatically reduced stability and thus very low LDL receptor activity. We have cloned and sequenced a human cDNA (LDLC) which corrects the mutant phenotypes of ldlC, but not ldlB, cells. Unlike wild-type CHO or ldlB cells, ldlC cells had virtually no detectable endogenous LDLC mRNA, indicating that LDLC is likely to be the normal human homologue of the defective gene in ldlC cells. The predicted sequence of the human LDLC protein (ldlCp, approximately 83 kD) is not similar to that of any known proteins, and contains no major common structural motifs such as transmembrane domains or an ER translocation signal sequence. We have also determined the sequence of the Caenorhabditis elegans ldlCp by cDNA cloning and sequencing. Its similarity to that of human ldlCp suggests that ldlCp mediates a well- conserved cellular function. Immunofluorescence studies with anti-ldlCp antibodies in mammalian cells established that ldlCp is a peripheral Golgi protein whose association with the Golgi is brefeldin A sensitive. In ldlB cells, ldlCp was expressed at normal levels; however, it was not associated with the Golgi. Thus, a combination of somatic cell and molecular genetics has identified a previously unrecognized protein, ldlCp, which is required for multiple Golgi functions and whose peripheral association with the Golgi is both LDLB dependent and brefeldin A sensitive.
