---
pmid: '14704204'
title: Fission yeast Mus81.Eme1 Holliday junction resolvase is required for meiotic
  crossing over but not for gene conversion.
authors:
- Smith GR
- Boddy MN
- Shanahan P
- Russell P
journal: Genetics
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC1462924
doi: 10.1093/genetics/165.4.2289
---

# Fission yeast Mus81.Eme1 Holliday junction resolvase is required for meiotic crossing over but not for gene conversion.
**Authors:** Smith GR, Boddy MN, Shanahan P, Russell P
**Journal:** Genetics (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1093/genetics/165.4.2289](https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/165.4.2289)
**PMC:** [PMC1462924](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1462924/)

## Abstract

1. Genetics. 2003 Dec;165(4):2289-93. doi: 10.1093/genetics/165.4.2289.

Fission yeast Mus81.Eme1 Holliday junction resolvase is required for meiotic 
crossing over but not for gene conversion.

Smith GR(1), Boddy MN, Shanahan P, Russell P.

Author information:
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, 
Washington 98109, USA. gsmith@fhcrc.org

Most models of homologous recombination invoke cleavage of Holliday junctions to 
explain crossing over. The Mus81.Eme1 endonuclease from fission yeast and humans 
cleaves Holliday junctions and other branched DNA structures, leaving its 
physiological substrate uncertain. We report here that Schizosaccharomyces pombe 
mus81 mutants have normal or elevated frequencies of gene conversion but 20- to 
100-fold reduced frequencies of crossing over. Thus, gene conversion and 
crossing over can be genetically separated, and Mus81 is required for crossing 
over, supporting the hypothesis that the fission yeast Mus81.Eme1 protein 
complex resolves Holliday junctions in meiotic cells.

DOI: 10.1093/genetics/165.4.2289
PMCID: PMC1462924
PMID: 14704204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Most models of homologous recombination invoke cleavage of Holliday junctions to explain crossing over. The Mus81.Eme1 endonuclease from fission yeast and humans cleaves Holliday junctions and other branched DNA structures, leaving its physiological substrate uncertain. We report here that Schizosaccharomyces pombe mus81 mutants have normal or elevated frequencies of gene conversion but 20- to 100-fold reduced frequencies of crossing over. Thus, gene conversion and crossing over can be genetically separated, and Mus81 is required for crossing over, supporting the hypothesis that the fission yeast Mus81.Eme1 protein complex resolves Holliday junctions in meiotic cells.
