---
pmid: '11792622'
title: Nitric oxide-induced changes in intracellular zinc homeostasis are mediated
  by metallothionein/thionein.
authors:
- St Croix CM
- Wasserloos KJ
- Dineley KE
- Reynolds IJ
- Levitan ES
- Pitt BR
journal: Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1152/ajplung.00267.2001
---

# Nitric oxide-induced changes in intracellular zinc homeostasis are mediated by metallothionein/thionein.
**Authors:** St Croix CM, Wasserloos KJ, Dineley KE, Reynolds IJ, Levitan ES, Pitt BR
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajplung.00267.2001](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajplung.00267.2001)

## Abstract

1. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2002 Feb;282(2):L185-92. doi: 
10.1152/ajplung.00267.2001.

Nitric oxide-induced changes in intracellular zinc homeostasis are mediated by 
metallothionein/thionein.

St Croix CM(1), Wasserloos KJ, Dineley KE, Reynolds IJ, Levitan ES, Pitt BR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, Graduate School of 
Public Health, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15261, USA. 
cls13+@pitt.edu

Comment in
    Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2002 Feb;282(2):L183-4. doi: 
10.1152/ajplung.00424.2001.

We hypothesized that metallothionein (MT), a cysteine-rich protein with a strong 
affinity for Zn(2+), plays a role in nitric oxide (NO) signaling events via 
sequestration or release of Zn(2+) by the unique thiolate clusters of the 
protein. Exposing mouse lung fibroblasts (MLF) to the NO donor S-nitrosocysteine 
resulted in 20-30% increases in fluorescence of the Zn(2+)-specific fluorophore 
Zinquin that were rapidly reversed by the Zn(2+) chelator 
N,N,N',N'-tetrakis-(2-pyridylmethyl)ethylenediamine. The absence of a 
NO-mediated increase in labile Zn(2+) in MLF from MT knockouts and its 
restoration after MT complementation by adenoviral gene transfer inferred a 
critical role for MT in the regulation of Zn(2+) homeostasis by NO. Additional 
data obtained in sheep pulmonary artery endothelial cells suggested a role for 
the apo form of MT, thionein (T), as a Zn(2+)-binding protein in intact cells, 
as overexpression of MT caused inhibition of NO-induced changes in labile Zn(2+) 
that were reversed by Zn(2+) supplementation. Furthermore, 
fluorescence-resonance energy-transfer data showed that overexpression of green 
fluorescent protein-modified MT prevented NO-induced conformational changes, 
which are indicative of Zn(2+) release from thiolate clusters. This effect was 
restored by Zn(2+) supplementation. Collectively, these data show that MT 
mediates NO-induced changes in intracellular Zn(2+) and suggest that the ratio 
of MT to T can regulate Zn(2+) homeostasis in response to nitrosative stress.

DOI: 10.1152/ajplung.00267.2001
PMID: 11792622 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
