---
pmid: '28218432'
title: BECN2 interacts with ATG14 through a metastable coiled-coil to mediate autophagy.
authors:
- Su M
- Li Y
- Wyborny S
- Neau D
- Chakravarthy S
- Levine B
- Colbert CL
- Sinha SC
journal: Protein Sci
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5405433
doi: 10.1002/pro.3140
---

# BECN2 interacts with ATG14 through a metastable coiled-coil to mediate autophagy.
**Authors:** Su M, Li Y, Wyborny S, Neau D, Chakravarthy S, Levine B, Colbert CL, Sinha SC
**Journal:** Protein Sci (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pro.3140](https://doi.org/10.1002/pro.3140)
**PMC:** [PMC5405433](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5405433/)

## Abstract

1. Protein Sci. 2017 May;26(5):972-984. doi: 10.1002/pro.3140. Epub 2017 Mar 12.

BECN2 interacts with ATG14 through a metastable coiled-coil to mediate 
autophagy.

Su M(1), Li Y(1), Wyborny S(1), Neau D(2), Chakravarthy S(3), Levine B(4), 
Colbert CL(1), Sinha SC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, North Dakota State University, 
Fargo, North Dakota, 58108-6050.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Cornell University, 
Northeastern Collaborative Access Team, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, 
Illinois, 60439.
(3)Biophysics Collaborative Access Team/Illinois Institute of Technology, 
Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, Illinois, 60439.
(4)Center for Autophagy Research, Department of Internal Medicine and Howard 
Hughes Medical Research Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, Texas, 75390.

ATG14 binding to BECN/Beclin homologs is essential for autophagy, a critical 
catabolic homeostasis pathway. Here, we show that the α-helical, coiled-coil 
domain (CCD) of BECN2, a recently identified mammalian BECN1 paralog, forms an 
antiparallel, curved homodimer with seven pairs of nonideal packing 
interactions, while the BECN2 CCD and ATG14 CCD form a parallel, curved 
heterodimer stabilized by multiple, conserved polar interactions. Compared to 
BECN1, the BECN2 CCD forms a weaker homodimer, but binds more tightly to the 
ATG14 CCD. Mutation of nonideal BECN2 interface residues to more ideal pairs 
improves homodimer self-association and thermal stability. Unlike BECN1, all 
BECN2 CCD mutants bind ATG14, although more weakly than wild type. Thus, polar 
BECN2 CCD interface residues result in a metastable homodimer, facilitating 
dissociation, but enable better interactions with polar ATG14 residues 
stabilizing the BECN2:ATG14 heterodimer. These structure-based mechanistic 
differences in BECN1 and BECN2 homodimerization and heterodimerization likely 
dictate competitive ATG14 recruitment.

© 2017 The Protein Society.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.3140
PMCID: PMC5405433
PMID: 28218432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
