---
pmid: '11828029'
title: 'The APRR1/TOC1 quintet implicated in circadian rhythms of Arabidopsis thaliana:
  II. Characterization with CCA1-overexpressing plants.'
authors:
- Matsushika A
- Makino S
- Kojima M
- Yamashino T
- Mizuno T
journal: Plant Cell Physiol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcf006
---

# The APRR1/TOC1 quintet implicated in circadian rhythms of Arabidopsis thaliana: II. Characterization with CCA1-overexpressing plants.
**Authors:** Matsushika A, Makino S, Kojima M, Yamashino T, Mizuno T
**Journal:** Plant Cell Physiol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1093/pcp/pcf006](https://doi.org/10.1093/pcp/pcf006)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell Physiol. 2002 Jan;43(1):118-22. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcf006.

The APRR1/TOC1 quintet implicated in circadian rhythms of Arabidopsis thaliana: 
II. Characterization with CCA1-overexpressing plants.

Matsushika A(1), Makino S, Kojima M, Yamashino T, Mizuno T.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology, School of Agriculture, Nagoya 
University, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, 464-8601 Japan.

We previously identified a novel class of proteins, named pseudo-response 
regulators (APRRs) in Arabidopsis thaliana, each of which (APRR1, APRR3, APRR5, 
APRR7, and APRR9) has an intriguing structural design containing an N-terminal 
pseudo receiver domain and a C-terminal CONSTANS motif. Among them, APRR1 is 
identical to TOC1, previously proposed to be a candidate component of an 
Arabidopsis circadian clock. Intriguingly, expressions of the APRR1/TOC1 family 
of genes are under control of coordinate circadian rhythms at the level of 
transcription, in the manner that each APRR-transcript starts accumulating 
sequentially after dawn with 2 to 3 h intervals in the order: 
APRR9-->APRR7-->APRR5-->APRR3-->APRR1/TOC1. Here we examined this 
circadian-related event, "circadian waves of the APRR1/TOC1 quintet", by 
employing CCA1-overexpression (CCA1-ox) transgenic plants, based on the fact 
that CCA1 is a well-characterized and the most plausible oscillator component. 
It was found that aberrant overexpression of the CCA1 gene severely perturbed 
free-running and sequential rhythms of the APRR1/TOC1 family of genes. In the 
accompanying paper, it was shown that overexpression of APRR1 also results in a 
marked alteration of the CCA1 circadian rhythm, and vice versa. Taken together, 
it was suggested that there are intimate and mutual links between these two 
types of circadian-associated components (APRRs and CCA1).

DOI: 10.1093/pcp/pcf006
PMID: 11828029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
