---
pmid: '10982837'
title: Identification and functional analysis of human Tom22 for protein import into
  mitochondria.
authors:
- Yano M
- Hoogenraad N
- Terada K
- Mori M
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2000'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC86274
doi: 10.1128/MCB.20.19.7205-7213.2000
---

# Identification and functional analysis of human Tom22 for protein import into mitochondria.
**Authors:** Yano M, Hoogenraad N, Terada K, Mori M
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.20.19.7205-7213.2000](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.20.19.7205-7213.2000)
**PMC:** [PMC86274](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC86274/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Oct;20(19):7205-13. doi: 10.1128/MCB.20.19.7205-7213.2000.

Identification and functional analysis of human Tom22 for protein import into 
mitochondria.

Yano M(1), Hoogenraad N, Terada K, Mori M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Kumamoto University School of Medicine, 
Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.

Mitochondria have a receptor complex in the outer membrane which recognizes and 
translocates mitochondrial proteins synthesized in the cytosol. We report here 
the identification and functional analysis of human Tom22 (hTom22). hTom22 has 
an N-terminal negatively charged region exposed to the cytosol, a putative 
transmembrane region, and a C-terminal intermembrane space region with little 
negative charge. Tom22 forms a complex with Tom20, and its cytosolic domain 
functions as an import receptor as in fungi. An import inhibition assay, using 
pre-ornithine transcarbamylase (pOTC) derivatives and a series of hTom22 
deletion mutants, showed that the C-terminal segment of the cytosolic domain is 
important for presequence binding, whereas the N-terminal domain is important 
for binding to the mature portion of pOTC. No evidence for pOTC interaction with 
the Tom22 intermembrane space domain was obtained. Binding studies revealed that 
the presequence is critical for pOTC binding to Tom20, whereas both the 
presequence and mature portion are important for binding to Tom22. A cell-free 
immunoprecipitation assay indicated that an internal segment of the Tom22 
cytosolic domain is important for interaction with Tom20.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.20.19.7205-7213.2000
PMCID: PMC86274
PMID: 10982837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Mitochondria have a receptor complex in the outer membrane which recognizes and translocates mitochondrial proteins synthesized in the cytosol. We report here the identification and functional analysis of human Tom22 (hTom22). hTom22 has an N-terminal negatively charged region exposed to the cytosol, a putative transmembrane region, and a C-terminal intermembrane space region with little negative charge. Tom22 forms a complex with Tom20, and its cytosolic domain functions as an import receptor as in fungi. An import inhibition assay, using pre-ornithine transcarbamylase (pOTC) derivatives and a series of hTom22 deletion mutants, showed that the C-terminal segment of the cytosolic domain is important for presequence binding, whereas the N-terminal domain is important for binding to the mature portion of pOTC. No evidence for pOTC interaction with the Tom22 intermembrane space domain was obtained. Binding studies revealed that the presequence is critical for pOTC binding to Tom20, whereas both the presequence and mature portion are important for binding to Tom22. A cell-free immunoprecipitation assay indicated that an internal segment of the Tom22 cytosolic domain is important for interaction with Tom20.

DISCUSSION

We have identified a protein import receptor from human mitochondria of 15.5 kDa (hTom22) and demonstrated it to be the human ortholog of fungal Tom22 based on the following findings: (i) hTom22 and fungal Tom22s show significant sequence homology and have similar domains, (ii) hTom22 is an integral mitochondrial outer membrane protein with the N-terminal portion exposed to the cytosol and the C-terminal portion exposed to the IMS, (iii) the cytosolic domain is involved in preprotein binding, and (iv) hTom22 forms a complex with Tom20.

We have shown that the C-terminal region (residues 63 to 82) of the hTom22 cytosolic domain is important for presequence binding, whereas the N-terminal region is required for binding to the mature portion of the mitochondrial preprotein, pOTC. This C-terminal region is predicted to form a β-sheet or turn structure and contains only one negative charge. We found that the positive charges in the presequence were important but not essential for binding to Tom22. Taken together, the interaction between Tom22 and presequence appeared to be mediated by both hydrophobic and hydrophilic interactions. Recent structural analysis of hTom20 by nuclear magnetic resonance analysis revealed that presequence binding to this receptor is mediated mainly by hydrophobic rather than by ionic interaction ( 1 ). Besides binding to presequences, receptors also appear to interact with the mature parts of preprotein, although the contribution of this interaction in total binding may differ among receptors. We found that hTom20 bound mainly to the presequence of pOTC and partly to the mature portion ( 40 ). Brix et al. ( 3 ), using a peptide scan method for analyzing the binding of preprotein to yeast receptors, found that, whereas CoxVI-derived peptides corresponding to its presequence bound mainly to Tom20, peptides corresponding to the mature protein also bound. Indeed, the mature peptides bound more strongly to Tom22, which is in agreement with the findings we report here that hTom20 binds mainly to the presequence of pOTC, whereas hTom22 binds mainly to the mature portion. Stronger inhibition of pOTC-GFP import by the cytosolic domain of Tom22 than by that of Tom20 (Fig. 6 D) suggests that Tom22 has a higher affinity for the presequence than does Tom20.

Although the cytosolic domains of hTom22 and fungal Tom22s have a significant homology, the IMS domains are much less similar. The IMS domain of hTom22 has few negative charges and contains a unique segment rich in glutamine residues. A similar segment, called the Q-rich motif, is also present in hTom20. This segment was shown previously to be important for binding to preproteins and for preprotein import ( 34 , 40 ). The involvement of the IMS domain of fungal Tom22s in preprotein import has been debated. Studies using mitochondria lacking the IMS domain suggested that the domain is required for promoting the transfer of presequence to the machinery in the inner membrane ( 4 , 15 ). Chemical and photo-cross-linking experiments suggested that the presequence binds mainly to Tom40 in the trans site after entry of preprotein into the translocation pore ( 15 , 32 ). In contrast, direct binding of preprotein to the IMS domain of Tom22 was reported by Komiya et al. ( 17 ). In the present study, we could not detect preprotein binding to the IMS domain of hTom22.

Haucke et al. ( 11 ) have suggested that fungal Tom20 and Tom70 interact with each other through tetratricopeptide repeat motifs, which are thought to mediate protein-protein interaction ( 7 ). However, recently, van Wilpe et al. ( 38 ) reported that the interaction of the receptors Tom20 and Tom70 with the translocation pore, Tom40, is through the cytosolic domain of Tom22 in yeast. Since neither fungal Tom22 nor hTom22 has an apparent tetratricopeptide repeat motif, some other interaction must be involved. In this study, we found that the internal segment of the cytosolic domain of hTom22 (residues 49 to 71) is important for interaction with hTom20. This remains to be confirmed by structural analysis.
