---
pmid: '10627470'
title: Expression of functional interleukin-15 receptor and autocrine production of
  interleukin-15 as mechanisms of tumor propagation in multiple myeloma.
authors:
- Tinhofer I
- Marschitz I
- Henn T
- Egle A
- Greil R
journal: Blood
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
---

# Expression of functional interleukin-15 receptor and autocrine production of interleukin-15 as mechanisms of tumor propagation in multiple myeloma.
**Authors:** Tinhofer I, Marschitz I, Henn T, Egle A, Greil R
**Journal:** Blood (2000)

## Abstract

1. Blood. 2000 Jan 15;95(2):610-8.

Expression of functional interleukin-15 receptor and autocrine production of 
interleukin-15 as mechanisms of tumor propagation in multiple myeloma.

Tinhofer I(1), Marschitz I, Henn T, Egle A, Greil R.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cytology, Department of Internal Medicine, University 
of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.

Interleukin-15 (IL-15) induces proliferation and promotes cell survival of human 
T and B lymphocytes, natural killer cells, and neutrophils. Here we report the 
constitutive expression of a functional IL-15 receptor (IL-15R) in 6 of 6 
myeloma cell lines and in CD38(high)/CD45(low )plasma cells belonging to 14 of 
14 patients with multiple myeloma. Furthermore, we detected IL-15 transcripts in 
all 6 myeloma cell lines, and IL-15 protein in 4/6 cell lines and also in the 
primary plasma cells of 8/14 multiple myeloma patients. Our observations confirm 
the existence of an autocrine IL-15 loop and point to the potential paracrine 
stimulation of myeloma cells by IL-15 released from the cellular 
microenvironment. Blocking autocrine IL-15 in cell lines increased the rate of 
spontaneous apoptosis, and the degree of this effect was comparable to the 
pro-apoptotic effect of depleting autocrine IL-6 by antibody targeting. IL-15 
was also capable of substituting for autocrine IL-6 in order to promote cell 
survival and vice versa. In short-term cultures of primary myeloma cells, the 
addition of IL-15 reduced the percentage of tumor cells spontaneously undergoing 
apoptosis. Furthermore, IL-15 lowered the responsiveness to Fas-induced 
apoptosis and to cytotoxic treatment with vincristine and doxorubicin but not 
with dexamethasone. These data add IL-15 to the list of important factors 
promoting survival of multiple myeloma cells and demonstrate that it can be 
produced and be functionally active in an autocrine manner. (Blood. 
2000;95:610-618)

PMID: 10627470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
