---
pmid: '17331979'
title: Mitochondrial frataxin interacts with ISD11 of the NFS1/ISCU complex and multiple
  mitochondrial chaperones.
authors:
- Shan Y
- Napoli E
- Cortopassi G
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddm038
---

# Mitochondrial frataxin interacts with ISD11 of the NFS1/ISCU complex and multiple mitochondrial chaperones.
**Authors:** Shan Y, Napoli E, Cortopassi G
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddm038](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddm038)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 Apr 15;16(8):929-41. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddm038. Epub 2007
Mar  1.

Mitochondrial frataxin interacts with ISD11 of the NFS1/ISCU complex and 
multiple mitochondrial chaperones.

Shan Y(1), Napoli E, Cortopassi G.

Author information:
(1)VM:Molecular Biosciences, 1311 Haring Hall, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

The neurodegenerative disorder Friedreich's ataxia (FRDA) is caused by mutations 
in frataxin, a mitochondrial protein whose function remains controversial. Using 
co-immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry we identified multiple interactors 
of mitochondrial frataxin in mammalian cells. One interactor was mortalin/GRP75, 
a homolog of the yeast ssq1 chaperone that integrates iron-sulfur clusters into 
imported mitochondrial proteins. Another interactor was ISD11, recently 
identified as a component of the eukaryotic complex Nfs1/ISCU, an essential 
component of iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis. Interactions between frataxin and 
ISD11, and frataxin and GRP75 were confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation 
experiments in both directions. Immunofluorescence analysis demonstrated that 
ISD11 co-localized with both frataxin and with mitochondria. The point mutations 
I154F and W155R in frataxin cause FRDA and are clustered to one surface of the 
protein, and these mutations decrease the interaction of frataxin with ISD11. 
The frataxin/ISD11 interaction was also decreased by the chelator EDTA, and was 
increased by supplementation with nickel but not other metal ions. Nickel 
supplementation rescued the defective interaction of mutant frataxin I154F and 
W155R with ISD11. Upon ISD11 depletion by siRNA in HEK293T cells, the amount of 
the Nfs1/ISCU protein complex declined, as did the activity of the iron-sulfur 
cluster enzyme aconitase, while the cellular iron content was increased, as seen 
in tissues from FRDA patients. Furthermore, ISD11 mRNA levels were decreased in 
FRDA patient cells. These data suggest that frataxin binds the iron-sulfur 
biogenesis Nfs1/ISCU complex through ISD11, that the interaction is 
nickel-dependent, and that multiple consequences of frataxin deficiency are 
duplicated by ISD11 deficiency.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddm038
PMID: 17331979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
