---
pmid: '12732644'
title: RASSF2 is a novel K-Ras-specific effector and potential tumor suppressor.
authors:
- Vos MD
- Ellis CA
- Elam C
- Ulku AS
- Taylor BJ
- Clark GJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M300554200
---

# RASSF2 is a novel K-Ras-specific effector and potential tumor suppressor.
**Authors:** Vos MD, Ellis CA, Elam C, Ulku AS, Taylor BJ, Clark GJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M300554200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M300554200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jul 25;278(30):28045-51. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M300554200. Epub 
2003 May 5.

RASSF2 is a novel K-Ras-specific effector and potential tumor suppressor.

Vos MD(1), Ellis CA, Elam C, Ulku AS, Taylor BJ, Clark GJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Cancer Biology, NCI, National Institutes of Health, 
Rockville, Maryland 20850-3300, USA.

Ras proteins regulate a wide range of biological processes by interacting with a 
broad assortment of effector proteins. Although activated forms of Ras are 
frequently associated with oncogenesis, they may also provoke 
growth-antagonistic effects. These include senescence, cell cycle arrest, 
differentiation, and apoptosis. The mechanisms that underlie these 
growth-inhibitory activities are relatively poorly understood. Recently, two 
related novel Ras effectors, NORE1 and RASSF1, have been identified as mediators 
of apoptosis and cell cycle arrest. Both of these proteins exhibit many of the 
properties normally associated with tumor suppressors. We now identify a novel 
third member of this family, designated RASSF2. RASSF2 binds directly to K-Ras 
in a GTP-dependent manner via the Ras effector domain. However, RASSF2 only 
weakly interacts with H-Ras. Moreover, RASSF2 promotes apoptosis and cell cycle 
arrest and is frequently down-regulated in lung tumor cell lines. Thus, we 
identify RASSF2 as a new member of the RASSF1 family of Ras effectors/tumor 
suppressors that exhibits a specificity for interacting with K-Ras.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M300554200
PMID: 12732644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
