---
pmid: '12855682'
title: Heat shock protein 90 as an endogenous protein enhancer of inducible nitric-oxide
  synthase.
authors:
- Yoshida M
- Xia Y
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M305214200
---

# Heat shock protein 90 as an endogenous protein enhancer of inducible nitric-oxide synthase.
**Authors:** Yoshida M, Xia Y
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M305214200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M305214200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Sep 19;278(38):36953-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M305214200. Epub
2003  Jul 10.

Heat shock protein 90 as an endogenous protein enhancer of inducible 
nitric-oxide synthase.

Yoshida M(1), Xia Y.

Author information:
(1)Davis Heart and Lung Research Institute, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, 
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, The Ohio State University, 
Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

Nitric oxide (NO) generated by inducible NO synthase (iNOS) plays crucial roles 
in inflammation and host defense. With an intrinsically bound calmodulin, iNOS 
is fully active once expressed in cells. Thus, regulation of NO production from 
iNOS was thought to primarily occur at the enzyme transcriptional level. Here we 
show that NO synthesis from iNOS can be profoundly modulated by heat shock 
protein 90 (hsp90) through protein-protein interaction. To study whether hsp90 
affects iNOS function, recombinant murine iNOS was purified from an Escherichia 
coli expression system by affinity chromatography. Hsp90, at physiological 
concentrations (10-500 nm), dose-dependently increased iNOS activity. This was a 
specific effect because neither denatured hsp90 nor irrelevant bovine serum 
albumin affected iNOS function. Overexpression of hsp90 enhanced NO production 
in iNOS-transfected cells. On the contrary, hsp90 inhibition dramatically 
decreased NO formation from iNOS in macrophages. Co-immunoprecipitation studies 
showed that hsp90 and iNOS associated with each other in cells. Overexpression 
of iNOS resulted in NO-mediated cellular injury. Hsp90 inhibition markedly 
attenuated NO formation and prevented cellular injury. These results 
demonstrated that hsp90 is an allosteric enhancer of iNOS. iNOS is coupled with 
hsp90 in cells, and this coupling facilitates NO synthesis. In light of the 
critical role of hsp90 in iNOS-mediated cytotoxic action, modulating the 
interaction between hsp90 and iNOS may be a new approach to intervene 
inflammation and immune response.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M305214200
PMID: 12855682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
