---
pmid: '19417103'
title: Genome-wide replication profiles indicate an expansive role for Rpd3L in regulating
  replication initiation timing or efficiency, and reveal genomic loci of Rpd3 function
  in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
authors:
- Knott SR
- Viggiani CJ
- Tavaré S
- Aparicio OM
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2682954
doi: 10.1101/gad.1784309
---

# Genome-wide replication profiles indicate an expansive role for Rpd3L in regulating replication initiation timing or efficiency, and reveal genomic loci of Rpd3 function in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Knott SR, Viggiani CJ, Tavaré S, Aparicio OM
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.1784309](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.1784309)
**PMC:** [PMC2682954](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2682954/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2009 May 1;23(9):1077-90. doi: 10.1101/gad.1784309.

Genome-wide replication profiles indicate an expansive role for Rpd3L in 
regulating replication initiation timing or efficiency, and reveal genomic loci 
of Rpd3 function in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Knott SR(1), Viggiani CJ, Tavaré S, Aparicio OM.

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Computational Biology Program, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, California 90089, USA.

In higher eukaryotes, heritable gene silencing is associated with histone 
deacetylation and late replication timing. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the 
histone deacetylase Rpd3 regulates gene expression and also modulates 
replication timing; however, these mechanisms have been suggested to be 
independent, and no global association has been found between replication timing 
and gene expression levels. Using 5-Bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation 
to generate genome-wide replication profiles, we identified >100 late-firing 
replication origins that are regulated by Rpd3L, which is specifically targeted 
to promoters to silence transcription. Rpd3S, which recompacts chromatin after 
transcription, plays a primary role at only a handful of origins, but subtly 
influences initiation timing globally. The ability of these functionally 
distinct Rpd3 complexes to affect replication initiation timing supports the 
idea that histone deacetylation directly influences initiation timing. 
Accordingly, loss of Rpd3 function results in higher levels of histone H3 and H4 
acetylation surrounding Rpd3-regulated origins, and these origins show a 
significant association with Rpd3 chromatin binding and gene regulation, 
supporting a general link between histone acetylation, replication timing, and 
control of gene expression in budding yeast. Our results also reveal a novel and 
complementary genomic map of Rpd3L- and Rpd3S-regulated chromosomal loci.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.1784309
PMCID: PMC2682954
PMID: 19417103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
