---
pmid: '16099979'
title: FD, a bZIP protein mediating signals from the floral pathway integrator FT
  at the shoot apex.
authors:
- Abe M
- Kobayashi Y
- Yamamoto S
- Daimon Y
- Yamaguchi A
- Ikeda Y
- Ichinoki H
- Notaguchi M
- Goto K
- Araki T
journal: Science
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.1115983
---

# FD, a bZIP protein mediating signals from the floral pathway integrator FT at the shoot apex.
**Authors:** Abe M, Kobayashi Y, Yamamoto S, Daimon Y, Yamaguchi A, Ikeda Y, Ichinoki H, Notaguchi M, Goto K, Araki T
**Journal:** Science (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1115983](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1115983)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2005 Aug 12;309(5737):1052-6. doi: 10.1126/science.1115983.

FD, a bZIP protein mediating signals from the floral pathway integrator FT at 
the shoot apex.

Abe M(1), Kobayashi Y, Yamamoto S, Daimon Y, Yamaguchi A, Ikeda Y, Ichinoki H, 
Notaguchi M, Goto K, Araki T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, 
Kyoto 606-8502, Japan.

Comment in
    Science. 2005 Aug 12;309(5737):1024-5. doi: 10.1126/science.1117203.

FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT) is a conserved promoter of flowering that acts downstream 
of various regulatory pathways, including one that mediates photoperiodic 
induction through CONSTANS (CO), and is expressed in the vasculature of 
cotyledons and leaves. A bZIP transcription factor, FD, preferentially expressed 
in the shoot apex is required for FT to promote flowering. FD and FT are 
interdependent partners through protein interaction and act at the shoot apex to 
promote floral transition and to initiate floral development through 
transcriptional activation of a floral meristem identity gene, APETALA1 (AP1). 
FT may represent a long-distance signal in flowering.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1115983
PMID: 16099979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
