---
pmid: '23233672'
title: A shared endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation pathway involving the
  EDEM1 protein for glycosylated and nonglycosylated proteins.
authors:
- Shenkman M
- Groisman B
- Ron E
- Avezov E
- Hendershot LM
- Lederkremer GZ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3554889
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.438275
---

# A shared endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation pathway involving the EDEM1 protein for glycosylated and nonglycosylated proteins.
**Authors:** Shenkman M, Groisman B, Ron E, Avezov E, Hendershot LM, Lederkremer GZ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M112.438275](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M112.438275)
**PMC:** [PMC3554889](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3554889/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jan 25;288(4):2167-78. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.438275. Epub
2012  Dec 11.

A shared endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation pathway involving the 
EDEM1 protein for glycosylated and nonglycosylated proteins.

Shenkman M(1), Groisman B, Ron E, Avezov E, Hendershot LM, Lederkremer GZ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Research and Immunology, George Wise Faculty of Life 
Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel.

Studies of misfolded protein targeting to endoplasmic reticulum-associated 
degradation (ERAD) have largely focused on glycoproteins, which include the bulk 
of the secretory proteins. Mechanisms of targeting of nonglycosylated proteins 
are less clear. Here, we studied three nonglycosylated proteins and analyzed 
their use of known glycoprotein quality control and ERAD components. Similar to 
an established glycosylated ERAD substrate, the uncleaved precursor of 
asialoglycoprotein receptor H2a, its nonglycosylated mutant, makes use of 
calnexin, EDEM1, and HRD1, but only glycosylated H2a is a substrate for the 
cytosolic SCF(Fbs2) E3 ubiquitin ligase with lectin activity. Two 
nonglycosylated BiP substrates, NS-1κ light chain and truncated Igγ heavy chain, 
interact with the ERAD complex lectins OS-9 and XTP3-B and require EDEM1 for 
degradation. EDEM1 associates through a region outside of its mannosidase-like 
domain with the nonglycosylated proteins. Similar to glycosylated substrates, 
proteasomal inhibition induced accumulation of the nonglycosylated proteins and 
ERAD machinery in the endoplasmic reticulum-derived quality control compartment. 
Our results suggest a shared ERAD pathway for glycosylated and nonglycosylated 
proteins composed of luminal lectin machinery components also capable of 
protein-protein interactions.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.438275
PMCID: PMC3554889
PMID: 23233672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
