---
pmid: '29100095'
title: Mutations in GPAA1, Encoding a GPI Transamidase Complex Protein, Cause Developmental
  Delay, Epilepsy, Cerebellar Atrophy, and Osteopenia.
authors:
- Nguyen TTM
- Murakami Y
- Sheridan E
- Ehresmann S
- Rousseau J
- St-Denis A
- Chai G
- Ajeawung NF
- Fairbrother L
- Reimschisel T
- Bateman A
- Berry-Kravis E
- Xia F
- Tardif J
- Parry DA
- Logan CV
- Diggle C
- Bennett CP
- Hattingh L
- Rosenfeld JA
- Perry MS
- Parker MJ
- Le Deist F
- Zaki MS
- Ignatius E
- Isohanni P
- Lönnqvist T
- Carroll CJ
- Johnson CA
- Gleeson JG
- Kinoshita T
- Campeau PM
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5673666
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.09.020
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Mutations in GPAA1, Encoding a GPI Transamidase Complex Protein, Cause Developmental Delay, Epilepsy, Cerebellar Atrophy, and Osteopenia.
**Authors:** Nguyen TTM, Murakami Y, Sheridan E, Ehresmann S, Rousseau J, St-Denis A, Chai G, Ajeawung NF, Fairbrother L, Reimschisel T, Bateman A, Berry-Kravis E, Xia F, Tardif J, Parry DA, Logan CV, Diggle C, Bennett CP, Hattingh L, Rosenfeld JA, Perry MS, Parker MJ, Le Deist F, Zaki MS, Ignatius E, Isohanni P, Lönnqvist T, Carroll CJ, Johnson CA, Gleeson JG, Kinoshita T, Campeau PM
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.09.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.09.020)
**PMC:** [PMC5673666](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5673666/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2017 Nov 2;101(5):856-865. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.09.020.

Mutations in GPAA1, Encoding a GPI Transamidase Complex Protein, Cause 
Developmental Delay, Epilepsy, Cerebellar Atrophy, and Osteopenia.

Nguyen TTM(1), Murakami Y(2), Sheridan E(3), Ehresmann S(1), Rousseau J(1), 
St-Denis A(1), Chai G(4), Ajeawung NF(1), Fairbrother L(5), Reimschisel T(5), 
Bateman A(5), Berry-Kravis E(6), Xia F(7), Tardif J(1), Parry DA(3), Logan 
CV(3), Diggle C(3), Bennett CP(3), Hattingh L(8), Rosenfeld JA(7), Perry MS(9), 
Parker MJ(10), Le Deist F(1), Zaki MS(11), Ignatius E(12), Isohanni P(12), 
Lönnqvist T(13), Carroll CJ(14), Johnson CA(3), Gleeson JG(4), Kinoshita T(2), 
Campeau PM(15).

Author information:
(1)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Sainte Justine Research Center, University 
of Montreal, Montreal, QC H3T1C5, Canada.
(2)Yabumoto Department of Intractable Disease Research, Research Institute for 
Microbial Diseases, and Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka University, 
Osaka 565-0871, Japan.
(3)Faculty of Medicine and Health University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK.
(4)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Rady Children's Institute for Genomic 
Medicine, Department of Neuroscience, University of California, San Diego, San 
Diego, CA 92093, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 
37232, USA.
(6)Departments of Pediatrics, Neurological Sciences, and Biochemistry, Rush 
University Medical Center, Rush University, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.
(7)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(8)Department of Radiology, Bradford Royal Infirmary, Duckworth Lane, Bradford 
BD9 6RJ, UK.
(9)Comprehensive Epilepsy Program, Jane and John Justin Neuroscience Center, 
Cook Children's Medical Center, Fort Worth, TX 76104, USA.
(10)Sheffield Children's Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Western Bank, Sheffield 
S10 2TH, UK.
(11)Clinical Genetics Department, Human Genetics and Genome Research Division, 
National Research Centre, Cairo 12311, Egypt.
(12)Research Programs Unit, Molecular Neurology, University of Helsinki, 00290 
Helsinki, Finland; Department of Child Neurology, Children's Hospital, 
University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Hospital District of 
Helsinki and Uusimaa, 00029 Helsinki, Finland.
(13)Department of Child Neurology, Children's Hospital, University of Helsinki 
and Helsinki University Hospital, Hospital District of Helsinki and Uusimaa, 
00029 Helsinki, Finland.
(14)Research Programs Unit, Molecular Neurology, University of Helsinki, 00290 
Helsinki, Finland; Molecular and Clinical Sciences Research Institute, St. 
George's, University of London, Cranmer Terrace, London SW17 0RE, UK.
(15)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Sainte Justine Research Center, University 
of Montreal, Montreal, QC H3T1C5, Canada; Department of Pediatrics, University 
of Montreal, Montreal, QC H3T 1J4, Canada. Electronic address: 
p.campeau@umontreal.ca.

Approximately one in every 200 mammalian proteins is anchored to the cell 
membrane through a glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor. These proteins 
play important roles notably in neurological development and function. To date, 
more than 20 genes have been implicated in the biogenesis of GPI-anchored 
proteins. GPAA1 (glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor attachment 1) is an 
essential component of the transamidase complex along with PIGK, PIGS, PIGT, and 
PIGU (phosphatidylinositol-glycan biosynthesis classes K, S, T, and U, 
respectively). This complex orchestrates the attachment of the GPI anchor to the 
C terminus of precursor proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum. Here, we report 
bi-allelic mutations in GPAA1 in ten individuals from five families. Using 
whole-exome sequencing, we identified two frameshift mutations (c.981_993del 
[p.Gln327Hisfs∗102] and c.920delG [p.Gly307Alafs∗11]), one intronic splicing 
mutation (c.1164+5C>T), and six missense mutations (c.152C>T [p.Ser51Leu], 
c.160_161delinsAA [p.Ala54Asn], c.527G>C [p.Trp176Ser], c.869T>C [p.Leu290Pro], 
c.872T>C [p.Leu291Pro], and c.1165G>C [p.Ala389Pro]). Most individuals presented 
with global developmental delay, hypotonia, early-onset seizures, cerebellar 
atrophy, and osteopenia. The splicing mutation was found to decrease GPAA1 mRNA. 
Moreover, flow-cytometry analysis of five available individual samples showed 
that several GPI-anchored proteins had decreased cell-surface abundance in 
leukocytes (FLAER, CD16, and CD59) or fibroblasts (CD73 and CD109). Transduction 
of fibroblasts with a lentivirus encoding the wild-type protein partially 
rescued the deficiency of GPI-anchored proteins. These findings highlight the 
role of the transamidase complex in the development and function of the 
cerebellum and the skeletal system.

Copyright © 2017 American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.09.020
PMCID: PMC5673666
PMID: 29100095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
