---
pmid: '9207062'
title: Interaction of human apurinic endonuclease and DNA polymerase beta in the base
  excision repair pathway.
authors:
- Bennett RA
- Wilson DM 3rd
- Wong D
- Demple B
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC23779
doi: 10.1073/pnas.94.14.7166
---

# Interaction of human apurinic endonuclease and DNA polymerase beta in the base excision repair pathway.
**Authors:** Bennett RA, Wilson DM 3rd, Wong D, Demple B
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.94.14.7166](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.94.14.7166)
**PMC:** [PMC23779](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC23779/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Jul 8;94(14):7166-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.94.14.7166.

Interaction of human apurinic endonuclease and DNA polymerase beta in the base 
excision repair pathway.

Bennett RA(1), Wilson DM 3rd, Wong D, Demple B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Toxicology, Harvard School of Public 
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Mutagenic abasic (AP) sites are generated directly by DNA-damaging agents or by 
DNA glycosylases acting in base excision repair. AP sites are corrected via 
incision by AP endonucleases, removal of deoxyribose 5-phosphate, repair 
synthesis, and ligation. Mammalian DNA polymerase beta (Polbeta) carries out 
most base excision repair synthesis and also can excise deoxyribose 5-phosphate 
after AP endonuclease incision. Yeast two-hybrid analysis now indicates 
protein-protein contact between Polbeta and human AP endonuclease (Ape protein). 
In vitro, binding of Ape protein to uncleaved AP sites loads Polbeta into a 
ternary complex with Ape and the AP-DNA. After incision by Ape, only Polbeta 
exhibits stable DNA binding. Kinetic experiments indicated that Ape accelerates 
the excision of 5'-terminal deoxyribose 5-phosphate by Polbeta. Thus, the two 
central players of the base excision repair pathway are coordinated in 
sequential reactions.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.94.14.7166
PMCID: PMC23779
PMID: 9207062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
