---
pmid: '16537643'
title: An N-terminally acetylated Arf-like GTPase is localised to lysosomes and affects
  their motility.
authors:
- Hofmann I
- Munro S
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.02958
---

# An N-terminally acetylated Arf-like GTPase is localised to lysosomes and affects their motility.
**Authors:** Hofmann I, Munro S
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.02958](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.02958)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2006 Apr 15;119(Pt 8):1494-503. doi: 10.1242/jcs.02958. Epub 2006 
Mar 14.

An N-terminally acetylated Arf-like GTPase is localised to lysosomes and affects 
their motility.

Hofmann I(1), Munro S.

Author information:
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 2QH, UK.

Small GTPases of the Arf and Rab families play key roles in the function of 
subcellular organelles. Each GTPase is usually found on only one compartment 
and, hence, they confer organelle specificity to many intracellular processes. 
However, there has so far been little evidence for specific GTPases present on 
lysosomes. Here, we report that two closely related human Arf-like GTPases, 
Arl8a and Arl8b (also known as Arl10b/c and Gie1/2), localise to lysosomes in 
mammalian cells, with the single homologue in Drosophila cells having a similar 
location. Conventionally, membrane binding of Arf and Arl proteins is mediated 
by both an N-terminal myristoyl group and an N-terminal amphipathic helix that 
is inserted into the lipid bilayer upon activation of the GTPase. Arl8a and 
Arl8b do not have N-terminal myristoylation sites, and we find that Arl8b is 
instead N-terminally acetylated, and an acetylated methionine is necessary for 
its lysosomal localization. Overexpression of Arl8a or Arl8b results in a 
microtubule-dependent redistribution of lysosomes towards the cell periphery. 
Live cell imaging shows that lysosomes move more frequently both toward and away 
from the cell periphery, suggesting a role for Arl8a and Arl8b as positive 
regulators of lysosomal transport.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.02958
PMID: 16537643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
