---
pmid: '20364130'
title: Diversity in DNA recognition by p53 revealed by crystal structures with Hoogsteen
  base pairs.
authors:
- Kitayner M
- Rozenberg H
- Rohs R
- Suad O
- Rabinovich D
- Honig B
- Shakked Z
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2010'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3280089
doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1800
---

# Diversity in DNA recognition by p53 revealed by crystal structures with Hoogsteen base pairs.
**Authors:** Kitayner M, Rozenberg H, Rohs R, Suad O, Rabinovich D, Honig B, Shakked Z
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nsmb.1800](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb.1800)
**PMC:** [PMC3280089](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3280089/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2010 Apr;17(4):423-9. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1800. Epub 2010
Apr  4.

Diversity in DNA recognition by p53 revealed by crystal structures with 
Hoogsteen base pairs.

Kitayner M(1), Rozenberg H, Rohs R, Suad O, Rabinovich D, Honig B, Shakked Z.

Author information:
(1)Department of Structural Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israel.

Comment in
    Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2010 Apr;17(4):390-1. doi: 10.1038/nsmb0410-390.

p53 binds as a tetramer to DNA targets consisting of two decameric half-sites 
separated by a variable spacer. Here we present high-resolution crystal 
structures of complexes between p53 core-domain tetramers and DNA targets 
consisting of contiguous half-sites. In contrast to previously reported p53-DNA 
complexes that show standard Watson-Crick base pairs, the newly reported 
structures show noncanonical Hoogsteen base-pairing geometry at the central A-T 
doublet of each half-site. Structural and computational analyses show that the 
Hoogsteen geometry distinctly modulates the B-DNA helix in terms of local shape 
and electrostatic potential, which, together with the contiguous DNA 
configuration, results in enhanced protein-DNA and protein-protein interactions 
compared to noncontiguous half-sites. Our results suggest a mechanism relating 
spacer length to protein-DNA binding affinity. Our findings also expand the 
current understanding of protein-DNA recognition and establish the structural 
and chemical properties of Hoogsteen base pairs as the basis for a novel mode of 
sequence readout.

DOI: 10.1038/nsmb.1800
PMCID: PMC3280089
PMID: 20364130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

p53 binds as a tetramer to DNA targets consisting of two decameric half-sites separated by a variable spacer. Here we present high-resolution crystal structures of complexes between p53 core-domain tetramers and DNA targets consisting of contiguous half-sites. In contrast to previously reported p53-DNA complexes that display standard Watson-Crick base pairs, the newly reported structures exhibit non-canonical Hoogsteen base-pairing geometry at the central A/T doublet of each half-site. Structural and computational analyses demonstrate that the Hoogsteen geometry distinctly modulates the B-DNA helix in terms of local shape and electrostatic potential which together with the contiguous DNA configuration results in enhanced protein-DNA and protein-protein interactions compared to non-contiguous half-sites. Our results suggest a mechanism, which relates spacer length to protein-DNA binding affinity. Our findings also expand the current understanding of protein-DNA recognition and establish the structural and chemical properties of Hoogsteen base pairs as the basis for a novel mode of sequence readout.

DISCUSSION

In this paper we present high-resolution crystal structures of self-assembled complexes between the core-domain of human p53 and its consensus DNA targets where the two decameric half-sites are contiguous. In our previous studies the two half-sites were separated by two base pairs. In both cases, four p53 molecules self-assemble on two B-DNA half-sites to form a tetramer which is a dimer of dimers. However, the 3-D architecture of the form reported here, referred to as a type-II complex, is distinctly different from the previously discovered, type-I form. The differences are due to the specific configuration and the particular shape of the DNA binding site. Whereas in type-II structures the DNA helix is straight, a large deformation at the junction between half-sites is observed in type-I complexes. This deformation brings the attached dimers into close proximity, thereby facilitating inter-dimer protein-protein interactions which contribute to the stability and cooperativity of the tetrameric complex 19 . However, this inter-dimer interface is much smaller than that of type-II complexes where the two dimers are parallel to each other due to the contiguous arrangement of the half-sites. Establishing as large an interface in type-I complexes as seen in type-II complexes would require a much larger deformation of the DNA at a much greater energy cost whose magnitude will depend on the intrinsic structure and flexibility of the specific DNA sequence. This provides an explanation of the effect of the DNA spacer in lowering the observed binding affinity and stability of type-I complexes in comparison to complexes with a contiguous configuration of the same DNA half-sites 19

Although the direct contacts between the protein and the DNA are essentially identical in both cases, type-II complexes exhibit novel structural features, of which the most remarkable is the non-canonical Hoogsteen base-pair geometry displayed by the A/T base pairs at the center of each half-site. The propensity of A/T and G/C base pairs to adopt the Hoogsteen geometry has been demonstrated in other protein-DNA complexes 27 – 31 . In two complexes, the TATA box bound to TBP 28 and the DNA bound to IHF 27 , Hoogsteen base pairs are associated with unusually large DNA deformations. In the case of the replication complex of DNA polymerase iota, the enzyme is ‘specialized’ for recognizing Hoogsteen base-pairing 30 , 31 . In one of our previously determined type-I p53-DNA complexes, two A/T base pairs between the two decameric half-sites and hence not involved in DNA binding, displayed Hoogsteen geometry 19 . The only previous example where a Hoogsteen base pair is observed in undistorted B-DNA is a binding site of the MATα2 homeodomain, where a single A/T base pair has a Hoogsteen geometry 29 . The type-II complexes reported here represent the first example in which several Hoogsteen base pairs are observed within a transcription factor binding site that is part of an essentially undistorted B-DNA helix. Moreover, they are found to playa key role in modulating the DNA shape and thus the quaternary structure and energetics of the corresponding complexes.

Hoogsteen base pairs are not frequently observed in B-DNA although the propensity of A/T base pairs to adopt this geometry was shown by several crystal structures of free DNA fragments that contain sequences of alternating A and T bases 32 , 33 . However, this conformation appeared to be induced by crystal packing interactions of the free DNA fragments because NMR studies of (dA-dT) n fragments (n=3,4,5) indicated that the Watson-Crick geometry was the dominant one in solution 32 . Hence, there must be a force driving the A/T pairs to assume this conformation in their complexes with p53. This would appear to be provided by the large increase in protein-protein interactions among the four core domains of type-II tetramers that is enabled by the DNA sequence (zero spacer) and conformation formed when the two central base pairs assume a Hoogsteen geometry. Thus, the observed higher affinity and stability of p53 complexes with DNA targets that contain contiguous half-sites relative to those with inserted two base pairs between the same half-sites 19 appear to be caused by both the enhanced protein-protein and protein-DNA interactions observed in Type-II complexes.

In type-II p53-DNA complexes, Hoogsteen base pairing affects the shape of the DNA binding site and, specifically, generates four narrow minor groove regions which are distributed over the two half-sites. These in turn are responsible for the presence of enhanced negative electrostatic potentials which are recognized by Arg248 side chains. The correlation between DNA shape and minor groove electrostatics is a newly identified protein-DNA readout mechanism that is employed by Hox proteins 34 and other protein families 26 , 35 . p53 uses a similar mechanism for positioning its Arg248 side chains and for stabilizing its interactions with DNA. However, in contrast to previously described systems, variations in the DNA shape of the present complexes are driven by the altered base-pairing geometry rather than sequence-dependent narrowing of the minor groove.

The use of Hoogsteen base pairs in protein-DNA recognition extends the array of base and shape recognition mechanisms that are available for the readout of DNA sequence (see review by Rohs et al . 35 ). The extension of the four letter alphabet of Watson-Crick base pairs by Hoogsteen base pairs is apparently used by p53 in recognizing, in a differential manner, a wide range of DNA response elements. Based on the crystal structures reported here and comparisons with other structures described above, the relative predisposition of A/T doublets to adopt the Hoogsteen geometry in the context of CATG, a sequence motif that is abundant in natural p53 response elements 7 , is probably higher in DNA targets with contiguous half-sites than in others. It is noteworthy that in a series of binding experiments performed with natural p53 binding sites, several p53 response elements implicated in cell-cycle arrest and DNA repair that contain contiguous half-sites with CATG core elements were among the highest binding affinity sites. Conversely, apoptosis-related response elements containing CATG elements or other A/T combinations, but with one or two base-pair inserts between half-sites, were among the lowest binding affinity sites 15 . The structural and energetic basis of the CATG preference for the non-canonical base-pairing geometry and the effect of the flanking bases are still unclear. Additionally, it still remains to be seen which pairing schemes are likely to be employed by the less common A/T rich doublets such as AA, TT or TA. It is very likely that such doublets or those mixed with G/C pairs at the center of each half-site will lead to diverse DNA shapes and electrostatic patterns, thereby further expanding the repertoire of readout mechanisms by p53. The growing complexity of p53 function discovered in recent years 36 , may thus be associated, at least in part, with the growing diversity in its DNA recognition modes.

Methods

Methods and any associated references are available in the online version of the paper at http://www.nature.com/nsmb/ .

Accession codes . Protein Data Bank: Coordinates and structure factors for the three p53/DNA complexes have been deposited with the accession codes 3IGK, 3IGL and 3KZ8.

Note: Supplementary Information is available on the Nature Structural & Molecular Biology website.
