---
pmid: '23415655'
title: The C-terminal domain of CblD interacts with CblC and influences intracellular
  cobalamin partitioning.
authors:
- Gherasim C
- Hannibal L
- Rajagopalan D
- Jacobsen DW
- Banerjee R
journal: Biochimie
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3657558
doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2013.02.003
---

# The C-terminal domain of CblD interacts with CblC and influences intracellular cobalamin partitioning.
**Authors:** Gherasim C, Hannibal L, Rajagopalan D, Jacobsen DW, Banerjee R
**Journal:** Biochimie (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.biochi.2013.02.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biochi.2013.02.003)
**PMC:** [PMC3657558](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3657558/)

## Abstract

1. Biochimie. 2013 May;95(5):1023-32. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2013.02.003. Epub
2013  Feb 14.

The C-terminal domain of CblD interacts with CblC and influences intracellular 
cobalamin partitioning.

Gherasim C(1), Hannibal L, Rajagopalan D, Jacobsen DW, Banerjee R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical Center, 
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0600, USA.

Mutations in cobalamin or B12 trafficking genes needed for cofactor assimilation 
and targeting lead to inborn errors of cobalamin metabolism. The gene 
corresponding to one of these loci, cblD, affects both the mitochondrial and 
cytoplasmic pathways for B12 processing. We have demonstrated that fibroblast 
cell lines from patients with mutations in CblD, can dealkylate exogenously 
supplied methylcobalamin (MeCbl), an activity catalyzed by the CblC protein, but 
show imbalanced intracellular partitioning of the cofactor into the MeCbl and 
5'-deoxyadenosylcobalamin (AdoCbl) pools. These results confirm that CblD 
functions downstream of CblC in the cofactor assimilation pathway and that it 
plays an important role in controlling the traffic of the cofactor between the 
competing cytoplasmic and mitochondrial routes for MeCbl and AdoCbl synthesis, 
respectively. In this study, we report the interaction of CblC with four CblD 
protein variants with variable N-terminal start sites. We demonstrate that a 
complex between CblC and CblD can be isolated particularly under conditions that 
permit dealkylation of alkylcobalamin by CblC or in the presence of the 
corresponding dealkylated and oxidized product, hydroxocobalamin (HOCbl). A weak 
CblC·CblD complex is also seen in the presence of cyanocobalamin. Formation of 
the CblC·CblD complex is observed with all four CblD variants tested suggesting 
that the N-terminal 115 residues missing in the shortest variant are not 
essential for this interaction. Furthermore, limited proteolysis of the CblD 
variants indicates the presence of a stable C-terminal domain spanning residues 
∼116-296. Our results are consistent with an adapter function for CblD, which in 
complex with CblC·HOCbl, or possibly the less oxidized CblC·cob(II)alamin, 
partitions the cofactor between AdoCbl and MeCbl assimilation pathways.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biochi.2013.02.003
PMCID: PMC3657558
PMID: 23415655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
