---
pmid: '16581771'
title: CCN1/Cyr61 is regulated by the canonical Wnt signal and plays an important
  role in Wnt3A-induced osteoblast differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells.
authors:
- Si W
- Kang Q
- Luu HH
- Park JK
- Luo Q
- Song WX
- Jiang W
- Luo X
- Li X
- Yin H
- Montag AG
- Haydon RC
- He TC
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2006'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1446962
doi: 10.1128/MCB.26.8.2955-2964.2006
---

# CCN1/Cyr61 is regulated by the canonical Wnt signal and plays an important role in Wnt3A-induced osteoblast differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells.
**Authors:** Si W, Kang Q, Luu HH, Park JK, Luo Q, Song WX, Jiang W, Luo X, Li X, Yin H, Montag AG, Haydon RC, He TC
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.26.8.2955-2964.2006](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.26.8.2955-2964.2006)
**PMC:** [PMC1446962](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1446962/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Apr;26(8):2955-64. doi: 10.1128/MCB.26.8.2955-2964.2006.

CCN1/Cyr61 is regulated by the canonical Wnt signal and plays an important role 
in Wnt3A-induced osteoblast differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells.

Si W(1), Kang Q, Luu HH, Park JK, Luo Q, Song WX, Jiang W, Luo X, Li X, Yin H, 
Montag AG, Haydon RC, He TC.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Oncology Laboratory, University of Chicago Medical Center, 5841 
South Maryland Avenue, MC3079, Chicago, IL 60637.

Marrow mesenchymal stem cells are pluripotent progenitors that can differentiate 
into bone, cartilage, muscle, and fat cells. Wnt signaling has been implicated 
in regulating osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells. Here, we 
analyzed the gene expression profile of mesenchymal stem cells that were 
stimulated with Wnt3A. Among the 220 genes whose expression was significantly 
changed by 2.5-fold, we found that three members of the CCN family, CCN1/Cyr61, 
CCN2/connective tissue growth factor (CTGF), and CCN5/WISP2, were among the most 
significantly up-regulated genes. We further investigated the role of CCN1/Cyr61 
in Wnt3A-regulated osteogenic differentiation. We confirmed that CCN1/Cyr61 was 
up-regulated at the early stage of Wnt3A stimulation. Chromatin 
immunoprecipitation analysis indicates that CCN1/Cyr61 is a direct target of 
canonical Wnt/beta-catenin signaling. RNA interference-mediated knockdown of 
CCN1/Cyr61 expression diminished Wnt3A-induced osteogenic differentiation. 
Furthermore, exogenously expressed CCN1/Cyr61 was shown to effectively promote 
mesenchymal stem cell migration. These findings suggest that tightly regulated 
CCN1/Cyr61 expression may play an important role in Wnt3A-induced osteoblast 
differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.26.8.2955-2964.2006
PMCID: PMC1446962
PMID: 16581771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Marrow mesenchymal stem cells are pluripotent progenitors that can differentiate into bone, cartilage, muscle, and fat cells. Wnt signaling has been implicated in regulating osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells. Here, we analyzed the gene expression profile of mesenchymal stem cells that were stimulated with Wnt3A. Among the 220 genes whose expression was significantly changed by 2.5-fold, we found that three members of the CCN family, CCN1/Cyr61, CCN2/connective tissue growth factor (CTGF), and CCN5/WISP2, were among the most significantly up-regulated genes. We further investigated the role of CCN1/Cyr61 in Wnt3A-regulated osteogenic differentiation. We confirmed that CCN1/Cyr61 was up-regulated at the early stage of Wnt3A stimulation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis indicates that CCN1/Cyr61 is a direct target of canonical Wnt/β-catenin signaling. RNA interference-mediated knockdown of CCN1/Cyr61 expression diminished Wnt3A-induced osteogenic differentiation. Furthermore, exogenously expressed CCN1/Cyr61 was shown to effectively promote mesenchymal stem cell migration. These findings suggest that tightly regulated CCN1/Cyr61 expression may play an important role in Wnt3A-induced osteoblast differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells.

DISCUSSION

Molecular mechanisms underlying osteoblast lineage-specific differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells remain to be elucidated. Wnt/β-catenin signaling may be involved in osteoblast differentiation and bone formation ( 5 , 19 , 33 ). We have previously found that β-catenin signaling is deregulated in primary bone tumors ( 21 ). Although several targets of Wnt/β-catenin signaling have been reported previously ( 22 , 23 , 45 , 50 , 52 , 58 ), the diverse biological functions initiated by the Wnt/β-catenin signal in mesenchymal stem cells remain to be understood. Here, by analyzing the gene expression profile of mesenchymal stem cells stimulated with Wnt3A, we found that four members of the CCN family are regulated by Wnt signaling, suggesting that the CCN family may play an important role in Wnt3A signaling in mesenchymal stem cells. CCN4/WISP1 and CCN5/WISP2 have been shown to be regulated by Wnt and/or β-catenin signaling ( 45 , 58 ). We have recently demonstrated that CCN2/CTGF is a mutual downstream target of osteogenic BMP and Wnt3A-induced osteogenic differentiation ( 34 ).

Here, we focused on the functional role of CCN1/Cyr61 in Wnt3A-induced osteogenic differentiation. We first confirmed the microarray findings and demonstrated that CCN1/Cyr61 is up-regulated at the early stage of Wnt3A stimulation but is nearly at the basal level at day 7. We next demonstrated that CCN1/Cyr61 is a direct target of the β-catenin/Tcf4 complex by using a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Using RNAi-mediated gene knockdown experiments, we found that the knockdown of CCN1/Cyr61 expression significantly diminished Wnt3A-induced osteogenic differentiation. Interestingly, we previously demonstrated that RNAi-mediated knockdown of CCN2/CTGF expression did not affect Wnt3A-induced osteogenic differentiation ( 34 ), suggesting that CCN1/Cyr61 may play a distinct role in Wnt3A signaling in mesenchymal stem cells. We further demonstrated that CCN1/Cyr61 can promote the migration ability of mesenchymal stem cells.

CCN1/Cyr61 belongs to the evolutionarily conserved CCN family of genes ( 4 , 6 , 7 , 30 , 38 , 49 ). CCN proteins exhibit a common multimodular organization with structural motifs resembling insulin-like growth factor binding proteins, Von Willebrand factor, thrombospondin, and the C-terminal cystine knot ( 4 , 6 , 7 , 30 , 38 , 49 ). The structural similarity between CCN and ECM proteins raises the possibility that CCN proteins are adhesive matricellular proteins and represent a new class of signaling molecules regulating cell proliferation. Several signaling proteins have been shown to physically interact with CCN proteins ( 28 ). Although the biological functions of CCN proteins remain to be fully elucidated, several lines of study suggest that CCN proteins may regulate multiple cellular processes such as cell proliferation, migration, differentiation, angiogenesis, and skeletal development ( 4 , 6 , 7 , 30 , 38 , 49 ).

CCN1/Cyr61 was first identified as the product of a growth factor-inducible immediate-early gene ( 41 ). Aberrant expression of CCN1/Cyr61 is associated with breast cancer, wound healing, and vascular diseases such as atherosclerosis and restenosis ( 46 ). CCN1/Cyr61-null animals suffer embryonic death in which approximately 30% succumbed to a failure in chorioallantoic fusion, and the reminder perished due to placental vascular insufficiency and compromised vessel integrity ( 37 ). These findings have established CCN1/Cyr61 as an essential regulator of development, especially in angiogenesis. The Xenopus laevis homolog of CCN1/Cyr61, Xcyr61, has recently been shown to be required for normal gastrulation movements, which is at least mediated in part through the adhesive properties of Xcyr61 and its related ability to modulate the assembly of the ECM ( 29 ). Intriguingly, Xcyr61 has been shown to stimulate or inhibit Wnt signaling in a context-dependent manner ( 29 ). These findings are interesting, as increasing evidence suggests that the Wnt signal may be modulated by heparan sulfate proteoglycans in the ECM ( 32 , 47 ). It is conceivable that CCN1/Cyr61 may function as a feedback regulator of Wnt signaling in a context-dependent fashion. Our data suggest that in mesenchymal stem cells, an early induction of CCN1/Cyr61 may be required for Wnt3A-induced osteogenic differentiation. Future investigations should be directed toward elucidating the functional roles of CCN1/Cyr61 in the Wnt signaling pathway, particularly in the context of osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells.
