---
pmid: '8358790'
title: Bcl-2 heterodimerizes in vivo with a conserved homolog, Bax, that accelerates
  programmed cell death.
authors:
- Oltvai ZN
- Milliman CL
- Korsmeyer SJ
journal: Cell
year: '1993'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(93)90509-o
---

# Bcl-2 heterodimerizes in vivo with a conserved homolog, Bax, that accelerates programmed cell death.
**Authors:** Oltvai ZN, Milliman CL, Korsmeyer SJ
**Journal:** Cell (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0092-8674(93)90509-o](https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(93)90509-o)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 1993 Aug 27;74(4):609-19. doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(93)90509-o.

Bcl-2 heterodimerizes in vivo with a conserved homolog, Bax, that accelerates 
programmed cell death.

Oltvai ZN(1), Milliman CL, Korsmeyer SJ.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute Department of Medicine, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110.

Bcl-2 protein is able to repress a number of apoptotic death programs. To 
investigate the mechanism of Bcl-2's effect, we examined whether Bcl-2 
interacted with other proteins. We identified an associated 21 kd protein 
partner, Bax, that has extensive amino acid homology with Bcl-2, focused within 
highly conserved domains I and II. Bax is encoded by six exons and demonstrates 
a complex pattern of alternative RNA splicing that predicts a 21 kd membrane 
(alpha) and two forms of cytosolic protein (beta and gamma). Bax homodimerizes 
and forms heterodimers with Bcl-2 in vivo. Overexpressed Bax accelerates 
apoptotic death induced by cytokine deprivation in an IL-3-dependent cell line. 
Overexpressed Bax also counters the death repressor activity of Bcl-2. These 
data suggest a model in which the ratio of Bcl-2 to Bax determines survival or 
death following an apoptotic stimulus.

DOI: 10.1016/0092-8674(93)90509-o
PMID: 8358790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
