---
pmid: '11574543'
title: The G2/M regulator 14-3-3sigma prevents apoptosis through sequestration of
  Bax.
authors:
- Samuel T
- Weber HO
- Rauch P
- Verdoodt B
- Eppel JT
- McShea A
- Hermeking H
- Funk JO
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M106427200
---

# The G2/M regulator 14-3-3sigma prevents apoptosis through sequestration of Bax.
**Authors:** Samuel T, Weber HO, Rauch P, Verdoodt B, Eppel JT, McShea A, Hermeking H, Funk JO
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M106427200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M106427200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 30;276(48):45201-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M106427200. Epub
2001  Sep 26.

The G2/M regulator 14-3-3sigma prevents apoptosis through sequestration of Bax.

Samuel T(1), Weber HO, Rauch P, Verdoodt B, Eppel JT, McShea A, Hermeking H, 
Funk JO.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Tumor Biology, Department of Dermatology, University 
of Erlangen-Nuremberg, 91052 Erlangen, Germany.

In response to DNA damage and genotoxic stress, the p53 tumor suppressor 
triggers either cell cycle arrest or apoptosis. The G(2) arrest after damage is, 
in part, mediated by the p53 target, 14-3-3final sigma (final sigma). Colorectal 
tumor cells lacking final sigma are exquisitely sensitive to DNA damage. Here we 
analyzed the mechanism of this sensitivity in final sigma(-/-) as compared with 
final sigma(+/+) human colorectal tumor cells. Exposure to adriamycin resulted 
in rapid apoptosis only in final sigma(-/-) cells. This was further 
characterized by caspase-3 activation, p21(CIP1) cleavage, and CDK2 activation. 
Moreover, Bax was rapidly translocated out of the cytoplasm, and cytochrome c 
was released in final sigma(-/-) cells. Transient adenovirus-mediated 
reconstitution of final sigma in the final sigma(-/-) cells led to effective 
rescue of this phenotype and protected cells against apoptosis. The association 
of final sigma, Bax, and CDK1 in protein complexes may be the basis for this 
antiapoptotic mechanism. In conclusion, final sigma not only enforces the 
p53-dependent G(2) arrest but also delays the apoptotic signal transduction.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M106427200
PMID: 11574543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
