---
pmid: '15385626'
title: 'BIG2, a guanine nucleotide exchange factor for ADP-ribosylation factors: its
  localization to recycling endosomes and implication in the endosome integrity.'
authors:
- Shin HW
- Morinaga N
- Noda M
- Nakayama K
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC532010
doi: 10.1091/mbc.e04-05-0388
---

# BIG2, a guanine nucleotide exchange factor for ADP-ribosylation factors: its localization to recycling endosomes and implication in the endosome integrity.
**Authors:** Shin HW, Morinaga N, Noda M, Nakayama K
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.e04-05-0388](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.e04-05-0388)
**PMC:** [PMC532010](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC532010/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Cell. 2004 Dec;15(12):5283-94. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e04-05-0388. Epub
2004  Sep 22.

BIG2, a guanine nucleotide exchange factor for ADP-ribosylation factors: its 
localization to recycling endosomes and implication in the endosome integrity.

Shin HW(1), Morinaga N, Noda M, Nakayama K.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa 920-0934, 
Japan.

Small GTPases of the ADP-ribosylation factor (ARF) family play a key role in 
membrane trafficking by regulating coated vesicle formation, and guanine 
nucleotide exchange is essential for the ARF function. Brefeldin A blocks the 
ARF-triggered coat assembly by inhibiting the guanine nucleotide exchange on 
ARFs and causes disintegration of the Golgi complex and tubulation of endosomal 
membranes. BIG2 is one of brefeldin A-inhibited guanine nucleotide exchange 
factors for the ARF GTPases and is associated mainly with the trans-Golgi 
network. In the present study, we have revealed that another population of BIG2 
is associated with the recycling endosome and found that expression of a 
catalytically inactive BIG2 mutant, E738K, selectively induces membrane tubules 
from this compartment. We also have shown that BIG2 has an exchange activity 
toward class I ARFs (ARF1 and ARF3) in vivo and inactivation of either ARF 
exaggerates the BIG2(E738K)-induced tubulation of endosomal membranes. These 
observations together indicate that BIG2 is implicated in the structural 
integrity of the recycling endosome through activating class I ARFs.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e04-05-0388
PMCID: PMC532010
PMID: 15385626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
