---
pmid: '10838196'
title: Characterization of two alpha-galactosidase mutants (Q279E and R301Q) found
  in an atypical variant of Fabry disease.
authors:
- Kase R
- Bierfreund U
- Klein A
- Kolter T
- Utsumi K
- Itoha K
- Sandhoff K
- Sakuraba H
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0925-4439(00)00024-7
---

# Characterization of two alpha-galactosidase mutants (Q279E and R301Q) found in an atypical variant of Fabry disease.
**Authors:** Kase R, Bierfreund U, Klein A, Kolter T, Utsumi K, Itoha K, Sandhoff K, Sakuraba H
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0925-4439(00)00024-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0925-4439(00)00024-7)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Jun 15;1501(2-3):227-35. doi: 
10.1016/s0925-4439(00)00024-7.

Characterization of two alpha-galactosidase mutants (Q279E and R301Q) found in 
an atypical variant of Fabry disease.

Kase R(1), Bierfreund U, Klein A, Kolter T, Utsumi K, Itoha K, Sandhoff K, 
Sakuraba H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, the Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical 
Science, Tokyo Metropolitan Organization for Medical Research, Japan. 
kase@rinshoken.or.jp

The mutant products Q279E ((279)Gln to Glu) and R301Q ((301)Arg to Gln) of the 
X-chromosomal inherited alpha-galactosidase (EC 3.2.1. 22) gene, found in 
unrelated male patients with variant Fabry disease (late-onset cardiac form) 
were characterized. In contrast to patients with classic Fabry disease, who have 
no detectable alpha-galactosidase activity, atypical variants have residual 
enzyme activity. First, the properties of insect cell-derived recombinant 
enzymes were studied. The K(m) and V(max) values of Q279E, R301Q, and wild-type 
alpha-galactosidase toward an artificial substrate, 
4-methylumbelliferyl-alpha-D-galactopyranoside, were almost the same. In order 
to mimic intralysosomal conditions, the degradation of the natural substrate, 
globotriaosylceramide, by the alpha-galactosidases was analyzed in a 
detergent-free-liposomal system, in the presence of sphingolipid activator 
protein B (SAP-B, saposin B). Kinetic analysis revealed that there was no 
difference in the degradative activity between the mutants and wild-type 
alpha-galactosidase activity toward the natural substrate. Then, immunotitration 
studies were carried out to determine the amounts of the mutant gene products 
naturally occurring in cells. Cultured lymphoblasts, L-57 (Q279E) and L-148 
(R301Q), from patients with variant Fabry disease, and L-20 (wild-type) from a 
normal subject were used. The 50% precipitation doses were 7% (L-57) and 10% 
(L-148) of that for normal lymphoblast L-20, respectively. The residual 
alpha-galactosidase activity was 3 and 5% of the normal level in L-57 and L-148, 
respectively. The quantities of immuno cross-reacting materials roughly 
correlated with the residual alpha-galactosidase activities in lymphoblast cells 
from the patients. Compared to normal control cells, fibroblast cells from a 
patient with variant Fabry disease, Q279E mutation, secreted only small amounts 
of alpha-galactosidase activity even in the presence of 10 mM NH(4)Cl. It is 
concluded that Q279E and R301Q substitutions do not significantly affect the 
enzymatic activity, but the mutant protein levels are decreased presumably in 
the ER of the cells.

DOI: 10.1016/s0925-4439(00)00024-7
PMID: 10838196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
