---
reference_id: PMID:41009394
title: Rules of Engagement for Components of Membrane Protein Biogenesis at the Human Endoplasmic Reticulum.
authors:
- Zimmermann R
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/ijms26188823
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Rules of Engagement for Components of Membrane Protein Biogenesis at the Human Endoplasmic Reticulum.
**Authors:** Zimmermann R
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms26188823](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms26188823)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2025 Sep 10;26(18):8823. doi: 10.3390/ijms26188823.

Rules of Engagement for Components of Membrane Protein Biogenesis at the Human
Endoplasmic Reticulum.

Zimmermann R(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Saarland University, 66421
Homburg, Germany.

In human cells, the biogenesis of membrane proteins, which account for one
quarter of polypeptides and sixty percent of human drug targets, is initiated at
the membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). This process involves N-terminal
signal peptides or transmembrane helices in the membrane protein precursors.
Over one hundred proteins enable membrane-targeting and -insertion of the
precursors as well as their folding and covalent modifications. Four targeting
pathways to the Sec61 channel in the ER membrane with their effectors and three
cooperating or independent membrane protein-insertases have been identified. We
combined knock-down of individual components of these pathways and insertases in
HeLa cells with label-free quantitative mass spectrometric analysis of the
proteomes. Differential protein abundance analysis in comparison to control
cells was employed to identify clients of components involved in the targeting
or membrane insertion of precursors. Alternatively, knock-out cells or relevant
patient fibroblasts were employed. The features of the client polypeptides were
characterized to identify the client types of the different components and,
ideally, their rules of engagement. In this review/article-hybrid, the focus is
on global lessons from and limitations of the proteomic approach in answering
the cell biological question, as well as on new aspects, such as N-terminal
acetylation of membrane protein precursors.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms26188823
PMCID: PMC12469465
PMID: 41009394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflicts of interest.