---
pmid: '18653718'
title: Hint2 is expressed in the mitochondria of H295R cells and is involved in steroidogenesis.
authors:
- Lenglet S
- Antigny F
- Vetterli L
- Dufour JF
- Rossier MF
journal: Endocrinology
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1210/en.2008-0400
---

# Hint2 is expressed in the mitochondria of H295R cells and is involved in steroidogenesis.
**Authors:** Lenglet S, Antigny F, Vetterli L, Dufour JF, Rossier MF
**Journal:** Endocrinology (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1210/en.2008-0400](https://doi.org/10.1210/en.2008-0400)

## Abstract

1. Endocrinology. 2008 Nov;149(11):5461-9. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-0400. Epub 2008
Jul  24.

Hint2 is expressed in the mitochondria of H295R cells and is involved in 
steroidogenesis.

Lenglet S(1), Antigny F, Vetterli L, Dufour JF, Rossier MF.

Author information:
(1)Service of Endocrinology & Diabetology, University Hospital of Geneva, 
Geneva, Switzerland.

Hint2 belongs to the superfamily of histidine triad hydrolase enzymes. Recently, 
it has been shown to influence the mitochondria-dependent apoptosis occurring in 
hepatocytes, but its mechanism of action is still obscure. Here, we demonstrate 
that Hint2 is expressed in the mitochondria of H295R cells and in normal 
adrenals, and that this protein is involved in steroidogenesis. The presence of 
Hint2 in H295R cells was revealed by RT-PCR and by immunoblot analysis of 
subcellular fractions. The protein appeared associated with mitochondrial 
membranes, probably facing the interior of the organelle. Hint2 overexpression 
in H295R cells had no effect on pregnenolone secretion elicited by angiotensin 
II or K+, whereas protein silencing with specific small interfering RNA resulted 
in a marked reduction of the steroidogenic response. The duration of the 
mitochondrial calcium signal induced by angiotensin II was also reduced upon 
Hint2 down-regulation with small interfering RNA, but not affected after its 
overexpression, suggesting that under basal conditions, Hint2 is optimally 
expressed, and not rate limiting in steroidogenesis. Moreover, Hint2 also 
appeared involved in Ca2+-independent pathways leading to steroid formation. 
Indeed, pregnenolone formation in response to either forskolin or a hydroxyl 
analog of cholesterol was markedly reduced after Hint2 silencing. 
Calcium-dependent and calcium-independent actions of Hint2 on steroidogenesis 
could be related to its ability to maintain a favorable mitochondrial potential. 
In conclusion, these data suggest that, in H295R cells, Hint2 is required for an 
optimal steroidogenic response, possibly because of a particular signalling 
function exerted within the mitochondria and that still remains to determine at 
the molecular level.

DOI: 10.1210/en.2008-0400
PMID: 18653718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
