---
pmid: '17948050'
title: Malt1 ubiquitination triggers NF-kappaB signaling upon T-cell activation.
authors:
- Oeckinghaus A
- Wegener E
- Welteke V
- Ferch U
- Arslan SC
- Ruland J
- Scheidereit C
- Krappmann D
journal: EMBO J
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2080808
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601897
---

# Malt1 ubiquitination triggers NF-kappaB signaling upon T-cell activation.
**Authors:** Oeckinghaus A, Wegener E, Welteke V, Ferch U, Arslan SC, Ruland J, Scheidereit C, Krappmann D
**Journal:** EMBO J (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7601897](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7601897)
**PMC:** [PMC2080808](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2080808/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2007 Nov 14;26(22):4634-45. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601897. Epub 2007
Oct  18.

Malt1 ubiquitination triggers NF-kappaB signaling upon T-cell activation.

Oeckinghaus A(1), Wegener E, Welteke V, Ferch U, Arslan SC, Ruland J, 
Scheidereit C, Krappmann D.

Author information:
(1)GSF-National Research Center for Environment and Health, Institute of 
Toxicology, Neuherberg, Germany.

Triggering of antigen receptors on lymphocytes is critical for initiating 
adaptive immune response against pathogens. T-cell receptor (TCR) engagement 
induces the formation of the Carma1-Bcl10-Malt1 (CBM) complex that is essential 
for activation of the IkappaB kinase (IKK)/NF-kappaB pathway. However, the 
molecular mechanisms that link CBM complex formation to IKK activation remain 
unclear. Here we report that Malt1 is polyubiquitinated upon T-cell activation. 
Ubiquitin chains on Malt1 provide a docking surface for the recruitment of the 
IKK regulatory subunit NEMO/IKKgamma. TRAF6 associates with Malt1 in response to 
T-cell activation and can function as an E3 ligase for Malt1 in vitro and in 
vivo, mediating lysine 63-linked ubiquitination of Malt1. Multiple lysine 
residues in the C-terminus of Malt1 serve as acceptor sites for the assembly of 
polyubiquitin chains. Malt1 mutants that lack C-terminal ubiquitin acceptor 
lysines are impaired in rescuing NF-kappaB signaling and IL-2 production in 
Malt1-/- T cells. Thus, our data demonstrate that induced Malt1 ubiquitination 
is critical for the engagement of CBM and IKK complexes, thereby directing TCR 
signals to the canonical NF-kappaB pathway.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601897
PMCID: PMC2080808
PMID: 17948050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Triggering of antigen receptors on lymphocytes is critical for initiating adaptive immune response against pathogens. T-cell receptor (TCR) engagement induces the formation of the Carma1–Bcl10–Malt1 (CBM) complex that is essential for activation of the IκB kinase (IKK)/NF-κB pathway. However, the molecular mechanisms that link CBM complex formation to IKK activation remain unclear. Here we report that Malt1 is polyubiquitinated upon T-cell activation. Ubiquitin chains on Malt1 provide a docking surface for the recruitment of the IKK regulatory subunit NEMO/IKKγ. TRAF6 associates with Malt1 in response to T-cell activation and can function as an E3 ligase for Malt1 in vitro and in vivo , mediating lysine 63-linked ubiquitination of Malt1. Multiple lysine residues in the C-terminus of Malt1 serve as acceptor sites for the assembly of polyubiquitin chains. Malt1 mutants that lack C-terminal ubiquitin acceptor lysines are impaired in rescuing NF-κB signaling and IL-2 production in Malt1−/− T cells. Thus, our data demonstrate that induced Malt1 ubiquitination is critical for the engagement of CBM and IKK complexes, thereby directing TCR signals to the canonical NF-κB pathway.

Introduction

The adaptive immune response is initiated upon specific recognition of antigens presented on the surface of antigen-presenting cells (APC) by T lymphocytes. Productive activation and clonal expansion of T cells requires the concerted action of the T-cell receptor (TCR) and the CD28 co-stimulatory receptor. TCR/CD28 co-engagement induces the formation of the immunological synapse at the contact site of T cell and APC through clustering of lipid rafts, receptor molecules and cytosolic signaling mediators ( van der Merwe, 2002 ). TCR/CD28-initiated signaling networks ultimately promote the activation of several transcription factors including NFAT, AP-1 and NF-κB ( Okamura and Rao, 2001 ).

NF-κB plays a key role for the regulation of T-cell activation by mediating the induction of various genes that control T-cell proliferation, activation and survival ( Ghosh et al , 1998 ). The NF-κB transcription factor family comprises the Rel proteins p65 (RelA), RelB, c-Rel, NF-κB1 (p105/p50) and NF-κB2 (p100/p52), which can form various combinations of homo- and heterodimers. In unstimulated cells, NF-κB proteins are retained in the cytoplasm by their tight association with inhibitory (IκB) proteins ( Hayden and Ghosh, 2004 ). TCR/CD28 co-ligation induces canonical NF-κB signaling, which involves phosphorylation and degradation of small cytosolic IκB inhibitors (IκBα, IκBβ and IκBɛ), and subsequent nuclear translocation and DNA binding of NF-κB. IκB phosphorylation is catalyzed by the IκB kinase (IKK) complex, which consists of the two catalytic subunits IKKα and IKKβ and the essential regulatory subunit IKKγ/NEMO. Hence, an elucidation of signaling mechanisms that control IKK activation is critical for understanding the regulatory events involved in T-cell activation ( Rawlings et al , 2006 ; Schulze-Luehrmann and Ghosh, 2006 ; Weil and Israel, 2006 ).

TCR/CD28 stimulation induces receptor proximal tyrosine phosphorylation, followed by an association of phospholipase C-γ, small G proteins (e.g., Rac and Ras) and guanine nucleotide exchange factors (e.g., SOS and Vav) to the immunological synapse ( Weil and Israel, 2006 ). The protein kinase C (PKC) isoform PKCθ is recruited to the immunological synapse upon T-cell activation ( Monks et al , 1997 ), and was found to be indispensable for TCR triggered NF-κB activation ( Sun et al , 2000 ; Bi et al , 2001 ). Genetic ablations in mice have revealed key molecules that couple PKCθ activation to IKK/NF-κB signaling. These include Carma1 (CARD11), Bcl10, Malt1 and Caspase8 ( Ruland et al , 2001 , 2003 ; Egawa et al , 2003 ; Hara et al , 2003 ; Jun et al , 2003 ; Ruefli-Brasse et al , 2003 ; Su et al , 2005 ). The CARD-containing Carma1 protein is a member of the MAGUK (membrane-associated guanylate kinase) family of proteins ( McAllister-Lucas et al , 2001 ). Carma1 is associated with the plasma membrane and recruited to the immunological synapse upon TCR/APC contact ( Gaide et al , 2002 ). Bcl10 and Malt1, which were originally cloned from translocation breakpoints associated with malignant MALT (mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue) lymphomas ( Akagi et al , 1999 ; Morgan et al , 1999 ; Willis et al , 1999 ; Zhang et al , 1999 ), are constitutively associated and recruited to Carma1 in a PKC-dependent manner ( Matsumoto et al , 2005 ; Sommer et al , 2005 ). In T cells, PKCθ phosphorylates Carma1 in a central linker region, which triggers a conformational change of Carma1 and thereby promotes homotypic interaction between the N-terminal CARDs of Carma1 and Bcl10 and thus Carma1–Bcl10–Malt1 (CBM) complex formation ( Matsumoto et al , 2005 ). PDK1 associates with PKCθ and Carma1 and might function as a molecular bridge to facilitate Carma1 phosphorylation ( Lee et al , 2005 ).

The molecular mechanisms that trigger IKK activation downstream of the CBM complex on the route to NF-κB are not fully understood. Carma1, Bcl10 and Malt1 were shown to promote NF-κB activation by inducing IKKγ polyubiquitination ( Zhou et al , 2004 ; Shambharkar et al , 2007 ). TAK1 (transforming growth factor-β-activated kinase 1) has been proposed to function as an IKK kinase in TCR signaling ( Wang et al , 2001 ; Sun et al , 2004 ; Wan et al , 2006 ), and TAB2/3 contain ubiquitin-binding domains (UBDs) that can mediate recruitment of TAK1 to ubiquitinated IKKγ ( Kanayama et al , 2004 ). Malt1 was suggested to possess an intrinsic E3 ligase activity that catalyzes IKKγ ubiquitination ( Zhou et al , 2004 ). In addition, the RING ubiquitin ligase TRAF6 can either directly associate with the C-terminus of Malt1 via two conserved binding motifs ( Sun et al , 2004 ), or is indirectly recruited to Malt1 through association with Caspase8 ( Bidere et al , 2006 ). A role for TRAF6 in TCR-induced IKK activation is further supported by RNAi experiments ( Sun et al , 2004 ; Bidere et al , 2006 ). However, T-cell-specific ablation of TRAF6 indicates that one or several other E3 ligases, for example, TRAF2, can compensate for the loss of TRAF6 ( King et al , 2006 ). TRAF6 was shown to cooperate with the C-terminus of Malt1 to promote IKKγ ubiquitination ( Sun et al , 2004 ), and might thus contribute ubiquitin ligase activity. However, abrogation of IKKγ ubiquitination caused only a partial reduction of PKC-dependent NF-κB activation in T cells ( Zhou et al , 2004 ), hinting that other targets for regulatory ubiquitination must be involved in directing CBM complex formation to IKK activation upon TCR/CD28 co-engagement.

We have identified Malt1 as a novel substrate for induced regulatory ubiquitination in response to TCR/CD28 co-ligation. Malt1 ubiquitin chains provide docking surfaces for the recruitment of IKKγ to the CBM complex. Congruently, NF-κB signaling in T cells critically depends on an intact ubiquitin-binding motif in IKKγ. We further demonstrate that TRAF6 is an E3 ligase for Malt1 and induces the attachment of lysine 63-linked ubiquitin chains to the C-terminus of Malt1. Importantly, the replacement of ubiquitin acceptor sites on Malt1 impairs TCR induced NF-κB activation, demonstrating a crucial role for regulatory Malt1 ubiquitination. Thus, our data provide evidence that Malt1 ubiquitination is directing CBM complex formation to IKK activation in response to TCR/CD28 engagement.

Discussion

In T cells recruitment of Bcl10/Malt1 to Carma1 is essential for IKK activation in response to TCR/CD28 co-ligation, but the molecular mechanisms of IKK activation downstream of the CBM have not been fully elucidated. In our study, we present several lines of evidence that ubiquitination of Malt1 functionally links CBM and IKK complexes. First, Malt1 ubiquitination coincides with the activation of the IKK/NF-κB-signaling pathway. Second, IKKγ associates with Malt1 ubiquitin chains and the ubiquitin-binding motif of IKKγ is critical for NF-κB signaling in response to T-cell activation. Third, TRAF6 can catalyze the assembly of K63-linked ubiquitin chains in vitro and functions as a potential ubiquitin ligase for Malt1 in vivo . Fourth, T-cell activation induces the assembly of ubiquitin chains to multiple C-terminal lysines of Malt1 and conservative replacement (lysine to arginine exchange) of ubiquitin attachment sites strongly decreases the ability of Malt1 to mediate T-cell stimulation-dependent NF-κB signaling and IL-2 production. Collectively, the data demonstrate that polyubiquitination of Malt1 is essential for directing TCR signaling to the canonical NF-κB pathway.

We suggest the following model of IKK activation in T cells ( Figure 6C ). TCR/CD28 co-engagement initiates a series of receptor proximal signaling events that lead to the activation of PKCθ ( Sun et al , 2000 ). PKCθ phosphorylation of Carma1 promotes recruitment of Bcl10–Malt1 to Carma1 and thus CBM complex formation ( Matsumoto et al , 2005 ; Sommer et al , 2005 ). The ubiquitin ligase TRAF6 is recruited to the C-terminus of Malt1 and mediates the assembly of K63-linked ubiquitin chains to lysine residues in the vicinity. IKKγ binds through its ubiquitin-binding moiety to ubiquitin chains on Malt1. Further, TAB2/TAK1 associate with ubiquitinated Malt1 upon T-cell stimulation, but it remains to be seen whether this is due to a direct interaction of the TAB2 UBD and Malt1-attached ubiquitin chains. TAK1 was shown to function as activating kinase for IKKβ kinase ( Wang et al , 2001 ; Sun et al , 2004 ; Wan et al , 2006 ), suggesting that recruitment of TAK1 to ubiquitinated Malt1 upon TCR engagement could lead to subsequent IKK activation. However, the necessity for TAK1 at this stage has not been completely resolved and alternatively, binding of IKKγ to Malt1 ubiquitin chains could induce proximity and autoactivation of IKK complexes ( Hayden and Ghosh, 2004 ). Future studies must determine whether recruitment of several UBD containing proteins is crucial for efficient signal propagation.

The function of Malt1 in TCR/CD28-induced IKK activation seems to be analogous to the role of RIP1 in TNFα-triggered NF-κB activation. It was shown that TNFα stimulation-induced RIP1 polyubiquitination, potentially catalyzed by the E3 ligase TRAF2, provides a platform for the recruitment of IKKs to the TNF receptor complex ( Ea et al , 2006 ; Li et al , 2006 ; Wu et al , 2006 ). Nevertheless, there is a discrepancy between Malt1 and RIP1 regarding the mode of ubiquitination. A single lysine residue (K377) was shown to serve as the attachment site for ubiquitin chains to RIP1 ( Ea et al , 2006 ; Li et al , 2006 ). However, mutation of RIP1 at position K377 diminished its inducible interaction with TNF receptor complexes ( Ea et al , 2006 ), indicating that lack of ubiquitination could be caused by disturbed recruitment rather than mutation of the substrate attachment site. Based on in vivo and in vitro evidence, we find that for the assembly of ubiquitin chains to Malt1, any lysine within an acceptable distance seems to be sufficient, which is in agreement with observations that RING E3 ligases often do not precisely position the ubiquitin chain to specific acceptor lysines ( Passmore and Barford, 2004 ). Since the C-terminal lysine mutants of Malt1 associate with Bcl10 and TRAF6 and integrate into the CBM complex, we can exclude that gross structural alterations have been evoked and that upstream signaling is defective.

A previous study has suggested that Bcl10/Malt1-induced ubiquitination of IKKγ is crucial for NF-κB signaling in T cells, and that Malt1 contains intrinsic ubiquitin ligase activity ( Zhou et al , 2004 ). Although we cannot completely exclude that Malt1 is a TRAF6-dependent E3 ligase, in our experiments we did not observe that Malt1 is significantly autoubiquitinated after overexpression in cells or in vitro (see Figure 3A and C , and data not shown). Thus, Malt1 does not seem to confer sufficient E3 ligase activity. In line with these observations, a separate study suggested that TRAF6 might be the E3 ligase that mediates Malt1-dependent IKKγ ubiquitination ( Sun et al , 2004 ). Carma1 and Bcl10–Malt1 can induce ubiquitination of IKKγ on K399; however, K399R mutation has only very little effect on inducible NF-κB activation in T cells ( Zhou et al , 2004 ; Shambharkar et al , 2007 ). Thus, the functional link between IKKγ ubiquitination and NF-κB activation for T-cell activation is rather vague. It is tempting to speculate that different regulatory mechanisms are required for sustained productive T-cell activation. However, the kinetic of Malt1 ubiquitination and the mutagenesis of C-terminal Malt1 acceptor lysines suggest that attachment of ubiquitin chains to Malt1 is a key event to initialize IKK/NF-κB signaling in response to TCR/CD28 co-engagement.

Recently, it was suggested that T-cell activation can trigger phosphorylation and ubiquitination of the IKK complex by two distinct mechanisms ( Shambharkar et al , 2007 ). Although Carma1 and Bcl10 are involved in TRAF6-dependent ubiquitination of IKKγ, both proteins are dispensable for TAK1-dependent IKKα/β phosphorylation. Mechanistically, it is unclear how these separate pathways are integrated. We find that the critical components, including Carma1, Bcl10, Malt1, TRAF6, TAB2/TAK1 and IKKγ, are directly or indirectly associating, suggesting that they should act in concert. However, it might be that some components (e.g., TAK1) can perform certain tasks independent of the other mediators.

Previous studies have reported impaired IKK/NF-κB activation after siRNA-mediated downregulation of TRAF6 ( Sun et al , 2004 ; Bidere et al , 2006 ). In line with this, we found that downregulation of TRAF6 resulted in a partial inhibition of Malt1 ubiquitination and NF-κB signaling. Unexpectedly, mice that lack expression of TRAF6 in T cells have no apparent abnormalities in NF-κB activation upon TCR engagement ( King et al , 2006 ). However, the importance of regulatory K63-linked ubiquitination in TCR signaling is supported by the conditional excision of the UBC13 locus in T cells, as thymocytes from these mice are defective in IKK/NF-κB activation ( Yamamoto et al , 2006 ). Altogether, the data indicate that one or several unknown E3 ligases compensate for the loss of TRAF6 in T cells. Based on siRNA experiments, Sun et al (2004) have suggested that TRAF2 could be involved in TCR-dependent NF-κB activation. Future studies must therefore determine whether TRAF2 or other E3 ligases might have a redundant function with TRAF6 in mediating TCR-induced NF-κB signaling.

Recent results demonstrated a conserved function of Bcl10–Malt1 in directing antifungal responses and G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCR) to NF-κB activation ( Gross et al , 2006 ; Klemm et al , 2007 ; McAllister-Lucas et al , 2007 ; Wang et al , 2007 ). The Carma1 homologue Carma3 (CARD10) functions as a scaffold for GPCR-initiated NF-κB activation, which is abrogated by TRAF6 deficiency ( Grabiner et al , 2007 ). Further, the CBM complex is critical for the survival of a subset of malignant lymphomas ( Ngo et al , 2006 ). Chromosomal translocations leading to the generation of API2–Malt1 fusion proteins are associated with aggressive MALT lymphoma, and API2–Malt1 requires the C-terminus of Malt1 for triggering NF-κB activation ( Zhou et al , 2005 ). Thus, C-terminal Malt1 ubiquitination may be relevant for activation of NF-κB in various physiological and pathological settings.
