---
pmid: '8663217'
title: Identification of domains in human beta-hexosaminidase that determine substrate
  specificity.
authors:
- Pennybacker M
- Liessem B
- Moczall H
- Tifft CJ
- Sandhoff K
- Proia RL
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.29.17377
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Identification of domains in human beta-hexosaminidase that determine substrate specificity.
**Authors:** Pennybacker M, Liessem B, Moczall H, Tifft CJ, Sandhoff K, Proia RL
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.271.29.17377](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.271.29.17377)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jul 19;271(29):17377-82. doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.29.17377.

Identification of domains in human beta-hexosaminidase that determine substrate 
specificity.

Pennybacker M(1), Liessem B, Moczall H, Tifft CJ, Sandhoff K, Proia RL.

Author information:
(1)Section on Biochemical Genetics, Genetics and Biochemistry Branch, NIDDK, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The lysosomal beta-hexosaminidases are dimers composed of alpha and beta 
subunits. beta-Hexosaminidase A (alphabeta) is a heterodimer, whereas 
hexosaminidase B (betabeta) and S (alphaalpha) are homodimers. Although 
containing a high degree of amino acid identity, each subunit expresses a unique 
active site that can be distinguished by a differential ability to hydrolyze 
charged substrates. The site on the beta-subunit primarily degrades neutral 
substrates, whereas the alpha-subunit site is, in addition, active against 
sulfated substrates. Isozyme specificity is also exhibited with glycolipid 
substrates. Among human isozymes, only beta-hexosaminidase A together with the 
GM2 activator protein can degrade the natural substrate, GM2 ganglioside, at 
physiologically significant rates. To identify the domains of the human 
beta-hexosaminidase subunits that determine substrate specificity, we have 
generated chimeric subunits containing both alpha- and beta-subunit sequences. 
The chimeric constructs were expressed in HeLa cells to screen for activity and 
then selected constructs were produced in the baculovirus expression system to 
assess their ability to degrade GM2 ganglioside in the presence of GM2 activator 
protein. Generation of activity against the sulfated substrate required the 
substitution of two noncontinuous alpha-subunit sequences (amino acids 1-191 and 
403-529) into analogous positions of the beta-subunit. Chimeric constructs 
containing only one of these regions linked to the beta-subunit sequence showed 
either neutral substrate activity only (amino acids 1-191) or lacked enzyme 
activity entirely (amino acids 403-529). Neither the chimeras nor the wild-type 
subunits displayed activator-dependent GM2-hydrolyzing activity when expressed 
alone. However, one chimeric subunit containing alpha amino acids 1-191 fused 
with beta amino acids 225 to 556, when co-expressed with the wild-type 
alpha-subunit, showed activity comparable with that of recombinant 
beta-hexosaminidase A formed by the co-expression of the alpha- and 
beta-subunits. This result indicates that the beta-subunit amino acids 225-556 
contribute an essential function in the GM2-hydrolyzing activity of 
beta-hexosaminidase A.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.29.17377
PMID: 8663217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
