---
pmid: '18616943'
title: Phosphorylation of U24 from Human Herpes Virus type 6 (HHV-6) and its potential
  role in mimicking myelin basic protein (MBP) in multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Tait AR
- Straus SK
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2008.06.050
---

# Phosphorylation of U24 from Human Herpes Virus type 6 (HHV-6) and its potential role in mimicking myelin basic protein (MBP) in multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Tait AR, Straus SK
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2008.06.050](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2008.06.050)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2008 Aug 6;582(18):2685-8. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2008.06.050. Epub
 2008 Jul 9.

Phosphorylation of U24 from Human Herpes Virus type 6 (HHV-6) and its potential 
role in mimicking myelin basic protein (MBP) in multiple sclerosis.

Tait AR(1), Straus SK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of British Columbia, 2036 Main Mall, 
Vancouver, BC, Canada V6T 1Z1.

Myelin basic protein (MBP) from multiple sclerosis (MS) patients contains lower 
levels of phosphorylation at Thr97 than normal individuals. The significance of 
phosphorylation at this site is not fully understood, but it is proposed to play 
a role in the normal functioning of MBP. Human Herpesvirus Type 6 encodes the 
protein U24, which has tentatively been implicated in the pathology of MS. U24 
shares a 7 amino acid stretch encompassing the Thr97 phosphorylation site of 
MBP: PRTPPPS. We demonstrate using a combination of mass spectrometry, thin 
layer chromatography and autoradiography, that U24 can be phosphorylated at the 
equivalent threonine. Phospho-U24 may confound signalling or other pathways in 
which phosphorylated MBP may participate, precipitating a pathological process.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2008.06.050
PMID: 18616943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
