---
pmid: '32141990'
title: miR-4286/TGF-β1/Smad3-Negative Feedback Loop Ameliorated Vascular Endothelial
  Cell Damage by Attenuating Apoptosis and Inflammatory Response.
authors:
- He Z
- Xue H
- Liu P
- Han D
- Xu L
- Zeng X
- Wang J
- Yang B
- Luo B
journal: J Cardiovasc Pharmacol
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1097/FJC.0000000000000813
---

# miR-4286/TGF-β1/Smad3-Negative Feedback Loop Ameliorated Vascular Endothelial Cell Damage by Attenuating Apoptosis and Inflammatory Response.
**Authors:** He Z, Xue H, Liu P, Han D, Xu L, Zeng X, Wang J, Yang B, Luo B
**Journal:** J Cardiovasc Pharmacol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1097/FJC.0000000000000813](https://doi.org/10.1097/FJC.0000000000000813)

## Abstract

1. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 2020 May;75(5):446-454. doi: 
10.1097/FJC.0000000000000813.

miR-4286/TGF-β1/Smad3-Negative Feedback Loop Ameliorated Vascular Endothelial 
Cell Damage by Attenuating Apoptosis and Inflammatory Response.

He Z(1), Xue H(1), Liu P(1), Han D(1), Xu L(1), Zeng X(1), Wang J(1), Yang B(2), 
Luo B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular, the First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou 
Medical University, Guangzhou, China; and.
(2)Stroke Center of Guangzhou Panyu Central Hospital, Guangzhou, China.

Atherosclerosis (AS), known as the chronic inflammatory disease, results from 
the dysfunction of vascular endothelial cells (VECs). Transforming growth 
factor-β1 (TGF-β1) has been reported to be induced by oxidized low-density 
lipoprotein (ox-LDL) and contribute to AS-related vascular endothelial cell 
damage. This work planned to study the mechanism of TGF-β1 in vascular 
endothelial cell damage. We found that TGF-β1 was activated by ox-LDL in human 
umbilical vascular endothelial cells (HUVECs). Silence of TGF-β1 reversed the 
inductive effect of ox-LDL on apoptosis and inflammatory response of HUVECs. 
Mechanistically, microRNA-4286 (miR-4286) targeted and inhibited TGF-β1 to 
inhibit Smad3, and Smad3 bound to the promoter of miR-4286 to repress its 
transcription. Rescue assays indicated that miR-4286 ameliorated the 
ox-LDL-induced apoptosis and inflammatory response through inhibiting TGF-β1. In 
conclusion, our study first demonstrated that miR-4286/TGF-β1/Smad3-negative 
feedback loop ameliorated vascular endothelial cell damage by attenuating 
apoptosis and inflammatory response, providing new thoughts for promoting the 
treatment of AS.

DOI: 10.1097/FJC.0000000000000813
PMID: 32141990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
