---
pmid: '12560945'
title: The signature motif in human glucose-6-phosphate transporter is essential for
  microsomal transport of glucose-6-phosphate.
authors:
- Pan CJ
- Chen LY
- Mansfield BC
- Salani B
- Varesio L
- Chou JY
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s00439-002-0903-3
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The signature motif in human glucose-6-phosphate transporter is essential for microsomal transport of glucose-6-phosphate.
**Authors:** Pan CJ, Chen LY, Mansfield BC, Salani B, Varesio L, Chou JY
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00439-002-0903-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-002-0903-3)

## Abstract

1. Hum Genet. 2003 Apr;112(4):430-3. doi: 10.1007/s00439-002-0903-3. Epub 2003
Jan  31.

The signature motif in human glucose-6-phosphate transporter is essential for 
microsomal transport of glucose-6-phosphate.

Pan CJ(1), Chen LY, Mansfield BC, Salani B, Varesio L, Chou JY.

Author information:
(1)Section on Cellular Differentiation, Heritable Disorders Branch, National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Building 10, Room 9S241, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1830, USA.

Glycogen storage disease type Ib (GSD-Ib) is caused by a deficiency in the 
glucose-6-phosphate transporter (G6PT). Sequence alignments identify a signature 
motif shared by G6PT and a family of transporters of phosphorylated metabolites. 
Two null signature motif mutations have been identified in the G6PT gene of 
GSD-Ib patients. In this study, we characterize the activity of seven additional 
mutants within the motif. Five mutants lack microsomal G6P uptake activity and 
one retains residual activity, suggesting that in G6PT the signature motif is a 
functional element required for microsomal glucose-6-phosphate transport.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-002-0903-3
PMID: 12560945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
