---
pmid: '11884367'
title: 'Mitochondrial PKCepsilon and MAPK form signaling modules in the murine heart:
  enhanced mitochondrial PKCepsilon-MAPK interactions and differential MAPK activation
  in PKCepsilon-induced cardioprotection.'
authors:
- Baines CP
- Zhang J
- Wang GW
- Zheng YT
- Xiu JX
- Cardwell EM
- Bolli R
- Ping P
journal: Circ Res
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1161/01.res.0000012702.90501.8d
---

# Mitochondrial PKCepsilon and MAPK form signaling modules in the murine heart: enhanced mitochondrial PKCepsilon-MAPK interactions and differential MAPK activation in PKCepsilon-induced cardioprotection.
**Authors:** Baines CP, Zhang J, Wang GW, Zheng YT, Xiu JX, Cardwell EM, Bolli R, Ping P
**Journal:** Circ Res (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1161/01.res.0000012702.90501.8d](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.res.0000012702.90501.8d)

## Abstract

1. Circ Res. 2002 Mar 8;90(4):390-7. doi: 10.1161/01.res.0000012702.90501.8d.

Mitochondrial PKCepsilon and MAPK form signaling modules in the murine heart:
enhanced mitochondrial PKCepsilon-MAPK interactions and differential MAPK
activation in PKCepsilon-induced cardioprotection.

Baines CP(1), Zhang J, Wang GW, Zheng YT, Xiu JX, Cardwell EM, Bolli R, Ping P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Louisville, and the Jewish Hospital
Heart and Lung Institute, Louisville, KY 40202, USA.

Although activation of protein kinase C (PKC) epsilon and mitogen-activated
protein kinases (MAPKs) are known to play crucial roles in the manifestation of
cardioprotection, the spatial organization of PKCepsilon signaling modules in
naïve and protected myocardium remains unknown. Based on evidence that
mitochondria are key mediators of the cardioprotective signal, we hypothesized
that PKCepsilon and MAPKs interact, and that they form functional signaling
modules in mitochondria during cardioprotection. Both immunoblotting and
immunofluorescent staining demonstrated that PKCepsilon, ERKs, JNKs, and p38
MAPK co-localized with cardiac mitochondria. Moreover, transgenic activation of
PKCepsilon greatly increased mitochondrial PKCepsilon expression and activity,
which was concomitant with increased mitochondrial interaction of PKCepsilon
with ERKs, JNKs, and p38 as determined by co-immunoprecipitation. These complex
formations appeared to be independent of PKCepsilon activity, as the
interactions were also observed in mice expressing inactive PKCepsilon. However,
although both active and inactive PKCepsilon bound to all three MAPKs, increased
phosphorylation of mitochondrial ERKs was only observed in mice expressing
active PKCepsilon but not in mice expressing inactive PKCepsilon. Examination of
potential downstream targets of mitochondrial PKCepsilon-ERK signaling modules
revealed that phosphorylation of the pro-apoptotic protein Bad was elevated in
mitochondria. Together, these data show that PKCepsilon forms
subcellular-targeted signaling modules with ERKs, leading to the activation of
mitochondrial ERKs. Furthermore, formation of mitochondrial PKCepsilon-ERK
modules appears to play a role in PKCepsilon-mediated cardioprotection, in part
by the phosphorylation and inactivation of Bad.

DOI: 10.1161/01.res.0000012702.90501.8d
PMID: 11884367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
