---
pmid: '11821067'
title: The sorLA cytoplasmic domain interacts with GGA1 and -2 and defines minimum
  requirements for GGA binding.
authors:
- Jacobsen L
- Madsen P
- Nielsen MS
- Geraerts WP
- Gliemann J
- Smit AB
- Petersen CM
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(01)03299-9
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The sorLA cytoplasmic domain interacts with GGA1 and -2 and defines minimum requirements for GGA binding.
**Authors:** Jacobsen L, Madsen P, Nielsen MS, Geraerts WP, Gliemann J, Smit AB, Petersen CM
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0014-5793(01)03299-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0014-5793(01)03299-9)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2002 Jan 30;511(1-3):155-8. doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(01)03299-9.

The sorLA cytoplasmic domain interacts with GGA1 and -2 and defines minimum 
requirements for GGA binding.

Jacobsen L(1), Madsen P, Nielsen MS, Geraerts WP, Gliemann J, Smit AB, Petersen 
CM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Vrije Universiteit, 1081 
HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands. lija@bio.vu.nl

We report that the Vps10p domain receptor sorLA binds the adaptor proteins GGA1 
and -2, which take part in Golgi-endosome sorting. The GGAs bind with 
differential requirements via three critical residues in the C-terminal segment 
of the sorLA cytoplasmic tail. Unlike in sortilin and the mannose 6-phosphate 
receptors, the GGA-binding segment in sorLA contains neither an acidic cluster 
nor a dileucine. Our results support the concept of sorLA as a potential sorting 
receptor and suggest that key residues in sorLA and sortilin conform to a new 
type of motif (psi-psi-X-X-phi) defining minimum requirements for GGA binding to 
cytoplasmic receptor domains.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(01)03299-9
PMID: 11821067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
