---
pmid: '17512405'
title: RNAi-dependent and -independent RNA turnover mechanisms contribute to heterochromatic
  gene silencing.
authors:
- Bühler M
- Haas W
- Gygi SP
- Moazed D
journal: Cell
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.03.038
---

# RNAi-dependent and -independent RNA turnover mechanisms contribute to heterochromatic gene silencing.
**Authors:** Bühler M, Haas W, Gygi SP, Moazed D
**Journal:** Cell (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2007.03.038](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2007.03.038)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2007 May 18;129(4):707-21. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.03.038.

RNAi-dependent and -independent RNA turnover mechanisms contribute to 
heterochromatic gene silencing.

Bühler M(1), Haas W, Gygi SP, Moazed D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

In fission yeast, the RNAi pathway is required for heterochromatin-dependent 
silencing of transgene insertions at centromeric repeats and acts together with 
other pathways to silence transgenes at the silent mating-type locus. Here, we 
show that transgene transcripts at centromeric repeats are processed into siRNAs 
and are therefore direct targets of RNAi. Furthermore, we show that Cid14, a 
member of the Trf4/5 family of poly(A) polymerases, has poly(A) polymerase 
activity that is required for heterochromatic gene silencing. Surprisingly, 
while siRNA levels in cid14Delta cells are dramatically reduced, the structural 
integrity of heterochromatin appears to be preserved. Cid14 resides in a complex 
similar to the TRAMP complex found in budding yeast, which is part of a nuclear 
surveillance mechanism that degrades aberrant transcripts. Our findings indicate 
that polyadenylation by a TRAMP-like complex contributes to robust silencing of 
heterochromatic genes in fission yeast via the recruitment of the exosome and/or 
the RNAi machinery.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.03.038
PMID: 17512405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
