---
pmid: '21888622'
title: A global survey of CRM1-dependent nuclear export sequences in the human deubiquitinase
  family.
authors:
- García-Santisteban I
- Bañuelos S
- Rodríguez JA
journal: Biochem J
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1042/BJ20111300
---

# A global survey of CRM1-dependent nuclear export sequences in the human deubiquitinase family.
**Authors:** García-Santisteban I, Bañuelos S, Rodríguez JA
**Journal:** Biochem J (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BJ20111300](https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20111300)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2012 Jan 1;441(1):209-17. doi: 10.1042/BJ20111300.

A global survey of CRM1-dependent nuclear export sequences in the human 
deubiquitinase family.

García-Santisteban I(1), Bañuelos S, Rodríguez JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology and Animal Physiology, 
University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU, B° Sarriena s/n, 48940 Leioa, Spain.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Jun 14;113(24):E3317-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1606225113.

The mechanisms that regulate the nucleocytoplasmic localization of human 
deubiquitinases remain largely unknown. The nuclear export receptor CRM1 binds 
to specific amino acid motifs termed NESs (nuclear export sequences). By using 
in silico prediction and experimental validation of candidate sequences, we 
identified 32 active NESs and 78 inactive NES-like motifs in human 
deubiquitinases. These results allowed us to evaluate the performance of three 
programs widely used for NES prediction, and to add novel information to the 
recently redefined NES consensus. The novel NESs identified in the present study 
reveal a subset of 22 deubiquitinases bearing motifs that might mediate their 
binding to CRM1. We tested the effect of the CRM1 inhibitor LMB (leptomycin B) 
on the localization of YFP (yellow fluorescent protein)- or GFP (green 
fluorescent protein)-tagged versions of six NES-bearing deubiquitinases [USP 
(ubiquitin-specific peptidase) 1, USP3, USP7, USP21, CYLD (cylindromatosis) and 
OTUD7B (OTU-domain-containing 7B)]. YFP-USP21 and, to a lesser extent, 
GFP-OTUD7B relocated from the cytoplasm to the nucleus in the presence of LMB, 
revealing their nucleocytoplasmic shuttling capability. Two sequence motifs in 
USP21 had been identified during our survey as active NESs in the export assay. 
Using site-directed mutagenesis, we show that one of these motifs mediates USP21 
nuclear export, whereas the second motif is not functional in the context of 
full-length USP21.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20111300
PMID: 21888622 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
