---
pmid: '27233290'
title: 'Cognitive Aging in a Social and Affective Context: Advances Over the Past
  50 Years.'
authors:
- Kensinger EA
- Gutchess AH
journal: J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/geronb/gbw056
---

# Cognitive Aging in a Social and Affective Context: Advances Over the Past 50 Years.
**Authors:** Kensinger EA, Gutchess AH
**Journal:** J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/geronb/gbw056](https://doi.org/10.1093/geronb/gbw056)

## Abstract

1. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci. 2017 Jan;72(1):61-70. doi: 
10.1093/geronb/gbw056. Epub 2016 May 27.

Cognitive Aging in a Social and Affective Context: Advances Over the Past 50 
Years.

Kensinger EA(1), Gutchess AH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts. 
Elizabeth.kensinger@bc.edu.
(2)Department of Psychology, Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts.

OBJECTIVE: This review contemplates the recent consideration of social and 
affective factors within the study of cognitive aging and examines the multiple 
ways in which these factors intersect.
METHODS: The article briefly reviews the models applied to cognitive aging and 
considers how they can inform the understanding of socioaffective aging. It then 
discusses the ways in which socioaffective and cognitive abilities intersect.
RESULTS: Models of cognitive aging can fruitfully be applied to socioaffective 
aging, although with some points of divergence. The interactions between 
cognitive and socioaffective aging are multifaceted and include bidirectional 
influences.
DISCUSSION: Socioaffective domains may preserve function within cognitive 
domains in part because socioaffective processing provides a rich source of 
environmental support and links to motivated cognition. The authors outline 
future directions related to these hypotheses.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The 
Gerontological Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/geronb/gbw056
PMID: 27233290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
