---
pmid: '32079726'
title: The fibroblast-derived protein PI16 controls neuropathic pain.
authors:
- Singhmar P
- Trinh RTP
- Ma J
- Huo X
- Peng B
- Heijnen CJ
- Kavelaars A
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC7071920
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1913444117
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The fibroblast-derived protein PI16 controls neuropathic pain.
**Authors:** Singhmar P, Trinh RTP, Ma J, Huo X, Peng B, Heijnen CJ, Kavelaars A
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1913444117](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1913444117)
**PMC:** [PMC7071920](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7071920/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2020 Mar 10;117(10):5463-5471. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1913444117. Epub 2020 Feb 20.

The fibroblast-derived protein PI16 controls neuropathic pain.

Singhmar P(1), Trinh RTP(1), Ma J(1), Huo X(1), Peng B(2), Heijnen CJ(1), 
Kavelaars A(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratories of Neuroimmunology, Department of Symptom Research, The 
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030.
(2)Department of Bioinformatics & Computational Biology, The University of Texas 
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030.
(3)Laboratories of Neuroimmunology, Department of Symptom Research, The 
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030; 
akavelaars@mdanderson.org.

Chronic pain is a major clinical problem of which the mechanisms are 
incompletely understood. Here, we describe the concept that PI16, a protein of 
unknown function mainly produced by fibroblasts, controls neuropathic pain. The 
spared nerve injury (SNI) model of neuropathic pain increases PI16 protein 
levels in fibroblasts in dorsal root ganglia (DRG) meninges and in the 
epi/perineurium of the sciatic nerve. We did not detect PI16 expression in 
neurons or glia in spinal cord, DRG, and nerve. Mice deficient in PI16 are 
protected against neuropathic pain. In vitro, PI16 promotes transendothelial 
leukocyte migration. In vivo, Pi16-/- mice show reduced endothelial barrier 
permeability, lower leukocyte infiltration and reduced activation of the 
endothelial barrier regulator MLCK, and reduced phosphorylation of its substrate 
MLC2 in response to SNI. In summary, our findings support a model in which PI16 
promotes neuropathic pain by mediating a cross-talk between fibroblasts and the 
endothelial barrier leading to barrier opening, cellular influx, and increased 
pain. Its key role in neuropathic pain and its limited cellular and tissue 
distribution makes PI16 an attractive target for pain management.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1913444117
PMCID: PMC7071920
PMID: 32079726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.
