---
reference_id: PMID:10085091
title: "Cloning and characterization of human prostate coactivator ARA54, a novel protein that associates with the androgen receptor."
authors:
- Kang HY
- Yeh S
- Fujimoto N
- Chang C
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.13.8570
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Cloning and characterization of human prostate coactivator ARA54, a novel protein that associates with the androgen receptor.
**Authors:** Kang HY, Yeh S, Fujimoto N, Chang C
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.274.13.8570](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.13.8570)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Mar 26;274(13):8570-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.13.8570.

Cloning and characterization of human prostate coactivator ARA54, a novel
protein that associates with the androgen receptor.

Kang HY(1), Yeh S, Fujimoto N, Chang C.

Author information:
(1)George Whipple Lab for Cancer Research, Departments of Pathology, Urology,
and Radiation Oncology and the Cancer Center, University of Rochester Medical
Center, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

Androgen receptor (AR) is a member of the steroid receptor superfamily that may
require coactivators for proper or maximal transactivation. Using a yeast
two-hybrid screening followed by mammalian cell analyses, we identified a novel
ligand-dependent AR-associated protein, ARA54, which consists of 474 amino acids
with a molecular mass of 54 kDa. We demonstrated that ARA54 might function as a
preferential coactivator for AR-mediated transactivation in human prostate
cancer DU145 cells. Interestingly, our data also showed that ARA54 could
significantly enhance the transcriptional activity of LNCaP mutant AR (ARt877a)
but not wild type AR or another mutant AR (ARe708k) in the presence of 10 nM
17beta-estradiol or 1 microM hydroxyflutamide. These results imply that both
ARA54 and the positions of the AR mutation (877 versus 708) might contribute to
the specificity of AR-mediated transactivation. Our findings further
demonstrated that the C-terminal domain of ARA54 can serve as a dominant
negative inhibitor and exogenous full-length ARA54 can reverse this squelching
effect on AR transcriptional activity. Co-expression of ARA54 with other AR
coactivators, such as ARA70 or SRC-1, showed additive stimulation of AR-mediated
transactivation, which indicates that these cofactors may function individually
as AR coactivators to induce AR target gene expression. Through our findings, we
have identified and characterized a novel AR coactivator, ARA54, which may play
an important role in the AR signaling pathway in human prostate.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.13.8570
PMID: 10085091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]