---
pmid: '25911380'
title: The seventh zinc finger motif of A20 is required for the suppression of TNF-α-induced
  apoptosis.
authors:
- Yamaguchi N
- Yamaguchi N
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2015.04.022
---

# The seventh zinc finger motif of A20 is required for the suppression of TNF-α-induced apoptosis.
**Authors:** Yamaguchi N, Yamaguchi N
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2015.04.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2015.04.022)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2015 May 22;589(12):1369-75. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2015.04.022.
Epub  2015 Apr 22.

The seventh zinc finger motif of A20 is required for the suppression of 
TNF-α-induced apoptosis.

Yamaguchi N(1), Yamaguchi N(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Chiba University, Chiba 260-8675, Japan. Electronic address: 
yamaguchinoritaka@chiba-u.jp.
(2)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Chiba University, Chiba 260-8675, Japan.

The ubiquitin-editing enzyme A20 suppresses nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) activation 
and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α)-induced apoptosis in a deubiquitinating and 
ubiquitin ligase activity-dependent manner. Although recent studies revealed 
that A20 regulates NF-κB independently of its enzymatic activity through its 
seventh zinc finger motif (ZnF7), the involvement of ZnF7 in TNF-α-induced 
apoptosis is not clear. In this study, ZnF7 was found to be important for 
A20-mediated suppression of TNF-α-induced apoptosis. We also found that the 
ubiquitin ligases cIAP1/2 are required for A20 to suppress TNF-α-induced 
apoptosis. Because A20 binds to cIAP1/2 through ZnF7, these results suggest that 
A20 may control cIAP1/2 when suppressing TNF-α-induced apoptosis.

Copyright © 2015 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2015.04.022
PMID: 25911380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
