---
pmid: '2318981'
title: Bile acid profiles in peroxisomal 3-oxoacyl-coenzyme A thiolase deficiency.
authors:
- Clayton PT
- Patel E
- Lawson AM
- Carruthers RA
- Collins J
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '1990'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC296562
doi: 10.1172/JCI114563
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Bile acid profiles in peroxisomal 3-oxoacyl-coenzyme A thiolase deficiency.
**Authors:** Clayton PT, Patel E, Lawson AM, Carruthers RA, Collins J
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (1990)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI114563](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI114563)
**PMC:** [PMC296562](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC296562/)

## Abstract

1. J Clin Invest. 1990 Apr;85(4):1267-73. doi: 10.1172/JCI114563.

Bile acid profiles in peroxisomal 3-oxoacyl-coenzyme A thiolase deficiency.

Clayton PT(1), Patel E, Lawson AM, Carruthers RA, Collins J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Child Health, Institute of Child Health, London, United 
Kingdom.

Fast atom bombardment mass spectrometry and gas chromatography-mass spectrometry 
were used to analyze bile acids in the body fluids of an infant (L.C.) whose 
liver contained no immunoreactive peroxisomal 3-oxoacyl-CoA thiolase. The 
profiles were compared with those of six patients with undetectable peroxisomes 
(Zellweger syndrome) and two siblings (N.B. and I.B.) whose defect of 
peroxisomal beta-oxidation could not be localized by morphological studies of 
peroxisomes or by immunoblotting of peroxisomal beta-oxidation proteins. 3 
alpha, 7 alpha, 12 alpha-Trihydroxy-5 beta-cholestan-26-oic acid (THCA) was 
present in bile and plasma of all patients. However, bile from L.C., N.B. and 
I.B. contained unconjugated varanic acid (3 alpha, 7 alpha, 12 alpha, 
24-tetrahydroxy-5 beta-cholestan-26-oic acid) as the major C27 bile acid, 
whereas bile from Zellweger patients contained only small amounts of varanic 
acid. In the bile from L.C. two isomers of varanic acid were present; in the 
bile from N.B. and I.B. a single isomer predominated. L.C., N.B., and I.B. all 
produced bile containing small amounts of (24E)-3 alpha, 7 alpha, 12 
alpha-trihydroxy-5 beta-cholest-24-en-26-oic acid [( 24E]-delta 24-THCA), its 
[24Z]- isomer, 3 alpha, 7 alpha, 12 alpha-trihydroxy-5 beta-cholest-23-en-26-oic 
acid and 3 alpha, 7 alpha, 12 alpha-trihydroxy-27-nor-5 beta-cholestan-24-one. 
The results provide evidence for peroxisomal pathways for cholic acid synthesis 
in man via THCA, delta 24-THCA and varanic acid and show that bile acid analyses 
can be used to diagnose peroxisomal thiolase deficiency.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI114563
PMCID: PMC296562
PMID: 2318981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
