---
pmid: '12572677'
title: 'Copper-induced trafficking of the cU-ATPases: a key mechanism for copper homeostasis.'
authors:
- Mercer JF
- Barnes N
- Stevenson J
- Strausak D
- Llanos RM
journal: Biometals
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1023/a:1020719016675
---

# Copper-induced trafficking of the cU-ATPases: a key mechanism for copper homeostasis.
**Authors:** Mercer JF, Barnes N, Stevenson J, Strausak D, Llanos RM
**Journal:** Biometals (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1023/a:1020719016675](https://doi.org/10.1023/a:1020719016675)

## Abstract

1. Biometals. 2003 Mar;16(1):175-84. doi: 10.1023/a:1020719016675.

Copper-induced trafficking of the cU-ATPases: a key mechanism for copper 
homeostasis.

Mercer JF(1), Barnes N, Stevenson J, Strausak D, Llanos RM.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, School of Biological and Chemical 
Sciences, Deakin University, Burwood, Australia. jmercer@deakin.edu.au

The Menkes protein (MNK) and Wilson protein (WND) are transmembrane, CPX-type 
Cu-ATPases with six metal binding sites (MBSs) in the N-terminal region 
containing the motif GMXCXXC. In cells cultured in low copper concentration MNK 
and WND localize to the transGolgi network but in high copper relocalize either 
to the plasma membrane (MNK) or a vesicular compartment (WND). In this paper we 
investigate the role of the MBSs in Cu-transport and trafficking. The copper 
transport activity of MBS mutants of MNK was determined by their ability to 
complement a strain of Saccharomyces cerevisiae deficient in CCC2 (delta ccc2), 
the yeast MNK/WND homologue. Mutants (CXXC to SXXS) of MBS1, MBS6, and MBSs1-3 
were able to complement delta ccc2 while mutants of MBS4-6, MBS5-6 and all six 
MBS inactivated the protein. Each of the inactive mutants also failed to display 
Cu-induced trafficking suggesting a correlation between trafficking and 
transport activity. A similar correlation was found with mutants of MNK in which 
various MBSs were deleted, but two constructs with deletion of MBS5-6 were 
unable to traffic despite retaining 25% of copper transport activity. Chimeras 
in which the N-terminal MBSs of MNK were replaced with the corresponding MBSs of 
WND were used to investigate the region of the molecules that is responsible for 
the difference in Cu-trafficking of MNK and WND. The chimera which included the 
complete WND N-terminus localized to a vesicular compartment, similar to WND in 
elevated copper. Deletions of various MBSs of the WND N-terminus in the chimera 
indicate that a targeting signal in the region of MBS6 directs either WND/MNK or 
WND to a vesicular compartment of the cell.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1020719016675
PMID: 12572677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
