---
pmid: '8206937'
title: The catalytic subunit of protein phosphatase 2A is carboxyl-methylated in vivo.
authors:
- Favre B
- Zolnierowicz S
- Turowski P
- Hemmings BA
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
---

# The catalytic subunit of protein phosphatase 2A is carboxyl-methylated in vivo.
**Authors:** Favre B, Zolnierowicz S, Turowski P, Hemmings BA
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1994)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jun 10;269(23):16311-7.

The catalytic subunit of protein phosphatase 2A is carboxyl-methylated in vivo.

Favre B(1), Zolnierowicz S, Turowski P, Hemmings BA.

Author information:
(1)Friedrich Miescher-Institut, Basel, Switzerland.

We have used polyclonal antibodies against an internal peptide (residues 169 to 
182; Ab169/182) and a peptide corresponding to the carboxyl terminus (residues 
299 to 309; Ab299/309) to look for in vivo modifications of protein phosphatase 
2A catalytic (PP2Ac) subunit. Treatment of extracts from human breast cancer 
(MCF7) cells with either alkali or ethanol increased immunoreactivity of PP2Ac 
subunit severalfold on Western blots with Ab299/309, but did not apparently 
change molecular weight or isoelectric point of the protein. In contrast, 
immunoreactivity with Ab169/182 was unchanged by these treatments. Subsequently, 
we demonstrated that the increase in PP2Ac subunit recognition by Ab299/309 
coincides with the demethylation of this protein at the carboxyl-terminal 
leucine (Leu309). Methylation of PP2Ac subunit, in vitro, increases its activity 
toward both phosphorylase a and a phosphopeptide. The carboxyl-terminal sequence 
(TPDYFL) of PP2Ac subunit is completely conserved between mammals, yeast, fruit 
fly, and plants which suggests that regulation of this enzyme activity by 
carboxyl-terminal methylation has been conserved during evolution.

PMID: 8206937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
