---
pmid: '25678554'
title: Characterization of mitochondrial FOXRED1 in the assembly of respiratory chain
  complex I.
authors:
- Formosa LE
- Mimaki M
- Frazier AE
- McKenzie M
- Stait TL
- Thorburn DR
- Stroud DA
- Ryan MT
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv058
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Characterization of mitochondrial FOXRED1 in the assembly of respiratory chain complex I.
**Authors:** Formosa LE, Mimaki M, Frazier AE, McKenzie M, Stait TL, Thorburn DR, Stroud DA, Ryan MT
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddv058](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddv058)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 May 15;24(10):2952-65. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv058. Epub 2015 
Feb 12.

Characterization of mitochondrial FOXRED1 in the assembly of respiratory chain 
complex I.

Formosa LE(1), Mimaki M(2), Frazier AE(3), McKenzie M(4), Stait TL(3), Thorburn 
DR(5), Stroud DA(6), Ryan MT(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, La Trobe Institute for Molecular Science, La 
Trobe University, Melbourne, VIC 3086, Australia, Department of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton, Melbourne 3800, Australia.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, La Trobe Institute for Molecular Science, La 
Trobe University, Melbourne, VIC 3086, Australia.
(3)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Royal Children's Hospital and 
University of Melbourne Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, VIC 3052, Australia.
(4)Centre for Genetic Diseases, MIMR-PHI Institute of Medical Research, Clayton, 
Melbourne 3168, Australia and.
(5)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Royal Children's Hospital and 
University of Melbourne Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, VIC 3052, Australia, Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Royal 
Children's Hospital, Melbourne, VIC 3052, Australia.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton, 
Melbourne 3800, Australia.
(7)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton, 
Melbourne 3800, Australia, Michael.Ryan@monash.edu.

Human mitochondrial complex I is the largest enzyme of the respiratory chain and 
is composed of 44 different subunits. Complex I subunits are encoded by both 
nuclear and mitochondrial (mt) DNA and their assembly requires a number of 
additional proteins. FAD-dependent oxidoreductase domain-containing protein 1 
(FOXRED1) was recently identified as a putative assembly factor and FOXRED1 
mutations in patients cause complex I deficiency; however, its role in assembly 
is unknown. Here, we demonstrate that FOXRED1 is involved in mid-late stages of 
complex I assembly. In a patient with FOXRED1 mutations, the levels of mature 
complex I were markedly decreased, and a smaller ∼475 kDa subcomplex was 
detected. In the absence of FOXRED1, mtDNA-encoded complex I subunits are still 
translated and transiently assembled into a late stage ∼815 kDa intermediate; 
but instead of transitioning further to the mature complex I, the intermediate 
breaks down to an ∼475 kDa complex. As the patient cells contained residual 
assembled complex I, we disrupted the FOXRED1 gene in HEK293T cells through 
TALEN-mediated gene editing. Cells lacking FOXRED1 had ∼10% complex I levels, 
reduced complex I activity, and were unable to grow on galactose media. 
Interestingly, overexpression of FOXRED1 containing the patient mutations was 
able to rescue complex I assembly. In addition, FOXRED1 was found to 
co-immunoprecipitate with a number of complex I subunits. Our studies reveal 
that FOXRED1 is a crucial component in the productive assembly of complex I and 
that mutations in FOXRED1 leading to partial loss of function cause defects in 
complex I biogenesis.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddv058
PMID: 25678554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
