---
pmid: '23742842'
title: 'Splicing and beyond: the many faces of the Prp19 complex.'
authors:
- Chanarat S
- Sträßer K
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.05.023
---

# Splicing and beyond: the many faces of the Prp19 complex.
**Authors:** Chanarat S, Sträßer K
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.05.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.05.023)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Oct;1833(10):2126-34. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.05.023. Epub 2013 Jun 3.

Splicing and beyond: the many faces of the Prp19 complex.

Chanarat S(1), Sträßer K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, 
Martinsried, Germany.

The conserved Prp19 complex (Prp19C) - also known as NineTeen Complex (NTC) - 
functions in several processes of paramount importance for cellular homeostasis. 
NTC/Prp19C was discovered as a complex that functions in splicing and more 
specifically during the catalytic activation of the spliceosome. More recent 
work revealed that NTC/Prp19C plays a role in transcription elongation in 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and in genome maintenance in higher eukaryotes. In 
addition, mouse PRP19 might ubiquity late proteins targeted for degradation and 
guide them to the proteasome. Furthermore, NTC/Prp19C has been implicated in 
lipid droplet biogenesis. In the future, the molecular function of NTC/Prp19C in 
all of these processes needs to be refined or elucidated. Most of NTC/Prp19C's 
functions have been shown in only one or few organisms. However, since this 
complex is highly conserved it is likely that it has the same functions across 
all species. Moreover, one NTC/Prp19C or different subcomplexes could function 
in the above-mentioned processes. Intriguingly, NTC/Prp19C might link these 
different processes to ensure an optimal coordination of cellular processes. 
Thus, many important questions about the functions of this interesting complex 
remain to be investigated. In this review we discuss the different functions of 
NTC/Prp19C focusing on the novel and emerging ones as well as open questions.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.05.023
PMID: 23742842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
