---
pmid: '16685654'
title: Mutations in the gene encoding peroxisomal sterol carrier protein X (SCPx)
  cause leukencephalopathy with dystonia and motor neuropathy.
authors:
- Ferdinandusse S
- Kostopoulos P
- Denis S
- Rusch H
- Overmars H
- Dillmann U
- Reith W
- Haas D
- Wanders RJ
- Duran M
- Marziniak M
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC1474093
doi: 10.1086/503921
pubmed_publication_types:
- Case Reports
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: CASE_REPORT
---

# Mutations in the gene encoding peroxisomal sterol carrier protein X (SCPx) cause leukencephalopathy with dystonia and motor neuropathy.
**Authors:** Ferdinandusse S, Kostopoulos P, Denis S, Rusch H, Overmars H, Dillmann U, Reith W, Haas D, Wanders RJ, Duran M, Marziniak M
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1086/503921](https://doi.org/10.1086/503921)
**PMC:** [PMC1474093](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1474093/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2006 Jun;78(6):1046-52. doi: 10.1086/503921. Epub 2006 Mar 29.

Mutations in the gene encoding peroxisomal sterol carrier protein X (SCPx) cause 
leukencephalopathy with dystonia and motor neuropathy.

Ferdinandusse S(1), Kostopoulos P, Denis S, Rusch H, Overmars H, Dillmann U, 
Reith W, Haas D, Wanders RJ, Duran M, Marziniak M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Academic Medical Center at the 
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 1105 AZ, The Netherlands. 
s.ferdinandusse@amc.uva.nl

In this report, we describe the first known patient with a deficiency of sterol 
carrier protein X (SCPx), a peroxisomal enzyme with thiolase activity, which is 
required for the breakdown of branched-chain fatty acids. The patient presented 
with torticollis and dystonic head tremor as well as slight cerebellar signs 
with intention tremor, nystagmus, hyposmia, and azoospermia. Magnetic resonance 
imaging showed leukencephalopathy and involvement of the thalamus and pons. 
Metabolite analyses of plasma revealed an accumulation of the branched-chain 
fatty acid pristanic acid, and abnormal bile alcohol glucuronides were excreted 
in urine. In cultured skin fibroblasts, the thiolytic activity of SCPx was 
deficient, and no SCPx protein could be detected by western blotting. Mutation 
analysis revealed a homozygous 1-nucleotide insertion, 545_546insA, leading to a 
frameshift and premature stop codon (I184fsX7).

DOI: 10.1086/503921
PMCID: PMC1474093
PMID: 16685654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

In this report, we describe the first known patient with a deficiency of sterol carrier protein X (SCPx), a peroxisomal enzyme with thiolase activity, which is required for the breakdown of branched-chain fatty acids. The patient presented with torticollis and dystonic head tremor as well as slight cerebellar signs with intention tremor, nystagmus, hyposmia, and azoospermia. Magnetic resonance imaging showed leukencephalopathy and involvement of the thalamus and pons. Metabolite analyses of plasma revealed an accumulation of the branched-chain fatty acid pristanic acid, and abnormal bile alcohol glucuronides were excreted in urine. In cultured skin fibroblasts, the thiolytic activity of SCPx was deficient, and no SCPx protein could be detected by western blotting. Mutation analysis revealed a homozygous 1-nucleotide insertion, 545_546insA, leading to a frameshift and premature stop codon (I184fsX7).
