---
pmid: '17948026'
title: The proteasome maturation protein POMP facilitates major steps of 20S proteasome
  formation at the endoplasmic reticulum.
authors:
- Fricke B
- Heink S
- Steffen J
- Kloetzel PM
- Krüger E
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2267243
doi: 10.1038/sj.embor.7401091
---

# The proteasome maturation protein POMP facilitates major steps of 20S proteasome formation at the endoplasmic reticulum.
**Authors:** Fricke B, Heink S, Steffen J, Kloetzel PM, Krüger E
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.embor.7401091](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.embor.7401091)
**PMC:** [PMC2267243](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2267243/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2007 Dec;8(12):1170-5. doi: 10.1038/sj.embor.7401091. Epub 2007 Oct 
19.

The proteasome maturation protein POMP facilitates major steps of 20S proteasome 
formation at the endoplasmic reticulum.

Fricke B(1), Heink S, Steffen J, Kloetzel PM, Krüger E.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Monbijoustrasse 
2, 10117 Berlin, Germany.

The quality control of proteins mediated by the plasticity of the proteasome 
system is regulated by the timely and flexible formation of this multisubunit 
proteolytic enzyme complex. Adaptable biogenesis of the 20S proteasome core 
complex is therefore of vital importance for adjusting to changing proteolytic 
requirements. However, the molecular mechanism and the cellular sites of 
mammalian proteasome formation are still unresolved. By using precursor 
complex-specific antibodies, we now show that the main steps in 20S core complex 
formation take place at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Thereby, the proteasome 
maturation protein (POMP)--an essential factor of mammalian proteasome 
biogenesis--interacts with ER membranes, binds to alpha1-7 rings, recruits 
beta-subunits stepwise and mediates the association of mammalian precursor 
complexes with the ER. Thus, POMP facilitates the main steps in 20S core complex 
formation at the ER to coordinate the assembly process and to provide cells with 
freshly formed proteasomes at their site of function.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.embor.7401091
PMCID: PMC2267243
PMID: 17948026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
