---
pmid: '32721402'
title: Enhanced MAPK1 Function Causes a Neurodevelopmental Disorder within the RASopathy
  Clinical Spectrum.
authors:
- Motta M
- Pannone L
- Pantaleoni F
- Bocchinfuso G
- Radio FC
- Cecchetti S
- Ciolfi A
- Di Rocco M
- Elting MW
- Brilstra EH
- Boni S
- Mazzanti L
- Tamburrino F
- Walsh L
- Payne K
- Fernández-Jaén A
- Ganapathi M
- Chung WK
- Grange DK
- Dave-Wala A
- Reshmi SC
- Bartholomew DW
- Mouhlas D
- Carpentieri G
- Bruselles A
- Pizzi S
- Bellacchio E
- Piceci-Sparascio F
- Lißewski C
- Brinkmann J
- Waclaw RR
- Waisfisz Q
- van Gassen K
- Wentzensen IM
- Morrow MM
- Álvarez S
- Martínez-García M
- De Luca A
- Memo L
- Zampino G
- Rossi C
- Seri M
- Gelb BD
- Zenker M
- Dallapiccola B
- Stella L
- Prada CE
- Martinelli S
- Flex E
- Tartaglia M
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2020'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC7477014
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.06.018
---

# Enhanced MAPK1 Function Causes a Neurodevelopmental Disorder within the RASopathy Clinical Spectrum.
**Authors:** Motta M, Pannone L, Pantaleoni F, Bocchinfuso G, Radio FC, Cecchetti S, Ciolfi A, Di Rocco M, Elting MW, Brilstra EH, Boni S, Mazzanti L, Tamburrino F, Walsh L, Payne K, Fernández-Jaén A, Ganapathi M, Chung WK, Grange DK, Dave-Wala A, Reshmi SC, Bartholomew DW, Mouhlas D, Carpentieri G, Bruselles A, Pizzi S, Bellacchio E, Piceci-Sparascio F, Lißewski C, Brinkmann J, Waclaw RR, Waisfisz Q, van Gassen K, Wentzensen IM, Morrow MM, Álvarez S, Martínez-García M, De Luca A, Memo L, Zampino G, Rossi C, Seri M, Gelb BD, Zenker M, Dallapiccola B, Stella L, Prada CE, Martinelli S, Flex E, Tartaglia M
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.06.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.06.018)
**PMC:** [PMC7477014](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7477014/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2020 Sep 3;107(3):499-513. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.06.018.
Epub  2020 Jul 27.

Enhanced MAPK1 Function Causes a Neurodevelopmental Disorder within the 
RASopathy Clinical Spectrum.

Motta M(1), Pannone L(2), Pantaleoni F(1), Bocchinfuso G(3), Radio FC(1), 
Cecchetti S(4), Ciolfi A(1), Di Rocco M(5), Elting MW(6), Brilstra EH(7), Boni 
S(8), Mazzanti L(9), Tamburrino F(9), Walsh L(10), Payne K(10), Fernández-Jaén 
A(11), Ganapathi M(12), Chung WK(13), Grange DK(14), Dave-Wala A(15), Reshmi 
SC(16), Bartholomew DW(15), Mouhlas D(15), Carpentieri G(2), Bruselles A(17), 
Pizzi S(1), Bellacchio E(1), Piceci-Sparascio F(18), Lißewski C(19), Brinkmann 
J(19), Waclaw RR(20), Waisfisz Q(6), van Gassen K(7), Wentzensen IM(21), Morrow 
MM(21), Álvarez S(22), Martínez-García M(22), De Luca A(18), Memo L(23), Zampino 
G(24), Rossi C(25), Seri M(25), Gelb BD(26), Zenker M(19), Dallapiccola B(1), 
Stella L(3), Prada CE(27), Martinelli S(17), Flex E(17), Tartaglia M(28).

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino 
Gesù, IRCCS, 00146 Rome, Italy.
(2)Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino 
Gesù, IRCCS, 00146 Rome, Italy; Department of Oncology and Molecular Medicine, 
Istituto Superiore di Sanità, 00161 Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Chemical Science and Technologies, University of Rome Tor 
Vergata, 00133, Rome, Italy.
(4)Microscopy Area, Core Facilities, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, 00161 Rome, 
Italy.
(5)Department of Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, 
00161 Rome, Italy; Department of Biochemical Science "A. Rossi Fanelli," 
Sapienza University of Rome, 00185 Rome, Italy.
(6)Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit, 1117 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(7)Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, 3584 CX Utrecht, 
the Netherlands.
(8)Medical Genetics Unit, S. Martino Hospital, 32100 Belluno, Italy.
(9)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi 
Hospital, University of Bologna, 40138 Bologna, Italy.
(10)Indiana University Health at Riley Hospital for Children, Indianapolis, IN 
46202, USA.
(11)Department of Pediatrics Neurology, Hospital Universitario Quirón de Madrid, 
Universidad Europea de Madrid, 28223 Madrid, Spain.
(12)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University Medical 
Center, New York, NY 10032, USA.
(13)Departments of Pediatrics and Medicine, Columbia University Medical Center, 
New York, NY 10032, USA.
(14)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetics and Genomic Medicine, 
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(15)Institute for Genomic Medicine, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH 
43215, USA.
(16)Institute for Genomic Medicine, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH 
43215, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, 
OH 43215, USA.
(17)Department of Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, 
00161 Rome, Italy.
(18)Medical Genetics Division, Fondazione IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, 
71013 San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy.
(19)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Magdeburg, 39120 Magdeburg, 
Germany.
(20)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 
Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.
(21)GeneDx, Gaithersburg, 20877 MD, USA.
(22)Medical Department, NimGenetics, 28049 Madrid, Spain.
(23)Ambulatorio Genetica Clinica, Ospedale San Bortolo, 36100 Vicenza, Italy.
(24)Center for Rare Disease and Congenital Defects, Fondazione Policlinico 
Universitario Gemelli, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, 00168 Rome, Italy.
(25)Medical Genetics Unit, Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, University of 
Bologna, 40138 Bologna, Italy.
(26)Mindich Child Health and Development Institute and Department of Pediatrics, 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(27)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 
Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA; Division of Human Genetics, Cincinnati Children's 
Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.
(28)Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino 
Gesù, IRCCS, 00146 Rome, Italy. Electronic address: marco.tartaglia@opbg.net.

Signal transduction through the RAF-MEK-ERK pathway, the first described 
mitogen-associated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade, mediates multiple cellular 
processes and participates in early and late developmental programs. Aberrant 
signaling through this cascade contributes to oncogenesis and underlies the 
RASopathies, a family of cancer-prone disorders. Here, we report that de novo 
missense variants in MAPK1, encoding the mitogen-activated protein kinase 1 
(i.e., extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase 2, ERK2), cause a 
neurodevelopmental disease within the RASopathy phenotypic spectrum, reminiscent 
of Noonan syndrome in some subjects. Pathogenic variants promote increased 
phosphorylation of the kinase, which enhances translocation to the nucleus and 
boosts MAPK signaling in vitro and in vivo. Two variant classes are identified, 
one of which directly disrupts binding to MKP3, a dual-specificity protein 
phosphatase negatively regulating ERK function. Importantly, signal 
dysregulation driven by pathogenic MAPK1 variants is stimulus reliant and 
retains dependence on MEK activity. Our data support a model in which the 
identified pathogenic variants operate with counteracting effects on MAPK1 
function by differentially impacting the ability of the kinase to interact with 
regulators and substrates, which likely explains the minor role of these 
variants as driver events contributing to oncogenesis. After nearly 20 years 
from the discovery of the first gene implicated in Noonan syndrome, PTPN11, the 
last tier of the MAPK cascade joins the group of genes mutated in RASopathies.

Copyright © 2020 American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.06.018
PMCID: PMC7477014
PMID: 32721402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I.M.W. and M.M.M. are employees of GeneDx. S.Á. 
and M.M.-G. are employees of NimGenetics. All the other authors declare no 
competing interests.

## Full Text

Abstract

Signal transduction through the RAF-MEK-ERK pathway, the first described mitogen-associated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade, mediates multiple cellular processes and participates in early and late developmental programs. Aberrant signaling through this cascade contributes to oncogenesis and underlies the RASopathies, a family of cancer-prone disorders. Here, we report that de novo missense variants in MAPK1 , encoding the mitogen-activated protein kinase 1 (i.e., extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase 2, ERK2), cause a neurodevelopmental disease within the RASopathy phenotypic spectrum, reminiscent of Noonan syndrome in some subjects. Pathogenic variants promote increased phosphorylation of the kinase, which enhances translocation to the nucleus and boosts MAPK signaling in vitro and in vivo . Two variant classes are identified, one of which directly disrupts binding to MKP3, a dual-specificity protein phosphatase negatively regulating ERK function. Importantly, signal dysregulation driven by pathogenic MAPK1 variants is stimulus reliant and retains dependence on MEK activity. Our data support a model in which the identified pathogenic variants operate with counteracting effects on MAPK1 function by differentially impacting the ability of the kinase to interact with regulators and substrates, which likely explains the minor role of these variants as driver events contributing to oncogenesis. After nearly 20 years from the discovery of the first gene implicated in Noonan syndrome, PTPN11 , the last tier of the MAPK cascade joins the group of genes mutated in RASopathies.

Introduction

Signaling through the RAF-MEK-ERK pathway, the first described mitogen-associated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade, mediates multiple cellular processes in response to growth factors, cytokines, and hormones. 1 , 2 Due to its nodal role in signal transduction, signal traffic through this cascade is tightly controlled, and enhanced flow through it is a well-characterized event contributing to oncogenesis. 3 At the organism level, MAPK signaling participates in early and late developmental programs, including organogenesis, morphology determination, synaptic plasticity, and growth. 4 , 5 , 6 Consistently, germline mutations in genes encoding proteins with a role in the RAS-MAPK signaling cascade or having a functional link to this pathway have been linked causally to the RASopathies, a family of genetic disorders sharing distinctive facial dysmorphisms, short stature, variable cognitive impairment and behavioral problems, and a wide spectrum of cardiac defects as major features. 7 , 8 , 9 These syndromes are also characterized by a variably increased risk for certain childhood malignancies, including rhabdomyosarcoma, neuroblastoma, brain tumors, acute leukemias, and juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia. 10 , 11 , 12 Notably, these discoveries have elucidated a paradigm with two major “classes” of activating pathogenic variants involving proteins of the RAS-MAPK pathway, somatic defects in cancer and germline lesions in RASopathies, that have differential impacts on cell transformation and development. 7 , 13

Noonan syndrome (NS [MIM: PS163950]), the most common and clinically variable disorder among the RASopathies, 14 is genetically heterogeneous and is caused by pathogenic variants in more than ten genes encoding proteins with roles in the RAS-MAPK signaling cascade or having functional links to this pathway, with variation in PTPN11 (MIM: 176876 ), 15 SOS1 (MIM: 182530 ), 16 , 17 RAF1 (MIM: 164760 ), 18 , 19 RIT1 (MIM: 609591 ), 20 and LZTR1 (MIM: 600574 ) 21 , 22 accounting for the majority of cases. In about 10%–20% of affected individuals, however, the clinical diagnosis is not molecularly confirmed, suggesting that additional genes are likely implicated in the pathogenesis of this disorder or raising the possibility that other still unrecognized RASopathies (i.e., diseases caused by RAS-MAPK signaling dysregulation) or genocopies (i.e., diseases with significant clinical overlap with NS but caused by distinct molecular mechanisms) may account for these affected individuals.

In this study, we established that de novo missense variants in MAPK1 , encoding the mitogen-activated protein kinase 1 (also known as extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase 2, ERK2), underlie a neurodevelopmental disorder within the clinical spectrum of the RASopathies. We characterized the clinical profile of seven unrelated affected individuals and used primary fibroblasts and cell lines ectopically expressing individual mutant alleles to demonstrate that these mutations promote stimulus-dependent gain-of-function (GoF) of the kinase and enhance MAPK signaling in vitro . Knock-in and transgenic mpk-1 lines in Caenorhabditis elegans ( C. elegans ) were used to demonstrate the activating behavior of the tested amino acid substitutions in vivo . Our in silico and in vitro analyses indicate that the identified variants operate with counteracting effects on MAPK1 function by differentially impacting the ability of the kinase to interact with regulators and substrates and that their GoF retains dependence on MEK activity, which likely explains the minor impact of MAPK1 variation as a driver event in oncogenesis.

Discussion

Our findings establish germline MAPK1 missense variants as the cause of a previously unrecognized neurodevelopmental disorder falling within the RASopathy clinical spectrum, with a phenotype reminiscent of NS in a subset of subjects. The non-random distribution of the identified allelic series and our in silico , in vitro , and in vivo data consistently indicate that pathogenic MAPK1 variants cause GoF and promote a boosted signal flow through the MAPK cascade. The collected data suggest that the disease-causing amino acid changes can be subdivided into at least two major classes and offer a mechanistic interpretation for the activating consequences of variants affecting the DRS.

Although two individuals of the present cohort (subjects 1 and 2) were identified among a small cohort of subjects with features suggestive of NS for whom pathogenic variants had not been identified in known RASopathy-associated genes, systematic screening of the entire MAPK1 coding sequence in an additional 267 subjects who had a clinically suspected diagnosis of RASopathy not explained by mutations in the previously identified genes implicated in these disorders did not find other pathogenic variants. This suggests that MAPK1 variation represents a rare event in subjects with NS-related features and that it may be more commonly associated with currently unclassified syndromic DD/ID.

Our collective data indicate that pathogenic MAPK1 variants are activating and can be classified within two mechanistic groups affecting proper binding of the kinase to regulators and effectors or perturbing the mechanism of activation of the kinase. We showed that the defective negative regulation exerted by MKP3 (and possibly other MKPs) represents a generalizable mechanism for the GoF behavior of the identified MAPK1 variants. Notably, substitutions in or close to the DRS can lead to either GoF or LoF 61 by impairing proper MAPK1 binding to regulators and substrates. Our structural and experimental analyses support a model in which disease-causing variants operate with counteracting effects on MAPK1 function by differentially impacting the ability of the altered proteins to interact with MEK1, MKP3, and substrates. Remarkably, the evidence that only some intermolecular interactions are impaired by the pathogenic substitutions in the DRS strongly suggests that these lesions produce only a local perturbation of the binding interface, rather than an overall conformational rearrangement of the CD domain. Consistent with the GoF role of the identified MAPK1 variants, no pathogenic amino acid change was found to involve residues at the FRS. This is in line with recent data demonstrating a mutually exclusive distribution of GoF and LoF MAPK1 changes in these domains, with the former limited to DRS residues and the latter involving FRS residues. 61

According to the Tissue Cancer Genome Atlas and Cosmic datasets, MAPK1 gene amplification is observed in a significant proportion of ovarian, bladder, lung, and breast cancers (5% to 20% of cases). However, while enhanced MAPK1 activation driven by oncogenic mutations in upstream signal transducers (e.g., PTPN11 , HRAS [MIM: 190020 ], KRAS [MIM: 190070 ], NRAS [MIM: 164790 ], and BRAF [MIM: 164757 ]) is a common theme in cancer, MAPK1 mutations do not represent a major somatic event contributing to oncogenesis. Indeed, they have been reported in a substantially restricted number of tumors and less frequently with respect to other genes coding for signal transducers with role in the RAS-MAPK pathway (COSMIC database). Based on our findings, this is likely linked to the particular behavior of these mutations, which are stimulus dependent and confer only mild and/or context-specific GoF because of their counterbalancing consequences on MAPK1 function. In this proposed model, the disease-causing amino acid substitutions clustering at the DRS significantly affect MKP3 binding and MKP3-mediated MAPK1 dephosphorylation of the regulatory residues, Thr185 and Tyr187. However, since DRS also mediates MAPK1 binding to a number of signaling partners and scaffolding proteins, it is possible that these mutations may also variably impact binding of the kinase to a large number of MAPK1 interacting proteins, including substrates. 47 , 60 , 66 , 67 It is therefore reasonable to hypothesize that each of the identified pathogenic variants may variably exert counterbalancing effects on the phosphorylation status of the kinase and its capability to couple its activation to efficient phosphorylation of substrates.

We clinically and molecularly profile a RASopathy caused by activating germline pathogenic variation of MAPK1 . After nearly 20 years from the discovery of the first gene implicated in NS, PTPN11 , 15 the last tier of the MAPK cascade finally joins the group of genes mutated in RASopathies. Our findings further extend the molecular mechanisms by which upregulation of MAPK signaling is linked to human disease and provide a rationale for the differential impact of MAPK1 mutations in development and oncogenesis.
