---
pmid: '18835984'
title: Interaction of the mycobacterial heparin-binding hemagglutinin with actin,
  as evidenced by single-molecule force spectroscopy.
authors:
- Verbelen C
- Dupres V
- Raze D
- Bompard C
- Locht C
- Dufrêne YF
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2583614
doi: 10.1128/JB.00974-08
---

# Interaction of the mycobacterial heparin-binding hemagglutinin with actin, as evidenced by single-molecule force spectroscopy.
**Authors:** Verbelen C, Dupres V, Raze D, Bompard C, Locht C, Dufrêne YF
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JB.00974-08](https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.00974-08)
**PMC:** [PMC2583614](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2583614/)

## Abstract

1. J Bacteriol. 2008 Dec;190(23):7614-20. doi: 10.1128/JB.00974-08. Epub 2008 Oct
 3.

Interaction of the mycobacterial heparin-binding hemagglutinin with actin, as 
evidenced by single-molecule force spectroscopy.

Verbelen C(1), Dupres V, Raze D, Bompard C, Locht C, Dufrêne YF.

Author information:
(1)Unité de Chimie des Interfaces, Université Catholique de Louvain, Croix du 
Sud 2/18, B-1348 Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.

Although Mycobacterium tuberculosis and related species are considered to be 
typical endosomal pathogens, recent studies have suggested that mycobacteria can 
be present in the cytoplasm of infected cells and cause cytoskeleton 
rearrangements, the mechanisms of which remain unknown. Here, we used 
single-molecule force spectroscopy to demonstrate that the heparin-binding 
hemagglutinin (HBHA), a surface adhesin from Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
displaying sequence similarities with actin-binding proteins, is able to bind to 
actin. Force curves recorded between actin and the coiled-coil, N-terminal 
domain of HBHA showed a bimodal distribution of binding forces reflecting the 
detection of single and double HBHA-actin interactions. Force curves obtained 
between actin and the lysine-rich C-terminal domain of HBHA showed a broader 
distribution of binding events, suggesting they originate primarily from 
intermolecular electrostatic bridges between cationic HBHA domains and anionic 
actin residues. We also explored the dynamics of the HBHA-actin interaction, 
showing that the binding force and binding frequency increased with the pulling 
speed and contact time, respectively. Taken together, our data indicate that 
HBHA is able to specifically bind actin, via both its N-terminal and C-terminal 
domains, strongly suggesting a role of the HBHA-actin interaction in the 
pathogenesis of mycobacterial diseases.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00974-08
PMCID: PMC2583614
PMID: 18835984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
