---
pmid: '14718668'
title: 'Chemogenomic profiling: identifying the functional interactions of small molecules
  in yeast.'
authors:
- Giaever G
- Flaherty P
- Kumm J
- Proctor M
- Nislow C
- Jaramillo DF
- Chu AM
- Jordan MI
- Arkin AP
- Davis RW
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC321760
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0307490100
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Chemogenomic profiling: identifying the functional interactions of small molecules in yeast.
**Authors:** Giaever G, Flaherty P, Kumm J, Proctor M, Nislow C, Jaramillo DF, Chu AM, Jordan MI, Arkin AP, Davis RW
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0307490100](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0307490100)
**PMC:** [PMC321760](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC321760/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Jan 20;101(3):793-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0307490100. Epub 2004 Jan 12.

Chemogenomic profiling: identifying the functional interactions of small 
molecules in yeast.

Giaever G(1), Flaherty P, Kumm J, Proctor M, Nislow C, Jaramillo DF, Chu AM, 
Jordan MI, Arkin AP, Davis RW.

Author information:
(1)Stanford Genome Technology Center, 855 California Avenue, Palo Alto, CA 
94304-1103, USA. ggiaever@stanford.edu

We demonstrate the efficacy of a genome-wide protocol in yeast that allows the 
identification of those gene products that functionally interact with small 
molecules and result in the inhibition of cellular proliferation. Here we 
present results from screening 10 diverse compounds in 80 genome-wide 
experiments against the complete collection of heterozygous yeast deletion 
strains. These compounds include anticancer and antifungal agents, statins, 
alverine citrate, and dyclonine. In several cases, we identified previously 
known interactions; furthermore, in each case, our analysis revealed novel 
cellular interactions, even when the relationship between a compound and its 
cellular target had been well established. In addition, we identified a chemical 
core structure shared among three therapeutically distinct compounds that 
inhibit the ERG24 heterozygous deletion strain, demonstrating that cells may 
respond similarly to compounds of related structure. The ability to identify 
on-and-off target effects in vivo is fundamental to understanding the cellular 
response to small-molecule perturbants.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0307490100
PMCID: PMC321760
PMID: 14718668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
