---
pmid: '30190425'
title: GEF mechanism revealed by the structure of SmgGDS-558 and farnesylated RhoA
  complex and its implication for a chaperone mechanism.
authors:
- Shimizu H
- Toma-Fukai S
- Kontani K
- Katada T
- Shimizu T
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6156624
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1804740115
---

# GEF mechanism revealed by the structure of SmgGDS-558 and farnesylated RhoA complex and its implication for a chaperone mechanism.
**Authors:** Shimizu H, Toma-Fukai S, Kontani K, Katada T, Shimizu T
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1804740115](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1804740115)
**PMC:** [PMC6156624](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6156624/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2018 Sep 18;115(38):9563-9568. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1804740115. Epub 2018 Sep 6.

GEF mechanism revealed by the structure of SmgGDS-558 and farnesylated RhoA 
complex and its implication for a chaperone mechanism.

Shimizu H(1), Toma-Fukai S(1), Kontani K(2), Katada T(3), Shimizu T(4).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 113-0033 
Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Meiji Pharmaceutical University, Kiyose-shi, 
204-8588 Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Faculty of Pharmacy, Musashino University, Nishitokyo-shi, 202-0023 Tokyo, 
Japan.
(4)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 113-0033 
Tokyo, Japan; shimizu@mol.f.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

SmgGDS has dual functions in cells and regulates small GTPases as both a guanine 
nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) for the Rho family and a molecular chaperone 
for small GTPases possessing a C-terminal polybasic region followed by four 
C-terminal residues called the CaaX motif, which is posttranslationally 
prenylated at its cysteine residue. Our recent structural work revealed that 
SmgGDS folds into tandem copies of armadillo-repeat motifs (ARMs) that are not 
present in other GEFs. However, the precise mechanism of GEF activity and 
recognition mechanism for the prenylated CaaX motif remain unknown because 
SmgGDS does not have a typical GEF catalytic domain and lacks a pocket to 
accommodate a prenyl group. Here, we aimed to determine the crystal structure of 
the SmgGDS/farnesylated RhoA complex. We found that SmgGDS induces a significant 
conformational change in the switch I and II regions that opens up the 
nucleotide-binding site, with the prenyl group fitting into the cryptic pocket 
in the N-terminal ARMs. Taken together, our findings could advance the 
understanding of the role of SmgGDS and enable drug design strategies for 
targeting SmgGDS and small GTPases.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1804740115
PMCID: PMC6156624
PMID: 30190425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
