---
pmid: '11295070'
title: Hyperthermia-induced apoptosis in two rat yolk sac tumor cell lines with different
  radiothermosensitivity in vitro.
authors:
- Islam MS
- Mitsuhashi N
- Akimoto T
- Sakurai H
- Hasegawa M
- Ishikawa H
- Niibe H
journal: Oncol Rep
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.3892/or.8.3.501
---

# Hyperthermia-induced apoptosis in two rat yolk sac tumor cell lines with different radiothermosensitivity in vitro.
**Authors:** Islam MS, Mitsuhashi N, Akimoto T, Sakurai H, Hasegawa M, Ishikawa H, Niibe H
**Journal:** Oncol Rep (2001)
**DOI:** [10.3892/or.8.3.501](https://doi.org/10.3892/or.8.3.501)

## Abstract

1. Oncol Rep. 2001 May-Jun;8(3):501-7. doi: 10.3892/or.8.3.501.

Hyperthermia-induced apoptosis in two rat yolk sac tumor cell lines with 
different radiothermosensitivity in vitro.

Islam MS(1), Mitsuhashi N, Akimoto T, Sakurai H, Hasegawa M, Ishikawa H, Niibe 
H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology and Radiation Oncology, Gunma University School of 
Medicine, Maebashi, Gunma 371-8511, Japan. mdsislam@med.gunma-u.ac.jp

We investigated cell susceptibility to hyperthermia-induced apoptosis in two rat 
yolk sac tumor cell lines (RYSTs) and attempted to correlate this with the known 
potentially relevant molecular determinants of apoptosis, p53 protein status, 
Bcl-2 family of proteins and heat shock proteins (Hsp). Parent cell line, NMT-1 
(carrying wild-type p53 gene) was radiosensitive but thermoresistant compared to 
the variant cell line, NMT-1R (mutated type p53), which was isolated from NMT-1 
by repeated radiation exposure. Induction of apoptosis by hyperthermia at 43 
degrees C was morphologically detected in both RYSTs using hematoxylin and 
eosin, and TUNEL staining and additionally confirmed by DNA ladder formation 
(the cleavage of DNA into oligonucleosomal fragments). Western blot analysis 
showed an increase in expression of p53, p21WAF1/CIP1, Hsp70 proteins in both 
cell lines after heat-shock at 43 degrees C for 30 min. Hsp90 expression 
increased in NMT-1 but was not affected by heating in NMT-1R cells, whereas 
hyperthermia exerted no effect on the endogenous expression of Bax. Bcl-2 
protein could not be detected in either RYST. These results suggest that 
hyperthermia induced apoptosis in both NMT-1 and NMT-1R and apoptosis in RYSTs 
may be independent of p53-dependent signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.3892/or.8.3.501
PMID: 11295070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
