---
pmid: '15250827'
title: 'Structural organization of mitochondrial human complex I: role of the ND4
  and ND5 mitochondria-encoded subunits and interaction with prohibitin.'
authors:
- Bourges I
- Ramus C
- Mousson de Camaret B
- Beugnot R
- Remacle C
- Cardol P
- Hofhaus G
- Issartel JP
journal: Biochem J
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1133742
doi: 10.1042/BJ20040256
---

# Structural organization of mitochondrial human complex I: role of the ND4 and ND5 mitochondria-encoded subunits and interaction with prohibitin.
**Authors:** Bourges I, Ramus C, Mousson de Camaret B, Beugnot R, Remacle C, Cardol P, Hofhaus G, Issartel JP
**Journal:** Biochem J (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BJ20040256](https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20040256)
**PMC:** [PMC1133742](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1133742/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2004 Nov 1;383(Pt. 3):491-9. doi: 10.1042/BJ20040256.

Structural organization of mitochondrial human complex I: role of the ND4 and 
ND5 mitochondria-encoded subunits and interaction with prohibitin.

Bourges I(1), Ramus C, Mousson de Camaret B, Beugnot R, Remacle C, Cardol P, 
Hofhaus G, Issartel JP.

Author information:
(1)UMR 5090 CNRS-DRDC, CEA Grenoble, 38054 Grenoble cedex 9, France.

Mitochondria-encoded ND (NADH dehydrogenase) subunits, as components of the 
hydrophobic part of complex I, are essential for NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase 
activity. Mutations or lack of expression of these subunits have significant 
pathogenic consequences in humans. However, the way these events affect complex 
I assembly is poorly documented. To understand the effects of particular 
mutations in ND subunits on complex I assembly, we studied four human cell 
lines: ND4 non-expressing cells, ND5 non-expressing cells, and rho degrees cells 
that do not express any ND subunits, in comparison with normal complex I control 
cells. In control cells, all the seven analysed nuclear-encoded complex I 
subunits were found to be attached to the mitochondrial inner membrane, except 
for the 24 kDa subunit, which was nearly equally partitioned between the 
membranes and the matrix. Absence of a single ND subunit, or even all the seven 
ND subunits, caused no major changes in the nuclear-encoded complex I subunit 
content of mitochondria. However, in cells lacking ND4 or ND5, very low amounts 
of 24 kDa subunit were found associated with the membranes, whereas most of the 
other nuclear-encoded subunits remained attached. In contrast, membrane 
association of most of the nuclear subunits was significantly reduced in the 
absence of all seven ND proteins. Immunopurification detected several 
subcomplexes. One of these, containing the 23, 30 and 49 kDa subunits, also 
contained prohibitin. This is the first description of prohibitin interaction 
with complex I subunits and suggests that this protein might play a role in the 
assembly or degradation of mitochondrial complex I.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20040256
PMCID: PMC1133742
PMID: 15250827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
