---
pmid: '22582279'
title: DivIVA-mediated polar localization of ComN, a posttranscriptional regulator
  of Bacillus subtilis.
authors:
- dos Santos VT
- Bisson-Filho AW
- Gueiros-Filho FJ
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3393515
doi: 10.1128/JB.05879-11
---

# DivIVA-mediated polar localization of ComN, a posttranscriptional regulator of Bacillus subtilis.
**Authors:** dos Santos VT, Bisson-Filho AW, Gueiros-Filho FJ
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JB.05879-11](https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.05879-11)
**PMC:** [PMC3393515](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3393515/)

## Abstract

1. J Bacteriol. 2012 Jul;194(14):3661-9. doi: 10.1128/JB.05879-11. Epub 2012 May 
11.

DivIVA-mediated polar localization of ComN, a posttranscriptional regulator of 
Bacillus subtilis.

dos Santos VT(1), Bisson-Filho AW, Gueiros-Filho FJ.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica, Instituto de Química, Universidade de São Paulo, 
São Paulo, Brazil.

ComN (YrzD) is a small, 98-amino-acid protein recently shown to be involved in 
the posttranscriptional control of the late competence comE operon in Bacillus 
subtilis. We show here that ComN localizes to the division site and cell poles 
in a DivIVA-dependent fashion. Yeast two-hybrid and glutathione S-transferase 
pulldown experiments showed that ComN interacts directly with DivIVA. ComN is 
not essential for the polar assembly of the core competence DNA uptake 
machinery. Nevertheless, polar localization of ComN should play some role in 
competence acquisition because delocalization of ComN leads to a small reduction 
in competence efficiency. We found that ComN promotes the accumulation of its 
target comE mRNA to septal and polar sites. Thus, we speculate that localized 
translation of ComE proteins may be required for efficient competence 
development. Our results underscore the versatility of DivIVA as a promoter of 
the differentiation of bacterial poles and demonstrate that the repertoire of 
polarly localized molecules in B. subtilis is broad, including a regulator of 
gene expression and its target mRNA. Moreover, our findings suggest that mRNA 
localization may play a role in the subcellular organization of bacteria.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.05879-11
PMCID: PMC3393515
PMID: 22582279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
