---
pmid: '23064648'
title: DICER- and AGO3-dependent generation of retinoic acid-induced DR2 Alu RNAs
  regulates human stem cell proliferation.
authors:
- Hu Q
- Tanasa B
- Trabucchi M
- Li W
- Zhang J
- Ohgi KA
- Rose DW
- Glass CK
- Rosenfeld MG
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3743530
doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2400
---

# DICER- and AGO3-dependent generation of retinoic acid-induced DR2 Alu RNAs regulates human stem cell proliferation.
**Authors:** Hu Q, Tanasa B, Trabucchi M, Li W, Zhang J, Ohgi KA, Rose DW, Glass CK, Rosenfeld MG
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nsmb.2400](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb.2400)
**PMC:** [PMC3743530](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3743530/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2012 Nov;19(11):1168-75. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2400. Epub
2012  Oct 14.

DICER- and AGO3-dependent generation of retinoic acid-induced DR2 Alu RNAs 
regulates human stem cell proliferation.

Hu Q(1), Tanasa B, Trabucchi M, Li W, Zhang J, Ohgi KA, Rose DW, Glass CK, 
Rosenfeld MG.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, 
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA.

Although liganded nuclear receptors have been established to regulate RNA 
polymerase II (Pol II)-dependent transcription units, their role in regulating 
Pol III-transcribed DNA repeats remains largely unknown. Here we report that 
~2-3% of the ~100,000-200,000 total human DR2 Alu repeats located in proximity 
to activated Pol II transcription units are activated by the retinoic acid 
receptor (RAR) in human embryonic stem cells to generate Pol III-dependent RNAs. 
These transcripts are processed, initially in a DICER-dependent fashion, into 
small RNAs (~28-65 nt) referred to as repeat-induced RNAs that cause the 
degradation of a subset of crucial stem-cell mRNAs, including Nanog mRNA, which 
modulate exit from the proliferative stem-cell state. This regulation requires 
AGO3-dependent accumulation of processed DR2 Alu transcripts and the subsequent 
recruitment of AGO3-associated decapping complexes to the target mRNA. In this 
way, the RAR-dependent and Pol III-dependent DR2 Alu transcriptional events in 
stem cells functionally complement the Pol II-dependent neuronal transcriptional 
program.

DOI: 10.1038/nsmb.2400
PMCID: PMC3743530
PMID: 23064648 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
