---
pmid: '16858726'
title: A complexomic study of Escherichia coli using two-dimensional blue native/SDS
  polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.
authors:
- Lasserre JP
- Beyne E
- Pyndiah S
- Lapaillerie D
- Claverol S
- Bonneu M
journal: Electrophoresis
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/elps.200500912
---

# A complexomic study of Escherichia coli using two-dimensional blue native/SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.
**Authors:** Lasserre JP, Beyne E, Pyndiah S, Lapaillerie D, Claverol S, Bonneu M
**Journal:** Electrophoresis (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1002/elps.200500912](https://doi.org/10.1002/elps.200500912)

## Abstract

1. Electrophoresis. 2006 Aug;27(16):3306-21. doi: 10.1002/elps.200500912.

A complexomic study of Escherichia coli using two-dimensional blue native/SDS 
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.

Lasserre JP(1), Beyne E, Pyndiah S, Lapaillerie D, Claverol S, Bonneu M.

Author information:
(1)Plateforme Génomique Fonctionnelle Bordeaux - Pôle Protéomique, Université 
Victor Segalen Bordeaux 2, Bordeaux, France.

Study of the complexome - all the protein complexes of the cell - is essential 
for a better understanding and more global vision of cell function. Using 
two-dimensional blue native/SDS-PAGE (2-D BN/SDS-PAGE) technology, the cytosolic 
and membrane protein complexes of Escherichia coli were separated. Then, the 
different partners of each protein complex were identified by LC-MS/MS. In this 
report, 306 protein complexes were separated and identified. Among these protein 
complexes, 50 heteromultimeric and 256 homomultimeric protein complexes were 
found. Among the 50 heteromultimeric protein complexes, 18 previously described 
protein complexes validate the technology. In this study, 109 new protein 
complexes were found, providing insight into the function of previously 
uncharacterized bacterial proteins.

DOI: 10.1002/elps.200500912
PMID: 16858726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
