---
reference_id: PMID:18650932
title: Par-4 inhibits Akt and suppresses Ras-induced lung tumorigenesis.
authors:
- Joshi J
- Fernandez-Marcos PJ
- Galvez A
- Amanchy R
- Linares JF
- Duran A
- Pathrose P
- Leitges M
- Cañamero M
- Collado M
- Salas C
- Serrano M
- Moscat J
- Diaz-Meco MT
journal: EMBO J
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.149
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Par-4 inhibits Akt and suppresses Ras-induced lung tumorigenesis.
**Authors:** Joshi J, Fernandez-Marcos PJ, Galvez A, Amanchy R, Linares JF, Duran A, Pathrose P, Leitges M, Cañamero M, Collado M, Salas C, Serrano M, Moscat J, Diaz-Meco MT
**Journal:** EMBO J (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2008.149](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2008.149)

## Content

1. EMBO J. 2008 Aug 20;27(16):2181-93. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.149. Epub 2008 Jul
 24.

Par-4 inhibits Akt and suppresses Ras-induced lung tumorigenesis.

Joshi J(1), Fernandez-Marcos PJ, Galvez A, Amanchy R, Linares JF, Duran A,
Pathrose P, Leitges M, Cañamero M, Collado M, Salas C, Serrano M, Moscat J,
Diaz-Meco MT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer and Cell Biology, University of Cincinnati College of
Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA.

The atypical PKC-interacting protein, Par-4, inhibits cell survival and
tumorigenesis in vitro, and its genetic inactivation in mice leads to reduced
lifespan, enhanced benign tumour development and low-frequency carcinogenesis.
Here, we demonstrate that Par-4 is highly expressed in normal lung but reduced
in human lung cancer samples. We show, in a mouse model of lung tumours, that
the lack of Par-4 dramatically enhances Ras-induced lung carcinoma formation in
vivo, acting as a negative regulator of Akt activation. We also demonstrate in
cell culture, in vivo, and in biochemical experiments that Akt regulation by
Par-4 is mediated by PKCzeta, establishing a new paradigm for Akt regulation
and, likely, for Ras-induced lung carcinogenesis, wherein Par-4 is a novel
tumour suppressor.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2008.149
PMCID: PMC2519103
PMID: 18650932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]