---
pmid: '21044950'
title: Genome-wide YFP fluorescence complementation screen identifies new regulators
  for telomere signaling in human cells.
authors:
- Lee OH
- Kim H
- He Q
- Baek HJ
- Yang D
- Chen LY
- Liang J
- Chae HK
- Safari A
- Liu D
- Songyang Z
journal: Mol Cell Proteomics
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3033672
doi: 10.1074/mcp.M110.001628
---

# Genome-wide YFP fluorescence complementation screen identifies new regulators for telomere signaling in human cells.
**Authors:** Lee OH, Kim H, He Q, Baek HJ, Yang D, Chen LY, Liang J, Chae HK, Safari A, Liu D, Songyang Z
**Journal:** Mol Cell Proteomics (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1074/mcp.M110.001628](https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M110.001628)
**PMC:** [PMC3033672](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3033672/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2011 Feb;10(2):M110.001628. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M110.001628.
 Epub 2010 Nov 2.

Genome-wide YFP fluorescence complementation screen identifies new regulators 
for telomere signaling in human cells.

Lee OH(1), Kim H, He Q, Baek HJ, Yang D, Chen LY, Liang J, Chae HK, Safari A, 
Liu D, Songyang Z.

Author information:
(1)Severance Hospital Integrative Research Institute for Cerebral and 
Cardiovascular Disease, Yonsei University Health System, Seoul, Korea.

Detection of low-affinity or transient interactions can be a bottleneck in our 
understanding of signaling networks. To address this problem, we developed an 
arrayed screening strategy based on protein complementation to systematically 
investigate protein-protein interactions in live human cells, and performed a 
large-scale screen for regulators of telomeres. Maintenance of vertebrate 
telomeres requires the concerted action of members of the Telomere Interactome, 
built upon the six core telomeric proteins TRF1, TRF2, RAP1, TIN2, TPP1, and 
POT1. Of the ∼12,000 human proteins examined, we identified over 300 proteins 
that associated with the six core telomeric proteins. The majority of the 
identified proteins have not been previously linked to telomere biology, 
including regulators of post-translational modifications such as protein kinases 
and ubiquitin E3 ligases. Results from this study shed light on the molecular 
niche that is fundamental to telomere regulation in humans, and provide a 
valuable tool to investigate signaling pathways in mammalian cells.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M110.001628
PMCID: PMC3033672
PMID: 21044950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Detection of low-affinity or transient interactions can be a bottleneck in our understanding of signaling networks. To address this problem, we developed an arrayed screening strategy based on protein complementation to systematically investigate protein-protein interactions in live human cells, and performed a large-scale screen for regulators of telomeres. Maintenance of vertebrate telomeres requires the concerted action of members of the Telomere Interactome, built upon the six core telomeric proteins TRF1, TRF2, RAP1, TIN2, TPP1, and POT1. Of the ∼12,000 human proteins examined, we identified over 300 proteins that associated with the six core telomeric proteins. The majority of the identified proteins have not been previously linked to telomere biology, including regulators of post-translational modifications such as protein kinases and ubiquitin E3 ligases. Results from this study shed light on the molecular niche that is fundamental to telomere regulation in humans, and provide a valuable tool to investigate signaling pathways in mammalian cells.

DISCUSSION

The importance of mapping protein-protein interaction networks and elucidating regulatory components that are integral to biological pathways cannot be overstated. Signaling regulators are often of low abundance, and their association with the targets may be transient or weak. Such characteristics make it difficult to capture and study key regulatory interactions, despite the wide array of tools that have been developed over the years for protein-protein interactions. Recent studies have demonstrated the benefit of detecting protein-protein interactions using protein complementation assay (PCA) systems ( 68 ). For example, a dihydrofolate reductase-based PCA method was used to investigate the yeast interactome, where thousands of interactions were identified ( 69 ). Given that many of the yeast genetic tools are not yet available in mammals, we decided to employ the PCA method that utilizes split Venus YFP to analyze the interactomes in human cells ( 52 , 54 , 56 , 58 ). Compared with approaches such as yeast-two-hybrid and co-IP/mass spectrometry, it offers distinct advantages. Pair-wise protein-protein interactions are analyzed in live human cells, providing spatial information about protein-protein interactions. As a nontranscription based approach, it avoids bait self-activation and nonnuclear localization issues that frequently plague two-hybrid methods. PCA/BiFC is ideal for live or single cell experiments, circumventing the need for large numbers of cells and lengthy in vitro purification steps as is the case for IP/mass spectrometry. Most importantly, transient or weak interactions as well as low abundance regulators that may be lost during in vitro purification steps, can be “trapped” thanks to the cofolding of YFP fragments. This attribute really sets it apart from other screening methods including PCA approaches that utilize dihydrofolate reductase or luciferase ( 68 , 70 ), and enables it to more readily identify regulatory interactions such as those between enzymes and their substrates. In support of this notion, we recently used a BiFC-based screening strategy and identified a rac-GDI protein that binds CARD9 in macrophages in a bacterial infection-dependent manner ( 71 ). We anticipate that our screen strategy will make major impact in this area and help to facilitate the process of identifying signal dependent interactions.

The screen strategy described here detects pair-wise interactions in the human proteome in a systematic manner, enables the identification of regulatory interactions such as those between enzymes and their substrates, and creates a high-resolution map of the interactome. Here we report our work on elucidating the interaction networks centering around the six core telomeric proteins. Screens utilizing split GFP or YFP have been performed previously ( 72 , 73 ), however, split GFP or YFP cofolding is much less efficient than Venus YFP ( 74 ). In addition, previous screens were not systematic and the resulting interactions were not further characterized, and nonspecific interactions because of spontaneous cofolding of the YFP fragments were not eliminated. This is the first time an array-based high-throughput protein complementation screen technology has been used to map interaction networks in live human cells. Some of the identified proteins did not appear to localize to the telomeres in our secondary screens. Although we cannot rule out the possibility that they are false positives, it is possible that these proteins may be targeted to telomeres under specific conditions. Furthermore, telomeric proteins travel through different cellular compartments following their synthesis and have been implicated in nontelomeric activities ( 75 , 76 ). Therefore, these proteins may have novel function outside of the telomeres. Nevertheless, the large number of newly identified and confirmed telomere interacting proteins is a testimony to the power of the screens. We believe that this technology will be an extremely valuable tool to study protein networks and signaling transduction in general, and help to relieve the bottleneck in our understanding of signaling pathways in human cells.

Our current library should detect the majority of interacting proteins within a radius of ∼20 nm. Differentiating between constitutive versus induced interactions (in response to signaling cues) can be easily achieved by our screening strategy. One limitation is the need to coexpress YFP-tagged bait and prey proteins in the same cells in order to achieve fluorescence complementation. YFP tags may alter the conformation or activity of the tagged proteins and lead to false negatives. In theory, high-affinity, direct interactions are likely to lead to higher percentage of PCA/BiFC positive cells and stronger fluorescence complementation. Although PCA/BiFC does appear to be more tolerant of differences in expression, high expression levels of bait and prey may still result in false positives. Therefore, secondary screens are needed to validate the identified interactions. The method described here may be further improved with an inducible expression system, particularly in cases where prolonged stable interactions between two proteins might be detrimental to cells. This will help to reduce the rate of false negatives as well. Our current PCA/BiFC array library contains ∼12,000 genes, approximately half of the genes in the human genome. Expanding the array library will certainly facilitate more complete interactome mapping.

Protein-protein interaction networks in human cells are much more complex than we originally anticipated ( 77 ). Our screens offer a multitude of candidates for further analysis of their potential role in telomere biology or other pathways. Over 80% of the identified proteins have been validated by secondary screens, which translates into an average of 40 binding partners for a given core telomere protein. It is unlikely that the identified ∼300 proteins bind simultaneously with the six telomeric proteins. Instead, they may form a variety of subcomplexes and associate with the six core telomeric proteins in different cellular compartments or at different times to mediate diverse biological processes. It is equally possible that some interactions are cell-type dependent or developmentally regulated. Further studies are needed to unravel how these processes contribute to the maintenance of telomere homeostasis.

Consistent with the major roles of the six telomeric proteins, the top category of biological processes scored in our screen belongs to chromatin organization, biogenesis, and telomere maintenance ( Fig. 2 C ). In this category, we found many enzymes including helicases, methyltransferases, acetyl-transferases, kinases, and phosphatases. Whether these enzymes associate with the telomeres constitutively or transiently remain to be investigated. Understanding how these enzymes are regulated and their roles in telomere capping will be an intriguing area of research in the near future. Another interesting finding from our screen is the closeness of the TRF2-RAP1 heterodimer, but not TIN2-TPP1-POT1 subcomplex, to core histone subunits. This structural organization of the telomere chromatin is consistent with the model that the TPP1-POT1 complex is primarily involved in telomere ssDNA protection, and thus positioned more distal from the histone-coated dsDNA region.

It is intriguing to find apoptosis as one of the top biological processes mediated by the Telomere Interactome. Several proteins that are involved in stress response pathways and mitochondria function were found in our screens. It is possible that telomere dysfunction may trigger stress and apoptosis signaling through these proteins. In support of this hypothesis, it has been shown that disregulation of telomeric proteins in mammalian cells renders these cells sensitive to apoptosis in both p53-dependent and independent manner ( 78 – 82 ). Our result suggests that the six telomeric proteins may have a more direct role in connecting telomere dysfunction to apoptosis.

In addition, we found a collection of E3 ligases that likely control the stability and/or function of the six core telomeric proteins. More than one E3 ligase may associate with a given telomeric protein, perhaps to respond to distinct cellular signaling cues or function in different cellular compartments. As we begin to address the relationship between ubiquitination and telomere homeostatsis, such findings offer important clues to the participants of these biological events. We demonstrate here that our arrayed screen strategy can identify regulatory components of the telomere interactome, which makes it an invaluable tool for signal transduction and mechanistic studies.
