---
pmid: '19558423'
title: 'Differential petiole growth in Arabidopsis thaliana: photocontrol and hormonal
  regulation.'
authors:
- Millenaar FF
- Van Zanten M
- Cox MCH
- Pierik R
- Voesenek LACJ
- Peeters AJM
journal: New Phytol
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8137.2009.02921.x
---

# Differential petiole growth in Arabidopsis thaliana: photocontrol and hormonal regulation.
**Authors:** Millenaar FF, Van Zanten M, Cox MCH, Pierik R, Voesenek LACJ, Peeters AJM
**Journal:** New Phytol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1469-8137.2009.02921.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8137.2009.02921.x)

## Abstract

1. New Phytol. 2009;184(1):141-152. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8137.2009.02921.x. Epub 
2009 Jun 24.

Differential petiole growth in Arabidopsis thaliana: photocontrol and hormonal 
regulation.

Millenaar FF, Van Zanten M, Cox MCH(1), Pierik R(1), Voesenek LACJ(1), Peeters 
AJM(1).

Author information:
(1)Plant Ecophysiology, Institute of Environmental Biology, Utrecht University, 
Sorbonnelaan 16, 3584 CA, Utrecht, the Netherlands.

Comment in
    Plant Signal Behav. 2009 Sep;4(9):899-901. doi: 10.4161/psb.4.9.9528.

Environmental challenges such as low light intensity induce differential 
growth-driven upward leaf movement (hyponastic growth) in Arabidopsis thaliana. 
However, little is known about the physiological regulation of this response. 
Here, we studied how low light intensity is perceived and translated into a 
differential growth response in Arabidopsis. We used mutants defective in light, 
ethylene and auxin signaling, and in polar auxin transport, as well as chemical 
inhibitors, to analyze the mechanisms of low light intensity-induced 
differential growth. Our data indicate that photosynthesis-derived signals and 
blue light wavelengths affect petiole movements and that rapid induction of 
hyponasty by low light intensity involves functional cryptochromes 1 and 2, 
phytochrome-A and phytochrome-B photoreceptor proteins. The response is 
independent of ethylene signaling. Auxin and polar auxin transport, by contrast, 
play a role in low light intensity-induced differential petiole growth. We 
conclude that low light intensity-induced differential petiole growth requires 
blue light, auxin signaling and polar auxin transport and is, at least in part, 
genetically separate from well-characterized ethylene-induced differential 
growth.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-8137.2009.02921.x
PMID: 19558423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
