---
pmid: '9878702'
title: Region-specific astrogliosis in brains of mice heterozygous for mutations in
  the neurofibromatosis type 1 (Nf1) tumor suppressor.
authors:
- Rizvi TA
- Akunuru S
- de Courten-Myers G
- Switzer RC 3rd
- Nordlund ML
- Ratner N
journal: Brain Res
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2854494
doi: 10.1016/s0006-8993(98)01133-0
---

# Region-specific astrogliosis in brains of mice heterozygous for mutations in the neurofibromatosis type 1 (Nf1) tumor suppressor.
**Authors:** Rizvi TA, Akunuru S, de Courten-Myers G, Switzer RC 3rd, Nordlund ML, Ratner N
**Journal:** Brain Res (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0006-8993(98)01133-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0006-8993(98)01133-0)
**PMC:** [PMC2854494](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2854494/)

## Abstract

1. Brain Res. 1999 Jan 16;816(1):111-23. doi: 10.1016/s0006-8993(98)01133-0.

Region-specific astrogliosis in brains of mice heterozygous for mutations in the 
neurofibromatosis type 1 (Nf1) tumor suppressor.

Rizvi TA(1), Akunuru S, de Courten-Myers G, Switzer RC 3rd, Nordlund ML, Ratner 
N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of 
Cincinnati College of Medicine, 231 Bethesda Avenue, Cincinnati, OH, 45267-0521, 
USA.

Brains from human neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) patients show increased 
expression of glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), consistent with activation 
of astrocytes (M.L. Nordlund, T.A. Rizvi, C.I. Brannan, N. Ratner, Neurofibromin 
expression and astrogliosis in neurofibromatosis (type 1) brains, J. 
Neuropathol. Exp. Neurology 54 (1995) 588-600). We analyzed brains from 
transgenic mice in which the Nf1 gene was targeted by homologous recombination. 
We show here that, in all heterozygous mice analyzed, there are increased 
numbers of astrocytes expressing high levels of GFAP in medial regions of the 
periaqueductal gray and in the nucleus accumbens. More subtle, but significant, 
changes in the number of GFAP positive astrocytes were observed in the 
hippocampus in 60% of mutant mice analyzed. Astrocytes with elevated GFAP were 
present at 1 month, 2 months, 6 months and 12 months after birth. Most brain 
regions, including the cerebellum, basal ganglia, cerebral cortex, hypothalamus, 
thalamus, cortical amygdaloid area, and white matter tracts did not show any 
gliotic changes. No evidence of degenerating neurons was found using de Olmos' 
cupric silver stain. We conclude that Nf1/nf1 mice provide a model to study 
astrogliosis associated with neurofibromatosis type 1.

Copyright 1999 Elsevier Science B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/s0006-8993(98)01133-0
PMCID: PMC2854494
PMID: 9878702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
