---
pmid: '22525402'
title: 'ß-ureidopropionase deficiency: phenotype, genotype and protein structural
  consequences in 16 patients.'
authors:
- van Kuilenburg AB
- Dobritzsch D
- Meijer J
- Krumpel M
- Selim LA
- Rashed MS
- Assmann B
- Meinsma R
- Lohkamp B
- Ito T
- Abeling NG
- Saito K
- Eto K
- Smitka M
- Engvall M
- Zhang C
- Xu W
- Zoetekouw L
- Hennekam RC
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2012.04.001
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# ß-ureidopropionase deficiency: phenotype, genotype and protein structural consequences in 16 patients.
**Authors:** van Kuilenburg AB, Dobritzsch D, Meijer J, Krumpel M, Selim LA, Rashed MS, Assmann B, Meinsma R, Lohkamp B, Ito T, Abeling NG, Saito K, Eto K, Smitka M, Engvall M, Zhang C, Xu W, Zoetekouw L, Hennekam RC
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbadis.2012.04.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbadis.2012.04.001)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Jul;1822(7):1096-108. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbadis.2012.04.001. Epub 2012 Apr 14.

ß-ureidopropionase deficiency: phenotype, genotype and protein structural 
consequences in 16 patients.

van Kuilenburg AB(1), Dobritzsch D, Meijer J, Krumpel M, Selim LA, Rashed MS, 
Assmann B, Meinsma R, Lohkamp B, Ito T, Abeling NG, Saito K, Eto K, Smitka M, 
Engvall M, Zhang C, Xu W, Zoetekouw L, Hennekam RC.

Author information:
(1)Academic Medical Center, Emma Children's Hospital, Department of Clinical 
Chemistry, Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. a.b.vanKuilenburg@amc.uva.nl

ß-ureidopropionase is the third enzyme of the pyrimidine degradation pathway and 
catalyzes the conversion of N-carbamyl-ß-alanine and 
N-carbamyl-ß-aminoisobutyric acid to ß-alanine and ß-aminoisobutyric acid, 
ammonia and CO(2). To date, only five genetically confirmed patients with a 
complete ß-ureidopropionase deficiency have been reported. Here, we report on 
the clinical, biochemical and molecular findings of 11 newly identified 
ß-ureidopropionase deficient patients as well as the analysis of the mutations 
in a three-dimensional framework. Patients presented mainly with neurological 
abnormalities (intellectual disabilities, seizures, abnormal tonus regulation, 
microcephaly, and malformations on neuro-imaging) and markedly elevated levels 
of N-carbamyl-ß-alanine and N-carbamyl-ß-aminoisobutyric acid in urine and 
plasma. Analysis of UPB1, encoding ß-ureidopropionase, showed 6 novel missense 
mutations and one novel splice-site mutation. Heterologous expression of the 6 
mutant enzymes in Escherichia coli showed that all mutations yielded mutant 
ß-ureidopropionase proteins with significantly decreased activity. Analysis of a 
homology model of human ß-ureidopropionase generated using the crystal structure 
of the enzyme from Drosophila melanogaster indicated that the point mutations 
p.G235R, p.R236W and p.S264R lead to amino acid exchanges in the active site and 
therefore affect substrate binding and catalysis. The mutations L13S, R326Q and 
T359M resulted most likely in folding defects and oligomer assembly impairment. 
Two mutations were identified in several unrelated ß-ureidopropionase patients, 
indicating that ß-ureidopropionase deficiency may be more common than 
anticipated.

© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2012.04.001
PMID: 22525402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
