---
pmid: '40088780'
title: TOR1AIP2 as a candidate gene for dystonia-hemichorea/hemiballism.
authors:
- Kafantari E
- Hernandez VJ
- Necpál J
- Leonidou M
- Baureder R
- Hedberg-Oldfors C
- Jech R
- Zech M
- Schwartz TU
- Puschmann A
journal: Parkinsonism Relat Disord
year: '2025'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2025.107781
---

# TOR1AIP2 as a candidate gene for dystonia-hemichorea/hemiballism.
**Authors:** Kafantari E, Hernandez VJ, Necpál J, Leonidou M, Baureder R, Hedberg-Oldfors C, Jech R, Zech M, Schwartz TU, Puschmann A
**Journal:** Parkinsonism Relat Disord (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.parkreldis.2025.107781](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.parkreldis.2025.107781)

## Abstract

1. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2025 May;134:107781. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2025.107781. Epub 2025 Mar 11.

TOR1AIP2 as a candidate gene for dystonia-hemichorea/hemiballism.

Kafantari E(1), Hernandez VJ(2), Necpál J(3), Leonidou M(4), Baureder R(5), 
Hedberg-Oldfors C(6), Jech R(7), Zech M(8), Schwartz TU(2), Puschmann A(9).

Author information:
(1)Lund University, Skåne University Hospital, Department of Clinical Sciences 
Lund, Neurology, Lund, Sweden. Electronic address: Efthymia.Kafantari@med.lu.se.
(2)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 
USA.
(3)2nd Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, Comenius University, 
Bratislava, Slovakia; Department of Neurology, Zvolen Hospital, Zvolen, 
Slovakia.
(4)Lund University, Skåne University Hospital, Department of Clinical Sciences 
Lund, Neurology, Lund, Sweden.
(5)Lund University, Skåne University Hospital, Department of Clinical Sciences 
Lund, Clinical Neurophysiology, Lund, Sweden.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Institute of Biomedicine, Sahlgrenska 
Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(7)Department of Neurology, Charles University in Prague, 1st Faculty of 
Medicine and General University Hospital in Prague, 121 08, Prague, Czech 
Republic.
(8)Institute of Neurogenomics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, Germany; 
Institute of Human Genetics, School of Medicine, Technical University of Munich, 
Munich, Germany; Institute of Advanced Study, Technical University of Munich, 
Garching, Germany.
(9)Lund University, Skåne University Hospital, Department of Clinical Sciences 
Lund, Neurology, Lund, Sweden; SciLifeLab National Research Infrastructure, 
Sweden.

Dystonia is a movement disorder characterized by genetic and clinical 
heterogeneity. A recurring p.(Glu303del)-deletion in TOR1A is a well-established 
cause for DYT-TOR1A (DYT1), an autosomal dominant early-onset isolated dystonia. 
TOR1A encodes TorsinA, an AAA + ATPase located in the nuclear envelope. By whole 
exome analyses of a family with a novel dystonia-hemichorea-/hemiballism 
phenotype, we identified a TOR1AIP2 NM_001199260.2 c.1234A > G p.(Arg412Gly) 
variant. The variant is very rare in databases and was absent from whole exome 
data from >1000 dystonia patients. TOR1AIP2 encodes LULL1, a transmembrane 
protein that activates TorsinA, and correct interaction between TorsinA and 
LULL1 is essential for proper nuclear envelope architecture. The p.(Arg412Gly) 
variant disrupts the binding interface between TorsinA and LULL1 around 
p.Arg412; this same interface is also impaired in DYT1. Functional analyses via 
a co-purification assay revealed that interaction between TorsinA-LULL1Arg412Gly 
is weaker than the wild-type interaction, and that it resembles the situation in 
DYT1 (TorsinAΔE303-LULL1). A second family with milder dystonia, hemichorea, and 
stereotypic leg flexion during gait and a TOR1AIP2 p.(Gln338His) variant was 
identified. The clinical phenotype of both families shared proximal arm 
movements, and flutter in facial musculature. Expressivity of the movement 
disorder symptoms was variable. Several proteins in the nuclear envelope have 
been implicated in various forms of neurodevelopmental disorders with dystonia. 
Taken together, our findings suggest TOR1AIP2 as a new candidate gene implicated 
in a complex hereditary movement disorder with dystonia and 
hemichorea/hemiballism.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2025.107781
PMID: 40088780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests:Co-author is member of the Editorial 
Board of Parkinsonism and Related Disorders - M.Z. Co-author was Associate 
Editor for Parkinsonism and Related Disorders until Dec 2023 - A.P.If there are 
other authors, they declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the 
work reported in this paper.
