---
pmid: '17965274'
title: MPB2C, a microtubule-associated protein, regulates non-cell-autonomy of the
  homeodomain protein KNOTTED1.
authors:
- Winter N
- Kollwig G
- Zhang S
- Kragler F
journal: Plant Cell
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2174720
doi: 10.1105/tpc.107.044354
---

# MPB2C, a microtubule-associated protein, regulates non-cell-autonomy of the homeodomain protein KNOTTED1.
**Authors:** Winter N, Kollwig G, Zhang S, Kragler F
**Journal:** Plant Cell (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1105/tpc.107.044354](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.107.044354)
**PMC:** [PMC2174720](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2174720/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell. 2007 Oct;19(10):3001-18. doi: 10.1105/tpc.107.044354. Epub 2007
Oct  26.

MPB2C, a microtubule-associated protein, regulates non-cell-autonomy of the 
homeodomain protein KNOTTED1.

Winter N(1), Kollwig G, Zhang S, Kragler F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Viena, Viena A-1030, Austria.

Plasmodesmata establish a pathway for the intercellular trafficking of viral 
movement proteins and endogenous non-cell-autonomous proteins, such as the two 
closely related meristem-maintaining KNOTTED1-like homeobox (KNOX) proteins Zea 
mays KNOTTED1 (KN1) and Arabidopsis thaliana SHOOTMERISTEMLESS (STM). KNOX 
family members are DNA binding proteins that regulate the transcriptional 
activity of target genes in conjunction with BEL1-like homeodomain proteins. It 
has been shown previously, using in vivo transport assays, that the C-terminal 
domain of KN1, including the homeodomain, is necessary and sufficient for 
cell-to-cell transport through plasmodesmata. Here, using interaction and 
coexpression assays, we demonstrate that the microtubule-associated and viral 
movement protein binding protein MPB2C from Nicotiana tabacum, and its homolog 
in Arabidopsis, At MPB2C, are KN1/STM binding factors. Interaction between the 
MPB2C proteins and KN1/STM was mapped to the KN1 homeodomain, a region not 
essential for heterodimerization with BEL1. Expression of MPB2C in single cells 
prevented KN1 cell-to-cell movement. Furthermore, in vivo trichome rescue 
studies established that MPB2C negatively regulates KN1 association to 
plasmodesmata and, consequently, cell-to-cell transport. These findings are 
discussed in terms of the role played by MPB2C proteins in regulating the 
cell-to-cell trafficking of homeodomain proteins in plants.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.107.044354
PMCID: PMC2174720
PMID: 17965274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Plasmodesmata establish a pathway for the intercellular trafficking of viral movement proteins and endogenous non-cell-autonomous proteins, such as the two closely related meristem-maintaining KNOTTED1-like homeobox (KNOX) proteins Zea mays KNOTTED1 (KN1) and Arabidopsis thaliana SHOOTMERISTEMLESS (STM). KNOX family members are DNA binding proteins that regulate the transcriptional activity of target genes in conjunction with BEL1-like homeodomain proteins. It has been shown previously, using in vivo transport assays, that the C-terminal domain of KN1, including the homeodomain, is necessary and sufficient for cell-to-cell transport through plasmodesmata. Here, using interaction and coexpression assays, we demonstrate that the microtubule-associated and viral movement protein binding protein MPB2C from Nicotiana tabacum , and its homolog in Arabidopsis , At MPB2C, are KN1/STM binding factors. Interaction between the MPB2C proteins and KN1/STM was mapped to the KN1 homeodomain, a region not essential for heterodimerization with BEL1. Expression of MPB2C in single cells prevented KN1 cell-to-cell movement. Furthermore, in vivo trichome rescue studies established that MPB2C negatively regulates KN1 association to plasmodesmata and, consequently, cell-to-cell transport. These findings are discussed in terms of the role played by MPB2C proteins in regulating the cell-to-cell trafficking of homeodomain proteins in plants.

INTRODUCTION

In plants, cell fate is generally determined through positional information. Exchange of non-cell-autonomous signals may provide the means by which cells assume their fate in relation to surrounding tissues. To this end, information molecules may cross the plasma membranes via secretion/internalization or follow a symplasmic route via plasmodesmata (PD). Cell-to-cell trafficking of macromolecules, such as RNA-protein complexes, is thought to occur through PD. Numerous studies on viral movement proteins (MPs) as well as endogenous plant proteins have provided direct evidence for the involvement of a PD-based non-cell-autonomous protein (NCAP) signaling pathway ( Haywood et al., 2002 ; Lucas and Lee, 2004 ; Ruiz-Medrano et al., 2004 ).

An important class of NCAPs is represented by the KNOTTED1-like homeobox (KNOX) proteins that play key roles in meristems, including KNOTTED1 (KN1) in maize ( Zea mays ) ( Lucas et al., 1995 ) and SHOOTMERISTEMLESS (STM) and KNAT1/BREVIPEDICELLUS (BP) in Arabidopsis thaliana ( Kim et al., 2003 , 2005b ). These KN1-like transcription factors have a highly conserved structure, insofar as they contain KNOX, ELK, and homeodomain (HD) motifs, are expressed in shoot meristems, and are required to maintain cells in an undifferentiated state ( Vollbrecht et al., 1991 ; Lincoln et al., 1994 ; Long et al., 1996 ; Venglat et al., 2002 ). Ectopic expression of STM, BP, or KN1 in Arabidopsis results in the formation of lobed leaves, irregular vein patterns, and ectopic meristem-like structures ( Lincoln et al., 1994 ; Chuck et al., 1996 ; Byrne et al., 2000 ; Hibara et al., 2003 ).

The cell-to-cell movement capacity of a subclass of KNOX proteins was confirmed, in vivo, in Arabidopsis leaves and shoot apices ( Kim et al., 2002 , 2003 , 2005b ). An ingenious trichome rescue assay, developed by Kim et al. (2005b) , provided independent proof that KN1 functions as an NCAP. In that study, subepidermal expression of a GLABROUS1-KN1 fusion protein in a trichome-deficient glabra1 ( gl1 ) background line restored trichome development in the epidermal layer. This trichome rescue system confirmed the capacity of KN1 to mediate cell-to-cell trafficking of its mRNA and showed that the HD motif is necessary for NCAP function.

KNOX proteins have been found to interact with a number of other proteins. The KNOX motif is necessary for the formation of heterodimeric complexes with BEL1-like HD (BLH) proteins ( Bellaoui et al., 2001 ; Muller et al., 2001 ), and, depending on their composition, KNOX-BLH heterodimers recognize specific DNA motifs ( Bellaoui et al., 2001 ; Muller et al., 2001 ; Nagasaki et al., 2001 ; Smith et al., 2002 ; Chen et al., 2003 , 2004 ; Bhatt et al., 2004 ). In general, as with the animal homologs of KNOX and BLH proteins, it is thought that the HD motif mediates binding to promoter sequences of genes that affect cell fate ( Smith et al., 2002 ). Binding of BLH family members to STM occurs independently of the BLH HD motif and appears to trigger the nuclear import of STM ( Cole et al., 2006 ).

Other KNOX-interacting partners are found among members of the Arabidopsis OVATE family proteins (At OFPs). In transient expression assays, At OFP1–green fluorescent protein (GFP) colocalizes with BP or BLH1 to form punctate structures along microtubules as well as at the cell periphery ( Hackbusch et al., 2005 ). Thus, At OFP members may be involved in localizing HD proteins to the cytoskeleton. Interestingly, the punctate structures formed by OFP-GFP at the microtubules are very similar to those detected with the structurally unrelated microtubule-associated protein MPB2C ( Kragler et al., 2003 ).

Microinjection experiments have established that maize KN1 has the capacity to interact with PD to increase the size exclusion limit (SEL) and mediate its cell-to-cell trafficking as well as that of its own mRNA ( Lucas et al., 1995 ; Kragler et al., 2000 ). Most viruses encode specialized MPs that have the capacity to interact with host proteins to regulate their intercellular transport through PD, and such microinjection studies provided direct evidence in support of the hypothesis that KN1 and tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) MP utilize common components of the NCAP pathway ( Kragler et al., 1998b , 2000 ).

There is evidence that the regulation of movement of the TMV MP-RNA complex into neighboring cells depends on the interactions of TMV MP with endogenous proteins such as the NON-CELL-AUTONOMOUS PATHWAY PROTEIN1 (NCAPP1) ( Lee et al., 2003 ), PD-located casein kinases ( Lee et al., 2005 ), cell wall–modifying enzymes such as pectin methyl esterase ( Chen et al., 2000 ), or the Ca 2+ -sequestering protein calreticulin ( Chen et al., 2005 ). Furthermore, within plant cells, the TMV MP association with microfilaments and microtubules appears to regulate the access of the TMV MP-RNA complex to the PD pathway ( Heinlein et al., 1995 ; McLean et al., 1995 ; Boyko et al., 2000 , 2007 ; Gillespie et al., 2002 ; Nelson and Citovsky, 2005 ; Wright et al., 2007 ).

Insight into the mechanism by which microtubules may negatively regulate TMV MP movement has been gained through the identification of MPB2C, an endogenous protein in Nicotiana tabacum that interacts with the TMV MP. In situ labeling experiments demonstrated that MPB2C localizes to microtubules, and transient expression assays revealed that it inhibits the cell-to-cell movement of TMV MP ( Kragler et al., 2003 ). In transiently MPB2C-silenced Nicotiana benthamiana plants, the TMV MP association with microtubules was reduced; however, the protein was still transported from cell to cell ( Curin et al., 2007 ). In addition, plants appear to regulate the levels of TMV MP by targeting it to the ubiquitin-dependent 26S proteasome degradation pathway ( Reichel and Beachy, 2000 ).

In this study, we further explored the events underlying KN1 cell-to-cell trafficking by testing the capacity of KN1 to interact with MPB2C. Our studies revealed that MPB2C can interact with KN1 and STM but not with BEL1. MPB2C binding was mapped to the HD motif shown to be essential for the cell-to-cell movement of KN1. Movement assays provided evidence that MPB2C functions in vivo as a negative regulator of KN1 cell-to-cell movement activity. Based on these findings, we advance the hypothesis that plants use a common pathway involving MPB2C to regulate the entry of viral MPs and HD proteins into the NCAP pathway.

DISCUSSION

Intercellular trafficking of HD transcription factors, such as KN1, STM, and KNAT1, is likely to act as an important developmental signal in plants. HD protein trafficking is thought to occur via PD and should be under strict control to ensure the proper separation of differentiation domains. Developmental modifications in PD are known to affect free GFP diffusion and to regulate selective KN1 transport ( Itaya et al., 1998 ; Oparka et al., 1999 ; Kim et al., 2002 , 2003 , 2005a , 2005b ). However, almost nothing is known about the potential PD transport regulators suggested to exist for KN1 or STM. Here, we show that MPB2C is an RNA and HD motif binding protein that functions as a component in the regulation of KN1 trafficking.
