---
pmid: '11294867'
title: Activation and functional characterization of the mosaic receptor SorLA/LR11.
authors:
- Jacobsen L
- Madsen P
- Jacobsen C
- Nielsen MS
- Gliemann J
- Petersen CM
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M100857200
---

# Activation and functional characterization of the mosaic receptor SorLA/LR11.
**Authors:** Jacobsen L, Madsen P, Jacobsen C, Nielsen MS, Gliemann J, Petersen CM
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M100857200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M100857200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 22;276(25):22788-96. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M100857200. Epub 
2001 Apr 9.

Activation and functional characterization of the mosaic receptor SorLA/LR11.

Jacobsen L(1), Madsen P, Jacobsen C, Nielsen MS, Gliemann J, Petersen CM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, University of Aarhus, DK-8000, Aarhus C, 
Denmark.

We previously isolated and sequenced the approximately 250-kDa type 1 receptor 
sorLA/LR11, a mosaic protein with elements characterizing the Vps10p domain 
receptor family as well as the low density lipoprotein receptor family. The N 
terminus of the Vps10p domain comprises a consensus sequence for cleavage by 
furin ((50)RRKR(53)) that precedes a truncation found in sorLA isolated from 
human brain. Here we show that sorLA, like sortilin-1/neurotensin receptor-3, 
whose lumenal domain consists of a Vps10p domain only, is synthesized as a 
proreceptor that is cleaved by furin in late Golgi compartments. We show that 
the truncation conditions the Vps10p domain for propeptide inhibitable binding 
of neuropeptides and the receptor-associated protein. We further demonstrate 
that avid binding of the receptor-associated protein, apolipoprotein E, and 
lipoprotein lipase not inhibited by propeptide occurs to sites located in other 
lumenal domains. In transfected cells, about 10% of full-length sorLA were 
expressed on the cell surface capable of mediating endocytosis. However, the 
major pool of receptors was found in late Golgi compartments, suggesting 
possible interaction with newly synthesized ligands. The results show that 
sorLA, following activation by truncation, binds multiple ligands and may 
mediate both endocytosis and sorting.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M100857200
PMID: 11294867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
