---
pmid: '14729820'
title: Mutant NDUFS3 subunit of mitochondrial complex I causes Leigh syndrome.
authors:
- Bénit P
- Slama A
- Cartault F
- Giurgea I
- Chretien D
- Lebon S
- Marsac C
- Munnich A
- Rötig A
- Rustin P
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1757256
doi: 10.1136/jmg.2003.014316
---

# Mutant NDUFS3 subunit of mitochondrial complex I causes Leigh syndrome.
**Authors:** Bénit P, Slama A, Cartault F, Giurgea I, Chretien D, Lebon S, Marsac C, Munnich A, Rötig A, Rustin P
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.2003.014316](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.2003.014316)
**PMC:** [PMC1757256](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1757256/)

## Abstract

1. J Med Genet. 2004 Jan;41(1):14-7. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2003.014316.

Mutant NDUFS3 subunit of mitochondrial complex I causes Leigh syndrome.

Bénit P(1), Slama A, Cartault F, Giurgea I, Chretien D, Lebon S, Marsac C, 
Munnich A, Rötig A, Rustin P.

Author information:
(1)Unité de Recherche sur les Handicaps Génétiques de l'Enfant (INSERM U393) and 
Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris Cedex 15, 
France.

Respiratory chain complex I deficiency represents a genetically heterogeneous 
group of diseases resulting from mutations in mitochondrial or nuclear genes. 
Mutations have been reported in 13 of the 14 subunits encoding the core of 
complex I (seven mitochondrial and six nuclear genes) and these result in Leigh 
or Leigh-like syndromes or cardiomyopathy. In this study, a combination of 
denaturing high performance liquid chromatography and sequence analysis was used 
to study the NDUFS3 gene in a series of complex I deficient patients. Mutations 
found in this gene (NADH dehydrogenase iron-sulphur protein 3), coding for the 
seventh and last subunit of complex I core, were shown to cause late onset Leigh 
syndrome, optic atrophy, and complex I deficiency. A biochemical diagnosis of 
complex I deficiency on cultured amniocytes from a later pregnancy was confirmed 
through the identification of disease causing NDUFS3 mutations in these cells. 
While mutations in the NDUFS3 gene thus result in Leigh syndrome, a dissimilar 
clinical phenotype is observed in mutations in the NDUFV2 and NDUFS2 genes, 
resulting in encephalomyopathy and cardiomyopathy. The reasons for these 
differences are uncertain.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2003.014316
PMCID: PMC1757256
PMID: 14729820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
