---
pmid: '12796307'
title: Genetic interactions of the E3 ubiquitin ligase component FbxA with cyclic
  AMP metabolism and a histidine kinase signaling pathway during Dictyostelium discoideum
  development.
authors:
- Tekinay T
- Ennis HL
- Wu MY
- Nelson M
- Kessin RH
- Ratner DI
journal: Eukaryot Cell
year: '2003'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC161463
doi: 10.1128/EC.2.3.618-626.2003
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Genetic interactions of the E3 ubiquitin ligase component FbxA with cyclic AMP metabolism and a histidine kinase signaling pathway during Dictyostelium discoideum development.
**Authors:** Tekinay T, Ennis HL, Wu MY, Nelson M, Kessin RH, Ratner DI
**Journal:** Eukaryot Cell (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1128/EC.2.3.618-626.2003](https://doi.org/10.1128/EC.2.3.618-626.2003)
**PMC:** [PMC161463](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC161463/)

## Abstract

1. Eukaryot Cell. 2003 Jun;2(3):618-26. doi: 10.1128/EC.2.3.618-626.2003.

Genetic interactions of the E3 ubiquitin ligase component FbxA with cyclic AMP 
metabolism and a histidine kinase signaling pathway during Dictyostelium 
discoideum development.

Tekinay T(1), Ennis HL, Wu MY, Nelson M, Kessin RH, Ratner DI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Columbia University, New York, New 
York 10032, USA.

Dictyostelium discoideum amoebae with an altered fbxA gene, which is thought to 
encode a component of an SCF E3 ubiquitin ligase, have defective regulation of 
cell type proportionality. In chimeras with wild-type cells, the mutant amoebae 
form mainly spores, leaving the construction of stalks to wild-type cells. To 
examine the role of fbxA and regulated proteolysis, we have recovered the 
promoter of fbxA and shown that it is expressed in a pattern resembling that of 
a prestalk-specific gene until late in development, when it is also expressed in 
developing spore cells. Because fbxA cells are developmentally deficient in pure 
culture, we were able to select suppressor mutations that promote sporulation of 
the original mutant. One suppressor mutation resides within the gene regA, which 
encodes a cyclic AMP (cAMP) phosphodiesterase linked to an activating response 
regulator domain. In another suppressor, there has been a disruption of dhkA, a 
gene encoding a two-component histidine kinase known to influence Dictyostelium 
development. RegA appears precociously and in greater amounts in the fbxA mutant 
than in the wild type, but in an fbxA/dhkA double mutant, RegA is restored to 
wild-type levels. Because the basis of regA suppression might involve 
alterations in cAMP levels during development, the concentrations of cAMP in all 
strains were determined. The levels of cAMP are relatively constant during 
multicellular development in all strains except the dhkA mutant, in which it is 
reduced at least sixfold. The level of cAMP in the double mutant dhkA/fbxA is 
relatively normal. The levels of cAMP in the various mutants do not correlate 
with spore formation, as would be expected on the basis of our present 
understanding of the signaling pathway leading to the induction of spores. 
Altered amounts of RegA and cAMP early in the development of the mutants suggest 
that both fbxA and dhkA genes act earlier than previously thought.

DOI: 10.1128/EC.2.3.618-626.2003
PMCID: PMC161463
PMID: 12796307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Dictyostelium discoideum amoebae with an altered fbxA gene, which is thought to encode a component of an SCF E3 ubiquitin ligase, have defective regulation of cell type proportionality. In chimeras with wild-type cells, the mutant amoebae form mainly spores, leaving the construction of stalks to wild-type cells. To examine the role of fbxA and regulated proteolysis, we have recovered the promoter of fbxA and shown that it is expressed in a pattern resembling that of a prestalk-specific gene until late in development, when it is also expressed in developing spore cells. Because fbxA cells are developmentally deficient in pure culture, we were able to select suppressor mutations that promote sporulation of the original mutant. One suppressor mutation resides within the gene regA , which encodes a cyclic AMP (cAMP) phosphodiesterase linked to an activating response regulator domain. In another suppressor, there has been a disruption of dhkA , a gene encoding a two-component histidine kinase known to influence Dictyostelium development. RegA appears precociously and in greater amounts in the fbxA mutant than in the wild type, but in an fbx A/ dhk A double mutant, RegA is restored to wild-type levels. Because the basis of regA suppression might involve alterations in cAMP levels during development, the concentrations of cAMP in all strains were determined. The levels of cAMP are relatively constant during multicellular development in all strains except the dhkA mutant, in which it is reduced at least sixfold. The level of cAMP in the double mutant dhkA/fbxA is relatively normal. The levels of cAMP in the various mutants do not correlate with spore formation, as would be expected on the basis of our present understanding of the signaling pathway leading to the induction of spores. Altered amounts of RegA and cAMP early in the development of the mutants suggest that both fbxA and dhkA genes act earlier than previously thought.

DISCUSSION

The fbxA mutation has pronounced effects on cell type proportioning and on cell fate choice in chimeras with wild-type cells ( 12 ). The cloned fbxA promoter rescued both the morphological phenotype and spore-forming capacity of the original mutant better than the actin or ecmA promoters. Nelson et al., using in situ hybridization, showed that fbxA mRNA accumulated in the prestalk cells of slugs ( 25 ); in agreement, we found GFP accumulation predominantly in the prestalk compartment throughout development. However, late in development, when spores have undergone encapsulation, they too expressed GFP, perhaps because of a role of cAMP in spore encapsulation.

The effects of loss of FbxA on cell proportioning and cell fate suggest that the protein is active by the time of mound formation, when amoebae undergo their initial differentiation into prespore and prestalk cells. Our Western blot experiments revealed the accumulation of FbxA protein by 4 h of development, and other results here argue for even earlier expression: the cAMP phosphodiesterase RegA accumulates to high levels in the fbxA background, and this accumulation can be seen even in vegetative amoebae. It follows that FbxA itself must be active in wild-type vegetative cells so that its elimination can result in the RegA excess.

Expression of the FbxA protein may occur at low levels in cells other than prestalk cells. This may explain the developmental advantage which fbxA amoebae exhibit when mixed with wild-type cells ( 12 ). If prespore cells did not normally express the FbxA protein, mutating them should make no difference. Since fbxA prespore cells affect their wild-type neighbors in chimeras, there must be some expression of FbxA. This may be at levels too low to be detected by Western blotting or by expression of GFP from the isolated promoter at the time of establishment of the cell type proportions.

Mutations in genes regA and dhkA were selected by their ability to suppress the spore-forming defect of fbxA cells, and both suppressors also rescued substantially the culmination deficiency of the fbxA strain. RegA is a target of SCF-mediated degradation, as shown by Mohanty et al. ( 23 ). RegA has two important domains, a response regulator region and a cAMP phosphodiesterase domain. The site of integration of the disrupting plasmid in the regA suppressor was at nucleotide 686 in the response regulator domain. The second suppressor, DhkA, is a receptor histidine kinase. The DhkA molecule has several domains including a CHASE domain, which was identified as a receptor for plant cytokinins, and a histidine kinase domain ( 4 ). The disrupting plasmid inserted at nucleotide 5799 of the coding sequence, which is at the 3′ side of the coding sequence for the histidine kinase domain (see references 4 and 24 for reviews of the domain structure of DhkA and similar molecules). The fact that mutation of dhkA suppresses a mutation in fbxA (which in turn regulates RegA) provides a connection from the cell surface to the cAMP regulatory apparatus of the cell ( 37 , 39 ).

FbxA is an F-box protein component of an SCF ubiquitin ligase complex, and such complexes target proteins for degradation by proteasomes. We found RegA expression to be turned on dramatically at about 12 h in development of wild-type amoebae, although the protein is present at low levels throughout the process (see also reference 39 ). The level of RegA in the fbxA mutant is high, a finding that is consistent with RegA being the target for degradation by the FbxA-SCF complex ( 23 ). RegA also appears earlier in development in this mutant than in the wild type, suggesting that RegA levels are normally kept low very early in development, and even in vegetative amoebae, through SCF-mediated proteolysis. RegA levels appear to be depressed in the presence of the dhkA mutation, as seen either by comparing the dhkA mutant to the wild type or by comparing the fbxA/dhkA strain to the fbxA strain.

RegA is itself a regulated molecule, controlled by degradation but also by phosphorylation through a two-component histidine kinase-signaling pathway ( 37 , 39 ). Since dhkA mutants, like regA mutants, suppress the effect of the fbxA mutation, this observation might be explained by a mechanism whereby DhkA activates RegA. Thus, in the absence of FbxA, RegA levels would be high and that of cAMP would be low, but since RegA's cAMP phosphodiesterase activity could depend on DhkA, eliminating DhkA would allow cAMP accumulation and restore development. Such a model is consistent with that proposed by Thomason et al. ( 38 ) but not that of Wang et al., who suggest that DhkA inhibits the phosphodiesterase activity of RegA ( 42 ). Perhaps the effect of the dhkA mutation on RegA at early developmental times differs from that at late development times, in response to changes in other (unknown) signaling components. Alternatively, as various two-component histidine kinases also function, under particular circumstances, as protein phosphatases, RegA may be activated by another histidine kinase, and yet DhkA could counter that effect.

Studies of dhk A indicate that it is important at late stages of development, when the prespore cells encapsulate. A small peptide called SDF2 has been proposed as its ligand ( 5 , 42 ). However, the fbxA gene acts much earlier (see above), and thus the corrective effects of dhkA mutation are likely to as well. In particular, the dhkA mutation suppresses the overaccumulation of RegA in the fbxA background at all times for which we have data, including data as early as after 0, 4, and 8 h of development. DhkA must be active (at least in the fbxA mutant background, but probably in wild-type cells also) at these early times.

The identification of regA and dhkA as the two suppressors of fbxA focused our attention on the developmental levels of cAMP in those strains. cAMP has long been recognized as a key controlling metabolite during Dictyostelium development: cAMP mediates many of the transitional steps in development, beginning with the transition from growth to development, which also depends on activation of PKA ( 34 ). Several hours later, secreted cAMP mediates aggregation, while intracellular cAMP increases are essential for the activation of new genes during the aggregation, mound, and culmination stages (for a review see reference 16 ). The encapsulation of the spores at the end of development will not proceed without a surge of intracellular cAMP ( 14 , 38 ). Finally, the dormancy of spores appears to depend on high levels of intracellular cAMP ( 41 ). In contrast, cAMP is not necessary for the trophic phase of Dictyostelium 's life cycle; adenylyl cyclase mutants grow well ( 26 ).

The importance of the recurrent activation of PKA during Dictyostelium development is evident from the properties of rapid-development mutants ( rde ). These mutants produce spores in a much shorter time than the wild type does, but at the expense of proper morphogenesis ( 1 , 6 , 9 , 15 , 33 , 40 ). cAMP metabolism in most such mutants is affected. Mutations of the cAMP phosphodiesterase RegA or of a phosphotransfer protein called RdeA (which acts on RegA) all serve to drive up cAMP levels under particular circumstances to activate PKA and to accelerate the developmental program. Overexpression of the PKA catalytic subunit has a similar effect. Ax2 cells transformed with an actin-15-driven version of fbxA , selected at 100 μg of G-418/ml, proceed through development more rapidly than wild-type Ax2 cells ( 25 ; our unpublished observations). This is consistent with excessive degradation of the cAMP phosphodiesterase RegA and a consequent rise in intracellular cAMP.

The levels of intracellular cAMP that we found during the development of the fbxA , regA , and dhkA mutants are unexpected in light of the above considerations. Wild-type cells exhibited relatively constant levels of cAMP between 8 and 17 h of development. To our surprise, cAMP amounts were little changed from amounts in the wild type in either the regA null mutant or the fbxA null mutant (in which RegA accumulates to excess). The dhkA mutation does diminish cAMP levels, levels that are mostly restored to normal in the fbxA/dhkA double mutant.

The lack of effect of RegA mutations on cAMP levels can be explained in several ways. RegA is expressed predominantly by prestalk cells (roughly 20% of the total slug cell population) as shown previously ( 28 ). If so, changes in its phosphodiesterase activity might not influence the overall amount of cAMP that we measured. If RegA were to affect the rapid and fleeting rise of intracellular cAMP in response to an external cAMP pulse (as in aggregation), we would have missed this temporal effect. cAMP levels may be subject to regulation by phosphodiesterases other than RegA: a cAMP/cGMP activity, PdeE, has recently been described ( 8 ).

The effect of dhkA mutation on cAMP levels is noteworthy. cAMP levels are severalfold lower than wild-type levels throughout development of the dhkA mutant, even at a time (8 h) before the mutation has greatly affected overall morphology. Elimination of FbxA in addition to DhkA appreciably restores cAMP levels. Consonant with the effects on cAMP, the fbxA/dhkA double mutant sporulates 3- to 10-fold better than does the dhkA mutant and has improved terminal developmental morphology. The downstream target(s) or effector(s) of DhkA is not known, but the enzyme could affect adenylyl cyclases ( 7 , 17 ) or phosphodiesterases ( 7 ).

The present results define a new prestalk promoter, suggest an earlier time for dhkA activity than previously thought, connect this receptor histidine kinase to FbxA and RegA, and, most strikingly, show a dramatic dependence of cAMP accumulation on DhkA.
