---
pmid: '29187380'
title: Nbeal2 interacts with Dock7, Sec16a, and Vac14.
authors:
- Mayer L
- Jasztal M
- Pardo M
- Aguera de Haro S
- Collins J
- Bariana TK
- Smethurst PA
- Grassi L
- Petersen R
- Nurden P
- Favier R
- Yu L
- Meacham S
- Astle WJ
- Choudhary J
- Yue WW
- Ouwehand WH
- Guerrero JA
journal: Blood
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5877783
doi: 10.1182/blood-2017-08-800359
---

# Nbeal2 interacts with Dock7, Sec16a, and Vac14.
**Authors:** Mayer L, Jasztal M, Pardo M, Aguera de Haro S, Collins J, Bariana TK, Smethurst PA, Grassi L, Petersen R, Nurden P, Favier R, Yu L, Meacham S, Astle WJ, Choudhary J, Yue WW, Ouwehand WH, Guerrero JA
**Journal:** Blood (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2017-08-800359](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2017-08-800359)
**PMC:** [PMC5877783](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5877783/)

## Abstract

1. Blood. 2018 Mar 1;131(9):1000-1011. doi: 10.1182/blood-2017-08-800359. Epub
2017  Nov 29.

Nbeal2 interacts with Dock7, Sec16a, and Vac14.

Mayer L(1)(2), Jasztal M(1)(2), Pardo M(3), Aguera de Haro S(1)(2), Collins 
J(1)(2)(4), Bariana TK(1)(5)(6), Smethurst PA(1)(2), Grassi L(1)(2), Petersen 
R(1)(2), Nurden P(7), Favier R(8)(9), Yu L(3), Meacham S(1)(2), Astle WJ(10), 
Choudhary J(3), Yue WW(11), Ouwehand WH(1)(2)(3), Guerrero JA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom.
(2)National Health Service Blood and Transplant, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(3)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Haematology, Barts Health National Health Service Trust, 
London, United Kingdom.
(5)Katharine Dormandy Haemophilia Centre and Thrombosis Unit, Royal Free London 
NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Haematology, University College London Cancer Institute, 
London, United Kingdom.
(7)Institut Hospitalo-Universitaire L'Institut de Rythmologie et Modelisation 
Cardiaque, Hopital Xavier Arnozan, Pessac, France.
(8)Département d'Hématologie, Assistance-Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Centre de 
Référence des Pathologies Plaquettaires, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, 
France.
(9)INSERM, Villejuif, France.
(10)Cardiovascular Epidemiology Unit of the Medical Research Council/British 
Heart Foundation, Department of Public Health and Primary Care, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom; and.
(11)Structural Genomics Consortium, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Blood. 2018 Mar 1;131(9):949-950. doi: 10.1182/blood-2017-12-820274.

Mutations in NBEAL2, the gene encoding the scaffolding protein Nbeal2, are 
causal of gray platelet syndrome (GPS), a rare recessive bleeding disorder 
characterized by platelets lacking α-granules and progressive marrow fibrosis. 
We present here the interactome of Nbeal2 with additional validation by reverse 
immunoprecipitation of Dock7, Sec16a, and Vac14 as interactors of Nbeal2. We 
show that GPS-causing mutations in its BEACH domain have profound and possible 
effects on the interaction with Dock7 and Vac14, respectively. Proximity 
ligation assays show that these 2 proteins are physically proximal to Nbeal2 in 
human megakaryocytes. In addition, we demonstrate that Nbeal2 is primarily 
localized in the cytoplasm and Dock7 on the membrane of or in α-granules. 
Interestingly, platelets from GPS cases and Nbeal2-/- mice are almost devoid of 
Dock7, resulting in a profound dysregulation of its signaling pathway, leading 
to defective actin polymerization, platelet activation, and shape change. This 
study shows for the first time proteins interacting with Nbeal2 and points to 
the dysregulation of the canonical signaling pathway of Dock7 as a possible 
cause of the aberrant formation of platelets in GPS cases and Nbeal2-deficient 
mice.

© 2018 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2017-08-800359
PMCID: PMC5877783
PMID: 29187380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.
