---
pmid: '15911627'
title: Peroxisomal import of human alanine:glyoxylate aminotransferase requires ancillary
  targeting information remote from its C terminus.
authors:
- Huber PA
- Birdsey GM
- Lumb MJ
- Prowse DT
- Perkins TJ
- Knight DR
- Danpure CJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M502719200
---

# Peroxisomal import of human alanine:glyoxylate aminotransferase requires ancillary targeting information remote from its C terminus.
**Authors:** Huber PA, Birdsey GM, Lumb MJ, Prowse DT, Perkins TJ, Knight DR, Danpure CJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M502719200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M502719200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jul 22;280(29):27111-20. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M502719200. Epub 
2005 May 23.

Peroxisomal import of human alanine:glyoxylate aminotransferase requires 
ancillary targeting information remote from its C terminus.

Huber PA(1), Birdsey GM, Lumb MJ, Prowse DT, Perkins TJ, Knight DR, Danpure CJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 
6BT, United Kingdom.

Although human alanine:glyoxylate aminotransferase (AGT) is imported into 
peroxisomes by a Pex5p-dependent pathway, the properties of its C-terminal 
tripeptide (KKL) are unlike those of any other type 1 peroxisomal targeting 
sequence (PTS1). We have previously suggested that AGT might possess ancillary 
targeting information that enables its unusual PTS1 to work. In this study, we 
have attempted to locate this information and to determine whether or not it is 
a characteristic of all vertebrate AGTs. Using the two-hybrid system, we show 
that human AGT interacts with human Pex5p in mammalian cells, but not yeast 
cells. Using (immuno)fluorescence microscopic analysis of the distribution of 
various constructs expressed in COS cells, we show the following. 1) The 
putative ancillary peroxisomal targeting information (PTS1A) in human AGT is 
located entirely within the smaller C-terminal structural domain of 110 amino 
acids, with the sequence between Val-324 and Ile-345 being the most likely 
candidate region. 2) The PTS1A is present in all mammalian AGTs studied (human, 
rat, guinea pig, rabbit, and cat), but not amphibian AGT (Xenopus). 3) The PTS1A 
is necessary for peroxisomal import of human, rabbit, and cat AGTs, but not rat 
and guinea pig AGTs. We speculate that the internal PTS1A of human AGT works in 
concert with the C-terminal PTS1 by interacting with Pex5p indirectly with the 
aid of a yet-to-be-identified mammal-specific adaptor molecule. This interaction 
might reshape the tetratricopeptide repeat domain allosterically, enabling it to 
accept KKL as a functional PTS1.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M502719200
PMID: 15911627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
