---
pmid: '18448433'
title: The transfer of heavy chains from bikunin proteins to hyaluronan requires both
  TSG-6 and HC2.
authors:
- Sanggaard KW
- Sonne-Schmidt CS
- Krogager TP
- Lorentzen KA
- Wisniewski HG
- Thøgersen IB
- Enghild JJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M800874200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The transfer of heavy chains from bikunin proteins to hyaluronan requires both TSG-6 and HC2.
**Authors:** Sanggaard KW, Sonne-Schmidt CS, Krogager TP, Lorentzen KA, Wisniewski HG, Thøgersen IB, Enghild JJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M800874200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M800874200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jul 4;283(27):18530-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M800874200. Epub
2008  Apr 29.

The transfer of heavy chains from bikunin proteins to hyaluronan requires both 
TSG-6 and HC2.

Sanggaard KW(1), Sonne-Schmidt CS, Krogager TP, Lorentzen KA, Wisniewski HG, 
Thøgersen IB, Enghild JJ.

Author information:
(1)Center for Insoluble Protein Structures (inSPIN) and Interdisciplinary 
Nanoscience Center (iNANO) at the Department of Molecular Biology, Science Park, 
University of Aarhus, Gustav Wiedsvej 10C, 8000 Aarhus C, Denmark.

Tumor necrosis factor-stimulated gene-6 protein (TSG-6) is involved in the 
transfer of heavy chains (HCs) from inter-alpha-inhibitor (IalphaI), 
pre-alpha-inhibitor, and as shown here HC2.bikunin to hyaluronan through the 
formation of covalent HC.TSG-6 intermediates. In contrast to IalphaI and 
HC2.bikunin, pre-alpha-inhibitor does not form a covalent complex in vitro using 
purified proteins but needs the presence of another factor (Rugg, M. S., Willis, 
A. C., Mukhopadhyay, D., Hascall, V. C., Fries, E., Fülöp, C., Milner, C. M., 
and Day, A. J. (2005) J. Biol. Chem. 280, 25674-25686). In the present study we 
purified the required component from human plasma and identified it as HC2. 
Proteins containing HC2 including IalphaI, HC2.bikunin, and free HC2 promoted 
the formation of HC3.TSG-6 and subsequently HC3.hyaluronan complexes. HC1 or HC3 
did not possess this activity. The presented data reveal that both HC2 and TSG-6 
are required for the transesterification reactions to occur.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M800874200
PMID: 18448433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
