---
pmid: '11138012'
title: Lipodystrophy in the fld mouse results from mutation of a new gene encoding
  a nuclear protein, lipin.
authors:
- Péterfy M
- Phan J
- Xu P
- Reue K
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/83685
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Lipodystrophy in the fld mouse results from mutation of a new gene encoding a nuclear protein, lipin.
**Authors:** Péterfy M, Phan J, Xu P, Reue K
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1038/83685](https://doi.org/10.1038/83685)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 2001 Jan;27(1):121-4. doi: 10.1038/83685.

Lipodystrophy in the fld mouse results from mutation of a new gene encoding a 
nuclear protein, lipin.

Péterfy M(1), Phan J, Xu P, Reue K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, California, 
USA.

Mice carrying mutations in the fatty liver dystrophy (fld) gene have features of 
human lipodystrophy, a genetically heterogeneous group of disorders 
characterized by loss of body fat, fatty liver, hypertriglyceridemia and insulin 
resistance. Through positional cloning, we have isolated the gene responsible 
and characterized two independent mutant alleles, fld and fld(2J). The gene 
(Lpin1) encodes a novel nuclear protein which we have named lipin. Consistent 
with the observed reduction of adipose tissue mass in fld and fld(2J)mice, 
wild-type Lpin1 mRNA is expressed at high levels in adipose tissue and is 
induced during differentiation of 3T3-L1 pre-adipocytes. Our results indicate 
that lipin is required for normal adipose tissue development, and provide a 
candidate gene for human lipodystrophy. Lipin defines a novel family of nuclear 
proteins containing at least three members in mammalian species, and homologs in 
distantly related organisms from human to yeast.

DOI: 10.1038/83685
PMID: 11138012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
