---
pmid: '26019235'
title: Epigenetic changes as a common trigger of muscle weakness in congenital myopathies.
authors:
- Rokach O
- Sekulic-Jablanovic M
- Voermans N
- Wilmshurst J
- Pillay K
- Heytens L
- Zhou H
- Muntoni F
- Gautel M
- Nevo Y
- Mitrani-Rosenbaum S
- Attali R
- Finotti A
- Gambari R
- Mosca B
- Jungbluth H
- Zorzato F
- Treves S
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv195
---

# Epigenetic changes as a common trigger of muscle weakness in congenital myopathies.
**Authors:** Rokach O, Sekulic-Jablanovic M, Voermans N, Wilmshurst J, Pillay K, Heytens L, Zhou H, Muntoni F, Gautel M, Nevo Y, Mitrani-Rosenbaum S, Attali R, Finotti A, Gambari R, Mosca B, Jungbluth H, Zorzato F, Treves S
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddv195](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddv195)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Aug 15;24(16):4636-47. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv195. Epub 2015 
May 27.

Epigenetic changes as a common trigger of muscle weakness in congenital 
myopathies.

Rokach O(1), Sekulic-Jablanovic M(1), Voermans N(2), Wilmshurst J(3), Pillay 
K(4), Heytens L(5), Zhou H(6), Muntoni F(6), Gautel M(7), Nevo Y(8), 
Mitrani-Rosenbaum S(9), Attali R(9), Finotti A(10), Gambari R(10), Mosca B(11), 
Jungbluth H(12), Zorzato F(13), Treves S(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedicine and Anesthesia, Basel University Hospital, Basel, 
Switzerland.
(2)Department of Neurology, Roadboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Paediatric Neurology and Child Health.
(4)Department of Paediatric Pathology, NHLS, Cape Town, South Africa, Department 
of Paediatrics and Child Health, University of Cape Town, Red Cross Children's 
Hospital, Cape Town, South Africa.
(5)Department of Anesthesiology and Neurology, Antwerp University Hospital, 
Antwerp, Belgium.
(6)Dubowitz Neuromuscular Centre and MRC Centre for Neuromuscular Diseases, 
Institute of Child Health, London, UK.
(7)Randall Division of Cell and Molecular Biophysics and Cardiovascular 
Division, King's College London, London, UK.
(8)The Unit of Neuropediatrics and Child Development, Division of Pediatrics.
(9)Goldyne Savad Institute of Gene Therapy, Hadassah Hebrew University Medical 
Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
(10)Department of Life Sciences, Section of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.
(11)Department of Life Sciences, General Pathology Section, University of 
Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(12)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Neuromuscular Service, Evelina 
Children's Hospital, St. Thomas' Hospital, London, UK and Department of Basic 
and Clinical Neuroscience, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience 
(IoPPN), King's College London, London, UK.
(13)Department of Biomedicine and Anesthesia, Basel University Hospital, Basel, 
Switzerland, Department of Life Sciences, General Pathology Section, University 
of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(14)Department of Biomedicine and Anesthesia, Basel University Hospital, Basel, 
Switzerland, Department of Life Sciences, General Pathology Section, University 
of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, susan.treves@unibas.ch.

Congenital myopathies are genetically and clinically heterogeneous conditions 
causing severe muscle weakness, and mutations in the ryanodine receptor gene 
(RYR1) represent the most frequent cause of these conditions. A common feature 
of diseases caused by recessive RYR1 mutations is a decrease of ryanodine 
receptor 1 protein content in muscle. The aim of the present investigation was 
to gain mechanistic insight into the causes of this reduced ryanodine receptor 
1. We found that muscle biopsies of patients with recessive RYR1 mutations 
exhibit decreased expression of muscle-specific microRNAs, increased DNA 
methylation and increased expression of class II histone deacetylases. 
Transgenic mouse muscle fibres over-expressing HDAC-4/HDAC-5 exhibited decreased 
expression of RYR1 and of muscle-specific miRNAs, whereas acute knock-down of 
RYR1 in mouse muscle fibres by siRNA caused up-regulation of HDAC-4/HDAC-5. 
Intriguingly, increased class II HDAC expression and decreased ryanodine 
receptor protein and miRNAs expression were also observed in muscles of patients 
with nemaline myopathy, another congenital neuromuscular disorder. Our results 
indicate that a common pathophysiological pathway caused by epigenetic changes 
is activated in some forms of congenital neuromuscular disorders.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddv195
PMID: 26019235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
