---
pmid: '25579814'
title: Structural plasticity of methyllysine recognition by the tandem tudor domain
  of 53BP1.
authors:
- Tong Q
- Cui G
- Botuyan MV
- Rothbart SB
- Hayashi R
- Musselman CA
- Singh N
- Appella E
- Strahl BD
- Mer G
- Kutateladze TG
journal: Structure
year: '2015'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4321732
doi: 10.1016/j.str.2014.11.013
---

# Structural plasticity of methyllysine recognition by the tandem tudor domain of 53BP1.
**Authors:** Tong Q, Cui G, Botuyan MV, Rothbart SB, Hayashi R, Musselman CA, Singh N, Appella E, Strahl BD, Mer G, Kutateladze TG
**Journal:** Structure (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.str.2014.11.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2014.11.013)
**PMC:** [PMC4321732](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4321732/)

## Abstract

1. Structure. 2015 Feb 3;23(2):312-21. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2014.11.013. Epub 2015 
Jan 8.

Structural plasticity of methyllysine recognition by the tandem tudor domain of 
53BP1.

Tong Q(1), Cui G(2), Botuyan MV(2), Rothbart SB(3), Hayashi R(4), Musselman 
CA(1), Singh N(2), Appella E(4), Strahl BD(3), Mer G(5), Kutateladze TG(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, 
Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 
55905, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics and the Lineberger Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC 
27599, USA.
(4)Laboratory of Cell Biology, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 
20892, USA.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 
55905, USA. Electronic address: mer.georges@mayo.edu.
(6)Department of Pharmacology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, 
Aurora, CO 80045, USA. Electronic address: tatiana.kutateladze@ucdenver.edu.

p53 is dynamically regulated through various posttranslational modifications 
(PTMs), which differentially modulate its function and stability. The 
dimethylated marks p53K370me2 and p53K382me2 are associated with p53 activation 
or stabilization and both are recognized by the tandem Tudor domain (TTD) of 
53BP1, a p53 cofactor. Here we detail the molecular mechanisms for the 
recognition of p53K370me2 and p53K382me2 by 53BP1. The solution structures of 
TTD in complex with the p53K370me2 and p53K382me2 peptides show a remarkable 
plasticity of 53BP1 in accommodating these diverse dimethyllysine-containing 
sequences. We demonstrate that dimeric TTDs are capable of interacting with the 
two PTMs on a single p53K370me2K382me2 peptide, greatly strengthening the 
53BP1-p53 interaction. Analysis of binding affinities of TTD toward methylated 
p53 and histones reveals strong preference of 53BP1 for p53K382me2, H4K20me2, 
and H3K36me2 and suggests a possible role of multivalent contacts of 53BP1 in 
p53 targeting to and accumulation at the sites of DNA damage.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2014.11.013
PMCID: PMC4321732
PMID: 25579814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

INTRODUCTION

The tumor suppressor p53 is mutated in nearly half of all human cancers, and most of the remaining cancers are associated with decreased p53 levels or alterations in p53-mediated signaling pathways ( Brosh and Rotter, 2009 ; Cheok et al., 2011 ; Levine and Oren, 2009 ; Muller and Vousden, 2013 ). p53 is a transcription factor involved in the regulation of over 100 genes essential in cell cycle control, senescence, DNA damage repair, and apoptosis ( Vousden and Lane, 2007 ). Owing to its rapid degradation, the constitutive concentration of p53 in resting cells is maintained at a relatively low level. However, in response to DNA damage or other stress signals, p53 becomes activated and triggers growth arrest followed by DNA damage repair or induces apoptosis if the damage cannot be repaired. Transcriptional activity, nuclear accumulation, stability, and translocation of p53 are mediated by multiple post-translational modifications (PTMs), including phosphorylation, acetylation, methylation, ubiquitination, SUMOylation and neddylation ( Dai and Gu, 2010 ; Zhang et al., 2012 ). The PTMs are especially abundant in the C-terminal regulatory domain (CTD) of p53, which contains multiple modifiable lysine, serine and threonine residues.

Four lysine residues, K370, K372, K373 and K382, in the p53 CTD tail are currently known to undergo methylation ( Chuikov et al., 2004 ; Huang and Berger, 2008 ; Huang et al., 2010 ; Huang et al., 2006 ; Huang et al., 2007 ; Kachirskaia et al., 2008 ; Shi et al., 2007 ) ( Figure 1A ). Methylation was originally thought to influence p53 stability and function by competing for the same lysine residues that can be acetylated or ubiquitinated. It is now well established that monoubiquitination of lysines leads to p53 translocation from the nucleus to the cytoplasm, polyubiquitination targets p53 for proteasomal degradation, and acetylation increases p53 stability and occupancy at promoters of p53 target genes ( Dai and Gu, 2010 ). Several pioneering reports have demonstrated that methylation marks in the CTD tail have an effect on transcriptional and transcription-independent functions of p53 ( Chuikov et al., 2004 ; Huang and Berger, 2008 ; Huang et al., 2010 ; Huang et al., 2006 ; Huang et al., 2007 ; Kachirskaia et al., 2008 ; Shi et al., 2007 ). These PTMs can alter the structure, dynamics and ability of p53 to interact with various binding partners and mediate p53 commitment to a particular pathway within a large p53-dependent signaling network.

The biological outcome of CTD methylation can lead to p53 activation or suppression, depending on the PTM position and the extent of methylation, i.e. the number of methyl groups attached to the ε-amino moiety of the lysine. Monomethylation of K372 by the lysine methyltransferase 7 (KMT7), also known as SET7/9, stabilizes p53 at chromatin and facilitates transcription of p53 target genes ( Chuikov et al., 2004 ). In contrast, monomethylation of either K370 by KMT3C (Smyd2) or K382 by KMT5A (SET8/PR-SET7) suppresses p53 transactivation ( Huang et al., 2006 ; Huang et al., 2007 ; Shi et al., 2007 ; West et al., 2010 ), and dimethylation of K373 by homologous KMT1C/D (G9a/Glp) also correlates with inactive p53 ( Huang et al., 2010 ).

The dimethylated marks p53K370me2 and p53K382me2 have been identified in vivo and biochemically characterized in vitro , though methyltransferases responsible for writing these PTMs remain unknown ( Huang et al., 2007 ; Kachirskaia et al., 2008 ). Cellular levels of these PTMs increase in response to DNA damage, and p53K370me2 and p53K382me2 have been simultaneously detected in stressed and unstressed cells by mass spectrometry (MS), although it remains unclear whether these marks are present on the same p53 molecule ( DeHart et al., 2014 ). p53K370me2 positively regulates p53 transcriptional activity and can be demethylated to a repressive p53K370me1 mark by lysine specific demethylase 1 (LSD1), whereas p53K382me2 is associated with p53 stability and accumulation at DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) ( Huang et al., 2007 ; Kachirskaia et al., 2008 ). Both p53K382me2 and p53K370me2 are recognized by the tandem Tudor domain (TTD) of p53-binding protein 1 (53BP1) ( Figure 1A ) ( Huang et al., 2007 ; Kachirskaia et al., 2008 ). Interaction of the TTD module with p53K382me2 plays a role in p53 stabilization at DSBs, and binding to p53K370me2 is essential for p53 transactivation upon DNA damage ( Huang et al., 2007 ; Kachirskaia et al., 2008 ). 53BP1 is a key DNA damage response mediator and a co-activator of p53 that also recognizes methylated histones, H4K20me2 particularly, as well as dimethylated at K810 retinoblastoma protein and DNA ( Botuyan et al., 2006 ; Carr et al., 2014 ; Charier et al., 2004 ; Huyen et al., 2004 ; Kim et al., 2006 ). Recent studies have shown that the association of 53BP1 TTD with H4K20me2 is necessary but not sufficient to rapidly recruit 53BP1 to damaged DNA. Such recruitment requires oligomerization of 53BP1 through its oligomerization domain, located upstream of the TTD ( Fradet-Turcotte et al., 2013 ; Ward et al., 2006 ; Zgheib et al., 2009 ) and ubiquitination of histone H2A ( Fradet-Turcotte et al., 2013 ). The pairing of TTDs via 53BP1 oligomerization raises the possibility for a mechanistic and functional crosstalk between multiple dimethyllysine substrates, including PTMs on p53 and histones.

Here we describe the molecular basis for binding of the 53BP1 TTD module to p53K370me2 and p53K382me2. NMR structures of the complexes reveal a remarkable plasticity of 53BP1 in accommodating these diverse dimethyllysine-containing sequences. Analyses of binding affinities and specificities indicate that 53BP1 can simultaneously recognize dual K370me2/K382me2 marks on a single p53 substrate and suggest a model for rapid accumulation of p53 at DSBs that involves multiple interactions of oligomeric 53BP1 with p53, H4K20me2 and H3K36me2.
