---
pmid: '22056876'
title: A retinoic acid receptor RARα pool present in membrane lipid rafts forms complexes
  with G protein αQ to activate p38MAPK.
authors:
- Piskunov A
- Rochette-Egly C
journal: Oncogene
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.499
---

# A retinoic acid receptor RARα pool present in membrane lipid rafts forms complexes with G protein αQ to activate p38MAPK.
**Authors:** Piskunov A, Rochette-Egly C
**Journal:** Oncogene (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/onc.2011.499](https://doi.org/10.1038/onc.2011.499)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2012 Jul 12;31(28):3333-45. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.499. Epub 2011 Nov
 7.

A retinoic acid receptor RARα pool present in membrane lipid rafts forms 
complexes with G protein αQ to activate p38MAPK.

Piskunov A(1), Rochette-Egly C.

Author information:
(1)Department of functional genomics and cancer, IGBMC (Institut de Génétique et 
de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire), INSERM, U964, CNRS, UMR7104, Université 
de Strasbourg, Illkirch Cedex, France.

Retinoic acid (RA) regulates several gene programs by nuclear RA receptors 
(RARs) that are ligand-dependent transcriptional transregulators. The basic 
mechanism for switching on transcription of cognate-target genes involves RAR 
binding at specific response elements and a network of interactions with 
coregulatory protein complexes. In addition to these classical genomic effects, 
we recently demonstrated that RA also induces the rapid activation of the 
p38MAPK/MSK1 pathway, with characteristic downstream consequences on the 
phosphorylation of RARs and the expression of their target genes. Here, we aimed 
at deciphering the underlying mechanism of the rapid non-genomic effects of RA. 
We highlighted a novel paradigm in which a fraction of the cellular RARα pool is 
present in membrane lipid rafts, where it forms complexes with G protein alpha Q 
(Gαq) in response to RA. This rapid RA-induced formation of RARα/Gαq complexes 
in lipid rafts is required for the activation of p38MAPK that occurs in response 
to RA. Accordingly, in RA-resistant cancer cells, characterized by the absence 
of p38MAPK activation, RARα present in membrane lipid rafts does not associate 
with Gαq, pointing out the essential contribution of RARα/Gαq complexes in RA 
signaling.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2011.499
PMID: 22056876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
