---
pmid: '10942414'
title: Human erythrocyte pyrimidine 5-nucleotidase, PN-I, is identical to p36, a protein
  associated to lupus inclusion formation in response to alpha-interferon.
authors:
- Amici A
- Emanuelli M
- Raffaelli N
- Ruggieri S
- Saccucci F
- Magni G
journal: Blood
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Human erythrocyte pyrimidine 5-nucleotidase, PN-I, is identical to p36, a protein associated to lupus inclusion formation in response to alpha-interferon.
**Authors:** Amici A, Emanuelli M, Raffaelli N, Ruggieri S, Saccucci F, Magni G
**Journal:** Blood (2000)

## Abstract

1. Blood. 2000 Aug 15;96(4):1596-8.

Human erythrocyte pyrimidine 5-nucleotidase, PN-I, is identical to p36, a 
protein associated to lupus inclusion formation in response to alpha-interferon.

Amici A(1), Emanuelli M, Raffaelli N, Ruggieri S, Saccucci F, Magni G.

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Biochimica and Dipartimento di Biotecnologie Agrarie ed 
Ambientali, Università di Ancona, Ancona, Italy.

Erythrocyte maturation is accompanied by RNA degradation and release of 
mononucleotides. We have previously purified PN-I, a pyrimidine nucleotidase 
whose deficiency is associated with hemolytic anemia. Computer-aided analysis of 
PN-I tryptic and CNBr peptide sequences revealed substantial identity with 
tryptic peptide sequences reported for p36, an alpha-interferon-induced protein. 
PN-I partial sequences were matched through the expressed sequence tag database 
with different human complementary DNA (cDNA) clones, whose sequences were 
exploited to screen a human placenta cDNA library. PN-I cDNA, coding for a 
286-residue protein, was expressed in Escherichia coli, yielding a fully active 
recombinant enzyme. The recombinant protein sequence comprised the peptide 
sequences determined for PN-I and p36. Rabbit antisera raised against two 
peptides deriving from p36 and PN-I tryptic digestions, respectively, recognized 
both wild-type and recombinant PN-I. Molecular properties of the two proteins 
were essentially the same. We conclude that p36 and PN-I are identical proteins. 
(Blood. 2000;96:1596-1598)

PMID: 10942414 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
