---
pmid: '11053377'
title: BenR, a XylS homologue, regulates three different pathways of aromatic acid
  degradation in Pseudomonas putida.
authors:
- Cowles CE
- Nichols NN
- Harwood CS
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC94779
doi: 10.1128/JB.182.22.6339-6346.2000
---

# BenR, a XylS homologue, regulates three different pathways of aromatic acid degradation in Pseudomonas putida.
**Authors:** Cowles CE, Nichols NN, Harwood CS
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JB.182.22.6339-6346.2000](https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.182.22.6339-6346.2000)
**PMC:** [PMC94779](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC94779/)

## Abstract

1. J Bacteriol. 2000 Nov;182(22):6339-46. doi: 10.1128/JB.182.22.6339-6346.2000.

BenR, a XylS homologue, regulates three different pathways of aromatic acid 
degradation in Pseudomonas putida.

Cowles CE(1), Nichols NN, Harwood CS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, 
USA.

Pseudomonas putida converts benzoate to catechol using two enzymes that are 
encoded on the chromosome and whose expression is induced by benzoate. Benzoate 
also binds to the regulator XylS to induce expression of the TOL (toluene 
degradation) plasmid-encoded meta pathway operon for benzoate and methylbenzoate 
degradation. Finally, benzoate represses the ability of P. putida to transport 
4-hydroxybenzoate (4-HBA) by preventing transcription of pcaK, the gene encoding 
the 4-HBA permease. Here we identified a gene, benR, as a regulator of benzoate, 
methylbenzoate, and 4-HBA degradation genes. A benR mutant isolated by random 
transposon mutagenesis was unable to grow on benzoate. The deduced amino acid 
sequence of BenR showed high similarity (62% identity) to the sequence of XylS, 
a member of the AraC family of regulators. An additional seven genes located 
adjacent to benR were inferred to be involved in benzoate degradation based on 
their deduced amino acid sequences. The benABC genes likely encode benzoate 
dioxygenase, and benD likely encodes 2-hydro-1,2-dihydroxybenzoate 
dehydrogenase. benK and benF were assigned functions as a benzoate permease and 
porin, respectively. The possible function of a final gene, benE, is not known. 
benR activated expression of a benA-lacZ reporter fusion in response to 
benzoate. It also activated expression of a meta cleavage operon promoter-lacZ 
fusion inserted in an E. coli chromosome. Third, benR was required for 
benzoate-mediated repression of pcaK-lacZ fusion expression. The benA promoter 
region contains a direct repeat sequence that matches the XylS binding site 
previously defined for the meta cleavage operon promoter. It is likely that BenR 
binds to the promoter region of chromosomal benzoate degradation genes and 
plasmid-encoded methylbenzoate degradation genes to activate gene expression in 
response to benzoate. The action of BenR in repressing 4-HBA uptake is probably 
indirect.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.182.22.6339-6346.2000
PMCID: PMC94779
PMID: 11053377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
