---
pmid: '9278415'
title: The self-association and fibronectin-binding sites of fibulin-1 map to calcium-binding
  epidermal growth factor-like domains.
authors:
- Tran H
- VanDusen WJ
- Argraves WS
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.36.22600
---

# The self-association and fibronectin-binding sites of fibulin-1 map to calcium-binding epidermal growth factor-like domains.
**Authors:** Tran H, VanDusen WJ, Argraves WS
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.272.36.22600](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.272.36.22600)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1997 Sep 5;272(36):22600-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.36.22600.

The self-association and fibronectin-binding sites of fibulin-1 map to 
calcium-binding epidermal growth factor-like domains.

Tran H(1), VanDusen WJ, Argraves WS.

Author information:
(1)Biochemistry Department, American Red Cross, Rockville, Maryland 20855, USA.

Fibulin-1 is a modular glycoprotein with amino-terminal anaphylatoxin-like 
modules followed by nine epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like modules and, 
depending on alternative splicing, four possible carboxyl termini. Fibulin-1 has 
been shown to self-associate as well as to bind calcium, fibronectin (FN), 
laminin, nidogen, and fibrinogen. To map ligand-binding sites within fibulin-1, 
polypeptides corresponding to various regions of fibulin-1 were expressed 
recombinantly and evaluated for their capacity to bind calcium, FN, or 
fibulin-1. A calcium-binding site(s) was mapped to EGF-like modules 5-9. A 
fibulin-1 self-association site was localized to EGF-like modules 5 and 6 (amino 
acid residues 356-440), as was a binding site for FN. The self-association 
interaction mediated by this pair of modules involved calcium since divalent 
cation chelators reduced the binding affinity of the interaction. By contrast, 
FN binding to EGF-like modules 5 and 6 was unaffected by the presence of 
divalent cation chelators. It can be concluded that EGF-like modules 5 and 6 
bind calcium and mediate homotypic interaction between EGF-like modules 5 and 6 
present in different fibulin-1 molecules and heterotypic interaction between 
EGF-like modules 5 and 6 and type III repeats 13 and 14 in FN. While additional 
binding sites for calcium or FN were not detected, another fibulin-1 
self-association site was found within amino acid residues 30-173. However, 
unlike the self-association site in EGF-like modules 5 and 6, which was 
functional in the native protein, the amino-terminal site was cryptic and 
revealed only after the protein was denatured.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.272.36.22600
PMID: 9278415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
