---
pmid: '24639530'
title: Reprogrammed and transmissible intestinal microbiota confer diminished susceptibility
  to induced colitis in TMF-/- mice.
authors:
- Bel S
- Elkis Y
- Elifantz H
- Koren O
- Ben-Hamo R
- Lerer-Goldshtein T
- Rahimi R
- Ben Horin S
- Nyska A
- Shpungin S
- Nir U
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3977313
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1319114111
---

# Reprogrammed and transmissible intestinal microbiota confer diminished susceptibility to induced colitis in TMF-/- mice.
**Authors:** Bel S, Elkis Y, Elifantz H, Koren O, Ben-Hamo R, Lerer-Goldshtein T, Rahimi R, Ben Horin S, Nyska A, Shpungin S, Nir U
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1319114111](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1319114111)
**PMC:** [PMC3977313](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3977313/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Apr 1;111(13):4964-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1319114111. Epub 2014 Mar 17.

Reprogrammed and transmissible intestinal microbiota confer diminished 
susceptibility to induced colitis in TMF-/- mice.

Bel S(1), Elkis Y, Elifantz H, Koren O, Ben-Hamo R, Lerer-Goldshtein T, Rahimi 
R, Ben Horin S, Nyska A, Shpungin S, Nir U.

Author information:
(1)The Mina and Everard Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences and Quaresa Institute 
for Cancer Research, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan 5290002, Israel.

Tata Element Modulatory Factor (TMF/ARA160) is a multifunctional 
Golgi-associated protein, which accumulates in colonic enterocytes and goblet 
cells. Mice lacking TMF/ARA160 (TMF(-/-)) produce thick and uniform colonic 
mucus that resists adherent bacterial colonization and diminishes susceptibility 
of these mice to induced acute colitis, through a mechanism that is not fully 
understood. Here, we show that mucus secretion by goblet cells is altered in the 
colon of TMF(-/-) mice, resulting in the formation of a highly oligomerized 
colonic gel-forming mucin, MUC2. Microbiome analysis revealed a shift in the 
microbiota of TMF(-/-) mice leading to predominance of the Firmicutes phylum and 
a significantly higher abundance of probiotic beneficial bacterial species. 
Notably, this trait was transmissible, and when cohoused with wild-type animals, 
TMF(-/-) mice influenced the microbiota and diminished the susceptibility of 
wild-type mice to chemically induced dextran sulfate sodium colitis. Thus, 
altered mucus secretion in TMF(-/-) mouse colons is accompanied by a 
reprogrammed intestinal microbiota, leading to a transmissible reduced 
sensitivity to induced colitis.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1319114111
PMCID: PMC3977313
PMID: 24639530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
