---
pmid: '7883170'
title: flbD encodes a Myb-like DNA-binding protein that coordinates initiation of
  Aspergillus nidulans conidiophore development.
authors:
- Wieser J
- Adams TH
journal: Genes Dev
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1101/gad.9.4.491
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# flbD encodes a Myb-like DNA-binding protein that coordinates initiation of Aspergillus nidulans conidiophore development.
**Authors:** Wieser J, Adams TH
**Journal:** Genes Dev (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.9.4.491](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.9.4.491)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 1995 Feb 15;9(4):491-502. doi: 10.1101/gad.9.4.491.

flbD encodes a Myb-like DNA-binding protein that coordinates initiation of 
Aspergillus nidulans conidiophore development.

Wieser J(1), Adams TH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Texas A&M University, College Station 77843.

The timing of asexual fruiting body formation during Aspergillus nidulans colony 
development is precisely regulated so that conidiophores are typically produced 
1-2 mm behind the growing edge of the colony. Mutations in any of four A. 
nidulans genes, flbB, flbC, flbD, or flbE, result in colonies that are delayed 
at least 24 hr in their ability to initiate conidiophore development resulting 
in fluffy colonies with conidiophores forming in the center, at least 12-15 mm 
behind the growing edge. The requirement for each of these four genes in 
determining the timing of developmental initiation precedes transcriptional 
activation of the primary developmental regulatory gene brlA, indicating a 
possible role for each gene in developmentally regulated activation of brlA 
expression. The wild-type flbD gene was isolated and shown to encode an 
approximately 1.6-kb mRNA that is present throughout the A. nidulans life cycle. 
The deduced FlbD protein sequence predicts a 314-amino-acid polypeptide with 
significant identity at its amino terminus to the DNA-binding domain of the Myb 
family of transcription factors indicating that FlbD probably functions as a 
sequence-specific transcriptional activator. Although conidiophore development 
does not normally occur in submerged culture, forced overexpression of flbD in 
submerged hyphae caused inappropriate activation of brlA expression and resulted 
in production of complex conidiophores that produced all of the distinct cell 
types observed in wild-type conidiophores including viable spores. This ability 
of flbD overexpression to activate conidiation requires brlA, flbB, and flbA 
(another early developmental regulator) but does not require flbC or flbE. We 
propose that FlbD functions during normal development by activating 
transcription of other genes required for development (such as brlA) and that 
FlbD activity is normally controlled post-transcriptionally by an unknown 
mechanism.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.9.4.491
PMID: 7883170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
