---
reference_id: PMID:23962723
title: Hexokinase activity is required for recruitment of parkin to depolarized mitochondria.
authors:
- McCoy MK
- Kaganovich A
- Rudenko IN
- Ding J
- Cookson MR
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt407
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hexokinase activity is required for recruitment of parkin to depolarized mitochondria.
**Authors:** McCoy MK, Kaganovich A, Rudenko IN, Ding J, Cookson MR
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddt407](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddt407)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Jan 1;23(1):145-56. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt407. Epub 2013 Aug
 19.

Hexokinase activity is required for recruitment of parkin to depolarized
mitochondria.

McCoy MK(1), Kaganovich A, Rudenko IN, Ding J, Cookson MR.

Author information:
(1)Cell Biology and Gene Expression Section and.

Autosomal recessive parkinsonism genes contribute to maintenance of
mitochondrial function. Two of these, PINK1 and parkin, act in a pathway
promoting autophagic removal of depolarized mitochondria. Although recruitment
of parkin to mitochondria is PINK1-dependent, additional components necessary
for signaling are unclear. We performed a screen for endogenous modifiers of
parkin recruitment to depolarized mitochondria and identified hexokinase 2 (HK2)
as a novel modifier of depolarization-induced parkin recruitment. Hexose kinase
activity was required for parkin relocalization, suggesting the effects are
shared among hexokinases including the brain-expressed hexokinase 1 (HK1).
Knockdown of both HK1 and HK2 led to a stronger block in parkin relocalization
than either isoform alone, and expression of HK2 in primary neurons promoted
YFP-parkin recruitment to depolarized mitochondria. Mitochondrial parkin
recruitment was attenuated with AKT inhibition, which is known to modulate HK2
activity and mitochondrial localization. We, therefore, propose that
Akt-dependent recruitment of hexokinases is a required step in the recruitment
of parkin prior to mitophagy.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddt407
PMCID: PMC3857951
PMID: 23962723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]