---
pmid: '32960676'
title: RAB33B recruits the ATG16L1 complex to the phagophore via a noncanonical RAB
  binding protein.
authors:
- Pantoom S
- Konstantinidis G
- Voss S
- Han H
- Hofnagel O
- Li Z
- Wu YW
journal: Autophagy
year: '2021'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC8496732
doi: 10.1080/15548627.2020.1822629
---

# RAB33B recruits the ATG16L1 complex to the phagophore via a noncanonical RAB binding protein.
**Authors:** Pantoom S, Konstantinidis G, Voss S, Han H, Hofnagel O, Li Z, Wu YW
**Journal:** Autophagy (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15548627.2020.1822629](https://doi.org/10.1080/15548627.2020.1822629)
**PMC:** [PMC8496732](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8496732/)

## Abstract

1. Autophagy. 2021 Sep;17(9):2290-2304. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2020.1822629. Epub 
2020 Sep 22.

RAB33B recruits the ATG16L1 complex to the phagophore via a noncanonical RAB 
binding protein.

Pantoom S(1)(2), Konstantinidis G(1)(3), Voss S(4)(5), Han H(5), Hofnagel O(5), 
Li Z(6), Wu YW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Umeå Centre for Microbial Research, Umeå University, 
Umeå, Sweden.
(2)Translational Neurodegeneration Section "Albrecht-kossel", Department of 
Neurology, University Medical Center Rostock , Rostock, Germany.
(3)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology,Foundation for Research and 
Technology-Hellas , Crete, Greece.
(4)Chemical Genomics Centre of the Max Planck Society, Dortmund, Germany.
(5)Max-Planck-Institute of Molecular Physiology, Dortmund, Germany.
(6)National Cancer Center, National Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Cancer 
Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, 
Beijing, China.

Autophagosome formation is a fundamental process in macroautophagy/autophagy, a 
conserved self-eating mechanism in all eukaryotes, which requires the 
conjugating ATG (autophagy related) protein complex, ATG12-ATG5-ATG16L1 and 
lipidated MAP1LC3/LC3 (microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3). How the 
ATG12-ATG5-ATG16L1 complex is recruited to membranes is not fully understood. 
Here, we demonstrated that RAB33B plays a key role in recruiting the ATG16L1 
complex to phagophores during starvation-induced autophagy. Crystal structures 
of RAB33B bound to the coiled-coil domain (CCD) of ATG16L1 revealed the 
recognition mechanism between RAB33B and ATG16L1. ATG16L1 is a novel RAB-binding 
protein (RBP) that can induce RAB proteins to adopt active conformation without 
nucleotide exchange. RAB33B and ATG16L1 mutually determined the localization of 
each other on phagophores. RAB33B-ATG16L1 interaction was required for LC3 
lipidation and autophagosome formation. Upon starvation, a fraction of RAB33B 
translocated from the Golgi to phagophores and recruited the ATG16L1 complex. In 
this work, we reported a new mechanism for the recruitment of the 
ATG12-ATG5-ATG16L1 complex to phagophores by RAB33B, which is required for 
autophagosome formation.Abbreviations: ATG: autophagy-related; Cα: alpha carbon; 
CCD: coiled-coil domain; CLEM: correlative light and electron microscopy; DTE: 
dithioerythritol; EBSS: Earle's balanced salt solution; EDTA: 
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid; EGFP: enhanced green fluorescent protein; FBS: 
fetal bovine serum; FLIM: fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy; FRET: 
Förster resonance energy transfer; GDP: guanosine diphosphate; GOLGA2/GM130: 
golgin A2; GppNHp: guanosine 5'-[β,γ-imido]triphosphate; GST: glutathione 
S-transferase; GTP: guanosine triphosphate; GTPγS: guanosine 
5'-O-[gamma-thio]triphosphate; HA (tag): hemagglutinin (tag); HEK: human 
embryonic kidney; HeLa: Henrietta Lacks; HEPES: 
(4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid); IgG: immunoglobulin G; Kd: 
dissociation constant; MAP1LC3/LC3: microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 
3; MCF7: Michigan cancer foundation-7; MEF: mouse embryonic fibroblast; MEM: 
minimum essential medium Eagle; MST: microscale thermophoresis; NEAA: 
non-essential amino acids; PBS: phosphate-buffered saline; PE: 
phosphatidylethanolamine; PtdIns3P: phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate; RAB: 
RAS-associated binding; RB1CC1/FIP200: RB1 inducible coiled-coil protein 1; RBP: 
RAB-binding protein; SD: standard deviation; SDS: sodium dodecyl sulfate; 
SQSTM1/p62: sequestosome 1; TBS-T: tris-buffered saline-tween 20; WD (repeat): 
tryptophan-aspartic acid (repeat); WIPI2B: WD repeat domain phosphoinositide 
interacting 2B; WT: wild type.

DOI: 10.1080/15548627.2020.1822629
PMCID: PMC8496732
PMID: 32960676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the authors.
