---
pmid: '8692841'
title: 'Isolation and characterization of two human transcription factor IIH (TFIIH)-related
  complexes: ERCC2/CAK and TFIIH.'
authors:
- Reardon JT
- Ge H
- Gibbs E
- Sancar A
- Hurwitz J
- Pan ZQ
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC39049
doi: 10.1073/pnas.93.13.6482
---

# Isolation and characterization of two human transcription factor IIH (TFIIH)-related complexes: ERCC2/CAK and TFIIH.
**Authors:** Reardon JT, Ge H, Gibbs E, Sancar A, Hurwitz J, Pan ZQ
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.93.13.6482](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.93.13.6482)
**PMC:** [PMC39049](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC39049/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Jun 25;93(13):6482-7. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.93.13.6482.

Isolation and characterization of two human transcription factor IIH 
(TFIIH)-related complexes: ERCC2/CAK and TFIIH.

Reardon JT(1), Ge H, Gibbs E, Sancar A, Hurwitz J, Pan ZQ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina 
School of Medicine, Chapel Hill 27599, USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996 Sep 17;93(19):10538.

Transcription factor IIH (TFIIH) is a multisubunit protein complex essential for 
both the initiation of RNA polymerase class II (pol II)-catalyzed transcription 
and nucleotide excision repair of DNA. Recent studies have shown that TFIIH 
copurifies with the cyclin-dependent kinase (cdk)-activating kinase complex 
(CAK) that includes cdk7, cyclin H, and p36/MAT1. Here we report the isolation 
of two TFIIH-related complexes: TFIIH* and ERCC2/CAK. TFIIH* consists of a 
subset of the TFIIH complex proteins including ERCC3 (XPB), p62, p44, p41, and 
p34 but is devoid of detectable levels of ERCC2 (XPD) and CAK. ERCC2/CAK was 
isolated as a complex that exhibits CAK activity that cosediments with the three 
CAK components (cdk7, cyclin H, and p36/MAT1) as well as the ERCC2 (XPD) 
protein. TFIIH* can support pol II-catalyzed transcription in vitro with lower 
efficiency compared with TFIIH. This TFIIH*-dependent transcription reaction was 
stimulated by ERCC2/CAK. The ERCC2/CAK and TFIIH* complexes are each active in 
DNA repair as shown by their ability to complement extracts prepared from ERCC2 
(XPD)- and ERCC3 (XPB)-deficient cells, respectively, in supporting the excision 
of DNA containing a cholesterol lesion. These data suggest that TFIIH* and 
ERCC2/CAK interact to form the TFIIH holoenzyme capable of efficiently 
assembling the pol II transcription initiation complex and directly 
participating in excision repair reactions.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.93.13.6482
PMCID: PMC39049
PMID: 8692841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Transcription factor IIH (TFIIH) is a multisubunit protein complex essential for both the initiation of RNA polymerase class II (pol II)-catalyzed transcription and nucleotide excision repair of DNA. Recent studies have shown that TFIIH copurifies with the cyclin-dependent kinase (cdk)-activating kinase complex (CAK) that includes cdk7, cyclin H, and p36/MAT1. Here we report the isolation of two TFIIH-related complexes: TFIIH* and ERCC2/CAK. TFIIH* consists of a subset of the TFIIH complex proteins including ERCC3 (XPB), p62, p44, p41, and p34 but is devoid of detectable levels of ERCC2 (XPD) and CAK. ERCC2/CAK was isolated as a complex that exhibits CAK activity that cosediments with the three CAK components (cdk7, cyclin H, and p36/MAT1) as well as the ERCC2 (XPD) protein. TFIIH* can support pol II-catalyzed transcription in vitro with lower efficiency compared with TFIIH. This TFIIH*-dependent transcription reaction was stimulated by ERCC2/CAK. The ERCC2/CAK and TFIIH* complexes are each active in DNA repair as shown by their ability to complement extracts prepared from ERCC2 (XPD)- and ERCC3 (XPB)-deficient cells, respectively, in supporting the excision of DNA containing a cholesterol lesion. These data suggest that TFIIH* and ERCC2/CAK interact to form the TFIIH holoenzyme capable of efficiently assembling the pol II transcription initiation complex and directly participating in excision repair reactions.
