---
pmid: '9045804'
title: 'Identification of a penicillin-binding protein 3 homolog, PBP3x, in Pseudomonas
  aeruginosa: gene cloning and growth phase-dependent expression.'
authors:
- Liao X
- Hancock RE
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC178857
doi: 10.1128/jb.179.5.1490-1496.1997
---

# Identification of a penicillin-binding protein 3 homolog, PBP3x, in Pseudomonas aeruginosa: gene cloning and growth phase-dependent expression.
**Authors:** Liao X, Hancock RE
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1128/jb.179.5.1490-1496.1997](https://doi.org/10.1128/jb.179.5.1490-1496.1997)
**PMC:** [PMC178857](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC178857/)

## Abstract

1. J Bacteriol. 1997 Mar;179(5):1490-6. doi: 10.1128/jb.179.5.1490-1496.1997.

Identification of a penicillin-binding protein 3 homolog, PBP3x, in Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa: gene cloning and growth phase-dependent expression.

Liao X(1), Hancock RE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, Canada.

A homolog of Pseudomonas aeruginosa penicillin-binding protein 3 (PBP3), named 
PBP3x in this study, was identified by using degenerate primers based on 
conserved amino acid motifs in the high-molecular-weight PBPs. Analysis of the 
translated sequence of the pbpC gene encoding this PBP3x revealed that 41 and 
48% of its amino acids were identical to those of Escherichia coli and P. 
aeruginosa PBP3s, respectively. The downstream sequence of pbpC encoded 
convergently transcribed homologs of the E. coli soxR gene and the Mycobacterium 
bovis adh gene. The pbpC gene product was expressed from the T7 promoter in E. 
coli and was exported to the cytoplasmic membrane of E. coli cells and could 
bind [3H] penicillin. By using a broad-host-range vector, pUCP27, the pbpC gene 
was expressed in P. aeruginosa PAO4089. [3H]penicillin-binding competition 
assays indicated that the pbpC gene product had lower affinities for several 
PBP3-targeted beta-lactam antibiotics than P. aeruginosa PBP3 did, and 
overexpression of the pbpC gene product had no effect on the susceptibility to 
the PBP3-targeted antibiotics tested. By gene replacement, a PBP3x-defective 
interposon mutant (strain HC132) was obtained and confirmed by Southern blot 
analysis. Inactivation of PBP3x caused no changes in the cell morphology or 
growth rate of exponentially growing cells, suggesting that pbpC was not 
required for cell viability under normal laboratory growth conditions. However, 
the upstream sequence of pbpC contained a potential sigma(s) recognition site, 
and pbpC gene expression appeared to be growth rate regulated. 
[3H]penicillin-binding assays indicated that PBP3 was mainly produced during 
exponential growth whereas PBP3x was produced in the stationary phase of growth.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.179.5.1490-1496.1997
PMCID: PMC178857
PMID: 9045804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
