---
pmid: '26961863'
title: AGEs and HMGB1 Increase Inflammatory Cytokine Production from Human Placental
  Cells, Resulting in an Enhancement of Monocyte Migration.
authors:
- Shirasuna K
- Seno K
- Ohtsu A
- Shiratsuki S
- Ohkuchi A
- Suzuki H
- Matsubara S
- Nagayama S
- Iwata H
- Kuwayama T
journal: Am J Reprod Immunol
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/aji.12506
---

# AGEs and HMGB1 Increase Inflammatory Cytokine Production from Human Placental Cells, Resulting in an Enhancement of Monocyte Migration.
**Authors:** Shirasuna K, Seno K, Ohtsu A, Shiratsuki S, Ohkuchi A, Suzuki H, Matsubara S, Nagayama S, Iwata H, Kuwayama T
**Journal:** Am J Reprod Immunol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1111/aji.12506](https://doi.org/10.1111/aji.12506)

## Abstract

1. Am J Reprod Immunol. 2016 May;75(5):557-68. doi: 10.1111/aji.12506. Epub 2016 
Mar 9.

AGEs and HMGB1 Increase Inflammatory Cytokine Production from Human Placental 
Cells, Resulting in an Enhancement of Monocyte Migration.

Shirasuna K(1), Seno K(1), Ohtsu A(1), Shiratsuki S(1), Ohkuchi A(2), Suzuki 
H(2), Matsubara S(2), Nagayama S(2), Iwata H(1), Kuwayama T(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Animal Reproduction, Department of Agriculture, Tokyo 
University of Agriculture, Atsugi, Kanagawa, Japan.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Jichi Medical University, 
Shimotsuke, Tochigi, Japan.

PROBLEM: Advanced glycation end products (AGEs) and high-mobility group box-1 
(HMGB1) are considered contributing to placental inflammation. We examined the 
effect of AGEs and HMGB1 on cytokines from Sw.71 human trophoblast cell lines 
and the interactions between Sw.71 cells and THP-1-monocytes.
METHODS OF STUDY: Sw.71 cells were cultured with/without AGEs or HMGB1. We 
examined the role of AGEs or HMGB1 on THP1 migration and effect of AGEs on IL-6 
from Sw.71 cells using co-cultures or conditioned medium from THP-1 cells.
RESULTS: AGEs and HMGB1 increased interleukin (IL)-6, IL-8, and chemokine C-C 
motif ligand 2 (CCL2) secretion from Sw.71 cells. The secretion of IL-6 was 
dependent on reactive oxygen species (ROS) and NF-κB. AGEs stimulated IL-6 
secretion through receptor RAGE and TLR4, whereas HMGB1 stimulated it through 
TLR4. AGEs, but not HMGB1, increased monocyte migration via IL-8 and CCL2 from 
Sw.71 cells. THP-1 monocytes induced IL-6 secretion from Sw.71 cells, and AGEs 
further stimulated it.
CONCLUSIONS: AGEs and HMGB1 may promote sterile placental inflammation 
cooperating with monocytes/macrophages.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/aji.12506
PMID: 26961863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
