---
pmid: '38542487'
title: Extrahepatic Vitamin K-Dependent Gla-Proteins-Potential Cardiometabolic Biomarkers.
authors:
- Galunska B
- Yotov Y
- Nikolova M
- Angelov A
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC10971439
doi: 10.3390/ijms25063517
---

# Extrahepatic Vitamin K-Dependent Gla-Proteins-Potential Cardiometabolic Biomarkers.
**Authors:** Galunska B, Yotov Y, Nikolova M, Angelov A
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25063517](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25063517)
**PMC:** [PMC10971439](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10971439/)

## Abstract

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Mar 20;25(6):3517. doi: 10.3390/ijms25063517.

Extrahepatic Vitamin K-Dependent Gla-Proteins-Potential Cardiometabolic 
Biomarkers.

Galunska B(1), Yotov Y(2)(3), Nikolova M(1), Angelov A(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry Molecular Medicine and Nutrigenomics, Medical 
University of Varna, 9000 Varna, Bulgaria.
(2)First Department of Internal Diseases, Section Cardiology, Medical University 
of Varna, 9000 Varna, Bulgaria.
(3)Second Cardiology Clinic, Department of Non-Invasive Cardiology, University 
Hospital "St. Marina", 9000 Varna, Bulgaria.
(4)First Cardiology Clinic with Intensive Cardiology Activity, University 
Hospital "St. Marina", 9000 Varna, Bulgaria.

One mechanism to regulate pathological vascular calcification (VC) is its active 
inhibition. Loss or inactivation of endogenic inhibitors is a major inductor of 
VC. Such inhibitors are proteins rich in gamma-glutamyl residues (Gla-proteins), 
whose function strongly depends on vitamin K. The current narrative review is 
focused on discussing the role of extrahepatic vitamin K-dependent Gla-proteins 
(osteocalcin, OC; matrix Gla-protein, MGP; Gla-rich protein, GRP) in 
cardio-vascular pathology. Gla-proteins possess several functionally active 
forms whose role in the pathogenesis of VC is still unclear. It is assumed that 
low circulating non-phosphorylated MGP is an indicator of active calcification 
and could be a novel biomarker of prevalent VC. High circulating completely 
inactive MGP is proposed as a novel risk factor for cardio-vascular events, 
disease progression, mortality, and vitamin K deficiency. The ratio between 
uncarboxylated (ucOC) and carboxylated (cOC) OC is considered as an indicator of 
vitamin K status indirectly reflecting arterial calcium. Despite the evidence 
that OC is an important energy metabolic regulator, its role on global 
cardio-vascular risk remains unclear. GRP acts as a molecular mediator between 
inflammation and calcification and may emerge as a novel biomarker playing a key 
role in these processes. Gla-proteins benefit clinical practice as inhibitors of 
VC, modifiable by dietary factors.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25063517
PMCID: PMC10971439
PMID: 38542487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
