---
pmid: '17964261'
title: Pyrin activates the ASC pyroptosome in response to engagement by autoinflammatory
  PSTPIP1 mutants.
authors:
- Yu JW
- Fernandes-Alnemri T
- Datta P
- Wu J
- Juliana C
- Solorzano L
- McCormick M
- Zhang Z
- Alnemri ES
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2719761
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.08.029
---

# Pyrin activates the ASC pyroptosome in response to engagement by autoinflammatory PSTPIP1 mutants.
**Authors:** Yu JW, Fernandes-Alnemri T, Datta P, Wu J, Juliana C, Solorzano L, McCormick M, Zhang Z, Alnemri ES
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2007.08.029](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2007.08.029)
**PMC:** [PMC2719761](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2719761/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2007 Oct 26;28(2):214-27. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.08.029.

Pyrin activates the ASC pyroptosome in response to engagement by 
autoinflammatory PSTPIP1 mutants.

Yu JW(1), Fernandes-Alnemri T, Datta P, Wu J, Juliana C, Solorzano L, McCormick 
M, Zhang Z, Alnemri ES.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for Apoptosis 
Research, Kimmel Cancer Institute, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 
19107, USA.

The molecular mechanism by which mutations in the cytoskeleton-organizing 
protein PSTPIP1 cause the autoinflammatory PAPA syndrome is still elusive. Here, 
we demonstrate that PSTPIP1 requires the familial Mediterranean fever protein 
pyrin to assemble the ASC pyroptosome, a molecular platform that recruits and 
activates caspase-1. We provide evidence that pyrin is a cytosolic receptor for 
PSTPIP1. Pyrin exists as a homotrimer in an autoinhibited state due to 
intramolecular interactions between its pyrin domain (PYD) and B-box. Ligation 
by PSTPIP1, which is also a homotrimer, activates pyrin by unmasking its PYD, 
thereby allowing it to interact with ASC and facilitate ASC oligomerization into 
an active ASC pyroptosome. Because of their high binding affinity to pyrin's 
B-box, PAPA-associated PSTPIP1 mutants were found to be more effective than WT 
PSTPIP1 in inducing pyrin activation. Therefore, constitutive ligation and 
activation of pyrin by mutant PSTPIP1 proteins explain the autoinflammatory 
phenotype seen in PAPA syndrome.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.08.029
PMCID: PMC2719761
PMID: 17964261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Introduction

Caspase-1 plays a pivotal role in innate immunity and host defense against pathogenic infections. Caspase-1 is activated by intracellular assemblies, called inflammasomes, in response to diverse pathogenic infections and cellular stresses ( Mariathasan and Monack, 2007 ). The activated caspase-1 cleaves the inactive pro-IL-1β and pro-IL-18 to produce the active proinflammatory cytokines IL-1β and IL-18, respectively, which are potent pro-inflammatory cytokines. Caspase-1 also plays an important role in an inflammatory form of cell death called pyroptosis ( Fernandes-Alnemri et al., 2007 ; Fink and Cookson, 2005 ). During pyroptosis, caspase-1 is activated by a unique supramolecular platform called the pyroptosome, which is composed of oligomerized dimers of the adaptor protein ASC ( Fernandes-Alnemri et al., 2007 ).

Deregulated activation of caspase-1 is responsible for a number of systemic autoinflammatory diseases in humans ( Ting et al., 2006 ). These diseases represent a group of inherited disorders characterized by recurrent episodes of inflammation and fever without an apparent stimulus and of a major involvement of autoantibodies or autoreactive T cells ( Galeazzi et al., 2006 ; Hull et al., 2003 ). Mutations in basic components of the inflammasomes appear to be responsible for some of these autoinflammatory diseases. For example, mutations in the CIAS1 gene which encodes cryopyrin cause three autoinflammatory diseases in humans ( Feldmann et al., 2002 ; Hoffman et al., 2001 ). Our recent studies suggest that some of these mutations increase self-self interactions and oligomerization of the mutant cryopyrin proteins thereby causing more oligomerization of ASC and activation of caspase-1 ( Yu et al., 2006 ). Likewise, mutations in the MEFV gene which encodes pyrin are associated with the most common autoinflammatory disease, Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) in humans ( Consortium, 1997a ; Consortium, 1997b ). Pyrin interacts with ASC, and like cryopyrin, triggers ASC oligomerization, activation of procaspase-1 and IL-1β processing ( Yu et al., 2006 ). How the FMF-associated mutations lead to increased inflammation is not yet clear, but it is likely that these mutations alter the activity of pyrin leading to increased ASC oligomerization in FMF patients.

Some human auto-inflammatory diseases are caused by mutations in upstream regulatory components of the inflammasomes ( Galeazzi et al., 2006 ; Hull et al., 2003 ; Ting et al., 2006 ). In particular, two missense mutations in a protein called proline serine threonine phosphatase-interacting protein 1 (PSTPIP1) (also known as CD2-binding protein 1, CD2BP1) have been reported in patients with the dominantly-inherited auto-inflammatory syndrome of pyogenic arthritis, pyoderma gangrenosum, acne (PAPA) ( Wise et al., 2002 ). PSTPIP1 interacts with pyrin ( Shoham et al., 2003 ), and also associates with actin and plays an important role in the organization of the cytoskeleton ( Badour et al., 2003 ; Cote et al., 2002 ; Spencer et al., 1997 ). The two PAPA-associated mutations appear to diminish the interaction of PSTPIP1 with PEST-type protein tyrosine phosphatase PTP-PEST ( Wise et al., 2002 ), but markedly increase the binding of PSTPIP1 to pyrin ( Shoham et al., 2003 ). Based on these observations, it was suggested that these PSTPIP1 mutants exert a dominant negative effect on pyrin and inhibit its anti-inflammatory activity leading to increased production of IL-1β in PAPA patients ( Shoham et al., 2003 ). However, based on our recent observations that pyrin could assemble an inflammasome and could promote ASC oligomerization and caspase-1 activation ( Yu et al., 2006 ), we propose that binding of the PSTPIP1 mutants to pyrin increases its ability to assemble the ASC pyroptosome, rather than inhibits its anti-inflammatory activity.

In this report, we investigated the role of pyrin in the mechanism of activation of caspase-1 by the PAPA-associated PSTPIP1 mutants in THP-1 monocytes and a HEK-293T cell-based reconstitution system. In support of our hypothesis, we found that pyrin is required for formation of the ASC pyroptosome and caspase-1 activation by the autoinflammatory PSTPIP1 mutants. We have also elucidated the mechanism of activation of pyrin by PSTPIP1. Our results show for the first time that both pyrin and PSTPIP1 are homotrimers and that pyrin is a cytosolic receptor for PSTPIP1. The pyrin homotrimer is not fully active due to the masking of its PYD by its B-box. Binding of PSTPIP1 to the B-box of pyrin unmasks the PYD, which then interacts with ASC, thereby causing oligomerization of ASC and formation of the ASC pyroptosome that recruits and activates procaspase-1. Our findings therefore provide the biochemical basis for understanding how pyrin activity is regulated, and shed light on pyrin as a direct activator of the ASC pyroptosome in innate immunity.

Discussion

Two missense mutations in the coiled-coil domain of the cytoskeleton binding protein PSTPIP1 have been identified in patients with the auto-inflammatory PAPA syndrome ( Wise et al., 2002 ). Macrophages from these patients secrete excessive amounts of IL-1β compared to macrophages from normal subjects in response to LPS stimulation ( Shoham et al., 2003 ), suggesting that the disease-associated PSTPIP1 mutants some how increase the activity of caspase-1, which is responsible for processing of the inactive pro-IL-1β to the mature biologically active IL-1β cytokine. In this report we studied the mechanism by which the disease-associated PSTPIP1 mutants activate caspase-1 and characterized the role of pyrin in this process. We demonstrate that the disease-associated PSTPIP1 mutants require pyrin to induce formation of the ASC pyroptosome ( Fernandes-Alnemri et al., 2007 ), a molecular platform that recruits and activates caspase-1.

The exact role of pyrin in innate immunity and inflammation is still controversial. One model suggests that pyrin inhibits pro-inflammatory signaling pathways by sequestration of ASC or inhibition of the enzymatic activity of caspase-1 via its SPRY (also known as B30.2) domain ( Chae et al., 2003 ; Chae et al., 2006 ), and its loss of function could lead to development of an auto-inflammatory disease. However, this model does not address previous observations that human pyrin is induced as an immediate-early response gene by pro-inflammatory stimuli like interferon alpha and gamma ( Centola et al., 2000 ). Even more significantly mouse pyrin does not contain the SPRY domain ( Chae et al., 2000 ), which indicates that the reported inhibition of caspase-1 by the SPRY domain of pyrin is not a conserved function of pyrin. This model also does not explain why mice that express a practically inactive C-terminal truncated pyrin do not develop an auto-inflammatory disease similar to FMF, but are only slightly hyper-responsive to LPS-induced endotoxic shock ( Chae et al., 2003 ). An alternative model presented here suggests that pyrin functions as a pro-inflammatory mediator particularly in the case of the auto-inflammatory PAPA syndrome. This model is supported by our recently published biochemical data, which clearly showed that the interaction between pyrin and ASC results in ASC oligomerization and activation of caspase-1 ( Yu et al., 2006 ). This model is also supported by several lines of evidence presented here, which demonstrate that pyrin is dramatically induced by retroviral infection, and its induction is associated with increased caspase-1 activation and IL-1β generation in THP-1 cells expressing the PAPA-associated PSTPIP1 mutants. In agreement with this model, siRNA-mediated knockdown of pyrin in THP-1 cells that stably express the PSTPIP1 A230T mutant reduced IL-1β secretion in response to retroviral infection. Furthermore, ectopic expression of the PAPA-associated PSTPIP1 mutants in 293 cells containing caspase-1 and ASC but lacking pyrin did not induce caspase-1 activation. In contrast, expression of these mutants in 293 cells containing caspase-1, ASC and pyrin induced caspase-1 activation, which was directly proportional to the expression level of pyrin. Altogether, the above evidence indicates that pyrin plays a critical role as a mediator of caspase-1 activation in response to expression of the disease-associated PSTPIP1 mutants.

Initiator caspases, like caspase-1, require dimerization for activation. This process is performed by oligomeric molecular platforms such as the Nalp1 inflammasome ( Faustin et al., 2007 ), and the ASC pyroptosome that we described recently ( Fernandes-Alnemri et al., 2007 ). These molecular platforms recruit procaspase-1 thereby increasing its local concentration on the surface of the platform to a critical level that prompts its dimerization and activation. In this study, we demonstrated that engagement of pyrin by PAPA-associated PSTPIP1 mutants induces potent ASC pyroptosome assembly. Additionally, we elucidated the mechanism by which the PSTPIP1 mutants activate the ASC pyroptosome. Our model is illustrated in Fig. 7 . As demonstrated here by chemical cross-linking and gel filtration analyses, both pyrin and PSTPIP1 preexist as homotrimers ( Fig. 4 and supplementary Fig. 1 ). In the unbound conformation, the PYD of pyrin is masked by direct interactions with its B-box, preventing recruitment of ASC to the PYD of pyrin. PSTPIP1 homotrimer binds to the pyrin homotrimer via a direct interaction with the B-box. Binding of PSTPIP1 to pyrin results in unmasking of the PYD of pyrin, which now becomes free to interact with the PYD of ASC. The close proximity of ASC monomers on the surface of the pyrin homotrimer induces ASC oligomerization, which we believe is an important initial step in the nucleation and subsequent assembly of the ASC pyroptosome. The PYD of pyrin is critical for ASC oligomerization, since point mutations in the PYD of pyrin that abrogate its interaction with the PYD of ASC also abrogate ASC oligomerization and caspase-1 activation by pyrin ( Yu et al., 2006 ).

We show that the region required for optimal binding to PSTPIP1 is present within the B-box of pyrin. This region is not only important for PSTPIP1 binding but also important for auto-inhibition of pyrin, since substitution with a homologous region from Trim5α or deletion of this region resulted in constitutive activation of pyrin. These important observations explain why pyrin has a low basal activity, although it is a homotrimer. It is well established that activation of initiator caspases in mammalian cells is performed by oligomeric platforms that are assembled from monomers in response to specific stimuli. For instance, the Apaf-1 apoptosome is assembled into a heptameric molecular platform after binding of monomeric Apaf-1 to cytochrome c and ATP ( Bao and Shi, 2007 ). Similarly, the Nalp1 inflammasome is assembled into an oligomeric platform after binding of monomeric Nalp1 to MDP and ribonucleoside triphosphates ( Faustin et al., 2007 ). In contrast to these examples, pyrin preexists in an autoinhibited homotrimeric state, and binding of PSTPIP1 to its B-box transforms it into the active conformation. Homotrimerization of pyrin is mediated by its coiled-coil domain. This domain is a protein-protein interaction domain that has been shown to mediate oligomerization and formation of high molecular weight oligomeric complexes in the pyrin-related Trim family of proteins ( Javanbakht et al., 2006 ; Meroni and Diez-Roux, 2005 ; Mische et al., 2005 ; Peng et al., 2000 ; Reymond et al., 2001 ). It is not yet obvious whether activation by PSTPIP1 induces further oligomerization of the pyrin homotrimer, but our cross-linking and gel filtration experiments revealed that both pyrin and PSTPIP1 form oligomeric species larger than homotrimers. Like pyrin, PSTPIP1 contains a coiled-coil domain, which likely mediates its homotrimerization ( supplementary Fig. 1A ). However, it is not clear whether trimerization of PSTPIP1 is required or whether a monomeric PSTPIP1 could also activate pyrin. To test this possibility, monomeric PSTPIP1 mutants that can still interact with pyrin are necessary. Generation of these monomeric PSTPIP1 mutants might be difficult because this requires deleting or mutating critical regions of the coiled-coil domain of PSTPIP1, which is necessary for its association with pyrin ( Shoham et al., 2003 ), and further harbors the two PAPA-associated mutations.

Albeit minor differences, it appears that the mechanism of activation of pyrin resembles that of the Caenorhabditis elegans Ced-4 protein. Ced-4 preexists as an inhibited dimer in a complex with the anti-apoptotic protein Ced-9 ( Yan et al., 2005 ). In this complex, Ced-9 acts like the B-box of pyrin to prevent Ced-4 from activating the Ced-3 procaspase. Binding of the pro-apoptotic Egl-1 protein to Ced-9 induces significant conformational changes in Ced-9 prompting the dissociation of Ced-9 from the Ced-4 dimer. The freed Ced-4 dimer further dimerizes to form a tetramer that recruits and induce activation of Ced-3. In a sense, the roles of Egl-1 in Ced-4 activation and PSTPIP1 in pyrin activation are very similar, namely to relieve the inhibitory effect of Ced-9 on Ced-4 and the B-box on pyrin, respectively.

The trimeric nature of pyrin could explain in part why the majority of FMF-associated mutations are seemingly recessive mutations, and why they predispose some heterozygous carriers to other inflammatory diseases ( Grimaldi et al., 2006 ; Ozen et al., 2003 ; Rabinovich et al., 2007 ). In heterozygous subjects the probability of having a pyrin trimer containing three mutated pyrin monomers is 12.5 % of the total pyrin trimers. This might not be sufficient to show a dominant phenotype, but might predispose subjects to other inflammatory diseases. The remaining pyrin trimers are either made entirely of WT monomers (12.5 %) or of a mixture of WT and mutant pyrin monomers (75 %). The WT-mutant pyrin heterotrimers may not be able to show a total gain of function phenotype, but they might have a low level of activity, because the three monomers in these pyrin heterotrimers must be all activated at the same time to optimally recruit and oligomerize ASC.

The disease-associated PSTPIP1 mutations are clearly gain-of-function mutations because PAPA syndrome is a dominantly inherited disease. Indeed co-immunoprecipitation and in vitro pull-down experiments, demonstrated that the mutant PSTPIP1 proteins exhibit more binding to pyrin than the WT protein. According to our model this enhanced association of PSTPIP1 mutants with pyrin B-box could induce constitutive activation of pyrin thereby leading to more ASC oligomerization, and subsequently more caspase-1 activation. This is indeed supported by immunoprecipitation experiments, which revealed that pyrin exhibits enhanced association with ASC in the presence of the disease-associated PSTPIP1 mutants. Moreover, pyrin induced more ASC pyroptosome assembly in the presence of the PSTPIP1 mutants compared to WT PSTPIP1. As to why mutations of PSTPIP1, also a functional trimer, behave dominantly unlike the pyrin mutations, it is likely that one or two mutant subunit(s) of the PSTPIP1 trimer might be sufficient for binding to pyrin. Once bound, the remaining WT subunit(s) of PSTPIP1 might be able to disrupt the PYD-B box association by a steric hindrance mechanism or by a cooperative binding mechanism (i, e., binding of the mutant subunit might facilitate binding of the WT subunit to the B-boxes of the pyrin homotrimer). In support of this, we have observed that a heterotrimer of WT and A230T mutant PSTPIP1 exhibit strong binding to pyrin comparable to binding of a homotrimer of mutant A230T to pyrin ( supplementary Fig. 4A ). The WT PSTPIP1 subunit(s) in the heterotrimer exhibited significantly more binding than the WT subunits in the WT homotrimer ( supplementary Fig. 4B , compare 4 th and 6 th lanes). These results explain why mutations of PSTPIP1 behave dominantly.

Although there is no direct evidence as yet to support a role for pyrin in viral restriction, the evidence presented here showing induction of endogenous pyrin in response to retroviral infection of THP-1 cells, and previous observations that interferon alpha ( Centola et al., 2000 ) induces pyrin expression in monocytes suggest that pyrin might indeed play an important role as anti-viral pro-inflammatory mediator. Significantly, the domain architecture of pyrin is present in a family of proteins designated the tripartite motif (Trim) family with many members (Trim5α, Trim19, Trim22, Trim32) that function to restrict viral replication in mammalian cells ( Meroni and Diez-Roux, 2005 ; Nisole et al., 2005 ). The best characterized among these is Trim5α which, like human pyrin, contains a central B-box and coiled-coil domain and a C-terminal SPRY domain, but differs only by the presence of an N-terminal RING domain in place of the PYD in pyrin. It has been recently shown that the SPRY domain of Trim5α is involved in the recognition of retroviral capsid proteins and viral restriction ( Nisole et al., 2005 ; Sebastian and Luban, 2005 ; Yap et al., 2004 ; Yap et al., 2005 ). Interestingly, a single amino acid substitution in SPRY domain of human Trim5α changes its specificity and confers on it the ability to recognize HIV capsids and restrict HIV-1 infection ( Yap et al., 2005 ). Therefore, it is reasonable to speculate that the SPRY domain of pyrin might also function similarly as in Trim5α to recognize retroviral capsid proteins and restrict viral infection via activation of the pyrin/ASC pyroptosome. The SPRY domain might interact with the B-box after binding to retroviral proteins in a manner similar to that of PSTPIP1, resulting in activation of pyrin. It remains to be seen if that is the case, and whether the FMF-associated amino acid substitutions in the SPRY domain of pyrin were selected for during human evolution to cope up with evolving strains of retroviruses and to expand the spectrum of viruses that could be recognized by pyrin's SPRY domain.

Further evidence for the possible involvement of the SPRY domain in the regulation of the inflammasome activity came during sequence analysis of the zebrafish genome which surprisingly revealed that zebrafish does not contain a pyrin gene but actually contains a hybrid gene that encodes a protein homologous to both human pyrin and cryopyrin proteins, with a C-terminal SPRY domain (Genbank accession # XP_69186, supplementary Fig. 2 ). It is well established now that cryopyrin is a major sensor of pathogens and stress stimuli and a central activator of the caspase-1 inflammasome in response to these stimuli. The domain structure of the zebrafish XP_69186 protein (zebrafish cryopyrin) is similar to that of human cryopyrin but it contains an additional SPRY domain at the C-terminus. It appears that the C-terminal half of the LRR domain in cryopyrin is replaced with a SPRY domain in the zebrafish cryopyrin. This suggests that the functions of human pyrin and cryopyrin proteins are combined in one molecule in the zebrafish. Furthermore, the physical association of the SPRY domain with zebrafish cryopyrin together with the observations that the majority of the FMF-disease associated mutations are present in the SPRY domain of human pyrin more than underscores the importance of this domain in pathogen recognition and in regulation of the inflammasome activity. Further sequence analysis of the zebrafish genome revealed the presence of the SPRY domain at the C-termini of other zebrafish cryopyrin related genes (Genbank accession #s XP_690650 , XP_699873 ).

The cytoskeleton plays an important role in the pyrin/PSTPIP1 inflammatory pathway. Both pyrin and PSTPIP1 were found associated with the actin cytoskeleton ( Mansfield et al., 2001 ; Spencer et al., 1997 ), and in the case of pyrin it was also found in association with microtubules ( Mansfield et al., 2001 ), indicating that the two proteins may participate in the regulation of the cytoskeleton during inflammation. Consistent with the importance of the cytoskeleton organization for pyrin function, the pyrin inflammatory pathway is uniquely sensitive to the microtubule disruptive agent colchicine, and colchicine's responsiveness is an important diagnostic element for FMF ( Dinarello et al., 1974 ; Margolis and Wilson, 1977 ; Zemer et al., 1986 ; Zemer et al., 1974 ). In support of these observations our biochemical data clearly demonstrates that the ability of pyrin to activate caspase-1 is inhibited by colchicine and nocodazol, thus establishing that the therapeutic benefit of colchicine is attributed to its ability to target pyrin, preventing it from activating caspase-1.
