---
pmid: '11696983'
title: Isolation and characterization of the human gene homologous to the Drosophila
  headcase (hdc) gene in chromosome bands 6q23-q24, a region of common deletion in
  human pancreatic cancer.
authors:
- Makino N
- Yamato T
- Inoue H
- Furukawa T
- Abe T
- Yokoyama T
- Yatsuoka T
- Fukushige S
- Orikasa S
- Takahashi T
- Horii A
journal: DNA Seq
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.3109/10425170109041340
---

# Isolation and characterization of the human gene homologous to the Drosophila headcase (hdc) gene in chromosome bands 6q23-q24, a region of common deletion in human pancreatic cancer.
**Authors:** Makino N, Yamato T, Inoue H, Furukawa T, Abe T, Yokoyama T, Yatsuoka T, Fukushige S, Orikasa S, Takahashi T, Horii A
**Journal:** DNA Seq (2001)
**DOI:** [10.3109/10425170109041340](https://doi.org/10.3109/10425170109041340)

## Abstract

1. DNA Seq. 2001;11(6):547-53. doi: 10.3109/10425170109041340.

Isolation and characterization of the human gene homologous to the Drosophila 
headcase (hdc) gene in chromosome bands 6q23-q24, a region of common deletion in 
human pancreatic cancer.

Makino N(1), Yamato T, Inoue H, Furukawa T, Abe T, Yokoyama T, Yatsuoka T, 
Fukushige S, Orikasa S, Takahashi T, Horii A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Tohoku University School of Medicine, 2-1 
Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

Deletions of the long arm of chromosome 6 (6q) are one of the most common 
chromosomal abnormalities in multiple human malignancies. Previously, we have 
identified three commonly deleted regions on 6q (6q21, 6q23-q24, and 6q26) in 
pancreatic cancer by loss of heterozygosity studies, suggesting the presence of 
one or more tumor suppressor genes on this chromosome arm. Using a combination 
of database search and cDNA library screening, we successfully isolated a 
transcript from 6q24. This mRNA encodes a protein consisting of 543 amino acids 
with homology to the Drosophila headcase (hdc) gene and, thus, is designated as 
hHDC. Northern analysis identified a ubiquitously expressed 5.6-kb transcript. 
Seventeen (81%) of 21 pancreatic cancer cell lines and four (80%) of five renal 
cell carcinoma cell lines showed low level expression, suggesting that the hHDC 
gene may play an important role in some human cancers.

DOI: 10.3109/10425170109041340
PMID: 11696983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
