---
pmid: '22711498'
title: Activation of Ras-dependent signaling pathways by G(14) -coupled receptors
  requires the adaptor protein TPR1.
authors:
- Kwan DH
- Yung LY
- Ye RD
- Wong YH
journal: J Cell Biochem
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/jcb.24225
---

# Activation of Ras-dependent signaling pathways by G(14) -coupled receptors requires the adaptor protein TPR1.
**Authors:** Kwan DH, Yung LY, Ye RD, Wong YH
**Journal:** J Cell Biochem (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jcb.24225](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcb.24225)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Biochem. 2012 Nov;113(11):3486-97. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24225.

Activation of Ras-dependent signaling pathways by G(14) -coupled receptors 
requires the adaptor protein TPR1.

Kwan DH(1), Yung LY, Ye RD, Wong YH.

Author information:
(1)Division of Life Science and the Biotechnology Research Institute, Hong Kong 
University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, 
China.

Many G(q) -coupled receptors mediate mitogenic signals by stimulating 
extracellular signal-regulated protein kinases (ERKs) that are typically 
regulated by the small GTPase Ras. Recent studies have revealed that members of 
the Gα(q) family may possess the ability to activate Ras/ERK by interacting with 
the adaptor protein tetratricopeptide repeat 1 (TPR1). Within the Gα(q) family, 
the highly promiscuous Gα(14) can relay signals from numerous receptors. Here, 
we examined if Gα(14) interacts with TPR1 to stimulate Ras signaling pathways. 
Expression of the constitutively active Gα(14) QL mutant in HEK293 cells led to 
the formation of GTP-bound Ras as well as increased phosphorylations of 
downstream signaling molecules including ERK and IκB kinase. Stimulation of 
endogenous G(14) -coupled somatostatin type 2 and α(2) -adrenergic receptors 
produced similar responses in human hepatocellular HepG2 carcinoma cells. 
Co-immunoprecipitation assays using HEK293 cells demonstrated a stronger 
association of TPR1 for Gα(14) QL than Gα(14) , suggesting that TPR1 
preferentially binds to the GTP-bound form of Gα(14) . Activated Gα(14) also 
interacted with the Ras guanine nucleotide exchange factors SOS1 and SOS2. 
Expression of a dominant negative mutant of TPR1 or siRNA-mediated knockdown of 
TPR1 effectively abolished the ability of Gα(14) to induce Ras signaling in 
native HepG2 or transfected HEK293 cells. Although expression of the dominant 
negative mutant of TPR1 suppressed Gα(14) QL-induced phosphorylations of ERK and 
IκB kinase, it did not affect Gα(14) QL-induced stimulation of phospholipase Cβ 
or c-Jun N-terminal kinase. Our results suggest that TPR1 is required for Gα(14) 
to stimulate Ras-dependent signaling pathways, but not for the propagation of 
signals along Ras-independent pathways.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.24225
PMID: 22711498 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
