---
pmid: '25063848'
title: PAAT, a novel ATPase and trans-regulator of mitochondrial ABC transporters,
  is critically involved in the maintenance of mitochondrial homeostasis.
authors:
- Yang X
- Yang J
- Li L
- Sun L
- Yi X
- Han X
- Si W
- Yan R
- Chen Z
- Xie G
- Li W
- Shang Y
- Liang J
journal: FASEB J
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1096/fj.14-254045
---

# PAAT, a novel ATPase and trans-regulator of mitochondrial ABC transporters, is critically involved in the maintenance of mitochondrial homeostasis.
**Authors:** Yang X, Yang J, Li L, Sun L, Yi X, Han X, Si W, Yan R, Chen Z, Xie G, Li W, Shang Y, Liang J
**Journal:** FASEB J (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1096/fj.14-254045](https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.14-254045)

## Abstract

1. FASEB J. 2014 Nov;28(11):4821-34. doi: 10.1096/fj.14-254045. Epub 2014 Jul 25.

PAAT, a novel ATPase and trans-regulator of mitochondrial ABC transporters, is 
critically involved in the maintenance of mitochondrial homeostasis.

Yang X(1), Yang J(1), Li L(1), Sun L(1), Yi X(1), Han X(1), Si W(2), Yan R(1), 
Chen Z(1), Xie G(1), Li W(1), Shang Y(2), Liang J(3).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research, Ministry of 
Education, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Peking University 
Health Science Center, Beijing, China; and.
(2)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research, Ministry of 
Education, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Peking University 
Health Science Center, Beijing, China; and Tianjin Key Laboratory of Medical 
Epigenetics, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Tianjin Medical 
University, Tianjin, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research, Ministry of 
Education, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Peking University 
Health Science Center, Beijing, China; and liang_jing@hsc.pku.edu.cn.

ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters are implicated in a diverse range of 
physiological and pathophysiological processes, such as cholesterol and lipid 
transportation and multidrug resistance. Despite the considerable efforts made 
in understanding of the cellular function of ABC proteins, the regulation 
mechanism of this type of protein is still poorly defined. Here we report the 
identification and functional characterization of a novel ATPase protein, 
protein associated with ABC transporters (PAAT), in humans. PAAT contains a 
nucleotide-binding domain (NBD)-like domain and a signal for intramitochondrial 
sorting. We showed that PAAT is localized in both the cytoplasm and the 
mitochondria and has an intrinsic ATPase activity. PAAT physically interacts 
with the 3 known mitochondrial inner membrane ABC proteins, ABCB7, ABCB8, and 
ABCB10, but not ABCB1, ABCB6, or ABCG2, and functionally regulates the transport 
of ferric nutrients and heme biosynthesis. Significantly, PAAT deficiency 
promotes cell death, reduces mitochondrial potential, and sensitizes 
mitochondria to oxidative stress-induced DNA damages. Our experiments revealed 
that PAAT is a novel ATPase and a trans-regulator of mitochondrial ABC 
transporters that plays an important role in the maintenance of mitochondrial 
homeostasis and cell survival.

© FASEB.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.14-254045
PMID: 25063848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
