---
pmid: '8626561'
title: Association between mitogen-activated protein kinase and the zeta chain of
  the T cell receptor (TcR) with the SH2,3 domain of p56lck. Differential regulation
  by TcR cross-linking.
authors:
- August A
- Dupont B
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.17.10054
---

# Association between mitogen-activated protein kinase and the zeta chain of the T cell receptor (TcR) with the SH2,3 domain of p56lck. Differential regulation by TcR cross-linking.
**Authors:** August A, Dupont B
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.271.17.10054](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.271.17.10054)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1996 Apr 26;271(17):10054-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.17.10054.

Association between mitogen-activated protein kinase and the zeta chain of the T 
cell receptor (TcR) with the SH2,3 domain of p56lck. Differential regulation by 
TcR cross-linking.

August A(1), Dupont B.

Author information:
(1)Immunology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute for Cancer Research, New York, 
New York 10021, USA.

A number of protein-tyrosine kinases have been shown to be important in T cell 
activation. One such kinase, Lck, has been demonstrated genetically to be 
essential for T cell receptor (TcR) signaling, and the SH2 and SH3 (src homology 
2 and 3) domains of Lck have been shown to be indispensable for T cell 
activation. We have sought substrates with which the SH2,3 domain would interact 
following T cell activation, using fusion proteins containing the Lck SH2 and 
SH3 domains linked to glutathione S-transferase. We demonstrate that the SH2,3 
region interacts specifically and directly with numerous tyrosine-phosphorylated 
molecules following TcR cross-linking, including constitutively with 
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)/extracellular-regulated kinase and 
inducibly with the zeta chain of the TcR. The interaction with 
MAPK/extracellular-regulated kinase was via the SH3 domain. The interaction with 
the tyrosine-phosphorylated zeta chain, while phosphotyrosine-dependent, 
required both the SH3 and SH2 domains. These interactions were specific as 
molecules known to be tyrosine-phosphorylated following TcR cross-linking, 
phospholipase C-gamma1 and Fyn, were not bound. Thus, we suggest that during TcR 
signaling, Lck interacts with numerous molecules, including MAPK and TcR-zeta, 
via its SH2,3 domain. The interaction with MAPK would place Lck in a position to 
be involved in the complex resulting in the activation of MAPK. In addition, the 
binding of Lck to the tyrosine-phosphorylated zeta chain of the TcR would serve 
to strengthen the interaction of the associated CD4 and the TcR complex, leading 
to increased avidity for the antigen-major histocompatibility protein complex.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.17.10054
PMID: 8626561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
