---
pmid: '12032823'
title: Overexpression of the Notch target genes Hes in vivo induces lymphoid and myeloid
  alterations.
authors:
- Kawamata S
- Du C
- Li K
- Lavau C
journal: Oncogene
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1205487
---

# Overexpression of the Notch target genes Hes in vivo induces lymphoid and myeloid alterations.
**Authors:** Kawamata S, Du C, Li K, Lavau C
**Journal:** Oncogene (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1205487](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1205487)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2002 May 30;21(24):3855-63. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1205487.

Overexpression of the Notch target genes Hes in vivo induces lymphoid and 
myeloid alterations.

Kawamata S(1), Du C, Li K, Lavau C.

Author information:
(1)SyStemix Inc. 3155 Porter Dr., Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA.

To examine the effects of Notch signaling on hematopoiesis, we transplanted mice 
with progenitors transduced with a constitutively active form of Notch1 
(Notch1IC) or the Notch1 target genes Hes. Notch1IC-transduced cells induce T 
cell tumors and cannot generate B lymphocytes in vivo. Hes-transplanted mice 
remained healthy but cells transduced with Hes1 or Hes5 were partially impaired 
in their ability to differentiate into B cells. Both Hes1 and Hes5 were 
upregulated in the BM of Notch1IC mice and their ability to interfere with the 
transcriptional activity of E2A in a reporter assay was comparable to that of 
Notch1IC. This suggests that the inhibition of B cell development in the 
Notch1IC-transduced cells could be mediated by the interference of HES1/HES5 
proteins with E2A. Hes1-, Hes5- and Notch1IC-transduced bone marrow cells 
cultured ex vivo in a colony forming assay in the presence of cytokines that 
promote myeloid differentiation remained very immature, indicating that the 
myeloid potential of these bone marrow cells was altered. Thymocytes 
overexpressing Hes1, Hes5 or Notch1IC matured normally into CD4 and CD8 single 
positive cells in vivo. Altogether our data suggest that Notch1IC induces T cell 
tumors independently of Hes genes but that its interference with lymphoid B and 
myeloid maturation is partly mediated by Hes1 and Hes5. DOI:

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1205487
PMID: 12032823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
