---
pmid: '15031724'
title: Physical and functional interaction between BH3-only protein Hrk and mitochondrial
  pore-forming protein p32.
authors:
- Sunayama J
- Ando Y
- Itoh N
- Tomiyama A
- Sakurada K
- Sugiyama A
- Kang D
- Tashiro F
- Gotoh Y
- Kuchino Y
- Kitanaka C
journal: Cell Death Differ
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.cdd.4401418
---

# Physical and functional interaction between BH3-only protein Hrk and mitochondrial pore-forming protein p32.
**Authors:** Sunayama J, Ando Y, Itoh N, Tomiyama A, Sakurada K, Sugiyama A, Kang D, Tashiro F, Gotoh Y, Kuchino Y, Kitanaka C
**Journal:** Cell Death Differ (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.cdd.4401418](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.cdd.4401418)

## Abstract

1. Cell Death Differ. 2004 Jul;11(7):771-81. doi: 10.1038/sj.cdd.4401418.

Physical and functional interaction between BH3-only protein Hrk and 
mitochondrial pore-forming protein p32.

Sunayama J(1), Ando Y, Itoh N, Tomiyama A, Sakurada K, Sugiyama A, Kang D, 
Tashiro F, Gotoh Y, Kuchino Y, Kitanaka C.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, 
Japan.

Bcl-2 homology domain (BH) 3-only proteins of the proapoptotic Bcl-2 subfamily 
play a key role as initiators of mitochondria-dependent apoptosis. To date, at 
least 10 mammalian BH3-only proteins have been identified, and it is now being 
realized that they have different roles and mechanisms of regulation in the 
transduction of apoptotic signals to mitochondria. Hrk/DP5 is one of the 
mammalian BH3-only proteins implicated in a variety of physiological and 
pathological apoptosis, yet the molecular mechanism involved in Hrk-mediated 
apoptosis remains poorly understood. In an attempt to identify cellular proteins 
participating in Hrk-mediated apoptosis, we have conducted yeast two-hybrid 
screening for Hrk-interacting proteins and isolated p32, a mitochondrial protein 
that has been shown to form a channel consisting of its homotrimer. In vitro 
binding, co-immunoprecipitation, as well as immunocytochemical analyses verified 
specific interaction and colocalization of Hrk and p32, both of which depended 
on the presence of the highly conserved C-terminal region of p32. Importantly, 
Hrk-induced apoptosis was suppressed by the expression of p32 mutants lacking 
the N-terminal mitochondrial signal sequence (p32(74-282)) and the conserved 
C-terminal region (p32 (1-221)), which are expected to inhibit binding of Hrk 
competitively to the endogenous p32 protein and to disrupt the channel function 
of p32, respectively. Furthermore, small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of 
p32 conferred protection against Hrk-induced apoptosis. Altogether, these 
results suggest that p32 may be a key molecule that links Hrk to mitochondria 
and is critically involved in the regulation of Hrk-mediated apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.cdd.4401418
PMID: 15031724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
