---
pmid: '31413141'
title: The MS4A gene cluster is a key modulator of soluble TREM2 and Alzheimer's disease
  risk.
authors:
- Deming Y
- Filipello F
- Cignarella F
- Cantoni C
- Hsu S
- Mikesell R
- Li Z
- Del-Aguila JL
- Dube U
- Farias FG
- Bradley J
- Budde J
- Ibanez L
- Fernandez MV
- Blennow K
- Zetterberg H
- Heslegrave A
- Johansson PM
- Svensson J
- Nellgård B
- Lleo A
- Alcolea D
- Clarimon J
- Rami L
- Molinuevo JL
- Suárez-Calvet M
- Morenas-Rodríguez E
- Kleinberger G
- Ewers M
- Harari O
- Haass C
- Brett TJ
- Benitez BA
- Karch CM
- Piccio L
- Cruchaga C
journal: Sci Transl Med
year: '2019'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: xml
pmcid: PMC6697053
doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aau2291
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The MS4A gene cluster is a key modulator of soluble TREM2 and Alzheimer's disease risk.
**Authors:** Deming Y, Filipello F, Cignarella F, Cantoni C, Hsu S, Mikesell R, Li Z, Del-Aguila JL, Dube U, Farias FG, Bradley J, Budde J, Ibanez L, Fernandez MV, Blennow K, Zetterberg H, Heslegrave A, Johansson PM, Svensson J, Nellgård B, Lleo A, Alcolea D, Clarimon J, Rami L, Molinuevo JL, Suárez-Calvet M, Morenas-Rodríguez E, Kleinberger G, Ewers M, Harari O, Haass C, Brett TJ, Benitez BA, Karch CM, Piccio L, Cruchaga C
**Journal:** Sci Transl Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1126/scitranslmed.aau2291](https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.aau2291)
**PMC:** [PMC6697053](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6697053/)

## Abstract

1. Sci Transl Med. 2019 Aug 14;11(505):eaau2291. doi:
10.1126/scitranslmed.aau2291.

The MS4A gene cluster is a key modulator of soluble TREM2 and Alzheimer's 
disease risk.

Deming Y(1)(2), Filipello F(3), Cignarella F(3), Cantoni C(3), Hsu S(1), 
Mikesell R(3), Li Z(1), Del-Aguila JL(1), Dube U(1), Farias FG(1), Bradley J(1), 
Budde J(1), Ibanez L(1), Fernandez MV(1), Blennow K(4)(5), Zetterberg 
H(4)(5)(6), Heslegrave A(6)(7), Johansson PM(8), Svensson J(9), Nellgård B(10), 
Lleo A(11)(12), Alcolea D(11)(12), Clarimon J(11)(12), Rami L(13), Molinuevo 
JL(13)(14), Suárez-Calvet M(14)(15)(16), Morenas-Rodríguez E(15)(17), 
Kleinberger G(15)(17)(18), Ewers M(19), Harari O(1)(20)(21), Haass 
C(16)(17)(22), Brett TJ(20)(23), Benitez BA(1)(20)(21), Karch CM(24)(20)(21), 
Piccio L(25)(20)(26), Cruchaga C(24)(20)(21).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(2)Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, University of Wisconsin School of 
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53792, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO 63110, USA.
(4)Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience and 
Physiology, Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg, Mölndal, 
Sweden.
(5)Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory, Department of Neuroscience and 
Physiology, University of Gothenburg, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Mölndal, 
Sweden.
(6)Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL Institute of Neurology, Queen 
Square, London, UK.
(7)UK Dementia Research Institute at UCL, London, UK.
(8)Department of Clinical Sciences Helsingborg, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(9)Department of Internal Medicine, Institute of Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy 
at the University of Gothenburg, Göteborg, Sweden.
(10)Department of Anesthesiology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Institute of Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy at the University 
of Gothenburg, Göteborg, Sweden.
(11)Department of Neurology, IIB Sant Pau, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(12)Center for Networker Biomedical Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases 
(CIBERNED), Madrid, Spain.
(13)IDIBAPS, Alzheimer's Disease and Other Cognitive Disorders Unit, Neurology 
Service, ICN Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain.
(14)Barcelonaβeta Brain Research Center, Pasqual Maragall Foundation, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(15)Biomedical Center (BMC), Biochemistry, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität 
München, Munich, Germany.
(16)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Munich, Germany.
(17)Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy), Munich, Germany.
(18)ISAR Bioscience GmbH, 2152 Planegg, Germany.
(19)Institute for Stroke and Dementia Research, University Hospital, LMU, 
Munich, Germany.
(20)Hope Center for Neurological Disorders, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(21)NeuroGenomics and Informatics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(22)Chair of Metabolic Biochemistry, Biomedical Center (BMC), Faculty of 
Medicine, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, 81377 Munich, Germany.
(23)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(24)Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, MO 63110, USA. karchc@wustl.edu picciol@wustl.edu ccruchaga@wustl.edu.
(25)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, MO 63110, USA. karchc@wustl.edu picciol@wustl.edu ccruchaga@wustl.edu.
(26)Brain and Mind Centre, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2050, Australia.

Soluble triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (sTREM2) in 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) has been associated with Alzheimer's disease (AD). 
TREM2 plays a critical role in microglial activation, survival, and 
phagocytosis; however, the pathophysiological role of sTREM2 in AD is not well 
understood. Understanding the role of sTREM2 in AD may reveal new pathological 
mechanisms and lead to the identification of therapeutic targets. We performed a 
genome-wide association study (GWAS) to identify genetic modifiers of CSF sTREM2 
obtained from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative. Common variants 
in the membrane-spanning 4-domains subfamily A (MS4A) gene region were 
associated with CSF sTREM2 concentrations (rs1582763; P = 1.15 × 10-15); this 
was replicated in independent datasets. The variants associated with increased 
CSF sTREM2 concentrations were associated with reduced AD risk and delayed age 
at onset of disease. The single-nucleotide polymorphism rs1582763 modified 
expression of the MS4A4A and MS4A6A genes in multiple tissues, suggesting that 
one or both of these genes are important for modulating sTREM2 production. Using 
human macrophages as a proxy for microglia, we found that MS4A4A and TREM2 
colocalized on lipid rafts at the plasma membrane, that sTREM2 increased with 
MS4A4A overexpression, and that silencing of MS4A4A reduced sTREM2 production. 
These genetic, molecular, and cellular findings suggest that MS4A4A modulates 
sTREM2. These findings also provide a mechanistic explanation for the original 
GWAS signal in the MS4A locus for AD risk and indicate that TREM2 may be 
involved in AD pathogenesis not only in TREM2 risk-variant carriers but also in 
those with sporadic disease.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aau2291
PMCID: PMC6697053
PMID: 31413141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: CC receives research 
support from: Biogen, EISAI, Alector and Parabon. The funders of the study had 
no role in the collection, analysis, or interpretation of data; in the writing 
of the report; or in the decision to submit the paper for publication. CC is a 
member of the advisory board of ADx Healthcare and Vivid Genomics. KB has served 
as a consultant or at advisory boards for Alzheon, BioArctic, Biogen, Eli Lilly, 
Fujirebio Europe, IBL International, Merck, Novartis, Pfizer, and Roche 
Diagnostics, and is a co-founder of Brain Biomarker Solutions in Gothenburg AB, 
a GU Ventures-based platform company at the University of Gothenburg. HZ has 
served at scientific advisory boards for Eli Lilly, Roche Diagnostics and Wave, 
has received travel support from Teva and is a co-founder of Brain Biomarker 
Solutions in Gothenburg AB, a GU Ventures-based platform company at the 
University of Gothenburg. Christian Haass has a patent for TREM2 cleavage 
modulators and uses thereof (PCT/EP2017/068684)

## Full Text

IntroductionIn 2013, two groups independently identified a rare variant in TREM2 (p.R47H) that increased risk for AD almost three-fold, making TREM2 the strongest genetic risk factor for late-onset AD since the identification of APOE ε4 30 years earlier (1, 2). TREM2 p.R47H is also associated with clinical, imaging, and neuropathological AD phenotypes, including advanced behavioral symptoms, gray matter atrophy, and Braak staging (3, 4). Additional rare variants in TREM2 have also been associated with AD risk including p.R62H, p.H157Y, p.R98W, p.D87N, p.T66M, p.Y38C, and p.Q33X (1, 5–7).TREM2 encodes a protein that is part of a transmembrane receptor-signaling complex essential for the immune response of myeloid cells such as microglia. TREM2 is highly and specifically expressed in microglia in the central nervous system (CNS) where it plays a key role in microglial activation, survival, and phagocytosis (8–11). Recent evidence from AD animal models suggests that TREM2 has a complex relationship with the key proteins involved in AD pathogenesis (amyloid-beta (Aβ) and tau) (12). In studies suggesting that TREM2 may be protective in AD, TREM2 has been associated with phagocytosis in the presence of Aβ (13). The introduction of the human TREM2 transgene reduced pathology and rescued cognitive function in amyloid-bearing mice (14). A common phenotype across mouse models of amyloidosis is that reduction or loss of Trem2 leads to fewer amyloid plaque-associated microglia, resulting in more diffuse plaques and enhanced neuritic damage (15–17). In contrast, studies of tau pathology indicate that Trem2 deficiency protects against neurodegeneration, suggesting a detrimental role for TREM2 in the presence of tau pathology (18, 19). Together, these studies demonstrate that TREM2 plays an important, yet complex, role in AD pathology.In addition to the full-length TREM2 which makes up part of a transmembrane receptor, a soluble form of TREM2 (sTREM2) is produced by alternative splicing or proteolytic cleavage of the full-length TREM2 protein (6, 13, 20). Three distinct transcripts for TREM2 are found in human brain tissue, including a short alternatively spliced transcript that excludes exon 4 (encoding the transmembrane domain) to produce a soluble isoform of TREM2 (6). Recently a cleavage site was identified in TREM2 that can be targeted by proteases such as ADAM10, ADAM17, and gamma-secretase to generate sTREM2 (21, 22). sTREM2 is released into the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) where it can be quantified (13, 23–28). CSF sTREM2 is hypothesized to increase in response to microglial activation due to neurodegenerative processes (24, 27). Our group and others have demonstrated that CSF sTREM2 is elevated in AD (23, 24, 26). Changes in CSF sTREM2 appear to occur after amyloid accumulation, beginning approximately five years before clinical symptom onset in autosomal dominant forms of AD (25). Additionally, CSF sTREM2 positively correlates with CSF tau and phosphorylated tau (ptau), but not with CSF Aβ42, suggesting that sTREM2 may be associated with pathological processes occurring after the accumulation of Aβ (23, 24, 26). Thus, CSF sTREM2 has emerged as an important and dynamic biomarker of disease processes throughout AD pathogenesis.Our group and others have shown that using CSF biomarkers of complex diseases as quantitative endophenotypes can help identify genes that contribute to key biological pathways involved in disease (29–31). In this study, we aimed to identify genetic modifiers of CSF sTREM2. We conducted a genome wide association study (GWAS) of CSF sTREM2 from more than 1,390 individuals and detected a locus within the MS4A gene region (11q12.2) that displays genome-wide significant association with CSF sTREM2. We then used bioinformatic, transcriptomic, and cellular approaches to examine correlations between MS4A genes and TREM2. Based on these findings, we propose that the MS4A gene family contains one or more key modulators of sTREM2.

Introduction

In 2013, two groups independently identified a rare variant in TREM2 (p.R47H) that increased risk for AD almost three-fold, making TREM2 the strongest genetic risk factor for late-onset AD since the identification of APOE ε4 30 years earlier (1, 2). TREM2 p.R47H is also associated with clinical, imaging, and neuropathological AD phenotypes, including advanced behavioral symptoms, gray matter atrophy, and Braak staging (3, 4). Additional rare variants in TREM2 have also been associated with AD risk including p.R62H, p.H157Y, p.R98W, p.D87N, p.T66M, p.Y38C, and p.Q33X (1, 5–7).

TREM2 encodes a protein that is part of a transmembrane receptor-signaling complex essential for the immune response of myeloid cells such as microglia. TREM2 is highly and specifically expressed in microglia in the central nervous system (CNS) where it plays a key role in microglial activation, survival, and phagocytosis (8–11). Recent evidence from AD animal models suggests that TREM2 has a complex relationship with the key proteins involved in AD pathogenesis (amyloid-beta (Aβ) and tau) (12). In studies suggesting that TREM2 may be protective in AD, TREM2 has been associated with phagocytosis in the presence of Aβ (13). The introduction of the human TREM2 transgene reduced pathology and rescued cognitive function in amyloid-bearing mice (14). A common phenotype across mouse models of amyloidosis is that reduction or loss of Trem2 leads to fewer amyloid plaque-associated microglia, resulting in more diffuse plaques and enhanced neuritic damage (15–17). In contrast, studies of tau pathology indicate that Trem2 deficiency protects against neurodegeneration, suggesting a detrimental role for TREM2 in the presence of tau pathology (18, 19). Together, these studies demonstrate that TREM2 plays an important, yet complex, role in AD pathology.

In addition to the full-length TREM2 which makes up part of a transmembrane receptor, a soluble form of TREM2 (sTREM2) is produced by alternative splicing or proteolytic cleavage of the full-length TREM2 protein (6, 13, 20). Three distinct transcripts for TREM2 are found in human brain tissue, including a short alternatively spliced transcript that excludes exon 4 (encoding the transmembrane domain) to produce a soluble isoform of TREM2 (6). Recently a cleavage site was identified in TREM2 that can be targeted by proteases such as ADAM10, ADAM17, and gamma-secretase to generate sTREM2 (21, 22). sTREM2 is released into the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) where it can be quantified (13, 23–28). CSF sTREM2 is hypothesized to increase in response to microglial activation due to neurodegenerative processes (24, 27). Our group and others have demonstrated that CSF sTREM2 is elevated in AD (23, 24, 26). Changes in CSF sTREM2 appear to occur after amyloid accumulation, beginning approximately five years before clinical symptom onset in autosomal dominant forms of AD (25). Additionally, CSF sTREM2 positively correlates with CSF tau and phosphorylated tau (ptau), but not with CSF Aβ42, suggesting that sTREM2 may be associated with pathological processes occurring after the accumulation of Aβ (23, 24, 26). Thus, CSF sTREM2 has emerged as an important and dynamic biomarker of disease processes throughout AD pathogenesis.

Our group and others have shown that using CSF biomarkers of complex diseases as quantitative endophenotypes can help identify genes that contribute to key biological pathways involved in disease (29–31). In this study, we aimed to identify genetic modifiers of CSF sTREM2. We conducted a genome wide association study (GWAS) of CSF sTREM2 from more than 1,390 individuals and detected a locus within the MS4A gene region (11q12.2) that displays genome-wide significant association with CSF sTREM2. We then used bioinformatic, transcriptomic, and cellular approaches to examine correlations between MS4A genes and TREM2. Based on these findings, we propose that the MS4A gene family contains one or more key modulators of sTREM2.

ResultsThe goal of this study was to identify genetic modifiers of CSF sTREM2 and to better understand the role of sTREM2 in biological pathways relevant to AD. To accomplish this goal, we analyzed genetic data and CSF sTREM2 from 813 individuals from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). We then sought to replicate our findings in independent datasets (N = 580).CSF sTREM2 correlates with age, sex, and AD biomarkersOur discovery cohort was obtained from the ADNI (N = 813), the largest dataset for CSF sTREM2 to date. The analyzed dataset included 172 AD, 169 cognitive normal, 183 early Mild Cognitive impairment (eMCI), 221 late-MCI and 68 Significant Memory Concern (SMC) individuals (Table 1). We excluded participants with MCI due to non-AD causes and participants carrying previously identified risk mutations in TREM2 (Table 2 and Supplementary Table S1). CSF sTREM2 in our analyses approximated a normal distribution without transformation; therefore, we analyzed the raw values, unless otherwise stated.We tested the correlation between age at the time of lumbar puncture (LP) and CSF sTREM2 and found a positive correlation, consistent with our previous reports (Pearson r = 0.270, P = 4.66×10−15; Supplementary Fig. S1) (24). We also evaluated whether CSF sTREM2 was associated with sex, as previously reported (24–26, 32). There was no significant difference between CSF sTREM2 in males (3,926 ± 1,969 pg/mL) versus females (3,873 ± 1,856 pg/mL, one-tailed P = 0.694; Fig. S1). CSF sTREM2 positively correlated with CSF tau (r = 0.377, P = 9.59±10−29) and ptau (r = 0.348, P = 2.08±10−24; Fig. S1). Consistent with our previous findings, there was no significant correlation between CSF sTREM2 and CSF Aβ42 levels (r = 0.074, P = 0.052; Fig. S1). CSF sTREM2 was significantly correlated with tau/Aβ42 and ptau/Aβ42 ratio (r = 0.171, P = 5.71×10−6; r = 0.176, P = 3.18×10−6; respectively). However, the correlations were not as strong as those observed between CSF sTREM2 and tau or ptau, suggesting that the correlations are likely driven by the associations with CSF tau and ptau levels (Fig. S1).We also examined CSF sTREM2 in 38 individuals heterozygous for TREM2 risk variants which were not included in the GWAS: p.D87N, p.L211P, p.R47H, p.R62H, and p.H157Y (Table 2). There was a significant difference in CSF sTREM2 between TREM2 risk variant carriers (P = 0.042) as reported previously (24). We also observed variant specific effects on CSF sTREM2. CSF sTREM2 was significantly lower in p.L211P carriers (2,578 ± 1,444 pg/mL) compared to non-carriers (3,903 ± 1,919 pg/mL, P = 0.026; Supplementary Fig. S2). CSF sTREM2 was significantly elevated in p.R47H carriers (4,852 ± 1,172 pg/mL) compared to p.L211P carriers (P = 0.029) and p.D87N carriers (2,082 ± 239 pg/mL, P = 0.041), but not significantly different from non-carriers (P = 0.223; Fig. S2).The MS4A gene region is associated with CSF sTREM2To identify genetic variants that modify CSF sTREM2, we tested for association between CSF sTREM2 and single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with a minor allele frequency (MAF) >0.02 using an additive linear regression model with age, sex, and two principal components (PCs) as covariates. A total of 7,320,475 genotyped and imputed SNPs passed strict quality control as described in the methods. TREM2 risk-variant carriers were excluded from the GWAS analyses.A genome-wide significant genetic association with CSF sTREM2 was identified on chromosome 11 within the MS4A gene region (Fig. 1, and Supplementary Fig. S3 and Supplementary Table S2). The top SNP was rs1582763, an intergenic variant nearest MS4A4A (located 26 Kb 5′of MS4A4A; 11q12.2). This common variant (A allele, MAF = 0.368, genotyped) produced a genome-wide significant association with CSF sTREM2 (N = 807, β = 735.1, P = 1.15×10−15; Fig. 1) and explained more than 6% of the variance in sTREM2 (adjusted r2 = 0.064; see supplementary results). Results from case-control stratified analyses indicate that both clinically diagnosed cognitively impaired individuals (N = 606, β = 675.8, P = 8.19×10−10) and cognitively normal controls (N = 207, β = 912.4, P = 5.20×10−8) contributed to the association between the MS4A locus and CSF sTREM2 (Supplementary Fig. S4). No common variants were identified that modified CSF sTREM2 and reached genome-wide significant P values in the APOE, TYROBP, TREM2, ADAM10 or ADAM17 regions (Supplementary Fig. S5). Interestingly, common variants within the TREM family gene locus showed a marginal association with CSF sTREM2 (rs200443049, intronic indel, N = 805, β = 416.5, P = 2.01×10−5; Fig. S5).To determine whether there was more than one independent signal within the MS4A locus, we performed conditional analyses including rs1582763 in the regression model. After conditioning for rs1582763, the most significant variant was rs6591561 (G allele, MAF = 0.316, genotyped), a missense variant within MS4A4A (NP_076926.2:p.M159V), which is not in linkage disequilibrium (LD) with rs1582763 (r2 = 0.112, D′ = 0.646). Rs6591561 (MS4A4A p.M159V) was associated with CSF sTREM2 but in the opposite direction of the main signal (rs1582763). The minor allele of rs6591561 was associated with reduced CSF sTREM2, and this association was independent of rs1582763 (before conditioning: β = −783.7, P = 1.47×10−9; after conditioning: β = −378.4, P = 1.55×10−4; Fig. 1). After conditioning for rs6591561 (MS4A4A p.M159V), rs1582763 remained genome-wide significant (β = 625.7, P = 4.52×10−11; Fig. 1), providing further evidence that these are independent signals.Replication in independent datasets and meta-analysisIn order to replicate the associations of rs1582763 and rs6591561(MS4A4A p.M159V) in an independent data set, we analyzed an additional 580 samples of CSF sTREM2 along with associated genetic data that were obtained from six different studies: the Charles F. and Joanne Knight Alzheimer Disease Research Center (Knight ADRC); the Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network (DIAN); two studies from the Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg (GHDEM and GHPH); the Memory Unit and Alzheimer’s laboratory at the Hospital of Sant Pau in Barcelona (Sant Pau Initiative on Neurodegeneration; SPIN); and the ICN Hospital Clinic-IDIBAPS in Barcelona. These datasets have been described previously (24–26, 32) (Supplementary Table S3).Analysis of this data set replicated the association of rs1582763 with elevated CSF sTREM2 (z = 5.743, P = 9.28×10−9; Fig. 2). Further meta-analysis combining ADNI and the replication datasets showed a strong association between rs1582763 and elevated CSF sTREM2 (Pmeta = 4.48×10−21; Fig. 2). In addition, analysis of the independent datasets replicated the association between rs6591561 (MS4A4A p.M159V) and reduced CSF sTREM2 (z = −3.715, P = 2.03×10−4; Fig. 2), while meta-analysis of rs6591561 combining ADNI with the replication datasets also showed a genome-wide significant association (Pmeta = 1.65×10−11; Fig. 2). Individual results for each dataset are shown in Supplementary Table S4.Comparisons between MS4A association and APOEAPOE genotype is the strongest genetic risk factor for AD (33) and APOE ε4 is the strongest genetic association for CSF Aβ42 and tau (31, 34). To determine whether APOE genotype is associated with CSF sTREM2, we created a variable representing APOE-mediated AD risk by recoding APOE genotype for each individual as 0 for ε2/ε2, 1 for ε2/ε3, 2 for ε3/ε3, 3 for ε2/ε4, 4 for ε3/ε4, and 5 for ε4/ε4. We added this APOE genotype risk variable to a regression model, adjusting for age, sex, and two PCs for population stratification and found that APOE genotype was not significantly associated with CSF sTREM2 (β = −26.5, P = 0.613). The SNP commonly used as a proxy for APOE ε4, rs769449, was also not associated with CSF sTREM2 (β = −106.9, P = 0.308).The influence of APOE genotype on Aβ pathology, and therefore biomarkers for Aβ pathology including CSF Aβ42, has been a consistent finding (31, 35). Of the 813 individuals in this study, we had data for CSF Aβ42 available for 695 individuals. To compare CSF Aβ42 and sTREM2 on the same scale, we converted Aβ42 and sTREM2 values to z-scores by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation for each respective protein. After conversion, we verified the association between APOE genotype and CSF Aβ42. As expected, there was a strong negative effect of APOE genotype on CSF Aβ42 (β = −0.361, P = 1.69×10−34). We also stratified the CSF Aβ42 into quartiles and calculated the OR of APOE genotype for the first vs. the last quartile. APOE genotype had an OR = 2.84 for lower CSF Aβ42 (95% CI = 2.30 – 3.56, P = 8.44×10−21).Within the same subset of individuals, the effect size of rs1582763 on CSF sTREM2 was similar (β = 0.366, P = 7.53×10−13) to that of APOE on CSF Aβ42 (β = −0.361, P = 1.69×10−34). When comparing the lower vs. upper quartiles of CSF sTREM2, rs1582763 had an OR = 3.34 for higher CSF sTREM2 (95% CI = 2.37 – 4.82, P = 2.50×10−11), which is similar to the magnitude of effect of APOE on CSF Aβ42 (OR = 2.84, 95% CI 2.30 – 3.56). Thus, the impact of rs1582763 (located in the MS4A gene region) on CSF sTREM2 is similar to that of APOE (the major modulator of AD risk) on CSF Aβ42.Additional genes associated with CSF sTREM2To identify genes associated with CSF sTREM2 we used MAGMA, which maps every SNP to the nearest gene, takes into account LD structure, and uses multiple regression analyses to provide a P value for the association of each gene with the tested phenotype. There were four genes associated with CSF sTREM2 that passed multiple test correction (P < 2.75×10−6). All of these genes belong to the MS4A gene family: MS4A4A (P = 3.15×10−11), MS4A4E (P = 6.13×10−12), MS4A2 (P = 1.29×10−11), and MS4A6A (P = 1.44×10−11; Fig. 3). Interestingly, TREML2 approached gene-wide significance with 89 mapped variants (P = 3.23×10−6; Fig. 3), suggesting there may be additional genes contributing to CSF sTREM2.Mendelian RandomizationNext, we used Mendelian randomization (MR) to determine whether CSF sTREM2 is involved in AD pathogenesis or if it is just associated with disease due to either a confounding factor or reverse causality. MR estimates a causal effect from observational data, in this case CSF sTREM2, in the presence of confounding factors. We used the two independent genome-wide SNPs in Chr. 11 (rs1582763 and rs6591561) as instrumental factors. We also used the top SNP in Chr. 6 (rs28385608), since this locus was marginally significant in both the single-variant and gene-based analyses. Summary statistics from the largest AD risk GWAS published to date (36) were used as input data. We ran multiple MR models to take into account any potential heterogeneity in the data and to obtain robust estimates. For example, the penalized MR-Egger model downweights the variants with heterogeneous causal estimates. In all MR models, the analyses yielded a significant association (P ≤ 2.14×10−3; Fig. 4), suggesting that CSF sTREM2 may be involved in AD pathogenesis.Functional annotation of genome-wide significant signals in the MS4A gene regionThe genome-wide significant association with CSF sTREM2 is located in a gene-rich region including at least 15 genes, most of which are members of the MS4A gene family: OOSP2, OOSP4B, OOSP1, MS4A2, MS4A6A, MS4A4E, MS4A4A, MS4A6E, MS4A7, MS4A14, MS4A5, MS4A1, MS4A12, MS4A13, and MS4A8. To determine the functional variants and specific genes that modulate CSF sTREM2, we performed additional bioinformatic analyses.We first examined whether any of the genome-wide significant variants were located within exonic regions. We identified two coding variants: the missense variant within MS4A4A rs6591561 (p.M159V, MAF = 0.316, β = −593.6, P = 1.47×10−9), which is reported above, and a synonymous variant within MS4A6A, rs12453 (p.L137L; MAF = 0.392, β = 710.5, P = 1.77×10−15) which is in high LD with rs1582763 (r2 = 0.782, D′ = 0.924). Neither variant was predicted by SIFT or PolyPhen to be loss-of-function, pathogenic, or damaging.Because the top signal, rs1582763, is independent of the MS4A4A coding variant, we analyzed if this top variant showed evidence of expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) effects on MS4A genes. In whole blood, rs1582763 was associated with reduced expression of MS4A6A (GTEx: β = −0.089, P = 3.90×10−5; Westra: Z = −23.42, P = 2.95×10−121) and MS4A4A (GTEx: β = −0.123, P = 6.1×10−5; Westra: Z = −7.21, P = 5.52×10−13), and increased expression of MS4A2 (Westra: Z = 8.06, P = 7.49×10−16). To verify these findings, we analyzed gene expression data from blood obtained from 365 individuals in ADNI and found that rs1582763 produces a cis-eQTL effect with reduced MS4A4A (β = −0.226, P = 1.04×10−4) and MS4A6A expression (β = −0.080, P = 6.02×10−6). The eQTL effect of rs1582763 on MS4A4A and MS4A6A was observed in both clinically diagnosed AD cases (N = 235; MS4A4A: β = −0.194, P = 6.05×10−3; MS4A6A: β = −0.053, P=1.24×10−2) and cognitively normal controls (N = 80; MS4A4A: β = −0.326, P=1.10×10−2; MS4A6A: β = −0.138, P = 3.32×10−4), suggesting that the cis-eQTL effect is independent of disease status.We further analyzed whether rs1582763 produces an eQTL effect in human brain tissue using GTEx and Braineac data. Interestingly, rs1582763 was nominally associated with MS4A4A expression in cortex from both GTEx (β = 0.215, P = 8.0×10−3) and Braineac (β = 0.327, P = 6.3×10−3; Supplementary Tables S5–S6). However, the direction of the eQTL effect in brain was opposite of the effect in blood. Similarly, rs1582763 produced a nominal cis-eQTL effect on MS4A6A expression in GTEx (Frontal cortex: β = 0.183, P = 0.04 and Cortex: β = 0.165, P = 0.05) and Braineac (medulla; β = 0.337, P = 4.50×10−4). These data suggest there may be tissue specific effects of rs1582763 on the expression of MS4A genes. These results also suggest that MS4A4A and/or MS4A6A are the genes modulating CSF sTREM2.To determine whether rs1582763 produces a trans-eQTL effect on TREM2 in brain tissue, we analyzed genetic and expression data from the Knight ADRC and Mount Sinai Brain Bank (37). Rs1582763 was not associated with TREM2 gene expression levels (Knight ADRC, parietal lobe, P = 0.610; Mount Sinai Brain Bank, BM10 P = 0.251; BM22 P = 0.635; BM36 P = 0.269 and BM44 P = 0.999). These findings suggest that the association between rs1582763 and CSF sTREM2 is driven by the cis-eQTL effect on MS4A4A and/or MS4A6A rather than directly impacting TREM2 expression.MS4A genes and TREM2 gene expression are highly correlatedTo begin to understand the relationship between MS4A genes and TREM2, we examined the correlation between expression of TREM2 and genes within the MS4A cluster using brain RNA-seq data. Among the 16 genes tested from the MS4A gene cluster, the expression of three genes (MS4A4A, MS4A6A, and MS4A7) were consistently positively correlated with TREM2 gene expression in human brain tissue. In autopsy-confirmed late-onset AD cases and controls (Knight ADRC), TREM2 expression was significantly correlated with expression of MS4A4A (N = 40, r = 0.41, P = 8.00×10−3) and MS4A6A (N = 41, r = 0.67, P = 1.60×10−6; Supplementary Fig. S6 and Table S7). These findings were replicated in two independent RNA-seq datasets obtained from the Mayo Clinic Brain Bank (N = 162; MS4A4A: r = 0.68, P = 1.00×10−23; MS4A6A: r = 0.76, P = 1.60×10−31; Supplementary Fig. S7 and Table S8) and Mount Sinai Brain Bank (N = 300; MS4A4A: r = 0.61, P = 1.60×10−16; MS4A6A: r = 0.52, P = 7.90×10−8; Supplementary Fig. S8 and Table S9). These data further support that MS4A4A and/or MS4A6A modulate CSF sTREM2.Targeting MS4A4A on human macrophages decreases soluble TREM2 in vitroMS4A4A and MS4A6A are both highly expressed in microglia (38). The mouse ortholog for MS4A6A is Ms4a6e, however there is no mouse ortholog for MS4A4A (39, 40). Thus, to understand the role of MS4A genes on TREM2 function, we utilized human cell models. To begin evaluating the functional connection between TREM2 and MS4A4A and MS4A6A, we used human macrophages, since they express TREM2, MS4A4A, and MS4A6A, and are frequently employed to model microglia (41). Human macrophages were derived in vitro from blood monocytes, and the macrophage culture media was tested for the presence of sTREM2 by ELISA. Since stimulation of macrophages with IL-4 results in upregulation of TREM2 and MS4A4A (42, 43), we measured sTREM2 in the presence or absence of IL-4 as previously described (27). We detected sTREM2 in the macrophage media beginning at day 3-post isolation which increased progressively with culture time, consistent with previous reports (P < 0.0001; Supplementary Fig. S9A) (27). By day 7, stimulation with IL-4 had significantly increased sTREM2 in the media compared to un-treated cells (P = 0.015; Supplementary Fig. S9B).To examine the therapeutic potential of targeting these MS4A proteins, we next evaluated whether antibody-mediated targeting of MS4A4A or MS4A6A modulated extracellular sTREM2. Human macrophages were treated on day 7 with commercially available antibodies to MS4A4A, MS4A6A, and isotype controls, then sTREM2 was measured in culture media 48 hours post-treatment. We found that an antibody directed against MS4A4A was sufficient to significantly reduce sTREM2 (P < 0.0001; Fig. 5A). However, treatment with an anti-MS4A6A antibody failed to alter sTREM2 (Fig. 5A). We observed similar results when macrophages were stimulated with IL-4 prior to antibody treatment (P < 0.0001; Fig. S9C). The effect of the MS4A4A antibody on sTREM2 levels was dose-dependent. Treatment of macrophages with 1, 5, or 10 μg/mL of the MS4A4A antibody produced a dose-dependent decrease in sTREM2 (P = 9.63×10−8, Spearman R2 = −0.88; Fig. 5). Extracellular sTREM2 was unchanged with increasing concentrations of the isotype-matched control antibody (IgG Mouse; Fig. 5B). The slope for the anti-MS4A4A antibody was significantly different from the control antibody (P = 0.0018; Fig. 5B). These results suggest that specifically targeting MS4A4A reduces sTREM2 produced by human macrophages.To determine whether MS4A4A expression is sufficient to change the release of sTREM2 in culture media, we either overexpressed or knocked-down human MS4A4A using a lentiviral system in human macrophages. For the overexpression experiments, macrophages were transduced with lentiviral particles containing MS4A4A or GFP for 24 hours. Cells and media were collected 48 hours post-transduction. Overexpression of MS4A4A WT was sufficient to significantly increase MS4A4A mRNA (P = 0.0043; Fig. 5C) and MS4A4A protein levels (P <0.0001; Fig. 5D and Fig. S9D) compared to the GFP control-treated macrophages and protein levels. Macrophages overexpressing MS4A4A also produced significantly more sTREM2 compared to GFP control-treated cells (P = 0.028; Fig. 5E). These results were replicated in four independent experiments and demonstrate that targeting MS4A4A at the molecular or protein level is sufficient to alter sTREM2. Conversely, transduction of human macrophages with lentiviral particles containing MS4A4A-specific shRNA decreased MS4A4A expression by 75% (P=0.01; Supplementary Fig. S10) and was sufficient to reduce sTREM2 levels compared to scrambled shRNA treated macrophages (P=0.0001; Fig. S10).MS4A4A colocalizes with TREM2 in human macrophagesWe performed immunocytochemistry studies in human macrophages to determine the cellular localization of MS4A4A and TREM2. MS4A4A is reportedly expressed on the macrophage plasma membrane (42) and on the plasma membrane and intracellular organelles in human mast cells, where it may play a role in protein trafficking (44). Consistent with these reports, we found MS4A4A primarily expressed on the plasma membrane of human macrophages, and also intracellularly (Fig. 5F, see white arrows). Intense staining for TREM2 was detected in areas surrounding the nucleus and in discrete regions on the plasma membrane (Fig. 5F, see yellow arrows). To determine specific colocalization of MS4A4A and TREM2, we stained human macrophages with markers for the endoplasmic reticulum (KDEL), Golgi (Giantin), and lipid rafts (Caveolin-1) (Fig. 5G and Fig. S9G). MS4A4A and TREM2 colocalized with Caveolin-1 positive lipid-enriched structures on the plasma membrane (Fig. 5G, see white arrowheads). We also detected partial colocalization of TREM2 with both endoplasmic reticulum (KDEL) and Golgi (Giantin). In contrast, MS4A4A did not colocalize with these intracellular markers (Fig. S9G). IL-4-mediated stimulation of human macrophages increased expression of both MS4A4A and TREM2 (Fig. S9E, F and H), which is consistent with previous reports (41, 42).

The goal of this study was to identify genetic modifiers of CSF sTREM2 and to better understand the role of sTREM2 in biological pathways relevant to AD. To accomplish this goal, we analyzed genetic data and CSF sTREM2 from 813 individuals from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). We then sought to replicate our findings in independent datasets (N = 580).

CSF sTREM2 correlates with age, sex, and AD biomarkersOur discovery cohort was obtained from the ADNI (N = 813), the largest dataset for CSF sTREM2 to date. The analyzed dataset included 172 AD, 169 cognitive normal, 183 early Mild Cognitive impairment (eMCI), 221 late-MCI and 68 Significant Memory Concern (SMC) individuals (Table 1). We excluded participants with MCI due to non-AD causes and participants carrying previously identified risk mutations in TREM2 (Table 2 and Supplementary Table S1). CSF sTREM2 in our analyses approximated a normal distribution without transformation; therefore, we analyzed the raw values, unless otherwise stated.We tested the correlation between age at the time of lumbar puncture (LP) and CSF sTREM2 and found a positive correlation, consistent with our previous reports (Pearson r = 0.270, P = 4.66×10−15; Supplementary Fig. S1) (24). We also evaluated whether CSF sTREM2 was associated with sex, as previously reported (24–26, 32). There was no significant difference between CSF sTREM2 in males (3,926 ± 1,969 pg/mL) versus females (3,873 ± 1,856 pg/mL, one-tailed P = 0.694; Fig. S1). CSF sTREM2 positively correlated with CSF tau (r = 0.377, P = 9.59±10−29) and ptau (r = 0.348, P = 2.08±10−24; Fig. S1). Consistent with our previous findings, there was no significant correlation between CSF sTREM2 and CSF Aβ42 levels (r = 0.074, P = 0.052; Fig. S1). CSF sTREM2 was significantly correlated with tau/Aβ42 and ptau/Aβ42 ratio (r = 0.171, P = 5.71×10−6; r = 0.176, P = 3.18×10−6; respectively). However, the correlations were not as strong as those observed between CSF sTREM2 and tau or ptau, suggesting that the correlations are likely driven by the associations with CSF tau and ptau levels (Fig. S1).We also examined CSF sTREM2 in 38 individuals heterozygous for TREM2 risk variants which were not included in the GWAS: p.D87N, p.L211P, p.R47H, p.R62H, and p.H157Y (Table 2). There was a significant difference in CSF sTREM2 between TREM2 risk variant carriers (P = 0.042) as reported previously (24). We also observed variant specific effects on CSF sTREM2. CSF sTREM2 was significantly lower in p.L211P carriers (2,578 ± 1,444 pg/mL) compared to non-carriers (3,903 ± 1,919 pg/mL, P = 0.026; Supplementary Fig. S2). CSF sTREM2 was significantly elevated in p.R47H carriers (4,852 ± 1,172 pg/mL) compared to p.L211P carriers (P = 0.029) and p.D87N carriers (2,082 ± 239 pg/mL, P = 0.041), but not significantly different from non-carriers (P = 0.223; Fig. S2).

CSF sTREM2 correlates with age, sex, and AD biomarkers

Our discovery cohort was obtained from the ADNI (N = 813), the largest dataset for CSF sTREM2 to date. The analyzed dataset included 172 AD, 169 cognitive normal, 183 early Mild Cognitive impairment (eMCI), 221 late-MCI and 68 Significant Memory Concern (SMC) individuals (Table 1). We excluded participants with MCI due to non-AD causes and participants carrying previously identified risk mutations in TREM2 (Table 2 and Supplementary Table S1). CSF sTREM2 in our analyses approximated a normal distribution without transformation; therefore, we analyzed the raw values, unless otherwise stated.

We tested the correlation between age at the time of lumbar puncture (LP) and CSF sTREM2 and found a positive correlation, consistent with our previous reports (Pearson r = 0.270, P = 4.66×10−15; Supplementary Fig. S1) (24). We also evaluated whether CSF sTREM2 was associated with sex, as previously reported (24–26, 32). There was no significant difference between CSF sTREM2 in males (3,926 ± 1,969 pg/mL) versus females (3,873 ± 1,856 pg/mL, one-tailed P = 0.694; Fig. S1). CSF sTREM2 positively correlated with CSF tau (r = 0.377, P = 9.59±10−29) and ptau (r = 0.348, P = 2.08±10−24; Fig. S1). Consistent with our previous findings, there was no significant correlation between CSF sTREM2 and CSF Aβ42 levels (r = 0.074, P = 0.052; Fig. S1). CSF sTREM2 was significantly correlated with tau/Aβ42 and ptau/Aβ42 ratio (r = 0.171, P = 5.71×10−6; r = 0.176, P = 3.18×10−6; respectively). However, the correlations were not as strong as those observed between CSF sTREM2 and tau or ptau, suggesting that the correlations are likely driven by the associations with CSF tau and ptau levels (Fig. S1).

We also examined CSF sTREM2 in 38 individuals heterozygous for TREM2 risk variants which were not included in the GWAS: p.D87N, p.L211P, p.R47H, p.R62H, and p.H157Y (Table 2). There was a significant difference in CSF sTREM2 between TREM2 risk variant carriers (P = 0.042) as reported previously (24). We also observed variant specific effects on CSF sTREM2. CSF sTREM2 was significantly lower in p.L211P carriers (2,578 ± 1,444 pg/mL) compared to non-carriers (3,903 ± 1,919 pg/mL, P = 0.026; Supplementary Fig. S2). CSF sTREM2 was significantly elevated in p.R47H carriers (4,852 ± 1,172 pg/mL) compared to p.L211P carriers (P = 0.029) and p.D87N carriers (2,082 ± 239 pg/mL, P = 0.041), but not significantly different from non-carriers (P = 0.223; Fig. S2).

The MS4A gene region is associated with CSF sTREM2To identify genetic variants that modify CSF sTREM2, we tested for association between CSF sTREM2 and single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with a minor allele frequency (MAF) >0.02 using an additive linear regression model with age, sex, and two principal components (PCs) as covariates. A total of 7,320,475 genotyped and imputed SNPs passed strict quality control as described in the methods. TREM2 risk-variant carriers were excluded from the GWAS analyses.A genome-wide significant genetic association with CSF sTREM2 was identified on chromosome 11 within the MS4A gene region (Fig. 1, and Supplementary Fig. S3 and Supplementary Table S2). The top SNP was rs1582763, an intergenic variant nearest MS4A4A (located 26 Kb 5′of MS4A4A; 11q12.2). This common variant (A allele, MAF = 0.368, genotyped) produced a genome-wide significant association with CSF sTREM2 (N = 807, β = 735.1, P = 1.15×10−15; Fig. 1) and explained more than 6% of the variance in sTREM2 (adjusted r2 = 0.064; see supplementary results). Results from case-control stratified analyses indicate that both clinically diagnosed cognitively impaired individuals (N = 606, β = 675.8, P = 8.19×10−10) and cognitively normal controls (N = 207, β = 912.4, P = 5.20×10−8) contributed to the association between the MS4A locus and CSF sTREM2 (Supplementary Fig. S4). No common variants were identified that modified CSF sTREM2 and reached genome-wide significant P values in the APOE, TYROBP, TREM2, ADAM10 or ADAM17 regions (Supplementary Fig. S5). Interestingly, common variants within the TREM family gene locus showed a marginal association with CSF sTREM2 (rs200443049, intronic indel, N = 805, β = 416.5, P = 2.01×10−5; Fig. S5).To determine whether there was more than one independent signal within the MS4A locus, we performed conditional analyses including rs1582763 in the regression model. After conditioning for rs1582763, the most significant variant was rs6591561 (G allele, MAF = 0.316, genotyped), a missense variant within MS4A4A (NP_076926.2:p.M159V), which is not in linkage disequilibrium (LD) with rs1582763 (r2 = 0.112, D′ = 0.646). Rs6591561 (MS4A4A p.M159V) was associated with CSF sTREM2 but in the opposite direction of the main signal (rs1582763). The minor allele of rs6591561 was associated with reduced CSF sTREM2, and this association was independent of rs1582763 (before conditioning: β = −783.7, P = 1.47×10−9; after conditioning: β = −378.4, P = 1.55×10−4; Fig. 1). After conditioning for rs6591561 (MS4A4A p.M159V), rs1582763 remained genome-wide significant (β = 625.7, P = 4.52×10−11; Fig. 1), providing further evidence that these are independent signals.

The MS4A gene region is associated with CSF sTREM2

To identify genetic variants that modify CSF sTREM2, we tested for association between CSF sTREM2 and single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with a minor allele frequency (MAF) >0.02 using an additive linear regression model with age, sex, and two principal components (PCs) as covariates. A total of 7,320,475 genotyped and imputed SNPs passed strict quality control as described in the methods. TREM2 risk-variant carriers were excluded from the GWAS analyses.

A genome-wide significant genetic association with CSF sTREM2 was identified on chromosome 11 within the MS4A gene region (Fig. 1, and Supplementary Fig. S3 and Supplementary Table S2). The top SNP was rs1582763, an intergenic variant nearest MS4A4A (located 26 Kb 5′of MS4A4A; 11q12.2). This common variant (A allele, MAF = 0.368, genotyped) produced a genome-wide significant association with CSF sTREM2 (N = 807, β = 735.1, P = 1.15×10−15; Fig. 1) and explained more than 6% of the variance in sTREM2 (adjusted r2 = 0.064; see supplementary results). Results from case-control stratified analyses indicate that both clinically diagnosed cognitively impaired individuals (N = 606, β = 675.8, P = 8.19×10−10) and cognitively normal controls (N = 207, β = 912.4, P = 5.20×10−8) contributed to the association between the MS4A locus and CSF sTREM2 (Supplementary Fig. S4). No common variants were identified that modified CSF sTREM2 and reached genome-wide significant P values in the APOE, TYROBP, TREM2, ADAM10 or ADAM17 regions (Supplementary Fig. S5). Interestingly, common variants within the TREM family gene locus showed a marginal association with CSF sTREM2 (rs200443049, intronic indel, N = 805, β = 416.5, P = 2.01×10−5; Fig. S5).

To determine whether there was more than one independent signal within the MS4A locus, we performed conditional analyses including rs1582763 in the regression model. After conditioning for rs1582763, the most significant variant was rs6591561 (G allele, MAF = 0.316, genotyped), a missense variant within MS4A4A (NP_076926.2:p.M159V), which is not in linkage disequilibrium (LD) with rs1582763 (r2 = 0.112, D′ = 0.646). Rs6591561 (MS4A4A p.M159V) was associated with CSF sTREM2 but in the opposite direction of the main signal (rs1582763). The minor allele of rs6591561 was associated with reduced CSF sTREM2, and this association was independent of rs1582763 (before conditioning: β = −783.7, P = 1.47×10−9; after conditioning: β = −378.4, P = 1.55×10−4; Fig. 1). After conditioning for rs6591561 (MS4A4A p.M159V), rs1582763 remained genome-wide significant (β = 625.7, P = 4.52×10−11; Fig. 1), providing further evidence that these are independent signals.

Replication in independent datasets and meta-analysisIn order to replicate the associations of rs1582763 and rs6591561(MS4A4A p.M159V) in an independent data set, we analyzed an additional 580 samples of CSF sTREM2 along with associated genetic data that were obtained from six different studies: the Charles F. and Joanne Knight Alzheimer Disease Research Center (Knight ADRC); the Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network (DIAN); two studies from the Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg (GHDEM and GHPH); the Memory Unit and Alzheimer’s laboratory at the Hospital of Sant Pau in Barcelona (Sant Pau Initiative on Neurodegeneration; SPIN); and the ICN Hospital Clinic-IDIBAPS in Barcelona. These datasets have been described previously (24–26, 32) (Supplementary Table S3).Analysis of this data set replicated the association of rs1582763 with elevated CSF sTREM2 (z = 5.743, P = 9.28×10−9; Fig. 2). Further meta-analysis combining ADNI and the replication datasets showed a strong association between rs1582763 and elevated CSF sTREM2 (Pmeta = 4.48×10−21; Fig. 2). In addition, analysis of the independent datasets replicated the association between rs6591561 (MS4A4A p.M159V) and reduced CSF sTREM2 (z = −3.715, P = 2.03×10−4; Fig. 2), while meta-analysis of rs6591561 combining ADNI with the replication datasets also showed a genome-wide significant association (Pmeta = 1.65×10−11; Fig. 2). Individual results for each dataset are shown in Supplementary Table S4.

Replication in independent datasets and meta-analysis

In order to replicate the associations of rs1582763 and rs6591561(MS4A4A p.M159V) in an independent data set, we analyzed an additional 580 samples of CSF sTREM2 along with associated genetic data that were obtained from six different studies: the Charles F. and Joanne Knight Alzheimer Disease Research Center (Knight ADRC); the Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network (DIAN); two studies from the Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg (GHDEM and GHPH); the Memory Unit and Alzheimer’s laboratory at the Hospital of Sant Pau in Barcelona (Sant Pau Initiative on Neurodegeneration; SPIN); and the ICN Hospital Clinic-IDIBAPS in Barcelona. These datasets have been described previously (24–26, 32) (Supplementary Table S3).

Analysis of this data set replicated the association of rs1582763 with elevated CSF sTREM2 (z = 5.743, P = 9.28×10−9; Fig. 2). Further meta-analysis combining ADNI and the replication datasets showed a strong association between rs1582763 and elevated CSF sTREM2 (Pmeta = 4.48×10−21; Fig. 2). In addition, analysis of the independent datasets replicated the association between rs6591561 (MS4A4A p.M159V) and reduced CSF sTREM2 (z = −3.715, P = 2.03×10−4; Fig. 2), while meta-analysis of rs6591561 combining ADNI with the replication datasets also showed a genome-wide significant association (Pmeta = 1.65×10−11; Fig. 2). Individual results for each dataset are shown in Supplementary Table S4.

Comparisons between MS4A association and APOEAPOE genotype is the strongest genetic risk factor for AD (33) and APOE ε4 is the strongest genetic association for CSF Aβ42 and tau (31, 34). To determine whether APOE genotype is associated with CSF sTREM2, we created a variable representing APOE-mediated AD risk by recoding APOE genotype for each individual as 0 for ε2/ε2, 1 for ε2/ε3, 2 for ε3/ε3, 3 for ε2/ε4, 4 for ε3/ε4, and 5 for ε4/ε4. We added this APOE genotype risk variable to a regression model, adjusting for age, sex, and two PCs for population stratification and found that APOE genotype was not significantly associated with CSF sTREM2 (β = −26.5, P = 0.613). The SNP commonly used as a proxy for APOE ε4, rs769449, was also not associated with CSF sTREM2 (β = −106.9, P = 0.308).The influence of APOE genotype on Aβ pathology, and therefore biomarkers for Aβ pathology including CSF Aβ42, has been a consistent finding (31, 35). Of the 813 individuals in this study, we had data for CSF Aβ42 available for 695 individuals. To compare CSF Aβ42 and sTREM2 on the same scale, we converted Aβ42 and sTREM2 values to z-scores by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation for each respective protein. After conversion, we verified the association between APOE genotype and CSF Aβ42. As expected, there was a strong negative effect of APOE genotype on CSF Aβ42 (β = −0.361, P = 1.69×10−34). We also stratified the CSF Aβ42 into quartiles and calculated the OR of APOE genotype for the first vs. the last quartile. APOE genotype had an OR = 2.84 for lower CSF Aβ42 (95% CI = 2.30 – 3.56, P = 8.44×10−21).Within the same subset of individuals, the effect size of rs1582763 on CSF sTREM2 was similar (β = 0.366, P = 7.53×10−13) to that of APOE on CSF Aβ42 (β = −0.361, P = 1.69×10−34). When comparing the lower vs. upper quartiles of CSF sTREM2, rs1582763 had an OR = 3.34 for higher CSF sTREM2 (95% CI = 2.37 – 4.82, P = 2.50×10−11), which is similar to the magnitude of effect of APOE on CSF Aβ42 (OR = 2.84, 95% CI 2.30 – 3.56). Thus, the impact of rs1582763 (located in the MS4A gene region) on CSF sTREM2 is similar to that of APOE (the major modulator of AD risk) on CSF Aβ42.

Comparisons between MS4A association and APOE

APOE genotype is the strongest genetic risk factor for AD (33) and APOE ε4 is the strongest genetic association for CSF Aβ42 and tau (31, 34). To determine whether APOE genotype is associated with CSF sTREM2, we created a variable representing APOE-mediated AD risk by recoding APOE genotype for each individual as 0 for ε2/ε2, 1 for ε2/ε3, 2 for ε3/ε3, 3 for ε2/ε4, 4 for ε3/ε4, and 5 for ε4/ε4. We added this APOE genotype risk variable to a regression model, adjusting for age, sex, and two PCs for population stratification and found that APOE genotype was not significantly associated with CSF sTREM2 (β = −26.5, P = 0.613). The SNP commonly used as a proxy for APOE ε4, rs769449, was also not associated with CSF sTREM2 (β = −106.9, P = 0.308).

The influence of APOE genotype on Aβ pathology, and therefore biomarkers for Aβ pathology including CSF Aβ42, has been a consistent finding (31, 35). Of the 813 individuals in this study, we had data for CSF Aβ42 available for 695 individuals. To compare CSF Aβ42 and sTREM2 on the same scale, we converted Aβ42 and sTREM2 values to z-scores by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation for each respective protein. After conversion, we verified the association between APOE genotype and CSF Aβ42. As expected, there was a strong negative effect of APOE genotype on CSF Aβ42 (β = −0.361, P = 1.69×10−34). We also stratified the CSF Aβ42 into quartiles and calculated the OR of APOE genotype for the first vs. the last quartile. APOE genotype had an OR = 2.84 for lower CSF Aβ42 (95% CI = 2.30 – 3.56, P = 8.44×10−21).

Within the same subset of individuals, the effect size of rs1582763 on CSF sTREM2 was similar (β = 0.366, P = 7.53×10−13) to that of APOE on CSF Aβ42 (β = −0.361, P = 1.69×10−34). When comparing the lower vs. upper quartiles of CSF sTREM2, rs1582763 had an OR = 3.34 for higher CSF sTREM2 (95% CI = 2.37 – 4.82, P = 2.50×10−11), which is similar to the magnitude of effect of APOE on CSF Aβ42 (OR = 2.84, 95% CI 2.30 – 3.56). Thus, the impact of rs1582763 (located in the MS4A gene region) on CSF sTREM2 is similar to that of APOE (the major modulator of AD risk) on CSF Aβ42.

Additional genes associated with CSF sTREM2To identify genes associated with CSF sTREM2 we used MAGMA, which maps every SNP to the nearest gene, takes into account LD structure, and uses multiple regression analyses to provide a P value for the association of each gene with the tested phenotype. There were four genes associated with CSF sTREM2 that passed multiple test correction (P < 2.75×10−6). All of these genes belong to the MS4A gene family: MS4A4A (P = 3.15×10−11), MS4A4E (P = 6.13×10−12), MS4A2 (P = 1.29×10−11), and MS4A6A (P = 1.44×10−11; Fig. 3). Interestingly, TREML2 approached gene-wide significance with 89 mapped variants (P = 3.23×10−6; Fig. 3), suggesting there may be additional genes contributing to CSF sTREM2.

Additional genes associated with CSF sTREM2

To identify genes associated with CSF sTREM2 we used MAGMA, which maps every SNP to the nearest gene, takes into account LD structure, and uses multiple regression analyses to provide a P value for the association of each gene with the tested phenotype. There were four genes associated with CSF sTREM2 that passed multiple test correction (P < 2.75×10−6). All of these genes belong to the MS4A gene family: MS4A4A (P = 3.15×10−11), MS4A4E (P = 6.13×10−12), MS4A2 (P = 1.29×10−11), and MS4A6A (P = 1.44×10−11; Fig. 3). Interestingly, TREML2 approached gene-wide significance with 89 mapped variants (P = 3.23×10−6; Fig. 3), suggesting there may be additional genes contributing to CSF sTREM2.

Mendelian RandomizationNext, we used Mendelian randomization (MR) to determine whether CSF sTREM2 is involved in AD pathogenesis or if it is just associated with disease due to either a confounding factor or reverse causality. MR estimates a causal effect from observational data, in this case CSF sTREM2, in the presence of confounding factors. We used the two independent genome-wide SNPs in Chr. 11 (rs1582763 and rs6591561) as instrumental factors. We also used the top SNP in Chr. 6 (rs28385608), since this locus was marginally significant in both the single-variant and gene-based analyses. Summary statistics from the largest AD risk GWAS published to date (36) were used as input data. We ran multiple MR models to take into account any potential heterogeneity in the data and to obtain robust estimates. For example, the penalized MR-Egger model downweights the variants with heterogeneous causal estimates. In all MR models, the analyses yielded a significant association (P ≤ 2.14×10−3; Fig. 4), suggesting that CSF sTREM2 may be involved in AD pathogenesis.

Mendelian Randomization

Next, we used Mendelian randomization (MR) to determine whether CSF sTREM2 is involved in AD pathogenesis or if it is just associated with disease due to either a confounding factor or reverse causality. MR estimates a causal effect from observational data, in this case CSF sTREM2, in the presence of confounding factors. We used the two independent genome-wide SNPs in Chr. 11 (rs1582763 and rs6591561) as instrumental factors. We also used the top SNP in Chr. 6 (rs28385608), since this locus was marginally significant in both the single-variant and gene-based analyses. Summary statistics from the largest AD risk GWAS published to date (36) were used as input data. We ran multiple MR models to take into account any potential heterogeneity in the data and to obtain robust estimates. For example, the penalized MR-Egger model downweights the variants with heterogeneous causal estimates. In all MR models, the analyses yielded a significant association (P ≤ 2.14×10−3; Fig. 4), suggesting that CSF sTREM2 may be involved in AD pathogenesis.

Functional annotation of genome-wide significant signals in the MS4A gene regionThe genome-wide significant association with CSF sTREM2 is located in a gene-rich region including at least 15 genes, most of which are members of the MS4A gene family: OOSP2, OOSP4B, OOSP1, MS4A2, MS4A6A, MS4A4E, MS4A4A, MS4A6E, MS4A7, MS4A14, MS4A5, MS4A1, MS4A12, MS4A13, and MS4A8. To determine the functional variants and specific genes that modulate CSF sTREM2, we performed additional bioinformatic analyses.We first examined whether any of the genome-wide significant variants were located within exonic regions. We identified two coding variants: the missense variant within MS4A4A rs6591561 (p.M159V, MAF = 0.316, β = −593.6, P = 1.47×10−9), which is reported above, and a synonymous variant within MS4A6A, rs12453 (p.L137L; MAF = 0.392, β = 710.5, P = 1.77×10−15) which is in high LD with rs1582763 (r2 = 0.782, D′ = 0.924). Neither variant was predicted by SIFT or PolyPhen to be loss-of-function, pathogenic, or damaging.Because the top signal, rs1582763, is independent of the MS4A4A coding variant, we analyzed if this top variant showed evidence of expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) effects on MS4A genes. In whole blood, rs1582763 was associated with reduced expression of MS4A6A (GTEx: β = −0.089, P = 3.90×10−5; Westra: Z = −23.42, P = 2.95×10−121) and MS4A4A (GTEx: β = −0.123, P = 6.1×10−5; Westra: Z = −7.21, P = 5.52×10−13), and increased expression of MS4A2 (Westra: Z = 8.06, P = 7.49×10−16). To verify these findings, we analyzed gene expression data from blood obtained from 365 individuals in ADNI and found that rs1582763 produces a cis-eQTL effect with reduced MS4A4A (β = −0.226, P = 1.04×10−4) and MS4A6A expression (β = −0.080, P = 6.02×10−6). The eQTL effect of rs1582763 on MS4A4A and MS4A6A was observed in both clinically diagnosed AD cases (N = 235; MS4A4A: β = −0.194, P = 6.05×10−3; MS4A6A: β = −0.053, P=1.24×10−2) and cognitively normal controls (N = 80; MS4A4A: β = −0.326, P=1.10×10−2; MS4A6A: β = −0.138, P = 3.32×10−4), suggesting that the cis-eQTL effect is independent of disease status.We further analyzed whether rs1582763 produces an eQTL effect in human brain tissue using GTEx and Braineac data. Interestingly, rs1582763 was nominally associated with MS4A4A expression in cortex from both GTEx (β = 0.215, P = 8.0×10−3) and Braineac (β = 0.327, P = 6.3×10−3; Supplementary Tables S5–S6). However, the direction of the eQTL effect in brain was opposite of the effect in blood. Similarly, rs1582763 produced a nominal cis-eQTL effect on MS4A6A expression in GTEx (Frontal cortex: β = 0.183, P = 0.04 and Cortex: β = 0.165, P = 0.05) and Braineac (medulla; β = 0.337, P = 4.50×10−4). These data suggest there may be tissue specific effects of rs1582763 on the expression of MS4A genes. These results also suggest that MS4A4A and/or MS4A6A are the genes modulating CSF sTREM2.To determine whether rs1582763 produces a trans-eQTL effect on TREM2 in brain tissue, we analyzed genetic and expression data from the Knight ADRC and Mount Sinai Brain Bank (37). Rs1582763 was not associated with TREM2 gene expression levels (Knight ADRC, parietal lobe, P = 0.610; Mount Sinai Brain Bank, BM10 P = 0.251; BM22 P = 0.635; BM36 P = 0.269 and BM44 P = 0.999). These findings suggest that the association between rs1582763 and CSF sTREM2 is driven by the cis-eQTL effect on MS4A4A and/or MS4A6A rather than directly impacting TREM2 expression.

Functional annotation of genome-wide significant signals in the MS4A gene region

The genome-wide significant association with CSF sTREM2 is located in a gene-rich region including at least 15 genes, most of which are members of the MS4A gene family: OOSP2, OOSP4B, OOSP1, MS4A2, MS4A6A, MS4A4E, MS4A4A, MS4A6E, MS4A7, MS4A14, MS4A5, MS4A1, MS4A12, MS4A13, and MS4A8. To determine the functional variants and specific genes that modulate CSF sTREM2, we performed additional bioinformatic analyses.

We first examined whether any of the genome-wide significant variants were located within exonic regions. We identified two coding variants: the missense variant within MS4A4A rs6591561 (p.M159V, MAF = 0.316, β = −593.6, P = 1.47×10−9), which is reported above, and a synonymous variant within MS4A6A, rs12453 (p.L137L; MAF = 0.392, β = 710.5, P = 1.77×10−15) which is in high LD with rs1582763 (r2 = 0.782, D′ = 0.924). Neither variant was predicted by SIFT or PolyPhen to be loss-of-function, pathogenic, or damaging.

Because the top signal, rs1582763, is independent of the MS4A4A coding variant, we analyzed if this top variant showed evidence of expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) effects on MS4A genes. In whole blood, rs1582763 was associated with reduced expression of MS4A6A (GTEx: β = −0.089, P = 3.90×10−5; Westra: Z = −23.42, P = 2.95×10−121) and MS4A4A (GTEx: β = −0.123, P = 6.1×10−5; Westra: Z = −7.21, P = 5.52×10−13), and increased expression of MS4A2 (Westra: Z = 8.06, P = 7.49×10−16). To verify these findings, we analyzed gene expression data from blood obtained from 365 individuals in ADNI and found that rs1582763 produces a cis-eQTL effect with reduced MS4A4A (β = −0.226, P = 1.04×10−4) and MS4A6A expression (β = −0.080, P = 6.02×10−6). The eQTL effect of rs1582763 on MS4A4A and MS4A6A was observed in both clinically diagnosed AD cases (N = 235; MS4A4A: β = −0.194, P = 6.05×10−3; MS4A6A: β = −0.053, P=1.24×10−2) and cognitively normal controls (N = 80; MS4A4A: β = −0.326, P=1.10×10−2; MS4A6A: β = −0.138, P = 3.32×10−4), suggesting that the cis-eQTL effect is independent of disease status.

We further analyzed whether rs1582763 produces an eQTL effect in human brain tissue using GTEx and Braineac data. Interestingly, rs1582763 was nominally associated with MS4A4A expression in cortex from both GTEx (β = 0.215, P = 8.0×10−3) and Braineac (β = 0.327, P = 6.3×10−3; Supplementary Tables S5–S6). However, the direction of the eQTL effect in brain was opposite of the effect in blood. Similarly, rs1582763 produced a nominal cis-eQTL effect on MS4A6A expression in GTEx (Frontal cortex: β = 0.183, P = 0.04 and Cortex: β = 0.165, P = 0.05) and Braineac (medulla; β = 0.337, P = 4.50×10−4). These data suggest there may be tissue specific effects of rs1582763 on the expression of MS4A genes. These results also suggest that MS4A4A and/or MS4A6A are the genes modulating CSF sTREM2.

To determine whether rs1582763 produces a trans-eQTL effect on TREM2 in brain tissue, we analyzed genetic and expression data from the Knight ADRC and Mount Sinai Brain Bank (37). Rs1582763 was not associated with TREM2 gene expression levels (Knight ADRC, parietal lobe, P = 0.610; Mount Sinai Brain Bank, BM10 P = 0.251; BM22 P = 0.635; BM36 P = 0.269 and BM44 P = 0.999). These findings suggest that the association between rs1582763 and CSF sTREM2 is driven by the cis-eQTL effect on MS4A4A and/or MS4A6A rather than directly impacting TREM2 expression.

MS4A genes and TREM2 gene expression are highly correlatedTo begin to understand the relationship between MS4A genes and TREM2, we examined the correlation between expression of TREM2 and genes within the MS4A cluster using brain RNA-seq data. Among the 16 genes tested from the MS4A gene cluster, the expression of three genes (MS4A4A, MS4A6A, and MS4A7) were consistently positively correlated with TREM2 gene expression in human brain tissue. In autopsy-confirmed late-onset AD cases and controls (Knight ADRC), TREM2 expression was significantly correlated with expression of MS4A4A (N = 40, r = 0.41, P = 8.00×10−3) and MS4A6A (N = 41, r = 0.67, P = 1.60×10−6; Supplementary Fig. S6 and Table S7). These findings were replicated in two independent RNA-seq datasets obtained from the Mayo Clinic Brain Bank (N = 162; MS4A4A: r = 0.68, P = 1.00×10−23; MS4A6A: r = 0.76, P = 1.60×10−31; Supplementary Fig. S7 and Table S8) and Mount Sinai Brain Bank (N = 300; MS4A4A: r = 0.61, P = 1.60×10−16; MS4A6A: r = 0.52, P = 7.90×10−8; Supplementary Fig. S8 and Table S9). These data further support that MS4A4A and/or MS4A6A modulate CSF sTREM2.

MS4A genes and TREM2 gene expression are highly correlated

To begin to understand the relationship between MS4A genes and TREM2, we examined the correlation between expression of TREM2 and genes within the MS4A cluster using brain RNA-seq data. Among the 16 genes tested from the MS4A gene cluster, the expression of three genes (MS4A4A, MS4A6A, and MS4A7) were consistently positively correlated with TREM2 gene expression in human brain tissue. In autopsy-confirmed late-onset AD cases and controls (Knight ADRC), TREM2 expression was significantly correlated with expression of MS4A4A (N = 40, r = 0.41, P = 8.00×10−3) and MS4A6A (N = 41, r = 0.67, P = 1.60×10−6; Supplementary Fig. S6 and Table S7). These findings were replicated in two independent RNA-seq datasets obtained from the Mayo Clinic Brain Bank (N = 162; MS4A4A: r = 0.68, P = 1.00×10−23; MS4A6A: r = 0.76, P = 1.60×10−31; Supplementary Fig. S7 and Table S8) and Mount Sinai Brain Bank (N = 300; MS4A4A: r = 0.61, P = 1.60×10−16; MS4A6A: r = 0.52, P = 7.90×10−8; Supplementary Fig. S8 and Table S9). These data further support that MS4A4A and/or MS4A6A modulate CSF sTREM2.

Targeting MS4A4A on human macrophages decreases soluble TREM2 in vitroMS4A4A and MS4A6A are both highly expressed in microglia (38). The mouse ortholog for MS4A6A is Ms4a6e, however there is no mouse ortholog for MS4A4A (39, 40). Thus, to understand the role of MS4A genes on TREM2 function, we utilized human cell models. To begin evaluating the functional connection between TREM2 and MS4A4A and MS4A6A, we used human macrophages, since they express TREM2, MS4A4A, and MS4A6A, and are frequently employed to model microglia (41). Human macrophages were derived in vitro from blood monocytes, and the macrophage culture media was tested for the presence of sTREM2 by ELISA. Since stimulation of macrophages with IL-4 results in upregulation of TREM2 and MS4A4A (42, 43), we measured sTREM2 in the presence or absence of IL-4 as previously described (27). We detected sTREM2 in the macrophage media beginning at day 3-post isolation which increased progressively with culture time, consistent with previous reports (P < 0.0001; Supplementary Fig. S9A) (27). By day 7, stimulation with IL-4 had significantly increased sTREM2 in the media compared to un-treated cells (P = 0.015; Supplementary Fig. S9B).To examine the therapeutic potential of targeting these MS4A proteins, we next evaluated whether antibody-mediated targeting of MS4A4A or MS4A6A modulated extracellular sTREM2. Human macrophages were treated on day 7 with commercially available antibodies to MS4A4A, MS4A6A, and isotype controls, then sTREM2 was measured in culture media 48 hours post-treatment. We found that an antibody directed against MS4A4A was sufficient to significantly reduce sTREM2 (P < 0.0001; Fig. 5A). However, treatment with an anti-MS4A6A antibody failed to alter sTREM2 (Fig. 5A). We observed similar results when macrophages were stimulated with IL-4 prior to antibody treatment (P < 0.0001; Fig. S9C). The effect of the MS4A4A antibody on sTREM2 levels was dose-dependent. Treatment of macrophages with 1, 5, or 10 μg/mL of the MS4A4A antibody produced a dose-dependent decrease in sTREM2 (P = 9.63×10−8, Spearman R2 = −0.88; Fig. 5). Extracellular sTREM2 was unchanged with increasing concentrations of the isotype-matched control antibody (IgG Mouse; Fig. 5B). The slope for the anti-MS4A4A antibody was significantly different from the control antibody (P = 0.0018; Fig. 5B). These results suggest that specifically targeting MS4A4A reduces sTREM2 produced by human macrophages.To determine whether MS4A4A expression is sufficient to change the release of sTREM2 in culture media, we either overexpressed or knocked-down human MS4A4A using a lentiviral system in human macrophages. For the overexpression experiments, macrophages were transduced with lentiviral particles containing MS4A4A or GFP for 24 hours. Cells and media were collected 48 hours post-transduction. Overexpression of MS4A4A WT was sufficient to significantly increase MS4A4A mRNA (P = 0.0043; Fig. 5C) and MS4A4A protein levels (P <0.0001; Fig. 5D and Fig. S9D) compared to the GFP control-treated macrophages and protein levels. Macrophages overexpressing MS4A4A also produced significantly more sTREM2 compared to GFP control-treated cells (P = 0.028; Fig. 5E). These results were replicated in four independent experiments and demonstrate that targeting MS4A4A at the molecular or protein level is sufficient to alter sTREM2. Conversely, transduction of human macrophages with lentiviral particles containing MS4A4A-specific shRNA decreased MS4A4A expression by 75% (P=0.01; Supplementary Fig. S10) and was sufficient to reduce sTREM2 levels compared to scrambled shRNA treated macrophages (P=0.0001; Fig. S10).

Targeting MS4A4A on human macrophages decreases soluble TREM2 in vitro

MS4A4A and MS4A6A are both highly expressed in microglia (38). The mouse ortholog for MS4A6A is Ms4a6e, however there is no mouse ortholog for MS4A4A (39, 40). Thus, to understand the role of MS4A genes on TREM2 function, we utilized human cell models. To begin evaluating the functional connection between TREM2 and MS4A4A and MS4A6A, we used human macrophages, since they express TREM2, MS4A4A, and MS4A6A, and are frequently employed to model microglia (41). Human macrophages were derived in vitro from blood monocytes, and the macrophage culture media was tested for the presence of sTREM2 by ELISA. Since stimulation of macrophages with IL-4 results in upregulation of TREM2 and MS4A4A (42, 43), we measured sTREM2 in the presence or absence of IL-4 as previously described (27). We detected sTREM2 in the macrophage media beginning at day 3-post isolation which increased progressively with culture time, consistent with previous reports (P < 0.0001; Supplementary Fig. S9A) (27). By day 7, stimulation with IL-4 had significantly increased sTREM2 in the media compared to un-treated cells (P = 0.015; Supplementary Fig. S9B).

To examine the therapeutic potential of targeting these MS4A proteins, we next evaluated whether antibody-mediated targeting of MS4A4A or MS4A6A modulated extracellular sTREM2. Human macrophages were treated on day 7 with commercially available antibodies to MS4A4A, MS4A6A, and isotype controls, then sTREM2 was measured in culture media 48 hours post-treatment. We found that an antibody directed against MS4A4A was sufficient to significantly reduce sTREM2 (P < 0.0001; Fig. 5A). However, treatment with an anti-MS4A6A antibody failed to alter sTREM2 (Fig. 5A). We observed similar results when macrophages were stimulated with IL-4 prior to antibody treatment (P < 0.0001; Fig. S9C). The effect of the MS4A4A antibody on sTREM2 levels was dose-dependent. Treatment of macrophages with 1, 5, or 10 μg/mL of the MS4A4A antibody produced a dose-dependent decrease in sTREM2 (P = 9.63×10−8, Spearman R2 = −0.88; Fig. 5). Extracellular sTREM2 was unchanged with increasing concentrations of the isotype-matched control antibody (IgG Mouse; Fig. 5B). The slope for the anti-MS4A4A antibody was significantly different from the control antibody (P = 0.0018; Fig. 5B). These results suggest that specifically targeting MS4A4A reduces sTREM2 produced by human macrophages.

To determine whether MS4A4A expression is sufficient to change the release of sTREM2 in culture media, we either overexpressed or knocked-down human MS4A4A using a lentiviral system in human macrophages. For the overexpression experiments, macrophages were transduced with lentiviral particles containing MS4A4A or GFP for 24 hours. Cells and media were collected 48 hours post-transduction. Overexpression of MS4A4A WT was sufficient to significantly increase MS4A4A mRNA (P = 0.0043; Fig. 5C) and MS4A4A protein levels (P <0.0001; Fig. 5D and Fig. S9D) compared to the GFP control-treated macrophages and protein levels. Macrophages overexpressing MS4A4A also produced significantly more sTREM2 compared to GFP control-treated cells (P = 0.028; Fig. 5E). These results were replicated in four independent experiments and demonstrate that targeting MS4A4A at the molecular or protein level is sufficient to alter sTREM2. Conversely, transduction of human macrophages with lentiviral particles containing MS4A4A-specific shRNA decreased MS4A4A expression by 75% (P=0.01; Supplementary Fig. S10) and was sufficient to reduce sTREM2 levels compared to scrambled shRNA treated macrophages (P=0.0001; Fig. S10).

MS4A4A colocalizes with TREM2 in human macrophagesWe performed immunocytochemistry studies in human macrophages to determine the cellular localization of MS4A4A and TREM2. MS4A4A is reportedly expressed on the macrophage plasma membrane (42) and on the plasma membrane and intracellular organelles in human mast cells, where it may play a role in protein trafficking (44). Consistent with these reports, we found MS4A4A primarily expressed on the plasma membrane of human macrophages, and also intracellularly (Fig. 5F, see white arrows). Intense staining for TREM2 was detected in areas surrounding the nucleus and in discrete regions on the plasma membrane (Fig. 5F, see yellow arrows). To determine specific colocalization of MS4A4A and TREM2, we stained human macrophages with markers for the endoplasmic reticulum (KDEL), Golgi (Giantin), and lipid rafts (Caveolin-1) (Fig. 5G and Fig. S9G). MS4A4A and TREM2 colocalized with Caveolin-1 positive lipid-enriched structures on the plasma membrane (Fig. 5G, see white arrowheads). We also detected partial colocalization of TREM2 with both endoplasmic reticulum (KDEL) and Golgi (Giantin). In contrast, MS4A4A did not colocalize with these intracellular markers (Fig. S9G). IL-4-mediated stimulation of human macrophages increased expression of both MS4A4A and TREM2 (Fig. S9E, F and H), which is consistent with previous reports (41, 42).

MS4A4A colocalizes with TREM2 in human macrophages

We performed immunocytochemistry studies in human macrophages to determine the cellular localization of MS4A4A and TREM2. MS4A4A is reportedly expressed on the macrophage plasma membrane (42) and on the plasma membrane and intracellular organelles in human mast cells, where it may play a role in protein trafficking (44). Consistent with these reports, we found MS4A4A primarily expressed on the plasma membrane of human macrophages, and also intracellularly (Fig. 5F, see white arrows). Intense staining for TREM2 was detected in areas surrounding the nucleus and in discrete regions on the plasma membrane (Fig. 5F, see yellow arrows). To determine specific colocalization of MS4A4A and TREM2, we stained human macrophages with markers for the endoplasmic reticulum (KDEL), Golgi (Giantin), and lipid rafts (Caveolin-1) (Fig. 5G and Fig. S9G). MS4A4A and TREM2 colocalized with Caveolin-1 positive lipid-enriched structures on the plasma membrane (Fig. 5G, see white arrowheads). We also detected partial colocalization of TREM2 with both endoplasmic reticulum (KDEL) and Golgi (Giantin). In contrast, MS4A4A did not colocalize with these intracellular markers (Fig. S9G). IL-4-mediated stimulation of human macrophages increased expression of both MS4A4A and TREM2 (Fig. S9E, F and H), which is consistent with previous reports (41, 42).

DiscussionIn this study, we performed a genome-wide analysis for genetic modifiers of CSF sTREM2. We observed two independent signals in the MS4A gene region that passed genome-wide significance thresholds for association with CSF sTREM2: rs1582763 and rs6591561 (MS4A4A p.M159V). Importantly, rs1582763 is associated with elevated CSF sTREM2, reduced AD risk (36), and delayed age-at-onset (40). Conversely, rs6591561 (MS4A4A p.M159V) is associated with reduced CSF sTREM2, increased AD risk (36), and accelerated age-at-onset (40). These SNPs modify expression of MS4A4A and MS4A6A in human blood and brain tissue. The expression of both these genes is highly correlated with TREM2 gene expression. In human macrophages MS4A4A and TREM2 colocalize on lipid rafts, and pharmacologic or genetic modification of MS4A4A produced changes in sTREM2. Thus, we present genetic, molecular, and functional evidence suggesting that MS4A genes, particularly MS4A4A, are key modulators of sTREM2.Our findings that variants in the MS4A gene region are associated with CSF sTREM2 provide a putative biological connection between the MS4A family, TREM2, and AD risk. Prior to this study, TREM2 was directly implicated in AD through the identification of rare variants that increase AD risk (1, 2). Thus, TREM2 was thought to only impact a small percentage of AD cases. The putative role of TREM2 in sporadic disease was less clear. Common variants in the MS4A locus, including the top SNP we found associated with CSF sTREM2, were reported to be associated with AD risk (rs1582763, OR = 0.898, P = 1.81×10−15) (36) and age-at-onset (HR = 0.929, P = 9.26×10−9) (40), but the functional variant and mechanism of action was unknown. Here we show that variants within this AD risk locus modify CSF sTREM2. More specifically our data indicate that AD risk variants are associated with lower CSF sTREM2 and the protective AD variants are associated with elevated CSF sTREM2. This relationship between CSF sTREM2 and AD risk is supported by previous studies suggesting that AD-risk and Nasu-Hakola causal TREM2 variants are loss-of-function and that increasing TREM2 or activating the TREM2 signaling pathway could offer a new therapeutic approach (45).We present multiple lines of evidence that genes within the MS4A cluster modulate sTREM2. First, we observed a strong and consistent association across multiple independent datasets (Pmeta = 4.48×10−21; Fig. 2). For comparison, the effect size of rs1582763 on CSF sTREM2 (OR = 3.34; 95% CI = 2.37 – 4.82) is similar to that of APOE genotype on CSF Aβ42 (OR = 2.84; 95% CI = 2.30 – 3.50). Second, the MS4A association with CSF sTREM2 represents a trans effect: TREM2 is located on chromosome 9 and this MS4A locus is on chromosome 11. As our group and others have reported, it is not common to find trans-protein quantitative trait loci (pQTLs) with large effect sizes and most trans-pQTLs occur in genes which encode receptors or that have other regulatory influences on the protein studied (46–51). Thus, we hypothesize that one or more genes within the MS4A locus may be key modulators of sTREM2. Third, our functional studies support a relationship between MS4A4A and sTREM2. Using pharmacologic (antibody) or genetic (lentivirus-mediated overexpression and knockdown) approaches, we targeted MS4A4A and observed changes in sTREM2 produced by human macrophages. Overexpression of MS4A4A resulted in elevated extracellular sTREM2 compared to GFP expressing cells, and antibodies targeting MS4A4A led to a dose-dependent reduction of sTREM2 levels.These results suggest that MS4A4A may be a therapeutic target for AD. MS4A4A colocalizes with TREM2 in human macrophages and both proteins are upregulated in response to IL-4-mediated stimulation. TREM2 and MS4A4A are both highly and specifically expressed in human microglia (38). While the function of MS4A4A in the brain is poorly understood, it may be involved in protein trafficking and clathrin-dependent endocytosis (44). The finding that modifying MS4A4A affects sTREM2 in human macrophages supports a putative relationship between these two proteins. Compounds that overexpress MS4A4A or increase MS4A4A activity could modify AD risk through regulation of sTREM2.The origin and function of sTREM2 is still poorly understood. Most studies investigating the role of TREM2 in AD pathogenesis have focused on characterizing the impact of TREM2 loss-of-function or rare TREM2 risk variants. These studies evaluate the impact of TREM2 deficiency (18, 52) or haploinsufficiency (15) but are unable to draw any conclusions about a potential role for sTREM2 specifically. Some evidence suggests that sTREM2 binds to and sequesters TREM2 ligands, such as apolipoproteins, thus preventing these ligands from activating the TREM2 receptor (53, 54). Others propose that sTREM2 works independently of the TREM2 receptor. Treatment with sTREM2 enhanced microglial survival and cytokine release in both WT and Trem2−/− cells (55). In both WT and Trem2−/− primary microglia, the introduction of sTREM2 increased mRNA levels of IL-1β, IL-6, TNF, and IL-10 in a dose-dependent manner, further suggesting that sTREM2 may trigger microglial activation independently of the TREM2 receptor (55). These findings demonstrate that further research is necessary to determine the role of sTREM2 in AD. The correlations between CSF sTREM2 and CSF tau (r = 0.377, P = 9.59×10−29) and CSF ptau (r = 0.348, P = 2.08×10−24), which have been reported consistently in independent studies (23, 24, 26), may provide some clue. There is increasing evidence that microglia play a key role in tau-mediated neurodegeneration in AD and similar tauopathies (56). Considering that TREM2, MS4A4A, and MS4A6A are exclusively expressed in microglia in the CNS, our findings add further support to this putative role for microglia in tau-mediated pathogenic mechanisms.Our Mendelian randomization analyses provide additional support that sTREM2 may be involved in AD pathogenesis. Mendelian randomization uses genetic variation as instrumental variables to analyze whether a specific variable, which can be an exposure or protein (57), is associated with a specific outcome (AD risk in this case) independently of reverse causation or confounding effect. We used, as instrumental variables, the three independent SNPs that showed strong association with sTREM2 and found significant associations for CSF sTREM2 with AD risk, demonstrating for the first time that sTREM2 may actually be involved in AD and is not merely a product of the disease process. In this study we did not analyze the association of sTREM2 with case-control status as previous studies (24, 25) have recently demonstrated that sTREM2 is associated with AD risk. While case-control studies are informative, case-control analyses do not account for longitudinal changes in biomarkers, which may change as a function of disease stage. Additional analyses demonstrating the longitudinal changes of CSF sTREM2 using the amyloid/tau/neurodegeneration (A/T/N) classification will be helpful for understanding the dynamic changes of sTREM2 during disease course.There are some limitations to the present study. The first limitation is that this study only included common variants (MAF > 2%); therefore, we are unable to determine the effect of genes that only harbor low frequency or rare functional variants. Although some studies have linked APOE with TREM2 (58), we did not observe an association between APOE genotype and CSF sTREM2. Thus, APOE does not play a role in modulating sTREM2. However, we cannot yet conclude whether other genes such TYROBP, ADAM10, or ADAM17 play a role in modulating CSF sTREM2. These genes were reported to be involved in TREM2 cleavage (21, 22); therefore, we would expect to find a strong association with CSF sTREM2 in these gene regions. However, the risk variants in TYROBP are all rare (59, 60) and although there are variants in ADAM10 known to affect the function or expression of ADAM10, these variants also occur infrequently (61). By excluding low frequency and rare variants, this analysis was not able to identify genetic signals in these genes. Additional studies of sequence data in a larger sample size will be necessary to determine the role of TYROBP, ADAM10 or ADAM17 in CSF sTREM2 modulation. A second limitation of this study is that we cannot conclude whether other genes in the MS4A locus also modulate sTREM2. Our data indicate that MS4A4A modulates CSF sTREM2. This is supported by the eQTL analyses, the correlation of MS4A4A and TREM2 mRNA levels, the identification of a non-synonymous MS4A4A variant associated with CSF sTREM2, and our functional studies. Our preliminary functional studies suggest that MS4A6A does not modify sTREM2, but due to limited availability of MS4A6A reagents we cannot definitively rule out a relationship between MS4A6A and sTREM2. Since the GWAS and bioinformatics analyses only consistently supported a putative functional role for MS4A4A and MS4A6A, we did not investigate the other MS4A gene family members; therefore, we cannot exclude the possibility that other genes in the MS4A region modulate sTREM2. Another limitation of this study is that we are only beginning to uncover the functional relationship between MS4A4A and sTREM2. The significance of this study resides in the identification and functional validation associating MS4A4A with sTREM2. This study also begins to provide a functional explanation for the original AD risk association identified in the MS4A gene region. Our functional data support the genetic association between MS4A4A and sTREM2 as we were able to modify extracellular sTREM2 by modulating MS4A4A expression or targeting MS4A4A with specific antibodies. MS4A4A may modify sTREM2 as part of the machinery needed for cleavage, through intracellular TREM2 trafficking, or by binding to extracellular sTREM2. Additional functional studies interrogating all the possible mechanisms will be necessary to address these important questions.In summary, this study identified for the first time MS4A4A as an important player in TREM2 biology, providing a mechanistic explanation of the MS4A genetic association with AD risk, supporting the importance of TREM2 biology in AD risk in general, and demonstrating that sTREM2 may be involved in AD pathology.

In this study, we performed a genome-wide analysis for genetic modifiers of CSF sTREM2. We observed two independent signals in the MS4A gene region that passed genome-wide significance thresholds for association with CSF sTREM2: rs1582763 and rs6591561 (MS4A4A p.M159V). Importantly, rs1582763 is associated with elevated CSF sTREM2, reduced AD risk (36), and delayed age-at-onset (40). Conversely, rs6591561 (MS4A4A p.M159V) is associated with reduced CSF sTREM2, increased AD risk (36), and accelerated age-at-onset (40). These SNPs modify expression of MS4A4A and MS4A6A in human blood and brain tissue. The expression of both these genes is highly correlated with TREM2 gene expression. In human macrophages MS4A4A and TREM2 colocalize on lipid rafts, and pharmacologic or genetic modification of MS4A4A produced changes in sTREM2. Thus, we present genetic, molecular, and functional evidence suggesting that MS4A genes, particularly MS4A4A, are key modulators of sTREM2.

Our findings that variants in the MS4A gene region are associated with CSF sTREM2 provide a putative biological connection between the MS4A family, TREM2, and AD risk. Prior to this study, TREM2 was directly implicated in AD through the identification of rare variants that increase AD risk (1, 2). Thus, TREM2 was thought to only impact a small percentage of AD cases. The putative role of TREM2 in sporadic disease was less clear. Common variants in the MS4A locus, including the top SNP we found associated with CSF sTREM2, were reported to be associated with AD risk (rs1582763, OR = 0.898, P = 1.81×10−15) (36) and age-at-onset (HR = 0.929, P = 9.26×10−9) (40), but the functional variant and mechanism of action was unknown. Here we show that variants within this AD risk locus modify CSF sTREM2. More specifically our data indicate that AD risk variants are associated with lower CSF sTREM2 and the protective AD variants are associated with elevated CSF sTREM2. This relationship between CSF sTREM2 and AD risk is supported by previous studies suggesting that AD-risk and Nasu-Hakola causal TREM2 variants are loss-of-function and that increasing TREM2 or activating the TREM2 signaling pathway could offer a new therapeutic approach (45).

We present multiple lines of evidence that genes within the MS4A cluster modulate sTREM2. First, we observed a strong and consistent association across multiple independent datasets (Pmeta = 4.48×10−21; Fig. 2). For comparison, the effect size of rs1582763 on CSF sTREM2 (OR = 3.34; 95% CI = 2.37 – 4.82) is similar to that of APOE genotype on CSF Aβ42 (OR = 2.84; 95% CI = 2.30 – 3.50). Second, the MS4A association with CSF sTREM2 represents a trans effect: TREM2 is located on chromosome 9 and this MS4A locus is on chromosome 11. As our group and others have reported, it is not common to find trans-protein quantitative trait loci (pQTLs) with large effect sizes and most trans-pQTLs occur in genes which encode receptors or that have other regulatory influences on the protein studied (46–51). Thus, we hypothesize that one or more genes within the MS4A locus may be key modulators of sTREM2. Third, our functional studies support a relationship between MS4A4A and sTREM2. Using pharmacologic (antibody) or genetic (lentivirus-mediated overexpression and knockdown) approaches, we targeted MS4A4A and observed changes in sTREM2 produced by human macrophages. Overexpression of MS4A4A resulted in elevated extracellular sTREM2 compared to GFP expressing cells, and antibodies targeting MS4A4A led to a dose-dependent reduction of sTREM2 levels.

These results suggest that MS4A4A may be a therapeutic target for AD. MS4A4A colocalizes with TREM2 in human macrophages and both proteins are upregulated in response to IL-4-mediated stimulation. TREM2 and MS4A4A are both highly and specifically expressed in human microglia (38). While the function of MS4A4A in the brain is poorly understood, it may be involved in protein trafficking and clathrin-dependent endocytosis (44). The finding that modifying MS4A4A affects sTREM2 in human macrophages supports a putative relationship between these two proteins. Compounds that overexpress MS4A4A or increase MS4A4A activity could modify AD risk through regulation of sTREM2.

The origin and function of sTREM2 is still poorly understood. Most studies investigating the role of TREM2 in AD pathogenesis have focused on characterizing the impact of TREM2 loss-of-function or rare TREM2 risk variants. These studies evaluate the impact of TREM2 deficiency (18, 52) or haploinsufficiency (15) but are unable to draw any conclusions about a potential role for sTREM2 specifically. Some evidence suggests that sTREM2 binds to and sequesters TREM2 ligands, such as apolipoproteins, thus preventing these ligands from activating the TREM2 receptor (53, 54). Others propose that sTREM2 works independently of the TREM2 receptor. Treatment with sTREM2 enhanced microglial survival and cytokine release in both WT and Trem2−/− cells (55). In both WT and Trem2−/− primary microglia, the introduction of sTREM2 increased mRNA levels of IL-1β, IL-6, TNF, and IL-10 in a dose-dependent manner, further suggesting that sTREM2 may trigger microglial activation independently of the TREM2 receptor (55). These findings demonstrate that further research is necessary to determine the role of sTREM2 in AD. The correlations between CSF sTREM2 and CSF tau (r = 0.377, P = 9.59×10−29) and CSF ptau (r = 0.348, P = 2.08×10−24), which have been reported consistently in independent studies (23, 24, 26), may provide some clue. There is increasing evidence that microglia play a key role in tau-mediated neurodegeneration in AD and similar tauopathies (56). Considering that TREM2, MS4A4A, and MS4A6A are exclusively expressed in microglia in the CNS, our findings add further support to this putative role for microglia in tau-mediated pathogenic mechanisms.

Our Mendelian randomization analyses provide additional support that sTREM2 may be involved in AD pathogenesis. Mendelian randomization uses genetic variation as instrumental variables to analyze whether a specific variable, which can be an exposure or protein (57), is associated with a specific outcome (AD risk in this case) independently of reverse causation or confounding effect. We used, as instrumental variables, the three independent SNPs that showed strong association with sTREM2 and found significant associations for CSF sTREM2 with AD risk, demonstrating for the first time that sTREM2 may actually be involved in AD and is not merely a product of the disease process. In this study we did not analyze the association of sTREM2 with case-control status as previous studies (24, 25) have recently demonstrated that sTREM2 is associated with AD risk. While case-control studies are informative, case-control analyses do not account for longitudinal changes in biomarkers, which may change as a function of disease stage. Additional analyses demonstrating the longitudinal changes of CSF sTREM2 using the amyloid/tau/neurodegeneration (A/T/N) classification will be helpful for understanding the dynamic changes of sTREM2 during disease course.

There are some limitations to the present study. The first limitation is that this study only included common variants (MAF > 2%); therefore, we are unable to determine the effect of genes that only harbor low frequency or rare functional variants. Although some studies have linked APOE with TREM2 (58), we did not observe an association between APOE genotype and CSF sTREM2. Thus, APOE does not play a role in modulating sTREM2. However, we cannot yet conclude whether other genes such TYROBP, ADAM10, or ADAM17 play a role in modulating CSF sTREM2. These genes were reported to be involved in TREM2 cleavage (21, 22); therefore, we would expect to find a strong association with CSF sTREM2 in these gene regions. However, the risk variants in TYROBP are all rare (59, 60) and although there are variants in ADAM10 known to affect the function or expression of ADAM10, these variants also occur infrequently (61). By excluding low frequency and rare variants, this analysis was not able to identify genetic signals in these genes. Additional studies of sequence data in a larger sample size will be necessary to determine the role of TYROBP, ADAM10 or ADAM17 in CSF sTREM2 modulation. A second limitation of this study is that we cannot conclude whether other genes in the MS4A locus also modulate sTREM2. Our data indicate that MS4A4A modulates CSF sTREM2. This is supported by the eQTL analyses, the correlation of MS4A4A and TREM2 mRNA levels, the identification of a non-synonymous MS4A4A variant associated with CSF sTREM2, and our functional studies. Our preliminary functional studies suggest that MS4A6A does not modify sTREM2, but due to limited availability of MS4A6A reagents we cannot definitively rule out a relationship between MS4A6A and sTREM2. Since the GWAS and bioinformatics analyses only consistently supported a putative functional role for MS4A4A and MS4A6A, we did not investigate the other MS4A gene family members; therefore, we cannot exclude the possibility that other genes in the MS4A region modulate sTREM2. Another limitation of this study is that we are only beginning to uncover the functional relationship between MS4A4A and sTREM2. The significance of this study resides in the identification and functional validation associating MS4A4A with sTREM2. This study also begins to provide a functional explanation for the original AD risk association identified in the MS4A gene region. Our functional data support the genetic association between MS4A4A and sTREM2 as we were able to modify extracellular sTREM2 by modulating MS4A4A expression or targeting MS4A4A with specific antibodies. MS4A4A may modify sTREM2 as part of the machinery needed for cleavage, through intracellular TREM2 trafficking, or by binding to extracellular sTREM2. Additional functional studies interrogating all the possible mechanisms will be necessary to address these important questions.

In summary, this study identified for the first time MS4A4A as an important player in TREM2 biology, providing a mechanistic explanation of the MS4A genetic association with AD risk, supporting the importance of TREM2 biology in AD risk in general, and demonstrating that sTREM2 may be involved in AD pathology.

Materials and MethodsStudy DesignThe goal of this study was to identify common genetic variants and genes associated with CSF sTREM2. To do this, we used a three-stage genome-wide association study: discovery, replication, and meta-analyses. The discovery phase included 813 individuals from ADNI, and the replication phase included 580 independent samples from six different studies. Meta-analyses were performed using a fixed effect model. Genetic loci that passed the multiple test correction for GWAS (P < 5×10−8) were functionally annotated using bioinformatics tools to identify variants and genes most likely driving the GWAS signal.To validate the genetic findings, we performed cell-based studies modeling the most likely functional genes identified by the functional annotation. Our analyses identified MS4A4A and MS4A6A as putative functional genes. Our hypothesis is that changes in protein levels or function of the functional gene(s) should also result in changes of sTREM2. These genes, as well as TREM2, are primarily expressed in microglia in the brain. Additionally, MS4A4A does not have a mouse ortholog. For this reason, we decided to use primary human macrophages.Transfecting/transducing primary human macrophages is challenging; therefore, we decided to first use antibodies against MS4A4A and MS4A6A as a quick screening method. Primary human macrophages, were treated with the specific MS4A antibodies and sTREM2 was measured in the media by ELISA. Then we transduced primary macrophages using lentivirus to overexpress MS4A4A. ELISA was used to measure sTREM2 in the media.Ethics statementThe Institutional Review Boards of all participating institutions approved the study and research was carried out in accordance with the approved protocols. Written informed consent was obtained from participants or their family members.Cohort demographicsCerebrospinal fluid was obtained from the Alzheimer Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) and sTREM2 was measured with enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) by a group of investigators at Washington University in St Louis (WashU) and a group at Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität (LMU) München department of Neurology (Munich, Germany). A total of 172 AD, 169 cognitive normal, 183 early Mild Cognitive impairment (eMCI), 221 late-MCI and 68 Significant Memory Concern (SMC) individuals were studied in addition to 38 TREM2 mutation carriers (p.D87N, p.H157Y, p.L211P, p.R47H, and p.R62H). TREM2 risk-variant carriers were excluded from the GWAS analyses. Demographic characteristics of the datasets can be seen in Table 1, Table 2, and Supplementary tables S1 and S3. Additional datasets were used for replication of the top SNPs, demographic characteristics are shown in Supplementary Table S3. Data were obtained from The Charles F. and Joanne Knight Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center (Knight ADRC), GHPH, GHDEM, SPIN, Clinic-IDIBAPS, and The Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network (DIAN) (24–26, 32).RNA-seq data were obtained from four independent cohorts as described previously (37). The Knight ADRC provided data from 28 brains taken from neuropathologically-confirmed late-onset AD, an additional 10 AD cases with known TREM2 mutations, and 14 cognitively healthy controls. DIAN provided data from 19 autosomal-dominantly inherited early-onset AD. RNA extraction and sequencing methods were described previously (37). RNA-seq data were obtained from the Mayo Clinic Brain Bank via the AMP-AD Knowledge portal (https://www.synapse.org; synapse ID = 5550404; accessed January 2017), the RNA extraction and sequencing methods were described previously (62). The AMP-AD portal was also utilized to obtain RNA-seq data from the Mount Sinai Brain Bank (https://www.synapse.org; synapse ID = 3157743; accessed January 2017) which included data from 1,030 samples collected from four brain regions taken from 300 individuals, as described previously (63). QC and processing were performed as previously described and additional information is in the supplementary methods (37).ELISA for CSF sTREM2CSF samples were obtained and measured separately by investigators at WashU as described previously (24) and LMU. CSF sTREM2 measurements from LMU were obtained using an ELISA based on the MSD platform and is comprehensively described in previous publications (13, 25, 26). Measured CSF values were corrected by plate-specific correction factors obtained by each group and the corrected values were used for analyses. Pearson’s correlation was used to compare the corrected sTREM2 values between the two different ELISA methods in overlapping samples (N = 980, r = 0.834, P = 2.2×10−254). Detailed description of the ELISA and QC can be found in the supplementary methods.When more than one experiment was performed in vitro to measure sTREM2 in cell culture media results are expressed as normalized values on untreated controls.Genotyping and imputationSamples were genotyped with the Illumina 610 or Omniexpress chip. Stringent quality control (QC) criteria were applied to each genotyping array separately before combining genotype data. The minimum call rate for single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and individuals was 98% and autosomal SNPs not in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (P < 1×10−6) were excluded. X-chromosome SNPs were analyzed to verify gender identification. Unanticipated duplicates and cryptic relatedness (Pihat ≥0.25) among samples were tested by pairwise genome-wide estimates of proportion identity-by-descent, and when a pair of identical or related samples was identified, the sample from Knight-ADRC or with a higher number of variants that passed QC was prioritized. EIGENSTRAT (64) was used to calculate principal components. APOE ε2, ε3, and ε4 isoforms were determined by genotyping rs7412 and rs429358 using Taqman genotyping technology as previously described (65–67). The 1000 Genomes Project Phase 3 data (October 2014), SHAPEIT v2.r837 (68), and IMPUTE2 v2.3.2 (69) were used for phasing and imputation. Individual genotypes imputed with probability < 0.90 were set to missing and imputed genotypes with probability ≥0.90 were analyzed as fully observed. Genotyped and imputed variants with MAF < 0.02 or IMPUTE2 information score < 0.30 were excluded, leaving 7,320,475 variants for analyses.Statistical methodsStatistical analyses and data visualization were performed in R v3.4.0 (70), PLINK v1.9 (71), and LocusZoom v1.3 (72). Corrected raw values for CSF sTREM2 were normally distributed, so two-sample t-tests were used to compare CSF levels between males and females. Kruskal-Wallis with post-hoc Dunn’s test was used for multiple group comparisons of the TREM2 mutation carriers and non-carriers. Pearson’s product moment correlation coefficient was used for correlation analyses. Single-variant associations with CSF sTREM2 were tested using the additive linear regression model in PLINK v1.9 (71). Covariates included age at time of LP, sex, and the first two principal component factors to account for population structure. To determine whether there were spurious associations due to differences in assay, we tested the CSF sTREM2 measures from WashU and LMU and in both cases a genome-wide signal in the MS4A cluster were found (See Figure 1 and Supplementary Figure S3). The genomic inflation factor was λ < 1.008 for all of the genetic analyses. Statistical significance for single-variant analyses was selected based on the commonly used threshold estimated from Bonferroni correction of the likely number of independent tests in genome-wide analyses (P < 5 × 10−8). Meta-analyses were performed using a fixed effect model in METAL (73).To identify additional independent genetic signals, conditional analyses were conducted by adding the SNP with the smallest P value as a covariate into the default regression model and testing all remaining regional SNPs for association. The dataset was stratified by the most recently reported case status and the genetic signals from the joint dataset were tested to determine whether the genetic associations were driven by cases or controls. To determine whether the identified genetic association within the joint dataset was sex-specific, the dataset was stratified by sex and each sex was tested for the association. Results from the sex-specific analyses were verified in a subset of age-matched samples (N = 367 each for males and females, Table S1).Gene expression was inferred using Salmon v0.7.2 (74) transcript expression quantification of the coding transcripts of Homo sapiens included in the GENCODE reference genome (GRCh37.75). Gene counts data were transformed to stabilize expression variances along the range of mean values and normalized according to library size using the variance stabilizing transformation (VST) function in DESeq2 (75). Correlations between expression of TREM2 and each member of the MS4A gene family, with an average TPM > 1, were tested in each independent RNA-seq cohort.Differences in mRNA levels, and sTREM2 levels for the cell-based studies were analyzing using the non-parametric Mann-Whitney test or Kruskal Wallis H test for multi-group comparisons.Bioinformatics annotationAll variants below the threshold for suggestive significance (P < 1×10−5) were taken forward for functional annotation using ANNOVAR version 2015–06–17 (76) and examined for potential regulatory functions using HaploReg v4.1 (77) and RegulomeDB v1.1 (78). Search tools from publicly available databases, Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) Analysis V7 (79), the Brain eQTL Almanac (Braineac) (80), and the Westra Blood eQTL browser (48), were utilized to determine if significant SNPs were reported eQTLs. The Encyclopedia of DNA elements (ENCODE, https://www.encodeproject.org/) was queried, filtering for brain tissue in Homo sapiens, to examine DNA elements affected by the associated SNPs. The Ensembl Variant Effect Predictor (VEP, http://grch37.ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/Tools/VEP) (81) was queried for the predicted effects of identified coding variants, including any applicable SIFT and PolyPhen scores.Mendelian RandomizationWe used the R package MendelianRandomization (82) which includes three primary methods: inverse-variance weighted (IVW), median-based (simple or weighted), and MR-Egger. The MR-Egger method has an option to use robust regression instead of standard regression or a penalized option that downweights the contribution of genetic variants with outlying (heterogeneous) causal estimates. We tested all three primary methods and the different options for the MR-Egger method.The SNPs selected for the analysis were the two independent SNPs (rs1582763, and rs659156) from chromosome 11 as well as the top SNP in Chr 6 (rs28385608). This SNP was included because the locus was near significant in the gene-based analyses and this SNP had the smallest P value within the region in the single-variant analysis. The beta-coefficients and standard errors for the three selected SNPs from this study were used as input with summary statistics from a large GWAS for AD risk (36).Human macrophages culturesPeripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were purified from human blood on Ficoll-Paque PLUS density gradient (Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ). To generate macrophages, PBMCs were cultured in 6-well culture plates (3×106 cell/well) in RPMI-1640 without fetal bovine serum. After 2 hours of culture PBMCs were washed twice with PBS 1X and cultured in RPMI supplemented with 50 ng/ml MCSF for 7 days at 37° C with 5% CO2. Supernatants from macrophage cultures were collected at different time points, centrifuged at 21000g for 15 min and filtered through a 0.22 μm filter to remove all cells and membrane debris. Macrophage supernatants were then frozen in aliquots at −80°C until used in the ELISA for human sTREM2.In vitro experiments with anti MS4A antibodiesHuman macrophages after 7 days in culture were incubated with 10, 5 and 1 μg/ml of anti-MS4A4A Biolegend (cat #372502 (clone 5C12)); or anti-MS4A6A (Invitrogen cat #PA5–72732) antibodies in the presence or absence of IL-4 (Peprotech; 15 ng/ml) in culture. Mouse IgG Isotype (Thermo Fisher cat: #10400C) was used as control. After 48 hours cell culture media were collected, centrifuged at 21,000g for 15 min and filtered through a 0.22 μm filter to remove all cells and membrane debris. Macrophage supernatants were then frozen in aliquots at −80°C until used in the ELISA for human sTREM2.Lentivirus vector preparationLentiviral vectors encoding human MS4A4A WT cDNA (NM_148975) Myc-DDK-tagged (RC204646L1), GFP (PS100071), the shRNA for MS4A4A (pGFP-C-shLenti MS4A4A (TL303135B) and the control shRNA pGFP-C-shLenti Scrambled (TR30021) were obtained from Origene and produced as previously described (83, 84). All constructs were verified by Sanger sequencing. To generate viral particles, HEK-293T cells were transfected using calcium phosphate with the packaging construct and packaging plasmids Gag-Pol, Rev, and VSV-G. Supernatant containing lentiviral particles were collected at 48 and 72 h after transfection. Viral supernatant was collected according to previously published protocols (84). Transduction was carried out with different volumes 1, 5, 10, 50, 100 and 500 uL of supernatant in HEK-293T cells for 24 hours. Transduction efficiency, defined as percentage of transduced cells expressing GFP, was assessed qualitatively using an Olympus IX81 fluorescence microscope (Center Valley, PA).Transductions of Human macrophagesCultured monocyte-derived macrophages were transduced with lentiviral vectors. The highest transduction efficiency (60–70%) was reached with 400 uL of unconcentrated virus after five days in culture. Macrophages were transduced with lentivirus vector for 24 hours, rinsed and fresh media added. Cells and media were collected 48 hours later for sTREM2 ELISA and qPCR analyses.Lentivirus-mediated MS4A4A knock-downMonocyte-derived macrophages were transduced with lentiviral particles to knock-down MS4A4A (pGFP-C-shLenti MS4A4A (Origene: TL303135B)) or a control shRNA (pGFP-C-shLenti Scrambled (Origene: TR30021)). Macrophages were transduced with lentiviral particles for 48 hours. At day 7, cells were detached and FAC-sorted for GFP-positive populations using Becton Dickinson FACSARIA II cell sorter. GFP-positive sorted cells were re-plated and media and cell pellets were collected 3 days later for sTREM2 ELISA and qPCR analyses.Quantitative PCRThe effect of overexpression was measured by real-time qPCR analysis using probe specific for MS4A4A. Macrophages transduced with the lentiviral particles were collected in TRIzol reagent and total RNA was extracted using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen). cDNA was prepared from the total RNA using a High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Thermo Fisher). Gene expression levels were analyzed by real-time PCR using TaqMan assays for MS4A4A (Hs00254780_m1) and GAPDH (Hs02758991_g1) on a QuantStudio 12K Flex Real-Time PCR System (Thermo Fisher). To avoid amplification interference, expression assays were run in separate wells from the housekeeping gene GAPDH. Real-time data were analyzed by the comparative CT method. Average CT values for each sample were normalized to the average CT values for the housekeeping gene GAPDH. The resulting value was corrected for assay efficiency. Samples with a standard error of 20% or less were analyzed.Immunocytochemistry and cell imagingCells were fixed for 15–20 min at room temperature (RT) in 4 % (w/v) PFA, 4 % (w/v) sucrose, 20 mM NaOH and 5 mM MgCl2 in PBS, pH 7.4. For intracellular staining, cells were permeabilized and blocked for 60 min at RT in 5% Horse serum, 0.1% Saponin in PBS and incubated at 4 °C overnight with human anti-TREM2 (R&D, AF1828) and human anti-MS4A4A (Biolegend, clone 5C12) primary antibodies diluted in PBS, 5% Horse serum. Samples were analyzed with an Olympus FV1200 scanning confocal microscope and a Zeiss LSM880 laser scanning confocal microscope (Carl Zeiss Inc, Thornwood, NY) equipped with 63X, 1.4 NA Zeiss Plan Apochromat oil objective. The Olympus FV1200 laser scanning confocal: (Olympus-America, Inc, Waltham, MA) equipped with five detectors (2 spectral and 1filter based) and two GaAsP PMTs. Images were captured using an OLYMPUS PlanApoN 60X, 1.4 NA super corrected oil objective [PlanApoN 60X OIL SC] objectives. The 405nm, 488nm, 559nm diode lasers and 635nm HeNe (helium neon) lasers were utilized with an optimal pinhole of 1 airy unit to acquire images. Images were finally processed with ImageJ software. DF ZEN 2.1 black edition software was used to obtain Z-stacks through the entire height of the cells with confocal Z-slices of 1.5μm (63X) and an interval of 0.5 μm. Some of the images were acquired using a Nikon Eclipse 90i fluorescent and bright field microscope and analyzed for quantitation with the Metamorph 7.7 software.

Materials and Methods

Study DesignThe goal of this study was to identify common genetic variants and genes associated with CSF sTREM2. To do this, we used a three-stage genome-wide association study: discovery, replication, and meta-analyses. The discovery phase included 813 individuals from ADNI, and the replication phase included 580 independent samples from six different studies. Meta-analyses were performed using a fixed effect model. Genetic loci that passed the multiple test correction for GWAS (P < 5×10−8) were functionally annotated using bioinformatics tools to identify variants and genes most likely driving the GWAS signal.To validate the genetic findings, we performed cell-based studies modeling the most likely functional genes identified by the functional annotation. Our analyses identified MS4A4A and MS4A6A as putative functional genes. Our hypothesis is that changes in protein levels or function of the functional gene(s) should also result in changes of sTREM2. These genes, as well as TREM2, are primarily expressed in microglia in the brain. Additionally, MS4A4A does not have a mouse ortholog. For this reason, we decided to use primary human macrophages.Transfecting/transducing primary human macrophages is challenging; therefore, we decided to first use antibodies against MS4A4A and MS4A6A as a quick screening method. Primary human macrophages, were treated with the specific MS4A antibodies and sTREM2 was measured in the media by ELISA. Then we transduced primary macrophages using lentivirus to overexpress MS4A4A. ELISA was used to measure sTREM2 in the media.

Study Design

The goal of this study was to identify common genetic variants and genes associated with CSF sTREM2. To do this, we used a three-stage genome-wide association study: discovery, replication, and meta-analyses. The discovery phase included 813 individuals from ADNI, and the replication phase included 580 independent samples from six different studies. Meta-analyses were performed using a fixed effect model. Genetic loci that passed the multiple test correction for GWAS (P < 5×10−8) were functionally annotated using bioinformatics tools to identify variants and genes most likely driving the GWAS signal.

To validate the genetic findings, we performed cell-based studies modeling the most likely functional genes identified by the functional annotation. Our analyses identified MS4A4A and MS4A6A as putative functional genes. Our hypothesis is that changes in protein levels or function of the functional gene(s) should also result in changes of sTREM2. These genes, as well as TREM2, are primarily expressed in microglia in the brain. Additionally, MS4A4A does not have a mouse ortholog. For this reason, we decided to use primary human macrophages.

Transfecting/transducing primary human macrophages is challenging; therefore, we decided to first use antibodies against MS4A4A and MS4A6A as a quick screening method. Primary human macrophages, were treated with the specific MS4A antibodies and sTREM2 was measured in the media by ELISA. Then we transduced primary macrophages using lentivirus to overexpress MS4A4A. ELISA was used to measure sTREM2 in the media.

Ethics statementThe Institutional Review Boards of all participating institutions approved the study and research was carried out in accordance with the approved protocols. Written informed consent was obtained from participants or their family members.

Ethics statement

The Institutional Review Boards of all participating institutions approved the study and research was carried out in accordance with the approved protocols. Written informed consent was obtained from participants or their family members.

Cohort demographicsCerebrospinal fluid was obtained from the Alzheimer Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) and sTREM2 was measured with enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) by a group of investigators at Washington University in St Louis (WashU) and a group at Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität (LMU) München department of Neurology (Munich, Germany). A total of 172 AD, 169 cognitive normal, 183 early Mild Cognitive impairment (eMCI), 221 late-MCI and 68 Significant Memory Concern (SMC) individuals were studied in addition to 38 TREM2 mutation carriers (p.D87N, p.H157Y, p.L211P, p.R47H, and p.R62H). TREM2 risk-variant carriers were excluded from the GWAS analyses. Demographic characteristics of the datasets can be seen in Table 1, Table 2, and Supplementary tables S1 and S3. Additional datasets were used for replication of the top SNPs, demographic characteristics are shown in Supplementary Table S3. Data were obtained from The Charles F. and Joanne Knight Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center (Knight ADRC), GHPH, GHDEM, SPIN, Clinic-IDIBAPS, and The Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network (DIAN) (24–26, 32).RNA-seq data were obtained from four independent cohorts as described previously (37). The Knight ADRC provided data from 28 brains taken from neuropathologically-confirmed late-onset AD, an additional 10 AD cases with known TREM2 mutations, and 14 cognitively healthy controls. DIAN provided data from 19 autosomal-dominantly inherited early-onset AD. RNA extraction and sequencing methods were described previously (37). RNA-seq data were obtained from the Mayo Clinic Brain Bank via the AMP-AD Knowledge portal (https://www.synapse.org; synapse ID = 5550404; accessed January 2017), the RNA extraction and sequencing methods were described previously (62). The AMP-AD portal was also utilized to obtain RNA-seq data from the Mount Sinai Brain Bank (https://www.synapse.org; synapse ID = 3157743; accessed January 2017) which included data from 1,030 samples collected from four brain regions taken from 300 individuals, as described previously (63). QC and processing were performed as previously described and additional information is in the supplementary methods (37).

Cohort demographics

Cerebrospinal fluid was obtained from the Alzheimer Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) and sTREM2 was measured with enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) by a group of investigators at Washington University in St Louis (WashU) and a group at Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität (LMU) München department of Neurology (Munich, Germany). A total of 172 AD, 169 cognitive normal, 183 early Mild Cognitive impairment (eMCI), 221 late-MCI and 68 Significant Memory Concern (SMC) individuals were studied in addition to 38 TREM2 mutation carriers (p.D87N, p.H157Y, p.L211P, p.R47H, and p.R62H). TREM2 risk-variant carriers were excluded from the GWAS analyses. Demographic characteristics of the datasets can be seen in Table 1, Table 2, and Supplementary tables S1 and S3. Additional datasets were used for replication of the top SNPs, demographic characteristics are shown in Supplementary Table S3. Data were obtained from The Charles F. and Joanne Knight Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center (Knight ADRC), GHPH, GHDEM, SPIN, Clinic-IDIBAPS, and The Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network (DIAN) (24–26, 32).

RNA-seq data were obtained from four independent cohorts as described previously (37). The Knight ADRC provided data from 28 brains taken from neuropathologically-confirmed late-onset AD, an additional 10 AD cases with known TREM2 mutations, and 14 cognitively healthy controls. DIAN provided data from 19 autosomal-dominantly inherited early-onset AD. RNA extraction and sequencing methods were described previously (37). RNA-seq data were obtained from the Mayo Clinic Brain Bank via the AMP-AD Knowledge portal (https://www.synapse.org; synapse ID = 5550404; accessed January 2017), the RNA extraction and sequencing methods were described previously (62). The AMP-AD portal was also utilized to obtain RNA-seq data from the Mount Sinai Brain Bank (https://www.synapse.org; synapse ID = 3157743; accessed January 2017) which included data from 1,030 samples collected from four brain regions taken from 300 individuals, as described previously (63). QC and processing were performed as previously described and additional information is in the supplementary methods (37).

ELISA for CSF sTREM2CSF samples were obtained and measured separately by investigators at WashU as described previously (24) and LMU. CSF sTREM2 measurements from LMU were obtained using an ELISA based on the MSD platform and is comprehensively described in previous publications (13, 25, 26). Measured CSF values were corrected by plate-specific correction factors obtained by each group and the corrected values were used for analyses. Pearson’s correlation was used to compare the corrected sTREM2 values between the two different ELISA methods in overlapping samples (N = 980, r = 0.834, P = 2.2×10−254). Detailed description of the ELISA and QC can be found in the supplementary methods.When more than one experiment was performed in vitro to measure sTREM2 in cell culture media results are expressed as normalized values on untreated controls.

ELISA for CSF sTREM2

CSF samples were obtained and measured separately by investigators at WashU as described previously (24) and LMU. CSF sTREM2 measurements from LMU were obtained using an ELISA based on the MSD platform and is comprehensively described in previous publications (13, 25, 26). Measured CSF values were corrected by plate-specific correction factors obtained by each group and the corrected values were used for analyses. Pearson’s correlation was used to compare the corrected sTREM2 values between the two different ELISA methods in overlapping samples (N = 980, r = 0.834, P = 2.2×10−254). Detailed description of the ELISA and QC can be found in the supplementary methods.

When more than one experiment was performed in vitro to measure sTREM2 in cell culture media results are expressed as normalized values on untreated controls.

Genotyping and imputationSamples were genotyped with the Illumina 610 or Omniexpress chip. Stringent quality control (QC) criteria were applied to each genotyping array separately before combining genotype data. The minimum call rate for single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and individuals was 98% and autosomal SNPs not in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (P < 1×10−6) were excluded. X-chromosome SNPs were analyzed to verify gender identification. Unanticipated duplicates and cryptic relatedness (Pihat ≥0.25) among samples were tested by pairwise genome-wide estimates of proportion identity-by-descent, and when a pair of identical or related samples was identified, the sample from Knight-ADRC or with a higher number of variants that passed QC was prioritized. EIGENSTRAT (64) was used to calculate principal components. APOE ε2, ε3, and ε4 isoforms were determined by genotyping rs7412 and rs429358 using Taqman genotyping technology as previously described (65–67). The 1000 Genomes Project Phase 3 data (October 2014), SHAPEIT v2.r837 (68), and IMPUTE2 v2.3.2 (69) were used for phasing and imputation. Individual genotypes imputed with probability < 0.90 were set to missing and imputed genotypes with probability ≥0.90 were analyzed as fully observed. Genotyped and imputed variants with MAF < 0.02 or IMPUTE2 information score < 0.30 were excluded, leaving 7,320,475 variants for analyses.

Genotyping and imputation

Samples were genotyped with the Illumina 610 or Omniexpress chip. Stringent quality control (QC) criteria were applied to each genotyping array separately before combining genotype data. The minimum call rate for single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and individuals was 98% and autosomal SNPs not in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (P < 1×10−6) were excluded. X-chromosome SNPs were analyzed to verify gender identification. Unanticipated duplicates and cryptic relatedness (Pihat ≥0.25) among samples were tested by pairwise genome-wide estimates of proportion identity-by-descent, and when a pair of identical or related samples was identified, the sample from Knight-ADRC or with a higher number of variants that passed QC was prioritized. EIGENSTRAT (64) was used to calculate principal components. APOE ε2, ε3, and ε4 isoforms were determined by genotyping rs7412 and rs429358 using Taqman genotyping technology as previously described (65–67). The 1000 Genomes Project Phase 3 data (October 2014), SHAPEIT v2.r837 (68), and IMPUTE2 v2.3.2 (69) were used for phasing and imputation. Individual genotypes imputed with probability < 0.90 were set to missing and imputed genotypes with probability ≥0.90 were analyzed as fully observed. Genotyped and imputed variants with MAF < 0.02 or IMPUTE2 information score < 0.30 were excluded, leaving 7,320,475 variants for analyses.

Statistical methodsStatistical analyses and data visualization were performed in R v3.4.0 (70), PLINK v1.9 (71), and LocusZoom v1.3 (72). Corrected raw values for CSF sTREM2 were normally distributed, so two-sample t-tests were used to compare CSF levels between males and females. Kruskal-Wallis with post-hoc Dunn’s test was used for multiple group comparisons of the TREM2 mutation carriers and non-carriers. Pearson’s product moment correlation coefficient was used for correlation analyses. Single-variant associations with CSF sTREM2 were tested using the additive linear regression model in PLINK v1.9 (71). Covariates included age at time of LP, sex, and the first two principal component factors to account for population structure. To determine whether there were spurious associations due to differences in assay, we tested the CSF sTREM2 measures from WashU and LMU and in both cases a genome-wide signal in the MS4A cluster were found (See Figure 1 and Supplementary Figure S3). The genomic inflation factor was λ < 1.008 for all of the genetic analyses. Statistical significance for single-variant analyses was selected based on the commonly used threshold estimated from Bonferroni correction of the likely number of independent tests in genome-wide analyses (P < 5 × 10−8). Meta-analyses were performed using a fixed effect model in METAL (73).To identify additional independent genetic signals, conditional analyses were conducted by adding the SNP with the smallest P value as a covariate into the default regression model and testing all remaining regional SNPs for association. The dataset was stratified by the most recently reported case status and the genetic signals from the joint dataset were tested to determine whether the genetic associations were driven by cases or controls. To determine whether the identified genetic association within the joint dataset was sex-specific, the dataset was stratified by sex and each sex was tested for the association. Results from the sex-specific analyses were verified in a subset of age-matched samples (N = 367 each for males and females, Table S1).Gene expression was inferred using Salmon v0.7.2 (74) transcript expression quantification of the coding transcripts of Homo sapiens included in the GENCODE reference genome (GRCh37.75). Gene counts data were transformed to stabilize expression variances along the range of mean values and normalized according to library size using the variance stabilizing transformation (VST) function in DESeq2 (75). Correlations between expression of TREM2 and each member of the MS4A gene family, with an average TPM > 1, were tested in each independent RNA-seq cohort.Differences in mRNA levels, and sTREM2 levels for the cell-based studies were analyzing using the non-parametric Mann-Whitney test or Kruskal Wallis H test for multi-group comparisons.

Statistical methods

Statistical analyses and data visualization were performed in R v3.4.0 (70), PLINK v1.9 (71), and LocusZoom v1.3 (72). Corrected raw values for CSF sTREM2 were normally distributed, so two-sample t-tests were used to compare CSF levels between males and females. Kruskal-Wallis with post-hoc Dunn’s test was used for multiple group comparisons of the TREM2 mutation carriers and non-carriers. Pearson’s product moment correlation coefficient was used for correlation analyses. Single-variant associations with CSF sTREM2 were tested using the additive linear regression model in PLINK v1.9 (71). Covariates included age at time of LP, sex, and the first two principal component factors to account for population structure. To determine whether there were spurious associations due to differences in assay, we tested the CSF sTREM2 measures from WashU and LMU and in both cases a genome-wide signal in the MS4A cluster were found (See Figure 1 and Supplementary Figure S3). The genomic inflation factor was λ < 1.008 for all of the genetic analyses. Statistical significance for single-variant analyses was selected based on the commonly used threshold estimated from Bonferroni correction of the likely number of independent tests in genome-wide analyses (P < 5 × 10−8). Meta-analyses were performed using a fixed effect model in METAL (73).

To identify additional independent genetic signals, conditional analyses were conducted by adding the SNP with the smallest P value as a covariate into the default regression model and testing all remaining regional SNPs for association. The dataset was stratified by the most recently reported case status and the genetic signals from the joint dataset were tested to determine whether the genetic associations were driven by cases or controls. To determine whether the identified genetic association within the joint dataset was sex-specific, the dataset was stratified by sex and each sex was tested for the association. Results from the sex-specific analyses were verified in a subset of age-matched samples (N = 367 each for males and females, Table S1).

Gene expression was inferred using Salmon v0.7.2 (74) transcript expression quantification of the coding transcripts of Homo sapiens included in the GENCODE reference genome (GRCh37.75). Gene counts data were transformed to stabilize expression variances along the range of mean values and normalized according to library size using the variance stabilizing transformation (VST) function in DESeq2 (75). Correlations between expression of TREM2 and each member of the MS4A gene family, with an average TPM > 1, were tested in each independent RNA-seq cohort.

Differences in mRNA levels, and sTREM2 levels for the cell-based studies were analyzing using the non-parametric Mann-Whitney test or Kruskal Wallis H test for multi-group comparisons.

Bioinformatics annotationAll variants below the threshold for suggestive significance (P < 1×10−5) were taken forward for functional annotation using ANNOVAR version 2015–06–17 (76) and examined for potential regulatory functions using HaploReg v4.1 (77) and RegulomeDB v1.1 (78). Search tools from publicly available databases, Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) Analysis V7 (79), the Brain eQTL Almanac (Braineac) (80), and the Westra Blood eQTL browser (48), were utilized to determine if significant SNPs were reported eQTLs. The Encyclopedia of DNA elements (ENCODE, https://www.encodeproject.org/) was queried, filtering for brain tissue in Homo sapiens, to examine DNA elements affected by the associated SNPs. The Ensembl Variant Effect Predictor (VEP, http://grch37.ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/Tools/VEP) (81) was queried for the predicted effects of identified coding variants, including any applicable SIFT and PolyPhen scores.

Bioinformatics annotation

All variants below the threshold for suggestive significance (P < 1×10−5) were taken forward for functional annotation using ANNOVAR version 2015–06–17 (76) and examined for potential regulatory functions using HaploReg v4.1 (77) and RegulomeDB v1.1 (78). Search tools from publicly available databases, Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) Analysis V7 (79), the Brain eQTL Almanac (Braineac) (80), and the Westra Blood eQTL browser (48), were utilized to determine if significant SNPs were reported eQTLs. The Encyclopedia of DNA elements (ENCODE, https://www.encodeproject.org/) was queried, filtering for brain tissue in Homo sapiens, to examine DNA elements affected by the associated SNPs. The Ensembl Variant Effect Predictor (VEP, http://grch37.ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/Tools/VEP) (81) was queried for the predicted effects of identified coding variants, including any applicable SIFT and PolyPhen scores.

Mendelian RandomizationWe used the R package MendelianRandomization (82) which includes three primary methods: inverse-variance weighted (IVW), median-based (simple or weighted), and MR-Egger. The MR-Egger method has an option to use robust regression instead of standard regression or a penalized option that downweights the contribution of genetic variants with outlying (heterogeneous) causal estimates. We tested all three primary methods and the different options for the MR-Egger method.The SNPs selected for the analysis were the two independent SNPs (rs1582763, and rs659156) from chromosome 11 as well as the top SNP in Chr 6 (rs28385608). This SNP was included because the locus was near significant in the gene-based analyses and this SNP had the smallest P value within the region in the single-variant analysis. The beta-coefficients and standard errors for the three selected SNPs from this study were used as input with summary statistics from a large GWAS for AD risk (36).

Mendelian Randomization

We used the R package MendelianRandomization (82) which includes three primary methods: inverse-variance weighted (IVW), median-based (simple or weighted), and MR-Egger. The MR-Egger method has an option to use robust regression instead of standard regression or a penalized option that downweights the contribution of genetic variants with outlying (heterogeneous) causal estimates. We tested all three primary methods and the different options for the MR-Egger method.

The SNPs selected for the analysis were the two independent SNPs (rs1582763, and rs659156) from chromosome 11 as well as the top SNP in Chr 6 (rs28385608). This SNP was included because the locus was near significant in the gene-based analyses and this SNP had the smallest P value within the region in the single-variant analysis. The beta-coefficients and standard errors for the three selected SNPs from this study were used as input with summary statistics from a large GWAS for AD risk (36).

Human macrophages culturesPeripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were purified from human blood on Ficoll-Paque PLUS density gradient (Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ). To generate macrophages, PBMCs were cultured in 6-well culture plates (3×106 cell/well) in RPMI-1640 without fetal bovine serum. After 2 hours of culture PBMCs were washed twice with PBS 1X and cultured in RPMI supplemented with 50 ng/ml MCSF for 7 days at 37° C with 5% CO2. Supernatants from macrophage cultures were collected at different time points, centrifuged at 21000g for 15 min and filtered through a 0.22 μm filter to remove all cells and membrane debris. Macrophage supernatants were then frozen in aliquots at −80°C until used in the ELISA for human sTREM2.

Human macrophages cultures

Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were purified from human blood on Ficoll-Paque PLUS density gradient (Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ). To generate macrophages, PBMCs were cultured in 6-well culture plates (3×106 cell/well) in RPMI-1640 without fetal bovine serum. After 2 hours of culture PBMCs were washed twice with PBS 1X and cultured in RPMI supplemented with 50 ng/ml MCSF for 7 days at 37° C with 5% CO2. Supernatants from macrophage cultures were collected at different time points, centrifuged at 21000g for 15 min and filtered through a 0.22 μm filter to remove all cells and membrane debris. Macrophage supernatants were then frozen in aliquots at −80°C until used in the ELISA for human sTREM2.

In vitro experiments with anti MS4A antibodiesHuman macrophages after 7 days in culture were incubated with 10, 5 and 1 μg/ml of anti-MS4A4A Biolegend (cat #372502 (clone 5C12)); or anti-MS4A6A (Invitrogen cat #PA5–72732) antibodies in the presence or absence of IL-4 (Peprotech; 15 ng/ml) in culture. Mouse IgG Isotype (Thermo Fisher cat: #10400C) was used as control. After 48 hours cell culture media were collected, centrifuged at 21,000g for 15 min and filtered through a 0.22 μm filter to remove all cells and membrane debris. Macrophage supernatants were then frozen in aliquots at −80°C until used in the ELISA for human sTREM2.

In vitro experiments with anti MS4A antibodies

Human macrophages after 7 days in culture were incubated with 10, 5 and 1 μg/ml of anti-MS4A4A Biolegend (cat #372502 (clone 5C12)); or anti-MS4A6A (Invitrogen cat #PA5–72732) antibodies in the presence or absence of IL-4 (Peprotech; 15 ng/ml) in culture. Mouse IgG Isotype (Thermo Fisher cat: #10400C) was used as control. After 48 hours cell culture media were collected, centrifuged at 21,000g for 15 min and filtered through a 0.22 μm filter to remove all cells and membrane debris. Macrophage supernatants were then frozen in aliquots at −80°C until used in the ELISA for human sTREM2.

Lentivirus vector preparationLentiviral vectors encoding human MS4A4A WT cDNA (NM_148975) Myc-DDK-tagged (RC204646L1), GFP (PS100071), the shRNA for MS4A4A (pGFP-C-shLenti MS4A4A (TL303135B) and the control shRNA pGFP-C-shLenti Scrambled (TR30021) were obtained from Origene and produced as previously described (83, 84). All constructs were verified by Sanger sequencing. To generate viral particles, HEK-293T cells were transfected using calcium phosphate with the packaging construct and packaging plasmids Gag-Pol, Rev, and VSV-G. Supernatant containing lentiviral particles were collected at 48 and 72 h after transfection. Viral supernatant was collected according to previously published protocols (84). Transduction was carried out with different volumes 1, 5, 10, 50, 100 and 500 uL of supernatant in HEK-293T cells for 24 hours. Transduction efficiency, defined as percentage of transduced cells expressing GFP, was assessed qualitatively using an Olympus IX81 fluorescence microscope (Center Valley, PA).

Lentivirus vector preparation

Lentiviral vectors encoding human MS4A4A WT cDNA (NM_148975) Myc-DDK-tagged (RC204646L1), GFP (PS100071), the shRNA for MS4A4A (pGFP-C-shLenti MS4A4A (TL303135B) and the control shRNA pGFP-C-shLenti Scrambled (TR30021) were obtained from Origene and produced as previously described (83, 84). All constructs were verified by Sanger sequencing. To generate viral particles, HEK-293T cells were transfected using calcium phosphate with the packaging construct and packaging plasmids Gag-Pol, Rev, and VSV-G. Supernatant containing lentiviral particles were collected at 48 and 72 h after transfection. Viral supernatant was collected according to previously published protocols (84). Transduction was carried out with different volumes 1, 5, 10, 50, 100 and 500 uL of supernatant in HEK-293T cells for 24 hours. Transduction efficiency, defined as percentage of transduced cells expressing GFP, was assessed qualitatively using an Olympus IX81 fluorescence microscope (Center Valley, PA).

Transductions of Human macrophagesCultured monocyte-derived macrophages were transduced with lentiviral vectors. The highest transduction efficiency (60–70%) was reached with 400 uL of unconcentrated virus after five days in culture. Macrophages were transduced with lentivirus vector for 24 hours, rinsed and fresh media added. Cells and media were collected 48 hours later for sTREM2 ELISA and qPCR analyses.

Transductions of Human macrophages

Cultured monocyte-derived macrophages were transduced with lentiviral vectors. The highest transduction efficiency (60–70%) was reached with 400 uL of unconcentrated virus after five days in culture. Macrophages were transduced with lentivirus vector for 24 hours, rinsed and fresh media added. Cells and media were collected 48 hours later for sTREM2 ELISA and qPCR analyses.

Lentivirus-mediated MS4A4A knock-downMonocyte-derived macrophages were transduced with lentiviral particles to knock-down MS4A4A (pGFP-C-shLenti MS4A4A (Origene: TL303135B)) or a control shRNA (pGFP-C-shLenti Scrambled (Origene: TR30021)). Macrophages were transduced with lentiviral particles for 48 hours. At day 7, cells were detached and FAC-sorted for GFP-positive populations using Becton Dickinson FACSARIA II cell sorter. GFP-positive sorted cells were re-plated and media and cell pellets were collected 3 days later for sTREM2 ELISA and qPCR analyses.

Lentivirus-mediated MS4A4A knock-down

Monocyte-derived macrophages were transduced with lentiviral particles to knock-down MS4A4A (pGFP-C-shLenti MS4A4A (Origene: TL303135B)) or a control shRNA (pGFP-C-shLenti Scrambled (Origene: TR30021)). Macrophages were transduced with lentiviral particles for 48 hours. At day 7, cells were detached and FAC-sorted for GFP-positive populations using Becton Dickinson FACSARIA II cell sorter. GFP-positive sorted cells were re-plated and media and cell pellets were collected 3 days later for sTREM2 ELISA and qPCR analyses.

Quantitative PCRThe effect of overexpression was measured by real-time qPCR analysis using probe specific for MS4A4A. Macrophages transduced with the lentiviral particles were collected in TRIzol reagent and total RNA was extracted using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen). cDNA was prepared from the total RNA using a High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Thermo Fisher). Gene expression levels were analyzed by real-time PCR using TaqMan assays for MS4A4A (Hs00254780_m1) and GAPDH (Hs02758991_g1) on a QuantStudio 12K Flex Real-Time PCR System (Thermo Fisher). To avoid amplification interference, expression assays were run in separate wells from the housekeeping gene GAPDH. Real-time data were analyzed by the comparative CT method. Average CT values for each sample were normalized to the average CT values for the housekeeping gene GAPDH. The resulting value was corrected for assay efficiency. Samples with a standard error of 20% or less were analyzed.

Quantitative PCR

The effect of overexpression was measured by real-time qPCR analysis using probe specific for MS4A4A. Macrophages transduced with the lentiviral particles were collected in TRIzol reagent and total RNA was extracted using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen). cDNA was prepared from the total RNA using a High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Thermo Fisher). Gene expression levels were analyzed by real-time PCR using TaqMan assays for MS4A4A (Hs00254780_m1) and GAPDH (Hs02758991_g1) on a QuantStudio 12K Flex Real-Time PCR System (Thermo Fisher). To avoid amplification interference, expression assays were run in separate wells from the housekeeping gene GAPDH. Real-time data were analyzed by the comparative CT method. Average CT values for each sample were normalized to the average CT values for the housekeeping gene GAPDH. The resulting value was corrected for assay efficiency. Samples with a standard error of 20% or less were analyzed.

Immunocytochemistry and cell imagingCells were fixed for 15–20 min at room temperature (RT) in 4 % (w/v) PFA, 4 % (w/v) sucrose, 20 mM NaOH and 5 mM MgCl2 in PBS, pH 7.4. For intracellular staining, cells were permeabilized and blocked for 60 min at RT in 5% Horse serum, 0.1% Saponin in PBS and incubated at 4 °C overnight with human anti-TREM2 (R&D, AF1828) and human anti-MS4A4A (Biolegend, clone 5C12) primary antibodies diluted in PBS, 5% Horse serum. Samples were analyzed with an Olympus FV1200 scanning confocal microscope and a Zeiss LSM880 laser scanning confocal microscope (Carl Zeiss Inc, Thornwood, NY) equipped with 63X, 1.4 NA Zeiss Plan Apochromat oil objective. The Olympus FV1200 laser scanning confocal: (Olympus-America, Inc, Waltham, MA) equipped with five detectors (2 spectral and 1filter based) and two GaAsP PMTs. Images were captured using an OLYMPUS PlanApoN 60X, 1.4 NA super corrected oil objective [PlanApoN 60X OIL SC] objectives. The 405nm, 488nm, 559nm diode lasers and 635nm HeNe (helium neon) lasers were utilized with an optimal pinhole of 1 airy unit to acquire images. Images were finally processed with ImageJ software. DF ZEN 2.1 black edition software was used to obtain Z-stacks through the entire height of the cells with confocal Z-slices of 1.5μm (63X) and an interval of 0.5 μm. Some of the images were acquired using a Nikon Eclipse 90i fluorescent and bright field microscope and analyzed for quantitation with the Metamorph 7.7 software.

Immunocytochemistry and cell imaging

Cells were fixed for 15–20 min at room temperature (RT) in 4 % (w/v) PFA, 4 % (w/v) sucrose, 20 mM NaOH and 5 mM MgCl2 in PBS, pH 7.4. For intracellular staining, cells were permeabilized and blocked for 60 min at RT in 5% Horse serum, 0.1% Saponin in PBS and incubated at 4 °C overnight with human anti-TREM2 (R&D, AF1828) and human anti-MS4A4A (Biolegend, clone 5C12) primary antibodies diluted in PBS, 5% Horse serum. Samples were analyzed with an Olympus FV1200 scanning confocal microscope and a Zeiss LSM880 laser scanning confocal microscope (Carl Zeiss Inc, Thornwood, NY) equipped with 63X, 1.4 NA Zeiss Plan Apochromat oil objective. The Olympus FV1200 laser scanning confocal: (Olympus-America, Inc, Waltham, MA) equipped with five detectors (2 spectral and 1filter based) and two GaAsP PMTs. Images were captured using an OLYMPUS PlanApoN 60X, 1.4 NA super corrected oil objective [PlanApoN 60X OIL SC] objectives. The 405nm, 488nm, 559nm diode lasers and 635nm HeNe (helium neon) lasers were utilized with an optimal pinhole of 1 airy unit to acquire images. Images were finally processed with ImageJ software. DF ZEN 2.1 black edition software was used to obtain Z-stacks through the entire height of the cells with confocal Z-slices of 1.5μm (63X) and an interval of 0.5 μm. Some of the images were acquired using a Nikon Eclipse 90i fluorescent and bright field microscope and analyzed for quantitation with the Metamorph 7.7 software.

Supplementary MaterialSupp

Supplementary Material
