---
pmid: '26940873'
title: Analysis of Oligomerization Properties of Heme a Synthase Provides Insights
  into Its Function in Eukaryotes.
authors:
- Swenson S
- Cannon A
- Harris NJ
- Taylor NG
- Fox JL
- Khalimonchuk O
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4858986
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.707539
---

# Analysis of Oligomerization Properties of Heme a Synthase Provides Insights into Its Function in Eukaryotes.
**Authors:** Swenson S, Cannon A, Harris NJ, Taylor NG, Fox JL, Khalimonchuk O
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M115.707539](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M115.707539)
**PMC:** [PMC4858986](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4858986/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2016 May 6;291(19):10411-25. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.707539. Epub 
2016 Mar 3.

Analysis of Oligomerization Properties of Heme a Synthase Provides Insights into 
Its Function in Eukaryotes.

Swenson S(1), Cannon A(1), Harris NJ(2), Taylor NG(2), Fox JL(3), Khalimonchuk 
O(4).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Biochemistry and Nebraska Redox Biology Center, 
University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska 68588 and.
(2)the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, College of Charleston, 
Charleston, South Carolina 29424.
(3)the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, College of Charleston, 
Charleston, South Carolina 29424 foxjl@cofc.edu.
(4)From the Department of Biochemistry and Nebraska Redox Biology Center, 
University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska 68588 and 
okhalimonchuk2@unl.edu.

Heme a is an essential cofactor for function of cytochrome c oxidase in the 
mitochondrial electron transport chain. Several evolutionarily conserved enzymes 
have been implicated in the biosynthesis of heme a, including the heme a 
synthase Cox15. However, the structure of Cox15 is unknown, its enzymatic 
mechanism and the role of active site residues remain debated, and recent 
discoveries suggest additional chaperone-like roles for this enzyme. Here, we 
investigated Cox15 in the model eukaryote Saccharomyces cerevisiae via several 
approaches to examine its oligomeric states and determine the effects of active 
site and human pathogenic mutations. Our results indicate that Cox15 exhibits 
homotypic interactions, forming highly stable complexes dependent upon 
hydrophobic interactions. This multimerization is evolutionarily conserved and 
independent of heme levels and heme a synthase catalytic activity. Four 
conserved histidine residues are demonstrated to be critical for eukaryotic heme 
a synthase activity and cannot be substituted with other heme-ligating amino 
acids. The 20-residue linker region connecting the two conserved domains of 
Cox15 is also important; removal of this linker impairs both Cox15 
multimerization and enzymatic activity. Mutations of COX15 causing single amino 
acid conversions associated with fatal infantile hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and 
the neurological disorder Leigh syndrome result in impaired stability (S344P) or 
catalytic function (R217W), and the latter mutation affects oligomeric 
properties of the enzyme. Structural modeling of Cox15 suggests these two 
mutations affect protein folding and heme binding, respectively. We conclude 
that Cox15 multimerization is important for heme a biosynthesis and/or transfer 
to maturing cytochrome c oxidase.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M115.707539
PMCID: PMC4858986
PMID: 26940873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
