---
pmid: '20531392'
title: The peroxisomal receptor Pex19p forms a helical mPTS recognition domain.
authors:
- Schueller N
- Holton SJ
- Fodor K
- Milewski M
- Konarev P
- Stanley WA
- Wolf J
- Erdmann R
- Schliebs W
- Song YH
- Wilmanns M
journal: EMBO J
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2928687
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.115
---

# The peroxisomal receptor Pex19p forms a helical mPTS recognition domain.
**Authors:** Schueller N, Holton SJ, Fodor K, Milewski M, Konarev P, Stanley WA, Wolf J, Erdmann R, Schliebs W, Song YH, Wilmanns M
**Journal:** EMBO J (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2010.115](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2010.115)
**PMC:** [PMC2928687](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2928687/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2010 Aug 4;29(15):2491-500. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.115. Epub 2010 Jun
 8.

The peroxisomal receptor Pex19p forms a helical mPTS recognition domain.

Schueller N(1), Holton SJ, Fodor K, Milewski M, Konarev P, Stanley WA, Wolf J, 
Erdmann R, Schliebs W, Song YH, Wilmanns M.

Author information:
(1)EMBL c/o DESY, Notkestrasse 85, Hamburg, Germany.

The protein Pex19p functions as a receptor and chaperone of peroxisomal membrane 
proteins (PMPs). The crystal structure of the folded C-terminal part of the 
receptor reveals a globular domain that displays a bundle of three long helices 
in an antiparallel arrangement. Complementary functional experiments, using a 
range of truncated Pex19p constructs, show that the structured alpha-helical 
domain binds PMP-targeting signal (mPTS) sequences with about 10 muM affinity. 
Removal of a conserved N-terminal helical segment from the mPTS recognition 
domain impairs the ability for mPTS binding, indicating that it forms part of 
the mPTS-binding site. Pex19p variants with mutations in the same sequence 
segment abolish correct cargo import. Our data indicate a divided N-terminal and 
C-terminal structural arrangement in Pex19p, which is reminiscent of a similar 
division in the Pex5p receptor, to allow separation of cargo-targeting signal 
recognition and additional functions.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2010.115
PMCID: PMC2928687
PMID: 20531392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
