---
pmid: '22500019'
title: Amyloid β (Aβ) peptide directly activates amylin-3 receptor subtype by triggering
  multiple intracellular signaling pathways.
authors:
- Fu W
- Ruangkittisakul A
- MacTavish D
- Shi JY
- Ballanyi K
- Jhamandas JH
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3365692
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.331181
---

# Amyloid β (Aβ) peptide directly activates amylin-3 receptor subtype by triggering multiple intracellular signaling pathways.
**Authors:** Fu W, Ruangkittisakul A, MacTavish D, Shi JY, Ballanyi K, Jhamandas JH
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M111.331181](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M111.331181)
**PMC:** [PMC3365692](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3365692/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2012 May 25;287(22):18820-30. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.331181. Epub 
2012 Apr 12.

Amyloid β (Aβ) peptide directly activates amylin-3 receptor subtype by 
triggering multiple intracellular signaling pathways.

Fu W(1), Ruangkittisakul A, MacTavish D, Shi JY, Ballanyi K, Jhamandas JH.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

The two age-prevalent diseases Alzheimer disease and type 2 diabetes mellitus 
share many common features including the deposition of amyloidogenic proteins, 
amyloid β protein (Aβ) and amylin (islet amyloid polypeptide), respectively. 
Recent evidence suggests that both Aβ and amylin may express their effects 
through the amylin receptor, although the precise mechanisms for this 
interaction at a cellular level are unknown. Here, we studied this by generating 
HEK293 cells with stable expression of an isoform of the amylin receptor family, 
amylin receptor-3 (AMY3). Aβ1-42 and human amylin (hAmylin) increase cytosolic 
cAMP and Ca(2+), trigger multiple pathways involving the signal transduction 
mediators protein kinase A, MAPK, Akt, and cFos. Aβ1-42 and hAmylin also induce 
cell death during exposure for 24-48 h at low micromolar concentrations. In the 
presence of hAmylin, Aβ1-42 effects on HEK293-AMY3-expressing cells are 
occluded, suggesting a shared mechanism of action between the two peptides. 
Amylin receptor antagonist AC253 blocks increases in intracellular Ca(2+), 
activation of protein kinase A, MAPK, Akt, cFos, and cell death, which occur 
upon AMY3 activation with hAmylin, Aβ1-42, or their co-application. Our data 
suggest that AMY3 plays an important role by serving as a receptor target for 
actions Aβ and thus may represent a novel therapeutic target for development of 
compounds to treat neurodegenerative conditions such as Alzheimer disease.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.331181
PMCID: PMC3365692
PMID: 22500019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
