---
pmid: '10745006'
title: Crystal structure of human branched-chain alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase and
  the molecular basis of multienzyme complex deficiency in maple syrup urine disease.
authors:
- AEvarsson A
- Chuang JL
- Wynn RM
- Turley S
- Chuang DT
- Hol WG
journal: Structure
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0969-2126(00)00105-2
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Crystal structure of human branched-chain alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase and the molecular basis of multienzyme complex deficiency in maple syrup urine disease.
**Authors:** AEvarsson A, Chuang JL, Wynn RM, Turley S, Chuang DT, Hol WG
**Journal:** Structure (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0969-2126(00)00105-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0969-2126(00)00105-2)

## Abstract

1. Structure. 2000 Mar 15;8(3):277-91. doi: 10.1016/s0969-2126(00)00105-2.

Crystal structure of human branched-chain alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase and the 
molecular basis of multienzyme complex deficiency in maple syrup urine disease.

AEvarsson A(1), Chuang JL, Wynn RM, Turley S, Chuang DT, Hol WG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Structure, University of Washington School of 
Medicine, Seattle 98195, USA.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in components of the extraordinarily large alpha-ketoacid 
dehydrogenase multienzyme complexes can lead to serious and often fatal 
disorders in humans, including maple syrup urine disease (MSUD). In order to 
obtain insight into the effect of mutations observed in MSUD patients, we 
determined the crystal structure of branched-chain alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase 
(E1), the 170 kDa alpha(2)beta(2) heterotetrameric E1b component of the 
branched-chain alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase multienzyme complex.
RESULTS: The 2.7 A resolution crystal structure of human E1b revealed 
essentially the full alpha and beta polypeptide chains of the tightly packed 
heterotetramer. The position of two important potassium (K(+)) ions was 
determined. One of these ions assists a loop that is close to the cofactor to 
adopt the proper conformation. The second is located in the beta subunit near 
the interface with the small C-terminal domain of the alpha subunit. The known 
MSUD mutations affect the functioning of E1b by interfering with the cofactor 
and K(+) sites, the packing of hydrophobic cores, and the precise arrangement of 
residues at or near several subunit interfaces. The Tyr-->Asn mutation at 
position 393-alpha occurs very frequently in the US population of Mennonites and 
is located in a unique extension of the human E1b alpha subunit, contacting the 
beta' subunit.
CONCLUSIONS: Essentially all MSUD mutations in human E1b can be explained on the 
basis of the structure, with the severity of the mutations for the stability and 
function of the protein correlating well with the severity of the disease for 
the patients. The suggestion is made that small molecules with high affinity for 
human E1b might alleviate effects of some of the milder forms of MSUD.

DOI: 10.1016/s0969-2126(00)00105-2
PMID: 10745006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
