---
pmid: '11731479'
title: The yeast SAS (something about silencing) protein complex contains a MYST-type
  putative acetyltransferase and functions with chromatin assembly factor ASF1.
authors:
- Osada S
- Sutton A
- Muster N
- Brown CE
- Yates JR 3rd
- Sternglanz R
- Workman JL
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC312835
doi: 10.1101/gad.907201
---

# The yeast SAS (something about silencing) protein complex contains a MYST-type putative acetyltransferase and functions with chromatin assembly factor ASF1.
**Authors:** Osada S, Sutton A, Muster N, Brown CE, Yates JR 3rd, Sternglanz R, Workman JL
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.907201](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.907201)
**PMC:** [PMC312835](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC312835/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2001 Dec 1;15(23):3155-68. doi: 10.1101/gad.907201.

The yeast SAS (something about silencing) protein complex contains a MYST-type 
putative acetyltransferase and functions with chromatin assembly factor ASF1.

Osada S(1), Sutton A, Muster N, Brown CE, Yates JR 3rd, Sternglanz R, Workman 
JL.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI), Department of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 
Pennsylvania 16802-4500, USA.

It is well established that acetylation of histone and nonhistone proteins is 
intimately linked to transcriptional activation. However, loss of 
acetyltransferase activity has also been shown to cause silencing defects, 
implicating acetylation in gene silencing. The something about silencing (Sas) 2 
protein of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, a member of the MYST (MOZ, Ybf2/Sas3, Sas2, 
and TIP60) acetyltransferase family, promotes silencing at HML and telomeres. 
Here we identify a ~450-kD SAS complex containing Sas2p, Sas4p, and the 
tf2f-related Sas5 protein. Mutations in the conserved acetyl-CoA binding motif 
of Sas2p are shown to disrupt the ability of Sas2p to mediate the silencing at 
HML and telomeres, providing evidence for an important role for the 
acetyltransferase activity of the SAS complex in silencing. Furthermore, the SAS 
complex is found to interact with chromatin assembly factor Asf1p, and asf1 
mutants show silencing defects similar to mutants in the SAS complex. Thus, 
ASF1-dependent chromatin assembly may mediate the role of the SAS complex in 
silencing.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.907201
PMCID: PMC312835
PMID: 11731479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
