---
pmid: '17906639'
title: The prolyl isomerase Pin1 orchestrates p53 acetylation and dissociation from
  the apoptosis inhibitor iASPP.
authors:
- Mantovani F
- Tocco F
- Girardini J
- Smith P
- Gasco M
- Lu X
- Crook T
- Del Sal G
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nsmb1306
---

# The prolyl isomerase Pin1 orchestrates p53 acetylation and dissociation from the apoptosis inhibitor iASPP.
**Authors:** Mantovani F, Tocco F, Girardini J, Smith P, Gasco M, Lu X, Crook T, Del Sal G
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nsmb1306](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb1306)

## Abstract

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2007 Oct;14(10):912-20. doi: 10.1038/nsmb1306. Epub 2007 
Sep 30.

The prolyl isomerase Pin1 orchestrates p53 acetylation and dissociation from the 
apoptosis inhibitor iASPP.

Mantovani F(1), Tocco F, Girardini J, Smith P, Gasco M, Lu X, Crook T, Del Sal 
G.

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio Nazionale Consorzio Interuniversitario Biotecnologie (LNCIB), 
Area Science Park, Università di Trieste, Trieste, 34100, Italy.

Comment in
    Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2007 Oct;14(10):885-7. doi: 10.1038/nsmb1007-885.

The tumor-suppressor function of p53 relies on its transcriptional activity, 
which is modulated by post-translational modifications and interactions with 
regulatory proteins. The prolyl isomerase Pin1 has a central role in transducing 
phosphorylation of p53 into conformational changes that affect p53 stability and 
function. We found that Pin1 is required for efficient loading of p53 on target 
promoters upon stress. In addition, Pin1 is recruited to chromatin by p53 and 
stimulates binding of the p300 acetyltransferase and consequent p53 acetylation. 
Accordingly, tumor-associated mutations at Pin1-binding residues within the p53 
proline-rich domain hamper acetylation of p53 by p300. After phosphorylation of 
p53 at Ser46 triggered by cytotoxic stimuli, Pin1 also mediates p53's 
dissociation from the apoptosis inhibitor iASPP, promoting cell death. In tumors 
bearing wild-type p53, expression of Pin1 and iASPP are inversely correlated, 
supporting the clinical relevance of these interactions.

DOI: 10.1038/nsmb1306
PMID: 17906639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
