---
pmid: '18000865'
title: Gliatrophic and gliatropic roles of PVF/PVR signaling during axon guidance.
authors:
- Learte AR
- Forero MG
- Hidalgo A
journal: Glia
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/glia.20601
---

# Gliatrophic and gliatropic roles of PVF/PVR signaling during axon guidance.
**Authors:** Learte AR, Forero MG, Hidalgo A
**Journal:** Glia (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1002/glia.20601](https://doi.org/10.1002/glia.20601)

## Abstract

1. Glia. 2008 Jan 15;56(2):164-76. doi: 10.1002/glia.20601.

Gliatrophic and gliatropic roles of PVF/PVR signaling during axon guidance.

Learte AR(1), Forero MG, Hidalgo A.

Author information:
(1)Neurodevelopment Group, School of Biosciences, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham, United Kingdom.

Evidence of molecular and functional homology between vertebrate and Drosophila 
glia is limited, restricting the power of Drosophila as a model system to 
unravel the molecular basis of glial function. Like in vertebrates, in the 
Drosophila central nervous system glial cells are produced in excess and surplus 
glia are eliminated by apoptosis adjusting final glial number to axons. The 
underlying molecular mechanisms are largely unknown, as the only gliatrophic 
pathway known to date in flies is the EGFR and its ligands. The PDGFR signaling 
pathway plays a major role in regulating oligodendrocyte migration and number in 
vertebrates. Here, we show that the Drosophila PDGFR/VEGFR homologue PVR is 
required in midline glia during axon guidance for glial survival and migration, 
ultimately enabling axonal enwrapment. The midline glia migrate aided by the VUM 
and the MP1 midline neurons--sources of PVF ligands--and concomitantly 
interactions with neurons maintain midline glia survival. Upon loss of function 
for PVF/PVR signaling midline glia apoptosis increases, and gain of function 
induces supernumerary midline glia. Midline glial cells are displaced towards 
ectopic sources of PVF ligands. PVR signaling promotes midline glia survival 
through AKT and ERK pathways. This work shows that the PVR/PDGFR pathway plays 
conserved gliatrophic and gliatropic roles in subsets of glial cells in flies 
and vertebrates.

Copyright (c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/glia.20601
PMID: 18000865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
