---
pmid: '21173098'
title: A time course of hepcidin response to iron challenge in patients with HFE and
  TFR2 hemochromatosis.
authors:
- Girelli D
- Trombini P
- Busti F
- Campostrini N
- Sandri M
- Pelucchi S
- Westerman M
- Ganz T
- Nemeth E
- Piperno A
- Camaschella C
journal: Haematologica
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3069225
doi: 10.3324/haematol.2010.033449
---

# A time course of hepcidin response to iron challenge in patients with HFE and TFR2 hemochromatosis.
**Authors:** Girelli D, Trombini P, Busti F, Campostrini N, Sandri M, Pelucchi S, Westerman M, Ganz T, Nemeth E, Piperno A, Camaschella C
**Journal:** Haematologica (2011)
**DOI:** [10.3324/haematol.2010.033449](https://doi.org/10.3324/haematol.2010.033449)
**PMC:** [PMC3069225](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3069225/)

## Abstract

1. Haematologica. 2011 Apr;96(4):500-6. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2010.033449. Epub 
2010 Dec 20.

A time course of hepcidin response to iron challenge in patients with HFE and 
TFR2 hemochromatosis.

Girelli D(1), Trombini P, Busti F, Campostrini N, Sandri M, Pelucchi S, 
Westerman M, Ganz T, Nemeth E, Piperno A, Camaschella C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Verona, Policlinico GB Rossi, 37134 
Verona, Italy. domenico.girelli@univr.it

Comment in
    Haematologica. 2011 Apr;96(4):485-8. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2011.042036.

BACKGROUND: Inadequate hepcidin production leads to iron overload in nearly all 
types of hemochromatosis. We explored the acute response of hepcidin to iron 
challenge in 25 patients with HFE-hemochromatosis, in two with 
TFR2-hemochromatosis and in 13 controls. Sixteen patients (10 C282Y/C282Y 
homozygotes, 6 C282Y/H63D compound heterozygotes) had increased iron stores, 
while nine (6 C282Y/C282Y homozygotes, 3 C282Y/H63D compound heterozygotes) were 
studied after phlebotomy-induced normalization of iron stores.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We analyzed serum iron, transferrin saturation, and serum 
hepcidin by both enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and mass-spectrometry at 
baseline, and 4, 8, 12 and 24 hours after a single 65-mg dose of oral iron.
RESULTS: Serum iron and transferrin saturation significantly increased at 4 
hours and returned to baseline values at 8-12 hours in all groups, except in the 
iron-normalized patients who showed the highest and longest increase of both 
parameters. The level of hepcidin increased significantly at 4 hours and 
returned to baseline at 24 hours in controls and in the C282Y/H63D compound 
heterozygotes at diagnosis. The hepcidin response was smaller in 
C282Y-homozygotes than in controls, barely detectable in the patients with 
iron-depleted HFE-hemochromatosis and absent in those with TFR2-hemochromatosis. 
Conclusions Our results are consistent with a scenario in which TFR2 plays a 
prominent and HFE a contributory role in the hepcidin response to a dose of oral 
iron. In iron-normalized patients with HFE hemochromatosis, both the low 
baseline hepcidin level and the weak response to iron contribute to 
hyperabsorption of iron.

DOI: 10.3324/haematol.2010.033449
PMCID: PMC3069225
PMID: 21173098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
