---
pmid: '17543862'
title: A Cul3-based E3 ligase removes Aurora B from mitotic chromosomes, regulating
  mitotic progression and completion of cytokinesis in human cells.
authors:
- Sumara I
- Quadroni M
- Frei C
- Olma MH
- Sumara G
- Ricci R
- Peter M
journal: Dev Cell
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2007.03.019
---

# A Cul3-based E3 ligase removes Aurora B from mitotic chromosomes, regulating mitotic progression and completion of cytokinesis in human cells.
**Authors:** Sumara I, Quadroni M, Frei C, Olma MH, Sumara G, Ricci R, Peter M
**Journal:** Dev Cell (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.devcel.2007.03.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2007.03.019)

## Abstract

1. Dev Cell. 2007 Jun;12(6):887-900. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2007.03.019.

A Cul3-based E3 ligase removes Aurora B from mitotic chromosomes, regulating 
mitotic progression and completion of cytokinesis in human cells.

Sumara I(1), Quadroni M, Frei C, Olma MH, Sumara G, Ricci R, Peter M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland. 
izabela.sumara@bc.biol.ethz.ch

Faithful cell-cycle progression is tightly controlled by the 
ubiquitin-proteasome system. Here we identify a human Cullin 3-based E3 ligase 
(Cul3) which is essential for mitotic division. In a complex with the 
substrate-specific adaptors KLHL9 and KLHL13, Cul3 is required for correct 
chromosome alignment in metaphase, proper midzone and midbody formation, and 
completion of cytokinesis. This Cul3-based E3 ligase removes components of the 
chromosomal passenger complex from mitotic chromosomes and allows their 
accumulation on the central spindle during anaphase. Aurora B directly binds to 
the substrate-recognition domain of KLHL9 and KLHL13 in vitro, and 
coimmunoprecipitates with the Cul3 complex during mitosis. Moreover, Aurora B is 
ubiquitylated in a Cul3-dependent manner in vivo, and by reconstituted 
Cul3/KLHL9/KLHL13 ligase in vitro. We thus propose that the Cul3/KLHL9/KLHL13 E3 
ligase controls the dynamic behavior of Aurora B on mitotic chromosomes, and 
thereby coordinates faithful mitotic progression and completion of cytokinesis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2007.03.019
PMID: 17543862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
