---
pmid: '11172752'
title: Prolonged fear responses in mice lacking dopamine D1 receptor.
authors:
- El-Ghundi M
- O'Dowd BF
- George SR
journal: Brain Res
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0006-8993(00)03234-0
---

# Prolonged fear responses in mice lacking dopamine D1 receptor.
**Authors:** El-Ghundi M, O'Dowd BF, George SR
**Journal:** Brain Res (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0006-8993(00)03234-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0006-8993(00)03234-0)

## Abstract

1. Brain Res. 2001 Feb 16;892(1):86-93. doi: 10.1016/s0006-8993(00)03234-0.

Prolonged fear responses in mice lacking dopamine D1 receptor.

El-Ghundi M(1), O'Dowd BF, George SR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Toronto, Medical Sciences Building, 
1 King's College Circle, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada.

Dopamine is an important neurotransmitter involved in learning and memory 
including emotional memory. The involvement of dopamine in conditioned fear has 
been widely documented. However, little is known about the molecular mechanisms 
that underlie contextual fear conditioning and memory consolidation. To address 
this issue, we used dopamine D1-deficient mice (D1-/-) and their wild-type 
(D1+/+) and heterozygote (D1+/-) siblings to assess aversive learning and 
memory. We quantified two different aspects of fear responses to an environment 
where the mice have previously received unsignaled footshocks. Using one-trial 
step-through passive avoidance and conditioned freezing paradigms, mice were 
conditioned to receive mild inescapable footshocks then tested for acquisition, 
retention and extinction of conditioned fear responses 5 min after and up to 
45-90 days post-training. No differences were observed among any of the 
genotypes in the acquisition of passive avoidance response or fear-induced 
freezing behavior. However, with extended testing, D1-/- mice exhibited 
prolonged retention and delayed extinction of conditioned fear responses in both 
tasks, suggesting that D1-/- mice are capable of acquiring aversive learning 
normally. These findings demonstrate that the dopamine D1 receptor is not 
important for acquisition or consolidation of aversive learning and memory but 
has an important role in modulating the extinction of fear memory.

DOI: 10.1016/s0006-8993(00)03234-0
PMID: 11172752 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
