---
pmid: '16581093'
title: Differential pharmacological in vitro properties of organic cation transporters
  and regional distribution in rat brain.
authors:
- Amphoux A
- Vialou V
- Drescher E
- Brüss M
- Mannoury La Cour C
- Rochat C
- Millan MJ
- Giros B
- Bönisch H
- Gautron S
journal: Neuropharmacology
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2006.01.005
---

# Differential pharmacological in vitro properties of organic cation transporters and regional distribution in rat brain.
**Authors:** Amphoux A, Vialou V, Drescher E, Brüss M, Mannoury La Cour C, Rochat C, Millan MJ, Giros B, Bönisch H, Gautron S
**Journal:** Neuropharmacology (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuropharm.2006.01.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropharm.2006.01.005)

## Abstract

1. Neuropharmacology. 2006 Jun;50(8):941-52. doi:
10.1016/j.neuropharm.2006.01.005.  Epub 2006 Mar 31.

Differential pharmacological in vitro properties of organic cation transporters 
and regional distribution in rat brain.

Amphoux A(1), Vialou V, Drescher E, Brüss M, Mannoury La Cour C, Rochat C, 
Millan MJ, Giros B, Bönisch H, Gautron S.

Author information:
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U513, Faculté de 
Médecine, Université Paris XII, D-94010 Créteil, France.

Organic cation transporters (OCTs) are polyspecific carriers implicated in 
low-affinity, corticosteroid-sensitive extraneuronal catecholamine uptake in 
peripheral tissues. The three main OCT subtypes, OCT1, OCT2 and OCT3, are also 
present in the brain, but their central role remains unclear. In the present 
study, we investigated by comparative in situ hybridization analysis the 
regional distribution of these transporters in rat brain and compared their 
functional properties in stably transfected HEK293 cells expressing human or rat 
OCTs. In rat brain, OCT2 and OCT3 mRNAs are expressed predominantly in regions 
located at the brain-cerebrospinal fluid border, with OCT3 mRNA expression 
extending to regions that belong to monoaminergic pathways such as raphe nuclei, 
striatum and thalamus. After normalization with MPP+ uptake, OCT2 and OCT3 
subtypes share a similar monoamine preference profile, with higher transport 
efficacies for epinephrine and histamine than for the other monoamines. 
Interestingly, a significant level of epinephrine transport, previously only 
shown for rOCT2, is achieved by most OCTs subtypes. Finally, another novel 
finding was that OCTs are sensitive to 3,4-methylenedioxymetamphetamine (MDMA), 
phencyclidine (PCP), MK-801 and ketamine. Altogether, all our results suggest a 
functional specialization of OCT subtypes, based both on their intrinsic 
properties and their differential regional expression pattern in the brain.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2006.01.005
PMID: 16581093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
