---
pmid: '22095285'
title: Mutation of ATF4 mediates resistance of neuronal cell lines against oxidative
  stress by inducing xCT expression.
authors:
- Lewerenz J
- Sato H
- Albrecht P
- Henke N
- Noack R
- Methner A
- Maher P
journal: Cell Death Differ
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3321624
doi: 10.1038/cdd.2011.165
---

# Mutation of ATF4 mediates resistance of neuronal cell lines against oxidative stress by inducing xCT expression.
**Authors:** Lewerenz J, Sato H, Albrecht P, Henke N, Noack R, Methner A, Maher P
**Journal:** Cell Death Differ (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/cdd.2011.165](https://doi.org/10.1038/cdd.2011.165)
**PMC:** [PMC3321624](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3321624/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Death Differ. 2012 May;19(5):847-58. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2011.165. Epub 2011
 Nov 18.

Mutation of ATF4 mediates resistance of neuronal cell lines against oxidative 
stress by inducing xCT expression.

Lewerenz J(1), Sato H, Albrecht P, Henke N, Noack R, Methner A, Maher P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany. 
jan.lewerenz@googlemail.com

Selecting neuronal cell lines for resistance against oxidative stress might 
recapitulate some adaptive processes in neurodegenerative diseases where 
oxidative stress is involved like Parkinson's disease. We recently reported that 
in hippocampal HT22 cells selected for resistance against oxidative glutamate 
toxicity, the cystine/glutamate antiporter system x(c)(-), which imports cystine 
for synthesis of the antioxidant glutathione, and its specific subunit, xCT, are 
upregulated. (Lewerenz et al., J Neurochem 98(3):916-25). Here, we show that in 
these glutamate-resistant HT22 cells upregulation of xCT mediates glutamate 
resistance, and xCT expression is induced by upregulation of the transcription 
factor ATF4. The mechanism of ATF4 upregulation consists of a 13 bp deletion in 
the upstream open reading frame (uORF2) overlapping the ATF4 open reading frame. 
The resulting uORF2-ATF4 fusion protein is efficiently translated even at a low 
phosphorylation levels of the translation initiation factor eIF2α, a condition 
under which ATF4 translation is normally suppressed. A similar ATF4 mutation 
associated with prominent upregulation of xCT expression was identified in PC12 
cells selected for resistance against amyloid β-peptide. Our data indicate that 
ATF4 has a central role in regulating xCT expression and resistance against 
oxidative stress. ATF4 mutations might have broader significance as upregulation 
of xCT is found in tumor cells and associated with anticancer drug resistance.

DOI: 10.1038/cdd.2011.165
PMCID: PMC3321624
PMID: 22095285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
