---
pmid: '22365833'
title: Dynamic protein-protein interaction wiring of the human spliceosome.
authors:
- Hegele A
- Kamburov A
- Grossmann A
- Sourlis C
- Wowro S
- Weimann M
- Will CL
- Pena V
- Lührmann R
- Stelzl U
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2011.12.034
---

# Dynamic protein-protein interaction wiring of the human spliceosome.
**Authors:** Hegele A, Kamburov A, Grossmann A, Sourlis C, Wowro S, Weimann M, Will CL, Pena V, Lührmann R, Stelzl U
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2011.12.034](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2011.12.034)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2012 Feb 24;45(4):567-80. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2011.12.034.

Dynamic protein-protein interaction wiring of the human spliceosome.

Hegele A(1), Kamburov A, Grossmann A, Sourlis C, Wowro S, Weimann M, Will CL, 
Pena V, Lührmann R, Stelzl U.

Author information:
(1)Otto-Warburg Laboratory, Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, 14195 
Berlin, Germany.

More than 200 proteins copurify with spliceosomes, the compositionally dynamic 
RNPs catalyzing pre-mRNA splicing. To better understand protein - protein 
interactions governing splicing, we systematically investigated interactions 
between human spliceosomal proteins. A comprehensive Y2H interaction matrix 
screen generated a protein interaction map comprising 632 interactions between 
196 proteins. Among these, 242 interactions were found between spliceosomal core 
proteins and largely validated by coimmunoprecipitation. To reveal dynamic 
changes in protein interactions, we integrated spliceosomal complex purification 
information with our interaction data and performed link clustering. These data, 
together with interaction competition experiments, suggest that during step 1 of 
splicing, hPRP8 interactions with SF3b proteins are replaced by hSLU7, 
positioning this second step factor close to the active site, and that the 
DEAH-box helicases hPRP2 and hPRP16 cooperate through ordered interactions with 
GPKOW. Our data provide extensive information about the spliceosomal protein 
interaction network and its dynamics.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2011.12.034
PMID: 22365833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
