---
pmid: '15518539'
title: 'Why zinc fingers prefer zinc: ligand-field symmetry and the hidden thermodynamics
  of metal ion selectivity.'
authors:
- Lachenmann MJ
- Ladbury JE
- Dong J
- Huang K
- Carey P
- Weiss MA
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi0491999
---

# Why zinc fingers prefer zinc: ligand-field symmetry and the hidden thermodynamics of metal ion selectivity.
**Authors:** Lachenmann MJ, Ladbury JE, Dong J, Huang K, Carey P, Weiss MA
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi0491999](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi0491999)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2004 Nov 9;43(44):13910-25. doi: 10.1021/bi0491999.

Why zinc fingers prefer zinc: ligand-field symmetry and the hidden 
thermodynamics of metal ion selectivity.

Lachenmann MJ(1), Ladbury JE, Dong J, Huang K, Carey P, Weiss MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Case Western Reserve University, 10900 Euclid 
Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio 44106-4935, USA.

The zinc finger, a motif of protein-nucleic acid recognition broadly conserved 
among eukaryotes, is a globular minidomain containing a tetrahedral 
metal-binding site. Preferential coordination of Zn(2+) (relative to Co(2+)) is 
proposed to reflect differences in ligand-field stabilization energies (LFSEs) 
due to complete or incomplete occupancy of d orbitals. LFSE predicts that the 
preference for Zn(2+) should be purely enthalpic in accord with calorimetric 
studies of a high-affinity consensus peptide (CP-1; Blasie, C. A., and Berg, J. 
(2002) Biochemistry 41, 15068-73). Despite its elegance, the general 
predominance of LFSE is unclear as (i) the magnitude by which CP-1 prefers 
Zn(2+) is greater than that expected and (ii) the analogous metal ion 
selectivity of a zinc metalloenzyme (carbonic anhydrase) is driven by changes in 
entropy rather than enthalpy. Because CP-1 was designed to optimize zinc 
binding, we have investigated the NMR structure and metal ion selectivity of a 
natural finger of lower stability derived from human tumor-suppressor protein 
WT1. Raman spectroscopy suggests that the structure of the WT1 domain is 
unaffected by interchange of Zn(2+) and Co(2+). As in CP-1, preferential binding 
of Zn(2+) (relative to Co(2+)) is driven predominantly by differences in 
enthalpy, but in this case the enthalpic advantage is less than that predicted 
by LFSE. A theoretical framework is presented to define the relationship between 
LFSE and other thermodynamic factors, such as metal ion electroaffinities, 
enthalpies of hydration, and the topography of the underlying folding landscape. 
The contribution of environmental coupling to entropy-enthalpy compensation is 
delineated in a formal thermodynamic cycle. Together, these considerations 
indicate that LFSE provides an important but incomplete description of the 
stringency and thermodynamic origin of metal-ion selectivity.

DOI: 10.1021/bi0491999
PMID: 15518539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
