---
pmid: '8838578'
title: Disappearance of actin-binding protein, drebrin, from hippocampal synapses
  in Alzheimer's disease.
authors:
- Harigaya Y
- Shoji M
- Shirao T
- Hirai S
journal: J Neurosci Res
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/jnr.490430111
---

# Disappearance of actin-binding protein, drebrin, from hippocampal synapses in Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Harigaya Y, Shoji M, Shirao T, Hirai S
**Journal:** J Neurosci Res (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jnr.490430111](https://doi.org/10.1002/jnr.490430111)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci Res. 1996 Jan 1;43(1):87-92. doi: 10.1002/jnr.490430111.

Disappearance of actin-binding protein, drebrin, from hippocampal synapses in 
Alzheimer's disease.

Harigaya Y(1), Shoji M, Shirao T, Hirai S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Gunma University School of Medicine, Japan.

The actin-binding protein drebrin is localized in postsynaptic terminals in 
adult brain and is considered to be related to synaptic plasticity. 
Immunocytochemical study demonstrated that widespread drebrin immunoreactivity 
was observed in hippocampal formations of control human brains, while 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) brains showed remarkable reductions in this 
immunoreactivity. Western blot analysis demonstrated that drebrin E (116kD) as 
well as drebrin A (125 kD) presented in adult human brains, and that these 
isoforms were decreased in parallel in AD brains. On the other hand, synaptic 
vesicle-specific 38-kD protein (SVP-38), a presynaptic marker was not so changed 
in AD brains in comparison with control brains by both techniques. These 
findings suggest that drebrin E and A in the adult human brain may be 
co-localized in postsynaptic terminals, and that drebrin may be more sensitive 
as a marker of synaptic damage than SVP-38, and that the disappearance of 
drebrin may contribute to the pathogenesis of memory disturbance in AD.

DOI: 10.1002/jnr.490430111
PMID: 8838578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
