---
pmid: '17717711'
title: Functional, histopathologic and natural history study of neuropathy associated
  with EGR2 mutations.
authors:
- Szigeti K
- Wiszniewski W
- Saifi GM
- Sherman DL
- Sule N
- Adesina AM
- Mancias P
- Papasozomenos SCh
- Miller G
- Keppen L
- Daentl D
- Brophy PJ
- Lupski JR
journal: Neurogenetics
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s10048-007-0094-0
---

# Functional, histopathologic and natural history study of neuropathy associated with EGR2 mutations.
**Authors:** Szigeti K, Wiszniewski W, Saifi GM, Sherman DL, Sule N, Adesina AM, Mancias P, Papasozomenos SCh, Miller G, Keppen L, Daentl D, Brophy PJ, Lupski JR
**Journal:** Neurogenetics (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10048-007-0094-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10048-007-0094-0)

## Abstract

1. Neurogenetics. 2007 Nov;8(4):257-62. doi: 10.1007/s10048-007-0094-0. Epub 2007
 Aug 24.

Functional, histopathologic and natural history study of neuropathy associated 
with EGR2 mutations.

Szigeti K(1), Wiszniewski W, Saifi GM, Sherman DL, Sule N, Adesina AM, Mancias 
P, Papasozomenos SCh, Miller G, Keppen L, Daentl D, Brophy PJ, Lupski JR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, One 
Baylor Plaza, Rm 604B, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Mutations in the EGR2 gene cause a spectrum of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease and 
related inherited peripheral neuropathies. We ascertained ten consecutive 
patients with various EGR2 mutations, report a novel de novo mutation, and 
provide longitudinal clinical data to characterize the natural history of the 
peripheral neuropathy. We confirmed that respiratory compromise and cranial 
nerve dysfunction are commonly associated with EGR2 mutations and can be useful 
in guiding molecular diagnosis. We also contrast morphological studies in the 
context of the I268N homozygous recessive mutation affecting the NAB repressor 
binding site and the R359W dominant-negative mutation in the zinc-finger domain.

DOI: 10.1007/s10048-007-0094-0
PMID: 17717711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
