---
pmid: '21572435'
title: COP1 is a tumour suppressor that causes degradation of ETS transcription factors.
authors:
- Vitari AC
- Leong KG
- Newton K
- Yee C
- O'Rourke K
- Liu J
- Phu L
- Vij R
- Ferrando R
- Couto SS
- Mohan S
- Pandita A
- Hongo JA
- Arnott D
- Wertz IE
- Gao WQ
- French DM
- Dixit VM
journal: Nature
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature10005
---

# COP1 is a tumour suppressor that causes degradation of ETS transcription factors.
**Authors:** Vitari AC, Leong KG, Newton K, Yee C, O'Rourke K, Liu J, Phu L, Vij R, Ferrando R, Couto SS, Mohan S, Pandita A, Hongo JA, Arnott D, Wertz IE, Gao WQ, French DM, Dixit VM
**Journal:** Nature (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature10005](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature10005)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2011 May 15;474(7351):403-6. doi: 10.1038/nature10005.

COP1 is a tumour suppressor that causes degradation of ETS transcription 
factors.

Vitari AC(1), Leong KG, Newton K, Yee C, O'Rourke K, Liu J, Phu L, Vij R, 
Ferrando R, Couto SS, Mohan S, Pandita A, Hongo JA, Arnott D, Wertz IE, Gao WQ, 
French DM, Dixit VM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry, Genentech, Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San 
Francisco, California 94080, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2011 Jun 09;11(7):466. doi: 10.1038/nrc3089.

The proto-oncogenes ETV1, ETV4 and ETV5 encode transcription factors in the E26 
transformation-specific (ETS) family, which includes the most frequently 
rearranged and overexpressed genes in prostate cancer. Despite being critical 
regulators of development, little is known about their post-translational 
regulation. Here we identify the ubiquitin ligase COP1 (also known as RFWD2) as 
a tumour suppressor that negatively regulates ETV1, ETV4 and ETV5. ETV1, which 
is mutated in prostate cancer more often, was degraded after being ubiquitinated 
by COP1. Truncated ETV1 encoded by prostate cancer translocation TMPRSS2:ETV1 
lacks the critical COP1 binding motifs and was 50-fold more stable than 
wild-type ETV1. Almost all patient translocations render ETV1 insensitive to 
COP1, implying that this confers a selective advantage to prostate epithelial 
cells. Indeed, COP1 deficiency in mouse prostate elevated ETV1 and produced 
increased cell proliferation, hyperplasia, and early prostate intraepithelial 
neoplasia. Combined loss of COP1 and PTEN enhanced the invasiveness of mouse 
prostate adenocarcinomas. Finally, rare human prostate cancer samples showed 
hemizygous loss of the COP1 gene, loss of COP1 protein, and elevated ETV1 
protein while lacking a translocation event. These findings identify COP1 as a 
tumour suppressor whose downregulation promotes prostatic epithelial cell 
proliferation and tumorigenesis.

DOI: 10.1038/nature10005
PMID: 21572435 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
