---
pmid: '10198436'
title: A role for the yeast SWI/SNF complex in DNA replication.
authors:
- Flanagan JF
- Peterson CL
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC148416
doi: 10.1093/nar/27.9.2022
---

# A role for the yeast SWI/SNF complex in DNA replication.
**Authors:** Flanagan JF, Peterson CL
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/27.9.2022](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/27.9.2022)
**PMC:** [PMC148416](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC148416/)

## Abstract

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 1999 May 1;27(9):2022-8. doi: 10.1093/nar/27.9.2022.

A role for the yeast SWI/SNF complex in DNA replication.

Flanagan JF(1), Peterson CL.

Author information:
(1)Program in Molecular Medicine and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical Center, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

The yeast SWI/SNF complex is required for expression of many genes and for the 
full functioning of several transcriptional activators. Genetic and biochemical 
studies indicate that SWI/SNF uses the energy of ATP hydrolysis to antagonize 
chromatin-mediated transcriptional repression. We have tested the possibility 
that SWI/SNF might also play a role in DNA replication. A mitotic minichromosome 
stability assay was used to investigate the replication efficiency of a variety 
of autonomous replication sequences (ARSs) in the presence and absence of 
SWI/SNF. The stability of minichromosomes that contain ARS1, ARS309 or ARS307 is 
not altered by lack of SWI/SNF, whereas the functioning of ARS121 is crippled 
when SWI/SNF is inactivated. The SWI/SNF dependence of ARS121 does not require 
the replication enhancer factor, ABF1, and thus, it appears to be a property of 
a minimal ARS121 origin. Likewise, a minimal derivative of ARS1 that lacks the 
ABF1 replication enhancer acquires SWI/SNF dependence. Replacing the ABF1 
binding site at ARS1 with a binding site for the LexA-GAL4 chimeric activator 
also creates a SWI/SNF-dependent ARS. Our studies suggest that the SWI/SNF 
chromatin remodeling complex can play a role in both replication and 
transcription and, furthermore, that SWI/SNF dependence of ARS elements is a 
property of both an ARS-specific replication enhancer and the overall 
organization of ARS sequence elements.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/27.9.2022
PMCID: PMC148416
PMID: 10198436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
