---
pmid: '11292345'
title: Selection of ligands by panning of domain libraries displayed on phage lambda
  reveals new potential partners of synaptojanin 1.
authors:
- Zucconi A
- Dente L
- Santonico E
- Castagnoli L
- Cesareni G
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/jmbi.2001.4572
---

# Selection of ligands by panning of domain libraries displayed on phage lambda reveals new potential partners of synaptojanin 1.
**Authors:** Zucconi A, Dente L, Santonico E, Castagnoli L, Cesareni G
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1006/jmbi.2001.4572](https://doi.org/10.1006/jmbi.2001.4572)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Biol. 2001 Apr 13;307(5):1329-39. doi: 10.1006/jmbi.2001.4572.

Selection of ligands by panning of domain libraries displayed on phage lambda 
reveals new potential partners of synaptojanin 1.

Zucconi A(1), Dente L, Santonico E, Castagnoli L, Cesareni G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Via della 
Ricerca Scientifica, 00133, Italy.

One of the goals of functional genomics is the description of reliable and 
complete protein interaction networks. To facilitate ligand discovery from 
complex protein mixtures, we have developed an improved approach that is 
affected by a negligible fraction of false positives. We have combined a novel 
technique based on the display of cDNA libraries on the capsid of bacteriophage 
lambda and an efficient plaque assay to reveal phage displaying ligands that are 
enriched after only a couple of affinity purification steps. We show that the 
lambda display system has a unique ability to display, at high density, proteins 
ranging in size from a few to at least 300 amino acid residues. This 
characteristic permits attenuation of the size bias in the selection procedure 
and, at the same time, offers a sensitive plaque assay that permits us to do 
away with the ligand background without unduly increasing the number of 
selection cycles. By using a proline-rich fragment of the synaptojanin 1 protein 
as a bait, we have identified, in a brain cDNA display library, seven ligands 
all containing either SH3 or WW domains. Four of these correspond to proteins 
that have already been validated as physiological partners, while the remaining 
three are new partners, whose physiological relevance remains to be established. 
Two different proline-rich regions of the p21-activated protein kinase 1 (Pak1) 
and WAVE/SCAR2 protein retrieve from the library different proteins containing 
SH3 or WW domains.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.2001.4572
PMID: 11292345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
