---
pmid: '16453431'
title: A cAMP-dependent protein kinase is present in differentiating Dictyostelium
  discoideum cells.
authors:
- Gunzburg J
- Veron M
journal: EMBO J
year: '1982'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC553163
doi: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1982.tb01297.x
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# A cAMP-dependent protein kinase is present in differentiating Dictyostelium discoideum cells.
**Authors:** Gunzburg J, Veron M
**Journal:** EMBO J (1982)
**DOI:** [10.1002/j.1460-2075.1982.tb01297.x](https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1460-2075.1982.tb01297.x)
**PMC:** [PMC553163](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC553163/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 1982;1(9):1063-8. doi: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1982.tb01297.x.

A cAMP-dependent protein kinase is present in differentiating Dictyostelium 
discoideum cells.

Gunzburg J(1), Veron M.

Author information:
(1)Unité de Biochimie Cellulaire, Départment de Biochimie et Génétique 
Moléculaire, Institut Pasteur, 28, rue du Docteur Roux, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, 
France.

We demonstrate the occurrence of a cAMP-dependent protein kinase in 
Dictyostelium discoideum cells at the terminal stage of differentiation. A 
cAMP-binding component was purified to homogeneity by affinity chromatography. 
This subunit inhibits the activity of purified catalytic subunit from beef heart 
protein kinase; the inhibition is reversed upon addition of cAMP. The protein is 
highly specific for cAMP and has a dissociation constant of 4 nM. The isolated 
regulatory subunit is a monomer of 39 K, with a sedimentation coefficient of 
3.5S and a frictional coefficient of 1.24. The differences between this 
regulatory subunit and regulatory subunits of protein kinases from other sources 
are discussed.

DOI: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1982.tb01297.x
PMCID: PMC553163
PMID: 16453431

## Full Text

Abstract

We demonstrate the occurrence of a cAMP-dependent protein kinase in Dictyostelium discoideum cells at the terminal stage of differentiation. A cAMP-binding component was purified to homogeneity by affinity chromatography. This subunit inhibits the activity of purified catalytic subunit from beef heart protein kinase; the inhibition is reversed upon addition of cAMP. The protein is highly specific for cAMP and has a dissociation constant of 4 nM. The isolated regulatory subunit is a monomer of 39 K, with a sedimentation coefficient of 3.5S and a frictional coefficient of 1.24. The differences between this regulatory subunit and regulatory subunits of protein kinases from other sources are discussed.
