---
pmid: '12084722'
title: Naturally occurring mutations in the largest extracellular loops of ABCA1 can
  disrupt its direct interaction with apolipoprotein A-I.
authors:
- Fitzgerald ML
- Morris AL
- Rhee JS
- Andersson LP
- Mendez AJ
- Freeman MW
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M204996200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Naturally occurring mutations in the largest extracellular loops of ABCA1 can disrupt its direct interaction with apolipoprotein A-I.
**Authors:** Fitzgerald ML, Morris AL, Rhee JS, Andersson LP, Mendez AJ, Freeman MW
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M204996200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M204996200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 6;277(36):33178-87. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M204996200. Epub
2002  Jun 25.

Naturally occurring mutations in the largest extracellular loops of ABCA1 can 
disrupt its direct interaction with apolipoprotein A-I.

Fitzgerald ML(1), Morris AL, Rhee JS, Andersson LP, Mendez AJ, Freeman MW.

Author information:
(1)Lipid Metabolism Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.

The ABCA1 transporter contains two large domains into which many of the genetic 
mutations in individuals with Tangier disease fall. To investigate the 
structural requirements for the cellular cholesterol efflux mediated by ABCA1, 
we have determined the topology of these two domains and generated transporters 
harboring five naturally occurring missense mutations in them. These mutants, 
unlike wild type ABCA1, produced little or no apoA-I-stimulated cholesterol 
efflux when transfected into 293 cells, establishing their causality in Tangier 
disease. Because all five mutant proteins were well expressed and detectable on 
the plasma membrane, their interaction with the ABCA1 ligand, apolipoprotein 
(apo) A-I, was measured using bifunctional cross-linking agents. Four of five 
mutants had a marked decline in cross-linking to apoA-I, whereas one (W590S) 
retained full cross-linking activity. Cross-linking of apoA-I was 
temperature-dependent, rapid in onset, and detectable with both lipid- and 
water-soluble cross-linking agents. These results suggest that apoA-I-stimulated 
cholesterol efflux cannot occur without a direct interaction between the 
apoprotein and critical residues in two extracellular loops of ABCA1. The 
behavior of the W590S mutant indicates that although binding of apoA-I by ABCA1 
may be necessary, it is not sufficient for stimulation of cholesterol efflux.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M204996200
PMID: 12084722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
