---
pmid: '17540175'
title: Binding of ras to phosphoinositide 3-kinase p110alpha is required for ras-driven
  tumorigenesis in mice.
authors:
- Gupta S
- Ramjaun AR
- Haiko P
- Wang Y
- Warne PH
- Nicke B
- Nye E
- Stamp G
- Alitalo K
- Downward J
journal: Cell
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.03.051
---

# Binding of ras to phosphoinositide 3-kinase p110alpha is required for ras-driven tumorigenesis in mice.
**Authors:** Gupta S, Ramjaun AR, Haiko P, Wang Y, Warne PH, Nicke B, Nye E, Stamp G, Alitalo K, Downward J
**Journal:** Cell (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2007.03.051](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2007.03.051)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2007 Jun 1;129(5):957-68. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.03.051.

Binding of ras to phosphoinositide 3-kinase p110alpha is required for ras-driven 
tumorigenesis in mice.

Gupta S(1), Ramjaun AR, Haiko P, Wang Y, Warne PH, Nicke B, Nye E, Stamp G, 
Alitalo K, Downward J.

Author information:
(1)Signal Transduction Laboratory, Cancer Research UK London Research Institute, 
44 Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A 3PX, UK.

Comment in
    Cell. 2007 Jun 1;129(5):855-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.05.031.

Ras proteins signal through direct interaction with a number of effector 
enzymes, including type I phosphoinositide (PI) 3-kinases. Although the ability 
of Ras to control PI 3-kinase has been well established in manipulated cell 
culture models, evidence for a role of the interaction of endogenous Ras with PI 
3-kinase in normal and malignant cell growth in vivo has been lacking. Here we 
generate mice with mutations in the Pi3kca gene encoding the catalytic p110alpha 
isoform that block its interaction with Ras. Cells from these mice show 
proliferative defects and selective disruption of signaling from growth factors 
to PI 3-kinase. The mice display defective development of the lymphatic 
vasculature, resulting in perinatal appearance of chylous ascites. Most 
importantly, they are highly resistant to endogenous Ras oncogene-induced 
tumorigenesis. The interaction of Ras with p110alpha is thus required in vivo 
for certain normal growth factor signaling and for Ras-driven tumor formation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.03.051
PMID: 17540175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
