---
pmid: '10575017'
title: A role for the clathrin assembly domain of AP180 in synaptic vesicle endocytosis.
authors:
- Morgan JR
- Zhao X
- Womack M
- Prasad K
- Augustine GJ
- Lafer EM
journal: J Neurosci
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6782422
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.19-23-10201.1999
---

# A role for the clathrin assembly domain of AP180 in synaptic vesicle endocytosis.
**Authors:** Morgan JR, Zhao X, Womack M, Prasad K, Augustine GJ, Lafer EM
**Journal:** J Neurosci (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.19-23-10201.1999](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.19-23-10201.1999)
**PMC:** [PMC6782422](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6782422/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 1999 Dec 1;19(23):10201-12. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.19-23-10201.1999.

A role for the clathrin assembly domain of AP180 in synaptic vesicle 
endocytosis.

Morgan JR(1), Zhao X, Womack M, Prasad K, Augustine GJ, Lafer EM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North 
Carolina 27710, USA.

We have used the squid giant synapse to determine whether clathrin assembly by 
AP180 is important for synaptic vesicle endocytosis. The squid homolog of AP180 
encodes a 751 amino acid protein with 40% sequence identity to mouse AP180. 
Alignment of squid AP180 with other AP180 homologs shows that amino acid 
identity was highest in the N-terminal inositide-binding domain of the protein 
and weakest in the C-terminal clathrin assembly domain. Recombinant squid AP180 
was able to assemble clathrin in vitro, suggesting a conserved three-dimensional 
structure that mediates clathrin assembly despite the divergent primary sequence 
of the C-terminal domain. Microinjection of the C-terminal domains of either 
mouse or squid AP180 into the giant presynaptic terminal of squid enhanced 
synaptic transmission. Conversely, a peptide from the C-terminal domain of squid 
AP180 that inhibited clathrin assembly in vitro completely blocked synaptic 
transmission when it was injected into the giant presynaptic terminal. This 
inhibitory effect occurred over a time scale of minutes when the synapse was 
stimulated at low (0.03 Hz), physiological rates. Electron microscopic analysis 
revealed several structural changes consistent with the inhibition of synaptic 
vesicle endocytosis; peptide-injected terminals had far fewer synaptic vesicles, 
were depleted of coated vesicles, and had a larger plasma membrane perimeter 
than terminals injected with control solutions. In addition, the remaining 
synaptic vesicles were significantly larger in diameter. We conclude that the 
clathrin assembly domain of AP180 is important for synaptic vesicle recycling at 
physiological rates of activity and that assembly of clathrin by AP180 is 
necessary for maintaining a pool of releasable synaptic vesicles.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.19-23-10201.1999
PMCID: PMC6782422
PMID: 10575017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
