---
pmid: '8868049'
title: A recombinant inwardly rectifying potassium channel coupled to GTP-binding
  proteins.
authors:
- Chan KW
- Langan MN
- Sui JL
- Kozak JA
- Pabon A
- Ladias JA
- Logothetis DE
journal: J Gen Physiol
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: xml_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC2216996
doi: 10.1085/jgp.107.3.381
---

# A recombinant inwardly rectifying potassium channel coupled to GTP-binding proteins.
**Authors:** Chan KW, Langan MN, Sui JL, Kozak JA, Pabon A, Ladias JA, Logothetis DE
**Journal:** J Gen Physiol (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1085/jgp.107.3.381](https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.107.3.381)
**PMC:** [PMC2216996](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2216996/)

## Abstract

1. J Gen Physiol. 1996 Mar;107(3):381-97. doi: 10.1085/jgp.107.3.381.

A recombinant inwardly rectifying potassium channel coupled to GTP-binding 
proteins.

Chan KW(1), Langan MN, Sui JL, Kozak JA, Pabon A, Ladias JA, Logothetis DE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, City University of New York, New 
York 10029, USA.

GTP-binding (G) proteins have been shown to mediate activation of inwardly 
rectifying potassium (K+) channels in cardiac, neuronal and neuroendocrine 
cells. Here, we report functional expression of a recombinant inwardly 
rectifying channel which we call KGP (or hpKir3.4), to signify that it is K+ 
selective, G-protein-gated and isolated from human pancreas. KGP expression in 
Xenopus oocytes resulted in sizeable basal (or agonist-independent) currents 
while coexpression with a G-protein-linked receptor, yielded additional 
agonist-induced currents. Coexpression of KGP and hGIRK1 (a human brain homolog 
of GIRK1/Kir3.1) produced much larger basal currents than those observed with 
KGP or hGIRK1 alone, and upon coexpression with receptor, similarly large 
agonist-induced currents could be obtained. Pertussis toxin treatment 
significantly diminished agonist-dependent currents due to either KGP or 
KGP/hGIRK1 expression. Interestingly, PTX also significantly reduced basal KGP 
or KGP/hGIRK1 currents, suggesting that basal activity is largely the result of 
G-protein gating as well. When the two channels were coexpressed with receptor, 
the relative increase in current elicited by agonist was similar whether KGP and 
hGIRK1 were expressed alone or together. When in vitro translated or when 
expressed in Xenopus oocytes or CHO mammalian cells, KGP gave rise to a 
nonglycosylated 45-kD protein. Antibodies directed against either KGP or hGIRK1 
coprecipitated both proteins coexpressed in oocytes, providing evidence for the 
heteromeric assembly of the two channels and suggesting that the current 
potentiation seen with coexpression of the two channel subunits is due to 
specific interactions between them. An endogenous oocyte protein similar in size 
to KGP was also coprecipitated with hGIRK1.

DOI: 10.1085/jgp.107.3.381
PMCID: PMC2216996
PMID: 8868049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

GTP-binding (G) proteins have been shown to mediate activation of inwardly rectifying potassium (K+) channels in cardiac, neuronal and neuroendocrine cells. Here, we report functional expression of a recombinant inwardly rectifying channel which we call KGP (or hpKir3.4), to signify that it is K+ selective, G-protein-gated and isolated from human pancreas. KGP expression in Xenopus oocytes resulted in sizeable basal (or agonist-independent) currents while coexpression with a G-protein-linked receptor, yielded additional agonist-induced currents. Coexpression of KGP and hGIRK1 (a human brain homolog of GIRK1/Kir3.1) produced much larger basal currents than those observed with KGP or hGIRK1 alone, and upon coexpression with receptor, similarly large agonist-induced currents could be obtained. Pertussis toxin treatment significantly diminished agonist-dependent currents due to either KGP or KGP/hGIRK1 expression. Interestingly, PTX also significantly reduced basal KGP or KGP/hGIRK1 currents, suggesting that basal activity is largely the result of G-protein gating as well. When the two channels were coexpressed with receptor, the relative increase in current elicited by agonist was similar whether KGP and hGIRK1 were expressed alone or together. When in vitro translated or when expressed in Xenopus oocytes or CHO mammalian cells, KGP gave rise to a nonglycosylated 45-kD protein. Antibodies directed against either KGP or hGIRK1 coprecipitated both proteins coexpressed in oocytes, providing evidence for the heteromeric assembly of the two channels and suggesting that the current potentiation seen with coexpression of the two channel subunits is due to specific interactions between them. An endogenous oocyte protein similar in size to KGP was also coprecipitated with hGIRK1.
