---
pmid: '25680637'
title: 'Novel Insights into NeuN: from Neuronal Marker to Splicing Regulator.'
authors:
- Duan W
- Zhang YP
- Hou Z
- Huang C
- Zhu H
- Zhang CQ
- Yin Q
journal: Mol Neurobiol
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s12035-015-9122-5
---

# Novel Insights into NeuN: from Neuronal Marker to Splicing Regulator.
**Authors:** Duan W, Zhang YP, Hou Z, Huang C, Zhu H, Zhang CQ, Yin Q
**Journal:** Mol Neurobiol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12035-015-9122-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035-015-9122-5)

## Abstract

1. Mol Neurobiol. 2016 Apr;53(3):1637-1647. doi: 10.1007/s12035-015-9122-5. Epub 
2015 Feb 14.

Novel Insights into NeuN: from Neuronal Marker to Splicing Regulator.

Duan W(1), Zhang YP(2), Hou Z(3), Huang C(4), Zhu H(4)(5)(6)(7), Zhang CQ(8), 
Yin Q(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical University, 
Chongqing, 400037, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical 
University, Chongqing, 400037, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical 
University, Chongqing, 400037, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, TN, 37232, USA.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, 
37232, USA.
(6)Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, 37232, USA.
(7)The Vanderbilt Kennedy Center for Research on Human Development, Vanderbilt 
University, Nashville, TN, 37232, USA.
(8)Department of Neurosurgery, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical 
University, Chongqing, 400037, People's Republic of China. cqzhang@tmmu.edu.cn.
(9)Department of Rehabilitation and Physical Therapy, Xinqiao Hospital, Third 
Military Medical University, Chongqing, 400037, People's Republic of China. 
qingyin646891@yahoo.com.

Neuronal nuclei (NeuN) is a well-recognized "marker" that is detected 
exclusively in post-mitotic neurons and was initially identified through an 
immunological screen to produce neuron-specific antibodies. Immunostaining 
evidence indicates that NeuN is distributed in the nuclei of mature neurons in 
nearly all parts of the vertebrate nervous system. NeuN is highly conserved 
among species and is stably expressed during specific stages of development. 
Therefore, NeuN has been considered to be a reliable marker of mature neurons 
for the past two decades. However, this role has been challenged by recent 
studies indicating that NeuN staining is variable and even absent during certain 
diseases and specific physiological states. More importantly, despite the 
widespread use of the anti-NeuN antibody, the natural identity of the NeuN 
protein remained elusive for 17 years. NeuN was recently eventually identified 
as an epitope of Rbfox3, which is a novel member of the Rbfox1 family of 
splicing factors. This identification might provide a novel perspective on NeuN 
expression during both physiological and pathological conditions. This review 
summarizes the current progress on the biochemical identity and biological 
significance of NeuN and recommends caution when applying NeuN immunoreactivity 
as a definitive marker of mature neurons in certain diseases and specific 
physiological states.

DOI: 10.1007/s12035-015-9122-5
PMID: 25680637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
