---
pmid: '25901318'
title: Functional and mechanistic studies of XPC DNA-repair complex as transcriptional
  coactivator in embryonic stem cells.
authors:
- Cattoglio C
- Zhang ET
- Grubisic I
- Chiba K
- Fong YW
- Tjian R
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4426448
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1505569112
---

# Functional and mechanistic studies of XPC DNA-repair complex as transcriptional coactivator in embryonic stem cells.
**Authors:** Cattoglio C, Zhang ET, Grubisic I, Chiba K, Fong YW, Tjian R
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1505569112](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1505569112)
**PMC:** [PMC4426448](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4426448/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 May 5;112(18):E2317-26. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1505569112. Epub 2015 Apr 21.

Functional and mechanistic studies of XPC DNA-repair complex as transcriptional 
coactivator in embryonic stem cells.

Cattoglio C(1), Zhang ET(1), Grubisic I(2), Chiba K(1), Fong YW(3), Tjian R(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Li 
Ka Shing Center for Biomedical and Health Sciences, California Institute of 
Regenerative Medicine Center of Excellence.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Li 
Ka Shing Center for Biomedical and Health Sciences, California Institute of 
Regenerative Medicine Center of Excellence, University of California 
Berkeley-University of California, San Francisco Graduate Program in 
Bioengineering, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720; and.
(3)Brigham Regenerative Medicine Center, Cardiovascular Division, Department of 
Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Cambridge, MA 
02139.
(4)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Li 
Ka Shing Center for Biomedical and Health Sciences, California Institute of 
Regenerative Medicine Center of Excellence, jmlim@berkeley.edu.

The embryonic stem cell (ESC) state is transcriptionally controlled by OCT4, 
SOX2, and NANOG with cofactors, chromatin regulators, noncoding RNAs, and other 
effectors of signaling pathways. Uncovering components of these regulatory 
circuits and their interplay provides the knowledge base to deploy ESCs and 
induced pluripotent stem cells. We recently identified the DNA-repair complex 
xeroderma pigmentosum C (XPC)-RAD23B-CETN2 as a stem cell coactivator (SCC) 
required for OCT4/SOX2 transcriptional activation. Here we investigate the role 
of SCC genome-wide in murine ESCs by mapping regions bound by RAD23B and 
analyzing transcriptional profiles of SCC-depleted ESCs. We establish OCT4 and 
SOX2 as the primary transcription factors recruiting SCC to regulatory regions 
of pluripotency genes and identify the XPC subunit as essential for interaction 
with the two proteins. The present study reveals new mechanistic and functional 
aspects of SCC transcriptional activity, and thus underscores the diversified 
functions of this regulatory complex.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1505569112
PMCID: PMC4426448
PMID: 25901318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
