---
pmid: '24440350'
title: Targeting of the MET receptor tyrosine kinase by small molecule inhibitors
  leads to MET accumulation by impairing the receptor downregulation.
authors:
- Leiser D
- Pochon B
- Blank-Liss W
- Francica P
- Glück AA
- Aebersold DM
- Zimmer Y
- Medová M
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.12.025
---

# Targeting of the MET receptor tyrosine kinase by small molecule inhibitors leads to MET accumulation by impairing the receptor downregulation.
**Authors:** Leiser D, Pochon B, Blank-Liss W, Francica P, Glück AA, Aebersold DM, Zimmer Y, Medová M
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2013.12.025](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2013.12.025)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2014 Mar 3;588(5):653-8. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.12.025. Epub 
2014 Jan 17.

Targeting of the MET receptor tyrosine kinase by small molecule inhibitors leads 
to MET accumulation by impairing the receptor downregulation.

Leiser D(1), Pochon B(1), Blank-Liss W(1), Francica P(1), Glück AA(1), Aebersold 
DM(1), Zimmer Y(1), Medová M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, and 
University of Bern, 3010 Bern, Switzerland; Department of Clinical Research, 
University of Bern, 3010 Bern, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, and 
University of Bern, 3010 Bern, Switzerland; Department of Clinical Research, 
University of Bern, 3010 Bern, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
michaela.Medova@dkf.unibe.ch.

The MET receptor tyrosine kinase is deregulated primarily via overexpression or 
point mutations in various human cancers and different strategies for MET 
inhibition are currently evaluated in clinical trials. We observed by Western 
blot analysis and by Flow cytometry that MET inhibition by different MET small 
molecule inhibitors surprisingly increases in a dose-dependent manner total MET 
levels in treated cells. Mechanistically, this inhibition-related MET 
accumulation was associated with reduced Tyr1003 phosphorylation and MET 
physical association with the CBL ubiquitin ligase with concomitant decrease in 
MET ubiquitination. These data may suggest careful consideration for design of 
anti-MET clinical protocols.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.12.025
PMID: 24440350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
