---
pmid: '9987991'
title: Regional and subcellular distribution of a neutral and basic amino acid transporter
  in forebrain neurons containing nitric oxide synthase.
authors:
- Pickel VM
- Pohorille A
- Chan J
- Tate SS
- Nirenberg MJ
journal: J Comp Neurol
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/(sici)1096-9861(19990222)404:4<459::aid-cne4>3.0.co;2-9
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Regional and subcellular distribution of a neutral and basic amino acid transporter in forebrain neurons containing nitric oxide synthase.
**Authors:** Pickel VM, Pohorille A, Chan J, Tate SS, Nirenberg MJ
**Journal:** J Comp Neurol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1002/(sici)1096-9861(19990222)404:4<459::aid-cne4>3.0.co;2-9](https://doi.org/10.1002/(sici)1096-9861(19990222)404:4<459::aid-cne4>3.0.co;2-9)

## Abstract

1. J Comp Neurol. 1999 Feb 22;404(4):459-72. doi: 
10.1002/(sici)1096-9861(19990222)404:4<459::aid-cne4>3.0.co;2-9.

Regional and subcellular distribution of a neutral and basic amino acid 
transporter in forebrain neurons containing nitric oxide synthase.

Pickel VM(1), Pohorille A, Chan J, Tate SS, Nirenberg MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neuroscience, Cornell University Medical College, 
New York, New York 10021, USA. vpickel@med.cornell.edu

The neutral and basic amino acid transporter (NBAT) facilitates 
sodium-independent transport of L-amino acids in renal and intestinal epithelial 
cells and has been postulated to play a similar role in neurons. In previous 
studies, NBAT has been detected within enteric and brainstem autonomic neurons 
in a distribution similar to that of constitutive nitric oxide synthase (cNOS). 
Furthermore, L-arginine, the required precursor for nitric oxide synthesis, is 
an excellent NBAT substrate. Together, these findings suggest that NBAT may play 
a role in the regulation of nitric oxide synthesis, through the control of 
precursor availability. To gain insight into the potential physiological role of 
NBAT in central neurons, we used an antipeptide antiserum to examine the light 
and electron microscopic immunocytochemical localization of NBAT in the rat 
forebrain and to compare this distribution with that of cNOS. Immunolabeling for 
NBAT was detected within perikarya and dendrite-like processes that were most 
numerous in the frontal and cingulate cortex, the ventral striatum, the central 
amygdala, and the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis. Labeled varicose axonal 
processes were distributed most densely in the agranular insular cortex and the 
paraventricular nuclei of the thalamus and hypothalamus (PVH). Electron 
microscopy showed that immunogold labeling for NBAT was distributed along 
plasmalemmal and vacuolar membranes within somata, dendrites, and axonal 
profiles. Many of the NBAT-containing somata and dendrites contained detectable 
cNOS. Our results suggest that expression of NBAT may provide specific 
populations of cNOS-containing forebrain neurons with a unique mechanism for 
regulating somatodendritic synthesis of nitric oxide.

DOI: 10.1002/(sici)1096-9861(19990222)404:4<459::aid-cne4>3.0.co;2-9
PMID: 9987991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
