---
pmid: '22203680'
title: Assembly and architecture of biogenesis of lysosome-related organelles complex-1
  (BLOC-1).
authors:
- Lee HH
- Nemecek D
- Schindler C
- Smith WJ
- Ghirlando R
- Steven AC
- Bonifacino JS
- Hurley JH
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3285357
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.325746
---

# Assembly and architecture of biogenesis of lysosome-related organelles complex-1 (BLOC-1).
**Authors:** Lee HH, Nemecek D, Schindler C, Smith WJ, Ghirlando R, Steven AC, Bonifacino JS, Hurley JH
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M111.325746](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M111.325746)
**PMC:** [PMC3285357](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3285357/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Feb 17;287(8):5882-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.325746. Epub
2011  Dec 27.

Assembly and architecture of biogenesis of lysosome-related organelles complex-1 
(BLOC-1).

Lee HH(1), Nemecek D, Schindler C, Smith WJ, Ghirlando R, Steven AC, Bonifacino 
JS, Hurley JH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Bio and Nano Chemistry, Kookmin University, Seoul 136-702, 
Korea.

BLOC-1 (biogenesis of lysosome-related organelles complex-1) is critical for 
melanosome biogenesis and has also been implicated in neurological function and 
disease. We show that BLOC-1 is an elongated complex that contains one copy each 
of the eight subunits pallidin, Cappuccino, dysbindin, Snapin, Muted, BLOS1, 
BLOS2, and BLOS3. The complex appears as a linear chain of eight globular 
domains, ∼300 Å long and ∼30 Å in diameter. The individual domains are flexibly 
connected such that the linear chain undergoes bending by as much as 45°. Two 
stable subcomplexes were defined, pallidin-Cappuccino-BLOS1 and 
dysbindin-Snapin-BLOS2. Both subcomplexes are 1:1:1 heterotrimers that form 
extended structures as indicated by their hydrodynamic properties. The two 
subcomplexes appear to constitute flexible units within the larger BLOC-1 chain, 
an arrangement conducive to simultaneous interactions with multiple BLOC-1 
partners in the course of tubular endosome biogenesis and sorting.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.325746
PMCID: PMC3285357
PMID: 22203680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
