---
pmid: '22854966'
title: DERP6 (ELP5) and C3ORF75 (ELP6) regulate tumorigenicity and migration of melanoma
  cells as subunits of Elongator.
authors:
- Close P
- Gillard M
- Ladang A
- Jiang Z
- Papuga J
- Hawkes N
- Nguyen L
- Chapelle JP
- Bouillenne F
- Svejstrup J
- Fillet M
- Chariot A
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3463322
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.402727
---

# DERP6 (ELP5) and C3ORF75 (ELP6) regulate tumorigenicity and migration of melanoma cells as subunits of Elongator.
**Authors:** Close P, Gillard M, Ladang A, Jiang Z, Papuga J, Hawkes N, Nguyen L, Chapelle JP, Bouillenne F, Svejstrup J, Fillet M, Chariot A
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M112.402727](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M112.402727)
**PMC:** [PMC3463322](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3463322/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Sep 21;287(39):32535-45. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.402727. Epub 
2012 Aug 1.

DERP6 (ELP5) and C3ORF75 (ELP6) regulate tumorigenicity and migration of 
melanoma cells as subunits of Elongator.

Close P(1), Gillard M, Ladang A, Jiang Z, Papuga J, Hawkes N, Nguyen L, Chapelle 
JP, Bouillenne F, Svejstrup J, Fillet M, Chariot A.

Author information:
(1)Interdisciplinary Cluster for Applied Genoproteomics (GIGA-R), University of 
Liège, CHU, Sart-Tilman, B-4000 Liège, Belgium. Pierre.Close@ulg.ac.be

The Elongator complex is composed of 6 subunits (Elp1-Elp6) and promotes RNAPII 
transcript elongation through histone acetylation in the nucleus as well as tRNA 
modification in the cytoplasm. This acetyltransferase complex directly or 
indirectly regulates numerous biological processes ranging from exocytosis and 
resistance to heat shock in yeast to cell migration and neuronal differentiation 
in higher eukaryotes. The identity of human ELP1 through ELP4 has been reported 
but human ELP5 and ELP6 have remained uncharacterized. Here, we report that 
DERP6 (ELP5) and C3ORF75 (ELP6) encode these subunits of human Elongator. We 
further investigated the importance and function of these two subunits by a 
combination of biochemical analysis and cellular assays. Our results show that 
DERP6/ELP5 is required for the integrity of Elongator and directly connects ELP3 
to ELP4. Importantly, the migration and tumorigenicity of melanoma-derived cells 
are significantly decreased upon Elongator depletion through ELP1 or ELP3. 
Strikingly, DERP6/ELP5 and C3ORF75/ELP6-depleted melanoma cells have similar 
defects, further supporting the idea that DERP6/ELP5 and C3ORF75/ELP6 are 
essential for Elongator function. Together, our data identify DERP6/ELP5 and 
C3ORF75/ELP6 as key players for migration, invasion and tumorigenicity of 
melanoma cells, as integral subunits of Elongator.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.402727
PMCID: PMC3463322
PMID: 22854966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
