---
pmid: '33769792'
title: Encapsulin Nanocontainers as Versatile Scaffolds for the Development of Artificial
  Metabolons.
authors:
- Jenkins MC
- Lutz S
journal: ACS Synth Biol
year: '2021'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.0c00636
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Encapsulin Nanocontainers as Versatile Scaffolds for the Development of Artificial Metabolons.
**Authors:** Jenkins MC, Lutz S
**Journal:** ACS Synth Biol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1021/acssynbio.0c00636](https://doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00636)

## Abstract

1. ACS Synth Biol. 2021 Apr 16;10(4):857-869. doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.0c00636.
Epub  2021 Mar 26.

Encapsulin Nanocontainers as Versatile Scaffolds for the Development of 
Artificial Metabolons.

Jenkins MC(1)(2), Lutz S(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30084, United 
States.
(2)School of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Georgia Institute of Technology, 
Atlanta, Georgia 30306, United States.
(3)Codexis Inc., 200 Penobscot Drive, Redwood City, California 94063, United 
States.

The construction of non-native biosynthetic pathways represents a powerful, 
modular strategy for the production of valuable synthons and fine chemicals. 
Accordingly, artificially affixing enzymes that catalyze sequential reactions 
onto DNAs, proteins, or synthetic scaffolds has proven to be an effective route 
for generating de novo metabolons with novel functionalities and superior 
efficiency. In recent years, nanoscale microbial compartments known as 
encapsulins have emerged as a class of robust and highly engineerable 
proteinaceous containers with myriad applications in biotechnology and synthetic 
biology. Herein we report the concurrent surface functionalization and internal 
packaging of encapsulins from Thermotoga maritima to generate a catalytically 
competent two-enzyme metabolon. Encapsulins were engineered to covalently 
sequester up to 60 copies of a dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) enzyme variant on 
their exterior surfaces using the SpyCatcher bioconjugation system, while their 
lumens were packaged with a tetrahydrofolate-dependent demethylase enzyme using 
short peptide affinity tags abstracted from the encapsulin's native protein 
cargo. Successful cross-talk between the two colocalized enzymes was confirmed 
as tetrahydrofolate produced by externally tethered DHFR was capable of driving 
the demethylation of a lignin-derived aryl substrate by packaged demethylases, 
albeit slowly. The subsequent introduction of a previously reported 
pore-enlarging deletion in the encapsulin shell was shown to enhance metabolite 
exchange such that the encapsulin-based metabolon functioned at speeds 
equivalent to those of the two enzymes freely dispersed in solution. Our work 
thus further emphasizes the engineerability of encapsulins and their potential 
use as flexile scaffolds for biocatalytic applications.

DOI: 10.1021/acssynbio.0c00636
PMID: 33769792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
