---
pmid: '16837549'
title: BLOC-1 interacts with BLOC-2 and the AP-3 complex to facilitate protein trafficking
  on endosomes.
authors:
- Di Pietro SM
- Falcón-Pérez JM
- Tenza D
- Setty SR
- Marks MS
- Raposo G
- Dell'Angelica EC
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1593172
doi: 10.1091/mbc.e06-05-0379
---

# BLOC-1 interacts with BLOC-2 and the AP-3 complex to facilitate protein trafficking on endosomes.
**Authors:** Di Pietro SM, Falcón-Pérez JM, Tenza D, Setty SR, Marks MS, Raposo G, Dell'Angelica EC
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.e06-05-0379](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.e06-05-0379)
**PMC:** [PMC1593172](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1593172/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Cell. 2006 Sep;17(9):4027-38. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e06-05-0379. Epub 2006
 Jul 12.

BLOC-1 interacts with BLOC-2 and the AP-3 complex to facilitate protein 
trafficking on endosomes.

Di Pietro SM(1), Falcón-Pérez JM, Tenza D, Setty SR, Marks MS, Raposo G, 
Dell'Angelica EC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 
90095, USA.

The adaptor protein (AP)-3 complex is a component of the cellular machinery that 
controls protein sorting from endosomes to lysosomes and specialized related 
organelles such as melanosomes. Mutations in an AP-3 subunit underlie a form of 
Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome (HPS), a disorder characterized by abnormalities in 
lysosome-related organelles. HPS in humans can also be caused by mutations in 
genes encoding subunits of three complexes of unclear function, named biogenesis 
of lysosome-related organelles complex (BLOC)-1, -2, and -3. Here, we report 
that BLOC-1 interacts physically and functionally with AP-3 to facilitate the 
trafficking of a known AP-3 cargo, CD63, and of tyrosinase-related protein 1 
(Tyrp1), a melanosomal membrane protein previously thought to traffic only 
independently of AP-3. BLOC-1 also interacts with BLOC-2 to facilitate Tyrp1 
trafficking by a mechanism apparently independent of AP-3 function. Both BLOC-1 
and -2 localize mainly to early endosome-associated tubules as determined by 
immunoelectron microscopy. These findings support the idea that BLOC-1 and -2 
represent hitherto unknown components of the endosomal protein trafficking 
machinery.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e06-05-0379
PMCID: PMC1593172
PMID: 16837549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
