---
pmid: '10202051'
title: Mutations that cause the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome impair the interaction of
  Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP) with WASP interacting protein.
authors:
- Stewart DM
- Tian L
- Nelson DL
journal: J Immunol
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
---

# Mutations that cause the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome impair the interaction of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP) with WASP interacting protein.
**Authors:** Stewart DM, Tian L, Nelson DL
**Journal:** J Immunol (1999)

## Abstract

1. J Immunol. 1999 Apr 15;162(8):5019-24.

Mutations that cause the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome impair the interaction of 
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP) with WASP interacting protein.

Stewart DM(1), Tian L, Nelson DL.

Author information:
(1)Immunophysiology Section, Metabolism Branch, National Cancer Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) is an X-linked recessive disorder characterized 
by thrombocytopenia, eczema, immune deficiency, and a proclivity toward lymphoid 
malignancy. Lymphocytes of affected individuals show defects of activation, 
motility, and cytoskeletal structure. The disease gene encodes a 502-amino acid 
protein named the WAS protein (WASP). Studies have identified a number of 
important interactions that place WASP in a role of integrating signaling 
pathways with cytoskeletal function. We performed a two-hybrid screen to 
identify proteins interacting with WASP and cloned a proline-rich protein as a 
specific WASP interactor. Our clone of this protein, termed WASP interacting 
protein (WIP) by others, shows a difference in seven amino acid residues, 
compared with the previously published sequence revealing an additional profilin 
binding motif. Deletion mutant analysis reveals that WASP residues 101-151 are 
necessary for WASP-WIP interaction. Point mutant analyses in the two-hybrid 
system and in vitro show impairment of WASP-WIP interaction with three WASP 
missense mutants known to cause WAS. We conclude that impaired WASP-WIP 
interaction may contribute to WAS.

PMID: 10202051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
