---
pmid: '30620337'
title: Loss of the sphingolipid desaturase DEGS1 causes hypomyelinating leukodystrophy.
authors:
- Pant DC
- Dorboz I
- Schluter A
- Fourcade S
- Launay N
- Joya J
- Aguilera-Albesa S
- Yoldi ME
- Casasnovas C
- Willis MJ
- Ruiz M
- Ville D
- Lesca G
- Siquier-Pernet K
- Desguerre I
- Yan H
- Wang J
- Burmeister M
- Brady L
- Tarnopolsky M
- Cornet C
- Rubbini D
- Terriente J
- James KN
- Musaev D
- Zaki MS
- Patterson MC
- Lanpher BC
- Klee EW
- Pinto E Vairo F
- Wohler E
- Sobreira NLM
- Cohen JS
- Maroofian R
- Galehdari H
- Mazaheri N
- Shariati G
- Colleaux L
- Rodriguez D
- Gleeson JG
- Pujades C
- Fatemi A
- Boespflug-Tanguy O
- Pujol A
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2019'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC6391109
doi: 10.1172/JCI123959
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Video-Audio Media
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Loss of the sphingolipid desaturase DEGS1 causes hypomyelinating leukodystrophy.
**Authors:** Pant DC, Dorboz I, Schluter A, Fourcade S, Launay N, Joya J, Aguilera-Albesa S, Yoldi ME, Casasnovas C, Willis MJ, Ruiz M, Ville D, Lesca G, Siquier-Pernet K, Desguerre I, Yan H, Wang J, Burmeister M, Brady L, Tarnopolsky M, Cornet C, Rubbini D, Terriente J, James KN, Musaev D, Zaki MS, Patterson MC, Lanpher BC, Klee EW, Pinto E Vairo F, Wohler E, Sobreira NLM, Cohen JS, Maroofian R, Galehdari H, Mazaheri N, Shariati G, Colleaux L, Rodriguez D, Gleeson JG, Pujades C, Fatemi A, Boespflug-Tanguy O, Pujol A
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI123959](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI123959)
**PMC:** [PMC6391109](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6391109/)

## Abstract

1. J Clin Invest. 2019 Mar 1;129(3):1240-1256. doi: 10.1172/JCI123959. Epub 2019 
Feb 11.

Loss of the sphingolipid desaturase DEGS1 causes hypomyelinating leukodystrophy.

Pant DC(1)(2), Dorboz I(3), Schluter A(1)(2), Fourcade S(1)(2), Launay N(1)(2), 
Joya J(1)(2), Aguilera-Albesa S(4), Yoldi ME(4), Casasnovas C(1)(2)(5), Willis 
MJ(6), Ruiz M(1)(2), Ville D(7), Lesca G(8), Siquier-Pernet K(9)(10), Desguerre 
I(9)(10), Yan H(11)(12), Wang J(11), Burmeister M(12)(13), Brady L(14), 
Tarnopolsky M(14), Cornet C(15), Rubbini D(15), Terriente J(15), James KN(16), 
Musaev D(16), Zaki MS(17), Patterson MC(18), Lanpher BC(19), Klee EW(19)(20), 
Pinto E Vairo F(19)(20), Wohler E(21), Sobreira NLM(22), Cohen JS(23), Maroofian 
R(24), Galehdari H(25), Mazaheri N(25)(26), Shariati G(26)(27), Colleaux 
L(9)(10), Rodriguez D(28)(29), Gleeson JG(16), Pujades C(30), Fatemi A(23)(31), 
Boespflug-Tanguy O(3)(32), Pujol A(1)(2)(33).

Author information:
(1)Neurometabolic Diseases Laboratory, Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute 
(IDIBELL), 08908 L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(2)Center for Biomedical Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), ISCIII, Madrid, 
Spain.
(3)INSERM UMR 1141, DHU PROTECT, Paris Diderot University, Sorbonne Paris Cité, 
Paris, France.
(4)Pediatric Neurology Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Navarra Health Service, 
Navarrabiomed, Pamplona, Spain.
(5)Neuromuscular Unit, Neurology Department, Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, 
c/Feixa Llarga s/n, 08907 L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Naval Medical Center San Diego, San Diego, 
California, USA.
(7)Department of Neuropediatrics, Lyon University Hospital, Lyon, France.
(8)Department of Medical Genetics, Lyon University Hospital and GENDEV team CNRS 
UMR 5292, INSERM U1028, CRNL, and University Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Lyon, 
France.
(9)Paris Descartes - Sorbonne Paris Cité University, Imagine Institute, Paris, 
France.
(10)Developmental Brain Disorders Laboratory, INSERM UMR 1163, Paris, France.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, China.
(12)Molecular & Behavioral Neuroscience Institute, and.
(13)Departments of Computational Medicine & Bioinformatics, Psychiatry and Human 
Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(14)Department of Pediatrics (Neuromuscular and Neurometabolics), McMaster 
Children's Hospital, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(15)ZeClinics SL, PRBB, Barcelona, Spain.
(16)Laboratory for Pediatric Brain Disease, Department of Neurosciences, Howard 
Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, San Diego, California, USA.
(17)Human Genetics and Genome Research Division, Clinical Genetics Department, 
National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt.
(18)Departments of Neurology and Pediatrics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, 
USA.
(19)Department of Clinical Genomics and.
(20)Center for Individualized Medicine, Department of Health Sciences Research, 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(21)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(22)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, and Department of 
Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, 
USA.
(23)Moser Center for Leukodystrophies at the Kennedy Krieger Institute, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(24)Genetics Research Centre, Molecular and Clinical Sciences Institute, St. 
George's, University of London, London, United Kingdom.
(25)Department of Genetics, Faculty of Science, Shahid Chamran University of 
Ahvaz, Ahvaz, Iran.
(26)Narges Medical Genetics and Prenatal Diagnosis Laboratory, Kianpars, Ahvaz, 
Iran.
(27)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Ahvaz Jundishapur 
University of Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran.
(28)APHP, Department of Neuropediatrics, National Reference Center for 
Neurogenetic Disorders, Hôpital Armand-Trousseau, GHUEP, Paris, France.
(29)GRC ConCer-LD, Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Université, Paris, France.
(30)Department of Experimental and Health Sciences, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(31)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, 
Maryland, USA.
(32)Assistance Publique des Hopitaux de Paris (APHP), Reference Center for 
Leukodystrophies and Rare Leukoencephalopathies (LEUKOFRANCE), Hôpital Robert 
Debré, Paris, France.
(33)Catalan Institution of Research and Advanced Studies (ICREA), Barcelona, 
Catalonia, Spain.

Sphingolipid imbalance is the culprit in a variety of neurological diseases, 
some affecting the myelin sheath. We have used whole-exome sequencing in 
patients with undetermined leukoencephalopathies to uncover the endoplasmic 
reticulum lipid desaturase DEGS1 as the causative gene in 19 patients from 13 
unrelated families. Shared features among the cases include severe motor arrest, 
early nystagmus, dystonia, spasticity, and profound failure to thrive. MRI 
showed hypomyelination, thinning of the corpus callosum, and progressive 
thalamic and cerebellar atrophy, suggesting a critical role of DEGS1 in myelin 
development and maintenance. This enzyme converts dihydroceramide (DhCer) into 
ceramide (Cer) in the final step of the de novo biosynthesis pathway. We 
detected a marked increase of the substrate DhCer and DhCer/Cer ratios in 
patients' fibroblasts and muscle. Further, we used a knockdown approach for 
disease modeling in Danio rerio, followed by a preclinical test with the 
first-line treatment for multiple sclerosis, fingolimod (FTY720, Gilenya). The 
enzymatic inhibition of Cer synthase by fingolimod, 1 step prior to DEGS1 in the 
pathway, reduced the critical DhCer/Cer imbalance and the severe locomotor 
disability, increasing the number of myelinating oligodendrocytes in a zebrafish 
model. These proof-of-concept results pave the way to clinical translation.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI123959
PMCID: PMC6391109
PMID: 30620337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.

## Full Text

Abstract

Sphingolipid imbalance is the culprit in a variety of neurological diseases, some affecting the myelin sheath. We have used whole-exome sequencing in patients with undetermined leukoencephalopathies to uncover the endoplasmic reticulum lipid desaturase DEGS1 as the causative gene in 19 patients from 13 unrelated families. Shared features among the cases include severe motor arrest, early nystagmus, dystonia, spasticity, and profound failure to thrive. MRI showed hypomyelination, thinning of the corpus callosum, and progressive thalamic and cerebellar atrophy, suggesting a critical role of DEGS1 in myelin development and maintenance. This enzyme converts dihydroceramide (DhCer) into ceramide (Cer) in the final step of the de novo biosynthesis pathway. We detected a marked increase of the substrate DhCer and DhCer/Cer ratios in patients’ fibroblasts and muscle. Further, we used a knockdown approach for disease modeling in Danio rerio, followed by a preclinical test with the first-line treatment for multiple sclerosis, fingolimod (FTY720, Gilenya). The enzymatic inhibition of Cer synthase by fingolimod, 1 step prior to DEGS1 in the pathway, reduced the critical DhCer/Cer imbalance and the severe locomotor disability, increasing the number of myelinating oligodendrocytes in a zebrafish model. These proof-of-concept results pave the way to clinical translation.

Introduction

Leukodystrophies (LDs) are a heterogeneous group of rare, heritable disorders of all ages that primarily affect the brain’s white matter, often leading to motor and cognitive impairment in early childhood and progression to severe disability over time ( 1 , 2 ). All modes of inheritance, broad pathogenic mechanisms, and complex cellular interactions underlie LDs, yet many cases remain unexplained with an unknown biochemical or molecular basis ( 3 ). With progress in clinical genomics, new forms of ultrarare LDs are being recognized ( 4 – 6 ), and advances in novel technologies in gene, cell, and enzyme therapy hold promise for improving patient management ( 7 , 8 ).

Using whole-exome sequencing (WES), we have identified homozygous or compound heterozygous pathogenic variants in the DEGS1 gene in 19 LD patients from 13 unrelated families. DEGS1 was first cloned in 1996 from Drosophila melanogaster , and was given the name drosophila degenerative spermatocyte 1, or DEGS1 ( 9 ). It encodes a Δ4-dihydroceramide desaturase (OMIM 615843) mapping to chromosome 1q42.11, also known as DES1 . This enzyme catalyzes the insertion of a Δ4,5- trans double bond into dihydroceramide (DhCer) to convert it to ceramide (Cer), in the final step of the de novo Cer biosynthesis pathway ( Figure 1 ) ( 10 ).

Biosynthesis of Cer, made of a sphingoid base and a fatty acid, mainly occurs via 3 distinct pathways: (a) the de novo pathway, which takes place in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and uses palmitoyl-CoA and serine as its precursors; (b) the sphingomyelinase pathway, which takes place in the plasma membrane, Golgi apparatus, and mitochondria, and converts sphingomyelin into Cer bidirectionally; and (c) the salvage pathway, which converts complex sphingolipids species into Cer and recycles the acyl moiety of Cer in both lysosomes and endosomes ( Figure 1 ) ( 11 ). This compartmentalization of the more than 200 structurally distinct Cer suggests a high complexity of regulation and function, which is only beginning to emerge ( 12 , 13 ).

Cer is the central unit of all sphingolipids, serving as a building block and as a hub for bioactive, more complex lipidic species. The biosynthesis of Cer is followed by the addition of sugar moieties to generate glucosylceramide and galactosylceramide, which undergo further transformation into gangliosides and sulfatides, respectively. Galactosylceramides and sulfatides with very long N -acyl chains, in particular C24:0 and C24:1, are the most abundant myelin lipid components ( 14 , 15 ). Indeed, defects of galactosylceramidase and arylsulfatase A, 1 and 2 steps after DEGS1, respectively, cause Krabbe disease/globoid LD (GLD) and metachromatic LD (MLD) ( Figure 1 ), 2 well-characterized demyelinating LDs. Beyond the myelin sheath, sphingolipids are involved in numerous biological processes related to cell survival, metabolic regulation, and adaptation to stressors ( 16 ). The importance of sphingolipids in neurodegenerative disease has recently expanded beyond lysosomal disorders or classical sphingolipidosis. Secondary disturbances of these lipid species including DhCer have been shown in Huntington disease ( 17 ) and Alzheimer’s patients ( 18 ).

Evidence from studies in animal models supports an essential role of DEGS1 in development ( 19 , 20 ). Homozygous Degs1 –/– mice die within the first 8 weeks of age, presenting a complex phenotype, including small size, scaly skin, sparse hair, and tremors ( 19 ). Lipidomics analysis showed that Degs1 –/– mice exhibit accumulation of DhCer and higher DhCer/Cer ratios in several tissues ( 19 ), similarly to the D. melanogaster model ( 20 ).

Our patients presented with hypomyelinating LD with progressive atrophy of the corpus callosum (CC), thalami, and cerebellum, severe failure to thrive, and peripheral neuropathy. Using patients’ fibroblasts, we functionally validated variants by testing their impact on DhCer/Cer ratios and reactive oxygen species (ROS) production. Importantly, treatment with fingolimod (FTY720), a drug targeting sphingolipid metabolism and a broadly used treatment for relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (MS), improved the metabolic imbalance, numbers of myelin-producing oligodendrocytes, and locomotor deficits in a zebrafish model.

Discussion

This study highlights the interest of using freely accessible information-exchange platforms, such as GeneMatcher after exome sequencing, for rapid identification of molecular causes of ultrarare disorders and collection of sufficient cases to delineate a disease spectrum and improve management ( 30 ).

Patients with DEGS1-related LD shared clinical and MRI features of hypomyelinating LD. In this heterogeneous group of LDs, a large clinical spectrum of disease severity has been described in terms of defective myelination and axonal suffering. A large majority of our DEGS1 patients present the severe form of hypomyelinating LD, accompanied by thin CC and cerebellar atrophy as observed with TUBB4-related LD ( 31 ). However, the hypomyelination observed in TUBB4, as well as in the severe forms of PLP1-related LD, is more diffuse and remains stable over time ( 32 ). The relative preservation of the subcortical white matter relative to the clinical severity of DEGS1 patients may represent an interesting MRI diagnostic feature. Likewise, the observed improvement in myelination in our patients contrasts with the progressive atrophy affecting first the CC, then thalami and cerebellum, and finally the whole brain. This suggests a critical role of DEGS1 and Cer metabolism in myelin development and maintenance, but also in neuronal/axonal functioning. The hypomyelinating pattern of the deep white matter and the T2 hyperintensities of the thalamic regions are also observed in infantile GM1/GM2 gangliosidosis ( 22 , 33 ). Finally, the association of central and peripheral demyelination are the hallmarks of disorders of sphingolipid metabolism (MLD and GLD), and of the peroxisomes ( 34 ). Although individual features in the DEGS1-related patients are not specific, their combination results in a defined pattern distinguishable from other LDs.

The importance of maintaining sphingolipid balance for the nervous system is well exemplified in the lysosomal disorders such as Gaucher, Niemann Pick, or Farber, all one enzymatic step away from DEGS1 ( Figure 1 ) ( 8 ). Indeed, in many lipid storage disorders, deficiency or malfunctioning of one of the enzymes involved in sphingolipid metabolism results in accumulation of the corresponding lipid substrate, leading to cellular dysfunction and death. Accumulation of DhCer is involved in many stress signals such as cell cycle regulation, autophagy induction, apoptosis, and ROS generation ( 35 , 36 ), the latter being substantiated by our results. Redox imbalance is intertwined with energy homeostasis in diseases of myelin ( 23 , 37 ), and may play a role in the cachexia observed in the large majority of our patients. Moreover, suppressing DEGS1 led to cell cycle arrest, cell growth inhibition, and apoptosis in cell culture models ( 16 , 38 ), which may explain the decrease of myelinating MBP + oligodendrocyte numbers and perhaps contribute to the general developmental delay and impressive failure to thrive in our patients. Concerning the biogenesis and stability of the myelin sheath, an enhanced proportion of DhCer (in particular C16-DhCer) has recently been shown to destabilize model membranes by increasing permeability and the formation of rigid domains ( 35 ). Of note, C16-DhCer is increased in our MO-DEGS1 model and lowered by FTY720 treatment ( Supplemental Table 2 ). It is therefore tempting to posit that the exquisitely regulated process of myelin sheath biogenesis and compaction, including the lipid-lipid and lipid-protein interactions with major protein players such as MBP, MAG, or PLP ( 14 , 39 ), is likely to be severely disturbed, simply by the biophysical consequences of the DhCer/Cer imbalance on the cellular membranes.

Further, it has been recently shown that in the Drosophila ( ifc ) KO, photoreceptor degeneration was caused by increased DhCer, not reduced levels of Cer ( 20 ). Along the same lines, Cer reduction by itself appears to have a positive effect by enhancing myelin repair in acute and chronic demyelination paradigms, as deduced from a model of acid sphingomyelinase deficiency ( 40 ). Of note, impairment of alkaline ceramidase 3 (ACER3 ) , just one step after DEGS1 ( Figure 1 ), causes a recently described form of childhood leukoencephalopathy of similar clinical presentation to the DEGS1-related LD, with a hypomyelinating aspect of the periventricular and deep white matter, severe brain atrophy by 5 years of age, and peripheral neuropathy ( 5 ). It is intriguing that the plasma profile of the described patient showed mainly accumulation of DhCer, along with various Cer forms and lactosylceramides to a lesser extent ( 5 ). Further investigations will be necessary to determine the precise molecular mechanisms through which excess of DhCer may be toxic for myelinating oligodendrocytes or for the biogenesis of the myelin sheath. By the same token, and beyond the plausible direct negative effects of substrate accumulation in this case, we should acknowledge that sphingolipid metabolism constitutes an intricate network coupled in a metabolic ripple ( 16 ). As such, the loss of a given enzyme function may cause a shift in the substrate specificity of other enzymes in the pathway, leading to increased production of atypical lipid products that may be toxic to the cell ( 41 ). This intriguing possibility should be explored for DEGS1, likely by using a systems biology type of approach, ideally including integration of comprehensive lipidomics and transcriptomics data ( 42 ). A bulk of evidence suggests that FTY720 has potential to become a lead player in this context. Its success in relapsing-remitting MS relies on its activity as immunosuppressant, acting by sequestering circulating mature lymphocytes to the lymph nodes, and preventing their penetration into the brain and subsequent myelin destruction. Its molecular effects promoting neuron and oligodendrocyte survival are based on the structural similarity of FTY720 to sphingosine, which allows it to work as a bona fide functional antagonist to S1P receptors ( 43 , 44 ), and has lately been shown to even improve microstructural integrity and myelination in the white matter tracts of human MS patients ( 45 ).

In part because of this structural similarity to sphingosine, FTY720 is a pleiotropic drug that also interferes with sphingolipid de novo biosynthesis, mainly by inhibiting CerS ( 29 , 43 ), the enzyme that converts sphinganine to DhCer, one step prior to DEGS1, and also converts sphingosine to Cer ( Figure 1 ). There are 66 CerS orthologs in mammals ( 46 ) and 9 — due to whole genome duplication — in zebrafish ( 47 ). These enzymes transfer a variable length fatty acyl-coenzyme A (fatty acyl-CoA) to the amine group of sphinganine or sphingosine. Studies employing genetic manipulations have demonstrated that different CerS isoforms exhibit strong preference for fatty acyl-CoAs with differing carbon chain lengths, although with extensive overlaps. CerS1 exclusively uses 18-carbon (C18) fatty acids, forming C18 (d18:1/18:0) Cer, while CerS2 preferentially forms d18:1/24:0 (C24:0) and d18:1/24:1 (C24:1) Cer. CerS3 synthesizes very long-chain Cer (>C26-Cer), CerS4 forms C18-/C20-/C24-Cer, and CerS5 and CerS6 synthesize mostly C14-/C16-/C18-Cer ( 48 , 49 ). Thus, the broad spectrum of DhCer species accumulated first in the DEGS1 zebrafish model, and then reduced by FTY720 (spanning C13:1 DhCer to C28:0 DhCer, Supplemental Table 2 ), adds complexity to future studies aiming to identify the drug’s most plausible targets in this model.

Additional experimental evidence supports the protective effect of FTY720 in sphingolipid metabolism–related disorders, such as GLD, which is caused by inactivation of galactosylceramidase (GALC) resulting in the accumulation of the toxic metabolite galactosylsphingosine (psychosine) in the brain. FTY720 treatment attenuated the psychosine-induced demyelination process in mouse organotypic cerebellar slice cultures ( 50 ). With this notion in mind, and our proof-of-principle results in a model organism, we posit that FTY720 (or novel, more specific next-generation sphingosine analogs interfering with CerS or other enzymatic steps along the pathway) may provide a promising therapeutic option for white-matter disorders linked to DEGS1 deficiency and perhaps others in sphingolipid metabolism, paving the way for the repurposing of FTY720 for other diseases. Our next step as a DEGS1 consortium is the validation of a robust biomarker in plasma (such as DhCer/Cer ratios) to monitor target engagement upon treatment and to prepare for early clinical intervention aiming to alleviate and modify the disease course of this life-threatening condition.
