---
pmid: '25136068'
title: Mycoplasma hyorhinis infection promotes NF-κB-dependent migration of gastric
  cancer cells.
authors:
- Duan H
- Chen L
- Qu L
- Yang H
- Song SW
- Han Y
- Ye M
- Chen W
- He X
- Shou C
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0650
---

# Mycoplasma hyorhinis infection promotes NF-κB-dependent migration of gastric cancer cells.
**Authors:** Duan H, Chen L, Qu L, Yang H, Song SW, Han Y, Ye M, Chen W, He X, Shou C
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0650](https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0650)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Res. 2014 Oct 15;74(20):5782-94. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0650.
Epub  2014 Aug 18.

Mycoplasma hyorhinis infection promotes NF-κB-dependent migration of gastric 
cancer cells.

Duan H(1), Chen L(1), Qu L(1), Yang H(1), Song SW(1), Han Y(1), Ye M(2), Chen 
W(2), He X(3), Shou C(4).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of 
Education), Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Peking University 
Cancer Hospital and Institute, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Zhejiang Provincial People's Hospital, Hangzhou, 
Zhejiang, China.
(3)Department of Pathology, Zhejiang Provincial People's Hospital, Hangzhou, 
Zhejiang, China. shouchengchao@gmail.com xianglh992004@163.com.
(4)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of 
Education), Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Peking University 
Cancer Hospital and Institute, Beijing, China. shouchengchao@gmail.com 
xianglh992004@163.com.

Chronic infection of Mycoplasma hyorhinis (M. hyorhinis) has been postulated to 
be associated with several types of cancer, but its effect on patients' survival 
and host factors mediating its infection remain unclear. Herein, we demonstrated 
that M. hyorhinis p37 protein expression in gastric cancer tissues predicts poor 
survival and associates with metastasis. M. hyorhinis infects mammalian cells 
and promotes gastric cancer cell invasiveness via its membrane protein p37. 
Synthesized peptide corresponding to the N-terminus of p37 prevents M. hyorhinis 
infection. Host Annexin A2 (ANXA2) interacts with the N-terminus of p37. In 
addition, EGFR forms a complex with p37 and ANXA2, and is required for M. 
hyorhinis-induced phosphorylation and membrane recruitment of ANXA2. M. 
hyorhinis infection is inhibited by siRNA-mediated knockdown of ANXA2 or EGFR, 
but is enhanced by expression of ectopic ANXA2 or EGFR. Downstream of ANXA2 and 
EGFR, the NF-κB pathway is activated and mediates M. hyorhinis-driven cell 
migration. In conclusion, our study unveils the effect of M. hyorhinis infection 
on gastric cancer survival and uncovers the mechanisms by which M. hyorhinis 
infects mammalian cells and promotes cancer cell migration.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0650
PMID: 25136068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
