---
pmid: '22069314'
title: Site-directed mutagenesis reveals key residue for O antigen chain length regulation
  and protein stability in Pseudomonas aeruginosa Wzz2.
authors:
- Kintz EN
- Goldberg JB
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3243511
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.273979
---

# Site-directed mutagenesis reveals key residue for O antigen chain length regulation and protein stability in Pseudomonas aeruginosa Wzz2.
**Authors:** Kintz EN, Goldberg JB
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M111.273979](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M111.273979)
**PMC:** [PMC3243511](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3243511/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Dec 23;286(51):44277-44284. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.273979.
Epub  2011 Nov 8.

Site-directed mutagenesis reveals key residue for O antigen chain length 
regulation and protein stability in Pseudomonas aeruginosa Wzz2.

Kintz EN(1), Goldberg JB(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Cancer Biology, University of 
Virginia Health System, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Cancer Biology, University of 
Virginia Health System, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908. Electronic address: 
jbg2b@virginia.edu.

The production of preferred lipopolysaccharide O antigen chain lengths is 
important for the survival of pathogenic Gram-negative bacteria in different 
environments, yet how Wzz proteins regulate these lengths is not well 
understood. The Wzz2 proteins from two different serotype O11 Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa strains are responsible for the expression of different very long 
chain lengths despite high sequence homology. Site-directed mutagenesis was 
performed to determine whether a specific amino acid was responsible for this 
difference in chain length; the residue present in position 321 within the 
second predicted coiled-coil region was able to determine which chain length was 
produced. A panel of site-directed mutants introducing different amino acids at 
this position implicated that the charge of the amino acid affected chain 
length, with positively charged residues associated with shorter chain lengths. 
Expression data also suggested this site was important for overall stability of 
the protein because mutants predicted to disrupt proper folding of the α helix 
led to lower protein levels. Cross-linking studies found that Wzz2 proteins 
producing shorter chain lengths had more stable higher-order oligomers. Mapping 
residue 321 onto the solved Escherichia coli Wzz FepE crystal structure 
predicted it to be located within α helix 8, which participates in 
intermonomeric interactions. These data further support the observation that Wzz 
oligomerization is necessary for chain length regulating activity but also 
provide evidence that differences in complex stability or changes in the 
conformation of the oligomer can lead to shifts in the length of the O antigen 
side chain.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.273979
PMCID: PMC3243511
PMID: 22069314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The production of preferred lipopolysaccharide O antigen chain lengths is important for the survival of pathogenic Gram-negative bacteria in different environments, yet how Wzz proteins regulate these lengths is not well understood. The Wzz2 proteins from two different serotype O11 Pseudomonas aeruginosa strains are responsible for the expression of different very long chain lengths despite high sequence homology. Site-directed mutagenesis was performed to determine whether a specific amino acid was responsible for this difference in chain length; the residue present in position 321 within the second predicted coiled-coil region was able to determine which chain length was produced. A panel of site-directed mutants introducing different amino acids at this position implicated that the charge of the amino acid affected chain length, with positively charged residues associated with shorter chain lengths. Expression data also suggested this site was important for overall stability of the protein because mutants predicted to disrupt proper folding of the α helix led to lower protein levels. Cross-linking studies found that Wzz2 proteins producing shorter chain lengths had more stable higher-order oligomers. Mapping residue 321 onto the solved Escherichia coli Wzz FepE crystal structure predicted it to be located within α helix 8, which participates in intermonomeric interactions. These data further support the observation that Wzz oligomerization is necessary for chain length regulating activity but also provide evidence that differences in complex stability or changes in the conformation of the oligomer can lead to shifts in the length of the O antigen side chain.

Introduction

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is a major component of the outer membrane of a Gram-negative bacterium. It is composed of lipid A, the core oligosaccharide, and the O antigen side chain. The O antigen side chain, which consists of repeating sugar subunits, is important for the virulence of pathogenic Gram-negative bacteria because it can be involved in the attachment to host cells, protection from the innate immune system, and proper localization of surface virulence factors ( 1 ). Different Gram-negative bacteria produce side chains of different lengths, and even within a species the length can vary depending on strain. Several species produce O antigen side chains with two different preferred lengths; there is evidence these chain lengths have been optimized to allow for better survival within the host during an infection ( 2 , 3 ).

The Wzz proteins, which are members of the polysaccharide co-polymerase family of proteins ( 4 ), are responsible for determining the number of O antigen subunits that are linked together to form the side chain. In strains producing two different preferred chain lengths, different Wzz proteins are used to regulate each chain length ( 5 – 7 ). Although the sequence similarity among Wzz proteins from different species is relatively low, they all contain two transmembrane domains at the amino- and carboxyl-terminal ends of the protein that anchors them in the inner membrane. The middle portion is exposed in the periplasm; structural analyses indicate it is largely α-helical ( 8 , 9 ). Because O antigen side chain synthesis occurs in the periplasm, this allows for the Wzz protein to interact with either the Wzy polymerase or the growing chain of O antigen subunits to determine the number of subunits linked together before ligation to lipid A+core.

Despite the importance of achieving proper O antigen side chain lengths for the survival of the bacteria during infections, how the Wzz proteins regulate this activity is not well understood. Mutational analyses have determined that single amino acid changes over the entire length of the protein could lead to shifts in preferred chain length or completely abolish the ability of Wzz to regulate any chain length ( 10 , 11 ). Because these studies were unable to define a specific active site associated with regulating O antigen chain length, it is now assumed that Wzz does not possess any inherent enzymatic activity for regulating chain length but instead acts as a structural scaffold for the other O antigen assembling components.

Cross-linking studies indicate Wzz proteins form homo-oligomers ( 11 ), which has been confirmed via several structural analyses ( 9 , 12 , 13 ). This ability to homo-oligomerize is tied to their length-regulating activity; mutants that no longer oligomerize also fail to regulate chain length ( 11 ). Oligomers with sizes consistent of octamers have been observed via Western blot ( 6 ). The crystal structures to the periplasmic region of three Wzz proteins have been solved, and all three crystallized as oligomers with one, Wzz FepE, existing as a nonamer ( 9 ). The crystal structures suggested a general shape for Wzz oligomers, with the monomers coming together to form an open barrel structure that extends ∼100 Å into the periplasmic space. Because there is a rough correlation between the number of Wzz proteins associated together in an oligomer and the length of the O antigen side chain produced, a model has been proposed where the bell-shaped Wzz oligomer serves as a scaffold around which the rest of the O antigen assembly proteins organize. According to this theory, an increased number of Wzz monomers in the oligomer could aggregrate a larger number of the Wzy polymerase, leading to increased chain lengths ( 9 ).

Pseudomonas aeruginosa encodes two Wzz proteins, Wzz1 and Wzz2 ( 6 ). Daniels et al. ( 6 ) demonstrated that Wzz2 is highly homologous across different serotypes of P. aeruginosa , and we have taken advantage of this similarity to perform our own site-directed mutagenesis studies in an attempt better understand Wzz activity. Previous studies have attempted to alter chain length with mutations designed to disrupt the conformation of the Wzz protein, whereas we were able to compare variations in wild-type sequences of two Wzz2 proteins from two strains of the same serotype that produce different very long chain lengths. Our results found a major role for the second coiled-coil region in determining the chain length produced. This location appears to be involved in monomer-monomer interactions and raises intriguing possibilities about the role of oligomer stability for the chain length regulating activity of Wzz.

DISCUSSION

In this study we were able to take advantage of the high sequence similarity between two serotype O11 Wzz2 proteins to investigate O antigen chain length regulation. Because the Wzz2 proteins from the two serotype O11 strains produce two different very long O antigen side chains, we were able to use complementation of our DΔM to identify the amino acid responsible for this shift in chain length. The amino acid in position 321, located within the second predicted coiled-coil region, was able to define which chain length was produced. Our use of a panel of site-directed mutants indicated the charge of this amino acid plays a role in determining which chain length is produced and also hinted at differences in protein stability depending on the residue present at position 321. Our cross-linking time course studies suggest the stability of higher order oligomers plays a role in determining chain length. Mapping the location of residue 321 onto the FepE crystal structure indicated it occurred within α helix 8. α Helix 8 interacts with the α helix 6 on neighboring monomers, providing further evidence for this region being involved in monomer-monomer stability.

The most current theory of Wzz activity focuses on the amount of Wzy associated with the Wzz oligomer; larger oligomers can associate with an increased amount of Wzy, leading to more rounds of polymerization and longer chain lengths ( 9 ). When trying to explain our results based on this theory of Wzz activity, we found many aspects inconsistent with our data. For example, the evidence presented in favor of the above model suggested that higher levels of Wzz protein leads to shorter chain lengths ( 9 ). The idea that Wzz levels influence the chain length produced do not agree with our expression data, where differential expression of the Wzz2 proteins led only to differences in the amount of the preferred chain length. Additionally, in the mutagenesis study recently performed by Papadapolous and Morona ( 17 ) on Shigella flexneri Wzz SF , it was found that expression levels of their various mutants did not correlate with the resulting chain length; several Wzz proteins were undetectable via Western blotting yet still produced a regulated chain length. These results indicate that chain length is not correlated with the amount of Wzz protein present, as might be expected if Wzz activity is dependent on its interaction with Wzy.

It has been noted that single amino acid changes over the entire length of the Wzz protein can cause slight shifts in the chain length produced ( 10 , 11 ). The current model, with its emphasis on the complex created between Wzz oligomers and the Wzy polymerase, does not offer any explanation for these observations. The only difference found between threonine and lysine versions of the Wzz2 proteins shown here that might explain the difference in chain lengths produced was the amount of oligomerization; lysine versions of Wzz2 had more of the available protein existing as higher-order oligomers, and these complexes were more stable over the time course experiment. Papadopalous and Morona ( 17 ) also noted that chain length was related to the stability of Wzz protein interactions; they described a positive correlation between dimer stability and the production of longer chain lengths. This initially seems to contradict our results, where the Wzz2 proteins that produced shorter very long chain lengths were found to have more stable oligomers, but several key differences in our studies may explain the discrepancy. For example, the introduction of a five-amino acid linker, as performed in their study ( 17 ), potentially has a much more dramatic effect on Wzz conformation opposed to the site-directed mutants used in our studies, which were naturally occurring variants from wild-type P. aeruginosa strains. Additionally, higher-order oligomers are much more readily detectable for the P. aeruginosa Wzz2 protein compared with the S. flexneri Wzz SF protein, allowing us to track stability of the complex over time more easily.

In addition to the Papadopalous and Morona ( 17 ) study mentioned above, another recent study was performed to investigate Wzz activity, and both studies reached conclusions that support our own. One of the mutations identified by Papadopalous and Morona ( 17 ) mapped to the same area on α helix 8 on the Wzz FepE crystal structures as the location of our residue 321. This mutated wzz sf gene did not express well compared with other mutations found, demonstrating the importance of this region in protein stability. Kalynych et al. created chimeras between Salmonella enterica Wzz ST and S. flexneri Wzz SF to identify which regions of the proteins were responsible for determining chain length ( 18 ). The authors determined that regions spanning from amino acids 200 to 274 in the Wzz ST and Wzz SF proteins dictated which chain length the chimeric Wzz protein would produce. The aligning amino acid in the Wzz ST crystal structure with our residue 321 is a glutamine in position 256, contained within this region. They also found that this region was important for the stability of the oligomers formed ( 18 ). The results of both these studies support our data that α helix 8 plays an important role in Wzz chain length regulating activity, protein expression, and oligomer stability.

One class of mutants in the Papadopalous and Morona study ( 17 ) produced a chain length longer than that made by the wild-type protein. Both mutants mapped to the base of the Wzz monomer and were directed toward the center of the cavity within the oligomer ( 17 ). They hypothesized that the addition of the five-amino acid linker in this region may have affected the width of the cavity, making it larger and leading to an increase in the number of subunits linked together. Although the interface between monomers is largely hydrophobic, Tocilj et al. ( 9 ) noted that the area contained several charged residues that may be important for monomer-monomer interactions ( 9 ). In the case of our Wzz2 proteins, the charged lysine may lead to a tighter association between monomers, and the stability of the lysine Wzz2 proteins we observed is in fact evidence for a more compact barrel structure. In this case, a more compact periplasmic domain would lead to a shorter chain length as the Wzz2 “ruler” would be shortened physically. Studies are under way to determine whether there is any significant difference in the conformation of the oligomer between threonine and lysine versions of Wzz2.

We propose a model where Wzz proteins have a preferred oligomerization state and that when they exist in this conformation, they will produce the chain length inherent to their sequence. This would explain how undetectable levels of protein still regulate chain length and the lack of correlation between Wzz amount and the length of the side chain ( 17 ). Because there is evidence for an interaction between Wzz and O antigen, the length of the side chain may be determined by physically interacting with the barrel of the oligomer ( 9 ). With the barrel acting as a ruler in the periplasm, different conformations of the complex would lead to the production of different side chains. In this scenario, a more compact barrel would produce a shorter chain length because the area along which the O antigen subunit and the oligomer potentially interact would be reduced. The observed correlation between oligomer dimensions and chain length produced would therefore be the result of larger periplasmic barrel structures and not necessarily the amount of associated Wzy.

Our studies have again illustrated the connection between O antigen chain length and the ability of Wzz to form oligomers but provide further evidence that the chain length produced may be dependent on either the stability or the shape of the oligomer formed. Although the interaction between Wzz and Wzy is obviously important in the synthesis of the O antigen side chain, current models may place too much emphasis on the ratio of these proteins. The periplasmic barrel may play an important role in determining the length of the side chain, possibly by acting as way to physically measure the length. Further studies into the structure of this region, especially between two similar proteins producing two different lengths as were used in these studies, may yield important insights into how Wzz proteins regulate chain length.
