---
pmid: '20859253'
title: Hen1 is required for oocyte development and piRNA stability in zebrafish.
authors:
- Kamminga LM
- Luteijn MJ
- den Broeder MJ
- Redl S
- Kaaij LJ
- Roovers EF
- Ladurner P
- Berezikov E
- Ketting RF
journal: EMBO J
year: '2010'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2982757
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.233
---

# Hen1 is required for oocyte development and piRNA stability in zebrafish.
**Authors:** Kamminga LM, Luteijn MJ, den Broeder MJ, Redl S, Kaaij LJ, Roovers EF, Ladurner P, Berezikov E, Ketting RF
**Journal:** EMBO J (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2010.233](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2010.233)
**PMC:** [PMC2982757](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2982757/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2010 Nov 3;29(21):3688-700. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.233. Epub 2010 Sep
 21.

Hen1 is required for oocyte development and piRNA stability in zebrafish.

Kamminga LM(1), Luteijn MJ, den Broeder MJ, Redl S, Kaaij LJ, Roovers EF, 
Ladurner P, Berezikov E, Ketting RF.

Author information:
(1)Hubrecht Institute-KNAW, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands.

Erratum in
    EMBO J. 2012 Jan 4;31(1):248.

Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) are germ line-specific small RNA molecules that 
have a function in genome defence and germ cell development. They associate with 
a specific class of Argonaute proteins, named Piwi, and function through an RNA 
interference-like mechanism. piRNAs carry a 2'-O-methyl modification at their 3' 
end, which is added by the Hen1 enzyme. We show that zebrafish hen1 is 
specifically expressed in germ cells and is essential for maintaining a female 
germ line, whereas it is dispensable in the testis. Hen1 protein localizes to 
nuage through its C-terminal domain, but is not required for nuage formation. In 
hen1 mutant testes, piRNAs become uridylated and adenylated. Uridylation 
frequency is highest on retro-transposon-derived piRNAs and is accompanied by 
decreased piRNA levels and mild derepression of transposon transcripts. 
Altogether, our data suggest the existence of a uridylation-mediated 3'-5' 
exonuclease activity acting on piRNAs in zebrafish germ cells, which is 
counteracted by nuage-bound Hen1 protein. This system discriminates between 
piRNA targets and is required for ovary development and fully efficient 
transposon silencing.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2010.233
PMCID: PMC2982757
PMID: 20859253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) are germ line-specific small RNA molecules that have a function in genome defence and germ cell development. They associate with a specific class of Argonaute proteins, named Piwi, and function through an RNA interference-like mechanism. piRNAs carry a 2′- O -methyl modification at their 3′ end, which is added by the Hen1 enzyme. We show that zebrafish hen1 is specifically expressed in germ cells and is essential for maintaining a female germ line, whereas it is dispensable in the testis. Hen1 protein localizes to nuage through its C-terminal domain, but is not required for nuage formation. In hen1 mutant testes, piRNAs become uridylated and adenylated. Uridylation frequency is highest on retro-transposon-derived piRNAs and is accompanied by decreased piRNA levels and mild derepression of transposon transcripts. Altogether, our data suggest the existence of a uridylation-mediated 3′–5′ exonuclease activity acting on piRNAs in zebrafish germ cells, which is counteracted by nuage-bound Hen1 protein. This system discriminates between piRNA targets and is required for ovary development and fully efficient transposon silencing.

Introduction

Small RNAs are potent regulators of gene expression in many different systems. These RNA co-factors provide sequence specificity to so-called Argonaute proteins that, when targeted to RNA and/or DNA, can initiate a variety of responses ( Hutvagner and Simard, 2008 ). The most basic activity of Argonaute proteins is target cleavage. This is a very specific endonucleolytic activity generating 5′-phosphate and 3′-hydroxyl groups ( Martinez and Tuschl, 2004 ), and it is targeted to the phosphodiester bond opposite bases 10 and 11 of the small RNA molecule ( Elbashir et al, 2001 ). Interestingly, in animal systems, many Argonaute proteins have lost their nucleolytic activity, and have adopted other mechanisms to affect the activities of their targets.

In animal germ cells, a specific subset of Argonaute proteins is expressed: the Piwi proteins ( Cox et al, 1998 ). This subfamily has retained its endonucleolytic activity ( Gunawardane et al, 2007 ) and is guided to their targets by Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) ( Girard et al, 2006 ; Aravin et al, 2007 ). In most systems, multiple Piwi paralogues are present ( Carmell et al, 2002 ). In zebrafish, there are two Piwi paralogues: Ziwi and Zili ( Houwing et al, 2007 , 2008 ). Together, Piwi proteins and piRNAs are required for a number of different processes, including germ cell differentiation and meiosis ( Deng and Lin, 2002 ; Kuramochi-Miyagawa et al, 2004 ; Carmell et al, 2007 ; Houwing et al, 2008 ). On a molecular level, Piwi proteins are required for transposon control. Whether this relates directly to the germ cell defects observed in Piwi mutants is currently unclear.

In all systems studied a major part of the Piwi-associated piRNAs are derived from repetitive elements ( Brennecke et al, 2007 ; Carmell et al, 2007 ; Aravin et al, 2008 ; Houwing et al, 2008 ). In vertebrates, including zebrafish, retro-elements, or RNA-based transposons, give rise to the most abundant piRNA populations ( Houwing et al, 2007 ; Aravin et al, 2008 ). As the mode of piRNA biogenesis responds to the actual presence of transposon transcripts (see below), this bias towards retro-elements may reflect the inactivity of DNA transposons in vertebrates ( Feschotte and Pritham, 2007 ).

Biogenesis of piRNAs is distinct from the processing of short-interfering RNAs (siRNAs) and microRNAs (miRNAs): piRNAs are not derived from double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) precursors by Dicer ( Vagin et al, 2006 ; Houwing et al, 2007 ), but from single-stranded RNA. The current models on piRNA biogenesis involve a central function for the Piwi proteins themselves, with Piwi protein-mediated target cleavage generating the 5′ ends of new piRNAs ( Brennecke et al, 2007 ; Gunawardane et al, 2007 ; Aravin et al, 2008 ; Houwing et al, 2008 ). These 5′ ends are bound by another Piwi protein paralogue, followed by trimming of the 3′ end, resulting in a characteristic piRNA length and 3′-end heterogeneity for each Piwi paralogue. Consequently, different Piwi paralogues tend to bind piRNAs of different polarity; in zebrafish, Ziwi generally binds piRNAs that are anti-sense to transposon coding regions and Zili has a preference for sense piRNAs ( Houwing et al, 2008 ). When both sense and anti-sense transcripts of a piRNA-targeted locus are present, this mechanism creates a cyclic process in which specific piRNA species can be amplified. This is often referred to as the ping-pong cycle ( Brennecke et al, 2007 ).

Apart from the Dicer-independent mode of biogenesis, piRNAs differ in yet another aspect from miRNAs and most siRNAs in animals: they are methylated on the 2′-hydroxyl group at their 3′ end ( Vagin et al, 2006 ; Houwing et al, 2007 ; Ohara et al, 2007 ; Kirino and Mourelatos, 2007a ). This modification is found on all small RNAs in Arabidopsis ( Yu et al, 2005 ), but in the animal kingdom it is found almost exclusively on piRNAs, with the notable exception of endogenous siRNAs in Drosophila ( Horwich et al, 2007 ). The enzyme responsible for placing this modification onto miRNAs in plants is HEN1 ( Yang et al, 2006 ), an enzyme with a methyltransferase domain and two dsRNA-binding domains. This is consistent with plant HEN1 modifying dsRNA precursors during miRNA biogenesis in Arabidopsis . Recently, a crystal structure of Arabidopsis HEN1 has been reported, showing how the dsRNA-binding domains and the methyltransferase domain come together, resulting in the proper positioning of the 3′ ends of the miRNA precursor in the catalytic site ( Huang et al, 2009 ). In plants lacking HEN1, miRNAs are destabilized and are subject to 3′-end uridylation and degradation, resulting in pleiotropic phenotypes ( Chen et al, 2002 ; Park et al, 2002 ; Li et al, 2005 ).

In animals, putative Hen1 homologues have been identified ( Tkaczuk et al, 2006 ), but these lack the dsRNA-binding regions found in the plant HEN1 enzyme, implying that they do not act on double-stranded substrates. Indeed, it has been shown that animal Hen1 can methylate single-stranded RNAs, bind to Piwi proteins, and is required for piRNA accumulation and efficient Piwi-pathway activity ( Horwich et al, 2007 ; Saito et al, 2007 ; Kirino and Mourelatos, 2007b ; Kurth and Mochizuki, 2009 ). We show that zebrafish Hen1 is specifically expressed in germ cells and is required for oocyte development, and consequently, female development of zebrafish. Hen1 localizes to nuage through interactions with its C-terminal domain (CTD), but is not essential for nuage formation. As expected, Hen1 mediates piRNA methylation, and we reveal that this prevents both adenylation and uridylation. We show that uridylation, but not adenylation, is associated with piRNA destabilization, most likely through a 3′–5′ exonucleolytic pathway. Consequently, in hen1 mutants, transposon transcripts can be mildly up-regulated. The uridylation process discriminates between RNA- and DNA-based transposable elements, possibly reflecting target-dependent uridylation of piRNAs in the absence of Hen1.

Discussion

The results we present here describe zebrafish Hen1 as a factor required for ovary development. On a molecular level, we firmly place Hen1 in the zebrafish Piwi pathway: Hen1 can localize to nuage and is required for the 2′- O -methylation of piRNAs in the adult testis. In its absence, terminal transferase activities start to act on piRNAs, leading to adenylation and uridylation, with uridylation correlating with destabilization of piRNAs. Below we discuss the implications of these findings in more detail.
