---
pmid: '15745965'
title: 'Axonal transport, amyloid precursor protein, kinesin-1, and the processing
  apparatus: revisited.'
authors:
- Lazarov O
- Morfini GA
- Lee EB
- Farah MH
- Szodorai A
- DeBoer SR
- Koliatsos VE
- Kins S
- Lee VM
- Wong PC
- Price DL
- Brady ST
- Sisodia SS
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6726084
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3089-04.2005
---

# Axonal transport, amyloid precursor protein, kinesin-1, and the processing apparatus: revisited.
**Authors:** Lazarov O, Morfini GA, Lee EB, Farah MH, Szodorai A, DeBoer SR, Koliatsos VE, Kins S, Lee VM, Wong PC, Price DL, Brady ST, Sisodia SS
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3089-04.2005](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3089-04.2005)
**PMC:** [PMC6726084](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6726084/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2005 Mar 2;25(9):2386-95. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3089-04.2005.

Axonal transport, amyloid precursor protein, kinesin-1, and the processing 
apparatus: revisited.

Lazarov O(1), Morfini GA, Lee EB, Farah MH, Szodorai A, DeBoer SR, Koliatsos VE, 
Kins S, Lee VM, Wong PC, Price DL, Brady ST, Sisodia SS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Pharmacology, and Physiology, The University of 
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

The sequential enzymatic actions of beta-APP cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1), 
presenilins (PS), and other proteins of the gamma-secretase complex liberate 
beta-amyloid (Abeta) peptides from larger integral membrane proteins, termed 
beta-amyloid precursor proteins (APPs). Relatively little is known about the 
normal function(s) of APP or the neuronal compartment(s) in which APP undergoes 
proteolytic processing. Recent studies have been interpreted as consistent with 
the idea that APP serves as a kinesin-1 cargo receptor and that PS and BACE1 are 
associated with the APP-resident membranous cargos that undergo rapid axonal 
transport. In this report, derived from a collaboration among several 
independent laboratories, we examined the potential associations of APP and 
kinesin-1 using glutathione S-transferase pull-down and coimmunoprecipitation 
assays. In addition, we assessed the trafficking of membrane proteins in the 
sciatic nerves of transgenic mice with heterozygous or homozygous deletions of 
APP. In contrast to previous reports, we were unable to find evidence for direct 
interactions between APP and kinesin-1. Furthermore, the transport of kinesin-1 
and tyrosine kinase receptors, previously reported to require APP, was unchanged 
in axons of APP-deficient mice. Finally, we show that two components of the APP 
proteolytic machinery, i.e., PS1 and BACE1, are not cotransported with APP in 
the sciatic nerves of mice. These findings suggest that the hypothesis that APP 
serves as a kinesin-1 receptor and that the proteolytic processing machinery 
responsible for generating Abeta is transported in the same vesicular 
compartment in axons of peripheral nerves requires revision.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3089-04.2005
PMCID: PMC6726084
PMID: 15745965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
