---
reference_id: PMID:16055927
title: "Mutation of DNAJC19, a human homologue of yeast inner mitochondrial membrane co-chaperones, causes DCMA syndrome, a novel autosomal recessive Barth syndrome-like condition."
authors:
- Davey KM
- Parboosingh JS
- McLeod DR
- Chan A
- Casey R
- Ferreira P
- Snyder FF
- Bridge PJ
- Bernier FP
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.2005.036657
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Mutation of DNAJC19, a human homologue of yeast inner mitochondrial membrane co-chaperones, causes DCMA syndrome, a novel autosomal recessive Barth syndrome-like condition.
**Authors:** Davey KM, Parboosingh JS, McLeod DR, Chan A, Casey R, Ferreira P, Snyder FF, Bridge PJ, Bernier FP
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.2005.036657](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.2005.036657)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2006 May;43(5):385-93. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2005.036657. Epub 2005
Jul  31.

Mutation of DNAJC19, a human homologue of yeast inner mitochondrial membrane
co-chaperones, causes DCMA syndrome, a novel autosomal recessive Barth
syndrome-like condition.

Davey KM(1), Parboosingh JS, McLeod DR, Chan A, Casey R, Ferreira P, Snyder FF,
Bridge PJ, Bernier FP.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Diagnostic Laboratory, Alberta Children's Hospital, Calgary,
Alberta 2T 5C7, Canada.

BACKGROUND: A novel autosomal recessive condition, dilated cardiomyopathy with
ataxia (DCMA) syndrome, has been identified in the Canadian Dariusleut Hutterite
population, characterised by early onset dilated cardiomyopathy with conduction
defects, non-progressive cerebellar ataxia, testicular dysgenesis, growth
failure, and 3-methylglutaconic aciduria.
OBJECTIVE: To map DCMA syndrome and identify the mutation underlying this
condition.
METHODS: A genome wide scan was undertaken on consanguineous Hutterite families
using a homozygosity mapping approach in order to identify the DCMA associated
chromosomal region. Mutation analysis was carried out on positional candidate
genes in this region by sequencing. Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction and bioinformatics analyses were then used to characterise the mutation
and determine its effect on the protein product.
RESULTS: The association of DCMA syndrome with a 2.2 Mb region of chromosome
3q26.33 was found. A disease associated mutation was identified: IVS3-1 G-->C in
the DNAJC19 gene, encoding a DNAJ domain containing protein of previously
unknown function (Entrez Gene ID 131118).
CONCLUSIONS: The DNAJC19 protein was previously localised to the mitochondria in
cardiac myocytes, and shares sequence and organisational similarity with
proteins from several species including two yeast mitochondrial inner membrane
proteins, Mdj2p and Tim14. Tim14 is a component of the yeast inner mitochondrial
membrane presequence translocase, suggesting that the unique phenotype of DCMA
may be the result of defective mitochondrial protein import. It is only the
second human disorder caused by defects in this pathway that has been
identified.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2005.036657
PMCID: PMC2564511
PMID: 16055927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: none declared