---
pmid: '14962674'
title: Functional rescue of vitamin C synthesis deficiency in human cells using adenoviral-based
  expression of murine l-gulono-gamma-lactone oxidase.
authors:
- Ha MN
- Graham FL
- D'Souza CK
- Muller WJ
- Igdoura SA
- Schellhorn HE
journal: Genomics
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2003.08.018
---

# Functional rescue of vitamin C synthesis deficiency in human cells using adenoviral-based expression of murine l-gulono-gamma-lactone oxidase.
**Authors:** Ha MN, Graham FL, D'Souza CK, Muller WJ, Igdoura SA, Schellhorn HE
**Journal:** Genomics (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ygeno.2003.08.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ygeno.2003.08.018)

## Abstract

1. Genomics. 2004 Mar;83(3):482-92. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2003.08.018.

Functional rescue of vitamin C synthesis deficiency in human cells using 
adenoviral-based expression of murine l-gulono-gamma-lactone oxidase.

Ha MN(1), Graham FL, D'Souza CK, Muller WJ, Igdoura SA, Schellhorn HE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada L8S 4K1.

l-Gulono-gamma-lactone oxidase (GULO) is a critical enzyme present in most 
mammalian species that is required for the terminal step in vitamin C 
biosynthesis. Primates are absolutely dependent on exogenously supplied dietary 
vitamin C due to inactivation of the Gulo gene by mutation over 40 million years 
ago. In this study, we report the cloning and expression of the murine 
l-gulono-gamma-lactone oxidase cDNA and gene. The cDNA (2.3 kb) encodes an open 
reading frame of 440 amino acids that shows high homology to the rat 
l-gulono-gamma-lactone oxidase (>94%). The Gulo gene is 22 kb long and contains 
12 exons. The 11 introns range in size from 479 to 5641 bp. Northern blot 
analysis revealed high expression of Gulo transcript in the liver. To 
investigate whether metabolic loss of vitamin C biosynthesis in human cells can 
be corrected by heterologous expression of GULO, we constructed a 
first-generation adenoviral vector expressing the murine GULO cDNA under the 
transcriptional control of the murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV) early promoter. Low 
rescue efficiency of Gulo-expressing adenoviral constructs and reduced viral 
growth in HEK293 cells were observed, suggesting that overexpression of Gulo may 
be inhibitory to cell growth. Placement of a removable stuffer fragment flanked 
by lox sites between the MCMV promoter and the Gulo gene resulted in efficient 
vector rescue and normal viral replication in parental HEK293 cells and 
high-level expression of Gulo in HEK293 cells expressing Cre recombinase. Cells 
infected with Gulo-expressing vectors overexpressed an FAD-containing protein 
that corresponded in size to that predicted for recombinant GULO protein and 
expressed a functional enzyme as measured by the conversion of 
l-gulono-gamma-lactone to ascorbic acid in cell-free extracts. The cloning of 
the murine Gulo cDNA and the construction of Gulo-expressing adenoviral vectors 
are vital steps toward determining the role of vitamin C in basic metabolism and 
in disease.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2003.08.018
PMID: 14962674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
