---
pmid: '27994074'
title: Novel Resolvin D2 Receptor Axis in Infectious Inflammation.
authors:
- Chiang N
- de la Rosa X
- Libreros S
- Serhan CN
journal: J Immunol
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5225078
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1601650
---

# Novel Resolvin D2 Receptor Axis in Infectious Inflammation.
**Authors:** Chiang N, de la Rosa X, Libreros S, Serhan CN
**Journal:** J Immunol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.4049/jimmunol.1601650](https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.1601650)
**PMC:** [PMC5225078](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5225078/)

## Abstract

1. J Immunol. 2017 Jan 15;198(2):842-851. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1601650. Epub
2016  Dec 19.

Novel Resolvin D2 Receptor Axis in Infectious Inflammation.

Chiang N(#)(1), de la Rosa X(#)(1), Libreros S(1), Serhan CN(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Experimental Therapeutics and Reperfusion Injury, Department of 
Anesthesiology, Perioperative and Pain Medicine, Harvard Institutes of Medicine, 
Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 
02115, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Resolution of acute inflammation is an active process governed by specialized 
proresolving mediators, including resolvin (Rv)D2, that activates a cell surface 
G protein-coupled receptor, GPR18/DRV2. In this study, we investigated 
RvD2-DRV2-dependent resolution mechanisms using DRV2-deficient mice 
(DRV2-knockout [KO]). In polymicrobial sepsis initiated by cecal ligation and 
puncture, RvD2 (∼2.7 nmol/mouse) significantly increased survival (>50%) of 
wild-type mice and reduced hypothermia and bacterial titers compared with 
vehicle-treated cecal ligation and puncture mice that succumbed at 48 h. 
Protection by RvD2 was abolished in DRV2-KO mice. Mass spectrometry-based lipid 
mediator metabololipidomics demonstrated that DRV2-KO infectious exudates gave 
higher proinflammatory leukotriene B4 and procoagulating thromboxane B2, as well 
as lower specialized proresolving mediators, including RvD1 and RvD3, compared 
with wild-type. RvD2-DRV2-initiated intracellular signals were investigated 
using mass cytometry (cytometry by time-of-flight), which demonstrated that RvD2 
enhanced phosphorylation of CREB, ERK1/2, and STAT3 in WT but not DRV2-KO 
macrophages. Monitored by real-time imaging, RvD2-DRV2 interaction significantly 
enhanced phagocytosis of live Escherichia coli, an action dependent on protein 
kinase A and STAT3 in macrophages. Taken together, we identified an RvD2/DRV2 
axis that activates intracellular signaling pathways that increase 
phagocytosis-mediated bacterial clearance, survival, and organ protection. 
Moreover, these results provide evidence for RvD2-DRV2 and their downstream 
pathways in pathophysiology of infectious inflammation.

Copyright © 2017 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1601650
PMCID: PMC5225078
PMID: 27994074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
