---
pmid: '25767118'
title: Crystal Structure of the N-Acetylmuramic Acid α-1-Phosphate (MurNAc-α1-P) Uridylyltransferase
  MurU, a Minimal Sugar Nucleotidyltransferase and Potential Drug Target Enzyme in
  Gram-negative Pathogens.
authors:
- Renner-Schneck M
- Hinderberger I
- Gisin J
- Exner T
- Mayer C
- Stehle T
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4409245
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.620989
---

# Crystal Structure of the N-Acetylmuramic Acid α-1-Phosphate (MurNAc-α1-P) Uridylyltransferase MurU, a Minimal Sugar Nucleotidyltransferase and Potential Drug Target Enzyme in Gram-negative Pathogens.
**Authors:** Renner-Schneck M, Hinderberger I, Gisin J, Exner T, Mayer C, Stehle T
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M114.620989](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M114.620989)
**PMC:** [PMC4409245](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4409245/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2015 Apr 24;290(17):10804-13. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.620989. Epub 
2015 Mar 12.

Crystal Structure of the N-Acetylmuramic Acid α-1-Phosphate (MurNAc-α1-P) 
Uridylyltransferase MurU, a Minimal Sugar Nucleotidyltransferase and Potential 
Drug Target Enzyme in Gram-negative Pathogens.

Renner-Schneck M(1), Hinderberger I(2), Gisin J(2), Exner T(3), Mayer C(4), 
Stehle T(5).

Author information:
(1)From the Interfaculty Institute of Biochemistry (IFIB).
(2)Interfaculty Institute of Microbiology and Infection Medicine Tübingen 
(IMIT), Department of Biology, and.
(3)Institute of Pharmacy, University of Tübingen, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.
(4)Interfaculty Institute of Microbiology and Infection Medicine Tübingen 
(IMIT), Department of Biology, and christoph.mayer@uni-tuebingen.de.
(5)From the Interfaculty Institute of Biochemistry (IFIB), 
thilo.stehle@uni-tuebingen.de.

The N-acetylmuramic acid α-1-phosphate (MurNAc-α1-P) uridylyltransferase MurU 
catalyzes the synthesis of uridine diphosphate (UDP)-MurNAc, a crucial precursor 
of the bacterial peptidoglycan cell wall. MurU is part of a recently identified 
cell wall recycling pathway in Gram-negative bacteria that bypasses the general 
de novo biosynthesis of UDP-MurNAc and contributes to high intrinsic resistance 
to the antibiotic fosfomycin, which targets UDP-MurNAc de novo biosynthesis. To 
provide insights into substrate binding and specificity, we solved crystal 
structures of MurU of Pseudomonas putida in native and ligand-bound states at 
high resolution. With the help of these structures, critical enzyme-substrate 
interactions were identified that enable tight binding of MurNAc-α1-P to the 
active site of MurU. The MurU structures define a "minimal domain" required for 
general nucleotidyltransferase activity. They furthermore provide a structural 
basis for the chemical design of inhibitors of MurU that could serve as novel 
drugs in combination therapy against multidrug-resistant Gram-negative 
pathogens.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.620989
PMCID: PMC4409245
PMID: 25767118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
