---
pmid: '16352593'
title: Targeting of Miz-1 is essential for Myc-mediated apoptosis.
authors:
- Patel JH
- McMahon SB
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M513038200
---

# Targeting of Miz-1 is essential for Myc-mediated apoptosis.
**Authors:** Patel JH, McMahon SB
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M513038200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M513038200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Feb 10;281(6):3283-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M513038200. Epub 2005
 Dec 13.

Targeting of Miz-1 is essential for Myc-mediated apoptosis.

Patel JH(1), McMahon SB.

Author information:
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The c-Myc oncoprotein plays a central role in human cancer via its ability to 
either activate or repress the transcription of essential downstream targets. 
For many of the repressed target genes, down-regulation by c-Myc relies on its 
ability to bind and inactivate the transcription factor Miz-1. Although Miz-1 
inactivation is suspected to be essential for at least some of the biological 
activities of c-Myc, it has been difficult to demonstrate this requirement 
experimentally. Using a combination of short hairpin RNA-mediated knockdown and 
a previously characterized mutant of c-Myc that is defective for Miz-1 
inactivation, we examined whether this inactivation is critical for three of the 
most central biological functions of c-Myc, cell cycle progression, 
transformation, and apoptosis. The results of this analysis demonstrated that in 
the in vitro assays utilized here, Miz-1 inactivation is dispensable for 
c-Myc-induced cell cycle progression and transformation. In marked contrast, the 
ability of c-Myc to induce apoptosis in primary diploid human fibroblasts in 
response to growth factor withdrawal is entirely dependent on its ability to 
inactivate Miz-1. These data have a significant impact on our understanding of 
the biochemical mechanisms dictating how c-Myc mediates opposing biological 
functions, such as transformation and apoptosis, and demonstrate the first 
requirement for Miz-1 inactivation in any of the biological functions of c-Myc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M513038200
PMID: 16352593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
