---
pmid: '9837812'
title: The first nuclear-encoded complex I mutation in a patient with Leigh syndrome.
authors:
- Loeffen J
- Smeitink J
- Triepels R
- Smeets R
- Schuelke M
- Sengers R
- Trijbels F
- Hamel B
- Mullaart R
- van den Heuvel L
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1377631
doi: 10.1086/302154
pubmed_publication_types:
- Case Reports
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: CASE_REPORT
---

# The first nuclear-encoded complex I mutation in a patient with Leigh syndrome.
**Authors:** Loeffen J, Smeitink J, Triepels R, Smeets R, Schuelke M, Sengers R, Trijbels F, Hamel B, Mullaart R, van den Heuvel L
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1086/302154](https://doi.org/10.1086/302154)
**PMC:** [PMC1377631](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1377631/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Hum Genet. 1998 Dec;63(6):1598-608. doi: 10.1086/302154.

The first nuclear-encoded complex I mutation in a patient with Leigh syndrome.

Loeffen J(1), Smeitink J, Triepels R, Smeets R, Schuelke M, Sengers R, Trijbels 
F, Hamel B, Mullaart R, van den Heuvel L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Nijmegen Center for Mitochondrial Disorders, The 
Netherlands.

Comment in
    Am J Hum Genet. 1998 Dec;63(6):1594-7. doi: 10.1086/302169.

Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH):ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) 
is the largest multiprotein enzyme complex of the respiratory chain. The 
nuclear-encoded NDUFS8 (TYKY) subunit of complex I is highly conserved among 
eukaryotes and prokaryotes and contains two 4Fe4S ferredoxin consensus patterns, 
which have long been thought to provide the binding site for the iron-sulfur 
cluster N-2. The NDUFS8 cDNA contains an open reading frame of 633 bp, coding 
for 210 amino acids. Cycle sequencing of amplified NDUFS8 cDNA of 20 patients 
with isolated enzymatic complex I deficiency revealed two compound heterozygous 
transitions in a patient with neuropathologically proven Leigh syndrome. The 
first mutation was a C236T (P79L), and the second mutation was a G305A (R102H). 
Both mutations were absent in 70 control alleles and cosegregated within the 
family. A progressive clinical phenotype proceeding to death in the first months 
of life was expressed in the patient. In the 19 other patients with enzymatic 
complex I deficiency, no mutations were found in the NDUFS8 cDNA. This article 
describes the first molecular genetic link between a nuclear-encoded subunit of 
complex I and Leigh syndrome.

DOI: 10.1086/302154
PMCID: PMC1377631
PMID: 9837812 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
