---
pmid: '15485911'
title: The Yaf9 component of the SWR1 and NuA4 complexes is required for proper gene
  expression, histone H4 acetylation, and Htz1 replacement near telomeres.
authors:
- Zhang H
- Richardson DO
- Roberts DN
- Utley R
- Erdjument-Bromage H
- Tempst P
- Côté J
- Cairns BR
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC522225
doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.21.9424-9436.2004
---

# The Yaf9 component of the SWR1 and NuA4 complexes is required for proper gene expression, histone H4 acetylation, and Htz1 replacement near telomeres.
**Authors:** Zhang H, Richardson DO, Roberts DN, Utley R, Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P, Côté J, Cairns BR
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.24.21.9424-9436.2004](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.24.21.9424-9436.2004)
**PMC:** [PMC522225](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC522225/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Nov;24(21):9424-36. doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.21.9424-9436.2004.

The Yaf9 component of the SWR1 and NuA4 complexes is required for proper gene 
expression, histone H4 acetylation, and Htz1 replacement near telomeres.

Zhang H(1), Richardson DO, Roberts DN, Utley R, Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P, 
Côté J, Cairns BR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, School of Medicine, University of Utah, 
2000 Circle of Hope, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Yaf9, Taf14, and Sas5 comprise the YEATS domain family in Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae, which in humans includes proteins involved in acute leukemias. The 
YEATS domain family is essential, as a yaf9Delta taf14Delta sas5Delta triple 
mutant is nonviable. We verify that Yaf9 is a stable component of NuA4, an 
essential histone H4 acetyltransferase complex. Yaf9 is also associated with the 
SWR1 complex, which deposits the histone H2A variant Htz1. However, the 
functional contribution of Yaf9 to these complexes has not been determined. 
Strains lacking YAF9 are sensitive to DNA-damaging agents, cold, and caffeine, 
and the YEATS domain is required for full Yaf9 function. NuA4 lacking Yaf9 
retains histone acetyltransferase activity in vitro, and Yaf9 does not markedly 
reduce bulk H4 acetylation levels, suggesting a role for Yaf9 in the targeting 
or regulation of NuA4. Interestingly, yaf9Delta strains display reduced 
transcription of genes near certain telomeres, and their repression is 
correlated with reduced H4 acetylation, reduced occupancy by Htz1, and increased 
occupancy by the silencing protein Sir3. Additionally, the spectra of 
phenotypes, genes, and telomeres affected in yaf9Delta and htz1Delta strains are 
significantly similar, further supporting a role for Yaf9 in Htz1 deposition. 
Taken together, these data indicate that Yaf9 may function in NuA4 and SWR1 
complexes to help antagonize silencing near telomeres.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.24.21.9424-9436.2004
PMCID: PMC522225
PMID: 15485911 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
