---
pmid: '17900620'
title: Rz/Rz1 lysis gene equivalents in phages of Gram-negative hosts.
authors:
- Summer EJ
- Berry J
- Tran TA
- Niu L
- Struck DK
- Young R
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2007.08.045
---

# Rz/Rz1 lysis gene equivalents in phages of Gram-negative hosts.
**Authors:** Summer EJ, Berry J, Tran TA, Niu L, Struck DK, Young R
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmb.2007.08.045](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2007.08.045)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Biol. 2007 Nov 9;373(5):1098-112. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2007.08.045. Epub 
2007 Aug 24.

Rz/Rz1 lysis gene equivalents in phages of Gram-negative hosts.

Summer EJ(1), Berry J, Tran TA, Niu L, Struck DK, Young R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, 2128 TAMU, Texas A and M 
University, College Station, TX 77843-2128, USA.

Under usual laboratory conditions, lysis by bacteriophage lambda requires only 
the holin and endolysin genes, but not the Rz and Rz1 genes, of the lysis 
cassette. Defects in Rz or Rz1 block lysis only in the presence of high 
concentrations of divalent cations. The lambda Rz and Rz1 lysis genes are 
remarkable in that Rz1, encoding an outer membrane lipoprotein, is completely 
embedded in the +1 register within Rz, which itself encodes an integral inner 
membrane protein. While Rz and Rz1 equivalents have been identified in T7 and 
P2, most phages, including such well-studied classic phages as T4, P1, T1, Mu 
and SP6, lack annotated Rz/Rz1 equivalents. Here we report that a search 
strategy based primarily on gene arrangement and membrane localization signals 
rather than sequence similarity has revealed that Rz/Rz1 equivalents are nearly 
ubiquitous among phages of Gram-negative hosts, with 120 of 137 phages 
possessing genes that fit the search criteria. In the case of T4, a deletion of 
a non-overlapping gene pair pseT.2 and pseT.3 identified as Rz/Rz1 equivalents 
resulted in the same divalent cation-dependent lysis phenotype. Remarkably, in 
T1 and six other phages, Rz/Rz1 pairs were not found but a single gene encoding 
an outer membrane lipoprotein with a C-terminal transmembrane domain capable of 
integration into the inner membrane was identified. These proteins were named 
"spanins," since their protein products are predicted to span the periplasm 
providing a physical connection between the inner and outer membranes. The T1 
spanin gene was shown to complement the lambda Rz-Rz1- lysis defect, indicating 
that spanins function as Rz/Rz1 equivalents. The widespread presence of Rz/Rz1 
or their spanin equivalents in phages of Gram-negative hosts suggests a strong 
selective advantage and that their role in the ecology of these phages is 
greater than that inferred from the mild laboratory phenotype.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2007.08.045
PMID: 17900620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
