---
pmid: '16433694'
title: Molecular investigation and long-term clinical progress in Greek Cypriot families
  with recessive distal renal tubular acidosis and sensorineural deafness due to mutations
  in the ATP6V1B1 gene.
authors:
- Feldman M
- Prikis M
- Athanasiou Y
- Elia A
- Pierides A
- Deltas CC
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2006.00559.x
---

# Molecular investigation and long-term clinical progress in Greek Cypriot families with recessive distal renal tubular acidosis and sensorineural deafness due to mutations in the ATP6V1B1 gene.
**Authors:** Feldman M, Prikis M, Athanasiou Y, Elia A, Pierides A, Deltas CC
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1399-0004.2006.00559.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1399-0004.2006.00559.x)

## Abstract

1. Clin Genet. 2006 Feb;69(2):135-44. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2006.00559.x.

Molecular investigation and long-term clinical progress in Greek Cypriot 
families with recessive distal renal tubular acidosis and sensorineural deafness 
due to mutations in the ATP6V1B1 gene.

Feldman M(1), Prikis M, Athanasiou Y, Elia A, Pierides A, Deltas CC.

Author information:
(1)The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus.

The spectrum of distal renal tubular acidosis (dRTA) includes a genetically 
heterogeneous group of inherited conditions of both autosomal-dominant and 
recessive mode of inheritance. The basic defect is linked to the renal part of 
acid-base homeostasis, which is partly achieved by the regulated luminal 
secretion of H+ at the apical surface of the alpha-intercalated cells of renal 
collecting ducts. This is coupled to bicarbonate reabsorption with chloride 
counter transport across the basolateral membranes. Here, we describe the 
molecular findings of the first two Greek Cypriot families with recessive dRTA 
and the long-term clinical findings in four of five affected members. DNA 
linkage analysis with four polymorphic markers flanking the ATP6V1B1 gene on 
chromosome 2 gave evidence for positive linkage; direct DNA analysis by 
automated DNA sequencing revealed that patients in one family were homozygous 
for mutation 229+1G>T (IVS7+1G>T) and that patients in the second family were 
compound heterozygous for 229+1G>T and R157C. The mutations were found on four 
different haplotypes. Both the mutations were previously reported in patients of 
Turkish origin. Three known polymorphic variants were also identified. The five 
patients demonstrated the whole clinical spectrum of the disease including death 
in infancy, failure to thrive, rickets, nephrocalcinosis, nephrolithiasis, and 
episodes of hypokalemic paralysis. Some of the family members are now in their 
mid 30s and late 20s, and nephrolithiasis with recurrent renal colics is their 
main problem. Renal function has remained normal. In conclusion, early diagnosis 
in infancy and prompt treatment with alkali and potassium supplements is of 
great benefit to the patient with dRTA and ensures normal growth. The 
identification of responsible mutations facilitates antenatal or postnatal 
diagnosis in concerned families and improves the prognosis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2006.00559.x
PMID: 16433694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
