---
pmid: '29344832'
title: Mitogen activated protein kinase 6 and MAP kinase phosphatase 1 are involved
  in the response of Arabidopsis roots to L-glutamate.
authors:
- López-Bucio JS
- Raya-González J
- Ravelo-Ortega G
- Ruiz-Herrera LF
- Ramos-Vega M
- León P
- López-Bucio J
- Guevara-García ÁA
journal: Plant Mol Biol
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s11103-018-0699-8
---

# Mitogen activated protein kinase 6 and MAP kinase phosphatase 1 are involved in the response of Arabidopsis roots to L-glutamate.
**Authors:** López-Bucio JS, Raya-González J, Ravelo-Ortega G, Ruiz-Herrera LF, Ramos-Vega M, León P, López-Bucio J, Guevara-García ÁA
**Journal:** Plant Mol Biol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11103-018-0699-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11103-018-0699-8)

## Abstract

1. Plant Mol Biol. 2018 Mar;96(4-5):339-351. doi: 10.1007/s11103-018-0699-8. Epub
 2018 Jan 17.

Mitogen activated protein kinase 6 and MAP kinase phosphatase 1 are involved in 
the response of Arabidopsis roots to L-glutamate.

López-Bucio JS(1), Raya-González J(2), Ravelo-Ortega G(2), Ruiz-Herrera LF(2), 
Ramos-Vega M(3), León P(3), López-Bucio J(4), Guevara-García ÁA(5).

Author information:
(1)CONACYT-Instituto de Investigaciones Químico-Biológicas, Universidad 
Michoacana de San Nicolás de Hidalgo, Edificio B3, Ciudad Universitaria, C. P. 
58030, Morelia, Michoacán, Mexico.
(2)Instituto de Investigaciones Químico-Biológicas, Universidad Michoacana de 
San Nicolás de Hidalgo, Edificio B3, Ciudad Universitaria, C. P. 58030, Morelia, 
Michoacán, Mexico.
(3)Instituto de Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Apartado 
Postal 510-3, 62250, Cuernavaca, Morelos, Mexico.
(4)Instituto de Investigaciones Químico-Biológicas, Universidad Michoacana de 
San Nicolás de Hidalgo, Edificio B3, Ciudad Universitaria, C. P. 58030, Morelia, 
Michoacán, Mexico. jbucio@umich.mx.
(5)Instituto de Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Apartado 
Postal 510-3, 62250, Cuernavaca, Morelos, Mexico. aguevara@ibt.unam.mx.

The function and components of L-glutamate signaling pathways in plants have 
just begun to be elucidated. Here, using a combination of genetic and 
biochemical strategies, we demonstrated that a MAPK module is involved in the 
control of root developmental responses to this amino acid. Root system 
architecture plays an essential role in plant adaptation to biotic and abiotic 
factors via adjusting signal transduction and gene expression. L-Glutamate 
(L-Glu), an amino acid with neurotransmitter functions in animals, inhibits root 
growth, but the underlying genetic mechanisms are poorly understood. Through a 
combination of genetic analysis, in-gel kinase assays, detailed cell elongation 
and division measurements and confocal analysis of expression of auxin, 
quiescent center and stem cell niche related genes, the critical roles of L-Glu 
in primary root growth acting through the mitogen-activated protein kinase 6 
(MPK6) and the dual specificity serine-threonine-tyrosine phosphatase MKP1 could 
be revealed. In-gel phosphorylation assays revealed a rapid and dose-dependent 
induction of MPK6 and MPK3 activities in wild-type Arabidopsis seedlings in 
response to L-Glu. Mutations in MPK6 or MKP1 reduced or increased root cell 
division and elongation in response to L-Glu, possibly modulating auxin 
transport and/or response, but in a PLETHORA1 and 2 independent manner. Our data 
highlight MPK6 and MKP1 as components of an L-Glu pathway linking the auxin 
response, and cell division for primary root growth.

DOI: 10.1007/s11103-018-0699-8
PMID: 29344832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
