---
pmid: '9512512'
title: Sox1 directly regulates the gamma-crystallin genes and is essential for lens
  development in mice.
authors:
- Nishiguchi S
- Wood H
- Kondoh H
- Lovell-Badge R
- Episkopou V
journal: Genes Dev
year: '1998'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC316632
doi: 10.1101/gad.12.6.776
---

# Sox1 directly regulates the gamma-crystallin genes and is essential for lens development in mice.
**Authors:** Nishiguchi S, Wood H, Kondoh H, Lovell-Badge R, Episkopou V
**Journal:** Genes Dev (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.12.6.776](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.12.6.776)
**PMC:** [PMC316632](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC316632/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 1998 Mar 15;12(6):776-81. doi: 10.1101/gad.12.6.776.

Sox1 directly regulates the gamma-crystallin genes and is essential for lens
development in mice.

Nishiguchi S(1), Wood H, Kondoh H, Lovell-Badge R, Episkopou V.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Embryology, Medical Research Council (MRC) Clinical Sciences
Centre, Hammersmith Hospital, London W12 0NN, UK.

gamma-Crystallins are major structural components of the lens fiber cells in
amphibians and mammals. Many dominant inherited cataracts in humans and mice
have been shown to map within the gamma-crystallin gene cluster. Several
transcription factors, including PAX6 and SOX proteins, have been suggested as
candidates for crystallin gene regulation. Here we show that the targeted
deletion of Sox1 in mice causes microphthalmia and cataract. Mutant lens fiber
cells fail to elongate, probably as a result of an almost complete absence of
gamma-crystallins. It appears that the direct interaction of the SOX1 protein
with a promoter element conserved in all gamma-crystallin genes is responsible
for their expression.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.12.6.776
PMCID: PMC316632
PMID: 9512512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

γ -Crystallins are major structural components of the lens fiber cells in amphibians and mammals. Many dominant inherited cataracts in humans and mice have been shown to map within the γ -crystallin gene cluster. Several transcription factors, including PAX6 and SOX proteins, have been suggested as candidates for crystallin gene regulation. Here we show that the targeted deletion of Sox1 in mice causes microphthalmia and cataract. Mutant lens fiber cells fail to elongate, probably as a result of an almost complete absence of γ -crystallins. It appears that the direct interaction of the SOX1 protein with a promoter element conserved in all γ -crystallin genes is responsible for their expression.

Results and Discussion

We used targeted mutagenesis in embryonic stem (ES) cells to delete the major part of the Sox1 gene that encodes for the HMG box and the entire carboxy-terminal domain (Fig. 1 ). Mice heterozygous for the Sox1 deletion did not exhibit any obvious abnormalities and were fertile. Mice homozygous for the mutation were born with the expected Mendelian frequency in both an inbred 129/Sv and hybrid (mainly 129/Sv × MF1) background, indicating that Sox1 is not essential for embryonic life. However, homozygous mice are microphthalmic, suffer from spontaneous seizures, and show high mortality in both genetic backgrounds. The surviving homozygotes of both sexes rarely mate and are unfit to care for their offspring.

Consistent with the expression pattern of Sox1 during eye development, histological analysis of Sox1 mutant eyes at different stages revealed abnormal lens development (Fig. 2 ). Normally, the posterior cells of the lens vesicle, those that are closer to the retina, stop dividing, elongate throughout most of the diameter of the lens, and fill the cavity of the lens vesicle (Fig. 2 A,C,E). In the mutant lens, induction and fiber cell differentiation occur normally but the fiber cells fail to elongate all the way toward the anterior epithelial wall, leaving a cavity within the lens vesicle (Fig. 2 B,D,F). The size of the mutant lens is reduced by ∼20%; at 15.5 days postcoitum (dpc) the diameter of the lens was 550 ± 20 μm (mean ± s.d. ) in the wild-type ( n = 4) and 430 ± 50 μm in the mutant ( n = 4). This correlates with a similar reduction of cell number in the mutant lens. As Sox1, Sox2, and Sox3 are mainly expressed in the dividing neural epithelium in the CNS ( Collignon et al. 1996 ), it is possible that they may be involved in mitotic activity. To explain the reduction in size and cell number of the mutant lens we performed BrdU incorporation assays at 12.5 and 15.5 dpc (Fig. 2 G–K). We did not find any significant difference in the mitotic activity of cells in the anterior germinal epithelium between wild-type and mutant lens; at 15.5 dpc the proliferative index, which is the ratio of proliferating cells (BrdU-positive nuclei) to the total number, was the same in wild-type (0.222 ± 0.023 in three embryos) and mutant (0.223 ± 0.016 in three embryos) anterior germinal epithelium. Surprisingly, we observed some (1%–2%) dividing fiber cells, as indicated by significant BrdU incorporation, in the 15.5 dpc mutant lens (Fig. 2 J,K). We conclude that the absence of Sox1 is not important for proliferation in the anterior germinal epithelium. Although Sox1 may play a role in survival of lens cells, we cannot exclude the possibility that the difference in size and cell number between mutant and wild-type lens is a secondary event (cell death or degeneration). Mice heterozygous for the Sox1 deletion do not show any lens defects or late onset cataracts.

The time when the lens defect first becomes apparent correlates with the commencement of crystallin gene expression seen in normal lens ∼12.5 dpc ( Goring et al. 1992 ). This coincides with the up-regulation of Sox1 expression and concomitant down-regulation of Sox2 (Fig. 3 ). We examined the expression of most crystallin genes in the eyes of the Sox1 mutant embryos using an RT–PCR assay (Fig. 4 ). We did not find any significant difference in expression of both α -class genes ( αA and αB ) nor of the two genes from the β -class we have examined. However, this is not the case for the γ -crystallin gene cluster. This consists of six very homologous genes: γA, γB, γC, γD, γE, and γF. The time of activation of the cluster is ∼12.5 dpc in normal lenses ( Goring et al. 1992 ) although we found that γC is activated a day earlier (data not shown) and γD later than 12.5 dpc. At 12.5 dpc, we found that γA and γB gene transcripts are undetectable while γF is present at a low level in the mutant lens. However, by 15.5 dpc, all the γ -crystallin genes are down-regulated, including γC and γE, that were unaffected at 12.5 dpc. At this stage, this down-regulation is not a secondary event due to the small size of the lens or lens–cell degeneration as the expression of the other lens-specific crystallin classes α - and β - in the mutant eye is unaffected. Within the limits for quantitation of the RT–PCR assay, we do not see a reduction in γ -crystallin gene expression in heterozygous mice. This is in contrast with other SOX mutations that show haploid insufficiency, such as in human SOX9, where heterozygotes invariably show campomelic dysplasia ( Foster et al. 1994 ).

In vitro experiments using chicken lens explants showed that SOX2 protein binding is required for lens-specific activity of the chicken δ1 -crystallin enhancer as well as the mouse γF -crystallin promoter ( Kamachi et al. 1995 ). However, Sox1 expression persists in the developing mouse lens long after the Sox2 gene is silent (Fig. 3 ). Furthermore, there is evidence that mouse SOX1 activates the γF -crystallin promoter better than SOX2 in chicken lens explants (Y. Kamachi and H. Kondoh, pers. comm.). SOX2 binds to an element that is essential for activation of the γF -crystallin promoter in chicken lens explants ( Kamachi et al. 1995 ). This element is conserved in all γ -crystallin promoters ( Kamachi et al. 1995 ) and contains a consensus SOX binding site ( Lok et al. 1989 ; Pevny and Lovell-Badge 1997 ) (Fig. 5 A). We therefore performed EMSAs using recombinant SOX1 protein to show that SOX1 binds specifically to this site (Fig. 5 B). Incubation of SOX1 with the mouse γA -crystallin promoter element produced a protein–DNA complex. This binding is sequence-specific as it was competed by an excess of wild-type γA -crystallin oligonucleotide but not by a mutated one ( γA M), in which the consensus SOX binding site sequence is disrupted (Fig. 5 B). In addition, the specific signal is no longer detected in the EMSA when anti-SOX1 antiserum abFB43 or ab791 is added. We conclude from both our in vitro and in vivo data that γ -crystallin genes are direct targets for SOX1.

Our data show that SOX1 is essential for activation of some γ -crystallin genes and for maintaining expression of all of them. The two genes, γC and γE, that are expressed at 12.5 dpc in the Sox1 mutant lens may have been activated by SOX2. This is possible as SOX1 and SOX2 proteins have similar properties in vitro ( Kamachi et al. 1995 ; Collignon et al. 1996 ). In addition, we find that SOX2 protein is present in the lens-pit nuclei at 10.5 dpc and in some nuclei of the lens fiber cells at 12.5 dpc (Fig. 3 ). However, by 15.5 dpc, we cannot detect SOX2 protein in the nuclei of the fiber cells (Fig. 3 ). Therefore, in the Sox1 mutant lens, all genes within the entire γ -crystallin gene cluster are turned off coincident with the loss of SOX2 protein within lens fiber nuclei. The notion that SOX1 and SOX2, and presumably SOX3 may be functionally redundant with respect to each other is also supported by the finding that they can bind to the same DNA sequences ( Pevny and Lovell-Badge 1997 ), and it is consistent with our observation that loss of SOX1 does not have any obvious consequences during early development of the CNS. Another example of functional redundancy within the SOX gene family is provided by the Sox4 gene disruption in mice. This causes major abnormalities only in cardiac and pro-B-lymphocyte development although the gene is expressed in many other sites in the embryo ( Schilham et al. 1996 ).

The delay of fiber cell elongation in the mutant coincides with the down-regulation of γ -crystallin genes. The γ -crystallin deficit is probably responsible for the incomplete elongation of the lens fibers. This could be explained by the theory that fiber cell elongation may be controlled osmotically by the protein concentration inside the cell ( Parmelee and Beebe 1988 ). However, targeted disruption of the mouse αA -crystallin gene, which is also a major crystallin, does not affect fiber elongation and mice have normal but smaller lens ( Brady et al. 1997 ). In this case, there may be an up-regulation of αB -crystallin gene expression that partially compensates for the loss of α A. Alternatively, crystallins may have additional nonrefractory functions, like architectural and intracellular functions important for the differentiation of the lens fiber cells ( Piatigorsky and Wistow 1989 ; Brady et al. 1997 ). This theory has been supported by the discovery that α -crystallin functions as a chaperone in vitro ( Horwitz 1992 ). Another example of the involvement of γ -crystallins in developmental functions is the Elo mouse ( Cartier et al. 1992 ), in which only the γE -crystallin gene is mutated. The phenotype has much in common with the lens abnormality in the Sox1 mutant mice as it also affects fiber cell elongation and causes microphthalmia. Although the γE mutation is dominant, it is possible that it acts in a dominant-negative fashion. In addition, the effects of SOX1 on other genes important for differentiation, architecture, and survival of the lens fiber cells might contribute to the overall phenotype of the lens.

Binding of SOX proteins to the target DNA induces dramatic bends; therefore, it has been suggested that they function as architectural factors. Nevertheless, SOX proteins share several characteristics with classical transcription factors and putative transactivation domains have been mapped for several of them, including SOX1 (see Pevny and Lovell-Badge 1997 and references therein). Further analysis of the Sox1 mutant mice will allow us to understand the mechanism of its action and learn more about the functional interchangeability with other SOX proteins.

Finally, it is important to emphasize that the Sox1 mutant mice could be a useful tool in studying lens development and in investigating the role of γ -crystallins in lens development and in cataracts. The γ -crystallin gene cluster has been shown to be linked to the Coppock like cataract in humans ( Lubsen et al. 1987 ) and the Cat-2 t , No, and Tol mutations in mice ( Everett et al. 1994 ). We have cloned the human SOX1 gene and mapped it to chromosome 13q34 ( Malas et al. 1997 ); this locus should now be examined for linkage with similar abnormalities in humans.
