---
pmid: '23123091'
title: Involvement of PTEN in TPA-mediated p53-activation in mouse skin epidermal
  JB6 cells.
authors:
- Robbins D
- Ponville J
- Morris K
- Zhao Y
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.10.036
---

# Involvement of PTEN in TPA-mediated p53-activation in mouse skin epidermal JB6 cells.
**Authors:** Robbins D, Ponville J, Morris K, Zhao Y
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2012.10.036](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2012.10.036)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2012 Nov 30;586(23):4108-13. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.10.036.
Epub  2012 Oct 30.

Involvement of PTEN in TPA-mediated p53-activation in mouse skin epidermal JB6 
cells.

Robbins D(1), Ponville J, Morris K, Zhao Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology & Neuroscience, Louisiana State 
University Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, LA 71103, USA.

Our recent studies suggest a unique role of p53 during the early stage of cancer 
development. However, how p53 activation is regulated during TPA treatment 
remains elusive. We used murine skin epidermal JB6 promotion-sensitive (P+) and 
promotion resistant (P-) cells to observe differential expression of PTEN during 
TPA-induced p53 activation. Total PTEN expression was decreased in only P+ 
cells. Nuclear expression of PTEN increased and complex formation between PTEN 
and p53 occurred in P+ cells treated with TPA. Knocking down PTEN expression via 
siRNA inhibited TPA-induced Bax expression. Similar effects were seen with the 
p53 inhibitor, pifithrin-alpha. Cells that were transfected with siRNA to PTEN 
exhibited enhanced tumorigenicity. Our findings suggest PTEN mediates 
TPA-induced p53 activation.

Copyright © 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.10.036
PMID: 23123091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
