---
pmid: '17492394'
title: Mutations in the WFS1 gene are a frequent cause of autosomal dominant nonsyndromic
  low-frequency hearing loss in Japanese.
authors:
- Fukuoka H
- Kanda Y
- Ohta S
- Usami SI
journal: J Hum Genet
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s10038-007-0144-3
---

# Mutations in the WFS1 gene are a frequent cause of autosomal dominant nonsyndromic low-frequency hearing loss in Japanese.
**Authors:** Fukuoka H, Kanda Y, Ohta S, Usami SI
**Journal:** J Hum Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10038-007-0144-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10038-007-0144-3)

## Abstract

1. J Hum Genet. 2007;52(6):510-515. doi: 10.1007/s10038-007-0144-3. Epub 2007 May
 11.

Mutations in the WFS1 gene are a frequent cause of autosomal dominant 
nonsyndromic low-frequency hearing loss in Japanese.

Fukuoka H(1), Kanda Y(2), Ohta S(3), Usami SI(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Shinshu University School of Medicine, 
3-1-1 Asahi, Matsumoto, 390-8621, Japan.
(2)Kanda ENT Clinic, 4-25 Wakakusa-cho, Nagasaki, 852-8023, Japan.
(3)Aomori Prefectural Hospital, 2-1-1 Higashi-Tsukurimichi, Aomori, 030-8553, 
Japan.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Shinshu University School of Medicine, 
3-1-1 Asahi, Matsumoto, 390-8621, Japan. usami@hsp.md.shinshu-u.ac.jp.

Mutations in WFS1 are reported to be responsible for two conditions with 
distinct phenotypes; DFNA6/14/38 and autosomal recessive Wolfram syndrome. They 
differ in their associated symptoms and inheritance mode, and although their 
most common clinical symptom is hearing loss, it is of different types. While 
DNFA6/14/38 is characterized by low frequency sensorineural hearing loss 
(LFSNHL), in contrast, Wolfram syndrome is associated with various hearing 
severities ranging from normal to profound hearing loss that is dissimilar to 
LFSNHL (Pennings et al. 2002). To confirm whether within non-syndromic hearing 
loss patients WFS1 mutations are found restrictively in patients with LFSNHL and 
to summarize the mutation spectrum of WFS1 found in Japanese, we screened 206 
Japanese autosomal dominant and 64 autosomal recessive (sporadic) non-syndromic 
hearing loss probands with various severities of hearing loss. We found three 
independent autosomal dominant families associated with two different WFS1 
mutations, A716T and E864K, previously detected in families with European 
ancestry. Identification of the same mutations in independent families with 
different racial backgrounds suggests that both sites are likely to be 
mutational hot spots. All three families with WFS1 mutations in this study 
showed a similar phenotype, LFSNHL, as in previous reports. In this study, 
one-third (three out of nine) autosomal dominant LFSNHL families had mutations 
in the WFS1 gene, indicating that in non-syndromic hearing loss WFS1 is 
restrictively and commonly found within autosomal dominant LFSNHL families.

DOI: 10.1007/s10038-007-0144-3
PMID: 17492394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
