---
pmid: '19427212'
title: Spatial control of cytokinesis by Cdr2 kinase and Mid1/anillin nuclear export.
authors:
- Almonacid M
- Moseley JB
- Janvore J
- Mayeux A
- Fraisier V
- Nurse P
- Paoletti A
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2009.04.024
---

# Spatial control of cytokinesis by Cdr2 kinase and Mid1/anillin nuclear export.
**Authors:** Almonacid M, Moseley JB, Janvore J, Mayeux A, Fraisier V, Nurse P, Paoletti A
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cub.2009.04.024](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2009.04.024)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2009 Jun 9;19(11):961-6. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2009.04.024. Epub 2009 
May 7.

Spatial control of cytokinesis by Cdr2 kinase and Mid1/anillin nuclear export.

Almonacid M(1), Moseley JB, Janvore J, Mayeux A, Fraisier V, Nurse P, Paoletti 
A.

Author information:
(1)Institut Curie, Centre de Recherche, F-75248 Paris, France.

Maintaining genome integrity and cellular function requires proper positioning 
of the cell division plane. In most eukaryotes, cytokinesis relies on a 
contractile actomyosin ring positioned by intrinsic spatial signals that are 
poorly defined at the molecular level. Fission yeast cells assemble a medial 
contractile ring in response to positive spatial cues from the nucleus at the 
cell center and negative spatial cues from the cell tips. These signals control 
the localization of the anillin-like protein Mid1, which defines the position of 
the division plane at the medial cortex, where it recruits contractile-ring 
components at mitosis onset. Here we show that Cdr2 kinase anchors Mid1 at the 
medial cortex during interphase through association with the Mid1 N terminus. 
This association underlies the negative regulation of Mid1 distribution by cell 
tips. We also demonstrate that the positive signaling from the nucleus is based 
on Mid1 nuclear export, which links division-plane position to nuclear position 
during early mitosis. After nuclear displacement, Mid1 nuclear export is 
dominant over Cdr2-dependent positioning of Mid1. We conclude that Cdr2- and 
nuclear export-dependent positioning of Mid1 constitute two overlapping 
mechanisms that relay cell polarity and nuclear positional information to ensure 
proper division-plane specification.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2009.04.024
PMID: 19427212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
