---
pmid: '7663524'
title: 'Primary adhalinopathy: a common cause of autosomal recessive muscular dystrophy
  of variable severity.'
authors:
- Piccolo F
- Roberds SL
- Jeanpierre M
- Leturcq F
- Azibi K
- Beldjord C
- Carrié A
- Récan D
- Chaouch M
- Reghis A
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ng0695-243
---

# Primary adhalinopathy: a common cause of autosomal recessive muscular dystrophy of variable severity.
**Authors:** Piccolo F, Roberds SL, Jeanpierre M, Leturcq F, Azibi K, Beldjord C, Carrié A, Récan D, Chaouch M, Reghis A
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng0695-243](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng0695-243)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 1995 Jun;10(2):243-5. doi: 10.1038/ng0695-243.

Primary adhalinopathy: a common cause of autosomal recessive muscular dystrophy 
of variable severity.

Piccolo F, Roberds SL, Jeanpierre M, Leturcq F, Azibi K, Beldjord C, Carrié A, 
Récan D, Chaouch M, Reghis A, et al.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet 1995 Sep 11(1):104.

Marked deficiency of muscle adhalin, a 50 kDa sarcolemmal dystrophin-associated 
glycoprotein, has been reported in severe childhood autosomal recessive muscular 
dystrophy (SCARMD). This is a Duchenne-like disease affecting both males and 
females first described in Tunisian families. Adhalin deficiency has been found 
in SCARMD patients from North Africa Europe, Brazil, Japan and North America 
(SLR & KPC, unpublished data). The disease was initially linked to an 
unidentified gene on chromosome 13 in families from North Africa, and to the 
adhalin gene itself on chromosome 17q in one French family in which missense 
mutations were identified. Thus there are two kinds of myopathies with adhalin 
deficiency: one with a primary defect of adhalin (primary adhalinopathies), and 
one in which absence of adhalin is secondary to a separate gene defect on 
chromosome 13. We have examined the importance of primary adhalinopathies among 
myopathies with adhalin deficiency, and describe several additional mutations 
(null and missense) in the adhalin gene in 10 new families from Europe and North 
Africa. Disease severity varies in age of onset and rate of progression, and 
patients with null mutations are the most severely affected.

DOI: 10.1038/ng0695-243
PMID: 7663524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
