---
pmid: '19822757'
title: Identification of a physiological E2 module for the human anaphase-promoting
  complex.
authors:
- Williamson A
- Wickliffe KE
- Mellone BG
- Song L
- Karpen GH
- Rape M
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2775311
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0907887106
---

# Identification of a physiological E2 module for the human anaphase-promoting complex.
**Authors:** Williamson A, Wickliffe KE, Mellone BG, Song L, Karpen GH, Rape M
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0907887106](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0907887106)
**PMC:** [PMC2775311](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2775311/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Oct 27;106(43):18213-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0907887106. Epub 2009 Oct 12.

Identification of a physiological E2 module for the human anaphase-promoting 
complex.

Williamson A(1), Wickliffe KE, Mellone BG, Song L, Karpen GH, Rape M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
CA 94720, USA.

Ubiquitination by the anaphase-promoting complex (APC/C) is essential for 
proliferation in all eukaryotes. The human APC/C promotes the degradation of 
mitotic regulators by assembling K11-linked ubiquitin chains, the formation of 
which is initiated by its E2 UbcH10. Here, we identify the conserved Ube2S as a 
K11-specific chain elongating E2 for human and Drosophila APC/C. Ube2S depends 
on the cell cycle-dependent association with the APC/C activators Cdc20 and Cdh1 
for its activity. While depletion of Ube2S already inhibits APC/C in cells, the 
loss of the complete UbcH10/Ube2S-module leads to dramatic stabilization of 
APC/C substrates, severe spindle defects, and a strong mitotic delay. Ube2S and 
UbcH10 are tightly co-regulated in the cell cycle by APC/C-dependent 
degradation. We conclude that UbcH10 and Ube2S constitute a physiological 
E2-module for APC/C, the activity of which is required for spindle assembly and 
cell division.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0907887106
PMCID: PMC2775311
PMID: 19822757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Ubiquitination by the anaphase-promoting complex (APC/C) is essential for proliferation in all eukaryotes. The human APC/C promotes the degradation of mitotic regulators by assembling K11-linked ubiquitin chains, the formation of which is initiated by its E2 UbcH10. Here, we identify the conserved Ube2S as a K11-specific chain elongating E2 for human and Drosophila APC/C. Ube2S depends on the cell cycle-dependent association with the APC/C activators Cdc20 and Cdh1 for its activity. While depletion of Ube2S already inhibits APC/C in cells, the loss of the complete UbcH10/Ube2S-module leads to dramatic stabilization of APC/C substrates, severe spindle defects, and a strong mitotic delay. Ube2S and UbcH10 are tightly co-regulated in the cell cycle by APC/C-dependent degradation. We conclude that UbcH10 and Ube2S constitute a physiological E2-module for APC/C, the activity of which is required for spindle assembly and cell division.

Discussion

The APC/C is essential for cell cycle progression in all eukaryotes ( 5 ). The human APC/C modifies substrates with K11-linked ubiquitin chains to trigger their proteasomal degradation ( 11 ). The formation of K11-linked chains is initiated by its E2 UbcH10, which recognizes TEK boxes in substrates and ubiquitin ( 11 ). Here, we identify the conserved Ube2S as a K11-specific chain elongating E2 for human and Drosophila APC/C. Together, UbcH10 and Ube2S promote the efficient degradation of APC/C substrates, spindle assembly, and progression through mitosis. We propose that UbcH10 and Ube2S constitute the physiological E2 module of human APC/C during mitosis.

The cooperation between Ube2S and UbcH10 is reminiscent of yeast APC/C, which uses a chain-initiating E2, Ubc4, and a chain-elongating E2, Ubc1 ( 34 ). However, Ubc4 and Ubc1 function sequentially to assemble K48-linked ubiquitin chains, whereas human UbcH10 and Ube2S most likely bind APC/C at the same time. This hypothesis is supported by competition studies, in which a large excess of UbcH10 does not block the binding of Ube2S to Cdh1 or APC/C, and by ubiquitination assays, in which Ube2S and UbcH10 promote the APC/C-dependent ubiquitination of each other. By binding to different sites on the APC/C, UbcH10 and Ube2S can truly cooperate in the assembly of K11-linked ubiquitin chains, allowing them to promote the degradation of the extended family of human APC/C substrates.

UbcH10 binds the RING subunit Apc11 and the cullin subunit Apc2 ( 25 , 34 ). Consistent with a different mode of APC/C interaction, Ube2S directly binds the APC/C activators Cdc20 and Cdh1. The deletion of C-terminal amino acids of Ube2S ablates its binding to Cdh1 and abrogates its activity toward APC/C, which implies that the association between Ube2S and Cdh1 is required for Ube2S activity. The interaction between Ube2S and Cdc20/Cdh1 is cell-cycle regulated and occurs only at times when Cdc20 and Cdh1 activate APC/C. We propose that recruitment of Ube2S in part explains the capability of Cdc20 and Cdh1 to increase the catalytic activity of the APC/C.

The strongest effects on cell cycle progression are observed, if Ube2S and UbcH10 are co-depleted from cells. This indicates that APC/C ubiquitinates at least some substrates, if one E2 is present at low concentrations. It is possible that other E2s partially compensate for loss of either UbcH10 or Ube2S. Such E2s are unlikely to include UBE2D/UbcH5 or UBE2K/E2–25K, which neither assemble specific K11-linked chains ( 11 ), nor target APC/C substrates for degradation in extracts ( 11 ), nor show genetic interactions with UbcH10. We believe it is more likely that even low levels of UbcH10 support initiation of short chains, which could then be extended by Ube2S. In support of this notion, mutation of UbcH10 in flies or its efficient depletion in several human cell lines lead to cyclin B stabilization and a delay in mitosis ( 21 , 23 , 26 , 35 – 37 ), while incomplete depletion of UbcH10 does not produce these phenotypes ( 38 ).

Consistent with their close cooperation in modifying APC/C substrates, UbcH10 and Ube2S are tightly co-regulated in cells. Both E2s are degraded during G1, which is promoted by APC/C-dependent ubiquitination. The APC/C turns against its own E2s only after most, if not all, APC/C substrates have been degraded. As co-depletion of UbcH10 and Ube2S inactivates APC/C during mitosis, it can be assumed that the degradation of both E2s during G1 also shuts off most of APC/C, as previously proposed ( 21 ).

The identification of Ube2S as a K11-specific E2 for the APC/C underscores the importance of K11-linked ubiquitin chains for cell cycle control ( 11 ). The phenotypes observed after co-depletion of Ube2S and UbcH10 are reminiscent of the strong mitotic delay caused by injection of a K11-deficient ubiquitin mutant into Xenopus embryos ( 11 ). A proteomic analysis revealed that p97/CDC48, whose depletion causes mitotic arrest in HeLa cells ( 39 ), efficiently binds K11-linked ubiquitin chains ( 40 ). K11-linked ubiquitin chains also accumulate in diseases with impaired proteasome activity, such as Huntington's or Alzheimer's ( 41 ), and they are abundant in normally dividing cells ( 12 ). Together, these findings point to K11-linked chains as critical, if not essential, regulators of proteasomal degradation and cell cycle progression in higher eukaryotes.

In conclusion, we have identified the highly conserved Ube2S as a chain-elongating E2 of human and Drosophila APC/C. UbcH10 and Ube2S likely constitute the physiological E2 module for the APC/C during mitosis, in which UbcH10 initiates and Ube2S elongates K11-linked ubiquitin chains. The inhibition of mitotic APC/C is an attractive goal for chemotherapy, which, as shown here, could be accomplished by small molecules targeting both UbcH10 and Ube2S.

Materials and Methods

Detailed materials and methods can be found in the SI Methods . Ube2S was purified as an N-terminal MBP fusion protein, and the MBP-tagged was cleaved off by TEV protease before Ube2S was used in assays. UbcH10 and UbcH5c were purified from E. coli , while E1 and His Cdh1 were purified from Sf9 cells. In vitro ubiquitinations were performed as described, with APC/C being obtained from human HeLa S3 cells ( 11 ). Immunofluorescence analysis was performed in HeLa cells as described ( 21 ). siRNAs were obtained from Dharmacon (for sequences see SI Methods ). Ube2S-binding partners were identified by MudPIT-mass spectrometry performed the UCB Proteomics/Mass Spectrometry Laboratory (P/MSL).
