---
pmid: '15518571'
title: Human ribosomal protein S3 interacts with DNA base excision repair proteins
  hAPE/Ref-1 and hOGG1.
authors:
- Hegde V
- Wang M
- Deutsch WA
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi049234b
---

# Human ribosomal protein S3 interacts with DNA base excision repair proteins hAPE/Ref-1 and hOGG1.
**Authors:** Hegde V, Wang M, Deutsch WA
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi049234b](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi049234b)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2004 Nov 9;43(44):14211-7. doi: 10.1021/bi049234b.

Human ribosomal protein S3 interacts with DNA base excision repair proteins 
hAPE/Ref-1 and hOGG1.

Hegde V(1), Wang M, Deutsch WA.

Author information:
(1)Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Louisiana State University, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 70808, USA.

The human ribosomal protein S3 (hS3) possesses associated activities that 
suggest alternative roles beyond its participation in protein translation. For 
example, it is capable of cleaving apurinic/apyrimidinic (AP) DNA via a 
beta-elimination reaction, an activity that is missing in partially purified 
extracts of xeroderma pigmentosum group-D fibroblasts. In a recent study, we 
showed by surface plasmon resonance (SPR) that hS3 also has a very high apparent 
binding affinity for 7,8-dihydro-8-oxoguanine (8-oxoG) and AP sites in DNA. 
Using the same SPR technology, it is shown here that hS3 positively interacts 
with the human base excision repair (BER) enzymes N-glycosylase/AP lyase OGG1 
and APE/Ref-1. Using a DNA substrate that allows for the detection of 8-oxoG 
repair, we also show that hOGG1 N-glycosylase activity becomes increasingly more 
robust in the presence of hS3. Human S3 was found to co-immunoprecipitate with 
both hOGG1 and APE/Ref-1, indicating that these proteins physically interact 
with one another. These results raise the possibility that hS3 not only 
functions as a ribosomal protein but, in addition, may influence repair 
activities at sites of DNA damage.

DOI: 10.1021/bi049234b
PMID: 15518571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
