---
pmid: '16020546'
title: Human acyl-CoA dehydrogenase-9 plays a novel role in the mitochondrial beta-oxidation
  of unsaturated fatty acids.
authors:
- Ensenauer R
- He M
- Willard JM
- Goetzman ES
- Corydon TJ
- Vandahl BB
- Mohsen AW
- Isaya G
- Vockley J
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M504460200
---

# Human acyl-CoA dehydrogenase-9 plays a novel role in the mitochondrial beta-oxidation of unsaturated fatty acids.
**Authors:** Ensenauer R, He M, Willard JM, Goetzman ES, Corydon TJ, Vandahl BB, Mohsen AW, Isaya G, Vockley J
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M504460200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M504460200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Sep 16;280(37):32309-16. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M504460200. Epub 
2005 Jul 14.

Human acyl-CoA dehydrogenase-9 plays a novel role in the mitochondrial 
beta-oxidation of unsaturated fatty acids.

Ensenauer R(1), He M, Willard JM, Goetzman ES, Corydon TJ, Vandahl BB, Mohsen 
AW, Isaya G, Vockley J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Mayo 
Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Unsaturated fatty acids play an important role in the prevention of human 
diseases such as diabetes, obesity, cancer, and neurodegeneration. However, 
their oxidation in vivo by acyl-CoA dehydrogenases (ACADs) that catalyze the 
first step of each cycle of mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation is not 
entirely understood. Recently, a novel ACAD (ACAD-9) of unknown function that is 
highly homologous to human very-long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase was identified 
by large-scale random sequencing. To characterize its enzymatic role, we have 
expressed ACAD-9 in Escherichia coli, purified it, and determined its pattern of 
substrate utilization. The N terminus of the mature form of the enzyme was 
identified by in vitro mitochondrial import studies of precursor protein. A 
37-amino acid leader peptide was cleaved sequentially by two mitochondrial 
peptidases to yield a predicted molecular mass of 65 kDa for the mature subunit. 
Submitochondrial fractionation studies found native ACAD-9 to be associated with 
the mitochondrial membrane. Gel filtration analysis indicated that, like 
very-long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase, ACAD-9 is a dimer, in contrast to the 
other known ACADs, which are tetramers. Purified mature ACAD-9 had maximal 
activity with long-chain unsaturated acyl-CoAs as substrates (C16:1-, C18:1-, 
C18:2-, C22:6-CoA). These results suggest a previously unrecognized role for 
ACAD-9 in the mitochondrial beta-oxidation of long-chain unsaturated fatty 
acids. Because of the substrate specificity and abundance of ACAD-9 in brain, we 
speculate that it may play a role in the turnover of lipid membrane unsaturated 
fatty acids that are essential for membrane integrity and structure.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M504460200
PMID: 16020546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
