---
reference_id: PMID:7639695
title: "Octopus S-crystallins with endogenous glutathione S-transferase (GST) activity: sequence comparison and evolutionary relationships with authentic GST enzymes."
authors:
- Chiou SH
- Yu CW
- Lin CW
- Pan FM
- Lu SF
- Lee HJ
- Chang GG
journal: Biochem J
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1042/bj3090793
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Octopus S-crystallins with endogenous glutathione S-transferase (GST) activity: sequence comparison and evolutionary relationships with authentic GST enzymes.
**Authors:** Chiou SH, Yu CW, Lin CW, Pan FM, Lu SF, Lee HJ, Chang GG
**Journal:** Biochem J (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1042/bj3090793](https://doi.org/10.1042/bj3090793)

## Content

1. Biochem J. 1995 Aug 1;309 ( Pt 3)(Pt 3):793-800. doi: 10.1042/bj3090793.

Octopus S-crystallins with endogenous glutathione S-transferase (GST) activity: 
sequence comparison and evolutionary relationships with authentic GST enzymes.

Chiou SH(1), Yu CW, Lin CW, Pan FM, Lu SF, Lee HJ, Chang GG.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Crystallin Research, National Taiwan University, Taipei.

S-Crystallin is a major protein present in the lenses of cephalopods (octopus 
and squid). To facilitate the cloning of this crystallin gene, cDNA was 
constructed from the poly(A)+ mRNA of octopus lenses, and amplified by PCR for 
nucleotide sequencing. Sequencing of 10 of 15 positive clones coding for this 
crystallin revealed three distinct S-crystallin isoforms with 61-64% identity in 
nucleotide sequences and 42-58% similarity in amino acid sequences when compared 
with homologous crystallins in squid lenses. These charge-isomeric crystallins 
also show between 26 and 33% amino acid sequence identity to four major classes 
of glutathione S-transferase (GST), a major detoxification enzyme present in 
most mammalian tissues. For further analysis, expression of one of the 
S-crystallin cDNAs was carried out in the bacterial expression system pQE-30, 
and the S-crystallin protein produced in Escherichia coli was purified to 
homogeneity to determine the enzymic properties. We found that the expressed 
octopus S-crystallin possessed much lower GST activity than the authentic GSTs 
from other tissues. Sequence comparison and construction of phylogenetic trees 
for S-crystallins from squid and octopus lenses and various classes of GSTs 
revealed that S-crystallins represent a multigene family which is structurally 
related to Alpha-class GSTs and probably derived from the ancestral GST by gene 
duplication and subsequent multiple mutational substitutions.

DOI: 10.1042/bj3090793
PMCID: PMC1135702
PMID: 7639695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]