---
reference_id: PMID:9001212
title: Molecular cloning of human FKBP51 and comparisons of immunophilin interactions with Hsp90 and progesterone receptor.
authors:
- Nair SC
- Rimerman RA
- Toran EJ
- Chen S
- Prapapanich V
- Butts RN
- Smith DF
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1128/MCB.17.2.594
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular cloning of human FKBP51 and comparisons of immunophilin interactions with Hsp90 and progesterone receptor.
**Authors:** Nair SC, Rimerman RA, Toran EJ, Chen S, Prapapanich V, Butts RN, Smith DF
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.17.2.594](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.17.2.594)

## Content

1. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Feb;17(2):594-603. doi: 10.1128/MCB.17.2.594.

Molecular cloning of human FKBP51 and comparisons of immunophilin interactions
with Hsp90 and progesterone receptor.

Nair SC(1), Rimerman RA, Toran EJ, Chen S, Prapapanich V, Butts RN, Smith DF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha
68198-6260, USA.

A cDNA for human FKBP51 has been cloned and sequenced, and protein products have
been expressed in both in vitro and bacterial systems. The deduced amino acid
sequence for human FKBP51 is 90% identical to sequences of recently described
murine proteins and is 55% identical to the sequence of human FKBP52. Human
FKBP51 mRNA is expressed in a wide range of tissues, and the protein has
peptidylprolyl isomerase activity that is inhibited by FK506 but not
cyclosporine. FKBP51 is the same as a previously described progesterone
receptor-associated immunophilin that, similar to FKBP52 and cyclophilin 40, is
an Hsp90-binding protein and appears in functionally mature steroid receptor
complexes along with Hsp90 and p23. Each of the three receptor-associated
immunophilins displays interactions with progesterone receptor that are more
dynamic than Hsp90-receptor interactions. Whereas FKBP52 and FKBP51 compete
about equally well for binding to Hsp90 in a purified system, FKBP51 accumulates
preferentially in progesterone receptor complexes assembled in a cell-free
system. This observation provides a precedent for differential interactions
between Hsp90-associated immunophilins and target proteins such as steroid
receptors.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.17.2.594
PMCID: PMC231784
PMID: 9001212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]