---
pmid: '12794108'
title: 'Notch-regulated ankyrin-repeat protein inhibits Notch1 signaling: multiple
  Notch1 signaling pathways involved in T cell development.'
authors:
- Yun TJ
- Bevan MJ
journal: J Immunol
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.170.12.5834
---

# Notch-regulated ankyrin-repeat protein inhibits Notch1 signaling: multiple Notch1 signaling pathways involved in T cell development.
**Authors:** Yun TJ, Bevan MJ
**Journal:** J Immunol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.4049/jimmunol.170.12.5834](https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.170.12.5834)

## Abstract

1. J Immunol. 2003 Jun 15;170(12):5834-41. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.170.12.5834.

Notch-regulated ankyrin-repeat protein inhibits Notch1 signaling: multiple 
Notch1 signaling pathways involved in T cell development.

Yun TJ(1), Bevan MJ.

Author information:
(1)IDEC Pharmaceuticals, San Diego, CA 92121, USA.

We have characterized the function of Notch-regulated ankyrin-repeat protein 
(Nrarp) in mouse cell lines and in hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). Nrarp 
overexpression is able to block Notch-induced activation of CBF-1. In AKR1010 
thymoma cells, Nrarp overexpression blocks CBF-1-dependent transcriptional 
activation of Notch-responsive genes and inhibits phenotypic changes associated 
with Notch activation. Enforced expression of Nrarp in mouse HSCs results in a 
profound block in T lineage commitment and progression through early stages of 
thymocyte maturation. In contrast, Deltex-1 overexpression in HSCs can also 
block T lineage commitment but not progression through the early double negative 
stages of thymocyte maturation. The different effects of Deltex-1 and Nrarp 
overexpression suggest that alternate Notch signaling pathways mediate T vs B 
lineage commitment and thymocyte maturation.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.170.12.5834
PMID: 12794108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
