---
pmid: '16027149'
title: Heterotrimeric G protein-independent signaling of a G protein-coupled receptor.
  Direct binding of ARNO/cytohesin-2 to the carboxyl terminus of the A2A adenosine
  receptor is necessary for sustained activation of the ERK/MAP kinase pathway.
authors:
- Gsandtner I
- Charalambous C
- Stefan E
- Ogris E
- Freissmuth M
- Zezula J
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M506515200
---

# Heterotrimeric G protein-independent signaling of a G protein-coupled receptor. Direct binding of ARNO/cytohesin-2 to the carboxyl terminus of the A2A adenosine receptor is necessary for sustained activation of the ERK/MAP kinase pathway.
**Authors:** Gsandtner I, Charalambous C, Stefan E, Ogris E, Freissmuth M, Zezula J
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M506515200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M506515200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Sep 9;280(36):31898-905. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M506515200. Epub 
2005 Jul 18.

Heterotrimeric G protein-independent signaling of a G protein-coupled receptor. 
Direct binding of ARNO/cytohesin-2 to the carboxyl terminus of the A2A adenosine 
receptor is necessary for sustained activation of the ERK/MAP kinase pathway.

Gsandtner I(1), Charalambous C, Stefan E, Ogris E, Freissmuth M, Zezula J.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, Center of Biomolecular Medicine and Pharmacology, 
Medical University of Vienna, Austria.

The A2A adenosine receptor is a prototypical G(s)-coupled receptor, but it also 
signals, e.g. to mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase, via a pathway that is 
independent of heterotrimeric G proteins. Truncation of the carboxyl terminus 
affects the strength of the signal through these alternative pathways. In a 
yeast two-hybrid interaction hunt, we screened a human brain library for 
proteins that bound to the juxtamembrane portion of the carboxyl terminus of the 
A2A receptor. This approach identified ARNO/cytohesin-2, a nucleotide exchange 
factor for the small (monomeric) G proteins of the Arf (ADP-ribosylation factor) 
family, as a potential interaction partner. We confirmed a direct interaction by 
mutual pull down (of fusion proteins expressed in bacteria) and by 
immunoprecipitation of the proteins expressed in mammalian cells. To circumvent 
the long term toxicity associated with overexpression of ARNO/cytohesin-2, we 
created stable cell lines that stably expressed the A2A receptor and where 
ARNO/cytohesin-2 or the dominant negative version E156K-ARNO/cytohesin-2 was 
inducible by mifepristone. Cyclic AMP accumulation induced by an A2A-specific 
agonist was neither altered by ARNO/cytohesin-2 nor by the dominant negative 
version. This was also true for agonist-induced desensitization. In contrast, 
expression of dominant negative E156K-ARNO/cytohesin-2 and of dominant negative 
T27N-Arf6 abrogated the sustained phase of MAP kinase stimulation induced by the 
A2A receptor. We therefore conclude that ARNO/cytohesin-2 is required to support 
the alternative, heterotrimeric G protein-independent, signaling pathway of A2A 
receptor, which is stimulation of MAP kinase.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M506515200
PMID: 16027149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
