---
pmid: '19470755'
title: Cdo binds Abl to promote p38alpha/beta mitogen-activated protein kinase activity
  and myogenic differentiation.
authors:
- Bae GU
- Kim BG
- Lee HJ
- Oh JE
- Lee SJ
- Zhang W
- Krauss RS
- Kang JS
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2715815
doi: 10.1128/MCB.00199-09
---

# Cdo binds Abl to promote p38alpha/beta mitogen-activated protein kinase activity and myogenic differentiation.
**Authors:** Bae GU, Kim BG, Lee HJ, Oh JE, Lee SJ, Zhang W, Krauss RS, Kang JS
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.00199-09](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.00199-09)
**PMC:** [PMC2715815](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2715815/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Aug;29(15):4130-43. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00199-09. Epub 2009
May  26.

Cdo binds Abl to promote p38alpha/beta mitogen-activated protein kinase activity 
and myogenic differentiation.

Bae GU(1), Kim BG, Lee HJ, Oh JE, Lee SJ, Zhang W, Krauss RS, Kang JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Mount Sinai School of 
Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA. Robert.Krauss@mssm.edu

The p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway is required for 
differentiation of skeletal myoblasts, but how the pathway is activated during 
this process is not well understood. One mechanism involves the cell surface 
receptor Cdo (also known as Cdon), which binds to Bnip-2 and JLP, scaffold 
proteins for Cdc42 and p38, respectively; formation of these complexes results 
in Bnip-2/Cdc42-dependent activation of p38. It has been reported that the 
tyrosine kinase Abl promotes myogenic differentiation in a manner dependent on 
its cytoplasmic localization, but the cytoplasmic signaling proteins with which 
it interacts to achieve this effect are unidentified. We report that Abl 
associates with both Cdo and JLP during myoblast differentiation. Abl binds a 
proline-rich motif in Cdo via its SH3 domain, and these regions of Abl and Cdo 
are required for their promyogenic effects. Cdo is important for full Abl kinase 
activity, and Abl is necessary for full activation of p38 MAPK, during myogenic 
differentiation. As seen with myoblasts depleted of Cdo, the diminished 
differentiation displayed by Abl-depleted cells is rescued by the expression of 
an activated form of the immediate upstream p38-activating kinase MAPK kinase 6. 
Abl's promyogenic effect is therefore linked to a multiprotein cell surface 
complex that regulates differentiation-dependent p38 activation.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00199-09
PMCID: PMC2715815
PMID: 19470755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
