---
pmid: '12679534'
title: 'The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor family in plants: a genome-wide
  study of protein structure and functional diversity.'
authors:
- Heim MA
- Jakoby M
- Werber M
- Martin C
- Weisshaar B
- Bailey PC
journal: Mol Biol Evol
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/molbev/msg088
---

# The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor family in plants: a genome-wide study of protein structure and functional diversity.
**Authors:** Heim MA, Jakoby M, Werber M, Martin C, Weisshaar B, Bailey PC
**Journal:** Mol Biol Evol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1093/molbev/msg088](https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msg088)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Evol. 2003 May;20(5):735-47. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msg088. Epub 2003
Apr  2.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor family in plants: a genome-wide 
study of protein structure and functional diversity.

Heim MA(1), Jakoby M, Werber M, Martin C, Weisshaar B, Bailey PC.

Author information:
(1)Max-Planck-Institute for Plant Breeding Research, Cologne, Germany.

Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors (TFs) belong to a family of 
transcriptional regulators present in three eukaryotic kingdoms. Many different 
functions have been identified for these proteins in animals, including the 
control of cell proliferation and development of specific cell lineages. Their 
mechanism for controlling gene transcription often involves homodimerization or 
heterodimerization. In plants, little is known about the bHLH family, but we 
have determined that there are 133 bHLH genes in Arabidopsis thaliana and have 
confirmed that at least 113 of them are expressed. The AtbHLH genes constitute 
one of the largest families of transcription factors in A. thaliana with 
significantly more members than are found in most animal species and about an 
equivalent number to those in vertebrates. Comparisons with animal sequences 
suggest that the majority of plant bHLH genes have evolved from the ancestral 
group B class of bHLH genes. By studying the AtbHLH genes collectively, twelve 
subfamilies have been identified. Within each of these main groups, there are 
conserved amino acid sequence motifs outside the DNA binding domain. Potential 
gene redundancy among members of smaller subgroups has been analyzed, and the 
resulting information is presented to provide a simplified visual interpretation 
of the gene family, identifying related genes that are likely to share similar 
functions. Based on the current characterization of a limited number of plant 
bHLH proteins, we predict that this family of TFs has a range of different roles 
in plant cell and tissue development as well as plant metabolism.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msg088
PMID: 12679534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
