---
pmid: '8097324'
title: Interleukin 13, a T-cell-derived cytokine that regulates human monocyte and
  B-cell function.
authors:
- McKenzie AN
- Culpepper JA
- de Waal Malefyt R
- Brière F
- Punnonen J
- Aversa G
- Sato A
- Dang W
- Cocks BG
- Menon S
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1993'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC46376
doi: 10.1073/pnas.90.8.3735
---

# Interleukin 13, a T-cell-derived cytokine that regulates human monocyte and B-cell function.
**Authors:** McKenzie AN, Culpepper JA, de Waal Malefyt R, Brière F, Punnonen J, Aversa G, Sato A, Dang W, Cocks BG, Menon S
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.90.8.3735](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.90.8.3735)
**PMC:** [PMC46376](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC46376/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Apr 15;90(8):3735-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.90.8.3735.

Interleukin 13, a T-cell-derived cytokine that regulates human monocyte and 
B-cell function.

McKenzie AN(1), Culpepper JA, de Waal Malefyt R, Brière F, Punnonen J, Aversa G, 
Sato A, Dang W, Cocks BG, Menon S, et al.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, DNAX Research Institute of Molecular and 
Cellular Biology, Palo Alto, CA 94304-1104.

We have isolated the human cDNA homologue of a mouse helper T-cell-specific cDNA 
sequence, called P600, from an activated human T-cell cDNA library. The human 
cDNA encodes a secreted, mainly unglycosylated, protein with a relative 
molecular mass of approximately 10,000. We show that the human and mouse 
proteins cause extensive morphological changes to human monocytes with an 
associated up-regulation of major histocompatibility complex class II antigens 
and the low-affinity receptor for immunoglobulin E (Fc epsilon RII or CD23). In 
addition, they stimulate proliferation of human B cells that have been activated 
by anti-IgM antibodies or by anti-CD40 monoclonal antibodies presented by a 
mouse Ltk- cell line transfected with CDw32. Furthermore, the human protein 
induced considerable levels of IgM and IgG, but no IgA production, in cultures 
in which highly purified human surface IgD+ or total B cells were cocultured 
with an activated CD4+ T-cell clone. Based on these findings, we propose that 
this immunoregulatory protein be designated interleukin 13.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.90.8.3735
PMCID: PMC46376
PMID: 8097324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
