---
pmid: '17382284'
title: Crystal structure of the yeast nicotinamidase Pnc1p.
authors:
- Hu G
- Taylor AB
- McAlister-Henn L
- Hart PJ
journal: Arch Biochem Biophys
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC1931499
doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2007.01.037
---

# Crystal structure of the yeast nicotinamidase Pnc1p.
**Authors:** Hu G, Taylor AB, McAlister-Henn L, Hart PJ
**Journal:** Arch Biochem Biophys (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.abb.2007.01.037](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.abb.2007.01.037)
**PMC:** [PMC1931499](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1931499/)

## Abstract

1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2007 May 1;461(1):66-75. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2007.01.037.
 Epub 2007 Mar 2.

Crystal structure of the yeast nicotinamidase Pnc1p.

Hu G(1), Taylor AB, McAlister-Henn L, Hart PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The University of Texas Health Science Center at 
San Antonio, 7703 Floyd Curl Drive, San Antonio, TX 78229-3900, USA.

The yeast nicotinamidase Pnc1p acts in transcriptional silencing by reducing 
levels of nicotinamide, an inhibitor of the histone deacetylase Sir2p. The Pnc1p 
structure was determined at 2.9A resolution using MAD and MIRAS phasing methods 
after inadvertent crystallization during the pursuit of the structure of 
histidine-tagged yeast isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH). Pnc1p displays a cluster 
of surface histidine residues likely responsible for its co-fractionation with 
IDH from Ni(2+)-coupled chromatography resins. Researchers expressing 
histidine-tagged proteins in yeast should be aware of the propensity of Pnc1p to 
crystallize, even when overwhelmed in concentration by the protein of interest. 
The protein assembles into extended helical arrays interwoven to form an 
unusually robust, yet porous superstructure. Comparison of the Pnc1p structure 
with those of three homologous bacterial proteins reveals a common core fold 
punctuated by amino acid insertions unique to each protein. These insertions 
mediate the self-interactions that define the distinct higher order oligomeric 
states attained by these molecules. Pnc1p also acts on pyrazinamide, a substrate 
analog converted by the nicotinamidase from Mycobacterium tuberculosis into a 
product toxic to that organism. However, we find no evidence for detrimental 
effects of the drug on yeast cell growth.

DOI: 10.1016/j.abb.2007.01.037
PMCID: PMC1931499
PMID: 17382284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The yeast nicotinamidase Pnc1p acts in transcriptional silencing by reducing levels of nicotinamide, an inhibitor of the histone deacetylase Sir2p. The Pnc1p structure was determined at 2.9 Å resolution using MAD and MIRAS phasing methods after inadvertent crystallization during the pursuit of the structure of histidine-tagged yeast isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH). Pnc1p displays a cluster of surface histidine residues likely responsible for its co-fractionation with IDH from Ni 2+ -coupled chromatography resins. Researchers expressing histidine-tagged proteins in yeast should be aware of the propensity of Pnc1p to crystallize, even when overwhelmed in concentration by the protein of interest. The protein assembles into extended helical arrays interwoven to form an unusually robust, yet porous superstructure. Comparison of the Pnc1p structure with those of three homologous bacterial proteins reveals a common core fold punctuated by amino acid insertions unique to each protein. These insertions mediate the self-interactions that define the distinct higher order oligomeric states attained by these molecules. Pnc1p also acts on pyrazinamide, a substrate analog converted by the nicotinamidase from Mycobacterium tuberculosis into a product toxic to that organism. However, we find no evidence for detrimental effects of the drug on yeast cell growth.
