---
pmid: '18940611'
title: 'Structural basis for Ca2+ -dependent formation of ALG-2/Alix peptide complex:
  Ca2+/EF3-driven arginine switch mechanism.'
authors:
- Suzuki H
- Kawasaki M
- Inuzuka T
- Okumura M
- Kakiuchi T
- Shibata H
- Wakatsuki S
- Maki M
journal: Structure
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.str.2008.07.012
---

# Structural basis for Ca2+ -dependent formation of ALG-2/Alix peptide complex: Ca2+/EF3-driven arginine switch mechanism.
**Authors:** Suzuki H, Kawasaki M, Inuzuka T, Okumura M, Kakiuchi T, Shibata H, Wakatsuki S, Maki M
**Journal:** Structure (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.str.2008.07.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2008.07.012)

## Abstract

1. Structure. 2008 Oct 8;16(10):1562-73. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2008.07.012.

Structural basis for Ca2+ -dependent formation of ALG-2/Alix peptide complex: 
Ca2+/EF3-driven arginine switch mechanism.

Suzuki H(1), Kawasaki M, Inuzuka T, Okumura M, Kakiuchi T, Shibata H, Wakatsuki 
S, Maki M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Molecular Biosciences, Graduate School of 
Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya University, Nagoya 464-8601, Japan.

ALG-2 belongs to the penta-EF-hand (PEF) protein family and interacts with 
various intracellular proteins, such as Alix and TSG101, that are involved in 
endosomal sorting and HIV budding. Through X-ray crystallography, we solved the 
structures of Ca(2+)-free and -bound forms of N-terminally truncated human ALG-2 
(des3-20ALG-2), Zn(2+)-bound form of full-length ALG-2, and the structure of the 
complex between des3-23ALG-2 and the peptide corresponding to Alix799-814 in 
Zn(2+)-bound form. Binding of Ca(2+) to EF3 enables the side chain of Arg125, 
present in the loop connecting EF3 and EF4, to move enough to make a primary 
hydrophobic pocket accessible to the critical PPYP motif, which partially 
overlaps with the GPP motif for the binding of Cep55 (centrosome protein 55 
kDa). Based on these results, together with the results of in vitro binding 
assay with mutant ALG-2 and Alix proteins, we propose a Ca(2+)/EF3-driven 
arginine switch mechanism for ALG-2 binding to Alix.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2008.07.012
PMID: 18940611 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
