---
pmid: '20531388'
title: Mutant huntingtin-impaired degradation of beta-catenin causes neurotoxicity
  in Huntington's disease.
authors:
- Godin JD
- Poizat G
- Hickey MA
- Maschat F
- Humbert S
journal: EMBO J
year: '2010'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2910267
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.117
---

# Mutant huntingtin-impaired degradation of beta-catenin causes neurotoxicity in Huntington's disease.
**Authors:** Godin JD, Poizat G, Hickey MA, Maschat F, Humbert S
**Journal:** EMBO J (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2010.117](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2010.117)
**PMC:** [PMC2910267](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2910267/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2010 Jul 21;29(14):2433-45. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.117. Epub 2010 Jun
 8.

Mutant huntingtin-impaired degradation of beta-catenin causes neurotoxicity in 
Huntington's disease.

Godin JD(1), Poizat G, Hickey MA, Maschat F, Humbert S.

Author information:
(1)Institut Curie, Orsay, France.

Huntington's disease (HD) is a fatal neurodegenerative disorder causing 
selective neuronal death in the brain. Dysfunction of the ubiquitin-proteasome 
system may contribute to the disease; however, the exact mechanisms are still 
unknown. We report here a new pathological mechanism by which mutant huntingtin 
specifically interferes with the degradation of beta-catenin. Huntingtin 
associates with the beta-catenin destruction complex that ensures its 
equilibrated degradation. The binding of beta-catenin to the destruction complex 
is altered in HD, leading to the toxic stabilization of beta-catenin. As a 
consequence, the beta-transducin repeat-containing protein (beta-TrCP) rescues 
polyglutamine (polyQ)-huntingtin-induced toxicity in striatal neurons and in a 
Drosophila model of HD, through the specific degradation of beta-catenin. 
Finally, the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug indomethacin that decreases 
beta-catenin levels has a neuroprotective effect in a neuronal model of HD and 
in Drosophila and increases the lifespan of HD flies. We thus suggest that 
restoring beta-catenin homeostasis in HD is of therapeutic interest.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2010.117
PMCID: PMC2910267
PMID: 20531388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Huntington's disease (HD) is a fatal neurodegenerative disorder causing selective neuronal death in the brain. Dysfunction of the ubiquitin–proteasome system may contribute to the disease; however, the exact mechanisms are still unknown. We report here a new pathological mechanism by which mutant huntingtin specifically interferes with the degradation of β-catenin. Huntingtin associates with the β-catenin destruction complex that ensures its equilibrated degradation. The binding of β-catenin to the destruction complex is altered in HD, leading to the toxic stabilization of β-catenin. As a consequence, the β-transducin repeat-containing protein (β-TrCP) rescues polyglutamine (polyQ)-huntingtin-induced toxicity in striatal neurons and in a Drosophila model of HD, through the specific degradation of β-catenin. Finally, the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug indomethacin that decreases β-catenin levels has a neuroprotective effect in a neuronal model of HD and in Drosophila and increases the lifespan of HD flies. We thus suggest that restoring β-catenin homeostasis in HD is of therapeutic interest.

Introduction

Huntington's disease (HD) is a devastating neurodegenerative disorder caused by an abnormal polyglutamine (polyQ) tract in the N-terminal part of the huntingtin protein ( Young, 2003 ; Borrell-Pages et al, 2006 ). HD develops when this expansion exceeds 35 glutamine residues, and there is a strong inverse correlation between the number of residues and age at onset. HD is characterized by the preferential dysfunction and death of striatal and cortical neurons in the brain and the presence of neuritic and intranuclear inclusions in neurons. These events may result from a gain of toxic functions conferred by the expanded polyglutamine tract and from a loss of the beneficial properties of huntingtin. There is currently no effective treatment for preventing or delaying disease progression, and death usually occurs within 10–20 years after the appearance of the first clinical symptoms.

The Wnt signal transduction cascade has a central function in development, in adults and in disease processes ( Clevers, 2006 ; Gordon and Nusse, 2006 ; Polakis, 2007 ; Angers and Moon, 2009 ). This pathway controls the levels of cytosolic β-catenin that are tightly regulated in cells, which constantly synthesize and degrade this protein. In the presence of Wnt ligands, β-catenin degradation is inhibited, it accumulates in the cytoplasm, translocates in the nucleus and activates Wnt-responsive genes. Under unstimulated conditions, a multiprotein complex known as the destruction complex is required for the processing of β-catenin through the generation of ubiquitinated β-catenin ( Kimelman and Xu, 2006 ). Within this complex, which includes the two scaffolding proteins—axin and the adenomatous polyposis coli protein APC—β-catenin is phosphorylated sequentially at serine 45 by casein kinase 1 (CKI) and at positions 41, 37 and 33 by the glycogen synthase kinase GSK3-β ( Liu et al, 2002 ). These two phosphorylation events create a consensus recognition site for the β-transducin repeat-containing protein (β-TrCP), which serves as the substrate recognition subunit for the SCF β-TrCP E3 ubiquitin ligase complex ( Jiang and Struhl, 1998 ; Hart et al, 1999 ; Latres et al, 1999 ; Winston et al, 1999 ; Wu et al, 2003 ; Kimelman and Xu, 2006 ). SCF β-TrCP is an SCF (Skp1-Cul1-F-box protein) complex consisting of three invariable components—Rbx1, Cul1 and Skp1—together with the F-box protein β-TrCP. Ubiquitinated β-catenin is subsequently degraded by the 26S proteasome ( Aberle et al, 1997 ; Orford et al, 1997 ).

Earlier studies have provided evidence that misfolded toxic polyQ-huntingtin protein induces a global impairment of the ubiquitin–proteasome system (UPS) that is pathogenic in HD ( Bennett et al, 2005 ). However, other studies suggest an accumulation of polyubiquitinated proteins in HD in the absence of a general UPS impairment ( Bett et al, 2006 , 2009 ; Maynard et al, 2009 ). This suggests that the UPS is generally functional in HD, but that pathogenic huntingtin may impair selectively the ubiquitination process of specific substrates. However, the identity of such substrates remains to be defined. Furthermore, how mutant huntingtin regulates the degradation of specific substrates has not been addressed.

We report here the accumulation of β-catenin in its phosphorylated form in HD. This accumulation of β-catenin does not lead to transcriptional activation of c-myc and axin2, two endogenous targets of β-catenin, and is toxic for striatal neurons. β-Catenin stabilization results from disruption of the β-catenin destruction complex, which normally ensures the controlled degradation of this molecule. The restoration of physiological β-catenin levels therefore has a neuroprotective effect in HD. In particular, the anti-inflammatory drug indomethacin, which reduces β-catenin levels, inhibits the toxic effects of mutant huntingtin in vitro and in vivo .

Theβ-catenin that accumulates is phosphorylated and this accumulation does not result in transcriptional activation

Phosphorylation of β-catenin by CKI and GSK3-β is a prerequisite step to its ubiquitination and degradation by the proteasome ( Liu et al, 2002 ). We investigated the phosphorylation status of β-catenin that accumulates in HD with specific antibodies recognizing forms of β-catenin phosphorylated either at positions 41 and 45 or at positions 33, 37 and 41 ( Figure 1E and G ). Phosphorylated β-catenin was elevated in brain extracts from 22-month-old CAG140 mice and in post-mortem striatal samples from HD patients ( Figure 1E–H ). Similar observations were made in 8-month-old CAG140 mice (data not shown). Therefore, the stabilization of β-catenin in HD occurs subsequent to its phosphorylation by CKI and GSK3-β.

On Wnt signalling, β-catenin accumulates in the cytoplasm and translocates to the nucleus, where it acts as a transcriptional coactivator to modulate the expression of target genes such as those encoding c-myc and axin2 ( He et al, 1998 ; Yan et al, 2001 ; Jho et al, 2002 ). We analysed the levels of c-myc ( Figure 1I ) and axin2 ( Figure 1J ) transcripts by quantitative real-time RT–PCR in cortical extracts from 22-month-old CAG140 knock-in mice. We did not find changes in axin2 or c-myc gene expression in HD mice as compared with their wild-type littermates. We conclude that polyQ-huntingtin-induced β-catenin accumulation does not result in transcriptional activation. This agrees with our observation that β-catenin accumulates under its phosphorylated form.

Discussion

In this study, we found that β-catenin levels were upregulated by either N-terminal 480- and 548-amino acid fragments or full-length forms of huntingtin in cell lines, primary cultures of striatal neurons, two knock-in HD mouse models, Drosophila and patients. Our data thus reveal an impairment in β-catenin turnover, and we have now unequivocally demonstrated that specifically decreasing β-catenin levels is neuroprotective in HD. Indeed, chimeric F-box proteins that only recognize β-catenin and facilitate its degradation ( Liu et al, 2004 ), reduce the deleterious effects of polyQ-huntingtin in striatal neurons. In vivo , we used genetic and pharmacological approaches. Expression of β-TrCP/Slimb prevented the loss of eye pigmentation and ommatidial morphology defects in a Drosophila model of HD. In support, β-catenin/armadillo knockdown has been shown to abolish the toxic effects of polyQ-huntingtin in a similar Drosophila model ( Kaltenbach et al, 2007 ). Finally, indomethacin both decreased the eye pigmentation defect and increased the lifespan of HD flies.

We found that polyQ-huntingtin impaired the correct formation of the β-catenin destruction complex. Huntingtin interacts with β-catenin, β-TrCP and axin. We suggest that, in normal conditions, huntingtin may act as a scaffold protein, promoting β-catenin degradation by facilitating the recognition of β-catenin by β-TrCP within the destruction complex ( Figure 6F ). Consistent with this hypothesis, Wu et al (2003) showed that the interaction between β-catenin and β-TrCP is weak and suggested that other proteins may stabilize this interaction. Furthermore, several SCF components in addition to β-catenin, including cullins 2 and 5 and the ring finger 20 and 40 proteins, have been shown to interact with huntingtin in yeast two-hybrid system ( Kaltenbach et al, 2007 ). In pathological conditions, polyQ-huntingtin interacts less strongly with β-catenin than wild-type huntingtin, so this effect is lost and β-catenin subsequently accumulates.

The UPS has an important function in HD, due to the involvement of this system in the degradation of misfolded toxic polyQ-huntingtin protein ( Ortega et al, 2007 ). The observation of an abnormal enrichment of HD inclusion bodies with ubiquitin and proteasome subunits provided the first evidence that the dysfunction in UPS may contribute to the pathogenesis of the disease. Indeed, a global inhibition of the UPS caused by the inhibition of the proteasome activity by polyQ-huntingtin has been suggested in disease ( Jana et al, 2001 ; Venkatraman et al, 2004 ; Bennett et al, 2005 ; Diaz-Hernandez et al, 2006 ). Furthermore, the age-dependent decrease in proteasome activity contributes to the accumulation of short fragments of polyQ-huntingtin ( Zhou et al, 2003 ). However, other studies suggest the presence of a largely operative UPS in HD ( Bett et al, 2006 , 2009 ; Maynard et al, 2009 ). Finally, as many diverse proteins are degraded by the proteasome, the UPS may not be considered an appropriate target for treatment purposes. We describe here a new pathogenic pathway in which polyQ-huntingtin interferes with the degradation of a single protein, β-catenin. This function is specific to huntingtin and does not necessarily extend to other proteins whose polyQ mutations cause neurodegenerative disorders. Indeed, β-catenin does not bind to ataxin 7 or ataxin 3 even though ataxin 3 is known to be involved in the UPS ( Chai et al, 2004 ). We provide the proof-of-principle that the restoration of β-catenin levels to normal levels may be of therapeutic value. This restoration may be achieved by targeting β-TrCP, through the use of β-catenin-specific chimeric F-box proteins, or by indomethacin treatment.

Huntingtin may modulate the degradation of β-catenin only or may also affect the degradation process of other substrates. Indeed, β-TrCP has other substrates ( Kimelman and Xu, 2006 ) including REST, the calcineurin inhibitor RCAN1, IκBα and p53, all of which are known to be either upregulated or downregulated in HD ( Zuccato et al, 2003 ; Khoshnan et al, 2004 ; Bae et al, 2005 ; Westbrook et al, 2008 ; Ermak et al, 2009 ). As the huntingtin/β-TrCP interaction is not modified by the presence of an abnormal polyQ expansion, the way in which huntingtin and its mutant form interact with these proteins may be responsible for the observed changes in degradation, with weaker interactions in pathological conditions favouring degradation and conversely. Consistent with our data, one recent study reported an accumulation of polyubiquitinated proteins in HD in the absence of a general UPS impairment ( Maynard et al, 2009 ). This suggests that the UPS system is generally functional in HD, but, as for β-catenin and β-TrCP, polyQ-huntingtin may induce the impairment of ubiquitination processes for specific substrates.

Several molecular mechanisms are involved in the physiopathology of HD. These mechanisms include mitochondrial, transcriptional and transport alterations, oxidative stress, inflammation and apoptosis. It may be necessary to interfere with several of these mechanisms to treat HD successfully. Indomethacin is a multitarget drug that was initially studied as an inhibitor of several isoforms of cyclooxygenase ( Hawcroft et al, 2002 ; Kapitanovic et al, 2006 ). It increases the cellular levels of heat shock proteins in mammalian cells ( Ishihara et al, 2004 ). We show here that at least some of the neuroprotective effects of indomethacin in HD could be mediated by the β-catenin pathway. However, indomethacin may be beneficial due to its inhibitory effects on cyclooxygenase. Indomethacin could also act by suppressing protein aggregation, as it was shown in a cellular model of polyglutamine disease ( Ishihara et al, 2004 ). Finally, anti-inflammatory compounds, such as celecoxib, acetylsalicylate and rofecoxib, did not show beneficial effects in transgenic HD mice expressing short fragments of polyQ-huntingtin to model HD ( Norflus et al, 2004 ; Schilling et al, 2004 ). These fragments may not be sufficient to interact with β-catenin and/or β-TrCP and therefore such models may not be relevant to study molecules counteracting the toxic effect of this pathway.

An association between β-catenin and cancer has been clearly demonstrated, particularly for colorectal cancer ( Polakis, 2007 ). The accumulation of β-catenin in the nucleus leads to excessive cell proliferation and tumorigenesis ( Polakis, 2007 ). In neurodegenerative conditions, the situation is less clear. Both increases and decreases in β-catenin levels have been reported for Alzheimer's disease ( Boonen et al, 2009 ). Mutations in the presenilin 1 gene account for a large proportion of cases of familial early onset Alzheimer's disease, in which β-catenin stabilization occurs ( Kang et al, 1999 ). In PC12 cells expressing mutant presenilin 1, the increase in β-catenin levels is associated with a defect in neuronal differentiation ( Teo et al, 2005 ). In adult mice, mutation of the presenillin 1 gene and the resulting accumulation of β-catenin lead to a transient increase in proliferation, followed by an increase in apoptosis in the dentate gyrus ( Chevallier et al, 2005 ). In HD, we show an accumulation of phosphorylated β-catenin. Indeed, the impairment leading to this accumulation occurs downstream of the phosphorylations by CKI and GSK3-β ( Figure 6F ). Non-phosphorylated β-catenin activates Wnt-responsive genes. In agreement, the observed accumulation of β-catenin in HD did not lead to a global increased transcriptional activity. Treatments targeting β-catenin are neuroprotective in HD, but further studies are required to identify the precise mechanisms by which an aberrant stabilization of phosphorylated β-catenin ultimately leads to dysfunction and toxicity.
