---
pmid: '17410208'
title: Dissecting mechanisms of nuclear mRNA surveillance in THO/sub2 complex mutants.
authors:
- Rougemaille M
- Gudipati RK
- Olesen JR
- Thomsen R
- Seraphin B
- Libri D
- Jensen TH
journal: EMBO J
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1864968
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601669
---

# Dissecting mechanisms of nuclear mRNA surveillance in THO/sub2 complex mutants.
**Authors:** Rougemaille M, Gudipati RK, Olesen JR, Thomsen R, Seraphin B, Libri D, Jensen TH
**Journal:** EMBO J (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7601669](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7601669)
**PMC:** [PMC1864968](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1864968/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2007 May 2;26(9):2317-26. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601669. Epub 2007 Apr
 5.

Dissecting mechanisms of nuclear mRNA surveillance in THO/sub2 complex mutants.

Rougemaille M(1), Gudipati RK, Olesen JR, Thomsen R, Seraphin B, Libri D, Jensen 
TH.

Author information:
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Centre de Genetique 
Moleculaire, Gif sur Yvette, France.

The nuclear exosome is involved in numerous RNA metabolic processes. Exosome 
degradation of rRNA, snoRNA, snRNA and tRNA in Saccharomyces cerevisiae is 
activated by TRAMP complexes, containing either the Trf4p or Trf5p poly(A) 
polymerase. These enzymes are presumed to facilitate exosome access by appending 
oligo(A)-tails onto structured substrates. Another role of the nuclear exosome 
is that of mRNA surveillance. In strains harboring a mutated THO/Sub2p system, 
involved in messenger ribonucleoprotein particle biogenesis and nuclear export, 
the exosome-associated 3' --> 5' exonuclease Rrp6p is required for both 
retention and degradation of nuclear restricted mRNAs. We show here that Trf4p, 
in the context of TRAMP, is an mRNA surveillance factor. However, unlike Rrp6p, 
Trf4p only partakes in RNA degradation and not in transcript retention. 
Surprisingly, a polyadenylation-defective Trf4p protein is fully active, 
suggesting polyadenylation-independent mRNA degradation. Transcription 
pulse-chase experiments show that HSP104 molecules undergoing quality control in 
THO/sub2 mutant strains fall into two distinct populations: One that is quickly 
degraded after transcription induction and another that escapes rapid decay and 
accumulates in foci associated with the HSP104 transcription site.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601669
PMCID: PMC1864968
PMID: 17410208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
