---
pmid: '25857266'
title: Pontin, a new mutant p53-binding protein, promotes gain-of-function of mutant
  p53.
authors:
- Zhao Y
- Zhang C
- Yue X
- Li X
- Liu J
- Yu H
- Belyi VA
- Yang Q
- Feng Z
- Hu W
journal: Cell Death Differ
year: '2015'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4648328
doi: 10.1038/cdd.2015.33
---

# Pontin, a new mutant p53-binding protein, promotes gain-of-function of mutant p53.
**Authors:** Zhao Y, Zhang C, Yue X, Li X, Liu J, Yu H, Belyi VA, Yang Q, Feng Z, Hu W
**Journal:** Cell Death Differ (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/cdd.2015.33](https://doi.org/10.1038/cdd.2015.33)
**PMC:** [PMC4648328](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4648328/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Death Differ. 2015 Nov;22(11):1824-36. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2015.33. Epub
2015  Apr 10.

Pontin, a new mutant p53-binding protein, promotes gain-of-function of mutant 
p53.

Zhao Y(1), Zhang C(1), Yue X(1), Li X(1), Liu J(1), Yu H(1), Belyi VA(1), Yang 
Q(1), Feng Z(1), Hu W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey, 
Rutgers the State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, NJ 08903, USA.

Tumor-suppressor p53 is frequently mutated in human cancers. Many 
tumor-associated mutant p53 (mutp53) proteins gain new functions in promoting 
tumorigenesis, defined as gain-of-function (GOF). The mechanisms for mutp53 GOF 
are not well understood. Here, we report Pontin, a highly conserved AAA+ ATPase 
important for various cellular functions, as a new mutp53-binding protein. This 
Pontin-mutp53 interaction promotes mutp53 GOF in invasion, migration and 
anchorage-independent growth of tumor cells. The ATPase domain of Pontin is 
crucial for its promoting effect on mutp53 GOF; blocking the ATPase activity of 
Pontin by a Pontin-specific ATPase inhibitor or an ATPase-deficient 
dominant-negative Pontin expression vector greatly diminished mutp53 GOF. Pontin 
promotes mutp53 GOF through regulation of mutp53 transcriptional activity; 
knockdown of Pontin abolished the transcriptional regulation of mutp53 toward a 
group of genes. Furthermore, overexpression of Pontin in tumors is associated 
with the poor survival in cancer patients, especially those containing mutp53. 
Our results highlight an important role and mechanism for Pontin, a new mutp53 
partner, in promoting mutp53 GOF in tumorigenesis.

DOI: 10.1038/cdd.2015.33
PMCID: PMC4648328
PMID: 25857266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Tumor-suppressor p53 is frequently mutated in human cancers. Many tumor-associated mutant p53 (mutp53) proteins gain new functions in promoting tumorigenesis, defined as gain-of-function (GOF). The mechanisms for mutp53 GOF are not well understood. Here, we report Pontin, a highly conserved AAA+ ATPase important for various cellular functions, as a new mutp53-binding protein. This Pontin–mutp53 interaction promotes mutp53 GOF in invasion, migration and anchorage-independent growth of tumor cells. The ATPase domain of Pontin is crucial for its promoting effect on mutp53 GOF; blocking the ATPase activity of Pontin by a Pontin-specific ATPase inhibitor or an ATPase-deficient dominant-negative Pontin expression vector greatly diminished mutp53 GOF. Pontin promotes mutp53 GOF through regulation of mutp53 transcriptional activity; knockdown of Pontin abolished the transcriptional regulation of mutp53 toward a group of genes. Furthermore, overexpression of Pontin in tumors is associated with the poor survival in cancer patients, especially those containing mutp53. Our results highlight an important role and mechanism for Pontin, a new mutp53 partner, in promoting mutp53 GOF in tumorigenesis.

Discussion

Ample evidence has demonstrated that mutp53 can promote tumorigenesis through GOF mechanism. 8 However, its underlying mechanisms are not well understood. In this study, Pontin was identified as a new mutp53-binding protein. Pontin preferentially binds to mutp53, through its C-terminus. Pontin is an essential component of several protein complexes that regulate transcription, telomerase activities, chromatin remodeling, metabolism and DNA repair. 15 , 16 , 17 Pontin is frequently overexpressed in tumors. Some of the Pontin-interacting proteins, including c-Myc and β -catenin, have pivotal roles in tumorigenesis, suggesting an important role of Pontin in tumorigenesis. 18 , 19 However, the mechanism of Pontin in tumorigenesis is poorly understood. This study shows that Pontin promotes mutp53 GOF in tumorigenesis, including increased migration, invasion, metastasis and anchorage-independent cell growth. Our results established an important role of Pontin in promoting mutp53 GOF, and also provided a new mechanism for Pontin in tumorigenesis.

As an ATPase, Pontin has Walker A and Walker B motifs that are involved in ATP binding and ATP hydrolysis, respectively. The ATPase activity of Pontin is important for many of its functions. Results in this study show that Pontin-D302N, an ATPase-deficient dominant-negative mutant, binds to mutp53 to a similar extent compared with wild-type Pontin, indicating that the ATPase activity is not required for the Pontin–mutp53 interaction. Notably, Pontin-D302N, which competes with endogenous wild-type Pontin to interact with mutp53, greatly inhibits mutp53 GOF. Similarly, Rottlerin, a Pontin-specific ATPase inhibitor, greatly inhibits mutp53 GOF. Furthermore, although knockdown of endogenous Pontin inhibits mutp53 GOF, ectopic expression of the Pontin fragments containing the Walker B motif restores mutp53 GOF in cells with knockdown of endogenous Pontin. These results show that its ATPase activity is required for Pontin to regulate mutp53 GOF.

Pontin is a component of several chromatin-remodeling complexes, including Ino80 complex, TIP60/NuA4 complex and SWR1 complex, and is essential for their chromatic-remodeling activities and transcriptional regulation. 15 , 16 It is possible that the Pontin–mutp53 interaction recruits mutp53 to specific DNA-binding sites or chromatin landscapes, and facilitates mutp53 to transcriptionally regulate a group of genes directly or together with other transcription factors. Results from IF assays show that Pontin is predominantly localized in the nucleus and largely colocalized with mutp53. Knockdown of Pontin abolishes mutp53's transcriptional activity toward a group of genes. Some genes that require Pontin for their transcriptional regulation by mutp53, including STMN1, ADRB1, ITPR1, RIPK1, CtBP2, TPD52 and TOX3 , have been suggested to have roles in tumorigenesis, especially for migration and metastasis. 30 , 31 , 38 , 39 , 40 , 41 Results from ChIP assays show that mutp53 interacts with some target genes at their regulatory regions in a Pontin-dependent manner. It remains unclear why Pontin selectively regulates mutp53 transcriptional activity toward certain genes. Future studies should further increase our understanding on the role and mechanisms of Pontin in regulating mutp53 GOF.

Pontin overexpression has been observed in many human cancers. 21 Results from this study and previous reports show that Pontin overexpression in tumors is strongly associated with poor prognosis. 21 Interestingly, Pontin expression levels have a much stronger prognostic value in breast cancers containing mutp53 than those without mutp53. This observation suggests that Pontin has an important role in mutp53-promoted tumorigenesis, and highlights the biological significance of Pontin overexpression in tumors, especially those containing mutp53.

In summary, this study established Pontin as a new mutp53-binding protein, and demonstrated that Pontin promotes mutp53 GOF in tumorigenesis in an ATPase-dependent manner. Results from this study raise interesting and intriguing possibilities to block mutp53 GOF in tumors through targeting Pontin or its ATPase activity.
