---
pmid: '11297552'
title: Platelet-derived growth factor C (PDGF-C), a novel growth factor that binds
  to PDGF alpha and beta receptor.
authors:
- Gilbertson DG
- Duff ME
- West JW
- Kelly JD
- Sheppard PO
- Hofstrand PD
- Gao Z
- Shoemaker K
- Bukowski TR
- Moore M
- Feldhaus AL
- Humes JM
- Palmer TE
- Hart CE
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M101056200
---

# Platelet-derived growth factor C (PDGF-C), a novel growth factor that binds to PDGF alpha and beta receptor.
**Authors:** Gilbertson DG, Duff ME, West JW, Kelly JD, Sheppard PO, Hofstrand PD, Gao Z, Shoemaker K, Bukowski TR, Moore M, Feldhaus AL, Humes JM, Palmer TE, Hart CE
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M101056200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M101056200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jul 20;276(29):27406-14. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M101056200. Epub 
2001 Apr 10.

Platelet-derived growth factor C (PDGF-C), a novel growth factor that binds to 
PDGF alpha and beta receptor.

Gilbertson DG(1), Duff ME, West JW, Kelly JD, Sheppard PO, Hofstrand PD, Gao Z, 
Shoemaker K, Bukowski TR, Moore M, Feldhaus AL, Humes JM, Palmer TE, Hart CE.

Author information:
(1)ZymoGenetics Inc., Seattle, Washington 98102, USA. gilbertd@zgi.com

We have characterized platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) C, a novel growth 
factor belonging to the PDGF family. PDGF-C is a multidomain protein with the 
N-terminal region homologous to the extracellular CUB domain of neuropilin-1, 
and the C-terminal region consists of a growth factor domain (GFD) with homology 
to vascular endothelial growth factor (25%) and PDGF A-chain (23%). A 
serum-sensitive cleavage site between the two domains allows release of the GFD 
from the CUB domain. Competition binding and immunoprecipitation studies on 
cells bearing both PDGF alpha and beta receptors reveal a high affinity binding 
of recombinant GFD (PDGF-CC) to PDGF receptor-alpha homodimers and PDGF 
receptor-alpha/beta heterodimers. PDGF-CC exhibits greater mitogenic potency 
than PDGF-AA and comparable or greater mitogenic activity than PDGF-AB and 
PDGF-BB on several mesenchymal cell types. Analysis of PDGF-CC in vivo in a 
diabetic mouse model of delayed wound healing showed that PDGF-CC significantly 
enhanced repair of a full-thickness skin excision. Together, these studies 
describe a third member of the PDGF family (PDGF-C) as a potent mitogen for 
cells of mesenchymal origin in in vitro and in vivo systems with a binding 
pattern similar to PDGF-AB.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M101056200
PMID: 11297552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
