---
pmid: '11923452'
title: Alpha1b-adrenergic receptors control locomotor and rewarding effects of psychostimulants
  and opiates.
authors:
- Drouin C
- Darracq L
- Trovero F
- Blanc G
- Glowinski J
- Cotecchia S
- Tassin JP
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6758308
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-07-02873.2002
---

# Alpha1b-adrenergic receptors control locomotor and rewarding effects of psychostimulants and opiates.
**Authors:** Drouin C, Darracq L, Trovero F, Blanc G, Glowinski J, Cotecchia S, Tassin JP
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-07-02873.2002](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-07-02873.2002)
**PMC:** [PMC6758308](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6758308/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2002 Apr 1;22(7):2873-84. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-07-02873.2002.

Alpha1b-adrenergic receptors control locomotor and rewarding effects of 
psychostimulants and opiates.

Drouin C(1), Darracq L, Trovero F, Blanc G, Glowinski J, Cotecchia S, Tassin JP.

Author information:
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U.114, Collège de 
France.

Drugs of abuse, such as psychostimulants and opiates, are generally considered 
as exerting their locomotor and rewarding effects through an increased 
dopaminergic transmission in the nucleus accumbens. Noradrenergic transmission 
may also be implicated because most psychostimulants increase norepinephrine 
(NE) release, and numerous studies have indicated interactions between 
noradrenergic and dopaminergic neurons through alpha1-adrenergic receptors. 
However, analysis of the effects of psychostimulants after either destruction of 
noradrenergic neurons or pharmacological blockade of alpha1-adrenergic receptors 
led to conflicting results. Here we show that the locomotor hyperactivities 
induced by d-amphetamine (1-3 mg/kg), cocaine (5-20 mg/kg), or morphine (5-10 
mg/kg) in mice lacking the alpha1b subtype of adrenergic receptors were 
dramatically decreased when compared with wild-type littermates. Moreover, 
behavioral sensitizations induced by d-amphetamine (1-2 mg/kg), cocaine (5-15 
mg/kg), or morphine (7.5 mg/kg) were also decreased in knock-out mice when 
compared with wild-type. Ruling out a neurological deficit in knock-out mice, 
both strains reacted similarly to novelty, to intraperitoneal saline, or to the 
administration of scopolamine (1 mg/kg), an anti-muscarinic agent. Finally, 
rewarding properties could not be observed in knock-out mice in an oral 
preference test (cocaine and morphine) and conditioned place preference 
(morphine) paradigm. Because catecholamine tissue levels, autoradiography of D1 
and D2 dopaminergic receptors, and of dopamine reuptake sites and locomotor 
response to a D1 agonist showed that basal dopaminergic transmission was similar 
in knock-out and wild-type mice, our data indicate a critical role of 
alpha1b-adrenergic receptors and noradrenergic transmission in the vulnerability 
to addiction.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-07-02873.2002
PMCID: PMC6758308
PMID: 11923452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
