---
pmid: '34626534'
title: SPRED2 loss-of-function causes a recessive Noonan syndrome-like phenotype.
authors:
- Motta M
- Fasano G
- Gredy S
- Brinkmann J
- Bonnard AA
- Simsek-Kiper PO
- Gulec EY
- Essaddam L
- Utine GE
- Guarnetti Prandi I
- Venditti M
- Pantaleoni F
- Radio FC
- Ciolfi A
- Petrini S
- Consoli F
- Vignal C
- Hepbasli D
- Ullrich M
- de Boer E
- Vissers LELM
- Gritli S
- Rossi C
- De Luca A
- Ben Becher S
- Gelb BD
- Dallapiccola B
- Lauri A
- Chillemi G
- Schuh K
- Cavé H
- Zenker M
- Tartaglia M
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2021'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC8595899
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2021.09.007
---

# SPRED2 loss-of-function causes a recessive Noonan syndrome-like phenotype.
**Authors:** Motta M, Fasano G, Gredy S, Brinkmann J, Bonnard AA, Simsek-Kiper PO, Gulec EY, Essaddam L, Utine GE, Guarnetti Prandi I, Venditti M, Pantaleoni F, Radio FC, Ciolfi A, Petrini S, Consoli F, Vignal C, Hepbasli D, Ullrich M, de Boer E, Vissers LELM, Gritli S, Rossi C, De Luca A, Ben Becher S, Gelb BD, Dallapiccola B, Lauri A, Chillemi G, Schuh K, Cavé H, Zenker M, Tartaglia M
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2021.09.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2021.09.007)
**PMC:** [PMC8595899](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8595899/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2021 Nov 4;108(11):2112-2129. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2021.09.007.
 Epub 2021 Oct 8.

SPRED2 loss-of-function causes a recessive Noonan syndrome-like phenotype.

Motta M(1), Fasano G(1), Gredy S(2), Brinkmann J(3), Bonnard AA(4), Simsek-Kiper 
PO(5), Gulec EY(6), Essaddam L(7), Utine GE(5), Guarnetti Prandi I(8), Venditti 
M(1), Pantaleoni F(1), Radio FC(1), Ciolfi A(1), Petrini S(9), Consoli F(10), 
Vignal C(11), Hepbasli D(2), Ullrich M(2), de Boer E(12), Vissers LELM(12), 
Gritli S(13), Rossi C(14), De Luca A(10), Ben Becher S(7), Gelb BD(15), 
Dallapiccola B(1), Lauri A(1), Chillemi G(16), Schuh K(2), Cavé H(4), Zenker 
M(3), Tartaglia M(17).

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino 
Gesù, IRCCS, 00146 Rome, Italy.
(2)Institute of Physiology, University of Wuerzburg, 97070 Wuerzburg, Germany.
(3)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Magdeburg, 39120 Magdeburg, 
Germany.
(4)Assistance Publique des Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Hôpital Robert Debré, 
Département de Génétique, 75019 Paris, France; INSERM UMR 1131, Institut de 
Recherche Saint-Louis, Université de Paris, Paris, France.
(5)Department of Pediatric Genetics, Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, 
Sihhiye, 06100 Ankara, Turkey.
(6)Department of Medical Genetics, Health Sciences University, Istanbul Kanuni 
Sultan Suleyman Training and Research Hospital, 34303 Istanbul, Turkey.
(7)Department of Pediatrics-PUC, Béchir Hamza Children's Hospital, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Tunis El Manar, Jebbari 1007, Tunis, Tunisia.
(8)Dipartimento per la Innovazione nei Sistemi Biologici, Agroalimentari e 
Forestali, Università Della Tuscia, 01100 Viterbo, Italy.
(9)Confocal Microscopy Core Facility, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, 00146 
Rome, Italy.
(10)Medical Genetics Division, Fondazione IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, 
71013 San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy.
(11)Assistance Publique des Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Hôpital Robert Debré, 
Département de Génétique, 75019 Paris, France.
(12)Department of Human Genetics, Radboudumc, 6525 GA Nijmegen, the Netherlands; 
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University, 6525 
GA Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(13)Department of Immunology, Pasteur Institute of Tunis, 1002 Tunis-Belvédère, 
Tunisia.
(14)Genetica Medica, IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna, 40138 
Bologna, Italy.
(15)Mindich Child Health and Development Institute and Department of Pediatrics, 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(16)Dipartimento per la Innovazione nei Sistemi Biologici, Agroalimentari e 
Forestali, Università Della Tuscia, 01100 Viterbo, Italy; Istituto di 
Biomembrane, Bioenergetica e Biotecnologie Molecolari, Centro Nazionale Delle 
Ricerche, 70126 Bari, Italy.
(17)Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino 
Gesù, IRCCS, 00146 Rome, Italy. Electronic address: marco.tartaglia@opbg.net.

Upregulated signal flow through RAS and the mitogen-associated protein kinase 
(MAPK) cascade is the unifying mechanistic theme of the RASopathies, a family of 
disorders affecting development and growth. Pathogenic variants in more than 20 
genes have been causally linked to RASopathies, the majority having a dominant 
role in promoting enhanced signaling. Here, we report that SPRED2 loss of 
function is causally linked to a recessive phenotype evocative of Noonan 
syndrome. Homozygosity for three different variants-c.187C>T (p.Arg63∗), 
c.299T>C (p.Leu100Pro), and c.1142_1143delTT (p.Leu381Hisfs∗95)-were identified 
in four subjects from three families. All variants severely affected protein 
stability, causing accelerated degradation, and variably perturbed SPRED2 
functional behavior. When overexpressed in cells, all variants were unable to 
negatively modulate EGF-promoted RAF1, MEK, and ERK phosphorylation, and 
time-course experiments in primary fibroblasts (p.Leu100Pro and 
p.Leu381Hisfs∗95) documented an increased and prolonged activation of the MAPK 
cascade in response to EGF stimulation. Morpholino-mediated knockdown of spred2a 
and spred2b in zebrafish induced defects in convergence and extension cell 
movements indicating upregulated RAS-MAPK signaling, which were rescued by 
expressing wild-type SPRED2 but not the SPRED2Leu381Hisfs∗95 protein. The 
clinical phenotype of the four affected individuals included developmental 
delay, intellectual disability, cardiac defects, short stature, skeletal 
anomalies, and a typical facial gestalt as major features, without the 
occurrence of the distinctive skin signs characterizing Legius syndrome. These 
features, in part, characterize the phenotype of Spred2-/- mice. Our findings 
identify the second recessive form of Noonan syndrome and document pleiotropic 
consequences of SPRED2 loss of function in development.

Copyright © 2021 American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2021.09.007
PMCID: PMC8595899
PMID: 34626534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.

## Full Text

Introduction

Dysregulated signaling through the RAS/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade has profound consequences on cell behavior and development. Impaired function of the three members of the RAS subfamily or each tier of the MAPK backbone (i.e., RAF, MEK, and ERK proteins) dramatically affects cell homeostasis 1 , 2 and perturbs developmental programs. 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 On the other hand, enhanced or prolonged activation of this cascade due to activating variants in HRAS (MIM: 190020 ), KRAS (MIM: 190070 ), NRAS (MIM: 164790 ), BRAF (MIM: 164757 ), RAF1 (MIM: 164760 ), MAP2K1 (MIM: 176872 ), MAP2K2 (MIM: 601263 ), or MAPK1 (MIM: 176948 ) and an increasing number of genes encoding proteins acting as positive regulators of this signaling cascade is a major event contributing to oncogenesis and causes a family of diseases affecting development and growth collectively known as the RASopathies. 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 Equivalent consequences have been associated with loss-of-function (LoF) variants affecting negative regulators causing defective signaling switch-off. 12 , 13 , 14 , 15

In line with the shared pathogenesis and the pleiotropic consequences of aberrant RAS/MAPK signaling in development, RASopathies are multisystem disorders with significant clinical overlap. Major features include a distinctive facies, postnatally reduced growth, a wide spectrum of congenital heart defects (CHD), hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), cognitive impairment and behavioral anomalies, skeletal and skin features, as well as variable predisposition to malignancies. 8 , 10 , 16 , 17 These disorders are generally transmitted as dominant traits, although recessive inheritance has recently been recognized in Noonan syndrome (NS [MIM: PS163950]), 18 , 19 the most clinically variable condition among RASopathies. While all RASopathies are rare disorders, NS and neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1 [MIM: 162210 ]) are relatively common, which is likely due to the underlying genetic heterogeneity (NS), large size of the implicated gene (NF1), relatively mild impact on fitness (i.e., a significant proportion of families segregating the two disorders), and the selfish behavior of mutations in spermatogonial stem cells. 8 , 10 , 20

Pathogenic variants in more than 20 genes have been reported to cause RASopathies. 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 Among these, only a minority (i.e., CBL [MIM: 165360 ], LZTR1 [MIM: 600574 ], NF1 [MIM: 613113 ], and SPRED1 [MIM: 609291 ]) encode proteins functioning as negative modulators of the RAS-MAPK pathway. In this context, inefficient signaling switch-off operating at the level of RAS proteins has been established as the mechanism of disease underlying NF1 and Legius syndrome (LGSS [MIM: 611431 ]). 25 NF1 is characterized by Lisch nodules on the iris, cutaneous café-au-lait macules (CALMs), axillary/inguinal freckling, skeletal defects, learning disabilities, neurofibromas, and increased risk for certain cancers ( Table S1 ). 26 The disorder is caused by heterozygous inactivating variants in NF1 , which encodes neurofibromin, a multidomain protein functioning as a RAS-specific GTPase activating protein (GAP) negatively controlling RAS activity by promoting conversion of active GTP-bound RAS to its inactive, GDP-bound state. 27 , 28 Of note, a small proportion of subjects with pathogenic NF1 variants shows clinical overlap with NS, resulting in the so-called neurofibromatosis-Noonan syndrome (MIM: 601321 ). 29 , 30 Similar to NF1, LGSS is characterized by CALMs, with or without freckling; in LGSS, however, Lisch nodules and the NF1-associated neurofibromas and malignancies do not occur ( Table S1 ). 31 In affected subjects, developmental delay (DD), behavioral anomalies, and hyperactivity, as well as facial features suggestive of NS are commonly reported. The disorder is caused by heterozygous mutations in the Sprouty-related, EVH1 domain containing 1 ( SPRED1 ) gene, 32 encoding a protein inhibiting RAS function by promoting neurofibromin translocation to the plasma membrane and its binding to GTP-bound RAS. 33 , 34 SPRED binding to neurofibromin is a required step for the ability of the GAP to suppress RAS function, and a recent study has solved the structure of the ternary complex involving SPRED1, neurofibromin, and GTP-bound KRAS, providing mechanistic insights of this regulatory circuit negatively controlling RAS-MAPK signaling. 34

The three members of the SPRED family (i.e., SPRED1, SPRED2, and SPRED3) share a similar domain organization and function. 25 , 35 These proteins are characterized by an N -terminal Enabled/VASP homology 1 (EVH1) domain, a central c-Kit related binding domain (KBD) (missing in SPRED3), and a C-terminal cysteine-rich Sprouty-related (SPR) domain. The EVH1 domain is essential for the inhibitory function of SPRED proteins exerted on RAS since it mediates binding of the protein to neurofibromin. 34 , 36 The SPR domain, which is shared with the members of the Sprouty family, undergoes post-translational processing (i.e., palmitoylation) and is responsible for binding of SPRED proteins to the cytoplasmic leaflet of membranes. 37 , 38 , 39 The three proteins negatively regulate signal traffic through the RAS-MAPK pathway elicited by multiple growth factors (e.g., FGF and EGF) and cytokines, with SPRED1 and SPRED2 sharing the stronger suppression activity. 39 Of note, partial redundancy in Spred1 and Spred2 function has been documented. 40

Despite the successful use of exome/genome sequencing in understanding the molecular bases of RASopathies during the last years, a large proportion of individuals with a clinical diagnosis of RASopathy or having an unclassified but RASopathy-related phenotype remains molecularly unsolved. By a “functional candidacy” strategy performed in the frame of the NSEuroNet consortium, using parallel sequencing of a panel of genes functionally related to the currently known RASopathy genes, we identify SPRED2 (MIM: 609292 ) as a gene implicated in a RASopathy clinically resembling NS. Biochemical, in vitro and in vivo functional studies indicate that the identified SPRED2 variants are inactivating and that SPRED2 LoF results in an enhanced, stimulus-dependent activation of the MAPK cascade. Remarkably and differently from LGSS, this new condition is transmitted as a recessive trait, indicating a differential requirement of SPRED2 and SPRED1 function in developmental processes.

Discussion

Our findings provide evidence that loss of SPRED2 function underlies a recessive developmental disorder within the RASopathy clinical spectrum resembling NS. Complementary in silico , in vitro , and in vivo analyses documented that pathogenic SPRED2 variants can affect protein stability, causing accelerated degradation, but can also affect proper targeting of SPRED2 to the plasma membrane or impair its binding to neurofibromin. These effects converge toward an upregulation of MAPK signaling. Remarkably, the associated clinical features significantly differ from those resulting from SPRED1 haploinsufficiency occurring in LGSS.

SPRED2 is a member of a family of proteins functioning as negative regulators of signaling elicited by cell-surface receptor tyrosine kinases. Among these, four paralogs of the Sprouty subfamily (SPRY1-4) have been identified in mammals and documented to suppress the activation of the MAPK cascade induced in response to a variety of growth factors. 68 Their negative modulatory function is exerted at the level of RAS activation by preventing SOS translocation to membranes and its positive modulatory role on RAS function. 69 A negative regulatory role of these proteins on MAPK signaling by binding and inactivating RAF has also been suggested. 70 On the other hand, the three members of the SPRED subfamily negatively control MAPK signaling by promoting binding of neurofibromin to activated, GTP-bound RAS. 25 Among these, SPRED3 appears to have a lower inhibitory activity, 39 possibly as a result of a reduced affinity in neurofibromin binding. 59 Similarly, wide and partially overlapping expression patterns have been reported for SPRED1 and SPRED2 (Genotype-Tissue Expression Project [GTEx] portal, Human Protein Atlas), with the former being more broadly expressed during embryogenesis 71 and the latter more extensively expressed in adult organs and tissues. 35 In contrast, Spred3 expression appears more restricted, being limited to the brain (GTEx portal). 39 These observations suggest a differential role of the three proteins in controlling MAPK signaling, which is in line with the different phenotypes characterizing the generated KO mice. Indeed, Spred1 −/− mice show a lower body weight, a shortened face, spatial learning and memory deficits, and eosinophilia, 72 , 73 while Spred2 −/− mice were reported to have a markedly reduced growth and shorter long bones, 54 cardiac fibrosis and arrhythmias, and a shortened lifespan. 67 The different features previously documented in these models, together with those observed in the present study (see below), indicate a differential role of these proteins in controlling bone morphogenesis, hematopoiesis, cardiac function, and multiple cellular processes (present study), 25 , 35 , 68 even though the finding that Spred1 and Spred2 KO mice are viable while Spred1/2 double KO mice are embryonic lethal supports partial redundancy in function. 40

Similar to what is observed in affected individuals, Spred2 −/− mice showed signs of cardiac arrhythmias and hypertrophy, reduced growth and weight, kyphosis, cranial anomalies, splenomegaly, and enlargement of the brain ventricle system. The observed shortened skull, the splenomegaly, and the cardiac hypertrophy in Spred2 −/− mice resemble phenotypes of the Raf1 L613V , Kras V14I , and Ptpn11 D61G/+ mouse models of NS. 74 , 75 , 76 However, neither the pulmonary valve stenosis documented in affected individuals was replicated in Spred2 −/− mice, nor other changes in right ventricular hemodynamics were detected in mice. So far, malformation of the gyrus dentatus and kidney features were detected only in mice, possibly due to the small number of identified subjects with bi-allelic inactivating SPRED2 variants or/and young age of the affected subjects. The obsessive-compulsive disorder-like behavior observed in Spred2 −/− mice is supportive for potential behavioral changes in affected individuals; 77 on the other hand, no data are currently available concerning cognitive or learning aspects in these mice.

Among the members of the SPRY/SPRED family, only SPRED1 had previously been established to be implicated in a Mendelian disorder, 13 while heterozygous missense variants of SPRY4 (MIM: 607984 ) had been reported as a contributing event in congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (MIM: 615266 ), a condition characterized by oligogenic inheritance. 78 Here, we report that SPRED2 is also causally associated with a Mendelian disorder. The four affected individuals from the three unrelated consanguineous families here reported were identified in the frame of a multicentric collaborative effort (NSEuroNet consortium). Two unrelated individuals were identified at the University Hospital of Magdeburg among 320 subjects with a tentative diagnosis of RASopathy found negative for mutations in previously known genes. One individual (3-II-1) was identified among 1,664 affected individuals screened at the Robert Debré Hospital, Paris, for diagnostic testing for NS or a related disorder. Finally, no bi-allelic occurrence of functionally relevant SPRED2 variants was identified among 40 subjects with a suspected clinical diagnosis of RASopathy, negative for pathogenic variants in known genes implicated in these disorders, who were assessed by exome sequencing (Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Rome) and among 471 affected individuals referred for genetic testing because of a suspected RASopathy screened at the Policlinico S. Orsola, Bologna, and Fondazione Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo (among these 57/471 were positive for pathogenic PTPN11 variants). Overall, these findings indicate that mutations in SPRED2 likely account for a relatively small proportion of affected individuals with clinical diagnosis suggestive of NS and are very uncommon in a non-consanguineous setting, though structural rearrangements (e.g., large intragenic deletions) and variants affecting regulatory and deep intronic regions were not systematically considered in our mutational scanning effort.

In contrast with the significant overlap between LGSS and NF1, the clinical features occurring in the identified subjects with bi-allelic inactivating SPRED2 variants are more closely related to NS ( Table S1 ). LGSS, which is caused by heterozygous inactivating variants in SPRED1 , is a substantially mild version of NF1. 31 In LGSS, multiple CALMs freckling, DD, learning difficulties, and behavioral problems commonly occur. NS-like craniofacial features are also a relatively common finding, while Lisch nodules, neurofibromas, optic gliomas, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors, and NF1-specific bone lesions are essentially absent. Different from what is observed in LGSS, the phenotypes associated with disrupted SPRED2 function fit well within the clinical spectrum of NS, with short stature, a short/webbed neck with a low posterior hairline, ID, and craniofacial and thorax features resembling NS. Cardiac involvement (CHD and HCM), which is generally not observed in LGSS and is a recurrent feature of NS, was reported in three of the four subjects, and included ECG anomalies, HCM, and PVS. Of note, CALMs or axillary/inguinal freckling were not reported in these subjects. Moreover, differently from LGSS, the present condition is inherited as a recessive trait, which further supports partial redundancy. The distinct clinical presentations associated with SPRED1 haploinsufficiency and SPRED2 LoF support the idea that these proteins play different roles in development. While dedicated studies are required to dissect the role of these proteins in the modulation of RAS-MAPK signaling, multiple factors likely contribute to this picture. On one hand, the two genes are characterized by only partially overlapping expression patterns in adult tissues and during development, which are expected to contribute to the “unique” ability of the two proteins to control the amplitude and duration of activation of the MAPK cascade in response of various extracellular signals and in a specific temporal and spatial manner. On the other hand, it is also likely that the two proteins have different strengths in contributing to the tuning mechanism regulating the intensity and dynamics of MAPK signaling, and that the cellular context might be relevant for such function. Overall, both quantitative and qualitative aspects likely are relevant in explaining the diverse phenotype associated with decreased/loss of function of SPRED1 and SPRED2. While dedicated efforts are required to answer these questions, a noticeable finding of this study is the occurrence of conserved themes in the functional dysregulation associated with pathogenic SPRED1 and SPRED2 variants. Previous functional characterization of the molecular causes leading to SPRED1 haploinsufficiency in LGSS documented various aspects of the biochemical behavior, including defective protein synthesis or accelerated degradation, aberrant localization, and impaired interaction with neurofibromin, as the invariantly occurring events. 32 , 34 , 59 The same key aspects were found to be affected by the bi-allelic SPRED2 variants implicated in the present recessive NS-like disorder.

To conclude, we provide evidence that inactivating bi-allelic variants in SPRED2 underlie a rare recessive clinical phenotype that is distinct from LGSS and resembles NS. These pathogenic variants affect different properties of the protein but are functionally equivalent, causing loss of SPRED2 function and upregulation of MAPK signaling. Further studies are required to more accurately understand the different modulatory function of SPRED proteins in intracellular signaling and development.
