---
pmid: '21569246'
title: Myomegalin is a novel A-kinase anchoring protein involved in the phosphorylation
  of cardiac myosin binding protein C.
authors:
- Uys GM
- Ramburan A
- Loos B
- Kinnear CJ
- Korkie LJ
- Mouton J
- Riedemann J
- Moolman-Smook JC
journal: BMC Cell Biol
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3103437
doi: 10.1186/1471-2121-12-18
---

# Myomegalin is a novel A-kinase anchoring protein involved in the phosphorylation of cardiac myosin binding protein C.
**Authors:** Uys GM, Ramburan A, Loos B, Kinnear CJ, Korkie LJ, Mouton J, Riedemann J, Moolman-Smook JC
**Journal:** BMC Cell Biol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1471-2121-12-18](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2121-12-18)
**PMC:** [PMC3103437](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3103437/)

## Abstract

1. BMC Cell Biol. 2011 May 10;12:18. doi: 10.1186/1471-2121-12-18.

Myomegalin is a novel A-kinase anchoring protein involved in the phosphorylation 
of cardiac myosin binding protein C.

Uys GM(1), Ramburan A, Loos B, Kinnear CJ, Korkie LJ, Mouton J, Riedemann J, 
Moolman-Smook JC.

Author information:
(1)US/MRC Centre for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Department of Biomedical 
Sciences, University of Stellenbosch, South Africa.

BACKGROUND: Cardiac contractility is regulated by dynamic phosphorylation of 
sarcomeric proteins by kinases such as cAMP-activated protein kinase A (PKA). 
Efficient phosphorylation requires that PKA be anchored close to its targets by 
A-kinase anchoring proteins (AKAPs). Cardiac Myosin Binding Protein-C (cMyBPC) 
and cardiac troponin I (cTNI) are hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM)-causing 
sarcomeric proteins which regulate contractility in response to PKA 
phosphorylation.
RESULTS: During a yeast 2-hybrid (Y2H) library screen using a 
trisphosphorylation mimic of the C1-C2 region of cMyBPC, we identified isoform 4 
of myomegalin (MMGL) as an interactor of this N-terminal cMyBPC region. As MMGL 
has previously been shown to interact with phosphodiesterase 4D, we speculated 
that it may be a PKA-anchoring protein (AKAP).To investigate this possibility, 
we assessed the ability of MMGL isoform 4 to interact with PKA regulatory 
subunits R1A and R2A using Y2H-based direct protein-protein interaction assays. 
Additionally, to further elucidate the function of MMGL, we used it as bait to 
screen a cardiac cDNA library. Other PKA targets, viz. CARP, COMMD4, ENO1, ENO3 
and cTNI were identified as putative interactors, with cTNI being the most 
frequent interactor.We further assessed and confirmed these interactions by 
fluorescent 3D-co-localization in differentiated H9C2 cells as well as by in 
vivo co-immunoprecipitation. We also showed that quantitatively more interaction 
occurs between MMGL and cTNI under β-adrenergic stress. Moreover, siRNA-mediated 
knockdown of MMGL leads to reduction of cMyBPC levels under conditions of 
adrenergic stress, indicating that MMGL-assisted phosphorylation is requisite 
for protection of cMyBPC against proteolytic cleavage.
CONCLUSIONS: This study ascribes a novel function to MMGL isoform 4: it meets 
all criteria for classification as an AKAP, and we show that is involved in the 
phosphorylation of cMyBPC as well as cTNI, hence MMGL is an important regulator 
of cardiac contractility. This has further implications for understanding the 
patho-aetiology of HCM-causing mutations in the genes encoding cMyBPC and cTNI, 
and raises the question of whether MMGL might itself be considered a candidate 
HCM-causing or modifying factor.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2121-12-18
PMCID: PMC3103437
PMID: 21569246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
