---
pmid: '17505062'
title: Growth factor signaling pathways modulate BRCA1 repression of estrogen receptor-alpha
  activity.
authors:
- Ma Y
- Hu C
- Riegel AT
- Fan S
- Rosen EM
journal: Mol Endocrinol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1210/me.2006-0397
---

# Growth factor signaling pathways modulate BRCA1 repression of estrogen receptor-alpha activity.
**Authors:** Ma Y, Hu C, Riegel AT, Fan S, Rosen EM
**Journal:** Mol Endocrinol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1210/me.2006-0397](https://doi.org/10.1210/me.2006-0397)

## Abstract

1. Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Aug;21(8):1905-23. doi: 10.1210/me.2006-0397. Epub 2007
May  15.

Growth factor signaling pathways modulate BRCA1 repression of estrogen 
receptor-alpha activity.

Ma Y(1), Hu C, Riegel AT, Fan S, Rosen EM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown 
University, Washington, D.C. 20057-1469, USA.

The breast cancer susceptibility gene BRCA1 is mutated in about one half of all 
hereditary breast cancer cases, and its expression is frequently decreased in 
sporadic cancers. Previously, we demonstrated a functional interaction between 
the BRCA1 and estrogen receptor-alpha (ER-alpha) proteins that causes inhibition 
of ER-alpha signaling. Here, we examined the role of growth factor signaling 
pathways in modulating this interaction. We found that underexpression of BRCA1 
caused ligand-independent activation of ER-alpha that was mediated through 
phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3K)/c-Akt signaling. BRCA1 underexpression also 
enhanced estrogen-inducible ER-alpha activity in a PI3K/Akt-dependent manner. 
Exogenous c-Akt conferred estrogen-independent ER-alpha activation and rescued 
the BRCA1 repression of estrogen-stimulated ER-alpha activity. BRCA1 knockdown 
stimulated c-Akt activity, in part, by inhibiting the activity of protein 
phosphatase 2A, an enzyme that dephosphorylates Akt. ERs with point mutations of 
several growth factor-targeted serine residues (S167A, S118A, and S118/167A) 
were resistant to repression by BRCA1, although the single point mutant 
receptors still associated with the BRCA1 protein. The enhanced ER-alpha 
activity attributable to BRCA1 knockdown was dependent, in part, on serine 
residues 167 and 118 of ER-alpha. BRCA1 knockdown caused an increase in ER-alpha 
phosphorylation on serine-167 (but not serine-118 or serine-104/106) that was 
dependent on PI3K/Akt signaling and was mimicked by pharmacologic inhibition of 
protein phosphatase 2A. These findings suggest that BRCA1 regulates Akt 
signaling and the PI3K/Akt pathway modulates the ability of BRCA1 to repress 
ER-alpha, in part through serine phosphorylation events in the activation 
function-1 domain of ER-alpha.

DOI: 10.1210/me.2006-0397
PMID: 17505062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
