---
pmid: '37565810'
title: 'Protein O-mannosylation: one sugar, several pathways, many functions.'
authors:
- Koff M
- Monagas-Valentin P
- Novikov B
- Chandel I
- Panin V
journal: Glycobiology
year: '2023'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC10859634
doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwad067
---

# Protein O-mannosylation: one sugar, several pathways, many functions.
**Authors:** Koff M, Monagas-Valentin P, Novikov B, Chandel I, Panin V
**Journal:** Glycobiology (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/glycob/cwad067](https://doi.org/10.1093/glycob/cwad067)
**PMC:** [PMC10859634](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10859634/)

## Abstract

1. Glycobiology. 2023 Dec 25;33(11):911-926. doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwad067.

Protein O-mannosylation: one sugar, several pathways, many functions.

Koff M(1), Monagas-Valentin P(1), Novikov B(1), Chandel I(1), Panin V(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, AgriLife Research, Texas A&M 
University, College Station, College Station, TX 77843, United States.

Recent research has unveiled numerous important functions of protein 
glycosylation in development, homeostasis, and diseases. A type of glycosylation 
taking the center stage is protein O-mannosylation, a posttranslational 
modification conserved in a wide range of organisms, from yeast to humans. In 
animals, protein O-mannosylation plays a crucial role in the nervous system, 
whereas protein O-mannosylation defects cause severe neurological abnormalities 
and congenital muscular dystrophies. However, the molecular and cellular 
mechanisms underlying protein O-mannosylation functions and biosynthesis remain 
not well understood. This review outlines recent studies on protein 
O-mannosylation while focusing on the functions in the nervous system, 
summarizes the current knowledge about protein O-mannosylation biosynthesis, and 
discusses the pathologies associated with protein O-mannosylation defects. The 
evolutionary perspective revealed by studies in the Drosophila model system are 
also highlighted. Finally, the review touches upon important knowledge gaps in 
the field and discusses critical questions for future research on the molecular 
and cellular mechanisms associated with protein O-mannosylation functions.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/glycob/cwad067
PMCID: PMC10859634
PMID: 37565810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
