---
pmid: '15131110'
title: NCB5OR is a novel soluble NAD(P)H reductase localized in the endoplasmic reticulum.
authors:
- Zhu H
- Larade K
- Jackson TA
- Xie J
- Ladoux A
- Acker H
- Berchner-Pfannschmidt U
- Fandrey J
- Cross AR
- Lukat-Rodgers GS
- Rodgers KR
- Bunn HF
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC3045664
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M402664200
---

# NCB5OR is a novel soluble NAD(P)H reductase localized in the endoplasmic reticulum.
**Authors:** Zhu H, Larade K, Jackson TA, Xie J, Ladoux A, Acker H, Berchner-Pfannschmidt U, Fandrey J, Cross AR, Lukat-Rodgers GS, Rodgers KR, Bunn HF
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M402664200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M402664200)
**PMC:** [PMC3045664](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3045664/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 16;279(29):30316-25. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M402664200. Epub 
2004 May 6.

NCB5OR is a novel soluble NAD(P)H reductase localized in the endoplasmic 
reticulum.

Zhu H(1), Larade K, Jackson TA, Xie J, Ladoux A, Acker H, Berchner-Pfannschmidt 
U, Fandrey J, Cross AR, Lukat-Rodgers GS, Rodgers KR, Bunn HF.

Author information:
(1)Hematology Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. haozhu@rics.bwh.harvard.edu

The NAD(P)H cytochrome b5 oxidoreductase, Ncb5or (previously named b5+b5R), is 
widely expressed in human tissues and broadly distributed among the animal 
kingdom. NCB5OR is the first example of an animal flavohemoprotein containing 
cytochrome b5 and chrome b5 reductase cytodomains. We initially reported human 
NCB5OR to be a 487-residue soluble protein that reduces cytochrome c, 
methemoglobin, ferricyanide, and molecular oxygen in vitro. Bioinformatic 
analysis of genomic sequences suggested the presence of an upstream start codon. 
We confirm that endogenous NCB5OR indeed has additional NH2-terminal residues. 
By performing fractionation of subcellular organelles and confocal microscopy, 
we show that NCB5OR colocalizes with calreticulin, a marker for endoplasmic 
reticulum. Recombinant NCB5OR is soluble and has stoichiometric amounts of heme 
and flavin adenine dinucleotide. Resonance Raman spectroscopy of NCB5OR presents 
typical signatures of a six-coordinate low-spin heme similar to those found in 
other cytochrome b5 proteins. Kinetic measurements showed that full-length and 
truncated NCB5OR reduce cytochrome c actively in vitro. However, both 
full-length and truncated NCB5OR produce superoxide from oxygen with slow 
turnover rates: kcat = approximately 0.05 and approximately 1 s(-1), 
respectively. The redox potential at the heme center of NCB5OR is -108 mV, as 
determined by potentiometric titrations. Taken together, these data suggest that 
endogenous NCB5OR is a soluble NAD(P)H reductase preferentially reducing 
substrate(s) rather than transferring electrons to molecular oxygen and 
therefore not an NAD(P)H oxidase for superoxide production. The subcellular 
localization and redox properties of NCB5OR provide important insights into the 
biology of NCB5OR and the phenotype of the Ncb5or-null mouse.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M402664200
PMCID: PMC3045664
PMID: 15131110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The NAD(P)H cytochrome b 5 oxidoreductase, Ncb5or (previously named b 5+ b 5R), is widely expressed in human tissues and broadly distributed among the animal kingdom. NCB5OR is the first example of an animal flavohemoprotein containing cytochrome b 5 and cytochrome b 5 reductase domains. We initially reported human NCB5OR to be a 487-residue soluble protein that reduces cytochrome c , methemoglobin, ferricyanide, and molecular oxygen in vitro . Bioinformatic analysis of genomic sequences suggested the presence of an upstream start codon. We confirm that endogenous NCB5OR indeed has additional NH 2 -terminal residues. By performing fractionation of subcellular organelles and confocal microscopy, we show that NCB5OR colocalizes with calreticulin, a marker for endoplasmic reticulum. Recombinant NCB5OR is soluble and has stoichiometric amounts of heme and flavin adenine dinucleotide. Resonance Raman spectroscopy of NCB5OR presents typical signatures of a six-coordinate low-spin heme similar to those found in other cytochrome b 5 proteins. Kinetic measurements showed that full-length and truncated NCB5OR reduce cytochrome c actively in vitro . However, both full-length and truncated NCB5OR produce superoxide from oxygen with slow turnover rates: k cat = ~0.05 and ~1 s −1 , respectively. The redox potential at the heme center of NCB5OR is −108 mV, as determined by potentiometric titrations. Taken together, these data suggest that endogenous NCB5OR is a soluble NAD(P)H reductase preferentially reducing substrate(s) rather than transferring electrons to molecular oxygen and therefore not an NAD(P)H oxidase for superoxide production. The subcellular localization and redox properties of NCB5OR provide important insights into the biology of NCB5OR and the phenotype of the Ncb5or -null mouse.
