---
pmid: '21319273'
title: An important role for CDK2 in G1 to S checkpoint activation and DNA damage
  response in human embryonic stem cells.
authors:
- Neganova I
- Vilella F
- Atkinson SP
- Lloret M
- Passos JF
- von Zglinicki T
- O'Connor JE
- Burks D
- Jones R
- Armstrong L
- Lako M
journal: Stem Cells
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/stem.620
---

# An important role for CDK2 in G1 to S checkpoint activation and DNA damage response in human embryonic stem cells.
**Authors:** Neganova I, Vilella F, Atkinson SP, Lloret M, Passos JF, von Zglinicki T, O'Connor JE, Burks D, Jones R, Armstrong L, Lako M
**Journal:** Stem Cells (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1002/stem.620](https://doi.org/10.1002/stem.620)

## Abstract

1. Stem Cells. 2011 Apr;29(4):651-9. doi: 10.1002/stem.620.

An important role for CDK2 in G1 to S checkpoint activation and DNA damage 
response in human embryonic stem cells.

Neganova I(1), Vilella F, Atkinson SP, Lloret M, Passos JF, von Zglinicki T, 
O'Connor JE, Burks D, Jones R, Armstrong L, Lako M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle University, International Centre for 
Life, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.

A precise understanding of mechanisms used by human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) 
to maintain genomic integrity is very important for their potential clinical 
applications. The G1 checkpoint serves to protect genomic integrity and prevents 
cells with damaged DNA from entering S-phase. Previously, we have shown that 
downregulation of cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (CDK2) in hESC causes G1 arrest, 
loss of pluripotency, upregulation of cell cycle inhibitors p21 and p27 and 
differentiation toward extraembryonic lineages. In this study, we investigate in 
detail the role of CDK2 in cellular processes, which are crucial to the 
maintenance of genomic stability in hESC such as G1 checkpoint activation, DNA 
repair, and apoptosis. Our results suggest that downregulation of CDK2 triggers 
the G1 checkpoint through the activation of the ATM-CHK2-p53-p21 pathway. 
Downregulation of CDK2 is able to induce sustained DNA damage and to elicit the 
DNA damage response (DDR) as evidenced by the formation of distinct γ-H2.AX and 
RAD52-BRCA1 foci in hESC nuclei. CDK2 downregulation causes high apoptosis at 
the early time points; however, this is gradually decreased overtime as the DDR 
is initiated. Our mass spectrometry analysis suggest that CDK2 does interact 
with a large number of proteins that are involved in key cellular processes such 
as DNA replication, cell cycle progression, DNA repair, chromatin modeling, 
thus, suggesting a crucial role for CDK2 in orchestrating a fine balance between 
cellular proliferation, cell death, and DNA repair in hESC.

Copyright © 2011 AlphaMed Press.

DOI: 10.1002/stem.620
PMID: 21319273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
