---
pmid: '19934218'
title: A dual role for EDEM1 in the processing of rod opsin.
authors:
- Kosmaoglou M
- Kanuga N
- Aguilà M
- Garriga P
- Cheetham ME
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2787460
doi: 10.1242/jcs.055228
---

# A dual role for EDEM1 in the processing of rod opsin.
**Authors:** Kosmaoglou M, Kanuga N, Aguilà M, Garriga P, Cheetham ME
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.055228](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.055228)
**PMC:** [PMC2787460](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2787460/)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2009 Dec 15;122(Pt 24):4465-72. doi: 10.1242/jcs.055228. Epub 2009
 Nov 24.

A dual role for EDEM1 in the processing of rod opsin.

Kosmaoglou M(1), Kanuga N, Aguilà M, Garriga P, Cheetham ME.

Author information:
(1)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, UK.

Mutations in rod opsin, the archetypal G-protein-coupled receptor, cause 
retinitis pigmentosa. The majority of mutations, e.g. P23H, cause protein 
misfolding, resulting in ER retention, induction of the unfolded protein 
response and degradation by ERAD. If misfolded rod opsin escapes degradation, it 
aggregates and forms intracellular inclusions. Therefore, it is important to 
identify the chaperones that mediate the folding or degradation of rod opsin. ER 
degradation enhancing alpha-mannosidase-like 1 (EDEM1) can enhance the release 
of terminally misfolded glycoproteins from the calnexin chaperone system. Here, 
we identify EDEM1 as a novel chaperone of rod opsin. EDEM1 expression promoted 
the degradation of P23H rod opsin and decreased its aggregation. By contrast, 
shRNA-mediated knockdown of EDEM1 increased both the amount of P23H rod opsin 
and its aggregation into inclusions. EDEM1 was detected in rod photoreceptor 
inner segments and EndoH-sensitive rod opsin co-immunoprecipitated with EDEM1 
from retina, suggesting that rod opsin is a physiological EDEM1 client. 
Unexpectedly, EDEM1 binding to rod opsin was independent of mannose trimming and 
EDEM1 promoted the cell-surface expression of mutant rod opsin. Collectively, 
the data suggest that EDEM1 is a chaperone for rod opsin and that expression of 
EDEM1 can be used to promote correct folding, as well as enhanced degradation, 
of mutant proteins in the ER to combat protein-misfolding disease.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.055228
PMCID: PMC2787460
PMID: 19934218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Introduction

Rhodopsin is an archetypal seven-transmembrane G-protein-coupled receptor
 (GPCR) responsible for scotopic vision under dim light conditions. Rhodopsin
 is formed from rod opsin and the 11- cis -retinal chromophore. The
 apoprotein of rhodopsin, rod opsin, is synthesized in the inner segment (IS)
 of rod photoreceptor cells before vectorial transport to the rod outer segment
 (OS) photosensory cilia. Mutations in rod opsin cause the neurodegenerative
 disease retinitis pigmentosa (RP), which leads to blindness
 ( Dryja et al., 1990 )
 (OMIM:180380). Dominant mutations in rod opsin account for ∼25% of all
 autosomal dominant RP (ADRP) cases and over 200 point mutations have been
 identified to date
 ( http://www.sph.uth.tmc.edu/Retnet/ ).

Different amino acid substitutions in rod opsin result in distinct cellular
 and biochemical defects; hence, a functional classification was suggested
 ( Sung et al., 1993 ), which was
 recently extended ( Mendes et al.,
 2005 ). The distinction between rod opsin mutational consequences
 is vital for understanding the disease pathogenesis of RP. The majority of rod
 opsin mutations, such as the most common mutation in North America that
 changes intradiscal (or lumenal) Pro23 to His (P23H), are class II mutations,
 which result in the misfolding of the protein. Heterologous expression of
 class II rod opsin mutants in 293S and COS1 cells revealed that these were
 retained in the ER, suggesting that the quality control system of this
 compartment did not permit further traffic of folding-defective polypeptides
 through the secretory system ( Kaushal and
 Khorana, 1994 ; Sung et al.,
 1991 ).

P23H rod opsin misfolding stimulates the unfolded protein response (UPR)
 ( Lin et al., 2007 ). The UPR is
 an adaptive ER stress response designed to enhance the folding, as well as
 degradation of misfolded proteins, thereby reducing misfolding stress;
 however, rod opsin misfolding might lead to persistent stress that cannot be
 overcome. Misfolded P23H mutant rod opsin protein was shown to have less
 helical structure and tertiary contacts, and more susceptibility to trypsin
 digestion, suggesting that the misfolded proteins are less compact than the
 folded forms ( Liu et al.,
 1996 ). Misfolded P23H mutant rod opsin can spontaneously aggregate
 and form microscopically visible inclusion bodies, which are considered to be
 end-stage products of protein aggregation in the cell
 ( Illing et al., 2002 ; Saliba et al., 2002 ). The
 aggregation of P23H rod opsin leads to global impairment of proteasome
 function, which might lead to reduced degradation of misfolded proteins and
 other clients of the ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS)
 ( Bennett et al., 2005 ). In the
 presence of proteasome inhibitors, P23H rod opsin is ubiquitylated,
 degradation is inhibited, and export from the ER to the cytosol is delayed
 ( Illing et al., 2002 ; Saliba et al., 2002 ),
 confirming that turnover is mediated by the UPS and underscoring the role of
 the proteasome in the retrotranslocation and ER-associated degradation (ERAD)
 of mutant rod opsin.

Rhodopsin is N-glycoslyated at Asn2 and Asn15 in the first intradiscal (or
 lumenal) domain. These glycan chains of P23H rod opsin are required for
 efficient recognition by the ERAD machinery in targeting the mutant protein
 for degradation by the UPS ( Saliba et al.,
 2002 ), hence a lectin chaperone was suggested to mediate the
 degradation of rod opsin. A recent study revealed that this key chaperone is
 unlikely to be calnexin, because cells with dysfunctional calnexin processed
 P23H rod opsin similarly to controls
 ( Kosmaoglou and Cheetham,
 2008 ).

EDEM1 (ER degradation-enhancing, α-mannosidase-like 1) enhances ERAD
 of a terminally misfolded α1-antitrypsin variant, null Hong Kong (NHK,
 HK A1AT) ( Hosokawa et al.,
 2001 ). The overexpression of recombinant EDEM1 can enhance the
 release of terminally misfolded glycoproteins from the calnexin chaperone
 system and their demannosylation ( Molinari
 et al., 2003 ; Oda et al.,
 2003 ), thereby accelerating their elimination from the ER lumen.
 Furthermore, reduction of endogenous EDEM1 by RNA interference
 ( Molinari et al., 2003 ) and
 inactivation of the UPR IRE1-XBP1 pathway have both been shown to decrease the
 efficiency of glycoprotein ERAD, which eventually compromises cellular
 secretory capacity ( Eriksson et al.,
 2004 ; Yoshida et al.,
 2003 ). Therefore, EDEM1 is a potential component of the normal
 response to rod opsin misfolding and manipulation of EDEM1 could affect mutant
 rod opsin degradation.

Here, we investigated the potential role of EDEM1 in the modulation of rod
 opsin processing. EDEM1 overexpression and knockdown were analysed on P23H
 mutant rod opsin degradation, aggregation and traffic. Formation of
 EDEM1–rod-opsin complexes was probed in cells and in the retina.
 Collectively, the data suggest that rod opsin is an EDEM1 client and that
 manipulation of EDEM1 could be a useful therapeutic target in rhodopsin RP and
 other protein-misfolding diseases.

Discussion

Protein degradation in the ER must be finely tuned because underactivity
 could lead to the accumulation of aberrant polypeptides
 ( Eriksson et al., 2004 ) and the
 formation of protein aggregates. However, hyperactivity of ERAD could cause
 the extraction of intermediates from productive folding, resulting in their
 premature disposal ( Sato et al.,
 1998 ). EDEM1 is involved in the regulation of protein degradation
 in the ER. It has been reported to accelerate the degradation of model
 glycoprotein substrates via ERAD ( Hosokawa
 et al., 2001 ; Molinari et al.,
 2003 ; Wu et al.,
 2003 ). The data presented here suggest that there is a synergy
 between folding and degradation machineries, such that a physiological client
 rod opsin is subject to both processes mediated by EDEM1 because it can not
 only accelerate the degradation, but also promotes the folding and traffic of
 P23H rod opsin.

It was initially thought that mannose trimming was a prerequisite for
 glycoprotein binding with EDEM1 ( Hosokawa
 et al., 2003 ). Evidence suggested that upon release from the
 calnexin cycle by glucosidase II, misfolded glycoproteins could either be
 transferred to EDEM1 for degradation or UGGT for re-entry into the calnexin
 cycle. Hence the trimming of the α1,2 mannose residue by ERManI was
 thought to establish the fate of the glycoprotein toward degradation
 ( Oda et al., 2003 ). However,
 there is now evidence that EDEM1, and the yeast homologue Htm1p, might not
 require mannose trimming for the recognition of misfolded protein substrates
 and the interaction might also be mediated by exposed hydrophobic domains
 ( Cormier et al., 2009 ; Clerc et al., 2009 ; Molinari et al., 2003 ). This
 is consistent with our data, because treatment with the ERManI inhibitor
 kifunensine did not disrupt the interaction with P23H rod opsin. However,
 mannosidase activity might still be required for full ERAD activity because
 kifunensine partially inhibited the EDEM1 enhanced degradation of P23H
 opsin.

EDEM1 enhances degradation by inhibiting covalent dimer formation and
 possibly also inhibits the aggregation of misfolded glycoproteins
 ( Hosokawa et al., 2006 ; Olivari et al., 2006 ). It is
 thought that EDEM1 accomplishes this by maintaining the retrotranslocation
 capacity of terminally misfolded glycoproteins after reduction of sulphhydryl
 groups, which occurs before retrotranslocation. There are 10 cysteine residues
 in rod opsin, but there is only one correct disulphide bond – between
 C110 and C187 – and upon protein misfolding, C187 forms an incorrect
 disulphide linkage with C185 ( Karnik et
 al., 1988 ). Therefore, rod opsin might be modified by
 oxidoreductase enzymes before retrotranslocation and chaperones, such as
 EDEM1, might have an important role in facilitating this step.

EDEM1 turnover inhibition by chloroquine resulted in enhanced degradation
 of glycoproteins by premature interruption of protein-folding attempts and
 reduced secretion of native proteins ( Cali
 et al., 2008 ). By contrast, EDEM1 overexpression promoted the
 folding and traffic of mutant P23H rod opsin. It is possible that EDEM1 clears
 terminally misfolded P23H rod opsin, thereby allowing other chaperones to
 interact with the folding-competent mutant rod opsin and assist in their
 productive folding. Alternatively, the enhanced degradation of mutant rod
 opsin might reduce aggregation, and thereby allow productive folding to occur
 in the absence of aggregation seeds and proteasome inhibition.

EDEM1 was initially identified in a screen of genes that are upregulated
 during acute ER stress, but not cytoplasmic stress
 ( Hosokawa et al., 2001 ). P23H
 rod opsin induces the UPR and persistent stress might lead to attenuation of
 the IRE1-XBP1 pathway and induction of the CHOP-mediated proapoptotic pathway
 to cause photoreceptor death ( Lin et al.,
 2007 ). EDEM1 functions as a component of the IRE1-XBP1 pathway,
 hence EDEM1 could be cytoprotective in alleviating stress as a result of
 misfolded rod opsin, which could be manipulated in the development of
 therapies for RP.

A rod cell synthesises over 10 million molecules of rhodopsin every day, so
 photoreceptors are not unlike hepatocytes or antibody-secreting plasma cells.
 ER-stress transducers are thought to be activated in dedicated secretory cells
 and this might reflect the EDEM1 expression in photoreceptors. Cells involved
 in these processes have also displayed enhanced survival and/or
 differentiation, with activation of the IRE1-XBP1 pathway
 ( Iwakoshi et al., 2003 ). The
 presence of an EDEM1-rhodopsin complex in the photoreceptor ER suggests that
 EDEM1 is part of the normal folding surveillance for rod opsin.

This is the first time an improvement in mutant rod opsin processing has
 been mediated by a molecular chaperone. Pharmacological chaperones have been
 known to enhance rod opsin folding ( Mendes
 and Cheetham, 2008 ; Noorwez et
 al., 2004 ; Saliba et al.,
 2002 ). However, EDEM1 represents a novel mechanism for the
 enhanced processing of mutant P23H rod opsin. The newly elucidated dual
 function of enhanced degradation and improved folding is perhaps crucial for
 rod opsin RP and other protein misfolding diseases.
