---
pmid: '11390662'
title: A human protein with sequence similarity to Drosophila mastermind coordinates
  the nuclear form of notch and a CSL protein to build a transcriptional activator
  complex on target promoters.
authors:
- Kitagawa M
- Oyama T
- Kawashima T
- Yedvobnick B
- Kumar A
- Matsuno K
- Harigaya K
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC87094
doi: 10.1128/MCB.21.13.4337-4346.2001
---

# A human protein with sequence similarity to Drosophila mastermind coordinates the nuclear form of notch and a CSL protein to build a transcriptional activator complex on target promoters.
**Authors:** Kitagawa M, Oyama T, Kawashima T, Yedvobnick B, Kumar A, Matsuno K, Harigaya K
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.21.13.4337-4346.2001](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.21.13.4337-4346.2001)
**PMC:** [PMC87094](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC87094/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Jul;21(13):4337-46. doi: 10.1128/MCB.21.13.4337-4346.2001.

A human protein with sequence similarity to Drosophila mastermind coordinates 
the nuclear form of notch and a CSL protein to build a transcriptional activator 
complex on target promoters.

Kitagawa M(1), Oyama T, Kawashima T, Yedvobnick B, Kumar A, Matsuno K, Harigaya 
K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Tumor Pathology, Chiba University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan. kitagawa@med.m.chiba-u.ac.jp

Mastermind (Mam) has been implicated as an important positive regulator of the 
Notch signaling pathway by genetic studies using Drosophila melanogaster. Here 
we describe a biochemical mechanism of action of Mam within the Notch signaling 
pathway. Expression of a human sequence related to Drosophila Mam (hMam-1) in 
mammalian cells augments induction of Hairy Enhancer of split (HES) promoters by 
Notch signaling. hMam-1 stabilizes and participates in the DNA binding complex 
of the intracellular domain of human Notch1 and a CSL protein. Truncated 
versions of hMam-1 that can maintain an association with the complex behave in a 
dominant negative fashion and depress transactivation. Furthermore, Drosophila 
Mam forms a similar complex with the intracellular domain of Drosophila Notch 
and Drosophila CSL protein during activation of Enhancer of split, the 
Drosophila counterpart of HES. These results indicate that Mam is an essential 
component of the transcriptional apparatus of Notch signaling.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.21.13.4337-4346.2001
PMCID: PMC87094
PMID: 11390662 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
