---
pmid: '2783588'
title: Identification of a point mutation resulting in a heat-labile adenosine deaminase
  (ADA) in two unrelated children with partial ADA deficiency.
authors:
- Hirschhorn R
- Tzall S
- Ellenbogen A
- Orkin SH
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '1989'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC303706
doi: 10.1172/JCI113909
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Identification of a point mutation resulting in a heat-labile adenosine deaminase (ADA) in two unrelated children with partial ADA deficiency.
**Authors:** Hirschhorn R, Tzall S, Ellenbogen A, Orkin SH
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI113909](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI113909)
**PMC:** [PMC303706](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC303706/)

## Abstract

1. J Clin Invest. 1989 Feb;83(2):497-501. doi: 10.1172/JCI113909.

Identification of a point mutation resulting in a heat-labile adenosine 
deaminase (ADA) in two unrelated children with partial ADA deficiency.

Hirschhorn R(1), Tzall S, Ellenbogen A, Orkin SH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, New York University Medical Center, New York 10016.

We have determined the mutation in a child with partial adenosine deaminase 
(ADA) deficiency who is phenotypically homozygous for a mutant ADA gene encoding 
a heat-labile enzyme (Am. J. Hum. Genet. 38: 13-25). Sequencing of cDNA 
demonstrated a C to A transversion that results in the replacement of a proline 
by a glutamine residue at codon 297. As this mutation generated a new 
recognition site in exon 10 of genomic DNA for the enzyme Alu I, Southern blot 
analysis was used to establish that this child was indeed homozygous for the 
mutation. The abnormal restriction fragment generated by this mutation was also 
found in a second partially ADA-deficient patient who phenotypically is a 
genetic compound and also expresses a heat-labile ADA (in addition to a more 
acidic than normal ADA) (Am. J. Hum. Genet. 38: 13-25). Sequencing of cDNA 
clones from the second patient established the identical codon 297 mutation. 
Transfection of the mutant cDNA into heterologous cells resulted in expression 
of a heat-labile ADA of normal electrophoretic mobility and isoelectric point, 
properties exhibited by the ADA in the patients' cells.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI113909
PMCID: PMC303706
PMID: 2783588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
