---
pmid: '10944119'
title: 'Exportin 4: a mediator of a novel nuclear export pathway in higher eukaryotes.'
authors:
- Lipowsky G
- Bischoff FR
- Schwarzmaier P
- Kraft R
- Kostka S
- Hartmann E
- Kutay U
- Görlich D
journal: EMBO J
year: '2000'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC302028
doi: 10.1093/emboj/19.16.4362
---

# Exportin 4: a mediator of a novel nuclear export pathway in higher eukaryotes.
**Authors:** Lipowsky G, Bischoff FR, Schwarzmaier P, Kraft R, Kostka S, Hartmann E, Kutay U, Görlich D
**Journal:** EMBO J (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/19.16.4362](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/19.16.4362)
**PMC:** [PMC302028](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC302028/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2000 Aug 15;19(16):4362-71. doi: 10.1093/emboj/19.16.4362.

Exportin 4: a mediator of a novel nuclear export pathway in higher eukaryotes.

Lipowsky G(1), Bischoff FR, Schwarzmaier P, Kraft R, Kostka S, Hartmann E, Kutay 
U, Görlich D.

Author information:
(1)ZMBH, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Transport receptors of the importin beta superfamily account for many of the 
nuclear import and export events in eukaryotic cells. They mediate translocation 
through nuclear pore complexes, shuttle between nucleus and cytoplasm and 
co-operate with the RanGTPase system to regulate their interactions with cargo 
molecules in a compartment-specific manner. We used affinity chromatography on 
immobilized RanGTP to isolate further candidate nuclear transport receptors and 
thereby identified exportin 4 as the most distant member of the importin beta 
family so far. Exportin 4 appears to be conserved amongst higher eukaryotes, but 
lacks obvious orthologues in yeast. It mediates nuclear export of eIF-5A 
(eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5A) and possibly that of other 
cargoes. The export signal in eIF-5A appears to be complex and to involve the 
hypusine modification that is unique to eIF-5A. We discuss possible cellular 
roles for nuclear export of eIF-5A.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/19.16.4362
PMCID: PMC302028
PMID: 10944119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Transport receptors of the importin β superfamily account for many of the nuclear import and export events in eukaryotic cells. They mediate translocation through nuclear pore complexes, shuttle between nucleus and cytoplasm and co-operate with the RanGTPase system to regulate their interactions with cargo molecules in a compartment-specific manner. We used affinity chromatography on immobilized RanGTP to isolate further candidate nuclear transport receptors and thereby identified exportin 4 as the most distant member of the importin β family so far. Exportin 4 appears to be conserved amongst higher eukaryotes, but lacks obvious orthologues in yeast. It mediates nuclear export of eIF-5A (eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5A) and possibly that of other cargoes. The export signal in eIF-5A appears to be complex and to involve the hypusine modification that is unique to eIF-5A. We discuss possible cellular roles for nuclear export of eIF-5A.

Introduction

Importin β-related nuclear transport receptors mediate many of the nucleocytoplasmic transport events (reviewed in Dahlberg and Lund, 1998 ; Mattaj and Englmeier, 1998 ; Görlich and Kutay, 1999 ; Nakielny and Dreyfuss, 1999 ). These receptors shuttle between nucleus and cytoplasm, interact with nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) and recognize and bind cargo molecules. According to the direction in which they carry a cargo, they can be classified as importins or exportins. The directionality of transport appears to be determined by a RanGTP gradient across the nuclear envelope (NE). Transport receptors are RanGTP-binding proteins that respond to this gradient by loading and unloading their cargo in the appropriate compartment; importins bind their import substrates at low RanGTP levels in the cytoplasm, release them upon RanGTP binding in the nucleus ( Rexach and Blobel, 1995 ; Chi et al ., 1996 ; Görlich et al ., 1996b ; Izaurralde et al ., 1997 ; Schlenstedt et al ., 1997 ; Siomi et al ., 1997 ; Jäkel and Görlich, 1998 ) and return as cargo-free RanGTP–importin complexes to the cytoplasm ( Izaurralde et al ., 1997 ; Hieda et al ., 1999 ). RanGTP–importin complexes are finally disassembled by the concerted action of cytoplasmic RanGAP and RanBP1 (or RanBP2), releasing the importin to bind and import another substrate molecule ( Bischoff and Görlich, 1997 ; Floer et al ., 1997 ; Lounsbury and Macara, 1997 ). Exportins are regulated in a precisely converse manner to importins. They bind their export substrates preferentially at high RanGTP concentrations in the nucleus and exit the nucleus as trimeric cargo–exportin–RanGTP complexes ( Fornerod et al ., 1997a ; Kutay et al ., 1997a , 1998 ; Arts et al ., 1998a ; Kaffman et al ., 1998 ). The cytoplasmic disassembly of such complexes also requires RanGAP and RanBP1 (or RanBP2) ( Bischoff and Görlich, 1997 ; Kutay et al ., 1997a ), and results in cargo release from the exportins and GTP hydrolysis, and allows the exportins to re-enter the nucleus and to accomplish further rounds of export.

The overall sequence similarity between the various transport receptors is low and, in many cases, restricted to the N-terminal RanGTP-binding motif ( Fornerod et al., 1997b ; Görlich et al., 1997 ). This can be explained at least in part by the fact that these receptors bind very different cargoes, such as the basic IBB domain in the case of importin β ( Görlich et al., 1996a ; Weis et al., 1996 ), tRNA in the case of exportin-t ( Arts et al., 1998a ; Kutay et al., 1998 ) or a leucine-rich nuclear export signal (NES) in the case of CRM1 ( Fischer et al., 1995 ; Wen et al., 1995 ; Fornerod et al., 1997a ; Stade et al., 1997 ). The RanGTP-binding motif can thus be considered as a diagnostic feature of importin β-related transport receptors, and in fact it allowed the identification of most of the 14 family members from the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae ( Fornerod et al., 1997b ; Görlich et al., 1997 ). Higher eukaryotes employ an even larger number of transport receptors; at least 22 in the case of mammals (see Görlich and Kutay, 1999 ; Nakielny and Dreyfuss, 1999 ; this study and our unpublished data). It has been a major effort in the field of nuclear transport to allocate functions to each of these receptors and to identify the transport signals that they recognize.

While characterizing a novel mammalian exportin (see below), we identified eIF-5A (eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5A) as a potential export substrate. eIF-5A was originally isolated as a candidate translation factor from a polyribosome-bound fraction ( Kemper et al ., 1976 ; Benne et al ., 1978 ) and was suggested to be involved in the formation of the first peptide bond. Subsequent studies, however, indicated that translational initiation is not directly affected by a loss of eIF-5A function ( Kang and Hershey, 1994 ; Zuk and Jacobson, 1998 ) and that eIF-5A is not required to assemble translation initiation complexes. Bona fide translation initiation factors are usually present substoichiometrically to ribosomes and associate with them only during initiation. In contrast, eIF-5A is present in excess over ribosomes ( Hershey, 1994 ) and largely bound to cytoplasmic, puromycin-sensitive structures that might represent (rER-bound) polysomes ( Shi et al ., 1997 ). One should therefore assume that if eIF-5A functions in translation, then it is at some step subsequent to initiation.

eIF-5A carries a uniquely modified lysine that is referred to as hypusine [Nε-(4-amino-2-hydroxybutyl) l -lysine; Shiba et al ., 1971 ; Park et al ., 1982 ; Cooper et al ., 1983 ]. eIF-5A is apparently the only hypusine-containing protein. It is present in eukaryotes ( Gordon et al ., 1987 ) and archaebacteria ( Bartig et al ., 1992 ) and is in fact one of the best conserved proteins between the two kingdoms. eIF-5A itself and its modification pathway are essential for viability in yeast ( Schnier et al ., 1991 ; Wöhl et al ., 1993 ; Sasaki et al ., 1996 ).

The X-ray structures of eIF-5A from two archaea species have been solved ( Kim et al., 1998 ; Peat et al., 1998 ). They show eIF-5A to be composed of two compact domains that are linked by a flexible hinge. N-terminal domain I contains the hypusine modification site in an extended, protruding and highly conserved loop. The modification is unlikely to have a major effect on the eIF-5A structure. Instead, its absolute conservation indicates that the hypusine mediates essential interactions with other macromolecules. Hypusine is a 2-fold positively charged amino acid and resembles nucleic acid-binding polyamines such as spermine and spermidine. Domain II is similar to the RNA-binding motif found in the prokaryotic cold shock protein CspA, which has been suggested to function as an RNA chaperone ( Jiang et al., 1997 ). Domain II and the hypusine-containing loop from domain I might thus constitute a bipartite RNA-binding site ( Kim et al., 1998 ; Peat et al., 1998 ). An RNA-binding activity of eIF-5A has indeed been detected in vitro and has been found to depend on the hypusine modification ( Liu et al., 1997 ). However, it is still unclear whether this RNA-binding activity reflects a genuine function of eIF-5A and if so what the physiological RNA ligand(s) of eIF-5A might be.

Eubacteria lack a hypusine-modified eIF-5A equivalent. However, the sequence similarity between eubacterial EF-P and archaebacterial/eukaryotic eIF-5A is significant enough to assume safely that the two represent homologous proteins ( Kyrpides and Woese, 1998 ). EF-P is essential for viability in Escherichia coli ( Aoki et al., 1997 ) and present in all eubacterial genomes examined so far. eIF-5A/EF-P can thus be considered a universally conserved and essential protein; it is apparently the only known protein that falls into this category whose function has remained elusive.

Loss of eIF-5A function is ultimately lethal ( Schnier et al., 1991 ; Kang and Hershey, 1994 ; Sasaki et al., 1996 ; Zuk and Jacobson, 1998 ; Jansson et al., 2000 ). In their mortal phase the cells show diverse defects. Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells stop cell division, but continue to enlarge in size. One specific defect is an impaired degradation of mRNA, particularly of short-lived messages ( Zuk and Jacobson, 1998 ). The defect apparently occurs between mRNA decapping and degradation by the Xrn1p exonuclease and could be consistent with the assumed RNA-binding activity of eIF-5A. However, it is unclear whether RNA turnover is the primary function that makes eIF-5A indispensable for viability in all organisms. Upon eIF-5A inactivation in yeast, the overall rate of translation is reduced by ∼30%, but is not immediately abolished ( Kang and Hershey, 1994 ; Zuk and Jacobson, 1998 ), suggesting that translational initiation and elongation can proceed in the absence or at very low concentrations of eIF-5A. The intermediate effect on the overall translation rate and the absolute requirement of eIF-5A for viability could possibly be explained by a failure of eIF-5A-deficient cells to synthesize a subset of proteins or to synthesize them in a biologically active form.

Here we report the identification of a novel mammalian member of the importin β superfamily, which we refer to as exportin 4 (Exp4). We show that Exp4 functions as a nuclear export receptor for eIF-5A and perhaps for other substrates as well. As eIF-5A appears to be an RNA-binding protein, it might function as an export adapter in RNA export. Alternatively, Exp4-mediated eIF-5A export might be used to restrict eIF-5A activity to the cytoplasm.

Discussion

Nuclear transport receptors of the importin β superfamily mediate many, although not all, transport pathways between nucleus and cytoplasm. Five family members from higher eukaryotes, namely importin β, importin 5, importin 7, transportin 1 and transportin SR, are known to function in import ( Chi et al ., 1995 ; Görlich et al ., 1995 ; Imamoto et al ., 1995 ; Pollard et al ., 1996 ; Fridell et al ., 1997 ; Jäkel and Görlich, 1998 ; Kataoka et al ., 1999 ), while three receptors have been shown to function in export: CAS, which mediates the export of importin α ( Kutay et al ., 1997a ); exportin-t, that of tRNA ( Arts et al ., 1998a ; Kutay et al ., 1998 ); and CRM1, which accounts for export of a variety of substrates ( Fornerod et al ., 1997a ; Stade et al ., 1997 ), many of which contain a leucine-rich NES. Here we identify a fourth mammalian exportin, Exp4, as an export receptor for eIF-5A.

Exp4 is the most distant family member identified so far. Nevertheless, it functions according to the same principles as the other exportins i.e. it binds its export cargo preferentially in a nuclear environment in the presence of RanGTP, forming a trimeric eIF-5A–Exp4–RanGTP export complex. This complex is subsequently transferred out of the nucleus. Cytoplasmic disassembly of the complex and concomitant cargo release are brought about by the concerted action of RanGAP and RanBP1 (or RanBP2, respectively), and also result in the hydrolysis of the Ran-bound GTP. The ‘empty’ exportin can then re-enter the nucleus and participate in another round of export.

Available expressed sequence tags and genomic sequences indicate that Exp4 orthologues exist in vertebrates (human, cattle, rat, pig, frog and zebrafish), invertebrates ( Halocynthia roretzi and Caenorhabditis elegans ) and plants (cotton). It is remarkable, however, that the yeast S.cerevisiae has no identifiable Exp4 orthologue. It remains to be seen whether yeast also shows the phenomenon of active nuclear export of eIF-5A and if so, by which components it is mediated.

Another study has suggested that eIF-5A export is mediated by CRM1 ( Rosorius et al ., 1999 ). Our data clearly argue against this scenario and instead demonstrate that CRM1 binds eIF-5A at least 1000 times more weakly than Exp4 (Figure 4 ). The concentration of eIF-5A in HeLa cells is ∼6 µM (data not shown; see Hershey, 1994 ), i.e. similarly abundant to Ran. This high abundance might explain why higher eukaryotic cells employ a specialized pathway for eIF-5A export.

The identification of a novel export pathway poses the question for the corresponding export signal. The hypusine modification is apparently part of the signal that allows eIF-5A to access the Exp4 pathway. Recombinant eIF-5A that lacks the modification binds to Exp4 35 times more weakly than the fully modified protein, i.e. the recognition of the modification appears to contribute ∼8 KJ/mol binding energy. Deoxyhypusine can partially, but not fully, substitute for hypusine (Table I ), indicating that the hydroxyl moiety of hypusine also contributes to Exp4 binding. Our data also indicate that Exp4 recognizes more than just the hypusine and the flanking residues, and for stable binding requires large parts of the eIF-5A molecule (see Table I ). This resembles certain other export substrates such as tRNA ( Arts et al., 1998b ; Lipowsky et al., 1999 ), importin α ( Kutay et al., 1997a ; Herold et al., 1998 ) or snurportin 1 ( Huber et al., 1998 ; Paraskeva et al., 1999 ), where the identity of the export substrate per se , and not some short ‘transplantable’ export signal, appears to be recognized by their cognate exportins.

Does Exp4 also have export substrates other than eIF-5A? Given that hypusine is part of the export signal and that eIF-5A is apparently the only hypusine-containing protein, it appears unlikely that Exp4 recognizes any other export substrate in an identical way. However, it is known that a given transport pathway can be accessed by very different signals. Transportin, for example, can bind and import proteins containing an M9 or a BIB domain ( Pollard et al ., 1996 ; Jäkel and Görlich, 1998 ) and even has separate binding sites for these two domains ( Jäkel and Görlich, 1998 ). By analogy, Exp4 might then also recognize and export different types of cargoes, and we are currently testing this possibility.

A central question is why do higher eukaryotic cells need to export eIF-5A from their nuclei? This question is intimately linked to the question of the function of eIF-5A, which is still open at present. eIF-5A has been suggested to recognize the NES in the HIV-Rev protein and to mediate its export ( Ruhl et al ., 1993 ; Bevec et al ., 1996 ). This assumption has already been contradicted by Henderson and Percipalle (1997) , who reported that recombinant eIF-5A is unable to bind Rev specifically. We can confirm and extend this conclusion in that native, hypusinated eIF-5A also does not specifically interact with Rev. We used immobilized Rev to bind Rev-interacting factors from a complete HeLa extract and observed efficient CRM1 binding in the expected RanGTP-regulated manner (see Supplementary figure), confirming CRM1 as the receptor and export mediator for proteins with a Rev-type NES ( Fornerod et al ., 1997a ; Fukuda et al ., 1997 ; Stade et al ., 1997 ). In contrast, eIF-5A was undetectable amongst the Rev-interacting proteins.

eIF-5A appears to be an RNA-binding protein ( Liu et al ., 1997 ), with probably the hypusine modification and the C-terminal domain contributing to the interaction ( Liu et al ., 1997 ; Kim et al ., 1998 ; Peat et al ., 1998 ). Although we do not yet know which RNAs eIF-5A normally interacts with, it would be an attractive possibility that eIF-5A functions as an export adapter for these RNAs. There is no definitive evidence against this hypothesis; however, a number of complications need to be considered. First, assuming that the essential function of eIF-5A is conserved between eukaryotes and archaea, and given that archaea have no nuclei, one has to conclude that nuclear export of other macromolecules cannot be the primary function of eIF-5A. Of course, eukaryotic eIF-5A might be a multifunctional protein that took over a role in RNA export later in evolution. Secondly, if eIF-5A was an export adapter, then one should expect it to be actively imported into nuclei. However, nuclear accumulation of eIF-5A appears to occur solely by passive diffusion, as it is insensitive to reagents that block facilitated NPC passage. Thirdly, the hypusine modification is essential for eIF-5A function, probably involved in the interaction with its functional targets and required for the RNA-binding activity of eIF-5A. Our data indicate that the hypusine is also involved in the interaction with Exp4. It remains to be seen whether the hypusine in an eIF-5A–Exp4–RanGTP complex is then still available for RNA binding (and export).

Alternatively, Exp4 might mask the hypusine and other crucial parts of the eIF-5A molecule in order to prevent an interaction of eIF-5A with potential targets in the nucleus. Thus, eIF-5A might be actively exported from nuclei, not because it is a transporter for other macromolecules, but instead because its function must be restricted to the cytoplasm. The bets for eIF-5A’s function are still open and its elucidation will require the identification of the macromolecules with which eIF-5A interacts in a physiological context. The available data would be consistent with eIF-5A being involved in some aspect of translation or cytoplasmic degradation of mRNA or with eIF-5A functioning as an RNA chaperonin or in some other facet of RNA metabolism. We found that eIF-5A accumulates in the absence of Exp4 in nucleoli, the sites where ribosomes are assembled. Such untimely binding of eIF-5A to pre-ribosomal particles might interfere with ribosome biogenesis. Exp4-mediated export of eIF-5A would certainly be an elegant solution to avoid such a problem.
