---
pmid: '15109498'
title: ATF4 is a substrate of RSK2 and an essential regulator of osteoblast biology;
  implication for Coffin-Lowry Syndrome.
authors:
- Yang X
- Matsuda K
- Bialek P
- Jacquot S
- Masuoka HC
- Schinke T
- Li L
- Brancorsini S
- Sassone-Corsi P
- Townes TM
- Hanauer A
- Karsenty G
journal: Cell
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(04)00344-7
---

# ATF4 is a substrate of RSK2 and an essential regulator of osteoblast biology; implication for Coffin-Lowry Syndrome.
**Authors:** Yang X, Matsuda K, Bialek P, Jacquot S, Masuoka HC, Schinke T, Li L, Brancorsini S, Sassone-Corsi P, Townes TM, Hanauer A, Karsenty G
**Journal:** Cell (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(04)00344-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(04)00344-7)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2004 Apr 30;117(3):387-98. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(04)00344-7.

ATF4 is a substrate of RSK2 and an essential regulator of osteoblast biology; 
implication for Coffin-Lowry Syndrome.

Yang X(1), Matsuda K, Bialek P, Jacquot S, Masuoka HC, Schinke T, Li L, 
Brancorsini S, Sassone-Corsi P, Townes TM, Hanauer A, Karsenty G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics and Bone Disease Program of Texas, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Coffin-Lowry Syndrome (CLS) is an X-linked mental retardation condition 
associated with skeletal abnormalities. The gene mutated in CLS, RSK2, encodes a 
growth factor-regulated kinase. However, the cellular and molecular bases of the 
skeletal abnormalities associated with CLS remain unknown. Here, we show that 
RSK2 is required for osteoblast differentiation and function. We identify the 
transcription factor ATF4 as a critical substrate of RSK2 that is required for 
the timely onset of osteoblast differentiation, for terminal differentiation of 
osteoblasts, and for osteoblast-specific gene expression. Additionally, RSK2 and 
ATF4 posttranscriptionally regulate the synthesis of Type I collagen, the main 
constituent of the bone matrix. Accordingly, Atf4-deficiency results in delayed 
bone formation during embryonic development and low bone mass throughout 
postnatal life. These findings identify ATF4 as a critical regulator of 
osteoblast differentiation and function, and indicate that lack of ATF4 
phosphorylation by RSK2 may contribute to the skeletal phenotype of CLS.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(04)00344-7
PMID: 15109498 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
