---
pmid: '7671302'
title: Loss of neurofibromin results in neurotrophin-independent survival of embryonic
  sensory and sympathetic neurons.
authors:
- Vogel KS
- Brannan CI
- Jenkins NA
- Copeland NG
- Parada LF
journal: Cell
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(95)90470-0
---

# Loss of neurofibromin results in neurotrophin-independent survival of embryonic sensory and sympathetic neurons.
**Authors:** Vogel KS, Brannan CI, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG, Parada LF
**Journal:** Cell (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0092-8674(95)90470-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(95)90470-0)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 1995 Sep 8;82(5):733-42. doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(95)90470-0.

Loss of neurofibromin results in neurotrophin-independent survival of embryonic 
sensory and sympathetic neurons.

Vogel KS(1), Brannan CI, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG, Parada LF.

Author information:
(1)Center for Developmental Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas 75235-9133, USA.

Mutations at the neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1) locus in humans and mice result in 
abnormal growth of neural crest-derived cells, including melanocytes and Schwann 
cells. We have exploited a targeted disruption of the NF1 gene in mice to 
examine the role of neurofibromin in the acquisition of neurotrophin dependence 
in embryonic neurons. We show that both neural crest- and placode-derived 
sensory neurons isolated from NF1(-/-) embryos develop, extend neurites, and 
survive in the absence of neurotrophins, whereas their wild-type counterparts 
die rapidly unless nerve growth factor (NGF) or brain-derived neurotrophic 
factor (BDNF) is added to the culture medium. Moreover, NF1 (-/-) sympathetic 
neurons survive for extended periods and acquire mature morphology in the 
presence of NGF-blocking antibodies. Our results are consistent with a model 
wherein neurofibromin acts as a negative regulator of neurotrophin-mediated 
signaling for survival of embryonic peripheral neurons.

DOI: 10.1016/0092-8674(95)90470-0
PMID: 7671302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
