---
pmid: '9188863'
title: Alternative splicing of the human CDC25B tyrosine phosphatase. Possible implications
  for growth control?
authors:
- Baldin V
- Cans C
- Superti-Furga G
- Ducommun B
journal: Oncogene
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1201063
---

# Alternative splicing of the human CDC25B tyrosine phosphatase. Possible implications for growth control?
**Authors:** Baldin V, Cans C, Superti-Furga G, Ducommun B
**Journal:** Oncogene (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1201063](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1201063)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 1997 May 22;14(20):2485-95. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1201063.

Alternative splicing of the human CDC25B tyrosine phosphatase. Possible 
implications for growth control?

Baldin V(1), Cans C, Superti-Furga G, Ducommun B.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale du CNRS Université Paul 
Sabatier, Toulouse, France.

CDC25B2, a protein tyrosine phosphatase closely related to the putative CDC25B 
oncogene, was identified in a Burkitt lymphoma cDNA library. CDC25B2 differs 
from CDC25B by a 14 residue insertion and a 41 residue deletion, which are both 
located in the amino-terminal region of the protein, upstream of the catalytic 
domain. Examination of the genomic sequence revealed that CDC25B1 (formerly B) 
and CDC25B2 are splice variants of the same gene. A third variant, CDC25B3, that 
carries both the 14 and the 41 residue sequences was also identified in the same 
cDNA library. All three variants were detected in a panel of human primary 
culture and cell lines, although at different levels. In primary fibroblasts and 
in HeLa cells the CDC25B expression is cell cycle regulated, reaching a maximum 
in G2-phase. In vitro, CDC25B1 phosphatase is slightly more active than CDC25B2 
and B3. However, episomal overexpression of the three CDC25B variants in fission 
yeast reveals that in vivo, CDC25B2 is largely more active than either B1 or B3 
(B2>B3>B1) both to complement a thermosensitive S pombe CDC25 activity and to 
act as a mitotic inducer. Alternative splicing of CDC25B may therefore 
contribute to the control of cell proliferation.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1201063
PMID: 9188863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
