---
pmid: '12045255'
title: Pivotal role of the renin/prorenin receptor in angiotensin II production and
  cellular responses to renin.
authors:
- Nguyen G
- Delarue F
- Burcklé C
- Bouzhir L
- Giller T
- Sraer JD
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC150992
doi: 10.1172/JCI14276
---

# Pivotal role of the renin/prorenin receptor in angiotensin II production and cellular responses to renin.
**Authors:** Nguyen G, Delarue F, Burcklé C, Bouzhir L, Giller T, Sraer JD
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI14276](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI14276)
**PMC:** [PMC150992](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC150992/)

## Abstract

1. J Clin Invest. 2002 Jun;109(11):1417-27. doi: 10.1172/JCI14276.

Pivotal role of the renin/prorenin receptor in angiotensin II production and 
cellular responses to renin.

Nguyen G(1), Delarue F, Burcklé C, Bouzhir L, Giller T, Sraer JD.

Author information:
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) U489, and 
Association Claude Bernard, Hopital Tenon, Paris, France. 
genevieve.nguyen@tnn.ap-hop-paris.fr

Comment in
    Curr Hypertens Rep. 2003 Apr;5(2):98-9. doi: 10.1007/s11906-003-0063-4.

Renin is an aspartyl protease essential for the control of blood pressure and 
was long suspected to have cellular receptors. We report the expression cloning 
of the human renin receptor complementary DNA encoding a 350-amino acid protein 
with a single transmembrane domain and no homology with any known membrane 
protein. Transfected cells stably expressing the receptor showed renin- and 
prorenin-specific binding. The binding of renin induced a fourfold increase of 
the catalytic efficiency of angiotensinogen conversion to angiotensin I and 
induced an intracellular signal with phosphorylation of serine and tyrosine 
residues associated to an activation of MAP kinases ERK1 and ERK2. High levels 
of the receptor mRNA are detected in the heart, brain, placenta, and lower 
levels in the kidney and liver. By confocal microscopy the receptor is localized 
in the mesangium of glomeruli and in the subendothelium of coronary and kidney 
artery, associated to smooth muscle cells and colocalized with renin. The renin 
receptor is the first described for an aspartyl protease. This discovery 
emphasizes the role of the cell surface in angiotensin II generation and opens 
new perspectives on the tissue renin-angiotensin system and on renin effects 
independent of angiotensin II.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI14276
PMCID: PMC150992
PMID: 12045255 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
