---
pmid: '20375098'
title: Transcriptional corepressor SHP recruits SIRT1 histone deacetylase to inhibit
  LRH-1 transactivation.
authors:
- Chanda D
- Xie YB
- Choi HS
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2919721
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq227
---

# Transcriptional corepressor SHP recruits SIRT1 histone deacetylase to inhibit LRH-1 transactivation.
**Authors:** Chanda D, Xie YB, Choi HS
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkq227](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkq227)
**PMC:** [PMC2919721](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2919721/)

## Abstract

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Aug;38(14):4607-19. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq227. Epub 2010
 Apr 7.

Transcriptional corepressor SHP recruits SIRT1 histone deacetylase to inhibit 
LRH-1 transactivation.

Chanda D(1), Xie YB, Choi HS.

Author information:
(1)Hormone Research Center, School of Biological Sciences and Technology, 
Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Republic of Korea.

Orphan nuclear receptor Small Heterodimer Partner (SHP; NR0B2) is a 
transcriptional corepressor of a wide variety of nuclear receptors (NRs). Here, 
we report that SHP recruits SIRT1, a class III histone deacetylase, in an 
NR-specific manner to inhibit transcriptional activity. SHP interacts and 
co-localizes specifically with SIRT1 in vivo and inhibition of SIRT1 activity 
leads to a recovery from the intrinsic repressive activity of SHP but not of 
DAX1. Furthermore, we observed that SIRT1 does not deacetylate SHP or LRH1. 
However, inhibition of either SIRT1 or SHP significantly diminished the 
repressive effect of SHP on LRH1 transactivity. LRH1-mediated activation of 
CYP7A1 and SHP gene transcription was significantly repressed by both SHP and 
SIRT1 whereas inhibition of SIRT1 activity by inhibitors or dominant negative 
SIRT1 or knockdown of SHP led to a significant release of this inhibitory 
effect. ChIP assays revealed that SHP recruits SIRT1 on LRH1 target gene 
promoters and SIRT1 deacetylated template-dependent histone H3 and H4 to inhibit 
transcription of LRH1 target genes. Finally, we demonstrated that inhibition of 
SIRT1 activity significantly reversed SHP-mediated inhibition of bile-acid 
synthesis by LRH1 overexpression, thereby suggesting a novel mechanism of 
SHP-mediated inhibition of LRH1-dependent bile-acid homeostasis via recruitment 
of SIRT1 histone deacetylase protein.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkq227
PMCID: PMC2919721
PMID: 20375098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
