---
reference_id: PMID:18385096
title: Characterization of a Bcl-XL-interacting protein FKBP8 and its splice variant in human RPE cells.
authors:
- Chen Y
- Sternberg P
- Cai J
journal: Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1167/iovs.07-1121
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of a Bcl-XL-interacting protein FKBP8 and its splice variant in human RPE cells.
**Authors:** Chen Y, Sternberg P, Cai J
**Journal:** Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1167/iovs.07-1121](https://doi.org/10.1167/iovs.07-1121)

## Content

1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2008 Apr;49(4):1721-7. doi: 10.1167/iovs.07-1121.

Characterization of a Bcl-XL-interacting protein FKBP8 and its splice variant in
human RPE cells.

Chen Y(1), Sternberg P, Cai J.

Author information:
(1)Vanderbilt Eye Institute, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee 37232, USA.

PURPOSE: The immunophilin protein FKBP8 interacts with Bcl2/Bcl-XL and is
essential for mouse eye development. The purpose of this study was to define the
expression of the FKBP8 gene in cultured human RPE cells and explore its
involvement in the control of apoptosis.
METHODS: Rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) was performed on RNA isolated
from human RPE cells. The existence of FKBP8 and a splice variant was confirmed
by RT-PCR. The interaction between Bcl-XL and FKBP8 was measured by
coimmunoprecipitation. ARPE-19 cells stably overexpressing FKBP8 and its splice
variant were established. Their responses to thapsigargin and t-butyl
hydroperoxide-induced cell death were measured by flow cytometry. Apoptosis was
determined by terminal deoxyribonucleotidyl transferase-mediated
fluorescein-dUTP nick-end labeling (TUNEL) assay. The activities of the nuclear
factor of activated T cells (NFAT) were measured by reporter assay after
transient transfection.
RESULTS: RACE and RT-PCR identified a splice variant of FKBP8 lacking exons 3,
4, and 5 in human RPE cells. Both the full-length and the short form of FKBP8
proteins showed mitochondrial distribution and directly interacted with Bcl-XL.
Overexpression of FKBP8 caused increased sensitivity to apoptosis induced by
thapsigargin. The transcriptional activity of NFAT was not affected by FKBP8.
CONCLUSIONS: FKBP8 and its novel splice variant are Bcl-XL-interacting proteins
and regulate the apoptotic signaling pathways in the RPE.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.07-1121
PMCID: PMC2715170
PMID: 18385096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]