---
pmid: '28992046'
title: Phosphorylated E2F1 is stabilized by nuclear USP11 to drive Peg10 gene expression
  and activate lung epithelial cells.
authors:
- Wang D
- Zhao J
- Li S
- Wei J
- Nan L
- Mallampalli RK
- Weathington NM
- Ma H
- Zhao Y
journal: J Mol Cell Biol
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6075510
doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mjx034
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Phosphorylated E2F1 is stabilized by nuclear USP11 to drive Peg10 gene expression and activate lung epithelial cells.
**Authors:** Wang D, Zhao J, Li S, Wei J, Nan L, Mallampalli RK, Weathington NM, Ma H, Zhao Y
**Journal:** J Mol Cell Biol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jmcb/mjx034](https://doi.org/10.1093/jmcb/mjx034)
**PMC:** [PMC6075510](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6075510/)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Cell Biol. 2018 Feb 1;10(1):60-73. doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mjx034.

Phosphorylated E2F1 is stabilized by nuclear USP11 to drive Peg10 gene 
expression and activate lung epithelial cells.

Wang D(1), Zhao J(2), Li S(2)(3), Wei J(2), Nan L(1), Mallampalli RK(2)(4), 
Weathington NM(2)(4), Ma H(1), Zhao Y(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesia, the First Affiliated Hospital of Jilin University, 
Changchun, China.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care 
Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, USA.
(3)Department of General Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian 
Medical University, Dalian, China.
(4)Acute Lung Injury Center of Excellence and Vascular Medical Institute, 
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, USA.

Phosphorylation affects ubiquitination, stability, and activity of 
transcriptional factors, thus regulating various cellular functions. E2F 
transcriptional factor 1 (E2F1) regulates paternally expressed imprinted gene 10 
(Peg10) expression, thereby promoting cell proliferation. However, the effect of 
E2F1 stability on Peg10 expression and the molecular regulation of E2F1 
stability by its phosphorylation have not been well demonstrated. Here, we 
describe a new pathway in which phosphorylation of E2F1 by GSK3β increases E2F1 
association with the deubiquitinating enzyme, ubiquitin-specific protease 11 
(USP11), which removes K63-linked ubiquitin chains thereby preventing E2F1 
degradation in the nuclei. Downregulation of USP11 increases E2F1 ubiquitination 
and reduces E2F1 stability and protein levels, thereby decreasing Peg10 mRNA 
levels. Physiologically, USP11 depletion suppresses cell proliferation and wound 
healing in lung epithelial cells, and these effects are reversed by E2F1 and 
PEG10 overexpression. Thus, our study reveals a new molecular model that 
phosphorylation promotes substrate stability through increasing its association 
with a deubiquitinating enzyme. The data suggest that GSK3β and USP11 act in 
concert to modulate E2F1 abundance and PEG10 expression in lung epithelial cells 
to affect cell wound healing. This study provides new therapeutic targets to 
lessen lung injury by improving lung epithelial cell repair and remodeling after 
injury.

DOI: 10.1093/jmcb/mjx034
PMCID: PMC6075510
PMID: 28992046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
