---
pmid: '21191019'
title: A protein (ORF2) encoded by the latency-related gene of bovine herpesvirus
  1 interacts with Notch1 and Notch3.
authors:
- Workman A
- Sinani D
- Pittayakhajonwut D
- Jones C
journal: J Virol
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3067920
doi: 10.1128/JVI.01937-10
---

# A protein (ORF2) encoded by the latency-related gene of bovine herpesvirus 1 interacts with Notch1 and Notch3.
**Authors:** Workman A, Sinani D, Pittayakhajonwut D, Jones C
**Journal:** J Virol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.01937-10](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.01937-10)
**PMC:** [PMC3067920](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3067920/)

## Abstract

1. J Virol. 2011 Mar;85(6):2536-46. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01937-10. Epub 2010 Dec 29.

A protein (ORF2) encoded by the latency-related gene of bovine herpesvirus 1 
interacts with Notch1 and Notch3.

Workman A(1), Sinani D, Pittayakhajonwut D, Jones C.

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Morisson Life 
Science Center, Rm. 234, Lincoln, NE 68583-0900, USA.

Like other Alphaherpesvirinae subfamily members, bovine herpesvirus 1 (BHV-1) 
establishes latency in sensory neurons. The latency-related RNA (LR-RNA) is 
abundantly expressed in latently infected sensory neurons. An LR mutant virus 
with stop codons at the amino terminus of the first open reading frame (ORF) in 
the LR gene (ORF2) does not reactivate from latency, in part because it induces 
higher levels of apoptosis in infected neurons. ORF2 is not the only viral 
product expressed during latency, but it is important for the latency 
reactivation cycle because it inhibits apoptosis. In this study, a yeast 
2-hybrid screen revealed that ORF2 interacted with two cellular transcription 
factors, Notch1 and Notch3. These interactions were confirmed in mouse 
neuroblastoma cells by confocal microscopy and in an in vitro "pulldown" assay. 
During reactivation from latency, Notch3 RNA levels in trigeminal ganglia were 
higher than those during latency, suggesting that Notch family members promote 
reactivation from latency or that reactivation promotes Notch expression. A 
plasmid expressing the Notch1 intercellular domain (ICD) stimulated productive 
infection and promoters that encode the viral transcription factor bICP0. The 
Notch3 ICD did not stimulate productive infection as efficiently as the Notch1 
ICD and had no effect on bICP0 promoter activity. Plasmids expressing the Notch1 
ICD or the Notch3 ICD trans-activated a late promoter encoding glycoprotein C. 
ORF2 reduced the trans-activation potential of Notch1 and Notch3, suggesting 
that ORF2 interfered with the trans-activation potential of Notch. These studies 
provide evidence that ORF2, in addition to inhibiting apoptosis, has the 
potential to promote establishment and maintenance of latency by sequestering 
cellular transcription factors.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01937-10
PMCID: PMC3067920
PMID: 21191019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
