---
pmid: '8666394'
title: Localization of the human mitochondrial citrate transporter protein gene to
  chromosome 22Q11 in the DiGeorge syndrome critical region.
authors:
- Heisterkamp N
- Mulder MP
- Langeveld A
- ten Hoeve J
- Wang Z
- Roe BA
- Groffen J
journal: Genomics
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/geno.1995.9982
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Localization of the human mitochondrial citrate transporter protein gene to chromosome 22Q11 in the DiGeorge syndrome critical region.
**Authors:** Heisterkamp N, Mulder MP, Langeveld A, ten Hoeve J, Wang Z, Roe BA, Groffen J
**Journal:** Genomics (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1006/geno.1995.9982](https://doi.org/10.1006/geno.1995.9982)

## Abstract

1. Genomics. 1995 Sep 20;29(2):451-6. doi: 10.1006/geno.1995.9982.

Localization of the human mitochondrial citrate transporter protein gene to 
chromosome 22Q11 in the DiGeorge syndrome critical region.

Heisterkamp N(1), Mulder MP, Langeveld A, ten Hoeve J, Wang Z, Roe BA, Groffen 
J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Children's Hospital of Los Angeles, California 
90027, USA.

A high percentage of patients with DiGeorge syndrome and velo-cardio-facial 
syndrome have interstitial deletions on chromosome 22q11. The shortest region of 
overlap is currently estimated to be around 55 kb. Two segments of DNA from 
chromosome 22q11, located 160 kb apart, were cloned because they contained NotI 
restriction enzyme sites. In the current study we demonstrate that these 
segments are absent from chromosomes 22 carrying microdeletions of two different 
DiGeorge patients. Fluorescence in situ and Southern blot hybridization was 
further used to show that this locus is within the DiGeorge critical region. 
Phylogenetically conserved sequences adjacent to one human cell lines. cDNAs 
isolated with a probe from this segment showed it to contain the gene for teh 
human mitochondrial citrate transporter protein. Deletion of this gene in 
DiGeorge syndrome and velocardio-facial syndrome may contribute to the mental 
deficiency seen in the patients.

DOI: 10.1006/geno.1995.9982
PMID: 8666394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
