---
pmid: '10436013'
title: ERp57 functions as a subunit of specific complexes formed with the ER lectins
  calreticulin and calnexin.
authors:
- Oliver JD
- Roderick HL
- Llewellyn DH
- High S
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '1999'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC25489
doi: 10.1091/mbc.10.8.2573
---

# ERp57 functions as a subunit of specific complexes formed with the ER lectins calreticulin and calnexin.
**Authors:** Oliver JD, Roderick HL, Llewellyn DH, High S
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.10.8.2573](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.10.8.2573)
**PMC:** [PMC25489](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC25489/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Cell. 1999 Aug;10(8):2573-82. doi: 10.1091/mbc.10.8.2573.

ERp57 functions as a subunit of specific complexes formed with the ER lectins 
calreticulin and calnexin.

Oliver JD(1), Roderick HL, Llewellyn DH, High S.

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, M13 9PT, 
United Kingdom.

ERp57 is a lumenal protein of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and a member of the 
protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) family. In contrast to archetypal PDI, ERp57 
interacts specifically with newly synthesized glycoproteins. In this study we 
demonstrate that ERp57 forms discrete complexes with the ER lectins, calnexin 
and calreticulin. Specific ERp57/calreticulin complexes exist in canine 
pancreatic microsomes, as demonstrated by SDS-PAGE after cross-linking, and by 
native electrophoresis in the absence of cross-linking. After in vitro 
translation and import into microsomes, radiolabeled ERp57 can be cross-linked 
to endogenous calreticulin and calnexin while radiolabeled PDI cannot. Likewise, 
radiolabeled calreticulin is cross-linked to endogenous ERp57 but not PDI. 
Similar results were obtained in Lec23 cells, which lack the glucosidase I 
necessary to produce glycoprotein substrates capable of binding to calnexin and 
calreticulin. This observation indicates that ERp57 interacts with both of the 
ER lectins in the absence of their glycoprotein substrate. This result was 
confirmed by a specific interaction between in vitro synthesized calreticulin 
and ERp57 prepared in solution in the absence of other ER components. We 
conclude that ERp57 forms complexes with both calnexin and calreticulin and 
propose that it is these complexes that can specifically modulate glycoprotein 
folding within the ER lumen.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.10.8.2573
PMCID: PMC25489
PMID: 10436013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

ERp57 is a lumenal protein of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and a member of the protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) family. In contrast to archetypal PDI, ERp57 interacts specifically with newly synthesized glycoproteins. In this study we demonstrate that ERp57 forms discrete complexes with the ER lectins, calnexin and calreticulin. Specific ERp57/calreticulin complexes exist in canine pancreatic microsomes, as demonstrated by SDS-PAGE after cross-linking, and by native electrophoresis in the absence of cross-linking. After in vitro translation and import into microsomes, radiolabeled ERp57 can be cross-linked to endogenous calreticulin and calnexin while radiolabeled PDI cannot. Likewise, radiolabeled calreticulin is cross-linked to endogenous ERp57 but not PDI. Similar results were obtained in Lec23 cells, which lack the glucosidase I necessary to produce glycoprotein substrates capable of binding to calnexin and calreticulin. This observation indicates that ERp57 interacts with both of the ER lectins in the absence of their glycoprotein substrate. This result was confirmed by a specific interaction between in vitro synthesized calreticulin and ERp57 prepared in solution in the absence of other ER components. We conclude that ERp57 forms complexes with both calnexin and calreticulin and propose that it is these complexes that can specifically modulate glycoprotein folding within the ER lumen.

INTRODUCTION

In order to enter the secretory pathway, proteins are cotranslationally translocated across the membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) as extended polypeptide chains. Upon entering the lumen of the ER the proteins begin to fold, normally with the assistance of molecular chaperones and other folding factors ( Gething and Sambrook, 1992 ). Calnexin, an integral membrane protein, and calreticulin, a soluble lumenal protein, are two such molecular chaperones believed to be involved in this process (reviewed in by Helenius et al. , 1997 ; Trombetta and Helenius, 1998 ). They share regions of high sequence identity and have similar binding activities, associating transiently with many glycoproteins being synthesized within the ER ( Ou et al. , 1993 ; Peterson et al. , 1995 ; Helenius et al. , 1997 ).

Calnexin and calreticulin predominantly act as lectins recognizing proteins carrying one or more monoglucosylated oligosaccharide side chains regardless of the conformation of the polypeptide ( Rodan et al. , 1996 ; Zapun et al. , 1997 ). The carbohydrate structure, GlcNAc 2 Man 7–9 Glc 1 , is generated from the initial N-linked glycan, GlcNAc 2 Man 9 Glc 3 , by the action of glucosidases I and II. The presence of monoglucosylated oligosaccharides, and hence calnexin and calreticulin binding, is determined by two enzymes. Glucosidase II removes the final glucose residue generating a deglucosylated side chain, and UDP glucose:glycoprotein glucosyl transferase (UGGT) can add a single glucose residue back onto this structure, thus regenerating the monoglucosylated side chain ( Trombetta et al. , 1989 ). Significantly, UGGT recognizes only incompletely folded glycoproteins as substrates ( Trombetta and Parodi, 1992 ; Sousa and Parodi, 1995 ). Thus, UGGT acts as a folding sensor, detecting nonnative glycoproteins and reglucosylating them, thereby allowing further rounds of binding to calnexin and calreticulin ( Hammond and Helenius, 1994 ; Peterson et al. , 1995 ; van Leeuwen and Kearse, 1996 ; Helenius et al. , 1997 ).

If calnexin and calreticulin act principally as lectins, then additional ER components may be required to directly influence protein folding during the calnexin/calreticulin cycle. The principal candidate for this role is ERp57. ERp57 (also known as ERp61, ER-60, GRP58, PDI-Q2, and HIP 70) is a member of the protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) family which, in addition to archetypal PDI, also includes ERp72 (CaBP2), P5 (CaBP1) ( Freedman et al. , 1994 ; Holtzman, 1997 ) and the pancreas-specific PDIp ( Desilva et al. , 1997 ; Volkmer et al. , 1997 ). ERp57 contains two “thioredoxin motifs” which in PDI constitute the thiol/disulfide oxidoreductase active sites ( Freedman et al. , 1994 ). A PDI-like thiol-dependent reductase activity for ERp57 has been demonstrated in vitro by several groups ( Srivastava et al. , 1993 ; Bourdi et al. , 1995 ; Hirano et al. , 1995 ), indicating that ERp57 may influence protein folding. ERp57 has also been proposed to be a carnitine palmitoyl transferase ( Murthy and Pande, 1994 ), a cysteine protease ( Urade and Kito, 1992 ), and a hormone-induced protein of the brain ( Mobbs et al. , 1990a , b ).

We have previously shown that the thiol-dependent reductase, ERp57, interacts specifically with glycosylated secretory and membrane proteins imported into canine pancreatic microsomes ( Elliott et al. , 1997 ; Oliver et al. , 1997 ) and semipermeabilized mammalian cells ( Van der Wal et al. , 1998 ). Like the interactions of calnexin and calreticulin, the interactions of ERp57 with glycoproteins required glucose trimming for both binding and release. We concluded that ERp57 interacted with glycoproteins in tandem with calnexin or calreticulin, most likely as a complex.

Other workers have also provided evidence that ERp57 is an important factor in glycoprotein folding. Zapun et al. (1998) found that when unfolded monoglucosylated ribonuclease B was bound to a soluble version of calnexin, missing the transmembrane and cytosolic portions, its folding was greatly enhanced by the presence of ERp57, but not PDI. This work demonstrated the ability of ERp57 to catalyze the formation of disulfide bonds in a glycoprotein bound to calnexin. Several groups have demonstrated the presence of ERp57, in addition to calnexin and calreticulin, during the assembly of the MHC class I complex ( Hughes and Cresswell, 1998 ; Lindquist et al. , 1998 ; Morrice and Powis, 1998 ).

In this study, we set out to investigate more directly the interactions of ERp57, calnexin, calreticulin, and PDI in a variety of systems.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Restriction enzymes were purchased from New England Biolabs (Herts, UK). T7 and T3 RNA polymerases, transcription buffers, rabbit reticulocyte lysate, and Flexi-lysate were supplied by Promega (Southampton, UK). Bismaleimidohexane (BMH) was from Pierce and Warriner (Warrington, UK). Polyclonal rabbit anti-calreticulin serum used for blotting was raised against mature human calreticulin ( Roderick et al. , 1997 ). Anti-calreticulin serum for immunoprecipitation was from Affinity BioReagents (Cambridge Bioscience, Cambridge, UK); anti-calnexin was a gift from Dr. Ari Helenius (Yale University, New Haven, CT); anti-ERp57 was a gift from Dr. Tom Wileman (Institute for Animal Health, Woking, UK); anti-PDI was kindly provided by Dr. Neil Bulleid (University of Manchester, Manchester, UK). Chinese hamster ovary and Lec23 cell lines were a gift from Dr. P. Stanley (Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York, NY). Protein A-Sepharose was supplied by Zymed (Cambridge Bioscience, Cambridge, UK). l -[ 35 S]methionine and the Western blot reagent (Renaissance) were purchased from New England Nuclear DuPont (Stevenage, UK). Digitonin was supplied by Calbiochem (Nottingham, UK). All other chemicals were purchased from Sigma (Dorset, UK) or BDH-Merck (Dorset, UK).

DISCUSSION

The exact nature and importance of the calnexin–calreticulin pathway during glycoprotein folding and quality control remain controversial (see Helenius et al. , 1997 ; Trombetta and Helenius, 1998 ). The view that calnexin and calreticulin bind to the carbohydrate moiety of a glycoprotein substrate as an initial recognition event, and that this enables subsequent protein–protein interactions to occur ( Arunachalam and Cresswell, 1995 ; Ware et al. , 1995 ; Zhang et al. , 1995 ), has now largely been superseded. There is very good evidence that calnexin and calreticulin function as lectins and recognize only carbohydrate, and not protein, determinants. Several groups have recently demonstrated that calnexin and calreticulin alone do not distinguish between folded and unfolded polypeptides and will bind to a substrate as long as it is monoglucosylated ( Rodan et al. , 1996 ; Allen and Bulleid, 1997 ; Zapun et al. , 1997 ). These data also suggest that calnexin and calreticulin do not influence glycoprotein folding directly.

While calnexin and calreticulin may not recognize protein determinants directly, it is possible that these molecules recruit other ER components that do exert a direct effect on protein folding. The best candidate for such a component is ERp57, a member of the PDI family of proteins. PDI-like proteins contain two (PDI, ERp57, P5, PDIp), or three (ERp72) copies of the sequence motif -Cys-Gly-His-Cys-. In PDI this motif is the active site for disulfide formation and isomerization activities ( Vuori et al. , 1992 ; LaMantia and Lennarz, 1993 ). ERp57 has been ascribed a variety of names and functions, and elucidating its role in vivo has proved complex (see Elliott et al. [1997] and references therein).

Evidence that ERp57 can interact with newly synthesized glycoproteins originated from a study of the biosynthesis of the Glut 1 glucose transporter ( Oliver et al. , 1996 ). A 60-kDa ER lumenal protein was found to interact with calnexin and its glycoprotein substrate Glut 1. After observing a similar 60- kDa protein associated with nascent secretory glycoproteins, we were able to identify it as ERp57 ( Oliver et al. , 1997 ). Subsequently, ERp57 was also shown to associate with the membrane protein glycophorin C and was formally identified as a cross-linking partner of Glut 1 ( Elliott et al. , 1997 ). Throughout these studies it was striking that the substrate-binding properties of ERp57 mimicked those of calnexin and calreticulin, i.e., both glycosylation and glucose trimming were required for binding to occur. In addition, ERp57-glycoprotein cross-linking products were coimmunoprecipitated with calnexin and calreticulin if the samples were not first denatured by heating with SDS. These findings suggested that ERp57 bound to nascent glycoproteins as part of discrete complexes formed with both calnexin and calreticulin ( Elliott et al. , 1997 ; Oliver et al. , 1997 ; Van der Wal et al. , 1998 ).

In order to understand better the relationship between ERp57 and the ER lectins, calnexin and calreticulin, we have studied their interactions with one another directly. When the interactions between endogenous ER lumenal proteins were stabilized by cross-linking, before SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting, evidence for specific ERp57–calreticulin adducts was obtained. Likewise, when the soluble components present inside ER microsomes were separated by native gel electrophoresis, an ERp57/calreticulin complex could still be identified in the absence of any cross-linking. This confirmed the presence of ERp57/ER lectin complexes within ER-derived pancreatic microsomes.

To increase the sensitivity of our assay, we next synthesized radiolabeled calreticulin, ERp57, and PDI in vitro, imported these 35 S-labeled proteins into microsomes, and studied their interactions with endogenous ER lumenal components. Very strong cross-linking of labeled calreticulin to endogenous ERp57 was observed, and in the converse experiment labeled ERp57 was found to cross-link strongly to endogenous calreticulin. In addition, labeled ERp57 was cross-linked to endogenous calnexin. Thus, it was possible to form complexes of ERp57 with either calnexin or calreticulin in vitro. Since ERp57 is not glycosylated, these complexes are clearly not the result of “typical” interactions between calnexin/calreticulin and a glycoprotein substrate.

As ERp57 is a member of the PDI family of proteins, we chose archetypal PDI as a control for these experiments. Archetypal PDI has 29% sequence identity and 56% sequence similarity with ERp57 ( Koivunen et al. , 1996 ). The cross-linking experiments employed a homobifunctional reagent, BMH, which specifically cross-links proteins to one another via their cysteine residues. Both mature proteins contain six cysteine residues, while PDI contains an additional cysteine in the signal sequence. Furthermore, PDI had successfully been cross-linked to a cys-containing mutant of glycophorin C ( Elliott et al. , 1997 ) and to procollagen chains ( Wilson et al. , 1998 ) using BMH. Hence, although clearly capable of BMH-dependent cross-linking, no adducts of PDI with calnexin or calreticulin were observed with this reagent. In addition, no complexes were detected between calreticulin and PDI after native gel electrophoresis.

The cross-linking experiments were repeated substituting semipermeabilized mammalian cells for microsomes. Once again, complexes were observed between ERp57 and calreticulin or calnexin, both in parental CHO cells capable of typical glycoprotein processing, and in Lec23 CHO cells in which glucosidase I activity is defective. Calnexin and calreticulin do not bind to glycoproteins in Lec23 cells ( Ora and Helenius, 1995 ; Van der Wal et al. , 1998 ), and hence we could conclude that ERp57–calreticulin and ERp57–calnexin complexes are formed in the absence of glycoprotein substrates for the ER lectins. This observation was verified by showing that ERp57 could interact with calreticulin in solution. The products of two separate in vitro translation reactions were simply mixed, and the ability of the two translation products to interact with one another was determined. In these experiments both proteins are present at a much lower effective concentration than inside the ER lumen, and no monoglucosylated glycoprotein substrates would be present. Remarkably, efficient and specific cross-linking of ERp57 to calreticulin was observed in this system.

We conclude that the ERp57 present in the ER lumen normally functions as a subunit of discrete complexes formed with calreticulin and calnexin, and that the formation of these complexes is not dependent upon the presence of glycoprotein substrates. These data add substantial weight to our original proposal that ERp57 functions in combination with calnexin or calreticulin in order to modulate glycoprotein folding within the ER lumen ( Elliott et al. , 1997 ; Oliver et al. , 1997 ). We have now shown that ERp57 forms discrete, stable complexes with both calnexin and calreticulin.

Our data are in good agreement with the recent study of Corbett et al. (1999) which showed that purified recombinant calreticulin and ERp57 interact specifically in solution. Our current study shows that this interaction reflects the situation occurring inside an intact ER. This may be contrasted with the previously reported interaction between calreticulin and PDI ( Baksh et al. , 1995 ). We detect no such interaction when using canine pancreatic microsomes, semi-intact mammalian cells, or mixing in vitro translation products. It has now been shown that calreticulin associates with PDI only at very low Ca 2+ concentrations, i.e., below 100 μM ( Corbett et al. , 1999 ). The steady state Ca 2+ concentration in the ER lumen is reported to be 500–800 μM, and this reduces to 200–300 μM after Ca 2+ release in response to 10 μM histamine ( Alonso et al. , 1999 ). Our results were obtained using intact ER-derived microsomes and semi-intact mammalian cells, and they underline the fact that, under the conditions observed in vivo ( Alonso et al. , 1999 ), ERp57 forms a specific complex with the ER lectins, calnexin and calreticulin, while we find no evidence that PDI is associated with these components. The very low Ca 2+ concentration needed to observe an interaction between PDI and calreticulin ( Corbett et al. , 1999 ) would require an almost complete emptying of the ER calcium store such as that observed in response to treatment with 50 mM caffeine ( Alonso et al. , 1999 ).

We propose that ERp57 is recruited to interact with newly synthesized, incompletely folded, glycoproteins via its association with the lectins, calreticulin and calnexin. Thus, the perturbation of glycoprotein folding that results from preventing calnexin and calreticulin binding (see Helenius et al. [1997] and references therein) most likely results from interfering with ERp57 function. Once exposed to a newly synthesized glycoprotein, ERp57 may function as a glycoprotein-specific thiol/disulfide oxidoreductase (see Figure 6 ) and thereby have a direct influence on protein folding.

The initial studies of ERp57 thiol-reductase activity ( Srivastava et al. , 1993 ; Bourdi et al. , 1995 ; Hirano et al. , 1995 ) were all carried out in the absence of any ER lectins and used a nonglycosylated precursor (insulin). Since the results described above and our previous work ( Elliott et al. , 1997 ; Oliver et al. , 1997 ; Van der Wal et al. , 1998 ) all indicate that ERp57 functions in combination with calnexin and calreticulin to interact exclusively with glycoproteins, these early studies of ERp57 activity are unlikely to reflect its true capacity. A recent study by Zapun et al. (1998) has now addressed these deficiencies. The authors found that the PDI activity of ERp57 on the refolding of monoglucosylated ribonuclease B is greatly enhanced by the presence of calreticulin or a soluble form of calnexin. In contrast, the activity of PDI in the same assay was decreased upon the addition of ER lectins ( Zapun et al. , 1998 ). This observation provides the first direct evidence that ERp57 can indeed specifically modulate glycoprotein folding in combination with the ER lectins, calnexin and calreticulin (c.f. Figure 6 ). On the basis of the work presented here, we propose that ERp57 performs this function as a subunit of discrete, stable protein complexes formed with calnexin and calreticulin. Significantly, ERp57 also binds to glycoproteins that lack any cysteine residues ( Elliott et al. , 1997 ; Oliver et al. , 1997 ), and that do not, therefore, require any intramolecular disulfide exchange. Thus, it remains possible that, like PDI ( Freedman et al. , 1994 ; Kemmink et al. , 1997 ; Yao et al. , 1997 ; Wilson et al. , 1998 ), ERp57 may also play a more general role as a molecular chaperone within the ER lumen.
