---
pmid: '22115783'
title: Lysosomal targeting of phafin1 mediated by Rab7 induces autophagosome formation.
authors:
- Lin WJ
- Yang CY
- Li LL
- Yi YH
- Chen KW
- Lin YC
- Liu CC
- Lin CH
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.11.043
---

# Lysosomal targeting of phafin1 mediated by Rab7 induces autophagosome formation.
**Authors:** Lin WJ, Yang CY, Li LL, Yi YH, Chen KW, Lin YC, Liu CC, Lin CH
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.11.043](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.11.043)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Jan 6;417(1):35-42. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.11.043. Epub 2011 Nov 15.

Lysosomal targeting of phafin1 mediated by Rab7 induces autophagosome formation.

Lin WJ(1), Yang CY, Li LL, Yi YH, Chen KW, Lin YC, Liu CC, Lin CH.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National Yang-Ming University, 
Taipei, Taiwan.

Autophagy orchestrates programmed cell death via crossroads of complex vesicle 
trafficking including autophagosome and lysosome interaction. Phafin1, an 
endosome proteins composed of Pleckstrin homology (PH) and Fab1-YotB-Vac1p-EEA1 
(FYVE) domain membrane-binding domains, is involved in caspase-independent 
apoptosis. We report here that the increased expression of phafin1 and its FYVE 
domain caused the formation of enlarged endosomes. Phafin1 also modulates the 
membrane density of certain receptors and participates in endocytosis and 
autophagy processes. The PH-domain of phafin1 is dispensable for lysosomal 
targeting. Moreover, the tail-domain of phafin1 provides lysosomal targeting 
signature and the ability to induce autophagy that is mediated by Rab7 
signaling. The results suggest that in addition to its role in endosome 
transport, phafin1 is also involved in lysosomal targeting and autophagosome 
formation.

Crown Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.11.043
PMID: 22115783 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
