---
reference_id: PMID:19541650
title: Signaling mechanisms involved in altered function of macrophages from diet-induced obese mice affect immune responses.
authors:
- Zhou Q
- Leeman SE
- Amar S
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0904412106
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Signaling mechanisms involved in altered function of macrophages from diet-induced obese mice affect immune responses.
**Authors:** Zhou Q, Leeman SE, Amar S
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0904412106](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0904412106)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Jun 30;106(26):10740-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0904412106. Epub 2009 Jun 17.

Signaling mechanisms involved in altered function of macrophages from
diet-induced obese mice affect immune responses.

Zhou Q(1), Leeman SE, Amar S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Periodontology and Oral Biology, School of Dental Medicine,
Boston University, Boston, MA 02118, USA.

Recent research links diet-induced obesity (DIO) with impaired immunity,
although the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. We find that the induction of
inducible NO synthase (iNOS) and cytokines is suppressed in mice with DIO and in
bone marrow macrophages (BMMPhi) from mice with DIO exposed to an oral pathogen,
Porphyromonas gingivalis. BMMPhi from lean mice pre-treated with free fatty
acids (FFAs) and exposed to P. gingivalis also exhibit a diminished induction of
iNOS and cytokines. BMMPhi from lean and obese mice exposed to P. gingivalis and
analyzed by a phosphorylation protein array show a reduction of Akt only in
BMMPhi from mice with DIO. This reduction is responsible for diminished
NF-kappaB activation and diminished induction of iNOS and cytokines. We next
observed that Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) is suppressed in BMMPhi from DIO mice
whereas carboxy-terminal modulator protein (CTMP), a known suppressor of Akt
phosphorylation, is elevated. This elevation stems from defective TLR2
signaling. In BMMPhi from lean mice, both FFAs and TNF-alpha--via separate
pathways--induce an increase in CMTP. However, in BMMPhi from DIO mice, TLR2 can
no longer inhibit the TNF-alpha-induced increase in CTMP caused by P. gingivalis
challenge. This defect can then be restored by transfecting WT TLR2 into BMMPhi
from DIO mice. Thus, feeding mice a high-fat diet over time elevates the CTMP
intracellular pool, initially via FFAs activating TLR2 and later when the
defective TLR2 is unable to inhibit TNF-alpha-induced CTMP. These findings
unveil a link between obesity and innate immunity.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0904412106
PMCID: PMC2697902
PMID: 19541650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.