---
pmid: '24467211'
title: Glycine decarboxylase is an unusual amino acid decarboxylase involved in tumorigenesis.
authors:
- Go MK
- Zhang WC
- Lim B
- Yew WS
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi4014227
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Glycine decarboxylase is an unusual amino acid decarboxylase involved in tumorigenesis.
**Authors:** Go MK, Zhang WC, Lim B, Yew WS
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi4014227](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi4014227)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2014 Feb 11;53(5):947-56. doi: 10.1021/bi4014227. Epub 2014 Feb
3.

Glycine decarboxylase is an unusual amino acid decarboxylase involved in 
tumorigenesis.

Go MK(1), Zhang WC, Lim B, Yew WS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National 
University of Singapore , 8 Medical Drive, Singapore 117597.

Glycine decarboxylase (GLDC) is a metabolic oncogene that links glycine 
metabolism with tumorigenesis. In humans, GLDC is part of a multienzyme complex 
(which includes the lipoyl-containing H-protein) that couples the 
decarboxylation of glycine to the biosynthesis of serine. Details of the 
GLDC-catalyzed glycine decarboxylation reaction are critical to drug development 
but remain elusive. This is the first report on the mechanism of the 
GLDC-catalyzed reaction and shows that GLDC is an unusual PLP-containing α-amino 
acid decarboxylase that removes carbon dioxide from the glycine substrate 
without releasing the expected amine (methylamine, a metabolic precursor of 
toxic formaldehyde) as a product. In an unusual decarboxylation mechanism, the 
resulting aminomethyl moiety is instead transferred to an accessory H-protein. 
This study defines the role of H-protein in GLDC-catalyzed glycine 
decarboxylation. (1) H-Protein is not required for glycine decarboxylation but, 
instead, is required for the release of the aminomethyl moiety from the 
quinonoid adduct. (2) Glycine decarboxylation is reversible and presumably 
proceeds through a stable quinonoid intermediate. (3) The physiological product 
of glycine decarboxylation is H-protein-S-aminomethyl dihydrolipoyllysine and 
not methylamine (in the absence of H-protein, the aminomethyl moiety remains as 
a quinonoid adduct). Mechanistic insights obtained from this study will inform 
future efforts for targeted anticancer therapeutic development.

DOI: 10.1021/bi4014227
PMID: 24467211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
