---
pmid: '10544019'
title: A human IAP-family gene, apollon, expressed in human brain cancer cells.
authors:
- Chen Z
- Naito M
- Hori S
- Mashima T
- Yamori T
- Tsuruo T
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/bbrc.1999.1585
---

# A human IAP-family gene, apollon, expressed in human brain cancer cells.
**Authors:** Chen Z, Naito M, Hori S, Mashima T, Yamori T, Tsuruo T
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1006/bbrc.1999.1585](https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.1999.1585)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Nov 2;264(3):847-54. doi: 
10.1006/bbrc.1999.1585.

A human IAP-family gene, apollon, expressed in human brain cancer cells.

Chen Z(1), Naito M, Hori S, Mashima T, Yamori T, Tsuruo T.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Biosciences, University of Tokyo, 1-1-1, Yayoi, 
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-0032, Japan.

IAP is a family of protein that has baculovirus IAP repeat (BIR) domains and 
inhibits apoptosis. We found a human IAP family gene, which we named Apollon, 
encoding a huge protein (530 kDa) that contains a single BIR domain and a 
ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme domain, that is a human homolog of BRUCE. Apollon 
protein was expressed in four of six brain cancers (gliomas), and one of five 
ovarian cancers in 38 human cancer cell lines that we examined. Among the brain 
cancer cell lines, SNB-78 expressed a high level of Apollon, and this cell line 
shows resistance against various anticancer drugs. Treating SNB-78 cells with 
antisense oligonucleotide against Apollon reduced the expression of Apollon 
protein, and significantly sensitized the cells to apoptosis induced by 
cisplatin and camptothecin. These results suggest that Apollon protects SNB-78 
cells from undergoing apoptosis and, at least in part, plays a role in 
tumorigenesis and drug resistance of this cell line.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.1999.1585
PMID: 10544019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
