---
pmid: '30776074'
title: FSH3 mediated cell death is dependent on NUC1 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
authors:
- Gowsalya R
- Ravi C
- Kannan M
- Nachiappan V
journal: FEMS Yeast Res
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/femsyr/foz017
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# FSH3 mediated cell death is dependent on NUC1 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Gowsalya R, Ravi C, Kannan M, Nachiappan V
**Journal:** FEMS Yeast Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1093/femsyr/foz017](https://doi.org/10.1093/femsyr/foz017)

## Abstract

1. FEMS Yeast Res. 2019 May 1;19(3):foz017. doi: 10.1093/femsyr/foz017.

FSH3 mediated cell death is dependent on NUC1 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Gowsalya R(1), Ravi C(1), Kannan M(2), Nachiappan V(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Bharathidasan 
University, Tiruchirappalli - 620 024, Tamil Nadu, India.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Virginia Commonwealth 
University, Richmond, VA 23298, USA.

Family of Serine Hydrolases (FSH) members FSH1, FSH2 and FSH3 in Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae share conserved sequences with the human candidate tumor suppressor 
OVCA2. In this study, hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) exposure increased the expression 
of both mRNA and protein levels of FSH3 in wild-type (WT) yeast cells. The 
deletion of FSH3 improved the yeast growth rate under H2O2-induction as compared 
to WT control cells. The overexpression of FSH3 in WT yeast cells caused an 
apoptotic phenotype, including accumulation of reaction oxygen species, 
decreased cell viability and cell death. The double deletions fsh1Δ fsh2Δ, fsh1Δ 
fsh3Δ and fsh2Δ fsh3Δ displayed increased growth compared to WT cells. However, 
the overexpression of FSH3 effectively inhibited cell growth in all double 
deletions. Moreover, the overexpression of FSH3 in cells lacking NUC1 did not 
cause any growth defect in the presence or absence of H2O2. Our results suggest 
that FSH3 induced apoptosis of yeast in a NUC1 dependent manner.

© FEMS 2019.

DOI: 10.1093/femsyr/foz017
PMID: 30776074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
