---
pmid: '16396914'
title: The Dictyostelium bZIP transcription factor DimB regulates prestalk-specific
  gene expression.
authors:
- Zhukovskaya NV
- Fukuzawa M
- Yamada Y
- Araki T
- Williams JG
journal: Development
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/dev.02190
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The Dictyostelium bZIP transcription factor DimB regulates prestalk-specific gene expression.
**Authors:** Zhukovskaya NV, Fukuzawa M, Yamada Y, Araki T, Williams JG
**Journal:** Development (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.02190](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.02190)

## Abstract

1. Development. 2006 Feb;133(3):439-48. doi: 10.1242/dev.02190. Epub 2006 Jan 5.

The Dictyostelium bZIP transcription factor DimB regulates prestalk-specific 
gene expression.

Zhukovskaya NV(1), Fukuzawa M, Yamada Y, Araki T, Williams JG.

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, MSI/WTB Complex, UK.

The ecmA gene is specifically expressed in prestalk cells and its transcription 
is induced by the chlorinated hexaphenone DIF-1. We have purified a novel bZIP 
transcription factor, DimB, by affinity chromatography on two spatially 
separated ecmA promoter fragments. Mutagenesis of the cap-site proximal 
DimB-binding site (the -510 site) greatly decreases ecmA expression in the pstO 
cells, which comprise the rear half of the prestalk zone, and also in the 
Anterior-Like Cells, which lie scattered throughout the prespore region. 
However, DimB is not essential for normal expression of the ecmA gene, instead 
it spatially limits its expression; ecmA is relatively highly expressed in the 
subset of prestalk cells that coats the prestalk zone, but in slugs of a 
DimB-null strain, ecmA is highly expressed throughout the prestalk zone. Because 
the -510 site is required for correct ecmA expression, we posit a separate 
activator protein that competes with DimB for binding to the -510 site. DimB 
rapidly accumulates in the nucleus when cells are exposed to DIF-1, and ChIP 
analysis shows that, in the presence of extracellular cAMP, DIF-1 causes DimB to 
associate with the ecmA promoter in vivo. Thus, DIF-1 regulates DimB activity to 
generate a gradient of ecmA expression in the prestalk zone of the slug.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.02190
PMID: 16396914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
