---
pmid: '17644812'
title: A high content in lipid-modified peripheral proteins and integral receptor
  kinases features in the arabidopsis plasma membrane proteome.
authors:
- Marmagne A
- Ferro M
- Meinnel T
- Bruley C
- Kuhn L
- Garin J
- Barbier-Brygoo H
- Ephritikhine G
journal: Mol Cell Proteomics
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/mcp.M700099-MCP200
---

# A high content in lipid-modified peripheral proteins and integral receptor kinases features in the arabidopsis plasma membrane proteome.
**Authors:** Marmagne A, Ferro M, Meinnel T, Bruley C, Kuhn L, Garin J, Barbier-Brygoo H, Ephritikhine G
**Journal:** Mol Cell Proteomics (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1074/mcp.M700099-MCP200](https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M700099-MCP200)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2007 Nov;6(11):1980-96. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M700099-MCP200. 
Epub 2007 Jul 20.

A high content in lipid-modified peripheral proteins and integral receptor 
kinases features in the arabidopsis plasma membrane proteome.

Marmagne A(1), Ferro M, Meinnel T, Bruley C, Kuhn L, Garin J, Barbier-Brygoo H, 
Ephritikhine G.

Author information:
(1)Institut des Sciences du Végétal, CNRS-UPR 2355, Bât 22, avenue de la 
Terrasse, 91198 Gif sur Yvette Cedex, France.

The proteomics of plasma membrane has brought to date only scarce and partial 
information on the actual protein repertoire. In this work, the plant plasma 
membrane proteome of Arabidopsis thaliana was investigated. A highly purified 
plasma membrane fraction was washed by NaCl and Na2CO3 salts, and the insoluble 
fractions were further analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS. With 446 proteins identified, 
we hereby describe the largest plasma membrane proteome diversity reported so 
far. Half of the proteins were predicted to display transmembrane domains and/or 
to be anchored to the membrane, validating a posteriori the pertinence of the 
approach. A fine analysis highlighted two main specific and novel features. 
First, the main functional category is represented by a majority of as yet 
unreported signaling proteins, including 11% receptor-like kinases. Second, 16% 
of the identified proteins are predicted to be lipid-modified, specifically 
involving double lipid linkage through N-terminal myristoylation, 
S-palmitoylation, C-terminal prenylation, or glycosylphosphatidylinositol 
anchors. Thus, our approach led for the first time to the identification of a 
large number of peripheral proteins as part of the plasma membrane and allowed 
the functionality of the plasma membrane in the cell context to be reconsidered.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M700099-MCP200
PMID: 17644812 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
