---
pmid: '25652827'
title: Agrochemical control of plant water use using engineered abscisic acid receptors.
authors:
- Park SY
- Peterson FC
- Mosquna A
- Yao J
- Volkman BF
- Cutler SR
journal: Nature
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature14123
---

# Agrochemical control of plant water use using engineered abscisic acid receptors.
**Authors:** Park SY, Peterson FC, Mosquna A, Yao J, Volkman BF, Cutler SR
**Journal:** Nature (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature14123](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14123)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2015 Apr 23;520(7548):545-8. doi: 10.1038/nature14123. Epub 2015 Feb
4.

Agrochemical control of plant water use using engineered abscisic acid 
receptors.

Park SY(1), Peterson FC(2), Mosquna A(1), Yao J(1), Volkman BF(2), Cutler SR(1).

Author information:
(1)1] Center for Plant Cell Biology and Department of Botany and Plant Sciences, 
University of California, Riverside, California 92521, USA [2] Institute for 
Integrative Genome Biology, Riverside, California 92521, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, 
Wisconsin 53226, USA.

Comment in
    Trends Plant Sci. 2015 Jun;20(6):330-2. doi: 10.1016/j.tplants.2015.04.001.

Rising temperatures and lessening fresh water supplies are threatening 
agricultural productivity and have motivated efforts to improve plant water use 
and drought tolerance. During water deficit, plants produce elevated levels of 
abscisic acid (ABA), which improves water consumption and stress tolerance by 
controlling guard cell aperture and other protective responses. One attractive 
strategy for controlling water use is to develop compounds that activate ABA 
receptors, but agonists approved for use have yet to be developed. In principle, 
an engineered ABA receptor that can be activated by an existing agrochemical 
could achieve this goal. Here we describe a variant of the ABA receptor 
PYRABACTIN RESISTANCE 1 (PYR1) that possesses nanomolar sensitivity to the 
agrochemical mandipropamid and demonstrate its efficacy for controlling ABA 
responses and drought tolerance in transgenic plants. Furthermore, 
crystallographic studies provide a mechanistic basis for its activity and 
demonstrate the relative ease with which the PYR1 ligand-binding pocket can be 
altered to accommodate new ligands. Thus, we have successfully repurposed an 
agrochemical for a new application using receptor engineering. We anticipate 
that this strategy will be applied to other plant receptors and represents a new 
avenue for crop improvement.

DOI: 10.1038/nature14123
PMID: 25652827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
