---
pmid: '11240025'
title: Scavenger receptor class B type I (SR-BI) mediates adhesion of neonatal murine
  microglia to fibrillar beta-amyloid.
authors:
- Husemann J
- Loike JD
- Kodama T
- Silverstein SC
journal: J Neuroimmunol
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0165-5728(01)00239-9
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Scavenger receptor class B type I (SR-BI) mediates adhesion of neonatal murine microglia to fibrillar beta-amyloid.
**Authors:** Husemann J, Loike JD, Kodama T, Silverstein SC
**Journal:** J Neuroimmunol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0165-5728(01)00239-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0165-5728(01)00239-9)

## Abstract

1. J Neuroimmunol. 2001 Mar 1;114(1-2):142-50. doi:
10.1016/s0165-5728(01)00239-9.

Scavenger receptor class B type I (SR-BI) mediates adhesion of neonatal murine 
microglia to fibrillar beta-amyloid.

Husemann J(1), Loike JD, Kodama T, Silverstein SC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Cellular Biophysics, Columbia University, 
College of Physicians and Surgeons, 630 West 168th Street, New York, NY 10032, 
USA. jh577@columbia.edu

Class A scavenger receptors (SR-A) mediate microglial interaction with fibrillar 
beta-amyloid (fAbeta). We report here that neonatal microglia from SR-A knockout 
mice (SR-A-/-) adhere to surface-bound fAbeta, and produce reactive oxygen 
species (ROS) as efficiently as wildtype microglia; that both wildtype and 
SR-A-/- microglia express SR-BI; that antibodies against SR-BI do not affect 
adhesion or ROS production by wildtype microglia, but inhibit adhesion and ROS 
production of SR-A-/- microglia to immobilized fAbeta by approximately 40%. 
Adhesion to fAbeta-coated surfaces, and uptake of fAbeta by both wildtype and 
SR-A-/- microglia was almost completely inhibited by incubation with fucoidan. 
Thus SR-BI and SR-A mediate similar effector functions in neonatal microglia, 
which suggests that SR-BI plays as important a role as SR-A, and can maintain 
the wildtype phenotype in SR-A-/- microglia.

DOI: 10.1016/s0165-5728(01)00239-9
PMID: 11240025 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
