---
pmid: '14960621'
title: 'Dysregulation in the suicide brain: mRNA expression of corticotropin-releasing
  hormone receptors and GABA(A) receptor subunits in frontal cortical brain region.'
authors:
- Merali Z
- Du L
- Hrdina P
- Palkovits M
- Faludi G
- Poulter MO
- Anisman H
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6730322
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4734-03.2004
---

# Dysregulation in the suicide brain: mRNA expression of corticotropin-releasing hormone receptors and GABA(A) receptor subunits in frontal cortical brain region.
**Authors:** Merali Z, Du L, Hrdina P, Palkovits M, Faludi G, Poulter MO, Anisman H
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4734-03.2004](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4734-03.2004)
**PMC:** [PMC6730322](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6730322/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2004 Feb 11;24(6):1478-85. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4734-03.2004.

Dysregulation in the suicide brain: mRNA expression of corticotropin-releasing 
hormone receptors and GABA(A) receptor subunits in frontal cortical brain 
region.

Merali Z(1), Du L, Hrdina P, Palkovits M, Faludi G, Poulter MO, Anisman H.

Author information:
(1)University of Ottawa Institute of Mental Health Research, University of 
Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario K1N 6N5, Canada.

Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) and GABA have been implicated in 
depression, and there is reason to believe that GABA may influence CRH 
functioning. The levels of CRH, and mRNA for CRH-binding protein, CRH1, and CRH2 
receptors, as well as various GABA(A) receptor subunits (alpha1, alpha2, alpha3, 
alpha4, alpha5, delta, and gamma2), were determined in several frontal cortical 
brain regions of depressed suicide victims and nondepressed individuals who had 
not died by suicide. Relative to the comparison group, CRH levels were elevated 
in frontopolar and dorsomedial prefrontal cortex, but not in the ventrolateral 
prefrontal cortex of suicide victims. Conversely, using quantitative PCR 
analyses, it was observed that, in frontopolar cortex, mRNA for CRH1, but not 
CRH2, receptors were reduced in suicide brains, possibly secondary to the high 
levels of CRH activity. In addition, mRNA of the alpha1, alpha3, alpha4, and 
delta receptor subunits was reduced in the frontopolar region of suicide 
victims. Interestingly, a partial analysis of the GABA(A) receptor functional 
genome revealed high cross-correlations between subunit expression in cortical 
regions of nondepressed individuals, suggesting a high degree of coordinated 
gene regulation. However, in suicide brains, this regulation was perturbed, 
independent of overall subunit abundance. These findings raise the possibility 
that the CRH and GABA(A) receptor subunit changes, or the disturbed coordination 
between these GABA(A) receptor subunits, contribute to depression and/or 
suicidality or are secondary to the illness/distress associated with it.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4734-03.2004
PMCID: PMC6730322
PMID: 14960621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
