---
pmid: '29884772'
title: Peroxisomal monoubiquitinated PEX5 interacts with the AAA ATPases PEX1 and
  PEX6 and is unfolded during its dislocation into the cytosol.
authors:
- Pedrosa AG
- Francisco T
- Bicho D
- Dias AF
- Barros-Barbosa A
- Hagmann V
- Dodt G
- Rodrigues TA
- Azevedo JE
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2018'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC6065197
doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.003669
---

# Peroxisomal monoubiquitinated PEX5 interacts with the AAA ATPases PEX1 and PEX6 and is unfolded during its dislocation into the cytosol.
**Authors:** Pedrosa AG, Francisco T, Bicho D, Dias AF, Barros-Barbosa A, Hagmann V, Dodt G, Rodrigues TA, Azevedo JE
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.RA118.003669](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA118.003669)
**PMC:** [PMC6065197](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6065197/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2018 Jul 20;293(29):11553-11563. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.003669. 
Epub 2018 Jun 8.

Peroxisomal monoubiquitinated PEX5 interacts with the AAA ATPases PEX1 and PEX6 
and is unfolded during its dislocation into the cytosol.

Pedrosa AG(1), Francisco T(2), Bicho D(2), Dias AF(1), Barros-Barbosa A(2), 
Hagmann V(3), Dodt G(3), Rodrigues TA(1), Azevedo JE(4).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde (i3S), Universidade do Porto, 
Rua Alfredo Allen, 208, 4200-135 Porto, Portugal; Instituto de Biologia 
Molecular e Celular (IBMC), Universidade do Porto, Rua Alfredo Allen, 208, 
4200-135 Porto, Portugal; Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas de Abel Salazar 
(ICBAS), Universidade do Porto, Rua Alfredo Allen, 208, 4200-135 Porto, 
Portugal.
(2)Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde (i3S), Universidade do Porto, 
Rua Alfredo Allen, 208, 4200-135 Porto, Portugal; Instituto de Biologia 
Molecular e Celular (IBMC), Universidade do Porto, Rua Alfredo Allen, 208, 
4200-135 Porto, Portugal.
(3)Interfakultäres Institut für Biochemie, Universität Tübingen, Hoppe Seyler 
Strasse 4, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.
(4)Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde (i3S), Universidade do Porto, 
Rua Alfredo Allen, 208, 4200-135 Porto, Portugal; Instituto de Biologia 
Molecular e Celular (IBMC), Universidade do Porto, Rua Alfredo Allen, 208, 
4200-135 Porto, Portugal; Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas de Abel Salazar 
(ICBAS), Universidade do Porto, Rua Alfredo Allen, 208, 4200-135 Porto, 
Portugal. Electronic address: jazevedo@ibmc.up.pt.

PEX1 and PEX6 are two members of the ATPases associated with diverse cellular 
activities (AAA) family and the core components of the receptor export module of 
the peroxisomal matrix protein import machinery. Their role is to extract 
monoubiquitinated PEX5, the peroxisomal protein-shuttling receptor, from the 
peroxisomal membrane docking/translocation module (DTM), so that a new cycle of 
protein transportation can start. Recent data have shown that PEX1 and PEX6 form 
a heterohexameric complex that unfolds substrates by processive threading. 
However, whether the natural substrate of the PEX1-PEX6 complex is 
monoubiquitinated PEX5 (Ub-PEX5) itself or some Ub-PEX5-interacting component(s) 
of the DTM remains unknown. In this work, we used an established cell-free in 
vitro system coupled with photoaffinity cross-linking and protein PEGylation 
assays to address this problem. We provide evidence suggesting that DTM-embedded 
Ub-PEX5 interacts directly with both PEX1 and PEX6 through its ubiquitin moiety 
and that the PEX5 polypeptide chain is globally unfolded during the 
ATP-dependent extraction event. These findings strongly suggest that 
DTM-embedded Ub-PEX5 is a bona fide substrate of the PEX1-PEX6 complex.

© 2018 Pedrosa et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.003669
PMCID: PMC6065197
PMID: 29884772 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article

## Full Text

Abstract

PEX1 and PEX6 are two members of the A TPases a ssociated with diverse cellular a ctivities (AAA) family and the core components of the receptor export module of the peroxisomal matrix protein import machinery. Their role is to extract monoubiquitinated PEX5, the peroxisomal protein-shuttling receptor, from the peroxisomal membrane docking/translocation module (DTM), so that a new cycle of protein transportation can start. Recent data have shown that PEX1 and PEX6 form a heterohexameric complex that unfolds substrates by processive threading. However, whether the natural substrate of the PEX1–PEX6 complex is monoubiquitinated PEX5 (Ub-PEX5) itself or some Ub-PEX5–interacting component(s) of the DTM remains unknown. In this work, we used an established cell-free in vitro system coupled with photoaffinity cross-linking and protein PEGylation assays to address this problem. We provide evidence suggesting that DTM-embedded Ub-PEX5 interacts directly with both PEX1 and PEX6 through its ubiquitin moiety and that the PEX5 polypeptide chain is globally unfolded during the ATP-dependent extraction event. These findings strongly suggest that DTM-embedded Ub-PEX5 is a bona fide substrate of the PEX1–PEX6 complex.

Introduction

Peroxisomes are cytoplasmic organelles delimited by a single membrane found in almost all eukaryotes ( 1 ). In mammals, they harbor a set of ∼100 different proteins and are involved in several metabolic pathways, such as β-oxidation of fatty acids, synthesis of plasmalogens and bile acids, and detoxification of glyoxylate ( 2 – 6 ). Despite their simplicity, peroxisomes play important roles in human health and development, as demonstrated by a group of inherited metabolic disorders in which peroxisomes are partially or even completely defective, the peroxisomal biogenesis disorders ( 7 ). These diseases are caused by mutations in genes encoding proteins mechanistically involved in several aspects of peroxisome biogenesis, the so-called peroxins or PEX proteins ( 6 – 8 ). In mammals, 16 peroxins are presently known, 10 of which are components of the machinery that sorts newly synthesized proteins to the organelle matrix (reviewed in Ref. 9 ).

Proteins destined for the peroxisomal matrix are synthesized in the cytosol and transported to the organelle membrane by PEX5, the peroxisomal matrix protein–shuttling receptor ( 10 – 20 ). There, cargo-loaded PEX5 interacts with the docking/translocation module (DTM), 4 a multisubunit transmembrane complex comprising the core components PEX2, PEX10, PEX12, PEX13, and PEX14 ( 21 , 22 ). This interaction culminates with the insertion of PEX5 into the DTM with the concomitant translocation and release of the cargo protein into the organelle matrix ( 23 – 26 ). No ATP hydrolysis or membrane potential is needed for these steps; the driving force for the complete cargo transport process resides in the strong protein–protein interactions that are established between PEX5 and DTM components ( 23 , 25 , 27 ).

After releasing its cargo, PEX5 has to be extracted from the DTM so that a new protein transport cycle can be initiated. Recycling of PEX5 involves three steps. First, DTM-embedded PEX5 is monoubiquitinated at a conserved cysteine residue (Cys-11 in the human protein) ( 28 , 29 ). Then monoubiquitinated PEX5 (Ub-PEX5) is extracted into the cytosol in an ATP hydrolysis–dependent manner by the so-called receptor export module (REM) ( 27 , 30 , 31 ). This is a protein complex comprising PEX1 and PEX6, two members of the AAA ATPases family, plus a poorly conserved peroxisomal membrane protein (PEX26 in mammals, APEM9 in plants, or PEX15 in yeasts/fungi), which anchors the ATPases to the organelle membrane ( 32 – 34 ). Finally, Ub-PEX5 is deubiquitinated in the cytosol probably by a combination of enzymatic and nonenzymatic events ( 35 – 37 ).

Although the general properties of the PEX5-mediated protein import pathway are known, the mechanistic details of each of its steps remain mostly unclear. In this work, we focused on the mechanism used by the REM to extract Ub-PEX5 from the DTM.

An abundance of structural/functional data was recently reported for the yeast REM. These include EM structures of the PEX1–PEX6 complex, an X-ray structure of the cytosolic domain of PEX15, and the structure of a trimeric complex containing these three proteins (reviewed in Ref. 38 ) ( 39 – 42 ). These studies revealed that PEX1 and PEX6 assemble into a ring-shaped heterohexameric complex, best described as a trimer of PEX1–PEX6 heterodimers, displaying a relatively large pore at its center. These data, together with mutational analyses of PEX1 and PEX6 showing that the conserved hydrophobic residues of the so-called pore loops are important for PEX1–PEX6 function, might suggest that the PEX1–PEX6 complex uses its pore to handle substrates ( 39 , 40 , 42 ). Robust data showing that the PEX1–PEX6 complex indeed unfolds substrates in a pore loop–dependent manner using a processive threading mechanism were reported very recently ( 42 ). Surprisingly, the unfolding/threading activity of the PEX1–PEX6 complex was detected using a soluble fragment of PEX15 as substrate, but whether or not PEX15 is a natural substrate for these ATPases remains unknown, as thoroughly discussed by the authors of that work ( 42 ) (also see “Discussion”).

Here, we asked whether or not DTM-embedded Ub-PEX5 displays properties of a bona fide REM substrate. Our data show that DTM-embedded Ub-PEX5 interacts directly with PEX1–PEX6 and is globally unfolded during the ATP-dependent extraction step. This suggests that Ub-PEX5 is indeed a natural substrate of the REM.

Results

The results reported below were obtained with a cell-free in vitro system that recapitulates all the steps of the PEX5-mediated protein import pathway. This experimental system was thoroughly described recently ( 43 ), but a brief explanation is provided here for clarity. The core of the system is a rat liver post-nuclear supernatant (PNS; the source of peroxisomes and cytosolic proteins), which is incubated with an in vitro synthesized radiolabeled PEX5 protein under appropriate conditions. During this incubation, a fraction of the radiolabeled PEX5 protein becomes inserted into the peroxisomal DTM, where it is subsequently monoubiquitinated at cysteine 11 and rapidly exported into the cytosol by the REM in an ATP-dependent manner. A number of strategies can be used to block this pathway ( 43 ). For instance, AMP-PNP and ATPγS, two ATP analogs used in this work, are excellent substrates for the ubiquitin-conjugating cascade ( 36 , 44 ) but potent inhibitors of the REM ( 36 ). Thus, in vitro assays containing one of these nucleotides will reveal an accumulation of Ub-PEX5 at the peroxisomal DTM, particularly so if the PNS was previously “primed” ( i.e. preincubated with a small amount of ATP to release endogenous PEX5 from the DTMs) ( 25 ). Two types of in vitro assays are used here: the so-called single-step and two-step import/export assays. The first involves a single incubation of the reaction mixture. If such an assay is performed in the presence of ATP, then all of the steps of the pathway will occur ( i.e. radiolabeled PEX5 will continuously interact with the DTM, where it is monoubiquitinated and subsequently exported into the soluble phase of the assay). Thus, if at the end of the incubation period, the PNS is centrifuged to separate organelles from soluble proteins, most monoubiquitinated PEX5 will be detected in the soluble fraction. In the two-step import/export assay, a radiolabeled PEX5 protein is first accumulated at the DTM in the presence of AMP-PNP or ATPγS (the first step of the assay); the organelles are then isolated by centrifugation, ressuspended, and incubated in buffer containing ATP (the second step) to allow export of the Ub-PEX5 protein into the soluble phase of the assay ( 36 ). The two-step assay is particularly suited to characterize events downstream of the monoubiquitination step. For practical reasons related to the lability of the thiol ester bond linking ubiquitin to cysteine 11 of PEX5 ( 29 ), all of the PEX5 proteins used in this work contain instead a lysine at position 11. These C11K mutants are fully functional both in vitro and in vivo ( 35 ), but the corresponding monoubiquitinated forms are much more resistant upon SDS-PAGE, which can be performed under reducing conditions. Also, many of the experiments described here were performed with a truncated protein comprising amino acid residues 1–324 of PEX5 and derivatives of it. This protein lacks the globular tetratricopeptide repeat domain of PEX5 and thus is unable to bind efficiently PTS1-containing proteins. However, all of the other functions of the receptor are preserved in this C-terminal truncated species ( 45 ). Finally, two readouts are possible in these assays. One, a protease-protection assay, explores the fact that PEX5, or truncated versions of it, are extremely sensitive to proteases, such as proteinase K, unless they are inserted into the DTM. In the other, no protease treatment is performed; one just monitors the distribution of monoubiquitinated PEX5 species between the organelle and soluble fractions of the assay by SDS-PAGE/autoradiography. It is important to note that in the latter case, large amounts of nonubiquitinated PEX5 species will be detected in the organelle pellets. Although a fraction of this material represents nonubiquitinated PEX5 specifically interacting with the DTM, the majority may represent PEX5 protein nonspecifically adsorbed to the organelles, some of which may even appear in the supernatant fraction of a two-step assay. Thus, no conclusions are drawn from the behavior of these nonubiquitinated PEX5 species.

Discussion

It has long been known that extraction of Ub-PEX5 from the peroxisomal DTM is an ATP-dependent process that requires the AAA ATPases PEX1 and PEX6 ( 27 , 30 , 31 ), but how exactly this occurs has remained mysterious. A priori , and as discussed before ( 50 ), there are two possibilities: 1) the REM could interact with Ub-PEX5 and pull it from the DTM, releasing it into the cytosol, or 2) the REM could bind and unfold/sequester DTM components that interact with Ub-PEX5, thus disrupting all of the interactions that maintain the receptor at the peroxisomal membrane. Although the first possibility is conceptually more straightforward, recent data on yeast and mammalian PEX1 and PEX6 proteins could actually support the second mechanism. We are referring to the fact that in vitro , the yeast PEX1–PEX6 complex can bind and unfold a soluble fragment of PEX15, the yeast orthologue of mammalian PEX26, but not a linear ubiquitin-PEX5 fusion protein, and to the findings that both mammalian and yeast PEX1–PEX6 complexes interact with the PEX5–PEX14 complex via PEX26 and PEX15, respectively ( 42 , 60 ). Together, these data might suggest that the interaction between PEX5 and PEX14, the main PEX5-binding component of the DTM, is disrupted by the PEX1–PEX6 complex via PEX15/PEX26 ( 42 ). Although such a mechanism is plausible, the data supporting it can actually be interpreted differently. Indeed, as recently discussed by Gardner et al. ( 42 ), the interaction between PEX15/PEX26 and the PEX5–PEX14 complex may simply reflect a role of PEX15/PEX26 in recruiting Ub-PEX5 to the PEX1–PEX6 complex, and the fact that the yeast PEX1–PEX6 complex does not unfold a soluble linear ubiquitin-PEX5 fusion protein in vitro could mean that the AAA complex recognizes only correctly monoubiquitinated PEX5 ( i.e. PEX5 ubiquitinated at its residue 11) or that the interaction between the PEX1–PEX6 complex and PEX5 requires other peroxins, which were not present in those in vitro assays. Finally, the fact that yeast PEX1–PEX6 unfolds a C-terminally truncated PEX15 protein in vitro does not necessarily mean that it does so with full-length PEX15 in vivo , particularly when we consider that the free disordered C-terminal end of the recombinant PEX15 fragment engaged by the PEX1–PEX6 complex in those in vitro assays corresponds to an internal domain in the membrane-embedded full-length PEX15 protein. Clearly, additional work was necessary to clarify this issue.

Here, we used an established cell-free in vitro system to address this problem. We provide evidence strongly supporting the view that mammalian Ub-PEX5 is a bona fide substrate of the REM. Indeed, we found that DTM-embedded Ub-PEX5 can be photocross-linked to both PEX1 and PEX6. This suggests that Ub-PEX5 interacts directly with the AAA ATPases of the REM, an expected property for an authentic substrate. More importantly, we have shown that 1) PEX5 cysteine residues located dozens/hundreds residues apart from the pentapeptide motifs that mediate the interaction of PEX5 with the DTM (see Fig. 1 ) become largely exposed to a maleimide reagent during the ATP-dependent dislocation process, and 2) fusing the N-terminal half of PEX5 (a domain fully functional in both the import and export steps ( 50 )) to mouse DHFR results in a protein that arrests at the export step particularly when the stability of DHFR is increased by MTX. Thus, together, these results suggest that DTM-embedded Ub-PEX5 undergoes global unfolding during the ATP-dependent extraction process and that its unfolding is mandatory for a complete extraction from the organelle surface.

Although it is still unclear how DTM-embedded Ub-PEX5 is recruited to the translocation pore of the PEX1–PEX6 hexameric complex, the data presented here, together with previous findings, allow us to propose two hypothetical models. Both take into account that the minimal information necessary to engage the REM resides in the ubiquitin moiety itself plus the region comprising residues 10–125 of PEX5 ( 45 ) (this work). In one model, a protein loop in the 10–125 region of PEX5 would enter the PEX1–PEX6 pore through its cis side ( i.e. the membrane-facing side of the PEX1–PEX6 complex). ATP hydrolysis would then lead to the translocation of the remaining Ub-PEX5 domains through the REM pore, ultimately releasing the complete substrate into the cytosol, at the trans side of the PEX1–PEX6 complex. The rather large pore of the PEX1–PEX6 complex, which may widen even more during substrate translocation, as proposed recently for CDC48 ( 66 ), together with the finding that PEX5(1–324;C11K)-Ub(1–74) displays no detectable export problems (see Fig. 2 A ) might support this possibility.

In the second model, the PEX1–PEX6 ring would assemble around the short exposed segment of PEX5 that follows residue 11 ( 45 ). This would place this short segment of PEX5 inside the pore and the ubiquitin moiety of Ub-PEX5 already at the trans side of the PEX1–PEX6 complex. ATP hydrolysis would then lead to the complete dislocation of the PEX5 polypeptide chain into the cytosol. Discriminating between these two possibilities will be a challenging task, but the experimental tools and strategies developed in this work will surely help us to understand this and other still unclear aspects of the peroxisomal matrix protein import machinery.

Miscellaneous methods

35 S-Labeled proteins were synthesized in rabbit reticulocyte lysates using the TNT® quick-coupled transcription/translation system (Promega) in the presence of EasyTag TM l -[ 35 S]methionine (specific activity, >1000 Ci/mmol; PerkinElmer Life Sciences) following the manufacturer's instructions.

The antibody against ABCD3 ( 73 ) was kindly provided by Dr. Wilhelm W. Just (University of Heidelberg). The anti-PEX6 antibody was raised in rabbit against human His-PEX6(1–421). Rabbit polyclonal anti-PEX1 antibody (NBP1-80577; Novus Biologicals) was purchased. All primary antibodies were detected with goat alkaline phosphatase–conjugated anti-rabbit antibodies (A9919; Sigma-Aldrich).
