---
pmid: '29581031'
title: IL-7-induced phosphorylation of the adaptor Crk-like and other targets.
authors:
- Aiello FB
- Guszczynski T
- Li W
- Hixon JA
- Jiang Q
- Hodge DL
- Massignan T
- Di Lisio C
- Merchant A
- Procopio AD
- Bonetto V
- Durum SK
journal: Cell Signal
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC7983156
doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2018.03.008
---

# IL-7-induced phosphorylation of the adaptor Crk-like and other targets.
**Authors:** Aiello FB, Guszczynski T, Li W, Hixon JA, Jiang Q, Hodge DL, Massignan T, Di Lisio C, Merchant A, Procopio AD, Bonetto V, Durum SK
**Journal:** Cell Signal (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cellsig.2018.03.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cellsig.2018.03.008)
**PMC:** [PMC7983156](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7983156/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Signal. 2018 Jul;47:131-141. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2018.03.008. Epub
2018  Mar 24.

IL-7-induced phosphorylation of the adaptor Crk-like and other targets.

Aiello FB(1), Guszczynski T(2), Li W(3), Hixon JA(4), Jiang Q(5), Hodge DL(6), 
Massignan T(7), Di Lisio C(8), Merchant A(9), Procopio AD(10), Bonetto V(11), 
Durum SK(12).

Author information:
(1)Cancer and Inflammation Program, CCR, NCI, NIH, Bldg 560, Frederick, MD 
21702, USA. Electronic address: fbaiello@unich.it.
(2)Molecular Targets Laboratory, FCRDC, Bldg 560, Frederick, MD 21702, USA. 
Electronic address: Tad.guszczynski@mail.nih.gov.
(3)Cancer and Inflammation Program, CCR, NCI, NIH, Bldg 560, Frederick, MD 
21702, USA. Electronic address: liwenq@mail.nih.gov.
(4)Cancer and Inflammation Program, CCR, NCI, NIH, Bldg 560, Frederick, MD 
21702, USA. Electronic address: hixonj@mail.nih.gov.
(5)Cancer and Inflammation Program, CCR, NCI, NIH, Bldg 560, Frederick, MD 
21702, USA. Electronic address: qiong.jiang@qiagen.com.
(6)Laboratory of Experimental Medicine, FCRDC, Bldg 560, Frederick, MD 21702, 
USA. Electronic address: hodged@mail.nih.gov.
(7)Dulbecco Telethon Institute, IRCCS-Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche M. 
Negri, via La Masa 19, 20156 Milano, Italy.
(8)Department of Medicine and Aging Sciences, University of Chieti-Pescara, via 
dei Vestini, 66013 Chieti, Italy. Electronic address: chiara.dilisio@unich.it.
(9)Center for Cancer Research, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic address: 
anand.merchant@nih.gov.
(10)Department of Clinical and Medical Sciences, Marche Polytechnic University, 
via Tronto 10, 60100 Ancona, Italy. Electronic address: a.d.procopio@univpm.it.
(11)Dulbecco Telethon Institute, IRCCS-Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche M. 
Negri, via La Masa 19, 20156 Milano, Italy. Electronic address: 
valentina.bonetto@marionegri.it.
(12)Cancer and Inflammation Program, CCR, NCI, NIH, Bldg 560, Frederick, MD 
21702, USA. Electronic address: durum@mail.nih.gov.

IL-7 is required for T cell differentiation and mature T cell homeostasis and 
promotes pro-B cell proliferation and survival. Tyrosine phosphorylation plays a 
central role in IL-7 signaling. We identified by two-dimensional electrophoresis 
followed by anti-phosphotyrosine immunoblotting and mass spectrometry sixteen 
tyrosine phosphorylated proteins from the IL-7-dependent cell line D1. IL-7 
stimulation induced the phosphorylation of the proteins STI1, ATIC and hnRNPH, 
involved in pathways related to survival, proliferation and gene expression, 
respectively, and increased the phosphorylation of CrkL, a member of a family of 
adaptors including the highly homologous Crk isoforms CrkII and CrkI, important 
in multiple signaling pathways. We observed an increased phosphorylation of CrkL 
in murine pro-B cells and in murine and human T cells. In addition, IL-7 
increased the association of CrkL with the transcription factor Stat5, essential 
for IL-7 pro-survival activity. The selective tyrosine kinase inhibitor 
Imatinib. counteracted the IL-7 pro-survival effect in D1 cells and decreased 
CrkL phosphorylation. These data suggested that CrkL could play a pro-survival 
role in IL-7-mediated signaling. We observed that pro-B cells also expressed, in 
addition to CrkL, the Crk isoforms CrkII and CrkI and therefore utilized pro-B 
cells conditionally deficient in all three to evaluate the role of these 
proteins. The observation that the IL-7 pro-survival effect was reduced in 
Crk/CrkL conditionally-deficient pro-B cells further pointed to a pro-survival 
role of these adaptors. To further evaluate the role of these proteins, gene 
expression studies were performed in Crk/CrkL conditionally-deficient pro-B 
cells. IL-7 decreased the transcription of the receptor LAIR1, which inhibits B 
cell proliferation, in a Crk/CrkL-dependent manner, suggesting that the Crk 
family of proteins may promote pro-B cell proliferation. Our data contribute to 
the understanding of IL-7 signaling and suggest the involvement of Crk family 
proteins in pathways promoting survival and proliferation.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2018.03.008
PMCID: PMC7983156
PMID: 29581031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
