---
pmid: '15548744'
title: Heterodimerization and endocytosis of Arabidopsis brassinosteroid receptors
  BRI1 and AtSERK3 (BAK1).
authors:
- Russinova E
- Borst JW
- Kwaaitaal M
- Caño-Delgado A
- Yin Y
- Chory J
- de Vries SC
journal: Plant Cell
year: '2004'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC535869
doi: 10.1105/tpc.104.025387
---

# Heterodimerization and endocytosis of Arabidopsis brassinosteroid receptors BRI1 and AtSERK3 (BAK1).
**Authors:** Russinova E, Borst JW, Kwaaitaal M, Caño-Delgado A, Yin Y, Chory J, de Vries SC
**Journal:** Plant Cell (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1105/tpc.104.025387](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.104.025387)
**PMC:** [PMC535869](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC535869/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell. 2004 Dec;16(12):3216-29. doi: 10.1105/tpc.104.025387. Epub 2004
Nov  17.

Heterodimerization and endocytosis of Arabidopsis brassinosteroid receptors BRI1 
and AtSERK3 (BAK1).

Russinova E(1), Borst JW, Kwaaitaal M, Caño-Delgado A, Yin Y, Chory J, de Vries 
SC.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Wageningen University, 6703 HA Wageningen, The 
Netherlands.

In Arabidopsis thaliana brassinosteroid (BR), perception is mediated by two 
Leu-rich repeat receptor-like kinases, BRASSINOSTEROID INSENSITIVE1 (BRI1) and 
BRI1-ASSOCIATED RECEPTOR KINASE1 (BAK1) (Arabidopsis SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS 
RECEPTOR-like KINASE3 [AtSERK3]). Genetic, biochemical, and yeast (Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae) interaction studies suggested that the BRI1-BAK1 receptor complex 
initiates BR signaling, but the role of the BAK1 receptor is still not clear. 
Using transient expression in protoplasts of BRI1 and AtSERK3 fused to cyan and 
yellow fluorescent green fluorescent protein variants allowed us to localize 
each receptor independently in vivo. We show that BRI1, but not AtSERK3, 
homodimerizes in the plasma membrane, whereas BRI1 and AtSERK3 preferentially 
heterodimerize in the endosomes. Coexpression of BRI1 and AtSERK3 results in a 
change of the steady state distribution of both receptors because of accelerated 
endocytosis. Endocytic vesicles contain either BRI1 or AtSERK3 alone or both. We 
propose that the AtSERK3 protein is involved in changing the equilibrium between 
plasma membrane-located BRI1 homodimers and endocytosed BRI1-AtSERK3 
heterodimers.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.104.025387
PMCID: PMC535869
PMID: 15548744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

In Arabidopsis thaliana brassinosteroid (BR), perception is mediated by two Leu-rich repeat receptor-like kinases, BRASSINOSTEROID INSENSITIVE1 (BRI1) and BRI1-ASSOCIATED RECEPTOR KINASE1 (BAK1) (Arabidopsis SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR-like KINASE3 [AtSERK3]). Genetic, biochemical, and yeast ( Saccharomyces cerevisiae ) interaction studies suggested that the BRI1-BAK1 receptor complex initiates BR signaling, but the role of the BAK1 receptor is still not clear. Using transient expression in protoplasts of BRI1 and AtSERK3 fused to cyan and yellow fluorescent green fluorescent protein variants allowed us to localize each receptor independently in vivo. We show that BRI1, but not AtSERK3, homodimerizes in the plasma membrane, whereas BRI1 and AtSERK3 preferentially heterodimerize in the endosomes. Coexpression of BRI1 and AtSERK3 results in a change of the steady state distribution of both receptors because of accelerated endocytosis. Endocytic vesicles contain either BRI1 or AtSERK3 alone or both. We propose that the AtSERK3 protein is involved in changing the equilibrium between plasma membrane–located BRI1 homodimers and endocytosed BRI1-AtSERK3 heterodimers.

INTRODUCTION

Brassinosteroid (BR) signaling is one of the best-studied signal transduction pathways in plants. In contrast with animals where steroid hormones are perceived by nuclear receptors, plants employ plasma membrane receptors that include the BRASSINOSTEROID INSENSITIVE1 (BRI1) protein. The Leu-rich repeat (LRR) receptor-like kinase (RLK) BRI1 was identified as a loss-of-function BR-insensitive Arabidopsis thaliana mutant that cannot be rescued by exogenous application of BRs ( Li and Chory, 1997 ). The BRI1 protein consists of an extracellular domain, a single transmembrane domain, and a cytoplasmic Ser/Thr kinase. The extracellular domain contains 25 LRRs and a 70–amino acid island domain between the 21st and the 22nd LRR that was found essential for BR binding ( He et al., 2000 ; Wang et al., 2001 ). A second LRR RLK, BRI1-ASSOCIATED RECEPTOR KINASE1 (BAK1), was identified in an activation-tagging screen for bri1 suppressors ( Li et al., 2002 ) and in a yeast ( Saccharomyces cerevisiae ) two-hybrid screen for BRI1 kinase domain interacting proteins ( Nam and Li, 2002 ). BAK1 has a shorter extracellular domain, with only five LRRs, and it lacks the 70–amino acid island domain. BAK1 is identical to the previously described Arabidopsis SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR-like KINASE3 (AtSERK3), a member of a small family of related RLKs ( Hecht et al., 2001 ). Genetic and molecular data support the notion that BRI1 and BAK1 (AtSERK3) are part of the same BR receptor complex, although two other BRI1 homologs have been reported to function as BR receptors ( Yin et al., 2002b ). First, bak1 null alleles are semidwarfs with reduced BR insensitive phenotypes. Second, overexpression of BAK1 (AtSERK3) suppresses weak bri1 alleles with mutations in the extracellular and in the kinase domain and gives rise to a BRI1-overexpression phenotype in wild-type plants (reviewed in Clouse, 2002 ; Li, 2003 ). Several downstream components in BR signaling have also been identified. Negative and positive regulators of BR signaling were identified as a GSK-3/Shaggy-like kinase called Brassinosteroid Insensitive 2 ( Li and Nam, 2002 ) and the nuclear-localized Ser/Thr phosphatase bri1 Suppressor 1 family ( Mora-García et al., 2004 ), respectively. Their potential substrates are the nuclear proteins BRASSINAZOLE RESISTANT1 ( Wang et al., 2002 ) and bri1 -EMS-SUPPRESSOR1 (BES1) ( Yin et al., 2002a ). Neither of these proteins has been shown to be a direct target of the BRI1/BAK1 (AtSERK3) heterodimer. BRI1 and BAK1 (AtSERK3) localize to the plasma membrane ( Friedrichsen et al., 2000 ; Li et al., 2002 ), whereas BRASSINAZOLE RESISTANT1 and BES1 proteins accumulate in the nucleus after BR application ( Wang et al., 2002 ; Yin et al., 2002a ). How the BRI1-BAK1 (AtSERK3) receptor complex transmits the BR signal is not known, although two recent models suggest similarities to either animal Try kinase or transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) cell surface receptor activation (reviewed in Clouse, 2002 ; Li, 2003 ).

Signaling events in animal cells require endocytosis, and endosomes are considered to function as signaling compartments in addition to a more general role in receptor recycling (reviewed in Gonzáles-Gaitán, 2003 ). During endocytosis, several intermediate compartments are distinguished. In the early sorting endosomes, a decision is made to direct endocytosed receptors either toward late endosomes and to degradation in lysosomes or to recycle the receptors back to the plasma membrane via recycling endosomes (reviewed in Gruenberg, 2001 ). In plants, endocytosis is poorly understood, but similar mechanisms are proposed ( Ueda et al., 2001 ). Recently, studies of the GDP/GTP exchange factor for small G-proteins of the auxin responsive factor class (ARF-GEF), GNOM ( Geldner et al., 2003 ), and of sterol trafficking in Arabidopsis ( Grebe et al., 2003 ) demonstrate the importance of endocytosis in plant development. Although previously demonstrated in plants ( Horn et al., 1989 ), virtually nothing is known about the role of endocytosis in plant receptor-mediated signaling. Previously, we showed that the AtSERK1 protein internalizes into early endosomes when coexpressed with the PP2C type KINASE ASSOCIATED PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE (KAPP) in cowpea ( Vigna unguiculata ) protoplasts ( Shah et al., 2002 ). It was proposed that the function of KAPP was tightly coupled to a mechanism of plant receptor internalization.

To study the dynamics of the BRI1/AtSERK3 interaction in living cells and to determine whether endocytosis of the two receptors is taking place, we tagged both BRI1 and AtSERK3 proteins with the green fluorescent protein (GFP) variants exhibiting either yellow or cyan fluorescent proteins (YFP or CFP, respectively). This allowed us to follow both receptors simultaneously in vivo and to apply imaging techniques, such as fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy (FLIM) to determine Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET), indicative of receptor heterodimerization. These techniques are essential for imaging protein interactions in living plant ( Shah et al., 2001 , 2002 ; Immink et al., 2002 ) and animal cells ( Sorkin et al., 2000 ; Haj et al., 2002 ).

Our results show that BRI1 and AtSERK3 are constantly recycled via endosomes. When coexpressed, the two receptors are sorted into different endosomal compartments containing either BRI1 or AtSERK3 alone, or both. Interestingly, BRI1 and AtSERK3 do not constitutively interact because they show interaction mainly in the endosomes and in restricted areas on the plasma membrane. This resembles the endocytic pathway of internalization of animal receptors and suggests a function of the AtSERK3 protein in redistributing the BRI1 receptor.
