---
pmid: '10934215'
title: Modifications in lignin and accumulation of phenolic glucosides in poplar xylem
  upon down-regulation of caffeoyl-coenzyme A O-methyltransferase, an enzyme involved
  in lignin biosynthesis.
authors:
- Meyermans H
- Morreel K
- Lapierre C
- Pollet B
- De Bruyn A
- Busson R
- Herdewijn P
- Devreese B
- Van Beeumen J
- Marita JM
- Ralph J
- Chen C
- Burggraeve B
- Van Montagu M
- Messens E
- Boerjan W
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M006915200
---

# Modifications in lignin and accumulation of phenolic glucosides in poplar xylem upon down-regulation of caffeoyl-coenzyme A O-methyltransferase, an enzyme involved in lignin biosynthesis.
**Authors:** Meyermans H, Morreel K, Lapierre C, Pollet B, De Bruyn A, Busson R, Herdewijn P, Devreese B, Van Beeumen J, Marita JM, Ralph J, Chen C, Burggraeve B, Van Montagu M, Messens E, Boerjan W
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M006915200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M006915200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Nov 24;275(47):36899-909. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M006915200.

Modifications in lignin and accumulation of phenolic glucosides in poplar xylem 
upon down-regulation of caffeoyl-coenzyme A O-methyltransferase, an enzyme 
involved in lignin biosynthesis.

Meyermans H(1), Morreel K, Lapierre C, Pollet B, De Bruyn A, Busson R, Herdewijn 
P, Devreese B, Van Beeumen J, Marita JM, Ralph J, Chen C, Burggraeve B, Van 
Montagu M, Messens E, Boerjan W.

Author information:
(1)Vakgroep Moleculaire Genetica & Departement Plantengenetica, Vlaams 
Interuniversitair Instituut voor Biotechnologie, Universiteit Gent, B-9000 Gent, 
Belgium.

Caffeoyl-coenzyme A O-methyltransferase (CCoAOMT) methylates, in vitro, 
caffeoyl-CoA and 5-hydroxyferuloyl-CoA, two possible precursors in monolignol 
biosynthesis in vivo. To clarify the in vivo role of CCoAOMT in lignin 
biosynthesis, transgenic poplars with 10% residual CCoAOMT protein levels in the 
stem xylem were generated. Upon analysis of the xylem, the affected transgenic 
lines had a 12% reduced Klason lignin content, an 11% increased 
syringyl/guaiacyl ratio in the noncondensed lignin fraction, and an increase in 
lignin-attached p-hydroxybenzoate but otherwise a lignin composition similar to 
that of wild type. Stem xylem of the CCoAOMT-down-regulated lines had a pink-red 
coloration, which coincided with an enhanced fluorescence of mature vessel cell 
walls. The reduced production of CCoAOMT caused an accumulation of 
O(3)-beta-d-glucopyranosyl-caffeic acid, O(4)-beta-d-glucopyranosyl-vanillic 
acid, and O(4)-beta-d-glucopyranosyl-sinapic acid (GSA), as authenticated by 
(1)H NMR. Feeding experiments showed that O(3)-beta-d-glucopyranosyl-caffeic 
acid and GSA are storage or detoxification products of caffeic and sinapic acid, 
respectively. The observation that down-regulation of CCoAOMT decreases lignin 
amount whereas GSA accumulates to 10% of soluble phenolics indicates that 
endogenously produced sinapic acid is not a major precursor in syringyl lignin 
biosynthesis. Our in vivo results support the recently obtained in vitro 
enzymatic data that suggest that the route from caffeic acid to sinapic acid is 
not used for lignin biosynthesis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M006915200
PMID: 10934215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
