---
pmid: '18073111'
title: Transformation efficiency of RasQ61 mutants linked to structural features of
  the switch regions in the presence of Raf.
authors:
- Buhrman G
- Wink G
- Mattos C
journal: Structure
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2273997
doi: 10.1016/j.str.2007.10.011
---

# Transformation efficiency of RasQ61 mutants linked to structural features of the switch regions in the presence of Raf.
**Authors:** Buhrman G, Wink G, Mattos C
**Journal:** Structure (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.str.2007.10.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2007.10.011)
**PMC:** [PMC2273997](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2273997/)

## Abstract

1. Structure. 2007 Dec;15(12):1618-29. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2007.10.011.

Transformation efficiency of RasQ61 mutants linked to structural features of the 
switch regions in the presence of Raf.

Buhrman G(1), Wink G, Mattos C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Structural Biochemistry, North Carolina State 
University, 128 Polk Hall-CB 7622, Raleigh, NC 27695, USA.

Transformation efficiencies of Ras mutants at residue 61 range over three orders 
of magnitude, but the in vitro GTPase activity decreases 10-fold for all 
mutants. We show that Raf impairs the GTPase activity of RasQ61L, suggesting 
that the Ras/Raf complex differentially modulates transformation. Our crystal 
structures show that, in transforming mutants, switch II takes part in a network 
of hydrophobic interactions burying the nucleotide and precatalytic water 
molecule. Our results suggest that Y32 and a water molecule bridging it to the 
gamma-phosphate in the wild-type structure play a role in GTP hydrolysis in lieu 
of the Arg finger in the absence of GAP. The bridging water molecule is absent 
in the transforming mutants, contributing to the burying of the nucleotide. We 
propose a mechanism for intrinsic hydrolysis in Raf-bound Ras and elucidate 
structural features in the Q61 mutants that correlate with their potency to 
transform cells.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2007.10.011
PMCID: PMC2273997
PMID: 18073111 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
