---
pmid: '8943244'
title: Cloning, expression, and chaperone-like activity of human alphaA-crystallin.
authors:
- Andley UP
- Mathur S
- Griest TA
- Petrash JM
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.50.31973
---

# Cloning, expression, and chaperone-like activity of human alphaA-crystallin.
**Authors:** Andley UP, Mathur S, Griest TA, Petrash JM
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.271.50.31973](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.271.50.31973)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1996 Dec 13;271(50):31973-80. doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.50.31973.

Cloning, expression, and chaperone-like activity of human alphaA-crystallin.

Andley UP(1), Mathur S, Griest TA, Petrash JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Washington University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA. petrash@am.seer.wustl.edu

One of the major protein components of the ocular lens, alpha-crystallin, is 
composed of alphaA and alphaB chain subunits that have structural homology to 
the family of mammalian small heat shock proteins. Like other small heat shock 
proteins, alpha-crystallin subunits associate to form large oligomeric 
aggregates that express chaperone-like activity, as defined by the ability to 
suppress nonspecific aggregation of proteins destabilized by treatment with a 
variety of denaturants including heat, UV irradiation, and chemical 
modification. It has been proposed that age-related loss of sequences at the C 
terminus of the alphaA chain subunit may be a factor in the pathogenesis of 
cataract due to diminished capacity of the truncated crystallin to protect 
against nonspecific aggregation of lens proteins. To evaluate the functional 
consequences of alpha-crystallin modification, two mutant forms of alphaA 
subunits were prepared by site-directed mutagenesis. Like wild type (WT), 
aggregates of approximately 540 kDa were formed from a tryptophan-free alphaA 
mutant (W9F). When added in stoichiometric amounts, both WT and W9F subunits 
completely suppressed the heat-induced aggregation of aldose reductase. In 
contrast, subunits encoded by a truncation mutant in which the C-terminal 17 
residues were deleted (R157STOP), despite having spectroscopic properties 
similar to WT, formed much larger aggregates with a marked reduction in 
chaperone-like activity. Similar results were observed when the chaperone-like 
activity was assessed through inhibition of gamma-crystallin aggregation induced 
by singlet oxygen. These results demonstrate that the structurally conservative 
substitution of Phe for Trp-9 has a negligible effect on the functional 
interaction of alphaA subunits, and that deletion of C-terminal sequences from 
the alphaA subunit results in substantial loss of chaperone-like activity, 
despite overall preservation of secondary structure.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.50.31973
PMID: 8943244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
