---
pmid: '10523504'
title: A targeted gene silencing technique shows that Drosophila myosin VI is required
  for egg chamber and imaginal disc morphogenesis.
authors:
- Deng W
- Leaper K
- Bownes M
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.112.21.3677
---

# A targeted gene silencing technique shows that Drosophila myosin VI is required for egg chamber and imaginal disc morphogenesis.
**Authors:** Deng W, Leaper K, Bownes M
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.112.21.3677](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.112.21.3677)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 1999 Nov;112 ( Pt 21):3677-90. doi: 10.1242/jcs.112.21.3677.

A targeted gene silencing technique shows that Drosophila myosin VI is required 
for egg chamber and imaginal disc morphogenesis.

Deng W(1), Leaper K, Bownes M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Edinburgh, Darwin 
Building, King's Buildings, Edinburgh EH9 3JR, UK. mbownes@srv0.bio.ed.ac.uk.

We report that Drosophila unconventional myosin VI, encoded by Myosin heavy 
chain at 95F (Mhc95F), is required for both imaginal disc and egg chamber 
morphogenesis. During oogenesis, Mhc95F is expressed in migrating follicle 
cells, including the border cells, which migrate between the nurse cells to lie 
at the anterior of the oocyte; the columnar cells that migrate over the oocyte; 
the centripetal cells that migrate between the oocyte and nurse cells; and the 
dorsal-anterior follicle cells, which migrate to secrete the chorionic 
appendages. Its function during development has been studied using a targeted 
gene silencing technique, combining the Gal4-UAS targeted expression system and 
the antisense RNA technique. Antibody staining shows that the expression of 
myosin 95F is greatly decreased in follicle cells when antisense Mhc95F RNA is 
expressed. Interfering with expression of Drosophila myosin VI at various 
developmental stages frequently results in lethality. During metamorphosis it 
results in adult flies with malformed legs and wings, indicating that myosin VI 
is essential for imaginal disc morphogenesis. During oogenesis, abnormal 
follicle cell shapes and aberrant follicle cell migrations are observed when 
antisense Mhc95F is expressed in follicle cells during stages 9 to 10, 
suggesting that the Drosophila myosin VI is required for follicle cell 
epithelial morphogenesis.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.112.21.3677
PMID: 10523504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
