---
pmid: '10999600'
title: Characterization of the biochemical properties of the human Upf1 gene product
  that is involved in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay.
authors:
- Bhattacharya A
- Czaplinski K
- Trifillis P
- He F
- Jacobson A
- Peltz SW
journal: RNA
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC1369996
doi: 10.1017/s1355838200000546
---

# Characterization of the biochemical properties of the human Upf1 gene product that is involved in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay.
**Authors:** Bhattacharya A, Czaplinski K, Trifillis P, He F, Jacobson A, Peltz SW
**Journal:** RNA (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1017/s1355838200000546](https://doi.org/10.1017/s1355838200000546)
**PMC:** [PMC1369996](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1369996/)

## Abstract

1. RNA. 2000 Sep;6(9):1226-35. doi: 10.1017/s1355838200000546.

Characterization of the biochemical properties of the human Upf1 gene product 
that is involved in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay.

Bhattacharya A(1), Czaplinski K, Trifillis P, He F, Jacobson A, Peltz SW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Medicine and 
Dentistry of New Jersey, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscataway 08854, 
USA.

The Upf1 protein in yeast has been implicated in the modulation of efficient 
translation termination as well as in the accelerated turnover of mRNAs 
containing premature stop codons, a phenomenon called nonsense-mediated mRNA 
decay (NMD). A human homolog of the yeast UPF1, termed HUpf1/RENT1, has also 
been identified. The HUpf1 has also been shown to play a role in NMD in 
mammalian cells. Comparison of the yeast and human UPF1 proteins demonstrated 
that the amino terminal cysteine/histidine-rich region and the region comprising 
the domains that define this protein as a superfamily group I helicase have been 
conserved. The yeast Upf1p demonstrates RNA-dependent ATPase and 5' --> 3' 
helicase activities. In this paper, we report the expression, purification, and 
characterization of the activities of the human Upf1 protein. We demonstrate 
that human Upf1 protein displays a nucleic-acid-dependent ATPase activity and a 
5'--> 3' helicase activity. Furthermore, human Upf1 is an RNA-binding protein 
whose RNA-binding activity is modulated by ATP. Taken together, these results 
indicate that the activities of the Upf1 protein are conserved across species, 
reflecting the conservation of function of this protein throughout evolution.

DOI: 10.1017/s1355838200000546
PMCID: PMC1369996
PMID: 10999600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The Upf1 protein in yeast has been implicated in the modulation of efficient translation termination as well as in the accelerated turnover of mRNAs containing premature stop codons, a phenomenon called nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD). A human homolog of the yeast UPF1, termed HUpf1/RENT1, has also been identified. The HUpf1 has also been shown to play a role in NMD in mammalian cells. Comparison of the yeast and human UPF1 proteins demonstrated that the amino terminal cysteine/histidine-rich region and the region comprising the domains that define this protein as a superfamily group I helicase have been conserved. The yeast Upf1p demonstrates RNA-dependent ATPase and 5' --> 3' helicase activities. In this paper, we report the expression, purification, and characterization of the activities of the human Upf1 protein. We demonstrate that human Upf1 protein displays a nucleic-acid-dependent ATPase activity and a 5'--> 3' helicase activity. Furthermore, human Upf1 is an RNA-binding protein whose RNA-binding activity is modulated by ATP. Taken together, these results indicate that the activities of the Upf1 protein are conserved across species, reflecting the conservation of function of this protein throughout evolution.
