---
pmid: '18787040'
title: Axl and Tyro3 modulate female reproduction by influencing gonadotropin-releasing
  hormone neuron survival and migration.
authors:
- Pierce A
- Bliesner B
- Xu M
- Nielsen-Preiss S
- Lemke G
- Tobet S
- Wierman ME
journal: Mol Endocrinol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2582545
doi: 10.1210/me.2008-0169
---

# Axl and Tyro3 modulate female reproduction by influencing gonadotropin-releasing hormone neuron survival and migration.
**Authors:** Pierce A, Bliesner B, Xu M, Nielsen-Preiss S, Lemke G, Tobet S, Wierman ME
**Journal:** Mol Endocrinol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1210/me.2008-0169](https://doi.org/10.1210/me.2008-0169)
**PMC:** [PMC2582545](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2582545/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Endocrinol. 2008 Nov;22(11):2481-95. doi: 10.1210/me.2008-0169. Epub 2008 
Sep 11.

Axl and Tyro3 modulate female reproduction by influencing gonadotropin-releasing 
hormone neuron survival and migration.

Pierce A(1), Bliesner B, Xu M, Nielsen-Preiss S, Lemke G, Tobet S, Wierman ME.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Denver School of Medicine, 
Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA.

GnRH neurons must undergo a complex and precise pattern of neuronal migration to 
appropriately target their projections to the median eminence to trigger 
gonadotropin secretion and thereby control reproduction. Using NLT GnRH cells as 
a model of early GnRH neuronal development, we identified the potential 
importance of Axl and Tyro3, members of the TAM (Tyro3, Axl, and Mer) family of 
receptor tyrosine kinases in GnRH neuronal cell survival and migration. 
Silencing studies evaluated the role of Tyro3 and Axl in NLT GnRH neuronal cells 
and suggest that both play a role in Gas6 stimulation of GnRH neuronal survival 
and migration. Analysis of mice null for both Axl and Tyro3 showed normal onset 
of vaginal opening but delayed first estrus and persistently abnormal estrous 
cyclicity compared with wild-type controls. Analysis of GnRH neuronal numbers 
and positioning in the adult revealed a total loss of 24% of the neuronal 
network that was more striking (34%) when considered within specific anatomical 
compartments, with the largest deficit surrounding the organum vasculosum of the 
lamina terminalis. Analysis of GnRH neurons during embryogenesis identified a 
striking loss of immunoreactive cells within the context of the ventral 
forebrain compartment (36%) and not more rostrally. Studies using caspase 3 
cleavage as a marker of apoptosis showed that Axl(-/-), Tyro3(-/-) 
double-knockout mice had increased cell death in the nose and dorsal forebrain, 
supporting the underlying mechanism of cell loss. Together these data suggest 
that Axl and Tyro3 mediate the survival and appropriate targeting of GnRH 
neurons to the ventral forebrain, thereby contributing to normal reproductive 
function and cyclicity in the female.

DOI: 10.1210/me.2008-0169
PMCID: PMC2582545
PMID: 18787040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
