---
pmid: '19150984'
title: Identification and functional analysis of a novel cyclin e/cdk2 substrate ankrd17.
authors:
- Deng M
- Li F
- Ballif BA
- Li S
- Chen X
- Guo L
- Ye X
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2658080
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807827200
---

# Identification and functional analysis of a novel cyclin e/cdk2 substrate ankrd17.
**Authors:** Deng M, Li F, Ballif BA, Li S, Chen X, Guo L, Ye X
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M807827200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M807827200)
**PMC:** [PMC2658080](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2658080/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Mar 20;284(12):7875-88. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807827200. Epub
2009  Jan 16.

Identification and functional analysis of a novel cyclin e/cdk2 substrate 
ankrd17.

Deng M(1), Li F, Ballif BA, Li S, Chen X, Guo L, Ye X.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathogenic Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of 
Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.

Cyclin E/Cdk2 is a key regulator in G(1)-S transition. We have identified a 
novel cyclin E/Cdk2 substrate called Ankrd17 (ankyrin repeat protein 17) using 
the TAP tag purification technique. Ankrd17 protein contains two clusters of a 
total 25 ankyrin repeats at its N terminus, one NES (nuclear exporting signal) 
and one NLS (nuclear localization signal) in the middle, and one RXL motif at 
its C terminus. Ankrd17 is expressed in various tissues and associates with 
cyclin E/Cdk2 in an RXL-dependent manner. It can be phosphorylated by cyclin 
E/Cdk2 at 3 phosphorylation sites (Ser(1791), Ser(1794), and Ser(2150)). 
Overexpression of Ankrd17 promotes S phase entry, whereas depletion of Ankrd17 
expression by small interfering RNA inhibits DNA replication and blocks cell 
cycle progression as well as up-regulates the expression of p53 and p21. Ankrd17 
is localized to the nucleus and interacts with DNA replication factors including 
MCM family members, Cdc6 and PCNA. Depletion of Ankrd17 results in decreased 
loading of Cdc6 and PCNA onto DNA suggesting that Ankrd17 may be directly 
involved in the DNA replication process. Taken together, these data indicate 
that Ankrd17 is an important downstream effector of cyclin E/Cdk2 and positively 
regulates G(1)/S transition.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M807827200
PMCID: PMC2658080
PMID: 19150984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Cyclin E/Cdk2 is a key regulator in G 1 -S transition. We have
 identified a novel cyclin E/Cdk2 substrate called Ankrd17 (ankyrin repeat
 protein 17) using the TAP tag purification technique. Ankrd17 protein contains
 two clusters of a total 25 ankyrin repeats at its N terminus, one NES (nuclear
 exporting signal) and one NLS (nuclear localization signal) in the middle, and
 one R X L motif at its C terminus. Ankrd17 is expressed in various
 tissues and associates with cyclin E/Cdk2 in an R X L-dependent manner.
 It can be phosphorylated by cyclin E/Cdk2 at 3 phosphorylation sites
 (Ser 1791 , Ser 1794 , and Ser 2150 ).
 Overexpression of Ankrd17 promotes S phase entry, whereas depletion of Ankrd17
 expression by small interfering RNA inhibits DNA replication and blocks cell
 cycle progression as well as up-regulates the expression of p53 and p21.
 Ankrd17 is localized to the nucleus and interacts with DNA replication factors
 including MCM family members, Cdc6 and PCNA. Depletion of Ankrd17 results in
 decreased loading of Cdc6 and PCNA onto DNA suggesting that Ankrd17 may be
 directly involved in the DNA replication process. Taken together, these data
 indicate that Ankrd17 is an important downstream effector of cyclin
 E /Cdk2 and positively regulates G 1 /S transition.

RESULTS

Association of Ankrd17 with Cdk2 in Vitro and in Vivo —To
 identify potential Cdk2-associated proteins, a TAP tag purification procedure
 was performed. 293T cells were transduced with Cdk2 expression retrovirus
 pMSCV-c-FLAG-HA-Cdk2. Empty retrovirus pMSCV-c-FLAG-HA, which does not express
 Cdk2, was also included in the experiment as a control. The transduced cells
 were lysed and subjected to double immunoprecipitation, first with anti-FLAG
 beads and then with anti-HA beads. The elution was separated on a 4–12%
 Nupage SDS-PAGE and resolved proteins were visualized by staining with Sigma
 EZ blue ( Fig. 1 A ). The
 proteins were excised from the gel and subjected to trypsin digestion followed
 by liquid chromatographytandem mass spectrometry analysis. The mass spectrum
 results showed that some proteins were known Cdk2 interacting proteins such as
 cyclin E, cyclin A, p21, and pRb, but also some new proteins were identified
 as potential Cdk2-associated partners ( Fig.
 1 B ). One of them is a novel ankyrin repeat protein 17
 (Ankrd17), which was also identified as a relevant cyclin E /Cdk2
 substrate with the use of expression cloning (data not shown).

To confirm the direct interaction of Ankrd17 with Cdk2, GST-Ankrd17 (amino
 acids 1681–1819) was used for the GST pull-down experiments
 ( Fig. 1 C ). In
 addition, because cyclin E was known to complex with Cdk2, we also examined
 the interaction of Ankrd17 with cyclin E. The result showed that Ankrd17
 interacts with cyclin E/Cdk2 ( Fig.
 1 C , lane 3 ). The presence of R X L motifs
 in Ankrd17, together with interaction with cyclin E/Cdk2, suggested that
 Ankrd17 is a substrate for cyclin E/Cdk2, as R X L motifs are often
 found in substrates of cyclin kinase and are involved in the interaction
 between cyclins and their substrates
 ( 5 – 8 ).
 To see if the R X L motif in Ankrd17 was responsible for the
 interaction with cyclin E /Cdk2, R X L mutants were generated,
 such as GST-Ankrd17AQA and pCMV-FLAG-Ankrd17AQA and tested in GST pull-down
 and coimmunoprecipitation assays, respectively. Results showed that in both
 assays, whereas wild type Ankrd17 was found to be associated with cyclin
 E/Cdk2, the Ankrd17AQA mutants failed to interact with the kinase complex
 ( Fig. 1 , lane 4 of panel C ; lane 6 of panel D ). These data suggested
 that the R X L motif of Ankrd17 is critical for cyclin E/Cdk2 binding.
 To further demonstrate the interaction between Ankrd17 and Cdk2 as well as
 cyclin E in vivo , expression vectors for FLAG-tagged Ankrd17
 (pCMV-FLAG-Ankrd17) were introduced into 293T cells by transfection. The cell
 lysates were immunoprecipitated with FLAG antibody and immunoblotted with
 cyclin E and Cdk2 antibodies. The tagged Ankrd17 protein was found to be
 associated with cyclin E/Cdk2 ( Fig.
 1 D , lane 5 ), indicating that Ankrd17 interacts
 with the cyclin E/Cdk2 complex in cells. To further confirm the interaction
 between endogenous Ankrd17 and cyclin E/Cdk2 in vivo , the cell
 lysates from 293T cells were immunoprecipitated with Ankrd17 antibody and
 immunoblotted with Cdk2 antibody. The result showed that endogenous Ankrd17
 binds to Cdk2 ( Fig.
 1 E ). The cell lysates were also immunoprecipitated with
 cyclin E antibody and immunoblotted with Ankrd17 antibody. The data showed
 that endogenous Ankrd17 was associated with cyclin E
 ( Fig. 1 F ).

Characterization of Ankrd17 —Ankrd17 is encoded by a
 non-annotated gene located at human chromosome 4q13.3. Ankrd17 has two
 isoforms (a and b). Full-length cDNA of Ankrd17 of isoform b has an open
 reading frame of 7059 bp with a calculated molecular mass of 260 kDa (2352
 amino acids) ( Fig.
 2 A ). It was ubiquitously expressed in all human tissues
 examined by reverse transcriptase-PCR ( Fig.
 2 B ). Predicted Ankrd17 protein consists of 2 clusters
 with a total of 25 ankyrin repeats at its N-terminal, one NES site, one NLS
 site, one KH domain, and one R X L motif at its C-terminal.

To examine the localization of Ankrd17, the U2OS and HeLa cell lysates were
 fractionated into nuclear and cytosolic fractions and immunoblotted with
 Ankrd17, β-tubulin, and MCM3 antibodies. The result indicated that
 Ankrd17 was localized in the nucleus in both cell lines
 ( Fig. 2 C ).

To examine the phosphorylation sites of Ankrd17, Ankrd17 purified from 293T
 cells after transfection with a pCMV-FLAG-Ankrd17 expression plasmid was
 subjected to a mass spectrometry analysis
 ( Fig. 2 D ). Three
 phosphorylation sites in Ankrd17 at Ser 1791 , Ser 1794 ,
 and Ser 2150 were identified in this assay.

Phosphorylation of Ankrd17 by Cyclin E/Cdk2 in Vitro —The
 interaction of Ankrd17 with the cyclin E/Cdk2 complex and involvement of the
 R X L motif in the interaction suggested that Ankrd17 is a substrate of
 cyclin E/Cdk2. To examine whether Ankrd17 can be phosphorylated by cyclin
 E/Cdk2, GST-Ankrd17 (amino acids 1681–1819) and GST-Ankrd17AQA protein
 were incubated with [γ- 32 P]ATP in the absence or presence of
 purified GST-cyclin E and Cdk2. As shown in the Fig. 3 A , GST-Ankrd17
 can be phosphorylated by cyclin E/Cdk2, indicating that the Ankrd17 is a
 substrate for cyclin E/Cdk2. In contrast, GST-Ankrd17AQA was not efficiently
 phosphorylated by cyclin E/Cdk2. The GST- cyclin A /Cdk2 was also
 included in the kinase assay, the result showed that Ankrd17 was
 phosphorylated more specifically by cyclin E/Cdk2 than cyclin A/Cdk2
 ( Fig. 3 B ). According
 to the mass spectrometry data as shown in Fig. 2 D ,
 Ser 1791 and Ser 1794 in Ankrd17 were phosphorylated in vivo . To test whether Ankrd17 Ser 1791 and
 Ser 1794 were phosphorylated by cyclin E/Cdk2, GST Ankrd17
 S1737A/S1740A/S1791A/S1794A and triple mutants were generated and subjected to in vitro kinase assay, the result showed that the phosphorylation of
 Ankrd17 were decreased when Ser 1791 and Ser 1794 were
 mutated to Ala, whereas its phosphorylation was recovered to 86 and 93% when
 they were changed back to Ser, respectively
 ( Fig. 3 C , lanes
 5 and 6 ). Interestingly, Ser 1740 in Ankrd17 was also
 important for its phosphorylation ( Fig.
 3 C , lane 4 ). Because GST-Ankrd17
 S1737A/S1740A/S1791A/S1794A still could be phosphorylated, it implied that
 there were other sites of serine or threonine in this region that can be
 phosphorylated by cyclin E /Cdk2 at certain levels.

Effects of Ankrd17 on U2OS Cell Cycle Distribution —To gain
 further insight into the function of Ankrd17, we examined the effect of
 Ankrd17 overexpression on cell cycle distribution. When transfected into U2OS
 cells, overexpressed Ankrd17 caused a significant increase in the fraction of
 cells in S phase and a concomitant decrease in the G 1 population in
 a dose-dependent manner ( Fig.
 4 A ). To examine whether the increase of S phase
 population was due to the S phase blockage caused by overexpression of
 Ankrd17, we used nocodazole to block the cell cycle at the M phase and
 analyzed the cell cycle distribution of Ankrd17-overexpressed cells and
 control cells. As shown in Fig.
 4 B , Ankrd17-overexpressed cells could proceed from S
 phase to the M phase as well as the control cells, indicating that the
 increase of S phase population in Ankrd17-overexpressed cells was not the
 result of the S phase blockage. Furthermore, U2OS cells were cotransfected
 with cyclin E , Cdk2, and Ankrd17 and subjected to flow cytometry
 analysis, the result showed that Ankrd17 coordinated with cyclin E/Cdk2 to
 promote cell cycle progression ( Fig.
 4 C ). These results suggested that Ankrd17 is a positive
 regulator for the cell cycle progression.

Effects of Depletion of Ankrd17 on DNA Replication and Cell Cycle
 Progression —To address whether Ankrd17 is required for cell cycle
 progression, we used RNA interference assays with synthetic siRNA duplexes to
 inhibit the expression of Ankrd17 protein in U2OS cells and examined the
 effect of the depletion of Ankrd17 expression on cell cycle distribution. As
 shown in Fig. 5 A , 3
 sets of siRNA of Ankrd17 ( 1 , 2 , and 3 ) were tested
 for eliminating Ankrd17 protein in U2OS cells. Although all 3 siRNAs were
 capable to knockdown Ankrd17 protein significantly at 48 h after transfection,
 siRNA1 and siRNA3 are more efficient at an earlier time point (12 h). Flow
 cytometry data showed that all 3 sets of siRNA were able to significantly
 block the cell entering S phase when compared with the control
 ( Fig. 5 B ).
 Interestingly, siRNA1 and siRNA3 were found more effective in blocking S phase
 entry than siRNA2, which is consistent with the different knockdown
 efficiencies found for these siRNAs. These observations suggested that Ankrd17
 has an essential role in regulating S phase entry.

To further confirm that depletion of Ankrd17 blocked S phase entry, the
 U2OS cells transfected with Ankrd17 siRNA were starved without serum and
 release for 16 h, the cell cycle profiles were analyzed by flow cytometry. As
 seen in Fig. 5 C , after
 serum release, the fraction of Ankrd17-depleted cells entering the
 S/G 2 /M phase (46.6%) was much lower than that of control cells
 (69.8%) indicating depletion of Ankrd17 inhibited cell cycle progression.

To determine whether depletion of Ankrd17 regulates proteins involved in
 cell cycle, U2OS cells were transfected with Ankrd17 siRNA. Immunoblot
 analysis showed that silencing Ankrd17 was associated with increases in p53
 and p21 and decreases in cyclin A as compared with that in cells transfected
 with control siRNA, whereas the level of cyclin D, cyclin E, and p27 were not
 changed ( Fig. 5 D ). It
 is known that activation of p53 induces the expression of various genes
 including p21 , which mediates cell cycle arrest
 ( 34 ). This result suggested
 that depletion of Ankrd17 may activate the p53-p21 pathway and block cell
 cycle progression.

To examine the effect of the inhibition of Ankrd17 expression on DNA
 replication, we monitored the incorporation of BrdUrd in U2OS cells
 transfected with siRNA duplexes of Ankrd17. The U2OS cells were labeled with
 BrdUrd at 48 and 72 h after transfection. The percentage of BrdUrd-labeled
 cells was scored by immunofluorescence
 ( Fig. 6, A–C ).
 The percentage of BrdUrd positive cells in Ankrd17-depleted cells was lower
 than that in control cells, which was consistent with the results from flow
 cytometric analysis.

Following transfection with siRNA duplexes of Ankrd17, U2OS cells were
 starved for 48 h and released for 2–20 h at 2-h intervals and labeled
 with BrdUrd. As shown in Fig.
 6 D , BrdUrd incorporation in the cells transfected with
 siRNA of Ankrd17 decreased dramatically compared with that in the cells
 transfected with control siRNA. These results further indicated that depletion
 of Ankrd17 blocked the DNA replication and the S phase entry.

Ankrd17 Localized on Chromatin in a Cell Cycle-dependent
 Manner —As shown in Fig.
 2 C , Ankrd17 was predominantly localized in the nucleus.
 To further investigate its localization in the nucleus, U2OS cells were
 separated into CSK-soluble and -insoluble fractions. As shown in Fig. 7 A , Ankrd17 was
 detected both in CSK-soluble and -insoluble fractions. The CSK-insoluble
 fraction was further digested with micrococcal nuclease. Unlike MCM3, Ankrd17
 did not dissociate from the CSK-insoluble fraction treated with micrococcal
 nuclease (MNase) indicating Ankrd17 may be either a nuclear matrix protein or
 chromatin-bound protein that is resistant to MNase. To determine this, the
 CSK-insoluble fraction was treated with different concentrations of NaCl. As
 shown in Fig. 7 A ( right panel ), most of the Ankrd17 dissociated at a salt
 concentration of 0.3 m NaCl, which shared the similar pattern with
 the origin recognition complex protein Orc1, Cdc6, and MCM10
 ( 35 , 36 ). Lamin B, as a nuclear
 matrix protein, was not extracted by 0.3 m NaCl. These results
 strongly indicate that the CSK-insoluble fraction of Ankrd17 binds to
 chromatin, not a nuclear matrix protein.

To examine the protein level of Ankrd17 during the cell cycle, U2OS cells
 were synchronized in G 1 , G 1 /S, S, S/G 2 , and M
 phases, respectively. The cells were collected and their progression through
 cell cycle was monitored by flow cytometry. The total cell extract and
 chromatin-bound fraction from different phases were prepared and analyzed by
 immunoblotting with Ankrd17 as well as MCM3, -5, -7, Cdc6, and PCNA
 antibodies. As shown in Fig.
 7 B , Ankrd17 in the chromatin-bound fraction was much
 lower in M phase compared with that in other phases, whereas Ankrd17 in the
 total cell extract was expressed at similar levels in all phases of cell
 cycle. A binding profile similar to that of chromatin was also found for MCM3,
 MCM5, and MCM7. They were absent during mitosis, and they reassociated with
 chromatin in early G 1 phase, similar to results described
 previously. Very similar results have been obtained in HeLa cells (data not
 shown).

We further analyzed the chromatin association of Ankrd17 in cells that were
 released from nocodazole block to the G 1 phase. Because the U2OS
 cell line enters the G 1 phase very rapidly (within 20 min) after
 release from nocodazole-mediated mitotic arrest, it was very difficult to
 obtain consistent data to carry out the experiment to determine the Ankrd17
 loading onto chromatin using U2OS cells. To overcome this technical problem,
 we utilized HeLa cells, which showed similar expression patterns of Ankrd17 in
 different cell phases (data not shown) and had ∼3 h to exit mitosis after
 release from nocodazole-induced mitotic arrest. As shown in Fig. 7 C , Ankrd17
 loading onto chromatin was gradually increased, whereas cyclin B as the M
 phase marker was decreased as cells exit M phase. Interestingly, the
 chromatin-bound Ankrd17 accumulated at the M to G 1 phase
 transition, which showed a similar pattern as MCM3, -5, and -7.

Ankrd17 Interacted with Proteins Involved in DNA
 Replication —The cell cycle-dependent chromatin loading of Ankrd17
 leads us to ask whether it directly participates in DNA replication. The
 interaction between Ankrd17 and MCM family members, Cdc6, and PCNA were
 examined. 293T cells were transfected with pCMV-FLAG-Ankrd17. The cell lysates
 were immunoprecipitated with FLAG antibody and immunoblotted with MCM3, MCM5,
 MCM7, Cdc6, and PCNA antibodies, respectively. As shown in Fig. 7 D , Ankrd17 can
 interact with MCM3, MCM5, MCM7, Cdc6, and PCNA. To further confirm the
 interaction between Ankrd17 and the MCM family member, Cdc6, and PCNA, the
 cell lysates of 293T cells were immunoprecipitated with Ankrd17 antibody or
 normal rabbit serum as control and immunoblotted with MCM7, Cdc6, and PCNA
 antibodies. The result showed that endogenous Ankrd17 can interact with MCM7,
 Cdc6, and PCNA ( Fig.
 7 E ).

Depletion of Ankrd17 Decreases the Loading of CDC6 and PCNA onto the
 Chromatin —To analyze the role of Ankrd17 on the replication
 machinery, we used a well characterized fractionation method to determine the
 loading of Ankrd17 to chromatin; wherein actively engaged replication proteins
 are tethered to chromatin, replication proteins that are not involved in
 replication are in a soluble nucleoplasmic pool
 ( 33 ). The siRNA-transfected
 U2OS cell lysates were separated as CSK-soluble and -insoluble parts. The
 total cell extracts and CSK-insoluble fraction were immunoblotted with MCM3,
 -5, -7, Cdc6, Cdc45, and PCNA antibodies. As seen in Fig. 8 A , Cdc6 levels
 were decreased both in total cell extract and the CSK-insoluble fraction in
 Ankrd17-depleted cells. PCNA was found to be significantly less only in the
 CSK-insoluble fraction (chromatin-bound fraction) in Ankrd17 knockdown cells,
 but not the total amount of PCNA. In contrast, the levels of MCM3, -5, -7, and
 Cdc45 remained unchanged in both the total cell extracts and CSK-insoluble
 fraction in Ankrd17-depleted cells. Because depletion of Ankrd17 caused a
 dramatic decrease of chromatin-bound CDC6 and PCNA, this suggested that
 assembly of the replication complex was deregulated with the loss of Ankrd17.
 These results were further validated by immunofluorescence data, wherein U2OS
 cells were transfected with control siRNA (control) and Ankrd17 siRNA
 (Ankrd17) or untransfected (untreated). These cells were extracted with or
 without CSK buffer, fixed, and followed by immunostaining for PCNA
 ( red ) and MCM3 ( green ) antibodies, respectively
 ( Fig. 8 B ). The PCNA
 and MCM3 positive cells were scored and the results showed that the ratio of
 PCNA positive cells in CSK-extracted cells was significantly lower in the
 Ankrd17-depleted cells when compared with controls
 ( Fig. 8 C , left
 panel ), whereas the percentage of PCNA positive cells did not change in
 unextracted cells. The percentage of MCM3 positive cells was not altered in
 Ankrd17-depleted cells in both CSK-treated and untreated cells
 ( Fig. 8 C , right
 panel ). The results were consistent with the immunoblotting data
 ( Fig. 8 A ).
 Collectively, our data suggested that Ankrd17 interacts with proteins involved
 in DNA replication. Loss of Ankrd17 affects Cdc6 and PCNA loading onto
 DNA.

DISCUSSION

Our results suggest that Ankrd17 is a novel substrate of cyclin
 E /Cdk2 with potent cell cycle regulatory properties. Its overexpression
 promotes cell cycle progression, whereas depletion blocks DNA replication and
 regulates the level of p53 and p21. The predicted amino acid sequence analysis
 reveals five characteristic features of the Ankrd17 protein (see Fig. 2 A ), including 25
 ankyrin repeats, NES, NLS, KH, and R X L motif. The R X L motif
 was demonstrated to be essential for Ankrd17 binding to the cyclin
 E /Cdk2 complex (see Fig. 1, C and D ). Ankyrin repeats are a conserved sequence of 33
 amino acids found in many proteins with a wide variety of functions, ranging
 from cell cycle control, transcription regulation, and cell differentiation,
 to cell anchorage
 ( 37 – 39 ).
 One ankyrin repeat consists of a β-hairpin loop and two α-helices.
 These repeats form a higher order complex where protein-protein interacts via
 the exposed β-hairpin loops. It has been found that some ankyrin repeat
 proteins may bind to multiple targets to form functional complexes. For
 example, p16 not only binds to Cdk4 and Cdk6, but also to transcription factor
 NF-κB and c-Jun kinase under physiological conditions
 ( 40 , 41 ). Another example of the
 multipartner ankyrin protein is gankyrin, which is overexpressed in esophageal
 carcinoma and hepatoma ( 39 ).
 Its physiological partners include Cdk4, Rb, and S6 ATPase of the 26 S
 proteasome and HDM2 ( 42 , 43 ). Here we demonstrate that
 Ankrd17 can bind cyclin E /Cdk2, MCM family members (MCM3, MCM5, and
 MCM7), Cdc6, and PCNA. However, more studies are required to address whether
 Ankrd17 protein may bind to different target proteins and function in
 different pathways.

A proportion of Ankrd17 is located in chromatin regions that are resistant
 to nuclease digestion. It can be released from the nuclease-resistant fraction
 by high salt concentrations, which shares the property of other
 nuclease-resistant chromatin-bound proteins, such as Orc1, MCM10, Cdc6,
 transcribing RNA polymerase, and SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex
 ( 35 , 36 , 44 , 45 ). This observation suggests
 that Ankrd17 is involved in DNA pre-replication complex formation, chromatin
 remodeling, and transcribing chromatin. Like the MCM2–7 subunits,
 Ankrd17 is found in both the soluble and chromatin-bound fractions in the
 nucleus. In mammalian cells, the MCM subunits assemble on DNA beginning in
 late mitosis and remain associated with the chromatin until DNA synthesis is
 completed. The chromatin-bound Ankrd17 showed a similar pattern as MCMs,
 suggesting that Ankrd17 may be involved in DNA replication. The observation
 that Ankrd17 interacts with MCM family members, Cdc6, and PCNA supports this
 hypothesis, as does the decreased association of Cdc6 and PCNA with chromatin
 when Ankrd17 is depleted. Unlike the MCMs, dissociation of Ankrd17 from
 chromatin appears to occur slightly later in the cell cycle (early M as
 opposed to G 2 phase) than for the MCM subunits, which could imply
 that Ankrd17 might play a role in other aspects besides DNA replication.

DNA replication initiation proceeds in the presence of a pre-replicative
 complex (pre-RC) at origins of replication and the licensing cofactor Cdt1 and
 Cdc6 that recruit the MCM2–7 complex. The formation of a replication
 fork is promoted by subsequent recruitment of additional factors such as
 MCM10, Cdc45, and the GINS complex, and activation of S phase cyclin-dependent
 kinases (Cdks) and the Cdc7-Dbf4 kinase (DDK), MCM2–7 complex together
 with associated factors recruit DNA polymerases and other factors required for
 DNA synthesis, such as PCNA
 ( 46 , 47 ). In this study, we have
 shown that depletion of Ankrd17 affects the loading of PCNA, but not MCMs,
 onto the chromatin. MCMs are components of the pre-RC, whereas PCNA is a
 component of the replication complex that synthesizes DNA at the replication
 fork. This observation might suggest that Ankrd17 function is dispensable for
 the loading of MCMs onto chromatin to form the pre-RC, but is needed for the
 formation of replicative complexes. However, additional analyses are required
 to accurately determine whether Ankrd17 directly or indirectly affects the
 loading of PCNA. Previous researches suggest that Cdc6 is essential for MCM
 loading onto the chromatin. Intriguingly, depletion of Ankrd17 causes the
 decrease of Cdc6 loading onto chromatin but has no effects on the MCM family.
 This may be due to the fact that a lower level of Cdc6 can be sufficient
 enough to mediate MCM loading in Ankrd17-depleted cells.

It has been found that phosphorylation of MCM family members by cyclin /Cdks regulates their assembly into the prereplication complex
 and their helicase activity, which is essential for DNA replication
 ( 30 , 48 , 49 ). Ankrd17 can be
 phosphorylated by cyclin E /Cdk2, but whether phosphorylation of
 Ankrd17 regulates its association with the components in the pre-replication
 complex and loading onto chromatin and controls the activity of pre-RC needs
 to be further elucidated. In addition, Ankrd17 affects the loading of Cdc6 and
 PCNA onto chromatin, whereas the connection between the phosphorylation of
 Ankrd17 and the recruitment of Cdc6 and PCNA still need to be addressed in the
 future.

To date, studies in mice suggest that Ankrd17 is involved in liver
 development, but the detailed mechanism is unclear
 ( 50 ). Ankrd17 was
 serologically defined as breast cancer antigen NY-BR-16 and its peptide
 APRVPVQAL was identified as a major histocompatibility complex-associated
 tumor peptide ( 51 , 52 ) but its relevance to
 cancer is currently unknown. Recent study using kinase engineering strategy
 combined with chemical enrichment and mass spectrometry showed that Ankrd17
 was a potential substrate of cyclin A/Cdk2
 ( 53 ). Given the interesting
 and complicated structural features of Ankrd17, it is tempting to speculate
 that Ankrd17 could play pivotal roles in cell cycle regulation and DNA
 replication. Further studies are warranted to unmask the link between
 functional domains of Ankrd17 and their potential role in cell cycle
 progression and tumorigenesis.
