---
pmid: '9422736'
title: Identification and characterization of a novel protein interacting with Ral-binding
  protein 1, a putative effector protein of Ral.
authors:
- Ikeda M
- Ishida O
- Hinoi T
- Kishida S
- Kikuchi A
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.2.814
---

# Identification and characterization of a novel protein interacting with Ral-binding protein 1, a putative effector protein of Ral.
**Authors:** Ikeda M, Ishida O, Hinoi T, Kishida S, Kikuchi A
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.273.2.814](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.2.814)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jan 9;273(2):814-21. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.2.814.

Identification and characterization of a novel protein interacting with 
Ral-binding protein 1, a putative effector protein of Ral.

Ikeda M(1), Ishida O, Hinoi T, Kishida S, Kikuchi A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hiroshima University School of Medicine, 1-2-3 
Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734, Japan.

Ral-binding protein 1 (RalBP1) is a putative effector protein of Ral and 
exhibits a GTPase activating activity for Rac and CDC42. To clarify the function 
of RalBP1, we isolated a novel protein that interacts with RalBP1 by yeast 
two-hybrid screening and designated it POB1 (partner of RalBP1). POB1 consists 
of 521 amino acids, shares a homology with Eps15, which has been identified as 
an epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor substrate, and has two proline-rich 
motifs. The POB1 mRNA was expressed in cerebrum, cerebellum, lung, kidney, and 
testis. POB1 interacted with RalBP1 in COS cells and the C-terminal region of 
POB1 was responsible for this interaction. The binding domain of RalBP1 to POB1 
was distinct from its binding domain to Ral. Ral and POB1 simultaneously 
interacted with RalBP1 in COS cells. The binding of POB1 to RalBP1 did not 
affect the GTPase activating activity of RalBP1. Furthermore, POB1 bound to Grb2 
but not to Nck or Crk. POB1 was tyrosine-phosphorylated in COS cells upon 
stimulation with EGF and made a complex with EGF receptor. These results suggest 
that RalBP1 makes a complex with POB1 and that this complex may provide a link 
between tyrosine kinase, Src homology 3 (SH3)-containing protein, and Ral.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.2.814
PMID: 9422736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
