---
pmid: '21376233'
title: Activation of multiple proto-oncogenic tyrosine kinases in breast cancer via
  loss of the PTPN12 phosphatase.
authors:
- Sun T
- Aceto N
- Meerbrey KL
- Kessler JD
- Zhou C
- Migliaccio I
- Nguyen DX
- Pavlova NN
- Botero M
- Huang J
- Bernardi RJ
- Schmitt E
- Hu G
- Li MZ
- Dephoure N
- Gygi SP
- Rao M
- Creighton CJ
- Hilsenbeck SG
- Shaw CA
- Muzny D
- Gibbs RA
- Wheeler DA
- Osborne CK
- Schiff R
- Bentires-Alj M
- Elledge SJ
- Westbrook TF
journal: Cell
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC6014607
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.02.003
---

# Activation of multiple proto-oncogenic tyrosine kinases in breast cancer via loss of the PTPN12 phosphatase.
**Authors:** Sun T, Aceto N, Meerbrey KL, Kessler JD, Zhou C, Migliaccio I, Nguyen DX, Pavlova NN, Botero M, Huang J, Bernardi RJ, Schmitt E, Hu G, Li MZ, Dephoure N, Gygi SP, Rao M, Creighton CJ, Hilsenbeck SG, Shaw CA, Muzny D, Gibbs RA, Wheeler DA, Osborne CK, Schiff R, Bentires-Alj M, Elledge SJ, Westbrook TF
**Journal:** Cell (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2011.02.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2011.02.003)
**PMC:** [PMC6014607](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6014607/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2011 Mar 4;144(5):703-18. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.02.003.

Activation of multiple proto-oncogenic tyrosine kinases in breast cancer via 
loss of the PTPN12 phosphatase.

Sun T(1), Aceto N, Meerbrey KL, Kessler JD, Zhou C, Migliaccio I, Nguyen DX, 
Pavlova NN, Botero M, Huang J, Bernardi RJ, Schmitt E, Hu G, Li MZ, Dephoure N, 
Gygi SP, Rao M, Creighton CJ, Hilsenbeck SG, Shaw CA, Muzny D, Gibbs RA, Wheeler 
DA, Osborne CK, Schiff R, Bentires-Alj M, Elledge SJ, Westbrook TF.

Author information:
(1)Verna & Marrs McLean Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Baylor 
College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2011 Mar 4;144(5):638-40. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.02.030.

Among breast cancers, triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is the most poorly 
understood and is refractory to current targeted therapies. Using a genetic 
screen, we identify the PTPN12 tyrosine phosphatase as a tumor suppressor in 
TNBC. PTPN12 potently suppresses mammary epithelial cell proliferation and 
transformation. PTPN12 is frequently compromised in human TNBCs, and we identify 
an upstream tumor-suppressor network that posttranscriptionally controls PTPN12. 
PTPN12 suppresses transformation by interacting with and inhibiting multiple 
oncogenic tyrosine kinases, including HER2 and EGFR. The tumorigenic and 
metastatic potential of PTPN12-deficient TNBC cells is severely impaired upon 
restoration of PTPN12 function or combined inhibition of PTPN12-regulated 
tyrosine kinases, suggesting that TNBCs are dependent on the proto-oncogenic 
tyrosine kinases constrained by PTPN12. Collectively, these data identify PTPN12 
as a commonly inactivated tumor suppressor and provide a rationale for 
combinatorially targeting proto-oncogenic tyrosine kinases in TNBC and other 
cancers based on their profile of tyrosine-phosphatase activity.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.02.003
PMCID: PMC6014607
PMID: 21376233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

INTRODUCTION

Breast cancer is the most common malignancy among women and is comprised of a heterogeneous group of diseases stratified into three major subtypes ( Di Cosimo and Baselga, 2010 ; Jemal et al., 2008 ). Two of these are defined by expression of steroid hormone receptors (estrogen receptor [ER] and progesterone receptor [PR]) or amplification/overexpression of the receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) HER2. Agents targeting these proteins have led to significant increases in patient survival ( Osborne, 1998 ; Slamon et al., 1989 ). In contrast, the triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) subtype is defined only by the absence of ER and PR expression or HER2 amplification, underscoring our lack of understanding of key pathways driving TNBC. TNBC comprises approximately 20% of breast cancer, and the prognosis for patients with TNBC is poor because of its propensity for recurrence and metastasis and a lack of effective targeted therapeutics ( Hurvitz and Finn, 2009 ). Consequently, a major challenge remaining in breast cancer treatment is to identify aberrant signaling networks underlying this aggressive subtype of breast cancer.

Protein tyrosine phosphorylation plays a central role in cellular physiology and in cancer ( Hunter, 2009 ). For instance, aberrant activation of the human epidermal growth factor receptor (HER) family of RTKs occurs frequently in many malignancies, including breast, lung, and brain cancer ( Yarden and Sliwkowski, 2001 ). Although HER2 signaling is required for tumor maintenance in HER2-amplified disease ( Slamon et al., 1989 ), the role of HER2 and other HER family tyrosine kinases (TKs) in breast cancer subtypes lacking HER2 amplification is unclear. Notably, in the absence of TK mutational activation or amplification, other pathways that regulate HER2 and other TKs may also be involved in tumorigenesis but remain to be elucidated.

Protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) also regulate the equilibrium of tyrosine phosphorylation and, in principle, can serve as antagonists to TK signaling to play a prominent role in tumor suppression ( Tonks, 2006 ). However, much less is known about the role of PTPs in suppressing tumorigenesis. In this study we have employed an unbiased functional screen for tumor suppressors and identified a role for the tyrosine phosphatase PTPN12 in TNBC. Loss of PTPN12 leads to malignant transformation of human mammary epithelial cells (HMECs) through multi-TK activation. PTPN12 function is frequently compromised in TNBC by deletions, defective sequence variants, or loss of expression, suggesting that HER2/EGFR and other RTK signaling is aberrantly activated in non-HER2-amplified breast cancers. Restoring PTPN12 expression in PTPN12-deficient TNBC cells inhibits their proliferation, tumorigenicity, and metastatic potential in vivo. These results identify PTPN12 as a tumor suppressor and suggest that combinatorial TK signaling is a key dependency in TNBC and, therefore, a target for cancer therapies.
