---
pmid: '17596282'
title: Unique mechanisms of growth regulation and tumor suppression upon Apc inactivation
  in the pancreas.
authors:
- Strom A
- Bonal C
- Ashery-Padan R
- Hashimoto N
- Campos ML
- Trumpp A
- Noda T
- Kido Y
- Real FX
- Thorel F
- Herrera PL
journal: Development
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/dev.02875
---

# Unique mechanisms of growth regulation and tumor suppression upon Apc inactivation in the pancreas.
**Authors:** Strom A, Bonal C, Ashery-Padan R, Hashimoto N, Campos ML, Trumpp A, Noda T, Kido Y, Real FX, Thorel F, Herrera PL
**Journal:** Development (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.02875](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.02875)

## Abstract

1. Development. 2007 Aug;134(15):2719-25. doi: 10.1242/dev.02875. Epub 2007 Jun
27.

Unique mechanisms of growth regulation and tumor suppression upon Apc 
inactivation in the pancreas.

Strom A(1), Bonal C, Ashery-Padan R, Hashimoto N, Campos ML, Trumpp A, Noda T, 
Kido Y, Real FX, Thorel F, Herrera PL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Faculty 
of Medicine, 1 Rue Michel-Servet, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

beta-catenin signaling is heavily involved in organogenesis. Here, we 
investigated how pancreas differentiation, growth and homeostasis are affected 
following inactivation of an endogenous inhibitor of beta-catenin, adenomatous 
polyposis coli (Apc). In adult mice, Apc-deficient pancreata were enlarged, 
solely as a result of hyperplasia of acinar cells, which accumulated 
beta-catenin, with the sparing of islets. Expression of a target of 
beta-catenin, the proto-oncogene c-myc (Myc), was increased in acinar cells 
lacking Apc, suggesting that c-myc expression is essential for hyperplasia. In 
support of this hypothesis, we found that conditional inactivation of c-myc in 
pancreata lacking Apc completely reversed the acinar hyperplasia. Apc loss in 
organs such as the liver, colon and kidney, as well as experimental 
misexpression of c-myc in pancreatic acinar cells, led to tumor formation with 
high penetrance. Surprisingly, pancreas tumors failed to develop following 
conditional pancreas Apc inactivation. In Apc-deficient acini of aged mice, our 
studies revealed a cessation of their exaggerated proliferation and a reduced 
expression of c-myc, in spite of the persistent accumulation of beta-catenin. In 
conclusion, our work shows that beta-catenin modulation of c-myc is an essential 
regulator of acinar growth control, and unveils an unprecedented example of Apc 
requirement in the pancreas that is both temporally restricted and 
cell-specific. This provides new insights into the mechanisms of tumor 
pathogenesis and tumor suppression in the pancreas.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.02875
PMID: 17596282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
