---
pmid: '23541532'
title: 'Ubiquilin-2 (UBQLN2) binds with high affinity to the C-terminal region of
  TDP-43 and modulates TDP-43 levels in H4 cells: characterization of inhibition by
  nucleic acids and 4-aminoquinolines.'
authors:
- Cassel JA
- Reitz AB
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3960997
doi: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2013.03.020
---

# Ubiquilin-2 (UBQLN2) binds with high affinity to the C-terminal region of TDP-43 and modulates TDP-43 levels in H4 cells: characterization of inhibition by nucleic acids and 4-aminoquinolines.
**Authors:** Cassel JA, Reitz AB
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbapap.2013.03.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbapap.2013.03.020)
**PMC:** [PMC3960997](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3960997/)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Jun;1834(6):964-71. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbapap.2013.03.020. Epub 2013 Mar 27.

Ubiquilin-2 (UBQLN2) binds with high affinity to the C-terminal region of TDP-43 
and modulates TDP-43 levels in H4 cells: characterization of inhibition by 
nucleic acids and 4-aminoquinolines.

Cassel JA(1), Reitz AB.

Author information:
(1)ALS Biopharma, LLC, Doylestown, PA 18902, USA. jcassel@alsbiopharma.com

Recently, it was reported that mutations in the ubiquitin-like protein 
ubiquilin-2 (UBQLN2) are associated with X-linked amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
(ALS), and that both wild-type and mutant UBQLN2 can co-localize with aggregates 
of C-terminal fragments of TAR DNA binding protein (TDP-43). Here, we describe a 
high affinity interaction between UBQLN2 and TDP-43 and demonstrate that 
overexpression of both UBQLN2 and TDP-43 reduces levels of both exogenous and 
endogenous TDP-43 in human H4 cells. UBQLN2 bound with high affinity to both 
full length TDP-43 and a C-terminal TDP-43 fragment (261-414 aa) with KD values 
of 6.2nM and 8.7nM, respectively. Both DNA oligonucleotides and 
4-aminoquinolines, which bind to TDP-43, also inhibited UBQLN2 binding to TDP-43 
with similar rank order affinities compared to inhibition of oligonucleotide 
binding to TDP-43. Inhibitor characterization experiments demonstrated that the 
DNA oligonucleotides noncompetitively inhibited UBQLN2 binding to TDP-43, which 
is consistent with UBQLN2 binding to the C-terminal region of TDP-43. 
Interestingly, the 4-aminoquinolines were competitive inhibitors of UBQLN2 
binding to TDP-43, suggesting that these compounds also bind to the C-terminal 
region of TDP-43. In support of the biochemical data, co-immunoprecipitation 
experiments demonstrated that both TDP-43 and UBQLN2 interact in human 
neuroglioma H4 cells. Finally, overexpression of UBQLN2 in the presence of 
overexpressed full length TDP-43 or C-terminal TDP-43 (170-414) dramatically 
lowered levels of both full length TDP-43 and C-terminal TDP-43 fragments 
(CTFs). Consequently, these data suggest that UBQLN2 enhances the clearance of 
TDP-43 and TDP-43 CTFs and therefore may play a role in the development of 
TDP-43 associated neurotoxicity.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2013.03.020
PMCID: PMC3960997
PMID: 23541532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
