---
pmid: '16611888'
title: Targeting of p300/CREB binding protein coactivators by simian virus 40 is mediated
  through p53.
authors:
- Borger DR
- DeCaprio JA
journal: J Virol
year: '2006'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1472010
doi: 10.1128/JVI.80.9.4292-4303.2006
---

# Targeting of p300/CREB binding protein coactivators by simian virus 40 is mediated through p53.
**Authors:** Borger DR, DeCaprio JA
**Journal:** J Virol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.80.9.4292-4303.2006](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.80.9.4292-4303.2006)
**PMC:** [PMC1472010](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1472010/)

## Abstract

1. J Virol. 2006 May;80(9):4292-303. doi: 10.1128/JVI.80.9.4292-4303.2006.

Targeting of p300/CREB binding protein coactivators by simian virus 40 is 
mediated through p53.

Borger DR(1), DeCaprio JA.

Author information:
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Department of Medical Oncology, Harvard Medical 
School, Mayer Building 457, 44 Binney Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The primary transforming functions of simian virus 40 large T antigen (SV40 LT) 
are conferred primarily through the binding and inactivation of p53 and the 
retinoblastoma family members. Normal p53 function requires an association with 
the CREB binding protein (CBP)/p300 coactivators, and a ternary complex 
containing SV40 LT, p53, and CBP/p300 has been identified previously. In this 
report, we have evaluated a secondary function of p53 bound to the SV40 LT 
complex in mediating the binding of human CBP/p300. We demonstrate that p53 
associated with SV40 LT was posttranslationally modified in a manner consistent 
with the binding of CBP/p300. Furthermore, expression of SV40 LT induced the 
proportion of p53 phosphorylated on S15. An essential function for p53 in 
bridging the interaction between SV40 LT and CBP/p300 was identified through the 
reconstitution of the SV40 LT-CBP/p300 complex upon p53 reexpression in p53-null 
cells. In addition, the SV40 LT-CBP/p300 complex was disrupted through RNA 
interference-mediated depletion of endogenous p53. We also demonstrate that SV40 
LT was acetylated in a p300- and p53-dependent manner, at least in part through 
the CH3 domain of p300. Therefore, the binding of p53 serves to modify SV40 LT 
by targeting CBP and p300 binding to direct the acetylation of SV40 LT.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.80.9.4292-4303.2006
PMCID: PMC1472010
PMID: 16611888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The primary transforming functions of simian virus 40 large T antigen (SV40 LT) are conferred primarily through the binding and inactivation of p53 and the retinoblastoma family members. Normal p53 function requires an association with the CREB binding protein (CBP)/p300 coactivators, and a ternary complex containing SV40 LT, p53, and CBP/p300 has been identified previously. In this report, we have evaluated a secondary function of p53 bound to the SV40 LT complex in mediating the binding of human CBP/p300. We demonstrate that p53 associated with SV40 LT was posttranslationally modified in a manner consistent with the binding of CBP/p300. Furthermore, expression of SV40 LT induced the proportion of p53 phosphorylated on S15. An essential function for p53 in bridging the interaction between SV40 LT and CBP/p300 was identified through the reconstitution of the SV40 LT-CBP/p300 complex upon p53 reexpression in p53-null cells. In addition, the SV40 LT-CBP/p300 complex was disrupted through RNA interference-mediated depletion of endogenous p53. We also demonstrate that SV40 LT was acetylated in a p300- and p53-dependent manner, at least in part through the CH3 domain of p300. Therefore, the binding of p53 serves to modify SV40 LT by targeting CBP and p300 binding to direct the acetylation of SV40 LT.

DISCUSSION

We have demonstrated that SV40 LT can target endogenous CBP and p300 for binding not only in mouse cells but in human cells as well. In a recent report from our laboratory, we identified the acetylation of SV40 LT on a discrete K697 residue ( 66 ). This posttranslational modification was reduced by 15-fold through homologous disruption of CBP gene expression. The residual SV40 LT acetylation was not attributed to the PCAF acetyltransferase, but p300 acetyltransferase activity could not be ruled out. We have demonstrated in this report that SV40 LT can be acetylated directly through the acetyltransferase activity of p300, directed in part through the CH3 domain. While our previous report identified factors that promote LT acetylation, we now demonstrate that p53 is an integral bridging factor that promotes the interaction with CBP/p300 in the SV40 LT complex.

SV40 LT binding has been shown to repress the transactivation function of CBP and p300 ( 24 ). The potential impact of SV40 LT in reducing the amount active CBP is suggested by the increased incidence of tumors in patients with the CBP haploinsufficiency disorder Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome ( 58 ). While an increased incidence of hematological malignancies has been identified in mice that are heterozygous for CBP expression, no increased incidence of tumor formation was noted in matched p300 heterozygous mice ( 45 ). However, somatic missense mutations and truncations in p300 have been identified in a small subset of human epithelial cancers, usually associated with an inactivation of the second allele ( 29 , 59 ). Although it is feasible that SV40 LT targeting of CBP/p300 could be required for efficient promotion of the transformed phenotype, additional experimentation is required.

Through p53 siRNA experiments and the reintroduction of p53 into p53-null cells, we have demonstrated that SV40 LT requires p53 to intermediate the SV40 LT and CBP/p300 complex. These observations are consistent with reports of SV40 LT existing in a ternary complex with p53 and CBP ( 24 ). While the human papillomavirus viral oncoprotein E6 promotes the degradation of p53 through E6-AP ( 79 ), E6 has the ability to target CBP/p300 in residues that are independent of p53 binding ( 65 , 93 ). Polyoma LT does not associate with p53 but targets the binding of p300 and CBP ( 18 , 61 ). E1A binds to p300 and CBP directly through the E1A N-terminal sequences and the CR1 domain, and these regions are essential for its transforming functions ( 39 ). Therefore, our observations that SV40 LT expression can promote the accumulation of p53 to levels 20- to 70-fold above those of the control, which is consistent with data from previous reports ( 68 ), suggest a mechanism for binding of CBP/p300 that is unique to SV40 LT. It also raises the question of whether previous studies that have inferred functions of SV40 LT through a mutation of the p53 domain actually implicated p53 inactivation as well as CBP/p300 targeting.

We have demonstrated that inactivated p53 in the SV40 LT complex is posttranslationally modified on discrete residues (S15, S20, and S37) known to be targeted by the DNA damage checkpoint kinases ATM, ATR, Chk1, and DNA-PK. The ability of SV40 LT to induce the relative level of S15 phosphorylation was of particular interest, as phosphorylation at this residue can stabilize the interaction of p53 with CBP/p300 ( 22 , 48 ). The mechanisms by which SV40 LT induces these posttranslational modifications on p53 is unknown. However, SV40 LT activity is known to promote aneuploidy and other chromosomal abnormalities ( 74 ). Genomic instability may be manifested through the ability of SV40 LT to form a physical complex with checkpoint proteins involved in DNA repair and mitotic spindle checkpoint regulation. SV40 LT can enhance endoreduplication manifested during nocodazole treatment through binding and sequestration of the mitotic spindle checkpoint function of Bub1 ( 19 ). Endoreduplication of cellular and viral DNA imposed by SV40 LT has also been attributed to the binding of NBS1 ( 85 ). The ability of SV40 LT to promote chromosomal instability may lead to the activation of the DNA damage checkpoint kinases, with the subsequent phosphorylation of p53.

NBS1 associates with MRE11 and RAD50 to form a sensing or repair complex at the sites of DNA damage ( 12 ). While the NBS1/MRE11/RAD50 complex is required to recruit and activate ATM ( 13 , 14 , 49 , 50 ), phosphorylation of NBS1 by activated ATM is subsequently required for promoting S-phase arrest and survival following ionizing radiation ( 28 , 53 , 86 , 92 ). The inability of SV40 LT to interfere with NBS1 phosphorylation following DNA damage ( 85 ) suggests that SV40 LT may interfere with NBS1 function downstream of ATM activation. This is consistent with the ability of SV40 LT expression to induce the phosphorylation of p53 on residues targeted by ATM, ATR, Chk1, and DNA-PK. By targeting the inactivation of p53, SV40 LT association allows cells to bypass p53-dependent apoptosis and cell cycle arrest induced by DNA damage checkpoint control mechanisms while enhancing a p53 bridging function. The resulting complex with CBP and p300 could then direct the acetylation of SV40 LT and associated p53, as we have observed.

For p300, the domain possessing acetyltransferase activity has been localized to a region encompassing amino acids 1284 to 1669. This region is sufficient to acetylate core histones (H2A, H2B, H3, and H4) as well as a p53 peptide ( 10 ). We have demonstrated that this acetyltransferase domain of human p300 linked to the CH3 domain was sufficient to bind and induce the basal acetylation of SV40 LT. Interestingly, although similar fragments containing mutated acetyltransferase activity could bind SV40 LT with a higher affinity, the mutant fragment did not diminish basal acetylation of SV40 LT. Furthermore, SV40 LT acetylation was induced by the overexpression of full-length p300. We initially interpreted these results as indicative of a transient association, as the ability to acetylate SV40 LT on K697 may have subsequently destabilized the association between SV40 LT and p300. However, immunoprecipitation experiments have not demonstrated an enhanced ability of acetylation-deficient SV40 LT K697R and K697A mutants to associate with endogenous human p300 (data not shown). Since we can increase the levels of basally acetylated SV40 LT by transient overexpression of p300, we postulate that only a subset of SV40 LT binds to p300 and CBP to become acetylated. Furthermore, these data suggest that SV40 LT binding does not inhibit the acetyltransferase activity of CBP and p300, consistent with data previously reported by Valls et al. ( 82 ).

Acetylation is a well-described posttranslational modification that can modulate protein interactions, DNA binding, and subcellular localization of a number of transcription factors. Acetylation of adenoviral E1A by p300 and PCAF on K239 disrupts the ability of E1A to repress CREB-mediated transcriptional activation. This has been attributed to either a reduced affinity for CtBP corepressor binding ( 91 ) or reduced nuclear translocation through an attenuated interaction with importin-α3 ( 57 ). In addition to its effects on promoting cell cycle entry, a number of SV40 LT functions are required for viral replication, including SV40 origin-specific DNA binding, helicase, and ATPase activities. Acetylation of the human immunodeficiency virus Tat transactivator by p300 has been shown to be required for transactivation of the human immunodeficiency virus promoter during viral replication ( 64 ) and for stimulating transcriptional elongation by dissociating Tat from TAR RNA ( 43 ). Therefore, acetylation of SV40 LT likely modulates the components within the SV40 LT protein complex, but further work is required to identify the specific function of SV40 LT that is impacted.
