---
pmid: '22085931'
title: Optimal functional levels of activation-induced deaminase specifically require
  the Hsp40 DnaJa1.
authors:
- Orthwein A
- Zahn A
- Methot SP
- Godin D
- Conticello SG
- Terada K
- Di Noia JM
journal: EMBO J
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3273393
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.417
---

# Optimal functional levels of activation-induced deaminase specifically require the Hsp40 DnaJa1.
**Authors:** Orthwein A, Zahn A, Methot SP, Godin D, Conticello SG, Terada K, Di Noia JM
**Journal:** EMBO J (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2011.417](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2011.417)
**PMC:** [PMC3273393](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3273393/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2012 Feb 1;31(3):679-91. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.417. Epub 2011 Nov
15.

Optimal functional levels of activation-induced deaminase specifically require 
the Hsp40 DnaJa1.

Orthwein A(1), Zahn A, Methot SP, Godin D, Conticello SG, Terada K, Di Noia JM.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Mechanisms of Genetic Diversity, Institut de Recherches 
Cliniques de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

The enzyme activation-induced deaminase (AID) deaminates deoxycytidine at the 
immunoglobulin genes, thereby initiating antibody affinity maturation and 
isotype class switching during immune responses. In contrast, off-target DNA 
damage caused by AID is oncogenic. Central to balancing immunity and cancer is 
AID regulation, including the mechanisms determining AID protein levels. We 
describe a specific functional interaction between AID and the Hsp40 DnaJa1, 
which provides insight into the function of both proteins. Although both major 
cytoplasmic type I Hsp40s, DnaJa1 and DnaJa2, are induced upon B-cell activation 
and interact with AID in vitro, only DnaJa1 overexpression increases AID levels 
and biological activity in cell lines. Conversely, DnaJa1, but not DnaJa2, 
depletion reduces AID levels, stability and isotype switching. In vivo, 
DnaJa1-deficient mice display compromised response to immunization, AID protein 
and isotype switching levels being reduced by half. Moreover, DnaJa1 
farnesylation is required to maintain, and farnesyltransferase inhibition 
reduces, AID protein levels in B cells. Thus, DnaJa1 is a limiting factor that 
plays a non-redundant role in the functional stabilization of AID.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2011.417
PMCID: PMC3273393
PMID: 22085931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
