---
pmid: '15137946'
title: Comparative genomics identifies a flagellar and basal body proteome that includes
  the BBS5 human disease gene.
authors:
- Li JB
- Gerdes JM
- Haycraft CJ
- Fan Y
- Teslovich TM
- May-Simera H
- Li H
- Blacque OE
- Li L
- Leitch CC
- Lewis RA
- Green JS
- Parfrey PS
- Leroux MR
- Davidson WS
- Beales PL
- Guay-Woodford LM
- Yoder BK
- Stormo GD
- Katsanis N
- Dutcher SK
journal: Cell
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(04)00450-7
---

# Comparative genomics identifies a flagellar and basal body proteome that includes the BBS5 human disease gene.
**Authors:** Li JB, Gerdes JM, Haycraft CJ, Fan Y, Teslovich TM, May-Simera H, Li H, Blacque OE, Li L, Leitch CC, Lewis RA, Green JS, Parfrey PS, Leroux MR, Davidson WS, Beales PL, Guay-Woodford LM, Yoder BK, Stormo GD, Katsanis N, Dutcher SK
**Journal:** Cell (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(04)00450-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(04)00450-7)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2004 May 14;117(4):541-52. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(04)00450-7.

Comparative genomics identifies a flagellar and basal body proteome that 
includes the BBS5 human disease gene.

Li JB(1), Gerdes JM, Haycraft CJ, Fan Y, Teslovich TM, May-Simera H, Li H, 
Blacque OE, Li L, Leitch CC, Lewis RA, Green JS, Parfrey PS, Leroux MR, Davidson 
WS, Beales PL, Guay-Woodford LM, Yoder BK, Stormo GD, Katsanis N, Dutcher SK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO 63110, USA.

Cilia and flagella are microtubule-based structures nucleated by modified 
centrioles termed basal bodies. These biochemically complex organelles have more 
than 250 and 150 polypeptides, respectively. To identify the proteins involved 
in ciliary and basal body biogenesis and function, we undertook a comparative 
genomics approach that subtracted the nonflagellated proteome of Arabidopsis 
from the shared proteome of the ciliated/flagellated organisms Chlamydomonas and 
human. We identified 688 genes that are present exclusively in organisms with 
flagella and basal bodies and validated these data through a series of in 
silico, in vitro, and in vivo studies. We then applied this resource to the 
study of human ciliation disorders and have identified BBS5, a novel gene for 
Bardet-Biedl syndrome. We show that this novel protein localizes to basal bodies 
in mouse and C. elegans, is under the regulatory control of daf-19, and is 
necessary for the generation of both cilia and flagella.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(04)00450-7
PMID: 15137946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
