---
pmid: '18599441'
title: Mass spectrometry reveals modularity and a complete subunit interaction map
  of the eukaryotic translation factor eIF3.
authors:
- Zhou M
- Sandercock AM
- Fraser CS
- Ridlova G
- Stephens E
- Schenauer MR
- Yokoi-Fong T
- Barsky D
- Leary JA
- Hershey JW
- Doudna JA
- Robinson CV
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2587604
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0801313105
---

# Mass spectrometry reveals modularity and a complete subunit interaction map of the eukaryotic translation factor eIF3.
**Authors:** Zhou M, Sandercock AM, Fraser CS, Ridlova G, Stephens E, Schenauer MR, Yokoi-Fong T, Barsky D, Leary JA, Hershey JW, Doudna JA, Robinson CV
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0801313105](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0801313105)
**PMC:** [PMC2587604](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2587604/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Nov 25;105(47):18139-44. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0801313105. Epub 2008 Jul 1.

Mass spectrometry reveals modularity and a complete subunit interaction map of 
the eukaryotic translation factor eIF3.

Zhou M(1), Sandercock AM, Fraser CS, Ridlova G, Stephens E, Schenauer MR, 
Yokoi-Fong T, Barsky D, Leary JA, Hershey JW, Doudna JA, Robinson CV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Lensfield Road, Cambridge 
CB2 1EW, United Kingdom.

The eukaryotic initiation factor 3 (eIF3) plays an important role in translation 
initiation, acting as a docking site for several eIFs that assemble on the 40S 
ribosomal subunit. Here, we use mass spectrometry to probe the subunit 
interactions within the human eIF3 complex. Our results show that the 13-subunit 
complex can be maintained intact in the gas phase, enabling us to establish 
unambiguously its stoichiometry and its overall subunit architecture via tandem 
mass spectrometry and solution disruption experiments. Dissociation takes place 
as a function of ionic strength to form three stable modules eIF3(c:d:e:l:k), 
eIF3(f:h:m), and eIF3(a:b:i:g). These modules are linked by interactions between 
subunits eIF3b:c and eIF3c:h. We confirmed our interaction map with the 
homologous yeast eIF3 complex that contains the five core subunits found in the 
human eIF3 and supplemented our data with results from immunoprecipitation. 
These results, together with the 27 subcomplexes identified with increasing 
ionic strength, enable us to define a comprehensive interaction map for this 
800-kDa species. Our interaction map allows comparison of free eIF3 with that 
bound to the hepatitis C virus internal ribosome entry site (HCV-IRES) RNA. We 
also compare our eIF3 interaction map with related complexes, containing 
evolutionarily conserved protein domains, and reveal the location of subunits 
containing RNA recognition motifs proximal to the decoding center of the 40S 
subunit of the ribosome.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0801313105
PMCID: PMC2587604
PMID: 18599441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

The eukaryotic initiation factor 3 (eIF3) plays an important role in translation initiation, acting as a docking site for several eIFs that assemble on the 40S ribosomal subunit. Here, we use mass spectrometry to probe the subunit interactions within the human eIF3 complex. Our results show that the 13-subunit complex can be maintained intact in the gas phase, enabling us to establish unambiguously its stoichiometry and its overall subunit architecture via tandem mass spectrometry and solution disruption experiments. Dissociation takes place as a function of ionic strength to form three stable modules eIF3(c:d:e:l:k), eIF3(f:h:m), and eIF3(a:b:i:g). These modules are linked by interactions between subunits eIF3b:c and eIF3c:h. We confirmed our interaction map with the homologous yeast eIF3 complex that contains the five core subunits found in the human eIF3 and supplemented our data with results from immunoprecipitation. These results, together with the 27 subcomplexes identified with increasing ionic strength, enable us to define a comprehensive interaction map for this 800-kDa species. Our interaction map allows comparison of free eIF3 with that bound to the hepatitis C virus internal ribosome entry site (HCV-IRES) RNA. We also compare our eIF3 interaction map with related complexes, containing evolutionarily conserved protein domains, and reveal the location of subunits containing RNA recognition motifs proximal to the decoding center of the 40S subunit of the ribosome.

Discussion

Here, we report a model of the subunit organization of human eIF3, the largest and most complex of the eukaryotic initiation factors. Our model, is based primarily on data from MS of intact subcomplexes generated in solution and is supported by a subset of interactions generated independently by IP and our analysis of the homologous yeast complex. Our results reveal facile dissociation of subunits eIF3i, j, k, and m as well as three well defined interaction modules generated by manipulating the ionic strength of the complex-containing solution. Furthermore, results from binding of human eIF3 to the IRES shows that although dissociation of larger subcomplexes is prevented, eIF3i and the eIF3l:k dimer are still able to dissociate, suggesting that these subunits are not directly involved in the interactions with the IRES.

If we compare our model with data for other protein complexes containing both MPN and PCI domains ( 10 ), we note that the two MPN domain-containing subunits, eIF3f and h, interact directly in our subunit organization map ( Fig. 5 a ), a phenomenon also observed with another PCI-containing complex, the proteasome lid ( 14 ). Moreover, several directly interacting PCI domains are found in both complexes, supporting their role in providing a scaffold for active subunits. Our interaction map for human eIF3 also establishes direct interactions among eIF3b, g, i, and j, four of the five non-PCI/MPN subunits absent in the other two PCI complexes.

The high sensitivity of eIF3 to dissociation into subcomplexes as the ionic strength is raised suggests that electrostatic interactions may play a central role in maintaining the integrity of the complex and in regulating its function. The three largest subunits eIF3a, b, and c are extensively phosphorylated, occupy a central position in our model, and are conserved between human and yeast ( 16 ). Increasing ionic strength leads primarily to dissociation of interactions between eIF3b:c and eIF3c:h, suggesting that salt bridges between charged groups, such as phosphorylated side-chains, are directly involved in the interfaces between these subunits. It is therefore tempting to speculate that phosphorylation of eIF3 is involved in regulating labile interactions, both between eIF3 modules and subcomplexes and maybe also with other parts of the translational apparatus. It is also conceivable that the three modules, observed in nonphysiological high ionic-strength buffers, may mimic dephosphorylated states of the complex in vivo .

It is interesting to compare our results with a recent report of coexpression of subunits and formation of a reconstituted functional “core” for the mammalian eIF3 comprising subunits eIF3a, b, c, e, f, and h ( 20 ). Interestingly, all of the “functionally dispensable” subunits according to this study are located on the periphery of the complex in our model and are not involved in interactions between our three modules, consistent with our overall view of this assembly.

Our results also show that one of the core subunits eIF3c is observed in a series of subcomplexes containing up to seven noncore mammalian subunits not present in the yeast complex (f, h, m, d, e, l, and k). The role of eIF3c may therefore involve facilitating the recruitment and assembly of these noncore subunits into the intact eIF3 complex. This proposal is supported by deletion of eIF3c from a functional subcomplex that resulted in loss of its ability to promote binding of mRNA to the 40S ribosomal subunit ( 20 ). eIF3b also has an established scaffolding role ( 24 ) and is found involved in mRNA binding ( 11 , 25 ). In our network, it interacts directly with the other RNA recognition motif (RRM)-containing subunit eIF3g. Both are located in close proximity to eIF3j, known to be located at the decoding centre of the 40S subunit ( 9 ) ( Fig. 5 b ). This is an intriguing observation because it implies a role of RNA recognition for these two subunits (eIF3b and g) in binding and presenting mRNA to the decoding centre of the ribosome.

The labile binding of eIF3j, as shown by its absence from all of our subcomplexes, implies its ready dissociation from the complex. Interestingly, eIF3j has been shown to dissociate from eIF3 in quiescent T lymphocytes, but upon activation, eIF3j binds eIF3 and 40S ribosomal subunits, implying that the interaction of subunit j with eIF3 may well be regulated ( 26 ). Moreover, eIF3j has been shown to have more than one role, not only in the decoding center ( 9 ), but also taking part in 20S pre-rRNA processing ( 4 ). The fact that this critical subunit is only loosely associated and is located close to eIF3b:g:i and the observation that subunit eIF3i is also labile implies that dissociation of eIF3j, with or without its neighboring subunits, may well be associated with its regulatory role in translation initiation and in ribosome biogenesis ( 4 ).

Overall, in this study, we have derived a subunit interaction map for a 13-subunit complex using an emerging MS approach ( 13 , 14 , 27 ). If we consider our interaction map with the five-lobed architecture revealed by cryo-EM ( 8 ), it is tempting to speculate that the subcomplexes frequently observed in our MS experiments may correspond to the lobes identified within the EM structure. The assignment of these subcomplexes to the different domains of the 3D EM structure remains to be completed. Overall, the subunit architecture presented here, together with knowledge of the ease of dissociation and interactions that link the three stable modules provide an intriguing insight into the relationships between subunits and their possible functional significance in this complex initiation factor.

Experimental Methods

The eIF3 sample was purified from HeLa cell cytosol as described ( 8 , 15 ).
