---
pmid: '22863012'
title: Brown remodeling of white adipose tissue by SirT1-dependent deacetylation of
  Pparγ.
authors:
- Qiang L
- Wang L
- Kon N
- Zhao W
- Lee S
- Zhang Y
- Rosenbaum M
- Zhao Y
- Gu W
- Farmer SR
- Accili D
journal: Cell
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3413172
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.06.027
---

# Brown remodeling of white adipose tissue by SirT1-dependent deacetylation of Pparγ.
**Authors:** Qiang L, Wang L, Kon N, Zhao W, Lee S, Zhang Y, Rosenbaum M, Zhao Y, Gu W, Farmer SR, Accili D
**Journal:** Cell (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2012.06.027](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2012.06.027)
**PMC:** [PMC3413172](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3413172/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2012 Aug 3;150(3):620-32. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.06.027.

Brown remodeling of white adipose tissue by SirT1-dependent deacetylation of 
Pparγ.

Qiang L(1), Wang L, Kon N, Zhao W, Lee S, Zhang Y, Rosenbaum M, Zhao Y, Gu W, 
Farmer SR, Accili D.

Author information:
(1)Naomi Berrie Diabetes Center, Department of Medicine, College of Physicians 
and Surgeons of Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2013 Feb 1;112(3):411-4. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.113.300870.

Brown adipose tissue (BAT) can disperse stored energy as heat. Promoting 
BAT-like features in white adipose (WAT) is an attractive, if elusive, 
therapeutic approach to staunch the current obesity epidemic. Here we report 
that gain of function of the NAD-dependent deacetylase SirT1 or loss of function 
of its endogenous inhibitor Deleted in breast cancer-1 (Dbc1) promote "browning" 
of WAT by deacetylating peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (Ppar)-γ on 
Lys268 and Lys293. SirT1-dependent deacetylation of Lys268 and Lys293 is 
required to recruit the BAT program coactivator Prdm16 to Pparγ, leading to 
selective induction of BAT genes and repression of visceral WAT genes associated 
with insulin resistance. An acetylation-defective Pparγ mutant induces a brown 
phenotype in white adipocytes, whereas an acetylated mimetic fails to induce 
"brown" genes but retains the ability to activate "white" genes. We propose that 
SirT1-dependent Pparγ deacetylation is a form of selective Pparγ modulation of 
potential therapeutic import.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.06.027
PMCID: PMC3413172
PMID: 22863012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
