---
pmid: '8670134'
title: Characterization of the hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA lyase precursor, a protein
  targeted to peroxisomes and mitochondria.
authors:
- Ashmarina LI
- Robert MF
- Elsliger MA
- Mitchell GA
journal: Biochem J
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1217198
doi: 10.1042/bj3150071
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Characterization of the hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA lyase precursor, a protein targeted to peroxisomes and mitochondria.
**Authors:** Ashmarina LI, Robert MF, Elsliger MA, Mitchell GA
**Journal:** Biochem J (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1042/bj3150071](https://doi.org/10.1042/bj3150071)
**PMC:** [PMC1217198](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1217198/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 1996 Apr 1;315 ( Pt 1)(Pt 1):71-5. doi: 10.1042/bj3150071.

Characterization of the hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA lyase precursor, a protein 
targeted to peroxisomes and mitochondria.

Ashmarina LI(1), Robert MF, Elsliger MA, Mitchell GA.

Author information:
(1)Service de génétique médicale, Hopital Sainte-Justine, Université de 
Montréal, Québec, Canada.

We previously showed that human liver hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA (HMG-CoA) lyase 
(HL; EC 4.1.3.4) is found in both mitochondria and peroxisomes. HL contains a 
27-residue N-terminal mitochondrial targeting sequence which in cleaved on 
mitochondrial entry, as well as a C-terminal Cys-Lys-Leu peroxisomal targeting 
motif. Because peroxisomal HL has a greater molecular mass and more basic pI 
value than mitochondrial HL, we predicted that peroxisomal HL retains the 
mitochondrial leader. To test this hypothesis, we expressed both the precursor 
(pHL) and mature (mHL) peptides in Escherichia coli and studied their 
properties. pHL purified by ion-exchange and hydrophobic chromatography had a pI 
of 7.6 on FPLC chromatofocusing and a molecular mass of 34.5 kDa on SDS/PAGE, 
similar to our findings for peroxisomal HL. For purified mHL, pI (6.2) and 
molecular mass (32 kDa) values resemble those of mitochondrial HL. Purified pHL 
is similar to mHL in K(m) for HMG-CoA (44.8 microM), k(cat) (6.3 min(-1)) and pH 
optimum (9.0-9.5). However, the quaternary structures of pHL and mHL differ. On 
Superose 12 FPLC gel filtration and also on ultrafiltration, both in the 
presence and in the absence of HMG-CoA), pHL behaves as a monomer whereas mHL 
migrates as a dimer. We conclude that the HL percursor is probably identical to 
peroxisomal HL, that its catalytic properties resemble those of mature 
mitochondrial HL, and that the mitochondrial leader peptide prevents 
dimerization on pHL.

DOI: 10.1042/bj3150071
PMCID: PMC1217198
PMID: 8670134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
