---
pmid: '21512031'
title: Hippo pathway inhibits Wnt signaling to restrain cardiomyocyte proliferation
  and heart size.
authors:
- Heallen T
- Zhang M
- Wang J
- Bonilla-Claudio M
- Klysik E
- Johnson RL
- Martin JF
journal: Science
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC3133743
doi: 10.1126/science.1199010
---

# Hippo pathway inhibits Wnt signaling to restrain cardiomyocyte proliferation and heart size.
**Authors:** Heallen T, Zhang M, Wang J, Bonilla-Claudio M, Klysik E, Johnson RL, Martin JF
**Journal:** Science (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1199010](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1199010)
**PMC:** [PMC3133743](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3133743/)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2011 Apr 22;332(6028):458-61. doi: 10.1126/science.1199010.

Hippo pathway inhibits Wnt signaling to restrain cardiomyocyte proliferation and 
heart size.

Heallen T(1), Zhang M, Wang J, Bonilla-Claudio M, Klysik E, Johnson RL, Martin 
JF.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M System Health Science 
Center, 2121 West Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2011 Apr 22;332(6028):426-7. doi: 10.1126/science.1205972.

Genetic regulation of mammalian heart size is poorly understood. Hippo signaling 
represents an organ-size control pathway in Drosophila, where it also inhibits 
cell proliferation and promotes apoptosis in imaginal discs. To determine 
whether Hippo signaling controls mammalian heart size, we inactivated Hippo 
pathway components in the developing mouse heart. Hippo-deficient embryos had 
overgrown hearts with elevated cardiomyocyte proliferation. Gene expression 
profiling and chromatin immunoprecipitation revealed that Hippo signaling 
negatively regulates a subset of Wnt target genes. Genetic interaction studies 
indicated that β-catenin heterozygosity suppressed the Hippo cardiomyocyte 
overgrowth phenotype. Furthermore, the Hippo effector Yap interacts with 
β-catenin on Sox2 and Snai2 genes. These data uncover a nuclear interaction 
between Hippo and Wnt signaling that restricts cardiomyocyte proliferation and 
controls heart size.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1199010
PMCID: PMC3133743
PMID: 21512031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Genetic regulation of mammalian heart size is poorly understood. Hippo signaling represents an organ-size control pathway in Drosophila , where it also inhibits cell proliferation and promotes apoptosis in imaginal discs. To determine whether Hippo signaling controls mammalian heart size, we inactivated Hippo pathway components in the developing mouse heart. Hippo-deficient embryos had overgrown hearts with elevated cardiomyocyte proliferation. Gene expression profiling and chromatin immunoprecipitation revealed that Hippo signaling negatively regulates a subset of Wnt target genes. Genetic interaction studies indicated that β- catenin heterozygosity suppressed the Hippo cardiomyocyte overgrowth phenotype. Furthermore, the Hippo effector Yap interacts with β-catenin on Sox2 and Snai2 genes. These data uncover a nuclear interaction between Hippo and Wnt signaling that restricts cardiomyocyte proliferation and controls heart size.
