---
pmid: '12504082'
title: Human IL-21 and IL-4 bind to partially overlapping epitopes of common gamma-chain.
authors:
- Zhang JL
- Foster D
- Sebald W
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0006-291x(02)02836-x
---

# Human IL-21 and IL-4 bind to partially overlapping epitopes of common gamma-chain.
**Authors:** Zhang JL, Foster D, Sebald W
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0006-291x(02)02836-x](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0006-291x(02)02836-x)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Jan 10;300(2):291-6. doi: 
10.1016/s0006-291x(02)02836-x.

Human IL-21 and IL-4 bind to partially overlapping epitopes of common 
gamma-chain.

Zhang JL(1), Foster D, Sebald W.

Author information:
(1)Theodor-Boveri-Institut f체r Biowissenschaften, Biozentrum, Physiologische 
Chemie II, Universit채t W체rzburg, Am Hubland, D-97074 W체rzburg, Germany. 
zhang@biozentrum.uni-wuerzburg.de

Interleukin 21 (IL-21) is a recently identified novel cytokine that plays an 
important role in the regulation of B, T, and NK cell functions. Its effects 
depend on binding to and signaling through an IL-21 receptor complex consisting 
of the IL-21 receptor (IL-21R) and the common gamma-chain (gamma(c)). In this 
study using biosensor technique, the ligand-binding properties of IL-21R and 
gamma(c), which are presently poorly understood on a molecular level, were 
analyzed employing recombinant ectodomains of IL-21R and gamma(c). The formation 
of a binary complex between IL-21 and immobilized IL-21R (K(D) 70pM), gamma(c) 
and immobilized IL-21 (K(D) 160 microM) and a ternary complex between gamma(c) 
and IL-21 saturated immobilized IL-21R (K(D) 160nM) could be analyzed. The 
gamma(c) residues involved in IL-21 binding were defined by alanine-scanning 
mutational analysis. The epitope comprises gamma(c) residues N44, Y103, N128, 
L161, E162, and L208. It is not identical but partially overlapping with the 
previously established gamma(c) epitope for IL-4 binding. These results open the 
way to understand the molecular recognition mechanism in the IL-21 receptor 
system and also the promiscuous binding properties of gamma(c).

DOI: 10.1016/s0006-291x(02)02836-x
PMID: 12504082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
