---
pmid: '16766265'
title: HMGA2 induces pituitary tumorigenesis by enhancing E2F1 activity.
authors:
- Fedele M
- Visone R
- De Martino I
- Troncone G
- Palmieri D
- Battista S
- Ciarmiello A
- Pallante P
- Arra C
- Melillo RM
- Helin K
- Croce CM
- Fusco A
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2006.04.024
---

# HMGA2 induces pituitary tumorigenesis by enhancing E2F1 activity.
**Authors:** Fedele M, Visone R, De Martino I, Troncone G, Palmieri D, Battista S, Ciarmiello A, Pallante P, Arra C, Melillo RM, Helin K, Croce CM, Fusco A
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccr.2006.04.024](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2006.04.024)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Cell. 2006 Jun;9(6):459-71. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2006.04.024.

HMGA2 induces pituitary tumorigenesis by enhancing E2F1 activity.

Fedele M(1), Visone R, De Martino I, Troncone G, Palmieri D, Battista S, 
Ciarmiello A, Pallante P, Arra C, Melillo RM, Helin K, Croce CM, Fusco A.

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR and Dipartimento 
di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Università di Napoli Federico 
II, 80131 Naples, Italy.

HMGA2 gene amplification and overexpression in human prolactinomas and the 
development of pituitary adenomas in HMGA2 transgenic mice showed that HMGA2 
plays a crucial role in pituitary tumorigenesis. We have explored the pRB/E2F1 
pathway to investigate the mechanism by which HMGA2 acts. Here we show that 
HMGA2 interacts with pRB and induces E2F1 activity in mouse pituitary adenomas 
by displacing HDAC1 from the pRB/E2F1 complex-a process that results in E2F1 
acetylation. We found that loss of E2F1 function (obtained by mating HMGA2 and 
E2F1(-/-) mice) suppressed pituitary tumorigenesis in HMGA2 mice. Thus, 
HMGA2-mediated E2F1 activation is a crucial event in the onset of these tumors 
in transgenic mice and probably also in human prolactinomas.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccr.2006.04.024
PMID: 16766265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
