---
pmid: '24646679'
title: Diverse cell type-specific mechanisms localize G protein-coupled receptors
  to Caenorhabditis elegans sensory cilia.
authors:
- Brear AG
- Yoon J
- Wojtyniak M
- Sengupta P
journal: Genetics
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4063923
doi: 10.1534/genetics.114.161349
---

# Diverse cell type-specific mechanisms localize G protein-coupled receptors to Caenorhabditis elegans sensory cilia.
**Authors:** Brear AG, Yoon J, Wojtyniak M, Sengupta P
**Journal:** Genetics (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1534/genetics.114.161349](https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.114.161349)
**PMC:** [PMC4063923](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4063923/)

## Abstract

1. Genetics. 2014 Jun;197(2):667-84. doi: 10.1534/genetics.114.161349. Epub 2014 
Mar 18.

Diverse cell type-specific mechanisms localize G protein-coupled receptors to 
Caenorhabditis elegans sensory cilia.

Brear AG(1), Yoon J(1), Wojtyniak M(1), Sengupta P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and National Center for Behavioral Genomics, Brandeis 
University, Waltham, Massachusetts 02454.
(2)Department of Biology and National Center for Behavioral Genomics, Brandeis 
University, Waltham, Massachusetts 02454 sengupta@brandeis.edu.

The localization of signaling molecules such as G protein-coupled receptors 
(GPCRs) to primary cilia is essential for correct signal transduction. Detailed 
studies over the past decade have begun to elucidate the diverse sequences and 
trafficking mechanisms that sort and transport GPCRs to the ciliary compartment. 
However, a systematic analysis of the pathways required for ciliary targeting of 
multiple GPCRs in different cell types in vivo has not been reported. Here we 
describe the sequences and proteins required to localize GPCRs to the cilia of 
the AWB and ASK sensory neuron types in Caenorhabditis elegans. We find that 
GPCRs expressed in AWB or ASK utilize conserved and novel sequences for ciliary 
localization, and that the requirement for a ciliary targeting sequence in a 
given GPCR is different in different neuron types. Consistent with the presence 
of multiple ciliary targeting sequences, we identify diverse proteins required 
for ciliary localization of individual GPCRs in AWB and ASK. In particular, we 
show that the TUB-1 Tubby protein is required for ciliary localization of a 
subset of GPCRs, implying that defects in GPCR localization may be causal to the 
metabolic phenotypes of tub-1 mutants. Together, our results describe a 
remarkable complexity of mechanisms that act in a protein- and cell-specific 
manner to localize GPCRs to cilia, and suggest that this diversity allows for 
precise regulation of GPCR-mediated signaling as a function of external and 
internal context.

Copyright © 2014 by the Genetics Society of America.

DOI: 10.1534/genetics.114.161349
PMCID: PMC4063923
PMID: 24646679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
