---
pmid: '22156578'
title: Molecular mechanisms leading to three different phenotypes in the cblD defect
  of intracellular cobalamin metabolism.
authors:
- Stucki M
- Coelho D
- Suormala T
- Burda P
- Fowler B
- Baumgartner MR
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr579
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Molecular mechanisms leading to three different phenotypes in the cblD defect of intracellular cobalamin metabolism.
**Authors:** Stucki M, Coelho D, Suormala T, Burda P, Fowler B, Baumgartner MR
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddr579](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddr579)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Mar 15;21(6):1410-8. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr579. Epub 2011
Dec  8.

Molecular mechanisms leading to three different phenotypes in the cblD defect of 
intracellular cobalamin metabolism.

Stucki M(1), Coelho D, Suormala T, Burda P, Fowler B, Baumgartner MR.

Author information:
(1)Division of Metabolism, Children’s Research Center (CRC), University 
Children’s Hospital, Zu¨ rich, Switzerland.

The cblD defect of intracellular vitamin B(12) metabolism can lead to isolated 
methylmalonic aciduria (cblD-MMA) or homocystinuria (cblD-HC), or combined 
methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria (cblD-MMA/HC). We studied the 
mechanism whereby MMADHC mutations can lead to three phenotypes. The effect of 
various expression vectors containing MMADHC modified to contain an enhanced 
mitochondrial leader sequence or mutations changing possible downstream sites of 
reinitiation of translation or mutations introducing stop codons on rescue of 
adenosyl- and methylcobalamin (MeCbl) formation was studied. The constructs were 
transfected into cell lines derived from various cblD patient's fibroblasts. 
Expression of 10 mutant alleles from 15 cblD patients confirmed that the nature 
and location of the mutations correlate with the biochemical phenotype. In 
cblD-MMA/HC cells, improving mitochondrial targeting of MMADHC clearly increased 
the formation of adenosylcobalamin (AdoCbl) with a concomitant decrease in MeCbl 
formation. In cblD-MMA cells, this effect was dependent on the mutation and 
showed a negative correlation with endogenous MMADHC mRNA levels. These findings 
support the hypothesis that a single protein exists with two different 
functional domains that interact with either cytosolic or mitochondrial targets. 
Also a delicate balance exists between cytosolic MeCbl and mitochondrial AdoCbl 
synthesis, supporting the role of cblD protein as a branch point in 
intracellular cobalamin trafficking. Furthermore, our data indicate that the 
sequence after Met116 is sufficient for MeCbl synthesis, whereas the additional 
sequence between Met62 and Met116 is required for AdoCbl synthesis. Accordingly, 
western blot studies reveal proteins of the size expected from the stop codon 
position with subsequent reinitiation of translation.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddr579
PMID: 22156578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
