---
pmid: '18566107'
title: HMSN/ACC truncation mutations disrupt brain-type creatine kinase-dependant
  activation of K+/Cl- co-transporter 3.
authors:
- Salin-Cantegrel A
- Shekarabi M
- Holbert S
- Dion P
- Rochefort D
- Laganière J
- Dacal S
- Hince P
- Karemera L
- Gaspar C
- Lapointe JY
- Rouleau GA
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn172
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# HMSN/ACC truncation mutations disrupt brain-type creatine kinase-dependant activation of K+/Cl- co-transporter 3.
**Authors:** Salin-Cantegrel A, Shekarabi M, Holbert S, Dion P, Rochefort D, Laganière J, Dacal S, Hince P, Karemera L, Gaspar C, Lapointe JY, Rouleau GA
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddn172](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddn172)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Sep 1;17(17):2703-11. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn172. Epub 2008
Jun  19.

HMSN/ACC truncation mutations disrupt brain-type creatine kinase-dependant 
activation of K+/Cl- co-transporter 3.

Salin-Cantegrel A(1), Shekarabi M, Holbert S, Dion P, Rochefort D, Laganière J, 
Dacal S, Hince P, Karemera L, Gaspar C, Lapointe JY, Rouleau GA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Centre of Excellence in Neuromics, CHUM Research 
Centre, University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada.

The potassium-chloride co-transporter 3 (KCC3) is mutated in hereditary motor 
and sensory neuropathy with agenesis of the corpus callosum (HMSN/ACC); however, 
the molecular mechanisms of HMSN/ACC pathogenesis and the exact role of KCC3 in 
the development of the nervous system remain poorly understood. The functional 
regulation of this transporter by protein partners is also largely unknown. 
Using a yeast two-hybrid approach, we discovered that the C-terminal domain 
(CTD) of KCC3, which is lost in most HMSN/ACC-causing mutations, directly 
interacts with brain-specific creatine kinase (CK-B), an ATP-generating enzyme 
that is also a partner of KCC2. The interaction of KCC3 with CK-B was further 
confirmed by in vitro glutathione S-transferase pull-down assay, followed by 
sequencing of the pulled-down complexes. In transfected cultured cells, 
immunofluorescence labeling showed that CK-B co-localizes with wild-type KCC3, 
whereas the kinase fails to interact with the inactive truncated KCC3. Finally, 
CK-B's inhibition by DNFB results in reduction of activity of KCC3 in functional 
assays using Xenopus laevis oocytes. This physical and functional association 
between the co-transporter and CK-B is, therefore, the first protein-protein 
interaction identified to be potentially involved in the pathophysiology of 
HMSN/ACC.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddn172
PMID: 18566107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
