---
pmid: '18069989'
title: Structural characterization and pharmacodynamic effects of an orally active
  11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 inhibitor.
authors:
- Hale C
- Véniant M
- Wang Z
- Chen M
- McCormick J
- Cupples R
- Hickman D
- Min X
- Sudom A
- Xu H
- Matsumoto G
- Fotsch C
- St Jean DJ Jr
- Wang M
journal: Chem Biol Drug Des
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1747-0285.2007.00603.x
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Structural characterization and pharmacodynamic effects of an orally active 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 inhibitor.
**Authors:** Hale C, Véniant M, Wang Z, Chen M, McCormick J, Cupples R, Hickman D, Min X, Sudom A, Xu H, Matsumoto G, Fotsch C, St Jean DJ Jr, Wang M
**Journal:** Chem Biol Drug Des (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1747-0285.2007.00603.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1747-0285.2007.00603.x)

## Abstract

1. Chem Biol Drug Des. 2008 Jan;71(1):36-44. doi:
10.1111/j.1747-0285.2007.00603.x.  Epub 2007 Dec 7.

Structural characterization and pharmacodynamic effects of an orally active 
11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 inhibitor.

Hale C(1), Véniant M, Wang Z, Chen M, McCormick J, Cupples R, Hickman D, Min X, 
Sudom A, Xu H, Matsumoto G, Fotsch C, St Jean DJ Jr, Wang M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Metabolic Disorders, Amgen Inc., One Amgen Center Drive, 
Thousand Oaks, CA 91320, USA.

11Beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 regulates glucocorticoid action and 
inhibition of this enzyme is a viable therapeutic strategy for the treatment of 
type 2 diabetes and the metabolic syndrome. Here, we report a potent and 
selective 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 inhibitor with a binding 
mode elucidated from the co-crystal structure with the human 
11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1. The inhibitor is bound to the 
steroid-binding pocket making contacts with the catalytic center and the solvent 
channel. The inhibitor binding is facilitated by two direct hydrogen bond 
interactions involving Tyrosine183 of the catalytic motif Tyr-X-X-X-Lys and 
Alanine172. In addition, the inhibitor makes many hydrophobic interactions with 
both the enzyme and the co-factor nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate 
(reduced). In lean C57BL/6 mice, the compound inhibited both the in vivo and ex 
vivo 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 activities in a dose-dependent 
manner. The inhibitory effects correlate with the plasma compound 
concentrations, suggesting that there is a clear pharmacokinetic and 
pharmacodynamic relationship. Moreover, at the same doses used in the 
pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic studies, the inhibitor did not cause the 
activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis in an acute mouse model, 
suggesting that this compound exhibits biological effects with minimal risk of 
activating the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1747-0285.2007.00603.x
PMID: 18069989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
