---
pmid: '23934647'
title: α-Synuclein is involved in manganese-induced ER stress via PERK signal pathway
  in organotypic brain slice cultures.
authors:
- Xu B
- Wang F
- Wu SW
- Deng Y
- Liu W
- Feng S
- Yang TY
- Xu ZF
journal: Mol Neurobiol
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s12035-013-8527-2
---

# α-Synuclein is involved in manganese-induced ER stress via PERK signal pathway in organotypic brain slice cultures.
**Authors:** Xu B, Wang F, Wu SW, Deng Y, Liu W, Feng S, Yang TY, Xu ZF
**Journal:** Mol Neurobiol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12035-013-8527-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035-013-8527-2)

## Abstract

1. Mol Neurobiol. 2014 Feb;49(1):399-412. doi: 10.1007/s12035-013-8527-2. Epub
2013  Aug 10.

α-Synuclein is involved in manganese-induced ER stress via PERK signal pathway 
in organotypic brain slice cultures.

Xu B(1), Wang F, Wu SW, Deng Y, Liu W, Feng S, Yang TY, Xu ZF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Health, School of Public Health, China Medical 
University, Shenyang, Liaoning, 110001, People's Republic of China, 
xubin@mail.cmu.edu.cn.

Overexposure to manganese (Mn) has been known to induce neuronal damage 
involving endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. However, the exact mechanism of 
Mn-induced ER stress is unclear. Increasing evidence suggested that the 
overexpression of alpha-synuclein played a critical role in Mn-induced 
neurotoxicity. To explore whether the occurrence of ER stress was associated 
with alpha-synuclein overexpression, we made the rat brain slices model of 
silencing alpha-synuclein using short-interference RNA. After non-silencing 
alpha-synuclein slices were treated with Mn (0-400 μM) for 24 h, there was a 
dose-dependent increase in apoptotic rates of cells and levels of lactate 
dehydrogenase in the culture medium. Moreover, there was a dose-dependent 
increase in the protein expression of 78, 94-kDa glucose-regulated protein 
(GRP78/94), C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP), and caspase-12. Moreover, PKR-like 
ER kinase (PERK) phosphorylation, PERK-mediated phosphorylation of eIF2a, and 
ATF4 expression also increased. Inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1) activation 
and X-box-binding protein-1 (Xbp1) mRNA splicing increased. Activating 
transcription factor 6 p90 levels did not change. However, after silencing 
alpha-synuclein slices were treated with 400 μM Mn for 24 h, there was a 
significant decrease in the expression of GRP78/94, CHOP, and caspase-12 
compared with 400 μM Mn-treated non-silencing alpha-synuclein slices. 
Furthermore, PERK phosphorylation, PERK-mediated phosphorylation of eIF2a, and 
ATF4 mRNA expression also decreased. However, IRE1 phosphorylation and Xbp1 mRNA 
splicing did not change. The findings revealed that Mn induced ER stress via 
activation of PERK and IRE1 signaling pathways and subsequent apoptosis in 
cultured slices. Moreover, alpha-synuclein protein was associated with 
Mn-induced activation of PERK signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.1007/s12035-013-8527-2
PMID: 23934647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
