---
pmid: '29211846'
title: SLC25A10 biallelic mutations in intractable epileptic encephalopathy with complex
  I deficiency.
authors:
- Punzi G
- Porcelli V
- Ruggiu M
- Hossain MF
- Menga A
- Scarcia P
- Castegna A
- Gorgoglione R
- Pierri CL
- Laera L
- Lasorsa FM
- Paradies E
- Pisano I
- Marobbio CMT
- Lamantea E
- Ghezzi D
- Tiranti V
- Giannattasio S
- Donati MA
- Guerrini R
- Palmieri L
- Palmieri F
- De Grassi A
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2018'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC5886107
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddx419
pubmed_publication_types:
- Case Reports
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: CASE_REPORT
---

# SLC25A10 biallelic mutations in intractable epileptic encephalopathy with complex I deficiency.
**Authors:** Punzi G, Porcelli V, Ruggiu M, Hossain MF, Menga A, Scarcia P, Castegna A, Gorgoglione R, Pierri CL, Laera L, Lasorsa FM, Paradies E, Pisano I, Marobbio CMT, Lamantea E, Ghezzi D, Tiranti V, Giannattasio S, Donati MA, Guerrini R, Palmieri L, Palmieri F, De Grassi A
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddx419](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddx419)
**PMC:** [PMC5886107](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5886107/)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2018 Feb 1;27(3):499-504. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddx419.

SLC25A10 biallelic mutations in intractable epileptic encephalopathy with 
complex I deficiency.

Punzi G(1), Porcelli V(1), Ruggiu M(2), Hossain MF(2), Menga A(1), Scarcia P(1), 
Castegna A(1), Gorgoglione R(1), Pierri CL(1), Laera L(1)(3), Lasorsa FM(3), 
Paradies E(3), Pisano I(1), Marobbio CMT(1), Lamantea E(4), Ghezzi D(4)(5), 
Tiranti V(4), Giannattasio S(3), Donati MA(6), Guerrini R(6)(7), Palmieri 
L(1)(3), Palmieri F(1)(3), De Grassi A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences, Biotechnology and Biopharmaceutics, University of 
Bari, 70125 Bari, Italy.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, St. John's University, Queens, NY 11439, 
USA.
(3)Institute of Biomembranes, Bioenergetics and Molecular Biotechnologies, CNR, 
70125 Bari, Italy.
(4)Unit of Molecular Neurogenetics, Foundation IRCCS Institute of Neurology "C. 
Besta", 20126 Milan, Italy.
(5)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, University of Milan, 20122 
Milan, Italy.
(6)Department of Neuroscience, Children's Hospital "A. Meyer", 50139 Florence, 
Italy.
(7)IRCCS Stella Maris Foundation, 56128 Pisa, Italy.

Mitochondrial diseases are a plethora of inherited neuromuscular disorders 
sharing defects in mitochondrial respiration, but largely different from one 
another for genetic basis and pathogenic mechanism. Whole exome sequencing was 
performed in a familiar trio (trio-WES) with a child affected by severe 
epileptic encephalopathy associated with respiratory complex I deficiency and 
mitochondrial DNA depletion in skeletal muscle. By trio-WES we identified 
biallelic mutations in SLC25A10, a nuclear gene encoding a member of the 
mitochondrial carrier family. Genetic and functional analyses conducted on 
patient fibroblasts showed that SLC25A10 mutations are associated with reduction 
in RNA quantity and aberrant RNA splicing, and to absence of SLC25A10 protein 
and its transporting function. The yeast SLC25A10 ortholog knockout strain 
showed defects in mitochondrial respiration and mitochondrial DNA content, 
similarly to what observed in the patient skeletal muscle, and growth 
susceptibility to oxidative stress. Albeit patient fibroblasts were depleted in 
the main antioxidant molecules NADPH and glutathione, transport assays 
demonstrated that SLC25A10 is unable to transport glutathione. Here, we report 
the first recessive mutations of SLC25A10 associated to an inherited severe 
mitochondrial neurodegenerative disorder. We propose that SLC25A10 
loss-of-function causes pathological disarrangements in respiratory-demanding 
conditions and oxidative stress vulnerability.

© The Author(s) 2017. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddx419
PMCID: PMC5886107
PMID: 29211846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Mitochondrial diseases are a plethora of inherited neuromuscular disorders sharing defects in mitochondrial respiration, but largely different from one another for genetic basis and pathogenic mechanism. Whole exome sequencing was performed in a familiar trio (trio-WES) with a child affected by severe epileptic encephalopathy associated with respiratory complex I deficiency and mitochondrial DNA depletion in skeletal muscle. By trio-WES we identified biallelic mutations in SLC25A10 , a nuclear gene encoding a member of the mitochondrial carrier family. Genetic and functional analyses conducted on patient fibroblasts showed that SLC25A10 mutations are associated with reduction in RNA quantity and aberrant RNA splicing, and to absence of SLC25A10 protein and its transporting function. The yeast SLC25A10 ortholog knockout strain showed defects in mitochondrial respiration and mitochondrial DNA content, similarly to what observed in the patient skeletal muscle, and growth susceptibility to oxidative stress. Albeit patient fibroblasts were depleted in the main antioxidant molecules NADPH and glutathione, transport assays demonstrated that SLC25A10 is unable to transport glutathione. Here, we report the first recessive mutations of SLC25A10 associated to an inherited severe mitochondrial neurodegenerative disorder. We propose that SLC25A10 loss-of-function causes pathological disarrangements in respiratory-demanding conditions and oxidative stress vulnerability.

Introduction

The mitochondrial respiratory complex I couples the transfer of electrons from NADH to ubiquinone and the translocation of protons from the mitochondrial matrix to the intermembrane space, contributing to oxidative phosphorylation. Clinical presentation of complex I deficiency is extremely heterogeneous, ranging from fatal neonatal disease to adult-onset neurodegenerative disorders ( 1 ), and often associates to epilepsy ( 2 ). The vast genetic heterogeneity of isolated complex I deficiency is caused by mutations in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) or, in most cases, in nuclear-DNA genes encoding structural subunits, assembly factors, or other proteins with apparently complex I-unrelated functions (see OMIM 252010). Further, the activity of complex I is susceptible to environmental factors, such as oxidative stress ( 3 ).

SLC25A10 (also known as DIC) transports dicarboxylates and phosphate across the inner mitochondrial membrane, and is conserved from yeast to mammals ( 4 , 5 ). As reviewed in ( 6 ), SLC25A10 inhibition has been repeatedly reported to cause reduced levels of mitochondrial glutathione (GSH) and impairment of complex I activity in rat neurons ( 7 ).

Here we report the first human mutations abolishing SLC25A10 function in a patient affected by a progressive form of epileptic encephalopathy and severe hypotonia associated with complex I deficiency.

Discussion

Here, we show the first SLC25A10 recessive mutations associated with a mitochondrial disorder with severe epileptic and progressive encephalopathy. Albeit additional SLC25A10 mutations in unrelated individuals will be required as standard proof of causality, we report genetic and functional evidence supporting that SLC25A10 is a novel disease-causing gene. Trio-WES analysis indicated SLC25A10 as the only gene encoding a mitochondria-targeted protein with mutations compatible with the patient family tree. The relevance of the detected mutations was demonstrated by the absence of maternal SLC25A10 RNA, hosting a premature stop codon, and the remarkably reduced content and impaired splicing of the paternal SLC25A10 RNA, hosting a synonymous and an intronic mutation. Consistently, the western-blot immunodetection exhibited absence of SLC25A10, and the transport assay on reconstituted mitochondrial extracts revealed no SLC25A10 activity. A S. cerevisiae strain lacking DIC1 , the functional analog of SLC25A10 in yeast ( 4 , 5 ), showed impairment in mitochondrial respiration and decrease in mtDNA copy number, similarly to what observed in the patient skeletal muscle, when yeast cells underwent prolonged respiratory-demanding conditions.

The respiratory proficiency in permissive cell growth conditions, together with the neuromuscular patient phenotype, suggests that the respiratory-chain defect may be secondary to biochemical intracellular derangements ( 15 ) and that SLC25A10 functions cannot be accomplished by other transporters, at least in neuronal and muscle cells. Multiple literature findings reviewed in ( 6 ) indicated that SLC25A10 confers oxidative stress resistance, which was attributed to a putative SLC25A10-mediated transport of GSH into mitochondria. In rat neurons in particular, Slc25a10 inhibition has been shown to cause mitochondrial GSH depletion ( 7 , 12 ), release of H 2 O 2 from mitochondria and complex I deficiency due to oxidative stress ( 7 ). Our results suggest that SLC25A10 lack-of-function might confer oxidative stress vulnerability, since the patient fibroblasts show depletion in the main antioxidant molecules NADPH and GSH, and the yeast knockout strain displays growth defect upon addiction of H 2 O 2 . Oxidative stress might induce mtDNA degradation ( 16 ) and impair mitochondrial respiration, especially at complex I, which is the greatest and more vulnerable respiratory complex ( 17 ). However, our observation that rat Slc25a10 does not transport GSH, in agreement with similar findings with yeast DIC1 ( 18 ), infers that oxidative stress resistance depends on SLC25A10 functions other than transport of GSH. The known SLC25A10 substrates malate and succinate may contribute to the cell antioxidant system, since they are donors of reducing equivalents for the production of NADPH, GSH and ubiquinol ( Supplementary Material, Fig. S11 ). In addition to redox defense, SLC25A10 was proposed to modulate the energy metabolism of the cell, since knockdown of SLC25A10 in a cancer cell line decreases the protein content of the hypoxia inducible factor 1α (HIF-1α), a key regulator of the shift between glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation ( 19 ). Future work is warranted to exploit the SLC25A10 -mediated molecular mechanisms that protect cellular respiration and redox state.

Materials and Methods

WES and related data analyses are described in Supplementary Material . qRT-PCR was carried out ( 20 ) using Thermo Fisher assays for human SLC25A10 (Hs00201730_m1) and ACTB gene (Hs99999903_m1). Minigene expression constructs were generated using the primers listed in Supplementary Material, Table S1 , from both the maternal and paternal SLC25A10 allele, and were analysed as reported in Supplementary Material . The anti-SLC25A10 polyclonal antiserum antibody ( 8 , 21 ) was used for western-blot immunodetection on fibroblast mitochondrial extracts. The latter were reconstituted into proteoliposomes and analysed by transport assays as described ( 8 , 22 ). Metabolite quantification by mass spectrometry analysis was performed as reported ( 23–25 ). Rat Slc25a10 bacterial expression, reconstitution and transport assays were performed as reported ( 5 , 22 ). S. cerevisiae strains were obtained from EUROSCARF (wild-type S288C strain and isogenic DIC1 knockout strain YLR348c:kanMX4), and were analysed as described in Supplementary Material .
