---
pmid: '19725078'
title: Proteomic analysis of increased Parkin expression and its interactants provides
  evidence for a role in modulation of mitochondrial function.
authors:
- Davison EJ
- Pennington K
- Hung CC
- Peng J
- Rafiq R
- Ostareck-Lederer A
- Ostareck DH
- Ardley HC
- Banks RE
- Robinson PA
journal: Proteomics
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/pmic.200900126
---

# Proteomic analysis of increased Parkin expression and its interactants provides evidence for a role in modulation of mitochondrial function.
**Authors:** Davison EJ, Pennington K, Hung CC, Peng J, Rafiq R, Ostareck-Lederer A, Ostareck DH, Ardley HC, Banks RE, Robinson PA
**Journal:** Proteomics (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pmic.200900126](https://doi.org/10.1002/pmic.200900126)

## Abstract

1. Proteomics. 2009 Sep;9(18):4284-97. doi: 10.1002/pmic.200900126.

Proteomic analysis of increased Parkin expression and its interactants provides 
evidence for a role in modulation of mitochondrial function.

Davison EJ(1), Pennington K, Hung CC, Peng J, Rafiq R, Ostareck-Lederer A, 
Ostareck DH, Ardley HC, Banks RE, Robinson PA.

Author information:
(1)Section of Ophthalmology and Neuroscience, Leeds Institute for Molecular 
Medicine, Wellcome Trust Brenner Building, St. James's University Hospital, 
Leeds, UK.

Parkin is an ubiquitin-protein ligase (E3), mutations of which cause juvenile 
onset - autosomal recessive Parkinson's disease, and result in reduced enzymic 
activity. In contrast, increased levels are protective against mitochondrial 
dysfunction and neurodegeneration, the mechanism of which is largely unknown. In 
this study, 2-DE and MS proteomic techniques were utilised to investigate the 
effects of increased Parkin levels on protein expression in whole cell lysates 
using in an inducible Parkin expression system in HEK293 cells, and also to 
isolate potential interactants of Parkin using tandem affinity purification and 
MS. Nine proteins were significantly differentially expressed (+/-2-fold change; 
p<0.05) using 2-DE analysis. MS revealed the identity of these proteins to be 
ACAT2, HNRNPK, HSPD1, PGK1, PRDX6, VCL, VIM, TPI1, and IMPDH2. The first seven 
of these were reduced in expression. Western blot analysis confirmed the 
reduction in one of these proteins (HNRNPK), and that its levels were dependent 
on 26S proteasomal activity. Tandem affinity purification/MS revealed 14 
potential interactants of Parkin; CKB, DBT, HSPD1, HSPA9, LRPPRC, NDUFS2, PRDX6, 
SLC25A5, TPI1, UCHL1, UQCRC1, VCL, YWHAZ, YWHAE. Nine of these are directly 
involved in mitochondrial energy metabolism and glycolysis; four were also 
identified in the 2-DE study (HSP60, PRDX6, TPI1, and VCL). This study provides 
further evidence for a role for Parkin in regulating mitochondrial activity 
within cells.

DOI: 10.1002/pmic.200900126
PMID: 19725078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
