---
pmid: '19229105'
title: Parkin, PINK1, and DJ-1 form a ubiquitin E3 ligase complex promoting unfolded
  protein degradation.
authors:
- Xiong H
- Wang D
- Chen L
- Choo YS
- Ma H
- Tang C
- Xia K
- Jiang W
- Ronai Z
- Zhuang X
- Zhang Z
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2648688
doi: 10.1172/JCI37617
---

# Parkin, PINK1, and DJ-1 form a ubiquitin E3 ligase complex promoting unfolded protein degradation.
**Authors:** Xiong H, Wang D, Chen L, Choo YS, Ma H, Tang C, Xia K, Jiang W, Ronai Z, Zhuang X, Zhang Z
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI37617](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI37617)
**PMC:** [PMC2648688](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2648688/)

## Abstract

1. J Clin Invest. 2009 Mar;119(3):650-60. doi: 10.1172/JCI37617. Epub 2009 Feb
23.

Parkin, PINK1, and DJ-1 form a ubiquitin E3 ligase complex promoting unfolded 
protein degradation.

Xiong H(1), Wang D, Chen L, Choo YS, Ma H, Tang C, Xia K, Jiang W, Ronai Z, 
Zhuang X, Zhang Z.

Author information:
(1)Burnham Institute for Medical Research, 10901 N. Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, 
CA 92037, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2009 Mar;119(3):442-5. doi: 10.1172/jci38619.

Mutations in PARKIN, pten-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1), and DJ-1 are 
individually linked to autosomal recessive early-onset familial forms of 
Parkinson disease (PD). Although mutations in these genes lead to the same 
disease state, the functional relationships between them and how their 
respective disease-associated mutations cause PD are largely unknown. Here, we 
show that Parkin, PINK1, and DJ-1 formed a complex (termed PPD complex) to 
promote ubiquitination and degradation of Parkin substrates, including Parkin 
itself and Synphilin-1 in neuroblastoma cells and human brain lysates. Genetic 
ablation of either Pink1 or Dj-1 resulted in reduced ubiquitination of 
endogenous Parkin as well as decreased degradation and increased accumulation of 
aberrantly expressed Parkin substrates. Expression of PINK1 enhanced 
Parkin-mediated degradation of heat shock-induced misfolded protein. In 
contrast, PD-pathogenic Parkin and PINK1 mutations showed reduced ability to 
promote degradation of Parkin substrates. This study identified a functional 
ubiquitin E3 ligase complex consisting of PD-associated Parkin, PINK1, and DJ-1 
to promote degradation of un-/misfolded proteins and suggests that their 
PD-pathogenic mutations impair E3 ligase activity of the complex, which may 
constitute a mechanism underlying PD pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI37617
PMCID: PMC2648688
PMID: 19229105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Mutations in PARKIN , pten-induced putative kinase 1 ( PINK1 ), and DJ-1 are individually linked to
               autosomal recessive early-onset familial forms of Parkinson disease (PD). Although
               mutations in these genes lead to the same disease state, the functional relationships
               between them and how their respective disease-associated mutations cause PD are
               largely unknown. Here, we show that Parkin, PINK1, and DJ-1 formed a complex (termed PPD complex ) to promote ubiquitination and degradation of Parkin
               substrates, including Parkin itself and Synphilin-1 in neuroblastoma cells and human
               brain lysates. Genetic ablation of either Pink1 or Dj-1 resulted in reduced ubiquitination of endogenous Parkin as well
               as decreased degradation and increased accumulation of aberrantly expressed Parkin
               substrates. Expression of PINK1 enhanced Parkin-mediated degradation of heat
               shock–induced misfolded protein. In contrast, PD-pathogenic Parkin and
               PINK1 mutations showed reduced ability to promote degradation of Parkin substrates.
               This study identified a functional ubiquitin E3 ligase complex consisting of
               PD-associated Parkin, PINK1, and DJ-1 to promote degradation of un-/misfolded
               proteins and suggests that their PD-pathogenic mutations impair E3 ligase activity of
               the complex, which may constitute a mechanism underlying PD pathogenesis.

Introduction

Parkinson disease (PD) is a progressive neurodegenerative movement disorder affecting
            approximately 2% of the population over 65 years of age. It is pathologically
            characterized by pronounced loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra of the
            midbrain and formation of ubiquitin-positive Lewy body aggregates ( 1 , 2 ). Although administration
            of L-DOPA temporarily relieves parkinsonism, no treatment is currently available to
            prevent disease progression and neurodegeneration. Understanding the molecular basis of
            PD is likely to facilitate development of effective therapies of the disease.

Most PD cases are sporadic. Nevertheless, mutations in at least 7 genes are linked to
            early onset familial form PD, including mutations in a-synuclein ,
            ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal esterase L1 ( uchL1 ), and leucine-rich
            repeat kinase 2 ( LRRK2 ) for autosomal dominant cases and mutations in Parkin , pten-induced putative kinase 1 ( PINK1 ), DJ-1 , and ATPase type 13A2 ( ATP13A2 ) for autosomal
            recessive cases ( 1 – 6 ). Characterization of these genes has provided
            important insights into PD pathogenesis. For example, α-synuclein is a major
            structural component of Lewy bodies in PD ( 7 ).
            PD-associated α-synuclein mutant proteins show increased propensity to
            self-aggregate to form oligomeric species and Lewy body–like fibrils
            compared with WT α-synuclein, directly linking disease-associated
            α-synuclein mutant proteins to PD pathology ( 8 , 9 ). However, the functional
            relationships of these genes and how their respective disease-associated mutations cause
            selective neuronal loss and Lewy body formation remains largely unknown, even though
            mutations of these genes cause the same disease.

Among the genes linked to the autosomal recessive early onset familial form of PD, Parkin encodes a protein with E3 ligase activity, mediating
            ubiquitination and degradation of multiple proteins ( 5 , 10 – 12 ). Sequence analysis strongly suggests that PINK1 is a putative
            kinase with 2 identified substrates ( 13 – 15 ). DJ-1 protects
            cells from oxidative stress both in transfected cells and in Drosophila ( 16 – 19 ). Inactivation of Parkin or Dj-1 in mouse and PINK1 in Drosophila results in
            mitochondrial dysfunction and increased sensitivity to oxidative stress ( 20 – 25 ). Together, Parkin, PINK1, and DJ-1 likely protect against oxidative stress
            in cells via a common mechanism, suggesting potential functional interactions among the
            3 proteins.

In this study, we aimed to investigate the functional relationship of Parkin, PINK1, and
            DJ-1. Our results demonstrate that Parkin, PINK1, and DJ-1 form what we believe is a
            novel E3 complex that promotes ubiquitination and degradation of aberrantly expressed
            and heat shock–induced Parkin substrates, Parkin and Synphilin-1. Pathogenic
            PINK1 or Parkin mutants showed impaired ability to degrade Parkin and Synphilin-1. These
            results suggest that the Parkin/PINK1/DJ-1 (PPD) complex plays an important role in
            degradation of un-/misfolded Parkin substrates.

Discussion

We have identified in this study what we believe is a novel functional E3 ligase complex
            designated as the PPD complex, consisting of 3 PD-associated proteins, Parkin, PINK1,
            and DJ-1. We further demonstrated that the PPD E3 ligase complex plays an important role
            in promoting degradation of un-/misfolded Parkin substrates. PD-pathogenic mutants of
            Parkin and PINK1 impaired E3 ligase activity of the PPD complex. Our results suggest
            multiple PD-linked genes function in PD pathogenesis via a common mechanism.

The significance of this study is the finding that 3 PD-related proteins physically
            interact and form a functional E3 ligase complex to regulate UPS-mediated protein
            degradation. The findings suggest a function of PINK1 and DJ-1 that is independent of
            maintaining mitochondrial homeostasis. In our investigation we used 4 different methods
            to determine complex formation by Parkin, PINK1, and DJ-1 in vitro and in vivo. These
            include coimmunoprecipitation in cells overexpressing the 3 proteins, in vitro complex
            assembly using purified recombinant proteins, coimmunoprecipitation in human brain
            lysates, and immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry analysis. Our findings
            provide biochemical and mechanistic evidence to support previous reports of genetic
            interaction of Parkin and PINK1 in Drosophila ( 22 , 23 , 25 ) and association of digenic mutations of PINK1 and DJ-1 with
            early onset familial PD cases ( 27 ). Nevertheless,
            the PPD complex is not necessarily the only important one involving PINK1, given that
            mass spectrometry analysis identifies multiple PINK1 interacting proteins. The E3 ligase
            activity of the PPD complex was further shown in transfected cells and an in vitro
            ubiquitination assay using previously defined ( 10 , 11 , 26 ) Parkin substrates, Synphilin-1, and Parkin itself. Our results suggest
            that Parkin likely has very limited activity in the absence of PINK1. However, Parkin E3
            ligase activity is remarkably potentiated by expression of PINK1. Thus, PINK1 plays an
            essential role in maintaining high E3 ligase activity of Parkin. These findings also
            provide an explanation for inconsistent reports of Parkin E3 ligase activity in previous
            studies ( 12 ). Another importance of this study is
            to identify the PPD complex as what we believe is a novel E3 ligase. Three classes of E3
            ligase have been previously described, including HECT domain ligases, RING finger
            ligases, and U-box domain ligases ( 30 ). RING
            finger E3 ligases can be either a single protein, such as CBL ( 31 ), or a multiple protein complex, such as the
            skip/cullin/F-box/Rbx1/2 (SCF) complex ( 32 ). In
            the PPD complex, Parkin is a RING finger protein binding to E2 and substrate, while
            PINK1 and DJ-1 act as regulatory components. PINK1, a serine/threonine kinase, makes the
            PPD complex, to our knowledge, the first E3 ligase complex with a kinase subunit. The
            role of serine/threonine kinase activity of PINK1 in this complex remains unknown. One
            possibility is that PINK1 regulates protein ubiquitination by phosphorylating either the
            complex components or substrates. DJ-1 facilitates but is not required for E3 ligase
            activity of the complex. One potential role of DJ-1 in this complex is to stabilize
            PINK1 ( 27 ).

The UPS plays critical roles in PD pathogenesis ( 5 , 33 , 34 ). Our finding of PD-pathogenic mutants of PINK1 and Parkin to impair the PPD
            E3 ligase activity supports a role of the PPD E3 ligase in PD pathogenesis. Consistent
            with this notion, we have previous identified digenic mutations of PINK1 and DJ-1 that
            are associated with early onset familial PD cases ( 27 ). Since the identification of Parkin as an E3 ligase, one uncertainty is the
            identity of its substrates that are also the substrates of the PPD complex. Parkin
            ubiquitinates a number of proteins in vitro. Nevertheless, few of these in vitro
            substrates accumulate in Parkin-deficient cells ( 20 ). In this study, we have also found that levels of Parkin and Synphilin-1 are
            not altered in either PINK1- or DJ-1–deficient cells. These results suggest
            that Parkin substrates can be degraded by alternative mechanisms under physiological
            conditions. However, overexpression of Parkin substrates or heat shock treatment
            resulted in Parkin substrate accumulation in PINK1-deficient cells. One explanation is
            that the PPD complex functions as a quality control system to degrade unfolded and
            misfolded Parkin substrates induced by oxidative stress in neurons. Pathogenic mutations
            that reduce PPD activity likely disrupt the UPS, leading to increased susceptibility to
            oxidative stress and accumulation of un-/misfolded proteins in cells, therefore eventual
            neuronal death and Lewy body formation. WT Parkin, but not PD-pathogenic mutant Parkin,
            has been previously shown to protect cells against dopamine-induced oxidative stress via
            a UPS-mediated mechanism ( 35 ). Parkin, PINK1, and
            DJ-1 are also individually implicated in oxidative stress protection ( 2 , 18 , 19 , 21 , 36 – 39 ). Furthermore, Parkin mediates polyubiquitination, and subsequently
            degradation, of the highly aggregative ER transmembrane protein Pael-R ( 12 , 40 ). In
            this study, the aberrantly expressed proteins and heat shock–induced
            misfolded Parkin accumulated in the absence of PINK1.

This study connects 3 PD-linked genes in a single functional pathway that further
            highlights a common mechanism of PD pathogenesis. Parkin has been shown to ubiquitinate
            Synphilin-1 and a rare O -glycosylated form of α-synuclein
               ( 26 , 41 ), suggesting that these genes functionally interact to regulate PD
            pathogenesis. A recent study indicates a role for Parkin in modulating ubiquitination of
            LRRK2, a newly identified gene linked to autosomal dominant familial PD ( 42 ). Together, this study should facilitate further
            investigation of PD-pathogenic mechanisms and the design of novel PD treatment
            strategies.
