---
pmid: '17637670'
title: Two distinct modes of guidance signalling during collective migration of border
  cells.
authors:
- Bianco A
- Poukkula M
- Cliffe A
- Mathieu J
- Luque CM
- Fulga TA
- Rørth P
journal: Nature
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature05965
---

# Two distinct modes of guidance signalling during collective migration of border cells.
**Authors:** Bianco A, Poukkula M, Cliffe A, Mathieu J, Luque CM, Fulga TA, Rørth P
**Journal:** Nature (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature05965](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature05965)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2007 Jul 19;448(7151):362-5. doi: 10.1038/nature05965.

Two distinct modes of guidance signalling during collective migration of border 
cells.

Bianco A(1), Poukkula M, Cliffe A, Mathieu J, Luque CM, Fulga TA, Rørth P.

Author information:
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, 69117, Germany.

Although directed migration is a feature of both individual cells and cell 
groups, guided migration has been studied most extensively for single cells in 
simple environments. Collective guidance of cell groups remains poorly 
understood, despite its relevance for development and metastasis. Neural crest 
cells and neuronal precursors migrate as loosely organized streams of individual 
cells, whereas cells of the fish lateral line, Drosophila tracheal tubes and 
border-cell clusters migrate as more coherent groups. Here we use Drosophila 
border cells to examine how collective guidance is performed. We report that 
border cells migrate in two phases using distinct mechanisms. Genetic analysis 
combined with live imaging shows that polarized cell behaviour is critical for 
the initial phase of migration, whereas dynamic collective behaviour dominates 
later. PDGF- and VEGF-related receptor and epidermal growth factor receptor act 
in both phases, but use different effector pathways in each. The myoblast city 
(Mbc, also known as DOCK180) and engulfment and cell motility (ELMO, also known 
as Ced-12) pathway is required for the early phase, in which guidance depends on 
subcellular localization of signalling within a leading cell. During the later 
phase, mitogen-activated protein kinase and phospholipase Cgamma are used 
redundantly, and we find that the cluster makes use of the difference in signal 
levels between cells to guide migration. Thus, information processing at the 
multicellular level is used to guide collective behaviour of a cell group.

DOI: 10.1038/nature05965
PMID: 17637670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
