---
pmid: '15841462'
title: Interaction between the HCV NS3 protein and the host TBK1 protein leads to
  inhibition of cellular antiviral responses.
authors:
- Otsuka M
- Kato N
- Moriyama M
- Taniguchi H
- Wang Y
- Dharel N
- Kawabe T
- Omata M
journal: Hepatology
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/hep.20666
---

# Interaction between the HCV NS3 protein and the host TBK1 protein leads to inhibition of cellular antiviral responses.
**Authors:** Otsuka M, Kato N, Moriyama M, Taniguchi H, Wang Y, Dharel N, Kawabe T, Omata M
**Journal:** Hepatology (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/hep.20666](https://doi.org/10.1002/hep.20666)

## Abstract

1. Hepatology. 2005 May;41(5):1004-12. doi: 10.1002/hep.20666.

Interaction between the HCV NS3 protein and the host TBK1 protein leads to 
inhibition of cellular antiviral responses.

Otsuka M(1), Kato N, Moriyama M, Taniguchi H, Wang Y, Dharel N, Kawabe T, Omata 
M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of 
Tokyo, Japan.

The persistent nature of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection suggests that HCV 
encodes proteins that enable it to overcome host antiviral responses. Toll-like 
receptor 3 (TLR3)-mediated signaling, which recognizes the double-stranded RNA 
that is produced during viral replication and induces type I interferons, 
including interferon beta (IFN-beta), is crucial to the host defense against 
viruses. Recent studies suggest that a TIR domain-containing adaptor protein, 
TRIF, and two protein kinases, TANK-binding kinase-1 (TBK1) and IkappaB 
kinase-epsilon (IKKepsilon), play essential roles in TLR3-mediated IFN-beta 
production through the activation of the transcriptional factor interferon 
regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3). We report that the HCV NS3 protein interacts 
directly with TBK1, and that this binding results in the inhibition of the 
association between TBK1 and IRF-3, which leads to the inhibition of IRF-3 
activation. In conclusion, these results suggest the mechanisms of the 
inhibition of the innate immune responses of HCV infection by NS3 protein.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.20666
PMID: 15841462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
