---
pmid: '35102342'
title: Recognition and inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 by humoral innate immunity pattern
  recognition molecules.
authors:
- Stravalaci M
- Pagani I
- Paraboschi EM
- Pedotti M
- Doni A
- Scavello F
- Mapelli SN
- Sironi M
- Perucchini C
- Varani L
- Matkovic M
- Cavalli A
- Cesana D
- Gallina P
- Pedemonte N
- Capurro V
- Clementi N
- Mancini N
- Invernizzi P
- Bayarri-Olmos R
- Garred P
- Rappuoli R
- Duga S
- Bottazzi B
- Uguccioni M
- Asselta R
- Vicenzi E
- Mantovani A
- Garlanda C
journal: Nat Immunol
year: '2022'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/s41590-021-01114-w
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Recognition and inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 by humoral innate immunity pattern recognition molecules.
**Authors:** Stravalaci M, Pagani I, Paraboschi EM, Pedotti M, Doni A, Scavello F, Mapelli SN, Sironi M, Perucchini C, Varani L, Matkovic M, Cavalli A, Cesana D, Gallina P, Pedemonte N, Capurro V, Clementi N, Mancini N, Invernizzi P, Bayarri-Olmos R, Garred P, Rappuoli R, Duga S, Bottazzi B, Uguccioni M, Asselta R, Vicenzi E, Mantovani A, Garlanda C
**Journal:** Nat Immunol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41590-021-01114-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-021-01114-w)

## Abstract

1. Nat Immunol. 2022 Feb;23(2):275-286. doi: 10.1038/s41590-021-01114-w. Epub
2022  Jan 31.

Recognition and inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 by humoral innate immunity pattern 
recognition molecules.

Stravalaci M(#)(1)(2), Pagani I(#)(3), Paraboschi EM(1)(2), Pedotti M(4), Doni 
A(1), Scavello F(1), Mapelli SN(1), Sironi M(1), Perucchini C(1), Varani L(4), 
Matkovic M(4), Cavalli A(4)(5), Cesana D(6), Gallina P(6), Pedemonte N(7), 
Capurro V(7), Clementi N(8), Mancini N(8), Invernizzi P(9)(10), Bayarri-Olmos 
R(11), Garred P(11), Rappuoli R(12)(13), Duga S(1)(2), Bottazzi B(1), Uguccioni 
M(2)(4), Asselta R(1)(2), Vicenzi E(14), Mantovani A(15)(16)(17), Garlanda 
C(18)(19).

Author information:
(1)IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital, Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, Milan, Italy.
(3)Viral Pathogenesis and Biosafety Unit, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific 
Institute, Milan, Italy.
(4)Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Università della Svizzera italiana 
(USI), Bellinzona, Switzerland.
(5)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(6)San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy (SR-Tiget), IRCCS, San 
Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.
(7)UOC Genetica Medica, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy.
(8)Laboratory of Microbiology and Virology, IRCCS Scientific Institute and 
Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy.
(9)Division of Gastroenterology, Center for Autoimmune Liver Diseases, 
Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Milano-Bicocca, Monza, Italy.
(10)European Reference Network on Hepatological Diseases (ERN RARE-LIVER), San 
Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Italy.
(11)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Department of Clinical Immunology, Section 
7631, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital, København, Denmark.
(12)Monoclonal Antibody Discovery Lab, Fondazione Toscana Life Sciences, Siena, 
Italy.
(13)Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(14)Viral Pathogenesis and Biosafety Unit, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific 
Institute, Milan, Italy. vicenzi.elisa@hsr.it.
(15)IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital, Milan, Italy. 
alberto.mantovani@humanitasresearch.it.
(16)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, Milan, Italy. 
alberto.mantovani@humanitasresearch.it.
(17)The William Harvey Research Institute, Queen Mary University of London, 
Charterhouse Square, London, UK. alberto.mantovani@humanitasresearch.it.
(18)IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital, Milan, Italy. 
cecilia.garlanda@humanitasresearch.it.
(19)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, Milan, Italy. 
cecilia.garlanda@humanitasresearch.it.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2022 Jun;23(6):861-864. doi: 10.1038/s41590-022-01227-w.
    Nat Immunol. 2022 Jun;23(6):865-867. doi: 10.1038/s41590-022-01228-9.

The humoral arm of innate immunity includes diverse molecules with antibody-like 
functions, some of which serve as disease severity biomarkers in coronavirus 
disease 2019 (COVID-19). The present study was designed to conduct a systematic 
investigation of the interaction of human humoral fluid-phase pattern 
recognition molecules (PRMs) with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 
2 (SARS-CoV-2). Of 12 PRMs tested, the long pentraxin 3 (PTX3) and 
mannose-binding lectin (MBL) bound the viral nucleocapsid and spike proteins, 
respectively. MBL bound trimeric spike protein, including that of variants of 
concern (VoC), in a glycan-dependent manner and inhibited SARS-CoV-2 in three in 
vitro models. Moreover, after binding to spike protein, MBL activated the lectin 
pathway of complement activation. Based on retention of glycosylation sites and 
modeling, MBL was predicted to recognize the Omicron VoC. Genetic polymorphisms 
at the MBL2 locus were associated with disease severity. These results suggest 
that selected humoral fluid-phase PRMs can play an important role in resistance 
to, and pathogenesis of, COVID-19, a finding with translational implications.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature America, Inc.

DOI: 10.1038/s41590-021-01114-w
PMID: 35102342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
