---
pmid: '19017811'
title: A functional proteomics approach links the ubiquitin-related modifier Urm1
  to a tRNA modification pathway.
authors:
- Schlieker CD
- Van der Veen AG
- Damon JR
- Spooner E
- Ploegh HL
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2584574
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0808756105
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# A functional proteomics approach links the ubiquitin-related modifier Urm1 to a tRNA modification pathway.
**Authors:** Schlieker CD, Van der Veen AG, Damon JR, Spooner E, Ploegh HL
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0808756105](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0808756105)
**PMC:** [PMC2584574](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2584574/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Nov 25;105(47):18255-60. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0808756105. Epub 2008 Nov 18.

A functional proteomics approach links the ubiquitin-related modifier Urm1 to a 
tRNA modification pathway.

Schlieker CD(1), Van der Veen AG, Damon JR, Spooner E, Ploegh HL.

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 9 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, 
MA 02142, USA. schlieke@wi.mit.edu

Urm1 is a highly conserved ubiquitin-related modifier of unknown function. A 
reduction of cellular Urm1 levels causes severe cytokinesis defects in HeLa 
cells, resulting in the accumulation of enlarged multinucleated cells. To 
understand the underlying mechanism, we applied a functional proteomics approach 
and discovered an enzymatic activity that links Urm1 to a tRNA modification 
pathway. Unlike ubiquitin (Ub) and many Ub-like modifiers, which are commonly 
conjugated to proteinaceous targets, Urm1 is activated by an unusual mechanism 
to yield a thiocarboxylate intermediate that serves as sulfur donor in tRNA 
thiolation reactions. This mechanism is reminiscent of that used by prokaryotic 
sulfur carriers and thus defines the evolutionary link between ancient Ub 
progenitors and the eukaryotic Ub/Ub-like modification systems.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0808756105
PMCID: PMC2584574
PMID: 19017811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
