---
pmid: '17218261'
title: Ubiquitination regulates PTEN nuclear import and tumor suppression.
authors:
- Trotman LC
- Wang X
- Alimonti A
- Chen Z
- Teruya-Feldstein J
- Yang H
- Pavletich NP
- Carver BS
- Cordon-Cardo C
- Erdjument-Bromage H
- Tempst P
- Chi SG
- Kim HJ
- Misteli T
- Jiang X
- Pandolfi PP
journal: Cell
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1855245
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.11.040
---

# Ubiquitination regulates PTEN nuclear import and tumor suppression.
**Authors:** Trotman LC, Wang X, Alimonti A, Chen Z, Teruya-Feldstein J, Yang H, Pavletich NP, Carver BS, Cordon-Cardo C, Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P, Chi SG, Kim HJ, Misteli T, Jiang X, Pandolfi PP
**Journal:** Cell (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2006.11.040](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2006.11.040)
**PMC:** [PMC1855245](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1855245/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2007 Jan 12;128(1):141-56. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.11.040.

Ubiquitination regulates PTEN nuclear import and tumor suppression.

Trotman LC(1), Wang X, Alimonti A, Chen Z, Teruya-Feldstein J, Yang H, Pavletich 
NP, Carver BS, Cordon-Cardo C, Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P, Chi SG, Kim HJ, 
Misteli T, Jiang X, Pandolfi PP.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Biology and Genetics Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, Memorial 
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2007 Jan 12;128(1):25-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.12.023.

The PTEN tumor suppressor is frequently affected in cancer cells, and inherited 
PTEN mutation causes cancer-susceptibility conditions such as Cowden syndrome. 
PTEN acts as a plasma-membrane lipid-phosphatase antagonizing the 
phosphoinositide 3-kinase/AKT cell survival pathway. However, PTEN is also found 
in cell nuclei, but mechanism, function, and relevance of nuclear localization 
remain unclear. We show that nuclear PTEN is essential for tumor suppression and 
that PTEN nuclear import is mediated by its monoubiquitination. A lysine mutant 
of PTEN, K289E associated with Cowden syndrome, retains catalytic activity but 
fails to accumulate in nuclei of patient tissue due to an import defect. We 
identify this and another lysine residue as major monoubiquitination sites 
essential for PTEN import. While nuclear PTEN is stable, polyubiquitination 
leads to its degradation in the cytoplasm. Thus, we identify cancer-associated 
mutations of PTEN that target its posttranslational modification and demonstrate 
how a discrete molecular mechanism dictates tumor progression by differentiating 
between degradation and protection of PTEN.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.11.040
PMCID: PMC1855245
PMID: 17218261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

INTRODUCTION

Since the original identification of the tumor suppressor PTEN ( P hosphatase and TEN sin homolog on chromosome TEN ) ( Li et al., 1997 ; Steck et al., 1997 ) numerous reports have described PTEN -loss or mutation in cancer specimens, cancer cell lines and inherited cancer predisposing syndromes ( Bonneau and Longy, 2000 ; Li et al., 1997 ), rendering this gene one of the most frequently affected tumor suppressors of the post-p53 era.

To better understand the causal nature of PTEN -loss in human cancer we and others have genetically modeled the effects of Pten -loss in mouse and shown that such animals faithfully recapitulate the tumor spectrum observed in PTEN -deficient patients ( Di Cristofano et al., 1998 ; Podsypanina et al., 1999 ; Suzuki et al., 1998 ; Trotman et al., 2003 ). These studies have firmly placed Pten -loss to the stage of tumor initiation in epithelial cancer. Most notably, we have demonstrated PTEN haploinsufficiency (reviewed in ( Sherr, 2004 ), as a single copy becomes unable to prevent prostate cancer either in the context of loss of certain other tumor suppressor genes, ( Di Cristofano et al., 2001 ; Ma et al., 2005 ; Trotman et al., 2006 ) or, alternatively, in the context of genetically engineered reduction of Pten expression just below heterozygosity ( Trotman et al., 2003 ). In addition, we have shown recently that complete Pten -loss even provokes the p53-dependent cellular senescence response ( Chen et al., 2005 ) that antagonizes prostate tumorigenesis redefining the previously assumed interplay of these two major tumor suppressor genes ( Trotman and Pandolfi, 2003 ). This finding further underscored the importance of a “non-Knudsonian” single-hit working model for loss of PTEN in tumor initiation and clarifies why indeed a majority of human tumors are retaining a wildtype copy of PTEN ( Sansal and Sellers, 2004 ). Thus, understanding the mechanisms of PTEN regulation that govern this “heterozygous tumor progression” is imperative for progress in the field.

PTEN catalyzes the conversion of the membrane lipid second messenger PIP 3 to PIP 2 ( Maehama and Dixon, 1998 ), and therefore is the key antagonist of various PIP 3 -dependent proto-oncogenic kinases, chiefly among them AKT/PKB ( Stambolic et al., 1998 ). This firmly positions PTEN action to the cell’s plasma membrane ( Cantley, 2002 ; Di Cristofano and Pandolfi, 2000 ). However, it has long been observed that in several tissues and cultured cells PTEN is also found in cell nuclei (reviewed in ( Lian and Di Cristofano, 2005 ). While it remains unclear what function can be attributed to this nuclear pool of PTEN specifically, positive correlation between nuclear PTEN and suppression of tumor progression has been described for both cutaneous melanoma and colorectal cancer ( Whiteman et al., 2002 ; Zhou et al., 2002 ). But in spite of such correlative studies, to date no proof for an essential role of nuclear PTEN in tumor suppression has been accrued. Furthermore, although these data suggested that nuclear PTEN could retain some activity, it still has remained unclear how PTEN subcellular localization would be regulated.

Nuclear protein import is generally mediated by distinct and, importantly, transferable Nuclear Localization Signal (NLS) sequences such as the SV-40 T-antigen-like cluster of positively charged amino acids. Such sequences confer binding to import receptors, which mediate uni- or bidirectional transport across the Nuclear Pore Complexes (NPC’s, see ( Chook and Blobel, 2001 ; Gorlich and Kutay, 1999 )). Yet, no functional NLS sequence satisfying the essential criteria has been found in PTEN, suggesting that PTEN either binds to another NLS-bearing protein to be transported in a “piggy-back” fashion or that an altogether novel mechanism could regulate its nuclear import.

We describe here the discovery of a cancer-associated mutation that targets PTEN post-translational modification leading to an aberrant nuclear exclusion phenotype in a family of patients with Cowden Syndrome (CS). CS is one of three closely related autosomal dominant cancer syndromes, caused by germ line inactivating mutations of PTEN and is characterized by high cancer susceptibility ( Eng, 2003 ). By identifying the biophysical, biochemical and cell-biological deficiencies of this mutant we here establish the first causal relationship between PTEN post-translational modification, nuclear import and tumor initiation.

DISCUSSION

The molecular makeup of spontaneous cancers at the clinical stage usually presents a complex mixture of primary and consequential events, some of which are thought to contribute to essential aspects of tumor progression ( Hanahan and Weinberg, 2000 ). Cancer syndrome associated mutations in contrast, often constitute well-defined primary tumorigenic events that are causal to tumor formation ( Nagy et al., 2004 ). Specifically, germ-line mutation of PTEN has been shown to underlie the closely related autosomal dominant tumor susceptibility syndromes Cowden disease and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome ( Eng, 2003 ). Therefore, we anticipated that PTEN germline mutations hold valuable information and novel insights into PTEN function in tumor initiation. While most of the described mutations result in truncation many PTEN missense mutations affect its catalytic activity. Through investigating instead how the enzymatically functional PTEN K289E mutant could be at the root of inheritable cancer, we have come to several novel conclusions:

I) We have discovered that deficiency in PTEN import causes cancer susceptibility, independent of catalytic activity. While it has been previously shown that the PTEN K289E mutant retains catalytic activity ( Georgescu et al., 2000 ), its nuclear import defect has so far remained elusive. Correlation of the K289E import defect with the observed cytoplasmic accumulation in the relevant Cowden patient tissue thus represents the first example of a causal relation between PTEN localization and cancer initiation. Since no such certainty on the cause-and-effect relation exists in sporadic mutations like PTEN K13E (which as published also suffers reduction in catalytic activity ( Walker et al., 2004 )), the K289E mutation allows us to unambiguously ascribe a tumor suppressive function to PTEN nuclear localization. In agreement with this finding we find significant correlation between low tumor stage in colon cancer and dominant nuclear PTEN localization.

II) We show that nuclear PTEN import is regulated by mono-ubiquitination, which to our knowledge represents the first example of target protein ubiquitination enhancing nuclear import (and shuttling). PTEN poly-ubiquitination, in contrast leads to its cytoplasmic retention and degradation ( Ciechanover, 2005 ) and is therefore oncogenic in nature (see also(Wang et al., submitted). Thus PTEN mono-ubiquitination and subsequent nuclear import has a protective function, a highly relevant finding for the discussion of NEDD4-1 in tumorigenesis (see below). As mentioned, ubiquitin charging of some E2-ligases has been shown to regulate their nuclear import ( Plafker et al., 2004 ), and intriguingly de-ubiquitination of the Bcl-3 transcription factor has been recently shown to cause its cytoplasmic accumulation ( Massoumi et al., 2006 ). Yet, Bcl-3 cytoplasmic accumulation due to loss of nuclear (Ub-mediated) retention cannot be excluded, in contrast to PTEN where ubiquitination dictates the actual transport rates.

Mono-ubiquitination has previously been implied in p53 nuclear export ( Li et al., 2003 ; Lohrum et al., 2001 ), but p53 also contains several well-characterized NLS and NES sequences that enhance transport ( Michael and Oren, 2003 ). PTEN in contrast, may rely entirely on the ubiquitination system for shuttling since no transferable NLS-like sequences have been demonstrated for it and we have shown that the K13 cluster does not rely on charge for import. It will be interesting to see if PTEN shares ubiquitination-specific import receptors with the above-mentioned cargoes.

III) We identify K13 and K289 as two major and conserved sites for PTEN ubiquitination and we show that their mutation leads to a constitutive shuttling defect that can be overcome by forced mono-ubiquitination. Importantly, PIP 2 phospholipid binding and allosteric PTEN activation functions have also been ascribed to the basic patch containing K13 (for a review see ( Leslie and Downes, 2004 )) and it will be interesting to see how these functions affect ubiquitination and vice versa .

Since further sites on PTEN can also be ubiquitinated both in vitro and in vivo , we hypothesize that mono-ubiquitination efficiency is a limiting step of PTEN shuttling, and that ubiquitin proteases reverse this process and antagonize shuttling because the nuclear pool of PTEN is not quantitatively mono-ubiquitinated. Taken together, our data suggest a model ( Figure 7D ), in which cytoplasmic mono-ubiquitination of PTEN leads to either PTEN import or alternatively poly-ubiquitination and PTEN degradation (by NEDD4-1). Nuclear PTEN-Ub can shuttle back to the cytoplasm or after de-ubiquitination remains nuclear and protected from cytoplasmic degradation until it is again mono-ubiquitinated and exported.

IV) We demonstrate that PTEN nuclear localization is coupled to activity of the only known PTEN E3-ligase, NEDD4-1, which can both mono- and poly-ubiquitinated PTEN in vitro and in vivo . Since we here show that mono-ubiquitination is essential for PTEN function, Nedd4-1 effectively has both oncogenic (PTEN degradation) and tumor suppressive (PTEN shuttling) potential. Several scenarios how PTEN levels and localization are regulated can therefore be envisioned: (i) NEDD4-1 modification/ protein association could switch it from mono- to poly-ubiquitination mode, (ii) NEDD4-1 localization could dictate PTEN levels in a particular compartment (in poly-ubiquitination mode) and/ or transport out of the compartment (in mono-ubiquitination mode). In this respect it is interesting to note that although many cells show dominant cytoplasmic NEDD4-1, some cell lines and certain murine tissues show strong nuclear NEDD4-1 (Trotman and Pandolfi, unpublished). Significantly, the above implications for NEDD4-1 localization and activity apply equally to PTEN de-ubiquitinases, which we propose to be essential for control of PTEN residence times and stability within the nuclear and cytoplasmic compartments as depicted ( Figure 7D ).

V) We find that nuclear PTEN is not only protected but still able to antagonize AKT and cause apoptosis. These findings are in line with our observation of dominant nuclear PTEN localization in early stage but not advanced stage colon cancer. Together with our observations in the Cowden patient tissue, these data suggest that retention of the nuclear import capability of PTEN is a critical tumor-suppressive determinant and it will be interesting to see if other patient derived PTEN mutations also target PTEN import instead of catalytic activity.

Taken together, we have through an integrative approach, linked the genetics of a cancer syndrome with the biochemistry and cell biology of protein modification to demonstrate how ubiquitination regulates nuclear import and tumor progression through PTEN. We therefore propose that ubiquitin is a decisive regulator of this major tumor suppressor and that further defining this process is crucial to understanding and developing ubiquitination-related cancer therapies.
