---
pmid: '9064344'
title: Signaling capacity of the T cell antigen receptor is negatively regulated by
  the PTP1C tyrosine phosphatase.
authors:
- Pani G
- Fischer KD
- Mlinaric-Rascan I
- Siminovitch KA
journal: J Exp Med
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: xml_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC2192780
doi: 10.1084/jem.184.3.839
---

# Signaling capacity of the T cell antigen receptor is negatively regulated by the PTP1C tyrosine phosphatase.
**Authors:** Pani G, Fischer KD, Mlinaric-Rascan I, Siminovitch KA
**Journal:** J Exp Med (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1084/jem.184.3.839](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.184.3.839)
**PMC:** [PMC2192780](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2192780/)

## Abstract

1. J Exp Med. 1996 Sep 1;184(3):839-52. doi: 10.1084/jem.184.3.839.

Signaling capacity of the T cell antigen receptor is negatively regulated by the 
PTP1C tyrosine phosphatase.

Pani G(1), Fischer KD, Mlinaric-Rascan I, Siminovitch KA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The association of PTP1C deficiency with the multiplicity of lymphoid cell 
abnormalities manifested by motheaten (me) and viable motheaten (me(v)) mice 
suggests a pivotal role for this tyrosine phosphatase in the regulation of 
lymphocyte differentiation and function. To delineate the relevance of PTP1C to 
T cell physiology, we have examined me and me(v) T cells with regards to their 
capacity to transduce activating signals through the T cell antigen receptor 
(TCR). Although thymocyte maturation appeared normal in the mutant mice, both 
thymocytes and peripheral T cells from these animals exhibited proliferative 
response to TCR stimulation that were markedly increased relative to those 
elicited in normal cells. Compared to normal thymocytes, PTP1C-deficient 
thymocytes also showed increased constitutive tyrosine phosphorylation of the 
TCR complex and enhanced and prolonged TCR-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of 
the TCR-zeta and CD3-epsilon, as well as a number of cytosolic proteins, most 
notably a 38-kD phosphoprotein found to associate with the Grb2 adaptor SH2 
domain in activated thymocytes. These latter phosphoproteins also associated 
with the Vav guanine nucleotide exchange factor upon TCR ligation, and were 
dephosphorylated by recombinant PTP1C in vitro. In conjunction with the finding 
of PTP1C-TCR association in unstimulated normal thymocytes, these results reveal 
the capacity of PTP1C to interact with and likely dephosphorylate resting and 
activated TCR complex components, as well as more distal signaling effectors 
that are normally recruited to the Vav and Grb2 SH2 domains after TCR 
stimulation. These data therefore strongly implicate PTP1C in the downregulation 
of TCR signaling capacity and, taken together with the aberrant prolongation of 
TCR-induced, mitogen-associated kinase (MAPK) activation observed in 
PTP1C-deficient thymocytes, these findings suggest that the inhibitory influence 
of PTP1C on TCR signal relay is realized through its effects on both the TCR 
complex and downstream signaling elements that couple the activated antigen 
receptor to the Ras/MAPK response pathway.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.184.3.839
PMCID: PMC2192780
PMID: 9064344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

The association of PTP1C deficiency with the multiplicity of lymphoid cell abnormalities manifested by motheaten (me) and viable motheaten (me(v)) mice suggests a pivotal role for this tyrosine phosphatase in the regulation of lymphocyte differentiation and function. To delineate the relevance of PTP1C to T cell physiology, we have examined me and me(v) T cells with regards to their capacity to transduce activating signals through the T cell antigen receptor (TCR). Although thymocyte maturation appeared normal in the mutant mice, both thymocytes and peripheral T cells from these animals exhibited proliferative response to TCR stimulation that were markedly increased relative to those elicited in normal cells. Compared to normal thymocytes, PTP1C- deficient thymocytes also showed increased constitutive tyrosine phosphorylation of the TCR complex and enhanced and prolonged TCR- induced tyrosine phosphorylation of the TCR-zeta and CD3-epsilon, as well as a number of cytosolic proteins, most notably a 38-kD phosphoprotein found to associate with the Grb2 adaptor SH2 domain in activated thymocytes. These latter phosphoproteins also associated with the Vav guanine nucleotide exchange factor upon TCR ligation, and were dephosphorylated by recombinant PTP1C in vitro. In conjunction with the finding of PTP1C-TCR association in unstimulated normal thymocytes, these results reveal the capacity of PTP1C to interact with and likely dephosphorylate resting and activated TCR complex components, as well as more distal signaling effectors that are normally recruited to the Vav and Grb2 SH2 domains after TCR stimulation. These data therefore strongly implicate PTP1C in the downregulation of TCR signaling capacity and, taken together with the aberrant prolongation of TCR- induced, mitogen-associated kinase (MAPK) activation observed in PTP1C- deficient thymocytes, these findings suggest that the inhibitory influence of PTP1C on TCR signal relay is realized through its effects on both the TCR complex and downstream signaling elements that couple the activated antigen receptor to the Ras/MAPK response pathway.
