---
pmid: '18407919'
title: Novel mutations in LHX3 are associated with hypopituitarism and sensorineural
  hearing loss.
authors:
- Rajab A
- Kelberman D
- de Castro SC
- Biebermann H
- Shaikh H
- Pearce K
- Hall CM
- Shaikh G
- Gerrelli D
- Grueters A
- Krude H
- Dattani MT
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn114
---

# Novel mutations in LHX3 are associated with hypopituitarism and sensorineural hearing loss.
**Authors:** Rajab A, Kelberman D, de Castro SC, Biebermann H, Shaikh H, Pearce K, Hall CM, Shaikh G, Gerrelli D, Grueters A, Krude H, Dattani MT
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddn114](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddn114)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Jul 15;17(14):2150-9. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn114. Epub 2008
Apr  10.

Novel mutations in LHX3 are associated with hypopituitarism and sensorineural 
hearing loss.

Rajab A(1), Kelberman D, de Castro SC, Biebermann H, Shaikh H, Pearce K, Hall 
CM, Shaikh G, Gerrelli D, Grueters A, Krude H, Dattani MT.

Author information:
(1)Genetics Unit, DGHA, Ministry of Health, Muscat, Sultanate of Oman.

Homozygous loss-of-function mutations in the transcription factor LHX3 have been 
associated with hypopituitarism with structural anterior pituitary defects and 
cervical abnormalities with or without restricted neck rotation. We report two 
novel recessive mutations in LHX3 in four patients from two unrelated pedigrees. 
Clinical evaluation revealed that all four patients exhibit varying degrees of 
bilateral sensorineural hearing loss, which has not been previously reported in 
association with LHX3 mutations, in addition to hypopituitarism including 
adrenocorticotropic hormone deficiency and an unusual skin and skeletal 
phenotype in one family. Furthermore, re-evaluation of three patients previously 
described with LHX3 mutations showed they also exhibit varying degrees of 
bilateral sensorineural hearing loss. We have investigated a possible role for 
LHX3 in inner ear development in humans using in situ hybridization of human 
embryonic and fetal tissue. LHX3 is expressed in defined regions of the sensory 
epithelium of the developing inner ear in a pattern overlapping that of SOX2, 
which precedes the onset of LHX3 expression and is known to be required for 
inner ear and pituitary development in both mice and humans. Moreover, we show 
that SOX2 is capable of binding to and activating transcription of the LHX3 
proximal promoter in vitro. This study therefore extends the phenotypic spectrum 
associated with LHX3 mutations to encompass variable sensorineural hearing loss 
and suggests a possible interaction between LHX3 and SOX2 likely to be important 
for development of both the inner ear and the anterior pituitary in human 
embryonic development.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddn114
PMID: 18407919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
