---
pmid: '16491076'
title: Negative regulation of CD8 expression via Cd8 enhancer-mediated recruitment
  of the zinc finger protein MAZR.
authors:
- Bilic I
- Koesters C
- Unger B
- Sekimata M
- Hertweck A
- Maschek R
- Wilson CB
- Ellmeier W
journal: Nat Immunol
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3001192
doi: 10.1038/ni1311
---

# Negative regulation of CD8 expression via Cd8 enhancer-mediated recruitment of the zinc finger protein MAZR.
**Authors:** Bilic I, Koesters C, Unger B, Sekimata M, Hertweck A, Maschek R, Wilson CB, Ellmeier W
**Journal:** Nat Immunol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ni1311](https://doi.org/10.1038/ni1311)
**PMC:** [PMC3001192](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3001192/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Immunol. 2006 Apr;7(4):392-400. doi: 10.1038/ni1311. Epub 2006 Feb 19.

Negative regulation of CD8 expression via Cd8 enhancer-mediated recruitment of 
the zinc finger protein MAZR.

Bilic I(1), Koesters C, Unger B, Sekimata M, Hertweck A, Maschek R, Wilson CB, 
Ellmeier W.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Immunology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna 1090, Austria.

Coreceptor expression is tightly regulated during thymocyte development. 
Deletion of specific Cd8 enhancers leads to variegated expression of 
CD8alphabeta heterodimers in double-positive thymocytes. Here we show CD8 
variegation is correlated with an epigenetic 'off' state, linking Cd8 enhancer 
function with chromatin remodeling of the adjacent genes Cd8a and Cd8b1 (Cd8). 
The zinc finger protein MAZR bound the Cd8 enhancer and interacted with the 
nuclear receptor corepressor N-CoR complex in double-negative thymocytes. MAZR 
was downregulated in double-positive and CD8 single-positive thymocytes. 
'Enforced' expression of MAZR led to impaired Cd8 activation and variegated CD8 
expression. Our results demonstrate epigenetic control of the Cd8 loci and 
identify MAZR as an important regulator of Cd8 expression.

DOI: 10.1038/ni1311
PMCID: PMC3001192
PMID: 16491076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
