---
pmid: '22422861'
title: ESCRT-III governs the Aurora B-mediated abscission checkpoint through CHMP4C.
authors:
- Carlton JG
- Caballe A
- Agromayor M
- Kloc M
- Martin-Serrano J
journal: Science
year: '2012'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: xml
pmcid: PMC3998087
doi: 10.1126/science.1217180
---

# ESCRT-III governs the Aurora B-mediated abscission checkpoint through CHMP4C.
**Authors:** Carlton JG, Caballe A, Agromayor M, Kloc M, Martin-Serrano J
**Journal:** Science (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1217180](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1217180)
**PMC:** [PMC3998087](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3998087/)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2012 Apr 13;336(6078):220-5. doi: 10.1126/science.1217180. Epub 2012 
Mar 15.

ESCRT-III governs the Aurora B-mediated abscission checkpoint through CHMP4C.

Carlton JG(1), Caballe A, Agromayor M, Kloc M, Martin-Serrano J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, King's College London School of Medicine, 
London, UK.

Comment in
    Science. 2012 Apr 13;336(6078):166-7. doi: 10.1126/science.1221832.

The endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT) machinery plays an 
evolutionarily conserved role in cytokinetic abscission, the final step of cell 
division where daughter cells are physically separated. Here, we show that 
charged multivesicular body (MVB) protein 4C (CHMP4C), a human ESCRT-III 
subunit, is involved in abscission timing. This function correlated with its 
differential spatiotemporal distribution during late stages of cytokinesis. 
Accordingly, CHMP4C functioned in the Aurora B-dependent abscission checkpoint 
to prevent both premature resolution of intercellular chromosome bridges and 
accumulation of DNA damage. CHMP4C engaged the chromosomal passenger complex 
(CPC) via interaction with Borealin, which suggested a model whereby CHMP4C 
inhibits abscission upon phosphorylation by Aurora B. Thus, the ESCRT machinery 
may protect against genetic damage by coordinating midbody resolution with the 
abscission checkpoint.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1217180
PMCID: PMC3998087
PMID: 22422861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

The final separation of daughter cells during cytokinesis is the ancestral function of the Endosomal Sorting Complex Required for Transport (ESCRT) machinery (1-5) which also acts to resolve equivalent membrane scission events in Multivesicular Body (MVB) formation (6, 7) and Human Immunodeficiency Virus-1 (HIV-1) budding (8, 9). Midbody recruitment of ESCRT-III, the filament-forming scission machinery, is an essential event in cytokinesis that is thought to provide constrictive force during abscission (2, 10-12). An Aurora B-dependent abscission checkpoint (NoCut) is thought to retard abscission to prevent damage of lagging chromosomes that are trapped in the midbody (14-16) and may function more generally as an abscission timer (14). However, mechanisms that modulate abscission timing remain poorly understood and the involvement of the core abscission machinery in this process is unclear.

Here, we investigated the function of CHMP4A, -B and –C, human homologs of the yeast ESCRT-III subunit Snf7p. For this purpose, specific siRNAs and antibodies against each of the CHMP4s were developed (17) (Fig. S1). We then analysed ESCRT-dependent endosomal downregulation of Class I Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC-I) molecules in HeLa cells stably expressing the K3 ubiquitin ligase from Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpes virus (KSHV) (18). Similarly to depletion of Tumour Susceptibility Gene 101 (TSG101), depletion of CHMP4B prevented MHC-I degradation, whereas depletion of CHMP4A or CHMP4C had little effect on this process (Fig. S2A and S2B). As expected (13), depletion of CHMP4A or CHMP4C did not inhibit HIV-1 release and only depletion of CHMP4B inhibited this ESCRT-dependent process (Fig. S3). Furthermore, CHMP4A and CHMP4C were dispensable for completion of cytokinesis, whereas CHMP4B was again the sole paralog required (Fig. 1A and 1B). However, in asynchronous cultures of CHMP4C-depleted HeLa cells, fewer cells were connected by midbodies (Fig. 1C), leading us to question whether midbodies were resolved faster in cells lacking CHMP4C.

We then imaged live HeLa cells stably expressing mCherry-Tubulin (HeLa mCh-Tub) (19) to examine mitotic dynamics. CHMP4C-depleted cells (Fig. 1D) showed normal duration of early mitotic phases and centrosome amplification (Fig. 1E and S4A). We next monitored tubulin-disassembly at the midbody as a marker that correlates strongly with abscission (16). Cells treated with control siRNAs resolved their midbodies with similar kinetics and depletion of CHMP4C reduced abscission time by approximately 30 minutes (Fig. 1F, S4A, Movie 1-4). Abscission was also faster in cells co-depleted of CHMP4C and Spastin, an ATPase involved in destabilization of midbody microtubules (20, 21), suggesting that CHMP4C and Spastin regulate distinct stages of abscission (Fig S4B). We next used cell lines stably expressing mCh-tubulin and comparable levels of either Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP)-tagged CHMP4B or CHMP4C (22) (Fig. 1G) for simultaneous imaging of abscission and midbody recruitment of ESCRT-III. Early phases of mitosis and abscission (Fig. 1H and 1I) were similar in control and GFP-CHMP4B-expressing cells. However, expression of GFP-CHMP4C resulted in an abscission delay that could be explained by increased levels of intracellular CHMP4C (Fig. 1I, S5A-D, Movie 5 and 6). As expected (12), GFP-CHMP4B localized transiently to the midbody arms immediately (21±7 minutes) prior to abscission whereas GFP-CHMP4C localized earlier to the midbody, arriving 176±19 minutes prior to abscission (Fig 2A-D). During its recruitment, GFP-CHMP4C localized initially to the midbody arms, before being directed to the central region (Flemming body) (Fig. 2A-D, S5A-D, Movie 5 and 6). Thus, CHMP4B and CHMP4C exhibit differential spatiotemporal distribution during late cytokinesis.

We sought differences between CHMP4 paralogs that could explain their differential behavior. Alignment of the regulatory region at the C-termini of CHMP4s revealed a CHMP4C-specific insertion (INS) at residues 201-217 (Fig. 2E). This insertion is expanded in mammals (Fig. S6) and contains numerous Serine (S) and Threonine residues. Transiently overexpressed CHMP4 chimeras containing CHMP4C’s C-terminus were more potent inhibitors of cell division (Fig. 2F) and grafting INS into the corresponding region of CHMP4B produced a chimera that inhibited cell division (Fig. 2F), suggesting that INS may be a platform for phosphorylation that inhibits abscission. We next determined the spatial distribution of CHMP4C during abscission by analysing Hemagglutinin (HA)-tagged CHMP4C expressed stably at near-endogenous levels. In early midbodies HA-CHMP4C localized to the midbody arms, whereas in late midbodies, as observed for GFP-CHMP4C in living cells (Fig. 2B), HA-CHMP4C localised to the Flemming-body in an INS-dependent manner (Fig. 2G and 2H). In contrast, CHMP4A and CHMP4B were only observed on midbody arms (Fig. S5E). We speculated that phosphorylation of residues within INS may have directed CHMP4C’s localization and mapped the determinant of Flemming-body localization in late-cyokinesis to S210, a residue conforming to the consensus sequence for Aurora B ([R/K](1-3)-X-[S/T] (23) (Fig. 2G, 2H and S5F).

We next wondered if CHMP4C participated in the Aurora B-dependent NoCut abscission checkpoint. This checkpoint can be activated by partial depletion of Nucleoporin 153 kDa (NUP153) and is evidenced by an accumulation of cells unable to complete abscission and arrested at the midbody stage (24). NoCut activation was prevented by co-depletion of CHMP4C with NUP153 (Fig. 3A and 3B), despite phosphorylated Aurora B persisting at midbodies (Fig. 3C). Chromosomes trapped at the midbody may provide an alternative NoCut activation route. We found that HA-CHMP4C preferentially localized to intercellular chromatin bridges illuminated with Yellow Fluorescent Protein (YFP)-tagged Lamin Associated Protein 2β (LAP2β) (Fig. 3D, S7A and S7B). Moreover, HA-CHMP4C co-localized with activated Aurora B at these chromatin bridges (Fig. 3E). We examined intercellular DNA-bridge resolution in CHMP4C-depleted cells, observing that YFP-LAP2β-positive bridge formation and cellular viability was normal (Fig. S7C and S7D) and found, similarly to Aurora B-inhibited cells (16), faster resolution of YFP-LAP2β-positive chromatin bridges (Fig. 3F, S7E-G, Movies 7-9). Consequently, stable depletion of CHMP4C resulted in increased levels of Histone H2AX phosphorylation (Fig. 3G, S7H), suggesting that deregulation of the abscission checkpoint in these cells results in the accumulation of genetic damage (25).

Given the essential role of CHMP4C in the regulation of abscission timing and its participation in the Aurora B-dependent abscission checkpoint, we searched for links between components of the CPC and ESCRT-III by yeast two-hybrid. We found interactions between Borealin and CHMP2A, CHMP4B, CHMP4C and CHMP6 (Fig. 4A and 4B), and mapped these interactions to the C-terminus of Borealin (Fig S8A), a region that recruits adaptor proteins to the CPC. CHMP4C was the strongest interactor with Borealin and we could co-precipitate CHMP4C with Aurora B (Fig. S8B), confirming that the ESCRT-machinery is able to engage the CPC. Co-localisation of HA-CHMP4C and members of the CPC was observed in early, but not late, midbodies (Fig. 4C, S8C and S8D). Accordingly, a λ-phosphatase-sensitive, mobility-shifted form of HA-CHMP4C was detected in mitotic lysates and was enriched upon a phospho-affinity resin (Fig. 4D and S8E). Similarly to Centrosomal protein of 55 kDa (CEP55) (26, 27), CHMP4C phosphorylation occurred at mitotic onset and reverted in a phosphatase-dependent manner as mitosis progressed (Fig. 4E). An Aurora B inhibitor reduced CHMP4C phosphorylation (Fig. 4F) and the epitope detected by α-CHMP4C, which recognizes INS, was masked in the mobility-shifted fraction and revealed upon λ-phosphatase treatment (Fig. 4D), suggesting that residues within CHMP4C’s insertion were phosphorylated during mitosis. Finally, Aurora B could specifically phosphorylate CHMP4C on S210 within INS, the residue required for Flemming Body localisation (Fig. 4G, 4H, S8F and S8G).

To investigate the role of Aurora B-phosphorylation of CHMP4C on abscission timing, we employed HeLa mCh-Tub cell lines stably expressing HA-tagged, siRNA-resistant versions of CHMP4C (HA-CHMP4CR, HA-CHMP4CR δINS or HA-CHMP4CR S210A) expressed at similar, near-endogenous levels (Fig. 4I). Interaction of these mutants with known CHMP4C-binding proteins (Fig. S8H) was maintained and early mitotic phases were completed normally in cells depleted of endogenous CHMP4C and reliant upon these proteins (Fig S8I). Importantly, HA-CHMP4CR rescued the faster abscission induced by CHMP4C depletion (Fig. 4J) whereas cells reliant upon HA-CHMP4CR δINS and HA-CHMP4CR S210A could not (Fig. 4K). We propose that Aurora B-dependent phosphorylation of S210 allows CHMP4C localization to the Flemming body and acts as a brake upon the late stages of cytokinesis. Furthermore, cells stably expressing YFP-LAP2β and HA-CHMP4CR S210A were unable to delay abscission in response to intracellular chromatin bridges, despite the presence of these proteins at the chromatin bridge (Fig S9A), indicating deregulation of the NoCut checkpoint in these cells (Fig 4L).

Here we found that CHMP4C acts as an essential regulator of the Aurora B-mediated abscission checkpoint. In the absence of CHMP4C, cells complete abscission faster. We suggest that Aurora B-dependent phosphorylation of CHMP4C upon S210 directs its Flemming-body localization and delays abscission through activation of NoCut, possibly by preventing assembly of a productive abscission complex. A phospho-mimetic mutation (S210D) had no apparent effect on known CHMP4C interactions (Fig S9B) suggesting phospho-regulation of abscission timing may involve as-yet unknown CHMP4C-binding partners. That the S210 consensus site is conserved only in mammals suggests that this mechanism might have emerged late in evolution as a safety belt in addition to the interactions of the CPC with CHMP2A and CHMP6. CHMP4C depletion circumvents the NoCut abscission checkpoint, allows faster resolution of chromatin-bridges and induces the accumulation of phosphorylated H2AX. These observations are consistent with a role of CHMP4C in protection against DNA-damage accumulation In this context, as well as being Charged MVB Proteins (28), CHMPs were originally reported as Chromatin-Modifying Proteins (29) that could associate with condensed chromatin, suggesting that the physical interaction of lagging chromosomes and ESCRT-III at the midbody may trigger activation of NoCut.

Supplementary MaterialMovie S1Supp dataMovie S2Movie S3Movie S4Movie S5Movie S6Movie S7Movie S8Movie S9

Supplementary Material
