---
pmid: '11981823'
title: The role of complement receptors type 1 (CR1, CD35) and 2 (CR2, CD21) in promoting
  C3 fragment deposition and membrane attack complex formation on normal peripheral
  human B cells.
authors:
- Nielsen CH
- Pedersen ML
- Marquart HV
- Prodinger WM
- Leslie RG
journal: Eur J Immunol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/1521-4141(200205)32:5<1359::AID-IMMU1359>3.0.CO;2-V
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The role of complement receptors type 1 (CR1, CD35) and 2 (CR2, CD21) in promoting C3 fragment deposition and membrane attack complex formation on normal peripheral human B cells.
**Authors:** Nielsen CH, Pedersen ML, Marquart HV, Prodinger WM, Leslie RG
**Journal:** Eur J Immunol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1002/1521-4141(200205)32:5<1359::AID-IMMU1359>3.0.CO;2-V](https://doi.org/10.1002/1521-4141(200205)32:5<1359::AID-IMMU1359>3.0.CO;2-V)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Immunol. 2002 May;32(5):1359-67. doi: 
10.1002/1521-4141(200205)32:5<1359::AID-IMMU1359>3.0.CO;2-V.

The role of complement receptors type 1 (CR1, CD35) and 2 (CR2, CD21) in 
promoting C3 fragment deposition and membrane attack complex formation on normal 
peripheral human B cells.

Nielsen CH(1), Pedersen ML, Marquart HV, Prodinger WM, Leslie RG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Immunology, Odense University Hospital, Odense, 
Denmark.

Normal human B lymphocytes are known to activate the alternative pathway (AP) of 
complement, leading to C3-fragment deposition and membrane attack complex (MAC) 
formation. The process is mediated via complement receptor type 2 (CR2, CD21), 
with complement receptor type 1 (CR1, CD35) playing a subsidiary role. In this 
study, we examine the relative contributions of CR1 and CR2 to the deposition of 
C3 fragments and MAC on B lymphocytes under circumstances where all complement 
pathways are operational. C3-fragment deposition and MAC formation were assessed 
on human peripheral B lymphocytes in the presence of 30% autologous serum. 
Blocking the CR2 ligand-binding site with monoclonal antibody (mAb) FE8 resulted 
in significant reduction (37.9+/-11.9%) in C3-fragment deposition, whereas MAC 
formation was only marginally affected (12.1+/-22.2% reduction). Blocking the 
CR1 binding-site resulted in significant reduction of both C3-fragment 
deposition (22.0+/-14.5%) and MAC formation (47.4+/-13.8%). Both the lack of CR2 
influence on MAC formation and the promotion of C3-fragment deposition by CR1 
are in striking contrast to the situation where only the AP is operational. The 
presence of erythrocytes (E) bearing CR1, however, markedly reduced both 
C3-fragment deposition and MAC formation. Our data suggest that C3-fragment 
deposition and MAC formation on B lymphocytes in vivo may involve both AP and 
classical pathway activation, with CR1 contributing significantly to the latter. 
On the other hand, the presence of extrinsic CR1, on E, may serve to limit 
spontaneous MAC formation and thereby ensure cell survival in the circulation.

DOI: 10.1002/1521-4141(200205)32:5<1359::AID-IMMU1359>3.0.CO;2-V
PMID: 11981823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
