---
pmid: '31831667'
title: Cryo-electron microscopy structures of human oligosaccharyltransferase complexes
  OST-A and OST-B.
authors:
- Ramírez AS
- Kowal J
- Locher KP
journal: Science
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.aaz3505
---

# Cryo-electron microscopy structures of human oligosaccharyltransferase complexes OST-A and OST-B.
**Authors:** Ramírez AS, Kowal J, Locher KP
**Journal:** Science (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.aaz3505](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaz3505)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2019 Dec 13;366(6471):1372-1375. doi: 10.1126/science.aaz3505.

Cryo-electron microscopy structures of human oligosaccharyltransferase complexes 
OST-A and OST-B.

Ramírez AS(#)(1), Kowal J(#)(1), Locher KP(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, Eidgenössische Technische 
Hochschule (ETH), CH-8093 Zürich, Switzerland.
(2)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, Eidgenössische Technische 
Hochschule (ETH), CH-8093 Zürich, Switzerland. locher@mol.biol.ethz.ch.
(#)Contributed equally

Oligosaccharyltransferase (OST) catalyzes the transfer of a high-mannose glycan 
onto secretory proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum. Mammals express two 
distinct OST complexes that act in a cotranslational (OST-A) or 
posttranslocational (OST-B) manner. Here, we present high-resolution 
cryo-electron microscopy structures of human OST-A and OST-B. Although they have 
similar overall architectures, structural differences in the catalytic subunits 
STT3A and STT3B facilitate contacts to distinct OST subunits, DC2 in OST-A and 
MAGT1 in OST-B. In OST-A, interactions with TMEM258 and STT3A allow ribophorin-I 
to form a four-helix bundle that can bind to a translating ribosome, whereas the 
equivalent region is disordered in OST-B. We observed an acceptor peptide and 
dolichylphosphate bound to STT3B, but only dolichylphosphate in STT3A, 
suggesting distinct affinities of the two OST complexes for protein substrates.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works.

DOI: 10.1126/science.aaz3505
PMID: 31831667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
