---
pmid: '19769575'
title: Closely related receptor complexes differ in their ABA selectivity and sensitivity.
authors:
- Szostkiewicz I
- Richter K
- Kepka M
- Demmel S
- Ma Y
- Korte A
- Assaad FF
- Christmann A
- Grill E
journal: Plant J
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.04025.x
---

# Closely related receptor complexes differ in their ABA selectivity and sensitivity.
**Authors:** Szostkiewicz I, Richter K, Kepka M, Demmel S, Ma Y, Korte A, Assaad FF, Christmann A, Grill E
**Journal:** Plant J (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.04025.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.04025.x)

## Abstract

1. Plant J. 2010 Jan;61(1):25-35. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.04025.x. Epub
2009  Sep 21.

Closely related receptor complexes differ in their ABA selectivity and 
sensitivity.

Szostkiewicz I(1), Richter K, Kepka M, Demmel S, Ma Y, Korte A, Assaad FF, 
Christmann A, Grill E.

Author information:
(1)Lehrstuhl für Botanik, Technische Universität München, Am Hochanger 4, 
D-85354 Freising, Germany.

The recent discovery of a variety of receptors has led to new models for hormone 
perception in plants. In the case of the hormone abscisic acid (ABA), which 
regulates plant responses to abiotic stress, perception seems to occur both at 
the plasma membrane and in the cytosol. The cytosolic receptors for ABA have 
recently been identified as complexes between protein phosphatases 2C (PP2C) and 
regulatory components (RCAR/PYR/PYL) that bind ABA. Binding of ABA to the 
receptor complexes inactivates the PP2Cs, thereby activating the large variety 
of physiological processes regulated by ABA. The Arabidopsis genome encodes 13 
homologues of RCAR1 and approximately 80 PP2Cs, of which six in clade A have 
been identified as negative regulators of ABA responses. In this study we 
characterize a novel member of the RCAR family, RCAR3. RCAR3 was identified in a 
screen for interactors of the PP2Cs ABI1 and ABI2, which are key regulators of 
ABA responses. RCAR3 was shown to repress ABI1 and ABI2 in vitro, and to 
stimulate ABA signalling in protoplast cells. RCAR3 conferred greater ABA 
sensitivity to the PP2C regulation than RCAR1, whereas stereo-selectivity for 
(S)-ABA was less stringent with RCAR3 as compared with RCAR1. In addition, 
regulation of the protein phosphatase activity by RCAR1 and RCAR3 was more 
sensitive to ABA for ABI1 than for ABI2. Based on the differences we have 
observed in transcriptional regulation and biochemical properties, we propose a 
model whereby differential expression of the co-receptors and combinatorial 
assembly of the receptor complexes act in concert to modulate and fine-tune ABA 
responses.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.04025.x
PMID: 19769575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
