---
pmid: '15155885'
title: SPINDLY and GIGANTEA interact and act in Arabidopsis thaliana pathways involved
  in light responses, flowering, and rhythms in cotyledon movements.
authors:
- Tseng TS
- Salomé PA
- McClung CR
- Olszewski NE
journal: Plant Cell
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC490045
doi: 10.1105/tpc.019224
---

# SPINDLY and GIGANTEA interact and act in Arabidopsis thaliana pathways involved in light responses, flowering, and rhythms in cotyledon movements.
**Authors:** Tseng TS, Salomé PA, McClung CR, Olszewski NE
**Journal:** Plant Cell (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1105/tpc.019224](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.019224)
**PMC:** [PMC490045](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC490045/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell. 2004 Jun;16(6):1550-63. doi: 10.1105/tpc.019224. Epub 2004 May 21.

SPINDLY and GIGANTEA interact and act in Arabidopsis thaliana pathways involved 
in light responses, flowering, and rhythms in cotyledon movements.

Tseng TS(1), Salomé PA, McClung CR, Olszewski NE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Biology and Plant Molecular Genetics Institute, 
University of Minesota, St. Paul, Minesota 55108, USA.

SPINDLY (SPY) is a negative regulator of gibberellin signaling in Arabidopsis 
thaliana that also functions in previously undefined pathways. The N terminus of 
SPY contains a protein-protein interaction domain consisting of 10 
tetratricopeptide repeats (TPRs). GIGANTEA (GI) was recovered from a yeast 
two-hybrid screen for proteins that interact with the TPR domain. GI and SPY 
also interacted in Escherichia coli and in vitro pull-down assays. The 
phenotypes of spy and spy-4 gi-2 plants support the hypothesis that SPY 
functions with GI in pathways controlling flowering, circadian cotyledon 
movements, and hypocotyl elongation. GI acts in the long-day flowering pathway 
upstream of CONSTANS (CO) and FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT). Loss of GI function causes 
late flowering and reduces CO and FT RNA levels. Consistent with SPY functioning 
in the long-day flowering pathway upstream of CO, spy-4 partially suppressed the 
reduced abundance of CO and FT RNA and the late flowering of gi-2 plants. Like 
gi, spy affects the free-running period of cotyledon movements. The free-running 
period was lengthened in spy-4 mutants and shortened in plants that overexpress 
SPY under the control of the 35S promoter of Cauliflower mosaic virus. When 
grown under red light, gi-2 plants have a long hypocotyl. This hypocotyl 
phenotype was suppressed in spy-4 gi-2 double mutants. Additionally, dark-grown 
and far-red-light-grown spy-4 seedlings were found to have short and long 
hypocotyls, respectively. The different hypocotyl length phenotypes of spy-4 
seedlings grown under different light conditions are consistent with SPY acting 
in the GA pathway to inhibit hypocotyl elongation and also acting as a 
light-regulated promoter of elongation.

Copyright 2004 American Society of Plant Biologists

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.019224
PMCID: PMC490045
PMID: 15155885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
