---
pmid: '23676495'
title: Apolipoproteins E and AV mediate lipoprotein clearance by hepatic proteoglycans.
authors:
- Gonzales JC
- Gordts PL
- Foley EM
- Esko JD
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3668842
doi: 10.1172/JCI67398
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Apolipoproteins E and AV mediate lipoprotein clearance by hepatic proteoglycans.
**Authors:** Gonzales JC, Gordts PL, Foley EM, Esko JD
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI67398](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI67398)
**PMC:** [PMC3668842](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3668842/)

## Abstract

1. J Clin Invest. 2013 Jun;123(6):2742-51. doi: 10.1172/JCI67398. Epub 2013 May
8.

Apolipoproteins E and AV mediate lipoprotein clearance by hepatic proteoglycans.

Gonzales JC(1), Gordts PL, Foley EM, Esko JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Glycobiology Research and 
Training Center, UCSD, La Jolla, California 92093-0687, USA.

The heparan sulfate proteoglycan (HSPG) syndecan-1 (SDC1) acts as a major 
receptor for triglyceride-rich lipoprotein (TRL) clearance in the liver. We 
sought to identify the relevant apolipoproteins on TRLs that mediate binding to 
SDC1 and determine their clinical relevance. Evidence supporting ApoE as a major 
determinant arose from its enrichment in TRLs from mice defective in hepatic 
heparan sulfate (Ndst1f/fAlbCre⁺ mice), decreased binding of ApoE-deficient TRLs 
to HSPGs on human hepatoma cells, and decreased clearance of ApoE-deficient 
[³H]TRLs in vivo. Evidence for a second ligand was suggested by the faster 
clearance of ApoE-deficient TRLs after injection into WT Ndst1f/fAlbCre⁻ versus 
mutant Ndst1f/fAlbCre⁺ mice and elevated fasting and postprandial plasma 
triglycerides in compound Apoe⁻/⁻Ndst1f/fAlbCre⁺ mice compared with either 
single mutant. ApoAV emerged as a candidate based on 6-fold enrichment of ApoAV 
in TRLs accumulating in Ndst1f/fAlbCre⁺ mice, decreased binding of TRLs to 
proteoglycans after depletion of ApoAV or addition of anti-ApoAV mAb, and 
decreased heparan sulfate-dependent binding of ApoAV-deficient particles to 
hepatocytes. Importantly, disruption of hepatic heparan sulfate-mediated 
clearance increased atherosclerosis. We conclude that clearance of TRLs by 
hepatic HSPGs is atheroprotective and mediated by multivalent binding to ApoE 
and ApoAV.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI67398
PMCID: PMC3668842
PMID: 23676495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
