---
pmid: '11018465'
title: 'Human sphingosine-1-phosphate lyase: cDNA cloning, functional expression studies
  and mapping to chromosome 10q22(1).'
authors:
- Van Veldhoven PP
- Gijsbers S
- Mannaerts GP
- Vermeesch JR
- Brys V
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s1388-1981(00)00079-2
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Human sphingosine-1-phosphate lyase: cDNA cloning, functional expression studies and mapping to chromosome 10q22(1).
**Authors:** Van Veldhoven PP, Gijsbers S, Mannaerts GP, Vermeesch JR, Brys V
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1388-1981(00)00079-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1388-1981(00)00079-2)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Sep 27;1487(2-3):128-34. doi: 
10.1016/s1388-1981(00)00079-2.

Human sphingosine-1-phosphate lyase: cDNA cloning, functional expression studies 
and mapping to chromosome 10q22(1).

Van Veldhoven PP(1), Gijsbers S, Mannaerts GP, Vermeesch JR, Brys V.

Author information:
(1)Katholoeke Universiteit Leuven, Departement Moleculaire Celbiologie, Leuven, 
Belgium. paul.vanveldhoven@med.kuleuven.ac.be

Sphingosine-1-phosphate lyase catalyzes the last step in sphingolipid breakdown, 
the cleavage of phosphorylated sphingoid bases such as sphingenine-1-phosphate. 
The latter lipid is not only a catabolite, but can influence as an inter- and/or 
intracellular second messenger many cellular processes. To allow for the 
diagnosis of human disorders that might be linked to a deficient lyase, the 
human sphingosine-1-phosphate lyase cDNA was cloned. The obtained cDNA encoded a 
protein of 568 amino acids with a calculated molecular mass of 63492 Da. 
Hydropathy plots revealed the presence of one membrane span near the 
amino-terminal which is however not required for enzyme activity since 
recombinant poly-His-tagged lyase, lacking this membrane span, was functionally 
active. Site-directed mutagenesis disclosed the importance of the cysteine 
residues 218 and 317 for the cleavage reaction. Northern analysis showed the 
presence of rare large-sized mRNAs of 6.7, 5.8 and 4 kb and the highest 
expression in liver. By fluorescent in situ hybridization, the gene was mapped 
to chromosome 10q22.

DOI: 10.1016/s1388-1981(00)00079-2
PMID: 11018465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
