---
reference_id: PMID:35130329
title: SPCS1-Dependent E2-p7 processing determines HCV Assembly efficiency.
authors:
- Alzahrani N
- Wu MJ
- Sousa CF
- Kalinina OV
- Welsch C
- Yi M
journal: PLoS Pathog
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010310
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SPCS1-Dependent E2-p7 processing determines HCV Assembly efficiency.
**Authors:** Alzahrani N, Wu MJ, Sousa CF, Kalinina OV, Welsch C, Yi M
**Journal:** PLoS Pathog (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.ppat.1010310](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1010310)

## Content

1. PLoS Pathog. 2022 Feb 7;18(2):e1010310. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010310.
eCollection 2022 Feb.

SPCS1-Dependent E2-p7 processing determines HCV Assembly efficiency.

Alzahrani N(1), Wu MJ(1), Sousa CF(2), Kalinina OV(2)(3), Welsch C(4), Yi M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch
at Galveston, Galveston, Texas, United States of America.
(2)Drug Bioinformatics Group, HIPS, HZI, Saarbrücken, Germany.
(3)Medical Faculty, Saarland University, Homburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine 1, Goethe University Hospital, Frankfurt am
Main, Germany.

Recent studies identified signal peptidase complex subunit 1 (SPCS1) as a
proviral host factor for Flaviviridae viruses, including HCV. One of the SPCS1's
roles in flavivirus propagation was attributed to its regulation of signal
peptidase complex (SPC)-mediated processing of flavivirus polyprotein,
especially C-prM junction. However, whether SPCS1 also regulates any
SPC-mediated processing sites within HCV polyprotein remains unclear. In this
study, we determined that loss of SPCS1 specifically impairs the HCV E2-p7
processing by the SPC. We also determined that efficient separation of E2 and
p7, regardless of its dependence on SPC-mediated processing, leads to SPCS1
dispensable for HCV assembly These results suggest that SPCS1 regulates HCV
assembly by facilitating the SPC-mediated processing of E2-p7 precursor.
Structural modeling suggests that intrinsically delayed processing of the E2-p7
is likely caused by the structural rigidity of p7 N-terminal transmembrane
helix-1 (p7/TM1/helix-1), which has mostly maintained membrane-embedded
conformations during molecular dynamics (MD) simulations.
E2-p7-processing-impairing p7 mutations narrowed the p7/TM1/helix-1 bending
angle against the membrane, resulting in closer membrane embedment of the
p7/TM1/helix-1 and less access of E2-p7 junction substrate to the catalytic site
of the SPC, located well above the membrane in the ER lumen. Based on these
results we propose that the key mechanism of action of SPCS1 in HCV assembly is
to facilitate the E2-p7 processing by enhancing the E2-p7 junction site
presentation to the SPC active site. By providing evidence that SPCS1
facilitates HCV assembly by regulating SPC-mediated cleavage of E2-p7 junction,
equivalent to the previously established role of this protein in C-prM junction
processing in flavivirus, this study establishes the common role of SPCS1 in
Flaviviridae family virus propagation as to exquisitely regulate the
SPC-mediated processing of specific, suboptimal target sites.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010310
PMCID: PMC8853643
PMID: 35130329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exists.