---
pmid: '27211852'
title: A novel mutation of α-galactosidase A gene causes Fabry disease mimicking primary
  erythromelalgia in a Chinese family.
authors:
- Ge W
- Wei B
- Zhu H
- Miao Z
- Zhang W
- Leng C
- Li J
- Zhang D
- Sun M
- Xu X
journal: Int J Neurosci
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1080/00207454.2016.1191483
---

# A novel mutation of α-galactosidase A gene causes Fabry disease mimicking primary erythromelalgia in a Chinese family.
**Authors:** Ge W, Wei B, Zhu H, Miao Z, Zhang W, Leng C, Li J, Zhang D, Sun M, Xu X
**Journal:** Int J Neurosci (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1080/00207454.2016.1191483](https://doi.org/10.1080/00207454.2016.1191483)

## Abstract

1. Int J Neurosci. 2017 May;127(5):448-453. doi: 10.1080/00207454.2016.1191483. 
Epub 2016 Jun 3.

A novel mutation of α-galactosidase A gene causes Fabry disease mimicking 
primary erythromelalgia in a Chinese family.

Ge W(1)(2), Wei B(3), Zhu H(4), Miao Z(4), Zhang W(5), Leng C(1), Li J(6), Zhang 
D(1), Sun M(3), Xu X(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Neurology , The Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow 
University , Suzhou , China.
(2)f Department of Neurology , The Affiliated Hospital of Xuzhou Medical College 
, Xuzhou , China.
(3)b Institute for Fetology , The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow 
University , Suzhou , China.
(4)c Institute of Neuroscience , Soochow University , Suzhou , China.
(5)d Laboratory of Clinical Genetics , Peking Union Medical College Hospital , 
Beijing , China.
(6)e Department of Neurology , Suzhou Kowloon Hospital , Suzhou , China.

PURPOSE: Fabry disease is an X-linked genetic disorder caused by the mutations 
of α-galactosidase A (GLA, MIM 300644) gene presenting with various clinical 
symptoms including small-fiber peripheral neuropathy and limb burning pain. 
Here, we reported a Chinese pedigree with the initial diagnosis of primary 
erythromelalgia in an autosomal dominant (AD)-inherited pattern.
METHODS: Mutation analysis of SCN9A and GLA genes by direct sequencing and 
functional analysis of a novel mutation of GLA in cells were performed.
RESULTS: Our data did not show any pathological mutations in SCN9A gene; 
however, a novel missense mutation c.139T>C (p.W47R) of GLA was identified in a 
male proband as well as two female carriers in this family. Enzyme assay of 
α-galactosidase A activity showed deficient enzyme activity in male patients and 
female carriers, further confirming the diagnosis of Fabry disease. Finally, a 
functional analysis indicated that the replacement of the 47th amino acid 
tryptophan (W47) with arginine (W47R) or glycine (W47G) led to reduced activity 
of α-galactosidase A in 293T cells. Therefore, these findings demonstrated that 
the novel mutation p.W47R of GLA is the cause of Fabry disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Because Fabry disease and primary erythromelalgia share similar 
symptoms, it is a good strategy for clinical physicians to perform genetic 
mutation screenings on both SCN9A and GLA genes in those patients with limb 
burning pain but without a clear inheritant pattern.

DOI: 10.1080/00207454.2016.1191483
PMID: 27211852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
