---
pmid: '18923428'
title: Regulated release of ERdj3 from unfolded proteins by BiP.
authors:
- Jin Y
- Awad W
- Petrova K
- Hendershot LM
journal: EMBO J
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2580786
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.207
---

# Regulated release of ERdj3 from unfolded proteins by BiP.
**Authors:** Jin Y, Awad W, Petrova K, Hendershot LM
**Journal:** EMBO J (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2008.207](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2008.207)
**PMC:** [PMC2580786](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2580786/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2008 Nov 5;27(21):2873-82. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.207. Epub 2008 Oct 
16.

Regulated release of ERdj3 from unfolded proteins by BiP.

Jin Y(1), Awad W, Petrova K, Hendershot LM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Tumor Cell Biology, St Jude Children's Research 
Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

DnaJ proteins often bind to unfolded substrates and recruit their Hsp70 
partners. This induces a conformational change in the Hsp70 that stabilizes its 
binding to substrate. By some unknown mechanism, the DnaJ protein is released. 
We examined the requirements for the release of ERdj3, a mammalian ER DnaJ, from 
substrates and found that BiP promoted the release of ERdj3 only in the presence 
of ATP. Mutations in ERdj3 or BiP that disrupted their interaction interrupted 
the release of ERdj3. BiP mutants that were defective in any step of the ATPase 
cycle were also unable to release ERdj3. These results demonstrate that a 
functional interaction between ERdj3 and BiP, including both a direct 
interaction and the ability to stimulate BiP's ATPase activity are required to 
release ERdj3 from substrate and support a model where ERdj3 must recruit BiP 
and stimulate its high-affinity association with the substrate through 
activation of ATP hydrolysis to trigger its own release from substrates. On the 
basis of similarities among DnaJs and Hsp70s, this is likely to be applicable to 
other Hsp70-DnaJ pairs.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2008.207
PMCID: PMC2580786
PMID: 18923428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

DnaJ proteins often bind to unfolded substrates and recruit their Hsp70 partners. This induces a conformational change in the Hsp70 that stabilizes its binding to substrate. By some unknown mechanism, the DnaJ protein is released. We examined the requirements for the release of ERdj3, a mammalian ER DnaJ, from substrates and found that BiP promoted the release of ERdj3 only in the presence of ATP. Mutations in ERdj3 or BiP that disrupted their interaction interrupted the release of ERdj3. BiP mutants that were defective in any step of the ATPase cycle were also unable to release ERdj3. These results demonstrate that a functional interaction between ERdj3 and BiP, including both a direct interaction and the ability to stimulate BiP's ATPase activity are required to release ERdj3 from substrate and support a model where ERdj3 must recruit BiP and stimulate its high-affinity association with the substrate through activation of ATP hydrolysis to trigger its own release from substrates. On the basis of similarities among DnaJs and Hsp70s, this is likely to be applicable to other Hsp70–DnaJ pairs.

Introduction

The Hsp70 family of molecular chaperones is a highly conserved, widely expressed, and well-studied group of proteins. These chaperones are found in all organisms where they have a function in every cellular organelle and are essential for nearly all cellular processes. The binding of Hsp70 proteins to non-native structures on a vast array of substrate proteins can serve to stabilize folding intermediates, prevent their aggregation, and aid in protein folding and assembly. This is achieved through direct interaction of the C-terminal substrate-binding domain (SBD) of Hsp70 proteins with exposed hydrophobic residues on substrate proteins. Peptide-binding studies suggested a preference for extended chains in which the hydrophobic amino acids would be oriented in a single direction to engage the peptide-binding pocket of the Hsp70 protein, a possibility that is supported by NMR ( Landry et al , 1992 ) and crystallographic ( Zhu et al , 1996 ) studies. The binding and release of substrates to the SBD of Hsp70 proteins are tightly regulated by the highly conserved N-terminal nucleotide-binding domain (NBD) ( Liberek et al , 1991b ), which can bind either ATP or ADP. When ATP occupies the cleft of the NBD, the SBD is in an open configuration, which has both a high on and high off rate for unfolded proteins. The hydrolysis of ATP to ADP results in a closure of the lid on the SBD, which stabilizes the interaction with bound proteins. Discharge of the unfolded protein occurs when ADP is released and exchanged for ATP. This reopens the lid on the SBD, which allows the bound substrate to be released and provides an opportunity for it to fold. A number of recent studies shed light on the interaction between the two domains, which controls the activity of this group of chaperones ( Jiang et al , 2005 ; Vogel et al , 2006a , 2006b ; Liu and Hendrickson, 2007 ; Awad et al , 2008 ).

The Hsp70 ATPase cycle, which is essential to the chaperoning process, is controlled by a number of cofactors that regulate either ATP hydrolysis or nucleotide exchange. DnaJ was originally identified along with DnaK (Hsp70) in a genetic screen in Escherichia coli for genes that are required for DNA replication ( Saito and Uchida, 1977 ; Yochem et al , 1978 ). Later it was shown that DnaK and DnaJ are in the same genetic pathway and that DnaJ stimulates the ATPase activity of DnaK, thereby stabilizing the binding of DnaK to substrates ( Liberek et al , 1991a ). As is the case with Hsp70s, DnaJ proteins are present in all organisms and all organelles, and the number of DnaJ proteins in an organism often exceeds the number of Hsp70 proteins present ( Caplan et al , 1993 ; Cheetham and Caplan, 1998 ). All DnaJ proteins possess a highly conserved ∼70 amino-acid ‘J' domain, which contains an invariant tripeptide sequence, His-Pro-Asp, that is required to interact with the ATP-bound form Hsp70 proteins ( Mayer et al , 1999 ). Similar to Hsp70 proteins, at least some DnaJ proteins can bind directly to unfolded substrates ( Cheetham and Caplan, 1998 ; Fan et al , 2003 ). Peptide-binding studies for E. coli DnaJ revealed significant overlap with the peptides that bound DnaK ( Rudiger et al , 2001 ), arguing that DnaJ was likely to also bind to extended hydrophobic residues on unfolded proteins. This possibility was supported by crystallographic data obtained for a peptide bound to the yeast cytosolic DnaJ protein, Ydj1 ( Li et al , 2003 ). The fact that DnaJs specifically interact with the ATP-bound form of Hsp70s led to a model ( Mayer et al , 1999 ) where DnaJ proteins would bind first to unfolded proteins, recruit the ATP-bound or ‘open' form of Hsp70 to the substrate, and then stimulate its ATPase activity to ‘close' it onto the substrate more stably. This model was supported by data showing that a cytosolic DnaJ protein bound to nascent chains extruding from the ribosome before the Hsp70 protein did ( Hendrick et al , 1993 ), and by in vitro binding studies with DnaK, DnaJ, and denatured luciferase ( Szabo et al , 1994 ) and with HscA and HscB, a specialized Hsp70–DnaJ pair of E. coli ( Silberg et al , 2004 ). However, these studies did not reveal how DnaJ proteins were released from the substrate. Unlike Hsp70, DnaJ proteins do not bind to nucleotide and have not been demonstrated to exist in different conformational states.

The mammalian ER possesses at least six DnaJ family members ( Brightman et al , 1995 ; Meyer et al , 2000 ; Tyedmers et al , 2000 ; Yu et al , 2000 ; Shen et al , 2002 ; Cunnea et al , 2003 ; Rutkowski et al , 2007 ; Petrova et al , 2008 ). One of these, ERdj3, was shown previously by our group to bind to a number of unfolded proteins in the ER that were BiP substrates ( Shen and Hendershot, 2005 ). When the binding of wild-type and mutant (HPD → QPD) ERdj3 to several different substrates was compared, we consistently found that mutant ERdj3 bound quantitatively better and longer than wild-type ERdj3 ( Shen and Hendershot, 2005 ). The present study was undertaken to better understand the requirements for releasing DnaJ proteins from substrates. Using a series of ERdj3 and BiP mutants, we found that release of ERdj3 was not simply due to a competition with BiP, but that a functional interaction between ERdj3 and BiP was required. We hypothesize that once ERdj3 has recruited BiP to the substrate it must stimulate BiP's ATPase activity to induce high-affinity binding of BiP to the substrate, which produces the signal for ERdj3 release from substrate.

Discussion

There is now a significant amount of data to argue that DnaJ proteins bind to unfolded proteins initially and due to their ability to interact specifically with the ATP form of Hsp70s serve to recruit the open form of the Hsp70 to the substrate. Hsp70 proteins must be able to interact with a DnaJ protein as well as to bind and hydrolyse ATP to be efficiently recruited to the substrate ( Wawrzynow et al , 1995a ). Much less is understood about how DnaJ proteins leave the substrate once Hsp70 has been recruited, although several models have been proposed. First, it is possible that once the DnaJ protein contacts an Hsp70, it releases the unfolded protein and the Hsp70 captures it ( Rudiger et al , 2001 ). The identification of stable DnaJ–Hsp70–substrate complexes ( Szabo et al , 1994 ; Wawrzynow et al , 1995a ; Han and Christen, 2003 ; Shen and Hendershot, 2005 ) makes this scenario less likely, as do our data showing that the E201G BiP mutant, which does make contact with ERdj3, is unable to induce the release of ERdj3. Second, it is possible that, in addition to the conformational change that DnaJ induces in the Hsp70 protein, upon substrate binding and ATP hydrolysis the Hsp70 protein provides a reciprocal signal to the DnaJ protein that causes its release. It is known that type I and II DnaJ proteins have a second interaction site with the SBD of Hsp70s ( Laufen et al , 1999 ), but it is not clear which domain of DnaJ is involved in this binding ( Wall et al , 1995 ; Wawrzynow and Zylicz, 1995b ; Linke et al , 2003 ; Sahi and Craig, 2007 ), but if it involved the SBD of DnaJ proteins, this second interaction could induce its release. The fact that similar requirements for release were observed with P58/DNAJ3c, a type III DnaJ protein ( Petrova et al , 2008 ), makes this possibility less likely as the SBD of this group of proteins does not evidently resemble that of type I and II DnaJ proteins and probably does not share the same orientation to the J domain ( Gruschus et al , 2004 ). However, in the absence of a full-length structure for the various types of DnaJ proteins, we do not know the relative orientation of J domains to SBD.

Finally, it has been proposed that once the J domain interacts with the NBD of Hsp70, it reorients the Hsp70 and in some way wrenches the substrate from DnaJ ( Landry, 2003 ). Our demonstration that wild-type BiP, which binds the substrate but cannot release the QPD or HPN mutant, is compatible with this model, as the absence of the BiP–ERdj3 interaction would not allow BiP to wrench the substrate from ERdj3. This wrenching would need to happen before ATP is hydrolysed, as DnaJ domains lose affinity for the ADP-bound form of Hsp70 ( Wawrzynow and Zylicz, 1995b ). Our finding that ATP must be added simultaneously for the BiP-mediated release to occur argues that the formation of this three-way complex is critical to release, as in the absence of ATP, BiP would not interact with ERdj3 and be concentrated locally. However, the fact that E201G BiP is able to interact with substrate and ERdj3 but cannot induce the release of ERdj3 argues that, although necessary, the formation of the three-way complex is not sufficient to wrench the DnaJ protein from the substrate. Instead, our data argue that in addition to recruiting BiP to the substrate, the DnaJ protein may be able to ‘sense' that ‘it' has stimulated the ATPase activity of BiP or that BiP must assume the capability to wrench the substrate from the DnaJ partner in an ATP-dependent manner.

Our discovery that the release of ERdj3 from substrate is dependent on a functional interaction with BiP is likely to be true of other DnaJ–Hsp70 pairs. Recent data from Petrova et al demonstrate a similar requirement for the release of another ER-localized DnaJ protein, P58, from substrate. Mutations in either P58 or BiP that disrupted the interaction between them blocked the release of P58 from misfolded RNase A. In addition, an earlier in vitro study found that Ydj1 bound to a substrate and prevented its aggregation, but it could not fold the protein unless Hsp70 and ATP were present ( Lu and Cyr, 1998a , 1998b ; Fan et al , 2005 ). In view of our data, it is reasonable to suggest that DnaJ remained bound to the substrate in the absence of DnaK, thereby preventing its aggregation, but also preventing it from folding. Only in the presence of ATP would both chaperones be released allowing the substrate to fold. We would speculate, based on our data, that in the absence of ATP that both DnaK and DnaJ might bind, but folding would not occur.

Our previous characterization of the interaction of ERdj3 with substrates in cultured cell lines revealed that wild-type ERdj3 disappeared from BiP–substrate complexes long before folding was complete, whereas a QPD mutant remained associated with the substrate ( Shen and Hendershot, 2005 ). This led us to speculate that the prolonged binding of the QPD mutant to substrates could be due to its inability to recognize that BiP had bound productively to the substrate. The data presented here confirm that the release of ERdj3 from substrate, at least in vitro , required an interaction between the J domain of ERdj3 and NBD of BiP and argue that indeed this is the reason for prolonged association of mutant ERdj3 with substrates in vivo . The in vitro release of ERdj3 from substrate required BiP's ATPase activity (T37G, G227D, and E201G), its ability to interact with ERdj3 (R197H), and presumably its substrate-binding ability ( Petrova et al , 2008 ). These requirements would ensure that once a DnaJ protein engages an unfolded substrate, it would remain bound to prevent aggregation until it had recruited an open form of Hsp70 to the substrate, allowed the Hsp70 to initially associate with the substrate and then hydrolyse ATP to form a more stable interaction. Only when all of these steps had occurred would the DnaJ protein release from the Hsp70 and from the substrate. This scenario is consistent with most published data showing that DnaJ proteins bind first and more transiently than Hsp70, which remain associated until folding is complete.

In summary, our studies reveal that BiP promotes the release of ERdj3 from substrates in the presence of ATP. This is not due to a competition for binding sites on the substrate once BiP is recruited through its association with ERdj3, but rather it requires a functional interaction between ERdj3 and BiP. This includes both the ability to physically interact with each other and the ability of ERdj3 to stimulate the ATPase activity of BiP. The fact that similar data were observed with another ERdj–BiP pair (Petrova et al , 2008, in press) argues that this mechanism is likely to be used for the release of other DnaJ proteins from substrates.
