---
pmid: '21422291'
title: E3 ligase Rad18 promotes monoubiquitination rather than ubiquitin chain formation
  by E2 enzyme Rad6.
authors:
- Hibbert RG
- Huang A
- Boelens R
- Sixma TK
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3078399
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1017516108
---

# E3 ligase Rad18 promotes monoubiquitination rather than ubiquitin chain formation by E2 enzyme Rad6.
**Authors:** Hibbert RG, Huang A, Boelens R, Sixma TK
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1017516108](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1017516108)
**PMC:** [PMC3078399](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3078399/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Apr 5;108(14):5590-5. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1017516108. Epub 2011 Mar 21.

E3 ligase Rad18 promotes monoubiquitination rather than ubiquitin chain 
formation by E2 enzyme Rad6.

Hibbert RG(1), Huang A, Boelens R, Sixma TK.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biochemistry and Center for Biomedical Genetics, Netherlands 
Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, 1066 CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

In ubiquitin conjugation, different combinations of E2 and E3 enzymes catalyse 
either monoubiquitination or ubiquitin chain formation. The E2/E3 complex 
Rad6/Rad18 exclusively monoubiquitinates the proliferating cell nuclear antigen 
(PCNA) to signal for "error prone" DNA damage tolerance, whereas a different set 
of conjugation enzymes is required for ubiquitin chain formation on PCNA. Here 
we show that human E2 enzyme Rad6b is intrinsically capable of catalyzing 
ubiquitin chain formation. This activity is prevented during PCNA ubiquitination 
by the interaction of Rad6 with E3 enzyme Rad18. Using NMR and X-ray 
crystallography we show that the R6BD of Rad18 inhibits this activity by 
competing with ubiquitin for a noncovalent "backside" binding site on Rad6. Our 
findings provide mechanistic insights into how E3 enzymes can regulate the 
ubiquitin conjugation process.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1017516108
PMCID: PMC3078399
PMID: 21422291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest .
