---
pmid: '15802217'
title: 'Overexpression of human alanine:glyoxylate aminotransferase in Escherichia
  coli: renaturation from guanidine-HCl and affinity for pyridoxal phosphate co-factor.'
authors:
- Coulter-Mackie MB
- Lian Q
- Wong SG
journal: Protein Expr Purif
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2004.11.004
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Overexpression of human alanine:glyoxylate aminotransferase in Escherichia coli: renaturation from guanidine-HCl and affinity for pyridoxal phosphate co-factor.
**Authors:** Coulter-Mackie MB, Lian Q, Wong SG
**Journal:** Protein Expr Purif (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pep.2004.11.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pep.2004.11.004)

## Abstract

1. Protein Expr Purif. 2005 May;41(1):18-26. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2004.11.004.

Overexpression of human alanine:glyoxylate aminotransferase in Escherichia coli: 
renaturation from guanidine-HCl and affinity for pyridoxal phosphate co-factor.

Coulter-Mackie MB(1), Lian Q, Wong SG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada V6H 3N1. marioncm@interchange.ubc.ca

Alanine:glyoxylate aminotransferase-1 (AGT) is a human liver peroxisomal enzyme 
whose deficiency results in, primary hyperoxaluria type 1 (PH1), a fatal 
metabolic disease. AGT requires a pyridoxal phosphate (PLP) co-factor in its 
active site. The AGT gene usually exists in one of two polymorphic forms, the 
major and minor alleles. We describe here an overexpression system for normal 
and mutant variants of human AGT in Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3) pLysS. We have 
extracted functional AGT from inclusion bodies using guanidine-HCl. Denaturation 
and re-folding of the overexpressed AGT after guanidine-HCl treatment produces 
high yields of biologically active protein and provides a strategy for 
generating an apoenzyme to investigate PLP-binding. K(M)s for PLP were 
determined by reconstitution of the apoenzyme. Successful folding was 
independent of the presence of PLP. The K(M) for PLP for minor allele AGT was 
significantly higher than that for major allele AGT. This decreased affinity 
could be attributed to I340M, a polymorphism associated with the minor allele. 
G170R, located on the minor allele and the most common PH1 mutation, had no 
effect on the affinity for PLP. PH1 mutations, G41V and G41R, showed enhanced 
activity after re-folding. We suggest that the renaturation/re-folding and 
reconstitution strategies provide an approach for studying the maturation of AGT 
under optimal conditions and in isolation from cellular quality control and 
chaperoning processes. Furthermore, our data show that mutations with serious 
consequences in vivo may not be inherently catalytically inactive and may be 
rescuable.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2004.11.004
PMID: 15802217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
