---
pmid: '14668352'
title: The SANT2 domain of the murine tumor cell DnaJ-like protein 1 human homologue
  interacts with alpha1-antichymotrypsin and kinetically interferes with its serpin
  inhibitory activity.
authors:
- Kroczynska B
- Evangelista CM
- Samant SS
- Elguindi EC
- Blond SY
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1553221
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M310903200
---

# The SANT2 domain of the murine tumor cell DnaJ-like protein 1 human homologue interacts with alpha1-antichymotrypsin and kinetically interferes with its serpin inhibitory activity.
**Authors:** Kroczynska B, Evangelista CM, Samant SS, Elguindi EC, Blond SY
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M310903200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M310903200)
**PMC:** [PMC1553221](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1553221/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 19;279(12):11432-43. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M310903200. Epub 
2003 Dec 10.

The SANT2 domain of the murine tumor cell DnaJ-like protein 1 human homologue 
interacts with alpha1-antichymotrypsin and kinetically interferes with its 
serpin inhibitory activity.

Kroczynska B(1), Evangelista CM, Samant SS, Elguindi EC, Blond SY.

Author information:
(1)Center for Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, College of Pharmacy, Department of 
Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy, University of Illinois, Chicago, Illinois 
60607-7173, USA.

The murine tumor cell DnaJ-like protein 1 or MTJ1/ERdj1 is a membrane J-domain 
protein enriched in microsomal and nuclear fractions. We previously showed that 
its lumenal J-domain stimulates the ATPase activity of the molecular chaperone 
BiP/GRP78 (Chevalier, M., Rhee, H., Elguindi, E. C., and Blond, S. Y. (2000) J. 
Biol. Chem. 275, 19620-19627). MTJ1/ERdj1 also contains a large 
carboxyl-terminal cytosolic extension composed of two tryptophan-mediated 
repeats or SANT domains for which the function(s) is unknown. Here we describe 
the cloning of the human homologue HTJ1 and its interaction with 
alpha(1)-antichymotrypsin (ACT), a member of the serine proteinase inhibitor 
(serpin) family. The interaction was initially identified in a two-hybrid 
screening and further confirmed in vitro by dot blots, native electrophoresis, 
and fluorescence studies. The second SANT domain of HTJ1 (SANT2) was found to be 
sufficient for binding to ACT, both in yeast and in vitro. Single 
tryptophan-alanine substitutions at two strictly conserved residues 
significantly (Trp-497) or totally (Trp-520) abolished the interaction with ACT. 
SANT2 binds to human ACT with an intrinsic affinity equal to 0.5 nm. 
Preincubation of ACT with nearly stoichiometric concentrations of SANT2 
wild-type but not SANT2: W520A results in an apparent loss of ACT inhibitory 
activity toward chymotrypsin. Kinetic analysis indicates that the formation of 
the covalent inhibitory complex ACT-chymotrypsin is significantly delayed in the 
presence of SANT2 with no change on the catalytic efficiency of the enzyme. This 
work demonstrates for the first time that the SANT2 domain of MTJ1/HTJ1/ERdj1 
mediates stable and high affinity protein-protein interactions.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M310903200
PMCID: PMC1553221
PMID: 14668352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The murine tumor cell DnaJ-like protein 1 or MTJ1/ERdj1 is a membrane J-domain protein enriched in microsomal and nuclear fractions. We previously showed that its lumenal J-domain stimulates the ATPase activity of the molecular chaperone BiP/GRP78 (Chevalier, M., Rhee, H., Elguindi, E. C., and Blond, S. Y. (2000) J. Biol. Chem . 275, 19620–19627). MTJ1/ERdj1 also contains a large carboxyl-terminal cytosolic extension composed of two tryptophan-mediated repeats or SANT domains for which the function(s) is unknown. Here we describe the cloning of the human homologue HTJ1 and its interaction with α 1 -antichymotrypsin (ACT), a member of the serine proteinase inhibitor (serpin) family. The interaction was initially identified in a two-hybrid screening and further confirmed in vitro by dot blots, native electrophoresis, and fluorescence studies. The second SANT domain of HTJ1 (SANT2) was found to be sufficient for binding to ACT, both in yeast and in vitro . Single tryptophanalanine substitutions at two strictly conserved residues significantly (Trp-497) or totally (Trp-520) abolished the interaction with ACT. SANT2 binds to human ACT with an intrinsic affinity equal to 0.5 n m . Preincubation of ACT with nearly stoichiometric concentrations of SANT2 wild-type but not SANT2: W520A results in an apparent loss of ACT inhibitory activity toward chymotrypsin. Kinetic analysis indicates that the formation of the covalent inhibitory complex ACT-chymotrypsin is significantly delayed in the presence of SANT2 with no change on the catalytic efficiency of the enzyme. This work demonstrates for the first time that the SANT2 domain of MTJ1/HTJ1/ERdj1 mediates stable and high affinity protein-protein interactions.

DISCUSSION

In mammals, BiP is a molecular chaperone resident of the ER that can potentially interact with at least five J-domain accessory proteins recently renamed ERdj1–5 ( 21 – 29 ). MTJ1/ERdj1 is a class III membrane co-chaperone that interacts with BiP in dog microsomes ( 24 ) and stimulates its ATPase activity in vitro ( 23 ). Apart from the lumenal J-domain that mediates the interaction with BiP ( 23 ), MTJ1/ERdj1 contains a highly charged region adjacent to the transmembrane helix that binds to ribosomes and modulates the rate of translation of newly synthesized polypeptides ( 24 ). In addition, MTJ1/ERdj1 possesses a large carboxyl-terminal extension composed of two SANT domains and a spacer region for which the function was completely unknown. In the present study, we report the cloning of the human homologue HTJ1 ( Fig. 1 ) and the critical role of its distal SANT domain (SANT2) in the formation of a stable complex with the serpin ACT. In another report, 2 we show that the HTJ1 SANT2 domain also interacts with ITIH4, a member of the inter-α-trypsin inhibitor, reinforcing the concept that HTJ1 may be involved in multiple protein-protein interactions on both sides of the endoplasmic reticulum membrane. Its lumenal J-domain interacts with the molecular chaperone BiP ( 23 ), whereas its cytosolic domain may interact with ribosomes ( 24 ) and newly translated polypeptides.

The biochemical and kinetic studies presented in this article show that SANT2 delays the formation of the ACT-chymotrypsin acyl complex ( Fig. 9 ) and slows down the kinetics of association between ACT and chymotrypsin without affecting the catalytic properties of the enzyme ( Fig. 10 , Table II ). A general model for the function of serpins based on their physical properties, mechanism, and structure has been established and recently described in fine detail ( 48 , 49 ). In addition to chymotrypsin, ACT inhibits the serine proteases cathepsin G, mast cell chymase, and proenkephalin processing enzymes ( 50 – 53 ). ACT, like other serpins, is characterized by a mobile RSL that is a substrate for the protease, and a dominant β-sheet A that can open to insert the cleaved active site loop or bind exogenous free peptides of the same or similar sequence ( 50 , 54 – 56 ). Herein we present evidence that SANT2 binds to ACT within a region (residues 140–343) that does not overlap with the RSL itself ( Fig. 4 ) and that the resulting SANT2-ACT complex no longer exhibits inhibitory activity toward chymotrypsin ( Figs. 8 and 9 ). The SANT2-ACT complex is very stable and forms with a dissociation constant equal to K app = 0.5 n m for 4 n m ACT, a value that is about 4 order of magnitude smaller than the average serpin plasma concentration (around 45 mg/100 ml or 7 m m ) in healthy individuals ( 57 ).

ACT is an abundant serum glycoprotein that is produced by liver cells through the secretory pathway. The ACT precursor contains a signal peptide ( Fig. 3 A ) that is cleaved upon translocation across the ER membrane. Glycosylation occurs in the ER prior to transport to the Golgi apparatus and fusion of secretory vesicles with the plasma membrane. Interestingly, HTJ1 can rescue the thermosensitive phenotype of a Sec63 translocation-deficient mutant, 4 suggesting that HTJ1 functions in protein translocation across the endoplasmic reticulum membrane. Because a small positively charged region distal of the COOH-terminal of MTJ1 is associated with ribosomes ( 24 ), newly translated ACT may associate with HTJ1 through the SANT2 domain prior to its translocation across the ER. We attempt to detect ACT-HTJ1 complexes in membrane fractions prepared from non-transfected hepatocarcinoma HepG2 cells, or transfected with a vector that overexpresses MTJ1 ( 58 ). Unfortunately, ACT has a size similar to the heavy chain of immunoglobulins used in the immunoprecipitation experiments and could not be detected under these conditions. 5 It is thus unclear whether or not MTJ1/ERdj1 can stably interact with ACT in vivo . In mammalian cells, translocation is a co-translational process and the complex between ERdj1 and ACT may be too short-lived to be detected.

A carboxyl-terminal fragment of MTJ1 was originally found in nuclear extracts ( 22 ), and localizes to the nucleus when expressed on its own in COS-7-transfected cells ( 58 ). The molecular mechanisms that generate the MTJ1 truncated nuclear form are unclear and remain under investigation in our laboratory. The Sec63-like region that separates the two SANT domains contains a putative nuclear localization signal (R 439 PRRRK, Fig. 1 ) that could target the soluble fragment to the nucleus. Interestingly, ACT also localizes in cell nuclei ( 59 , 60 ) but does not possess any putative nuclear localization signal. ACT also has the unique property to bind DNA through exposed lysine residues with no effect on its protease inhibitory activity ( 61 ). ACT-DNA interaction is believed to play a role in tumor cell protection and in modulating the activity of chymotrypsin-like enzymes in chromatin ( 62 ). However, very little has been done in this area and the role of ACT DNA binding activity in the nucleus remains unknown. Interestingly, two recent reports ( 63 , 64 ) describe that a developmentally regulated serpin, the m yeloid and e rythroid n uclear t ermination stage-specific protein or MENT, also localizes to the nucleus and exerts a role in chromatin remodeling. It is very tempting to propose that the interaction of MTJ1 with ACT could mediate membrane release and nuclear localization of the complex and regulation of gene transcription through the DNA binding activity of ACT itself or through protein-protein interactions mediated by the HTJ1 SANT domain(s). Studies are underway to further characterize the role of HTJ1 in ACT secretion, function, and organelle targeting.

SANT domains are reminiscent of tryptophan-mediated DNA binding repeats and are found in many proteins, only few of which have been studied such as MIDA-1, a murine J-domain protein involved in cell growth ( 65 – 67 ), the Zuotin-related factors ( 68 – 70 ), the proto-oncogene c- myb ( 71 ), the M-phase phosphoprotein 11 ( 72 ), Ada2 ( 33 ), and the histone-associated CoREST and Mta-L1 ( 34 ). The arrangement of the two SANT domains in MTJ1, separated by a 116-residue spacer, is similar to that in CoREST ( 32 , 34 ), N-CoR, and SMRT ( 37 ). In the case of N-CoR and SMRT, the SANT domains not only interact with HDAC3 (histone deacetylase 3) but also activate its deacetylase activity ( 36 , 37 ). The yeast and human Ada2p are found in histone acetyltransferase complexes and their SANT domains are important for acetylation of histone NH 2 -terminal tails ( 33 , 35 ). Although highly homologous, SANT1 and SANT2 are not interchangeable and ACT has no affinity for SANT1. Although our screen was performed with the complete cytosolic region of HTJ1, no SANT1-interacting protein has been identified so far. Protein modeling of HTJ1 SANT1 and SANT2 domains indicate that although the overall folds are very similar, surface residues are much more polar in SANT1 than they are in SANT2. 2 These differences may be sufficient to control the specificity and thus the function of HTJ1 SANT domains. This hypothesis is currently being tested in our laboratory.

Aromatic residues are highly conserved in all SANT-containing proteins ( 30 ) and are important for their function. For example, substitution of tryptophans to alanine in Ada2 leads to a SAGA complex partially defective for nucleosome acetylation ( 33 ) and greatly reduces the sequence-specific DNA binding activity of c- myb ( 71 ). We clearly show here that tryptophan 520 is critical for the formation of the SANT2-ACT complex, whereas the other tryptophan residue (Trp-497) appears to be more closely engaged in the interactions with ITIH4. 2 In both cases, however, substitution of the other tryptophan by an alanine greatly decreases the affinity for the substrate. These observations indicate that the HTJ1 SANT2 domain can interact with several target proteins through overlapping but somehow distinct surface areas.
