---
pmid: '22921828'
title: Enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli exploits a tryptophan switch to hijack
  host f-actin assembly.
authors:
- Aitio O
- Hellman M
- Skehan B
- Kesti T
- Leong JM
- Saksela K
- Permi P
journal: Structure
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3472031
doi: 10.1016/j.str.2012.07.015
---

# Enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli exploits a tryptophan switch to hijack host f-actin assembly.
**Authors:** Aitio O, Hellman M, Skehan B, Kesti T, Leong JM, Saksela K, Permi P
**Journal:** Structure (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.str.2012.07.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2012.07.015)
**PMC:** [PMC3472031](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3472031/)

## Abstract

1. Structure. 2012 Oct 10;20(10):1692-703. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2012.07.015. Epub 
2012 Aug 23.

Enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli exploits a tryptophan switch to hijack host 
f-actin assembly.

Aitio O(1), Hellman M, Skehan B, Kesti T, Leong JM, Saksela K, Permi P.

Author information:
(1)Program in Structural Biology and Biophysics, Institute of Biotechnology, 
University of Helsinki, FI-00014, Helsinki, Finland.

Comment in
    Structure. 2012 Oct 10;20(10):1613-5. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2012.09.006.

Intrinsically disordered protein (IDP)-mediated interactions are often 
characterized by low affinity but high specificity. These traits are essential 
in signaling and regulation that require reversibility. Enterohaemorrhagic 
Escherichia coli (EHEC) exploit this situation by commandeering host 
cytoskeletal signaling to stimulate actin assembly beneath bound bacteria, 
generating "pedestals" that promote intestinal colonization. EHEC translocates 
two proteins, EspF(U) and Tir, which form a complex with the host protein IRTKS. 
The interaction of this complex with N-WASP triggers localized actin 
polymerization. We show that EspF(U) is an IDP that contains a transiently 
α-helical N-terminus and dynamic C-terminus. Our structure shows that single 
EspF(U) repeat forms a high-affinity trimolecular complex with N-WASP and IRTKS. 
We demonstrate that bacterial and cellular ligands interact with IRTKS SH3 in a 
similar fashion, but the bacterial protein has evolved to outcompete cellular 
targets by utilizing a tryptophan switch that offers superior binding affinity 
enabling EHEC-induced pedestal formation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2012.07.015
PMCID: PMC3472031
PMID: 22921828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
