---
pmid: '12220631'
title: Different protein kinase families are activated by osmotic stresses in Arabidopsis
  thaliana cell suspensions. Involvement of the MAP kinases AtMPK3 and AtMPK6.
authors:
- Droillard M
- Boudsocq M
- Barbier-Brygoo H
- Laurière C
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(02)03162-9
---

# Different protein kinase families are activated by osmotic stresses in Arabidopsis thaliana cell suspensions. Involvement of the MAP kinases AtMPK3 and AtMPK6.
**Authors:** Droillard M, Boudsocq M, Barbier-Brygoo H, Laurière C
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0014-5793(02)03162-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0014-5793(02)03162-9)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2002 Sep 11;527(1-3):43-50. doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(02)03162-9.

Different protein kinase families are activated by osmotic stresses in 
Arabidopsis thaliana cell suspensions. Involvement of the MAP kinases AtMPK3 and 
AtMPK6.

Droillard M(1), Boudsocq M, Barbier-Brygoo H, Laurière C.

Author information:
(1)Institut des Sciences du Végétal, UPR 2355, CNRS, 1 av. de la terrasse, 91198 
Cedex, Gif s/Yvette, France.

Five Ca(2+)-independent protein kinases were rapidly activated by hypoosmotic 
stress, moderate or high hyperosmolarity induced by several osmolytes, sucrose, 
mannitol or NaCl. Three of these kinases, transiently activated by 
hypoosmolarity, recognised by anti-phosphorylated mitogen-activated protein 
(MAP) kinase antibodies, sensitive to a MAP kinase inhibitor and inactivated by 
the action of a tyrosine phosphatase, corresponded to MAP kinases. Using 
specific antibodies, two of the MAP kinases were identified as AtMPK6 and 
AtMPK3. The two other protein kinases, durably activated by high 
hyperosmolarity, did not belong to the MAP kinase family. Activation of AtMPK6 
and AtMPK3 by hypoosmolarity depended on upstream protein kinases sensitive to 
staurosporine and on calcium influx. In contrast, these two transduction steps 
were not involved in the activation of the two protein kinases activated by high 
hyperosmolarity.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(02)03162-9
PMID: 12220631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
