---
pmid: '17531813'
title: Cdc18 enforces long-term maintenance of the S phase checkpoint by anchoring
  the Rad3-Rad26 complex to chromatin.
authors:
- Hermand D
- Nurse P
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.04.014
---

# Cdc18 enforces long-term maintenance of the S phase checkpoint by anchoring the Rad3-Rad26 complex to chromatin.
**Authors:** Hermand D, Nurse P
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2007.04.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2007.04.014)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2007 May 25;26(4):553-63. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.04.014.

Cdc18 enforces long-term maintenance of the S phase checkpoint by anchoring the 
Rad3-Rad26 complex to chromatin.

Hermand D(1), Nurse P.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research UK, London Research Institute, Cell Cycle Group, 44 Lincoln's 
Inn Field, London WC2A 3PX, UK. damien.hermand@fundp.ac.be 
<damien.hermand@fundp.ac.be>

DNA replication is initiated by recruitment of Cdc18 to origins. During S phase, 
CDK-dependent destruction of Cdc18 occurs. We show that when DNA replication 
stalls, Cdc18 persists in a chromatin-bound complex including the checkpoint 
kinases Rad3 and Rad26. Rad26 directly binds Cdc18 and is required for Rad3 
recruitment to chromatin. Depletion of Cdc18 when DNA replication is stalled 
leads to release of Rad3 and Rad26 from chromatin and entry into an aberrant 
mitosis even though replication intermediates can still be detected. These 
findings indicate that Cdc18 plays a pivotal role in checkpoint maintenance by 
anchoring the Rad3-Rad26 complex to chromatin. Cdc18 persistence during 
DNA-replication arrest requires the S phase checkpoint that inhibits the S phase 
CDK. We propose that S phase arrest activates the S phase checkpoint blocking 
mitosis onset and inhibiting Cdc18 degradation, and that the stabilized Cdc18, 
in turn, anchors Rad3 to chromatin to ensure long-term checkpoint maintenance.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.04.014
PMID: 17531813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
