---
pmid: '8906787'
title: The tumour-suppressor gene patched encodes a candidate receptor for Sonic hedgehog.
authors:
- Stone DM
- Hynes M
- Armanini M
- Swanson TA
- Gu Q
- Johnson RL
- Scott MP
- Pennica D
- Goddard A
- Phillips H
- Noll M
- Hooper JE
- de Sauvage F
- Rosenthal A
journal: Nature
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/384129a0
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The tumour-suppressor gene patched encodes a candidate receptor for Sonic hedgehog.
**Authors:** Stone DM, Hynes M, Armanini M, Swanson TA, Gu Q, Johnson RL, Scott MP, Pennica D, Goddard A, Phillips H, Noll M, Hooper JE, de Sauvage F, Rosenthal A
**Journal:** Nature (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1038/384129a0](https://doi.org/10.1038/384129a0)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 1996 Nov 14;384(6605):129-34. doi: 10.1038/384129a0.

The tumour-suppressor gene patched encodes a candidate receptor for Sonic 
hedgehog.

Stone DM(1), Hynes M, Armanini M, Swanson TA, Gu Q, Johnson RL, Scott MP, 
Pennica D, Goddard A, Phillips H, Noll M, Hooper JE, de Sauvage F, Rosenthal A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Genentech, Inc., South San Francisco, California 
94080, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 1996 Nov 14;384(6605):119-20. doi: 10.1038/384119a0.

The protein Sonic hedgehog (Shh) controls patterning and growth during 
vertebrate development. Here we demonstrate that it binds Patched (vPtc), which 
has been identified as a tumour-suppressor protein in basal cell carcinoma, with 
high affinity. We show that Ptc can form a physical complex with a newly cloned 
vertebrate homologue of the Drosophila protein Smoothened (vSmo), and that vSmo 
is coexpressed with vPtc in many tissues but does not bind Shh directly. These 
findings, combined with available genetic evidence from Drosophila, support the 
hypothesis that Ptc is a receptor for Shh, and that vSmo could be a signalling 
component that is linked to Ptc.

DOI: 10.1038/384129a0
PMID: 8906787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
