---
pmid: '15001987'
title: Heparin affin regulatory peptide binds to vascular endothelial growth factor
  (VEGF) and inhibits VEGF-induced angiogenesis.
authors:
- Héroult M
- Bernard-Pierrot I
- Delbé J
- Hamma-Kourbali Y
- Katsoris P
- Barritault D
- Papadimitriou E
- Plouet J
- Courty J
journal: Oncogene
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1206879
---

# Heparin affin regulatory peptide binds to vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and inhibits VEGF-induced angiogenesis.
**Authors:** Héroult M, Bernard-Pierrot I, Delbé J, Hamma-Kourbali Y, Katsoris P, Barritault D, Papadimitriou E, Plouet J, Courty J
**Journal:** Oncogene (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1206879](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1206879)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2004 Mar 4;23(9):1745-53. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1206879.

Heparin affin regulatory peptide binds to vascular endothelial growth factor 
(VEGF) and inhibits VEGF-induced angiogenesis.

Héroult M(1), Bernard-Pierrot I, Delbé J, Hamma-Kourbali Y, Katsoris P, 
Barritault D, Papadimitriou E, Plouet J, Courty J.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Recherche sur la Croissance Cellulaire, la Réparation et la 
Régénération Tissulaires (CRRET), FRE CNRS 2412, Université Paris XII-Val de 
Marne, Avenue du Général de Gaulle, 94010 Créteil, France.

Heparin affin regulatory peptide (HARP) is an heparin-binding molecule involved 
in the regulation of cell proliferation and differentiation. Here, we report 
that HARP inhibited the biological activity induced by the 165-amino-acid form 
of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF165) on human umbilical vein 
endothelial cells. Endothelial-cell proliferation induced by VEGF165 showed 
about 50% inhibition in the presence of HARP in a concentration of 3 nM. In 
similar range of concentrations, HARP blocked tube formation induced by VEGF165 
in three-dimensional angiogenesis assay. In vivo studies showed that HARP 
inhibited the VEGF165-induced Matrigel trade mark infiltration of endothelial 
cells. We then investigated the mechanisms of this inhibition and shown that 
HARP inhibited the binding of 125I-VEGF165 to the VEGF receptors of endothelial 
cells. Additional studies using VEGF soluble receptors indicated that binding of 
125I-VEGF165 to kinase insert domain-containing receptor and neuropilin receptor 
was inhibited by HARP, but conversely the binding of 125I-VEGF165 to fms-like 
tyrosine kinase I receptor was unaffected. A competitive affinity-binding assay 
demonstrated that HARP interacted directly with VEGF165 with a dissociation 
coefficient of 1.38 nM. Binding assay using deletion mutants of HARP revealed 
that the thrombospondin type-1 repeats domains were involved in this 
interaction. These data demonstrate for the first time that the angiogenic 
factor HARP can also negatively regulates the angiogenic activity of VEGF165.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1206879
PMID: 15001987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
