---
pmid: '10534406'
title: 'Human eukaryotic initiation factor EIF2C1 gene: cDNA sequence, genomic organization,
  localization to chromosomal bands 1p34-p35, and expression.'
authors:
- Koesters R
- Adams V
- Betts D
- Moos R
- Schmid M
- Siermann A
- Hassam S
- Weitz S
- Lichter P
- Heitz PU
- von Knebel Doeberitz M
- Briner J
journal: Genomics
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/geno.1999.5951
---

# Human eukaryotic initiation factor EIF2C1 gene: cDNA sequence, genomic organization, localization to chromosomal bands 1p34-p35, and expression.
**Authors:** Koesters R, Adams V, Betts D, Moos R, Schmid M, Siermann A, Hassam S, Weitz S, Lichter P, Heitz PU, von Knebel Doeberitz M, Briner J
**Journal:** Genomics (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1006/geno.1999.5951](https://doi.org/10.1006/geno.1999.5951)

## Abstract

1. Genomics. 1999 Oct 15;61(2):210-8. doi: 10.1006/geno.1999.5951.

Human eukaryotic initiation factor EIF2C1 gene: cDNA sequence, genomic 
organization, localization to chromosomal bands 1p34-p35, and expression.

Koesters R(1), Adams V, Betts D, Moos R, Schmid M, Siermann A, Hassam S, Weitz 
S, Lichter P, Heitz PU, von Knebel Doeberitz M, Briner J.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Pathology, Department of Pathology, University Hospital 
of Zurich, Schmelzbergstrasse 12, Zurich, 8091, Switzerland. 
R.Koesters@dkfz-heidelberg.de

We report the cloning and characterization of the human eukaryotic protein 
translation initiation factor EIF2C1 gene. The human EIF2C1 gene consists of 19 
exons and 18 introns that span a region of almost 50 kb. It is located on the 
short arm of chromosome 1 in the region 1p34-p35. This genomic region is 
frequently lost in human cancers such as Wilms tumors, neuroblastoma, and 
carcinomas of the breast, liver, and colon. The human EIF2C1 gene is 
ubiquitously expressed at low to medium levels. Differential polyadenylation and 
splicing result in a complex transcriptional pattern. The cDNA sequence is 7478 
bp long and contains an extremely large 3' untranslated region of 4799 bp with 
multiple, short repeated segments composed of mono-, tri-, or quattronucleotides 
interspersed throughout. The human EIF2C1 gene belongs to a multigene family in 
human. It is highly conserved during evolution, sharing about 90% identity with 
rabbit eIF2C and 70% identity with plant AGO1 at the amino acid level. These 
facts suggest that human EIF2C1 might play an important physiological role.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/geno.1999.5951
PMID: 10534406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
