---
pmid: '16223484'
title: The C-terminal region of cis-retinol/androgen dehydrogenase 1 (CRAD1) confers
  ER localization and in vivo enzymatic function.
authors:
- Lidén M
- Tryggvason K
- Eriksson U
journal: Exp Cell Res
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2005.07.032
---

# The C-terminal region of cis-retinol/androgen dehydrogenase 1 (CRAD1) confers ER localization and in vivo enzymatic function.
**Authors:** Lidén M, Tryggvason K, Eriksson U
**Journal:** Exp Cell Res (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yexcr.2005.07.032](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yexcr.2005.07.032)

## Abstract

1. Exp Cell Res. 2005 Dec 10;311(2):205-17. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2005.07.032.
Epub  2005 Oct 11.

The C-terminal region of cis-retinol/androgen dehydrogenase 1 (CRAD1) confers ER 
localization and in vivo enzymatic function.

Lidén M(1), Tryggvason K, Eriksson U.

Author information:
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Stockholm Branch, Box 240, S-17177 
Stockholm, Sweden.

Retinoic acid is generated from retinol (vitamin A) by the sequential actions of 
two different classes of enzymes, retinol dehydrogenases and retinal 
dehydrogenases. Several enzymes implicated in this process have been identified 
and characterized in vitro. However, our understanding of the cell biological 
function and regulation of this process is limited. To get further knowledge 
regarding the regulation of RA biosynthesis, we have determined possible 
regulatory mechanisms at the transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels for 
the prototypic microsomal retinol dehydrogenase cis-retinol/androgen 
dehydrogenase 1 (CRAD1). We note that the expression and stability of the enzyme 
are only moderately controlled by the retinoid status. Instead, we find that the 
cytosolic tail dramatically affects the activity of the enzyme, and we have 
mapped the structural elements required for ER retention and in vivo functional 
activity, respectively. Although inactive tail-deletion mutants display an 
abnormal subcellular localization, restoration of ER localization per se is not 
sufficient for enzymatic activity suggesting that additional trans-acting 
components interacting with, or modifying, the cytosolic tail are required for 
controlling the activity of the enzyme in vivo.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2005.07.032
PMID: 16223484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
