---
pmid: '22855489'
title: Membrane interaction of the portal protein gp20 of bacteriophage T4.
authors:
- Quinten TA
- Kuhn A
journal: J Virol
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3457163
doi: 10.1128/JVI.01284-12
---

# Membrane interaction of the portal protein gp20 of bacteriophage T4.
**Authors:** Quinten TA, Kuhn A
**Journal:** J Virol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.01284-12](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.01284-12)
**PMC:** [PMC3457163](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3457163/)

## Abstract

1. J Virol. 2012 Oct;86(20):11107-14. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01284-12. Epub 2012 Aug 1.

Membrane interaction of the portal protein gp20 of bacteriophage T4.

Quinten TA(1), Kuhn A.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, University of Hohenheim, 
Stuttgart, Germany.

Assembly of the bacteriophage T4 head structure occurs at the cytoplasmic face 
of the inner membrane of Escherichia coli with the formation of proheads. The 
proheads contain an internal scaffolding core that determines the size and the 
structure of the capsid. In a mutant where the major shell protein gp23 was 
compromised, core structures without a shell had been detected. Such core 
structures were also found in the mutant T4am20am23. Since the mutation in gene 
20 is at the N terminus of gp20, it was assumed that these core structures 
assemble in the absence of gp20. However, sequencing showed that the mutation 
introduces a new ribosome binding site that leads to a restart at codon 15. 
Although the mutant protein gp20s lacks the very N-terminal sequence, we found 
that it still binds to the membrane of the host cell and can initiate prohead 
assembly. This explains its activity to allow the assembly of core structures 
and proheads at the membrane surface. With a cross-linking approach, we show 
here that gp20 and gp20s are escorted by the chaperones DnaK, trigger factor, 
and GroEL and dock on the membrane at the membrane protein YidC.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01284-12
PMCID: PMC3457163
PMID: 22855489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
