---
pmid: '20357282'
title: Glycogenin-1 deficiency and inactivated priming of glycogen synthesis.
authors:
- Moslemi AR
- Lindberg C
- Nilsson J
- Tajsharghi H
- Andersson B
- Oldfors A
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0900661
pubmed_publication_types:
- Case Reports
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: CASE_REPORT
---

# Glycogenin-1 deficiency and inactivated priming of glycogen synthesis.
**Authors:** Moslemi AR, Lindberg C, Nilsson J, Tajsharghi H, Andersson B, Oldfors A
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa0900661](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa0900661)

## Abstract

1. N Engl J Med. 2010 Apr 1;362(13):1203-10. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0900661.

Glycogenin-1 deficiency and inactivated priming of glycogen synthesis.

Moslemi AR(1), Lindberg C, Nilsson J, Tajsharghi H, Andersson B, Oldfors A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Gothenburg, 
Gothenburg, Sweden.

Glycogen, which serves as a major energy reserve in cells, is a large, branched 
polymer of glucose molecules. We describe a patient who had muscle weakness, 
associated with the depletion of glycogen in skeletal muscle, and cardiac 
arrhythmia, associated with the accumulation of abnormal storage material in the 
heart. The skeletal muscle showed a marked predominance of slow-twitch, 
oxidative muscle fibers and mitochondrial proliferation. Western blotting showed 
the presence of unglucosylated glycogenin-1 in the muscle and heart. Sequencing 
of the glycogenin-1 gene, GYG1, revealed a nonsense mutation in one allele and a 
missense mutation, Thr83Met, in the other. The missense mutation resulted in 
inactivation of the autoglucosylation of glycogenin-1 that is necessary for the 
priming of glycogen synthesis in muscle.

2010 Massachusetts Medical Society

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa0900661
PMID: 20357282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
