---
pmid: '12754703'
title: Mutant NDUFV2 subunit of mitochondrial complex I causes early onset hypertrophic
  cardiomyopathy and encephalopathy.
authors:
- Bénit P
- Beugnot R
- Chretien D
- Giurgea I
- De Lonlay-Debeney P
- Issartel JP
- Corral-Debrinski M
- Kerscher S
- Rustin P
- Rötig A
- Munnich A
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/humu.10225
pubmed_publication_types:
- Case Reports
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: CASE_REPORT
---

# Mutant NDUFV2 subunit of mitochondrial complex I causes early onset hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and encephalopathy.
**Authors:** Bénit P, Beugnot R, Chretien D, Giurgea I, De Lonlay-Debeney P, Issartel JP, Corral-Debrinski M, Kerscher S, Rustin P, Rötig A, Munnich A
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.10225](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.10225)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mutat. 2003 Jun;21(6):582-6. doi: 10.1002/humu.10225.

Mutant NDUFV2 subunit of mitochondrial complex I causes early onset hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy and encephalopathy.

Bénit P(1), Beugnot R, Chretien D, Giurgea I, De Lonlay-Debeney P, Issartel JP, 
Corral-Debrinski M, Kerscher S, Rustin P, Rötig A, Munnich A.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U393, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France.

Respiratory chain complex I deficiencies represent a genetically heterogeneous 
group of diseases resulting from mutations in either mitochondrial or nuclear 
DNA. Combination of denaturing high performance liquid chromatography and 
sequence analysis allowed us to show that a 4-bp deletion in intron 2 
(IVS2+5_+8delGTAA) of the NDUFV2 gene (encoding NADH dehydrogenase ubiquinone 
flavoprotein 2) causes complex I deficiency and early onset hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy with trunk hypotonia in three affected sibs of a consanguineous 
family. The homozygous mutation altering the consensus splice-donor site of exon 
2 resulted in 70% decreased NDUFV2 protein and complex I deficiency. While 
mutation in a number of genes encoding complex I subunits essentially result in 
neurological symptoms, this first mutation in NDUFV2 is strikingly associated 
with cardiomyopathy, as previously observed in the unique case of NDFUS2 
mutations.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.10225
PMID: 12754703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
