---
pmid: '15448143'
title: Identification and characterization of a novel monoamine transporter in the
  human brain.
authors:
- Engel K
- Zhou M
- Wang J
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M407913200
---

# Identification and characterization of a novel monoamine transporter in the human brain.
**Authors:** Engel K, Zhou M, Wang J
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M407913200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M407913200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Nov 26;279(48):50042-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M407913200. Epub
2004  Sep 23.

Identification and characterization of a novel monoamine transporter in the 
human brain.

Engel K(1), Zhou M, Wang J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 
98195, USA.

Precise control of monoamine neurotransmitter levels in the extracellular fluids 
of the brain is critical in maintaining efficient and robust neurotransmission. 
High affinity transporters in the solute carrier SLC6A family function in 
removing monoamines from the neurosynaptic cleft. Emerging evidence suggests 
that these transporters are only one part of a system of transporters that work 
in concert to maintain brain homeostasis of monoamines. Here we report the 
cloning and characterization of a new human plasma membrane monoamine 
transporter, PMAT. The PMAT cDNA encodes a protein of 530 amino acid residues 
with 10-12 transmembrane segments. PMAT is not homologous to known 
neurotransmitter transporters but exhibits low homology to members of the 
equilibrative nucleoside transporter family. When expressed in Madin-Darby 
canine kidney cells and Xenopus laevis oocytes, PMAT efficiently transports 
serotonin (K(m) = 114 mum), dopamine (K(m) = 329 mum), and the neurotoxin 
1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (K(m) = 33 mum). In contrast, there is no 
significant interaction of PMAT with nucleosides or nucleobases. PMAT-mediated 
monoamine transport does not require Na(+) or Cl(-) but appears to be sensitive 
to changes in membrane potential. Northern blot analysis showed that PMAT is 
predominantly expressed in the human brain and widely distributed in the central 
nervous system. These studies demonstrate that PMAT may be a novel low affinity 
transporter for biogenic amines, which, under certain conditions, might 
supplement the role of the high affinity transporters in the brain.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M407913200
PMID: 15448143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
