---
pmid: '26567335'
title: Human Type IV P-type ATPases That Work as Plasma Membrane Phospholipid Flippases
  and Their Regulation by Caspase and Calcium.
authors:
- Segawa K
- Kurata S
- Nagata S
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4705396
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.690727
---

# Human Type IV P-type ATPases That Work as Plasma Membrane Phospholipid Flippases and Their Regulation by Caspase and Calcium.
**Authors:** Segawa K, Kurata S, Nagata S
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M115.690727](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M115.690727)
**PMC:** [PMC4705396](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4705396/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2016 Jan 8;291(2):762-72. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.690727. Epub 2015
 Nov 13.

Human Type IV P-type ATPases That Work as Plasma Membrane Phospholipid Flippases 
and Their Regulation by Caspase and Calcium.

Segawa K(1), Kurata S(1), Nagata S(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Laboratory of Biochemistry & Immunology, Immunology Frontier 
Research Center, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.
(2)From the Laboratory of Biochemistry & Immunology, Immunology Frontier 
Research Center, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan 
snagata@ifrec.osaka-u.ac.jp.

In plasma membranes, flippases translocate aminophospholipids such as 
phosphatidylserine and phosphatidylethanolamine from the extracellular to the 
cytoplasmic leaflet. Mammalian ATP11C, a type IV P-type ATPase, acts as a 
flippase at the plasma membrane. Here, by expressing 12 human type IV P-type 
ATPases in ATP11C-deficient cells, we determined that ATP8A2 and ATP11A can also 
act as plasma membrane flippases. As with ATP11C, ATP8A2 and ATP11A localized to 
the plasma membrane in a CDC50A-dependent manner. ATP11A was cleaved by caspases 
during apoptosis, and a caspase-resistant ATP11A blocked apoptotic PtdSer 
exposure. In contrast, ATP8A2 was not cleaved by caspase, and cells expressing 
ATP8A2 did not expose PtdSer during apoptosis. Similarly, high Ca(2+) 
concentrations inhibited the ATP11A and ATP11C PtdSer flippase activity, but 
ATP8A2 flippase activity was relatively resistant to Ca(2+). ATP11A and ATP11C 
were ubiquitously expressed in human and mouse adult tissues. In contrast, 
ATP8A2 was expressed in specific tissues, such as the brain and testis. Thus, 
ATP8A2 may play a specific role in translocating PtdSer in these tissues.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M115.690727
PMCID: PMC4705396
PMID: 26567335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
