---
pmid: '3033643'
title: Structure and expression of human dihydropteridine reductase.
authors:
- Lockyer J
- Cook RG
- Milstien S
- Kaufman S
- Woo SL
- Ledley FD
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1987'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC304863
doi: 10.1073/pnas.84.10.3329
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Structure and expression of human dihydropteridine reductase.
**Authors:** Lockyer J, Cook RG, Milstien S, Kaufman S, Woo SL, Ledley FD
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1987)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.84.10.3329](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.84.10.3329)
**PMC:** [PMC304863](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC304863/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1987 May;84(10):3329-33. doi:
10.1073/pnas.84.10.3329.

Structure and expression of human dihydropteridine reductase.

Lockyer J, Cook RG, Milstien S, Kaufman S, Woo SL, Ledley FD.

Dihydropteridine reductase (DHPR; EC 1.6.99.7) catalyzes the NADH-mediated 
reduction of quinonoid dihydrobiopterin and is an essential component of the 
pterin-dependent aromatic amino acid hydroxylating systems. A cDNA for human 
DHPR was isolated from a human liver cDNA library in the vector lambda gt11 
using a monospecific antibody against sheep DHPR. The nucleic acid sequence and 
amino acid sequence of human DHPR were determined from a full-length clone. A 
112 amino acid sequence of sheep DHPR was obtained by sequencing purified sheep 
DHPR. This sequence is highly homologous to the predicted amino acid sequence of 
the human protein. Gene transfer of the recombinant human DHPR into COS cells 
leads to expression of DHPR enzymatic activity. These results indicate that the 
cDNA clone identified by antibody screening is an authentic and full-length cDNA 
for human DHPR.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.84.10.3329
PMCID: PMC304863
PMID: 3033643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
