---
pmid: '11179428'
title: Negative factor from SIV binds to the catalytic subunit of the V-ATPase to
  internalize CD4 and to increase viral infectivity.
authors:
- Mandic R
- Fackler OT
- Geyer M
- Linnemann T
- Zheng YH
- Peterlin BM
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC30956
doi: 10.1091/mbc.12.2.463
---

# Negative factor from SIV binds to the catalytic subunit of the V-ATPase to internalize CD4 and to increase viral infectivity.
**Authors:** Mandic R, Fackler OT, Geyer M, Linnemann T, Zheng YH, Peterlin BM
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.12.2.463](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.12.2.463)
**PMC:** [PMC30956](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC30956/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Cell. 2001 Feb;12(2):463-73. doi: 10.1091/mbc.12.2.463.

Negative factor from SIV binds to the catalytic subunit of the V-ATPase to 
internalize CD4 and to increase viral infectivity.

Mandic R(1), Fackler OT, Geyer M, Linnemann T, Zheng YH, Peterlin BM.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Medicine, University of 
California, San Francisco, California 94143-0703, USA.

The accessory protein negative factor (Nef) from human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV) and simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) is required for optimal viral 
infectivity and the progression to acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). 
Nef interacts with the endocytic machinery, resulting in the down-regulation of 
cluster of differentiation antigen 4 (CD4) and major histocompatibility complex 
class I (MHCI) molecules on the surface of infected cells. Mutations in the 
C-terminal flexible loop of Nef result in a lower rate of internalization by 
this viral protein. However, no loop-dependent binding of Nef to adaptor 
protein-2 (AP-2), which is the adaptor protein complex that is required for the 
internalization of proteins from the plasma membrane, could be demonstrated. In 
this study we investigated the relevance of different motifs in Nef from 
SIV(mac239) for its internalization, CD4 down-regulation, binding to components 
of the trafficking machinery, and viral infectivity. Our data suggest that the 
binding of Nef to the catalytic subunit H of the vacuolar membrane ATPase 
(V-ATPase) facilitates its internalization. This binding depends on the 
integrity of the whole flexible loop. Subsequent studies on Nef mutant viruses 
revealed that the flexible loop is essential for optimal viral infectivity. 
Therefore, our data demonstrate how Nef contacts the endocytic machinery in the 
absence of its direct binding to AP-2 and suggest an important role for subunit 
H of the V-ATPase in viral infectivity.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.12.2.463
PMCID: PMC30956
PMID: 11179428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
