---
pmid: '16672277'
title: Amino acids C-terminal to the 14-3-3 binding motif in CDC25B affect the efficiency
  of 14-3-3 binding.
authors:
- Uchida S
- Kubo A
- Kizu R
- Nakagama H
- Matsunaga T
- Ishizaka Y
- Yamashita K
journal: J Biochem
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/jb/mvj079
---

# Amino acids C-terminal to the 14-3-3 binding motif in CDC25B affect the efficiency of 14-3-3 binding.
**Authors:** Uchida S, Kubo A, Kizu R, Nakagama H, Matsunaga T, Ishizaka Y, Yamashita K
**Journal:** J Biochem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jb/mvj079](https://doi.org/10.1093/jb/mvj079)

## Abstract

1. J Biochem. 2006 Apr;139(4):761-9. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvj079.

Amino acids C-terminal to the 14-3-3 binding motif in CDC25B affect the 
efficiency of 14-3-3 binding.

Uchida S(1), Kubo A, Kizu R, Nakagama H, Matsunaga T, Ishizaka Y, Yamashita K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Life Science, Graduate School of Science and Technology, Kanazawa 
University, Kakuma-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-1192.

The phospho-site adapter protein 14-3-3 binds to target proteins at amino acid 
sequences matching the consensus motif Arg-X-X-Ser/Thr-X-Pro, where the serine 
or threonine residue is phosphorylated and X is any amino acid. The 
dual-specificity phosphatase CDC25B, which is involved in cell cycle regulation, 
contains five 14-3-3 binding motifs, but 14-3-3 preferentially binds to the 
motif at Ser309 in CDC25B1 (or Ser323 in CDC25B3). In the present study, we 
demonstrate that amino acid residues C-terminal to the 14-3-3 binding motif 
strongly affect the efficiency of 14-3-3 binding. Alanine substitutions at 
residues downstream of the Ser309 motif dramatically reduced 14-3-3 binding, 
although phosphorylation of Ser309 was unaffected. We also observed that binding 
of endogenous 14-3-3 to mutant CDC25B occurred less efficiently than to the wild 
type. Mutants to which 14-3-3 cannot bind efficiently tend to be located in the 
nucleus, although not as specifically as the alanine substitution mutant of 
Ser309. These results indicate that amino acid sequences C-terminal to the 
consensus binding site have an important role in the efficient binding of 14-3-3 
to at least CDC25B, which may partly explain why some consensus sequences are 
inactive as 14-3-3 binding sites.

DOI: 10.1093/jb/mvj079
PMID: 16672277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
