---
pmid: '15480426'
title: Thioredoxin modulates activator protein 1 (AP-1) activity and p27Kip1 degradation
  through direct interaction with Jab1.
authors:
- Hwang CY
- Ryu YS
- Chung MS
- Kim KD
- Park SS
- Chae SK
- Chae HZ
- Kwon KS
journal: Oncogene
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1208116
---

# Thioredoxin modulates activator protein 1 (AP-1) activity and p27Kip1 degradation through direct interaction with Jab1.
**Authors:** Hwang CY, Ryu YS, Chung MS, Kim KD, Park SS, Chae SK, Chae HZ, Kwon KS
**Journal:** Oncogene (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1208116](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1208116)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2004 Nov 25;23(55):8868-75. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1208116.

Thioredoxin modulates activator protein 1 (AP-1) activity and p27Kip1 
degradation through direct interaction with Jab1.

Hwang CY(1), Ryu YS, Chung MS, Kim KD, Park SS, Chae SK, Chae HZ, Kwon KS.

Author information:
(1)Center for Systems Biology, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and 
Biotechnology, Taejon 305-333, Korea.

Thioredoxin (Trx) is a cellular redox enzyme that plays multiple roles in 
regulating cell growth and apoptosis. Jun activation domain-binding protein 1 
(Jab1) was originally identified as a coactivator of activator protein 1 (AP-1) 
transcription and was also shown to promote degradation of the cyclin-dependent 
kinase inhibitor, p27Kip1. Recently, Jab1 expression was associated with the 
progression and poor prognosis of pituitary, epithelial ovarian, and breast 
cancers, suggesting that it plays a role in oncogenesis. Here, we report that 
Trx specifically interacts with and modulates the function of Jab1. Fluorescence 
resonance energy transfer and co-immunoprecipitation studies revealed that Trx 
and Jab1 colocalize and directly interact with each other. Further, Trx 
negatively regulates two important Jab1-controlled signaling pathways, 
activation of AP-1 transcription and degradation of p27Kip1, probably through a 
direct interaction between Trx and C-terminal of Jab1. The negative effect of 
Trx on AP-1 activity is Jab1-dependent, as it disappears when Jab1 levels are 
suppressed by an antisense approach. In addition, Trx competes with p27Kip1 for 
Jab1 binding. Taken together, our results suggest that Trx may regulate cell 
cycle and growth through a novel modulation of Jab1-mediated proliferation 
signals, further indicating that Trx may have the ability to control tumor 
progression.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1208116
PMID: 15480426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
