---
pmid: '20819954'
title: Crystal structure and mutational analysis of aminoacylhistidine dipeptidase
  from Vibrio alginolyticus reveal a new architecture of M20 metallopeptidases.
authors:
- Chang CY
- Hsieh YC
- Wang TY
- Chen YC
- Wang YK
- Chiang TW
- Chen YJ
- Chang CH
- Chen CJ
- Wu TK
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2998127
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.139683
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Crystal structure and mutational analysis of aminoacylhistidine dipeptidase from Vibrio alginolyticus reveal a new architecture of M20 metallopeptidases.
**Authors:** Chang CY, Hsieh YC, Wang TY, Chen YC, Wang YK, Chiang TW, Chen YJ, Chang CH, Chen CJ, Wu TK
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110.139683](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.139683)
**PMC:** [PMC2998127](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2998127/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Dec 10;285(50):39500-10. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.139683. Epub 
2010 Sep 6.

Crystal structure and mutational analysis of aminoacylhistidine dipeptidase from 
Vibrio alginolyticus reveal a new architecture of M20 metallopeptidases.

Chang CY(1), Hsieh YC, Wang TY, Chen YC, Wang YK, Chiang TW, Chen YJ, Chang CH, 
Chen CJ, Wu TK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, National Chiao Tung 
University, Hsinchu 30010, Taiwan.

Aminoacylhistidine dipeptidases (PepD, EC 3.4.13.3) belong to the family of M20 
metallopeptidases from the metallopeptidase H clan that catalyze a broad range 
of dipeptide and tripeptide substrates, including L-carnosine and 
L-homocarnosine. Homocarnosine has been suggested as a precursor for the 
neurotransmitter γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and may mediate the antiseizure 
effects of GABAergic therapies. Here, we report the crystal structure of PepD 
from Vibrio alginolyticus and the results of mutational analysis of 
substrate-binding residues in the C-terminal as well as substrate specificity of 
the PepD catalytic domain-alone truncated protein PepD(CAT). The structure of 
PepD was found to exist as a homodimer, in which each monomer comprises a 
catalytic domain containing two zinc ions at the active site center for its 
hydrolytic function and a lid domain utilizing hydrogen bonds between helices to 
form the dimer interface. Although the PepD is structurally similar to PepV, 
which exists as a monomer, putative substrate-binding residues reside in 
different topological regions of the polypeptide chain. In addition, the lid 
domain of the PepD contains an "extra" domain not observed in related M20 family 
metallopeptidases with a dimeric structure. Mutational assays confirmed both the 
putative di-zinc allocations and the architecture of substrate recognition. In 
addition, the catalytic domain-alone truncated PepD(CAT) exhibited substrate 
specificity to l-homocarnosine compared with that of the wild-type PepD, 
indicating a potential value in applications of PepD(CAT) for GABAergic 
therapies or neuroprotection.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.139683
PMCID: PMC2998127
PMID: 20819954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
