---
pmid: '26913973'
title: The revisited genome of Pseudomonas putida KT2440 enlightens its value as a
  robust metabolic chassis.
authors:
- Belda E
- van Heck RG
- José Lopez-Sanchez M
- Cruveiller S
- Barbe V
- Fraser C
- Klenk HP
- Petersen J
- Morgat A
- Nikel PI
- Vallenet D
- Rouy Z
- Sekowska A
- Martins Dos Santos VA
- de Lorenzo V
- Danchin A
- Médigue C
journal: Environ Microbiol
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.13230
---

# The revisited genome of Pseudomonas putida KT2440 enlightens its value as a robust metabolic chassis.
**Authors:** Belda E, van Heck RG, José Lopez-Sanchez M, Cruveiller S, Barbe V, Fraser C, Klenk HP, Petersen J, Morgat A, Nikel PI, Vallenet D, Rouy Z, Sekowska A, Martins Dos Santos VA, de Lorenzo V, Danchin A, Médigue C
**Journal:** Environ Microbiol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1462-2920.13230](https://doi.org/10.1111/1462-2920.13230)

## Abstract

1. Environ Microbiol. 2016 Oct;18(10):3403-3424. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.13230.
Epub  2016 Apr 28.

The revisited genome of Pseudomonas putida KT2440 enlightens its value as a 
robust metabolic chassis.

Belda E(1)(2), van Heck RG(3), José Lopez-Sanchez M(4)(5), Cruveiller S(4), 
Barbe V(6), Fraser C(7), Klenk HP(8)(9), Petersen J(8), Morgat A(10), Nikel 
PI(11), Vallenet D(4), Rouy Z(4), Sekowska A(5), Martins Dos Santos VA(3), de 
Lorenzo V(11), Danchin A(5), Médigue C(4).

Author information:
(1)Alternative Energies and Atomic Energy Commission (CEA), Genomic Institute & 
CNRS-UMR8030 & Evry University, Laboratory of Bioinformatics Analysis in 
Genomics and Metabolism, 2 rue Gaston Crémieux, 91057, Evry, France. 
eugeni.belda-cuesta@pasteur.fr.
(2)Institut Pasteur, Unit of Insect Vector Genetics and Genomics, Department of 
Parasitology and Mycology, 28, rue du Dr. Roux, Paris, Cedex 15, 75724, France. 
eugeni.belda-cuesta@pasteur.fr.
(3)Laboratory of Systems and Synthetic Biology, Wageningen University, 
Dreijenplein 10, Building number 316, 6703, HB, Wageningen, The Netherlands.
(4)Alternative Energies and Atomic Energy Commission (CEA), Genomic Institute & 
CNRS-UMR8030 & Evry University, Laboratory of Bioinformatics Analysis in 
Genomics and Metabolism, 2 rue Gaston Crémieux, 91057, Evry, France.
(5)AMAbiotics SAS, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moëlle Épinière, Hôpital de la 
Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
(6)Alternative Energies and Atomic Energy Commission (CEA), Genomic Institute, 
National Sequencing Center, 2 rue Gaston Crémieux, 91057, Evry, France.
(7)Institute for Genome Sciences, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, 
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(8)Leibniz Institute DSMZ - German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell 
Cultures, Braunschweig, Germany.
(9)School of Biology, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 7RU, UK.
(10)Swiss-Prot Group, SIB Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Geneva, CH-1206, 
Switzerland.
(11)Systems and Synthetic Biology Program, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología 
(CNB-CSIC), C/Darwin 3, 28049, Madrid, Spain.

By the time the complete genome sequence of the soil bacterium Pseudomonas 
putida KT2440 was published in 2002 (Nelson et al., ) this bacterium was 
considered a potential agent for environmental bioremediation of industrial 
waste and a good colonizer of the rhizosphere. However, neither the annotation 
tools available at that time nor the scarcely available omics data-let alone 
metabolic modeling and other nowadays common systems biology approaches-allowed 
them to anticipate the astonishing capacities that are encoded in the genetic 
complement of this unique microorganism. In this work we have adopted a suite of 
state-of-the-art genomic analysis tools to revisit the functional and metabolic 
information encoded in the chromosomal sequence of strain KT2440. We identified 
242 new protein-coding genes and re-annotated the functions of 1548 genes, which 
are linked to almost 4900 PubMed references. Catabolic pathways for 92 compounds 
(carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus sources) that could not be accommodated by the 
previously constructed metabolic models were also predicted. The resulting 
examination not only accounts for some of the known stress tolerance traits 
known in P. putida but also recognizes the capacity of this bacterium to perform 
difficult redox reactions, thereby multiplying its value as a platform 
microorganism for industrial biotechnology.

© 2016 The Authors. Environmental Microbiology published by Society for Applied 
Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.13230
PMID: 26913973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
