---
pmid: '1328208'
title: Overexpression, purification, sequence analysis, and characterization of the
  T4 bacteriophage dda DNA helicase.
authors:
- Hacker KJ
- Alberts BM
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1992'
full_text_available: false
---

# Overexpression, purification, sequence analysis, and characterization of the T4 bacteriophage dda DNA helicase.
**Authors:** Hacker KJ, Alberts BM
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1992)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1992 Oct 15;267(29):20674-81.

Overexpression, purification, sequence analysis, and characterization of the T4 
bacteriophage dda DNA helicase.

Hacker KJ(1), Alberts BM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California, San 
Francisco 94143-0448.

The bacteriophage T4 dda protein is a 5'-3' DNA helicase that stimulates DNA 
replication and recombination reactions in vitro and seems to play a role in the 
initiation of T4 DNA replication in vivo. Oligonucleotide probes based on 
NH2-terminal amino acid sequence were used to precisely map the location of the 
dda gene on the T4 chromosome. Using polymerase chain reaction techniques, the 
dda gene was then cloned into an expression vector, and the overproduced protein 
was purified in two chromatography steps. Both the genomic and cloned dda genes 
were sequenced and found to be identical, encoding a protein of 439 amino acids. 
The dda protein contains amino acid sequences resembling those of other known 
helicases, and is most homologous to the Escherichia coli recD protein. Protein 
affinity chromatography was used to show a direct interaction between the dda 
protein and the T4 uvsX protein (a rec A-type DNA recombinase).

PMID: 1328208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
