---
pmid: '21768116'
title: DC2 and keratinocyte-associated protein 2 (KCP2), subunits of the oligosaccharyltransferase
  complex, are regulators of the gamma-secretase-directed processing of amyloid precursor
  protein (APP).
authors:
- Wilson CM
- Magnaudeix A
- Yardin C
- Terro F
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3173112
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.249748
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# DC2 and keratinocyte-associated protein 2 (KCP2), subunits of the oligosaccharyltransferase complex, are regulators of the gamma-secretase-directed processing of amyloid precursor protein (APP).
**Authors:** Wilson CM, Magnaudeix A, Yardin C, Terro F
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M111.249748](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M111.249748)
**PMC:** [PMC3173112](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3173112/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Sep 9;286(36):31080-91. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.249748. Epub 
2011 Jul 18.

DC2 and keratinocyte-associated protein 2 (KCP2), subunits of the 
oligosaccharyltransferase complex, are regulators of the 
gamma-secretase-directed processing of amyloid precursor protein (APP).

Wilson CM(1), Magnaudeix A, Yardin C, Terro F.

Author information:
(1)Université de Limoges, Groupe de Neurobiologie Cellulaire-EA3842 Homéostasie 
Cellulaire et Pathologies, Faculté de Médecine, 2 Rue du Dr. Raymond Marcland, 
87025 Limoges Cedex, France. cornelia.wilson@unilim.fr

The oligosaccharyltransferase complex catalyzes the transfer of oligosaccharide 
from a dolichol pyrophosphate donor en bloc onto a free asparagine residue of a 
newly synthesized nascent chain during the translocation in the endoplasmic 
reticulum lumen. The role of the less known oligosaccharyltransferase (OST) 
subunits, DC2 and KCP2, recently identified still remains to be determined. 
Here, we have studied DC2 and KCP2, and we have established that DC2 and KCP2 
are substrate-specific, affecting amyloid precursor protein (APP), indicating 
that they are not core components required for N-glycosylation and OST activity 
per se. We show for the first time that DC2 and KCP2 depletion affects APP 
processing, leading to an accumulation of C-terminal fragments, both C99 and 
C83, and a reduction in full-length mature APP. This reduction in mature APP 
levels was not due to a block in secretion because the levels of sAPPα secreted 
into the media were unaffected. We discover that DC2 and KCP2 depletion affects 
only the γ-secretase complex, resulting in a reduction of the PS1 active 
fragment blocking Aβ production. Conversely, we show that the overexpression of 
DC2 and KCP2 causes an increase in the active γ-secretase complex, particularly 
the N-terminal fragment of PS1 that is generated by endoproteolysis, leading to 
a stimulation of Aβ production upon overexpression of DC2 and KCP2. Our findings 
reveal that components of the OST complex for the first time can interact with 
the γ-secretase and affect the APP processing pathway.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.249748
PMCID: PMC3173112
PMID: 21768116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
