---
pmid: '11971963'
title: c-Abl tyrosine kinase regulates the human Rad9 checkpoint protein in response
  to DNA damage.
authors:
- Yoshida K
- Komatsu K
- Wang HG
- Kufe D
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC133797
doi: 10.1128/MCB.22.10.3292-3300.2002
---

# c-Abl tyrosine kinase regulates the human Rad9 checkpoint protein in response to DNA damage.
**Authors:** Yoshida K, Komatsu K, Wang HG, Kufe D
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.22.10.3292-3300.2002](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.22.10.3292-3300.2002)
**PMC:** [PMC133797](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC133797/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 May;22(10):3292-300. doi:
10.1128/MCB.22.10.3292-3300.2002.

c-Abl tyrosine kinase regulates the human Rad9 checkpoint protein in response to 
DNA damage.

Yoshida K(1), Komatsu K, Wang HG, Kufe D.

Author information:
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 
02115, USA.

The ubiquitously expressed c-Abl tyrosine kinase is activated in the apoptotic 
response of cells to DNA damage. The mechanisms by which c-Abl signals the 
induction of apoptosis are not understood. Here we show that c-Abl binds 
constitutively to the mammalian homolog of the Schizosaccharomyces pombe Rad9 
cell cycle checkpoint protein. The SH3 domain of c-Abl interacts directly with 
the C-terminal region of Rad9. c-Abl phosphorylates the Rad9 Bcl-2 homology 3 
domain (Tyr-28) in vitro and in cells exposed to DNA-damaging agents. The 
results also demonstrate that c-Abl-mediated phosphorylation of Rad9 induces 
binding of Rad9 to the antiapototic Bcl-x(L) protein. The regulation of Rad9 by 
c-Abl in the DNA damage response is further supported by the demonstration that 
the interaction between c-Abl and Rad9 contributes to DNA damage-induced 
apoptosis. These findings indicate that Rad9 is regulated by a c-Abl-dependent 
mechanism in the apoptotic response to genotoxic stress.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.22.10.3292-3300.2002
PMCID: PMC133797
PMID: 11971963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
