---
pmid: '26040712'
title: Spastin and ESCRT-III coordinate mitotic spindle disassembly and nuclear envelope
  sealing.
authors:
- Vietri M
- Schink KO
- Campsteijn C
- Wegner CS
- Schultz SW
- Christ L
- Thoresen SB
- Brech A
- Raiborg C
- Stenmark H
journal: Nature
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature14408
---

# Spastin and ESCRT-III coordinate mitotic spindle disassembly and nuclear envelope sealing.
**Authors:** Vietri M, Schink KO, Campsteijn C, Wegner CS, Schultz SW, Christ L, Thoresen SB, Brech A, Raiborg C, Stenmark H
**Journal:** Nature (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature14408](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14408)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2015 Jun 11;522(7555):231-5. doi: 10.1038/nature14408. Epub 2015 Jun
3.

Spastin and ESCRT-III coordinate mitotic spindle disassembly and nuclear 
envelope sealing.

Vietri M(1), Schink KO(1), Campsteijn C(1), Wegner CS(1), Schultz SW(1), Christ 
L(1), Thoresen SB(1), Brech A(1), Raiborg C(1), Stenmark H(2).

Author information:
(1)1] Centre for Cancer Biomedicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, 
Montebello, N-0379 Oslo, Norway [2] Department of Molecular Cell Biology, 
Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University Hospital, Montebello, N-0379 
Oslo, Norway.
(2)1] Centre for Cancer Biomedicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, 
Montebello, N-0379 Oslo, Norway [2] Department of Molecular Cell Biology, 
Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University Hospital, Montebello, N-0379 
Oslo, Norway [3] Centre of Molecular Inflammation Research, Faculty of Medicine, 
Norwegian University of Science and Technology, N-7491 Trondheim, Norway.

Comment in
    Nature. 2015 Jun 11;522(7555):159-60. doi: 10.1038/nature14527.
    Science. 2015 Jun 19;348(6241):1314-5. doi: 10.1126/science.aac7083.

At the onset of metazoan cell division the nuclear envelope breaks down to 
enable capture of chromosomes by the microtubule-containing spindle apparatus. 
During anaphase, when chromosomes have separated, the nuclear envelope is 
reassembled around the forming daughter nuclei. How the nuclear envelope is 
sealed, and how this is coordinated with spindle disassembly, is largely 
unknown. Here we show that endosomal sorting complex required for transport 
(ESCRT)-III, previously found to promote membrane constriction and sealing 
during receptor sorting, virus budding, cytokinesis and plasma membrane repair, 
is transiently recruited to the reassembling nuclear envelope during late 
anaphase. ESCRT-III and its regulatory AAA (ATPase associated with diverse 
cellular activities) ATPase VPS4 are specifically recruited by the 
ESCRT-III-like protein CHMP7 to sites where the reforming nuclear envelope 
engulfs spindle microtubules. Subsequent association of another ESCRT-III-like 
protein, IST1, directly recruits the AAA ATPase spastin to sever microtubules. 
Disrupting spastin function impairs spindle disassembly and results in extended 
localization of ESCRT-III at the nuclear envelope. Interference with ESCRT-III 
functions in anaphase is accompanied by delayed microtubule disassembly, 
compromised nuclear integrity and the appearance of DNA damage foci in 
subsequent interphase. We propose that ESCRT-III, VPS4 and spastin cooperate to 
coordinate nuclear envelope sealing and spindle disassembly at nuclear 
envelope-microtubule intersection sites during mitotic exit to ensure nuclear 
integrity and genome safeguarding, with a striking mechanistic parallel to 
cytokinetic abscission.

DOI: 10.1038/nature14408
PMID: 26040712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
