---
pmid: '12223546'
title: Impaired D2 dopamine receptor function in mice lacking type 5 adenylyl cyclase.
authors:
- Lee KW
- Hong JH
- Choi IY
- Che Y
- Lee JK
- Yang SD
- Song CW
- Kang HS
- Lee JH
- Noh JS
- Shin HS
- Han PL
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6758068
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-18-07931.2002
---

# Impaired D2 dopamine receptor function in mice lacking type 5 adenylyl cyclase.
**Authors:** Lee KW, Hong JH, Choi IY, Che Y, Lee JK, Yang SD, Song CW, Kang HS, Lee JH, Noh JS, Shin HS, Han PL
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-18-07931.2002](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-18-07931.2002)
**PMC:** [PMC6758068](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6758068/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2002 Sep 15;22(18):7931-40. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-18-07931.2002.

Impaired D2 dopamine receptor function in mice lacking type 5 adenylyl cyclase.

Lee KW(1), Hong JH, Choi IY, Che Y, Lee JK, Yang SD, Song CW, Kang HS, Lee JH, 
Noh JS, Shin HS, Han PL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Ewha Institute of Neuroscience, Ewha Womans 
University School of Medicine, Seoul, 110-783, Korea.

Dopamine receptor subtypes D1 and D2, and many other seven-transmembrane 
receptors including adenosine receptor A2A, are colocalized in striatum of 
brain. These receptors stimulate or inhibit adenylyl cyclases (ACs) to produce 
distinct physiological and pharmacological responses and interact with each 
other synergistically or antagonistically at various levels. The identity of the 
AC isoform that is coupled to each of these receptors, however, remains unknown. 
To investigate the in vivo role of the type 5 adenylyl cyclase (AC5), which is 
preferentially expressed in striatum, mice deficient for the AC5 gene were 
generated. The genetic ablation of the AC5 gene eliminated >80% of 
forskolin-induced AC activity and 85-90% of AC activity stimulated by either D1 
or A2A receptor agonists in striatum. However, D1- or A2A-specific 
pharmaco-behaviors were basically preserved, whereas the signal cascade from D2 
to AC was completely abolished in AC5(-/-), and motor activity of AC5(-/-) was 
not suppressed by treatment of cataleptic doses of the antipsychotic drugs 
haloperidol and sulpiride. Interestingly, both haloperidol and clozapine at low 
doses remarkably increased the locomotion of AC5(-/-) in the open field test 
that was produced in part by a common mechanism that involved the increased 
activation of D1 dopamine receptors. Together, these results suggest that AC5 is 
the principal AC integrating signals from multiple receptors including D1, D2, 
and A2A in striatum and the cascade involving AC5 among diverse D2 signaling 
pathways is essential for neuroleptic effects of antipsychotic drugs.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-18-07931.2002
PMCID: PMC6758068
PMID: 12223546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
