---
pmid: '12077251'
title: Transcriptional regulation of GATA-3 by an intronic regulatory region and fetal
  liver zinc finger protein 1.
authors:
- Hwang ES
- Choi A
- Ho IC
journal: J Immunol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.169.1.248
---

# Transcriptional regulation of GATA-3 by an intronic regulatory region and fetal liver zinc finger protein 1.
**Authors:** Hwang ES, Choi A, Ho IC
**Journal:** J Immunol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.4049/jimmunol.169.1.248](https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.169.1.248)

## Abstract

1. J Immunol. 2002 Jul 1;169(1):248-53. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.169.1.248.

Transcriptional regulation of GATA-3 by an intronic regulatory region and fetal 
liver zinc finger protein 1.

Hwang ES(1), Choi A, Ho IC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public 
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

GATA-3 is a T cell-specific transcription factor and is essential for the 
development of the T cell lineage. The transcriptional regulation of GATA-3, 
however, remains elusive. In this study, we report the identification of a 
regulatory region located within the first intron of the murine GATA-3 gene. The 
intronic regulatory region contains both a positive and a negative cis-acting 
element but, as a whole, serves as a potent T cell-specific enhancer and is 
essential for the promoter activity in vitro. By using yeast one-hybrid 
screening, we discovered that fetal liver zinc finger protein 1 (Fliz1) could 
bind specifically to the negative cis-acting element, the sequence of which is 
conserved between the mouse and human GATA-3 genes. More importantly, 
overexpression of Fliz1 repressed the expression of GATA-3 in vivo and in vitro. 
Our data suggest that the expression of GATA-3 might be partly regulated by the 
intronic regulatory region and Fliz1 in a developmental stage-specific fashion.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.169.1.248
PMID: 12077251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
