---
pmid: '23264731'
title: MTR120/KIAA1383, a novel microtubule-associated protein, promotes microtubule
  stability and ensures cytokinesis.
authors:
- Fong KW
- Leung JW
- Li Y
- Wang W
- Feng L
- Ma W
- Liu D
- Songyang Z
- Chen J
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2013'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3619811
doi: 10.1242/jcs.116137
---

# MTR120/KIAA1383, a novel microtubule-associated protein, promotes microtubule stability and ensures cytokinesis.
**Authors:** Fong KW, Leung JW, Li Y, Wang W, Feng L, Ma W, Liu D, Songyang Z, Chen J
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.116137](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.116137)
**PMC:** [PMC3619811](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3619811/)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2013 Feb 1;126(Pt 3):825-37. doi: 10.1242/jcs.116137. Epub 2012
Dec  21.

MTR120/KIAA1383, a novel microtubule-associated protein, promotes microtubule 
stability and ensures cytokinesis.

Fong KW(1), Leung JW, Li Y, Wang W, Feng L, Ma W, Liu D, Songyang Z, Chen J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Microtubules (MTs) are the major constituent of the mitotic apparatus. 
Deregulation of MT dynamics leads to chromosome missegregation, cytokinesis 
failure and improper inheritance of genetic materials. Here, we describe the 
identification and characterization of KIAA1383/MTR120 (microtubule regulator 
120 kDa) as a novel MT-associated protein. We found that MTR120 localizes to 
stabilized MTs during interphase and to the mitotic apparatus during mitosis. 
MTR120 overexpression results in MT bundling and acetylation. In vitro, purified 
MTR120 protein binds to and bundles preassembled MTs. Moreover, depletion of 
MTR120 by RNA interference leads to cytokinesis failure and polyploidy. These 
phenotypes can be rescued by wild-type MTR120 but not by the MT non-binding 
mutant of MTR120. Together, these data suggest that MTR120 is a novel 
MT-associated protein that directly stabilizes MTs and hence ensures the 
fidelity of cell division.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.116137
PMCID: PMC3619811
PMID: 23264731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Introduction

A microtubule (MT) is a polarized cylindrical structure composed of α/β-tubulin dimers. Its plus ends are dynamic and subjected to frequent growing and shrinking, whereas its minus ends are inert and capped by a γ-tubulin ring complex that also provides a template for MT nucleation ( Kollman et al., 2011 ; Lüders and Stearns, 2007 ). MTs play a pivotal role in coordinating numerous biological processes, including chromosome segregation and cell motility. MT-associated proteins (MAPs) can bind to MTs in various manners, either on the ends or along the lattice ( Jiang and Akhmanova, 2011 ). MAPs are believed to play indispensable roles in modulating many MT-based cellular functions.

MAPs regulate the functions of the MT-based mitotic spindle structure via several different mechanisms. For example, MT plus-end-directed motor Eg-5 establishes spindle bipolarity by crosslinking MTs outward from the spindle poles ( Kapitein et al., 2005 ). Minus-end-directed motor Dynein transports MTs and spindle pole components toward the MT minus-end, contributing to spindle pole organization ( Merdes et al., 2000 ). Non-motor MAPs such as NuMA are required for spindle pole focusing ( Silk et al., 2009 ). TPX2 activates and mediates Aurora A kinase localization onto spindle MTs ( Kufer et al., 2002 ). MT plus-end master EB1 stabilizes the plus ends of spindle MT and therefore influences chromosome alignment ( Green et al., 2005 ).

Distinct MAPs regulate midzone MT to facilitate cytokinesis. For instance, PRC1, an evolutionarily conserved MAP, plays an important role in midzone assembly, an early polarization step ( Mollinari et al., 2002 ; Mollinari et al., 2005 ). Kinesin family member MKLP1, together with CYK4, forms the central spindling complex that promotes midzone MT bundling and recruits regulators for late abscission ( Pavicic-Kaltenbrunner et al., 2007 ). In the chromosome passenger complex, INCENP binds to and activates another chromosome passenger complex component, Aurora B kinase, which in turn phosphorylates central spindlin complex, facilitating midbody formation ( Guse et al., 2005 ; Sessa et al., 2005 ).

Because MAPs play significant roles in various cellular processes, including mitosis, a more complete inventory may contribute to a better understanding of spindle assembly, chromosome segregation, and more importantly, genome stability maintenance. In a study of subcellular localization of human ORFs, we found that KIAA1383 had a robust MT localization pattern when overexpressed. In this study, we found that KIAA1383 is a novel MAP that promotes MT stability and participates in cytokinesis. Given its major function in stabilizing MT, we named this protein MTR120 (microtubule regulator 120 kDa).

Discussion

In this study, we identified MTR120 as a novel MAP in a high-throughput proteomic screen and demonstrated that it promotes MT stability. Moreover, we found that the MT-binding ability is essential for MTR120s function in stabilizing MTs, which is critical for its roles in mitotic progression and cytokinesis.

To fully understand MAPs' roles in mitosis, several research groups have used various approaches to identify MAPs, mainly based on biochemical purification ( Sauer et al., 2005 ; Torres et al., 2011 ). Here, we carried out a large-scale analysis of the subcellular localization of all 15,483 ORFs in the human ORFeome v5.1 collection, which is complementary to previous approaches. We identified tubulins, previously characterized MAPs, and putative new MAPs, including several uncharacterized proteins, such as C9ORF9, C16ORF48, ODF3L, TMEM214, C17ORF28 and KIAA1383/MTR120 ( Fig. 1B,C ). These putative MAPs provide an opportunity to understand how MAPs participate in diverse cellular processes. Our study only focuses on one, KIAA1383/MTR120.

The middle region (residues 347–697) of MTR120, which contains the MT-binding domain, is rich in basic residues, reminiscent of the MT-binding sequences of conventional MAPs. However, scanning this region yielded no recognizable MT-binding motif, suggesting that MTR120 contains a novel MT-binding domain. Unlike other general MAPs, MTR120 is enriched at a subset of MTs (i.e. acetylated MTs) during interphase, which is reminiscent of other MAPs, such as CAP350 and centrobin/NIP2. In particular, MT-binding of CAP350 is required for modulating MT dynamics around Golgi ( Hoppeler-Lebel et al., 2007 ). Centrobin/NIP2-tubulin interaction is involved in centriole elongation and mitotic spindle assembly ( Gudi et al., 2011 ; Lee et al., 2010 ). These MAPs and MTR120 may represent a subgroup of MAPs that has a preference for stabilized MT and participates in cellular events that are highly dependent on these MTs.

Cytokinesis failure may result from centrosome malfunction because a population of MTR120 always adheres to centrosomes. In fact, surgical removal of centrosomes abolishes cell abscission and arrests cell in G 1 phase ( Hinchcliffe et al., 2001 ; Khodjakov and Rieder, 2001 ). Furthermore, several centrosomal proteins, such as centrin, centrolin, CEP55, and CP110, are required for proper cytokinesis, and prolong silencing of these proteins leads to the formation of multicellular syncytia or multinucleated progenies ( Gromley et al., 2003 ; Gromley et al., 2005 ; Salisbury et al., 2002 ; Tsang et al., 2006 ; Zhao et al., 2006 ). These proteins likely act in distinct manners, but how they cooperate in cytokinesis is still unclear. We evaluated the potential centrosome-specific defects in MTR120 knockdown cells. However, we found no weakening or fragmentation of Aurora A kinase labeling in mitotic centrosomes, indicating no significant abnormality of centrosome maturation (unpublished observation). Loss of MTR120 also had no apparent effect on centrosomal MT nucleation ( supplementary material Fig. S6 ), indicating that MTR120 is dispensable for centrosomes to act as MT's organization center. To determine when mitotic progression is disturbed in MTR120-depleted cells, we monitored M-phase using live-cell imaging. In the absence of MTR120, cells underwent chromosome segregation, indicating that spindle-MTs can attach to the kinetochore. However, the furrow failed to ingress completely during late mitosis (telophase), leading to a cytokinesis failure. As shown here, MTR120s major function is binding and stabilizing MT. Thus, we suspect that in the absence of MTR120, MT becomes less stable (as indicated by reduced tubulin acetylation), which is at least one of the mechanisms that leads to the cytokinesis defect observed in MTR120-depleted cells.

Because MT stabilization is involved in multiple steps during mitosis, we also evaluated the central spindle organization. Although PRC1, Aurora B kinase, and Polo-like kinase 1 targeted the spindle midzone in MTR120 -silenced cells, they had a distorted or discontinued pattern ( Fig. 7D,E ). Of note, such mislocalization of PRC1 is distinct from what has been observed in Kif-4 knockdown cells. Kif-4 is a binding partner of PRC1. Kif-4 downregulation causes dispersed or diffuse patterns of PRC1 and other midzone proteins, including Aurora B kinase ( Hu et al., 2011 ; Kurasawa et al., 2004 ; Zhu and Jiang, 2005 ). We speculate that MTR120 is not essential for loading midzone proteins onto the central spindle. Instead, its involvement is likely to be indirect and structural. Indeed, MTR120 exhibited a robust MT-bundling effect, which is reminiscent of the MT structure induced by the central spindle protein, PRC1 ( Mollinari et al., 2002 ). Overexpressed PRC1 was co-localized with MTR120 in vivo (unpublished observation). PRC1 and other proteins may play an initial role in crosslinking MTs to form a central spindle, whereas MTR120 may play a regulatory role in preventing these MT bundles from collapsing. Alternatively, these MAPs may act synergistically during cytokinesis.

MTR120 orthologs are present in several vertebrates ( supplementary material Fig. S1 ). In addition, MTR120 expression can be detected in a wide range of cell lines ( Fig. 2B ), indicating that it plays a fundamental role in coordinating cell division. In fact, when we searched the NCBI EST profile, we found that its transcript is present in both the fetus and adult, again suggesting that MTR120 has a general function in cell cycle regulation.

Tetraploidy cells that stem from cytokinesis failure may give rise to more chromosome aberration, which promotes further aneuploidy and genomic instability and eventually leads to tumorigenesis ( Holland and Cleveland, 2009 ). For example, overexpression of oncogene Aurora A kinase causes cytokinesis failure ( Meraldi et al., 2002 ), which may contribute to its oncogenic effect. By searching the public resource in Oncomine (Compendia Bioscience, Ann Arbor, MI), we found that MTR120 mRNA levels in various colorectal cancer tissues are low, ranging from a −2.386-fold ( P = 7.05×10 −4 ) to a −3.162-fold ( P = 3.12×10 −8 ) change compared with normal tissues using the TCGA colorectal dataset ( n = 237). These data raise the possibility that MTR120 downregulation is associated with tumorigenesis. Of course, future studies are needed to test this possibility.
