---
pmid: '15955804'
title: The sarcolemmal calcium pump inhibits the calcineurin/nuclear factor of activated
  T-cell pathway via interaction with the calcineurin A catalytic subunit.
authors:
- Buch MH
- Pickard A
- Rodriguez A
- Gillies S
- Maass AH
- Emerson M
- Cartwright EJ
- Williams JC
- Oceandy D
- Redondo JM
- Neyses L
- Armesilla AL
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M501326200
---

# The sarcolemmal calcium pump inhibits the calcineurin/nuclear factor of activated T-cell pathway via interaction with the calcineurin A catalytic subunit.
**Authors:** Buch MH, Pickard A, Rodriguez A, Gillies S, Maass AH, Emerson M, Cartwright EJ, Williams JC, Oceandy D, Redondo JM, Neyses L, Armesilla AL
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M501326200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M501326200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Aug 19;280(33):29479-87. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M501326200. Epub 
2005 Jun 14.

The sarcolemmal calcium pump inhibits the calcineurin/nuclear factor of 
activated T-cell pathway via interaction with the calcineurin A catalytic 
subunit.

Buch MH(1), Pickard A, Rodriguez A, Gillies S, Maass AH, Emerson M, Cartwright 
EJ, Williams JC, Oceandy D, Redondo JM, Neyses L, Armesilla AL.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, The University of Manchester, Stopford Bldg., 
Manchester, UK.

The calcineurin/nuclear factor of activated T-cell (NFAT) pathway represents a 
crucial transducer of cellular function. There is increasing evidence placing 
the sarcolemmal calcium pump, or plasma membrane calcium/calmodulin ATPase pump 
(PMCA), as a potential modulator of signal transduction pathways. We demonstrate 
a novel interaction between PMCA and the calcium/calmodulin-dependent 
phosphatase, calcineurin, in mammalian cells. The interaction domains were 
located to the catalytic domain of PMCA4b and the catalytic domain of the 
calcineurin A subunit. Endogenous calcineurin activity, assessed by measuring 
the transcriptional activity of its best characterized substrate, NFAT, was 
significantly inhibited by 60% in the presence of ectopic PMCA4b. This 
inhibition was notably reversed by the co-expression of the PMCA4b interaction 
domain, demonstrating the functional significance of this interaction. PMCA4b 
was, however, unable to confer its inhibitory effect in the presence of a 
calcium/calmodulin-independent constitutively active mutant calcineurin A 
suggesting a calcium/calmodulin-dependent mechanism. The modulatory function of 
PMCA4b is further supported by the observation that endogenous calcineurin moves 
from the cytoplasm to the plasma membrane when PMCA4b is overexpressed. We 
suggest recruitment by PMCA4b of calcineurin to a low calcium environment as a 
possible explanation for these findings. In summary, our results offer strong 
evidence for a novel functional interaction between PMCA and calcineurin, 
suggesting a role for PMCA as a negative modulator of calcineurin-mediated 
signaling pathways in mammalian cells. This study reinforces the emerging role 
of PMCA as a molecular organizer and regulator of signaling transduction 
pathways.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M501326200
PMID: 15955804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
