---
pmid: '24855650'
title: Characterization of a Mycobacterium tuberculosis nanocompartment and its potential
  cargo proteins.
authors:
- Contreras H
- Joens MS
- McMath LM
- Le VP
- Tullius MV
- Kimmey JM
- Bionghi N
- Horwitz MA
- Fitzpatrick JA
- Goulding CW
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2014'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4140288
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.570119
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Characterization of a Mycobacterium tuberculosis nanocompartment and its potential cargo proteins.
**Authors:** Contreras H, Joens MS, McMath LM, Le VP, Tullius MV, Kimmey JM, Bionghi N, Horwitz MA, Fitzpatrick JA, Goulding CW
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M114.570119](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M114.570119)
**PMC:** [PMC4140288](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4140288/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jun 27;289(26):18279-89. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.570119. Epub 
2014 May 22.

Characterization of a Mycobacterium tuberculosis nanocompartment and its 
potential cargo proteins.

Contreras H(1), Joens MS(2), McMath LM(1), Le VP(1), Tullius MV(3), Kimmey 
JM(3), Bionghi N(3), Horwitz MA(3), Fitzpatrick JA(2), Goulding CW(4).

Author information:
(1)From the Departments of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry and.
(2)the Waitt Advanced Biophotonics Center, Salk Institute for Biological 
Studies, La Jolla, California 92037, and.
(3)the Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, School of 
Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, California 90095.
(4)From the Departments of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry and Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, University of California, Irvine, California 92697, 
celia.goulding@uci.edu.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis has evolved various mechanisms by which the bacterium 
can maintain homeostasis under numerous environmental assaults generated by the 
host immune response. M. tuberculosis harbors enzymes involved in the oxidative 
stress response that aid in survival during the production of reactive oxygen 
species in activated macrophages. Previous studies have shown that a 
dye-decolorizing peroxidase (DyP) is encapsulated by a bacterial 
nanocompartment, encapsulin (Enc), whereby packaged DyP interacts with Enc via a 
unique C-terminal extension. M. tuberculosis also harbors an encapsulin homolog 
(CFP-29, Mt-Enc), within an operon with M. tuberculosis DyP (Mt-DyP), which 
contains a C-terminal extension. Together these observations suggest that Mt-DyP 
interacts with Mt-Enc. Furthermore, it has been suggested that DyPs may function 
as either a heme-dependent peroxidase or a deferrochelatase. Like Mt-DyP, M. 
tuberculosis iron storage ferritin protein, Mt-BfrB, and an M. tuberculosis 
protein involved in folate biosynthesis, 7,8-dihydroneopterin aldolase 
(Mt-FolB), have C-terminal tails that could also interact with Mt-Enc. For the 
first time, we show by co-purification and electron microscopy that mycobacteria 
via Mt-Enc can encapsulate Mt-DyP, Mt-BfrB, and Mt-FolB. Functional studies of 
free or encapsulated proteins demonstrate that they retain their enzymatic 
activity within the Mt-Enc nanocompartment. Mt-DyP, Mt-FolB, and Mt-BfrB all 
have antioxidant properties, suggesting that if these proteins are encapsulated 
by Mt-Enc, then this nanocage may play a role in the M. tuberculosis oxidative 
stress response. This report provides initial structural and biochemical clues 
regarding the molecular mechanisms that utilize compartmentalization by which 
the mycobacterial cell may aid in detoxification of the local environment to 
ensure long term survival.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.570119
PMCID: PMC4140288
PMID: 24855650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Mycobacterium tuberculosis has evolved various mechanisms by which the bacterium can maintain homeostasis under numerous environmental assaults generated by the host immune response. M. tuberculosis harbors enzymes involved in the oxidative stress response that aid in survival during the production of reactive oxygen species in activated macrophages. Previous studies have shown that a dye-decolorizing peroxidase (DyP) is encapsulated by a bacterial nanocompartment, encapsulin (Enc), whereby packaged DyP interacts with Enc via a unique C-terminal extension. M. tuberculosis also harbors an encapsulin homolog (CFP-29, Mt-Enc), within an operon with M. tuberculosis DyP (Mt-DyP), which contains a C-terminal extension. Together these observations suggest that Mt-DyP interacts with Mt-Enc. Furthermore, it has been suggested that DyPs may function as either a heme-dependent peroxidase or a deferrochelatase. Like Mt-DyP, M. tuberculosis iron storage ferritin protein, Mt-BfrB, and an M. tuberculosis protein involved in folate biosynthesis, 7,8-dihydroneopterin aldolase (Mt-FolB), have C-terminal tails that could also interact with Mt-Enc. For the first time, we show by co-purification and electron microscopy that mycobacteria via Mt-Enc can encapsulate Mt-DyP, Mt-BfrB, and Mt-FolB. Functional studies of free or encapsulated proteins demonstrate that they retain their enzymatic activity within the Mt-Enc nanocompartment. Mt-DyP, Mt-FolB, and Mt-BfrB all have antioxidant properties, suggesting that if these proteins are encapsulated by Mt-Enc, then this nanocage may play a role in the M. tuberculosis oxidative stress response. This report provides initial structural and biochemical clues regarding the molecular mechanisms that utilize compartmentalization by which the mycobacterial cell may aid in detoxification of the local environment to ensure long term survival.

Introduction

The etiologic agent of tuberculosis, Mycobacterium tuberculosis , infects ∼11.1 million people per year, resulting in over 1.3 million deaths worldwide ( 1 ). With the emergence of M. tuberculosis strains resistant to the major anti-tuberculosis therapies, the discovery of novel drug targets is imperative to triumph over tuberculosis infection. Deciphering the complicated biology of M. tuberculosis , which has both active and latent forms, will aid in the discovery of new therapeutics to combat this highly successful pathogen.

In mammalian cells, exosomes are secreted vesicles proposed to be involved in mediating the adaptive immune response ( 2 , 3 ). Mycobacterial proteins have been discovered in exosomes of cells infected with M. tuberculosis . One mycobacterial protein identified within exosomes was a 29-kDa culture filtrate protein (CFP-29, Rv0798c) ( 4 ), reported to be secreted ( 5 ), although lacking a signal peptide. CFP-29 has 58% amino acid identity to Brevibacterium linens M18 linocin protein (also known as encapsulin, Bl-Enc) 3 ( 5 ), implying that CFP-29 is an M. tuberculosis encapsulin homolog (Mt-Enc). Throughout the remainder of this work, CFP-29 (Rv0798c) will be referred to as Mt-Enc. Additionally, the gene encoding Bl-Enc is within a two-gene operon containing a gene encoding for a dye-decolorizing peroxidase (Bl-DyP) with a ∼25-amino acid C-terminal extension ( Fig. 1 A ). The crystal structure of a close homolog of Bl-Enc, Thermotoga maritima encapsulin (Tm-Enc), has been determined, revealing a 60-subunit icosahedral nanocompartment ( 6 ). Electron microscopy (EM) shows that coexpression of Bl-DyP and Bl-Enc results in encapsulation of Bl-DyP within the Bl-Enc nanocage, where encapsulation of Bl-DyP is abolished upon truncation of its C-terminal extension ( 6 ). Finally, a search across bacterial genomes demonstrates that genes encoding for Enc are usually in two-gene operons with a gene encoding for either DyP or ferritin-like proteins, all with predominately hydrophobic C-terminal extensions ( Fig. 1 A ) ( 6 ). These observations suggest that Enc proteins compartmentalize DyP or ferritin-like proteins via their C-terminal tails. Notably, both DyPs and ferritin proteins possess antioxidant properties ( 7 , 8 ).

Mt-Enc, the only homolog of Enc in M. tuberculosis , is part of a two-gene operon with the gene for a DyP-like peroxidase (Mt-DyP, Rv0799c), where Mt-DyP contains a C-terminal extension similar to Bl-DyP ( Fig. 1 A ). DyP-type peroxidases are a novel family of fungal and bacterial heme-dependent peroxidases that can oxidize lignin and anthraquinone dyes in the presence of H 2 O 2 ( 9 , 10 ). However, the Escherichia coli DyP ortholog, Ec-YfeX, was proposed to possess deferrochelatase activity, where Ec-YfeX can catalyze the extraction of iron from heme without cleavage of the tetrapyrrole ring ( 11 ), although in a parallel study, Ec-YfeX was demonstrated to be a heme-dependent peroxidase with no detectable deferrochelatase activity ( 12 ). If Mt-DyP is a heme-dependent peroxidase, then Mt-DyP may protect M. tuberculosis against host oxidative assault by H 2 O 2 .

Notably, two other M. tuberculosis proteins have aliphatic C-terminal extensions beyond what is seen in other bacterial homologs and similar to Mt-DyP, suggesting that these proteins may also be cargo proteins for Mt-Enc. Mt-BfrB, one of the two iron storage ferritin proteins within M. tuberculosis , has a C-terminal tail ( Fig. 1 A ) and has displayed antioxidant properties ( 13 , 14 ). In addition, an enzyme involved in folate metabolism, 7,8-dihydroneopterin aldolase (Mt-FolB), also has an aliphatic C-terminal extension ( Fig. 1 B ). In a previous study, Mt-FolB structure determination shows that this C-terminal extension is disordered, and Mt-FolB enzymatic activity is independent of the C-terminal tail. Furthermore, its substrate has also been implicated in M. tuberculosis resistance to oxidative stress ( 15 – 17 ).

Herein we describe the Mt-Enc encapsulation of three different M. tuberculosis enzymes, Mt-DyP, Mt-BfrB, and Mt-FolB, all of which possess antioxidant properties. We show by EM that Mt-Enc can encapsulate M. tuberculosis cargo enzymes and show by biochemical analyses that the enzymes remain active within the Mt-Enc nanocompartment. We also carried out preliminary characterization of Mt-DyP and suggest that it is primarily a heme peroxidase. To our knowledge, this study provides the initial report into mycobacterial compartmentalization of enzymes, whereby protein encapsulation by Mt-Enc may function to combat oxidative stress within the human host.

DISCUSSION

Encapsulins are a recently discovered family of conserved prokaryotic proteinaceous nanocompartments, first described by Sutter et al. ( 6 ). Enc cargo proteins have C-terminal tails required for their encapsulation, where Enc and cargo proteins are usually found in a two-gene operon, suggesting tight translational coupling. We have demonstrated that M. tuberculosis has an Enc nanocompartment similar in diameter to that of Tm-Enc ( 6 ), implying that it is also a 60-subunit icosahedral shell. Mt-Enc exists in a two-gene operon, where the upstream Mt-DyP harbors a C-terminal extension. Coexpression of Mt-DyP and Mt-Enc results in encapsulation of Mt-DyP by Mt-Enc, an interaction mediated by the C-terminal tail of Mt-DyP. Although it is possible that Mt-Enc and Mt-DyP are expressed as a polycistronic mRNA transcript, the transcriptional and translational regulation of these proteins in M. tuberculosis is unknown. Additionally, we have demonstrated that Mt-BfrB and Mt-FolB are also encapsulated by Mt-Enc, via an interaction mediated by the C-terminal extension of each protein cargo, where loss of this C-terminal tail abolishes the interaction with Mt-Enc and their subsequent encapsulation. These results show that Mt-Enc could potentially compartmentalize other mycobacterial enzymes that bear a C-terminal tail.

Compartmentalization is important for organization, increasing the local concentration of functionally related enzymes and confining unstable reaction intermediates within the cell. Many bacteria produce protein-based microcompartments (MCPs) that are larger than encapsulin nanocages but also encapsulate various cargo enzymes ( 48 , 49 ). In Salmonella enterica , MCPs are proposed to organize reactions as well as isolate “unstable” reaction intermediates that may form within the compartment ( 48 ), such as proteins involved in 1,2-propanediol utilization (Pdu) ( 50 ) and ethanolamine utilization (Eut) ( 48 ). Indeed, a recent comparative genomics study predicts that in some organisms, MCPs may encapsulate bacterioferritin ( 51 ), similar to Mt-Enc. A common feature of MCP-compartmentalized enzymes is an additional short N-terminal sequence found to be necessary for targeting enzymes to the MCP interior ( 48 , 52 ), akin to the cargo protein C-terminal extensions required for their encapsulation in Enc ( 6 ). It could be surmised that engineering a C-terminal tail on an enzyme could potentiate encapsulation by Mt-Enc and possibly deliver and/or release cargo enzymes under conditions where the compartment disassembles.

This study and previous ones ( 6 , 27 ) demonstrate that encapsulins from four different organisms self-assemble into 60-subunit nanocompartments with a diameter of ∼220–240 Å and can accommodate multiple copies of a single cargo protein. Distant sequence homologs of Tm-Enc, Pyrocuccus furiosus PfV, and the major caspid protein gp5 of the HK97 virus (18 and 9% sequence identity, respectively) are close structural homologs of Tm-Enc (root mean square deviations of 2.39 and 2.65 Å, respectively) ( 53 ). All three proteins form icosahedral cages; however, Tm-Enc has T = 1 symmetry with 60 subunits/cage ( 6 ), PfV has T = 3 symmetry with 180 subunits/cage ( 53 ), and gp5 has T = 7 symmetry with 420 subunits/cage ( 54 ). Thus, one can postulate that Enc homologs, such as Mt-Enc, may form higher symmetry icosahedral cages in vivo to allow for more than one cargo protein or even an entire reaction pathway to be encapsulated, as observed for MCPs ( 49 ).

Passage of substrates through encapsulin is currently unknown. Charged pores observed for Tm-Enc may mediate substrate specificity ( 6 ), regulating the flux of substrates in and out of encapsulin that are available to the protein cargo. This may also be the case with Mt-Enc and the differential activity of encapsulated Mt-DyP with various electron-donor substrates, where guaiacol is neutral and ABTS is negatively charged. Rhamanpour and Bugg ( 27 ) reported peroxidase activity of Rj-DypB when encapsulated within Rj-Enc with lignin as a substrate. This was an unexpected result because the expected pore size of Enc (<5 Å wide) is not large enough to accommodate the passage of lignin ( 27 ), suggesting that the Enc pore is dynamic. Indeed, utilizing dynamic light scattering, it was observed that native Rj-Enc has a diameter of 220 Å; however, after acidic disassembly followed by reassembly with Rj-DyP, the complex has a diameter of 310 Å ( 27 ). The flexibility of the Enc monomer may allow Enc to form compartments consisting of more than 60 subunits or to expand its pore size to modulate substrate entry ( 6 , 27 ).

Mycobacteria are resistant to assault by host oxidative metabolites ( 46 ), where the presence of iron storage proteins and peroxidases aids in mycobacterial viability. A recent study demonstrated that an M. tuberculosis double deletion mutant of bfrA and bfrB exhibited vulnerability to oxidative stress ( 14 ), and the MtbΔ bfrB mutant has greater susceptibility than the MtbΔ bfrA mutant ( 13 , 14 ), highlighting the importance of Mt-BfrB in M. tuberculosis survival during oxidative assault. Mt-BfrB has antioxidant properties by storing iron, thereby preventing the generation of hydroxyl radicals upon oxygen exposure. Furthermore, in vivo , it has been shown that Mt-BfrB is up-regulated under hypoxic conditions ( 55 ), during assault by NO donors ( 56 ), and during adaptation to the stationary phase ( 57 ). We have demonstrated that Mt-DyP can function as a heme-dependent peroxidase; thus, Mt-DyP may aid in mycobacteria resistance to host oxidative assault ( 46 ). This could potentially hold true for Mt-FolB. Mt-FolB is a 7,8-dihydroneopterin aldolase that is involved in folate biosynthesis, converting folate precursor 7,8-dihydroneopterin to 6-hydroxymethyl-7,8-dihydropterin. Mt-FolB displays cooperative dependence on 7,8-dihydroneopterin binding from an apotetrameric form to active substrate-bound octameric form ( 16 ). Furthermore, its substrate possesses antioxidant properties ( 15 , 17 ). Thus, if M. tuberculosis encounters host oxidative stress, then 7,8-dihydroneopterin may function as an antioxidant maintaining a relatively low cellular concentration. However, when oxidative stress diminishes, the concentration of 7,8-dihydroneopterin would increase to the critical level to form active, octameric Mt-FolB, and M. tuberculosis would continue with its normal folate biosynthetic pathway ( 16 ). Recently, an in vitro study showed that there were five Mt-FolB reaction products ( 58 ). Another potential benefit of encapsulation of Mt-FolB could be to ( a ) prevent side products of the reaction forming and ( b ) allow 7,8-dihydroneopterin to remain “free” within the cytosol to act as an antioxidant. Thus, M. tuberculosis encapsulation of proteins may provide the bacterium multiple mechanisms for protecting itself from oxidative damage arising from host immune defenses.

Encapsulation of DyP and ferritin homologs has previously been observed in other organisms ( 6 , 27 ); however, there is no evidence that Enc interacts with FolB in other organisms. A recent study suggests that a potential Haliangium ochraceum aldolase is compartmentalized by a bacterial BMC by its C-terminal extension ( Fig. 1 A ) ( 59 ). Furthermore, M. tuberculosis i n vivo microarray data suggest that Mt-Enc and Mt-FolB both are up-regulated under hypoxic conditions ( 60 ) and exposure to cephalexin ( 61 ), further suggesting that they indeed may interact.

This study provides the first evidence of a mycobacterial nanocompartment that has the ability to encapsulate cargo proteins, where encapsulated cargo proteins retain their enzymatic activities. To date, there are no reports illustrating the formation of a proteinaceous nanocompartment in mycobacteria. It is unknown which cargo protein(s) Mt-Enc encapsulates in vivo , how it is regulated, and whether it can accommodate multiple cargo proteins. As has been suggested for other bacterial compartments ( 62 ), the potential for carrying cargo and apparent protein stability make Mt-Enc an appealing vehicle to be exploited as a drug delivery system.
