---
pmid: '21703453'
title: A phosphorylation cycle shapes gradients of the DYRK family kinase Pom1 at
  the plasma membrane.
authors:
- Hachet O
- Berthelot-Grosjean M
- Kokkoris K
- Vincenzetti V
- Moosbrugger J
- Martin SG
journal: Cell
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.05.014
---

# A phosphorylation cycle shapes gradients of the DYRK family kinase Pom1 at the plasma membrane.
**Authors:** Hachet O, Berthelot-Grosjean M, Kokkoris K, Vincenzetti V, Moosbrugger J, Martin SG
**Journal:** Cell (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2011.05.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2011.05.014)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2011 Jun 24;145(7):1116-28. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.05.014.

A phosphorylation cycle shapes gradients of the DYRK family kinase Pom1 at the 
plasma membrane.

Hachet O(1), Berthelot-Grosjean M, Kokkoris K, Vincenzetti V, Moosbrugger J, 
Martin SG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Fundamental Microbiology, Faculty of Biology and Medicine, 
University of Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.

Concentration gradients regulate many cell biological and developmental 
processes. In rod-shaped fission yeast cells, polar cortical gradients of the 
DYRK family kinase Pom1 couple cell length with mitotic commitment by inhibiting 
a mitotic inducer positioned at midcell. However, how Pom1 gradients are 
established is unknown. Here, we show that Tea4, which is normally deposited at 
cell tips by microtubules, is both necessary and, upon ectopic cortical 
localization, sufficient to recruit Pom1 to the cell cortex. Pom1 then moves 
laterally at the plasma membrane, which it binds through a basic region 
exhibiting direct lipid interaction. Pom1 autophosphorylates in this region to 
lower lipid affinity and promote membrane release. Tea4 triggers Pom1 plasma 
membrane association by promoting its dephosphorylation through the protein 
phosphatase 1 Dis2. We propose that local dephosphorylation induces Pom1 
membrane association and nucleates a gradient shaped by the opposing actions of 
lateral diffusion and autophosphorylation-dependent membrane detachment.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.05.014
PMID: 21703453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
