---
pmid: '26609151'
title: Defects in Synaptic Plasticity, Reduced NMDA-Receptor Transport, and Instability
  of Postsynaptic Density Proteins in Mice Lacking Microtubule-Associated Protein
  1A.
authors:
- Takei Y
- Kikkawa YS
- Atapour N
- Hensch TK
- Hirokawa N
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6705472
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2671-15.2015
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Defects in Synaptic Plasticity, Reduced NMDA-Receptor Transport, and Instability of Postsynaptic Density Proteins in Mice Lacking Microtubule-Associated Protein 1A.
**Authors:** Takei Y, Kikkawa YS, Atapour N, Hensch TK, Hirokawa N
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2671-15.2015](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2671-15.2015)
**PMC:** [PMC6705472](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6705472/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2015 Nov 25;35(47):15539-54. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2671-15.2015.

Defects in Synaptic Plasticity, Reduced NMDA-Receptor Transport, and Instability 
of Postsynaptic Density Proteins in Mice Lacking Microtubule-Associated Protein 
1A.

Takei Y(1), Kikkawa YS(2), Atapour N(3), Hensch TK(4), Hirokawa N(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Graduate School of Medicine, 
University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan, Department of Anatomy and 
Neuroscience, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 
305-8575, Japan.
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Graduate School of Medicine, 
University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan, Department of 
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, University of 
Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.
(3)Laboratory for Neuronal Circuit Development, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, 
Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.
(4)Laboratory for Neuronal Circuit Development, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, 
Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan, Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, 
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, and.
(5)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Graduate School of Medicine, 
University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan, Center of Excellence in 
Genome Medicine Research, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia 
hirokawa@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

Microtubule-associated protein 1A (MAP1A) is a member of the major non-motor 
microtubule-binding proteins. It has been suggested that MAP1A tethers NMDA 
receptors (NRs) to the cytoskeleton by binding with proteins postsynaptic 
density (PSD)-93 and PSD-95, although the function of MAP1A in vivo remains 
elusive. The present study demonstrates that mouse MAP1A plays an essential role 
in maintaining synaptic plasticity through an analysis of MAP1A knock-out mice. 
The mice exhibited learning disabilities, which correlated with decreased 
long-term potentiation and long-term depression in the hippocampal neurons, as 
well as a concomitant reduction in the extent of NR-dependent EPSCs. Surface 
expression of NR2A and NR2B subunits also decreased. Enhanced activity-dependent 
degradation of PSD-93 and reduced transport of NR2A/2B in dendrites was likely 
responsible for altered receptor function in neurons lacking MAP1A. These data 
suggest that tethering of NR2A/2B with the cytoskeleton through MAP1A is 
fundamental for synaptic function.
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: This work is the first report showing the significance 
of non-motor microtubule-associated protein in maintaining synaptic plasticity 
thorough a novel mechanism: anchoring of NMDA receptors to cytoskeleton supports 
transport of NMDA receptors and stabilizes postsynaptic density scaffolds 
binding to NMDA receptors. Newly generated mutant mice lacking MAP1A exhibited 
learning disabilities and reduced synaptic plasticity attributable to 
disruptions of the anchoring machinery.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/3515539-16$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2671-15.2015
PMCID: PMC6705472
PMID: 26609151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.
