---
pmid: '12900424'
title: 'A novel interaction between perlecan protein core and progranulin: potential
  effects on tumor growth.'
authors:
- Gonzalez EM
- Mongiat M
- Slater SJ
- Baffa R
- Iozzo RV
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.C300310200
---

# A novel interaction between perlecan protein core and progranulin: potential effects on tumor growth.
**Authors:** Gonzalez EM, Mongiat M, Slater SJ, Baffa R, Iozzo RV
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.C300310200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.C300310200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 3;278(40):38113-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C300310200. Epub
2003  Aug 4.

A novel interaction between perlecan protein core and progranulin: potential 
effects on tumor growth.

Gonzalez EM(1), Mongiat M, Slater SJ, Baffa R, Iozzo RV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Anatomy, and Cell Biology, Thomas Jefferson 
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

In an in vivo search of novel partners for perlecan, a major heparan sulfate 
proteoglycan of basement membranes and cell surfaces, we identified progranulin, 
a secreted growth factor, as a strong interacting protein. Unambiguous 
interaction, first observed with the yeast two-hybrid system, was corroborated 
by co-immunoprecipitation studies using cell-free transcription/translation and 
transient cell transfection assays. The interaction of progranulin with perlecan 
domain V involved the first two laminin- and epidermal growth factor-like 
repeats. Within progranulin, the subdomains interacting most with perlecan 
harbored granulins F and B. Kinetics analysis of the interaction using surface 
plasmon resonance showed a saturable binding of relative low affinity (KD 
approximately 1 microM). These results were supported by significant expression 
overlap of these two proteins in a series of ovarian tumor tissue microarrays. 
Progranulin was present within proliferating blood vessels of ovarian carcinomas 
and perivascular matrices, with a distribution similar to perlecan. Notably, 
both progranulin and domain V stimulated the growth of adrenal carcinoma cells. 
However, when used together in equimolar amounts, the two proteins counteracted 
each other's activity. Thus, progranulin/perlecan interaction could contribute 
to a fine regulation of tumor angiogenesis and could ultimately affect cancer 
growth.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.C300310200
PMID: 12900424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
