---
pmid: '18591258'
title: A yeast exosome cofactor, Mpp6, functions in RNA surveillance and in the degradation
  of noncoding RNA transcripts.
authors:
- Milligan L
- Decourty L
- Saveanu C
- Rappsilber J
- Ceulemans H
- Jacquier A
- Tollervey D
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2519741
doi: 10.1128/MCB.00463-08
---

# A yeast exosome cofactor, Mpp6, functions in RNA surveillance and in the degradation of noncoding RNA transcripts.
**Authors:** Milligan L, Decourty L, Saveanu C, Rappsilber J, Ceulemans H, Jacquier A, Tollervey D
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.00463-08](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.00463-08)
**PMC:** [PMC2519741](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2519741/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Sep;28(17):5446-57. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00463-08. Epub 2008
Jun  30.

A yeast exosome cofactor, Mpp6, functions in RNA surveillance and in the 
degradation of noncoding RNA transcripts.

Milligan L(1), Decourty L, Saveanu C, Rappsilber J, Ceulemans H, Jacquier A, 
Tollervey D.

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh 
EH9 3JR, United Kingdom.

A genome-wide screen for synthetic lethal (SL) interactions with loss of the 
nuclear exosome cofactors Rrp47/Lrp1 or Air1 identified 3'-->5' exonucleases, 
the THO complex required for mRNP assembly, and Ynr024w (Mpp6). SL interactions 
with mpp6Delta were confirmed for rrp47Delta and nuclear exosome component Rrp6. 
The results of bioinformatic analyses revealed homology between Mpp6 and a human 
exosome cofactor, underlining the high conservation of the RNA surveillance 
system. Mpp6 is an RNA binding protein that physically associates with the 
exosome and was localized throughout the nucleus. The results of functional 
analyses demonstrated roles for Mpp6 in the surveillance of both pre-rRNA and 
pre-mRNAs and in the degradation of "cryptic" noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs) derived 
from intergenic regions and the ribosomal DNA spacer heterochromatin. 
Strikingly, these ncRNAs are also targeted by other exosome cofactors, including 
Rrp47, the TRAMP complex (which includes Air1), and the Nrd1/Nab3 complex, and 
are degraded by both Rrp6 and the core exosome. Heterochromatic transcripts and 
other ncRNAs are characterized by very rapid degradation, and we predict that 
functional redundancy is an important feature of ncRNA metabolism.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00463-08
PMCID: PMC2519741
PMID: 18591258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
