---
pmid: '19653274'
title: Lef-1 isoforms regulate different target genes and reduce cellular adhesion.
authors:
- Jesse S
- Koenig A
- Ellenrieder V
- Menke A
journal: Int J Cancer
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/ijc.24802
---

# Lef-1 isoforms regulate different target genes and reduce cellular adhesion.
**Authors:** Jesse S, Koenig A, Ellenrieder V, Menke A
**Journal:** Int J Cancer (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ijc.24802](https://doi.org/10.1002/ijc.24802)

## Abstract

1. Int J Cancer. 2010 Mar 1;126(5):1109-20. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24802.

Lef-1 isoforms regulate different target genes and reduce cellular adhesion.

Jesse S(1), Koenig A, Ellenrieder V, Menke A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, University of Ulm, D-89081 Ulm, Germany.

The lymphoid enhancer factor 1 (Lef-1) belongs to the nuclear transducers of 
canonical Wnt-signalling in embryogenesis and cancer. Lef-1 acts, in cooperation 
with beta-catenin, as a context-dependent transcriptional activator or 
repressor, thereby influencing multiple cellular functions such as 
proliferation, differentiation and migration. Here we report that an increased 
Lef-1 expression in human pancreatic cancer correlates with advanced tumour 
stages. In pancreatic tumours, two different transcripts of Lef-1 have been 
detected in various stages, as demonstrated by RT-PCR analysis. One transcript 
was identified as the full length Lef-1 (Lef-1 FL), whereas the second, shorter 
transcript lacked exon VI (Lef-1 Deltaexon VI) compared to the published 
sequence. Comparative analysis of these two Lef-1 variants revealed that they 
exhibit different cellular effects after transient expression in pancreatic 
carcinoma cells. Forced expression of Lef-1 Deltaexon VI inhibited E-cadherin 
expression in a beta-catenin-independent way. Increased amounts of Lef-1 
Deltaexon VI resulted in reduced cellular aggregation and increased cell 
migration. Expression of Lef-1 FL, but not the newly identified Lef-1 Deltaexon 
VI, induced the expression of the cell cycle regulating proteins c-myc and 
cyclin D1 in cooperation with beta-catenin and it enhanced cell proliferation. 
Our findings indicate that expression of alternatively spliced Lef-1 isoforms is 
involved in the determination of proliferative or migratory characteristics of 
pancreatic carcinoma cells.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.24802
PMID: 19653274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
