---
pmid: '16968738'
title: Selective membrane exclusion in phagocytic and macropinocytic cups.
authors:
- Mercanti V
- Charette SJ
- Bennett N
- Ryckewaert JJ
- Letourneur F
- Cosson P
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.03190
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Selective membrane exclusion in phagocytic and macropinocytic cups.
**Authors:** Mercanti V, Charette SJ, Bennett N, Ryckewaert JJ, Letourneur F, Cosson P
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.03190](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.03190)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2006 Oct 1;119(Pt 19):4079-87. doi: 10.1242/jcs.03190. Epub 2006
Sep  12.

Selective membrane exclusion in phagocytic and macropinocytic cups.

Mercanti V(1), Charette SJ, Bennett N, Ryckewaert JJ, Letourneur F, Cosson P.

Author information:
(1)Université de Genève, Centre Médical Universitaire, Département de 
Physiologie Cellulaire et Métabolisme, 1 rue Michel Servet, CH-1211 Genève 4, 
Switzerland.

Specialized eukaryotic cells can ingest large particles and sequester them 
within membrane-delimited phagosomes. Many studies have described the delivery 
of lysosomal proteins to the phagosome, but little is known about membrane 
sorting during the early stages of phagosome formation. Here we used 
Dictyostelium discoideum amoebae to analyze the membrane composition of newly 
formed phagosomes. The membrane delimiting the closing phagocytic cup was 
essentially derived from the plasma membrane, but a subgroup of proteins was 
specifically excluded. Interestingly the same phenomenon was observed during the 
formation of macropinosomes, suggesting that the same sorting mechanisms are at 
play during phagocytosis and macropinocytosis. Analysis of mutant strains 
revealed that clathrin-associated adaptor complexes AP-1, -2 and -3 were not 
necessary for this selective exclusion and, accordingly, ultrastructural 
analysis revealed no evidence for vesicular transport around phagocytic cups. 
Our results suggest the existence of a new, as yet uncharacterized, sorting 
mechanism in phagocytic and macropinocytic cups.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.03190
PMID: 16968738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
