---
reference_id: PMID:9502717
title: Antimorphic goosecoids.
authors:
- Ferreiro B
- Artinger M
- Cho K
- Niehrs C
journal: Development
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1242/dev.125.8.1347
keywords:
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Body Patterning/physiology
- DNA Primers
- DNA-Binding Proteins/biosynthesis
- "Embryo, Nonmammalian/physiology"
- Embryonic Induction
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Goosecoid Protein
- Herpes Simplex Virus Protein Vmw65/biosynthesis
- Homeodomain Proteins
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Phenotype
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "RNA, Messenger/biosynthesis"
- Recombinant Fusion Proteins/biosynthesis
- Repressor Proteins
- Transcription Factors
- "Transcription, Genetic"
- Transcriptional Activation
- Xenopus/embryology
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Antimorphic goosecoids.
**Authors:** Ferreiro B, Artinger M, Cho K, Niehrs C
**Journal:** Development (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.125.8.1347](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.125.8.1347)

## Content

1. Development. 1998 Apr;125(8):1347-59. doi: 10.1242/dev.125.8.1347.

Antimorphic goosecoids.

Ferreiro B(1), Artinger M, Cho K, Niehrs C.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Embryology, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, 
Heidelberg, Germany.

goosecoid (gsc) is a homeobox gene expressed in the Spemann organizer that has 
been implicated in vertebrate axis formation. Here antimorphic gscs are 
described. One antimorphic gsc (MTgsc) was fortuitously created by adding 5 myc 
epitopes to the N terminus of gsc. The other antimorph (VP16gsc) contains the 
transcriptional activation domain of VP16. mRNA injection of either antimorph 
inhibits dorsal gastrulation movements and leads to embryos with severe axial 
defects. They upregulate ventral gene expression in the dorsal marginal zone and 
inhibit dorsal mesoderm differentiation. Like the VP16 domain, the N-terminal 
myc tags act by converting wild-type gsc from a transcriptional repressor into 
an activator. However, unlike MTgsc, VP16gsc is able at low dose to uncouple 
head from trunk formation, indicating that different antimorphs may elicit 
distinct phenotypes. The experiments reveal that gsc and/or gsc-related genes 
function in axis formation and gastrulation. Moreover, this work warns against 
using myc tags indiscriminately for labeling DNA-binding proteins.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.125.8.1347
PMID: 9502717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]