---
pmid: '20732328'
title: Solution structure of the heterotrimeric complex between the interaction domains
  of RFX5 and RFXAP from the RFX gene regulatory complex.
authors:
- Laird KM
- Briggs LL
- Boss JM
- Summers MF
- Garvie CW
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2949527
doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.08.025
---

# Solution structure of the heterotrimeric complex between the interaction domains of RFX5 and RFXAP from the RFX gene regulatory complex.
**Authors:** Laird KM, Briggs LL, Boss JM, Summers MF, Garvie CW
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmb.2010.08.025](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2010.08.025)
**PMC:** [PMC2949527](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2949527/)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Biol. 2010 Oct 15;403(1):40-51. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.08.025. Epub
2010  Aug 21.

Solution structure of the heterotrimeric complex between the interaction domains 
of RFX5 and RFXAP from the RFX gene regulatory complex.

Laird KM(1), Briggs LL(1), Boss JM(2), Summers MF(1), Garvie CW(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Maryland, Baltimore 
County, 1000 Hilltop Circle, Baltimore, MD 21250, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of 
Medicine, 1510 Clifton Road, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Maryland, Baltimore 
County, 1000 Hilltop Circle, Baltimore, MD 21250, USA. Electronic address: 
colin.garvie@roche.com.

The mammalian immune response is mediated by a heterotetrameric transcriptional 
control complex, called regulatory factor X (RFX), that regulates the expression 
of major histocompatibility complex class II genes. RFX comprises three 
proteins: RFX5 (two copies), RFXAP, and RFXB, and mutations and deletions that 
prevent the assembly of the RFX complex have been linked to a severe 
immunodeficiency disorder. Two RFX5 molecules and one RFXAP molecule assemble in 
the cytoplasm prior to nuclear localization, a process mediated by an N-terminal 
"dimerization domain" of RFX5 (RFX5(N)) and a C-terminal domain of RFXAP 
(RFXAP(C)). We previously presented evidence that RFXAP(C) is unstructured in 
the absence of RFX5(N) but adopts a regular structure in the RFX5(N)(2)-RFXAP(C) 
complex and that the RFX5(N)(2)-RFXAP(C) complex binds RFXB with high affinity. 
We now report the structure of the RFX5(N)(2)-RFXAP(C) complex, determined in 
solution by (15)N- and (13)C-edited NMR spectroscopy. RFX5(N) consists of a long 
central helix flanked by two shorter helices. The central helices of the two 
RFX5(N) molecules form an antiparallel coiled coil, and the flanking helices 
pack at the ends of the long helices in a perpendicular arrangement such that 
the RFX5(N) dimer is shaped like a staple. RFXAP(C) consists of two α-helices 
that form a V-shaped structure that packs within the RFX5(N)(2) staple. Leucine 
residues in the leucine-rich region of RFX5(N) (62-LYLYLQL-68) that are critical 
for major histocompatibility complex class II gene expression in vivo contribute 
to both the dimer (Leu64 and Leu68) and the RFX5(N)-RFXAP(C) interfaces (Leu62 
and Leu66). The clustering of hydrophobic residues from different regions of 
RFXAP(C) suggests a potential binding site for RFXB.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.08.025
PMCID: PMC2949527
PMID: 20732328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
