---
pmid: '20068069'
title: Clusterin facilitates COMMD1 and I-kappaB degradation to enhance NF-kappaB
  activity in prostate cancer cells.
authors:
- Zoubeidi A
- Ettinger S
- Beraldi E
- Hadaschik B
- Zardan A
- Klomp LW
- Nelson CC
- Rennie PS
- Gleave ME
journal: Mol Cancer Res
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2808437
doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-09-0277
---

# Clusterin facilitates COMMD1 and I-kappaB degradation to enhance NF-kappaB activity in prostate cancer cells.
**Authors:** Zoubeidi A, Ettinger S, Beraldi E, Hadaschik B, Zardan A, Klomp LW, Nelson CC, Rennie PS, Gleave ME
**Journal:** Mol Cancer Res (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-09-0277](https://doi.org/10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-09-0277)
**PMC:** [PMC2808437](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2808437/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cancer Res. 2010 Jan;8(1):119-30. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-09-0277. Epub
 2010 Jan 12.

Clusterin facilitates COMMD1 and I-kappaB degradation to enhance NF-kappaB 
activity in prostate cancer cells.

Zoubeidi A(1), Ettinger S, Beraldi E, Hadaschik B, Zardan A, Klomp LW, Nelson 
CC, Rennie PS, Gleave ME.

Author information:
(1)The Vancouver Prostate Centre and Department of Urological Sciences, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Secretory clusterin (sCLU) is a stress-activated, cytoprotective chaperone that 
confers broad-spectrum cancer treatment resistance, and its targeted inhibitor 
(OGX-011) is currently in phase II trials for prostate, lung, and breast cancer. 
However, the molecular mechanisms by which sCLU inhibits treatment-induced 
apoptosis in prostate cancer remain incompletely defined. We report that sCLU 
increases NF-kappaB nuclear translocation and transcriptional activity by 
serving as a ubiquitin-binding protein that enhances COMMD1 and I-kappaB 
proteasomal degradation by interacting with members of the SCF-betaTrCP E3 
ligase family. Knockdown of sCLU in prostate cancer cells stabilizes COMMD1 and 
I-kappaB, thereby sequestrating NF-kappaB in the cytoplasm and decreasing 
NF-kappaB transcriptional activity. Comparative microarray profiling of 
sCLU-overexpressing and sCLU-knockdown prostate cancer cells confirmed that the 
expression of many NF-kappaB-regulated genes positively correlates with sCLU 
levels. We propose that elevated levels of sCLU promote prostate cancer cell 
survival by facilitating degradation of COMMD1 and I-kappaB, thereby activating 
the canonical NF-kappaB pathway.

DOI: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-09-0277
PMCID: PMC2808437
PMID: 20068069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
