---
pmid: '11834450'
title: Structurally distinct membrane-associated and soluble forms of GH-binding protein
  in the mouse.
authors:
- Cerio RJ
- Xing F
- Fatula RJ
- Keith DE
- Yang X
- Talamantes F
- Southard JN
- Southard JN
journal: J Endocrinol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1677/joe.0.1720321
---

# Structurally distinct membrane-associated and soluble forms of GH-binding protein in the mouse.
**Authors:** Cerio RJ, Xing F, Fatula RJ, Keith DE, Yang X, Talamantes F, Southard JN, Southard JN
**Journal:** J Endocrinol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1677/joe.0.1720321](https://doi.org/10.1677/joe.0.1720321)

## Abstract

1. J Endocrinol. 2002 Feb;172(2):321-31. doi: 10.1677/joe.0.1720321.

Structurally distinct membrane-associated and soluble forms of GH-binding 
protein in the mouse.

Cerio RJ(1), Xing F, Fatula RJ, Keith DE, Yang X, Talamantes F, Southard JN, 
Southard JN.

Author information:
(1)Biochemistry Program, Indiana University of Pennsylvania, 975 Oakland Avenue, 
Indiana, Pennsylvania 15705, USA.

It has previously been shown that the large increase in GH-binding capacity of 
mouse liver microsomes during pregnancy is due largely to an increase in the 
amount of GH-binding protein (GHBP), with a more modest increase in GH receptor 
(GHR). Here we show that mouse liver GHBP is predominantly present as a 
membrane-associated protein structurally distinct from the soluble form of GHBP 
present in serum. Liver GHBP is associated with both intracellular membranes and 
the plasma membrane. Membrane-associated GHBP and soluble GHBP appear to be 
identical polypeptides distinguished by the addition of different N-glycans to 
asparagine residues. The pattern of release of GHBP from membranes by various 
treatments indicates that GHBP associates with membranes through noncovalent 
interactions with one or more membrane protein, but not with GHR. Covalent 
crosslinking provides evidence for several GHBP-associated membrane 
polypeptides, with molecular masses ranging from 58 kDa to over 200 kDa. These 
studies in the mouse and similar studies in the rat suggest that GHBP is an 
important cell-surface receptor for GH in the liver of these species. We 
postulate that an arginine-glycine-aspartic acid sequence found on rat and mouse 
GHBP but absent in other species is responsible for the association of GHBP with 
the plasma membrane by binding to one or more integrins on the surface of liver 
cells.

DOI: 10.1677/joe.0.1720321
PMID: 11834450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
