---
pmid: '25865831'
title: Drebrin depletion alters neurotransmitter receptor levels in protein complexes,
  dendritic spine morphogenesis and memory-related synaptic plasticity in the mouse
  hippocampus.
authors:
- Jung G
- Kim EJ
- Cicvaric A
- Sase S
- Gröger M
- Höger H
- Sialana FJ
- Berger J
- Monje FJ
- Lubec G
journal: J Neurochem
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/jnc.13119
---

# Drebrin depletion alters neurotransmitter receptor levels in protein complexes, dendritic spine morphogenesis and memory-related synaptic plasticity in the mouse hippocampus.
**Authors:** Jung G, Kim EJ, Cicvaric A, Sase S, Gröger M, Höger H, Sialana FJ, Berger J, Monje FJ, Lubec G
**Journal:** J Neurochem (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jnc.13119](https://doi.org/10.1111/jnc.13119)

## Abstract

1. J Neurochem. 2015 Jul;134(2):327-39. doi: 10.1111/jnc.13119. Epub 2015 Apr 29.

Drebrin depletion alters neurotransmitter receptor levels in protein complexes, 
dendritic spine morphogenesis and memory-related synaptic plasticity in the 
mouse hippocampus.

Jung G(1), Kim EJ(1), Cicvaric A(2), Sase S(1), Gröger M(3), Höger H(4), Sialana 
FJ(1), Berger J(5), Monje FJ(2), Lubec G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Department of Neurophysiology and Neuropharmacology, Center for Physiology 
and Pharmacology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(3)Core Facility Imaging, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Core Unit of Biomedical Research, Division of Laboratory Animal Science and 
Genetics, Medical University of Vienna, Himberg, Austria.
(5)Department of Pathobiology of the Nervous System, Center for Brain Research, 
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Drebrin an actin-bundling key regulator of dendritic spine genesis and 
morphology, has been recently proposed as a regulator of hippocampal 
glutamatergic activity which is critical for memory formation and maintenance. 
Here, we examined the effects of genetic deletion of drebrin on dendritic spine 
and on the level of complexes containing major brain receptors. To this end, 
homozygous and heterozygous drebrin knockout mice generated in our laboratory 
and related wild-type control animals were studied. Level of protein complexes 
containing dopamine receptor D1/dopamine receptor D2, 5-hydroxytryptamine 
receptor 1A (5-HT1(A)R), and 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 7 (5-HT7R) were 
significantly reduced in hippocampus of drebrin knockout mice whereas no 
significant changes were detected for GluR1, 2, and 3 and NR1 as examined by 
native gel-based immunoblotting. Drebrin depletion also altered dendritic spine 
formation, morphology, and reduced levels of dopamine receptor D1 in dendritic 
spines as evaluated using immunohistochemistry/confocal microscopy. 
Electrophysiological studies further showed significant reduction in 
memory-related hippocampal synaptic plasticity upon drebrin depletion. These 
findings provide unprecedented experimental support for a role of drebrin in the 
regulation of memory-related synaptic plasticity and neurotransmitter receptor 
signaling, offer relevant information regarding the interpretation of previous 
studies and help in the design of future studies on dendritic spines.

© 2015 International Society for Neurochemistry.

DOI: 10.1111/jnc.13119
PMID: 25865831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
