---
pmid: '17670746'
title: High glucose increases angiopoietin-2 transcription in microvascular endothelial
  cells through methylglyoxal modification of mSin3A.
authors:
- Yao D
- Taguchi T
- Matsumura T
- Pestell R
- Edelstein D
- Giardino I
- Suske G
- Rabbani N
- Thornalley PJ
- Sarthy VP
- Hammes HP
- Brownlee M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M704703200
---

# High glucose increases angiopoietin-2 transcription in microvascular endothelial cells through methylglyoxal modification of mSin3A.
**Authors:** Yao D, Taguchi T, Matsumura T, Pestell R, Edelstein D, Giardino I, Suske G, Rabbani N, Thornalley PJ, Sarthy VP, Hammes HP, Brownlee M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M704703200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M704703200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Oct 19;282(42):31038-45. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M704703200. Epub 
2007 Aug 1.

High glucose increases angiopoietin-2 transcription in microvascular endothelial 
cells through methylglyoxal modification of mSin3A.

Yao D(1), Taguchi T, Matsumura T, Pestell R, Edelstein D, Giardino I, Suske G, 
Rabbani N, Thornalley PJ, Sarthy VP, Hammes HP, Brownlee M.

Author information:
(1)Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation International Center for Diabetic 
Complications Research, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York 
10461, USA.

Methylglyoxal is a highly reactive dicarbonyl degradation product formed from 
triose phosphates during glycolysis. Methylglyoxal forms stable adducts 
primarily with arginine residues of intracellular proteins. The biologic role of 
this covalent modification in regulating cell function is not known. Here we 
report that in mouse kidney endothelial cells, high glucose causes increased 
methylglyoxal modification of the corepressor mSin3A. Methylglyoxal modification 
of mSin3A results in increased recruitment of O-GlcNAc-transferase, with 
consequent increased modification of Sp3 by O-linked N-acetylglucosamine. This 
modification of Sp3 causes decreased binding to a glucose-responsive GC-box in 
the angiopoietin-2 (Ang-2) promoter, resulting in increased Ang-2 expression. 
Increased Ang-2 expression induced by high glucose increased expression of 
intracellular adhesion molecule 1 and vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 in cells 
and in kidneys from diabetic mice and sensitized microvascular endothelial cells 
to the proinflammatory effects of tumor necrosis factor alpha. This novel 
mechanism for regulating gene expression may play a role in the pathobiology of 
diabetic vascular disease.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M704703200
PMID: 17670746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
