---
pmid: '21325504'
title: Frizzled3 is required for neurogenesis and target innervation during sympathetic
  nervous system development.
authors:
- Armstrong A
- Ryu YK
- Chieco D
- Kuruvilla R
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3046637
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4243-10.2011
---

# Frizzled3 is required for neurogenesis and target innervation during sympathetic nervous system development.
**Authors:** Armstrong A, Ryu YK, Chieco D, Kuruvilla R
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4243-10.2011](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4243-10.2011)
**PMC:** [PMC3046637](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3046637/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2011 Feb 16;31(7):2371-81. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4243-10.2011.

Frizzled3 is required for neurogenesis and target innervation during sympathetic 
nervous system development.

Armstrong A(1), Ryu YK, Chieco D, Kuruvilla R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21218, 
USA.

The sympathetic nervous system has served as an amenable model system to 
investigate molecular mechanisms underlying developmental processes in the 
nervous system. While much attention has been focused on neurotrophic factors 
controlling survival and connectivity of postmitotic sympathetic neurons, 
relatively little is known about signaling mechanisms regulating development of 
sympathetic neuroblasts. Here, we report that Frizzled3 (Fz3), a member of the 
Wnt receptor family, is essential for maintenance of dividing sympathetic 
neuroblasts. In Fz3(-/-) mice, sympathetic neuroblasts exhibit decreased 
proliferation and premature cell cycle exit. Fz3(-/-) sympathetic neuroblasts 
also undergo enhanced apoptosis, which could not be rescued by eliminating the 
proapoptotic factor, Bax. These deficits result in reduced generation of 
sympathetic neurons and pronounced decreases in the size of sympathetic chain 
ganglia. Furthermore, the axons of sympathetic neurons that persist in Fz3(-/-) 
ganglia are able to extend out of sympathetic ganglia toward distal targets, but 
fail to fully innervate final peripheral targets. The cell cycle exit, but not 
target innervation, defects in Fz3(-/-) mice are phenocopied in mice with 
conditional ablation of β-catenin, a component of canonical Wnt signaling, in 
sympathetic precursors. Sympathetic ganglia and innervation of target tissues 
appeared normal in mice lacking a core planar cell polarity (PCP) component, 
Vangl2. Together, our results suggest distinct roles for Fz3 during sympathetic 
neuron development; Fz3 acts at early developmental stages to maintain a pool of 
dividing sympathetic precursors, likely via activation of β-catenin, and Fz3 
functions at later stages to promote innervation of final peripheral targets by 
postmitotic sympathetic neurons.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4243-10.2011
PMCID: PMC3046637
PMID: 21325504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The sympathetic nervous system has served as an amenable model system to investigate molecular mechanisms underlying developmental processes in the nervous system. While much attention has been focused on neurotrophic factors controlling survival and connectivity of postmitotic sympathetic neurons, relatively little is known about signaling mechanisms regulating development of sympathetic neuroblasts. Here, we report that Frizzled3 (Fz3), a member of the Wnt receptor family, is essential for maintenance of dividing sympathetic neuroblasts. In Fz3 −/− mice, sympathetic neuroblasts exhibit decreased proliferation and premature cell cycle exit. Fz3 −/− sympathetic neuroblasts also undergo enhanced apoptosis, which could not be rescued by eliminating the proapoptotic factor, Bax . These deficits result in reduced generation of sympathetic neurons and pronounced decreases in the size of sympathetic chain ganglia. Furthermore, the axons of sympathetic neurons that persist in Fz3 −/− ganglia are able to extend out of sympathetic ganglia toward distal targets, but fail to fully innervate final peripheral targets. The cell cycle exit, but not target innervation, defects in Fz3 −/− mice are phenocopied in mice with conditional ablation of β-catenin, a component of canonical Wnt signaling, in sympathetic precursors. Sympathetic ganglia and innervation of target tissues appeared normal in mice lacking a core planar cell polarity (PCP) component, Vangl2. Together, our results suggest distinct roles for Fz3 during sympathetic neuron development; Fz3 acts at early developmental stages to maintain a pool of dividing sympathetic precursors, likely via activation of β-catenin, and Fz3 functions at later stages to promote innervation of final peripheral targets by postmitotic sympathetic neurons.

Introduction

The sympathetic nervous system, a branch of the autonomic nervous system, is critical for tissue homeostasis. Postganglionic sympathetic neurons innervate a variety of peripheral targets to regulate several physiological processes including blood glucose levels, cardiac output and body temperature. Development of the sympathetic nervous system is coordinated by a combination of intrinsic transcriptional determinants, and extrinsic signals derived from neighboring vasculature and peripheral targets. Sympathetic neurons are generated from sympathoadrenal precursors that originate from the dorsal neural tube and migrate ventrally to coalesce into ganglia in the vicinity of the dorsal aorta. Migration of sympathetic precursors is controlled by the receptor tyrosine kinases, ErbB2/3 ( Britsch et al., 1998 ) and Ret ( Enomoto et al., 2001 ), as well as the guidance receptors, neuropilin1 ( Kawasaki et al., 2002 ) and Plexin A3/A4 ( Waimey et al., 2008 ). Acquisition of noradrenergic features including expression of dopamine β-hydroxylase (DβH) and tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) occurs early in development, and is dependent on transcriptional regulators Mash1, Phox2a/2b, Hand2 and Gata3, as well as diffusible signals such as bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) secreted by the dorsal aorta ( Goridis and Rohrer, 2002 ; Howard, 2005 ). Upon completion of neurogenesis, postmitotic sympathetic neurons are influenced by several extrinsic cues including hepatocyte growth factor, artemin, neurotrophin-3, and nerve growth factor (NGF), to coordinate axonal outgrowth, extension along the vasculature, final target innervation and survival ( Glebova and Ginty, 2005 ). It has been postulated that the majority of the final complement of sympathetic neurons is generated by intensive proliferation of immature noradrenergic sympathetic neuroblasts over a period lasting several days [embryonic day 12.5 (E12.5)–E17.5 in rodents] ( Hendry, 1977 ; Rothman et al., 1978 ; Rubin, 1985 ; Fagan et al., 1996 ). Sympathetic neuroblasts differ from their peripheral sensory and parasympathetic neuronal counterparts and CNS precursors in that they express markers of mature neurons including catecholamine synthesizing enzymes, β-III-tubulin and neurofilament proteins and even bear neuritic processes, but still undergo massive proliferation ( Rothman et al., 1978 , 1980 ; Rohrer and Thoenen, 1987 ; DiCicco-Bloom et al., 1990 ). While several molecular players have been shown to promote proliferation of cultured sympathetic neuroblasts in vitro ( DiCicco-Bloom and Black, 1988 ; DiCicco-Bloom et al., 1990 , 2000 ; Pincus et al., 1990 ), the signals that control proliferation of noradrenergic sympathetic neuroblasts in vivo remains unknown.

Wnt signaling through seven-pass transmembrane Frizzled receptors has been implicated in several developmental events in the nervous system including cell fate specification, cell proliferation, neuronal survival and connectivity ( Ciani and Salinas, 2005 ). During peripheral nervous system (PNS) development, sensory dorsal root ganglia exhibit marked reductions in size in mice lacking both Wnt1/Wnt3a ( Ikeya et al., 1997 ) or with conditional deletion of the cytoplasmic Wnt effector, β-catenin, in premigratory neural crest cells ( Hari et al., 2002 ). However, primordial sympathetic ganglia, which are also derived from neural crest precursors, appear normal in these mutant mice. Currently, 19 Wnt and 10 Frizzled genes have been identified in mammals. Despite the widespread expression of Wnts and Frizzleds in the nervous system and their involvement in almost every aspect of neuronal development in multiple neuronal populations, there is limited information so far about the contribution of Wnt/Frizzled signaling to sympathetic nervous system development. Recently, we defined a role for Wnt5a expressed in sympathetic neurons in mediating axon branching and innervation of final targets during late stages of sympathetic neuron development ( Bodmer et al., 2009 ). Here, we report that Frizzled3 (Fz3) is essential for the normal generation of postganglionic sympathetic neurons. Our analysis of Fz3-deficient mice revealed fewer S-phase proliferating neuroblasts, premature cell cycle exit and enhanced apoptosis in early-stage superior cervical ganglia (SCGs), compared with wild-type littermates. Fz3 −/− embryos also showed marked reductions and in some cases, complete absence of sympathetic innervation of several peripheral targets. The neurogenesis, but not innervation, defects in Fz3 −/− embryos are also observed in mice lacking β-catenin specifically in the sympathetic neuron lineage. Analysis of homozygous Looptail ( Lp/Lp ) mice mutant for Vangl2 ( Kibar et al., 2001 ; Montcouquiol et al., 2003 ), which encodes for a core PCP gene, did not reveal any sympathetic nervous system deficits similar to that observed in Fz3 −/− mice. These results identify a critical role for a Fz3/β-catenin signaling pathway in neurogenesis of sympathetic neurons by maintaining a pool of dividing sympathetic precursors. Additionally, our results indicate that Fz3, but not β-catenin, regulates innervation of final peripheral targets by postmitotic sympathetic neurons.

Conditional ablation of β-catenin in sympathetic ganglia results in enhanced cell cycle exit and reduced neurogenesis, but does not affect target innervation

To determine the downstream signaling effectors that might mediate the effects of Fz3 in sympathetic ganglia, we then focused our attention on β-catenin, a critical component of the canonical Wnt signaling pathway and cadherin-dependent cell–cell adhesion. Loss-of-function and gain-of-function analyses in mice have established a fundamental role for β-catenin in proliferation and expansion of neuronal progenitors in the cortex, dorsal neural crest precursors and ventral midbrain dopaminergic neurons ( Chenn and Walsh, 2002 ; Megason and McMahon, 2002 ; Woodhead et al., 2006 ; Tang et al., 2009 , 2010 ). In perhaps the most noted example, expression of constitutively activated β-catenin in mice results in enlarged brains due to the propensity of cortical precursors to reenter the cell cycle and undergo symmetrical divisions ( Chenn and Walsh, 2002 ). To study the role of β-catenin in sympathetic ganglia, we crossed transgenic TH-Cre mice ( Gong et al., 2007 ) with mice harboring a LoxP -based conditional β-catenin allele (β- catenin flox/flox ) ( Brault et al., 2001 ), to ablate β-catenin specifically in cells of the sympathetic lineage. Analyses of the SCGs in TH-Cre; β- catenin flox/flox mice revealed a significant reduction in ganglia size ( Fig. 6 A , B ) and cell number ( Fig. 6 C ) by E16.5, compared with littermate controls that either lacked the TH-Cre transgene or carried a wild-type β-catenin allele. At E16.5, there were 9145 ± 1977 cells in TH-Cre; β- catenin flox/flox SCG, compared with 15,381 ± 1277 cells in wild-type ganglia. These results indicate a cell-autonomous requirement for β-catenin in TH-expressing sympathetic precursors for early SCG development. The significant reductions in SCG cell number in E16.5 embryos deficient for Fz3 and β-catenin suggested that Fz3 might be acting in part, via β-catenin, to promote neurogenesis. To further test this hypothesis, we monitored cell cycle progression in TH-Cre; β- catenin flox/flox embryos by labeling with EdU for 24 h and coimmunostaining with Ki67, thus analyzing how many progenitors have exited the cell cycle. Indeed, similar to the phenotype seen in E13.5 Fz3 −/− embryos, more progenitors exited the cell cycle during the 24 h time window in the TH-Cre; β- catenin flox/flox embryos, compared with wild-type control mice ( Fig. 6 D ). At E13.5, 41% of neuroblasts in TH-Cre; β- catenin flox/flox SCG had exited the cell cycle compared with 29% of wild-type progenitors. Together, these results suggest that, like Fz3, β-catenin signaling in sympathetic ganglia positively regulates neurogenesis by maintaining sympathetic neuroblasts within the cell cycle.

To further investigate whether the loss of β-catenin recapitulates all the sympathetic deficits observed in Fz3 −/− embryos, we performed whole-mount TH immunostaining to assess sympathetic innervation of peripheral targets in TH-Cre; β- catenin flox/flox embryos. Remarkably, although the SCG cell number was significantly depleted in TH-Cre; β- catenin flox/flox embryos, the pattern and extent of sympathetic innervation of target tissues in mutant embryos was largely indistinguishable from that in wild-type mice. Unlike Fz3 −/− embryos, sympathetic fibers were observed to ramify in the parenchyma of the kidneys ( Fig. 6 F ) and stomach ( Fig. 6 H , J ) and within the proximal part of the small intestine ( Fig. 6 L , N ) in E16.5 TH-Cre; β- catenin flox/flox mice, as in wild-type embryos (kidney, Fig. 6 E ; stomach, Fig. 6 G , I ; and intestine, Fig. 6 K , M ). Thus, although neuronal number is reduced with removal of β-catenin in sympathetic ganglia, axons of remaining neurons can reach their destinations and arborize to fully innervate target tissues. Together, these results suggest that the neurogenesis effect of Fz3 might be transduced via β-catenin signaling within sympathetic ganglia, while β-catenin is dispensable for mediating the Fz3-dependent innervation of sympathetic targets.

Discussion

Sympathetic neuroblasts, often referred to as “young neurons” are the immediate precursors of postmitotic sympathetic neurons, and they undergo multiple rounds of cell division to expand the precursor pool and increase sympathetic ganglia size before exiting the cell cycle. However, the molecular events that regulate expansion of sympathetic neuroblasts remain unknown. Using mice lacking Fz3 , we now identify Fz3-mediated signaling as being essential for maintaining the proliferative capacity and survival of sympathetic neuroblasts. Fz3 is expressed in SCG at a stage when it is comprised primarily of proliferating sympathetic neuroblasts. In Fz3 −/− mice, sympathetic neuroblasts exit the cell cycle precociously and undergo apoptosis, leading to a depletion of progenitor cells and pronounced reductions in sympathetic ganglia size, as development proceeds. Moreover, conditional inactivation of β-catenin, a cytoplasmic Wnt effector, in cells of the sympathetic lineage resulted in neurogenesis deficits similar to that observed in Fz3 −/− mice. Together, these findings provide evidence in support of a Fz3/β-catenin signaling pathway acting within sympathetic neuroblasts to regulate proliferation. Our analyses also uncover a temporally and mechanistically distinct role for Fz3 in promoting innervation of peripheral targets by postmitotic neurons, a function that is independent of β-catenin.

We found no effects of Fz3 deletion on the development of early neural crest cells, migration of neural crest-derived sympathetic progenitors and their acquisition of noradrenergic characteristics. Consistent with the notion that absence of Fz3 does not cause a broad loss of neural crest derivatives, we found no significant abnormalities in dorsal root ganglia (unpublished results), which are also neural crest derived. The observed phenotypes in Fz3 −/− embryos differ from those reported in other mouse mutants with neurogenesis deficits in the sympathetic nervous system. Mice lacking the transcription factors, Mash1 ( Morikawa et al., 2009 ), Hand2 ( Hendershot et al., 2008 ), Phox2b ( Pattyn et al., 1999 ), Gata3 ( Tsarovina et al., 2004 ) and Insm1 ( Wildner et al., 2008 ), or defective in BMP signaling ( Morikawa et al., 2009 ) show marked reductions in expression of noradrenergic markers and deficits in proliferation of early neural crest-derived sympathetic progenitors. Rather, our results identify Fz3 as being essential for maintaining immature neuroblasts already committed to a sympathetic neuronal fate in a dividing state. Interestingly, mice deficient for the transcription factor Sox11 have been recently shown to exhibit reduced proliferation of TH-expressing sympathetic neuroblasts, similar to that seen in Fz3 −/− embryos ( Potzner et al., 2010 ). Several Sox transcription factors including Sox2 ( Van Raay et al., 2005 ), Sox9 ( Blache et al., 2004 ) and Sox17 ( Ye et al., 2009 ) are downstream mediators of Frizzled signaling and it remains to be determined whether Fz3 and Sox11 are involved in the same pathway that regulates sympathetic neuroblast proliferation.

The similar alterations in cell cycle exit and SCG size in Fz3 −/− mice, and mice with conditional deletion of β-catenin in the sympathetic lineage suggests that the proliferative effects of Fz3 are likely to be transduced by β-catenin. Previously, deleting β-catenin in Wnt1-expressing premigratory neural crest cells resulted in reduced sensory ganglia due to a role for β-catenin in specification of cells in the sensory neuron lineage, but sympathetic ganglia were reported to be normal ( Hari et al., 2002 ). However, in our analyses, removal of β-catenin in neural crest-derived cells already committed to a sympathetic lineage using TH-Cre results in normal formation and aggregation of primordial sympathetic ganglia, but pronounced decrease in ganglia size later on due to reduced proliferation of sympathetic neuroblasts. Thus, the timing of β-catenin removal reveals distinct requirements for β-catenin during PNS development. β-Catenin could exert its effects by direct or indirect regulation of core components of the cell cycle machinery ( Shtutman et al., 1999 ; Tetsu and McCormick, 1999 ; Megason and McMahon, 2002 ; ten Berge et al., 2008 ). β-Catenin might also influence proliferation of neuroepithelial progenitors through its function as an adhesion protein and regulation of adherens junction integrity and epithelial architecture in the developing cortex ( Woodhead et al., 2006 ; Stocker and Chenn, 2009 ) and ventral midbrain ( Tang et al., 2009 ). However, in the developing SCG, it remains unclear whether and how cell adhesion defects could underlie the reduced proliferation that we observed in β-catenin mutant mice.

The loss of Fz3 and presumably β-catenin in sympathetic ganglia not only causes defects in proliferation, but also affects cell survival. Enhanced apoptosis is seen in early E13.5–E16.5 Fz3 −/− SCG with significant reductions in ganglia size by E16.5 in both Fz3 −/− and β-catenin-mutant embryos. Several lines of evidence suggest that Fz3 depletion results in the apoptosis of an intermediate sympathetic population that has inappropriately exited the cell cycle, rather than the loss of actively dividing sympathetic precursors or mature postmitotic neurons depending on trophic support from final target tissues. First, we did not detect significant differences in apoptosis of proliferating sympathetic neuroblasts between wild-type and Fz3 −/− embryos. Second, peak levels of apoptosis in the Fz3 −/− SCGs are observed at E16.5, just before the period of active sympathetic innervation of final targets. Concomitantly, reduction in cell numbers in the Fz3 −/− SCGs is complete by E16.5, and there is no further increase in apoptosis and depletion of cell numbers during the period of target-dependent trophic support of postmitotic sympathetic neurons at P0.5. In contrast, in mice lacking target-derived NGF signaling, excessive cell death in the SCG is first evident at E17.5 and is exacerbated postnatally, with near complete loss of mature sympathetic neurons a week after birth ( Fagan et al., 1996 ; Glebova and Ginty, 2004 ). Last, the enhanced apoptosis observed in Fz3 −/− SCG uses a Bax-independent pathway. The finding that SCG cell death in Fz3 −/− mice is not prevented by Bax removal contrasts sharply with the protection afforded by Bax elimination in postmitotic sympathetic neurons deprived of NGF ( Middleton and Davies, 2001 ; Glebova and Ginty, 2004 ). Together, these findings suggest that the precise timing of production of postmitotic neurons is critical during development. Thus, sympathetic neuroblasts that improperly exit the cell cycle in the absence of Fz3 or β-catenin may not be exposed in a timely manner to regulatory signals necessary for proper transition to mature postmitotic neurons, and subsequently undergo cell death.

Previous analyses of Fz3 −/− mice showed dramatic losses in major axon tracts in the CNS but no phenotypes were observed in the PNS ( Wang et al., 2002 ), presumably because the analyses were performed at early embryonic stages (E12.5) before the formation of sympathetic chain ganglia. We observed a complete absence or marked reduction of sympathetic fibers in many peripheral targets by E16.5 in Fz3 −/− embryos. Given the demonstrated role of Fz3 in axon guidance in the CNS ( Lyuksyutova et al., 2003 ; Wang et al., 2006a ), it is possible that failure of Fz3 −/− sympathetic axons to enter final target areas reflects an axonal guidance function for Fz3. Axonal bundles emanating from the Fz3 −/− sympathetic ganglia were defasciculated and more disorganized, suggesting that deficits in target innervation could stem, in part, from early navigational errors as soon as axons extend from the ganglia toward the periphery. However, at least for some targets such as the stomach and intestinal tract, Fz3 −/− sympathetic axons were capable of approaching their final target fields, but failed to enter and fully innervate the entire target fields. Available evidence supports a role for PCP signaling in Fz3-mediated axonal targeting in the CNS ( Bovolenta et al., 2006 ; Wang and Nathans, 2007 ; Fenstermaker et al., 2010 ). Like PCP-dependent processes, axon navigation is a directional cellular behavior that depends on cytoskeletal dynamics. Axonal targeting phenotypes observed in Fz3 −/− CNS are similar to those in mice lacking another well established PCP gene, Celsr3 , encoding for a seven-pass transmembrane cadherin ( Tissir et al., 2005 ; Zhou et al., 2008 ). We found normal sympathetic innervation of targets in Vangl2 lp/lp mutant mice, however, it is feasible that Vangl2 might function redundantly with other PCP components such as Celsr3 or Vangl1 in Fz3-dependent targeting of sympathetic fibers. Vangl1 is closely related to Vangl2 (with the proteins sharing 70% similarity) and functions redundantly with Vangl2 to mediate several PCP processes ( Torban et al., 2008 ; Song et al., 2010 ). Further studies will delineate the contributions of PCP signaling in promoting Fz3-mediated axon targeting in the sympathetic nervous system.

Our work underscores the diversity of functions of a single Frizzled receptor, Fz3, in the developing nervous system. Fz3 function and mechanism of action is strongly context-dependent. In addition to its previously described roles in PCP-dependent processes, axonal outgrowth and guidance in the CNS, we uncover a critical role for Fz3 in sympathetic neurogenesis and target innervation in the PNS in this study.
