---
pmid: '20588253'
title: CHIP-dependent termination of MEKK2 regulates temporal ERK activation required
  for proper hyperosmotic response.
authors:
- Maruyama T
- Kadowaki H
- Okamoto N
- Nagai A
- Naguro I
- Matsuzawa A
- Shibuya H
- Tanaka K
- Murata S
- Takeda K
- Nishitoh H
- Ichijo H
journal: EMBO J
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2928693
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.141
---

# CHIP-dependent termination of MEKK2 regulates temporal ERK activation required for proper hyperosmotic response.
**Authors:** Maruyama T, Kadowaki H, Okamoto N, Nagai A, Naguro I, Matsuzawa A, Shibuya H, Tanaka K, Murata S, Takeda K, Nishitoh H, Ichijo H
**Journal:** EMBO J (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2010.141](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2010.141)
**PMC:** [PMC2928693](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2928693/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2010 Aug 4;29(15):2501-14. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.141. Epub 2010 Jun
29.

CHIP-dependent termination of MEKK2 regulates temporal ERK activation required
for proper hyperosmotic response.

Maruyama T(1), Kadowaki H, Okamoto N, Nagai A, Naguro I, Matsuzawa A, Shibuya H,
Tanaka K, Murata S, Takeda K, Nishitoh H, Ichijo H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Pharmaceutics, Laboratory of Cell Signaling, Japan
Science and Technology Corporation, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo,
Japan.

The extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) pathway is an important
signalling pathway that regulates a large number of cellular processes,
including proliferation, differentiation and gene expression. Hyperosmotic
stress activates the ERK pathway, whereas little is known about the regulatory
mechanisms and physiological functions of ERK activation in hyperosmotic
response. Here, we show that MAPK/ERK kinase kinase 2 (MEKK2), a member of the
MAPKKK family, mediated the specific and transient activation of ERK, which was
required for the induction of aquaporin 1 (AQP1) and AQP5 gene expression in
response to hyperosmotic stress. Moreover, we identified the E3 ubiquitin ligase
carboxyl terminus of Hsc70-interacting protein (CHIP) as a binding partner of
MEKK2. Depletion of CHIP by small-interference RNA or gene targeting attenuated
the degradation of MEKK2 and prolonged the ERK activity. Interestingly,
hyperosmolality-induced gene expression of AQP1 and AQP5 was suppressed by CHIP
depletion and was reversed by inhibition of the prolonged phase of ERK activity.
These findings show that transient activation of the ERK pathway, which depends
not only on MEKK2 activation, but also on CHIP-dependent MEKK2 degradation, is
crucial for proper gene expression in hyperosmotic stress response.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2010.141
PMCID: PMC2928693
PMID: 20588253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict
of interest.
