---
pmid: '16154161'
title: SUMO-1 modification of centrosomal protein hNinein promotes hNinein nuclear
  localization.
authors:
- Cheng TS
- Chang LK
- Howng SL
- Lu PJ
- Lee CI
- Hong YR
journal: Life Sci
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2005.06.021
---

# SUMO-1 modification of centrosomal protein hNinein promotes hNinein nuclear localization.
**Authors:** Cheng TS, Chang LK, Howng SL, Lu PJ, Lee CI, Hong YR
**Journal:** Life Sci (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lfs.2005.06.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lfs.2005.06.021)

## Abstract

1. Life Sci. 2006 Feb 2;78(10):1114-20. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2005.06.021. Epub 2005
 Sep 9.

SUMO-1 modification of centrosomal protein hNinein promotes hNinein nuclear 
localization.

Cheng TS(1), Chang LK, Howng SL, Lu PJ, Lee CI, Hong YR.

Author information:
(1)Graduate Institute of Biochemistry, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, ROC.

A centrosomal-associated protein, ninein is a microtubules minus end capping, 
centrosome position, and anchoring protein, but the underlying structure and 
physiological functions are still unknown. To identify the molecules that 
regulate the function of human ninein in centrosome, we performed yeast 
two-hybrid screen and isolated the SUMO-conjugating E2 enzyme, Ubc9, and 
SUMOylation enhancing enzymes, including PIAS1 and PIASxalpha, as binding 
partners of hNinein. These interactions as well as the interaction between 
hNinein and SUMO-1 are also confirmed by a glutathione S-transferase (GST) 
pull-down experiment. Furthermore, the C-terminal region of hNinein can be 
SUMOylated in vitro and in HeLa cells transfected with a plasmid expressing 
GFP-hNinein. Our findings firstly place SUMOylation target on the centrosome 
structure protein, hNinein, which results in the switch localization from 
centrosome to nucleus, suggesting the importance of the SUMOylation of hNinein 
and probably other centrosomal proteins may also be involved in the centrosome 
activity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lfs.2005.06.021
PMID: 16154161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
