---
pmid: '9294234'
title: A possible role for kinase-associated protein phosphatase in the Arabidopsis
  CLAVATA1 signaling pathway.
authors:
- Williams RW
- Wilson JM
- Meyerowitz EM
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC23386
doi: 10.1073/pnas.94.19.10467
---

# A possible role for kinase-associated protein phosphatase in the Arabidopsis CLAVATA1 signaling pathway.
**Authors:** Williams RW, Wilson JM, Meyerowitz EM
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.94.19.10467](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.94.19.10467)
**PMC:** [PMC23386](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC23386/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Sep 16;94(19):10467-72. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.94.19.10467.

A possible role for kinase-associated protein phosphatase in the Arabidopsis 
CLAVATA1 signaling pathway.

Williams RW(1), Wilson JM, Meyerowitz EM.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biology, 156-29, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 
91125, USA.

Continuous growth and development in plants are accomplished by meristems, 
groups of undifferentiated cells that persist as stem cells and initiate organs. 
While the structures of the apical and floral meristems in dicotyledonous plants 
have been well described, little is known about the underlying molecular 
mechanisms controlling cell proliferation and differentiation in these 
structures. We have shown previously that the CLAVATA1 (CLV1) gene in 
Arabidopsis encodes a receptor kinase-like protein that controls the size of the 
apical and floral meristems. Here, we show that KAPP, a gene encoding a 
kinase-associated protein phosphatase, is expressed in apical and young floral 
meristems, along with CLV1. Overexpression of KAPP mimics the clv1 mutant 
phenotype. Furthermore, CLV1 has kinase activity: it phosphorylates both itself 
and KAPP. Finally, KAPP binds and dephosphorylates CLV1. We present a model 
where KAPP functions as a negative regulator of the CLAVATA1 signal transduction 
pathway.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.94.19.10467
PMCID: PMC23386
PMID: 9294234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Continuous growth and development in plants are accomplished by meristems, groups of undifferentiated cells that persist as stem cells and initiate organs. While the structures of the apical and floral meristems in dicotyledonous plants have been well described, little is known about the underlying molecular mechanisms controlling cell proliferation and differentiation in these structures. We have shown previously that the CLAVATA1 ( CLV1 ) gene in Arabidopsis encodes a receptor kinase-like protein that controls the size of the apical and floral meristems. Here, we show that KAPP , a gene encoding a kinase-associated protein phosphatase, is expressed in apical and young floral meristems, along with CLV1 . Overexpression of KAPP mimics the clv1 mutant phenotype. Furthermore, CLV1 has kinase activity: it phosphorylates both itself and KAPP. Finally, KAPP binds and dephosphorylates CLV1. We present a model where KAPP functions as a negative regulator of the CLAVATA1 signal transduction pathway.

DISCUSSION

We have started to investigate the molecular mechanisms of CLV1 signal transduction. We have shown that the CLV1 kinase domain can undergo intermolecular autophosphorylation, which suggests that the active CLV1 protein may function as a multimer. The KAPP protein binds the phosphorylated form of CLV1 and exhibits phosphatase activity on the CLV1 protein. CLV1 is expressed in regions that also express KAPP , although the KAPP expression domain is much larger. Finally, transgenic plants overexpressing KAPP mimic the floral defects seen in weak clv1 mutant plants. These data taken together argue that KAPP may function as a negative regulator of the CLV1 signal transduction pathway. A model for the CLV1 signal transduction pathway is given in Fig. 5 . Further experimentation will be needed to test the in vivo validity of this model, as the data are suggestive but not conclusive. In particular, KAPP may function in a process parallel to CLV1.
