---
pmid: '9593753'
title: Cloning and characterization of a second human CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase.
authors:
- Lykidis A
- Murti KG
- Jackowski S
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.22.14022
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Cloning and characterization of a second human CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase.
**Authors:** Lykidis A, Murti KG, Jackowski S
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.273.22.14022](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.22.14022)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1998 May 29;273(22):14022-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.22.14022.

Cloning and characterization of a second human CTP:phosphocholine 
cytidylyltransferase.

Lykidis A(1), Murti KG, Jackowski S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, 
Tennessee 38105, USA.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem 1998 Jul 24;273(30):19357.

CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase (CCT) is a key regulator of 
phosphatidylcholine biosynthesis, and only a single isoform of this enzyme, 
CCTalpha, is known. We identified and sequenced a human cDNA that encoded a 
distinct CCT isoform, called CCTbeta, that is derived from a gene different from 
that encoding CCTalpha. CCTbeta transcripts were detected in human adult and 
fetal tissues, and very high transcript levels were found in placenta and 
testis. CCTbeta and CCTalpha proteins share highly related, but not identical, 
catalytic domains followed by three amphipathic helical repeats. Like CCTalpha, 
CCTbeta required the presence of lipid regulators for maximum catalytic 
activity. The amino terminus of CCTbeta bears no resemblance to the amino 
terminus of CCTalpha, and CCTbeta protein was localized to the cytoplasm as 
detected by indirect immunofluorescent microscopy. Whereas CCTalpha activity is 
regulated by reversible phosphorylation, CCTbeta lacks most of the corresponding 
carboxyl-terminal domain and contained only 3 potential phosphorylation sites of 
the 16 identified in CCTalpha. Transfection of COS-7 cells with a CCTbeta 
expression construct led to the overexpression of CCT activity, the accumulation 
of cellular CDP-choline, and enhanced radiolabeling of phosphatidylcholine. 
CCTbeta protein was posttranslationally modified in COS-7 cells, resulting in 
slower migration during polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Expression of 
CCTbeta/CCTalpha chimeric proteins showed that the amino-terminal portion of 
CCTbeta was required for posttranslational modification. These data demonstrate 
that a second, distinct CCT enzyme is expressed in human tissues and provides 
another mechanism by which cells regulate phosphatidylcholine production.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.22.14022
PMID: 9593753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
