---
pmid: '9733711'
title: Cloning and expression analysis of a novel salicylate suppressible gene, Hs-CUL-3,
  a member of cullin/Cdc53 family.
authors:
- Du M
- Sansores-Garcia L
- Zu Z
- Wu KK
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.38.24289
---

# Cloning and expression analysis of a novel salicylate suppressible gene, Hs-CUL-3, a member of cullin/Cdc53 family.
**Authors:** Du M, Sansores-Garcia L, Zu Z, Wu KK
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.273.38.24289](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.38.24289)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Sep 18;273(38):24289-92. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.38.24289.

Cloning and expression analysis of a novel salicylate suppressible gene, 
Hs-CUL-3, a member of cullin/Cdc53 family.

Du M(1), Sansores-Garcia L, Zu Z, Wu KK.

Author information:
(1)Vascular Biology Research Center and Division of Hematology, University of 
Texas-Houston Health Science Center, Medical School, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

By using a mRNA differential display technique to search for salicylate 
suppressible genes, we identified a cDNA in human foreskin fibroblasts, which by 
GenBankTM DNA data base search shows sequence homology to the recently reported 
cullin/Cdc53 (CUL) family genes, especially CUL-3. We have cloned the 
full-length human CUL-3 (Hs-CUL-3) cDNA. It encodes a 768-amino acid polypeptide 
and has a predicted molecular weight of 88,939. The amino acid sequence of 
Hs-CUL-3 shows 46% homology to that of its Caenorhabditis elegans ortholog, 
Ce-CUL-3, and 27 and 23% to that of Hs-CUL-1 and Hs-CUL-2, respectively. 
Northern blot analysis showed that phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate increased the 
expression of Hs-CUL-3 mRNA in a concentration- and time-dependent manner, and 
this increase was inhibited by sodium salicylate. Hs-CUL-3 widely expressed in 
human tissues and its expression in cultured COLO205 colon cancer cells was 
increased when compared with that in normal colon cells. It is likely that 
Hs-CUL-3 is involved in cell proliferation control.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.38.24289
PMID: 9733711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
