---
pmid: '14699151'
title: Interaction of bcl-2 with Paxillin through its BH4 domain is important during
  ureteric bud branching.
authors:
- Sorenson CM
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M310079200
---

# Interaction of bcl-2 with Paxillin through its BH4 domain is important during ureteric bud branching.
**Authors:** Sorenson CM
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M310079200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M310079200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 19;279(12):11368-74. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M310079200. Epub 
2003 Dec 29.

Interaction of bcl-2 with Paxillin through its BH4 domain is important during 
ureteric bud branching.

Sorenson CM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53792, 
USA. cmsorenson@wisc.edu

bcl-2 protects cells from apoptosis initiated by a variety of stimuli including 
loss of cell adhesion. Mice deficient in bcl-2 (bcl-2-/-) develop renal 
hypoplastic/cystic dysplasia, a condition that leads to significant morbidity 
and mortality in children. The precise mechanism of action of bcl-2 has not been 
elucidated. bcl-2 may merely facilitate survival of precursor cells and/or may 
play a more "active" role during morphogenesis by interacting with other 
proteins such as paxillin. Recent work in this laboratory demonstrated that 
bcl-2 directly associates with paxillin. The data presented here demonstrate 
that the bcl-2 homology 4 (BH4) domain, specifically amino acids 17-31, is 
necessary for the bcl-2 interaction with paxillin. Paxillin also associated with 
the BH4 domains of more closely related bcl-2 family members, bcl-xL and bcl-w, 
compared with that from the non-mammalian homologue ced9. Tyrosines 21 and 28 in 
the bcl-2 BH4 domain were essential for interaction with paxillin. In embryonic 
kidney organ culture, incubation with the bcl-2 BH4 domain resulted in 
inhibition of ureteric bud branching. Therefore, these data suggest that the 
interaction of bcl-2 with paxillin plays an important role during nephrogenesis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M310079200
PMID: 14699151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
