---
pmid: '12826627'
title: A Link between circadian-controlled bHLH factors and the APRR1/TOC1 quintet
  in Arabidopsis thaliana.
authors:
- Yamashino T
- Matsushika A
- Fujimori T
- Sato S
- Kato T
- Tabata S
- Mizuno T
journal: Plant Cell Physiol
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcg078
---

# A Link between circadian-controlled bHLH factors and the APRR1/TOC1 quintet in Arabidopsis thaliana.
**Authors:** Yamashino T, Matsushika A, Fujimori T, Sato S, Kato T, Tabata S, Mizuno T
**Journal:** Plant Cell Physiol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1093/pcp/pcg078](https://doi.org/10.1093/pcp/pcg078)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell Physiol. 2003 Jun;44(6):619-29. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcg078.

A Link between circadian-controlled bHLH factors and the APRR1/TOC1 quintet in 
Arabidopsis thaliana.

Yamashino T(1), Matsushika A, Fujimori T, Sato S, Kato T, Tabata S, Mizuno T.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology, School of Agriculture, Nagoya 
University, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, 464-8601 Japan.

APRR1 (ARABIDPSIS PSUEDO-RESPONSE REGULATOR 1) (or TOC1, TIMING OF CAB 
EXPRESSION 1) is believed to be a crucial component of biological clocks of 
Arabidopsis thaliana. Nevertheless, its molecular function remains to be fully 
elucidated. Based on the results of yeast two-hybrid and in vitro binding 
assays, we previously showed that APRR1/TOC1 interacts with certain bHLH factors 
(i.e. PIF3 and PIL1, which are PHYTOCHROME INTERACTING FACTOR 3 and its homolog 
(PIF3-LIKE 1), respectively). To critically examine the relevance of PIL1 with 
reference to the function of APRR1/TOC1, T-DNA insertion mutants were isolated 
for PIL1. No phenotype was observed for such homozygous pil1 mutants, in terms 
of circadian-associated events in plants. We then examined more extensively a 
certain set of bHLH factors, which are considerably similar to PIL1 in their 
structural designs. The results of extensive analyses of such bHLH factors 
(namely, HFR1, PIL2, PIF4, PIL5 and PIL6) in wild-type and APRR1-overexressing 
(APRR1-ox) transgenic lines provided us with several new insights into a link 
between APRR1/TOC1 and these bHLH factors. In yeast two-hybrid assays, 
APRR1/TOC1 showed the ability to interact with these proteins (except for HFR1), 
as well as PIL1 and PIF3. Among them, it was found that the expressions of PIF4 
and PIL6 were regulated in a circadian-dependent manner, exhibiting free-running 
robust rhythms. The expressions of PIF4 and PIL6 were regulated also by light in 
a manner that their transcripts were rapidly accumulated upon exposure of 
etiolated seedlings to light. The light-induced expressions of PIF4 and PIL6 
were severely impaired in APRR1-ox transgenic lines. Taken together, here we 
propose the novel view that these bHLH factors (PIF4 and PIL6) might play roles, 
in concert with APRR1/TOC1, in the integration of light-signals to control both 
circadian and photomorphogenic processes.

DOI: 10.1093/pcp/pcg078
PMID: 12826627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
