---
pmid: '31880316'
title: Signalling lymphocyte activation molecule family member 9 is found on select
  subsets of antigen-presenting cells and promotes resistance to Salmonella infection.
authors:
- Wilson TJ
- Clare S
- Mikulin J
- Johnson CM
- Harcourt K
- Lyons PA
- Dougan G
- Smith KGC
journal: Immunology
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC7078004
doi: 10.1111/imm.13169
---

# Signalling lymphocyte activation molecule family member 9 is found on select subsets of antigen-presenting cells and promotes resistance to Salmonella infection.
**Authors:** Wilson TJ, Clare S, Mikulin J, Johnson CM, Harcourt K, Lyons PA, Dougan G, Smith KGC
**Journal:** Immunology (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/imm.13169](https://doi.org/10.1111/imm.13169)
**PMC:** [PMC7078004](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7078004/)

## Abstract

1. Immunology. 2020 Apr;159(4):393-403. doi: 10.1111/imm.13169. Epub 2020 Jan 28.

Signalling lymphocyte activation molecule family member 9 is found on select 
subsets of antigen-presenting cells and promotes resistance to Salmonella 
infection.

Wilson TJ(1)(2), Clare S(3), Mikulin J(1), Johnson CM(4), Harcourt K(3), Lyons 
PA(2)(5), Dougan G(3)(5), Smith KGC(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Miami University, Oxford, OH, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University 
of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(3)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, UK.
(4)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK.
(5)Cambridge Institute for Therapeutic Immunology and Infectious Disease, 
Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

Signalling lymphocyte activation molecule family member 9 (SLAMF9) is an orphan 
receptor of the CD2/SLAM family of leucocyte surface proteins. Examination of 
SLAMF9 expression and function indicates that SLAMF9 promotes inflammation by 
specialized subsets of antigen-presenting cells. Within healthy liver and 
circulating mouse peripheral blood mononuclear cells, SLAMF9 is expressed on 
CD11b+ , Ly6C- , CD11clow , F4/80low , MHC-II+ , CX3 CR1+ mononuclear phagocytes 
as well as plasmacytoid dendritic cells. In addition, SLAMF9 can be found on 
peritoneal B1 cells and small (F4/80low ), but not large (F4/80high ), 
peritoneal macrophages. Upon systemic challenge with Salmonella enterica 
Typhimurium, Slamf9-/- mice were impaired in their ability to clear the 
infection from the liver. In humans, SLAMF9 is up-regulated upon differentiation 
of monocytes into macrophages, and lipopolysaccharide stimulation of 
PMA-differentiated, SLAMF9 knockdown THP-1 cells showed an essential role of 
SLAMF9 in production of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, tumour 
necrosis factor-α, and interleukin-1β. Taken together, these data implicate 
SLAMF9 in the initiation of inflammation and clearance of bacterial infection.

© 2019 The Authors. Immunology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/imm.13169
PMCID: PMC7078004
PMID: 31880316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.
