---
pmid: '19893533'
title: Structural insights into the mechanism of abscisic acid signaling by PYL proteins.
authors:
- Yin P
- Fan H
- Hao Q
- Yuan X
- Wu D
- Pang Y
- Yan C
- Li W
- Wang J
- Yan N
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1730
---

# Structural insights into the mechanism of abscisic acid signaling by PYL proteins.
**Authors:** Yin P, Fan H, Hao Q, Yuan X, Wu D, Pang Y, Yan C, Li W, Wang J, Yan N
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nsmb.1730](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb.1730)

## Abstract

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2009 Dec;16(12):1230-6. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1730. Epub 2009
 Nov 5.

Structural insights into the mechanism of abscisic acid signaling by PYL 
proteins.

Yin P(1), Fan H, Hao Q, Yuan X, Wu D, Pang Y, Yan C, Li W, Wang J, Yan N.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Bio-membrane and Membrane Biotechnology, 
TsinghuaUniversity, Beijing, China.

Abscisic acid (ABA) is an important phytohormone that regulates plant stress 
responses. Proteins from the PYR-PYL-RCAR family were recently identified as ABA 
receptors. Upon binding to ABA, a PYL protein associates with type 2C protein 
phosphatases (PP2Cs) such as ABI1 and ABI2, inhibiting their activity; the 
molecular mechanisms by which PYLs mediate ABA signaling remain unknown, 
however. Here we report three crystal structures: apo-PYL2, (+)-ABA-bound PYL2 
and (+)-ABA-bound PYL1 in complex with phosphatase ABI1. Apo-PYL2 contains a 
pocket surrounded by four highly conserved surface loops. In response to ABA 
binding, loop CL2 closes onto the pocket, creating a surface that recognizes 
ABI1. In the ternary complex, the CL2 loop is located near the active site of 
ABI1, blocking the entry of substrate proteins. Together, our data reveal the 
mechanisms by which ABA regulates PYL-mediated inhibition of PP2Cs.

DOI: 10.1038/nsmb.1730
PMID: 19893533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
