---
pmid: '10749848'
title: The human liver-specific homolog of very long-chain acyl-CoA synthetase is
  cholate:CoA ligase.
authors:
- Steinberg SJ
- Mihalik SJ
- Kim DG
- Cuebas DA
- Watkins PA
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.C000015200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The human liver-specific homolog of very long-chain acyl-CoA synthetase is cholate:CoA ligase.
**Authors:** Steinberg SJ, Mihalik SJ, Kim DG, Cuebas DA, Watkins PA
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.C000015200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.C000015200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2000 May 26;275(21):15605-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C000015200.

The human liver-specific homolog of very long-chain acyl-CoA synthetase is 
cholate:CoA ligase.

Steinberg SJ(1), Mihalik SJ, Kim DG, Cuebas DA, Watkins PA.

Author information:
(1)Kennedy Krieger Institute and the Departments of Neurology and Pediatrics, 
The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Unconjugated bile acids must be activated to their CoA thioesters before 
conjugation to taurine or glycine can occur. A human homolog of very long-chain 
acyl-CoA synthetase, hVLCS-H2, has two requisite properties of a bile acid:CoA 
ligase, liver specificity and an endoplasmic reticulum subcellular localization. 
We investigated the ability of this enzyme to activate the primary bile acid, 
cholic acid, to its CoA derivative. When expressed in COS-1 cells, hVLCS-H2 
exhibited cholate:CoA ligase (choloyl-CoA synthetase) activity with both 
non-isotopic and radioactive assays. Other long- and very long-chain acyl-CoA 
synthetases were incapable of activating cholate. Endogenous choloyl-CoA 
synthetase activity was also detected in liver-derived HepG2 cells but not in 
kidney-derived COS-1 cells. Our results are consistent with a role for hVLCS-H2 
in the re-activation and re-conjugation of bile acids entering liver from the 
enterohepatic circulation rather than in de novo bile acid synthesis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.C000015200
PMID: 10749848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
