---
pmid: '18324336'
title: Mitotic spindle destabilization and genomic instability in Shwachman-Diamond
  syndrome.
authors:
- Austin KM
- Gupta ML Jr
- Coats SA
- Tulpule A
- Mostoslavsky G
- Balazs AB
- Mulligan RC
- Daley G
- Pellman D
- Shimamura A
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2263145
doi: 10.1172/JCI33764
---

# Mitotic spindle destabilization and genomic instability in Shwachman-Diamond syndrome.
**Authors:** Austin KM, Gupta ML Jr, Coats SA, Tulpule A, Mostoslavsky G, Balazs AB, Mulligan RC, Daley G, Pellman D, Shimamura A
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI33764](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI33764)
**PMC:** [PMC2263145](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2263145/)

## Abstract

1. J Clin Invest. 2008 Apr;118(4):1511-8. doi: 10.1172/JCI33764.

Mitotic spindle destabilization and genomic instability in Shwachman-Diamond 
syndrome.

Austin KM(1), Gupta ML Jr, Coats SA, Tulpule A, Mostoslavsky G, Balazs AB, 
Mulligan RC, Daley G, Pellman D, Shimamura A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology, Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.

Deficiencies in the SBDS gene result in Shwachman-Diamond syndrome (SDS), an 
inherited bone marrow failure syndrome associated with leukemia predisposition. 
SBDS encodes a highly conserved protein previously implicated in ribosome 
biogenesis. Using human primary bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs), lymphoblasts, 
and skin fibroblasts, we show that SBDS stabilized the mitotic spindle to 
prevent genomic instability. SBDS colocalized with the mitotic spindle in 
control primary BMSCs, lymphoblasts, and skin fibroblasts and bound to purified 
microtubules. Recombinant SBDS protein stabilized microtubules in vitro. We 
observed that primary BMSCs and lymphoblasts from SDS patients exhibited an 
increased incidence of abnormal mitoses. Similarly, depletion of SBDS by siRNA 
in human skin fibroblasts resulted in increased mitotic abnormalities and 
aneuploidy that accumulated over time. Treatment of primary BMSCs and 
lymphoblasts from SDS patients with nocodazole, a microtubule destabilizing 
agent, led to increased mitotic arrest and apoptosis, consistent with spindle 
destabilization. Conversely, SDS patient cells were resistant to taxol, a 
microtubule stabilizing agent. These findings suggest that spindle instability 
in SDS contributes to bone marrow failure and leukemogenesis.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI33764
PMCID: PMC2263145
PMID: 18324336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
