---
pmid: '9302272'
title: Identification of a fourth half ABC transporter in the human peroxisomal membrane.
authors:
- Shani N
- Jimenez-Sanchez G
- Steel G
- Dean M
- Valle D
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/6.11.1925
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Identification of a fourth half ABC transporter in the human peroxisomal membrane.
**Authors:** Shani N, Jimenez-Sanchez G, Steel G, Dean M, Valle D
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/6.11.1925](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/6.11.1925)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 1997 Oct;6(11):1925-31. doi: 10.1093/hmg/6.11.1925.

Identification of a fourth half ABC transporter in the human peroxisomal 
membrane.

Shani N(1), Jimenez-Sanchez G, Steel G, Dean M, Valle D.

Author information:
(1)Kennedy Krieger Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Three half ATP-binding cassette transporters (ALDP, ALDR, PMP70) are known to be 
present in the human peroxisome membrane. Mutations in the gene encoding ALDP 
cause X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy; the role of ALDR and PMP70 in human disease 
is unclear. We report the cloning and characterization of a fourth human gene 
encoding a peroxisomal half ABC transporter. The gene, designated P70R, maps to 
chromosome 14q24, encodes a 73 kDa transporter most similar to PMP70, and is 
expressed in all human tissues examined. Because half ABC transporters 
heterodimerize to form functional transporters, the identification of a fourth 
member of this family in the peroxisome membrane has implications for our 
understanding of mammalian peroxisomes and the genetic disorders of peroxisomal 
function.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/6.11.1925
PMID: 9302272 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
