---
pmid: '16199027'
title: Vezatin, a protein associated to adherens junctions, is required for mouse
  blastocyst morphogenesis.
authors:
- Hyenne V
- Louvet-Vallée S
- El-Amraoui A
- Petit C
- Maro B
- Simmler MC
journal: Dev Biol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2005.09.004
---

# Vezatin, a protein associated to adherens junctions, is required for mouse blastocyst morphogenesis.
**Authors:** Hyenne V, Louvet-Vallée S, El-Amraoui A, Petit C, Maro B, Simmler MC
**Journal:** Dev Biol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ydbio.2005.09.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2005.09.004)

## Abstract

1. Dev Biol. 2005 Nov 1;287(1):180-91. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2005.09.004. Epub
2005  Sep 29.

Vezatin, a protein associated to adherens junctions, is required for mouse 
blastocyst morphogenesis.

Hyenne V(1), Louvet-Vallée S, El-Amraoui A, Petit C, Maro B, Simmler MC.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Cellulaire du Développement, UMR 7622, CNRS, 
Université Pierre et Marie Curie, 75252 Paris cedex 05, France.

Cell-cell interactions play a major role during preimplantation development of 
the mouse embryo. The formation of adherens junctions is a major feature of 
compaction, the first morphogenetic event that takes place at the 8-cell stage. 
Then, during the following two cell cycles, tight junctions form, and the outer 
layer of cells differentiate into a functional epithelium, leading to the 
formation of the blastocoel cavity. Until now, E-cadherin was the only 
transmembrane molecule localized in adherens junctions and required for early 
development. Vezatin is a transmembrane protein of adherens junctions, 
interacting with the E-cadherin-catenins complex. Here, we show that vezatin is 
expressed very early during mouse preimplantation development. It co-localizes 
with E-cadherin throughout development, being found all around the cell cortex 
before compaction and basolaterally in adherens junctions thereafter. In 
addition, vezatin is also detected in nuclei during most of the cell cycle. 
Finally, using a morpholino-oligonucleotide approach to inhibit vezatin function 
during preimplantation development, we observed that inhibition of vezatin 
synthesis leads to a cell cycle arrest with limited cell-cell interactions. This 
phenotype can be rescued when mRNAs coding for vezatin missing the 5'UTR are 
co-injected with the anti-vezatin morpholino-oligonucleotide. Cells derived from 
blastomeres injected with morpholino-oligonucleotide had a reduced amount of 
vezatin concomitantly with a decrease in the quantity of E-cadherin and 
beta-catenin localized in the areas of intercellular contact. Shift in 
E-cadherin cortical distribution was correlated with a strong decrease in 
E-cadherin mRNA and protein contents. Altogether, these observations demonstrate 
that vezatin is required for morphogenesis of the preimplantation mouse embryo.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2005.09.004
PMID: 16199027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
