---
reference_id: PMID:8978681
title: Mechanism of activation of protein kinase B by insulin and IGF-1.
authors:
- Alessi DR
- Andjelkovic M
- Caudwell B
- Cron P
- Morrice N
- Cohen P
- Hemmings BA
journal: EMBO J
year: '1996'
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Mechanism of activation of protein kinase B by insulin and IGF-1.
**Authors:** Alessi DR, Andjelkovic M, Caudwell B, Cron P, Morrice N, Cohen P, Hemmings BA
**Journal:** EMBO J (1996)

## Content

1. EMBO J. 1996 Dec 2;15(23):6541-51.

Mechanism of activation of protein kinase B by insulin and IGF-1.

Alessi DR(1), Andjelkovic M, Caudwell B, Cron P, Morrice N, Cohen P, Hemmings
BA.

Author information:
(1)MRC Protein Phosphorylation Unit, Department of Biochemistry, University of
Dundee, UK.

Insulin activated endogenous protein kinase B alpha (also known as RAC/Akt
kinase) activity 12-fold in L6 myotubes, while after transfection into 293 cells
PKBalpha was activated 20- and 50-fold in response to insulin and IGF-1
respectively. In both cells, the activation of PKBalpha was accompanied by its
phosphorylation at Thr308 and Ser473 and, like activation, phosphorylation of
both of these residues was prevented by the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
inhibitor wortmannin. Thr308 and/or Ser473 were mutated to Ala or Asp and
activities of mutant PKBalpha molecules were analysed after transfection into
293 cells. The activity of wild-type and mutant PKBalpha was also measured in
vitro after stoichiometric phosphorylation of Ser473 by MAPKAP kinase-2. These
experiments demonstrated that activation of PKBalpha by insulin or insulin-like
growth factor-1 (IGF-1) results from phosphorylation of both Thr308 and Ser473,
that phosphorylation of both residues is critical to generate a high level of
PKBalpha activity and that the phosphorylation of Thr308 in vivo is not
dependent on phosphorylation of Ser473 or vice versa. We propose a model whereby
PKBalpha becomes phosphorylated and activated in insulin/IGF-1-stimulated cells
by an upstream kinase(s).

PMCID: PMC452479
PMID: 8978681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]