---
pmid: '17317006'
title: 14-3-3zeta facilitates GSK3beta-catalyzed tau phosphorylation in HEK-293 cells
  by a mechanism that requires phosphorylation of GSK3beta on Ser9.
authors:
- Li T
- Paudel HK
journal: Neurosci Lett
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2006.11.073
---

# 14-3-3zeta facilitates GSK3beta-catalyzed tau phosphorylation in HEK-293 cells by a mechanism that requires phosphorylation of GSK3beta on Ser9.
**Authors:** Li T, Paudel HK
**Journal:** Neurosci Lett (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neulet.2006.11.073](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2006.11.073)

## Abstract

1. Neurosci Lett. 2007 Mar 13;414(3):203-8. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2006.11.073.
Epub  2007 Feb 3.

14-3-3zeta facilitates GSK3beta-catalyzed tau phosphorylation in HEK-293 cells 
by a mechanism that requires phosphorylation of GSK3beta on Ser9.

Li T(1), Paudel HK.

Author information:
(1)Bloomfield Center for Research in Aging, Lady Davis Institute for Medical 
Research, Sir Mortimer B. Davis-Jewish General Hospital, 3755 Cote Ste 
Catherine, and Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, McGill University, 
Montreal, Quebec H3T 1E2, Canada.

Hyperphosphorylated tau is the prominent component of paired helical filaments, 
which are the major component of neurofibrillary tangles associated with 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). Glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK3beta) is 
implicated to phosphorylate tau in normal and AD brain. Previously, we isolated 
a large multiprotein complex containing tau, Ser9-phosphorylated GSK3beta and 
14-3-3zeta from bovine brain microtubules. We showed that within the complex, 
14-3-3zeta binds to tau and GSK3beta and mediates GSK3beta-catalyzed tau 
phosphorylation. A recent report however indicated that 14-3-3zeta does not bind 
to tau or GSK3beta and does not increase tau phosphorylation by GSK3beta in cell 
models [T.A. Matthews, G.V.W. Johnson, Neurosci. Lett. 384 (2005) 211-216]. In 
the current study we have thoroughly analyzed the binding of 14-3-3zeta with tau 
and GSK3beta and evaluated the effect of 14-3-3zeta on tau phosphorylation by 
GSK3beta in HEK-293 cells. We found that 14-3-3zeta binds to tau and 
Ser9-phosphorylated GSK3beta. Nonphosphorylated GSK3beta phosphorylates tau 
without being influenced by 14-3-3zeta. Ser9-phosphorylated GSK3beta on the 
other hand phosphorylates tau significantly only in the presence of 14-3-3zeta. 
Our data demonstrate that 14-3-3zeta mediates tau phosphorylation by 
Ser9-phosphorylated GSK3beta in HEK-293 cells.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2006.11.073
PMID: 17317006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
