---
pmid: '11158055'
title: 'Human types 1 and 3 3 alpha-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases: differential lability
  and tissue distribution.'
authors:
- Dufort I
- Labrie F
- Luu-The V
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1210/jcem.86.2.7216
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Human types 1 and 3 3 alpha-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases: differential lability and tissue distribution.
**Authors:** Dufort I, Labrie F, Luu-The V
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jcem.86.2.7216](https://doi.org/10.1210/jcem.86.2.7216)

## Abstract

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Feb;86(2):841-6. doi: 10.1210/jcem.86.2.7216.

Human types 1 and 3 3 alpha-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases: differential lability 
and tissue distribution.

Dufort I(1), Labrie F, Luu-The V.

Author information:
(1)Oncology and Molecular Endocrinology Research Center, Laval University 
Medical Center (CHUL) and Laval University, Québec G1V 4G2, Canada.

3 alpha-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases (3 alpha-HSDs) catalyze the conversion of 
3-ketosteroids to 3 alpha-hydroxy compounds. The best known 3 alpha-HSD activity 
is the transformation of the most potent natural androgen, dihydrotestosterone, 
into 5 alpha-androstan-3 alpha,17 beta-diol (3 alpha-diol), a compound having 
much lower activity. Previous reports show that 3 alpha-HSDs are involved in the 
metabolism of glucocorticoids, progestins, prostaglandins, bile acid precursors, 
and xenobiotics. 3 alpha-HSDs could, thus, play a crucial role in the control of 
a series of active steroid levels in target tissues. In the human, type 1 3 
alpha-HSD was first identified as human chlordecone reductase. Recently, we have 
isolated and characterized type 3 3 alpha-HSD that shares 81.7% identity with 
human type 1 3 alpha-HSD. The transfection of vectors expressing types 1 and 3 3 
alpha-HSD in transformed human embryonic kidney (HEK-293) cells indicates that 
both enzymes efficiently catalyze the transformation of dihydrotestosterone into 
3 alpha-diol in intact cells. However, when the cells are broken, the activity 
of type 3 3 alpha-HSD is rapidly lost, whereas the type 1 3 alpha-HSD activity 
remains stable. We have previously found that human type 5 17 beta-HSD which 
possesses 84% and 86% identity with types 1 and 3 3 alpha-HSD, respectively, is 
also labile, whereas rodent enzymes such as mouse type 5 17 beta-HSD and rat 3 
alpha-HSD are stable after homogenization of the cells. The variable stability 
of different enzymatic activities in broken cell preparations renders the 
comparison of different enzymes difficult. RNA expression analysis indicates 
that human type 1 3 alpha-HSD is expressed exclusively in the liver, whereas 
type 3 is more widely expressed and is found in the liver, adrenal, testis, 
brain, prostate, and HaCaT keratinocytes. Based on enzymatic characteristics and 
sequence homology, it is suggested that type 1 3 alpha-HSD is an ortholog of rat 
3 alpha-HSD while type 3 3 alpha-HSD, which must have diverged recently, seems 
unique to human and is probably more involved in intracrine activity.

DOI: 10.1210/jcem.86.2.7216
PMID: 11158055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
