---
pmid: '16507998'
title: Inhibition of ADP/ATP exchange in receptor-interacting protein-mediated necrosis.
authors:
- Temkin V
- Huang Q
- Liu H
- Osada H
- Pope RM
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1430284
doi: 10.1128/MCB.26.6.2215-2225.2006
---

# Inhibition of ADP/ATP exchange in receptor-interacting protein-mediated necrosis.
**Authors:** Temkin V, Huang Q, Liu H, Osada H, Pope RM
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.26.6.2215-2225.2006](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.26.6.2215-2225.2006)
**PMC:** [PMC1430284](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1430284/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Mar;26(6):2215-25. doi: 10.1128/MCB.26.6.2215-2225.2006.

Inhibition of ADP/ATP exchange in receptor-interacting protein-mediated 
necrosis.

Temkin V(1), Huang Q, Liu H, Osada H, Pope RM.

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, 240 E. Huron, Suite 2300, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Receptor-interacting protein (RIP) has been implicated in the induction of death 
receptor-mediated, nonapoptotic cell death. However, the mechanisms remain to be 
elucidated. Here we show that tumor necrosis factor alpha induced RIP-dependent 
inhibition of adenine nucleotide translocase (ANT)-conducted transport of ADP 
into mitochondria, which resulted in reduced ATP and necrotic cell death. The 
inhibition of ADP/ATP exchange coincided with the loss of interaction between 
ANT and cyclophilin D and the inability of ANT to adopt the cytosolic 
conformational state, which prevented cytochrome c release. Neither 
overexpression of Bcl-xL nor inhibition of reactive oxygen species prevented 
necrosis. In contrast, the ectopic expression of ANT or cyclophilin D was 
effective at preventing cell death. These observations demonstrate a novel 
mechanism initiated through death receptor ligation and mediated by RIP that 
results in the suppression of ANT activity and necrosis.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.26.6.2215-2225.2006
PMCID: PMC1430284
PMID: 16507998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
