---
pmid: '24787902'
title: Functional and molecular features of the calmodulin-interacting protein IQCG
  required for haematopoiesis in zebrafish.
authors:
- Chen LT
- Liang WX
- Chen S
- Li RK
- Tan JL
- Xu PF
- Luo LF
- Wang L
- Yu SH
- Meng G
- Li KK
- Liu TX
- Chen Z
- Chen SJ
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ncomms4811
---

# Functional and molecular features of the calmodulin-interacting protein IQCG required for haematopoiesis in zebrafish.
**Authors:** Chen LT, Liang WX, Chen S, Li RK, Tan JL, Xu PF, Luo LF, Wang L, Yu SH, Meng G, Li KK, Liu TX, Chen Z, Chen SJ
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncomms4811](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms4811)

## Abstract

1. Nat Commun. 2014 May 2;5:3811. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4811.

Functional and molecular features of the calmodulin-interacting protein IQCG 
required for haematopoiesis in zebrafish.

Chen LT(1), Liang WX(2), Chen S(3), Li RK(4), Tan JL(5), Xu PF(5), Luo LF(5), 
Wang L(6), Yu SH(5), Meng G(5), Li KK(5), Liu TX(5), Chen Z(5), Chen SJ(4).

Author information:
(1)1] State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics and Shanghai, Institute of 
Hematology, Rui Jin Hospital affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University (SITU) 
School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200025, China [2] Institute of Health Sciences, 
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences and Graduate School, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences and SITU School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China [3].
(2)1] Central Laboratory, Lianyungang First People's Hospital, Lianyungang 
222002, China [2].
(3)1] Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Old Road Campus Research Building, 
University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7DQ, UK [2].
(4)1] State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics and Shanghai, Institute of 
Hematology, Rui Jin Hospital affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University (SITU) 
School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200025, China [2] Institute of Health Sciences, 
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences and Graduate School, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences and SITU School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics and Shanghai, Institute of 
Hematology, Rui Jin Hospital affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University (SITU) 
School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200025, China.
(6)Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences and 
Graduate School, Chinese Academy of Sciences and SITU School of Medicine, 
Shanghai 200025, China.

We previously reported a fusion protein NUP98-IQCG in an acute leukaemia, which 
functions as an aberrant regulator of transcriptional expression, yet the 
structure and function of IQCG have not been characterized. Here we use 
zebrafish to investigate the role of iqcg in haematopoietic development, and 
find that the numbers of haematopoietic stem cells and 
multilineage-differentiated cells are reduced in iqcg-deficient embryos. 
Mechanistically, IQCG binds to calmodulin (CaM) and acts as a molecule upstream 
of CaM-dependent kinase IV (CaMKIV). Crystal structures of complexes between CaM 
and IQ domain of IQCG reveal dual CaM-binding footprints in this motif, and 
provide a structural basis for a higher CaM-IQCG affinity when deprived of 
calcium. The results collectively allow us to understand IQCG-mediated calcium 
signalling in haematopoiesis, and propose a model in which IQCG stores CaM at 
low cytoplasmic calcium concentrations, and releases CaM to activate CaMKIV when 
calcium level rises.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms4811
PMID: 24787902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
