---
pmid: '11925526'
title: Sequence and spatial expression of zebrafish (Danio rerio) alphaA-crystallin.
authors:
- Runkle S
- Hill J
- Kantorow M
- Horwitz J
- Posner M
journal: Mol Vis
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2957823
---

# Sequence and spatial expression of zebrafish (Danio rerio) alphaA-crystallin.
**Authors:** Runkle S, Hill J, Kantorow M, Horwitz J, Posner M
**Journal:** Mol Vis (2002)
**PMC:** [PMC2957823](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2957823/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Vis. 2002 Mar 11;8:45-50.

Sequence and spatial expression of zebrafish (Danio rerio) alphaA-crystallin.

Runkle S(1), Hill J, Kantorow M, Horwitz J, Posner M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Ashland University, Ashland, OH, USA.

PURPOSE: To determine the nucleotide sequence, amino acid sequence and tissue 
specificity of zebrafish alphaA-crystallin.
METHODS: RACE, both 3' and 5', was used to clone the zebrafish alphaA-crystallin 
gene. The peptide sequence of the encoded protein was deduced and compared to 
cavefish, shark, amphibian, bird and human orthologues using the CLUSTAL W 
algorithm. alphaA-crystallin transcript was evaluated in brain, heart, lens, 
liver, skeletal muscle/skin, and spleen by semi-quantitative RT-PCR.
RESULTS: The 173 amino acid sequence of zebrafish alphaA-crystallin was 
determined to be 73% and 86% similar to its human and cavefish orthologues, 
respectively. We detected high expression of zebrafish alphaA-crystallin in the 
lens and very low expression in liver and spleen.
CONCLUSIONS: Few amino acids identified as being functionally important to 
chaperone function differ between zebrafish and mammalian alphaA-crystallin. The 
expression of alphaA-crystallin is mainly confined to the lens in both taxa. 
These data suggest that zebrafish alphaA-crystallin plays a physiologically 
limited role outside of the zebrafish lens, similar to its mammalian 
orthologues.

PMCID: PMC2957823
PMID: 11925526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
