---
pmid: '11250902'
title: The TRA-1 transcription factor binds TRA-2 to regulate sexual fates in Caenorhabditis
  elegans.
authors:
- Wang S
- Kimble J
journal: EMBO J
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC145520
doi: 10.1093/emboj/20.6.1363
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The TRA-1 transcription factor binds TRA-2 to regulate sexual fates in Caenorhabditis elegans.
**Authors:** Wang S, Kimble J
**Journal:** EMBO J (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/20.6.1363](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/20.6.1363)
**PMC:** [PMC145520](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC145520/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2001 Mar 15;20(6):1363-72. doi: 10.1093/emboj/20.6.1363.

The TRA-1 transcription factor binds TRA-2 to regulate sexual fates in 
Caenorhabditis elegans.

Wang S(1), Kimble J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison and Howard Hughes 
Medical Institute, 53706-1544, USA.

The tra-1 and tra-2 sex-determining genes promote female fates in Caenorhabditis 
elegans. Classical genetic studies placed tra-1 as the terminal regulator of the 
pathway with tra-2 acting upstream as a regulator of regulators of tra-1. Here 
we report the surprising result that the TRA-1 transcription factor binds the 
intracellular domain of the TRA-2 membrane protein. This binding is dependent on 
the MX regulatory domain, a region of the TRA-2 intracellular domain shown 
previously to be critical for the onset of hermaphrodite spermatogenesis. The 
functional importance of the TRA-1-TRA-2 physical interaction is supported by 
genetic interactions between tra-1(0) and tra-2(mx) mutations: a reduction of 
tra-1 gene dose from two copies to one copy enhances the tra-2(mx) feminization 
phenotype, but has no apparent somatic effect. In Caenorhabditis briggsae, we 
also find an MX-dependent interaction between Cb-TRA-1 and Cb-TRA-2, but 
intriguingly, no cross-species interactions are seen. The conservation of the 
TRA-1- TRA-2 interaction underscores its importance in sex determination.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/20.6.1363
PMCID: PMC145520
PMID: 11250902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
