---
pmid: '12483302'
title: 'Genomic structure of the human mitochondrial chaperonin genes: HSP60 and HSP10
  are localised head to head on chromosome 2 separated by a bidirectional promoter.'
authors:
- Hansen JJ
- Bross P
- Westergaard M
- Nielsen MN
- Eiberg H
- Børglum AD
- Mogensen J
- Kristiansen K
- Bolund L
- Gregersen N
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s00439-002-0837-9
---

# Genomic structure of the human mitochondrial chaperonin genes: HSP60 and HSP10 are localised head to head on chromosome 2 separated by a bidirectional promoter.
**Authors:** Hansen JJ, Bross P, Westergaard M, Nielsen MN, Eiberg H, Børglum AD, Mogensen J, Kristiansen K, Bolund L, Gregersen N
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00439-002-0837-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-002-0837-9)

## Abstract

1. Hum Genet. 2003 Jan;112(1):71-7. doi: 10.1007/s00439-002-0837-9. Epub 2002 Oct
 16.

Genomic structure of the human mitochondrial chaperonin genes: HSP60 and HSP10 
are localised head to head on chromosome 2 separated by a bidirectional 
promoter.

Hansen JJ(1), Bross P, Westergaard M, Nielsen MN, Eiberg H, Børglum AD, Mogensen 
J, Kristiansen K, Bolund L, Gregersen N.

Author information:
(1)Research Unit for Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences and Arhus 
University Hospital, Arhus, Denmark.

Although the mitochondrial chaperonin Hsp60 and its co-chaperonin Hsp10 have 
received great attention in the last decade, and it has been proposed that 
mutations and variations in these genes may be implicated in genetic diseases, 
the genome structure of the human HSP60 and HSP10 genes (also known as HSPD1 and 
HSPE1, respectively) has not been firmly established. The picture has been 
confused by the presence of many pseudogenes of both HSP60 and HSP10 and the 
long surviving assumption that the HSP60 gene is intron-less. An earlier report 
on the partial sequence of the human HSP60 gene and the presence of introns has 
largely been overlooked. We present the full sequence of the human HSP60 and 
HSP10 genes. The two genes are linked head to head comprising approximately 17 
kb and consist of 12 and 4 exons, respectively. The first exon of the human 
HSP60 gene is non-coding and the first exon of the human HSP10 gene ends with 
the start codon. Analysis of human and mouse expressed sequence tag sequences in 
GenBank indicates that alternative splicing occurs resulting in HSP60 gene 
transcripts with different exon-1 sequences. By sequencing of the exons, the 
exon/intron boundaries and the region between the two genes in 10 Danish 
individuals (five couples), nine nucleotide variations and one intronic deletion 
have been detected that, by subsequent typing of one child from each couple, 
have been assigned to five haplotypes. The human HSP60 gene has been localised, 
by radiation hybrid mapping, between markers AFMA121YH1 and WI-10756 on 
chromosome 2. This location and the position of two homologous fragments in the 
Human Genome Assembly are consistent with cytogenetic position 2q33.1. Using a 
luciferase-reporter assay, we demonstrate that the region between the two genes 
functions as a bi-directional promoter. The transcriptional activity of the 
promoter fragment in the HSP60 direction is approximately twice that in the 
HSP10 direction under normal growth conditions and, upon heat-shock, promoter 
activity in either direction increased by a factor of approximately 12. One of 
the nucleotide variations detected is localised in a putative 
SP1-transcription-factor-binding site in the bidirectional promoter region and 
analysis of the transcriptional activity of the promoter fragment with this 
variation has shown that it does not affect transcription levels both with and 
without heat-shock.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-002-0837-9
PMID: 12483302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
