---
pmid: '11242052'
title: A conserved XIAP-interaction motif in caspase-9 and Smac/DIABLO regulates caspase
  activity and apoptosis.
authors:
- Srinivasula SM
- Hegde R
- Saleh A
- Datta P
- Shiozaki E
- Chai J
- Lee RA
- Robbins PD
- Fernandes-Alnemri T
- Shi Y
- Alnemri ES
journal: Nature
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/35065125
---

# A conserved XIAP-interaction motif in caspase-9 and Smac/DIABLO regulates caspase activity and apoptosis.
**Authors:** Srinivasula SM, Hegde R, Saleh A, Datta P, Shiozaki E, Chai J, Lee RA, Robbins PD, Fernandes-Alnemri T, Shi Y, Alnemri ES
**Journal:** Nature (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1038/35065125](https://doi.org/10.1038/35065125)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2001 Mar 1;410(6824):112-6. doi: 10.1038/35065125.

A conserved XIAP-interaction motif in caspase-9 and Smac/DIABLO regulates 
caspase activity and apoptosis.

Srinivasula SM(1), Hegde R, Saleh A, Datta P, Shiozaki E, Chai J, Lee RA, 
Robbins PD, Fernandes-Alnemri T, Shi Y, Alnemri ES.

Author information:
(1)Center for Apoptosis Research and the Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology, Kimmel Cancer Institute, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

Erratum in
    Nature 2001 Jun 28;411(6841):1081.

Comment in
    Nature. 2001 Mar 1;410(6824):33-4. doi: 10.1038/35065201.
    . 2001 Jun 27:NOT-OD-01-046.
    . 2001 May 24:NOT-OD-01-040.

X-linked inhibitor-of-apoptosis protein (XIAP) interacts with caspase-9 and 
inhibits its activity, whereas Smac (also known as DIABLO) relieves this 
inhibition through interaction with XIAP. Here we show that XIAP associates with 
the active caspase-9-Apaf-1 holoenzyme complex through binding to the amino 
terminus of the linker peptide on the small subunit of caspase-9, which becomes 
exposed after proteolytic processing of procaspase-9 at Asp315. Supporting this 
observation, point mutations that abrogate the proteolytic processing but not 
the catalytic activity of caspase-9, or deletion of the linker peptide, 
prevented caspase-9 association with XIAP and its concomitant inhibition. We 
note that the N-terminal four residues of caspase-9 linker peptide share 
significant homology with the N-terminal tetra-peptide in mature Smac and in the 
Drosophila proteins Hid/Grim/Reaper, defining a conserved class of IAP-binding 
motifs. Consistent with this finding, binding of the caspase-9 linker peptide 
and Smac to the BIR3 domain of XIAP is mutually exclusive, suggesting that Smac 
potentiates caspase-9 activity by disrupting the interaction of the linker 
peptide of caspase-9 with BIR3. Our studies reveal a mechanism in which binding 
to the BIR3 domain by two conserved peptides, one from Smac and the other one 
from caspase-9, has opposing effects on caspase activity and apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1038/35065125
PMID: 11242052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
