---
pmid: '12628188'
title: Structural evidence for feedback activation by Ras.GTP of the Ras-specific
  nucleotide exchange factor SOS.
authors:
- Margarit SM
- Sondermann H
- Hall BE
- Nagar B
- Hoelz A
- Pirruccello M
- Bar-Sagi D
- Kuriyan J
journal: Cell
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(03)00149-1
---

# Structural evidence for feedback activation by Ras.GTP of the Ras-specific nucleotide exchange factor SOS.
**Authors:** Margarit SM, Sondermann H, Hall BE, Nagar B, Hoelz A, Pirruccello M, Bar-Sagi D, Kuriyan J
**Journal:** Cell (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(03)00149-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(03)00149-1)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2003 Mar 7;112(5):685-95. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(03)00149-1.

Structural evidence for feedback activation by Ras.GTP of the Ras-specific 
nucleotide exchange factor SOS.

Margarit SM(1), Sondermann H, Hall BE, Nagar B, Hoelz A, Pirruccello M, Bar-Sagi 
D, Kuriyan J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, State University of New 
York at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA.

Growth factor receptors activate Ras by recruiting the nucleotide exchange 
factor son of sevenless (SOS) to the cell membrane, thereby triggering the 
production of GTP-loaded Ras. Crystallographic analyses of Ras bound to the 
catalytic module of SOS have led to the unexpected discovery of a highly 
conserved Ras binding site on SOS that is located distal to the active site and 
is specific for Ras.GTP. The crystal structures suggest that Ras.GTP stabilizes 
the active site of SOS allosterically, and we show that Ras.GTP forms ternary 
complexes with SOS(cat) in solution and increases significantly the rate of 
SOS(cat)-stimulated nucleotide release from Ras. These results demonstrate the 
existence of a positive feedback mechanism for the spatial and temporal 
regulation of Ras.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(03)00149-1
PMID: 12628188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
