---
pmid: '16919237'
title: Breast cancer metastasis suppressor 1 (BRMS1) is stabilized by the Hsp90 chaperone.
authors:
- Hurst DR
- Mehta A
- Moore BP
- Phadke PA
- Meehan WJ
- Accavitti MA
- Shevde LA
- Hopper JE
- Xie Y
- Welch DR
- Samant RS
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1557677
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.08.005
---

# Breast cancer metastasis suppressor 1 (BRMS1) is stabilized by the Hsp90 chaperone.
**Authors:** Hurst DR, Mehta A, Moore BP, Phadke PA, Meehan WJ, Accavitti MA, Shevde LA, Hopper JE, Xie Y, Welch DR, Samant RS
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.08.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.08.005)
**PMC:** [PMC1557677](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1557677/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Oct 6;348(4):1429-35. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.08.005. Epub 2006 Aug 10.

Breast cancer metastasis suppressor 1 (BRMS1) is stabilized by the Hsp90 
chaperone.

Hurst DR(1), Mehta A, Moore BP, Phadke PA, Meehan WJ, Accavitti MA, Shevde LA, 
Hopper JE, Xie Y, Welch DR, Samant RS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, 
USA.

Breast cancer metastasis suppressor 1 (BRMS1) is a member of the mSin3-HDAC 
transcription co-repressor complex. However, the proteins associated with BRMS1 
have not been fully identified. Yeast two-hybrid screen, immuno-affinity 
chromatography, and co-immunoprecipitation experiments were performed to 
identify BRMS1 interacting proteins (BIPs). In addition to known core mSin3 
transcriptional complex components RBBP1 and mSDS3, BRMS1 interacted with other 
proteins including three chaperones: DNAJB6 (MRJ), Hsp90, and Hsp70. Hsp90 is a 
known target of HDAC6 and reversible acetylation is one of the mechanisms that 
is implicated in regulation of Hsp90 chaperone complex activity. BRMS1 
interacted with class II HDACs, HDAC 4, 5, and 6. We further found that BRMS1 is 
stabilized by Hsp90, and its turnover is proteasome dependent. The stability of 
BRMS1 protein may be important in maintaining the functional role of BRMS1 in 
metastasis suppression.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.08.005
PMCID: PMC1557677
PMID: 16919237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
