---
pmid: '12665524'
title: 'Binding of urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR) to the mannose
  6-phosphate/insulin-like growth factor II receptor: contrasting interactions of
  full-length and soluble forms of uPAR.'
authors:
- Kreiling JL
- Byrd JC
- Deisz RJ
- Mizukami IF
- Todd RF 3rd
- MacDonald RG
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M302249200
---

# Binding of urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR) to the mannose 6-phosphate/insulin-like growth factor II receptor: contrasting interactions of full-length and soluble forms of uPAR.
**Authors:** Kreiling JL, Byrd JC, Deisz RJ, Mizukami IF, Todd RF 3rd, MacDonald RG
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M302249200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M302249200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jun 6;278(23):20628-37. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M302249200. Epub
2003  Mar 27.

Binding of urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR) to the mannose 
6-phosphate/insulin-like growth factor II receptor: contrasting interactions of 
full-length and soluble forms of uPAR.

Kreiling JL(1), Byrd JC, Deisz RJ, Mizukami IF, Todd RF 3rd, MacDonald RG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Nebraska 
Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68198-4525, USA.

Urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR) binding by the mannose 
6-phosphate/insulin-like growth factor II receptor (Man-6-P/IGF2R) is considered 
important to Man-6-P/IGF2R tumor suppressor function via regulation of cell 
surface proteolytic activity. Our goal was to map the uPAR binding site of the 
Man-6-P/IGF2R by analyzing the uPAR binding characteristics of a panel of 
minireceptors containing different regions of the Man-6-P/IGF2R extracytoplasmic 
domain. Coimmunoprecipitation assays revealed that soluble recombinant uPAR 
(suPAR) bound the Man-6-P/IGF2R at two distinct sites, one localized to the 
amino-terminal end of the Man-6-P/IGF2R extracytoplasmic domain (repeats 1-3) 
and the other to the more carboxyl-terminal end (repeats 7-9). These sites 
correspond with the positions of the two Man-6-P binding domains of 
Man-6-P/IGF2R. Indeed, the suPAR-Man-6-P/IGF2R interaction was inhibited by 
Man-6-P, and binding-competent su-PAR species represented a minor percentage 
(8-30%) of the suPAR present. In contrast, Man-6-P/IGF2R binding of endogenous, 
full-length uPAR solubilized from plasma membranes of the prostate cancer cell 
line, PC-3, was not inhibited by Man-6-P. Further studies showed that very 
little (<5%) endogenous uPAR was Man-6-P/IGF2R binding-competent. We conclude 
that, contrary to previous reports, the interaction between uPAR and 
Man-6-P/IGF2R is a low percentage binding event and that suPAR and full-length 
uPAR bind the Man-6-P/IGF2R by different mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M302249200
PMID: 12665524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
