---
pmid: '8543280'
title: '[Analysis of the human acidic epididymal glycoprotein-like molecule: isolation
  of cDNA and tissue localization].'
authors:
- Hayashi M
journal: Hokkaido Igaku Zasshi
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
---

# [Analysis of the human acidic epididymal glycoprotein-like molecule: isolation of cDNA and tissue localization].
**Authors:** Hayashi M
**Journal:** Hokkaido Igaku Zasshi (1995)

## Abstract

1. Hokkaido Igaku Zasshi. 1995 Sep;70(5):743-53.

[Analysis of the human acidic epididymal glycoprotein-like molecule: isolation 
of cDNA and tissue localization].

[Article in Japanese]

Hayashi M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hokkaido University School of 
Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.

Acidic epididymal glycoprotein (AEG) is an androgen-dependent, epididymal 
secretory protein assumed to play a major role in sperm maturation. In the 
present study, we isolated cDNA clones encoding the human AEG-like molecule and 
determined their nucleotide sequences. The deduced human AEG-like molecule was 
made up of 230 amino acids, excluding a signal peptide, and contained one 
potential N-linked glycosylation site. All cysteinyl residues were conserved 
between the human AEG-like molecule and the AEG molecules of rats and mice. The 
human AEG-like molecule was equally similar to the AEG molecules of rats and 
mice and a related testis-specific protein known as TPX1 of human and mice 
(approximately 40% amino acid sequence similarity). Northern blot analysis 
showed that the human AEG-like gene is expressed specifically in the epididymis. 
To identify the product of the human AEG-like gene, polyclonal antibody was 
produced by immunizing rabbits with a recombinant human AEG-like protein 
expressed in E. coli. This antibody detected a major band of 30 kD and a minor 
band of 26 kD in the caput, corpus, and cauda regions of the epididymis, the 
ductus deferens, the sperm, and the seminal plasma. Immunohistochemical analysis 
showed that the human AEG-like molecule is located in the lumen and epithelium 
of distal ductus efferentes and epididymal ducts, and on the postacrosomal 
region of the sperm head.

PMID: 8543280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
