---
pmid: '34685729'
title: 'Pediatric Encephalopathy: Clinical, Biochemical and Cellular Insights into
  the Role of Gln52 of GNAO1 and GNAI1 for the Dominant Disease.'
authors:
- Solis GP
- Kozhanova TV
- Koval A
- Zhilina SS
- Mescheryakova TI
- Abramov AA
- Ishmuratov EV
- Bolshakova ES
- Osipova KV
- Ayvazyan SO
- Lebon S
- Kanivets IV
- Pyankov DV
- Troccaz S
- Silachev DN
- Zavadenko NN
- Prityko AG
- Katanaev VL
journal: Cells
year: '2021'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC8535069
doi: 10.3390/cells10102749
---

# Pediatric Encephalopathy: Clinical, Biochemical and Cellular Insights into the Role of Gln52 of GNAO1 and GNAI1 for the Dominant Disease.
**Authors:** Solis GP, Kozhanova TV, Koval A, Zhilina SS, Mescheryakova TI, Abramov AA, Ishmuratov EV, Bolshakova ES, Osipova KV, Ayvazyan SO, Lebon S, Kanivets IV, Pyankov DV, Troccaz S, Silachev DN, Zavadenko NN, Prityko AG, Katanaev VL
**Journal:** Cells (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells10102749](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells10102749)
**PMC:** [PMC8535069](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8535069/)

## Abstract

1. Cells. 2021 Oct 14;10(10):2749. doi: 10.3390/cells10102749.

Pediatric Encephalopathy: Clinical, Biochemical and Cellular Insights into the 
Role of Gln52 of GNAO1 and GNAI1 for the Dominant Disease.

Solis GP(1), Kozhanova TV(2)(3), Koval A(1), Zhilina SS(2)(3), Mescheryakova 
TI(2), Abramov AA(2), Ishmuratov EV(2), Bolshakova ES(2), Osipova KV(2), 
Ayvazyan SO(2), Lebon S(4), Kanivets IV(5), Pyankov DV(5), Troccaz S(1), 
Silachev DN(1)(6)(7)(8), Zavadenko NN(3), Prityko AG(2)(3), Katanaev VL(1)(8).

Author information:
(1)Translational Research Center in Oncohaematology, Department of Cell 
Physiology and Metabolism, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, CH-1211 
Geneva, Switzerland.
(2)St. Luka's Clinical Research Center for Children, 119620 Moscow, Russia.
(3)Department of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Medical Genetics, Faculty of 
Pediatrics, Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, 117997 Moscow, 
Russia.
(4)Unit of Pediatric Neurology and Neurorehabilitation, Division of Pediatrics, 
Woman-Mother-Child Department, Lausanne University Hospital (CHUV), 1011 
Lausanne, Switzerland.
(5)Center of Medical Genetics, Genomed Ltd., 115093 Moscow, Russia.
(6)A.N. Belozersky Research Institute of Physico-Chemical Biology, Moscow State 
University, 119992 Moscow, Russia.
(7)V.I. Kulakov National Medical Research Center of Obstetrics, Gynecology and 
Perinatology, 117997 Moscow, Russia.
(8)School of Biomedicine, Far Eastern Federal University, 690090 Vladivostok, 
Russia.

Heterotrimeric G proteins are immediate transducers of G protein-coupled 
receptors-the biggest receptor family in metazoans-and play innumerate functions 
in health and disease. A set of de novo point mutations in GNAO1 and GNAI1, the 
genes encoding the α-subunits (Gαo and Gαi1, respectively) of the heterotrimeric 
G proteins, have been described to cause pediatric encephalopathies represented 
by epileptic seizures, movement disorders, developmental delay, intellectual 
disability, and signs of neurodegeneration. Among such mutations, the Gln52Pro 
substitutions have been previously identified in GNAO1 and GNAI1. Here, we 
describe the case of an infant with another mutation in the same site, Gln52Arg. 
The patient manifested epileptic and movement disorders and a developmental 
delay, at the onset of 1.5 weeks after birth. We have analyzed biochemical and 
cellular properties of the three types of dominant pathogenic mutants in the 
Gln52 position described so far: Gαo[Gln52Pro], Gαi1[Gln52Pro], and the novel 
Gαo[Gln52Arg]. At the biochemical level, the three mutant proteins are deficient 
in binding and hydrolyzing GTP, which is the fundamental function of the healthy 
G proteins. At the cellular level, the mutants are defective in the interaction 
with partner proteins recognizing either the GDP-loaded or the GTP-loaded forms 
of Gαo. Further, of the two intracellular sites of Gαo localization, plasma 
membrane and Golgi, the former is strongly reduced for the mutant proteins. We 
conclude that the point mutations at Gln52 inactivate the Gαo and Gαi1 proteins 
leading to aberrant intracellular localization and partner protein interactions. 
These features likely lie at the core of the molecular etiology of pediatric 
encephalopathies associated with the codon 52 mutations in GNAO1/GNAI1.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10102749
PMCID: PMC8535069
PMID: 34685729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
