---
pmid: '19427028'
title: Cullin3-based polyubiquitination and p62-dependent aggregation of caspase-8
  mediate extrinsic apoptosis signaling.
authors:
- Jin Z
- Li Y
- Pitti R
- Lawrence D
- Pham VC
- Lill JR
- Ashkenazi A
journal: Cell
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.03.015
---

# Cullin3-based polyubiquitination and p62-dependent aggregation of caspase-8 mediate extrinsic apoptosis signaling.
**Authors:** Jin Z, Li Y, Pitti R, Lawrence D, Pham VC, Lill JR, Ashkenazi A
**Journal:** Cell (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2009.03.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2009.03.015)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2009 May 15;137(4):721-35. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.03.015. Epub 2009
May  7.

Cullin3-based polyubiquitination and p62-dependent aggregation of caspase-8 
mediate extrinsic apoptosis signaling.

Jin Z(1), Li Y, Pitti R, Lawrence D, Pham VC, Lill JR, Ashkenazi A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Genentech, Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San 
Francisco, CA 94080, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2009 May 15;137(4):604-6. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.04.052.

Cell-surface death receptors such as DR4 and DR5 trigger apoptosis through a 
death-inducing signaling complex (DISC) that recruits the apical protease 
caspase-8. Apoptosis commitment requires efficient activation and autocatalytic 
release of caspase-8 into the cytoplasm to engage executioner caspases. While 
DISC recruitment initiates caspase-8 stimulation, full activation of the 
protease depends on further molecular aggregation events that are not fully 
understood. Here, we show that death receptor ligation induces 
polyubiquitination of caspase-8, through a previously unknown interaction of the 
DISC with a cullin3 (CUL3)-based E3 ligase. CUL3-mediated caspase-8 
polyubiquitination required the RING box protein RBX1, whereas the 
deubiquitinase A20 reversed this modification. The ubiquitin-binding protein 
p62/sequestosome-1 promoted aggregation of CUL3-modified caspase-8 within 
p62-dependent foci, leading to full activation and processing of the enzyme and 
driving commitment to cell death. These results identify a mechanism that 
positively controls apoptosis signaling by polyubiquitination and aggregation of 
a key initiator caspase.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.03.015
PMID: 19427028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
