---
pmid: '23636329'
title: EGFR modulates microRNA maturation in response to hypoxia through phosphorylation
  of AGO2.
authors:
- Shen J
- Xia W
- Khotskaya YB
- Huo L
- Nakanishi K
- Lim SO
- Du Y
- Wang Y
- Chang WC
- Chen CH
- Hsu JL
- Wu Y
- Lam YC
- James BP
- Liu X
- Liu CG
- Patel DJ
- Hung MC
journal: Nature
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC3717558
doi: 10.1038/nature12080
---

# EGFR modulates microRNA maturation in response to hypoxia through phosphorylation of AGO2.
**Authors:** Shen J, Xia W, Khotskaya YB, Huo L, Nakanishi K, Lim SO, Du Y, Wang Y, Chang WC, Chen CH, Hsu JL, Wu Y, Lam YC, James BP, Liu X, Liu CG, Patel DJ, Hung MC
**Journal:** Nature (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature12080](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature12080)
**PMC:** [PMC3717558](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3717558/)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2013 May 16;497(7449):383-7. doi: 10.1038/nature12080. Epub 2013 May
1.

EGFR modulates microRNA maturation in response to hypoxia through 
phosphorylation of AGO2.

Shen J(1), Xia W, Khotskaya YB, Huo L, Nakanishi K, Lim SO, Du Y, Wang Y, Chang 
WC, Chen CH, Hsu JL, Wu Y, Lam YC, James BP, Liu X, Liu CG, Patel DJ, Hung MC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2013 Jun;13(6):377. doi: 10.1038/nrc3534.
    Dev Cell. 2013 Jun 24;25(6):553-4. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2013.06.009.
    Cell Res. 2013 Oct;23(10):1157-8. doi: 10.1038/cr.2013.87.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are generated by two-step processing to yield small RNAs that 
negatively regulate target gene expression at the post-transcriptional level. 
Deregulation of miRNAs has been linked to diverse pathological processes, 
including cancer. Recent studies have also implicated miRNAs in the regulation 
of cellular response to a spectrum of stresses, such as hypoxia, which is 
frequently encountered in the poorly angiogenic core of a solid tumour. However, 
the upstream regulators of miRNA biogenesis machineries remain obscure, raising 
the question of how tumour cells efficiently coordinate and impose specificity 
on miRNA expression and function in response to stresses. Here we show that 
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), which is the product of a 
well-characterized oncogene in human cancers, suppresses the maturation of 
specific tumour-suppressor-like miRNAs in response to hypoxic stress through 
phosphorylation of argonaute 2 (AGO2) at Tyr 393. The association between EGFR 
and AGO2 is enhanced by hypoxia, leading to elevated AGO2-Y393 phosphorylation, 
which in turn reduces the binding of Dicer to AGO2 and inhibits miRNA processing 
from precursor miRNAs to mature miRNAs. We also identify a long-loop structure 
in precursor miRNAs as a critical regulatory element in 
phospho-Y393-AGO2-mediated miRNA maturation. Furthermore, AGO2-Y393 
phosphorylation mediates EGFR-enhanced cell survival and invasiveness under 
hypoxia, and correlates with poorer overall survival in breast cancer patients. 
Our study reveals a previously unrecognized function of EGFR in miRNA maturation 
and demonstrates how EGFR is likely to function as a regulator of AGO2 through 
novel post-translational modification. These findings suggest that modulation of 
miRNA biogenesis is important for stress response in tumour cells and has 
potential clinical implications.

DOI: 10.1038/nature12080
PMCID: PMC3717558
PMID: 23636329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.

## Full Text

Abstract

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are generated by two-step processing to yield small RNAs that negatively regulate target gene expression at the post-transcriptional level 1 . Deregulation of miRNAs has been linked to diverse pathological processes, including cancer 2 , 3 . Recent studies have also implicated miRNAs in the regulation of cellular response to a spectrum of stresses 4 , such as hypoxia, which is frequently encountered in the poorly angiogenic core of a solid tumour 5 . However, the upstream regulators of miRNA biogenesis machineries remain obscure, raising the question of how tumour cells efficiently coordinate and impose specificity on miRNA expression and function in response to stresses. Here we show that epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), which is the product of a well-characterized oncogene in human cancers, suppresses the maturation of specific tumour-suppressor-like miRNAs in response to hypoxic stress through phosphorylation of argonaute 2 (AGO2) at Tyr 393. The association between EGFR and AGO2 is enhanced by hypoxia, leading to elevated AGO2-Y393 phosphorylation, which in turn reduces the binding of Dicer to AGO2 and inhibits miRNA processing from precursor miRNAs to mature miRNAs. We also identify a long-loop structure in precursor miRNAs as a critical regulatory element in phospho-Y393-AGO2-mediated miRNA maturation. Furthermore, AGO2-Y393 phosphorylation mediates EGFR-enhanced cell survival and invasiveness under hypoxia, and correlates with poorer overall survival in breast cancer patients. Our study reveals a previously unrecognized function of EGFR in miRNA maturation and demonstrates how EGFR is likely to function as a regulator of AGO2 through novel post-translational modification. These findings suggest that modulation of miRNA biogenesis is important for stress response in tumour cells and has potential clinical implications.

METHODS SUMMARY

We used quantitative PCR with reverse transcription to measure the expression levels of precursor and mature miRNAs, as described previously 27 . Customized next-generation RNA deep sequencing, including both small-RNA application and whole-transcriptome analysis, was performed according to the standard protocol (Applied Biosystems). The full methodology can be found in Supplementary Information .
