---
pmid: '9766676'
title: Inhibition of tumor cell growth by RTP/rit42 and its responsiveness to p53
  and DNA damage.
authors:
- Kurdistani SK
- Arizti P
- Reimer CL
- Sugrue MM
- Aaronson SA
- Lee SW
journal: Cancer Res
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
---

# Inhibition of tumor cell growth by RTP/rit42 and its responsiveness to p53 and DNA damage.
**Authors:** Kurdistani SK, Arizti P, Reimer CL, Sugrue MM, Aaronson SA, Lee SW
**Journal:** Cancer Res (1998)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Res. 1998 Oct 1;58(19):4439-44.

Inhibition of tumor cell growth by RTP/rit42 and its responsiveness to p53 and 
DNA damage.

Kurdistani SK(1), Arizti P, Reimer CL, Sugrue MM, Aaronson SA, Lee SW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical 
School, Harvard Institutes of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Through a differential screening technique, we have identified a cDNA clone with 
differential expression in normal versus tumor cells. This clone, designated 
rit42 (reduced in tumor, 42 kDa), was previously isolated as a 
homocysteine-inducible gene in human endothelial cells (RTP), and the same or a 
highly related androgen-responsive gene in mouse has also been identified. Both 
Northern blot analysis and in situ hybridization demonstrated a significantly 
diminished expression in tumor cells, including those derived from breast and 
prostate when compared with normal cells. It was shown that RTP/rit42 mRNA 
cycles with cell division, peaking at G1 and G2-M, with lower expression in S 
phase. The biphasic expression of RTP/rit42 mRNA was absent in tumor cells. 
Introduction of rit42 cDNA into human cancer cells reduced cell growth both in 
vitro and in nude mice. Moreover, analysis of a tetracycline-regulated 
p53-inducible system in null-p53 cell lines showed that RTP/rit42 mRNA 
expression increased concomitantly with p53 expression and followed a similar 
time course. In addition, DNA-damaging agents induced RTP/rit42 expression in a 
p53-dependent manner but independent of a p53-mediated G1 arrest. 
Immunofluorescence analysis of a FLAG epitope-tagged RTP/rit42 protein revealed 
a cytoplasmic localization pattern with redistribution to the nucleus upon DNA 
damage. We have localized RTP/rit42 to human chromosome 8q24.3. Taken together, 
these results are consistent with a growth inhibitory role for RTP/rit42, and 
its down-regulation may contribute to the tumor malignant phenotype.

PMID: 9766676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
