---
pmid: '23770679'
title: Microtubules and Alp7-Alp14 (TACC-TOG) reposition chromosomes before meiotic
  segregation.
authors:
- Kakui Y
- Sato M
- Okada N
- Toda T
- Yamamoto M
journal: Nat Cell Biol
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ncb2782
---

# Microtubules and Alp7-Alp14 (TACC-TOG) reposition chromosomes before meiotic segregation.
**Authors:** Kakui Y, Sato M, Okada N, Toda T, Yamamoto M
**Journal:** Nat Cell Biol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncb2782](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb2782)

## Abstract

1. Nat Cell Biol. 2013 Jul;15(7):786-96. doi: 10.1038/ncb2782. Epub 2013 Jun 16.

Microtubules and Alp7-Alp14 (TACC-TOG) reposition chromosomes before meiotic 
segregation.

Kakui Y(1), Sato M, Okada N, Toda T, Yamamoto M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate School of Science, 
University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Tokyo 113-0032, Japan.

Tethering kinetochores at spindle poles facilitates their efficient capture and 
segregation by microtubules at mitotic onset in yeast. During meiotic prophase 
of fission yeast, however, kinetochores are detached from the poles, which 
facilitates meiotic recombination but may cause a risk of chromosome 
mis-segregation during meiosis. How cells circumvent this dilemma remains 
unclear. Here we show that an extensive microtubule array assembles from the 
poles at meiosis I onset and retrieves scattered kinetochores towards the poles 
to prevent chromosome drift. Moreover, the microtubule-associated protein 
complex Alp7-Alp14 (the fission yeast orthologues of mammalian TACC-TOG) is 
phosphorylated by Polo kinase, which promotes its meiosis-specific association 
to the outer kinetochore complex Nuf2-Ndc80 of scattered kinetochores, thereby 
assisting in capturing remote kinetochores. Although TOG was recently 
characterized as a microtubule polymerase, Dis1 (the other TOG orthologue in 
fission yeast), together with the Dam1 complex, plays a role in microtubule 
shortening to pull kinetochores polewards. Thus, microtubules and their binding 
proteins uniquely reconstitute chromosome configuration during meiosis.

DOI: 10.1038/ncb2782
PMID: 23770679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
