---
pmid: '36136759'
title: GWAS of genetic factors affecting white blood cell morphological parameters
  in Sardinians uncovers influence of chromosome 11 innate immunity gene cluster on
  eosinophil morphology.
authors:
- Marongiu M
- Pérez-Mejías G
- Orrù V
- Steri M
- Sidore C
- Díaz-Quintana A
- Mulas A
- Busonero F
- Maschio A
- Walter K
- Tardaguila M
- Akbari P
- Soranzo N
- Fiorillo E
- Gorospe M
- Schlessinger D
- Díaz-Moreno I
- Cucca F
- Zoledziewska M
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2023'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC9941829
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddac238
---

# GWAS of genetic factors affecting white blood cell morphological parameters in Sardinians uncovers influence of chromosome 11 innate immunity gene cluster on eosinophil morphology.
**Authors:** Marongiu M, Pérez-Mejías G, Orrù V, Steri M, Sidore C, Díaz-Quintana A, Mulas A, Busonero F, Maschio A, Walter K, Tardaguila M, Akbari P, Soranzo N, Fiorillo E, Gorospe M, Schlessinger D, Díaz-Moreno I, Cucca F, Zoledziewska M
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddac238](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddac238)
**PMC:** [PMC9941829](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9941829/)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2023 Feb 19;32(5):790-797. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddac238.

GWAS of genetic factors affecting white blood cell morphological parameters in 
Sardinians uncovers influence of chromosome 11 innate immunity gene cluster on 
eosinophil morphology.

Marongiu M(1), Pérez-Mejías G(2), Orrù V(1), Steri M(1), Sidore C(1), 
Díaz-Quintana A(2), Mulas A(1), Busonero F(1), Maschio A(1), Walter K(3), 
Tardaguila M(3), Akbari P(3)(4)(5)(6), Soranzo N(3)(6)(7)(8)(9), Fiorillo E(1), 
Gorospe M(10), Schlessinger D(4), Díaz-Moreno I(2), Cucca F(1)(11), Zoledziewska 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Ricerca Genetica e Biomedica (IRGB), Consiglio Nazionale delle 
Ricerche (CNR), 09042 Monserrato, Sardinia, Italy.
(2)Instituto de Investigaciones Químicas (IIQ)- Centro de Investigaciones 
Científicas Isla de la Cartuja (cicCartuja), Universidad de Sevilla-CSIC, 41092 
Sevilla, Spain.
(3)Human Genetics, Wellcome Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton 
CB10 1SA, Cambridge, UK.
(4)British Heart Foundation Cardiovascular Epidemiology Unit, Department of 
Public Health and Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Strangeways Research 
Laboratory, Wort's Causeway, Cambridge CB1 8RN, UK.
(5)Medical Research Council Biostatistics Unit, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge Institute of Public Health, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Forvie Site, 
Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 0SR, UK.
(6)The National Institute for Health Research Blood and Transplant Unit in Donor 
Health and Genomics, University of Cambridge, Strangeways Research Laboratory, 
Wort's Causeway, Cambridge CB1 8RN, UK.
(7)Department of Hematology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge Biomedical 
Campus, Cambridge CB2 0AW, UK.
(8)British Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK.
(9)Genomics Research Centre, Human Technopole, 20157 Milan, Italy.
(10)Laboratory of Genetics and Genomics, National Institute on Aging (NIA), 
National Institutes of Health (NIH), Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.
(11)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Sassari University, 07100 Sassari, Italy.

Few genome-wide association studies (GWAS) analyzing genetic regulation of 
morphological traits of white blood cells have been reported. We carried out a 
GWAS of 12 morphological traits in 869 individuals from the general population 
of Sardinia, Italy. These traits, included measures of cell volume, conductivity 
and light scatter in four white-cell populations (eosinophils, lymphocytes, 
monocytes, neutrophils). This analysis yielded seven statistically significant 
signals, four of which were novel (four novel, PRG2, P2RX3, two of CDK6). Five 
signals were replicated in the independent INTERVAL cohort of 11 822 
individuals. The most interesting signal with large effect size on eosinophil 
scatter (P-value = 8.33 x 10-32, beta = -1.651, se = 0.1351) falls within the 
innate immunity cluster on chromosome 11, and is located in the PRG2 gene. 
Computational analyses revealed that a rare, Sardinian-specific PRG2:p.Ser148Pro 
mutation modifies PRG2 amino acid contacts and protein dynamics in a manner that 
could possibly explain the changes observed in eosinophil morphology. Our 
discoveries shed light on genetics of morphological traits. For the first time, 
we describe such large effect size on eosinophils morphology that is relatively 
frequent in Sardinian population.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddac238
PMCID: PMC9941829
PMID: 36136759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Few genome-wide association studies (GWAS) analyzing genetic regulation of morphological traits of white blood cells have been reported. We carried out a GWAS of 12 morphological traits in 869 individuals from the general population of Sardinia, Italy. These traits, included measures of cell volume, conductivity and light scatter in four white-cell populations (eosinophils, lymphocytes, monocytes, neutrophils). This analysis yielded seven statistically significant signals, four of which were novel (four novel, PRG2 , P2RX3 , two of CDK6 ). Five signals were replicated in the independent INTERVAL cohort of 11 822 individuals. The most interesting signal with large effect size on eosinophil scatter ( P -value = 8.33 x 10 −32 , beta = −1.651, se = 0.1351) falls within the innate immunity cluster on chromosome 11, and is located in the PRG2 gene. Computational analyses revealed that a rare, Sardinian-specific PRG2:p.Ser148Pro mutation modifies PRG2 amino acid contacts and protein dynamics in a manner that could possibly explain the changes observed in eosinophil morphology. Our discoveries shed light on genetics of morphological traits. For the first time, we describe such large effect size on eosinophils morphology that is relatively frequent in Sardinian population.

Introduction

Large-scale genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have revealed thousands of loci affecting the levels of white blood cell subpopulations ( 1 , 2 ). However, previous GWAS scans have tended to focus on common genetic variants, while rare coding variants were often not directly assessed. The use of dense coverage genetic maps thus accesses more of genetic landscape and can also increase the likelihood to identify causal variants or proxies for the genotyped single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) ( 3 ).

The range of studies can also be extended from standard diagnostically used parameters to relatively non-classical parameters, enabling the exploration of the mechanism of regulation of white blood cell levels and their effects on related diseases. Previous GWAS studies using data on white blood cells derived from hematology analyzers have focused mainly on cell counts. Novel technologies of hematology analyzers provide additional detailed cell morphology analysis. WBC differential technology biophysically characterizes blood cells and detects abnormal cells through flow cytometric analysis with multiple light-scatter angles and digital conductivity. Cells are unaltered by staining. For example, DxH Coulter Cellular Analysis VCS technology measures cell volume (V, estimate cell size), conductivity (C, that is used to collect information about the permeability of cells, internal structure of the cell, including chemical composition and nuclear volume) and light scatter (S, that gives information about internal complexity like cellular granularity, nuclear lobularity and cell surface structure) in neutrophils, lymphocytes, monocytes and eosinophils ( 4 ).

Standard blood cell diagnostic evaluations include levels of different cell populations. For red blood cells, many morphological features are also analyzed, and platelet volume has also been usually reported. By contrast, morphologic features of white blood cells are rarely included in previous GWAS blood cell evaluations ( 2 ). However, previous GWAS on polychromatic flow cytometry–fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) analyses evaluated some of these parameters ( 5 ). To date, only one study comprehensively analyzed such parameters assessed by a hematology analyzer ( 6 ). However, they are relevant in diagnosis and research and can be determined by appropriate laser settings and light refraction. Such non-classical cell parameters, are reported based on histogram data. They may be related to clinical conditions, assessed by statistical co-localization of genetic association data with other types of data. The possible function of the associated variants can also be further analyzed to look for protein folding effects of nonsynonymous variants providing insights into the function of rare coding variants.

Here, we report a GWAS of morphologic non classical white blood cell traits such as cell volume, conductivity and light scatter ( 7 ). We replicated five signals in the Interval cohort. Of two rare Sardinian specific variants in PRG2 and HBB , the second was already described in our FACS previous study ( 5 ). Using molecular dynamics (MD) analysis we infer that the previously undetected mutation in PRG2 could interfere with the mature PRG2 non-toxic granules formation, possibly influencing the crystallization/aggregation processes that mediate PRG2 toxicity.

Discussion

A population sequencing GWAS for non-classical morphologic parameters of white blood cells enabled the detection of a coding variant in the PRG2 gene affecting eosinophil scatter (EOS)-reduced cell granularity. After conditional analysis a second variant in the P2RX3 gene that reduced cell granularity in eosinophils (EOS) was discovered. Furthermore, a variant in the CDK6 gene, previously associated with myeloid cell counts and intracellular complexity, was found here associated with neutrophil and eosinophil volume (EOV, NEV) ( Supplementary Material, Fig. S3 ).
