---
pmid: '10783144'
title: Identification of a novel partner of RNA polymerase II subunit 11, Che-1, which
  interacts with and affects the growth suppression function of Rb.
authors:
- Fanciulli M
- Bruno T
- Di Padova M
- De Angelis R
- Iezzi S
- Iacobini C
- Floridi A
- Passananti C
journal: FASEB J
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1096/fasebj.14.7.904
---

# Identification of a novel partner of RNA polymerase II subunit 11, Che-1, which interacts with and affects the growth suppression function of Rb.
**Authors:** Fanciulli M, Bruno T, Di Padova M, De Angelis R, Iezzi S, Iacobini C, Floridi A, Passananti C
**Journal:** FASEB J (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1096/fasebj.14.7.904](https://doi.org/10.1096/fasebj.14.7.904)

## Abstract

1. FASEB J. 2000 May;14(7):904-12. doi: 10.1096/fasebj.14.7.904.

Identification of a novel partner of RNA polymerase II subunit 11, Che-1, which 
interacts with and affects the growth suppression function of Rb.

Fanciulli M(1), Bruno T, Di Padova M, De Angelis R, Iezzi S, Iacobini C, Floridi 
A, Passananti C.

Author information:
(1)Cell Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics Laboratory, Regina Elena Cancer 
Institute, 00158 Rome, Italy.

hRPB11 is a core subunit of RNA polymerase II (pol II) specifically 
down-regulated on doxorubicin (dox) treatment. Levels of this protein profoundly 
affect cell differentiation, cell proliferation, and tumorigenicity in vivo. 
Here we describe Che-1, a novel human protein that interacts with hRPB11. Che-1 
possesses a domain of high homology with Escherichia coli RNA polymerase final 
sigma-factor 70 and SV40 large T antigen. In addition, we report that Che-1 
interacts with the retinoblastoma susceptibility gene (Rb) by two distinct 
domains. Functionally, we demonstrate that Che-1 represses the growth 
suppression function of Rb, counteracting the inhibitory action of Rb on the 
trans-activation function of E2F1. These results identify a novel protein that 
binds Rb and the core of pol II, and suggest that Che-1 may be part of 
transcription regulatory complex.

DOI: 10.1096/fasebj.14.7.904
PMID: 10783144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
