---
pmid: '11051553'
title: Nucleophosmin/B23 is a target of CDK2/cyclin E in centrosome duplication.
authors:
- Okuda M
- Horn HF
- Tarapore P
- Tokuyama Y
- Smulian AG
- Chan PK
- Knudsen ES
- Hofmann IA
- Snyder JD
- Bove KE
- Fukasawa K
journal: Cell
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)00093-3
---

# Nucleophosmin/B23 is a target of CDK2/cyclin E in centrosome duplication.
**Authors:** Okuda M, Horn HF, Tarapore P, Tokuyama Y, Smulian AG, Chan PK, Knudsen ES, Hofmann IA, Snyder JD, Bove KE, Fukasawa K
**Journal:** Cell (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(00)00093-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(00)00093-3)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2000 Sep 29;103(1):127-40. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)00093-3.

Nucleophosmin/B23 is a target of CDK2/cyclin E in centrosome duplication.

Okuda M(1), Horn HF, Tarapore P, Tokuyama Y, Smulian AG, Chan PK, Knudsen ES, 
Hofmann IA, Snyder JD, Bove KE, Fukasawa K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology, and Anatomy, University of 
Cincinnati College of Medicine, Ohio 45267, USA.

In animal cells, duplication of centrosomes and DNA is coordinated. Since 
CDK2/cyclin E triggers initiation of both events, activation of CDK2/cyclin E is 
thought to link these two events. We identified nucleophosmin (NPM/B23) as a 
substrate of CDK2/cyclin E in centrosome duplication. NPM/B23 associates 
specifically with unduplicated centrosomes, and NPM/B23 dissociates from 
centrosomes by CDK2/cyclin E-mediated phosphorylation. An anti-NPM/B23 antibody, 
which blocks this phosphorylation, suppresses the initiation of centrosome 
duplication in vivo. Moreover, expression of a nonphosphorylatable mutant NPM/ 
B23 in cells effectively blocks centrosome duplication. Thus, NPM/B23 is a 
target of CDK2/cyclin E in the initiation of centrosome duplication.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)00093-3
PMID: 11051553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
