---
pmid: '19074642'
title: Gastrin activates paracrine networks leading to induction of PAI-2 via MAZ
  and ASC-1.
authors:
- Almeida-Vega S
- Catlow K
- Kenny S
- Dimaline R
- Varro A
journal: Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2643906
doi: 10.1152/ajpgi.90340.2008
---

# Gastrin activates paracrine networks leading to induction of PAI-2 via MAZ and ASC-1.
**Authors:** Almeida-Vega S, Catlow K, Kenny S, Dimaline R, Varro A
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpgi.90340.2008](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpgi.90340.2008)
**PMC:** [PMC2643906](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2643906/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2009 Feb;296(2):G414-23. doi: 
10.1152/ajpgi.90340.2008. Epub 2008 Dec 12.

Gastrin activates paracrine networks leading to induction of PAI-2 via MAZ and 
ASC-1.

Almeida-Vega S(1), Catlow K, Kenny S, Dimaline R, Varro A.

Author information:
(1)Physiological Laboratory, School of Biomedical Sciences, University of 
Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.

The gastric hormone gastrin regulates the expression of a variety of genes 
involved in control of acid secretion and also in the growth and organization of 
the gastric mucosa. One putative target is plasminogen activator inhibitor-2 
(PAI-2), which is a component of the urokinase activator system that acts 
extracellularly to inhibit urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) and 
intracellularly to suppress apoptosis. Previous studies have demonstrated that 
gastrin induces PAI-2 both in gastric epithelial cells expressing the gastrin 
(CCK-2) receptor and, via activation of paracrine networks, in adjacent cells 
that do not express the receptor. We have now sought to identify the response 
element(s) in the PAI-2 promoter targeted by paracrine mediators initiated by 
gastrin. Mutational analysis identified two putative response elements in the 
PAI-2 promoter that were downstream of gastrin-activated paracrine signals. One 
was identified as a putative MAZ site, mutation of which dramatically reduced 
both basal and gastrin-stimulated responses of the PAI-2 promoter by a mechanism 
involving PGE(2) and the small GTPase RhoA. Yeast one-hybrid screening 
identified the other as binding the activating signal cointegrator-1 (ASC-1) 
complex, which was shown to be the target of IL-8 released by gastrin. RNA 
interference (RNAi) knockdown of two subunits of the ASC-1 complex (p50 and p65) 
inhibited induction of PAI-2 expression by gastrin. The data reveal previously 
unsuspected transcriptional mechanisms activated as a consequence of 
gastrin-triggered paracrine networks and emphasize the elaborate and complex 
cellular control mechanisms required for a key component of tissue responses to 
damage and infection.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpgi.90340.2008
PMCID: PMC2643906
PMID: 19074642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The gastric hormone gastrin regulates the expression of a variety of genes involved in control of acid secretion and also in the growth and organization of the gastric mucosa. One putative target is plasminogen activator inhibitor-2 (PAI-2), which is a component of the urokinase activator system that acts extracellularly to inhibit urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) and intracellularly to suppress apoptosis. Previous studies have demonstrated that gastrin induces PAI-2 both in gastric epithelial cells expressing the gastrin (CCK-2) receptor and, via activation of paracrine networks, in adjacent cells that do not express the receptor. We have now sought to identify the response element(s) in the PAI-2 promoter targeted by paracrine mediators initiated by gastrin. Mutational analysis identified two putative response elements in the PAI-2 promoter that were downstream of gastrin-activated paracrine signals. One was identified as a putative MAZ site, mutation of which dramatically reduced both basal and gastrin-stimulated responses of the PAI-2 promoter by a mechanism involving PGE 2 and the small GTPase RhoA. Yeast one-hybrid screening identified the other as binding the activating signal cointegrator-1 (ASC-1) complex, which was shown to be the target of IL-8 released by gastrin. RNA interference (RNAi) knockdown of two subunits of the ASC-1 complex (p50 and p65) inhibited induction of PAI-2 expression by gastrin. The data reveal previously unsuspected transcriptional mechanisms activated as a consequence of gastrin-triggered paracrine networks and emphasize the elaborate and complex cellular control mechanisms required for a key component of tissue responses to damage and infection.

DISCUSSION

The main findings of the present study are that gastrin stimulates PAI-2 expression in cells that do not express the CCK-2 receptor via paracrine mechanisms directed at both a MAZ cis -regulatory element that is downstream of prostaglandin stimulation and a previously unrecognized gastrin response element within the 93-bp of the PAI-2 promoter that binds the p50 subunit of ASC-1 and is downstream of IL-8. Although it is well recognized that gastrin activates paracrine mechanisms in the gastric mucosa ( 17 , 20 ), little has been done until now to distinguish between transcriptional responses that are a consequence of direct effects (i.e., on cells expressing the CCK-2 receptor) and those that are a consequence of activation of paracrine-signaling networks. Plasminogen activator inhibitor-2 is a good model for study of the relevant mechanisms since it is induced by gastrin both in cells expressing the CCK-2 receptor, e.g., ECL cells, and in adjacent cells that do not express the receptor, e.g., mucus cells ( 44 , 45 ). The biological consequences of gastrin-stimulation of PAI-2 are inhibition of apoptosis and suppression of uPA activity, thereby limiting thrombolysis, which suggests that PAI-2 is a component of the system by which gastrin promotes mucosal protection.

In studies of transcriptional responses to hormones, growth factors, cytokines, and other regulatory factors, it is often convenient to assume that regulated gene expression is an exclusive property of cells expressing the relevant receptor. But in mixed cell populations it is also clear that activation of one receptor may induce a paracrine cascade, allowing other cells to respond and providing the capacity for both amplification of the response and integration with other signaling pathways. In the case of many G protein-coupled receptors, particularly those that act via Gα q/11 , liberation of EGF receptor ligands appears to be a common mechanism for activation of a paracrine signaling cascade ( 38 , 40 ), and it is clear that gastrin also acts by liberation of EGF-R ligands such as heparin-binding EGF in several different systems ( 46 , 48 ). Induction of COX-2 and liberation of PGE 2 is also now recognized as an important component of the response to a variety of hormones (including gastrin), cytokines, and other paracrine mediators ( 47 ). In addition to both liberation of EGF receptor ligands, and activation of COX-2, it is well established that gastrin exerts effects via release of histamine ( 21 ); although less intensively explored, there is also evidence for gastrin stimulation of IL-8 ( 23 ) and FGF ( 35 ). We have sought to develop experimental systems that allow the separate study of transcriptional responses secondary to paracrine mechanisms. In particular we have studied responses of luciferase reporter constructs transfected into either AGS cell clones that express the CCK-2 receptor or those that do not but are cocultured with CCK-2-expressing cells ( 44 ). The response of the former can be considered the total response: i.e., the sum of both direct intracellular signaling pathway and of paracrine activated pathways; the response of the latter is attributable solely to paracrine pathways. The direct intracellular response includes roles for PKC, Ras, Raf, MAPKase, RhoA, NF-κB, CREB, and AP-1, whereas the paracrine pathway includes roles for RhoA and, as we now show, MAZ and ASC-1 ( Fig. 7 ).

Gastrin stimulation of COX-2 in cells expressing the CCK-2 receptor has been reported by many groups ( 3 , 41 , 43 ). There is evidence that induction of COX-2 by gastrin in vivo is relevant to cytoprotection and ulcer healing ( 7 , 30 ). However, specific changes in gene expression in response to gastrin that are dependent on this pathway are unclear and more needs to be done to characterize the relevant downstream receptors and signaling pathways. Nevertheless, the present data identify MAZ-mediated PAI-2 expression as one such target. The MAZ site in PAI-2 appears important for basal expression, but there is also a proportionate reduction in the response to gastrin. Interestingly, a previous study implicated MAZ as a mediator of gastrin-stimulated trefoil factor (TFF)-1 expression in AGS cells ( 28 ). Moreover like PAI-2, TFF-1 is thought to be important in host defense. Earlier studies of MAZ (Myc-associated zinc finger protein, also known as ZF87 or Pur-1) have established that it is widely distributed and its targets include control of insulin expression ( 6 , 27 ). We suggest that it is now timely to consider its role in the specific context of control of expression of genes involved in gastric cytoprotection.

The stimulation of IL-8 by gastrin has now been reported by several groups ( 23 , 42 , 44 ). The role of IL-8 in H. pylori gastritis, particularly as a neutrophil chemoattractant has been well documented ( 11 ). Moreover, previous studies have shown expression of IL-8 receptors on AGS cells, i.e., CXCR1 and CXCR2 ( 5 ). Even so, the role of IL-8 as a downstream mediator of the effects of gastrin has been largely neglected. Our previous work established increased expression of PAI-2 in response to both H. pylori and gastrin compatible with a convergence of actions on this gene ( 45 ). The present observations now identify the ASC-1 complex as a potential mediator in this pathway. Previous work has shown ASC-1 to be important for activation of transcription in several systems and to consist of four subunits: p50, p200, p100, and the central subunit p65 ( 26 ). Disruption of this complex interferes with its DNA binding and results in loss of function ( 33 ). The p65 subunit was previously identified as thyroid receptor interacting protein 4 (TRIP4) ( 32 ) and was shown to be a novel transcriptional coactivating molecule for nuclear receptors ( 29 ). Silencing at least two subunits of ASC-1, p50 and p65, inhibited gastrin-stimulated PAI-2 expression, indicating that ASC-1 acts as a transcription activator complex to regulate transcription.

In recent years it has become evident that the mucosal microenvironment plays an important role in regulating epithelial function. Interactions between different epithelial cells and between epithelial and mesenchymal cells mediated by paracrine factors are key determinants of normal mucosal organization in development, in wound healing, and in the progression to cancer that occurs with prolonged inflammation and H. pylori infection. In view of the hostile nature of the gastric environment it is not surprising that multiple defense mechanisms have evolved that allow the tissue to respond to infection and damage by minimizing acid-peptic autodigestion and ulcer formation. The induction of PAI-2 is thought to be one component of this response ( 17 ). In very many other tissues induction of PAI-2 is also thought to be a response to damage, infection, or inflammation ( 4 , 12 , 52 ). In addition, PAI-2 expression has been linked to cancer ( 1 , 2 ), and it seems possible that whereas acute induction is protective, long-term upregulation is potentially a contributory factor in tumorigenesis. For these reasons an understanding of the multiple mechanisms by which PAI-2 expression is controlled are likely to be of relevance in many different circumstances.

Together the data indicate how complex interacting extracellular signals can control the transcriptional responses of a single gene and how different regulatory elements within the promoter can be linked to different signaling pathways. Particularly in the case of genes that are induced in multiple cell types within a given tissue, we suggest that careful consideration should always be given to the need to examine paracrine pathways downstream of a single extracellular mediator. At the level of signaling pathways, much remains to be done to understand how the various regulatory mechanisms interact; for example, the mechanisms controlling the abundance and posttranslational modifications to MAZ and ASC-1 in this system remain unknown. More specifically, in the context of PAI-2 regulation we would suggest that the multiple pathways shown to determine expression in gastric epithelial cells indicate that there are many opportunities for integration of different inputs in varying physiological and pathological circumstances between different cell populations in the gastric mucosa.
