---
pmid: '12571280'
title: Nonerythroid alphaII spectrin is required for recruitment of FANCA and XPF
  to nuclear foci induced by DNA interstrand cross-links.
authors:
- Sridharan D
- Brown M
- Lambert WC
- McMahon LW
- Lambert MW
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.00294
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Nonerythroid alphaII spectrin is required for recruitment of FANCA and XPF to nuclear foci induced by DNA interstrand cross-links.
**Authors:** Sridharan D, Brown M, Lambert WC, McMahon LW, Lambert MW
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.00294](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.00294)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2003 Mar 1;116(Pt 5):823-35. doi: 10.1242/jcs.00294.

Nonerythroid alphaII spectrin is required for recruitment of FANCA and XPF to 
nuclear foci induced by DNA interstrand cross-links.

Sridharan D(1), Brown M, Lambert WC, McMahon LW, Lambert MW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, UMDNJ - New Jersey Medical 
School and the Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Newark, NJ 07103, USA.

The events responsible for repair of DNA interstrand cross-links in mammalian 
cells, the proteins involved and their interactions with each other are poorly 
understood. The present study demonstrates that the structural protein 
nonerythroid alpha spectrin (alphaSpIISigma*), present in normal human cell 
nuclei, plays an important role in repair of DNA interstrand cross-links. These 
results show that alphaSpIISigma* relocalizes to nuclear foci after damage of 
normal human cells with the DNA interstrand cross-linking agent 
8-methoxypsoralen plus ultraviolet A (UVA) light and that FANCA and the known 
DNA repair protein XPF localize to the same nuclear foci. That alphaSpIISigma* 
is essential for this re-localization is demonstrated by the finding that in 
cells from patients with Fanconi anemia complementation group A (FA-A), which 
have decreased ability to repair DNA interstrand cross-links and decreased 
levels of alphaSpIISigma*, there is a significant reduction in formation of 
damage-induced XPF as well as alphaSpIISigma* nuclear foci, even though levels 
of XPF are normal in these cells. In corrected FA-A cells, in which levels of 
alphaSpIISigma* are restored to normal, numbers of damage-induced nuclear foci 
are also returned to normal. Co-immunoprecipitation studies show that 
alphaSpIISigma*, FANCA and XPF co-immunoprecipitate with each other from normal 
human nuclear proteins. These results demonstrate that alphaSpIISigma*, FANCA 
and XPF interact with each other in the nucleus and indicate that there is a 
close functional relationship between these proteins. These studies suggest that 
an important role for alphaSpIISigma* in the nucleus is to act as a scaffold, 
aiding in recruitment and alignment of repair proteins at sites of damage.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.00294
PMID: 12571280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
