---
pmid: '12407188'
title: Hd3a, a rice ortholog of the Arabidopsis FT gene, promotes transition to flowering
  downstream of Hd1 under short-day conditions.
authors:
- Kojima S
- Takahashi Y
- Kobayashi Y
- Monna L
- Sasaki T
- Araki T
- Yano M
journal: Plant Cell Physiol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcf156
---

# Hd3a, a rice ortholog of the Arabidopsis FT gene, promotes transition to flowering downstream of Hd1 under short-day conditions.
**Authors:** Kojima S, Takahashi Y, Kobayashi Y, Monna L, Sasaki T, Araki T, Yano M
**Journal:** Plant Cell Physiol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1093/pcp/pcf156](https://doi.org/10.1093/pcp/pcf156)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell Physiol. 2002 Oct;43(10):1096-105. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcf156.

Hd3a, a rice ortholog of the Arabidopsis FT gene, promotes transition to 
flowering downstream of Hd1 under short-day conditions.

Kojima S(1), Takahashi Y, Kobayashi Y, Monna L, Sasaki T, Araki T, Yano M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of the Society for Techno-innovation of Agriculture, Forestry and 
Fisheries, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-0854 Japan.

Heading date 3a (Hd3a) has been detected as a heading-date-related quantitative 
trait locus in a cross between rice cultivars Nipponbare and Kasalath. A 
previous study revealed that the Kasalath allele of Hd3a promotes heading under 
short-day (SD) conditions. High-resolution linkage mapping located the Hd3a 
locus in a approximately 20-kb genomic region. In this region, we found a 
candidate gene that shows high similarity to the FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT) gene, 
which promotes flowering in Arabidopsis: Introduction of the gene caused an 
early-heading phenotype in rice. The transcript levels of Hd3a were increased 
under SD conditions. The rice Heading date 1 (Hd1) gene, a homolog of CONSTANS 
(CO), has been shown to promote heading under SD conditions. By expression 
analysis, we showed that the amount of Hd3a mRNA is up-regulated by Hd1 under SD 
conditions, suggesting that Hd3a promotes heading under the control of Hd1. 
These results indicate that Hd3a encodes a protein closely related to 
Arabidopsis FT and that the function and regulatory relationship with Hd1 and 
CO, respectively, of Hd3a and FT are conserved between rice (an SD plant) and 
Arabidopsis (a long-day plant).

DOI: 10.1093/pcp/pcf156
PMID: 12407188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
