---
pmid: '12496365'
title: CDK5 regulates cell adhesion and migration in corneal epithelial cells.
authors:
- Gao C
- Negash S
- Guo HT
- Ledee D
- Wang HS
- Zelenka P
journal: Mol Cancer Res
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
---

# CDK5 regulates cell adhesion and migration in corneal epithelial cells.
**Authors:** Gao C, Negash S, Guo HT, Ledee D, Wang HS, Zelenka P
**Journal:** Mol Cancer Res (2002)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cancer Res. 2002 Nov;1(1):12-24.

CDK5 regulates cell adhesion and migration in corneal epithelial cells.

Gao C(1), Negash S, Guo HT, Ledee D, Wang HS, Zelenka P.

Author information:
(1)National Eye Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD. Yang Ming University, Taipei, 
Taiwan.

CDK5 and its activator, p35, are expressed in mouse corneal epithelium and can 
be coimmunoprecipited from corneal epithelial cell lysates. Immunostaining shows 
CDK5 and p35 in all layers of the corneal epithelium, especially along the basal 
side of the basal cells. Stable transfection of corneal epithelial cells with 
CDK5, which increases CDK5 kinase activity by approximately 33%, also increases 
the number of cells adhering to fibronectin and the strength of adhesion. CDK5 
kinase activity seems to be required for this effect, because the kinase 
inactive mutation, CDK5-T33, either reduces adhesion or has no significant 
effect, depending on the level of expression. Using an in vitro scrape wound in 
confluent cultures of stably transfected cells to examine the effect of CDK5 on 
cell migration, we show that reoccupation of the wound area is significantly 
decreased by CDK5 and increased by CDK5-T33. These findings indicate that CDK5 
may be an important regulator of adhesion and migration of corneal epithelial 
cells.

PMID: 12496365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
