---
pmid: '11102975'
title: First missense mutations (R388W and R425H) of AMPD1 accompanied with myopathy
  found in a Japanese patient.
authors:
- Morisaki H
- Higuchi I
- Abe M
- Osame M
- Morisaki T
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/1098-1004(200012)16:6<467::AID-HUMU3>3.0.CO;2-V
pubmed_publication_types:
- Case Reports
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: CASE_REPORT
---

# First missense mutations (R388W and R425H) of AMPD1 accompanied with myopathy found in a Japanese patient.
**Authors:** Morisaki H, Higuchi I, Abe M, Osame M, Morisaki T
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1002/1098-1004(200012)16:6<467::AID-HUMU3>3.0.CO;2-V](https://doi.org/10.1002/1098-1004(200012)16:6<467::AID-HUMU3>3.0.CO;2-V)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mutat. 2000 Dec;16(6):467-72. doi: 
10.1002/1098-1004(200012)16:6<467::AID-HUMU3>3.0.CO;2-V.

First missense mutations (R388W and R425H) of AMPD1 accompanied with myopathy 
found in a Japanese patient.

Morisaki H(1), Higuchi I, Abe M, Osame M, Morisaki T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioscience, National Cardiovascular Center Research Institute, 
Osaka, Japan. morisaki@ri.ncvc.go.jp

Skeletal muscle AMP deaminase (AMPD: E.C. 3.5.4.6) deficiency is one of the most 
common inherited defects in the Caucasians, but not in Asians. Although a 
diagnosis of AMPD1 deficiency is indeed based on the reduced enzymatic activity, 
its clinical significance is still rather controversial since most subjects are 
asymptomatic. Alternative splicing of exon 2 in individuals who have inherited 
this defect is thought to provide a mechanism for phenotypic rescue that may 
explain the variability of clinical symptoms as we reported earlier. In this 
report we present the first case with a detectable defect of the AMPD1 gene in a 
Japanese patient with myopathy. Two missense mutations (R388W and R425H) in exon 
9 and exon 10 of the AMPD1 gene were found. Prokaryotic expression showed a 
comparable amount of the AMPD1 peptides and undetectable AMPD activity in the 
constructs with these mutations. From this study, we have concluded that this 
patient is a compound heterozygote for AMPD1 mutant allele. This study also 
demonstrates the first reported instance of detectable dysfunction of the AMPD1 
gene product, suggesting that AMPD1 indeed has a key role in muscle metabolism 
and function.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/1098-1004(200012)16:6<467::AID-HUMU3>3.0.CO;2-V
PMID: 11102975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
