---
pmid: '17586728'
title: Specific cleavage of agrin by neurotrypsin, a synaptic protease linked to mental
  retardation.
authors:
- Reif R
- Sales S
- Hettwer S
- Dreier B
- Gisler C
- Wölfel J
- Lüscher D
- Zurlinden A
- Stephan A
- Ahmed S
- Baici A
- Ledermann B
- Kunz B
- Sonderegger P
journal: FASEB J
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1096/fj.07-8800com
---

# Specific cleavage of agrin by neurotrypsin, a synaptic protease linked to mental retardation.
**Authors:** Reif R, Sales S, Hettwer S, Dreier B, Gisler C, Wölfel J, Lüscher D, Zurlinden A, Stephan A, Ahmed S, Baici A, Ledermann B, Kunz B, Sonderegger P
**Journal:** FASEB J (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1096/fj.07-8800com](https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.07-8800com)

## Abstract

1. FASEB J. 2007 Nov;21(13):3468-78. doi: 10.1096/fj.07-8800com. Epub 2007 Jun
22.

Specific cleavage of agrin by neurotrypsin, a synaptic protease linked to mental 
retardation.

Reif R(1), Sales S, Hettwer S, Dreier B, Gisler C, Wölfel J, Lüscher D, 
Zurlinden A, Stephan A, Ahmed S, Baici A, Ledermann B, Kunz B, Sonderegger P.

Author information:
(1)University of Zurich, Department of Biochemistry, Winterthurerstrasse 190, 
CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland.

The synaptic serine protease neurotrypsin is thought to be important for 
adaptive synaptic processes required for cognitive functions, because humans 
deficient in neurotrypsin suffer from severe mental retardation. In the present 
study, we describe the biochemical characterization of neurotrypsin and its so 
far unique substrate agrin. In cell culture experiment as well as in 
neurotrypsin-deficient mice, we showed that agrin cleavage depends on 
neurotrypsin and occurs at two conserved sites. Neurotrypsin and agrin were 
expressed recombinantly, purified, and assayed in vitro. A catalytic efficiency 
of 1.3 x 10(4) M(-1) x s(-1) was determined. Neurotrypsin activity was shown to 
depend on calcium with an optimal activity in the pH range of 7-8.5. Mutagenesis 
analysis of the amino acids flanking the scissile bonds showed that cleavage is 
highly specific due to the unique substrate recognition pocket of neurotrypsin 
at the active site. The C-terminal agrin fragment released after cleavage has 
recently been identified as an inactivating ligand of the Na+/K+-ATPase at CNS 
synapses, and its binding has been demonstrated to regulate presynaptic 
excitability. Therefore, dysregulation of agrin processing is a good candidate 
for a pathogenetic mechanism underlying mental retardation. In turn, these 
results may also shed light on mechanisms involved in cognitive functions.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.07-8800com
PMID: 17586728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
