---
pmid: '11418127'
title: CSN3 interacts with IKKgamma and inhibits TNF- but not IL-1-induced NF-kappaB
  activation.
authors:
- Hong X
- Xu L
- Li X
- Zhai Z
- Shu H
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(01)02535-2
---

# CSN3 interacts with IKKgamma and inhibits TNF- but not IL-1-induced NF-kappaB activation.
**Authors:** Hong X, Xu L, Li X, Zhai Z, Shu H
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0014-5793(01)02535-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0014-5793(01)02535-2)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2001 Jun 15;499(1-2):133-6. doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(01)02535-2.

CSN3 interacts with IKKgamma and inhibits TNF- but not IL-1-induced NF-kappaB 
activation.

Hong X(1), Xu L, Li X, Zhai Z, Shu H.

Author information:
(1)College of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, PR China.

The transcription factor nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) plays a pivotal role 
in immune and inflammatory responses. Activation of NF-kappaB requires the 
activity of IKK, a kinase complex that contains two catalytic subunits, IKKalpha 
and IKKbeta, and a regulatory subunit IKKgamma. To understand how IKK activity 
is regulated, we searched for IKKgamma-interacting proteins by the yeast 
two-hybrid system. These screenings identified CSN3, a component of the COP9 
signalsome, as a protein specifically interacting with IKKgamma. Overexpression 
of CSN3 inhibits NF-kappaB activation triggered by tumor necrosis factor (TNF), 
but not interleukin-1 (IL-1). Moreover, overexpression of CSN3 also inhibits 
NF-kappaB activation triggered by proteins involved in TNF signaling, including 
TNF-R1, TRAF2, RIP, and NIK, but not by TRAF6, a protein involved in IL-1 
signaling. These data suggest that CSN3 is a specific negative regulator of TNF- 
but not IL-1-induced NF-kappaB activation pathways.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(01)02535-2
PMID: 11418127 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
