---
pmid: '20566710'
title: Mitochondrial ATP synthase deficiency due to a mutation in the ATP5E gene for
  the F1 epsilon subunit.
authors:
- Mayr JA
- Havlícková V
- Zimmermann F
- Magler I
- Kaplanová V
- Jesina P
- Pecinová A
- Nusková H
- Koch J
- Sperl W
- Houstek J
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq254
pubmed_publication_types:
- Case Reports
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: CASE_REPORT
---

# Mitochondrial ATP synthase deficiency due to a mutation in the ATP5E gene for the F1 epsilon subunit.
**Authors:** Mayr JA, Havlícková V, Zimmermann F, Magler I, Kaplanová V, Jesina P, Pecinová A, Nusková H, Koch J, Sperl W, Houstek J
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddq254](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddq254)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Sep 1;19(17):3430-9. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq254. Epub 2010
Jun  21.

Mitochondrial ATP synthase deficiency due to a mutation in the ATP5E gene for 
the F1 epsilon subunit.

Mayr JA(1), Havlícková V, Zimmermann F, Magler I, Kaplanová V, Jesina P, 
Pecinová A, Nusková H, Koch J, Sperl W, Houstek J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg A5020, 
Austria.

F1Fo-ATP synthase is a key enzyme of mitochondrial energy provision producing 
most of cellular ATP. So far, mitochondrial diseases caused by isolated 
disorders of the ATP synthase have been shown to result from mutations in mtDNA 
genes for the subunits ATP6 and ATP8 or in nuclear genes encoding the biogenesis 
factors TMEM70 and ATPAF2. Here, we describe a patient with a homozygous 
p.Tyr12Cys mutation in the epsilon subunit encoded by the nuclear gene ATP5E. 
The 22-year-old woman presented with neonatal onset, lactic acidosis, 
3-methylglutaconic aciduria, mild mental retardation and developed peripheral 
neuropathy. Patient fibroblasts showed 60-70% decrease in both 
oligomycin-sensitive ATPase activity and mitochondrial ATP synthesis. The 
mitochondrial content of the ATP synthase complex was equally reduced, but its 
size was normal and it contained the mutated epsilon subunit. A similar 
reduction was found in all investigated F1 and Fo subunits with the exception of 
Fo subunit c, which was found to accumulate in a detergent-insoluble form. This 
is the first case of a mitochondrial disease due to a mutation in a nuclear 
encoded structural subunit of the ATP synthase. Our results indicate an 
essential role of the epsilon subunit in the biosynthesis and assembly of the F1 
part of the ATP synthase. Furthermore, the epsilon subunit seems to be involved 
in the incorporation of subunit c to the rotor structure of the mammalian 
enzyme.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddq254
PMID: 20566710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
