---
pmid: '12456012'
title: Evolutionary analyses of ABC transporters of Dictyostelium discoideum.
authors:
- Anjard C
- Loomis WF
- Dictyostelium Sequencing Consortium
journal: Eukaryot Cell
year: '2002'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC117992
doi: 10.1128/EC.1.4.643-652.2002
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Evolutionary analyses of ABC transporters of Dictyostelium discoideum.
**Authors:** Anjard C, Loomis WF, Dictyostelium Sequencing Consortium
**Journal:** Eukaryot Cell (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1128/EC.1.4.643-652.2002](https://doi.org/10.1128/EC.1.4.643-652.2002)
**PMC:** [PMC117992](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC117992/)

## Abstract

1. Eukaryot Cell. 2002 Aug;1(4):643-52. doi: 10.1128/EC.1.4.643-652.2002.

Evolutionary analyses of ABC transporters of Dictyostelium discoideum.

Anjard C(1), Loomis WF; Dictyostelium Sequencing Consortium.

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular Genetics, Division of Biology, University of 
California--San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093-0368, USA.

The ABC superfamily of genes is one of the largest in the genomes of both 
bacteria and eukaryotes. The proteins encoded by these genes all carry a 
characteristic 200- to 250-amino-acid ATP-binding cassette that gives them their 
family name. In bacteria they are mostly involved in nutrient import, while in 
eukaryotes many are involved in export. Seven different families have been 
defined in eukaryotes based on sequence homology, domain topology, and function. 
While only 6 ABC genes in Dictyostelium discoideum have been studied in detail 
previously, sequences from the well-advanced Dictyostelium genome project have 
allowed us to recognize 68 members of this superfamily. They have been 
classified and compared to animal, plant, and fungal orthologs in order to gain 
some insight into the evolution of this superfamily. It appears that many of the 
genes inferred to have been present in the ancestor of the crown organisms 
duplicated extensively in some but not all phyla, while others were lost in one 
lineage or the other.

DOI: 10.1128/EC.1.4.643-652.2002
PMCID: PMC117992
PMID: 12456012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The ABC superfamily of genes is one of the largest in the genomes of both bacteria and eukaryotes. The proteins encoded by these genes all carry a characteristic 200- to 250-amino-acid ATP-binding cassette that gives them their family name. In bacteria they are mostly involved in nutrient import, while in eukaryotes many are involved in export. Seven different families have been defined in eukaryotes based on sequence homology, domain topology, and function. While only 6 ABC genes in Dictyostelium discoideum have been studied in detail previously, sequences from the well-advanced Dictyostelium genome project have allowed us to recognize 68 members of this superfamily. They have been classified and compared to animal, plant, and fungal orthologs in order to gain some insight into the evolution of this superfamily. It appears that many of the genes inferred to have been present in the ancestor of the crown organisms duplicated extensively in some but not all phyla, while others were lost in one lineage or the other.

Conclusions.

Multigene families are subject to random birth-and-death processes, resulting in considerable variation in the number of genes ( 22 , 25 , 26 ). Duplications result in growth of the family, while deletions reduce, and can eliminate, the family. Members of multigene families gradually diverge by accumulation of point mutations and may eventually acquire different functions; alternatively, one of the copies may become a nonfunctional pseudogene and ultimately diverge so much that it cannot be recognized as belonging to the family. Members of the ABC superfamily appear to have been subject to all these forces.

Based on the number of clusters that we see for the Dictyostelium ABC genes (Table 1 ), the common progenitor of Dictyostelium , yeast, plants, and animals most likely had at least 25 genes encoding ABC proteins. Some encoded half-transporters, while others encoded full transporters. A few may have consisted only of the ABC domain. These founder genes gave rise to other ABC genes by duplication until the superfamily grew to have 68 members in D. discoideum . This is more than are present in either the yeast or the human genome but only half as many as are found in the plant A. thaliana .

Considering the number of related genes in the ABC superfamily, it is somewhat surprising that we were able to recognize only two pseudogenes. Regions adjacent to functional ABC genes were carefully scrutinized, but only ABCG.9 and ABCF.4 were found to have a linked pseudogene. In the ABCG.9 pseudogene, a large deletion removed the beginning of the gene and the end was found to be inverted. The nucleotide sequences of the remnants of this gene are still 95% identical to their comparable sequences in ABCG.9, suggesting that little time for random nucleotide mutations has passed since this gene became nonfunctional. The ABCF.4 pseudogene also suffered deletions while the remnants are nearly identical to the gene. It appears that the rate of deletion of dispensable regions is high in Dictyostelium , which may account for its relatively small genome size ( 22 ). Pseudogenes do not last long in this genome.

There is also clear evidence for rectification in the ABC superfamily. Reverse-transcribed copies of both processed and unprocessed mRNAs appear to have frequently replaced homologous regions in various members of the ABC families. There is no other plausible way to account for the observations that nucleotides at synonymous codon positions as well as the sequences of introns are conserved over long stretches of the genes and yet the nucleotide sequences flanking these regions show divergence levels indicating a far more ancient birth of the genes. Rectification among members of a gene family increases the degree of similarity and can lead to underestimation of the divergence time if these genes are used as a molecular clock.

Recent structural studies have indicated that active transport by ABC transporters requires that substrates enter a chamber formed by the paired TM domains in the membrane and partition into the aqueous environment following conformational changes of the transporter ( 8 , 27 ). The energy of ATP binding to the ABC domains appears to provide the initial energy for translocation of the substrate across membranes. Subsequent hydrolysis of ATP and release of ADP and P i allow the transporter to return to its original conformation by repacking the α-helices within the plane of the membrane using a combination of rotation and tilting. Although all ABC transporters are evolutionarily related, the details of their transport mechanisms may vary between members of different families.

Alignment of the proteins belonging to each of the ABC families allowed us to recognize identifier motifs that distinguish members of one family from members of all other ABC families (Table 2 ) (see also Fig. 8 in the supplementary figures on the website). Likewise, unique identifiers can distinguish among the different groups within a family. These short sequences are often sufficient to enable recognition of members of the family in other organisms when GenBank is queried.

Dictyostelium carries genes encoding members of every ABC family that has been recognized so far. Many are closely related to transporters that can confer drug resistance. Dictyostelium appears to be equipped to rapidly export a wide variety of compounds. There may have been a strong selective advantage in the ability of the amoebae to protect themselves from toxic compounds they might have encountered in their soil habitat by pumping them out as soon as they entered. Other members of the superfamily may serve specialized developmental roles by releasing intercellular signals at appropriate stages of development.
