---
reference_id: PMID:11973269
title: Depletion of definitive gut endoderm in Sox17-null mutant mice.
authors:
- Kanai-Azuma M
- Kanai Y
- Gad JM
- Tajima Y
- Taya C
- Kurohmaru M
- Sanai Y
- Yonekawa H
- Yazaki K
- Tam PP
- Hayashi Y
journal: Development
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1242/dev.129.10.2367
keywords:
- Animals
- Apoptosis/genetics
- DNA-Binding Proteins
- Digestive System/embryology
- Digestive System Abnormalities
- Endoderm/pathology
- Female
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- High Mobility Group Proteins
- Mice
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- "Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- SOXF Transcription Factors
- Transcription Factors
- "Viscera/embryology, pathology"
- Xenopus Proteins
- Zebrafish Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Depletion of definitive gut endoderm in Sox17-null mutant mice.
**Authors:** Kanai-Azuma M, Kanai Y, Gad JM, Tajima Y, Taya C, Kurohmaru M, Sanai Y, Yonekawa H, Yazaki K, Tam PP, Hayashi Y
**Journal:** Development (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.129.10.2367](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.129.10.2367)

## Content

1. Development. 2002 May;129(10):2367-79. doi: 10.1242/dev.129.10.2367.

Depletion of definitive gut endoderm in Sox17-null mutant mice.

Kanai-Azuma M(1), Kanai Y, Gad JM, Tajima Y, Taya C, Kurohmaru M, Sanai Y, 
Yonekawa H, Yazaki K, Tam PP, Hayashi Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Anatomy, The University of Tokyo, Yayoi 1-1-1, 
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.

In the mouse, the definitive endoderm is derived from the epiblast during 
gastrulation, and, at the early organogenesis stage, forms the primitive gut 
tube, which gives rise to the digestive tract, liver, pancreas and associated 
visceral organs. The transcription factors, Sox17 (a Sry-related HMG box factor) 
and its upstream factors, Mixer (homeobox factor) and Casanova (a novel Sox 
factor), have been shown to function as endoderm determinants in Xenopus and 
zebrafish, respectively. However, whether the mammalian orthologues of these 
genes are also involved with endoderm formation is not known. We show that 
Sox17(-/-) mutant embryos are deficient of gut endoderm. The earliest 
recognisable defect is the reduced occupancy by the definitive endoderm in the 
posterior and lateral region of the prospective mid- and hindgut of the 
headfold-stage embryo. The prospective foregut develops properly until the late 
neural plate stage. Thereafter, elevated levels of apoptosis lead to a reduction 
in the population of the definitive endoderm in the foregut. In addition, the 
mid- and hindgut tissues fail to expand. These are accompanied by the 
replacement of the definitive endoderm in the lateral region of the entire 
length of the embryonic gut by cells that resemble the visceral endoderm. In the 
chimeras, although Sox17-null ES cells can contribute unrestrictedly to 
ectodermal and mesodermal tissues, few of them could colonise the foregut 
endoderm and they are completely excluded from the mid- and hindgut endoderm. 
Our findings indicate an important role of Sox17 in endoderm development in the 
mouse, highlighting the idea that the molecular mechanism for endoderm formation 
is likely to be conserved among vertebrates.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.129.10.2367
PMID: 11973269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]