---
pmid: '18164289'
title: Dual localization of the RNA binding protein CUGBP-1 to stress granule and
  perinucleolar compartment.
authors:
- Fujimura K
- Kano F
- Murata M
journal: Exp Cell Res
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2007.10.024
---

# Dual localization of the RNA binding protein CUGBP-1 to stress granule and perinucleolar compartment.
**Authors:** Fujimura K, Kano F, Murata M
**Journal:** Exp Cell Res (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yexcr.2007.10.024](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yexcr.2007.10.024)

## Abstract

1. Exp Cell Res. 2008 Feb 1;314(3):543-53. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2007.10.024. Epub
 2007 Nov 12.

Dual localization of the RNA binding protein CUGBP-1 to stress granule and 
perinucleolar compartment.

Fujimura K(1), Kano F, Murata M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Graduate School of Liberal Arts and Sciences, 
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, 3-8-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, 153-8902, Japan. 
kfuji@bio.c.u-tokyo.ac.jp <kfuji@bio.c.u-tokyo.ac.jp>

The mRNA-binding protein CUGBP-1 is a multi-faceted factor, involved in a wide 
range of biological processes including splicing, translation initiation and 
mRNA degradation. Here we show that CUGBP-1 is a novel constituent of stress 
granule (SG), the translational silencing machinery assembled in response to 
environmental stress. CUGBP-1 was rapidly routed to SGs upon exposure to a 
variety of environmental stress, and actively shuttles between the nucleus and 
SGs. The linker domain located between the second and third RNA recognition 
motifs (RRMs) was found to be essential for the recruitment of CUGBP-1 to SGs. 
Importantly, we discovered that the linker domain is also required to direct 
CUGBP-1 to another subcellular structure, perinucleolar compartment (PNC). These 
results demonstrate the dynamic behavior of CUGBP-1 during stress response and 
that the linker region, in concert with RRMs, plays a significant role in 
defining its subcellular localization and dynamics.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2007.10.024
PMID: 18164289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
