---
pmid: '16950131'
title: Phospho-regulation of the Cdc14/Clp1 phosphatase delays late mitotic events
  in S. pombe.
authors:
- Wolfe BA
- McDonald WH
- Yates JR 3rd
- Gould KL
journal: Dev Cell
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2006.07.016
---

# Phospho-regulation of the Cdc14/Clp1 phosphatase delays late mitotic events in S. pombe.
**Authors:** Wolfe BA, McDonald WH, Yates JR 3rd, Gould KL
**Journal:** Dev Cell (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.devcel.2006.07.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2006.07.016)

## Abstract

1. Dev Cell. 2006 Sep;11(3):423-30. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2006.07.016.

Phospho-regulation of the Cdc14/Clp1 phosphatase delays late mitotic events in 
S. pombe.

Wolfe BA(1), McDonald WH, Yates JR 3rd, Gould KL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University School of 
Medicine, Medical Center North B-2309, 1161 21st Avenue South, Nashville, 
Tennessee 37232, USA.

In eukaryotes, exit from mitosis occurs through the inactivation of the 
Cdk1-cyclin B kinase complex and the reversal of its phosphorylation events. 
These late mitotic events are tightly regulated to occur only after the onset of 
anaphase and prior to cytokinesis. Central to this regulation is the conserved 
Cdc14 family of protein phosphatases, whose activity reverses Cdk-dependent 
phosphorylation events. S. cerevisiae Cdc14 activity is restrained from 
dephosphorylating Cdk substrates and inactivating Cdk1 through its nucleolar 
sequestration prior to anaphase. Here, we describe a unique mode of Cdc14 
regulation that operates prior to anaphase in fission yeast. Cdk1 phosphorylates 
and inhibits the catalytic activity of the Cdc14 family member, Clp1/Flp1. As 
Cdk1 activity declines during anaphase progression, Clp1/Flp1 autocatalytically 
reverses these phosphorylation events to stimulate its own activity. These 
findings point to a simple regulatory circuit that couples Cdk1 activation with 
its inactivation mediated through phosphorylation-dependent regulation of 
Clp1/Flp1 phosphatase activity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2006.07.016
PMID: 16950131 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
