---
pmid: '16575408'
title: 'The estrogen-responsive B box protein: a novel enhancer of interleukin-1beta
  secretion.'
authors:
- Munding C
- Keller M
- Niklaus G
- Papin S
- Tschopp J
- Werner S
- Beer HD
journal: Cell Death Differ
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.cdd.4401896
---

# The estrogen-responsive B box protein: a novel enhancer of interleukin-1beta secretion.
**Authors:** Munding C, Keller M, Niklaus G, Papin S, Tschopp J, Werner S, Beer HD
**Journal:** Cell Death Differ (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.cdd.4401896](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.cdd.4401896)

## Abstract

1. Cell Death Differ. 2006 Nov;13(11):1938-49. doi: 10.1038/sj.cdd.4401896. Epub 
2006 Mar 31.

The estrogen-responsive B box protein: a novel enhancer of interleukin-1beta 
secretion.

Munding C(1), Keller M, Niklaus G, Papin S, Tschopp J, Werner S, Beer HD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Institute of Cell Biology, ETH Zurich, ETH 
Honggerberg, CH-8093 Zurich, Switzerland.

The estrogen-responsive B box protein (EBBP) and Pyrin belong to a family of 
structurally related proteins. While mutations in the pyrin gene cause an 
autoinflammatory disease, the biological function of EBBP is unknown. In this 
study, we identified the proinflammatory cytokine interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) 
as an EBBP-binding partner. Furthermore, caspase-1 and NACHT, LRR and Pyrin 
domain containing protein (NALP) 1, two components of the recently identified 
inflammasome, a platform for the activation of caspase-1, also interact with 
EBBP. These proteins bind to the RFP domain of EBBP, suggesting that this domain 
of so far unknown function is an important protein-binding domain. EBBP was 
secreted in a caspase-1-dependent manner from cultured cells, and its secretion 
was enhanced by IL-1beta. Vice versa, endogenous and overerexpressed EBBP 
increased IL-1beta secretion. These results provide evidence for a role of EBBP 
in innate immunity by enhancing the alternative secretion pathway of IL-1beta.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.cdd.4401896
PMID: 16575408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
