---
pmid: '30824926'
title: Isoform-specific GSK3A activity is negatively correlated with human sperm motility.
authors:
- Freitas MJ
- Silva JV
- Brothag C
- Regadas-Correia B
- Fardilha M
- Vijayaraghavan S
journal: Mol Hum Reprod
year: '2019'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC6440577
doi: 10.1093/molehr/gaz009
---

# Isoform-specific GSK3A activity is negatively correlated with human sperm motility.
**Authors:** Freitas MJ, Silva JV, Brothag C, Regadas-Correia B, Fardilha M, Vijayaraghavan S
**Journal:** Mol Hum Reprod (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1093/molehr/gaz009](https://doi.org/10.1093/molehr/gaz009)
**PMC:** [PMC6440577](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6440577/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Hum Reprod. 2019 Apr 1;25(4):171-183. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gaz009.

Isoform-specific GSK3A activity is negatively correlated with human sperm 
motility.

Freitas MJ(1), Silva JV(1)(2)(3), Brothag C(4), Regadas-Correia B(5)(6)(7), 
Fardilha M(1), Vijayaraghavan S(4).

Author information:
(1)Signal Transduction Laboratory, Institute for Research in Biomedicine-iBiMED, 
Medical Sciences Department, University of Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal.
(2)Reproductive Genetics & Embryo-fetal Development Group, Institute for 
Innovation and Health Research (I3S), University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(3)Department of Microscopy, Laboratory of Cell Biology, and Unit for 
Multidisciplinary Research in Biomedicine (UMIB), Institute of Biomedical 
Sciences Abel Salazar (ICBAS), University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(4)Kent State University, Kent, OH, USA.
(5)CNC.IBILI-Institute for Biomedical Imaging and Life Sciences, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
(6)CIBIT-Coimbra Institute for Biomedical Imaging and Translational Research, 
University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
(7)Department Quantitative Methods and Information and Management Systems, 
Coimbra Business School, Coimbra, Portugal.

In mouse and bovine sperm, GSK3 activity is inversely proportional to motility. 
Targeted disruption of the GSK3A gene in testis results in normal 
spermatogenesis, but mature sperm present a reduced motility, rendering male 
mice infertile. On the other hand, GSK3B testis-specific KO is fertile. Yet in 
human sperm, an isoform-specific correlation between GSK3A and sperm motility 
was never established. In order to analyze GSK3 function in human sperm 
motility, normospermic and asthenozoospermic samples from adult males were used 
to correlate GSK3 expression and activity levels with human sperm motility 
profiles. Moreover, testicular and sperm GSK3 interactomes were identified using 
a yeast two-hybrid screen and coimmunoprecipitation, respectively. An extensive 
in-silico analysis of the GSK3 interactome was performed. The results proved 
that inhibited GSK3A (serine phosphorylated) presents a significant strong 
positive correlation (r = 0.822, P = 0.023) with the percentage of progressive 
human sperm, whereas inhibited GSK3B is not significantly correlated with sperm 
motility (r = 0.577, P = 0.175). The importance of GSK3 in human sperm motility 
was further reinforced by in-silico analysis of the GSK3 interactome, which 
revealed a high level of involvement of GSK3 interactors in sperm 
motility-related functions. The limitation of techniques used for GSK3 
interactome identification can be a drawback, since none completely mimics the 
physiological environment. Our findings prove that human sperm motility relies 
on isoform-specific functions of GSK3A within this cell. Given the reported 
relevance of GSK3 protein-protein interactions in sperm motility, we 
hypothesized that they stand as potential targets for male contraceptive 
strategies based on sperm motility modulation.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For 
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molehr/gaz009
PMCID: PMC6440577
PMID: 30824926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

In mouse and bovine sperm, GSK3 activity is inversely proportional to motility. Targeted disruption of the GSK3A gene in testis results in normal spermatogenesis, but mature sperm present a reduced motility, rendering male mice infertile. On the other hand, GSK3B testis-specific KO is fertile. Yet in human sperm, an isoform-specific correlation between GSK3A and sperm motility was never established. In order to analyze GSK3 function in human sperm motility, normospermic and asthenozoospermic samples from adult males were used to correlate GSK3 expression and activity levels with human sperm motility profiles. Moreover, testicular and sperm GSK3 interactomes were identified using a yeast two-hybrid screen and coimmunoprecipitation, respectively. An extensive in-silico analysis of the GSK3 interactome was performed. The results proved that inhibited GSK3A (serine phosphorylated) presents a significant strong positive correlation ( r = 0.822, P = 0.023) with the percentage of progressive human sperm, whereas inhibited GSK3B is not significantly correlated with sperm motility ( r = 0.577, P = 0.175). The importance of GSK3 in human sperm motility was further reinforced by in-silico analysis of the GSK3 interactome, which revealed a high level of involvement of GSK3 interactors in sperm motility-related functions. The limitation of techniques used for GSK3 interactome identification can be a drawback, since none completely mimics the physiological environment. Our findings prove that human sperm motility relies on isoform-specific functions of GSK3A within this cell. Given the reported relevance of GSK3 protein–protein interactions in sperm motility, we hypothesized that they stand as potential targets for male contraceptive strategies based on sperm motility modulation.

Introduction

Glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3), a serine/threonine kinase, has been involved in a wide range of cellular processes such as apoptosis, mitosis and proliferation ( Kaidanovich-Beilin and Woodgett, 2011 ; Beurel et al. , 2015 ). Moreover, deregulation of GSK3 functions has been associated with pathological conditions such as cancer, Alzheimer’s disease and diabetes ( Amar et al. , 2011 ; Gao et al. , 2011 ). GSK3 is ubiquitously expressed and is encoded by two genes giving rise to two isoforms: GSK3A and GSK3B. The isoforms differ in their N-termini, with GSK3A having a unique glycine-rich N-terminus which is highly conserved in mammals, suggesting an isoform-specific function ( Azoulay-Alfaguter et al. , 2011 ).

GSK3 plays a central role in the male reproductive system. In mouse testis, GSK3A is expressed in the seminiferous tubules and its expression increases during the onset of spermatogenesis, peaking in the adult testis ( Bhattacharjee et al. , 2015 ). GSK3B expression is present in cells entering meiosis, spermatids and Sertoli cells ( Guo et al. , 2003 ). Curiously, targeted disruption of GSK3A gene in testis, results in normal spermatogenesis, but the mature sperm present a reduced motility and metabolism, rendering male mice infertile ( Bhattacharjee et al. , 2015 , 2018 ). On the other hand, the GSK3B testis-specific knock-out was fertile ( Bhattacharjee et al. , 2018 ). In mouse and bovine sperm, GSK3 activity is inversely proportional to sperm motility and in immotile caput sperm, GSK3 activity is six times higher than that of motile caudal sperm ( Vijayaraghavan et al. , 1996 , 2000 ). GSK3 activity is controlled by its phosphorylation state. When serine phosphorylated, GSK3 catalytic activity is low (GSK3A Ser9 and GSK3B Ser21) but when tyrosine phosphorylated, it is activated (GSK3A Tyr 279 and GSK3B Tyr 216) ( Wang et al. , 1994 ).

Although in bovine and mouse, the role of GSK3 in male fertility is well established, in human sperm the knowledge is limited. With that in mind, we performed a GSK3 characterization, by determining its activity levels in asthenozoospermic and normozoospermic ejaculated human samples and its subcellular location in human sperm. The observation that mouse GSK3B cannot substitute for GSK3A implies that GSK3A is essential for normal sperm physiology. We considered that the unique role of GSK3A in sperm motility is reliant on its interactors and, as such, identified the GSK3A and GSK3B interactomes in both human testis and sperm.

Discussion

GSK3 has been long associated with sperm motility acquisition and maintenance in mammals ( Smith et al. , 1999 ; Vijayaraghavan et al. , 2000 ; Somanath et al. , 2004 ). Recently, an isoform-specific function of GSK3A in mice sperm primary motility acquisition has been suggested. However, the characterization of both GSK3 isoforms (GSK3A and GSK3B) in human sperm and testis physiology has been sparse. Assessment of a similar isoform-specific function of GSK3A in human sperm motility acquisition was thus necessary. This work aimed to characterize GSK3 isoforms in human sperm as well as identify and analyze the GSK3A and GSK3B interactome in human sperm and testis. Ultimately, this can help decipher the role of isoform-specific functions of GSK3 in human sperm physiology.

In this study we provided evidence to support that mature human sperm cells are unique in their need for GSK3A isoform to achieve progressive motility. Similar to other mammals, both GSK3 isoforms are present in human testis and sperm (Fig. 1 ). Characterization of GSK3 levels in normospermic and asthenozoospermic samples proved that in ejaculated human sperm, serine phosphorylated GSK3A presents a strong positive correlation with progressive sperm motility, but serine phosphorylation GSK3B does not show any correlation with sperm motility (Fig. 1 ). Furthermore, correlation between the percentage of immotile spermatozoa ( Supplementary Table SII ) and levels of serine phosphorylated GSK3A is in accordance with the correlation observed with progressive motile spermatozoa. This shows that GSK3A activity is strongly correlated with human sperm motility, being a negative modulator, while GSK3B appears does not influence sperm motility. This is the first observation that GSK3 activity is associated with human sperm motility and that this function is a GSK3A isoform-specific function. The power of the study was limited by the relatively small samples size (three normozoospermic samples and four asthenozoospermic samples). However, recent studies reinforce the results obtained. Using, knock-out technology a GSK3A isoform-specific function in mice sperm motility has been proved by Bhattacharjee and colleagues ( Bhattacharjee et al. , 2015 , 2018 ).

A possible explanation for the inability of GSK3B to substitute for GSK3A in human sperm relies on a distinct spatial expression pattern between GSK3 isoforms in human sperm cells. The immunocytochemistry studies performed, showed that GSK3A is consistently present in the tail, but in only 75% of the cases was it also present in the head. Opposing GSK3A, GSK3B is always present on the head of human sperm, while its localization on the tail is irregular. A more plausible explanation for isoform-specific function of GSK3 in human sperm is GSK3 isoform-specific interactors that bind, target and modulate each isoform in human sperm. Work by Zeidner et al. , showed that RACK1 is a GSK3A isoform-specific interactor in the central nervous system, and that this interaction requires the unique glycine-rich GSK3A N-termini ( Zeidner et al. , 2011 ).

With the purpose of identifying GSK3 isoform-specific interactions in the male reproductive system, the GSK3A and GSK3B interactomes in human testis and sperm were identified and characterized ( Supplementary Tables III, IV, VI and VII ). Due to technical restrains (human testis availability and sperm physiology), the human testis GSK3 interactome was constructed using an yeast two-hybrid approach, while for the human sperm GSK3 interactome, coimmunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry was undertaken. The yeast-two hybrid system relies on the yeast cell environment, not fully mimicking mammalian cells. Yet, it is one of the only techniques that indicates binary interactions. Coimmunoprecipitation does not prove direct interaction, and weak interactions are usually lost but retains intracellular environment conditions. Approximately 27% of the GSK3 interactions identified in this study have been previously described, which results in high confidence in the GSK3 interactomes identified. Furthermore, the interaction between GSK3 and AXIN2 was acknowledged, for the first time, in testis. This interaction is extensively described in somatic cells ( Stamos and Weis, 2013 ; Voronkov and Krauss, 2013 ; Song et al. , 2014 ; Pronobis et al. , 2015 ), reinforcing our confidence in the results obtained for the GSK3 interactome.

With the purpose of constructing the most complete GSK3 interactome, GSK3 interactions available on PPIs databases were retrieved and GSK3-centered networks were constructed (Figs 3 and 4 , Supplementary Figs S4 and S5 ). To identify GSK3 interactions key for sperm physiology (more specifically sperm motility), tissue-expression, phenotypes and gene ontology annotations were integrated into the GSK3 networks. It may be noted that the knowledge of protein tissue expression is still limited and typically does not take into account tissue-specific alternatively spliced transcripts. This is particularly relevant for testis, since testis is a tissue with a higher number of alternative transcripts splice variants ( Elliott and Grellscheid, 2006 ; Uhlén et al. , 2015 ). None of GSK3A interactors listed on databases showed a testis-specific or -enriched expression. We identified the first testis-enriched or -specific GSK3A interactors which reflects the importance for deepening the knowledge on sperm physiology of our results. Regarding GSK3A interactions, 20.1% have a motility-related annotation and for GSK3B, 21% of interactors have been previously link to cell motility. This is relevant considering the sperm cells are the only human cells that possesses a progressive motile function. The fact that almost a quarter of the GSK3 interactome may be involved in the motility cell function reflects that the molecular mechanisms that control sperm cell motility are still partially unknown. Focusing on GSK3A interactions that have previously been shown to be involved, we highlight PRSS37. This protein is the only GSK3A interactor that is known to be associated with sperm motility, testis annotations, and categorized as enriched in testis (Fig. 3 ). Previous studies demonstrated that when PRSS37 is absent in mice testis, fertilization is compromised due to inadequate spermatogenesis, decreased sperm oviduct-migration and decreased sperm-zona binding ( Shen et al. , 2013a ). Concerning testis functions, our analysis revealed that AR, PPP1CC and AKAP9 appear to have a prominent role since germ cells and other types of testicular cells are greatly affected by their absence (Fig. 4 ). These findings are in accordance with former studies ( Varmuza et al. , 1999 ; Wang et al. , 2009 ; Schimenti et al. , 2013 ).

LRP6 and AKAP11, two GSK3 interactors identified in this study, were chosen for further characterization, as being previously involved in male reproduction. LRP6 was already described as involved in sperm motility and testis physiology, and AKAP11 in mouse spermatogenesis ( Reinton et al. , 2000 ; Koch et al. , 2015 ). While the interaction between AKAP11 and GSK3B has been previously described ( Tanji et al. , 2002 ), to our knowledge this is the first description of the interaction with GSK3A and the first time the interaction is described in human testis. In contrast with earlier studies in human sperm ( Reinton et al. , 2000 ), we showed that AKAP11 is localized in the anterior portion of the head and equatorial region (Fig. 5 B). In somatic cells, AKAP11 has been associated with cell migration ( Logue et al. , 2011 ) and in 2002, Tanji et al. showed that AKAP11, PPP1, PRKACA and GSK3B formed a multimeric complex in which PPP1 and PRKACA controlled GSK3B activity. Since both PPP1 and PRKACA have been extensively described in mammalian testis and sperm ( Smith et al. , 1996 ; Davidson et al. , 2005 ; Schimenti et al. , 2013 ), we may assume that similar multimeric complex may be formed to control GSK3 activity.

Bioinformatics analysis revealed that in mice, absence of LRP6 correlates with male infertility ( Supplementary Fig. S5 and Supplementary Table SXI ). Expression studies showed that LRP6 is present in human testis and sperm and is localized along the entire flagellum (Fig. 5 A and B). Furthermore, when LRP6 is phosphorylated on S1490 (in somatic cells a GSK3 substrate ( Davidson et al. , 2005 ; Zeng et al. , 2005 )), its subcellular location is restricted to the human sperm midpiece (Fig. 5 B). This is in accordance to earlier studies in mice and bovine sperm ( Koch et al. , 2015 ). Interestingly, only a small percentage of the sperm cells within the same sample present staining for both LRP6 and S140 phosphorylated LRP6. Further studies to understand why this expression pattern occurs may prove useful. Koch et al . (2015) explored the non-genetic effects of B-catenin signaling on human sperm and suggested that the interaction between LRP6 and GSK3 is required for protein stabilization and consequently sperm motility. Therefore, despite the fact that in somatic cells GSK3/LRP6 interaction is involved in gene expression, our results reinforce that in human sperm this interaction can be fundamental for sperm physiology.

In conclusion, our data revealed an isoform-specific need for GSK3A in human progressive sperm motility modulation. The GSK3 interactome identified in this work uncovers the extent to which GSK3 can be involved in sperm motility and reveals new potential players in the molecular mechanisms of sperm motility. Even more, study of GSK3A interactors such as PRSS37 deserve to be pursued since the likelihood of this protein being involved in sperm motility is high. Furthermore, although we attempted to identify specific GSK3A interactors, no interaction was validated as GSK3A-unique. Selective GSK3A inhibitors and identification of specific targets of GSK3A can facilitate the development of a new group of male contraceptives based on sperm motility arrest.
