---
pmid: '18296522'
title: DivIVA is required for polar growth in the MreB-lacking rod-shaped actinomycete
  Corynebacterium glutamicum.
authors:
- Letek M
- Ordóñez E
- Vaquera J
- Margolin W
- Flärdh K
- Mateos LM
- Gil JA
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2347398
doi: 10.1128/JB.01934-07
---

# DivIVA is required for polar growth in the MreB-lacking rod-shaped actinomycete Corynebacterium glutamicum.
**Authors:** Letek M, Ordóñez E, Vaquera J, Margolin W, Flärdh K, Mateos LM, Gil JA
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JB.01934-07](https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.01934-07)
**PMC:** [PMC2347398](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2347398/)

## Abstract

1. J Bacteriol. 2008 May;190(9):3283-92. doi: 10.1128/JB.01934-07. Epub 2008 Feb 
22.

DivIVA is required for polar growth in the MreB-lacking rod-shaped actinomycete 
Corynebacterium glutamicum.

Letek M(1), Ordóñez E, Vaquera J, Margolin W, Flärdh K, Mateos LM, Gil JA.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Biología Molecular, Area de Microbiología, Facultad de 
Biología, Universidad de León, 24071 León, Spain.

The actinomycete Corynebacterium glutamicum grows as rod-shaped cells by zonal 
peptidoglycan synthesis at the cell poles. In this bacterium, experimental 
depletion of the polar DivIVA protein (DivIVA(Cg)) resulted in the inhibition of 
polar growth; consequently, these cells exhibited a coccoid morphology. This 
result demonstrated that DivIVA is required for cell elongation and the 
acquisition of a rod shape. DivIVA from Streptomyces or Mycobacterium localized 
to the cell poles of DivIVA(Cg)-depleted C. glutamicum and restored polar 
peptidoglycan synthesis, in contrast to DivIVA proteins from Bacillus subtilis 
or Streptococcus pneumoniae, which localized at the septum of C. glutamicum. 
This confirmed that DivIVAs from actinomycetes are involved in polarized cell 
growth. DivIVA(Cg) localized at the septum after cell wall synthesis had started 
and the nucleoids had already segregated, suggesting that in C. glutamicum 
DivIVA is not involved in cell division or chromosome segregation.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01934-07
PMCID: PMC2347398
PMID: 18296522 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
