---
pmid: '19363271'
title: Binding of Hsp90 to tau promotes a conformational change and aggregation of
  tau protein.
authors:
- Tortosa E
- Santa-Maria I
- Moreno F
- Lim F
- Perez M
- Avila J
journal: J Alzheimers Dis
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.3233/JAD-2009-1049
---

# Binding of Hsp90 to tau promotes a conformational change and aggregation of tau protein.
**Authors:** Tortosa E, Santa-Maria I, Moreno F, Lim F, Perez M, Avila J
**Journal:** J Alzheimers Dis (2009)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JAD-2009-1049](https://doi.org/10.3233/JAD-2009-1049)

## Abstract

1. J Alzheimers Dis. 2009;17(2):319-25. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2009-1049.

Binding of Hsp90 to tau promotes a conformational change and aggregation of tau 
protein.

Tortosa E(1), Santa-Maria I, Moreno F, Lim F, Perez M, Avila J.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular "Severo Ochoa" CSIC/UAM, Facultad de Ciencias, 
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Cantoblanco, Madrid, Spain.

Tau pathology, associated with Alzheimer's disease, is characterized by the 
presence of phosphorylated and aggregated tau. Phosphorylation of tau takes 
place mainly in the vicinity of the tubulin-binding region of the molecule and 
its self aggregation is also mediated via this tubulin-binding region. Tau 
phosphorylation and aggregation have been related with conformational changes of 
the protein. These changes could be regulated by chaperones such as heat shock 
proteins, since one of these, heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90), has already been 
described as a putative tau-binding protein. In this work, we have confirmed the 
interaction of Hsp90 with tau protein and report that binding of Hsp90 to tau 
facilitates a conformational change that could result in its phosphorylation by 
glycogen synthase kinase 3 and its aggregation into filamentous structures.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2009-1049
PMID: 19363271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
