---
pmid: '30704899'
title: Pacer Is a Mediator of mTORC1 and GSK3-TIP60 Signaling in Regulation of Autophagosome
  Maturation and Lipid Metabolism.
authors:
- Cheng X
- Ma X
- Zhu Q
- Song D
- Ding X
- Li L
- Jiang X
- Wang X
- Tian R
- Su H
- Shen Z
- Chen S
- Liu T
- Gong W
- Liu W
- Sun Q
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2018.12.017
---

# Pacer Is a Mediator of mTORC1 and GSK3-TIP60 Signaling in Regulation of Autophagosome Maturation and Lipid Metabolism.
**Authors:** Cheng X, Ma X, Zhu Q, Song D, Ding X, Li L, Jiang X, Wang X, Tian R, Su H, Shen Z, Chen S, Liu T, Gong W, Liu W, Sun Q
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2018.12.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2018.12.017)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2019 Feb 21;73(4):788-802.e7. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2018.12.017.
Epub  2019 Jan 28.

Pacer Is a Mediator of mTORC1 and GSK3-TIP60 Signaling in Regulation of 
Autophagosome Maturation and Lipid Metabolism.

Cheng X(1), Ma X(1), Zhu Q(1), Song D(1), Ding X(1), Li L(2), Jiang X(1), Wang 
X(1), Tian R(1), Su H(1), Shen Z(2), Chen S(2), Liu T(3), Gong W(4), Liu W(1), 
Sun Q(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, and Department of Cardiology of the Second 
Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310058, 
China.
(2)National Institute of Biological Sciences, Beijing 102206, China.
(3)Department of Cell Biology, and Department of General Surgery of Sir Run Run 
Shaw Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310058, China.
(4)Department of Surgery, Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School 
of Medicine, Hangzhou 310012, China.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, and Department of Cardiology of the Second 
Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310058, 
China. Electronic address: qmsun@zju.edu.cn.

Comment in
    Autophagy. 2019 Jun;15(6):1120-1121. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2019.1596500.

mTORC1 and GSK3 play critical roles in early stages of (macro)autophagy, but how 
they regulate late steps of autophagy remains poorly understood. Here we show 
that mTORC1 and GSK3-TIP60 signaling converge to modulate autophagosome 
maturation through Pacer, an autophagy regulator that was identified in our 
recent study. Hepatocyte-specific Pacer knockout in mice results in impaired 
autophagy flux, glycogen and lipid accumulation, and liver fibrosis. Under 
nutrient-rich conditions, mTORC1 phosphorylates Pacer at serine157 to disrupt 
the association of Pacer with Stx17 and the HOPS complex and thus abolishes 
Pacer-mediated autophagosome maturation. Importantly, dephosphorylation of Pacer 
under nutrient-deprived conditions promotes TIP60-mediated Pacer acetylation, 
which facilitates HOPS complex recruitment and is required for autophagosome 
maturation and lipid droplet clearance. This work not only identifies Pacer as a 
regulator in hepatic autophagy and liver homeostasis in vivo but also reveals a 
signal integration mechanism involved in late stages of autophagy and lipid 
metabolism.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2018.12.017
PMID: 30704899 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
