---
pmid: '12885753'
title: A20 protects from CD40-CD40 ligand-mediated endothelial cell activation and
  apoptosis.
authors:
- Longo CR
- Arvelo MB
- Patel VI
- Daniel S
- Mahiou J
- Grey ST
- Ferran C
journal: Circulation
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000083718.76889.D0
---

# A20 protects from CD40-CD40 ligand-mediated endothelial cell activation and apoptosis.
**Authors:** Longo CR, Arvelo MB, Patel VI, Daniel S, Mahiou J, Grey ST, Ferran C
**Journal:** Circulation (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1161/01.CIR.0000083718.76889.D0](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.CIR.0000083718.76889.D0)

## Abstract

1. Circulation. 2003 Sep 2;108(9):1113-8. doi:
10.1161/01.CIR.0000083718.76889.D0.  Epub 2003 Jul 28.

A20 protects from CD40-CD40 ligand-mediated endothelial cell activation and 
apoptosis.

Longo CR(1), Arvelo MB, Patel VI, Daniel S, Mahiou J, Grey ST, Ferran C.

Author information:
(1)Immunobiology Research Center, Department of Surgery and Medicine, Beth 
Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass 02215, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: CD40/CD40 ligand (CD40L) signaling is a potent activator of 
endothelial cells (ECs) and promoter of atherosclerosis. In this study, we 
investigate whether A20 (a gene we have shown to be antiinflammatory and 
antiapoptotic in ECs) can protect from CD40/CD40L-mediated EC activation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Overexpression of CD40, in a transient transfection system, 
activates the transcription factor NF-kappaB and upregulates IkappaBalpha, 
E-selectin, and tissue factor (TF) reporter activity. Coexpression of A20 
inhibits NF-kappaB and upregulation of IkappaBalpha and E-Selectin but not TF, 
suggesting that CD40 induces TF in a non-NF-kappaB-dependent manner. In human 
coronary artery ECs (HCAECs), adenovirus-mediated overexpression of A20 blocks 
physiological, CD40-induced activation of NF-kappaB, upstream of IkappaBalpha 
degradation (Western blot) and subsequently upregulation of ICAM-1, VCAM-1, and 
E-selectin (flow cytometry). Although A20 does not block TF transcription its 
expression in HCAECs inhibits TF induction (colorimetric assay and RT-PCR) by 
blunting CD40 upregulation. We demonstrate that CD40 signaling induces apoptosis 
in a proinflammatory microenvironment. A20 overexpression protects from 
CD40-mediated EC apoptosis (DNA content analysis and trypan blue exclusion). We 
also demonstrate that signaling through CD40L activates NF-kappaB and induces 
apoptosis in ECs, both of which are inhibited by A20 overexpression.
CONCLUSIONS: A20 works at multiple levels to protect ECs from CD40/CD40L 
mediated activation and apoptosis. A20-based therapy could be beneficial for the 
treatment of vascular diseases such as atherosclerosis and transplant-associated 
vasculopathy.

DOI: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000083718.76889.D0
PMID: 12885753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
