---
pmid: '16962592'
title: Honokiol causes the p21WAF1-mediated G(1)-phase arrest of the cell cycle through
  inducing p38 mitogen activated protein kinase in vascular smooth muscle cells.
authors:
- Lee B
- Kim CH
- Moon SK
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2006.08.064
---

# Honokiol causes the p21WAF1-mediated G(1)-phase arrest of the cell cycle through inducing p38 mitogen activated protein kinase in vascular smooth muscle cells.
**Authors:** Lee B, Kim CH, Moon SK
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2006.08.064](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2006.08.064)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2006 Oct 2;580(22):5177-84. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2006.08.064.
Epub  2006 Sep 5.

Honokiol causes the p21WAF1-mediated G(1)-phase arrest of the cell cycle through 
inducing p38 mitogen activated protein kinase in vascular smooth muscle cells.

Lee B(1), Kim CH, Moon SK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, College of Medicine, Konkuk University, Chungju City, 
Chungbuk 380-701, South Korea.

Honokiol, an active component in extracts of Magnolia officinalis, has been 
proposed to play a role in anti-inflammatory, antioxidant activity, 
anti-angiogenic and anti-tumor activity. Although honokiol has a variety of 
pharmacological effects on certain cell types, its effects on vascular smooth 
muscle cells (VSMC) are unclear. This issue was investigated in the present 
study, honokiol was found to inhibit cell viability and DNA synthesis in 
cultured VSMC. These inhibitory effects were associated with G1 cell cycle 
arrest. Treatment with honokiol blocks the cell cycle in the G1 phase, 
down-regulates the expression of cyclins and CDKs and up-regulates the 
expression of p21WAF1, a CDK inhibitor. While honokiol did not up-regulate p27, 
it caused an increase in the promoter activity of the p21WAF1 gene. Immunoblot 
and deletion analysis of the p21WAF1 promoter showed that honokiol induced the 
expression of p21WAF1 and that this expression was independent of the p53 
pathway. Furthermore, the honokiol-mediated signaling pathway involved in VSMC 
growth inhibition was examined. Among the relevant pathways, honokiol induced a 
marked activation of p38 MAP kinase and JNK. The expression of dominant negative 
p38 MAP kinase and SB203580, a p38 MAP kinase specific inhibitor, blocked the 
expression of honokiol-dependent p38 MAP kinase and p21WAF1. Consistently, 
blockade of p38 MAPK kinase function reversed honokiol-induced VSMC 
proliferation and cell cycle proteins. These data demonstrate that the p38 MAP 
kinase pathway participates in p21WAF1 induction, subsequently leading to a 
decrease in the levels of cyclin D1/CDK4 and cyclin E/CDK2 complexes and 
honokiol-dependent VSMC growth inhibition. In conclusion, these findings 
concerning the molecular mechanisms of honokiol in VSMC provides a theoretical 
basis for clinical approaches to the use therapeutic agents in treating 
atherosclerosis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2006.08.064
PMID: 16962592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
