---
pmid: '19806183'
title: Rational extension of the ribosome biogenesis pathway using network-guided
  genetics.
authors:
- Li Z
- Lee I
- Moradi E
- Hung NJ
- Johnson AW
- Marcotte EM
journal: PLoS Biol
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2749941
doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000213
---

# Rational extension of the ribosome biogenesis pathway using network-guided genetics.
**Authors:** Li Z, Lee I, Moradi E, Hung NJ, Johnson AW, Marcotte EM
**Journal:** PLoS Biol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pbio.1000213](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1000213)
**PMC:** [PMC2749941](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2749941/)

## Abstract

1. PLoS Biol. 2009 Oct;7(10):e1000213. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000213. Epub
2009  Oct 6.

Rational extension of the ribosome biogenesis pathway using network-guided 
genetics.

Li Z(1), Lee I, Moradi E, Hung NJ, Johnson AW, Marcotte EM.

Author information:
(1)Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, Institute for Cellular and 
Molecular Biology, University of Texas, Austin, Texas, USA.

Biogenesis of ribosomes is an essential cellular process conserved across all 
eukaryotes and is known to require >170 genes for the assembly, modification, 
and trafficking of ribosome components through multiple cellular compartments. 
Despite intensive study, this pathway likely involves many additional genes. 
Here, we employ network-guided genetics-an approach for associating candidate 
genes with biological processes that capitalizes on recent advances in 
functional genomic and proteomic studies-to computationally identify additional 
ribosomal biogenesis genes. We experimentally evaluated >100 candidate yeast 
genes in a battery of assays, confirming involvement of at least 15 new genes, 
including previously uncharacterized genes (YDL063C, YIL091C, YOR287C, 
YOR006C/TSR3, YOL022C/TSR4). We associate the new genes with specific aspects of 
ribosomal subunit maturation, ribosomal particle association, and ribosomal 
subunit nuclear export, and we identify genes specifically required for the 
processing of 5S, 7S, 20S, 27S, and 35S rRNAs. These results reveal new 
connections between ribosome biogenesis and mRNA splicing and add >10% new 
genes-most with human orthologs-to the biogenesis pathway, significantly 
extending our understanding of a universally conserved eukaryotic process.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000213
PMCID: PMC2749941
PMID: 19806183 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.
