---
pmid: '10875918'
title: Fas preassociation required for apoptosis signaling and dominant inhibition
  by pathogenic mutations.
authors:
- Siegel RM
- Frederiksen JK
- Zacharias DA
- Chan FK
- Johnson M
- Lynch D
- Tsien RY
- Lenardo MJ
journal: Science
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.288.5475.2354
---

# Fas preassociation required for apoptosis signaling and dominant inhibition by pathogenic mutations.
**Authors:** Siegel RM, Frederiksen JK, Zacharias DA, Chan FK, Johnson M, Lynch D, Tsien RY, Lenardo MJ
**Journal:** Science (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.288.5475.2354](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.288.5475.2354)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2000 Jun 30;288(5475):2354-7. doi: 10.1126/science.288.5475.2354.

Fas preassociation required for apoptosis signaling and dominant inhibition by 
pathogenic mutations.

Siegel RM(1), Frederiksen JK, Zacharias DA, Chan FK, Johnson M, Lynch D, Tsien 
RY, Lenardo MJ.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2000 Jun 30;288(5475):2328-9. doi: 10.1126/science.288.5475.2328.

Heterozygous mutations encoding abnormal forms of the death receptor Fas 
dominantly interfere with Fas-induced lymphocyte apoptosis in human autoimmune 
lymphoproliferative syndrome. This effect, rather than depending on 
ligand-induced receptor oligomerization, was found to stem from ligand- 
independent interaction of wild-type and mutant Fas receptors through a specific 
region in the extracellular domain. Preassociated Fas complexes were found in 
living cells by means of fluorescence resonance energy transfer between variants 
of green fluorescent protein. These results show that formation of preassociated 
receptor complexes is necessary for Fas signaling and dominant interference in 
human disease.

DOI: 10.1126/science.288.5475.2354
PMID: 10875918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
