---
pmid: '24351927'
title: Parkinson-related LRRK2 mutation R1441C/G/H impairs PKA phosphorylation of
  LRRK2 and disrupts its interaction with 14-3-3.
authors:
- Muda K
- Bertinetti D
- Gesellchen F
- Hermann JS
- von Zweydorf F
- Geerlof A
- Jacob A
- Ueffing M
- Gloeckner CJ
- Herberg FW
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3890784
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1312701111
---

# Parkinson-related LRRK2 mutation R1441C/G/H impairs PKA phosphorylation of LRRK2 and disrupts its interaction with 14-3-3.
**Authors:** Muda K, Bertinetti D, Gesellchen F, Hermann JS, von Zweydorf F, Geerlof A, Jacob A, Ueffing M, Gloeckner CJ, Herberg FW
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1312701111](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1312701111)
**PMC:** [PMC3890784](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3890784/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jan 7;111(1):E34-43. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1312701111. Epub 2013 Dec 18.

Parkinson-related LRRK2 mutation R1441C/G/H impairs PKA phosphorylation of LRRK2 
and disrupts its interaction with 14-3-3.

Muda K(1), Bertinetti D, Gesellchen F, Hermann JS, von Zweydorf F, Geerlof A, 
Jacob A, Ueffing M, Gloeckner CJ, Herberg FW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Kassel, 34132 Kassel, Germany.

Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) is a multidomain protein implicated in 
Parkinson disease (PD); however, the molecular mechanism and mode of action of 
this protein remain elusive. cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA), along with 
other kinases, has been suggested to be an upstream kinase regulating LRRK2 
function. Using MS, we detected several sites phosphorylated by PKA, including 
phosphorylation sites within the Ras of complex proteins (ROC) GTPase domain as 
well as some previously described sites (S910 and S935). We systematically 
mapped those sites within LRRK2 and investigated their functional consequences. 
S1444 in the ROC domain was confirmed as a target for PKA phosphorylation using 
ROC single-domain constructs and through site-directed mutagenesis. 
Phosphorylation at S1444 is strikingly reduced in the major PD-related LRRK2 
mutations R1441C/G/H, which are part of a consensus PKA recognition site 
((1441)RASpS(1444)). Furthermore, our work establishes S1444 as a PKA-regulated 
14-3-3 docking site. Experiments of direct binding to the three 14-3-3 isotypes 
gamma, theta, and zeta with phosphopeptides encompassing pS910, pS935, or pS1444 
demonstrated the highest affinities to phospho-S1444. Strikingly, 14-3-3 binding 
to phospho-S1444 decreased LRRK2 kinase activity in vitro. Moreover, 
substitution of S1444 by alanine or by introducing the mutations R1441C/G/H, 
abrogating PKA phosphorylation and 14-3-3 binding, resulted in increased LRRK2 
kinase activity. In conclusion, these data clearly demonstrate that LRRK2 kinase 
activity is modulated by PKA-mediated binding of 14-3-3 to S1444 and suggest 
that 14-3-3 interaction with LRRK2 is hampered in R1441C/G/H-mediated PD 
pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1312701111
PMCID: PMC3890784
PMID: 24351927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
