---
pmid: '15190117'
title: Neurogenic effect of beta-amyloid peptide in the development of neural stem
  cells.
authors:
- López-Toledano MA
- Shelanski ML
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6729298
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0974-04.2004
---

# Neurogenic effect of beta-amyloid peptide in the development of neural stem cells.
**Authors:** López-Toledano MA, Shelanski ML
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0974-04.2004](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0974-04.2004)
**PMC:** [PMC6729298](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6729298/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2004 Jun 9;24(23):5439-44. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0974-04.2004.

Neurogenic effect of beta-amyloid peptide in the development of neural stem 
cells.

López-Toledano MA(1), Shelanski ML.

Author information:
(1)Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain and 
Department of Pathology, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.

The adult mammalian brain contains neural stem cells (NSCs) with self-renewal 
and multilineage potential in the hippocampus and subventricular zone. However, 
neurogenesis from these areas does not compensate for neuronal loss in 
age-related neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's disease (AD). To 
test whether an impairment of neurogenesis could contribute to the pathogenesis 
of AD, we examined the effects of amyloid-beta peptide (Abeta) on the survival 
and neuronal differentiation of cultured NSCs from striatum and hippocampus. We 
show that Abeta peptide does not impair the neurogenic rate in NSC progeny, but 
that it increases the total number of neurons in vitro in a dose-dependent 
manner. The neurogenic effect of Abeta peptide is not dependent on soluble 
factors released from the NSC progeny. Neurogenesis is induced by Abeta42 and 
not Abeta40 or Abeta 25-35, and the activity appears to be a property of Abeta 
oligomers and not fibrils. These results suggest that Abeta may have positive as 
well as deleterious actions, and that a knowledge of the mechanisms involved in 
the former could be valuable in exploiting the regenerative and plastic 
potential of the brain in preventing and treating Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0974-04.2004
PMCID: PMC6729298
PMID: 15190117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
