---
pmid: '30559373'
title: CRISPR-Cas9 genome engineering of primary CD4(+) T cells for the interrogation
  of HIV-host factor interactions.
authors:
- Hultquist JF
- Hiatt J
- Schumann K
- McGregor MJ
- Roth TL
- Haas P
- Doudna JA
- Marson A
- Krogan NJ
journal: Nat Protoc
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6637941
doi: 10.1038/s41596-018-0069-7
---

# CRISPR-Cas9 genome engineering of primary CD4(+) T cells for the interrogation of HIV-host factor interactions.
**Authors:** Hultquist JF, Hiatt J, Schumann K, McGregor MJ, Roth TL, Haas P, Doudna JA, Marson A, Krogan NJ
**Journal:** Nat Protoc (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41596-018-0069-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41596-018-0069-7)
**PMC:** [PMC6637941](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6637941/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Protoc. 2019 Jan;14(1):1-27. doi: 10.1038/s41596-018-0069-7.

CRISPR-Cas9 genome engineering of primary CD4(+) T cells for the interrogation 
of HIV-host factor interactions.

Hultquist JF(1)(2)(3)(4), Hiatt J(3)(5)(6)(7)(8), Schumann K(5)(6), McGregor 
MJ(1)(2)(3), Roth TL(5)(6)(7)(8), Haas P(1)(2)(3), Doudna JA(9)(10)(11)(12)(13), 
Marson A(14)(15)(16)(17)(18)(19), Krogan NJ(20)(21)(22).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California, 
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(2)Quantitative Biosciences Institute (QBI), University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Institute for Virology and Immunology, J. David Gladstone Institutes, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases, Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(6)Diabetes Center, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, 
USA.
(7)Medical Scientist Training Program, University of California, San Francisco, 
San Francisco, CA, USA.
(8)Biomedical Sciences Graduate Program, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(9)Innovative Genomics Institute, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, 
CA, USA.
(10)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, 
Berkeley, CA, USA.
(11)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA, USA.
(12)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, 
USA.
(13)Physical Biosciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 
Berkeley, CA, USA.
(14)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. alexander.marson@ucsf.edu.
(15)Diabetes Center, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, 
USA. alexander.marson@ucsf.edu.
(16)Innovative Genomics Institute, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, 
CA, USA. alexander.marson@ucsf.edu.
(17)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA. 
alexander.marson@ucsf.edu.
(18)UCSF Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. alexander.marson@ucsf.edu.
(19)Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, CA, USA. alexander.marson@ucsf.edu.
(20)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California, 
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. nevan.krogan@ucsf.edu.
(21)Quantitative Biosciences Institute (QBI), University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. nevan.krogan@ucsf.edu.
(22)Institute for Virology and Immunology, J. David Gladstone Institutes, San 
Francisco, CA, USA. nevan.krogan@ucsf.edu.

CRISPR-Cas9 gene-editing strategies have revolutionized our ability to engineer 
the human genome for robust functional interrogation of complex biological 
processes. We have recently adapted this technology for use in primary human 
CD4+ T cells to create a high-throughput platform for analyzing the role of host 
factors in HIV infection and pathogenesis. Briefly, CRISPR-Cas9 
ribonucleoproteins (crRNPs) are synthesized in vitro and delivered to activated 
CD4+ T cells by nucleofection. These cells are then assayed for editing 
efficiency and expanded for use in downstream cellular, genetic, or 
protein-based assays. This platform supports the rapid, arrayed generation of 
multiple gene manipulations and is widely adaptable across culture conditions, 
infection protocols, and downstream applications. Here, we present detailed 
protocols for crRNP synthesis, primary T-cell culture, 96-well nucleofection, 
molecular validation, and HIV infection, and discuss additional considerations 
for guide and screen design, as well as crRNP multiplexing. Taken together, this 
procedure allows high-throughput identification and mechanistic interrogation of 
HIV host factors in primary CD4+ T cells by gene knockout, validation, and HIV 
spreading infection in as little as 2-3 weeks.

DOI: 10.1038/s41596-018-0069-7
PMCID: PMC6637941
PMID: 30559373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests An intellectual property 
patent application has been filed for the use of CRISPR-Cas9 RNPs to edit the 
genome of human primary hematopoietic cells. A.M. is a cofounder of Spotlight 
Therapeutics, serves on the scientific advisory board of PACT Pharma, and was 
previously an adviser to Juno Therapeutics. The Marson lab has received 
sponsored research funding from Juno Therapeutics, Epinomics, and Sanofi, and a 
gift from Gilead. The remaining authors declare no competing interests.
