---
pmid: '18281285'
title: AIP1 is critical in transducing IRE1-mediated endoplasmic reticulum stress
  response.
authors:
- Luo D
- He Y
- Zhang H
- Yu L
- Chen H
- Xu Z
- Tang S
- Urano F
- Min W
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2335342
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M710557200
---

# AIP1 is critical in transducing IRE1-mediated endoplasmic reticulum stress response.
**Authors:** Luo D, He Y, Zhang H, Yu L, Chen H, Xu Z, Tang S, Urano F, Min W
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M710557200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M710557200)
**PMC:** [PMC2335342](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2335342/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2008 May 2;283(18):11905-12. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M710557200. Epub
2008  Feb 15.

AIP1 is critical in transducing IRE1-mediated endoplasmic reticulum stress 
response.

Luo D(1), He Y, Zhang H, Yu L, Chen H, Xu Z, Tang S, Urano F, Min W.

Author information:
(1)Interdepartmental Program in Vascular Biology and Therapeutics, Department of 
Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, 
USA.

We have previously shown that ASK1-interacting protein 1 (AIP1) transduces tumor 
necrosis factor-induced ASK1-JNK signaling. Because endoplasmic reticulum (ER) 
stress activates ASK1-JNK signaling cascade, we investigated the role of AIP1 in 
ER stress-induced signaling. We created AIP1-deficient mice (AIP1-KO) from which 
mouse embryonic fibroblasts and vascular endothelial cells were isolated. 
AIP1-KO cells show dramatic reductions in ER stress-induced, but not oxidative 
stress-induced, ASK1-JNK activation and cell apoptosis. The ER stress-induced 
IRE1-JNK/XBP-1 axis, but not the PERK-CHOP1 axis, is blunted in AIP1-KO cells. 
ER stress induced formation of an AIP1-IRE1 complex, and the PH domain of AIP1 
is critical for the IRE1 interaction. Furthermore, reconstitution of AIP1-KO 
cells with AIP1 wild type, not an AIP1 mutant with a deletion of the PH domain 
(AIP1-DeltaPH), restores ER stress-induced IRE1-JNK/XBP-1 signaling. AIP1-IRE1 
association facilitates IRE1 dimerization, a critical step for activation of 
IRE1 signaling. More importantly, AIP1-KO mice show impaired ER stress-induced 
IRE1-dependent signaling in vivo. We conclude that AIP1 is essential for 
transducing the IRE1-mediated ER stress response.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M710557200
PMCID: PMC2335342
PMID: 18281285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

We have previously shown that ASK1-interacting protein 1 (AIP1) transduces
 tumor necrosis factor-induced ASK1-JNK signaling. Because endoplasmic
 reticulum (ER) stress activates ASK1-JNK signaling cascade, we investigated
 the role of AIP1 in ER stress-induced signaling. We created AIP1-deficient
 mice (AIP1-KO) from which mouse embryonic fibroblasts and vascular endothelial
 cells were isolated. AIP1-KO cells show dramatic reductions in ER
 stress-induced, but not oxidative stress-induced, ASK1-JNK activation and cell
 apoptosis. The ER stress-induced IRE1-JNK/XBP-1 axis, but not the PERK-CHOP1
 axis, is blunted in AIP1-KO cells. ER stress induced formation of an AIP1-IRE1
 complex, and the PH domain of AIP1 is critical for the IRE1 interaction.
 Furthermore, reconstitution of AIP1-KO cells with AIP1 wild type, not an AIP1
 mutant with a deletion of the PH domain (AIP1-ΔPH), restores ER
 stress-induced IRE1-JNK/XBP-1 signaling. AIP1-IRE1 association facilitates
 IRE1 dimerization, a critical step for activation of IRE1 signaling. More
 importantly, AIP1-KO mice show impaired ER stress-induced IRE1-dependent
 signaling in vivo . We conclude that AIP1 is essential for transducing
 the IRE1-mediated ER stress response.

RESULTS

ER Stress-induced Activation of ASK1-JNK and Apoptosis Is Blunted in
 AIP1-KO Cells —We created AIP1-deficient mice based on a homologous
 recombination (see “Experimental Procedures” for details). To
 determine the role of AIP1 in ER stress signaling, we isolated MLEC and MEF.
 AIP1-WT and AIP1-KO MLEC were treated with an ER stress stimulus, thapsigargin
 (Tsg, 5 μ m ) or Tm (1 μ m ) for the indicated times.
 TNF treatment (10 ng/ml) was used as a control. ASK1 activity was determined
 by an in vitro kinase assay using glutathione S -transferase-MKK4 as a substrate. Activation of JNK was detected by
 Western blotting with a phospho-specific antibody. TNF-induced ASK1-JNK
 activation was reduced in AIP1-KO EC, consistent with our previous reports
 that AIP1 is critical for TNF-induced ASK1-JNK signaling
 ( Fig. 1 a ).
 Interestingly, AIP1-KO EC also showed a dramatic reduction in ER
 stress-induced ASK1-JNK signaling ( Fig.
 1 a ). EC were also treated with oxidative stress stimuli
 (H 2 O 2 , t -butyl hydroperoxide, or paraquat). In
 this case AIP1 deficiency had no effects on oxidative stress-induced JNK
 activation ( Fig. 1 b ).
 Activation of ASK1-JNK has been linked to EC apoptosis, and we determined ER
 stress-induced EC apoptosis by a double staining with propidium iodide and
 annexin V followed by FACS analysis. Consistent with an impaired ASK1-JNK
 signaling, AIP1-KO EC showed a dramatic reduction in ER stress-induced
 apoptosis ( Fig. 1, c and d ). Similarly, reduced ER stress-induced ASK1-JNK
 activation and apoptosis were observed in AIP1-KO MEF compared with AIP1-WT
 MEF ( Fig. 1, e and f ).

ER Stress-induced Activation of IRE1-JNK/XBP-1 Axis Is Blunted in
 AIP1-KO EC —We then determined whether AIP1 regulates IRE1, an
 upstream activator of ASK1-JNK in ER stress signaling. Activation of IRE1 also
 leads to induction of spliced forms of XBP-1. AIP1-WT and AIP1-KO EC were
 treated with tunicamycin (which induces ER stress by inhibiting protein N -linked glycosylation) for the indicated times (0–240 min).
 Phosphorylation of IRE1 and induction of XBP-1 expression were determined by
 Western blotting with respective antibodies. As shown in Fig. 2 a , Tm strongly
 induced activation of IRE1 at 15–30 min and induction of spliced forms
 of XBP-1 at 120–240 min. Tm-induced activation of IRE1 and synthesis of
 XBP-1 were blunted in AIP1-KO EC ( Fig.
 2 a ). Activation of the PERK-CHOP axis, a parallel pathway
 activated by ER stress, was also examined by measuring phosphorylation of PERK
 and expression of CHOP. In contrast to IRE1-JNK/XBP-1 axis, Tm-induced
 phosphorylation of PERK and induction of CHOP expression were still activated
 in AIP1-KO MLEC. AIP1 deletion augmented Tm-induced phosphorylation of PERK,
 suggesting a possible negative role of AIP1 in PERK signaling
 ( Fig. 2, b and c ). Taken together, these observations suggest that AIP1
 is specifically involved in ER stress-activated IRE1-JNK/XBP-1 axis but not
 the PERK-CHOP axis.

The PH Domain of AIP1 Is Critical for IRE1 Binding —To
 determine the mechanism by which AIP1 regulates IRE1 activity, we examined
 whether ER stress induces association of AIP1 with IRE1. MLEC were treated
 with Tm (1 μ m for 15 min), and endogenous complexes of AIP1-IRE1
 in EC were determined by co-immunoprecipitation assays. AIP1-IRE1 complex was
 not detected in resting EC. However, ER stress strongly induced an association
 of AIP1 with IRE1 ( Fig.
 3 a , top three panels ). ER stress also induced an
 association of TRAF2 with IRE1 and AIP1 as determined by immunoprecipitation
 assay with anti-TRAF2 ( Fig.
 3 a , bottom three panels ). These data suggest
 that IRE1, AIP1, and TRAF2 form complexes in response to ER stress.
 Interestingly, IRE1-TRAF2 complex was not detected in AIP1-KO cells,
 suggesting that the formation of IRE1-AIP1 complex is required for subsequent
 recruitment of TRAF2 to IRE1.

To map the critical domain of AIP1 for IRE1 binding, BAEC were transfected
 with FLAG-tagged AIP1-F, AIP1-ΔPH (with a deletion of the PH domain), or
 AIP1-PH (containing the PH domain only) in the presence of IRE1
 ( Fig. 3 b ). Association
 of AIP1-F and IRE1 was determined by co-immunoprecipitation assays. AIP1-IRE1
 complex was weakly detected in resting EC and was enhanced in response to Tm
 treatment ( Fig. 3 c ).
 AIP1-PH strongly bound to IRE1 in an ER stress-independent manner. However,
 AIP1-ΔPH failed to bind to IRE1, suggesting that the PH domain on AIP1
 is necessary and sufficient for the binding to IRE1. The kinase activity of
 IRE1 has been shown to be critical for IRE1-TRAF2 interaction
 ( 5 ). To determine whether the
 kinase activity of IRE1 is necessary for AIP1 binding, BAEC were transfected
 with FLAG-tagged AIP1-F and AIP1-ΔPH in the presence of IRE1-WT or
 IRE1-KA (a kinase-dead form) ( Fig.
 3 b ). AIP1-F (but not AIP1-ΔPH) binds to both
 IRE1-WT and IRE1-KA, indicating that AIP1-IRE1 interaction was independent of
 the kinase activity of IRE1 ( Fig.
 3 d ).

The PH Domain of AIP1 Is Necessary but Not Sufficient to Activate
 IRE1-JNK/XBP-1 Signaling —The critical role of the AIP1 PH domain in
 IRE1 binding prompted us to determine its role in AIP1-mediated IRE1
 signaling. To eliminate the effect of endogenous AIP1, we reconstituted
 AIP1-KO MLEC with AIP1-F, AIP1-ΔPH, or AIP1-PH. Reconstituted MLEC were
 treated with Tm for the indicated times (0, 30, and 240 min), and
 phosphorylation of IRE1, JNK, and PERK was determined. Reconstitution of
 AIP1-KO MLEC with AIP1-F restored the ER stress-induced activation of
 IRE1-JNK/XBP-1 signaling ( Fig.
 4 ). In contrast, reconstitution of AIP1-ΔPH or AIP1-PH, like
 vector control (VC), failed to restore the ER stress response. As a control,
 expression of different forms of AIP1 had no effects on Tm-induced
 phosphorylation of PERK. These results suggest that the PH domain of AIP1 is
 necessary but not sufficient to activate IRE1-JNK/XBP-1 signaling.

AIP1 Enhances Dimerization of IRE1 —Dimerization of IRE1 is a
 prerequisite step for its activation and the subsequent downstream events
 ( 23 , 24 ). We determined whether
 AIP1 induces IRE1 dimerization. To this end, we determined the effects of AIP1
 on the dimerization between IRE1α and IRE1β. Similar to IRE1α
 ( Fig. 3 b ), IRE1β
 contains an ER lumen domain, a transmembrane domain, a kinase domain, and an
 endonuclease domain ( Fig.
 5 a ). Myc-tagged IRE1β-WT, -KA, and -ΔC were
 co-expressed into BAEC with IRE1α in the presence or absence of AIP1.
 Association of IRE1α and IRE1β was determined by a
 co-immunoprecipitation assay with anti-Myc followed by Western blot with
 anti-IRE1α. Association of IRE1α with IRE1β-WT and
 IRE1β-ΔC was strongly increased by AIP1 co-expression, indicating
 that IRE1 proteins dimerize via their luminal/transmembrane domain.
 ( Fig. 5 b ). In
 contrast, IRE1β-KA failed to associate with IRE1α even in the
 presence of AIP1, suggesting that the kinase activity of IRE1 is required for
 their dimerization and IRE1β-KA may function as a dominant negative
 mutant. These data indicate that AIP1 facilitate IRE1 protein
 dimerization.

ER Stress Responses Are Blunted in AIP1-KO Mice —Finally, we
 examined the role of AIP1 in ER stress responses in vivo . AIP1-WT and
 AIP1-KO mice were administered intraperitoneally with tunicamycin at 1 μg/g
 body weight, and lung tissue was harvested at 6, 12, and 24 h after injection.
 ER stress responses were determined by Western blot for signaling. Six hours
 after Tm injection, phosphorylation of IRE1 and IRE1 downstream target JNK as
 well as IRE1-dependent expression of XBP-1 were dramatically induced in WT
 mouse tissues. Activation of IRE1-JNK and expression of XBP-1 in AIP1-KO mice
 were significantly reduced compared with WT mice. Expression of XBP-1 target
 genes including the oxidoreductase endoplasmic reticulum oxidoreductin-1
 (Ero1-L) and protein disulfide isomerase was determined by quantitative
 reverse transcription PCR ( Fig.
 6 b ). Similarly, activation of PERK and its downstream
 CHOP1 was detected at 6 h post-injection. In contrast to the IRE1 axis, AIP1
 deficiency had no effects on Tm-induced activation of PERK and induction of
 CHOP ( Fig. 6 a ). These
 data suggest that AIP1 may specifically involve in ER stress-induced
 IRE1-JNK/XBP-1 axis without effects on the PERK-CHOP pathway.

DISCUSSION

In the present study, we have defined a critical function of AIP1 in ER
 stress-mediated signaling and responses in vitro and in
 vivo . AIP1-KO fibroblasts (MEF) and vascular EC show dramatic reduction
 in ER stress-induced ASK1-JNK activation and cell apoptosis. We demonstrated
 that ER stress-induced IRE1-JNK/XBP-1 axis, but not the PERK-CHOP1 axis, is
 specifically blunted in AIP1-KO cells. AIP1 via its PH domain associates with
 IRE1. Moreover, the PH domain of AIP1 is critical for AIP1-mediated IRE1
 activation as demonstrated by reconstitution of AIP1-KO cells with AIP1 or
 AIP1 mutant with a deletion of the PH domain. Finally, we showed that AIP1
 facilitates IRE1 dimerization, a critical step for activation of IRE1
 signaling. Our study demonstrates an essential role of AIP1 in transducing
 IRE1-mediated ER stress responses.

Recent studies suggest that TNFR1 signaling components, including TNFR1,
 RIP1, TRAF2, and ASK1, are involved in the activation of JNK as ER
 stress-induced JNK activation is reduced or diminished in MEFs with deficiency
 of each individual component
 ( 6 , 7 , 25 – 27 ).
 The current model suggests that TNFR1 signaling components function downstream
 of IRE1. ER stress could induce association of IRE1 with TNFR1 at 1 h after ER
 stress stimulation ( 25 ). It is
 not known whether this resulted from an autocrine effect of TNF that has been
 shown to be induced by ER stress in MEFs
 ( 27 ). Similarly, IRE1
 associates with TRAF2 in an IRE1 kinase-dependent manner
 ( 5 ), suggesting that IRE1
 recruits TRAF2 after IRE1 activation in response to ER stress. In contrast, we
 showed that association of AIP1 with IRE1 is not dependent on the kinase
 activity of IRE1. Furthermore, AIP1 binds to IRE1 in response to ER stress,
 facilitating IRE1 dimerization. More importantly, ER stress-induced IRE1
 activation and its downstream ASK1-JNK signaling are blunted in AIP1-KO EC. So
 far, no studies have determined the effects of TNF signaling components on
 IRE1 activity/activation, and our study provides the first evidence that a TNF
 signaling component, AIP1, may directly regulate IRE1 activity.

One current model of IRE1 activation (so-called “Competitive
 Deprivation” model of BiP dissociation)
 ( 23 , 24 ) proposes that the abundant
 luminal ER chaperon BiP (also known as glucose-regulated protein 78, GRP78)
 maintains IRE1 in an inactive state. Upon ER stress, BiP preferentially binds
 to unfolded proteins, thereby releasing IRE1 to undergo activation by
 homodimerization and autophosphorylation. Alternative mechanisms, IRE1
 activation without release of BiP, have been also proposed
 ( 4 , 28 , 29 ). In response to ER stress
 stimulation, AIP1 associates with IRE1 and enhances IRE1 dimerization upon
 binding to IRE1, suggesting a direct role of AIP1 in regulating IRE1 activity.
 Similarly, it has been shown that Bcl-2 family proteins BAX and BAK can
 directly bind to IRE1 and regulate IRE1 activation
 ( 30 ). It needs to be further
 determined whether AIP1 facilitates the release of IRE1 from BiP, contributing
 to AIP1-mediated IRE1 dimerization. The PH domain of AIP1 is critical for IRE1
 binding. However, reconstitutions of AIP1-KO EC with AIP1-F, AIP1-ΔPH,
 and AIP1-PH indicate that the PH domain of AIP1 is necessary but not
 sufficient to mediate ER stress-induced activation of IRE1, suggesting other
 domains of AIP1 or/and its associated proteins are required in this process.
 Thus, the exact mechanism by which AIP1 mediates IRE1 activation needs be
 investigated.

It has been shown that IRE1 recruits TRAF2, which in turn activates
 ASK1-JNK cascade in response to ER stress
 ( 5 ). Our data show that ER
 stress induces association of AIP1 with both IRE1 and TRAF2, suggesting
 formation of a putative IRE1-AIP1-TRAF2 complex. We have previously defined
 the critical domain of AIP1 in binding with TRAF2. AIP1 utilizes a C-terminal
 PER (Period-like) domain that binds to the N-terminal RING finger of TRAF2,
 transducing TNF-induced ASK1-JNK signaling
 ( 15 ). It is conceivable that
 AIP1-TRAF2 form a similar complex, mediating ER stress-induced activation of
 the ASK1-JNK signaling pathway. More importantly, our data demonstrate that
 AIP1 is crucial for ER stress-induced activation of IRE1 and formation of the
 IRE1-TRAF2 complex. Our results are consistent with a previous report that
 only an active form of IRE1 associates with TRAF2
 ( 5 ). Several remaining
 questions are raised from our current study. The localization of the IRE1-AIP1
 complex has not been determined; the role of RIP1, a critical kinase involved
 in AIP1-mediated ASK1-JNK activation in TNF signaling, is not known. We will
 address these questions in future studies.

A malfunction of the ER stress response has been associated with a variety
 of human diseases such as atherosclerosis, diabetes, and neurodegenerative
 disorders. Given the critical role of AIP1 in ER stress response, the
 availability of AIP1-flox and AIP1-deficient mice warrants further
 investigation on AIP1 function in the progression of these diseases.
