---
pmid: '25313067'
title: Angiotensin II signaling via protein kinase C phosphorylates Kelch-like 3,
  preventing WNK4 degradation.
authors:
- Shibata S
- Arroyo JP
- Castañeda-Bueno M
- Puthumana J
- Zhang J
- Uchida S
- Stone KL
- Lam TT
- Lifton RP
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4217463
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1418342111
---

# Angiotensin II signaling via protein kinase C phosphorylates Kelch-like 3, preventing WNK4 degradation.
**Authors:** Shibata S, Arroyo JP, Castañeda-Bueno M, Puthumana J, Zhang J, Uchida S, Stone KL, Lam TT, Lifton RP
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1418342111](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1418342111)
**PMC:** [PMC4217463](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4217463/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Oct 28;111(43):15556-61. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1418342111. Epub 2014 Oct 13.

Angiotensin II signaling via protein kinase C phosphorylates Kelch-like 3, 
preventing WNK4 degradation.

Shibata S(1), Arroyo JP(2), Castañeda-Bueno M(2), Puthumana J(2), Zhang J(2), 
Uchida S(3), Stone KL(4), Lam TT(4), Lifton RP(5).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Genetics and Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Teikyo University School of Medicine, Tokyo 173-8605, Japan; and 
Department of Clinical Epigenetics, Research Center for Advanced Science and 
Technology, University of Tokyo, Tokyo 153-0041, Japan Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510; 
richard.lifton@yale.edu shigeru.shibata@med.teikyo-u.ac.jp.
(2)Departments of Genetics and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510;
(3)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Teikyo University 
School of Medicine, Tokyo 173-8605, Japan; and.
(4)Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry and.
(5)Departments of Genetics and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510; richard.lifton@yale.edu 
shigeru.shibata@med.teikyo-u.ac.jp.

Hypertension contributes to the global burden of cardiovascular disease. 
Increased dietary K(+) reduces blood pressure; however, the mechanism has been 
obscure. Human genetic studies have suggested that the mechanism is an 
obligatory inverse relationship between renal salt reabsorption and K(+) 
secretion. Mutations in the kinases with-no-lysine 4 (WNK4) or WNK1, or in 
either Cullin 3 (CUL3) or Kelch-like 3 (KLHL3)--components of an E3 ubiquitin 
ligase complex that targets WNKs for degradation--cause constitutively increased 
renal salt reabsorption and impaired K(+) secretion, resulting in hypertension 
and hyperkalemia. The normal mechanisms that regulate the activity of this 
ubiquitin ligase and levels of WNKs have been unknown. We posited that missense 
mutations in KLHL3 that impair binding of WNK4 might represent a phenocopy of 
the normal physiologic response to volume depletion in which salt reabsorption 
is maximized. We show that KLHL3 is phosphorylated at serine 433 in the Kelch 
domain (a site frequently mutated in hypertension with hyperkalemia) by protein 
kinase C in cultured cells and that this phosphorylation prevents WNK4 binding 
and degradation. This phosphorylation can be induced by angiotensin II (AII) 
signaling. Consistent with these in vitro observations, AII administration to 
mice, even in the absence of volume depletion, induces renal KLHL3(S433) 
phosphorylation and increased levels of both WNK4 and the NaCl cotransporter. 
Thus, AII, which is selectively induced in volume depletion, provides the signal 
that prevents CUL3/KLHL3-mediated degradation of WNK4, directing the kidney to 
maximize renal salt reabsorption while inhibiting K(+) secretion in the setting 
of volume depletion.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1418342111
PMCID: PMC4217463
PMID: 25313067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
