---
pmid: '1756860'
title: Identification of amino acid residues of Ras protein that are essential for
  signal-transducing activity but not for enhancement of GTPase activity by GAP.
authors:
- Fujita-Yoshigaki J
- Shirouzu M
- Koide H
- Nishimura S
- Yokoyama S
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '1991'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0014-5793(91)80665-p
---

# Identification of amino acid residues of Ras protein that are essential for signal-transducing activity but not for enhancement of GTPase activity by GAP.
**Authors:** Fujita-Yoshigaki J, Shirouzu M, Koide H, Nishimura S, Yokoyama S
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0014-5793(91)80665-p](https://doi.org/10.1016/0014-5793(91)80665-p)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 1991 Dec 9;294(3):187-90. doi: 10.1016/0014-5793(91)80665-p.

Identification of amino acid residues of Ras protein that are essential for 
signal-transducing activity but not for enhancement of GTPase activity by GAP.

Fujita-Yoshigaki J(1), Shirouzu M, Koide H, Nishimura S, Yokoyama S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, University of 
Tokyo, Japan.

To determine the amino acid residues required for the signal-transducing 
activity of the human c-Ha-Ras protein, we introduced point mutations at 
residues 45-54 near the 'effector region' (residues 32-40). We transfected PC12 
cells with these mutant genes and also micro-injected the mutant proteins, bound 
with an unhydrolyzable GTP analog, into PC12 cells. Both procedures showed that 
Val45----Glu and Gly48----Cys mutations impaired the ability of the Ras protein 
to induce morphological change of PC12 cells. These mutations did not affect the 
guanine nucleotide-binding activity or GTPase activity in the absence or 
presence of bovine GTPase-activating protein (GAP). Therefore, the Val45 and 
Gly48 residues should be included by definition in the effector region 
responsible for the signal transduction, while only a subset of the 
effector-region residues is required for enhancement of the GTPase activity by 
GAP.

DOI: 10.1016/0014-5793(91)80665-p
PMID: 1756860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
