---
pmid: '10572032'
title: 'Genetic control of trichome branch number in Arabidopsis: the roles of the
  FURCA loci.'
authors:
- Luo D
- Oppenheimer DG
journal: Development
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/dev.126.24.5547
---

# Genetic control of trichome branch number in Arabidopsis: the roles of the FURCA loci.
**Authors:** Luo D, Oppenheimer DG
**Journal:** Development (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.126.24.5547](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.126.24.5547)

## Abstract

1. Development. 1999 Dec;126(24):5547-57. doi: 10.1242/dev.126.24.5547.

Genetic control of trichome branch number in Arabidopsis: the roles of the FURCA 
loci.

Luo D(1), Oppenheimer DG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Coalition for BioMolecular Products, 
University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL 35487-0344, USA.

We are using trichome (hair) morphogenesis as a model to study how plant cell 
shape is controlled. During a screen for new mutations that affect trichome 
branch initiation in Arabidopsis, we identified seven new mutants that show a 
reduction in trichome branch number from three branches to two. These mutations 
were named furca, after the Latin word for two-pronged fork. These seven 
recessive mutations were placed into four complementation groups that define 
four new genes: FURCA1, FURCA2, FURCA3 and FURCA4. The trichome branch number 
phenotype indicates that the FURCA genes encode positive regulators of trichome 
branch initiation. Analysis of double mutants suggests that primary and 
secondary branch initiation events are not genetically distinct, but rely on the 
levels of partially redundant groups of regulators of trichome branch 
initiation. Based on the analysis of both epistatic and additive genetic 
interactions between the FURCA genes and other genes that control trichome 
branch number, we propose a model that explains how these genes interact to 
control trichome branch initiation. This model successfully predicts the 
phenotypes of all the single and double mutants examined and suggests points of 
control of the trichome branch pathway.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.126.24.5547
PMID: 10572032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
