---
pmid: '17304241'
title: The Caenorhabditis elegans cell-cycle regulator ZYG-11 defines a conserved
  family of CUL-2 complex components.
authors:
- Vasudevan S
- Starostina NG
- Kipreos ET
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1808032
doi: 10.1038/sj.embor.7400895
---

# The Caenorhabditis elegans cell-cycle regulator ZYG-11 defines a conserved family of CUL-2 complex components.
**Authors:** Vasudevan S, Starostina NG, Kipreos ET
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.embor.7400895](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.embor.7400895)
**PMC:** [PMC1808032](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1808032/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2007 Mar;8(3):279-86. doi: 10.1038/sj.embor.7400895. Epub 2007 Feb
16.

The Caenorhabditis elegans cell-cycle regulator ZYG-11 defines a conserved 
family of CUL-2 complex components.

Vasudevan S(1), Starostina NG, Kipreos ET.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular Biology, University of Georgia, 724 Biological 
Sciences Building, Athens, Georgia 30602, USA.

The cullin CUL-2 is a crucial component of a subclass of multisubunit 
cullin-RING ubiquitin-ligases. The specificity of CUL-2-based complexes is 
provided by variable substrate-recognition subunits that bind to specific 
substrates. In Caenorhabditis elegans, CUL-2 regulates several key processes in 
cell division and embryonic development, including meiotic progression, 
anterior-posterior polarity and mitotic chromatin condensation. However, the 
substrate recognition subunits that work in these CUL-2-dependent processes were 
unknown. Here, we present evidence that ZYG-11 is the substrate-recognition 
subunit for a CUL-2-based complex that regulates these functions. We show that 
ZYG-11 interacts with CUL-2 in vivo and binds to the complex adaptor protein 
Elongin C using a nematode variant of the VHL-box motif. We show that the ZYG11 
gene family encompasses two main branches in metazoa, and provide evidence that 
members of the extended ZYG11 family in nematodes and humans are conserved 
components of CUL2-based ubiquitin-ligases.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.embor.7400895
PMCID: PMC1808032
PMID: 17304241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
