---
pmid: '10438780'
title: Conserved cytoplasmic loops are important for both the transport and chemotaxis
  functions of PcaK, a protein from Pseudomonas putida with 12 membrane-spanning regions.
authors:
- Ditty JL
- Harwood CS
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC93997
doi: 10.1128/JB.181.16.5068-5074.1999
---

# Conserved cytoplasmic loops are important for both the transport and chemotaxis functions of PcaK, a protein from Pseudomonas putida with 12 membrane-spanning regions.
**Authors:** Ditty JL, Harwood CS
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JB.181.16.5068-5074.1999](https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.181.16.5068-5074.1999)
**PMC:** [PMC93997](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC93997/)

## Abstract

1. J Bacteriol. 1999 Aug;181(16):5068-74. doi: 10.1128/JB.181.16.5068-5074.1999.

Conserved cytoplasmic loops are important for both the transport and chemotaxis 
functions of PcaK, a protein from Pseudomonas putida with 12 membrane-spanning 
regions.

Ditty JL(1), Harwood CS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, 
USA.

Chemotaxis to the aromatic acid 4-hydroxybenzoate (4-HBA) by Pseudomonas putida 
is mediated by PcaK, a membrane-bound protein that also functions as a 4-HBA 
transporter. PcaK belongs to the major facilitator superfamily (MFS) of 
transport proteins, none of which have so far been implicated in chemotaxis. 
Work with two well-studied MFS transporters, LacY (the lactose permease) and 
TetA (a tetracycline efflux protein), has revealed two stretches of amino acids 
located between the second and third (2-3 loop) and the eighth and ninth (8-9 
loop) transmembrane regions that are required for substrate transport. These 
sequences are conserved among most MFS transporters, including PcaK. To 
determine if PcaK has functional requirements similar to those of other MFS 
transport proteins and to analyze the relationship between the transport and 
chemotaxis functions of PcaK, we generated strains with mutations in amino acid 
residues located in the 2-3 and 8-9 loops of PcaK. The mutant proteins were 
analyzed in 4-HBA transport and chemotaxis assays. Cells expressing mutant PcaK 
proteins had a range of phenotypes. Some transported at wild-type levels, while 
others were partially or completely defective in 4-HBA transport. An aspartate 
residue in the 8-9 loop that has no counterpart in LacY and TetA, but is 
conserved among members of the aromatic acid/H(+) symporter family of the MFS, 
was found to be critical for 4-HBA transport. These results indicate that 
conserved amino acids in the 2-3 and 8-9 loops of PcaK are required for 4-HBA 
transport. Amino acid changes that decreased 4-HBA transport also caused a 
decrease in 4-HBA chemotaxis, but the effect on chemotaxis was sometimes 
slightly more severe. The requirement of PcaK for both 4-HBA transport and 
chemotaxis demonstrates that P. putida has a chemoreceptor that differs from the 
classical chemoreceptors described for Escherichia coli and Salmonella 
typhimurium.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.181.16.5068-5074.1999
PMCID: PMC93997
PMID: 10438780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
