---
pmid: '19011621'
title: Arginine methylation regulates the p53 response.
authors:
- Jansson M
- Durant ST
- Cho EC
- Sheahan S
- Edelmann M
- Kessler B
- La Thangue NB
journal: Nat Cell Biol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ncb1802
---

# Arginine methylation regulates the p53 response.
**Authors:** Jansson M, Durant ST, Cho EC, Sheahan S, Edelmann M, Kessler B, La Thangue NB
**Journal:** Nat Cell Biol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncb1802](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb1802)

## Abstract

1. Nat Cell Biol. 2008 Dec;10(12):1431-9. doi: 10.1038/ncb1802. Epub 2008 Nov 16.

Arginine methylation regulates the p53 response.

Jansson M(1), Durant ST, Cho EC, Sheahan S, Edelmann M, Kessler B, La Thangue 
NB.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Medical 
Sciences Division, University of Oxford, Old Road Campus Research Building, Old 
Road Campus, off Roosevelt Drive, Oxford, OX3 7DQ, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2008 Dec;10(12):1389-90. doi: 10.1038/ncb1208-1389.

Activation of the p53 tumour suppressor protein in response to DNA damage leads 
to apoptosis or cell-cycle arrest. Enzymatic modifications are widely believed 
to affect and regulate p53 activity. We describe here a level of 
post-translational control that has an important functional consequence on the 
p53 response. We show that the protein arginine methyltransferase (PRMT) 5, as a 
co-factor in a DNA damage responsive co-activator complex that interacts with 
p53, is responsible for methylating p53. Arginine methylation is regulated 
during the p53 response and affects the target gene specificity of p53. 
Furthermore, PRMT5 depletion triggers p53-dependent apoptosis. Thus, methylation 
on arginine residues is an underlying mechanism of control during the p53 
response.

DOI: 10.1038/ncb1802
PMID: 19011621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
