---
pmid: '19387494'
title: The antiapoptotic protein AAC-11 interacts with and regulates Acinus-mediated
  DNA fragmentation.
authors:
- Rigou P
- Piddubnyak V
- Faye A
- Rain JC
- Michel L
- Calvo F
- Poyet JL
journal: EMBO J
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2693147
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.106
---

# The antiapoptotic protein AAC-11 interacts with and regulates Acinus-mediated DNA fragmentation.
**Authors:** Rigou P, Piddubnyak V, Faye A, Rain JC, Michel L, Calvo F, Poyet JL
**Journal:** EMBO J (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2009.106](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2009.106)
**PMC:** [PMC2693147](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2693147/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2009 Jun 3;28(11):1576-88. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.106. Epub 2009 Apr 
23.

The antiapoptotic protein AAC-11 interacts with and regulates Acinus-mediated 
DNA fragmentation.

Rigou P(1), Piddubnyak V, Faye A, Rain JC, Michel L, Calvo F, Poyet JL.

Author information:
(1)INSERM UMRS 940, Equipe Avenir, Université Paris 7, Institut de Génétique 
Moléculaire, Paris, France.

The nuclear factor Acinus has been suggested to mediate apoptotic chromatin 
condensation after caspase cleavage. However, this role has been challenged by 
recent observations suggesting a contribution of Acinus in apoptotic 
internucleosomal DNA cleavage. We report here that AAC-11, a survival protein 
whose expression prevents apoptosis that occurs on deprivation of growth 
factors, physiologically binds to Acinus and prevents Acinus-mediated DNA 
fragmentation. AAC-11 was able to protect Acinus from caspase-3 cleavage in vivo 
and in vitro, thus interfering with its biological function. Interestingly, 
AAC-11 depletion markedly increased cellular sensitivity to anticancer drugs, 
whereas its expression interfered with drug-induced cell death. AAC-11 possesses 
a leucine-zipper domain that dictates, upon oligomerization, its interaction 
with Acinus as well as the antiapoptotic effect of AAC-11 on drug-induced cell 
death. A cell permeable peptide that mimics the leucine-zipper subdomain of 
AAC-11, thus preventing its oligomerization, inhibited the AAC-11-Acinus complex 
formation and potentiated drug-mediated apoptosis in cancer cells. Our results, 
therefore, show that targeting AAC-11 might be a potent strategy for cancer 
treatment by sensitization of tumour cells to chemotherapeutic drugs.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2009.106
PMCID: PMC2693147
PMID: 19387494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
