---
pmid: '8425218'
title: 'Mad: a heterodimeric partner for Max that antagonizes Myc transcriptional
  activity.'
authors:
- Ayer DE
- Kretzner L
- Eisenman RN
journal: Cell
year: '1993'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(93)90661-9
---

# Mad: a heterodimeric partner for Max that antagonizes Myc transcriptional activity.
**Authors:** Ayer DE, Kretzner L, Eisenman RN
**Journal:** Cell (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0092-8674(93)90661-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(93)90661-9)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 1993 Jan 29;72(2):211-22. doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(93)90661-9.

Mad: a heterodimeric partner for Max that antagonizes Myc transcriptional 
activity.

Ayer DE(1), Kretzner L, Eisenman RN.

Author information:
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, 
Washington 98104.

Myc family proteins appear to function through heterodimerization with the 
stable, constitutively expressed bHLH-Zip protein, Max. To determine whether Max 
mediates the function of regulatory proteins other than Myc, we screened a 
lambda gt11 expression library with radiolabeled Max protein. One cDNA 
identified encodes a new member of the bHLH-Zip protein family, Mad. Human Mad 
protein homodimerizes poorly but binds Max in vitro, forming a sequence-specific 
DNA binding complex with properties very similar to those of Myc-Max. Both 
Myc-Max and Mad-Max heterocomplexes are favored over Max homodimers, and, unlike 
Max homodimers, the DNA binding activity of the heterodimers is unaffected by 
CKII phosphorylation. Mad does not associate with Myc or with representative 
bHLH, bZip, or bHLH-Zip proteins. In vivo transactivation assays suggest that 
Myc-Max and Mad-Max complexes have opposing functions in transcription and that 
Max plays a central role in this network of transcription factors.

DOI: 10.1016/0092-8674(93)90661-9
PMID: 8425218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
