---
pmid: '15851028'
title: microRNA-directed phasing during trans-acting siRNA biogenesis in plants.
authors:
- Allen E
- Xie Z
- Gustafson AM
- Carrington JC
journal: Cell
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.04.004
---

# microRNA-directed phasing during trans-acting siRNA biogenesis in plants.
**Authors:** Allen E, Xie Z, Gustafson AM, Carrington JC
**Journal:** Cell (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2005.04.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2005.04.004)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2005 Apr 22;121(2):207-21. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.04.004.

microRNA-directed phasing during trans-acting siRNA biogenesis in plants.

Allen E(1), Xie Z, Gustafson AM, Carrington JC.

Author information:
(1)Center for Gene Research and Biotechnology, Oregon State University,
Corvallis, Oregon 97331, USA.

Plants and animals use small RNAs (microRNAs [miRNAs] and siRNAs) as guides for
posttranscriptional and epigenetic regulation. In plants, miRNAs and
trans-acting (ta) siRNAs form through distinct biogenesis pathways, although
they both interact with target transcripts and guide cleavage. An integrated
approach to identify targets of Arabidopsis thaliana miRNAs and ta-siRNAs
revealed several new classes of small RNA-regulated genes, including
conventional genes such as Argonaute2 and an E2-ubiquitin conjugating enzyme.
Surprisingly, five ta-siRNA-generating transcripts were identified as targets of
miR173 or miR390. Rather than functioning as negative regulators, miR173- and
miR390-guided cleavage was shown to set the 21-nucleotide phase for ta-siRNA
precursor processing. These data support a model in which miRNA-guided formation
of a 5' or 3' terminus within pre-ta-siRNA transcripts, followed by
RDR6-dependent formation of dsRNA and Dicer-like processing, yields phased
ta-siRNAs that negatively regulate other genes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.04.004
PMID: 15851028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
