---
pmid: '12909615'
title: Karyopherin-alpha2 protein interacts with Chk2 and contributes to its nuclear
  import.
authors:
- Zannini L
- Lecis D
- Lisanti S
- Benetti R
- Buscemi G
- Schneider C
- Delia D
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M303304200
---

# Karyopherin-alpha2 protein interacts with Chk2 and contributes to its nuclear import.
**Authors:** Zannini L, Lecis D, Lisanti S, Benetti R, Buscemi G, Schneider C, Delia D
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M303304200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M303304200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 24;278(43):42346-51. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M303304200. Epub 
2003 Aug 9.

Karyopherin-alpha2 protein interacts with Chk2 and contributes to its nuclear 
import.

Zannini L(1), Lecis D, Lisanti S, Benetti R, Buscemi G, Schneider C, Delia D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Via G. 
Venezian 1, 20133 Milan, Italy.

Chk2 is a nuclear protein kinase involved in the DNA damage-induced ataxia 
telangiectasia mutated-dependent checkpoint arrest at multiple cell cycle 
phases. Searching for Chk2-binding proteins by a yeast two-hybrid system, we 
identified a strong interaction with karyopherin-alpha2 (KPNA-2), a gene product 
involved in active nuclear import of proteins bearing a nuclear localization 
signal (NLS). This finding was confirmed by glutathione S-transferase pull-down 
and co-immunoprecipitation assays. Of the three predicted Chk2 NLSs, located at 
amino acids 179-182 (NLS-1), 240-256 (NLS-2), and 515-522 (NLS-3), only the 
latter mediated the interaction with KPNA-2 in the yeast two-hybrid system, and 
in particular with its C terminus. Unlike mutations in NLS-1 or NLS-2, which 
left the nuclear localization of Chk2 unaffected, mutations in NLS-3 caused a 
cytoplasmic relocalization, indicating that the NLS-3 motif acts indeed as NLS 
for Chk2 in vivo. Finally, co-transfection experiments with green fluorescent 
protein (GFP)-Chk2 and wild type or mutant KPNA-2 confirmed the role of KPNA-2 
in nuclear import of Chk2.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M303304200
PMID: 12909615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
