---
pmid: '26545797'
title: Biochemical analyses and molecular modeling explain the functional loss of
  17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 3 mutant G133R in three Tunisian patients with
  46, XY Disorders of Sex Development.
authors:
- Engeli RT
- Rhouma BB
- Sager CP
- Tsachaki M
- Birk J
- Fakhfakh F
- Keskes L
- Belguith N
- Odermatt A
journal: J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.jsbmb.2015.10.023
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Biochemical analyses and molecular modeling explain the functional loss of 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 3 mutant G133R in three Tunisian patients with 46, XY Disorders of Sex Development.
**Authors:** Engeli RT, Rhouma BB, Sager CP, Tsachaki M, Birk J, Fakhfakh F, Keskes L, Belguith N, Odermatt A
**Journal:** J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jsbmb.2015.10.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsbmb.2015.10.023)

## Abstract

1. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2016 Jan;155(Pt A):147-54. doi: 
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2015.10.023. Epub 2015 Nov 3.

Biochemical analyses and molecular modeling explain the functional loss of 
17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 3 mutant G133R in three Tunisian patients with 
46, XY Disorders of Sex Development.

Engeli RT(1), Rhouma BB(2), Sager CP(3), Tsachaki M(1), Birk J(1), Fakhfakh 
F(2), Keskes L(2), Belguith N(4), Odermatt A(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular and Systems Toxicology, Department of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Pharmacenter, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Human Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of Sfax, 
Sfax, Tunisia.
(3)Molecular Modeling, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Pharmacenter, 
University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(4)Human Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of Sfax, 
Sfax, Tunisia; Department of Medical Genetics, HediChaker Hospital, Sfax, 
Tunisia. Electronic address: Neila.Belguith@fmsf.rnu.tn.
(5)Division of Molecular and Systems Toxicology, Department of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Pharmacenter, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland. Electronic 
address: alex.odermatt@unibas.ch.

Mutations in the HSD17B3 gene resulting in 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 
3 (17β-HSD3) deficiency cause 46, XY Disorders of Sex Development (46, XY DSD). 
Approximately 40 different mutations in HSD17B3 have been reported; only few 
mutant enzymes have been mechanistically investigated. Here, we report novel 
compound heterozygous mutations in HSD17B3, composed of the nonsense mutation 
C206X and the missense mutation G133R, in three Tunisian patients from two 
non-consanguineous families. Mutants C206X and G133R were constructed by 
site-directed mutagenesis and expressed in HEK-293 cells. The truncated C206X 
enzyme, lacking part of the substrate binding pocket, was moderately expressed 
and completely lost its enzymatic activity. Wild-type 17β-HSD3 and mutant G133R 
showed comparable expression levels and intracellular localization. The 
conversion of Δ4-androstene-3,17-dione (androstenedione) to testosterone was 
almost completely abolished for mutant G133R compared with wild-type 17β-HSD3. 
To obtain further mechanistic insight, G133 was mutated to alanine, 
phenylalanine and glutamine. G133Q and G133F were almost completely inactive, 
whereas G133A displayed about 70% of wild-type activity. Sequence analysis 
revealed that G133 on 17β-HSD3 is located in a motif highly conserved in 
17β-HSDs and other short-chain dehydrogenase/reductase (SDR) enzymes. A homology 
model of 17β-HSD3 predicted that arginine or any other bulky residue at position 
133 causes steric hindrance of cofactor NADPH binding, whereas substrate binding 
seems to be unaffected. The results indicate an essential role of G133 in the 
arrangement of the cofactor binding pocket, thus explaining the loss-of-function 
of 17β-HSD3 mutant G133R in the patients investigated.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jsbmb.2015.10.023
PMID: 26545797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
