---
pmid: '9813017'
title: Suppressors of superoxide dismutase (SOD1) deficiency in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
  Identification of proteins predicted to mediate iron-sulfur cluster assembly.
authors:
- Strain J
- Lorenz CR
- Bode J
- Garland S
- Smolen GA
- Ta DT
- Vickery LE
- Culotta VC
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.47.31138
---

# Suppressors of superoxide dismutase (SOD1) deficiency in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Identification of proteins predicted to mediate iron-sulfur cluster assembly.
**Authors:** Strain J, Lorenz CR, Bode J, Garland S, Smolen GA, Ta DT, Vickery LE, Culotta VC
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.273.47.31138](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.47.31138)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Nov 20;273(47):31138-44. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.47.31138.

Suppressors of superoxide dismutase (SOD1) deficiency in Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae. Identification of proteins predicted to mediate iron-sulfur cluster 
assembly.

Strain J(1), Lorenz CR, Bode J, Garland S, Smolen GA, Ta DT, Vickery LE, Culotta 
VC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Johns Hopkins University School 
of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland 21202, USA.

Yeast deficient in the cytosolic copper/zinc superoxide dismutase (SOD1) exhibit 
metabolic defects indicative of oxidative damage even under non-stress 
conditions. To help identify the endogenous sources of this oxidative damage, we 
isolated mutant strains of S. cerevisiae that suppressed metabolic defects 
associated with loss of SOD1. Six complementation groups were isolated and three 
of the corresponding genes have been identified. One sod1Delta suppressor 
represents SSQ1 which encodes a hsp70-type molecular chaperone found in the 
mitochondria. A second sod1Delta suppressor gene, designated JAC1, represents a 
new member of the 20-kDa J-protein family of co-chaperones. Jac1p contains a 
mitochondrial targeting consensus sequence and may serve as the partner for 
Ssq1p. Homologues of Ssq1p and Jac1p are found in bacteria in close association 
with genes proposed to be involved in iron-sulfur protein biosynthesis. The 
third suppressor gene identified was NFS1. Nfs1p is homologous to cysteine 
desulfurase enzymes that function in iron-sulfur cluster assembly and is also 
predicted to be mitochondrial. Each of the suppressor mutants identified 
exhibited diminished rates of respiratory oxygen consumption and was found to 
have reduced mitochondrial aconitase and succinate dehydrogenase activities. 
Taken together these results suggest a role for Ssq1p, Jac1p, and Nfs1p in 
assembly/maturation of mitochondrial iron-sulfur proteins and that one or more 
of the target Fe/S proteins contribute to oxidative damage in cells lacking 
copper/zinc SOD.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.47.31138
PMID: 9813017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
