---
pmid: '20060297'
title: Chaperone-assisted selective autophagy is essential for muscle maintenance.
authors:
- Arndt V
- Dick N
- Tawo R
- Dreiseidler M
- Wenzel D
- Hesse M
- Fürst DO
- Saftig P
- Saint R
- Fleischmann BK
- Hoch M
- Höhfeld J
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2009.11.022
---

# Chaperone-assisted selective autophagy is essential for muscle maintenance.
**Authors:** Arndt V, Dick N, Tawo R, Dreiseidler M, Wenzel D, Hesse M, Fürst DO, Saftig P, Saint R, Fleischmann BK, Hoch M, Höhfeld J
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cub.2009.11.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2009.11.022)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2010 Jan 26;20(2):143-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2009.11.022. Epub 2010 
Jan 7.

Chaperone-assisted selective autophagy is essential for muscle maintenance.

Arndt V(1), Dick N, Tawo R, Dreiseidler M, Wenzel D, Hesse M, Fürst DO, Saftig 
P, Saint R, Fleischmann BK, Hoch M, Höhfeld J.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Cell Biology and Bonner Forum Biomedizin, University of Bonn, 
Ulrich-Haberland-Strasse 61a, D-53121 Bonn, Germany.

How are biological structures maintained in a cellular environment that 
constantly threatens protein integrity? Here we elucidate proteostasis 
mechanisms affecting the Z disk, a protein assembly essential for actin 
anchoring in striated muscles, which is subjected to mechanical, thermal, and 
oxidative stress during contraction [1]. Based on the characterization of the 
Drosophila melanogaster cochaperone Starvin (Stv), we define a conserved 
chaperone machinery required for Z disk maintenance. Instead of keeping Z disk 
proteins in a folded conformation, this machinery facilitates the degradation of 
damaged components, such as filamin, through chaperone-assisted selective 
autophagy (CASA). Stv and its mammalian ortholog BAG-3 coordinate the activity 
of Hsc70 and the small heat shock protein HspB8 during disposal that is 
initiated by the chaperone-associated ubiquitin ligase CHIP and the autophagic 
ubiquitin adaptor p62. CASA is thus distinct from chaperone-mediated autophagy, 
previously shown to facilitate the ubiquitin-independent, direct translocation 
of a client across the lysosomal membrane [2]. Impaired CASA results in Z disk 
disintegration and progressive muscle weakness in flies, mice, and men. Our 
findings reveal the importance of chaperone-assisted degradation for the 
preservation of cellular structures and identify muscle as a tissue that highly 
relies on an intact proteostasis network, thereby shedding light on diverse 
myopathies and aging.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2009.11.022
PMID: 20060297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
