---
pmid: '20056832'
title: Acute insulin signaling in pancreatic beta-cells is mediated by multiple Raf-1
  dependent pathways.
authors:
- Alejandro EU
- Kalynyak TB
- Taghizadeh F
- Gwiazda KS
- Rawstron EK
- Jacob KJ
- Johnson JD
journal: Endocrinology
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2817610
doi: 10.1210/en.2009-0678
---

# Acute insulin signaling in pancreatic beta-cells is mediated by multiple Raf-1 dependent pathways.
**Authors:** Alejandro EU, Kalynyak TB, Taghizadeh F, Gwiazda KS, Rawstron EK, Jacob KJ, Johnson JD
**Journal:** Endocrinology (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1210/en.2009-0678](https://doi.org/10.1210/en.2009-0678)
**PMC:** [PMC2817610](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2817610/)

## Abstract

1. Endocrinology. 2010 Feb;151(2):502-12. doi: 10.1210/en.2009-0678. Epub 2010
Jan  7.

Acute insulin signaling in pancreatic beta-cells is mediated by multiple Raf-1 
dependent pathways.

Alejandro EU(1), Kalynyak TB, Taghizadeh F, Gwiazda KS, Rawstron EK, Jacob KJ, 
Johnson JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Physiological Sciences, University of British 
Columbia, 5358 Life Sciences Building, 2350 Health Sciences Mall, Vancouver, 
British Columbia, Canada.

Insulin enhances the proliferation and survival of pancreatic beta-cells, but 
its mechanisms remain unclear. We hypothesized that Raf-1, a kinase upstream of 
both ERK and Bad, might be a critical target of insulin in beta-cells. To test 
this hypothesis, we treated human and mouse islets as well as MIN6 beta-cells 
with multiple insulin concentrations and examined putative downstream targets 
using immunoblotting, immunoprecipitation, quantitative fluorescent imaging, and 
cell death assays. Low doses of insulin rapidly activated Raf-1 by 
dephosphorylating serine 259 and phosphorylating serine 338 in human islets, 
mouse islets, and MIN6 cells. The phosphorylation of ERK by insulin was 
eliminated by exposure to a Raf inhibitor (GW5074) or transfection with a 
dominant-negative Raf-1 mutant. Insulin also enhanced the interaction between 
mitochondrial Raf-1 and Bcl-2 agonist of cell death (Bad), promoting Bad 
inactivation via its phosphorylation on serine 112. Insulin-stimulated ERK 
phosphorylation was abrogated by calcium chelation, calcineurin and 
calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II inhibitors, and Ned-19, a nicotinic acid 
adenine dinucleotide phosphate receptor (NAADPR) antagonist. Blocking Raf-1 and 
Ca(2+) signaling resulted in nonadditive beta-cell death. Autocrine insulin 
signaling partly accounted for the effects of glucose on ERK phosphorylation. 
Our results demonstrate that Raf-1 is a critical target of insulin in primary 
beta-cells. Activation of Raf-1 leads to both an ERK-dependent pathway that 
involves nicotinic acid adenine dinucleotide phosphate-sensitive Ca(2+) stores 
and Ca(2+)-dependent phosphorylation events, and an ERK-independent pathway that 
involves Bad inactivation at the mitochondria. Together our findings identify a 
novel insulin signaling pathway in beta-cells and shed light on insulin's 
antiapoptotic and mitogenic mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1210/en.2009-0678
PMCID: PMC2817610
PMID: 20056832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
