---
pmid: '26311719'
title: MicroRNA-143 Activation Regulates Smooth Muscle and Endothelial Cell Crosstalk
  in Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension.
authors:
- Deng L
- Blanco FJ
- Stevens H
- Lu R
- Caudrillier A
- McBride M
- McClure JD
- Grant J
- Thomas M
- Frid M
- Stenmark K
- White K
- Seto AG
- Morrell NW
- Bradshaw AC
- MacLean MR
- Baker AH
journal: Circ Res
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4620852
doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.306806
---

# MicroRNA-143 Activation Regulates Smooth Muscle and Endothelial Cell Crosstalk in Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension.
**Authors:** Deng L, Blanco FJ, Stevens H, Lu R, Caudrillier A, McBride M, McClure JD, Grant J, Thomas M, Frid M, Stenmark K, White K, Seto AG, Morrell NW, Bradshaw AC, MacLean MR, Baker AH
**Journal:** Circ Res (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.306806](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.306806)
**PMC:** [PMC4620852](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4620852/)

## Abstract

1. Circ Res. 2015 Oct 23;117(10):870-883. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.306806.
Epub  2015 Aug 26.

MicroRNA-143 Activation Regulates Smooth Muscle and Endothelial Cell Crosstalk 
in Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension.

Deng L(#)(1), Blanco FJ(#)(1), Stevens H(1), Lu R(1)(2), Caudrillier A(1), 
McBride M(1), McClure JD(1), Grant J(1), Thomas M(3)(4), Frid M(5), Stenmark 
K(5), White K(1)(6), Seto AG(7), Morrell NW(8), Bradshaw AC(1), MacLean MR(1), 
Baker AH(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cardiovascular and Medical Sciences, University of Glasgow, 
Glasgow, G12 8TA, UK.
(2)King's British Heart Foundation Centre, King's College London, 125 
Coldharbour Lane, London SE59NU, United Kingdom.
(3)Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Horsham UK.
(4)AstraZeneca R&D Mölndal, R&D | Respiratory, Inflammation and Autoimmunity 
(RIA) Innovative Medicines, Building AC461, SE-431 83 Mölndal, Sweden.
(5)Division of Critical Care Medicine/Cardiovascular Pulmonary Research 
Laboratories, Department of Pediatrics and Medicine, University of Colorado 
Denver, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(6)Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Inc.,250 Massachusetts Avenue, 
Cambridge, MA 02139, United States.
(7)MiRagen Therapeutics, Inc, Boulder, CO.
(8)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Medicine, Addenbrooke's 
Hospital, University of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine, Cambridge, CB2 
0QQ, UK.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Circ Res. 2017 Feb 17;120(4):e6. doi: 10.1161/RES.0000000000000136.

RATIONALE: The pathogenesis of pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) remains 
unclear. The 4 microRNAs representing the miR-143 and miR-145 stem loops are 
genomically clustered.
OBJECTIVE: To elucidate the transcriptional regulation of the miR-143/145 
cluster and the role of miR-143 in PAH.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We identified the promoter region that regulates 
miR-143/145 microRNA expression in pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells 
(PASMCs). We mapped PAH-related signaling pathways, including estrogen receptor, 
liver X factor/retinoic X receptor, transforming growth factor-β (Smads), and 
hypoxia (hypoxia response element), that regulated levels of all pri-miR stem 
loop transcription and resulting microRNA expression. We observed that 
miR-143-3p is selectively upregulated compared with miR-143-5p during PASMC 
migration. Modulation of miR-143 in PASMCs significantly altered cell migration 
and apoptosis. In addition, we found high abundance of miR-143-3p in 
PASMC-derived exosomes. Using assays with pulmonary arterial endothelial cells, 
we demonstrated a paracrine promigratory and proangiogenic effect of 
miR-143-3p-enriched exosomes from PASMC. Quantitative polymerase chain reaction 
and in situ hybridization showed elevated expression of miR-143 in calf models 
of PAH and in samples from PAH patients. Moreover, in contrast to our previous 
findings that had not supported a therapeutic role in vivo, we now demonstrate a 
protective role of miR-143 in experimental pulmonary hypertension in vivo in 
miR-143-/- and anti-miR-143-3p-treated mice exposed to chronic hypoxia in both 
preventative and reversal settings.
CONCLUSIONS: MiR-143-3p modulated both cellular and exosome-mediated responses 
in pulmonary vascular cells, whereas inhibition of miR-143-3p blocked 
experimental pulmonary hypertension. Taken together, these findings confirm an 
important role for the miR-143/145 cluster in PAH pathobiology.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.306806
PMCID: PMC4620852
PMID: 26311719 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
