---
pmid: '15080893'
title: BACE (beta-secretase) modulates the processing of APLP2 in vivo.
authors:
- Pastorino L
- Ikin AF
- Lamprianou S
- Vacaresse N
- Revelli JP
- Platt K
- Paganetti P
- Mathews PM
- Harroch S
- Buxbaum JD
journal: Mol Cell Neurosci
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2003.12.013
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# BACE (beta-secretase) modulates the processing of APLP2 in vivo.
**Authors:** Pastorino L, Ikin AF, Lamprianou S, Vacaresse N, Revelli JP, Platt K, Paganetti P, Mathews PM, Harroch S, Buxbaum JD
**Journal:** Mol Cell Neurosci (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mcn.2003.12.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mcn.2003.12.013)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2004 Apr;25(4):642-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2003.12.013.

BACE (beta-secretase) modulates the processing of APLP2 in vivo.

Pastorino L(1), Ikin AF, Lamprianou S, Vacaresse N, Revelli JP, Platt K, 
Paganetti P, Mathews PM, Harroch S, Buxbaum JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029, 
USA.

BACE is an aspartyl protease that cleaves the amyloid precursor protein (APP) at 
the beta-secretase cleavage site and is involved in Alzheimer's disease. The aim 
of our study was to determine whether BACE affects the processing of the APP 
homolog APLP2. To this end, we developed BACE knockout mice with a targeted 
insertion of the gene for beta-galactosidase. BACE appeared to be exclusively 
expressed in neurons as determined by differential staining. BACE was expressed 
in specific areas in the cortex, hippocampus, cerebellum, pons, and spinal cord. 
APP processing was altered in the BACE knockouts with Abeta levels decreasing. 
The levels of APLP2 proteolytic products were decreased in BACE KO mice, but 
increased in BACE transgenic mice. Overexpression of BACE in cultured cells led 
to increased APLP2 processing. Our results strongly suggest that BACE is a 
neuronal protein that modulates the processing of both APP and APLP2.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mcn.2003.12.013
PMID: 15080893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
