---
pmid: '8707851'
title: Pantophysin is a ubiquitously expressed synaptophysin homologue and defines
  constitutive transport vesicles.
authors:
- Haass NK
- Kartenbeck MA
- Leube RE
journal: J Cell Biol
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: xml_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC2120938
doi: 10.1083/jcb.134.3.731
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Pantophysin is a ubiquitously expressed synaptophysin homologue and defines constitutive transport vesicles.
**Authors:** Haass NK, Kartenbeck MA, Leube RE
**Journal:** J Cell Biol (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1083/jcb.134.3.731](https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.134.3.731)
**PMC:** [PMC2120938](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2120938/)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Biol. 1996 Aug;134(3):731-46. doi: 10.1083/jcb.134.3.731.

Pantophysin is a ubiquitously expressed synaptophysin homologue and defines 
constitutive transport vesicles.

Haass NK(1), Kartenbeck MA, Leube RE.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cell Biology, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Federal 
Republic of Germany.

Certain properties of the highly specialized synaptic transmitter vesicles are 
shared by constitutively occurring vesicles. We and others have thus identified 
a cDNA in various nonneuroendocrine cell types of rat and human that is related 
to synaptophysin, one of the major synaptic vesicle membrane proteins, which we 
termed pantophysin. Here we characterize the gene structure, mRNA and protein 
expression, and intracellular distribution of pantophysin. Its mRNA is detected 
in murine cell types of nonneuroendocrine as well as of neuroendocrine origin. 
The intron/exon structure of the murine pantophysin gene is identical to that of 
synaptophysin except for the last intron that is absent in pantophysin. The 
encoded polypeptide of calculated mol wt 28,926 shares many sequence features 
with synaptophysin, most notably the four hydrophobic putative transmembrane 
domains, although the cytoplasmic end domains are completely different. Using 
antibodies against the unique carboxy terminus pantophysin can be detected by 
immunofluorescence microscopy in both exocrine and endocrine cells of human 
pancreas, and in cultured cells, colocalizing with constitutive secretory and 
endocytotic vesicle markers in nonneuroendocrine cells and with synaptophysin in 
cDNA-transfected epithelial cells. By immunoelectron microscopy, the majority of 
pantophysin reactivity is detected at vesicles with a diameter of < 100 nm that 
have a smooth surface and an electron-translucent interior. Using cell 
fractionation in combination with immunoisolation, these vesicles are enriched 
in a light fraction and shown to contain the cellular vSNARE cellubrevin and the 
ubiquitous SCAMPs in epithelial cells and synaptophysin in neuroendocrine or 
cDNA-transfected nonneuroendocrine cells and neuroendocrine tissues. Pantophysin 
is therefore a broadly distributed marker of small cytoplasmic transport 
vesicles independent of their content.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.134.3.731
PMCID: PMC2120938
PMID: 8707851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Certain properties of the highly specialized synaptic transmitter vesicles are shared by constitutively occurring vesicles. We and others have thus identified a cDNA in various nonneuroendocrine cell types of rat and human that is related to synaptophysin, one of the major synaptic vesicle membrane proteins, which we termed pantophysin. Here we characterize the gene structure, mRNA and protein expression, and intracellular distribution of pantophysin. Its mRNA is detected in murine cell types of nonneuroendocrine as well as of neuroendocrine origin. The intron/exon structure of the murine pantophysin gene is identical to that of synaptophysin except for the last intron that is absent in pantophysin. The encoded polypeptide of calculated mol wt 28,926 shares many sequence features with synaptophysin, most notably the four hydrophobic putative transmembrane domains, although the cytoplasmic end domains are completely different. Using antibodies against the unique carboxy terminus pantophysin can be detected by immunofluorescence microscopy in both exocrine and endocrine cells of human pancreas, and in cultured cells, colocalizing with constitutive secretory and endocytotic vesicle markers in nonneuroendocrine cells and with synaptophysin in cDNA-transfected epithelial cells. By immunoelectron microscopy, the majority of pantophysin reactivity is detected at vesicles with a diameter of < 100 nm that have a smooth surface and an electron-translucent interior. Using cell fractionation in combination with immunoisolation, these vesicles are enriched in a light fraction and shown to contain the cellular vSNARE cellubrevin and the ubiquitous SCAMPs in epithelial cells and synaptophysin in neuroendocrine or cDNA-transfected nonneuroendocrine cells and neuroendocrine tissues. Pantophysin is therefore a broadly distributed marker of small cytoplasmic transport vesicles independent of their content.
