---
pmid: '9668136'
title: Genetic analysis of salt tolerance in arabidopsis. Evidence for a critical
  role of potassium nutrition.
authors:
- Zhu JK
- Liu J
- Xiong L
journal: Plant Cell
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC144057
doi: 10.1105/tpc.10.7.1181
---

# Genetic analysis of salt tolerance in arabidopsis. Evidence for a critical role of potassium nutrition.
**Authors:** Zhu JK, Liu J, Xiong L
**Journal:** Plant Cell (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1105/tpc.10.7.1181](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.10.7.1181)
**PMC:** [PMC144057](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC144057/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell. 1998 Jul;10(7):1181-91. doi: 10.1105/tpc.10.7.1181.

Genetic analysis of salt tolerance in arabidopsis. Evidence for a critical role 
of potassium nutrition.

Zhu JK(1), Liu J, Xiong L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Sciences, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona 85721, 
USA. jkzhu@ag.arizona.edu

A large genetic screen for sos (for salt overly sensitive) mutants was performed 
in an attempt to isolate mutations in any gene with an sos phenotype. Our search 
yielded 28 new alleles of sos1, nine mutant alleles of a newly identified locus, 
SOS2, and one allele of a third salt tolerance locus, SOS3. The sos2 mutations, 
which are recessive, were mapped to the lower arm of chromosome V, approximately 
2.3 centimorgans away from the marker PHYC. Growth measurements demonstrated 
that sos2 mutants are specifically hypersensitive to inhibition by Na+ or Li+ 
and not hypersensitive to general osmotic stresses. Interestingly, the SOS2 
locus is also necessary for K+ nutrition because sos2 mutants were unable to 
grow on a culture medium with a low level of K+. The expression of several 
salt-inducible genes was superinduced in sos2 plants. The salt tolerance of 
sos1, sos2, and sos3 mutants correlated with their K+ tissue content but not 
their Na+ tissue content. Double mutant analysis indicated that the SOS genes 
function in the same pathway. Based on these results, a genetic model for salt 
tolerance mechanisms in Arabidopsis is presented in which SOS1, SOS2, and SOS3 
are postulated to encode regulatory components controlling plant K+ nutrition 
that in turn is essential for salt tolerance.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.10.7.1181
PMCID: PMC144057
PMID: 9668136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

A large genetic screen for sos (for salt overly sensitive) mutants was performed in an attempt to isolate mutations in any gene with an sos phenotype. Our search yielded 28 new alleles of sos1, nine mutant alleles of a newly identified locus, SOS2, and one allele of a third salt tolerance locus, SOS3. The sos2 mutations, which are recessive, were mapped to the lower arm of chromosome V, approximately 2.3 centimorgans away from the marker PHYC. Growth measurements demonstrated that sos2 mutants are specifically hypersensitive to inhibition by Na+ or Li+ and not hypersensitive to general osmotic stresses. Interestingly, the SOS2 locus is also necessary for K+ nutrition because sos2 mutants were unable to grow on a culture medium with a low level of K+. The expression of several salt-inducible genes was superinduced in sos2 plants. The salt tolerance of sos1, sos2, and sos3 mutants correlated with their K+ tissue content but not their Na+ tissue content. Double mutant analysis indicated that the SOS genes function in the same pathway. Based on these results, a genetic model for salt tolerance mechanisms in Arabidopsis is presented in which SOS1, SOS2, and SOS3 are postulated to encode regulatory components controlling plant K+ nutrition that in turn is essential for salt tolerance.
