---
pmid: '9691085'
title: Disruption of the dopamine D3 receptor gene produces renin-dependent hypertension.
authors:
- Asico LD
- Ladines C
- Fuchs S
- Accili D
- Carey RM
- Semeraro C
- Pocchiari F
- Felder RA
- Eisner GM
- Jose PA
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC508909
doi: 10.1172/JCI3685
---

# Disruption of the dopamine D3 receptor gene produces renin-dependent hypertension.
**Authors:** Asico LD, Ladines C, Fuchs S, Accili D, Carey RM, Semeraro C, Pocchiari F, Felder RA, Eisner GM, Jose PA
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI3685](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI3685)
**PMC:** [PMC508909](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC508909/)

## Abstract

1. J Clin Invest. 1998 Aug 1;102(3):493-8. doi: 10.1172/JCI3685.

Disruption of the dopamine D3 receptor gene produces renin-dependent 
hypertension.

Asico LD(1), Ladines C, Fuchs S, Accili D, Carey RM, Semeraro C, Pocchiari F, 
Felder RA, Eisner GM, Jose PA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, 
D.C. 20007, USA.

Since dopamine receptors are important in the regulation of renal and 
cardiovascular function, we studied the cardiovascular consequences of the 
disruption of the D3 receptor, a member of the family of D2-like receptors, 
expressed in renal proximal tubules and juxtaglomerular cells. Systolic and 
diastolic blood pressures were higher (approximately 20 mmHg) in heterozygous 
and homozygous than in wild-type mice. An acute saline load increased urine flow 
rate and sodium excretion to a similar extent in wild-type and heterozygous mice 
but the increase was attenuated in homozygous mice. Renal renin activity was 
much greater in homozygous than in wild-type mice; values for heterozygous mice 
were intermediate. Blockade of angiotensin II subtype-1 receptors decreased 
systolic blood pressure for a longer duration in mutant than in wild-type mice. 
Thus, disruption of the D3 receptor increases renal renin production and 
produces renal sodium retention and renin-dependent hypertension.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI3685
PMCID: PMC508909
PMID: 9691085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
