---
pmid: '11854404'
title: Activation of p42 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), but not c-Jun NH(2)-terminal
  kinase, induces phosphorylation and stabilization of MAPK phosphatase XCL100 in
  Xenopus oocytes.
authors:
- Sohaskey ML
- Ferrell JE Jr
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC65641
doi: 10.1091/mbc.01-11-0553
---

# Activation of p42 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), but not c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase, induces phosphorylation and stabilization of MAPK phosphatase XCL100 in Xenopus oocytes.
**Authors:** Sohaskey ML, Ferrell JE Jr
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.01-11-0553](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.01-11-0553)
**PMC:** [PMC65641](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC65641/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Cell. 2002 Feb;13(2):454-68. doi: 10.1091/mbc.01-11-0553.

Activation of p42 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), but not c-Jun 
NH(2)-terminal kinase, induces phosphorylation and stabilization of MAPK 
phosphatase XCL100 in Xenopus oocytes.

Sohaskey ML(1), Ferrell JE Jr.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Program in Cancer Biology, Stanford 
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305-5174, USA. 
sohaskey@socrates.berkeley.edu

Dual-specificity protein phosphatases are implicated in the direct 
down-regulation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) activity in vivo. 
Accumulating evidence suggests that these phosphatases are components of 
negative feedback loops that restore MAPK activity to low levels after diverse 
physiological responses. Limited information exists, however, regarding their 
posttranscriptional regulation. We cloned two Xenopus homologs of the mammalian 
dual-specificity MAPK phosphatases MKP-1/CL100 and found that overexpression of 
XCL100 in G2-arrested oocytes delayed or prevented progesterone-induced meiotic 
maturation. Epitope-tagged XCL100 was phosphorylated on serine during G2 phase, 
and on serine and threonine in a p42 MAPK-dependent manner during M phase. 
Threonine phosphorylation mapped to a single residue, threonine 168. 
Phosphorylation of XCL100 had no measurable effect on its ability to 
dephosphorylate p42 MAPK. Similarly, mutation of threonine 168 to either valine 
or glutamate did not significantly alter the binding affinity of a catalytically 
inactive XCL100 protein for active p42 MAPK in vivo. XCL100 was a labile protein 
in G2-arrested and progesterone-stimulated oocytes; surprisingly, its 
degradation rate was increased more than twofold after exposure to hyperosmolar 
sorbitol. In sorbitol-treated oocytes expressing a conditionally active 
DeltaRaf-DD:ER chimera, activation of the p42 MAPK cascade led to 
phosphorylation of XCL100 and a pronounced decrease in the rate of its 
degradation. Our results provide mechanistic insight into the regulation of a 
dual-specificity MAPK phosphatase during meiotic maturation and the adaptation 
to cellular stress.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.01-11-0553
PMCID: PMC65641
PMID: 11854404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
