---
pmid: '15989956'
title: ARF-BP1/Mule is a critical mediator of the ARF tumor suppressor.
authors:
- Chen D
- Kon N
- Li M
- Zhang W
- Qin J
- Gu W
journal: Cell
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.03.037
---

# ARF-BP1/Mule is a critical mediator of the ARF tumor suppressor.
**Authors:** Chen D, Kon N, Li M, Zhang W, Qin J, Gu W
**Journal:** Cell (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2005.03.037](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2005.03.037)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2005 Jul 1;121(7):1071-83. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.03.037.

ARF-BP1/Mule is a critical mediator of the ARF tumor suppressor.

Chen D(1), Kon N, Li M, Zhang W, Qin J, Gu W.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Department of Pathology, College of Physicians 
and Surgeons, Columbia University, 1150 St. Nicholas Avenue, New York, New York 
10032.

Comment in
    Cell. 2005 Jul 1;121(7):963-5. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.06.018.

Although the importance of the ARF tumor suppressor in p53 regulation is well 
established, numerous studies indicate that ARF also suppresses cell growth in a 
p53/Mdm2-independent manner. To understand the mechanism of ARF-mediated tumor 
suppression, we identified a ubiquitin ligase, ARF-BP1, as a key factor 
associated with ARF in vivo. ARF-BP1 harbors a signature HECT motif, and its 
ubiquitin ligase activity is inhibited by ARF. Notably, inactivation of ARF-BP1, 
but not Mdm2, suppresses the growth of p53 null cells in a manner reminiscent of 
ARF induction. Surprisingly, in p53 wild-type cells, ARF-BP1 directly binds and 
ubiquitinates p53, and inactivation of endogenous ARF-BP1 is crucial for 
ARF-mediated p53 stabilization. Thus, our study modifies the current view of 
ARF-mediated p53 activation and reveals that ARF-BP1 is a critical mediator of 
both the p53-independent and p53-dependent tumor suppressor functions of ARF. As 
such, ARF-BP1 may serve as a potential target for therapeutic intervention in 
tumors regardless of p53 status.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.03.037
PMID: 15989956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
