---
pmid: '10198222'
title: Effects of missense mutations and deletions on membrane anchoring and enzyme
  function of human steroid 21-hydroxylase (P450c21).
authors:
- Lajic S
- Nikoshkov A
- Holst M
- Wedell A
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/bbrc.1999.0482
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Effects of missense mutations and deletions on membrane anchoring and enzyme function of human steroid 21-hydroxylase (P450c21).
**Authors:** Lajic S, Nikoshkov A, Holst M, Wedell A
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1006/bbrc.1999.0482](https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.1999.0482)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Apr 13;257(2):384-90. doi: 
10.1006/bbrc.1999.0482.

Effects of missense mutations and deletions on membrane anchoring and enzyme 
function of human steroid 21-hydroxylase (P450c21).

Lajic S(1), Nikoshkov A, Holst M, Wedell A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Hospital, Stockholm, 171 76, 
Sweden. Svetlana.Lajic@cmm.di.se

We studied membrane binding and enzyme function of six variant forms of human 
steroid 21-hydroxylase (P450c21), a mutant (P30Q) from a patient with congenital 
adrenal hyperplasia, four artificial deletions in the amino terminal region 
(delS1 and del S2; the first and second hydrophobic segment, delS3; the region 
in between, delS4; the combination of these), and one naturally ocurring 
polymorphism in a region implicated to be critical for membrane integration 
(delL10). Enzyme function was assayed after transient expression in COS-1 cells, 
and membrane binding was studied by coupled in vitro transcription-translation 
in the presence of microsomal membranes. P450c21(delS1) retained some enzyme 
activity but showed severely reduced membrane binding. P450c21(P30Q), P450c21 
(delS2), P450c21(delS3), and P450c21(delS4) had abolished enzyme function. 
P450c21(P30Q) and P450c21 (delS2) did not affect membrane binding, P450c21 
(delS3) had slightly reduced binding with a qualitative difference suggested by 
the absence of a glycosylated form of the protein, and P450c21(delS4) had 
abolished membrane integration. No significant differences could be identified 
for the delL10 variant. These data support that P450c21 spans the membrane 
through its first hydrophobic domain only, and that the protein lacking this 
segment retains sufficiently normal structure to enable catalysis. They also 
confirm that P30Q is responsible for the severe phenotype of the patient in 
which it was found, and indicate that the common delL10 polymorphism does not 
have a major effect on enzyme function.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.1999.0482
PMID: 10198222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
