---
pmid: '9614966'
title: The structure and function of Escherichia coli penicillin-binding protein 3.
authors:
- Nguyen-Distèche M
- Fraipont C
- Buddelmeijer N
- Nanninga N
journal: Cell Mol Life Sci
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC11147360
doi: 10.1007/s000180050157
---

# The structure and function of Escherichia coli penicillin-binding protein 3.
**Authors:** Nguyen-Distèche M, Fraipont C, Buddelmeijer N, Nanninga N
**Journal:** Cell Mol Life Sci (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s000180050157](https://doi.org/10.1007/s000180050157)
**PMC:** [PMC11147360](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11147360/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 1998 Apr;54(4):309-16. doi: 10.1007/s000180050157.

The structure and function of Escherichia coli penicillin-binding protein 3.

Nguyen-Distèche M(1), Fraipont C, Buddelmeijer N, Nanninga N.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Protein Engineering, Université de Liège, Sart Tilman, Belgium. 
mng.disteche@ulg.ac.be

Escherichia coli penicillin-binding protein PBP3 is a key element in cell 
septation. It is presumed to catalyse a transpeptidation reaction during 
biosynthesis of the septum peptidoglycan but, in vitro, its enzymatic activity 
has only been demonstrated with thiolester analogues of the natural peptide 
substrate. It has no detectable transglycosylase activity with lipid II as 
substrate. This tripartite protein is constructed of an N-terminal membrane 
anchor-containing module that is essential for cell septation, a 
non-penicillin-binding (n-PB) module of unknown function and a C-terminal 
penicillin-binding (PB) module exhibiting all the characteristic motifs of 
penicilloyl serine transferases. The n-PB module, which is required for the 
folding and stability of the PB module, may provide recognition sites for other 
cell division proteins. Initiation of septum formation is not PBP3-dependent but 
rests on the appearance of the FtsZ ring, and is thus penicillin-insensitive. 
The control of PBP3 activity during the cell cycle is briefly discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/s000180050157
PMCID: PMC11147360
PMID: 9614966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
