---
pmid: '19854831'
title: Translocation of sphingosine kinase 1 to the plasma membrane is mediated by
  calcium- and integrin-binding protein 1.
authors:
- Jarman KE
- Moretti PA
- Zebol JR
- Pitson SM
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2804196
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.068395
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Translocation of sphingosine kinase 1 to the plasma membrane is mediated by calcium- and integrin-binding protein 1.
**Authors:** Jarman KE, Moretti PA, Zebol JR, Pitson SM
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M109.068395](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.068395)
**PMC:** [PMC2804196](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2804196/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jan 1;285(1):483-92. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.068395. Epub 2009
 Oct 23.

Translocation of sphingosine kinase 1 to the plasma membrane is mediated by 
calcium- and integrin-binding protein 1.

Jarman KE(1), Moretti PA, Zebol JR, Pitson SM.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Cancer Biology, SA Pathology, Frome Road, Adelaide, South 
Australia, Australia.

SK1 (sphingosine kinase 1) plays an important role in many aspects of cellular 
regulation. Most notably, elevated cellular SK1 activity leads to increased cell 
proliferation, protection from apoptosis, and induction of neoplastic 
transformation. We have previously shown that translocation of SK1 from the 
cytoplasm to the plasma membrane is integral for oncogenesis mediated by this 
enzyme. The molecular mechanism mediating this translocation of SK1 has remained 
undefined. Here, we demonstrate a direct role for CIB1 (calcium and 
integrin-binding protein 1) in this process. We show that CIB1 interacts with 
SK1 in a Ca(2+)-dependent manner at the previously identified 
"calmodulin-binding site" of SK1. We also demonstrate that CIB1 functions as a 
Ca(2+)-myristoyl switch, providing a mechanism whereby it translocates SK1 to 
the plasma membrane. Both small interfering RNA knockdown of CIB1 and the use of 
a dominant-negative CIB1 we have generated prevent the agonist-dependent 
translocation of SK1. Furthermore, we demonstrate the requirement of 
CIB1-mediated translocation of SK1 in controlling cellular sphingosine 
1-phosphate generation and associated anti-apoptotic signaling.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.068395
PMCID: PMC2804196
PMID: 19854831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
