---
pmid: '15753091'
title: GRIM-19 interacts with nucleotide oligomerization domain 2 and serves as downstream
  effector of anti-bacterial function in intestinal epithelial cells.
authors:
- Barnich N
- Hisamatsu T
- Aguirre JE
- Xavier R
- Reinecker HC
- Podolsky DK
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M413776200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# GRIM-19 interacts with nucleotide oligomerization domain 2 and serves as downstream effector of anti-bacterial function in intestinal epithelial cells.
**Authors:** Barnich N, Hisamatsu T, Aguirre JE, Xavier R, Reinecker HC, Podolsky DK
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M413776200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M413776200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 13;280(19):19021-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M413776200. Epub
2005  Mar 7.

GRIM-19 interacts with nucleotide oligomerization domain 2 and serves as 
downstream effector of anti-bacterial function in intestinal epithelial cells.

Barnich N(1), Hisamatsu T, Aguirre JE, Xavier R, Reinecker HC, Podolsky DK.

Author information:
(1)Gastrointestinal Unit, Department of Medicine, Center for the Study of 
Inflammatory Bowel Disease, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.

Comment in
    Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2008 Mar;14(3):434-5. doi: 10.1002/ibd.20313.

Nucleotide oligomerization domain 2 (NOD2) functions as a mammalian cytosolic 
pathogen recognition molecule, and variants have been associated with risk for 
Crohn disease. We recently demonstrated that NOD2 functions as an anti-bacterial 
factor limiting survival of intracellular invasive bacteria. To gain further 
insight into the mechanism of NOD2 activation and signal transduction, we 
performed yeast two-hybrid screening. We demonstrate that GRIM-19, a protein 
with homology to the NADPH dehydrogenase complex, interacts with endogenous NOD2 
in HT29 cells. GRIM-19 is required for NF-kappaB activation following 
NOD2-mediated recognition of bacterial muramyl dipeptide. GRIM-19 also controls 
pathogen invasion of intestinal epithelial cells. GRIM-19 expression is 
decreased in inflamed mucosa of patients with inflammatory bowel diseases. 
GRIM-19 may be a key component in NOD2-mediated innate mucosal responses and 
serve to regulate intestinal epithelial cell responses to microbes.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M413776200
PMID: 15753091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
