---
pmid: '16567426'
title: Saccharomyces cerevisiae Rot1p is an ER-localized membrane protein that may
  function with BiP/Kar2p in protein folding.
authors:
- Takeuchi M
- Kimata Y
- Hirata A
- Oka M
- Kohno K
journal: J Biochem
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/jb/mvj063
---

# Saccharomyces cerevisiae Rot1p is an ER-localized membrane protein that may function with BiP/Kar2p in protein folding.
**Authors:** Takeuchi M, Kimata Y, Hirata A, Oka M, Kohno K
**Journal:** J Biochem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jb/mvj063](https://doi.org/10.1093/jb/mvj063)

## Abstract

1. J Biochem. 2006 Mar;139(3):597-605. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvj063.

Saccharomyces cerevisiae Rot1p is an ER-localized membrane protein that may 
function with BiP/Kar2p in protein folding.

Takeuchi M(1), Kimata Y, Hirata A, Oka M, Kohno K.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and 
Technology (NAIST), 8916-5 Takayama, Ikoma, Nara 630-0192.

The 70-kDa heat shock protein (Hsp70) family of molecular chaperones cooperates 
with cofactors to promote protein folding, assembly of protein complexes and 
translocation of proteins across membranes. Although many cofactors of cytosolic 
Hsp70s have been identified, knowledge about cofactors of BiP/Kar2p, an 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-resident Hsp70, is still poor. Here we propose the 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae protein Rot1p as a possible cofactor of BiP/Kar2p 
involved in protein folding. Rot1p was found to be an essential, ER-localized 
membrane protein facing the lumen. ROT1 genetically interacted with several ER 
chaperone genes including KAR2, and the rot1-2 mutation triggered the unfolded 
protein response. Rot1p associated with Kar2p, especially under conditions of ER 
stress, and maturation of a model protein, a reduced form of carboxypeptidaseY, 
was impaired in a kar2-1 rot1-2 double mutant. These findings suggest that Rot1p 
participates in protein folding with Kar2p. Morphological analysis of rot1-2 
cells revealed cell wall defects and accumulation of autophagic bodies in the 
vacuole. This implies that the protein folding machinery in which Rot1p is 
involved chaperones proteins acting in various physiological processes including 
cell wall synthesis and lysis of autophagic bodies.

DOI: 10.1093/jb/mvj063
PMID: 16567426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
