---
pmid: '16044149'
title: Activation of the protein kinase B pathway by the HPV-16 E7 oncoprotein occurs
  through a mechanism involving interaction with PP2A.
authors:
- Pim D
- Massimi P
- Dilworth SM
- Banks L
journal: Oncogene
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1208935
---

# Activation of the protein kinase B pathway by the HPV-16 E7 oncoprotein occurs through a mechanism involving interaction with PP2A.
**Authors:** Pim D, Massimi P, Dilworth SM, Banks L
**Journal:** Oncogene (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1208935](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1208935)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2005 Nov 24;24(53):7830-8. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1208935.

Activation of the protein kinase B pathway by the HPV-16 E7 oncoprotein occurs 
through a mechanism involving interaction with PP2A.

Pim D(1), Massimi P, Dilworth SM, Banks L.

Author information:
(1)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Area Science 
Park, Padriciano-99, 34012 Trieste, Italy. pim@icgeb.org

Protein kinase B (PKB) or Akt is one of several second messenger kinases that 
are activated by cell attachment and growth factor signaling, and that transmit 
signals to the cell nucleus to inhibit apoptosis and thereby increase cell 
survival during proliferation. Other viral proteins target this pathway by 
increasing PKB/Akt phosphorylation, and this pathway has been implicated in the 
transformation of human keratinocytes by HPV E6 and E7, together with activated 
notch 1. Here, we examine how HPV E7 expression affects the phosphorylation of 
PKB. We show that HPV-16 E7 increases the level of phosphorylation of PKB in 
response to serum stimulation, by a mechanism independent of downregulation of 
PTEN phosphatase, a known inhibitor of the PI3K (PI3 kinase) pathway. The use of 
specific antibodies shows that some proportion of PKB/Akt that is phosphorylated 
both on threonine 308 and serine 473 is maintained in the presence of E7 in a 
PI3 kinase-independent manner, and is activated for phosphorylation of BAD, a 
known downstream target of PKB/Akt. Use of E7 mutants has ruled out both an 
inhibition of IGFBP-3, a known E7 target and PKB/Akt modulator, and the 
interaction of E7 with cellular pocket proteins, as being the mechanism for the 
PKB/Akt stimulation. PKB binds PP2A and is a known substrate of PP2A. Here, we 
show that HPV E7 also binds to both the 35 kDa catalytic and 65 kDa structural 
subunits of PP2A, an interaction that sequesters these subunits and inhibits 
their interaction with PKB, thereby maintaining PKB/Akt signaling by inhibiting 
its dephosphorylation.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1208935
PMID: 16044149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
