---
pmid: '20551902'
title: CIN85 regulates dopamine receptor endocytosis and governs behaviour in mice.
authors:
- Shimokawa N
- Haglund K
- Hölter SM
- Grabbe C
- Kirkin V
- Koibuchi N
- Schultz C
- Rozman J
- Hoeller D
- Qiu CH
- Londoño MB
- Ikezawa J
- Jedlicka P
- Stein B
- Schwarzacher SW
- Wolfer DP
- Ehrhardt N
- Heuchel R
- Nezis I
- Brech A
- Schmidt MHH
- Fuchs H
- Gailus-Durner V
- Klingenspor M
- Bogler O
- Wurst W
- Deller T
- de Angelis MH
- Dikic I
journal: EMBO J
year: '2010'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2910270
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.120
---

# CIN85 regulates dopamine receptor endocytosis and governs behaviour in mice.
**Authors:** Shimokawa N, Haglund K, Hölter SM, Grabbe C, Kirkin V, Koibuchi N, Schultz C, Rozman J, Hoeller D, Qiu CH, Londoño MB, Ikezawa J, Jedlicka P, Stein B, Schwarzacher SW, Wolfer DP, Ehrhardt N, Heuchel R, Nezis I, Brech A, Schmidt MHH, Fuchs H, Gailus-Durner V, Klingenspor M, Bogler O, Wurst W, Deller T, de Angelis MH, Dikic I
**Journal:** EMBO J (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2010.120](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2010.120)
**PMC:** [PMC2910270](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2910270/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2010 Jul 21;29(14):2421-32. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.120. Epub 2010 Jun
 15.

CIN85 regulates dopamine receptor endocytosis and governs behaviour in mice.

Shimokawa N(1), Haglund K, Hölter SM, Grabbe C, Kirkin V, Koibuchi N, Schultz C, 
Rozman J, Hoeller D, Qiu CH, Londoño MB, Ikezawa J, Jedlicka P, Stein B, 
Schwarzacher SW, Wolfer DP, Ehrhardt N, Heuchel R, Nezis I, Brech A, Schmidt 
MHH, Fuchs H, Gailus-Durner V, Klingenspor M, Bogler O, Wurst W, Deller T, de 
Angelis MH, Dikic I.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biochemistry II and Cluster of Excellence Macromolecular 
Complexes, Goethe University, Frankfurt (Main), Germany.

Despite extensive investigations of Cbl-interacting protein of 85 kDa (CIN85) in 
receptor trafficking and cytoskeletal dynamics, little is known about its 
functions in vivo. Here, we report the study of a mouse deficient of the two 
CIN85 isoforms expressed in the central nervous system, exposing a function of 
CIN85 in dopamine receptor endocytosis. Mice lacking CIN85 exon 2 
(CIN85(Deltaex2)) show hyperactivity phenotypes, characterized by increased 
physical activity and exploratory behaviour. Interestingly, CIN85(Deltaex2) 
animals display abnormally high levels of dopamine and D2 dopamine receptors 
(D2DRs) in the striatum, an important centre for the coordination of animal 
behaviour. Importantly, CIN85 localizes to the post-synaptic compartment of 
striatal neurons in which it co-clusters with D2DRs. Moreover, it interacts with 
endocytic regulators such as dynamin and endophilins in the striatum. Absence of 
striatal CIN85 causes insufficient complex formation of endophilins with D2DRs 
in the striatum and ultimately decreased D2DR endocytosis in striatal neurons in 
response to dopamine stimulation. These findings indicate an important function 
of CIN85 in the regulation of dopamine receptor functions and provide a 
molecular explanation for the hyperactive behaviour of CIN85(Deltaex2) mice.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2010.120
PMCID: PMC2910270
PMID: 20551902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Despite extensive investigations of Cbl-interacting protein of 85 kDa (CIN85) in receptor trafficking and cytoskeletal dynamics, little is known about its functions in vivo . Here, we report the study of a mouse deficient of the two CIN85 isoforms expressed in the central nervous system, exposing a function of CIN85 in dopamine receptor endocytosis. Mice lacking CIN85 exon 2 (CIN85 Δex2 ) show hyperactivity phenotypes, characterized by increased physical activity and exploratory behaviour. Interestingly, CIN85 Δex2 animals display abnormally high levels of dopamine and D2 dopamine receptors (D2DRs) in the striatum, an important centre for the coordination of animal behaviour. Importantly, CIN85 localizes to the post-synaptic compartment of striatal neurons in which it co-clusters with D2DRs. Moreover, it interacts with endocytic regulators such as dynamin and endophilins in the striatum. Absence of striatal CIN85 causes insufficient complex formation of endophilins with D2DRs in the striatum and ultimately decreased D2DR endocytosis in striatal neurons in response to dopamine stimulation. These findings indicate an important function of CIN85 in the regulation of dopamine receptor functions and provide a molecular explanation for the hyperactive behaviour of CIN85 Δex2 mice.

Introduction

Cbl-interacting protein of 85 kDa (CIN85)/SH3-domain kinase binding protein 1 (SH3KBP1) forms, together with CMS (p130Cas ligand with multiple SH3 domains)/CD2-associated protein (CD2AP), a family of adaptor molecules with established functions in coordinating the spatial and temporal assembly of protein complexes during receptor endocytosis, formation of kidney glomeruli and organization of the immunological synapse in T cells ( Dikic, 2002 ). Common to both CIN85/SH3KBP1 (alias CIN85) and CMS/CD2AP is a core structural organization comprising three N-terminal SH3 domains, followed by a centrally located proline-rich region and a C-terminal coiled coil ( Dikic, 2002 ). In addition, in a functional perspective, both family members share certain characteristics, given that their SH3 domains specifically recognize a consensus Px(P/A)xxR motif, present in Cbl ( Petrelli et al, 2002 ; Soubeyran et al, 2002 ; Kurakin et al, 2003 ; Kobayashi et al, 2004 ; Jozic et al, 2005 ; Moncalian et al, 2006 ) and other proteins involved in endocytosis, including synaptojanin, Huntingtin-interacting protein 1-related, Alix and Dab2 ( Chen et al, 2000 ; Kowanetz et al, 2004 ), as well as regulators of the actin cytoskeleton, such as cortactin and the actin-capping protein CAPZ ( Kirsch et al, 2001 ; Welsch et al, 2001 ; Cormont et al, 2003 ; Hutchings et al, 2003 ; Lynch et al, 2003 ). Indeed, a function of CIN85 and CMS/CD2AP in the regulation of actin dynamics is emphasized by their ability to directly interact with F-actin and induce bundling of actin filaments ( Gaidos et al, 2007 ). The multitude of verified interaction partners has placed CIN85 as a central adaptor molecule involved in the recruitment of the endocytic machinery required for the internalization of a variety of cell surface receptors, including growth factor receptors (such as EGFR, Met and VEGFR) ( Petrelli et al, 2002 ; Soubeyran et al, 2002 ; Kobayashi et al, 2004 ), immunoglobulin IgE receptors in mast cells ( Molfetta et al, 2005 ), as well as during the infectious internalization of the bacterial pathogen Listeria monocytogenes ( Veiga and Cossart, 2005 ).

Despite sharing many overlapping molecular functions in cultured cells, investigations in mice deficient of CD2AP have highlighted that CIN85 and CD2AP may have distinct functions in vivo . In agreement with its abundance in the kidney, mice lacking CD2AP suffer from a nephrotic syndrome caused by defective podocyte functionality during the formation of the glomerular slit diaphragm, eventually resulting in lethality at 6–8 weeks of age ( Shih et al, 1999 ). An important function for CD2AP in spermatocyte production has furthermore been established, given that podocyte-specific reintroduction of transgenic CD2AP in knockout mice is sufficient to rescue animals into adulthood, but renders male mice infertile ( Grunkemeyer et al, 2005 ). Interestingly, the podocyte and the cells of the basal seminiferous tubule are both cell types in which CIN85 is poorly expressed.

As a result of alternative splicing and differential promoter usage, the mouse CIN85 genomic locus gives rise to multiple isoforms, including CIN85-xl, CIN85-l (CIN85), CIN85-ΔA, CIN85-m, CIN85-s, CIN85-t and CIN85-h ( Supplementary Figure S1 ) ( Buchman et al, 2002 ; Finniss et al, 2004 ). The different isoforms display specific patterns of expression, among which CIN85-xl and CIN85-l are most abundant in brain and CIN85-l and CIN85-ΔA in thymus and spleen (Figure 2D; Supplementary Figure S1 ; Buchman et al, 2002 ). Lower levels of various isoforms can also be detected in kidney, muscle, skin, heart, lung and testis ( Buchman et al, 2002 and unpublished observations). CD2AP is on the other hand predominantly expressed in spleen, thymus, heart, kidney, lung, muscle and liver, but seems to be lacking in neuronal cells ( Dustin et al, 1998 ; Shih et al, 1999 ; Li et al, 2000 ).

In this study, we report a novel function of CIN85 in the regulation of post-synaptic dopamine receptor endocytosis in striatal neurons. In wild-type mice, CIN85 resides post-synaptically and associates with endocytic regulators, such as dynamin and endophilins. In mouse striatal neurons, absence of brain-specific CIN85 expression results in inefficient complex formation between dopamine receptors and endophilins, as well as reduced internalization of stimulated dopamine receptors. Mice deficient of brain-specific CIN85 expression show hyperactive phenotypes, which in many ways resemble the behavioural aberrations displayed in human beings affected by attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), a disorder strongly associated with abnormal dopamine signalling.
