---
pmid: '26152465'
title: Proteomic profiling of the extracellular matrix (slime sheath) of Dictyostelium
  discoideum.
authors:
- Huber RJ
- O'Day DH
journal: Proteomics
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/pmic.201500143
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Proteomic profiling of the extracellular matrix (slime sheath) of Dictyostelium discoideum.
**Authors:** Huber RJ, O'Day DH
**Journal:** Proteomics (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pmic.201500143](https://doi.org/10.1002/pmic.201500143)

## Abstract

1. Proteomics. 2015 Oct;15(19):3315-9. doi: 10.1002/pmic.201500143. Epub 2015 Aug
 17.

Proteomic profiling of the extracellular matrix (slime sheath) of Dictyostelium 
discoideum.

Huber RJ(1), O'Day DH(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Cell & Systems Biology, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.
(3)Department of Biology, University of Toronto Mississauga, Mississauga, 
Ontario, Canada.

Dictyostelium discoideum has historically served as a model system for cell and 
developmental biology, but recently it has gained increasing attention as a 
model for the study of human diseases. The extracellular matrix (ECM) of this 
eukaryotic microbe serves multiple essential functions during development. It 
not only provides structural integrity to the moving multicellular 
pseudoplasmodium, or slug, it also provides components that regulate cell 
motility and differentiation. An LC/MS/MS analysis of slug ECM revealed the 
presence of a large number of proteins in two wild-type strains, NC4 and WS380B. 
GO annotation identified a large number of proteins involved in some form of 
binding (e.g. protein, polysaccharide, cellulose, carbohydrate, ATP, cAMP, ion, 
lipid, vitamin), as well as proteins that modulate metabolic processes, cell 
movement, and multicellular development. In addition, this proteomic analysis 
identified numerous expected (e.g. EcmA, EcmD, discoidin I, discoidin II), as 
well as unexpected (e.g. ribosomal and nuclear proteins) components. These 
topics are discussed in terms of the structure and function of the ECM during 
the development of this model amoebozoan and their relevance to ongoing 
biomedical research.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/pmic.201500143
PMID: 26152465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
