---
pmid: '11486016'
title: Control of DNA rereplication via Cdc2 phosphorylation sites in the origin recognition
  complex.
authors:
- Vas A
- Mok W
- Leatherwood J
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2001'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC87296
doi: 10.1128/MCB.21.17.5767-5777.2001
---

# Control of DNA rereplication via Cdc2 phosphorylation sites in the origin recognition complex.
**Authors:** Vas A, Mok W, Leatherwood J
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.21.17.5767-5777.2001](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.21.17.5767-5777.2001)
**PMC:** [PMC87296](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC87296/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Sep;21(17):5767-77. doi: 10.1128/MCB.21.17.5767-5777.2001.

Control of DNA rereplication via Cdc2 phosphorylation sites in the origin 
recognition complex.

Vas A(1), Mok W, Leatherwood J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, State University of New 
York, Stony Brook, NY 11794-5222, USA.

Cdc2 kinase is a master regulator of cell cycle progression in the fission yeast 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Our data indicate that Cdc2 phosphorylates 
replication factor Orp2, a subunit of the origin recognition complex (ORC). Cdc2 
phosphorylation of Orp2 appears to be one of multiple mechanisms by which Cdc2 
prevents DNA rereplication in a single cell cycle. Cdc2 phosphorylation of Orp2 
is not required for Cdc2 to activate DNA replication initiation. Phosphorylation 
of Orp2 appears first in S phase and becomes maximal in G(2) and M when Cdc2 
kinase activity is required to prevent reinitiation of DNA replication. A mutant 
lacking Cdc2 phosphorylation sites in Orp2 (orp2-T4A) allowed greater 
rereplication of DNA than congenic orp2 wild-type strains when the limiting 
replication initiation factor Cdc18 was deregulated. Thus, Cdc2 phosphorylation 
of Orp2 may be redundant with regulation of Cdc18 for preventing reinitiation of 
DNA synthesis. Since Cdc2 phosphorylation sites are present in Orp2 (also known 
as Orc2) from yeasts to metazoans, we propose that cell cycle-regulated 
phosphorylation of the ORC provides a safety net to prevent DNA rereplication 
and resulting genetic instability.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.21.17.5767-5777.2001
PMCID: PMC87296
PMID: 11486016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Cdc2 kinase is a master regulator of cell cycle progression in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe . Our data indicate that Cdc2 phosphorylates replication factor Orp2, a subunit of the origin recognition complex (ORC). Cdc2 phosphorylation of Orp2 appears to be one of multiple mechanisms by which Cdc2 prevents DNA rereplication in a single cell cycle. Cdc2 phosphorylation of Orp2 is not required for Cdc2 to activate DNA replication initiation. Phosphorylation of Orp2 appears first in S phase and becomes maximal in G 2 and M when Cdc2 kinase activity is required to prevent reinitiation of DNA replication. A mutant lacking Cdc2 phosphorylation sites in Orp2 ( orp2-T4A ) allowed greater rereplication of DNA than congenic orp2 wild-type strains when the limiting replication initiation factor Cdc18 was deregulated. Thus, Cdc2 phosphorylation of Orp2 may be redundant with regulation of Cdc18 for preventing reinitiation of DNA synthesis. Since Cdc2 phosphorylation sites are present in Orp2 (also known as Orc2) from yeasts to metazoans, we propose that cell cycle-regulated phosphorylation of the ORC provides a safety net to prevent DNA rereplication and resulting genetic instability.

Yeast methods, strains, and plasmids.

S. pombe methods were essentially as described by Moreno et al. ( 53 ): YES is rich medium, and EMM2 is defined medium and was supplemented with leucine (L), uracil (U), adenine (A), and histidine (H) as indicated. YSO is rich medium low in adenine ( 36 ). The vitamin B 1 thiamine (B1) was added to 2.7 mg/liter as indicated. Genotypes are listed in Table 1 .

Potential phosphorylation sites [(S/T)P] encoded by orp2 were mutated by site-directed mutagenesis using PCR. To generate orp2-T4A , plasmid pJL207 ( orp2 + cloned into pREP3 [ 40 ]) was used as a template. Primers P1 and P2 amplified the 5′ coding region of orp2 + ; P2 has nucleotide changes that altered Thr to Ala. Separately, primers P3 and P4 were used to amplify the region of orp2 + 3′ of the sequence amplified by P1-P2. The P3 primer has nucleotide changes to alter two Thr codons to Ala codons and introduces an Xho I site. The P1-P2 and P3-P4 products were gel isolated, phosphorylated, and ligated together, and the ligation product was amplified using P1 and P4. This product was cloned to replace the corresponding region of the orp2 + , and the clone was sequenced. Resulting amino acid changes are shown in Fig. 1 . The mutated region was subcloned into appropriate orp2 + vectors as follows: pJL211 (pRep1-GST-orp2 [ 40 ]) was changed to make pJL329 (pRep1-GST-orp2-T4A). pJL320 (genomic orp2 + , leu1 + integrating vector [see below]) was changed to make pJL322 (genomic orp2 -T4A, leu1 + integrating vector). Primer sequences were P1 (CTGAAGATACGTTTTCAACCATTTTTAAAG), P2 (CGCCTAAAAAAGGAGTTCTTGAAGAT), P3 (CAACAACTTCTGGTGCTAATGTAGAAGG), and P4 (CTCCTCGAGCACCAGGACATCGAA).

To express alleles of orp2 from the orp2 promoter in the genome, an orp2 + leu1 + vector (pJL320) was constructed. pJL320 contains the orp2 promoter and coding sequence followed by the nmt1 terminator cloned between the Pst I- Sac I sites of integrating vector pJK148 ( leu1 + ) ( 35 ). Steps in construction of pJL320 were as follows: The 1.7-kb Pst I- Nde I fragment from pER17 ( 40 ) was cloned into Pst I/ Nde I-digested pJL207 (pREP3- orp2 + ) ( 40 ), thus replacing the nmt1 promoter with the orp2 promoter. From this, the Pst I- Sac I fragment containing the orp2 promoter and coding sequence and the nmt1 terminator was moved into Pst I- Sac I-digested pJK148 to create pJL320. pJL320 was cut with Pfl MI (in the orp2 5′ noncoding region) to target integration at orp2Δ::ura4 + to create orp2 Δ:: ura4 + :: orp2 + ( leu1 + ).

Construction of JLP230 orp2 + and JLP238 orp2 -T4A strains was as follows: plasmids pJL320 ( orp2 + leu1 + ) and pJL322 ( orp2 -T4A leu1 + ) were integrated at the orp2Δ::ura4 + locus in diploid JLP46. Transformants were sporulated, and strains JLP230 and JLP238 were isolated and checked by Southern blot analysis. JLP306 and 308 are Ura − derivatives of JLP230 and JLP238 made by one-step gene replacement of the ura4 + within the orp2Δ::ura4 + by transformation with Hin dIII-digested pJL378 (pJL378 is an unmarked deletion of orp2 coding sequences cloned into the Hin dIII site of pBluescript). Ura − transformants were obtained using YES–0.1% 5-fluoroorotic acid to create orp2Δ::ura4 + ::orp2 + ( leu1 + ).

Construction of nmt1 GST-Cdc18* strains was as follows: pAL27-GST-cdc18-T4A has Thr codons at positions 26, 98, 104 and 134 mutated to Ala ( 44 ). pAL27-GST-cdc18-T4A was linearized with Stu I and integrated at ura4-294 in strain FWP162 h + leu1-32 ura4-294. GST-Cdc18-T4A is referred to as Cdc18*. The transformant JLP515 h + leu1-32 ura4-294::GST-cdc18-T4A , ura4 + was selected on plates lacking Ura, and stable integrants were identified as isolates that failed to grow on 0.1% 5-fluoroorotic acid–YES plates. JLP515 was mated to JLP306 ( orp2Δ::orp2-T4A leu1 + ) to obtain strains JLP518, JLP519, and additional congenic isolates. JLP515 was mated to JLP308 ( orp2Δ::orp2 + leu1 + ) to obtain JLP523, JLP524, and additional congenic isolates. All isolates were obtained by tetrad dissection.

DISCUSSION

Cdc2 phosphorylation sites are present in the amino termini of Orc2 proteins from yeasts to humans. We have shown that the S. pombe Orc2, Orp2, is a substrate for Cdc2 in vitro and appears to be phosphorylated by Cdc2 in vivo. Mutation of Cdc2 phosphorylation sites in Orp2 results in a phenotype of enhanced rereplication when other controls preventing DNA rereplication are inactivated. We propose that phosphorylation of Orp2 is redundant with phosphorylation of Cdc18 to maintain once-per-cell-cycle control of DNA replication. Finally, our data suggest that Cdc2 phosphorylation of Orp2 is dispensable for Cdc2 activation of DNA replication.

There is evidence for phosphorylation of Orc2 proteins from budding yeast, fission yeast, and Xenopus to humans. As predicted from the Orp2 sequence, Orp2 can be phosphorylated in vitro by Cdc2. This Orp2 phosphorylation depends on putative Cdc2 sites. Lygerou and Nurse have shown that Orp2 is also phosphorylated in vivo, producing a change in electrophoretic mobility ( 45 ). We find that this in vivo phosphorylation likewise depends on the Cdc2 sites. The in vivo phosphorylation state of Orp2 varies according to cell cycle position, with maximal phosphorylation in the M phase and minimal phosphorylation in G 1 . This corresponds to the pattern of Cdc2 activation through the cell cycle. These observations suggest that Orp2 may be an in vivo substrate of Cdc2.

The failure to phosphorylate Orp2 in the cdc13 cyclin deletion mutant suggests that a Cdc2-Cdc13 complex is important to phosphorylate Orp2 in vivo. Failure to phosphorylate Orp2 in cells lacking Cdc13 is not easily explained as a failure of these cells to enter mitosis because other blocks to mitosis did not block Orp2 phosphorylation. That loss of the one cyclin Cdc13 nearly abolishes Orp2 phosphorylation suggests that other cyclins, such as the S-phase cyclin Cig2, are poor effectors of Orp2 phosphorylation ( 24 , 51 ). Phosphorylation of Orp2 by a CDK complex primarily active in G 2 /M rather than an S-phase-specific complex is consistent with a model in which Orp2 phosphorylation helps prevent rereplication during G 2 /M rather than having a primary role in activating replication initiation in the S phase.

Orp2 phosphorylation was reduced but not abolished in Cdc2 mutants arrested at restrictive temperature. There are three likely causes for Orp2 remaining phosphorylated when Cdc2 is inactivated. (i) There may be a kinase other than Cdc2 that carries out the phosphorylation. This is possible but seems unlikely given the importance of the Cdc13 cyclin for Orp2 phosphorylation. (ii) The mutant Cdc2 may retain some residual activity. Indeed, these temperature-sensitive cdc2 alleles almost certainly do have residual function at restrictive temperature because complete inactivation of Cdc2 in G 2 followed by reactivation of Cdc2 leads to rereplication and diploidization, which is not seen in these cdc2 mutants ( 27 ). (iii) Orp2 phosphorylation may be particularly stable. For instance, Cdc2 substrates might be rapidly dephosphorylated at the end of mitosis by a phosphatase analogous to Cdc14 of budding yeast. In this case, phosphates on Cdc2 substrates such as Orp2 might be quite stable until the end of mitosis. Notably, budding yeast orc2 - 1 is synthetically lethal with cdc14 - 1, which could be explained if Cdc14 removes inhibitory phosphates from Orc2 ( 43 ).

Since both Cdc2 and Orp2 are essential for replication initiation, we looked for defects in the initiation of replication in the nonphosphorylatable orp2-T4A mutant, but no defects were seen; growth rate was normal; S phase was normal as assayed by flow cytometry; cell size at division was normal; there was no genetic interaction with the cdc18-K9 mutant, and the transformation frequency of orp2-T4A mutants was, if anything, higher than that of the wild type. Finally, deletion of the first 127 amino acids of Orp2 did not obviously affect growth, suggesting that the N-terminal domain of Orp2 is not needed for initiation. Since each chromosome may have hundreds of origins of replication, even a severe reduction in the efficiency of initiation in these mutants ( orp2-T4A and GST-Orp2-Δ127 ) would still allow many origins to fire, perhaps leading to normal growth rate, DNA content, and cell division kinetics. However, it is harder to explain how transformation frequency could be normal if the orp2-T4A mutant suffered from a significant initiation defect.

Indeed the orp2-T4A mutant functioned up to threefold better than wild-type orp2 in transformation efficiency. This apparent gain of function could be explained if the Orp2 phosphorylation can inhibit initiation at least partially, especially at functional origins. For example, although Orp2 is not phosphorylated when the S phase begins, the presence of phosphorylated Orp2 at the end of mitosis might have an effect on the following S phase by delaying establishment of prereplicative complexes. The Orp2-T4A protein would suffer no such interference and so might have a higher efficiency of firing individual origins and a resulting higher transformation efficiency.

It is possible that phosphorylation of the N-terminal domain of Orp2 is important for initiation, but is completely redundant with phosphorylation of some other replication proteins. It is well known that other replication proteins (e.g., Cdc18, Mcm4, and Cdc23 [also known as Mcm10]) have clusters of Cdc2 phosphorylation sites. Thus, an initiation defect might appear only when multiple phosphorylation sites on multiple proteins are mutated simultaneously. The orp2 mutants used in this study may be useful to investigate this possibility in the future.

In this study, we find evidence suggesting that Orp2 phosphorylation is redundant with phosphorylation of other replication proteins to prevent reinitiation of replication. We were more successful in finding a phenotype when we looked for rereplication because we had some knowledge of other pathways that prevent rereplication and could deregulate those pathways. This deregulation was achieved by overexpression of Cdc18* from the nmt promoter, a condition in which both the transcription and phosphorylation of Cdc18 are deregulated and cells are driven to rereplicate DNA. Both the kinetics and magnitude of rereplication were affected by mutation of Cdc2 phosphorylation sites in Orp2. Rereplication occurred 4 to 6 h after the appearance of Cdc18* in the wild-type strains but only 2 h after the appearance of Cdc18* in the orp2-T4A strains. Thus, the orp2-T4A mutant is sensitized to rereplication, showing that the phosphorylation sites in Orp2 help to prevent rereplication.

The idea that phosphorylation of Orp2 is more important for inhibiting reinitiation of replication than for triggering initiation is consistent with the timing of Orp2 phosphorylation and with its dependence on cdc13 + . Orp2 phosphorylation is first detected at about the time of the S phase, but is maximal in G 2 and M when initiation is no longer occurring and when reinitiation must be prevented. Orp2 phosphorylation is not seen in the cdc13 mutant; this mutant replicates (suggesting phosphorylation of Orp2 is not essential for replication) and rereplicates (consistent with the idea that phosphorylation of Orp2 helps prevent rereplication).

The idea that phosphorylation of Orp2 helps prevent reinitiation is also consistent with Orc2 phosphorylation and ORC-CDK interactions in other systems. In Xenopus extracts, XOrc2 is unphosphorylated during interphase and becomes highly phosphorylated during mitosis ( 9 ). Xenopus ORC fails to bind the Cdk2-cyclin A or Cdk2-cyclin E complexes known to be important for activating initiation of replication but does bind the Cdc2-cyclin A complexes that might be important for preventing reinitiation ( 65 ). Finally, mutation of the consensus CDK phosphorylation sites in budding yeast Orc2 together with mutation of sites in Orc6 also sensitizes cells to rereplication (J. J. Li, personal communication).

In current models for replication initiation, the Orc proteins form a seemingly static platform onto which other initiation factors are assembled. How then might Orp2 phosphorylation inhibit reinitiation of DNA replication? Since binding of the ORC to DNA is not regulated and Orp2 is not targeted for destruction ( 34 , 36 , 45 , 57 ), phosphorylation of Orp2 probably alters binding to other initiation factors (e.g., Cdc18) or promotes changes within the ORC complex. Our favored model is that the N-terminal domain of Orp2 is activated by phosphorylation to inhibit initiation, perhaps by binding a negative regulator analogous to geminin, or by interfering with the binding of other initiator proteins to the ORC ( 50 , 69 , 73 ). Another model is that the N-terminal domain of Orp2 has a positive function that is then inactivated by phosphorylation. This second model is hard to reconcile with the fact that most of the N-terminal domain of Orp2, including the phosphorylation sites, can be deleted without abolishing Orp2 function. One prediction of either model is that phosphorylated Orp2 would not initiate DNA replication. However, the orp2-T3D allele created to try to mimic Orp2 phosphorylation shows only a very weak initiation defect. Our simple models may be incorrect or the orp2-T3D mutant may fail to mimic the phosphorylated state of Orp2. Identifying what factors interact with the N terminus of Orp2 would help clarify exactly how phosphorylation modulates the ORC function.

In Xenopus and humans, the homologue of Cdc18, Cdc6, is not fully degraded during the S phase (reviewed in reference 70 ). In these organisms, mechanisms for preventing reinitiation that are independent of Cdc6, such as phosphorylation of Orc2, may be even more important than they are in yeasts. Since CDK phosphorylation sites in the amino terminus of Orp2 are a conserved feature of Orc2 and its homologs, the phosphorylation of Orc2 may be a conserved mechanism for maintaining once-per-cell-cycle control of DNA replication. Of course, there must also be additional controls (since, for instance, the orp2-T4A mutant does not rereplicate unless Cdc18* is overexpressed). Multiple overlapping controls provide extra assurance that cells will not reinitiate replication. Any one control may be sufficient to prevent bulk rereplication of DNA but might allow occasional rereplication events from some origins. Such rare events would not be readily detectable in the laboratory except by specially designed genetic tests, but the genomic instability caused by even very rare reinitiation might reduce fitness in simple eukaryotes such as yeast and possibly lead to genetic diseases and cancer in humans.
