---
pmid: '17172357'
title: The coactivator function of Arabidopsis NPR1 requires the core of its BTB/POZ
  domain and the oxidation of C-terminal cysteines.
authors:
- Rochon A
- Boyle P
- Wignes T
- Fobert PR
- Després C
journal: Plant Cell
year: '2006'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1785396
doi: 10.1105/tpc.106.046953
---

# The coactivator function of Arabidopsis NPR1 requires the core of its BTB/POZ domain and the oxidation of C-terminal cysteines.
**Authors:** Rochon A, Boyle P, Wignes T, Fobert PR, Després C
**Journal:** Plant Cell (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1105/tpc.106.046953](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.106.046953)
**PMC:** [PMC1785396](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1785396/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell. 2006 Dec;18(12):3670-85. doi: 10.1105/tpc.106.046953. Epub 2006
Dec  15.

The coactivator function of Arabidopsis NPR1 requires the core of its BTB/POZ 
domain and the oxidation of C-terminal cysteines.

Rochon A(1), Boyle P, Wignes T, Fobert PR, Després C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Brock University, St. Catharines, Ontario, 
Canada L2S 3A1.

NONEXPRESSOR OF PATHOGENESIS-RELATED GENES1 (NPR1) regulates systemic acquired 
resistance (SAR) in Arabidopsis thaliana, and current models propose that after 
treatment with salicylic acid (SA), Cys-82 and Cys-216 of NPR1 are reduced, 
leading to nuclear import. The interaction of nucleus-localized NPR1 with TGA 
transcription factors results in the activation of defense genes, including the 
SAR marker PATHOGENESIS-RELATED-1 (PR-1), and the deployment of SAR. Little is 
known about how TGA factors or NPR1 regulate transcription or whether a TGA-NPR1 
complex forms on DNA. We show that TGA2 and NPR1 are recruited to PR-1 
independently of each other and of SA treatment. Consistent with the result that 
a triple knockout in TGA2/5/6 derepresses PR-1, in vivo plant transcription 
assays revealed that TGA2 is not an autonomous transcription activator but is a 
transcriptional repressor in both untreated and SA-treated cells. However, after 
stimulation with SA, TGA2 is incorporated into a transactivating complex with 
NPR1, forming an enhanceosome that requires the core of the NPR1 BTB/POZ domain 
(residues 80 to 91) and the oxidation of NPR1 Cys-521 and Cys-529. These Cys 
residues are found in a new type of transactivation domain that we term 
Cys-oxidized. These data further our understanding of the mechanism by which 
TGA2 and NPR1 activate Arabidopsis PR-1.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.106.046953
PMCID: PMC1785396
PMID: 17172357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

NONEXPRESSOR OF PATHOGENESIS-RELATED GENES1 (NPR1) regulates systemic acquired resistance (SAR) in Arabidopsis thaliana , and current models propose that after treatment with salicylic acid (SA), Cys-82 and Cys-216 of NPR1 are reduced, leading to nuclear import. The interaction of nucleus-localized NPR1 with TGA transcription factors results in the activation of defense genes, including the SAR marker PATHOGENESIS-RELATED-1 ( PR-1 ), and the deployment of SAR. Little is known about how TGA factors or NPR1 regulate transcription or whether a TGA-NPR1 complex forms on DNA. We show that TGA2 and NPR1 are recruited to PR-1 independently of each other and of SA treatment. Consistent with the result that a triple knockout in TGA2/5/6 derepresses PR-1 , in vivo plant transcription assays revealed that TGA2 is not an autonomous transcription activator but is a transcriptional repressor in both untreated and SA-treated cells. However, after stimulation with SA, TGA2 is incorporated into a transactivating complex with NPR1, forming an enhanceosome that requires the core of the NPR1 BTB/POZ domain (residues 80 to 91) and the oxidation of NPR1 Cys-521 and Cys-529. These Cys residues are found in a new type of transactivation domain that we term Cys-oxidized. These data further our understanding of the mechanism by which TGA2 and NPR1 activate Arabidopsis PR-1 .

INTRODUCTION

Plants, unlike animals, do not possess specialized cells for protection against invading pathogens. Instead, every plant cell must be capable of perceiving pathogens and mounting effective defense responses if the organism is to successfully protect itself from infection. Upon detection of an invading microbe, plant defense responses arise from the activation of signal transduction pathways that lead to global transcriptional reprogramming ( Dangl and Jones, 2001 ; Durrant and Dong, 2004 ). Among the induced genes are pathogenesis-related ( PR ) genes, which are activated both at the site of infection and in uninfected parts of the plant in response to the pathogen-induced accumulation of salicylic acid (SA) ( Ryals et al., 1996 ). Local and distal SA accumulations are mandatory for the deployment of a systemic long-lasting and broad-spectrum plant disease resistance response called systemic acquired resistance (SAR) ( Ryals et al., 1996 ; Durrant and Dong, 2004 ; Pieterse and Van Loon, 2004 ). Exogenous application of SA, or SA analogs, including 2,6-dichloroisonicotinic acid (INA) and benzothiadiazole, termed chemical SAR, also triggers PR gene induction and SAR deployment ( Ward et al., 1991 ).

The NONEXPRESSOR OF PATHOGENESIS-RELATED GENES1 (NPR1) protein is the key regulator of SAR ( Cao et al., 1994 ; Delaney et al., 1995 ). In resting cells of wild-type Arabidopsis thaliana , NPR1 is found in both the cytoplasm and the nucleus ( Després et al., 2000 ). However, in an npr1-1 mutant line of Arabidopsis overexpressing an NPR1:green fluorescent protein (GFP) fusion protein, the NPR1 fusion is sequestered in the cytoplasm and localizes to the nucleus only after INA treatment ( Kinkema et al., 2000 ). The cytoplasmic NPR1:GFP fusion protein is contained within an oligomer complex held together by disulfide bridges ( Mou et al., 2003 ). Upon INA treatment, NPR1 Cys-82 and Cys-216 are presumably reduced and NPR1:GFP is released from this complex, resulting in the accumulation of protein monomers inside the nucleus ( Mou et al., 2003 ).

Activation of PR genes during SAR, which requires the nuclear localization of NPR1 ( Kinkema et al., 2000 ), is also dependent on a functionally redundant clade of three basic Leu zipper TGA transcription factors, TGA2, TGA5, and TGA6, that interact with NPR1 ( Zhang et al., 1999 ; Després et al., 2000 ). A triple knockout of these TGA genes abolished PR-1 induction by INA, indicating that the gene products could act as transcriptional activators ( Zhang et al., 2003 ). This conclusion is supported by a report in which a chimeric TGA2-GAL4:DB protein was used to study gene regulation and proposed to act as a transcriptional activator ( Fan and Dong, 2002 ). However, in a finding that appears to be contradictory to the previous one, Zhang et al. (2003) showed that whether unstimulated or INA-treated, the triple knockout plants displayed higher levels of PR-1 (compared with levels found in the wild type without INA), which could indicate that the proteins of the TGA2-containing clade act as repressors of PR-1 , presumably by binding to its promoter ( Zhang et al., 2003 ). Furthermore, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) experiments have demonstrated that TGA2 physically interacts with the PR-1 promoter in an SA- and NPR1-dependent manner ( Johnson et al., 2003 ), which would also contradict the hypothesis that TGA2 binds to the PR-1 promoter in the absence of SA ( Zhang et al., 2003 ). Thus, it is not clear whether TGA2 is a transcriptional activator or a repressor. PR-1 is also positively regulated in an SA-dependent, but NPR1-independent, manner by the transcription factor WHY1 ( Desveaux et al., 2004 ). Furthermore, PR-1 is negatively regulated by SUPPRESSOR OF NPR1-INDUCIBLE1 (SNI1) ( Li et al., 1999 ), and ChIP experiments have shown an increase in histone H3 acetylation and methylation at the PR-1 promoter in sni1 mutant plants ( Mosher et al., 2006 ). These data implicate chromatin structure in the regulation of PR-1 expression.

NPR1 and TGA factors (TGA1 and TGA2) show a direct physical interaction within the nucleus and in vitro ( Subramaniam et al., 2001 ; Fan and Dong, 2002 ; Després et al., 2003 ). This interaction stimulates the DNA binding activity of TGA factors to their cognate cis -acting element in vitro ( Després et al., 2000 , 2003 ) and in vivo ( Fan and Dong, 2002 ). However, despite the fact that NPR1 and TGA2 can form a ternary complex on the DNA (DNA-TGA2-NPR1 complex) in yeast ( Weigel et al., 2005 ), it is unclear whether, when inside a plant nucleus, they will only interact in the nucleoplasm or whether they will form such a ternary complex. To date, there is no experimental evidence indicating that NPR1 is actually recruited to the PR-1 gene in vivo. Therefore, aside from its DNA binding enhancement activity on TGA factors, the biochemical role of NPR1 in NPR1-TGA complexes, if any, remains speculative.

NPR1 contains two protein–protein interaction motifs: ankyrin repeats ( Cao et al., 1997 ; Ryals et al., 1997 ; Mosavi et al., 2004 ) and a BTB/POZ (for Broad complex, Tramtrack, and Bric-a-brac/Pox virus and Zinc finger) domain ( Bardwell and Treisman, 1994 ; Aravind and Koonin, 1999 ). The ankyrin repeats mediate interactions with TGA factors, and their mutation abolishes NPR1-TGA complex formation, PR gene expression, and SAR ( Cao et al., 1997 ; Ryals et al., 1997 ; Zhang et al., 1999 ; Després et al., 2000 , 2003 ). The functional requirements of the NPR1 BTB/POZ in disease resistance are not yet understood.

Here, we demonstrate that TGA2 is not a transcriptional activator in resting or SA-treated cells, as it is unable to activate transcription when expressed on its own. We show that TGA2 and NPR1 can, independently of one another, physically interact with the PR-1 promoter in both resting and SA-treated cells. We also show that NPR1 contains an autonomous transactivation domain in its C terminus and acts as a coactivator in SA-treated cells, where it associates with TGA2 to create a transcriptional activating complex. NPR1 and TGA2 are sufficient to activate gene expression after stimulation of the cells with SA; thus, the DNA-TGA2-NPR1 ternary complex constitutes an SA-dependent enhanceosome. We demonstrate that the coactivator function of NPR1 requires the presence of the BTB/POZ core and the oxidation of Cys-521 and Cys-529, located in the transactivation domain of NPR1. Finally, using an in vivo labeling technique capable of distinguishing between the reduced and oxidized states of Cys residues, we determined that Cys-521 and Cys-529 are oxidized in both resting and SA-treated cells. The data presented here not only provide a mechanistic understanding of transcriptional regulation mediated by the TGA2-NPR1 complex but also help to elucidate the biochemical function of TGA2, a repressor of NPR1-mediated derepression, and NPR1, a coactivator, and to unravel the existence of a new type of eukaryotic transactivation domain that we term the Cys-oxidized transactivation domain.

DISCUSSION

Our study has demonstrated that TGA2 is not a transcriptional activator whether cells are resting or SA-treated. Furthermore, our data argue that, upon SA treatment, PR-1 is upregulated by a transactivation complex composed of at least TGA2 and NPR1. First, ChIP in wild-type Arabidopsis confirmed that NPR1 is recruited to the PR-1 promoter in both nontreated and SA-treated cells. Second, despite the fact that TGA2 is not a transactivator, NPR1 associates with TGA2 in SA-stimulated cells to form a transcriptional activating complex, both on a heterologous (5X Gal4 UAS) and a native ( PR-1 ) promoter. Third, genetic complementation analyses of rationally designed site-directed and deletion mutants of the NPR1 BTB/POZ established a role for the core of this domain in activating PR-1 . This finding is important because it establishes a direct correlation between complementation of PR-1 expression and transactivation on the heterologous promoter of a complex containing TGA2 and these NPR1 BTB/POZ mutants. Fourth, a Cys-oxidized transactivation domain in the C terminus of NPR1 is also required for the activation of PR-1 by the TGA2-NPR1 complex. This emphasizes again the correlation between transactivation of the TGA2-NPR1 complex and the activation of PR-1 . We thus conclude that, in SA-treated cells, NPR1 is a TGA2 coactivator essential for PR-1 induction.

Statistical Methods

All pooled data are expressed as averages, and error bars represent sd . When data from two independent populations are compared, statistical significance was assessed using a two-tailed Student's t test.
