---
pmid: '26203138'
title: Gene-Silencing Screen for Mammalian Axon Regeneration Identifies Inpp5f (Sac2)
  as an Endogenous Suppressor of Repair after Spinal Cord Injury.
authors:
- Zou Y
- Stagi M
- Wang X
- Yigitkanli K
- Siegel CS
- Nakatsu F
- Cafferty WB
- Strittmatter SM
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4510284
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1718-15.2015
---

# Gene-Silencing Screen for Mammalian Axon Regeneration Identifies Inpp5f (Sac2) as an Endogenous Suppressor of Repair after Spinal Cord Injury.
**Authors:** Zou Y, Stagi M, Wang X, Yigitkanli K, Siegel CS, Nakatsu F, Cafferty WB, Strittmatter SM
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1718-15.2015](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1718-15.2015)
**PMC:** [PMC4510284](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4510284/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2015 Jul 22;35(29):10429-39. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1718-15.2015.

Gene-Silencing Screen for Mammalian Axon Regeneration Identifies Inpp5f (Sac2) 
as an Endogenous Suppressor of Repair after Spinal Cord Injury.

Zou Y(1), Stagi M(1), Wang X(1), Yigitkanli K(1), Siegel CS(1), Nakatsu F(1), 
Cafferty WB(1), Strittmatter SM(2).

Author information:
(1)Cellular Neuroscience, Neurodegeneration and Repair Program, 
Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, Departments of Neurology and 
Neurobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06536.
(2)Cellular Neuroscience, Neurodegeneration and Repair Program, 
Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, Departments of Neurology and 
Neurobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06536 
stephen.strittmatter@yale.edu.

Axonal growth and neuronal rewiring facilitate functional recovery after spinal 
cord injury. Known interventions that promote neural repair remain limited in 
their functional efficacy. To understand genetic determinants of mammalian CNS 
axon regeneration, we completed an unbiased RNAi gene-silencing screen across 
most phosphatases in the genome. We identified one known and 17 previously 
unknown phosphatase suppressors of injury-induced CNS axon growth. Silencing 
Inpp5f (Sac2) leads to robust enhancement of axon regeneration and growth cone 
reformation. Results from cultured Inpp5f(-/-) neurons confirm lentiviral shRNA 
results from the screen. Consistent with the nonoverlapping substrate 
specificity between Inpp5f and PTEN, rapamycin does not block enhanced 
regeneration in Inpp5f(-/-) neurons, implicating mechanisms independent of the 
PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. Inpp5f(-/-) mice develop normally, but show enhanced 
anatomical and functional recovery after mid-thoracic dorsal hemisection injury. 
More serotonergic axons sprout and/or regenerate caudal to the lesion level, and 
greater numbers of corticospinal tract axons sprout rostral to the lesion. 
Functionally, Inpp5f-null mice exhibit enhanced recovery of motor functions in 
both open-field and rotarod tests. This study demonstrates the potential of an 
unbiased high-throughput functional screen to identify endogenous suppressors of 
CNS axon growth after injury, and reveals Inpp5f (Sac2) as a novel suppressor of 
CNS axon repair after spinal cord injury. Significance statement: The extent of 
axon regeneration is a critical determinant of neurological recovery from 
injury, and is extremely limited in the adult mammalian CNS. We describe an 
unbiased gene-silencing screen that uncovered novel molecules suppressing axonal 
regeneration. Inpp5f (Sac2) gene deletion promoted recovery from spinal cord 
injury with no side effects. The mechanism of action is distinct from another 
lipid phosphatase implicated in regeneration, PTEN. This opens new pathways for 
investigation in spinal cord injury research. Furthermore the screening 
methodology can be applied on a genome wide scale to discovery the entire set of 
mammalian genes contributing to axonal regeneration.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/3510429-11$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1718-15.2015
PMCID: PMC4510284
PMID: 26203138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
