---
pmid: '19832943'
title: Arabidopsis MPK6 is involved in cell division plane control during early root
  development, and localizes to the pre-prophase band, phragmoplast, trans-Golgi network
  and plasma membrane.
authors:
- Müller J
- Beck M
- Mettbach U
- Komis G
- Hause G
- Menzel D
- Samaj J
journal: Plant J
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.04046.x
---

# Arabidopsis MPK6 is involved in cell division plane control during early root development, and localizes to the pre-prophase band, phragmoplast, trans-Golgi network and plasma membrane.
**Authors:** Müller J, Beck M, Mettbach U, Komis G, Hause G, Menzel D, Samaj J
**Journal:** Plant J (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.04046.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.04046.x)

## Abstract

1. Plant J. 2010 Jan;61(2):234-48. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.04046.x. Epub
2009  Oct 12.

Arabidopsis MPK6 is involved in cell division plane control during early root 
development, and localizes to the pre-prophase band, phragmoplast, trans-Golgi 
network and plasma membrane.

Müller J(1), Beck M, Mettbach U, Komis G, Hause G, Menzel D, Samaj J.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cellular and Molecular Botany, University of Bonn, Kirschallee 
1, 53115 Bonn, Germany.

The proper spatial and temporal expression and localization of mitogen-activated 
protein kinases (MAPKs) is essential for developmental and cellular signalling 
in all eukaryotes. Here, we analysed expression, subcellular localization and 
function of MPK6 in roots of Arabidopsis thaliana using wild-type plants and 
three mpk6 knock-out mutant lines. The MPK6 promoter showed two expression 
maxima in the most apical part of the root meristem and in the root transition 
zone. This expression pattern was highly consistent with 'no root' and 'short 
root' phenotypes, as well as with ectopic cell divisions and aberrant cell 
division planes, resulting in disordered cell files in the roots of these mpk6 
knock-out mutants. In dividing root cells, MPK6 was localized on the subcellular 
level to distinct fine spots in the pre-prophase band and phragmoplast, 
representing the two most important cytoskeletal structures controlling the cell 
division plane. By combining subcellular fractionation and microscopic in situ 
and in vivo co-localization methods, MPK6 was localized to the plasma membrane 
(PM) and the trans-Golgi network (TGN). In summary, these data suggest that MPK6 
localizing to mitotic microtubules, secretory TGN vesicles and the PM is 
involved in cell division plane control and root development in Arabidopsis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.04046.x
PMID: 19832943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
