---
pmid: '11440721'
title: A molecular link between stem cell regulation and floral patterning in Arabidopsis.
authors:
- Lohmann JU
- Hong RL
- Hobe M
- Busch MA
- Parcy F
- Simon R
- Weigel D
journal: Cell
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00384-1
---

# A molecular link between stem cell regulation and floral patterning in Arabidopsis.
**Authors:** Lohmann JU, Hong RL, Hobe M, Busch MA, Parcy F, Simon R, Weigel D
**Journal:** Cell (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00384-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00384-1)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2001 Jun 15;105(6):793-803. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00384-1.

A molecular link between stem cell regulation and floral patterning in 
Arabidopsis.

Lohmann JU(1), Hong RL, Hobe M, Busch MA, Parcy F, Simon R, Weigel D.

Author information:
(1)Plant Biology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La 
Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

The homeotic gene AGAMOUS (AG) has dual roles in specifying organ fate and 
limiting stem cell proliferation in Arabidopsis flowers. We show that the floral 
identity protein LEAFY (LFY), a transcription factor expressed throughout the 
flower, cooperates with the homeodomain protein WUSCHEL (WUS) to activate AG in 
the center of flowers. WUS was previously identified because of its role in 
maintaining stem cell populations in both shoot and floral meristems. The 
unsuspected additional role of WUS in regulating floral homeotic gene expression 
supports the hypothesis that floral patterning uses a general meristem 
patterning system that was present before flowers evolved. We also show that AG 
represses WUS at later stages of floral development, thus creating a negative 
feedback loop that is required for the determinate growth of floral meristems.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00384-1
PMID: 11440721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
