---
pmid: '27237792'
title: A Gα-Stimulated RapGEF Is a Receptor-Proximal Regulator of Dictyostelium Chemotaxis.
authors:
- Liu Y
- Lacal J
- Veltman DM
- Fusetti F
- van Haastert PJ
- Firtel RA
- Kortholt A
journal: Dev Cell
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2016.05.001
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# A Gα-Stimulated RapGEF Is a Receptor-Proximal Regulator of Dictyostelium Chemotaxis.
**Authors:** Liu Y, Lacal J, Veltman DM, Fusetti F, van Haastert PJ, Firtel RA, Kortholt A
**Journal:** Dev Cell (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.devcel.2016.05.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2016.05.001)

## Abstract

1. Dev Cell. 2016 Jun 6;37(5):458-72. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2016.05.001. Epub
2016  May 26.

A Gα-Stimulated RapGEF Is a Receptor-Proximal Regulator of Dictyostelium 
Chemotaxis.

Liu Y(1), Lacal J(2), Veltman DM(3), Fusetti F(4), van Haastert PJ(1), Firtel 
RA(2), Kortholt A(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biochemistry, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 7, 9747 
AG Groningen, the Netherlands.
(2)Section of Cell and Developmental Biology, Division of Biological Sciences, 
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
(3)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge CB2 0QH, UK.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Groningen 
Biological Sciences and Biotechnology Institute, University of Groningen, 9747 
AG Groningen, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Cell Biochemistry, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 7, 9747 
AG Groningen, the Netherlands. Electronic address: a.kortholt@rug.nl.

Chemotaxis, or directional movement toward extracellular chemical gradients, is 
an important property of cells that is mediated through G-protein-coupled 
receptors (GPCRs). Although many chemotaxis pathways downstream of Gβγ have been 
identified, few Gα effectors are known. Gα effectors are of particular 
importance because they allow the cell to distinguish signals downstream of 
distinct chemoattractant GPCRs. Here we identify GflB, a Gα2 binding partner 
that directly couples the Dictyostelium cyclic AMP GPCR to Rap1. GflB localizes 
to the leading edge and functions as a Gα-stimulated, Rap1-specific guanine 
nucleotide exchange factor required to balance Ras and Rap signaling. The 
kinetics of GflB translocation are fine-tuned by GSK-3 phosphorylation. Cells 
lacking GflB display impaired Rap1/Ras signaling and actin and myosin dynamics, 
resulting in defective chemotaxis. Our observations demonstrate that GflB is an 
essential upstream regulator of chemoattractant-mediated cell polarity and 
cytoskeletal reorganization functioning to directly link Gα activation to 
monomeric G-protein signaling.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2016.05.001
PMID: 27237792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
