---
pmid: '15689152'
title: Mechanism of CDK5/p25 binding by CDK inhibitors.
authors:
- Mapelli M
- Massimiliano L
- Crovace C
- Seeliger MA
- Tsai LH
- Meijer L
- Musacchio A
journal: J Med Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/jm049323m
---

# Mechanism of CDK5/p25 binding by CDK inhibitors.
**Authors:** Mapelli M, Massimiliano L, Crovace C, Seeliger MA, Tsai LH, Meijer L, Musacchio A
**Journal:** J Med Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1021/jm049323m](https://doi.org/10.1021/jm049323m)

## Abstract

1. J Med Chem. 2005 Feb 10;48(3):671-9. doi: 10.1021/jm049323m.

Mechanism of CDK5/p25 binding by CDK inhibitors.

Mapelli M(1), Massimiliano L, Crovace C, Seeliger MA, Tsai LH, Meijer L, 
Musacchio A.

Author information:
(1)Structural Biology Unit, Department of Experimental Oncology, European 
Institute of Oncology, Via Ripamonti 435, 20141 Milan, Italy.

The cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK) CDK1, CDK2, CDK4, and CDK6 are 
serine/threonine protein kinases targeted in cancer therapy due to their role in 
cell cycle progression. The postmitotic CDK5 is involved in biological pathways 
important for neuronal migration and differentiation. CDK5 represents an 
attractive pharmacological target as its deregulation is implicated in various 
neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, and Niemann-Pick 
type C diseases, ischemia, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. We have generated 
an improved crystal form of CDK5 in complex with p25, a segment of the p35 
neuronal activator. The crystals were used to solve the structure of CDK5/p25 
with (R)-roscovitine and aloisine at a resolution of 2.2 and 2.3 A, 
respectively. The structure of CDK5/p25/roscovitine provides a rationale for the 
preference of CDK5 for the R over the S stereoisomer. Furthermore, roscovitine 
stabilized an unusual collapsed conformation of the glycine-rich loop, an 
important site of CDK regulation, and we report an investigation of the effects 
of glycine-rich loop phosphorylation on roscovitine binding. The CDK5/p25 
crystals represent a valuable new tool for the identification and optimization 
of selective CDK inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1021/jm049323m
PMID: 15689152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
