---
pmid: '15064722'
title: 'WWOX binds the specific proline-rich ligand PPXY: identification of candidate
  interacting proteins.'
authors:
- Ludes-Meyers JH
- Kil H
- Bednarek AK
- Drake J
- Bedford MT
- Aldaz CM
journal: Oncogene
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4143251
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1207680
---

# WWOX binds the specific proline-rich ligand PPXY: identification of candidate interacting proteins.
**Authors:** Ludes-Meyers JH, Kil H, Bednarek AK, Drake J, Bedford MT, Aldaz CM
**Journal:** Oncogene (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1207680](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1207680)
**PMC:** [PMC4143251](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4143251/)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2004 Jun 24;23(29):5049-55. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1207680.

WWOX binds the specific proline-rich ligand PPXY: identification of candidate 
interacting proteins.

Ludes-Meyers JH(1), Kil H, Bednarek AK, Drake J, Bedford MT, Aldaz CM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Science Park-Research Division, PO Box 389, Smithville, TX 78957-0389, USA.

WWOX, the gene that maps to common chromosomal fragile site FRA16D, is 
frequently affected by aberrations in multiple types of cancers. WWOX encodes a 
46 kDa protein that contains two WW domains and a short-chain oxidoreductase 
(SDR) domain. We recently demonstrated that ectopic expression of WWOX inhibits 
xenograft tumor growth of tumorigenic breast cancer cells. Little is known of 
the biochemical function(s) of WWOX. The SDR domain is predicted to be involved 
in sex-steroid metabolism and the WW domains are likely involved in 
protein-protein interactions. In this report, we identify the specific 
proline-rich ligand for WWOX as PPXY and show that the amino-terminal WW domain 
is responsible for this interaction. Using the WWOX WW domains as a probe, we 
screened high-density protein arrays and identified five candidate-binding 
partners. The binding to one of these candidates, small membrane protein of the 
lysosome/late endosome (SIMPLE), was further analysed, and we observed that a 
specific PPSY motif in the SIMPLE amino-acid sequence was required to interact 
with the amino-terminal WW domain of WWOX. In addition, immunofluorescence 
staining demonstrated that endogenous WWOX and SIMPLE co-localize to perinuclear 
compartments of MCF-7 human breast cancer cells. These studies demonstrate that 
WWOX contains a Group I WW domain that binds known cellular proteins containing 
the specific ligand PPXY. Identification and characterization of WWOX 
interacting proteins will lead to an understanding of the biological functions 
of WWOX in normal and tumor cells.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1207680
PMCID: PMC4143251
PMID: 15064722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
