---
pmid: '10456885'
title: 'Role of ornibactin biosynthesis in the virulence of Burkholderia cepacia:
  characterization of pvdA, the gene encoding L-ornithine N(5)-oxygenase.'
authors:
- Sokol PA
- Darling P
- Woods DE
- Mahenthiralingam E
- Kooi C
journal: Infect Immun
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC96763
doi: 10.1128/IAI.67.9.4443-4455.1999
---

# Role of ornibactin biosynthesis in the virulence of Burkholderia cepacia: characterization of pvdA, the gene encoding L-ornithine N(5)-oxygenase.
**Authors:** Sokol PA, Darling P, Woods DE, Mahenthiralingam E, Kooi C
**Journal:** Infect Immun (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1128/IAI.67.9.4443-4455.1999](https://doi.org/10.1128/IAI.67.9.4443-4455.1999)
**PMC:** [PMC96763](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC96763/)

## Abstract

1. Infect Immun. 1999 Sep;67(9):4443-55. doi: 10.1128/IAI.67.9.4443-4455.1999.

Role of ornibactin biosynthesis in the virulence of Burkholderia cepacia: 
characterization of pvdA, the gene encoding L-ornithine N(5)-oxygenase.

Sokol PA(1), Darling P, Woods DE, Mahenthiralingam E, Kooi C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, University of Calgary 
Health Sciences Center, Calgary, Alberta T2N 4N1. psokol@ucalgary.ca

Burkholderia cepacia is a frequent cause of respiratory infections in cystic 
fibrosis patients. B. cepacia has been shown to produce at least four 
siderophores which may play a role in the virulence of this organism. To 
characterize genes involved in the synthesis of siderophores, Tn5-OT182 mutants 
were isolated in strain K56-2, which produces two siderophores, salicylic acid 
(SA) and ornibactins. Two mutants were characterized that did not produce zones 
on Chrome Azurol S agar in a commonly used assay to detect siderophore activity. 
These mutants were determined to produce sevenfold more SA than K56-2 yet did 
not produce detectable amounts of ornibactins. These mutants, designated I117 
and T10, had a transposon insertion in genes with significant homology to 
pyoverdine biosynthesis genes of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. I117 contained an 
insertion in a pvdA homolog, the gene for the enzyme L-ornithine N(5)-oxygenase, 
which catalyzes the hydroxylation of L-ornithine. Ornibactin synthesis in this 
mutant was partially restored when the precursor L-N(5)-OH-Orn was added to the 
culture medium. T10 contained an insertion in a pvdD homolog, which is a peptide 
synthetase involved in pyoverdine synthesis. beta-Galactosidase activity was 
iron regulated in both I117 and T10, suggesting that the transposon was inserted 
downstream of an iron-regulated promoter. Tn5-OT182 contains a lacZ gene that is 
expressed when inserted downstream of an active promoter. Both I117 and T10 were 
deficient in uptake of iron complexed to either ornibactins or SA, suggesting 
that transposon insertions in ornibactin biosynthesis genes also affected other 
components of the iron transport mechanism. The B. cepacia pvdA homolog was 
approximately 47% identical and 59% similar to L-ornithine N(5)-oxygenase from 
P. aeruginosa. Three clones were identified from a K56-2 cosmid library that 
partially restored ornibactin production, SA production, and SA uptake to 
parental levels but did not affect the rate of (59)Fe-ornibactin uptake in I117. 
A chromosomal pvdA deletion mutant was constructed that had a phenotype similar 
to that of I117 except that it did not hyperproduce SA. The pvdA mutants were 
less virulent than the parent strain in chronic and acute models of respiratory 
infection. A functional pvdA gene appears to be required for effective 
colonization and persistence in B. cepacia lung infections.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.67.9.4443-4455.1999
PMCID: PMC96763
PMID: 10456885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
