---
pmid: '22585903'
title: The transcription factor network associated with the amino acid response in
  mammalian cells.
authors:
- Kilberg MS
- Balasubramanian M
- Fu L
- Shan J
journal: Adv Nutr
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3649461
doi: 10.3945/an.112.001891
---

# The transcription factor network associated with the amino acid response in mammalian cells.
**Authors:** Kilberg MS, Balasubramanian M, Fu L, Shan J
**Journal:** Adv Nutr (2012)
**DOI:** [10.3945/an.112.001891](https://doi.org/10.3945/an.112.001891)
**PMC:** [PMC3649461](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3649461/)

## Abstract

1. Adv Nutr. 2012 May 1;3(3):295-306. doi: 10.3945/an.112.001891.

The transcription factor network associated with the amino acid response in 
mammalian cells.

Kilberg MS(1), Balasubramanian M, Fu L, Shan J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Florida 
College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL. mkilberg@u.edu

Mammals exhibit multiple adaptive mechanisms that sense and respond to 
fluctuations in dietary nutrients. Consumption of reduced total dietary protein 
or a protein diet that is deficient in 1 or more of the essential amino acids 
triggers wide-ranging changes in feeding behavior and gene expression. At the 
level of individual cells, dietary protein deficiency is manifested as amino 
acid (AA) deprivation, which activates the AA response (AAR). The AAR is 
composed of a collection of signal transduction pathways that terminate in 
specific transcriptional programs designed to catalyze adaptation to the 
nutrient stress or, ultimately, undergo apoptosis. Independently of the AAR, 
endoplasmic reticulum stress activates 3 signaling pathways, collectively 
referred to as the unfolded protein response. The transcription factor 
activating transcription factor 4 is one of the terminal transcriptional 
mediators for both the AAR and the unfolded protein response, leading to a 
significant degree of overlap with regard to the target genes for these stress 
pathways. Over the past 5 y, research has revealed that the basic leucine zipper 
superfamily of transcription factors plays the central role in the AAR. 
Formation of both homo- and heterodimers among the activating transcription 
factor, CCAAT enhancer-binding protein, and FOS/JUN families of basic leucine 
zipper proteins forms the nucleus of a highly integrated transcription factor 
network that determines the initiation, magnitude, and duration of the cellular 
response to dietary protein or AA limitation.

DOI: 10.3945/an.112.001891
PMCID: PMC3649461
PMID: 22585903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Author disclosures: M. S. Kilberg, M. 
Balasubramanian, L. Fu, and J. Shan, no conflicts of interest.
