---
pmid: '23220234'
title: Dimerization of pro-oncogenic protein Anterior Gradient 2 is required for the
  interaction with BiP/GRP78.
authors:
- Ryu J
- Park SG
- Lee PY
- Cho S
- Lee DH
- Kim GH
- Kim JH
- Park BC
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.11.105
---

# Dimerization of pro-oncogenic protein Anterior Gradient 2 is required for the interaction with BiP/GRP78.
**Authors:** Ryu J, Park SG, Lee PY, Cho S, Lee DH, Kim GH, Kim JH, Park BC
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.11.105](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.11.105)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Jan 11;430(2):610-5. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.11.105. Epub 2012 Dec 4.

Dimerization of pro-oncogenic protein Anterior Gradient 2 is required for the 
interaction with BiP/GRP78.

Ryu J(1), Park SG, Lee PY, Cho S, Lee DH, Kim GH, Kim JH, Park BC.

Author information:
(1)Medical Proteomics Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience & 
Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon 305-333, Republic of Korea.

Anterior Gradient 2 (AGR2), an ER stress-inducible protein, has been reported to 
be localized in endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and its level is elevated in numerous 
metastatic cancers. Recently, it has been demonstrated that AGR2 is involved in 
the control of ER homeostasis. However, the molecular mechanism how AGR2 
regulates ER stress response remains unclear. Herein we show that AGR2 
homo-dimerizes through an intermolecular disulfide bond. Moreover, dimerization 
of AGR2 attenuates ER stress-induced cell death through the association with 
BiP/GRP78. Thus, these results suggest that dimerization of AGR2 is crucial in 
mediating the ER stress signaling pathway.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.11.105
PMID: 23220234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
