---
pmid: '19524513'
title: Phosphorylation-driven assembly of the RIP1-RIP3 complex regulates programmed
  necrosis and virus-induced inflammation.
authors:
- Cho YS
- Challa S
- Moquin D
- Genga R
- Ray TD
- Guildford M
- Chan FK
journal: Cell
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2727676
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.05.037
---

# Phosphorylation-driven assembly of the RIP1-RIP3 complex regulates programmed necrosis and virus-induced inflammation.
**Authors:** Cho YS, Challa S, Moquin D, Genga R, Ray TD, Guildford M, Chan FK
**Journal:** Cell (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2009.05.037](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2009.05.037)
**PMC:** [PMC2727676](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2727676/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2009 Jun 12;137(6):1112-23. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.05.037.

Phosphorylation-driven assembly of the RIP1-RIP3 complex regulates programmed 
necrosis and virus-induced inflammation.

Cho YS(1), Challa S, Moquin D, Genga R, Ray TD, Guildford M, Chan FK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, MA 01655, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2009 Jul 23;138(2):229-32. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.07.006.

Programmed necrosis is a form of caspase-independent cell death whose molecular 
regulation is poorly understood. The kinase RIP1 is crucial for programmed 
necrosis, but also mediates activation of the prosurvival transcription factor 
NF-kappaB. We postulated that additional molecules are required to specifically 
activate programmed necrosis. Using a RNA interference screen, we identified the 
kinase RIP3 as a crucial activator for programmed necrosis induced by TNF and 
during virus infection. RIP3 regulates necrosis-specific RIP1 phosphorylation. 
The phosphorylation of RIP1 and RIP3 stabilizes their association within the 
pronecrotic complex, activates the pronecrotic kinase activity, and triggers 
downstream reactive oxygen species production. The pronecrotic RIP1-RIP3 complex 
is induced during vaccinia virus infection. Consequently, RIP3(-/-) mice 
exhibited severely impaired virus-induced tissue necrosis, inflammation, and 
control of viral replication. Our findings suggest that RIP3 controls programmed 
necrosis by initiating the pronecrotic kinase cascade, and that this is 
necessary for the inflammatory response against virus infections.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.05.037
PMCID: PMC2727676
PMID: 19524513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
