---
pmid: '9223296'
title: The Schizosaccharomyces pombe spindle checkpoint protein mad2p blocks anaphase
  and genetically interacts with the anaphase-promoting complex.
authors:
- He X
- Patterson TE
- Sazer S
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1997'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC21538
doi: 10.1073/pnas.94.15.7965
---

# The Schizosaccharomyces pombe spindle checkpoint protein mad2p blocks anaphase and genetically interacts with the anaphase-promoting complex.
**Authors:** He X, Patterson TE, Sazer S
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.94.15.7965](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.94.15.7965)
**PMC:** [PMC21538](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC21538/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Jul 22;94(15):7965-70. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.94.15.7965.

The Schizosaccharomyces pombe spindle checkpoint protein mad2p blocks anaphase 
and genetically interacts with the anaphase-promoting complex.

He X(1), Patterson TE, Sazer S.

Author information:
(1)Verna and Marrs McLean Department of Biochemistry, Baylor College of 
Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The spindle checkpoint monitors mitotic spindle integrity and the attachment of 
kinetochores to the spindle. Upon sensing a defect the checkpoint blocks cell 
cycle progression and thereby prevents chromosome missegregation. Previous 
studies in budding yeast show that the activated spindle checkpoint inhibits the 
onset of anaphase by an unknown mechanism. One possible target of the spindle 
checkpoint is anaphase promoting complex (APC), which controls all postmetaphase 
events that are blocked by spindle checkpoint activation. We have isolated mad2, 
a spindle checkpoint component in fission yeast, and shown that mad2 
overexpression activates the checkpoint and causes a cell cycle arrest at the 
metaphase-to-anaphase transition. In addition to the observation that 
mad2-induced arrest can be partially relieved by mitosis-promoting factor 
inactivation, we present genetic evidence consistent with the hypothesis that 
the spindle checkpoint imposes a cell cycle arrest by inhibiting APC-dependent 
proteolysis.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.94.15.7965
PMCID: PMC21538
PMID: 9223296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The spindle checkpoint monitors mitotic spindle integrity and the attachment of kinetochores to the spindle. Upon sensing a defect the checkpoint blocks cell cycle progression and thereby prevents chromosome missegregation. Previous studies in budding yeast show that the activated spindle checkpoint inhibits the onset of anaphase by an unknown mechanism. One possible target of the spindle checkpoint is anaphase promoting complex (APC), which controls all postmetaphase events that are blocked by spindle checkpoint activation. We have isolated mad2 , a spindle checkpoint component in fission yeast, and shown that mad2 overexpression activates the checkpoint and causes a cell cycle arrest at the metaphase-to-anaphase transition. In addition to the observation that mad2 -induced arrest can be partially relieved by mitosis-promoting factor inactivation, we present genetic evidence consistent with the hypothesis that the spindle checkpoint imposes a cell cycle arrest by inhibiting APC-dependent proteolysis.

DNA Methods.

In a screen described in detail elsewhere (X.H., T.E.P., and S.S., unpublished data), a S. pombe cDNA library in pREP3X vector (a gift from Bruce Edgar, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, and Chris Norbury, University of Oxford, U.K.), in which cDNA expression is controlled by the thiamine-repressible nmt1 promoter ( 27 ), was transformed into wild-type cells. Transformants were screened based on the toxicity and the mitotic defects caused by cDNA overexpression. Plasmids from S. pombe transformants were recovered by standard procedures ( 26 ) and amplified in Escherichia coli . The cDNA inserts and their restriction fragments were subcloned into Bluescript KS(−) (Stratagene) and sequenced using the Sequenase Version 2.0 (United States Biochemical). pREP41X-mad2 and pREP81X-mad2 were constructed by subcloning the Xho I/ Bam HI fragment of the mad2 cDNA from pREP3X into pREP41X and pREP81X, respectively, to achieve lower levels of mad2 overexpression ( 27 ).

RESULTS

In a cDNA library overproduction screen in which cells displaying transcription-dependent lethality were examined microscopically, mad2 was isolated as a gene whose overproduction arrests cells in mitosis (X.H., T.E.P., and S.S., unpublished data). The amino acid sequence of fission yeast mad2p is 53% identical to budding yeast Mad2p (GenBank accession no. U14132 ) (Fig. 1 A ). If mad2p functions as a spindle checkpoint protein in fission yeast, cells lacking mad2p would be expected to be hypersensitive to microtubule-destabilizing drugs, such as TBZ, because of their inability to arrest cell cycle progression in the presence of a defective spindle ( 7 , 8 ). A haploid strain containing a mad2 deletion mutation ( mad2 Δ ) was viable, but the strain was hypersensitive to TBZ (Fig. 1 B ).

To determine whether mad2 Δ was also sensitive to spindle defects of a different kind, we tested the synthetic lethality of mad2 Δ and nda3–311 cs . nda3–311 cs mutants at the restrictive temperature are arrested at prometaphase and lack a mitotic spindle due to a cold-sensitive mutation in the β-tubulin gene. The nda3–311 cs phenotype is highly reversible: within 6 min after return to the permissive temperature, the cells form a functional mitotic spindle and complete mitosis properly ( 33 ). Both mad2 Δ and nda3–311 cs , as single mutants, maintained high viability with cold treatment. In contrast, the mad2 Δ nda3–311 cs double mutant rapidly lost viability (Fig. 1 C ). Under these conditions the double mutant, but neither of the single mutants, continued to synthesize DNA, as evidenced by the appearance of cells with a greater than 2C DNA content (Fig. 1 D ). Microscopic observation of the cells stained with DAPI showed that after 9 hr at the restrictive temperature, 33% of the double mutant cells had abnormally large nuclei and very bright DNA fluorescence. In 59% of cells, septation proceeded in the absence of nuclear division, resulting in the “cut” phenotype ( 34 ) and an unequal partitioning of DNA to the daughter cells. These microscopic images are consistent with the histograms of DNA content (Fig. 1 D ) and provide an explanation for the origin of heteroploidy in the double mutant. mad2 Δ cells, therefore, bypass mitosis in the absence of a normal spindle and undergo both septation and the next round of DNA replication.

Overexpression of the mad2 cDNA in fission yeast, under control of the thiamine-repressible promoter nmt1 ( 35 ), inhibited cell growth. Thirteen hours after transcriptional derepression of mad2 at 32°C, cell division ceased and the arrested cells displayed characteristic features of metaphase: the H1 kinase activity of MPF was significantly higher than that of wild-type asynchronous cells when normalized to the amount of immunoprecipitated p34 cdc2 (Fig. 2 A ), and >50% of the cells had condensed chromosomes and a short mitotic spindle (Fig. 2 B ), compared with only 2% in a wild-type asynchronous culture ( 31 ).

The high MPF activity in cells overexpressing mad2 could be either a cause or a consequence of the metaphase arrest resulting from mad2 overexpression. To distinguish between these possibilities, we investigated the effects of MPF inactivation on cell cycle arrest induced by mad2 overexpression. The mad2 cDNA was transformed into cdc2–33 ts cells, which contain a mutation in the MPF kinase catalytic subunit that results in rapid, temperature-sensitive loss of kinase activity ( 28 , 36 ) and cell cycle arrest after 30 min at the restrictive temperature ( 37 ). In both wild-type cells (Fig. 2 B ) and the cdc2–33 ts mutant grown at the permissive temperature (data not shown), mad2 overexpression arrested cells at metaphase with a linear array of brightly stained condensed chromosomes and a short mitotic spindle. The cells were then transferred to the restrictive temperature to inactivate MPF. After 1 hr, the chromosomes remained condensed and unseparated and the mitotic spindle remained intact and failed to elongate. The most striking abnormality was the relocalization of the undivided nucleus to one-half of the cell (Fig. 2 C ), whereas in wild-type cells, relocalization occurs only after nuclear division. In some of these cells (Fig. 2 C , cells 3 and 4), cytoplasmic microtubule structures started to form (Fig. 2 C , arrows in cells 3 and 4) before the short spindle completely disassembled, although in wild-type cells, cytoplasmic microtubule reassembly occurs only after mitotic spindle elongation and disassembly ( 31 ). After 2 hr, 40–45% of the arrested cells had a medial septum (Fig. 2 D ), one anucleated cell, and one uninucleated cell with decondensed chromosomes. Anti-tubulin immunofluorescence revealed that these septated cells no longer had a mitotic spindle but contained cytoplasmic microtubules (data not shown). MPF inactivation in cdc13–117 ts , a strain harboring a mutation in the cyclin B subunit of MPF ( 38 ), had similar effects on mad2 arrested cells (data not shown).

mad2 overexpression prevented chromosome separation, spindle elongation, and exit from mitosis, suggesting that it blocked all aspects of the metaphase-to-anaphase transition. APC, a protein complex that functions as a ubiquitin ligase in the proteolysis pathway, controls the metaphase-to-anaphase transition. Fission yeast cells with a temperature-sensitive mutation in the APC subunits cut4, cut9 , or nuc2 transiently arrest in metaphase at the restrictive temperature with phenotypes that resemble the metaphase arrest induced by mad2 overexpression in wild-type cells ( 20 , 22 , 23 ). These mutant cells eventually exit from mitosis without undergoing anaphase ( 20 , 22 , 23 ), and their terminal phenotypes are similar to mad2 -arrested cells in which MPF has subsequently been inactivated: the cells are septated, have a single nucleus in one of the daughter cells, and do not undergo spindle elongation. Because mad2 overexpression blocks the metaphase-to-anaphase transition, it is possible that activation of the spindle checkpoint arrests cell cycle progression by inhibiting APC activity. This hypothesis predicts a genetic interaction between the spindle checkpoint and protein ubiquitination systems. To test this possibility we asked whether mutants in APC are hypersensitive to mad2 overexpression when compared with wild-type cells (Fig. 3 ). Medium-level expression of mad2 (pREP41X-mad2) had no obvious effect on wild-type cell growth but almost completely inhibited the growth of both cut9–665 ts and nuc2–663 ts cells at the permissive temperature (25°C). Low-level expression (pREP81X-mad2) also specifically inhibited the mutants. As expected, high-level expression of mad2 (pREP3X-mad2) was lethal to all three strains.
