---
pmid: '24507776'
title: ERCC6L2 mutations link a distinct bone-marrow-failure syndrome to DNA repair
  and mitochondrial function.
authors:
- Tummala H
- Kirwan M
- Walne AJ
- Hossain U
- Jackson N
- Pondarre C
- Plagnol V
- Vulliamy T
- Dokal I
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2014'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3928664
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.01.007
---

# ERCC6L2 mutations link a distinct bone-marrow-failure syndrome to DNA repair and mitochondrial function.
**Authors:** Tummala H, Kirwan M, Walne AJ, Hossain U, Jackson N, Pondarre C, Plagnol V, Vulliamy T, Dokal I
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.01.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.01.007)
**PMC:** [PMC3928664](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3928664/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2014 Feb 6;94(2):246-56. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.01.007.

ERCC6L2 mutations link a distinct bone-marrow-failure syndrome to DNA repair and 
mitochondrial function.

Tummala H(1), Kirwan M(1), Walne AJ(1), Hossain U(2), Jackson N(3), Pondarre 
C(4), Plagnol V(5), Vulliamy T(6), Dokal I(2).

Author information:
(1)Blizard Institute, Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, 
Queen Mary University of London, London E1 2AT, UK.
(2)Blizard Institute, Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, 
Queen Mary University of London, London E1 2AT, UK; Barts Health NHS Trust, 
London E1 1BB, UK.
(3)Department of Haematology, University Hospital, Coventry CV2 2DX, UK.
(4)Institute of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Lyon I University, Lyon 
69008, France.
(5)University College London Genetics Institute, London WC1E 6BT, UK.
(6)Blizard Institute, Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, 
Queen Mary University of London, London E1 2AT, UK. Electronic address: 
t.vulliamy@qmul.ac.uk.

Exome sequencing was performed in three index cases with bone marrow failure and 
neurological dysfunction and whose parents are first-degree cousins. Homozygous 
truncating mutations were identified in ERCC6L2 in two of the individuals. Both 
of these mutations affect the subcellular localization and stability of ERCC6L2. 
We show here that knockdown of ERCC6L2 in human A549 cells significantly reduced 
their viability upon exposure to the DNA-damaging agents mitomycin C and 
Irofulven, but not etoposide and camptothecin, suggesting a role in nucleotide 
excision repair. ERCC6L2-knockdown cells also displayed H2AX phosphorylation, 
which significantly increased upon genotoxic stress, suggesting an early 
DNA-damage response. Intriguingly, ERCC6L2 was seen to translocate to the 
mitochondria and the nucleus in response to DNA damage, and ERCC6L2 knockdown 
induced intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS). Treatment with the ROS 
scavenger N-acetyl cysteine attenuated the Irofulven-induced cytotoxicity in 
ERCC6L2-knockdown cells and abolished ERCCGL2 traffic to the mitochondria and 
nucleus in response to this DNA-damaging agent. Collectively, these observations 
identify a distinct bone-marrow-failure syndrome due to mutations in ERCC6L2, a 
gene implicated in DNA repair and mitochondrial function.

Copyright © 2014 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.01.007
PMCID: PMC3928664
PMID: 24507776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Exome sequencing was performed in three index cases with bone marrow failure and neurological dysfunction and whose parents are first-degree cousins. Homozygous truncating mutations were identified in ERCC6L2 in two of the individuals. Both of these mutations affect the subcellular localization and stability of ERCC6L2. We show here that knockdown of ERCC6L2 in human A549 cells significantly reduced their viability upon exposure to the DNA-damaging agents mitomycin C and Irofulven, but not etoposide and camptothecin, suggesting a role in nucleotide excision repair. ERCC6L2 -knockdown cells also displayed H2AX phosphorylation, which significantly increased upon genotoxic stress, suggesting an early DNA-damage response. Intriguingly, ERCC6L2 was seen to translocate to the mitochondria and the nucleus in response to DNA damage, and ERCC6L2 knockdown induced intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS). Treatment with the ROS scavenger N-acetyl cysteine attenuated the Irofulven-induced cytotoxicity in ERCC6L2 -knockdown cells and abolished ERCCGL2 traffic to the mitochondria and nucleus in response to this DNA-damaging agent. Collectively, these observations identify a distinct bone-marrow-failure syndrome due to mutations in ERCC6L2 , a gene implicated in DNA repair and mitochondrial function.

Introduction

Bone-marrow-failure syndromes are a heterogeneous group of life-threatening disorders characterized by the inability of the bone marrow to make an adequate number of mature blood cells. 1,2 They can be variable in their severity and can affect either one or all of the hematopoietic lineages. In some cases, individuals can be classified into recognized syndromes, such as Fanconi anemia (FA [MIM 227650 ]) 3 and dyskeratosis congenita (DC [MIM 305000 ]). 4

In these diseases, the categorization of affected individuals has been facilitated by the recognition of characteristic features, such as the diagnostic mucocutaneous symptoms of DC (abnormal skin pigmentation, nail dystrophy, and leukoplakia). Alternatively, specific genetic and/or functional defects can be used in diagnosis, exemplified by the characteristically increased chromosomal breakage observed in FA individuals. However, there are also cases where the bone marrow failure is associated with one or more extrahematopoietic abnormalities but does not fit into a recognized syndrome and the underlying genetic and functional basis is thus unknown.

The recent availability of next-generation sequencing technology is making it possible to elucidate the genetic basis and pathophysiology of uncharacterized human diseases. From our repository of bone-marrow-failure cases, we chose three genetically uncharacterized index cases in whom to perform exome sequencing with the aim of identifying variants in a common gene. They had trilineage (erythroid, myeloid, and megakaryocytic) bone marrow failure and came from consanguineous families; all three also had developmental delay characterized by learning disability, and two out of the three cases also had microcephaly ( Table 1 ). We hypothesized that this approach would enrich for homozygous disease-causing mutations.

Discussion

In this study, we report on two homozygous truncating ERCC6L2 mutations identified in individuals with neurological dysfunction (developmental delay and microcephaly) and bone marrow failure (cases 1 and 2, Table 1 and Figure 1 ). These mutations cause impaired subcellular localization and reduced stability of ERCC6L2 ( Figure 2 ). We show that ERCC6L2 acts as a DNA-damage-response protein by exacerbating γH2AX foci formation in response to DNA-damaging agents ( Figure 3 ). Our data also demonstrate that ERCC6L2 traffics to the mitochondria and nucleus in a ROS-dependent fashion in response to DNA damage ( Figures 4 and 5 ).

Given the deficiency of ERCC6L2 in the bone marrow of individuals harboring LOF variants in ERCC6L2, it is reasonable to suggest that their DNA-damage response is impaired. Because a DNA-damage response is required during cell proliferation and tissue maintenance, its persistent impairment would result in a slow accumulation of DNA damage. In addition to showing the dual traffic of ERCC6L2 from the cytosol to the mitochondria and nucleus after genotoxic stress, we have shown a parallel increase in γH2AX foci and intracellular ROS in ERCC6L2 -knockdown cells. Increasing ROS levels leading to alteration in cellular homeostasis is considered to be of major pathological significance in neurodegenerative disorders 28 and bone marrow failure. 29

There is also evidence that the increase in ROS levels and incompetent DNA-damage repair contributes to the pathogenesis of bone-marrow-failure syndromes. 30 For example, although FA is primarily characterized by chromosome instability, developmental abnormalities, and cancer susceptibility, it also shows reduced mitochondrial function and increased ROS production. 31 CS and the functionally related xeroderma pigmentosum (XP [MIM 278700 , 610651 , 278720 , 278730 , 278740 , 278760 , and 278780 ]) are also caused by an inability to repair DNA damage, particularly UV-induced DNA crosslinking 32 and increased ROS production. 32,33 Cells from CS individuals and CS mouse models have also shown increased ROS activity and accumulation of damaged mitochondria as a result of defective mitochondrial clearance by autophagy. 19 Recently, studies on DC lymphoblasts have revealed elevated levels of ROS and a pronounced DNA-damage response leading to a proliferative defect and apoptosis. 34,35 It is also known that increased ROS levels impair the self-renewal capacity of hematopoietic progenitor cells in bone marrow. 31 Taking all this together, we propose that an increase in ROS and the accumulation of DNA damage are the underlying causes of the disease observed in our affected individuals.

Although some features overlap with previously described syndromes, the individuals reported in this study also have significant differences ( Table 1 ). For instance, FA is characterized by abnormal chromosomal breakage, but analysis of peripheral-blood lymphocytes in our affected individuals did not identify such defects. The increased sensitivity to MMC in FA is also much more pronounced than that observed in our ERCC6L2 -knockdown assays ( Figure 3 A) and the primary cells of these individuals ( Table 1 ). Equally, bone marrow failure is not a reported feature of CS, although neurological abnormalities are present in most cases. 36 XP, on the other hand, is primarily characterized by hypersensitivity to sunlight and subsequent development of carcinomas, and only some cases present with neurologic disease. 36 Interestingly, a recent study reported a variant in ERCC4 ( XPF ) in a CS individual with overlapping features of XP (severe photosensitivity and abnormal skin pigmentation) and FA (abnormal chromosomal breakage). 37 Hoyeraal Hreidarsson syndrome (HHS [MIM 300240 ]) is characterized by neurological dysfunction, microcephaly, and bone marrow failure and is considered to be a severe form of DC, 38 a telomere maintenance disorder, 39,40 which itself commonly manifests with mucocutaneous abnormalities and bone marrow failure. 4 Our individuals lacked the mucocutaneous features, immunodeficiency, and cerebellar hypoplasia typically seen in DC and HHS and, in comparison to age-matched controls, had variable telomere lengths when measured by multiplex PCR 41 ( Table 1 and Figure S8 ). It is also notable that exome sequencing did not identify variations in any of the known genes associated with bone marrow failure in these individuals.

Because there is no precise match between all the features in the cases reported here and other genetically characterized disorders, we propose the presently described disorder as a distinct bone-marrow-failure syndrome. We also believe that our study highlights the combined roles of intracellular ROS and DNA damage in driving bone marrow failure.
