---
pmid: '11809897'
title: Human AP-endonuclease 1 and hnRNP-L interact with a nCaRE-like repressor element
  in the AP-endonuclease 1 promoter.
authors:
- Kuninger DT
- Izumi T
- Papaconstantinou J
- Mitra S
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC100287
doi: 10.1093/nar/30.3.823
---

# Human AP-endonuclease 1 and hnRNP-L interact with a nCaRE-like repressor element in the AP-endonuclease 1 promoter.
**Authors:** Kuninger DT, Izumi T, Papaconstantinou J, Mitra S
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/30.3.823](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/30.3.823)
**PMC:** [PMC100287](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC100287/)

## Abstract

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Feb 1;30(3):823-9. doi: 10.1093/nar/30.3.823.

Human AP-endonuclease 1 and hnRNP-L interact with a nCaRE-like repressor element 
in the AP-endonuclease 1 promoter.

Kuninger DT(1), Izumi T, Papaconstantinou J, Mitra S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Biological Chemistry and Genetics and Sealy Center for 
Molecular Science, University of Texas Medical Branch, 6.136 Medical Research 
Building, Route 1079, Galveston, TX 77555, USA.

The major human AP-endonuclease 1 (APE1) is a multifunctional protein that plays 
a central role in the repair of damaged DNA by acting as a dual-function 
nuclease in the base excision repair pathway. This enzyme was also independently 
identified as a redox activator of AP-1 DNA-binding activity and has 
subsequently been shown to activate a variety of transcription factors via a 
redox mechanism. In a third distinct role, APE1 was identified as a component of 
a trans-acting complex that acts as a repressor by binding to the negative 
calcium responsive elements (nCaRE)-A and nCaRE-B, which were first discovered 
in the promoter of the human parathyroid gene and later in the APE1 promoter 
itself. Here we show that the nuclear protein complex which binds to the 
nCaRE-B2 of the hAPE1 gene contains APE1 itself and the heterogeneous nuclear 
ribonucleoprotein L (hnRNP-L). The interaction between the APE1 and hnRNP-L 
proteins does not require the presence of nCaRE-B2. Our results support the 
possibility that the APE1 gene is down-regulated by its own product, which would 
be the first such example of the regulation of a DNA repair enzyme, and identify 
a novel function of hnRNP-L in transcriptional regulation.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/30.3.823
PMCID: PMC100287
PMID: 11809897 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
