---
pmid: '11988487'
title: Domain mapping studies reveal that the M domain of hsp90 serves as a molecular
  scaffold to regulate Akt-dependent phosphorylation of endothelial nitric oxide synthase
  and NO release.
authors:
- Fontana J
- Fulton D
- Chen Y
- Fairchild TA
- McCabe TJ
- Fujita N
- Tsuruo T
- Sessa WC
journal: Circ Res
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1161/01.res.0000016837.26733.be
---

# Domain mapping studies reveal that the M domain of hsp90 serves as a molecular scaffold to regulate Akt-dependent phosphorylation of endothelial nitric oxide synthase and NO release.
**Authors:** Fontana J, Fulton D, Chen Y, Fairchild TA, McCabe TJ, Fujita N, Tsuruo T, Sessa WC
**Journal:** Circ Res (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1161/01.res.0000016837.26733.be](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.res.0000016837.26733.be)

## Abstract

1. Circ Res. 2002 May 3;90(8):866-73. doi: 10.1161/01.res.0000016837.26733.be.

Domain mapping studies reveal that the M domain of hsp90 serves as a molecular 
scaffold to regulate Akt-dependent phosphorylation of endothelial nitric oxide 
synthase and NO release.

Fontana J(1), Fulton D, Chen Y, Fairchild TA, McCabe TJ, Fujita N, Tsuruo T, 
Sessa WC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Cardiobiology Program, Boyer Center 
for Molecular Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Conn 
06536, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2002 May 3;90(8):838-41. doi: 10.1161/01.res.0000018173.10175.ff.

Protein-protein interactions with the molecular chaperone hsp90 and 
phosphorylation on serine 1179 by the protein kinase Akt leads to activation of 
endothelial nitric oxide synthase. However, the interplay between these 
protein-protein interactions remains to be established. In the present study, we 
show that vascular endothelial growth factor stimulates the coordinated 
association of hsp90, Akt, and resultant phosphorylation of eNOS. 
Characterization of the domains of hsp90 required to bind eNOS, using yeast 
2-hybrid, cell-based coprecipitation experiments, and GST-fusion proteins, 
revealed that the M region of hsp90 interacts with the amino terminus of eNOS 
and Akt. The addition of purified hsp90 to in vitro kinase assays facilitates 
Akt-driven phosphorylation of recombinant eNOS protein, but not a short peptide 
encoding the Akt phosphorylation site, suggesting that hsp90 may function as a 
scaffold for eNOS and Akt. In vivo, coexpression of adenoviral or the cDNA for 
hsp90 with eNOS promotes nitric oxide release; an effect eliminated using a 
catalytically functional phosphorylation mutant of eNOS. These results 
demonstrate that stimulation of endothelial cells with vascular endothelial 
growth factor recruits eNOS and Akt to an adjacent region on the same domain of 
hsp90, thereby facilitating eNOS phosphorylation and enzyme activation.

DOI: 10.1161/01.res.0000016837.26733.be
PMID: 11988487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
