---
pmid: '35551457'
title: Molecular insights into biogenesis of glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor proteins.
authors:
- Xu Y
- Jia G
- Li T
- Zhou Z
- Luo Y
- Chao Y
- Bao J
- Su Z
- Qu Q
- Li D
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2022'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC9098846
doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-30250-6
---

# Molecular insights into biogenesis of glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor proteins.
**Authors:** Xu Y, Jia G, Li T, Zhou Z, Luo Y, Chao Y, Bao J, Su Z, Qu Q, Li D
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-022-30250-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30250-6)
**PMC:** [PMC9098846](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9098846/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Commun. 2022 May 12;13(1):2617. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-30250-6.

Molecular insights into biogenesis of glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor 
proteins.

Xu Y(#)(1), Jia G(#)(2), Li T(#)(1), Zhou Z(#)(3), Luo Y(1)(4), Chao Y(3), Bao 
J(1), Su Z(5), Qu Q(6), Li D(7).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, CAS Center for Excellence in 
Molecular Cell Science, Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, 
University of CAS, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), 320 Yueyang Road, 200030, 
Shanghai, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, Department of 
Geriatrics and National Clinical Research Center for Geriatrics, West China 
Hospital, Sichuan University, 610044, Chengdu, China.
(3)Shanghai Stomatological Hospital, School of Stomatology, Shanghai Key 
Laboratory of Medical Epigenetics, International Co-laboratory of Medical 
Epigenetics and Metabolism (Ministry of Science and Technology), Institutes of 
Biomedical Sciences, Department of Systems Biology for Medicine, Fudan 
University, 200032, Shanghai, China.
(4)School of Life Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, 393 Middle 
Huaxia Road, 201210, Shanghai, China.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, Department of 
Geriatrics and National Clinical Research Center for Geriatrics, West China 
Hospital, Sichuan University, 610044, Chengdu, China. zsu@scu.edu.cn.
(6)Shanghai Stomatological Hospital, School of Stomatology, Shanghai Key 
Laboratory of Medical Epigenetics, International Co-laboratory of Medical 
Epigenetics and Metabolism (Ministry of Science and Technology), Institutes of 
Biomedical Sciences, Department of Systems Biology for Medicine, Fudan 
University, 200032, Shanghai, China. qqh@fudan.edu.cn.
(7)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, CAS Center for Excellence in 
Molecular Cell Science, Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, 
University of CAS, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), 320 Yueyang Road, 200030, 
Shanghai, China. dianfan.li@sibcb.ac.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Eukaryotic cells are coated with an abundance of glycosylphosphatidylinositol 
anchor proteins (GPI-APs) that play crucial roles in fertilization, 
neurogenesis, and immunity. The removal of a hydrophobic signal peptide and 
covalent attachment of GPI at the new carboxyl terminus are catalyzed by an 
endoplasmic reticulum membrane GPI transamidase complex (GPI-T) conserved among 
all eukaryotes. Here, we report the cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) structure 
of the human GPI-T at a global 2.53-Å resolution, revealing an equimolar 
heteropentameric assembly. Structure-based mutagenesis suggests a legumain-like 
mechanism for the recognition and cleavage of proprotein substrates, and an 
endogenous GPI in the structure defines a composite cavity for the lipid 
substrate. This elongated active site, stemming from the membrane and spanning 
an additional ~22-Å space toward the catalytic dyad, is structurally suited for 
both substrates which feature an amphipathic pattern that matches this geometry. 
Our work presents an important step towards the mechanistic understanding of 
GPI-AP biosynthesis.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-022-30250-6
PMCID: PMC9098846
PMID: 35551457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
