---
pmid: '9030779'
title: Functional characterization of the N-glycosylation sites of human acid sphingomyelinase
  by site-directed mutagenesis.
authors:
- Ferlinz K
- Hurwitz R
- Moczall H
- Lansmann S
- Schuchman EH
- Sandhoff K
journal: Eur J Biochem
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1997.511_1a.x
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Functional characterization of the N-glycosylation sites of human acid sphingomyelinase by site-directed mutagenesis.
**Authors:** Ferlinz K, Hurwitz R, Moczall H, Lansmann S, Schuchman EH, Sandhoff K
**Journal:** Eur J Biochem (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1432-1033.1997.511_1a.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1432-1033.1997.511_1a.x)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Biochem. 1997 Jan 15;243(1-2):511-7. doi: 
10.1111/j.1432-1033.1997.511_1a.x.

Functional characterization of the N-glycosylation sites of human acid 
sphingomyelinase by site-directed mutagenesis.

Ferlinz K(1), Hurwitz R, Moczall H, Lansmann S, Schuchman EH, Sandhoff K.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Organische Chemie und Biochemie, Bonn, Germany.

Most soluble lysosomal enzymes require a mannose-6-phosphate recognition marker 
present on asparagine-linked oligosaccharides for proper targeting to lysosomes. 
We have determined the influence of the six potential N-linked oligosaccharide 
chains of human acid sphingomyelinase (ASM) on catalytic activity, targeting, 
and processing of the enzyme. Each N-glycosylation site was modified by 
site-directed mutagenesis and subsequently expressed in COS-1 cells. Evidence is 
presented that five of these sites are used. Elimination of the four N-terminal 
glycosylation sites does not disturb lysosomal targeting, processing, or 
enzymatic activity. However, removal of the two C-terminal N-glycosylation sites 
inhibits the formation of mature enzyme. Absence of glycosylation site five 
resulted in rapid cleavage of the primary translation product to an 
enzymatically inactive protein which accumulated inside the endoplasmic 
reticulum/Golgi, whereas deletion of glycosylation site six led to the formation 
of an inactive ASM precursor, also retained inside the endoplasmic 
reticulum/Golgi. Our results also provide evidence that the site of early 
proteolytic cleavage of newly synthesized ASM must be located between the second 
and third glycosylation sites.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1997.511_1a.x
PMID: 9030779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
