---
pmid: '9566925'
title: Localization of atypical protein kinase C isoforms into lysosome-targeted endosomes
  through interaction with p62.
authors:
- Sanchez P
- De Carcer G
- Sandoval IV
- Moscat J
- Diaz-Meco MT
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '1998'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC110686
doi: 10.1128/MCB.18.5.3069
---

# Localization of atypical protein kinase C isoforms into lysosome-targeted endosomes through interaction with p62.
**Authors:** Sanchez P, De Carcer G, Sandoval IV, Moscat J, Diaz-Meco MT
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.18.5.3069](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.18.5.3069)
**PMC:** [PMC110686](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC110686/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 May;18(5):3069-80. doi: 10.1128/MCB.18.5.3069.

Localization of atypical protein kinase C isoforms into lysosome-targeted 
endosomes through interaction with p62.

Sanchez P(1), De Carcer G, Sandoval IV, Moscat J, Diaz-Meco MT.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa (Consejo Superior de 
Investigaciones Cientificas-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid), Universidad 
Autónoma, Canto Blanco, Spain.

An increasing number of independent studies indicate that the atypical protein 
kinase C (PKC) isoforms (aPKCs) are critically involved in the control of cell 
proliferation and survival. The aPKCs are targets of important lipid mediators 
such as ceramide and the products of the PI 3-kinase. In addition, the aPKCs 
have been shown to interact with Ras and with two novel proteins, LIP 
(lambda-interacting protein; a selective activator of lambda/iotaPKC) and the 
product of par-4 (a gene induced during apoptosis), which is an inhibitor of 
both lambda/iotaPKC and zetaPKC. LIP and Par-4 interact with the zinc finger 
domain of the aPKCs where the lipid mediators have been shown to bind. Here we 
report the identification of p62, a previously described 
phosphotyrosine-independent p56(lck) SH2-interacting protein, as a molecule that 
interacts potently with the V1 domain of lambda/iotaPKC and, albeit with lower 
affinity, with zetaPKC. We also show in this study that ectopically expressed 
p62 colocalizes perfectly with both lambda/iotaPKC and zetaPKC. Interestingly, 
the endogenous p62, like the ectopically expressed protein, displays a punctate 
vesicular pattern and clearly colocalizes with endogenous lambda/iotaPKC and 
endogenous zetaPKC. P62 colocalizes with Rab7 and partially with lamp-1 and 
limp-II as well as with the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor in activated 
cells, but not with Rab5 or the transferrin receptor. Of functional relevance, 
expression of dominant negative lambda/iotaPKC, but not of the wild-type enzyme, 
severely impairs the endocytic membrane transport of the EGF receptor with no 
effect on the transferrin receptor. These findings strongly suggest that the 
aPKCs are anchored by p62 in the lysosome-targeted endosomal compartment, which 
seems critical for the control of the growth factor receptor trafficking. This 
is particularly relevant in light of the role played by the aPKCs in mitogenic 
cell signaling events.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.18.5.3069
PMCID: PMC110686
PMID: 9566925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

An increasing number of independent studies indicate that the atypical protein kinase C (PKC) isoforms (aPKCs) are critically involved in the control of cell proliferation and survival. The aPKCs are targets of important lipid mediators such as ceramide and the products of the PI 3-kinase. In addition, the aPKCs have been shown to interact with Ras and with two novel proteins, LIP (lambda-interacting protein; a selective activator of λ/ιPKC) and the product of par-4 (a gene induced during apoptosis), which is an inhibitor of both λ/ιPKC and ζPKC. LIP and Par-4 interact with the zinc finger domain of the aPKCs where the lipid mediators have been shown to bind. Here we report the identification of p62, a previously described phosphotyrosine-independent p56 lck SH2-interacting protein, as a molecule that interacts potently with the V1 domain of λ/ιPKC and, albeit with lower affinity, with ζPKC. We also show in this study that ectopically expressed p62 colocalizes perfectly with both λ/ιPKC and ζPKC. Interestingly, the endogenous p62, like the ectopically expressed protein, displays a punctate vesicular pattern and clearly colocalizes with endogenous λ/ιPKC and endogenous ζPKC. P62 colocalizes with Rab7 and partially with lamp-1 and limp-II as well as with the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor in activated cells, but not with Rab5 or the transferrin receptor. Of functional relevance, expression of dominant negative λ/ιPKC, but not of the wild-type enzyme, severely impairs the endocytic membrane transport of the EGF receptor with no effect on the transferrin receptor. These findings strongly suggest that the aPKCs are anchored by p62 in the lysosome-targeted endosomal compartment, which seems critical for the control of the growth factor receptor trafficking. This is particularly relevant in light of the role played by the aPKCs in mitogenic cell signaling events.

DISCUSSION

The regulation and subcellular localization of different PKC isotypes by protein-protein interaction is emerging as a field of intense research. PKCs have traditionally been considered the targets of lipid second messengers, which in most cases, such as DAG or the 3′-phosphoinositides, do not discriminate between the different PKC isotypes. Therefore, the existence of selective protein modulators for the different PKC isoforms may be an elegant way for the distinct isotypes to have a specific mechanism of regulation and/or action. In seminal work, Mochly-Rosen’s group first isolated a family of novel proteins termed RACKs, which serve to localize some classical PKC subspecies to cellular compartments where they may perform specific functions ( 35 , 46 ). We have recently identified two novel proteins that selectively bind to the aPKCs: LIP and Par-4 ( 12 , 13 ). Both proteins interact with the zinc finger region of the aPKCs ( 12 , 13 ), where the lipid second messengers have been shown to bind to regulate the classical isoforms ( 40 , 45 ). Therefore, it is not surprising that LIP and Par-4 have profound effects on the activation of the aPKCs in vitro and in vivo ( 12 , 13 ).

Together with the V3 domain, the V1 region in the regulatory domain of the different PKCs is where the major differences in the amino acid sequence are found ( 40 ). Kuroda et al. ( 30 ) used the regulatory domain of βI-PKC as the bait in a two-hybrid screen and cloned a novel LIM-containing protein, termed ENH, demonstrating that it interacted not only with the V1 domain of βI-PKC but also with that of ζPKC. Therefore, ENH does not appear to be specific for a particular PKC isotype ( 30 ). Other LIM proteins, including the LIM kinase, also interacted with different PKC isoforms in a completely unselective manner ( 30 , 42 ). Mochly-Rosen’s group has recently identified a RACK protein selective for ɛPKC that interacts with the V1 domain of this kinase ( 9a ). Here we show that p62, a previously described phosphotyrosine-independent p56 lck SH2-interacting protein ( 27 ), potently binds to the V1 domain of λ/ιPKC and, albeit with lower affinity, to ζPKC, but not to αPKC or ɛPKC. Therefore, in contrast to the LIM proteins, p62 shows a clear selectivity for the aPKC isotypes.

While the present study was in preparation, Puls et al. ( 44 ) reported the cloning of p62 in a two-hybrid screen with full-length ζPKC as the bait. The mapping of the region in ζPKC where p62 binds is consistent with our observation that p62 interacts with the V1 domain. However, there are a number of differences between the data of Puls et al. ( 44 ) and ours. First, in our study p62 is not a substrate for ζPKC. The reasons for this discrepancy are unclear but may be related to differences between the assay conditions employed in the two studies. However, it should be noted that in the experiments shown in Fig. 5 our PKC preparations were shown to be fully capable of phosphorylating two different substrates with no effect on p62. Another difference between the findings of Puls et al. ( 44 ) and those reported here concerns the subcellular localization of p62 and its relationship with the aPKCs. Puls et al. ( 44 ) claimed that, when ectopically expressed, p62 artifactually forms vesicles (Puls et al. called them “amorphous aggregates”) which do not correlate with endosomal or lysosomal markers. Only the overexpression of ζPKC, according to these researchers, is capable of returning p62 to its purported physiological location, which Puls et al. claim is the cytosol. In another previous study that addressed the subcellular localization of different PKC isotypes ectopically overexpressed in NIH 3T3 cells, diffuse cytosolic staining for ζPKC was also reported ( 23 ). However, a more recent report shows a vesicular punctate pattern for endogenous ζPKC in confocal immunofluorescence experiments ( 56 ). We show here that exogenously expressed and endogenous p62 localizes, at least in part, in vesicles that contain Rab7 and two lysosomal markers. More importantly, confocal immunofluorescence analysis with an antibody that recognizes the endogenous p62 clearly gives a vesicular staining like that observed with the ectopically expressed protein, strongly suggesting that the physiological location of p62 is not the cytosol but most probably the endosomal compartment. The ectopic expression of tagged versions of λ/ιPKC or ζPKC along with p62 with a different tag demonstrates that both aPKCs colocalize with p62 in the vesicular structures. With regard to the physiological localization of ζPKC and λ/ιPKC, we used monoclonal antibodies selective for each atypical PKC isotype in confocal immunofluorescence experiments to address this issue. Interestingly, and consistent with the punctate vesicular staining of the endogenous p62, these experiments showed that the endogenous λ/ιPKC and ζPKC both give a vesicular pattern that colocalizes with endogenous p62 in the late endosomal compartment.

The demonstration that p62 colocalizes with the EGF receptor in activated cells but not with the transferrin receptor may be physiologically relevant. The aPKCs have been shown to be activated by different growth factors ( 5 , 11 , 34 , 52 ) through the PI 3-kinase cascade ( 1 , 34 , 39 , 52 ). Interestingly, the inhibition of PI 3-kinase dramatically impairs the internalization of growth factor receptors, which takes place via the lysosome-targeted, but not the recycling, endosomal pathway ( 51 ). The fact that the p62-aPKC complex is located in the subcellular compartment that receives the lysosome-targeted growth factor receptor and the reported ability of PI 3-kinase products to activate the aPKCs strongly suggest that these kinases could play a critical role in controlling trafficking of the receptor from the plasma membrane to the lysosomes. In fact, we show here that the expression of dominant negative λ/ιPKC, but not of the wild-type enzyme, severely impairs the endocytic membrane trafficking of the EGF receptor but does not affect the transferrin receptor. This finding is reminiscent of the effect produced by transfection of dominant negative mutants of Rab7 on membrane transport leading from early to late endosomes ( 19 ). It is interesting that p62 perfectly colocalizes with Rab7 (see above) but not with Rab5, which controls the uptake from the cell surface to the early endosomes ( 19 ). P62 differs from LIP and Par-4 in that it does not modulate aPKC enzymatic activity. However, besides anchoring the aPKCs into the endosomal compartment, p62 could act as a scaffold, allowing the aPKCs to be close to other regulators and/or effectors ( 44 ). Understanding how all these molecules assemble in vivo and their relationship with the lipid mediators that target the aPKCs is a challenge for researchers of future studies.
