---
pmid: '27569582'
title: GOLM1 Modulates EGFR/RTK Cell-Surface Recycling to Drive Hepatocellular Carcinoma
  Metastasis.
authors:
- Ye QH
- Zhu WW
- Zhang JB
- Qin Y
- Lu M
- Lin GL
- Guo L
- Zhang B
- Lin ZH
- Roessler S
- Forgues M
- Jia HL
- Lu L
- Zhang XF
- Lian BF
- Xie L
- Dong QZ
- Tang ZY
- Wang XW
- Qin LX
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC5021625
doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2016.07.017
---

# GOLM1 Modulates EGFR/RTK Cell-Surface Recycling to Drive Hepatocellular Carcinoma Metastasis.
**Authors:** Ye QH, Zhu WW, Zhang JB, Qin Y, Lu M, Lin GL, Guo L, Zhang B, Lin ZH, Roessler S, Forgues M, Jia HL, Lu L, Zhang XF, Lian BF, Xie L, Dong QZ, Tang ZY, Wang XW, Qin LX
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccell.2016.07.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2016.07.017)
**PMC:** [PMC5021625](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5021625/)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Cell. 2016 Sep 12;30(3):444-458. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2016.07.017. Epub
 2016 Aug 25.

GOLM1 Modulates EGFR/RTK Cell-Surface Recycling to Drive Hepatocellular 
Carcinoma Metastasis.

Ye QH(1), Zhu WW(2), Zhang JB(3), Qin Y(4), Lu M(5), Lin GL(1), Guo L(1), Zhang 
B(1), Lin ZH(1), Roessler S(6), Forgues M(7), Jia HL(5), Lu L(5), Zhang XF(5), 
Lian BF(8), Xie L(8), Dong QZ(9), Tang ZY(2), Wang XW(10), Qin LX(11).

Author information:
(1)Liver Cancer Institute, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China.
(2)Liver Cancer Institute, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China; Department 
of General Surgery, Huashan Hospital, Cancer Metastasis Institute, Fudan 
University, 12 Urumqi Road (M), Shanghai 200040, China.
(3)Liver Cancer Institute, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China; Department 
of Infectious Diseases, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 200040, 
China.
(4)Institutes of Biomedical Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China; 
Department of Pancreatic and Hepatobiliary Surgery, Fudan University Shanghai 
Cancer Center, Shanghai 200032, China.
(5)Department of General Surgery, Huashan Hospital, Cancer Metastasis Institute, 
Fudan University, 12 Urumqi Road (M), Shanghai 200040, China.
(6)Laboratory of Human Carcinogenesis, Center for Cancer Research, National 
Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA; Institute of Pathology, 
University Hospital Heidelberg 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
(7)Laboratory of Human Carcinogenesis, Center for Cancer Research, National 
Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(8)Shanghai Center for Bioinformatics Technology, Shanghai 201203, China.
(9)Department of General Surgery, Huashan Hospital, Cancer Metastasis Institute, 
Fudan University, 12 Urumqi Road (M), Shanghai 200040, China; Institutes of 
Biomedical Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China.
(10)Laboratory of Human Carcinogenesis, Center for Cancer Research, National 
Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic address: 
xw3u@nih.gov.
(11)Liver Cancer Institute, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China; Department 
of General Surgery, Huashan Hospital, Cancer Metastasis Institute, Fudan 
University, 12 Urumqi Road (M), Shanghai 200040, China; Institutes of Biomedical 
Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China. Electronic address: 
qinlx@fudan.edu.cn.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2016 Sep 12;30(3):374-375. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2016.08.014.

The mechanism of cancer metastasis remains poorly understood. Using gene 
profiling of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tissues, we have identified GOLM1 as 
a leading gene relating to HCC metastasis. GOLM1 expression is correlated with 
early recurrence, metastasis, and poor survival of HCC patients. Both gain- and 
loss-of-function studies determine that GOLM1 acts as a key oncogene by 
promoting HCC growth and metastasis. It selectively interacts with epidermal 
growth factor receptor (EGFR) and serves as a specific cargo adaptor to assist 
EGFR/RTK anchoring on the trans-Golgi network (TGN) and recycling back to the 
plasma membrane, leading to prolonged activation of the downstream kinases. 
These findings reveal the functional role of GOLM1, a Golgi-related protein, in 
EGFR/RTK recycling and metastatic progression of HCC.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccell.2016.07.017
PMCID: PMC5021625
PMID: 27569582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) indicated no potential conflicts 
of interest.

## Full Text

INTRODUCTION

Metastasis is a major hallmark of cancer and yet remains the most poorly understood component of cancer pathogenesis ( Nguyen et al., 2009 ). It is a complex multistep process involving alterations in the dissemination, invasion, survival, and growth of new cancer cell colonies, which are regulated by a complex network of intra- and inter-cellular signal transduction cascades ( Chaffer and Weinberg, 2011 ). Growth-factor-responsive receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) have been shown to play critical roles in malignant transformation and cancer metastasis ( Lamorte and Park, 2001 ). The oncogenic activation of RTKs can be induced by various mechanisms such as transcriptional over-expression, chromosomal translocation, point mutation, and the creation of an autocrine loop ( Abella and Park, 2009 ). Among these, defective endocytosis and recycling of RTKs, which enhance the long-term mitogenic effects of growth factors by increasing the availability of plasma membrane receptors, have been regarded as multifaceted hallmarks of cancer cells ( Mosesson et al., 2008 ). During such process, cargos transportation to different subcellular compartments is mainly modulated by the Golgi apparatus ( Emr et al., 2009 ; Rothman, 1994 ), which sorts RTKs to be recycled or degraded after ligand binding. However, little is known about the Golgi-related molecules that control the intracellular transportation/recycling of RTKs or their possible roles in cancer metastasis.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the second leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide ( Stewart et al., 2014 ). The high probability of metastasis makes its prognosis very dismal even after potentially curative treatment ( Song et al., 2004 ). Understanding the mechanisms of HCC metastasis would allow for the development of effective approaches to reduce HCC mortality. In our previous study, we found that alterations in gene expression profiles favoring HCC metastasis are initiated in the primary tumors ( Ye et al., 2003 ). In this study, we want to further identify the gene favoring HCC metastasis, and determine its critical roles in HCC growth and metastasis to provide both a prognostic marker and therapeutic target for combating HCC metastasis.
