---
pmid: '11244051'
title: Interleukin-10 and the interleukin-10 receptor.
authors:
- Moore KW
- de Waal Malefyt R
- Coffman RL
- O'Garra A
journal: Annu Rev Immunol
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1146/annurev.immunol.19.1.683
---

# Interleukin-10 and the interleukin-10 receptor.
**Authors:** Moore KW, de Waal Malefyt R, Coffman RL, O'Garra A
**Journal:** Annu Rev Immunol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev.immunol.19.1.683](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.immunol.19.1.683)

## Abstract

1. Annu Rev Immunol. 2001;19:683-765. doi: 10.1146/annurev.immunol.19.1.683.

Interleukin-10 and the interleukin-10 receptor.

Moore KW(1), de Waal Malefyt R, Coffman RL, O'Garra A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, DNAX Research Institute of Molecular and 
Cellular Biology Inc., Palo Alto, California 94304, USA. kevin.moore@dnax.org

Interleukin-10 (IL-10), first recognized for its ability to inhibit activation 
and effector function of T cells, monocytes, and macrophages, is a 
multifunctional cytokine with diverse effects on most hemopoietic cell types. 
The principal routine function of IL-10 appears to be to limit and ultimately 
terminate inflammatory responses. In addition to these activities, IL-10 
regulates growth and/or differentiation of B cells, NK cells, cytotoxic and 
helper T cells, mast cells, granulocytes, dendritic cells, keratinocytes, and 
endothelial cells. IL-10 plays a key role in differentiation and function of a 
newly appreciated type of T cell, the T regulatory cell, which may figure 
prominently in control of immune responses and tolerance in vivo. Uniquely among 
hemopoietic cytokines, IL-10 has closely related homologs in several virus 
genomes, which testify to its crucial role in regulating immune and inflammatory 
responses. This review highlights findings that have advanced our understanding 
of IL-10 and its receptor, as well as its in vivo function in health and 
disease.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev.immunol.19.1.683
PMID: 11244051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
