---
pmid: '10072425'
title: Functional domains of the SYT and SYT-SSX synovial sarcoma translocation proteins
  and co-localization with the SNF protein BRM in the nucleus.
authors:
- Thaete C
- Brett D
- Monaghan P
- Whitehouse S
- Rennie G
- Rayner E
- Cooper CS
- Goodwin G
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/8.4.585
---

# Functional domains of the SYT and SYT-SSX synovial sarcoma translocation proteins and co-localization with the SNF protein BRM in the nucleus.
**Authors:** Thaete C, Brett D, Monaghan P, Whitehouse S, Rennie G, Rayner E, Cooper CS, Goodwin G
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/8.4.585](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/8.4.585)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 1999 Apr;8(4):585-91. doi: 10.1093/hmg/8.4.585.

Functional domains of the SYT and SYT-SSX synovial sarcoma translocation 
proteins and co-localization with the SNF protein BRM in the nucleus.

Thaete C(1), Brett D, Monaghan P, Whitehouse S, Rennie G, Rayner E, Cooper CS, 
Goodwin G.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cancer Research, Molecular Carcinogenesis Section, The Haddow 
Laboratories, 15 Cotswold Road, Sutton, Surrey SM2 5NG, UK.

The t(X;18)(p11.2;q11.2) chromosomal translocation commonly found in synovial 
sarcomas fuses the SYT gene on chromosome 18 to either of two similar genes, 
SSX1 or SSX2, on the X chromosome. The SYT protein appears to act as a 
transcriptional co-activator and the SSX proteins as co-repressors. Here we have 
investigated the functional domains of the proteins. The SYT protein has a novel 
conserved 54 amino acid domain at the N-terminus of the protein (the SNH domain) 
which is found in proteins from a wide variety of species, and a C-terminal 
domain, rich in glutamine, proline, glycine and tyrosine (the QPGY domain), 
which contains the transcriptional activator sequences. Deletion of the SNH 
domain results in a more active transcriptional activator, suggesting that this 
domain acts as an inhibitor of the activation domain. The C-terminal SSX domain 
present in SYT-SSX translocation protein contributes a transcriptional repressor 
domain to the protein. Thus, the fusion protein has transcriptional activating 
and repressing domains. We demonstrate that the human homologue of the 
SNF2/Brahama protein BRM co-localizes with SYT and SYT-SSX in nuclear speckles, 
and also interacts with SYT and SYT-SSX proteins in vitro. This interaction may 
provide an explanation of how the SYT protein activates gene transcription.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/8.4.585
PMID: 10072425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
