---
pmid: '24632071'
title: The TMEFF2 tumor suppressor modulates integrin expression, RhoA activation
  and migration of prostate cancer cells.
authors:
- Chen X
- Corbin JM
- Tipton GJ
- Yang LV
- Asch AS
- Ruiz-Echevarría MJ
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4021708
doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2014.03.005
---

# The TMEFF2 tumor suppressor modulates integrin expression, RhoA activation and migration of prostate cancer cells.
**Authors:** Chen X, Corbin JM, Tipton GJ, Yang LV, Asch AS, Ruiz-Echevarría MJ
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbamcr.2014.03.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbamcr.2014.03.005)
**PMC:** [PMC4021708](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4021708/)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Jun;1843(6):1216-24. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2014.03.005. Epub 2014 Mar 13.

The TMEFF2 tumor suppressor modulates integrin expression, RhoA activation and 
migration of prostate cancer cells.

Chen X(1), Corbin JM(2), Tipton GJ(2), Yang LV(3), Asch AS(4), Ruiz-Echevarría 
MJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Brody School of Medicine at 
East Carolina University, Greenville, NC 27834, USA.
(2)Department of Oncology, Brody School of Medicine at East Carolina University, 
Greenville, NC 27834, USA.
(3)Department of Oncology, Brody School of Medicine at East Carolina University, 
Greenville, NC 27834, USA; Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of 
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA; Department of Anatomy 
and Cell Biology, Brody School of Medicine at East Carolina University, 
Greenville, NC 27834, USA.
(4)Department of Oncology, Brody School of Medicine at East Carolina University, 
Greenville, NC 27834, USA; Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of 
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.
(5)Department of Oncology, Brody School of Medicine at East Carolina University, 
Greenville, NC 27834, USA; Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of 
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA; Department of Anatomy 
and Cell Biology, Brody School of Medicine at East Carolina University, 
Greenville, NC 27834, USA. Electronic address: ruizechevarriam@ecu.edu.

Cell adhesion and migration play important roles in physiological and 
pathological states, including embryonic development and cancer invasion and 
metastasis. The type I transmembrane protein with epidermal growth factor and 
two follistatin motifs 2 (TMEFF2) is expressed mainly in brain and prostate and 
its expression is deregulated in prostate cancer. We have previously shown that 
TMEFF2 can function as a tumor suppressor by inhibiting cell migration and 
invasion of prostate cells. However, the molecular mechanisms involved in this 
inhibition are not clear. In this study we demonstrate that TMEFF2 affects cell 
adhesion and migration of prostate cancer cells and that this effect correlates 
with changes in integrin expression and RhoA activation. Deletion of a 13 
basic-rich amino acid region in the cytoplasmic domain of TMEFF2 prevented these 
effects. Overexpression of TMEFF2 reduced cell attachment and migration on 
vitronectin and caused a concomitant decrease in RhoA activation, stress fiber 
formation and expression of αv, β1 and β3 integrin subunits. Conversely, TMEFF2 
interference in 22Rv1 prostate cancer cells resulted in an increased integrin 
expression. Results obtained with a double TRAMP/TMEFF2 transgenic mouse also 
indicated that TMEFF2 expression reduced integrin expression in the mouse 
prostate. In summary, the data presented here indicate an important role of 
TMEFF2 in regulating cell adhesion and migration that involves integrin 
signaling and is mediated by its cytoplasmic domain.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2014.03.005
PMCID: PMC4021708
PMID: 24632071 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: none declared
