---
pmid: '9582350'
title: Impaired assembly of E1 decarboxylase of the branched-chain alpha-ketoacid
  dehydrogenase complex in type IA maple syrup urine disease.
authors:
- Wynn RM
- Davie JR
- Chuang JL
- Cote CD
- Chuang DT
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.21.13110
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Impaired assembly of E1 decarboxylase of the branched-chain alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase complex in type IA maple syrup urine disease.
**Authors:** Wynn RM, Davie JR, Chuang JL, Cote CD, Chuang DT
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.273.21.13110](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.21.13110)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1998 May 22;273(21):13110-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.21.13110.

Impaired assembly of E1 decarboxylase of the branched-chain alpha-ketoacid 
dehydrogenase complex in type IA maple syrup urine disease.

Wynn RM(1), Davie JR, Chuang JL, Cote CD, Chuang DT.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Biochemistry and Internal Medicine, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75235-9038, USA.

The E1 decarboxylase component of the human branched-chain ketoacid 
dehydrogenase complex comprises two E1alpha (45.5 kDa) and two E1beta (37.5 kDa) 
subunits forming an alpha2 beta2 tetramer. In patients with type IA maple syrup 
urine disease, the E1alpha subunit is affected, resulting in the loss of E1 and 
branched-chain ketoacid dehydrogenase catalytic activities. To study the effect 
of human E1alpha missense mutations on E1 subunit assembly, we have developed a 
pulse-chase labeling protocol based on efficient expression and assembly of 
human (His)6-E1alpha and untagged E1beta subunits in Escherichia coli in the 
presence of overexpressed chaperonins GroEL and GroES. Assembly of the two 
35S-labeled E1 subunits was indicated by their co-extraction with 
Ni2+-nitrilotriacetic acid resin. The nine E1alpha maple syrup urine disease 
mutants studied showed aberrant kinetics of assembly with normal E1beta in the 
2-h chase compared with the wild type and can be classified into four categories 
of normal (N222S-alpha and R220W-alpha), moderately slow (G245R-alpha), slow 
(G204S-alpha, A240P-alpha, F364C-alpha, Y368C-alpha, and Y393N-alpha), and no 
(T265R-alpha) assembly. Prolonged induction in E. coli grown in the YTGK medium 
or lowering of induction temperature from 37 to 28 degreesC (in the case of 
T265R-alpha), however, resulted in the production of mutant E1 proteins. 
Separation of purified E1 proteins by sucrose density gradient centrifugation 
showed that the wild-type E1 existed entirely as alpha2 beta2 tetramers. In 
contrast, a subset of E1alpha missense mutations caused the occurrence of 
exclusive alphabeta dimers (Y393N-alpha and F364C-alpha) or of both alpha2beta2 
tetramers and lower molecular weight species (Y368C-alpha and T265R-alpha). 
Thermal denaturation at 50 degreesC indicated that mutant E1 proteins aggregated 
more rapidly than wild type (rate constant, 0.19 min-1), with the T265R-alpha 
mutant E1 most severely affected (rate constant, 4.45 min-1). The results 
establish that the human E1alpha mutations in the putative thiamine 
pyrophosphate-binding pocket that are studied, with the exception of 
G204S-alpha, have no effect on E1 subunit assembly. The T265R-alpha mutation 
adversely impacts both E1alpha folding and subunit interactions. The mutations 
involving the C-terminal aromatic residues impede both the kinetics of subunit 
assembly and the formation of the native alpha2 beta2 structure.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.21.13110
PMID: 9582350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
