---
pmid: '9545237'
title: Cell wall integrity modulates RHO1 activity via the exchange factor ROM2.
authors:
- Bickle M
- Delley PA
- Schmidt A
- Hall MN
journal: EMBO J
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1170568
doi: 10.1093/emboj/17.8.2235
---

# Cell wall integrity modulates RHO1 activity via the exchange factor ROM2.
**Authors:** Bickle M, Delley PA, Schmidt A, Hall MN
**Journal:** EMBO J (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/17.8.2235](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/17.8.2235)
**PMC:** [PMC1170568](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1170568/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 1998 Apr 15;17(8):2235-45. doi: 10.1093/emboj/17.8.2235.

Cell wall integrity modulates RHO1 activity via the exchange factor ROM2.

Bickle M(1), Delley PA, Schmidt A, Hall MN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Biozentrum, University of Basel, 
Klingelbergstrasse 70, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland.

The essential phosphatidylinositol kinase homologue TOR2 of Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae controls the actin cytoskeleton by activating a GTPase switch 
consisting of RHO1 (GTPase), ROM2 (GEF) and SAC7 (GAP). We have identified two 
mutations, rot1-1 and rot2-1, that suppress the loss of TOR2 and are 
synthetic-lethal. The wild-type ROT1 and ROT2 genes and a multicopy suppressor, 
BIG1, were isolated by their ability to rescue the rot1-1 rot2-1 double mutant. 
ROT2 encodes glucosidase II, and ROT1 and BIG1 encode novel proteins. We present 
evidence that cell wall defects activate RHO1. First, rot1, rot2, big1, cwh41, 
gas1 and fks1 mutations all confer cell wall defects and suppress tor2(ts). 
Second, destabilizing the cell wall by supplementing the growth medium with 
0.005% SDS also suppresses a tor2(ts) mutation. Third, disturbing the cell wall 
with SDS or a rot1, rot2, big1, cwh41, gas1 or fks1 mutation increases GDP/GTP 
exchange activity toward RHO1. These results suggest that cell wall defects 
suppress a tor2 mutation by activating RHO1 independently of TOR2, thereby 
inducing TOR2-independent polarization of the actin cytoskeleton and cell wall 
synthesis. Activation of RHO1, a subunit of the cell wall synthesis enzyme 
glucan synthase, by a cell wall alteration would ensure that cell wall synthesis 
occurs only when and where needed. The mechanism of RHO1 activation by a cell 
wall alteration is via the exchange factor ROM2 and could be analogous to 
signalling by integrin receptors in mammalian cells.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/17.8.2235
PMCID: PMC1170568
PMID: 9545237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
