---
pmid: '26680203'
title: Structural basis of Nav1.7 inhibition by an isoform-selective small-molecule
  antagonist.
authors:
- Ahuja S
- Mukund S
- Deng L
- Khakh K
- Chang E
- Ho H
- Shriver S
- Young C
- Lin S
- Johnson JP Jr
- Wu P
- Li J
- Coons M
- Tam C
- Brillantes B
- Sampang H
- Mortara K
- Bowman KK
- Clark KR
- Estevez A
- Xie Z
- Verschoof H
- Grimwood M
- Dehnhardt C
- Andrez JC
- Focken T
- Sutherlin DP
- Safina BS
- Starovasnik MA
- Ortwine DF
- Franke Y
- Cohen CJ
- Hackos DH
- Koth CM
- Payandeh J
journal: Science
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.aac5464
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Structural basis of Nav1.7 inhibition by an isoform-selective small-molecule antagonist.
**Authors:** Ahuja S, Mukund S, Deng L, Khakh K, Chang E, Ho H, Shriver S, Young C, Lin S, Johnson JP Jr, Wu P, Li J, Coons M, Tam C, Brillantes B, Sampang H, Mortara K, Bowman KK, Clark KR, Estevez A, Xie Z, Verschoof H, Grimwood M, Dehnhardt C, Andrez JC, Focken T, Sutherlin DP, Safina BS, Starovasnik MA, Ortwine DF, Franke Y, Cohen CJ, Hackos DH, Koth CM, Payandeh J
**Journal:** Science (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.aac5464](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aac5464)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2015 Dec 18;350(6267):aac5464. doi: 10.1126/science.aac5464.

Structural basis of Nav1.7 inhibition by an isoform-selective small-molecule 
antagonist.

Ahuja S(1), Mukund S(1), Deng L(2), Khakh K(3), Chang E(3), Ho H(1), Shriver 
S(1), Young C(3), Lin S(3), Johnson JP Jr(3), Wu P(1), Li J(4), Coons M(1), Tam 
C(1), Brillantes B(1), Sampang H(1), Mortara K(1), Bowman KK(1), Clark KR(5), 
Estevez A(1), Xie Z(3), Verschoof H(3), Grimwood M(6), Dehnhardt C(6), Andrez 
JC(6), Focken T(6), Sutherlin DP(4), Safina BS(4), Starovasnik MA(1), Ortwine 
DF(4), Franke Y(1), Cohen CJ(3), Hackos DH(7), Koth CM(8), Payandeh J(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Structural Biology, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, CA 
94080, USA.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, CA 94080, 
USA.
(3)Department of Biology, Xenon Pharmaceuticals Inc., Burnaby, British Columbia, 
V5G 4W8, Canada.
(4)Department of Discovery Chemistry, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, CA 
94080, USA.
(5)Department of Biochemical and Cellular Pharmacology, Genentech Inc., South 
San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.
(6)Department of Chemistry, Xenon Pharmaceuticals Inc., Burnaby, British 
Columbia, V5G 4W8, Canada.
(7)Department of Neuroscience, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, CA 94080, 
USA. hackos.david@gene.com koth.christopher@gene.com payandeh.jian@gene.com.
(8)Department of Structural Biology, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, CA 
94080, USA. hackos.david@gene.com koth.christopher@gene.com 
payandeh.jian@gene.com.

Voltage-gated sodium (Nav) channels propagate action potentials in excitable 
cells. Accordingly, Nav channels are therapeutic targets for many cardiovascular 
and neurological disorders. Selective inhibitors have been challenging to design 
because the nine mammalian Nav channel isoforms share high sequence identity and 
remain recalcitrant to high-resolution structural studies. Targeting the human 
Nav1.7 channel involved in pain perception, we present a protein-engineering 
strategy that has allowed us to determine crystal structures of a novel receptor 
site in complex with isoform-selective antagonists. GX-936 and related 
inhibitors bind to the activated state of voltage-sensor domain IV (VSD4), where 
their anionic aryl sulfonamide warhead engages the fourth arginine gating charge 
on the S4 helix. By opposing VSD4 deactivation, these compounds inhibit Nav1.7 
through a voltage-sensor trapping mechanism, likely by stabilizing inactivated 
states of the channel. Residues from the S2 and S3 helices are key determinants 
of isoform selectivity, and bound phospholipids implicate the membrane as a 
modulator of channel function and pharmacology. Our results help to elucidate 
the molecular basis of voltage sensing and establish structural blueprints to 
design selective Nav channel antagonists.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/science.aac5464
PMID: 26680203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
