---
pmid: '34943955'
title: Commander Complex-A Multifaceted Operator in Intracellular Signaling and Cargo.
authors:
- Laulumaa S
- Varjosalo M
journal: Cells
year: '2021'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC8700231
doi: 10.3390/cells10123447
---

# Commander Complex-A Multifaceted Operator in Intracellular Signaling and Cargo.
**Authors:** Laulumaa S, Varjosalo M
**Journal:** Cells (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells10123447](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells10123447)
**PMC:** [PMC8700231](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8700231/)

## Abstract

1. Cells. 2021 Dec 7;10(12):3447. doi: 10.3390/cells10123447.

Commander Complex-A Multifaceted Operator in Intracellular Signaling and Cargo.

Laulumaa S(1), Varjosalo M(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Systems Biology Group, Institute of Biotechnology, University of 
Helsinki, 00790 Helsinki, Finland.

Commander complex is a 16-protein complex that plays multiple roles in various 
intracellular events in endosomal cargo and in the regulation of cell 
homeostasis, cell cycle and immune response. It consists of COMMD1-10, CCDC22, 
CCDC93, DENND10, VPS26C, VPS29, and VPS35L. These proteins are expressed 
ubiquitously in the human body, and they have been linked to diseases including 
Wilson's disease, atherosclerosis, and several types of cancer. In this review 
we describe the function of the commander complex in endosomal cargo and 
summarize the individual known roles of COMMD proteins in cell signaling and 
cancer. It becomes evident that commander complex might be a much more important 
player in intracellular regulation than we currently understand, and more 
systematic research on the role of commander complex is required.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10123447
PMCID: PMC8700231
PMID: 34943955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.
