---
pmid: '16636064'
title: The estrogen-responsive B box protein is a novel regulator of the retinoid
  signal.
authors:
- Cheung BB
- Bell J
- Raif A
- Bohlken A
- Yan J
- Roediger B
- Poljak A
- Smith S
- Lee M
- Thomas WD
- Kavallaris M
- Norris M
- Haber M
- Liu HL
- Zajchowski D
- Marshall GM
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M600879200
---

# The estrogen-responsive B box protein is a novel regulator of the retinoid signal.
**Authors:** Cheung BB, Bell J, Raif A, Bohlken A, Yan J, Roediger B, Poljak A, Smith S, Lee M, Thomas WD, Kavallaris M, Norris M, Haber M, Liu HL, Zajchowski D, Marshall GM
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M600879200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M600879200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jun 30;281(26):18246-56. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M600879200. Epub 
2006 Apr 24.

The estrogen-responsive B box protein is a novel regulator of the retinoid 
signal.

Cheung BB(1), Bell J, Raif A, Bohlken A, Yan J, Roediger B, Poljak A, Smith S, 
Lee M, Thomas WD, Kavallaris M, Norris M, Haber M, Liu HL, Zajchowski D, 
Marshall GM.

Author information:
(1)Children's Cancer Institute Australia for Medical Research, Randwick, New 
South Wales 2031, Australia.

Retinoic acid (RA) induces growth arrest, cell death, and differentiation in 
many human cancer cells in vitro and has entered routine clinical use for the 
treatment of several human cancer types. One mechanism by which cancer cells 
evade retinoid-induced effects is through repression of retinoic acid receptor 
beta (RARbeta) gene transcription. The RA response element beta (betaRARE) is 
the essential DNA sequence required for retinoid-induced RARbeta transcription. 
Here we show that the estrogen-responsive B box protein (EBBP), a member of the 
RING-B box-coiled-coil protein family, is a betaRARE-binding protein. EBBP 
undergoes serine threonine phosphorylation and enhanced protein stability after 
RA treatment. Following RA treatment, we also observed increased nuclear EBBP 
levels in aggregates with the promyelocytic leukemia protein at promyelocytic 
leukemia nuclear bodies. EBBP enhanced RA-responsive RARbeta transcription in 
RA-sensitive and -resistant cancer cells, which were resistant to both a histone 
deacetylase inhibitor and a demethylating agent. EBBP-specific small interfering 
RNA reduced basal and RA-induced RARbeta expression. EBBP increased 
betaRARE-transactivating function through its coiled-coil domain. Taken 
together, our work suggests that EBBP may have a pivotal role in the retinoid 
anti-cancer signal.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M600879200
PMID: 16636064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
