---
pmid: '24612402'
title: The transcriptional response of prokaryotes to phytoplankton-derived dissolved
  organic matter in seawater.
authors:
- Beier S
- Rivers AR
- Moran MA
- Obernosterer I
journal: Environ Microbiol
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.12434
---

# The transcriptional response of prokaryotes to phytoplankton-derived dissolved organic matter in seawater.
**Authors:** Beier S, Rivers AR, Moran MA, Obernosterer I
**Journal:** Environ Microbiol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1462-2920.12434](https://doi.org/10.1111/1462-2920.12434)

## Abstract

1. Environ Microbiol. 2015 Oct;17(10):3466-80. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.12434. Epub
 2014 May 21.

The transcriptional response of prokaryotes to phytoplankton-derived dissolved 
organic matter in seawater.

Beier S(1)(2), Rivers AR(3), Moran MA(3), Obernosterer I(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)UPMC University Paris 06, UMR 7621, LOMIC, UMS 2348, Observatoire 
Océanologique, Banyuls/mer, F-66650, France.
(2)CNRS, UMR 7621, LOMIC, Observatoire Océanologique, Banyuls/mer, F-66650, 
France.
(3)Department of Marine Sciences, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, 30602, USA.

To better understand the functional responses in prokaryotes to dissolved 
organic matter (DOM), we compared the transcriptional pattern of natural 
prokaryotic communities grown in continuous cultures on seawater amended with 
phytoplankton-derived DOM. Metatranscriptomic reads were classified 
taxonomically (by genomic binning) and functionally (using Kyoto Encyclopedia of 
Genes and Genomes), and the relative gene expression of individual taxa (genome 
bins) was compared with the total community response. In the first experiment 
comparing seawater and seawater amended with diatom-derived DOM, 
metatranscriptomes revealed pronounced differences in pathways involved in 
carbohydrate and lipid metabolism. In the second experiment comparing seawater 
amended with cyanobacteria- and diatom-derived DOM, metatranscriptomes had 
similar functional profiles, likely reflecting more similar DOM regimes in this 
experimental setup. Among the five most abundant taxa investigated in more 
detail, two featured pronounced differences in transcript abundance between 
treatments suggesting that they were specialized in the use of only one of the 
two DOM regimes. However, these two taxa were less involved in carbohydrate 
metabolism than others and had few genes that were significantly regulated in 
response to the DOM source. Our results indicate that both substrate composition 
and the competitive interplay of community members were decisive for the 
functional response of a microbial system.

© 2014 Society for Applied Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.12434
PMID: 24612402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
