---
pmid: '20079715'
title: NUMBL interacts with TRAF6 and promotes the degradation of TRAF6.
authors:
- Zhou L
- Ma Q
- Shi H
- Huo K
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.01.037
---

# NUMBL interacts with TRAF6 and promotes the degradation of TRAF6.
**Authors:** Zhou L, Ma Q, Shi H, Huo K
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.01.037](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.01.037)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Feb 12;392(3):409-14. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.01.037. Epub 2010 Jan 15.

NUMBL interacts with TRAF6 and promotes the degradation of TRAF6.

Zhou L(1), Ma Q, Shi H, Huo K.

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, People's Republic 
of China.

Tumor necrosis factor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6) is an essential adaptor 
protein for IL-1R or TLR-mediated NF-kappaB signaling pathway activation. In 
previous work we have found NUMBL interacts with TAB2 and negatively regulates 
NF-kappaB signaling pathway. Here, we report that NUMBL directly binds to TRAF6 
in vivo and in vitro. NUMBL down-regulates TRAF6 protein level and shortens its 
half-life. Furthermore, knockdown of NUMBL significantly increases endogenous 
TRAF6 protein level in the cultured cortical neurons. In vivo ubiquitination 
assays indicate that NUMBL promotes the assembly of K48-linked 
polyubiquitination chains on TRAF6, but has no significant effect on its 
K63-linked polyubiquitination. Our results collectively reveal that NUMBL 
interacts with TRAF6 and promotes the degradation of TRAF6 in vivo, leading to 
the inhibition of NF-kappaB signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.01.037
PMID: 20079715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
