---
pmid: '17724469'
title: Reduced expression of vacuole membrane protein 1 affects the invasion capacity
  of tumor cells.
authors:
- Sauermann M
- Sahin O
- Sültmann H
- Hahne F
- Blaszkiewicz S
- Majety M
- Zatloukal K
- Füzesi L
- Poustka A
- Wiemann S
- Arlt D
journal: Oncogene
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1210743
---

# Reduced expression of vacuole membrane protein 1 affects the invasion capacity of tumor cells.
**Authors:** Sauermann M, Sahin O, Sültmann H, Hahne F, Blaszkiewicz S, Majety M, Zatloukal K, Füzesi L, Poustka A, Wiemann S, Arlt D
**Journal:** Oncogene (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1210743](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1210743)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2008 Feb 21;27(9):1320-6. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1210743. Epub 2007 Aug
 27.

Reduced expression of vacuole membrane protein 1 affects the invasion capacity 
of tumor cells.

Sauermann M(1), Sahin O, Sültmann H, Hahne F, Blaszkiewicz S, Majety M, 
Zatloukal K, Füzesi L, Poustka A, Wiemann S, Arlt D.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Genome Analysis, German Cancer Research Center, 
Heidelberg, Germany.

Vacuole membrane protein 1 (Vmp1) is described as a cancer-relevant cell cycle 
modulator, but the function of this protein and its mode of action in tumor 
progression are still unknown. In this study, we show that the VMP1 mRNA level 
is significantly reduced in kidney cancer metastases as compared to primary 
tumors. Further, VMP1 expression is also decreased in the invasive breast cancer 
cell lines HCC1954 and MDA-MB-231 as compared to the non-invasive cell lines 
MCF-12A, T-47D and MCF-7. We show for the first time that Vmp1 is a plasma 
membrane protein and an essential component of initial cell-cell contacts and 
tight junction formation. It interacts with the tight junction protein Zonula 
Occludens-1 and colocalizes in spots between neighboring HEK293 cells. 
Downregulation of VMP1 by RNAi results in loss of cell adherence, and increases 
the invasion capacity of the non-invasive kidney cancer cell line Caki-2. In 
conclusion, our findings establish Vmp1 to be a novel cell-cell adhesion protein 
and that its expression level determines the invasion and metastatic potential 
of cancer cells.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1210743
PMID: 17724469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
