---
pmid: '38157846'
title: Dual regulation of SLC25A39 by AFG3L2 and iron controls mitochondrial glutathione
  homeostasis.
authors:
- Shi X
- DeCiucis M
- Grabinska KA
- Kanyo J
- Liu A
- Lam TT
- Shen H
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2024'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: xml
pmcid: PMC10922821
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2023.12.008
---

# Dual regulation of SLC25A39 by AFG3L2 and iron controls mitochondrial glutathione homeostasis.
**Authors:** Shi X, DeCiucis M, Grabinska KA, Kanyo J, Liu A, Lam TT, Shen H
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2023.12.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2023.12.008)
**PMC:** [PMC10922821](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10922821/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2024 Feb 15;84(4):802-810.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2023.12.008.
Epub  2023 Dec 28.

Dual regulation of SLC25A39 by AFG3L2 and iron controls mitochondrial 
glutathione homeostasis.

Shi X(1), DeCiucis M(1), Grabinska KA(1), Kanyo J(2), Liu A(3), Lam TT(4), Shen 
H(5).

Author information:
(1)Cellular and Molecular Physiology Department, Yale School of Medicine, New 
Haven, CT, USA; Systems Biology Institute, Yale West Campus, West Haven, CT, 
USA.
(2)Keck MS & Proteomics Resource, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(3)Amity High School, Woodbridge, CT, USA.
(4)Keck MS & Proteomics Resource, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA; 
Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, New Haven, 
CT, USA.
(5)Cellular and Molecular Physiology Department, Yale School of Medicine, New 
Haven, CT, USA; Systems Biology Institute, Yale West Campus, West Haven, CT, 
USA. Electronic address: hongying.shen@yale.edu.

Organelle transporters define metabolic compartmentalization, and how this 
metabolite transport process can be modulated is poorly explored. Here, we 
discovered that human SLC25A39, a mitochondrial transporter critical for 
mitochondrial glutathione uptake, is a short-lived protein under dual regulation 
at the protein level. Co-immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry and CRISPR 
knockout (KO) in mammalian cells identified that mitochondrial m-AAA protease 
AFG3L2 is responsible for degrading SLC25A39 through the matrix loop 1. SLC25A39 
senses mitochondrial iron-sulfur cluster using four matrix cysteine residues and 
inhibits its degradation. SLC25A39 protein regulation is robust in developing 
and mature neurons. This dual transporter regulation, by protein quality control 
and metabolic sensing, allows modulating mitochondrial glutathione level in 
response to iron homeostasis, opening avenues for exploring regulation of 
metabolic compartmentalization. Neuronal SLC25A39 regulation connects 
mitochondrial protein quality control, glutathione, and iron homeostasis, which 
were previously unrelated biochemical features in neurodegeneration.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2023.12.008
PMCID: PMC10922821
PMID: 38157846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.

## Full Text

IntroductionMitochondrial metabolite transporters1–3 define metabolic compartmentalization between mitochondria and rest of the cell4, and transport dysregulation is associated with many pathological conditions such as neurodegenerative disorders, metabolic syndromes and cancers. Despite the recent discoveries of protein identities that facilitate metabolite transport, the mechanism by which transporter proteins can be regulated remain unexplored.Given the critical role of mitochondrial redox metabolism and oxidative stress5–8 in physiology, we focus on the regulation of mitochondrial transport for glutathione, the most abundant endogenous antioxidant. Glutathione9 critically supports redox signaling and biosynthesis of iron-sulfur (Fe-S) cluster cofactors inside the mitochondrial matrix10–12. Because glutathione is exclusively synthesized in the cytosol, how glutathione enters the mitochondrial matrix remained a decades-old mystery until the recent identification that a previously uncharacterized mitochondrial metabolite transporter, SLC25A39 (A39), is critical for mitochondrial glutathione transport13,14. A39 belongs to the SoLute Carrier 25 (SLC25) family, the largest transporter family that is responsible for translocating diverse metabolite ligands across the mitochondrial inner membrane1–3. Despite the relatively small mitochondrial volume, mitochondrial glutathione accounts for 10–15% of the total cellular glutathione pool10. We therefore hypothesize that a direct regulation of A39 could have a major impact on glutathione compartmentalization and cellular metabolism.

Introduction

Mitochondrial metabolite transporters1–3 define metabolic compartmentalization between mitochondria and rest of the cell4, and transport dysregulation is associated with many pathological conditions such as neurodegenerative disorders, metabolic syndromes and cancers. Despite the recent discoveries of protein identities that facilitate metabolite transport, the mechanism by which transporter proteins can be regulated remain unexplored.

Given the critical role of mitochondrial redox metabolism and oxidative stress5–8 in physiology, we focus on the regulation of mitochondrial transport for glutathione, the most abundant endogenous antioxidant. Glutathione9 critically supports redox signaling and biosynthesis of iron-sulfur (Fe-S) cluster cofactors inside the mitochondrial matrix10–12. Because glutathione is exclusively synthesized in the cytosol, how glutathione enters the mitochondrial matrix remained a decades-old mystery until the recent identification that a previously uncharacterized mitochondrial metabolite transporter, SLC25A39 (A39), is critical for mitochondrial glutathione transport13,14. A39 belongs to the SoLute Carrier 25 (SLC25) family, the largest transporter family that is responsible for translocating diverse metabolite ligands across the mitochondrial inner membrane1–3. Despite the relatively small mitochondrial volume, mitochondrial glutathione accounts for 10–15% of the total cellular glutathione pool10. We therefore hypothesize that a direct regulation of A39 could have a major impact on glutathione compartmentalization and cellular metabolism.

ResultsSLC25A39 protein regulation depends on GSH and the matrix cysteine residues.To explore the regulatory mechanism of A39, we performed amino acid sequence analysis13,15 and Alphafold structure prediction16 of A39. In addition to the typical structural fold of the SLC25 transporters, the threefold pseudo-symmetrical, six transmembrane α-helices surrounding the central transport cavity, the analysis revealed that A39 contains an extra mitochondrial matrix loop between transmembrane domain 1 and 2 with a low structural prediction confidence score (Fig. 1A). This loop 1 of amino acids 41–105 contains four matrix-exposed, thiol Cysteine (Cys) residues17,18 (Fig. 1A), which exceeds Cys frequency in proteins at around 1.7%19. C-terminal FLAG-tagged A39 construct with all four cysteine residues mutated to alanine, A394CA-FLAG, as well as A39WT-FLAG, can be expressed as a level similar to that of the endogenous A39 (Fig. 1B). A394CA-FLAG can fully restore mitochondrial GSH depletion in the A39 CRISPR KO cells similar to the wild type A39-FLAG (Fig. 1C), suggesting that the transporter activity is preserved in the A394CA mutant, while another cysteine mutant of the substrate binding site A39C334S-FLAG can only rescue partially (Fig. 1C). However, A394CA -FLAG completely abolished A39 protein upregulation upon pharmacological inhibition of glutathione biosynthesis using buthionine sulfoximine (BSO) (Fig. 1B), a regulation specific to A39 protein at the post-transcriptional level (Fig. S1A–C) that was previously reported with an unknown mechanism14.SLC25A39 is a short-lived protein and degradation is regulated.Because ectopically over-expressed recombinant A39-FLAG protein driven by the CMV promoter can only be expressed as a level similar to that of the endogenous A39 (Fig. 1B), we suspected that A39 protein might be tightly maintained at a low level under basal condition and is then alleviated upon GSH depletion by BSO. Indeed, we first identified that human A39 protein level is extremely low in comparison to the A39 mRNA level, which stands out as a proteome-wide outlier of protein-mRNA correlation in the HEK293T cells (CZI Open Cell20, Fig. 1D) — the majority of the mitochondrial SLC25 transporters exhibit correlated protein and mRNA ratios (Fig. 1D). Because all inner membrane SLC25 transporters are imported through a common TIM22 import mechanism, we suspected that A39 protein stability is regulated. We then performed cycloheximide (CHX) chase experiments and discovered that pre-synthesized A39 protein indeed exhibited a very short half-life < 2 h under basal condition (Fig. 1E). A394CA protein exhibited a similar short half-life (Fig. 1F). This half-life is drastically shorter than the majority of mitochondrial proteins21,22 of approximately median half-life at 87 h23. BSO significantly extended A39’s half-life (Fig. 1E), but failed to extend the short half-life of A394CA (Fig. 1F). This suggests that under basal condition, both pre-synthesized wild-type A39 and A394CA mutant were quickly degraded, and BSO treatment inhibited A39 degradation through a mechanism that depends on the matrix cysteines. These two regulatory mechanisms of A39, both fast degradation and BSO-mediated stabilization, are yet to be explored.Mitochondrial m-AAA protease AFG3L2 is responsible for A39 degradation.To characterize the quality control pathway that degrades A39, we combined co-immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry (MS) and CRISPR KO in cells to identify its regulatory machinery. We first selected K562 clonal cells ectopically expressing relatively high level of A39-FLAG and a mitochondrial tag (HA-MITO, 3xHA-eGFP-OMP2524,25) from the clonal A39 CRISPR KO cells (Fig. 2A and S2A). We treated the cells with BSO for 2 days to increase the A39-FLAG protein level (Fig. S2A), rapidly immuno-isolated the mitochondria via HA-MITO using anti-HA magnetic beads, and then immunoprecipitated A39 binding partners using anti-FLAG resin in a mild 1% digitonin-containing lysates (Fig. 2A). Wild type K562 cell expressing HA-MITO tag was used as the control. Silver staining of the immunoprecipitants revealed an enrichment of A39-FLAG protein that migrated around 40 kD, confirmed by MS (Fig. 2A). One major band around 60 kD that is specific to A39-FLAG IP was identified as HSPD1/HSP60 by MS (Fig. 2A), an abundant mitochondrial matrix chaperonin that facilitates folding and refolding of matrix proteins26. HSPD1 enrichment suggested that the matrix portion of A39 protein may be flexible and misfolded, however, because HSPD1 CRISPR KO did not affect A39 protein level under basal condition (Fig. 2C), we did not follow up here. We then performed MS analysis of the entire gel lane from the A39-FLAG immunoprecipitants and control to identify specific A39 binding partners (Table S1). We categorized the hits into pathways relevant to mitochondrial quality control and A39-related metabolite sensing mechanisms that include mitochondrial proteases, matrix chaperones, mitophagy-related, and iron-related proteins (Fig. 2B). We then performed CRISPR to knock out 11 representative protein hits from these pathways to investigate the impact on A39 protein level, both under basal condition and BSO treatment (Fig. 2C). Strikingly, CRISPR KO of only two proteins dramatically stabilized A39 under basal condition, AFG3L2 and ABCB7 (Fig. 2C, red), among which AFG3L2 KO upregulated basal A39 protein level to a much higher level and A39 level in the AFG3L2 KO was no longer sensitive to BSO treatment (Fig. 2C). Western blot (Fig. S2B) and qPCR (Fig. S2C) confirmed successful depletion of AFG3L2 and ABCB7 in the corresponding CRISPR KOs. And mRNA level of the endogenous SLC25A39 did not change (Fig. S2D).AFG3L2 is the subunit of the mitochondrial m-AAA proteases in the inner membrane with catalytic sites facing the matrix27, and its mutations cause neurological disorders including dominant spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA28)28 and Spastic ataxia 5, autosomal recessive (SPAX5)29. AFG3L2 CRISPR KO increased the basal level of endogenous A39, A39-FLAG and A394CA-FLAG (Fig. 2D), suggesting its role in the quality control of A39 (and A394CA) under basal condition. ABCB7 is a mitochondrial inner membrane protein and a putative transporter for certain Fe-S cluster species30. Because ABCB7 CRISPR KO only increased wild-type A39-FLAG but not A394CA-FLAG (Fig. 2E), we suspected that ABCB7 might function in the second branch of the regulation, the BSO-mediated A39 stabilization, that depends on the matrix cysteines.The quality control regulation of A39 protein is specific to AFG3L2. Two hexametric m-AAA proteases exist in human, homo-oligomeric AFG3L2 complexes and hetero-oligomeric complexes of the homologous AFG3L2 and SPG731,32. Together with i-AAA protease active in the intermembrane space YME1L and other membrane-bound peptidases, they play a central role for inner membrane protein quality control. Notably, our co-immunoprecipitation MS did not recover SPG7 and YME1L, and CRISPR KO of SPG7 and YME1L did not affect A39 protein level (Fig. 2C), suggesting a specificity by AFG3L2.CHX chase experiment identified that AFG3L2 CRISPR KO completely abolished A39 degradation beyond 8 hrs (Fig. 2G and H) -- a complete stabilization upon AFG3L2 loss is different from the moderate BSO-mediated stabilization (Fig. 1E). This suggests that A39 is a specific, short-lived substrate of AFG3L2, and other mitochondrial proteases cannot compensate and substitute for A39 proteolytic regulation. We validated these findings in HeLa cells, in which AFG3L2 CRISPR KO cells also upregulated A39 level that can be reduced by re-expressing AFG3L2–3xFLAG (Fig. 2F). We therefore concluded that AFG3L2 is necessary for degrading A39 under basal condition and this function cannot be substituted by other mitochondrial proteases.A39 degradation is targeted through the matrix loop 1, which controls mitochondrial glutathione level.We then tested whether the matrix loop 1 of A39 is responsible for A39 degradation by AFG3L2. We generated two A39 fusion constructs by swapping the long A39 loop 1 to the corresponding loop of either the homologous transporter SLC25A40 (A40), A39A40L1 -FLAG, or to that of the dicarboxylate SLC25 transporter SLC25A11 (A11), A39A11L1-FLAG (Fig 3A and B). As expected, due to the shorter sequences, A39A11L1-FLAG and A39A40L1-FLAG migrated at lower molecular weights than A39-FLAG (Fig. 3C). Importantly, A39A11L1-FLAG and A39A40L1-FLAG were expressed at a much higher level than A39-FLAG under basal condition (Fig. 3C), and AFG3L2 CRISPSR KO cannot further stabilize these two fusion proteins (Fig. 3C), suggesting they were resistant to degradation. A lack of AFG3L2-mediated degradation for the loop 1-swapping A39 fusion constructs strongly suggested that A39’s matrix loop 1 is responsible for AFG3L2 recognition and degradation.We then explored the functional consequence of A39 upregulation on mitochondrial glutathione level using three different experimental conditions. First, we performed mitochondrial metabolite profiling in the AFG3L2 CRISPR KO cells upon rapid mitochondrial immunoisolation using HA-MITO tag and discovered that the KO mitochondria lacking the protease had a higher A39 protein level as expected (Fig. 3D), and increased GSH level (Fig. 3E). Second, we immunoisolated mitochondria from BSO-treated A39 CRISPR KO cells expressing either A39-FLAG or A394CA-FLAG where only A39-FLAG can be upregulated but not A394CA-FLAG (Fig. 3F); and then performed in vitro mitochondria-based uptake assay using stable isotope labeled GSH [M+3] (GSH-[glycine-13C2, 15N]) for 15 min. The uptake assay revealed significantly higher GSH uptake in the A39-FLAG-expressing cells (Fig. 3G), despite A394CA-FLAG is a functional transporter (Fig. 1C). Third and specifically, we compared mitochondrial glutathione level in the A39 KO cells overexpressing A39-FLAG or A39A11L1-FLAG, in which A39A11L1-FLAG is expressed at a much higher level than A39-FLAG (Fig. 3H). Indeed, while A39-FLAG can rescue mitochondrial glutathione depletion in the A39 KO cells to the control level, A39A11L1-FLAG further increased mitochondrial GSH higher than that of the control level (Fig. 3I). Labeled GSH mitochondrial uptake assay from these cells also confirmed a high mitochondrial glutathione uptake rate (Fig. 3J). Therefore, we concluded that a regulated A39 transporter protein level directly controls mitochondrial matrix glutathione level.SLC25A39 degradation is inhibited by a coordinated sensing of mitochondrial Fe-S cluster by the matrix cysteines.What is the mechanism that stabilizes A39 protein during BSO treatment? We first tested and ruled out the possibility that BSO affects AFG3L2 activity, because BSO treatment did not affect level of NDUFA9 (Fig. 4A), whose degradation depends on AFG3L2 in the mammalian cells33. Because previous studies of A39 identified a coupling between A39 and mitochondrial iron homeostasis13,14,34,35, we hypothesized a BSO-mediated, A39’s matrix-cysteine-dependent metabolic sensing mechanism. Consistent with this notion, our CRISPR KO assay (Fig. 2C) already observed that CRISPR KO of the putative mitochondrial Fe-S cluster transporter ABCB7 stabilized A39 protein in a similar manner that depends on A39’s matrix cysteines (Fig. 2E). Following up on this, we deployed three strategies to perturb iron homeostasis to investigate the impact on A39 protein level (Fig. 4B). First, depleting cellular iron using an iron chelator deferoxamine (DFO), which is sensed by increased cytosolic iron-sensing IRP2 level (Fig. S3A and S3B), diminished BSO-mediated A39 protein upregulation (Fig. 4C and S3B). Second, depleting mitochondrial iron by double CRISPR KO of the two mitochondrial iron transporters, SLC25A28 and SLC25A37 (Fig. S3C and S3D), completely abolished BSO-mediated A39 protein upregulation (Fig. 4D). Third, inhibiting Fe-S cluster biosynthesis chaperone by CRISPR KO of HSCB or GLRX5 (Fig. S3E and S3F) significantly dampened BSO-mediated A39 protein upregulation (Fig. 4E). Then, to investigate the contribution of individual matrix cysteines in A39, we generated four FLAG-tagged single cysteine mutants, A39C74A, A39C78A, A38C88A and A39C94A. While all four mutants can be expressed similar to the wild-type level under basal condition, all four mutants exhibited reduced stabilization upon BSO treatment (Fig. S3G), suggesting a coordinated regulation through all four cysteines.To assay whether the four matrix cysteines might be directly involved in iron sensing, we applied reactive cysteine labeling reagent, iodoacetyl-PEG2-biotin (MW = 542 Da), to label cysteine residues of A39WT-FLAG in the A39 and AFG3L2 double KO K562 cell mitochondrial lysates, and assayed iron-dependent labeling efficiency through A39-FLAG mobility shift (Fig. 4F). Because A39 protein contains three additional cysteine residues besides the four matrix cysteines, we observed a modest mobility shift of the labeled A39-FLAG from the BSO-treated condition, corresponding to a partial labeling (Fig. 4G, black asterisk). Importantly, cellular iron depletion by either DFO or BSO + DFO treatment allowed A39-FLAG to be maximally labeled and to migrate at a higher molecular weight (Fig. 4G, cyan asterisk), suggesting more cysteine residues of A39 became exposed upon iron depletion and reactive to labeling. The mobility shift reflects cysteine labeling, because A39-FLAG from mitochondrial lysates without labeling reaction migrated at the similar molecular weight (Fig. 4G, red asterisk) and the protein abundances were comparable due to AFG3L2 KO. We therefore concluded that A39’s four matrix cysteines are responsible for coordinated sensing of matrix iron homeostasis, protecting A39 from degradation.A39 regulation in the neuronal cells.Mutations in AFG3L2 are known to cause neurological disorders28,29,36 and A39 is a candidate risk gene for late onset Parkinson’s disease37. In addition, as glutathione, iron, and mitochondrial dysregulation have all been implicated in neurological disorders, we then explored if this A39 protein regulation mechanism also occurs in the neuronal cells. We chose the human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) KOLF2.1J cell-derived glutamatergic neurons utilizing Tet-On doxycycline (Dox)-inducible NGN2 expression (Fig. 4H)38–40. The neuronal differentiation was robust (>95%) based on neuronal morphology and they were considered mature iNeurons on differentiation Day 21 (Fig. S3H). Western blotting for synaptic marker Synaptophysin confirmed synaptic development (Fig. 4I). We observed a time-dependent reduction of A39 protein level during neuronal differentiation (Fig. 4I), which is accompanied by a decline of the Fe-S cluster machinery HSCB (Fig. 4I), suggesting a coordinated regulation of mitochondrial glutathione and Fe-S cluster during differentiation. The AFG3L2 protein level remained unchanged (Fig. 4I). A39 reduction in neurons is likely due to reduced iron sensing that activates degradation, because BSO treatment in the mature iNeurons dramatically upregulated A39 protein level (Fig. 4J and 4K), which can be dampened by DFO treatment (Fig. 4K). The occurrence of A39 regulation in the neuronal cells might suggest a regulated neuronal glutathione compartmentalization in the context of brain disorders.

SLC25A39 protein regulation depends on GSH and the matrix cysteine residues.To explore the regulatory mechanism of A39, we performed amino acid sequence analysis13,15 and Alphafold structure prediction16 of A39. In addition to the typical structural fold of the SLC25 transporters, the threefold pseudo-symmetrical, six transmembrane α-helices surrounding the central transport cavity, the analysis revealed that A39 contains an extra mitochondrial matrix loop between transmembrane domain 1 and 2 with a low structural prediction confidence score (Fig. 1A). This loop 1 of amino acids 41–105 contains four matrix-exposed, thiol Cysteine (Cys) residues17,18 (Fig. 1A), which exceeds Cys frequency in proteins at around 1.7%19. C-terminal FLAG-tagged A39 construct with all four cysteine residues mutated to alanine, A394CA-FLAG, as well as A39WT-FLAG, can be expressed as a level similar to that of the endogenous A39 (Fig. 1B). A394CA-FLAG can fully restore mitochondrial GSH depletion in the A39 CRISPR KO cells similar to the wild type A39-FLAG (Fig. 1C), suggesting that the transporter activity is preserved in the A394CA mutant, while another cysteine mutant of the substrate binding site A39C334S-FLAG can only rescue partially (Fig. 1C). However, A394CA -FLAG completely abolished A39 protein upregulation upon pharmacological inhibition of glutathione biosynthesis using buthionine sulfoximine (BSO) (Fig. 1B), a regulation specific to A39 protein at the post-transcriptional level (Fig. S1A–C) that was previously reported with an unknown mechanism14.

SLC25A39 protein regulation depends on GSH and the matrix cysteine residues.

To explore the regulatory mechanism of A39, we performed amino acid sequence analysis13,15 and Alphafold structure prediction16 of A39. In addition to the typical structural fold of the SLC25 transporters, the threefold pseudo-symmetrical, six transmembrane α-helices surrounding the central transport cavity, the analysis revealed that A39 contains an extra mitochondrial matrix loop between transmembrane domain 1 and 2 with a low structural prediction confidence score (Fig. 1A). This loop 1 of amino acids 41–105 contains four matrix-exposed, thiol Cysteine (Cys) residues17,18 (Fig. 1A), which exceeds Cys frequency in proteins at around 1.7%19. C-terminal FLAG-tagged A39 construct with all four cysteine residues mutated to alanine, A394CA-FLAG, as well as A39WT-FLAG, can be expressed as a level similar to that of the endogenous A39 (Fig. 1B). A394CA-FLAG can fully restore mitochondrial GSH depletion in the A39 CRISPR KO cells similar to the wild type A39-FLAG (Fig. 1C), suggesting that the transporter activity is preserved in the A394CA mutant, while another cysteine mutant of the substrate binding site A39C334S-FLAG can only rescue partially (Fig. 1C). However, A394CA -FLAG completely abolished A39 protein upregulation upon pharmacological inhibition of glutathione biosynthesis using buthionine sulfoximine (BSO) (Fig. 1B), a regulation specific to A39 protein at the post-transcriptional level (Fig. S1A–C) that was previously reported with an unknown mechanism14.

SLC25A39 is a short-lived protein and degradation is regulated.Because ectopically over-expressed recombinant A39-FLAG protein driven by the CMV promoter can only be expressed as a level similar to that of the endogenous A39 (Fig. 1B), we suspected that A39 protein might be tightly maintained at a low level under basal condition and is then alleviated upon GSH depletion by BSO. Indeed, we first identified that human A39 protein level is extremely low in comparison to the A39 mRNA level, which stands out as a proteome-wide outlier of protein-mRNA correlation in the HEK293T cells (CZI Open Cell20, Fig. 1D) — the majority of the mitochondrial SLC25 transporters exhibit correlated protein and mRNA ratios (Fig. 1D). Because all inner membrane SLC25 transporters are imported through a common TIM22 import mechanism, we suspected that A39 protein stability is regulated. We then performed cycloheximide (CHX) chase experiments and discovered that pre-synthesized A39 protein indeed exhibited a very short half-life < 2 h under basal condition (Fig. 1E). A394CA protein exhibited a similar short half-life (Fig. 1F). This half-life is drastically shorter than the majority of mitochondrial proteins21,22 of approximately median half-life at 87 h23. BSO significantly extended A39’s half-life (Fig. 1E), but failed to extend the short half-life of A394CA (Fig. 1F). This suggests that under basal condition, both pre-synthesized wild-type A39 and A394CA mutant were quickly degraded, and BSO treatment inhibited A39 degradation through a mechanism that depends on the matrix cysteines. These two regulatory mechanisms of A39, both fast degradation and BSO-mediated stabilization, are yet to be explored.

SLC25A39 is a short-lived protein and degradation is regulated.

Because ectopically over-expressed recombinant A39-FLAG protein driven by the CMV promoter can only be expressed as a level similar to that of the endogenous A39 (Fig. 1B), we suspected that A39 protein might be tightly maintained at a low level under basal condition and is then alleviated upon GSH depletion by BSO. Indeed, we first identified that human A39 protein level is extremely low in comparison to the A39 mRNA level, which stands out as a proteome-wide outlier of protein-mRNA correlation in the HEK293T cells (CZI Open Cell20, Fig. 1D) — the majority of the mitochondrial SLC25 transporters exhibit correlated protein and mRNA ratios (Fig. 1D). Because all inner membrane SLC25 transporters are imported through a common TIM22 import mechanism, we suspected that A39 protein stability is regulated. We then performed cycloheximide (CHX) chase experiments and discovered that pre-synthesized A39 protein indeed exhibited a very short half-life < 2 h under basal condition (Fig. 1E). A394CA protein exhibited a similar short half-life (Fig. 1F). This half-life is drastically shorter than the majority of mitochondrial proteins21,22 of approximately median half-life at 87 h23. BSO significantly extended A39’s half-life (Fig. 1E), but failed to extend the short half-life of A394CA (Fig. 1F). This suggests that under basal condition, both pre-synthesized wild-type A39 and A394CA mutant were quickly degraded, and BSO treatment inhibited A39 degradation through a mechanism that depends on the matrix cysteines. These two regulatory mechanisms of A39, both fast degradation and BSO-mediated stabilization, are yet to be explored.

Mitochondrial m-AAA protease AFG3L2 is responsible for A39 degradation.To characterize the quality control pathway that degrades A39, we combined co-immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry (MS) and CRISPR KO in cells to identify its regulatory machinery. We first selected K562 clonal cells ectopically expressing relatively high level of A39-FLAG and a mitochondrial tag (HA-MITO, 3xHA-eGFP-OMP2524,25) from the clonal A39 CRISPR KO cells (Fig. 2A and S2A). We treated the cells with BSO for 2 days to increase the A39-FLAG protein level (Fig. S2A), rapidly immuno-isolated the mitochondria via HA-MITO using anti-HA magnetic beads, and then immunoprecipitated A39 binding partners using anti-FLAG resin in a mild 1% digitonin-containing lysates (Fig. 2A). Wild type K562 cell expressing HA-MITO tag was used as the control. Silver staining of the immunoprecipitants revealed an enrichment of A39-FLAG protein that migrated around 40 kD, confirmed by MS (Fig. 2A). One major band around 60 kD that is specific to A39-FLAG IP was identified as HSPD1/HSP60 by MS (Fig. 2A), an abundant mitochondrial matrix chaperonin that facilitates folding and refolding of matrix proteins26. HSPD1 enrichment suggested that the matrix portion of A39 protein may be flexible and misfolded, however, because HSPD1 CRISPR KO did not affect A39 protein level under basal condition (Fig. 2C), we did not follow up here. We then performed MS analysis of the entire gel lane from the A39-FLAG immunoprecipitants and control to identify specific A39 binding partners (Table S1). We categorized the hits into pathways relevant to mitochondrial quality control and A39-related metabolite sensing mechanisms that include mitochondrial proteases, matrix chaperones, mitophagy-related, and iron-related proteins (Fig. 2B). We then performed CRISPR to knock out 11 representative protein hits from these pathways to investigate the impact on A39 protein level, both under basal condition and BSO treatment (Fig. 2C). Strikingly, CRISPR KO of only two proteins dramatically stabilized A39 under basal condition, AFG3L2 and ABCB7 (Fig. 2C, red), among which AFG3L2 KO upregulated basal A39 protein level to a much higher level and A39 level in the AFG3L2 KO was no longer sensitive to BSO treatment (Fig. 2C). Western blot (Fig. S2B) and qPCR (Fig. S2C) confirmed successful depletion of AFG3L2 and ABCB7 in the corresponding CRISPR KOs. And mRNA level of the endogenous SLC25A39 did not change (Fig. S2D).AFG3L2 is the subunit of the mitochondrial m-AAA proteases in the inner membrane with catalytic sites facing the matrix27, and its mutations cause neurological disorders including dominant spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA28)28 and Spastic ataxia 5, autosomal recessive (SPAX5)29. AFG3L2 CRISPR KO increased the basal level of endogenous A39, A39-FLAG and A394CA-FLAG (Fig. 2D), suggesting its role in the quality control of A39 (and A394CA) under basal condition. ABCB7 is a mitochondrial inner membrane protein and a putative transporter for certain Fe-S cluster species30. Because ABCB7 CRISPR KO only increased wild-type A39-FLAG but not A394CA-FLAG (Fig. 2E), we suspected that ABCB7 might function in the second branch of the regulation, the BSO-mediated A39 stabilization, that depends on the matrix cysteines.The quality control regulation of A39 protein is specific to AFG3L2. Two hexametric m-AAA proteases exist in human, homo-oligomeric AFG3L2 complexes and hetero-oligomeric complexes of the homologous AFG3L2 and SPG731,32. Together with i-AAA protease active in the intermembrane space YME1L and other membrane-bound peptidases, they play a central role for inner membrane protein quality control. Notably, our co-immunoprecipitation MS did not recover SPG7 and YME1L, and CRISPR KO of SPG7 and YME1L did not affect A39 protein level (Fig. 2C), suggesting a specificity by AFG3L2.CHX chase experiment identified that AFG3L2 CRISPR KO completely abolished A39 degradation beyond 8 hrs (Fig. 2G and H) -- a complete stabilization upon AFG3L2 loss is different from the moderate BSO-mediated stabilization (Fig. 1E). This suggests that A39 is a specific, short-lived substrate of AFG3L2, and other mitochondrial proteases cannot compensate and substitute for A39 proteolytic regulation. We validated these findings in HeLa cells, in which AFG3L2 CRISPR KO cells also upregulated A39 level that can be reduced by re-expressing AFG3L2–3xFLAG (Fig. 2F). We therefore concluded that AFG3L2 is necessary for degrading A39 under basal condition and this function cannot be substituted by other mitochondrial proteases.

Mitochondrial m-AAA protease AFG3L2 is responsible for A39 degradation.

To characterize the quality control pathway that degrades A39, we combined co-immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry (MS) and CRISPR KO in cells to identify its regulatory machinery. We first selected K562 clonal cells ectopically expressing relatively high level of A39-FLAG and a mitochondrial tag (HA-MITO, 3xHA-eGFP-OMP2524,25) from the clonal A39 CRISPR KO cells (Fig. 2A and S2A). We treated the cells with BSO for 2 days to increase the A39-FLAG protein level (Fig. S2A), rapidly immuno-isolated the mitochondria via HA-MITO using anti-HA magnetic beads, and then immunoprecipitated A39 binding partners using anti-FLAG resin in a mild 1% digitonin-containing lysates (Fig. 2A). Wild type K562 cell expressing HA-MITO tag was used as the control. Silver staining of the immunoprecipitants revealed an enrichment of A39-FLAG protein that migrated around 40 kD, confirmed by MS (Fig. 2A). One major band around 60 kD that is specific to A39-FLAG IP was identified as HSPD1/HSP60 by MS (Fig. 2A), an abundant mitochondrial matrix chaperonin that facilitates folding and refolding of matrix proteins26. HSPD1 enrichment suggested that the matrix portion of A39 protein may be flexible and misfolded, however, because HSPD1 CRISPR KO did not affect A39 protein level under basal condition (Fig. 2C), we did not follow up here. We then performed MS analysis of the entire gel lane from the A39-FLAG immunoprecipitants and control to identify specific A39 binding partners (Table S1). We categorized the hits into pathways relevant to mitochondrial quality control and A39-related metabolite sensing mechanisms that include mitochondrial proteases, matrix chaperones, mitophagy-related, and iron-related proteins (Fig. 2B). We then performed CRISPR to knock out 11 representative protein hits from these pathways to investigate the impact on A39 protein level, both under basal condition and BSO treatment (Fig. 2C). Strikingly, CRISPR KO of only two proteins dramatically stabilized A39 under basal condition, AFG3L2 and ABCB7 (Fig. 2C, red), among which AFG3L2 KO upregulated basal A39 protein level to a much higher level and A39 level in the AFG3L2 KO was no longer sensitive to BSO treatment (Fig. 2C). Western blot (Fig. S2B) and qPCR (Fig. S2C) confirmed successful depletion of AFG3L2 and ABCB7 in the corresponding CRISPR KOs. And mRNA level of the endogenous SLC25A39 did not change (Fig. S2D).

AFG3L2 is the subunit of the mitochondrial m-AAA proteases in the inner membrane with catalytic sites facing the matrix27, and its mutations cause neurological disorders including dominant spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA28)28 and Spastic ataxia 5, autosomal recessive (SPAX5)29. AFG3L2 CRISPR KO increased the basal level of endogenous A39, A39-FLAG and A394CA-FLAG (Fig. 2D), suggesting its role in the quality control of A39 (and A394CA) under basal condition. ABCB7 is a mitochondrial inner membrane protein and a putative transporter for certain Fe-S cluster species30. Because ABCB7 CRISPR KO only increased wild-type A39-FLAG but not A394CA-FLAG (Fig. 2E), we suspected that ABCB7 might function in the second branch of the regulation, the BSO-mediated A39 stabilization, that depends on the matrix cysteines.

The quality control regulation of A39 protein is specific to AFG3L2. Two hexametric m-AAA proteases exist in human, homo-oligomeric AFG3L2 complexes and hetero-oligomeric complexes of the homologous AFG3L2 and SPG731,32. Together with i-AAA protease active in the intermembrane space YME1L and other membrane-bound peptidases, they play a central role for inner membrane protein quality control. Notably, our co-immunoprecipitation MS did not recover SPG7 and YME1L, and CRISPR KO of SPG7 and YME1L did not affect A39 protein level (Fig. 2C), suggesting a specificity by AFG3L2.

CHX chase experiment identified that AFG3L2 CRISPR KO completely abolished A39 degradation beyond 8 hrs (Fig. 2G and H) -- a complete stabilization upon AFG3L2 loss is different from the moderate BSO-mediated stabilization (Fig. 1E). This suggests that A39 is a specific, short-lived substrate of AFG3L2, and other mitochondrial proteases cannot compensate and substitute for A39 proteolytic regulation. We validated these findings in HeLa cells, in which AFG3L2 CRISPR KO cells also upregulated A39 level that can be reduced by re-expressing AFG3L2–3xFLAG (Fig. 2F). We therefore concluded that AFG3L2 is necessary for degrading A39 under basal condition and this function cannot be substituted by other mitochondrial proteases.

A39 degradation is targeted through the matrix loop 1, which controls mitochondrial glutathione level.We then tested whether the matrix loop 1 of A39 is responsible for A39 degradation by AFG3L2. We generated two A39 fusion constructs by swapping the long A39 loop 1 to the corresponding loop of either the homologous transporter SLC25A40 (A40), A39A40L1 -FLAG, or to that of the dicarboxylate SLC25 transporter SLC25A11 (A11), A39A11L1-FLAG (Fig 3A and B). As expected, due to the shorter sequences, A39A11L1-FLAG and A39A40L1-FLAG migrated at lower molecular weights than A39-FLAG (Fig. 3C). Importantly, A39A11L1-FLAG and A39A40L1-FLAG were expressed at a much higher level than A39-FLAG under basal condition (Fig. 3C), and AFG3L2 CRISPSR KO cannot further stabilize these two fusion proteins (Fig. 3C), suggesting they were resistant to degradation. A lack of AFG3L2-mediated degradation for the loop 1-swapping A39 fusion constructs strongly suggested that A39’s matrix loop 1 is responsible for AFG3L2 recognition and degradation.We then explored the functional consequence of A39 upregulation on mitochondrial glutathione level using three different experimental conditions. First, we performed mitochondrial metabolite profiling in the AFG3L2 CRISPR KO cells upon rapid mitochondrial immunoisolation using HA-MITO tag and discovered that the KO mitochondria lacking the protease had a higher A39 protein level as expected (Fig. 3D), and increased GSH level (Fig. 3E). Second, we immunoisolated mitochondria from BSO-treated A39 CRISPR KO cells expressing either A39-FLAG or A394CA-FLAG where only A39-FLAG can be upregulated but not A394CA-FLAG (Fig. 3F); and then performed in vitro mitochondria-based uptake assay using stable isotope labeled GSH [M+3] (GSH-[glycine-13C2, 15N]) for 15 min. The uptake assay revealed significantly higher GSH uptake in the A39-FLAG-expressing cells (Fig. 3G), despite A394CA-FLAG is a functional transporter (Fig. 1C). Third and specifically, we compared mitochondrial glutathione level in the A39 KO cells overexpressing A39-FLAG or A39A11L1-FLAG, in which A39A11L1-FLAG is expressed at a much higher level than A39-FLAG (Fig. 3H). Indeed, while A39-FLAG can rescue mitochondrial glutathione depletion in the A39 KO cells to the control level, A39A11L1-FLAG further increased mitochondrial GSH higher than that of the control level (Fig. 3I). Labeled GSH mitochondrial uptake assay from these cells also confirmed a high mitochondrial glutathione uptake rate (Fig. 3J). Therefore, we concluded that a regulated A39 transporter protein level directly controls mitochondrial matrix glutathione level.

A39 degradation is targeted through the matrix loop 1, which controls mitochondrial glutathione level.

We then tested whether the matrix loop 1 of A39 is responsible for A39 degradation by AFG3L2. We generated two A39 fusion constructs by swapping the long A39 loop 1 to the corresponding loop of either the homologous transporter SLC25A40 (A40), A39A40L1 -FLAG, or to that of the dicarboxylate SLC25 transporter SLC25A11 (A11), A39A11L1-FLAG (Fig 3A and B). As expected, due to the shorter sequences, A39A11L1-FLAG and A39A40L1-FLAG migrated at lower molecular weights than A39-FLAG (Fig. 3C). Importantly, A39A11L1-FLAG and A39A40L1-FLAG were expressed at a much higher level than A39-FLAG under basal condition (Fig. 3C), and AFG3L2 CRISPSR KO cannot further stabilize these two fusion proteins (Fig. 3C), suggesting they were resistant to degradation. A lack of AFG3L2-mediated degradation for the loop 1-swapping A39 fusion constructs strongly suggested that A39’s matrix loop 1 is responsible for AFG3L2 recognition and degradation.

We then explored the functional consequence of A39 upregulation on mitochondrial glutathione level using three different experimental conditions. First, we performed mitochondrial metabolite profiling in the AFG3L2 CRISPR KO cells upon rapid mitochondrial immunoisolation using HA-MITO tag and discovered that the KO mitochondria lacking the protease had a higher A39 protein level as expected (Fig. 3D), and increased GSH level (Fig. 3E). Second, we immunoisolated mitochondria from BSO-treated A39 CRISPR KO cells expressing either A39-FLAG or A394CA-FLAG where only A39-FLAG can be upregulated but not A394CA-FLAG (Fig. 3F); and then performed in vitro mitochondria-based uptake assay using stable isotope labeled GSH [M+3] (GSH-[glycine-13C2, 15N]) for 15 min. The uptake assay revealed significantly higher GSH uptake in the A39-FLAG-expressing cells (Fig. 3G), despite A394CA-FLAG is a functional transporter (Fig. 1C). Third and specifically, we compared mitochondrial glutathione level in the A39 KO cells overexpressing A39-FLAG or A39A11L1-FLAG, in which A39A11L1-FLAG is expressed at a much higher level than A39-FLAG (Fig. 3H). Indeed, while A39-FLAG can rescue mitochondrial glutathione depletion in the A39 KO cells to the control level, A39A11L1-FLAG further increased mitochondrial GSH higher than that of the control level (Fig. 3I). Labeled GSH mitochondrial uptake assay from these cells also confirmed a high mitochondrial glutathione uptake rate (Fig. 3J). Therefore, we concluded that a regulated A39 transporter protein level directly controls mitochondrial matrix glutathione level.

SLC25A39 degradation is inhibited by a coordinated sensing of mitochondrial Fe-S cluster by the matrix cysteines.What is the mechanism that stabilizes A39 protein during BSO treatment? We first tested and ruled out the possibility that BSO affects AFG3L2 activity, because BSO treatment did not affect level of NDUFA9 (Fig. 4A), whose degradation depends on AFG3L2 in the mammalian cells33. Because previous studies of A39 identified a coupling between A39 and mitochondrial iron homeostasis13,14,34,35, we hypothesized a BSO-mediated, A39’s matrix-cysteine-dependent metabolic sensing mechanism. Consistent with this notion, our CRISPR KO assay (Fig. 2C) already observed that CRISPR KO of the putative mitochondrial Fe-S cluster transporter ABCB7 stabilized A39 protein in a similar manner that depends on A39’s matrix cysteines (Fig. 2E). Following up on this, we deployed three strategies to perturb iron homeostasis to investigate the impact on A39 protein level (Fig. 4B). First, depleting cellular iron using an iron chelator deferoxamine (DFO), which is sensed by increased cytosolic iron-sensing IRP2 level (Fig. S3A and S3B), diminished BSO-mediated A39 protein upregulation (Fig. 4C and S3B). Second, depleting mitochondrial iron by double CRISPR KO of the two mitochondrial iron transporters, SLC25A28 and SLC25A37 (Fig. S3C and S3D), completely abolished BSO-mediated A39 protein upregulation (Fig. 4D). Third, inhibiting Fe-S cluster biosynthesis chaperone by CRISPR KO of HSCB or GLRX5 (Fig. S3E and S3F) significantly dampened BSO-mediated A39 protein upregulation (Fig. 4E). Then, to investigate the contribution of individual matrix cysteines in A39, we generated four FLAG-tagged single cysteine mutants, A39C74A, A39C78A, A38C88A and A39C94A. While all four mutants can be expressed similar to the wild-type level under basal condition, all four mutants exhibited reduced stabilization upon BSO treatment (Fig. S3G), suggesting a coordinated regulation through all four cysteines.To assay whether the four matrix cysteines might be directly involved in iron sensing, we applied reactive cysteine labeling reagent, iodoacetyl-PEG2-biotin (MW = 542 Da), to label cysteine residues of A39WT-FLAG in the A39 and AFG3L2 double KO K562 cell mitochondrial lysates, and assayed iron-dependent labeling efficiency through A39-FLAG mobility shift (Fig. 4F). Because A39 protein contains three additional cysteine residues besides the four matrix cysteines, we observed a modest mobility shift of the labeled A39-FLAG from the BSO-treated condition, corresponding to a partial labeling (Fig. 4G, black asterisk). Importantly, cellular iron depletion by either DFO or BSO + DFO treatment allowed A39-FLAG to be maximally labeled and to migrate at a higher molecular weight (Fig. 4G, cyan asterisk), suggesting more cysteine residues of A39 became exposed upon iron depletion and reactive to labeling. The mobility shift reflects cysteine labeling, because A39-FLAG from mitochondrial lysates without labeling reaction migrated at the similar molecular weight (Fig. 4G, red asterisk) and the protein abundances were comparable due to AFG3L2 KO. We therefore concluded that A39’s four matrix cysteines are responsible for coordinated sensing of matrix iron homeostasis, protecting A39 from degradation.

SLC25A39 degradation is inhibited by a coordinated sensing of mitochondrial Fe-S cluster by the matrix cysteines.

What is the mechanism that stabilizes A39 protein during BSO treatment? We first tested and ruled out the possibility that BSO affects AFG3L2 activity, because BSO treatment did not affect level of NDUFA9 (Fig. 4A), whose degradation depends on AFG3L2 in the mammalian cells33. Because previous studies of A39 identified a coupling between A39 and mitochondrial iron homeostasis13,14,34,35, we hypothesized a BSO-mediated, A39’s matrix-cysteine-dependent metabolic sensing mechanism. Consistent with this notion, our CRISPR KO assay (Fig. 2C) already observed that CRISPR KO of the putative mitochondrial Fe-S cluster transporter ABCB7 stabilized A39 protein in a similar manner that depends on A39’s matrix cysteines (Fig. 2E). Following up on this, we deployed three strategies to perturb iron homeostasis to investigate the impact on A39 protein level (Fig. 4B). First, depleting cellular iron using an iron chelator deferoxamine (DFO), which is sensed by increased cytosolic iron-sensing IRP2 level (Fig. S3A and S3B), diminished BSO-mediated A39 protein upregulation (Fig. 4C and S3B). Second, depleting mitochondrial iron by double CRISPR KO of the two mitochondrial iron transporters, SLC25A28 and SLC25A37 (Fig. S3C and S3D), completely abolished BSO-mediated A39 protein upregulation (Fig. 4D). Third, inhibiting Fe-S cluster biosynthesis chaperone by CRISPR KO of HSCB or GLRX5 (Fig. S3E and S3F) significantly dampened BSO-mediated A39 protein upregulation (Fig. 4E). Then, to investigate the contribution of individual matrix cysteines in A39, we generated four FLAG-tagged single cysteine mutants, A39C74A, A39C78A, A38C88A and A39C94A. While all four mutants can be expressed similar to the wild-type level under basal condition, all four mutants exhibited reduced stabilization upon BSO treatment (Fig. S3G), suggesting a coordinated regulation through all four cysteines.

To assay whether the four matrix cysteines might be directly involved in iron sensing, we applied reactive cysteine labeling reagent, iodoacetyl-PEG2-biotin (MW = 542 Da), to label cysteine residues of A39WT-FLAG in the A39 and AFG3L2 double KO K562 cell mitochondrial lysates, and assayed iron-dependent labeling efficiency through A39-FLAG mobility shift (Fig. 4F). Because A39 protein contains three additional cysteine residues besides the four matrix cysteines, we observed a modest mobility shift of the labeled A39-FLAG from the BSO-treated condition, corresponding to a partial labeling (Fig. 4G, black asterisk). Importantly, cellular iron depletion by either DFO or BSO + DFO treatment allowed A39-FLAG to be maximally labeled and to migrate at a higher molecular weight (Fig. 4G, cyan asterisk), suggesting more cysteine residues of A39 became exposed upon iron depletion and reactive to labeling. The mobility shift reflects cysteine labeling, because A39-FLAG from mitochondrial lysates without labeling reaction migrated at the similar molecular weight (Fig. 4G, red asterisk) and the protein abundances were comparable due to AFG3L2 KO. We therefore concluded that A39’s four matrix cysteines are responsible for coordinated sensing of matrix iron homeostasis, protecting A39 from degradation.

A39 regulation in the neuronal cells.Mutations in AFG3L2 are known to cause neurological disorders28,29,36 and A39 is a candidate risk gene for late onset Parkinson’s disease37. In addition, as glutathione, iron, and mitochondrial dysregulation have all been implicated in neurological disorders, we then explored if this A39 protein regulation mechanism also occurs in the neuronal cells. We chose the human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) KOLF2.1J cell-derived glutamatergic neurons utilizing Tet-On doxycycline (Dox)-inducible NGN2 expression (Fig. 4H)38–40. The neuronal differentiation was robust (>95%) based on neuronal morphology and they were considered mature iNeurons on differentiation Day 21 (Fig. S3H). Western blotting for synaptic marker Synaptophysin confirmed synaptic development (Fig. 4I). We observed a time-dependent reduction of A39 protein level during neuronal differentiation (Fig. 4I), which is accompanied by a decline of the Fe-S cluster machinery HSCB (Fig. 4I), suggesting a coordinated regulation of mitochondrial glutathione and Fe-S cluster during differentiation. The AFG3L2 protein level remained unchanged (Fig. 4I). A39 reduction in neurons is likely due to reduced iron sensing that activates degradation, because BSO treatment in the mature iNeurons dramatically upregulated A39 protein level (Fig. 4J and 4K), which can be dampened by DFO treatment (Fig. 4K). The occurrence of A39 regulation in the neuronal cells might suggest a regulated neuronal glutathione compartmentalization in the context of brain disorders.

A39 regulation in the neuronal cells.

Mutations in AFG3L2 are known to cause neurological disorders28,29,36 and A39 is a candidate risk gene for late onset Parkinson’s disease37. In addition, as glutathione, iron, and mitochondrial dysregulation have all been implicated in neurological disorders, we then explored if this A39 protein regulation mechanism also occurs in the neuronal cells. We chose the human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) KOLF2.1J cell-derived glutamatergic neurons utilizing Tet-On doxycycline (Dox)-inducible NGN2 expression (Fig. 4H)38–40. The neuronal differentiation was robust (>95%) based on neuronal morphology and they were considered mature iNeurons on differentiation Day 21 (Fig. S3H). Western blotting for synaptic marker Synaptophysin confirmed synaptic development (Fig. 4I). We observed a time-dependent reduction of A39 protein level during neuronal differentiation (Fig. 4I), which is accompanied by a decline of the Fe-S cluster machinery HSCB (Fig. 4I), suggesting a coordinated regulation of mitochondrial glutathione and Fe-S cluster during differentiation. The AFG3L2 protein level remained unchanged (Fig. 4I). A39 reduction in neurons is likely due to reduced iron sensing that activates degradation, because BSO treatment in the mature iNeurons dramatically upregulated A39 protein level (Fig. 4J and 4K), which can be dampened by DFO treatment (Fig. 4K). The occurrence of A39 regulation in the neuronal cells might suggest a regulated neuronal glutathione compartmentalization in the context of brain disorders.

DiscussionHere, we reported a dual regulatory mechanism acting on a mitochondrial transporter protein, by both protein quality control and metabolic sensing, which directly controls mitochondrial glutathione uptake in response to iron homeostasis (Fig. 4L), a finding independently reported by Liu et al.41. The proteolytic regulation of A39 is specific to the mitochondrial m-AAA protease AFG3L2, and cannot be substituted by other mitochondrial proteases that also act around the inner mitochondrial membrane42,43. A direct sensing of mitochondrial iron homeostasis inhibits A39 degradation, further enabling a specific transporter regulation and coordinated metabolism of two essential and reactive redox metabolites, glutathione and iron. We further went on to reveal this A39 regulation in the developing and mature neurons. This unexpected link between mitochondrial glutathione and m-AAA protease AFG3L2 might lead to unexplored pathophysiological mechanisms under a diverse clinical spectrum of AFG3L2 mutation-associated neurodegenerative disorders that range from ataxia to parkinsonism28,36. This dual regulatory mechanism of SLC25A39 transporter, by AFG3L2 and iron, further advances our understandings of metabolic regulation through protein quality control and metabolite sensing, opening new avenues for exploring regulation of metabolic compartmentalization in cellular metabolism.Limitations of the StudyWe reported a dual protein regulation of SLC25A39 by the mitochondrial protease AFG3L2 and iron sensing, however, the exact mechanisms how SLC25A39 is targeted for degradation and how iron sensing inhibits this degradation are yet to be explored. And whether SLC25A39 regulation by AFG3L2 might be involved in pathology of AFG3L2-mutation associated neurological disorders needs to be investigated.

Here, we reported a dual regulatory mechanism acting on a mitochondrial transporter protein, by both protein quality control and metabolic sensing, which directly controls mitochondrial glutathione uptake in response to iron homeostasis (Fig. 4L), a finding independently reported by Liu et al.41. The proteolytic regulation of A39 is specific to the mitochondrial m-AAA protease AFG3L2, and cannot be substituted by other mitochondrial proteases that also act around the inner mitochondrial membrane42,43. A direct sensing of mitochondrial iron homeostasis inhibits A39 degradation, further enabling a specific transporter regulation and coordinated metabolism of two essential and reactive redox metabolites, glutathione and iron. We further went on to reveal this A39 regulation in the developing and mature neurons. This unexpected link between mitochondrial glutathione and m-AAA protease AFG3L2 might lead to unexplored pathophysiological mechanisms under a diverse clinical spectrum of AFG3L2 mutation-associated neurodegenerative disorders that range from ataxia to parkinsonism28,36. This dual regulatory mechanism of SLC25A39 transporter, by AFG3L2 and iron, further advances our understandings of metabolic regulation through protein quality control and metabolite sensing, opening new avenues for exploring regulation of metabolic compartmentalization in cellular metabolism.

Limitations of the StudyWe reported a dual protein regulation of SLC25A39 by the mitochondrial protease AFG3L2 and iron sensing, however, the exact mechanisms how SLC25A39 is targeted for degradation and how iron sensing inhibits this degradation are yet to be explored. And whether SLC25A39 regulation by AFG3L2 might be involved in pathology of AFG3L2-mutation associated neurological disorders needs to be investigated.

Limitations of the Study

We reported a dual protein regulation of SLC25A39 by the mitochondrial protease AFG3L2 and iron sensing, however, the exact mechanisms how SLC25A39 is targeted for degradation and how iron sensing inhibits this degradation are yet to be explored. And whether SLC25A39 regulation by AFG3L2 might be involved in pathology of AFG3L2-mutation associated neurological disorders needs to be investigated.

STAR MethodsRESOURCE AVAILABILITYLead contactFurther information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Hongying Shen ( hongying.shen@yale.edu)Materials availabilityAll reagents generated in this study are available from the lead contact without restriction.Data and code availabilityThe raw data for the proteomics have been deposited with the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD047327 and is publicly available as of the date of publication.This paper does not report original codes.Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILSCell culturesK562 cells (ATCC, CCL-243), HeLa-M cells (a subclone of HeLa, ATCC, CCL-2 from P. De Camilli laboratory), and HEK293T cells (ATCC, CRL-3216) were maintained in DMEM (Thermo Fisher, 11995) supplemented with 10% FBS (Sigma, F2442) and 100 U /ml Pen/Strep (Thermo Fisher, 15140122).For human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)-derived neuronal experiments, we used an established human KOLF 2.1J iPSCs (Jackson Laboratory, JIPSC1000)40 engineered to harbor a doxycycline-inducible NGN2 transgene expressed at the AAVS1 safe harbor locus38,39,44. Cell maintenance and differentiation is following the previous literature39. For maintenance, the iPSCs were seeded at a density of 0.3 M per well in a 6 well Geltrex coated plate (Thermo Fisher Scientific, A1413302) supplemented with 10 μM ROCK inhibitor (Selleck Chemicals, S1049) in E8 Flex medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific, A2858501). The media was replaced with fresh E8 Flex Medium without ROCK inhibitor within 24 hours and the cells were passaged every 2–3 days at 70–80% confluency with StemPro Accutase (Thermo Fisher Scientific, A1110501). To generate excitatory neurons (iNeurons), hiPSCs were induced by DMEM/F12 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 11320033) containing 2 mg/ml of doxycycline (Sigma, D9891) for 2 days. These cells were then incubated with StemPro Accutase for 5 min, quenched with DMEM/F12 medium, and counted. The cell suspension was centrifuged at 300 g at room temperature for 5 min and the cell pellet was gently resuspended in 2 ml iNeuron medium prepared with the following reagents: BrainPhys medium (StemCell Technologies, 5790), B27 supplement (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 17504044), NT-3 (Peprotech, 450–03), BDNF (Peprotech, 450–02), laminin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 23017015), and 2 mg/ml doxycycline. The induced cells were then seeded at a density of 2 M per well on a PLO-borate (Millipore Sigma, P3655; Thermo Fisher Scientific, 28341) and Geltrex-coated 6-well plate. The following day, 1 ml of iNeuron medium was added to the medium and a half medium change was performed every 2–3 days until respective time points required for the time course assays (Day 7, Day 14, and Day 21).All the cells were tested for mycoplasma quarterly using Universal Mycoplasma Detection kit (ATCC, 30–1012K).METHOD DETAILSPlasmids and cloningFor single KO cells, the following sgRNAs were synthesized and cloned into the lentiCRISPR v2 vector (Addgene, 52961), and the resulting plasmids were used to generate the knockout lines. sgRNA sequences used for targeted integration can be found in Table S2. For the DKO cells, spCas9 guides were synthesized and cloned into either lentiCRISPR v2 vector (puromycin selection) and pXPR_BRD051 (hygromycin selection) vector, and the resulting plasmids were used to generate the single knockout (puromycin selection) and the double knockout (a combination of puromycin and hygromycin selection) lines. For the study of SLC25A39, Lentiviral plasmids were used to ectopically express human SLC25A39WT, SLC25A39C334S, SLC25A394CA, SLC25A39C74A, SLC25A39C78A SLC25A39C88A, SLC25A39C94A, SLC25A39A11L1 and SLC25A39A40L1 proteins with a C-terminal FLAG tag following a flexible linker. A lentiviral plasmid for the human SLC25A39WT with a C-terminal FLAG tag without the linker was used in the Fig. S2A. To study AFG3L2, the lentiviral vector was used to express AFG3L2 with a C-terminal 3xFLAG tag. For rapid mitochondrial isolation experiments, the following plasmid was used: pMXs-3xHA-EGFP-OMP25 (Addgene, 83356).Lentivirus production and transduction for cell line generationLentivirus was produced using HEK 293T cells. Specifically, 0.5 × 106 HEK293T cells were plated in a 6 cm dish one day before induction. A mixture of 0.6 μg pMD2.G (Addgene, 12259), 0.9 μg psPAX2 (Addgene, 12260), and 1 μg lentiviral plasmids was mixed with 125 μl serum-free DMEM and 5 μl of Lipofectamine P3000 reagent (Invitrogen, 100022057). The mixture was then combined with 2.5 μl of Lipofectamine 3000 reagent (Invitrogen, 100022050) and 125 μl serum-free DMEM, and incubated for 15–30 min at room temperature before adding dropwise to the cells. Two days after induction, the spent media was collected and filtered through a 0.45 μm sterile filter, and the resulting virus was stored at −80 °C until use. For infection, 0.5×106 cells were plated in 24-well plate in DMEM containing 10% FBS, 10 μg/ml polybrene, and 250–300 μl of virus-containing media. Spin infection was performed at 2000 g for 60 min at 37 °C. After overnight incubation, the infected cells were transferred to a 10 cm dish containing the fresh media supplemented with the corresponding antibiotic.To generate the DKOs and corresponding controls, cells were first infected with plasmids bearing a hygromycin selection cassette, followed by selection with 0.25 mg/ml hygromycin (Roche, 10843555001) for one week. After, the cells were infected again with plasmids bearing a puromycin selection cassette followed by 2 μg/ml puromycin (Gibco, A1113803) selection for two days. Two cutting controls were used for the growth fitness defects caused by double-strand DNA breaks during the Cas9 cutting. For SLC25A39 and AFG3L2 double KO expressing various FLAG-tagged SLC25 fusion proteins, sgRNA targeting SLC25A39 cloned in the pLentiCRISPR V2-blast was used followed by 10 μg/ml blasticidin (Alfa Aesar, J61883.FPL) selection for 6 days clonal selection.qPCR for mRNA levelThe mRNAs were isolated from 0.5 million cells using RNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen, 74104); the cDNA was prepared using SuperScript III First-Strand Synthesis SuperMix for qRT-PCR kit (Invitrogen, 11752050). The qPCR experiments were performed on the QuantStudio 6 Flex Real-Time PCR Systems using the recommended TaqMan probes (See Key Resources Table).ImmunoblottingFor the western blotting experiments, samples were lysed with RIPA lysis buffer (Thermo Scientific, J60645.AK) supplemented with 1% SDS and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, 11836170001). SDS-PAGE was performed using NuPAGE 4–12% Bis-Tris gel (Invitrogen, NP0335BOX) and the blot was visualized for labeling by chemiluminescent on a Bio-Rad ChemiDoc MP imaging system. The protein content was measured using Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific, 23225) for sample normalization. The following antibodies and concentration were used: Anti-SLC25A39 (Proteintech, 14963–1-AP, 1:300); Anti-VDAC (Cell Signaling Technology, 4661T, 1:1000); Anti-GAPDH (Invitrogen, 39–8600, 1:1000); Anti-SLC25A40 (Abcam, ab69075, 1:1000); Anti-AFG3L2 (Proteintech, 14631–1-AP, 1:1000); Anti-FLAG (GenScript, A00187, 1:1000); Anti-NDUFA9 (Invitrogen, 459100, 1:1000); Anti-HSCB (Proteintech, 15132–1-AP, 1:1000); Anti-GLRX5 (Sigma, HPA042465, 1:500); Anti-Synaptophysin 1 (Synaptic Systems,101002, 1:1000); Anti-IRP2 (Cell Signaling Technology, 37135S, 1:500); Anti-SLC25A37(Mitoferrin1) (Proteintech, 26469–1-AP, 1:1000); Anti-ABCB7 (Proteintech, 11158–1-AP, 1:1000); Goat anti-Rabbit IgG (H+L) Secondary Antibody, HRP (Invitrogen, PI31460, 1:5000 ); and Goat anti-Mouse IgG (H+L) Secondary Antibody, HRP ((Invitrogen, PI31430, 1:5000 ).Protein degradation assayThe cells were pretreated as described in figure legends. For each sample, 2 M cells were incubated with 150 μg/ml CHX (cycloheximide, Sigma, C4859) in a six-well plate, which was collected at the indicated times. For degradation assay in BSO, cells were pre-treated with 1 mM BSO for 2d, and incubated with CHX together with 1mM BSO for the indicated times. Western blot was used to quantify the A39 protein level. The intensity of the A39 protein was measured and analyzed using Fiji45.Co-immunoprecipitation from the mitochondrial lysatesBSO-treated clonal SLC25A39 KO K562 cells expressing SLC25A39-FLAG and 3xHA-EGFP-OMP25 was selected. 150 million cells were washed with PBS and collected at 1,000 g for 2 min at 4 °C, suspended in 3 ml KPBS buffer (136 mM KCl, 10 mM KH2PO4, pH 7.25) containing protease inhibitor cocktail to yield a homogenous single cell suspension, and aliquots were individually lysed by 20 gentle strokes using hand-held Dounce tissue grinder with tight-fitting pestle B (VMR, Kontes). Cell lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 1,000 g for 2 min at 4 °C, and transferred to new EP tubes containing 300 μl pre-washed anti-HA magnetic beads (Pierce, 88837). After an end-to-end rotator incubation for 5 min in the cold room, the isolated mitochondria were washed with KPBS buffer for 3 times, and lysed with 600 μl of TBS buffer (pH=7.5) containing 0.5% digitonin (w/v) in wet ice for 15 min. The lysate was transferred to a new 1.5 ml tube and spun at 10,000 g for 5 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was transferred to a new 1.5 ml EP tube containing 70 μl pre-washed anti-FLAG resin (GenScript, L00432). After an end-to-end rotator incubation for 40 min at room temperature, the resins were washed with 0.04% digitonin (w/v) TBS buffer three times. A39-FLAG protein was eluted from the FLAG resin with 60 μl of TBS buffer containing 300μg/ml FLAG peptide (GenScript, RP10586) after a 20-min incubation at room temperature with pipetting, and collected by centrifugation using spin cups (Thermo Scientific, 69702) at 2,000 g for 2 min at 4 °C.Silver stainingThe sliver staining is following the product protocol in a glass container. The gel was immediately fixed using 40% methanol/10% acetic acid (v/v) for 60 min. Then the gel was transferred to a solution containing 10% ethanol/5% acetic acid (v/v) for 30 min, immersed in a 1x oxidizer (Bio-Rad, 1610444) for 10 min, washed using deionized water several times (10 min each) until all the yellow color was removed from the gel, and stained by the silver reagent (Bio-Rad, 1610445) for 30 min. After that, the gel was quickly washed using deionized water to remove excess silver reagent. Lastly, the developer solution (Bio-Rad, 1610450) was used to develop the gel several times until the protein bands became clearly visible. To stop the staining process, 5% acetic acid (v/v) was used.Sequence analysis and structural modelingPrimary amino acid sequences were aligned using MUSCLE (MUltiple Sequence Comparison by Log-Expectation). A structure model of human SLC25A39 was generated using the AlphaFold16,46.Mitochondrial isolation and uptake assayA rapid mitochondria immunoisolation method was following the protocols24,25. Approximately 30 million cell lines expressing mito IP constructs were washed with PBS, collected at 1,000 g for 2 min at 4 °C, suspended in 1 ml KPBS buffer (136 mM KCl, 10 mM KH2PO4, pH 7.25) to form homogenous single-cell suspension, and lysed by 20 gentle strokes in a 2 ml hand-held Dounce tissue grinder with tight-fitting pestle B (VMR, Kontes). Cell lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 1,000 g for 2 min at 4 °C, and transferred to a new 1.5 ml EP tube containing 80 μl pre-washed anti-HA magnetic beads (Pierce, 88837). After an end-to-end rotator incubation for 3.5 min in the cold room, the isolated mitochondria were washed with KPBS buffer for 3 times. For the metabolite profiling experiment, mitochondrial metabolites were extracted with 50 μl acetonitrile-methanol-water (27:9:1 v/v/v). For the western blotting experiment, mitochondrial proteins were lysed with 100 μl RIPA lysis buffer containing 1% SDS and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, 11836170001).For the mitochondrial uptake assay, the isolated mitochondria on beads were incubated with 5 mM labeled GSH, GSH-[glycine-13C2, 15N] (Sigma, 683620), in 100 μl assay buffer (110 mM sucrose, 20 mM HEPES pH7.4, 10 mM KH2PO4, 3 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, 0.1% BSA). The uptake assay was performed at room temperature by horizontal shaking at 170 rpm and manually mixed one time. At the indicated time point, the incubated mitochondrion was washed three times with KPBS buffer, and metabolites were extracted with 50 μl acetonitrile-methanol-water (27:9:1 v/v/v) for immediate LC-MS analysis.Mass spectrometry for mitochondrial GSH levelLC/MS-based analyses were performed on a Q Exactive plus benchtop orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with an Ion Max source and a HESI II probe, which was coupled to a Vanquish UHPLC system. The polar metabolites from mitochondria were analyzed on a SeQuant ZIC-pHILIC polymeric 5 μm, 150×2.1 mm column (EMD-Millipore 150460). Mobile phase A was consisted of 20 mM ammonium carbonate in water at pH 9.6 (adjusted with ammonium hydroxide), and mobile phase B consisted of 100% acetonitrile. The column temperature was held at 27 °C with the injection volume of 5 μl, and an autosampler temperature of 4 °C. The LC conditions were set as following: the flow rate was 0.15 ml/min with a gradient of 80% B at 0 min, 80% B at 0.5 min, 20% B at 20.5 min, 20% B at 21.3 min, 80% B at 21.5 min and till 29 min. The mass data were acquired in the polarity switching mode with full scan mode in a range of 70–1000 m/z, with the resolution at 70,000, the AGC target at 1e6, the maximum injection time at 80 ms, the sheath gas flow at 50 units, the auxiliary gas flow at 10 units, the sweep gas flow at 2 units, the spray voltage at 2.5 kV, the capillary temperature at 310°C, and the auxiliary gas heater temperature at 370°C. Xcalibur 4.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to pick peaks and integrate peak intensity.Mass spectrometry for SLC25A39-FLAG immunoprecipitantsThe co-immunoprecitants were loaded in a SDS-PAGE gel and run for a short time to remove the elution buffer composition. Cut gel slices were further cut into small pieces, fixed with 1 ml of methanol-water-acetic acid (45:45:10 v/v/v) for 15 min on a tilt-table, and then washed three times with 1 ml water for 5 min. The bands were washed with 1 ml 100 mM NH4HCO3 (ammonium bicarbonate, ABC) 50% acetonitrile (ACN) for 20 min, then reduced by the addition of 175 μl 4.5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 100 mM ABC and incubated at 37 °C for 20 min. The DTT solution was removed, and the samples were cooled to room temperature. The samples were alkylated by the addition of 175 μl 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAN) in 100 mM ABC and incubation at room temperature in the dark for 20 min. The IAN solution was removed, and the gels were washed with 1 ml 50% ACN/100 mM ABC twice for 10 min, with 1 ml 50% ACN/25 mM ABC twice for 10 min, then briefly dried by SpeedVac. Digestion was performed by adding 1 gel volume of 25 mM ABC containing 2.5 ng/μl of digestion grade trypsin (Promega, V5111) and incubating at 37 °C for 16 hours. The supernatants containing the tryptic peptides were transferred to new Eppendorf tubes. The residual peptides in the gel bands were extracted with 500 μl 80% ACN/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for 15 min and combined with the original digests, then dried in a SpeedVac. The peptides were dissolved in 30 μl MS loading buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid), with 5 μl injected for LC-MS/MS analysis.LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive Plus equipped with a Waters nanoAcquity UPLC system utilizing a binary solvent system (A: 100% water, 0.1% formic acid; B: 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Trapping was performed at 5 μl/min, 99.5% Buffer A for 3 min using a Waters Symmetry® C18 180μm x 20mm trap column. Peptides were separated using an ACQUITY UPLC PST (BEH) C18 nanoACQUITY Column (1.7 μm, 75 μm x 250 mm) maintained at 37 °C and eluted at 300 nl/min with the following gradient: 3% buffer B at initial conditions; 5% B at 1 minute; 25% B at 90 min; 50% B at 110 min; 90% B at 115 min; 90% B at 120 min; return to initial conditions at 125 min. MS was acquired in profile mode over the 300–1,700 m/z range using 1 microscan, 70,000 resolution, AGC target of 3E6, and a maximum injection time of 45 ms. Data dependent MS/MS were acquired in centroid mode on the top 20 precursors per MS scan using 1 microscan, 17,500 resolution, AGC target of 1E5, maximum injection time of 100 ms, and an isolation window of 1.7 m/z. Precursors were fragmented by HCD activation with a collision energy of 28%. MS/MS were collected on species with an intensity threshold of 1E4, charge states of 2–6, and peptide match preferred. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 seconds.Data was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.5) (Thermo Scientific) software and searched in-house using the Mascot algorithm (version 2.8.0) (Matrix Science). The data was searched against the Swissprotein database with taxonomy restricted to Homo sapiens (20,405 sequences) along with a custom database containing the hSLC25A39-FLAG sequence. Search parameters used were trypsin digestion with up to 2 missed cleavages; peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm; MS/MS fragment tolerance of 0.02 Da; fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine, and variable modifications of methionine oxidation and deamidation on asparagine and glutamine. Normal and decoy database searches were performed, with the confidence level set to 95% (p<0.05). Scaffold v5.1.2 (Proteome Software Inc.) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability (assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm) and contained at least 2 identified peptides.Cysteine labeling and mobility shift assayApproximately 25 million clonal SLC25A39 and AFG3L2 double CRISPR KO K562 cells expressing SLC25A39-FLAG in each condition were washed with PBS, collected at 1,000 g for 2 min at 4 °C, suspended in 1.5 ml hypotonic buffer (100 mM sucrose, 1mM EGTA, 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4) containing protease inhibitor cocktail to form homogenous single-cell suspension, and kept on wet ice for 10 min, and then lysed by 30 gentle strokes in the 2 ml hand-held Dounce tissue grinder with tight-fitting pestle B (VMR, Kontes). Cell lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 1,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was transferred to a new 1.5 ml EP tube and spun at 10,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. Afterward, the pellet was lysed with 150 μl of 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) reaction buffer containing 1% digitonin (w/v) wet ice for 15 min. Mitochondrial lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 10,000 g for 5 min at 4 °C. For Cysteine labeling, 50 μl of mitochondrial lysates were reacted with the 50 μl of freshly prepared reaction buffer (4 mM EZ-link Iodoacetyl-PEG2-Biotin (Thermos scientific, 21334) in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) and 1mM TCEP. The reaction was conducted in the dark at room temperature for 90 min, and quenched by an aliquot of 4x Laemmli Sample buffer (Bio-Rad, 1610747). To assay mobility of the labeled A39-FLAG, the samples were separated by SDS-PAGE using NuPAGE 4–12% Bis-Tris gel (Invitrogen, NP0335BOX) at 75 V for 6 hours, and anti-FLAG antibody was used to detect the both labeled and unlabeled A39-FLAG.QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSISFor metabolite profiling experiments, data were shown as mean ± s.d., n≥3 biologically independent samples. Statistical significance was calculated using two-tailed t-test. Significance level was indicated as *** p < 0.001, ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05 and n.s. p > 0.05. All other important experiments were validated at least two times. Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism (8.4.3a), Microsoft Excel (Microsoft Office 365), or as reported by the relevant computational tools.

STAR Methods

RESOURCE AVAILABILITYLead contactFurther information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Hongying Shen ( hongying.shen@yale.edu)Materials availabilityAll reagents generated in this study are available from the lead contact without restriction.Data and code availabilityThe raw data for the proteomics have been deposited with the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD047327 and is publicly available as of the date of publication.This paper does not report original codes.Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.

RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

Lead contactFurther information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Hongying Shen ( hongying.shen@yale.edu)

Lead contact

Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Hongying Shen ( hongying.shen@yale.edu)

Materials availabilityAll reagents generated in this study are available from the lead contact without restriction.

Materials availability

All reagents generated in this study are available from the lead contact without restriction.

Data and code availabilityThe raw data for the proteomics have been deposited with the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD047327 and is publicly available as of the date of publication.This paper does not report original codes.Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.

Data and code availability

The raw data for the proteomics have been deposited with the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD047327 and is publicly available as of the date of publication.

This paper does not report original codes.

Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.

EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILSCell culturesK562 cells (ATCC, CCL-243), HeLa-M cells (a subclone of HeLa, ATCC, CCL-2 from P. De Camilli laboratory), and HEK293T cells (ATCC, CRL-3216) were maintained in DMEM (Thermo Fisher, 11995) supplemented with 10% FBS (Sigma, F2442) and 100 U /ml Pen/Strep (Thermo Fisher, 15140122).For human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)-derived neuronal experiments, we used an established human KOLF 2.1J iPSCs (Jackson Laboratory, JIPSC1000)40 engineered to harbor a doxycycline-inducible NGN2 transgene expressed at the AAVS1 safe harbor locus38,39,44. Cell maintenance and differentiation is following the previous literature39. For maintenance, the iPSCs were seeded at a density of 0.3 M per well in a 6 well Geltrex coated plate (Thermo Fisher Scientific, A1413302) supplemented with 10 μM ROCK inhibitor (Selleck Chemicals, S1049) in E8 Flex medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific, A2858501). The media was replaced with fresh E8 Flex Medium without ROCK inhibitor within 24 hours and the cells were passaged every 2–3 days at 70–80% confluency with StemPro Accutase (Thermo Fisher Scientific, A1110501). To generate excitatory neurons (iNeurons), hiPSCs were induced by DMEM/F12 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 11320033) containing 2 mg/ml of doxycycline (Sigma, D9891) for 2 days. These cells were then incubated with StemPro Accutase for 5 min, quenched with DMEM/F12 medium, and counted. The cell suspension was centrifuged at 300 g at room temperature for 5 min and the cell pellet was gently resuspended in 2 ml iNeuron medium prepared with the following reagents: BrainPhys medium (StemCell Technologies, 5790), B27 supplement (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 17504044), NT-3 (Peprotech, 450–03), BDNF (Peprotech, 450–02), laminin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 23017015), and 2 mg/ml doxycycline. The induced cells were then seeded at a density of 2 M per well on a PLO-borate (Millipore Sigma, P3655; Thermo Fisher Scientific, 28341) and Geltrex-coated 6-well plate. The following day, 1 ml of iNeuron medium was added to the medium and a half medium change was performed every 2–3 days until respective time points required for the time course assays (Day 7, Day 14, and Day 21).All the cells were tested for mycoplasma quarterly using Universal Mycoplasma Detection kit (ATCC, 30–1012K).

EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS

Cell culturesK562 cells (ATCC, CCL-243), HeLa-M cells (a subclone of HeLa, ATCC, CCL-2 from P. De Camilli laboratory), and HEK293T cells (ATCC, CRL-3216) were maintained in DMEM (Thermo Fisher, 11995) supplemented with 10% FBS (Sigma, F2442) and 100 U /ml Pen/Strep (Thermo Fisher, 15140122).For human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)-derived neuronal experiments, we used an established human KOLF 2.1J iPSCs (Jackson Laboratory, JIPSC1000)40 engineered to harbor a doxycycline-inducible NGN2 transgene expressed at the AAVS1 safe harbor locus38,39,44. Cell maintenance and differentiation is following the previous literature39. For maintenance, the iPSCs were seeded at a density of 0.3 M per well in a 6 well Geltrex coated plate (Thermo Fisher Scientific, A1413302) supplemented with 10 μM ROCK inhibitor (Selleck Chemicals, S1049) in E8 Flex medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific, A2858501). The media was replaced with fresh E8 Flex Medium without ROCK inhibitor within 24 hours and the cells were passaged every 2–3 days at 70–80% confluency with StemPro Accutase (Thermo Fisher Scientific, A1110501). To generate excitatory neurons (iNeurons), hiPSCs were induced by DMEM/F12 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 11320033) containing 2 mg/ml of doxycycline (Sigma, D9891) for 2 days. These cells were then incubated with StemPro Accutase for 5 min, quenched with DMEM/F12 medium, and counted. The cell suspension was centrifuged at 300 g at room temperature for 5 min and the cell pellet was gently resuspended in 2 ml iNeuron medium prepared with the following reagents: BrainPhys medium (StemCell Technologies, 5790), B27 supplement (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 17504044), NT-3 (Peprotech, 450–03), BDNF (Peprotech, 450–02), laminin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 23017015), and 2 mg/ml doxycycline. The induced cells were then seeded at a density of 2 M per well on a PLO-borate (Millipore Sigma, P3655; Thermo Fisher Scientific, 28341) and Geltrex-coated 6-well plate. The following day, 1 ml of iNeuron medium was added to the medium and a half medium change was performed every 2–3 days until respective time points required for the time course assays (Day 7, Day 14, and Day 21).All the cells were tested for mycoplasma quarterly using Universal Mycoplasma Detection kit (ATCC, 30–1012K).

Cell cultures

K562 cells (ATCC, CCL-243), HeLa-M cells (a subclone of HeLa, ATCC, CCL-2 from P. De Camilli laboratory), and HEK293T cells (ATCC, CRL-3216) were maintained in DMEM (Thermo Fisher, 11995) supplemented with 10% FBS (Sigma, F2442) and 100 U /ml Pen/Strep (Thermo Fisher, 15140122).

For human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)-derived neuronal experiments, we used an established human KOLF 2.1J iPSCs (Jackson Laboratory, JIPSC1000)40 engineered to harbor a doxycycline-inducible NGN2 transgene expressed at the AAVS1 safe harbor locus38,39,44. Cell maintenance and differentiation is following the previous literature39. For maintenance, the iPSCs were seeded at a density of 0.3 M per well in a 6 well Geltrex coated plate (Thermo Fisher Scientific, A1413302) supplemented with 10 μM ROCK inhibitor (Selleck Chemicals, S1049) in E8 Flex medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific, A2858501). The media was replaced with fresh E8 Flex Medium without ROCK inhibitor within 24 hours and the cells were passaged every 2–3 days at 70–80% confluency with StemPro Accutase (Thermo Fisher Scientific, A1110501). To generate excitatory neurons (iNeurons), hiPSCs were induced by DMEM/F12 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 11320033) containing 2 mg/ml of doxycycline (Sigma, D9891) for 2 days. These cells were then incubated with StemPro Accutase for 5 min, quenched with DMEM/F12 medium, and counted. The cell suspension was centrifuged at 300 g at room temperature for 5 min and the cell pellet was gently resuspended in 2 ml iNeuron medium prepared with the following reagents: BrainPhys medium (StemCell Technologies, 5790), B27 supplement (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 17504044), NT-3 (Peprotech, 450–03), BDNF (Peprotech, 450–02), laminin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 23017015), and 2 mg/ml doxycycline. The induced cells were then seeded at a density of 2 M per well on a PLO-borate (Millipore Sigma, P3655; Thermo Fisher Scientific, 28341) and Geltrex-coated 6-well plate. The following day, 1 ml of iNeuron medium was added to the medium and a half medium change was performed every 2–3 days until respective time points required for the time course assays (Day 7, Day 14, and Day 21).

All the cells were tested for mycoplasma quarterly using Universal Mycoplasma Detection kit (ATCC, 30–1012K).

METHOD DETAILSPlasmids and cloningFor single KO cells, the following sgRNAs were synthesized and cloned into the lentiCRISPR v2 vector (Addgene, 52961), and the resulting plasmids were used to generate the knockout lines. sgRNA sequences used for targeted integration can be found in Table S2. For the DKO cells, spCas9 guides were synthesized and cloned into either lentiCRISPR v2 vector (puromycin selection) and pXPR_BRD051 (hygromycin selection) vector, and the resulting plasmids were used to generate the single knockout (puromycin selection) and the double knockout (a combination of puromycin and hygromycin selection) lines. For the study of SLC25A39, Lentiviral plasmids were used to ectopically express human SLC25A39WT, SLC25A39C334S, SLC25A394CA, SLC25A39C74A, SLC25A39C78A SLC25A39C88A, SLC25A39C94A, SLC25A39A11L1 and SLC25A39A40L1 proteins with a C-terminal FLAG tag following a flexible linker. A lentiviral plasmid for the human SLC25A39WT with a C-terminal FLAG tag without the linker was used in the Fig. S2A. To study AFG3L2, the lentiviral vector was used to express AFG3L2 with a C-terminal 3xFLAG tag. For rapid mitochondrial isolation experiments, the following plasmid was used: pMXs-3xHA-EGFP-OMP25 (Addgene, 83356).Lentivirus production and transduction for cell line generationLentivirus was produced using HEK 293T cells. Specifically, 0.5 × 106 HEK293T cells were plated in a 6 cm dish one day before induction. A mixture of 0.6 μg pMD2.G (Addgene, 12259), 0.9 μg psPAX2 (Addgene, 12260), and 1 μg lentiviral plasmids was mixed with 125 μl serum-free DMEM and 5 μl of Lipofectamine P3000 reagent (Invitrogen, 100022057). The mixture was then combined with 2.5 μl of Lipofectamine 3000 reagent (Invitrogen, 100022050) and 125 μl serum-free DMEM, and incubated for 15–30 min at room temperature before adding dropwise to the cells. Two days after induction, the spent media was collected and filtered through a 0.45 μm sterile filter, and the resulting virus was stored at −80 °C until use. For infection, 0.5×106 cells were plated in 24-well plate in DMEM containing 10% FBS, 10 μg/ml polybrene, and 250–300 μl of virus-containing media. Spin infection was performed at 2000 g for 60 min at 37 °C. After overnight incubation, the infected cells were transferred to a 10 cm dish containing the fresh media supplemented with the corresponding antibiotic.To generate the DKOs and corresponding controls, cells were first infected with plasmids bearing a hygromycin selection cassette, followed by selection with 0.25 mg/ml hygromycin (Roche, 10843555001) for one week. After, the cells were infected again with plasmids bearing a puromycin selection cassette followed by 2 μg/ml puromycin (Gibco, A1113803) selection for two days. Two cutting controls were used for the growth fitness defects caused by double-strand DNA breaks during the Cas9 cutting. For SLC25A39 and AFG3L2 double KO expressing various FLAG-tagged SLC25 fusion proteins, sgRNA targeting SLC25A39 cloned in the pLentiCRISPR V2-blast was used followed by 10 μg/ml blasticidin (Alfa Aesar, J61883.FPL) selection for 6 days clonal selection.qPCR for mRNA levelThe mRNAs were isolated from 0.5 million cells using RNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen, 74104); the cDNA was prepared using SuperScript III First-Strand Synthesis SuperMix for qRT-PCR kit (Invitrogen, 11752050). The qPCR experiments were performed on the QuantStudio 6 Flex Real-Time PCR Systems using the recommended TaqMan probes (See Key Resources Table).ImmunoblottingFor the western blotting experiments, samples were lysed with RIPA lysis buffer (Thermo Scientific, J60645.AK) supplemented with 1% SDS and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, 11836170001). SDS-PAGE was performed using NuPAGE 4–12% Bis-Tris gel (Invitrogen, NP0335BOX) and the blot was visualized for labeling by chemiluminescent on a Bio-Rad ChemiDoc MP imaging system. The protein content was measured using Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific, 23225) for sample normalization. The following antibodies and concentration were used: Anti-SLC25A39 (Proteintech, 14963–1-AP, 1:300); Anti-VDAC (Cell Signaling Technology, 4661T, 1:1000); Anti-GAPDH (Invitrogen, 39–8600, 1:1000); Anti-SLC25A40 (Abcam, ab69075, 1:1000); Anti-AFG3L2 (Proteintech, 14631–1-AP, 1:1000); Anti-FLAG (GenScript, A00187, 1:1000); Anti-NDUFA9 (Invitrogen, 459100, 1:1000); Anti-HSCB (Proteintech, 15132–1-AP, 1:1000); Anti-GLRX5 (Sigma, HPA042465, 1:500); Anti-Synaptophysin 1 (Synaptic Systems,101002, 1:1000); Anti-IRP2 (Cell Signaling Technology, 37135S, 1:500); Anti-SLC25A37(Mitoferrin1) (Proteintech, 26469–1-AP, 1:1000); Anti-ABCB7 (Proteintech, 11158–1-AP, 1:1000); Goat anti-Rabbit IgG (H+L) Secondary Antibody, HRP (Invitrogen, PI31460, 1:5000 ); and Goat anti-Mouse IgG (H+L) Secondary Antibody, HRP ((Invitrogen, PI31430, 1:5000 ).Protein degradation assayThe cells were pretreated as described in figure legends. For each sample, 2 M cells were incubated with 150 μg/ml CHX (cycloheximide, Sigma, C4859) in a six-well plate, which was collected at the indicated times. For degradation assay in BSO, cells were pre-treated with 1 mM BSO for 2d, and incubated with CHX together with 1mM BSO for the indicated times. Western blot was used to quantify the A39 protein level. The intensity of the A39 protein was measured and analyzed using Fiji45.Co-immunoprecipitation from the mitochondrial lysatesBSO-treated clonal SLC25A39 KO K562 cells expressing SLC25A39-FLAG and 3xHA-EGFP-OMP25 was selected. 150 million cells were washed with PBS and collected at 1,000 g for 2 min at 4 °C, suspended in 3 ml KPBS buffer (136 mM KCl, 10 mM KH2PO4, pH 7.25) containing protease inhibitor cocktail to yield a homogenous single cell suspension, and aliquots were individually lysed by 20 gentle strokes using hand-held Dounce tissue grinder with tight-fitting pestle B (VMR, Kontes). Cell lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 1,000 g for 2 min at 4 °C, and transferred to new EP tubes containing 300 μl pre-washed anti-HA magnetic beads (Pierce, 88837). After an end-to-end rotator incubation for 5 min in the cold room, the isolated mitochondria were washed with KPBS buffer for 3 times, and lysed with 600 μl of TBS buffer (pH=7.5) containing 0.5% digitonin (w/v) in wet ice for 15 min. The lysate was transferred to a new 1.5 ml tube and spun at 10,000 g for 5 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was transferred to a new 1.5 ml EP tube containing 70 μl pre-washed anti-FLAG resin (GenScript, L00432). After an end-to-end rotator incubation for 40 min at room temperature, the resins were washed with 0.04% digitonin (w/v) TBS buffer three times. A39-FLAG protein was eluted from the FLAG resin with 60 μl of TBS buffer containing 300μg/ml FLAG peptide (GenScript, RP10586) after a 20-min incubation at room temperature with pipetting, and collected by centrifugation using spin cups (Thermo Scientific, 69702) at 2,000 g for 2 min at 4 °C.Silver stainingThe sliver staining is following the product protocol in a glass container. The gel was immediately fixed using 40% methanol/10% acetic acid (v/v) for 60 min. Then the gel was transferred to a solution containing 10% ethanol/5% acetic acid (v/v) for 30 min, immersed in a 1x oxidizer (Bio-Rad, 1610444) for 10 min, washed using deionized water several times (10 min each) until all the yellow color was removed from the gel, and stained by the silver reagent (Bio-Rad, 1610445) for 30 min. After that, the gel was quickly washed using deionized water to remove excess silver reagent. Lastly, the developer solution (Bio-Rad, 1610450) was used to develop the gel several times until the protein bands became clearly visible. To stop the staining process, 5% acetic acid (v/v) was used.Sequence analysis and structural modelingPrimary amino acid sequences were aligned using MUSCLE (MUltiple Sequence Comparison by Log-Expectation). A structure model of human SLC25A39 was generated using the AlphaFold16,46.Mitochondrial isolation and uptake assayA rapid mitochondria immunoisolation method was following the protocols24,25. Approximately 30 million cell lines expressing mito IP constructs were washed with PBS, collected at 1,000 g for 2 min at 4 °C, suspended in 1 ml KPBS buffer (136 mM KCl, 10 mM KH2PO4, pH 7.25) to form homogenous single-cell suspension, and lysed by 20 gentle strokes in a 2 ml hand-held Dounce tissue grinder with tight-fitting pestle B (VMR, Kontes). Cell lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 1,000 g for 2 min at 4 °C, and transferred to a new 1.5 ml EP tube containing 80 μl pre-washed anti-HA magnetic beads (Pierce, 88837). After an end-to-end rotator incubation for 3.5 min in the cold room, the isolated mitochondria were washed with KPBS buffer for 3 times. For the metabolite profiling experiment, mitochondrial metabolites were extracted with 50 μl acetonitrile-methanol-water (27:9:1 v/v/v). For the western blotting experiment, mitochondrial proteins were lysed with 100 μl RIPA lysis buffer containing 1% SDS and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, 11836170001).For the mitochondrial uptake assay, the isolated mitochondria on beads were incubated with 5 mM labeled GSH, GSH-[glycine-13C2, 15N] (Sigma, 683620), in 100 μl assay buffer (110 mM sucrose, 20 mM HEPES pH7.4, 10 mM KH2PO4, 3 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, 0.1% BSA). The uptake assay was performed at room temperature by horizontal shaking at 170 rpm and manually mixed one time. At the indicated time point, the incubated mitochondrion was washed three times with KPBS buffer, and metabolites were extracted with 50 μl acetonitrile-methanol-water (27:9:1 v/v/v) for immediate LC-MS analysis.Mass spectrometry for mitochondrial GSH levelLC/MS-based analyses were performed on a Q Exactive plus benchtop orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with an Ion Max source and a HESI II probe, which was coupled to a Vanquish UHPLC system. The polar metabolites from mitochondria were analyzed on a SeQuant ZIC-pHILIC polymeric 5 μm, 150×2.1 mm column (EMD-Millipore 150460). Mobile phase A was consisted of 20 mM ammonium carbonate in water at pH 9.6 (adjusted with ammonium hydroxide), and mobile phase B consisted of 100% acetonitrile. The column temperature was held at 27 °C with the injection volume of 5 μl, and an autosampler temperature of 4 °C. The LC conditions were set as following: the flow rate was 0.15 ml/min with a gradient of 80% B at 0 min, 80% B at 0.5 min, 20% B at 20.5 min, 20% B at 21.3 min, 80% B at 21.5 min and till 29 min. The mass data were acquired in the polarity switching mode with full scan mode in a range of 70–1000 m/z, with the resolution at 70,000, the AGC target at 1e6, the maximum injection time at 80 ms, the sheath gas flow at 50 units, the auxiliary gas flow at 10 units, the sweep gas flow at 2 units, the spray voltage at 2.5 kV, the capillary temperature at 310°C, and the auxiliary gas heater temperature at 370°C. Xcalibur 4.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to pick peaks and integrate peak intensity.Mass spectrometry for SLC25A39-FLAG immunoprecipitantsThe co-immunoprecitants were loaded in a SDS-PAGE gel and run for a short time to remove the elution buffer composition. Cut gel slices were further cut into small pieces, fixed with 1 ml of methanol-water-acetic acid (45:45:10 v/v/v) for 15 min on a tilt-table, and then washed three times with 1 ml water for 5 min. The bands were washed with 1 ml 100 mM NH4HCO3 (ammonium bicarbonate, ABC) 50% acetonitrile (ACN) for 20 min, then reduced by the addition of 175 μl 4.5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 100 mM ABC and incubated at 37 °C for 20 min. The DTT solution was removed, and the samples were cooled to room temperature. The samples were alkylated by the addition of 175 μl 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAN) in 100 mM ABC and incubation at room temperature in the dark for 20 min. The IAN solution was removed, and the gels were washed with 1 ml 50% ACN/100 mM ABC twice for 10 min, with 1 ml 50% ACN/25 mM ABC twice for 10 min, then briefly dried by SpeedVac. Digestion was performed by adding 1 gel volume of 25 mM ABC containing 2.5 ng/μl of digestion grade trypsin (Promega, V5111) and incubating at 37 °C for 16 hours. The supernatants containing the tryptic peptides were transferred to new Eppendorf tubes. The residual peptides in the gel bands were extracted with 500 μl 80% ACN/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for 15 min and combined with the original digests, then dried in a SpeedVac. The peptides were dissolved in 30 μl MS loading buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid), with 5 μl injected for LC-MS/MS analysis.LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive Plus equipped with a Waters nanoAcquity UPLC system utilizing a binary solvent system (A: 100% water, 0.1% formic acid; B: 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Trapping was performed at 5 μl/min, 99.5% Buffer A for 3 min using a Waters Symmetry® C18 180μm x 20mm trap column. Peptides were separated using an ACQUITY UPLC PST (BEH) C18 nanoACQUITY Column (1.7 μm, 75 μm x 250 mm) maintained at 37 °C and eluted at 300 nl/min with the following gradient: 3% buffer B at initial conditions; 5% B at 1 minute; 25% B at 90 min; 50% B at 110 min; 90% B at 115 min; 90% B at 120 min; return to initial conditions at 125 min. MS was acquired in profile mode over the 300–1,700 m/z range using 1 microscan, 70,000 resolution, AGC target of 3E6, and a maximum injection time of 45 ms. Data dependent MS/MS were acquired in centroid mode on the top 20 precursors per MS scan using 1 microscan, 17,500 resolution, AGC target of 1E5, maximum injection time of 100 ms, and an isolation window of 1.7 m/z. Precursors were fragmented by HCD activation with a collision energy of 28%. MS/MS were collected on species with an intensity threshold of 1E4, charge states of 2–6, and peptide match preferred. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 seconds.Data was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.5) (Thermo Scientific) software and searched in-house using the Mascot algorithm (version 2.8.0) (Matrix Science). The data was searched against the Swissprotein database with taxonomy restricted to Homo sapiens (20,405 sequences) along with a custom database containing the hSLC25A39-FLAG sequence. Search parameters used were trypsin digestion with up to 2 missed cleavages; peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm; MS/MS fragment tolerance of 0.02 Da; fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine, and variable modifications of methionine oxidation and deamidation on asparagine and glutamine. Normal and decoy database searches were performed, with the confidence level set to 95% (p<0.05). Scaffold v5.1.2 (Proteome Software Inc.) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability (assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm) and contained at least 2 identified peptides.Cysteine labeling and mobility shift assayApproximately 25 million clonal SLC25A39 and AFG3L2 double CRISPR KO K562 cells expressing SLC25A39-FLAG in each condition were washed with PBS, collected at 1,000 g for 2 min at 4 °C, suspended in 1.5 ml hypotonic buffer (100 mM sucrose, 1mM EGTA, 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4) containing protease inhibitor cocktail to form homogenous single-cell suspension, and kept on wet ice for 10 min, and then lysed by 30 gentle strokes in the 2 ml hand-held Dounce tissue grinder with tight-fitting pestle B (VMR, Kontes). Cell lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 1,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was transferred to a new 1.5 ml EP tube and spun at 10,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. Afterward, the pellet was lysed with 150 μl of 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) reaction buffer containing 1% digitonin (w/v) wet ice for 15 min. Mitochondrial lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 10,000 g for 5 min at 4 °C. For Cysteine labeling, 50 μl of mitochondrial lysates were reacted with the 50 μl of freshly prepared reaction buffer (4 mM EZ-link Iodoacetyl-PEG2-Biotin (Thermos scientific, 21334) in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) and 1mM TCEP. The reaction was conducted in the dark at room temperature for 90 min, and quenched by an aliquot of 4x Laemmli Sample buffer (Bio-Rad, 1610747). To assay mobility of the labeled A39-FLAG, the samples were separated by SDS-PAGE using NuPAGE 4–12% Bis-Tris gel (Invitrogen, NP0335BOX) at 75 V for 6 hours, and anti-FLAG antibody was used to detect the both labeled and unlabeled A39-FLAG.

METHOD DETAILS

Plasmids and cloningFor single KO cells, the following sgRNAs were synthesized and cloned into the lentiCRISPR v2 vector (Addgene, 52961), and the resulting plasmids were used to generate the knockout lines. sgRNA sequences used for targeted integration can be found in Table S2. For the DKO cells, spCas9 guides were synthesized and cloned into either lentiCRISPR v2 vector (puromycin selection) and pXPR_BRD051 (hygromycin selection) vector, and the resulting plasmids were used to generate the single knockout (puromycin selection) and the double knockout (a combination of puromycin and hygromycin selection) lines. For the study of SLC25A39, Lentiviral plasmids were used to ectopically express human SLC25A39WT, SLC25A39C334S, SLC25A394CA, SLC25A39C74A, SLC25A39C78A SLC25A39C88A, SLC25A39C94A, SLC25A39A11L1 and SLC25A39A40L1 proteins with a C-terminal FLAG tag following a flexible linker. A lentiviral plasmid for the human SLC25A39WT with a C-terminal FLAG tag without the linker was used in the Fig. S2A. To study AFG3L2, the lentiviral vector was used to express AFG3L2 with a C-terminal 3xFLAG tag. For rapid mitochondrial isolation experiments, the following plasmid was used: pMXs-3xHA-EGFP-OMP25 (Addgene, 83356).

Plasmids and cloning

For single KO cells, the following sgRNAs were synthesized and cloned into the lentiCRISPR v2 vector (Addgene, 52961), and the resulting plasmids were used to generate the knockout lines. sgRNA sequences used for targeted integration can be found in Table S2. For the DKO cells, spCas9 guides were synthesized and cloned into either lentiCRISPR v2 vector (puromycin selection) and pXPR_BRD051 (hygromycin selection) vector, and the resulting plasmids were used to generate the single knockout (puromycin selection) and the double knockout (a combination of puromycin and hygromycin selection) lines. For the study of SLC25A39, Lentiviral plasmids were used to ectopically express human SLC25A39WT, SLC25A39C334S, SLC25A394CA, SLC25A39C74A, SLC25A39C78A SLC25A39C88A, SLC25A39C94A, SLC25A39A11L1 and SLC25A39A40L1 proteins with a C-terminal FLAG tag following a flexible linker. A lentiviral plasmid for the human SLC25A39WT with a C-terminal FLAG tag without the linker was used in the Fig. S2A. To study AFG3L2, the lentiviral vector was used to express AFG3L2 with a C-terminal 3xFLAG tag. For rapid mitochondrial isolation experiments, the following plasmid was used: pMXs-3xHA-EGFP-OMP25 (Addgene, 83356).

Lentivirus production and transduction for cell line generationLentivirus was produced using HEK 293T cells. Specifically, 0.5 × 106 HEK293T cells were plated in a 6 cm dish one day before induction. A mixture of 0.6 μg pMD2.G (Addgene, 12259), 0.9 μg psPAX2 (Addgene, 12260), and 1 μg lentiviral plasmids was mixed with 125 μl serum-free DMEM and 5 μl of Lipofectamine P3000 reagent (Invitrogen, 100022057). The mixture was then combined with 2.5 μl of Lipofectamine 3000 reagent (Invitrogen, 100022050) and 125 μl serum-free DMEM, and incubated for 15–30 min at room temperature before adding dropwise to the cells. Two days after induction, the spent media was collected and filtered through a 0.45 μm sterile filter, and the resulting virus was stored at −80 °C until use. For infection, 0.5×106 cells were plated in 24-well plate in DMEM containing 10% FBS, 10 μg/ml polybrene, and 250–300 μl of virus-containing media. Spin infection was performed at 2000 g for 60 min at 37 °C. After overnight incubation, the infected cells were transferred to a 10 cm dish containing the fresh media supplemented with the corresponding antibiotic.To generate the DKOs and corresponding controls, cells were first infected with plasmids bearing a hygromycin selection cassette, followed by selection with 0.25 mg/ml hygromycin (Roche, 10843555001) for one week. After, the cells were infected again with plasmids bearing a puromycin selection cassette followed by 2 μg/ml puromycin (Gibco, A1113803) selection for two days. Two cutting controls were used for the growth fitness defects caused by double-strand DNA breaks during the Cas9 cutting. For SLC25A39 and AFG3L2 double KO expressing various FLAG-tagged SLC25 fusion proteins, sgRNA targeting SLC25A39 cloned in the pLentiCRISPR V2-blast was used followed by 10 μg/ml blasticidin (Alfa Aesar, J61883.FPL) selection for 6 days clonal selection.

Lentivirus production and transduction for cell line generation

Lentivirus was produced using HEK 293T cells. Specifically, 0.5 × 106 HEK293T cells were plated in a 6 cm dish one day before induction. A mixture of 0.6 μg pMD2.G (Addgene, 12259), 0.9 μg psPAX2 (Addgene, 12260), and 1 μg lentiviral plasmids was mixed with 125 μl serum-free DMEM and 5 μl of Lipofectamine P3000 reagent (Invitrogen, 100022057). The mixture was then combined with 2.5 μl of Lipofectamine 3000 reagent (Invitrogen, 100022050) and 125 μl serum-free DMEM, and incubated for 15–30 min at room temperature before adding dropwise to the cells. Two days after induction, the spent media was collected and filtered through a 0.45 μm sterile filter, and the resulting virus was stored at −80 °C until use. For infection, 0.5×106 cells were plated in 24-well plate in DMEM containing 10% FBS, 10 μg/ml polybrene, and 250–300 μl of virus-containing media. Spin infection was performed at 2000 g for 60 min at 37 °C. After overnight incubation, the infected cells were transferred to a 10 cm dish containing the fresh media supplemented with the corresponding antibiotic.

To generate the DKOs and corresponding controls, cells were first infected with plasmids bearing a hygromycin selection cassette, followed by selection with 0.25 mg/ml hygromycin (Roche, 10843555001) for one week. After, the cells were infected again with plasmids bearing a puromycin selection cassette followed by 2 μg/ml puromycin (Gibco, A1113803) selection for two days. Two cutting controls were used for the growth fitness defects caused by double-strand DNA breaks during the Cas9 cutting. For SLC25A39 and AFG3L2 double KO expressing various FLAG-tagged SLC25 fusion proteins, sgRNA targeting SLC25A39 cloned in the pLentiCRISPR V2-blast was used followed by 10 μg/ml blasticidin (Alfa Aesar, J61883.FPL) selection for 6 days clonal selection.

qPCR for mRNA levelThe mRNAs were isolated from 0.5 million cells using RNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen, 74104); the cDNA was prepared using SuperScript III First-Strand Synthesis SuperMix for qRT-PCR kit (Invitrogen, 11752050). The qPCR experiments were performed on the QuantStudio 6 Flex Real-Time PCR Systems using the recommended TaqMan probes (See Key Resources Table).

qPCR for mRNA level

The mRNAs were isolated from 0.5 million cells using RNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen, 74104); the cDNA was prepared using SuperScript III First-Strand Synthesis SuperMix for qRT-PCR kit (Invitrogen, 11752050). The qPCR experiments were performed on the QuantStudio 6 Flex Real-Time PCR Systems using the recommended TaqMan probes (See Key Resources Table).

ImmunoblottingFor the western blotting experiments, samples were lysed with RIPA lysis buffer (Thermo Scientific, J60645.AK) supplemented with 1% SDS and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, 11836170001). SDS-PAGE was performed using NuPAGE 4–12% Bis-Tris gel (Invitrogen, NP0335BOX) and the blot was visualized for labeling by chemiluminescent on a Bio-Rad ChemiDoc MP imaging system. The protein content was measured using Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific, 23225) for sample normalization. The following antibodies and concentration were used: Anti-SLC25A39 (Proteintech, 14963–1-AP, 1:300); Anti-VDAC (Cell Signaling Technology, 4661T, 1:1000); Anti-GAPDH (Invitrogen, 39–8600, 1:1000); Anti-SLC25A40 (Abcam, ab69075, 1:1000); Anti-AFG3L2 (Proteintech, 14631–1-AP, 1:1000); Anti-FLAG (GenScript, A00187, 1:1000); Anti-NDUFA9 (Invitrogen, 459100, 1:1000); Anti-HSCB (Proteintech, 15132–1-AP, 1:1000); Anti-GLRX5 (Sigma, HPA042465, 1:500); Anti-Synaptophysin 1 (Synaptic Systems,101002, 1:1000); Anti-IRP2 (Cell Signaling Technology, 37135S, 1:500); Anti-SLC25A37(Mitoferrin1) (Proteintech, 26469–1-AP, 1:1000); Anti-ABCB7 (Proteintech, 11158–1-AP, 1:1000); Goat anti-Rabbit IgG (H+L) Secondary Antibody, HRP (Invitrogen, PI31460, 1:5000 ); and Goat anti-Mouse IgG (H+L) Secondary Antibody, HRP ((Invitrogen, PI31430, 1:5000 ).

Immunoblotting

For the western blotting experiments, samples were lysed with RIPA lysis buffer (Thermo Scientific, J60645.AK) supplemented with 1% SDS and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, 11836170001). SDS-PAGE was performed using NuPAGE 4–12% Bis-Tris gel (Invitrogen, NP0335BOX) and the blot was visualized for labeling by chemiluminescent on a Bio-Rad ChemiDoc MP imaging system. The protein content was measured using Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific, 23225) for sample normalization. The following antibodies and concentration were used: Anti-SLC25A39 (Proteintech, 14963–1-AP, 1:300); Anti-VDAC (Cell Signaling Technology, 4661T, 1:1000); Anti-GAPDH (Invitrogen, 39–8600, 1:1000); Anti-SLC25A40 (Abcam, ab69075, 1:1000); Anti-AFG3L2 (Proteintech, 14631–1-AP, 1:1000); Anti-FLAG (GenScript, A00187, 1:1000); Anti-NDUFA9 (Invitrogen, 459100, 1:1000); Anti-HSCB (Proteintech, 15132–1-AP, 1:1000); Anti-GLRX5 (Sigma, HPA042465, 1:500); Anti-Synaptophysin 1 (Synaptic Systems,101002, 1:1000); Anti-IRP2 (Cell Signaling Technology, 37135S, 1:500); Anti-SLC25A37(Mitoferrin1) (Proteintech, 26469–1-AP, 1:1000); Anti-ABCB7 (Proteintech, 11158–1-AP, 1:1000); Goat anti-Rabbit IgG (H+L) Secondary Antibody, HRP (Invitrogen, PI31460, 1:5000 ); and Goat anti-Mouse IgG (H+L) Secondary Antibody, HRP ((Invitrogen, PI31430, 1:5000 ).

Protein degradation assayThe cells were pretreated as described in figure legends. For each sample, 2 M cells were incubated with 150 μg/ml CHX (cycloheximide, Sigma, C4859) in a six-well plate, which was collected at the indicated times. For degradation assay in BSO, cells were pre-treated with 1 mM BSO for 2d, and incubated with CHX together with 1mM BSO for the indicated times. Western blot was used to quantify the A39 protein level. The intensity of the A39 protein was measured and analyzed using Fiji45.

Protein degradation assay

The cells were pretreated as described in figure legends. For each sample, 2 M cells were incubated with 150 μg/ml CHX (cycloheximide, Sigma, C4859) in a six-well plate, which was collected at the indicated times. For degradation assay in BSO, cells were pre-treated with 1 mM BSO for 2d, and incubated with CHX together with 1mM BSO for the indicated times. Western blot was used to quantify the A39 protein level. The intensity of the A39 protein was measured and analyzed using Fiji45.

Co-immunoprecipitation from the mitochondrial lysatesBSO-treated clonal SLC25A39 KO K562 cells expressing SLC25A39-FLAG and 3xHA-EGFP-OMP25 was selected. 150 million cells were washed with PBS and collected at 1,000 g for 2 min at 4 °C, suspended in 3 ml KPBS buffer (136 mM KCl, 10 mM KH2PO4, pH 7.25) containing protease inhibitor cocktail to yield a homogenous single cell suspension, and aliquots were individually lysed by 20 gentle strokes using hand-held Dounce tissue grinder with tight-fitting pestle B (VMR, Kontes). Cell lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 1,000 g for 2 min at 4 °C, and transferred to new EP tubes containing 300 μl pre-washed anti-HA magnetic beads (Pierce, 88837). After an end-to-end rotator incubation for 5 min in the cold room, the isolated mitochondria were washed with KPBS buffer for 3 times, and lysed with 600 μl of TBS buffer (pH=7.5) containing 0.5% digitonin (w/v) in wet ice for 15 min. The lysate was transferred to a new 1.5 ml tube and spun at 10,000 g for 5 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was transferred to a new 1.5 ml EP tube containing 70 μl pre-washed anti-FLAG resin (GenScript, L00432). After an end-to-end rotator incubation for 40 min at room temperature, the resins were washed with 0.04% digitonin (w/v) TBS buffer three times. A39-FLAG protein was eluted from the FLAG resin with 60 μl of TBS buffer containing 300μg/ml FLAG peptide (GenScript, RP10586) after a 20-min incubation at room temperature with pipetting, and collected by centrifugation using spin cups (Thermo Scientific, 69702) at 2,000 g for 2 min at 4 °C.

Co-immunoprecipitation from the mitochondrial lysates

BSO-treated clonal SLC25A39 KO K562 cells expressing SLC25A39-FLAG and 3xHA-EGFP-OMP25 was selected. 150 million cells were washed with PBS and collected at 1,000 g for 2 min at 4 °C, suspended in 3 ml KPBS buffer (136 mM KCl, 10 mM KH2PO4, pH 7.25) containing protease inhibitor cocktail to yield a homogenous single cell suspension, and aliquots were individually lysed by 20 gentle strokes using hand-held Dounce tissue grinder with tight-fitting pestle B (VMR, Kontes). Cell lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 1,000 g for 2 min at 4 °C, and transferred to new EP tubes containing 300 μl pre-washed anti-HA magnetic beads (Pierce, 88837). After an end-to-end rotator incubation for 5 min in the cold room, the isolated mitochondria were washed with KPBS buffer for 3 times, and lysed with 600 μl of TBS buffer (pH=7.5) containing 0.5% digitonin (w/v) in wet ice for 15 min. The lysate was transferred to a new 1.5 ml tube and spun at 10,000 g for 5 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was transferred to a new 1.5 ml EP tube containing 70 μl pre-washed anti-FLAG resin (GenScript, L00432). After an end-to-end rotator incubation for 40 min at room temperature, the resins were washed with 0.04% digitonin (w/v) TBS buffer three times. A39-FLAG protein was eluted from the FLAG resin with 60 μl of TBS buffer containing 300μg/ml FLAG peptide (GenScript, RP10586) after a 20-min incubation at room temperature with pipetting, and collected by centrifugation using spin cups (Thermo Scientific, 69702) at 2,000 g for 2 min at 4 °C.

Silver stainingThe sliver staining is following the product protocol in a glass container. The gel was immediately fixed using 40% methanol/10% acetic acid (v/v) for 60 min. Then the gel was transferred to a solution containing 10% ethanol/5% acetic acid (v/v) for 30 min, immersed in a 1x oxidizer (Bio-Rad, 1610444) for 10 min, washed using deionized water several times (10 min each) until all the yellow color was removed from the gel, and stained by the silver reagent (Bio-Rad, 1610445) for 30 min. After that, the gel was quickly washed using deionized water to remove excess silver reagent. Lastly, the developer solution (Bio-Rad, 1610450) was used to develop the gel several times until the protein bands became clearly visible. To stop the staining process, 5% acetic acid (v/v) was used.

Silver staining

The sliver staining is following the product protocol in a glass container. The gel was immediately fixed using 40% methanol/10% acetic acid (v/v) for 60 min. Then the gel was transferred to a solution containing 10% ethanol/5% acetic acid (v/v) for 30 min, immersed in a 1x oxidizer (Bio-Rad, 1610444) for 10 min, washed using deionized water several times (10 min each) until all the yellow color was removed from the gel, and stained by the silver reagent (Bio-Rad, 1610445) for 30 min. After that, the gel was quickly washed using deionized water to remove excess silver reagent. Lastly, the developer solution (Bio-Rad, 1610450) was used to develop the gel several times until the protein bands became clearly visible. To stop the staining process, 5% acetic acid (v/v) was used.

Sequence analysis and structural modelingPrimary amino acid sequences were aligned using MUSCLE (MUltiple Sequence Comparison by Log-Expectation). A structure model of human SLC25A39 was generated using the AlphaFold16,46.

Sequence analysis and structural modeling

Primary amino acid sequences were aligned using MUSCLE (MUltiple Sequence Comparison by Log-Expectation). A structure model of human SLC25A39 was generated using the AlphaFold16,46.

Mitochondrial isolation and uptake assayA rapid mitochondria immunoisolation method was following the protocols24,25. Approximately 30 million cell lines expressing mito IP constructs were washed with PBS, collected at 1,000 g for 2 min at 4 °C, suspended in 1 ml KPBS buffer (136 mM KCl, 10 mM KH2PO4, pH 7.25) to form homogenous single-cell suspension, and lysed by 20 gentle strokes in a 2 ml hand-held Dounce tissue grinder with tight-fitting pestle B (VMR, Kontes). Cell lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 1,000 g for 2 min at 4 °C, and transferred to a new 1.5 ml EP tube containing 80 μl pre-washed anti-HA magnetic beads (Pierce, 88837). After an end-to-end rotator incubation for 3.5 min in the cold room, the isolated mitochondria were washed with KPBS buffer for 3 times. For the metabolite profiling experiment, mitochondrial metabolites were extracted with 50 μl acetonitrile-methanol-water (27:9:1 v/v/v). For the western blotting experiment, mitochondrial proteins were lysed with 100 μl RIPA lysis buffer containing 1% SDS and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, 11836170001).For the mitochondrial uptake assay, the isolated mitochondria on beads were incubated with 5 mM labeled GSH, GSH-[glycine-13C2, 15N] (Sigma, 683620), in 100 μl assay buffer (110 mM sucrose, 20 mM HEPES pH7.4, 10 mM KH2PO4, 3 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, 0.1% BSA). The uptake assay was performed at room temperature by horizontal shaking at 170 rpm and manually mixed one time. At the indicated time point, the incubated mitochondrion was washed three times with KPBS buffer, and metabolites were extracted with 50 μl acetonitrile-methanol-water (27:9:1 v/v/v) for immediate LC-MS analysis.

Mitochondrial isolation and uptake assay

A rapid mitochondria immunoisolation method was following the protocols24,25. Approximately 30 million cell lines expressing mito IP constructs were washed with PBS, collected at 1,000 g for 2 min at 4 °C, suspended in 1 ml KPBS buffer (136 mM KCl, 10 mM KH2PO4, pH 7.25) to form homogenous single-cell suspension, and lysed by 20 gentle strokes in a 2 ml hand-held Dounce tissue grinder with tight-fitting pestle B (VMR, Kontes). Cell lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 1,000 g for 2 min at 4 °C, and transferred to a new 1.5 ml EP tube containing 80 μl pre-washed anti-HA magnetic beads (Pierce, 88837). After an end-to-end rotator incubation for 3.5 min in the cold room, the isolated mitochondria were washed with KPBS buffer for 3 times. For the metabolite profiling experiment, mitochondrial metabolites were extracted with 50 μl acetonitrile-methanol-water (27:9:1 v/v/v). For the western blotting experiment, mitochondrial proteins were lysed with 100 μl RIPA lysis buffer containing 1% SDS and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, 11836170001).

For the mitochondrial uptake assay, the isolated mitochondria on beads were incubated with 5 mM labeled GSH, GSH-[glycine-13C2, 15N] (Sigma, 683620), in 100 μl assay buffer (110 mM sucrose, 20 mM HEPES pH7.4, 10 mM KH2PO4, 3 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, 0.1% BSA). The uptake assay was performed at room temperature by horizontal shaking at 170 rpm and manually mixed one time. At the indicated time point, the incubated mitochondrion was washed three times with KPBS buffer, and metabolites were extracted with 50 μl acetonitrile-methanol-water (27:9:1 v/v/v) for immediate LC-MS analysis.

Mass spectrometry for mitochondrial GSH levelLC/MS-based analyses were performed on a Q Exactive plus benchtop orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with an Ion Max source and a HESI II probe, which was coupled to a Vanquish UHPLC system. The polar metabolites from mitochondria were analyzed on a SeQuant ZIC-pHILIC polymeric 5 μm, 150×2.1 mm column (EMD-Millipore 150460). Mobile phase A was consisted of 20 mM ammonium carbonate in water at pH 9.6 (adjusted with ammonium hydroxide), and mobile phase B consisted of 100% acetonitrile. The column temperature was held at 27 °C with the injection volume of 5 μl, and an autosampler temperature of 4 °C. The LC conditions were set as following: the flow rate was 0.15 ml/min with a gradient of 80% B at 0 min, 80% B at 0.5 min, 20% B at 20.5 min, 20% B at 21.3 min, 80% B at 21.5 min and till 29 min. The mass data were acquired in the polarity switching mode with full scan mode in a range of 70–1000 m/z, with the resolution at 70,000, the AGC target at 1e6, the maximum injection time at 80 ms, the sheath gas flow at 50 units, the auxiliary gas flow at 10 units, the sweep gas flow at 2 units, the spray voltage at 2.5 kV, the capillary temperature at 310°C, and the auxiliary gas heater temperature at 370°C. Xcalibur 4.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to pick peaks and integrate peak intensity.

Mass spectrometry for mitochondrial GSH level

LC/MS-based analyses were performed on a Q Exactive plus benchtop orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with an Ion Max source and a HESI II probe, which was coupled to a Vanquish UHPLC system. The polar metabolites from mitochondria were analyzed on a SeQuant ZIC-pHILIC polymeric 5 μm, 150×2.1 mm column (EMD-Millipore 150460). Mobile phase A was consisted of 20 mM ammonium carbonate in water at pH 9.6 (adjusted with ammonium hydroxide), and mobile phase B consisted of 100% acetonitrile. The column temperature was held at 27 °C with the injection volume of 5 μl, and an autosampler temperature of 4 °C. The LC conditions were set as following: the flow rate was 0.15 ml/min with a gradient of 80% B at 0 min, 80% B at 0.5 min, 20% B at 20.5 min, 20% B at 21.3 min, 80% B at 21.5 min and till 29 min. The mass data were acquired in the polarity switching mode with full scan mode in a range of 70–1000 m/z, with the resolution at 70,000, the AGC target at 1e6, the maximum injection time at 80 ms, the sheath gas flow at 50 units, the auxiliary gas flow at 10 units, the sweep gas flow at 2 units, the spray voltage at 2.5 kV, the capillary temperature at 310°C, and the auxiliary gas heater temperature at 370°C. Xcalibur 4.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to pick peaks and integrate peak intensity.

Mass spectrometry for SLC25A39-FLAG immunoprecipitantsThe co-immunoprecitants were loaded in a SDS-PAGE gel and run for a short time to remove the elution buffer composition. Cut gel slices were further cut into small pieces, fixed with 1 ml of methanol-water-acetic acid (45:45:10 v/v/v) for 15 min on a tilt-table, and then washed three times with 1 ml water for 5 min. The bands were washed with 1 ml 100 mM NH4HCO3 (ammonium bicarbonate, ABC) 50% acetonitrile (ACN) for 20 min, then reduced by the addition of 175 μl 4.5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 100 mM ABC and incubated at 37 °C for 20 min. The DTT solution was removed, and the samples were cooled to room temperature. The samples were alkylated by the addition of 175 μl 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAN) in 100 mM ABC and incubation at room temperature in the dark for 20 min. The IAN solution was removed, and the gels were washed with 1 ml 50% ACN/100 mM ABC twice for 10 min, with 1 ml 50% ACN/25 mM ABC twice for 10 min, then briefly dried by SpeedVac. Digestion was performed by adding 1 gel volume of 25 mM ABC containing 2.5 ng/μl of digestion grade trypsin (Promega, V5111) and incubating at 37 °C for 16 hours. The supernatants containing the tryptic peptides were transferred to new Eppendorf tubes. The residual peptides in the gel bands were extracted with 500 μl 80% ACN/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for 15 min and combined with the original digests, then dried in a SpeedVac. The peptides were dissolved in 30 μl MS loading buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid), with 5 μl injected for LC-MS/MS analysis.LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive Plus equipped with a Waters nanoAcquity UPLC system utilizing a binary solvent system (A: 100% water, 0.1% formic acid; B: 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Trapping was performed at 5 μl/min, 99.5% Buffer A for 3 min using a Waters Symmetry® C18 180μm x 20mm trap column. Peptides were separated using an ACQUITY UPLC PST (BEH) C18 nanoACQUITY Column (1.7 μm, 75 μm x 250 mm) maintained at 37 °C and eluted at 300 nl/min with the following gradient: 3% buffer B at initial conditions; 5% B at 1 minute; 25% B at 90 min; 50% B at 110 min; 90% B at 115 min; 90% B at 120 min; return to initial conditions at 125 min. MS was acquired in profile mode over the 300–1,700 m/z range using 1 microscan, 70,000 resolution, AGC target of 3E6, and a maximum injection time of 45 ms. Data dependent MS/MS were acquired in centroid mode on the top 20 precursors per MS scan using 1 microscan, 17,500 resolution, AGC target of 1E5, maximum injection time of 100 ms, and an isolation window of 1.7 m/z. Precursors were fragmented by HCD activation with a collision energy of 28%. MS/MS were collected on species with an intensity threshold of 1E4, charge states of 2–6, and peptide match preferred. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 seconds.Data was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.5) (Thermo Scientific) software and searched in-house using the Mascot algorithm (version 2.8.0) (Matrix Science). The data was searched against the Swissprotein database with taxonomy restricted to Homo sapiens (20,405 sequences) along with a custom database containing the hSLC25A39-FLAG sequence. Search parameters used were trypsin digestion with up to 2 missed cleavages; peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm; MS/MS fragment tolerance of 0.02 Da; fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine, and variable modifications of methionine oxidation and deamidation on asparagine and glutamine. Normal and decoy database searches were performed, with the confidence level set to 95% (p<0.05). Scaffold v5.1.2 (Proteome Software Inc.) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability (assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm) and contained at least 2 identified peptides.

Mass spectrometry for SLC25A39-FLAG immunoprecipitants

The co-immunoprecitants were loaded in a SDS-PAGE gel and run for a short time to remove the elution buffer composition. Cut gel slices were further cut into small pieces, fixed with 1 ml of methanol-water-acetic acid (45:45:10 v/v/v) for 15 min on a tilt-table, and then washed three times with 1 ml water for 5 min. The bands were washed with 1 ml 100 mM NH4HCO3 (ammonium bicarbonate, ABC) 50% acetonitrile (ACN) for 20 min, then reduced by the addition of 175 μl 4.5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 100 mM ABC and incubated at 37 °C for 20 min. The DTT solution was removed, and the samples were cooled to room temperature. The samples were alkylated by the addition of 175 μl 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAN) in 100 mM ABC and incubation at room temperature in the dark for 20 min. The IAN solution was removed, and the gels were washed with 1 ml 50% ACN/100 mM ABC twice for 10 min, with 1 ml 50% ACN/25 mM ABC twice for 10 min, then briefly dried by SpeedVac. Digestion was performed by adding 1 gel volume of 25 mM ABC containing 2.5 ng/μl of digestion grade trypsin (Promega, V5111) and incubating at 37 °C for 16 hours. The supernatants containing the tryptic peptides were transferred to new Eppendorf tubes. The residual peptides in the gel bands were extracted with 500 μl 80% ACN/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for 15 min and combined with the original digests, then dried in a SpeedVac. The peptides were dissolved in 30 μl MS loading buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid), with 5 μl injected for LC-MS/MS analysis.

LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive Plus equipped with a Waters nanoAcquity UPLC system utilizing a binary solvent system (A: 100% water, 0.1% formic acid; B: 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Trapping was performed at 5 μl/min, 99.5% Buffer A for 3 min using a Waters Symmetry® C18 180μm x 20mm trap column. Peptides were separated using an ACQUITY UPLC PST (BEH) C18 nanoACQUITY Column (1.7 μm, 75 μm x 250 mm) maintained at 37 °C and eluted at 300 nl/min with the following gradient: 3% buffer B at initial conditions; 5% B at 1 minute; 25% B at 90 min; 50% B at 110 min; 90% B at 115 min; 90% B at 120 min; return to initial conditions at 125 min. MS was acquired in profile mode over the 300–1,700 m/z range using 1 microscan, 70,000 resolution, AGC target of 3E6, and a maximum injection time of 45 ms. Data dependent MS/MS were acquired in centroid mode on the top 20 precursors per MS scan using 1 microscan, 17,500 resolution, AGC target of 1E5, maximum injection time of 100 ms, and an isolation window of 1.7 m/z. Precursors were fragmented by HCD activation with a collision energy of 28%. MS/MS were collected on species with an intensity threshold of 1E4, charge states of 2–6, and peptide match preferred. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 seconds.

Data was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.5) (Thermo Scientific) software and searched in-house using the Mascot algorithm (version 2.8.0) (Matrix Science). The data was searched against the Swissprotein database with taxonomy restricted to Homo sapiens (20,405 sequences) along with a custom database containing the hSLC25A39-FLAG sequence. Search parameters used were trypsin digestion with up to 2 missed cleavages; peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm; MS/MS fragment tolerance of 0.02 Da; fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine, and variable modifications of methionine oxidation and deamidation on asparagine and glutamine. Normal and decoy database searches were performed, with the confidence level set to 95% (p<0.05). Scaffold v5.1.2 (Proteome Software Inc.) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability (assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm) and contained at least 2 identified peptides.

Cysteine labeling and mobility shift assayApproximately 25 million clonal SLC25A39 and AFG3L2 double CRISPR KO K562 cells expressing SLC25A39-FLAG in each condition were washed with PBS, collected at 1,000 g for 2 min at 4 °C, suspended in 1.5 ml hypotonic buffer (100 mM sucrose, 1mM EGTA, 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4) containing protease inhibitor cocktail to form homogenous single-cell suspension, and kept on wet ice for 10 min, and then lysed by 30 gentle strokes in the 2 ml hand-held Dounce tissue grinder with tight-fitting pestle B (VMR, Kontes). Cell lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 1,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was transferred to a new 1.5 ml EP tube and spun at 10,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. Afterward, the pellet was lysed with 150 μl of 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) reaction buffer containing 1% digitonin (w/v) wet ice for 15 min. Mitochondrial lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 10,000 g for 5 min at 4 °C. For Cysteine labeling, 50 μl of mitochondrial lysates were reacted with the 50 μl of freshly prepared reaction buffer (4 mM EZ-link Iodoacetyl-PEG2-Biotin (Thermos scientific, 21334) in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) and 1mM TCEP. The reaction was conducted in the dark at room temperature for 90 min, and quenched by an aliquot of 4x Laemmli Sample buffer (Bio-Rad, 1610747). To assay mobility of the labeled A39-FLAG, the samples were separated by SDS-PAGE using NuPAGE 4–12% Bis-Tris gel (Invitrogen, NP0335BOX) at 75 V for 6 hours, and anti-FLAG antibody was used to detect the both labeled and unlabeled A39-FLAG.

Cysteine labeling and mobility shift assay

Approximately 25 million clonal SLC25A39 and AFG3L2 double CRISPR KO K562 cells expressing SLC25A39-FLAG in each condition were washed with PBS, collected at 1,000 g for 2 min at 4 °C, suspended in 1.5 ml hypotonic buffer (100 mM sucrose, 1mM EGTA, 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4) containing protease inhibitor cocktail to form homogenous single-cell suspension, and kept on wet ice for 10 min, and then lysed by 30 gentle strokes in the 2 ml hand-held Dounce tissue grinder with tight-fitting pestle B (VMR, Kontes). Cell lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 1,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was transferred to a new 1.5 ml EP tube and spun at 10,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. Afterward, the pellet was lysed with 150 μl of 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) reaction buffer containing 1% digitonin (w/v) wet ice for 15 min. Mitochondrial lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 10,000 g for 5 min at 4 °C. For Cysteine labeling, 50 μl of mitochondrial lysates were reacted with the 50 μl of freshly prepared reaction buffer (4 mM EZ-link Iodoacetyl-PEG2-Biotin (Thermos scientific, 21334) in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) and 1mM TCEP. The reaction was conducted in the dark at room temperature for 90 min, and quenched by an aliquot of 4x Laemmli Sample buffer (Bio-Rad, 1610747). To assay mobility of the labeled A39-FLAG, the samples were separated by SDS-PAGE using NuPAGE 4–12% Bis-Tris gel (Invitrogen, NP0335BOX) at 75 V for 6 hours, and anti-FLAG antibody was used to detect the both labeled and unlabeled A39-FLAG.

QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSISFor metabolite profiling experiments, data were shown as mean ± s.d., n≥3 biologically independent samples. Statistical significance was calculated using two-tailed t-test. Significance level was indicated as *** p < 0.001, ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05 and n.s. p > 0.05. All other important experiments were validated at least two times. Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism (8.4.3a), Microsoft Excel (Microsoft Office 365), or as reported by the relevant computational tools.

QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS

For metabolite profiling experiments, data were shown as mean ± s.d., n≥3 biologically independent samples. Statistical significance was calculated using two-tailed t-test. Significance level was indicated as *** p < 0.001, ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05 and n.s. p > 0.05. All other important experiments were validated at least two times. Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism (8.4.3a), Microsoft Excel (Microsoft Office 365), or as reported by the relevant computational tools.

Supplementary Material1Table S1. A39-FLAG SDS-PAGE gel band mass spectrometry results, related to Figure 2.2

Supplementary Material

Table S1. A39-FLAG SDS-PAGE gel band mass spectrometry results, related to Figure 2.
