---
pmid: '9188776'
title: 'Human L-3-phosphoserine phosphatase: sequence, expression and evidence for
  a phosphoenzyme intermediate.'
authors:
- Collet JF
- Gerin I
- Rider MH
- Veiga-da-Cunha M
- Van Schaftingen E
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(97)00438-9
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Human L-3-phosphoserine phosphatase: sequence, expression and evidence for a phosphoenzyme intermediate.
**Authors:** Collet JF, Gerin I, Rider MH, Veiga-da-Cunha M, Van Schaftingen E
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0014-5793(97)00438-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0014-5793(97)00438-9)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 1997 May 26;408(3):281-4. doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(97)00438-9.

Human L-3-phosphoserine phosphatase: sequence, expression and evidence for a 
phosphoenzyme intermediate.

Collet JF(1), Gerin I, Rider MH, Veiga-da-Cunha M, Van Schaftingen E.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Physiological Chemistry, ICP and University of Louvain, 
Brussels, Belgium.

We report the sequence of the cDNA encoding human L-3-phosphoserine phosphatase. 
The encoded polypeptide contains 225 residues and shows 30% sequence identity 
with the Escherichia coli enzyme. The human protein was expressed in a bacterial 
expression system and purified. Similar to known L-3-phosphoserine phosphatases, 
it catalyzed the Mg2(+)-dependent hydrolysis of L-phosphoserine and an exchange 
reaction between L-serine and L-phosphoserine. In addition we found that the 
enzyme was phosphorylated upon incubation with L-[32P]phosphoserine, which 
indicates that the reaction mechanism proceeds via the formation of a 
phosphoryl-enzyme intermediate. The sensitivity of the phosphoryl-enzyme to 
alkali and to hydroxylamine suggests that an aspartyl- or a glutamyl-phosphate 
was formed. The nucleotide sequence of the cDNA described in this article has 
been deposited in the EMBL data base under accession number Y10275.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(97)00438-9
PMID: 9188776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
