---
pmid: '8202156'
title: Transport of cytoplasmic particles catalysed by an unconventional myosin in
  living Drosophila embryos.
authors:
- Mermall V
- McNally JG
- Miller KG
journal: Nature
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/369560a0
---

# Transport of cytoplasmic particles catalysed by an unconventional myosin in living Drosophila embryos.
**Authors:** Mermall V, McNally JG, Miller KG
**Journal:** Nature (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1038/369560a0](https://doi.org/10.1038/369560a0)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 1994 Jun 16;369(6481):560-2. doi: 10.1038/369560a0.

Transport of cytoplasmic particles catalysed by an unconventional myosin in 
living Drosophila embryos.

Mermall V(1), McNally JG, Miller KG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Washington University, St Louis, Missouri 63130.

Myosins are actin-activated ATPases that are able to translocate along actin 
filaments using energy derived from ATP hydrolysis. Non-muscle cells contain 
conventional myosins, which are similar in sequence and structure to muscle 
myosin, and a number of unconventional myosins whose head sequences are similar 
but tail sequences are unrelated to conventional myosins. The myosin superfamily 
currently consists of nine classes; Drosophila 95F is an unconventional myosin 
and the original member of class VI, which includes a homologue found in pig 
kidney. Some unconventional myosins have been suggested as mediators of some 
types of intracellular transport, but there is little direct evidence for this 
function (but see ref. 6). We have observed transport of cytoplasmic particles 
in live Drosophila embryos in three dimensions using computational optical 
sectioning microscopy. We present here evidence that this transport is 
actin-based, ATP-dependent and catalysed by one such unconventional myosin, the 
95F myosin. This is, to our knowledge, the first direct observation of transport 
catalysed by an unconventional myosin in living cells.

DOI: 10.1038/369560a0
PMID: 8202156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
