---
pmid: '17010938'
title: RILP interacts with VPS22 and VPS36 of ESCRT-II and regulates their membrane
  recruitment.
authors:
- Wang T
- Hong W
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.09.064
---

# RILP interacts with VPS22 and VPS36 of ESCRT-II and regulates their membrane recruitment.
**Authors:** Wang T, Hong W
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.09.064](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.09.064)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Nov 17;350(2):413-23. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.09.064. Epub 2006 Sep 25.

RILP interacts with VPS22 and VPS36 of ESCRT-II and regulates their membrane 
recruitment.

Wang T(1), Hong W.

Author information:
(1)Membrane Biology Laboratory, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 
Proteos, 61 Biopolis Drive, Singapore 138673, Singapore.

RILP is emerging as a key regulator of late endocytic pathway by functioning as 
a downstream effector of activated Rab7 and Rab34, while 
ESCRT-I-->ESCRT-II-->ESCRT-III machinery acts in sorting proteins to the 
multivesicular body (MVB) initiated at the early/sorting endosome. We show here 
that the early machinery is integrated with the late machinery through a novel 
regulatory loop in which RILP interacts with VPS22 and VPS36 of ESCRT-II to 
mediate their membrane recruitment. The N-terminal and C-terminal half of RILP 
mediate interaction with VPS22 and VPS36, respectively. Overexpression of RILP 
leads to enlarged and clustered MVBs marked by lysobisphosphatidic acid (LBPA). 
In addition, RILP or its C-terminal fragment causes a retardation of sorting 
internalized EGF to the degradation route at the level of sorting endosomes 
marked by EEA1. We propose that RILP-->ESCRT-II serves as a regulatory/feedback 
loop to govern the coordination of early and late parts of the endocytic 
pathway.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.09.064
PMID: 17010938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
