---
pmid: '19427902'
title: Purification of human transcription factors Nanog and Sox2, each in complex
  with Skp, an Escherichia coli periplasmic chaperone.
authors:
- Ha SC
- Pereira JH
- Jeong JH
- Huh JH
- Kim SH
journal: Protein Expr Purif
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2009.05.003
---

# Purification of human transcription factors Nanog and Sox2, each in complex with Skp, an Escherichia coli periplasmic chaperone.
**Authors:** Ha SC, Pereira JH, Jeong JH, Huh JH, Kim SH
**Journal:** Protein Expr Purif (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pep.2009.05.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pep.2009.05.003)

## Abstract

1. Protein Expr Purif. 2009 Oct;67(2):164-8. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2009.05.003. Epub
 2009 May 8.

Purification of human transcription factors Nanog and Sox2, each in complex with 
Skp, an Escherichia coli periplasmic chaperone.

Ha SC(1), Pereira JH, Jeong JH, Huh JH, Kim SH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

Nanog and Sox2 are key transcriptional factors involved in self-renewal and 
pluripotency of stem cells in human and other mammals. Nanog and Sox2 contain 
homeodomain (HD) and high-mobility group (HMG) DNA-binding domain, respectively, 
for targeting them to their regulatory regions and the other regions with 
transactivation function by providing sites for recruiting other transcriptional 
regulators. To gain insights in the biochemical and biophysical characteristics 
of the other regions of Nanog and Sox2, we have tried to overproduce and purify 
full length wild-type human Nanog and Sox2 expressed in Escherichia coli. 
Interestingly, we found that Nanog and Sox2 were individually stabilized by 
tight interaction with Skp, an E. coli periplasmic chaperone, thereby enabling 
stable over-expression and purification of Nanog and Sox2, each in complex with 
Skp. Purified Skp complexes of Nanog and Sox maintained DNA-binding activity 
toward its cognate DNA sequence. A similar approach may be applicable for some 
other mammalian proteins that are unstable or difficult to over-express in E. 
coli.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2009.05.003
PMID: 19427902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
