---
pmid: '1849108'
title: Gene targeting of the aggregation stage cAMP receptor cAR1 in Dictyostelium.
authors:
- Sun TJ
- Devreotes PN
journal: Genes Dev
year: '1991'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1101/gad.5.4.572
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Gene targeting of the aggregation stage cAMP receptor cAR1 in Dictyostelium.
**Authors:** Sun TJ, Devreotes PN
**Journal:** Genes Dev (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.5.4.572](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.5.4.572)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 1991 Apr;5(4):572-82. doi: 10.1101/gad.5.4.572.

Gene targeting of the aggregation stage cAMP receptor cAR1 in Dictyostelium.

Sun TJ(1), Devreotes PN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205.

cAR1, a G-protein-linked surface cAMP receptor, plays a central role in the 
development of Dictyostelium. To investigate its role, we sought to target the 
cAR1 gene by homogolous recombination. Transformation of these amoebas with 
appropriately designed vectors results in integration into the cAR1 locus with 
high frequency. cAR1 "null" mutants, resulting from double crossover events, 
fail to bind or sense cAMP and arrest in early development. The null mutants can 
be rescued by constitutive expression of a wild-type cAR1 cDNA. Carboxy-terminal 
deletion mutants, derived from single crossover events, express a truncated form 
of cAR1 that binds and senses cAMP. These cells proceed through the 
developmental program, albeit with a delay. Constitutive expression of a similar 
truncated form of cAR1 also rescues the null mutant. These observations prove 
that cAR1-mediated signal transduction controls the development of Dictyostelium 
and allow structural/functional studies of a G-protein-linked receptor in its 
natural context.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.5.4.572
PMID: 1849108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
