---
pmid: '23168492'
title: LYRM7/MZM1L is a UQCRFS1 chaperone involved in the last steps of mitochondrial
  Complex III assembly in human cells.
authors:
- Sánchez E
- Lobo T
- Fox JL
- Zeviani M
- Winge DR
- Fernández-Vizarra E
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3570683
doi: 10.1016/j.bbabio.2012.11.003
---

# LYRM7/MZM1L is a UQCRFS1 chaperone involved in the last steps of mitochondrial Complex III assembly in human cells.
**Authors:** Sánchez E, Lobo T, Fox JL, Zeviani M, Winge DR, Fernández-Vizarra E
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbabio.2012.11.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbabio.2012.11.003)
**PMC:** [PMC3570683](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3570683/)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Mar;1827(3):285-93. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbabio.2012.11.003. Epub 2012 Nov 17.

LYRM7/MZM1L is a UQCRFS1 chaperone involved in the last steps of mitochondrial 
Complex III assembly in human cells.

Sánchez E(1), Lobo T, Fox JL, Zeviani M, Winge DR, Fernández-Vizarra E.

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Investigación Traslacional, Hospital Universitario Miguel Servet, 
Zaragoza, Spain.

The mammalian Complex III (CIII) assembly process is yet to be completely 
understood. There is still a lack in understanding of how the structural 
subunits are put together and which additional factors are involved. Here we 
describe the identification and characterization of LYRM7, a human protein 
displaying high sequence homology to the Saccharomyces cerevisiae protein Mzm1, 
which was recently shown as an assembly factor for Rieske Fe-S protein 
incorporation into the yeast cytochrome bc(1) complex. We conclude that human 
LYRM7, which we propose to be renamed MZM1L (MZM1-like), works as a human Rieske 
Fe-S protein (UQCRFS1) chaperone, binding to this subunit within the 
mitochondrial matrix and stabilizing it prior to its translocation and insertion 
into the late CIII dimeric intermediate within the mitochondrial inner membrane. 
Thus, LYRM7/MZM1L is a novel human CIII assembly factor involved in the UQCRFS1 
insertion step, which enables formation of the mature and functional CIII 
enzyme.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbabio.2012.11.003
PMCID: PMC3570683
PMID: 23168492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
