---
pmid: '8733127'
title: 'cDNA cloning of a human homologue of the Caenorhabditis elegans cell fate-determining
  gene mab-21: expression, chromosomal localization and analysis of a highly polymorphic
  (CAG)n trinucleotide repeat.'
authors:
- Margolis RL
- Stine OC
- McInnis MG
- Ranen NG
- Rubinsztein DC
- Leggo J
- Brando LV
- Kidwai AS
- Loev SJ
- Breschel TS
- Callahan C
- Simpson SG
- DePaulo JR
- McMahon FJ
- Jain S
- Paykel ES
- Walsh C
- DeLisi LE
- Crow TJ
- Torrey EF
- Ashworth RG
- Macke JP
- Nathans J
- Ross CA
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/5.5.607
---

# cDNA cloning of a human homologue of the Caenorhabditis elegans cell fate-determining gene mab-21: expression, chromosomal localization and analysis of a highly polymorphic (CAG)n trinucleotide repeat.
**Authors:** Margolis RL, Stine OC, McInnis MG, Ranen NG, Rubinsztein DC, Leggo J, Brando LV, Kidwai AS, Loev SJ, Breschel TS, Callahan C, Simpson SG, DePaulo JR, McMahon FJ, Jain S, Paykel ES, Walsh C, DeLisi LE, Crow TJ, Torrey EF, Ashworth RG, Macke JP, Nathans J, Ross CA
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/5.5.607](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/5.5.607)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 1996 May;5(5):607-16. doi: 10.1093/hmg/5.5.607.

cDNA cloning of a human homologue of the Caenorhabditis elegans cell 
fate-determining gene mab-21: expression, chromosomal localization and analysis 
of a highly polymorphic (CAG)n trinucleotide repeat.

Margolis RL(1), Stine OC, McInnis MG, Ranen NG, Rubinsztein DC, Leggo J, Brando 
LV, Kidwai AS, Loev SJ, Breschel TS, Callahan C, Simpson SG, DePaulo JR, McMahon 
FJ, Jain S, Paykel ES, Walsh C, DeLisi LE, Crow TJ, Torrey EF, Ashworth RG, 
Macke JP, Nathans J, Ross CA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD 21205-2196, USA.

The two most consistent features of the diseases caused by trinucleotide repeat 
expansion-neuropsychiatric symptoms and the phenomenon of genetic 
anticipation-may be present in forms of dementia, hereditary ataxia, 
Parkinsonism, bipolar affective disorder, schizophrenia and autism. To identify 
candidate genes for these disorders, we have screened human brain cDNA libraries 
for the presence of gene fragments containing polymorphic trinucleotide repeats. 
Here we report the cDNA cloning of CAGR1, originally detected in a retinal cDNA 
library. The 2743 bp cDNA contains a 1077 bp open reading frame encoding 359 
amino acids. This amino acid sequence is homologous (56% amino acid identify and 
81% amino acid conservation) to the Caenorhabditis elegans cell fate-determining 
protein mab-21. CAGR1 is expressed in several human tissues, most prominently in 
the cerebellum, as a message of approximately 3.0 kb. The gene was mapped to 
13q13, just telomeric to D13S220. A 5'-untranslated CAG trinucleotide repeat is 
highly polymorphic, with repeat length ranging from six to 31 triplets and a 
heterozygosity of 87-88% in 684 chromosomes from several human populations. One 
allele from an individual with an atypical movement disorder and bipolar 
affective disorder type II contains 46 triplets, 15 triplets longer than any 
other allele detected. Though insufficient data are available to link the long 
repeat to this clinical phenotype, an expansion mutation of the CAGR1 repeat can 
be considered a candidate for the etiology of disorders with anticipation or 
developmental abnormalities, and particularly any such disorders linked to 
chromosome 13.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/5.5.607
PMID: 8733127 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
