---
pmid: '12487375'
title: Acrolein activates mitogen-activated protein kinase signal transduction pathways
  in rat vascular smooth muscle cells.
authors:
- Ranganna K
- Yousefipour Z
- Nasif R
- Yatsu FM
- Milton SG
- Hayes BE
journal: Mol Cell Biochem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1023/a:1020659808981
---

# Acrolein activates mitogen-activated protein kinase signal transduction pathways in rat vascular smooth muscle cells.
**Authors:** Ranganna K, Yousefipour Z, Nasif R, Yatsu FM, Milton SG, Hayes BE
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biochem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1023/a:1020659808981](https://doi.org/10.1023/a:1020659808981)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biochem. 2002 Nov;240(1-2):83-98. doi: 10.1023/a:1020659808981.

Acrolein activates mitogen-activated protein kinase signal transduction pathways 
in rat vascular smooth muscle cells.

Ranganna K(1), Yousefipour Z, Nasif R, Yatsu FM, Milton SG, Hayes BE.

Author information:
(1)College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, Texas Southern University, Houston, 
TX 77004, USA. kranganna@hotmail.com

Acrolein, a major component of cigarette smoke, an environmental pollutant and 
an endogenous lipid peroxidation product, has been implicated in the development 
of atherosclerosis. Although a link between vascular injury and acrolein has 
been indicated, the exact molecular mechanism of acrolein-induced toxicity to 
vasculature is unknown. In an effort to elucidate the molecular basis of 
acrolein-induced vascular toxicity, the possibility of the intracellular 
signaling system as one of the targets of acrolein-induced toxicity is 
investigated in the present study. Exposure of cultured rat vascular smooth 
muscle cells (VSMCs) to different doses of acrolein not only causes cytotoxicity 
but also alters cellular morphology in a concentration and time-dependent 
manner. VSMCs exhibit cytotoxicity to a narrow concentration range of 5-10 
microg/ml and display no toxicity to 2 microg/ml acrolein even after 24 h of 
exposure. Furthermore, exposure to acrolein results in activation of members of 
the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) family and protein tyrosine kinases. 
The extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2), stress-activated 
protein kinases/c-jun NH2-terminal kinases (SAPK/JNK) and p38MAPK are 
effectively and transiently activated by acrolein in a concentration and 
time-dependent fashion. While all three MAPKs exhibit significant activation 
within 5 min of exposure to acrolein, maximum activation (ERK1/2 and p38MAPK) or 
close to maximum activation (SAPK/JNK) occurs on exposure to 5 microg/ml 
acrolein for 2 h. Acrolein-induced activation of MAPKs is further substantiated 
by the activation of transcription factors, c-jun and activator transcription 
factor-2 (ATF-2), by acrolein-activated SAPK/JNK and p38MAPK, respectively. 
Additionally several cellular proteins exhibit spectacular protein tyrosine 
phosphorylation, particularly in response to 2 and 5 microg/ml of acrolein. 
Interestingly, the acrolein-induced activation of MAPKs precedes 
acrolein-stimulated protein tyrosine phosphorylation, which occurs after 2 h of 
exposure to acrolein. However, the time course of maximum protein tyrosine 
phosphorylation profile corresponds to the peak activation profile of MAPKs. The 
activation of MAPKs and protein tyrosine phosphorylation by acrolein appears to 
be independent of acrolein-induced toxicity. VSMCs exposed to 2 microg/ml 
acrolein exhibit no toxicity but stimulates significant activation of MAPKs and 
protein tyrosine phosphorylation. Although acrolein-induced VSMC toxicity is not 
blocked by MAPK inhibitors, PD98059, an inhibitor of MAPK kinase and SB203580, 
an inhibitor of p38MAPK, eitheralone or in combination, each MAPK responds 
differently to the inhibitors. Most prominently, although SB203580, an inhibitor 
of both SAPK/JNK and p38MAPK, significantly inhibited acrolein-induced 
activation of p38MAPK, it also stimulated SAPK/JNK activation by acrolein alone 
and in combination with PD98059. These results provide the first evidence that 
the activation of both growth-regulated (ERK1/2) and stress-regulated (SAPK/JNK 
and p38MAPK) MAPKs as well as tyrosine kinases are involved in the mediation of 
acrolein-induced effects on VSMC, which may play a crucial role in vascular 
pathogenesis due to environmentally and endogenously produced acrolein.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1020659808981
PMID: 12487375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
