---
pmid: '15181002'
title: 'Redox reactions of the iron-sulfur cluster in a ribosomal RNA methyltransferase,
  RumA: optical and EPR studies.'
authors:
- Agarwalla S
- Stroud RM
- Gaffney BJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1237038
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M405702200
---

# Redox reactions of the iron-sulfur cluster in a ribosomal RNA methyltransferase, RumA: optical and EPR studies.
**Authors:** Agarwalla S, Stroud RM, Gaffney BJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M405702200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M405702200)
**PMC:** [PMC1237038](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1237038/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Aug 13;279(33):34123-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M405702200. Epub
2004  Jun 4.

Redox reactions of the iron-sulfur cluster in a ribosomal RNA methyltransferase, 
RumA: optical and EPR studies.

Agarwalla S(1), Stroud RM, Gaffney BJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California-San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94107, USA. sanjay@cgl.ucsf.edu

An unprecedented [4Fe-4S] iron-sulfur cluster was found in RumA, the enzyme that 
methylates U1939 in Escherichia coli 23 S ribosomal RNA (Agarwalla, S., Kealey, 
J. T., Santi, D. V., and Stroud, R. M. (2002) J. Biol. Chem. 277, 8835-8840; 
Lee, T. T., Agarwalla, S., and Stroud, R. M. (2004) Structure 12, 397-407). 
Methyltransferase reactions do not involve a redox step. To understand the 
structural and functional roles of the cluster in RumA, we have characterized 
redox reactions of the iron-sulfur cluster. As isolated aerobically, RumA 
exhibits a visible absorbance maximum at 390 nm and is EPR silent. It cannot be 
reduced by anaerobic additions of dithionite. Photoreduction by 
deazariboflavin/EDTA gives EPR spectra, the quantity (56% of S = 1/2 species) 
and details (g(av) approximately 1.96-1.93) of which indicate a [4Fe-4S](1+) 
cluster in the reduced RumA. Oxidation of RumA by ferricyanide leads to loss of 
the 390-nm band and appearance of lower intensity bands at 444 and 520 nm. EPR 
spectra of ferricyanide-oxidized RumA show a fraction (<8%) of the FeS cluster 
trapped in the [3Fe-4S](1+) form (g(av) approximately 2.011) together with 
unusual radical-like spectrum (g' values 2.015, 2.00, and 1.95). RumA also 
reacts with nitric oxide to give EPR spectra characteristic of the protein-bound 
iron dinitrosyl species. Oxidation of the cluster leads to its decomposition and 
that could be a mechanism for regulating the activity of RumA under conditions 
of oxidative stress in the cell. Sequence data base searches revealed that RumA 
homologs are widespread in various kingdoms of life and contain a conserved and 
unique iron-sulfur cluster binding motif, CX(5)CGGC.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M405702200
PMCID: PMC1237038
PMID: 15181002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
