---
reference_id: PMID:26083743
title: UbiX is a flavin prenyltransferase required for bacterial ubiquinone biosynthesis.
authors:
- White MD
- Payne KA
- Fisher K
- Marshall SA
- Parker D
- Rattray NJ
- Trivedi DK
- Goodacre R
- Rigby SE
- Scrutton NS
- Hay S
- Leys D
journal: Nature
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/nature14559
keywords:
- "Alkyl and Aryl Transferases/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Aspergillus niger/enzymology, genetics"
- Biocatalysis
- "Carboxy-Lyases/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Catalytic Domain
- "Crystallography, X-Ray"
- Cycloaddition Reaction
- Decarboxylation
- "Dimethylallyltranstransferase/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Electron Transport
- Flavin Mononucleotide/metabolism
- "Flavins/biosynthesis, chemistry, metabolism"
- "Models, Molecular"
- "Pseudomonas aeruginosa/enzymology, genetics, metabolism"
- Ubiquinone/biosynthesis
content_type: full_text_xml
full_text_attempted: true
full_text_provider: pmc
oa_status: green
---

# UbiX is a flavin prenyltransferase required for bacterial ubiquinone biosynthesis.
**Authors:** White MD, Payne KA, Fisher K, Marshall SA, Parker D, Rattray NJ, Trivedi DK, Goodacre R, Rigby SE, Scrutton NS, Hay S, Leys D
**Journal:** Nature (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature14559](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14559)

## Content

1. Nature. 2015 Jun 25;522(7557):502-6. doi: 10.1038/nature14559. Epub 2015 Jun
17.

UbiX is a flavin prenyltransferase required for bacterial ubiquinone 
biosynthesis.

White MD(1), Payne KA(1), Fisher K(1), Marshall SA(1), Parker D(2), Rattray 
NJ(1), Trivedi DK(1), Goodacre R(1), Rigby SE(1), Scrutton NS(1), Hay S(1), Leys 
D(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Synthetic Biology of Fine and Speciality Chemicals, Manchester 
Institute of Biotechnology, The University of Manchester, Manchester M1 7DN, UK.
(2)Innovation/Biodomain, Shell International Exploration and Production, 
Westhollow Technology Center, 3333 Highway 6 South, Houston, Texas 77082-3101, 
USA.

Ubiquinone (also known as coenzyme Q) is a ubiquitous lipid-soluble redox 
cofactor that is an essential component of electron transfer chains. Eleven 
genes have been implicated in bacterial ubiquinone biosynthesis, including ubiX 
and ubiD, which are responsible for decarboxylation of the 
3-octaprenyl-4-hydroxybenzoate precursor. Despite structural and biochemical 
characterization of UbiX as a flavin mononucleotide (FMN)-binding protein, no 
decarboxylase activity has been detected. Here we report that UbiX produces a 
novel flavin-derived cofactor required for the decarboxylase activity of UbiD. 
UbiX acts as a flavin prenyltransferase, linking a dimethylallyl moiety to the 
flavin N5 and C6 atoms. This adds a fourth non-aromatic ring to the flavin 
isoalloxazine group. In contrast to other prenyltransferases, UbiX is 
metal-independent and requires dimethylallyl-monophosphate as substrate. Kinetic 
crystallography reveals that the prenyltransferase mechanism of UbiX resembles 
that of the terpene synthases. The active site environment is dominated by π 
systems, which assist phosphate-C1' bond breakage following FMN reduction, 
leading to formation of the N5-C1' bond. UbiX then acts as a chaperone for 
adduct reorientation, via transient carbocation species, leading ultimately to 
formation of the dimethylallyl C3'-C6 bond. Our findings establish the mechanism 
for formation of a new flavin-derived cofactor, extending both flavin and 
terpenoid biochemical repertoires.

DOI: 10.1038/nature14559
PMCID: PMC4988493
PMID: 26083743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest. Readers are welcome to comment on the online version of the paper.

Flavin is a common cofactor responsible for highly versatile
(redox)-chemistry9, its properties modified or
fine-tuned by the protein scaffold, occasionally through covalent attachment to the
protein matrix via the C6 or C8 atoms of the isoalloxazine
dimethylbenzene ring10. We have shown that the
reversible decarboxylases belonging to the UbiD/Fdc enzyme family require a heavily
modified FMN cofactor5. In these enzymes, the FMN
is linked to a C5-alkyl group via N5-C1’ and C6-C3’ linkages,
adding a 4th (non-aromatic) ring to the isoalloxazine ring system. Knock-out
of ubiD/fdc or the associated ubiX/pad genes leads to
similar phenotypes, and the latter have been shown to encode for FMN-binding proteins
for which no decarboxylase activity has been detected in vitro2–4,11. Recently it was found that
UbiX/Pad is responsible for activation of S. cerevisiae Fdc12, suggesting that UbiX/Pad is responsible for the
synthesis of the UbiD/Fdc cofactor. The observed FMN modification by a
C5-unit suggests this occurs through prenyltransferase activity [Fig 1a].

We tested this hypothesis by incubating Pseudomonas aeruginosa
UbiX13 with oxidized FMN and the universal
isoprene precursors dimethylallyl-pyrophosphate (DMAPP) or isopentenyl-pyrophosphate
(IPP). However, spectroscopic evidence for formation of a ternary isoprene
precursor:FMN:UbiX complex or of covalent FMN modification could not be obtained. By
contrast, perturbation in the FMN UV-visible spectrum was observed in the presence of
dimethylallyl-monophosphate (DMAP), leading to an apparent
Kd of 12.0 ± 0.4 μM [Fig
1b]. While the minor spectral perturbation is indicative of binding close to
the FMN isoalloxazine, it does not reflect FMN modification. However, reduction of the
ternary FMN:DMAP:UbiX complex using sodium dithionite followed by re-oxidation under
aerobic conditions leads to formation of a stable purple coloured intermediate [Fig 1c]. Ultra high performance liquid chromatography
coupled with high resolution mass spectrometry of extracts from both the reduced and
re-oxidized ternary FMN:DMAP:UbiX complex reveal a molecular species with mass
corresponding to the reduced (prFMNreduced) or radical
(prFMNradical) form of the UbiD/Fdc1 cofactor, respectively [Extended data Fig 1] and electron paramagnetic
resonance (EPR) spectroscopy confirms the formation of a radical in ~95% yield
(relative to FMN) in the reoxidized ternary complex [Fig
1d]. Furthermore, the radical species has EPR properties consistent with that
of a N5, C6 alkylated flavin semiquinone [Extended data
figs 2-4]. Activity of
Aspergillus niger apo-Fdc1 could be reconstituted in
vitro following anaerobic incubation with prFMNreduced-UbiX.
Decarboxylase activity could only be observed after exposure of the reconstituted Fdc1
to oxygen [Fig 1e], but appeared independent of the
presence of UbiX [Extended data fig 5a]. No
activity could be observed when incubating apo-Fdc1 with the
prFMNradical-UbiX. This suggests only the prFMNreduced form
can be correctly oxidized by UbiD/Fdc1 to the corresponding reactive N5-iminium species
(prFMNiminium).

Stopped-flow experiments mixing reduced FMNH2-UbiX with DMAP under
anaerobic conditions reveal transient formation of a distinct spectral species [species
2 in Fig 1f] prior to formation of the
prFMNreduced product. The rate of formation species 2 showed a hyperbolic
dependence on [DMAP] with apparent Kd =730 ± 70 μM and limiting
rate of kf1=177 ± 7 s-1 [Extended data fig 5]. The decay was independent of DMAP concentration and
occurred with kf2=0.316±0.002 s-1. Stopped-flow experiments
mixing reduced prFMNreduced-UbiX with oxygen reveal that the rate of
formation of the purple coloured end product is linearly dependent on oxygen
concentration [Extended data fig 5].

We obtained the 1.8 Å crystal structure of P. aeruginosa
UbiX in complex with oxidized FMN and DMAP [Fig
2a-b]. The DMAP substrate is located directly above the FMN isoalloxazine
re face, with the dimethylallyl moiety sandwiched between the FMN
and Ala89-Ser90. The dimethylallyl group is furthermore surrounded by aromatic ring
systems of W84, Y169, and W200 that, together with the FMN dimethylbenzene moiety,
resemble the π-cage found in other prenyltransferases or terpene synthases6–8.
The phosphate moiety is bound by several cationic residues, including conserved residues
R122, K129, R139 and R185 in addition to polar interactions with S90, backbone amide of
Gly91, Glu140 and Tyr169 [Extended data fig. 6].
The short N5 to substrate C1’ distance (3.3 Å) and relative small
N10-N5-C1’ angle of 98° are compatible with those observed for other
flavin-substrate complexes9,14. No evidence of direct nucleophilic/oxidative attack of the
oxidized FMN N5 was observed. Substrate complex crystals that are transiently reduced
with sodium dithionite under aerobic conditions turned purple upon oxidation, closely
resembling solution properties. The 1.6 Å crystal structure of a purple coloured
crystal reveals formation of the 4-ring prFMNradical [Fig 2d]. Although product formation has little effect on the active
site structure, the presence of the fourth ring is accompanied by a slight rotation of
the FMN at the N3 atom. This accommodates the extended isoalloxazine ring system while
keeping the hydrophilic network involved in binding the isoalloxazine ring intact. These
observations establish UbiX crystals are catalytically competent, but do not reveal the
order in which both N5-C1’ and C6-C3’ linkages are made.

We used kinetic crystallography to provide detailed insights into the UbiX
mechanism, taking advantage of the fact a relatively long-lived intermediate can be
observed in solution studies [Fig 1f]. Reduction of
the enzyme-substrate complex by sodium dithionite followed by rapid-freezing and
structure determination to 1.4 Å reveals formation of an unusual N5-C1’
dimethylallyl adduct occurs within 1-5 s, establishing that N5-C1’ bond formation
occurs first [Fig 2c]. The N5-C1’ adduct
adopts a significant butterfly-conformation, and the N5 is clearly
sp3 hybridized. Although Ser15 and
Glu49 are located in proximity of the N5, a (transient) reorientation of both side
chains is required to establish a hydrogen bonding network with the N5. The 1.9 Å
structure of substrate complex crystals frozen 20-30 s following reduction reveals
formation of the prFMNreduced product (Extended data Fig 7). Longer incubation times lead to formation of the
prFMNradical species as indicated by a gradual purple colouration of crystals. No other
intermediates were seen to accumulate within the WT crystals, in agreement with our
stopped-flow solution data [Fig 1f].

In order to determine whether Ser15-Glu49 are involved in N5 deprotonation and/or
formation of the C6-C3’ linkage, we created an E49Q variant. The mutation
severely affects, but does not abolish in vitro Fdc1 activation (Fig 1e). While the oxidized substrate E49Q complex is
similar in structure to the corresponding WT structure [Fig 3a], a distinct intermediate species was seen following reduction and
rapid freezing within 1-5 seconds [Fig 3b]. While
the latter structure clearly contains a reduced FMNH2, no N5-C1’ bond
has formed, in contrast to the corresponding 1-5 s WT intermediate structure [Fig 2c]. Furthermore, both Ser15 and Gln49 establish
a hydrogen bonding network with the N5. This suggests N5 deprotonation through
Ser15-Glu49 is linked to N5-C1’ bond formation, a process largely rendered
ineffective through the E49Q mutation [Fig 4,
species Ireduced] Structures of the E49Q variant derived for crystals frozen
0.5-10 min after reduction reveal accumulation of an N5-C1’ dimethylallyl adduct
does occur [Fig 3c], albeit distinct in
conformation from that observed in the 1-5 s WT structure [Fig 2c].

In the E49Q N5-C1’ dimethylallyl adduct, the dimethylallyl
substrate-derived moiety has undergone a 180° rotation when compared to the WT
N5-adduct species, along with a small rotation of the isoalloxazine ring [Fig 3c; Fig 4
species IVa]. Furthermore, both Ser15 and Gln49 form a hydrogen bonding network with N5,
with the Ser15-N5 hydrogen bond maintaining the N5 in an sp3
state. This series of conformational changes achieves two objectives: a proton relay
network is established between the N5 and solvent via S15 and E49, and additional space
is created between the isoalloxazine dimethylbenzene moiety and Y169 to allow for
formation of the 4th ring.

Many of the conformational changes observed in the E49Q N5-dimethylallyl adduct
are unlikely to present a significant barrier to the reaction even within the crystals.
However, the observed reorientation of the dimethylallyl moiety would require
substantial protein breathing motions to occur if achieved through rotation along the
dimethylallyl C1-C2 bond. An alternative route through olefin isomerisation is possible,
via protonation of the C2’ atom (adding a pro-S hydrogen) with
transient formation of a ternary C3’ carbocation [Fig 4, species III]. The latter could reorient in the absence of active site
deformation and be converted to the observed E49Q dimethylallyl–N5 adduct [Fig 4, species IVa] by abstraction of the C2’
pro-R proton. The substrate-derived phosphate is ideally positioned
to establish a proton relay network to the substrate C2’, and the ternary
C3’ carbocation resides within a so-called π-cage made by the FMN
dimethylbenzene moiety, Y169 and W200 that could assist carbocation formation.
Surprisingly, despite little difference in structure, crystals of a Y169F variant are
severely compromised in their catalytic ability. A similar observation is made when
using UbiXY169F variant for in vitro reconsitution of Fdc1
activity (Fig 1e). In the UbiXY169F
crystals, an N5-C1’ DMA adduct nearly identical to that seen for the WT crystals
can be readily obtained, but remains stable for several minutes [Extended data Figure 8]. This suggests Y169 is key to the
conformational changes that follow formation of the first N5 adduct [Fig 4, species III], possibly through assisting
proton transfer via the substrate phosphate to the dimethylallyl C2’ or
stabilisation of the ternary C3’ carbocation.

We have been unable to trap any intermediates during formation of the
dimethylallyl C3’ – flavin C6 bond. We suggest C6 nucleophilic attack on
the dimethylallyl C3’ carbocation occurs concomitant with or following
protonation of the C2’ via the bound phosphate [Fig
4, species IVb]. The resulting cyclohexadiene adduct (species V) can form the
final product (species VI) through aromatization concomitant with proton abstraction
via Ser15-Glu49 [Extended data Fig
9]. We suggest the E49Q mutation also affects this particular deprotonation,
leading to the accumulation of an intermediate (species IVa) preceding this step as
observed in the crystals. It is possible that formation of the cyclohexadiene adduct (V)
occurs directly following conformational change of the C3’ carbocation species
(III), via species IVb without intermediate deprotonation/protonation as outlined for
species IVa.

In addition to UbiX, a distinct family of flavoenzymes (type 2 isopentenyl
diphosphate isomerases) bind isoprene precursors. The latter have been suggested to use
the flavin as an acid-base in the interconversion of IPP and DMAPP15–16. Instead, our
data reveal UbiX has many similarities to terpene synthases, achieving the required
isoprenyl chemistry via similar strategies [Fig 4]
8,17–18. We suggest formation of
an initial allylic carbocation through leaving of the phosphate group (pyrophosphate in
the terpene synthases) is achieved through stabilization of the carbocation species
within an active site dominated by π-systems (i.e. the π-cage).
Furthermore, FMN reduction appears to act as the trigger for phosphate-C1’ bond
breakage, increasing the electron density of the isoalloxazine ring that stacks with the
dimethylallyl substrate. In contrast to the metal requiring terpene synthases, the
leaving group is stabilized by a multitude of ionic interactions. A direct contact with
the conserved Glu140 furthermore suggests phosphate protonation occurs concomitant with
C1’ allylic carbocation formation and/or N5 nucleophilic attack [Fig 4, species Ireduced). Following
formation of the N5-C1’ bond, UbiX appears to act as a chaperone for substrate
reorientation (conversion of species III to IVb), similar to what is postulated to occur
for terpene synthases. In UbiX, it appears both the leaving group phosphate as well as a
conserved Tyr residue (Y169) are involved in catalysing the conformational change of the
N5 adduct required for completion of the reaction.

The presence of ubiX/ubiD-like genes in the majority of
microbes2,19–21 and the essential role
played in prokaryotic ubiquinone biosynthesis2
suggest an ancient evolutionary origin for the UbiX flavin prenyltransferase chemistry.
It remains unclear at this stage why dimethylallyl-monophosphate is
used by UbiX, as opposed to the universal dimethylallyl-diphosphate22. This might serve as a means to regulate product formation via
availability of DMAP. While the isomer isopentenyl monophosphate has recently been shown
to occur in certain archaea23, the metabolic
route to dimethylallyl-monophosphate remains unclear. The unusual biochemical strategy
of using a reduced - rather than oxidized- flavin to act as a nucleophile9,24–25 ensures formation of a
relatively stable N5-alkyl adduct species (prFMNreduced), as opposed to the
corresponding N5-iminium adduct (prFMNiminium). The latter would be prone to
hydrolysis prior to transfer to apo-UbiD/Fdc1. Whether
non-ubiD related enzymes make use of the novel chemical properties
of the UbiX product remains to be established.

The ubix gene of Pseudomonas
aeruginosa was amplified from synthesized DNA (codon optimized for
expression in Escherichia coli, Genescript) by PCR using
Phusion polymerase (NEB). The PCR products were cloned in to the NcoI and
HindIII restriction sites of the pNIC28a-Bsa4 vector using ligation independent
methods (Infusion HD, Clontech). This generated a construct with an N terminal
polyhistidine tag and TEV protease cleavage site similar to that used in ref 12.
The Infusion product was transformed into E.coli NEB5α
competent cells (NEB) to allow verification of the expression construct by
sequencing (Eurofins). Validated pNIC28-Bsa4-ubix was
transformed into E.coli BL21 (DE3) competent cells (NEB) for
protein production.

The A. niger fdc1 gene was codon optimized to remove
codons that were rare in E. coli and synthesized (Genscript) in
pUC57. The gene was excised out of pUC57 using NdeI and
XhoI, cloned into the NdeI and
XhoI sites of pET30a using T4 ligase (NEB) and transformed
into E. coli NEB5α. Once the sequence of the insert was
confirmed A. niger Fdc1 pET30a was transformed into E.
coli Bl21(DE3).

Mutagenesis primers were designed using the QuikChange Primer Design
Program (www.genomics.agilent.com/primerDesignProgram.jsp) to be used in
conjunction with Phusion polymerase mediated PCR. Template DNA was removed by
DpnI (NEB) digest and the PCR products were transformed into E.
coli NEB5α competent cells to allow mutagenesis to be
verified by sequencing. Constructs possessing validated mutations were
transformed into E. coli BL21 (DE3) competent cells for protein
production.

E. coli transformants were grown in 1l of Luria-Bertani
(LB) broth at 37°C/180rpm until an OD600 of 0.6 – 0.8
was reached. Cultures were induced with 0.3mM IPTG and grown overnight at
20°C/180rpm. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 7000g for 10
minutes.

Cell pellets were re-suspended in 50mM Tris, 500mM NaCl pH 8.0 buffer
supplemented with lysozyme, RNase, DNase (Sigma) and a Complete EDTA free
protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). The cells were lysed using a French Press
cell disrupter at 1500 Psi followed by centrifugation at 48000g for 30 minutes
and filtration through a 0.45 micron membrane. The soluble supernatant was
loaded on to equilibrated Ni-NTA agarose resin (Qiagen) and washed successively
with 4 column volumes of re-suspension buffer containing 10 and 40mM imidazole.
The protein was eluted with 250mM imidazole and analysed by SDS-PAGE to verify
sample purity. Imidazole was removed using a 10-DG desalting column (Bio-rad)
equilibrated with 20mM Tris, 200mM NaCl pH 8.0. Where necessary the samples were
incubated with 10mM FMN to improve flavin occupancy in the protein. Excess FMN
was removed before experimentation by desalting, as described above. The N
terminal polyhistdine tag was retained for all experiments.

A. niger Fdc1 was purified as described above using
50mM Tris, 200mM NaCl pH 7.5 as the re-suspension buffer and 20mM Tris, 100mM
NaCl pH 7.5 as the desalting buffer.

UV-visible absorbance spectra were recorded using a Cary UV-visible
spectrophotometer. Protein concentrations were estimated from A280
using their respective absorbance coefficients, which were calculated from their
primary amino acid sequence using the ProtParam program on the ExPASy proteomics
server. Wild type and E49Q P. aeruginosa UbiX
ε280 = 16960M-1 cm-1, Y169F
ε280 =15470 M-1 cm-1 and W200F
ε280 = 11460M-1 cm-1. The
concentration of A.niger Fdc1 and FMN were estimated using
ε280 = 68870M-1 cm-1 and
ε450 = 12500M-1 cm-1
respectively.

Distinct perturbations in the absorbance profile of FMN allowed the
binding of DMAP to be monitored using UV-visible spectroscopy. The effects of
titrating minimal volumes of 12.5μM DMAP on the absorbance spectrum of
30μM UbiX:FMN were recorded and converted to difference spectra by
subtracting titrated profiles from the DMAP-free sample. The dissociation
constant of DMAP was determined by analyzing the total deviation in absorbance
between 310 and 540nm in function of DMAP concentration using the tight binding
equation

All anaerobic work was performed under N2 in a glove box
(Belle Technology, UK). 150μM P. aeruginosa UbiX:FMN was
rendered anaerobic in 20mM Tris, 200mM NaCl pH 8.0 and mixed with 1mM DMAP to
monitor the effect of redox cycling on flavin properties. Sodium dithionite was
titrated into the sample to fully reduce the FMN, which was subsequently
re-oxidized. UV-visible spectra were recorded at each stage and 300μl
aliquots were isolated for EPR analysis.

The oxidized product of UbiX turnover was extracted from P.
aeruginosa UbiX under aerobic conditions by denaturing the protein
with equal volumes of acetonitrile at 70°C. Precipitate was removed by
centrifugation at 16000g for 10 minutes. The resulting supernatant was sent for
high-resolution mass analysis.

The reduced product of UbiX turnover was generated under anaerobic
conditions from a steady state reaction containing 1mM FMNH2, 1mM
DMAP and 20μM P. aeruginosa UbiX. Protein was removed by
precipitation at room temperature as described above. The resulting supernatant
was sent for analysis by high-resolution mass spectrometry.

The kinetics of a single turnover reaction between UbiX:FMNH2
and DMAP was studied under anaerobic conditions on a SX.18MV-R stopped-flow
spectrophotometer (Applied Photophysics, dead time approximately 1 ms) by
measuring changes in the flavin absorbance spectrum logarithmically over 60
seconds using a photodiode array (PDA) detector. 100μM UbiX:FMN was
rendered anaerobic in 20mM Tris, 200mM NaCl pH 8.0 and supplemented with 1mM
glucose, 10U ml-1 glucose oxidase (Sigma) to guarantee an oxygen free
environment. The protein was reduced with sodium dithionite before being rapidly
mixed with equal volumes of 500μM – 4mM DMAP at room temperature.
The spectral intermediates were resolved by singular value decomposition using
the Pro-Kineticist program (Applied Photophysics). Data could be fitted with
minimum residuals to a three step model (A>B>C>D), which
allowed the rate constants kf1, kf2 and kf3 to
be estimated. Species D was identified as a photoinduced adduct and considered
an artifact of the prolonged illumination required.

The kinetic parameters of a single turnover reaction between
UbiX:prFMNreduced and oxygenated buffer were measured using a
stopped flow instrument (see above). Here 100μM UbiX:FMN was rendered
anaerobic (in the absence of glucose oxidase), before being reduced with
dithionite and mixed with 1mM DMAP. The protein was rapidly mixed with equal
volumes of 0 – 100% oxygenated buffer, producing absorbance spectra that
could be analyzed by single value decomposition. Data were fitted to a one step
model (A>B), which allowed the rate constant kAB to be
estimated.

For reconstitution under steady state conditions, a solution containing
1mM FMNH2, 1mM DMAP and respectively wild type P.
aeruginosa UbiX, E49Q or Y169F was incubated with 50μM
apo-A. niger Fdc1 in 20mM Tris, 200mM NaCl, 1mM
MnCl2 pH 8.0 under anaerobic conditions. The specific activity of
reconstitued Fdc1 with 50μM cinnamic acid (in 50mM KPO4, 50mM
KCl pH 6.0; either aerobic or anaerobic) was determined at regular time
intervals by measuring the rate of decarboxylation at 270nm using a Cary
UV-visible spectrophotometer.

Reconstitution experiments using a filtered UbiX reaction were carried
out using 2mM FMNH2 anaerobically incubated overnight with 5mM DMAP
and 50µM UbiX. This reaction mixture was used to reconstitute A.
niger apo-Fdc1 (supplemented with Mn2+) in a 2:1 molar
ratio, assuming complete conversion of FMNH2 to
prFMNreduced. To obtain filtrate devoid of UbiX, the reaction
mixture was anaerobically filtered in 10K MWCO centrifugal concentrator
(Generon). A negative control with DMAP omitted from the overnight reaction was
also performed. Decarboxylase activity was measured using as 800µM
aerobic cinnamic acid.

7.5mg/ml P. aeruginosa UbiX in 20mM Tris, 200mM NaCl pH
8.0 was supplemented with 0.5mM FMN and mixed with 1mM DMAP to promote ligand
binding in the active site. Initial screening, sitting 0.3μl protein and
0.3μl mother liquor next to 50μl reservoir, yielded a variety of
hits after 1 – 2 days at 25°C. The best crystals were obtained
after 1 – 2 days in 12% PEG 3350, 150mM sodium thiocyanate, and 100mM
Tris pH 7.2 at 25°C. Crystals of the UbiX variants were obtained in the
same conditions.

All crystals were cryoprotected in mother liquor supplemented with 10%
PEG 200 and flash cooled in liquid nitrogen. Reaction intermediates were
obtained by flash cooling crystals that had been incubated in cryoprotectant
containing sodium dithionite. Where periods of long soaking were necessary, the
cryoprotectant was also supplemented with FMN and DMAP to reduce dissociation
from the crystals. Diffraction data was collected up to 1.4Å at Diamond
beamlines at 100K and processed using the CCP4 suite25. Data was reduced and scaled using XDS26. The structure of P.
aeruginosa UbiX was refined using REFMAC5, using 3ZQU as te
starting model, and refined by cycles of manual rebuilding in COOT and
additional processing in REFMAC525.
Ligand coordinates and definitions were generated using the GlycoBioChem PRODRG2
server (http://davapc1.bioch.dundee.ac.uk/cgi-bin/prodrg). The data and
refinement statistics are available in Extended
Data Table 1.

All solvents were of HPLC-MS grade and purchased from
Sigma–Aldrich (Gillingham, UK). HPLC grade formic acid was purchased from
Fisher Scientific (Loughborough, UK). Mass spectrometer calibration solution and
chromatography columns were purchased from Thermo-Fisher Scientific (Hemel
Hempstead, UK).

All UHPLC-MS work was carried out on a Thermo-Finnigan Orbitrap-LTQ
XL™ hybrid mass spectrometer operated in negative ionization mode coupled
to a Thermo Accela autosampler (Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).
Chromatographic separations were adapted from work carried out by Fu and
co-workers27 and performed on a
Thermo Hypersil Gold 2.1µm C18 column at a solvent flow-rate
of 400 µL min-1. For initial profiling tests the column was
eluted with 0.1% formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile
(B). The solvent composition during gradient elution was initiated with 5% (B)
for 5 min and subsequently ramped to 95% (B) over 15 min, followed by a 5 min
isocratic elution at 95% (B) before a return to 95% (A) held for further 5 min
for column equilibration. All samples were maintained at 4 °C within the
autosampler refrigerator whilst the column was maintained at 50°C within
the autosampler oven. Mass calibration was carried out in accordance with the
manufacturer’s guidelines using caffeine, the tetrapeptide MRFA and
Ultramark 1621 in an acetonitrile/methanol/acetic acid solution. Acquisition
settings for initial profiling were carried out at 60,000 resolution in centroid
and ran at 1 µ-scan per 400ms in the 100-1000 m/z range
with source gasses set at Sheath Gas = 40 arb units, Aux Gas =5 arb units, Sweep
Gas = 5 (all systems specific arbitrary units). The ESI source voltage was set
to 4.2V, and capillary ion transfer tube temperature set at 275°C.

Mass fragmentation analysis was carried out with the same column
chemistry, source settings and flow rate but with an isocratic solvent elution
of 55% (A) / 45% (B), an optimum composition determined for eluting the analyte
of interest, based on the initial elution profile described above. MS source,
sample storage/column was kept under identical conditions. Collision Induced
Dissociation (CID) settings were set up to trap target ions with an isolation
width of 1.0 m/z, normalized collision energy of 35, activation
Q of 0.250 and activation time of 30 ms.

Continuous wave X-band (~9.4 GHz) EPR spectra were obtained using
a Bruker ELEXSYS E500 EPR spectrometer operating at cryogenic temperatures via
an Oxford Instruments ESR900 liquid helium cryostat interfaced with an ITC503
temperature controller from the same manufacturer. Samples were 250 μl in
Wilmad 4 mm o.d. quartz tubes. Sample temperatures were as stated, microwave
power was 10 μW, modulation amplitude was 1.5 G. Pulsed electron nuclear
double resonance (ENDOR) spectra were obtained at 65 K using a Bruker ELEXSYS
E580 spectrometer equipped with an EN 4118X-MD4 dielectric resonator.
Temperature control was effected using an Oxford Instruments CF935 cryostat and
ITC503 temperature controller. The Davies pulsed ENDOR sequence was employed at
intermediate Q using soft microwave pulses and FID detection (π/2 = 200
ns) with a 9 ms radiofrequency π pulse.

Density function theory (DFT) models of FMN:DMA adducts were optimised
in the gas phase using the (U)BP3LYP/6-311++G(d,p) level of theory implemented
in Gaussian 09 [28]. The models consist
of an FMN truncated after the 2’ carbon and 2-methyl-2-butene, i.e. the
dephosphorylated DMAP (Extended data Fig.
4). Structural alignments to the crystal coordinates were performed using
Swiss-PdbViewer version 4.1 [29].
Harmonic vibrational frequencies calculated using normal mode analysis were used
to confirm that optimised geometries were always in local or global minima.

a: Structural elucidation of the reduced UbiX/Fdc1
co-factor. From an initial full scan TIC on UbiX/Fdc1 extract, a 525
m/z ion extracted chromatogram was created under a
gradient elution using H2O/ acetonitrile both containing 0.1%
Formic Acid indicating a major peak apex at 9.57 mins with a 54/46 solvent
elution composition (not shown). Subsequent data dependant TIC and 525
m/z scan extracted chromatograms were created under 55%
A / 45% B isocratic solvent elution and ion extraction between 524.5-525.5
m/z produced a singular peak at 2.28mins displaying an
associated full scan molecular ion peak with m/z = 525.1726
(M+ =
C22H30N4O9P) at a resolution of
58,500 with a mass accuracy of 3.59 ppm. Fragmentation of the 525.1726
m/z molecular ion peak in an automated data dependent
manner using helium based-chemical induced dissociation (CID level 35)
generated a spectral tree that indicates the removal of the newly formed,
more labile, tertiary ring at the MS2 level. Subsequent removal
of the phosphate head group at the MS3 level was achieved using
CID 35 on the 456.23 m/z molecular species with a final
MS4 step using CID 35 on 358.18 m/z
completely removing the tail group from the central 3-ring isoalloxazine
system.

b: Structural elucidation of the re-oxidised UbiX/Fdc1
co-factor. From an initial full scan TIC on UbiX/Fdc1 extract
(i), a 524 m/z ion extracted chromatogram
was created under a gradient elution using H2O/ acetonitrile both
containing 0.1% Formic Acid indicating a major peak apex at 9.24 mins with a
48/52 solvent composition (not shown). Subsequent data dependant TIC and 524
m/z scan extracted chromatograms (ii) were
created under 50% A / 50% B isocratic solvent elution and ion extraction
between 523.5-524.5 m/z produced a singular peak at
2.08mins displaying an associated full scan molecular ion peak with
m/z = 524.1656 (M+ =
C22H29N4O9P) at a resolution
of 58,500 with a mass accuracy of 2.78 ppm. Fragmentation of the 524.1656
m/z molecular ion peak in an automated data dependent
manner using helium based-chemical induced dissociation (CID level 35)
generated a spectral tree (iii) that indicates the removal of
the newly formed, more labile, tertiary ring at the MS2 level.
Subsequent removal of the phosphate head group at the MS3 level
was achieved using CID 35 on the 498.31 m/z molecular
species to create 327.18 (A) alongside a sister fragment 455.31 (B) that
represents the full removal of the tertiary ring but retaining the phosphate
head group.

Panel A. X-band continuous wave EPR spectra of UbiX in frozen
solution: i) WT as isolated; ii) WT plus DMAP; iii) WT reduced with
dithionite; iv) WT + DMAP reduced with dithionite; v) WT + DMAP reduced with
dithionite and reoxidised with oxygen; vi) Y169F mutant + DMAP reduced with
dithionite and reoxidised with oxygen; vii) W200F mutant + DMAP reduced with
dithionite and reoxidised with oxygen. Clearly the FMN-DMAP adduct radical
is only formed when UbiX is reoxidised in the presence of DMAP and this
formation is not affected by mutation of those aromatic residues forming the
π-cage that could give rise to Y or W radical species. Panel B.
X-band continuous wave EPR spectra of frozen solutions of WT UbiX + DMAP and
reduced with dithionite with the addition of potassium ferricyanide to the
following concentrations: i) 260 μM; ii) 160 μM; iii) 50
μM; iv) 40 μM; v) 30 μM; vi) 20 μM; vii) 0
μM. Experimental conditions: microwave power 10 μW, modulation
amplitude 1.5 G, temperature 20 K. Showing the radical can also be formed
using chemical oxidation in the absence of oxygen and thus does not arise
from a peroxide species generated by the reaction of reduced oxygen species
formed when the dithionite sample is exposed to oxygen. An initial radical
is formed under these conditions that exhibits a considerably broader EPR
signal than the prFMNradical and is as yet unidentified.

Pulsed Davies ENDOR spectra of the prFMNradical:UbiX
complex. The spectrum was measured at a field equivalent to gav =
2.0033. While a complete assignment of the spectrum requires specific
deuteration of FMN and DMAP, the ENDOR spectrum is dominated by two large
hyperfine couplings to β-protons indicated as HA and
HB. Using the Heller-McConnell equation the values of the
dihedral angles, θ, can be determined as shown and are consistent
with the orientation of the C1’-protons of the DMAP-derived fragment
of the radical observed crystallographically, as shown in the figure above.
The unpaired electron spin density, ρ, at N5 of the FMN-derived
fragment of the radical can also be estimated from the Heller-McConnell
equation. B’ is negligible while B” is thought to have a value
of ~160, although studies of β-protons coupled to unpaired
electron spin density at a nitrogen atom are rare, giving an unpaired spin
density at N5 of ~0.3, consistent with calculations and considerably
smaller than the unpaired electron spin density of 0.4 or greater expected
for C1’ of an aromatic amino acid radical.

Top, DFT model of the purple radical species showing the location of
significant atomic spin densities (>|0.02|) to the right. The
optimised structure (blue carbons) overlaid with the crystal coordinates
(green carbons) is shown below. The model was geometry optimised in the gas
phase using the UB3LYP/6-311++G(d,p) level of theory. Cartesian coordinates
of the optimised structure are given in Supplementary
Information.

A) Reconstitution of A. niger Fdc activity with
UbiX:prFMNreduced and prFMNreduced obtained
through filtration of a UbiX:prFMNreduced reaction. Control
reactions are devoid of any DMAP substrate. B) Rate of formation of spectral
species 2 (see Fig 1f) in function of
DMAP concentration. C) Rate of decay of spectral species 2 (see Fig 1f) in function of DMAP
concentration. D) Spectral species obtained from singular value
decomposition of rapid-scan stopped-flow spectrophotometric data following
mixing of UbiX:prFMNreduced with oxygenated buffer. E) The rate
of purple radical (species B in panel d of this figure) formation as
obtained from singular value decomposition of rapid-scan stopped-flow
spectrophotometric data following mixing of UbiX:prFMNreduced
with oxygenated buffer has a linear dependence on oxygen concentration.
Error bars are s.e.m. n=3

Multiple sequence alignment of UbiX/Pad enzymes from selected
bacterial or fungal species. Pseudomonas aeruginosa UbiX
(NP_252708), Escherichia coli O157:H7 EcdB
(NP_311620), Escherichia coli UbiX
(YP_490553), Bacillus subtilis BsdB
(WP_009966530), Saccharomyces cerevisiae Pad1
(AAB64980), Aspergillus niger PadA1 (ABN13117), and orf8
from the Thauera aromatica phenylphosphate carboxylase gene
cluster (PAAD_THAAR). Conserved residues involved in phosphate
binding, N5 polar network or formation of the substrate binding p-cage are
indicated by labelled arrows. Secondary structure elements of P.
aeruginosa UbiX crystal structure are shown. Alpha-helices and
310-helices (denoted as n) are shown as squiggles,
β-strands by arrows and β-turns as TT.

Crystal structure of P. aeruginosa UbiX:FMN:DMAP
flash cooled to 100K at 30 s following complete reduction by sodium
dithionite. Two orientations are displayed as in Fig 2. The omit map for the prFMNreduced
product is shown as green mesh, contoured at 4 sigma.

Crystal structures of P. aeruginosa
UbiXY169F a) Detailed view of the
UbiXY169:FMN:DMAP complex with individual amino acids
contributing to active site structure shown in atom colored sticks (carbons
colour coded as in Fig 2a). Two
orientations are displayed as in Fig 2.
The omit map for the DMAP substrate is shown as green mesh, contoured at 4
sigma. b) Detailed view of the UbiXY169F N5-C1’ adduct
species obtained through flash-cooling following reduction. The omit map for
the N5-C1’ adduct is shown as green mesh, contoured at 4 sigma.

a) DFT models of species II and IVa (as defined in Fig 4). Conversion from II to IVa is
achieved by ~180° rotation about C1’-C2’ (blue
arrow) and the N5-H and methanol species (red) are only found in species IVa
models. b) Overlay of the species II DFT model (green carbons) with the
crystal coordinates of species II and Ser15 (teal carbons). c) Three DFT
models of IVa were examined and two orthogonal projections are shown
overlaid with the crystal coordinates (teal carbons): (Vi,
yellow carbons) with a methanol analogue of Ser15 (a, in red) with the C-N5
distance fixed to the crystallographic distance of 4.0 Å;
(Vii, magenta carbons) with N5 protonated (no
methanol), and (Viii, light pink carbons) with N5
deprotonated and no methanol. DFT model of species V and VI are shown in d)
and e), respectively and are overlaid in f) (V green carbons, VI magenta
carbons). g). Overlay of the species VI DFT model (magenta carbons) with the
crystal coordinates (teal carbons). Models were geometry optimised in the
gas phase using the B3LYP/6-311++G(d,p) level of theory. Harmonic
vibrational frequencies calculated using normal mode analysis were used to
confirm that optimised geometries of all species were in local or global
minima. In the case of species Vi,
‘ModRedundant’ optimisation was performed to fix the C-N5
distance and one imaginary frequency of 67.60 cm-1 was observed.
Cartesian coordinates of the optimised structures are given in Supplementary
Information.

Data collection and refinement statistics