---
pmid: '18418386'
title: Essential role of the chaperonin folding compartment in vivo.
authors:
- Tang YC
- Chang HC
- Chakraborty K
- Hartl FU
- Hayer-Hartl M
journal: EMBO J
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2396394
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.77
---

# Essential role of the chaperonin folding compartment in vivo.
**Authors:** Tang YC, Chang HC, Chakraborty K, Hartl FU, Hayer-Hartl M
**Journal:** EMBO J (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2008.77](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2008.77)
**PMC:** [PMC2396394](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2396394/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2008 May 21;27(10):1458-68. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.77. Epub 2008 Apr 
17.

Essential role of the chaperonin folding compartment in vivo.

Tang YC(1), Chang HC, Chakraborty K, Hartl FU, Hayer-Hartl M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, 
Martinsried, Germany.

The GroEL/GroES chaperonin system of Escherichia coli forms a nano-cage allowing 
single protein molecules to fold in isolation. However, as the chaperonin can 
also mediate folding independently of substrate encapsulation, it remained 
unclear whether the folding cage is essential in vivo. To address this question, 
we replaced wild-type GroEL with mutants of GroEL having either a reduced cage 
volume or altered charge properties of the cage wall. A stepwise reduction in 
cage size resulted in a gradual loss of cell viability, although the mutants 
bound non-native protein efficiently. Strikingly, a mild reduction in cage size 
increased the yield and the apparent rate of green fluorescent protein folding, 
consistent with the view that an effect of steric confinement can accelerate 
folding. As shown in vitro, the observed acceleration of folding was dependent 
on protein encapsulation by GroES but independent of GroES cycling regulated by 
the GroEL ATPase. Altering the net-negative charge of the GroEL cage wall also 
strongly affected chaperonin function. Based on these findings, the GroEL/GroES 
compartment is essential for protein folding in vivo.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2008.77
PMCID: PMC2396394
PMID: 18418386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
