---
pmid: '27233470'
title: Functional Analysis of Missense Variants in the Putative Breast Cancer Susceptibility
  Gene XRCC2.
authors:
- Hilbers FS
- Luijsterburg MS
- Wiegant WW
- Meijers CM
- Völker-Albert M
- Boonen RA
- van Asperen CJ
- Devilee P
- van Attikum H
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/humu.23019
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Functional Analysis of Missense Variants in the Putative Breast Cancer Susceptibility Gene XRCC2.
**Authors:** Hilbers FS, Luijsterburg MS, Wiegant WW, Meijers CM, Völker-Albert M, Boonen RA, van Asperen CJ, Devilee P, van Attikum H
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.23019](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.23019)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mutat. 2016 Sep;37(9):914-25. doi: 10.1002/humu.23019. Epub 2016 Jun 17.

Functional Analysis of Missense Variants in the Putative Breast Cancer 
Susceptibility Gene XRCC2.

Hilbers FS(1), Luijsterburg MS(1), Wiegant WW(1), Meijers CM(1), Völker-Albert 
M(1), Boonen RA(1), van Asperen CJ(2), Devilee P(1)(3), van Attikum H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 2300, 
RC, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
2300, RC, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 2300, RC, 
The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Hum Mutat. 2016 Sep;37(9):833. doi: 10.1002/humu.22886.

XRCC2 genetic variants have been associated with breast cancer susceptibility. 
However, association studies have been complicated because XRCC2 variants are 
extremely rare and consist mainly of amino acid substitutions whose grouping is 
sensitive to misclassification by the predictive algorithms. We therefore 
functionally characterized variants in XRCC2 by testing their ability to restore 
XRCC2-DNA repair deficient phenotypes using a cDNA-based complementation 
approach. While the protein-truncating variants p.Leu117fs, p.Arg215*, and 
p.Cys217* were unable to restore XRCC2 deficiency, 19 out of 23 missense 
variants showed no or just a minor (<25%) reduction in XRCC2 function. The 
remaining four (p.Cys120Tyr, p.Arg91Trp, p.Leu133Pro, and p.Ile95Leu) had a 
moderate effect. Overall, measured functional effects correlated poorly with 
those predicted by in silico analysis. After regrouping variants from published 
case-control studies based on the functional effect found in this study and 
reanalysis of the prevalence data, there was no longer evidence for an 
association with breast cancer. This suggests that if breast cancer 
susceptibility alleles of XRCC2 exist, they are likely restricted to 
protein-truncating variants and a minority of missense changes. Our study 
emphasizes the use of functional analyses of missense variants to support 
variant classification in association studies.

© 2016 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.23019
PMID: 27233470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
