---
pmid: '10708591'
title: Cell-type-dependent induction of eotaxin and CCR3 by ionizing radiation.
authors:
- Huber MA
- Kraut N
- Addicks T
- Peter RU
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/bbrc.2000.2287
---

# Cell-type-dependent induction of eotaxin and CCR3 by ionizing radiation.
**Authors:** Huber MA, Kraut N, Addicks T, Peter RU
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1006/bbrc.2000.2287](https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.2000.2287)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Mar 16;269(2):546-52. doi: 
10.1006/bbrc.2000.2287.

Cell-type-dependent induction of eotaxin and CCR3 by ionizing radiation.

Huber MA(1), Kraut N, Addicks T, Peter RU.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Ulm, Oberer Eselsberg 40 (BWK), Ulm, 
89081, Germany.

Eotaxin is an eosinophil-specific C-C chemokine that is implicated in the 
pathogenesis of eosinophilic inflammatory diseases, such as asthma and atopic 
dermatitis, by acting specifically on its receptor CCR3. Using RT-PCR analysis, 
we show that the expression of eotaxin is upregulated upon treatment with 
ionizing radiation (IR) in human dermal fibroblasts, but not in the bronchial 
epithelial cell line A549. In contrast, the gene encoding CCR3 is markedly 
induced in both cell types. None of the genes coding for other CCR3 ligands are 
significantly induced by IR in these cell types. cDNA array analysis of 
irradiated versus nonirradiated A549 cells and human dermal fibroblasts confirm 
and extend these results, and support the observation that regulation of 
eotaxin/CCR3-induction by IR occurs in a selective and cell-type-dependent 
manner. They further suggest that the induction of signaling via eotaxin and 
CCR3 may be an important step leading to eosinophilia in patients with radiation 
exposure.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.2000.2287
PMID: 10708591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
