---
pmid: '11777919'
title: Sphingosine kinase interacts with TRAF2 and dissects tumor necrosis factor-alpha
  signaling.
authors:
- Xia P
- Wang L
- Moretti PA
- Albanese N
- Chai F
- Pitson SM
- D'Andrea RJ
- Gamble JR
- Vadas MA
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111423200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Sphingosine kinase interacts with TRAF2 and dissects tumor necrosis factor-alpha signaling.
**Authors:** Xia P, Wang L, Moretti PA, Albanese N, Chai F, Pitson SM, D'Andrea RJ, Gamble JR, Vadas MA
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M111423200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M111423200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 8;277(10):7996-8003. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111423200. Epub 
2002 Jan 2.

Sphingosine kinase interacts with TRAF2 and dissects tumor necrosis factor-alpha 
signaling.

Xia P(1), Wang L, Moretti PA, Albanese N, Chai F, Pitson SM, D'Andrea RJ, Gamble 
JR, Vadas MA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Human Immunology, The Hanson Institute, Institute of Medical and 
Veterinary Science and University of Adelaide, Frome Road, Adelaide SA 5000, 
Australia. pu.xia@imvs.sa.gov

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2011 Dec 9;286(49):42785.
    J Biol Chem. 2011 Mar 18;286(11):9894.

Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF) receptor-associated factor 2 (TRAF2) is one of 
the major mediators of TNF receptor superfamily transducing TNF signaling to 
various functional targets, including activation of NF-kappa B, JNK, and 
antiapoptosis. We investigated how TRAF2 mediates differentially the distinct 
downstream signals. We now report a novel mechanism of TRAF2-mediated signal 
transduction revealed by an association of TRAF2 with sphingosine kinase (SphK), 
a lipid kinase that is responsible for the production of sphingosine 
1-phosphate. We identified a TRAF2-binding motif of SphK that mediated the 
interaction between TRAF2 and SphK resulting in the activation of the enzyme, 
which in turn is required for TRAF2-mediated activation of NF-kappa B but not 
JNK. In addition, by using a kinase inactive dominant-negative SphK and a mutant 
SphK that lacks TRAF2-binding motif we show that the interaction of TRAF2 with 
SphK and subsequent activation of SphK are critical for prevention of apoptosis 
during TNF stimulation. These findings show a role for SphK in the signal 
transduction by TRAF2 specifically leading to activation of NF-kappa B and 
antiapoptosis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111423200
PMID: 11777919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
