---
pmid: '12065586'
title: Identification and characterization of Gemin7, a novel component of the survival
  of motor neuron complex.
authors:
- Baccon J
- Pellizzoni L
- Rappsilber J
- Mann M
- Dreyfuss G
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M203478200
---

# Identification and characterization of Gemin7, a novel component of the survival of motor neuron complex.
**Authors:** Baccon J, Pellizzoni L, Rappsilber J, Mann M, Dreyfuss G
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M203478200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M203478200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 30;277(35):31957-62. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M203478200. Epub 
2002 Jun 13.

Identification and characterization of Gemin7, a novel component of the survival 
of motor neuron complex.

Baccon J(1), Pellizzoni L, Rappsilber J, Mann M, Dreyfuss G.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Biochemistry & Biophysics, 
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 
19104-6148, USA.

The survival of motor neurons (SMN) protein is the product of the gene mutated 
or deleted in the neurodegenerative disease, spinal muscular atrophy. SMN is 
part of a large macromolecular complex that also contains Gemin2, Gemin3, 
Gemin4, Gemin5, and Gemin6. The SMN complex functions in the assembly of 
spliceosomal small nuclear ribonucleoproteins and probably other 
ribonucleoprotein particles. We have identified a novel protein component of the 
SMN complex termed Gemin7 using native purified SMN complexes and peptide 
sequencing by mass spectrometry. Coimmunoprecipitation and immunolocalization 
experiments demonstrate that Gemin7 is a component of the SMN complex and 
colocalizes with SMN in the cytoplasm and in gems. Binding experiments show that 
Gemin7 interacts directly with SMN and Gemin6 and mediates the association of 
Gemin6 with the SMN complex. The amino acid sequence of Gemin7 does not contain 
any recognizable motifs with the exception of several arginine and glycine 
repeats that are necessary for its interaction with SMN. Moreover, Gemin7 
interacts with several Sm proteins of spliceosomal small nuclear 
ribonucleoproteins, in particular, with SmE. With the identification of Gemin7, 
the inventory of the core components of the SMN complex appears essentially 
complete.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M203478200
PMID: 12065586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
